SERMONS Preached upon Several Occasions: BY THE RIGHT REVEREND FATHER IN GOD,
JOHN WILKINS, D.D. And late Lord Bishop of CHESTER.

Never before Published.

LONDON: Printed for Tho. Basset, Ric. Chiswell and Will. Rogers. M.DC.LXXXII.

THE PUBLISHER TO THE READER.
I Easily foresee that in this censorious and inquisitive Age two Questions
will be asked concerning the publishing of these Sermons, Why no sooner? or,
Why at all? since so many come abroad (...) the Age is almost oppressed with
them. To the first I answer, because I was not at leisure before to review
them, and to get them transcribed out of a hand not legible enough for the
Press: To the other, because though there be many Sermons, yet not many such;
whether we consider in them, the usefulness and weight of the matters treated
of; or the suitable manner of handling them, in a style of so much clearness
and closeness and strength, as was fitted (as he himself was wont to wish) to
the capacity of the weakest and the conviction of the strongest; or the solid
and well-poized judgment of the Author in points of difficulty; or lastly, the
admirable candor and moderation of his temper in matters of difference and
dispute.

And I purposely mention his moderation, and likewise adventure to commend him
for it; notwithstanding that this Virtue, so much esteemed and magnified by
wise men in all Ages, has of late been declaimed against with so much zeal and
fierceness, and yet with that good grace and confidence, as if it were not only
no Virtue but even the sum and abridgment of all Vices. I say, notwithstanding
all this, I am still of the old ^pinion that moderation is a Virtue, and one of
the peculiar ornaments and advantages of the excellent constitution of our
Church, and must at last be the temper of her Members, especially the Clergy,
if ever we seriously intend the firm establishment of this Church, and do not
industriously design by cherishing heats and divisions among our selves to let
in Popery at these breaches.

As to the Author himself, I cannot forbear out of a generous indignation to
see the ashes of so worthy a Man trampled upon, to take notice of a very
slight, and, I think, unjust Character given of him in a late Book entitled
Historia and Antiquitates Universitatis Oxoniensis; whether by the Author of
that Book, or by some other Hand, is variously reported, and I am not curious
to know. The former part of the Character is chiefly made up of invidious
reflections upon his carriage, and the circumstances of his condition in the
late Times; in all which, because I did not then know him, I leave him to be
vindicated or censured by those who were witnesses of his whole behavior and
temper in that time. The latter part of it consists of flat and ill-favored
commendations, as, That he was Philosophiae and Mathematicae addictissimus, a
great well-willer to Philosophy and the Mathematics; the exact Character of an
Empirick and an Almanack-maker, when these two excellencies happen to be in
conjunction: And then, that to the study of Divinity he added eloquentiam
inconcionando non contemnendam, an eloquence in Preaching not to be despised;
which though it be but a very cold and slender commendation both of his
Divinity and his Eloquence, yet I must own something of kindness in it, because
there is in good earnest a sort of Eloquence in Preaching that is to be
despised. To finish the kindness, and that nothing might be omitted that might
any ways cast an odium upon him, as he is placed next before Mr. Hobbs, so I
cannot but observe in comparing their Characters, that there is apparently far
less of envy and detraction in that of Mr. Hobbs's, than in this of the
Reverend Bishop; for which I can imagine no other reason but this; that Mr.
Hobbs was then alive to speak for himself, but the dead bite not.

Upon the whole, it has often been no small matter of wonder to me, whence it
should come to pass that so great a Man, and so great a lover of Mankind, who
had the inclination, the skill, and the opportunity to oblige so very many, and
was so highly valued and reverenced by all that knew him, should yet have the
hard fate to fall under the heavy displeasure and censure of those who knew him
not: And that he who never did any thing to make himself one personal enemy,
should have the ill fortune to have so many. I think I may truly say, that
there are, or have been, very few in this Age and Nation, so well known, and so
greatly esteemed and favored, first by a judicious Prince, and then by so many
Persons of high rank and quality, and of singular worth and eminency in all the
learned Prefessions, as our Author was.

And this surely cannot be denied him, it is so well known to many worthy
Persons yet living, and has been so often acknowledged even by his enemies,
that in the late times of confusion, almost all that was preserved and kept up
of Ingenuity and Learning, of good Order and Government in the University of
Oxford, was chiefly owing to his prudent conduct and encouragement. Which
consideration alone, had there been no other, might have prevailed with some
there to have treated his memory with at least common kindness and respect. Not
to do this to the dead, and in Character of him that was intended to live to
posterity, seems very hard; and yet I shall only make this soft reflection upon
it, That there is no readier way for any man to bring his own worth into
question, than by endeavoring to detract from the universally acknowledged
worth of other men.

Having said this out of justice as well as friendship to the Author, and by
way of necessary vindication of him from the envy endeavored to be raised
against him by some in this present Age, I leave these Discourses of his to
justify themselves and him to Posterity.

John Tillotson.

THE CONTENTS.
SERMON I. Hebrews XI.26. FOR he had respect unto the recompense of reward.
Page 1. SERMON II. and III. Romans XIV.17.18. For the Kingdom of God is not
meat and drink, but righteousness, and peace, and joy, in the Holy Ghost. For
he that in these things serves Christ is acceptable to God and approved of
men. Page 41, 75.
SERMON IV. Titus XI.10. That they may adorn the Doctrine of God our Savior in
all things. Page 99. SERMON V. At a Visitation. Titus XI.15. These things
speak, and exhort, and rebuke withal Authority; LET NO MAN DESPISE THEE. Page
131. SERMON VI. Ecclesiastes I.18. For in much wisdom is much grief; and he
that increases knowledge, increases sorrow. Page 165. SERMON VII. Proverbs
IV.7. Wisdom is the principal thing, therefore get wisdom. Page 197. SERMON
VIII. Proverbs XIII.20. He that walks with wise men, shall be wise; but a
companion of fools shall be destroyed. Page 235. SERMON IX. Ecclesiastes IV.9.
Two are better than one. Page 263. SERMON X. At the Spittle. Isaiah XXXII.8.
The liberal devises liberal things, and by liberal things shall he stand. Page
289. SERMON XI. Luke VII.5. For he loves our nation, and has built us a
Synagogue. Page 327. SERMON XII. Proverbs XXV.15. A soft tongue breaks the
bone. Page 359. SERMON XIII. Philippians IV.5. Let your moderation be known
unto all men, the Lord is at hand. Page 391. SERMON XIV. and XV. Romans XII.19.
Dearly beloved, avenge not your selves, but rather give place unto wrath; for
it is written, vengeance is mine, I will repay, says the Lord. Page 429, 457.
The First Sermon.
HEBREWS XI.26. For he had respect unto the recompense of reward.


AMongst the many doubts and scruples which are apt to disquiet the hearts of
good Men, there are none more frequent than those occasioned by their own
mistake, concerning the scope and ends they aim at. For when upon an impartial
enquiry into their own condition, they find, that which has the chief influence
upon them in any temptation or difficult service is not so much the deformity
of sin, or the beauty of holiness, as the fear of Hell and the hopes of
Salvation; this is apt to deject them with sad doubts and fears concerning
their own sincerity, as if they were yet only in a mercenary slavish state of
Unregeneracy, and had not in any measure attained to those filial affections
which belong to the state of Adoption. And by this means it comes to pass, that
they do often needlessly disquiet themselves and discourage others.

My design therefore from the Text, is so to clear up and state the Truth in
this case, as may prevent those mistakes and the ill consequences of them.

The chief scope of this Chapter is to set forth the nature and the power of
Faith. The Nature of it is described ver. 1. to be the substance of things
hoped for, and the evidence of things not seen. The Power of it is afterward
exemplified, by diverse instances out of the Old Testament, concerning many
strange Difficulties and Trials, which those holy men of Ancient times were
enabled to undergo, being strengthened chiefly by this Grace of Faith. In the
relation of which, there is an observable mixture of Examples, some of lesser
note, with others of remarkable eminency, least weak Christians might be
discouraged at those great Examples of Abraham, and Isaac, and Moses; as being
unable ever to imitate such patterns.

Amongst the rest of these Examples, this of Moses is one of the most
remarkable, and it may justly be set upon Record as a strange thing, that one
in the heat of Youth, as he was, who had always been brought up amid'st the
delights and favor of the Court, and so by his Age and manner of Education
inclined to Pleasures and Ambition; that such an one should notwithstanding,
prefer the troubles of a Wilderness before the Pleasures of a Court, exchange
all his honors for the present, and his hopes for the future, for certain
reproach and troubles; refusing to be called the Son of Pharaoh 's Daughter,
and choosing rather to suffer affliction with the People of God. And because it
might be wondered at, upon what reason and motive he did this; the Text gives
us an account of it, he had respect unto the recompense of reward.

The words will not need much explication. They give us an account what it was
that did chiefly encourage Moses to so strange a choice; and that was, his
belief that he should be a gainer by it, his expectation of a reward for it.
(...), For he has respect to the recompense of reward. There are but two
principal terms in the Text, the one denoting the Act and the other the Object.

1. The Act, (...), which we Translate, he had respect to. The word signifies
properly the fixing of his Eye with intention, as men usually do at the mark
which they aim at.

2. The Object, (...), the recompense of reward. The word Reward does not
necessarily imply Merit, as is evident from Romans 4.4. where it is supposed that
it may be of Grace; especially when it referrs to the happiness of our future
state in Heaven; which can never be strictly deserved by any work that we can
do. But it signifies commonly the bestowing of any good thing before promised,
whether out of free Grace and Bounty, or by way of Hire or Wages.

The Proposition I shall insist upon from these words, is this:

Prop.
That it is not only permissively lawful, or an indulgence allowed unto the
infirmity of weak believers, but it is likewise necessary for the most eminent
Saints, to strengthen and support themselves in their difficulties by a special
and particular regard to the recompense of reward.

A Point, which in many respects will deserve your attention, not being so
commonly treated of, and the generality of Men being very apt to mistake about
it; and yet a mistake in this may prove of very dangerous consequence,
especially to one that lies under any fear or dejection of mind, by putting him
into an incapacity of receiving any comfortable evidence concerning his own
sincerity.

I am not ignorant that this inference may seem unto many a bold Paradox and
mistake, as being directly against what has so commonly been asserted and
taught by many others. And therefore I shall endeavor to be the more wary and
considerate in the explication and proof of it.

For Explication of it: It Is requisite that the chief terms be cleared and
distinguished.

1. Reward is of two kinds: 1. Temporal, consisting in a freedom from outward
evils, and the enjoyment of all those blessings which concern our well being in
this Life: Or 2. Eternal, which includes our deliverance from Hell, our
enjoyment of God, and all those inconceiveable joys, which we hope for in the
Life to come.

2. A Man may propose a thing to himself as his End, or aim two manner of ways,
Subordinately, or Principally: 1. That is a Subordinate end, which we desire,
not for it self, but as a means for the helping of us to something beyond it:
2. That is a Principal or ultimate end, unto which all our other prosecutions
and endeavors are but subservient means.

Now to apply these distinctions to our present purpose:

1. Temporal rewards may be the subordinate end in our Obedience; and therefore
are they so often proposed to us in Scripture; and for this reason, Goodness
has the promises of this Life.

2. Temporal reward may at first be the chief occasion of men's being converted
and following Christ. The first reason which made the Woman of Samaria give ear
to him, Job. 4.15.
was her hopes to be eased of the trouble of coming so often to draw water at
the Well. And there is no reason to doubt but that amongst those Multitudes
which at first followed our Savior out of by-ends, some out of curiosity to
see his Miracles, others out of want and hunger to feed upon his Loaves, others
for their health that he might cure them, there were many that proved true
Converts.

3. We must not propose Temporal rewards as our chief end; for then we shall
venture upon any means whereby they may be procured, and consequently shall be
put upon many unlawful courses, which may seem more likely to advantage our
aims in this kind.

4. The chief and ultimate end of all our Actions should be the glory of God.
Since all things are of Him, and through Him, it is but reason they should be to
Him likewise. As the Apostle joins them, Romans 11.36. And thus far I suppose men
do generally agree about this point. But they do not commonly apprehend or
consider, that we do then make the glory of God our principal end, when we
place our chiefest happiness in the enjoyment of him. So that we are not to
look upon his glory as any thing abstracted from, or contrary to our own good,
but that wherein it consists; God himself (in the phrase of the Schools) being
our objective happiness: I am thy exceeding great reward, Genesis 15.1. And our
own Salvation, or our enjoyment of him, being our formal happiness. So that
that Man who does principally aim at his own Salvation or the enjoyment of God,
may properly be said to make the glory of God his chief and ultimate end: It
being a vain imagination for us to suppose any other or better way for the
promoting of his glory, than by our own happiness, which he principally designs.

As for those Cases which some Men put, wherein these two are separated and
opposed, as if a Man should be content to be damned for the promoting of God's
glory, etc. It were easy to prove that they are inconsiderate, presumptuous
suppositions, not without such wild inconsistences as are not to be supposed,
necessarily implying one of these two absurdities: Either that the chief end of
every Man ought not to be his own happiness, or that his happiness does not
chiefly consist in the enjoyment of God; both which are fundamental Principles.
For the glory of God is a Relative term, and signifies nothing else but that
excellency of his which results from all his other attributes, his mercy,
justice, power, etc. Now which of his attributes is like to be advanced by
supposing a Creature that loves him in the highest degree should be made
eternally miserable? So then the substance of this last conclusion thus
explained, is this: That as Temporal rewards maybe a subordinate end, so our
Eternal reward must be the principal end of all our Actions.

And so much briefly for the stating or explication of the Point. As for the
proof of it from Scripture, it seems very clear from the Text, wherein we have
an account of that which enabled Moses for this difficult service, his looking
to the reward, now if there had been any other aim, which had a greater
influence and efficacy upon this Action of his, it would not seem agreeable to
the Rules of reason, that a less encouragement should be set down, as the cause
of it, when there was somewhat else upon which that effect had a nearer
dependence.

We have another like instance to the same purpose, in this very Chapter
concerning Abraham. It was questionless a hard duty for him to leave his
Country and his Fathers house, to be a Sojourner in a strange Land; but that
which encouraged him to obey God in this command, was a double reward which he
expected: 1. Temporal, that he should receive that place for his inheritance,
v. 8. 2. Eternal, a City that has Foundations whose Builder and Maker is God,
v. 10.

So in the Chapter immediately before this, ver. 34. the Apostle speaking of
some who were enabled to take joyfully the spoiling of their goods, he renders
this as their chief reason that encouraged them to it, because they knew in
themselves that they had in Heaven a far better and a more enduring Substance.
That which made St. Paul himself to esteem those temporal afflictions to be but
light and momentany, 2 Cor. 4.17.
was the consideration of that far more exceeding and eternal weight of glory
in the Heavens. Upon this ground it is, that our Christian Progress is so often
in Scripture compared unto a Race, where men put forth themselves to the
utmost, 1 Cor. 9.25.
and all for the hopes of obtaining a Crown. And in reference to this does the
Apostle profess of himself, that he did follow after, and reach forth, and
press forward to the mark, that is, he did strein himself with his utmost
diligence and industry, and all for a price (so it follows) for the price of
the high calling of God in Christ, Philip. 3.12, 13, 14.

It were easy to cite abundance of other Scriptures to this purpose, Mat. 5.12.
Romans 2.17. 1 Colos. 1.4, 5. Rev. 2.10.22, 14. 1 Timothy 6.19.
but I hasten to the Reasons of the point.

1. From that Prime and Fundamental Law of Nature, whereby every created thing
is by its most powerful and immediate instincts carried out to its own
conservation. Nothing is more essential, not only to rational, but even to
sensitive Nature, than that it should principally seek its own continuance and
well-being, and all other things only in order to this: So that it may justly
be questioned, whether it be in it self possible, or consistent with this
Principle of Nature, for a Man to love any thing more than himself, or not for
himself upon some account or other? It is granted on all hands, that our chief
end, our summum bonum, is our own happiness: All the difference is, wherein
this happiness does consist, some placing it in the present enjoyments of this
Life, others in the future good things of another World; one Man is for the
Court of Egypt, and to be called the Son of Pharoahs Daughter, another will
rather choose Affliction and reproach for the present in expectation of some
better reward afterward. And though both do vastly differ about the several
ways and means which they propose to themselves, yet they do and must agree in
the same general scope and end of happiness. So that according to this
Principle, to aim chiefly at our own well-being, is not only permissively
lawful (as I said before) a thing which we may do; nor is it necessary only by
way of precept, being, that which a Man ought to do as his duty; but it is
likewise essentially necessary to our very nature; so that every Man must do
it, nor can he do otherwise.

For the clearer explication of this, I shall crave leave to remember you of
that distinction which I have elsewhere had occasion to insist upon, betwixt
Natural Principles and Moral Duties.

1. By natural Principles, I mean such kind of impressions, as are originally
stamped upon the nature of things, whereby they are fitted for those services,
to which they are designed in their Creation: The Acts of which are necessary,
and under no kind of liberty of being suspended. Herein did the Wisdom of the
Creation consist, that God was pleased to endue the kinds of things, with such
natures and principles, as might accommodate them for those works to which they
were appointed. And he Governs all things by such Laws, as are suited to those
several natures, which he had at first implanted in them. The most universal
principle belonging to all kinds of things is self-preservation, which in Man
(being a rational Agent) is somewhat further advanced to strong propensions and
desires of the Soul, after a state of happiness, which has the predominancy
over all other inclinations, as being the supreme and ultimate end, to which
all particular designs and actions must be subservient.

2. By Moral Duties I mean, such Habits or Actions as are the most proper means
for the attaining of this end. About these we have a liberty of Acting; to
which we are to be induced in a moral way, by such kind of Arguments and
Motives, as are in themselves sufficient to convince the Reason.

So that self-love and the proposing of happiness as our chief end, though it
be the Foundation of Duty, that basis or substratum upon which the Law is
founded, yet it is not properly a moral duty; because every Man must do it
necessarily, nor can he do otherwise.

Now to suppose that the Holy and Wise God should impose any thing as a duty
upon his Creatures, which is inconsistent with those principles that he himself
has implanted in their natures, in their first Creation, is an apprehension as
absurd in it self as it is unworthy of God.

This natural Principle of endeavoring after happiness, is the Foundation of
all Moral Duties: For the highest moral inducement or motive to persw^de men to
any thing, is to represent such a thing as necessary to their happiness; so
that our Obligation to Duty, is from the Law of God, but the great motive to it
is Love to our selves and a natural desire of happiness.

2. From the chief scope of all those promises and threats so frequent in
Scripture, which are certainly intended for this very purpose to excite and
quicken us in our Obedience. Now it cannot be denied, but that it is our duty to
make that the aim and end of our actions, which the Scripture it self proposes
to be so; namely, to avoid the evil and obtain the good therein mentioned:
Deuteronomy. 30.19, 20. After that large Catalogue of Mercies and Judgments before
recited, Moses puts them in mind, that he had set before them that day, life
and death, blessing and cursing, therefore choose life, that thou and thy seed
may live, etc. Upon this account it is that several precepts in Scripture
are pressed upon us with so many affectionate insinuations taken from the
consideration of our own good: Deuteronomy. 5.29. Oh that there were such an heart in
them, that they would fear me, and keep my Commandments always, that it might
be well with them, and their Children after them. And Chap. 6. v. 24. The Lord
Commanded us to do all these things for our good always, that he might preserve
us alive, etc. Now I say, it is not only lawful, but it is our duty to serve God
upon his own motives and encouragements, and to make that a principal reason
and end of our obedience, which he himself proposes to us under those
Considerations.

3. From the nature of that Principle, which has the chief influence upon the
very life and actions of every Religious Man, and that is Faith. The just shall
live by Faith. As Reason is the Foundation of all humane actions, so is Faith
of Religious dutys. And every one under the notion of just or Religious, is
acted by this principle of Faith, as brutes are by Sense, and Men by Reason.
Now Faith, v. 1. Is the substance of things hoped for, and the evidence of
things not seen. Where among the things hoped for, and not seen, are clearly
meant, the happiness and salvation which we expect hereafter, the rewards of a
better life, which Faith does as realy discern in the promises, as if they were
actually present to the Sense. Hence it is, that Salvation is said to be the
end of our Faith, receiving the end of your Faith even the Salvation of your
Souls, 1 Pet. 1.9. So then if all Religious actions be derived from Faith, as
the main root and principle of them, and if Faith does chiefly refer to the
rewards hoped for and not seen, then it must needs follow, that it is as
necessary for a believer to have a principal aim at the rewards, as it is for
him to live by Faith: And that he may as well pretend to be above the life of
Faith, as to be above the help of those encouragements of the rewards and
promises proposed in Scripture; and so far as Faith has an influence upon our
Religious actions, so far must we respect the recompense of reward.

4. From the nature of our Love, which is another Principle; whereby the Soul
is acted and carried on, in all its attempts and prosecutions. Now the proper
object of Love, is not so much that which is absolutely good in it self, as
that which is relatively so to us. And this being rightly understood will give
very much light unto the chief difficulties about the Point in hand: It Is true
indeed, there are in the Deity, attributes of such a superlative goodness, that
of themselves they do deserve infinitely more than the best of our affections;
but yet they prove effectual to the winning over of our love and desires so far
only, as they are apprehended to be convenient for us. And therefore the
exactest Schoolman, who spends most of his time and endeavors in the
contemplation of those transcendent excellencies which are to be found in the
Deity, after all his Studies may find his heart as cold and stupid, as the most
ignorant man. These things may raise his wonder, but not his affections, or in
the phrase of a good Divine, they may dazzle his understanding into a more
distempered ignorance, but will never be able to ravish his Soul with those
angelical flames of love, which sanctified men do feel on Earth, and the
glorified Saints do fully enjoy in Heaven. Hence is it, that though the Devil
does understand those absolute perfections in the divine nature better than any
man in the World, as that God is most wise, most holy, most glorious; yet he
does not love him, because he himself cannot receive any benefit by him. And
upon the same ground is it, that though a man should be sufficiently persuaded,
that his neighbor has more grace than himself, and so is absolutely more
lovely, yet he is not bound to love his neighbor better than himself; because
it is not absolute, but relative good, that is the surest ground of love. And
therefore the beloved Disciple who had most skill in the nature of this grace,
tells us that we loved God because he loved us first, 1 John 4.19. Implying
some kind of necessity of apprehending God under the notion of a Friend or a
Savior, before we shall love him. He that comes to God must look upon him as
(...), a Rewarder, v. 6. Now, I say, if God's love to us, must be the chief
reason of our love to him, then is it necessary for us in our best services to
have a principal respect unto the reward, and those things which to us may be
most advantageous. To which I shall add, That the phrase of loving God with all
our hearts, with all our souls, and with all our might (so frequent in
Scripture) does signify no more, than loving him as our chief end. We are
allowed to love other things in such a measure and proportion as they are
conducible to our real happiness, and as they are subordinate ends: But our
chief and ultimate end is said to have all, because it comprehends under it all
the intermediate.

5. Unto these I might add a fifth Reason, from those eminent examples in
Scripture to this purpose. That of Adam, who whilst he was in the perfect state
of innocence, and consequently could not have any such reluctance or weakness
in his nature, which might make a good duty seem difficult, yet God saw it
necessary for him, that his obedience should be fenced about with promises and
threatenings. Do this and live, Genesis 2.17.
The day thou eatest thereof thou shall dye the death. And therefore certainly
it is not possible for us, who have corrupted natures to attain unto any
perfection above this. Nay of Christ himself, it is recorded in the next
Chapter to this, verse. 2. That he endured the Cross and despised the shame for
the joy that was set before him. And so too in the fifth Chap. verse. 7.8. He
was afraid, and learned obedience by the things which he suffered. Now you know
that our Savior was perfect Man: perfect in regard of all those things which
are essentially and necessarily annexed to our natures, and perfect too in
respect of that utmost holiness of which in this life we are capable; and
therefore if he according to his humanity were thus quickened in his obedience,
by hopes of reward and fears of suffering, certainly then it is impossible for
us whilst we are in this World to be ever above such helps.

I shall need to say no more for confirmation of the Point. There are many
Objections against it, as being beside the common road and opinion; some of the
chief of these, I shall endeavor briefly to examine and answer, and then
proceed to application.

The first Objection may be from that common notion of mercenary love and
servile fear, 1 Object.
which are usually thus described, when we do good out of love to the reward
that belongs to it, and avoid evil out of fear of those judgments that may
follow upon it. And these are frequently condemned as sinful affections,
belonging to the Devil and wicked men, and no way agreeing to one that has the
nature of a Child. To which purpose are those common sayings, Oderunt peccare
mali formidine poenae: And that of St. Augustine, Qui Gehennas metuit, Ep. 4.4.
non peccare metuit sed ardere; ille autem peccare metuit, qui peccatum ipsum
sicut gehennas odit. He that is restrained from sinning by the fear of Hell, is
not so much afraid to sin as to be damned; he only does truly fear sin who
hates it as he does Hell; with diverse the like speeches.

Sol.
For Answer to this: 1. As to the authority of such usual opinions or sayings,
it is considerable that the Assertion here maintained, being acknowledged to be
a Paradox, it cannot therefore in reason be expected, that bare humane
Testimony should be looked upon as of any special force against it. And to
speak as the truth is, it is too common a fault amongst good Divines to take up
general notions upon trust, without applying them to the rule by a particular
examination.

2. As to the reason of this Objection, I humbly conceive with submission, that
the proper nature of servile fear, is to drive us from God in rebellion and
disloyalty, rather than to him in obedience and submission. And therefore the
metaphor is taken from a slave, in whom the fear of his master makes him run
away from him, and desire that he may not return to him again, as it was with
the Amalekites servant, 1 Samuel 30.15. When men are afraid of God and fly from
him as an enemy, whose ruin they wish, according to that common saying: Quem
quisque metuit, periisse expetit: So that a man cannot do good out of a servile
fear, this does not put him upon the performance of his duty, but of his lusts;
such was that fear in Adam, which made him fly from and endeavor to hide
himself and his faults from God, 1 Samuel 31.4.
such was that in Saul and Judas, which made one of them run upon his sword,
and the other to strangle himself. The disposition of a child is fear mixed
with love: The fear of the rod may bring a child to his father in filial
obedience, tho it drive the servant from his master in a slavish disloyalty.
And so likewise for mercenary love; which is when reward can hire us to any
thing without any consideration of the good or evil of it, as in those two
examples of Saul and Judas, one of whom would disobey God to win the spoils of
his enemies, and the other betray his master for thirty pieces of silver. Such
was that also in Balaam, of whom the Apostle says, 2 Pet. 2.15.
that he loved the wages of unrighteousness, because of his strong inclinations
to curse Israel, that he might obtain Balaac's reward.

It Is true indeed, if there be in a man's heart any secret desire of liberty to
sin, and a grief because there is punishment annexed to it, such a disposition
of the soul is unquestionably evil; and of such alone it may be truly said,
that he does not fear to sin, but to be punished, as St. Austin speaks. And yet
it does not follow but that sin ought to be avoided for the punishment
denounced against it. And he who out of consideration of punishment is afraid
to offend God (supposing that he does not in his heart, actually desire any
thing against the Law and Justice of God) such an one does as he ought; for
punishments are truly to be feared, and they are therefore proposed in
Scripture to deterr us from sinning.

2. Object.
2. Another Objection is this: If in our obedience we may chiefly aim at our
own private benefit, then it seems that we may love our selves better than God;
nay then we set up our selves in his room. For that which we propose as our
chief end, that we make our God: And this (says one) is the highest impiety
imaginable; why, a man had better pull the Sun out of Heaven than pull God
thence, which he does whilst he makes a Deity of himself. It Is not better than
the Indians Idolatry, who adore the Devil; nor less absurd than the Egyptians
Devotion, who worship the Onyons and Leeks. God is to be loved for himself, and
to love him for any thing else, were to place somewhat above him.

For answer to this, Sol.
you may please to remember what was said before, that we do then make God our
chief end, and give him that supreme honor which he expects, when we place all
our happiness in the enjoyment of him. He does not propose himself to us in
Scripture as abstracted from our good, but as comprehending it. So he tells
Abraham, I am thy exceeding great reward: Genesis 15.1.
So that the loving of God for himself and his own excellency, so much talked
of in Mystical Divinity, is but another name, it is not another thing, from
Heaven and Salvation: For the enjoyment of God is Heaven. And as a man's love
is to any thing, so must his desire be of enjoying it. Nor can it otherwise be,
but that if God be our objective happiness, our enjoyment of him must be our
formal happiness. The force of this Argument supposes those things to be
separated and opposed, which do necessarily involve one the other.

3. Object.
3. A third Objection may be from those two great examples of Moses, the
instance of the Text; and St. Paul, as some think, the Penman of it.

1. As for Moses, we read of him that he was so desirous of his brethren's
pardon, that rather than his request for them should be denied, he would have
his own name blotted out of the Book of Life. Exodus 32.32.

2. And St. Paul speaking of the rejection of the Jews, professes that he
wished himself to be an Anathema from Christ; for his brethren and kinsmen
according to the flesh, Romans 9.3. From whence it may seem that these holy men
had so fully cast of all respects of their own, that they could wish themselves
damned, for the salvation of their brethren. So far were they from aiming
principally at the recompense of reward.

Sol.
To that of Moses, I answer, it is evident from the context, that it is to be
understood of temporal death, not Eternal. In the 10th. Verse of that Chapter,
God had told Moses that if he would let him alone, to destroy that People for
their Idolatry, he would make of him a great Nation: ver. 32. Moses rather
desires that God would spare the People; and destroy him; rather than not
forgive their sin, blot me I pray thee out of the Book which thou have written.
The phrase of a written Book, being a metaphorical expression, and signifying
no more than the purpose of God, which he has decreed within himself in
reference to future events, so that to be cut off by an untimely death, is to
be blotted out of this Book. Now to die for a man's Country is no more than
what every wise and valiant man is engaged to by the Rules of Morality. There
being a happiness beyond and above a temporal life which may be purchased by
such sufferings.

As to St. Paul's wish of being an Anathema from Christ: such a desire if
understood in the strictest sense of it, cannot be lawful upon any condition;
the reason is, because a man cannot properly be an Anathema from Christ, unless
he be in a state of sin, and consequently an enemy to God, as well as in a
state of misery. And there is no imaginable condition that can make it lawful
for a man to wish himself in a state of sin: Besides that it implies a gross
contradiction, as if a man out of the zeal of his love to God, should wish
himself to be an enemy to him, and to be eternally separated from him.

Or if any shall suppose the meaning of his wish to be, that he might be only
separated from the enjoyment of Christ, without being an enemy to him: Besides
that this is inconsistent with the Divine goodness, that those who love him in
the highest degree, should be debarred from the enjoyment of him: It has in it
likewise a plain contradiction to the nature of love and zeal.

The proper notion of loving any thing with all our might, is so to esteem and
desire it, as to place our chief happiness in the enjoyment of it. And zeal is
nothing else but a warm anger against any thing which may hinder us in this
fruition. So that for a man out of the Zeal of his love to God, to be content
not to enjoy him, must needs be a plain contradiction.

And as for such a degree of love to to our brethren as the strictest sense of
these words does imply, it is neither lawful, nor possible: 1. Not lawful,
because God has proposed the love of our selves as the pattern of our love to
others, and it is not fit that in drawing the portraicture, we should spoil the
pattern. That order in Charity to which we are obliged does not permit this. 2.
Not possible, because such a love would be in some sense greater than that
which Christ showed unto the World, and greater than that has no man, Joh.
15.13. So that this phrase is not to be understood in the strictest literal
sense, or if it should, it is by no means lawful, and therefore not to be drawn
into example.

What the most proper and genuine sense of that Scripture may be, is not so
easy to determine, St. Hierom understands it de occisione corporali; so making
it equivalent with that other saying of the same Apostle, 1 These. 2.8. We were
willing to have imparted unto you, nor the Gospel of God only, but also our
Souls (or lives) because ye were dear unto us. So Christ is said to be made a
curse for us, by reason of that ignominious death, etc.

Photius.
Some others would have the sense of it thus interpreted. I could wish you were
made partakers of the true faith, though I were as yet alienated from it.

Others by this phrase of Anathema from Christ, Dr. Hammond.
suppose to be meant Excommunication from the Church, which is the body of
Christ, with those consequences, which did commonly ensue upon it; (...) the
destruction of the flesh, i. e. several diseases and temporal afflictions,
which the Apostle was content to undergo for his brethrens sake.

It Is observed by some, that amongst the Jews (unto whose customs and practice
the Apostle does here allude) there were two sorts of Anathema's, the one
styled Niddui, by which men were debarred the external Communion of the Church
for the space of 30 days: The other Cherem, which did extend to a perpetual
exclusion from the Church by execrations and curses. The Apostle he styles it
Anathema Maranatha. It Is thought that his wish in this place, does allude only
to the first of these, and does import only his being content to undergo some
temporary, short separation from the Church privileges and from the
consolations of Christ, but not an eternal separation from the Spirit and Grace
of Christ.

Others would have this to be the sense of the words, as if he should have
said, I could be content for my brethrens sake, not only to want the honor of
my Apostleship, but in respect of my outward condition, to be the most
contemptible amongst Christians, as those are, who are Anathematized or
Excommunicated.

That which to me seems the most rational solution of this difficult Scripture,
is to look upon it as an Hyperbolical expression (of which we have several
other instances in Scripture) which are not to be interpreted according to the
strict literal sense of the words, but according to the drift of the speaker,
St. Paul being under great prejudices amongst his Countrymen as an enemy to
them, for his defection from them, and adhering to the Christian assemblies,
does endeavor to vindicate himself from those prejudices, by a most solemn
protestation, that there was nothing imaginable, and possible for him to do or
suffer, for their benefit, but what he was most ready and willing unto. So far
was he from deserving to be thought their enemy: Which sense seems likewise to
be favored by the verb (...), optarim, the potential, I could wish, answerable
to that other place, Gal. 4.15. I bear you record that if it had been possible,
you would have plucked out your own Eyes and have given them to me.

Hence it is easy to collect what we are to judge of those expressions like to
this, ascribed to diverse others. That of one of the Popish Saints, who wished
that she her self might be cast into Hell, upon that condition that she might
stop the mouth of it, so that none might ever enter afterward. That of
Anselme: That if Hell and Sin were set before him, he would rather choose Hell,
than Sin: That he had rather be in Hell without Sin, than in Heaven with it.
Loyola.
That of another, that he did not so much fear and hate the torments as the
blasphemies of the damned; with diverse the like expressions frequent in the
Popish Legend, and Mystical Divines.

Now I say though it is possible that such kind of speeches may proceed from
those that are good, in some special zeal and heat of their affections, yet
they are not from a serious considerate judgment, but being compared with the
rule will be found to be unwary, boasting expressions, pretending to a higher
degree of sanctity than men are capable of, or than is required from them.

I fear I have been too long in confirmation of this Point: I shall be but very
brief in the Application of it.

1. This may serve to confute that common and uncomfortable error, so
frequently vented both from the Pulpit, and the Press, namely, that it is not
enough to prove our sincerity, that we are able to do good out of love to the
reward, and so to avoid evil for fear of punishment; wicked men may go so far;
every one that is sanctified, must be able to hate sin chiefly for its own
deformity, and to love goodness for its own comeliness and beauty, and so far
make the glory of God his chief aim (not any respect of his own) that if his
damnation might conduce more to Gods glory, he were bound to desire that,
rather than to be saved: Unto those that talk at this rate, I might suggest
that advice of the Wiseman, Eccles. 7.16. Be not righteous over much, neither
make thy self over wise, why should thou destroy thy self? That is, do not
pretend to such holiness, as thou art not capable of, this is to be
over-righteous; do not invent such precepts as the Scripture does not
prescribe, this is to be over-wise; by limiting salvation unto such rules as
thou art not able to conform unto, thou may be said to destroy thy self. It
would be a sufficient confutation of such men, if they could impartially
examine their own hearts, what that motive is which has the chief influence
upon them in all their difficult services, whether or no it be not, or should
not be, the promises of the Gospel apprehended by faith, and if so, it may be a
sufficient shame and check to them for the venting of such doctrines, according
to which they themselves must needs remain in a comfortless condition: St. Paul
reckons upon it as being a good degree of grace, that he was able to look more
at the things which are not seen, 2 Cor. 4.18.
than upon the things which are seen.

It Is the folly and peevishness of our natures to run into extremities of all
kinds: As, the generality of men on the one hand to licentiousness and
profaneness, so some on the other, to frame unto themselves such rules of
holiness as God does not require, being wise above that which is written. Some
of the Schoolmen and Mystical Divines have been so rigid in this kind, Sess.
6. Can. 8.
that the Council of Trent were fain to make particular Canon against them.
Wherein they denounce an Anathema unto any one who shall say, it is unlawful for
a man to avoid sin out of the fear of Hell.

It cannot be denied but that there is a vast difference amongst men, in
reference to their performance of duties; as for an unregenerate person, he
cannot set about any good duty without much pain and disquietness; spiritual
services are utterly against the bent of his inclinations; when he is engaged
in them he is out of his element, like a fish in the air. Whereas on the
contrary, the more any one grows in grace, the more his nature is
spiritualized, the more amiableness does he see in the ways of God, and he can
walk in them with a kind of complacency and naturalness, as better agreeing
with his sanctified desires; and sometimes perhaps the thought of Gods
excellencies, may in respect of sense be actually more incumbent and pressing
upon his Spirit, than the consideration of reward; but that which in a man's
general course, is the root and principal encouragement against all
difficulties must be this recompense of reward.

2. Let us be exhorted to imitate this Example in the Text: In all our
temptations and difficulties to propose unto our selves those great and
precious promises which are offered in the Scriptures.

Learn to judge concerning the true difference of things, and to value them
according to their real worth, and to prefer the things that are not seen. It
is in this place your trade and business, to be skilled in all the advantages
of Exchange, and it will be a very great shame and folly for men that profess
Christianity, so to be immersed in these present sensual things as to neglect
their future hopes. It Is observable how the Scripture does in several places
set forth this recompense of reward, under such kind of descriptions as might
render it most desirable to all sorts of men: Sometimes it is styled Riches,
hid Treasure, a Pearl, or Jewel of inestimable value: Sometimes Honor, the
sitting upon a Throne, the inheritance of a Kingdom, a Crown of Life and Glory:
Sometimes delight, fullness of joy, Rivers of pleasures; that men might not be
tempted by any thing else, to a neglect of this. And therefore in every
particular temptation, whether of allurement or danger, we are to fly for
refuge unto the hope that is set before us, remembering that great and terrible
day of the Lord, etc.

The true reason why men are so easily overcome by these present worldly hopes
and fears, is because they do not labor to strengthen and to stir up their
Faith, in respect of those future things which are not seen. It could not be,
if men did really believe and consider what they profess, that they should be
so foolish as to run upon mischief, and forsake their own mercies. It was a
considerable advantage to Moses to be looked upon as the son of Pharaohs
daughter, and yet he esteemed this as nothing in comparison of the inheritance
of a far better Kingdom; and therefore he despised all other things that came
in competition with that. We have none of us perhaps so great temptations, but
yet we have as great encouragements as he, having a share in the same promises,
and being partakers of the like hopes; and therefore we ought to be very much
ashamed, upon every slight occasion to walk so unanswerably to them. Though
some men may have greater temptations than others, yet this is our privilege,
that no man can have so great temptation to sin as he has to his duty.

Do but consider the advice of the Apostle 2 Pet. 3.14. Speaking of a
Christians future happiness. Wherefore beloved since you look for such things,
be diligent that ye be found in peace without spot and blameless. Let me add
the like speech of another Apostle, with which I shall conclude, 2 Cor. 7.1.
Since we have such promises, and entertain such expectations, Let us therefore
cleanse our selves from all filthiness both of flesh and spirit, perfecting
holiness in the fear of God.

The End of the First Sermon.
The Second Sermon.
ROMANS XIV.17.18. For the Kingdom of God is not meat and drink, but
righteousness and peace and joy in the holy Ghost.

For he that in these things serves Christ, is acceptable to God, and approved
of Men.


THere is nothing of greater importance toward the healing of the minds of
men, than to have a right understanding of those Principles, by which they
profess to be guided in their differences. Now tho it should be granted that
some of the Leaders amongst all Parties, are chiefly swayed by their particular
interests and desires of dominion, yet because they have done, and will always,
pretend at least, to found their differences upon grounds of Religion, whereby
those that are Followers amongst them are heated to a zeal and eagerness in
opposition of one another: Therefore it is of very great consequence that men
should be rightly informed, what Religion is? Wherein it chiefly consists? What
are the main things to be contended for about it? How men should demean
themselves in matters of lesser moment? In what method the obligation of things
is to be stated? And in brief, how they should so order their conversations, as
to be both accepted of God, and approved of men? Than which nothing can more
effectually conduce to that general peace and settlement, which these Nations
are now in expectation of: To which purpose I have made choice of this Text.

The occasion and dependence of the Words is this:

There being in those Primitive times many converts, as well amongst the
Gentiles as Jews, that different way, wherein they had been severally
instituted, did by accident prove a great impediment, to their joining together
for promoting the work of the Gospel.

The Gentiles having been before given up to a most irrational way of Worship
of dumb Idols, which had no tolerable plea for the reason or institution of it,
were upon their receiving of Christianity, wholly won over to the simplicity of
the Gospel. Whereas the Jews having been educated in another way of Worship,
enjoined by God himself, confirmed with many miracles, by the hand of Moses,
whose Doctrine and Laws, for a long time together had been preached amongst
them, in every City, being read in the Synagogues every Sabbath day, Act.
15.21. They could not so easily be won over to embrace the Gospel, so as wholly
to renounce all their legal institutions, but were apt to think that some of
them might very well consist together with Christianity.

There are two instances which the Apostle does particularly insist upon, in
this Chapter, that of meats, and days. Nothing was more detestable among the
Jews, than to eat of their forbidden meats, and there was no kind of torment
but they would undergo, 2 Maccab. Chap. 7.
rather than be induced to offend in this kind; as having radicated in them a
general abhorrency from such things, grounded upon Religion.

And as for the observation of Days, wherein the solemnity of Worship did
consist, It could not be expected but that the Religious Jews, must needs be
much prejudiced against any such way, as did pretend to an abolition of them.

Now in this case, there were but two ways of obviating this difference: 1.
Either the Apostles must insist upon their Apostolical Authority, and by some
Canon or decree condemn these superstitious scruples; they themselves having
been the chief Preachers of the Gospel, and confirmed it by many signs and
miracles, might with reason expect, that they should be owned as infallible
judges, in a controversy of this nature, in whose determination others ought to
acquiesce. And there are but few men in the World, engaged in Parties, who upon
such an advantage would not rather have inclined to this course. Or else, 2.
They must find out some expedient for this difference, to accommodate matters
unto the present state of things, and to moderate the rigor on either hand. And
it seemed good to the Holy Ghost and to the Apostles, rather to take this way,
which is the main scope of this Chapter. Wherein the Apostle lays down several
rules to regulate men's carriage in cases of this nature.

1. To forbear offensive disputes about these things, verse. 1.

2. To avoid despising and condemning one another upon this account. He that
has a clearer light concerning his own just liberty, must not despise another
who comes short in this persuasion; and the other must not judge him, as being
loose and irreligious in doing more than he ought, v. 3. This he confirms by
these Reasons.

1. You have no commission and authority to judge another man's servant, verse. 4.

2. Tho you both differ about these controverted Points, yet you both agree in
these other Rules, that no Man ought to put a stumbling block, or occasion to
fall, in his brothers way, verse. 13. And that every one ought to walk
charitably, v. 15. And to take care that their good be not evil spoken of, v.
16. And the Rules in which both sides do agree, ought not to be violated in the
prosecution of those things about which they differ: And then in the words of
the Text, he pitches upon another cogent reason to the same purpose, because
the Kingdom of God consists not in such things as were of the same and the like
nature with the controverted Points; such things are no indication of a man's
good or bad state, and therefore you ought not to judge of men's conditions by
them: but in those more weighty and substantial duties of righteousness, and
peace, and joy in the holy Ghost; whosoever lays out his strength and zeal in
things of this nature, shall be sure (though he do mistake in other matters) to
be both accepted of God, and approved of men. That Is the connection of the words:

The Text contains a description of those chief things wherein Religion
consists.

1. The thing described. 2. The description it self.
By that phrase, the Kingdom of God, is meant, Christianity, or the state of
Religion under the Government of the Messiah, which was by the Jews commonly
styled the Age of the Messiah, or the Kingdom of God, according to that famous
Prophecy of Daniel, c. 2. v. 44. That the God of Heaven should set up a Kingdom
which should never be destroyed, but should stand for ever. Conformably
whereunto the Apostle to the Hebrews, c. 12. v. 28. calls the state and
dispensation of the Gospel a Kingdom which cannot be moved.

This is described both by the Matter, Principle, and Effects of it:

1. The Object matter, wherein it consists, and that both Negatively and
Positively.

1. Negatively, It Is not meat and drink, that is, it consists not in, or is not
to be judged of by those more circumstantial parts of Religion, referring to
external observances; which as to the acts of them may be performed by all kind
of persons, whether good or bad; and do not necessarily suppose or require any
habitual goodness to the doing of them. Not but that 'twas a sin to neglect
these under the law, and 'twas a duty to be rightly persuaded concerning our
liberty from them under the Gospel; but yet not of such moment or consequence,
that a man might hereby judge of his own or another state.

2. Positively, but in righteousness and peace and joy in the holy Ghost. That
is, in such internal habits and dispositions of the soul, whereby the mind is
renewed and changed, and made conformable to the image of God, particularly.

1. Righteousness, (...), this is twofold: 1. Imputed, styled the righteousness
of Faith: Of which the Apostle had treated at large in the eleven first
Chapters of this Epistle.

2. Inherent, that is such a sanctification of the nature, whereby a man is
carried on to a universal conformity unto the moral Law, both in respect of the
first and second Table. Which latter seems to be more immediately intended in
this place, because it may more properly be considered under the notion of a
duty, and is likewise the most obvious and natural sign, whereby a man may
judge of his estate: And is elsewhere called grace, in opposition to meats,
Heb. 13.9. It is a good thing that the heart be established with grace, not
with meats, which have not profited them that have been occupied therein.

2. Peace, (...), this Word also is capable of a twofold sense. 1. It may
signify a quiet state of mind, arising from an assurance of our reconciliation
with God. In which sense it is to be understood Romans 5.1. Being justified by
Faith, we have peace with God. This is sometimes stiyed (...), and is rather a
privilege than a duty. Or else 2. It may signify the grace of Peaceableness,
the desire and study of promoting peace amongst one another, a readiness and
willingness of mind to agree with such in affection from whom we differ in
judgment. And this is properly our duty, being sometimes styled (...) and
(...), which tho it be but a branch of that general righteousness signified in
the former Word, yet the Apostle thought fit to specify this in particular,
because of its suitableness to the business in hand. And that this is the
proper sense of the Word in this place may appear by v. 19. where he returns
again to a further enforcing of this duty, Let us therefore follow after the
things which make for peace.

3. Joy in the holy Ghost: This phrase likewise is capable of a twofold sense.
1. It may signify a blessing or privilege, consisting in the enlargement of the
Soul, by the shining in of the light of Gods Countenance, when he is pleased to
shed abroad a sense of his love in our hearts, and by that means to fill us
with joy unspeakable and glorious. Or 2. A Grace or duty, which Christians are
bound to labor after, and to attain: And that is, quiet submission to every
dispensation of providence, an ability of rejoicing in an afflicted estate, as
being acted by principles above these sensible things. This is elsewhere
styled, rejoicing in hope, Romans 5.2. -- 12.12. And in another place, 1 These.
1.6. the Apostle does particularly explain what he means by this joy in the
holy Ghost, namely the bearing of affliction with joy; ye received the word in
much affliction, with joy in the holy Ghost. It Is styled by this name for its
opposition to the joy of the World, which is grounded only upon external
prosperity; whereas that which must support a man under an afflicted estate, is
something of an higher nature.

2. Religion is here described by its principle or end, whosoever in these
things serves Christ. There must be a serving of Christ in these things, that
is, it is not the mere performance of such moral duties as are of natural
obligation, unless they be done in obedience to him as our Lord and Lawgiver,
and in reliance upon him, for his pardon and acceptance as our Priest and
Savior, that can make us acceptable to Christ, or entitle us to the name of
Christians.

3. From the fruits and effects of it. It renders a man acceptable to God and
approved of men. 1. Accepted of God (...), well-pleasing to God. It Is the same
with that Word, Acts 10.35. In every Nation he that fears God and works
righteousness is accepted with him. 2. Approved of men, (...), it is an
expression frequently applied to gold, to signify its purity and excellency;
and to money in general to express its currantness. So the Septuagint, Genesis
23.16. (...), current money. And from thence it is translated to signify the
integrity of persons, such as pass for current and approved amongst all sorts
of men.

The Words thus explained may very properly afford these three Observations.

1. That there are some things in Religion, wherein a man may be very forward
and zealous, and yet fall short of the Kingdom of God, It Is not meat and drink.

2. There are other things in Religion, wherein if a man be faithful and
sincere, he shall be accepted by God, tho he should mistake and fall short of
his duty in other things, But righteousness and peace, etc.

3. The Reason why Christians of several persuasions are less approved to one
another, is because they lay out more of their zeal and strength in those
lesser things, meat and drink, than in those of greater consequence.

Prop. I.
I. There are some things in Religion wherein a Man may be very forward and
zealous, and yet fall short of the Kingdom of God.

Not as if these things were to be despised or neglected; they are matters of
Religion, and therefore must be of consequence. And it is a man's duty to labor
after a right persuasion concerning the just bounds of his liberty. And it is no
less than a sin and superstition for a man to be needlessly scrupulous in such
things. But yet these things are not so essential to a state of grace, but
that, as on the one hand a mistake in them shall not prove so pernicious as to
make a man (who is otherwise sincere) incapable of the Kingdom of God: So
neither is a right persuasion or a zeal in them, so essentially good as to
entitle a man to it.

To the same purpose is that Text, 1 Cor. 8.8. Meat commends not a Man to
God, for neither if we eat are we the better, neither if we eat not are we the
worse. Heb. 13.9. It Is good that the heart be established with grace, not with
meats, which have not profited them that have been busied therein.

Gal. 6.5. In Christ Jesus neither circumcision avails any thing, nor
uncircumcision, but faith which works by love. And elsewhere it is said,
bodily exercise profits little; with several other the like Scriptures, which
I cannot stand to enumerate.

I shall briefly suggest these two Reasons of the Point.

1. Because these things do not make us the better, as was said in that
forecited place, 1 Cor. 8.8. And therefore cannot entitle us to the Kingdom of
God. They profit not, Heb. 13.9. That is, they are not effectual to the things
of greatest consequence. They do not improve a man as to his state of holiness,
his real intrinsical worth. There is not any natural moral good in them, but
they are so denominated, because we do hereby exercise our moral righteousness
and obedience, which is good in it self: These things are mere externals,
whereas the kingdom of God is chiefly internal and spiritual.

2. Because these kind of Services do not necessarily require or suppose that
which is the very life and power of Religion, but are things of another kind
and sphere, and might be observed upon other by-ends. A Jew might have nothing
at all of inward grace in his heart, and yet be very scrupulous in the
observance of meats and days. And usually men think to compensate their want of
the substance of Religion, by their zeal in circumstantials: And besides, any
external act of Religion, suppose dying for it, may be performed upon such
natural principles, as are wholly heterogeneous to it. So that these things do
neither make us holy, nor suppose us to be so; and therefore can be no good
evidence.

The Use and application of this should be to enquire, what things there are
now in controversy amongst us in these times, answerable to these differences
about meat and drink, and to proportion our demeanor toward one another in
reference to such things, according to the Rules here prescribed.

It is not very easy nor perhaps would it be prudent, to enumerate any
particular list of such things as are now under debate amongst us in these
times: But you may know them by these three general Notes.

1. They are such things as are not against natural light, otherwise they would
have a moral vitiousness in them, and be opposite to that righteousness
mentioned in the other clause.

2. They are such things as good men, true believers, may and do differ about.

3. They are such things as wicked men and hypocrites, may be very zealous for,
or against, on both sides. Whatever the thing be, either concerning Practice or
Opinion, which comes under all these notes (not any one of them) it may be
safely brought under the same Rules, that are here given concerning the
differences about meats and drinks: Namely these three.

1. First not to think our selves better men than others, for our advantages in
things of this nature. The Apostle says they do not commend us to God, and
therefore should not commend us to our selves. He says they do not make us
better, and therefore we should not think our selves better for them. And
besides they are common to hypocrites and wicked men, and upon that account
cannot be any special arguments of our goodness.

2. We are not to think the worse of others for their differences of this
nature, so as to despise them, or censure them. It cannot be, but that we must
needs think the worse of their actions or opinions; because whoever judges
himself to be in the right, must needs conclude those of an opposite persuasion
or practice to be in the wrong: But we are not upon this account to censure
such persons as to their estates and conditions, as if they were not sincerely
Religious, nor in favor with God. For though they should be erroneous and
mistaken in their judgments in such things, yet if their conversation be more
just and righteous than ours, if more humble and peaceable, they are thereupon
to be accounted better than we are; both more acceptable of God, and more
approved of men.

3. We are not to prosecute any Truth or Duty of this nature, to the prejudice
of such things as are of greater moment. There are several Truths which are not
of so great consequence as peace, and unity, and charity. And therefore in such
things, there ought to be a mutual forbearance toward one another; and men
should endeavor by all means of amity and kindness to join together, for the
promoting of those more substantial Truths and Duties, wherein they agree
according to that Rule of the Apostle. Philip. 3.15, 16. And if in any thing ye
be otherwise minded, God shall reveal even this unto you: Nevertheless whereto
we have already attained, let us walk by the same rule, let us mind the same
thing.

There are two things by which men are usually provoked to heat and eagerness,
in their differences of this kind. 1. A false apprehension of the weight and
necessity of their opinions, by reason of those consequences which they fasten
to them, and will have to stand or fall with them. And 2. An apprehension of
their great clearness and perspicuity, upon which account they conceive no man
ought to oppose them. Now this case in the Text wants not pretenses of either
kind: 'Twere not difficult to infer very dangerous consequences from the
joining together of Mosaical observances, with Christian Religion; and then
whatever any man's persuasion may be, as to the certainty and perspicuity of his
particular opinion, I am sure he cannot have greater, better grounds of
confidence, than there were for this case in the Text about meats and drinks.
Where besides the evidence from the nature of the thing, there was likewise
most express Apostolical authority, for the stating the question, that the
legal institutions about meats and drinks were abolished. And yet, out of
tender respect to those who had contrary prejudices, they were not to trouble
them with unnecessary disputes, but to bear their infirmities, and every one to
study how to please his neighbor for his good to edification, Chap. 15. ver. 1.

If it be objected, that St. Paul elsewhere shows much zeal and vehemence,
about these very points of Mosaical observances, as where he calls the great
sticklers for them Dogs, Concision, wishes them cut off, etc. To this it may be
answered:

1. This vehemence of his is directed against false brethren, such contentious
persons as were not sincere, Philip. 1.16. And Pareus thinks this was after
that solemn determination of this case in an Apostolical Council, Act. 15.

2. It was for want of this candor and moderation which here he advises unto.
Because they laid so great weight upon their Opinions as to make them necessary
to salvation; and would not indulge or show forbearance toward one another for
these kind of differences.

3. For the scandal hereby accasioned, which is a moral evil; and upon this
account he is sometimes pretty quick and warm, even against such as were
sincere and good men. This was the ground of that contest betwixt him and
Peter, Gal. 2.11. The case was this: St. Peter was the Apostle of the
Circumcision, having a more peculiar relation to the Jewish Converts; yet when
he resided at Antioch, where there lived multitudes of converted Gentiles, it
was his usual practice most freely to converse and eat with them, as owning
them for brethren: But afterward, when some Jews were sent thither from
Jerusalem, out of fear to offend them, he wholly withdrew and separated himself
from all conversation with the Gentiles; and by his example, the other
believing Jews were likewise carried a way to the same practice, as if they had
so great a zeal for Mosaical observances, that they could not own such as did
not observe them. Now this the Apostle Paul styles dissembling, v. 13. Not
walking uprightly according to the truth of the Gospel, v. 14. In which respect
there was a moral evil in it, toward which we are not bound to show the same
tenderness. And it was a thing of so dangerous consequence, in respect of
discouragement and scandal to all the Gentiles, that upon this occasion St.
Paul withstood him to the face. Which carriage of his, was not opposite, but
most suitable unto that advice of tenderness and forbearance, which is here
prescribed.

To shut up all in a word; it would exceedingly conduce to our common peace and
settlement, in times of differences and controversy, if those Rules of
Christianity so often inculcated in Scripture, were more regarded and observed
amongst the Professors of it.

That men would be wise unto sobriety, and not above what is written. Not
thinking more highly of themselves and their abilities than they ought, Romans
12.3. But be ready to condescend to men of lower parts, v. 16. And to demean
our selves toward every one according to the different measure of gifts, which
God has been pleased to dispense to them; speaking the truth in love, Ephesians.
4.15. Endeavoring to heal differences in the most placid gentle manner,
without envyings, strifes, backbitings, whisperings, 2 Cor. 12.20. Doing
nothing through strife or vainglory, but in lowliness of mind, every one
esteeming others better than himself, Phil. 2.3. They that exceed others in
knowledge, should exceed them likewise in the study of peace. The best of us do
now know but in part, darkly; that time is to come, when all these differences
shall be cleared up, and we shall have a full vision of the true state of
things. In the mean space it concerns us to forbear one another, in those
lesser things about which we differ: And to be very zealous about those great
matters in which we agree, namely, Righteousness, and peace, and joy in the
holy Ghost.

Prop. II.
II. There are some things in Religion, wherein if a man faithfully serve
Christ, he shall be accepted by him, tho he should mistake and fall short of
his duty in other things.

That is, if a man be truly conscientious and sincere in those more substantial
duties of righteousness, and peace, and joy in the holy Ghost, it is not his
mistakes or failings in other lesser things that shall make him incapable of
the Kingdom of God.

There are several expressions in Scripture, whereby these more essential and
necessary parts of Religion, are distinguished from those of lesser
consequence, Heb. 13.9. They are comprehended under that general name of Grace,
in opposition to meats. It Is good that the heart be established with grace, not
with meats, Matthew. 23.23. They are styled the weighty matters of the law:
judgment, mercy, faith, love, in opposition to the tithing of mint and cummin.
Very frequently Obedience in opposition to Sacrifice: To be washed and
cleansed, putting away the evil of our doings, learning to do well, seeking to
do judgment, in opposition to incense, oblations, and new moons, etc. Isa. 1.1.
Circumcision of the flesh, outward and according to the letter, and
circumcision of the heart, inward and according to the Spirit.

I shall mention only one Scripture for proof of the Point: 1 Cor. 3.11, 12. If
a man hold to the foundation which is Jesus Christ, though he build upon this
foundation, Gold and Silver, precious Stones, or wood, hay, stubble, the fire
shall try it, if it be burnt he shall suffer loss, but he himself shall be
saved.

By Gold, Silver and precious stones, is meant pure and solid Doctrine, by the
other, wood, hay, and stubble is signified such vain erroneous Doctrine, as
cannot endure the test of fire, the fire of Affliction and Temptation, the fire
of the Spirit which searches and proves hidden things, or the fire of the
last day, but will be discovered and consumed by them, to the loss of all that
pains and cost, which men have laid out in such superstructions: But not to the
ruin of the builder, for he himself shall be saved.

If I were to give Instances and Examples for the confirmation of this truth,
there is no holy man, mere man, that ever was in the world, but may serve as a
witness to it. Not to mention the ancient Patriarchs, Prophets, the Apostles
themselves, who were none of them without their mistakes and failings at some
time or other; it were not difficult to produce a very large Catalogue of
errors, out of the Writings of the ancient Fathers: Who tho they were the great
Master Builders of their times, and by their holiness, zeal, learning,
sufferings, did in their generations exceedingly promote the work of the
Gospel, yet they were not without their hay and stubble; every one of them
being obnoxious to errors, and some of them to none of the least: Both Irenaeus
and Justin Martyr, Clemens Alexandrinus, Tertullian, Cyprian, Origin, Hierom,
and Augustine more than ever he retracted: But that it would in many respects be
inconvenient to uncover their nakedness. And those amongst us in these days,
who either really are, or are esteemed to be, the great Luminaries of Religion,
they are not greater than the Fathers were in their times. Many of the
superstructions, which they lay out so much care and cost upon, will prove but
mere hay and stubble, when they come to a trial by fire.

I shall but mention these two Reasons of the Point.

1. From the nature of Man, to which nothing is more incident than frailty and
error. He was a good man that said, Who can understand his errors? not only of
his practice, but his judgment too. And he who in another place, In many things
we offend all. If any one should say he has no error, That man has not the
truth in him. Now if men's integrity in the more substantial parts of Religion
did not secure them notwithstanding these errors and failings, no man living
could be saved.

2. From the nature of Religion, which comprehends under it things of several
natures and degrees. There are some things essential, substantial, fundamental;
other things circumstantial, accidental. Religion is compared to a building, it
is not a covering of the roof with thatch, or leaving a flaw in the wall, but
only a failing or breach in the Foundation, that will cause the fall or ruin
of it. Again it is compared to a new life and nature. Now it is not a blackness
of the visage, or deformity of the members, nor every hurt or wound of the
body, that shall prove mortal, so long as the vital parts remain sound and
entire: And on the other side a hurt in the vitals would prove mortal, tho the
countenance were never so beautiful. But it is a principle this, so very obvious
and plain and without any dispute, that it will be needless to insist any
longer upon the confirmation of it.

In the Application of this Point I shall insist only upon two Uses, of
Examination, and Ehxortation.

I. For Examination: If it be so that some things are of such absolute
necessity to our happiness, it will concern us then to examine and judge our
selves by these things. Nothing is more desirable, than for a man to know upon
good grounds the truth of his own estate and condition, in respect of his
interest in the kingdom of God, and nothing can better discover this than our
serving of Christ in righteousness, peace and joy in the holy Ghost.

1. For Righteousness, by this I told you before we are to understand an
universal conformity to the moral Law, both first and second Table, with
subordination to the grace of faith. Now this, as it concerns the duties of the
first Table, is properly called Holiness; and as it refers to the second Table,
Justice or righteousness; who even allows himself in a neglect or violation of
either of these, whatever he may think of himself, is not accepted of God: 1.
As for Holiness, we are told expressly that without it no man shall see the
Lord. Heb. 12.14. Mat. 5.8.
And elsewhere it is said, the pure in heart shall see God. He that does either
generally omit or neglect the duties of Gods worship, and has not an holy awe
and dread upon his mind toward matters of Religion, but can deal with sacred
things with the same slight and common affection, wherewith he manages other
ordinary matters, has just reason to suspect himself as coming short of the
kingdom of God: 2. And so likewise for that other righteousness of the second
Table, referring unto Justice in our dealings with one another: Tho the having
of this be not enough to entitle us to the Kingdom of God, yet the want of it,
is enough to bar us from it. It Is so suitable to the light of nature, so
necessary to humane society, that there is not any one kind of failing that
does more scandalize the profession of Religion, or render it less approved
amongst men, than offenses of this kind, especially such as are done upon
pretense of Religion.

2. As for Peace: Our Savior tells us, Matthew. 5.9. The peace makers' shall be
called the children of God. By this shall all men know that ye are my
disciples, Ioh. 13.35
if ye love one another. Where as there is envying, and strife, and division
amongst you, are ye not carnal, and walk as men? 1 Cor. 3.3. The Apostle makes
it his business, Gal. 5.19. to set down such marks whereby men may judge of
their conditions, both in respect of the fruits of the flesh and of the spirit.
And amongst the fruits of the flesh, he has no less than seven several
expressions to this purpose; Hatred, variance, emulation, wrath, strife,
sedition, envyings. And then he subjoyns, ver. 21. They who do such things
shall not inherit the kingdom of God. And in the next verse, when he comes to
reckon up the fruits of the spirit, he mentions but nine particulars, and of
them there are six that refer to this grace, The fruit of the spirit is love,
peace, long-suffering, gentleness, goodness, meekness, against such there is no
law. The New Testament is so frequent and so express in this point, that a man
of an unpeaceable contentious spirit must very grossly delude himself to build
his confidence upon his zeal in lesser matters with the neglect of this.

3. And so in the third place, for joy in the holy Ghost, that is, a cheerful
and sedate temper of mind, under all outward dispensations, though cross to our
particular hopes and desires; as being secure of our interest in him who has
the management of all times and events at his own disposal, and has engaged
himself by promise to order them so, as that they shall prove for the best to
those that love him. This is a duty frequently insisted upon in Scripture, and
it is one main branch of that life of faith, which is proper to believers. And
therefore those froward peevish professors, who are never contented with any
estate, but are always complaining, apt to interpret every thing for an injury
and unworthy dealing toward them, have upon this ground just cause to suspect
themselves, of much impotence, unbelief, pride, want of that lowliness and
meekness of spirit, which the Gospel does require. If upon a strict enquiry we
find our selves, wilfully, grossly negligent in these more substantial things,
we have just cause to suspect our conditions.

II. I have but one Use more, for Exhortation, with which I shall conclude this
Point. To quicken and stir us up to lay out our strength and zeal for the
promoting of these things both in our selves and others. There cannot be any
more effectual motive, as to our selves, than what I have already insisted
upon, that nothing else can secure us without these, and that these will secure
us without other things.

But besides, these things, in reference to our doing good unto others, will be
more effectual than any other abilities whatsoever. They are singular
advantages for a man in his dealing with others, to have the gift of wisdom, an
ability of discerning spirits, of clearing and opening deep mysterious things,
a mighty power of persuading and convincing. But to all these, if a man were
able in a case of doubt, and difficulty, to confirm what he preaches by a
miracle, one would think, that were a most infallible way of subduing any
opposition, and carrying all before him. And yet all these advantages would
signify nothing, without these moral foundations; and a keeping close to these,
might in some measure be effectual without miracles. It Is a saying of a
Reverend Divine, Garbott Resurrect. of Christ.
that if the Gospel were now to be planted again, all the miracles in the
world, would not be sufficient to make it take, whilst our morals are no better
than they are. A miracle may strike a little wonderment at first, but good
morality soaks and sinks to the heart. And therefore it were a most rational
thing in a man to mistrust the truth of any Miracle which did tend to the
prejudice of things morally good. And the Scripture in several places does
encourage to it. Gal. 1.8. 2 These. 2.9. Revel. 16.13.
Deuteronomy. 13.1. Upon which account it may be asserted that the sutableness of the
doctrine of the Gospel, unto purest, highest Morality, did as much conduce to
the spreading of it, as the Miracles whereby it was confirmed. And therefore
when many of the Pharisees did pretend those wonderful acts of our Savior to
be done by Magical arts and the help of the Devil, they were presently confuted
by the holiness of his doctrine; These are not the words of him that has a
Devil, Joh. 10.21. And what can be said higher in the commendation of any
thing, than that it is a test whereby to try even Miracles themselves, and does
in some sense give authority to them.

And therefore there is very good reason why we should be excited to a great
zeal in the promoting righteousness, and peace, and joy in the holy Ghost. It Is
true, subtle notions and questions, are more the fashion of the times than
these moral duties, but they are withal the disease of the times, and
Professors now if ever may be said to be sick of Questions, as the phrase is: 1 Timothy 6.4. Whereas these other things were Religion before any of these fashions
came into request, and will be so when they are laid aside and vanished. As
being founded upon that universal perpetual Law, written in every man's heart,
which can never be either augmented, or diminisht, or abrogated. Nec per
senatum aut populum solvi hac lege possumus. No power can dispense with this
Law: Nor does it need any interpreter to explain it. Non erat alia Romae, alia
Athenis, alia nunc, alia posthac, sed and omnes gentes, omni tempore, una lex
and sempiterna and immutabilis continebit, says the Roman Orator. It Is the
same in all places and in all times; as proceeding from the Supreme Lawgiver,
toward whom he that will not yield obedience, must deny his own essence and
dependence; as he goes on very sublimely and elegantly upon that subject.

I know many other things are necessary, as to our religious state, besides
these moral Duties. But yet these are the primary foundations. And nothing else
will be effectual without these.

The End of the second Sermon.
The Third Sermon.
ROMANS XIV.17.18. For the Kingdom of God is not meat and drink, but
righteousness* and peace, and joy in the holy Ghost.

For he that in these things serves Christ, is acceptable to God, and approved
of Men.


III. Prop. III.
THE true reason why Christians of several persuasions stand less approved
toward one another, is for want of a right proportioning their zeal about
matters of Religion, and because they lay out more of their strength in these
lesser things, than on those of greater consequence.

There is no reason to expect that the minds of men should ever be united to a
mutual liking and approving of one another, till they can come to be more truly
zealous, and more heartily concerned for those substantial matters of
righteousness, and peace, and joy in the holy Ghost, than for those
circumstantials of meats and drinks.

If we consult the state of the Primitive times, as it is represented in the
Acts of the Apostles and the Epistles, we shall find that this was the occasion
both of raising and keeping up the differences amongst the Christians then,
namely, the insisting more upon forms and parties, meats and days, some being
for Paul, others for Apollos, others for Cephas, than upon the substance of
duties. And the same likewise might be made evident from abundant testimony out
of Ecclesiastical Writers, concerning the following Ages. And what has been
the state of things in our own times is sufficiently obvious to any easy
observation.

There are two heads of Reasons or Argument, that I shall mention for proof of
the Point.

1. From the nature and usual consequents of that zeal whereby men are engaged
to these lesser things.

2. From the nature and necessary fruits of men's being devoted to the more
substantial things of Religion.

I. Zeal about these lesser matters is not only consistent with strifes and
divisions, but is many times the very occasion and fuel whereby they are
begotten and continued amongst men. What the Apostle says concerning those
questions which he calls foolish and unlearned, 2 Timothy 2.23. Titus 3.9.
is in some proportion true concerning such other disputes as are managed with
greater vehemence than they ought; that from hence comes envy, strife,
railings, evil surmisings, 1 Timothy 6.4. Let a man but look indifferently, round
about him, amongst all the kinds of Parties in our times, even those whom in
his own judgment he esteems the best, and then say, whether, both our common
peace and the power of Religion has not suffered exceedingly upon this
account. When men have once given up themselves to controversies of this
nature, tho they should perhaps be on the right side, yet these consequences do
ordinarily follow upon it.

1. Such men are narrowed in their judgments, liable to strong prejudices upon
very weak grounds.

2. Soured in their spirits, becoming more censorious and rugged in their
dispositions.

3. Vitiated in their morals, declining in the duties of moral honesty,
neglecting the ties of Relations, friendship, gratitude, and such other things,
as should secure and sweeten humane society.

4. Cooled in their zeal and fervor toward the more substantial parts of
religion, whilst they are wholly taken up with the prosecution of lesser
matters. That man has conversed but a little in the world, or at least made
but slender observation, who has not in these times met with abundance of
examples to this purpose.

II. The second Reason is from the nature of these more weighty and substantial
matters of Religion, whose property, it is to unite the minds of men and heal
their differences. There is a twofold notion under which the strifes and
contentions amongst men, may be considered either as their Sin or Judgment.

Now this laying out our selves, upon the more substantial matters of Religion,
will free a man from contention in both these respects.

1. As it is a Sin: By freeing us from, and strengthening us against many of
those temptations to this sin that others are exposed unto. He that makes it
his principal care to deal righteously in his conversation with others, will be
sure thereby to minister less occasion of raising strife, and has the
advantage of avoiding and composing those heats that others would raise against
him. If a man design this as his great business, to follow the things that make
for peace, he will not be apt to be immersed in Parties, or transported with
particular interests, or misled by the affectation of singularity; but he will
be always ready to put the best construction upon things, to pity the
infirmities, and forgive the injuries of others. He that is able to rejoice in
an afflicted condition, is thereby in a good measure freed from those
temptations of hopes and fears whereby others are engaged. And consequently
will be less concerned in the designs of men, or the issue of things: Such an
one knows how to be content with his present state, and to be patient under
sufferings; and if he should not prevail for those things, which others will
needs contend with him about, yet he can be happy without them. In brief,
Religion does mortify those inward lusts, which are the first principles of
contentions and divisions without us. It makes a man meek and lowly, blameless
and harmless, teaches him not to revenge himself, but to overcome evil with
good; to speak evil of no man, to be no brawler, not to strive, but to be
gentle and humble, showing all meekness to all men.

2. Sometimes contentions and divisions are inflicted as a judgment, when the
Lord is pleased to mix a perverse spirit amongst men, filling them with
confusion and disorder, making them dash one against another, till they are
broken to pieces. Now this minding the main things of Religion, does likewise
conduce to the freeing of us from this. The Text tells us these things make us
acceptable to God: (...) Prove. 16.7. When a man's ways please the Lord, he will
make his enemies to be at peace with him. As God does sometimes punish
disobedience, by making a man's friends to become his enemies, so is he pleased
to reward obedience by making a man's enemies to become his friends. He has the
hearts of all men in his hands, and can bend them as he pleases; and he has
by promise engaged himself, either so to change their affections, that they
shall be friends to us, or at least so to restrain their hostility that they
shall not hurt us, 1 Pet. 3.13. Who is he that will harm you, if you be
followers of that which is good? If a man be truly religious and holy, and give
himself up to such courses, as are even to the light of nature unquestionably
good, it cannot be but that he must hereby acquire a reverence and esteem even
in the hearts of wicked men.

I know there is an Objection against this, which is obvious to every one, to
which something must be said by way of answer. Did not our Savior tell his
disciples that they should be hated of all men for his sake, Matthew. 10.22. And
does not David complain of some that were enemies to him, for this very reason,
because he was a follower of that which was good, Psalm. 38.20. All that will
live godly in Christ Jesus must suffer persecution, 2 Timothy 3.12. Because ye are
not of the world, therefore does the world hate you, Joh. 15.19. with several
other scriptures; besides the constant experience of all Ages to the same
purpose.

To this it may be answered, that it is true, there is in Nature, a necessary
unavoidable enmity, betwixt light and darkness, good and evil, the seed of the
woman and the seed of the serpent. And it is not the meaning of these promises
to abolish or reconcile that enmity or opposition, which is founded in the
nature of things, but only to suspend the Acts of it. The more righteous any
man is, by so much the greater opposition must there be betwixt him and
sinners. But yet he is hereby after a more especial manner entitled to Gods
protection, to preserve him from any real hurt, or damage by them. And they are
for the most part, the imperfections and failings of good men, that do expose
them to sufferings of this nature. And then besides, tho some men have such a
superfluity of malitiousness, as the phrase is Iam. 1.21 being hardened against
the common principles of morality, as to express a hatred and enmity against
others, for their goodness, yet it is not so with all, nor perhaps with any at
all times. But the worst of men, must in their secret judgments and most
retired thoughts, bear an inward reverence toward those that are good. As
there is in vice a natural deformity, whereby it does appear odious, even to
the consciences of those who are guilty of it; so is there a beauty in holiness
and virtue, whereby it appears lovely even to those men's hearts, whose mouths
are apt to reproach it. It cannot be but that some men will be apt to speak
against us for well-doing. And yet well-doing is the best way to put to silence
the ignorance of foolish men, 1 Pet. 2.15. Or if it do not wholly silence them,
but that they will be speaking against us as evil doers, yet it is not without
some secret shame, and guilt of being false accusers, 1 Pet. 3.16.

And so much may serve for the proof of the Point. I come now to the
Application of it: Wherein it may serve for these two Uses, Instruction and
Exhortation.

I. Information: If it be so, that the minding of the main things of Religion,
more than lesser differences, be that which must render us acceptable to God,
and approved of men, then these things will follow.

1. We have reason to suspect that our ways upon this account may not be
acceptable unto God, when we find that we do not stand approved to men,
especially to good men.

2. It Is a preposterous course to seek the approbation of men by any such way,
as will render us unacceptable to God; these two being linked together, both in
their own natures, and by particular promises. It Is true, a man may get into
the favor of a Party, by appearing vehement and zealous in some particular
contest, but this will render him less approved to other good men, less useful
in his generation, and consequently less acceptable to God.

3. It Is a vain thing to expect any peace and settlement amongst men, till they
come to be more concerned for those great things of Religion, than for others
of lesser moment. There may be a change of Forms and Parties and the external
state of things, but their minds will still abide at the same distance, till
they come to be united in these great things of righteousness, and peace, and
joy in the holy Ghost. It Is not the pouring of a liquor from one vessel to
another that takes off its sourness and acrimony, without such a mixture as may
enter into it, and alter the nature of it. If men would make this to be their
great design and business to strive who should be most righteous, and
peaceable, and patient, other contentions amongst them would quickly vanish.

4. A man may insist so much in the vindication of some truths and duties, as
thereby to bring a prejudice upon Religion. He may do the Devils work by his
endeavors to promote such things, as are in themselves right and true. I mean
such contests, as concern points of the same or the like nature, with those of
meats and drinks in the Text.

But what then may some say, should we be of no opinion in such things? Must we
all turn Scepticks, and be indifferent to every thing, as if there could be no
certainty?

I answer, by no means, nothing less; every man should endeavor to have a full
persuasion in his own mind concerning the things in difference: And when he
does well understand them, he should be ready to assert and maintain them, as
occasion may be offered, and so far as the nature of the things will bear.

Only herein lies the great difficulty which will require much Christian
prudence and consideration to the stating of it, namely, how to proportion our
zeal aright, in reference to several truths, which I shall particularly speak
to in the next Use.

II. Use of Exhortation.

1. To be cautious and considerate in the right managing of our differences
about these lesser things. There was never any Age, wherein contests of this
nature have not been in fashion; tho perhaps never so much as in ours. And
therefore it will the more concern us to regulate our prosecutions and
demeanor about them. In order to which these two things are to be well weighed
and considered, namely, the Evidence and Importance of the things in question.

1. For their Evidence: Every truth, whether natural or revealed, is not alike
evident; some are more obscure and doubtful than others. And because the
evidence of things is the ground and formal reason of our assent to them,
therefore it is our duty to proportion the degrees of our assent, to those of
our evidence. Not to be doubtful in things that are clear, nor to be confident
in things that are doubtful; but with an equal disposition of mind, to submit
to every thing according to its clearness and perspicuity: In opposition to
this there are two extremes, which are exceedingly prejudicial to Religion
(especially in times when controversies and disputes about it do so much
abound) namely, Scepticalness and Dogmaticalness.

1. By Scepticalness, I mean, a willingness and inclination of mind, rather to
comply with doubts and objections, than with proofs and evidences; an aptness
to pick quarrels with every thing, tho never so manifest, as if we were not
willing that any thing should be certain and established. Besides the insolence
and pride which is the ground of this disposition, there is likewise much of
folly and contradiction in it, whereby such men do become obnoxious unto that
other extreme of Dogmaticalness, which they affect most to avoid. For to look
upon every thing as doubtful, is to deny the clear evidence of some things; and
it is as well dogmaticalness to deny clear evidence where it is, as to assert it
where it is not.

2. By Dogmaticalness, I mean, a readiness to be over confident of the things we
are well inclined to; an aptness to own every thing for equally true and
certain, which is professed by that Company or Party of men, amongst whom our
names are listed; when a man receives a whole System of doctrine by the bulk,
as if every thing in it, were undoubtedly true, and alike evident, without a
particular enquiry into the grounds and reasons of things. An unwillingness to
listen unto any objection, which may seem to make against them, or to shake
their certainty. This is a blameable partiality on the other hand; and has in
it the like inconsistency and contradiction with the other extreme. Such
Persons hereby exposing the most clear and manifest truths to the suspicion of
error, by putting more obscure and doubtful matters in the same rank with them.

2. The Second thing to be considered is the Importance of the matters in
question. As every truth is not of the same evidence, so neither is it of the
same necessity. But there are in this respect likewise several degrees amongst
them: Some things are essential to Religion, belonging to the foundation, and
are therefore necessary to the very being of a Christian. As Righteousness in
the Text, that is, faith, and holiness, and justice, or as it is elsewhere
expressed, faith which works by love: Other things are only superstructions,
and belong only to the well-being of a Christian, amongst which some are as
gold, and silver, and precious stones, things of the greatest value amongst
men, next to life and being; others are of a lighter consequence and more
remote from the foundation. Now herein much Christian prudence will be required
to distinguish aright, concerning the importance of several truths and duties,
and accordingly to proportion our zeal for them, and our contention about them.

Not by our remisness to bring down foundation Truths to the same rate with
superstructions; nor by our forwardness on the other hand, to raise up
superstructions unto the same value with fundamentals; which are the two
extremes referring to the importance of the things, by which truth it self will
be very much prejudiced.

1. Too great carelessness and coldness about necessary truths, a kind of
indifferency about all matters of Religion, as if they were all alike, and did
so far only oblige, as the Civil Laws of several Countries did enforce them. I
cannot say of this extreme, that it does increase Controversies in Religion;
but it does that which is much worse, it takes away the subject of the
question, I mean Religion it self.

2. On the other side, a man may lay too great a weight on some things, which
are truths and duties. And there is nothing more ordinary than for good men,
when they are once well persuaded of some particular opinion, to think they do
God good service, by prosecuting it with their utmost zeal, or by laying
greater weight upon it than the nature of the thing requires, or will admit.
But this must needs be of very dangerous consequence: For if this course be
admitted, where shall it end? Why may not falsehood be obtruded upon us on the
same account? If we once transgress those bounds which are fixed by the nature
of things in respect of their evidence and importance, there can be no security
against the wildest errors in the world.

These two things that I have mentioned, being soberly considered and
impartially applied, to some of our late and present controversies, would very
much conduce to the healing of the minds of men, and taking them off from many
of those contentions and animosities which now abound.

2. We should hence be persuaded to lay out our selves with our utmost zeal and
intention of mind upon those great things of righteousness, and peace, and joy
in the holy Ghost. It were easy to mention abundance of Arguments, to excite
and quicken men to a fervency about these things, would the time permit it. I
shall very briefly sum up what remains under these two heads, the Excellency
and Seasonableness of these things.

1. From their Excellency: There are but two kind of things that any men aim at
or endeavor after, to get into the favor of Men, and of God, to be safe here
and happy hereafter. Why now these things do entitle us to both, they make us
to be accepted of God, and approved of men. They are not only duties but
privileges, the chief part of that salvation and glory, which we are capable of
on this side of Heaven. That which makes men zealous in other points, is their
apprehension of the importance and clearness of the things they insist upon:
Why, there can be nothing of greater importance than these things, wherein the
power and substance of Religion does consist. And as for their evidence, let it
be supposed that in some of the controversies now on foot amongst us, there
should in some solemn Assembly be an appeal made to heaven, to determine which
of the Parties were in the right: If upon such an appeal, an Angel should
immediately be sent down, or men should rise from the dead, and declare that
such a Way and Party were in the right, and the others mistaken, one would
think that upon such an advantage, men might have good ground to be zealous and
confident. Why we have more reason to be zealous for righteousness, and peace,
and joy in the holy Ghost, than men would have upon such a miraculous
confirmation of their Opinions: Because these things are of the highest
importance, and we have for them the same if not better evidence. And the
reason is this: By the same natural light which convinces a man that God alone
is Omnipotent, and can only do miracles, that he is infinitely good, and will
not perform any miracle in confirmation of a sin or an error: By the same light
it is that we are convinced of moral duties. But now we cannot have the like
degree of evidence, that this or that particular action is a miracle, (because
of the obscurity of natural causes) as we may that holiness, and righteousness,
and peaceableness, are duties, and of a natural goodness and obligation. We are
in the frame of our natures better fitted and prepared to understand morals,
than naturals, what is honest rather than what is possible; and it is great
reason we should be so, because we are more concerned in the one than the
other. So that it is not possible there should be any better evidence than what
we have for the goodness and obligation of these things.

2. From the Seasonableness of these things, both in respect of. 1. What we
have seen in the Times lately past, And 2. What we are in expectation of for
the future.

1. For the time past: No man can be ignorant of those horrid scandals that
have been brought upon Religion by the neglect of these moral duties, under the
highest pretenses of zeal to other matters. Whereby some men have been induced
to despise all profession of Religion, as being but mere pretense and design,
as if there were nothing in it of reality. Now if we have in us any tenderness
for the honor of Religion, if we would make up that breach and wipe off that
blemish that has in this respect been brought upon it, it must be by our
integrity and zeal for the promoting of these more substantial matters, both in
our selves and others. It Is true, men have been always apt to rest themselves
in moral performances, as if they alone were sufficient to entitle us to
heaven, and consequently as the endeavor to drive them off from such
presumptions as these, can never be unseasonable, so on the other hand when men
shall out of pretense to some higher notions and seize, dare to neglect
and violate these moral duties, it is then, if ever, seasonable to insist upon
the necessity, and importance of them.

2. In reference to that settlement and peace, which we are now in expectation
of, to which these things will most effectually conduce. It must be granted
that it is beyond humane contrivance to find out any infallible way of securing
future events; nor is it consistent with the nature of humane affairs, which
are often swayed by such intricate providence, as we are not able to foresee
or comprehend the reason of; God sometimes making use of such men, who are most
vehement against a thing to be the chief instruments of promoting it, and those
who are most for it to be the occasions of hindering it.

So that I say in this respect, there is a necessity that we should acquiesce
in such fair probabilities, as the prudence of men can contrive and the state
of things will admit. He that has observed those various providence, which
these poor distracted Nations have of late years been exercised with, cannot
but take notice, that since our first civil tempests and storms, there have
been some seasons wherein we have seemed to be near the Harbor and upon the
borders of settlement: And yet in the midst of all our hopes, there has still
been some unexpected emergency, whereby we have been driven back again into the
wide Ocean, and exposed to all our former fears and dangers. What may be the
issue of our present expectations, no man can be certain of. Only of this we
may be most sure, that this laying out our selves upon the duties of
righteousness, and peace, and joy in the holy Ghost, will be the best security
for every man in his private capacity, and the most effectual remedy for the
public.

It cannot be but that in times of change and revolution, men's minds must be
variously exercised with hopes and fears, according as their several interests
do engage them. The great thoughts of heart upon some men are, how they may be
secured in the change of times: But now if men would repose themselves upon
Scripture security, I would refer them to that place Romans 13.3. Will thou not
then be afraid of the power? do that which is good, and thou shall have praise
of the same. This being the very natural end of magistracy, namely, the praise
of them that do well, 1 Pet. 2.14.

I shall shut up all with that saying of the Apostle, 1 Pet. 3.10. cited out of
the 34 Psalm. What man is he that would see good days? Let him eschew evil and
do good, let him seek peace and ensue it. He may be most certain by this means
to be entitled unto the protection of God: For the eyes of the Lord are over
the righteous, and his ears are open unto their prayers: And safety from men;
For who is he that will harm you if you be followers of that which is good?

The End of the Third Sermon.
The Fourth Sermon.
TITUS II.10. That they may adorn the doctrine of God our Savior in all things.


ST. Paul having by his Preaching laid the foundation of a Christian Church in
Crete or Candia, and not having leisure to reside amongst them, for the farther
building them up in their most holy faith, by reason of his employment in
several other places, to the care of which (as being the Apostle of the
Gentiles) he was engaged, he does depute Titus in his stead.

And for his better encouragement and direction, in those ministerial
employments committed to him, he writes to him this Epistle, consisting
(besides the preface and conclusion) of so many parts as there are Chapters,
which are three.

Verse. 5.
The first being concerning the ordaining of elders or Bishops, with some
animadversions against such as did trouble the peace of the Church.

The second concerning those particular duties that belong to the several
orders and degrees of persons in a Family.

The third concerning the common duties of Christians in general.

The Text is under the Second of these Heads, wherein Titus is instructed in
that sound doctrine (as'tis styled, v. 1.) whereunto he was to exhort several
Ages, Sexes and Orders of persons in an aeconomical relation.

Aged men have their lesson, v. 2.

Aged Women, v. 3. Young Women, v. 4.5.

Young men, and more particularly Titus himself, as being under that rank, v.
6.7, 8. Servants, v. 9.10.

All which Exhortations are enforced by several reasons from the 11 v. to the
end of the Chapter.

That which Servants are exhorted to, is a submissive gentleness and fidelity;
to be obedient unto their own Masters, to please them well in all things, not
answering again, not purloining, but showing all good fidelity: Which
exhortation is further pressed upon them by a particular reason, taken from
that common duty incumbent upon all believers, to bring a reputation upon the
Religion which they did profess, in the words of the Text, That they may adorn
the doctrine of God our Savior in all things.

That Is the connection and scope of the Text. There are four Terms which may
seem to need explication. What is meant by, They adorning the doctrine of God
our Savior in all things.

1. The Subjects of this exhortation, in the word they, that is, Servants, v.
9. By which word is not only meant such kind of Servants, as are now in use
amongst us, Conductitij, hired Servants, who in other respects are Freemen, and
can let themselves out to service, upon such kind of conditions, and for such a
time as they shall agree upon: But it comprehends likewise Mancipia, Slaves,
such as are bought and sold in the market, and reckoned amongst men's goods and
chattels. For such were many of the Servants in the Primitive times. Now
because those that are in a servile condition are naturally of a more
illiberal, rugged and disingenuous temper, the Apostle would have such Servants
as are converted, to manifest a change upon themselves in this respect,
becoming more mild and gentle in their carriage, whereby they should remove
that prejudice and scandal that was brought upon Religion by others: As if the
privilege of their being made free by Christ, and having him for their Master,
might authorize them to be more stubborn and insolent toward their civil
relations, and not to remain any longer under the yoke of human servitude. It
would bring a reputation upon the doctrine of the Gospel which they professed,
when others should by experience find it so powerful upon them, as to render
those who are in the hardest condition of servitude, patient and submissive
under their yoke, trusty and faithful in their duties.

2. The next term to be inquired after is the Act, Adorn. The word is (...), it
signifies to set a thing off for its best advantage of comeliness, that it may
appear grateful and lovely to the beholders. It consists in two things, removal
of blemishes, and addition of ornaments: Many things that are of an excellent
beauty in their own native simplicities, may yet be capable of such
supperadditions, as will contribute to their further ornament. Now men may then
be said to adorn their profession, when they do studiously endeavor to avoid
all such uncomely actions, as may bring a prejudice upon it, and to do such
things as may make it appear most amiable, and win over others to a love of it.

3. The Object matter, in that phrase The doctrine of God our Savior; whereby
we are to understand the Gospel; which is therefore said to be the doctrine of
Christ, because he is the chief Author and object of it. It being the word of
reconciliation by him. Now tho it be not in the power of any creature to add
any thing unto the beauty of this doctrine, which is in it self the wisdom of
God in a mystery, 2 Cor. 2.7. The glorious Gospel, 2 Cor. 4.4. And the light of
the knowledge of the glory of God in the face of Jesus Christ, v. 6. The riches
of the glory of God, Colos. 1.27. Which are some of the highest expressions of
beauty, that words can reach unto: And so this doctrine is not in it self
capable of any real addition of beauty from us, no more than we can add light
to the Sun; yet God is pleased to esteem and to accept of that as an ornament
to it, when our conversation is as becomes the Gospel of Christ, as the phrase
is Philip. 1.27. When men walk sutably to those rules of goodness, and purity,
and meekness, which are therein so often insisted upon.

4. As for that phrase, All things, it does refer not only to those duties of
Religion and Worship, which do more immediately concern our communion with
himself; but likewise to the businesses of our conversing with others, to our
managing of secular and worldly business; our very recreations and diversions
should not be without a savor of Christianity. And we should, even in these
things, give evidence of our faith, sobriety and patience, and humility and
contentedness. And so likewise for the duties of our relations, even the
meanest of them: That of Servants, who tho they be themselves of the basest and
most contemptible condition, yet are in a capacity according to their sphere,
of bringing honor to their profession as well as those that are most noble.

So much I conceive sufficient for the explication of the words in the Text.
Tho the duty here mentioned do by its particular connection in this place more
immediately refer to those that are in the relation of Servants, yet it is
supposed to be of a more general extent, and to reach unto all other degrees
and professions, for whom the reasons of it will hold a fortiori. For if those
of the meanest condition are not exempted from this endeavor, much more then
should others make it their care and business, who have greater advantages for
it, and consequently greater engagements to it. And according to this more
general extent of this duty, I intend the prosecution of it.

The Doctrine I would insist upon, is this:

It is the duty of every Christian so to demean himself in every business,
condition, relation, as may adorn the Gospel, and win over others to a love of
it.

There is a special care to be had to the comeliness of our actions, that they
be such and so managed, as to bring a reputation to the doctrine we profess,
and make it seem lovely in the eyes of others.

I might cite abundance of proofs to this purpose. All those admonitions in
Scripture. 1. Of not giving offense to others. But 2. Rather winning them over
by our good examples, are but other kind of expressions signyfing the same
thing with this in the Text.

Such are those places which do prohibit the giving an occasion for the name of
God and his doctrine to be blasphemed, Romans 2.24. 1 Timothy 6.1. Or causing the
way of truth to be evil spoken of, 2 Pet. 2.2. Or giving occasion to the
adversary to speak reproachfully, 1 Timothy 5.14. Signifying that special care and
caution which we ought to use in vindicating the reputation of Religion. Men
are full of prejudice against the ways of God, apt to entertain hard thoughts
against them, as if they were rough, deformed and uneven, ready to catch at all
occasions of confirming themselves in these prejudices, from the haltings and
imprudences of those that profess Religion: And therefore it should be their
endeavor to be very wary of giving any advantages of this kind. This was
Nehemiahs argument, c. 5. v. 9. Ought ye not to walk in the fear of God,
because of the reproach of the heathen our enemies? And in this very Chapter of
the Text, the Apostle exhorts that their behavior be as becomes holiness,
v. 3. that the word of God be not blasphemed, v. 5. that he who is of the
contrary part may be ashamed, having no evil thing to say of you, v. 8. So
again, 1 Pet. 2.12. For this reason ought your conversation to be honest among
the Gentiles, that whereas they are apt to speak against you as evil doers, 1
Pet. 3.16.
they may by your good works which they shall behold, be brought to glorify God
in the day of visitation.

To this purpose likewise are all those other Scriptures, which do mention it
as a duty to win over others by our good examples. To let our light so shine
before men, Mat. 5.16.
that others seeing our good works may glorify our Father which is in heaven;
Heb. 10.24.
To consider one another, to provoke unto love and good works, that is, so far
to study the tempers, inclinations, interests, of those we converse with, that
thereby we may be able to take the right advantage of doing good upon them.
Romans 11.14.
If by any means we may provoke them to an honest emulation. So Philip. 2.15.
That ye may be blameless and harmless, the Sons of God, without rebuke in the
midst of a crooked and perverse generation, amongst whom ye may shine as lights
in the world: That you may be of as great usefulness and ornament in your
several Spheres as the lights in the firmament.

So Women's conversations ought to be such, as to win their Husbands, etc. 1
Pet. 3.1, 2.

I shall cite but one Text more for the proof of this, and then proceed to the
Reasons of it. It Is that known place, Philip. 4.8. Finally, brethren,
whatsoever things are true, whatsoever things are honest, whatsoever things are
just, whatsoever things are pure, whatsoever things are lovely, whatsoever
things are of good report, if there be any virtue, and if there be any praise,
think of these things. Wherein the Apostle does by a peculiar strain of
Rhetoric inculcate upon the Philippians, in the most comprehensive words, and
the most serious vehement manner, all such lovely and desirable
qualifications, as might serve to adorn their professions.

Whatsoever things are true: That is, sincere and real, free from all false
pretenses and appearances.

Whatsoever things are honest: The original word is (...), which signifies
properly venerable. That is such things as may occasion in others a reverend
esteem of you.

Whatsoever things are just: That is, free from the suspicion of unworthy
partiality or base ends, not so much aiming at serving the interest of a Party,
as doing that which is in it self right and just.

Whatsoever things are pure: (...), That is, things that are free from all
immodest uncomliness.

Whatsoever things are lovely: (...), That is, grateful and benign, such as
will render a man most acceptable to those with whom he converses; free from
that asperity and ruggedness, which does so deform some men's carriage.

Whatsoever things are of good report: (...). There are some things that by the
consent of Nations are of a good fame and well reputed of; the Apostle would
have a special care taken of such matters, there being nothing of greater
consequence to the interest of a Profession, than the good name of those that
profess it.

If there be any virtue, (...). Which Word tho it be most frequent amongst the
Philosophers, yet it is very seldom used in Scripture and not any where by St.
Paul, excepting this place, as being perhaps too low an expression for those
spiritual Graces, which Christians ought chiefly to labor after. But yet as
for all those things that are commendable amongst the very Heathen, which they
style by the name of Virtue, Christians ought not to be defective in such
things, or think it below them to imitate such examples.

If there be any praise, whatsoever is counted laudable and comely by the very
light of nature, ought not to be neglected by them.

For the further confirmation of this Truth, I shall suggest three Reasons to
convince the equity of it.

1. This doctrine does adorn us, Reason 1.
and therefore it is but reason that we should adorn it. We are all of us
naturally in a deformed forlorn condition, being wretched and miserable, and
poor and blind and naked, Rev. 3.17.
and it is alone this Doctrine of the Gospel that does furnish us with gold, and
eye salve, and white raiment to enrich and beautfy us. We are of our selves
children of darkness, it is the Gospel that does beget us again to a lively
hope, and make us children of the light; and therefore it is but reason that we
should walk worthy of our vocation, and as becomes children of the light,
Ephesians. 5.8. Setting forth the virtues of him that called us into his marvailous
light, 1 Pet. 2.9. Light is one of the most glorious and beautiful creatures in
the world, and therefore an earthly and sordid carriage will not become that
title. Those that are raised to this privilege should endeavor after such
virtues as will be suitable to it. Men are content in the night time to be
homely and plain, but in the day they will endeavor to have their garments
decent and comely about them. So should Christians demean themselves;
remembering the obligation that lies upon them from their calling, counting it a
greater shame to them to do any unworthy act, under the glorious light of the
Gospel about them, and the illumination of the spirit within them, than other
men do to commit any filthiness in the face of the Sun. Men usually are very
careful to advance the honor and reputation of that from which they receive
their own. So that the Law of gratitude does engage us to this duty, which is
the first reason.

2. In the adorning of our professions, we do really promote our own advantage,
Reason 2.
and adorn our selves, the reputation of that redounding to our benefit, and
the blemishes of it to our disparagement. The honor and esteem that is given to
any Profession does reflect upon the Professors; men are usually very sensible
in things of their own interest, how careful will they be in adorning their
Habitations, not grudging to bestow much labor and cost to this purpose, and
for their Bodies nothing more common than vanities and excess in the adorning
of these; and yet after all their care and delicacy in this kind, these bodies
of theirs are but frail earthly Tabernacles and must shortly prove worms-meat,
and molder away into their original dust: And so likewise for their Names; all
those difficulties that men undergo in the pursuit of fame and glory, which is
the business of men of more large and generous spirits, is but for the adorning
of their names and perpetuating them to posterity, which tho it have its proper
use and bounds, yet is it but vanity as Solomon says, seeing that which now is,
in the days to come shall be forgotten, Eccles. 2.16. Every generation
producing something which seems new and strange to take up men's talk and
wonder, and to drown the memory of former persons and actions.

Now if we would do any thing of this kind which may be for our real advantage,
it must be by the adorning of this Doctrine, which abides for ever. The sweet
ornament of a good name, which we endeavor to pour upon the head of that, will
run down and be communicated to the skirts about it, all that belong unto it.
There are but two kind of things that may justly challenge any care from us of
this nature; some things ought to be adorned for their own worth and dignity,
other things for that special affection we bear to them, and the desire of
having them loved and esteemed by others; in both which respects, this doctrine
of the Gospel ought to be preferred before any thing else, especially since our
own advantage is so much concerned in it. That is a second Reason, the Law of
self-love does engage it.

Reason 3.
3. And lastly, which may serve instead of all other Reasons, this is the great
end of our Creation and Being, the chief business upon which we were sent into
the world, to glorify God, and bring honor to his name: Which we then do in
reference to others, when we demean our selves so as to cause them to
acknowledge and speak well of him. This is to walk worthy of the Lord, 1 These.
2.12. and as becomes the Gospel of Christ, Philip. 1.27. When those that of
themselves are apt to speak evil of our Profession, shall by our good
conversation be convinced and won over to a love of it. This is the greatest
and most noble work, that any man is capable of contributing unto; And
therefore that may be another Reason to enforce the necessity of it, it is the
chief end of our Creation.

I shall need to say no more by way of Explication or Proof: I come now to the
Application of this Point, wherein it may be improved to these Uses.

I. For Information, If it be every ones duty to take special care of adorning
his profession, then it will follow:

1. That men are not only to regard the lawfulness of their actions as to the
matter, but the comeliness of them too as to the manner and degree. As there is
difference betwixt clothing and ornaments, so is there betwixt the mere
lawfulness of actions and the comeliness of them. A Christian should even in
moral duties do something beyond the common level of men, aiming at things that
are more generous and heroical, and may give a luster to his profession;
especially in such matters, as border nearest to the proper Graces of
Christianity, as gratitude, patience, meekness, self-denial. And in such cases
where other ordinary men may be supposed to yield unto common infirmity and
temptation, the usual excuse of their failings; he should press on with greater
vigor as considering the cause that depends upon him, the reputation of his
holy Profession. Some things, that for the substance of them may be just, yet
being performed without respect to this end, may prove blame worthy. Bonum must
be ex causa integra: The defect of any such circumstance whereby an action
might be better performed, does lay a blemish upon it. Now we are to provide
things honest in the sight of all men; to acquit and commend our selves not
only to our own consciences, but to other men's consciences too, 2 Cor. 4.2.
This does principally consist in the right circumstantiating of actions, and
will require much prudence to judge what is seasonable and fit.

2. Hence it will follow, that amongst that great variety of duties, which are
incumbent upon a Christian, there ought to be a special regard unto such, as
are of general approbation, and most suitable to the reason of mankind: that is,
to those moral duties which the light of Nature does oblige unto, because those
who are without, will be apt to take an estimate of us, by our conformity to
these. And that man will never arrive to the esteem of being Religious who
should be found negligent and defective in this kind, either in respect of an
holy awe and fear toward the divine Majesty which he does profess to adore,
justice, equity, charity, gentleness in his dealing and conversing with others;
these things being of an universal approbation, amongst men that pretend to any
Religion. For tho natural men are apt to entertain prejudices and hard thoughts
against many religious duties, yet there are some things that are both
acceptable of God, and approved of men, Romans 14.18. And that is, when Religion
is not so much put in meats and drinks and external forms, as in righteousness
and peace, etc. It Is true indeed, a man must take heed of resting in these
moral seize; but on the other side he must take heed of coming short of
them too. He that pretends to grace and does not come up to these, is in as
bad, and (in many respects) a much worse condition, than he that rests in them.
It Is true likewise, that there may be much danger in seeking to please men, but
yet this is an end, which we may and should propose to our selves even in our
religious conversation, Romans 15.2. Let every one please his neighbor: it is the
Apostles advice there; and he owns it for his practice, 2 Cor. 10.33. Even as I
please all men in all things, not seeking mine own profit, but the profit of
many that they may be saved. There must and will always be an enmity betwixt
the seed of the Woman and the seed of the Serpent; but yet this does not hinder
but that we may labor for so much favor in their eyes as may give us
advantage of doing good upon them. It Is said of the Apostles, that they had
favor with all the people, Act. 2.47. And upon that account were they so
powerful amongst them. Some of these things would not perhaps be so proper to
be insisted on, did not the condition of the times make them seasonable; when
so many men under the profession of Religion (which is now in fashion, and
therefore easy) do indulge themselves in the neglect of moral duties. As if the
pretenses to holiness, which do really so much the more engage to these things,
might yet serve as a dispensation from them; than which nothing can be more
uncomely.

2. But I hasten to a second Use, for Reproof of such persons who are so far
from being Ornaments, that they are rather spots and blemishes to the Doctrine
of the Gospel. Such are of two kinds, Careless and Scandalous Professors.

I. For those that are Careless and Barren, who are wholly immersed in
themselves, and the observance of their own humors, without any regard to the
profiting or pleasing of others. There is something in men's religious
conversation, answerable to the slovenliness of their outward carriage, whereby
others are made averse, and as it were nauseated from conversing with them.
Such are all selfish, morose, churlish, contentious men, who instead of
inviting others, do rather discourage them from the ways of Religion.

II. For such as are scandalous, who whilst they profess religion, do allow
themselves in some notorious sins: And sometimes commit them under the very
pretense of Religion; as the Pharisees are accused to devour widows houses,
that is to do acts of injustice and cruelty, under the pretense of devotion and
zeal: Both these are an abomination, but especially the latter, which does
involve in it the highest affront and indignity against religion, that can be.
It is really to scoff and despise that, to which in appearance we pretend the
highest reverence. It is to carry Christ about in scorn to be derided by
others, crying hail King of the Jews, and yet spitting upon him and buffeting
him. Such persons are so far from adorning their profession, that they do their
utmost to disparage it, and make it appear odious. What serious man would be
invited to own that for a Religion, which is professed by men of such false and
hateful conversations. There are two things I would briefly suggest by way of
motive to dissuade men from offending in either of these kinds, viz. the
Unworthiness, and the Danger of such carriage.

1. It Is Unworthy and odious to cast a blemish and reproach upon that to which
we owe our own honor; to destroy those whom we are bound to love and help. The
Scripture puts it as a brand upon the loose Sons of Eli, Hophni and Phinehas, 1 Samuel 2.17. That they caused men to abhor the offerings of the Lord. And nothing
can be more hateful than to bring sacred things into contempt: It was Jacob's
complaint against his Sons, Simeon and Levi, Genesis 34.30. That they had made him
to stink amongst the inhabitants of the Lord. So does the unworthy carriage of
Professors, cause the hearts of others to rise up against them with much scorn
and detestation.

2. And as it is unworthy, so likewise is it dangerous; you know the several
Woes in Scripture denounced and executed against those that give offense.
Temporal judgments upon their names, Malach. 2.9. The Priests that caused
others to stumble at the Law, are threatdned to be made contemptible and base
before all the people. And there is nothing more equal, than that those who
expose religion to contempt should suffer under it themselves.

Judgments in respect of life: Balaam was for this reason slain with the sword,
because he taught Balak to lay a stumbling block before the children of Israel,
Numb. 31.8. The Sons of Eli were upon the like account slain by the
Philistines, 1 Samuel 4.11.

But that is not all: For besides this temporal death, it does expose a man
likewise to Eternal death. And it is but reason that it should be so, because
the sins of such offenders do extend to the ruin of the souls of others; they
doing what in them lies to destroy those for whom Christ dyed, 1 Cor. 8.11.
It Is spoken concerning the abuse of our liberty in things indifferent, it is
much more concerning actions in themselves sinful.

That Is a known Text, Matthew. 18.6. It were better for a man to have a millstone
hung about his neck, and to be cast into the Sea, than to offend one of these
little ones. Now if to offend but one, and that a little one, that is one that
is weak in knowledge and faith, will expose a man to a certain and dreadful
vengeance, what then may they expect, who in regard of the eminency of their
place, reputation, profession, do occasion a more general and spreading
scandal, both in respect of the number and quality of the persons offended, and
cause the ways of God to be commonly evil spoken of? As if the profession of
religion, were but a design to bring about some politic ends, and as if all
men who did pretend to holiness were to be suspected as deceivers; if those
that brought up an evil report upon the Land of promise, were so severely
punished, Numb. 14.37.
being destroyed by a plague from heaven. Certainly then, the offense and the
punishment ought to be estimated to be as much greater here, as this heavenly
Canaan is better than that earthly.

3. I have but one Use more, and that shall be for Exhortation, to persuade us
unto the study of this duty in the Text. That we would every one in our several
places, endeavor to bring honor to our profession, and to vindicate it from
those reproaches, to which the unworthy conversation of some professors has
exposed it. I know not any duty more seasonable to be pressed than this,
because of those so great and common scandals that have been given in our
Times. Wherein too many have justified all those old Calumnies and reproaches,
which the malice of the ancient Heathen was wont to charge upon the primitive
Christians.

For our better direction in the performance of this duty, you may please to
remember what was suggested before. That the nature of adorning does consist in
these two things: The removal of Blemishes and the addition of Ornaments.

1. For the Removal of Blemishes: There are several things which are after a
more especial manner blemishes to the conversation of a Christian. Besides
those grosser vices, which are most opposite to the purity of evangelical
doctrine, by which this profession should be distinguished from all others: I
say besides these, there are some actions likewise, which seeming not to
contain in them any gross iniquity or injustice, are thereupon more easily
fallen into. And yet being destructive to peace and friendship amongst men, and
against the good of humane Society, and consequently hateful to the generality
of mankind, are therefore very great blemishes to the profession of Religion.
Such are suspitiousness, evil-surmisings, tale-bearers, which are the fuel to
contention, as the Wiseman speaks, Prove. 26.20. Malignity, that is an aptness
to put the worst construction upon things, whispering, backbiting, rash
censuring of others; which things in the opinion of St. James are not
consistent with the very show or profession of Religion. If any man amongst you
seems to be religious and bridleth not his tongue, that man's religion is
vain, Jam. 1.26. Being busy-bodies, under the pretense of zeal and religion, in
the affairs of others, wherein we are not concerned, which is very apt to
provoke men unto much indignation and prejudice.

And then besides these blemishes, which concern our civil conversation with
others, there are some likewise which men are subject unto in the performance
of their religious duties. An imprudent openness, and too much affecttation in
them, as if we did them to be seen of men. A being strict in lesser things and
loose in greater, which is to walk circumspectly, as fools not as wise, and
has usually much provocation in it. There are several other things of this
nature, which I cannot stand to enumerate; but these are some of those
particular failings, to which those who would be thought the more strict
Professors are subject, which ought to be avoided, as being after a more
especial manner blemishes to our Profession.

2. There are some peculiar Virtues and Graces, which are commended to us, as
being more especial ornaments to our Profession.

1 Pet. 3.15
1. Nothing does become men more than a holy reverence and fear in speaking of
the things of God. There is an uncomeliness, and there may be a superstition
too, in the unseasonable mixing of sacred things with mirth.

2. In reference to others nothing is of a more universal approbation, than
Love and Justice.

1. For Love, there must be a philanthropia, extending to the good of mankind
and public benefit; not confining our designs within the narrow compass of our
own private advantage and the observance of our selves: And there must be a
philadelphia too, a more especial love to the brethren, and readiness to serve
and help them, especially for such as are in distress, and in a state of
affliction. The works of mercy to such are not only sweet odors in the sight of
God, but before men.

2. And so for Justice likewise: Uprightness and single heartedness, a freedom
from guile and designs, being commendable amongst all professions of men. And
therefore the neglect or want of these must needs be a great blemish amongst
Christians. When those that are professors shall be more ready to serve the
interest of a Party, than to observe the rules of justice and equity, this must
needs occasion hard thoughts and speeches against them.

3. In regard of our selves; the holy Ghost does frequently commend to us,
humility, meekness, modesty, as being the most comely ornaments, and indeed the
very badge and livery of our Profession. We are exhorted to be clothed with
humility, resembling it to a garment, with which we are to deck our selves; and
a meek and quiet spirit is expressly compared unto, and preferred before the
adorning with gold and apparel; and as those are usually valued by men, so this
is said to be in the sight of God of great price, 1 Pet. 3.4. And the Scripture
styles modest behavior, neat, 1 Timothy 3.2. (...). That Is the Word, we translate
it, of good behavior, but it is the same with this in the Text, and signifies
properly neat or comely.

Nothing is more frequently inculcated in the Gospel, than these kind of
graces, that we should be gentle, easy to be entreated, favorable toward the
infirmities of others, putting the best construction upon things; Being soft in
our answers, slow to anger, ready to forgive, overcoming evil with good,
speaking evil of no man, being no brawlers, but gentle, showing all meekness to
all men, Titus 3.2.

These graces are all of them of such a lovely and winning nature, that it
would exceedingly promote the interest of Religion if they did more shine forth
in the lives of those who call themselves Professors in these times.

It Is true, these Graces do more naturally arise from a condition of trouble
and suffering, as the primitive times were. And in such days as these, when the
profession of Religion is in fashion, and advantageous to a man's secular ends,
and the Church in a kind of triumphant condition, many of those who profess
Religion (if they are not otherwise persons of judgment and solid worth) are
more apt to grow insolent, and rugged toward others. But yet these Graces
would be no less comely now, than they were then. Nay the greater the
difficulty of them is, the greater would their ornament be. And therefore the
more watchful ought we to be, in respect of the temptations against them.

I know there are several other things which some men make choice of for the
ornaments of Religion, as skill in some affected insignificant phrases, or some
high airy notions, zeal for some particular forms, or in serving the interest
of a Party. Nothing is more obvious to any ones observation, than that many men
do principally insist upon some such things as these, for the great ornaments
of their profession, by which they measure themselves and others.

Whereas some of these things are so far from being ornaments that they are at
the best but spots and blemishes, and the best of them are but fashions, which
though they may seem comely in some particular place and seasons, yet they have
not any absolute beauty in them, and at another time will appear deformed.
Whereas these other things I have mentioned, will never be out of fashion, as
having in them an absolute beauty of their own, not depending upon places,
times, or opinion.

The End of the fourth Sermon.
The Fifth Sermon. At a Visitation holden at London.
TITUS II.15. These things speak, and exhort, and rebuke with all authority:
LET NO MAN DESPISE THEE.


THese words do contain one of the Apostolical Rules or Canons, whereby Church
officers are directed, to preserve the dignity of their places, and the
authority of their ministry, and therefore cannot be unseasonable for for the
present occasion and solemnity.

In the beginning of this Chapter the Apostle had mentioned that sound
Doctrine, which he would have Titus in his preaching to insist upon, with
reference to several ages, sexes, and conditions of persons, to verse 11.

After which he proceeds to a brief recapitulation of those more general
duties, wherein all men are concerned, of Sobriety, Righteousness, and
Godliness: And takes notice of those new peculiar reasons, whereby the Gospel
does oblige men to a strict observance of these moral duties, namely: 1. From
that great reward, which it does more clearly propose, The blessed hope and
that glorious appearing of the great God, v. 13. 2. From the assistance which
it gives to us, by redeeming us from our Iniquities, v. 14. Abolishing the
guilt, and subduing the power of sin; which ought to be very powerful motives,
whereby Christians should be excited, to become a peculiar people, separate
from the rest of the world, zealous of good works; striving by their fervency,
and diligence, and cheerfulness, as much to excel others in their obedience,
as they do in the privileges.

Having mentioned these great fundamental duties, he thereupon subjoyns this
exhortation, these things speak, and exhort and rebuke with all authority.

These things, i. e. especially these more substantial and weighty matters,
wherein the essence of Religion does consist, in opposition to other smaller
points of less evidence or consequence.

These things speak: Be ready to instruct such as are ignorant, in these
duties; and exhort them to a careful observance of them. And if any man be so
contumacious, notwithstanding this instruction and exhortation, as to violate
these known duties, let him be rebuked with all authority. Do not deal with
such an one in a precarious way, but with such a courage and majesty, as may
become him who has power in the name of God to command others to observe their
duties. The messengers of God should not fear the faces of men; such kind of
matters, as these, are of that evidence and importance, as may well bear a man
out, to speak with authority, and to strike an awe upon the hearts of such as
shall gainsay and oppose them.

And in order to this, that such rebukes may be of authority, and the more
effectual; the Apostle advises to take special care, that no man despise him.

Not as if it were in our power what others shall think of us. For as honor est
in honorante, so is contempt likewise: Men will take the liberty of judging as
they please; they may through ignorance, or malice, or envy, have mean thoughts
of those that are most worthy; but tho the form of honor be not in our power,
yet the matter of it is, namely virtuous and worthy actions. And we may deserve
the esteem of others, tho they should be so unjust as deny it to us.

So that the meaning of this exhortation of not letting others despise us, must
be, so far as in us lies, we must be careful not to do any thing, which may
give occasion to others to have mean and despicable thoughts of us. That man's
exhortations and rebukes must needs be altogether vain and insignificant, who
by any unworthy actions has rendered himself contemptible: Whereas, if by
well-doing we approve our selves to the consciences of others, it cannot be but
that we shall have authority with them. Men must and will stand in awe of us,
when we demean our selves so as they may have reason to believe that when we
are angry, God is displeased with them.

I shall prosecute my discourse upon this Text, with all imaginable plainness
under these three heads.

1. I shall endeavor to show what despising is, and wherein it consists. 2. Of
what great consequence it is, that Ministers should preserve themselves from
contempt. 3. The means how this may be done.
And then conclude all with some brief application.

I. Concerning the nature of despising, what it is, and wherein it consists: It
signifies briefly, cheap and low thoughts of a person, together with a suitable
demeanor toward him.

The most proper object of it, is littleness and impotence. Whatever we
apprehend to be of any kind of power, we have a suitable regard to it. If it be
of a hurtful nature, we hate and fear and take care to avoid it: But as for
such things as are little and impotent, not able to do either good or hurt, we
are not any further concerned for them, but barely to despise and contemn them.

It Is properly opposed to honoring; both of them being originally acts of the
understanding, in passing judgment upon the nature of things.

When we do in our minds own or acknowledge the real worth or virtue of any
one, this is inward honoring; when we testify this by our words or actions,
this is external honoring: And so on the other side, when we do in our
thoughts take notice of and acknowledge the vileness or worthlesness of things
or persons, this is inward despising, which in Scripture phrase is styled,
Deuteronomy. 25.3 27.16. Phil. 3.8.
counting a thing vile, setting it at naught, esteeming it as dung. When we
testify this by words or actions, this is external contempt, and in Scripture
phrase is expressed by kicking at a thing; 1 Samuel 2.29.
treading it under our feet, casting it behind us, turning our back upon it,
puffing at it. Psalm. 12.5.


Both these abstractly considered, are of an indifferent nature, neither good
nor evil in themselves, but as they are circumstantiated by their manner, and
measure, and objects. Every man should proportion his esteem of things,
according to the real value of them, not calling good evil, or evil good. Where
there is no real worth men may, and should despise; nor ought they toward such
things to give any honor. It Is as much a man's duty to contemn a vile person,
Psalm. 15.4.
as to honor them that fear the Lord*

It Is true, we should abstract betwixt the calling and persons of others. There
may be a reverence due to the calling, when there is none due to the person but
only upon account of his calling; and it is a sin in men not to distinguish in
such cases. But withal it is so easy, so common, so natural a thing, for the
scandal of a person to reflect upon his profession, that it shall be put upon
his account, as being part of his guilt, that he has laid a stumbling block in
the way of others, by causing them to speak evil of his profession. And as
things now are in the world, nothing can be more vain, than for men to think
that the dignity of their places will keep up their esteem in the hearts of
others, without the foundation of real worth in their persons.

Now amongst all other things whatsoever, there is nothing that has in it so
much provocation as contempt. It Is much worse than hatred; that supposes a man
to be considerable. The Philosophers make it to be the occasion of all anger:
And experience tells us, it is one of the hardest things to be born, even by
wise and good men.

And so much shall serve to be spoken concerning the first head, the nature of
despising, etc. I proceed to the second.

II. Of what great importance it is for persons in this sacred function, to
preserve themselves from contempt. Which may be made evident by three kind of
arguments, upon the account of 1. Fitness and Congruity: 2. Necessity and Duty:
and 3. Interest and advantage.

1. Upon the account of Fitness and Congruity: The Apostle had declared it as a
rule a little before the Text, v. 10. That Servants should adorn the doctrine
of God our Savior in all things. By Servants in those times are meant, amongst
others, such as were slaves, bought and sold in the Market, the lowest and
basest condition of men; and yet these are obliged by the rules of
Christianity, so to demean themselves, as to adorn their profession, and win
over others to a love of it; and therefore those of a higher calling and
station, must needs be so much the more obliged to this, as they have greater
abilities and opportunities for it.

The men of our Calling ought to be of such eminence, that others in comparison
to them, may be called Grex, the Flock, of which we are the Governors and
Pastors. It Is required as a previous condition to capacitate a man for this
Calling, that he must have a good report of those that are without, 1 Timothy 3.7.
i. e. of the Heathens and Unbelievers; who, tho they are not competent judges
of faith and opinions, yet they may be of manners and honesty* And if this be
required to admission into that Calling, it is most reasonable that men should
not lose it afterward. We are the lights of the world, and therefore ought to
contribute to the beauty of it: The salt of the Earth, and therefore ought to
be of grateful and savoury conversation.

There lies a more peculiar obligation upon persons in public places, to
preserve their reputations clear and without blemish. The higher any thing is
situated in the universe, the more luster has it, as the Stars: And so
likewise is it in the body, the superior parts, the face and eyes, are the
proper seat for beauty and comeliness.

A private person is not so much concerned to look after public fame, as he
who is engaged in public employment. That kind of generous virtue which can
abundantly satisfy it self with the conscience of well-doing, while in a
private station, if once called to any such employment, where it must be useful
to others by its Authority, it is most fitting then, that it should seek the aid
of opinion and public esteem. Because it is this which rules the world, and
stamps upon things the rates at which they are to pass. Not that this can add
any thing to a man's virtue, more than the light of the Sun does to the beauty
of the other creatures in the universe, but only render it more conspicuous and
visible to others, who are to be influenced by it. That Is the first argument:
There is a Congruity that such persons, as are of public employment, should be
of public esteem.

2. It Is necessary also, upon the account of Duty, both toward others and our
selves.

1. With respect to those with whom we converse, who are committed to our
charge; toward whom we must needs be altogether insignificant and as mere
ciphers, unless we demean our selves so as to be reverenced by them.

There are two things which every man ought with his utmost care to attend
unto, Conscience and Credit.

The first chiefly for our selves, the other both for our selves and others:
Nobis est necessaria vita nostra, aliis fama nostra: As St. Austin speaks. He
is cruel to himself who neglects the first, and he is both imprudent to
himself, and useless to others, who neglects the second.

When God gives men favor and respect in the eyes of others, the proper
improvement of it is, to make use of it as an advantage for prevailing with
them, and doing good upon them. Whereas without this, all that a man can do or
say must be ineffectual. If he himself be once looked upon as contemptible,
it is not to be expected that others should have any regard to his exhortations
or counsels. You know the story of that people, who refused their consent to a
good Law, because it was proposed by a vile person.

Authority in the first notion of it is a relative term, and does import that
reverend opinion which men have concerning the persons of others: It consists
of Love and Fear. It supposes as its correlate, Venerableness, that is goodness
and power, in the persons whom it refers to. And these two, according to the
rule of Relations, mutuo se ponunt and tollunt. Where there is no
venerableness, there can be no authority, in this sense.

2. Upon account of duty toward our selves, who by being despised may be
rendered desperate; there being no such way to make a man loose and profligate
as to have a blasted name. Shame is one of the most powerful curbs to restrain
men from unworthy courses, and where this does not, there is little hope that
any thing else should prevail. Reproach is styled the snare of the Devil, 1 Timothy 3.7. Because they who are deservedly fallen under this, are as much in his
power, and at his disposal, as if he had taken them in a snare

The appetite of glory is that natural principle, whereby we are to be quickened
unto virtuous actions. And without a sense of honor, no man is like ever to
attempt any thing that is great and noble. Negligere quid de se quisque
sentiat, non solum arrogantis est, sed etiam dissoluti, says Tully. No man
does neglect or despise a good name, but such a one, as does either despair of,
or resolve against, doing any thing that may deserve it.

3. It Is highly advantageous upon the account of Interest. And that both in
regard to the benefit to be hereby obtained, and the mischief to be avoided.

1. For the advantage accruing to us, by preserving our selves from being
despised: Honor is the greatest blessing among all humane things which this
world can afford us; infinitely to be preferred before riches or pleasures, and
in some cases before life it self. A good name is rather to be chosen than
great riches; Prove. 22.1 Eccles. 7.1 Ecclus. 41.12, 13.
and loving favor rather than silver or gold. One that is a generous virtuous
man, will choose to die rather than to do any thing that may justly expose him
to infamy. St. Paul was of this mind, 1 Cor. 9.15. It were better for me to
die, than that any should make my glorying void.

And because it is a thing of so great excellency, therefore do we pay it, as
the best service we can do, to God, and to his Deputies, magistrates and
parents. It Is the reward of virtue, and therefore does highly deserve our
esteem.

Besides the advantage we have by this while we live, it is one of those things,
that will abide after us, when we are gone out of the world, and for that
reason a special regard is to be had to it; and the more wise and virtuous any
man is, the more care will he take to transmit a grateful memory of himself to
future times: And if he must be spoken of after his departure, that he be well
spoken of, that his name may be as a precious ointment, leaving a perfume
behind it, that men may rise up at the mention of him and call him blessed.

2. It Is our interest, in reference to the avoiding of that mischief which we
may otherwise be exposed unto by doing things that will render us despicable. I
shall mention only two places of Scripture which will afford abundant proof to
this purpose. One is, 1 Samuel 2.17. Where it is said of the Sons of Eli, that
they did by their scandalous carriage render themselves vile before all the
assembly, and caused them to abhor the offerings of the Lord. And it is worth
your special notice, that which follows upon this. I do not know any more
dreadful threats in the whole Bible. Chap. 3.11, God tells them, that he will
execute his vengeance upon them in such a manner, as shall strike a dread and
horror by the very relation of it, and cause both the ears of them that hear it
to tingle. And again, v. 14. I have sworn to the house of Eli, that their
iniquity shall not be purged with sacrifices nor with offerings for ever: i. e.
Those very means which were appointed as the remedy and expiation for other
men's sins shall be no benefit to them. Sacrifices and Offerings were the things
about which they had offended, by rendering them contemptible, causing others
to abhor them: And therefore no reason for such persons to expect any remedy
from them, whatsoever their particular repentance might do, as to the saving of
their souls. The offenses they had committed were so highly scandalous, that
God was immutably resolved, (he had sworn it) to execute upon them some signal
vengeance in this life that should manifest to the world how much he was
concerned, for that dishonor which these men had cast upon his Worship. Which
judgments did afterward accordingly come to pass in the sudden death of Eli
and his two Sons, and his Daughter in Law, in the rejection of Abiathar from
the Priests office, 1 King. 2.27.
and in that Massacre committed by Saul at Nob, upon fourscore and five Priests
of this family, 1 Samuel 22.19.
together with their wives and children and servants.

The other Scripture is that, Malach 2. toward the beginning, where speaking
of such Priests, as by their unworthy carriage, did render the public worship
contemptible, v. 8.
and cause others to stumble at the Law, God threatens that he will send a
curse upon them, v. 2.
and will curse their blessings, v. 3.
and spread dung upon their faces, v. 9.
and make them contemptible and base before all the people. See Ierem 23.40.
And there is nothing more equal, than that those who expose religion to
contempt, should suffer under it themselves.

Now to put all this together, if we have any ingenuity, and desire to do
things decent and congruous to our Profession; any sense of the duty which we
owe to others, whom it is our business to persuade; or which we owe to our
selves, in the preservation of that whereby we are to be excited unto virtuous
and worthy actions: If we have any sense of our own interest, in securing to
our selves the greatest blessing, and avoiding the greatest mischief that this
world can afford, it will upon all accounts highly concern us, that we do not
so demean our selves as to deserve to be despised.

III. I proceed to the third general head proposed, namely the means whereby we
are to preserve our selves from contempt; which are of two kinds: Negative and
Positive.

1. Negative, or such things as in order to this we are carefully to avoid. All
kind of vices whatsoever, especially such as have in them a more peculiar
deformity and turpitude, which are most likely to alienate the minds of others
from us.

I observed before that littleness and impotence is the most proper object of
contempt. I am small and despised, says David, Psalm. 119.141.

So that all such qualities and actions, as will make us appear unto others to
be but minute and little things, must needs render us despicable.

Such are Narrowness of mind, judging of things and persons by little measures;
setting up for reputation by zeal in the smallest matters, with neglect of the
greater: Putting the highest value upon those little things of gain and
promotion and the favor of men; which therefore ought to be esteemed but
little, because they cannot make us better, and we can enjoy them but a little
while. We must shortly go out of this world, when all such things shall be
useless to us, and therefore ought not to come in competition with those other
matters, which may conduce to our living with honor, and dying with comfort.

Being subject to immoderate desires, fears, impatience; to be amused and
transported with wonder at outward pomp and grandeur. All which does arise from
a wrong estimate of things occasioned by our own littleness. Magna ista, quia
parvi sumus, credimus. Senec.
These things would not seem great to us, if we our selves were not little.

From whence will follow a servility of spirit, a readiness to dissemble,
flatter, revile, to bow down to any kind of baseness before such whom we
conceive able to assist or to hinder us in our little designs of gain: And on
the other side, demeaning our selves with insolence toward others from whom we
can neither hope nor fear any thing in this kind.

These are blemishes, which in all ages the men of our Calling have been
accused of. And the truth is, they are liable to some peculiar temptations in
this kind, more than others: And therefore ought to be more especially careful
for the avoiding of them.

To which I shall only add this one consideration: If we of the Clergy would
not have others to despise us, we must be careful not to despise one another.
Those in places of dignity and power should not carry it with too great a
distance from their brethren. The proper notation of the word despise, is to
look down upon a thing, as being much below us.

And much less should they permit any of their Officers, to carry themselves
with insolence toward such as are of this sacred Functoin. It cannot be but
that others will despise us, when they see that we despise one another.

2. The Positive means to this end, are, in general, all kind of virtue and
goodness. But there are some things which the Apostle advises to, as having a
more peculiar fitness and tendency to this purpose, (...), Whatsoever things
are venerable, whatsoever things are lovely, whatsoever things are of good
report, if there be any virtue, if there be any praise, (...), have these
things in account, Phil. 4.8.

Of these I shall mention only three.

1. Wisdom. 2. Generosity and largeness of mind. 3. Holiness of life.
I. Wisdom, this makes a man's face to shine, and the strength of it to be
doubled, Eccles. 8.1. Puts a luster upon a person, renders him venerable and
amiable, conciliates an honor and an awe from those with whom he converseth.

By wisdom I mean, recta ratio agibilium, as Aquinas defines it. Not only skill
in books, and things, and notions, but the art of business, directing a man to
what is fit and convenient in several cases and circumstances, the knowledge of
humane nature, of the various inclinations, tempers, interests of men and
times. It Is not sufficient for him that would be a Pilot to understand the
general Theory of Navigation, without the knowledge of particular Coasts, and
Shelves, and Currents, and Tides, and Winds.

It Is by this virtue of prudence, that a man must be enabled to cut off
occasion from them that would seek occasion, 2 Cor. 11.12. And, considering
that great variety and inconstancy which there is in the judgments and
affections of men, the clashings and intanglements of cross interests, the
several changes and vicissitudes that befall humane affairs; I say all these
things considered, it is not mere integrity, without great prudence, that can
preserve a man in a constant and clear reputation.

2. Generosity of mind, magnanimity. As littleness will render a man
despicable, so by the rule of contraries, this true greatness and largeness of
soul must make him venerable. By this I mean an inclination of mind to things
that are truly great and noble, making virtue and true honor the common
measure of every thing, aiming at that which is great and excellent in every
kind of virtue; having but a small esteem for any of these external matters,
because they can add nothing to our inward real worth.

Every man is endowed with a natural principle, inclining him to a state of
happiness; and has in some measure both an ability to judge of, and a freedom
or liberty to apply himself unto, those moral actions or duties, which are the
proper means for the promoting of this end. Nor is he upon any other account to
be justly praised or blamed, but according to the right or wrong use of this
natural liberty. And therefore according as such a man does find either in
himself or others a constant and firm resolution to make a right use of this,
so does he proportion his esteem toward them. Preferring this inward
greatness, this rectitude of mind, whereby a man is resolved in every
condition, to do that which shall appear to be his duty, before any kind of
external greatness whatsoever.

And if men did rightly understand their true interests, there is nothing more
suitable or more advantageous to humane nature than this. Sen. Epist. 104.
Magnanimos nos natura produxit, and ut quibusdam animalibus ferum dedit,
quibusdam subdolum, quibusdam pavidum, ita nobis gloriosum and excelsum
spiritum, quaerentem ubi honestissime, non ubi tutissime vivat. We are
naturally born with greater and more generous souls than other creatures, and
therefore for a man to debase himself below the Nobility of his creation may
justly expose him to contempt.

It Is this that must make a man humble and gentle, set him above the common
impotences of pride and passion, the false disguises of greatness. Of which
kind of temper it may be truly said, non est magnitudo, tumor est.

It Is this that must keep us from being puffed up with prosperity or dejected
with adversity; free us from being envious, suspicious, fearful, being secure
upon the confidence of our own innocence; not being subject to those vehement
desires and impatience whereby others are transported. Because those things
which provoke them seem but little to us, and therefore must have but little
power over us.

It Is this that must make a man prefer an empire over himself, before power
over others; and the opportunity of being helpful to others, before the
advantage of gaining by them; bearing good will to all mankind, compassionate,
affable, officious, taking all opportunities of doing good to every one. Nor is
there any other qualification whatsoever, that will make a man appear more
grateful and lovely even to enemies themselves, than this generous frame of
mind.

3. The third particular I mentioned to this purpose was Holiness of life.
Which is frequently mentioned in Scripture as a proper means to keep our esteem
in the hearts of others, and preserve us from being despised. They that would
be blameless must be harmless, carrying themselves as the Sons of God without
rebuke, Philip. 2.15. And a little before the Text, v. 7. The Apostle exhorts
Titus, to show himself a pattern of good works, that he who is of the contrary
part may be ashamed, having no evil thing to say of you. So again, 1 Pet. 3.16.
It Is said that a good conversation will make people ashamed to speak evil of
us. And it was by faith and holiness that the Elders obtained a good report,
Heb. 11.2.

In the 1 Timothy 4.12. There is the same precept with this in the Text. Let no
man despise thy youth: To which it is immediately subjoyned as the most proper
direction to this purpose, but be thou an example of the believers, in word, in
conversation, in charity, in spirit, in purity.

When a man is careful to say what is good, and to do what is honest; to speak
well and to act better, endeavoring to be what he would seem to be, avoiding
all suspicions and appearances of evil; when he is zealous according to his
capacity for the promoting of public good, acting sincerely, prudently and
justly; endeavoring to make the times the better for him, wherein he lives,
this will be the most effectual means to make his name honorable, and his
memory precious.

More particularly: The demeaning of our selves with all due respect and
lowliness to our Superiors, is one of those well-doings whereby we are to put
to silence the ignorance of foolish men, 1 Pet. 2.13, 15, 18.

The proportioning of our zeal, according to the real worth and importance of
things, that is another Apostolical direction to this purpose, Romans 14.15, 16.
Having said, Let not your good be evil spoken of, he presently adds: For the
kingdom of God is not meats and drinks, but righteousness, and peace, and joy
in the holy Ghost; whosoever in these things serves Christ, shall be accepted
of God, and approved of men.

Being mild and gentle, not boisterous and peremptory; having the ornament of a
meek and quiet spirit; endeavoring as much as in us lies to live in peace with
all men, as being that which gives opportunity to the more calm, benign,
ingenuous operations of religion in the world.

Wherever these qualifications are, they must and will contract at least a
secret reverence, even from those that may outwardly pretend to hate and
despise us.

I have now done with the three general Heads proposed, it remains that I add
something briefly by way of application, in answer to this case, What Is to be
done if men will despise us, though we do not deserve it from them? In order
thereunto I shall suggest two things.

I. By way of rebuke to such despisers, who if they would but consult the
Scriptures, should find this unworthy disposition set off with such great
aggravations, both as to the nature of the sin, and the punishments that shall
be inflicted upon it, as were enough to fright men from offending in this kind.

1. For the Nature of the sin: The Wiseman tells us, He that despises his
neighbor is void of wisdom, Prove. 11.12. and sins, chap. 14.21. It Is made
the character of a proud Pharisee to despise others, Luke 18.9. That which
renders men like to dogs and swine trampling precious things under their feet.
Esau was therefore branded with the note of profaneness, because he despised
holy things, Heb. 12.16, 17. All which tho it be bad enough, yet that is much
worse, which our Savior affirms concerning it, Luke 10.16. He that despises
you despises me, and he that despises me despises him that sent me. And what
a horrid thing that must be for a poor mortal man to contemn the omnipotent
God, I need not, I cannot say: He himself has said, that as he will honor
those that honor him, so those that despise him shall be lightly esteemed, 1 Samuel 2.30. And he who is the King of Kings must needs be the fountain of honor
to dispose of it as he pleases. Those men shall be sure to be put to shame
whom God does despise, Psalm, 53.5.

2. As for those judgments of all kinds which this sin will expose unto, I
shall only refer you to some few Scriptures.

1. For Temporal judgments: See that place, 2 Chronicles. 36.16, 17. They mocked the
messengers of God, and despised their words, and misused the Prophets, till the
wrath of the Lord arose against his people, that there was no remedy; therefore
he brought upon them the King of the Chaldees, who slew their young men with
the Sword, and had no compassion upon young men and maidens, old men or him
that stooped for age, he gave them all into his hand. Where the ruin of the
Jewish Nation, wherein they were deprived of all kind of privileges, both
civil and ecclesiastical, is ascribed to this sin.

That Is a dreadful imprecation in Nehemiah, 4.4, 5. Hear, O our God, for we are
despised, and turn their reproach upon their own heads, and give them for a
prey in the land of Captivity, and cover not their iniquity, let not their sin
be blotted out from before thee.

2. And as for punishments in the other world: St. Peter tells us, that those
who despise dominions and speak evil of dignities shall perish in their own
corruption, 2 Pet. 2.10. And shall receive the reward of unrighteousness, v.
12. To which St. Jude adds, that there is reserved for them the blackness of
darkness for ever, v. 8. and 13.

II. By way of Direction, to those who are thus unworthily despised, not to be
discouraged at it, remembering what St. Paul says that with us it is but a
small thing to be judged of man's judgment, 1 Cor. 4.3.
but to approve our selves unto God in honor and dishonor: 2 Cor. 6.
Considering what he has promised, that when men speak evil against us
falsely, great shall our reward be in heaven: Mat. 5.11.
And we shall have praise of God. It Is said of our Savior that he despised the
shame: 1 Cor. 4.5.
And so should we too, Heb. 12.
contemn the contempt, of injurious scornful men. This perhaps was the meaning
of that precept to the disciples of shaking the dust off their feet against
those that despised them. Matt. 10.14. Acts 13.51


True honor is Consentiens laus bonorum. Cicero. Tusc. 2.
Such only can give true praise, who are themselves praiseworthy. For a man
deeply to resent his being despised by ignorant or unworthy men is over much to
honor them, as if their esteem could add any thing to our reputation.

To shut up all in a word; you have heard of what great consequence it is, that
we should preserve our selves from being despised, and by what means this is to
be done. Let me beseech you to consider and apply these things. We all pretend
to be zealous for the welfare of the Church, and very good reason we should
be so: But now, if in good earnest we are desireous to promote the honor and
interest of it, these are the ways whereby it must be done; and (whatsoever any
may think) nothing else without these, can be effectual to this purpose.

My brethren, it is not so long ago, but that we may and ought still to remember
it, what floods of contempt have been poured upon our sacred Profession, how it
has been exposed to indignities of all kinds. For which though there be
abundant reason to shame and condemn those unworthy men who were the
instruments of it, yet there is cause enough to believe that the holy
providence of God, who thought fit thus to permit and dispose of it, had just
occasion for it, and wise ends in it. Will it not then concern us to examine,
what those former provocations might be, whether any of those particulars I
have mentioned, that we may endeavor to prevent the like judgment for the
future; least if it should again befall us, it should make an utter end, and
not admit of a second remedy.

Wherefore I beseech you, as you have any tenderness for your own reputation,
for the dignity of your callings, for the peace of the nation, for the honor
of Religion, that you would be very jealous of all such things, as may reflect
disparagement on your holy calling.

It Is not the opposition of enemies on all hands that can do us so much hurt,
as the scandal and folly of pretending friends. If our enemies be more prudent
and holy, more humble and useful in their conversations than we are, it cannot
be but that they shall be reverenced when we shall be despised.

What remains then, but that we make our addresses to the Father of lights,
that he would continually supply his Church with faithful Pastors, who may make
it their business to honor God, and serve their generations, and adorn their
profession: That he would sanctify us with his spirit, and fill all our hearts
with his fear, that walking worthy of our Calling we may be honored while we
live, and happy when we dye*

Now the God of peace, who brought again from the dead our Lord Jesus Christ,
that great shepherd of the sheep, through the blood of the everlasting
covenant, make us perfect in every good work, to do his will; working in us
that which is well-pleasing in his sight, through Jesus Christ, to whom be
glory for ever and ever, Amen.

The End of the fifth Sermon.
The Sixth Sermon.
ECCLES. I.18. For in much wisdom there is much grief; and he that increases
knowledge increases sorrow.


THere are two kind of things which every serious considering man is naturally
very thoughtful about and inquisitive after, the ways of Providence and the
ways of Happiness. Both which in reference to the various opinions and
conjectures of men, are particularly and largely discussed in two several Books
of Scripture.

The first in the book of Job, wherein we have the most natural risings and
obvious suggestions of men's hearts, concerning the reasons and designs of
Providence in the dispensation of good and evil.

The other in this book of Ecclesiastes, wherein are set down the different
thoughts and attempts of men according to their several principles and tempers
in the pursuit after happiness.

In the first verse of this chapter we have a description of the Preacher, the
Son of David, King in Jerusalem.

The second verse is his Text: Vanity of Vanities, etc. This he does largely
prove by some general reasons to the twelfth verse of this Chap. and by an
induction of particulars, in several of the following Chapters.

The general reasons are chiefly four.

1. The fruitlesness of all our labors, v. 3. by which we are not able to
procure for our selves any substantial profit (...) any remainder, that will
tarry with us afterward; but like a sound they pass away, and leave nothing
behind them.

2. The changeableness and uncertainty of our conditions; in which respect, we
are much inferior to our other fellow creatures. This he illustrates by four
examples or similtudes.

1. From the Earth, which though it seems to be but as the sediment and rubbish
of the creation, yet is it better than man in respect of it is lastingness. For
one generation passes away and another comes, but the earth abides for ever,
v. 4.

2. From the sun, which though it do every day decline and set, yet does it
constantly rise again and shine with the same glory, v. 5. But man dies and
wastes away, yea man gives up the Ghost, and where is he? He lies down and
rises not till the heavens be no more, Job 14.10, 12.

Soles occidere and redire possunt;
Nobis cum semel occidit brevis lux
Nox est perpetua una dormienda.
As it is elegantly expressed by a Heahen Poet.

3. From the wind, the common emblem of uncertainty yet is it more constant
than man. For that knows its circuits and whirls about continually, v. 6.
Whereas our life passes away as does the wind, but returns not again, Psalm.
78.39.

4. From the sea, which though it be as uncertain as the moon by which it is
governed, yet is it more constant than man and his happiness. For though the
rivers run into it, and from it, yet that still keeps to its proper state and
dimensions, v. 7. Whereas man is still subject to ebbs and flows, to waves and
tempests, never resting in any settled condition, and at last wears out and
vanishes away. So that in these respects we are much inferior to the very
elements of which we are composed.

3. From that unspeakable wearisomness which is in every condition. All things
are full of labor, man cannot utter it, v. 8. The eye, and the ear, are senses
not easily cloyed, and yet are they sooner wearied than satisfied; there being
such an intrinsical weakness in the best outward delights, that the most
capacious senses are quickly glutted, even to a loathing of them.

4. From the disability of man by any new discovery to restore himself unto a
better condition; since there is no hope of finding any such new way to
happiness, which has not been formerly tried; from the ninth to the eleventh
verse. Though these latter ages in some respects are wiser, yet all their
inventions for the substance of them have already been of old time, and there
is no new thing under the Sun. That fancy of Plato being in some sense to be
allowed, that all knowledge is but remembrance, and forgetfulness the reason of
novelty.

These are the general reasons by which the Wiseman endeavors to prove and
illustrate that common vanity which overspreads the face of all things.

In the next place, he does further amplify and confirm this by an induction
of those particulars in which men usually place their happiness; Wisdom and
Learning, in the remaining part of this Chapter; Mirth and Iollity, chap. 2.1.
Sensual delights, v. 3. Works of Magnificence and Pleasure, v. 4.5, 6. External
Pomp and greatness, v. 7. Abundance of Riches and treasure, v. 8.9.

The Text I have chosen does contain Solomon's censure and experiment
concerning the first of these, which of all other things in the world does bear
in it the fairest appearance and probability of affording satisfaction to the
mind: This being its proper food and suitable to its desires, and most
excellent in it self. And therefore the Devil being to tempt our first parents
in the state of innocence, does propose this to them, as the most likely
temptation to prevail with such intelligent natures, that they should know good
and evil.

Now because Learning is of two kinds, either of Business or Things; therefore
Solomon makes a distinct enquiry into each. The first he calls Wisdom, the
other Knowledge: And he was himself very eminent for his great ability in both;
having made this choice, when it was put to him, that he might have wisdom and
knowledge, 2 Chronicles. 1.10. And the holy Ghost bears witness of him, that in this
respect there was none like unto him before him, nor after him should any arise
like unto him, 1 Kings 3.12.

And yet this Wiseman, notwithstanding all the great success of his enquiries,
upon a review of them does find by experience that as his fruitful studies had
increased his learning so had they also multiplied his grief. And therefore as
the issue of his experiment he lays down this observation which I have read
unto you, that in much wisdom, etc.

The Text then is the result of Solomon's experience upon his enquiry after
happiness in Learning. The chief terms of it are reducible under these two
heads.

1. The things censured, Wisdom and Knowledge. 2. The censure past upon them:
The one brings grief or indignation: The other sorrow.
I. Wisdom is the art of business, directing a man in the practical affairs of
life to what is fit and convenient, according to the variety of circumstances.
It consists in a solid judgment to discern the tempers and the interests of
men, the state of business, the probabilities of events and consequences,
together with a presentness of mind to obviate sudden acciddents.

II. Knowledge does concern the speculation of Nature in reference to causes
and effects, the differences and properties of things.

1. Concerning the first of these, Solomon tells us that there is much grief in
it. The original word is (...) which signifies properly indignation; and the
nature of that is a sharp anger mixed with scorn, occasioned either by contempt
in persons, or disappointment in things.

2. As for knowledge, that increases sorrow: Now sorrow is a perturbation of
mind in the apprehension of some present evil, which we are not able to contest
with or avoid. And least any should mistrust that these were only casual
accidental concomitants, without any mutual influence, therefore he tells us
that they are usually proportioned to one another, for the measure of them, and
do increase together to show their casual dependence.

We scarce read of any person in Scripture under greater discontent and
vexation of mind, than Achitophel; in whom it was the eminency of his parts
that set home upon his thoughts the disgrace of having his counsel despised,
with such aggravations as made him run upon his own voluntary ruin: And there
cannot be any higher degree of indignation than that which drives a man to
despair and self murder. I shall not need to cite that saying of Festus, to St.
Paul, much learning has made thee mad: Acts 26.24.
Because 'twas a gross falsehood and scandal as he applied it: But yet there
was somewhat of the common notion in it, that Nullum magnum ingenium sine
mixtura dementiae. You know that Fable of Prometheus, the great inventor of
Arts and Philosophy, who is said to have an Eagle or a Vulture perpetually
knowing upon his liver, signifying those continual cares and anxieties of mind
which knowing and inquisitive men are exposed unto.

But the chief proofs of this assertion of Solomon I would rank under three
Heads, by considering that vexation which there is in the Getting, Possession,
and Loss of these things.

1. For the Getting of them: It Is part of the primitive curse that nothing is
now attainable without the sweat of our brows; and the difficulty of every
thing is proportionable to the excellency of it: And therefore these being the
best of all other things, there must needs be much vexation and labor in the
enquiry after them. The Wiseman speaking concerning the search afte^ wisdom,
v. 13, tells us, that this sore travel has God given to the Sons of Adam, to
be exercised or afflicted therewith: He seems to allude unto that natural
thirst and appetite after knowledge, which our first Parents have transmitted
down to their posterity: And intimates the great justice and equity, that the
Sons of Adam should for his ambition and curiosity be punished with a
tantalizing desire; that the tree of knowledge should be within their view, but
out of their reach; so that they could not choose but desire and attempt after
it, but cannot attain unto it. And this earnest desire after knowledge
implanted in our hearts, compared with that great difficulty and labor in
getting of it, is that sore travel which God has given to the Sons of Adam to
be afflicted therewith.

Now the perplexities in this kind must needs be very great; whether we
consider, the blindness of our understandings, or the intricacie of things
themselves; the many dark recesses of nature, the obscurity and implication of
causes and effects (there being (...) in the Books of Scripture and Nature)
besides tho^^ accidental difficulties, which are occasioned by the subtilty and
intanglement of error, the variety of intricate opinions, the many involutions
of controversies and disputes, which are apt to whirl a man about with a
vertigo of contradictory probabilities; and instead of settling, to amuse and
distract the mind. To which may be added that difficulty and labor which is
occasioned by the disease of curiosity, to which inquisitive men are commonly
liable; by which they are made to wander about after all kind of varieties, and
like Noah's Dove are continually hovering, not knowing where to rest themselves
or set their feet. So that in all these respects the Wiseman had just cause to
complain, that much study is a weariness to the flesh, by reason of those many
cares and difficulties in the acquisition of wisdom and knowledge.

2. Nor is it better with us in the second place as to the Possession of them:
It being the property of learning, as not to diminish by communicating, so not
to fill up by addition to it: But the thirst after knowledge does increase with
it; like drink to a man in a fever, which inflames the appetite to a more
impetuous craving. Besides that it is apt to bring along with it much
disquietness in other respects, infusing into the soul weak fears, vast
desires, jealousies, impatience, emulations, doubts; in all which respects it
is almost grown into a Proverb, that nihil scire est vita jucundissima.

The Philosopher has observed it, that the most studious men (though they may
be naturally cheerful) yet commonly are by their studies and retirement made
sour and morose, and less patient of opposition; as being continually chafed
and tired out in wrestling with difficulties. And when they have leisure to
look abroad upon the state of things round about them, they cannot choose but
see every where much defect and lameness, much confusion and disorder, besides
the evils that are a far off; and not being able either to avoid these or amend
those, no wonder though their knowledge increases their sorrow. The more skill
a man has in any thing, with so much the more disgust and regret does he
behold the failings and deficiencies in that kind. He that has in his mind the
exact Idea's of Music or of Painting, cannot hear the discords, or behold the
bungling of such as are pretenders to those arts, without displeasure and
offense. And thus must it be with every wise man that beholds those
irregularities and confusions which he shall meet withal in the world.

But this will yet better appear, if we consider such men's conditions either in
relation to their Sufferings or Sins.

1. For their Sufferings: Such persons have usually the most tender sense, and
therefore must needs have the greatest sufferings: As an exact health is
required to an exquisite pain. They cannot but be very apprehensive of the
cares, dangers, and necessities wherewith they are encompassed; the injuries
and abuses that are offered to them: Eccles. 7.7. it is said, that oppression
makes a wise man mad, that is, transports him to some unusual rage; such an one
being best able to see and to judge of the deformity of any unjust, unworthy
action; and therefore his heart must needs rise up with much nauseousness and
indignation against it.

A man that by his knowledge has gotten an enlarged heart, is thereby made
less capable of a narrow indigent condition. He that uses to busy his thoughts
in surveying the vast frame of Nature, the several situations and advantages of
Kingdoms, or else in censuring the miscarriages of those public counsels and
transactions, upon which the fate of the greatest Nations and Persons have
depended; for this man to be himself without any kind of possession or power,
and after all these great thoughts to want necessaries for himself or family,
to be insulted over by some sordid ignorant peasant; how irksome must this be
to such a person? And yet this is oftentimes the case of wise and knowing men:
Eccles. 9.11.
For the race is not always to the swift, neither yet bread to the wise, nor
riches to men of understanding, nor favor to men of skill, but time and chance
happens to them all; that is, the great abilities of these persons cannot
secure them, by any such special privilege, but that they may be involved in
the same necessities and casualties which befall the common herd of mankind.

2. As for Sin: Such persons are more exposed to it, by reason of those
temptations to which they are obnoxious; knowledge in it self being apt to puff
up. And yet they cannot find so much pleasure in it as others, 1 Cor. 8.1.
by reason of those inward regrets and smitings of conscience which will
imbitter it to them. Nor can they sin at so cheap a rate, by reason of those
many stripes denounced against the knowing Servant. The Chaldee Paraphrase in
translating of the Text, renders the words thus: That man who increases in
knowledge and not in grace and repentance, does treasure up for himself the
anger and indignation of the Lord. So that in all these respects, there must
needs be much vexation, in the possession of wisdom and knowledge.

3. And yet notwithstanding all this men cannot choose but be much troubled at
the loss of it. Which may be three manner of ways.

1. by the unfaithfulness of memory; which is like a leaking vessel, and does
quicky let slip the things committed to its custody. Now it must needs be a
great vexation to a man to take much pains in gathering in, and treasuring up,
and afterward to let all drop out again through the chinks of a leaking
memory; his labor being to as little purpose as if he had laved water into a
sive.

2. Through the defects of old age; when the sun and the moon, and the stars
shall be darkened, chap. 12. The Understanding and the other inferior Faculties
being deprived of their wonted light and reason: Childhood returning again to
the mind as well as to the feeble members. It Is related of a great Scholar,
Richard Swisset, a person that lived about 300 years since; of so profound
learning and subtilty that De subtle. lib. 16. Ex. 324, 340.
Scaliger says of him, that his abilities were fere supra humanum ingenium.
Cardan and he do both agree in this, that he is to be ranked amongst the first
ten of the greatest Wits that ever were.
some ages since of this Place, by name Swisset; who for his manner of Writing
by demonstrations was afterward called the Calculator; that being grown old he
often wept, because he was not able to understand the Books which he had
written in his younger days.

3. By Death, which shall put a period to our Lives and our Learning at once.
Now for men to think, that though they run in never so hot a pursuit after
knowledge, yet they must shortly be laid in the dust, from whence all their
learning cannot either preserve or deliver them; to consider, that in this, the
wise has not a greater privilege than the fool; but the same forgetfulness
shall cover both their memories: For after death there is no remembrance of the
wiseman, more than of the fool; seeing that which now is, in the days to come
shall be forgotten. And lastly, to consider that after death, the soul of the
most ignorant peasant shall presently know more, than the profoundest
Philosophers, or the most subtle Schoolman could ever attain unto. I say to
consider all this, is of it self apt to make a man weary of life and learning,
whereby he is exposed to so much vexation.

I have been so long in the explication and proof of this, that it is so, that
I shall be but brief in the reasons, why it is so.

And I shall mention only those two, which are put together in the fifth ver.
of this chapter, 1. The impotency of wisdom and knowledge, that which is
crooked cannot be made strait. 2. The imperfection of it, that which is wanting
cannot be numbered.

The vexation of every thing is proportionable to the disappointment of it;
which in these things is so much the greater, by how much the hopes and
likelyhoods of contentment here, are more promising, and yet the trial and
issue more remote and contrary. Now that these things are so far from affording
real happiness must needs be evident upon these two grounds.

1. From their utter impotence and disability for that work wherein our
happiness does properly consist, the rectifying of our crooked natures,
restoring of us to an uprightness and conformity unto that image after which we
were created. Now, who knows not, that it is above the power of any natural
wisdom or knowledge fully to discover to us the deformity of our natural
states? much less then can they direct how to recover us out of it. The Devil
is perhaps a greater scholar than any man in the world, and yet all his
learning cannot find out a way, how to reinstate himself in his former
privileges of a glorified Angel.

2. From the deficiency and imperfection of these things in reference to their
own proper faculty, the Understanding; that which is wanting cannot be numbered.
That is, there are innumerable particulars in nature, which the most
inquisitive judgment shall never reach unto. No man shall ever find out the
works of God from the beginning to the end. And this is one of the most proper
effects of learning, that it discovers to a man his own ignorance. Now as there
is on the one hand much pleasure in finding out what a man knew not; so must
there be a proportionable grief in the consideration of those innumerable other
things which we cannot attain unto. It was the ambition of our first Parents to
aspire unto a perfect knowledge, to be like Gods, knowing good and evil; and
therefore it is but just that their posterity should be thus afflicted by the
vexation of their imperfect knowledge. It must needs be a greater trouble to an
inquisitive man to consider, that notwithstanding all his pains and care, yet
he must grow old in ignorance, and in most things shall know as little, as
those that are idle and foolish, the secrets of wisdom being double to that
which is, as Zophar tells us in Job, 11.6.

Now this great imperfection of our knowledge will more distinctly appear, if
we consider it under those several heads to which it is reducible, namely, the
knowledge of Words, Things, Times, Persons and Actions.

1. That learning which consists only in the form and paedagogy of Arts, or the
Critical notions upon words and phrases, has in it this intrinsical
imperfection, that it is only so far to be esteemed, as it conduces to the
knowledge of things; being in it self but a kind of pedantry, apt to infect a
man with such odd humors of pride, and affectation, and curiosity, as will
render him unfit for any great employment. Words being but the images of
matter, and to be wholly given up to the study of these, what is it but
Pygmalions phrenzy, to fall in love with a picture or image, as for Oratory
which is the best skill about words, that has by some Wisemen been esteemed
but a voluptuary art, like to cookery, which spoils wholesome meats, and helps
unwholesome, by the variety of sauces serving more to the pleasure of taste
than the health of the body.

2. As for real knowledge, that is likewise exceeding imperfect; whethe we look
to the history of nature, delivered down to us by the Ancients, which in many
things is evidently false, and therefore to be suspected in others; or else to
what the industry of these latter times has discovered; men having not been so
diligent and exact in their observations, as not to be deceived with casual and
fortuitous events.

The frame of this great Universe as it is represented to humane consideration
and inquiry, Verulam. Pref. ad Nov. Organ.
appearing like a perplexed Labyrinth, wherein there is so much ambiguity in
the several ways, so much fallacy in the similitude of things and signs, such
obliqueness and intricacy in the course of nature, that even sense it self,
which in such things is our chiefest guide, is fain to wander up and down in
uncertainties, and instead of leading us out, does many times lead us into
error. And for this reason, Philosophy has been so often questioned and
subverted in the very principle of it.

3. As for History of Times, Persons, Actions; we have reason enough to suspect
that they are generally written, according to the Author's interests and
prejudices, and do seldom contain an impartial and upright representation of
truth.

I do not mention Divinity, though here our knowledge be most imperfect; nor
has this been wholly free from its changes and fashions according to the
course of times.

Now all this arises from the imperfection of our knowledge in these things,
because We see but in part, darkly; That which is wanting in any of them cannot
be numbered.

If any one shall from hence object: That according to this, it were better for
a man to be idle, ignorant and cheerful, than to macerate himself with much
reading. If every state of life has its proper vexation, it is best to choose
that which has least.

To this Solomon answers, that it is true, every condition is bad enough, yet
some are better than others, For wisdom excels folly, c. 2.^4.
as much as a light excels darkness; and though it does expose us to sorrow,
yet this very sorrow is better than a careless sensual mirth, c. 7.3.
For by sadness the heart is made better.

If it be again objected, that it is not imaginable how the best things in the
world, should expose us to the worst mischiefs and troubles.

I answer, they are therefore the worst because they spring from the corruption
of the best, For Corruption optimi est pessima, the more excellent any thing is
in it self, the worse does it prove when abused or corrupted.

I have been too long in the Doctrinal part, it is more than time that I hasten
to the Application.

And here I shall not need to apologize, for the suitableness of this discourse
both to this Place and Time. Knowledge is here our business and profession, the
great Merchandise that we deal in, and this solemnity is our chief Mart,
wherein it is exposed to public view, and ought to be after a more especial
manner taught and learned. And therefore it cannot now be improper for us to be
put in remembrance of the many troubles and hazzards we are exposed unto in
this respect.

You have heard already how the greatest natural wisdom and knowledge, is not
only short of, but likewise opposite unto, that rest and satisfaction of mind
which we all pretend to seek after.

And therefore certainly it must needs follow as a most obvious and natural
inference.

1. By way of Instruction or Caution, that we have no reason to be proud of, or
to trust in that knowledge which we have already attained, or to pursue after
more with so much heat and eagerness as to forget those practical duties which
are most necessary.

2. By way of Exhortation, that we have great reason to apply our selves unto
those means which may prevent or remove the sorrows and dangers, to which these
things of themselves will expose us. And that is the substance of what I have to
say in the Application.

I. It may serve for Instruction, to acquaint us:

1. That we have little reason to be proud of, or to trust in that knowledge we
have already attained. It Is true, it has naturally a fermenting quality in it,
being apt to swell and puff up, and it is an hard matter for a man that has
much learning not to have a broad heart, as the Hebrew phrase is, that is, a
proud heart, as our Translation renders it, Prove. 21.4. But yet if it be
rightly considered, there can be no reason why any man should be proud of that
wherein the Devil does excel him. And the truth is, knowing persons of all
others have most cause to be humbled in the apprehension of their own ignorance
and folly, of which they must needs be most sensible. And as for confidence in
these things, they will be so far from assisting or relieving us in our
greatest exigencies, that they will rather add to our trouble and danger. It Is
not all the art of Reasoning or Rhetoric in the world that can deceive the
Devil, or silence a guilty clamorus conscience; nay, these things do usually
help to aggravate such men's conditions, by many dreadful apprehensions of that
wrath and vengeance to which their sins do expose them. The damned souls could
not suffer such exquisite torments, if in the state of separation they were not
raised to a much higher degree of knowledge than here they are capable of. And
as for that great business of a man's life, which does most of all concern him,
conversion and regeneration, the wisdom of this world is so far from helping us
in this, that it is enmity against God. No men usually are such fierce and
bitter opposers of the power of godliness, as those that have learned heads and
unsanctified hearts: Paul's powerful preaching was never more fruitless than
amongst the Athenians, whose learning was so far from showing them the
excellency, that it made them despise the simplicity of the Gospel. Our Savior
never met with more malicious opposition, than from the learned Scribes and
Pharisees; who did not only by open contempt resist his ministry, but also by
secret practices undermine his person. And therefore in all these respects we
have little reason either of pride or confidence in that knowledge which any of
us have already attained.

2. We have as little reason to be so eager in the pursuit after more, as to
forget or neglect those practical duties which are most necessary. It Is true,
knowledge is here the business of our particular Callings, as Scholars; in
which it is our duty to be diligent, and our just commendation to be skilful.
But yet there is somewhat else of greater concernment to us in our general
Callings, as Christians, a demeanor and conversation suitable to this
Profession; our failing in this will quickly bring a blemish upon the other.
There have been of late great complaints (and too much occasion for them) of
that contempt and reproach poured out upon men of our Calling; which though it
may argue much folly and madness in those unreasonable men who are the Authors
of it, yet perhaps there may be too much occasion given on our parts, for want
of that holiness and zeal and prudence and gravity which should accompany our
profession; besides that many of us do by our sloth and idleness, let other men
outgo us in those very gifts and abilities, which are more peculiarly required
to our Calling. Now I say, that which must promote both the usefulness and the
reputation of our knowledge, is when our practice and conversation is made
suitable to it. It Is not an ability to talk or to dispute of Religion; for in
these times, what man, nay what woman almost is there who does not pretend to
skill in this? But it is a holy and prudent conversation that must adorn our
profession, and provoke others to the love of it. And there are stronger
engagements upon us to this purpose, than upon any others. Because by our
Callings we profess our selves to be amongst those servants, who do not only
know, but are able to teach our masters will, and therefore our disobedience
shall be punished with many stripes.

It cannot be denied, but that skill in Controversies, the Tongues, History,
Philosophy, the Arts, are all of them not only great ornaments and advantages
to particular men, but in some sense also necessary for the Church; but yet
when all is done, it is this practical Divinity, that must bring us to heaven,
that must poise our judgments, and settle our consciences, and strengthen our
comforts; and save our souls. This must be our rejoicing at the last day, the
testimony of our consciences, 2 Cor. 1.12.
that in simplicity and godly sincerity, not with fleshly wisdom, but by the
grace of God we have had our conversations in this world.

2. A second Use shall be for exhortation, that we would apply our selves to
those means which may help to remedy the sorrows and dangers to which those
things of themselves will expose us.

There are diverse things of excellent use in Physic which yet cannot be safely
prescribed without the addition of some correctives to abate their noxious
qualities. Such is the condition of this natural wisdom and knowledge, which of
themselves have many flatuous and corroding qualities; but yet being mixed with
some proper correctives, may be made of singular use and efficacy. But you will
say, what are these other ingredients? Why the Apostle does prescribe a large
recipe of them, 2 Pet. 1.5, 6. Add to your knowledge, faith, virtue,
temperance, patience, goodness, brotherly kindness, charity. The mixture of
these other Christians Graces, will make our knowledge exceeding wholesome and
useful. I must not insist upon the particulars; only there are two Graces
amongst all the rest, which I cannot omit, being in Scripture phrase styled by
the name of wisdom and knowledge; and therefore of all others, the study of
these must needs be the most proper remedies to be applied in this case:
namely: 1. Faith in Christ: 2. Fear of God: These are properly the graces, the
other but the gifts of wisdom and knowledge.

1. Faith is wisdom unto salvation; the other is but wisdom unto grief; this
leads us unto a practical acquaintance with the Doctrine of our Lord Jesus
Christ, in whom are laid up all the treasures of wisdom and knowledge. Colos.
2.3.
Those are but the refuse, and the husks of knowledge, which are to be had
amongst the Creatures, the treasures of it are only to be obtained by an
acquaintance with the virtue of Christ's death and resurrection. Though a man
should be very well skilled in the way of secular business, knowing how to
bring about his own ends, to raise himself unto power, reputation, estate; yet
such an one is but a fool, if he be either ignorant, or careless, how to save
his own soul. And therefore if we aim at true wisdom, we should make it our
chief business to grow in grace, and in this knowledge of our Lord and Savior
Jesus Christ. St. Paul was a man of as great abilities as any that we read of,
bred up at the feet of Gamaliel, very well versed in the chief Authors of his
time, Epimenides, Menander, Aratus, whom he cites upon several occasions; of a
very powerful and masculine Oratory, as may be seen by the effects of it, in
his discourse with Faelix, Agrippa, Festus, and the men of Lystra, who for this
reason called him Mercury. And for his skill in Languages, he spoke with
tongues more than they all: 1 Cor. 14.
And yet this learned man, notwithstanding all these great abilities, does
profess that he desired to know nothing but Christ and him Crucified, that is,
nothing in comparison to that knowledge, or nothing but what might lead him to
it, or further him in it; nay he counts all things but loss for the excellency
of this knowledge of Christ Jesus his Lord. Philip. 3.^.


2. The second Grace I mentioned is, the fear of God, Job 28.28. The fear of
the Lord, that is wisdom, and to depart from evil is understanding. This is
that which Solomon, after all his other enquiries, does at last pitch upon as
the only remedy against those anxieties of mind, which every thing else did
expose him unto. And he sets down as the utmost result of all his experience,
that whosoever would be truly happy, he must make it his chief business to keep
up in his heart a holy awe and fear of the divine Majesty, and to apply himself
with an humble conformity unto the will of God. This he makes the conclusion of
his whole Sermon; and I shall shut up all with the same advice. If you would
have your other enquiries and learning made useful and comfortable unto you,
then, fear God and keep his commandments; for this is the whole duty of man.

The End of the sixth Sermon.
The Seventh Sermon.
PROVE. IV.7. Wisdom is the principal thing, therefore get wisdom.


AMongst that great variety of subjects which Solomon treats of, in this and
his other moral discourses, there is none more frequently mentioned, or more
largely insisted upon, than this of wisdom. He himself, when he was put to his
choice, having preferred this before all other things, and being so very
eminent above all other men, for his great abilities in this kind: He does
thereupon take all occasions to celebrate the praise of it, and to excite
others to the love and study of it.

It is one of his Proverbs to this purpose, which I have now made choice to
speak of: Being a subject amongst all others the most difficult to be treated
of, partly for the abstruseness of it, and partly for the copiousness of it,
being that which we are still to be learning all the days of our lives. And
therefore is it no easy matter, either to explain the nature, or contract the
doctrine of it within a narrow compass; which yet I shall endeavor to do with
as much plainness and brevity as I can.

The Word here translated Principal (...) is derived from a Root which
signifies the Head. It Is frequently used to express the summity or top of any
thing, the chief or most excellent part of it; the original or first: It may
import a priority of time, or order, or cause, or dignity. The Word translated
Ge^, signifies properly the acquiring such an interest and propriety as men
have in their possessions, which they account their own, and which they enjoy
for themselves.

The Proposition I would treat of from these words is this:

The attainment of true wisdom is that which does most of all deserve our care
and study. Prop.


In the prosecution of this, I shall endeavor. 1. To show the Nature of
Wisdom, what it is, and wherein it consists. 2. The Necessity of it, or the
grounds of our obligation to it, from Scripture, and Reason. 3. To apply this
by some useful inferences.

I. To show what Wisdom is, and wherein it consists: Which I would enlarge
under these four heads.

1. The description of its Nature and causes. 2. The several kinds and
distinctions of it. 3. The properties or effects that flow from it. 4. The
opposites to it.
1. For the description of the Nature of Wisdom, this is by Aristotle said to
be that intellectual Virtue whereby we are directed in our manners and
carriage, to make choice of the right Means in the prosecution of our true End.
Tully describes it to be ars vivendi: And to the same purpose Aquinas, Recta
ratio agibilium, the skill of demeaning a man's self aright in practical
affairs. And Solomon to the same purpose: The wisdom of the prudent is to
understand his way, Prove. 14.8. It is the end of science or knowledge to
furnish our minds with due conceptions, concerning the nature of things in
general, their differences, relations, dependencies, whether in themselves they
are either true or false, good or evil; but to be able to give a true judgment
of particulars, concerning what may be most fit and convenient, in that great
variety of Cases, which we shall meet with in the practical affairs of life,
this is properly the work of Wisdom and Prudence.

The Philosophers in their distribution of virtues have generally agreed upon
four, which they call cardinal, because all the rest do turn upon them as upon
their hinges.

These are Prudence, and universal Justice, and Fortitude, and Temperance:
Prudence is that virtue whereby a man is enabled to judge of what is right and
fitting to be done, according to variety of cases and circumstances. Justice is
that inclination of mind, whereby a man is disposed and fixed to do in every
business according to the Rules of right, and just as he ought. Fortitude is
that virtue whereby he is enabled to resist and subdue all such difficulties as
he may meet with in the performance of his duty, on the one hand, upon the
account of danger or fear. And Temperance is that virtue whereby he is enabled
to overcome the temptations on the other hand, of pleasure and allurement. So
that each of these virtues are of universal extent in all the affairs and
conditions of life; and there are many particular Cases, all such as are of any
importance, wherein every one of them is to be exercised. When a man shall
stand in need of Prudence to direct him in what is fitting; and of Justice to
incline him to do accordingly; and of Fortitude to resist those fears and
discouragements which be put in his way; and of Temperance to overcome the
temptations of allurement and pleasure, whereby he may be drawn aside and
enticed.

The first of these, which I am now treating of, is Wisdom or Prudence, and it
consists of these three parts:

I. A Sagacity of judgment to make a true estimate of 1. Things, 2. Persons, 3.
Times and 4. Events.

1. Of Things, and actions, according to the nature of them, whether they are
good or evil, and according to their degrees whether Gnatts or Camels, Moats or
Beams, Mint and Cummin or the weighty matters of the Law.

2. Of Persons, according to their various tempers, interests and inclinations.
The Philosopher has observed that every man has some handle in his
disposition, which he that can take hold of may thereby lead him about and
persuade him to any thing: Nor can there be a more palpable folly than to use
such courses in order to the persuading of men, as in their own natures are
like to alienate and exasperate them, rather than to convince them.

3. Of Times and seasons; as to the fitness of them, a wise man's heart
discerns both of time and judgment, Eccles. 8.5. That which at one time may
be very useful and proper, may not prove so at another season.

4. Of Events, as to the probability of them: A wise man foresees the evil and
hides himself: Again, he knows that things and persons are not to be judged of
by their present state, but by their final issues, which he is able oftimes to
foresee in their causes.

II. A Presence of mind, to obviate sudden accidents, that a man may not be
daunted with a surprise or unexpected emergency, but may have his wits about
him, to make the best diversion and provision that such a case will admit of.

III. Experience and observation of the most usual and probable consequences of
things, which being for the most part acquired upon many trials, and in long
time, therefore is this Virtue of Wisdom commonly appropriated to old age,
according to that in Job: With the ancients is wisdom, and in length of days
understaning, 12.12. But because a diligent observation of History is somewhat
equivalent to this, the world being but a great Theater, wherein the same parts
are repeated and acted over again in several Ages, therefore this may be some
help and supply where the other is wanting.

II. The second particular to be discussed is concerning the several kinds and
distinctions of it. The Scripture takes notice of two general kinds of it: One
that is a Grace or Virtue, the other that is not so.

1. The first of these is sometimes styled: The wisdom that is from above,
James 3.17. to show its original and descent: The wisdom of God, 1 Cor. 2.7. as
the Author of it: Wise unto Salvation, as the end of it, 2 Timothy 3.15. Wise to
that which is good, as the proper object of it, Romans 16.29.

2. The Opposite to this is sometimes called, the wisdom from beneath, or which
descends not from above, James 3.15. but is earthly, sensual, devilish. The
wisdom of the flesh, Romans 8.6, 7. which is enmity against God. The wisdom of
the world, 1 Cor. 2.6. We speak not the wisdom of this world, nor of the
princes of this world, that is, it is not our business to instruct men in those
subtilties of Philosophy, or arts of Policy, which pertain to these worldly
affairs, for which other men are celebrated as princes and famous in their
generations: But we speak the wisdom of God in a mystery, as it follows in the
next verse.

But besides this general distinction of Wisdom into good and bad, there is
likewise another distribution of it according to the several ends which men
propose to themselves, and the means whereby these several ends are to be
attained. The common end which every man does and must propose to himself by a
natural necessity, is a state of happiness. But according to men's different
apprehensions of this, and those several designs wherein they place their
happiness, so may their wisdom be distributed. Now there are three kinds of
things which men of several tempers do propose to themselves as their
happiness, either, 1. The gratifying of their carnal appetites in enjoying of
these worldly things. 2. In that peace and contentment of mind, which may be
attained by the exercise of moral Virtues: Or, 3. In spiritual blessedness.
According to which it is distinguished into these three kinds, Carnal Policy,
Moral Prudence, Spiritual Wisdom.

1. For Carnal Policy: The end of this is the satisfying of our sensual
appetites; either by luxury and pleasure, by gain and riches, or by honor,
power and greatness in the world. Which the Apostle St. John, 1 Ioh. 2.16. has
styled the lust of the flesh, the lust of the eye, and the pride of life.
Sensuality, Covetousness and Pride; to which St. James has appropriated the
Epithetes of sensual, earthly, devilish. James 3.15. The more weak and impotent
any Creature is, of so much the more narrow designs must it be. It Is an
argument of an infirm and little soul, when men are wholly immersed in
themselves, and confined to the gratifying of their brutish appetites: Such
persons are usually sui amantes sine rivali, as Cicero speaks; great lovers of
themselves, but without any rival or competitor: If they do attain their ends,
they are of all others the most ignonoble and despicable, a kind of impotent
vermin amongst men; and if they fail of their ends, nothing can be more vain
or miserable. Now the end that such men propose to themselves being small and
vile, and much below the nobility of the humane nature, therefore no wonder, if
they are put to prosecute it by unworthy means, by secret underminings, crafty
and fraudulent surprizals, destruction on the one hand, and base flattery and
complyances on the other hand, all kind of courses, per fas, and nefas,
quocunque modo, without any consideration of what is honest or just, if it seem
but likely to promote their particular design.

When these worldly things are made our chief end, then all those arts and
devices that are used about them, are but worldly policy and devilish craft.
But now when they are made a subordinate end, as they may, then the grace or
virtue of wisdom, may be of great use in the prosecution of them.

2. Moral Prudence: The end which this proposes to it self, is peace, quiet,
safety as to our outward condition, contentment and joy as to our inward frame,
and usefulness to those with whom we converse; and such a future state of
happiness as the light of nature will enable men to believe and hope for.

The Means for the attaining of this end, are the Moral Virtues: All those
virtuous habits whereby we are enabled to moderate our passions, to subdue our
corrupt inclinations, and to regulate our actions and carriage. Now though this
be not the same thing with that we call Divinity, yet it is in the very next
degree to it; if there had been no special Revelation from heaven, this had
been the utmost felicity that we could have proposed to our selves, or that our
natures had been capable of: And now that there is another way discovered to
repair the defects of our lapsed condition, it does not exclude moral honesty
and prudence as things superfluous, but does comprehend and take them in as a
necessary part of Religion, without which a man cannot so much as pretend to
grace and holiness; and where it stands alone separated from Christianity, how
defective and insufficient soever it may be for the attainment of true
blessedness, yet it is of it self of a very amiable nature, deserving love and
commendation. It Is said of our Savior that he loved the young man in the
Gospel upon this account: I do the rather mention this, because in the unwary
expressions of some men, morality has been sometimes declaimed against as if
it were a vice. It Is a disparagement indeed to a man, who lives under the means
of Grace, not to get above the morality of the Heathens, but it is a far greater
disparagement for a man to pretend unto higher seize, and yet to fall
short of them in the practice of moral duties.

3. Christian Wisdom: The end which this proposes is a state of eternal
blessedness, consisting in reconciliation to God, and communion with him. The
means for the attaining of this end, are the infused principles of grace, by
which our corrupted natures are to be renewed and repaired to their primitive
rectitude; Faith in a Mediator, together with an hearty, constant and universal
submission to the doctrine of the Gospel. Which is the wisdom of God whereby we
are made wise unto Salvation: So that Christian Wisdom may be defined to be
that habit of mind whereby a man is enabled to propose the true end of eternal
blessedness, and to judge aright concerning such means as may be most fit for
the attaining of this end, conforming his life and carriage accordingly.

This does not abolish humane wisdom, so far as we keep within due bounds, in
the getting and enjoying these worldly things, much less moral prudence; but
they may be both comprehended under it, as being subordinate and subservient to
it. Only this has upon all accounts the pre-eminence, as proposing the best
end, choosing the most certain and infallible means. In these secular affairs
the effect is not always tied to the means; The battle is not to the strong,
nor the race to the swift, but time and chance happen to them all. There may
happen some unexpected emergencies from undiscernible accidents, which may
blast all our designs and most probable contrivances: Besides that in a long
series and concatenation of designs, life it self may fail us, and then all our
thoughts perish. Nor can moral virtue always attain that joy and contentment
which it aims at, considering the many infirmities and temptations we are
liable unto. But now those graces and duties which are prescribed by Christian
wisdom, are most certain and infallible, and never fail of their end.

III. The next thing to be spoken unto, is concerning the proper effects of
Wisdom; the chief of which Solomon tells us is to direct, Eccles. 10.10. Wisdom
is profitable to direct. And this it does both as to the end and the means.

1. It directs to propose the right end, such as may be perfective of our
natures, and suitable to the happiness of a spiritual immortal soul, namely,
the fruition of the first and most supreme Being. That which is highest and
greatest in genere very, to gratify our understandings; and in genere boni, to
satisfy our wills and affections. Any thing that is short of this will not
reach up to the nature of an end, namely, to the utmost perfection of our
natures according to their kind. And for a man to mistake in his ultimate end,
is the most fatal incurable folly that may be, not to be remedied by any
possible artifice or diligence to be used about the means: All which will but
help to promote and increase the first error.

2. It directs to consult about the means: This the Philosopher calls, (...),
which consists in a judicious investigation about the several ways, and a
choice of such as are more proper to the end we propose. There are these two
qualifications requisite unto all such means as are consistent with true
wisdom. 1. They must be fit and accommodate to the end. And 2. They must be
honest and lawful in themselves: A defect in either of these will expose men to
the censure of folly, or of fraud. And there are two things which every wise
man should propose to himself in the management of his affairs, success and
safety. The making of some advance and progress in his main design; and the
securing himself from such dangers as he may meet with. In order to which there
are four conditions to be observed, as being highly subservient to the due
manner of contriving and executing of things. These are: 1. Forecast and
providence against want. 2. Wariness and caution against danger. 3. Order and
Union against opposition. 4. Sedulity and diligence against difficulties.


Which four qualifications seem to me to be recommended by Solomon, Prove.
30.24. Where he tells us, that there be four things, which are little upon the
earth, but they are exceeding wise, sapientiora sapientibus. The Ants are a
people not strong, yet they prepare their meat in the summer. The Conies are
but a feeble folk: Some read this Word mures montani the Mice, which for their
smallness seems more agreeable to those other examples with which they are
joined. These are but a feeble folk, yet they make their houses in the Rock.
The Locusts have no King, yet go they forth all of them by bands. The Spider
takes hold with her hands, and is in Kings Palaces.

Interpreters do very much vary in their expositions of this place: Some would
have it to refer to four kinds of necessary things to be acquired by wisdom. 1.
Food and sustenance, in the example of the Ant. 2. Safe habitation, in the
instance of the Mice. 3. Power, in the example of the Locusts. 4. Honor, by
that instance of the Spider. Implying that there is no person so mean and
impotent, but by wisdom may provide for his own, 1. Necessary subsistence, if
he takes the right opportunity. Gathering in summer, working whilst it is day,
before the night comes when no man can work. And 2. For his safe habitation, by
building upon a Rock, Matthew. 7. Getting a house not made with hands eternal in
the heavens, 2 Cor. 5. And 3. For his Power, by joining himself in society and
observing the Laws of it. And lastly for Honor, by his Sedulity and diligence
in opposing all the difficulties that he meets with.

Others conceive these words to refer to those several kinds of wisdom, which
belong to these four conditions or states of life. 1. That of the Countryman or
Husbandman, represented by the Ant, who lives in the field and gathers in the
harvest. 2. That of the Citizens, by the Mice, whose habitation is in the
Rocks. 3. That of the Soldier, by the Locusts, who go forth in bands. 4. That
of the Courtier, by the Spider, who lives in Kings Palaces.

There are several other conjectures about the meaning of the Wiseman in these
examples, which I shall not now mention. Only it is observable that the
instances here made use of, are of such Creatures as, besides their own
littleness and weakness, are withal of no kind of benefit to humane life,
either as to clothing, or food, or physic, but rather noxious and hurtful to
men; but what they want in usefulness as to these particulars, they may supply
by their teaching us wisdom.

1. The Ant prepares his meat in the summer, thereby teaching and instructing
us in that part of wisdom, which concerns providence and forecast against
future want.

2. The Conies, or as it may be more properly rendered the Mice, which are but a
feeble folk build their houses in the Rock, and not being able to make any
opposition or resistance against their enemies, they use their best wariness
and caution for the avoiding of them, and place their security in the
inaccessibleness of their habitation.

3. The Locusts go forth by bands: Though the Locust of it self be a most
impotent Creature, easily swept away or trodden under foot, yet are they safe
upon account of their numbers, and most formidable in their troops, wasting
whole Countries before them; so that no kind of opposition or resistance can
prevail against them.

4. The Spider takes hold with her hands, and is in Kings palaces. Though such
places be most frequented by company, and kept most neat and elegant, the
Spiders webb being often destroyed and swept down, yet by her unwearied
diligence and indefatigable industry, she renews it again, being ready to
repeat over her former labors, without despondency, as often as her losses and
necessities require; and by that means gets and continues an habitation in
palaces.

IV. The fourth thing I proposed to speak to, was the Opposites to this virtue
of wisdom, whether by way of excess, Craft; or by way of Defect, Folly.

1. The Redundant extreme of it is Craft, guile, a fraudulent subtilty, which
may properly be styled a being overwise i. e. wiser than the Rule; as if by
this a man were able to find out shorter ways than the lawful road, breaking
over hedge and ditch and all legal bounds, as if this were the most expedite
way to arrive at our journeys end. This is that which the Serpent is said to be
eminent for, above all other beasts of the field, Genesis 3. Whence it is usually
called a kind of crooked serpentine wisdom, consisting in an ability of
surprising and putting tricks upon others, lying always upon the catch, and
dealing by way of stratagem; which is allowable only in a state of War against
professed declared enemies, and where matters depend upon sudden actions; and
yet even in such cases this way of Craft will by a noble and generous enemy be
avoided as much as may be: But in our ordinary carriage to make use of it,
toward such to whom we profess amity and fair dealing, is exceeding unworthy,
and will make a man suspected by every one with whom he converseth, as a
dangerous person.

2. The Deficient extreme of Wisdom is called Folly or simpleness; which
consists in such a vicious habit as is acquired by the frequent neglect or
rejection of the ways of wisdom. And this is properly both a sin and a
punishment. This peculiar dishonor belonging to it, amongst all other vices,
that whereas some men have been so impudent, as to boast and take a pride in
their dishonest actions; yet there is no person to be found so wretched, as to
brag of his Folly. This being amongst all men counted most reproachful, and
that which will render one most contemptible.

Thus much for the first thing I proposed, concerning the Nature of Wisdom. I
proceed to the second, concerning the Necessity of it, or the grounds of our
obligation to it, both from Scripture, and Reason.

The Scripture proofs to this purpose may be reduced to these two Heads; the
precepts for it, the commendations of it.

1. The Precepts for it, are very frequent in Scripture, especially in this
Book, v. 5. of this Chapter. Get wisdom, get understanding, and forget it not.
So chap. 7.4. Say unto wisdom thou art my Sister, and to understanding, thou
art my Kinswoman, That is, grow into such an intimate relation and familiar
acquaintance with it, as persons usually have with such as are of the same
consanguinity. Dig for her as for Silver, Prove. 2.4.
and search for her as for hid treasure. Count no labor too much, that may
further you in this enquiry. In the N. T. we are commanded to be wise as
Serpents; to be wise unto that which is good; Matthew. 10.
to walk wisely to them that are without; Colos. 4.5.
to demean our selves amidst all the difficulties and temptations we shall meet
with in the world, with much caution and circumspection, not as fools but as
wise, Ephesians. 5.15.

2. The Commendations that are given in Scripture to this virtue, are so very
numerous, that it is very hard to speak briefly of them. There are four things
which are usually of greatest value and esteem amongst men, Riches, and Honor,
and Pleasure, and Life. And when the Scripture would set forth the commendation
of any thing, it does frequently compare it with, and prefer it before, some of
these things. It Is so in the present subject.

1. It Is better than Riches, Job 28.16. Wisdom cannot be valued with the gold
of Ophir, with the precious Onyx, or the Saphyr. The Gold and the Crystal
cannot equal it. And the exchange of it shall not be for Jewels of fine gold.
No mention shall be made of Coral or Pearls, for the price of wisdom is above
Rubies, the Topaz of Aethiopia shall not equal it, neither shall it be valued
with pure gold.

2. It is it self the greatest Honor, and will be a means to advance a man in
the esteem of others. It makes a man's face to shine, and the boldness of his
face shall be changed, Eccles. 8.1. It multiplies the strength of his face, as
the Original words may signify. It gives a luster to a person, whereby he
contracts love and reverence from all that know him. Good understanding gives
favor, Prove. 13.15. that is, renders a man amiable and acceptable to others.
The wise shall inherit glory, Prove. 3.

3. Wisdom is the truest and the best Pleasure. Filling the heart with joy and
the conscience with peace. Her ways are ways of pleasantness, and all her paths
are peace, Prove. 3.17. Wisdom excels folly, as much as light excels
darkness. Now light is sweet, and a pleasant thing it is for the eyes to behold
the sun, Eccles. 11.7. It Is not an easy matter to describe, what great pleasure
and satisfaction it is, for a man to stand upon the advantage-ground of wisdom
and experience, and to look down upon the mists and errors and wanderings which
those are subject to who walk in the vale below.

4. Wisdom is as our life: Length of days is in her right hand, Prove. 3.16. She
is a tree of life to them that lay hold upon her, v. 18. Whosoever finds me,
finds life, and he shall obtain favor of the Lord; but he that sins
against me wrongeth his own soul. All they that hate me love death, chap. 8.35.
The Scripture does abound in several other expressions to the same purpose,
which I have not now time to mention.

2. As to the principles of Reason, it may be made very evident, that Wisdom is
necessary to the safety of our persons, and to the success of our Actions.

1. It Is necessary to the safety of our persons; for the preventing and
subduing all those difficulties and oppositions and dangers that we shall meet
with. Discretion shall preserve thee, and understanding shall keep thee, to
deliver thee from the way of the evil man, Prove. 2.11. It shall teach thee to
walk in thy way safely, and thy foot shall not stumble, chap. 3.23. Our Savior
having sent forth his Disciples as sheeep in the midst of wolves, bids them be
wise as serpents, and innocent as doves. Innocence must secure them against any
legal punishment, or the sufferings under just government; and wisdom must
protect them against irregular violence, and the injustice of others: Teaching
them how to escape the snare, and prevent the surprizals of such as watch for
advantage against them.

2. It Is necessary to the management of our affairs with success: That which on
our parts is required to the success of any business, is an ability to contrive
and to execute; and this wisdom only can enable us for.

1. For the first, Solomon tells us, that a wise man's eyes are in his head,
Eccles. 2.14, where they may best serve him to look round about him, to
discover the distance and relations of things, and what is the shortest way of
passing from one affair to another. Such an one can see afar off: And though
future matters be for the most part, but as a dark empty space, which is alike
invisible to him that is blind, and to him that sees; yet a prudent man has
some advantage in this respect, being able in some cases in a good measure to
foresee events in their causes, and accordingly to provide for them.

2. And as Wisdom does thus fit a man for contrivance, by the right situation
of the eye, the organ of seeing; so likewise does it for execution, by the
right qualification of the hand, the instrument of action. A wise man's heart
is at his right hand, Eccles. 10.2. The most useful part for employment. He
goes readily and wisely to work, performs things with dexterity and fitness,
according to the most decent order: Whereas the heart of the fool is at his
left hand, that is, he goes about things awkwardly, not with that dexterity and
strength as he should. Now businesses thus managed are usually attended with
success, nor is there any thing to be further done on our parts to make any
action prosperous. Nullum Numen abest si sit prudentia: There is for the most
part a blessing from heaven upon undertakings that are wisely contrived and
managed.

In brief, Wisdom is necessary to our Obedience: A man may have good
affections, and be inclined to do that which is right, but he will not be able
to act accordingly, and to do honest things, without some measure of prudence
to judge of particular cases. It Is this that must preserve our minds from
error, our hearts from corruption, our lives from sin, our persons from shame
and danger; that must fit us for every condition, teaching us how to want, and
how to abound; that must render all our gifts and abilities useful. Such
persons as are much below others, as to Learning, Art, Wit, Diligence, Riches,
Power, yet by this virtue of Prudence may prove much more serviceable to God
and his Church, more useful in their generations, than those who do much exceed
them in all these other respects. From all which it may appear, that there is
sufficient reason to infer the necessity of this grace of Wisdom.

There remains only one Enquiry or Objection to be briefly stated and answered,
and I shall proceed to Application.

May not this be said to be a gift and a privilege, Object.
rather than a duty; and the want of it, a defect or unhappiness, rather than a
sin? Every man is not bound to be eloquent, learned, beautiful, witty, strong.
These are blessings and gifts, which depend upon our natural abilities,
leisure, education, experience, some of which are not in our power, and
therefore not to be imposed as duties, as if there were sin and guilt in being
without them; and why may not the same be said of Wisdom?

To this two things may be answered. 1. That Christian wisdom, for the nature
and substance of it, Ans.
is a duty; for the degrees, a gift. Every Christian though of the lowest form
is supposed to have the prudence of a Disciple and of submission, though not of
a Teacher and of conduct. He may have a sufficient ability, both to understand
and to make a right use of those means, which are necessary to his chief end,
namely eternal blessedness. And 2. As for moral and civil prudence, whereby a
man is to conduct himself in the ordinary affairs of life: This likewise is, as
to the substance of it, a duty, which all men are obliged unto in some measure,
according as their capacities, conditions, and opportunities may require;
though not all alike in the same kinds, or the same degree. It Is no culpable
defect in a private man, that he is without the art of government, any more
than it is in an Husbandman or Tradesman, to be destitute of skill in Military
and Naval matters, which are things of another kind. A private soldier is not
obliged to have the prudence of a General; nor is it to be expected that every
one who can govern a Family, should be able to govern a City. But when a man is
called from a private to a public station, he is then by virtue of this Call,
under an obligation of laboring after all those endowments and abilities,
whereby he may fill up and adorn his employment. The neglect of such abilities
as are suitable to a man's station, is not only a defect but a fault.

I have now done with the Doctrinal part: I shall be very brief in the
Application; wherein I shall touch at three Inferences.

1. From the nature of Wisdom, as it has been described, it will follow, that
no wicked man can be truly wise; because such men mistake in their chief end,
preferring earth before heaven, transient momentany things before those of
everlasting concernment; than which there cannot be a more monstrous folly. And
they mistake likewise in the honesty and fitness of the means, by reason of
their disability to discern betwixt things that differ, and to approve those
that are more excellent. They may have good wits, a quickness and vivacity of
fancy, and yet be far from being wise. It Is a Proverbial saying, that some men
have good wits, if wise men had them in keeping. When these two are separated
the former of them does many times prove a prejudice and an occasion of
mischief, and 'twere better for such persons to wear wooden daggers than those
of steel.

They may have much humane learning. But great Clerks are not always wise men.
Athens and Corinth were for their knowledge called the two eyes of the world;
as Rome and Carthage were for their military strength, the two Arms of it. And
yet the Apostle styles those of Corinth, fools, 1 Cor. 1.20. God has made
foolish the wisdom of the wise. And elsewhere speaking of the Grecian
Philosophers, he says, whilst they professed themselves to be wise, they became
fools.

They may have some skill in the Scriptures, as the Jewish Doctors had, whom
yet our Savior calls fools: Yea fools and blind, Matthew. 23.17.

They may have the art of bringing about their secular designs, growing great
and rich, and yet deserve no better a title than that laborious Rich man in the
Gospel, whom our Savior calls fool for his pains, Luke 12.20.

And lastly, they may likewise have some measure of moral uprightness, keeping
themselves unspotted from the pollutions of the world; and upon that account
may be called Virgins, but without true religion and holiness, they are but
foolish virgins, and such as shall miss of their end, Matthew. 25.1.

2. Hence it will follow, that grace and holiness is the truest wisdom. He that
is truly religious (whatever other accomplishments he may want) he is truly
wise. Behold, the fear of the Lord that is wisdom, Job 28.28
and to depart from evil is understanding: Psalm. 111.10.
Therefore keep his statutes, for this is your wisdom and understanding in the
sight of the Nations, Deuteronomy. 4.6. A good man is in Scripture phrase styled, the
man of wisdom, Micah, 6.9. And conversion a being turned to the wis^om of the
just, Luke 1.17. And on the other side all kind of Sin is in the usual
Scripture phrase called by the name of folly. Now it is no small advantage to
such as are truly religious, that whatever they may be destitute of as to these
worldly matters, yet they have the principal thing, namely, wisdom.

3. And lastly, if wisdom be the principal thing, then let it be our principal
endeavor to attain it; and above all other gettings, let us labor to get
understanding. Nothing can be more reasonable, than that our love and zeal
toward any thing, should be proportioned to the excellency of it. In order to
which we should carefully apply our selves to all those good means, whereby
wisdom is to be attained.

As for that kind of Prudence, which is requisite to the management of secular
business; this depends upon some natural abilities, as sagacity of judgment,
quickness and presence of mind, together with the advantage of long experience,
and therefore is not to be taught and learnt as other Arts and Sciences may.

We have Schools for Logic, Rhetoric, Mathematics, Philosophy, but none to
teach men wisdom and discretion. And the reason is, because this cannot (by
reason of the infinite variety of cases) be comprehended under any certain
rules; or if it could, yet all the Maxims that can be prescribed of this
nature will be but as a workman's tools; which though never so good in
themselves, yet without skill in the Artist will never make good work: And for
a man to think that he may be able in this respect to act wisely, by any
certain Rules or Maxims prescribed him, is all one as to imagine that the
tools of some excellent Artificer should (though in the hands of a bungler) be
able to produce good work.

But now on the other hand, that kind of Christian wisdom, which we are obliged
unto as our principal duty, and whereby we are to be made wise unto Salvation:
This is subject to certain rules and means for the attaining of it. Which in
the general are, keeping the Commandments, submitting to the doctrine of the
Gospel; and in order to this, attending at the gates of wisdom, receiving
instruction with all readiness, hiding the Law in our hearts, continually
meditating upon it; furnishing our minds with right principles, that it is
better to suffer than to sin, to have a good conscience than a great estate;
that these things which are seen are but temporal, Scenes and pageantry, false
pleasures and but for a season, but the things which are not seen are eternal.

More particularly. 1. The conversing with good company: He that walks with the
wise shall be wise, Prove. 13.20. 2. Humility, which is a grace that will render
a man teachable: The meek will he guide in judgment and teach his way. 3.
Praying for it: If any man lack wisdom, let him ask it of God, Dan. 2.31.
James 1.5. It Is he that gives wisdom to the wise, and knowledge to them that
know understanding. And therefore to him it is that we must apply our selves
for wise and understanding hearts, beseeching him that he would first direct us
by his counsel, assist us by his grace, and then bring us to glory.

The End of the seventh Sermon.
The Eighth Sermon.
PROVE. XIII.20. He that walks with wise men shall be wise, but a companion of
fools shall be destroyed.


THIS Book of the Proverbs is a Miscellany of Sentences, full of various and
profound wisdom, both with regard to things civil and sacred. It concerns all
kind of matters, the customs, vices, humors of men; the duties and business of
life; the government and events of providence. The principal rules and
observations concerning these, are here set down in plain and pithy Sentences:
And though some of them may at first glance perhaps seem to be but obvious and
flat, yet upon a nearer and more considerate view, they will all of them be
found to be (as they are styled) (...), ruling speeches, such as are fit to
have a special authority over a man, in the guidance of his affairs.

The Text concerns that great advantage or prejudice which will follow upon the
choice of those companions with whom we do most familiarly converse.

Society is in it self so necessary to humane life, that the Philosopher does
from thence define a Man to be (...), a sociable creature; as if this were one
main property and end of humane nature. Quaecunque vaga nascuntur and actura
vitam segregem, Sen. Benef. lib. 4. c. 18.
armata sunt, hominem imbecillitas cingit, says the Stoic. Other creatures
which are intended for wandering and solitude, are naturally armed for their
defense, whereas man is born the weakest and most helpless of all things,
having only these two advantages for his protection, Society and Reason.

But now because the chief benefit of this is not always to be attained in a
common relation to a public Body, without the more private and intimate league
of friendship; a crowd is not company; magna civitas may be magna solitudo,
therefore the want of friends may in some sense be called solitude, and so
disadvantageous to the well-being and comfort of life, ut solemn e mundo
videantur tollere, qui amicitiam de vita humana, (as the Roman Orator speaks)
that we had as good lose the sun out of the firmament, Cicero.
as friendship from amongst men.

It has been observed, that the wisest and greatest Monarchs that ever were,
in the midst of all their other enjoyments, could not think themselves happy
without this. And though the distance of their condition, might seem to debar
them from this privilege, which requires an equal; yet rather than want a
friend, they have descended to some of their subjects, making them to be
participes curarum, though not without great inconveniences and hazards from
the people. Such a high rate have they put upon this privilege of Friendship.

Adam in the state of innocence, could not be happy, though in Paradise,
without a companion.

Our Savior himself, who for our sakes was content to forgo the usual
pleasures and contentments of life, yet would not be without this necessary
refreshment of an intimate friend, but rather chose to admit one of his
servants unto this near relation, the disciple whom he loved.

The Wiseman having observed this great necessity of friendship and society,
and of what high importance it is to be right in the choice of them, he does in
this Book scatter up and down diverse Proverbial sayings for our direction
about it. Amongst these the Text is one.

For the manner of it, it is put by way of Antithesis or opposition, betwixt
good and bad company, under the name of wise and foolish; together with the
several consequences which will follow upon such conversation. The one shall
grow wise, the other shall be destroyed; wherein there is employed a double
issue or event, that being twice to be understood which is but once spoken; it
being all one as if he should have said, he that walks with the wise shall be
wise and prosperous, but a companion of fools shall be foolish and miserable.

The Terms have little of difficulty in them.

He that walks. By walking with or being a companion, is not meant every
casual commerce or negotiation with others: For he that in this sense would
wholly avoid wicked men, must needs go out of the world, 1 Cor. 5.10. But those
phrases do signify a more familiar and intimate converse.

With the wise. All mankind is in the usual Scripture phrase, especially in the
Writings of David and Solomon, distributed under these two heads of wise and
foolish, that is good or bad: Wisdom being that which enables a man to make
choice of the right means for the attaining of the right end, and only those
that are religious being enabled for this, in reference to the chief end of a
man's eternal happiness, therefore they alone are said to be wise. A companion
of fools shall be destroyed, (...). The Word translated destroyed, is derivable
either from one root which signifies to grow worse, or else from another which
signifies to be broken and ruined; and is fitly chosen out to comprehend both
senses. Besides that it has an elegant allusion by way of Paranomasiae unto the
former word (...), companion.

The chief scope of the Text may be summed up in this Observation.

That every man's present and future welfare, does very much depend upon the
right choice and improvement of those friends or companions with whom he does
most familiarly converse.

If with such as are good, he shall be wise and happy; if with wicked persons
he shall prove foolish for the present, and miserable for the future.

So that the subject I am to treat of is very proper and suitable to this Place,
which being chiefly intended for education, unto which the company and friends
that men make choice of does so much contribute; therefore it can never be
unseasonable here to put them in remembrance, or to stir them up to their
duties in this respect.

For the clearing of this Observation, it may be made very evident from diverse
Scriptures.

Upon this account it is, that we have such frequent cautions and threats
against conversing with bad company. This was the meaning of all those severe
prohibitions in the ceremonial Law, against touching of any unclean thing;
which in the morality of it (say the Ancient Fathers and other Interpreters)
does signify that exact care which we ought to have against all such company
whereby we may contract any inward pollutions.

It Is observable, that he who touched a dead beast was unclean but till the
evening, Levit. 11.24. But he who touched a dead man was unclean for seven
days, Numb. 19.11. signifying a bad man to be the most dangerous of all other
Creatures. For that this in scripture phrase is meant by a dead man, may be
sufficiently explained by that expression of the Apostle where he styles wicked
men to be such as are dead in trespasses and sins, Ephesians. 2.1. even whilst they
live, 1 Timothy 5.6. And elsewhere they are said to be whited sepulchers, which
may appear beautiful outwardly, but within are full of dead men's bones and all
uncleanness, Matthew. 23.27.

That Is a very sharp and elegant reprehension which the Prophet uses toward
Iehosaphat, in reference to his association with Ahab, 2 Cron. 19.2. Should
thou love them that hate the Lord? He puts it by way of question, to show the
inexcusable inconsistency of those men's actions who pretend to love God and yet
will be friends to those that hate him.

Prove. 22.24. Make no friendship with an angry man, and with a furious man thou
shall not go, least thou learn his ways. And because some might be apt to think
that they could converse with bad men without any such danger, therefore it is
further added, lest thou learn his ways, and get a snare to thy soul. Implying,
that though a man be very wary to avoid the corruption of bad company yet it
may insensibly steal upon him and surprise him as a snare.

There are diverse the like Precepts in the New Testament, 2 Timothy 3. The Apostle
having recited a long Catalogue of vicious persons, despisers of those that are
good, heady, highminded, having a form, etc. adds this clause at the end of it,
from such turn away; that is, avoid as much as may be all converse with them.
And there is a solemn adjuration, 2 These. 3.6. Now we command you Brethren, in
the name of our Lord Jesus Christ, that you will draw your selves from every
brother that walks disorderly. That place does not so properly signify
exclusion a sacris, but from familiar converse.

Psalm. 15.4. It Is set down as a special mark and evidence of such as shall be
saved, in whose eyes a vile person is contemned, but he honors them that
fear the Lord.

And holy David is very frequent in the proof of his integrity, and
consequently of his happy condition from this sign, by his dislike of wicked
company, and his love to those that are good.

Psalm. 26.4, 5. I have not sat with vain persons, neither will I go in with
dissemblers. I have hated the congregation of evil doers, and will not sit with
the wicked, Psalm. 101.4. I will not know a wicked person, ver. 5. Whosoever privily
slandereth his neighbor will I cut off; him that has a high look and proud
heart will I not suffer, Psalm. 139.21. Do not I hate them O Lord that hate
thee? and am not I grieved with those that rise up against thee? I hate them
with a perfect hatred and count them mine enemies. Psalm. 120.5. He bemoans his
unhappiness that he was forced to dwell in Meshec, and to have his habitation
in the tents of Kedar, that is, amongst such ungodly and cruel men as those of
that Country.

And so on the other side, he professes that his delight was in the saints and
to the excellent of the earth, Psalm. 16.3. Mine eye shall be upon the faithful
of the land, that they may dwell with me, Psalm. 101.6. I am a companion for all
those that fear thee and keep thy precepts, Psalm. 119.63. It were easy to cite
abundance of other Scriptures to this purpose.

And there is very good reason, why the nature of a man's friends or company
should be looked upon as of such great consequence to his well-being: Because
they have such a special influence, not only upon a man's temper and manners,
but upon all his chief concernments.

There are four things wherein most men place their welfare, some or all of
which every rational man does propose to himself in the choice of his friends.
These are reputation, safety, comfort, profit. Now each of these is only
attainable by conversing with those that are good.

1. For reputation or honor: Wicked men are fools in the phrase of the Text;
and what credit can a wise man expect by conversing with fools? They are styled
beasts in Scripture, dogs and swine and vipers; And it is the lowest most
ignoble condition that our humane natures can be deprest to with Nebuchadnezzar
to converse with beasts. Dan. 4.32.
Job does make it his great grief and complaint, I am a brother to dragons and
a companion to estriches, Job 30.29. They are dead men in the Scripture phrase,
Luke 24.5
and what should the living do amongst the dead: They are whited sepulchers
that are full of rottenness, and none but a mad man, Matthew. 23.27.
one that is possessed with a Devil, will live among tombs.

On the other side, good men are the excellent of the earth: Psalm. 163.
Such alone are truly noble and magnanimous, though not in outward respects,
yet in regard of intrinsecal value, which can only put a true worth upon a man:
So the righteous is always more excellent than his neighbor. Job upon the
dunghill, and Jeremiah in the mire, had more real worth in them, than any of
the greatest men of the world in the midst of all their pomp and glory. The
Saints of old when in their most despicable condition, wandering about in
sheepskins and goat skins, being destitute, afflicted, tormented, were in
themselves of so noble and inestimable a value that, in the judgment of the
holy Ghost, the world was not worthy of them. These are they that have the
highest relations, they are the children of God, heirs of a kingdom, the
spouse, the members of Christ: And therefore who ever would propose to himself
honor and reputation in his society, must make choice only of such companions.

2. For safety; The Text tells us that a companion of fools shall be destroyed.
Good men may be sometimes involved in the punishments of bad company, and
perish in their sins: Rev. 18.4. Come out of her my people, least you receive
of her plagues. That Is a known story of St. John, who durst not stay in the
same Bath where Cerinthus the Heretic was for fear he might be surprised with
some sudden judgment. Wicked men are infected leprous persons; and who can
converse with such without danger. If any one shall persuade himself that he
can enjoy their company and yet escape their contagion, he may as well think to
suspend the natural operation of fire; Can any one think to take coals in his
bosom and not be burned? Or can a man walk barefoot upon burning coals and yet
not hurt himself? Prove. 6.28. The conversing with bad company has as
unavoidable and powerful an efficacy as these natural agents which work
necessarily, whose operations cannot be suspended: Or if any should possibly so
far escape as not to be burnt with the fire of bad company, yet he must needs
be blacked with their smoke, which every prudent Christian will be careful to
avoid.

Whereas on the other side every one fares the better for the company of those
that are good. They are the lights of the world, the salt of the earth, the
pillars of a nation, those that stand in the gap to prevent an inundation of
judgment. The place is the safer for them where they live. Ten righteous
persons may sometimes be enough to save a whole City from temporal ruin.
Potiphar's house was blessed for Joseph's sake, Genesis 39.5. and all the
passengers in the ship were saved from drowning for St. Paul's sake, Acts
27.24. And if their cohabitation or common neighborhood may be so
advantageous, what is it then to be leagued unto them by a nearer and more
intimate tie of friendship.

3. For comfort: This is one of the principal ends of friendship, to ease and
refresh a man amidst the anxieties of life; and there is nothing of greater
efficacy to this purpose. Psalm. 133.1.
How pleasant is it for brethren to live together in unity: Seneca de Tranq. c.
7.
Quantum bonum est ubi sunt praeparata pectora, in quae tuto secretum omne
descendat, quorum sermo solicitudines leniat, sententia consilium expediat,
hilaritas tristitiam dissipet, conspectus ipse delectet? What a great comfort
and privilege is it to have another self to whom a man may freely communicate
all his secret troubles; whose conference may help to assuage our cares, whose
counsel to expedite our difficulties, whose cheerfulness to dissipate our
sadness, whose very look and presenee does delight? As Ointment and perfumes
rejoice the heart, so does the sweetness of a man's friend, Prove. 27.9.

But now this cannot be expected from any wicked person. There is such an utter
inconsistency and opposition betwixt good and bad, that there cannot be any
communion or harmony betwixt them: For what communion has light with darkness,
2 Cor. 6.14. Speaking of those who are unequally yoaked; An unjust man is an
abomination to the just, and he that is upright in the way is an abomination to
the wicked, Prove. 29.27: There is a natural enmity betwixt them, being of
opposite principles and ways.

How is it possible for a man that has any love or zeal for God to delight in
those by whom He is continually dishonored and provoked? Instead of any
refreshment by such company (if a man have David's temper) it will still
administer new occasion of trouble and sorrow. I beheld the transgressors and
was grieved. Psalm. 119.136, 158.
Rivers of waters run down mine eyes, because men keep not thy laws. No man can
delight in those that despise and reproach him. Why now a holy man looks upon
all rebellions against God, as being indignities against himself, Psalm. 69.9.
The reproaches of them that reproached thee, are fallen upon me.

Whereas on the other side: Those that are wise in the phrase of the Text are
the most delightful company that are. Wisdom makes a man's face to shine, puts a
splendour and amiableness upon a person: And for this reason, the communion of
saints is to be esteemed, one of the greatest comforts and privileges that we
are capable of in this world. It Is a kind of excommunication to be debarred of
such company; and it shall be a great part of our joy and happiness in heaven
that we shall there converse with the spirits of just men made perfect.

4. And lastly, for Profit: The most usual reason of men's friendship in the
world, is the hopes they have of getting by one another: though this in it self
is mercenary and poor, arva enim and pecudes isto modo diliguntur, Men love
their cattle and their land upon this account, they should love their friends
from an higher principle. But yet, if any should look for this, it is not to be
had from those that are bad: There is nothing to be expected from such friends,
but the increase of our sins and of our punishments: Micah 7.4.
The best of them is a briar and a thorn, which may pull off our fleece,
deprive us of our defense and our innocence; take from us what we have, but can
contribute nothing: Or if we should get some outward advantage by them, yet we
shall get partnership in their guilt, by that approbation which we seem to give
to them in our conversing with them. We may harden them in their impenitency,
blemish our profession; and what outward gain can be sufficient compensation
for such damages?

Whereas in conversing with those that are good, there are these advantages. 1.
Their example will by degrees insinuate into the mind, and obtain the force of
precepts, exciting us to a holy emulation. 2. Their very presence will affect
us with some kind of awe against evil. Sen. Ep 94
Est aliquid quod ex magno viro vel tacente proficias. 3. Their conference,
wholesome and savory, administering grace to the hearers. 4. Their counsel,
faithful and wise and hearty.

5. Their prayers, powerful, ready: And it is not easily imaginable, what an
advantage that is, to have a praying friend, or companion. We esteem it a great
privilege to have a friend at Court, who is able to further us in our business
and petitions, to have any special interest in a favorite; why, every good man
has power with God, and can prevail with him.

But I have stayed too long in the Doctrinal parts of this Discourse.

There are three lessons I would briefly insist upon in the Application of it.

1. That we would take notice of the great benefit to be obtained by the right
improvement of society and mutual converse with one another.

2. That we of this place would be careful, both for our selves and those
committed to our charge, in the right choice of our friends and company.

3. That we would labor for those proper qualifications and abilities which
may render us acceptable and useful in our conversing with others.

1. For the first, that we would take notice of the great benefit to be
obtained by Society. One chief reason why in these Places men do not make so
great a progress either in piety or learning as might be expected from those
special advantages which here we enjoy, is because they are not so careful to
improve the benefit to be had by society. Nothing more usual amongst men of all
ranks and conditions, than to join together in some common design for the
improvement of this quality of sociableness unto mutual benefit. This is the
chief ground of all those common Associations amongst men: In ordinary affairs,
Corporations for Cities, Companies for Trades; and so in higher matters,
Universities and Colleges for Learning, particular Churches for Religion: Each
of which in their kinds have in them a natural aptitude to afford some special
help for the promoting of their several ends, though perhaps none of them,
especially not the two last, are usually improved to the utmost benefit they
are capable of. It Is not easy to express what great advantage might be
obtained if men would but study to make the right use of mutual converse. We
may see daily, especially by late experience, how men of common and low
breeding, being called out to such employments, wherein they have been
necessitated to put forth themselves in a more than ordinary way of conversing
together and debating of businesses with one another, how strangely their parts
are heightened, how judicious and nimble they grow at business, how ready at
discourse; whereas a Bookish man, that spends the greatest part of his time in
reading and study, commonly he does not know more, or if he should, yet is he
less fit for those actions and businesses to which his knowledge should be
applied. And therefore the great and active men of the world have still looked
upon knowledge thus acquired as Pedantry, which rendered a man unfit for any
great employment. And this is one reason of those prejudices which by some men
have been lately taken up against these Places of learning; because they see
some others that have been bred up in another way to be as knowing and as
useful men, as those that come from hence; though such perhaps, besides the
eminency of their natural abilities, have had some other special advantages in
their educations, some way aquivalent to what is to be had in these Places,
which ought to be considered and allowed for; yet it cannot be denied, but that
we our selves may give too much occasion to such prejudices, by not improving
all the helps we have to the best purposes.

I cannot stand to mention how much men might by this means promote their
knowledge in the whole Circle of humane learning; particularly in that ability
of a ready, voluble, popular Rhetoric (wherein studious and retired men are
commonly defective) though it be so necessary in all kind of employments,
especially for the gifts of Prayer and Preaching.

But chiefly in matter of practical Religion, which would be much advantaged if
men were but more free toward one another in communicating their doubts,
temptations, comforts; warming their affections and building up one another by
mutual conference.

2. That we of this Place would be very wary and careful both for our selves
and those committed to our charge, in the right choice of our friends and
company.

There is nothing usually has a greater influence upon a man's temper and
carriage than the company with whom he does converse. And hence is it that if
good and bad be joined together in any near society, they either quickly part
or become alike. And it is the infirmity of our natures, that grace in the best
men is so imperfect, and sin so powerful, that in the conjunction of good and
evil, the good by a natural course are more easily corrupted than the evil
rectified.

We all know that it has been the bane of many young men sent hither for
education to mistake in the first choice of their company: And 'twere well if
some public brand could be set upon such loose flagitious persons, as make it
their business to seduce and corrupt others. A Leper under the law was the type
of a sinner; and he was to go with his head uncovered that others might know
and avoid him. These close and covered sinners are very dangerous, and may do
much hurt by their infection; there is scarce any such to be conversed with,
Qui non aliquod nobis vitium, aut commendat, aut imprimit, aut nescientibus
allinit.

It Is true, a man may make good use of the worst company, by observing the
deformity and hating the evil of them the more; but yet there is this danger in
the frequent converse with such, that the edge of our zeal and hate should be
somewhat abated by custom. He that with Lot vexes his soul with the wicked
conversation of those amongst whom he lives, may in time be less and less vexed
according as they grow more familiar to him. Besides, conversing with such will
be a means to make a man satisfy himself with any low or weak degrees of
goodness (which perhaps in comparison to his company may be considerable;)
whereas amongst those that are better, we have still new matter of imitation
and provocation. It Is a good rule of a heathen, Cum his conversare, qui te
meliorem facturi sunt; illos admit, Sen. Ep. 7.
quos tu potes facere meliores. Choose those for your intimates, by whom you may
be made better your selves, admit such; of whom you have any probable hopes
that they may be made better by you.

Nothing is more incongruous and unsuitable than for a man that pretends love
to religion, to delight in those that care not for it. Such persons are of
opposite relations and principles. Every good man is on the Lords side, Exodus
32.26.
the friend of God, and consequently is bound to hate that which is evil. Ioh.
15.15
Wicked men are his enemies, Psalm. 97.10
the Sons of Belial, of their Father the Devil: Good men are such as walk with
God, and have their faces toward Sion. 2 Cron. 19.6.
Wicked men walk contrary unto him, and turn their backs upon him; And
therefore such are by no means fit to associate withal.

On the other side; Good men are all of a City, fellow Citizens with the
Saints; all of a family, Gal. 6.10.
of the household of faith; all of a body, Ephesians. 4.16.
a body fitly joined together and compact, by that which every joint supplieth.
God delights in them, tho he inhabit eternity, and dwells in that high and
lofty place, yet he has respect to those of humble and contrite spirits. Deuteronomy.
32.9. Exodus 19.5 Ierem. 12.7. Psalm. 4.3.
They are styled his portion, his inheritance; a peculiar treasure unto him;
the dearly beloved of his soul: he sets apart the man that is godly for
himself. They that do not love such company here, have little reason to expect
that they shall enjoy communion with them hereafter.

A man may examine the choice of his friends by this Rule: Suppose he were in
some great exigence, wherein there were no help to be expected but from heaven,
can he then with any confidence send to his usual companions to relieve him
with their prayers? It may be he could heretofore freely discourse and jest
with them, but are they fit to pray for him; If not, this may convince his
conscience that he had made a bad choice.

3. That we would labor for those special qualifications and abilities which
may render us acceptable and useful in our conversing with others.

There are four conditions, amongst many others, that are more especially
suitable to this purpose.

1. A readiness to communicate, according to the gifts we have received, so
ministering the same one to another as good stewards of the manifold grace of
God. 1 Pet. 4.10
There is much envy and narrowness of spirit in that close reserved humor
which some men have; who confine all their gifts to themselves, as if they
should lose their own knowledge by communicating of it. Such men live to
themselves, as if they were not members of a body.

2. Humility. That Is a sociable grace, lovely in it self and acceptable to all:
It fits a man both to learn and to teach; such an one will not contend,
censure, disdain, but is kindly affectioned to others, esteeming better of
them, than of himself.

3. Prudence, in distinguishing of men's tempers, prejudices, infirmities; in
discerning of the right seasons and advantages to do good amongst them:
Teaching a man such an amiable and alluring facility, whereby he may insinuate
into the affections of others, and the more easily provoke them to love and
good works.

4. Ingenuity, and Candor of disposition, in owning of our own weaknesses or
faults, another gifts or preheminences. A sobriety and calmness of spirit, in
suspending rash censures, bitter expressions, or whatever may exasperate;
Forbearing one another in love. There is in some good men such a sower and
riged severity, such a proness to censure, as makes them less acceptable and
useful in their society, and deprives them of many opportunities of doing good
to others.

I can but name these particulars; each of them would deserve to be more
largely insisted upon, as being so very suitable and necessary for us of this
place. But I speak to wise men, and am loath any further to trespass upon your
patience: So then the substance of what been said is this, that society being
so necessary to humane nature, and the advantage or prejudice so very great as
to our well or ill being, according to our choice of such friends with whom we
do most famillarly converse, Therefore will it concern men to be very cautious
and wary in this matter.

And if they would render themselves useful and acceptable to others, it must
be by being wise and virtuous and religious persons. Those only who are good in
themselves being capable of doing good to others.

The End of the eighth Sermon.
The Ninth Sermon.
ECCLES. IV.9. Two are better than one.


THough the general design of this Book be sufficiently plain and obvious,
being a discourse from the most profound Principles of Reason and Philosophy,
de summo bono; yet it is not easy to find out the particular connection in many
parts of it.

In the eighth verse of this Chapter, the Wiseman enters upon a description of
the miseries of a covetous life, which he sets forth under these three
considerations. 1. His drudgery and excessive toil, because three is no end of
his labor; neither is his eyes satisfied with riches. A very proper expression
that, concerning satisfying the eye; that being the only enjoyment that a miser
has of his estate, namely, that he can look upon it as his own; and no wonder
if his labor be endless, if he must still drudge on till he have got enough to
satisfy his eye. 2. His inconsiderateness, in that he does bereave his soul of
good, that is, deprive himself of the benefit which he might have in a cheerful
fruition of his possessions; and yet he asks not for whom do I labor, that is,
he does not dispose them to any end; he neither uses them himself while he
lives, nor knows who shall enjoy them when he dies. 3. His solitariness: There
is one alone, there is not a second, yea, he has neither child nor brother;
that is, he is a forlorn friendless man, without the benefit and help of
society. Which kind of misery the Wiseman takes pains to set forth, by
commending the contrary, showing the advantage and convenience of a sociable
life; which is first generally asserted in the words of the Text, Two are
better than one: Then particularly illustrated by some common instances; to
show the advantage of society, both to the attaining of good, and the
preventing and avoiding of evil. There is in such a condition, mutual gain; men
rid more work when joined in society, and so increase their reward, v. 9.
mutual help in their infirmities, lifting one another when they fall, v. 10. In
their defects and wants, warning one another, v. 11, in their dangers, in
respect of enemies, whom an united strength may more effectually withstand, v.
12.

The words of the Text are for the scope and matter intended to assert the
advantages of friendship and a sociable life. For the manner of them, they are
in figurative expressions; the force of which I shall endeavor to explain both
Negatively, and Positively.

1. Negatively: 1. By two is not meant any kind of multitude; there may be too
much of this, as well as too little. No where is there less enjoyment of a man's
self than when a man is oppressed with clients and visitants.

And according to this construction the Words should be inverted; and we might
truly say One were better than Two, retiredness than multitude. Again, by Two
is not meant any kind of society or friends: Not companions in iniquity, as
were Simeon and Levi, this is rather a conspiracy than a company; and though
such do associate themselves, yet they shall be broken in pieces, Isai, 8.9.
Though they join hand in hand, yet they shall not go unpunished, Prove. 11.21.
2. By One is not meant any kind of solitude or privacy; not such as is opposed
to that hurry of business which men in public employments are exposed unto:
Those continual bustles and imbroilments, whereby a man is hindered from
retiring into or being acquainted with himself. For according to this
construction, the words should be inverted, and we might say One were better
than Two, privacy and retirement than multitude and tumult: Again by One here,
we are not to understand unity, and by Two division, as those expressions do
sometimes signify: Acts 7.26.
For unity is much better than division; upon which account the Pythagorean
Philosophers, amongst their other mystical traditions concerning numbers, were
wont to set a note of infamy upon the number Two, because it was the first
departure from unity.

2. Positively: 1. By Two is meant such as have the mutual help and benefit of
one another, being linked together in the bonds of friendship; among whom those
are especially to be comprehended who are joined by that nearer and more sacred
union of Marriage. 2. By One is meant such an one as lives in a forlorn
desolate condition, neither loving any, nor being loved by any but himself;
without the privilege of a friend to assist his labors, settle his fears, ease
his griefs, and augment his comforts: So that the true meaning of the words may
be comprehended in this Proposition.

That the sociable life of a friend is much more advantageous than to live
alone. Prop.
It Is a principle this, that has so clear evidence for it in the very light of
nature, that it might be needless to urge for it any Scripture authority.

It Is upon this ground that the Philosopher does describe a man to be (...), a
sociable creature, as if this did belong to the essence, and were one of the
properties of humane nature.

Adam himself in the state of innocence could not be happy (though in Paradise)
without a companion. Not to mention any thing of that tremendous mystery of the
Trinity of Persons in the Unity of the Godhead.

As for that imaginary Wiseman of the Stoics whom they suppose to be clapped up
in some dark dungeon, lost in some desolate Island, yet then he shall enjoy
such a kind of happiness as God himself would do if the world were destroyed,
acquiescit sibi, cogitationibus suis traditus -- in se reconditur, secum est:
Besides, that this is but boasting, and an imaginary Idea of such a state of
perfection as no man perhaps ever did, or shall attain unto. They themselves do
likewise acknowledge that though their Wiseman be seipso contentus, yet mavult
amicum. Though he may make some shift without a friend, yet he had much rather
have one; and therefore blame such, qui sapientem intra cutem suam cogunt, who
would deny him this privilege and confine him to himself.

There are three things of great consequence to the comfort and safety of life.
1. The rectifying of our judgments. 2. The regulating and composing of our
passions. 3. The assistance of our labors. Now the sociable life of a friend
will be very advantageous in all these respects.

1. For the rectifying of our judgments; that we may have a true notion of
things and business, and be able to judge what is most fit and expedient in
several cases and circumstances. There are two general defects which the
understandings of men are liable unto, Confusion and Error.

1. Confusion; when our minds are overwhelmed with tumultuous thoughts for want
of being methodized and digested by the relation of them. A man will be apt to
run away with vain Chimaera's, with weak and flat projects, whilst they remain
merely in speculation and in thoughts; whereas when they are put into words in
our relation of them to others, the weakness and defects of them will presently
appear.

So that a man had better (says a Noble Author) discourse to a statue or
picture than suffer his thoughts to pass in a smother. So that herein lies one
special advantage of friendship, that a man has the liberty of communicating
his secret thoughts, and thereby clearing them up to himself.

2. He has hereby likewise the benefit of faithful counsel to direct him
against the error of his thoughts. It Is an usual Saying, plus vident oculi quam
oculus; two eyes see more than one: And a stander by many times discerns that
which a better gamester overlooks. Men are usually very partial in judging of
things wherein they are concerned, according to their inclinations and
interests; apt to gloss them over with such appearances as may best suit with
their own advantage; and therefore in such cases they have need of the help of
others. No wiseman will in a business of moment trust to the advice of a
flatterer, because such an one will be sure to tell him what will please rather
than what will profit; why, for the same reason neither should he trust to
himself in such cases, for Maximus quisque adulator sibi, every man naturally
is his own greatest flatterer: Nor will a Stranger be fit for this work of
counsel, because such an one may not know the whole state of our businesses,
the series and circumstances of our affairs: Or if he do, yet we can have no
security of such an ones faithfulness, but that he may be apt to warp and bend
his counsels for his own private ends. It Is true indeed, Books will give
impartial counsel, without flattery or self-seeking: But there may be these
inconveniences in such counsel; that it is not like to be so suitable to our
particular occasions, in all the various circumstances of them; nor so lively
and efficacious as to the operation of it. And though good Books may in some
sense be said to be good friends and counselors, yet they are dead ones;
whereas the advice of a faithful friend has in it a remedy against all these
inconveniences; Such an one will neither flatter us nor serve his own ends; His
wisdom and fidelity will be ready to help us up when we fall, v. 10. and to
warm us with vigor when we are slack and remiss, v. 11.

2. Hence likewise in the second place may we expect the best help for the
regulating and composing of our passions. That which for the most part proves
the greatest disturbance to the peace and quiet of our lives is from the
disorders and vicissitudes of our passions, whereby the mind is kept
continually out of frame. What betwixt the frenzy of anger, the ague of hopes
and fears, the fever of love, the consumption of envy, our minds are kept in a
continual disease and distemper. So that whatever will conduce to the
preserving of these in a composedness and harmony, must needs be of great
consequence to our welfare: And the society of a friend may be very proper
and effectual to this purpose; not only for the liberty we have hereby of
breathing out our secret troubles, preventing that inward restraint and
suffocation whereby they would be multiplied, and by his counsel (which I
mentioned before;) but upon this account likewise, that such an one will help
to bear a part with us, and so lighten us of our burden by his compassion, and
so the less will come to our shares.

The Passions may be distinguished into two kinds; such as are more violent,
troublesome and unnatural, referring to evil; as Anger, Fear, Grief, etc.
Others more kindly and natural, relating to that which is good, and
consequently have a greater agreeableness to our desires; as Love, Hope, Joy,
etc. Now the first of these are by the help of a friend abated and weakened,
the other strengthened and confirmed, and both ways our quiet much promoted.
And the reason of this difference is founded in nature: Union strengthens any
thing that is natural, and weakens all violent impressions. That which adds to
the vigor of any living Creature, does both fit it for its natural operations,
and likewise to repel any praeternatural injury or violence. Thus likewise is
it in those things which concern the mind; the union of a friend does help to
strengthen us in matters agreeable to our natures, and to weaken those which
are repugnant. We divide to a friend our griefs, and so diminish them; we
communicate our joys, and so increase them.

3. The sociable life of a friend is likewise advantageous to us, for the
assistance of us in our labors; in respect of those many hazards and
difficulties we shall meet with in our several employments; we may by this help
be carried on, 1. With greater safety and confidence. 2. With greater
cheerfulness and vigor. 3. With greater success and advantage; and that both in
secular and spiritual affairs.

1. With greater safety and confidence: Which the Wiseman does take particular
notice of in this place, under a twofold instance. 1. Of two travailing
together, and if one of them fall the other will lift him up; but woe to him
that is alone when he falls, for he has not another to help him, that is, if
there be any evil which befalls a solitary helpless person, he may
irrecoverably sink under it, whereas another man will find support and relief
from the help of a friend. 2. Of two contending together; that opposition which
may be too strong for one, may be withstood and overcome by two. Which was the
consideration wherewith Ioab and his Brother Abishai did encourage one another,
2 Samuel 10.11. If the Syrians be too strong for me, then thou shall help me, but
if the Ammonites be too strong for thee, then will I come and help thee.
Whereas those that live without this mutual intercourse of friendly officers,
must be singly exposed to all kind of hazards. The strongest guards are but
weak protections, in comparison to love and friendship: Ab ipsis armis inter
arma periculum est. Those very arms which should defend us and be for our
safety, may be turned against us and prove our ruin.

Non sic excubiae, nec circumstantia tela,
Quam tutatur amor -- says Claudian.
And it is true this, in respect of spiritual affairs as well as civil; we may
proceed in our duties with greater safety upon this account. Solitariness is a
time of advantage for Satan's temptations. He set upon Eve when alone, and our
Savior when in the desert: This tempts the tempter; Omnia nobis mala solitudo
persuadet, says Seneca: Nothing so mischievous but this may be a temptation
unto: It Is an old saying, he that gives himself up to solitude, must be aut
Deus aut Demon, either he must have a self-sufficiency as God, or else Satan
will make him as bad as himself. We are dependant creatures, and shall always
in this world stand in need of mutual help from one another.

2. This will help to carry us on with greater cheerfulness, and vivacity in
our business. Society and mutual encouragement, will deceive the tediousness of
our labor, and cheer us up against all the troubles and oppositions we meet
with. It Is one of the main ends of friendship, this, to stand by and comfort a
man when he is in distress: 'Twas the custom of ancient times, for friends to
meet together for this very purpose; which was the occasion of the visit which
Job's friends made to him, in the time of his affliction: A friend is made for
adversity, says the Wiseman. It Is no difficult matter for a man to be full of
zeal and affection, whilst all things are well, and prosperous, and there is no
temptation to the contrary: but, Ovid de Trist. lib. 5. el. 15.
Cum Deus intonuit, non se subducere nimbo,
Id demum est pietas, id socialis amor.
We are to expect from others, who do not stand in the relation of friends,
that they should not own us in our troubles, but estrange themselves from us,
lest they likewise should partake of our misery: Like an herd of Deer, who will
push away any of their fellows that is wounded. But he that is a real friend,
will then take occasion to manifest his fidelity: Upon which account it is that
the privilege of friendship has been always esteemed one of the greatest
comforts of life. How pleasant is it for brethren to live together in unity,
Psalm. 133.1. As Ointment and perfumes rejoice the heart, so does the sweetness
of a man's friend, Prove. 27.9. And for the same reason is it, that the loss of
such Relations, is to be esteemed as one of the greatest afflictions that we
are capable of; losing a part of our selves, which cannot be without much pain
and grief. Which made David so bemoan the death of his friend Jonathan in those
pathetical complaints: I am distressed for thee my Brother Jonathan, very
pleasant have thou been unto me, thy love to me was wonderful, passing the love
of Women, 2 Samuel 1.26.

It Is so likewise as to our spiritual conditions, the society of Christian
friends being one main branch of the Communion of Saints. Which is, next to the
favor of God and the comfort of a good conscience, the greatest privilege we
enjoy on this side of heaven. Besides their good examples we have likewise
their counsel and their comforts to direct and support us in the performances
of our duty: And this is the work of an Angel, nay of God himself, the Son
being styled the Counselor, Isai 9.6. And the holy Ghost the Comforter: So
that by this means, one friend may be as an Angel, nay as God to another. Our
Savior himself though he were all-sufficient, yet when he was in his agony,
thought fit to make use of the comfort of an Angel. And as for the power of
such to excite us unto duty, Luke 22.43.
the Wiseman has well expressed it, Prove. 27.17. As Iron sharpens Iron, so
does a man his friend: Upon which account the Apostle exhorts to consider one
another, to provoke unto love and good works, exhorting one another, Heb.
10.24, 25.

3. This will much promote the success of our labors, and procure for us a
better reward, in the verse of the Text. When several heads and hands join
together in mutual fellowship, their affairs are managed with greater wisdom,
and end with better success: Vis unita fortior. And this is more peculiarly
true in spiritual services. Though God does always hear men when we pray to him
in secret and alone, yet he has promised that when two or three are gathered
together in his name, he will, after a more especial manner, be in the midst of
them; which made St. Paul so earnestly desire the prayers of the Romans, (...),
that they might wrestle together with him, Romans 15.30. And so more effectually
prevail. 'Twas for this reason that our Savior sent out his Disciples two by
two, that so they might more successfully advantage one another in the work of
their ministry. You know the story of King Ioash, how he prospered in all his
affairs during the life of his good friend Iehoiada; but after his death, he
revolted to Idolatry, and with an ungrateful cruelty slew the Son of Iehoiada,
for reproving his apostasy; after which nothing prospered with him, but having
been first spoiled by the Syrians, he was slain by his own servants, 1 Chronicles.
24. From all which the truth of the Proposition may sufficiently appear, that
the sociable life of a friend, is in many respects much more advantageous, than
to live alone.

1. For the Application of this; it may in the first place serve to convince
such as pretend to this relation, of the obligation they are under to observe
those mutual offices of friendship toward one another; of counselling them in
their difficulties, bearing a share with them in their several conditions,
rejoicing with them in their joys, and grieving with them in their griefs;
assisting them in their labors: Without which all the professions of love and
service, are but words of course that vanish into air and signify nothing. Nay
those near Relations of Parent and Child and Brother, and which is nearer, for
which a man is to forsake all other, that conjugal relation of Husband and
Wife, are only valuable upon this account, as they are friends, and without
this they are but empty names, Deuteronomy. 13.6. If thy Brother the Son of thy
Mother, or the Son of thy Daughter, or the wife of thy bosom, or thy friend
that is as thy own soul. This last is the highest step in the gradation: All
the other relations continue, though mixed with unkindness, but this last
implies dearness in the very essence of it, and is altogether inseparable from
it, a man may be a Father, Son, Husband, and without loving, but it is not
possible for him to be a friend without love and friendship.

2. And that we may be thus mutually helpful, to such as we profess friendship
to, we should labor for those due qualifications requisite to such a
condition. Of these I shall reckon four.

1. There must be true love, which is styled the bond of perfection, (...),
Colos. 3.14. The only bond that can make a perfect union. As two pieces of Iron
will never be perfectly hammered together, unless they are both red hot, so
neither will two minds be joined together in such an helpful union, unless they
are both warmed with the same heats of affection. That kind of amity which is
founded wholly upon private ends, negotiatio est, non amicitia, it is trafick
but not friendship.

2. A wise freedom, not to conceal any thing that may be beneficial, though it
may prove distasteful: An profecturus sim nescio, malum successum mihi, quam
fidem deesse: When we are uncertain of the issue of our admonitions, yet this
we may be sure of, that it is better to be without success on his part, than
fidelity on our own.

3. Patience: Make no friendship with an angry man, and with a furious man thou
shall not go, Prove. 22.24. Short spirited men, are neither good Counselors nor
Comforters. God is said (...), to suffer* and bear long with the manners of his
people in the wilderness, Acts 13.18. And the Apostle injoyns men to possess
their souls in patience. Implying, that he that is out of patience, is out of
the possession of his own soul; and therefore will not be fit to take care of
another.

4. Constancy, to hold out in all states and conditions, without deserting him
in trouble. To forsake a friend in his distress argues a man to have much
baseness and meaness of spirit, and to be without all true generosity. The
carriage of the Witch of Endor toward Saul will cast shame upon such unworthy
persons: Though she was sure that he was the next day to lose his kingdom and
be slain with his Sons, and so could neither hope for good nor fear any hurt
from him, yet when she saw him exceedingly dejected, lying upon the ground, and
refusing to eat, the remembrance of what he had been impresses upon her such a
reverence, that instead of meditating revenge for the law he had enacted
against persons of her Trade, she courts him with all the humble and respective
language that may be; endeavors to cheer him up, 1 Samuel 28.
bespeaks him to eat, kills for him her fatted calf; bestirs her self to
prepare unleavened bread, and uses him with as much respect as if he had been
still to continue in his most flourishing estate. The example of this Witch may
be a just condemnation and reproach to the perfidiousness of an unconstant
friend.

But above all other kinds of friendship, this of the Conjugal Relation does
most firmly oblige to these mutual duties. And because the occasion of this
present Meeting is to commemorate a solemnity of this nature, which was
celebrated in this Church this day was 16 years the happiness of which has
since that time been still continued with all the blessings of domestical love
and peace, besides the comforts of a hopeful posterity to succeed; therefore in
order to the present occasion, the better to excite your gratitude for the
mercies you commemorate, I would offer it to your consideration to look abroad
into the World and take a view of the state of many other great Families; how
uncomfortably they live by reason of domestical dissentions, which sometimes
rise to that height as to make a separation of those whom God has joined, to
their mutual dishonor and discomfort: And perhaps either no posterity to
continue the name, or such a vicious and debauched one, as will be a scandal to
it. They that understand the state of things abroad will find no great scarcity
of examples to this purpose. And therefore how great reason have others to be
thankful for their exemption in these respects.

Gods peculiar blessing of any in a relation is a farther obligation upon them
to serve him in the duties of that relation, which are in this case either
special to Husband and Wife, or joint and common to both.

1. Husbands should love their Wives as Christ loves his Church, Ephesians. 5.25.
Or as they love their own selves, v. 33.

2. Be kind to them, v. 29. Not harsh and bitter against them, Colos. 3.19.
Lest she cover the Altar of the Lord with her tears, so that he will not regard
thy offering any more, nor receive it with good will at thy hand, Malachi 2.13,
14.

3. Give honor to them as the weaker vessels, as being heirs with you of the
grace of life, 1 Pet. 3.7. Being tender of displeasing or disatisfying them, by
any imprudent action, or seeming neglect. Let her be unto thee as the loving
Hind, or the tender Roe, and be thou always satisfied with her love.

The Wife must:

1. Be subject to her Husband as to the Lord, Ephesians. 5.22. This is meet and
comely, Colos. 3.18. For after this manner the holy women of old time, that
trusted in God, were in subjection to their husbands, 1 Pet. 3.5. Which was
signified by their heads covered, 1 Cor. 11.10. They must not usurp authority
over the man, 1 Timothy 2.12. This would give occasion for the word of God to be
blasphemed, Titus 2.5.

2. To reverence them, 1 Pet. 3.6. And out of an awful regard to take care of
pleasing them: She that is married takes care to please her own husband, 1 Cor.
7.34.

3. To be of meek and sober spirits, placing their chiefest ornament in good
works, as becomes women professing godliness, 1 Timothy 2.9, 10. Either keeping
silence, v. 11. or speaking with wisdom, having the law of kindness in her
lips, Prove. 31.26.

The joint Duties common to both are:

1. To be mutual helps: Which was the end of this ordinance, Genesis 2.18.
participating in one another cares and concernments; This the very name
imports, they are (...), conjuges, draw in the same yoke, and therefore should
partake of the same burden and benefit.

2. In the educating of their children in the nurture and admonition of the
Lord; being instrumental for their regeneration, continually exciting them to
love of things that are truly virtuous and noble, and to a dislike and
aversation of all such matters, as are sinful and unworthy, going before them
in the example of a good life: They should whet the law upon them as the word
signifies, Deuteronomy. 6.7. that is inculcate it, going it over and over again, as
men do when they whet a thing; the first impressions are like to abide longest.
To pray for them; Job offered a sacrifice for each of his Children: Not to
provoke them to wrath, Ephesians. 6.4. lest they be discouraged, Colos. 3.21. Using
such a mixture of kindness and lenity in the exercise of parental authority as
may excite a filial awe mixed of love and fear.

3. In the government of the whole family. If God have blessed you in these
Relations you shall take up Joshua's resolution, I and my house will serve the
Lord, setting up his fear and worship in your families.

This is the best way to express your gratitude for mercies past, and will be
the surest means to continue and secure them for the future.

And if a blessing from this place, this Mount of blessing, from the mouth and
heart of him who had the happiness first to join your hands may be efficacious,
I shall close up all with this benediction.

The Lord bless you, and lift up the light of his countenance upon you:
Continue you in mutual love and peace, and give you to see the desire of your
souls upon your posterity; that after many days of mutual comfort here, you may
in a good old age be gathered to your Fathers, and that your Children after you
may rise up and call you blessed for your love and care of them in a virtuous
and christian education.

The End of the ninth Sermon.
The Tenth Sermon. At the Spittle Easter Wednesday, 1663.
ISAIAH XXXII.8. The liberal devises liberal things; and by liberal things
shall he stand.


IN the former part of this Chapter, we have a prophetical description of the
happy state of the Jewish Church and Nation under the reign of King Hezekiah,
who was in this respect a type of Christ, as to his government in the times of
the Gospel.

And whereas the former state of things, was under many wild confusions, by
reason of violence in the governors, and slavish flattery and ignorance in the
people, they should now be restored unto a due order and decorum.

That this Prince should by the justice of his government afford a security and
refuge, against that general irregularity and oppression, which had before
abounded: And after his delivery from Sennacherib, and recovery from sickness,
should effectually apply himself to the regulating of all public violence and
disorder in government; which are here metaphorically described by those
inconveniences of weather to which the inhabitants of that Country were most
liable, winds, and tempests, and drought, and heats. He shall be a hiding place
from the wind, and a cover^ from the tempest, as streams of water in a dry
place, as the shadow of a great rock in a weary land, v. 2.

2. And as for that gross ignorance and servile flattery, which this people had
before been guilty of, in styling evil good, and vile persons by honorable
names, this should now be rectified: Their eyes shall not be dimn, and they
shall understand knowledge, v. 3.4. The vile person shall no more be called
liberal, nor the churl said to be bountiful, v. 5. Such kind of persons shall
not any longer be in repute and esteem; men shall not either by mistake or
flattery, sooth up others in their vices. That which we translate vile, is
elsewhere rendered foolish: Nabal (...), 1 Samuel 25.25. Nabal is his name and
folly is with him, but being here opposed to liberal, it may signify a foolish
niggard, not without some allusion to the story of Nabal, whose name might in
those days be used as a byword. In the original there is an elegant
paranomasia: Nabal shall not be Nadib. Though their names be somewhat near, yet
their natures are vastly distant: Because such vile persons will both speak and
contrive and practice vile, disingenuous, false, unworthy things, v. 6.7.
Whereas on the contrary, the liberal devises liberal things, etc.

That Is the scope of the place, and the connection of the words: In them, we
have these three parts or terms to be explained.

1. The subject, or person spoken of, the liberal man. 2. The property ascribed
to him, devises liberal things. 3. The benefit or advantage promised to it,
and by liberal things shall he stand.
1. For the subject, or person spoken of; the liberal (...): The vulgar
translates it the Prince; the LXX. and the Arabic, the Religious; the Syriac,
the Great man. Exodus 25.2 c. 35.5, 22.
The original verb signifies properly to give with a ready willing mind, Psalm.
110.3.
voluntariness, freeness, generosity, largeness of heart, a cheerful, bountiful
giver. It Is frequently used in Seripture for a Prince, Prove. 17.7 Psalm. 118.9
or a Lord, because such kind of persons are by their conditions, more
peculiarly obliged to be so: answerable to the Greek (...), which we translate
benefactor, Luke 22.25. And equivalent to those English phrases, a man of
honor, a generous person, one that is truly noble and worthy, of a free
ingenuous spirit, without any tincture of servility or baseness. In opposition
to a narrow, abject, sordid mind.

2. The Property ascribed to this liberal person: He devises liberal things;
wherein there is an Act and Object.

1. The Act, he devises, (...). Consulit, meditatur; the bent and inclination
of his mind is set this way; his thoughts are continually working upon it. The
word may denote two things: Either serious deliberation about it, or readiness
of mind to it.

I. Serious deliberation about it; he devises, that is, he imploys his most
serious thoughts in this business, consulting and contriving in his mind, the
most proper and effectual ways for it: This is styled, v. 6. The working of the
heart; speaking of the vile person, his heart does work iniquity. And it is
elsewhere said of the wicked, that he devises mischief upon his bed, Psalm.
36.4.
and sets himself in a way that is not good: The expression does denote a
purposed application of the thoughts, when men are studious and inquisitive how
to effect and contrive things to the best advantage.

II. Readiness and spontaneity, such an one does not stay till he be provoked
or necessitated by others to such kind of works, but does of his own mind cast
about in his thoughts, how to find the most fitting objects for them. It has
been a Proverbial saying that Liberalitas non facit syllogismum, liberality,
does not stay to argue and debate, when a proper and fitting occasion is
offered, but upon the first suggestion does most freely close and comply with
it.

2. The Object, liberal things (...), ea quae digna sunt principe, things that
are noble and generous, such as become a person of a large and bountiful heart,
such things as are of the most comprehensive nature, redounding to public
general benefit, and the good of mankind. In opposition to those little acts of
fraud and circumvention and surprizal mentioned before, and all those narrow
selfish designs, which vile persons are addicted to.

3. The benefit or advantage promised to it: By liberal things shall he stand,
(...). The Word may signify to be established (as it is rendered in the
margin) or to rise, propter liberalitates consurget. We are apt to think that
these works of bounty, will be a means to undo a man, and bring him down in
his estate: Which is an opinion that the Philosopher, Eth. lib. 4. chap. 1.
does expressly own, affirming that a liberal man cannot grow rich. But 'twas
because he was ignorant of those divine promises which are made to this virtue;
and had not sufficiently considered, the several instances to the contrary,
which experience might have suggested to this purpose amongst the very
Heathens. Such kind of persons shall not only be not ruined by their bounty,
but they shall hereby be confirmed and advanced in all kind of prosperity; what
they bestow in this kind shall prove a saving instead of casting away; 2 Cor.
9.6.
and he that sows bountifully shall reap bountifully.

So that the Text does contain a description of this virtue of liberality, by
its work or property; and a recommendation of it by its wages, or the blessing
and success that belongs to it.

It Is a noble subject and very proper for the present Solemnity. And if the
plainest evidence from Scripture, or the clearest deductions of reason may be
of any force, I doubt not but to propose such considerations about it, as to
men that will attend and consider, shall either convince them, and win them
over to their duties, or leave them inexcusable.

In the prosecution of this subject, I shall observe this plain method.

1. Endeavor to show the nature of this Virtue; what it is, and wherein it
consists.

2. To prove the necessity of it, or the grounds of our obligation to it, from
Scripture and Reason, and then:

3. To apply it to our selves by some useful inference.

I. In treating concerning the first of these, the nature of this Virtue, I
shall speak briefly to these four heads: 1. The several Names of this Virtue.
2. The Nature of it. 3. The Qualifications of it, and Opposites to it.

1. For the several Names whereby it is described. There are two Hebrew words
for it (...) and (...), both of them mentioned, v. 5. and they do each of them
signify nobility and dignity, because this Virtue is so in it self, and it is
essential to such as deserve to be so esteemed; answerable to those English
words used to this purpose, Nobleness and Generosity: The Greek (...), and
Latin liberalitas, from whence the English is derived, do import an ingenuous
freedom in opposition to servility and baseness.

The periphrastical descriptions of it, are such as these, Opening our hands
wide, Deuteronomy. 15.8. Drawing out our souls, Isa. 58.10. Dispersing abroad, 2 Cor.
9.9. Being enriched in every thing to all bountifulness, 2 Cor. 9.11. To be
rich in good works, ready to distribute, willing to communicate, 1 Timothy 6.18.

2. For the Nature of it; it is described by the Philosopher to be, (...), a
virtuous mediocrity in the right use of our wealth, directing a man to a due
measure, both in the acquiring and keeping of his estate, but chiefly in giving
and disposing of it upon fitting occasions: Or, it is a virtuous habit, whereby
we are enabled and inclined to relieve the want, and promote the welfare of
others, in such cases where we are not obliged by humane laws. In persons of
large and princely estates, and in works of splendidness and grandeur, it is
styled by the name of magnificence; which differs only gradually from it: Being
extended to persons in a state of suffering and misery, it is styled mercy or
pity. To persons in a condition of want, it is styled Alms or Charity: Being
each of them the same thing for kind and substance, and diversified only by the
subjects and objects.

3. The Qualifications or conditions required to the due exercise of it, which
are chiefly four.

1. Willingness: 2. Freeness: 3. Readiness, for the manner; 4. Largeness, for
the measure; in opposition to Grudging, Mercenariness, Delay, Sparingness.

1. It must be done willingly with spontaneity, (...), with forwardness of
mind, 2 Cor. 8.12
2 Cor. 9.2. Not grudgingly, but cheerfully, v. 7. Thine heart shall not be
grieved when thou give to thy brother, Deuteronomy. 15.10. Sic des, quemadmodum
velles accipere. Prevent being asked, which will exceedingly enlarge a
kindness: Non tulit gratis, qui cum rogasset accepit: An ingenuous man may pay
dear for a kindness, when he is put to buy it with solicitation. An unjust
judge may be prevailed upon with importunity: David does with a kind of
triumphant joy celebrate the temper of his people in offering so willingly
their contributions toward the Temple; 2 Chronicles. 29 17, 18.
he looks upon it as such an excellent disposition, as was both acceptable to
God and approved of men; such, as was an honor to the Nation, and which God
did highly esteem.

2. It must be done Freely, without expecting reward, Luke 6.35. Do good --
expecting nothing again; freely you have received, freely give. He that is
liberal upon design, may be styled mercenary. Such kind of gifts are not
benevolence, but a bargain; not a dole but a bait: Mittit in hamo; Venatio est
non donatio, says St. Hierom: That Is a remarkable place, Prove. 22.16. He that
oppresses the poor to increase his riches,and he that gives to the rich shall
surely come to want. It Is obser^^ble there, that giving to the rich, is coupled
with oppressing the poor; both of them arising from the same kind of temper in
men, and designing the same end, as being alike thought sure ways to increase
our wealth, but the issue will be that such shall surely want. There is another
opposite Text to this purpose, Luke 14.12. When thou make a dinner call not
thy rich neighbors, lest they also bid thee again, and so a recompense be made
thee. One would think there should be no great hazard in that, and yet it is
mentioned as a dangerous thing, which men ought carefully to avoid, as being
likely upon another account to redound to our loss and prejudice, by hindering
our better recompenses at the resurrection of the just, v. 14.

3. It must be done readily, without delay: If that saying be true that bis dat
qui cito; then he does but half give who gives slowly: Say not to thy
neighbor, go and come again, and to morrow I will give thee, when thou have it
by thee, Prove. 3.28. Tantum gratiae demis, quantum morae adjicis: We are apt
our selves to be very impatient in our desires, when we are under any want or
exigence, and to say with David, Psalm. 69, 17.143, 7.
make have O Lord to help me: I am in trouble, O hear me speedily, for my
spirit fails. And it is but reason that we should be willing to do as we would
be done unto.

4. Besides these several qualifications for the manner, it must likewise be
done freely and liberally for the measure; according to our several abilities,
opening our hands wide and sowing bountifully. It Is for a brother of low degree
to give (...), 2 Cor. 9.6.
sparingly: They that are rich in this world, must be rich in good works also.
1 Timothy 6.18
Goats-hair and Badgers-skins may be a suitable gift for the people, and a mite
for a poor Widow; but the rich are to give Purple, and Gold, and Jewels. Exodus
35.
And in this sense is that Scripture to be fulfilled, that to whom much is
given of them much shall be required.

4. The Opposites to it; which (as of all other moral virtues) are of two
kinds, redundant, deficient; and Profuseness, and Covetousness.

Whereas there is a twofold office of liberality, namely, to direct us in a due
measure in getting or keeping, and in spending or giving. The Prodigal is
excessive in the latter and defective in the former: on the contrary the
Covetuous is excessive in the former and defective in the latter.

1. The exceeding extreme is styled Prodigality, profuseness, riotousness,
which observes neither the due manner, nor measure in keeping, or giving. It
has this peculiar folly belonging to it, that it takes care to destroy it
self: Quid stultius (says Cicero) quam quod libenter facias, curare ut id
diutius facere non possis.

2. The deficient extreme is churlishness, tenacity, shutting up the bowels of
compassion, being greedy of filthy lucre. 1 Timothy 3.3.
It has these particular characters given to it in Scripture; it is a kind of
Idolatry, inconsistent with Religion, no man can serve God and Mammon. He that
loves the world, the love of the Father is not in him: 1 Timothy 6.5, 6, 9, 10.
It Is the root of all evil leading men into temptations and snares, into many
foolish and noisome lusts, which drown men in perdition and destruction. It Is
hateful to men, amongst whom it will render a person vile and contemptible: and
it is abominable to God, the covetuous whom God abhors, Psalm. 10.3.

II. I proceed to the second head, the necessity of it, or the grounds of our
obligation to it from Scripture and Reason.

The Scripture proofs to this purpose I shall reduce under these four heads: 1.
The Precepts for it: 2. The Commendations of it: 3. The Promises made to it: 4.
The Threats and Judgments denounced upon the neglect of it.

1. The Precepts for it, which are very numerous, Deuteronomy. 15. This duty within a
little compass, is inculcated no less than four several times, and urged with
much emphaticalness: Thou shall not harden thy heart, nor shut thy hand against
thy poor Brother, v. 7. But thou shall open thy hand wide to him, v. 8. Thou
shall surely give him, and thy heart shall not be grieved when thou give to
him, v. 10. Therefore I command thee saying, thou shall open thy hand wide to
thy Brother, to thy poor, and to thy needy in thy land, v. 11.

Eccles. 11.1. Cast thy bread upon the waters, give a portion to seven, and
also to eight: In the morning sow thy seed, and in the evening withhold not
thine hand, Matthew. 5.42. Give to him that asks thee, Luke 6.33. Do good --
Hoping for nothing again, 1 Timothy 6.18. Charge them that are rich in this world,
that they be rich in good works, ready to distribute, willing to communicate,
Titus 3.8. This I will that thou affirm constantly, that those who believe in
God be careful to maintain good works. These are some of the Scripture Commands
to this purpose, which are very plain and positive. Nor can any reasonable man
doubt, but that he ought in such cases, to yield obedience to him, who has the
supreme dominion over us.

2. The Commendations of it: That which we translate a liberal soul, Prove.
11.25. In the Hebrew is the soul of blessing; because it is so both actively and
passively. As the virtue of charity is frequently celebrated for one of the
most excellent amongst all the rest, and set forth by many peculiar
commendations, as being better than sacrifice; the fulfilling of the Law; the
bond of perfectness; the great Commandment; the Royal Law: So is Bounty one of
the top branches of Charity. It Is justly counted a privilege, which men ought
to seek after and rejoice in, that they may receive good from others. Now the
Scripture tells us, that it is more blessed to give than to receive, Acts 20.35.
It Is both the evidence and the ornament of our Religion: It Is the chief fruit
whereby we are to judge of our sincerity. Men do vainly pretend to Faith and
Religion, without the proof of such good works: Obadiah does urge this to the
Prophet as an evidence of his fearing God, 1 Kings 18, 12, 13.
that he had been careful to relieve others in distress. And the Centurion was
for this reason styled a man of worth: Luke 7.5.
Pure Religion and undefiled, is to abound in works of this nature, to visit
the Fatherless and the widow, Jam. 1.27. The wisdom that is from above is full
of mercy and good fruits, Jam. 3.17.

The Apostle describes liberality to be a demeaning our selves sutably, to our
professed subjection to the Gospel of Christ, 2 Cor. 9.13. And elsewhere he
styles being fruitful in good works, a walking worthy of the Lord unto all
pleasing, Coll. 1.10.
providing things honest in the sight of all men, 2 Cor. 8.21. Works of bounty
are in another place said to be an odor of a sweet smell, Heb 13.16
a sacrifice acceptable and well pleasing unto God.

The image of God does more especially consist in this; Philip 4.18
nothing renders us so like him, as beneficence. We shall for this be called
the Children of the highest, Luke 6.35. Colos. 3.12.
It Is styled by the name of perfection, Luke 6.36. compared with Matthew. 5.48.
By this a man is said to honor his maker, Prove. 14.31. To make God a debtor,
Prove. 19.17. To feed hungry Christ and to cloth naked Christ: And at the day of
judgment, these kind of services shall have the preference before all others,
men being doomed to their eternal states acco^ding as they have been forward or
negligent in these duties. Matthew. 25.
And what can be said more highly in the commendation of any thing?

3. The promises that are made to it: In the general, of happiness, blessing,
reward. He that has mercy on the poor, happy is he, Prove. 14.21. He that has
a bountiful eye shall be blessed, Chap. 22.9. And God will pay him again, Chap.
19.17 His reward shall be great; It shall be given unto him, good measure,
pressed down, shaken together, and running over, Luke 5.38.

In special; for this life, and that which is to come.

1. For this life.

Success in our affairs: For this, the Lord thy God shall bless thee in all thy
works, and in all that thou set thine hand unto, Deuteronomy 15.10.

Deliverance out of trouble: If thou draw out thy soul to the hungry, and
satisfy the afflicted soul, then shall thy light rise in obscurity, and thy
darkness be as the noon day; and the Lord shall guide thee continually and
satisfy thy soul in drought, and make fat thy bones, and thou shall be like a
watered garden, and like a spring of water whose waters fail not, Isai.
58.10.11.

Tranquillity in our conditions: Daniel tells King Nebuchadnezzar, that showing
mercy to the poor may be a good means to lengthen his tranquillity, Dan. 4.27.

Plenty: He that gives to the poor shall not lack, Prove. 28.27. The liberal
soul shall be made fat, and he that waters shall be watered also himself,
Chap. 11.25. With this particular difference from the wealth that is gotten by
other means, that the gain which is the fruit of the promise, and proceeds from
the blessing of the Lord, does make rich and he adds no sorrow with it, Prove.
10.22.

Honor: Such an one shall be had in everlasting remembrance, Psalm. 112.6. His
name shall be exalted with honor, v. 9. Men shall rise up at the mention of
him and call him blessed.

Provision for their posterity: His seed shall be blessed, Psalm. 37.15. So as not
to beg their bread, Psalm. 25.

2. And as for the life to come: Men may by this means make themselves friends
of the unrighteous Mammon, Luke 16.9.
which shall hereafter receive them into everlasting habitations. 1 Timothy 619.
They do hereby lay up in store for themselves a good foundation against the
time to come, whereby they may lay hold on eternal life: the last doom and
sentence of, Matthew. 25.34.
Come ye blessed, or Go ye cursed, being pronounced upon men according as their
demeanor has been in this respect.

4. The threats and judgments denounced and executed upon the neglect of it,
Prove. 21.13. Whosoever stops his ear at the cry of the poor, he also shall cry
himself, but shall not be heard, Chap. 28.27. He that hides his eyes from such
as need his help, shall have many a curse: Men will curse him in prosperity,
and not pity him in adversity. He shall have judgment without mercy who has
showed no mercy, Jam. 2.13. With what measure we mete to others, it shall be
measured to us again. Which was verified in that parable of Dives, Qui non
dedit micam, non gustavit guttam. He that denied a crum of bread, could not
receive a drop of water: You know the sentence upon that unmerciful servant,
who having received great favor himself, would not yet show any kindness or
pity to his fellow, it is said his Lord was wroth with him, and delivered him to
the tormentors, Matthew. 18.34.

This was the occasion of that dreadful sentence of Excommunication denounced
against the Ammonites and Moabites, Deuteronomy. 23.34. They shall not enter into the
Congregation of the Lord for ever, ( i. e.) as some Interpreters would have it,
though they should be willing to turn Proselytes, yet should not they be
admitted, nor shall thou seek their peace and prosperity all thy days; v. 6.
And the reason was, because they met you not with bread and water in the way
when ye came forth out of Egypt. These being the only Nations whom God had
charged the Israelites not to fight against, Deuteronomy. 2.19. And for them not to
afford them any relief in their distress, had in it so much unkindness, as
should set an everlasting brand of infamy upon their Nations.

One of the Reasons which brought that fearful destruction upon Sodom was,
because she did not strengthen the hand of the poor and needy. Ezekiel. 16.49, 50.

Job had such an abhorrency against this vice, that he professes he had rather
his arm should fall from his shoulder blade, and his arms be broken from the
bone, than be guilty of it. Job 31.16.

Prove. 11.24. There is that withholdeth more than is meet, but it tends to
poverty. That place seems to refer to such as do give somewhat (though
sparingly) And if such come to poverty, much more shall those that give nothing
at all.

I have done with the Scripture proofs to this purpose. It cannot be, but that
men who do in good earnest believe the Scriptures, must needs be convinced by
such plain evidences as these.

I proceed to the Arguments from Reason, which I shall rank under these three
heads.

Equity, Justice, Advantage.
1. From Equity: The rules of fitness and congruity, such as every one who
pretends to reason or ingenuity, must submit unto, do oblige us to the exercise
of this grace. Which may be made out upon a threefold account. In respect of
God, The Poor, Our selves.


1. In respect of God, who bestows upon us all that we have, and therefore may
well expect that we should be ready to lay out some of it for his use,
according to his appointment. All things come of thee, and of thine own we have
given thee (says David) 1 Chr. 29.14. He renews his mercies to us every
morning, and daily loads us with his benefits. He gives to us liberally, and
upbraids us not, He spreads our Tables and fills our Cups, till they run over,
that we may be more ready with our superfluities, to fill the empty, and
satisfy the hungry with our good things, that our abundance may be a supply
for others wants, that there may be an equality, 2 Cor. 8.14. That passage 1 Timothy 6.17. does in every word of it contain an argument to this purpose, He
gives us all things richly to enjoy. He gives, we can claim nothing as our due;
us, so unworthy; richly; (i. e. bountifully) that others might be supplied out
of our store; to enjoy, not to hoard up or waste upon our lusts, but to dispose
of to their proper end and use. For ye know the grace of our Lord Jesus Christ,
that though he was rich, yet for your sakes he became poor, that ye through his
poverty might be made rich. 2 Cor. 8.9.

And there is all imaginable equity in this consequence, why God should require
this of us, having done so much for us. Suppose a man ransomed from death and
slavery, and want, and put into the possession of a great estate by the bounty
of another; who thereupon should make it his earnest request to him, that for
his sake he would spare some little of that plenty he had now conferred upon
him, toward the relief of some friends of his, who were nearly related to him,
upon whom he might have bestowed all that wealth, which he had chosen rather to
confer upon him: And should adjure him to this, by all the entreaties,
promises, and repeated importunities that could be; would not Heaven and Earth
cry shame against such a vile ungrateful wretch, as should in so small a matter
neglect so great an obligation? would not every man's heart rise up with much
keenness and indignation against the very mention of such a monster? But you
will say, are there any such vile wretches in the world? I Answer, all those
that are rich, and not bountiful upon good occasions, they are such. And if any
such there be in this place, I would say to every one of them, as Nathan did to
David; Thou art the man.

2. It Is equitable in respect of the Poor, who by reason of their relation to
us, and their need of us, may reasonably expect assistance from us. God could
have provided sufficiently for every one, But his providence has so ordered
it, Deuteronomy. ^^.11.
That there shall be always poor in the Land, to prove us in this kind, that
we might have fit matter for the exercise of this grace, and that we might have
some visible examples of what he can reduce us to when he pleases. Nor are
dignities or riches upon any other account desirable, but as they afford means
and opportunities of doing good to such as stand in need of our help. So that
the different states and degrees amongst men as to riches and poverty, seem by
the Providence of God to be purposely designed in order to the exercise of this
Virtue.

3. It Is equitable in respect of our selves. We are miserable, despicable
creatures, and can hope for nothing from God, but upon the account of Bounty;
without his mercy we are all of us lost and undone. Now the rules of congruity
will require, that we should be as ready to show mercy to others, as to expect
it for our selves; there is no man so absolute and independent, as not at some
time to stand in need of the help of others; Humane Society could not subsist,
without the mutual offices of kindnesses; and nothing is more suitable to
natural reason, than that we should be ready to do as we would be done unto.
That Is the first argument upon the account of common reason and ingenuity.

2. This is not only equitable and fitting, and the not doing of it an
incongruous, unreasonable thing: But it is likewise just, and the omission of it
an injury or sin. It Is observed by some learned Critics, That in the Hebrew,
and the rest of the Oriental Tongues, this virtue of Bounty and beneficence is
styled by the name of Justice or Righteousness (...) this being the word most
frequently used for it, and is accordingly often so rendered by the Septuagint;
in that forecited place. Psalm. 112.6. The Righteous shall be had in everlasting
remembrance: Where the context will make it evident, that by righteous is meant
the bountiful and charitable man. So Psalm. 37.12. Prove. 10.2. Psalm. 25.26.
The wicked borrows and pays not again, but the righteous shows mercy and
gives: And in several other places.

Though one man cannot implead another before the bar of humane Law, for not
doing him a kindness, for not being liberal to him: The end of the Law being to
preserve men within the bounds of justice; to keep them from doing injuries to
one another, which is more immediately necessary to the peace of Societies. Yet
in Gods Law, the not doing a kindness, when we have a fitting occasion, is
counted injustice; and he will arraign us for the omission of such occasions.

The Apostle having said Romans 13.7. Render to all their dues, pay to every man
your debts, subjoyns in the next verses; Owe no man any thing, but to love one
another; Implying that in the Scripture sense, Charity is a debt, and the not
paying of it an injustice. It Is such a debt as we can never fully discharge,
but though we are always paying of it, yet we must still be in arrear, whilst
there shall remain any ability, and occasion for our exercising of it.

Prove. 3.27. Withhold not good from him to whom it is due (or from the owners
thereof) speaking of works of bounty. When there are fit objects proposed to us
that need our help, they have a just title to it; and the not assisting of
them, is withholding from them their due.

We are but Stewards of our estate, and are to lay it out for such uses of the
Family, as are most agreeable to our Masters will; and the neglect of this is
styled, Luke 16.12
being unfaithful in that which is another man's.

God himself is the great Sovereign and Proprietor of the world; all men are
but his Subjects and Tenants; there is a Tribute or Rent which he requires from
them, upon the non-payment of which they forfeit their Tenure, and afterward
do but usurp, being in his sight without any lawful title to what they possess.
And he has appointed two kind of Receivers for this tribute or rent, which we
owe to him, his Ministers and the Poor; the not paying to one of these is
expressly styled, robbing of God, Malach. 3.8. it is so likewise in the other
case, Pauperibus non impertire rapina est, Nay, it may prove much worse, a kind
of Murder, which is the highest kind of injustice, Because not to save when we
may is to destroy, as is employed by our Savior, Luke 6.9. That Is the Second
Argument upon the account of justice or duty.

3. It Is highly advantageous to us; which is the last Argument upon the account
of interest. By liberal things shall we stand. It Is the best means to improve
and confirm a man's condition, in all the felicities of this life, and a better.

1. For this life: It Is the most effectual way both to improve and preserve our
estates, and to render us honorable and amiable in the esteem of others.

1. For the increasing of our estates: The Apostle compares it to sowing, which
refers to an harvest. The Husbandman would never scatter his seed upon the
ground, if he did not know, that it is much better for him to dispose of it so,
than to keep it in his granary. It Is of all others the most gainful way of
Trading. Ars omnium quaestuosissima, as one of the Fathers. When we receive
much for a little, certain for uncertain, eternal things for temporal.

2. For the preserving it safe. The Jews call Alms by the name of Salt, for its
preserving power. It Is laying up treasures in Heaven, where rust cannot
corrupt, nor thieves break through and steal. Such persons whom we help by our
beneficence, are but so many Treasurers whom we entrust with the custody of our
wealth; who will preserve it more safely for us, than any lock or guards, or
any other repositories can do. As for that wealth which is not so disposed of,
the thief may rob our Treasuries; the fire may devour our houses; creditors may
grow insolent; our grounds may become fruitless and barren, by reason of
unseasonable weather; tempests may destroy our adventures in merchandise; some
mistake in our conveyances may overthrow the title of our purchases: every one
of these may be subject to a thousand casualties. But, Extra fortunam est,
quicquid donatur amicis; Martial.

Quas dederis, solas semper habebis opes.


Says the Epigrammatist. A man can be sure only of that wealth which he has
given away.

It Is storyed of a great man, Alphonsus.
eminent for his bounty, that being asked by a friend, what he did intend to
reserve for himself, after all his bountiful gifts bestowed upon others?
Answered, ea ipsa quae dono: implying, that instead of alienating, he did
rather confirm his propriety in them, by disposing of them to good uses.

'Twas a significant saying to this purpose, Habeo quod dedi, perdidi quod
servavi. I do keep what I gave, but I have lost what I kept. To which it may be
added, That as these riches are not so much exposed to danger, so are they less
liable to the envy of others.

For Honor and repute, which is better than great Riches, it is said, he that
has mercy on the poor, honors his maker. Prove. 14.31. And God has said,
Him that honors me, I will honor. Prove. 19.
Every man is a friend to a man of gifts. Nor is such an one so much a loser in
his purse by his bounty, as he is a gainer in the hearts and affections of men.
The Centurion (though of a different way from the Jews) was upon this account
highly valued in their esteem, which made them so earnestly to intercede with
our Savior in his behalf, as being a worthy generous person, who had obliged
them by his public beneficence; and our Savior did upon that reason more
readily comply with their desires upon the first motion. Though upon another
occasion being twice solicited in the behalf of a Noble man's son, he refused
to go. Ioh 4.46.


This gives us an interest in the prayers of others. 2 Timothy 1.16. The Apostle
mentioning the good offices done to him by Onesiphorus, adds, The Lord give
mercy to his house, for he often refreshed me, and was not ashamed of my chains,
The Lord grant unto him that he may find mercy of the Lord in that day.

St. Hierom speaking of a bountiful man, gives this reason why such an one must
always be safe and happy; Habet enim multos intercessores, and impossible est
multorum preces non exaudiri. 2 Cor. 9.14.
Men do generally wish well to such and speak well of them; and will be ready
to stand by them, and assist them in their troubles. The highest expression of
love that can be, is for a man to be ready to lay down his life for another;
greater love than this has no man. Ioh. 15.13.
Now though scarcely for a righteous man will one dye, i. e. one of a severe
innocence, yet for a good man some will dare to dye, Romans 5.7. (i. e.) for a
Friend and Benefactor; one that is a public good, and of general usefulness,
worth a thousand others; For such an one men may be ready to venture their
lives; which is the highest expression of love and honor that may be.

And as for the advantage we hereby receive as to our future estates, this
likewise is much every way. It Is some security from that danger and prejudice,
which follows upon the having of riches. The evil of abundance is, That we are
thereby tempted to forget God: Prove. 36.
And it is the benefit of liberality, That it makes us to remember him, by
laying up our treasures in Heaven: And where the Treasure is, there will the
heart be also, Luke 12.33.

Works of Beneficence are called by St. Paul, (...)^ 1 Timothy 6.19.
The foundation of that reward we shall receive in the world to come. Mr. Mede.
Some Critics have observed that this Greek word in the Hellenistical use,
has an allusion to another Hebrew word, which in the Rabbinical Dialect
signifies Tabulae contractus, a Bill of Contract, a Bond or Obligation, by
virtue of which, at the day of payment, we may plead a right to the reward, as
being justly due to us, not vi meriti, but vi pacti, by virtue of that promise
whereby God has been pleased to become our debtor. And which is most
desirable, to have Christ at the last day to be our debtor and rewarder, or our
Enemy and Revenger?

III. In the Application of what has been said, there are some few things I
would observe, by way of Doctrinal Inference. Practical Inference.


1. By way of Instruction, these Corollaries.

1. If such persons only be truly noble and generous, who devise liberal
things, then all such as are averse from such things are but Nabals, vile and
foolish, and ought to be so esteemed, amongst them that will pass righteous
judgment, and are able to distinguish of things that differ. There may be an
outward respect due to titles of Honor and dignity, but when they are mee^ly
nominal, without any foundation of real worth to answer them, it is not to be
expected that they should acquire an inward esteem in the judgments and
affections of judicious Persons. Men may have the custody of great estates, but
they are rather the slaves than the masters of them, unless they have hearts to
dispose of them to good uses.

2. Hence we learn what to think of those, who are so far from devising liberal
things, that they must be forced to do just things. And will in cases of
differences yield no further than they can be compelled by Law: insisting to
the utmost upon every punctilio of advantage, which the rigor and the letter of
the Law will afford them. These are so far from being persons of honor, that
in the Scripture sense they ought not to be reputed persons of honesty; Equity
being necessary to that no less than Justice.

3. Those Persons are much mistaken, who think acts of this kind to be
arbitrary; that they may exert or restrain their bounty, at their own pleasure,
without doing injury to any one. Whereas it is plain, that the Scripture does
impose it as a necessary duty, and esteem the omission of it an injury. And
though we cannot be accused for our neglects in this kind before man's Tribunal,
yet God will pass upon us our final Sentence according to these works.

4. If this be so sure a means for the securing and improving our estates, and
that by liberal things men shall stand: This may afford some ground for our
enquiry, Whether the neglect of this duty may not have some influence* upon the
general complaints in these times, of want of money and trading, and of men's
failing in their estates. This is plain enough, that there is no age to be
mentioned, wherein the generality of persons of all ranks and conditions have
been more profuse and extravagant, as to those particular expenses that concern
themselves in all respects, Buildings, Diet, Apparel, etc. And it may justly be
feared that this excess in private expenses, may occasion a defect in their
public bounty: And then no wonder if men by neglect of liberal things do fall
and break.

2. By way of Exhortation; We may from hence be excited to these two things.

1. To give honor, love and respect to liberal persons: This is as much due to
them from others, as their bounty and charity is due from them to others. And
it cannot be less than an injury to detain from any one what is his due.

It was an usual form amongst the Jews upon the naming of worthy persons
deceased, to add this clause to the mention of them, whose memory is blessed.
And hence was that custom in the Primitive times of appointing Anniversary
Memorials and Festivals in honor of the Worthies deceased; to recount their
good deeds, celebrating the praises due to them, that others by their example
might be excited to do the like. And here I cannot in justice omit the
mentioning of a late public good Work (not sufficiently taken notice of,
though) redounding much to the honor of our Nation and Religion, I mean the
Redemption of so many Captives from Slavery, and restoring them again to their
native Countries; which certainly ought to be commemorated with praise as a
work of a sweet savor, both to God and men: and a further addition to that
double honor, which was before due to such as were the chief Promoters of it;
I mean the Clergy of this Church, in gratitude to God for his gracious and
wonderful restitution of them to their just Rights and Revenues.

And I may truly speak it to the everlasting honor of this famous City, that
it has afforded as many liberal worthy Benefactors for public good works,
(and that too since the Reformation, whatever the Papists suggest to the
contrary) as any other City in the Christian World. And which ought further to
be acknowledged to their deserved praise, the several Companies of it, have
generally discharged the trust committed to them by the Legacies of others,
with much more honor and fidelity than particular men use to do. Having of
their own accord, without being necessitated to it by a course of Law, observed
that fair ingenuous equity, which is proper in such cases, by augmenting the
allowances bequeathed in some proportion, according as the price and value of
things has increased. This I know has been done in some cases; and I am sure
by the rules of equity it ought to be so in others. That what was at first
designed by the will of the Donour as a meet and liberal maintenance, and now
by the rising of the value of things falls short of it, (if the revenue will
bear it) ought to be augmented in some proportion to what was first intended.
Such persons cannot justly pretend to this Character in the Text of devising
liberal things themselves, who are not free and generous in the right disposal
of the liberality of others.

2. Which brings me to the second branch of Exhortation, with which I shall
conclude: That as we are now convinced of, so should we be affected with, and
accordingly practice this excellent virtue of Liberality. And as we abound in
every thing, in Riches, Peace, Faith, Knowledge, that we abound in this grace
also. It may seem superfluous to add any thing further to that great cloud of
Testimonies and Arguments which I have already urged to this purpose. Without
this bounty and pity to others we can have no good assurance of Gods favor to
us, nor any grounds to expect it. With what face or confidence can any man ask
mercy for himself, Nehem. 13.14, 22. Mat. 5.7.
who is not ready to show it to others?

It Is this that must add an efficacy to our prayers, as it did with Cornelius;
that must sanctify our possessions, our unrighteous Mammon, Luke 11.41
which otherwise will not be clean to us. It Is the parent of honor, safety,
prosperity without us, of joy, peace, confidence within us; the greatest
comfort both in life and death, 2 Cor. 8.8, 24.
as being the surest evidence both of our grace here, and our glory hereafter.

'Twill be but a little while before every one of you shall be called to give
an account of your Stewardships; and would it not be your wisdom, before that
time to have a right state of your accounts and to examine how they stand? I am
sensible that I speak to men of experience, such as by their constant way of
dealing must needs be well versed in things of this nature; and do thoroughly
understand what belongs to the making up and adjusting of Accounts; how to put
together the charge, first of what they have received, and are responsible for;
and then the discharge, how it has been laid out and expended. And I appeal to
your Consciences, can you think this would be a good account at the last day to
say, Lord thou have entrusted me with so many Talents, such a revenue in land,
such a stock in money and commodities, such an income by Trading, or by
Offices, to the value it may be of some thousands or hundreds by the year. Of
which receipts I have expended, Imprimis, for my own use in buildings,
furniture, apparel, feasting, recreations, law suits, and perhaps some more
vicious way of expense, so many hundreds. Item, for thy use and service toward
the relief of thy poor members, to works of devotion or public bounty, either
so many blanks, or so many pence.

If men would deal impartially with themselves, putting both these together,
and compare them with one another; would not this be enough to shame and
confound men, if they were but serious in Religion, and did in good earnest
believe what they profess?

When we come to die, the remembrance of those sums, though but small ones,
which we have sent before us to heaven in works of bounty and charity, will be
a greater comfort and support to our minds than all those vast treasures which
we must leave behind us upon earth. If men do not believe these things, why do
they pretend to be Christians? If they do believe them, how is it possible they
should walk so unanswerably to them?

Oh! that what has been said might prevail with some amongst you, to enter
upon a firm resolution of altering the state of your Accounts for the future,
by reducing these two general Heads for your selves, and for God, unto a more
decent and equal proportion; that the one may not consist only of pounds, and
the other of pence. That so much at least may be laid out upon good works, as
may afford to your faith and hope some ground and foundation to lay hold on
eternal life.

The Eleventh Sermon.
LUKE VII.5. For he loves our Nation and has built us a Synagogue.


AMongst the many Passages in the Gospel concerning those miraculous cures,
which were wrought by our Savior, this of the Centurion's servant is upon
several accounts one of the most remarkable.

We have it recorded in two several Evangelists, by St. Matthew, Chap. 8. and
here by St. Luke. The first of these studying brevity and conciseness in the
relation of it, does thereupon omit several circumstances specified by the
other; whence there arises some seeming inconsistency betwixt them. From which
the Pagans and Manichees of old, took advantage in their Objections against the
truth of the Gospel.

The chief circumstance wherein the difference lies, is concerning the persons
who came unto Christ. In St. Matthew it is said, that the Centurion himself
came, beseeching of Christ, verse. 6. and answering of him, v. 8. And in this
place it is said, that the Centurion first sent the elders to him, v. 3. and
after his friends, v. 6. And part of their message is, Neither thought I my
self worthy to come unto thee, v. 7.

Several things are answered to this Objection by those who write concerning
the Harmony of the Evangelists. The most common Solution is, That what is done
by a man's Proxy or messenger, may be ascribed to a man's self, Apostolus
cujusque est and quisque, He that receives me receives him that sent me.
Matt. 10.40.
Christ is said to have preached peace to the Ephesians, Ephesians. 2.17. and
repentance to the old World, 1 Pet. 3.19. which he did not in his own Person,
but by his Messengers.

Others conceive, That the Centurion first sent the Elders of the Jews, whose
commission was only to beseech cure for his servant: And when upon their
request our Savior was pleased to come toward his house, then he sends some
other friends to deprecate that trouble, and to let him know, that he was not
so presumptuous as to expect or desire any such favor from him: but when
notwithstanding this message, our Savior still kept on his way toward his
house, then at last the Centurion himself comes out, and tells him, That he is
altogether unworthy to have so great a Guest come under his roof.

This being very suitable to all the circumstances of the story recorded by
both Evangelists, does sufficiently reconcile the seeming difficulty about it.

So that the Text is part of that message which was sent to our Savior in
behalf of the Centurions servant. For the better understanding of the Words,
and the Story to which they refer, it may be proper to premise something
concerning these four particulars.

1. The person sending, 2. The message or errand. 3. The messengers employed,
4. Their success, or the issue of this message.
1. The person sending, is here described by various circumstances; His
Calling, Religion, those special Virtues for which he was eminent.

1. His Calling or Profession. A certain Centurion, v. 2. A military Officer,
one of those Captains who were quartered up and down the several parts of
Judea, to prevent any commotions or seditions amongst the Jews, whilst they
were under the Roman Government; And it is likely that his Garrison or head
quarters were at Capernaum, the place where this Miracle was wrought.

2. For his Religion, he was neither Jew nor Christian but a Heathen;
acknowledging no other principles but what the light of Nature might lead a man
unto; whereby men are obliged to renounce Idols, to worship only the one true
God, to observe the rules of justice and charity, dealing so with others as
they desire to be dealt with themselves. Which rules are particularly
enumerated under seven heads, styled by the Rabbis, the seven precepts of
Noah. And the observance of these was then counted sufficient to entitle a man
a Proselyte; of which there were two kinds amongst the Jews called by them,
proselytes of the Covenant and of the Gate.

Those were called proselytes of the Covenant, who took upon them the sign of
it, namely circumcision, and did submit themselves to all the Jewish Rites
enjoined by Moses. And all such of what Nation soever, who were thus fully
converted to that Religion, were afterward counted as native Jews, and
admitted to the same common privileges, and to worship with them, both in the
times of the Tabernacle and of the Temple. Such was Vriah, etc.

Those were called proselytes of the Gate, who during the time of Solomon's
Temple, stood only without at the Gate, not being admitted within the septs or
enclosures of it; though in the second Temple there was an outward court
appointed for them called Atrium gentium. These were neither circumcised nor
observed any of the Mosaical Rites, but only those precepts of Natural Religion
which I mentioned before. And of these there were some in all Times amongst the
Jews, and usually great numbers in all Cities and Places of the Gentiles where
the Jews had Synagogues. Such was Naaman the Syrian, in the Old Testament;
Cornelius, and the Centurion in the New. In the History of the Acts of the
Apostles, there is frequent mention of these kind of proselytes under the title
of (...), worshippers or devout persons, chap. 13.43; 16.14; 17.4, 17; 18.4.
who also were the first Gentiles converted to Christianity.

And though there was a wide difference betwixt the Jews and these proselytes
in matters of Religion, yet did it not grow up to any such heats and
animosities betwixt them, but they lived peaceably together. As for the Jews,
though they were by the Law obliged to esteem such persons as Gentiles and
unclean, with whom they might not familiarly converse; yet were they willing
upon account of their virtue to allow them some share in their good opinion and
friendship: esteeming them to be pious men, and such as (according to their
opinion) should be admitted to some portion of happiness in the other World.
And the Apostle says of some of them that they feared God, Acts 10.1, 2. and
Chap. 13.16.

And on the other side, these Heathen proselytes, though they did not believe
the Jewish Religion, or submit to the Rites of it, yet because they found the
Principles of it more rational than any other, in the prohibiting of all vices,
in their worship of one God, and being free from Idolatry, which all other
Nations were guilty of; therefore had they a greater esteem for the Jews than
for any other; frequenting their Synagogues to hear the Law read and expounded,
and being ready to oblige them by any bounty and favor, whereby they might
testify a peculiar respect to them, as being devout and religious men.

3. As for those special virtues recorded of this Centurion, there are
observable in the Story of him these four things for which he was eminent.

1. His great tenderness and pity toward his sick servant, who is said to be
dear to him, v. 2. though it is probable that he was but a slave, either bought
with his money, or taken amongst the spoils of War; For such kind of Servants
were then most usual with the Romans, especially amongst military men; yet you
see how full of compassion he is toward him in his sickness, how solicitous
for his recovery, making all the interest he could, and engaging his chief
friends to mediate in his behalf; And from his being thus merciful we may
probably infer that he was likewise a man of courage and valor. For as
fierceness and cruelty is a sure indication of a Coward, so gentleness and
humanity are usually arguments of a great and generous mind.

2. His modesty and humility. Though others that knew him had a great esteem of
him, yet had he a mean opinion of himself; Neither thought he himself worthy to
come unto Christ. v. 7. He knew that the Jews did count themselves polluted by
any familiar converse with such as he was; and much less could he think himself
worthy to receive any such honor from Christ, as that he should vouchsafe to
come under his roof.

3. His bounty and generosity in works of devotion, manifested by building a
Synagogue for the Jews, erecting for them a place of public worship at his own
charge, which was a matter of no small expense.

4. His great ingenuity of mind in submitting to sufficient evidence. Having
been informed of those great Miracles wrought by our Savior, and that holy
Doctrine which he taught, he is immediately convinced that he must needs be a
Divine person. And accordingly he makes his address to him suitably to this
belief; expressing his faith in such a way as has no other instance like it in
Scripture: His request is, Say in a word, and my servant shall be healed. As if
he should have said, I do not think it fitting either for me to ask, or Christ
to grant, that he should vouchsafe to come and see my servant, or to lay his
hand on him; 'twill be sufficient if he shall please to speak the word only.
And he gives this reason for it, For if I who am but a man under authority,
have such a power over those committed to my charge as to make them come and go
at my command, much more then may he send away diseases by a word of his mouth.
For I am a man, thou art a Divine person, I am set under authority, thou art
the supreme Lord of all; I have Soldiers under me, a rough untractable
generation of men, and yet when I say to one go, he goes; and to another come,
he comes; to a third do this, he does it. Now sicknesses and diseases are thy
servants, under thine absolute dominion and command, to be disposed of as thou
please; and therefore as I am not worthy to come unto thee, nor is it fitting
for me to expect that thou should vouchsafe to come unto me; so is neither of
these necessary to the grant of my petition, It Is but saying the word, and my
servant shall be healed. Upon this message our Savior seems to be somewhat
surprised: it is said, he marvelled at him, and having made a stand, he turns
about to the people that followed him, and said unto them, I have not found so
great faith, no not in Israel, v. 9.

2. The business or message; which was to intercede with Christ for cure of a
sick servant. And this, those who were employed on this account did accordingly
endeavor with much earnestness; pressing their request with arguments taken
from the great merit and commendation of the Person in whose behalf they did
intercede; which they express first in the general, saying, he is worthy for
whom he should do this, v. 4. and this they further specify by two particular
instances: 1. From his public spiritedness, He loves our Nation; he is not a
person of the common temper, of a little narrow mind, immersed wholly in
himself, or given up to some small designs for his own private gain and
advantage. 2. His bounty and generosity in works of devotion, He has built us
a Synagogue. What by the help of his Soldiers, and his own expense, he has
very liberally erected for us a place for public Worship: which must needs be
a great obligation to those who had any zeal for their Religion; and is
accordingly made use of as a powerful motive of favor toward him.

But here, before I proceed any further, it may be proper to speak something
for the clearing up of this Question, How it comes to be recorded as a
commendable thing for a man to build a Synagogue, when we find no command or
institution for it in Scripture? And therefore it may seem to be a kind of
Will Worship, or humane invention, which may as well be said likewise
concerning our Churches in these Times of Christianity. We read indeed of a
glorious Tabernacle, and after of a stately Temple appointed by God himself.
All the Parts, Vtensils, Services, Officers, and every other circumstance
belonging to that worship, being particularly determined in Scripture. But we
read nothing at all of any command concerning Synagogues or Churches.

To this it may be answered, that the having of particular Places set apart for
the duties of public worship is of natural obligation, and therefore does not
require any positive law for the commanding of it. Though such kind of
Ceremonial and Typical precepts, as are no way derivable from natural light, do
receive all their obligation from being instituted; yet in things that are
moral, which a man may be acquainted with, and obliged unto by the mere light
of nature, in such cases a man is left to the dictates of Reason and Prudence.

And from this natural Principle was it that the ancient Patriarchs, who lived
abroad in Booths and Tents, frequently changing their places for fresh pasture,
when they came to any new place of abode, where they pitched their Tents, their
custom was to erect Altars, and enclose them about, which was usually done in
some mountains, high places and groves. And these (before they came to be
abused by Idolatry) were in general request amongst them, being styled by the
name of Sanctuaries or holy places, to which a reverence is commanded, Ye shall
keep my Sabbaths, Chap. 25.31. Ier. 9.11. Lam. 2.7.
and reverence my Sanctuaries, Levit. 19.30.

When the Israelites wandered in the Wilderness without any settled habitation,
they were commanded to make a moveable Tabernacle, before which they were to
worship, Exodus 26. And before that glorious Tabernacle was erected, Moses had a
Tent without the Camp for that purpose, called the Tabernacle of the
Congregation.

When they were to be in a settled condition, they are then commanded to fix
unto the place which the Lord their God should choose, Deuteronomy. 12.5. After, when
God had chosen Jerusalem, and in it Mount Moriah, David did first, out of his
own inclination, make an attempt toward this work of building the Temple,
which was afterward accomplished by Solomon. And that Temple being destroyed,
another was erected in the room of it, which (though it fell much short of the
former) yet was it one of the most noble and famous Structures in the whole
World.

Each of these, the Tabernacle and the Temples, were by particular appointment.
In after times we read of other kinds of buildings for worship, Synagogues and
Oratories.

Synagogues were somewhat answerable to our Parish-Churches, in which they were
wont to assemble for Prayer, Reading and interpreting the Law.

The Oratories or Proseuchae were lesser Structures, commonly erected without
the Towns, and by the Seaside: into which it was usual for Passengers to enter
for Praying, and giving of Alms.

When Synagogues began first to be erected is very difficult to determine. The
most common opinion is, that there were no Buildings of this kind till after
the Captivity. As for that phrase, They have burnt up all the Synagogues of God
in the land, Psalm. 74.8. the Original word translated Synagogues is (...) which
is frequently used in other Scriptures to signify tempus statutum, or stata
solennitas; according to which the meaning of it must be, that they have
abrogated the solemn Festivals, and caused them to cease: It Is so rendered by
the Chaldee Paraphrase, the Septuagint, and most of the other Versions. And
whereas St. James says, Act. 15.21. Moses of old time had in every City those
that preach him, being read in the Synagogues every Sabbath Day. To this it may
be answered, that the phrase of old time is not necessarily to be extended unto
the times of purest Antiquity, but may be well enough restrained to four or
five hundred years preceding, when Synagogues might first begin, namely after
the Captivity. But of this I have had occasion to treat more largely in another
Discourse.

Only this is sufficiently evident, that the liberty of building Synagogues,
was allowed every where to the Jews under the Roman Government in our Saviors
time; that He himself and his Apostles did very much frequent them, and
consequently approve them; that though the several Officers and Laws belonging
to them were without any Scripture-institution, yet our Savior does rather
suit the Doctrine and precepts of Christian worship to this of the Synagogue,
which was moral and perpetual, than to that of the Temple-service which was
instituted and transitory.

As for public Buildings for Christian worship, it is obvious that this Way
being in the first Ages every where opposed and spoken against, the Professors
of it were fain to meet (as they could with safety) sometimes in private
houses, belonging to some of the Disciples, where they had usually a fair upper
room furnished and set a part for these Meetings, and sometimes in grots and
caves, and woods: Till afterward, the heat of persecution being somewhat
abated, they had permission to build little Oratories; and in process of time
as Emperors and Kings began to favor Christianity, so were they careful to
erect for them most sumptuous and magnificent Temples. For which this Land and
Nation of ours was more particularly famous above any other part of the world.
Our Ancestors having been very devout and bountiful in works of this nature,
according to the old verse: Anglia, mons, pons, fons, Ecclesia. -- Now though
it be true that where ever men worship God with a sincere and upright heart
they shall be accepted; Jeremy in the mire, Jonah in the Whales belly, Daniel
in the den, the three Children in the furnace, the Thief on the Cross; yet this
does not hinder but that when we have opportunity for it, our Places of public
Worship should be both built and maintained, and esteemed in some measure
suitably to the dignity of that service they are to be employed about. And when
we are in a prosperous estate, it is as proper for us to worship God in the
beauty of Holiness, as it is to do it in caves and prisons when we are in a
condition that does necessitate us thereunto.

You have heard the two first Particulars, the person sending, and his message.
I shall speak more briefly to the other Two.

3. The messengers employed about this business; which were of two kinds. Those
who were first sent are said to be the Elders of the Jews, v. 3. whether the
Magistrates of the City, or the Governors of the Synagogue, the Civil or
Ecclesiastical Rulers is not evident; the Word may signify either. After
these, it is said he sent his friends, v. 6. who were perhaps some other of his
fellow-Officers belonging to that Garrison. And these Messengers (it should
seem) were heartily concerned in the good success of that business they
undertook, as appears by their earnestness about it: it is said that they did
beseech Christ, (...), v. 4. instantly, with much importunity and vehemence,
thereby testifying their zeal and good affection for the Person by whom they
were employed.

4. And lastly, the success or issue of this Negotiation: It Is said that our
Savior did upon the first motion condescend to their request. Though at
another time when he was twice solicited in the behalf of the Noblemans Son,
he refused to go, Ioh. 4.46. yet to show his special esteem and favor for a
Person under so worthy a Character as this Centurion, he does express his
willingness, not only to gratify him in the thing desired, the healing of his
servant, but to do more for him than was asked, namely to give him a visit;
besides that large testimony and approbation which he gives to the people
concerning his great worth.

So much shall serve for the opening of the Text and Story. The Observation I
would make from the words is this: To be of a public spirit, Observe.
and of a bountiful generous mind in works of Charity and Devotion is a sure
way to render a man acceptable to God and approved of men.

It was by these virtues that the Centurion (though a Heathen) was so much
endeared to the Jews, and so well accepted of by our Savior.

And the Scripture does attest to this truth in several other places. It Is said
Psalm. 112.6. of the bountiful man that he shall be had in everlasting
remembrance; and ver. 9. His name shall be exalted with honor. In conformity
to which it has been always a custom amongst the Jews in their speaking of any
worthy man deceased to add this clause to the mention of his name, whose
memorial is blessed.

1 Chronicles. 29. when David had persuaded the people to offer willingly and freely
toward the building of the Temple, see how they did all rejoice and exult in
the apprehension of it, v. 9. Then the people rejoiced, and David the King also
rejoiced with great joy, because they had offered willingly, and with a perfect
heart unto the Lord. They looked upon this work as a thing that was very well
pleasing to God, and an honor to their Nation, and consequently a just
occasion of joy and triumph to all the People.

When Nehemiah, Chap. 13.14. had with great industry and success promoted the
rebuilding of the Temple, he does, upon the reflection of it, break out into
this expression, Remember me, O my God, concerning this; and wipe not out the
good deeds that I have done for the house of my God, and for the Officers
thereof. It seems he believed his care and activity in this work to be a thing
very acceptable to God; which makes him desire that it might be recorded and
kept in remembrance to his advantage.

I might further confirm this Observation by several Reasons. I shall mention
only two.

1. From the suitableness of such kind of duties unto the moral and more
substantial parts of Religion. The Apostle tells us that the Kingdom of God is
not meat and drink, but righteusness and peace, and joy in the Holy Ghost; and
they who in these things serve Christ shall be accepted with God, and approved
of men, Romans 14.17, 18. The word Righteousness is frequently used in the
Scripture Phrase for the virtue of beneficence and bounty. By peace is meant
that gentle and charitable disposition, whereby a man is inclined to promote
the quiet of Societies and good will amongst men. And by the joy in the Holy
Ghost, we are to understand an ability to rejoice in an afflicted estate. These
are the things recommended to us as being the more weighty and essential parts
of Religion. It Is no difficult matter for a man to be zealous about meats and
drinks, he may do it to gratify his contentious humor, and to endear himself
to a Party: Nor is it hard for a man to pretend a zeal for Religion by some
good wishes or kind words, which are cheap things, and will cost him nothing;
but to give testimony of it by bountiful actions, that others may see our good
works, this is that which will make them glorify God in our behalf, and
acknowledge that he is in us of a truth. It was an humor in the Apostolical
times, as well as since, that men set up for reputation in Religion by their
zeal about some Opinions in lesser matters. Against which the Apostle cautions
Titus; Tit. 3.8.
This I will that thou affirm constantly, that they which believe in God be
careful to maintain good works. For which he gives this reason, For these
things are good and profitable unto men. Contentions and disputes may please
and gratify men's present humors and passions, but they are these works of
Piety and Bounty that must promote the more lasting and public welfare, and
the general good of mankind.

2. Persons thus qualified are supposed to be of an higher rank and degree
above other men. It is in Religion as in other Professions; there are some of a
Vulgar sort, of an ordinary and common standard; and there are others of a
taller stature, of a higher form and seize, from whom it may be expected
that they should adorn and add a luster to their Profession. And they are the
Virtues of this kind, namely a bountiful and charitable disposition toward any
public good work, that must raise men to this higher pitch of esteem above
others. When Araunah offered David freely his threshing-floor, and oxen, and
threshing instruments for Sacrifice, it is said, that he did it as a King, 2 Samuel 24.23. in a royal and princely manner; and David on the other side refused
it as a King, thinking it unworthy of him to offer unto God of that which cost
him nothing, v. 24.

I shall add nothing further at present by way of confirmation of this Point.
that which I chiefly aim at is the Application of it.

I have purposely made choice of this Subject, as having a peculiar
suitableness to the present state of things in this place. God has been
pleased by his late severe dispensations, first to destroy the inhabitants of
this City by the noisome pestilence, and since to lay waste our habitations by
a dreadful fire; wherein his own Houses, those that were dedicated to his
Worship, did not escape; But the devouring fire (in the phrase of the Psalmist)
did come into his Sanctuaries, Psalm. 74.7, 8.
casting down the dwelling places of his name to the ground; burning up the
Synagogues of God. And amidst the other dismal ruins of this place, it is one of
the saddest spectacles to behold so many Sacred Structures, the Monuments of
our Forefathers devotion and bounty laid in the dust.

I suppose it needless to prove the necessity of Religion to Government, or the
necessity of Places for public Worship to the keeping up of Religion. Those
things are in themselves so plain and obvious, that no reasonable man can have
any just cause to doubt of them. That which I aim at is, to excite others by
this example of the Centurion to such a love of their Nation and City, as may
engage them to some effectual care for the building up of our Synagogues.

And in order to this I would speak something: 1. Particularly to such as are
Magistrates; 2. Generally to all sorts of people.

1. To you that are Magistrates of this City: It Is one of the styles belonging
to your Offices to be repairers of breaches. Public things ought to be taken
care of by public persons. You have already made some provision to preserve
men's Proprieties in their grounds, to enlarge the passages and avenues, whereby
the City may be rendered more safe, beautiful and convenient for Trading; which
are good works, and such as become worthy Magistrates: But these things concern
you as you are men and Citizens; there are other things to be provided for as
you are Christians: And I would crave leave to be your remembrancer that some
effectual care may be taken for the rebuilding of the Places for public
Worship. It would be very convenient that as several Parishes are built up, so
the repair of Churches should be in some forwardness, to which the Inhabitants
might resort for the duties of Religion. The doing of this will perhaps prove a
matter of too great charge to be defrayed by the contribution of the
Inhabitants, considering their particular losses. But if any considerable help
could be procured for it from the Public (which there is no reason to doubt
of) the remainder might be made up by particular Charities. And both together
might prove sufficient for this great work. Nor is there any reason to
question, but if this business were seriously consulted, and vigorously
pursued, such ways might be offered as might prove effectual both for the
building of such a number of Churches as shall be thought sufficient, and
likewise for the providing of a sufficient maintenance for them, that none of
their Incumbents may be put to live precariously upon the benevolence of their
hearers. I humbly offer this to your consideration, as a thing that is your
duty, and will tend to your honor. And I do the rather mention it now, because
this is the proper season for it, while the Parliament is sitting, of whose
assistance toward so pious and necessary a work, there is no reason to doubt.
And because it will be a business of some time and much consideration, to
enumerate and digest all such particulars as are necessary to be provided for,
and established by Law; therefore will it be requisite that this work should be
timely set about, that there may be sufficient leisure to deliberate and
consult about the due management of it.

2. More generally to all sorts of people; that they would lend their helping
hands to so good a work as this is. If this Centurion in the Text, in a state
of Heathenism, under his more dark apprehensions of Religion, was so forward in
these works of public bounty, much more then will it concern us that are
Christians not to be backward or defective in them. I might (if the time would
permit) press this with great variety of arguments; I shall mention only some
few.

1. It Is our duty to be bountiful and liberal upon all good occasions, and may
of right and justice be required of us. God is pleased indeed for the better
encouragement of men to these things to style them Gifts and Loans which he
engages himself to repay, but they are Rent and Tribute, and Debt; upon the due
payment of which we hold our Possessions, and upon the neglect or non-payment
we forfeit our right to them. He is the supreme Lord of all, we are but his
Tenants. As in the times of the Law men were to acknowledge his right and
dominion by the offering of sacrifice; so should they in these times of the
Gospel by their liberal contributions toward any good work, for with such
sacrifices God is well pleased. When there is any good occasion offered for our
bounty, that is the time for the paying of our Rent and Tribute, and God does
then require it of us.

2. It Is our interest, a thing which upon several accounts tends to our
advantage and benefit.

1. With respect to our safety: The bountiful man shall be delivered in the
time of trouble, preserved from his enemies, strengthened upon the bed of
languishment, Psalm. 41.1, 2, 3.

2. It Is a means to promote the interest of our estates: The liberal man
devises liberal things, and by liberal things shall he stand, Isa. 32.8. ( i.
e.) He shall by this means be established and improved in his estate. The
liberal soul shall be made fat, and he that waters shall be watered also
himself, Prove. 11.25. Such kinds of works are in the Scripture Phrase compared
to sowing, which is always in order to an harvest and increase, And he that
sows bountifully shall reap bountifully, 2 Cor. 9.6.

3. This will promote the interest of honor and esteem amongst others: A
bountiful man shall be had in everlasting remembrance, and his name shall be
exalted with honor, Psalm. 112.6, 9. Every one is a friend to a man of gifts,
Prove. 19.

4. This will be a means to render our prayers and other services acceptable,
and to entitle us to the Divine favor. It Is mentioned as an argument of Gods
designing mercy and kindness to his people, when they became duly affected at
his displeasure against them in the ruin of their Temple, and were willing to
engage in the repair of it, Psalm. 102.13, 14. Thou will arise and have mercy
upon Sion, for the time to favor her, yea the set time is come. For thy
servants take pleasure in her stones, and favor the dust thereof. That Psalm
is thought to be composed by Nehemiah, when he designed the repair of the
Temple; and he mentions this as a ground of hope that God would now at last be
favorable to his People, because they were affected with a sad resentment at
the ruins of the Temple, and a zeal for the repair of it. Where it is implied to
be a mournful spectacle to see the Temple of God lying in the dust, under decay
and ruin; and an argument of Gods favor to a People when he puts it into their
hearts to restore such ruins.

There are several things which men are apt to pretend as Excuses from such
kind of duties: As,

1. The fear of want for themselves; to this the Scripture answers, that such
as are bountiful shall not lack, Prove. 28:27.

2. They must lay up for their children: Why? he that is merciful, his seed
shall be blessed, Psalm. 37.15.

3. But they are but of a mean condition, being put to labor hard for a poor
living. Neither should this exempt men from works of Charity. The Apostle
exhorts men to labor with their hands for this reason, that they may be able
to give to such as need, Ephesians. 4.28. This indeed will alter the case as to the
measure of such men's bounty, but will not totally excuse them from it. Exodus 35.
Goats hair, and Badgers skins, were heretofore esteemed a suitable gift for
the poor of the people. A brother of low degree may be allowed to give (...), 2
Cor. 9.6.
sparingly; and a mite shall be accepted from a poor widow. But those who are
rich in this world, should be rich in good works also, such were to bestow
purple and gold, and jewels. And in this sense is that Scripture to be
fulfilled, that to whom much is given, of them much shall be required. There
being no kind of cavil or exception apt to rise up in the hearts of men against
this duty, but the Scripture does in several places purposely obviate and
answer it.

I have only this one word to add, That we must all of us shortly die, and
after a few days are past, must go to the place whence we shall not return. And
when we come to lie upon our deathbeds, then the remembrance of our pious
bounty and charity, and of the good deeds we have done for the House of our
God, will minister more comfort to our minds than all the vast Treasures that
we can leave behind us upon Earth. Which consideration were enough to persuade
any one to this duty, who is but serious in Religion, and does in good earnest
believe what he professes.

The Twelfth Sermon.
PROVE. XXV.15. -- A soft tongue breaks the bone.


THE Book of the Proverbs is a Miscellany of Sentences full of various and
profound wisdom; such ruling Sentences, (...) as are fit to have a special
authority over a man in the guidance of his affairs. They concern all kind of
matters, the customs, vices, humors of men, the various businesses and
conditions of life. Quicquid agunt homines, votum, timor, ira, voluptas;
Gaudia, discursus.

And because there is no greater evidence of wisdom (which is the thing here
professed to be taught) than the due regulating of our words and speeches,
therefore is there no other subject which the Wiseman does more frequently
insist upon than this. And it is one of his Proverbs of this kind that I have
now made choice to treat of.

Amongst the many other Rules and Qualifications to be observed in the
government of our Words, that of mildness or meekness, both as to the matter
and manner of them is one of the most considerable.

And there is a special elegance in the Text to this purpose; it is one of those
Proverbs that does consist both of Similitudes and Antitheses or oppositions,
every word in it is figurative and metaphorical. The reducing of them to their
plain and natural significations will sufficiently unfold the meaning of them,
and may serve for Explication.

1. By Tongue we are to understand the speech or discourse, by a Metonymy of
the cause for the effect.

2. By the softness of it, is meant that kind of disposition which is
answerable to tenderness and yieldingness amongst tactile qualities, when a
thing does not resist the touch, so as to be offensive to it, but does rather
gently yield and give place to it. It Is styled elsewhere by the name of
smoothness, and compared to butter and oil, Psalm. 55.21.

It may comprehend under it these four general Virtues.

1. Meekness, (...), 1 Pet. 3.15. Be ready to answer every one with meekness
and reverence; which is that virtue whereby we are to restrain the anger of our
words.

2. Gentleness, (...), moderation, candor, Tit. 3.2. Speak evil of no man, be
no brawlers but gentle; whereby we relax from the highest extremity of things,
and do abate of saying the utmost we might.

3. Courteousness or affability, (...), 1 Pet. 3.8. Be courteous, not rendering
evil for evil, or reviling for reviling, etc. (...), qui sapit amica: When a
man endeavors to speak things benign and grateful, in whom there is a facility
or accommodateness for humane converse.

4. Kindness, Prove. 31.26. the Law of Kindness is said to be in the tongue of a
virtuous person. The original word is (...) which signifies properly benignity,
mercifulness, benevolence. The saying or doing more in the behalf of others,
than in strictness we are obliged unto.

These are the several Virtues comprehended under the metaphor of a soft tongue.

The Opposites to it are described in Scripture by these other expressions,

1. Hardness, in opposition to softness, 1 King. 12.13. it is said that Rehoboam
answered the people hardly, as it is properly rendered in the Margent, in the
Original (...) in the Septuagint (...), the same Greek word that in the 15 th
verse by St. Jude is translated hard speeches; it denotes properly things that
are harsh, stiff, rigorous; it is the same Hebrew word with that which is
rendered churlishness, 1 Samuel 25.3. Nabal is there said to be an evil and
churlish person, a difficult intractable man, such as no art or industry could
make pliable, or manage to any good purpose, as may be easily guessed by the
manner of that answer which he returned to David's messengers.

2. Roughness in opposition to smoothness, Prove. 18.23. The poor uses
entreaties, but the rich answers roughly. (...) fortia, robusta, sava,
boisterousness, imperiousness, that which is opposite to the meekness of
obsecrations and entreaties.

3. Sharpness, under the comparison of swords and arrows, and stings, and
razors, that which is apt to pierce and wound men, instead of that opposite
quality of Healing, which there should be in a virtuous tongue.

4. Bitterness, we read, Ps. 64.3. of bitter words; and cursing is styled
bitterness, Iam. 3.10, 11. and Romans 3.11. they are both put together as being
synonymous, whose mouth is full of cursing and bitterness. Amongst other kinds
of evil speaking, the Apostle reckons bitterness and wrath, and anger, which
are prohibited, Ephesians. 4.31. it is styled by this name, because it has such a
kind of effect upon the mind of others as this quality of bitterness has upon
the palate to constringe and nauseate it. For the ear tastes words as the
mouth tastes meats.

5. Clamor, (...), noise, loudness; which is likewise forbidden in that
forecited place, Ephesians. 4.31. because it is usually an indication of some such
eager passions as do not become a sober and prudent man, and are not suitable
to the spirit of Christianity.

6. Brawling, Tit. 3.2. to speak evil of no man, to be no brawlers, (...); it
signifies a verbal pugnacity, an aptness to wrangle and contend in words, to
smite with the tongue.

And so much shall serve for explication of the Metaphor of softness, together
with the opposites to it.

3. By the word bone, is meant that kind of hardness which is opposite to this
softness, that is, surly, fierce, untractable passions or dispositions; or else
such with whom, by reason of their place and distance, it is difficult for a man
to prevail, as is implied in the former part of the verse, By long forbearing
is a Prince persuaded.

4. By breaking is meant persuading (as in the forecited clause) pacifying,
convincing, appeasing, prevailing with. In brief, it signifies the subduing and
taking away the proper effect of hardness, which is to resist and oppose any
thing that it meets with. Now things that are hard are not usually broken, but
by such bodies as are more hard than they; so that herein lies the proper
elegance of the Text, that the tongue, which is a fleshy, tender and weak part,
should by the softness of it, be able to break that which is the hardest of all
the rest, the bones; and yet so it is that a meek and gentle way of discourse
is the most effectual means to overcome the fiercest passions, and most
obdurate cruel dispositions. And that is the true sense of the words stripped off
their Metaphors; and it is the Proposition I intend to prosecute.

There are several other Scriptures to this purpose, Prove. 15.1. A soft answer
turns away wrath. By wrath is meant the height and intention of anger; a soft
answer is prescribed as the best way to divert and appease it: Be ready always
to give an answer with meekness and reverence, 1 Pet. 3.15. and then it follows
in the next verse, That those who speak evil of you, and accuse you, may be
ashamed. A calm and gentle way in vindicating our selves is the most effectual
means to work confusion in such as would calumniate and reproach us. 'Twas St.
Paul's advised this, 2 Timothy 2.25. In meekness instructing those that oppose
themselves, (...), though they be such as set themselves against us. And his
practice was accordingly. Euodias and Syntiche were two women in the Church of
Philippi, who (it should seem) were at variance betwixt themselves, St. Paul
might have made use of his Apostolical authority to have stated the difference,
and to have rebuked the offending party; but he rather chooses this more
effectual way of entreaty; and perhaps they were both in fault: I beseech
Euodias, and I beseech Syntiche, that they be of the same mind in the Lord,
Phil. 4.2. But the great power and efficacy of this will better appear, by the
several instances and examples to this purpose recorded in Scripture.

Genesis 32. we have a story of Esau's meeting his brother Jacob; Esau was a rough
man as well in his inward disposition, as his outward behavior and way of
living, and it is probable by his bringing four hundred men with him, that he
came with a purpose of being revenged, and killing his brother Jacob, according
to his former resolution, Genesis 27.41. but those mild and humble expressions of
Jacob in styling him Lord, and himself a Servant; that message he sent by the
men who were to convey the droves, ver. 20. Behold thy servant Jacob is behind
us, for he said I will appease him with a present, and afterward I will see
his face, peradventure he will accept of me. These speeches did so soften the
rugged and inflexible disposition of Esau, that instead of taking revenge he
offers his brother kindness.

Judge. 8.1. when the men of Ephraim did enter into a high contest with Gideon,
and did chide with him sharply, as the Text has it, he did by his mild and
gentle answer, allay their heat: Is not the gleaning of the grapes of Ephraim
better than the vintage of Abiezer? then their anger was abated toward him,
when he said that, v. 3.

1 Samuel 1. Old Eli, who was mild more than enough toward his wicked Sons, yet
very severe in his censuring of Hannah, when he tells her she was drunk, v. 14.
she might have replied that he wronged her, and that she was no more drunk than
himself; but she rather chooses to answer, Not so my Lord, I am a woman of a
sorrowful spirit, I have drunk neither wine nor strong drink, but have poured
out my soul before the Lord; count not thy handmaid for a daughter of Belial,
ver. 15, 16. Upon this mild answer of hers, the old Prophet saw himself
mistaken, and for his rebuking he now blesses her, Go in peace, and the God of
Israel grant thee thy petition, v. 17.

What a kind of temper Saul was of, how full of passion and fierceness and
cruelty does appear by several instances; what an enmity he had against David,
with what ardor and impatience he did desire his ruin, may likewise be evident
from his secret underminings, and his open pursuit of him; and yet this harsh
and cruel disposition of his, is strangely wrought upon by the mild and humble
carriage of David. When he had cut off the skirt of his garment, 1 Samuel 24. and
thereby testified his fidelity to him, in that he had refused an opportunity of
hurting him, when it was in his power; styling him, My Lord and my Father, the
Lords Anointed, the King of Israel, in comparison to whom himself was but as a
dead dog, or a flea, v. 14. It Is said this did immediately so melt and dissolve
that stony heart of Saul, that he lift up his voice and wept, Animum sanguinis
and caedis sitientem repent ad lamenta and ejulatus compulit, Chrysostom.
says one of the Fathers: Whereas before he thirsted for nothing so much as
blood and slaughter, now he is so effectually wrought upon by this mildness as
to break out into tears of kindness and pity. And now he returns him a gentle
answer, Is it thy voice my son David, v. 16. Whom before he prosecuted as his
chiefest enemy, now he acknowledges for a Son, and commits to him (as if he
were his dearest friend) the care of his posterity. V. 21. Swear now therefore
unto me, that thou will not cut off my seed after me, nor destroy my name out
of my Fathers house.

1 Samuel 25. There is another pregnant example to this purpose. When David was
in a great chafe and fury against Nabal, and in the heat of his passion had
taken an Oath to kill all that belonged to him, v. 22. for that churlish and
taunting answer returned by his Messengers; then does Abigal by her soft and
gentle speeches mollify and allay this passion, she fell at his feet and said,
Let thy handmaid I pray thee speak in thine audience. v. 24. She acknowledges
the fault, that he had deserved better from Nabal; beseeches his pardon, and
tells him, that it will hereafter be no grief or offense of heart unto my Lord,
that thou have not shed blood causeless, or avenged thy self. V. 31. By which
she presently reduced him to a coolness and temper, made him gentle as a Lamb,
who was before fierce as a Lion. When our Savior called the Caananitish Woman
Dog: Matthew. 15.
We know how her humble and gentle answer prevailed with him, for the success
of her petition.

And it may be pertinent to this purpose, though it be in a Parable, what we
read Matthew. 18.23. of a certain King who called his Servants to an account, and
finding that one of them owed him ten thousand Talents, commanded him to be
sold with his Wife and Children and all that he had, who thereupon fell down
and worshipped him, saying, Lord have patience with we and I will pay thee all.
Ye know the issue of this humble demeanor? it is said, His Lord was moved with
compassion toward him, and forgave him his debt, v. 27.

Thus much shall serve for Scripture Testimonies and examples to this purpose.
I proceed to the further confirmation of this truth by two Reasons.

1. From the nature of these fierce passions, and this obduracy or hardness of
temper, which are increased by opposition, and consequently must be abated by
gentleness and yielding. The collision of two bodies that are hard, will be apt
to strike fire betwixt them, which cannot be done when one of them is soft.
Wrath is oftentimes compared to fire; now the way to extinguish fire is not by
blowing it, or adding fuel to it, but rather by withdrawing that by which it
is supplied: And it was a wise saying of the Son of Sirach, Ecclesiasticus 8.3.
He that striveth with a man of tongue, heaps wood upon his fire; and again
chap. 28.12. If thou blow the spark it shall burn, if thou spit upon it, it
shall be quenched, and both these come out of the mouth: i. e. such words may
be spoken as may either inflame the anger of others, or extinguish it; and of
what kind these must be, may be easily known by what I have been discoursing. I
appeal to every man's experience; did you ever know any man convinced or
converted by this wrathful boistrous way? does it not rather alienate men's
minds, and set them at a further distance? true indeed, it may be a means to
fright some meaner timorous spirits to a seeming feigned compliance, to make
them disguise their enmity, but it will never work them over to a hearty
conviction, and make them true friends. With what reason can any man expect
those counsels should be effectual, which are delivered in such a way as to
argue a hatred and contempt of the persons whom we would persuade. Though a man
be supposed to have the truth on his side, and should be able to urge very
cogent and strong arguments for the proof of it; yet if they should be pressed
with scorn and harshness and bitterness, the reason of them will not so much
enforce, as the passion of them will weaken and disparage them: It will
undoubtedly be the most effectual way to put hard arguments into soft words.

2. From the nature of Lenity and gentleness, whose property it is to insinuate
it self into the hardest things. It Is compared to Oil, which will penetrate
and supple more than any other liquor. He that goes about to convince and
persuade another, if he does so manage it that it may appear he intends
kindness to the person whom he would prevail upon, that he has a love for him,
and does heartily desire his welfare, his work is half done. That prophecy
Psalm. 45.4. Ride on prosperously because of the word of truth and meekness,
does refer to the Doctrine of the Gospel, and the Kingdom of Christ, which by
the meekness of its professors, was first propagated and became triumphant,
through the Heathen World. The true nature of things may be more clearly
distinguished, when there are no mists or clouds stirred up by the heat of
contention. Many differences might be half reconciled, if they were but mildly
debated. It was not perhaps without some mystery, that Noah's dove brought an
Olive branch in her mouth, to show the mutual dependence betwixt these two,
mildness and peace. It Is the end of anger to bring men to a sense of their
fault, or be revenged upon them for it; now a meek submission is one way of
satisfying this end. Besides, that mild and gentle carriage will discover the
weakness and deformity of rage and fierceness, and in that respect may be a
means to break it in others.

This expression in the Text concerning the hardest things being broken by the
softest, may perhaps contain in it an allusion to that ordinary experiment of
breaking of Flint upon a Pillow, and a Sword upon a Feather-bed; when the
concussion of a blow is more equally dispersed into all the parts of the body
so as to operate upon the weakest. It is Hippocrates his counsel, that a
Physician should always be provided with (...), Lenitives, gentle mollifying
applications, as being of frequent use and great efficacy; and they are so no
less to the minds and passions of men, than to their bodily diseases.

Before I come to the Application of this Point, there are these three
Questions to be spoken unto for the clearer stating of it, How this Doctrine
may consist with 1. Those Imprecations, 2. Those severe Increpations, 3. The
duty of zeal and reproving.


1. For the Imprecations and Curses. We have frequent example of these in
Scripture, Obj.
not only against sin in general, as those pronounced in Mount Ebal; but
likewise against particular persons. They are frequent in the Psalms, and
especially that 109. Psalm; and in the New Testament likewise, St. Peter to
Simon Magus, Acts 8.20. Thy Money perish with thee. St. Paul to Elymas, Acts
13.10. and elsewhere to Alexander the Copper-smith. 2 Timothy 4.14. and he wishes
they were cut off that trouble the Church. Gal. 5.12. Besides the many woes
which are denounced by our Savior himself against the Scribes and Pharisees.
Now the Question is, How these examples may consist with this Doctrine
concerning soft words?

To this several things may be said by way of Answer and Solution, Ans.
which the time will not permit me to insist upon, I shall only mention these
few.

1. Diverse of these Imprecations in Scripture, though they are pronounced
optatively, yet are they to be understood declaratively, as being declarations
of the true state and condition of such persons. They are Verba praedicentium,
non vota imprecantium, as St. Austin speaks. The Hebrew Phrase in those places
which are rendered as Imprecations, being as well capable of the Indicative
future, as the Imperative Mood and sense.

2. Those who used these Imprecations, were such as were extraordinary Persons,
endowed with the Spirit of discerning, whereby they were enabled to judge of
the incurable state of those with whom they conversed. There are some that are
cursed Children, as the Apostle speaks, 2 Pet. 2.14. (...), filii
maledictionis, execrandi homines, and to such curses are reserved as their due
portion: And therefore no wonder though such as had an extraordinary Spirit of
discerning their true state do use imprecations against them, which yet can be
no warrant for other persons to imitate. As none but the Magistrate may use the
Sword for revenge, because of his public station and calling, whereby he is
authorized for it; so none but extraordinary Prophetical men should use these
maledictions. If others shall presume upon it because of their example, they
will justly fall under the rebuke of our Savior, Luke 9.55. You know not what
Spirit ye are of. The ordinary rule prescribed for men's practice, is that of
Matthew. 5.44. Romans 12.14. Bless I say and curse not.

3. We are to consider the motive or affection, upon which such imprecations as
we read of have proceeded; which were not carnal, or rash anger or desire of
revenge in reference to any particular hurt or injury against themselves, the
usual occasions of them in other men; but Spiritual and Divine, respecting the
interest and cause of God and zeal for his glory. In our own cases we are
taught to be patient and long suffering, praying for our persecutors.

4. The wishing of evil directly to any under the notion of evil, must needs be
malice, and can never be lawful; Not but that it is lawful to pray for such
things as by way of consequence will necessarily imply a blasting and kind of
malediction upon the attempts of others, which is no way inconsistent with the
true happiness of their persons. The wishing of such kind of temporal evils, as
tend to the preventing of greater evils, or else are to be inflicted by way of
correction and vindicating of Divine Justice, are not opposite to the rules of
Charity. It Is lawful for us to wish conditionally some temporal evils upon our
selves by way of correction and restraint from sin, that God would rather
afflict us than suffer sin upon us; and consequently we may wish the same to
others, the love of our selves being the rule and measure of our love to
others. Of this nature was that petition Psalm. 83.16. Fill their faces with
shame O Lord, that they may seek thy name. This is not to pray against them but
for them. We may likewise pray against the unjust actions and attempts of our
enemies. Acts 4.29. And now O Lord! behold their threatenings, but not against
their persons. Mr. Perkins speaking concerning this Question, in his Cases of
Conscience, concludes it to be unlawful for a man to pray against the person of
the Pope, though he should believe him to be the Antichrist, but only against
his Antichristian state and regiment, whereby he sets himself against the
Kingdom of Christ. As for the imprecations of David that are sometimes repeated
out of the Psalms, they are by us to be used, either as the Historical part of
Scripture, or else as being directed against the kingdom of sin in general, and
the obdurate implacable enemies of God; or as being a kind of Prophecies,
wherein the punishment and revenge of such is foretold.

2. Obj.
2. How may this Doctrine of mild and soft words consist with those severe
Increpations in Scripture. Does not our Savior call the Pharisees, Serpents,
and generation of vipers, Mat. 23.33? and Herod by the name of Fox, Luke 13.32?
Does not the Apostle style some among the Philippians, dogs, Phil. 3.2? Beware
of dogs; and the Galatians, Fools, 3.1?

Answ.
To this it may be said, 1. That such Prophetical men as have an extraordinary
spirit of discerning, whereby they are able to judge the true state of others,
may use such hard words toward them, which it may not be lawful for others to
imitate, as was said before concerning imprecations. 2. Those that are in a
public station or in such a superior relation to us, as does authorize them to
correct and punish us, may likewise chide and reprehend us with severity; but
not such as are of a private condition, or have no superiority over us.

3. How may this consist with the duties of zeal and reproving, 3. Obj.
which ought sometimes to be done with severity, Rebuke them sharply. He that
says, Be angry and sin not, does seem to suppose that a man may sometimes sin
in not being angry, when by his sinful silence and lenity, he either really
does, or else seems to consent unto, and be partaker with others in their
offenses?

To this it may be said, Answ.
that it is not the nature of these things to oppose, but to regulate one
another. We read, Iam. 3.13. of meekness of wisdom, that is, such a wise
mildness as will direct a man how to order his zeal and rebukes, both as to the
degrees, objects, occasions and manner of expressing them. That Is a bottomless
boundless charity and severity which extends alike to all persons and offenses.
Let the proper objects of these be duly distinguished, and these graces may
very well consist together and be subservient to one another. When the matter
we are to speak to, does require any special indignation, it should appear to
proceed from the zeal of a displeased friend, rather than the bitterness of a
provoked enemy. It should seem to argue too much levity, for men to accustom
themselves to an Ironical and jeering way of rebuking others; nor is it so
suitable to that awful reverence which men should be affected with in the
discharge of their Ministerial employments. And it will be too much rashness to
check men in a passionate revengeful manner.

Appl.
For the Application of what has been said, I would infer these few Corollaries.

1. If soft words be of such a prevailing efficacy upon men, above such as are
wrathful and harsh, then soft and gentle Actions must be so too. Words being of
no other force than as they denote our inward thoughts or outward actions. We
read Hos. 11.4. of the bands of a man, and the cords of love; implying, that to
such as have not put off the nature of Humanity, there can be no such powerful
obligation as that of kindness.

2. The folly and sinfulness of hard speeches, to which may be reduced cursing,
reviling, upbraiding, scoffing or taunting, brawling, masterliness, or
imperiousness of speech, ostentation, scorning, churlishness and roughness, or
any other the like dispositions, whereby others may be provoked to anger and
offense; which will not become any man that pretends to Christianity in his
ordinary converse, much less Ministers, and least of all in the discharge of
this solemn duty. Nugae in ore sacerdotis sunt blasphemiae.

3. The lawfulnese and fitness of giving men the reverence and honor in
respect of their proper Titles, just praise and other civil respects, belonging
to their places and degrees. Against that melancholic generation of men, of
late risen up amongst us, who place so much of their Religion in being
unmannerly; than which nothing is more disagreeable to the light of nature, or
to the precepts and practice of Scripture. The Apostle exhorts, Romans 13.7. that
we should render to all their due, fear to whom fear, and honor to whom honor
is due. And 1 Pet. 2.17. We are enjoined to honor all men, that is, to give
every man that due esteem, both in our carriage and words, which according to
the rules of justice or charity, may belong unto him in respect of his place or
abilities, or condition. The compellations of Lord and Father are frequently
used in the Old Testament, by way of civil respect to those in a superior
condition. Paul and Silas did not give any check to the Iaylour, Act. 16.30.
when he styled them (...), Sirs, Masters or Lords* St. Luke uses the Title of
most excellent Theophilus, Luke 1.3. When St. Paul was to speak publicly for
himself before a Civil Judicature, he does with all imaginable softness
insinuate himself into the good liking of his Judges, by acknowledging his own
happiness, in that he was to plead before a Person so learned and expert in all
the Customs and Questions among the Jews as King Agrippa was, Act. 26. and
afterward when he was interrupted in his speech by Festus, by that rugged and
reproachful passage, in telling him he was mad; He makes a soft and submissive
answer to him, I am not mad most noble Festus.

As for that Objection, Mat. 23.8, 9. Call no man Father upon earth, neither be
ye called Masters. This cannot refer to those Titles of respect, which concern
Natural or Civil Relations, because these words were afterward frequently used
by the Apostles in this sense; but they must refer to that signification of the
words, wherein they were given to the leading men of the Pharisees, whose
dictates and Traditions were to be received without any examination or dispute,
as if they had a masterly or paternal power over the faith of men, and in this
sense God only is our Father or Master.

3. For the Reprehension of such as are apt to be transported unto bitter and
provoking words. This is very unmanly, as being against the rules of Morality,
and very unchristian, against the precepts of the Gospel. Though others should
begin with us by provoking language, yet 'twill not be proper for us to return
the like, this were to draw the saw of contention, which must needs make a very
harsh ungrateful noise to any sober hearers. 'Twere more noble to yield to our
adversary in this kind, than to subdue him; whereas if you do not give place to
him, you must give place to anger, and that is to give place to the Devil. That
whereby men use to cover and excuse their infirmities in this kind, Ephesians.
4.26, 27.
is the pretense that it is the sins of others by which they are provoked to
use so much sharpness to them; and against sin men ought to be zealously angry.

There are two Considerations I would suggest to such: 1. Have you any zeal
against your own sins, do they fasten upon your thoughts with any displeasure
and trouble proportionably to the injuries you suffer from men. To pretend that
your zeal is against the sins of others, when you have little sense of your own
must needs be hypocrisy. 2. If it be a sense of the sin and fault of others
that you are so affected with, then you will be willing to use the most
effectual way for the redressing of it, which is by such kind of reproofs as
proceed from love, not anger or revenge, such as may convince not exasperate.
Let it be supposed that the thing you contend for is truth, yet you must (...),
follow the truth in love. If one man may be fierce and severe because he is in
the right, why then another man that does but think himself so, will be so too;
and at this rate, what would become of peace and society amongst men?

4. I proceed to a word of Exhortation, to persuade us unto that kind of
softness and lenity in our speeches, which is here commended.

1. From the sinfulness, danger, mischief of the contrary disposition in a
threefold regard.

1. As to the effect of it. It Is quite opposite to the other. As a soft tongue
breaks the bone, so an hard tongue will be so far from breaking that which is
hard, nay or so much as that which is soft, that it will rather render it more
obdurate. Prove. 15 1.
Grievous words will stir up anger, even amongst men of gentle and peaceable
dispositions. David was a man of a meek and humble spirit, and yet what
transport of fury was he under upon the churlish answer of Nabal. And though at
another time when his spirit was low and he was under great affliction, he did
with another kind of temper endure the revilings of Shimei; yet that made an
impression upon him afterward; and his followers were under no little
indignation upon it, as may appear by that speech of Abisha, Why should this
dead dog curse my Lord the King, let me go over I pray thee, and take off his
head, ver. 9. When the people were assembled at the Coronation of Rehoboam, 1
King. 12.4.
professing their readiness to serve him, and beseeching him to make their yoke
lighter, upon his answering of them roughly, you know what a mischievous
consequence happened.

2. The Punishment belonging to it. There are many severe threats and judgments
denounced in Scripture against hard speeches. Psalm. 12.3. The Lord will cut off
the tongue that speaks proud things. Pride is the principle of this hardness,
as humility is of softness, Mat. 5.22. Whosoever shall say to his brother,
Racha, i. e. whosoever shall out of anger call him vain empty fellow, shall be
in danger of the Council, or the punishment of stoning; whosoever shall use any
more virulent opprobrious expressions, and call him fool, shall be in danger of
the Vivicomburium, to be burnt alive, ( i.e.) there shall hereafter at the last
judgment be such a kind of gradation in the punishment of these sins, as there
are for the most Capital offenses among men. One of the principal things that
men shall hereafter be condemned for, when the Lord comes with ten thousand of
his Saints to execute judgment, is their hard speeches, Jude 15.

3. It Is an indication of a rough and unhewen spirit, not reduced from its
natural ferity and savageness; not polished by education, not tamed and made
gentle for civil converse. A Fool will upbraid churlishly, Ecclus. 18.18. It Is
for a Nabal to use hard words. All kind of cruelty is commonly an argument of
cowardice. There is not usually a surer sign of an inveterate ill nature, than
the habit of sharp provoking speeches. Witness the Son of Sirach, Ecclus.
23.15. The man that is accustomed to opprobrious words, will never be reformed
all the days of his life. It Is the work of a Shimei and a Rabshekah to revile,
who upon that account are infamous to a Proverb. It Is observable that in the
distribution of the Tribes, betwixt mount Gerizim and mount Ebal, for the work
of blessing and cursing; those Tribes for the most part were appointed to stand
upon mount Ebal, who were the children of the bondwomen, less noble and
generous than the rest, and so the fitter for this harsh and servile work.

2. There are other motives to this purpose, to be derived from the benefit and
advantage of soft words, besides the efficacy and power of them.

1. They are of great Ornament; which should be a prevailing motive. Men
usually put an high value upon, and take great pains for those abilities which
will render their speech graceful and acceptable, to which nothing will
contribute more than this. Upon which account the Scripture styles it by this
name, that very Word which in one place is called kindness of the tongue, in
another place is rendered goodliness, Prove. 31.26.
Isa. 40.6. All flesh is grass, and the goodliness, etc. implying that nothing
is more comely and graceful than this.

2. Its suitableness to our profession, from the pattern set us by our Lord and
Master. Meekness was the grace of his lips; when he was reviled, he reviled not
again, when he suffered he threatened not, 1 Pet. 2.23. He was mild and gentle
toward his betrayers, accusers, condemners, crucifiers, As a sheep before his
shearer. And he has prescribed our imitation of him in this, as the surest way
to find rest for our souls, Mat. 11.29. It Is for dogs and swine to bark and
tear, and bite one another; Christians are, or should be, sheep and lambs.

In brief, it is a qualification this, that is usually an indication of wisdom
and greatness of mind, it is profitable to humane society, acceptable to God,
pleasing to men, advantageous to our quiet, honor, safety, and therefore upon
all these accounts may justly challenge our care and study.

I have been forced to run over some of these things but slightly, for fear of
being tedious. And Oh that what I have said might effectually prevail with men,
to lay aside all that bitterness and wrath, and evil speaking, which persons of
different persuasions have in all times, been prone to; that we might in this
kind unanimously join our hearts, and tongues and pens, to promote the public
peace and prosperity both of Church and State. What kind of importunities and
obsecrations should we not use toward one another for this end. But men can
but speak to the ear, it is God that must speak to the heart; let us beseech
him, the God of all patience and comfort, that he would bestow upon us soft
hearts, and soft tongues; that he would set a watch before our mouths, and keep
the door of our lips; that upon the experience we have had, of the mischief of
mutual exasperations, we may now every one of us apply our selves to the most
effectual means for composing the spirits of men, and healing their
differences, that laying aside all other provocations, we may make this our
business, to consider one another, to provoke unto love and good works.

The Thirteenth Sermon.
PHIL. IV.5. Let your moderation be known unto all men, the Lord is at hand.


THESE Words are among several other precepts and counsels which seem to have
no connection with one another, and therefore I shall handle them absolutely
without any reference to the Context.

And there are these three parts considerable in the words: 1. A Duty enjoined,
Moderation. 2. The extent or manner of its being exercised, it must be known
unto all men. 3. A reason or argument to enforce it, The Lord is at hand.


I have severed the Text into these parts for the more orderly explication of
the several Terms contained in it.

I. Concerning the virtue enjoined, your Moderation, (...). In the Original
it is an Adjective put Substantively, wherein there is a peculiar elegance and
Emphasis. The Syriac and Arabic render it mansuetudo, meekness. The Vulgar,
Arias Montanus, and others, modestia, modesty, a composedness of life and
manners. The Aethiopic, Autoritas vestra, your Authority; for which there seems
to be very little ground in the signification of the word. Others Humanitas:
Our old Translation did render it by the word Patience. And the same original
word is by our present Translation so rendered, 1 Timothy 3.3. Not given to filthy
lucre, but patient, (...)* sometimes it is translated clemency or courtesy,
Act. 24.4. sometimes gentleness, 2 Cor, 10.1. Titus 3.2. Iam. 3.17. 1 Pet. 2.18.

The Hebrews express the same notion by three words, derived from the root
(...). The one signifying rectitude, the other readiness to pardon, the other
Peace.

Aristot. Ethic. lib. 5. cap. 10.
The Philosopher in his Ethics, where he treats particularly of it, makes it to
be a species or branch of Justice, whereby we are directed and inclined to
supply that by right reason, which is not provided for in the words of the
written Law. Because it is not possible in the making of general Rules or Laws
to foresee all such particular cases and circumstances as may happen. Therefore
that habit whereby a man is enabled and inclined to deal according to the
equitable sense of the Law, and to allow for such particular circumstances as
may make a real difference in several Cases, this is styled (...) or equity,
which is a moral virtue placed betwixt the two extremes of (...) rigor, or
summum jus on the one hand, insisting too much upon the letter; and relaxatio
nimia, remitting too much from the true sense of it, on the other hand. Now
both these extremes, the excess and the defect being evidently vices, it must
thence necessarily follow, that the medium betwixt them must be a virtue, and
have in it the obligation of a duty.

So that he who in those things which the Lawgiver could not particularly
provide for does judge according to the equitable sense of the Law, is (...) an
equal Magistrate. And he who in such a case is willing to depart from his own
strict right, out of compliance with that meaning which the Legislator would in
such a case have particularly determined could he have foreseen it, is homo
aequus, as a private person.

But now besides this forinsecal notion of the word as it refers to positive
Laws, and the dispensation of justice, there may yet be another more general
sense of it, with relation to all kind of differences and contests amongst men,
whether in matters of Opinion or Interest; wherein they should demean
themselves toward one another with such a kind of temper as may be mutually
best for all, and may in the various changes and revolutions of things, most
promote the good of mankind. And so it is a virtue inclining us to such a kind
of benign and equitable temper in our conversing with one another, whereby we
may endeavor to preserve concord and amity in our treating concerning those
things about which we differ.

There are some virtues that go under several names, and yet are of the same
family and very near of kin, being differenced rather modally than
specifically, from the quality and condition of the person by whom they are to
be exercised. So the same virtue which in the generality of men we call
meekness and gentleness, this in superiors is styled* clemency, which is
lenitas superioris adversus inferiorem. Not that it has any different form or
act, but is only distinguished by the object toward whom it is exercised,
namely toward those of an inferior rank. And thus it is with this (...), which
is a kind of meekness, with this peculiar difference that it refers more
especially to matters of controversy, and does always incline to the most
amicable and gentle way in judging of and accommodating of things, and such a
prudent relaxation of the utmost rigor, as right reason shall direct according
to the variety of cases and circumstances.

And this I conceive to be the most proper notion of this word, according to
its true scope and extent. There are several other virtues of affinity to it,
being either fruits or concomitants of it, which I may have occasion to speak
of afterward.

II. The Second particular observed in the words, was the extent or manner of
this virtues being exercised, it must be known unto all men, which phrase may
signify three these things.

1. Those manifest and real proofs we are to give of this Virtue; which must be
such as may be seen and known unto all men. It must not only be internal as to
our temper and frame of mind, but external too in all our dealings and carriage
toward others.

2. That it be signal and eminent as to the degree of it, as being one of those
properties whereby Christians are to be distinguished from other Professions
and Sects of men in the world. Their light must so shine before men, that
others seeing their good works, may speak well of them. They must adorn the
doctrine they profess, by such a demeanor as may win over others to a love of
it.

3. That it be universal as to the extent of it, both in regard of the Acts,
Objects and Occasions of it, by showing equity and moderation in all
businesses, toward all persons, as well inferiors as superiors, the
unconverted Gentiles, and the contentious Jews; that neither of these may have
any just ground to accuse our good conversation. It Is no difficult matter for
men to be fair and kind, and moderate toward such as are of the same way, and
agree with them in the main. This is but a common and low attainment, and is
not thank-worthy, does not deserve any peculiar commendation. The rules of
Christianity do oblige to a greater extent of it, namely that it should be
toward all men.

III. The Third particular observed in the words is the reason or argument to
enforce this duty, The Lord is at hand, (...), prope, he is near. Which phrase
is capable of various senses. It may refer either,

1. To his presence with us, and knowledge of our actions. He always looks on,
and takes notice what our carriage and demeanor is; whether it be with that
gentleness and equity toward others, as his is toward us. He observes all our
ways, and therefore we had need to demean our selves as being under his eye.

2. Sometimes this phrase of Gods being near does refer to approaching
judgments. So the time of the destruction of Jerusalem is styled the coming of
the day of Christ, when he should execute temporal judgments upon his enemies.
Upon which account St. John styles that age by the name of (...), the last
hour, 1 Ioh. 2.18. So likewise is that place interpreted, Heb. 10.37. Ye have
need of patience, for yet a little while, (...), and he that shall come will
come and will not tarry. The scope of it being to comfort them that were ready
to fall off from Christianity, upon the persecution of the Jews, amongst whom
the Hebrew Christians lived.

3. He is near in respect of his coming to Judgment, and that in a twofold
respect.

1. In regard of every man's particular judgment at the time of his death. It Is
but a little while that we are to continue in this world, we must shortly die,
none of these lesser things are worth our eager contention. We should so demean
our selves at the present, as may bring us comfort at the last.

2. In respect of the general Judgment. That time cannot be far off, The end of
all things is at hand, 1 Pet. 4.7. He that shall come will come and will not
tarry. Rev. 1.3. and 22.10.
The Judge is at the door, Iam. 5.9. There are several passages in the New
Testament, which seem to intimate as if the Christians in the Apostles times
did expect that this day should come before the end of that generation. Which
St. Paul does caution them against, 2 These. 2.2. Be not soon shaken in mind or
troubled as if the day of Christ were at hand. So near at hand it was not. The
belief and expectation of that, as if this were the sense of those Prophecies
concerning it, might upon the disappointment of it, prove a temptation to
unbelief and Apostasy from the Christian faith: And therefore the Apostle
thinks fit to rectify that mistake and prevent the further progress of it. But
yet since no man knew when that day and hour would come, Christians ought
always to demean themselves as if it were at hand, and to live in a continual
expectation of that time when Christ shall come to judge the world and to
vindicate his Saints: When he shall render to every man according to his works,
to them who by a moderate demeanor of themselves, amidst the various
conditions of this life, and by a patient continuance in well-doing seek for
glory and honor, eternal life. But to them that are violent and contentious,
tribulation and anguish, Romans 2.7, 8. And therefore there is upon this account
very good reason why our moderation should be known unto all men.

The words thus explained will afford this Observation:

It Is the duty of Christians to give signal testimony of their equity and
moderation upon all occasions of difference and contest with one another: Not
to insist upon the utmost rigor of things, but to be ready to comply with all
such gentle and prudent expedients, as may help to heal and accommodate the
differences amongst them.

Though this word Moderation do but seldom occur in Scripture, being scarce any
where else used but here: yet that which is the substance and meaning of it, is
frequently commanded, and the contrary thereunto prohibited, under different
expressions in other places of Scripture. This some conceive to be the sense of
that place, Eccles. 7.7. Be not righteous over much, neither make thy self over
wise, why should thou destroy thy self. (i. e.) insist not upon the utmost
extremity of things, as if it were wisdom to take all the advantages you could
from the strict letter of the Law. This were the readiest way to destroy your
self by teaching other men to do the like against you; there being no safety
for any one, if every one must use another according to the utmost rigor.
Prove. 19.11. It is the glory of a man to pass over a transgression. Men may
think to get the repute of strictness and zeal by being rigid and severe
toward the failings of others: But it is a much more glorious thing to show
gentleness and forbearance toward them; It argues a man to have a noble and
generous mind, and a real sense of humanity.

There are several other expressions to this purpose in the New Testament. As
Ephesians. 4.1, 2. I beseech you that ye walk worthy of that vocation wherewith ye
are called, in all lowliness and meekness, with long suffering, forbearing one
another in love. v. 32. And be ye kind to one another, tender hearted,
forgiving one another, even as God for Christ's sake has forgiven you.

Phil. 2.3. Let nothing be done through strife or vain glory, but in lowliness
of mind let each esteem others better than themselves. v. 14.

Gentleness is reckoned as the fruit of the Spirit, Gal. 5.22. A mark of that
wisdom which is from above, Iam. 3.17. an inseparable property of the servant
of the Lord, who must not strive, but be gentle, showing all meekness to all
men, 2 Timothy 2.24.

Finally Brethren, have compassion one of another, be pitiful, be courteous,
not rendering evil for evil, or railing for railing, but contrariwise blessing,
1 Pet. 3.8, 9.

It were easy to back these precepts by several examples out of Scripture.
That of Abraham's carriage in the contest betwixt him and his Nephew Lot, who
for peace sake was willing to recede from his own right, and give him his
choice, that there might be no strife betwixt them, because they were brethren,
Genesis 13.8.

That of our Savior in his yielding ^o pay tribute for the avoiding of
offense, to which in strictness he was not obliged, Mat. 17.27. He was the
great ^xemplar as of all others, so particularly of this Christian grace. I
beseech you brethren by the meekness and gentleness of Christ, 2 Cor. 10.1.

St. Paul himself was as eminent for the practice of this duty, as for the
pressing of it upon others: In his becoming all things to all men, 1 Cor. 9.22.
and in pleasing all men in all things, not seeking his own profit, but the
profit of many, that they might be saved, 1 Cor. 10.33.

Suitable to this was that carriage of the Council of the Apostles, Act. 15. in
their not insisting upon the strict right of things, but accommodating those
Controversies of the Primitive times about the Jewish Rites, by such a Moderate
expedient, as might most effectually heal and compose those differences.

There are two kinds of Reasons by which I would confirm the necessity of this
duty. In respect of God and Man.

1. In respect of God.

1. He is at hand. 2. He deals so with us.
1. He is at hand; 1. Reas.
which is the Argument in the Text, He is near, being always about our paths,
and about our beds, he spies out all our goings. He observes our carriage, to
animadvert upon our failings, to assist and relieve us in our necessities, so
that we need not fear any prejudice from others upon this account. If they
shall from our Moderation be so much the more ready to injure us, He will be as
ready to vindicate and reward us. Psalm. 76.9. He will arise to judgment, to
save all the meek of the earth; here in this life. But besides, he is near in
respect of that final judgment and account he will call us unto at the last:

Either 1. Particular. 2. General.


1. Particular at every man's death, that time cannot be far off. When a few
days are come we must all go to the place whence we shall not return. Then all
other things will forsake us and vanish away, and nothing will be of any real
value to us, but the conscience of well-doing, which will go along with us, and
abide with us for ever. Men are here apt to put the greatest estimate upon
those things that concern their secular interests and advantages, whereas such
matters will be of little use to us then: And it is usually men's being immersed
in these lesser designs about some worldly selfish advantage that makes them
more eager and fierce about other matters of difference.

They that are of a narrow contracted soul in respect of their possessions,
have not usually any largeness or generosity of mind in reference to opinion.

2. He is at hand likewise in respect of his general judgment; when he will not
only judge the world in equity, as the Psalmist speaks, Psalm. 98.9. but for
their equity likewise; when there shall be a particular account required of men
for their works of Mercy, Kindness and Pity, and according as their carriage
has been in these respects here, so shall their condition be hereafter; when
there shall be special notice taken of men's severe and rigorous demeanor in
beating and insulting over their fellow servants. How can such persons answer
it then, when they shall expect mercy for themselves, and yet have not been
ready to show it to others? God has told us that he will not forgive us here,
without this readiness to forgive our brethren; and therefore we have no reason
to expect it from him hereafter.

2. Which brings me to the second branch of this first Reason, we should deal
so with others because God deals so with us. He is kind to the unthankful and
the evil. Be ye therefore merciful as your heavenly Father is merciful: It Is
our Saviors inference, Luke 6.36. It were not possible that the world should
subsist one moment, if it were not that his mercy did moderate the rigor of
his justice. If he should be severe to mark what is done amiss, who might abide
it? Every minute we deserve hell, and might expect to be cast into it. It is
because his compassions fail not, that we are not consumed. He considers what
we are able to do and to suffer; He knows our frame and remembers that we are
but dust; He chastises us with the rod of a man; and does never grieve
willingly or afflict the children of men: And all this he does upon this very
ground, that we might from hence learn to deal so with others. The less gentle
and moderate we are in our dealings with others, by so much the less sense have
we of the guilt and danger of our own sins, and the less experience of Gods
love and mercy in the pardon of them.

That Is a remarkable Parable to this purpose, Mat. 18.23. concerning the
Servant who being indebted to his Lord ten thousand Talents, was yet forgiven
out of great compassion. After which he did notwithstanding rigorously exact
from his fellow servants an hundred pence. You know what sentence was passed
upon him for it, Serve nequam, v. 32. O thou wicked servant, I forgive thee all
thy debt, should thou not also have had compassion on thy fellow servant,
even as I had pity on thee? And his Lord was wroth and delivered him to the
tormentors. So likewise shall my heavenly Father do unto you, if ye from your
hearts forgive not every one his brother their trespasses. 2. Reas.


The second kind of Reasons which I proposed for the enforcing of this Duty was
in respect of men, with reference to whom this virtue of Moderation will appear
to be a thing,

I. Most reasonable and fitting in it self, considering the Fallibility of
humane judgment. Mutability of humane affairs.


II. Most beneficial and advantageous for the good of men, both in regard of
Our own private welfare. The good of humane Societies in general.


I. It Is a thing most reasonable and fitting in it self, because of the
Fallibility of humane judgment: And that not only from the impotence of our
faculties, and the prejudices we are liable unto upon the account of interests,
which will strangely biass a man's judgment against clear evidence: But likewise
from the difficulty and obscurity of things; there being (...) everywhere, not
only in Nature and Scripture, but likewise in Political things, and the
ordinary concernments of humane affairs, whether matters of Right, or of Fact:
the most learned and inquisitive men many times differing in their judgments
concerning matters of Right: and as for matters of Story and Fact that are
variously reported, if a man has not been an eyewitness of them himself, it
cannot be but that he must give credit to them according to that esteem and
opinion which he has of the persons by whom they are related. All which put
together show how exceeding difficult and next to impossible it is, that men
should ever agree in the same apprehension of things. There is no considering
man who has with any serious thoughts reflected upon the common state and
condition of mankind in this respect but must needs own and acknowledge the
truth of that Saying, Pauci res ipsas sequuntur, plures nomina rerum, plurimi
nomina Magistrorum.

The generality of men being carried away by the Names of Leaders and Parties,
taking up opinions by the bulk and in the gross, as they are owned and
professed by that Party of men amongst whom they are listed.

Many are swayed by the prejudice of the Names of things either for or against
a thing. If an opinion or a design do but pretend to such a Name, they do
accordingly either receive or reject it, without examining how far it does
really promote or prejudice the thing they aim at.

And as for the Nature of things in themselves, there are but few, very few,
who set themselves to any serious impartial inquiry concerning them.

Now I say, he that considers the manifold mistakes which the judgments of men
are liable unto upon these accounts, he must, unless he will go out of the
world (as the Apostle speaks upon another occasion) demean himself toward
others, with this tenderness and moderation as to the things about which they
differ.

2. From the mutability of Humane affairs, which in their most secure and
flourishing estate are subject to revolutions: It being beyond the contrivance
of humane wisdom, to establish things unto such a fixedness as shall exempt
them from change; but many times those very courses which wise men take for the
settling and securing of things, and which may in themselves have a natural
aptitude to that purpose, are by the Providence of God made use of as the means
and occasions of trouble and change: Ludit in humanis divina potentia rebus. He
that has not yet learnt this lesson upon the experience of all those various
revolutions we have seen in these latter Times may deserve to be taught it, as
Gideon taught the men of Succoth with briars and thorns, Judge. 8.16.

Nothing is more obvious to any observing man than this, That when revolutions
have happened men make this their security and refuge, that they have in the
former state of things demeaned themselves with moderation, and have by many
kindnesses and civilities obliged such as differed from them. And this, if any
thing can, redounds to their advantage afterward, especially if they have to
do with such as have any true greatness or generosity of mind. Indeed if there
were any certain way to fix the state of things unto such an immutable
stability as could not alter, it would upon that account be more excusable for
a man to act with an uniform vigor and severity against every one that
differed. But supposing the mere possibility of change, nothing can be more
irrational than to demean our selves so toward others with that harshness and
severity as to render our selves incapable of receiving any kindness from them.
I do not speak this out of any compliance with that Machiavilian principle
which directs a man to engage no further in any good cause than he can safely
retreat. Every worthy man should with fidelity and courage assert the cause he
is well persuaded of; But it should be without all kind of fierceness and
bitterness against the persons of others, with as much forbearance and
gentleness as the nature of the thing will bear.

Considering that continual mutability which every condition is liable unto,
and which no humane wisdom can foresee and prevent, that kind of demeanor is
most rational, which may be most beneficial and safe as to our own particulars,
and mutually best for all others. Which brings me to the other Branch of this
second Reason.

II. This virtue is most advantageous for the good of men.

1. In regard of every man's private quiet and welfare in particular. It will
help to establish a man's title to these earthly things both with reference to
His Possession of them. His Fruition of them.
Psalm. 37.11. The meek shall inherit the earth, and shall delight themselves in
the abundance of peace. Which is afterward repeated by our Savior, Mat. 5.5.
and again in another place, Learn of me for I am meek and lowly, and ye shall
find rest for your souls, Mat. 11.29. The most effectual means to attain unto a
quiet state of life with others, is to carry our selves gently and kindly to
them, v. 7. of this Chapter, And the peace of God which passes all
understanding shall keep your hearts and minds through Christ Jesus, 1 Pet.
3.10. The Apostle having exhorted them to be pitiful and courteous, not
rendering evil for evil, or railing for railing, but contrariwise blessing, he
presently subjoins, he that will love life and see good days, let him keep his
tongue from evil, let him seek peace and ensue it. And then presently after,
Who is he that will harm you if you be followers of that which is good? No such
way to render our lives quiet, comfortable and safe, as to demean our selves
with candor and ingenuity toward those with whom we converse: And that not
only in respect of the effects and consequences of such carriage, but from the
nature of the thing it self; it supposes a calm and sedate temper of mind.
Whereas on the other side, that eagerness and fierceness of disposition,
whereby a man is apt to be transported with heats and severity in matters of
contest, as it does suppose such aestuations and storms as are inconsistent
with inward serenity, so likewise will it occasion outward trouble and
opposition from others. They who are always biting of others, will be in
continual danger of being devoured by others, Gal. 5.15. Those two qualities of
hateful and hating one another, are joined together as usual concomitants, Tit.
3.3. they who are apt to demean themselves as hating of others, will thereby be
rendered hateful to them.

2. This virtue will be very advantageous to the peace and welfare of humane
society in the general, which does very much depend upon the mutual
condescension and forbearance of men toward one another, in the things about
which they differ: It being utterly impossible, considering the infirmity and
prejudice to which our judgments are liable, that we should always agree in the
same apprehension of things. If upon every difference men should think
themselves obliged to prosecute matters to the utmost height and rigor, such
eager persons may easily from hence be induced to have recourse to Arms rather
than such precious things as truth and justice shall suffer; and being once
thus engaged, it will be impossible (if they will act consistently) to end
their differences by any accommodation, they must fight it out to the last till
one side be wholly subdued and destroyed. And thus would men grow wild and
savage, the benefits of Society would be lost, and mankind destroyed out of the
world.

It Is this moderation and calmness of spirit which takes men off from their
natural wildness and ferity, which tames and fits them for society. The less
any man has of it, the more does he degenerate and draw near to the nature of
brute creatures. The true notion of Gentileness and Nobility consisting in
these kind of qualifications, whereby a man is fitted for a sociable condition.

Now the design of Christianity being to promote the good of mankind and the
peace of Societies, therefore does the Doctrine of it so frequently insist upon
those kind of virtues and graces which are most conducible to this end. And
therefore upon all these accounts the truth of the Doctrine will appear very
evident, viz. That it is the duty of Christians to give signal testimony of
their equity and moderation upon all occasions of difference and contests with
one another.

There remains only one Objection to be briefly answered, and I shall proceed
to Application. It Is this, How may this consist with that zeal and strictness
of duty which we are obliged unto?

To this it may be answered: 1. That zeal does properly consist in an intention
of mind, and earnestness of affection in the prosecuting of such things as are
our duty, and in opposing such things whereby we are hindered in the performance
of our duty. Now supposing moderation to be a duty, a man ought to be zealous
for this grace, and against all such persons and things as are enemies and
hindrances of it. So that these things are not opposite, but consistent with,
and subservient to one another.

And as for that other Branch of the Objection concerning strictness and
exactness of duty, from which a man ought not to deviate out of compliance with
others. To this it may be said, That strictness is properly a keeping close to
the Law. Now it is not the naked letter, but the sense and meaning that is the
Law. And that man may be said to be most strict in his obedience, who does most
exactly comply with this. A man may violate the Law by observing the Letter,
and he may keep the Law by going against the letter.

Now Divine Laws themselves are capable of relaxation, which is the meaning of
that Proverbial saying so frequent in Scripture, That God will have mercy and
not sacrifice. And therefore much more will humane Laws admit of it.

There are these three things I would insist upon in the Application of this
Point.

1. First, To enquire whether we our selves are such as the Apostle does here
require Christians to be.

2. And then secondly, if not, that we would endeavor to be convinced of that
deformity and mischief which there is in the want of this Grace.

3. Lastly that we would be persuaded to be more careful in the attaining,
improving, and exercising of this Grace for the future.

1. To enquire whether we our selves are such as the Apostle does here require
Christians to be; such as upon all occasions of difference are ready to give
signal testimony of our gentleness and moderation. There are these two ways
whereby this may be discovered, namely by the Fruits and Concomitants.
Universality and extent of it.


1. By the fruits and concomitants of this virtue. Some have questioned whether
this word do denote any single virtue, and not rather a complexion of many
together. It Is certain that there are several other virtues of near affinity to
this, such as are either the effects or concomitants of this virtue, by which
the reality of it may be known. Of these I shall mention six.

1. Mutual forbearance toward one another, not taking all the advantages we
may have of vindicating our selves, making allowance for the infirmity of those
by whom we are injured. We that are strong ought to bear with the infirmities
of the weak, and not to please our selves, but our neighbor for his good: For
even Christ pleased not himself. Romans 15.1. We are to comfort the
feeble-minded, and to support the weak, 1 These. 5 14; not to be harsh and
rigorous toward them.

2. A readiness to forgive and conceal the manifest injuries of others, when
either the glory of God or the good of men either public or private shall
require it of us. That very expression which is translated ready to forgive,
Psalm. 89.5. is by the Septuagint rendered by the same word in the Text, (...).

3. Long-suffering, both with respect to Patience and Hope; not easily provoked
to passions, being slow to anger; not suddenly tired or discouraged by the
continuance of the things we suffer, or the delay of the things we hope for. 1
Cor. 13.4. Charity suffers long, and is kind. verse. 7. It bears all things,
hops all things.

4. Benignity, kindness, courtesy; a readiness to do good, to help and show
favor to those by whom we have been injured; such an affable, amiable carriage
as may win upon them; not harsh, scornful, churlish; overcoming evil with
good; a forwardness to promote love and peace with them, though it be by
receding from somewhat of our own right. Being favorable in our interpretation
of the words and actions of others. Approving what is good in them; not
aggravating what is evil; taking doubtful matters in the best sense; choosing
rather to offend by too much mildness than by too much severity.

5. Aequanimity, meekness, gentleness; such a sedateness of mind, whereby a man
is not easily transported to any high passions; not difficultly appeased,
especially upon submission and repentance. Such an evenness and smoothness of
disposition, as does not only serve to attemper anger, but to add a sweetness
and placidness to our carriage. An equal state of mind under the variety of
outward conditions, without being elated or dejected by them, Knowing how to
want, and how to abound. When our hearts are not immersed in any of these
earthly things, beyond their real worth and usefulness.

6. And lastly, Easiness to be entreated, when a man is exorable without the
violence of importunity; Not stiff and tenacious in matters of opinion beyond
what the great evidence and importance of things does require. Manageing the
business of our converse with others, without murmurings and disputings, Phil.
2.14. This same disputacity, or aptness to contend for victory, is no small
occasion of discord amongst men. And on the contrary, this willingness to
condescend, not leaning too much to our own understanding, is a special means
to promote amity and peace amongst them. This very word in the Text being used
by the Apostle, 1 Timothy 3.3. is there by Beza interpreted to be of the same
sense with (...), apt to yield and submit, non facile contentiosus, not easily
provoked to contentious disputes nor pertinacious in them.

Let a man look over the whole Doctrine of the Gospel in the New Testament, and
he shall find that there is not any other virtue or duty whatsoever so often
and so earnestly inculcated as those of this nature; as if our Savior had
designed to fix upon these, as being the grand Criteria whereby his Followers
should be distinguished from all other Sects and Professions of men in the
world.

Now if we desire to make enquiry concerning our own conditions in this
respect, these are some of those Concomitants, effects, properties whereby this
moderation is to be discerned.

2. Another Rule whereby we may examine our conformity to this precept in the
Text is the Universality and extent of it; whether we exercise it toward all
men, in all times, upon all occasions. They that are for moderation in the
managing of affairs at one time, and yet perhaps at another will look upon it
as an argument of disaffection and style it by the name of lukewarmness and
detestable neutrality, such persons cannot be said to love the virtue of
Moderation but the blessing and happiness of it. They are only for the passive
not the active part, to receive it from others not to show it to them. And to
how narrow a compass an enquiry by this Rule will confine this Grace, amidst
the several pretenders to it, I need not say.

2. In the next place we may hence be convinced of that deformity and mischief
which there is in the want of this Grace. It renders a man, 1. Unlike to God.
2. Unacceptable to men. 3. Pernicious to himself.


1. It renders a man unlike to God; in conformity to whom all our excellency
and happiness does consist. He is the Father of Mercies, the God of all
consolation. His appearance was in the soft and still voice, 1 King. 19.10, 11;
not in whirlwinds and Hurricanes: where there is spiritus procellae, it
proceeds from another principle. Christ is the Prince of peace, the great
Exemplar of meekness. It Is prophesied of him that he shall come down like dew
on a fleece of wool, like rain on the mowen grass, Psalm. 72.6. He shall not
cry, nor his voice be heard in the street, Isa. 42.2. The Holy Ghost was
pleased to appear in the shape of a Dove, the emblem of Meekness. Simplex
animal and laetum, St. Cypr. de unit. Eccles.
non fell amarum, non morsibus saevum, non unguium laceratione violentum. The
true Church is styled by the name of the Lilly amongst thorns: the Lilly does
not scratch and tear, that is the property of thorns and briars. Christians are
the Sheep and Lambs. Quid facit in pectore Christiano luporum feritas, Canum
rabies? says the same Father.

2. Unacceptable to men; as being against that common peace and quiet which
it is every man's interest to promote. It seems very obvious for men to reflect
what thoughts they have had concerning such persons as have been the chief
drivers on of several interests, in those wild revolutions we have seen of
late; how we have looked upon them as Incendiaries and enemies to public
peace. If it be said that the case is now altered, and we have a right side,
and a good cause; This ought to be most freely owned, and acknowledged with all
thankfulness: But yet it is farther considerable, that this virtue of
Moderation, does suppose a matter of right and justice. And then besides, the
better the cause is, the less need is there of any immoderate rigorous course
in the asserting of it. We shall hereby rather prejudice than promote it; by
inducing a suspicion, that it is not so much truth or justice as something else
that drives us on. And then besides where would this principle end? if one man
may be severe and rigorous because he is in the right; why then another who
does but think himself so, will be so too. And according to this, what would
become of peace and society?

Such blustering boisterous tempers as are all for the great river Euphrates
which runs with a torrent and a mighty noise, and refuse the still waters of
Shiloah which run soft and gently, as the Prophet speaks, Isa. 8.6. such are no
friends to peace, because it is the latter which is the river whose streams must
make glad the City of God, Psalm. 46.4. that is, must promote the quiet and
flourishing state of the Church, as a Reverend Prelate has elegantly expressed
it: Bishop Andrews Sermon.
It Is the advice of Seneca, that men would consider Vtrum mundi status gratior
sit, sereno and puro die, an cum fragoribus crebris omnia quatiuntur, and ignes
hinc atque illinc micant. What difference there is betwixt a serene and clear
day, and another full of thunder and flashes, and storms; Such difference there
is, says he, betwixt a calm moderate temper, and the passionate severity of
others.

3. It will prove pernicious to a man's self. For which I shall only give that
one instance, Luke 9.55. the two Disciples there, James and John, those Sons of
thunder, being much offended with the Samaritans, who refused to receive our
Savior, would needs in their immoderate zeal have fire from Heaven to destroy
them; For which they had a Scripture example in the story of Elias. But what
must have been the consequence of this? Why a while after our Savior went up
to Jerusalem, where he was Crucified, and therefore very good reason why fire
should come upon that likewise. Nay these very persons themselves, James and
John, desert and renounce him, and therefore there ought to be fire upon them
also; And so they make good that saying of the wise man, and by being righteous
overmuch destroy themselves, Eccles. 7.7. Nay one of these Disciples tells us,
Ioh. 1.10, 11. That the world knew him not, nor received him. Therefore why
should not that likewise be destroyed by fire? Of such a large and
comprehensive mischief is this sin, according to the natural consequences of it.

3. Lastly, we should hence be persuaded to be more careful in the attaining,
improving, exercising of this grace for the future. It Is a duty this, wherein
all sorts of persons are concerned, not only those of a private condition, in
their dealings with one another, but likewise such as are public Magistrates,
both as to their making and executing of Laws. They who are to consult public
settlement should have special regard to this equity and moderation, thereby to
heal the minds of men and to compose their differences. They should look upon
past sufferings as happening to them, eo modo quo grandines ac diluvia accidere
solent, and so bury them in oblivion.

I might to the many arguments already mentioned, add diverse other
considerations to excite men unto this virtue (would the time permit it). I
cannot omit that passage out of Seneca, so proper to this purpose, Quod si dii
placabiles and aequi delicta potentium non statim fulminibus prosequuntur,
quanto aequius est, homines hominibus praepositos miti animo exercere imperium.
If God does not presently take vengeance of our faults with thunder from
heaven, why should not men by his example become gentle and mild toward one
another. It Is a thought this, very proper for a man to revolve in his mind when
he is by his passion provoked to deal with rigor and extremity toward others.
Let him then consider, am not I more under Gods power than this offending
person is under mine; more obnoxious to his wrath and justice than he is to me?
Had he dealt with me according to my desert, I had long ago been cast into
hell: Yet I live and am spared, and do every day receive many testimonies of
his kindness. Is he thus favorable to me for this end, that I may be severe
and cruel to others? Has he forgiven my Talents, that I may rigorously exact
the pence from my brother? That man who has but any sparks of Religion or
ingenuity, cannot choose but be either overwhelmed with confusion, or melted
into compassion by such thoughts as these.

The Fourteenth Sermon.
ROMANS XII.19. Dearly beloved, avenge not your selves, but rather give place
unto wrath: For it is written, Vengeance is mine, I will repay, says the Lord.


I HAVE treated of late in a former Discourse concerning the virtue of
Moderation; showing the true nature and necessity of it, and how seasonable and
proper the pressing of it has been and will continually be for all places and
times; And more particularly for such as in any revolution are apt to think it
least seasonable, who for that very reason have more need to be put in
remembrance of their duty in this particular.

Now because this other subject of Revenge is of near affinity to it; being in
some sense the object of it, according to that definition of Seneca where he
describes Clemency and Moderation to be Temperantia animi in potestate
Vlciscendi; A temperance of mind when we have the power and opportunity of
revenge: Therefore I could not but judge it a very proper Subject to be annexed
to the former, and this Text as proper to found a discourse upon of this nature
as any other.

In the former part of this Epistle, the Apostle had insisted at large upon
several points of faith, more particularly upon that great Doctrine of
Justification. In this Chapter he proceeds to lay down certain precepts of
Christianity concerning practice and obedience, beginning with those that refer
to God, in the three first verses: And amongst them, with that which is the
foundation of all the rest, namely that we wholly devote and resign up our
selves unto his spiritual service. v. 1.

Then he proceeds to such duties as we owe to our Neighbors, whether, 1. Those
that are fellow members of the same Church, partakers of the same faith; from
ver. 4. to the 13. Or 2 dly, such as are enemies and persecutors, v. 14. Bless
them which persecute you; and again, v. 17. Recompense to no man evil for evil.
And because it is a duty (this) of more than ordinary difficulty, very much
against the natural inclinations of men, therefore he returns again to the
enforcing of it, in the words of the Text, and so to the end of the Chapter.

The Text is a Dissuasive from the sin of Revenge; in it there lie four
particulars very obvious:

1. An insinuating compellation, Dearly beloved.

2. The Precept or Prohibition it self, Avenge not your selves.

3. A direction for the better observance of this precept, But rather give
place unto wrath.

4. A Reason or Argument for the enforcing of it, For it is written, Vengeance
is mine, or belongs to me. I will repay says the Lord.

I shall briefly explain the several Terms.

1. The Compellation; (...), Dearly beloved. It Is but one word in the Greek,
but because of the special Emphasis of it, signifying the most cordial love,
therefore is it thus rendered in the English. And upon this account it is usually
ascribed to an only child; so the 70 translate that place, Genesis 22.2. Thine
only Son, thy dearly beloved Son. In which sense it is frequently used by other
Greek Authors, Homer, Plutarch, and others (as diverse Critics have observed.)
It signifies the dearest and most intimate affection. The Apostle does use it
both here and in several other places, that by so mild and obliging a
compellation he might the better insinuate and prevail with those whom he is to
persuade: Suitable to his own rule, In meekness instructing those that oppose
themselves.

2. The Precept or Prohibition it self, (...), non vosmet ipsos defendentes. So
the Vulgar, very improperly both as to the force of the word and the scope of
the place. There are two particulars to be enquired unto for the explication of
this clause: What is meant by Revenging. Revenging our selves.


1. What this (...), Vltio or Vindicta is may be very proper to be discussed,
because it is by several Authors used in such various and equivocal senses;
sometimes for a Passion of the mind, so Plato defines it in his Book de
Legibus, Vindicta est passio justitiae sequax; sometimes for a virtue, amongst
the Catalogue of which Aristotle does reckon it. Eth. lib. 4. And so likewise
Aquinas 2. 2 dae, making the two extremes of it to be cruelty, and too much
remission or abjectness. And sometimes likewise it is reckoned for a vice, as in
the Text, and according to the most usual acception of the word. And there is
reason enough why it may be referred to each of these heads, because supposing
it to be the first, a Passion, it must likewise be capable of being both a
Virtue and a Vice.

As there is in every man a natural inclination to vindicate himself from
injuries, so it is a Passion, that is, a natural act of the appetite. As this
passion is duly guided in the exercise of its acts, by the rules of justice and
prudence, both as to the proper objects, acts and circumstances of it, so it is
a virtue. As it does deviate from and transgress these rules, so it is a vice.
Which may be said of all the other passions likewise, Anger, Love, Fear, etc.
Though because of the general proclivity of men to offend in this kind,
therefore the most ordinary use of the word is in this worst sense.

That desire which a man may have of occasioning to another some trouble and
inconvenience upon the account of injury suffered from him, this is not
absolutely and abstractedly considered, in it self evil, but may be both lawful
and commendable, provided that the thing hereby chiefly aimed at be such a
moderate castigation as may be requisite for the conviction and the amendment
of the offender, a keeping up the authority of Laws, and a due satisfaction for
the damages we have suffered. There being a vast difference betwixt the study
of revenge, and the endeavor of reparation. This latter being no ways opposite
to Christian love, meekness, mutual forgiveness; God himself may remit the sin,
and not hate the person, and yet he may correct the offender, to vindicate his
Law and repair his own honor.

But now on the other hand, when the thing we chiefly aim at, is mischief to
the person by whom we have been injured, though we our selves receive no
benefit thereby, besides the satisfaction of our own enraged passions: Such a
wrathful retribution of evil is properly the sin of Revenge; whether or no the
evil that we occasion to him, be either greater, or equal, or less, to what we
have suffered from him.

2. What by revenging our selves? This expression does direct to the proper
agent of that suffering and penalty which we may occasion to another. Though
persons of a private capacity may seek to bring such as injure them to
punishment, yet they must not themselves inflict it, because there are others
appointed to this work, namely the public Magistrate, whose proper office this
is, He is the Minister of God, a revenger, (...), the same word as in the Text,
to execute wrath upon him that does evil, says the Apostle in the next
Chapter, Romans 13.4. it is a part this of distributive justice, and therefore
does belong to Governors, either to the Supreme, to whom it does primarily
appertain, or to those who are delegated by him; who are the Conservators of
humane Societies, and Guardians of Laws. Without such revengers there could be
no Government in the world; and therefore for private persons to invade their
office, is in some sense to depose them, and consequently to destroy
Government. Though even such public persons to whose office this work does
properly belong, are not altogether exempted from the danger of this sin. Upon
which account it is that Governors themselves ought not ordinarily to be
Judges in their own particular concernments; or at least not to be the
inflicters of the penalty upon such as injure them. To which may be added that
such Magistrates who take delight in inflicting punishment as punishment; who
do it with insolence, bitterness, contumely (which are against the common Laws
of humanity) such as do not principally respect the good of the Community, and
of the offending person, but have some secret regard to their own private
utility, or the satisfaction of their particular anger: In such cases the
Magistrate himself, whose office it is to revenge, may yet be guilty of the sin
of revenge.

3. The third particular observed in the words is a Direction for the better
observance of this duty, in that clause, but rather give place unto wrath. That
expression of giving place, (...), date locum, is a Metaphorical phrase. But
it is such a Metaphor as is not a peculiar Phraseology, but is somewhat general
and significant in several languages. The meaning of it is to yield and submit
unto. What kind of wrath is hereby intended is another question, fit to be
discussed. There are three several senses that have each of them a fair
pretense to the scope and meaning of this place.

1. It may signify the wrath of thine enemy; do not immediately fly to an
opposition of it, but rather withdraw from him that is provoked. Dum furor in
cursu est, currenti cede furori. Jacob did so to his brother. Esau, when he was
enraged against him, and resolved to kill him.

2. It may signify the wrath of God. Do not prevent or hinder that by
revenging your self. Take heed of invading his Office. Leave him to his own
work. Commit your selves to him that judges righteously, 1 Pet. 2.23.

3. It may refer to our own wrath. To the impetuousness of which we must so far
give place as not to act any thing upon the instigation of it. Respirate in
vestro furore, neque ruite praecipites, donec ira vestra deferveat. Let it have
some time to cool and abate, and take heed of being transported with it.

Each of these are suitable enough to the sense of the place, though the two
first seem to be more agreeable to the Reason annexed.

4. Which is the fourth particular observable in the words: For it is written,
Vengeance is mine, I will repay says the Lord, (...), which refers to that
place, Deuteronomy. 32.35* and to that Psalm. 94.1. O Lord God to whom vengeance
belongs. Which is again repeated Heb. 10.30. For we know him that has said,
Vengeance belongs unto me, I will recompense says the Lord.

And then it follows in the next verse of the Text, which is cited out of Prove.
25.21. Therefore if thine enemy hunger, feed him, if he thirst give him drink.
Under which expressions of meat and drink are comprehended all kind of
necessaries or conveniences, which his condition may require. Be kind and
benevolous to him, not only in case of extreme exigence, but so often as you
have opportunity of procuring any considerable advantage to his condition, For
in so doing thou shall heap coals of fire upon his head, whereby he shall be
either melted into kindness, or burnt for his obdurateness.

Some think the meaning of this passage is to be restrained only to the first
of these; it being against the chief scope of the place, and the highest kind
of revenge for a man to aim at the exposing of another to divine wrath and
vengeance; usually the roughest most obdurate tempers are to be subdued with
kindness. David conquered Saul this way, and melted him into tears of
repentance for his enmity against him. Nimis durus est animus, qui si
dilectionem nolit impendere, nolit rependere, says St. Austin. That man must
needs be of a very savage inflexible temper, who is not to be bent by
gentleness and kindness. Dr. Hammond.
Some conceive this phrase to be an allusion to the custom of Artificers in
their dealing with metals, which when they cannot bring to fusion by putting
fire under them, they use to heap live coals on the head or top of them, and by
that means do cause them to melt. That man is to be utterly despaired of as
being without all sense of humanity, whom repeated kindness will not melt and
dissolve.

But now because the most usual sense of this expression, coals of fire, does
denote punishment and vengeance, according to the proper importance of it in
other Scriptures, as Psalm. 18.8, 12, 13. and 140.12. and several other places.
Therefore this sense is not to be wholly neglected, nor is it unlawful for a
man in a secondary way to have respect unto it. And it is most suitable to that
clause in the precedent verse, Vengeance is mine. Though withal it must be
granted, that the precept in the verse immediately following of overcoming evil
with good, does seem to favor more the former sense.

And so much for Explication of the Text, both as to the Context and the Terms
of it.

The Proposition I would insist upon shall be this: Prop.
Christians ought to be very cautious against this sin of revenge.

The Apostle does in this place insist much upon it, frequently repeats the
prohibition to this purpose, which he endeavors to insinuate by the most
loving persuasions, and to enforce by several arguments to show of how great
moment and consequence this duty is. And it is withal both agreeable to the
light of nature, and to several other precepts and examples, both in the Old
and New Testament.

And first, it is most consonant this to the clear light of nature, and such
moral principles as are common to all mankind. Though I know very well that
diverse eminent Authors, the learned Grotius and others do from hence endeavor
to prove the insufficiency of Reason and Philosophy for the discovery and
attainment of true virtue. Because the wisest and best of the Heathen do
indulge themselves in this matter of revenge. To which purpose they usually
cite those sayings out of Aristotle, where he reckons it for a virtue, and in
another place where he says, Servile est, si contumeliose tracteris, id
tolerare. And that of Cicero, where he mentions revenge amongst those things,
Quae ad jus naturae pertinent. Besides that Doctrine of the Stoics, who were a
sect of men most strict and sublime in their morality; amongst whom
notwithstanding it was a principle, Sapientem non ignoscere, non misereri. That
a wise man ought not to pardon another man's faults, nor to compassionate his
sufferings. For which Seneca reasons thus, Venia est poenae meritae remissio.
De Clementia. 2.6.
Ergo ei ignoscitur qui puniri debuit. Sapiens autem nihil facit quod non
debet. To which may be added that Doctrine of the Alchoran, wherein the
remitting of injuries and neglect of revenge, is condemned as an impious thing.

From all which it is inferred that this prohibition of revenge is a pure
institution belonging to the Gospel and Christian Religion, and not derivable
from the light of nature.

But with reverence to those great Names, this will upon an impartial inquiry
be found to be a mistake; all the Agenda of Christianity being so far from
being opposite that they are most agreeable to humane reason, as it is
cultivated and heightened to its utmost improvement by Philosophy. As for those
speeches that are cited to this purpose, they may refer to the passion or
virtue of Revenge, not the vice of it. The same Authors abounding in many
severe prohibitions against this vice. Besides the many arguments they produce
of the unlawfulness and mischief of it, as the inconsistency of it with
Government and Society, with several other reasons which I may have occasion to
mention afterward. And the plain truth is, there is not any one thing in
morality that is capable of being made out by clearer natural evidence than the
sinfulness of revenge, supposing men to live under Laws and Government, as I
shall hereafter endeavor to show.

As for Scripture evidence to this purpose out of the Old Testament, nothing
can be more express than that place, Levit. 19.18. Thou shall not avenge nor
bear any grudg against the children of thy people, but thou shall love thy
neighbor as thy self. To which is annexed the same reason as in the Text, I am
the Lord. Nor is this to be extended merely to their persons, but to their
possessions likewise. Exodus 23.4, 5. If thou meet thine enemies ox or his ass
going astray, thou shall surely bring it back to him again. If thou see the
ass of him that hates thee lying under his burden, thou shall surely help with
him.

Though it cannot be denied that amongst the Judicial Laws of the Jewish
Nation, there are some that seem to make an allowance and indulgence for the
frowardness and hardness of that people in this particular (whether the
revenger of blood were not commanded to kill the manslayer see Weemes, 2. Vol.
2. part, p. 129.) as that concerning the liberty for the avenger of blood,
while his heart is hot, to pursue him that had unwittingly slain his neighbor,
and if he could overtake him before he got to one of the Cities of Refuge to be
revenged of him, Deuteronomy. 19.6. Josh. 20.3. Besides those other Laws of
retaliation, of an eye for an eye, and a tooth for a tooth; yet these Laws were
not established amongst them out of any fitness or commendableness of the
things in themselves absolutely considered, but only indulged by way of
permission, as being most suitable to the imperfect state of that people, and
for the prevention of greater mischiefs amongst them, as Tertullian has stated
this business, and out of him the learned Grotius in his Book de jure belli and
pacis, Lib. 2. Cap. 20.. 10.

Prove. 19.11. the wise man tells us that it is the discretion of a man to defer
his anger, and his glory to pass over a transgression. It Is the want of
prudence and generosity that does hastily transport men to the retribution of
injuries.

Prove. 24.17, 18. Rejoice not when thine enemy falls, and let not thine heart
be glad when he stumbleth, Lest the Lord see it, and it displease him, and he
turn away his wrath from him to thee. Where not only the doing of mischief our
selves, but the rejoicing at that which upon any other account does happen to
him is prohibited as an unworthy thing. And David complains of it as very
injurious dealing that his enemies rejoiced at his adversity, Psalm. 35.15.
though he had compassion on them when they were sick, and behaved himself as to
his friend or brother.

Ezekiel. 25.12. there are severe threatenings denounced against Edom, because he
had greatly offended by taking vengeance, and revenging himself upon the house
of Judah, ver. 14. Therefore will I lay my vengeance upon Edom, according to
mine anger, and according to my fury, and they shall know my vengeance, says
the Lord God. And ver. 15. Because the Philistines have dealt by revenge, and
have taken vengeance with a despiteful heart to destroy it for the old hatred;
therefore thus says the Lord, Behold I will stretch out my hands against the
Philistines, and I will execute great vengeance upon them, with furious rebukes.

But the Gospel is much more copious to this purpose, wherein our Savior does
require an higher degree of perfection in this kind, and does abolish those
indulgences which the Judicial Law did admit. He expects that Christians should
be so far from being overcome with this passion of private revenge, that they
should rather suffer patiently a second and third injury than revenge one.
Which is the true meaning of that precept, Mat. 5 39. Whosoever shall smite
thee on the right cheek, turn to him the other also. That expression of turning
the cheek, being a usual Scripture Phrase to signify bearing evil patiently,
Isa. 50.6. Lament. 3.30.

And v. 44. I say unto you love your enemies, bless them that curse you, do
good to them that hate you, and pray for them which despitefully use you, and
persecute you. For if you love them that love you, what reward have you, do not
even Publicans and sinners the same? But when once you come to love and do good
to enemies, this will prove you to be children of the Highest, and render you
perfect as your Heavenly Father is perfect, Luke 6.35.
ver. 48.

Mat. 6. Having taught his Disciples that form of prayer, wherein they are to
beg a conditional pardon of their own sins, Forgive us our trespasses as we
forgive them that trespass against us. Of which it may be said (as of the fifth
Commandment that it was the first with promise) so was this the first, the only
Petition with condition. And having signified this form, he returns immediately
after to comment upon this clause (singling it out from all the other Petitions
as laying great weight upon it) and this he does both positively, ver. 14. For
if ye forgive men their trespasses, then will your Heavenly Father forgive you
your trespasses. And negatively, v. 15. But if ye forgive not men their
trespasses, neither will your Heavenly Father forgive your trespasses. By which
place it appears that he who meditates revenge must curse himself when he
prays; he must carry in his own bosom the evidence that his sins are
unpardoned, and likewise a bar and incapacity, whereby he is disabled to ask or
expect the forgiveness of them.

To which may be added that Precept of being reconciled to our brother before
we bring our gift to the Altar, Mat. 5. The thoughts of revenge will render our
offerings and services unacceptable. As likewise that Parable concerning the
wicked servant, Mat. 18. who refused to forgive his fellow servant a hundred
pence, though his Lord had remitted to him ten thousand Talents.

I might mention several Examples to this purpose; that of Joseph toward his
Brethren: that of Job, Chap. 31.29. who professed that he rejoiced not at the
destruction of him that hated him; nor lift up himself when evil found him.
That of St. Stephen who prayed for those that stoned him, saying, Lord lay not
this sin to their charge, Act. 7.60. And above all that of our Savior himself,
Who when he was reviled, reviled not again, when he suffered he threatened not,
but committed himself to him that judges righteously, 1 Pet. 2.23.

I proceed to some Reasons or Arguments for the confirmation of this
Proposition. And shall mention six.

1. It Is a sin against God, the supreme Governor of the world, to whom this
work of vengeance belongs; which is the reason in the Text. And therefore men
who intrude upon it without his commission, do but invade his office; and
consequently renounce their subjection to him, and put themselves out of his
protection. We that are poor dependant Creatures, earthen vessels, worms and no
men, think our selves highly injured and affronted when those that are in any
inferior relation to us, our children or servants shall take upon them to
revenge themselves upon one another without appealing to us to do them right.
Why, God is infinitely more just, powerful, omniscient, and therefore has much
more reason to resent it as an high indignity when his creatures and vassals
shall so far forget their dependence upon him as to invade his office. The
Apostle tells us, Iam. 1.20. That the wrath of men works not the
righteousness of God. That justice which is done by a wrathful man does not
render him righteous in the sight of God. Or God has not appointed that
violent revengeful disposition of men to be the executor of his justice;
because it is not like to effect it with such a mixture of mercy as he will
approve or accept of.

2. It Is against Government, Magistrates, Laws; those bonds of Societies, which
are all needless and in vain, if every one may take a liberty of righting
himself. It Is the very end of Magistracy to prevent this. He is made a public
Avenger, to distribute rewards and punishments according to stated Laws, that
private men might not intermeddle with it. It Is true indeed, as for such
barbarous savage people as live wild, without being associated and united by
those bonds of justice, it is no wonder if such be continually retaliating of
injuries according to the opportunities and advantages they can get over one
another; there being no other remedy for men who live according to a state of
nature, amongst whom there is no person or place for appeal. And thus likewise
is it with such public persons, betwixt whom there is no common Judge to state
and vindicate their differences (as Sovereign Princes are) there being in such
cases no other remedy (unless they can accommodate things by Treaty) but that
War must follow, and the sword decide their Controversies. But when men are
once associated under Government and Laws, they must then have recourse to such
as are deputed to this office of vindicating common justice. Have you received
an injury, says Quintilian, Est lex, forum, judex nisi vos jure vindicari
pudet; There are Laws, Courts, Judges, unless your cause be such as you are
ashamed or afraid to bring it unto the trial and determination of Law. Though
even in this way it is not for every trivial offense that we are to trouble our
neighbor; nor for matters of moment, till all other ways of accommodation have
been first offered and tried, Law being a kind of War, which must be the last
means for Peace.

3. It Is against the very scope and spirit of Christianity, which consists in
self-denial, taking up the Cross, meekness, loving our enemies, forgiving such
as trespass against us. The great rule of Christianity is not to do to others
as they do to us, but as we would have them do to us. Whatsoever ye would that
men should do unto you, do you the same unto them, Mat. 7.12.

4. It Is against humanity; Inhumanum verbum est ultio, says Seneca. It Is
proper enough for wild brute creatures, but not for men. Nothing becomes humane
nature more than gentleness and humanity. Quintil.
Laus humanitatis potius quam voluptas ultionis concupiscenda est, says one of
the Roman Orators. The pleasure of revenge ought not to stand in any
competition with the praise of humanity. Nothing is more universally necessary
for the peace and welfare of humane Societies, than mutual pardon and
forbearance; because every one must frequently stand in need of it for himself,
and therefore must be ready to extend it to others. He that has any real sense
of his own frail condition, will find reason enough not to take all advantages
he may against others.

5. It Is against our own quiet and welfare; which consists in such a serene and
be calmed spirit as will not let the Sun go down upon our wrath. The study of
revenge will be a means to keep wounds green and festering, whereas otherwise
they might heal. Multi leves injurias altius sibi dimisere dum vindicant. Senec.
This gives impression to a slight injury, and makes it wound deep when we
resent it with revengeful thoughts. Maledicta, si irascaris, agnita videntur,
spreta exolescunt. He that neglects an injury, does blunt the edge of it.
Provoking words (says the Son of Syrach, Eccles. 28.12.) are like a coal of
fire, which if a man blow upon, it will kindle the more, but if he spit upon
it, 'twill go out.

Besides that it will be a means to multiply and renew fresh injuries upon us.
If we cannot stop at the first blow, why should we expect that our adversary
should stop at the second? He that will strike when he is not provoked, will do
so much more when he is smitten again, and so we shall but help to draw the
saw of contention, and multiply sufferings upon our selves by endeavoring to
retaliate them upon others.

6. Revenge is in it self as great, and in many respects a much greater sin,
than the first injury whereby it is occasioned. Quid refert inter provocantem
and provocatum, Tertul. de Patientia.
nisi quod ille prior in maleficio deprehenditur, and ille posterior. All the
difference betwixt the provoker and revenger is this, That the one is first,
the other second in the mischief. Et quid refert primus pecces an ultimus? And
what advantage is there for a man to be first or second in an evil action? It
cannot certainly be any good argument, that because such an one sinned first,
therefore we will second him: Qui dolorem regerit tantum excusatius peccat
(says Seneca), He that does revenge, does sin as well as the other, De Ira.
though he have this excuse for it, that he was first provoked to it. And yet
in another place he says, Non dubitabo dicere magis improbum esse eum, qui
illatam ulciscitur quam qui infert injuriam. I shall not doubt to affirm that
man of the two to be the most wicked, who revenges, than he who inflicts an
injury. Qui replicat multiplicat. Alter principium malo dedit, alter modum
abstulit. One gives a beginning, the other growth, multiplication, continuance,
and consequently endeavors to make it without measure or end. The first
violates some particular branch of the Law, but the revenge of that wrong does
depose the whole Law, and puts it out of office. He that has newly received an
injury, and has the sense of it fresh upon his own mind, does thereby better
understand the vexation and grievousness of it; and therefore for him to deal
hardly with others, whilst he has this sense fresh upon him, must needs from
hence receive an aggravation, Qui exemplo peccat, bis peccat, he having
immediately before experimented the deformity and mischief of that sin in
another.

If it be objected against all this which has been delivered, that we read
sometimes in Scripture of good men who are said to rejoice at the sight of
vengeance upon others, Psalm. 58.10. The righteous shall rejoice when he sees
the vengeance. And elsewhere they are said to pray for vengeance, Ier. 11.20. O
Lord of Hosts that judge righteously, Chap. 20.12.
let me see thy vengeance upon them. So St. Paul, 2 Timothy 4.14. speaking of
Alexander the Coppersmith doing him much harm, adds, the Lord reward him
according to his works. And Revel. 6.10. It Is said, that the souls under the
Altar do cry with a loud voice, saying, How long, O Lord, holy and true do
thou not judge and avenge our blood on them that dwell on the earth. Besides
several imprecations in other places.

To this it may be answered: 1. That as a man may pity men under those
sufferings, which he may acknowledge to be just upon them, so he may rejoice at
those sufferings as they are accomplishments of Divine justice, though not as
they are revenge for his particular injuries. 2. To speak unto God that he
would vindicate us, is but to appeal unto the supreme Judge that he would do us
right, to commit our cause unto him that judges righteously, as is said of our
Savior, 1 Pet. 2.23. Though this should be in such a manner as may tend to the
conviction, reformation and forgiveness of the offending person, rather than to
his ruin and condemnation; unless it be for such extraordinary persons as have
a spirit of discerning, and are able to penetrate into the true state of men as
to their implacable incorrigible condition. Other persons should consider what
spirit they are of as our Savior tells the Disciples James and John. Every man
may not call for fire from heaven to destroy others, though Elias did and might.

The Fifteenth Sermon.
ROMANS XII.19. Dearly beloved avenge not your selves, but rather give place unto
wrath; for it is written, Vengeance is mine, I will repay, says the Lord.


THere are these three things I would insist upon in the Application of this
Point.

1. To examine whether we are not guilty of this sin?

2. To convince men of the deformity and mischief of it.

3. To quicken and excite them unto a greater degree of watchfulness over
themselves, in respect of the temptations to this vice for the future.

1. To examine whether we our selves are not guilty of this sin? There is no
one thing wherein the corruption of nature is more apt to exert it self than in
offenses of this kind, as relating to that first fundamental principle of
nature, which is self-preservation; nor is it every ordinary degree of grace
and virtue that will exempt a man from the power of this sin. According to that
measure which there is in any, either of impotence, pride, cowardice, cruelty,
narrowness of mind, selfishness, in such a proportion must that man be of a
vindicative temper. And on the other side, he that is open and free in his way
of converse, apt to put the best construction upon things, to take more notice
of the virtues and kindnesses of men than of their failings, not subject to
jealousies and evil surmisings, but of a noble generous temper and carriage,
lifted up above the common level of vulgar minds, in such a degree will he be
exempted from this sin.

But now because there is a vindicative anger and indignation against others
which is our duty, namely that which is against offenders And that every man is
apt to palliate and excuse his own revengeful temper and carriage by pretending
this; therefore I shall briefly suggest these two Rules, whereby the truth of
it may be discovered, whether it be a Virtue or Vice. To examine whether,

1. Our anger be not more against the Persons than the Offenses.

And, 2. whether it be not directed more against offenses as they are injuries
to us, than as they are violations of the Divine Law. In both which cases we
fall under the guilt of this sin.

1. We are to examine whether our anger be not directed more against the
persons of offenders than against their offenses. If so, it is not the virtue
but the sin of revenge. And this may be known by our readiness to exert any act
of charity toward the offending person, in pitying and grieving for him, and
applying the most effectual means for his conviction and amendment. Our Savior
himself was angry at the sins of Jerusalem, and yet he wept over and bemoaned
their destruction. So did David for his enemies, Psalm. 35.13, 14. When they
were sick I put on sackcloth, and humbled my soul with fasting, I behaved my
self as though he had been my friend or brother, I bowed down heavily as one
that mourns for his mother.

On the other side when we have no kind of compassion toward them, nor charity
for them, but are continually reviling their persons, aggravating their faults,
adding to and increasing their sufferings, it is a sure sign this of a
vindicative temper.

2. We are to examine whether our anger be not more directed against offenses
as they are injuries to us, than as they are violations of the Divine Law.
Which will appear by that sense which we have of such transgressions, wherein
we our selves are not particularly reflected upon, though God be thereby highly
dishonored. If in such cases a man be calm and altogether unconcerned, if he
have little or no displeasure against persons that are highly debauched and
vicious, nay if he indulge himself in such kind of vices, it is altogether in
vain for such a man in his punishing of offenders, to pretend to zeal for the
upholding of Law and justice, and the glory of God. It Is a disguise that which
every one may see through. And though the punishment inflicted by such may be
righteous, and in it self justly deserved, yet as it comes from them under
these qualifications, it is not so much justice as revenge.

2. In the next place we may hence be convinced of that deformity and mischief
which there is in this sin. There are these six things that do usually
accompany it, either as causes, effects, or properties of it, Folly, Pride,
Impotence, Cowardice, Cruelty, Ingratitude.

1. Folly: The meditating of revenge is styled the resting or cherishing of
anger in our bosoms. And the Wise man tells us, that anger rests in the bosom
of fools, Eccles. 7.9. It Is the fool that rages, Prove. 14.16. The discretion
of a man will teach him to defer his anger, Prove. 19.11. And by the Rule of
Contraries it must be his folly to precipitate and hasten to revenge. Would not
that man be counted exceeding fond and imprudent, who if a horse kick him, will
think himself bound to recalcitrate or kick again, or to bite the dog by which
he is bitten? You will say those creatures want reason, and do not understand
the injury they do. Eo loco sit tibi quisquis consilio caret, says Seneca.
Why, so perhaps may those foolish men, by whom you have been unwarily provoked.

2. Pride: Every little injury will seem great, where men seem great to
themselves. It Is from the opinion and conceit which they have of their own
worth, that they are apt to aggravate every trespass as an high indignity.
Fierceness does arise from Pride. He that is puffed up with high imaginations
of himself and of his own deserts, Jove dignas concipit iras. What? such a man
as he? of so much worth to be so unworthily used by such an one? and thus (as
one well expresses it) as the boar whets and sharpens his tusks in his own
foam, Robinson's Essays.
so does a proud man excite and sharpen his own indignation and revenge in the
frothy imagination of his own worth. This is the reason why our Savior does
join together meekness and lowliness, self-denial and taking up the Cross.

3. Impotence, weakness, narrowness of soul, which is apt to make a man
suspicious, to startle and be provoked at every shadow. Quo infirmiores eo
magis iracundi. Persons that are old, sick, weak, are usually upon this account
most froward and vindicative. Whereas he that has any true courage and
greatness of mind will think it below him so much as to take notice of every
little injury. Non est magnus animus quem incurvat injuria. It Is not every
little blast that can shake him who is of a steady and noble courage. To be
always fretting and aggravating of injuries, formicarum and muscarum est (says
Plutarch) belongs to such little impotent creatures as Ants and Flies. And to
the same purpose Seneca, Pusilli hominis est and miseri repetere mordentem.
It Is the property of small and mean wretches to be always retaliating. Mures
and formicae, si manum admoveris, ora convertunt. Imbecillia, se laedi putant
si tanguntur. The more impotent any thing is, the more suspicious and
vindicative is it. There are many other sayings to this purpose amongst the
Heathen Writers. I cannot omit that one more out of the Satyrist. Iuvenal. Sat.
13.

-- Quippe minuti
Semper and infirmi est animi exiguique voluptas
Vltio, continuo sic collige, quod vindicta
Nemo magis gaudet quam foemina, etc.
I have the rather mentioned several of these Sayings out of the Heathen
Writers, in confirmation of what before I asserted, That Revenge is a sin
against the light of Nature, and that the rules of Philosophy are not in this
kind so defective as some have suggested.

4. Cruelty: This naturally follows from the other. The less confidence any one
has in his own courage, the more rigorous and severe must he be in taking the
advantages which he has against another. Vltio est aestus and fervor animi
turbidi, and mentis efferatae. Revenge is the aestuation of an enraged mind.
It Is styled humana feritas. It transports a man to savageness and ferity. Upon
which account it is that Civil Wars are of all others the most cruel, because
they are commonly managed by the dregs of the people, such kind of persons as
have no true generosity, which renders them fierce and cruel.

5. Cowardice: This likewise is an usual concomitant of the other. Nothing is
more natural to men than to make themselves the rule and measure whereby to
judge of others. And therefore it cannot be but that such persons must be very
obsequious and timorous toward all such as are above them, out of an
apprehension of what they themselves would do upon the like advantage. Such
persons as are usually most fierce in asserting a Cause when it has prevailed,
are usually least serviceable and courageous in vindicating of it when it is
low. Vltio est desperationi proxima, etsi videri vult fortitudo. It puts on the
disguise of gallantry and courage, which cannot bear the least shadow of
dishonor, but it proceeds from no better a ground than timerousness and
despair. All kind of Insolence and Tyranny whatsoever being founded upon fear
and cowardice.

6. Ingratitude: The very same unworthy temper and base principle, which makes
revenge seem an ease, will make thanks seem a burden. That which aggravates
injuries will diminish kindnesses. He who is ready to account every wrong
intolerable, will be apt to esteem every favor a due debt.

Add to all this, that it is a sin which will indispose a man for the duties of
piety, render our services unacceptable, put us into an incapacity of having
our sins forgiven, or so much as expecting or praying for it.

Besides that it will render a man feared and hated of all kind of persons
whatsoever, as being accompanied with a train of such vile concomitants as I
have before mentioned. He who wrongs one does thereby threaten all whom he has
power to hurt. And it is too true a saying, Oderunt quem metuunt, Men hate those
whom they fear.

But amongst all others this vice is more especially hateful in four sorts of
people (as a certain Author has observed. Robinson's Essays.
)

1. In men of power and authority; whose proper office it is in a legal regular
way, to execute wrath upon evil doers, and to vindicate others from injury. If
they become guilty in this kind themselves, they commit murder with the sword
of Justice, they transform themselves from Gods to Devils, and become
wickednesses in high places.

2. In such persons as have been obliged by acts of kindness and friendship,
which adds a peculiar aggravation to revengeful injurious dealing. Had it been
an enemy that had reproached me, then I could have born it; or if he that hated
me had lifted up himself against me, I would have hid my self from him: But it
was thou my friend and my acquaintance, Psalm. 55, 12, 13.

3. Professors of Religion; who are under the highest obligations and
restraints from offending in this kind, Genesis 20.11. when Abraham came to a
place where the fear of God was not, there was no kind of injurious dealing but
he thought he might expect from them; but to meet with this from such as make
profession of Religion, must needs have in it this aggravation of a surprizal
and disappointment, as being so directly against the principles they pretend to.

4. Such as are Poor, Prove. 28.3. A poor man that oppresses is like a sweeping
rain which leaves no food. Such an one is most like to be violent and
rapacious, because of his necessities. And yet it is directly against his
interest, as being most liable to suffer by such dealing himself.

5. To which I may add a fifth sort, namely, such as have but lately received
any signal deliverance or mercy themselves, to whom their Lord has freely
remitted ten thousand Talents, for them immediately after to be rigorous with
their fellow servants in exacting an hundred pence, has in it a great
unworthiness and incongruity. Such as have but lately experimented what a
suffering condition is, and can tell with what inward vexation and regret of
mind they were affected at the hard revengeful dealing of others toward them;
for such men to endeavor to bring others into the same state, the evil whereof
they have so lately tasted, has in it a peculiar aggravation.

3. The third and last particular to be insisted upon, is to quicken and excite
men unto a greater degree of watchfulness over themselves in respect of the
temptations to this vice for the future. I have urged several arguments to this
purpose already. To which I shall add some few other Considerations by way of
Motive.

1. To be ready to pardon and forget injuries is an argument of generosity and
greatness of mind, Prove. 16.32. He that is slow to anger is better than the
mighty; and he that rules his own spirit than he that takes a City. It Is one
of the properties whereby the Philosopher does describe a magnanimous generous
man (...), Ethic. 4.
that he is not any deep resenter of injuries, nor is he vindicative of them.
It Is from the same root that a man is made benign and grateful to friends,
which renders him gentle and exorable toward enemies. And though it be a noble
generous thing to contend in benefits, not to be outdone in kindnesses; yet not
so in injuries. Illic vinci turpe est, hic vincere. That man has the greatest
mind who can subdue his enemies by suffering and forgiving, and those are the
most ingenuous conquests which are made over the minds and affections of men by
kindness. According to that old Motto, Nobile vincendi genus patientia. Nothing
renders a man more venerable and amiable than this readiness to forgive. As for
such cases wherein it is not safe to pardon, there the exacting of due
punishment is not cruelty but just severity, and a political virtue: But when
there is no such public danger, when there may be any hopes of winning and
obliging men by kindness, it is not then only less profitable but likewise less
glorious to pursue them with punishments. How do we reverence the memories, and
rise up at the mention of the names of such persons as have in former ages been
famous for their Clemency and Indulgence? Camillus, Aristides, Socrates, and
Caesar, of whom it is said, that he was in Vlciscendo lenissimus, Su^ton.
apt to forget nothing so much as injuries. And Cicero no great lover or
flatterer of him, tells him, Nil habet nec fortuna tua majus, quam ut possis,
nec natura tua melius, quam ut velis, conservare quamplurimos. That herein did
consist the true greatness of his fortune, that he was able, and the goodness
of his nature that he was willing to show favor to his Adversaries. And on the
other side with what horror and aversation do we think of such as have been
full of fierceness and immanity.

2. A Second particular I would suggest, is, That we would consider what
difference there is, betwixt the advantages to be acquired by Revenging and
Pardoning of Injuries.

By occasioning some hurt and damage to an Adversary we may procure some
satisfaction to our own private particular passions. But on the other side, his
prosperity and virtue will redound to the public advantage.

The pleasure of revenge is but short and momentany; that which arises from
the conscience of honest and worthy actions is lasting and permanent.

By revenge a man is but even with his enemy, but by pardoning he is superior
to him.

He that suffers injury is but assaulted; but he that studies revenge is
overcome. Be not overcome of evil.

Men are very averse from yielding to their Adversaries, but he that has a
revengeful mind, does that which is much worse, he gives place to the Devil,
Ephesians. 4.27. who may be said to subdue us when he does by his instruments
provoke us to this sin.

By Revenge we may perhaps endamage our adversaries estate or body, but we do
withal thereby hurt our own souls; whereas by pardoning and relieving him we do
that which will be advantageous both to him and our selves.

It Is made a question amongst some, Which is most eligible, whether to have one
friend more, or one enemy less? Whether to add to our help, or substract from
our opposition? But without all scruple it must needs be more desirable, to
effect both these, namely, both to get one friend more and one enemy less.
Which can only be done by subduing them with kindness.

3. Though this be a duty always seasonable as to the habit, yet it is more
particularly necessary as to our exerting the acts of it when we approach
before God in any solemn duty.

The duty of Prayer, men must lift up holy hands without wrath, 1 Timothy 2.8.

Hearing the Word, Receive with meekness the ingrafted word, Jam. 1.21.

Particularly the Lords Supper, which is therefore styled a Communion, because
of that mutual love and agreement which it supposes amongst those that partake
of it. There was a strict prohibition of Leaven in the celebrating of the
Passover, and what was thereby signified the Apostle may inform us, where he
speaks of the leaven of malice and revenge, 1 Cor. 5.8. Mat. 5.23. If thou
bring thy gift to the altar, and there remembrest that thy brother has ought
against thee, leave there thy gift, and go first be reconciled to him. Though
Sacrifices and Oblations were a duty of the first Table, and one of the
principal parts of Religion, yet without this fraternal love and forbearance,
it will not be acceptable. And it is in vain for men to pretend to acts of
Piety, who are negligent in duties of Charity, and God will have this kind of
mercy rather than sacrifice. The Apostle tells us that the giving of alms is a
sacrifice of a sweet smelling savor, Phil. 4.18. And yet in another place he
tells us, that though a man should give all his goods to feed the poor, 1 Cor.
13.
yet without this charity it would profit him nothing. So necessary is this to
the rendering of our persons and services acceptable.

For the better observance of our duty in this particular be pleased to take
notice of these few Directions.

1. Labor to see the hand of Providence in every evil that befalls you; this
will take us off from revengeful thoughts against the instruments of our
sufferings. This was that which made Job so patient, Job 1.21. his ascribing
the losses he had by the Sabeans and Chaldeans to Gods Providence. 2 Samuel 16.11.
And so David when Shimei railed at him, pacified himself with this
consideration, The Lord has bid him.

2. Labor to get a true sense of your own sins and great unworthiness. Where
sins lie heavy, injuries will lie light. The more humble any man is the less
revengeful will he be.

3. Be very cautious to prevent the rising, or however to suppress the growth
of anger, Let not the Sun go down upon it. That which is but anger when we go
to bed, may rise up malice.

4. Consider that there are no kind of injurious persons but upon cool
deliberate thoughts, we may find sufficient reason not to revenge our selves
upon. Aut potentior, aut imbecillior, laesit: si imbecillior, parce illi; Sen.
de Ira.
si potentior, tibi. If he be much your inferior, spare him out of charity and
generosity; if more potent, spare your self out of wisdom. Is he a professed
enemy? he does but according to his kind. Have we deserved it from him? he
gives us but our due. Is he a good man? we should forgive him because God does.
Is he a wicked person? we may well forbear him, considering that dreadful
vengeance he is exposed to from God, both for that and all his other sins. Is
he a friend? we should the rather submit to some injuries, because we have
received former kindnesses from him.

It was a desperate speech that of Cosmus Duke of Florence, Though we read that
we are commanded to forgive our enemies, yet we no where read that we are
commanded to forgive our friends. Whereas this follows a majori, if enemies
much more friends; for that very reason, whereby Job did humble and appease all
impatient thoughts, Shall we receive good from their hands, and shall we not
receive evil? So that I say there is no kind of provocation we can meet with,
but may afford some ground or occasion for our forgiving of it.

I could not think of any fitter subject with which to take my leave of this
place than those that I have been lately insisting upon, concerning Gentleness
and Moderation, mutual forbearance and forgiveness of one another; which are so
universally seasonable for all times and places, of such general advantage both
as to public and private welfare, so peculiarly suited to the main drift and
spirit of the Gospel. And I should esteem it for a very great happiness and
success if I might be any ways instrumental to emancipate the minds of men from
those narrow and fierce principles whereby they are so easily apt to be
provoked to keenness and severity one against another, to the disturbance of
Society, and the taking men off from the quiet and comfort of their conditions.

The Scripture tells us that it is this virtue which I have now been exhorting
unto, that must render us perfect as our Heavenly Father is perfect; that must
raise us up unto the highest and nearest resemblance unto the Deity; that must
promote our inward comfort, and our outward peace. And therefore I cannot more
fitly shut up all than with that Valediction of the Apostles with which he
concludes his Second Epistle to the Corinthians.

Finally, Brethren, farewell: Be perfect, 2 Cor. 13.11.
be of good comfort, be of one mind, live in peace, and the God of love and
peace shall be with you.

FINIS.

