A BRIEF DISCOUR Concerning that CEREMO^^ OF Laying the Hand ON THE BIBLE IN
SWEARING.

By SAMVEL WILLARD, Teacher of a Church at Boston in New England.

LONDON, Printed by J. A. in the Year 1689.

TO THE READER.
THat many good and very learned Men have doubted the lawfulness of Kissing or
Touching the Book in taking a solemn Oath, cannot be denied; those great and
famous Divines, Rivet, Pareus, Voetius, have all written against it; and that
worthy Confessor and Martyr, Mr. William Thorp, did refuse to comply with the
mentioned Mode of Swearing; and he says, that Chrysostom was against the
Book-Oath, as he styles it; he thus argues, If I touch the Book, the meaning of
that Ceremony is nothing else but that I swear by it, when as it is not lawful
to Swear by any Creature, vid. Fox 's Martyrol. Vol. 1. p. 705, etc. In
Scotland and other Reformed Churches abroad, that Ceremony is not used; and in
our own Courts of Admiralty, another Form of Swearing is frequently practiced.
That some here in England forty years ago were scrupulous about this matter, we
may be assured, in that the Parliament in the Year 1649. in the Oath which they
enjoined on Mayors and other Magistrates, inserted a Proviso as to the Mode in
Swearing, that so doubting Consciences might not be ensnared, vid. Scobel 's
Collections, chap. 51. It is well known that those famous Divines, Dr. Thomas
Goodwin, Mr. Philip Nigh, and Mr. Jeremiah Buroughs, did judge the impleaded
Rite to be unwarrantable by the Word of God; and why should it be imposed,
when thereby the King may be deprived of the service of many good Subjects, who
have perhaps weak but tender Consciences? But as for Papists, they say, that to
swear on a Protestant Bible is no more than swearing on Aesop's Fables. It
seems also to be of weighty Consideration, that Kissing in a religious way is a
gesture of Adoration: Hence the Israelites kissed the Calves of Dan and Bethel,
Hos. 13.2. The Gentiles (and after them the Papists) were wont to kiss their
Images, as a signification that they did Worship them. But though we ought to
reverence the blessed Bible above all other Books, yet we may not Worship it,
but the Author of it only. Athanasius of old would not use any other Rite in
Swearing besides that of lifting up the Hand to Heaven.

The Reader (I hope) will find satisfaction in that brief and nervous Discourse
which is emitted herewith, and was written by a judicious and worthy Hand. It
is likewise to be hoped that this Disputation may excite others to enquire
into, and further clear the controverted Question, which is the thing designed
in this publication.

M. I.

A Brief ESSAY To the Resolution of that QUESTION, VIZ Whether the English
Custom of Laying the Hand upon the BIBLE in Swearing be Lawful?
IT had been altogether needless to have engaged in this Controversy at this
time, had not the stress which is laid upon this Ceremony, and the apparent
evils arising from such an Imposition enforced it; might those who make
Conscientious Scruples about it have been permitted to use their Christian
Liberty, (such as I am fully persuaded is granted them in his Majesty's
Gracious Declaration, and was for some while in Practice among us) I am of the
mind that there would not have been so much enquiry made about it, as Men by
this occasion think themselves concerned to make: but the apprehensions which
have been caused by what Entertainment the refusing of this Rite has met
withal, have made it requisite that Men's Consciences be rightly informed in
this Article.

I am not ignorant that a Man may be superstitious in needless scrupulosities,
as well as in using of unlawful Ceremonies; but then it will be requisite to
make a close enquiry into the matter, Whether the suspecting of the lawfulness
of so Swearing be such superstition? and when some Men do make so much of it,
it will put thinking Persons upon a more accurate Consideration about the
thing. If there be indeed nothing in it, it is pity that wise and honest Men
should trouble others, or expose themselves, their Reputation and Estate by
refusing it. And if it be a thing forbidden by God, I am sure tender
Consciences will be deeply concerned to save their inward Peace, whatsoever it
may cost them: For the satisfaction therefore of such, and at the earnest
desire of sundry of them, I have essayed to search after the mind of God in
this Case; in the solution whereof, I only design the reducing of it to the
known and approved Maxims of Non-conformists, it being in compliance with the
request of some such Men that I am thus engaged; less therefore will need to be
said to it than would otherwise be requisite: For there are diverse Postulata,
or Preliminary Conclusions, which belong to the solution, which will be taken
for granted by all that are any whit grounded in the Principles of
Nonconformity, and require only to be named, since all their Writings on this
subject furnish us with convincing evidence of the truth of them; and they are
such as these,

1. That all Religious Worship not Commanded by God, is forbidden.

2. That all Symbolical Ceremonies enjoined Men in Religious Worship, are made
Parts of Worship, and consequently, if not Commanded, forbidden.

3. That all such things imposed upon Men, are an infringement of their Liberty
of Conscience, and an exposing them to sin.

4. That things indifferent are to be avoided, in Case of Scandal arising by
the use of them, and it is a sin not to avoid them.

5. That no Practice of holy and good Men is sufficient to warrant my
Practicing after them, or ought to satisfy my Conscience.

These things supposed, (and it were easy to prove them, were it not already
done) I proceed to the matter under Consideration, and to wave a tedious
Discourse, and omit many things that might here be said, I shall endeavor to
reduce it to a Point in which the matter will be obvious.

Let it then be considered,

1. That in or about Swearing before Civil Authority, there are two things
which must be distinctly considered. 1. The Matter about which it is
conversant; and that is a Testimony, whether Assertory or Promissory: There is
something that a Man swears to, and this out of doubt belongs to the second
Table of the Moral Law, and the Ninth Commandment, and is no part of Worship,
but a thing merely Civil. 2. The Confirmation of this Testimony by the Oath,
and this none that I know of ever questioned but that it belongs to Worship,
and is generally referted to the first Table, and the third Command; (though
considered as a part of Natural Worship, it is also to be referred to the first
Command) it being an Invocation of God, a solemn Appeal to him, and (at least)
an implicit Imprecation against our selves, if we speak falsely; and therefore
calls for holy fear and reverence of him whose Name is thus called upon.

2. That to an Oath so given there is a double respect to be had. 1. To the use
of it, which is Civil; it being appointed for the putting of an end to
Controversies between Men, for the confirmation of Truth, and obligation of Men
most firmly unto fidelity in all the trust that is reposed in them, so far as
humane Prudence can reach. 2. To the Form of it, and that is purely Religious,
because in Swearing I do after the most solemn manner address my self to God,
who is the searcher of Hearts, and knows if I lie or dissemble; and call him to
witness upon my Soul: Yea, so essential a piece of Religion is Swearing, that
it is in Scripture Metonymically put for all Religion, Psalm. 63.11. Isa. 19.18.
It is indeed a solemn Prayer, and so an act of Worship.

3. That Ceremonies which are or may be used in Swearing come under a twofold
consideration. 1. Such as may be merely Civil, viz. Such as are the Notices by
which it may be known who is the Person swearing; and may be expressive of his
consent to, and being engaged in the Oath which is administered; concerning
which Ceremonies I make no doubt but that whatsoever Civil Authority shall
enjoin to be an Indication of the Person, and a witness of his voluntary
accepting the Oath, and acknowledging himself under the Obligation of it, may
be lawfully submitted to, and needs not to be disputed by him who is called to
swear, always provided there be no Profaneness in the Case. 2. Such as are
Religious, viz. that are used to strengthen or confirm the Oath, to add more
solemnity to it, to oblige the Person that takes it unto greater care and
caution, or to strengthen the credit of Testimony the more: Concerning all
which it must be asserted, that they are undoubted Appendages to Religious
Worship, and must therefore be tried by the Propositions laid down, the respect
being not Civil but purely Religious; for whatsoever is used as a religious
mean, to make me more serious in a Religious action, must needs be so, and
hence it must be either Natural or Instituted.

4. That an Oath being a solemn Prayer and Appeal, it hence ought to be made to
God alone: That Men are to swear by God only, is a Truth so fully clear in
Scripture, that no Man that is a Christian can call it in question; if
therefore in Swearing I appeal to any but God, I am guilty of false Worship,
Deuteronomy. 6.13. Jer. 5.7. and great reason, for there is none else can detect us,
and punish us if we be found forsworn.

5. That whatsoever is sworn by, is not a mere Medium, but an Object of
Worship: If I appeal to the God who is the Author of this Bible, I then make it
a Ceremony, and am only questionable about the lawfulness of using such a
stated Medium; but if I appeal to God and the Bible, then I make it a divine
Object of my Adoration: Hence Swearing by any thing is understood in Scripture
for making the thing we swear by our Object, Jer. 5 7, Matthew. 5.34, etc. and
then the Question is, Whether this be the true God, or an Idol?

Upon these Premises there will now need nothing more to be enquired after, but
only, Whether the laying the Hand upon the Book in Swearing may be accounted a
Civil sign merely, and such as may be used by Men? or, Whether it be not
certainly a part of religious Worship, according to Law, Usage and Custom? And
if it appears to be the latter, no Nonconformist can ever consent to it, 'till
first he depart from his own Principles.

To prove therefore that it is and must be so, is sufficient to my present
purpose, for the confirmation whereof, I offer these Arguments.

1. It is so by the true, proper, and unquestionable intent of the Law by which
it is required: And hence it must needs be so interpretatively of every one
that uses it in compliance with that Law. It is a Truth beyond suspicion, that
a Man's actions are not interpretable, according to his own private sense and
pretended meaning, but according to the common usage in which such actions are
taken, and for Men to pretend to another meaning, is practical Equivocation.
The Primitive Christians knew, that to cast Frankincense into the Fire upon an
Idol's Altar, would be Interpretative sacrificing to that Idol, let their
reserved meaning be what it would, and therefore they refused to do it. He
therefore that complies with any thing required in the Law, is truly reputed by
all Men to comply with the Law in the true and plain meaning of it. Now that
this is the indisputable sense of the Law, is evident; for what else is
Swearing by the Book but such? If we consult the Statute Law, possibly there is
no clearer mention of this appeal there, than what is in the Oath of Supremacy,
which in so many words joins the Invocation of God, and swearing by the
Contents of the Book. If we look to the Common Law, let all old Presidents
speak, which tell us that it is done Per sacra Dei Evangelia, by the Holy
Gospels; and this cannot intend only a signification of the Persons swearing,
and their consent, but expressly declares an appeal to the Book, which was never
appointed by God to be a Ceremony, much less an Object of my Appeal. And if we
look to the Canon Law, whence it borrows its Original, none need to be ignorant
that it was intended to put a religious respect on the Book, by the Authors of
it, whose very Principles plead the justification of a Religious Worship due to
some Creatures.

2. It is so by the Confession of those that have used it, and plead for it:
What else is intended, when in their Self-Justification, they tell us it is
done to put the more Solemnity upon the Oath; and that their meaning is, that
they do hereby significantly renounce all the benefits promised to Christians
in this Book, and invoke the Curses of it upon themselves, if they lie? and
this must of necessity be more than the bare Indigitation of the Person, and
nothing less than a Religious Application; which has not the Authority of God
for it, being neither a Natural, nor Instituted Medium.

3. It is so by the very thing that is chosen and appointed to be made use of,
viz. the Holy Bible, or Gospels: For, were it only to signify the Person and
his Consent, why might not any other thing do as well? Yea, why might not
lifting up the Hand be better approved, which is in Civil Law, used as a Civil
Sign, by which a Man is called to signify that he is the Person arraigned, and
consents to his being tried by the Authority of the Court where he stands to be
Judged; and is also a natural Sign accompanying of Prayer, or an outward
signification of Men's appealing to God in Prayer? This Book therefore must
needs have bin made choice of with a Religious respect.

4. It can be no Salvo to Men's Consciences, for this or that particular Judge,
or any Men in subordinate Authority, to say, That they intend nothing else by
it, when they impose it, but only the Notification of the Person, and
signifying that he does now take the Oath: for the Sense of the Law is always
one and the same: And though it must be granted necessary that Judges are, in
case of difficulty and dubiousness, to interpret the meaning of the Law, to Men
concerned to Act according to it; yet if they should give a sense evidently
other than the Law will bear, it can hardly be thought obliging; to be sure,
where the sense of the Law is clear and plain, their interpreting it otherwise
cannot satisfy one that knows it is not the meaning: For if so, what force can
there be in a Law, or what safety can the Subject pretend to himself in
measuring his Actions by it, because that which is the sense of it to day, may
be repugnant to it to morrow.

5. It does no whit mend the matter, that of late, those words [and the
Contents of this Book] are omitted in the giving or administering of the Oath,
it being only a Snare laid before Men, and no real favor to them, as not in
Truth affording any abatement upon the Consciences of such as are judicious;
and that is, because the same thing is intended in the Law, and is every whit
as much signified by the Act of Laying on the Hand, it being the sense of the
Law, in Obedience whereunto it is done: And Actions do speak as forcibly as
Words. Except therefore the Law it self could cease, or lose its sense, the
omission of a word explicatory mitigates it not; because all that know the
meaning of the Law, know what the Action signifies according to it.

6. Hence, in the Consciences of all saner, serious, and considering Men, he
that lays his Hand, upon the Book, whatever his reserved meaning to himself be,
is necessarily under such an Interpretation as this: and it thereby become a
matter of scandal to such as count it unlawful so to swear; and though he
Swears with never so many secret reserves to himself, he cannot possibly avoid
this Censure.

7. It is also to be observed, That whereas the Nature of Swearing is
principally contained in the Solemnity of the Appeal which men make, there is
no other solemn Caution and Religious obligation, laid upon Men to make them
afraid of Perjury, in the accustomed way of administering an Oath, but only in
the act of Laying the Hand on the Book, and that one word, So help you God;
which calls for a serious Observation, and speaks the design of the Ceremony.

8. Besides, it makes the Conclusion I have asserted, further evident, if we
consider that some Men say, That no Man can be legally indicted for Perjury,
except he have Sworn upon the Book; which if legally true, tells us, that the
Law makes it Essential to the Oath it self, and a part of the Religious Act of
Swearing.

9. He that invokes such a thing as his Helper in his Prayer, does certainly
make it of the Object which he prays unto: And he who lays his Hand on the Book
(whether he do it intentionally or no) does it interpretatively: And whether
this be not to make it more than a mere Ceremony, and greaten the blame of him
who does so swear, let any judicious Men determine.

Much more might be said concerning this Subject; but this may help
sufficiently to settle the Judgments, and satisfy the Consciences of any that
are Scrupulous; which is my farthest aim in this Script; as being not desirous
to offer any Provocation to one or other; but only studious to discharge a
Moral Duty lying upon me, to satisfy (as far as I may) the Consciences of them
that ask it of me, in such matters as properly and immediately concern God and
Religion.

FINIS.

