Smith Mayor,
Martis xxvto die Novembris 1684. Annoque Regni Regis Caroli Secundi, Angl.
etc. xxxvi,
THis Court does desire Mr Wagstaffe to Print his Sermon preached before the
Lord Mayor and Aldermen, at the Guild Hall Chapel, on Sunday Morning last.

Wagstaffe.

A SERMON PREACHED Before the Right Honorable THE Lord Mayor, AND THE COURT of
ALDERMEN, AT THE Guild Hall Chapel On November the 23d. 1684. By THOMAS
WAGSTAFFE, M. A.

LONDON, Printed for Walter Kettilby, at the Bishops Head in St. Paul's
Churchyard, 1685.

To the Right Honorable Sir JAMES SMITH, Knight. Lord Mayor Of the CITY of LONDON,
And to the Honorable the COURT of ALDERMEN.
THE Ends I aimed at in this Discourse were, to do the Church right, to take
off unreasonable Prejudices, and to persuade Men to the Communion of the best
established Church in the World. And the same (I humbly presume) were intended
by your Order for the publishing it: I do not apologize for the weakness
(though I am conscious of it) yuor Commands warrant its Publication; and
Obedience is part of the Religion of every Member of the Church of England. I
therefore only add my Prayers, that God would bless all Endeavors that tend to
the undeceiving the People, and settling them in Unity, Peace and Loyalty; not
only for your Lordship and the Honorable Court (whose Undertakings in this
kind are very remarkable) but also for every good Man in the Nation.

Your most Obedient and Humble Servant, Tho. Wagstaffe.

1. COR. 8.12. When ye Sin so against the Brethren, and offend their Weak
Conscience, ye Sin against Christ.


AMONG other the Reproaches laid upon the Church of England by its Adversaries,
one is that its Impositions are of a Scandalous Nature, that it injoyns such
things, as are offnsieve to Weak Brethren, and the very Words I have read to
you are (tho ignorantly) yet petulantly enough applied to Charge the Church
with Sin against Christ, in offending the Weak Consciences of the Brethren of
the Separation; as if the imposing two or three Ceremonies, were as Injurious
to tender minds now, as eating of Meat Sacrificed to Idols in the beginning of
Christianity.

A Charge it is of a very high Nature, for seeing the power the Church is
invested with, is for Edification, not Destruction: seeing it ought to have all
Tenderness, and compassionate regards toward the little Ones in Christ, if
(instead of this) she only lays stumbling Blocks in their way; the Church would
be (what her Enemies have called her) an Adulterous Spouse of Christ, and which
btrayes the trust her Lord has reposed in her, of forwarding the Salvation of
all Men under her Care: But if those bethe Representations only of Ignorance,
or Design, if in truth (upon full Consideration) there appears no just Ground
for such a Charge. It will not (I conceive) be unbecoming the filial Piety of a
true Son, to vindicate the Innocence of his Mother, to wipe of those Aspertions
which have been cast upon her, either by the Ignorant, or mistaken, or by the
crafty and malicious. In order to this purpose, I shall endeavor to do these
things following.

First, To state the Notion or Nature of Scandal or Offense, as it is
represented to us in the Gospel. 2. To inquire whether those that urge this
against us, are really offended in a Gospel Sense, tho the things in
controversy should be as evil as they represent them. 3. Suppse they were
offended, yet these 2. things ought to be considered. First. That this cannot
with any Sense or Conscience be urged by them that are offended. 2. If the
Matter of Offense be in things indifferent, we cannot forbear them upon account
of a weak Brother, where our Liberty is already determined. 3. Tho they are not
offended by us, they are really offended by the Leaders of the Separation. 4.
The Church of England has given no Occasion of offense to any. 5. Briefly
apply this to our selves.

First, I shall endeavor to state the Notion of Nature of Scandal as it is
represented in the Gospel, and in doing this I shall endeavor to consider the
most important Cases mentioned in the new Testament: (from whence only we can
have it) and from thence frame such a Notion as is agreeable to that
Representation the Gospel makes of it.

There are two Cases largely spoken to by St. Paul in the Epistles, one is the
Fourteenth and Fifteenth Chapters to the Romans, the other is the Eighth and
Tenth Chapters of the first Epistle to the Corinthians. Both these I shall
briefly consider.

Of that in the Fourteenth and Fifteenth to the Romans, the sum (I conceive)
is this; among the Roman Christians, there were several Jewish Converts; who
had not yet worn out the sense of Moses's Law but thought themselves, and all
others also converted to Christianity (in some measure) under the binding power
of it, as to the Observation of Days, Meats, etc. The Gentile Christians on the
contrary, esteemed themselves free from all such Observations, that these were
on parts of the Gospel dispensation, that therefore neither they nor the Jews
themselves ought to have any regard or account for them; and this (as it
usually happens in the differences of Parties and Opinions) made them Contemn
and Censure each other, the Strong despising the Weak, as too nice and
superstitious, and the Weak judging the Strong as profane, and neglecters of
Gods Law. And this was grown so high, that some of the weaker sort were hereby
endangered; and there were fears, the Jews might be discouraged from
Christianity, by unseasonablly exploding those things, which they knew were of
divine Institution; and which (tho abrogated) they had yet a Conscience for. In
this Case the Apostle advises not to Judge one another but Judge this rather,
that no man put a Stumbling Block, or an occasion to fall in his Brothers way
(Ver. 13.) the prejudices of Education and Customs (especially those that had
such a Sanction as those of the Jews) would not be so soon worn out; and the
severe insisting upon, or (which is worse) the reproachfully and contemptuously
inveighing against them, would rather avert and hinder new proselytes
(especially those of scrupulous and doubting minds) then any way engage them to
another Doctrine, or way of Religion. The Jews had been Born, and Bred up under
the Rites of Moses, and this was part of their Religion: And so soon as they
had entered into Christianity, presently to fall foul upon them, or to treat
them disdainfully and haughtily for using them; would be the readiest course to
drive them away. And therefore, too the thing be never so true, tho they were
never so much convinced that the distinction of Days and Meats, etc. were
wholly taken away by Christ, yet this ought to be mildly and meekly (at least)
pressed in reference to those who had other persuasions concerning them, and
who had not sufficient growth in Christianity, as to be fully instructed in the
Nature and force of Christian Liberty. I know (says he) and am persuaded by
the Lord Jesus that there is nothing unclean of it self, but to him that
esteems any thing unclean, to him it is unclean (Ver. 14.) although as to the
things themselves, I have a free Liberty, and may follow my own Sentiments, yet
I am to have respect, as well to my Brothers weakness, as to my own freedom,
and (because he thinks otherwise) if by any indiscreer or uncharitable use of
this Liberty, I offend him, and occasion him, that is not so fully persuaded,
to fall away from the faith, I ought not to make use of it. If thy Brother be
grieved with thy Meat, now walk thou not Charitably, Destroy not him with
thy Meat for whom Christ dyed, (ver. 15.)

And this I take to be the Sum of this matter, so far as it relates to the
case of Scandal, and of which (for the present) I shall desire only to remark
this one thing.

That the means whereby the weak Brethren were really (or likely to be)
offended (in the Case I have recited) were reproaching and despising the
Ceremonies of the Jews, tho they were really abrogated, and Contemning and
Slighting the weaker Christians that used them.

From whence we may briefly infer (for I shall make no further use of it) that
Vilifying and scorning Ceremonies, and them that use them, may as equally be an
occasion of scandal as imposing them. And St. Paul himself took such care in
this matter, that rather then offend the Jews he actually complied with a
Mosaical Rite, and Circumcised Timothy. He had (it seems) another opinion of
Christian Liberty, than the stiff men of Separation; they think their Liberty
invaded by Impositions, and they ought not to yield to their Governors, because
Christ has mad them free, and yet St. Paul (by virtue of his Christian
Liberty) not to offend them he was among, could use an abrogated Rite, and such
a one as Christ did unquestionably free us from. But some men have an odd and
perverse Notion of things? They think they have Christian Liverty enough to
break all the Laws and Injunctions of their Governors, but they are straight
laced, and can find no Christian Liberty to comply with them, and obedy them,
and this is the difference between Saint Paul and them, Saint Paul's Christian
Liberty gave him a Latitude, and he could do any thing that was not Sin, for
somewhat less ends then obedience to Magistrates; Circumcision he knew in it
self, was neither necessary, nor Convenient, yet he did use it for the sake and
satisfaction of those people, but our Libertines cry out they shall betray
their Liberty in doing any thing they do not like, and they will not go a
Hairs breadth tho it be to obey their Rulers, and to promote the Churches
peace. But this only by the way.

The second place the Apostle insists on in reference to the offending our weak
Brother, is that from whence the Text is chosen, and it is spoken to in the
Eighth and Tenth Chapters, of the First Epistle to the Corinthians, and the
Case I take to be this. Some thought it lawful to eat Meat offered to Idols,
and the Reason they gave for it was, because an Idol is nothing, and so could
not convey any Stain or Pollution to the Meat offered to it, that which was
nothing could not infect Gods real Creatures: But since he appointed them for
our use, and support, we might freely and indifferently use them for these
ends, whether they were, or were not sacrificed to Idols; for why should that
which was nothing debar a Man of a Right which God had given him? To this St.
Paul answers by granting the Reason that it is true, an Idol is nothing, and
there is no God but one, and therefore as to the things themselves they might
Eat, or not Eat, as they found themselves disposed: But there were some
accidental Considerations, which might make it unlawful, and inexpedient, and
those were tho not as to the things themselves, yet in reference to their
Brethren. For some with Conscience of the Idol unio this Hour, eat it as a
thing offered unto an Idol, that is, they take it as consecrated Meat, and part
of the Idol Worship, and their Conscience being weak is defiled (Ver. 7.) those
that had been newly converted from Idolatry, were not so fully weaned from
their old Opinions and Customs; but they had (as is usual in all changes) some
kind of Sense and Apprehension toward their former Modes of Worship, and
might the sooner be brought to relapse; and when they saw them that were
confirmed, or Eminent Christians doing the same things that Idolaters do, they
might be persuaded that Idolatry was not so Vain a thing, and they. who had yet
some kind of Conscience toward an Idol, might be induced to do the same, and
so be brought back to Idolatry, from which they had but lately escaped. For if
any Man see thee which have Knowledge sit at Meat in the Idols Temple, shall not
the Conscience of him that is weak be emboldened to eat these things that are
offered to Idols, and by that means, having not the same Sense and estimate of
things, be made a formal Idolator, and through thy Knowledge shall the weak
Brother perish for whom Christ dyed? ( ver. 10.11.) If therefore the Liberty a
knowing Christian has, be thus perversely used, as to become a stumbling block
to the Weak, If this knowledge of having a power to eat any of Gods Creatures,
be not directed by Love and Charity. It is a sinful abusing the privileges
Christ has purchased, and instead of complying with, is a direct Violation of
his Will; But when ye so Sin against the Brethren, and wound their weak
Conscience, ye Sin against Christ, (Ver. 12.)

And this, I conceive, is the sum, and full import of this place, and from
these two places I have mentioned, we may take a full account of the Nature of
Scandal, from hence are two things remarkable.

First, That a Weak Brother (in a Gospel Sense) is such one, as has been newly
converted to Christianity, and who (for want of Time, Consideration, or
Instruction) is not sufficiently confirmed in the Principles of it: It Is such a
one, whose Christianity as yet hangs loose; it is new, and unsettled, he has
yet some kind of Conscience, and tendency of mind to his former Ways, and so he
is apt to stagger, to be carried away by Temptations, and easily to be driven
back. His Religion is (as it were) pendulous, and any thing turns the Scales.
Fair, and gentle, and prudent Behavior may win him to a further embracing the
Faith; but inconsiderate, indiscreet, and uncharitable Methods may run him
again into his former Errors, and this was plainly the Case of the Weak
Persons in the places I have considered, and this I take to be the true Notion
of a Weak Brother: and I do not think there is any other Notion of it in the
whole Gospel. And such Person as these, every good Man will think it
reasonable, to treat with all the Gentleness, Yielding and Complyableness
possible. To submit to their infirmity, and as Saint Paul speaks, to become
every thing to them, that he might save them.

But what is this to those amongst us? Is there no difference between the Case
of new Converts and those Born and Bred up in Christianity? Who have sucked in
the principles of Religion with their milk, who have always lived under the
power of it, and have had time and opportunities more then sufficient, for
conviction, information and instruction? If such as those will be always Babes,
if their Faith be so unsettled still, such weakness is not only a great shame,
but I fear, when all hearts are tried, will appear not weakness but wilfulness.

Besides, what has the Case of weakness to do with those, Conference at
Hampton Court.
who as King James speaks are not only Strong, but Headstrong, who are
obstinately wedded to Foolish and unreasonable opinions, whom nothing of Lenity
can win, nothing of reason can satisfy; are these to be entertained with the
same tenderness that belongs to a weak Brother? Weakness indeed is but
obstinacy, and stiffness in error was never thought an argument of compassion
and sufferance. Our Savior himself, and his Apostles, who always condescended
to Weakness, yet vigorously and Zealously opposed themselves against
perverseness, and stubbornness.

2. Hence we see that Scandal or offending a Weak Brother, is no less then
perverting him from Christianity, and therefore we find in all places cited,
that when he is offended, he is said to be destroyed and made perish: This is
plainly the meaning of being offended here. And the being hindered from
believing in Christ, or being induced to forsake that Belief afterward, is the
sense of most (if not all) of the places of the New Testament where the words
Scandal or Offense are named, I shall need to instance but in two or three. In
the Thirteenth Chapter of Saint Matthew in the Parable of the Sower and the
Seed, that is, as our Savior himself interprets it, himself, and his Doctrine
at ver. 20, 21. it is said, He that receives the Seed in Stony places, is he
that hears the Word, and with joy receives it, but he has not Root; for
when Tribulation, or Persecution, comes because of the Word, by and by he is
offended, that is, by Reason of Tribulation, and Persecution, which follow upon
the profession of the Christian Faith he forsakes it. So Saint Matthew 18th.
Chapter ver. 6. Whosoever shall offend one of these little Ones that believe in
me, that is, shall make them leave the Profession, or Practice of my Faith. So
when the Jews are said to be offended at Christ, they were through their own
misconceptions and prejudices hindered from believing on him; so then being
offended is not so light a thing as some make of it, it is not being angry or
displeased, but such a thing whereby their Religion is endangered, and they are
thereby discouraged either from embracing, or continuing in Christianity.

Now this is matter of a very high Nature, and it is no Wonder that the Gospel,
which takes so much care for the Salvation of all Men, should (as much as may
be) endeavor to prevent the loss of any, Charity is the Sum of our Religion
as to God, so also to our Brother, and it is a duty incombent on all, both upon
the account of God, of their Christianity and of their Neighbor, to propagate
and spread it, and to use all fair means that others may entertain it, as well
as our selves. If therefore, by any behavior of ours, there is bred a dislike
and aversion, and our Brother falls away from Christ, we betray our Savior, we
hinder his design and end in coming, and we contradict the Fundamental
Principle of Christian Religion. These are things therefore of the highest
concernment, and it is no wonder our Savior and the Apostle gives such severe
Rules and Injunctions concerning them. The Salvation of a man is of high
importance: 'Twas that for which Christ died, and his Religion is the way to
it. It Is no harsh order therefore, That we should by all means take care, that
our Liberty is no a Stumbling Block to them that are Weak, (1 Cor. 8.9.) And
the Apostle professes for himself, that if Meat make his Brother to offend, he
will eat none while the World stands. that is, he will do nothing that is in
his power to forbear, rather than hazard the loss of his Brothers Soul, and
truly he must have mean thoughts of Christian Charity, and of Man's Salvation,
that will not deny himself a great many lawful Freedoms rather than his
Brothers Salvation shall be hazarded, and he be occasioned to forsake
Christianity.

And this I take to be the true Notion of Scandal as it is stated in the
Gospel, and concerning which those Rules, and Directions of not offending our
Brother were made. I confess there are Scandals of an inferior Nature, and in
which Sense Divines generally handle this Subject, and that is when our
Behavior occasions our Brother not to forsake the whole, but to break any part
of our Religion and fall into Sin, and this to it be true, yet there is a great
difference in degree and malignity, the great Scandal is that which is so much
spoken to, and those things and prescriptions (I have mentioned) tho they may
also in proportion be binding in reference to the lesser ones, yet I conceive
they are chiefly intended, and do primarily relate to the greater; tho they may
be Rules for our Behavior, and are to be so with Respect to any Sin of our
Brother, yet their first and chiefest Respect is in reference to his Total
desertion of Christianity.

To comprehend the whole therefore, A Weak Brother is offended, when by any
uncharitable behavior, imprudent use of liberty, or other means, he is driven
away from Christianity, or occasioned to violate any part of it; for tho (as I
said) the Rules the Gospel gives of not offending, have the first and chiefest
regard, and were mainly (if not only) intended to secure such from falling from
the Christian Faith, yet by Analogy and Parity of Reason they may have Respect
to prevent likewise their falling into any Sin, and here the argument is good
from the greater to the less; for if it be a Scandal to drive a man from
Christianity in the Whole, it is so (tho in an inferior degree) to occasion him
to forsake any Part of it. The Reason and Ground of these Rules was that
thereby Salvation was hazarded, and a Man's Sulvation is in danger (tho not
equally nor so much) by his falling into Sin, as by this leaving Christian
Religion. This is the first, the Nature of Scandal.

2. I shall endeavor to inquire into matter of Fact, whether they that urge
this objection are really offended in a Gospel sense, or whether any reasonable
Man can believe so, granting that the things are as bad as they represent them.
I shall not here enter into Men's Consciences, to their own Judge they stand or
fall. But the ground of this inquiry is this, They are always quarrelling at
our Ceremonies, always angry at and displeased with them, and nothing we can do
can persuade them to an approbation of them. Now this (which they take to be
their offense) is an undeniable Argument against it, and so long as they
continue in that mind, they are not only not offended, but it is impossible
they should be so. For suppose there was that real evil in them, which they
either do, or make us believe they think there is; the imposing them by the
Church, or the using them our selves, what inconvenience soever they may bring
to us, can never hazard them, who run from them as far as they are able. Let
our Ceremonies be as Antichristian and Idolatrous as they would have them,
what harm is that to those, who will not so much as touch them with one of
their Fingers? Had these People too great an opinion of Ceremonies, were they
apt to worship and adore them, and should our just and decent use of them bring
them to this, they would indeed be offended, tho we had not given the occasion:
But now to scorn and hate them, to vilify and reproach them, and all that use
them, and yet cry out they are offended at them, is a contradiction. In the
Case of Meat offered to Idols, the Strong are forbidden to eat, not because the
weak Brother is angry, or displeased with so doing, but for fear he should be
too well pleased with it, that is should like it so well as to do it himself,
and it was not because they had an ill opinion, but too good opinion of an
Idol, for as yet they had Conscience toward the Idol, and might be emboldened
to eat it as part of the Idol Worship. Their Weakness consisted in having too
good thoughts of these things, and therefore they should be forborne, lest they
should esteem them yet more, and so be confirmed in, or returned to Idolatry.
And (in this Sense) if our Brethren were offended, they should then frequent
our Assemblies, and Idolize our Ceremonies, and Esteem them holier than we do
our selves. But when they revile and clamor against them; when they deride and
scoff at them, if there should be any hurt in them, these (of all Men) are not
like to be spoiled by our Example: tho kneeling at the Sacrament should be
Idolatry, and the Surpliss, and Common Prayer downright Popery; yet the
Christianity of such cannot be endangered by them. For how can they be poluted,
and their weak Consciences wounded by any thing they will not use? These People
therefore think they are offended, only because they are angry and vexed, and
who can help it? such things will be, so long as there are peevish, unquiet,
and troublesome Natures in the World; but surely they ought not to hinder the
Church from injoyning, or us from using any thing that is decent and useful.
Nay, this is so far from being a Scandal, or any Inducement for us to forbear
these things, that upon this very account, and for their sakes, we ought to be
more Zealous and Earnest in them, if by any means we might bring them to some
Conscience of these things; if our careful discharge of our Duty might win upon
them, and they seeing our good works might be brought to a just regard for
Authority, and a right esteem for the Peace and Union of the Church. For those
that for matter of Rites can separate and divide, have too mean Esteem of Unity
and Obedience, and while they see us loose and careless in our Duty, it will be
apt to confirm them in their Error. The Weakness of our Brethren plainly
consists in too much slighting Decency and Ceremonies, and too little regard
for Authority. And an indifferency, coldness, or complying with them will
nourish their mistakes, will confirm them in their ill grounded Opinion, and
really offend them.

There is one Objection to this, and that is, That tho they should not be
offended in Reference to the use of the Ceremonies, because they do not use
them, yet the Ceremonies being imposed by the Church, and they having such an
Aversion to them, are thereby prejudiced against our Communion, and so want the
means of Salvation that is amongst us, and by that means they may, tho not by
the other, be offended. This Objection I do not know that it is urged by any of
them, nor indeed can it well be by those who think they have purer Ordinances,
and purer Ways of Worship. But what weight there is in this Objection, and how
far the Church in its Impositions may have regard to the Prejudices of People,
and whether this will relate to the Case of our present Dissenters, will be
spoke to under another Head.

3. Supposing they are really offended, yet however these two things ought to
be considered.

First, That this cannot with any Sense or Conscience be used by them that are
offended.

2. If the matter of Offense be in things indifferent, we cannot forbear them
upon the account of a weak Brother, where our Liberty is already determined.

First, That this cannot with any Sense or Conscience be urged by them that are
offended: I know they think they say something, when they say they are
offended, but whatsoever it may be against us, to be sure it is nothing for
themselves: For they do not consider that to be offended is a Sin, as well as
to offend, and the weak Brother that falls is in as much danger, as he that
makes him: For a Scandal becomes a Sin, no otherwise, than as it has Relation
to other Men's Sins, and if it be a Sin in the remote Occasion, it is certainly
so in the immediate Actor. He that causes a man to forsake his Duty, (which is
the Gospel Scandal.) is guilty of, and punishable for the Scandal, and he that
does it, is guilty of, and punishable for the Transgression of Gods Law: In
short, if it be a Sin to entice, to temper, or to provoke to Sin, it is
certainly not less to act, and to perform it, and therefore we read in the
Scandals the Gospel speaks of; These that were offended were not so very
Innocent, nor in a very hopeful Condition. But they are said to be lost, to
perish, and to be destroyed. And now is not this a hopeful Argument? and can
any man use it that is really offended? all that he says must rebound upon
himself, and every clamor against us flies in his own Face; for it is
certainly a Duty not to be scandalized, as well as not to scandal; and if they
are offended, and are sensible of it, they Sin knowingly; and if they know it,
why do they not remove their Offenses, and forbear to Sin? For it is certainly a
very strange thing, for Men perpetually to cry out, They are in a fault, and
yet never take care to mend it. But the truth is, the Men that talk at this
rate, do not know what they say, they take their own unreasonable Frets, and
Discontents for Offense, which notwithstanding in the Gospel-Sense is quite
contrary.

2. If the Matter of Offense be in things indifferent in their Nature, where
our Liberty is already determined, we cannot forhare them, tho our weak Brother
should thereby be offended. And this is our Case, the things in Controversy we
believe to be of an indifferent Nature, and such as are in our Superiors Power
to impose, and when lawful Authority has interposed, we are no longer free,
and the things which are indifferent in their Nature, are not now indifferent
in their use, we are under the binding Power of the Law, and are obliged to
observe them, by Virtue of those Injunctions which command us to submit our
selves to the Powers set over us: And now (in this Case) what would they have
us to do? would they have us despise Authority, and break through the Laws? this
perhaps might please and satisfy them; but sure they do not expect we should
wound our own Consciences to heal theirs, that we should Sin our selves to
prevent Sin in them. For (if they do not,) we do believe we are bound in
Conscience to obey our Governors in all things Lawful: the things that
occasioned the Scandals the Apostle speaks of, were as yet left undetermined,
and they might as well omit, as use them. But it is not so with us, we are tied
up by Laws, and therefore if our Brethren should be offended, we may be sorry,
but we cannot help it: We may wish they were more Judicious and Understanding,
than to be scandalized at Innocent Rites, and we may take all the Care we can
to inform them better; but we must not therefore forbear them, and disobey our
Rulers; we may have all Tenderness and Charity for them. But Charity begins at
home: we cannot out of Love to them ruin our selves, and neglect our Duty, and
make other Men's mistakes the Rule of our Consciences. And this is the third
Thing,

4. I shall endeavor to make out, that tho they are not offended by us, yet
they are really offended by the Leaders of the Separation. And this will retort
the Argument upon themselves: For this purpose I shall need only to remind you,
That the formal Nature of Scandal is such a Behavior of ours, as whereby our
Brother is lead into Sin. And to make this good against the Heads of the
Separation I shall premise, and take for granted these three Things.

First, That Obedience to Governors in all Lawful Things is a Duty.

2. That Separation from a Lawful Communion, from a Church whereof we are
National Members, and wherein we may Communicate without Sin, is a Sin.

3. That the Church of England is such a Church. These three (which might
easily be made out) but would take up too much time for the present Discourse,
and which I must now therefore take for granted. But they being granted it will
follow, that those Persons, who entice them from their Obedience, and who lead
them into Schism, are the persons that really offend them, ( i.e.) these are
the Men that Occasion them to Sin. Those therefore that lead them into
Conventicles, and teach them to despise Dominion, and speak evil of Dignities,
those that make them believe two or three Ceremonies are as heavy as the
Mosaical Yoke, that by calling hard Names, as Antichrist, and Baal's Priests,
fright and scare poor Poeple from our Communion; these are they that offend
them, that is, who make them Sin, and pervert them from their Duty. Where
therefore they learn to be proud and untractable, to be Factious and
Schismatical, to be Seditious and Ungovernable, there it is they must lay their
Offense. And if it be seriously enquired into, whence it is that these Men have
taken such an ill and Unrighteous Opinion concerning us, and the things we use,
as to believe the Communicating with us will pollute and defile them, this
cannot be in the things themselves, and it is some what odd, that Men should
believe the Church of England is Popishly given, which notwithstanding is, (and
any man may know it that will) the chiefest support of Protestanism, and the
greatest Bulwark against Popery in the World; it is strange that Men in their
wits should think, that whining and sighing, that undigested thoughts, and
crude, (not to say nonsensical) Expressions, should be the Spirit of Prayer,
and more fit to express the Necessities of a Congregation, than these that have
been deliberately penned by the most Judicious and Godly in a Nation: I say,
whence is it, that Men take up such Unrighteous Estimates? there is not one of
a thousand of them that ever examined the truth of things, or have any thing to
say besides some scurrilous Expressions; they take them upon trust, and swallow
down every thing their Leaders dictate, and so they become offended, and
separate from us, and fly from our Communion, And so long as they are made to
believe, that when we kneel at the receiving the Communion, we are Idolaters,
that the Cross in Baptism is making new Sacraments, that when they Communicate
with us, they shall join themselves to a Company of Jews, Heathens, or Papists;
these Men indeed are offended; but woe be to them by whom such Offenses come,
who raise up Bug-bears, and scare-Crows, and drive Christian People from what
they are bound in Conscience to do; these therefore that make them divide and
separate, that are always railing at an Innocent Church, that feed their
prejudices, and what their Discontents, that insinuate into the injudicious,
unstable, and unsettled; these (how much soever they may humor and please
them.) Are in truth the Persons that offend them, that is, that withdraw them
from their Duty, and Occasion them to Sin. For,

5. The Church of England has upon no account given Occasion of Offense to
any, she has not done any thing that may Discourage any Honest Man in the way
of his Salvation. But has used all means to set up the Kingdom of Christ, and
to promote the Interest of Souls. Her Doctrines are the same with the Gospel,
and the Faith which was once delivered to the Saints, she has preserved pure,
and delivered uncorrupted to her Children. And those who are offended at these,
would likewise be offended at Christ, if he was alive. But this I shall not now
need to insist upon, it being not denied by any, except the wildest sort of
Separatists. But does she not give Milk with one Breast, and Poison with the
other? though her Doctrines be pure, yet the Liturgy and Ceremonies she imposes
may pollute and defile our Consciences. And this might be something, if our
Ceremonies were Numerous and Cumbersome, if they were a Clog and Impediment to
Piety and Devotion, if they were invented, and set up by our Church, and not
used by the best Christians in Ancient Times; But if they are, for their
number, few; for their Nature, fit and apt to promote Religion and God's
Worship: If they have been used by the Primitive and early Christians, then
they cannot in Reason offend: And why should the Common Prayer, and the Sign of
the Cross corrupt us, which did very well agree, with the Consciences of the
best and purest Christians? But that which I shall chiefly insist on, is
comprehened in these three Things.

First, That the Methods the Church proceeded with in these Things upon the
Reformation, seemed most proper to revent Offenses.

2. That the Things she has retained are Decent and Useful, apt to advance
Religion and Gods Worship, and to secure it from Irreverence and Profanation,
and therefore might reasonably be enjoined for the benefit of a Religious
Society, tho some Persons of that Society might mistake them, or not approve
them

3. That she has taken all possible Care to satisfy even the most Scrupulous,
of her Innocence, and the cleerness of her Intentions in imposing them, and so
has used all reasonable ways to take off Prejudices and Offenses, and has in
all things (as much as the thing would admit) condescended to the weakest, and
most infirm in Faith, or Understanding.

And these three being made out, it will appear, that the Church is so far from
being Occasion of offending the Weak, that she has exercised all possible
Lenity and Tenderness toward them.

First, That the Methods the Church proceeded with in these things upon the
Reformation, seemed most proper to prevent Offenses, and that was when she
excluded all things that were Novel, Sinful, and tiresome, and retained what
was of undoubted Antiquity, easy, and useful. And this, (whatsoever some hot
Men may think) was certainly the evenest course that could be taken to prevent
Offenses on all Hands. Had there been more, and more troublesome kept, those
that complain now, might have Reason to be offended? Had all been thrown away,
as well the useful as others, a contrary Party might have been offended, and
when they saw us reform from what was convenient, they might have esteemed the
whole Reformation not just and necessary, but peevish or politic, and carried
on for other ends besides REligion and the Salvation of Souls. I know this kind
of reasoning will not down with some, and a man shall hardly escape from being
called a Papist for urging it. But for all that, since it is necessary the
Church should open its Arms to receive all, since the Apostle enjoins, to give
no offense, neither to the Jew, nor to the Gentile; it was (especially at that
time when a Nation was to be converted from the dregs of Popery) not only the
Wisdom, and Moderation, but the Christianity too of the first Reformers to
carry things with so much evenness and indifferency; as not to please the Fury
and Heats of the one Hand, nor the Errors and Faults on the other: And this
took away a great many Offenses, which were and still are objected against
Reformations in other places. And when they saw that we did not throw away the
Mettle with the Dross, that we did not cast off things profitable with the
unprofitable, it was a plain Evidence, that the end of the Reformation was
Truth, not Design; that what was aimed at was not Opposition, Contradiction, or
Interest, but only to establish and set up the Purity of the Gospel. And this
just and equal Dealing, was the most prudent and Conscientious course that
could be taken to prevent offenses, and a great many were by this means brought
into the Church (for most of the Nation was converted) who in all probability,
by other Furious Methods, by cutting up Root and Branch (as they call it) by
destroying every thing then in use, how useful soever, would have been
offended, that is, they would have been discouraged, and rather have kept to
their old superstitions, than have entered into a Church which Acted so
Unreasonably.

I know it is said, that this Method was proper enough in the Infant state of
Reformation when men's minds were yet hankering after Ceremonies and they could
not so soon be weaned from their old Dotages, and therefore it might then be
necessary to comply with them, for fear of diving them quite away from us. But
it is not so now, a through Reformation would be more fit and suitable; men are
now grown more wise and understanding, and know that these things are vain and
empty, Superstitous and Ridiculous, and therefore Iaffirm,

2. The things retained are decent and useful, etc. There are but Three or Four
things about which all this stir is made, as the Surpliss, and Liturgy, the
Cross in Baptism, and Kneeling at the Communion: Each of which notwithstanding
is fit and proper. Let any unprejudiced man consider, whether a Decent and
Solemn way of Worship is not apt to impress Reverence on men's minds, and
whether distinction of Habits does not contribute to the Solemnity. It plainly
does so in Magistrates and Judges, and no Mortal man can give a Reason, why it
should not have the same influence in Religious as well as Civil things. Is not
Gods worship like to be better secured from indecency, mistake and miscarriage,
by prescribed Rules, than by leaving the Modes to every giddy man's fancy and
opinion? Is not a form of words, where the matter is maturely thought on, and
every expression well weighed, more fit to excite Devotion, more suitable to
express the peoples wants and desires, than rash, inconsiderate, and hasty
thoughts, than idle, intemperate, and ridiculous expressions? Is not the Cross,
the Badg of our Christian profession? And when we are Baptized into Christ's
Death, is it not fit we should be minded of it? That we now take up the Cross,
and are to be Crucified to the World, that we should not be ashamed of a
Crucified Savior, but own and profess his Religion in spite of all
opposition. When Men worship God, and Commemorate infinite blessings, is it not
fit this should be done in the humblest posture? That therefore when we praise,
and return thanks to God and our Savior, and are partakers of his Body and
Blood, we rather Kneel, then behave ourselves as his equals, or as if we had
been at a bodily entertainment with one of our Neighbors.

These things are plain and obvious at the first sight, as very proper and
expedient for the more orderly and comely carrying on of Gods Worship. And this
is the first thing to be inquired into as to the imposition of any thing,
whether they are fit for the purposes they are intended, and if they are, then
there is sufficient Reason for the commanding them, tho some Persons should not
like them, or should fall into inconvenience by them, and the Reason is because
the end of Laws is the good of the Society, and if the good of the greatest
part is thereby promoted, it justifies and warrants such Impositions: Now the
Power the Church is invested with is for Edification, and if it injoyns such
things as are apt to edify, if it belongs to her to look after Gods service,
and if what she has ordained tends to the more due and Solemn performance of
the things of Religion, to make men, at their Worship Reverent and Devout, and
to prevent them from being vain, light, and impudent, then there is great
Reason for the imposing these things, tho some Persons should be offended at
them; there could never any Laws be made, if every Man's dislikes or offenses
were to be first consulted the best things will offend some, Tertullian says.
Bonae res neminem scandalisant nisi malam mentem. Tertul. de veland. virginib.
Good things offend none but the Evil, Humility and Charity offend the proud
and the covetous, Unity and Peace are not agreeable to the turbulent and
factious. Neither will be Laws enjoining Decency, Order, and Uniformity be
pleasing to them, who love Distraction, Solvenliness, and Irreverence in Gods
Worship.

3. The Church has taken all posible care to give all Satisfaction of
Innocence and clearness in her injunctions, and so has done (what lay in her)
to take off all unreasonable prejudices and offenses against them. If some have
taken mistakes and misapprehensions, if she has taken all care to rectify
those mistakes, if they will still be offended, the Church is by no means
chargeable with those offenses, she has taken so much pains to remove. And
herein the Charity and Condescension of the Church of England is very
Remarkable; there is not one of those things which have been objected against
her, but have been answered with all possible Clearness and Satisfaction, and
there has been all care taken fully to inform them of the clearness of her
intentions, for instance, she has declared over and over, that she places no
Holiness in Vestments, nor in any other Ceremonies, only she uses them for
Decency, Edification, and out of a due respect to Antiquity. That the Cross in
Baptism is not a new Sacrament, that it is not, nor ever was intended by her as
any addition to Christ's institution, but only as a convenient initiating Rite
into the Church. That by enjoining Kneeling at the Communion, she does not
intend any adoration of the Bread and Wine, but only a suitable gesture for the
purposes we are about at the Sacrament. And the like may be said of every other
thing that is cavill'd at. And now if after these full and often Declarations
they are resolved they will not believe them, nor examine the Truth of them; if
they are still resolved to be mistaken, their mistakes are Obstinate and
willful, and it is not in the Churches power to help it, she has done all she
can do, they may, if they will be still offended and fly from our Communion,
but surely it can never with any Reason be said, the Church has occasioned
them so to do. And this is the Fifth thing.

6. I shall endeavor, briefly to apply this to our Practice.

First, Let us with Zeal and Vigor assert the Constitutions of the Church
notwithstanding the mistakes, or pretended offenses of ignorant or ill meaning
Men. I would not be so mistaken, as if I had not all the Charity for every
honest man, tho he is mistaken: But surely it does not become us to feed their
mistakes, and for want of acquainting them with their Duty, to suffer them to
continue in error all their lives long; the more Charity we have for them, the
greater care we shall take to instruct them, and to win them from the Error of
their ways. When therefore we are Mealy Mouthed, or (which is worse) when by
any unworthy complyances we yield to them, or connive at them, we humor their
Errors and really offend them.

2. Let us be careful of our Conversation that as the Church has not, so we
may give no occasion of offense. Innocent Ceremonies are not, but ill lives are
offensive, vice was always Scandalous; and if this way we pervert any, we are
responsible for the offenses we cause. Our Follies will reflect upon the
Church; those who never examined it is principles, will be apt to think her as
vicious, as our selves, that she connives at those Crimes her Members commit. I
know it is not reasonable from the Sins of Professors to argue evil of the
Religion: But since the whole World is Governed more by Example, then
direction, it will certainly concern us, for the Churches sake, and for our
own, that we do not justly occasion men to speak evil of her, or of us. There
is not a vice the Church of England tolerates, nor a virtue that it does not
encourage to, and yet (we may remember) the irregularities of some particular
Members was made an objection against the whole Church, every Error, or
Looseness in a Member was made the fault of the Church. And so it is still, our
Mother will be wounded through our sides, every disorder we commit will be an
Arugment against her, and a discouragement from her Communion; we may Reason
for ever; but if we do not live too, we shall never gain Men to our Church;
Reason is an abstruse thing and all have not Faculties; but bad manners are
obvious, and every man has talent enough to know; our Sins therefore will
hinder more then our persuasions can draw, and those that can never answer our
Arguments, will yet gain Ground by our Vices; and here truly we are beholding
to our Adversaries, they will be sure to mind us of our Faults and sometimes
when there is no Ground, and think by charging us to discharge themselves even
from far greater Sins: But our faults will not make them Innocent, and an
Irregular behavior in a Churchmember will not justify Pride, and Faction,
and Schism in a Seperatist. Nor yet will their disorders acquit ours, nor will
ours be less because theirs are greater. What I shall therefore recommend is,
that whereas they cannot speak against us as Rebels, Schismatics, Seditious,
Turbulent, and unquiet, we may take care they shall not justly charge us with
any other vice: For let us do what we can, they will speak evil of us, which we
cannot help, but we can help, and let us take care, that they do not do it
justly, but as the Apostle says, (1 Pet. 2.12.) Let us have our Conversation
Honest among them, that whereas they speak against us as evildoers, they may
be our good Works, which they shall behold glorify God in the Day of Visitation.

FINIS.

