SERMONS PREACHED Upon several Occasions Before the KING AT WHITE HALL. By the
Right Reverend Father in God, JOHN WILKINS, late Lord Bishop of CHESTER. To
which is added, A DISCOURSE Concerning the Beauty of Providence. By the same
Author.

LONDON: Printed by H. Cruttenden for Robert Sollers in St. Paul's Churchyard.
1677.

TO THE Right Honorable GEORGE Lord BERKELEY, Lord of Berkeley, Mombray,
Seagrave, and Bruce, Custos Rotulorum of the Counties of Gloucester and Surrey:
and Governor of the LEVANT COMPANY.
May it please your Lordship,
HAving these scattered Discourses in my custody, and wholly at my disposal,
either to republish, or suffer them to sleep in that darkness wherein they lay;
I thought it very incongruous to the necessities of this degenerate age, to let
the excellent works of so learned, pious, and worthy a Prelate be extinct, and
lie hid from the open view of the World; since they are none of the worst of
which this Great Man was pleased to bless our times with.

These Sermons were framed for, and preached before a Great and Regal Auditory;
though by their plain, natural, and unaffected Style (a thing he always
delighted in) one would have thought the contrary; since the Chapels as well
as Courts of Princes, are by biased and self-interested principles so often
flattered.

And now I thought no man so fitting as your Lordship to shelter these
Discourses from the rage and fury of the Atheistical Malcontents of the Age;
they being the Fundamentals of Religion that he treats of; which I am very
sensible your Lordship well knows, are not only slighted, but bid open defiance
to, and the Authority of their Institution called in question.

That man would certainly be held a notorious Delinquent, that should openly
affront the King, and disown that Authority, and Legislative Power, by which he
commands Obedience to his Laws. The Consequent may be justly applicable, in the
words of a Reverend and Learned Dr. Stillingfleet.
Writer of our times, But to Blaspheme God, and Deride his Service, seems to
have a much greater malignity in it, inasmuch as our obligations to his Honor
and Service, are much greater than they can be to any created Being. And to
such kind of men it may be said, in the words of a Morn. Du Pless. de veritat.
Relig. Chr. Cap. 1.
Noble Author, Agnoscant vero hanc, suam formam, tanquam in speculo, miseri and
perditi illi, qui Deum obliviscendo, se sui oblitos non vident; quia formam
naturamque, essentiam, quantum in se est, obliterarunt.

That I make this DedicatoryEpistle proceeds not from a desire thus publicly
to expose my self, (for as I can have no interest to court the applause, so
neither have I any reason to value the censure of the World) but it is from a
sincere principle to express that Reverence I bear your Lordship; whom I know
as you have Goodness to pardon, so I presume to, your Honor will be both ready
and willing to stand in the defense of this bold Address.

That Length of Days may be in your Right Hand, and in your Left, Riches and
Honor, is the Hearty and Affectionate Prayer of him, who desires nothing more,
than to subscribe himself, (in all the circumstances of a becoming Devoir.)

My LORD, Your Lordship's most Humble and most Obedient Servant, J. G.

TO THE READER.
WHen first these Discourses were sent to the Press there was neither Epistle
nor Preface designed, but it being a thing altogether uncouth and unusual; I
was unwilling to affect any thing of singularity, and in this affair (to be so
great a friend to the Bookseller and Printer, as) to follow the common Road.

If there is any thing in the Publisher that thou may call folly or
presumption it was done through ignorance or inadvertency; and since I
acknowledge my fault, I hope you will pardon it.

As for the following Discourses they are so admirably well penned, and their
contexture so smooth and even that they are beyond all imaginable praise. It
would argue nothing less than presumption to speak in their behalf, and it
needs nothing more than the name of its Author to Recommend it to the World.

Farewell.
A SERMON Preached before the KING AT WHITE HALL, In Lent, 1669.
PROVE. 3. 16, 17. Length of days is in her right hand, and in her left hand
Riches and Honor.

Her ways are ways of Pleasantness, and all her Paths are Peace.


THE chief design of the Wiseman in this Text, is, to set forth the many great
advantages that belong to Religion; in order to which, he does here enumerate
those five principal things that must contribute to a complete state of
Happiness in this World, namely, Health, and Riches, and Honor, and Pleasure,
and Peace; and asserts concerning them, that they are the proper effects of
that wisdom which consists in being Religious,

This he expresses by way of Allegory, representing Wisdom (as is usual for
other Virtues) in the shape of a Woman, or Queen, with her Arms extended, in
the posture of directing and rewarding her Followers; holding in her right hand
the blessing of Health, or length of Days, the great Promise of the Law; to
which the Precedence of the right hand is therefore given, because it is
amongst all worldly Blessings the greatest and most desirable; that, without
which, a man cannot enjoy any thing else, nor so much as his own self; Length
of days is in her right hand. And then, for those other things, which the
generality of men do so much covet and labor after, Wealth, and Reputation;
these likewise are at her disposal, and must proceed from her gift; And in her
left hand, Riches and Honor. And, as for the Cheerfulness of our conditions,
he affirms, that the truest Pleasure must be found in those ways that are
directed by her; Her ways are ways of Pleasantness. And because there are
several things which have some present delight in them, seeming to drop as the
Honeycomb, and to be smoother Prove. 5. 4.
than Oil, and yet upon trial, do prove in the issue, bitter as Wormwood, and
sharp as a two-edged Sword; therefore it is added, that her ways are not only
pleasant, but they are likewise safe and quiet; all her paths are Peace.

That these things are the effects of Religion, is here only affirmed, which,
to them who believe the Authority of Scripture, is evidence sufficient: But, it
were easy to prove this concerning each of them, by all other kinds of
evidence, of which such matters are capable.

I purpose at this time to treat only concerning the third of them, namely,
Honor; as being the most proper Subject for this Presence and Auditory. And
that this can only be attained by Religion and Virtue, I doubt not but to prove
with so much strength and perspicuity, as shall be sufficient to convince any
o^^ who will but attend and consid^r.

In order to this, I shall first endeavor (...) state the true nature of
Ho^^^^, and to show wherein the most proper Notion of it does consist; it is an
equivocal word, and is capable of various senses.

First, Sometimes it is used to denote worthy and creditable Parentage; the
being derived from such Ancestors as have been famous in their Generation for
some eminent Virtue or Exploit: Wherein there is this benefit, that a man has
great examples in his own Family, and so much the stronger Obligation not to
degenerate from them: But it shows rather what such a man should be, than what
he is; and, to a person that is not Virtuous, does prove a prejudice rather
than an advantage.

Secondly, Sometimes it is used to signify Titles of Place and Dig^^ty,
according to the various orders and degrees of ^obility in sev^^al Nations:
But, this kind of Honor depending mee^^^ upon the Princes Favor, mu^^
therefore be wholly extrinsecal, and consequen^ly can have no more due to it
than a mere external respect. Such persons may challenge from us, that we
should give them their due Titles, and demean our selves toward them with that
Observance and Ceremony as becomes their Quality: But then, as to inward esteem
and affection, they can demand no greater a share of this, than according as
their real worth and virtue shall require. The Royal Stamp upon any kind of
Metal may be sufficient to give it an extrinsick value, and to determine the
Rate at which it is to pass amongst Coins, but it cannot give an intrinsic
value, or make that which is but Brass, to be Gold.

It Is true indeed, there are some Callings and Relations of men, to whom an
inward Veneration is due, though the persons themselves should not be Virtuous;
namely, Magistrates, and Ministers, and Parents, and Benefactors; who, having
somewhat of a Divine Stamp and Impress upon them, may therefore challenge from
us, that we should demean our selves toward them, both with such an outward
Respect as may become their Places, and with such an inward Respect too, as may
be suitable to that Image which they bear, our dependence upon them, and
obligation to them. But then, we cannot be obliged to think such persons good
men, unless we have some evidence to believe them to be so, or at least, not to
be otherwise; So that they are beholding to something extrinsical to their
Persons, namely, to their Callings and Relations, for that Honor which is paid
to them.

Thirdly, the word Honor is sometimes used for that Esteem and Reputation
which a man has in the World, especially amongst Virtuous Persons; according
to which sense it is defined by Tully to be Consentiens Laus Bonorum, Tuscul. Q.
2.
the concurrent approbation of good men; when those, who are best able to judge
of real worth, shall both think and speak well of others, this is properly
honoring of them. And in this sense (which is the most proper notion of the
words) it is one of the greatest blessings that this World can afford; much to
be preferred before Riches, or Pleasures, or Life it self. A good Name is
rather to be chosen than great Riches, and loving kindness rather than Silver
or Gold, Prove. 22. 1. One that is a Generous, Virtuous man, will choose to dye,
rather than do any thing that may expose him to Infamy: St. Paul was of this
mind; It were better for 1 Cor. 9. 15.
me to dye, than that any should make my glorying void. There have been some
wise men, who have neglected and refused that other kind of Honor, consisting
in Titles of Dignity, as conceiving more of burden and temptation in it, than
of real advantage; but no man in his wits did ever despise a good name, unless
such profligate dissolute wretches, as did either despair of, or resolve
against doing any thing that might deserve it. It Is not easy to reckon up the
many advantages that belong to this kind of Honor: It Is Power, inabling a man
to do things great and worthy, to be useful to his Friends and his Country:
It Is Safety, and does give a man such an interest in the esteem and affection
of others, as will make them concerned for his Welfare, ready to stand by him
and assist him in any kind of danger; which are so great advantages, that
whosoever shall wilfully neglect them, must needs be rendered very contemptible.

Having thus Explained the proper Notion of Honor, I proceed in the next place
to Prove, that Religion and Virtue is the only means ^or the attaining of it.
This I shall endeavor to do by Testimony, and by Reason, and by Experience,
which (...) all the kinds of Arguments that such matters are capable of.

First, By Testimony. The Scripture does abound in diverse Assertions and
Promises to this purpose: Such as are Religious are styled the Excellent of the
Earth, Psalm. 16. 3. and said to be more excellent than Cap. 12. 26. Deuteronomy. 32.
9. Exodus 19. 5. Jer. 12. 7. Psalm. 4. 3.
their Neighbors, Prove. 17. 27. They are Gods peculiar Treasure. The dearly
beloved of his Soul. He sets apart the Man that is Godly for himself. Though
such persons may be but low, as to their outward Condition; being put to wander
up and down in Sheepskins and Goat Skins, being destitute, afflicted,
tormented, seeking for refuge in Deserts and Mountains, in Dens and Caves of
the Earth; yet may they upon the account of Religion, be of such excellent
value, that in the Judgment of the Holy Ghost, The whole World is not worthy of
them, Heb. 11. 37, 38.

The Wiseman speaking of Religion, says, that it shall be an ornament of
Grace unto thy head, and as a chain Pro. 1. 9. Chap. 4. 8, 9.
about thy neck. Exalt her, and she shall promote thee, and bring thee to
honor; She shall give to thy head an ornament of Grace, and a Crown of Glory.
God has en^^^^ed himself by Promise to those ^^at are Religious, that he will
set ^he^ ^bove other Nations; they shall be made the Head, and not the Tail,
Deuteronomy. 28. 13. He has said, Those that honor me, I will honor, 1 Samuel 2. 30.
And certainly, John 12. 26.
he, who is the King of Kings, must needs be the Fountain of Honor, and able
to dispose of it as he pleases.

But, because such Persons as are no friends to Religion, may have but a small
esteem for the Authority of Scripture: Therefore to these I would suggest the
concurrent Opinion of Wise Men in all former Ages. Though the Ancient
Philosophers were divided into various Sects, and differed very much from one
another in several Opinions; yet, in this they have all agreed, that Honor is
due only to Virtue, and does not properly belong to any thing else. It would be
tedious to enumerate the several Sayings to this purpose, out of Plato,
Aristotle, Tully, Seneca, and the other Ancients: And certainly, that Man must
needs have a very extravagant conceit of his own Abilities, who dares prefer
his private Opinion, before the General Consent of Wisemen in former Ages,
such as have been counted the greatest Masters of Reason, and most eminent for
their Knowledge and their Wisdom,

Secondly, I proceed in the next place to confirm this by the Principles of
Reason, That Religion and Virtue is the cause of Honor. There may be a
two-sold Cause of Things Moral, Natural.


That is said to be the Moral Cause, which does dispose a Man to such a
Condition, upon the Account of Fitness and Desert; and in this sense Honor is
the Reward of Virtue. There is an equitable right, a suitableness and
congruity, that Good Men should be loved and esteemed, and Vicious Men exposed
to shame: As Snow in Summer, and as Rain in Harvest, so is Hononr unsuitable
for a Fool, Prove. 26. 1. The intermixing of Winter and Summer, would not cause
a greater disorder in the Natural World, than the cross disposal of Honor and
contempt would in the Moral World. And hence is it, that the Laws of all
Nations and Governments, have owned it as a Point of Policy, to excite their
Subjects unto Virtuous and worthy Actions, by the Motive of Honor; and to
deter them from Vicious courses, by the consideration of the shame and contempt
which belongs to them.

That is said to be the Natural Cause of a thing, which does by its own
immediate efficacy produce the Effect; and in this sense likewise is Virtue the
Cause of Honor. The Fire does not more Naturally produce heat, than Goodness
does Love and Esteem; Which will appear very plain, if we consider, That Inward
Honoring is nothing else, but the Believing a Man to be Worthy and Virtuous;
and the Testifying this by our Words and Actions is Outward Honoring. Now,
nothing can be more evident, than that the best means for one to be thought
good, is to be so.

A Man may excel in Strength, Beauty, Riches, Learning, Wit, which are all
commendable things, and will contribute to a Man's esteem; But, if we apprehend
such a one to be notoriously Vicious, This esteem will not be accompanied with
Love, but with Fear, Hate, and Envy; because such a one has by these things so
much the greater advantage of doing Mischief in the World: Whereas on the other
side, though a Man should be destitute of all these other advantages, without
any Nobility in his Ancestors, but of a small Estate, a low Condition; yet, if
we believe him to be a truly Virtuous Man, it cannot be, but that we must pay a
Veneration to him.

All things whatsoever have some Natural Standard, whereby the Goodness of them
is to be measured; namely, their suitableness unto that chief end, for which
they are designed. We do not therefore account a Ship to be good, because it is
curiously painted and gilded, or carved and inlayed, but because it is fitted
for all the purposes of Navigation, which is the proper end and use of a Ship:
Nor do we therefore account a Sword to be good, because it has a rich Hilt,
and an Embroidered Scabbard, but because it is fit for the proper use of a
Sword, which is to cut. They are the comparisons of Seneca, speaking of this
Subject; In homine quoque, nihil ad rem pertinet, quantum aret, quantum
foeneret, a quam multis salutetur, etc. sed quam bonus sit. It should be so
likewise in our esteem of men, who are not so much to be valued by the Grandeur
of their Estates or Titles, as by their inward goodness.

Every man is endowed with a natural Principle, inclining him to a state of
Hap^^ness, and has in some measure, both an ability to judge of, and a freedom
and liberty for applying himself unto those Duties, which are the proper means
for the promoting of this end. And this being the peculiar difference of the
Humane Nature, therefore a man is not upon any other account to be justly
praised or blamed, but according to the right or wrong use of this natural
liberty; and consequently as a man does find either in himself or others, a
constant and firm resolution to make a right use of this, so should he
proportion his esteem accordingly; preferring this inward Greatness, this
rectitude of Mind, whereby a man is resolved in every condition to do that
which shall appear to be his duty, before any external Greatness whatsoever.

There are two kind of Virtues amongst all the rest, which are by general
consent esteemed Venerable, and such as do advance the Reputation of those who
are endowed with them; namely Wisdom, Courage.


Because they have a more intrinsic rise, and do less depend upon external
advantages, but seem rather to be rooted in the inward frame and temper of
mind; and withal, are most beneficial both to our selves and others: The former
signifying a man to have those intellectual abilities which are proper to his
kind, whereby the Humane Nature is to be distinguished from other things: The
other, because it argues a Rectitude in the Will, and a Power to subdue the
Passion of Fear, which is most natural to our present state of Infirmity; and
withal does support a man against Difficulties, and enable him for those two
Services, of Doing and Suffering as he ought. And, for this Reason, the Vices
that are opposite to these, are amongst all others counted the most shameful;
there being no greater Reproach to be cast upon any one, than to be esteemed a
Fool, or a Coward.

Now a Man that is Irreligious, cannot justly pretend to either of these
Virtues.

1. For Wisdom. This is so essential to Religion, that in the Scripturephrase
(especially in the Writings of David and Solomon) they both go under the same
Name, and there is very good reason why it should be so; because there is such
an intimate agreement between the Natures of them: The Philosopher does define
Wisdom to consist in an ability and inclination, to make choice of the right
Means in the prosecution of our true End. And nothing can enable a Man for this
but Religion, both as to the Subordinate End of Temporal Happiness in this
World; but chiefly with respect to that great and S^preme End of Eternal
Happiness in the World to come.

2. And then for Courage, It Is not possible for a Man to be truly Valiant,
unless he be withal truly Religious: He may be bold and daring, and able (in a
fearless manner) to rush upon any danger; but then he must stifle his Reason
from considering what the Consequences of things may be, what shall become of
him hereafter, if he should miscarry. There being no man whatsoever so totally
free from the Apprehension of a future state, but that when he is serious and
considerate, he must be startled with Doubts and Fears concerning it: So that
there cannot be any rational, sedate, deliberate courage, but only in such, as
have some good hopes of a better Estate in the other World; And, it is Religion
only that can enable a Man for this,

3. I proceed to the Third kind of Argument to this purpose, from Experience;
By which, I mean that Practical Knowledge, which every man may attain by his own
Observation of the usual course of things in the World: And, by this, it will
appear, that no kind of persons have been more highly reverenced in the Hearts
and Consciences of others, than those that have been most eminent for their
Virtue and Religion; which has been always true, both with respect to Public
Communities, and Private Persons.

First, For Nations; If we consult the Stories of former Times, we shall find
that saying of Solomon constantly verified, That Righteousness does Prove. 14.
34.
exalt a Nation, but Sin does prove a reproach to it: And more especially the
sin of Irreligion and Profaneness; As this does increase in any Nation, so
must the Honor and Reputation of that Nation decrease. The Roman Empire was
then at the highest, as to its Name and Greatness, when it was so as to its
Virtue; when they were most punctual in observing the Rites of their Religion,
(though that were a false way of worship) most Heroical in their Justice,
Courage, Fidelity, Gratitude; then it was that they deserved to Govern the
World, and to be had in greatest Honor above all other Nations. And not only
Tully and Polybius, two Heathen Writers, who, upon that Account, might be
thought more partial; But St. Austin also and Lactantius, two of the Fathers,
do ascribe the flourishing of that Empire, when it was at his height, to the
Religion, and Piety, and Virtue of those times; And, as they did afterward
degenerate from this, so did they decline likewise in their Greatness and
Honor,

2. Thus also has it been with particular persons; Amongst the Heathen, What
Elogies do we find in the Honor of Socrates, Aristides, Cato Epictetus? The
latter of which, though but a poor Slave, had yet such a Veneration paid to his
Memory, that his Earthen Lamp by which he was wont to study, was, after his
Death, sold for 3000 Drachms.

Nor was it otherwise amongst the Christians; The Apostles were but poor
Fishermen, Illiterate Mechanics; Many of the Martyrs were but of mean
condition, much Opposed and Persecuted in the World; And yet these Men, during
the time of their lives, were highly Reverenced amongst those that knew them;
and since their Deaths, what can be more Glorious than that Renown which they
have amongst Men, when the greatest Kings and Princes will not mention their
Names without Reverence; when whole Nations are willing to set apart, and to
observe Solemn Days and Festivals in Honor of their Memories.

And, as it has always been thus formerly, so I appeal to every man's breast,
whether it be not so now: Let them but examine what their Inclinations are
toward such Persons, whom they believe to be truly Virtuous: Not only to such
amongst them as are their particular A^qua^ntance and Friends, but lik^wise to
S^rangers, nay, to very Enemies; whether they d^ not esteem, and love them, and
will well to them.

I shall crave leave to speak briefly to two Objections, that may be made
against what I have been Proving.

I. The Scripture says (speaking of good Men) That the World shall revile and
persecute them, and speak all m^nner of evil against them: Our Savior himself
was despised and re^^^ted of M^n; And his Apostles (...) used as the rubbish
and off-scour^^^^ of all things.

To these two things may be said by way of Answer.

First, It cannot otherwise be expected, but that when a New Religion is to be
set up, men must be highly concerned in their opposing of it, and of those that
promote it: And the forecited Texts do particularly relate to this very case;
when Christianity was first introduced into the World, and to be propagated by
the Sufferings of those that Professed it; which being an exempt case, and not
according to the usual course of things, therefore these Texts are not equally
applicable to other Times and Places, when and where the True Religion has
obtained, and the Kings prove Nursing ^athers to it.

Secondly, Those that knew our Savior and his Followers, did highly Honor
them: And, as for others, that were ignorant of them, and not sufficiently
convinced of their Goodness, it is no wonder that they used them accordingly.
The most vicious person that is, if he does either know, or have reason to
think another to be Virtuous, must of necessity pay to him an Inward Reverence;
Because it is not in any man's power* so far to offer violence to his own
Faculties, as to believe any thing against its Evidence. It Is true indeed, men
have a greater power over their Words and Actions, than they have over their
Belief; and therefore they may call, and use such a one as they please, they
may revile, and persecute him; And, in this sense, Honor est honorante, But,
even in so doing, they seem to pay a Veneration to Religion it self, whilst
they are fain to disguise it, under the Names of Hypocrisy, Heresy,
Superstition, thereby to justify themselves in their opposing of it.

II. It appears by the Experience of all Ages, that Vicious Men are sometimes
had in Honor.

To this it may be Answered.

1. External Honor may be due to them.

2. Internal Honor may be given to them, by such as do not know them. The mere
Opinion of being Virtuous, must of necessity have the same advantage in this
respect, with Real Goodness; The main difference is, that it is not like to
last, because is almost Morally impossible, for a Man, who does only dissemble
Virtue, to stand always upon so strict a guard, as not to be discovered. If it
be said, that men, who are Notoriously Vicious, are sometimes applauded, and
Cry'd-Up for their Virtue; It may be answered, That this cannot be so truly
styled Honoring as Flattering; The proper Notion of which does consist in
giving undue Commendations; Nor will any contribute to it, but vile Sycophants,
the worst kind of Enemies, and the most Incompetent Judges of real worth: Such
only being fit to give Praise, who are themselves Praiseworthy.

Now if this be the true state of the Case I have been speaking to; That the
generality of Wise and Considerate Men, in all former times, have attested to
this Truth, if the Reason of the thing require that it must be so; And if it
appear accordingly from Common Experience to be so, If the most Material
Objections against it, may be so plainly and fully satisfied, then there can be
no sufficient Reason to doubt of the truth of this Preposition; That Religion
and Virtue is the most proper means to promote the Interest of Honor, which is
the thing I am to prove.

I shall crave leave to suggest two things by way of Application, and I have
done.

First, this may convince men of ^olly, who seek for Honor by any other Means.
The great Instances which are commonly given, of Men's being Fools, is, from
their choosing such Means, as are altogether insuffient for the End they Design:
As the endeavoring to make a Blackamore White, by washing of him, etc. But,
the using of such Means, as are not only insufficient for, but opposite unto,
and Destructive of the End they Propose; this is a degree above Folly, and may
be styled Madness: It Is as if a Man should run into the Water to dry himself,
and into the Fire to cool himself; And yet this is the Case of many Men in the
World, who propose to themselves such Courses, for the Promoting of their
Honor, as are most Destructive of it; namely, Profaneness and Contempt of
Religion, Despising that which other Men stand in Awe of; by which they think
to get the Reputation of Wit, and of Courage; Of Wit, by pretending to
penetrate more deeply into the Nature of things, and to understand them better
than others do; not to be so easily imposed upon, as other Credulous People
are. Of Courage, by their not being so easily scared at the Apprehension of
Danger at a distance.

But, the Plain Truth is, such Persons do hereby prove themselves to be both
Fools and Cowards.

Fools, In mistaking their great Interests, in making choice of such means, as
can never promote the End they Design; There being no kind of Men that are
exposed (whatsoever they themselves may think of it) to Public Infamy and
Hatred, than those that seek for Credit by despising of Religion. Fools, in
venturing their future Estates and their Souls upon such hazards, as all
mankind would cry-out-upon for the most palpable folly and madness, if they
should do the like, toward their Temporal Estates, or their Bodies.

Cowards, In being more afraid of little dangers, because they are present,
than of greater, because they are suture, and at a distance: As that Soldier,
who does more dread the present danger of Fighting, when he is obliged to it,
than the future danger of suffering Martial Law for running away, may justly be
esteemed a notorious Coward; so that man who is more afraid of a present
inconvenience, by incurring the prejudice and displeasure of his loose
Companions, to whom he would be acceptable, than of a future mischief from the
Judgment of God.

No man will esteem another to be truly Valiant, because he is not afraid to do
such vile unworthy things as will expose him to the displeasure and punishment
of the Civil Magistrate; much less should be so accounted, for daring to do
such things, as will in the issue expose him to Divine Vengeance.

For men of no real worth to expect the esteem and affection of others, as it
is very unequal on their parts, requiring Brick without Straw; so neither is it
lawful nor possible for others to allow it them: not lawful, because it is as
well a man's duty to contemn a vile person, as to honor them that fear the
Lord. Not possible, Psalm. 15. 4.
because men must necessarily judge according to the most prevailing Evidence;
nor can they esteem such an one to be worthy, whom they know to be otherwise,
any more than they can believe that to be white and straight, which they see is
black and crooked.

Secondly, If these things be so, it will hence follow, that men who have any
sense of Honor, should, by these considerations, be excited to a love of that
which is the only means to it, namely, Religion and Virtue. Those of ^^avish,
sordid Spirits, may be more easily persuaded by the consideration of Gain; but
no motive can be more powerful with noble and generous Minds than that of
Honor. That man takes very ill measures of things, who does not make it one of
his principal cares to keep his Name unspotted; it being no easy matter to
recover a forfeited Reputation.

Such Profligate Wretches, as are without any sense of Honor or Shame, may
justly be esteemed the Public Pests and Mischiefs of Mankind, and such as
ought to be banished from amongst them, as being the common enemies to
Government and Societies.

Of all sorts of men, there lies a peculiar Obligation upon them that are in
Public Places, to preserve their Reputations clear, and without blemish: A
private Person is not so much concerned to look after Public Fame, as that man
is, who is engaged in Public Employment. He that can abundantly satisfy
himself, with the Conscience of well-doing, while he is in a Private Station,
if once he be called to any such Employment, where he must be useful to others
by his Authority; It Is most fitting then, that he should seek the Aid of
Opinion, and Public Esteem, because it is this which Rules the World, and
stamps upon Things the Rates at which they are to pass.

There is nothing in this World that we can propose to our selves of greater
benefit, than the Love and Esteem of good Men; I have showed before that it is
Power, it is Safety: And besides all the Advantages which we have by it whilst
we live, it is one of those things that will abide after us, when we are gone
out of this World; and for that reason a special regard is to be had to it:
And, the more Wise any Man is, the more Care will he take to transmit a
Grateful Memory of himself to future times; And, since he must be spoken of
after his departure, he will take Care that he be well spoken of, that his Name
may be as a precious Ointment, leaving a Perfume behind it; That men may rise
up at the mention of it, and call him blessed.

I shut up all, with that affectionate Exhortation of the Eloquent Apostle,
Phil. 4. 8. Finally Brethren, whatsoever things are Venerable, whatsoever
things are Lovely, whatsoever things are of good Report, If there be any
Virtue, if there be any Praise, think of these things. And the Peace of God,
which passes all understanding, shall keep your Hearts and minds through Jesus
Christ.

FINIS.
A Sermon. II.
SERMON Preached before the KING AT WHITE HALL, 1670.
ECCLES. 12. 13. Let us hear the conclusion of the whole matter; Fear God, and
keep his Commandments: for this is the whole duty of man.
THis Book is one of Solomon's Philosophical Discourses, containing such
principal Observations about Human Affairs, as are apt t^ offer themselves to
the thoughts of every serious considerate man, especially concerning those
things which may more immediately either promote or hinder our Happiness.

This Text is the Conclusion which he infers upon the whole matter, that which
is the most natural result of all such Debates and Enquiries.

In the former part he had taken into consideration those several states of
life, to which men usually apply themselves for Happiness; namely, Learning and
Wisdom, Mirth and Pleasures, Power and Greatness, Riches and Possessions: Each
of which he does by great variety of Arguments, prove to be vanity and
vexation, and altogether insufficient to the End for which they are designed.

Then he takes notice of the several Accidents of life, whether they concern
our Endeavors, or our Persons.

1. For our Endeavors. The most likely means are not always effectual for the
attaining of their End. The utmost that Human Councils and Prudence can provide
for, is to ^ake care, when they are to contend in a Race, that they be swifter
than those who run against them; or when they are to fight a Battle, that they
be stronger than those whom they are to encounter. And yet the Race is not
always to the swift, nor the Battle to the strong; neither yet Bread Chap. 9:
11, 12.
to the wise, nor yet Riches to men of understanding, nor Favor to men of
skill; but time and chance happens to them all. (i. e.) There is a secret
Providence which does overruled all those worldly events in such a manner, as
is not accountable to Human Reason. Even amongst Secular Businesses, which we
are apt to think most within our reach and compass, there is nothing so much
under the power of the wisest Counsels and Endeavors, but that the Providence
of God may interpose for the disappointing of it, and render it ineffectual.

And then for those Accidents to which our Persons are liable, He observes
these three things:

1. Our obnoxiousness to Pain and Sickness, which he styles by the names of
Wrath and Sorrow; under which, Chapter 5. 17.
when a man lies languishing, none of his Worldly Enjoyments will signify any
thing to him; nor will they be able to afford him any such ease or help, but
that he may be thereby cut off in the midst of his days, and then all his
thoughts perish, or else waste away a great part of his life with much anguish
and weariness; and may sometimes, perhaps, be driven to that extremity by
noisome and painful Diseases, as to choose strangling and Death, rather than
Life.

2. If it be supposed, that by the strength and cheerfulness of a Man's natural
temper, he should escape these, and live many years, and rejoice in them all;
yet he must remember the days of darkness, which shall be many. (i. e.) Chapter 11.
8.
Those who devote themselves to continual Mirth and Pleasure, cannot yet avoid
the thought of their future estates, what shall become of them hereafter, when
they are to depart out of this World; but that the remembrance of this will be
often thrusting into their Minds when ever they are retired and serious. And
this being to them a dark obscure condition; concerning their wellbeing, in
which they can have no reasonable hopes, must needs therefore be a great damp
and allay to all their other Enjoyments.

3. But in the third place: Suppose a man should be able to avoid sickness, and
to put the trouble of these tho^ghts likewise far from him; yet there is
somewhat else which he cannot possibly decline, Old Age will unavoidably steal
upon him, with all the infirmities of it; When the grinders shall be few, and
appetite cease; Chapter 12. 3.
when those who look out of the windows, shall be darkened, and the keepers of
the house shall tremble: when a man shall become a burden to himse^^, and to
his ^riends; when those of his nearest Relations, whom he has most obliged by
kindness, shall think it time for him to depart unto his long home, to creep
off the Stage, Chapter 12. 5.
and make room for succeeding Generations; and then, after a little
Funeral-pomp of the Mour^ers going about the streets,, a man shall be buried
out of the way, and forgotten: for there is no remembrance of the Chapter 2. 16.
wise, more than of the fool; seeing that which now is, in the d^ys to come
shall be forgotten. Every Generation producing somewhat which seems new and
s^range, to take up Men's talk and wonder, and to drown the Memory of former
Persons and Actions. And I appeal to any rational man, Whether these are not
some of the most material reflections that occur about Human Affairs.

Now from all these premises put together, he inserts this Conclusion in the
Text, That to fear God, and keep his Commandments, is the Whole of man (i. e.)
To be serious in the matter of Religion, and careful about our future states,
is that which every considerate man, after all his other disquisitions and
experiments, will find to be his greatest interest, that which does most of all
deserve his care and study.

There are these Two parts in the words:

1. A Description of Religion, which in the former Clause is said to consist in
fearing God, and keeping his Commandments. An awful apprehension of the Divine
Nature, and an obedient submission to His Will.

2. A Commendation of Religion, in the latter Clause, This is the Whole of man.

It is the second of these only, which I purpose to treat of at this time.

In the handling of which, the first thing to be enquired into, is, What is the
true import and meaning of this phrase in the Original: (...) for the
understanding of which, it will be proper to consider the several ways of
expressing it in other Translations.

The Septuagint and the Vulgar do render it verba^^m, This is All, or Every
man. The word Du^y, which is supplied by our English, being not in the
Original, or in other Translations. This ought to be the way and course of all
mankind, so the Targum. This is the course to which every man is designed, so
the Syriack. This will be most profitable and advantageous to men, so the
Arabi^k. This is the whole of man; so some of our later Interpreters, most
proper to the scope of the place, it being an usual Analalogy in the Hebrew,
Totius universalis, pro toto integrante, All for Whole.

So that according to these various Interpretations of the words, they may
contain in them a threefold reference: To the Essence, the Happiness, the
Business of man.

According to which, the sense of them must be, That Religon, or the fearing of
God, and keeping his Commandments, is a matter of so great consequence to Human
Nature, that

1. The Essence or Being of man, may be said to consist in it.

2. The Happiness or well-being of man does depend upon it.

3. The great Business or Duty of man, is to be conversant about it, and to
labor atter it.

These particulars I shall endeavor to make out by such clear Principles of
Reason, attested to by several of the wisest Heathen Writers, as may be enough
to satistie any serious man who is able to under^^and the reason and
consequence of things, and will but attend and consider.

1. I begin with the first: Religion is of so great importance, that the
Essence of man may be said to consist in it. Mankind may be considered under a
twofold notion:

1. More Separately, and by it self, according to that Principle whereby it is
constituted in such a rank of Creatures.

2. More Complexly, as joined in Society, for which Man seems to be naturally
designed, and without which he could not well subsist. Now Religion will appear
to be Essential to him in both these respects.

1. As considered S^parately, according to those Principles by which he is
framed. That which does constitute any thing in its Being, and distinguish it
from all other Things, This is that which we call the Form or Essence of a
thing. And this, for the Human Nature does consist in those very things which
are the chief Principles and ^oundations of Religion; namely, the Apprehensions
of a Deity, and an Expectation of a future state after this life: Which no
other Creature, below Man, does partake of; and which are common to all
Mankind, notwithstanding the utmost endeavors that can be used for the
suppressing of them.

As for what is commonly alleged in the behalf of Reason, it may be observed,
that in the Actions of many Brute Creatures there are discernable some kind of
footsteps, some impe^fect strictures and degrees of Ra^^^cination; such a
natural Sagacity as bears a near resemblance to Reason. from whence it may
follow, that it is not Reason in the general, which is the ^orm of Human
Nature; But Reason as it is determined to Actions of Religion, of which we do
not find the least signs or degrees in Brutes. Man being the only Creature in
this visible World, that is formed with a Capacity of worshipping and enjoying
his Maker. Nor is this any new Opinion, but such as several of the Ancient
Writers, Philosophers, Orators, Poets have attested to; who make this Notion of
a Deity, and Adoration of him, to be the the true difference betwixt Man and
Beast.

Plutarch afferts it to be a very improper thing to own such for Men, who do
not acknowledge and adore the Deity. And in another place, he affirms Irreligion
to be a kind of Stupor, whereby Men are deprived of their Senses.

So Tully: Ex tot generibus, nullum est animal, etc. Amongst all the living
Creatures that are in the World, there is none but Man that has any notion of
a Deity; and amongst Mankind, there is no Nation so wild and barbarous, but
pretends to some Religion.

And in another place, Quis ^unc De leg. l. 1.
hominem dixerit? Why should such a one be accounted a Man, who by what he sees
in the World, is not convinced of a Deity, and a Providence, and of that
adoration he owes to it? Of the same sense is that of the Satyrist, who
speaking of Religion, says this of it:

-- Separat hac nos Juvenal. Sat. 15.

A grege Brutorum, atque ideo venerabile soli
Sortiti ingenium divinorumque capaces.
It Is this (says he) that does distinguish us from Brute Creatures, That we
have Souls capable of Divine Impressions.

So that, by what has been said, it should appear, that the Definition of Man
may be rendered as well by the Difference of Religiosum, as Ration^le. As for
that Inconvenience which some may object, That Atheistical and Profane persons
will be hereby excluded: Why so they are by other Difference likewise: such
persons having no just pretense to Reason, who renounce Religion: and it were
well, if they might not only be reckoned amongst Beasts (as they are by the
Psalmist, where he styles them Brutish) but driven out amongst them likewise,
and banished from all Human Society* as being public Pes^s, and Mischiefs of
Mankind, such as would debase the Nobility of our Natures, to the condition of
Brute Creatures, and therefore fit only to live amongst them. Which brings me
to the

2. Consideration of Man as a Sociable Creature. Religion is essential to him
in this respect also, as being the surest Bond to tie men up to those
respective duties toward one another, without which, Government and Society
could not subsist.

There is a remarkable passage in Plutarch to this purpose, where he styles
Religion, the Cement of all Communities, and the chief Basis of all Legislative
Power. And in another place he says, That it is much more easy to build a City
in the open air, Against Colotes.
without any ground to found it upon, than to establish a Government without
Religion. A City (says he) may make some shift to subsist without Walls,
Schools, Theaters, Houses; nay, without Money, but not without Religion.

If it were not for this notion of a Deity, and those natural impressions which
we have concerning Justice and Probity, so necessary for the conservation of
Human Society; instead of those well-ordered Governments and Cities which are
now in the World, Mankind must have lived either wild and solitary in Caves and
Dens, like Savage-Beasts: or else in Troops of Robbers, subsi^^ing upon the
spoil and rapine of such as were weaker than themselves.

Pietate sublata, fides etiam, and Societas Not. Deor. L. 1.
humani generis, and una excellentassima virtus Justitia tollitur, Take but
away the awe of Religion, and all that Fidelity and Justice, so necessary for
the keeping up of Human Society, must perish with it.

It Is this fear of a Deity, and the sense of our obligation to Him, that is the
only effectual means to restrain Men within the bounds of Duty. And were this
wholly extinguished, there would follow such wild Disorders and Extravagancies
amongst men, as would not leave so much as the face or least shadow of Virtue
or Honesty in the World: There being no kind of Vice which men would not
abandon themselves unto, considering the impetuousness of their own natural
appetites, and the power of external temptations, were this restraint from
Religion once removed or abolished.

The two chief Opposites to Religion, are Profaneness and Superstition. Both
which, are prejudicial to Civil Government: The one by destroying Conscience,
the strongest obligation to Political Duties: The other by perverting and
abusing it; introducing in the stead it of, a new Primum Mobile, which
ravisheth the Spheres of Government, and puts them into a preternatural course,
as a Noble Lord Bacon's Essays.
Author has elegantly expressed it.

The two grand Relations that concern Society, are Government and Subjection.
And Irreligion does indispose men for both these.

1. For Government. Without Religion, Magistrates will lose that Courage and
Confidence belonging to their stations, which they cannot so well exert in
punishing the Offenses of others, when they are guilty of the same or the like
themselves. Those that sit on the Throne of Judgment should be able to scatter
away evil with their eyes, as Solomon speaks, Prove. 20. 8. By their very
presence and look, to strike an awe upon Offenders, which will not be so easily
done, if they should lie under the same guilt themselves; Sine Bonitate nulla
Majestas, says Seneca: The very nature of Majesty does denote Goodness as well
as Power. And without this, Governors may easily lose that Reverence which is
due to them from others, and consequently that Authority which they ought to
have over them. When they cease to be Gods in respect of their Goodness, they
may diminish in their Power; and though they should be able to keep men under
as to their Bodies and Estates, yet will they decline as to that awful Love and
Reverence whereby they should sway over the Hearts and Affections of men,

The Philosopher in the Fifth Book Cap. 11.
of his Politics, does lay it down as a Rule for Magistrates, That they must
be careful to give public Testimonies of their being religious and devout; for
which he gives this double reason: Because the people will be less subject to
entertain any jealousy or suspicion of suffering injury from such whom they
believe to be religious. And withal, they will be less subject to attempt the
doing of injury against such; as knowing, that good Magistrates are after a
more especial manner under the Divine Favor and protection having God to fight
with them, and for them. 2. The want of Religion will indispose men for the
condition of Subjects, and render them loose and unstable in those duties of
obedience and submission required to that state. How can it be expected from
that man who dares affront and despise God himself, that he should have any
hearty reverence for his Deputies and Vicegerents? Those who are destitute of
Religion and Conscience, as they are not to be trusted in any ordinary private
duty toward those with whom they converse, much less can they be useful in any
such extraordinary Action, whereby the public welfare is to be promoted. where
there are no seeds of Piety and Virtue, there can be nothing of Honor or
Magnanimity.

He that is subject only upon the account of Wrath, and the power of the Sword
which is over him, will be no longer so, when he has an opportunity of
escaping or resisting that Power. Nor is there any possible way to secure men
in their quiet subjection and obedience; but by their being obliged for
Conscience sake. And therefore such kind of persons, as by their open
profaneness and contempt of Religion, do endeavor to destroy Conscience from
amongst men, may justly be esteemed as the worst kind of Seditious Persons, and
most pernicious to Civil Government.

Whatever Disputes have been raised concerning the lawfulness of punishing men
for their dissenting Consciences in matters of Religion; yet never any man
questioned the lawfulness of punishing men for their profaneness and contempt
of all Religion. Such men as renounce Conscience, cannot pretend that they
suffer for it. And certainly this Vice does upon many accounts deserve the
greatest severity of Laws, as being in its own nature destructive of the very
Principles of Government, and the Peace of all Human Societies: Besides the
Mischiefs consequent upon it from Divine Vengeance,

So that upon all these accounts, there is just reason to infer the truth of
this Proposition, That Religion is totum hominis in this first sense, as it
refers to the Essence of Man considered either Separately, or as a Member of
Society.

2. It Is so likewise with respect to the Happiness and well-being of Man. That
is properly said to be the chief End or Happiness of a thing, which does raise
its nature to the utmost perfection, of which it is capable according to its
rank and kind. So the chief good belonging to a Vegetable or Plant, is to grow
up to a state of maturity, to continue to its natural period, and to propagate
its Kind, which is the utmost perfection that kind of Being is capable of. And
whereas Sensitive Creatures, beside those things which are common to them with
Plants, have likewise such faculties, whereby they are able to apprehend
external objects, and to receive pain or pleasure from them; Therefore the
Happiness proper to them, must consist in the Perfection of these Faculties,
namely, in sensible pleasures, the enjoying of such things as may be grateful
to their senses. But now Mankind, (if we will allow it to be a distinct rank of
Creatures superior to Brutes) being endowed with such Faculties, whereby it is
made capable of apprehending a Deity, and of expecting a future state after
this life; It will hence follow, That the proper happiness of man must consist
in the perfecting of this Faculty; namely, in such a state as may reconcile him
to the Divine Favor and afford him the best assurance of a blessed Immortality
hereafter. Which nothing else but Religion can so much as pretend to. And that
this is most agreeable to Natural Light, may appear from the Testimonies of
several of the Wisest Heathens, Pythagoras, Plato, Epictetus, etc. who assert a
Man's Happiness, or chief End, to consist in a likeness or resemblance to the
Divine Nature, in following of God, endeavoring to imitate him whom we
worship, which are but several descriptions of Religion.

It Is true indeed, the nature of Man, by reason of those other Capacities,
common to him with Plants and Brutes, may stand in need of several other
things, to render his condition pleasant and comfortable in this World, as
Health, Riches, Reputation, Safety, etc, Now herein is the great advantage of
Religion, that besides the principal work which it does for us, in securing our
future Estates in the other World; It is likewise the most effectual means to
promote our happiness in this World; and that not only Morally, upon account of
that Reward which Virtuous Actions do entitle a man unto from a just and a wise
Providence; But Naturally also, by reason of that Physical efficacy which the
Duties of Religion have in procuring for us each of those things, wherein our
Temporal Happiness does consist; in promoting the welfare not only of
particular persons, but of public Communities of Mankind in general, and of
the whole Universe. Insomuch, that if we could suppose our selves in a capacity
of capitulating with God, concerning the Terms upon which we would submit to
his Government, and to choose the Laws we would be bound to observe, It were not
Possible for us to make any Proposals which upon all Accounts should be more
advantageous to our own Interests, than those very Conditions, to which we are
obliged by the Rules of Religion and Virtue. And herein does the reasonableness
of Religion, and the Beauty and Wisdom of Providence most eminently appear
toward Mankind, in governing us by such Laws as do most apparently tend to the
perfecting of our Natures, and in making that only to be our Duty, which is our
Interest.

3. Religion is Totum hominis, with respect to the chief Business and Duty of
man, that which he ought to be most intent upon, and conversant about, as to
his Employment in this World. That General calling to which every man of what
rank or quality soever is to be engaged. Men are distributed under other
particular Callings, according as their Education, Abilities, Friends, and
several Opportunities do dispose of them. But the obligation of Religion, being
of universal concernment, does extend to all and every particular, there being
none exempted from it, Hoc est omnis homo, Every man is concerned in it. And it
is totum hominis likewise, It Is his calling, the chief business about which he
is to be employed.

I do not say, that a man's thoughts are always to be taken up about the
immediate Acts of Religion, any more than a Traveller is always to have his
mind actually fixed upon the thought of his Journey's end. This would be
inconsistent with the infirmity of our natures, and the necessity of our
conditions in this World. But yet, as he that is upon a Journey, does so order
all his Particular Motions, as may be most conducible to his General End; so
should men habitually, though they cannot actually, in every affair have
respect to their chief End, so as to observe all the duties of Religion, and
never to allow themselves in any thing against the rules of it. And he that
has this care continually upon his mind, (though he be but a Secular person)
may properly be said to make Religion his Business.

The Wiseman in the beginning of this Book, had proposed as his grand Quaery
to be discussed, to find out what was that good for the sons of Chapter 2. 3.
men, which they should do under the Heavens, all the days of their lives. (i.
e.) What was the chief employment or business which they should apply
themselves to in this World. And here in the Text he asserts it to be the
business of Religion; Fearing God, and keeping his Commandments: Suitable to
that Precept of Moses Deuteronomy. 10. 12. And now, O Israel, what does the Lord thy
God require of thee, but to fear the Lord thy God, to walk in his ways, and to
serve the Lord thy God, and keep his Commandments: And the Practice of St.
Paul, who made this his daily exercise, to keep his Conscience void of offense,
both toward God, and toward men. To the Reasonableness of this, several of
the wisest Heathens have attested. That Is a remarkable passage Moral. 1. ad
Eudem in fine.
in Aristotle to this purpose, where he states that to be the most desirable
proportion of all Worldly Felicities and Enjoyments, which is most consistent
with men's devoting themselves to the business of Religion: And that to be
either too much or too little of Wealth, or Honor, or Power, etc. whereby men
are hindered in their meditating upon God, or their worshipping of him.

So Epictetus, discoursing concerning the work and business he was designed to,
has this passage: If I had been made a Nightingale or a Swan, I should have
employed the time of my life in such a way as is suitable to the conditions of
those Creatures: But being made a Man, capable of serving and worshipping that
God from whom I had my Being, it is but reason that I should apply my self to
this, as being my proper work and business: (...). And therefore hereunto will
I devote my self, as being the chief Employment to which I am designed.

So Antoninus: Evety thing (says he) is designed for some kind of work; Lib.
8. Sect. 19.
Beasts and Plants, the Sun and Stars, (...). And what do you conceive your
business to be? Sensual pleasures? Bethink your self a little better, whether
this be suitable to the Nobility of your nature, and those excellent faculties
with which you are endowed.

Men usually apply themselves to that as their chief business, which may quit
cost and be worth their labor by which their Interest is most promoted. And
there is nothing can be more reasonable, than for that to be the chief business
of a man's Life, which is the chief end of his Being. Which is the third thing
I proposed to speak to.

I crave leave to mention two Inferences very briefly by way of Application,
and I have done.

If this be so, that Religion is of so great Importance, that it may be styled
the Whole of man, with reference to all those things that are of greatest
moment, The Essence, the Happiness, the Business of Man:

1. What Monsters of ^olly, and Madness, and Contradiction, must those men be,
who do upon this account put a greater value upon themselves, as being more
learned, and wise and better than others, because they can contemn and despise
Religion? Certainly, by all the Laws of God and Men, such Miscreants ought to
be rendered most vile and contemptible themselves. Their Discourses ought not
to be listened unto without nauseousness and detestation. Their Persons should
be used as the Lepers were under the Law, whose company every one was obliged
to avoid, as being unclean infectious persons. And perhaps this might be one
good way, if not of curing themselves, yet of hindering their Mischiefs upon
others, when they should find themselves abhorred and abandoned by all sober
men.

2. How dear should the Concernments of Religion be to every one of us, How
serious should we be in the Profession and Practice of it our selves! How
zealous in promoting the Honor and the power of it amongst others! The things
of this World are full of uncertainty, and of short continuance, When a few
days are past, we must all of us go to the place whence we shall not return-
And when we come to die, nothing then will be of any advantage to us, but
Religion, The testimony of our Consciences, that in simplicity and godly
sincerity, we have had our Conversation in this world. Upon which we may
confidently expect, that there is laid up for us a Crown of Righteousness,
which the Lord the Righteous Judge, will give unto us at the day of his
Appearance; when he shall come to bring every work into judgment, with every
secret thing, whether it be good, or whether it be evil.

FINIS.
A Sermon. III.
SERMON Preached before the KING AT WHITE HALL, In Lent, 1670.
ECCLES. 12. 14. For God shall bring every work into judgment, with every
secret thing, whether it be good, or whether it be evil.
THis Book does contain a Philosophical Disquisition concerning a State of
Happiness; wherein the Wise man does particularly discuss each of those
Subjects, which according to the various opinions and tempers of men, are
believed to have any pretense to it.

The precedent Verse (as I have formerly showed) does contain the Conclusion of
the whole matter; the chief inference and result ftom all the former Debates
and Enquiries; wherein he asserts, that every man's true happiness does consist
in being religious, In fearing God, and keeping his Commandments.

And though this Conclusion had been sufficiently proved by great variety of
Arguments, in the foregoing Discourse; yet he thinks fit here in the close of
all, to back and enforce it with one Argument more; which above all others is
most apt to make deep impression upon the minds of men; and (if any thing can)
to persuade them to the Duties of Religion: And that is the consideration of
the last Judgment, in the words of the Text, For God shall bring, etc.

That which I intend from these words, is to prove, against the Infidels and
Scoffers of this Age, the Reasonableness and the Credibility of this great
Principle of Religion, concerning a future state of Reward and Punishment.

Though the Principal Evidence for this do depend upon Scripture, especially
the New Testament, where it is said, That life and immortality 2 Timothy 1. 10.
is brought to light by the Gospel. Yet in a point of so great moment and
consequence as this is, it is not to be imagined, that God should have left
himself without a Witness to all the Nations of the World, but that all men
should be endowed with such natural Capacities and Notions, as being improved
by Consideration, will afford sufficient evidence for the belief of this great
Fundamental Principle.

As for such men, who live under-the sense of Guilt, whose Interest it is that
there should be no future account, it cannot be otherwise expected from such,
but that they should be willing to dis-believe this. And from hence it is, that
some of the Ancient Philosophers have employed their Learning and Subtilty, to
dispute themselves into some kind of doubts and uncertainty about it. And yet
the generality even of these have been forced to acknowledge it much more
probable than the contrary. And as for the Vulgar sort of people, who are
guided by the more simple dictates of Nature, these have in all Ages and
Nations submitted themselves to this Doctrine, and professed a firm belief of
it. And though Vulgar Opinion be but a very bad Topic about such matters as
may gratify men in their ease and sensual appetites; yet in such other Opinions
as are cross to their Worldly Interests, it may argue such things to be from
some natural impression upon their minds, which they must believe, and cannot
otherwise choose.

The Arguments I would make use of to this purpose, may be reduced to these
three general Heads:

1. From the suitableness of this Principle, to the most natural Notions of our
Minds.

2. The Necessity of it, to the Government of men's Lives and Actions in this
World.

3. The Necessity of it, for the vindication of Divine Providence.

1. I begin with the first: The suitableness of it to the most natural Notions
of our Minds, and those kind of Impressions which belong to us, as we are
Reasonable Creatures. We see by experience, that all other things (so far as
we are able to judge) Minerals, Plants, Beasts, etc. are naturally endowed with
such Principles, as are most fit to promote the perfection of their natures in
their several Kinds. And therefore it is by no means credible, that Mankind
only, the most excellent of all the other Creatures in this visible World, for
the service of whom, so many other things seem to be designed, should have such
kind of Principles interwoven in his very Nature, as do contain in them mere
cheats and delusions. And therefore whatsoever those things are, which the
generality of Mank^nd, esp^cially the most wise and the most considerate part
of them do agree in, ought to be allowed for highly credible; otherwise it must
follow, that we are framed with such kind of Faculties, as in our most cautious
exercise of them, are more likely to seduce us, and expose us to Error, than to
direct and lead us to the Truth.

But I shall endeavor to manifest this more particularly, by these three
Considerations.

1. This Principle is most suitable to the general Apprehensions of Mankind,
concerning the nature of Good and Evil.

2. To those natural Hopes and Expectations, which the generality of good men
have, concerning a state of future Happiness.

3. To those natural Fears and Expectations, which the generality of wicked men
are possessed with, concerning a future state of Punishment and Misery.

1. This Principle is most suitable to the general Apprehensions of Mankind
concerning the nature of Good and Evil. All men heretofore have agreed, that
there is such a Thing as the Law of Nature, whereby things are distinguished
into Good and Bad; according to which, the Actions of men are determined to be
either Virtuous or Vicious. And as the one of these, does in the essence of it
imply Comeliness and Reward; so does the other denote Turpitude and Punishment.
These things being implied in the very definitions of Virtue and Vice. And from
hence it will follow, That as there is some Superior Power who has put this
Law into our Natures; so will he take care to enforce the observance of it, by
rewarding and punishing men accordingly. This being implied in the nature of a
Law.

If there be nothing in the naked essence of things that makes them to differ,
but what does merely arise from Custom and Positive Laws; why then Custom and
Law would be able to render it a very virtuous and commendable thing for a man
to be ungrateful, a breaker of Compacts, a false Witness, a Perjured person;
which is so monstrous a Position, that the common Reason of Mankind will abhor
it upon the first proposal. Nothing is more obvious, than that there is an
universal desire amongst men, of seeming honesty: The most impudent and
profligate Wretch being loath to be esteemed to be, what really he is. The very
Sin of Hypocrisy, so general amongst men, does give a large Testimony to the
Beauty of Goodness, and the Deformity of Vice. Nor is there any account to be
given, why there should be impressed upon the nature of men such a value for
the one, and dislike for the other, if there were not in the things themselves,
something suitable to those contrary affections.

We see by experience, that there is such a kind of Rest and Acquiescence in
the mind, upon the discovery of Truth, and the doing of Virtuous Actions, as
belong to natural Bodies, when they are in their proper places: Which may argue
these things to have some peculiar suitableness to the Soul of man, and that
the opposites to them do offer violence to some natural Principle belonging to
it.

2. This Principle is most suitable to those natural Hopes and Expectations
which the generality of good men have concerning a state of future Happiness.
From whence does arise that Confidence and Courage, whereby those of meanest
Quality and Abilities (if otherwise Virtuous persons) can support themselves in
their sufferings for that which is good: Which does necessarily suppose in them
a strong, and even a natural belief and persuasion of such a future state,
wherein their sufferings shall be considered and rewarded.

Besides that, there is a natural desire in all men, after a state of Happiness
and Perfection. And if we consider the utter impossibility of attaining to any
such condition in this life, This will render it highly credible, That there
must be another state wherein this Happiness is attainable: otherwise Mankind
must fail of his chief End, being by a natural Principle most strongly inclined
to such a state of Happiness as he can never attain to. As if he were purposely
framed to be tormented betwixt these two Passions, Desire and Despair; an
earnest Propension after Happiness, and an utter incapacity of ever enjoying
it. And, which is yet more considerable, the better and the wiser any man is,
the more earnest desires and hopes has he after such a state of Happiness. And
if there be no such thing, not only Nature* but Virtue likewise must contribute
to make men miserable; than which, nothing can seem more unreasonable to those
who believe a Just and a Wise Providence.

3. This Principle is most suitable to those Fears and Expectations which the
generality of wicked men are possessed with, concerning a future state of
Misery. Witness those natural suggestions of Conscience in the worst of men,
that upon any wicked action (though never so private) are oftentimes startling
of them, with the apprehensions of another Judicature and Tribunal, before
which they shall be called to an account for their closest sins. All that
secret regret, and those inward smitings, Laniatus and Ictus, which are so
often felt in the Minds of men, upon the commission of any great sin, do argue
some common intimations, even in the Light of Nature, of another Judgment after
this life, wherein they shall be accountable for such Actions, which men do not
punish or take notice of.

And these natural Fears do usually seize upon all kind of men promiscuously,
even those who are most Potent, who by their own Wills can give Laws to
Nations, and command mighty Armies, yet cannot they avoid these Checks and
Lashes of Conscience, but that they will seize upon them, and shake them, as
well as the poorest meanest Subject. Nor can such as are most obstinately
wicked, who with their utmost study and endeavor, apply themselves to the
suppressing and disbelief of these Notions, so wholly stifle them, but that
they will be continually rising up in their Minds, and pursuing of them.

Now as there is no man whatsoever, that is wholly freed from these fears of
future misery after death, so there is no other Creature but Man, that has any
fears of this kind. And if there be no real ground for this, then must it
follow, That he who framed all his other Works with such an excellent
congruity, did yet so contrive the Nature of Man, the most noble amongst them,
as to prove a needless torment and burden to it self.

If it be said, That these Notions may proceed from such Principles as men have
derived from Institution, and the Teaching of others, and do not imply a
Nece^^^ty of any such Natural impressions.

To this it may be answered, That it is sufficient to denominate them Natural
Notions; if they have such a suitableness to the Minds of men, as makes them to
be generally owned by all those who apply their thoughts to the consideration
of them. And that they have such a natural suitableness, may appear, Because
Institution cannot so easily eradicate these Notions, as it can fix them. Now
if the mere teaching of others were it self sufficient to impress these
Notions, without any such peculiar congruity in the things themselves, It would
be as sufficient to deface them again: Especially considering the advantage on
this side, from that natural repugnancy we have against any thing which brings
disquiet to our Minds. And nothing is more troublesome in this kind, than the
Fear which follows upon Guilt.

But now, though there have been several men. of no mean Abilities, in several
Ages, who have made it their business to root out of the Minds of men all such
troublesome Notions about a futute state, endeavoring to persuade themselves
and others, That as there was a time before they were born into the world, when
they were not; So at their dying, or going out of it, they shall exist no more.
And yet, though it be their interest to believe this, though they make it their
study and business to persuade themselves and others to it; It may reasonably
be doubted, whether ever yet, there has been so much as one person that has
hereby become absolutely free from these Fears: But for the most part, Those
who would have them esteemed vain and imaginary, without any foundation in
Nature, These are the persons who are most assaulted with them.

Hi sunt qui trepidant and ad omnia fulgere pallent. So powerful and
unconquerable are these impressions, and therefore natural.

2. The second Reason I proposed to speak to, was from the Necessity of this
Principle, to the right government of men's Lives and Actions in this world, and
the preserving of Society amongst them.

Nothing can be more evident, than that the Human Nature is so framed, as not
to be regulated and kept within due bounds, without Laws; and Laws must be
insignificant, without the Sanctions of Rewards and Punishments, whereby men
may be necessitated to the observance of them. Now the temporal Rewards and
Punishments of this life, cannot be sufficient to this end; and therefore there
is a necessity, that there should be another future state of Happiness and
Misery.

All the Rewards and Punishments of this life, are to be expected either from
the Civil Magistrate, who by virtue of his Place and Calling is obliged to the
duty of distributive Justice: Or else from Divine Providence, according to that
most usual course which we find by Experience to be observed by Him, in his
dispensation of these Temporal things. Now neither of these can afford
sufficient Motives for the government of Men's Lives and Actions.

1. Not all that may be expected from the Civil Magistrate, because there may
be many good and evil Actions, which they cannot take notice of; and they can
reward and punish only such things as come under their cognizance. And if this
were the only restraint upon men, it could be no hindrance from any such
Mischief or Villainies which men had the opportunity of committing secretly. Nor
would it extend to those who had Power and Strength enough to defend themselves
from the Law, and escape the penalty of it, but that such might without any
check or fear, follow the inclinations of their own Appetites. Nor would it
afford any remedy in the case of such wicked Magistrates as should invert the
order of their Institution, proving Terrors to well-doers, and Encouragers to
those that do ill.

2, Not all that may be expected from Common Providence: For though it should
be granted, that according to the most usual and general course of things, both
Virtuous and Vicious Actions are rewarded and punished in this life; yet there
may be many particular cases which this Motive would not reach unto; namely,
all such cases where a man's Reason shall inform him, that there is far greater
probability of safety and advantage, by committing a sin, than can be
reasonably expected, (according to his experience of the usual course of things
in the World,) by doing his duty. Suppose the case of the three Children, or of
any others called to Martyrdom, who may be threatened with torments and death,
unless they will blaspheme God, and renounce their Religion, If it appear to
them very probable, suppose a hundred to one, that upon their refusal, Their
Persecutors will really execute what they Threaten: And if on the other side it
appear very improbabble, suppose ten thousand to one, that they shall not be
delivered by a Miracle: In such cases, it is not to be expected that the
consideration of the ordinary course of Providence in the dispensation of
Rewards and Punishments, should be sufficient to restrain a man from any kind
of Blasphemy or Villainy whatsoever.

But the thing I am speaking to, will more fully appear, by consideration of
those horrid Mischiefs of all kinds, that would most naturally follow from the
denial of this Doctrine.

If there be no such thing to be expected as Happiness or Misery hereafter, Why
then the only business that men are to take care of, is their present
well-being in this World; There being nothing to be counted either Good or Bad,
but in order to this. Those things which we conceive to be conducible to it,
being the only duties; and all other things that are cross to it, being the
only sins. And therefore whatever a man's Appetite shall incline him to, he
ought not to deny himself in it (be the thing what it will) so he can have it,
or do it without probable danger.

Suppose it be matter of Gain or Profit he is disposed to, if he can cheat or
steal securely, this will be so far from being a fault, that it is plainly his
duty, Because it is a proper means to promote his chief End,

And so for other cases of Anger, Hatred, Revenge, etc. according to this
Principle, a man must take the first opportunity of satisfying these Passions,
by doing any kind of mischief to the persons he is offended with, whether by
false Accusations and Perjury; or (if need be) by poisoning or stabbing of
them; provided he can do these things so, as to escape the suspicion of others,
and Human Penalty.

Now let any man judge what Bears, and Wolves, and Devils, men would prove to
one another, if every thing should be not only lawful, but a duty, whereby they
might gratify their impetuous Lusts, if they might either perjure themselves,
or steal, or murder, as often as they could do it safely, and get any advantage
by it.

But these things are so very obvious, and undeniable, that the most profane
Ath^^stical persons do own the truth of them. And upon this, they are willing
to acknowledge, That Religion and the belief of another life, is a very politic
invention, and needful for the well-governing of the world, and for the keeping
men in awe, from the doing any secret mischiefs. Which (by the way) is a
concession of no small advantage to the honor of Religion, considering that it
proceeds from the greatest professed Enemies to it. Whereby they grant, that it
is fit these things should be true, if they are not; or at least that it is
fit, that the generality of men should believe them to be true. And though they
themselves pretend to believe otherwise, yet are they not so far out of their
wits, as to be willing that those with whom they converse, their Wives, and
Children, and Servants, should be of the same Opinion with them, Because then
they could have no reason to expect any safety amongst them. What securiry
could any man have of his Estate, or Honor, or Life, if such with whom he is
most familiar and intimate, might think themselves at liberty to do all the
secret mischiefs to them, that they had opportunity to commir?

But there is one thing more, which those, who profess to dis-belief this
Principle, should do well to consider; and that is this, That there is no
imaginable reason, why (amongst those that know them) they should pretend to
any kind of Honesty or Conscience, because they are wholly destitute of all
such motives as may be sufficient to oblige them to any thing of this nature.
But according to them, that which is called Virtue and Religion, must be one of
the most silly and useless things in the world.

As for the Principle of Honor, which some imagine may supply the room of
Conscience, This relates only to external Reputation, and the esteem which we
have amongst others; And therefore can be of no influence to restrain men from
doing any secret mischief.

From what has been said, it will follow, That those who have any regard to
their own safeties, ought to abandon all kind of society with such pernicious
persons, who according to their own Principles, must take all opportunities of
doing any mischief to others, which they are able to effect, with any advantage
to themselves.

Now if this be so (as I have proved) that the nature of man is so framed, as
not to be effectually persuaded and wrought upon, without the consideration of
such a future state. If it be necessary to put in everlasting motives, as the
Sanctions of that Law, by which the Human Nature is to be governed; This must
render it highly credible, that there is such a state. Because it must needs be
very unworthy of God, to conceive of Him, that he has contrived the nature of
one of his best and most noble Creatures, after such a manner, as to make it
incapable of being governed without falsehood and deceit.

3. The third and last Argument I proposed to speak to, was from the necessity
of this Principle to the vindication of Divine Providence. Nothing is more
universally acknowledged, than that God is Good and Just. That well-doing shall
be rewarded, and evil Actions punished by Him. And yet we see that his
Dispensations in this life are many times promiscuous and uncertain: so tha^
(...) (...) j^dg of lov^ or hatred by all that is before him. The worst men are
sometimes in the best condition. If in this life only we had hope, we should be
of all men the most 1 Cor. ^5. 19.
miserabl^, says the Apostle, speaking concerning those primitive times of
Persecution, when the better any man was, the more he was exposed to sufferings.

Now the greater Uncertainty there is as to the pr^sent Affairs in this World,
by so much greater is the Certain^y of a future Ju^gment.

What could be a greater d^sparagement to Divine Providence, than to permit the
Calamities and Sufferings which good men undergo in this world, many times upon
the account of Religion, to pass unrewarded; and the many Mischiefs and
Prophanations, which wicked men take the advantage of committing, by their
Greatness and Prosperity in this world, to go unpunished?

What great glory would it be, to preside over this Material World, S^ars, and
Meteors, Sea and Land, Plants and Beasts, to put these things into such a
regular course, as may be suitable to their natures, and the operations for
which they are designed; and in the mean space to have no proportionable
regard, either for those that reverence the Deity, or those who contemn him?

It Is very well said to this purpose by a late Author, That not to conduct
Amyraldus
the course of N^^ure in a due manner, might speak some defect of Wisdom in
God: but not to compensate Vi^^ue and Vice, besides the defect of Wisdom, in
not adjusting things suitably to their qualifications, but crosly coupling
Prosperity with Vice, and Misery with Virtue, would argue too great a defect of
Goodness and Justice. And perhaps it would be less expedient (says he) with
Epicurus, to deny all Providence, than to ascribe it to such defects. It being
less unworthy of the Divine Nature, to neglect the Universe altogether, than to
administer Human Affairs with so much Injustice and Irregularity.

And therefore it is necessary for the vindication of Divine Providence, that
there should be a future state and day of Account, wherein every man shall be
forced to acknowledge, that verily there is a reward for the righteous; Psalm.
58. 11.
doubtless there is a God that judges the earth.

I crave leave for a word of Application, and I have done. If this be so, it
will concern us then to enquire,

1. Whether we do in good earnest believe this, That there shall be a future
state of Reward and Punishment, according as men's Lives and Actions have been
in this world. If not, why do we profess our selves to be Christians? Why do we
not renounce the Articles of our Creed? Nay, why do we pretend to any Religion?
Nothing can be more false and unworthy, than in a solemn and religious manner
to own that in our Profession, which we do inwardly disbelieve and deny.

2. Do we at any time seriously consider this? and revolve upon it in our
minds? Do we bethink our selves, what our condition is like to be at that time,
what preparations we have for it. what grounds we have for hope? There cannot
possibly be any greater stupidity, than for a man to be slight and careless in
a business of so great moment. It Is the want of believing and considering this,
that is the chief cause of all the viciousness and disorder in the world.

3. What impression does the belief and consideration of this make upon our
hearts and lives? Does it stir up in us, vehement desires, and carefulness of
mind in preparing for that time? If a man were to be tried for life at the next
Assizes, How would his thoughts be taken up about his defense, what answer he
should make, what the main Plea is which he should insist upon, by what
evidence it might be streng^hned and cleared up? He would as soon forget to eat
his meat, or to go to bed, as to let a business of this nature slip out of his
mind.

There is nothing more hard to be restrained, than the Impetuous and wild
Exorbitances of Youth; And yet such persons would not, durst not indulge
themselves, according to the ways of their own hearts, and the sight of their
eyes; If they did really believe and conside^, that ^or all these things God
would b^^^g them to Eccl. 11. 9.
judgment.

The business of Religion, must therefore be above all other things of greatest
consequence to us, because it is the only means to secure us, as to our future
conditions. The affairs of this life are but of short continuance, and full of
uncertainty: And therefore it is not much ma^erial what a man's condition may be
in that respect. But there is another state and time which will more nearly
concern our care; and that is the great day of Account. And till a man has in
some measure provided for this, he cannot live comfortably, or sleey quietly,
or have any solid peace in his mind; but must upon every serious reflection be
continually haunted with frightful apprehensions about his everlasting
condi^ion.

It Is scarce credible that any man should be so sottish, as to think, he shall
escape dying: and when we do come to depart out of this world, It will then be
no advantage to us, that we have had Riches, or Honor, or Power. These things
will then vanish away, as to our Possession of them; and the Remembrance of
them may prove a torment to our thoughts, rather than a comfort; especially if
we have reason to suspect, that these things were our portion in ^his life, and
may be reckoned upon as our good things which we had already. Certain It is,
that they will render our Accounts the more difficult: For to whom much is
given, of them much shall be required. We must be answerable not only for our
doings, but for the fruit of our doings. All Jer. 17. 10
the sins, or evil consequences which have been occasioned by our Miscarriages,
shall be set upon our score.

And if these things be so. What manner of persons ought we to be in 2 Pet. 3.
11, 12.
all holy conversation and godliness, looking for, and hastening unto the coming
of the day of God. If any thing can prevail with men to live soberly, Tit. 2.
12, 13.
righteously, and godly in this world, Ir must be from the consideration of
that blessed hope and glorious appearing of the Great God, our Savior Jesus
Christ: To whom with the Father, etc.

FINIS.
A DISCOURSE Concerning the BEAUTY OF Providence. By the Right Reverend Father
in God, JOHN WILKINS, late Lord Bishop of Chester.

Psalm. 25. 10. All the paths of the Lord are mercy and truth, to such as keep
his Covenant and his Testimonies. The Fifth Edition.

LONDON: Printed by Henry Cruttenden, 1677.

THE PREFACE TO THE READER.
AMongst all other Doctrines, this of Providence (though it do properly belong
to Natural Theology. yet) is of an Universal concernmen^ both for knowl^dg and
practice, as any other point, in Christian Divinity,

The very Heathens have acknowleaged, only a Universal Providence of G^d, which
puts the general kinds of things into a regular way of working; But his
particular Providence likewise, which takes care of Individual Persons and
Actions. Why else do all Religions oblige men to pray unto Him, and to expect
His special assistance in every kind of want or necessity?

But now, though this common Principle be so universally acknowledged in the
Notion of it, yet men are generally very negligent in the practical application
of it to particular times and conditions; and so lose that comfort and
satisfaction that may be reaped from it.

It is the chief aim and business of this Discourse, To convince and quicken
men unto this duty, as being by so much the more seasonable for these times, by
how much the present troubles and confusions do now call upon us for it.

It cannot but occasion some suggestions of Diffidence and Infidelity, to
consider those many strange revolutions and changes in the world which in
outward appearance seem so full of disorder and wild contingencies. And
therefore it must needs be of special consequence for a man to have his heart
established in the knowledge and belief of this truth here insisted upon:

In all Ages of the world men have Psalm. 73. Jer. 12.
been much startled in their judgments by that unequal dispensation which seems
to be in those outward things, That one event should be to the righteous Eccl.
9. 2. Chapter 5. 15. Chapter 8. 14.
and the wicked. Nay, That a just man should perish in his righteousness. and
the wicked should prosper in his wickedness. That Chapter 4. v. 11
on the side of the Oppressor there should be might, and the oppressed should
have none to comfort them. This has sometimes so amazed and perplexed the
thoughts of considering men, that whilst they looked barely upon events, they
could not tell how to extricate themselves from these difficulties; which
occasioned that speech of Solomon; Surely oppression Chapter 7. v. 7.
makes a wise man mad; that is, puts him to his wits end, transports him with
wild imaginations, whilst he knows not readily what to answer in defense of
such proceedings.

But now he that shall seriously consider how every thing is managed by an
All-seeing Providcnce, which is exactly careful, and infinitely wise, such a
man will be easily satisfied, that in all these obscure administrations (which
seem unto us so full of casual, negligent, promiscuous Events) there is an
admirable (though unsearchable) contrivance.

As for the particular design which Providence may aim at in some
dispensations, this does not always fall under our reach. It is the glory of
Pro. 25. 2.
God to conceal a matter. And many of his works are so ordered, that though a
man labor to seek them Eccl. 8. 7, 1.
out, yet he cannot find out, yet he shall not find them. Yea further, Though a
wise man think to know them, yet shall he not be able to find them. And
therefore, where we cannot understand his ways, it is there our duty, with an
humble reverence to admire the wisdom of them.

How would this (if rightly considered and applied) silence all those unseemly
murmurings and complaints of men in these times? Remember, there is nothing
befalls us but what Act. 4. 28.
the counsel of God had before dctermined to be done. And he can order things
for the best, as well when they cross our desires, as when they comply with
them.

And therefore when you see the violent perverting of judgment and Eccl. 5. 8.
justice in a province, marvel not at the matter. That is, Be not transported
with wonder, or impatience, or unbelief, as if the Providence of God were
regardless or negligent: For he that is higher than the highest regards.
Though they that have the highest power amongst men may be so far from
remedying, that they rather encourage such disorders; yet God has a strict
watchful eye upon them. And though men may be apt to secure themselves in such
proceedings, by the greatness of their own strength, as if there were nothing
above them; yet there are higher than they. And there is a Chapter 3. 27.
time, when God will judge both the righteous and the wicked.

Let us be careful of our own duty, to serve Providence in the usual means, and
leave the disposal of events to him. It should be every man's chief business to
clear up the evidences of his particular title and relation unto this great
Governor of the World; and this will be the surest means to set us above the
fear or hurt of all outward changes.

We see with what artifice and compliance men will insinuate themselves into
the affection of those who (according to several revolutions) are advanced into
the places of power. Of how much greater advantage would it be, to get an
interest in his favor who does and shall always rule over the sons of men,
having all times at his disposal, out of whose hands no strength or policy
shall ever be able to wrest the sway and dominion of things?

It cannot but afford strong consolation un^o every true Believer, to consider,
that he who has the chief influ^nce in all these great changes and variety of
events in the World, is both his God, and his Father.

How did this quiet the heart of old Eli? 1 Samuel 3. 18. It is the Lord, let him
do what seems him good. And David upon the same consideration professes, I
was dumb, and opened Psalm. 39. 9.
not my mouth, because thou did it. And our blessed Savior himself makes use
of this argument, The ^oh. 18. 11.
Cup that my Father has given me, shall I not drink it? Though the portion be
bitter and displeasing, yet so long as it comes from a loving and careful
Father, we have no reason to fear any hurt by it.

And on the other side, much of men's unquietness and dejection, is occasioned
either by the want of this evidence, or by the neglect of applying it. When
they terminate their thoughts upon secondary instruments, Fearing men Isa. 51.
12, 13.
that shall die, and the sons of men men that shall be made as grass:
forgetting the Lord their Maker, who stretched forth the Heavens, and laid the
Foundations of the earth. That is that which makes men to fear continually,
because of the fury of the oppressor.

How would it compose all these fears and distempers, if men would but labor
after this assurance of their interest in God, with the same zeal and intention
of mind wherewith they prosecute their particular engagements and animosities
against one another. He that has God for his strength and refuge, is always
sure to be on the strongest side, and need not fear the most tempestuous
mutations. Though the earth be removed, and the Mountains should be carried
into the midst of the Sea: Though the waters thereof roar, and be troubled; and
the Mountains shake with the swelling thereof.

Thus much I thought fit to premise in the general, concerning the necessity
and seasonableness of this Subject.

As for the particular occasion of publishing this Discourse, I have nothing to
say but this; That being solicited for a Copy of it by diverse persons (and some
of eminent quality) before whom it was occasionally Preached; I knew not any
more convenient way to satisfy their desires, than by such a public
communication of it.

I could speak something from my own experience concerning the efficacy of this
Doctrine, against those damps and dejections of mind unto which such times as
these will expose a man, It is my hearty Prayer, that it may be useful to
others also in this respect.

Farewell.
THE BEAUTY OF Providence.
ECCLES. 3. 11. He has made every thing beautiful in his time: also He has
set the World in their heart, yet no man can find out the work that God makes
from the beginning to the end.
THis Book contains Solomon's Experience in his search for Contentment; which
being not to be found amongst any of the Creatures, he advises never to trouble
our selves in an eager prosecution after them, but to enjoy our possessions
with a cheerful, liberal mind, without perplexing our selves in such cares and
labors, as may defraud us of those honest comforts to be had by them: for
there is nothing better for a man, then that he should eat and drink, and make
his Soul enjoy good in his labor, chapter 2. v. 24. That is one of the Conclusions
which Solomon infers from his former discourse, and which he farther amplifies,
and confirms in the following parts of his Sermon. It being his chief scope in
this Book, to direct men how to behave themselves with cheerfulness and
contentment under all those great revolutions, and that variety of eventts
which may befall them in the world.

This Chapter contains a discourse concerning God's government and disposal of
times; and is therefore not unfitly styled, the Calendar or Ephemerides of
seasons: whence the Wiseman with diverse arguments urges upon us what he had
before commended, a cheerful and contented mind.

The Text is one of these arguments; God has made every thing beautiful in his
time: that is, there is a wise order and contrivance in all the works of
providence: every particular Event is most seasonable in that time which God
appoints: and therefore we have no reason to repine at our condition, as if
matters did not go well with us; for it is impossible they should have been
better than they are: though they do cross our private hopes and desires, yet
God best understands the fittest order and season for all things making them
beautiful in his time.

Also he has set the World in their heart: by [world] here is not meant this
material world; but seculum, the succession and course of things, as the
original word (...) does properly import. This God has set in, or (...)
expounded unto men's hearts; that is, he has endowed us with an ability to
descern in some measure that seasonableness which he observes in the government
of the World.

Yet there is no man can find out the work that God makes from the beginning to
the end: that is, it is above humane ability to comprehend the reason of all
Divine proceedings; we cannot find them fully out from the beginning to the end.

Others conceive that the words may be more properly rendered thus: This very
suitable to the Original.
as long as the World shall last, God does reveal unto men's hearts the work
which he makes, from the beginning to the end, excepting only some things unto
which man cannot attain. As if he should have said, in all ages of the World
there are still some passages of Providence, wherein men may be able to discern
a beauty and comeliness, though there are some other particulars which we
cannot understand. The ^ense of both Interpretations being for the substance
much alike.

That Is the connection and meaning of the whole verse. The Text, according to
its natural fullness, does comprize in it these three particulars.

1. Every thing has its time.

2. Every thing in its time is beautiful.

3. That is the proper season for all things which God appoints.

1. Every thing has ^s ^me. To all things there is an appointed season, ver. 1.
Not only for such natural events as bear in them a kind of necessity, as a time
to be born, and a time to dye, ver. 2. but also for those voluntary actions
that seem to be most alterable and contingent; A time to weep, and a time to
laugh, ver. 4. The wisdom of Providence in the government of this lower world,
has disposed to every thing its particular season. This is that we call the
fullness of time, the ripeness of season. Prove. 27, 1. The Wise man says there,
that the day brings forth events, Paritura est dies; alluding to a
teeming-Mother, to whom. there is a set date for her delivery. So does Time
travel with the decrees of Providence, and for each several action there is a
pregnancy, and fullness of time.

2. Every thing in its time is beautiful; even such matters as in their own
natures are not without some deformity. A time to kill, v. 4. A time to mourn,
a time of war, v. 8. The scorching of Summer, and the extreme cold of Winter,
though both in themselves alike distastful, yet are comely in their seasons;
and those times would not be so beautiful without them. Nor is it the natural
goodness of any thing that can make it comely out of its proper season. That
which Beauty is in Bodies, and Harmony in Sounds, that is Opportunity in Time.
Now as White and Red, which are the usual Materials of Beauty, as those
particular Notes of which Music does consist, may be so disposed of, as to
cause deformity and discord: so actions, which in themselves are good, may be
depraved by their unseasonableness.

3. That is the proper season for all things which God appoints: Or thus: Every
particular Event, is most beautiful in that time which the Providence of God
has allotted to it. It Is above the contrivance of Human Policy to bring
matters about in their fittest order. And therefore 'twere but folly to
conclude, That things do not fall out well, unless they answer our desires: for
God best understands the fittest season for every purpose. And whatsoever, or
whenever he works, you may be sure it is both beautiful, and in its time; Even
those Events which do most thwart our private Ends (could all circumstances be
duly confidered) we should find them to be performed in their most comely
order, and best opportunity.

As for the two first Particulars, though they are implied in the Text, yet are
they most expressly handled in the former verses: And therefore I shall pass
them over without any there enlargement, insisting only upon this latter, as
being more directly agreeable to the main scope of the words.

And it is a Subject that in many respects will deserve your more especial
attention; it is not commonly treated of. And besides, it may very much conduce
to our contentment, to settle our hearts against all those conditions that may
befall us in the World. It Is of very general use and concernment, suitable to
all times and occasions: For times of suffering, to make us patient and
submissive: For times of mercy, to make us cheerful and thankful. In brief, it
extends to all persons, relations, businesses, seasons; nothing is more
generally useful than this, to have our hearts fully persuaded of that wise
order and contrivance which there is in the the disposal of every particular
Event in the World. And it is more especially seasonable for times of Trouble
and Confusion, when men are apt to mistrust the Government of Providence, as if
God neglect the care of this lower world, and leave all things to their own
jarring-principles. Then (I say) it is more especially seasonable to vindicate
the care and wisdom of Providence; to show that every thing God does, is best;
and consequently, that those many distractions and confusions under which we
suffer, are far better than any other (though the most flourishing) condition
could be. And that is the Subject I am now to insist upon. The point is this:

Every particular Event is most Propos.
beautiful in that time which the Providence of God has allotted to it.

A Truth, by so much the more seasonable for these times, by how much it is now
the more difficult to believe it.

The Observation lies plainly both in the scope of the place, and the most
obvious sense of the words.

The Scripture is copious in other proofs to this purpose. Deuteronomy. 32. 4.
Confirmation by Testimony Divine.
His work is perfect, and his ways are judgment; a God of truth, and without
iniquity, just and right. Not only his first work of Creation is exactly good
and perfect; but his ways of Provi^^nce also are disposed with judgment and
righteousness.

So again, Isa. 28. 29. The Lord of So Jer. 32. 19.
Hosts is wonderful in counsel, and excellent in working; that is, every event
of Providence is managed and pre-ordained by an admirable Wisdom. and therefore
must needs be of excellent contrivance.

And again, Dan. 2. 20, 21. Wisdom and might are his: he changes the times and
the seasons: he removes Kings, and he sets up Kings: Those two Attributes
of Strength and Wisdom are for the most part Job 36. 5.
put together in Scripture. God never shows any Argument of his Strength, but
his Wisdom is engaged in it also. Those great alterations and subversions which
happen in the world, do not more demonstrate the greatness of his Power in the
doing of them, than the greatness of his Wisdom in disposing of them for the
best.

And again, Psalm. 104. 24. O Lord, how manifold are thy works? in wisdom have
thou made them all: the earth is full of thy riches. Which is as well true of
the works of Providence, as of the works of Creation.

But this Truth is more directly intimated by that Vision of Ezekiel in the
Chapter of his Prophecy, wherein he does express how all Events in the world
are wisely disposed of by the care and government of Providence. The scope of
that Vision was, to confirm the faith of the Prophet in the certainty of those
things which he was to foretell; because God himself, by whom he was inspired,
had such a special influence in the orderly managing of all inferior Events.

Though matters might seem to run upon wheels (as we say), to follow their own
courses, without any special guidance; to go at random; yet these wheels have
eyes in them, v. 18. that is, there is the eye of Providence, which directs
them in their revolutions. And then besides, 2 Chronicles. 16. 9. Prove. 15. 3. ver.
10.
these wheels are likewise governed by the four living creatures; that is by
the Angels of God, who are fitted for all their services, with four remarkable
Endowments.

1. With Wisdom and Prudence, typified in that Vision, by the face of a man.

2. Courage and Resolution, the face of a Lion.

3. Sedulity and Diligence, the face of an Ox.

4. Swiftness and Dispatch, the face of an Eagle.

In all which, the Prophet does at large explain unto us, with what deliberate
care and forecast the Providence of God does dispose of all these inferior
Events.

This Truth may yet be further evidenced, Humane Testimony.
from the very Light of Nature, and the Testimony of the Heathen. Hence was it
that the Ancients did set forth their gods with Harps in their hands, to show
the harmony they observed in the government of the world. And Midas Bacon's
Sap. Vet.
was condemned to wear Asses ears, because he preferred Pan's Pipe before
Apollo's L^te; Humane Policy before Divine Providence.

Nay the Devil himself does acknowledge the wisdom and seasonableness of Divine
proceedings, and therefore would fain have sheltred himself under this
pretense: Matthew. 8. 29. Art thou come to torment us before our time? Implying,
that it would not become the God of Order to do any thing untimely. And
doubtless that must needs be an evident and a great Truth which is confessed by
the mouth of so great a Liar.

For the further confirmation of this, let us a little consider some of those
rugged passages of Providence which seem to be performed with the greatest
negligence and deformity.

Look upon the History of Joseph: Examples
He was (you know) one of the promised Seed, concerning whom God had foretold a
superiority and dominion over the rest of his Family. Now, that after this, he
should be exposed to the treachery of his malicious Brethren: that besides his
nearness to slaughter from their hands, he should be sold into a far Country,
whence there was no hopes ever to hear on him again: That there he should be so
endangered by the rage of a lustful woman, and suffer so tedious and unjust
Imprisonment; all this might seem to be an oversight and neglect of Providence,
as if it had forgotten the promotion which Joseph was designed to. And yet do
but reflect upon the latter part of the story, and you shall find, how all
these misfortunes did mightily conduce, not only to his advancement, but all to
the safety and preservation of that whole ^amily, which was then the Visible
Church. So that if each of his Brethren had given him as much money as they
sold him for, it had not been so great a kindness as he received from their
intended Cruelty.

It is an elegant gloss of St. Gregory upon this Story, Divino judicio quod
declinare conati sunt, renitendo servierunt: Ideo venditus est a fratribus
Joseph ne adoraretur, sed ideo est adoratus, quia venditus. It was so ordered
by Providence, that what they sought to decline, they did promote, even by
their striving against it; Joseph was therefore sold by his Brethren, that he
might not be worshipped, and yet he was therefore worshipped, because he was
sold. Sic divinum consilium dum deviatur, impl^tur; sic humana sapientia dum
reluctatur, comprehenditur. Even so the Divine Council is accomplished in being
opposed; so Humane Policy is defeated by the means of promoting it.

Thus also is it in the History of David: He was (you know) designed to a
Kingdom; but how many straits was he put to before he attained it? Being forced
into the Wilderness like a wandering Outlaw, and followed there by a company of
discontented persons, who was as ready (perhaps) upon every trivial occasion to
revolt from him, as before from Saul. But, above all the rest, his last
distress was the one of the most desperate, when he was spoiled at Ziglag, not
only of his goods, but his Wives and Children too, when his own Soldiers in
their mutiny and discontent were ready to stone him; there being then but
little hopes to save his life, much less to get a Kingdom, And yet this
distress also was, in the event of it, contrived to his advantage. For having
afterward pursued the Amalekites, he not only recovered his own, but got such
abundance of other spoils from them, as served him for rich Presents, whereby
he might renew and confirm the friendship of his wellwishers in Israel; that
after the death of Saul (which presently followed) he might by their free votes
be chose to succeed him, 1 Samuel, 30. and chap. 31.

You may observe likewise somewhat to this purpose in the story of Jonah, when
he was sent to Nineveh Jonah.
about so weighty a matter as the safety of that great and populous City, and
that too when their destruction was within ken, but forty days off; that he
should now make delays and fly to Tarshish; that upon such a strait he should
run himself into hazards, might seem to argue some carelessness and neglect in
the Government of Providence. And yet this error of his was so wisely managed
in the event, that it proved a great advantage to the main End of his business.
For it is a probable opinion, That these Mariners who cast Jonah into the Sea,
were a special occasion that his Preaching was so succesful afterward; the
Ninevites being by them informed, That this was that Prophet for whom they had
lately suffered so violent a Tempest; how the wind ceased, and all was calm
again, when they had once cast him into the Sea from whence in was not possible
he should be delivered, but by a Miracle. And therefore they concluded, That
this must needs be some man extraordinarily inspired from above; and that his
Preaching was not idle Threats, but such as might justly fright them into that
rigorous Fast which afterward we read of both for Man and Beast. It being the
wisdom of Providence so to contrive it that this offense of Jonah should
mightily advantage that End which it did seem most directly to oppose.

So likewise for that dissension betwixt Paul and Barnabas, Act. 15. Paul and
Barnabas.
it might seem the most unseasonable breach that could possibly be imagined;
when the Church of the Christians was now in its beginning and infancy, that
then the two chief Members of it should fall at variance amongst themselves,
was such an untimely dissen^ion, that an Enemy could not wish them worse..
Nothing could more thwart the promulgation of the Gospel of Peace, than the
contentions of those that preach it. If that State which is already established
into a Kingdom, divided against it self, cannot stand; much Mat. 12. 25.
less could those small beginnings think to increase into a Church by divisions.

And yet this likewise was so disposed of in the event, that it did mightily
conduce to the Gospel through the whole world: for by this means those two
parted asunder, the one into Cyprus, the other into Syria and Cilicia, and like
two mighty streams spread Ver. 39, 40, 41.
themselves several ways that so they might the better water the barren and
thirsty corners of the world.

Thus have you seen the Beauty of Providence in some rugged passages of it.
It Is so in every other particular, though seeming unto us never so deformed.
But man cannot find out the work of God from the beginning to the end.

For the further evidencing of this Confirmation by Reason.
truth, there are two grounds upon which it is bottomed, that being understood
and considered, will make the point very clear.

1. God is exactly careful of every thing.

2. He is infinitely wise, for the disposal of all to the best. Reas. 1.


1. God does overlook all things by an especial Providence. Ephesians. 1. 11. He
works all things after the counsel of his own will. There is no event in the
World i^ is ordered both according to God's will, and by his counsel: Psalm.
135. 6. Whatsoever the Lord pleased, that did he both in Heaven, and in Earth,
and in the Sea, and in all deep places. Not only in the Heaven, where his glory
is more especiolly conspicuous; but in the earth too, where matters seem to be
full of confusion: and in the Sea, and in all deep places, where we cannot so
much as take notice of them. There is nothing so great, but is under his Power;
nothing so little, but is within his Care. Those actions and events that seem
unto us most free, and casual, inconsiderable, are all of them ordered by his
Providence.

1. That which is most free, the hearts and affections of men do follow the
guidance of his Decrees; Men may do after their own counsels and inclinations,
but they are still suitable to his Providence; there is nothing more in our
thoughts and words; and yet both the preparation of the heart, and the answer
of the tongue, is from the Lord, Prove. 16. 1.

2. That which seems most casual: The disposing the Lot is from him, Prove. 16.
33. He who is accidentally flain by another, is said to be delivered into his
hands by God, Exodus 21. 13. That casual Arrow shot at random, was directed by
Providence to fulfill the prediction of Ahab's death, 1 King. 22. 34. There is
no liberty for Causes to operate in a loose and straggling way; but in matters
of greatest uncertainty, there is a preordained course of Effects.

3. The least, most inconsiderable things, are not neglected by Providence. It
was a Like that of the Poet, Non vacat exiguis rebus adesse Jovi.
profane speech of the Aramites, That God was the God of the Mountains, not of
the Valleys, 1 King. 20. 23. Whereas he regards the lowest, the least thing, as
well as the greatest. The young Lions, Psalm. 104. 21. The Ravens. Psalm. 147. 9.
are provided for by him. He feeds the Fowls of the air, adorns the Lillies, and
clothes the Grass of the Field, which to day is, and to morrow is cast into the
Oven. Sparrows (you know) are but cheap Birds; Are not two of them sold for a
farthing? Mat. 10. 29. And yet not one of these do fall to the ground without
your Father. He must give the Fowler leave to kill them; nay, when they are
upon the wing in their frequent and often repeated motions; yet then it is He
that must appoint them the time and place when and where they shall settle; and
in this sense also, not one of them does fall to the ground without your
father. The hairs of your head are yet less observable contemptible even to a
Proverb, Pili non facio, Ne pilo quidem melius. And yet these, with God, are
inter numerata, amongst those things whereof he takes an exact account.

That place 1 Cor 9. 9. Does God take care for Oxen? does not simply exempt
such things from the Law of his providence; but it is Argumentum a minori, and
does imply his especial care of that higher rank of creatures to whom these are
subordinate, The plain meaning of it is, that if God has by a particular Law
provided, that the Ox should not be muzled that treads out the corn; he will be
much more careful of the Laborers in his Harvest.

It Is recorded to the glory of some ancient Generals, that they were able to
call every common Soldier by his own name; and careful to provide not only Pay
for their Captains, but Litter also for the meanest Beast that did serve the
Camp. Now you know there is not any Creature but is a Soldier to the Lord of
Hosts. He does sometimes muster up an Army of Lice and Flies; and therefore
it is but reason that his Providence should take care for such things also: why
should it not be as great an argument of his Power to preserve and order these
lesser Creatures, as it was at first to make them? The Creation of a glorious
Angel did not cost him more than that of a despicable Fly. Was it not He that
out of the same primitive nothing put that difference which there is amongst
several natures? And if the Painter in the same Piece draw a silken and a
woollen garment, why should he value the one above the other, since it was the
same Art that did. both make and distinguish them?

2. As his Providence does extend Reas. 2.
to all things, so likewise does his Wisdom. As he is exactly careful, so is he
infinitely wise; and therefore as able for the contrivance of every the the
least particular thing, as he would be if he had nothing but that to look
after. If the Providence o^ God had but one project on foot, we could easily
conceive how he might be able to drive that through all the windings and
circumstances of it, with care and wisdom. Nay, we would trust any wise man
with the managing of a single business, when he had nothing else to distract
his endeavors: But for all those multitude of affairs amongst Men and Angels;
nay, for the very circumstances and manner of all those several actions and
motions which are performed in every moment of time through the whole World; we
cannot conceive but that in such a tumult of business the eye of Providence may
be sometimes overseen. But this arises from our mistake of the Divine Nature;
we measure God by our own finite abilities; whereas we should consider, that
that which is infinite, cannot be confined by Time, or Number, or Place; but is
as well able at all times to look to all things, in all places, as if there
were only one business to be cared for. You may see some imperfect resemblance
of this amongst the Creatures. Do but consider the Sun, how that at the same
time, without labor or confusion, it is employed in diverse services for all
the Creatures under Heaven; the distinctions of Seasons, the growth of several
Plants, its various influence upon Minerals, the cherishing of living
Creatures, with sundry other such variety of employments, which we are not able
so much as to take notice of. Or else, do but mark the nature of the Soul,
which at the same time perhaps does contemplate Heaven, direct the body in its
sundry motions, distribute the food in a wise proportion to the several parts,
not neglecting so much as the least hair about it, but supplying that with
suitable nourishment. And all this it does without weariness or distraction.
And if a Creature can do thus, much more then the Creator, who gives to every
thing its proper ability, and does actuate all things by a more immediate
assistance than the Soul it self. So that though we suppose infinite occasions,
(which notwithstanding Creatures are not capable of) yet the Providence and
Wisdom of God is infinite also; and there is the same proportion of infinite to
infinite, as of one to one

Now put both these Reasons together: If the Providence of God be thus exactly
careful of every the least particular; if he be thus infinitely wise for the
disposal of all to the best; no wonder then, though every Event in the World be
both beautiful, and in its time.

For the further clearing of this Vindication from Doubts and Objections.
Truth, there are two Doubts or Queries to be resolved, that seem to oppose it.

1. What Is the reason why this Beauty of Providence does not appear to us; but
that many things seem so full of disorder and confusion in the World?

2. How may this consist with the the permission of sinful actions, which can
neither be beautiful nor seasonable?

I begin with the first, to show the reason why in so many things we cannot
discern this Beauty of Providence. The verse of the Text tells us, That man
cannot find out the work of God from the beginning to the end: That is, it is
above humane capacity to comprehend the reason of all Divine proceedings; we
cannot find them fully out from the beginning to the end, And so Job. 9. 10. He
does great things past finding out. Lo, he goes by me, and I see him not: He
passes on also, but I perceive him not. And again, Chap. 23. 8, 9. Behold, I
go forward, but he is not there; and backward, but I cannot perceive him: on
the left hand where he does work, but I cannot hehold him; he hides himself on
the right hand, that I cannot see him. The meaning is, that where ever Job
turned his eyes, there were still some passages of Providence which he could
not apprehend the meaning of. God has reserved this as a peculiar prerogative
to himself. It is not for us to know the times and the s^asons which the Father
has put in his own power, Acts. 1. 7.

There may be a twofold reason of this:

1. The obscurity of the things themselves. There are treasures of wisdom. Col.
2. 3. not only for their preciousne^s, but for their privateness too; hidd^n
wisdom: 2 Cor. 1. 7. secrets of wisdom: and these are double to that which is
(as Zophar speaks), Job 11. 6. That is, those concealed Providence which we do
not discern the reason of, are of much greater proportion than those that
appear. We read in that forecited place, Ezekiel. 1, 16. of a wheel within a
wheel, signifying those involutions and intricacies which there are in the ways
of Providence. And the Psalmist tells us, that His way is in the sea, and his
paths in the great waters: and his foot steps are not known. Psalm. 77. 19.

As it is in the works of Nature, where there are many common things of
excellent beauty, which for their littleness do not fall under our sense: they
that have experimented the use of Microscopes, can tell, how in the parts of
the most minute creatures there may be discerned such gildings and
embroideries, and such curious variety as another would scarce believe. Why,
it is so in the works of Providence; there are very many passages of frequent
daily occurrence, whose excellent contrivance does not fall under our sense or
observation.

2. Our own ignorance and shortsightedness; and that in a twofold respect:

1. We cannot see that end and drift which Providence aims at in many
particulars; and therefore no wonder though they seem unto us rude and
uncomely. We measure things by this false balance of Opinion, which weighs only
their outsides, and does not look upon their ends and relations. Now the beauty
of things does consist much in their tendency and reference to their proper
ends. If an ignorant man that knows not the reason of a Windmill or Water-Mill
should look upon them only as places of habitation, he cannot think them well
situated, where they are so much exposed to the violence of winds and waves;
whereas he that understands how the wisdom of the Artificer has contrived
those motions unto useful ends* must needs confess a beauty and comeliness in
the work. It Is so likewise in the events of Providence, which none can rightly
apprehend, but he that understands the special drift and purposes which they
are designed to.

2. We cannot see the whole frame of things, how sundry particular Events, in a
mutual relation, do concur to make up the beauty of the whole. He that can
discern only two or three wheels in a Clock, how they move one against another,
would presently think, that there were contrariety and confusion in the work.
Whereas he that beholds the whole frame, and discerns how all those diverse
motions do jointly conduce to the same end cannot choose but acknowledge a wise
order in the contrivance of it. So likew^se is it in the frame of times; where
he alone is fit to judge of particulars, who understands how they r^ter to the
general. But now we are but of yesterday, and know nothing, because our days
upon the earth are as a shadow. (says Bildad) Job. 8. 9. We look upon things
according to a short succession, and so are not able to discern that beauty
which there is in their references to other matters afar off. But n^w, to God a
thousand years Psa. 90. 4. 2 Pet. 3. 8.
is but as one day. He beholds all things, w^^ther past or to come, in the same
instant. There is no succession in Eternity, but all things within the reach of
time are present unto that. Though in the revolution of a Wheel, there be a
mutual succession betwixt the parts contained in it; yet an eye that is placed
without, can at the same time discern the whole motion. Thus also is it in the
revolution of Time; where, though there be a mutual succession betwixt those
things that are contained under time; yet God, who is without and above it,
does at the same view behold all together. So that it is no wonder, though many
things seem beautiful to him, which to us who are so shortsighted, may appear
harsh and desormed.

2. The second Quaere was this, If there be such an over-ruiing Providence
which does dispose of all to the best; How comes it to pass that there are so
many sinsul actions in the World?

To this I answer two things:

1, When men thwart Gods will of Precept, they serve his will of Providence.
Those particular Interests of Gain, Honor, Pleasure, Revenge, which sway men's
desires and actions, are wisely contrived to the promoting of Gods Decrees and
Glory, When Augustus made the general Tax upon the World, His end was to enrich
himself, and fill his Coffers But God used it as a means to fulfill the Prophecy
of Christ's birth at Bethlehem. Rehoboam, and Jehu, and Cyrus, had all their
several aims in those works wherein they were subservient to Providence. And
they did still accomplish his counsel in prosecuting their own designs.

2. That which in re^pect of man's execution is wicked and disorderly, in
respect of God's appointment is beautiful and comely. There could not be any
more horrid act, than the betraying and Crucifying of our blessed Savior; and
yet even in this (as it was decreed by the determinate counsel and
fore-knowledg of God, Acts 2. 23.) there was the greatest Miracle of Divine
Wisdom that ever was extended to the Creature: such depths of Policy, which all
the subtilty of Men and Angels was not able to contrive, no nor to suspect,
(...), as the Apostle calls it, Ephesians, 3. 10. Interchangeable wisdom of curious
variety, as the word signifies. Now if God could thus manage the worst action
of man to the best advantage of man, well may we conclude, That every event of
Providence is Beautiful in its time.

I have now done with the Explication Applicat.
and Confi^mation of the Text. In the Application it may be useful for these
lessons:

1. ^or Information, and that in a twofold respect:

1. It may teach us our duty to take notice of, and observe the works 1. Use
For Inmation.
of Providence.

2. It may direct us what to judge of the affairs of these times under which we
are fallen.

1. If all the events of Providence be so wisely contrived, it is certainly then
our duty to consider and to take notice of them. Psalm. 111. 2. The works of the
Lord are great sought out of all them that have pleasure therein. And again, v.
4. He has so done his mavelous works, that they ought to be had in
remembrance. Now a man cannot be said to seek out, or to remember that which he
does not carefully observe. It Is the chief scope of that Psalm to excite men
unto this duty. And David makes it a note of Piety for men to delight
themselves in the contemplation of God's works, to remember Him in his ways, as
the Prophet Isaiah Isa. 65. 4.
speaks. This Asaph found by experience to be a special Antidote against all
diffidence and carnal fears; in the 77 Psalm when he was surprised with those
sad thoughts, Will the Lord cast us off for ever? and will he be no more
entreated? Has God forgotten to be gracious? etc. He presently applies himself
to this remedy, v. 11, 12. I will remember the works of the Lord; surely I will
remember thy wonders of old: I will meditate also of thy works, and talk of thy
doings,

If a man were but well read in the story and various passages of his life, he
might be able to make an experimental Divinity of his own. He that is observant
of Gods former dealings and dispensations toward him, may be thence furnished
with a rich treasury of experience against all future conditions.

There are very many duties that depend upon a right understanding of the
times. A man knows not how to order his prayer and praises, without some
observation and skill in these. It was a great commendation which was given to
the men of Issachar, that they had under standing in the times to know what
Israel ought to do, 1 Chronicles. 12. 32. and the ignorance of these the Wiseman
complains of, as being a very great evil, Ec^les. 9. 12. For man knows not
his time; but as fishes are taken in an evil net, and as birds are caught in
the snare: so are the sons of men nared in an evil time, when it falls suddenly
upon them.

Now this observance of Gods works and dispensations, is a duty always
seasonable, but more especially in such times as these. It Is commonly observed,
that though smooth and peaceable times are best for the Liver, the man that
lives in them; yet times that are full of change and vicissitude, are best for
the W^^^er, the Historian that writes of them: so though quiet seasons may best
suit with our desires and outward condition; yet these disturbed, confused
times, may be the best improved by observation, and do most set forth the
wisdom of Providence.

The Common Providence of God in the various seasons and order of Nature, may
afford excellent matter for contemplation; much more that special Providence of
his in the guidance of humane affairs, which have been always managed with
various wisdom.

But especially in his dispensations toward these latter ages, wherein there
have been many new, unusual emergencies, such as our forefathers have not known.

How many strange observable passages may a considering man pick out amongst
the affairs of these few last years? How strangely has the whole course of
things both in Churh and State, been turned about, beyond all men's
imaginations? How has God in every respect, and on all sides, pusled the
wisdom of the wise, and enfeebled the strength of the mighty, abating the glory
of all humane power, lifting himself up above others, in those things wherein
they dealt most proudly, effecting great matters by despised means! What
strange ebbs and flows of hope have we known? When men have been most full of
confidence, then some unexpected accident has ^ntervened, and disappointed
all: so that the wisest men have been often put to stand at a gaze, not knowing
what to judge of the issue of things: And (though we have not had leisure to
observe it, yet) there has been something equivalent to this in other Nations;
the whole Christian world being generally full of strange Commotions. Now we
may certainly conclude, That all these unusual turns and changes of things, are
not for nothing. There is some great design to be accomplished by them; it is
our duty with diligence to observe the passages, and with patience to attend
the issue.

2. This may direct us what to judge of the present times under which we are
fallen. If it be so that every particular Event is so exactly regular and
beautiful; hence then we may infer, how all that confusion and disorder which
seem to be in the affairs of these times is not so much in the things
themselves, as in our mistake of them. The Roughest seasons (though they may be
unsuitable to our desires) yet have in them a proper comeliness as well as
times of the greatest serenity.

True indeed, the Scripture does sometimes mention evil days; but Ephesians. 5. 16.
this is not so to be understood, as if Time in it self could be evil, either
naturally, for so God pronounces it good; or morally, because it is not
subjected to any Moral Rule; but only accidentally, in respect of our mistake
and abuse of it; when either we judge of it according to our own wishes, or
mispend it according to our own lusts. It Is only unwise, 2 Timothy 3. 1, 2.
unholy men, that make unhappy times.

As in the works of Creation, nothing is properly deformed, but every thing
has a peculiar beauty, according to that rank and station wherein it is placed:
though in vulgar speech we use to call a Toad and a Serpent ugly; yet that is
only in reference to common esteem: whereas in respect of the Universe they are
as regular and comely parts as any of the rest; their outward shapes being
suitable to their inward forms, and those purposes for which they are intended.
So it is likewise in the ways of Providence; those designs that in respect of
our apprehensions are carried on by a cryptical involved method, are yet in
themselves of as excellent contrivance, as any of those that seem to be of more
facil and perspicuous order.

If a man in these times shall with his reason consult only the outward face of
things they must needs seem full of irregularities and disorder; when the
spirits of men in the prosecution of the same ends, and the pretense of public
welfare, shall be imbittered against one another, even to public ruin: when
there is a violent Eccl. 5. 8.
perverting of judgment and justice in a Nation, and on the side of the
oppressor is might: but the oppressed Chap. 4. 1.
have none to comfort them.

When there is a total subversion of those degrees in which the order and
harmony of things does confist, Servants being on horses, and Princes walking
as Eccl. 10. 7
servants on the earth: When Job 9. 5, 6.
the mountains are removed, and pillars of the earth tremble. When Religion and
Laws (which are the foundation of a People) are out of Psalm. 11. 6.
course.

And yet even in all this, there may be a design of Providence for our good.
This is certain, All God's Promises to his Church are infallibly true, and all
his dispensations (though never so cross in outward appearance) have a tendency
toward the fulfilling of those Promises. And why should not a man rest himself
in this belief?

In our natural enquiries after the efficient cause of things, when our Reason
is at a stand, we are fain sometimes to sit down, and satisfy our selves in
the notion of occult qualities; and therefore much more should we be content to
be ignorant in the final cause of things, which lie more deep and obscure than
the other.

Let no man then presume to censure the several vicissitudes and changes of
things, as if they were unseasonable and ill contrived. Remember we are but
short-sighted, and cannot discern the various reserences and dependences
amongst the great affairs in the world, and therefore may be easily mistaken in
our opinion of them. We do in this world (for the most part) see only the dark
side of Providence. At the last and great day of manifestation, when the whole
plot of Divine Love shall be laid open, then we shall be able to discern the
Beauty of Providence in all the rugged passages of it; how tribulation,
distress, persecution, famine, nakedness, peril, and the sword, Romans 8. 28. 35.
do all work for the best to those that love God.

Judge nothing therefore before its time, 1 Cor. 4. 5. Consider, we cannot see
the works of God from the beginning to the end. And you know there is a vast
difference betwixt the beginning and the end of a building. It may be our lots
perhaps in these times to see only the beginning of the Fabric; when the old
frame is demolished, the rubbish lies scattered about, the new materials being
gathered into heaps. Posterity perhaps may see the end of it, when all these
confused preparations shall be made up into a beautiful structure.

2. This may serve for reproof of Use 2. For Reproof.
two sorts of persons.

1. Those that do not observe or regard the works of the Lord.

2. Those that murmur and repine at them.

1. This may reprove those that do not observe or regard the works of the Lord.
It Is a great argument of infidelity and irreligion, when men let many
remarkable Providence pass by them without notice or observation: or when they
look upon them only in a slight and superficial manner, like those whom the
Prophet Isaiah complains of, Seeing many Isa. 42. 20.
things but observing not.

This sin of Inadvertency of God's various Providence, has been oftentimes
severely threatened and punished in Scripture, Isa. 5. 12. Because they regard
not the work of the Lord, nor consider the operation of his hands, therefore is
my people gone into captivity. And again, Jer. 12. 11. The whole land is made
desolate, because no man lays it to heart.

The heaviest Judgments that can befall a Nation, are Captivity and Desolation.
And yet they are both denounced against this stupidity and carelessness of
Spirit. And you may guess at the hainousness of the sin, by the greatness of
the punishment.

It Is a sin, that is after a more especial manner appropriated to wicked men.
Psalm. 10. 4, 5. The wicked through the pride of his countenance, will not seek
after God: God is not in all his thoughts. Thy judgments are far above, out of
his sight. Things that he never enquires after, or regards, as if he were not
at all concerned in them. Quae supra nos nihil ad nos: He looks no further than
second Causes, unto which he ascribes the success or miscarriage of Events; and
does not take notice of that Divine Providence, by whose influence they are
guided. You see this is made the note of wicked men. And therefore, as we would
avoid that censure, so still it concerns us to avoid the sin.

2. This may serve for the reproof of those that murmour and repine at the
works of Providence, that take upon them the Magisterial judgment of events; as
if they could tell how to frame things much better, and to contrive the issue
of things to greater advantage. How ordinary is it for men to discourse thus
concerning the great changes of these times? as if the unsearchable ways of God
were to be judged before the Tribunal of Humane Reason: Who art thou O man that
Disputest with God (says the Apostle)? How despicable, in comparison to His
Infinite Majesty and Wisdom? If there be a Commonwealth amongst Ants and Bees
(as some Naturalists say there is), 'twould make a man smile to think, that
they should take upon them the censure of State-matters amongst us men: and yet
here the disproportion it finite; whereas betwixt God and man it is infinite: As
the Heavens are higher than the earth, so are my thoughts higher than Is. 55.
8, 9.
your thoughts, and my ways than your ways.

He that will take upon him to mend the contrivance of things, let him remember
(says one of the Stoics) that the first thing he is to do, is to mend God, to
teach him wisdom Epictetus.
and care. And if he shall think himself unfit for that, let him not presume
upon this. For consider, is not the Providence of God exactly careful of every
thing? Is not he infinitely wise, to dispose of all to the best? Are not all
things subservient to His will? Why certainly then, (however matters may appear
to us) yet nothing could have been better than it is. every thing shall prove
^or the best, in respect of His Glory, and (if we belong to Him) in respect of
our good too.

It Is an observable check which Solomon gives to such presumptuous persons as
are apt to repine at and censure the course of things, Eccl. 7. 10. Say not
thou, What is the cause why the former days were better than these? for thou
do not enquire wisely concerning concerning this. It should seem, that those
flourishing days of Solomon, so very eminent for all kind of plenty and peace
(Silver being in Jerusalem as stones, and Cedars as the Sycamore 2 Kings 20. 5.
in the vale for abundance), were not yet without some morose repining spirits,
who were still maligning the present condition of things; and therefore no
wonder if we find the like humor among men in other times.

This the wise man does here reprove, both by a prohibition and a reason.

1. A Prohibition, Say not thou, What is the cause why the former days were
better than these? that is, Be not transported with that common humor of
censuring and condemning the state of times, and commending the times past; as
if the course of Events were not managed by the same wise Providence now, which
governed the world before, He does not forbid men to enquire after the cause of
public sufferings: For this is frequently enjoined in Scriptue, that upon the
occasion of any special judgment, we should search and try our hearts, consider
our ways, and our doings, laboring to find out the cause of Gods displeasure,
that we may accordingly meet him in his ways. But the meaning is, that we
should not take upon us the p^remptory censure of times and dispensations,
presuming to condemn those things which we cannot understand.

2. The Reason. For thou do not enquire wisely concerning this thing. That Is
a figurative expression, styled a Meiosis, when a phrase signifies much more
than the naked words do import. The meaning is, it is extreme folly for men to
take upon them the censure of Times and Providence, as if they were competent
Judges of such matters.

There are two places of Scripture that will make up a Syllogism to prove this
Conclusion.

He that judges of a matter before he has enquired into, and understands it,
it is folly and shame unto him, Prove. 18. 13. But now, It does not belong unto
us to know the times and the seasons which the Father has kept in his power,
Act. 17. And therefore it must needs be folly to take upon us the Magisterial
censure of such things.

Every day has its proper evil, as well the former as these; and every Mat. 6.
34.
doy has its proper advantage, as well these as the former. The very dregs of
time, if we endeavor to make a right use of them, Ephesians. 5. 16.
may be redeemed into opportunity.

There are two reasons of men's offending in this kind:

1. When they look only upon some partlculars, without the consideration of
their proper end, or general frame. Now it is true indeed, that some particular
Events, singly looked upon, may seem very prejudicial; but the whole contexture
of affairs in their cooperation, shall prove for the best. All things shall
work together (...) for good to those that love God, Romans 8. 28.

But now it is above our capacity to comprehend the whole frame of things: And
that is not disorder in respect of the whole which to us may appear so, being
compared with some particulars. You know, that in the natural body the variety
and dissimilitude of parts, is required to the beauty of the whole; the
roundness of the head, the length of the arm, the flatness of the hand;
blackness in one part, and whiteness in another; all these being singly
compared amongst themselves, though they may seem to argue some opposition and
deformity, yet look upon them as they stand in relation to the whole frame, and
it will appear how in their several ways they do each of them conduce to its
comeliness and order. If this lower World had in it no changes and varieties,
but were in all respects alike, it would not then be so properly (...), a
beautiful World, as (...), a Lump or Mass.

2. Another occasion of men's offending in this kind, is, when they will judge of
Events according as they suit with their own wishes. And in this case, it is
impossible that every humor should be satisfied, because particular desires
(besides their opposition to one another) will likewise be inconsistent with
the general design. It would seem better perhaps to every private man, if he
himself were a Magistrate; or a King; and every common Soldier a Commander, or
a General. But how could this consist with the exigencies of the Commonwealth,
or an Army, where their must be degrees, and disproportion of places, according
to the necessity of several employments? It Is so in the government of this
great Universe: that difference which their is betwixt particular things, and
times, and persons, does much conduce to the beauty and convenience of the
whole.

It Is our safest way then to conclude, that all matters are for the best,
beautiful in their times, though to us they may seem full of disorder and
contrariety. Thus the Apostle in that remarkable place, Romans 11, 33. speaking
concerning the rejection of the Jews, when God would cast off and destroy his
peculiar people, and that for his own glory and advantage; he concludes, His
judgments unsearchable, and his ways past finding out: But of him, and to him
are all things: as if he should have said, God will do this strange work; and
though for my part I know not the reason of it, His judgments are unsearchable,
etc. yet sure I am, that of him and to him are all things; that, is as the
making of all things was of his power, so the resolution of all things should
be to his glory.

Though his judgments are as the great deep, for their obscurity and
unmeasurableness, not to be fathomed by our shallow apprehensions, yet his
righteousness is as the strong mountains, for their eminency and stableness,
Psalm. 36. 6. Though clouds and darkness may be round about him, yet
righteousness and judgment are the habitation of his throne, Psalm. 97. 2. Use
3. For Exhortation


3. This may serve for Exhortation, to persuade us unto these four duties.

1. Not to be too hasty in our desire or prosecution of any thing.

2. Nor to trouble our selves with any solicitous care about the success of
things.

3. To be equally prepared for all future Events.

4. To behave our selves with carefulness and contentment in all conditions.

1. Hence we learn, Not to be too hasty in our desire or prosecution of any
thing. God best knows the fitest season for every Event; we shall have it when
its time is come; and before that, 'twould not be beautiful: Like Snow in
Harvest (as the Wise Prove. 25. 13.
man speaks) which though it might possibly be some refreshment to our
particular, yet would be a deformity in the course of Nature.

There are some men whom the Prophet styles of a hasty heart, (...) Translated
Fearful.
Isa. 35. 4. who are too heady and impatient in their hopes. And it is a
weakness that arises from our infidelity and distrust of Providence. For he
that believes, makes no have, Chap. 28. 16. It Is God's usual course to defer
what he promises, thereby to exercise our faith, to put an edg on our desires,
and a value upon the blessing. In natural affairs, we are fain to expect the
proper season and maturity of things; the Husbandman will wait for his Harvest;
he does not expect to sow and reap both in a day. It should be so likewise in
other matters. And since that is always the fittest time for every thing which
God appoints, it will become us then patiently to wait his leisure, and not
with overhasty desires to run before him.

Abraham was fain to tarry a long time for a Son, David for a Kingdom, and the
whole World for Christ. He that rightly understands the worth of any blessing,
and his own want, cannot think much to wait for it. The poor man, at the Pool
of Bethesda, being sensible of his own lameness, was content to tarry there
thirty eight years in hopes of a remedy. Suppose a Promise were deferred to the
utmost, yet do but compare the shortness of our lives with the duration of our
souls, and then no delay can seem tedious. Neque enim est aliquid in tam
brevibus vitae metis ita serum, quod longum expectare immortalis putet Boethius
Consol. l. 4
animus. A man conscious to himself of his own mortality, cannot think any time
long which is confined within the narrow bounds of life.

Is there then any mercy which thou expectest? Do not over-rashly hasten it
with any indirect project, as if thou were able to help the Providence of God
with wiles and devices of thine own. Though it be long in coming, yet it will
come at last; it cannot be more slow than sure. When Isaac was laid upon the
Alter, and bound for a Sacrifice, and his Father's hand lift up for the fatal
blow, yet then there came a rescue from Heaven, which would not have been so
beautiful, if by any unlawful act it had been hastened before that time, either
by Abraham's sparing his Son, or Isaac's resisting his Father.

Joseph did undergo a tedious imprisonment in the Land of Egypt; it is likely,
being the Key-keeper, he might have taken his own time, and have escaped when he
would; but then he had lost his preferment: whereas by tarrying God's leisure,
he was delivered with advantage. Though David had been a long while anointed to
a Kingdom, yet because he did not use any hasty means for the enjoying of it,
therefore did Providence clear the Passage for him, and prospered it to him
afterward. He might have killed Saul in the Cave, and Abner 1. Sam. 24 11. 26.
17.
too, when he found them sleeping; but then he had been overhasty; 'twere
better they should fall by their Enemies. The Lord shall smite them when their
day shall come to dye, 1. Sam. 26. 10. And before that, 'twould be but rashness
to attempt it. And so likewise when he stopped himself in his haste after Nabal's
life, you know within a while after God took him away by his own immediate
hand, and gave both his Wife and Estate to David.

An over-forwardness in the hastening of our hopes, is the ready way to
imbitter them unto us. You know how much trouble and contention there grew from
that hasty act of Sarah, when in her mistrust of the Promise, and fear of being
childless, she must needs give Hagar, to Abraham.

So likewise for Jacob's too much haste in getting the blessing by a wrong
means, you know it cost him afterward many dangers, and a tedious exile.
Whereas if he had tarried longer, God would have brought it about for him by a
more easy and beautiful way.

Gods time is the best; and he never fails his own season: I the Lord will
hasten it in its time, Isa. 60. 22. For us to measure the fitness of seasons by
our own weak apprehensions, is not this to set the Sun by our Dial? we are too
short-sighted, apt to antedate the Promises. The Lord will arise, and have
mercy upon Sion, when the time to favor her, yea, when the set-time is come.
Psalm. 102, 13.

2. Hence we learn, Not to trouble our selves with any solicitous care about
the success of things. To serve Providence in the usual means, that is our
work; but the issue and event of things, that is God's work, we have nothing to
do in it. That which is not under our power, should not be under our care. If
there be nothing at our disposal, but that all Events do Ver. 9.
depend (...) upon an higher Providence, 'twere but a vain thing than to busy
our selves with hopes and fears about them. Much of the disquietness amongst
men in the world, arises from hence, that they busy themselves about God's
work, and neglect their own.

Is there then an evil thou fear? why, it is not in the power of any creature
to hurt thee. Though men should use plots and threats against thee, yet they
can do nothing. They sat together, and counseled against David, devising to
take away his life, Psalm. 31. 13. But what was his comfort? why, says he, v.
15. My times are in thy hands, O Lord. He knew that no ill sccess toward him
was in the power of others.

Or is there an evil thou feel? why, it comes from the hand of God. Be not
then impatient. It Is but a childish currish thing to beat the rod or bite the
stone that hurt thee. David could quietly undergo the railing of Shimei, when
once he had discerned in it the Providence of God.

Or is there a good thou hopest for? why, it is not within the reach of thy
abilities. And therefore 'twere but in vain to think thou could command it by
thine own endeavors. We would count it a mad thing for one that is naturally
low, to busy himself in the study and labor of growing tall, because this is
not alterable by any thing in our power; since no man can Eccl. 9. 11.
add one cuhit to his stature. Why, it is so in other things likewise; God does
as well set bounds to our estates, as to our statures; and of our selves we can
as little add one penny to that as one cubit to this. And therefore, never let
any one think that he can raise himself as he pleases, and be the Master of his
own Fortunes. Though he were furnished with the greatest helps and
probabilities of advancement; yet the battle is not always to the strong, nor
the race to the swift; neither bread to the wise, nor yet riches to men of
understanding, nor yet favor to men of skill; but time and chance happen to
them all, That is, there is a secret Providence, which does so unavoidably
dispose of these lower Events, that the likeliest means we can use, cannot
promise us any certain success.

They that with a compass-wisdom will delay Events, that with forecasts and
provisions will bind Providence; for the most part, are not only disappointed
in what they hoped for, but do meet with a curse instead of it. See that place,
Isa. 50, 11. Behold all ye that kindle a fire, that compass your selves about
with sparks, walk in the light of your fire, and in the sparks that you have
kindled; this shall you have of my hands, you shall lie down in sorrow.

3. Hence we learn to be equally prepared for all future Events, not wishing
for one more than another. Whatever comes to pass shall be beautiful, and
therefore should be welcome. All things that befall us, shall lead us on to the
same Journey's end, Happiness. And therefore we should not in our expectation
of future matters, engage our selves in the desire of any particular success;
but with a Traveller's indifferency (as Epictetus speaks in Disp. 1. 4. c. 7.
Arian) who when he comes to doubtful turnings, does not desire one way should
be true more than another. So should we entertain every thing that we meet with
in our passage through this life; especially since we are sure that there is
none of them but (if we belong to God) shall further us in that which is our
main business, our journey to Happiness.

And therefore to be very solicitous about any particular success, what is it
but to limit and confine the power of God? nay, to prefer our own policy before
the wisdom of Providence; as if we alone were able to discern what would be the
best issue of things; Mark how the same Heathen bespeaks such a person: Thou
foolish man (says he) do thou not desire that which will be most convenient
for thee? And can there be any thing better than what God appoints? (...).
Wherefore by such immoderate and eager desires, thou do as much as in thee
lies to corrupt the Judge, and seduce the Counselor.

The Stoics have many excellent passages to this purpose: Nunquam sapientem
poenitentiae subit (says Seneca) De benef. lib. 4. 34.
quia nihil melius illo tempore fieri potuit quam quod factum est. A wise man
is never troubled at any cross Event; he knows nothing could have been better
than it is. Omnia illi succedunt; nihil preter opinionem accidit. All things
are successful to him, he is disappointed in nothing, because indifferent to
every thing. Whilst others are tossed up and down betwixt hopes and fears, his
mind is established.

Now if mere Reason could advance Heathen men to such resolutions, much more
than should a Christian's Faith in the Providence of God, with those many
Promises wherein he has an interest, raise his mind to this Heroic temper,
and make him bend himself with a submissive compliance unto every condition.

Obj. But what then, may not a Object.
man (nay, should he not) be very earnest in his desires and prayers, for some
particular deliverance or blessing?

I answer, Yes. But in all temporal Sol.
matters, it must be still with a tacit submission to the will of God, who
knows better what is fit for us, than we do our selves. See the example of
David to this purpose, 1 Samuel 15. 25. He was there put to a very great
exigence, his Son Absalom had suddenly raised a great Army against him,
insomuch as he was fain to fly for his life: There were some of the Priests
adhered to him, and followed him with the Ark; but he, upon serious thoughts,
desires them to return again: For (says he) if I shall find favor in the eyes
of the Lord, he will bring me again, and show me both it, and his habitation.
But if he thus say unto me, I have no delight in thee; behold here I am, let
him do to me as seems good unto him. Here Is no deep anxiety or aestuation of
Spirit, no bitter exclaiming against his unnatural Son, and difloyal Subjects;
but quiet succumbency, an indifferent composure of mind, which resolves to be
content in every condition. He puts the case both ways, and is provided for
either. If it prove after this manner, why then so; if otherwise, then thus. So
true is that common Emblem, That every wise man is a Cube or Dye, not to be
flung from his bottom. Let him be cast any way, he still lights upon his right
basis; whatever his condition may be, Si fractus illabatur orbis, yet his mind
is still calm and peaceable.

Obj. But would you have a man Object.
turn Stoic? should he not be troubled at the afflictions that befall him?

Sol. I answer: Yes: He must be Sol.
sensible of his sufferings, and consequently cannot but grieve under them,
especially so far as his own sin and neglect has oceasioned them. But then it
should be his care to quiet his heart from immoderate trouble, by the
consideration of that wise Providence, who does dispose of all for the best.

4. Lastly, Hence we learn, To behave our selves with cheerfulness and
contentment under all those conditions which the Providence of God shall think
fittest for us. It Is the Wise-man's own inference from the Text in the Verses
immediately after it: There is nothing better, than for a man to rejoice, and
do good in V. 12, 13.
his life; that he should eat and drink, and enjoy the good of his labor. For
if every thing be best which God appoints, Aequ^in est ut ho mini placeat,
quicquid placet D^o.
we have no reason then to be troubled at any Event. What though it do cross
our desires, yet 'twould not have been so well, as if it had been otherwise.
Things cannot be better with us than they are. David thought it a hard case,
that that his Child by Bathsheba must dye. But did he lose any thing by it? Was
it not better for him to have such a legitimate Heir as Solomon was? We are but
ill contrivers of our own welfare, and therefore should without murmuring submit
our selves and affairs to the government of Providence. What though that do
straiten us in our desires? you are content to let the Physician bar you of
many things, because he has cast your water, felt your pulse. Consider then,
does it not as much concern us to provide for the salvation of our Souls, as
the health of our Bodies? or does not God understand this, as well as the
Physician that? What reason have we then to repine at his proceedings? He was a
wise Son in Plutarch, who being told by a friend that his Father would
disinherit him, answered, Non faciet nisi faciendum: He will do nothing but
what he should. Thus should a Christian willingly resign up himself in every
condition, to the disposal of Providence.

Do but apply this Consideration according to the several occasions of your
lives. When your hearts are at any times amazed or dejected with the thought of
the public confusions; remember, that God sits in Heaven, observing and
ordering all these inferior motions for the best.

And so too in the case of particular sufferings, it is likely that there is not
any amongst you, but has some kind of private trouble and grievance to which
he is more especially exposed; either weakness of body, or too narrow a
fortune, losses in your estates, disappointment in your hopes, unhappy
relations, or the like. And these things, as we are men, cannot choose but grate
upon our spirits with some kind of harshness and discontent. But now as
believers, we have a remedy against them. For consider, there is nothing
befalls us by chance. All things are ordered by the deliberate counsel and
fore-knowledg of God. He is as exactly careful of every one of us, as if he had
nothing else to look after. Do not thinkthat any trouble befalls you, because he
does not regard; for his Care and Providence does extend to all things: nor
because he cannot help; for He is Almighty: nor because he does not regard; for
He is equally infinite in all his Attributes: But because his Wisdom finds that
condition to be fittest for thee: there is something amiss which should be
mended. When the superfluous humor is corrected, the Physical Potion shall be
taken away. And it is not reasonable to expect Physic and Health both together.
When the wound is healed, the smarting-plaster shall be removed. And thou
may confidently say With David, Psalm. 119. 75. I know O Lord, that thy
judgments are right, and that thou in faithfulness have afflicted me.

How happy might we be, if we could settle our hearts upon these Considerations.

FINIS.

