Covenant-Keeping The Way to BLESSEDNESS, OR, A brief Discourse wherein is
shown the Connection which there is between the PROMISE, on God's Part; and
DVTY, on Our Part, in the Covenant of Grace: As it was Delivered in several
Sermons, Preached in Order to Solemn Renewing of Covenant.

By SAMVEL WILLARD Teacher of a Church in Boston in New England.

Deuteronomy. 7. 9. Know therefore that the Lord thy God, he is God, the faithful God,
which keeps Covenant and Mercy with them that Love him, and keep his
Commandments, to a thousand Generations:

10. And repayeth them that Hate him, to their face, to destroy them: He will
not be slack to him that hates Him, He will repay him to his face.

BOSTON IN NEW ENGLAND, Printed by James Glen, for Samuel Sewall. 1682.

To the READER.
THE Doctrine of the Covenant, however full of grace, and light, and glory,
has occasioned, as deep Enquiryes, so Disputes, and variety of Apprehensions,
and that too among men both godly and learned, yea, that have been eminently
so. True it is, that in Principles which do more nearly concern the foundation,
or that relate to the substantials of the Covenant, Orthodox Writers are of the
same Judgment; and their Circumstantial differences have caused the light of
Truth to break forth with a greater brightness and glory, Ex collisione
Ingeniorum fit scintilla Veritatis. There are very judicious Dr. Jacob, Mr.
Blake.
Divines, who in their Discourses of the Covenant of Grace, take it in a more
strict sense, for the same with that Covenant of Mercy, which the
Electbeleeving World is the proper subject of. Others (and those who have been
great Dr. Preston, Mr. Rutherford, Mr. Gelaspy, Mr. Ball.
Lights in the Church of God) under the Covenant of Grace, comprehend the
Covenant of Redemption. Those glorious and blessed Transactions, which have
from the days of Eternity, passed between the Father and the Son, concerning
the Redemption of lost Sinners, are, (though Decrees and purposes) by the
Scriptures held forth, and expressed unto us, in a Covenant-way. The Lord
Christ, is the Prince Head, and Mediator of the everlasting Covenant; He is the
great Patentee, with whom that heavenly Charter is confirmed, and established
for ever. Indeed, the Covenant of Redemption in respect of Christ is rather of
Works, than of Grace, his obedience being every way perfect and meritorious;
but as it relates to us, it is a Covenant of Grace, since it was from Infinite
grace in the blessed God, that He has given his Son to be a Surety for
Sinners, and that as to those whom Christ has Undertaken for, He accepts of
the obedience of another, without requiring Personal satisfaction according to
the Rigor and Holy Severity of the Law.

Various also, have the Conceptions, and Expressions, of very worthy Men, been,
concerning absolute, and conditional Promises. Some who affirm the Covenant to
be Mr. Cotton Mr. Bridge, Mr. Petto. etc.
absolute, yet acknowledge that Faith is necessary in order to Justification,
and that sincere Obedience, and perseverance therein is necessary, necessitate
Praecepti, et Medij, in order to the enjoyment of Salvation; only, they are
not free to use the word Conditions, lest they should make those things to be
Causae regnandi, which are but Via ad Regnum. On the other hand, they that
assert Conditions to be in the Covenant of Grace, do nevertheless, own, that
there are some Promises therein See Mr. Bulkley of the Covenant.
which as to the subjects of them, are free and Absolute; viz. The Promises
which respect first grace, the pouring down of the Spirit, the giving a new
Heart, etc. And that the Conditions or Qualifications required of men under the
Gospel in order unto Life and Salvation, viz. Faith, Repentance, Holiness,
Perseverance, shall most infallibly be performed as to the Elect of God, by
reason of the Covenant of Redemption, which is the foundation of that Covenant,
which some Judicious and Learned, call the Covenant of Reconciliation: So that
they are far from asserting an Uncertainty in the efficacy of the death of
Christ, or a Conditional Will in God, depending upon, and determined by the
Wills of Men; which Arminian Heterodoxy has been elaborately confuted, by
sundry great Twiss de scientia media. Voetius disp. de conditionata, seu media
in Deo scientia.
Authors. Thus far then, the Controversy about absolute and conditional
Promises, is not of such moment, but that we may, salva Fide and Charitate,
allow men to express their Notions, and peculiar sentiments therein: Only
there are, who under pretense of Absolute Promises destroy both saving Faith,
and Obedience. Antinomians do no better; and some there are, that under that
pretense would establish an Assurance of Salvation, before and without those
gracious Qualifications which the Scripture declares all men that are destitute
thereof, to be Christless, under the wrath of God, and the Heirs of eternal
Death. It will be found that such Doctrine is not the way to comfort true
Believers, but to harden presuming Hypocrites, who are willing to be sure of
Heaven, and yet to retain some secret sin; but what good will such a man's
assurance do him, in the day, when God shall take away his soul?

It is of vast Importance and Concernment, for men to be duly instructed and
established in the Doctrine of the Covenant: since most of the Errors of the
Times are thereby confuted. Blind Popish Errors, concerning Merits,
Satisfaction, many Mediators, etc. Arminian Tenants about Universal Redemption,
Free Will, Apostasy from Grace, etc. Socinian Haeresyes, denying the Deity and
Satisfaction of Christ. All these Errors are inconsistent with the Covenant of
Redemption, according as the Doctrine thereof has (in these later Times of
Light especially) been held forth from the Scriptures by See Dr. Jacob, and Mr.
Flavel's Sermons concerning the Covenant of Redemption.
several whom the Lord has raised up, and enabled unto that Service for his
Name. Antinomian Errors oppose the Truth of the Covenant, both as established
with Christ (the Second Adam) and with Believers who are his Seed, that by the
Gospel are required to live according to the Holy Rules of the Word of God, and
concerning whom the Lord has promised that they shall do so. Isa. 60. 21. with
53. 10, 11. Anabaptistical Errors have been very fatal to the Churches of
Christ since the Reformation; in which respect a Amiraldus de Pace inter
Evangel. procurand. P. 246.
Learned Man gives wise Counsil, when he advises the Ministers of the Gospel
to be (in a more especial man-ner) Industrious to establish their People in
Truths that are contrary to such Errors. It is from Mistakes about the
Covenant, that Men are carried away with deluding Opinions, to the unspeakable
Prejudice of their Children as well as of themselves. For my own part, I do
solemnly profess it, I value that Covenant Interest, which God of his Grace in
Christ (through the blessing of Abraham come upon the Gentiles) has vouchsafed
not only to me, but to my Children, to be ten thousand Times better, than any
earthly Inheritance which this World can afford: And truly, they have little
reason to expect that God will bless them in their Posterity, who set at naught
so blessed a Privilege.

These things being so, the ensuing Discourse concerning the Covenant of Grace,
will (I trust) be of good Use among the Lord's People: Therein the Reverend and
worthy Author, has with Candor delivered his own Judgment in Points that are
of a more Controversial, and Circumstantial Nature; not being willing to
contend about Words, where there is an Agreement in the main Principles, on
which the Truth stands immovable. I know, there are many excellent Treatises on
this Argument, already extant. Nevertheless, what is here presented is not to
be thought supervacaneous, since the Reader will find that these Sermons, as to
the Doctrinal part of them, are Succinct, Solid, and Judicious; and that the
Applicatory part, is both Powerful, and Seasonable, being wisely accomodated
unto the present State of these Churches: more especially unto such as have
lately and Explicitly renewed their Covenant with God, and one another. Blessed
be the Lord, in that He has stirred up the Heart of this His Servant, to give
such faithful Exhortations, and Cautions as are here to be seen. In special, I
rejoice to see what is Expressed, Page 107, 110. Where Professors are called
upon to deny themselves in some Lawful Libertyes, rather than to occasion
others to sin against the blessed God; And the Neglect of Church-watch and
Discipline, is bewailed, as that which does make Religion to languish among us.
And it is a delight to see that serious and solemn Caution, Page 124, 125. to
the Children rising up, that they should beware of overthrowing the Foundations
which our Fathers have laid.

Now the Lord own, and go along with his Truth, that thereby many may be
awakened, quickened, encouraged in faithful Desires, and Endeavors to keep
Covenant with God. So may they hope that the Lord's Faithfulness in keeping
Covenant with them, will extend it self to them that fear Him; yea, unto them,
and to their Children, and unto their Childrens Children, from generation to
generation.

Boston. N. England; November. 15. 1682. INCREASE MATHER.

Covenant-Keeping the way to Blessedness.
PSALM. 103. 17, 18. 17. But the mercy of the Lord is from everlasting to
everlasting upon them that fear him: and his righteousness unto Childrens
Children.

18. To such as keep his Covenant, and to those that remember his Commandments
to do them.


IT is an Observation worth our serious minding, that ever since God made Man
upon the Earth, he has dealt with him in the way of a Covenant: he was no
sooner brought into the World, but was transacted with in this way: and when he
had utterly lost himself by his disobedience to the first, then was a new and
Gospel Covenant opened and revealed unto him, in that first glorious promise
made after man's Apostasy; that the woman's Seed should break the Serpents head,
Genesis 3. 15. The knowledge therefore and understanding of the Covenant, and of
our true relation to it, is that which only can help us to the knowledge of our
own true estate, which is done by comparing our selves with it: Here also we
learn our duty by framing our selves according to the condition of it. This
last is of special moment to be pondered by a Church or People, designing to
renew their Covenant with God, and is the main design of this present Discourse.

This Psalm is a Psalm of Praise, its proper design is to move and persuade the
Church of God to celebrate His Glorious goodness and mercy to His People; to
which end there is from verse. 3. to 20. a particular enumeration of various
benefits, for which he is to be acknowledged and honored in the lips and
hearts of His People: One of these is recorded and illustrated from verse. 15.
to 19. viz. His endless mercy, and described,

1. By its duration, from everlasting to everlasting, it is not a fading or
soon-expiring Love, but abiding; this is illustrated by the contrary, or
compared with the mercy of Man, which must needs be like Himself, and what He
is, He tells us, verse. 15, 16. His days are as grass, etc. He is a poor,
frail, withering, dying thing, blown down like a bubble, with a little puff,
soon gone, and the remembrance of him lost in a little time.

2. By the subject of it, whereof here is a threefold Character, all indeed
aiming at one and the same thing, but varying in the expression, and that for
our better information: the subjects thereof are described by,

1. The inward principle whereby they are acted, them that fear him which word
is Jara, quando ad De ^m refertur generale est complectens omnem reverentiam
quae cum veneratione and Religione Deo exhibetur. Chemn.
used in the Old Testament to be an expression of the obedience of Faith; they
that fear God are true Believers, that have received the heart of Children, it
intends that reverential and filial fear that is in true Converts, which is the
spring and principl of obedience

2. The practice of this principle, such as keep His Covenant: i. e. those that
so order their lives, as to observe the obligation lying upon them in the
Covenant, and endeavor to frame themselves according to the Terms and
Prescripts of it, and that observe the conditions of it.

3. The rule which they follow in their practice, and how they follow this
rule; that remember His Commandments to do them: i. e. that study much to
acquaint themselves with the will of God about their duty, or how He expects
that they should order themselves and their ways; and this with full purpose,
and constant endeavor to practice accordingly. Though it be the second of
these I mainly intend to follow, yet so as including or comprehending of the
other two, for he that keeps Covenant is one that fears God and keeps His
commandments; these two comprize all that is required in the Covenant, Eccl.
12. 13.

3. By the Intaile of it, verse. 17. where the word Righteousness, is put in
instead of the word Mercy, to note unto us the sweet consent that is between
Justice and Mercy in this work, and also to confirm us in the belief of the
certainty of the accomplishment of this promise, inasmuch as God being a God of
Righteousness, cannot but do that which is right, he will therefore Perpetuate
his mercy according to the tenor and Terms of his Covenant.

* The word Covenant, used in our Berith Ab eligendo, quia eliguntur Personae
etc. Buxtorf. quod foedus est mutuus Consensas duorum, super aliqua re,
text, implies a mutual obligation, and voluntary, between parties, comes from
a Root which signifies to choose, because in a Covenant there is a choice of
parties and conditions.

* The word Keeping, implies a watchful care: a Noun from the Verb Shamar
Cannotat signifies Watchtower, implying that it is no easy matter to keep
Covenant, Curam, Solicitudinem, and Diligentiam, Rivet,
but requires care, diligence, vigilance, observation, and much pains, all
which are required in a watchman

The text propounds a great benefit, with a condition: i. e. it tell us that
there are great and glorious things to be had with God, and shows us the way in
which they are to be enjoyed: and lest any should suppose this to be a legal
and not evangelical proposition, let the terms of it be exactly minded, and we
shall be satisfied: The promise speaks not of things to be merited, purchased,
or earned by us, which are legal terms, but it speaks of Mercy: now the
dispensation of everlasting Mercy belongs not to the Covenant of Works, but of
Grace: the Covenant of Works has no mention of Mercy: Besides, wherever any
mention is made of favor to fallen Adam's Children, it is of Grace: The first
Covenant affords no relief to these. It outreacheth the power of fallen Man to
keep that Covenant, and in such a way to obtain the Promise.

Vide Synops. pur Theol. Disput. 22. S. 13, 14. etc. Poedus Evangelicum vel
vetus est, vel novum Maccov.
It is a grand mistake for any to account nothing Gospel, but the
New Testament: Indeed the greatest part of the Old Testament is Gospel,
containing the Gracious Transactions of God with fallen Man: Now wherever such
a thing is made mention of, it must needs come under the tenor of the
New Covenant, the first being made weak by the Sin of Man, and no ways able to
help him, Gal. 3. 21. Which could have given Life viz. to fallen Man. Moreover
the scope of this whole Psalm, is evangelicall, namely, to represent God to us
acting in the application of the mercies of the Covenant of Grace, Pardon,
Forgiveness, Pity, tender Care, etc.

Object. But if fearing God, keeping his Covenant, doing his Commandments be
here conditions of this Promise, then it is legal, for these are Works.

A. Conditions are said to be of two sorts.

1. Antecedent, which hold forth the cause, whereof the fulfilling of the
Promise is the effect, and such conditions in a Covenant, are said to merit or
earn: such were the conditions of the Covenant made with Adam: Do and live. He
was to have earned his happiness in a way of doing, and this is legal.

2 Connex and Consequent, which only holds forth the Connection of things, or
the way and means of conveyance, by and in which God gives the things which are
promised, but not for which, and yet without which they are not given. See,
Romans 8. 13. And of this sort are the conditions of the Gospel Covenant, d
Requiruntur equidem in hoc (scil. foedere fidei) opera rerum, non primario, ut
scil. ex iis homo justificetur: sed consequenter etc. Maccov.
among which these in our text are to be numbered: and this is not legal, but
purely evangelicall: they merit not as Works, but only lead as the way to
inherit the Promise, otherwise many expressions in the Gospel must needs be
accounted legal, where doing this and that, bears the respect of a
Connex-condition. See, Heb. 12. 14. Rev. 2. 17. etc. Tit. 3. 8. Moreover, in
the legal conditions, there is required perfection, in these God respects
sincerity. Hence.

Doct. God has in the Gospel promised everlasting mercies to all those that
keep his Covenant.

The matter now to be treated of, being the Covenant, in which Gods professed
People stand obliged, and principally that part of it which is incnmbent on
them to look carefully to, that we may the more clearly understand it: The
explication may be taken up in considering. 1. Something of the nature of a
Covenant in general. 2. What Covenant is here intended, and something of its
distinct nature. 3. What it is to keep this Covenant. 4. What are those
everlasting mercies that are therein engaged. 5. The evidence, and grounds or
reasons of the Doctrine: Of these in order.

I. Concerning the natnre of a Covenant in general: Foedus inter Deum and
homines, non est proprie foedus; sed analogice Maccov.
there is something Analogicall for Gods transactions with his People, being
suited to the condition of Mankind, hence, whatsoever is essential to a
Covenant among Men, is here applicable by way of Analogy, and the consideration
of humane dealings, by way of Paction, will serve to afford much of light for
the clearing up of our understandings in the way of our communion with God.

A Covenant, in general, may then be thus described: It it a mutual Engagement
between two Parties. Whatsoever is contained in this description, necessarily
belongs to every Covenant, and if you take away any one syllable of it, it
destroys the nature of a Covenant.

In this Description three things are observable:

1. Ark of Covenant opened, page 6.
That it is required to every Covenant that there be two parties concerned in
it: the notion of a Covenant belongs to the head of Relation, now all Relations
are made up of two parties: every Relate must have its Correlate: if there be a
Father, there must be a Child: if there be a lender, there must be a borrower:
so if there be a Covenanter, there must be one to be Covenanted withal. It is
improper to say a man Covenants with himself, or if he does, he must pnt on a
double respect, or represent himself under various considerations to himself.
And as there must be two parties, so no more than two parties are in a
Covenant, absolutely necessary; nay, properly there can be no more: For although
there may be ten thousand Men engaged in a Covenant (thus all the Subjects in a
Kingdom do stand in Covenant Relation to their Prince) yet still they
constitute but one party in that engagement. This does not deny but that a
Covenant may (in case of need) admit of an interposing Party, whose place and
business may be to stand as a surety, and that either for one Party, or else
between both, and for each; which latter sort of surety is also called a
Mediator: Id. Cap 7.
yet this is not essential unto a Covenant as such, i. e. there may be a proper
Covenant without it: although (as cases may be circumstanced) it is sometimes
very needful for the better, and more firm establishment of a Covenant: But
this makes not an increase of the number of Parties, because his suretiship
places him with, and puts him into the same state and condition in which the
party or parties do stand, He being involved in the same obligation with them.

2. In foedere se mutuo solenniter obligant. Kecke rm
In every Covenant there is an obligation or engagment and therein it agrees
with all Bills, Bonds, mortgages, or whatsoever of the like nature. That a
Covenant is an obligation, will appear from the end or intent of the making of
it, and that is to give the greater security to those transactions that are
between men. It is that there may be afforded the best assurance that can be
for the performance of a promise: Now it is the obligation under which a man
stands that puts him upon it to be the more careful to stand to what he has
promised to do, who might possibly be otherwise slack and remiss in performing
of it: And hence we read of the bond of the Covenant, Ezekiel. 20. 37. I will
bring you into the bond of the Covenant. i. e. either under the forfeiture of
the obligation, or else to renew their obligation; and so there be some that
interpret it, I will afflict you till you solemnly renew Covenant. Yea, it is
so essential that sometimes the Covenant receives Denomination from it, Zech.
11. 7.

3. In every Covenant there is a mutual obligation; and herein consists the
form or distinct nature of it: hereby it is distinguished from a mere bond or
obligation, for though in that there be two Parties, and also an engagement,
yet this engagement is but on one side, it is not mutual; and the reason of
this difference lies here, because a bare bond, is an acknowledgment of a debt
due upon the account of something already received in hand, unto the payment
whereof he herein so far gives security: but a Covenant is an agreement about
something to be done on the one part, and upon the due performance of it, there
is something to be received on the other part, and that the one may have his
work done, and the other may not loose his recompense, hence there is mutual
security given, and this is properly a Covenant: Thus the Covenant between God
and us runs upon such terms, I will be to you a God, and you shall be to me a
People, Exodus 6, 7.

But for our more full consideration of the mutual engagement of a Covenant, we
may observe a few particulars explicatory, viz.

1. In every Covenant there is something to be performed, and something to be
received upon performance; these two are properly the matter of a Covenant, or
the things that go in to its constitution, which two when they are in a
Covenant-way ratified, do constitute its form, it arises from, or is grounded
upon the occasions of dealing or trading between one and another: in like
manner we shall find in Scripture, that the Covenant of God is mainly made up
of precepts and promises, for the matter of it, I say mainly, for though it be
accidental to a Covenant, yet sometimes, and in some Covenants there is also a
forfeiture unto which the party who is bound to performance of any thing, does
stand obliged, besides the loss of the benefit he might have gained, by doing
of his duty, and this also we find to be in Gods Covenant, and is comprised
under the threatenings which are annexed unto it.

2 The ground or reason of a Covenant is, that each Party may be secured from
suffering any damage by the other; but may be able to claim and recover the
performance, that the one may not fail of having his work done according to his
mind, and the other when he has done it may not be at a loss for his
recompense: each Party is concerned to have security from the Party he indents
withal.

3. Hence it is requisite that the obligation should be mutual, because this is
the only way for men to express fair dealing one with another, and so to be
able to uphold a loving compliance: It is the proof of sincerity: deceitful
men will give fair words, and make plausible promises; but every honest and
well meaning man, will be as willing to be bound as to have another bound to
him, and therefore will be as ready, to give as to take security: It is true
such proceedings among men arise from the falseness which Man is prone to,
which God is a stranger from, and therefore in himself needs not so to be
engaged: His Promise is unfailable, but He indulgeth it to the weakness of our
Faith.

4. Hence also (the obligation being mutual) there is no Party in a Covenant
that is at liberty, or stands free, but is under engagement: It is not now at
his pleasure whither he will do or not do, though before it might be: Yea, God
Himself, though a free Agent, and His Grace is free Grace, who might have
chosen whither ever He would have come upon any terms with His Creatures; yet
acknowledges His Covenant-engagement in which He has bound Himself, and bids
us humbly to plead it, Psalm. 74. 20. Neither does this infringe, but inhaunce
the free Grace of God, that He is thus freely bound, who might, without wrong
to His Creatures have stood free.

5. By reason of mutual obligation, and that with respect to performance and
recompense. Hence in every Covenant there are two things always to be
distinctly, and carefully considered, namely the conditions and the consequents.

1. Conditions, wherein there is something required of, and engaged in to be
performed by the one Party, this is so essential, that there can be no Covenant
without a Condition. They are grossly mistaken who would propound that, as one
difference between the Covenant of Works, and that of Grace.

That that had Conditions in it, but this has none, but is absolute, or a free
and full Promise without any Condition. To deny it to have Conditions, is to
deny it to be a Covenant. In the Covenant of Grace Believers not only have a
hope, but it is a grounded hope, and it is grounded in the Covenant. Now that
ground of hope which flows from the Covenant to the Party standing engaged to
service, is properly from the condition of it; why else might not every one to
whom the Gospel is propounded enjoy this hope? contrary to, 1 John 3. 4. He
that has this hope purifyeth himself as He is pure. i. e. He Fortifyeth his
Hope by his Obedience: and thus every Gospel-command becomes a
Covenant-command. There may be an absolute command of mere Lordship, or
Sovereignty, but it cannot bear a relation to a Covenant, as a part of it, but
it must, besides the nature of a Command, bear also the notion of a Condition:
for, where there is a Command without a Promise, that is an act of mere
Lordship, such an one proceeds according to Power, but where there is a Command
with a Promise, or threatening adjoined unto it, this is now clothed with the
respect of a Covenant-command, and so carrys the nature of a Condition in it
with respect unto the Promise: as when God commands us to believe, and
promises that if we so do we shall be saved, or threatens, that upon failnre of
believing, we shall be damned, Mark. 16. 16.

2. Consequents, where there is a Promise, or a threatening, or both annexed to
the Condition, and engaged in: As the command is laid upon the one Party, or
the Condition is undertaken by him, so the Promise is made and engaged in by
the other Party: I do not say merely or absolutely a Promise, but a Promise
bearing a relation or respect to the Condition. Every Covenant-Promise is an
Hypothetical Promise. One may indeed, who is a free Agent, make (if he will) an
indefinit Promise, or absolute to another, to do this or that for him, but here
is but a single, and not a mutual obligation, and thereupon it bears not any
relation unto a Covenant, where the tie is mutual: God was not tied by any
necessity of nature to this or that way of dealing; He might therefore, had it
seemed good in His eyes, have acted merely as a Sovereign, and promised Life
and Salvation, illimitedly to these or those according to pleasure; but because
He has chosen to deal with Man in the way of a Covenant, therefore He does not
so do. An absolute Promise cannot be a Covenant-Promise, because it contradicts
the nature, and takes away that which is essential to a Covenant. Hence,
neither does this distinguish the two Covenants, the first and second, that the
Promises of the one follow the Conditions, the Promises of the other are
without any consideration. Every Covenant must have the essential requisites of
a Covenant in it, the Promises of it must therefore be conditional, and the
fulfilling of them consequent upon the performance of the Condition: and in the
same relation with the Promises are also the threatenings, one referring to the
performance, the other to the nonperformance of the Condition, See, Isa. 1 19,
20. Mark. 16. 16.

Thus of the nature of a Covenant, as to the essentials of it: but for our more
full and clear understanding, we may consider that there may be some accidental
difference between one Covenant and another, according to the different
capacity of the Parties: we may therefore observe this one distinction of the
Covenant, viz.

Foedus est par, vel impar Kecker.
Some Covenants are made between equals on equal terms, others are made
between superiors and inferiors; which occasions a great difference in
Covenants.

I. Some are made between equals upon equal terms, which parity or equality I
understand not, with any reference to their personal capacity, but only as they
stand under or related to the Covenant transaction: and then are both Parties
equal, when in their dealing and obligations they stand upon equal or even
ground, which is,

1. When the obligation is not only mutual, but also enterchangeable, viz. when
each of the Parties stands alike bound, both to conditions and consequents, and
this is a complicate Covenant, when the performance of it is requisite from,
and the thence arising profit or loss is to fall upon both alike; of this
nature or kind we are to account all Leagues offensive and defensive which are
made between Kingdoms, or Colonies, no ways depending one upon another, but by
acts of friendship: such also are Marriage-Covenants; for, although the Parties
are in some respect unequal, yet the obligation to duty, and the benefits
arising, are interchangeable.

2. When, although the Condition lies upon the one Party, and the consequent
upon the other, or one is bound thus to do, and the other to remunerate him so
doing; yet still the profit or loss is no ways more or less redounding to the
one then to the other: as when a Covenant is made, that such a person shall do
this or that piece of service, for which (if he perform it) he is to have such
a recompense; if he perform it not, he is to have nothing: here neither has
any advantage over the other: here all obligations on either side are merely
hypothetical, and there is no fault in neglect.

3. When one Party stands in no more need of such a Covenant then the other,
the one has as much dependence as the other, and no more, there is no more
natural tie or necessity here or there, here also is some sort of equality.

2. Impar, quo altera pars confoederatorum est superior altera inferior. Idem.
Others are made between superiors and inferiors; where I also consider
superiority and inferiority, not barely as it may be in tho subjects
themselves, their nature, station, etc. but only as they stand unequally in the
Covenant, and this difference is to be considered in two respects.

1. Whither the Parties in all other respects be equal or no. Yet when the one
Party has a necessary dependence upon the other, for some benefit which he
absolutely wants, and is to receive from him, which the other has no need to
confer upon him, nor is any ways advantaged by that which he is to do for him,
and he therefore does it merely upon the others necessity, for which he expects
some acknowledgment, and accordingly condescends to terms of agreement, thus
the borrower is a Servant to the lender: Thus a Potent Prince some times
undertakes the protection of a distressed State. Thus also God in Christ
undertakes the defense and salvation of a Company of poor undone perishing
Sinners that stood in absolute need of His help, but of whom he had no need,
but only to do them a pleasure, and thus Hezekiah pleads the Covenant of God,
Isai. 38. 14. I am oppressed, Lord undertake for me, Thus they, Jeremi. 14. 9.
We are called by the Name, leave us not.

2. When the one Party has full and absolute power ever the other Party; it is
in his hand, and he has ful^ right and privilege to do with, and dispose of
him according to his own pleasure, and may therefore lay upon him what
obligations he sees meet, and bind him to such Conditions as suit best with his
own Will; and the other stands under a necessary engagement, either by duty, or
at least because his Condition is such as he must needs accept of such terms as
are propounded to him, or else he has no hope nor help in his hand: Here is a
full and absolute Superiority, and Inferiority; and it is an Act of Voluntary
Condescendency in him to come upon any terms of agreement, who might have been
inexorable: Thus it is in the Hand and Power of the Conqueror to give
Conditions to the Conquered, and it is a favor to do it when it was in his
Power, and it may be he had been many ways provoked to have destroyed them;
and if he give them fair and noble Conditions, his great Candor, and Royal
Magnificence is therein expressed. In this Covenant thus circumstanced, the
Conditions of it are truly and properly called a Law, because they are
propounded with the Authority of the Superior; and the Inferior is held under
a necessity, either to accept of them, or to suffer. Hence, also the Scripture
uses the Word Covenant and law Synonymically, and indifferently; and each
Synechdochically; and as the Condition is called a Law, so the consequent, or
the engagement made on the Part of the Superior is called Grace, because it is
a free yielding in him to become bound in any favor, to those that were under
his Power, and whom he might as well have made to feel his severity: So that in
this state of Superiority, and Inferiority, which is absolute, a Law given,
with a Promise, or threatening, or both, annexed to it from one that has full
and free Power to enjoyne it, and signified unto those that do stand under a
tie of necessity or duty to accept of it, and do not withstand it, is properly
to be reputed a Covenant, it being a mutual obligation between two Parties,
which ever constitutes a Covenant: And this may suffice for the explaining of
the general nature of it; the particular consideration of which things, so far
forth as they may be made use of, as applicable to the present design, viz.
The nature of the Covenant between God and His People, will follow in the
sequel

II. We are to consider what Covenant this is which is here intended, and
something of its dictinct nature: and that the way unto this may be made clear,
we must take a brief survey and view of the whole transaction between God and
Man, since the time that God created him upon the earth, and the accommodation
of each Covenant to the state of Man, whether pure or lapsed.

See Dr. Gouge Comment. on Heb. 8. 6, 7, 8.
Now these Covenants are of two sorts, viz. of Works, and of Grace; and are
usually called the Old and the New Covenant: of each I shall speak something,
to show wherein they agree, and wherein they differ.

1. The Old Covenant, or Covenant of Works was accommodated to the State of Man
in his innocence, and is therefore called of Works, because it was propounded
under the notion of Work, and Wages: Vi Foederis, moralia opera Creaturae
respectum habent ad felicitatem. Alsted. Theol. page 361.
though there were abundance of Grace in that, taken in a large sense, for, not
only all those habitual principles, with which Man was furnished, as Knowledge,
Righteousness and Holiness, impowring him to do his duty, which were Additions
to his Nature, and are entitled the Image of God; were Gods free gift: nay,
His Creation it self was an effect Gods bounty, who did not owe him a Being:
but also the reward proposed was of that Nature and Value, as that the
Pepper-corn of Man's most perfect obedience, (which could no ways enrich or
profit his Lord) could not be thought to hold a valuable proportion to it: Yet,
notwithstanding, there was a Rule of Justice also attended in this matter
(which is no Egyptian Task-Master, requiring Bricks where no Straw is given)
God therefore made Man upright, Eccl. 7 29. i. e. Fitted him for His Rule, with
a concreated Power to attend it, and he suited a Rule to this capacity, and
both told him what was his Work He expected from him; What should be his Wages
if faithfully performed; What should be his damage in case of nonperformance:
His Talent was given him, and he was himself to improve it, and therefore is it
called a Covenant of Works.

2. The Covenant of Grace was every way suited to the condition of fallen Man,
who having lost the Stock and Estate, the trust whereof was at the first
committed to him, and now become utterly Bankrupt, and no ways able to set Up
again of himself, must have indulgence shown him, and help afforded to him,
otherwise he is ruined for ever, and it is therefore principally said to be of
Grace, because the whole contrivance of it in all things, as it respects the
objects, namely Man, is absolutely free. Man was a forfeited Creature into the
hands of revenging Justice, and God might have left him there for ever, and
done him no more but his right, it was then great Grace to stoop to make a New
Covenant with Him: and the whole frame of it, in all the parts of its
Constitution is so considered and stated as carries with it a manifest
demonstration of the Riches of Grace.

That these two Covenants are not only diverse, but opposite, the Scripture
seems to declare, though this being the opposition of Species, there are many
things in which they do agree; and there have been dangerous errors which have
arose from mistakes in this point: It may not then be amiss for prevention here
to put in two or three Considerations.

1. The Covenant of Works and of Grace agree in the general nature of a
Covenant: for this we may see the description given under the former Head, for
they are both of them equally Covenants: My meaning is, the transactions in
them are Analogicall, or accomodated to our conceptions of a Covenant, in both
alike.

2. The Covenant of Works is not destroyed, but accomplished by the Covenant of
Grace. The Covenant of Works was in some sense an everlasting Covenant, for it
was not to be taken away by disanulling, but by accomplishment: This he who
knew his own Work professes, Mat. 5. 17. I am not come to destroy, but to
fulfill, viz. The Law, i. e. the first Covenant for He came to merit Heaven for
us in a way of Doing; and in this sense one Covenant is not against another:
See, Gal. 3. 21. Is the Law then against the Promise of God? God forbid: The
Covenant of Works stands of such force, and bears such a Relation to all
Mankind, that it must be fulfilled to a tittle, and so satisfied, or else no
Man cannot be saved. The Covenant of Grace wageth no War with that of Works,
but its business is to find out and propound a Way, whereby it may be fully
performed according to all the challenges of it, and so as thereby clear
discovery may be made of Grace unto Man, for whom it is fulfilled.

3. Yea, Man's Salvation is so contrived in the Covenant of Grace, that the
Justice of the first, and the Mercy of the second, the Righteousness of the
first, and the Peace of the second, do entertain each the other with mutual
embraccs of perfect amity, Psalm. 85. 10, 11. And herein indeed are manifested
the unsearchable depths of infinite Wisdom, that the Covenant of Works is not
laid by as an useless thing, but is acknowledged in all its claims and
challenges; yea, and Gloriously, Triumphantly Exalted, and yet the People of
God removed out of harms way, and no whit endangered by it, as being not
personally under the Law, but under Grace, Romans 6. 14. But I proceed.

That Covenant which is now under consideration, is the second, or
New Covenant, or Covenant of Grace, in which only it is that the everlasting
Mercy of God breaks forth and appears to the Children of Men, now fallen from
the obedience of the first.

This is by some called One Covenant, because it indeed contains in it but one
design, viz. The exaltation of the Glory of mercy (tempered with Justice)
toward a company of undone Men: The procuring and accomplishing of which, in
this way, is that one business which is directly aimed at in it. But yet if we
look upon it narrowly, and view it from the beginning to the end, we shall find
that there are contained in it two distinct Covenants, and both of them
Covenants of Grace. Now the reason why we are to look upon the business of
Man's Salvation to be performed in two Covenants, will plainly appear, if we
consider the three particulars last mentioned: from whence we may gather that
there are two Works to be done, in the bringing of fallen Man to Glory, viz.

1. The first Covenant is to be compounded with all and satisfied, the demands
of the Law must be answered, and that must be according to the rigor of
Justice; every Condition of it must therefore be fulfilled to a tittle. and
(...) Mat. 5. 18. There is nevera syllable of merciful condescendency in that
Covenant; nor, though fallen Man be a Bankrupt and broken Merchant, will it
ever come to any losing composition with him; whither he have or have not to
pay, it will have all its due in weight and measure.

2. The Condition of the New Covenant must be performed, for, in, and by those
that are brought under it. For, though there are other Conditions, and such as
are suited to the state of fallen Man, and the manifestation of the Grace of
God to him, yet they are as positive unalterable Conditions as those of the
first, See Pareus on Genesis 18. 19.
and do as certainly exclude from happiness and sentence unto misery those that
fall short of them, as did the first, Mark, 16. 16. Now these are two distinct
things, and unto them are adapted two distinct Covenants, though both are full
of Grace to fallen Man, which will be further cleared when we consider the
difference between them. And indeed the want of this consideration is that
which puzzles many a soul, and makes them confused in diverse conceptions which
they have concerning the Covenant: for (as learned Preface to Covenant of
Redemption opened.
Doctor Owen well observes) to the understanding, conceptions, and notions that
Men have of the Covenant of God, and as this Doctrine is stated in their minds,
so are their conceptions of all other sacred Truths conformed.

Ark of the Covenant, P. 1.
Of these Covenants the first is by divines called the Covenant of Redemption,
and the other the Covenant of Reconciliation: For although God be reconciled in
the first, or satisfaction is given Him, which he takes up with on the account
of all His chosen, yet the actual transaction between God and Man, or mutual
Reconciliation is accomplished in the second. In the first is the Price of
Man's Ransom paid, and he by Price redeemed, therefore styled of Redemption.
In the second, the application of it is made, and the heart of Sinners is
reconciled unto God: Hence termed of Reconciliation. When the Scripture speaks
of the Covenant of Grace, it sometimes intends the one, and sometimes the other
of these, and though these two agree in many things, yet the difference between
them is such, as will well amount to such and so great a diversity, as to
denominate them two really distinct Covenants. Idem. Page 114. etc.
They both indeed arise from free Grace, as their Original giving Being to
them, and they do each design the Glory of this Grace as their ultimate end,
and the Salvation of Man as the way by which, or Man with respect to his
Salvation, as the subject in which that Grace is to be glorified; and they
equal extend only to the Elect, and all of these as the subjects of Application
of that Grace in which they are terminated; and do lastly center only in Christ
as the undertaker, and great Efficient that is used in the accomplishment of
them; for in both of these Covenants Christ stands in our Room and Place, and
is responsible for us, in the one as a Sacrifice, in the other as a Surety: But
yet there are diverse remarkable differences in them: For,

1. Idem. P. 118. ctc.
They have different Parties: In the one God and Christ are the two Parties, i.
e. Christ Personal, or the Person of Jesus Christ God Man; but in the other
God the Father, Son and Holy Ghost make the one Party, and Christ Mystical, i.
e. Christ and His Church considered as One, do make the other: And that I here
put Christ into both Parties is not to be wondered at, because He is Mediator,
and Surety on both sides: Christ is looked upon in the first as a Peculiar
Person Covenanting, in the other as a common Person in the Name of His Elect.
Hence, in the first of these the People of God are not to be looked upon as
Parties indenting, but as a Subject indented for; they do not Covenant to
redeem themselves, but are the Matter of Christ's Redemption, and hence they
are contained, not in the Condition, but in the Promise of that Covenant, Isa.
53. 10. If he shall make His Soul an offering for Sin, There is the Condition,
His Soul shall see His seed: There is the Promise; here therefore they ly in
the Promise, and there Salvation is the wages of Christ's Obedience: but in the
second they are indenting in Christ, and stand with Him under a
Covenant-Condition: Text; and this will show us a satisfactory reason, why many
Promises come absolutely to us, which are yet conditional Promises in the
Covenant they belong to: ex. gr. The Promise of Converting, Healing, Leading,
comes absolutely to the Elect, for they are converted without any previous
Condition in them; nor can we justly suppose any previous Preparatory
dispositions or qualifications, as Conditions ascertaining conversion: Hence
that, 2 Timothy 2 13. If we believe not, He abides true, He cannot deny Himself.
i. e. His Promise made to Christ: But still if we referr this Promise to the
right Covenant, it is conditional, and belongs to the Covenant of Redemption;
where, for the obtaining of this benefit, Christ stood engaged to buy him out
of the hand of the Law, and purchase and make payment for him of an inheritance
among the Saints; and if Christ had not fulfilled the condition of that
Covenant, no Elect Person had ever been converted: It was Christ that agreed
for; yea, bought and paid for them first: Hence it is, that although the
Gospel be propounded so in the Covenant of Reconciliation, as to Promise Life
upon condition of Believing, yet God in faithfulness does give to His Elect
this Grace of Faith, makes them Believers against their natural Wills, taking
away Obstinacy and Infidelity, and so brings them under the Condition by mere
Grace, because there is a more ancient Covenant of Grace than the
Gospell-Covenant, in which He stands fully and freely obliged thus to do.

2. The one of them is between equals, the other is between Superiors and
Inferiors: When I say the first was between equals, my meaning is, that both
the Parties were equal, and the terms also equal. There was an equality between
the Parties, it was a compact made between God the Father and His Fellow, so
Christ is called, Zech. 13. 7. He counted it no Arrogance or Injury to be His
Compeer Phil. 2. 6. An equality also in the terms, it was a free Covenant on
God's Part, He was not at all obliged to it, but did it according to His good
pleasure, Col. 1. 19. It was Voluntary also on Christ's Part, He did it
spontaneously, Phil. 2. 7. Whereas the other is between Parties greatly
disproportionable. As in the Covenant of Redemption, the Parties were equal,
and the Conditions equal; what Christ paid down was worth that which he
received, His Blood was Precious, and well worth the Lives of all that were
Redeemed by Him so here in the other the Parties are in themselves greatly
distant; there is the great God on the one side, and Man who is but a Worm on
the other, a Holy God, and Sinful Man, a Sovereign God, and Man a forfeited
creature, lost, undone, miserable: the condition also and consequents of this
Covenant hold no proportion of virtue between them, a little Faith and an
exceeding weight of Glory. Again, the one Party He is free and no ways
necessitated, might have glorified Himself in their ruin, and He is Sovereign,
they are condemned Captives, He may lay what He will upon them, and they are
bound to accept it, and if they do refuse it, that refusal shall increase
their guilt.

3. Though the Covenant of Redemption was a Covenant of Grace, respecting the
design and subject it aimed at, and that both on God's Part, and on Christ's
Part, both of them conspiring, and proposing the recovery of fallen Man, from a
state of misery without any merit of his own; yet in the true nature of it, as
it was made between the Parties Covenanting, it was a rigid and strict Covenant
of Works: If we consider what the Redeemer was to do for the procuring of
Salvation for His People: Jesus Christ, standing in our room and stead,
undertook and engaged to perform every tittle of the first Covenant: He did not
assume a Lordship over it to abrogate it, but became a subject of it to fulfill
it, Mat. 5. 17. and upon this account, or on these conditions He was to receive
His reward: the conditions that were laid upon Him were Works: It was by
Obedience that He was to Redeem us, Romans 5 19. By the Obedience of One, viz.
Christ. Hence all the Sins of the Elect were laid upon Him, and He was fain to
bear them, else He had not born them away from us, Isa. 53. 3, 8, 11. But the
Covenant of Reconciliation is grounded upon terms and conditions, which are in
their own nature gracious: Hence, the Apostle tells us, It is of Faith that it
might he of Grace, Romans 4. 16. In the one of these there is a perfect
Righteousness to be completely performed, but in the other there is a
Righteousness already wrought to be accepted and labored in.

4. In the Covenant of Redemption there was no Mediator: there were only the
Parties indenting. There was indeed no need of a Mediator, for there was no
difference between God and Christ to be taken up, for they were perfectly
satisfied one in another; neither was there any ground of distruct between God
and Christ, for they could readily take each others Word and Promise: nor had
they any reason or occasion to suspect one another. Indeed there could not
possibly be a Mediator in that transaction, for there was none that was capable
to be an interposing Party between God the Father and Son. But in the Covenant
of Reconciliation there is a Mediator, Jesus Christ, who stands between both,
that He may bring God and Man into Covenant together, and maintain the bond of
it, occuping the room of a Surety, undertaking, and giving security that there
shall be fair and faithful dealing on both hands. Hence we have that
assertion, Heb. 12. 24. Jesus the Mediator of the New Covenant, which belongs
to the Covenant of Reconciliation: Fallen Man is jealous of God, because he
knows Him not, and conscious of his own ill-deserving: God is justly jealous of
Man, who is become a liar, a faithless creature, and not to be trusted, always
ready to falsify his Oath, and break his Covenant. Hence in such a Covenant
wherein Man is to be dealt withal as one Party in it, there was necessary of a
Mediator, else there could have been no safe and secure transaction with him.
Other difference might have been propounded, but these may suffice to show that
there is a real and essential difference between those two Covenants.

Touching the nature, properties, and excellency of the Covenant of Redemption,
though it be of great worth and use to contemplate, yet it belongs not to our
present discourse: The matter we are upon referrs to the Covenant of
Reconciliation, in which Man stands as a Party actually engaged to the
performance of those terms and conditions which are required of him therein;
and it is only in the way of his attendance thereunto, according to the scope
and tenor of them that he can expect to enjoy the consequent blessing there
promised.

Of the Covenant of Reconciliation we may take this Description.

It is that mutual engagement, in which God the Father, Son and Spirit on the
one side, and His Church or People on the other side, stand engaged, in
Conditions, and consequent Promises. I mean, that the Church is engaged to
Conditions, and God to consequent Promises.

This Covenant presupposes the Covenant of Redemption to have gone before, and
have made way for it; and every true Believer has his eye always upon it: For
till such time as Care was taken that the just claims and demands of the Law
might be satisfied, and all the allegations which it could bring in against the
Sinner cleared and removed, reconciliation and atonement was not to be hoped
for: But now Christ having done that effectually, by fulfilling all
Righteousness, and suffering the full weight of punishment due for his Peoples
transgressions. Now there is a fair Way, and an open Door for a treaty of Peace
between God and Man, on such gracious terms os God shall condescend to propose
unto him.

The ground and reason of this Covenant is, because God will deal with Man in a
way agreeable to his nature, whom (being a reasonable creature, and a cause by
counsel of his own actions) he treats by making proffers to him, propounding
fair and rational Conditions, and adding gracious encouragements, and for the
full, clear, and unfailing performance of all, Jesus Christ stands ready as an
undertaker for the carrying on, and full accomplishment of the whole business,
on which account, and in respect of which Covenant, He is said to be the
Mediator between God and Man, 1 Timothy 2. 4.

Now this Covenant of Reconciliation is that which we usually call the
Gospel Covenant, because it brings in it the glad tidings of Peace, or carries
in it the discovery of a way wherein fallen Man may be restored to the favor
of God, and the enjoyment of His everlasting Love, which otherwise had been a
thing hopeless.

Now this Covenant (that we may at length come to the particular business here
intended) admits of a double consideration, or is to be looked upon according
to a different way of Administration, viz.

1. It may be looked upon according the inward and spiritual application of it
to the Elect, as it is made use of to the bringing of them into the invisible
Church, and placing them among the number of God's effectually called Ones,
which is performed by the efficacious operation of the Spirit of God, drawing
of Souls home to Jesus Christ by the means of Grace, making them powerful to
the end, and so putting these into a state of Grace by Believing, which is the
prime design of the Gospel: And according to this dispensation of it, it
extends only to the Elect, and is indeed nothing else but the application of
the Covenant of Redemption, to the proper Subject respected in it, be the means
of the Covenant of Reconciliation: and in this sense the Word Church is often
used in the New Testament intending only the converted Elect.

2. Ark of Covenant, P. 394.
It may be considered according to the visible and external dispensation of
it, in the way of the Gospel, as it is exhibited in the Ordinances, and given
out as an Edict from God unto those to whom the Gospel is sent, and there
carries in and with it the proposition of Life and Salvation, and the
threatening of Death and Damnation, and these according to the tenor of terms
and conditions which are therein made known: and thus extends, or bears a
relation, not only to such as are true Believers, but others also, viz. Unto
all those that are in the Visible Church, with there seed, professing Obedience
to Gospel Order and Ordinances. To this Covenant, or this manner of
dispensation of it, true Believers have truly and properly a relation, so far
as they are visible, and stand under visible Ordinances.

Under this last Consideration we are to look upon the Covenant to be presented
in our text, viz. The Covenant of Reconciliation according to the visible and
external dispensation of it among such a People as are in visible Covenant
with God: and this differs from the same Covenant according to the internal
dispensation of it, in these thing.

1. In the One, the Covenant is firmly established, and unalterably, God is
become the God and portion of the Soul that hopes and believes in him, and
Believers are made His People really, the soul is made to believe, the Covenant
is firmly settled, and unmoveably: whereas in the other it is only propounded
with the command and threatening on God's Part, and on the other hand as only
outwardly and professedly asserted and submitted to by those concerned, and
that oftentimes deceitfully, Psalm. 73. 35, 36, 37. not but that many in the
visible Covenant have more than outwardly assented to it. True Believers give
not only their hands, but their hearts also to God, but that referes to the
internal and not the visible dispensation of the Covenant.

2. In the One the Covenant is ratified and confirmed by a surety and
undertaker for the performance of it, by all those that are related to it: The
Sonl having closed with Christ by Faith, he becomes a never sailing surety for
him, that he shall do his Part of it, and to him that all the Promises of it
shall be fulfilled upon him: In the other it is not so, there is also Christ
propounded as a surety, and His readiness to undertake for us, if we will by
Faith close with and accept of Him to that end: He tenders Himself to be a
Cornerstone, but withal threatens to be a stumbling-stone, and Rock of
offense if He be not believed in but despised. In the one Christ is an
undertaking Mediator, in the other only a proffered Mediator. In both we are
assured that there is no treating with God, but by a middle person: the one
tells a Believer, that Christ stands in his room responsible for him; the other
tells all that are the subjects of it, they may have Him for such if they will,
Romans 10. 9.

3. In the one the good and happy estate of the Soul is made sure, and stands
firmly built upon a foundation which is immovable; he that once truly believes
in Christ is as secure of his blessedness, as those that are now in full
possession of it, Romans 11. 29. But in the other, Man stands only upon
conditions, according to his performing, or non-performing of which he must
expect to stand or fall. My meaning is, the condition is in one performed, or
so engaged in, that the Promise is ratified; in the other it may yet stand
unperformed, and so the subject of it is yet upon a hazardous bottom, and may
be lost and perish for all his relation to it, Romans 3. 13.

4. In the one the Believer is fully discharged from any challenge of the
Covenant of Works, the Law has not any more claim to hold him under, Romans 6.
14. Ye are not under the Law, i, e. As a Covenant, else Believers are under the
Law as a Rule. In the other, a Man may be still held captive of the Law, and ly
open to condemnation, only a deliverance is promised to him on conditions, Job.
3. 13. For it is certain none can deliver us from the Law, but Christ, and He
delivers none but those that fly to Him, and place their trust in Him: if Men
be not found in Christ, more then by a visible claim, the Law will seize upon
them.

5. In the one a Believer is brought under the Promises, and escaped from the
danger of the threatenings: Life is assured him, and Death is removed from him,
it says he shall not dye but live, Romans 8. 3. In Christ, i. e. by a living
Faith: in the other a Person is liable to both. verse. 13. Where the Apostle
directs his speech to them under the notion and consideration of visible
Believers, and so they have a respect to threatenings as well as promises: and
the reason is, because in the one the condition is looked upon as fulfilled
(being so in part, and the whole undertaken for by Christ) Hence he is escaped
the forfeiture: whereas in the other it is considered as a Covenant depending,
and to issue according to the carriage of the subject.

Now these are not essential differences, such as should make it two Covenants,
but all only such as arise from the Modall dispensation of it: The reason of
which different dispensation is, because God will gather up His Elect out of
the rubbish of the World, in such a way, as shall tend to leave others also
inexcusable if they will not come in. Indeed the main reason of this visible
dispensation is for the Elects sake, that they may be gathered in a way suting
the nature of a reasonable creature. There are many brought into the visible
Covenant that some may be saved of these many. God had rather a thousand should
have the Gospel unprofitably, than one chosen Vessel want it. But God does it
also that such as neglect the improving of it unto Salvation, may perish with
the greater condemnation, and more triumphant Exaltation of revenging Justice:
Hence, not only the Covenant of Works, but the Covenant of Grace too, will have
to lay to the charge of all such as for abusing of it, Joh. 3, 19.

3. What it is to keep Covenant?

Ans. Keeping of Covenant is to be interpreted or understood according to the
Relation and Station of the Party under consideration: respect is also to be
had to the quallity of the Covenant. Now in a Covenant wherein there is an
imparity in the Parties ( Poederis Dei cum homine ratio, non est inter eos qui
Paris sunt juris; sed inter Dominum and Servum. Alsted. Theol. P. 360.
and such is the Covenant of Reconciliation) it is a thing very useful to be
observed, that on the Part of the Inferior there is something to be done which
is expected as a duty from him, unto which he stands obliged whither there were
any conditions propounded or no; and that, either by virtue of a command given,
which was a prerogative of his Superior over him, if he had such an absolute
power, or by voluntary, and illimited Promise made thus to do, or both. Whereas
the Superior stands equally poized in the Covenant, as one that has no other
tie or obligation lying upon him, but what is conditional. Hence follows this
difference in the nature of keeping Covenant, viz. The Superior may keep his
Covenant either ways, namely, either by fulfilling the Covenant-Promise, or by
executing the Covenant threatening, always provided that it truly correspond,
or bear a due respect to to the deportment or behavior of the Inferior in the
things which he thus stands related to: Hence it is, that God keeps His Covenan
as well by inflicting punishment upon the disobedient, as by performing mercyes
for the obedient; although the Scripture usually refers to that Letter. But now
it is far otherwise on the part of the Inferior, for Obedience is the thing
which is expected from him, and therefore is engaged by a Promise annexed to
it; but disobedience is a wrong done to his Superior, and is therefore Hedged
with a severe threatening, and the guilt of it brings damage upon him: Hence it
is that by obedience he is reputed to keep Covenant, because then only does he
perform his Covenant-duty. Disobedience is a breach of Covenant, because he
violates by it the Covenant-duty.

Now our present discourse relates to the Inferior or his keeping Covenant, of
which take this description: It is his performance of the Covenant-condition of
Obedience: where, by the Word Obedience, I do not understand a member of
Religion contradistinct from Faith, or (or as the Word is often used to
express) the second Part of Divinity, but only a correspondent or suitable
demeanure to that Part of the Covenant which comes from the Superior under the
notion of a Law or Command, or something that is required and expected to be
performed in the Covenant: which, what it is, is yet under enquiry: and we are
now to discuss, viz.

Quest. What is the Condition required in the Covenant of Reconciliation,
considered as held forth in the visible and external dispensations of the
Gospel? and when this is well understood, we may easily conclude what it is to
keep Covenant.

Ans. But the answer of this question is not without its difficulty, partly
because the way lies very narrow between Antinomian and Arminian errors, and
therefore there needs the greater exactness in cutting the thread true, partly
because I find Judicious and Orthodox Divines to vary in their expressions of
it. But I suppose if we more narrowly observe them, we shall find that these
differences will appear to be rather in words and terms, then in substance:
for our better reconciling of these let us take notice.

1. That Faith and Obedience are the Parts of that Religion which is given to
fallen Man as the Rule of his Life, is acknowledged by all Orthodox, and
maintained as a grand Pillar against Antinomianisme, who (misusing the phrase,
Only believe) would exterminate New-Obedience from this Rule; whereas many
places in the New Testament do clearly stand for its confirmation: among many,
See, 2 Timothy 1. 13. Where Love intends, and is but another expression of
Obedience, Tit. 3. 8. Good Works, are Works conformed to the Rule of Obedience:
when God bids Men to believe, He does not forbid them to obey, nor discharge
them from Obedience, but does together enjoin them to it.

2. That both of these bear a relation to the Covenant of Reconciliation, or
are in the Gospell-Covenant as it is exhibited to Men in the outward
dispensation of it, is also a Truth not doubted of by those that love the
Truth. And the reason for it is plain, because (as we before heard) God still
transacts with Man in way of a Covenant; as also because there are Evangelicall
Promises made to the one and the other, and threatenings denounced against the
neglect of the one as well as the other, which things declare that Obedience
also has its relation to that Covenant.

3. That Faith is a new Covenant condition, is not a matter that needs dispute
(always denying it to be a meritorious Condition, or any ways to infringe the
freeness of Grace, but rather to enhaunce it) the Gospel is so full for it, and
so clear in setting it in opposition to the Works of the Law, i. e. the
condition of the first Covenant, and giving it the same place in the New
Covenant, viz. Of a Condition; the Promise also which is conditionally annexed
unto it, and that inseparably, makes it beyond ground of question, see Mark 16.
16. Joh. 3. 16. 36. Joh. 5. 12.

4. Hence the only enquiry here to be made, is, in what quality or
consideration Gospel-Obedience stands related to the Gospel Covenant? There are
some (yea, many) that determine that Faith is the only Gospelcondition, and
Obedience is a Gospel-command, and the ground of this conclusion seems to be,
partly because by believing we are brought into a State of Grace, and assured
of Salvation, and Obedience follows afterward: partly because if Obedience be
admitted as a New-Covenant-condition, we shall necessarily be reduced to a
Covenant of Works. Others there be that look upon Obedience to be not only a
part of, but a condition in the New Covenant, and that unto which the
conditional Promise stands related as well as unto Faith, and that there is no
danger by so saying and believing, of returning to the Old and Antiquated
Covenant of Works. I persuade my self that there is here no real difference or
contrary mind in the substance of what is believed, but that one thing is
really intended, which may be reconciled in these propositions.

1. We are here to carry in mind the forementioned destinction, viz. that the
conditions propounded in the Gospel are not Antecedent and Meritorious, or so
propounded as to be the procuring cause of God's Love and Favor, or of the
reward propounded in the Covenant, such as were the conditions of the Covenant
of Works and these propounded to Christ in the Covenant of Redemption: for
whatsoever respected to price and purchase, we must referr it to Christ alone:
But they are connex and consequent, only pointing out unto us the way in which
the free blessing of Grace is to be obtained by Mankind. Hence, we are utterly
to disclaim and oppugn all such Popish Doctrines, as any ways tend to render
good Works to be meritorious of the promised good. This is certain, that the
different way of proponnding one and the same thing, may greatly alter the
quality and consideration of it: If Salvation should be of Works as the Cause,
it would shut out Grace; but that good Works may be of the things that
accompany Salvation, and that necessarily as concomitants, is very well
consistent with the free Grace of God; appearing in our Salvation.

2. That which makes a Command in a Covenant become a Condition, is when it is
tied (especially when it is both Negatively and Affirmatively tied) to a
conditional Promise, It is true, that a command positively given in way of
mere sovereignty is no condition, but when there is a command given, and he
that gives it, so obliges himself with it to him to whom it is given, as to
engage that if he truly and faithfully perform it, he shall be thus and so
benefited by it; and also to threaten, that if he fall short, he shall thus
suffer: the command is now so qualified as properly to bear the notion of a
condition, because the Promise and threatening are positively related to it, and
must accordingly take place.

3. God having pleased to deal with Man, in the Gospel, in a way of Grace.
Hence, though He do command him as a Sovereign, yet he mixeth Grace in all His
Commands, so that there is no command which is enjoined us in the Gospel which
brings not its benefit along with it. Or there is no command in the Gospel
which comes to us under the Title of mere Sovereignty, but also carries with it
the sweetness of a Promise, as well as the rigor of a threatening. We may
observe that the quality of a condition is not only put upon Faith, as, Mark,
16. 16. but upon Obedience too, Heb. 12. 24. Romans 8. 13. That command in the
Gospel which if a Man do perform, he has assurance of Life in his
performance, but if he do not perform, he is certified of Death and Damnation
by the neglect of it, and all this according to the proposition of the
Gospell-Covenant, that must carry the respect of a condition; but such is
Gospel-Obedience, as the Scriptures forecited, and many more do evidence, or we
may take it thus: All that which God propounds in the Gospel as needful to be
performed by us; yea, so needful, as eternal Life, and Death are infallibly
consequent thereupon; yea, and are referrible thereto, is of the condition of
the Gospel Covenant, and that is Faith and Obedience: separate Obedience, and
you have a Faith which is vain, Jam. 2. 14. and which may be found in Devils,
verse. 19.

4. Whereas Faith is sometimes asserted to be the only Condition required of us
in the New Covenant, it is thus to be understood, viz. Either,

1. That Faith is the only Condition of our Justification, but not so of our
Salvation. It is a Condition of our Salvation too, but not only: the Right and
Title to Salvation is conferred in Believing, but there is Obedience also
requisite in the way to Salvation, Tit. 3. 8.

2. That Faith is the only Condition by which we come to have an interest in
Christ's suretiship, but not of what is in this suretiship engaged by Christ
for us that we shall do. By believing in him, Christ comes to be our
acknowledged and actual Surety in the Covenant of Reconciliation, who was our
designed and indented Surety in the Covenant of Redemption; but still there is
something he stands Surety for us in, which is formally to be done by us,
though vertually by the influence and efficacy of His Grace: God expects, and
Christ promises that we should fear Him, and obey Him, and for this He stands
bound in the behalf of every Believer; yet the visible Covenant being proposed
to us, as well as to Him: Hence, we also stand obliged to the performance of
it: God in it tells us what it is that He expects of us if we hope to enjoy
Him, which (though it must be wrought efficiently by His Spirit, yet it) must
be formally performed by us, Tit. 2. 11, 12.

3. Faith may be said to be the only Condition as it is a comprehensive Grace:
Both

1 As it is that whereby we lay hold upon Christ, and close with the Promise in
Him, and so come to be actually subjects of it according to the tenor of it in
the Covenant.

2. As it is the Spring and Life of New-Obedience, i. e. such a Faith whose
Nature is to work by Love; and hence we find that the whole Spiritual Life of a
Christian is called the Life of Faith, Heb. 10. 38. Gal. 2. 20. It is not an
idle, or dead, but a lively and working Faith: for indeed it is the Faith that
mixeth with the duty of a Christian that only puts a worth upon it in Gods
account, the want of which ingredient renders the most specious duties of Men
of no value, Heb. 11. 6.

Quest. But it may then be enquired whither Obedience be not rather a Promise
made to Faith, than a Condition required of us in the New Covenant? Since
Christ has Promised in the Gospel, that he that believes shall be saved, and
if so, then (by necessary consequence) he that Promises the end, Promises
also the means, i. e. All that which is requisite to bring us to Salvation, and
there Obedience may properly take its place.

Ans. In satisfaction to this inquiry these things are well to be weighed.

1. We must distinguish between a Promise made by God as one Party in the
Covenant, and one made by Christ, standing in the place of a Mediator
interposing between both Parties: t Jesus Christ Mr. Stone's Catechis
Manuscript.
stands as a Mediating, Surety on both sides: He makes Promises to His Father,
that all that He requires of us shall be done: And He makes Promises likewise
unto us, that all our Works shall be wrought in us and for us: He is a Surety
for both Conditions, and consequents of the Covenant; now the Surety represents
the Person for whom He is such, and therefore the Person is in Him engaged; for
in that respect He stands on that Party, there being but two in a Covenant: If
then a Surety Promise for us that we shall do thus or so, and that withal
Promise to us that He will do the same thing in and for us if we will rely on
Him for it; this does not change the Nature of it from being a debt on our
Parts; for though Christ has promised us that He will do it in us, yet God
still look sthat it shall be done by us.

2. We are to distinguish between that which we stand positively engaged to,
and that which God affords us to be our encouragement in standing to our
engagement: We stand engaged actually to serve God, to obey all His Commands:
But of our selves we cannot do it, Josh. 24. 19. Now to relieve our impotency,
and animate our Obedience, Christ engages to us, that if we will believe in
Him, we shall serve God, viz. That He will put His fear in our hearts, that we
shall not depart away from Him; He will give Grace. This is the excellency of
the Covenant of Grace, that it requires nothing of us, but withal discovers
to, and sets before us what, and where our help is for the performance of it,
which Grace is then highly abused when we think our selves thereby acquitted
from our duties; Paul was of another mind, and therefore frames an argument to
excite us to greater diligence, from this very consideration, Phil. 2. 12, 13.

3. It is to be observed that Christ's suretiship engages Him to two sorts of
Works: There are some which He is to do Personally and alone; such are all
those things which He did for us in performing all that was required in the
Covenant of Redemption: He alone made satisfaction to Divine Justice, and pai'd
the Price of our Ransom, fulfilling all Righteousness. But there are other
Works which He becomes engaged to work in us, as the efficient, which yet are
to be done by us, by the strength of His Grace: That we are to do something if
we would inherit Eternal Life, is the Language of all Gospel-precepts; Hence,
we stand engaged in the Gospell-Covenant to the performance of them: But God
had no reason to trust us, being all liars, and having proved false in one
Covenant already: it was therefore needful that Christ should engage for us:
Now these Works He does not alone, but as He is the Head of the Church, and all
influences into it, which flow from Him into the Body, these Works He performs
by His Members. These Works being required in the Covenant of Reconciliation,
where Christ Mystical, i. e. Christ and His Church are the Party engaging;
hence they fail not to be of the Condition, though required at His Hands as the
Head of it.

4. It is to be considered, that in the Act of Believing, the Soul does not
only give it self up to Christ as the high Priest of his Reconciliation, but
also as his Prophet, and his King, to be taught and to be ruled by Him, as one
that knows he has not skill or power to order and direct his own ways: And
this is properly that Obedience of Faith which Jesus Christ (when He receives
the Believer into this Relation) undertakes to maintain and carry on in him.
The Soul by Believing makes it sure that Christ shall be his Helper, to supply
him with all that Grace whereby he may do all that which the Covenant requires
of him: Hence, though we have Security from Christ to help us, yet this
engagement of His takes not away the quality of a Condition from our duty: Only
shows us whither we must go, and where our dependence must be, if ever we hope
to live as God's Vovenant People, who of our selves can do nothing.

If any shall (this notwithstanding) think it more fit and proper to call this
Obedience, rather a Covenant-Command, than a Condition, I shall not be eager to
dispute of terms, provided this one thing be granted, which cannot without
opposing the truth be denied, viz. That it is a part of the Gospell-way,
necessary to Salvation (i. e. Necessitate Praecepti and medii) beside, or
beyond which interpretation, I do not understand or urge the notion of a
Condition in the Gospell-Covenant.

And now having discovered the Conditions propounded and required in this
Covenant, the question under consideration, viz. What it is to keep Covenant
is easily hence answered: To keep Covenant is in general to perform that
Obligation we stand in to it; for Man to keep Covenant with God, is for him to
perform the conditions of his Covenant. In particular, let us observe that our
present discourse referrs to the visible dispensation of the Covenant, and our
so being related to it, as it stands propounded on God's Part, and at least
outwardly acknowledged and submitted to on our Part: The conditions then are
all those things which the Gospel calls for at our hands, or prescribes to us
as necessary to Salvation: and then to keep Covenant, is,

1. To believe in Jesus Christ for Life, i. e. for Grace and Glory: to go out
of our selves to Him for all, and rely on, or place our hope and trust in Him
alone: This every Member and Child of the Visible Church does stand bound or
engaged unto, and that upon no less or lower considerations than Salvation and
Damnation, Mark, 16. 16. In which believing they choose God alone for their
Portion, Jesus Christ for their only Redeeming-Mediator, the Spirit for their
only sanctifying Leader: They renounce all other vain trust and confidence:
They say, Ashur shall not save us, they cast their Idols to Moles and to the
Bats. They rest not upon the Works of their own hands, nor hope to receive any
thing at the Hands of God for their own sakes: They seek the Glory of God, and
give to Him the Honor and Praise due to His Name, they go to Him for all they
want, they acknowledge His Mercy and Grace in all they receive, etc. The truth
is, it is a large and vast condition to believe, and it is a certain and
undeniable truth, that every one in the Visible Church is a Covenant-breaker
till he believes, i. e. he falls short of his engagement.

2 In foedere gratiae Deus promittit homini se fore ipsi patrem in Christo, si
filialem praestiterit obedientiam. Alsted Theol. P. 375.
To perform Gospel-Obedience, which is the fruit and exercise of Faith; and is
therefore in Scripture called the Obedience of Faith, because it is nothing
else bnt Faith in Exercise, animating, quickening and improving all the Graces
of Sanctification to their proper actions. This Obedience is vastly differing
from that which is required in the Covenant of Works: For, although it be the
same Morall-Law which is the Rule of Obedience required or prescribed in both
the Covenants, yet it is presented under diverse considerations: In the first
Covenant it was considered as the Antecedent-condition, and Meritorious cause
of Man's Blessedness, and this Blessedness was therein propounded under the
notion of a reward of that Obedience: But here it is only as a consequent
condion or the way in which we are to attain unto felicity, Jam. 1. 25.
Besides, in the former it was to be performed by Man's own strength, or the
improvement of that Grace which was given Man in his Creation: In this it is to
be done by the help and strength of Christ, Phil. 4. 14. In the former it was
to be done perfectly, else Man was to lose his Reward: In this (though every
Believer ought to press earnestly after perfection, and be sensible of every
defect and bewail it before God, yet) none is to expect to be perfect in this
Life, but God has respect to, and readily acknowledges the sincerity and
integrity of His People. In the former God punished the least defect with
Death; in this God is tender and pitiful to His poor People, bearing with
their many infirmities, and accepting of their humble confession and
Repentance: There God animedverted on the least defect, here he covers many
transgressions: There he cast the Sinner out of His favor. Here His Children
are only chastised, but His Love is not taken away, nor Covenant profaned,
Psalm. 89. 30. etc. In the former, Repentance was of no worth nor account, for
it left no room for it; in this the People of God may in a way of Repentance
obtain Pardon, and there Sin is done away, Psalm. 32. 7. 2 Samuel 12. 13. These
differences well observed will give us Light into the true Nature of
Gospel-Obedience and there are these things requisite in it.

1. That there be a sincere and hearty Love and respect to all God's
Commandments. David (an Evangelicall Man) professes his endeared Love to God's
Law, and declares that His precepts are his delight; yea, that they are sweet
and precious to him, Psalm. 19. 7. etc. Yea, though he is not unacquainted with
his own frailty, yet by this token he is quieted, and not afraid of being put
to shame, Psalm. 119. 6.

2. That this be confirmed by a faithful endeavor after conformity to the
whole known and revealed will of God: This has its rise from the former, for
if we do love God, we will keep His Commandments, Joh. 14. 15. i. e. According
to the measure of Grace received, we will observe them with an upright and
devoted heart, David will exercise himself in the Law day and night, because he
loves it, Psalm. 119. We must avoid Temptations, abstain from fleshly lusts,
walk according to Rule, do our outmost that God may be glorified by us, and
therefore endeavor conformity to His holiness in our whole conversation.

3. To bear about an humble sense or consciousness of, and a Spirit of mourning
for our frailties and daily neglects; we must bewail both our impotency and
exorbitancy: Though we do Sin (for who lives and Sins not) yet we do not allow
it, though we do omit much of our duty, yet we condemn our selves for it:
Though Sin be too subtle and potent for us, and often we are entangled by it,
yet we do account it a sore Oppression, a distressing Captivity, and cry out
earnestly to Heaven for help and deliverance: This was Paul's Spirit and
practice, Romans 7. This shows the heart is true to God, and is therefore in his
account and interpretation esteemed Evangelicall-Obedience.

4. That we do constantly repair to Christ for His strength to help us, and
that solely relying upon His Grace to give us favor and acceptance with God,
and ultimately resolving all our hopes, not into our own, but His
Righteousness. This is that which we are engaged and required to do in the
New Covenant, and if we do not this, let our Obedience be never so specious, it
is still reputed but legal, and so becomes worthless. Sense of our own
infirmity disabling us from doing duty perfectly, ought not to discourage us
from endeavoring to do it sincerely, but its use is to teach us this Lesson,
that since our strength is not in our selves, but in another, we ought to go
out of our selves and repair unto Him. All the Grace and Strength of Jesus
Christ is exhibited and proffered in the Covenant for the help of a Believer in
performing of his duty, and here appears the Work of Faith in quickening and
enlivning of Obedience, that it enables us to rely upon this Strength of Christ
for our help, and (having placed our hope here) in this confidence to set about
our duty: And now, having cast our selves upon Christ to go on in it with
courage, not being dismayed for its imperfection, but leaving it with Him to
render the Services we do acceptable with His Father, looking to have our
Prayers and Performances offered, not by themselves, but with his sweet
incense: And hence, when we have thus by the grace of God done our duty, we are
to have no confidence in the worth and merit of our Obedience, to purchase
ought of favor and happiness for us; but to acquiesce (in the way of
Obedience) only in the Righteousness of Christ, Phil. 3. 8, 9.

Thus we see the Dependence between the two Covenants of Grace: The Covenant of
Reconciliation must always be considered with the respect it has to the
Covenant of Redemption, going before it, and making way for it: for till we are
Redeemed, we cannot be Reconciled. And when through the grace and help of Jesus
Christ our only Surety, we are enabled thus to walk and do, then do we in God's
account keep Covenant with Him, we answer the Laws, and perform the Conditions
of the Covenant of Grace enjoined us, and are acknowledged by him to be the
subjects of His special Grace, and Heirs of everlasting Mercyes.

IV. What are those everlasting Mercies that are engaged in the Covenant?

Ans. These Mercies comprize under them, the whole blessing of the
New Covenant: whatsoever is in particular promised to the People of God in His
Word, comes under this general Denomination in our Text.

These Mercies are called Everlasting for several Reasons.

1. From the Bigger and better Part of them, which are Positively and properly
so: Not but that there are Transitory and Passing Mercies, included in the
Covenant-Promise: For, Godliness has the Promise of the Life that now is, as
well as of that which is to come, 1 Timothy 4. 8. But these Temporal Mercies are
(though great in respect of our deserving, who are less then the least of
God's Mercies, yet) Little and of Low Consideration, when they are compared
with those which are in reversion in another World, and are therefore Swallowed
up and lost in the Contemplation of these.

2. To note to us the Original and Continuance of the whole Series of
Covenant-Mercies: For their Original, they proceed from Everlasting Love, and
are therefore said to be from Everlasting: The Love of God decreed them before
the Creature had a Being: yea, and in the Covenant of Redemption they were
provided and secured for God's Elect before Man either was, or actually stood
in need of any Mercy. for their continuance also, although some Mercies are
transient and pass away, and there are innumerable of these that visit and
pass by us every day, and when we have tasted of them, are gone, yet Mercies
continue, and the People of God shall enjoy all needful blessings through Time
and Eternity: they are Springs whose Waters though always running, yet never
fail, as one Mercy goes, another comes, and they shall never cease, Psalm. 82.
33. And are therefore called Everlasting.

3. Because all God's Mercies, that are Covenant-Blessings, or Fulfillings of
the Promise, are leading to Everlasting good: It is the difference whereby
Mercies in themselves, or Materially, the same, become (as it were) of another
kind to the People of God. God only blesses the wicked, but in blessing He
blesses His Children: i. e. puts real sure Blessings into their Mercies: The
Mercies of common Providence are every way fading Mercies, they are Snares and
Traps, and being misused become a Curse to those that possess them, the comfort
of them soon dies, but the bitterness abides. But Covenant-Mercies are
Sanctified Mercies, have a stamp of Love upon them, and contribute to the
eternal welfare of the souls of God's People, Romans 8. 28.

To enumerate these Mercies in particular, would be an endless Task: So rich is
God in Mercy and goodness to all those that fear Him: It is the Psalmists ready
acknowledgment, Psalm. 139. 17, 18. Their number passes the reach of our
Arithmetic: But if we look upon them in the gross, they will fall under three
comprehensive Heads: Temporal, Spiritual, and Eternal; in each of which
Bundles are contained favors exceeding Count.

1. Temporal, the Promise which is made to godliliness concerns the Life which
now is, 1 Timothy 4. 8. Whatsoever the wicked enjoy in this World by mere
indulgence, all this the People of God have by Promise: and that which those
have very little reason to hope for, these may lawfully challenge as their own:
If you search the Scripture, there you shall find, that God is very large in
His Promise to his People upon this account, if they will obey him, and keep
his Covenant. Particularly, See Deuteronomy. 28. begin, Covenant Relation engages
God's Love to His People, and Covenant-Promise obliges His fidelity: If God
feed the Ravens, much more will He take care for His Children: If God give good
things to them that hate Him, much more will He be bountiful to those that
love Him.: If God can hold back His Wrath from, and give Mercies to the
Children of the Curse, then surely the Children of Promise shall not be
forgotten.

2. Spiritual, by which I understand, all that Grace and those supplies of
Soul-good which are needful for the nourishment and comfort of the hearts of
the People of God in this Life, those that keep Covenant with God may go, by
virtue of this Promise for all that is needful to enable them to keep
Covenant, and to encourage them in so doing: Grace sufficient to carry him
through, was promised to Paul, and so it is to every Child of God as well:
under these spiritual Mercies are comprehended all those means of Grace which
are sanctified and improved by the Spirit of God, and all the saving fruits of
those means: All the graces of the Spirlt, and the exercise of those Graces:
yea, and the spiritual use and improvement of all the providence of God; these
are things of such inestimable value, that they exceed the capacity of any
natural Man to conceive or understand what they be, so Paul commends them,
Bolton, Directions to walk with God.
1 Cor. 2. 9.

3. Eternal, in which I aim at all those which are reserved and kept in store
to be the complete happiness, and perfect glory of the People of God in the
other Life: These are called the Kingdom, Luke 12. 32. Of these the Apostle
John speaks in a yet more sublime manner than Paul does of the former, 1 John
3. 2. Unregenerate Men are not acquainted with spiritual Blessings. But Saints
themselves (here) know but little of those which are eternal: All we can know
of them at present, is only thus much, that they shall make the enjoyer happy
beyond his thoughts, expectations, or possible desires, in which happiness
there shall be found no mixture or allay of any trouble or grief, nor shall
there be any either kind or degree of good wanting to make it perfect up to the
outmost of created capacity to be enterteined withal: These are in brief the
everlasting Mercyes of the Covenant, the distinct knowledge of them is reserved
for Glory.

V. In order to the evidencing and clearing up of the truth of the Doctrine
that these mercies are certainly engaged, it is needful that we first consider
something about the nature of the Covenant-Promise, and how, or in what way God
fulfills it, because many weak and tempted Christians are apt to stumble and be
in the dark about this matter: I shall only very briefly here present these
following conclusions.

1. That the Mercies lying in the Covenant-Promise do some of them bear a
proper respect to the end, and others to the means which are leading to the
end: And there is a great difference between these; it is therefore good that a
Christian should be well skilled in this distinction, and to know to which of
these two every Mercy of the Promise does belong. The Reason of this
distinction is, because, as there is a glorious happy end to which God leads
all his People, so there is an order of means by which he leads them home to
this end; the end is Glory, the means are Sustentation Protection, and
Preservation in a way of holiness, you shall find both these joined, in Psalm.
16. ult. also Psalm. 73. 24.

2. That as the end is certain and unfailing, so also are the means so far as
they do absolutely respect the end: i. e. means shall never be so wanting as to
frustrate the end. The end is indubititable, no Believer shall fall short of a
happy Estate after this Life, in the enjoyment of perfect Blessedness, and full
Fruition of the good of all the Promises: That this be not disappointed, a safe
Conduct in the way, and preservation from failing, and an accomplishing of all
that in us which is needful to prepare and fit us for this glorious Estate,
cannot be wanting: The Psalmist can therefore acquiesce in this, after many
wrangling thoughts which have disturbed his mind, and thrown him into much
disorder about many particular dispensations of Providence; here he rests,
Psalm. 73. 24. Thou shall guide, etc.

3. That in the fulfilling of these Promises which under the Title or Head of
Means, God reserves a Sovereignty to Himself in regard of the particular way of
Performance of them: And here we may observe.

1. That as the good Promised was firstly made over to Christ in the Covenant
of Redemption, and by Him purchased in behalf of H is Redeemed, so also the
dispensation of it is put into his hands, as he is the Mediator of the Covenant
of Reconciliation; it is his purchase, and therefore called the purchased
Possession, Ephesians. 1. 14. Nor is it heaven alone that is at his dispose, but the
orderly management of all the affairs of this World too: As Psalm. 2. 8, 9, 10.
Hence also, all Treasures are said to be Laid up in Him, Col. 2. 3. And he
gives them out to whom he sees meet, according to his own pleasure, Joh. 17. 2.
Christ as he is the Head of the Church has all in him, and he influenceth it
into his Members according to his own Wisdom, 1 Cor. 1. 30.

2. That Christ in fulfilling for his People all the good which respects the
Means, bears a constant eye to, and aim at the end: The sum and substance of
the business lying on his hands, is, to bring his own to be there where He is,
John. 17. 24. To bring many Sons to Glory, Heb, 2. 10. And if he do this, he
has accomplished that part of the Covenant in which God stands engaged to us,
and for which he is his Father's Surety. If a Believer be brought safe to
heaven, be it by what means soever, he has no ground to complain that God has
not fulfilled the whore Promise for him: If the means fail not of reaching to
the end, God is no Covenant-breaker, though we (through darkness and
diffidency) may sometime be ready to say as David, Does His Promise fail for
evermore?

3. Hence, Christ reserves a great latitude in his dispensation of temporal
good to us. The Blessings of this Life (having no other consideration in the
Condition required of us, then a faithful improvement of them so far as God
shall bestow them upon us, and a contented wanting them when He withholds them
from us) may be variously dispensed to us without any infringement of the
Promise. It is not necessary to our being brought unto Glory that we be thus or
so rich, healthy, abounding in Creature Comforts, etc. Poverty, Disgrace,
Sickness, etc, will be no objection against any one in the great day, why they
may not enter and possess the Kingdom. Again, abundance of these things, is
often to fallen Man an accasion of many temptations, to forget God and Glory,
to neglect his Work and Duty, and thereby would obstruct his main end, if God
in Wisdom did not prevent. Furthermore, it is not absolutely necessary that a
Believer should have any of these thiugs, only hypothetically. Christ can take
them hence to Glory when He sees meet. Hence, though, when God gives us any of
these things, it is our duty to accept and improve them as Covenant-Mercies;
yet, when he withholds them, we have no reason, either to think our selves
therefore strangers from the Covenant, or him to have forgotten what he has
promised; much less when we find a great deal of outward bitterness in the
enjoyment of them: For Christ has tacked a cross to this part of the Promise,
Mark. 10. 30.

4. Hence also, in his peforming of spiritual good, he may give it in what
degree he sees meet, and yet not fail of fulfilling the Promise: For though
here are many things that come under the Covenant-Condition, as requisite to be
performed by us, yet the New Covenant, most absolutely respects the Reality, and
not the Degree: and here are some spiritual blessings not necessary to our
performing the Condition. True Faith is required, sincere Obedience, real and
active Patience, spiritual Hope, and final Perseverance: But weak Faith comes
under the Promise as well as strong, and so of the rest. Now, if God maintain
Grace alive, that it dies not, it shall attain its end, viz. Glory. Although it
may not here be so illustrous, nor comfortable in some as in others: And as to
other spiritual favors which are not so much of the esse, as the been esse of
a state of Grace; here also we must acknowledge a great latitude, such as are,
strong Assurances, cleared Evidences, abounding Comforts, and overflowing
Joys: Christ may withdraw these as often, and as long, and to what degree he
sees meet, and yet not fail of his Promise If he carry us through a shady
valley, yet if he carry us to glory, if he lead us in the dark where we see
neither Sun, Moon nor Stars, yet if he feel out our way for us, and carry us
home, it suffices and we are to trust, Isa. 50. 10. Psalm. 23. 4.

4. The complete fulfilling of many spiritual Promises is reserved till another
Life. There is a near relation between things spiritual, and things heavenly:
Grace differs from Glory but in degree: Hence, as we are not to expect to have
the Promises of Glory fulfilled here. so neither such as belong to Grace to be
completed. God has said and Promised that he will take away all Sin, that he
will pluck out of us the heart of Stone, that he will give us complete Victory
over Satan, and many the like Words he has engaged in, concerning which a
Believer is many times ready to wonder, to think that God in the Promise speaks
so largly and liberally, and yet in his Providence seems to perform it so
little and so meanly in him; and now Satan tempts, his heart relents, doubts
begin to assault him, and he is ready to say, surely I have but deceived my
self: and why? The reason is, he forgets that here we are to live by Faith, and
not by Sight. The Promise is sure, and shall without fail be fulfilled; but
when? Why? When he has patiently waited, and comes to leave this, and go to
another World, but in the mean while, we are to expect and be content with
nothing but earnests, and some small essays and tastes of these things, viz.
Enough to keep him up to his Work, and to strengthen Faith in Hope to be
waiting in ways of Obedience for the accomplishment of it.

Now to clear up that there are such everlasting Mercies engaged, I might heap
up Scriptures in plenty, if need required it; and indeed we have no other
Demonstration of this Truth, then what God has therein revealed unto us. For
when Man had fallen away from his Obedience to the Covenant of Works, and
thereby involved himself in guilt, and a curse; who should discover to him
God's Thoughts and Counsels of Mercy, or speak to him of a Covenant of Grace,
but God Himself? The Word of God is therefore full for the confirmation of our
Faith in this point; every Promise in it is big with or full of Mercies; it
were endless to particularize. Now the Blessings of the New Covenant are called
Mercies, not only because it was God's free unmerited Mercy to exhibit them to
Man now fallen, and forfeited into the bands of revenging Justice; but also
because the way of his communicating them unto us is such, as there is no merit
of ours interposing it self to procure the application of them unto us; but
they come to us for the merit sake of Christ alone, Ezekiel. 36. 22.

But the main things to be enquired into for the clearing up of the Doctrine,
are two, viz. 1. Why God dispenses these Mercies in the way of a Covenant? 2.
How far they are to be accounted conditional in the Covenant-Promise?

1. Why God dispenses these Mercies in way of Covenant?

Ans. Besides the free Sovereign liberty which God challenges justly of
dealing with His Creatures in what way seems most meet to His own good
pleasure, which is His own Rule, and ought with greatest veneration to be
acknowledged by them: This way of Transaction is the best fitted and
accommodated to the state of fallen Man; and that,

1. Because, having been at first placed under a Covenant of Works, he could
not so well be delivered from the fears and terrors arising from his
apprehended violation of it, and the curses thereby brought upon himself, but
by the discoveries of a New Covenant of Grace. If God had not proclaimed a
Covenant of Grace, Man would have been held under the tenor of the Law. Adam
(now fallen) was under the amazment of that threatening of Death, Genesis 2. 17.
Nor could he discover any the least glimmerings of Hope till the
Covenant-Promise was made known for his encouragment, Genesis 3. 15. The Curse
denounced came by a Covenant, and therefore the Mercy promised must come in the
same way, that it may be every whit as plain and sure to us, for they are only
Covenant-Mercies, which are sure Mercies. Isa. 55. 3.

2. Because hereby, not only Salvation it self, but the way to the attaining of
it, is also made plain and clear. If God had only made it known, or declared
that he would save by Might, and by Power a number of fallen Adam's Progeny,
there might indeed have been some general and languishing hope afforded to
particular Men and Women, but it had been upon very weak and uncertain grounds;
nor could their hopes have been able to balance their fears; their state of
Misery being certain and evidently demonstrable, but their happiness (at least)
but in a remote probability. But when God not only reveals Salvation to be
provided, but publishes the way in which it is to be attained, and certainly
enjoyed: Now the People of God have an argumenr, and an evidence, and a clear
manifestation of the particular love of God to them. Now all this is done in
the way of a Covenant, in which there are Terms, Propositions, and Conditions.
Thus it is that we come to be ascertained, not only that a number shall be
saved, but who they be: They are here Characterized to us: and now Man knows
what he has to stand to, how to erect his hopes, and confirm them: By this way
there comes to be a very fair intelligence between God and his Creatures, Isa.
1. 16. with 19, 20.

3. Because in this way God declares and glorifies not only his sovereign
Mercy, but also his infinite Holiness and Justice. If Man had been saved in any
other way but this, God might and should have been eternally acknowledged a
most merciful God: But how to have reconciled Justice and Mercy, and
vindicated the Glory of his Holiness, as well as discovered the riches of his
Grace, it is not in our reach to understand how ever this could have been done
declaratively (as things were circumstanced) but in the way of a Covenant. But
here God displayes all these Articles: His Holiness, in making us Holy, in
having to do with Sinners only by a holy and spotless Mediator: His Justice in
taking full satisfaction at the hands of Christ for all that which the violated
Covenant of Works made demands of to the least tittle, and yet his Mercy in
accepting of us, though unworthy Sinners, justly removed from his favor, and
both Justice and Mercy united, in the exchange made between Christ and us; He
being made Sin for us, who knew none, viz. Imputatively; and we made the
Righteousness of God by Him. It is in the Covenant that all these Attributes
display themselves, Psalm. 85. 10, 11.

2. How far they are to be accounted Conditional in the Covenant-Promise?

Ans. It is certain they were Conditionally propounded to Christ in the
Covenant of Redemption, Isa. 53. 10. When thou shall make His Soul an offering
for Sin, He shall see His seed. For although they are now certainly put into
his hand, and left to his disposal, Joh. 5, 21, 22. Yet these are ever to be
looked upon as a purchase bought with such a price; without the payment of which
he had never had the Mediatorial dispensation of them conferred upon him, had
he failed in his fatisfaction, these Mercyes could never have been ours, but
this is not of our purpose:

Observe then,

2. That they are also Conditional in the Visible and Ministerial dispensation
of the Covenant of Reconciliation. The Gospel according to the tenor in which
it is published unto Men, makes profers of these Mercyes to none, nor engages
them by Promise unto any, but upon Terms, which all those that will enjoy them
must subscribe, and perform. Neither can any Gospel Minister in Christ's
Name, give unto any Man the least assurance of enjoying the promised Mercy, but
upon these Terms. We cannot say unto any Man in particular, positively, and
without any limitation you shall be saved. All that we can say to them is, If
you believe, you shall be saved: If you be saithfull to Death you shall receive
a Crown of Life; nor can we conclude the good estate of any, further than we
discover in them, such things as accompany salvation; on which grounds we may
hope well of some Men, but we can say no more of any, though they be admitted
never so near unto God in visible enjoyment of the privileges of the Gospel.
Paul himself could say no more to his Romans, Romans 8. 13. nor to any of the
Churches whom he directed his Epistles unto. The Apostles wrote and spoke to
those whom they knew to be visible Believers, as to such for whom they had
Charity, and yet as to such whom they did not know, but that (many of them)
might in the day of Revelation be found really unbeleevers, except they were by
special Revelation made to understand other ways of some particulars, we
therefore can Preach Salvation but Conditionally.

3. Though it is in no ways to be denied that every true Believer is under a
firm Promise, which God will never Repent of, and has therefore in him a
certain evidence of his Salvation, which God, that cannot lie has promised to
bestow upon him, and has also an undertaking Surety, viz. Jesus Christ, who
will certainly bring him unto Glory, yet in some respect the Promise may be
looked upon as Conditional to such an one, viz.

1. If he have a grounded and apprehended assurance of his Title to the
Promise, he has gained, and does keep it by discerning and apprehending of the
Condition wrought in him: If he knows that these Mercies are his, he first
knows this, that he is (by Grace) made snch an one as they do belong to by
Promise. To make the Promise it self to be an evidence of our interest in the
Promise, What is it else but to make the question it self the third argument by
which it is proved? Then which way of arguing what can be more foolish and
ridiculous? if it be known, it must be known by the Condition: So the Apostle
John argues, 1 John 3. 14.

2. Upon supposition (for we may suppose things that never shall be) that a
true Believer might fall from the Condition of the Covenant totally and
finally, it is certain he should lose, or miss of Salvation, and not inherit
these everlasting Mercies, Heb. 10. 38. If any draw back, my Soul shall have no
pleasure in him. Every Believer shall certainly be saved; that is an
impregnable truth: but yet if the Believer could become an unbeleever and so
remain, he should not be saved, for there shall no unbeleever, so dying, go to
heaven. The sum is, that a Believers Title to these Mercies is continued by
preserving and fortifying and rendering immortal that Grace whereby they may
keep Covenant with God, Jer. 32. 40.

3. That the People of God themselves do miss of many present blessings., and
suffer many present sorrows and evils, through their heedlesness and particular
sinful failures in their Covenant duty: though they fall not wholly from it.
It is true, that in these dispensations God Acts very Soveraignly; but still,
it is our duty to keep a constant eye to the Covenant, and thereby to discern
of Gods both Righteousness and Mercy. Why is a plague brought upon Israel, but
for David's Sin? Why must the Sword never depart from his House, but because he
has faultered in the Covenant? Psalm 89. 30. etc. That is spoken of Christ's
spiritual Seed of whom David was a Type. God by thus doing asserts His own
holiness, and lets his Vovenant People know how much Sin is displeasing to him.
And hence also, if at any time we escape punishment, when we have provoked God
by onr careless neglects, we must acknowledge it his merciful indulgence, but
if we suffer Sorrow, and broken Bones for our faults, we must say as David,
Psalm. 51. 6. Thou art just when thou Judge.

USE I.

For information, we may hence learn,

Collect. 1. To take notice of the wondrous kindness and good Will of God
exhibited to Men in the Covevant of Reconciliation. The very News of a Covenant
between God and fallen Man, is matter of just admiration: And the Matter or
Contents of it call the Children of Men to see and adore, viz. That God is in
the dispensation of it, Reconciling the World to himself. And there are five
things in special, which do serve to illustrate the great kindness of God to
the Children of Men in it, viz.

I. If we seriously consider who they be that are the Subjects with whom this
Covenant is made: There is an Emphasis in that Phrase, Luke 2. 14. Good Will
toward Men, and that is discoverable in many respects. If we Consider.

1. What Man had done to alienate God's heart and good Will from him for ever;
who, when God had Created and put him in a glorious Estate, given him an holy
Law for his direction; furnished him with his own Image, implanting all
needful graces to render his Obedience to that Law fiezable, made a good
Covenant with him, a Covenant of Life, put all the visible Creation in
subjection to him, and promised him all happiness if he would obey him: He,
this notwithstanding, wilfully slighted his Law, profaned his Covenant, abused
all his Favors, trampled upon his Glory, and set up vile things in his room:
how should God have good thought more of such a Creature?

2. That God had no need of Man to glorify him, nor was he obliged to any such
way as this to gloryfie himself by him. He could have gotten himself a Name by
destroying him, and made his Justice triumph in everlasting revenges. He had
glorious Angels enough to do him Service, and the residue of the Spirit was
with him, whereby he could have Created a New Generation of Men, even out of
the very Stones, had he ^een meet.

3. That Man was in himself a Creature serviceless as to any actual employment
for the glory of God, he was without strength, Romans 5. 6. More cost must be
laid out upon him to make him a vessel of glory, and fit him up for his
Master's use, than to have made a new World. He was a Creature like to be a
great trial and exercise to Divine Patience as long as he lived: A Creature
not fit to be trusted again with any Stock of grace, having so woefully failed,
and discovered himself faithless in his first Trust.

4. That when there were so many fallen Angels, Creatures capable of doing more
service, might they but have been restored, Creatures, for their Make, more
Noble and Laudable, and that yet notwithstanding he should pass by these, and
have nothing to do with them in way of a second Covenant, but leave them held
under that just condemnation in which they had involved themselves to be held
Prisoners of Justice, without any hope for ever, that he might look in Mercy
upon Men! This is a thought the Apostle could not entertain without very great
admiration, Heb. 2. 16.

5. That they were such Creatures into whom the Fall had put such an Antipathy
and Enmity against any manner of treating and Covenanting with God, or to have
any thing to do with him. They were enemies of grace, and therefore when he
comes to treat with them about such matters as concern their eternal Salvation,
they resist his Spirit, and reject his Profers: This both Christ and his
Apostles found, and this God knew before he treated with them, they were mere
enmity, Romans 8. 7. And that yet he should condescend to have to do with such a
subject in the treatyes of a second Covenant, this is his wondrous kindness to
Man.

2. If we consider the great things which were needful to be done in order to
the bringing about of this Covenant of Reconciliation. It was no light or
little matter to prepare the way for this treaty of correspondence between God
and Man, to set open a door of Salvation before Man, and make the profers of
entering into a New Covenant of Life with Him. The Cov. made with us, has its
stability from the Covenant made with Christ; and therefore this must be the
foundation of that. Ark of Cov. P. 28.
We must therefore always carry in our minds, that the Covenant of
Reconciliation points us to, and gives us notice of the Covenant of Redemption
necessarily, going before and making clear the way for it, without which it
could never have been propounded to fallen Man. It is here altogether needless
to dispute whither God punish Sin by necessity of Nature: this is certain, and
by all Orthodox maintained; That God's holiness and Justice were so concerned
and engaged in the Covenant of Works, that without due and full satisfaction
given to that Covenant in all it required, there was no way in which
Reconciliation could be expected: And that Man by himself should ever be able
to make this satisfaction, and thereby obtain his Peace, was impossible: It lay
therefore upon God Himself, to contrive and effect it, in which Contrivance,
His Wisdom, Power, and Love do wonderfully appear. If there had been nothing
else needed but an act of mere Pardon to have past upon Man in this
Transaction, the matter had not been so much, nor had the Grace of the Covenant
shined forth so eminently: But, that God might be both just, and the Justifier
of the ungodly, that the Penalty of the first Covenant might be exacted, and
yet Man saved, this was the great Thing of Weight. Hence, then is matter of our
admiration, that the Gospell-Covenant is founded on the Everlasting-Covenant,
between God and Christ. The Gospell-Covenant propounds Salvation freely, Isai
55. 1. Rev. 22. 17. But that it may so do, it is prevented, or way is made for
it by the Covenant of Redemption, in which this free Salvation is Bought with a
sufficient and Valuable Price. 1 Cor. 6. 20. When we hear in the Gospel that
God profers Mercy and Grace to Sinners; this declares wondrous condescendency
in God; but when we hear that we were under the Law, Condemned to die, and could
no way save our selves, and there was no Salvation possible to be obtained,
except the first Covenant were satisfied, and that the eternal Son of God
undertook for this; Yea, engaged Himself in a Covenant to His Father, to take
our Nature upon Him, and do our Works for us, and bear the Curse in our stead,
which we should have born, and that otherwise there could have been no hope
for our Salvation: And that the necessity of such an interposition did not shut
up the Bowels of Divine Favor against us, but that he brake through this
difficulty, and undertook to take away all these obstructions; this is a great
argument of His ineffable Love: And it should deeply affect us to think that
every Tender of Salvation which is made unto us, is made through the blood of a
Redeemer, else we should not have heard or had one gracious Profer or Promise,
so much as Conditionally propounded unto us.

3. If we consider the great benefits which are propounded and presented to us
in the Covenant. They are Infinite and Everlasting Mercies: All our Wants are
here supplied, All our desires are filled, All our Miseries are removed by it.
The Benefits are Great:

WHETHER,

1. Negative or those great Evils which it brings with it a freedom from: Man's
Fall had ruined, undone, bankrupted him: Man had procured to himself the Wrath
of an Holy God, the Curse of a Righteous Law; Had pulled down Vengeance on his
own head, and made himself a Prey to the Miseries of this and another World:
But the New Covenant opens to him a way for the escaping of all this: It
discovers how he may get free from all this Evil: How he may be Atoned unto
God, reconciled to the Law, and delivered from the Curses and Miseries he was
exposed unto, here is the first good News of Man's escape made known.

2. Positive, or those good things which it entitles them unto who embrace it
Cordially; which are Justification, not only Negative in Absolution from the
Curse, but Positive too, in declaring the Sinner to be Righteous: And Adoption,
in giving us the Title of the Sons of God, and in bestowing on us a real Right
to all the good things of God, constituting us Coheirs with Jesus Christ in
the purchased Possession: And Sanctification, in being purged from the Filth,
and delivered from the Dominion of Sin, and made partakers of the Graces of the
Spirit, whereby we are enabled to serve God in Holiness and Righteousness all
our Days: And Glorification, in those comfortable foretastes of Divine Love
and Favor, which are better than Life, and assurances of inheritiug the whole
Promise, and all the blessings laid up in it: These are Covenant Blessings.
Text.

4. If we consider the easy Terms of it: If these benefits had been
propounded to us upon Terms, hard and impossible, it had not been so glorious
as now it is, but the fair Tenders, and facile Propositions, or Conditions that
it stands upon, declare it to be a Rich Favor of God. Perfect Obedience to the
Law, without any Slip or Failure, and personal full satisfaction for every
Offense to it (those Rigorous Terms to the Covenant of Works) become
impossible to Man by reason of his Fall: These therefore are Removed, and
Evangelicall Gracious Terms are introduced in their Room. This Covenant
declares that the Law is already satisfied, Divine Justice fully appeased,
Salvation already completely wrought out and procured: It asks not of us any
personal satisfaction to God for our offenses, nor any meritorious Works of
ours to be the Prince of heaven's Purchase: All that which it requires is only
these two Things.

1. That we believe in Christ for Life and Salvation, which is nothing else but
only this, That we receive this Savior, that we embrace Him with our whole
hearts, as he is presented in His Offices of a Redeemer, that we with His
satisfaction, and rely upon it for acceptance, and thereby make it our own,
that it may stand up for us, and so become our Righteousness, and interpose to
satisfy for our Sins, and embrace His Obedience that it may merit our
happiness. How free a Salvation must that needs be which requires only our
acceptance, that so it may become ours? This is all, Rev. 22. 17. Joh. 3. 16.

2. That we perform Gospell-Obedience, which is nothing else but a sincere
devoting of our selves to God and His Service; a Dedication of our Lives to
Him, and endeavoring that in all things we may act and be to His Glory. That
we renounce the service of Sin and Satan, unto which we were devoted, and cast
off the usurped Government of other Lords, breaking all our Leagues with them,
that we may be for Him, and no other, who has bought us with His own Blood,
that we might be to Him Peculiar. Now what less can he demand, or we pay to Him
in order to the enjoyment of such, and so great favors and benefits as those
are which we receive by the Covenant? The yoke of the Covenant of Grace, is an
easy yoke, Mat. 11. ult.

5. If we consider the great helps which the Covenant affords us for the
fulfilling of these easy Terms. It must be acknowledged, that, as easy as
they are, it exceeds the power of fallen Man by himself to perform them, by
reason of the depravedness of his will and sinful enmity of his heart against
God. Were we left to the strength of our nature, we could never reach these
Conditions. But to remedy this difficulty, the Covenant holds forth sufficient
relief against all these impediments. Hence, when the Covenant-Command bids us
believe in Christ, to love and serve God. If we should make such an Objection
as this, we cannot believe, we cannot obey, they are things above us, and
hereupon we take discouragement, and begin to think our Condition is as remote
from hopes of Life and Salvation as ever, we mistake the Covenant: For God
knows that we cannot, and therefore, if we understand it aright, the Covenant
tells us that God does not expect at our hands, nor would he accept of us, a
Faith of our own making, or an Obedience done in our own strength; and that if
thus we should go about to endeavor to keep Covenant with him, we should but
irritate or make it void, and therefore Christ standing as a Mediator in the
Covenant, profers Himself to be our Surety and undertaker, to help us and work
all our works in and for us, that so we may perform the Terms, and attend the
Requisites of the Covenant; to work Faith in us, and perfect us in holiness,
and so to keep us that we shall never depart from Him: And if we set about, or
think to do any New-Covenant-duty, without an eye hither, and relyance here, we
run upon woeful undoing mistakes, and utterly lose our selves. Let all these
thoughts teach us to see and be affected with the excellency and Glory of the
New Covenant.

Coll. 2. We have here a Rule by which to judge of the State and Condition of a
People that are in Visible Covenant with God; and also it teaches us what is
the true and proper ground of a stable hope, that such a People may comfortably
rely upon: We see that it all has a certain reference to our dependence upon
this one supposition, if they keep Covenant: This is the only third argument
from whence may be drawn a sure conclusion. For our more full and clear
understanding of this, take these Assertions.

1. That for a People to enjoy all the visible and outward means of Grace and
Good, are outward and probationary favors. It is true, the Ordinances and
Privileges of the Gospel may in a sense be called spiritual, relating to the
end they direct us unto, because they are means guiding and leading us to the
enjoyment of spiritual good: but yet, in themselves, as they are enjoyed by a
visible Church, visibly, they are outward things: i. e. they are separable
from, and may be enjoyed without true, inward, saving Grace. A People High in
means may be Low in Grace, yea empty of it: Such was Capernaum, Mat. 11. 23.
Laodicea may be rich, and yet poor, Rev. 3. 17. etc. The best manured, and most
carefully tended Vineyard, may bring forth wild and sower Grapes, Isa. 5.
begin. And as they are outward, so also they are probationary; God tryes and
proves a People with Gospell-Priviledges. It is not sufficient security to a
Fig Tree, that because it is planted in the Vineyard, and there carefully
manured it shall therefore bear Figs: But the Husband Man comes year after
year, to see whither it bears or no, and it is possible that he shall find it
barren, though in the Vineyard. So that parable seems to hold forth, Luke 13.
7, 8. God indeed expects Fruit according to his laying out, and that justly,
and therefore He comes and looks for it, but it does not always prove
according to His just expectation. Not that God can indeed be frustrated of any
of His purposes: but God here speaks after the manner of Men, who are wont to
take pains in their Husbandry, with an eye to profit, and therefore observe
what In-comes they receive.

2. To confide in these outward enjoyments as if they were real assurances of
God's Complacency, is not Faith but Presumption. They are indeed expressions of
His beneficence, and bring with them a demonstration of His great benevolence,
but they are not assurances that He takes inward delight in such a People; it
is therefore a vain thing for them to repose their trust and confidence in
these things: And yet what more common then for the Children of Men thus to
delude themselves with such opinions. To trust in Church Priviledges, as it is
the most dangerous, so it is the most common mischief and misery of a People in
visible Covenant: God calls it, To trust in lying Words, Jer. 7. 4. And it was
a ground of the Jews ruin, who, when they abounded and were immersed in Sin
and Apostasy, yet thought it enough to say, they were Abraham's Children. John
Baptist therefore so solemnly warnes them of the danger of it, Mat. 3. 9. Think
not to say, etc. q. d. it is vain and will not profit. It is a most certain
truth, that God indulgeth, not only with worldly favors, and the affluence of
earthly abundance, but also with Gospellenjoyments, and plenty of outward means
of Grace. A multitude that are the generation of His Wrath, and Children of His
Curse, who shall be pressed to eternal Death, and sunk down to Hell by the
weight of Ordinances: Such were those unto whom the Prophet Isaiah was sent:
Isai. 6. 9, 10. The means they have had, have helped to fit them for their own
place.

3. Where God has done more for a People, there He expects more from them:
Clear for this is that of our Savior, Luke 12. 48. To whom much is given, of
him shall be much required. Christ in the Gospel compares the Kingdom of
Heaven (i e. the visible Church) to a Vineyard which the Owner Let out to
Husbandmen, and in the season sent for his Revenue Gospell-priviledges, as
freely as Men think they are bestowed upon them, (and indeed, inasmuch as they
are undeserved, they are free) yet they shall find, when God comes to reckon
with them, that they shall be called to a severe account for them: God keeps a
Book of accounts (what ever Men think of Him, or how careless soever they may
judge Him to be) and there He charge down to Men's score, all the several
particular disbursements which He has laid out upon this and that Man, these
and those Churches: You find the severals enumerated of what he had been out
upon, or done for his Vineyard, Isai. 5. begin. And so he does for every
Vineyard, and every Fig Tree. Every Sermon that is Preached to them, every
Sacrament that is administered, every Labourer whom He either fixes amongst
them, or sends occasionally to do any thing in His Husbandry there, these are
in His Treasures and a Memorial of them Registered with Him, not an Item
forgotten. Poor heathen have not so much to account for, as a People who are in
visible Covenant with God have. God connives at abundance of sin in places of
darkness, which He will not where Gospell-light shines. Observable is that of
the Apostle, Acts. 17. 30. The Times of this Ignorance, God Winked at, but now
commands all Men every where to Repent. And what a difference of times, merely
upon the account of the Gospel does our Savior Christ make! Joh. 15. 22. If I
had not come, and spoken to them, they had had no Sin, but now they have no
cloak for their Sins. Judah had the Temple and Ordinances with them, when the
Ten Tribes, by their Rebellion from the house of David, and carnal policy of
their own Kings, were obstructed in, and much hindered from enjoyment of these
liberties. God takes notice of it, and sets a signal Caution upon it, Hos. 4.
15. Though Israel play the harlot, let not Judah offend. The sum is, the more
liberal God has been to a People, the greater accounts they have to make up
with Him.

4. Nothing sooner, or more provokes God then the abusing or not well improving
of visible Covenant-priviledges. We shall find how God expostulates with Israel
in these very terms, Amos, 3. 2. Thee only have (...) known etc. The greater
the kindness is that is abused, the greater a provocation it must needs be: Now
Covenant-priviledges are the best and most exeelent Privileges which a People
can enjoy. It was the Jews advantage taken notice of by the Apostle, with a
Note of specialty put upon it, Romans 3. 1, 2. Chiefly, that to them were
committed the Oracles of God. And when David had enumerated the sundry favors
which God had bestowed upon His People Israel. He sets the peculiar emphasis
upon this, Psalm. 147. ult. He has not dealt so with any Nation. It is not so
great a Sin to abuse the Common goodness of God, and yet this is to treasure up
Wrath, Romans 2. 3. 4. These are little and low favors compared with the Gospel
and Covenant, in which eternal Life is exhibited, and therefore whatsoever
abuse God bears withal, this He cannot away with: If it once comes to a
despising and undervaluing, and not improving of such Mercies, then God cannot
hold His Peace, but must declare His displeasure, Deuteronomy. 32. 6. Do ye thus
requite the Lord?

5. When God purposes to bestow His everlasting Mercies upon a People, He
shows it by enabling of them to keep His Covenant. This is the plainest and
clearest manifestation of God's intentions: If He withhold this Grace, the most
excellent Privileges of a People are to them Judicial: It was a sad complaint
which Moses made, and it carried in it a very bad Omen to that so highly
privileged People of Israel, Deuteronomy. 29. 4. God has not given you an heart to
perceive, and eyes to see, and ears to hear unto this day. And very observable
is that expression of the Prophet, Jer. 31. 31-35. The New Covenant there
mentioned, was not another Covenant for the substance or matter propounded: It
was a Covenant of Reconciliation which was given to Israel when they came out
of Egypt: But it was to them only propounded, and outwardly made with them; but
they brake it, and thereby provoked God to swear against them in His Wrath,
that they should never enter into His Rest, Psalm. 95. ult. But here was an
inward and spiritual application of the Covenant, a working of the Conditions
of it in their hearts, and an establishment of their Souls upon it, by virtue
of which they were enabled to observe His Commandments, and to do them; and
thus they were made assured Owners of, and Partakers in those everlasting
Mercies therein exhibited. God's treating with Men only in a visible or outward
way, will vindicate His Justice, and leave them wholly inexcusable, when found
Despisers; but it in only His gracious application of the Covenant to their
Souls by the operation of His Holy Spirit working in them all that which is
well-pleasing in His sight, that brings saving good with it to His People: This
is Grace indeed.

6. Hence a true, grounded and permanent Hope must be established by an inward
and Self-search. Many are ready to boast of the Promises, and comfort
themselves with the Promises. They hence Carve out for themselves large
Consolations: But who are they that so do? There are some to whom God will say,
Hands off, you have nothing to do with these things, The Promise indeed is
full; everlasting Mercies, are Soulsaving Mercies: But what is all this to you?
You will say they are free Mercies, and why may not I embrace them as well as
another? True; but if God should ask you that question, Psalm. 50. 16, 17 --
What have thou to do to take My Covenant into thy mouth, seeing thou hate to
be reformed? What answer can you make to it? It is a very great piecs of folly
for a Man to boast of a favor, without considering of the way of a Conveyance.
God says, if you keep His Covenant, He has endless Mercies for you, and they
shall be yours: Oh yes! say you, Give me everlasting Mercies, I need them, I
accept of them: Yes, no doubt, But do you accept of the Covenant? Will you
freely close with Jesus Christ by a true and living Faith? Will you depart from
Iniquity, and cast off your Vanities? Will the wicked forsake his way, and the
unrighteous Man his thoughts? What, do you wince and boggle here? Are these
hard sayings which you cannot bare? Let me say then, What have you to do with
Mercies? Be not deceived, God is not mocked: If the filthy will be filthy
still, if the Proud, Vain, Profane, Lewd, etc. will be so still, and hold on
those courses, let them not glory in Covenant-Priviledges, and dream of golden
Mountains of Mercies: But the secret of the Lord is with them that fear Him,
and He will show them His Covenant.

Collect. 3. It may instruct us in the Nature and quality of the relation
wherein Children stand related to the Covenant: This Enquiry and Consideration,
both our Doctrine and Text lead us to: For though I mentioned not Children
particularly in the Doctrine, yet they are included in the general expression
of it, and distinctly mentioned in the Text, and God bears a respect to them in
the outward dispensation of the Covenant of Reconciliation. There are some that
wholly exclude their children from the Covenant, others there are who place too
much carnal confidence in their relation to it: And many Children too that
Cheat themselves upon this account: It is good therefore that they should know
both their Privilege and their Danger. The Text puts Parents and Childrens
Children (...) the same relation, and under the same Conditions.

I shall endeavor to clear up this Collection by opening three propositions.

Prop. 1. That the Children of Believers are equally interested in the visible
Covenant with their Fathers. By Believers I do not only intend those that are
such by a true and living Faith, but such also as are so by an open and
acknowledged profession of their Faith, for these also in the judgment of
Charity are to be acknowledged for true Believers: And it was to such, and in
such a notion, that the Apostles wrote all their Epistles to the Churches, as
has been before hinted and proved. By Children also I do not mean only the
immediate seed of such as firstly acknowledged and professed this Faith, nor
does the Scripture so intend, but their posterity in all Generations. Till for
Apostasy rejected,
Hence the Text says, Childrens Children: i. e. The succeeding Generations of
them: And so was Abraham's Covenant, which in the substance of it is ours, viz.
The Covenant of Grace and Reconciliation, see, Genesis 17. 9, 10. And if any do
object that the Text speaks of those only that keep Covenant, I answer, It is
true in respect of the Promise, but keeping Covenant presumes being in
Covenant. And when I say they are equally interested, I would be cautiously
understood, I do not therefore mean,

1. That they are always equally capable of actually enjoying the Privileges
of the Covenant: Divines well distinguish between jus ad rem, and jus in re. A
Child may have as good a right to his Estate when a Child as afterward; but he
cannot take possession of it, till he be legally of age: So neither does their
being in Covenant bring them immediately to all the Privileges, but according
to the Rules of the Gospel. Nor,

2. That they have always an equal invisible right to the blessing of the
Covenant: The advantage here is secret, and may sometimes be on the side of the
Parents, sometimes on the part of the Child, according to the inward operation
of the spirit: It is only the visible Covenant then which these stand equally
related to. Nor,

3. Do I dispute concerning the Parents conveyance of visible Privileges, or
how far they are to stand of fall with their Parents, or whither Parents by
bringing themselves under visible censures, may obstruct the benefit in regard
of their Children, till they do remove these obstructions: Some Divines are of
opinion that immediate Parents do equally hold or lose outward Privileges for
themselves, and for their Children, whiles in their Loins: But I speak of the
Children of visible Believers, standing right when their Children are born:
Their equality appears in these respects.

1. When God extended the Covenant to their Parents, He extended it to them at
the same time; though as to us who are Children of Time, we must have an
existence before we be actually in Covenant; yet as to God, who dwells in
Eternity, He engrosseth all Generations in one view, and so He takes Fathers
and Children together: Though the Fathers may be possibly considered as Agents,
and Trustees for their Children, whiles in their Loins: God did not say to
Abraham, I make a Covenant with thee now, and will make one with thy Children
hereafter: But He puts them both together, Genesis 17. 7. And hence they are
called God's Children, Ezekiel. 23. 37. Sons whom they bare to me.

2. The Covenant comes to each upon equal terms or propositions. The Covenant
stands visibly under the very same respects to the Father and to the Child: The
Text is clear for this, Fathers, and Childrens children if they keep Covenant
have a promise of Mercy: If they keep it the blessing is theirs, if they keep
it not they cannot expect it, or challenge it: Those therefore that object from
such Scriptures, that the Children are not in Covenant, but only conditionally
if they keep it, are to remember, as was hinted before, that keeping of
Covenant necessarily presupposes a Covenant to be kept, and the Person that so
keeps it, to be related to it, for none can keep Covenant but one that is first
in Covenant, nor yet can any but such break Covenant: He only breaks his
Promise that first made one: He only neglects his duty, that was first obliged.
It is not the Covenant it self, but the blessing of the Covenant, which is the
happiness of those that keep it. We read also of those that dealt falsely in the
Covenant, i. e. promised, and so were in Covenant, but performed not, Psalm. 78.
37. Jer. 6. 13.

3. They are equal in that the Father shall not suffer for the Child, nor the
Child for the Father, in case of breach of Covenant; but each being actually
under it, stands personally related to it: The Child now born, is to stand or
fall for himself, the Fathers Faith will not save the child, nor will his Sin
damn him. God took it as a false charge, when they counted their miseries to
be for their Fathers Sin, and not their own; and hence used that Proverb, The
Fathers have eaten sower Grapes, and the Childrens teeth are set on edge: and
therefore declares against it, professing that every one shall answer for
himself, see, Ezekiel. 18. Per totum. Children may by their Sin ripen judgment,
which God in patience delayed to execute in their Fathers days, and thus He
justly visits the Sins of the Fathers upon the children, when they follow the
same perverse courses, and grow worse in them: But yet in the Covenant every
one stands upon his own bottom. Children dying in their Infancy are saved by a
Faith wrought in them personally, and not acted by their Parents for them
relatively, Heb. 10. 38. The just shall be saved by [His] Faith. And yet it is
not to be denied that Parents are instruments or Media of deriving the visible
Covenant to their children, and may also lay in many outward blessings for
them; David's fidelity was remembered in times of Apostasy many Ages after: As
we find in the History: Though some interpret that of Christ; which is true in
the Antitype, yet it respected the Type too: But in these respects God Acts as
a Sovereign.

Prop. 2. That there are great visible privileges which the Children of
Believers do enjoy by virtue of being related to the Covenant. The objection
which the Apostle saw reason to anticipate of old, is much in use now adays,
and may admit the same resolution, Romans 3. begin. What advantage, etc? Much
every way. A great enquiry is made about Privileges, and many ask of us what
do we get by owning and acknowledging of the Covenant; yea, there are many that
discourage those who would do it, and tell them it is but a snare: And the
truth is, Men may make snares to themselves of the best visible favors of God,
and turn that which might be for their advantage to be for their hurt, yet the
Covenant it self wraps up a great many Privileges in it:

To name a few;

1. The ordinary revealed way of dispensing Salvation, being by the visible
Covenant; hence they are apparently nearer Salvation than others. What God does
in a secret way by Sovereign prerogative is not our business to enquire, Deuteronomy.
29. 29. But according to what is revealed in the Scriptures, the way to Life;
is by the Gospel and dispensation of it, and visible acceptance of, and
submition to it: Not that it is in it self saving, yet it is the outward way of
Gods appointment. Hence, that, Romans 10. 14. God may save those that are at
present out of visible Covenant, but then He brings them under the bond of it;
now, in as much as these in question are already under it, this is their great
advantage.

2. By virtue of the Covenant they are privileged, with Gospel Ordinances,
which are the means of Salvation. Ordinances are visible Covenant-Priviledges,
and they are for the bringing the Elect home unto Glory, Ephesians. 4. 10, 11, 12.

Object. But this is no Covenant-Priviledge, for the heathen have this Liberty,
we keep them not away from coming to the Ordinances.

Answ. From the Word Preached we exclude none, any may come that will.

But still,

1. There are no other Ordinances which we admit them to, till they do embrace
the Covenant, and that by a visible profession of Faith and Repentance; and so
they subject themselves to the Covenant of God, we Baptize them not, we admit
them not to the Lord's Table, exercise not Church watch cover, or discipline to
them till then: So that the Covenant is unto them a necessary Medium of
Perticipation, there must be a visible conversion wrought in them, from the
heathen to the Christian Religion.

2. Though the Word may be preached to the Heathen, yet it is committed to the
Church or Covenant People of God, Romans 3. 2. It is a depositum that God put
into their hands, a gift of God's favor which He has given His Church
possession of.

Quest. But it may then be demanded, why then do you not admit all the Children
of Believers to all the Ordinances? If they be theirs, wrong is done them by
debarring them of their Right.

Answ. That any of the Children of the Covenant, being adult, do not enjoy all
the Ordinances, is their own fault in a great measure: The Door of the House of
God stands open unto them, and if they are willing to come in to it, and are
regularly fit for it, there is no reason they should be prohibited; nay, all
encouragement is, or ought to be set before them, that they may, according to
our Saviors manner of expression, be compelled to come in, i. e. By the force
of argument and persuasion. Thus we see it is a great privilege to have a
Title to the Ordinances, for all that is needful to eternal Salvation, as to
means, is therein afforded them. The Word Preached is a perfect Rule, able to
make the Man of God so, 2 Timothy 3. 16, 17. The Sacraments administered have
abundance of grace in them, and afford great relief and sttength to the Souls
of those who know how to make use of them. The Church censures are Medicinal,
and appointed by God. For healing and not for destruction.

3. By virtue of the Covenant they are privileged with much more of the
presence and striving of the Spirit of God than others ordinarily enjoy. The
Spirit speaks directly to the Churches; He walks in the midst of the Golden
Candlesticks. Church Officers are Stars in Christ's own right Hand; and where
God has Recorded His Name, He has engaged His Presence, Exodus 20. 24. He
speaks more darkly, obscurely, weakly to Heathen by the light of their natural
consciences, then He does to those who sit under the Word and Means; the Word
being the Chariot in which He chooses to Ride most eminently, and with which He
insinuates Himself into the Souls of His People. These to be sure shall have
the first profers of Salvation made to them, Act. 13. 46. And if they embrace
and accept them to be theirs, herein they greatly please God. In a Word, they
are advantaged to have as much done with them for their good as can be, as to
Means: the care, the cost, the pains of the Husbandman, is is not laid out
upon the open Forest or wild Wilderness, but upon His Vineyard, Isa. 5. begin.

Prop. 3. That the Children of the Covenant stand in a very difficult and
hazardous relation. Many are prone to be proud of their privileges, and say,
The Temple of the Lord are These: They boast themselves and are confident in
their Church relations; but how few are there that do solemnly consider their
dangers? As it is a precious, so it is a very awful thing to be in visible
Covenant with God: The name of Covenant relation, viz. The Lord our God is a
great and dreadful Name, Deuteronomy. 28. 58. There are none upon the face of the
earth that stand upon more dangerous Precipices then the Children of the
Covenant: The truth of this assertion may be made clear, if we consider these
few things.

I. That visible-Covenant-interest will not afford Man sufficient security
against eternal Damnation. Many there are who fondly think the Covenant shall
save them, but they do but put a Cheat upon their own Souls. Keeping of
Covenant will save a man, according to God's promise who will be true to his
Word; but barely being outwardly in Covenant will not do it. The Covenant
indeed has saving Mercies in it, but they are exhibited or propounded to us
with an IF; if you keep it. There are many are admitted to tread in the Holy
Place, who shall never be entertained inthe most Holy. If some Men shall be so
bold as to plead the Covenant with Christ at the last day, he will counterplead
them; yea, and condemn them by the same Covenant, by which they think to be
saved, because it will be found that they did not keep it. This position is so
notoriously true, that there are manifold examples of those who have not only
forfeited the visible Privileges of it, but also have fallen from it into the
depth of Hell. What got Ishmael by being a child of the Church, and
circumcised, when he turned a mocker, but rejection from the Church, and
exclusion out of Heaven? What got Esau when he became profane? or Absalom when
he proved a Rebel? If Children grow Loose, Light, Vain, wicked, etc. There is
no hiding of themselves in the Church, or under the Covenant from the wrath of
God. He will search Jerusalem with Candles, and His wrath find out all those
who say in their hearts, God sees us not, Zeph. 1. 12. When dying David takes
upon him to instruct his Son Solomon about the Covenant, he opens the Nature
and Hazards of it, 1 Chronicles. 28. 9. If thou seek Him, He will be found of thee,
but if thou forsake Him, He will cast thee off for ever. A noble Vine may
degenerate, and the Children of Godly Parents may prove Apostates; and if they
do, What can be expected but Destruction? A Man must be something more than
outwardly a Jew, or Churchmember, or Child of the Covenant, else this will
deceive him, and give him no sure Title to Heaven and Glory.

2. That Godly Parents cannot by their Faith, nor all endeavors, work, no not
so much as secure the Regeneration and Salvation of their Children. It has
been a question moved by some, whither godly Parents doing their duty to their
children faithfully, and using their outmost endeavors in bringing them up for
God, may not rely on the Covenant-promise, and positively believe their
Children shall be saved, and that although for the present they see no change
wrought in them, but they walk in vain courses? In answer to which I shall
propound a few things to be considered.

1. That the Sovereignty of Divine Grace, which can neither be prevened nor
obliged by any thing in or for us, is a Pillar-truth of Christian Religion,
Romans 9. 16. It is not of him that wills, nor of him that runs, etc. So far
as we detract from God's Sovereignty in the dispensation of converting and
saving Grace, we so far make God a debtor to the Creature, before he makes
Himself so by a free Promise.

2. That all which Parents can do for their, Children, in attendance to the
Precept, viz. In bringing them up for God, instructing them in His knowledge
and fear, exercising their Authority in keeping them in from lewd courses, and
causing them to serve God in a visible attendance on the means of Grace, etc.
It is no more then their duty, and is in no ways to be counted meritorious,
Luke 17. 10. Hence, for their own Souls safety they must do it, except they
will hazard the displeasure of God.

3. That it out-does the power of Moral-means and endeavors, though never so
sincerely used, to Plant or infuse Grace into any Souls: The Work of Conversion
is not wrought by the will of Man, but of God only, Joh. 1. 13. If good Men
could Will, could Pray, could Labor Faith into any according to their desire,
their would none of their Children, none of their Servants, none of their
Neighbors, none in the World perish.

4. That Divine Faith is not only a confidence, but a grounded confidence: The
Rule does not only command and bind us to believe, but it also tells us what we
are to believe: The Hold of Faith is the Promise, and therefore it can be
assured of any thing no further then that goes: Faith must have a clear Word
for its Trust, else it is but vain: All our Plea is in the Covenant-Promise,
and if we cannot find that we look for [There] we have nothing to build upon,
but are at uncertainty.

5. That Believers have no absolute and illimited Promise in the Word of God
that all their Children, or this or that Child shall be saved, no nor limited
neither to their care, and faithfulness, that if they do their best, He will
infallibly add saving Grace: This will appear by two Arguments.

1. Because God is faithful to every Promise which He has made, He is a God
that cannot lie, or repent. I know godly Parents may be remiss, but they are
not always so, and yet have had their Children whom God has rejected: Abraham
his Ishmael: Isaac his Esau: David his Ahsolom and Adonijah: Eli his Hophni
and Phinehas: Now of Abraham we read that he was Trusty and Faithful in
teaching his children, Genesis 18. 19. And therefore he instructed, and
disciplined: Ishmael he circumcised him, and prayed earnestly for him.

2. Because the faithful People of God have themselves thus interpreted the
Promise, they judged it to be upon Supposition, and to carry a Condition in it:
Eminent for this is the forementioned instance of David: that he thus
understood it is evident, not only by that forecited warning which He gave to
Solomon, 1 Chronicles. 28. 9. But also by that knowledgment which he makes of it to
God Himself, Psalm. 132. 11, 12.

Object. But we shall find that God makes an absolute Promise to David that He
will establish His Covenant with His seed, and not Violate it, Psalm. 89. 28, 29.

Ans. It is to be observed that in that place David represents or typifyes
Christ the Head of the Church, and by His Children we are to understand only
those that are given to Christ of God in the Covenant of Redemption, concerning
whom it is certain they shall obtain Salvation; for as the Apostle says, 2 Timothy 2. 19. The foundation of God stands sure, having this seal, the Lord
knows who are His. But a Man may be a subject of the visible Covenant, who
has no right to the Covenant of Redemption.

Que. But you will say then, What encouragement is there for Parents to Pray
for, to instruct and take pains with their Children, and give them up to God in
the Covenant, if they cannot do all this in Faith? What is not of Faith is of
Sin.

Ans. There are other ways for Faith to act us in our Duty, besides this
particular confident persuasion of this fruit and effect. Consider then,

1. That Faith is to eye the Precept as well as the Promise: Faith is to
influence our duty as well as our assurance. Faith is the principle of our
obedience: And if we believe this is our duty, to perform, because God commands
it, and are hereby animated to our duty, this is Obedience of Faith: it is our
duty to sow our Seed in the Morning, etc. Although we know not which shall
prosper this or that: because Faith works by Love.

2. That a Believer is to be engaged to his duty, not only by a promise, but
also by the precept; it is true the promise is our Encouragement, but the
precept is our Rule; in submission to the command therefore he is to go about
his Work, and to leave the success of it to Divine dispose, and so doing he
performs his duty in Faith: and he that is not acted by this principle, but
does all merely as he thinks it may succeed, is truly mercenary.

3. There are other Promises which may encourage a Believer in this duty, viz.
That if he does it in Truth and sincerity it shall be accepted and rewarded by
God. God will some way or other make him to find that his labor has not been
in vain. The Husbandman is in duty to sow his Seed in Faith; but he is not
sure he shall have a good Crop. The Fig Tree may not blossom, though he manures
it with care, but this is his encouragement, that in a way of doing duty, God
has said that He will bless him.

4. Faith also teaches us that attending the means is nearer to the particular
blessing, than not attending but neglecting them. God oftener meets His people
in the way of his ordinary, then in the way of His extraordinary providence:
nor does God always, though He may sometimes in Sovereignty deny the desired
Blessing to His people; yea, and although He may sometimes work there where we
are guilty of shameful neglect, as in Converting Josiah, the son of a wicked
Amon, yet our neglect is inexcusable, because we have despised the Command.
Such a Parent as has faithfully done his duty, may die in Hope, that although
he see not the desired Fruit of his Pains and prayers yet they may appear when
his head is laid in the dust: To be sure he may with this comfort leave the
World, that he has been faithful in his place.

3. The provocations of Covenant-Children are most heinous, and consequently
most provoking to God. The Sins of none are so offensive in His sight as
theirs: You shall find therefore that the Scripture sets a Note observable upon
this consideration, Amos. 3. 2. so, Deuteronomy. 32. 19, The provokings of Sons and
Daughters are bitter, Jer. 5. 7. Thy Children have forsaken me, How shall I
pardon thee for this? God has taken such as these very near to Him, He has
given them such privileges, and so many advantages: Hence, for a child of the
Covenant, to live like the Children of heathen, and those whom God has not
known, this is a Sin of a deep Dye; yea, far deeper than theirs who only abuse
the light of nature, and common goodness of God: If you read, Ezekiel. 16. per
totum, You shall there see what a course God takes to make Jerusalems Sin to
appear unparrellel'd, viz. By declaring what Covenant privileges, and favors
they had enjoyed, and profanely abused: Verily, God can endure to see that in
Sodom, which He cannot bear to see in Zion.

4. Hence to perish from under the Covenant will be a most astonishing
perdition. If Judah provoke God to destroy her, She comes down wonderfully,
even to the astonishment of all her Neighbors: Let me tell you, there are none
that leave the World with such amazing Fears and Terrors that close their Lives
with such dreadful agonies and horrors, as such do, who have been related to
the Covenant, and enjoyed the privileges of it, and slighted them: The
remembrance of their Church state, their Baptism, the Ordinances they have sat
under, the Threatenings, Warnings, Counsels, and Encouragements of the Covenant,
which they have despised, will fill their Consciences with most dreadful
regrets and reflections. and if any have been so seared, as to stifle and
suppress all these remorces, and to depart this Life under a sullen and
desperate hardness, or a self-cheating hope; yet, in the great Day, when the
Righteous Judge shall give to every one according to their deeds, then woe, and
ten thousand woes to those Children of the Church that shall have despised
their privileges, and slighted the Grace proffered in the Covenant; that have
sold themselves to profaneness, or lived in desperate hypocrisy, that have
forgotten their Covenant-engagements to God, and brought themselves under the
Curses of that Covenant. Thus you see the relation of Children to the Covenant,
what are their Privileges, and what are their Dangers: God of His mercy grant
both to Parents and Children Grace and Wisdom to make a right improvement of
these solemn Considerations.

USE II.

For Exhortation to all such as stand related to God in the Covenant, to be
very careful and watchful to your selves that you keep it. You are not so
much to boast of, or confide in your Covenant Relation, as to see to your own
part and duty in which you are nextly concerned: Take these things for Motive.

1. It is no little or light matter to keep Covenant with God. It is true,
Evangelical duty is easy, if it be compared with those rigid and strict, yea
impossible to be performed demands of the Covenant of Works: Impossible, I mean
by the Children of fallen Adam. God gives acceptance to such weak Duties, and
withal gives strength to do them. But still, if we consider what it is that is
required in the Covenant of Grace, we shall find that it is for Matter very
large, and for difficulty, exceeding all our own power in our selves, and
cannot be performed without special Grace from Jesus Christ. There is a great
deal comprehended in those two short Words, Believe and Obey. Perseverance in
the Faith, maintaining it against all the shocks of Temptation which assaults
it: And constancy in Obedience, continuing faithful unto Death, waiting till
afterward for our reward; these are great Works. To do all we do for God, as
being His Servants, to devote all our time to Jesus Christ, as those who are
Bought with a Price, requires, Care, Diligence, Vigilance. Again, there are a
great many Duties laid upon us in the Covenant, the Precept is of great
latitude, Psalm. 119 96. Every Command is full. There are Duties to be done,
Sins to be avoided, there are Afflictions and Trials to be undergone: God is to
be believed in, and worshipped: Our Neighbors are to be honored and loved:
There are a great many relations which a Christian stands in, and every one
has its particular respective Duties. Moreover the whole Man, and all in it
stands engaged in these Covenant Duties: Every faculty and member owes
Obedience to the Will of God. We have our hearts to look after, and keep with
diligence for God and His Glory, Prove. 4. 23. Our tongue to order and keep
within bounds, which must be well looked after, Psalm. 39. 1. And all our bodily
actions must be conformed to Divine prescripts: All our Natural, Civil, and
Religious actions must be squared by the right Rule, and directed to their
proper End, 1 Cor. 10. 31. Finally, that which makes it so great a Work to keep
Covenant, is the weakness of our Grace, and strength of our Corruption, and
force of the Temptation we are exposed to: We have every one of us a Traitor in
our Bosom, besides a sollicitous and diligent Enemy waiting all opportunities
to tempt and draw us aside: And there must be great vigilance and resolution to
resist a subtle Devil holding correspondence with a treacherous heart: Put all
these things together, and they will speak thus much, that it is a very great
Work for a Christian to keep Covenant with God.

2. It is not a thing indifferent whither you keep Covenant or no. If you would
enjoy the comfort of the Promise, you must have the witness of your own
consciences unto this. It is one thing to be in visible Covenant, and another
to have the promise of the Covenant positively engaged to you. Men deceive
themselves greatly with this opinion, that they think, if they are in Covenant,
they have Christ for their Surety and Undertaker: And hence can maintain strong
confidence in the midst of their own careless and carnal neglects; abusing and
perverting many Scriptures, and particularly, that, 1 John 2. 1. If we sin, we
have an Advocate: They promise themselves that Christ shall answer for all
their breaches of Covenant, and hereupon it is no great matter with them to
neglect Duty, and live carelessly and irregularly: but we must beware of
deceiving our selves, for God will not be mocked, 1 These. 4. 7 Consider then,

1. We may be in visible Covenant, and yet not have Christ for our engaged
Undertaker, it is only Believers that have truly placed their souls trust in
Him, that He stands engaged to and for; to others He is only propounded. All in
the visible Church have not saving Faith wrought in them, they have not
cordially closed with Christ as their Prophet, Priest and King, though they
have outwardly and verbally promised so to do; and His Mediation and Redemption
will not be profitable to such: These have Pardon, Peace and Salvation promised
to them only with this proviso, if they believe, and that with such a caveat
annexed to it too, that if they believe not they shall be damned. God indeed
bestows upon them all visible means and helps to believing, but if they
improve them not unto the attaining of this Grace, they will be witnesses
against them in the Day of account, and help greatly to inflame their
Reckoning, Mat. 11. 23.

2. Christ stands Surety for Believers, not to encourage their neglect; but
only to help their Faith, relying upon Him in sense of self-insufficiencie: and
that too, either whiles they are striving to do good, and cannot do the good
which they would, or at least are mourning for and repenting of their falls and
neglects. Christ never intended that His Grace should be the Abettour and
Protector of Men's Wickedness: And so to improve it, is to turn it into
wantonness, which every serious Soul must abominate, Romans 6. 1, 2. And hence
also, though Christ will be an effectual Advocate for every [True] Believer,
Notwithstanding all his frailties and breaches of Covenant with God, yet He
will be no Abettour of him for his wilful and bold transgressions committed
upon presumption of Christ's intercession, but he will charge his sin home upon
him, as he did upon David, and make it an evil and bitter thing to him; He will
break his bones, wound his spirit, make him see the evil, and feel the smart of
it, so as to loath himself for it: In a Word, he will not apply his pardon
sensibly to the Soul, but in a way of deep humiliation, godly Sorrow and
Repentance.

3. Degeneracy, Apostasy, and Covenant breaking is an evil into which God's
visible Vovenant People are very apt to decline. It is as it were the
hereditary disease of the visible Church. It is a Malady Epidemical they very
often fall into it. It has been so from the beginning, besides the particular
discovery of false Professors, in the best Times and Ages, and Churches, it is
also observable, that there can scarcely any Authority be produced, that ever
the Church preserved a general integrity in Faith and Manners, above an Age at
once at the most. Yea, we find that Israel in the Wilderness, though under many
peculiar advantages to keep close with God, who was so near them, so ready to
help them, so wonderfully discovered Himself to them, did yet fall into
universal Idolatry before Joshua, and the Elders which outlived him were cold
in their graves: that people that had just before Joshua's death, solemnly
renewed Covenant, went after strange Gods: Reiigion scarcely well settled in
David's time, yet waines before Solomon's death; and soon after ten tribes go
away to direct idolatry, and the two that remained but little better. Josiah's
reformation was buried with him in one Grave. Since Christ came in the flesh,
the Apostles had scarce settled the Christian Churches, but they lived (some of
them) to see the mystery of iniquity begin to work: John who was the longest
lived, of the Apostles, saw five of the seven Churches of Asia manifestly
degenerating. Now the consideration of these things should put an aw upon our
spirits, and make us the more watchful, remembering that we have no more
security for our standing than they had,: It is the concluding argument which
the Apostle draws from such premises, 1 Cor. 10. 12. Let him that thinks he
stands, take heed lest he fall. They stood upon the same ground that we do,
neither have we any greater security of our standing, then they had of theirs.

4. Consider how great the severity of God has been against Covenant-breakers.
Joshua dissembled not with them, but gave them a true caution, John, 24. 19,
20. He will not forgive, etc. If you forsake, etc. God sends the Jews to Shilo,
to read there in those heaps and monuments of His anger, a Lesson of their own
admonition, Jer. 7. 11. The Histories of God's revenge upon His own People, for
affronts offered to His Covenant, are as well recorded for our instruction, as
those of His Mercies. God would have all of us to know, that He is Holy as well
as Gracious, and that He expects to be glorified by all those that draw near
unto Him. If Aaron's Sons offer strange fire, they themselves shall be
destroyed with fire from Heaven. Awful is that Scripture, Jer. 12. 7. I have
for saken my House: I have left mine heritage, I have given the dearly Beloved
of my Soul into the hand of her Enemies. Jerusalem came down wonderfully,
because she had forsaken her God. Apostate Churches are the most unsafe, and
insecure of any People of the World, and let us remember that the time is
drawing on when Judgment must begin at the House of God, and if so, we have
great need, if we would then escape, to see to our own hearts and lives, that
they be agreeable to what the Covenant expects of us.

5. Consider, there is Grace, Peace and safety to be had in our keeping
Covenant with God, it is David's profession, 119. 165. Great Peace have all
they that keep thy Law. There is no danger on God's part, that He should fail
of His Promise, it is part of His Name, and one of His precious Titles that He
is a God, keeping Covenant, His Truth and Faithfulness engage Him in it, we
have to do with a God that cannot lie: He never said to the house of Israel,
Seek my Face in vain. As Covenant-Mercyes are everlasting, so they are sure;
they are inviolably engaged to them that fear him, and keep His Covenant,
called, Sure Mercyes of David, Isa. 55. 3. As long as Vzziah walked with God,
He caused him to prosper: As far as God sees fit for His own Glory, Upright
Churches shall have outward Peace and prosperity: Or if, for His Glory, he
suffers persecution to come upon them to try their graces, they shall need to
fear none of these things, Rev. 2. 10. And it will be a blessed and
soul-satisfying conclusion, to be able to profesS in times of greatest
oppression, as they did, Psalm. 44. 17. etc. If a Church, as such, Apostatize;
yet faithful Ones and mourners in it shall be Marked out for Mercy, Ezekiel. 9.
begin. Those who then defile not their Garments, Shall walk with Him in White,
Rev. 3. 4. If God comes forth in His Indignation, and punishes the Inhabitants
of the Earth, yet still He will provide for them; call for them into their
Chambers, and shut the Door upon them for their security. And then shall the
Faithful know that it was not in vain for them that they served God, and were
not false to His Covenant, but stood firm against all shocks of Temptation,
though in the mean time, for a while, they may be scorned and scoffed at by the
World for their integrity.

In the further Prosecution of this Use, I shall first propound some general
helps, and then present more particular Directions.

For help, would we keep Covenant with God, Then,

1. You must go to and believe in Jesus Christ for Grace whereby you may be
enabled so to do. I name this first, Because it is the foundation of all:
Christ is the Surety and Undertaker in the Covenant on both Parties, and if you
would do any thing in this business, you must go to Him that He may work your
Works in and for you, the Life of a Christian, is a Life of Faith, Heb. 10. 38.

Consider therefore,

1 As long as you remain in unbelief, you are on that very account,
Covenant-breakers; for it is the first thing required in the Covenant, viz.
that we believe. It binds and obliges us to go to Christ, and make an absolute
choice of Him, and place the Hope and Trust of our Souls upon Him: Think of
this, you that live and ly in a State of Unregeneracy; you break your bond as
long as you thus live, and are not therefore under the Promise, but the
threatening at the present: When you shall be put upon trial, whether you have
kept Covenant with God, the first question will be, whither you have believed;
and if this cannot be made good, there needs no more enquiry to be made, but
the Case is cast against you, all the pleas you can possibly make from your
Moral Obedience, or Legal Works done by you will not in the least salve it,
but you will be found among, and pronounced to be workers of iniquity.

2. Without this Faith we cannot perform Gospel-Obedience, which is also
required of us. As it is the first thing called for on our Part, so it is the
root and Principle of all the rest, without which no service can be received.
To acceptable Obedience, Three things are required.

1. That the Person doing it be accepted in Christ.

2. That it be performed by strength derived from Christ.

3. That it come to God through His hands. Now to each of these Faith thus
embracing of Christ is requisite: Hence, without it no pleasing God, Heb. 11. 6.

III. Though we cannot go savingly to Christ before Faith be wrought in us,
because Faith is the first saving Grace; yet it is our duty to be diligently
using all those means which are appointed to this End, and therein to be
waiting upon Him for it. Sense therefore of our own inability, and utter
insufficiency to do this Work, in and of our selves, is not a just ground of
discouragement, but may be improved to excite and direct us to go there where
sufficiency is to be had; Christ therefore sends His gracious invitations to
such as these, Isa. 55. 1. Mat. 11. 28.

4. Those that have believed are to exercise Faith daily, going to Christ for
renewed Grace and strength, Faith is the great help, and the only help we have
in us, to fetch in that strength, by which alone we can do that which is
well-pleasing unto God. It is not for a Believer to say, I am weak, and dare
not stir; lest I fall: No, but he is to say, Christ is strong, and He has bid
me to wait on Him, and believe in Him. This I may assure you of; That when a
Child of God, in tender sense of his own inability to do his duty as he should,
has believingly cast it upon and committed it to Christ, the bigger and better
part of his duty is done, and he may cheerfully and steadfastly go through the
rest. Let none hope or think to keep Covenant in his own strength; nor let any
despair of it, as long as there is strength in Christ; especially considering,
that, if we believe in Him, He stands Surety for us, and is in the Covenant;
not only our High Priest to make satisfaction for us to his Father, but our
King too, to Rule in us, and lead us in His fear, and not to suffer us to
depart from Him all the days of our Lives. When we (finding our selves to be
of no Strength) go to, and Lean upon Jesus Christ, we are carried forth
happily, and shall serve God acceptably: It is then alone when we are too
presumptous of our own strength, and rely on that, that we fail, and dishonor
the Name of God by breaking His Covenant.

2. Labor to get a good understanding of, and acquaintance with the Nature,
Tenor and Extent of your Covenant-Duty, and keep it upon your thoughts. Many
are very forward, and critically inquisitive after the Nature of
Covenant-Priviledges: And indeed it is one great Study and discourse of the
Times: But that which is for our Practice, or in which we ought to be most of
all conversant; we are prone to be most backward in, viz. Our duty; whereas it
ought to be the Servants constant Care, to know his Lord's Will, How else
should he do it? God affords us many means of knowledge, our Ignorance
therefore (if we are guilty of it) will not be any part of an excusing Plea for
us. Ignorance of Duty under means of Knowledge, will not be acknowledged for
Ignorance, nor procure us any fewer stripes. What Men are wilfully or
unnecessarily ignorant of Through their own heedlesness, will be charged, not
as Ignorance, but contempt: Neither can we do acceptably, except we know. Let
us therefore be industrous to get a right understanding of the Will of God, and
what are the Rules of Faith and Practice, that so we may be furnished for every
good Work. The Lord expects more in these Days and Places of Gospel Light,
than where it is wanting. The Duties of Christians are many, and their Calls to
Duty are diversely circumstanced: Now God affords you many, both public and
private helps; be not you negligent in using of them. David, by frequent
Meditations attained to a large knowledge of God's Precepts, Psalm. 119. 99. And
if we could ponder upon these things as much, and with as much intensness of
mind, as we are wont to do upon our Worldly Concerns, we should in time grow
good proficients in them.

3. Get a Love to, and delight in the ways of God. There is no such help to a
cheerful and constant keeping of Covenant as a heart taken with and delighted
in the Command. Fear of Wrath may do something to restrain the outward Man from
many gross Enormities, which otherwise sinful Men would boldly and
unreclaimably run into: And hope of reward may put Men upon it to do many
things, which otherwise they would not be so forward to engage in: And it is
certain, that both fear and hope acting in their due Places, and managed by an
higher principle, are of no little use to a Child of God, whom his heavenly
Father is pleased to train up (in a great measure) by threatenings and promises.
But still there is nothing of such efficacy as Love: Fear and hope invite us to
close with the Command for our Own sake, but Love allures us to embrace it for
Its sake, for the preciousness of it. Love constrains: It is a forcible and
irresistible Impetus by which it carries us to our dnty: Many waters cannot
quench it: persecutions cannot obstruct, prosperity cannot inveigle it: It
makes the Command precious above all things: Gold, and fine Gold are not
comparable to it, etc. Psalm. 19. 9, 10. Now there is very much argument and
reason to make us in Love with Covenant-duties: They are the revealed will of
God, and if we love Him, we cannot but be in love with them. They are the
product of infinite Wisdom, suited properly to the condition of Man, and
therefore most desirable: They are the great things of the Law, and hence
deserve greatest esteem. Every Rule of Duty is a Rule of Life, and therefore
ought to be as dear ununto us as our own lives. It is not at all to be
questioned, but that the cause of the great neglect of duty among Professors,
and their remisseness in doing what the Covenant requires, and the hard coming
off of many duties which cross flesh and blood, arises from the want of such a
measure of love as ought to be.

4. Carefully avoid the throwing of your selves upon unnecessary Temptations to
break Covenant with God. There are enough will come unsent for, and ever when
the People of God do go about to set themselves in a most solemn manner to
engage in the service of God, Satan is then watching for an opportunity to give
them a furious assault. God no sooner gives Adam the Covenant but the Serpent
forthwith assaults him. We had need to keep as much as possibly we can out of
the way. Unnecessary compliance with wicked men carries great temptation in it;
Can one touch Pitch and not he defiled: Solomon was drawn away by his strange
wives; his wisdom (though uncomparable) was befooled and the great familiarity
which God held with him (who had appeared twice to him) was forgotten.
Jehoshaphat laid a snare for himself, and for his Kingdom, by making affinity,
and entering into a league offensive and defensive with the house of Ahab, and
it proved pernicious in the event. If Men will stand in the way of sinners, it
may be in a little while we shall find them sitting in the seat of the
scornful. The People of God should be acquainted with their own infectious
hearts, and know how apt and ready they are to be born down by the body of
death it self, much more when weights of temptation are hung upon it, else they
are not like to be true to God, or faithful in His Covenant. They that
unnecessarily frequent public houses, will in time learn to to be drunkards.
They that make a trade of keeping vain Company will grow themselves vain
persons: They that frequently converse with Heretics, and like society with
them, will at least become favorers of their Heresies. The counsel of the
Apostle was very seasonable and needful for a People in Covenant with God, to
follow, if ever they intend to be true to it, 2 Cor. 6. 14. etc. Be not
unequally yoaked together with unbeleevers, etc. Nor let us promise our selves
that God will keep us, if we watch not over our selves. He that walks
circumspectly only walks safely. Men may think their hearts Temptation-proof;
but if they will run the hazard in this confidence, they are like to come off
as Peter did in the High-Priest's Hall. As then you would have God hear when
you pray, Lead us not into Temptation, do not throw your selves into it.

5. Maintain and daily keep in exercise the work of Repentance. Though I know
it is dangerous and presumptuous for Men to adventure to Sin, upon hope to make
all good again by Repentance (as though a Man should boldly and frequently take
poison, because he has a precious Antidote by him) and indeed such a frame of
spirit cannot reign, and rule in a Believer, to whom Sin it self is in its own
nature abominable, yet such is the state of fallen Man (though converted) that
except they keep the grace of Repentance in continual exercise, they cannot
keep Covenant with God. There is no living a life of Gospel obedience without
it. The state of Believers in this life is a very imperfect state, in regard of
Sanctification, it being but in part or degree, not perfect. there is in a
Child of God a great deal of foolishness, by reason of which he often misseth
his way, and wandreth from the precept: much weakness which makes him to fall
seven times: he stumbles at a small thing that lies in his way: Every
difficulty is ready to be an obstacle unto him: Much also of rebellion is in
his heart, by reason of that Law which is in his members, which frequently
leads him Captive. Hence the wise Man makes that peremptory demand, Who can
say, I have made my heart clean, Pro. 20. 9. His errors and wanderings are so
many that [alas!] he cannot know them, Psalm. 19. 12. Hence has God in much
mercy, accommodated the Covenant of Grace to this imperfect state of His own
People, so that a principal part of our keeping Covenant with God, lies in our
upholding of the constant exercise of true Repentance. And God in His gracious
condescendency is pleased to acknowledge the penitent (though imperfect)
Believer to be a Covenant keeper, and though we ought not thereupon to be bold
to sin, yet if at any time, through our own frailty, and the subtilty of our
own deceitful hearts, we are overtaken, He has provided Christ to be an
Advocate for us, 1 John 2. 1. Hence, we find the Gospel-precepts are summarily
comprehended in those two words, Repent and Believe, Mark, 1. 15. And God has
abundantly promised in His word, that if His People do at any time repent of,
and heartily acknowledge and turn from their sinful faults, He will Hear in
Heaven, and Pardon, and their Sins shall be in His account, as if they had
never been committed. Now, to the end, that you may order your Repentance
aright, take these few Rules.

1. Labor to uphold and strengthen in your hearts a true and genuine hatred of
all Sin: This is the great Principle on which true Repentance acts. Our
commission of Sin arises from our Love and liking of it on our corrupt part:
Now Repentance acts in a direct contrariety unto this, and hence it proceeds
from hatred of Sin. Repentance is properly a change of the mind and affection.
All Self-Justification arises from the Complacency which Men have in their
sinful ways; hence arise excuses, and diminutive extenuations: And we are not
so much afraid of Sin, as of the wrath and punishment which attends it:
Whereas, if Sin were in it self hateful to us, we should both avoid it with
all care as a Man would the biting of a Serpent; and also when at any time we
are overtaken, we would loath our selves for it: Let Sin then be exceeding
sinful in your esteem, grow more and more out of love with, get therefore more
acquainted with the odious nature of it: See how contrary to God's holiness it
is, how impure, and what defilement it pollutes the Soul withal.

2. Dwell much and frequently upon the Work of Self-examination: We are very
apt to be curious Critics upon other Men's actions, but very superficial in
calling our selves to a through accouut: Hence, so little practical Repentance,
because we know so little that we have to repent of; and the reason is, because
we are such strangers at home. Would you not count him but an ill husband, who
can give a better account of his neighbors trading than of his own? Such are
these who can make a better description of others lives and ways than their
own. If the wise Man commends it as a point of prudence to know the state of
our Flocks and Herds, how far greater then is it to acquaint our selves with
the state of our Souls; which are to be kept above all keeping? David gives us
this advice. Psalm. 4. 4. Commune with your hearts. If Men would do thus; as it
would prevent a great deal of Repentance, so it would produce more kindly
Repentance. God indeed propounds this as one way to the removal of His greatest
judgments, Hag. 1. 7. Now therefore, consider your ways. The exactest
Christian (if he would thus retire into the Closet of meditation, and reflect
upon his own heart and life) world find abundant matter to humble and abase
him, to fill him with mourning and bitterness, and drive him to Christ for
pardon: there are so many straglings of a wandering and sinfully by assed heart,
so many aberrations of a misguided life.

3. Let all your Sins and breaches of Covenant drive you to Christ, mourning,
and yet believing, for pardon and washing, He is the Surety of the Covenant,
get Him engaged: He is the Fountain set open for Sin and for uncleanness. Go
wash your filthy garment here, and they that are often defiled, should be often
washing. Mourn after a Godly sort, that is an Index of true Repentance: But
think not that your tears will wash off the filth: Believe therefore on Christ
that He may do it. Repent and believe, Faith distinguishes Repentance
Evangelical from that which is Legal, it is mixed with Faith. Make Christ your
Righteousness and Sanctification; and make Him your Intercessour. Bring your
Sins every day to His Cross as those that are wearied and burdened with them;
and He will plead the Covenant for you: Your follies shall not be laid to your
charge, your iniquities shall be blotted out of His book of remembrance, sunk
down as a Millstone in the depths of the Sea, buried in a Grave of everlasting
oblivion, and God will confirm to you His everlasting Mercies.

2. I now come to some more particular directions for our right keeping
Covenant with God. And here let me premise that it is not my purpose to descend
to the most particular Rules; for we must know that Covenant-keeping is of
equal extent with Gospel-obedience, and that is exceeding broad. I shall only
propound some comprehensive particulars, and such as do most nearly concern us
considered as a Covenanted reforming People: Such we are by profession, God
grant we may be so in reality.

Here I shall first propound a few Rules to the whole body of the Church
considered as one, and then single out the Children of the Covenant, and add
some special Words of counsel unto them apart by themselves.

1. Let me prescribe some Scripture-Rules to the body of the Church, or Society
of God's People: Would you be found and acknowledged to be a Society that keeps
Covenant with God? Observe then these Directions.

1. Keep pure and entire all the Ordinances of God from corruption, either by
Depravation or Innovation. The Oracles and Ordinances of God are committed to
His Church as a great depositum, worthy of our utmost care and watchfulness:
They are great things, they are the means of eternal Life; the Glory, as well
as the Love of God is abundantly manifested in them to the Children of Men:
They are the fat things of his house, Psalm. 36. 8. 63. 5. They are things by
which, not only poor Man, but also (as sound Divines interpret that, Ephesians. 3.
10.) Angels themselves are instructed in the precious mystery of Man's
Salvation by Christ. And there is great reason why the People of God should
keep them up in their purity, because the Visible Covenant-transactions between
God and His People are therein upheld and continued. They are the means, both
of our keeping Covenant with God, and by which also He conveyes down to us the
spiritual blessings thereof. Furthermore, if the Ordinances be corrupted, the
streams by which we receive the Waters of Life are defiled, or obstructed,
which cannot but be very dangerous to the Church of Christ, and will certainly
expose many Souls to great hazards. And the more need have Men to look to it,
inasmuch as the present times greatly labor of this disease, and thereby there
are occasioned many and great temptations for the People of God to lose much
ground, and give way to their own damage in compliance with the lusts of Men.
Now there are two ways by which the Ordinances of Christ may be corrupted, and
either of them is exceeding dangerous, and cannot be admitted without our being
guilty of breaking Covenant, viz.

1. By Depravation: I mean a contemptuous rejection, and casting off the
Ordinances, either in Whole or in Part: Some there be that do wholly reject
Visible-Ordinances, as things Carnal, and not suited to the spiritual
dispensations of Grace in the Days of the Gospel; Men, who (under pretense of
holiness, and an extraordinary pitch of perfection) do throw off and trample
upon the very means of holiness: Men that have gained too much charity in the
World, but are indeed dangerous enemies to the People of God, and subverters of
Covenant-duties: Others there be that call some Ordinances in question, either
throwing them wholly aside, or, at the least, turning them out of the right
order and course. Anabaptisme is a dangerous underminer of Gospel Order and
Ordinances. And many there be that account it but a light matter to neglect
this or that of Christ's Institutions. Many plead, this is not necessary, and
that may be omitted without any danger: A Man may get to Heaven though he be
not baptized, or though he never comes to the Lord's Table. But to what end are
all these Cavellings and Argumentations used, but to throw an imputation of
folly upon the infinite wisdom of Jesus Christ? Neither are we to lay out the
way to Man's Salvation by the Rule of God's absolute Power, but according to
his revealed Will; and God that has annexed to His Covenant the means of the
Gospel as the way of our Duty, will not excuse us from the guilt of the
contempt of His Covenant, because we therefore neglected and slighted His
Ordinances, because we had a confidence in His Power and Mercy, hoping that He
would save us without them. If God were so exact with Moses, that He strictly
engaged him to follow the pattern given him in the mount, in all things
belonging to his house, not ommitting to prescribe the number and places of
every Pin in the Tabernacle, surely then He will charge breach of Covenant upon
all such as dare to mutilate or curtaile any of His Gospelappointments.

2. By Innovation: i. e. by introducing or bringing into the worship of God the
appendices or additions of Men's own inventions, under a pretense of holiness,
reverence, helps to devotion, or whatsoever other fair shows Men may endeavor
to cover it withal. God's command is strict, that we neither add to, nor take
from His Church Institutions. Christ is the only Lord and Lawgiver: And to
bind the Conscience to the Religious observation of any thing in worship, which
is not appointed by Him, is plain Superstition. The efficacy of all
Church-Ordinances for the good of the Souls of God's People depends upon the
blessing of Christ, which blessing He has no where engaged to Will Worship, or
that fear of God, which (therefore) is in vain taught by the precepts of Men,
and to think that Christ has not taken sufficient care in His Gospel, and made
plentiful Provision there, for the securing of His interest and Glory in His
Church, the welfare also, and salvation of the Souls of His People, is to
charge unfaithfulness, or, at the least, rash heedlesness and imprudence upon
Him who is declared to be faithful in His House, as Moses was in his; yea, with
this addition, that Moses did as a Servant, He as a Son. Let us then take heed
that we be not drawn away, nor turned aside. What temptations may be set before
us on these accounts, God only knows, and when they come, there are many
things which may seem but little, and we may be accounted nice and peevish for
standing on such punctilio's, yet even the (...) and tittles of the Will of
Christ are carefully to be maintained and defended. It was thought by some, no
great matter in Primitive times, to throw a little Frankincense upon the fire,
on the Heathen Altars, without a word speaking, and a liberty of private
interpretation of their intentions to them that did it; and they were judged
too prodigal of their Lives, that would not for so trifling a thing redeem
them: yet the Martyrs chose all manner of cruel Tortures rather than yield to
do it. I plead not for Nicetyes, nor pretended scrupulosityes in things merely
occasional and civil, which are appendices to Religion, and come not under any
particular Rule; but for what concerns the Ordinances themselves. Let us not
then seek after superficial Embellishments; but take delight in the simplicity
and plainness of Gospel-Dispensations.

2. Carefully avoid and withstand the Sins of the Time s: As there are no times
or ages of the Church free from their Temptations, so, as times change,
Temptations alter: There are diverse Sins, which (like diverse Garbes) take their
turns to be in fashion. And it is a principal trial of a Christian's
faithfulness in the Covenant when he refuses to go with a multitude to do
evil. This was Noah's commendation, and a singular advantage it brought with
it, Genesis 7. 1. But there are some times wherein Sin greatly abounds, and the
love of many waxes cold; when Apostasy is more general among Professors, when
the Stars fall: these are perilous times, this is an hour of Temptation; and
now he that is faithful to death shall have a Crown of Life. That this is such
an hour with most of the reformed Churches now in the World, is too manifest to
be called in question: And it is one part of our Covenant with God, to be
watchful and careful against the evils of the times: there are many Sins which
these places we live in do labor of, and God is greatly provoked by them, and
His Name dishonored: Some of the most notorious and dangerous of these I shall
enter particular caution against, viz.

1. A spirit of Contention. It is very lamentable to see how the People of God
are exceeding apt to fall out in their way to Heaven; how much the peace of
these and those Churches is shaken; what light matters foment, and what an
eager spirit there is to maintain divisions; a sad symptom of ruin if God in
mercy prevent it not: Heart-divisions certainly render a People guilty before
God, Hos. 10. 2. And do greatly hinder the progress of the truth; yea, take
away the beauty and strength of the Church, and bring all to confusion, Jam. 3.
16. Faith and Order, Peace and Truth is the glory of any Church: And it is a
great mercy for any society that theirs is spoken of in the Churches; and
blessed be God for this Congregation on that behalf, the Lord maintain and
increase it: Satan is always watching his opportunity, and if he finds
advantage will not neglect it, and must therefore be steadfastly resisted.

2. A spirit of giddiness and Error. Great is the unsetledness of many men's
principles, and wavering of their profession: Unsteady minds Men have, which
are ever learning, and never attaining to the knowledge of the truth. Men have
gotten itching ears, ever hearkening after some new Doctrines, and new
Teachers: The good old ways of Truth, which are the only ways leading Men to
Salvation, are too much trodden for them; they are too common for such singular
spirits, whereas God has bid us to seek for the old ways; and it will be
found only safe for a People to hold fast their profession which they have
received down from Jesus Christ, and certainly when Men go from this they go
from the Covenant.

3. A spirit of boundless Toleration. I am not now speaking of the Magistrates
power and duty, but of that which concerns the Churches of Christ. Who can but
acknowledge that times are then bad and sad, when a due and sober
witness-bearing against the prevailing evils of the times and places, is
stigmatized for Persecution; when men that pretend themselves to be for the
Truth, yet cannot patiently bear a plain and honest discovery of errors, is
not this indeed to persecute the saithful Servants of Jesus Christ? Though many
disputes have been in the Christian World about that question, viz. How far the
Civil Sword ought to be drawn against those who are the Publishers and
Maintainers of Erroneous and Heretical Doctrines and Practices: Yet the Church
of Christ ever accounted Her self engaged to condemn and suppress them, both by
Preaching and Writing against the Doctrines, and sharpening the Church censures
against the Persons of such as vented, and pertinaciously persisted in them;
purging out such Leaven from the lump: Nor did the Professors of the Truth
ever call this Persecution, till now of late. It was the commendation of the
Church of Ephesus, that they could not bear with such as those who said they
were Apostles, and were not, Rev. 2. 2. And it is great pity that it should
now be esteemed the Glory of any Churches that they can bear with them; yea,
cherish and defend them: The Covenant (I am sure) obliges to the contrary. And
this evil is the rather to be carefully resisted, because it is manifestly the
present Engine which Antichrist is making use of, to undermine and bring to
nothing the Protestant Churches withal.

4. A Korah-like spirit despising and envying, Magistracy and Ministry; and
doing what in them lies to render them low and contemptible. Men count it no
great matter to despise Dominions, and speak evil of Dignities, Jude, 7. In
particular, how are God's Ambassadors trampled upon? It is no new observation,
but of a considerable standing. Many there are now at rest in Glory, who
(living) were openly and plainly branded for the troublers of our Israel, and
the culpaple cause of many awful Judgments: But they shall trouble us no
more, and if still it must be so, that all the Apostasy or declension or
corruption that grows upon us must be laid to their charge, and they must be
accounted the Porters that open the door to let in calamity upon us, they must
for the present bear it; but God knows if these things are so, and though they
be silent, He will speak for them: This also is a Sin the times greatly labor
of, and a notorious breach of Covenant it is, and ought to be labored against.

5. Great Sensuality. It is a most prevailing iniquity, and contradicts that
sobriety which the Gospel Covenant obliges us unto. What abundance of
drunkenness? It is an Epidemical and infectious disease: Excess in meats
growing up almost into riot; Excess in ordinary entertainments, excess in
apparel, etc. I know it is no easy matter to set bounds, and prescribe
certain and determinate Rules in these things; and there ought to be a latitude
of charity extended by Christians one to another, but doubtless there is great
excess; and that it should be, and so abound, in such times wherein God has
been many ways bringing His People low, argues a great deal of the contempt of
the hand of the Lord which has been upon us: Be ye sober, is a precept often
urged and enjoined in the Gospel. There are other Sins also that have gotten
footing and extend too far, which it concerns God's Vovenant People to eye,
observe and avoid. Your Covenant with God engages you to withstand all sins;
and your own prudence will teach you to fortify most there, where the assault
of temptation is like to be the most furious. Examples, Especially of our
Fellow Christians and Professors, are of great force, and the efficacy of them
will not be avoided without great resistance. Put but a Vessel into the stream,
and if you do not row against it, it will readily enough run down with it. The
stream of the times will undoubtedly carry those Men away that will not take up
a resolution to stem it. And know it, it will be your Glory to have stood it
out, and weathered evil times: For you to stand true to the Covenant, when
there are so many that prove false, will be recorded to your honor and
commendation. When many Disciples went away from Christ, it was the credit of
the Twelve that they stood by Him, and would not go. I know many will account
you giddy, nice, whimsical, overprecise, to be ready to fall foul upon you with
calumnies and reproaches: for it has ever been the guise of loose Professors
(and by this note you may know them) that they count it a strange thing that
others cannot comply with them, and draw out their consciences to such a
latitude, as (for companies sake) to run into the same excess with themselves:
But know, and be assured, that if, to keep other men company, you go their
pace, and slip aside into their irregularities, when God shall come to plead
the controversy of His Covenant, you must not think it hard measure, if you be
made then also to keep company with them: But if you lay out your lives by the
straight Line of Scripture Truths, and not by the crooked line of such
examples, God will remember you with favor in such a time, when it will be not
only a safety, but a glory and a happiness so to be remembered: If you stand to
your Covenant-oath against such Temptations, He will never fail of His
Covenant-Promise,

3. Make conscience of discharging your Covenantdutyes one to another. Man is
made a sociable Creature, and the main end of society is designed for the
bettering of the Estate of Mankind, by giving them opportunity to be mutually
helpful each to other. And the particular end of Christian societyes
considered as such, is for the better promoting of spiritual good: This duty is
a Covenant-engagement which you stand under, not only by virtue of a voluntary
Promise plighted explicitly and engaged in mutually, but by the will of Christ,
it being a New Govenant-Command, Joh. 13. 34. A New Command I give you, that
you love one another. It is a Debt which you owe each to other for Christ's
sake. Love is a very large and comprehensive-duty. Christians being bound up
together in a society ought to express this Love by a fedulous endeavor to
carry on the Glory of Jesus Christ, and foreward the Salvation one of another.
I shall comprimize what I have to present as particular advice in this Case to
two Heads.

1. Encourage one another to holiness in Life and Conversation. We are called
to Holiness, and it is the way to Happiness, Heb. 12. 14. The Covenant of God
is an holy Covenant, and God is honored, and His Covenant established in a way
of Holiness: It is then the duty of such as fear God, frequently and sedulously
to quicken to it, and provoke one another to good Works.

Do this,

I. By the light and shine of a godly Conversation. The example of Christians
is very prevalent, whither it be good or bad: God sometimes pleases to make a
godly conversation convictive of gainsayers, and that which stops the mouths of
the most spiteful Enemies, and so brings from Men the tribute of Glory to Him,
Matt. 5. 16. Much more then may it be expected to be quickening and exciting to
the graces of Believers, and put them much foreward that truly fear God? The
zeal of one Saint (if it blaze) it may heat, even a great many: and indeed
there is great need to be put upon this, especially in these days wherein a
lukewarm-Profession is much in credit, being very fashionable; but forwardness
and zeal for God is almost out of date; and when there are also so many evil
examples carrying much of inticement in them to draw men away from God, and
turn them out of the right way, be therefore very wary that you do not add to
the number of such.

2. By readiness and forwardness to relieve one another with good and wholesome
Counsel and Christianhelp at every lift and time of need. God is wont for the
most part so to order it that in a Church there are some strong, and others
that are but weak, and it is His Will that the strong should help the weak, Ga.
6. 1. Are any not so well instructed in the Truth? Be willing to take pains
with them: Are any overpowered with grief, sorrow, etc? Comfort and strengthen
them: Open your hearts one to another, have you any thing laid up in your
Cabinet of experiences, and prudent observations which another stands in need
of, be not nigardly, but readily and cheerfully impart it. Peter is winnowed,
that he may be able to strengthen his Brethren. Bear one another burdens, Be
sure that you leave none that is weak and faint behind in the way to the
Kingdom, but take them along with you.

3. By mutual bearing and forbearing. Such is our state in this Life, that
there are many unavoidable frailties will discover themselves in our
conversation; it is impossible that Christians should have frequent converse
together, but now and then they will manifestly discover a dark side, and if we
be not ready to bear and cover a multitude of infirmities, we are not fit to
keep company with Men nor shall we ever forward one another Graces: And more
especially bear much in what may personally concern our selves: Paul will not
readily challenge his Galatians of doing him any injury.

4. By an holy Emulation. As there is a sinful, so there is an holy strife
among Christians, when we do not envy to others their Graces, but when by
looking upon them we are the more ashamed of our selves, and are thereby
excited to be the more industrious in imitating, and constant in endeavoring
to overtake, and if it were possible to outdo them. The Life of a Christian is
a Race, and every one there runs with might and main, and counts it his
interest and honor to get first to the Goal, etc. Paul in his Epistles often
propounds the pattern of one Church to another to the end that he might stir
them up to this emulation. Runners are not wont to let others go before them,
if they can help it.

5. By a yielding and complying Spirit. Be willing rather to lose part of your
own liberty; then by making use of it, be a means of wronging another
Conscience, who would, through your occasion, by reason of his own weakness,
abuse the liberty unto Sin against God. Paul's charity on this account was so
high, and his study to promote the spiritual good of Souls so Zealous, that
rather than obstruct it in the least, he would choose to debarr himself of the
most common liberty of Christians, 1 Cor. 8. ult.

6. By praying one for another. God is the Author of Holiness, pray therefore
that He would pour it out upon His People, and make it to abound: And in
special pray for those whom God calls to dispense the means of Holiness to you
(this boon Paul begged of his Ephesians, Ephesians. 6. 19.) that they may enjoy the
presence of God's holy Spirit, and receive Grace to be faithful in delivering
the whole counsel of God to you, and successeful, by His presence with, and
blessing upon their labors and endeavors, that so you, by them, may be helped
forward in the way to the everlasting Kingdom: All these Duties you owe one
another by virtue of the Covenant of God with you.

2. Beware of suffering one another in Sin, but in all faithfulness endeavor
each others recovery. None so much needs a helping hand to be lent him, as he
that is fallen, and it is a main part of that Love which the People of God ow
one to another, to be faithful in reproving Sin. If we are not to turn aside
from, nor to neglect to help our Neighbor's Ox, and Ass when they are fallen,
much less the Soul of our Brother: Not to reprove Sin, when there is need of a
reproof, is (if we will credit the interpretation of the Spirit of God)
accounted to hate him in our heart, Lev. 19. 17. And I the rather urge this,
because this duty seems to be much laid aside: And there are indeed many
temptations to neglect it; and yet such is the Condition of the People of God,
that they do often stand in need of it: To omit it (then) arguesa Spirit either
of flattery or cowardice. It is the duty of Christians to be faithful in
giving, and candid in taking of reproves, not (with the Galatians) to count
him our Enemy that tells us the truth: But (with David) to take it as a
kindness to be faithfully reproved, Psalm. 14. 5. It is the way which God has
appointed for our recovery out of Sin, and it is a great Judgment upon a People
where there is no Reprover. And not only so, but, not to reprove, is many times
interpreted to approve. Moreover, by this means we may prevent a great deal of
Sin: Reprooses are like the North Wind which cleanses the Air, If by reproving
we should offend our Brother, it is only his corruption that we offend; when
His Grace begins to stir, this will blow over, and our fidelity will be
greatefully acknowledged. However, if Asa imprison the Prophet, yet he saves
his own Soul: This you have promised by Covenant to do: And that you may do it
aright and to good effect, Observe these Rules in doing it.

1. Be sure all your Reproves proceed from Love, and not from bitterness:
Labor therefore after a meek, a gentle, and a bearing frame of spirit; you
must not always expect to meet with Grace, but often to encounter with
Corruption; and beware that you do not set your Corruption against it. A
Reproverundertakes the Place of a Spiritual Physician, and must deal with the
malady according to the state of the Patient, aiming at the recovery and
gaining of a Soul. Hence, that direction, Gal. 6. 1. You must mix meekness
with, and add Patience to all your rebukes, as those that desire to cover,
rather than discover another frailties.

Non modo Accusator, sed ne Objurgator quidem ferendus est is, qui quod in
altero vitium reprehendit, in eo ipse deprehenditur. Cic. in Verrem. Act. 5.
Page 300.
2. Let your lives as well as your words be a conviction of Sin in your
Brother: Loose and scandalous Professors are very unfit for this service.
Noah's Life as well as his Preaching condemned the Old World, he that carries
his Beam with him, is not fit to pluck away a Mote, Mat. 7. begin. It greatly
weakens a reproof when it is applied to a Sin we daily live in commission of,
and are known too much to allow in our selves. That which we not only speak
against, but live contrary to, will help our reproves to carry evidence along
with them; will give them credit of our sincerity and care, with a great deal
of authority.

3. Be as ready if occasion be given, to receive, as to minister a rebuke:
There are no follies and mistakes which may overtake one Christian, but are
also incident to another, and therefore it may be our turn sometimes to need
help, and when we do, it is our interest not to refuse, but thankfully accept
of it: And if we carry such a spirit with us, we shall by this means gain the
more credit, and be more likely to win upon others.

4. Be sure, when the Glory of God, and the spiritual good of your Brother
requires it, that you carry on your reproof to Conviction. There are some
things that arise only from sudden Passion, and there a transient rebuke may be
enough; other things may be more deliberate, and Men are led into them more
gradually; they may also be eminently reproachful to Religion, and a dangerous
snare to the Souls of them that are so tempted; our connivance in such cases
may not only blemish our profession, but be a great hazard to it also: At such
times, and in such a case; you break your Covenant if you suffer Sin in your
Brother, without using all the means which Christ has prescribed, and in the
order He has prescribed them, till the end be obtained. If private admonition
followed with gentleness and Patience, will not gain, but they still presist in
evil courses, or are not humbled for such faults, you must proceed by steps as
far as Christ has bid you. And I believe there is no one thing wherein the
Covenant is more universally broken, then in the neglect of this duty; and if
the use of these Ordinances shall once come to cease among the Churches, and
the sins of Church Members be not regularly suppressed, by reason of the
unfaithfulness of Brethren, Religion will languish, and the power of Godliness
fail. It is not the extending of the Covenant to Christians (as some dream) but
it is the neglect of Covenant-duties toward them, that is like to be the bane
of our profession, if any thing. Eli indulged his Sons, and one professor
indulgeth another; and it is to be feared, that if this were searched to the
root and bottom of it, it would be found that the original of it is
self-indulgence, and that when men wink at scandals in their Brethren, it is
because they expect the like in way of retaliation: and if things once come to
this pass, let any sober and prudent Man conjecture whither this be not the way
to cherish Apostasy; and what then will be the end of these things?

4. Take diligent care to secure the interest of Religion unto posterity. There
is not only a natural ty lying upon Parents to their Children, but there is
also a Covenant-ty lying upon the Churches of Christ to take care for the
propagating of the Covenant to after Ages. As God has taken the Children of
His People into the same Covenant with their Parents, so has He likewise taken
care, and made it a Duty, that they be owned, acknowledged, and looked after as
His. And though I know there are various apprehensions among the People of God
in this matter, yet I would not be altogether silent in it. I do verily believe
that besides the family care which is due from Parents to their Children, there
is something also which the Churches of Christ do ow to them, as they are the
Lambs of His Flock.

And that is,

1. That they be owned and acknowledged as such, and that not only in their
Infancy and Minority by applying the Ordinance of Baptism to them, but also in
riper and more grown years. Some there be that acknowledge them not at all to
have any visible Covenant relation and interest; if not in Word, yet in effect
they deny it; though possibly they may confess it to be Parents duty to
instruct them that they may be capable of it: But this is plainly
Anabaptistical: Others that own them in minority, yet look upon them to grow
out of that relation practically, when they grow up to years; but that such as
are related, should ordinarily lose this relation any other ways then by a
course of discipline, seems a Paradox, and has been elaborately confuted by
many, viz. That any Person should cast himself out. I doubt not but many
contrary minded to us, have very good intentions, and are acted by a zeal of
Holiness, but that there may be a mistake and a misguided zeal in the People of
God themselves is not to be doubted; and whither they or we are in an error
the day shall discover, mean while, as we believe, so we speak. Many believing
Jews in Paul's Time had their doubts and Controversyes about Circumcision. But
as for those who yield no relation to Children at all; but do account of, and
carry it to them as Strangers, under pretense of preserving Holiness in the
Churches; let any serious and understanding man judge whether that be a way to
propagate Holiness. I cannot but think that the serious and solemn Speech of
the Two Tribes and Half, to their Brethren, speaks something to our Times and
Churches. Josh. 22. 24, 25. If we have not rather done it (viz. built the
Altar) for fear of this thing, saying, in time to come your Children might
speak unto our Children, saying, What have you to do with the Lord God of
Israel? For the Lord has made Jordan a border between us and you, ye children
of Reuben, and children of Gad, ye have no part in the Lord: so shall your
children make our children cease from fearing the Lord. It is not in the nature
of fallen Man, spontaneously to own and acknowledge God: It is worth our
serious thoughts, whether, not to acknowledge our Children to be of the visible
People of God, be not in effect to say they have no part in the Lord; and so
puts an occasion in them to reject His fear? Or whether such an expression as
that of the Apostle does not carry more of encouragement in it? Act. 3. 25. Ye
are the Children of the Prophets, and of the Covenant God made with our
Fathers. It is doubtless (let men say or think what they please) some
privilege to be Children of the Covenant; there is in it great motive and
persuasive to them, although we know that there is none but the Spirit of God
is able to make this, or any other argument to be effectual with them for their
Conversion and Salvation.

2. That they may be made Possessours of the privileges of the Covenant
according as they are capable. Doubtless the visible privileges of the
Covenant, are not only an Honorarium to the People of God, but they are also
(and principally) means appointed and sanctified by God for the begetting and
increasing of Faith: And it is one end of God's conferring these privileges
upon any of the Children of Men, that His chosen may thereby, in His way, be
brought to partake in the invisible. The work of Conversion, since the planting
of Churches by Apostles and Apostolical Men, is ordinarily to be expected
within, and not out of the visibe Church. It is the Church unto whom the
Ordinances and Offices are given, 1 Cor. 12. 28. And that for all those ends
which are there needful: Nor are we to presume, or thereupon to ground the
visible Covenant Interest of Children, upon a presumption that they are born
Converted, or have received saving Grace in the womb; since we know that for
the most part it is otherwise, and that God has reserved this work to be
ordinarily performed by the means instrumentally in such as live and grow up to
years of knowledge: Though we believe He does it in a secret way for those that
die in infancy: God gives Men Ordinances, not only because they are converted
(though they are also for the perfecting of the Saints, Ephesians, 4. 12.) but also
that they may be converted, Mat. 3. 11, It is therefore our duty to take care
that they may want nothing of that which God has appointed for them for their
good. We cannot give saving (...) to our Children (that God reserves to (...)
Work) but the means of Grace we ought to (...). As (...) Works, so have (...)
Children, is to deny them to be (...) Kingdom of Christ, for this is (...) He
has appointed all His Subjects to wear; and a sign, and token of our
initiation into His Kingdom: To exclude them from Church-watch, is to refuse
them that help for their spiritual good, which Jesus Christ has allotted them,
and exspects we should afford them, as a part of the body. Touching their
admission to the Lord's-Table, I know there are (besides their birthright)
such qualifications requisite to be found in them, as may give satisfaction to a
well grounded Charity that they are spiritually fit for it, and to thrust, or
force them upon it, though without these requisite preparations, were cruel
charity. But,

3. That all means be used whereby they may be brought to such a fitness, and
so encouraged, and helped in coming to this Ordinance, is also a Duty the
Churches ow them. Touching the great care and pains which were taken upon this
score, by the primitive Gospel-Churches; Ecclesiastical History will give us a
plentiful account. God makes a great complaint, Ezekiel. 16. 20. Thou have taken
thy Sons and thy Daughters, which thou have born unto me, and these have thou
sacrificed unto them to be devoured. Now this is done in God's account, when
they are neglected, and not brought up for God. Peter had one particular charge
given him by Christ, to seed His Lambs. Now the care which the Church ows to
the Children of it, in order to their being fit to receive, and maintain the
purity of Gospel-Priviledges, is,

1. That they be instructed in Knowledge. I know the first care, and endeavor
upon this account lies upon Families, where it is to be begun; but, because
Parents ow their fidelity in this point, not only to their Children, but to the
Church also in respect of their Children: Hence, inquiry is to be made into
their proficiency, and Parents are accordingly to be further quickened or
encouraged: Yea, when they have done their best, there may more be needed to be
done for their further proficiency. Public Catechizing was a great business of
our first and best times, and it was blessed with no small success; and I
believe it one part of the unhappiness of our time, that it is laid aside; And
could it be revived again, it would certainly be an acceptable service to God,
and profitable to this and after Generations. This is training up Children in
knowledge, according to Scripture, and the neglect of which is so condemned,
Hos. 4. 6. And it would be a sad loss, if Religion should be lost in
New England, a Place of so great Light and Means, for want of attending upon
this Duty.

2. That a due and careful inspection be made into their Lives and
Conversations; that what there is of good may be encouraged, and what is
otherwise may be faithfully reproved. It is a temptation by which Satan gains
much advantage, that we are afraid of incurring the censure and title of
busybodies in other Men's matters, and hereupon neglect the charge and duty of
watching one over another: And it much discourageth Children on the other hand
from minding that which is good, at least, is a great encouragement to follow
their natural and corrupt inclinations in the pursuit of evil, when they see no
notice is taken of them, but they are looked upon as strangers, they are not
regarded, but they live and do as they list. I am persuaded; nay, I know there
are some Children of the Covenant would thankfully accept of faithful
admonitions, and serious counsels from them that fear God, and there is great
hope, were this practiced, God would bless it with good success.

3. That the ways, and orders, and Ordinances of God's House may be left to
them, not depraved or polluted, but pure and entire, according to the Orders of
the Gospel, and instructions of Jesus Christ. If we shall through neglect
suffer corruptions to creep in in our days, we may expect that they will grow
a-pace upon our Posterity. Apostasy has always been observed to grow much
faster than Reformation. There are some public Church duties, which (if
practically neglected) when once lost, will hardly be recovered; some evil
practices which if once grown into a custom, will soon plead prescription, and
not without great difficulty be suppressed: Something of this New-England's
experience will attest to, what bickerings, controversies and disputes have
been? What oppositions have been broken thorough, in redeeming our Childrens
interest? And there are many Ex orbitances standing at the door, ready to
thrust in. The Rule left us by Christ must be stood to, if we will have His
Peace, and it will be no little comfort to you when you leave this World, that
you leave behind, Religion settled upon the right Basis, and unpolluted; and
this will be a good argument of hope that God intends a blessing to succeeding
Generations: However, it will afford great peace to your Consciences, that
though Religion should dye, decay, suffer in the World, yet you have been true
to your Covenant with God; have been faithful observers of it in this your
Generation, and have done the best to leave it nothing worse than you found it;
and can therefore quietly depart out of the World; yea, go hence with a solid
hope and grouded expectation, to receive the Promise, and take possession of
everlasting Mercyes.

II. Give me leave in the next place to speak a few words in particular to
those that are the Children of the Covenant, and so I shall close this
discourse: And let these carefully receive, and lay up in their hearts these
few things. You here see the way for you either to keep or lose these
Covenant-Mercyes. Be therefore persuaded to know your Duty, and carefully to
set your selves to perform it. If you would have your Father's God continue to
be yours, you must make it your study and business to know and serve Him.
Solemn was David's advice to his Son Solomon, 1 Chro. 28. 9. Besides the
general motives which were propounded at the beginning of this Use. I would
leave a few special Considerations with you, God grant you may receive the
impression of them.

1. The main errand which brought your Fathers into this Wilderness, was not
only that they might themselves enjoy, but that they might settle for their
Children, and leave them in full possession of the free, pure, and uncorrupted
libertyes of the Covenant of Grace. They have made this Profession openly to
the World: yea, let reason speak, and say, what else was there which could have
tempted them to come into a Land which was not sown, leaving the pleasant
enjoyments of a good Land, and of which many of them had a good share, running
through so many hazards, wrestling with so many hardships, not expecting (and
it would have seemed vain and presumptuous to have expected) any worldly
advantage, or likelihood of any other compensation for such expenses as they
were at, and difficultyes they broke through, but only this? And if this were
the Portion they thought worth so much that they might have it to leave them,
it concerns you to mind and regard it. It was their love to your Souls that
embarked them in this design, and it will be horrible ingratitude in you to
slight it. You cannot neglect God's Covenant, but you do withal cast
reflections upon, and greatly undervalue; yea, and despise that work, which
will be New-England's Glory, and was so signally owned and abetted by God's
providence in the day of it; and will be unworthy heirs of your Father's
Estates, if you do not prosecute their begun designs.

2. What has God been doing upon the account of His Covenant in this Land?
Israel in Psalm. 78. begin. Were obliged to tell their Children God's Acts that
they might learn not to disobey: And we have abundance to say of God's doings
to this People, both of mercy and judgment. Whiles these Churches served God
in uprightness, He made all their ways to prosper, and their very Enemies to
be at peace with them. How did He Plant, and Water, and increase those mean
beginnings which at first were, till we began to grow considerable? Thus God
minded His Covenant. And what has been the language of all the adverse and
humbling providence that have since befallen the Land, but to give a testimony
of God's Covenant-controversie which He had with us? The doctrine which these
dealings of God with us, teach, is thus much; that our only way to prosperity
is to be true to God and His Covenant, but that, if we will deal falsely with
God, He will take vengeance on our inventions: It speaks this to the next
Generation, and bids them be sure take heed to themselves that they keep close
to the Covenant of their God.

3. The eyes of all that truly fear God, and take care for the perpetuating of
His Glory are upon you. You are the subjects both of the hopes and fears of a
great many. They that are now (under God) the props and supporters of Religion,
that hold up its foundations, know that they must ere long give place, and go
the way of all flesh, they cannot long be in the work themselves, but their
shoulders must be plucked from it; and their great care is that Religion may not
die with them, they would fain that God's Covenant might be perpetuated, though
they must be removed, and that Christ when He comes to Judgment might here
find a Church, or Churches, that truly serve Him: The security of the Ark lies
nearer their hearts than any other interest: And upon whom can their eyes be
but you, for whose everlasting good is their great care? They know that except
you be true and zealous for God and His Glory; God will rather reject then own
you; but if you be indeed set for Him, they believe Him to be true and
faithful, and that He will accept of you. If they could see the Covenant more
your care it would increase their joy: Their greatest fear is, least they
should transmit their dear-bought libertyes, into the hands of a careless
Posterity, that will throw them away for worldly interest and carnal
compliances. Blame them not if they count that precious which cost so much, and
are therefore much concerned least you by despising them should cast your
selves out from them.

4. You are Children of many Prayers: there has been and is much wrestling
with God on your behalf: Do not you despise this These Prayers are set to your
account: Remember there have been solemn days set apart on purpose to seek God
on your behalf; besides the constant Prayers and tears of your Parents, of your
Friends, of all those that fear God; and how glad would they be to see these
their Prayers answered in your conversion, and spiritual edification? I am
persuaded it would be the joyfullest day of thanksgiving that ever they kept.
see, Pro. 23. 15. 2 Epist. Joh. verse. 4. Oh! do not let so many Prayers be
lost, so many tears be spilt, and in vain: God has registered them, they are in
His Book, and in His Bottle, and He will bring them forth as heavy and sad
witnesses against you, if you have been found guilty of despising them.

5. If by forgetting to keep the Covenant of God, you provoke Him to withdraw
His Mercies from you, and profane His holy covenant, it will remain a blot and
brand of ignominy upon you to all Generations; when it shall be said of you
that you were the betrayers of these liberties, you thrust and put away from
you God and Christ: When it shall be said of this and that Generation, that
they were Zealous for God, studious of His interest, did, and suffered a great
deal for Him; yea, counted nothing too dear for the Gospel; then it shall be
said of you, behold the degenerate Children of godly Parents that would none of
Him: And when Men shall ask why did God so sorely punish those Children, that
answer shall be given, Deuteronomy. 29. 24, 25. Because they have forsaken the
Covenant of the Lord God of their Fathers, etc. And for direction here in a few
Words.

1. Look upon your selves as those that are engaged unto God by Covenant. This
is a strong ty lying upon the Children of the People of God, to serve and fear
Him; they are bound to it by Covenant-engagements. Evermore remember that you
are born for God and His Service, and are sanctified and set apart to Him from
the Womb by the bonds and ^y of the visible Covenant: You were sealed to this
Work in your Baptism, and if you depart from God, break His command, keep not
His Covenant, this will be a witness against you. You should use this as a
shield against all temptations which do assault you, to repel the force and
fury of them withal: You are devoted to God by an Oath; and cannot hearken to,
or entertain those motions, but you shall bring upon your selves the dreadful
guilt of Covenant Breaking. You are bound to God and His Work, and are not to
be for Sin and Satan The thought of the Covenant should be a daily monitour to
quicken and excite you to your Duty. Do not esteem the Covenant a snare to you,
as some do: all the hope you have of Salvation is in the way of the Covenant.
And it is God's goodness to you that He has pleased to take you so near Him,
only let it be your care to walk worthy of this Vocation.

2. Beware of misapplying your Covenant Interest to the strengthening of your
carnal security. It is not the Covenant that will secure you, except you be
keepers of it. The Promise in our Text, is not to them that are in it, but to
them that keep it. There is in this Temptation no little danger that the
Children of the Faithful are exposed to, by being deluded by Satan: There are
many that have acknowledged it, and bitterly complained of it when God has a
wakened them: They are ready to lean the weight of their Hope upon the
Covenant. The Jews in Jeremiah's time deceived themselves with this pretense,
Jer. 7. And in our Saviors time, Joh. 8. We are Abraham' s Children: Nay, we
have one Father which is God. Many carry with them a strong confidence that
they must needs do well, they have strong hopes of salvation, and their plea for
it is, their Parents were godly, they themselves of the visible Church, owned
and acknowledged as the Children of the Covenant, and hence they think the
Gospel-Promises are theirs, Christ is theirs by Covenant: But this will not
hold: Remember there is a Jew that is so outwardly, and there are, that are so
inwardly, there is a Circumcision of the flesh, and of the heart, a Baptism of
Water and of the Holy Ghost. The one External, the other Internal, and that
will never stead a Man without this. Covenant-priviledges are to be improved,
not to be boldly relied upon: The Name of the Lord our God is a great and a
fearful Name. God is Holy, and expects all should be so that will prove
themselves His People. Hence, that counsel, 2 Timothy 2. 19, Let every one that
names the Name of the Lord depart from iniquity.

3. Beware of rejecting or renouncing the Covenant of God: Do not cast off your
subjection to it, by any wilful act of yours: And this may be done two ways.

1. By disowning your selves, or withdrawing from owning your selves to stand
engaged to God in Covenant. Not to own is interpretatively to reject: When we
withdraw the shoulder, pluck back the neck, and are not willing to submit to
the Order and Ordinances of the Gospel; when Men count it a liberty to live at
large, and under no Church cognizance and control, and a bondage to stoop to
the ways and will of Christ in His Word: There is a great deal of this spirit
amongst us: Men are loath to be so much as under any visible ties of restraint
from Sin; and this provokes God to bring judgments upon us, and therefore
tells us, that by them He will bring us under the bond of the Covenant. Ezekiel.
20. 37.

2. By not hearkening or yielding obedience to the institutions of Christ
appointed for their good: When by any Sin or scandal they have dishonored the
Name of Christ, they submit not, nor are willing to obey the Rules He has set
down for their humbling and reforming, when they are impenitent and will not
hear the Church: Many will acknowledge this to be their Duty, who do yet
practically choose rather to stand off and be from under watch and discipline,
and so debar themselves and posterity, as much as in them, lies from visible
Privileges: This is also a renouncing, beware of it: Though you cannot by so
doing dissolve your Covenant relation, yet you may provoke God to reject and
cast you off.

4. Be much and earnest with God in Prayer that He would afford you His Grace,
whereby you may keep Covenant with Him. This is a great Duty encumbent on
Children; know therefore that it is no small thing to serve an holy and jealous
God: Remember that you are by nature averse and obstinate, your hearts are
estranged from God and Christ from the womb: The power to serve God and keep
his Commandments is not a gift of Nature, which is all enmity: Supernatural
grace is necessary to the doing so great a Work: Faith is the great
Covenant-Condition, and that is not of your selves: without this you cannot
please God, you cannot keep His Covenant: Nor can you work it in your hearts;
it must be wrought by a creating power, and you must go to God for it, it is
His gift, and He will be sought to. As long as you live in your unbelief, you
do nothing but break your Promise, violate your Covenant, and thereby lay in
wrath and condemnation for your selves, except you be converted, you cannot be
true to God: See then the sinfulness of your hearts and natures, the impotency
that is in you, you are in your natural estate, like Ephraim, unaccustomed to
the yoke, bewail it with him, and ask grace, Jer. 31. 18.

5. Get as near to God as you can in all those visible and outward ways of
Communion which He affords you the advantage and opportunity of. God has
appointed no Ordinance in vain. It is a matter of just grief to see so few of
the Children of the Covenant seeking after full fellowship in all the
Ordinances. I speak not this to precipitate such as are unworthy to make more
haste than good speed, but to rouse up the negligent, who either take no care
that they may be worthy, or do withdraw and keep themselves back,
notwithstanding they are hopefully prepared for these Ordinances. These are
both part of the Covenant, and helps to our keeping of Covenant. I know that a
form of Godliness without the power, is a Cheat to them that please themselves
with it; But I know too, that if the face of a visible Church cease or be taken
away from us, it will be a great and sore Judgment: And if the Children of the
Covenant withdraw themselves from this burden, and content themselves without
seeking it, and setting their shoulders to it, it is in great likelihood thus
to go to decay. It is a great Sin, and a crying shame to see such multitudes of
Christians and Professors turn their backs upon the Sacrament of the Lord's
Supper: if they are unworthy it is their shame that they have no better
profited under the Ordinances, and a dreadful sign it is of God's departure
from such a People. If they are in some measure fit, it should grieve them that
they put such a contempt and undervaluing upon the love of Christ, and the seal
of the New Covenant; for it is the least that can be said of such an act, that
it is so practically and interpretatively. And let me add this, that if you
rest in that, that your Children may be baptized as your selves are, and seek
not after means of growth and strength; if now you have no spiritual appetite
to these things, you discover a dangerous sign of much hypocrisy lodging in
your hearts.

6. Beware you do not wilfully overthrow the foundations which your Fathers
have laid. I know it is one thing to be charged for doing it, and another to do
it indeed: Many have been branded for this injuriously, whiles they have
asserted those things, which, though believed by our Predecessors, yet there
was no such occasion of practice as afterward. Besides, it is certain, that no
pattern or president or precept of Men is our Rule, any further then the
Scripture is theirs, 1 Cor. 11. 1. But here have been good foundations laid;
and there seems to be a threatening, as if those who are now grown and growing
up should meet temptation to subvert and overwhelm them. Beware how you lend an
hand to such a work; you shall find it a dangerous design. If any thing be
wanting God shall in due time reveal it to them that wait patiently. But if you
put your hands into the Wall to pluck down the Ways of Christ, a Serpent will
bite them: If you destroy what your Fathers have built, expect that God will
destroy you, at least make you feel the smart and bitterness of it. If Jericho
could not be built without a Curse, then certainly Jerusalem cannot be
undermined without a Curse.

I shall resume the general Exhortation, and so close this discourse. Let us
then all be really and industriously careful in this business: God has taken
us near Him, and we have drawn near to Him, at least in a visible and outward
profession: We have owned, we have many a time renewed our Covenant with Him,
and lately with great solemnity: What remains for us to do, but to study
faithfulness to God and to our own souls in it? We have a Covenant, our work is
to make sure of the Mercies of it: They are ours upon Conditions (I speak to a
visible Church) we may possess them, we may forfeit and lose them; if we lose
them we lose our Souls, and shall be the most unhappy People in the World. The
utter loss of Covenant-Mercies is an irreparable loss. We may lose them; Grace
and Glory are not so tied to the visible Covenant but they may be separated.
God proves us now with His Covenant, He waits to see what we will do, how we
will manage this Interest. It will be a great account that such a People will
have to give in in the great Day, when every Talent shall be reckoned for: Well
might the Psalmist advise, Serve the Lord with fear, rejoice with trembling,
Psalm. 2. 11. And the Apostle, Heb. 4. 1. Let us therefore fear, lest a Promise
being left us of entering into His rest, any of you should seem to come short
of it. None have more need to be afraid and awfully careful than a People that
are in Covenant with God. Every Sin of yours is aggravated with a peculiar
Consideration; every scandal is of a deep die, and gives great occasion for the
Name of God to be evil spoken of. You stand upon a dangerous Precipice, if you
fall, your fall must needs be stupendous. Be not then high minded but fear:
Fear, lest Satan and your deceitful hearts beguile you; fear lest you should in
bold presumption rest upon vain and carnal confidence; fear lest an evil heart
of unbelief should lead you away from the living God. You have a price in your
hands, make use of it, the Kingdom of God is come unto you, do not put it
away: The blessing of an everlasting Covenant, and in it everlasting blessings
are set before you: Fulfill the Condition and they are yours: If you cannot (and
you cannot) do it of your selves, let it drive you to Jesus Christ the
Mediator, that He may do it for you: His Grace was never wanting to that Soul
that truly sought it of Him: Serve Him, and He will save you: Repent not of
your engagements, draw not back your hand having set it to the Plough: Be
faithful in a little, and you shall be Heirs of great Glory. God requires
nothing of you, but what is your reasonable service; neither does He require
more than (of His rich Grace) He is free and ready to give you Power to
perform. You have to do with a God who is jealous for His great Name, that will
not be put off with pretenses. Christ who is the foundation of the Covenant, Is
not only a Cornerstone, but also a stumbling-stone, a Rock of offense. They
are not only the matters of this present life, but of eternity that you have
here to do in. If you forsake God, He will cast you off for ever: But if you do
in ^prightness devote your selves to Him, in true Faith depend upon him, with
sincere Obedience improve our Time and Talents for Him, He is Faithful that
has Promised, who will also perform it: There shall not one good Word of His
fall to the ground, but whatsoever He has spoken for your encouragement, shall
be fully accomplished for you: He shall give you the end of your faith, the
salvation of your Souls: And after you have serv^d Him in the Regeneration, you
shall sit upon Thrones, and be ^ith Abraham, with Isaac, and with Jacob in the
Kingdom; where you shall find your little Faith, your little Patience, your
little fidelity, Shall be (in Christ) rewarded with endless Glory.

FINIS.
The Printer, To the Reader.
Humanum est Errare is an old Cloak, and grown somewhat Threadbare: Besides, it
is not for every Man's Wearing, and there may be a question whether I have a
clear Title to it, or no: Wherefore I forbear to put it on, and entreat the
modest Reader, either to look off my naked ERRATA, or else charitably to
Correct them: Page 5. Line, 25. for (otherwise) Read otherwise. p. 16. l. 25.
r. Object. p. 17. l. 23. dele (not) p. 20. l. 12. r. equally. p. 23. l. 19.
strike out (labored) and r. believed. p. 25. l. 9. for (os) r. as. p. 26. l.
3. for (the) r. that. l. 8. for (be) r. by. p. 27. l. 8. for (73.) r. 78. l.
11. for. (referes) r. referrs. l. 16. r. failing. p. 28. l. 15. for (Job 3.
13.) r. John 3. 18. p. 29. l. 15. dele (as) p. 40. l. 22. for (there) r. their.
p. 51. l. 11. for (tenor) r. terror. p. 60. l. 22. for. (to) r. of. p. 67. l.
28. dele (a) p. 68. l. 26. r. in. p. 86 l. 2. for (John) r. Joshuah. p. 104. l.
14. for (to) r. and. p. 107. l. 10. r. industrious. p. 110. l. 24. r. persist.
There are other Literal Faults, and Mispointings, which it will be easier for
the Intelligent Reader to discern and amend, than for me here to insert.

THE NECESSITY OF SINCERITY, in renewing COVENANT: Opened and urged in a SERMON
Preached to the Third gathered Church in Boston New England, June, 29. 1680. On
the Day wherein they Solemnly renewed COVENANT.

By SAMVEL WILLARD Teacher of that Church.

Psalm. 119. 8. Let my Heart be sound in thy Statutes, that I be not ashamed.

Lam. 3. 41. Let us lift up our Heart with our hands to God in the Heavens.

BOSTON IN NEW ENGLAND.

Printed by James Glen, for Samuel Sewall. 1682.

The Necessity of SINCERITY in Renewing COVENANT.
Psalm. 78. 37. begin. For their Heart was not right with Him.
THe great Affair occasioning this Solemnity, and business we have to attend
this day in the presence of God, is to revive, and a new to ratify the
Covenant-engagement in which we stand obliged unto Him: To the end that we may
awaken our drowzy, and quicken our slow hearts to a diligence in performing
that duty, which (by a natural propensity, and too many insinuating
Temptations) we are very prone to neglect. As also that we may enjoy the
gracious and favorable presence of God with us, pardoning, owning and accepting
of us. That it is a laudable (and often a necessary) practice (as being
established by precept, and confirmed by the example of the People of God from
ancient Times) is not my present Work to insist upon, it being elsewhere, and
by the labors of another (now made public) sufficiently cleared. The great
thing is, that we may so do it as to obtain and not miss of our end: That we
may not (instead of obtaining a blessing) incense Divine displeasure, and pull
down a Curse upon our own heads. My design therefore is, to enter Caution and
propound counsel to that purpose (as God shall help) and that by an improvement
of these Words; to make way unto which let us only in general take notice of
the occasion and intendment of them.

The Psalmist, in this Psalm, after solemn attention required (and indeed
nothing is of more moment to be diligently pondered then this) recounts the
ancient transactions which had past between God and His Covenant People^ in
which, His main business is to inform us both of the Mercy and severity of
God, to teach us to serve Him with fear and joy; as also in the frailty, and
pronitude of a professing People to backslide and deal ^alsely with God; to
move us to the greater care and watchfulness in all that we have to do with God
in.

In this Historical Narrative, he first gives a general account of the ground
of God's controversy and the procuring cause of the mischiefs and miseryes
which befell that People, verse. 9, 10, 11. From whence he proceeds to an
enumeration of sundry choice and singular acts of Providence wrought in favor
of them, In Egypt, and in the Wilderness: These are scattered through the whole
Psalm: To which he adjoynes (and by which he illustrates) the greatness of
their provocation in sining and rebelling against Him. And indeed, for a People
under the special and eminent conduct of God's favor, to revolt and
degenerate, is a deep died transgression. No wonder then if we find him
enterweaving the story of God's wrath, and the mischiefs which wasted and
brought them low; the particulars whereof are recorded in Moses's History. And
that which most of all deserves remark, is, the moderation of Divine severity,
and God's remembrance of mercy in the midst of Judgment, so far, that He
spared that People, and brought them to a settlement and establishment in the
Land of Canaan, notwithstanding they had so grievously incensed His displeasure
against them. One most observable (and indeed admirable) Circumstance whereof
we may observe in the Text, with some Verses of the Context, viz. Their
grievous dissimulation in their Repentance and renewals of Covenant, This you
may view from verse. 34. The sum of it is thus much; when God's Hand lay heavy
upon them in sore and vexing Calamities, they fly to their Confessions,
Reformations, and Covenants: And indeed it is no new (but a frequent) thing for
a professing People, under the rod of God's anger, to do thus. Judgments
(especially such as are distressing) do awaken the Conscience which before was
infected with a Lethargy, and this being affrighted with the Terrors of the
Almighty drives (at least) to use outward means to pacify an offended Majesty,
and come upon terms of agreement with God. But here lay the misery of all, that
in this they betrayed their horrible wickedness, and did but dissemble, flatter
and lie. And what could have been expected to befall them for this but more
heavy wrath? Yet, in verse. 38, 39. God's pity prevailed, and when He might
righteously have destroyed, He spared.

This 37. verse. is an illustration or discovery of the deep dissimulation of
this People in the very act of their renewing Covenant with God, when they
professed Repentance, and promised reformation; and it is taken from the two
proper Heads of a Demonstrative Syllogism, viz. The cause of it, Text. And the
effect by which they discovered it in their after carriage; Neither were they
steadfast in His Covenant. The former is our present business to consider of.

The Words discover the moral reason of all false, hypocritical and treacherous
dealing with God by a professing and Covenanted People: The ground also and
reason of all after Apostasy and want of stedfastness in standing to Covenant
engagements, viz. The want of an upright heart. They made a great deal of do in
Covenants and Reformations, but all came to nothing, and issued at length in
doing worse than they had done before: And whence was it? Why, their heart was
not right with Him. And it is worthy our observation, that the Holy Ghost here
finds not fault with their returning to God, but only with that want of
sincerity; what they did had been well, if their hearts had been right in it,
it was the want of that which spoiled all. Their defect is our admonition, and
teaches us this,

Doct. If ever a People would do any thing to purpose in a Covenant of
Reformation, they must above all see that their Hearts be right with God in it.

It is not enough for Men to return by an outward profession, to make vows,
and enter into Promises and engagements. There may be a great deal of
formality, and a show of much solemnity in such things, but if the heart be not
true in it, all is in vain.

In the Explication Consider,
1. What we are to understand by the Heart. 2. When the Heart may be said to be
right with God. 3. The reason of the Doctrine:
First, What we are to understand by the Heart?

Answ. The Word is variously used in Scripture: Sometimes properly for that
member in a living Creature, which is the Principal seat of Life, and first
spring of Life actions. Sometimes Metaphorically for the inside and most
hidden part of a thing: So, Jonah, 2. 3. Again, by a Metonimy of the Subject, it
is used for those things that have their Seat in, and Original from the Heart:
Sometimes for the understanding, Prove. 10. 8. Sometimes for the Will: Jer. 3.
15. Sometimes for the affections, Pro. 14. 13. In a Word, the Soul with all its
faculties is often intended by the word [Heart] And so we are here to
understand it, and principally of the Will, which is Regent of all the
faculties, and according to the frame whereof God Judges of all the actions of
the Children of Men.

2. When the Heart may be said to be right with God?

Answ. The Word in our Text is variously interpreted, it signifies to make fit
or suitable to a thing; so some read that, Pro. 3. 19. By understanding He has
fitted the Heavens, i. e. Suited them to their end and use. It signifies also to
prepare or make a thing ready for the use it is to be employed about, so it is
translated, Psalm. 37. 23. The steps of a good Man are ordered (or prepared) by
the Lord: It also signifies to be stable, firm and constant: So it used, 1 Samuel
7. 16. Thy kingdom shall be established. A Heart then that is right with God
(as it relates to these Covenant-Transactions)

IS,

I. A Heart that is made fit to deal with God in such a way; and that is (in
brief) an Heart that is inwardly principled with saving Grace: A Heart that
has truly made choice of God in Jesus Christ for the object of his Faith and
Love. An Heart which (as the Needle in the Compass which is truly touched)
whatever shakeings it may have, yet never rests till it comes to point
directly to its Pole Star: Though by the force of many temptations he may turn
aside from God, yet has a true inclination of Soul toward him; though often
hurried by Satan and his own corruption, yet has the Root of the Matter in
him. Such an heart had David, though sometimes overtaken and born down with
great Sins; and this God had respect to when He was under greatest provocations.

2. An Heart that is duly prepared to the Work of Reformation. As there needs a
suitable Principle, so there is requisite a fit preparation to so solemn a
Transaction: The want of this is rendered as a Reason of Rehoboam's Apostasy, 2 Chronicles. 12. 14. He did evil, because he prepare not his Heart to seek the Lord?
The contrary to which is Jehoshaphat's commendation, Chap. 19. 3. Have prepared
thy heart to seek thy God. But he could not go through with Reformation for
want of this in the People. Chap, 20. 33. Men may make much a-do about outward
preparation, but without the preparation of the Heart all will end in mere
formality. Now to the due preparation of the Heart, it is requisite;

1. That they do solemnly consider, and well weigh what they do: Hasty and
precipitate actions are heartless actions; things done rashly without due
deliberation are not like to be permanent: Christ therefore would have men in
great Matters to sit down and consider, Luke 14. 28, etc.

2. That they be inwardly and thoroughly persuaded of the Necessity and
Excellency of what they are about to do. Necessity (I say) and that not merely
a compulsive necessity, such as Men are driven to by external Motives, as
Judgments, etc. But the necessary dependence of their spiritual good, and hope
in such a way. And hence, I add, the Excellency; Men must See a Beauty in the
Covenant, that it is a Glorious thing to have God engaged to us, and our Hearts
engaged to Him: David therefore accounts the Covenant all his Salvation, 2 Samuel
23. 5.

3. That they be strengthened with Holy Purposes and Resolutions to do as they
shall Promise and Engage. God regards not bare, empty Promises, But He looks
for Performance; and Men must purpose, if ever they intend to do: Every Holy
action has its rise in the Heart, devoting it self to God, and resolving to
serve Him. To promise, and never intend to perform, is mere mockery; it is not
what we pretend, but what we intend, That God regards. They in Jer. 44. begin.
Promised the Prophet fair, they spoke like honest and wel-meaning Men, let God
but direct, and they would do: But this was the furthest thing from their
thoughts, they were preocupied and forestalled with resolutions of their own,
and if these should be crossed, they were resolved, and they show it, verse. 16.
The Prophet did not speak to their minds: If he had, What obedient Men had
they been?

III. An Heart that is stable and firm to its purposes and promises. Men many
times think to do something for God, but a deceitful heart deludes them. Jehu
thought to have made a great Reformation, and begins with a notable Zeal, but
it tired before it had gone through all its Stages: And what was the Reason,
but because his Heart was not firm? It was a good frame David was in, when he
said, My Heart is fixed, Psalm. 57. 7. An irresolute, inconstant Heart is not
fit to have to do with an unchangeable God: It is God's complaint against them,
Hos. 6. 4. Your goodness is as the Morning Cloud, and as the Early Dew it goes
away. And it is often spoken to Israel's disgrace, That they soon forgot.

Thirdly, For the Reasons of the Doctrine, or why such Care should be used in
this Matter of Covenanting, they are taken.

I. From God with whom we are to transact in the Covenant, in Two or Three
respects.

1. God requires our Hearts in all that we have to do with Him in. The Heart
was a main and essential part of the Sacrifice that was to be offered up under
the Law; To signify to us, that no Services of ours are acceptable, but such
as are hearty, hence that upbraiding reproof, Hos. 7. 11. Ephraim is a silly
Dove without an Heart. God calls for every ones Heart, to be devoted to Him,
Pro. 23. 26. My Son give me thy Heart. That is the emphasis of many precepts,
Seek. the Lord with all thy Heart, Deuteronomy. 4. 29.-6. 5. etc. The most specious,
and most exactly attended Services, without this, are despised by Him. Hence
that complaint, Ezekiel. 33. 31.

2. God searches and tries, and thoroughly knows all Hearts, and there is no
putting Him off with outside Services, and varnished hypocritical pretenses
Men may be deceived, but God cannot; and all these who think to impose upon
Him, do but cheat their own Souls, Gal. 6, 7. Be not deceived, God is not
mocked. God knows all the secret thoughts and purposes of Men's hearts, and
they cannot hide their counsels from Him, though they mint them in the darkest
corners of their Souls, Psalm. 139. 12. Heb. 4. 12. And more especially does He
look with a curious and critical eye upon those that transact with Him in the
Covenant, for He expects to be glorified by all such as draw so near unto Him.

3. God will not accept of, but severely punish all heartless and hypocritical
Covenanters with him. It must needs add to Sin, and not mitigate it, to think
to cover it over with a falsifying Covenant. God may (to make known his
patience and compassion) bear with such long and often, thus he did with these,
as the Context shows: But yet he does remember, and will recompense all the
deceitful and false dealings of a Vovenant People. Men may say, and promise,
and vow as fairly as they will, but if their hearts be not right, God will not
hear them, but fall upon them in his wrath: See, Isa. 58. begin. Ezekiel. 14.
begin.

2. From our selves Covenanting with God.

FOR,

1. Our hearts are naturally hypocritical and dangerously deceitful; and hence,
if they be not Cautelously looked after, will lead us into cheats, and self
delusions: There is nothing, more subtle, sly, slippery than the heart of Man;
and it is very hard for us to know when it is right. See, Jer. 17. 9. Who can
know it? Many Men are apt to persuade themselves that their heart is right when
it is not: Jehu, when he was upon the spur, and his zeal on fire, would have
been angry if any one had then told him, that he would at last prove an
Idolater. Doubtless, these Israelites, when they made such promises and
protestations, as we find they did, were very confident of their own integrity,
and yet the next hour of temptation discovered their falsness; There is
therefore great need to be very wary of our hearts.

2. There is no hope that they should long hold out, and keep true to their
Covenants, that do not engage in them with their whole hearts. What Men are
driven to do upon fear or force, has no truth in it: Let but that fear be
removed, or constraint taken off them, and you shall quickly see them returning
age^ to their old wonts, and forgetting every Promise which they engaged
themselves in unto God. A notable instance we have for this in those Jews, Jer.
34. 8. etc. Their hearts were not to the Law and Covenant of God: Hence, though
in a hurry and distress, they made vows, and began to put them in execution,
yet the present danger was no sooner over, but they tasted sweetness in their
old Sins, and impudently returned to them again. Yea, this is the very Reason
rendered in our Text, why they so often revolted after so many returns. A thing
that moves by the force of weights, will move but till they are down: It must
be a living thing, that holds on its motion to the end. Hypocrisy and formality
will tire by the way and give in: It is only Grace in the heart that will carry
a Man through his Work.

3. God has made it our Duty to look to our hearts, Pro. 4. 23. Heb. 3. 12.
And although we can neither make nor keep them right by our own strength, yet
our Duty is to go to Him, and wait upon Him to do it for us, and in our place
to take pains, and use uttermost diligence about it: For, if we fail, the fault
will not be laid upon Him, but the sin will be our own. And indeed, not to look
to the integrity of our hearts in our Covenanting is in it self truly and
properly a breaking of Covenant in the very act of renewing it: And that brings
in the next.

III. From the Covenant it self; in which we do actually, and declaratively
engage our whole Man to God's Service, which cannot be the whole except the
heart be in it. The Covenant precept binds us to love God with all our heart,
and all our soul, etc. It is a spiritual Covenant, not only objectively, as the
object we Covenant with [God] is a Spirit; but subjectivly too, viz. As we who
enter into Covenant do engage all spiritual Service and Obedience unto God. He
that promises to reform, and does not begin at the heart is a vile dissembler:
And he that does not first secure the Quarters of his Soul for the service of
God, all the pains he takes in and about reformation, will be but to give his
lust a safe retirement to hide it self, and ly lurking in his heart till it
has a further and ^airer opportunity to walk abroad again in this life.

USE.

In the application of this Doctrine, I shall wave all other improvement which
might have been made of it, that so I may have the more room and opportunity to
press this Use of Exhortation; viz. That as it concerns all the People of God
in what things soever they have to deal about with Him, so it especially calls
upon us, who are this day engaging our selves to God in the matter of the
Covenant, to take special heed to our selves that in all this Procedure our
hearts be right with God. I might here urge many things by way of Motive, but
let these two or three suffice, viz.

I. Consider whom you have now to do and transact withal. I know you have to do
one with another, but this is not your main business, that is with God, and if
it be God you are now engaging with, let it then be thought upon.

1 Whether He do not deserve your hearts: if not He, Who? Has He not made
them? Does He not uphold and preserve them? Cannot He make them ^appy or
miserable? All that He has done for you, all that He has revealed in the
Promise which He is ready to perform in your behalf if you truly seek it of
Him, challenges your hearts to be devoted unto Him; yea, you do here engage
your selves to be His, and can you be so, and yet keep back your heart (which
is the main and principal thing) from Him?

2. Whether you can rationally hope that he will accept of your Covenanting
except your hearts be in it. To believe it, is to make him a liar. Did he not
of all the Sacrifices challenge the inwards (as the principal Part) for
himself? And what does that signify to us, but that the heart must be his in
every service of ours? Did he accept of the plausible, but heartless service of
the Jews, Ezekiel: 33. 31? see verse. ult. Did he accept of their fasts, Isa. 58?
No, and why not? Only because they were hypocritical and heartless.

3. Whether you can impose upon him and cheat him with an heartless Covenant.
Can you kiss your hands, and mean while hide hypocrisy in your hearts, and God
not know it? And can he know it, and not bear witness against it? Had you only
Man to do withal, you might with many fair words, and deceitful shows invite
him to credit and confide in your false and deceitful promises, for Man judges
according to appearance, but he who searches the darkest corner of the Soul,
and sees our inside, will not be so imposed upon.

4. Whether this be not the way to be accepted, notwithstanding all your
weakness and infirmities. It is a sincere Souls happiness (as it is an
hypocrites misery) that he has God to deal withal in the Covenant. When you
have done your utmost, and taken most pains to prepare your selves for this
business, you will still unavoidably bring many and great infirmities with you,
but God loves and will accept of truth in the inward part, and whatsoever
frailties are with you, yet this is pleadable in the greatest extremityes, Isa.
38. 3. I have walked before thee in truth, and with a perfect Heart. David, had
great Sins, yet God casts him not off, because his heart was perfect: Saul did
many specious things, but God rejects him, his heart was not true to God. Be
but sincere, and your Covenanting shall not be in vain.

2. Consider what is your present design? What is the thing which we intend in
renewing our Covenant with God? Is it a mere Ceremony and show, or is it a
business of importance? If it be a mere Ceremony, it will come under the just
censure of a vain oblation: But if it have some real and material purpose in
it, carefully enquire and see what that is: And whether the want of a firm and
fixed heart in it, will not evert and disappoint it. The design, then, of this
work (if any) is this, viz. To promote and forward a true and through
reformation, or (at least) to confirm and settle our selves in a serious and
stable Profession and practice of the fear and service of God; to put a
strongly and obligation upon our selves to keep close to God and his ways.
Now, if the heart be not right in this matter, all will come to naught, and be
to no purpose. It is not the least breach of Charity to say, that either no
reformation (or to be sure no durable reformation) will follow a verbal and
outside Profession. If the heart do not vow to God as well as the lips, we
shall never stand to such vows. The bond of a mere Oral Covenant (let it carry
never so fair promises in it) styed of a slip-knot, and a false heart will
easily unty (...). And what then is to be expected as the fruit of such a
Covenant? It is possible it may bear a little aw upon us for a few days, but
it will quickly wear off, and that which here follows in my Text, will be the
same which will be consequent upon our engagements: Neither were they steadfast
in His Covenant.

3 Consider how hard a thing it is for you to get your ^earts right in so
solemn a Service. I can assure you that except God afford his special help and
Grace, all the power of Man cannot effect it. It is a hard thing Man to know
when his heart is right: It will [solemnly protest that it is so, when it is
indeed most false, and if he be so foolish as to believe it at its word, he
shall be easily cheated. Did not Israel, when they were at mount Sinai, under
the amazing terrors of God's dreadful presence, think their hearts right, when
they made that profession to Moses? Deuteronomy. 5. 27. Speak thou unto us all that
the Lord our God shall speak unto thee, and we will hear it and do it. But let
us see what God says: verse. 28, 29. They have well said all that they have
spoken. Oh! that there were such an Heart in them, etc. Did not Jehu think his
heart was right, when he invites Jonadab as a Spectator, Come and see my zeal
for the Lord? The understanding may be convinced, and the affections may be
raised, and the Man may be forward, and yet a false heart in all this. And if
it be thus hard to know the hearts falseness, much more hard and difficult is
it, when it is discovered to be wrong, to get it right. Before the heart can be
right in the Covenant, it must part from that enmity which it bears against
God; it must lose its self-soveraignty, and be brought into true subjection
unto His Holy Will; it must renounce it self, its own guidance, its carnal
delights, and be truly and willingly devoted or consecrato God and His
Service: It must make a free, full, and everlasting choice of God and His
Ways, it must take delight to be bound and engaged to him, and account that
its Covenant-engagement unto God is its greatest liberty: It must take up
strong purposes and inviolable resolutions to do whatsover God commands. To
avoid what He prohibits, with greatest care and vigilance, to be for Him and no
other. How contrary and unpleasing these things are to flesh and blood, he
cannot but in some measure understand, who was ever truly acquainted with His
own heart.

4. Consider what it is that you desire may follow upon this days work. I dare
presume, that there is never an one of you but propounds to himself some good
effect to ensue upon so solemn an affair as this is; and so indeed their will
if it be not our own fault: But yet (on the other hand) take this also for an
undoubted truth, that if your hearts do here dissemble, and deal falsely, not
good, but evil is to be expected to follow. You would have God's anger turned
away, which has broken in upon us, and laid wast many of our pleasant things;
you would enjoy Him as a reconciled God; you would have Him to own us signally
by some tokens of His favor; whatever your desires be, the want of a right
heart in the duty will frustrate all. It is with you now to procure Life or
Death, God's Favor or more of His Anger. Alas! God is not delighted in a
pompous show, and a great appearance of seeming solemnity, as we poor Men are
apt to be; God's heart is no ways engaged to us by such things; an humble, an
holy and a contrite heart, is that which reaches His heart, and will procure
His Love and Favor. Let but your hearts be right with the Lord, And I dare
promise you that His shall be so with you; and He shall so witness it, as not
only you, but others also shall see and observe it. Eminent for this was that
hearty Covenant of Asa's, of which we have that memorable note, 2 Chro. 15. 15.
All Judah rejoiced at the Oath, for they had sworn with all their Heart, and
sought Him with their whole desire, and He was found of them: And the Lord gave
them rest round about. If you be not great Gainers you will be great losers. If
you think to deceive God, He will certainly deceive you: And whiles you are
vainly gaping after and promising your selves Mercy and deliverance, you shall
find Plagues and Miseries increase: But be faithful, and you shall prosper,
God, even your own God, shall bless you.

For Direction, that your hearts may be right in this Service;

1. Dread hypocrisy in this Work. Be awfully afraid to come before God with a
false heart. There is nothing more dangerous than carnal confidence. Prepare
your selves to the work by thinking seriously in your own Souls, how dreadful a
thing will it be for me now to come and dissemble with the holy One of Israel?
You had much better to impose upon all the World than so much as think to do so
upon God. Say thus to thy self, If I should now come and plight Promises, make
vows, enter a Covenant, and my heart not be in it, I shall pull down curses
upon my own Soul. Shall I call the God of heaven and of earth to witness to a
lie? Shall I invite His solemn presence to a mockery? And shall I not in so
doing draw down and hasten vengeance upon mine own head?

2. Be very jealous of your own hearts. Ever suspect and be afraid lest they
should be deceitful: Blessed is the Man that fears always, Pro. 28. 26.
Peter trusted to his heart, and it deceived him, and so may it be with me. It
is the wisdom of a Christian to watch his Soul diligently, looking upon it as
a slippery thing, and very ready to steal away from every holy and solemn work,
and to deceive him with vain shows, and false pretenses: he that trusts it, is
not Wise.

3. Be sure rightly to understand and clearly to know what it is that you
engage in. That Christian is most like to stand firm to his Covenants, that
enters upon them with the most mature deliberation: The want of this may bring
a Man into a great snare, and lay him open to grievous temptations, Prove. 20.
26. It is a snare to a Man to devour that which is holy; and after vows to make
inquiry. Without knowledge there can be no practice; without consideration
there can be no good resolution. A Man's heart cannot be in that promise which
he has not weighed in his understanding. He that Covenants to forsake that
Sin, which he has a full purpose in his heart to keep and hug as his Darling,
how is he like to stand to it? Remember then, that you engage to be for God,
and for no other: You give up your selves to be led by his Spirit, directed by
his Word, to be at his dispose and not your own; to make his Will your Rule,
and his Glory your end. You promise that you will not run in the Current and
Stream of the Times in the pursuit of vanity, nor seek your own things, but the
things of Christ. In a Word, you promise sincere and universal Obedience: Do
you know or consider this? Have you thought, and do you approve of it in your
hearts? If not, your hearts are false.

4. Take up a firm resolution to stand to and perform your promises It is not
Words, but Performances that God has a respect to. God will not be mocked with
flattering promises. Purposes do nextly come from the heart, and are elicite
Acts of the Will, and if these be wavering or unfixt, the heart is not right. A
Covenant with God, is a Bond firmly obliging the Soul, and our engagements to
him will never be performed without the greatest resolution. You shall meet
with great and many Temptations which will assault and batter you. Evermore,
when a People have been engaging to God in a solemn manner, they must expect
some shaking Tyral: And if then you would be strong and acquit your selves like
Men, your business now is to be fixed. When Temptations come and assail you, you
must say with David, The vows of God are upon me: And as Psalm. 119. 106. I have
sworn, and I will perform. If ever you repent of your engagement, your heart
was never firm in it. If you find Satan or your own hearts laying bait before
you to entise you, you must say as Abraham, I have lift up my hand to the God
of Heaven, etc. Let therefore your purposes be hearty purposes, free and not
constrained.

5. Beware of sinful Reserves. Nothing more frequent, nor more dangerous than
Equivocation: We make fair Covenants and plausible, but we have our mental
reservations, which spoil all. If your Covenant be not full, and free, and
plain, it is of no Worth. Saul is sent to destroy Amalek, and says, I have
done it, Only I reserved the best for a Sacrifice: He had that reserve in his
mind before. Naaman has his reserves: In this thing pardon thy Servant. It may
be you think with your selves I can do all, and I will do all, but this or that
one particular thing: One has his sinful and unlawful Calling by which he gets
a Living, another his oppression and deceit, another his excess in this or that
lawful liberty, etc. And this he intends to keep, and thinks to say, I never
intended this: Know it, this is a dreadful heart-deceit, and God will find it
out, and it will render your whole Covenant a vain oblation,

6. Trust not in your selves, or your own strength. In the first Covenant Man
was to look upon and exercise his created Grace, though not without imploring
Divine assistance and concurse: In the New Covenant Man is utterly to disclaim
himself, and deny all his own strength. The consideration of our own frailty
and plain impotency to spiritual things were discouragement enough to our
renewal of Covenant, If God expected, or we promised performance in our own
strength. Though every Believer must acknowledge (with Paul) that of himself he
can do nothing, yet is he neither to sit still and do nothing, or yet to
renounce the Covenant of God, and engaging of himself to his service: Only he
must carefully beware that he do not turn it into a Covenant of Works by being
his own undertaker; lest whiles he pretends to renew, he destroys the Covenant
of Grace. It may seem a Paradox, but is an Evangelical truth, that a Christian
must acknowledge that he can do nothing, and yet resolve, and bind himself to
do all.

Therefore,

7. In sense of your own utter insufficiency. Be sure to get Christ your
Undertaker and Surety in the Covenant. The heart is never right till it comes
to this: And this must be done, not by a presumptuous casting all upon him
whiles we indulge our careless neglect, and say, Let Christ answer for it: But
by a believing and humble dependence upon him as the head of the Covenant: And
that not only as a political head, standing responsible for the carriages of
all his Members; but also as the head of influences from whom (by Faith) we are
to derive Grace and strength to do and perform that duty which shall through
him be accepted by God, and reckoned to us as Covenant-keeping. And now having
him thus related and engaged to us, we may with an holy confidence devote our
selves to God and his Service. From him we shall derive Wisdom to instruct and
guide us in all the Covenant-Duties we are concerned in: From him we shall
fetch down Grace to animate, quicken, strengthen our Souls to Duty: From Him we
shall have encouragement and support against all faintings of spirit, and
despondencyes under our Work. In him we shall have all our weakness pityed and
pardoned: Through him we shall trample upon Temptation, and tread down
opposition. If Christ be with us, we shall not fail, though we may fall, for he
will lift us up: And if your hearts do truly and sincerely trust in him, and
wait upon him, he will not leave you wholly to swerve, or utterly to violate
your holy Covenant: But, when hypocritical, and heartless Professors stumble
and fall, and (by the righteous judgment of God) receive the due reward of
their dissimulation and falsehood; you shall be kept, preserved, established
unto the day of the appearauce of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ: And in
that Day when the secrets of Men's hearts shall be made manifest, and perfidious
and formal Professors shall be put to open shame, then shall your Truth and
Sincerity be openly acknowledged before Angels and Men, and the Glorious
Blessing of an everlasting Covenant shall be your Portion for evermore.

FINIS.

