A SERMON PREACHED before the KING, UPON The Seventh of March, 1668/9

BY JOHN Lord Bishop of CHESTER.

Published By His Majesty's special Command.

LONDON: Printed by T. Newcomb, for Sa. Gellibrand, at the Golden Ball in St.
Paul's Churchyard. 1669.

A SERMON Preached before the KING Upon the Seventh of this Instant March, 1669.
PROVE. 3. 16, 17. Length of days is in her right hand, and in her left hand
Riches and HONOR.

Her ways are ways of Pleasantness, and all her Paths are Peace.


THe chief Design of the Wise man in this Text, is, to set forth the many great
Advantages that belong to Religion; In order to which, he does here Enumerate
those five Principal things, that must contribute to a Complete state of
Happiness in this World, namely, Health, and Riches, and Honor, and Pleasure,
and Peace; And asserts concerning them, that they are the proper effects of
that wisdom which consist's in being Religious.

This he expresses by way of Allegory, representing Wisdom (as is usual for
other Virtues) in the shape of a Woman, or Queen, with her Arms extended, in
the Posture of Directing and Rewarding her Followers; Holding in her right hand
the Blessing of Health, or length of Days, the great Promise of the Law, to
which the Precedence of the right hand is therefore given, because it is
amongst all Worldly Blessings, the greatest and most desirable; That, without
which, a Man cannot enjoy any thing else, nor so much as his own self: Length
of days is in her right hand. And then, for those other things, which the
Generality of Men do so much covet and labor after, Wealth, and Reputation;
these likewise are at her Disposal, and must proceed from her Gift; And in her
left hand Riches and Honor. And, as for the Cheerfulness of our Conditions, he
affirms, that the truest Pleasure must be found in those ways that are
directed by Her; Her ways are ways of Pleasantness. And because there are
several things, which have some present delight in them, Prove. 5. 4.
seeming to drop as the Hony-Combe, and to be smoother then Oil; And yet upon
trial, do prove in the issue, bitter as Wormwood, and sharp as a two-edged
Sword; therefore it is added, that her ways are not only pleasant, but they are
likewise Safe and Quiet: All her Paths are Peace.

That these things are the effects of Religion, is here only affirmed, which,
to them who believe the Authority of Scripture, is evidence sufficient: But, it
were easy to prove this, concerning each of them, by all other kinds of
evidence, of which such matters are capable.

I purpose at this time to Treat only concerning the Third of them, namely
Honor; as being the most proper Subject for this Presence and Auditory. And
that this can only be attained by Religion and Virtue, I doubt not but to
prove, with so much strength and perspicuity as shall be sufficient to convince
any one, who will but attend and consider.

In order to this, I shall first endeavor to state the true Nature of Honor,
and to show wherein the most proper notion of it does consist; It Is an
equivocal word, and is capable of various senses.

First, Sometimes it is used to denote worthy and creditable Parentage; the
being derived from such Ancestors as have been famous in their Generation for
some eminent Virtue or Exploit: Wherein there is this benefit, that a Man has
great Examples in his own Family, and so much the stronger Obligation not to
degenerate from them: But it shows rather what such a Man should be, then what
he is; and, to a Person that is not Virtuous, does prove a Prejudice rather
then an advantage.

Secondly, Sometimes it is used to signify, Titles of Place and Dignity,
according to the various orders and degrees of Nobility in several Nations:
But, this kind of Honor depending merely upon the Princes Favor, must
therefore be wholly extrinsical, and consequently can have no more due to it,
then a mere External respect. Such persons may challenge from us, that we
should give them their due Titles, and demean our selves toward them with
that Observance and Ceremony as becomes their Quality: But then, as to inward
esteem and affection, they can demand no greater a share of this, then
according as their real worth and virtue shall require. The Royal Stamp upon
any kind of Metal, may be sufficient to give it an Extrinsick value, and to
determine the Rate at which it is to pass amongst Coins, but it cannot give an
Intrinsic value, or make that which is but Brass to be Gold.

It Is true indeed, there are some Callings and Relations of Men, to whom an
Inward Veneration is due, though the Persons themselves should not be Virtuous;
Namely, Magistrates, and Ministers, and Parents, and Benefactors; who, having
somewhat of a Divine Stamp and Impress upon them, may therefore challenge from
us, that we should demean our selves toward them, both with such an Outward
Respect, as may become their Places, and with such an Inward Respect too, as
may be suitable to that Image which they bear, our dependence upon them, and
Obligation to them. But then, we cannot be Obliged to think such Persons Good
Men, unless we have some Evidence to believe them to be so, or at least, not to
be otherwise; So that they are beholding to something extrinsical to their
Persons, namely, to their Callings and Relations, for that Honor which is paid
to them.

Thirdly, The word Honor is sometimes used for that Esteem and Reputation which
a Man has in the World, especially amongst Virtuous Persons; according to
which sense it is defined by Tully to be Consentiens Laus bonorum, Tuscul. Q. 2.
the Concurrent Approbation of Good Men; when those, who are best able to Judge
of real worth, shall both think and speak well of others, this is properly
Honoring of them. And in this sense (which is the most proper notion of the
words) it is one of the greatest blessings that this World can afford; much to
be preferrred before Riches, or Pleasures, or Life it self. A good Name is
rather to be chosen than great Riches, and loving kindness, rather than Silver
or Gold, Prove. 22. 1. One that is a Generous, Virtuous Man, will choose to dye,
rather than do any thing, that may expose him to Infamy: St. Paul was of this
Mind; 1 Cor. 9. 15.
It were better for me to dye, than that any should make my Glorying void.
There have been some Wise Men, who have neglected and rerefused that other kind
of Honor, consisting in Titles of Dignity, as conceiving more of Burden and
Temptation in it, than of real Advantage; But, no Man, in his Wits, did ever
despise a good Name, unless such profligate dissolute Wretches, as did either
despair of, or resolve against, doing any thing, that might deserve it. It Is
not easy to reckon up the many Advantages that belong to this kind of Honor:
It Is Power, inabling a Man to do things great and worthy, to be useful to his
Friends and his Country: It Is Safety, and does give a Man such an interest in
the esteem and affection of others, as will make them concerned for his
Welfare, ready to stand by him and assist him in any kind of Danger; which are
so great Advantages, that whosoever shall wilfully neglect them, must needs be
rendered very contemptible.

Having thus Explained the proper Notion of Honor, I proceed in the next place
to Prove, that Religion and Virtue is the only means for the attaining of it:
This I shall endeavor to do by Testimony, and by Reason, and by Experience,
which are all the kinds of Arguments, that such matters are capable of.

First, By Testimony. The Scripture does abound in diverse Assertions and
Promises to this purpose: Such as are Religious, are styled the Excellent of
the Earth, Psalm. 16. 3. and said to be more excellent than their Neighbors,
Cap. 12. ^6.
Prove. 17. 27. Deuteronomy. 3^. 9.
They are Gods peculiar Treasure. The dearly beloved of his Soul. Exodus 19. 5.
He sets apart the Man that is Godly for himself. Ierem. 12. 7.
Though such persons may be but low, Psalm. 4. 3.
as to their outward Condition; being put to wander up and down in Sheepskins
and Goat Skins, being destitute, afflicted, tormented, seeking for refuge, in
Deserts and Mountains, in Dens, and Caves of the Earth; yet may they, upon the
account of Religion, be of such an excellent value, that in the Judgment of
the Holy Ghost, The whole World is not worthy of them, Heb. 11. 37, 38.

The Wiseman speaking of Religion, says, that it shall be an ornament of
Grace to thy head, Prove. 1. 9.
and as a chain about thy neck, Exalt her, Chap. 4. 8. v. 9.
and she shall promote thee, and bring thee to honor, She shall give to thy
head an ornament of grace, and a Crown of glory. God has engaged himself by
Promise to those that are Religious, that he will set them above other Nations;
they shall be made the Head, and not the Tail, Deuteronomy. 28. 13. John. 12. 26.
He has said, Those that honor me, I will honor, 1 Samuel 2. 30. And certainly,
he, who is the King of Kings, must needs be the Fountain of Honor, and able to
dispose of it as he pleases.

But, because such persons, as are no friends to Religion, may have but a small
esteem for the Authority of Scripture; Therefore to these I would suggest the
concurrent Opinion of Wise Men in all former Ages. Though the ancient
Philosophers were divided into various Sects, and differed very much from one
another in several Opinions; yet, in this, they have all agreed, that Honor is
due only to Virtue, and does not properly belong to any thing else. It would be
tedious to enumerate the several sayings to this purpose, out of Plato,
Aristotle, Tully, Seneca, and the other Ancients: And certainly, that Man must
needs have a very extravagant conceit of his own Abilities, who dares prefer
his private Opinion, before the General Consent of Wise Men in former Ages,
such as have been counted the greatest Masters of Reason, and most eminent for
their Knowledge and their Wisdom.

Secondly, I proceed in the next place to confirm this by the Principles of
Reason, That Religion and Virtue is the cause of Honor. There may be a twofold
cause of things Moral, Natural.


That is said to be the Moral cause, which does dispose a Man to such a
Condition, upon the Account of Fitness and Desert, and in this sense Honor is
the Reward of Virtue; There is an equitable right, a sutableness and congruity,
that good Men should be loved and esteemed, and vicious Men exposed to shame:
As Snow in Summer, and as Rain in Harvest, so is Honor unsuitable for a Fool,
Prove. 26. 1. The intermixing of Winter and Summer, would not cause a greater
disorder in the Natural World, than the cross disposal of Honor and contempt,
would in the Moral World. And hence is it, that the Laws of all Nations and
Governments, have owned it as a point of Policy, to excite their Subjects unto
Virtuous and worthy Actions, by this Motive of Honor, and to deterr them from
Vicious Courses, by the consideration of the shame and contempt which belongs
to them.

That is said to be the Natural cause of a thing, which does by its own
immediate efficacy produce the effect; and in this sense likewise is Virtue the
cause of Honor. The Fire does not more naturally produce heat, than Goodness
does Love and Esteem; Which will appear very plain, if we consider, That Inward
Honoring is nothing else, but the Believing a Man to be Worthy and Virtuous;
and the Testifying this by our Words and Actions is Outward Honoring. Now,
nothing can be more evident, then that the best means for one to be thought
good, is to be so.

A Man may excel in Strength, Beauty, Riches, Learning, Wit, which are all
commendable things, and will contribute to a Man's esteem; But, if we apprehend
such a one to be notoriously Vicious, This esteem will not be accompanied with
Love, but with Fear, Hate, and Envy; because such a one has by these things so
much the greater advantage of doing Mischief in the World: Whereas on the other
side, though a Man should be destitute of all these other advantages, without
any Nobility in his Ancestors, but of a small Estate, a low Condition; yet, if
we believe him to be a truly. Virtuous Man, it cannot be, but that we must pay
a Veneration to him.

All things whatsoever have some Natural Standard, whereby the Goodness of them
is to be Measured; namely, their sutableness unto that chief end, for which
they are designed. We do not therefore account a Ship to be good, because it is
curiously painted and gilded, or carved and inlayed, but because it is fitted
for all the purposes of Navigation, which is, the proper end and use of a Ship:
Nor do we therefore account a Sword to be good, because it has a rich Hilt,
and an Embroidered Scabbard, but because it is fit for the proper use of a
Sword, which is to cut: They are the comparisons of Seneca, Sen. Ep. 76.
speaking of this Subject; In homine quoque, nihil ad rem pertinet, quantum
aret, quantum foeneret, a quam multis salutetur, etc. sed quam bonus sit. It
should be so likewise in our esteem of Men, who are not so much to be valued by
the Grandeur of their Estates or Titles, as by their inward goodness.

Every Man is endowed with a Natural principle, inclining him to a state of
Happiness, and has in some measure, both an Ability to judge of, and a
freedom and liberty for applying himself unto, those Duties, which are the
proper means for the promoting of this end: And this being the peculiar
difference of the Humane Nature, therefore a man is not upon any other account
to be justly praised or blamed, but according to the right or wrong use of this
natural liberty; And consequently as a Man does find, either in himself or
others, a constant and firm resolution, to make a right use of this, so should
he proportion his esteem accordingly; Preferring this Inward Greatness, this
Rectitude of Mind, whereby a Man is resolved in every condition to do that
which shall appear to be his Duty, before any External Greatness whatsoever.

There are two kind of Virtues amongst all the rest, which are by General
consent esteemed Venerable, and such as do advance the Reputation of those who
are endowed with them; namely Wisdom, Courage.


Because they have a more intrinsic rise, and do less depend upon External
advantages, but seem rather to be rooted in the Inward Frame and Temper of
Mind; and withal, are most beneficial both to our Selves and Others: The former
signifying a Man to have those Intellectual Abilities, which are proper to his
kind, whereby the Humane Nature is to be distinguished from other things: The
other, because it argues a Rectitude in the Will, and a Power to subdue the
Passion of Fear, which is most natural to our present state of Infirmity; and
withal does support a Man against Difficulties, and enable for those two
Services, of Doing and Suffering as he ought. And, for this Reason, the Vices
that are opposite to these, are amongst all others counted the most shameful;
There being no greater Reproach to be cast upon any one, then to be esteemed a
Fool, or a Coward.

Now a Man that is Irreligious cannot justly pretend to either of these Virtues.

1. For Wisdom. This is so essential to Religion, that in the Scripture Phrase
(especially in the Writings of David and Solomon) they boty go under the same
Name, and there is very good reason why it should be so; because there is such
an intimate agreement between the Natures of them: The Philosopher does define
Wisdom to consist in an ability and inclination, to make choice of the right
Means in the prosecution of our true End. And nothing can enable a Man for
this but Religion, both as to the Subordinate End of Temporal Happiness in this
World; but chiefly with respect to that great and Supreme End of Eternal
Happiness in the World to come.

2. And then for Courage, It Is not possible for a Man to be truly Valiant,
unless he be withal truly Religious: He may be bold and daring, and able (in a
fearless manner) to rush upon any danger, but then he must stifle his Reason
from considering what the Consequences of things may be, what shall become of
him hereafter, if he should miscarry. There being no man whatsoever so totally
free from the Apprehensions of a future state, but that when he is serious and
considerate, he must be startled with Doubts and Fears concerning it: So that
there cannot be any rational, sedate, deliberate courage, but only in such, as
have some good hopes of a better Estate in the other World; And, it is Religion
only that can enable a Man for this.

3. I proceed to the Third kind of Argument to this purpose, from Experience;
By which, I mean that Practical Knowledge, which every man may attain by his
own Observation of the usual course of things in the World: And, by this, it
will appear, that no kind of persons have been more highly Reverenced in the
Hearts and Consciences of others, then those that have been most eminent for
their Virtue and Religion; which has been always true, both with respect to
Public Communities, and Private Persons.

First, For Nations; If we consult the Stories of former times, we shall find
that saying of Solomon constantly verified, That Prove. 14. 34.
Righteousness does exalt a Nation, but Sin does prove a reproach to it: And
more especially the sin of Irreligion and Profaneness; As this does increase in
any Nation, so must the Honor and Reputation of that Nation decrease. The Roman
Empire was then at the highest, as to its Name and Greatness, when it was so as
to its Virtue; when they were most punctual in observing the Rites of their
Religion, (though that were a false way of Worship,) most Heroical in their
Justice, Courage, Fidelity, Gratitude; then it was that they deserved to Govern
the World, and to be had in greatest Honor above all other Nations: And not
only Tully and Polybius, two Heathen Writers, who, upon that Account, might be
thought more partial; But St. Austin also and Lactantius, two of the Fathers,
do ascribe the flourishing of that Empire, when it was at its height, to the
Religion, and Piety, and Virtue of those times; And, as they did afterward
degenerate from this, so did they decline likewise in their Greatness and Honor.

2. Thus also has it been with particular persons; Amongst the Heathen, What
Elogies do we find in the Honor of Socrates, Aristides, Cato, Epictetus? The
latter of which, though but a poor Slave, had yet such a Veneration paid to his
Memory, that his Earthen Lamp by which he was wont to Study, was, after his
Death, sold for 3000 Drachms.

Nor was it otherwise amongst the Christians; The Apostles were but poor
Fishermen, Illiterate Mechanics; Many of the Martyrs were but of mean
condition, much Opposed and Persecuted in the World; And yet these Men, during
the time of their lives, were highly Reverenced amongst those that knew them;
and since their Deaths, what can be more Glorious then that Renown which they
have amongst Men, when the greatest Kings and Princes will not mention their
Names without Reverence; when whole Nations are willing to set apart, and to
observe Solemn Days and Festivals in Honor of their Memories.

And, as it has always been thus formerly, so I appeal to every man's breast,
whether it be not so now; Let them but examine, what their Inclinations are
toward such Persons, whom they believe to be truly Virtuous: Not only to such
amongst them as are their particular Acquaintance and Friends, but likewise to
Strangers, nay to very Enemies; whether they do not esteem, and love them, and
will well to them.

I shall crave leave to speak briefly to two Objections, that may be made,
against what I have been Proving.

I. The Scripture says (speaking of good Men, That the World shall revile and
persecute them, and speak all manner of evil against them: Our Savior himself
was despised and rejected of Men; And his Apostles were used as the rubbish and
offscouring of all things. Isa. 53. 3.


To these two things may be said by way of Answer.

First, It cannot otherwise be expected, but that when a New Religion is to be
set up, men must be highly concerned in their opposing of it, and of those that
promote it: And the forecited Texts do particularly relate to this very case;
when Christianity was first introduced into the World, and to be propagated by
the Sufferings of those that Professed it; which being an exempt case, and not
according to the usual course of things, therefore these Texts are not equally
aplicable to other Times and Places, when and where the True Religion has
obtained, and Kings prove Nursing Fathers to it.

Secondly, Those that knew our Savior and his Followers, did highly Honor
them: And, as for others that were ignorant of them, and not sufficiently
convinced of their goodness, it is no wonder that they used them accordingly.
The most vicious person that is, if he does either know, or have reason to
think another to be Virtuous, must of necessity pay to him an Inward Reverence;
Because it is not in any man's power, so far to offer violence to his own
Faculties, as to believe any thing against his Evidence. It Is true indeed, men
have a greater power over their Words and Actions, then they have over their
Belief; and therefore they may call, and use such a one as they please, they
may revile, and persecute him; And, in this sense, Honor est in honorante: But,
even in so doing, they seem to pay a Veneration to Religion it self, whilst
they are fain to disguise it, under the Names of Hypocrisy, Heresy,
Superstition, thereby to justify themselves in their opposing of it.

II. It appears by the Experience of all Ages, that Vicious Men are sometimes
had in Honor.

To this it may be Answered.

1. External Honor may be due to them.

2. Internal Honor may be given to them, by such as do not know them. The mere
Opinion of being Virtuous, must of necessity have the same advantage in this
respect, with Real Goodness; The main difference is, that it is not like to
last, because it is almost Morally impossible, for a Man, who does only
dissemble Virtue, to stand always upon so strict a guard, as not to be
discovered. If it be said, that men, who are Notoriously Vicious, are sometimes
applauded, and Cry'd-Up for their Virtue; It may be Answered, That this cannot
be so truly styled Honoring as Flattering; The proper Notion of which does
consist in giving undue Commendations; Nor, will any contribute to it, but vile
Sycophants, the worst kind of Enemies, and the most Incompetent Judges of real
worth: Such only being fit to give true Praise, who are themselves
Praiseworthy.

Now, if this be the true state of the Case I have been speaking to; That the
generality of Wise and Considerate Men, in all former times, have attested to
this Truth, if the Reason of the thing require that it must be so; And, if it
appear accordingly from Common Experience to be so; If the most Material
Objections against it, may be so plainly and fully satisfied, then there can be
no sufficient Reason to doubt, of the truth of this Proposition; That Religion
and Virtue is the most proper means to promote the Interest of Honor, which is
the thing I was to prove.

I shall crave leave to suggest two things by way of Application, and I have
done.

First, This may convince men of Folly, who seek for Honor by any other Means.
The great Instances which are commonly given, of Men's being Fools, is, from
their Choosing such Means, as are altogether insufficient for the End they
Design: As the endeavoring to make a Blackamore White by washing of him, etc.
But, the using of such Means, as are not only insufficient for, but opposite
unto, and Destructive of the End they Propose; this is a degree above Folly,
and may be styled Madness: It Is as if a Man should run into the Water to dry
himself, and into the Fire to cool himself; And yet this is the Case of many
Men in the World, who propose to themselves such Courses, for the Promoting of
their Honor, as are most Destructive of it; namely, Profaneness, and Contempt of
Religion, Despising that which other Men stand in Awe of; by which they think
to get the Reputation of Wit, and of Courage; Of Wit, by pretending to
penetrate more deeply into the Nature of things, and to understand them better
then others do; not to be so easily imposed upon, as other Credulous People
are. Of Courage, by their not being so easily scared at the Apprehension of
Danger at a distance.

But, the Plain Truth is, such Persons do hereby prove themselves to be both
Fools and Cowards.

Fools, In mistaking their great Interests, in making choice of such means,
as can never promote the End they Design; There being no kind of Men that are
more exposed (whatsoever they themselves may think of it) to Public Infamy and
Hatred, than those that seek for Credit by despising of Religion. Fools, in
venturing their future Estates and their Souls, upon such hazards, as all
Mankind would Cry-out-upon for the most Palpable Folly and Madness, if they
should do the like, toward their Temporal Estates, or their Bodies.

Cowards, In being more afraid of little Dangers, because they are present,
than of greater, because they are future, and at a distance: As that Soldier,
who does more dread the present danger of Fighting, when he is obliged to it,
than the future danger of suffering Martial Law for running away, may justly be
esteemed a notorious Coward; So may that Man who is more afraid of a present
inconvenience, by incurring the prejudice and displeasure of his loose
Companions, to whom he would be acceptable, than of a future Mischief from the
Judgment of God.

No Man will esteem another to be truly Valiant, because he is not afraid to do
such vile unworthy things as will expose him to the displeasure and punishment
of the Civil Magistrate; Much less should he be so Accounted, for daring to do
such things, as will in the issue expose him to Divine Vengeance.

For Men of no real worth to expect the esteem and affection of others, as it
is very unequal on their parts, requiring Brick without Straw; So neither is it
Lawful nor Possible for others to allow it them: Not Lawful, because it is as
well a man's duty to contemn a vile Person, as to Honor those that fear the
Lord. Psalm. 15. 4.
Not Possible, because men must necessarily Judge according to the most
prevailing Evidence; nor can they esteem such a one to be worthy, whom they
know to be otherwise, any more than they can believe that to be White and
Straight, which they see is Black and Crooked.

Secondly, If these things be so, it will hence follow, that men who have any
Sense of Honor, should, by these considerations, be excited to a Love of that,
which is the only Means to it, namely, Religion and Virtue. Those of Slavish
Sordid Spirits, may be more easily persuaded by the consideration of Gain;
But, no Motive can be more powerful with Noble and Generous Minds, than that
of Honor. That man takes very ill measures of things, who does not make it one
of his principal cares to keep his Name unspotted; It being no easy matter to
recover a Forfeited Reputation.

Such Profligate Wretches, as are without any sense of Honor or Shame, may
justly be esteemed the Public Pests and Mischiefs of Mankind, and such as
ought to be Banished from amongst them, as being the Common Enemies to
Government and Societies.

Of all sorts of Men, there lies a peculiar Obligation upon them that are in
Public Places, to preserve their Reputations clear and without blemish: A
Private Person is not so much concerned to look after Public Fame, as that Man
is, who is engaged in Public Employment. He, that can abundantly satisfy
himself, with the Conscience of well doing, while he is in a Private Station,
if once he be called to any such Employment, where he must be Useful to others
by his Authority; It Is most fitting then, that he should seek the Aid of
Opinion, and Public Esteem, because it is this which Rules the World, and
Stamps upon Things the Rates at which they are to pass.

There is nothing in this World that we can Propose to our selves of greater
benefit, than the Love and Esteem of Good Men; I have showed before that it is
Power, it is Safety: And besides all the Advantages which we have by it whilst
we live, it is one of those things, that will abide after us, when we are gone
out of this World; And, for that reason a special regard is to be had to it:
And, the more Wise any Man is, the more Care will he take to transmit a
Grateful Memory of himself to future Times; And, since he must be Spoken of
after his Departure, he will take Care that he be well Spoken of, that his Name
may be as a Precious Ointment, leaving a Perfume behind it; That Men may Rise
up at the mention of it, and call him blessed.

I shall shut up all, with that Affectionate Exhortation of the eloquent
Apostle, Phil. 4. 8. Finally Brethren, whatsoever things are Venerable,
whatsoever things are Lovely, whatsoever things are of good Report, If there be
any Virtue, if there be any Praise, think of these Things. And the Peace of
God, which passes all understanding shall keep your Hearts and Minds through
Jesus Christ.

FINIS.

