Monday 13th. of April 1668. At a Meeting of the Council of the ROYAL SOCIETY:
Ordered, That the Discourse presented to the Royal Society, Entitled, An
Essay toward a Real Character, and Philosophical Language, be Printed by the
Printer to the Royal Society.

BROVNCKER Presi.

AN ESSAY Toward a REAL CHARACTER, And a PHILOSOPHICAL LANGUAGE.

By JOHN WILKINS D.D. Dean of RIPON, And Fellow of the ROYAL SOCIETY.

NVLLIVS IN VERBA
insignia of Royal Society

LONDON, Printed for SA: GELLIBRAND, and for JOHN MARTYN Printer to the ROYAL
SOCIETY, 1668.

To the Right Honorable WILLIAM LORD VISCOUNT BROUNCKER, PRESIDENT; Together
with the rest of the COUNCIL and FELLOWS of the ROYAL SOCIETY.
My Lord,
I NOW at length present to your Lordship those Papers I had drawn up
concerning a Real Character, and a Philosophical Language, which by several
Orders of the Society have been required of Me. I have been the longer about
it, partly because it required some considerable time to reduce the Collections
I had by me to this purpose, into a tolerable order; and partly because when
this work was done in Writing, and the Impression of it well nigh finished, it
happened (amongst many other better things) to be burnt in the late dreadful
Fire; by which, all that was Printed (excepting only two Copies) and a great
part of the unprinted Original was destroyed: The repairing of which, has
taken up the greatest part of my time ever since. I mention this by way of
Apology for that slackness and delay, I may seem to be guilty of in my
obedience to your Orders.

I am not so vain as to think that I have here completely finished this great
undertaking, with all the advantages of which such a design is capable. Nor on
the other hand, am I so diffident of this Essay, as not to b^lieve it
sufficient for the business to which it pretends, namely the distinct
expression of all things and notions that fall under discourse.

I am sensible of sundry defects in the several parts of this Book: And
therefore would make it my humble motion to your Lordship and this Society,
that you would by your Order appoint some of our number, thoroughly to examine
and consider the whole, and to offer their thoughts concerning what they judge
fit to be amended in it. Particularly in those Tables that concern the species
of Natural bodies; which, if they were (so far as they are yet known and
discovered) distinctly reduced and described, This would very much promote and
facilitate the knowledge of Nature, which is one great end of your Institution.
And besides, the ranging of these things into such an order as the Society
shall approve, would afford a very good method for your Repository, both for
the disposal of what you have already, and the supplying of what you want,
toward the completing of that Collection, so generously begun of late, by the
bounty of Mr. Daniel Collwal, a worthy Member of this Society. And by this
means, I should not doubt, but that in a very short space, you would have the
most useful Repository in the World.

It is no easy undertaking to Enumerate all such matters as are to be provided
for in such a design; But the business of Defining, being amongst all others
the most nice and difficult, must needs render it a very hard task for any one
to attempt the doing of this, for all kind of Things, Notions, and Words,
which yet is necessary to the design here proposed.

Upon which account I may be excused for being so sollicitous about the
assistance of others in these matters, because of their great difficulty and
importance. The completing of such a design, being rather the work of a
College and an Age, then of any single Person: I mean, the combined Studies of
many Students, amongst whom, the several shares of such a Work should be
distributed; And that for so long a course of time, wherein sufficient
experiments might be made of it by practice.

It has been said concerning that famous Italian Academy styled de la Crusca,
consisting of many choice Men of great Learning, that they bestowed forty years
in finishing their Vocabulary. And it is well enough known, that those great
Wits of the French Academy, did begin their Dictionary in the year 1639. And
for the hastening of the Work, did distribute the parts of it amongst several
Committees; and yet that undertaking is (for ought I can understand) far enough
from being finished.

Now if those famous Assemblies consisting of the great Wits of their Age and
Nations, did judge this Work of Dictionary-making, for the polishing of their
Language, worthy of their united labor and studies; Certainly then, the Design
here proposed, ought not to be thought unworthy of such assistance; it being as
much to be preferred before that, as things are better then words, as real
knowledge is beyond elegancy of speech, as the general good of mankind, is
beyond that of any particular Country or Nation.

I am very sensible that the most useful inventions do at their first
appearance, make but a very slow progress in the World, unless helped forward
by some particular advantage. Logarithms were an Invention of excellent Art and
usefulness; And yet it was a considerable time, before the Learned Men in other
parts, did so far take notice of them, as to bring them into use. The Art of
Shorthand, is in its kind an Ingenious device, and of considerable usefulness,
applicable to any Language, much wondered at by Travailers, that have seen the
experience of it in England: And yet though it be above Threescore years, since
it was first Invented, it is not to this day (for ought I can learn) brought
into common practice in any other Nation. And there is reason enough to expect
the like Fate for the design here proposed.

The only expedient I can think of against it, is, That it be sent abroad into
the World, with the reputation of having bin considered and approved of, by
such a Society as this; which may provoke, at least, the Learned part of the
World, to take notice of it, and to give it such encouragement, as it shall
appear to deserve.

And if upon such an amendment and recommendation by this Society, the design
here proposed, should happen to come into common use, It would requite the
Honor you bestow upon it, with abundant Interest. The being Instrumental in
any such discovery as does tend to the Universal good of Mankind, being
sufficient not only to make the Authors of it famous, but also the Times and
Places wherein they live.

He that knows how to estimate, that judgment inflicted on Mankind in the Curse
of the Confusion, with all the unhappy consequences of it, may thereby judge,
what great advantage and benefit there will be, in a remedy against it. Men are
content to bestow much time and pains in the Study of Languages, in order to
their more easy conversing with those of other Nations. It Is said of
Mithridates King of Pontus, that he was skilled in Two and twenty several
Tongues, which were spoken in the several Provinces under his Dominion: Which,
tho it were a very extraordinary attainment, yet how short a remedy was it
against the Curse of the Confusion, considering the vast multitude of Languages
that are in the World.

Besides that most obvious advantage which would ensue, of facilitating mutual
Commerce, amongst the several Nations of the World, and the improving of all
Natural knowledge; It would likewise very much conduce to the spreading of the
knowledge of Religion. Next to the Gift of Miracles, and particularly that of
Tongues, powered out upon the Apostles in the first planting of Christianity,
There is nothing that can more effectually conduce to the further
accomplishment of those Promises, which concern the diffusion of it, through
all Nations, then the design which is here proposed.

To which it will be proper for me to add, That this design will likewise
contribute much to the clearing of some of our Modern differences in Religion,
by unmasking many wild errors, that shelter themselves under the disguise of
affected phrases; which being Philosophically unfolded, and rendered according
to the genuine and natural importance of Words, will appear to be
inconsistencies and contradictions. And several of those pretended, mysterious,
profound notions, expressed in great swelling words, whereby some men set up
for reputation, being this way examined, will appear to be, either nonsense, or
very flat and jejune.

And tho it should be of no other use but this, yet were it in these days well
worth a man's pains and study, considering the Common mischief that is done, and
the many impostures and cheats that are put upon men, under the disguise of
affected insignificant Phrases.

But what ever may be the issue of this attempt, as to the establishing of a
real Character, and the bringing of it into Common use, amongst several Nations
of the World (of which I have but very slender expectations;) yet this I shall
assert with greater confidence, That the reducing of all things and notions, to
such kind of Tables, as are here proposed (were it as completely done as it
might be) would prove the shortest and plainest way for the attainment of real
Knowledge, that has been yet offered to the World. And I shall add further,
that these very Tables (as now they are) do seem to me a much better and
readier course, for the entering and training up of men in the knowledge of
things, then any other way of Institution that I know of; which I should not
presume to assert, before such able Judges as those of this Society, were it
not a thing I had well considered and were convinced of.

I have nothing further to add, but only the declaring myself to be most
Zealously devoted to the Honor and Welfare of the Royal Society,

And particularly (My Lord,) Your Lordships most Humble Servant, JO. VVILKINS.

TO THE READER.
IT may perhaps be expected by some, that I should give an account of my
engaging in a Work of this nature so unsuitable to my Calling and Business.

For the satisfaction of such, they may please to take notice, that this Work
was first undertaken, during that vacancy and leisure which I formerly enjoyed
in an Academicall station, to which the endeavors of promoting all kind of
useful knowledge, whereby Learning may be improved, is a very suitable
employment. In the time of that daily and intimate converse which I then
enjoyed, with that most Learned and excellent Person Dr. Seth Ward, the present
Bishop of Salisbury. I had frequent occasion of conferring with him, concerning
the various Desiderata, proposed by Learned men, or such things as were
conceived yet wanting to the advancement of several parts of Learning; amongst
which, this of the Universal Character, was one of the principal, most of which
he had more deeply considered, than any other Person that I knew. And in
reference to this particular, he would say, That as it was one of the most
useful, so he judged it to be one of the most feasible, amongst all the rest,
if prosecuted in a regular way. But for all such attemps to this purpose, which
he had either seen or heard of, the Authors of them did generally mistake in
their first foundations; whilst they did propose to themselves the framing of
such a Character, from a Dictionary of Words, according to some particular
Language, without reference to the nature of things, and that common Notion of
them, wherein Mankind does agree, which must chiefly be respected, before any
attempt of this nature could signify any thing, as to the main end of it.

It was from this suggestion of his, that I first had any distinct apprehension
of the proper course to be observed, in such an undertaking; having in a
Treatise I had published some years before, proposed the Hebrew Tongue as
consisting of fewest Radicals, to be the fittest ground work for such a design.

Besides the many Private conferences to this purpose, I must not forget to
mention, that Public account which he has given to the World, of his
thoughts upon this subject, in that Learned and Ingenious discourse styled
Vindiciae Academiarum; wherein he endeavors to Vindicate those Ancient and
famous Schools of Learning, from such reproaches, whereby some Ignorant and
ill-natured men (taking the advantage of those bad Times) would have exposed
them to contempt and ruin. In which Treatise there is mention made of some
considerable preparations, toward the Design here proposed, which if his other
necessary employments would have permitted him to have prosecuted, would
without doubt, long ere this, have been advanced to as great a Perfection, as
the first Essay in so difficult a matter could have attained.

It was some considerable time after this, before I had any thought of
attempting any thing in this kind: The first occasion of it was, from a desire
I had, to give some assistance to another person, who was willing to engage in
this design of framing a real Character, from the Natural notion of things; for
the helping of whom in so worthy an undertaking, I did offer to draw up for
him, the Tables of Substance, or the species of Natural Bodies, reduced under
their several Heads; which I did accordingly perform, much after the same
Method, as they are hereafter set down: Though in the doing of it, I found much
more labor and difficulty, then I expected, when I undertook it. But he for
whom I had done this, not liking this method, as being of too great a Compass,
conceiving that he could sufficiently provide for all the chief Radicals, in a
much briefer and more easy way, did not think fit to make use of these Tables.
Upon which, being my self convinced, That this which I had begun, was the only
course for the effecting of such a work, and being withal unwilling to loose so
much pains as I had already taken toward it, I resolved (as my leisure would
permit) to go on with the other Tables of Accidents. And when after many
reviews and changes I had reduced (as well as I could) into these Tables, all
simple things and notions, by a Consideration of them a Priori, I then judged
it necessary to attempt the reduction of a^l other Words in the Dictionary to
these Tables, either as they were Synonymous to them, or to be defined by them,
which would be a means to try the fullness of these Tables, and consequently to
supply their defects; And besides a great help to Learners, who without such a
direction, might not perhaps at first be able to find out the true place and
notion of many Words.

For the farther completing of this Work, I found it necessary to take into
consideration, the framing of such a Natural Grammar, as might be suited to the
Philosophy of Speech, abstracting from those many unnecessary rules belonging
to instituted Language; which proved a matter of no small difficulty,
considering the little help to be had for it, from those few Authors who had
before undertaken to do any thing in this kind.

In the doing of these things, I have not neglected any help that I could
procure from others, and must acknowledge my self much engaged to sundry
Learned Men of my acquaintance, for their directions, and furtherance in such
matters, as were most suitable to their several Studies and Professions.

Amongst the rest, I must not forget to make particular mention of the special
assistance I have received, in drawing up the Tables of Animals from that most
Learned and Inquisitive Gentleman, a worthy Member of the Royal Society, Mr.
Francis Willoughby, who has made it his particular business, in his late
Travails through the most considerable parts of Europe, to inquire after and
understand the several species of Animals, and by his own Observations is able
to advance that part of Learning, and to add many things, to what has been
formerly done, by the most Learned Authors in this kind.

And as for those most difficult Tables of Plants, I have received the like
assistance, from one of his Companions in Travail, Mr. John Wray, Late Fellow
of Trinity College in Cambridge, who besides his other general Knowledge, has
with great success applied himself to the Cultivating of that part of Learning.

And as for the principal difficulties, which I met with in any other part of
this Work, I must acknowledge my self obliged to the continual assistance I
have had, from my most Learned and worthy Friend, Dr. William Lloyd, then whom
(so far as I am able to judge,) this Nation could not have afforded a fitter
Person, either for that great Industry, or Accurate judgment, both in
Philological, and Philosophical matters, required to such a Work. And
particularly I must wholly ascribe to him that tedious and difficult task, of
suting the Tables to the Dictionary, and the drawing up of the Dictionary it
self, which upon trial, I doubt not, will be found to be the most perfect, that
was ever yet made for the English Tongue.

And here I think it proper to give notice that there are several Words
mentioned in the Dictionary, and frequently used amongst some Authors, which
are yet very questionable as to their fitness and propriety: Each of these were
in the Original Copy marked with an Asterisk, for the better distinction of
them; but by some oversight, these marks have been omitted in the Impression.

If any shall suggest, that some of the Enquiries here insisted upon (as
particularly those about the Letters of the Alphabet) do seem too minute and
trivial, for any prudent Man to bestow his serious thoughts and time about.
Such Persons may know, that the discovery of the true nature and Cause of any
the most minute thing, does promote real Knowledge, and therefore cannot be
unfit for any Man's endeauours, who is willing to contribute to the advancement
of Learning. Upon which Account some of the most eminent Persons, in several
Ages, who were Men of business, have not disdained to bestow their pains about
the First Elements of Speech.

Julius Caesar, is said to have written a Book de Analogia. And the Emperor
Charles the Great, to have made a Grammar of his vulgar Tongue. So did St.
Basil for the Greek; and St. Austin for the Latin, both extant in their Works.

Besides diverse of great reputation both Ancient and Modern, who have Written
whole Books on purpose, concerning the just Number of the Letters in the
Alphabet; Others have applied their disquisitions to some particular Letters:
Messala Corvinus, a Great Man, and a famous Orator amongst the Romans, Writ a
Book concerning the Letter S. Adamantius Martyr, was the Author of another
Book, concerning the Letters V. and B. Our Learned Gataker has Published a Book
concerning Dipthongs. And Jovianus Pontanus esteemed a Learned Man* has Two
Books de Adspiratione, or the Letter H. Mr. Franklyn has published a
particular Discourse concerning Accents, And Erycius Puteanus has Written a
Book purposely, de Inter punctione, of the true way of Pointing Clauses and
Sentences. And these Generally well esteemed for their great usefulness in the
Promoting of Learning: Which may be a sufficient Vindication against any
Prejudices of this Nature.

THE CONTENTS.
The First Part Containing the Prolegomena.
CHAPTER, I. I. THE Introduction. II. The Original of Languages. III. The First
Mother Tongues. IV. Their several Offsprings. Page, 1 CHAP. II. I. Concerning
the various Changes and Corruptions, to which all vulgar Languages are
obnoxious. II. Particularly concerning the Change of the English Tongue. III.
Whether any Language formerly in use, be now wholly lost. IV. Concerning the
first rise and occasion of New Languages. page 6 CHAP. III. I. The Original of
Letters and Writing. II. That all Letters were derived from the Hebrew. III.
The use of Letters is less Ancient, and the Kinds of them less numerous, than
of Languages themselves. IV. Of Notes for secrecy or brevity. V. Of a Real
Character. VI. Of Alphabets in General. page 10 CHAP. IV. I. Of the defects in
Common-Alphabets, as to the true Order of the Letters, II. Their just Number,
III. Determinate Powers, V. Fitting Names, V. Proper Figures. VI. Of the
Imperfections belonging to the Words of Languages, as to their Equivocalness,
Variety of Synonymous Words, Uncertain Phraseologies, Improper way of Writing.
page 14 CHAP. V. I. That neither Letters nor Languages, have been regularly
established by the Rules of Art. II. The Natural ground or Principle of the
several ways of Communication amongst Men. III. The first thing to be provided
for, in the establishing of a Philosophical Character or Language, is a just
enumeration of all such Things and Notions, to which Names are to be assigned.
page 19
The Second Part Containing Universal Philosophy.
CHAPTER. I. I. THE Scheme of Genus's. II. Concerning the more General Notions
of Things, The difficulty of Establishing these aright. III. Of Transcendentals
General. IV. Of Transcendentals Mixed. V. Of Transcendental Relations of
Action. VI. Of the several Notions belonging to Grammar, or Logic. Page, 22
CHAP. II. I. Concerning God. II. Of the several Things and Notions reducible
under that Collective Genus of the World. page 51 CHAP. III. I. Of Elements and
Meteors. II. Of Stones. III. Of Metals. page 56 CHAP. IV. I. Of Plants, The
difficulty of enumerating and describing these. II. The more general
distribution of them. III. Of Herbs considered according to their Leaves. IV.
Of Herbs considered according to their Flowers. V. Of Herbs considered
according to their Seed Vessels. VI. Of Shrubs. VII. Of Trees. page 67 CHAP. V.
I. Concerning Animals, The General distribution of them. II. Of Exanguious
Animals. III. Of Fishes. IV. Of Birds. V. Of Beasts. VI. A Digression
concerning the capacity of Noah's Ark. page 121 CHAP. VI. I. Of Parts of
Animate Bodies, whether I. Peculiar, or II. General. p. 168 CHAP. VII. I.
Concerning the Predicament of Quantity. I. Of Magnitude. II. Of Space. III. Of
Measure. page 181 CHAP. VIII. Concerning the Predicament of Quality, and the
several Genus's belonging to it. I. Of Natural Power. II. Of Habit. III. Of
Manners. IV. Of Sensible Quality. V. Of Disease; with the various differences
and species under each of these. page 194 CHAP. IX. Of the Predicament of
Action; The several Genus's under it. viz. I. Spiritual Action. II. Corporeal
Action. III. Motion. IV. Operation. p. 225 CHAP. X. Concerning Relation more
private, namely I. Oeconomical, or Family Relation; together with the several
kinds of things belonging to those in that capacity, either as II. Possessions,
or III. Provisions. page 249 CHAP. XI. Concerning Relation more Public,
whether I. Civil. II. Judiciary. III. Naval. IV. Military. V. Ecclesiastical.
page 263 CHAP. XII. I. A General Explication of the design of the foregoing
Tables. II. Particular Instances in the six principal Genus's of it. III.
Something to be noted concerning Opposites and Synonyma's. IV. An Account of
what kind of things ought not to be provided for in such Tables. p. 289
The Third Part Containing Philosophical Grammar.
CHAPTER. I. I. COncerning the several Kinds and Parts of Grammar. II. Of
Etymology, The more general Scheme of Integrals and Particles. III. Of Nouns
in General. IV. Of Substantives common, denoting either Things, Actions, or
Persons. V. Rules concerning Nouns of Action. VI. Of Substantives Abstracts.
VII. Of Adjectives according to the true Philosophical notion of them. VIII.
The true notion of a Verb. IX. Of derived Adverbs. X. A general Scheme of the
forementioned Derivations. page, 297 CHAP. II. I. Of Particles in General. II.
Of the Copula. III. Of Pronouns more generally. IV. More particularly. V. Of
Interjections more generally. VI. More particularly. p. 304 CHAP. III. I. Of
Prepositions in general. II. The particular kinds of them enumerated. III. An
Explication of the four last Combinations of them, relating to Place or Time.
p. 309 CHAP. IV. I. Of Adverbs in general. II. The particular kinds of them.
III. Of Conjunctions. p. 312 CHAP. V. I. Of Articles. II. Of Modes. III. Of
Tenses. IV. The most distinct way of expressing the differences of Time. p. 315
CHAP. VI. I. Of Transcendental particles, The end and use of them. II. The
usual ways for enlarging the sense of Words in instituted Languages. III. The
general Heads of Transcendental Particles. p. 318 CHAP. VII. Instances of the
great usefulness of these Transcendental Particles, with directions how they
are to be applied. p. 323 CHAP. VIII. Of the Accidental differences of Words.
I. Inflexion. II. Derivation. III. Composition. p. 352 CHAP. IX. Of the second
part of Grammar called Syntax. p. 354 CHAP. X. Of Orthography. I. Concerning
Letters. The Authors who have treated of this Subject. II. A brief Table of all
such kinds of Simple sound, which can be framed by the mouths of Men. III. A
further Explication of this Table, as to the Organs of Speech, and as to the
Letters framed by these Organs. p. 357 CHAP. XI. Of Vowels. p. 363 CHAP. XII.
Of Consonants. p. 366 CHAP. XIII. Of Compound Vowels, and Consonants. p. 370
CHAP. XIV. I. Of the Accidents of Letters, I. Their Names. II. Their Order.
III. Affinities and Oppositions. IV. Their Figures, with a twofold Instance of
a more regular Character for the Letters, The later of which may be styled
Natural. V. Of Pronunciation. VI. The several Letters dis-used by several
Nations. p. ^^^
The Fourth Part Containing a Real Character, and a Philosophical Language.
CHAPTER I. The proposal of one kind of Real Character (amongst many other
which might be offered) both for all Integrals, whether Genus's, Differences or
Species; together with the derivations and Inflexions belonging to them, as
likewise for all the several kinds of Particles. page, 385 CHAP. II. An
Instance of this Real Character, in the Lord's Prayer and the Creed. p. 395
CHAP. III. How this Real Character may be made effable in a distinct Language,
and what kind of Letters or Syllables may be conveniently assigned to each
Character. p. 414 CAHP. IV. Instance of this Philosohical Language, both in the
Lord's Prayer and the Creed: A comparison of the Language here proposed, with
fifty others, as to the facility and Euphonicalness of it. p. 421 CHAP. V.
Directions for the more easy learning of this Character and Language, with a
brief Table containing the Radicals, both Integrals and Particles; together
with the Character and Language, by which each of them are to be expressed. p.
439 CHAP. VI. The Appendix containing a Comparison betwixt this Natural
Philosophical Grammar and that of other Instituted Languages, particularly the
Latin, in respect of the multitude of unncecessary Rules and of Anomalisms,
concerning the China Character: The several Attemps and Proposals made by
others, toward a new kind of Character and Language. The advantage in respect
of facility, which this Philosophical Language has above the Latin. p. 441
ERRATA.
PAGE 6. Line 17. Read Instituted by Art. p. 15. l. 9. r. 3. By assigning, etc.
p. 16. l. 11. (Y) p. 27. l. 39. dele relief. p. 32. l. 43. dele poor. p. 40. l.
28. r. defer. p. 41. l. 21, 22. add administer, disperse, distribute Token,
Fairing, to the preceding line. p. 70. l. 38. r. dryer. p. 73. l. 3. r.
Laciniae. p. 91. l. 7, 8. r. of this Tribe. p. 94. l. 19. r. expand. p. 97. l
21, 31. r. Chichling. p. 133. l. 31. r. Oxyrhynchos. p. 134. l. ^8. r. Iozo. p.
139. l. 18. Channa. p. 147. l. 20. r. Cariocatactes. p. 150. l. 20, 21. r.
Coccothrauctes. p. 153. Of Birds. p. 156. l. 13. Avosetta. p. 157. l. 48.
Strepsiceros. p. 159. l. 5. r. Shrewmouse. p. 177. l. 10, etc. r. More properly
Organical; Whether such parts as are External; used for the Senses, etc.
Internal; used for Tasting, Speaking, or Eating.
p. 181. l. 40. after superficies add imyplying a respect to the sides or
limits of it. p. 291. l. 49. dele the, l. 50. r. the word Change. p 292. l. 22.
r. Arts. p. 299. l 35. r. Lux. p. 301. l. 14. r. Quantity. p. 309. l. 19. r.
this. p. 324. l. 38. r. abber. p 346. l. 29. r. Flat. p. 368. l. 12. r. Thin.
p. 390. l. 8, 9. r. upward, downward, above, below.

Page ^91. lin. 13. (...) p. 395. number, 71. (...) n. 74. (...) p. 399. n* 33.
(...) p. 400. n. 37, 45. (...) p. 404. l. 3. n. 23. (...) n. 27 (...) n. 37.
(...) n. 109. (...) p. 413. l. 20. (...) p. 422. l. 3. (...). p. 427. n 37.
couabys. p. 428.. l. 2. dele 86. l. 6. toualti. p 429 l. 19 for ou. r. s.

In the MARGIN.
PAge 70. Read Muscus. p. 72. Oryza. p. 76. Petasites. p. 86. Conyza. p. 89.
Perfoliata. Ery^gium. Sphondylium. p. 90 Charephyllon. p. 91. Thysselinum.
Chamadrys. p. 92. Chamaepitis. p. 93. Stachis. Bugula. p. 95. Caryophyllata. p.
99. Scorpioides. Bupleurifolio. p. 102. Caryophyllus. Ascyrum. p. 103.
Chamaedrys. p. 104. V^ola. Hyoscyamus. p. 106. Ebulus. p. 107. Grossularia. p.
108. Mahaleb. p. 109. Philyrhea. Pyracantha. Thyme^^a. p. 115. Laurocerasus. p.
116. Pistacia. Corylus. p. 123. Proscarabaus. p. 142. L^uciscus. p. 148. Ruffa,
Corylorum. p. 150. Alauda. Cenchramus. p. 152. Troglodytes. p. 158. Gazellus.

CHAP. I. I. The Introduction. II. The Original of Languages. III. The first
Mother-tongues. IV. Their several Offsprings.
IN the handling of that subject,. I.
I have here proposed to treat of, I shall digest the things which to me seem
most proper and material to be said upon this occasion, into four parts;
according to this following Method.

In the first Part I shall premise some things as Pracognita, concerning such
Tongues and Letters as are already in being, particularly concerning those
various defects and imperfections in them, which ought to be supplied and
provided against, in any such Language or Character, as is to be invented
according to the rules of Art.

The second Part shall contein that which is the great foundation of the thing
here designed, namely a regular enumeration and description of all those things
and notions, to which marks or names ought to be assigned according to their
respective natures, which may be styled the Scientifical Part, comprehending
Universal Philosophy. It being the proper end and design of the several
branches of Philosophy to reduce all things and notions unto such a frame, as
may express their natural order, dependence, and relations.

The third Part shall treat concerning such helps and Instruments, as are
requisite for the framing of these more simple notions into continued Speech or
Discourse, which may therefore be styled the Organical or Instrumental Part,
and does comprehend the Art of Natural or Philosophical Grammar.

In the fourth Part I shall show how these more general Rules may be applied
to particular kinds of Characters, and Languages, giving an instance of each.
To which shall be adjoined by way of Appendix, a Discourse showing the
advantage of such a kind of Philosophical Character and Language, above any of
those which are now known, more particularly above that which is of most
general use in these parts of the World; namely, the Latin.

Lastly, There shall be added a Dictionary of the English tongue, in which
shall be shown how all the words of this Language, according to the various
equivocal senses of them, may be sufficiently expressed by the Philosophical
Tables here proposed.

I begin with the first of these.

. II.
The design of this Treatise being an attempt toward a new kind of Character
and Language, it cannot therefore be improper to premise somewhat concerning
those already in being; the first Original of them, their several kinds, the
various changes and corruptions to which they are liable, together with the
manifold defects belonging to them. This I shall endeavor to do in the former
part of this Discourse.

There is scarce any subject that has been more thoroughly scanned and debated
amongst Learned men, than the Original of Languages and Letters. It Is evident
enough that no one Language is natural to mankind, because the knowledge which
is natural would generally remain amongst men, notwithstanding the
superinduction of any other particular Tongue, wherein they might be by Art.
Nor is it much to be wondered at, that the ancient Heathen, who knew nothing of
Scripture-revelation, should be inclined to believe, that either Men and
Languages were eternal; or, that if there were any particular time when men did
spring out of the Earth, and after inhabit alone and dispersedly in Woods and
Caves, they had at first no Articulate voice, but only such rude sounds as
Beasts have; till afterward particular Families increasing, or several
Families joining together for mutual safety and defense, under Government and
Societies, they began by degrees and long practice to consent in certain
Articulate sounds, whereby to communicate their thoughts, which in several
Countries made several Languages, according to that in the Poet, Cum
prorepserunt primis animalia terris,
Horat. lib. 1. Sat. 3.
Mutum and turpe pecus, glandem atque cubilia propter
Vnguibus and pugnis, dein fustibus, atque ita porro
Pugnabant armis, quae post fabricaverat usus,
Donec verba quibus voces sensusque notarent
Nominaque invenere; dehinc absistere bello,
Oppida coeperunt munire, and ponere leges,
Ne quis fur esset, neu latro, neu quis adulter, etc.


But to us, who have the revelation of Scripture, these kind of scruples and
conjectures are sufficiently stated. And it is evident enough that the first
Language was con-created with our first Parents, they immediately understanding
the voice of God speaking to them in the Garden. And how Languages came to be
multiplied, is likewise manifested in the Story of the Confusion of Babel. Genesis
11.1, 6.
How many Languages, and which they were that sprang up at that Confusion, is
altogether uncertain; whether many of them that were then in being, be not now
wholly lost; and many others, which had not the same original, have not since
arisen in the world, is not (I think) to be doubted.

The most received Conjecture is, that the Languages of the Confusion were
according to the several Families from Noah, which were 70 or 72. though there
be very strong probabilities to prove that they were not so many, and that the
first Dispersion did not divide mankind into so many Colonies. But now the
several Languages that are used in the world do far exceed this number. Not.
Hist. lib. 6. cap. 5. Strabo, lib. 11.
Pliny and Strabo do both make mention of a great Mart-Town in Colchos named
Dioscuria, to which men of three hundred Nations, and of so many several
Languages, were wont to resort for Trading. Which, considering the narrow
compass of Traffic before the invention of the magnetic Needle, must needs be
but a small proportion, in comparison to those many of the remoter and unknown
parts of the world.

Some of the American Histories relate, Mr. Cambden's Remains.
that in every fourscore miles of that vast Country, and almost in every
particular valley of Peru, the Inhabitants have a distinct Language. And one
who for several years traveled the Northern parts of America about Florida,
Purchase Pilg. lib. 8. sect. 4. chap. 1.
and could speak six several Languages of those people, does affirm, that he
found, upon his enquiry and converse with them, more than a thousand different
Languages amongst them.

As for those Languages which seem to have no derivation from, or dependence
upon, or affinity with one another,. III.
they are styled Linguae matrices, or Mother-tongues. Of these Joseph Scaliger
affirms there are eleven, and not more, used in Europe; Diatribe de Europaeorum
linguis.
whereof four are of more general and large extent, and the other seven of a
narrower compass and use. Of the more general Tongues.

1. The Greek was anciently of very great extent, not only in Europe, but in
Asia too, and Afric, Brerewood's Enquiries, chap. 1.
where several Colonies of that Nation were planted; by which dispersion and
mixture with other people it did degenerate into several Dialects. Besides
those four that are commonly noted, the Doric, Ionic, Aeolic, Attic, Herodotus
does mention four several Dialects of the Ionic. The inhabitants of Rhodes,
Cyprus, Crete, had each of them some peculiarity in their Language. And the
present Coptic or Egyptian seems, both from the words and the character, to be
a branch of this family, and was probably spread amongst that people in the days
of Alexander the Great, upon his conquering of them: Though some conceive that
there were at least 30000 families of Greeks planted in that Country long
before his time.

2. The Latin, though this be much of it a derivation from the Greek, (of which
the now French, Spanish, and Italian are several offsprings and derivations)
had anciently four several Dialects, De honesta disciplina, lib. 3. cap. 3.
as Petrus Crinitus shows cut of Varro.

3. The Teutonic or German is now distinguished into Upper and Lower. The Upper
has two notable Dialects. 1. The Danish, Scandian, Verstegan, chap. 7.
or perhaps the Gothic, to which belongs the Language used in Denmark, Norway,
Swedeland, and Island. 2. The Saxon, to which appertain the several Languages
of the English, the Scots, the Frisians, and those on the North of Elve.

4. The Slavonic is extended, though with some variation, through many large
Territories, Muscovia, Russia, Poland, Bohemia, Vandalia, Croatia, Lithuania,
Dalmatia; Gesuer. Mithridates, cap. 21.
and is said to be the vulgar Language used amongst 60 several Nations.

The Languages of lesser extent are, 1. The Albanese, or old Epirotic, now used
in the mountainous parts of Epirus.

2. The Europaean Tartar, or Scythian, from which some conceive our Irish to
have had its original. As for the Turkish Tongue, that is originally no other
but the Asiatic Tartar, mixed with Armenian and Persian, some Greek, and much
Arabic.

3. The Hungarian, used in the greatest part of that Kingdom.

4. The Finnic, used in Finland and Lapland.

5. The Cantabrian, used amongst the Biscainers, who live near the Ocean on the
Pyrene hills, bordering both upon France and Spain.

6. The Irish, in Ireland, and from thence brought over into some parts of
Scotland. Though Mr. Camden would have this to be a derivation from the Welsh.

7. The old Gaulish or British, which is yet preserved in Wales, Cornwall, and
Britain in France.

Enquiries, chap. 4.
To this number Mr. Brerewood does add four others, viz. 1. The Arabic, now used
in the steep mountains of Granata; which yet is a Dialect from the Hebrew, and
not a Mother Tongue. 2. The Cauchian, in East-Friseland. 3. The Illyrian, in
the Isle of Veggia. 4. The Iazygian, on the North side of Hungary.


Besides this difference of Languages in their first derivation, every
particular Tongue has its several Dialects.. IV.
Though Iudaea were a region of a very narrow compass, yet was it not without
its varieties of this kind: witness the story concerning Shibboleth and
Sibboleth; and that of the Levite, Judges 12. Judges 18.3. Matthew. 26.73.
who was discovered by his manner of speech; and S. Peter's being known for a
Galilaean. It Is so generally in other Countries, and particularly with us in
England, where the Northern and Western inhabitants do observe a different
dialect from other parts of the Nation, as may appear from that particular
instance mentioned by Verstegan. Whereas the inhabitants about London would
say, I would eat more cheese if I had it. A Northern man would speak it thus,
Ay sud eat mare cheese gyn ay had et. And a Western man thus, Chud eat more
cheese an chad it.

Every one of these reputed Mother-tongues, except the Arabic, (and perhaps the
Hungarian) was used in Europe during the time of the Roman Empire. But whether
they were all of them so ancient as the Confusion of Babel, does not appear;
there wants not good probability to the contrary for some of them.

Georg. Hornii Epist. in Boxhornii Origines Gallic.
It has been the opinion of some, particularly Boxhornius, that the Scythian
Tongue was the common mother from which both the Greek, Latin, German and
Persian were derived, as so many Dialects; and it is said that Salmasius did
incline to the same judgment. And Philip Cluverius conjectures, that both
Germans, Gauls, Spaniards, Britans, Swedes and Norwegians, did anciently use
one and the same Language. One principal argument used for this is, the
agreement of those remote Nations in some radical words. Joseph Scaliger
observes that the words, Father, Mother, Brother, Bond, etc. are used in the
Persian tongue, with some little variety, in the same sense and signification
as they are used with us. And Busbequius relates, that the inhabitants of
Taurica Chersonesus have diverse words in the same sense common with us, In
Epist.
as Wine, Silver, Corn, Salt, Fish, Apple, etc. But this might be merely
casual, or else occasioned by a mixture of Colonies, and will not argue a
derivation of one from another. So there are several words common to the Turks,
Germans, Boxhorn. Origin. Gallic. cap. 6. and 8.
Greeks, French, sometimes of the same, and sometimes of several
significations; which is not sufficient to argue that all these were of the
same Original.

Besides these Europaean, there is likewise great variety of Languages in other
parts of the world. As for the Hebrew Tongue, which is by many learned men
supposed to be the same that Abraham learnt when he came into Canaan, to which
that expression Isai. 19.18. The language of Canaan, is thought to allude; this
is supposed to be the first Mother tongue amongst all those that are now known
in the world, from which there are sundry derivations, as the Chaldee, Syriac,
Punic, Arabic, Persian* Aethiopic.

When the Jews were in Captivity at Babylon, mixed with the Chaldeans for 70
years, Brerewood's Enquiries, chap. 9.
in that tract of time they made up a Language distinct from both, which is
sometimes called Syriac, and sometimes Chaldee, and sometimes Hebrew. Those
passages in the Gospel, which are said to be in the Hebrew tongue, as Talitha
Kumi; Elohi, Elohi, Lamma sabachthani, John 5.2. and 19.13, 17. Acts 21.40.
Bochart. Geog. l. 1. cap. 15.
are properly Syriac; only they are called Hebrew, because that was the
Language which the Hebrews then used. A great part of this Syriac tongue is for
the substance of the words Chaldee, and Hebrew for the fashion, so degenerating
much from both. After the Captivity the pure Hebrew ceased to be vulgar,
remaining only amongst learned men, as appears by that place in Nehem. 8.7, 8.
where we find the Priests, upon reading of the Law to the people after their
coming out of Babylon, were fain to expound it distinctly to them, and to make
them understand the meaning of it; the common people, by long disuse, being
grown strangers to the Language wherein 'twas written. So in our Savior's
time, the unlearned Jews, whose vulgar Tongue the Syriac was, could not
understand those parts of Moses and the Prophets read to them in Hebrew every
Sabbath Day. Which was the reason of those public speeches and declarations of
any learned men, who occasionally came into the Synagogues, after the reading
of the Law: Luke 4.15, 16. Acts 13.15.
though neither Priests, nor Levites, nor Scribes, yet was it ordinary for them
to expound unto the people the meaning of those portions of Scripture that were
appointed to be read out of the Hebrew, which the people did not understand;
and to render their meaning in Syriac, which was their vulgar Tongue.

As for so much of the pure Hebrew as is now in being, which is only that in
the old Testament, though it be sufficient to express what is there intended,
yet it is so exceedingly defective in many other words requisite to humane
discourse, that the Rabbis are fain to borrow words from many other Languages,
Greek, Latin, Spanish, etc. as may appear at large in Buxtorf's Lexicon
Rabbinicum, and a particular Discourse written to this very purpose by David
Cohen de Lara. And, from the several defects and imperfections which seem to be
in this Language, it may be guessed not to be the same which was con-created
with our first Parents, and spoken by Adam in Paradise.

What other varieties of Tongues there have been, or are, in Asia, Afric, or
America, I shall not now enquire.

CHAP. II. I. Concerning the various changes and corruptions to which all
vulgar Languages are obnoxious. II. Particularly concerning the changes of the
English tongue. III. Whether any Language, formerly in use, be now wholly lost.
IV. Concerning the first rise and occasion of new Languages.
THere are three Queres which may deserve some farther disquisition.. I.
1. Whether the purest of those Mother-tongues, which yet remain, be not now
much changed from what they were at the first Confusion. 2. Whether and how any
of the Mother-tongues have been quite lost since the Confusion. 3. Whether and
how other new Languages have since arisen in the world.

1. To the first, Besides the common fate and corruption to which Languages as
well as all other humane things are subject, there are many other particular
causes which may occasion such a change: The mixture with other Nations in
Commerce; Marriages in Regal Families, which does usually bring some common
words into a Court fashion; that affectation incident to some eminent men in
all ages, of coining new words, and altering the common forms of speech, for
greater elegance; the necessity of making other words, according as new things
and inventions are discovered. Besides, the Laws of foreign Conquests usually
extend to Letters and Speech as well as Territories; the Victor commonly
endeavoring to propagate his own Language as far as his Dominions; which is
the reason why the Greek and Latin are so universally known. And when a Nation
is overspread with several Colonies of foreiners, though this do not always
prevail to abolish the former Language, yet if they make any long abode, this
must needs make such a considerable change and mixture of speech as will very
much alter it from its original Purity.

Those learned Languages which have now ceased to be vulgar, and remain only
in Books, by which the purity of them is regulated, may, whilst those Books are
extant and studied, continue the same without change. But all Languages that
are vulgar, as those learned ones formerly were, are upon the forementioned
occasions, subject to so many alterations, that in tract of time they will
appear to be quite another thing then what they were at first.

Brerewood's Enquiries, chap. 2. and 6.
The Liturgies of S. Basil and S. Chrysostom, which are yet used in the Greek
Churches in their public worship, the one for solemn, the other for common
days, have been a long time unintelligible to that people; so much is the
vulgar Greek degenerated from its former purity.

Histor. lib. 3.
And Polibius testifies, that the Articles of truce betwixt the Romans and
Carthaginians could scarce be understood by the most learned Roman Antiquaries
350 years after the time of their making.

. II.
If any English man should now write or speak as our forefathers did about six
or seven hundred years past, Alex. Gill Logonom. Anglican. Pre^ace.
we should as little understand him as if he were a foreiner; of which it were
easy to give several proofs by instance, if it were not inconsistent with my
present design of brevity. What the Saxons Language was at their first arrival
into England about the year 440, does not appear; but it is most probable that
the changes and differences of it, have been somewhat proportionable in several
Ages.

About the year of Christ 700 the Lord's Prayer in English was thus rendered:

Uren fader thic arth in heofnas, sic gehalgud thin noma: Cambden's Remains,
page 23.
to cymeth thin ric: sic thin willa sue is in heofnas and in eortho. Uren hlaf
ofer wirtlic sell us to daeg; and forget us scylda urna, sue we forgefen
scyldgum urum; and no inlead usith in custnung. Ah gefrig urich from ifle. Amen.

About 200 years after, it was changed thus:

Thu ure fader the eart on heofenum. Si thin nama gehalgod. Cum thin ric. Si
thin willa on eorthen swa, swa on heofenum. Lisle's Saxon Monuments.
Syle us to daeg urn daegthanlican hlaf. And forgif us ure gyltas swa, swa we
forgifath tham the with us agyltath. And ne led the us on costnung. Ac alys us
from yfle. Si it swa.

About the same time it was rendered in the Saxon Gospels, said to be Translated
by King Alfred, after this manner.

Faeder ure thu the earth on heofenum, si thin nama Gehalgod to be cume thin
Rice, Gewurthe thin willa on eorthan swa swa on heofnum, urne ge daeghwanlican
hlaf syle us to daeg. And forgyf us ure gyltas, swa swa we forgivath urum
gyltendum. And ne gelaedde thu us on costnung. Ac Alyse us of yfle.

About 260 years after, in the time of King Henry the 2d, it was rendered thus,
and sent over by Pope Adrian, an Englishman, turned into meter, that the
people might more easily learn and remember it.

Ure fadyr in heaven rich,
Thy name be hallyed ever lich,
Thou bring us thy michell bliss:
Als hit in heaven y. do,
Evar in earth been it also.
That holy bread that lasts ay,
Thou send it ous this ilke day,
Forgive ous all that we have don,
As we forgivet uch other mon:
Ne let ous fall into no founding,
Ac shield ous fro the foul thing. Amen.
And about a hundred years after, in the time of Henry the third, it was
rendered thus: Fader that art in heavin bliss,
Thin helge nam it wurth the bliss,
Cumen and mot thy kingdom,
Thin holy will it be all don,
In heaven and in erdh also,
So it shall bin full well Ic tro.
Gif us all bread on this day,
And forgif us ure sins,
As we do ure wider winnes:
Let us not in fonding fall,
Oac fro evil thu syld us all. Amen.


About two hundred years after this in the time of Henry the VI. (as appears by
a large manuscript Velume Bible in the Oxford-Library, said to have been this
Kings, and by him to have been given to the Carthusians in London;) It was
rendered thus.

Our fadir that art in hevenes, halewid be thy name, thy kingdom come to thee,
be thy will don in eerthe, as in hevene, give to us this day our breed over
othre substanc, and forgive to us our dettis, as we forgiven our dettouris,
and led us not into temptation, but delivere us from ivel. Amen.

In another M. S. of Wickliffes Translation, who lived in Richard the 2ds time,
it is rendered with very small difference from this.

About a hundred years after this, In a Bible set forth with the Kings licens,
translated by Thomas Matthew, and printed in the year 1537, it was rendered thus:

O our father which art in heven hallowed be thy name. Let thy kingdom come.
Thy will be fulfilled, as well in earth, as it is in heven. Geve us this day
our daily bred. And forgeve us our treaspases, even as we forgeve our
trespacers. And lead us not into temptacion, but delyver us from evyll. Amen.

After the same manner it is rendered in the Translation of William Tyndall,
with some little differences in the spelling.

This one instance may sufficiently manifest by what degrees this Language did
receive its several Changes, and how much altered it is now from what it has
been, and consequently what is to be expected in future times. Since Learning
began to flourish in our Nation, there have been more then ordinary Changes
introduced in our Language: partly by new artificial Compositions; partly by
enfranchising strange foreign words, for their elegance and significancy, which
now make one third part of our Language; and partly by refining and mollifying
old words, for the more easy and graceful sound: by which means this last
Century may be conjectured to have made a greater change in our Tongue, then
any of the former, as to the addition of new words.

And thus, in all probability, must it have been with all other vulgar
Languages. So that it is not likely that any of these Mother-tongues now in
being, are the same that they were at the first Confusion. So true is that of
the Poet: Horat. de art poetica.
Vt sylvae foliis pronos mutantur in annos,
Prima cadunt; ita verborum vetus interit aetas,
Et, juvenum ritu, florent modo nata vigentque.
Debemur morti nos nostraque --
And a little after, Multa renascentur quae jam cecidere, cadentque
Quae nunc sunt in honor vocabula, si volet usus,
Quem penes arbitrium est, and vis, and norma loqu^ndi.


2. As to the second Quere, Whether any of the Ancient Languages be now quite
lost;. III.
it may be answered, That if in some few hundreds of years a Language may be so
changed as to be scarce intelligible; then, in a much longer tract of time it
may be quite abolished, none of the most radical and substantial parts
remaining: For every change is a gradual corruption.

Before the flourishing of the Roman Empire, there were several native
Languages used in Italy, France, Spain. Ludov. Vives Annot. in August. Civ.
Dei, lib. 19. cap. 17.
In Italy we read of the Messapian, the Hetruscan, the Sabine, the Oscan, the
Hetrurian or Tuscan Languages; which are now thought by Learned men to be
utterly lost, and nowhere to be found in the World.

It Is probable that there was not only one Language in so vast a Territory as
France, but that several Provinces spoke several Languages: Brerewood's
Enquiries, chap. 6.
But what those Languages were, or whether yet extant, is uncertain. As for the
Celtae, who, inhabiting the inner part of the Country, were less subject to
foreign mixtures, it is most probable that their Language might be the British or
Welsh, which is yet spoken in some parts of France. De Bello Gallico, lib. 6.
Caesar reports that the Gauls were wont often to pass over into Britain, to be
instructed by the Druids, amongst whom there was then no use of Books or
Writing, and therefore they must communicate by Discourse. And Tacitus affirms
that the Speech of the British and Gauls, differed but little.

It is conceived that one of the ancient Tongues of Spain was the Cantabrian,
which does now there remain in the more barren mountainous, inaccessible parts,
where Conquerors are less willing to pursue, or desirous to plant; as our
British does in Wales. But it is probable that there might be several other
Languages besides this in so great a Continent, as well as in Italy, which are
now wholly lost and unknown.

3. As to the third Quere, concerning the first Rise and occasion of new
Languages, IV.
that may be sufficiently answered by what was before suggested, concerning
those many particular emergencies which may contribute to the introducing a
change in Languages.

Some think that the Italians, Spaniards and French, after they were totally
subdued by the Romans, and planted with their Colonies, did, after a certain
space of time, receive the Latin Tongue as their most vulgar Speech, and
retained it; till afterward, being several times overrun by the Northern
barbarous Nations, the Goths and Vandals, and other Tribes of the Germans, who
mixed with them, and after several Conquests resided amongst them, sometimes
20, 60, 200 years together; this afforded time enough for such a thorough
coalition betwixt them and the Natives, as could not but introduce a great
change in the common Language, whilst the Nations were forced to attemper their
Speech for the mutual understanding of one another.

Others conceive that those Countries did not at first perfectly receive the
Latin from the Romans, but did only make use of the most principal radical
words; neglecting the Grammatical rules of composition and inflection, and
withal varying the way of pronunciation, according to the unusualness and
difficulty of several sounds to several Countries: And that this was the first
and chief occasion of those various Medleys or several Dialects now in use;
which were afterward somewhat farther changed from their Originals, by those
several Inundations of the Barbarians

It Is not much material to dispute, which of these causes had the principal
influence in the extraction of these modern Tongues, so long as it is granted
that both of them might contribute and suffice for this effect. As for our
present English, this seems to be a mixture of the British, Roman, Saxon,
Danish, Norman, according to the several vicissitudes of Plantations and
Conquests, Cambden's Remains.
that this Nation has undergone. And according as such Conquests have been
more or less complete and absolute, so have the Languages been more or less
generally altered: which is the reason why the Saxon Tongue was by our
progenitors more fully introduced in England, then either that of the Franks
amongst the Gauls, or that of the Goths or Lumbards in Italy, or that of the
Goths, Vandals or Moors in Spain.

Linschotten vo^age, chap. 18.
That which seems to be the newest Language in the World, is the Malayan, which
is now as general and common amongst the Natives of the East Indies, as Latin
or French is in these parts of the World. It Is said to be but of late
invention, occasioned by the concourse of Fishermen from Pegu, Siam, Bengala,
and several other Nations, who meeting together at a place convenient for
Fishing, and finding that it was by situation exceeding commodious for Traffic
from several parts, did agree to settle there a Plantation; and accordingly
built the Town of Malacca, which has since, for many years, been governed by
the Portuguez, and is now under the power of the Hollander. And, for the more
facil converse with one another, they agreed upon a distinct Language, which
probably was made up by selecting the most soft and easy words belonging to
each several Nation. And this is the only Language (for ought I know) that
has ever been at once invented; if it may properly be styled a distinct
Language, and not rather a Medley of many. But this being invented by rude
Fishermen, it cannot be expected that it should have all those advantages, with
which it might have been furnished by the rules of Philosophy.

Additamentum de Regno ^atayae.
I know that the Learned Golius does affirm the China Language to be invented by
Art; but, upon the best discovery to be made of it at this distance, from those
who have lived many years in that Country, and pretend to understand the
Language, it appears to be so exceedingly equivocal, and in many respects so
very imperfect, that there is little reason to believe it had any such Original.

CHAP. III. I. The Original of Letters and Writing. II. That all Letters were
derived from the Hebrew. III. The use of Letters is less ancient, and the kinds
of them less numerous, then of the Languages themselves. IV. Of Notes for
Secrecy or Brevity. V. Of real Characters. VI. Of Alphabets in general.
HAving laid down this brief and general View of Languages, it is requisite that
something should be also premised concerning Letters,. I.
the Invention of which was a thing of so great Art and exquisiteness, that
Tully does from hence infer the divinity and spirituality of the humane soul,
Tuscul. Qu. lib. 1.
and that it must needs be of a far more excellent and abstracted Essence then
mere Matter or Body, in that it was able to reduce all articulate sounds to 24
Letters.

Though the Scripture does not mention any thing concerning the invention of
these; yet it is most generally agreed, that Adam, (though not immediately after
his Creation, yet) in process of time, upon his experience of their great
necessity and usefulness, did first invent the ancient Hebrew Character:
whether that which we now call the Hebrew, or else the Samaritan, is a question
much debated by several Learned men, which I shall not now inquire into, or
offer to determine.

As for those particular Alphabets which are by some ascribed to Adam, Enoch
and Noah, mentioned by several Authors, Coelum Orientis.
and in a late Discourse by Thomas Bangius, they have so little foundation in
any probable reason or story, that I shall not so much as make any farther
mention of them.

It has been abundantly cleared up by many Learned men, that the ancient
Hebrew Character has the priority before any other now known;. II.
which is confirmed by the concurrent testimony of the best and most ancient
Heathen Writers. And it is amongst rational arguments none of the least, for the
Truth and Divine Authority of Scripture, Grotius de Veritate Relig. lib. 1.
to consider the general concurrence of all manner of evidence for the
Antiquity of the Hebrew, and the derivation of all other Letters from it.

Pliny affirms in one place, Not. Hist. l. 7. cap. 56. Lib. 5. cap. 12.
that the first invention of Letters ought to be ascribed unto the Assyrians;
and in another place he says, that under the name of Syria he understands the
Regions which were styled Palestine, Iudaea and Phoenicia; and in the same
Chapter he ascribes the invention of Letters to the Phoenicians. So does Lucan
likewise; Bell. Pharsal. lib. 3.
Phoenices primi (famae si credimus) ausi
Mansuram rudibus vocem signare figuris.


With these agree Terpsichore.
Herodotus, Strabo, Symposiac. lib. 9.
Plutarch, Histor. lib. 4.
Curtius, Mela, etc. who all consent, that the Grecians did first receive their
Letters from the Phoenicians by Cadmus, who lived about the time of Joshua. And
that the Punic or Phoenician Tongue was the Canaanitish or the Hebrew, though
somewhat altered from its original pronunciation, Scaliger. Appendix de
Emendat. Temp.

Brerewood's Enquiries, chap. 7. Geograph. l. 2.


(as is wont in tract of time to befall Colonies planted far from home, amongst
strangers,) is sufficiently manifested from the remainders of it that are
extant in Plautus and other profane Authors, as they are cited by the learned
Bochart. And that the Phoenicians were Canaanites has proof also in Scripture,
because the same woman who in Mark 7.26. is styled a Syrophoenician, is said
Matthew. 15.22. to be a Canaanite.

That the ancient Greek Character was of very near affinity to the Samaritan,
and that the Latin Letters were of such an affinity to the Greek, and derived
from them, being in a manner the same with the ancient Ionic Letters, is made
very plain by Scaliger, Animad verse. in Eusebium, Anno 1617. Not. Hist. lib. 7.
cap. 56. Histor. lib. 1. Annal. 11.
and owned by Pliny and Dionysius Halicarnassensis. And Tacitus does
acknowledge that the ancient Latin Characters were in their shape and figure
almost the same with the Greek. And as for the other Letters that are known,
namely, the Syriac, Arabic, Aethiopic, Armenian, Coptic, Illyric, Georgian,
Gothic, there is this cogent Argument to prove them to be of the same Original,
because their Alphabets do generally observe the same order of Letters, which,
being in it self exceedingly irrational, cannot probably have any other reason
but imitation. Except only that of the Arabs, De Origin Scribendi, cap. 5.
says Hermannus Hugo, who, that they might not seem to have borrowed Letters
from others, did purposely disturb the order of the Alphabet; to which he might
have added the Aethiopic and Armenian.

. III.
There are two general things to be observed concerning these derived Letters.
1. That they are not of so great Antiquity. 2. That they are not so numerous as
Languages are.

1. They are not so ancient, many Nations remaining a long while before they
grew so far civilized as to understand the use of Letters, which to this day
are not known amongst many of the American Nations, nor the Inhabitants of
Lapland: and after they have been known, and of some public use, it has been
yet a considerable space, before persons have written any Discourse in their
own Language. It Is observed by Tschudas of the German, Enquiries, chap. 5.
and by Genebrard of the French Tongue, (says Mr. Brerewood) that it is not
much above 400 years, since Books began to be written in those Languages.

2. And because the use of Letters in particular Countries is not so ancient as
Language, therefore are they not of so numerous kinds; several Nations taking
up the use of Letters from their neighbors, and adapting them to their own
Tongue. Thus the Spanish, French, Italian, German, British, English, Irish,
etc. do all of them use the same Latin Character, it being probable that they
had none of their own, before they learnt this of the Romans. The Coptic or
Egyptian Character, ever since Egypt came under the Dominion of Macedon, has
been the Greek, excepting only seven Letters proper to their Tongue, which the
Greek Alphabet did not sufficiently express; The Muscovites likewise and the
Russians, the Georgians and Iacobins, do use the Greek Character; the Persians
and Turks use the Arabic: though the Letters of any Tongue do not always
remain the same, but are subject to the like fate and mutability, to which
Languages are exposed.

Besides this common way of Writing by the ordinary Letters, the Ancients have
sometimes used to communicate by other Notes,. IV.
which were either for Secrecy, or Brevity.

1. For Secrecy: such were the Egyptian Hieroglyphics, (as they are commonly
esteemed) being the representation of certain living Creatures, and other
Bodies, whereby they were wont to conceal from the vulgar the Mysteries of
their Religion. But there is reason to doubt whether there be any thing in
these worth the enquiry, the discoveries that have been hitherto made out of
them being but very few and insignificant. They seem to be but a slight,
imperfect invention, suitable to those first and ruder Ages; Vid. Purchase book
5. chap* 7. sect. 1.
much of the same nature with that Mexican way of writing by Picture, which was
a mere shift they were put to for want of the knowledge of Letters. And it
seems to me questionable, whether the Egyptians did not at first use their
Hieroglyphics upon the same account, namely, for the want of Letters.

Those ways of writing treated of by the Abbot Trithemius, were likewise for
occult or secret communication: And though some Learned men have suspected and
accused him to have thereby delivered the Art of Magic, or Conjuring; yet he is
sufficiently cleared and vindicated from any such prejudice in that very
learned and ingenious Discourse de Cryptographia, under the feigned name of
Gustavus Selenus, by which the noble Author, the Duke of Lunenburg, did
disguise his true name of Augustus Lunaeburgicus.

2. For Brevity: There were single Letters or marks, whereby the Romans were
wont to express whole words. Ennius is said to have invented 1100 of these; to
which number Tullius Tyro, Cicero's Libertus, (others say Cicero himself,)
added diverse others, Trithemius de Polygraphia,
to signify the particles of speech; after whom Philargyrus the Samian and
Macaenas, added yet more. After these Annaeus Seneca is said to have labored
in the regulating and digesting of those former notes; to which adding many of
his own, he augmented the whole number to 5000, published by Ianus Gruterus;
though amongst his there are diverse of a later invention, relating to Christian
institutions, which have been added since (as it is said) by S. Cyprian the
Martyr. The way of writing by these did require a vast memory and labor; yet
it was far short of expressing all things and Notions, and besides, had no
provision for Grammatical variations.

Of this nature is that Short-hand-writing by Characters so frequent with us in
England, and much wondered at by Foreiners; which has a great advantage for
speed and swiftness in writing; those who are expert in it being able this way
to take any ordinary discourse verbatim.

Besides these, there have been some other proposals and attempts about a Real
universal Character, that should not signify words,. V.
but things and notions, and consequently might be legible by any Nation in
their own Tongue; which is the principal design of this Treatise. That such a
Real Character is possible, and has been reckoned by Learned men amongst the
Desiderata, were easy to make out by abundance of Testimonies. To this purpose
is that which Piso mentions to be somewhere the wish of Galen, Histor. Not.
Indiae, lib. 4. c. 3.
That some way might be found out to represent things by such peculiar signs
and names as should express their natures; ut Sophistis eriperetur decertandi
and calumniandi occasio. There are several other passages to this purpose in
the Learned Verulam, in Vossius, De Augment. lib. 6. cap. 1. Orig. scribendi,
cap. 4.
in Hermannus Hugo, etc. besides what is commonly reported of the men of China,
who do now, and have for many Ages used such a general Character, by which the
Inhabitants of that large Kingdom, many of them of different Tongues, do
communicate with one another, every one understanding this common Character,
and reading it in his own Language.

It cannot be denied, but that the variety of Letters is an appendix to the
Curse of Babel, namely, the multitude and variety of Languages. And therefore,
for any man to go about to add to their number, will be but like the inventing
of a Disease, for which he can expect but little thanks from the world. But
this Consideration ought to be no discouragement: For supposing such a thing as
is here proposed, could be well established, it would be the surest remedy that
could be against the Curse of the Confusion, by rendering all other Languages
and Characters useless.

It does not appear that any Alphabet now in being, was invented at once or by
the rules of Art; but rather that all, except the Hebrew,. VI.
were taken up by Imitation, and past by degrees through several Changes; which
is the reason that they are less complete, and liable to several exceptions.
The Hebrew Character, as to the shape of it, though it appear solemn and grave,
yet has it not its Letters sufficiently distinguished from one another, and
withal it appears somewhat harsh and rugged. The Arabic Character, though it
show beautiful, yet is it too elaborate, and takes up too much room, and cannot
well be written small. The Greek and the Latin are both of them graceful and
indifferent easy, though not without their several imperfections.

As for the Aethiopic, it has no less then 202 Letters in its Alphabet;
namely, 7 Vowels, which they apply to every one of their 26 Consonants, to
which they add 20 other aspirated Syllables. All their Characters are
exceedingly complicated and perplexed, and much more difficult then those
proposed in this following Discourse for the expressing of things and notions.

Martinii Atlas Sinensis.
This is said likewise of the Tartarian, that every Character with them is a
Syllable, having each of the Vowels joined to its Consonant, as La, Le, Li,
etc. which must needs make a long and troublesome Alphabet.

But it is not my purpose to animadvert upon these Tongues that are less known,
so much as those with which these parts of the world are better acquainted.

CHAP. IV. I. The Defects in the common Alphabets, as to their true Order. II.
Just Number. III. Determinate Powers. IV. Fitting Names. V. Proper Figures of
the Letters. VI. The Imperfections belonging to the Words of Language, as to
their Equivocalness, variety of Synonymous words, uncertain Phraseologies,
improper way of Writing.
ONe special Circumstance which adds to the Curse of Babel is that difficulty
which there is in all Languages,. I.
arising from the various Imperfections belonging to them, both in respect of
1. their first Elements or Alphabets, 2. their Words.

1. For Alphabets, they are all of them, in many respects, liable to just
exception.

1. As to the Order of them, they are inartificial and confused, without any
such methodical distribution as were requisite for their particular natures and
differences; the Vowels and Consonants being promiscuously huddled together,
without any distinction: Whereas in a regular Alphabet, the Vowels and
Consonants should be reduced into Classes, according to their several kinds,
with such an order of precedence and subsequence as their natures will bear;
this being the proper end and design of that which we call Method, to separate
the Heterogeneous, and put the Homogeneous together, according to some rule of
precedence.

The Hebrew Alphabet, (the order of which is observed in several Scriptures,
Psalm. 119. and in the Book of Lamentations) from whence the others are derived,
is not free from this Imperfection.

2. For their Number, they are in several respects both Redundant, and
Deficient.. II.


1. Redundant and superfluous; either 1. By allotting several Letters to the
same power and sound. So in the Hebrew ((...) and (...)) and so perhaps ((...)
and (...)) ((...) and (...)) ((...) and (...)) ((...) and (...).) So in the
ordinary Latin, (C and K) (F and Ph.) Or 2. by reckoning double Letters amongst
the most simple elements of Speech: as in the Hebrew (...); in the Greek x and
(...); in the Latin (Q. Cu) (X. cs.) and I Consonant or Jod which is made up of
( dzh) by assigning several Letters to represent one simple power, as th, sh,
etc. So that none of these can regularly be reckoned amongst the simple
elements of Speech.

2. Deficient in other respects, especially in regard of Vowels, of which there
are 7 or 8 several kinds commonly used, (as I shall show afterward) though the
Latin Alphabet take notice but of five, whereof two, namely ( i and u.)
according to our English pronunciation of them, are not properly Vowels, but
Diphthongs. And besides, that gradual difference amongst Vowels of long and
short is not sufficiently provided for. The Ancients were wont to express a
long Vowel by doubling the Character of it; as Amaabam, Naata, Ree, Seeds,
Sanctissimiis, Mariinas: Vossius.
though oftentimes the Vowel I, instead of being doubled, was only prolonged
in the figure of it; as AEDILIS, PISO, VIVUS. For the ways used by us English
for lengthning and abbreviating Vowels, viz. by adding E quiescent to the end
of a word for prolonging a Syllable, and doubling the following Consonant for
the shortning of a Vowel, as Wane, Wann; Ware, War, etc. or else by inserting
some other Vowel, for the lengthning of it, as Meat, Met; Read, Red, etc. both
these are upon this account improper, because the sign ought to be where the
sound is. Nor would it be so fit to express this by a distinct Character,
because it denotes only an accidental or gradual difference, as by an Accent;
the chief use of Accents, for which they are necessary in ordinary speech,
being to signify Quantities and Elevations of voice.

3. For their Powers, they are very uncertain, not always fixed and determined
to the same signification:. III.
which as to our English pronunciation may be made to appear by abundance of
Instances both in the Vowels and Consonants.

1. As to the Vowels: It is generally acknowledged that each of them have
several sounds. Vocales omnes plurisonae, says Lipsius. And the learned
Vossius does assure us, De Pronunc. cap. 5.

Grammat. lib. 1. cap. 12. Ios. Scal. Diat. De varia pronunciatione.


that the Ancients did use their Vowels in very different ways, aliquando
tenuius exiliusque, nunc crassius, nunc intermedio sono.

The power of the Vowel (^) treated of afterward, is expressed in writing no
less then six several ways; by e. He, me, she, ye. ee. Thee, free, we. ie.
Field, yield, shield, chief. ea. Near, dear, hear. eo. People. i. Privilege.


So is the Power of the Vowel (a;) as in All, aul, aw, fault, caught, brought.
These are all various ways of writing the same long Vowel; besides which there
are other distinct ways of expressing the same Vowel when it is used short, as
in the words of, for, etc.

And for the Power of the Vowel (^) that is likewise written five several ways.

o. To, who, move. oe. Do. oo. Shoo, moon, noon. ou. Could, would. woe. Two.
And as for the Power of the Vowel (^) this also is written five several ways;
namely, by the Letters i. Sir, stir, firmament, etc. o. Honey, money, come, some,
love, etc. oo. Blood, flood. u. Turn, burn, burden. ou. Country, couple.


2. As to the Consonants, these likewise are of very uncertain Powers: witness
the different pronunciation of the letter ( C) in the word Circo, and ( G) in
the word Negligence. I know it is said that the letter ( C) before the Vowels a,
o, u, must be pronounced like ( K,) as in the words cado, coram, cudo; and
before the Vowels e, i, as S, as in the words cedo, cilium. But there is no
reason why it should be so. Upon which account our learned Country man, De
Linguae Anglicanae pronunciatione.
Sir Tho. Smith, does justly censure it as monstrum literae, non litera;
ignorantiae specimen, non artis; modo serpens, modo cornix.

Cessio, Sessio, Gratia.
The letters C, S, T, are often used alike, to denote the same Power, and that
both in English and French; and the letter ( S) is most frequently used for (Z)
which must needs be very improper. And, which is yet more irrational, some
Letters of the same name and shape are used sometimes for Vowels, and sometimes
for Consonants; as I* V, W, Y; which yet differ from one another sicut corpus
and anima, and ought by no means to be confounded. Priscian.


To which may be added, that from this equivocal power of Letters, it so falls
out, that

1. Some words are distinguished in writing, and not in pronunciation: as
Sessio, Cessio; Sera, Cera; Servus, Cervus; Syrus, Cyrus; Boar, Bore; Come,
Lat. Cum; Done, Dun; Dear, Deer; Hear, Here* Heart, Heart; Meat, Mete; Son, Sun;
Some, Lat. Sum; Toes, Toze; Toe, Towe; To, Too, Two.

2. Some words are distinguished in pronunciation, but not in writing; as the
words Give, i. Dare, Give, i. Vinculum; Get. i. Acquirere, Get, i. Gagates; is
and his in English, and is and his in Latin. So the Latin word Male, i. evilly,
is a dissyllable; whereas the English word Male, which signifies the masculine
Sex, is but a monosyllable. All which are very great incongruities, and such as
ought to be avoided in any regular establishment of Letters.

4. Their Names in most Alphabets, are very improperly expressed by words of
several syllables;. IV.
as Aleph, Beth, Gimel, etc. Alpha, Beta, Gamma, etc. And thus it is in 15
several Alphabets mentioned by Hermannus Hugo. In which respect the Roman
Alphabet, and our English, De Origin Scribendi c. 7.
which follows it very near, are much more convenient then the rest, where each
Letter is named simply by its Power. Though herein likewise there be some
defects: for the letter C should not be named See, but Kee; and G, not, as
usually we do, Iee, but (...): and so R, to conform it with the rest, should be
called er, not ar; and Z should be styled ez, not zad.

5. Their Figures have not that correspondency to their Natures and Powers
which were desirable in an artificially-invented Alphabet,. V.
wherein the Vowels ought to have something answerable in their Character unto
the several kinds of Apertion which they have in their sound. And so for the
Consonants, they should have some such affinity in their Figures as they have
in their Powers. It Is so in some of them, whether purposely or casually, I know
not; as BP. bp. CG. SZ. and perhaps TD, td: but not in others.

To this may be added, the manner of writing as to the Oriental Tongues, from
the right hand to the left, which is as unnatural and inconvenient, as to write
with the light on the wrong side. The Jews themselves write their particular
strokes of Letters from the left to the right hand; and therefore it would be
much more rational, Scaliger de Causis L. L. cap. 46.
that their words should be written so too.

Besides these Defects in the usual Alphabets or Letters, there are several
others likewise in the Words of Language,. VI.
and their Accidents and Constructions.

1. In regard of Equivocals, which are of several significations, and therefore
must needs render speech doubtful and obscure; and that argues a deficiency, or
want of a sufficient number of words. These are either absolutely so, or in
their figurative construction, or by reason of Phraseologies.

Of the first kind there are great variety in Latin. So the word LIBER apud
Literatos significat Codicem. LIBER apud Politicos significat Liberate
fruentem. LIBER apud Oratores significat Filium. LIBER apud Rusticos significat
Arboris corticem.


So the word Malus signifies both an Apple Tree, and Evil, and the Mast of a
ship; and Populus signifies both a Poplar-tree, and the People, etc. Besides
such Equivocals as are made by the inflexion of words: as Lex, legis, legi;
Lego, legis, legi: Sus, suis; Suo, suis; Suus, suis: Amare the Adverb; Amo,
amas, amavi, amare; and Amor, amaris vel amare: with abundance of the like of
each kind.

Nor is it better with the English Tongue in this respect, in which there is
great variety of Equivocals. So the word Bill signifies both a Weapon, a Bird's
Beak, and a written Scroul: The word Grave signifies both Sober, and Sepulcher,
and to Carve, etc.

As for the ambiguity of words by reason of Metaphor and Phraseology, this is
in all instituted Languages so obvious and so various, that it is needless to
give any instances of it; every Language having some peculiar phrases belonging
to it, which, if they were to be translated verbatim into another Tongue, would
seem wild and insignificant. In which our English does too much abound, witness
those words of Break, Bring, Cast, Clear, Come, Cut, Draw, Fall, Hand, Keep,
Lay, make, Pass, Put, Run, Set, Stand, Take, none of which have less then
thirty or forty, and some of them about a hundred several senses, according to
their use in Phrases, as may be seen in the Dictionary. And though the
varieties of Phrases in Language may seem to contribute to the elegance and
ornament of Speech; yet, like other affected ornaments, they prejudice the
native simplicity of it, and contribute to the disguising of it with false
appearances. Besides that, like other things of fashion, they are very
changeable, every generation producing new ones; witness the present Age,
especially the late times, wherein this grand imposture of Phrases has almost
eaten out solid Knowledge in all professions; such men generally being of most
esteem who are skilled in these Canting forms of speech, though in nothing else.

2. In respect of Synonymous words, which make Language tedious, and are
generally superfluities, since the end and use of Speech is for humane utility
and mutual converse; Scaliger de Causis L. L. cap. 188.
magis igitur refert ut brevis, and rectus, and simplex sit quam longus and
varius. And yet there is no particular Language but what is very obnoxious in
this kind. It Is said that the Arabic has above a thousand several names for a
Sword, Bp. Walton Prolegomena de Lingua Arabica, sect. 6.
and 500 for a Lion, and 200 for a Serpent, and fourscore for Honey. And though
perhaps no other Language do exceed at this rate, as to any particular; yet do
they all of them abound more then enough in the general. The examples of this
kind, for our English, may be seen in the following Tables. To this may be
added, that there are in most Languages several words that are mere Expletives,
not adding any thing to the Sense.

3. For the Anomalisms and Irregularities in Grammatical construction, which
abound in every Language, and in some of them are so numerous, that Learned men
have scrupled whether there be any such thing as Analogy.

4. For that Difference which there is in very many words betwixt the writing
and pronouncing of them, mentioned before. Scriptio est vocum pictura: And it
should seem very reasonable, that men should either speak as they write, or
write as they speak. And yet Custom has so rivetted this incongruity and
imperfection in all Languages, that it were an hopeless attempt for any man to
go about to repair and amend it. It Is needless to give instances of this, there
being in diverse Languages as many words whose sounds do disagree with their way
of writing, as those are that agree. What is said of our English Tongue is
proportionably true of most other Languages, That if ten Scribes (not
acquainted with the particular Speech) should set themselves to write according
to pronunciation, not any two of them would agree in the same way of spelling.

It Is an observation of a Learned man concerning the French Tongue, that it is
ineptissime confusa, alias ad fastidium otiosis suffarcta literis; alias ad
mendicitatem inops and jejuna; Sir Tho. Smith de recta Scriptione.
nunquam sibi constans, and raro rationi consona. It Is said that Peter Ramus
did labor much in reducing it to a new Orthography, but met with much
discouragement in this attempt from Learned men; besides the invincibleness of
general Custom, against which (for the most part) men strive in vain. What
better success those Learned ingenuous persons of the French Academy may have,
who have been for several years engaged in this Work, Gregorius Turone^sis.
I cannot conjecture. It Is related of Chilperick King of France, that he did,
for the compendiousness of writing, add to the French Alphabet these five
Letters, th. chapter o. x. ps. injoyning by a strict and solemn Edict the reception
and use of them through his Dominions; and that in all Schools Youths should be
instituted in the use of them. And yet, notwithstanding his Authority in
imposing of them, they were presently after his death laid aside and disused.

As to our own Language, several persons have taken much pains about the
Orthography of it. That Learned Knight Sir Thomas Smith, Secretary to Queen
Elizabeth, and sometime her Ambassador into France, has published an elegant
Discourse in Latin, De recta and emendata Linguae Anglicanae scriptione. After
him, this Subject was in another Discourse prosecuted by one of the Heralds,
who calls himself Chester; who was followed by one Wade, that writ to the same
purpose. After these, Bullaker endeavored to add to, and alter diverse things
in those others that preceded him; who was succeeded in the same attempt by
Alexander Gill, in his English Grammar. And yet so invincible is Custom, that
still we retain the same errors and incongruities in writing which our
Forefathers taught us.

CHAP. V. I. That neither Letters nor Languages have been regularly established
by the rules of Art. II. The natural Ground or Principle of the several ways of
Communication amongst men. III. The first thing to be provided for in the
establishing of a Philosophical Character or Language, is a just enumeration of
all such things and notions to which names are to be assigned.
FRom what has been already said it may appear, that there are no Letters or
Languages that have been at once invented and established according to the
Rules of Art; but that all, except the first,. I.
(of which we know nothing so certain as, that it was not made by human Art
upon Experience) have been either taken up from that first, and derived by way
of Imitation; or else, in a long tract of time, have, upon several emergencies,
admitted various and casual alterations; by which means they must needs be
liable to manifold defects and imperfections, that in a Language at once
invented and according to the rules of Art might be easily avoided. Nor could
this otherwise be, because that very Art by which Language should be regulated,
viz. Grammar, is of much later invention then Languages themselves, being
adapted to what was already in being, rather then the Rule of making it so.

Though the Hebrew Tongue be the most ancient, yet Rabbi Judah Chiug of Fez in
Afric, Vossius de Art Grammat. lib. 1. cap. 4.
who lived A. D. 1040. was the first that reduced it to the Art of Grammar. And
though there were both Greek and Latin Grammarians much more ancient; yet were
there none in either, till a long time after those Languages flourished: which
is the true reason of all those Anomalisms in Grammar; because the Art was
suited to Language, Vossius ibid. cap. 3.

Polydor. Virgil. lib. 1. cap. 7.


and not Language to the Art. Plato is said to be the first that considered
Grammar: Aristotle the first that by writing did reduce it into an Art: and
Epicurus the first that publicly taught it amongst the Grecians.

And for the Latin, Crates Mallotes, Ambassador to the Roman Senate from King
Attalus, betwixt the second and third Punic War, presently after the death of
Ennius, U. C. 583. was the first that brought in the Art of Grammar amongst the
Romans, says Suetonius.

These being some of the Defects or Imperfections in those Letters or
Languages, which are already known, may afford direction, what is to be avoided
by those who propose to themselves the Invention of a new Character or
Language, which being the principal end of this Discourse, I shall in the next
place proceed to lay down the first Foundations of it.

As men do generally agree in the same Principle of Reason, so do they likewise
agree in the same Internal Notion or Apprehension of things.. II.


The External Expression of these Mental notions, whereby men communicate their
thoughts to one another, is either to the Ear, or to the Eye.

To the Ear by Sounds, and more particularly by Articulate Voice and Words.

To the Eye by any thing that is visible, Motion, Light, Color, Figure; and
more particularly by Writing.

That conceit which men have in their minds concerning a Horse or Tree, is the
Notion or mental Image of that Beast, or natural thing, of such a nature, shape
and use. The Names given to these in several Languages, are such arbitrary
sounds or words, as Nations of men have agreed upon, either casually or
designedly, to express their Mental notions of them. The Written word is the
figure or picture of that Sound.

So that if men should generally consent upon the same way or manner of
Expression, as they do agree in the same Notion, we should then be freed from
that Curse in the Confusion of Tongues, with all the unhappy consequences of it.

Now this can only be done, either by enjoining some one Language and
Character to be universally learnt and practiced, (which is not to be expected,
till some person attain to the Universal Monarchy; and perhaps would not be
done then:) or else by proposing some such way as, by its facility and
usefulness, (without the imposition of Authority) might invite and engage men
to the learning of it; which is the thing here attempted.

In order to this, The first thing to be considered and enquired into is,
Concerning a just Enumeration and description of such things or notions as are
to have Marks or Names assigned to them.. III.


The chief Difficulty and Labor will be so to contrive the Enumeration of
things and notions, as that they may be full and adaequate, without any
Redundancy or Deficiency as to the Number of them, and regular as to their
Place and Order.

If to every thing and notion there were assigned a distinct Mark, together
with some provision to express Grammatical Derivations and Inflexions; this
might suffice as to one great end of a Real Character, namely, the expression
of our Conceptions by Marks which should signify things, and not words. And so
likewise if several distinct words were assigned for the names of such things,
with certain in variable Rules for all such Grammatical Derivations and
Inflexions, and such only, as are natural and necessary; this would make a
much more easy and convenient Language then is yet in being.

But now if these Marks or Notes could be so contrived, as to have such a
dependence upon, and relation to, one another, as might be suitable to the
nature of the things and notions which they represented; and so likewise, if
the Names of things could be so ordered, as to contain such a kind of affinity
or opposition in their letters and sounds, as might be some way answerable to
the nature of the things which they signified; This would yet be a farther
advantage superadded: by which, besides the best way of helping the Memory by
natural Method, the Understanding likewise would be highly improved; and we
should, by learning the Character and the Names of things, be instructed
likewise in their Natures, the knowledge of both which ought to be conjoined.

For the accurate effecting of this, it would be necessary, that the Theory it
self, upon which such a design were to be founded, should be exactly suited to
the nature of things. But, upon supposal that this Theory is defective, either
as to the Fullness or the Order of it, this must needs add much perplexity to
any such Attempt, and render it imperfect. And that this is the case with that
common Theory already received, need not much be doubted; which may afford some
excuse as to several of those things which may seem to be less conveniently
disposed of in the following Tables, or Schemes proposed in the next part.

The End of the First Part.
The Second Part, Containing a regular enumeration and description of all those
things and notions to which names are to be assigned.
CHAP. I. I. The Scheme of Genus's. II. Concerning the more general notions of
things, the difficulty of establishing these aright. III. Of Transcendentals
general. IV. Of Transcendental relations mixed. V. Of Transcendental relations
of Action. VI. Of the several notions belonging to Grammar or Logic.
HAVING dispatched the Prolegomena in the former part, I proceed (according to
the method proposed) to that more difficult attempt of enumerating and
describing all such things and notions as fall under discourse.

In treating concerning this, I shall first lay down a Scheme or Analysis of
all the Genus's or more common heads of things belonging to this design; And
then show how each of these may be subdivided by its peculiar Differences;
which for the better convenience of this institution, I take leave to determine
(for the most part) to the number of six. Unless it be in those numerous
tribes, of Herbs, Trees, Exanguious Animals, Fishes and Birds; which are of too
great variety to be comprehended in so narrow a compass. After which I shall
proceed to enumerate the several Species belonging to each of these
Differences, according to such an order and dependence amongst them, as may
contribute to the defining of them, and determining their primary
significations These Species are commonly joined together by pairs, for the
better helping of the Memory, (and so likewise are some of the Genus's and
Differences.) Those things which naturally have Opposites, are joined with
them, according to such Opposition, whether Single or Double. Those things that
have no Opposites, are paired together with respect to some Affinity which they
have one to another. Tho it must be acknowledged that these Affinities are
sometimes less proper and more remote, there being several things shifted into
these places, because I knew not how to provide for them better.

All kinds of things and notions, to which names are to be assigned, may be
distributed into such as are either more General; namely those Universal
notions, whether belonging more properly to Things; called TRANSCENDENTAL
GENERAL. I RELATION MIXED. II RELATION OF ACTION. III
Words; DISCOURSE. IV
Special; denoting either CREATOR. V Creature; namely such things as were
either created or concreated by God, not excluding several of those notions,
which are framed by the minds of men, considered either Collectively; WORLD. VI
Distributively; according to the several kinds of Beings, whether such as do
belong to Substance; Inanimate; ELEMENT. VII Animate; considered according to
their several Species; whether Vegetative Imperfect; as Minerals, STONE. VIII
METAL. IX
Perfect; as Plant, HERB consid. accord. to the LEAF. X FLOWER. XI SEED-VESSEL.
XII
SHRUB. XIII TREE. XIV

Sensitive; EXANGUIOUS. XV Sanguineous; FISH. XVI BIRD. XVII BEAST. XVIII


Parts; PECULIAR. XIX GENERAL. XX


Accident; Quantity; MAGNITUDE. XXI SPACE. XXII MEASURE. XXIII
Quality; whether NATURAL POWER. XXIV HABIT. XXV MANNERS. XXVI SENSIBLE
QUALITY. XXVII SICKNESS. XXVIII
Action SPIRITUAL. XXIX CORPOREAL. XXX MOTION. XXXI OPERATION. XXXII
Relation; whether more Private. OECONOMICAL. XXXIII POSSESSIONS. XXXIV
PROVISIONS. XXXV
Public. CIVIL. XXXVI. JUDICIAL. XXXVII MILITARY. XXXVIII NAVAL. XXXIX
ECCLESIASTICAL. XL.








In this precedent Scheme, all the several things or notions, to which names
are to be assigned, are reduced to forty Genus's. The first six of which do
comprehend such matters, as by reason of their Generalness, or in some other
respect, are above all those common heads of things called Predicaments; The
rest belonging to the several Predicaments, of which I reckon only five.
Amongst these, Substance does take in fourteen Genus's, Quantity three, Quality
five, Action four, and Relation eight.

This being supposed to be a sufficient general Scheme of things, that which is
next to be enquired after, is how each of those Genus's may be subdivided into
its proper differences and species. In order to which I shall offer that which
follows.

In the enumeration of all such things and notions as fall under discourse,
those are first to be considered which are more general or comprehensive,
belonging either to Metaphysic, or to Grammar and Logic.

Tho particulars are first in the order of Being, yet Generals are first in the
order of Knowing, because by these, such things and notions as are less
general, are to be distinguished and defined.

Now the proper end and design of Metaphysic should be to enumerate and explain
those more general terms, which by reason of their Universality and
Comprehensiveness, are either above all those Heads of things styled
Predicaments, or else common to several of them. And if this Science had been
so ordered, as to have contained a plain regular enumeration and description of
these general terms, without the mixture of nice and subtle disputes about
them; It might have been proper enough for learners to have begun with. But men
having purposely strained their Wits to frame and discuss so many intricate
questions, as are commonly treated of in it: It Is no wonder that it should
hereby be rendered, not only less fit for young beginners, but liable also to
the prejudice and neglect of those of riper judgments. That which I aim at in
treating concerning these things, is to offer some brief and plain description
of them, as being conscious that such matters as are prim^ nota, and most
obvious, are most hard to be defined. And the multiplying of words, about
things that are plain enough of themselves, does but contribute to the making
of them more obscure.

The right ordering of these Transcendentals is a business of no small
difficulty; because there is so little assistance or help to be had for it in
the Common Systems, according to which this part of Philosophy (as it seems to
me) is rendered the most rude and imperfect in the whole body of Sciences; as if
the compilers of it had taken no other care for those General notions, which
did not fall within the ordinary series of things, and were not explicable in
other particular Sciences, but only to tumble them together in several confused
heaps, which they styled the Science of Metaphysic. And this is one reason why
the usual enumeration of such Terms is very short and deficient in respect of
what it ought to be, many of those things being left out, which do properly
belong to this number; which defects are here intended to be in some measure
supplied. Tho it must be granted, that by reason of the exceeding
comprehensiveness of some notions, and the extreme subtilty of others, as
likewise because of the streightness of that method which I am bound up to by
these Tables it will so fall out, that several things cannot be disposed of so
accurately as they ought to be.

The several things belonging to Metaphysical or Transcendental notions may be
comprehended under these three Heads, namely such as are either more Absolute;
containing the Kinds, Causes, Differences and Modes of things, which I take the
liberty to call TRANSCENDENTAL GENERAL. Relative; whether Mixed; and common
both to Quantity, Quality, Whole and Part, styled TRANSCENDENTAL MIXED. Simple;
and proper to Action, viz. TRANSCENDENTAL relation of ACTION.


The most Universal conceptions of Things are usually styled TRANSCENDENTAL,
Metaphysic-all.

To which may be annexed by way of affinity, that general name which denotes
those highest and most common heads, under which the several kinds of things
may be reduced in an orderly series: viz. PREDICAMENT, Category.

Transcendentals general may be distributed into such as do concern the nature
of things according to their KINDS. I. CAUSES. II. Differences; ^ore ABSOLUTE
and Common. III. Relative to Action; considering THE END. IV. THE MEANS. V.

MODES. VI.


I. KIND.
I. That common Essence wherein things of different natures do agree, is called
GENUS, general, common Kind.

That common nature which is communicable to several Individuals, is called
SPECIES, Sort or special kind, specify, specifical. Breed.

These common kinds may be distinguished into such as are either more properly
Transcendental; namely, those most universal and comprehensive Terms which fall
under Discourse; relating to The first and most general Conception, of which
the Understanding takes notice, as most known. 1.
BEING, Entity, Essence, Existence, subsist, am, is, extant. NOTHING, Naught,
null, none, annul, disannul, annihilate, abrogate, abolish, void, undo,
cancel, evacuate, Ciphre.
Those Beings which are truly such, or those which our Senses mistake for
Beings. 2.
THING, Affair, Matter, Business, Case, real-ly, indeed. APPEARANCE, Apparition,
Phantasm, Show, Vision, Elusion and vanish.
Similitudes of Beings; formed in our Minds either by apprehension of things
that are, or imagination of things that are not. 3.
NOTION, Conception. FICTION, Figment, make, feign, frame, devise, counterfeit,
forge, coin, mint, Fable, Apologue, Romance, Tale, Legend, Mythology, Fairy,
Nymph, Centaur, Griffin, Bugbear, Goblin, Chymera, Atlantis, Vtopia.
The words assigned for the signifying of several Things and Notions: to which
that common name for the signifying of particular rational Beings may be
annexed, though less properly. 4
NAME, Style, Title, Titular, Compellation, Appellation, nominate, denominate,
Surname, Inscription, Nomenclator, anonymous, call, Nown, Term. PERSON, Age,
Party, Nobody, Wight.

Predicamental; those chief Heads, under which other Terms may be reduced;
denoting either Such things as subsist by themselves, or which (according to
the old Logical definition) require a subject of inhesion: Though they are
indeed nothing but the modes of Substance. 5.
SUBSTANCE, subsist. ACCIDENT-all.
That habitude of things whereby they may be said to have parts distinct and
capable of division, or the general disposition of things either to Action or
Passion. 6.
QUANTITY, Much, Deal, Mathematick. QVALITY, Disposition, Endowment, indue,
parts, qualification, manner, condition, estate.
The application of the Agent to the Patient, or the reception of the force of
the Agent. 7.
ACTION, do, perform, commit, practice* proceeding, function, exercise,
atchieve, dealing, Act, Fact, Deed, Feat, Exploit, Passage, Prank, Trick, play
the Part. PASSION, abide, ail, bear, endure, suffer, undergo, sustain, feel,
capable.
Such things as cannot be, or cannot be known, without a respect to something
else; or which may be, or may be understood of themselves, without any such
reference. 8.
RELATION, refer, Regard, Respect, Habitude, correlative. ABSOLVTENESS,
irrespective, peremptory, flat, positive.




II. That which any way contributes to the producing of an effect, II. CAUSE.
is styled CAUSE, Reason, Ground, Principle, proceed from, procure, produce,
make, constitute, Influence, raise, put, set, bring to pass.

That which proceeds from, or depends upon the Cause, is styled EFFECT, Event,
Issue, Fruit, accrue, Success, spring from, become, grow, come of it,
impression, Product.

Causes are commonly distributed into External, such as are without the Effect.
By which things are done; whether More immediate and absolute; either more
principal, of which the first Action is, or less principal, and subservient to
the chief Agent. 1.
EFFICIENT, Author, Maker, Efficacy, effectual, Energy, Virtue, Validity,
Force, Vigor, Operation, Influence, frame, constitute, beget, effect, do,
make, cause, work, render, create, bring to pass. INSTRUMENT, Tool* Organ-ical,
Implement:
More remote and relative; being either in The Agent; serving either to Excite,
or restrain it. 2.
IMPULSIVE, Incentive, Motive, Reason, Ground, Concitation, Instigation,
Inducement, impell, stimulate, stir up, prick forward, spur on, rouse, quicken,
irritate* provoke, excite, egging, incite, Instinct, Consideration, put on, set
at or on, move, urge, draw in. COHIBITIVE, restrain, check, curb, withold,
keep short or back, inhibit, repress, hold in, bridling, stint, coerce,
confine, limit, no ho, stay, staunch, moderate, master, control.
Direct and regulate its Action; either by that Idea which the Agent has in
his mind of some like case, or by some Pattern before his eyes. 3.
EXEMPLAR, Example, Instance, Idea, Precedent, Cause. TYPE, Pattern, Platform,
Model, Last, Mold, Prototype, Antitype, Extract, Original, Copy, Counterpart,
Draught, Sampler, Proof, Duplicate, exemplify, prefigure.

The Patient; relating to some peculiar capacity in the thing, or some fitness
in respect of time. 4.
CONDITION, Proviso* Salvo, in case, Term, Case, State, liking, Habit,
Qualification. OCCASION- al, Exigence, Emergence, Advantage, Opportunity, draw,
provoke, scandal.
Some third thing, by which the force of the Efficient is either increased or
abated, 5.
ADJUVANT, Help, Aid, Assistance, Succor, Relief, Support, Advantage,
auxiliary, subsidiary, avail, conduce, promote, farther, stand in stead,
supply, accommodate, serve, Co-adjutor, abet, take ones part, stand by, a stay
to one, forward, minister, relief, back one. IMPEDIENT, hinder, Obstacle,
Remora, Clog, Bar, debar, obstruct, cumber, Rub, Check, Dam, Luggage, Lumber,
Baggage, Prejudice, Disadvantage, foreslow, let, stop, Disservice, stay, stand
in the way, trigg, keep back, restrain, withold, interfere.


For whose sake a thing is: to which may be annexed the general name of such
things as have any tendency to the promoting of it. 6.
END, Aim, Mark, Goal, Drift, Intent, Effect, Purpose, Design, Scope, sake,
Reach, Reason, final, tend. MEANS, Way* Shift, Expedient, accommodate.

Internal, such as are within the Effect as its chief constituent parts; out of
which a thing is made, and of which it consists; or by which a thing is
constituted in its being, and distinguished from all other things. 7.
MATTER- ial, Stuff, Substance, Argument, Subject, Boot as fire-boot, etc.
FORM- al, Essence.



III. DIVERSITY.
III. Those general Names which may be styled Differences, are too numerous to
be placed under one common Head according to the method designed in these
Tables, and therefore are they here reduced unto three Heads: whereof the first
contains such as do not immediately imply any relation to Action, and are
therefore styled more abso^ute and common; namely, those more universal
Affections of Entity whereby several things are differenced, so as to make them
DIVERSE from one another* ( another, several, sundry, vary^ety dissonant, to and
fro* up and down, multiplicity, choice, different others Heterogeneous;) to
which the notion of IDENTITY, Very, sameness* all one, unvaried, may be
properly opposed, importing an Unity or Agreement in the same ^ssence.

These are distinguishable into such Differences of things as imply a respect
unto Something without the things themselves. The Understanding; in regard of
the congruity, or incongruity of things to our apprehensions of them. 1.
TRUTH, true, Verity, verify, very, Right, Sooth, irrefragably, likely,
probable. FALSEHOOD, false-ifie, Error, erroneous, untrue.
The Will; as to the agreement, or disagreement of things with that Faculty, so
as to be rendered desirable or avoidable. 2.
GOODNESS, Weal, Welfare, right, regular, well, rectify, better, best.
EVILNESS, ill, bad, naught, wrong, amiss, shrewd, scurvy, lewd, horrid,
horrible, corrupt, Pravity, deprave, Sin, Fault, Trespass, Transgress-ion,
Peccadillo, worse.

The nature of things in themselves; as to Their naked being, or not being. 3.
POSITIVENESS, Thesis. PRIVATIVENESS, Privation, bereave deprive, depose, put
out, or forth, take away, strip, divest, disseise, dispossess, disfurnish.
Their being* or not being what they are pretended to be. 4.
GENUINENESS, right, arrant, rank, very, native, legitimate, true, current.
S^VRIOVSNESS, mongrel, bastard, false, illegitimate, improper, adulterine,
base, misbegot, sophisticated.
Their degrees of being; whether present, or future and in possibility. 5.
ACTUALNESS, Existence, extant. POTENTIALNESS, Reversion, may* can.
Their Extension; being circumscribed by bounds, or not so circumscribed, 6.
FINITENESS, definite determined, limited, bounded, Term, Confine, Stint,
concluded. INFINITENESS, endless, indefinite, unbounded, immense,
indeterminate, unlimited, unmeasurable, inexhaustible.

Their Causes. Efficient; whether the order of common Providence, or the skill
of some inferior Agent. 7.
NATURALNESS, right, native, wild, carnal, praeternatural, supernatural.
FACTITIOVSNESS, artificial, technical, made.
Material; being either without all parts and composition, or being such, to
the framing of which several parts and ingredients do concur. 8.
SIMPLICITY, mere, sheer, clear, fine, plain, right, pure, unmixed, Ingredient,
single, uncompounded. MIXEDNESS, mingle, compound, blend* shuffle, Medly,
Miscellany, promiscuous, temper, Commixtion, complex, complicate, confound,
intermingle, Hodg-podge, Gallimaufry, Rhapsody, Centon, dash, brew.
Formal; being in such a state to which nothing is wanting, or else wanting
something of what they may and should have. 9.
PERFECTION, absolute, entire, full, accurate, exact, exquisite, punctual,
precise, complete, consummate, accomplish. strict, plenary, thoroughly, mature,
up at the top. IMPERFECTION, incomplete, lame.




IV. That kind of Difference betwixt things, IV. DIFFERENCE relating to the END
of Action.
which relates to Actions considering the End, may be styled DISAGREABLENESS,
unsuitable, discrepant.

To which may be opposed the Notion of CONVENIENCE, agreement, agreeable,
suitable, serving, c^mmodious.

These may be distinguished into such as are More Simple; denoting their
Fitness to promote, or hinder our well-being. 1.
PROFITABLENESS, Advantage, Benefit, Emolument, Interest, Concern, Boot, Fruit,
Vtility, Commodious, Edify, stand insted, good for. avail. HVRTFVLNESS, Harm,
Prejudice, Disadvantage, Damage, Disprofit, Nuisance, Mischief. discommodious,
nocent. shrewd turn, pernicious, noxious, noisome, damnifie, endammage, impair,
annoy, displeasure, naught for, vermin, weed.
Sutableness or unsutableness to our appetites. 2.
PLEASANTN^SS, Delight, Complacence, enjoyment, satisfaction, sweet, taking,
delicious, Paradise. VNPLEASANTNESS, Regret, displeasing, offensive, trouble,
grievous, uneasy* painful.
Agreableness or Disagreableness of things to Right reason. 3.
DUENESS, Duty, ought, should, Honest, owe, part, incumbent on. VNDVENESS,
ought not, dishonest.

More mixed implying a respect to the nature of the end, as to its Capacity or
Incapacity of existing. 4.
POSSIBILITY, Feasible, may, can. IMPOSSIBILITY, cannot be.
Degrees of goodness; whether such as are like to answer the desires, by
proving very great and considerable or such as are like to disappoint the
desires* by proving to be very little or none. 5.
IMPORTANCE, of Moment, Consequence, Strength, Force, Weight, material,
considerable, pithy, pregnant, essential, it mattereth. VANITY, Trifle,
trivial, frivolous, Foppery, Gewgaw, Knack, Toy, sleeveless, slight, light,
fruitless, fidling, void, Trumpery, Bauble, Quillet, Quirk, Gambol, to no boot,
to no purpose,
Esteem amongst good men; whether such as they are like to think well of, as
deserving praise and reward, or to think ill of, as deserving shame and
punishment. 6.
WORTHINESS, Merit, Desert, Value, demerit, cheap, dear, price, precious,
depreciate. UNWORTHINESS, Vile, Mean, Poor, undeserving, indign.




V. DIFFERENCE relating to the MEANS.
V. DIFFERENCES of things relating to the MEANS, may be distributed into such as
are More Simple, denoting the being of things Good; as good is determined by
Law; whether according to Law, or not against it. 1.
LAWFULNESS, legitimate, right, legal, canonical, orderly. INDIFFERENCE,
adiaphorous.
Custom or opinion; whether such as the generality of men do think well of and
practice, or dislike and avoid. 2.
DECENCY, Decorum, meet, fit, seemly, handsome, becoming, comely, goodly.
INDECENCY, Indecorum, unmeet, unfit, unseemly, unhandsome, uncomely,
misbeseeming, ugly.

Free from evil; whether of Hurt; 3.
SAFETY, Security, sure, tutelary, innoxious, save, protect, insure,
indemnifie, warrant, Sanctuary, Shelter, Refuge. DANGER, Hazard, Peril,
Ieopardy, unsafe, risk, venture, adventure, endanger, expose, incur.
Labor and Pain; in the Agent; the Doing of things with little or much labor. 4.
EASINESS, Facil-ity-itate, clear, gentle, light, DIFFICVLTY, Hard, uneasy,
crabbed, intricate, laborious, straight, Perplexity, rub, knot, graveling, hard
put to it.
Patient; The suffering of things with little or no labor, or with much. 5.
GENTLENESS, Easiness, softness, still, tenderly, gingerly. VIOLENCE,
boisterous, rough, harsh, blustering, impetuous, force, ravish.



Comparative; of the Nature of the means to one another; whether mutually
agreeing as having the same kind of affections, or disagreeing as having such
kind of affections as are apt to exclude one another out of the same subject. 6.
CONGRUITY, Sutableness, Agreableness, Sympathy, consonant, compatible, right,
apposite, fit, meet, apt, adapt, consistent, accord, conform, accommodate,
comply. CONTRARIETY, Repugnance, withstand, against, unsuitable, Antiperistasis,
counter, cross, incongruous, inconsistent, incompatible, interfere.
Usefulness or Vnusefulness of means to an end, whether in Lower degrees; when
there is a fair probability that a means may either promote or hinder the end.
7.
EXPEDIENCE, Convenience, behoovful, meet, fit, perquisite, requisite.
INCONVENIENCE, Inexpedience, unmeet, unfit, incommodious.
Higher degree; when there is a certain dependence betwixt the means and the
end.




To which may be opposed that kind of nexus betwixt means and end, which is
altogether uncertain and doubtful.

8.
NECESSITY, needful, requisite, essential, should, must, straight, exigent,
force, perquisite, pressing. CONTINGENCE, Venture, adventure, may, Accident,
peradventure, adventitious, fortuitous, incident, happen, perhaps.
VI. Those more general respects and habitudes which several things or notions
have to one another, are styled by the name of MODE, VI. MODE.
manner, way, sort, fashion, guise, wise, garb, course, form-ality, kind.

These may be distinguished into such as are Internal; denoting that In which
another thing exists, or the thing so existing in another 1.
SUBJECT, liable, obnoxious, exposed, matter, Text, Theme, undergo, capable.
ADIVNCT, Epithete, inherent.
About which a thing is employed. 2.
OBJECT, mark, scope, butt, treat, handle, meddle with, have to do with.

External; With which things are accompanied or done; according to the Kinds of
them, either in General, or specially of such things, as are remarkable for
Extraordinariness and Greatness. 3.
CIRCUMSTANCE, Rite, Ceremony. SOLEMNITY, Grandeur, state, Pomp, Port,
celebrate, solemnize, Rite.
Consequence of them; or that habitude resulting to any thing from the
consideration of all its circumstances together. 4.
STATE, Estate, Condition, Case, Iuncture, Liking, manner, pass, pickle,
plight, point, in good repair.

By which any thing is known. 5.
SIGN, Badge, Token, Mark, Note, Symptom, Symbol, Index, Indication, Cue,
Print, Scarr, Track, Signature, signify, Beacon, becken, Boad, foretoken,
presage, Prodigy, portentous, ominous, auspicious.
According to which any thing is, or is done; relating either to the Order
observed in the being or doing of things; whether by One person or thing after
another who has left his place, or for another who is only absent from his
place. 6.
ROOM, as Successor, Caliph, supply, place. STEAD, as substitute, subdititious,
serve for, succedaneous, Deputy, Surrogate, Vicar, Delegate, Vicegerent,
Attorney, Broaker, Factor, in lieu, Lieutenant, Proctor, Proxy.
Two persons or things either one after another, or one with another. 7.
TURN, Course, alternate, second, bout. RECIPROCATION, mutual, interchangeable,
intercourse, correspond.

Measures of Being; whether the more General name for such measures,
differenced according to more and less, or that special kind which denotes the
sudden and short Being or Doing of any thing according to a greater measure. 8.
DEGREE, gradual* a spice, a strein, gradation, leasurely, by little and
little. IMPETUS, Fit, Paroxysm, brunt, crash, effort, pang.
Affections of Being; with reference either to some common agreement and mutual
dependence, or to some inconsistency betwixt them. 9.
COGNATION, Affinity, Nearness. OPPOSITION, Disagreableness, contrary, counter,
repugnant, withstand, against, cross, thwart, other side, adverse, Antagonist,
Antithesis, confront, impugn, oppugn.





TRANSCENDENTAL Relations MIXED, may be distributed into such as do belong
either to QUANTITY, as considered More GENERALLY. I More restrainedly, to
CONTINUED QUANTITY. II DISCONTINUED QUANTITY. III

QUALITY, as considered more LARGELY IV STRICTLY. V
WHOLE and PART. VI


I. Transcend. Relations of QUANTITY MORE GENERAL.
I. TRANSCENDENTAL mixed Relations belonging to QUANTITY considered MORE
GENERALLY, may be distributed into such as do concern the measure of things
compared either with Other things of the same kind or company Indefinitely; as
to Being or Substance, namely when the things compared are considered Singly
and entire, Being either of an ordinary size, or more or less then ordinary. 1.
INDIFFERENCE, Pretty big, passable, reasonable, so so. GREATNESS, Magnitude,
ample, large, vast, huge, immense, grand, monstrous, prodigious, sound,
swinging, whisker, main, much, magnify, aggravate, exaggerate, a filthy deal,
a foul deal, Giant. LITTLENESS, Smalness, Petty, Minute, Modicum, Scautling,
diminutive, less, least, poor, abate, allay, extenuate, Elf, Dwarf, Shrimp,
Tit, Dandiprat, Pigmy.

Conjunctly; as consisting of several individuals or parts, whereof there are
together an ordinary number, or more or less then ordinary. 2.
MEDIOCRITY, a pretty deal, an indifferent quantity, mean, reasonable.
ABOVNDANCE, a great deal, much, a world, affluence, plenty, store, copious,
flush, satiate, flow, fluent, luxuriant, enough and to spare. SCARCITY, Little,
want, dearth, pinching, scant, bare, jejune, lack.


Use, with respect to the quantity of it, whether such as may by its just
proportion promote the end, or such as may hinder it, by being too much, or too
little. 3.
SUFFICIENCY, enough, big or much enough, competency, moderate, satisfy,
serve, well, full. EXCESS, Redundance, superfluity, needless, exuberance, too
much, overmuch, overcharge, cloy, glutt, surfeit, satiety, extreme, immoderate,
luxuriant, rank, out of reason, wast, fly out, lash out. DEFECT, Not enough,
lack, need, penury, indigent, necessitous, destitute, want, fail, fall short
of, slender, jejune, incompetent, insufficient.

Quality of it, denoting the being of a thing of an ordinary goodness, or more
or less then ordinary. 4.
INDIFFERENCY, Pretty well, tolerable, not amiss. EXCELLENCY, extraordinary
good, eminence, pre-eminence, egregious, eximious, incomparable, superlative,
sovereign, transcendent, singular, heroic, high, noble, gallant, choice,
passing, rare, remarkable, notable, Paragon, Mirror. SORRINESS, mean, poor,
vile, trivial, contemptible, despicable, frippery, Trash, Trumpery, Raff, Scum,
Drugg, silly, slight, paultry, scurvy, poor, course, flat, pedling, cheap,
worthless, Fellow, Sirrah, Companion, Rascal, Varlet, Wretch, Scoundril,
Skip-jack, Scrub, Vrchin, Flirt, Gill, Jade.


Definitely; as to Being; either of the same degree, or more or less. 5.
EQUALITY, Evenness, parity, peer, match, fellow, adaequate, aequipollent,
adjust, halves with, as many, all one. INEQVALITY, unequal, odds. SVPERIORITY,
above, upper, advantage, odds, pre-eminence, surmount, overpass, surpass,
exceed, go beyond, out-go, get the start, top, excel, prevail, predominant.
INFERIORITY, under -ling, disadvantage, allay, come short of, low.

Use; as means to an end, when one thing has the same degrees of fitness for
an end as another, or more or less. 6.
EQUIVALENCE, countervail. BETTERNESS. WORSENESS.



Themselves; in respect of their Being or substance, either continued the same,
or changed to more or less. 7.
AT A STAND. INCREASE, Augmentation, progress, increment, enlarge, magnify,
amplify, aggravate, improve, rise, grow, gain, come forward, crescent.
DIMINVTION, Abate, Bate, swage, assuage, decrease, extenuate, mince, mitigate,
allay, retrench, rebate, shrink.

QUALITY in general, either continuing in an ordinary degree, or being changed
to more or less. 8.
JUST TEMPER. INTENTION, heighten, strein, raise, aggravate, exaggerate,
exasperate, enhaunce, acute, cutting, keen, sore, piercing, vehement, urgent,
eager, earnest, deep sleep, amain, greatly, much. REMISSION, Abate, allay,
slake, slacken, swage, assuage, diminish, mitigate, slight, cold, slender,
weak, dead, dilute, dull, faint, gentle, light.

Use; when things either continue as they were, or else become more or less
good. 9.
KEEPING AT A STAY. MENDING, emendation, bettering, Reparation, Reformation,
Restoration, correct, redress, Improve, Edify, botch, cobble, clout, patch,
Progress, advance. MARRING, Spoiling, Deprave, Impair, spill, taint, alloy,
wear, corrupt, vitiate, wast.





II. Transcendental Mixed ^elations belonging to CONTINUED QUANTITY, II.
Transcend. Relations of CONTINUED QUANTITY.
may be distinguished into those various measures of distance according to the
difference of more or less, with respect either to Line; from END to End. 1.
LENGTH, -en, Longitude, prolong, protract, eeke out, extend, tedious,
prolixness. SHORTNESS, Brevity, Conciseness, abbreviate, curtal, abridge,
restrain, compendious, succinct.
Superficies; from side to side. 2.
BREADTH, Wideness, Latitude, Largeness, Ampleness, spacious, dilate, enlarge,
extend. NARROWNESS, Streightness, Scantness, close, compressed, pink-eyed,
restrain.
Body; reckoning from Top to Bottom. 3.
DEEPNESS, profound, Abyss, far into, high. SHALLOWNESS, Ford, Scour,
Depression, low, flat.
Bottom to Top. 4.
HIGHNESS, Altitude, exalt, elevate, Soar, sublime, tall, lofty, proper,
towering, advance, raise, aloft. LOWNESS, abase, bring down, depress, demiss,
nether
Any Superficies to the opposite. 5.
THICKNESS, Crassitude, gross, deep, incrassate, rouncival. THINNESS, slender,
fine, slim, lank, slank, slight, tenuity, gaunt, rare, subtle, attenuate.




III. Transcen. Relations of DISCONTINUED QUANTITY.
III. Transcendental Relations of DISCONTINUED QUANTITY or Number, may be
distributed into such as are either Comparative; denoting either a greater or
lesser number then ordinary. 1.
MULTITUDE, many, numerous, a world of, multiply, increase, propagate, store,
swarm, thick, press, crowd throng, rout. FEWNESS, Paucity, decrease, small
number, thin, diminishing.
Positive; concerning the Number of things, whether One, or more then one. 2.
SINGULARITY, Individual, numerical, single. PLVRALITY, more
Some or All. 3.
PARTICULARITY, special, peculiar. UNIVERSALITY, Generality, Catholic,
Ecumenical, utmost.

Kinds of things, whether One kind, or All kinds. 4.
SPECIALNESS, peculiar, particular. GENERALNESS, All.
Parts of which number consists, whether Equal or Unequal Units. 5.
EVENNESS, Parity. ODNESS, Imparity, uneven.
Position of things numbered, denoting their Being in a state of separation from
others, or in a state of conjunction with several others. 6.
SEGREGATENESS, sever, set apart or aside, Analysis, Anatomy, piecemeal, by
retail, dispense, distribute, one by one, Parcels, by pole. AGGREGATENESS,
Train, Troop, Company, Party, Scull, Swarm, Team, Flock, Heard, Pack, Covy,
Sheaf, Bale, Bundle, Fardle, Bunch, Cluster, Gross, by the great.
Order, belonging either to Things, or to Words. 7.
SERIES, Rank, Row, Class, successive, Chain, Course, Race, collateral,
Concatenation, Alphabet. CATALOGVE, Index, Table, List, Role, Bill, Scrole,
Terrier, a particular, Cargo, Inventory, Muster, impannel, Genealogy, Pedigree,
Vocabulary, Dictionary, Lexicon, Nomenclator, Almanac, Calendar.
Parts of an aggregate being all together. 8.
SUIT, Pack, Set, Mess, a Ring.





IV. Transcendental Relations belonging to QUALITY, IV. Transcen. Relations of
QUALITY at large.
as considered MORE LARGELY, may be distributed into such kind of Relations as
are either Single; containing a respect to the Cause of a thing, whether none
or any, The being of a thing, the first of its kind, or not. 1.
PRIMITIVENESS, Root, original, simple, underived. DERIVATIVENESS, conjugate,
Notation, Etymology, transmission.
Distance of a thing, whether without or with any other between. 2.
IMMEDIATENESS, Next. MEDIATENESS.
Manner of being, whether entirely of it self, or by virtue of something else.
3.
ABSOLUTENESS, Independent, Freehold. DEPENDENCY, Under.
Degrees of Being or Causality, whether superior and before all others, or
inferior, and after some others. 4.
PRINCIPALNESS, Chief, Special, Ringleader, sovereign, supreme, paramount,
first, main, arch, prime, primary, capital, cardinal fundamental, Top, Head,
Master. ACCESSORINESS, Abet, adherent, second, Companion, Party, Copartner,
Complice, Appendage, Label, Appurtenance, adventitious, collateral, conscious,
privy, side with, back, partake, participate, by the way, by the by.

Mutual; whether more Positive; signifying one thing either to have or not to
have Relation to some other. 5.
PERTINENCY, belong, appertain, apposite, to the purpose, touching, concern,
material, relate to, serve for, incumbent on. IMPERTINENCY, not to the purpose,
extravagant, sleeveless, wide from the matter, wild, idle, improper.
Comparative, denoting such relation to belong only to one or few, or to many.
6.
PROPERNESS, incommunicable, owner, peculiar, concern. COMMONNESS, usual,
vulgar, current, general, prostitute.




V. Transcend. Relations more strictly.
V. Transcendental Relations of QUALITY considered MORE STRICTLY, may be
distributed into such as do concern either their Being; The same or diverse. 1.
LIKENESS, Similitude, similar, assimilate, resemble, representation Species,
Idea, Image, Effigies, Portraiture. VNLIKENESS, Dissimilitude, dissimilar,
degenerous.
Circumstances; whether Special, relating to their Place, either the being of
things in their due positions, or out of their due places. 2.
ORDER, Regular, Method, array, imbattle, marshal, rally, in frame, dispose,
digest, range. CONFVSION, Disorder, Rhapsody, Chaos, Gallimaufry, tumult, rout,
coyl, disheveled, disranked, out of frame or order, promiscuous, Preposterous,
Ruffle, Shuffle, scamble, clutter, blunder, jumble, hurry, hurly burly, pell
mell.
Time, either the being of things as usually they are, or their being otherwise
then commonly they use to be. 3.
ORDINARINESS, common, usual, trivial, current. EXTRAORDINARINESS, strange,
uncouth, unusual, unwonted, of note, notable, notorious, Odness, Paradox.

General, The being of things according to certain rules or not so. 4.
REGULARNESS, right, rectify, rule. EXORBITANCY, Irregularness, Enormity,
Disorder, extravagant, licentious, wild, faulty, wrong, loose, immoderate,
unruly, unbridled, out of square, lash out, Heteroclyte, Anomalous.

Being known; either to many or few. 5.
PUBLICKNESS, Notorious, famous, common, extant, open, being out, or abroad,
Declaration, Manifesto, Remonstrance, Edition, Promulgation, set forth or out,
show, spread, blazon, publish, proclaim, divulge, denounce, produ^e, post up,
come to light, high way. PRIVATENESS, underhand, clancular, clandestine,
retire, between themselves.
Mixture with or addition of other things; when they are Better for such
mixture, or Worse for being without it. 6.
ORNATENESS, adorn, set out, Deck, beautify, embellish, trimm, trick, tire,
garnish, flourish, dress, prank, Ornament, Grace, florid, neat, smug, spruce,
elegant, quaint, fine, polite, gay, gaudy, gorgeous, flaring, garish,
flaunting, Gallant, Spark, Bracelet, Plume, Garland, Ouch, etc. HOMELINESS,
simple, rough, rude, untrimmed, plain, bald.
Better for being without such mixture, or worse for it. 7.
PURITY, Cleanness, undefiled, defecate, fine, refine, try, furbush, scour*
purge, purify, clarify, depuration, neat, abstersive. DEFILEMENT, Filthiness,
Impurity, unclean, fowl, squalid, bedawb, besmear, bewray, contaminate,
slabber, slubber, smear, soil, sully, pollute, daggle, slurry, smutch, smutt,
stain, alloy, embase, dash.




VI. That thing which is made up of several lesser things united together is
called by the name of WHOLE, Total, Integral, Entire, Sum, VI. Transcen.
Relations of WHOLE and PART.
All, Utterly* Quite and clean, full, plenary.

Those lesser things, by the union of which another greater thing is made up,
are styled by the common name of PARTS. Particle, Parcel, partial, Divide,
share, distribute, driblet, portion, piece, pittance.

The transcendental relations of whole and part are such as denote a respect to
Quantity Continued; in regard of the Quality; of Goodness or Badness of such
parts. 1.
BEST PART, Quintessence, Cream, Flower, the heart, Top. WORST PART, Refuse,
Scumm, Dreggs, Raff, draft, dross, rubbish, tare, bran, chaff, recrement,
trash, garbage, offal.
Time; either that which is first taken, whereby the goodness of the whole is
to be measured, or that which is superadded after the whole. 2.
SAY, taste, touch, scantling. VANTAGE, surplus, overplus, to boot, over and
above, over-weight, corollary, supplement, vails.
Place; specially in liquids, either that part which in separation does rise to
the top, or that which falls to the bottom. 3.
SCUM, Sandever, Mother. SEDIMENT, settling, caput mort, grounds, lees, dregs,
feculent, rack, defecate.
Figure; specially in solids; whether Roundish; in greater parts, or in lesser
parts. 4.
LUMP, Bole, Morsel, Bit, Cantle, Luncheon, Gobbet, Mammock, Stub, stump,
grumous, clotted, clod, turfe, sod. POWDER, Mote, Dust, Corn, Grain, Crum,
Grate, moulder.
Oblong; made either by Cutting, or by Breaking, 5.
CHIP, Lamin, Scale, Flake, Flaw, Flitter, shive, shiver, splinter. FRAGMENT,
Piece, Scrap, Sheard, tatter, Flitter, rag, shread, snip, slive, slice, collop,
cut.


Discontinued; denoting the respect of A Part put to another, or the whole as
being made up of such parts. 6.
ADDITUM, item, put to, insert, eke out. SVMM, lay or couch together, cast up,
count, draw to a head, come to, amount, result, total, in the whole.
A Part taken out from others, or the whole remaining after such taking out. 7.
ABLATUM, abate, defalk, retrench, deduct, subduct, substract, take away.
RESIDVE, overplus, surplussage, arrear, remainer, remnant, left behind, the
other, the rest, relics, orts, scraps, reversions, gleaning, offal, odd-ends,
stubs, stumps, stubble.
A Part repeated a certain number of times, so as to equal the whole, or the
whole considered as it is so made up. 8.
MULTIPLIER, Side. PRODVCT, rectangle.
A Part taken out such a certain number of times as leaves nothing of the
whole, or that number of times which is the correspondent part. 9.
DIVISOR. QVOTIENT.




TRANSCENDENTAL RELATIONS OF ACTION, may be distributed into such as are more
General. -- SIMPLE. I COMPARATE. II
Special; denoting either Kinds of Action. Solitary; wherein more then one
person is not necessarily supposed. BUSINESS. III. Social; wherein more then
one person is necessarily supposed. COMMERCE. IV
EVENTS. V ITION. VI



I. TRANS. RELAT. of ACTION SIMPLE.
I. Transcendental respects of ACTION SIMPLE or relating to single things, are
such as do concern The General condition of a thing, denoting the making of it
to be so, or to be otherwise. 1.
PUTTING, Set, Lay, Make. ALTERING, Change, Vary, Mutation, shift, Revolution,
Vicissitude, Catastrophe, Metamorphosis.
Ones right in a thing; whether Making it to be his, or not to be his. 2.
APPROPRIATING, own, set apart, engross, monopolize. ALIENATING, transferr,
estrange, pass away ones right.
Declaring it to be his, or not to be his. 3.
CLAIMING, Owning, Challenging, Demand, arrogate, assume, profess, attribute
ascribe, take upon him, declare for. ABDICATING, disclaim, disown, renounce,
relinquish, refuse, reject, repudiate, desert, forsake, disavow, disherit,
execrate, forswear, destitute, cast off, lay aside, put away.

Ones Possession; with respect to the Causing of a thing to be in ones
Possession or not. 4.
TAKING, Seizing, Apprehending, resume, surprise, assume, intercept. LEAVING,
Relinquish, Residue, forsake, spare.
Being of a thing in ones possession, or the not being of such a thing in ones
possession as he ought to have. 5.
HAVING, in hand, hold, possess. WANTING, indigent, lack, miss, necessity,
need, penury.
Continuing a thing in ones Possession or not. 6.
HOLDING, Detain, Retain, Keep. LETTING GO, Dismiss surrender, give up, Shed,
Cast, mew, resign.

The Knowledge of things, with respect to the Endeavor of knowing, or the good
success of such endeavor. 7.
SEEKING, search, feel for, grope, ransack, rummage, Quest. FINDING, retrive,
sift out, smell out, Foundling.
Causing a thing to be known, or hindering it from being known. 8.
SHOWING, disclose, detect, betray, reveal, discover, declare, demonstrate,
remonstrate, render. CONCEALING, Hide, Shelter, Suppress, Sculk, lurk, Secret,
Private, Latent, occult, underhand, close, clancular, clandestine in a corner,
in hugger mugger, recess, retire, slink, mich, sneak, slip, or steal away,
cloak, veil, hoodwink, mask, muffle.
Causing others to be perfectly known, or to be thought so. 9.
MANIFESTING, Apparent, Evident, plain, flat, open, conspicuous, perspicuous,
obvious, certain, clear, palpable, show, declare, certify set forth, come to
light. SEEMING, Semblance, Show, Pretense, Pretext, Vmbrage, Color, a show, a
blind, Formal, Appear, palliate, fain, bear in hand, make ^s if, make show of,
specious, disguise, Ey-service.




II. Transcendental Relations of Action COMPARATE, are such as do concern. II.
Trans. Relat. of Actions COMPARATE.


Diverse things at the same time; whether such kind of Actions as from the
nature of the Agents or Patients, may be called Corporeal; denoting the Causing
of things to be together or asunder. 1.
JOINING, annex, Connection, couple, link, copulation, concatenation,
conjunction, Coalition, coherent, copulative, conglutinate, combine, compact,
set or put together. SEPARATING, Segregate, sunder, sever, dissever, divide,
disjoin, disunite, dissect, dissolve, part, take in pieces, disjunctive.
Continuing them together or asunder. 2.
ADHEARING, Cleave, stick to, cling to, hang together, coherent, inseparable.
ABANDONING, Forsake, Desert, Relinquish, Leave, Forgo, Flinch, Quit,
Dereliction, forlorn, destitute, shake or cast off, start back, give over.

Mental; Putting of things together or asunder 3.
APPLYING, lay or put to. ABSTRACTING.
Both Corporeal and Mental; with respect to the Taking in of several things, or
the leaving out of some. 4.
COMPREHENDING, Contain, Comprize, Imply, Involve, Enclose, Include, inclusive,
hold, Complication. EXEMPTING, Except, restrain, seclude, exclude, save, salvo,
set aside.
Putting of things together, the better to judge of their likeness or
unlikeness, or examining of them for the distinguishing of that which is right
and true. 5.
COMPARING, Conferr, Collation, resemble. TRY, Prove, Search, Temptation,
Experiment, test, touch, examine, gage poise, pose, probe.


The same things at diverse times, whether the same as to Substance; signifying
either the doing of the same thing several times, or the making of a thing to
be different at one time from what it was before. 6.
REPEATING, Iterate, reiterate, recite, render, rehearse, redouble,
reduplicate, inculcate, ingeminate, recapitulate, renew, afresh, again,
Tautology, the burden. CHANGING, Mutation, Vary, Alter, Shift.
Quantity; The giving back of the very same thing, or of something else equal
to it. 7.
RESTORING, Give back, Restitution, refund, return, Restoration. COMPENSATING,
Recompense, award, make amends, remunerate, quit, requite, retaliate,
retribute, reparation, paying, fit, being even with, meet with, make good, cry
quittance, like for like, one for another.
Quality; endeavoring to show how another thing is, or to do the like. 8.
REPRESENTING, declare, show, exhibit, present. IMITATING, Mimick, personate,
take forth, follow.
Use; as means to an end, The making of a thing more fit or less fit for its
end. 9.
REPAIRING, Mending, Bettering, Improving, correct, rectify, renew, reedifie,
Emendation, Instauration, Redress, set to right, make good, make up, patch up,
piece up. SPOILING, Marring, corrupting, deprave, impair, raze, scrape or
cross out, slight works.


III. Trans. Relat. of BUSINESS.
III. Those kind of Actions about which men bestow their time and labor, are
called by the general name of BUSINESS, Affair, Task, Chare, Transaction,
Matter, Factor, Agent, negotiate, occupy, stickle, meddle, intermeddle,
dealing, employment, active.

To which may be opposed the Negation or being free from such Actions styled
LEASVRE, Vacation vacant, idle or spare time, unoccupied, respite.

Transcendental relations of BUSINESS, may be distributed into such as are
Previous to it. Mental or Verbal. 1.
DESIGNING, allot, appoint, plot, preordein, project. UNDERTAKING, enterprise,
take in hand set upon, task.
Real; either more general or more special, with respect to the providing of
requisite materials. 2.
PREPARING, Parade, previous, ready, make way, fitting, Tuning, Harbinger.
FURNISHING, Aequipage, fitting, ready.

Parts of it; whether Initial; with respect to the First entrance upon a
business; either Real or Seeming. 3.
BEGIINNING, Inchoate, initiate, commence, Inceptor, Spring, Rise, Original,
first, set about, set forth, set a foot, go in hand with, enter upon. OFFERING,
Propose profer, tender, bid, propound, overture.
Application of the labor, either to the doing of any thing, or to know whether
it can be done. 4.
ENDEAVORING, Devoir, bestir, adoo, coyl, stickle, strein, strive, struggle,
effort, make a stir, do ones best, reach after, lay out for. ESSAYING, Trying,
say, attempt, prove, tempt-ation, Test, Experience, enterprise, venture, sound,
taste, touch, run the risk or adventure.

Medial; with respect to the time bestowed in the doing of it, whether shorter
or longer time. 5.
DISPATCHING, Hasten, quick, high, forward, hurry, precipitate, speed,
C^lerity, Expedition, sudden, apace, out of hand, cut short. PROTRACTING,
Delay, desert, retard, slacken, respite, tarry, foreslow, linger, prolong,
lengthen, prorogue, procrastinate, dally, lagg, stand about, whiling about*
shift off, put off* post off, spin out time.
Final; with respect to the End of the Action; either the effecting of what we
undertake and profess, or our failing in it. 6.
PERFORMING, Accomplishing, Atchieve, fu^fil, verify, discharge, execute,
keep, observe, exploit, make good bring to pass. VIOLATING, infringe, break,
trespass, transgress.
Action it self; whether Perfect or Imperfect. 7.
FINISHING, Concluding, ending, accomplishing, fulfill, performing, cease, give
over, Period, Term, ultimate, last, consummate, determine, dispatched, done,
Catastrophe, clap up, shut up, wind up, close up, draw to an issue, go through
with, run his course. MISCARRYING, Failing.


Hindrances of it; either not rightly using the means, or not using some of
them. ERRING, Swerve, slip, stray, astray, mistake, oversight, deviate, falter,
fallible. heterodox, Fallacy, wrong, amiss, awry, being out, beside the mark.
OMITTING, Pretermit, Wave, decline, default, escape, lapse, leave, miss,
forbear, balk, supersede, overlook, overpass, preterition, overslip, overskip,
let pass, pass by or over, lay aside, hold ones hand.
Helps of it; denoting either avoiding mistakes at the beginning, or rectifying
mistakes afterward. 9.
PREVENTING, Anticipate, Previous, aforehand, forestal, Foregame. REMEDYING,
Redress, Shift, Aftergame, Help.



IV. Transcendental relations of Action concerning such things as are alienated
from one Person to another, IV. Transcen. Relations of COMMERCE.
are usually called by the General Name of COMMERCE, Intercourse, Traffic,
Prattick, have to do with.

These may be distributed into such as are Free; and not upon consideration
Passive; Not hindering one to take or to do. 1.
YIELDING, Suffering, permitting, give way, give place. SUBMITTING to.
Active; Imperfect; denoting a willingness to part with, or a desire to have a
thing. 2.
OFFERING, Proffer, tender, exhibit, present, recommend, Oblation. DEMANDING,
Require, Challenge.
Perfect; with respect to the Possession of a thing; the Parting with it, or
Taking of it. 2.
DELIVERING, Surrender, transferr, resign. RECEIVING, Take, entertain, capable,
reception, receptacle.
Right of a thing; the Parting with it, or Taking of it. 4.
GIVING, Bestow, confer, render, grant, contribute, endow, consign, Gift, Boon,
Largess, Collation, Donation, Donative, Gratis. ACCEPTING, Receiving,
administer, dispense, distribute, Token, Fairing, take in good part.



Conditional; and upon consideration, whether such as concern the Causing of
Relations by Actions that are Real; The Parting with something of ones own for
the use and in the stead of another, or the restoring what another has so
parted with. 5.
DISBURSING, Bestow, defray, extend, lay out, Bursar, Principal. REFUNDING,
Repay, return, reimburse.
Verbal; the Comparing and measuring of particulars, or reducing them to an
equality. 6.
RECKONING, Compute-ation, count, account, cast account, Calculate, Audit,
Score, Tally. BALLANCING, Evening of Accounts, Quitting scores, Adjust.

Relations themselves ensuing upon such Actions, whether as having somewhat of
ones own in another possession, or something of another in ones own
possession. 7.
BEING CREDITOR, Lending, Loan. BEING DEBTOR, Owing, Debt, upon score, in ones
books, behind hand, Arrear.
Ceasing or dissolution of such relations by some Act of the Debtor; either by
restoring what is due, or by being rendered unable for it. 8.
PAYING, Defray, discharge, satisfy, reimburse, Annuity, Poundage, Shot,
responsible. FAILING, Break, Bankrout.
Creditor; Acknowledging restitution, or Giving away his right to it. 9.
ACQUITTING, Discharge, Quittance, Receipt, clear accounts. FORGIVING,
Remitting, pardoning, put up,





V. EVENT.
V. The General name for that which follows upon Actions, especially as it
relates to the end for which Actions are done, is EVENT, Vpshot, issue, result,
emergence, accrue, occurr, come to pass, fall out, befall, betide, ensue,
prove, redound, happen, light, succeed, Luck, Fortune, End, Sequel, Success,
incident, coincident, intervene, supervene, take effect, how fares, goes,
speeds it, come of it, come to good or to naught.

Transcendental relations of Action belonging to Event, may be distributed into
such as do concern the Existing or not existing of the End designed. 1.
OBTEINING, Acquire, get, procure, attain, reach, gain, compass, recover, take,
win, catch, come by, pick up. FRVSTRATING, Fail, disappoint miss, defeat,
deceive, elude, cross, come short of, shift off, put by, of no effect, to no
purpose, vain, void, nullity.
Good or Evil accrewing to us by it, with respect to the Increasing or
Diminishing of our Possessions. 2.
GAINING, Lucre, Advantage, Profit, Emolument, Stock, the proceed, acquire,
get, win, recover, extort. LOOSING, Damage, decrement, detriment,
disadvantage, disprofit, wrack, spoil hurt, hinderance, out of ones way.
Diminishing or Increasing of our Want. 3.
SAVING, Sparing, take up. SPENDING, Lay out, bestow, expend, dispend, expense,
charges, cost, sumptuary, run out.
Continuing, or not Continuing of a thing in our Possession. Imperfect;
denoting the Endeavor and care we use about it, whether any or none. 4.
LAYING UP, Treasuring, Preserving, Stow, Hoord, Store, Repository. SQANDRING,
Lavish, profuse, careless, mispend, embezel, wast, unthrifty, ill husbandry,
spendthrift, flying out.
Perfect; Consisting in the Good or Ill success of such Endeavor. 5.
KEEPING, Preserve, retain, Custody, holding, promptuary, Cellar. LOOSING,
Perdition, loss, wrack, shed, spil.


Applying of a thing; whether more Simply; denoting the applying of a thing to
its proper end, or the not applying of it so. 6.
USING, Employ, improve, exercise, occupy, manage, treat, handle, entertain,
useful, serviceable, stand in good stead. ABSTEINING, Forbear, refrain, spare,
withdraw, wean, hold ones hand.
Relatively; as to that satisfaction or dissatisfaction of mind which we have
in the use of a thing. 7.
ENJOYING, Fruition. BEING SICK OF, Nauseate, loath, tedious, surfeit, weary of.

Result of such application, in the diminishing or increasing of our Pain. 8.
REFRESHING, Recreate, relieve, recruit, relaxation, refection, Bait. WEARYING,
Lassitude, tyring, tedious, faint, fatigue.
Hindrances. 9.
QUIETING, Tranquillity, rest, compose, sedate, serene, still, calm, set or be
at rest. TROVBLING, Molest, disturb, annoy, disquiet, incumber, infest,
interrupt, pester, cumber, turbulent, stirs, coil, broil, turmoil, garboil,
perturbation.




VI. The General name denoting Transcendental Motion or rest, VI. ITION.
is ITION, Going, Passing, Remove, betake, repair, transmission, Penetrate,
Flitt.

STAYING, Abide, remain, tarry, continue, reside, rest, stop, stick, damm,
detain, hold at a bay, Mansion, Stage, Remora.

The Relations belonging to this motion, may be distinguished into such as are
Solitary, supposing but one Person or Thing, with respect to its Moving toward
or from the Speaker. 1.
COMING, Arrive, Access, Resort, repair to, frequent, recourse, concourse,
confluence, return. GOING, Depart, recede, return, regress, ingress, egress, be
packing, be jogging, retire, retrograde, withdraw, dislodge, avaunt, void, slip
away, slink or sneak away, fling away, fall off, get gone, set forth, rub along.
Continuing of Motion; whether Simply; Toward the same term, or changing of
the Term. 2.
PROCEEDING, Persist, prosecute, persevere, progress, pass, advance, hold or go
on, set forward or on. TURNING, Winding, Veare, Double, tack, about, face
about, wheel about.
With Design; either to some certain place, or to no certain place. 3.
TRAVAILING, Expedition, Voyage, Journey, Progress, Peregrination, Itinerant,
Passenger, Wayfaring, March, set out, Palmer, Pilgrim, Pass, Pasport. WANDERING,
Stray, astray, range, rove, straggle, err-ant, Vagrant, Vagabond, random,
ramble, rome, prole, gad, Gypsy, Rogue, Landloper, Labyrinth, Ambages.


Social; supposing several persons or things. Causing another To go or to come,
4.
SENDING, Mission, missive, Token, convey, dismiss, Remit, dispatch, Messenger,
Ambassador, Legate, Envoy, Lieger, Emissary, Currier, Arrant. FETCHING, Bring,
reduce, forthcoming.
To come after, or to go before. 5.
LEADING, Guide, Conduct, bring, convey, draw, Manuduction. DRIVING, Chase,
drift, expel, repel, repulse, goad, beat back, Ferret out.

Coming after another thing in motion, or coming up equal to it. 6.
FOLLOWING, Ensue, come after, pursue, dogging, trace. OVERTAKING, Reach, Top,
Catch, fetch up.
Coming of things together from several terms, or the Preterition of something
in our way. 7.
MEETING, Obviate, obvious, encounter, occurr, Randevouze. AVOIDING, Decline,
Fly, shun, eschew, Wave, beware, escape, evade, shift off, out of the way.




Of DISCOURSE, Or the several notions belonging to Grammar or Logic.
THE most general name for those external expressions, whereby men do make
known their thoughts to one another,. VI.
is DISCOURSE, Commune, Communication, Parley, Talk, Colloquie, Tract, Treatise,
handle, Style.

To which may be annexed that particular way of discourse, most in use, namely
by articulate voice and words, called LANGUAGE, Tongue, Speech, Linguist,
dialect.

The several things and notions belonging to discourse, may be distributed into
such as do concern either the Parts of it; or those primary ingredients of
which it consists, whether More Simple; styled ELEMENTS. I Less Simple; WORDS.
II
Kinds of it; or those secondary parts belonging to it, whether such as are
Proper, to GRAMMAR. III. LOGIC. IV.
COMMON TO BOTH. V
MODES of it. VI


I. The first and more simple ingredients required to the framing of Discourse
or Language, are styled ELEMENTS. Abedarian. I^. ELEMENTS.


These may be distinguished into such as do concern either the Sounds made by
the Organs of speech, according to the General name; denoting either that which
is spoken, or the picture of it in writing. 1.
LETTER, literal. CHARACTER, Figure, Note, Letter, Cyphre, Orthography.
Particular kinds; relating to such as are More primary and simple; whether
such apert sounds as are framed by a free emission of the breath through the
organs of speech, or such closed sounds in the pronouncing of which the breath
is intercepted by some collision or closure amongst the instruments of speech.
2.
VOWEL. CONSONANT.
Less primary and mixed; either that which (for the most part) does consist of
several letters, pronounced in one continued motion, or of more Vowels
coalescing in one sound. 3.
SYLLABLE. DIPHTHONG.


Time or pause to be observed in the pronouncing of several words or sentences,
according to the General name; denoting that mark which serves, either for
separating such words as belong to several clauses or sentences, or for uniting
those words which are to be pronounced as one. 4.
INTERPUNCTION, Period, Point. HYPHEN, Maccaph.
Particular kinds; Lesser; according to the degrees of Less or More 5.
COMMA. SEMICOLON.
Greater; according to the degrees of Less or More. 6.
COLON. PERIOD, full point, stop, pause, rest.


Manner of Pronouncing; with reference to Distinction of such words or clauses
as are Less material; denoting that such a passage, either is not necessary to
make the sense perfect, or is added by way of Explication of something
preceding. 7.
PARENTHESIS. PARATHESIS, Exposition.
More material; either that which serves to distinguish such words, wherein the
force of the sense does more peculiarly consist, or that which denotes the
words to be intended to a contrary sense, to what they naturally signify. 8.
EMPHASIS. IRONY -- call.

Prolongation of Vowels, or Elevation of voice in the pronouncing of any
syllable. 9.
ACCENT. ACCENT, elevate.




II. WORDS.
II. Those particular sounds or Characters, which are agreed upon to signify
any one thing or notion, are called by the general name of WORD, Verbal,
verbatim, term, endite.

That which is intended by any such sound or Character, is called MEANING,
Sense, Signification, Purport, Acception, Import, tenor, denote, moral

Words may be distinguished according to the General name; given to the chief
kinds of them, whether the more Principal such as signify some entire thing or
notion, or the Less Principal, such as consignifie and serve to circumstantiate
other words with which they are joined. 1.
INTEGRAL. PARTICLE.
Particular kinds; whether of Integrals; considered according to their Natures;
being either more Absolute; denoting either the naked Essence of a thing, or
the Ens and thing it self. 2.
ABSTRACT, separate. CONCRETE, complex.
Relative; to the Names of things; whether such as signify more simply and of
themselves, or such whose signification does import their being adjoined to
something else. 3.
SUBSTANTIVE. ADJECTIVE.
Actions or Passions of things; (which is here taken notice of in compliance
with instituted Grammar, tho it be not properly one simple part of speech, but
rather a mixture of two, namely the Predicate and Copula.) To which may be
annexed that which is commonly adjoined unto this, to signify the Quality or
affection of the Action or Passion. 4.
VERB. ADVERBE DERIVED.


Place and Order in a proposition, whether that which according to natural
construction does precede the Copula, or that which does follow it. 5.
SUBJECT. PREDICATE, Attribute, asscribe, impute.

Particles; whether the Most necessary and essential to every proposition. 6.
COPULA.
Less necessary; Substitutive; in the room either of some Integral word, or of
some sentence or complex part of it. 7.
PRONOUN. INTERJECTION.
Connexive or declarative; whether such as are more Proper to Substantives;
being usually prefixed before them, either that whose office it is to join
integral with integral on the same side of the Copula, or that which serves for
the more full and distinct expression of Substantives. 8.
PREPOSITION. ARTICLE.
Common to other words; either that kind of particle which is usually adjoined
to Verbs, to signify some kind of Mode or Circumstance belonging to them, or
that which serves chiefly for the joining of clauses or sentences. 9.
ADVERBE UNDERIVED. CONJUNCTION.







III. COMPLEX GRAMMATICAL NOTIONS of Speech, III. COMPLEX GRAMMATICAL NOTIONS.
may be distinguished into such as concern the Portions into which a discourse
may be divided, whether more Imperfect; Absolute; either that which denotes
only some part of the sense, or that which signifies some complete sense. 1.
CLAUSE, Passage. SENTENCE, Period, Text, Aphorism, Apophthegm, Axiom, Impress,
Motto, Posie, Phrase, Style.
Relative; to the number and order of such parts, either the less, consisting
of one or more sentences, or the Greater being an Aggregate of these. 2.
VERSE, Staff, Stanza. SECTION, Paragraff, Article, Scene.

Perfect; containing either a Principal part, or an Entire discourse. 3.
CHAPTER, Act. BOOK, Tract, Treatise.

Kinds of such discourse; with respect to the Matter or Words, according to the
General name; denoting either a more loose and free way of putting the words
together, or that which is bound up to measure. 4.
PROSE. VERSE, Lyrick, Pindarick, Ode.
Particular kinds of Verse; either that which depends only upon some stated
measure of words, or that which does likewise suppose a similitude in the sound
of the ending Syllables. 5.
MEETRE- ical. RHYME.

Form or signification of words, whether Natural and according to the first
intention of them, or Artificial and borrowed, containing a reference to
something else of near affinity and similitude. 6.
PROPER. TRALATITIOUS, Metaphor, Trope, Parable, Simile,
Homely, or Ornate. 7.
SIMPLE. FIGURATE. Allegory, Improper, Riddle, Aenigmatical.
Full, or Defective; having something left out. 8.
EXPRESS, Plain, open, flat, explicit, Hint, Inkling, mention, set form.
UNDERSTOOD, Implied, implicit, tacit, intimated.
Easy, or Difficult to be understood. 9.
PLAIN, Evident, Perspicuous, clear, express, obvious, easy, facil, explain,
explicate, unfold, illustrate, open, make out. OBSCURE, Dark, abstruse, riddle,
aenigmatical, deep, profound, hard, difficult, mysterious, intrigue.





IV. COMPLEX LOGICAL NOTIONS.
IV. COMPLEX LOGICAL NOTIONS of discourse, may be distributed into such as are
Positive; concerning Words; with respect to their Ambiguity; Showing the
different senses which they are capable of, or using them in a fallacious
sense. 1.
DISTINCTION, discriminate. AEQUIVOCATION, Ambiguous, Amphibole.
Universality; Restraining a word unto some more proper and peculiar sense, or
enlarging of it as there may be occasion, to its full scope and
comprehensiveness. 2.
LIMITATION, Restriction, stint, bound, terminate, determine. AMPLIATION,
Enlarge, dilate, expatiate.

Things; declaring either their Natures; more or less perfectly. 3.
DEFINITION. DESCRIPTION, Character, delineate, pourtray, plot, platform, model.
Kinds; more or less perfectly. 4.
DIVISION, Parting, Dichotomy. PARTITION, Distribution, parting.
Affections; namely such common principles of knowledge whereby men are to be
directed in their judging. To which may be opposed the excluding of such
particulars as do not properly belong to those generals. 5.
RULE, Maxim, Axiom, Principle, Theorem, Canon, Rubric, Aphorism, regulate.
EXCEPTION, Exempt, reservation, restrain, exclude, seclude, salvo, save, set
aside.


Comparate or disputative, General; when from somethings already known and
granted, we endeavor to prove some other thing, or the taking of that other
thing as being so proved 6.
ARGUMENTATION, Reason, argue, dispute, debate, discuss, dissertation,
ratiocination, demonstration, sophistry, captious, cavil, polemic, mooting,
Problem, chop Logic. ILLATION, Inference, consequence, consectary, deduction,
sequel, Conclusion, Corollary, result, follow, imply.
Special; as respecting the Forms most Artificial, whether that which is most
full, or that which is defective. 7.
SYLLOGISM. ENTHYMEM.
Matter; Intrinsic from the nature of the things themselves, signifying the
proving of a General, whether from many or all the particulars, or from some
one or few particulars. 8.
INDUCTION, Particularize. EXAMPLE, Instance, exemplify, specify, leading
case.
Extrinsic; from the Authority of some other person, or a resemblance to some
other thing. 9.
CITATION, Quotation, testimonies, allege. ALLUSION, Glance.






V. MIXED NOTIONS OF DISCOURSE belonging both to Grammar and Logic may be
distributed into such as are Less complex; denoting such a complete sentence,
V. MIXED NOTIONS OF DISCOURSE.
wherein something is either affirmed or denied, To which may be adjoined such
kind of sentences, as by common use and long experience have obtained to be of
authority amongst men. 1.
PROPOSITION, Thesis, Assertion, Point, Doctrine, Observation, Position,
Problem. ADAGE, Proverb, Old-say or saw, Byword.
More complex; whether Kinds of discourse; Positive; More general; denoting
something to be spoken in presence, or written to be sent to others. 2.
ORATION, Speech, Harangue, Declamation, Oratory, Panegyric. EPISTLE, Letter.
More special; relating to matters of Fact, either the more usual name, or that
which denotes what is commonly said by many. 3.
NARRATION, Relate, Story, History, Tale, tell, Tidings, Report, recite,
recount, rehearse, impart, inform, Tradition, Annunciation, Commemoration,
Diary, Diurnal, Gazet, Chronicle, Legend, bring word, give notice, or
intelligence. RUMOR, Brute, Hearsay, Report, common Fame, Noise, Vogue.

Explicative; according to the General name; 4.
INTERPRETATION, Exposition, construction, explain, explicate, unfold,
Trouchman.
Particular kinds; whereby the words are Altered; by putting them into another
language, or into other words of the same language. 5.
TRANSLATION, Construe, version, interpret, turn, render. PARAPHRASE, Descant,
Metaphrase, Circumlocution.
Enlarged; by adding several other words for further explication, or
Contracted; into fewer words. 6.
COMMENTARY, Gloss, Note, Annotation, Stricture, Scholiast, Expositor. EPITOME,
Compendium, Brief, abbreviate, breviate, abridge, Breviary, succinct, concise,
Abstract, Synopsis, System, couch, contract, Summary, extract, recapitulate.



Appendages of discourse, whether the Extreme; either the Beginning or the End.
7.
PROLOGUE, Exordium, Preamble, Proem, Introduction, Preface, Prelude. EPILOGUE,
Conclusion.
Intermediate; either that which is more necessary, whereby one part is to be
connected to another, or such additional part as is less necessary to the main
scope of the discourse. 8.
TRANSITION, Pass-age. DIGRESSION, On the by, by the way, Diversion, Excursion,
Extravagant, glance.





VI. MODES OF DISCOURSE.
VI. MODES OF DISCOURSE* may be distributed into such as concern the business of
proving or persuading, either Antecedently; denoting such forms of speech as
imply Doubting, or a desire of being informed by others, to which may be
opposed the general name for those returns which others make to such forms of
speech. 1.
QUESTION, Ask, Interrogate, demand, examine, expostulate, Inquisition. ANSWER,
Responsal, Reply, Rejoinder, Return.
Knowing or acknowledging, whether Positive; saying a thing to be so, or not to
be so. 2.
AFFIRMATION, Assert, averr, avouch, prof^ss, Asseveration, Position. NEGATION,
Deny, renounce, refuse, Recusant, disavow, gainsay, repulse, say nay.
Conditional; allowing a thing to be so for the present, that we may thereby
the better judge of the consequences from it, or owning the truth asserted by
another. 3.
SUPPOSITION, Admit, premise, presuppose, Condition, Proviso, Hypothesis, put
case. CONCESSION, Grant, yield, allow, acknowledge, admit, agree.


Concomitantly; as the Acts or parts of it. More general; Saying something
against what another affirms, or saying what is most contrary to it. 4.
OPPOSITION, Gainsay, thwart. CONTRADICTION.
Arguing against another, to which is opposed, The showing an insufficiency in
such arguments. 5.
OBJECTION, Impugn, Cavil. SOLVTION, Solve, Answer, Resolve, Subterfuge,
Evasion, Casuist.

More special; relating to Our own arguments or opinions, by showing the truth
of them, or seconding such proof, by further evidence. 6.
PROBATION, Prove, demonstrate, evince, Evidence, verify, Reason, Presumption.
CONFIRMATION, Stablish, establish, ratify.
Our adversaries arguments, by showing the weakness of them, or turning the
force of them against himself. 7.
CONFUTATION, Refell, refute, disprove, reason against. RETORTION, Invert,
recriminate.


Subsequently,; whether Real; by rendering an adversary unable to defend his
own opinion, or making him to submit to ours. 8
POSING, Puzzle, nonplus, baffle, confound, gravel, run down. CONVICTION,
Satisfy, evince.
Verbal; acknowledging the truth of our opinion, or renouncing the error of his
own. 9.
CONFESSION, Acknowledge, own, yield, grant, profess, cry mercy. RECANTATION,
Renounce, retract, recall, revoke, unsay, bite in.




CHAP. II. I. Concerning GOD. II. Of the several things and notions reducible
under that collective Genus of WORLD.
THose more special kinds of beings to be treated of Antecedaneously to the
Predicaments,. I.
because they are not (as Predicaments are) capable of any subordinate species,
are GOD and WORLD.

That which the Heathen Philosophers style the first Mover, the first and
supreme cause of all things, and suppose to be a Being of all possible
perfections, is GOD, Lord, Jehovah, Deity, Divine-ity, Deifie.

And because of that absolute Simplicity and Purity of the Divine nature,
whereby it is distinguished from all other things, and therefore incapable of
being divided by Parts, or by Differences and Species as the rest are;
hereupon, under this Head there is only provision to be made for that great
Mystery of Christianity, the Sacred Persons of the Blessed Trinity FATHER. SON,
Christ, Jesus. HOLY GHOST, Holy Spirit.


To the name of God that of IDOL may be opposed, by which is meant any False
God; according to the Acception of the word in that Scripture, All the Gods of
the Heathen are Idols.

To the Second Person the name ANTICHRIST may be adjoined by way of Opposition;
the true Notion and Importance of the word so requiring.

By WORLD, Universe, is meant the Compages or Frame of the whole Creation,. II.
with more especial reference to those Principal and more General parts of
which it consists; whether SPIRITUAL and immaterial. I. Corporeal, considered
according to the Parts into which it is divided, whether CELESTIAL. II.
Terrestrial: either Inanimate. -- LAND. III. WATER. IV.
ANIMATE. V.
CIRCLES by which it is divided. VI.



I. By SPIRIT is meant Immaterial Substance: I. SPIRIT.
to which may be adjoined, as its proper Opposite, the word BODY, Corporeal,
Matter-ial, Carcass, Corpse, corpulent.

A Created Spirit is either such as Does not relate to a Body; and that
considered according to its General Name, as being a ministering Spirit. 1.
ANGEL- ical, Demon.
Special kinds, as Good or Evil. 2.
GOOD ANGEL, Cherub, Seraphim, Good Genius. DEVIL, Satan, Fiend, Diabolical,
Demon, Fury, Goblin, bad Genius.

Does relate to a Body; and that considered according to its General Name, as
being designed for the enlivening and quickening of a Body. 3.
SOUL, Animate, Spirit, Mind.
Special kinds, as rendering its Body capable of Nutrition and Growth; 4.
VEGETATIVE, grow.
Sense; 5.
SENSITIVE.
Discourse and Religion, together with a sense of moral good and evil. 6.
RATIONAL, reasonable.





II. HEAVEN.
II. Amongst Corporeal Substances, that which is esteemed most Simple and most
Perfect, whose general name is therefore frequently used to signify a place or
a state of the greatest Perfection and Happiness, together with that which in
both these respects is opposite, are commonly styled HEAVEN, Celestial,
Firmament, Sky. HELL, Infernal, Stygian.


Those parts of Heaven which fall under our Senses may be considered according
to their.

General Name; denoting such parts as are more Solid and Luminous. 1.
STARR, Stellate.
Particular kinds; either Fixed, that is to say, which do always keep the same
distance from one another. And these, for the better distinction and
remembrance of them, are usually distributed into diverse parcels or little
Aggregates, called Constellations: the received names of which are, according
to their imaginary Resemblances, either the proper names of Persons, as
Perseus, Andromeda, Orion, etc. or the names of brute Animals, as Bear, Lion,
Ram, etc. or the names of Inanimate things, as Balance, Arrow, etc. which may
each of them be sufficiently expressed, as the things themselves are to which
they are resembled, without being particularly provided for in the Table. And
because that great Luminary which rules the Day, with us in this System is, by
the most received Hypothesis, thought to belong to this number; therefore may
it be adjoined, as the most considerable Particular belonging to this General.
2.
FIXED STARR, Constellation. SUN, Solar.
Wandering, viz. which do not always keep the same distance from one another;
to which may be adjoined that other kind of Luminous Body, which is now by
sufficient observation and experiment discovered to be above the Atmosphere;
according to the General names. 3.
PLANET, Wandering starr. COMET, Blazing starr.
Particular kinds of Planets, being either Primary; Seen by us at a distance,
either more Frequently, Higher pair 4.
SATURN- ine. JUPITER, Jovial.
Lower pair, 5.
MARS. VENUS, Morning star, Evening star, Day starr.

Rarely, as being near the Sun, 6.
MERCURY- ial.

Inhabited by us, 7.
The GLOBE OF SEA AND LAND, Earth, World, Ecumenical, Terrestrial, Terrene,
Universe, Geography.

Secondary; whether moving about the Earth, or about any other Planet, 8.
MOON, Lunar. SATELLES.




III. By EARTH, Land, World, III. EARTH.
is meant the habitable parts of this Globe; to which may be adjoined the more
general name of the Greater parts of the Earth, denoted by the word COUNTRY,
Region, Land, Tract, Quarter, Coast.

The most considerable Notions belonging to Discourse, which refer to this, may
be distinguished with respect to its Figure, whether equal or unequal, Unequal
or Concave. 1.
PLAIN, Champion, Level, Flat, Even. MOVNTAIN, Hill, Ascent, Rising, Vpland,
Downs, Knoll. VALLEY, Vale, Dale, Bottom.

Boundaries, or adjacent Waters; which are either On all sides, whether Great,
more great, or less great. 2.
CONTINENT, Firm-land, Main-land. ISLAND, Isle, Insular.
Less, whether roundish and high, or oblong. 3.
ROCK, Cragg. CLIFF.

On three sides, which, according to a higher or lower situation, as it is
conspicuous more or less, is called 4.
PROMONTORY, Cape, Fore-land, Head-land, Point, PENE-ISLE.
On two sides, conspicuous, more or less. 5.
ISTHMUS, Straight, Neck of land. BANK, Shelf, Flat, Ridge, Shallow, Shole,
On one side, either according to the more general name, or that particular
kind which is sometimes covered with Sea. 6.
SHORE, Strand, Seacoast, Bank-side. WASHES, Sands.

Motion or Rest. 7.
QUICKSANDS, Drift, Syrtis. OAZ.



IV. WATER.
IV To the word WATER, as it denotes the watery part of this Terrestrial Globe,
may be adjoined the word SEA, Marine, Maritim; which denotes the more general
name of the greater parts of Water, as Country or Region does of Land.

The more considerable Notions under this Head may be distinguished as the
other, with respect to its Figure, whether equal or unequal, Unequal or Concave.
1.
AEQUOR, Calm Sea, Smooth Sea. WAVE, Billow, Surge, Vndulation, Rough.
WHIRL-POOL, Vorago, Gulf, Swallow.

Boundaries, or adjacent Land; which is either On all sides, whether Great,
more great, or less great. 2.
OCEAN, Main-sea. LAKE, Mere, Pond, Plash.
Less, whether obround and deep, or oblong. 3.
WELL, Head. SPRING, Fountain, Source, Rivulet.

On three sides, greater, or less. 4.
BAY, Gulf, Creek, Arm of the Sea, Harbor, Port, Key. PENE-LAKE, Haven,
Harbor, Port, Key.
On two sides, greater, or less 5.
FRETUM, Straight, Narrow sea, Sound. CHANNEL.
On one side, either according to the more general name, or that particular
kind which is sometimes higher, and sometimes lower upon the Land. 6.
SHORE, Margo aquea. TIDE, Ebb, Flow, High Water, Low Water, Neap-tide,
Springtide.

Motion or Rest; whether constantly moving, or generally at rest 7.
STREAM, River, Brook, Current, flow, pour, gush, Bourn, Rill, Rivulet, Eddy,
Gullet, Flood, Deluge, Inundation, Torrent, Cataract, Watercourse,
Running-water. STAGNUM, Pool, Puddle, Pond, stagnate, standing-water,
Dead-water.



V. ANIMATE PARTS OF THE WORLD.
V. The ANIMATE PARTS of the World do comprehend such Bodies as are endowed with
Life or Spirit; whether Vegetative, more Imperfect; such Bodies as grow in
Veins of the Earth, which though they are not commonly owned and reckoned under
this Rank, yet several Learned men have heretofore reduced them hither, as
being a more imperfect kind of Vegetable; because when Mines have seemed to be
totally exhausted of them, yet there has remained behind some kind of Seminal
or Spermatic parts, whereby they have in process of time been renewed again,
and continued to propagate their kinds. 1.
MINERAL.
Perfect; whether according to the General name; 2.
PLANT, Vegetable.
Special kinds; denoting either, that tribe of Plants that are most small,
tender and numerous; Or those kinds, amongst these, which are commonly fed upon
by beasts, etc. 3.
HERB, Wort, Weed, Botanic. GRASS, Grase, Greensword.


Sensitive, 4.
ANIMAL, Brute-ish.
Rational, 5.
MAN, Woman, Human-ity, Folk.



VI. Besides those General parts into which the World may be divided, VI.
IMAGINARY CIRCLES.
there is likewise consideration to be had of those Imaginary CIRCLES by which
men have agreed to divide both the Celestial and Terrestrial Globe, for the
better explaining of the Distances and Motions of the Stars, and the several
Climates of the Earth; to which may be adjoined for Affinity the Notion of
ORB, Sphere.

These Circles are either Greater, dividing the Sphere into two equal parts;
Indeterminately; namely that which separates the upper and visible part of the
Globe, from that which by reason of its being below us, we cannot see,
terminating our vision. 1.
HORIZON- tall.
Determinately; as to Northern and Southern parts; whether Directly; wherein
the Sun makes everywhere equal day and night: 2.
EQUATOR, Aequinoctial, the Line.
Obliquely, namely, that Line wherein the Sun is supposed constantly to move in
its Annual course: to which may be adjoined that Circular superficies, on each
side of this, which terminates the motion of the Planets; 3.
ECLIPTIC. ZODIAC.

Eastern and Western parts; wherein the Sun makes midday or midnight: to
which those other Circles correspond which pass through the Poles of the
Horizon, as the former do through the Poles of the World; 4.
MERIDIAN, Colure. AZIMUTH.


Lesser, dividing the Sphere into two unequal parts; whether Polar described by
the supposed motion of the Poles of the Ecliptic; either Northern or Southern.
5.
ARTIC. ANTARTIC.
Tropic, terminating the motion of the Sun in its greatest Declination;
Northern, or Southern. 6.
TROPIC of Summer Solstice. TROPIC of Winter Solstice.
Parallels, relating either to the Equator, or to the Horizon. 7.
PARALLEL. ALMACANTAR.




CHAP. III. I. Of Elements and Meteors. II. Of Stones. III. Of Metals.
. I.
WHereas men do now begin to doubt, whether those that are called the Four
ELEMENTS be really the Primordia rerum, First Principles, of which all mixed
Bodies are compounded; therefore may they here be taken notice of and
enumerated, without particular restriction to that Notion of them, as being
only the great Masses of natural Bodies, which are of a more simple Fabric
then the rest: For which reason the word METEOR may be annexed to Element, for
its affinity in this respect, signifying the several kinds of Bodies which are
of a more imperfect mixture. These are, according to the common Theory,
distinguishable into More simple; whether Real, such as do actually exist.
Lighter; FIRE. I. AIR. II.
Heavier; WATER. III. EARTH. IV.

APPARENT. V.
More mixed; denoting various modes of Air. WEATHER. VI.



I. The hottest and lightest kind of those that are counted Elements, I. FIRE.
is called FIRE: Burn, Scald, Singe, Kindle, Tind, Light.

The several Notions referring to the Parts or Kinds of it, are distinguishable
by their Magnitude, Place, Duration, Shape, etc.

The General parts or kinds of Fire, are either greater, which seem to be
enkindled Air; or less, being a small separated portion of Fire. 1.
FLAME, Blaze, Coruscation, Flash, Leam, Light fire. SPARK, Strike fire.
The Special sorts of Fiery Bodies, to which custom has given particular
names, are such as are either More considerable; in respect of their
Lastingness, continuing for some time in the same place; and then vanishing, or
falling. 2.
COMET, Standing, Blazing starr. FALLING STARR.
Suddenness; being either the Shining and flash of inflamed Exhalations, or the
Sound made by such Inflammations, 3.
LIGHTNING, Flash, Coruscation. THUNDER, Fulminate.

Less considerable; More high in the Air; Of Coherent parts, in the shape of a
standing perpendicular Column, or of a Dart in motion. 4.
BEAM, Trabs. DART, Iaculum.
Of Disjoined parts, of a shape bigger, or lesser. 5.
CAPRA SALTANS. SCINTILLAE VOLANTES.

More low in the Air, loose, wandering; as that which appears often to Mariners
at Sea: and if single, it is called St. Hermo, Helena, and is thought to
portend Storms; if double, it is styled Castor and Pollux, signifying good
weather: Or that which adheres to, and encompasses several Animals, without
hurting them, being probably an Inflammation of their Effluvia. 6.
IGNIS FATUUS, Will with a Wisp, Jack with a Lanthorn. IGNIS LAMBENS.
Within the Earth; 7.
DAMP.



II. AIR.
II. The General name for that kind of Body, which, for its Levity and Warmth,
is counted the next Element to that of Fire, is AER- eal, Wind, Breath.

It is distinguishable by its Purity; being either more remote from the Earth
and its Exhalations; or adjoining to the Terrestrial Globe, and impregnated by
the Steams and Efflluvia that proceed from it. 1.
ETHER, or ethereal Air, Firmament, Sky, Welkin. ATMOSPHERE.
Kinds of mixture, according to the more General name, or that particular kind
which signifies a mixture of Watery parts. 2
EXHALATION, Steam, Reek, Effluvium, volatile. VAPOR, Evaporate, Breathe.
Particular kinds in respect of its mixture with Earthy, or Fiery parts. 3.
FUME. SMOKE, Suffumigation, bloting, fume.

Motion, Above ground; Direct, or Circular. 4.
WIND, Blow, Gale, Breath, Blast, Puff, Gust, Flaw, Monsoon, Tradewind,
Bellows, Eolipile, Fan, Ventiduct. WHIRLWIND, He^ricano, Tornado.
Under ground; Violent, or Gentle. 5.
EARTHQUAKE. DAMP.




III. The third of those greater Masses of Body, considerable for its Gravity
and Moisture, III. WATER.
is styled WATER: Aqueous, Dip, padle, Drein.

The names belonging to this are such as concern either The smaller Particles
of it; whether Solid, or Hollow. 1.
DROP, Drip, drible, drizle, trickle, sprinkle, run, shed, instill. BUBBLE,
Froth, Spume, Foam, Mantle, Ebullition.
The Mixture of it with Air, Upper, or Lower. 2.
CLOUD, Overcast, gloomy. MIST, Fogg, nebulous.
The Condensation of it, from a Cloud, or from a Mist. 3.
RAIN, Drizie. DEW.
The Congelation of it, according to its more General acception, or according
to that special kind of it relating to the smaller particles of a Cloud, styled
4
FROST, Freeze, Ice, congele, Isicle. SNOW.
Particular restriction to the Drops of Rain, or of Dew. 5*
HAIL. RHYME, Hoar^frost.

The Kinds of Dew: More Concrete; of a sweet taste: to which may be adjoined
that peculiar kind of physical Dew mixed with the Exudations of the Plant
Ladanum. 6.
MANNA. LADANUM.
More Liquid; gathered from Plants by Bees: to which may be adjoined for its
affinity, that other natural Body gathered likewise by Bees, and of a clammy
consistence. 7.
HONEY. WAX.




IV. That which is commonly described to be the Coldest, Thickest, IV. EARTH.
Heaviest, of any of those Bodies counted Elements, is called EARTH, Land, Mold.

This is distinguishable by its Smaller Particles; Alone and without mixture. 1.
DUST.
Mixed with Water. 2.
DIRT, Mud, Mire, daggle, puddle:
Separated by Fire, descending, or ascending. 3.
ASHES, Embers, Cinders. SOOT, Fuliginous.

Bigger Masses of it, serviceable for building, and of a Cold, clammy
consistence, to which that common mixture which is made of this may be adjoined
for its affinity. 4.
CLAY. MORTAR, Lome.
Hot and dry consistence, usually made of burnt Stone; to which, for the same
reason, may be adjoined that other common mixture made of this. 5.
LIME. PLASTER, Parget, Tarras, daube.




The placing of that Pair, Flame, Spark under the first Difference; NOTE.
and that other Pair, Drop, Bubble, under the third Difference; with those
other Species under the fourth Difference, must be granted to be besides the
common Theory; But there is this account to be given of it, That there seems to
be the like kind of resemblance and affinity in these to their Genus'es, as
there is in some of the other Species, which are commonly received.

V. APPEARING METEORS are such as only seem to be, and have not any real
existence. V. APPEARING METEORS.


These are either of a Determined Shape; Part of a round. 1.
RAINBOW, Iris.
Round wholly; Encompassing any of the Planets or bigger Stars. 2.
HALO.
Representing the Sun, or the Moon. 3.
PARELIUS. PARASELENE.

Straight. 4.
VIRGAE, Streaks, Rays of Light.

Undetermined Shape, being a seeming Hollowness or Opening in the Heavens 5.
CHASM, Gaping.



VI. WEATHER.
VI. By WEATHER is meant the state and condition of the Air; the several kinds
of which, not sufficiently expressible by any words in the precedent Table, are
considered either as to The Air's Transparency, or Opacity. 1.
CLEARNESS, Open, serene. HAZINESS.
The various Meteors wherewith it may be affected; whether Rain, Simply and by
it self; either Drops, little, or great. 2.
MIZLING, Drizzle. SHOWER.
Stream. 3.
SPOUT.

Mixed, with violent Winds, or with Snow. 4.
STORM. SLEET.

Wind, considered according to its Quality; whether excessively cold, or mixed
with noxious vapors. 5.
BLASTING.
Quantity; being either Little, or not sufficient to ruffle the waters. 6.
GENTLE GALE, Breez. CALM, Still, Halcyon.
Much; whether equal, or unequal. 7.
STIFF GALE, High wind. TEMPEST, Storm, Flaw, blustering, boisterous.






OF STONES.
SUch kind of Minerals as are hard and friable are called STONES,. II.
Petrifie, Quarry: to which EARTHY CONCRETIONS may be annexed by way of
affinity, being more soft and brittle, and of a middle nature betwixt Stones
and Metals.

Stones may be distinguished into such as are VULGAR, and of no price. I.
MIDDLE-prized. II. PRECIOUS; either LESS TRANSPARENT. III. MORE TRANSPARENT. IV.

Earthy Concretions are either DISSOLVIBLE. V. NOT DISSOLVIBLE. VI.

I. VULGAR STONES, or such as are of little or no price, are distinguishable
from their different Magnitudes, Uses, Consistences, I. VULGAR STONES.
into the Greater Magnitudes of Stone; used either about Buildings; whether of
Walls; chiefly, being of a Softer consistence; whether natural, or factitious.
1.
FREESTONE. BRICK.
Harder consistence; not easily yielding to the Tool of the Workman, growing
either in Greater masses; 2.
RAGG.
Lesser masses; whether such as are for their figure More knobbed and unequal;
used for the striking of fire, either the more common which is less heavy, or
the less common which is more heavy, as having something in it of a metalline
mixture. 3.
FLINT. MARCHASITE, Fire-stone.
More round and even; 4.
PIBBLE, Thunderbolt.



Roof or Pavement; being of a laminated figure, either natural, or factitious.
5.
SLATE. TILE.

Metals, either for the Sharpning or trying of them. 6.
WHET-STONE. TOUCHSTONE.
Polishing or cutting of them; being either of a more spungy and soft, or of a
more hard consistence. 7.
PUMICE. EMRY.


Lesser Magnitudes; either more, or less minute. 8.
SAND, Grit. GRAVEL.



II. MIDDLE PRIZED STONES.
II. MIDDLE-PRIZED STONES are either of a Shining Politure, or capable of it;
whether of a Simple white color, and more soft consistence. 1.
ALABASTER.
Sometime white, sometime black or green, and sometime variegated with veins;
growing in greater, or lesser Masses. 2.
MARBLE, Porphyrie. AGAT.
Spotted; with Red upon a Greenish color, or with spots of Gold-colour upon
Blew. 3.
JASPIS, Heliotrope. LAZUL, Azure-stone.

Transparency: either Brittle; whether natural, or factitious. 4.
CRYSTAL- ine. GLASS, Vitrifie.
Fissil, into Flakes, either greater, or lesser. 5.
SELENITE, Muscovia glass, Isingglass, Sparr. TALC.

Relation to Metals; attracting of Iron, or making of Brass. 6.
LODESTONE, Magnet-ical, Compass. CADMIA, Calaminaris.
Incombustible nature. 7.
AMIANTUS, Asbestus.
Strange Original; not being properly Minerals, though usually reckoned amongst
them; but either a sub-marine Plant; or supposed to proceed from a liquid
Bitumen. 8.
CORAL- ine. AMBER.



There are several other kinds of Stony Consistences mentioned in the Authors
who write de Lapidibus. Some that are found in the Bodies of Animals, their
Stomachs, Guts, Bladders, Kidneys, etc. several of which are denominated from
the Animals in which they are found; as Alectorius, Chelidonius, Bezoar, etc.
Others have peculiar names from their shapes; as Astroides, Glossopetra, etc.
Others made of Animals or parts of Animals petrified, which may be sufficiently
expressed, without being particularly provided for in the Tables.

III. PRECIOUS STONES, Gemms, Jewels, are such as, III. PRECIOUS STONES LESS
TRANSPARENT.
for their rarity and beauty, are every where more esteemed: amongst which some
are LESS TRANSPARENT, which are distinguishable chiefly by their Colors:
either Representing variety of Colors with dimness, less, or more. 1.
OPAL. CATS-EYES.
Of particular Colors. Whitish and shining; though this be not properly a
Mineral, but a part of a testaceous Fish. 2.
PEARL.
Red. 3.
SARDIUS, Cornelian, Bloud-stone.
Pale Fleshy color, like that of a man's nail. 4.
ONYX.
Bluish. 5.
TURCOIS.
Pale Purple. 6.
CHALCEDONY.




As for that which is commonly styled a Toadstone; this is properly a tooth of
the Fish called Lupus marinus, as has been made evident to the Royal Society
by that Learned and inquisitive person Dr Merit.

IV. MORE TRANSPARENT Gemms; IV. PRECIOUS STONES MORE TRANSPARENT.
may be distinguished into such as are either Colorless: either most hard and
bright; or that which is very like to this in other respects, but only less
hard and bright. 1.
DIAMOND, Adamant. SAPPHIRE WHITE.
Colored; to be ranged according to the order of the colors in the Rainbow.
Red; of a luster greater, or less. 2.
RUBY, Carbuncle. RANATE.
Yellow* whether paler, or deeper. 3.
CHRYSOLITE. TOPAZ.
Green; either most bright and pleasant, or of a darker kind of Seagreen. 4.
EMERALD, Smaragd. BERYL.
Bluish. 5.
SAPPHIRE.
Purple or Violaceous; more inclining to Blew, or to Yellow. 6.
AMETHYST. HYACINTH.




V. EARTHY CONCRETIONS DISSOLVIBLE.
V. Such EARTHY CONCRETIONS as commonly grow in Mines, together with such other
factitious Substances as have some analogy to these, and are DISSOLVIBLE by
Fire or Water, may be distinguished by their being Not inflammable: More
simple; being several kinds of Salt, whether of the Seawater, the most
necessary Condiment for Meat; or of the Air, used as a chief ingredient in the
making of Gunpowder. 1.
SALT, Brine. NITRE, Saltpeter.
Earth; of a styptic quality and abstersive, proper for the drying of Wounds,
commonly boiled up into a consistence from a mineral water; or that other kind
of Earthy Salt dug up in great lumps. 2.
ALUME. SAL GEMMAE.
Metals of all kinds, sometimes called Sugars and Crystals; but agreeing in the
common nature with that which is styled 3.
VITRIOL, Chalchanthus, Copperas.
Vegetables; made either by fermentation, or by burning. 4.
TARTAR. ALCALI.
Animal Substances, made by Distillation, called 5.
URINOUS SALT.

More mixed of other Salts; more volatile, or fixed. 6.
SAL AMMONIAC. CHRYSOCOLLA, Borax.

Inflammable; of a more Dry consistence, and Yellowish color. 7.
SULPHUR, Brimstone.
Clammy and tenacious consistence Not sweet-sented; more solid, or more liquid.
8.
BITUMEN- inous. NAPHTHA.
Sweet-sented. 9.
AMBERGRIS,





VI. EARTHY CONCRETIONS NOT DISSOLVIBLE.
VI. EARTHY CONCRETIONS NOT DISSOLVIBLE may be distinguished by their various
Colors; being either White and soft according to degrees, more, or less. 1.
CHALK. MARLE.
Yellowish red, whether more yellow, or more red 2.
OKER, Yellow oker. RED OKER, Ruddie.
Black; of a finer or courser grain. 3.
JETT. PIT-COAL, Sea-coal.
Gold-colour, of a poisonous nature, either as it is dug out of the Earth, or
as it is sublimed. 4.
ORPIMENT, Auripigmentum. ARSENIC, Rats-bane.
Reddish; often found in the same Mines with Orpiment. 5.
SANDARACH.



OF METALS.
METAL is a Mineral, for the most part, of a hard consistence, close, ductil,
and fusil:. III.
It is distinguishable into Perfect* NATURAL. I. FACTITIOUS. II.
Imperfect, with reference to METALLINE KINDS. III. RECREMENTITIOUS PARTS. IV.



I. By NATURAL METALS are meant such as of themselves grow in the Earth,
without any kind of mixture, or other help by the Art of men. I. NATURAL METALS.
These are either More rare and precious; of a Yellowish color, most heavy,
not growing in any particular Mines, where it is imbased with any drossy
mixture: but found pure, either in small sands, or rocky branches. 1.
GOLD, Gilt, Or.
Whitish, and next in value to Gold, not subject to rust, and of a pleasant
sound. 2.
SILVER, Argent.

Of a middle value; of a Whitish color, and more soft consistence. 3.
TINN, Stannery.
Reddish color, the first material of Money. 4.
COPPER.

Most base and common: Of a softer consistence, and a darkish color, not
sonorous. 5.
LEAD, Plummer.
Of a harder consistence, being the common matter for Weapons and Tools. 6.
IRON.




II. By FACTITIOUS METALS are meant such as are made by the Art of men. II.
FACTITIOUS METALS.
These may be distinguished into such as are made of Copper and Lapis
calaminaris. 1.
BRASS, Brasier.
Tinn, Lead, and Tin-glass. 2.
PEWTER- er.
Iron depurated by frequent heating, and beating, and boiling with Salts. 3.
STEEL.



III. IMPERFECT kinds of METAL, are either Fluid. 1.
MERCURY, Quicksilver.
Solid and consistent; used for Purging, and chiefly for Vomiting. 2.
ANTIMONY- al.
Making of Pewter, being of shining brittle substance. 3.
BISMUTE, Tin glass.
Making of Soder, being like Tinn, but more hard and brittle. 4.
SPELTER, Zink, Spalt.
Painting; considered according to its natural state, being the Oar of
Quicksilver, and of a Dark red: or else as it is prepared by grinding, which
renders it of a Bright red. 5.
CINNABAR, Rudle. VERMILION.
Writing; not known to the Ancients, and therefore without any Latin or Greek
name. 6.
BLACK-LEAD.




IV. RECREMENTITIOUS PARTS OF METAL, are such as are cast off; either in the
Preparation of them, by Melting; being of parts More large and united; a kind
of scum arising from the separation of impurer mixtures in the fusion of
Metals, chiefly in the purging of Silver from Lead. 1.
LITHARGE.
More minute and separate; being a concretion of the lesser parts of Copper,
which fly out when that Metal is in fusion; either the heavier parts, which by
their gravity descend to the floor: or the more light and volatile parts, which
adhere to the roof or walls. 2.
SPODIUM. POMPHOLYX.

Beating or hammering. 3.
SCORIA, Scales.

Corruption of them; according to the General name. 4.
RUST, Canker.
Particular kinds; proceeding either of Copper and Brass, or of Lead. 5.
VERDIGREECE, Aerugo. CERUSE, White lead.




CHAP. IV. I. Of Plants, The difficulty of enumerating and describing these.
II. The more general distribution of them. III. Of Herbs considered according
to their Leaves. IV. Of Herbs considered according to their Flowers. V. Of
Herbs considered according to their Seed-vessels. VI. Of Shrubs. VII. Of Trees.
THe more perfect kind of Vegetables are called by the name of Plants,. I.
the several kinds of which are so exceeding numerous, as must needs render it
a very difficult task for any man who is most versed in the study of them,
either to enumerate them so fully or to order them so acurately, as will not be
liable to many exceptions; especially considering the streining and force that
must sometimes be used, to make things comply with the institution of these
tables into which they are to be reduced.

Gaspar Bauhinus does in his Pinax reckon up about six thousand several plants,
the particular names of which do amount to almost twice the number of words
here intended for the whole body of language. And there is reason enough to
believe, that there are many more besides those he mentions, since we find by
daily experience, in sowing the seeds of Flowers and of Trees, and the
different ways of culture used about them, that new kinds of Flowers and of
Fruits are continually produced, such as were not before described by any
Author, and such as do afterward propagate their kinds; insomuch that it may
well be doubted whether there be any determinate number of these subordinate
Species.

I design in these following tables to take notice only of the chief families
of Plants, to which the others are to be reduced. In the descriptions of which,
there will be no small difficulty, by reason of their great number, and the
want of proper words to express the more minute differences betwixt them, in
respect of shape, color, taste, smell, etc. to which instituted languages have
not assigned particular names. I mention this by way of Apology for the several
defects, which I am sensible of in the following tables.

In the description of those Plants which are heads of numerous families, I
take notice only of that Communis ratio, which belongs to all the subordinate
varieties of them, unless it be when there is no such common agreement
belonging to them all: or where several things are reduced under the same head,
some for their agreement in one Accident, and others for their agreement in
some other Accident; in which cases the descriptions here mentioned, are to be
understood of the chief and most common Plants of that name.

As for the various particulars contained under each family, as suppose Tulips,
Roses, Apples, Pears, Plums, etc. These need not be particularly provided for,
both because the just number of them is not yet stated, every year producing
new ones: And because they may as well be expressed Periphrastically here as in
all other Languages; either by their Seasons; whether Early or Late, Vernal,
Autumnal, Hyemal. Lastingness; being either Annual or Perennial. Bigness or
Littleness, Talness or Lowness. Manner of growth; whether Erect, Trailing,
Creeping, Climbing, Twisting. Place of growth; either Terrestrial, Hilly,
Sandy, Stony, Clay* etc. Aquatic, belonging either to Sea or Rivers, Marish,
Moorish, Fenny grounds. Several parts; whether in respect of the Root; being
either Fibrous, of bigger or lesser strings, more or less numerous, spreading
sidewise or tending more directly downwards: Or Bulbous, of one single bulb or
several, whether Obround, Compressed, Oblong, Coated or Scaly: Or Tuberous,
having its thicker parts contiguous, or hanging more at a distance by small
strings. Stemm or stalk; whether Solid or Hollow, Smooth or Rugged, Round or
Angular, Knotted or Jointed more or less frequently, being free from leaves, or
having leaves. Leaves; whether as to their Superficies; being Smooth, Unctuous,
Shining, Rough, Prickly, Hairy, Woolly, etc. Shape and figure; Round Angular,
Broad Narrow, Long Short, of smooth or of indented, jagged, waved, curled
edges, being either sharp or round pointed. Substance or Bulk; Thick Succulent,
or Thin Dry, being interspersed with nerves either direct or transverse.
Color; whether the same on both sides or different, clear or spotted, of a
brighter or darker green. Number; One, Two, Three, etc. Manner of growth;
whether singly, or in pairs opposite to each other: or having more then two
encompassing the stalk, Winged, Fingered, etc.
Flowers; as to their Shapes; consisting of one single undivided leaf, either
divided at the edge or not: or having several leaves, three, four, five or
more. Color; whether simple, as Red, Yellow, Purple, etc. or Mixed, Striped,
Speckled, Edged. Number; Bearing either One or Many, and these either single or
double. Manner of growth; whether of single flowers, being Erect, Hanging,
Reversed, etc. or of several flowers, Verticillate, Spicate, Umbelliferous.
Seed-vessels; whether Oblong, Closed or Open, Round, Hollow* Solid, Smooth,
Rugged, Prickly, Scaly, containing few or many seeds. Seeds themselves; Round,
square, flat, oblong, downy, etc. smooth, Echinate, black, white, shining, etc.
Fruits; Apples, Berries, etc. Juice; Waterish, Gummy, Milky, Yellow.



To all which may be added their different smells and tastes, and the several
uses they are commonly applied unto; by some of which Accidents all other
Plants may be sufficiently described.

I had formerly distributed the kinds of Herbs, according to those several ends
and purposes for which they are commonly used, into these three heads; 1. Such
as are for pleasure, being usually cherished in Gardens, for their flowers, or
beauty, or sweet sent. 2. Such as are Alimentary, being used by men for food,
either in respect of their Roots, their Leaves or Stalks, their Fruit or their
Seed. 3. Such as are Medicinal, being either Hot and biting, or Cold and
Stupefying, Purgative, Alterative, Vulnerary. But upon further consideration I
am satisfied, that though these heads may seem more facil and vulgar; yet are
they not so truly Philosophical, but depend too much upon the Opinions and
customs of several times and Countries.

As for the usual distinction betwixt Shrubbs and Trees* it does not seem (at
least so far as these things have been hitherto described) to have any such
distinct limits in nature, as were to be desired, and as is to be found betwixt
other things, there being several under each head, which seem to be of a
doubtful condition. Some that are reckoned for Shrubbs, which have a fair
pretense to be placed amongst Trees: and others accounted Trees, which without
any injury might be reduced to the Genus of Shrubbs. I do in the following
tables comply with that opinion, which seems most common and probable.

The reason why the two last differences of Trees, is not from their fruit (as
the others are) but from their Woods and Rines, or from their Rosins and Gumms,
is because these are the only things that we yet know of them, their natures in
other respects being not yet (for ought I know) described by any Authors.

As for any new species of Plants that shall hereafter be discovered, it is
probable they may by analogy be reduced either to some of the families here
mentioned, or at least to some of the Tribes.

I have added to the several species of Plants and Animals, their Latin names
in the Margin, because many of them are as well, if not better, known by such
compellations; and because they are most frequently treated of by the Authors
who write in that Language.

Plants may be distinguished into such as are more. II.
Minute and tender, called Herbs, to be considered according to their Leaves.
Flowers. Seed-vessels.
Large and hard being woody plants, whether the Lesser, which commonly grow up
from the root in several stemms called Shrubbs. Larger, which of themselves do
grow up in one single stemm, called Trees.



. III,
HERBS CONSIDERED ACCORDING TO THEIR LEAVES, may be distinguished into such as
are Imperfect; which either do want, or seem to want some of the more essential
parts of Plants, viz. either Root, Stalk or Seed. I. Perfect; having all the
essential parts belonging to a Plant, to be distinguished by the Fashion of the
leaf; whether Long; as all Gramineous herbs, having a long narrow leaf without
any foot-stalk. Not flowring; (i.) not having any foliaceous flower.
FRUMENTACEOUS; Such whose seed is used by men for food, either Bread, Pudding,
Broth, or Drink. II. NOT FRUMENTACEOUS; III.
Flowring; Being of BULBOUS ROOTS; Having no fibers from the side, but only
from the Bottom or the Top; whose leaves are more thick, undivided,
smooth-edged, and generally deciduous. IV. AFFINITY TO BULBOUS ROOTS; V.

ROUND; VI.
Texture of the Leaf; being either NERVOUS; having several prominent Fibers.
VII. SUCCULENT; having thick juicie leaves, covered with a close membrane,
through which the moisture cannot easily transpire, which makes them continue
in dry places. VIII.
SUPERFICIES of the Leaf, or MANNER of Growing. IX.



I. IMPERFECT HERBS.
I. IMPERFECT HERBS may be distinguished into Terrestrial; whether Most
imperfect; which seem to be of a spontaneous generation. Having no leaf, With a
Stemm and Head; the Greater or the Less. The later of which has by Mr. Hook
been first discovered to consist of small stemms with little balls at the top,
which flitter out when ripe. 1.
Fungus. Mucor.
MUSHROOM, Toadstool, Fungus, Touchwood, Spunke. MOULD, Horiness, Vinnewd.
Without a Stem, of a roundish figure growing either in the ground, being
esculent, and counted a great delicate: or on the ground* being (when dry) full
of an unsavory hurtful dust. 2.
Tuber. Fungus p^lverulentus.
TRUBS, Trufle. FUZBALL, Puchfist.

Having a leaf; being generally deeper then other plants and curled, growing in
such barren places where no other plants will thrive, either that which grows,
both on the ground, and on walls and trees, of which there are great varieties:
or that which grows only in moist grounds and shady places. 3.
MOSS. Moschus. Lichen.
LIVER WORT.

Less Imperfect; being counted Insoecund, whose seed and flower (if there be
any) is scarce discernable, commonly called Capillary Plants, whether such as
Have several leaves; Divided; Doubly; or subdivided, Greater; of a brighter or
a darker green, the latter being less and more finely cut. 4.
FEARN, Brake. Filix. Diyopteris.
OAK-FEARN.
Lesser; either that which grows commonly on walls and dry places, somewhat
resembling Rue both in the color and figure of the leaf: or that which grows
in moist shady places, having small slender black stalks. 5.
WHITE MAIDENHAIR, Wall-rue, Adianthum album. Capillus Veneris.
Tentwort BLACK MAIDENHAIR.

Singly; or not subdivided, Greater; of a broader leaf, and purgative root: or
of a narrower and longer leaf. 6.
POLYPODI. ROUGH SPLEENWORT. Polypodium. Lonchitis.

Lesser; either that which has a black stalk and winged leaves like those of a
Vetch: or that which has a thicker shorter leaf, not divided to the middle
ribb. 7.
ENGLISH BLACK MAIDENHAIR. Trichema^^s. Asplenium.
SPLEENWORT, Miltwast.


Undivided; either that whose leaves are somewhat broader toward the bottom,
where they encompass the stalk like a half moon: Or that whose leaf is more
equal. 8.
MULE FEARN. HARTSTONGUE. Hemionitis. Phyllitis.


Have but one leaf; either that whose leaf is like the others of this tribe,
with a tuft of very small flowers: or that which has an undivided succulent
leaf, with a small spike standing off from it. 9.
MOON WORT. Lunaria. Ophioglossum.
ADDERS TONGUE.


Aquatic; belonging to Fresh water; either that which consists of small round
leaves, floting on the top or immersed in the water, having little strings
shooting down from them: Or that which consists of long small sl^my filaments,
resembling green raw silk. 10*
DUCKWEED. Lens palustris. Conferva.
HAIRY RIVER WEED.
Salt water; being either of a Softer consistence; having some resemblance to
Mushrooms; either the Greater, being more round and thick, with pores every
way: or the Less, having long slender stalks with round leaves growing at the
top of them. 11.
SPONGE. Spongia. Androsace.
SEA NAVELWORT.
Moss, or ground Liverwort, having green curled leaves spreading on the ground.
12.
SEA-LETTICE. Lactuca marina.

Mushrooms and Moss; either that which is flat and roundish, hard and tough,
with several lines parallel to the circumference: or that whose leaves grow out
of one another without any stemm. 13.
SEA-EAR. Auris marina. Opuntia marina.
ROUND LEAVED OYSTER WEED.
Capillary Plants; having a soft membranaceous tough leaf, growing commonly
upon Stones and Rocks in the Sea. 14.
WRACK. Alga.


Harder consistence; being tough, with many filres or ribbs elegantly
distributed somewhat like the Mashes of a Net, growing to a great breadth.
Corallina marina Reticulata.
15.
SEA FANN.





II. GRAMINEOUS FRUMENTACEOUS HERBS.
II. GRAMINEOUS FRUMENTACEOUS HERBS, may be distinguished into such, whose seeds
are Greater; being covered either with a Thin membrane; without any husk
adhering, of a figure. Oblong; either that of a more turgid grain and brighter
color, every seed in the ear being covered with three loose husks: Or that
which bears a more black, lank, oblong seed, having always a beard adhering to
the husk of each grain in the growth. 1.
Triticum. Secale.
WHEAT. RY.
Roundish and somewhat compressed; being the biggest of this tribe, the ears
growing out of the sides of the stalk, the top of it having a chaffy panicle
without any seed. 2.
Frumentum Indicum.
MAIZE, Indian-wheat.

Husk; growing in a Spike; either that whose grains in the growth of them are
bearded, their husks adhering close to them, being the lowest: Or that whose
grains are more turgid and round, growing at a greater distance in a kind of
compounded ear, which seems to consist of several lesser spikes. 3.
BARLEY, Malt. Hordeum. Oriza.
RICE.
Panicle; or dispersed tuft, at a distance from each other, upon long
weak-stemms, not above two together, hanging down. 4.
Avena.
OAT.


Lesser; growing either in a Spike; or ear, having short beards, the grain
being of a yellowish color. 5.
Panicum.
PANIC.
Panicle or tuft; having a roundish shining seed, either that which is a more
tall large Plant, whose panicle stands upright: or that which is a less Plant,
whose panicle hangs down. 6.
Sorgum. Milium.
INDIAN MILLET. MILLET.




III. GRAMINEOUS PLANTS NOT used by men FOR FOOD, III GRAMINEOUS PLANTS NOT
USED BY MEN FOR FOOD.
may be distributed into such as are More properly called Grasses; (i.) such as
have a hollow jointed, and not branched stalk, and a ^tamineous flo^er, whether
such as are Spicate; considerable for the Largeness of the seed; being nearest
to those of the frumentaceous kind; either that of a short spike, squamous and
shining seed: or that res^mbling Panic. 1.
CANARY-GRASS. Phalaris. Gra. Pan^ceum.
PANIC-GRASS.
Figure of the spike; whether Full, compact and round; either that whose spike
is more soft and downy, resembling a fox-tail: or that which is like this but
more rough. 2.
FOX-TAIL. Alopecuros. Gr. Typhinum.
CATS-TAIL.
Not full, but lank; resembling either Wheat; 3.
WHEAT-GRASS. Gr. Triticeum.

Ry; either the greater used for the making of frails: or the lesser. 4.
MATWEED. Spartum. Gr. Hordeaceum.
WILD BARLEY.

Not compact, but loose, in which the parts are not close set together; e^ther
that whose spike is more flat and long, the seeds growing only on two ^ides
alternately, having an inebriating quality: or that whose spike has some
resemblance to wheat, the plant being apt to spread it self by the root. 5
DARNELL, Tares. Lolium. Gr. Caninum.
DOGS-GRASS, Quitch, Couch.
Not round; but having the husks inclining one way, being divided into many
parts, each whereof resembles the comb of a Cock. 6.
CR^STED-GRASS. Gr. Cristatum.



Paniculate; considerable for the Largeness of the Leaves; having jointed
stalks; either that whose stalks is commonly bigger and taller then other
Grasses: or that which bears a large perforate shining seed of an ash color. 7.
REED. Arundo. Lachrimae Job
JOB'S-TEARS.
Figure of the Panicle; comprehending such kind of plants as are Less common;
whether such as have Some resemblance to the panicle of Oats, or to the claws
of a bird. 8.
OAT-GRASS. Gr. Avenaceum. Dactyloides.
FINGER-GRASS.
Many squamous shining hollow heads hanging upon slender stalks: or having
hairy leaves, with long woolly strings on the sides of them, the seed being
contained in a close seed-vessel. 9.
PEARL-GRASS, Quaking-grass. HAIRY-GRASS. Gr. tremulum. Gr. hirsutum.


Most common; both in Pastures and Meadows, yielding the best food for Cattle,
both when growing, and when made into hay. 10.
MEADOW-GRASS.



Less properly called Grasses; considerable either for the Sent of the plant
being sweet; either that which grows in watery places, Gr. pratense paniculatum.
having a leaf like a flag, bearing a Iulus hard and close: or that whose
stalks have a spongy pith, bearing flowers like those of Reeds. 11.
SWEET SMELLING REED. CAMELS HAY. Calamus Aromaticus, Schoenanthus,

Stalk; being Lesser; either that which is triangular: or that which is round,
being full of a spongy pith 12.
GALINGAL^. RUSH. Cyperus. Iuncus.

Greater; of a woody substance, porous, used for walking staves. 13.
CANE.

Head or spike; Canna.
whether more Loose; having a soft downy substance; either on each side of the
spike, making it to resemble a feather: or intermixed with the panicle. 14.
FEATHER GRASS. COTTON GRASS. Gr. plumosum. Gr. tomentosum.

Close; whether Greater; either that which has a round cylindrical head, being
a tall plant, whose sp^ke is blackish and soft like velvet; or that which bears
several spherical burrs. 15.
REED MACE. BURR REED. Typha. Sparganium.

Lesser; having a naked stalk, bearing a small spike resembling the tail of a
Mouse. 16.
MOUSE-TAIL. Myosuros.







IV. GRAMINEOUS HERBS of BULBOUS ROOTS.
IV GRAMINEOUS HERBS of BULBOUS ROOTS, may be distinguished into such as are
considerable for their Flowers; which are generally made up of six leaves, or
divided into six lascinia: either these whose fibers grow from the Bottom of
the bulb; having the Roots Scaly; divided into many squamous laminae. The
Greater; whose root has a strong sent like that of a Fox, the flowers hanging
down round the top of the stalk, with a tuft of green leaves above them. 1.
CROWN IMPERIAL.
Corona Imperialis
The Lesser; having the stalk set with leaves, either that whose flower is more
large and hollow: or that whose flowers are smaller, having the leaves reversed
backwards. 2.
L^lium. Martagon.
LILLY. MARTAGON, Turks-cap.

Coated; made up of several coats encompassing one another. Bearing the flower
upon a stem; to be further distinguished by the Shape of the flower; whether
Large and Hollow; resembling a cup, either that which does generally bear but
one flower upon a stalk, standing upright, having an esculent root: or that
which does sometime^ bear two flowers upon a stalk, with checkered streaks,
hanging down their heads, the root consisting of two lobes. 3.
Tulipa. Fritiliaria.
TULIP. FRITILLARY.
Having a cup in the middle of the flower, which comes out of a skinny husk: or
that which has many small flowers together upon the same stalk. 4.
Narcissus. Hyacinthus.
DAFFODILL. HYACINTH.

Color of the flower; being generally white and marked with green, either that
with a starr-like flower, marked with a streak of green on the back of the
leaf: or that which has a hanging pendulous flower, whose leaves are tipped with
green. 5.
Ornithogalum. Viola bulbosa.
STARR OF BETHLEHEM. BULBOUS VIOLET, Snow-drop.
Figure of the leaf; resembling the blade of a sword, either that which bears a
Flower de luce, having nine leaves, three of which stand up: or that whose
flowers grow in a row under one another. 6.
Iris bulbosa. Gladiolus sigetum.
BULBOUS IRIS, Flower de luce. CORNFLAGG.

Having naked flowers, without any stem; whether that of a larger flower and
broader leaf: or that of a lesser flower and narrower leaf. 7.
M^DOW SAFFRON, Naked Lady. Colchicum. Crocus.
CROCUS, Saffron.


Top of the Bulb; whose root does usually consist of two bulbs, the flowers
growing in a kind of spike, of great variety of colors and shapes. 8.
O^ch^s.
ORCHIS, Satyrion.

Strong sent; whether such whose leaves are more. Long; their sent being Less
strong; the Greater; whose roots grow single, either that with hollow tubulous
leaves, the st^lk swelling out in the middle: or that of a broader leaf, rising
higher in the stalk and continuing green all winter. 9.
ONYON. C^pa. Porrum.
LEEK.
Lesser; whose roots grow commonly in clusters, either that which bears no
seed: or that which does bear seed, having very small tubulous leaves. 10.
Ascalonitis. Porrum sectile.
SHALOT, Echalole. CIVES.

More strong; either that whose root is divided into Cloves: or that of an
entire root, and in some esteem for the flower. 11.
Allium sativum. Moly.
GARLIC. MOLY.

Broad; having the root either Allium Vrsinum. Victorialis ^onga.
Oblong and small* either that which is lower with an Vmbell of large flowers:
or that which is taller, having a round head. 12.
RAMSON. MOUNTAIN RAMSON.
Round and great; growing upon the Seacoasts. 13.
Scylla.
SQUILL, Sea-onyon.





V. HERBS OF AFFINITY TO BULBOUS PLANTS, V. HERBS OF AFFINITY TO BULBOUS PLANTS.
upon account of their leaves or flowers, may be distinguished into such as are
either Esteemed for their flowers; growing in Dryer places; whether such Plants
as are more properly Europaean; whose flowers are Lesser; bearing 1.
Many flowers; Starr-like, either that of a Tuberous root, whose flowers grow
in a spike: or that of a Fibrous root. 1.
KINGS SPEAR. SPIDER WORT. Asphodelus. Phalangium.

One single flower; hanging the head, having a tuberous root, bearing two long
spotted leaves. 2.
DOGSTOOTH.

Larger; of a tuberous root, Dens caninus*
either that of a fading flower resembling a Lilly: or that whose leaf is like
the blade of a sword. 3.
DAY-LILLY. TUBEROUS FLOWER DE LUCE. Liliasphodelus* Iris tuberosa.


American; of a tuberous root, whose flowers are either Less sweet; either that
of broad leaves, bearing a scarlet flower like that of Corn-flagg, with a
geniculate stalk: or that which has long thick dry leaves, sharp pointed,
growing immediately from the root, bearing a stem of large flowers, hanging
down their heads. 4.
FLOWRING REED. JUCCA, Indian bread. Canna Indica. Iucca.

More sweet; growing in a spike, resembling the flowers of a Hyacinth. 5.
INDIAN HYACINTH. Hyacinthus. Indi^^^tu erosu^.



Watery places; the flowers coming forth in an Umbell, being of a purplish
color, having six leaves; the leaves of the Plant being long and triangular. 6.
FLOWRING RUSH. Iuncus floridus.


Not esteemed for their flowers; being distinguishable by their Having no
perfect leaves; but some little scaly substances resembling leaves, whether of
Fibrous roots; matted together, resembling a birds nest. 7.
BIRDS NEST. Nidus avis*

Scaly roots; with little protuberances somewhat resembling teeth, either that
whose root is more Round or more Branched. 8.
BROOMRAPE. TOOTHWORT. Orobanche. Dentaria aphyllos.


Having a naked style or pestle instead of a flower, whether the Greater; of a
Tuberous root, either that which has a spotted thick stalk like a Snake, with
a jagged leaf: or that of a Triangular undivided leaf. 9.
DRAGON. Dracontium,
WAKE ROBIN, Cuckoo-pintle. Arum.

Lesser; having either Broad or Narrow leaves. 10.
BROAD LEAVED FRIARS COWLE. Arisarum lat^sol. Arisarum angus^ifol.
NARROW LEAVED FRIARS-COWLE.





VI. ROUND LEAVED HERBS.
VI. HERBS OF ROUND LEAVES, may be distinguished into such whose leaves are
Larger; Terrestrial; Lying on the ground; the flower coming up before the leaf
and soon fading, either that whose leaf is white underneath, of a yellow
flower, growing one upon a stalk: or that which has a spike of purplish
flowers, being the larger plant. 1.
Tussilag^. Petasitis.
COLTSFOOT. BUTTERBURR.
Standing from the ground; bearing Burrs, the Greater or the Lesser. 2.
Bardana major. Bardana minor.
GREAT BURDOCK. LITTLE BURDOCK.
Growing upon mountainous places; having a purplish flower, and a pappous seed.
3.
Ca^aha.
HORSEFOOT, Mountain-Coltsfoot.

Aquatic; of smooth shining leaves, either that whose leaves are of a light
green and not serrate: or of a dark green and serrate, bearing yellow flowers.
4.
Nymp^^ea. Caltha palus^ris.
WATER-LILLY. MARSH-MARIGOLD.

Lesser; whose flowers do stand either Singly; on long footstalk, growing in
Dryer places; distinguishable by the Flower; having a bending head and a short
heel, either that of a bigger leaf and the flower of a more simple color: or
that of a lesser oblong leaf and the flower of several colors. 5.
Viola. Herba Trinita^is.
VIOLET. PANSY, Hearts-ease
Leaf; being more thick, somewhat resembling Ivy, either that whose leaves are
of a strong purgative quality, the flowers small, of a dirty purple: or that
which is esteemed for the flower, having a great tuberous root, the leaf for
the most part spotted. 6.
Asarum. Cyclan^e^.
ASARABACCA. SOWBREAD.

Fenny and boggy places; either that of pale yellowish leaves, which feel
unctuously, the flower like a Violet: or that which has a large white flower,
the leaves being like those of a Violet, but less. 7.
Pinguicula. Gramen Parnassi.
BUTTERWORT, Yorkshire Sanicle. GRASS OF PARNASSUS.

Many together; Terrestrial; distinguishable by The flowers; growing in a
Spike, being white, either that which is bigger, having green leaves like those
of a Pear Tree: or that which is less, with red hairs upon the leaves retaining
the Dew, growing in moist places: 8.
Pyrola. Ros solis.
WINTERGREEN. SUN DEW.
The leaves; Indented; and divided into several Angles, either that which has
smooth shining leaves and seeds like small burrs: or that whose leaves are
somewhat hairy, being of an elegant structure, bearing yellowish green flowers.
9.
SANICLE. Sanicula. Alchymilla.
LADIES MANTLE.
Scolloped about the edges; either that which is taller, of a white flower, the
root consisting of many small reddish kernels: or that which is lower, of a
yellow flower and fibrous root, growing in moist places. 10.
WHITE SAXIFRAGE. Saxifraga alba. Saxifraga aurea.
GOLDEN SAXIFRAGE.

The manner of growing; whether Creeping on the ground; either that with a
hairy leaf, of an ill sent; bearing a blew hooded flower: or that of a small
leaf, bearing a yellow flower. 11,
GROUND IVY, Alehoof, Tunnhoof. Hedera terrestris. Nummularia.
MONYWORT, Herb twopence.
Climbing; of a hot biting taste, and an elegant flower with a long heel. 12,
INDIAN CRESS. Nasturtium. Indicum.



Marine; growing in salt places near the Sea, either that of a salt juicy leaf,
bearing a spike of small white flowers: or that which has a large bell flower,
the plant running upon the ground, being Purgative. 13.
SCURVY GRASS. Cochlearia. Soldanella,
SEA-BINDWEED.





VII. HERBS OF NERVOUS LEAVES.
VII. HERBS OF NERVOUS LEAVES, may be distributed into such as are Terrestrial;
growing in dryer places, which are distinguishable according to the Fashion of
their leaves; whether More broad; to be further considered according to their
Manner of growth; having Leavy stalks; viz. the leaves embracing the stalk,
either that which has pleited leaves, whose root is a vehement purgative: or
that other, having a spike of flowers like those of Orchis. 1.
Helleborus albus. Helleborine.
WHITE HELLEBORE, Neezwort. HELLEBORINE, Bastard white Hellebore.
Naked stalks; and flowers in a spike, either that whose leaves are undivided:
or that whose leaves are so divided into jaggs, as to represent a Staggs horn.
2.
Plantago. Coronopus.
PLANTAIN. BUCKSHORN.

Color of the leaves; whether that whose leaves are of a dark green above and
ash-colored underneath, bearing a spike of flowers: or that whose leaves are
of a paler green, bearing the flowers in a kind of Vmbel. 3.
Bistorta. Saponaria.
SNAKEWEED, Bistort. SOPEWORT.

More narrow; either that whose spike is round and more long: or that whose
spike is more short, containing seeds resembling fleas. 4.
Holosicum. Psyllium.
SEA-PLANTAIN. FLEAWORT.

Number of their leaves; either that which has only one leaf: or that which
has only two leaves. 5.
Monophylion. Bitolium.
ONE-BLADE. TWAY-BLADE.
Flower; of one leaf, whether Greater; in the fashion of a Bell, the plant
having a bitter taste, either the Taller and larger: or the Lower and smaller. 6.
Gentiana. Gentianella.
GENTIAN, Fellwort. DWARF-GENTIAN.
Lesser; having small one leaved flowers, hanging down their heads and bearing
berries; either the Higher or the Lower. 7.
Sigillum Salomonis. Lilium convallium.
SOLOMONS-SEAL. LILLY OF THE VALLEY.


Aquatic; growing in the water, bearing spikes of flowers from the joints of
the stalk; either that of smooth edged leaves: or that whose leaves are either
curled or waved about the edges. 8
Potamogeiton. Tribulus aquaticus.
PONDWEED. WATER-CALTROPE.



VIII. SUCCULENT HERBS may be distributed into such as are Biggest, either that
whose leaf is more broad and not indented: VIII. SUCCULENT HERBS.
or that whose leaf is long, sharp and indented. 1.
HOUSELEEK, Sengreen. Sedum majus. Aloe.
ALOE.
Lesser; Terrestrial; considerable for having Broad and commonly crenated
leaves, a round stalk, the flowers growing in the fashion of an Umbell, either
that whose leaves are more blunt pointed: or that whose leaves are more sharp
pointed, the root having a sent like that of Roses. 2.
ORPINE, Teleph^um. Rhodia radix.
ROSEWORT.
Round pointed leaves not indented, either that which is greater, having
reddish stalks, bearing yellowish flowers, being esculent: or that which is
less, bearing small white flowers of five leaves. 3.
PURSLAIN. Portulaca. Cepaa.
GARDEN BROOKLIME.
White flowers, speckled with red, the leaves serrate, either that which has a
more round leaf, and larger flower: or that whose leaf is more oblong and
flower less. 4.
SPOTTED SANICLE. Sanicula guttata. Sedum serratum.
INDENTED SENGREEN.
Narrow leaves; growing in dry places: the Greater or the Lesser. 5.
STONE CROPP. Sedum minus. Illecebra.
WALL PEPPER.
Small round leaves; the stalk proceeding from the middle or Center of it,
bearing a spike of small flowers. 6.
NAVELWORT, Wall-pennywort, Vmbilicus Veneris.


Marine; growing in salt places, whose leaf is cylindrical, the ashes of it
being used in making of Glass. 7.
GLASSWORT. Cali.





IX. HERBS considered according to their SUPERFICIES, or MANNER OF GROWING.
IX, HERBS considered according to the SUPERFICIES of their Leaves, or their
MANNER OF GROWING, may be distinguished into such as are Rough leaved; whether
More rough; having Blew flowers; either that whose leaves are broader, having
black streaked seed: or that whose leaves are longer, the Segments of the
flower being not so sharp pointed as the other. 1.
Borago. Buglossum.
BURRAGE. BUGLOSS.
Long narrow leaves; either that which has a red root commonly used in Dying:
or that which bears larger flowers, which before they are explicated, do turn
like a Scorpions tail. 2.
Anchusa. Echium.
ALKANET. VIPERS BUGLOSS.

Less rough; distinguishable by their having Spotted leaves; bearing one entire
flower of different colors, viz. White and Purple on the same root: or that
whose flower is a round tube, hanging downwards, the leaves embracing the
stalk. 3.
Pulmonaria. Corinthe.
SAGE OF JERUSALEM, Ladies-glove. HONYWORT.
Broad leaves, sharp pointed, being large plants; either that whose flower is
long, hollow, and of one leaf, divided into five segments: or that which is of
an offensive sent, the flower of a dirty red, the flower succeeded by 4 seeds
in the shape of little burrs. 4.
Symph^tum. Cynoglossum.
COMFREY. DOGS-TONGUE, Hounds-tongue.
Small leaves; either that whose seed is of an ash color, hard and shining,
like a polished stone: or that the spike of whose flowers is crooked and
supposed to turn toward the Sun. 5.
Lithospermum. Heliotropium.
GRUMMELL. HELIOTROPE.


Stellate; so styled from the manner of the growth of their leaves, which
encompass the stalk at intervals, like the rays of a Starr; distinguishable by
bearing. Lesser flowers; Erect; having slender long leaves; of Solid stalks;
either the taller bearing red berries, the shoots of which are used for food: or
the lower of an ill sent, bearing yellow flowers, used in some places to
coagulate Milk. 6.
Asparagus. Gallium.
ASPARAGUS. LADIES-BEDSTRAW, Cheeserunning.
Hollow stalks; jointed without any leavy flowers, either that whose leaves are
like bristles: or that whose leaves are branched like the horns of a Stagg. 7.
Equis tum Millefolium cornutum aquaticum.
HORSE-TAIL. HORNED WATER-MILFOIL.

Ramping; of Broader leaves; either that which has a red root used for Dying:
or that whose leaf is more hairy, having four leaves opposite to one another at
a joint, bearing yellow flowers. 8.
Rubia ^inilerum. Cruciata.
MADDER. CROSSWORT.
Narrower leaves; either that which is like Madder: or that common weed, whose
stalks and little burrs are apt to stick to a man's clothes. 9.
M^llugo.Apar^^.
BASTARD MADDER. GOOSE-GRASS, Cleavers.


Larger flowers; growing on the top of the branches; either that of broader
leaves, growing commonly in woods, having a tuft of white four-leaved flowers
of a sweet sent: or that of narrower leaves, the flower consisting of five
leaves. 10.
WOODROF. A(...)la Spergula.
SPURRY.




Of Herbs considered according to their Flowers.
HErbs considered according to their flower,. IV.
having no seed-vessel besides the Cup which covers the flower, may be
distinguished into STAMINEOUS; whose flower does consist of threddy Filaments
or Stamina, having no leaves besides the Perianthium: or those herbaceous
leaves encompassing these stamina, which do not wither or fall away before the
seed is ripe. I. Foliaceous; which besides the Stamina have leaves, being
either of Compound flowers; consisting of many leaves: or a circle of Leaves,
and a Thrumm of short stamina, close set together; whether NOT PAPPOUS. II.
PAPPOUS, whose seeds do either ly in down: or have some downy parts. III.
Simple flowers; which besides a circle or border of leaves, have only some
fewer longer stamina more sparsedly set together, like threads or strings, to be
distinguished by the manner of the growing of the Flower; into Vmbelliferous;
such as grow in the fashion of an Umbel on several little stalks, proceeding
from the top of a bigger stalk, which all together represent the figure of an
inverted Cone, the flowers being the Basis, which have generally two seeds
growing together, and a compound leaf, whether of BROADER LEAVES; under which
are comprehended all such whose leaves are about the same breadth, or broader
then Parsley. IV. FINER LEAVES; under which are comprehended all such, whose
leaves are divided into narrower segments then those of Parsley. V.
Verticillate; by which those kinds of Plants are meant, whose flowers grow in
rundles or whirles about the stalk, being of the shape of a Hood or Helmet; as
likewise those whose flowers are of the like shape, namely Galeated, having the
like open seed-vessel, but their leaves growing by pairs, whether FRUTICOSE;
having stalks of a hard woody consistence. VI. NOT FRUTICOSE. VII.
SPICATE. VIII.
SEED; growing MANY TOGETHER IN A Cluster or BUTTON. IX.




I. HERBS OF STAMINEOUS FLOWERS.
I. HERBS OF STAMINEOUS FLOWERS, and not of grassy leaves, may be distributed
into such whose seeds are Triangular; the plants to which they belong being
either Perennial; Bigger; having a great leaf not jagged about the edges;
either that whose leaf is more large, and the root used for purging: or that
whose leaf is more oblong. 1.
Rhabarbarum. Lapathum.
RUBARB. DOCK.
Lesser; having a grateful acidity in the taste of the leaf; either that whose
leaf is oblong: or roundish. 2.
Acetosa. Acetosa Romana.
SORREL. FRENCH SORREL.

Annual; having leaves. Triangular; and black seed; either that which is Erect,
whose seed is Esculent: or that which is Climbing. 3.
BUCK-WHEAT, Brank. Tragopyrum. Convolvulus niger.
BLACK BINDWEED.
Not Angular; being short and slender, upon week procumbent stalks, full of
joints. 4.
Polygonum.
KNOT-GRASS.


Round; Distinguishable by Sex; of male and female; because from the same seed
some plants are produced, which bear flowers and no seeds, and others which
bear seeds and no flowers. The bigger; having a divided leaf; either that which
has a large hollow stalk, and a compound or fingered leaf, of the rine of
which Linen is made: or that which is a climbing Plant twisting about such
things as are next to it, from the right hand toward the left, contrary to the
manner of other twining Plants, of a rough roundish leaf, divided into many
segments, with a head of scaly tufts growing in a cluster or bunch, commonly
used to preserve drink from sowring. 5.
HEMP, Tow, Canvas. ^aunabis. Lupulus.
HOPP.
The Lesser; whose leaves are Shorter; either that which has smooth leaves and
is annual: or that which has hoary leaves being perennial. 6.
MERCURY. Mercurialis. Phyllon.
CHILDING MERCURY.
Longer; of serrate edges, the root being perennial. 7.
Cynocrambe.
DOGS MERCURY.


Not distinguishable by Sex; but either by their Leaf; being Triangular;
considerable for Being of an unctuous touch, and used for Sallets: either that
which has a bigger and echinate seed: or that which has a less and smooth
seed. 7.
Spinachia. Bonus Nenri^^^.
SPINACH. ENGLISH MERCURY.
Having a seed vessel made up of two leaves closing together: or having the
leaf sinuate about the edges. 9.
ORRAGE^ Atriplex. Pes Auserinus.
GOOS-FOOT.

Broad; with smooth edges of a dull insipid taste, with a large long root, the
seed-vessel being round, rugged and hard, containing two or three seeds. 10.
BEET. Beta.

Narrow and long, having a spicate head; either that used by Dyers, having
undivided leaves, and longer spikes: or that which has divided leaves, and
shorter spikes. 11.
DYERS-WEED. Luteola. Reseda.
BASE ROCKET.
Winged leaves; with a stiff stalk, growing to a good stature, and bearing
Triangular Cods. 12.
MEADOW-RUE. Thalictrum.


Sent or smell. Pleasant; either that whose leaves resemble those of an Oak,
with red veins: or that whose leaves resemble those of Wormwood, bearing the
flowers in a long spike, and having a rough seed-vessel. 13.
OAK OF JERUSALEM. Botrys. Ambrosia.
OAK OF CAPPADOCIA.
Unpleasant; having a serrate leaf with stinging prickles. 14.
NETTLE. Vrtica urens.


Seed-vessel; bearing chaffy tufts, either that which has a roundish leaf: or
that whose leaf is more oblong and pointed. 14.
BLITE. Blitum. Amaranthus.
PRINCES FEATHER, Amaranthus.
Place of Growth; being usually upon walls, having red stalks; and a rough
seed. 16.
PELLITORY OF THE WALL. Parietaria.

Littleness; being the least of this kind; either that which has weak stalks,
leaning on the ground, with leaves like those of Time but smaller, bearing the
seeds in clusters about the joints: or that which is of a woody stalk, bearing
the flowers and seeds at the top of the branches. 17.
RUPTUREWORT. Herniaria. Camphorata.
STINKING GROUND PINE.





II. HERBS OF A COMPOUND FLOWER NOT PAPPOUS.
II. HERBS having a COMPOUND FLOWER NOT PAPPOUS, may be distinguished into such
whose flowers are compounded either of Short hollow stamina thick set together
in a thrumm, with a circle of leaves: or without such a circle, commonly called
Corimbiferous, being either of Undivided leaves; having a Radiate flower; whose
limb is Yellow; either the Greater; and tallest, either that which is the
biggest of flowers: or that which has a tuberous esculent root. 1.
Flos solis. Flos solis Pyramidalis.
SUN-FLOWER. HIERUSALEM-HARTICHOKE.
Lesser; having a crooked seed. 2.
MARIGOLD.

Caltha.
White; either the greater and taller, having a ramous leavy stalk: or the
lesser and lower, having a naked stalk. 3.
Bellis major. Bellis minor.
GREAT DAISY. DAISY.

Naked Flower; considerable for having A strong pleasant smell; either that
which is the bigger plant, of a broad leaf: or that which is the lesser plant,
of more narrow leaves more deeply indented, whose flowers grow in an Umbell. 4.
Cosius hortorum. Ageratum.
ALECOST, Costmary. MAUDLIN TANSY.
Long hoary leaves; either that which is Odorate, having a yellowish flower, of
a dry strawy consistence, preserving the color for several years after its
being gathered: or that which bears a white flower, the more common sort of
which is not Odorate. 5.
Stoechas citrina. Guaphalium.
GOLDEN STAECHAS. CUDWEED, Cottonweed.


Divided leaves; having a Radiate flower; whose limb is Yellow; considerable
for the leaves; being More finely divided; either that which grows usually
amongst Corn: or that which does commonly grow in mountainous places, having
leaves like those of Fennel. 6.
Chrysanthemum segetum. Buphthalmum verum.
CORN MARIGOLD. OX-EY.
Winged leaves; like those of Tansy. 7.
Flos Africanus.
AFRICAN MARIGOLD.

White; whose leaves are More finely divided; either that of a pleasant: or
that of an unpleasant sent. 8.
Chamaemelum. Cotula faetida.
CAMOMIL. STINKING MAYWEED.
^ess finely divided; being of a strong sent. 9.
Mal^^aria.
FEAVERFEW.
Undivided; being long and narrow; either that whose leaves are indented about
the edges: or that whose leaves are smooth, being of a hot taste. 10.
SNEEZEWORT. TARRAGON. Ptarmica. Draco h^rba.



Naked flower; whose stalks are More woody; either that whose leaves are more
green: or that whose leaves are generally hoary and white. 11
SOUTHERNWOOD. Abrotanum. mas. Abrotanum foemina.
LAVENDER COTTON.
Less woody; either that of a bitter taste, and more pleasant smell: or that
whose sent is not so pleasant, whose leaves are green above and hoary
underneath. 12.
WORMWOOD. Absinthium. Artemisia.
MUGWORT.

Bearing their flowers in the fashion of an Vmbel, having winged leaves, either
that which is of a strong and not unpleasant sent: or that which is less
odorate. 13.
TANSY. Tanacetum. Millefolium.
MILFOIL.


Oblong tubulous leaves; the Greater; bearing many flowers upon a stalk, either
that whose leaves upon breaking have several little hairy strings, the flower
made up of tubulous leaves lasciniated at the top: or that of a more globular
flower, the root seeming to have a piece bitten off. 14.
SCABIOUS Scabiosa. Morsus Diaboli.
DEVILS BIT.
Lesser; bearing but one flower upon a stalk, like that of Scabious, either
that of a round blew flower, having a leaf like that of the lesser daisy: or
that of grassy leaves and a naked stalk 15
BLEW DAISY. Globularia. Caryophyllus marinus.
THRIFT, Sea Gilly-flower.

Oblong flat leaves; without any thrumm in the middle, bearing blew flowers,
either that which is smaller and annual: or that which is larger and perennial.
16.
ENDIVE. Endivia. Cichoreum.
SUCCORY.



III. PAPPOUS HERBS.
III. PAPPOUS HERBS, may be distributed into such whose heads are either Round
and Squamous, considerable upon Account of their Leaves; whether Prickly;
either that of a lesser: or that of a bigger head used for food. 1.
THISTLE. Carduus. Cinara.
HARTICHOKE.
Hoary; either that whose flower is commonly blew, of tubulous jagged leaves:
or that which bears a purple flower of flat leaves. 2.
Cyanus. Ptarmica Austriaca.
BLEWBOTTLE. AUSTRIAN SNEEZEWORT.
Serrate; commonly winged, the Lesser: or the Greater used in Physic. 3.
SAW-WORT. Serratula. Centaurium majus.
GREAT CENTORY.

Stalks; being dry and hard, bearing usually a purple flower; either that of a
more dark: or that of a lighter color. 4.
Iacea. Stabe.
KNAPWEED. SILVER KNAPWEED.
Seeds; being more large; either that of White: or that of Black seeds 5.
Carthamus. Chondrilla crupina.
BASTARD SAFFRON. BEARDED CREEPER.

Plain or flat; whose flower is either Radiate, or naked. Terrestrial;
considerable upon account of their Roots; being more large, bearing yellow
flowers; either that of a lesser leaf, the root of which is counted poisonous
to beasts: or that of a larger and longer leaf, the root of which is odorate
and bitter, and counted wholesome to men. 6.
Doronicum. Helenium.
LEOPARDS-BANE. ELECAMPANE.
Leaves; being thick, fatty and jagged, bearing yellow flowers; either that
which bears a thrummy flower: or that which bears a radiate flower. 7.
Senecio. Iacobaea.
GROUNDSIL. RAGWORT.
Flowers; as to their Manner of growth; in a kind of Vmbel, or Tuft; either
that whose flowers are naked and purplish: or that whose flowers are radiate
and yellow. 8.
Eupatorium cannabinum mas. Virga aurea.
DUTCH AGRIMONY. GOLDEN ROD.
Color; either that which bears flowers of different colors, the leaves
whereof somewhat resemble the rays of a Starr: or that whose flowers are
generally yellow, the leaves of the plant being Odorate. 9.
STARWORT. As^er. ^oniza.
FLEABANE.


Marine; having long thick leaves; either that the border of whose flower is
Purple and the middle of it Yellow: or that of a Yellow flower and hard stalks,
the leaves being narrow and cut in at the ends. 10.
SEA-STARWORT. Tripolium. Crithmum chrysanthemum.
GOLDEN FLOWERED SAMPHIRE.

Double; the plants having a milky juice, distinguishable by their Heads; being
smaller; either that of a more rugged leaf used for Sallads: or that of a
smoother leaf, said to sweat out a gumm at the joints. 11.
LETTICE. Lactuca. Chondrilla.
GUMM SUCCORY.
Leaves; whether Iagged; either that of a solid stalk: or that of a hollow
smooth stalk, the seed of which being ripe, does with the down upon it, spread
it self into a Sphaerical figure. 12.
HAWKWEED. Hieracium. Dens Leonis.
DANDELION.
Undivided; either that whose leaves are long and grassy, the flower of which
being closed, does represent a goats beard, whose root is esculent: or that
whose leaves are round pointed, and hairy. 13.
GOATS-BEARD. Tragopogon. Pilosella.
MOUSE-EAR.
Resembling thistles; but not prickly; either that which bears larger: or that
which bears lesser flowers. 14.
SOWTHISTLE. Sonch^^. Lampsana.
NIPPLEWORT.






IV. UMBELLIFEROUS HERBS OF BROADER LEAVES.
IV. UMBELLIFEROUS HERBS whose LEAVES are MORE BROAD and less finely cut, may be
distinguished into such as are, Odorate; and of a strong sent; whether such as
is More pleasant; in such kind of plants as are More properly belonging to this
tribe; to be distinguished upon Account of Leaves; as to their Shapes; whether
such are are Of Different shapes in the same plant, the lower leaves toward
the bottom of the stalk being rounder and broader, and those upon the stalk
more finely cut having Aromatic seeds; either that of a smaller seed: or that
of a more large seed, being round and hollow, the leaves of the plant being of
less pleasant sent then the seed 1.
Anisum. Coriandrum.
ANNIS. CORIANDER.
Winged leaves; resembling those of Parsnip; having the like smell and taste. 2.
Sison.
BASTARD STONE PARSLEY.
Fearn; either that which has a large black furrowed seed: or that whose seed
is less, and more slender, resembling an Oat. 3.
M^rrhis. Cicutaria vulgaris.
SWEET CICELY. WILD CICELY.

Not winged; resembling Parsley, but being much broader; either that which has
a large black streaked seed: or that which is a taller plant, having less
leaves and a stronger sent. 4.
Hipposel^num. Levisticum.
ALEXANDERS LOVAGE.

Color; whether Pale green; having large and broad leaves; either that which
has a yellow juice, the Vmbel of whose flowers is somewhat spherical, which
dies after bearing seed: or that which is of very near affinity to this in
shape and sent, but not so large, and more perennial. 5.
ANGELICA. Angelica. Imperatoria.
MASTERWORT.
Dark green; being indented; either that whose seed is broad: or angular. 6.
Laserpitium. Libanotis Theophrasti.
LASERWORT. HERB FRANKINCENSE OF THEOPHRASTUS.


Hairy tuft, encompassing the bottom of the stalk. 7.
Silermontanum.
SERMOUNTAIN.

Less properly belonging to this tribe; having winged leaves; either that whose
flowers are tubulous: or that which bears a great tuft of white flowers of a
sweet sent. 8.
Valeriana. Vlmaria.
VALERIAN. MEADOW SWEET.

Less pleasant; Lesser; either that of a weaker sent, but esculent and of a
grateful taste: or that of a stronger sent, growing naturally in moist places. 9.
PARSLEY. Petroselinum. Apium palusire.
SMALLAGE.
Larger; of a rough stalk, and winged leaves. 10.
HERCULES ALL-HEAL. Panax Herculeum.



Not odorate; distinguishable by their Roots; being esculent; either that of a
bigger root growing single: or that of a less root growing in clusters. 11.
PARSNIP. SKIRRET. Pastinaca sativa latifol. Sisarum.

Leaves; whether Whole, and somewhat nervous; either that whose leaves are more
round, the stalks growing through them: or that whose leaves are more long. 14.
THOROUGH WAX. Persoliata. Bupleurum.
HARES EAR.
Winged, and indented; either that whose root is of a hot biting taste: or that
whose leaf is divided into three, five, or more segments, being long and
narrow. 12.
BURNET SAXIFRAGE. Pimpinella saxifraga. Eringium umbelliferum.
UMBELLIFEROUS ERINGO.
Of different shapes in the same plant; the lower leaves being divided like
Parsley, the leaves upon the stalk being undivided, and encompassing it.
bearing a great, black, round seed. 13.
CANDY ALEXANDER. Smyrnium Creticum.


Place of growth; being proper to wet grounds; either that whose leaves are
hairy, and of a deep green, bearing a white flower: or that whose leaves are
not hairy. 15.
COW-PARSNIP. Sphondilium. Sium.
WATER-PARSNIP.




V. UMBELLIFEROUS HERBS whose LEAVES are more FINELY CUT into narrow segments,
V. UMBELLIFEROUS HERBS OF FINER LEAVES.
may be distinguished into such as are Odorate; having their leaves divided
into More long narrow segments; considerable upon account of their Leaves;
being Of a dark green; and small seeds; either that which is perennial, of
slender seeds: or that which is annual, of flat seeds 1.
Foeniculum. Anethum.
FENNEL. DILL.
Commonly divided into three segments at the ends; either that whose leaves are
more thin and dry: or more thick and succulent, used for sallade. 2.
HOGS FENNEL. Peu^edanum. Crithmum.
SAMPHIRE.

Seed; being either Large and broad; either that of a tall stature, the
segments of whose leaves are somewhat shorter then those of Fennel: or that
whose root smells like Frankincense. 3.
Ferula. Libanotis Galeni.
GIANT FENNEL. HERB FRANKINCENSE OF GALEN.
Long and more slender; whether the Bigger or the Less, of an Ar^matick sent. 4.
Meum. Ammi.
SPIGNEL. BISHOPSWEED.

Stalk; being crooked, bending several ways, 5.
S^seli Massili^use.
HARTWORT.

More short segments; having Rough seeds; either that whose root is large and
esculent: or that of a smaller root, the Umbels when the flower is faded,
resembling a Birds nest by closing or bending inwards toward the top. 6.
Pastinaca sativa tenui fol. Daucus.
CARRET. WILD CARRET, Birds-nest.
Long streaked seeds; either that which is the taller plant, bearing the lesser
seeds: or that which is the lower plant bearing the larger seeds. 7.
Carum. Cuminum.
CARROWEY. CUMMIN
Broad large seeds; or having a leaf hairy on the backside, and reddish. 8.
Panax Ascl^pium. Cherephyllon.
ALLHEAL. CHERVIL.
Large hollow stalk; either that of an offensive smell and counted poisonous:
or that which resembles this, growing in watery places. 9.
Cicuta. Cicutaria aquatica.
HEMLOCK. WATER HEMLOCK.


Not odorate; growing in Dryer places; distinguishable by their Roots; having
Tuberous roots; consisting of one single tuber, or of several. 10.
Bulbocastanon. ^lipendula ^ul^a^is.
EARTHNUT DROPWORT.
Roots of a hot biting taste; either that of a round dark colored seed: or that
of a broad flat seed, the root of which has a yellow purgative juice. 11.
PELLITORY OF SPAIN. SCORCHING FENNEL. Pyrethrum. Thapsia.


Stalks of the Vmbel, being strong and white, used for the picking of Teeth: to
which may be adjoined that other plant, if this fail, whose seeds are prickly.
12.
SPANISH PICKTOOTH. Gingidium. Caucalis.
BASTARD PARSLEY.

Watery places; of Fibrous roots; either that whose leaves have segments like
Fennel, but somewhat broader: or that whose segments are like those of Carret,
but smooth, and with a milky juice. 13.
WATER-MILFOIL. Millefolium aquaticum. Thyscelinum.
MILKY-PARSLEY.
Tuberous root; 14.
WATER DROPWORT. Oenanthe.






VI. VERTICILLATE FRUTICOSE HERBS, being all of them odorate, VI. VERTICILLATE
FRUTICOSE HERBS.
may be distinguished into such whose leaves are either Larger; whether Hoary
and rough; of a pleasant taste and smell. 1.
SAGE. Salvia.

Smooth; and of a dark green; either that whose leaves are cut in like those of
an Oak, more long and narrow: or that whose leaves are only indented about the
edges, being more short and broad. 2.
GERMANDER. Chamaedris. Teucrium.
TREE GERMANDER.

Lesser; whose leaves are either Short and roundish; the sent being More quick
and pungent; either the larger, having a woolly head: or the lesser. 3.
MASTICK. GOATS MARJORAM. Marum. Tragoriganum.

More wild and gentle; having smaller leaves, which grow thicker on the stalk.
4.
THYME. Thymus.


Long and narrow; whether Hoary; the Greater; bearing spikes; either that of
longer spikes, being the larger plant: or that of shorter thicker spikes. 5.
LAVENDER. Lavendula Staechas.
CASSIDONY, French Lavender, Stickadove.
Lesser; whose leaves are indented, being of a more dull sent, bearing small
flowers. 6.
POLIMOUNTAIN Polium montanum.


Smooth; either that whose leaves are softer and larger: or that whose leaves
are harder and less. 7.
HYSSOP. Hyssopus. Satureia.
WINTER-SAVORY.





VII. VERTICILLATE NOT FRUTICOSE HERBS, may be distinguished into such as are
Odorate; VII. VERTICILLATE NOT FRUTICOSE. HERBS.
considerable for their sent, whether Pleasant; The greater kind;
distinguishable by the Flowers; growing More close and thick together; either
that which is apt to creep and spread under ground by the roots: or that whose
leaf has some resemblance to the leaf of a Nettle. 1.
Mentha. Nepeta.
MINT. CAT-MINT.
More dispersedly; at the setting on of the leaves, having shorter and broader
leaves; the former of a darker green, and stronger sent. 2.
Melissa. Calamintha.
BALM. CALAMINT.

Seeds; growing in a large hollow Cup like an inverted Bell, having leaves like
Balm. 3.
Molucca.
ASSYRIAN BALM.
Scaly heads; the former a more grateful smell, and lesser leaves. 4.
Majorana. Origanum.
MARJORAM. WILD MARJORAM, Organy.
Leaves; Not hoary; either that whose leaves are, like those of Marjoram,
indented, the flowers growing in looser spikes: or that whose leaves are like
those of Thyme, but of a different sent. 5.
Ocymum. Acinos*
BASIL. STONE-BASIL.
Hoary; having leaves Broader; either that which has several scaly heads,
being the lesser plant: or that which is the bigger plant, whose flowers grow
in close rundels, of a stronger sent. 6.
Dictamnus. Marrubium album.
DITTANY. WHITE HOREHOUND.
Narrower; a low plant bearing a yellow flower. 7.
Chamaepytis.
GROUND PINE.



The least; a small creeping plant growing in watery places, being of a pungent
sent. 8.
Pulegium.
PENNYROYAL.

Not pleasant; distinguishable by the Sent; being like that of Garlic; either
that whose leaves are like those of Germander, growing in watery places: or
that whose leaves are like those of Sage, growing in woody places. 9.
Scordium. Scoredonia.
WATER GERMANDER. WOOD-SAGE.
Leaf; whether Rough; Broad leaf; the bigger or the Lesser. 10.
CLARY. Sclarea. Ho^minum.
WILD CLARY.
Resembling those of Nettle; the one narrower: the other broader and rounder
pointed. 11
DEAD NETTLE, Archangel. BLACK HOREHOUND. Vrtica iners. Marrubium nigrum.

Long; either the taller larger plant: or the lesser plant having not so thick
a down upon the leaves. 12.
BASE HOREHOUND. IRONWORT. Stachis. Sideritis.


Smooth; with a round jagged leaf, of a dark green, having a stiff stalk. 13.
MOTHER WORT.



Not odorate; Cardiaca.
considerable for having Long narrow leaves; the flowers coming out more
dispersedly, growing in watery places; either that whose leaves are more
narrow, and green like those of Hyssop: or that whose leaves are less narrow,
the flowers standing commonly two together at the joints. 14.
HEDGE HYSSOP. Gratiola. Lysimachia galericulata.
HOODED LOOSE STRIFE.
Spicate flowers; The greater; either that of oblong green notched leaves and
short spikes: or that which is the fatter plant, having longer spikes, growing
in watery places, bearing sometimes three leaves at a joint. 15
BETONY. Betonica. Lysimachia purpur^a.
PURPLE LOOSE STRIFE.
The lesser; bearing generally blew flowers; either that whose leaves resemble
those of wild Marjoram: or that whose leaves are like those of the lesser
Daisy, creeping by strings. 16.
SELF-HEAL. BUGLE. Prunella. Bugala.


No leaves; but only strings or wires, growing upon other plants, from whom
(when it is arrived to any bigness) it receives its nourishment, the root in
the ground dying. 17.
DODDER. Cuscuta.





VIII. SPICATE HERBS.
VIII. SPICATE HERBS, may be distinguished into such as are Spinous; having
prickly leaves, whether those whose head is Oblong; either that whose leaves do
so encompass the stalks as to hold the rain water: or that of a jagged leaf,
whose roots are often Candied for sweetmeats. 1.
Dipsacus. Eryngium.
TEASEL. ERINGO.
Round; either which has a resemblance to Thistles: or to Teasels. 2.
Carduus globosus. Virga Pastoris.
GLOBE THISTLE. SHEPHERDS ROD.

Not spinous; distinguishable by their Seeds; being little burrs; either that
of a winged leaf and yellow flower: or that of an undivided leaf, bearing a
white flower. 3.
Agrimonia. Circaea Lutetiana.
AGRIMONY. ENCHANTERS NIGHTSHADE.
Winged leaf. 4.
Pimpinella sanguisorba.
BURNET.
Trefoil; either that which has a woolly spike: or that whose seed-vessel does
in the top of it expend it self into five rays. 5.
Lagopus. Trifolium stellatum.
HARES-FOOT. STARR-HEADED TREFOIL.
Long leaves; growing in wet places; either that of a hot biting taste: or that
which has a fairer spike of flowers, being of an acid taste. 6.
Perficaria. Potamog^iton angustifolium.
ARSMART. NARROW-LEAVED PONDWEED.




IX. HERBS bearing MANY SEEDS together IN A cluster or BUTTON, IX. HERBS
BEARING MANY SEEDS IN A BUTTON.
may be distinguished according to the Leaf; into such as have Winged leaves;
either that whose leaf is underneath hoary and of a silver color: or that
whose leaves are broad at the end, having little pinnulae toward the bottom of
them, bearing a burr. 1.
WILD TANSY. Argentina. Cariophyllatae.
AVENS.
Fingered leaves; growing from the same point of the foot-stalk; either five,
having a flower consisting of five leaves: or seven, the flower consisting of
four leaves. 2.
CINQUEFOIL. Pentaphyllon. Tormentilla.
TORMENTIL.
But one leaf upon the foot-stalk of the flower, and but one flower; either
that whose leaves and stalks are generally more Smooth: or more Hairy, the head
after the flower is faded, being covered with long woolly locks. 3.
ANEMONY, Wind-flower. Anemone. Pulsatilla.
PASCH FLOWER.

Flowers; whether most commonly Yellow; shining as if varnished, bearing their
seed in a rough head; either that whose flower does generally consist of five
round pointed leaves: or that whose flower has eight or nine leaves blowing
early* 4.
CROW-FOOT. Ranunculus. Obelidonium minus.
PILEWORT.
Red; having leaves like those of Camomil. 5.
ADONIS FLOWER.

Seed; in a head of a round flat cheese-like figure; Flos Adonis.
either that which is Of rounder leaves; the Less or the Greater. 6.
MALLOW. Malva. Malva hortensis major.
HOLYHOK.
Of hoary soft leaves; either the less growing in Marshes: or the greater by
the Sea. 7.
MARSH MALLOWS. Althaea. Malva arborea.
TREE MALLOW.
Of jagged leaves; 8.
VERVAIN MALLOW. Alc^a.





Of Herbs considered according to their Seed-vessel.
HERBS of Perfect flowers considered according to their Seed-vessels, may be
distinguished into such as have A divided Seed-vessel;. V.
into several distinct cases, which may be called CORNICULATE. I. An ent^re
Seed-vessel; whether Siliquous; containing their seeds in long pods,
distinguishable according to their flowers, into Papillionaceous; the flower
having some resemblance to a Butterfly, as the blooms of Pease or Beans, etc.
whether CLIMBERS; such as are generally furnished with Tendrils or Claspers.
II. NOT CLIMBERS; being without such Tendrils. III.
Not papillionaceous; such whose FLOWERS do generally CONSIST OF FOUR LEAVES.
IV.
Capsulate; having shorter seed-vessels, distinguishable into Pentapetala; such
as bear FLOWERS OF FIVE LEAVES V. Tripetala, and Tetrapetala; such as bear
FLOWERS OF THREE or FOUR LEAVES VI. Monopetala; such as bear a flower of one
entire leaf, whether Campanulate; such whose flowers have some resemblance to
the figure of a Bell VII. Not campanulate; the limbs of whose flowers are
divided into several segments, representing so many distinct leaves. VIII.

BACCIFEROUS; whose seeds are included in a juicy pulpe. IX.



1. HERBS OF CORNICULATE SEED VESSELS.
I. HERBS OF A CORNICULATE or Horned SEED-VESSEL, may be distinguished into such
as are More esteemed for the flower; having Bigger seeds; either that with a
compound broad leaf, bearing the largest flower of any low herb: or that with a
winged leaf like Ash, having black shining seeds, and a sent like Hops. 1.
Paeonia. Fraxinella.
PIONY. FRAXINELLA, Bastard Dittany
Lesser seeds; either that of a divided slender leaf, the flower having a long
heel: or that which has a compound leaf, the flower bending downwards,
consisting of tubulous parts. 2.
Delpi^nium. Apud gia.
LARKS HEEL. COLUMBINE.

Less esteemed for the flower; having Hooded flowers; and roundish jagged
leaves; either that which is counted Poison: or that which is counted an
Antidote. Acomtu^. Anthora.
WOLVES BANE. WHOLESOME WOLVES BANE.
Not hooded flower; either that of a tuberous root, the flower coming cut of
the middle of the leaf, blowing in Winter: or that with a Triangular seed of a
biting taste. 4.
Acomtum hy^male. Staphis ag^^a.
WINTER WOLF-BANE. STA^ES-ACRE.
Seed-vessel; like the long bill of a bird; either that which bears larger
flowers, more sparsedly set: or that which bears lesser flowers in the fashion
of an Umbel. 5.
Geramum. (...).
RANES-BILL. VENUS COMB, Shepherds needle.




II. PAPILIONACEOUS CLIMBING HERBS, II. PAPILIONACEOUS CLIMBERS.
may be distributed into such as do climb; either by Twisting; having long flat
cods, their leaves being set by threes. 1.
KIDNEY BEAN, French bean, Ginny bean.
Tendrils; or Claspers, Phaseolus.
to befurther distinguished by their Seed; whether Round; and esculent; either
that whose seed is black, the leaves and flowers like those of the common Bean:
or that whose seed is not black, the leaves of a lighter green. 2.
BEAN OF THE ANCIENTS. Faba veterum. Pisum.
PEASE.
Flat; and esculent, having hairy winged leaves; the Greater: or the Less. 3.
VETCH. LENTIL. Vicia. Lens.


Cods; being knotted, otherwise resembling a Vetch. 4.
BITTER VETCH.
Stalks; being Angular; Orobus.
either that which bears one pair of smooth leaves upon a foot-stalk: or that
whose leaf is undivided, only toward the top, having two or three segments,
bearing a white flower. 5.
CHICKLING. Lathyrus. Ochrus.
WINGED WILD PEASE.
Leaves; by pairs encompassing the stalk, being more broad at bottom, and sharp
pointed, bearing a yellow flower, having black shining seeds. 6.
YELLOW WILD VETCH. Aphaca.

Manner of bearing the esculent part under ground; either that which bears its
seed both under ground, and above ground: or that of small tuberous esculent
roots, bearing bright purple flowers, many together upon a foot-stalk. 7.
UNDERGROUND CHICKLING. Arachidua. Terrae glandes.
PEASE EARTH-NUTS.




III PAPILIONACEOUS NOT CLIMBING.
III. PAPILIONACEOUS HERBS NOT CLIMBING, may be distinguished into such as have;
either More leaves then three; Esculent; whether the Larger; of a flat seed;
either that of a great hollow stalk, broad leaves of a dark green, the cod
lined with a woolly substance, the blossoms being black and white: or that
which has a fingered leaf, being from one foot-stalk divided into many
segments, bearing a spike of flowers. 1.
Faba. Lupinus.
BEAN. LUPIN.
Lesser; of a round seed, having small winged leaves indented, the cods round
and turgid. C^rn.
2.
CHICH PEASE.

Not esculent; to be further distinguished by their Flowers; growing in thick
spikes or tufts. The Greater; either that whose leaves grow like those of
Vetch, smooth, and of a sweet taste, a short crooked cod furrowed on the
outside, containing a double row of seeds: or that whose leaves are hairy.
Glaux vulgaris. Astragalus. sylvaticus
3.
WILD LICCORICE. MILK VETCH.
Lesser; either that whose flowers grow in a tuft, the utmost segment of the
leaf being broader then any of the other: or that whose flowers grow in a
spike, having a leaf divided like Rue. Anthyllis leguminosa. Fumaria.
4.
LADIES FINGER. FUMITORY.

Seed vessel; whether Rough; having winged leaves; either that whose flowers
grow in thicker spikes, of a shining red color, with prickly seeds growing at
the end of one another: or that whose flowers grow in more slender spikes from
the sides of the stalk, having a long thick root. Hedysarum clypeatum. Caput
gallinaceum.
5.
FRENCH HONNYSUCKLE. COCKS-HEAD, Sanfoin.
Smooth; whether such as bear Crooked cods; and yellow flowers, many together:
or crooked seeds in the shape of a Horsshooe, the seed vessel being indented on
one side. Securidaca. Ferrum Equinum.
6.
HATHCET VETCH. HORSSHOOE.
Straight; being long and slender, of grassy leaves, and a bright red flower.
Catanance.
7.
CRIMSON GRASS VETCH.

Stalk; being hairy, stiff and erect, with leaves consisting of many pairs of
Wings; the latter of which will contract it self upon the touch, Galega. Herba
viva.
as if it had sense. 8.
GOATS RUE. SENSITIVE PLANT.
Leaves; which are long and winged, being small plants; either that whose cods
grow together like the claws of a bird: or that with a spinous seed-vessel. 9.
BIRDS FOOT. Ornithopodium. Tribulus terristris.
LAND CALTROPS.


Not more then three leaves, distinguishable by their Flowers; growing in
spikes. Trefoil; either that which bears long spikes of yellow flowers, to
which succeed round seed-vessels, containing generally but one seed in each: or
that of a shorter spike. 10.
MELILOT. Melilotus. Trifolium pratense.
TREFOIL HONNYSUCKLE.
Not Trefoil; having a grassy leaf. 11.
MILKWORT.

Seed-vessels; Polygala.
Long; Crooked; either that whose leaves have same resemblance to those of
Purslain, growing by threes, of more slender cods: or that which has long
smooth undivided leaves, the seed-vessel being like a Caterpiller. 12.
SCORPION GRASS. Telephium Scorpoides. Scorpoides buplurifolio.
CATERPILLER.
Straight; whether More long and slender; either that which has little wings
or ears at the bottoms of the leaves: or that which has long: flat cods. 13.
LOTUS. FOEN GREEK. Lotus. Foenum Gracum.

Less long and thicker; having prickly stalks, bearing a large flower in
proportion to the plant. 14.
CAMOCK, Rest-harrow.


Round; and Spiral; either that which is smooth: Resta bovis.
or that which is prickly. 15.
SNAIL TREFOIL. Medica cochleata. Medica Echinata.
HEDGHOG TREFOIL.





IV. SILIQUOUS NOT PAPILIONACEOUS HERBS.
IV. SILIQUOUS HERBS NOT PAPILIONACEOUS, whose flowers consist generally of four
leaves, may be distinguished by their Being esteemed for the flower, having
Shrubby sta^ks; and being of a pleasant sent, of a round flat seed; either that
of hoary leaves: or that whose leaves are smooth, of a deep green. 1.
Leucoium Keiri.
STOCK GILLY-FLOWER. WALL FLOWER.
Oblong seeds; either that which has a more broad jagged leaf: or that which
has a sharp indented leaf, compounded of several together upon one foot-stalk.
2.
Hesperis. Dentaria.
DAMES VIOLET, Double Rocket. TOOTHWORT.
Seeds wrapped up in down; either that whose flower grows out from the top of the
cod, which makes it to be called filius ante patrem: or that which has a broad
nervous leaf with a milkie juice, bearing the flowers in a tuft, having a large
cod filled with a silkie substance. 3.
Lysimachia siliquosa Apocynum rectum Syriacum.
CODDED WILLOW HERB, Codded loose strife. UPRIGHT DOGS-BANE, Silk-grass.

Being used as Esculent; either their Roots; whether such as are commonly eaten
Boiled; either that whose leaves are more rough, the root commonly roundish: or
that whose leaves are more smooth, the root oblong, and of a more firm
substance. 4.
TURNIP. Rapum. Napus.
NAVEW.
Raw; of a biting taste, bearing purplish flowers, and long knotted cods. 5.
RADISH.

Raphanus.
Leaves; having Succulent leaves; of a bluish gray; either that of a jagged
leaf, yellow flower: or that of an undivided-leaf, bearing a white flower. 6.
Brassica. Perfoliata siliquosa.
CABBIDGE, Colewort, Colly-flower. CODDED THOROUGH WAX.
Iagged smooth leaves; either that which bears larger flowers growing more
sparsedly: or that which bears less flowers growing more close together. 7.
ROCKET. Eruca-Barbarea.
WINTER-CRESS.
The smell and taste of Garlic: or a hot biting taste, bearing large cods, which
being ripe are of a red color. 8.
Alliaria. Capsicum.
SAUCE ALONE, Jack by the Hedge. GINNY PEPPER.

Seeds; either that of short square cods: or that of long round cods. 9.
MUSTARD. Sinapi. Rapistrum.
CHARLOCK.

Leaf; whether Divided; or jagged. Less finely; being of a whitish blew, and
bearing commonly a yellow flower; either that which is a maritim plant, having
a larger flower, and longer cods: or that which has a yellow juice. 10.
HORNED POPPY. Papaver corniculatum. Chelidoni^m majus.
GREAT CELENDINE.
More finely; having slender cods. 11.
FLIXWEED. Sophia Chirurgorum.


Undivided; whose leaves are Smooth toward the top of the stalk, and rough
toward the bottom, bearing white flowers; either the greater, having many
slender long cods growing thick together on the top of the branches: or the
less, bearing the cods more dispersedly. 12.
TOWER MUSTARD. Turritis. Pilosella siliquosa.
CODDED MOUSE-EAR.
Long; bearing yellow flowers, being tall plants; either that which has narrow
dark green leaves, not serrate: or that whose leaves are more broad, of a pale
green and serrate. 13.
TREACLE WORMSEED. Camelina myagrum. Draba lute^.
YELLOW ARABIAN MUSTARD.


Seed wrapped up in down; having five leaves in the flower; either that which is
counted a Poison: or that which is counted an Antidote. 14.
DOGS-BANE. SWALLOW-WORT. Apocynum. Asclepias.

Growing in watery places; having winged leaves; either that which is esculent
of a biting taste, a short thick cod: or that which is in some esteem for the
flower, bearing more long and slender cods, and whitish flowers. 15.
WATER CRESS. Nassurtium aquaticum. Cardamine.
CUCKOE FLOWER, Lady-smock.



V. CAPSULATE HERBS of FIVE LEAVED FLOWERS.
V. CAPSULATE HERBS bearing FLOWERS OF FIVE LEAVES, may be distinguished into
such whose leaves are Undivided; Esteemed for the flower; whether such whose
flowers grow Sparsedly; being either of Sweet sent; and elegant structure,
their flowers standing in small cups; either that of a larger leaf and flower:
or that whose leaf and flower is smaller. 1.
GILLYFLOWER. Caryophillus. Caryophillus minor.
PINK.
No considerable sent; Growing in a cup; either the larger, the leaves of whose
flowers are more round pointed: or the lesser, having a clammy juice, whereby
little Flies are caught. 2.
CAMPION. Lychnis. Muscipula.
CATCHFLY.
Not growing in a cup; a low plant, bearing shining purple flowers. 3.
VENUS LOOKING-GLASS.


Speculum Veneris.
In an Vmbel or Tuft; Perennial whether that which bears flowers of various
colors on the same tuft: or that whose flowers are commonly of a bright
scarlet. 4.
LONDON TUFT, Sweet John, Sweet William. Armeria. Lychnis Chalcedonica.
BRISTOW NONSUCH.
Annual; whose leaves are of a bitter taste. 5.
Centaurium minu^.
LESSER CENTAURY.


Not esteemed for the flower; considerable either for their Manner of growth;
whether Erect; bearing Red flowers; growing commonly amongst Corn; either that
which bears small flowers, of smooth leaves, round seed, an angular cup: or
that which bears larger flowers, of a deep red, hoary leaves, and angular seed.
6.
Vaccaria. Pseudo. melanthium.
COW-BASIL. COCKLE.
Yellow flowers; of a red juice when bruised, whether such whose leaves are
Lesser; either that of a round stalk: or that of an angular stalk. 7.
St. JOHN'S WORT. ^ypericum. Ascirum.
St. PETERS-WORT.
Larger; having a round seed-vessel, like a berry. 8.
Androsaemum. vulgar.
TUTSAN, Park-leaves.


Procumbent; bearing White flowers; whose leaves are cut in about the middle;
either that which bears a more large flower: or that which bears a little
flower having hairy leaves. 9.
Gramen Leucanthemum. Alsine myoso^is.
STICHWORT. COMMON CHICKWEED.
Colored flowers; the latter being spotted on the backside of the leaves. 10.
BASTARD CHICKWEED. Alsine. Anagallis.
PIMPERNEL.


Milkie juice; bitter and caustic, of a triangular seed-vessel. 11.
Tithymallus.
SPURGE, Tithymal.
Large flowers; either that which is used for the making of fine linen, having
long narrow leaves, and a round seed vessel, containing oblong shining seeds:
or that with a stiff stalk, having leaves like those of Sallow, sometimes 3 or
4 at one setting on. 12.
Linum. Lysimachia lutea.
FLAX, Linseed. YELLOW LOOSE STRIFE.


Divided leaves; either that which has a strong sent, a round seed-vessel, the
leaves of a whitish blew color: or that which bears a large flower of a pale
blew, with a circle of leaves under it, having a large seed-vessel, horned at
the top. 13.
RUE, Herb of grace. Ruta. Nigella.
FENNEL FLOWER.



VI. CAPSULATE HERBS, whose flowers consist of three or four leaves, may be
distinguished into such as are; VI. CAPSULATE of three or four leaved flowers.
either of Three leaves; in the flower, being water plants; either that which
has long leaves like Aloes, with sharp serrate edges: or that whose leaf does
in the figure of it resemble a barbed Arrow. 1.
FRESH WATER SOLDIER. Militaris Aizoides. Sagittaria.
ARROW-HEAD.
Four leaves; in the flower, to be further distinguished by the Seed-vessel;
whether Compressed; Larger; and more broad; either that whose leaf is like the
leaf of a Nettle, the seed-vessel shining like Satin: or that of hoary stalks
and leaves, being the lesser. Viola lunaris. Alysson Dioscoridis.
2.
BULBONACH, Honesty, Satin. MADWORT OF DIOSCORIDES.
Lesser; the former of a biting taste. 3.
THLASPI. Thlaspi. Bursa pastoris.
SHEPHERDS PURSE.

Round; of Larger heads; and flowers being narcotic; either that of a bitter
white juice of which Opium is made, with a star-like covering on the top of the
seed-vessel: or that whose leaf is more finely jagged, having a rough
seed-vessel. Papaver. Argemone.
4.
POPPY. BASTARD POPPY.
Lesser heads; and flowers, being of a hot biting taste; either that which bears a
white flower and reddish seed: or that which bears long narrow leaves upon the
stalk, and others that are broader, and jagged toward the bottom of the stalk.
Nasturtium. Iberis.
5.
GARDEN CRESS. SCIATICA CRESS.


Leaf; as to the Biting taste; either that which is a large plant of a juicy
serrate leaf, of a light bluish green: or that which is a low small plant, of
jagged leaves, and rough seed-vessel, growing many together, each containing
one seed. Lepidium. Coronopus Ruellii.
6.
PEPPER-WORT. SWINES CRESS.
Shape; being like those of Ivy, the stalks being divided into three, and so
subdivided, one side of the lower part of the leaf standing out more then the
other. Epimedium.
7.
BARRENWORT.

Flower; in respect of the Color; being yellow, large plants; either that
whose leaves are of a bluish green, long and smooth, used in dying: or that
whose leaves are more narrow and indented. Glastum, Myagrum.
8.
WOAD. GOLD OF PLEASURE.
Manner of growth; in spikes. Upon the top of the stalks; bearing small blew
flowers; either that of lesser leaves indented: or that of a naked stalk,
growing by the sea side. Verbena. Limonium.
9.
VERVAIN. SEA-LAVENDER.
From the sides of the stalks; whether the Larger; having a flat seed-vessel.
10.
BROOKLIME. Anagallis aquatica.

Lesser; being small plants, having compressed seed-vessels like those of
Shepheards-purse: the latter bearing the bigger flower of a bright blew.
Veronica. Chamadris spuria.
11.
SPEEDWELL. WILD GERMANDER.







VII. CAMPANULATE
VII. CAMPANULATE HERBS, may be distinguished into such as are Climbing;
Pomiferous; bearing Bigger esculent fruit; ^i^her such as have Softer skins or
c^^ts; either that which is the largest, of a waterish taste, having a large
seed with a welt about the edges: or that which is of a more rich pleasant
taste, with a plain seed not marked in the limb of it. 1.
Pepo. Melo
POMPEON, Quash. MELON, Musk-melon.
Shelly coats; growing to such a hardness as renders them fit to make bottles,
etc. either that which bears commonly a white flower: or that of a yellow
flower. 2.
Cucurbita. Citrullus.
GOURD. CITRUL.

Lesser; Esculent; of a whitish pulp, and waterish taste. 3.
Cucumis.
COWCUMBER.
Purgative; either that of a figure like a Pear, of a bitter juice: or that
like a Cowcumber, but smaller and rough, the seeds spirting out upon breaking
off the stalk. 4.
Colocynthis. Cucumis asininus.
COLOQUINTIDA. WILD COWCUMBER.
Neither esculent nor purgative; having a leaf like that of a Vine, but less,
the fruit oblong but very small. 5.
Balsaminamas.
MALE BALSOM.


Capsulate; having a short round seed-vessel, and angular seeds, climbing by
twining about other plants; either that which is not purgative: or that which
has a milky juice in the root. A violent purgative, 6.
Convolv^lus. Scammonia Syriaca*
BINDWEED. SCAMMONY.

Erect; considerable for the flower, being either Greater; either that whose
flower is bigger at the bottom: or that which is less at the bottom. Europaean;
7.
Violae Marianae. Trachelium.
COVENTRY BELLS. THROATWORT.
Exotic; either that which has flowers of several colors, leaves like those
of Nightshade, growing by pairs, the branches alternatim: or that whose leaves
are jagged, having a large thorny seed-vessel. 8.
Mirabile Peruvianum. Strammonium.
MERVAIL OF PERU. THORN APPLE.

Lesser, either that which has An Esculent root; a long leaf, a blew flower,
the edge divided into five points: or that whose root is not esculent. 9.
Rapunculus. Campanula.
RAMPION. BELL-FLOWER.
A hollow flower; somewhat like the finger of a Glove: the second being of a
purgative quality. 10.
Digitalis. Sesamum.
FOXGLOVE. OILY PURGING PULSE
A Narcotic quality; either that which has large smooth unctuous leaves, but
very small seed: or that which has soft woolly leaves jagged. 11
Nicoti^na. Hyosciamus.
TOBACCO. HENBANE.





VIII. CAPSULATE HERBS NOT CAMPANULATE, having their leaves divided into
several segments, VIII. CAPSULATE HERBS NOT CAMPANULATE
may be distinguished into such as have Naked stalks; Of a rough nervous leaf;
either that which bears one flower upon a stalk which is bigger, being divided
into five laciniae: or that which bears a less flower, many together at the top
of the stalk. 1.
PRIMROSE. PAIGLE, Cowslip. Primula veris. Paralysis.

Of a thicker smoother leaf; the flowers growing many together, standing in a
shorter cup; either that which bears the bigger: or the smaller flower, the
leaves being hoary underneath. 2.
BEARS EAR. Auricula Vrsi. Paralysis montana.
BIRDS EY.
Of a round indented leaf; 3.
BEARS EAR SANICLE. Cortusa.


Leavy stalks; whether Taller plants; considerable for Bearing their flowers in
spikes; the limb of the flower being divided into five segments, with very
little hose; either that whose leaves and stalks are hoary: or that which has
less leaves, being green. 4.
MULLEIN. MOTH MULLEIN. Verbascum. Blattaria.

Having small duskie flowers; either that of a roundish leaf, and weak stalk,
the flower being a kind of Tube, with a lip on one side: or having a stiff
stalk, a leaf like a Nettle, a small purplish flower, and a round seed-vessel.
5.
BIRTHWORT. Aristolochia. Scrophularia.
FIGWORT.

Lesser plants; whether such as are Deciduous; to be further distinguished by
their different flowers. Resembling a head with a gaping mouth; having long
narrow leaves, the second having a heel. 6.
SNAPDRAGON. TOAD-FLAX. Antirrhinum. Linaria.

Resembling a helmet or hood; Having creased indented leaves; either that with
turgid husks: or that with smaller husks. 7.
COCKSCOMB. Crista galli. Euphrasia.
EYBRIGHT.
Having broad jagged leaves; with a spike of gaping flowers, being a larger
plant: or having long leaves jagged about the setting on, with large seed. 8.
BRANK URSIN, Bears-breech. COW WHEAT. Branca Vrsina. Melampyrum.


With heels; either that whose seed when ripe will spirt out of the cod,
bearing yellow flowers: or that of a pale downy leaf, weak stalks, trailing on
the ground. 9.
CODDED ARSMART. FEMALE FLUELLIN, Female Speedwell. Noli me tangere. Elatine.


Ever green; having weak stalks creeping on the ground. 10.
PERIWINKLE. Vinca pervinca.






IX. BACCIFEROUS HERBS.
IX. BACCIFEROUS HERBS, may be distinguished according to their Qualities; into
such as are Esculent; either in respect of the Fruit; being Most pleasant; a
Trefoil propagating by strings or wires. 1.
Fragaria.
STRAWBERRY.
Less pleasant; either that of a leaf like Agrimony, bearing round fruit of a
bright red: or that of a broad hairy rough leaf, bearing a large fruit almost
as big as a Cowcumber. 2.
Pomum amoris. Malum insa^um.
APPLE OF LOVE. MAD APPLE.

Root; bearing winged leaves, and a bell flower. 3.
^attata.
POTATO OF VIRGINIA.

Malignant; whether such whose leaves are more Simple and undivided; either
that which has a broad leaf, bearing black berries: or that which has a more
long, broad, dark colored leaf, a great root, bearing great berries on single
stalks. 4.
Solanum. Mandragoras.
NIGHTSHADE. MANDRAKE.
Compound; or made up of many segments; either that which bears light green
berries in a cluster: or that which bears but one leaf divided into four or
five parts, and but one black berry. 5.
Aconitum racemosum. Herba Paris.
HERB CHRISTOPHER, Berry bearing Wolves-bane. HERB TRUE LOVE, One Berry.


Manner of growth; of the Plants themselves; being Climbers, whether such as
are considerable for Purgativeness; bearing red berries; either that of a great
white root, having leaves like a Vine, but more rough: or that of a great black
root, with leaves like those of Ivy. 6.
Bryonia alba. Bryonia nigra.
WHITE BRIONY. BLACK BRIONY, Wild Vine, Ladies-seal
Being full of crooked prickles; having a long triangular leaf. 7.
Smilax aspera^
PRICKLY BINDWEED.

Berries; whether in a Bladder; either that which is a low plant, which bears a
red berry in a large bladder: or that whose leaves are like Chickweed, ramping
upon other plants. 8.
Alkake^gi. Cacubalum. Plinii.
WINTER CHERRY. BERRY BEARING CHICKWEED.
Vmbel; having winged leaves, like Elder, both for shape and sent. 9.
Eubulus.
DANEWORT.





Of Shrubs.
SHRUBS may be distributed into such as are Bacciferous;. VI.
Deciduous; SPINOUS, or thorny. I. NOT SPINOUS. II.
EVERGREEN. III.
SILIQUOUS; such as bear their seeds in PODS. IV. Graniferous; bearing smaller
seeds, whether such as are DECIDUOUS. V. EVERGREEN. VI.



1. BACCIFEROUS SPINOUS shrubs of DECIDUOUS leaves, may be distinguished into
such as have either Compound leaves; whether such as may be called Fingered;
viz. when several proceed from one point, bearing an esculent berry consisting
of many little pulpy grains aggregated together in one head; either that whose
branches are erect, bearing the more pleasant fruit: or that whose branches are
procumbent and trailing 1.
RASBERRY, Raspis. Rubus Idaeus. Rubus vulgaris.
BRAMBLE, Blackberry.
Winged; viz. growing by pairs against one another upon a middle rib; either
that which bears the more beautiful and sweet flower: or that whose flower is
less beautiful and sweet. 2.
ROSE. Rosa. Rosa canina.
BRIER.

Simple leaves; Divided into several segments; either that which bears a more
juicy esculent berry, being the lesser plant: or that which bears a drier red
berry, being the taller plant. 3.
GOOSBERRY. Groscularia. Oxyacantha.
WHITE THORN, Haw-thorn.
Undivided; whether Roundish; whose fruit is Esculent; either that which
produces a fruit like a small Plum, black, round, of an acid austere taste, the
blossoms coming out before the leaves: or that which bears its fruits in
clusters, being long slender reddish, of an acid taste. 4.
SLOE-TREE, Black-thorn. Prunus sylvestris. Berberis.
BARBERRY.
Not esculent; whether Purgative; having leaves like those of a Plum-tree,
bearing black berries used in dying. 5.
PURGING THORN. Rhamnus Catharticus.

Not purgative; either that which has long, stiff, slender, sharp thorns,
bearing a fruit resembling a hat: or that whose berries contein a long streaked
seed. 6.
CHRIST'S THORN. Paliurus. Lycium.
BOXTHORN.


Long; and somewhat hoary. 7.
BUCKS THORN. Rhamnus,






II. BACCIFEROUS Shrubs of DECIDUOUS leaves, NOT SPINOUS, II. BACCIFEROUS
DECIDUOUS NOT SPINOUS.
may be distributed into such whose berries are; either Esculent; bearing their
fruit In clusters; either that of a rich juice, spungy wood, trailing branches:
or that whose leaves are like those of Goosberry, but larger, and erect
branches. 1.
Vitis. Ribes.
VINE, Grape, Raisin. CURRAN.
Singly; being a low plant, of dark green leaves, hollow flowers, small fruit.
2.
Vitis Idaea vulgaris.
BILBERRY, Whortle-berry.

Not esculent; to be further distinguished with respect to the Leaf. Undivided;
Round; considerable for the Manner of bearing their fruit; whether In Vmbels;
whose leaves are Hoary; underneath; either that which bears black berries,
containing one flat seed: or that which bears red berries. 3.
Viburnum. Aria.
WAYFARING TREE. WHITE BEAM TREE, Cumberland Hawthorn.
Green; having red twigs, and a black fruit, containing one kernel. 4.
Cornus foemina.
DOGBERRY TREE.

In clusters; having but one grain in a black berry; either that whose leaves
are larger: or lesser. 5.
BIRDS CHERRY. Padus Theophrasti. Mahalab.
WILD ROCK CHERRY OF AUSTRIA.
Sparsedly; having several grains in a berry; whether such whose leaves are
Hoary underneath, and less; either that of a thicker leaf, bearing a red berry,
covered with a kind of down: or that other bearing a black berry. 6.
Chamaemespilus. Diospyros.
DWARF MEDLER. SWEET WHORT.
Green and larger; like those of Alder, but smoother, bearing a black berry,
the inward bark being a violent purgative. 7.
Alnus nigra baccifera.
BERRY BEARING ALDER.


Flowers; being tubulous and odorate; either that which is climbing: or that
which is erect. 8.
Periclymenum Periclymenum rectum.
WOODBINE, Honysuckle. UPRIGHT WOODBINE.
Taste of the fruit; being hot, biting, aromatic, growing in clusters, each
cluster coming out on the side of the stalk, opposite to a leaf on the other
side, being a Climber. 9.
Piper.
PEPPER.

Long; Purgative; bearing red berries; either that which sends out its blossoms
in winter before the leaves, being of a sweet sent: or that whose younger
branches and berries are quadrangular. 10.
MEZEREON. Mezereon. Enonymus.
SPINDLE TREE.
Not purgative; having slender flexile twigs; either that which bears black
berries in clusters: or that which bears red berries more sparsedly. 11.
Ligustrum. Cassia Po^tarum.
PRIVET. SHRUB CASSIA.


Iagged; either that which bears a great round cluster of white flowers: or
that which bears its flowers in an Vmbel. berries. 12.
Sambucus Rosea. Sambucus aquatica,
GELDER ROSE. WATER ELDER.
Compound; bearing a flower like Iessamine with round black shining stalks. 13.
Polemonium.
YELLOW JESSAMINE.
Having no leaf; the flowers and berries coming out at the joints of the 14.
^^agus.
SEA-GRAPE.




III. BACCIFEROUS SEMPERVIRENT SHRUBS, III. BACCIFEROUS SEMPERVIRENT SHRUBS.
may be distributed into such whose leaves are; either Compound; whether
Winged; either that which is of a fragrant smell, bearing yellow seeds in black
berries: or that which bears small berries like Mulberries. 1.
TRUE BALSOM, Balm. Balsamum Iudaicum. Poterium.
THORNY BURNET.
Fingered; having several leaves growing from one foot-stalk, bearing the fruit
in clusters. Palma humilis.
2.
DWARF PALM.

Entire; whether of Indented edges; bearing Black berries; either that whose
leaves grow against one another: or that whose leaves grow alternately. 3.
PHYLLYRAEA, Mock-privet. Philyrraea. Alaternus.
EVERGREEN PRIVET.
Red berries; either that of oblong shining serrate leaves, bearing fruit like
Strawberries, but bigger: or that which bears berries of a more pale yellowish
red. Arbutus. Pyrocantha.
4.
STRAWBERRY TREE. EVERGREEN THORN.

Smooth edges; to be further distinguished by the Taste; hot and biting, being
violent purgers; whether such whose leaves are Broader; of a tough stalk, the
leaves toward the bottom being more long then those of Bays, bearing greenish
flowers, and black berries, of a very hot taste. Laureola.
5.
SPURGE LAUREL.
Narrower; either that which bears long pale leaves and red berries: or that
which bears dark green leaves, the berries growing by threes. Thymalaea.
Chamaelaa tricoccos.
6.
SPURGE OLIVE. WIDOW WAIL.

Flower; as to the manner of its growth, as likewise of the berries; either In
the midst of the leaf; whether having Larger leaves; not spinous: the latter of
which has a small leaf growing out of the middle of another leaf, betwixt
which two, the blossoms and berries do grow. 7.
LAUREL OF ALEXANDRIA. Laurus Alexandrina. Hypoglossum.
HORSE-TONGUE.
Lesser leaves; spinous, bearing large red berries. 8.
BUTCHERS BROOM. Ruscus.


In an Vmbel; having a thick, broad, dark colored leaf, bearing early flowers,
and said to blossom twice in one year. 9.
WILD BAY.

Leaf; Laurus tinus.
whether Small, slender, and prickly at the ends, being odorate; either that
whose leaves and wood, are of a more pleasant sent, producing bluish berries:
or that whose sent is less pleasant, bearing black berries. Iuniperus. Sabina.
10.
JUNIPER. SAVIN.
Roundish and broad; either that which is odorate: or that whose flowers grow
in clusters, bearing pentagonal fruit about the bigness of a Pease. Myrtus.
Rhas myrtifol.
11.
MYRTLE MYRTLE SYMACH.

Manner of growing; upon other plants; either that which has weak branches,
angular shining leaves, black berries in clusters, growing commonly upon other
trees or walls: or that which never grows on the ground, of a paler color and
transparent berries. Hedera. Viscus.
12.
IVY. MISSELTO.





IV. SILIQUOUS SHRUBS.
IV. SILIQUOUS SHRUBS, may be distinguished into such as are Deciduous; whether
having Entire leaves; the Greater; being a tall plant, approaching nearer to
the magnitude of a Tree, bearing beautiful spikes of blew flowers. 1.
Syringa caerulio ^lore.
LILACH, Pipe-tree.
Lesser; either that of a round leaf, being a low plant, the bud of whose
flower, when pickled, is an esculent sauce, bearing large white flowers: or
that which is taller, bearing yellow flowers. 2.
Capparis. Aspalathus.
CAPAR. THORNY BROOM.

Compound leaves; Trefoils; bearing yellow flowers; the Greater, or the lesser.
3.
BEAN TREFOIL. Laburnum. Cytisus.
SHRUB TREFOIL.
Winged leaves; Europaean; considerable for having A purgative quality; either
that which has no od leaf at the end: or that which bears its seeds in hollow
pods or bladders. 4.
Sena. Colutaea.
SENA. BASTARD SENA.
An esculent root; of a sweet juice. 5.
Glycyrrhiza.
LICCORICE.

Exotic; The Greater; being thorny, bearing yellow flowers; either that whose
leaves are smaller, the flowers growing in a sphaerical cluster, being odorate:
or that whose leaves are much larger. 6.
Acacia. Acacia Americana.
BINDING BEAN TREE. LOCUST TREE.
The Lesser; considerable for the falling down of the branches, and closing of
the leaves upon a touch, as if the plant had sense. 7.
Planta humilis.
HUMBLE PLANT




Sempervirent; having Green twigs; bearing yellow flowers; either that which
has long slender, square, flexile twigs, and long thin cods: or that whose
twigs are more short, and stiff, and prickly, bearing shorter cods more full
and thick. 8.
BROOM. Genista. Genista spinosa.
FURRS.
Hoary leaves; either that which has long thorns, standing thick, bearing
white flowers shaped like those of Broom, having winged leaves: or that which
is a Cinquefoil. 9.
GOATS THORN. Tragacantha. Dorycnium.
DORYCNIUM.




V. GRANIFEROUS DECIDUOUS SHRUBS, V. GRANIFEROUS DECIDUOUS SHRUBS.
may be distinguished into such as are Erect; to be considered according to
their Flowers; whether such as have Smaller flowers; in spikes; bearing Round
fruit; like berries; either that which bears five leaves upon a foot-stalk: or
whose seed-vessels are pentagonal, containing small yellow seed. 1.
CHASTE TREE. Agnus castus. Spirae^ Theophrasti.
SPIKED WILLOW OF THEOPHRASTUS.
Seed wrapped up in Down; having very small leaves like those of Cipres, and an
odorate wood. 2.
TAMARISK. Tamariscus.


Larger flowers; whether Odorate; either that which has weak branches, whose
flowers are of a more pleasant smell: or that whose flowers are of a strong and
less pleasant smell. 3.
JESSAMINE. WHITE PIPE TREE. Iasminum. Syringa alba.

Not odorate; having leaves like those of Marsh mallow, being soft and hoary. 4.
SHRUB MALLOW. Althan.



Odorateness of the leaves; either that which grows in fenny places, bearing
long leaves, and small squamous Catkins: or that which is a lower plant, having
roundish nervous leaves, upon long footstalk, bearing woolly tufts, and seeds
like Lentils. 5.
GALLS. Elaeaguus cordi. Coccigrea.
RED SUMACH.
Milkiness of the juice; being a violent purger, having long leaves of a pale
green color. 6.
TREE SPURGE.

Climbers; Tithymallus arborescens
either by Twisting; either that which is a Trefoil: or that which has winged
leaves, bearing the flowers in a cluster, having feathery tufts. 7.
CLEMATIS, Virgins-bower. TRAVELERS JOY. Clematis. Vi^rna valgi.

Laying hold on walls or trees by small tendrils; like claws or fingers. 8.
VIRGINIAN CLIMBERS, Virginian Ivy. Hedera quinquefol. Canad^^sis.





VI. GRANIFEROUS EVERGREEN SHRUBS, may be distinguished into such as are
Europaean; VI. GRANIFEROUS EVERGREEN SHRUBS.
considerable for Bearing large flowers; whether that which has hoary leaves,
the flower consisting of five leaves: or that which bears long stiff leaves of
a dark green. 1.
Ci^^us. Nerium.
HOLY ROSE. OLEANDER, Rose-bay.
Having a purging quality; whether such as have Hoary leaves; either that which
has small leaves, thick set upon the stalk, being hoary underneath: or that
whose leaves are bigger, and hoary all over, bearing small flowers in tufts. 2.
Sana munda. Tarton rair.
SANA MUNDA. GUTTWORT, Trouble-belly.
Smooth hard dry leaves; bearing a blew flower like that of Scabious. 3.
Alypum monspeliensium.
HERB TERRIBLE.

Being odorate; whether such as have Hoary leaves; verticillate, having hooded
flowers; either that which has narrow long leaves hoary underneath: or that
which has broader leaves hoary all over, bearing yellow gaping flowers. 4.
Rosmarinus. Salvia frutic^sa.
ROSEMARY. SAGE MULLEIN.
Green leaves; whether that which bears small flowers in an Vmbel: or that
which bears a large flower like that of Oleander, yellow and spotted. 5.
Seseli Aethiopicum. Ledum Alpinum.
HARTWORT. SWEET MOUNTAIN ROSE.

The place of their growth; whether Near the Sea; being of a pale color;
either that whose leaves are smooth, bearing mossy flowers, and a small
compressed seed: or that of winged hoary shining leaves, bearing yellow flowers
in clusters. 6.
SEA PURSLAIN. Halimus. Iovis barba.
SILVER BUSH.
In barren places; being a low plant, having small hollow flowers, and little
leaves. 7.
HEATH.


Erica.
Exotic; a low shrub, the branches spreading and growing thick together, which
after being dried and shrunk up, will upon being put into warm water dilate and
expend themselves. 8.
Rose Hiericuntina.
ROSE OF JERICO.



Of Trees.
Trees may be distinguished according to their. VII.
Fruit or Seed; being contained either in a Fleshy pulp; whether POMIFEROUS. I.
PRUNIFEROUS. II. BACCIFEROUS. III.
Hard shell; NUCIFEROUS. IV. GLANDIFEROUS, or CONIFEROUS. V.
SINGLE TEGUMENTS, or Coverings. VI.
WOODS OR BARKS. VII. GUMMS OR ROSINS. VIII.


I. POMIFEROUS TREES, I. POMIFEROUS TREES.
may be distinguished into such as are More properly called Trees; whether
Deciduous; having Visible Blossoms; Esculent when ripe; More round; the tree
spreading more in breadth, both as to the branches and roots of it, the fruits
having an outward cavity at each end, in the place of the blossom and the
stalk, and five inward cavities lined with stiff membranes, each of which does
commonly contein two kernels. Malus.
1.
APPLE.
Less round; that part of the fruit where the stalk grows, being more
prominent; either that which rises more in height: or that which spreads more
in breadth, being a lower and more crooked tree, whose fruit is covered with a
Down, being when raw, of an unpleasant taste and sent. Pirus. Malus cydonea.
2.
PEAR. QUINCE.

Not esculent, till rotten; The greater; either that smaller tree, having long
leaves, dark green above and white beneath, the fruit having a wide aperture in
the place of the blossom: or that thorny tree, whose leaf and fruit is like a
Hawthorn, but the fruit bigger, and of a pleasant acidity. 3.
MEDLAR. Mespilus. Mespilus Aronia.
LAZAROLE.
The lesser; being tall trees; either that of winged serrate leaves, bearing a
fruit like a small Pear: or that of jagged leaves, bearing a lesser fruit in
clusters upon long footstalk. 4.
TRUE SERVICE. Sorbus. Sorbus torminalis.
COMMON SERVICE.


No visible blossoms; unless (as JOHN BAUHINUS observes) within the fruit,
being a weak tree, of smooth bark, large leaves, divided commonly into five
jags, whose fruit is of an oblong Pear-like figure, of a more soft consistence,
full of little grains. 5.
FIGG. Ficus.


Sempervirent; or evergreen; whose fruit is either Round; of a Hard,
crustaceous, brittle rine; a thorny tree, bearing large beautiful blossoms, the
fruit full of grains in a red pulp, with a kind of Coronet on the top of the
fruit, at the place of the blossom. 6.
POMEGRANATE. Malus Punica

Softer rine; the fruit as to its color being of a deep yellow; either that
which has a quick juice of a grateful acidity: or that whose juice is of a
more dull and flat taste. Aurantia. Pomum Adami.
7.
ORANGE. ADAMS APPLE.

Oblong; and oval; being of a pale yellow; either the bigger, whose rine is
more thick, and whose juice is less acid: or the less, whose rine is more thin,
and whose juice is more acid. Malus medica. Limonia.
8.
CITRON. LEMMON.


Less properly called Trees; bearing fruits of some resemblance to Figgs;
either that which grows to a great bigness, bearing a pleasant fruit, many in a
cluster, being Annual: or that whose leaves grow out of one another, of which
those in Northern Countries are commonly so small as to be reckoned amongst
Herbs. Musa arbor. Ficus Indica^.
9.
PLANTAIN TREE. INDIAN FIGG.



II. PRUNIFEROUS TREES.
II. PRUNIFEROUS TREES, may be distinguished into such as are Not Purgative;
Deciduous; whose fruits are Greater; whose stones are Rough; having many deep
crooked furrows; either that whose fruit is covered with a Down: or that whose
skin is not downy. 1.
Malus Pers^ca. Nucipersica.
PEACH. Malacotoon. NECTARINE.
Smooth; either that which is sooner ripe, of a more dry, solid, yellow pulp:
or that of a more succulent pulp. 2.
Malus Armeniaca. Prunus.
APRICOCK. PLUMM.

Lesser; putting out blossoms before leaves; either that which bears a more
round fruit upon a long foot-stalk: or that which bears a more oblong fruit
upon a shorter foot-stalk. 3.
Cerasus. Cornus.
CHERRY. CORNELION.

Sempervirent: having stones with very small kernels: either that which has
long narrow leaves, hoary underneath, the fruit not esculent till pickled: or
that which has very long leaves, like those of Reed, the fruit growing in
clusters, of a pleasant taste. 4.
Olea. Palma.
OLIVE. DATE.

Purgative; being sold in Apothecaries shops. Used sometimes for food; either
that whose fruit is bigger: or that which bears a small black turbinate fruit,
standing in a little cup, of a black, sweet, viscid pulp, adhering to the
stone, which conteins three seeds. 5.
Myrobalanus. Sebesten.
MIROBALANE. SEBESTEN.
Not used for food; either that whose fruit has some resemblance to an Olive:
or that which bears a red fruit, the leaf short, round, serrate, of a deep
green. 6.
Zizyphus alba. Zizyphus sativa.
WHITE JUJUBS COMMON JUJUBS.




III. BACCIFEROUS TREES, III. BACCIFEROUS TREES.
may be distinguished into such as are either.

Europaean; Deciduous; whose fruit is Esculent; having broad, roundish,
serrate, rough leaves, bearing a fruit like that of a Rasberry, but bigger. 1.
MULBERRY. Morus.

Not esculent; having Winged leaves; the wood more Soft and spungy; either
that, the younger branches of which are full of Pith, bearing the berries in an
Vmbel, being of an ill sent: or that which bears its berries in a close tuft,
the wood being used for giving a black tincture to Leather. 2.
ELDER. SUMACH. Sambucus. Rhus Sumach.

Hard; either that which bears its berries in an Vmbel, being of a red color
and an acid taste: or that which bears a small, round, oblong fruit, in long
clusters, having many hollow excrescences like Bladders. Fraxinus bubula.
Terebinthus.
3.
QUICKEN TREE. TURPENTINE TREE.

Single leaves; bearing a small black fruit upon a long foot-stalk, like that
of a Cherry, the leaves resembling those of Nettle. 4.
NETTLE TREE. Lotus.



Evergreen; considerable for their Berries; whether such as bear Black berries;
either that whose leaves are more short, odorate, of a deep green, each berry
containing two seeds: or that whose leaves are more pale, long, shining and
serrate. 5.
BAY. Laurus. Laurus cerasus.
LAUREL.
Red berries; either that which has small narrow leaves of a dark green: or
that which has large shining prickly leaves. 6.
YEW. Taxus. Agrifolium.
HOLLY.

Whitish berries; having small round leaves of an ill sent, a hard close wood
of a yellowish color. 7.
BOX. Buxus.

Gumms; either that which has winged leaves, without an od leaf at the end: or
that which has long narrow leaves, like those of Iris, producing a red Gum
called Sanguis draconis. 8.
MASTIC TREE. Lentiscus. Draco arbor.
DRAGON TREE.


Exotic; Deciduous; either that whose fruit is Aromatical, being the bottom of
the flower, which when ripe, grows turgid in the middle where the seeds are
contained: or that of winged leaves, serrate, of a deep green, bearing white
berries in clusters. 9.
LOVE TREE. Caryophyllus aromaticus. Azedarach.
BID TREE.
Evergreen; either that of an Aromatic wood used in Physic, having leaves like
those of a Fig Tree, but less: or that of winged leaves, long, narrow, sharp
pointed, bearing berries like those of Asparagus, in clusters. 10.
SASSAFRAS. INDIAN MOLLE. Sassafras. Molle arbor.



IV. NUCIFEROUS TREES.
IV. NUCIFEROUS TREES, may be distinguished into such as are Europaean;
containing in one common husk One Nut; having a covering that is either Thick
and pulpy; having oily kernels; either that which is the larger tree of winged
leaves, odorate, having a rugged kernel, divided into several lobes: or that
which is a lesser tree, having long narrow serrate leaves, and a smooth kernel.
1.
Iuglans. Amygdalus.
WALNUT. ALMOND.
Thin husks; either such as are Wholly encompassed; and covered by their husks;
whether that of winged leaves, having a white thin shell, upon which there is
another rugged covering: or that whose leaf is like that of a Quince, green
above and white underneath, the fruit covered with a downy husk, the kernel of
a bad taste. 2.
Pistacea.
PISTACIE, Fistic-nut. STORAX.
Styrax.
Open at one end; being smaller Trees, of broad indented leaves, bearing
Catkins; either that of a larger kernel and thinner shell, whose husk is
longer: or that of a lesser kernel and thicker shell, whose husk is shorter. 3.
Avellana. Corilus sylvestris.
FILBERT. SMALL NUT.


Several Nuts; whose outward husk is Echinate and prickly; either that which
has long, smooth, deeply indented leaves, the husk containing three or four
Nuts: or that which bears a short, roundish, shining leaf, having a smooth
bark, and Nuts of a triangular figure. 4.
Castanea. Fagus.
CHESTNUT. BEECH.
Smooth; and thin, in the form of a Bladder; being a small tree of winged
leaves. 5.
Staphylo-dendron.
BLADDER NUT.


Exotic; containing in one common husk One Nut; either that which is a large
tree, bearing the largest Nut of all that are known, covered with a thick rine
upon the shell: or that which has a hard Aromatic kernel, covered immediately
with a yellowish Aromatic husk, called Mace, upon which there is a thin shell,
and upon that a pulpy coat. 6.
COCO. Nux moschata.
NUTMEG.
Several Nuts; having a covering More thin; whose kernels are used for the
making of drinks, being but small trees; either that which grows in shady moist
places, having many kernels together in a husk: or that which is less properly
called a Nut, bearing a double kernel in a husk, each of them being flat on one
side, and gibbous on the other. 7.
CHOCOLATE. Cacao. Buna arbor.
COFFI.
Covered with a woolly substance: or that which besides the outward tegument
has likewise an inward pulp, wherein the fruit lies, of the shape of a Heart,
and the bigness of a Bean, used in Physic. 8.
Gossipium. Anacardium.
COTTON TREE. ANACARDIUM.





V. GLANDIFEROUS, and CONIFEROUS TREES, V. GLANDIFEROUS and CONIFEROUS TREES.
may be distinguished into such as are Glandiferous. Deciduous; either that
which is a large tree, of a hard lasting wood, a rugged bark, the leaves waved
at the edges: or that whose leaves are more deeply divided, bearing a larger
fruit, standing in great thick rugged cups, used for tanning. 1.
OAK. BITTER OAK. Quercus. Cerrus.

Evergreen; either that whose leaves resemble those of Holly, being of a dark
green above, and white underneath: or that which is very like to this, having a
very, thick, light, porous, deciduous bark. 2.
HOLM OAK. CORK TREE. Ilex. Suber.


Coniferous; Deciduous; bearing small Cones; either that which grows in watery
places, having leaves of a dark green, shaped like those of the Nut-tree: or
that whose leaves are very slender, growing in tufts, more thin at distances,
of a paler color. 3.
ALDER. LARICH TREE. Alnus. Larix.

Evergreen; whose Cones are Bigger; either that which is a large tall tree,
bearing great roundish Cones of smooth scales, standing upwards, the leaves
being small, narrow, and thick set together: or that which bears long slender
leaves, two growing out together from one socket, the Cones consisting of hard
woody scales. 4.
CEDAR. PINE. Cedrus. Pinus.

Lesser; having Long leaves; either that whose leaves encompass and cover the
branches; bearing long Cones hanging downwards: or that whose leaves grow from
each side of the stalk, being more flat, like those of Yew, green on the upper
side, and whitish underneath, furcated at the end, bearing Cones shorter and
thicker, growing erect. 5.
MALE FIRR TREE, Pitch-tree. FEMALE FIRR TREE. Abies mas. Abies foemina.

Short leaves; either that which grows in a conical figure, bearing small
roundish Cones: or that which has compressed branches of a strong resinous
sent, bearing small Cones encompassed with six scales. 6.
CYPRESS. Cupressus. Arbor vitae.
TREE OF LIFE.






VI. TREES whose Seeds are in SINGLE-TEGUMENTS.
VI. TREES bearing their Seeds in SINGLE TEGUMENTS or Coverings, may be
distinguished into such whose seeds are contained in Pods; called Siliquous
trees; whether such whose Pods are Larger; being Esculent; having winged
leaves, and very broad Pods. 1.
Siliqua arbor.
CAROB, St John's bread.
Purgative; either that which bears a round, black, and very long Pod, whose
pulp is used as a benign purgative: or that which bears a thick Pod, having
winged leaves, and a purgative pulp. 2.
Cassia. Tamarindus.
CASSIA. TAMARIND.

Lesser; having a round leaf, bearing elegant purple blossoms, and a thin Pod.
3.
Arbor Judah.
JUDAS TREE.

Membranaceous coverings; whether Foliaceous husks; either that whose leaves
are rough and indented, having a rugged bark:: or that whose leaf is somewhat
longer and smoother, having a more even bark. 4.
Vlmus. Carpinus.
ELM. HORNBEAM.
Alate seed-vessels; or Keys; whether such as do general bear Single Keys;
having winged leaves, a smooth bark, and a tough wood. 5.
Fraxinus.
ASH.
Double Keys; either that which has smaller leaves, divided into five
segments, being a brittle wood: or that which has broader leaves, more deeply
divided, being a soft wood. 6.
Acer minus. Acer majus.
MAPLE. SYCAMORE.


Catkins; called Iuliferous trees; whether such as are of Lesser leaves; either
that which has slender reddish twigs, smooth and white branches: or that which
bears a roundish crenate leaf, upon very slender footstalk, which makes them
apt to shake upon every little breath of wind. 7.
BIRCH. Betula. Populus tremula.
ASPIN.
Larger leaves; either that whose leaves are of a dark green, like those of
Ivy, having a whitish bark, and growing in watery places: or that whose leaves
are laciniated, being of a dark green above, and hoary white underneath. 8.
BLACK POPLAR. Populus nigra. Populus alba.
WHITE POPLAR.
Longer leaves; of a soft wood, growing most naturally in moist places; either
that whose leaves are more dense and compact, being the larger tree: or that
which is a less tree, having a broader leaf, and bearing larger Cat-kins. 9.
Salix angustisol. Salix latifol.
WILLOW. SALLOW.

Round Buttons; either that which has broad leaves ending in a point, being
smoother above then underneath, bearing a sweet blossom, and a round fruit
about the bigness of a Pease, containing one seed: or that which has a divided
leaf, whose fruit is echinate or prickly, containing several seeds 10.
LIME TREE. T^lia. Platanus.
PLANE TREE.



VII. TREES considered according to their WOODS or BARKS, VII. TREES considered
according to their WOODS or BARKS.
may be distinguished into such as are principally known and taken notice of
for their Woods; according to their uses in Physic; whether such as are
esteemed Cordial; being a hard, heavy, unctuous, Aromatic wood, the grain like
that of Oak. 1.
ALOE TREE.
Diaphoretic; of a hot biting taste; Lignum Aloes.
either that which is used against the Pox: or that which is commended as an
Antidote against the biting of Serpents. 2.
GUAIACUM, Pockwood. Lignum vitae. Lignum colubrinum.
SNAKEWOOD.
Cooling and Astringent; whether that of a deep red, being hard, heavy, and of
a finer grain, having a dull taste and no sent: or that which is yellowish, of a
strait course grain, and fragrant smell like Musk. 3.
RED SAUNDERS. Santalum rubrum. Santalum citrinum.
YELLOW SAUNDERS.
Useful against the Stone and diseases of the Kidneys; either that which tinges
Water so, as to make it in several lights to appear of two colors, bluish and
yellow, not considerable for taste or smell: or that which is yellowish in the
middle, and white on the outside, having a hottish taste, and a sent like that
of a white Rose. 4.
LIGNUM NEPHRITICUM. Lignum ^ephriticum. Lignum Rh^dium.
ROSEWOOD.

Mechanics; whether for Dying a red color; the former being a hard heavy wood
of a strait grain, with streaks of black. 5.
BRASIL WOOD. Brasilium lignum.
LOG WOOD.
Fabrile uses; whether the making of Cabinets; being capable of a shining
politure; either that of a black color, a close grain, being very heavy: or
that which is variegated with red and white. 6.
EBONY. PRINCES WOOD. Ebenum.

Tubes; for the conveiance of Water, being straight slender trees, growing to a
very great height, having a tuft of branches only at the top, the greatest part
of them being pith, enclosed in a shell of very hard wood, somewhat resembling
a Rush, 7.
CABBIDGE TREE, Palmetto Royal.



Barks; or Rines; either that which is Esculent; being Aromatic, and of a sweet
taste. 8.
CINNAMON.
Medicinal; Cinnamomum.
either that which is so sovereign a remedy for the cure of Agues, being of a
dark color, no considerable taste: or that which is of an Ash color, and a hot
biting taste, good against the Scurvy. 9.
CORTEX FEBRIFUGUS PERUVIANUS, Jesuits powder. Cortex febrifugus. Cortex
Winteranus.
CORTEX WINTERANUS.




VIII. TREES considered according to their GUMS or ROSINS.
VIII. TREES considered according to their GUMMS or ROSINS, may be
distinguished; either according to their Gums; whether Odorate; being of a
bitter taste, proceeding from an exotic thorny Tree. 1.
Myrrha.
MYRRH.
Not odorate; either that which proceeds from an Egyptian thorny tree: or that
which is of a yellowish color and bitter taste, leaving behind it a kind of
sweet relish, somewhat like Liccorice* 2.
Gummi Arabicum Sarcocolla.
GUMM ARABIC. SARCOCOLLA

Rosins; whose consistence is more Solid; and hard Odorate; having a More
pleasant sent; used for Suffumigations; being transparent; having Lesser
grains; either that which proceeds from an Arabian tree: or that which is of
near resemblance to this, proceeding from an Ethiopian Olive, of a
whitish-colour mixed with yellow particles. 3.
FRANKINCENSE, Olibanum. Thus. Gummi Elemi.
GUM ELEMI.
Bigger grains; proceeding from an American tree, the latter of which is more
clear and transparent. 4.
Gummi Anima. Copal.
GUMMI ANIMAE. COPAL.

Perfumes; either that which is of a more hard consistence, and more tenacious:
or that which is more easily dissolved. 5.
CARANNA. Caranna. Benzoin.
BENJAMIN.

Less pleasant sent; either that which is More volatile; white and transparent
from several trees. 6.
Camphora.
CAMPHIRE.
Less volatile; either that which is unctuous and bitterish, easily growing
soft, proceeding from an exotic thorny tree: or that which proceeds from a tall
tree like Poplar. 7.
Bdellium. Taca mahaca.
BDELLIUM. TACA MAHACA.


Not odorate; of a red tincture, used in painting and varnishing. 8
Lacca.
LAKE.

Liquid; being of a sweet sent; either that which is of a more strong smell: or
that which is of a reddish color, used for stopping defluxions. 9.
LIQUIDAMBRA. Liquidambra. Balsamum Peruvianum.
BALSAMUM PERUVIANUM.




CHAP. V. I. Concerning Animals, the general distribution of them. II. Of
exanguious Animals. III. Of Fish. IV. Of Birds. V. Of Beasts. VI. A Digression
concerning Noah's Ark.
SEnsitive creatures may be distinguished into such as are counted more
Imperfect; which have something analogous to blood,. I.
but are destitute of that red juice commonly so called, being therefore styled
EXANGUIOUS, having either no legs, or more legs then four, Perfect; whether
FISHES, which have no legs, but fins answerable to them, being covered with a
naked skin, or with scales, whose proper motion is swimming. BIRDS, which have
two legs and two wings, whose bodies are covered with feathers, being
oviparous, whose proper motion is flying. BEASTS, which are for the most part,
four-footed, hairy, and viviparous, excepting only some few which are without
feet or hair, and are oviparous.



It may be observed to be amongst these (as it is amongst the other ranks of
Beings,) that the more perfect kinds are the least numerous. Upon which
account, Insects being the most minute and imperfect, and some of them
(perhaps) of a spontaneous generation, are of the greatest variety, tho by
reason of their littleness, the several Species of them, have not hitherto been
sufficiently enumerated or described, by those Authors who have particularly
applied themselves to this study.

There are sundry of these, as likewise of other Animals, which have no Latin
names, as being unknown to the Romans, and there are sundry which have no
English names, as being strangers to us. And amongst those that have English
names, some are here described by their usual Appellations in Latin, because I
knew not at present how to render them properly in English: And some there are
peculiar to some coasts and rivers, and not commonly known elsewhere, which are
hard to be enumerated.

As for fictitious Animals, as Siren, or Mermaid, Phoenix, Griffin, Harpy,
Ruck, Centaur, Satyr, etc. there is no provision made for them in these tables,
because they may be infinite; and besides, being but bare names, and no more,
they may be expressed as Individuals are.

Of Exanguious Animals.
THose kinds of more imperfect Animals, which are destitute of that red juice,.
II.
commonly called blood, are styled Exanguious; to which may be annexed that
general name given to the least kinds of these, viz. Insect, from that incisure
or resemblance of cutting what is common to most of them in some part of their
bodies.

These EXANGUIOUS ANIMALS may be distinguished into Lesser; usually called
Insects; whether such whose generation is Analogous to that of other Animals;
which breed young like themselves, growing from a lesser to a greater
magnitude, not being transmutable into any other Insect; whether such as have.
NO FEET OR BUT SIX feet, being WITHOUT WINGS. I. SIX FEET and WINGS, or MORE
feet THEN SIX. II.
Anomalous; whether such as ARE DESIGNED TO A FURTHER TRASMUTATION. III. Have
in their production undergone several mutations; being first Eggs, then
Maggots or Caterpillars, then Aureliae, and then flying Insects, which after
their first production do not increase in magnitude; whether such as have NAKED
WINGS. IV. SHEATHED WINGS. V.


Greater; whether Hard; whose bones are on their outside; being either
CRUSTACEOUS; namely such as are wholly covered with a tough flexile substance,
having generally eight legs, besides a pair of claws, and two or more annulated
horns or feelers. VI. TESTACEOUS; of a more hard and brittle substance
TURBINATED; consisting of a cone-like cavity, rouled up in a spiral, which
beginning at the Aperture or mouth of them, does generally proceed from the
left hand to the right. VII NOT TURBINATED. VIII.

SOFT. IX.



I. INSECTS of an Analogous generation, having no feet, I. INSECTS* having no
feet, or but six, being without wings.
or but six feet, being without wings, may be distributed into those that are
Apoda; without feet. More oblong and round; Larger; More slender; of a reddish
color, with very little distinction of parts; either that which breeds in the
earth: or that which breeds in the bodies of children. 1.
EARTH WORM. Vermis. Lumbricus Intestinorum.
BELLY WORM.
More thick; either that which breeds in watery places, being used for the
drawing of blood: or that which is covered with a slimy moisture, having four
little horns like prominencies, or feelers. 2.
LEECH. Hirudo. Limax.
SNAIL.

Lesser; breeding in Animals; either the more minute, being small white Worms,
breeding in the lower guts of Men: or the bigger, sticking their heads in the
inward membranes of Horses stomachs or guts. 3.
ASCARIDES. BOTTS.

More short and flat; either that whose shape does somewhat resemble a
Flounder, found both in waters, and in the branches of the Porus bilearis, and
the liver of several of the Ruminant kind: or that of a Quadrate body, with a
little trunk standing out betwixt two Antennae, and six stringy substances
behind, living in the Sea. 4.
FLUKE. ASILUS.

Hexapoda; having six feet. Terrestrial; Greater; More slender; either that
whose body is somewhat compressed, sending out a light from her tail: or that
which is of a whitish color, more oblong, breeding in Meal. 5.
GLOWWORM. Cicindela. Farinaria.
MEAL-WORM, Gentle.
Less slender; either of a Darker color; being like a Beetle without wings,
but seeming to have some little rudiments of wings, noted for being apt upon a
touch to send out a yellowish oily substance from his joints. 6.
PROSCARAB. Proscarabeus.

Lighter color; whether that which resembles a Locust without wings: or that
which is of a Chestnut color, flat, broad, soft, avoiding light places. 7.
FIELD CRICKET. Brucus. Blatta non alata.
COCK ROCHES.


Lesser; troublesome to other Animals; whether that of a paler color: or that
of a dark red, being salient. 8
LOUSE. Pediculus. Pulex.
FLEA.

Aquatic; having a compressed body, with an oblique decussation upon the back,
and a long tail. 9.
WATER SCORPION. Scorpio aquaticus.





II. INSECTS winged, or having above six legs.
II. INSECTS of an Analogous generation, having either wings or more legs then
six, may be distributed into such as are Winged; whether Terrestrial; whose
bodies are More oblong; Living in open fields; and feeding on plants; either
that kind, by the swarms of which whole Countries have been sometimes
destroyed, having long hinder legs for leaping, making a noise by rubbing their
legs against their wings: or that of a long slender breast, often holding up
the two forelegs, which are longer then the other. 1.
Locusta. Mantis.
LOCUST, Grasshopper. MANTIS.
Living in holes of the ground, and houses; either that which affects to reside
near Hearths and Ovens, making a noise like a Locust, by the affriction of the
wings, having the wings lying more close to the body: or that whose forelegs
are broad and strong, divided into fingers like those of a Mole, whereby it is
enabled in a very short space to dig a hole in the ground. 2.
Gryllus. Gryllo-talpa.
CRICKET. FEN-CRICKET, Evechurr, Churr-worm.

More compressed and broad; whether that which has broad angular shoulders,
being marked with an oblique decussation on the back, having the proboscis
reversed under the belly: or that which is of a Chestnut color, having large
stiff wings, avoiding the light. 3.
Cimex. Blatta alata.
CIMEX SILVESTRIS. WINGED COCKROCH.

Aquatic; having a decussation or kind of Lozenge-mark on the back; either that
which runs upon the top of the water, having long legs like those of a Spider:
or that which has two long swimming legs behind, whereby he swims in the
water. 4.
Tipula. Cicada aquatica.
WATER SPIDER. CICADA AQUATICA.

Not winged; Terrestrial; having Eight legs; being hurtful to Animals; either
the Larger; whether that which by drawing out from the belly a slimy substance,
and working it with the feet, does frame a small Web to catch Flies: or that
which has an oval body, two forcipate claws, a knotty tail, with a crooked
sting at the end of it. 5.
Aranea. Scorpius.
SPIDER. SCORPION.
Middle kind; either that of a round body, the legs fixed to the neck, sticking
to Animals by thrusting the head into their skin: or that which is of a dark
red color, a tender skin, causing a very offensive stink, when crushed. 6.
TICK, Sheep-tick. Ricinus. Cimex.
PUNICE, Wall-louse.
Least kind; either that which breeds in corrupted Cheese, fruit, etc. or that
which does work it self into the skin of children. 7.
Syro. Acaris
MITE. WHEAL WORM.

Clothes; being of a silver color, mealy, oblong, of swift motion. 8.
Tinea.
MOTH.

Fourteen legs; covered with a scaly armature, having a flat belly, and a
gibbous back, being apt to roll it self up when touched. 9.
As^llus.
SOW, Ch^eselip, Hog-louse, Wood-louse.
More then fourteen feet; whether that whose body is of a more compressed: or a
more round figure. Scolopendra. Iulus.
10.
SCOLOPENDER. JULUS.

Aquatick; whether that which sticks to Fish, not much differing from an
Asellus, but only in respect of the tail, which is somewhat broad: or that
whose back is more gibbous, being apt to skip. Pediculus marinus. Pulex marinus.
11.
SEA LOUSE, SEA FLEA, Sugg, River Shrimp.




III. INSECTS of an ANOMALOUS generation, designed for a further transmutation,
III. ANOMALOUS INSECTS.
may be distinguished into such as are Apoda; those that are without feet,
considered according to the General name; 1.
MAGGOT. Eula.

Particular kinds; whether such as are. Sharp at both ends; either the bigger,
producing the favificous kind: or the lesser, breeding in the exorescies of
Oaks, and the tufts of Briars, and sometimes creeping out of the sides of
Caterpillars, producing a smaller sort of shining Fly, many of which are
Seticaudes. 2.
BE MAGGOT, Grub. SHINING FLY MAGGOT.
Broad and flat at their tails; either the greater, having two black spots on
the tail, the forepart being more slender, with two little black hooks upon
the head, by fixing of which, this Insect does draw his body forward, from
whence Flesh-flies proceed: or the lesser, with a short erect tail, producing
Flies of the Wasp kind. 3.
GENTILE. WASP-LIKE FLY MAGGOT.


Pedata; having legs, whether Hexapoda; such as have six legs. Aquatic; living
in the water; whether that which is naked, producing Dragon-flies: or that
which is in a case with little straws or sticks adhering to it, producing May
flies. 4.
LIBELLA WORM. CADEW, Straw-worm. Phryganeum.

Terrestrial; breeding several sorts of Scarabs; whether that which is of a
strait figure: or that whose tail is inverted under the belly. 5.
STRAIT BEETLE PRODUCING HEXAPOD. WHIRL WORM. Spondyle.


More then six legs; considerable according to the General name; comprehending
all such, as besides three pair of slender crooked legs, on the three first
annuli next the head, have two or more short thick legs behind, and two
appendages at the tail. To which may be adjoined the most principal of those. 6.
CATERPILLAR. SILK WORM. Eruca. Bombix.

Particular kinds; whether having Eight feet; that which in its progressive
motion does first gather its body up into a loop, resting it upon his hinder
feet and the appendages of the tail, and then thrusting himself forward, or
else skipping forward. 7.
GEOMETRA. SKIPPING WORM.
Many feet; amongst which the most common and numerous kind have fourteen feet;
whether those that are smooth: or those that are hirsute. 8.
SMOOTH CATERPILLAR. PALMER WORM, Bear worm.






IV. NAKED WINGED INSECTS.
IV. NAKED WINGED INSECTS, which in their production do undergo several
notations, may be distributed into such, whose wings are either Membranaceous;
consisting of a thin transparent film, being bred of Maggots or Worms that are
Apoda; without feet Bigger; Favificous; or making of Combs, in which multitudes
of them do co-habit and breed, having four wings; whether such as are
Beneficial; by their gathering of Honey and Wax from Plants; either that which
is of a more oblong figure, the males of which (called Drones) are without
stings, being commonly preserved in Gardens: or that which is more short, thick
and hairy, living more wildly in lesser swarms. 1.
Apis. Bombilius.
BE, Drone, Hive, Comb. HUMBLE-BEE.
Hurtful; by their destroying of fruits, Bees, etc. being of an oblong figure,
and a yellow color; either the less, of a lighter yellow: or the greater, of a
deeper yellow. 2.
Vespa. Crabro.
WASP. HORNET.

Not favificous; having Four wings; whether such as in their shapes resemble
Bees or Wasps. 3.
BEE-LIKE FLY. WASP-LIKE FLY.
Two wings; whether that of a short thick body, of various bignesses and
colors, proceeding from an oblong round Aurelia, feeding on flesh: or that of
a yellowish color, and longer legs, feeding on dung. 4.
Musca carnari^. Musca slercoraria.
FLESH FLY. DUNG FLY.


Lesser; living gregarioussy; either that of an oblong body, with a deep
incisure, having four wings, of which there are many that at sometimes are
without wings: or that of a more slender body, a tuft on the head, living near
watery places, having but two wings. 5.
Formica. Culex.
ANT, Emmet, Pismire. GNAT.

Pedata; having six feet; whether those of Broad wings; either that which has
a great head, a long strait proboscis lying under the belly, making a loud
noise, by the help of two stiff membranes that are upon his breast: or that
which has a near resemblance to a Butterfly, in respect of the largeness of
the wings, but only they are not farinaceous or erect. 6.
Cicada. Musca papilionacea.
CICADA. PAPILIONACEOUS FLY.
Narrow wings; being bred out of the water; either of a naked hexapod Worm: or
of one that lives in a case, to which little sticks and straws do adhere. 7.
Libella. Se^icauda.
DRAGON FLY, Bolts-head. MAY FLY.
Long legs; having but two wings. 8.
CRANE FLY. Shepherds fly.


Farinaceous wings; being covered with a mealy substance easily coming off upon
a touch, which in the Microscope appears to consist of small downy feathers, as
the most ingenuous Mr. Hook has first discovered; whether such whose wings in
the usual posture are Erected; standing upright upon their backs being of great
variety for colors and magnitudes, distinguishable into these two common
kinds, such as appear by day, or by night. 9.
BUTTERFLY. Papil^o. Phalaena.
MOTH.
Compressed; lying more flat on the body, the wings being more short and
strong, and the tail more broad. 10.
Praedatrix.
HAWK BUTTERFLY.




V. SHEATHED WINGED INSECTS, V. SHEATHED WINGED INSECTS.
commonly called Beetles or Scarabs, may be distributed into such, whose
coverings are more Thick, strong and horny; whether those that are accounted
Horned; having either One horn; the greater, the biggest of this tribe, the
horn turning downwards: or the lesser, being one of the smallest of this tribe,
having Antennae on each side of his snout or horn, which together represent the
Greek letter ps, breeding amongst and devouring Corn. 1.
RHINOCEROTE. Rhinoceros. Scarabaeus nasi-cornis.
WEEVILL.
Two horns; Stiff, without joints; whether branched like those of a Stagg: or
not branched like those of a Bull. Cervus volans. Buceros.
2.
STAG BEETLE. BULL FLY BEETLE.
Limber, and with joints; improperly called horns, being Antennae or feelers;
either that whose Antennae are very long and reversed over his back: or that
which has knobbed feelers not so long. 3.
GOAT-CHAFER. Capricornus. Scarabaeus Antennis nodo^s.
KNOBBED HORNED BEETLE.


Not horned; Terrestrial; having Longer coverings for their wings; The greater;
Of a dark blackish color; whether that which is most common: or that other of
near resemblance to this, having serrate legs, using to roll Dung into little
balls, by working backwards with his hinder feet. Scarabaeus vulgaris.
Scarabaeus Pilularis.
4.
COMMON BEETLE. DUNG BEETLE.
Of a lighter color; either that of a russet color, living in Trees, having a
long sharp tail, extended beyond the wings: or that of a shining green, feeding
on Roses. Scarabaeus Arboreus.
5.
DORR, Gray Beetle. GREEN CHAFER.

The lesser; either that of a long slender body, frequent about houses, making
a noise like the minute of a Watch, by striking the bottom of his breast
against his belly: or that of a more short round figure, living in the fields,
being either wholly red, or sometimes spotted with black 6.
DEATH WATCH. Scarabaeus dome^^icus. Scarabaeus punctatus.
LADY-COW.

Shorter coverings; not reaching half the length of their bodies, which are
long and slender, having forked tails, which they turn up in their defense; the
greater which is black: or the less which is of a reddish color 7.
STAPHILINUS. Staphilinus. Forficula.
EARWIGG.

Aquatic; either the greater, living under water, having the hinder pair of
legs longer for swimming, being said to fly out of the water sometimes in the
night: or the less of a gibbous round shining back, playing on the top of the
water. Scarabaeus aquat. major. Scarabaeus aquat. minor.
8.
GREAT WATER SCARAB. LE^S WATER SCARAB


Thin, weak and flexile; of more oblong bodies; either that which is of a
green, gilded, shining color, used for Causticks: or that which shines in the
night. Cicindela.
9.
CANTHARIS. GLOW WORM FLY.



VI. The greater sort of EXANGUIOUS ANIMALS being CRUSTACEOUS, VI. CRUSTACEOUS
EXANGUIOUS ANIMALS.
may be distributed into such whose figure is more Oblong; The greater; having
Naked shells; of a dark brown color; either that which has four pair of legs,
and two great claws: or that which has no claws, but five pair of legs, the
feelers somewhat compressed, being thorny on the back. 1.
Astacus. Lo^nsta marina.
LOBSTER. LONG OISTER.
Downy shell; having a broad head, with two short, broad, laminate prominencies
from it, five pair of legs, and no claws. 2.
Vrsus marinus.
SEA BEAR.

The lesser; living in Fresh water; resembling a Lobster, but much less, of a
hard shell. 3.
As^acus fluviat^lis.
CRAYFISH, Crevice.
Salt water; having a thinner shell, being of a pale flesh color; either that
of a sharper tail, the two forelegs being hooked and not forcipate: or that
which has a broader longer tail, with two purple spots upon it, being the
greater. 4.
Squilla. Squilla Mantis.
SHRIMP, Prawn. SQUILLA MANTIS.
Shells of other Sea Fishes; having besides two claws, and two pair of legs
hanging out of the shell, two other pair of soft hairy legs within the shell. 5.
Cancellus.
HERMIT FISH, Soldier Fish.


Roundish; comprehending the Crab-kind, whose bodies are somewhat compressed,
having generally shorter tails folded to their bellies. The Greater; having
Thick, strong, short claws; the latter of which has serrate prominencies on
the side of the claws, somewhat resembling the Comb of a Cock. 6
Cancer vulgaris. Cancer Heracleoticus.
COMMON CRABB. SEA-COCK
Slender claws; either that of a longer body, having two horns between his
eyes, being rough on the back and red when alive: or that whose upper shell
does extend beyond his body, having a long stiff tail. 7.
Cancer majus. Cancer molucensis.
CANCER MAJUS. MOLUCCA CRAB.

The Lesser; resembling A Common Crab; but being much less. 8.
Cancer minor.
LITTLE CRABB.
A Spider; whether that which is somewhat more oblong in the body, having a
long snout: or that whose body is round. 9.
Aranea marina. Aranea crustacea.
SEA SPIDER. CRUSTACEOUS SPIDER.





VII. TESTACEOUS TURBINATED exanguious ANIMALS, VII. TESTACEOUS TURBINATED
ANIMALS.
may be distributed into such as are More properly so called; whether such
whose spiral convolutions Do appear on the outside; being either Not produced;
but equal on both sides; either the Greater, having several Diaphragms
perforated, the Animal within somewhat resembling a Polypus: or the Less, being
of a dark red color, and found in fresh water. 1.
NAUTILUS. WATER-SNAIL.
Produced; whether More short in the spiral production, considerable for having
a Purple juice; heretofore used in Dying, the shells being either knobbed or
thorny; either that whose shell is very large and thick, being the strongest
and heaviest of this kind, having a long aperture: or that which has a
roundish aperture, with a neb or beak at one side of it. 2.
MUREX. PURPURA.
Long aperture; either that whose turbinated part is almost plain, and the part
not turbinated, much produced, somewhat like a Cylinder: or that which is of a
great bigness, having seven strong furrowed prominencies from one side of the
aperture. 3.
CYLINDROIDES. APORRHAIS.
Roundish aperture; either that which is more prominent, having more
revolutions: or that which is more compressed, having fewer revolutions, many
of them having a knob by the aperture. 4.
SEA SNAIL. Cochlea.
NERITES.

More oblong* always ending in a sharp point, having either a more Prominent
base; either the Greater: or the Lesser. 5.
PUCCINUM. TURBO.
Flat base; broad and round, being nearer to the figure of a Cone; the greater:
or the lesser, whose base is less flat. 6.
TROCHUS PERIWINKLE, Welke.



Do not appear on the outside; but are within the shell, having long apertures;
either that whose aperture is more narrow, being furrowed on either side: or
that whose aperture is somewhat wider, not furrowed on the sides of it. 7
VENUS SHELL. Concha Veneris. Concha Persica.
PERSIAN SHELL.

Less properly so called; being of near affinity to the Vnivalvs, the inside
having a pearl-like shining color, with several holes on one side, being at
one end on the outside somewhat turbinated. 8.
SEA EAR. Auris marina.




VIII. TESTACEOUS ANIMALS NOT TURBINATED.
VIII. EXANGUIOUS TESTACEOUS ANIMALS NOT TURBINATED, may be distributed into
such as are Vnivalvs; having but one shell; whether being Vnmoved; sticking
fast to Rocks or other things; whether that whose convexity does somewhat
resemble a short obtuse angled cone, having no hole at the top: or that which
is of an oblong figure, somewhat Cylindrical, fixed at the bottom to the place
where first it was bred, with an aperture at the top. 1.
LIMPET. Patella. Balanus.
CENTER FISH.
Moveable; either that of a Spherical figure somewhat compressed, full of
prickles, having one large round aperture at the bottom, and another small
aperture opposite to it: or that which is of a more oblong figure, a tender
shell, having two apertures on the same side. 2.
Echinus. Echinus spatagus.
BUTTON-FISH. MERMAIDS HEAD.

Bivalvs; having two shells; whether more Roundish; such whose outsides are
Smooth; whether that of a larger thicker shell, of a pearl-like shining, whose
inward part toward the joint, does end in a narrow sinus or cavity: or that
which is whitish on the outside. 3.
Concha margaritifera. Galades.
MOTHER OF PEARL. GALADES.
Rough; either that whose joint is more narrow, having no prominences in the
inside of it: or that whose joint is more broad, with two prominencies and two
correspondent cavities in each shell. 4.
OYSTER. Ostrea. Spondylus.
SPONDYL.
Furrowed; either the bigger; having one or two ear-like prominencies on the
outside toward the joint: or the less, having no such prominencies. 5.
Pecten. Pectuncalus.
SCOLLOP. COCKLE.

Oblong; considerable for being Less long; and nearest to the round kind, being
smooth, and having thin shells; either the greater, of a flattish and
compressed figure: or the lesser, being somewhat of a triangular figure, having
the edges of the shell indented. 6.
CHAMA. Chama. Tellina.
TELLINA.
More long; whether such as are Of a dark blackish color on the outside;
either the greater, which from a joint at one end more acute and slender, does
grow out to a great length, becoming broad at the other end, having a silk-like
substance within the shell: or the less, of which one kind has the joint at
the end, and is commonly eaten, the other has the joint on the side. 7.
Pinna. Musculus.
PINNA. MUSCLE.
Not closed exactly in all parts of their shells; either that which lies in
holes in a kind of marle at the bottom of the Sea, having an aperture near the
joint, and a little hook in the inside: or that which is open at both ends,
being the longest of all the rest, in proportion to its bigness. 8.
PHOLAS. Pholas. Solen.
SHEATH-FISH, Razor-fish
Growing by a neck to other things; whose shell consists of five parts,
commonly (though falsely) said to produce a Bird, being of a triangular figure.
9.
Bernicla.
BARNICLE.






IX. SOFT EXANGUIOUS ANIMALS, may be distributed into such as are More Perfect;
having mouths like the beaks of Birds, IX. SOFT EXANGUIOUS ANIMALS.
with eight stringy substances about them serving instead of legs, their bodies
containing a black liquor like Ink; whether those whose bodies are more
Obround; having No Antennae; or feelers, and being without any bone; either the
greatest, growing to a vast magnitude: or the less, whose legs are longer in
proportion, being of a sweet sent. 1.
POUR CONTREL, Preke, Polypus. Polypus. Bolitaena.
SWEET POLYPUS.
Antennae; either the greater, with a great, thick, soft, not pellucid bone in
the body: or the lesser, which is without such a bone, having small roundish
flapps on either side of the body. 2.
CUTTLE FISH. LESSER CUTTLE. Sepia. Sepiola Rondeletii.


Oblong; either that of longer Antennae with triangular flaps, having a long
pellucid bone resembling a Sword: or that of shorter Antennae, having the
triangular flaps nearer the tail, being of a reddish color. 3.
SLEVE. REDDISH SLEVE. Loligo. Loligo rubra.


Less perfect; counted Zoophytes, as being betwixt Plants and Animals; whether
such as have More distinction of parts; either that which has some resemblance
to a Hare: or that which has some resemblance to a naked black Snail, without
horns. 4.
SEA HARE. HOLOTHURIUS. Lepus. Holothurius.

Less distinction of parts; Pellucid; being a kind Of Gelly, roundish at the
top, marked with reddish lines in the form of a Starr, or Rose, having several
kinds of rays like legs, proceeding from the middle of it. 5.
BLUBBER. Pulmo marinus.

Not pellucid; usually sticking to other things; either that which is of
various figures, being covered with a hard callous skin, containing an esculent
pulpy substance: or that which is of a fleshy consistence, having no hard skin,
being of various shapes and bignesses, some of them stinging the hand upon the
touch. 6.
TETHYA. Tethya. Vrtica marina.
SEA NETTLE.





Of Fish.
. III.
FISH may be distributed into such as are Viviparous; and skinned; whose figure
is either OBLONG and roundish. I. FLAT or thick. II.
Oviparous; whether such as do generally belong to Salt water; to be further
distinguished by their Finns on the back; whether such, the rays of whose finns
are Wholly soft and flexile. III. Partly soft, and partly spinous; having TWO
FINNS on the back. IV. But ONE FINN. V.

Figure; whether OBLONG. VI. FLAT. VII.
CRUSTACEOUS COVERING. VIII.
Fresh water; being scaly. IX.



I. VIVIPAROUS OBLONG FISH.
I. VIVIPAROUS OBLONG FISH, may be distributed into such as are Cetaceous;
breeding their young within them, having lungs and no gills, and but one pair
of finns; either the greatest of all living Creatures, of which there are
several species, one without teeth or a tube to cast water, another with teeth
and such a tube, and another with a large long horn: or that other Fish of a
less magnitude, which is gregarious, often appearing above water. 1.
Balana. Dolphinus.
WHALE. PORPOIS, Dolphin.
Cartilagineous; said to hatch their young ones within their bellies, whose
mouths are placed under their noses; whether such as are more Proper to the
Sea; having generally a double Penis, wide mouths, and five apertures on each
side instead of Gills; to be further distinguished by their having Long snouts
or prominencies; either in the fashion of a Saw: or in the figure of a Sword,
being without those apertures on the side, common to the rest. 2.
SAW-FISH. Pristis. Xiphias.
SWORD-FISH.
Rows of very sharp teeth; the Greater: or the Lesser. 3.
Canis carcharias. Glaucus.
SHARKE. GLAUCUS.
Lips rough like a File, but without teeth; the Greater: or the Lesser. 4.
Mustelus levis. Asterias.
HOUND-FISH. SPOTTED HOUND-FISH.
Thorns on their backs; either joining to the former part of the Finns: or
obliquely crossing the rays of the finn. 5.
Galeus spinax. Centrina.
THORNBACK DOG. HOG-FISH.
The aperture of their mouths, nearer to their noses then any of the other
sorts of Dog-fish; and being spotted; either with large black spots: or with
smaller spots. 6.
GREATER DOG-FISH. Catulus major. Catulus minor.
LESSER DOG-FISH.
A head like the head of a Crutch, with the eyes at the ends of the transverse,
growing to a vast bigness: or having a very long slender tail. 7.
ZYGAENA. FOX. Zygaena. Vulpecula.


Common to salt and fresh water; having gills, but no teeth, their mouths being
placed under their noses; either that whose body is pentagonous, having five
rows of bonny lamins, not properly scales, four strings hanging before the
mouth: or that which is more round. 8.
STURGEON. Acipenser. Huso.
HUSO.




II. VIVIPAROUS CARTILAGINEOUS FISH, II. VIVIPAROUS FISH NOT LONG AND ROUND.
whose bodies are not long and round, may be distributed into such as are Flat
and broad; distinguishable by some peculiarity in their parts, as to Length; of
the Tail; being either Spinous; having a sharp serrated thorn on the tail
counted venomous; either that whose snout is less or more prominent. 1.
PASTINACA. Pastinaca. Aquila.
AQUILA.
Not spinous; either that whose back is smooth: or thorny. 2.
FLARE. Raia Lavis. Raia clavata.
THORNBACK.

Snout; being sharp; either that whose body is shorter in proportion to the
breadth: or that whose body is longer. 3.
RAIA OXYZYNCHOS, Maid. SQUATINO-RAIA.

Breadth of the head; having a thick short tail in the fashion of a Battledore;
either that which has five purple spots on the back: or that which has one
round aperture for each gill, a vast mouth, with stringy substances on his head
and back. 4.
CRAMP-FISH TOAD-FISH, Sea-divel. Torpedo. Rana piscatrix.

Situation of the mouth; which opens at the end of the snout, and not
underneath, as the rest of this tribe, having a more oblong body, and a very
rough skin, with finny substances, standing out from each side like wings. 5.
SCATE, Angel-fish. Squatina.


Thick and short; either that which has no tail, but resembles the head of a
Fish cut off, with one tooth in each jaw, and one hole for each gill: or that
which is of a reddish color and spinous. 6.
MOLE. Mola. Lumpus.
LUMP.



III. OVIPAROUS FISH of FLEXILE FINNS.
III. OVIPAROUS FISH, whose back FINNS are wholly soft and flexile, may be
distinguished into such as have Three such soft finns on their backs; namely
the Cod-kind, which use to be preserved for humane food by salting; either the
Shorter and thicker; whether Larger; either that which has a kind of beard: or
that of a black colored back. 1.
Molva. Asellus n^ger.
COD FISH, Keeling. COLE-FISH.
Lesser; either that which has a black spot on either side: or that which is
of a softer body, having very small scales, being the least of this kind. 2.
Asinus amiquorum. Asellus mollis.
HADDOCK. WHITING.

Longer and more slender; either that whose flesh when salted, looks yellow,
and is more brittle: or that other of near resemblance to this, whose hinder
finn seems to be two, by reason of its rising up higher in the further part,
tho it be properly but one. 3.
Asellus longus. Merlucius.
LING. HAAK, Poor John.

Two soft flexile finns; either the Bigger; whether the Tunny kind; having very
small scales, scarce discernable, with several pinnulae both above and below,
besides their finns, being of a shining blew on the back, and a silver color
on the belly and sides; the Larger; either that which has no streaks on the
sides: or that which has oblique transverse streaks from head to tail. 4.
TUNNY. Thynnus. Pelamis.
PELAMIS.
Lesser; having oblique transverse streaks more undulated. 5.
MACKEREL.

Scombrus.
Flying fish; having large spotted finns like wings, with two long strong
thorns behind the head: to which may be adjoined for its affinity in flying,
that other Fish, which has but one soft finn on the back, with large scales
near his tail. 6.
Milvus. Hirundo Plinii.
KITE-FISH. SWALLOW-FISH.

Least kind; distinguishable by their having The lower pair of finns connected;
latter having a shorter head, and more tumid jaws. 7.
Gobius marinus.
SEA GUDGEON. PAGANELLUS.
The rays of the former finn on the back, rising up much higher then the
membrane which connects them; either that whose former pair of finns are
connected: or that which has a hole instead of gills, whose eyes stand more
close together. 8.
JOTO. DRACUNCULUS.
Little black spots in the figure of Lozenges. 9.
APHUA GOBITES.


One soft flexile finn; distinguishable by their Being of the Herring kind;
namely scaly, without teeth, of a bright silver color on the belly, and a dark
shining color on the back, presently dying when taken out of the water, having
generally a row of sharp prickles under the belly; whether the Larger; More
common; being gregarious, swimming together in great multitudes; the greater:
or the lesser. 10.
HERRING, Sprat. Harengus major. Harengus minor.
PILCHARD.
Less common; being somewhat bigger and flatter then a Herring, with several
black spots on the sides, coming up into Rivers. 11.
SHAD. Clupea.


Lesser; either that which is more proper to salt water, being long and
roundish, having the upper mandible much more produced then the other: or that
which lives in Lakes, being of a broader figure then the former. 12.
ANCHOVY. CHALCIS Sarda. Encrasicholus.


Being of the Horn-fish kind; having a longer slender body and a long snout;
either that which is more known and common in Europe, having one finn from the
anus to the tail, and another opposite on the back, the vertebra or backbone
being of a green color: or that which is here less common, belonging to the
West Indies, having no finn upon his tail. 13.
NEEDLE FISH. TOBACCO-PIPE-FISH. Acus. Petimbuaba.

Having between the eyes two finn-like substances; and but two or three rays in
the lower pair of finns, with a row of small teeth, and a fang at each end;
either that which has upon his back-finn a beautiful spot variegated with
rundles; or that whose finn is of an unequal altitude. 14.
BLENNUS. SCORPIOIDES.
Wanting the lower pair of finns; of a deep figure, somewhat resembling that of
a Turbut: or being of a red color, with large scales, a great flat head, steep
from the eyes to the snout. 15.
STROMATEUS, Callicthys. NOVACULA.
Having some sharp teeth; and several other round broad teeth in the palate,
the tops of which are commonly sold for Toad-stones. 16.
LUPUS MARINUS SCHONFELDII.
Breadth or depth downwards; either that which has two long rays extending
beyond the tail, one from the back, the other from the belly: or that which
has but one long ray, like a Bodkin, proceeding from the fin on the back. Both
exotic Fishes, described by Margravius. 17.
PARU. GUAPERUA.




IV. OVIPAROUS FISH having one finn SPINOUS, and the other FLEXILE.
IV. OVIPAROUS FISH having two finns on the back, whereof the former is spinous
and stiff, and the other soft and flexile, may be distinguished into the
Bigger kind; whose figure is Shorter; distinguishable by their Having small
scales; being square toward the tail, which is forked: or else being of a more
deep figure, with the rays of the fore-finn very low, the former of them
pointing toward the head. 1.
AMIA, Leccia Salviani. G^AUCUS.
Having the finns almost joined; either that with a little short beard under
the chin* being undulated obliquely from the back to the belly with bluish and
yellow streaks: or that other of a near resemblance to this, only without a
beard, and of a more black color. 2.
CORACINUS. UMBRA

Longer; having a large mouth, with sharp teeth; either that which is spotted
when young, being very voracious: or that other of some resemblance to the
former, having large scales, an obtuse angled mouth, with streaks of black and
white from head to tail. 3.
LUPUS. Mugil.
ENGLISH MULLET.

Lesser kind; whether such as are considerable for Having two or three long
prominences like fingers before their lower finns; great bonny heads, large
broad finns, called the Gournet-kind, to be further distinguished by their
Color; Red, or Gray. 4
Cuculus. Hirundo.
RED GOURNET, Rochet. GRAY GOURNET.
Forked snouts; by reason of two flat prominencies resembling horns; either
that of shorter: or that of longer horns, the latter of which is covered with
large bonny scales, with eight rows of thorns, the body octangular, having but
two fingers. 5.
Lyra prior Rondeletii.
(...)-FISH, Piper. LYRA ALTERA RONDELETII.

Being of a reddish color; with two long prominencies from the lower jaw,
esteemed delicate food; either the bigger, whose scales are larger and stick
faster to the skin: or the lesser, whose scales are less, and apt to come off
upon a touch. 6.
TRUE MULLET. Mullus major. Mullus minor.
LESSER MULLET.
The length of their bodies; whether Having the lower mandible longer then the
other, the finns on the back being at a greater distance: or having the second
finn on the back very small, with a wide mouth like that of a Serpent. 7.
SPHYRAENA. SAURUS.
Being of a flattish figure; with oblique transverse yellowish streaks, from
the back to the belly, having the eyes very near the mouth: or being more
roundish, somewhat of the color and figure of Mackerel, only a row of prickles
on each side make it to appear quadrangular. 8.
WEAVER, Dragon-fish. Draco.
TRACHURUS.

Wanting the lower pair of finns; or being of a reddish color, without teeth,
having the scales edged with short hairy filaments, which makes it rough to the
touch. 9.
CAPRISCUS. APER.
Having a long slender snout; with a strong movable serrated thorn, belonging
to the former finn on the back, inclining toward the tail with bonny
substances instead of the lower finns, the finns on the back being nearer to
the tail then in other Fish: or having a strong serrated horn standing upright
on the head. 10.
TRUMPET-FISH. Scolopax. Monoceros Clusii.
MONOCEROS CLUSII.
Having the mouth and eyes reversed, looking upwards: or having a great head,
very wide gills, and but three rays in the lower pair of finns, the body being
spotted. 11.
URANOSCOPUS. SCORPAENA.
Being of a deep figure, without scales, having on each side a broad black
spot, and long bristles rising up above the rays of the finns. 12.
DOREE, St. Peter's fish. Ea^^r.





V. OVIPAROUS FISH of ONE FINN, partly STIFF, and partly SOFT.
V. OVIPAROUS FISH having one finn on the back, the rays of which are partly
stiff and spinous, and partly soft and flexile, may be distinguished into such
whose figure is more Broad; or deep; whether Europaean; Bigger; distinguishable
by their COLORS; whether Gold color between the eyes, having round sharp
teeth, and for the most part a purple spot near the gills: or that which is of
a like figure to the former, but only without this gold color, being black
about the tail. 1.
Aurata. Sparus.
GILT-HEAD, Sea-bream. SPARUS.
Streaked with yellow from head to tail; either that whose streaks are more
obscure, being of a shorter body: or that whose streaks are more conspicuous,
being of a longer body. 2.
CANTHARUS. SALPA.
Streaked with a dark color, transverse the back; either that whose streaks
are more obscure, being of a shorter broader figure, and having broad flat
teeth: or that whose streaks are more conspicuous, being of a longer body. 3.
SARGUS. MORMYLUS.
Reddish; on the back and sides; either the greater, having a dark spot on each
side near the head: or the lesser, being without such a spot. 4.
PAGRUS. RUBELLIO.

Being somewhat more produced in their bodies then the others of this deep
kind; either that which is black about the tail, having great eyes: or that of
a reddish color, with four remarkable teeth in either jaw. 5.
MELANURUS. DENTEX.
Having the finn on the back so low in the middle, that it seems two, with
great heads full of prickles, counted venomous; either the greater, of a
reddish color: or the lesser. 6.
Scorpius major. Scorpius minor.
GREATER SCORPION-FISH. LESSER SCORPION-FISH.

Least of these deep fishes, of a dark color, with large scales, and long
streaks from head to tail. 7.
CHROMIS.

Indian; described by Margravius; either that of a forked tail, having two
prickles on the cover of each gill: or that which has broad spots on either
side. 8.
JAGURACA. ACARA.

Long; distinguishable by Variety and beauty of colors; either the Greater, of
which there are several kinds, the most beautiful of which, is called Pavo, the
more dark, Merula: or the Lesser. 9.
SEA-THRUSH. Turdus.
JULIS.
Dark broad streaks; crossing the back; considerable for having Heads
variegated with red and blew; either the Greater: or the Lesser, having a black
spot in the middle of the finn on his back. 10.
SEA PERCH. Perca marina.
SACHETTUS.
The lower jaw longer then the upper; either that which is without prickles: or
that which has two prickles on the cover of the gills. 11.
PHYCIS. CHAUNA.
A broad black spot on either side; or very great eyes in proportion to the
body. 12.
MAENAS. BOOPS.





VI. OVIPAROUS FISH OF AN OBLONG FIGURE, being generally without scales, VI.
EEL-FIGURED FISH.
having slimy skins, apt to bend and twist with their bodies more then other
Fish, may be distributed into such as are Europaean; being either Proper to
Seawater; Longer; Round; whether More thick; either that which has but one
pair of swimming finns, and two little horns: or that which has no swimming
finns, with four little horns, and a sharp snout, the skin variegated with
yellow. 1.
Congrus.
CONGER. MURAENA.
More slender; either that which grows to a very great length, having a wider
and longer mouth then an Eel, the finn not reaching the tail, which is round
and not flat: or that which has one continued finn as Eeles, with four stringy
prominencies from the lower mandible, less round and long then the former. 2.
Serpens marinus.
SEA SERPENT. OPHIDION PLINII.

Flat; like a Ribbon or Fillet; either the bigger of a reddish color, having
two pair of finns: or the lesser, whose flesh is transparent, and the finn on
the belly thrice as deep as that on the back, having but one pair of fins. 3.
TAENIA MAJOR. TAENIA MINOR.

Shorter; either that with two finns on the back, with a kind of beard, and
instead of the lower pair of finns, having two long stringy substances cleft at
the ends: or that which is of a smaller magnitude, having one pair of swimming
finns, with a forked tail, to which the back finn is extended. 4.
TINCA MARINA. SAND-EELS.

Common to salt and fresh water; having a round aperture for the mouth, with
which they suck their nourishment, and seven holes on each side instead of
gills, being Cartilagineous, without swimming finns; either the Greater: or the
Lesser. 5.
Lampetra major. Lampetra minor.
LAMPREY. LAMPERN.
Proper to fresh water; considerable for having. Two pair of finns; either that
which is the biggest of this tribe, having two very long strings from the upper
jaw, and four shorter from the lower jaw, only one small finn upon the back,
and a long one under the belly: or that which is shorter and thicker then an
Eel, with a short beard from his lower mandible, having two finns on the back,
the hinder finn on the back and that under the belly, not being contiguous to
the tail, variegated in the color. 6.
Silurus. Mustela.
SHEAT FISH, River whale. EEL POUT.
One pair of finns; 7.
EEL. Anguilla.

Indian; described by Imperatus; either that with two long horns reversed over
the back: or that which has a flatness on his head and part of his back, in
which there are diverse transverse rimulae or chinks. 8.
SPADA MARINA. REMORA IMPERATI.





VII. PLAIN or flat FISH, being oviparous and bonny, VII. OVIPAROUS PLAIN FISH.
both whose eyes are on the same side of the flat, and the mouth transverse,
swimming broadwise, are either Oblong; and squamous; Greater; having the mouth
on the right side of the eyes; either that which is not spotted: or that which
is spotted. 1.
COMMON SOLE. Solea. Solea oculata.
SPOTTED SOLE.
Lesser; having the mouth on the left side of the eyes, having bigger scales. 2.
POLE. Cynoglossus.


Quadrate; Greater; either that of a gray marble color, spinous, having the
eyes on the right side: or that which has the eyes on the left side, being the
biggest of this Tribe. 3.
TURBUT. Rhombus.
HALIBUT.
Middle kind; being of a dark gray, and full of small asperities. 4.
BRETT.
Lesser kind; either that of a sandy reddish color, without scales or
asperities, having the eyes on the left side: or that which is reddish,
squamous, and with black spots. 5.
PLAIS. Passer. Passer niger.
FLOUNDER, Fluke.




VIII. FISHES OF A HARD CRUSTACEOUS SKIN, may be distributed into such as are
for the figure of them, VIII. FISHES OF A HARD CRUSTACEOUS SKIN.
either Sphaerical; having two broad teeth like those of men; whether Without
thorns; either that which has a more prominent mouth, and a bonny breast: or
that which is encompassed with very short hairs, close set. 1.
ORBIS SCUTATUS, Globe-fish. ORBIS HIRSUTUS.
With thorns; or prickles; either straight: or hooked. 2.
ORBIS MURICATUS. ORBIS ECHINATUS.

Angular; whether such as are more Perfect; either Triangular; being variegated
with angular figures on the body; either that which is without horns: or with
horns. 3.
Piscis triangularis. Piscis triangularis coruntus.
TRIANGULAR FISH. TRIANGULAR FISH HORNED.
Pentagonal; or of a five angled figure, encompassed with pentagonal bonny
scales. 4.
HOLOSTEUS.

Imperfect; for which reason they are by some reckoned amongst Insects, having
tubes, with a kind of valve, instead of mouths; either that which is more
oblong, of an Hexangular figure to the end of the finn on the back, and after
quadrangular: or that whose body is of an Heptangular figure in the former
part, and quadrangular in the hinder part, being spinous, the head having some
resemblance to that of a Horse. 5.
ACUS ARISTOTELIS. HIPPOCAMPUS.

RADIATE; in the form of the Rays of a Starr. 6.
Stella piscis^
STARR-FISH.



IX. SQAMOUS RIVER FISH.
IX. SQUAMOUS RIVER FISH, may be distributed into such as are either Bigger;
whether Voracious; whose scales are set together either More loose; being
generally bigger, such as have on their backs One finn; placed near the tail,
with wide mouths, and sharp long teeth, every other of which is moveable. 1.
PIKE, Jack, Pickerel.
Lucius.
Two finns; the hindermost of which is small, fleshy and without rays, having
generally teeth, which may be styled the Trout-kind, comprehending such as are
Common to fresh and salt water; either the biggest, of a reddish flesh: or the
least, of a white flesh, and violaceous smell. 2.
Salmo. Violacea.
SALMON. SMELT.
Proper to fresh water; whether Spotted; the Greater: or the Lesser, living in
Lakes. 3.
TROUT. Trutt^. Carpio.
CHARR.
Not spotted; considerable for being More round; either that which is streaked
from head to tail, having the finn on the back bigger and broader then in
Trouts: or that having a long snout. 4.
Thymallus, Oxyrynchos.
GRAYLING. UMBER.
More broad; and compressed, of a small mouth, without teeth; the Greater,
somewhat like a Herring: or the Lesser. 5.
FARRA. LAVARETTUS.




More close; and compact; being generally less scales in proportion then the
others, having a wide mouth, without teeth, but asperities analogous to teeth,
comprehending the Perch-kind, of which in sundry Countries there are several
varieties, distinguishable by their bigness or littleness, thickness or
slenderness. But the two principal kinds to which the others may be reduced,
are either such as have two finns on the back, the first spinous, and the other
soft, with transverse black streaks on the side, being commonly the bigger: or
but one finn, which is partly spinous, and partly soft, being of a yellowish
color, and commonly lesser. Perca. Perca aurata*
6.
PERCH. RUFF.

Not voracious; comprehending the Carp-kind, which have one finn on the back, no
teeth in their mouth, but only in the orifice of their stomachs, over which
teeth there is a kind of stone or bone, for the most part of a triangular
figure, by affriction against which, they grind their food; whether the Bigger;
comprehending such as delight more in Standing waters; either that whose scales
are larger, and more loose, the first ray of the finn being strong and serrate,
having four stringy prominencies from the upper lip: or that whose scales are
less and more compact, being very slimy, of a greenish color, the lower pair
of finns in the male being more thick and fleshy. 7.
CARPE. Cyprinus. Tinca.
TENCH.
Running waters; whether such as are more Thick and round; either that which
has four stringy prominencies resembling a beard: or that which has a great
head. 8.
BARBLE. Barbus. Capito.
CHUB, Chevin.
Broad and deep; either the most broad: or that which is less broad, having
commonly red eyes and finns. 9.
BREAM. Abramis. Rubellio.
ROCHE.


Lesser; floating usually toward the top of the water; either that which is
more thick, of some resemblance to a little Chub: or that which is more
compressed and thin, Luciscus. Alburnus.
10.
DARE, Dace. BLEAK, Blea.


Least kind of River Fishes; whether such as live more toward the Lower parts
of the water; near the ground; either such as have on the back One finn; with a
kind of beard on the mouth; the greater: or the lesser. 11.
GUDGEON. Gobio. Gobites barbatus,
LOACH, Groundling.
Two finns; with a large broad head. 12.
BULL-HEAD, Millers-Thumb, Gull. Gobio Capitatus.


Upper parts of the water; or near banks; either that which has but one finn
on the back, being smooth: or that which has two finns, being prickly, having
three strong prickles on either side, and a kind of Armature consisting of four
or five Laminae 13.
MINNOW. Phoximus. Pungitius.
BANSTICLE, Stickleback.




Of Birds.
BIRDS may be distinguished by their usual place of living, their food,
bigness, IV.
shape, use and other qualities, into Terrestrial; living chiefly on dry land;
whether CARNIVOROUS; feeding chiefly on Flesh. I. PHYTIVOROUS; feeding on
Vegetables; whether Of short round wings; less fit for flight. II. Of long
wings; and swifter flight; having their Bills; either more LONG AND SLENDER;
comprehending the Pidgeon and Thrush-kind. III. SHORT AND THICK; comprehending
the Bunting and Sparrow-kind. IV.

Insectivorous; feeding chiefly on Insects; (tho several of them do likewise
sometimes feed on Seeds) having slender straight bills to thrust into holes,
for the pecking out of Insects; whether the GREATER KIND. V. LEAST KIND. VI.

Aquatic; living either About and NEAR WATERY PLACES. VII. In waters; whether
FISSIPEDES; having the toes of their feet divided. VIII. PALMIPEDES; having the
toes of their feet united by a membrane. IX.




I. CARNIVOROUS BIRDS.
I. CARNIVOROUS BIRDS, may be distinguished into such as are either Rapacious;
living upon the prey of other Animals, having hooked beaks and talons, amongst
which the females are generally more large strong and fierce. Diurnal; preying
in the day time. The bigger and stronger kind; noted either for quick Sight, or
Sent; the latter of which is by Gesner distinguished from the former, that the
beak of it, does not grow crooked immediately from the root, but only at the
end or tip of it. 1.
EAGLE. Aquila. Vultur.
VULTUR.
The middle kind; being either made use of and trained up by Men for the
catching of other Birds, of which there are great varieties, distinguishable by
their manner of flight, bigness, shape, the Birds they prey upon, etc. or such
others as are of near affinity to these, but not commonly used to this purpose.
2.
Accipiter. Milvus.
HAWK. KITE, Buzzard, Glede,
The least kind; the former having prominent nostrils, being well known by his
voice: the other with a processus on the outside of the upper mandible. 3.
CUCKOO. Cuculus. Lanius.
BUTCHER BIRD.

Nocturnal; preying in the night, having broad faces, and great eyes; of which,
some have tufts of feathers standing out like long ears, or horns: others being
without such tufts. 4.
OWL HORNED. Bubo cornutus. Bubo non cornutus.
OWL NOT HORNED.

Semirapacious; feeding commonly either on Carrion, or other things, and more
seldom on living Animals. The Crow-kind; having a bill somewhat large and
strait; amongst which, those that are most common with us, are of a deep black
color, in their bodies The bigger kind; Greater: or Less. 5.
RAVEN. Corvus. Cornia.
CROW.
The lesser kind; having a mixture of dark brown with black: or being wholly
black on the body, with red bill and legs. 6.
DAW. CHOUGH. Monedula. Coracius.


The Parret-kind; of hooked bills, having two toes before, and two behind,
considerable for the variety of beautiful colors, and the imitation of speech;
the Greater: or the Less. 7.
PARRET. Psittacus. Psittacus minor.
PARAQUETO.
The Py-kind; of a chattering voice, having many notes; either pyed with black
and white, with a long train: or having some of the smaller feathers on each
wing, variegated with blew and black. 8.
MAGPY, Py. JAY. Pica candata. Pica glandaria.

The Woodpecker-kind; climbing upon trees and walls, in order to which they are
furnished with strong feathers in their train, to support them in climbing and
pecking; of which there are various species, reducible to these two kinds; such
as have a very long tongue, with two claws behind and two before: or such as
have shorter tongues, and but one toe behind. 9.
WOODPECKER OF LONG TONGUES. WOODPECKER OF SHORTER TONGUES. Picus martius.





That kind of Eagle, which is Of a dark yellow color, having legs feathered
down to the foot called. Chrysaetos. Black all over, excepting a white spot
between the shoulders on the back. called. Melanaetus. With a ring of white on
his tail. called. Pygargus. Osprey.
Feeding on Fish. called. Ossifragus.


That kind of Vulture noted for Percnopteros.
Having his head and part of neck bare of feathers called Bald Vulture. Vultur
Boeticus. Ald.
Being of a Chestnut color, and feathered down to the toes. called Chestnut
colored Vulture. Vultur aureus.
Being of a yellowish color, very great, having some of the feathers of the
wing, three foot long. called Golden Vulture.


Hawks are usually distinguished into such are Short winged; having their wings
considerably shorter then their trains, of which there are usually reckoned
three kinds. Accipiter Palumbarius. Accipiter fringillar^us. Tinnunculus.
The biggest of this kind called Fem. Goshawk, Male Tarcell. The lesser of this
kind; either having Transverse streaks of yellow. Oblong streaks.
called F. Sparrowhawk, M. Musket. Kestril.
Long winged; having their wings equal to, if not longer then their trains, of
which there are usually reckoned these six kinds, noted for Iersalco.
A whitish color, but spotted on the back with black spots. called F.
Gerfalcon, M. Ierkin. Falco montanus.
Having a fastigiated or rising head, being of an ash color. called Mountain
Falcon. Falco.
A thick head and flat, a short neck, and striking with the breast. called F.
Falcon, M. Tarcel. Lanarius.
Having a bluish bill and legs. called F. Lanner, M. Lanneret. Subbuteo.
Having a white spot behind his eyes on each side. called Hobby. Aesalon.
Being the least of all Hawks. called F. Merlin, M. Iack-Merlin.



Kites may be distinguished into such as are noted for Nilvus.
Having a very forked Train. called Common Kite. Buteo Triorchis.
Being or seeming bald on the head, having a round train, feeding on young
Rabbets. called Common Buzzard. Anataria.
Feeding on Fish. called Bald Buzzard.
Pygargus minor.
Being of a white or ash color, with a white streak on the Train. called
Ring-tail.


Lanius or Butcher bird, is of three several kinds, noted either for being Of a
reddish color on the back, the most common somewhat bigger then a Sparrow.
called Lanius vulgaris. Parti-colored, of the same bigness with the former.
called Ash-colored, about the bigness of a Blackbird. called Lanius cinereus
major.


Owls horned are of three kinds, namely such as are noted for being Of the
bigness of an Eagle, feathered down to the toes. called Bubo. Of the bigness of
a tame Dove. called Otus, Asio. Of the bigness of a Missle bird, with a single
feather on each side for a horn. called Scops.


Owls not horned, are of five kinds, namely such as are noted for Having a
border of feathers about the face, the legs feathered and toes hairy, about the
bigness of a Pidgeon. called Our common white Having a ring of white feathers
about each eye, a white bill, hairy legs and feet. Vlula Aldrovandi.
called Owl, living in Barns. Aluco.
Being of a darker color, living in Ivy-bushes. called Our common field Owl.
Strix Aldrovandi. Caprimulgus.
Being like a Cuckoo, having a short small bill, but a wide mouth. called
Goat-sucker. Being the least of all, not bigger then a Blackbird. called
Noctua.


Crows are usually distinguished into three kinds, namely that which is
Carnivorous. called Crow. Frugivorous, of a black color; gregarious, building
their nests together. called Rook. Cornix frugif*
Frugivorous, party colored; black and cinereous. called Roiston Crow. Cornix
Ciner:



To the Py-kind, those other birds may be reduced which are noted for having
The wings and head of a bright azure. called Roller Argentoratensis. A dark
color spotted with white. called Caryocatastes. A tuft of feathers on his
head. called Garrulus Bohemicus. A bill bigger then his whole body. called
Toucan. A large bill, with a kind of horn reversed upon the bill. called
Rhinoceros. Two long strings like the small naked stemm of a feather reaching
from the back beyond the train, and strong legs and claws. called Bird of
Paradise. Manucodiata.



These three last exotic Birds are not perhaps so proper to this tribe, but I
know not at present how to reduce them better.

To the first sort of the Woodpecker-kind, those Birds may be reduced which are
noted for Being Greater; of a Greenish color, and a black spot on the head of
the male. called Woodspite. Picus Martius viridis.
Black color, excepting a red spot upon the head of the Cock. called Hickwall.
Picus maximus niger.

Being of a lesser magnitude, about the bigness of a Blackbird, variegated
with black and white, with a red spot on the head of the Cock. called Witwall,
Hiho. Picus varius.
Holding the head on one side, somewhat bigger then a Sparrow, of a brownish
color. called Wry-neck. Iynx, Torquilla.



To the second sort of the Woodpecker-kind, those other Birds may be reduced,
which are noted for An Ash color, being about the bigness of a Sparrow. called
Nuthatch. Sitta.
A long slender bill, being about the bigness of a Sparrow. called
Wall-creeper. Picus murarius.
A long slender bill, being a little bigger then a Wren. called Ox-eye-creeper*
Certhia.
Being about the same color and bigness as a Lark, and noted for climbing upon
Reeds. called Reed-Sparrow. Iunco.
A greenish color, and less. called Lesser Reed-Sparrow. Canus varola.



II. PHYTIVOROUS BIRDS OF SHORT WINGS.
II. PHYTIVOROUS BIRDS OF SHORT WINGS, less fit for flight; may be distinguished
into such as are Flying; such as can bear up their bodies (tho with some
difficulty) by the motion of their wings, for some considerable time and space,
having generally shorter bills, being pulveratricious, of whitish flesh, most
proper for food, having gizzards (i. e.) strong musculous stomachs, laying many
Eggs, called the Poultry-kind. Domestic; 1.
The most common; having the train compressed upwards. COCK, Gallus.
Hen, Capon, Chicken, Pullet, Poultry. Less common; having an elegant train,
which is sometimes turned up and spread, and spurs on the legs; either that
whose colors are more elegant and beautiful, having a tuft on the head: or
that which is less beautiful. 2.
Pavo. Gallo-pavo.
PEACOCK. TURKEY.

Wild; either the Bigger kind; Living chiefly in woods; the former being
distinguishable by having a long train wherein the feathers do gradually
increase toward the middle: the other, by being feathered on the legs. 3.
PHEASANT. Phasianus.
ATTAGEN
Living in open fields; having no heel or back-claw; either the greater, being
about the bigness of a Turkey: or the less, being about the bigness of a
Pheasant. 4.
Otis.
BUSTARD. ANAS CAMPESTRIS BELLONII.
Being serrate on each side of the claws, and hairy to the toes; either the
bigger, feeding usually on fine leaves: or the less, feeding on Heath, of a
black color, the feathers of the train reversed sidewayes. 5.
Vrogallus. Tetrao.
COCK OF THE WOOD. HEATH COCK, Grous, Pout.

Middle kind; of a short train, to be further distinguished by their Reddish
Breasts; with the figure of a Horshooe: or having a red bill and legs. 6.
Perdix. Perdix rutta.
PARTRIDGE. RED PARTRIDGE.
Hairy legs; either that which has a black spot under the bill: or that which
is wholly white excepting some black on the train, being hairy to the very
nails or claws, living on the Alps. 7.
Galli^a Coryllorum.
HAZLE HEN. LAGOPUS.

Least poultry-kind; either that which has a short train, a small back toe: or
that which is of a deep body compressed upwards, having longer legs, with a
bill more like a Water-hen. 8.
QUAIL. Coturnix. Rallus.
RAIL.


Not flying; being the biggest of all Birds; the one having only two, and the
other three claws. 9.
Struthio-camelus. ^meu.
ESTRICH. CASSAWARE, Emew.



III. PHYTIVOROUS BIRDS OF LONG WINGS, III. PHYTIVOROUS BIRDS OF LONG WINGS.
and swifter flight, having their bills more long and slender, may be
distinguished into the Pidgeon-kind; laying but two Eggs. The Bigger; whether
the most common and domestic, of great variety of colors, living in houses: or
that which lives in woods, of an ash color, having a ring of white about the
neck 1
PIDGEON, Dove. Columba. Palambus torquatus.
RING-DOVE, Queest.
Lesser; either that which has a reddish breast: or that which is generally
marked on each side of the neck with azure and black, except some that are
wholly white, being the least of this kind. 2.
STOCK-DOVE. TURTLE. Oenas, Vinago. Turtur.


Thrush-kind; of a lesser magnitude then Pigeons, and longer trains in
proportion to their wings, laying more Eggs then two, being generally
baccivorous. Speckled on the breast; Canorous; considerable for having the bill
More round; being of a dunnish green on the back, feeding on Missle berries;
the Greater: or the Lesser. 3.
MISSLE-BIRD, Shreight. THRUSH, Throstle, Mavis, Song-Thrush. Turdus
viscivorus. Turdus.

More flat; spotted either with whitish, or reddish spots: the latter of which
has likewise a reddish tail 4.
STARE, Starling. MERULA SAXATILIS, Ruticilla major. Stur^^s,


Not Canorous; being Birds of passage, coming only in Winter; the Greater: or
the Lesser. 5.
FELDEFARE. Turdus pilaris. Turdus iliacus.
REDWING, Swinepipe.

Not speckled on the breast; Less beautiful for their colors; Canorous; either
that which is more black, with yellow bills and legs: or less black, having
some dark shining blew on the back, being somewhat waved on the breast. 6.
BLACKBIRD. PASSER SOLITARIUS. Merula.

Not canorous; either that which has on the breast an Area of white: or that
which is of an ash color. 7.
MERULA TORQUATA. MERULA MONTANA.

More beautiful for their colors; The Greater; either that which has a
reddish bill, the wings and train black, the rest of the body bright yellow: or
that which has a long black bill, a long crest of feathers upon the head,
tipped with black, with transverse streaks of black and white upon the wings. 8.
GALBULA. HOOP.
The Lesser; Vpupa.
having the three foremost toes joined together to the first joint, without any
membrane, the outmost and middle toe, to the second joint; either the bigger,
having a Bill somewhat crooked: Apiast^r, Merops. (...).
the lesser, having a strait strong bill. 9.
BEE-EATER. KING-FISHER, Alcyon.






IV. PHYTIVOROUS BIRDS OF SHORT THICK BILLS.
IV. PHYTIVOROUS BIRDS OF SHORT, THICK, strong BILLS, being generally
Granivorous, may be distinguished into such as do belong either to the
Bunting-kind; having a hard knob in the palate of the mouth. The bigger; being
Canorous. 1.
Emberiza alba Gesneri Alanda congener.
BUNTING.
The Lesser; not esteemed for singing; either that of a yellowish body: or that
which is yellow about the throat. 2.
Cenchryamus Belloni^. Citrinella Hortulanus.
YELLOW-HAMMER. HORTULANE.

Sparrow-kind; without such a knob in the mouth. Not canorous; The more common
and lesser kind; living either about houses: or in mountains, having a reddish
head. 3.
Passer. Passer montanus.
SPARROW. MOUNTAIN SPARROW.
The less common and greater kind; with a bigger stronger bill then the other,
to break the stones of fruits for their kernels; either that without a crest:
or that with one. 4.
COCOTHRAUSTES. COCOTHRAUSTES CRISTATUS INDICUS.

Canorous; Bigger; either that with a great head and a red breast: or that with
a cross bill, the upper and lower part crossing each other toward the middle,
said to sing in Winter 5.
R^bicilla. Loxia.
BULL-FINCH, Alpe, Nope. SHELL-APPLE, Cross-bill.
Lesser; considerable for their different colors; being either Greenish; the
Bigger: or Lesser. 6.
Chloris. Passer Canarius.
GREENFINCH. CANARY BIRD.
Brownish; The Bigger; either that whose breast is of a dilutered: or that
which is variegated with black on the head. 7.
Fringilla, Monte-fringilla.
CHAFFINCH. BRAMBLE, Brambling.
The Lesser; not red about the bill: or red about the bill. 8.
Linaria. Linaria rubra.
LINNET. RED LINNET.







V. INSECTIVOROUS the GREATER, V. INSECTIVOROUS, GREATER.
may be distinguished into such as are of Swifter flight; comprehending the
Swallow-kind, of long wings, forked trains, short legs, being much upon the
wing, Birds of passage, coming in Summer. The greater; building in Chymneys,
variegated with black and white, having a red spot on the breast: or building
in Churches, of a blackish color, very short feet, the biggest of this kind. 1.
SWALLOW. Hirundo. Hirundo apes.
SWIFT, Martlet, Church-Martin.
The lesser; building about houses, of a white rump, and feathered down to the
toes: or building in banks, with a broad spot on the breast. 2.
MARTIN. Martes. Hirundo riparia.
SAND-MARTIN, Shore-bird.

Slower flight; Canorous; considerable for Singing in the night; being of a
dark reddish color. 3.
NIGHTINGALE. Luscinia.

Having a long heel; the greater: or the less, living in watery places. 4.
LARK. Alauda. Alauda pratenys.
TIT-LARK.
Having a red breast; or a red train. 5.
ROBIN REDBREAST, Ruddock. Rubecula. Ruticilla.
REDSTART.

Not Canorous; considerable for The delicacy and fatness of their flesh; living
either amongst Figs, of which there are several varieties, the most common and
best known, being from his black head called Atricapilla: or living in holes of
the ground, and having a white rump. 3.
BECCAFIGO. Ficedula. Oena^ths.
WHEAT-EAR.
Having a long train, and frequently moving it; either the more common one,
which is black and white: or that which is less common, of a yellow color. 7.
WAGTAIL. Motacilla. Motacilla flava.
YELLOW WAGTAIL.
Living; either upon stony places or open Heaths: or that which creeps in
hedges, having the back like that of a common Sparrow, the breast of a Lead
color, with a black bill. 4.
STONE SMICH. Muscicapa tertia Aldrevandi. Curruca.
HEDGE SPARROW.





VI. LEAST INSECTIVOROUS BIRDS.
VI. The LEAST kind of INSECTIVOROUS BIRDS, may be distributed into such as are
Canorous; whether of a Greenish color in the body; to be further distinguished
by the color of the Head; either that of a black: or that of a yellow head. 1
LIGURINUS. SERINUS.
Neck; being of an ash color. 2.
CITRINELLA.

Brownish color; and spotted, the train more erect. 3.
Passer Troglod^^^.
WREN.

Not Canorous; being either Greenish; considerable for Having a tuft of yellow,
or red feathers upon the head: or being in other respects of the same shape
with this, but only wanting such a tuft. 4.
REGULUS CRISTATUS. REGULUS NON CRISTATUS.
Making a humming noise; of which there are several varieties not yet
sufficiently described. 5.
HUMMING BIRD.

Ton^nius.
Variegated with black and white; The bigger; with a broad black spot down the
breast; 6.
Tringillago.
GREAT TITMOUSE.
The lesser; considerable for having A bluish head: or a black head. 7.
Parus C^rul^us. Parus ater.
TITMOUSE. COLEMOUSE.
A long train: or a Tuft on the head. 8.
Parus caudatus. Parus Cristatus.
LONG TAILED TIT. CRESTED TIT.






VII. AQUATIC BIRDS living about and NEAR WET PLACES, VII. AQUATIC BIRDS living
NEAR WET PLACES.
having longer legs, and long slender bills for their more convenient going and
fetching up their food in such places, may be distinguished into The
Plover-kind; whose bills are about one inch and a quarter long. The bigger;
having A tuft on the head; being in the body and wings of a dark and white
color. 1.
LAPWING, Puet.
No tuft; either that of a greenish color, wanting a back claw: Vanellus.
or that of a gray color with a very small back claw. 2.
GREEN PLOVER. Pluvialis viridis. Pluvialis cinereus.
GRAY PLOVER.

The lesser; being without any back claw: either that of a greyish color,
caught by imitation: or that which has a black fillet about the eyes, and a
forked train. 3.
DOTTEREL. SEA LARK. Morin^llus. Charadrios.


The Redshank-kind; whose bills are about two inches long. The bigger;
considerable for Having a red bill and legs: or for having a kind of ruff
about the neck of the males, of great variety of colors, being pugnacious. 4.
REDSHANK. Hamatopus. Avis pugnax.
RUFF.
Being mixed of black and white; whether the greater, having transverse streaks
of black and white on the train: or the lesser, having only the exterior
feathers of the train white. 5.
TRINGA MAJOR. TRINGA MINOR.

The lesser; having white bellies; either that whose back is gray: or that of a
dark brown color. 6.
KNOT. STINT.

The Woodcock-kind; whose bills are about three inches long; whether having
Strait bills; Frequenting fresh waters; of a fulvous color spotted; the
greater: or the less; the male of which latter is much less, and of a shorter
bill then the female. 7.
WOODCOCK. SNIPE. Scolopax. Gallinago minor.

Frequenting salt waters; either that of a black and white color, with red
bill and legs, wanting a Postica: or that of a gray color, having a Postica. 8.
SEA PY* GODWIT. Haemantopus* Belloni^. Fedoa.


Crooked bills; either that of a gray color: or that whose feathers are of an
elegant scarlet, excepting the wings, which are black. 9.
CURLEW. GUARA BRASILEANA. Arquata.





VIII. AQUATIC FISSIPEDES.
VIII. AQUATIC BIRDS, living much in the water, being FISSIPEDES, may be
distinguished into such as are, Not swimming; but wading; comprehending the
Crane-kind, having long necks and legs, long and strong bills; whether Sharp
pointed bills; either such whose necks are Longer; considerable for Building in
Fenny places; being hairy on the head, having the windpipe reversed in the
form of the Letter S, and being Herbivorous: or building on Houses and
Chymneys, of a black and white color, with red legs and bill, making a noise
by the collision of the beak* being Piscivorous. 1.
Grus.
CRANE. Ciconia.
STORK.
Having a thicker bill; somewhat crooked and shorter then the others of this
tribe, with scarlet colored wings; or having a tuft of bristles on the head. 2.
PHAENICOPTER. GRUS BALEARICA.
Being of an ash color, having a tuft of feathers standing out behind the
head, building on trees; being Piscivorous, with one blind gut; either the
greater: or the lesser. 3.
HEARN. Ardea.
ARDEA CINEREA MINOR.
Being of a white color; in other respects like the former; the greater: or
the lesser. 4.
Ardea alba major. Ardea alba minor.
GREATER WHITE HEARN. LESSER WHITE HEARN.

Shorter neck; either that which is fulvous and spotted, being Piscivorous,
having one blind gut: or that which is white with a red bill. 5.
Ardea stellaris. Ardea Brasilica.
BITTOUR. BRASILEAN BITTOUR.

Broad and round pointed bill; like a Spoon, Piscivorous, of a white color. 6.
Platea.
SHOVELAR, Spoon-bill.

Swimming; either The Diving-kind; being much under water, and finn-footed,
viz. with a membrane standing off on each side of the toes, having downy
feathers, and wanting a train; either the greater, having a longer bill: or the
lesser, having a shorter bill. 7.
Colymbus major. Colymbus minor.
GREAT DIDAPPER, Dabehick. LITTLE DIDAPPER.
The More-hen-kind; whose bodies are somewhat compressed sidewayes; whether
Finn-footed; having a membrane of Scollopt edges on each side of the toes, a
bald head, being of a black color. 8.
Fulica.
COOT.
Not finn-footed; either the greater, which has a little red baldness: or the
lesser, having a long red bill. 9.
MOOR-HEN, Water-hen. Gallinula.
GALLINULA SERICA,





IX. AQUATIC PALMIPEDE Birds, IX. AQU^TIC PALMIPEDES.
whose toes are joined together with a membrane, may be distinguished into such
whose bills are either Flat and blunt; being Herbivorous. The greater; either
the biggest of a white color, having black legs: or the lesser, the males of
which are commonly white. 1.
SWAN, Cygnet. GOOSE, Gander, Gosling. Cygnus. Anser.

The middle kind; either the bigger, of a beautiful color, the head of a dark
green, the body white, with large spots of orange color: or the lesser, having
reddish legs. 2.
SHELDRAKE. DRAKE, Duck
The least kind; either the bigger, Ana^.
having the bill and legs of a lead color: or the lesser, being from the eyes
to the hinder part of the head of a greenish color. 3.
WIDGIN. TEALE. Penelope. Querquedula.


Sharp; being generally Piscivorous. The Solan-goose kind; having the four toes
joined together; whether White; either that which has a long bill, hooked at
the end, laying but one Egg: or having a great bag under the bill. 4.
SOLAN-GOOSE. PELICAN. Onocrotalos*

Black; the greater, used for catching of Fish: or the lesser. 5.
CORMORANT. Corvus marinus. Graculus palmipes.
SHAGG.

The Puffin-kind; frequenting desert Islands, wanting a postica, going upright,
laying but one Egg; whether such as build their nests Within the ground; in
holes; either that which is more common in Europe, having the top of the head,
the back, wings and train of a black color, the rest white, the bill somewhat
compressed upwards, short, of a triangular figure, and red at the point: to
which may be adjoined that American Bird, of a like shape to this, but bigger.
6.
PUFFIN. PENGUIN. Anas arctica Clusii. Penguin.

On the ground; chiefly rocky places, making their nests together; either that
with a compressed black bill, hooked at the end, having a white line on either
side: or that of a longer bill, less sharp, not hooked. 7.
RAZOR-BILL. GUILLAM. Alca Wormii. Iomavia.


The Diving-kind; being much under water, having round serrate bills, hooked at
the end; either that which is variegated with black and white: or that which is
of a cinereous color on the back, with a red head, and a tuft upon it. 8.
DIVER. Mergus. Mergus ^irratus.
DUNN DIVER.
The Gull kind, being much upon the wing as Swallows, commonly of an ash
color; either the bigger: or the lesser, having red bill and legs, with a
forked train. 9.
GULL, Sea-mew. Larus. Hirundo marina,
SEA SWALLOW, S^ray.




Besides the common sort of Swans, there is a wild kind, called Hooper, having
the windpipe going down to the bottom of the breast bone, and then reversed
upwards in the figure of the Letter S.

Besides the common Goose, there are several sorts of wild ones, whereof one is
black from the breast to the middle of the belly, called Brant Goose, Bernicla,
or Brenta.

To the Widgeon-kind may be reduced that other fowl, about the same bigness,
the two middle feathers of whose train do extend to a great length, called
Sea-Pheasant, Anas cauda acuta.

To the Teal-kind should be reduced that other fowl, of the like shape and
bigness, but being white where the other is green, called Gargane.

To the Gull-kind, does belong that other Bird, of a long slender bill bending
upwards, called Avogetta recurvi-rostra.

Of Beasts.
BEASTS, may be distinguished by their several shapes, properties, uses, food,.
V.
their tameness or wildness, etc. into such as are either Viviparous; producing
living young. WHOLE FOOTED, the soles of whose feet are undivided, being used
chiefly for Carriage. I. CLOVEN FOOTED. II. Clawed, or multifidous; the end of
whose feet is branched out into toes; whether NOT RAPACIOUS. III. RAPACIOUS;
living upon the prey of other Animals; having generally six short pointed
incisores, or cutting teeth, and two long fangs to hold their prey; whether the
CAT-KIND; having a roundish head. IV. DOG-KIND; whose heads are more oblong. V.


OVIPAROUS; breeding Eggs. VI.


I. WHOLE FOOTED BEASTS, I. WHOLE FOOTED BEASTS.
may be distinguished into such as are either of Solid hard hoofs; considerable
for Swiftness and comeliness; being used for riding. 1.
HORSE, Mare, Gelding, Nag, Palfrey, Steed, Courser, Gennet, Stallion, Equus.
Colt, Fool, Filly, Neigh, Groom, Ostler.
Slowness and strength in bearing burdens; having long ears; either the more
simple kind: or that mungrel generation begotten on a Mare. 2.
Asinus. Mulus.
ASS, Bray. MULE.

Softer feet; having some resemblance to the Lev. 11.4.26.
Cloven footed-kind; by reason of the upper part of the hoof being divided,
being ruminant, having a long slender neck, with one or two bunches on the
back. 3.
Camelus.
CAMEL, Dromedary.
Multifidous kind; having little prominencies at the end of the feet,
representing toes, being of the greatest magnitude amongst all other beasts,
used for the carriage and draught of great weights, and more particularly
esteemed for the tusks. 4.
Eliphas.
ELEPHANT, Ivory.




II. CLOVEN FOOTED BEASTS, II. CLOVEN FOOTED BEASTS.
may be distributed into such as are Horned and Ruminant; having two horns.
Hollow; not branched nor deciduons, being common both to the males and females,
useful to men both living and dead; whether the Bigger; being useful both by
their labor and flesh; 1.
KINE, Bull, Cow, Ox, Calf, Heifer, Bullock, Steer, Beef, Veal, Bos.
Runt, bellow, low, Heard, Cowheard.
Lesser; being useful either in respect of the Fleece and Flesh: or Hair and
Flesh. 2.
SHEEP, Ram, Ewe, Lamb, Weather, Mutton, Bleat, Fold, Flock, Ovis. Caper.
Shepherd. GOAT, Kid.

Solid; branched, deciduous, being proper only to the males; whether the Bigger
kind; either that of the highest stature, having horns without brow-antlers, of
a short stemm, and then spreading out into breadth, branched at the edges: or
that of a lower stature, having round, long, branched horns. 3.
ELKE. STAGG, Heart, Hind, Red Deer, Venison. Alcis. Cervus.

Middle kind; whose horns become broad toward the ends; either that of lesser
horns, not used for labor: or that which has the largest horns in proportion
to that body, of any other Deer, with a double branched brow-antler, being in
the Northern Countries used for the drawing of Sleds. 4.
BUCK, Do, Fawn, Pricket, Sorel, Sore, Fallow Deer, Venison. Dama. Rangifer.
REINDEER, Tarandu.
Least kind; having a short, round, branched horn. 5.
ROE-BUCK, Roe. Capreolus.



Horned but not ruminant; having but one horn, placed on the nose, being a
beast of great bigness, covered with a kind of Armature, and counted untamable.
6.
RHINOCEROT. Rhinoceros.

Ruminant but not horned; being useful to men only, when living, for carriage
of burdens, having the longest neck of any other Animal (if there be really any
such Beast.) 7.
CAMELOPARD, Giraffa. Camelopardus.

Neither horned nor ruminant; useful only when dead, for its flesh. 8.
HOG, Swine, Bore, Sow, Pig, Porket, Barrow, Shoot, Pork, Porcus.
Bacon, Brawn. Grunt.



Amongst those that belong to the Bovinum genus, there are several sorts
described by Authors distinguished by their having either A Beard; styled Vrus.
A Bunch on the back; styled Bisons. Horns reflected about the ears. styled
Bonasus. Broad, flat, rugged horns; styled Buffalus.


Besides the more common kinds of Sheep, there are others mentioned by Authors,
and described to have Straight wreathed horns. called Ovis Stepsiceros. Great
thick tails. called Broad tailed Sheep.


Amongst those that belong to the Goat-kind, besides the more vulgar sort,
there are others whose horns are either Ibex.
Angular and knobbed. called Stone Buck. Gimpse Rupicapra. Gazel.
Small and round; being hooked at the end. called Shamois. Straight and
wreathed. called Antilope.


III. CLAWED NOT RAPACIOUS.
III. CLAWED Beasts NOT RAPACIOUS, may be distinguished into such as are either
Man-like; having faces and ears somewhat resembling those of Men, with only
four broad incisores, or cutting teeth, and two short eye-teeth, not longer
then the other, their fore-feet being generally like hands, with thumbs, going
upon their heels; whether the Bigger kind; either that which has a short tail:
or that which has no tail. 1.
BABOON, Drill. Papio. Simia.
APE, Iackanapes.
Lesser kind; having a long tail, and being very nimble: to which may be
adjoined, for its affinity to this kind in respect of the face, that beast
which is the slowest of all others, having but three toes on each foot, feeding
on leaves, having a blind gut joined to the upper orifice of his stomach, being
probably ruminant. 2.
MONKEY, Marmosit. C^rcopithecus. Ignavus.
SLOTH, Haut, Ay.

Hare-kind; having two long teeth in the lower jaw before, and two others
opposite to those (tho not quite so long) in the upper jaw, most of which are
counted ruminant, because when they have by the help of their incisores filled
their mouths with meat, they after chew it over again with their Molares or
grinders, Levit. 11.
but they are not properly ruminant, because they have but one stomach, out of
which they do not fetch up their food being once swallowed.


These may be distinguished into the Bigger kind; whether such as are covered
with Hair; living either Above ground; being of all others the most fearful. 3.
HARE, Leveret.
Lepus.
Under ground; either that with long ears and a short tail: or that with short
ears and a long tail, being said to sleep all the Winter. 4.
CONNY, Rabbet. Cuniculus. Mus Alpinus.
MARMOTTO.

Quills; either the bigger: or the lesser kind. 5.
PORCUPINE. Histrix. Echinus.
HEDGHOG.

Middle kind; either that which lives in Trees, with a spreading bushy tail: or
that which lives on the ground, with a short tail, and course hair, having only
three toes on a foot. 6.
SQUIRREL. Sciurus,
GINNY PIG.
Least kind; living commonly, either In houses; being mischievous to Corn; the
greater: or lesser kind 7.
Sorex. Mus domes^icus.
RAT. MOUSE.
Abroad, under ground; having small eyes, and broad feet like hands, being not
so properly belonging to this tribe, but of near affinity to it. 8.
Talpa.
MOLE.




Besides the common Rat there are others having Flat tails, their hinder feet
being palmipedes. called Water-rat, Musk-rat. Short tails, and spotted skins.
called Leming. Mus Norvagicus.



Besides the more common sort of Mice there are others Of long snouts, counted
venomous. called Field-mouse, Sheew-mouse. Mus Araneus.
Of a sandy color, a spreading tail, sleeping much. called Dormouse. Mus
Avellanarum.
Having wings, upon which there are four claws instead of feet, the only flying
beast. called Batt, Flittermouse. Vespertilio.



IV. RAPACIOUS Beasts of the CAT-KIND, IV. RAPACIOUS CAT-KIND.
may be distributed into such, whose bodies are in proportion to their legs,
either Less long; having generally two Claviculae or canel-bones, by which they
are enabled to strike or cuff with their fore-feet, and to climb, being able to
sheath their claws; whether the Bigger; considerable for Boldness and courage;
being the chief of all wild beasts: or for slowness and slugginess, going upon
the heels. 1.
LION- ess, Whelp, roar. Leo. Vrsus,
BEAR, Cub.
Spottedness; either with Rundles: or with Streaks. 2.
TIGER. Tigris. Pardus.
PARD, Panther, Leopard.
Quick sightedness; 3.
OUNCE, Lynx. Lynx.


Lesser; either that Domestic Animal, the Enemy to Mice: or that wild fierce
creature, of some resemblance to this, producing Civet. 4.
CAT, Kitling, Kitten, Mew. CIVET-CAT. Catus. Zibetta.


More long; namely such as by the length of their bodies, and shortness of
their legs, are fitted to creep and wind themselves into holes, for the
catching of their prey. The Verminous-kind; whether such as are Terrestrial; of
a Courser furr; being noxious to Rabbets; either that which is frequently
trained up by Men for the catching of Connies: or that which is of a stinking
savor. 5.
FERRET. POLECAT, Fitchew. Viverra. Putorius.

Finer furr; whether the Bigger; being commonly white under the throat. 6.
MARTIN, Sable, Gennet. Martes.

Lesser; either that which is wholly white, excepting a black spot on the tail:
or that whose belly is white, the tip of the tail black, the back of a light
dun. 7.
STOAT, Ermine. WEESLE. Mustela.



Amphibious; either that of a finer furr, having a broad, thick, scaly tail: or
that of a courser furr. 8.
CASTOR, Beaver. OTTER. Castor. Lutra.





As for that mongrel generation, which many Authors describe, as being begotten
betwixt a Pard and a Lioness, being therefore called Leopard, as likewise that
other Beast, commonly described by the name of Gulo or Ierf, and that other
named Hyaena. There is reason to doubt, whether there be any such species of
Animals, distinct from those here enumerated. Tho the belief of these (as of
several other fictitious things) has been propagated by Orators, upon account
of their fitness to be made use of in the way of similitude.

V. RAPACIOUS DOG-KIND.
V. RAPACIOUS Beasts of the DOG-Kind, may be distinguished into such as are
either Europaean; Terrestrial; whether Bigger; either that which is noted for
tameness and docility: or for wildness and enmity to Sheep* 1.
Canis. Lupus.
DOG, Bitch, Puppy, Whelp* Bark, bay, yelp. WOLF, Howl.
Lesser; living usually in holes within the ground; either that which is noted
for subtilty, having a bushy tail: or that which is noted for tenacity in
biting, being esteemed commonly (tho falsely) to have the legs on the left side
shorter then the other. 2.
Vulpes. Taxus.
FOX. BADGER, Gray, Brock.

Amphibious; whether the Bigger, Being less hairy, having great tusks: or the
lesser, being more hairy. 3.
MORSE, Seahorse. Phocas.
SEAL, Sea-calf.

Exotic; being noted for Gregariousness; going in great troops, and being said
to assist the Lion in hunting. 4.
Lupus aureus.
JACKALL.
Long snout, and feeding on Ants, and sometimes on roots; either that of a
hairy: or that of a crustaceous covering. 5.
Tamandua. Ta^u.
ANT-BEARE. ARMADILLO.
A bag under the belly; wherein the young ones are received, being apt to hang
by the tail, having a mixed resemblance both to an Ape and a Fox. 6.
S^^ivulpes.
CARAGUYA.




Amongst the several species of Animals, there is not any of greater variety in
respect of accidental differences, then that of Dogs, which being the most
familiar and domestic Beast, has therefore several names assigned to it
according to these differences, which are derived either from the Countries in
which they are originally bred, and from which they are brought to other
places, as England, Ireland, Iceland, Ginny, etc. or their bigness or
littleness, or from their shape, color, hairiness, etc. But they are chiefly
distinguishable from those uses which men employ them about, either in respect
of Delight; LAP-DOGS. Companying; when they serve only to follow us up and
down. CURRS. Custody of places or things; MASTIFS. Hunting; either by Sight;
GASE-HOUNDS. Smell; whether for Birds; SPANIELS Terrestrial; LAND SPANIELS.
Aquatic; WATER SPANIELS.
Beasts; of a Greater kind; HOUNDS. Lesser kind; BEAGLES.

Swiftness; and running after Greater Beasts; GREYHOUNDS. Lesser Beasts;
LURCHERS.
Play; TUMBLERS.



VI. OVIPAROUS BEASTS; VI. OVIPAROUS BEASTS.
may be distinguished by their different ways of progressive motion; whether
Gradient; having four feet, the figure of their bodies being either more Broad;
whose outward covering is Crustaceous; belonging either to the Land: or to the
Water. 1.
TORTOISE, Land-tortoise. Testudo. Testudo marina.
TURTLE, Sea-tortoise.
Skinny; either that which is not poisonous: or that which is counted
poisonous. 2.
FROG, Tadpole, croke. Rana. Bufo.
TOAD, Tadpole.

Oblong; whose bodies and tails are more produced; whether the Greatest kind;
being skinned and scaly; either the larger: or the lesser, the latter of which
is described to have a dew-lap under the throat. 3.
CROCODILE, Allegator, Cayman, Leviathan. Crocodilus.
SENEMBI, Iguana.
Middle kind; either that which is most common in other Countries, and of
greatest varieties: or that which has two toes behind in each foot, with
prominencies upon the head like ears, being said (tho falsely) to feed only upon
air. 4.
LIZARD. Lacerta. Chamal^^.
CHAMELION.
Least kind; either that of a brownish color with yellow spots: or that of a
more dark color, having a broad tail for swimming. 5.
LAND SALAMANDER, Land Eft, Newt. Salamandra terrestris. Salamandra aquatica.
WATER SALAMANDER, Eft, Newt.


Creeping; being without feet, and of round oblong bodies; whether the Bigger
kind; 6.
SERPENT, Hiss. Serp^n^.

Middle kind; either that which is not poisonous: or that which is counted
poisonous, having two long, hollow, moveable teeth, hatching the Eggs within
its body. 7.
SNAKE, Hiss. Katrin t^^quata. Vipera.
VIPER, Adder, Aspe.
Least kind; commonly esteemed blind and poisonous. 8.
SLOW WORM. Ca^illa.





That kind of Animal which is commonly called a Dragon, and described to be a
kind of Serpent with wings and feet (if there ever were any such thing) might
possibly be some monstrous production, but there is reason to believe that
there is no such standing species in nature.

Besides the common kind of Frogs, there is another distinct sort, called the
Green frog, feeding on leaves, having blunt broad toes.

Besides the more usual sorts of Lizards, there are others described, as having
some distinct peculiarity in respect of Bigger magnitude, and greenness of
color. called The green Lizard. Blunt broad toes. called The Facetane Lizard.
Thicker body, having a tail annulated with scales. called Cordylus. Slender
body and small feet, resembling a Slow worm. called Chalcidica, Lizard. Small
head, and lesser scales. called Scinke.


. VI.
HAving now dispatched the enumeration and description of the several species of
Animals, I shall here take leave for a short digression, wherein I would
recommend this, as a thing worthy to be observed, namely, that great difference
which there is betwixt those opinions and apprehensions which are occasioned by
a more general and confused view of things, and those which proceed from a more
distinct consideration of them as they are reduced into order.

He that looks upon the Stars, as they are confusedly scattered up and down in
the Firmament, will think them to be (as they are sometimes styled)
innumerable, of so vast a multitude, as not to be determined to any set number:
but when all these Stars are distinctly reduced into particular
constellations, and described by their several places, magnitudes and names, it
appears, that of those that are visible to the naked eye, there are but few
more then a thousand in the whole Firmament, and but a little more then half so
many to be seen at once in any Hemisphere, taking in the minuter kinds of them,
even to six degrees of magnitude. It is so likewise in other things: He that
should put the Question, how many sorts of beasts, or birds, etc. there are in
the world, would be answered, even by such as are otherwise knowing and learned
men, that there are so many hundreds of them, as could not be enumerated;
whereas upon a distinct inquiry into all such as are yet known, and have been
described by credible Authors, it will appear that they are much fewer then is
commonly imagined, not a hundred sorts of Beasts, nor two hundred of Birds.

From this prejudice it is, that some heretics of old, and some Atheistical
scoffers in these later times, having taken the advantage of raising
objections, (such as they think unanswerable) against the truth and authority
of Scripture, particularly as to the description which is given by Moses,
concerning Noah's Ark, Genesis 6.15. where the dimensions of it are set down to be
three hundred cubits in length, fifty in breadth, and thirty in height, which
being compared with the things it was to contein, it seemed to them upon a
general view, (and they confidently affirmed accordingly) that it was utterly
impossible for this Ark to hold so vast a multitude of Animals, with a whole
years provision of food for each of them.

This objection seemed so considerable, both to some of the ancient Fathers,
and of our later Divines, who were otherwise learned and judicious men, but
less versed in Philosophy and Mathematics, that they have been put to
miserable shifts for the solving of it. Origin, and Saint Austin, and several
other considerable Authors, do for the avoiding of this difficulty affirm, that
Moses being skilled in all the learning of the Egyptians, does by the measure
of cubits, here applied to the Ark, understand the Egyptian Geometrical cubit,
each of which (say they) did contein six of the vulgar cubits, namely, nine
foot. But this does upon several accounts seem very unreasonable, because it
does not appear, that there was any such measure amongst the Egyptians or
Jews, styled the Geometrical cubit: And if there were, yet there is no
particular reason, why this sense should be applied to the word cubit here,
rather then in other places. It is said of Goliath, 1 Samuel 17.4.
that his height was six cubits and a span, which being understood of the
Geometrical cubit, will make him fifty four foot high, and consequently his
head must be about nine foot in the height or diameter of it, which must needs
be too heavy for David to carry.

Others not satisfied with this solution, think they have found a better
answer, by asserting that the stature of mankind being considerably larger in
the first ages of the world, therefore the measure of the cubit must be larger
likewise, and perhaps double to now what it is, which will much enlarge the
capacity of the Ark. But neither will this afford any reasonable satisfaction.
For if they will suppose men to be of a much bigger stature then, it is but
reasonable that the like should be supposed of other animals also; in which
case this answer amounts to nothing.

Others will have the sacred cubit to be here intended, which is said to be a
hands breadth longer then the civil cubit, Ezeck. 43.13. But there is not any
reason or necessity for this. And it is generally believed, that the sacred
cubit was used only in the measure of sacred Structures, as the Tabernacle and
Temple.

This seeming difficulty is much better solved by Ioh. Buteo in the Tract de
Arca Noe, wherein supposing the cubit to be the same with what we now call a
foot and a half, he proves Mathematically that there was a sufficient capacity
in the Ark, for the con^eining all those things it was designed for. But
because there are some things liable to exception in the Philosophical part of
that discourse, particularly in his enumeration of the species of Animals,
several of which are fabulous, some not distinct species, others that are true
species being left out; therefore I conceive it may not be improper in this
place to offer another account of those things.

It is plain in the description which Moses gives of the Ark, that it was
divided into three stories, each of them of ten cubits or fifteen foot high,
besides one cubit allowed for the declivity of the roof in the upper story. And
it is agreed upon as most probable, that the lower story was assigned to contein
all the species of beasts, the middle story for their food, and the upper
story, in one part of it, for the birds and their food, and the other part for
Noah, his family and utensils.

Now it may clearly be made out, that each of these stories was of a sufficient
capacity for the containing all those things to which they are assigned.

For the more distinct clearing up of this, I shall first lay down several
tables of the diverse species of beasts that were to be received into the Ark,
according to the different kinds of food, wherewith they are usually nourished,
containing both the number appointed for each of them, namely, the clean by
sevens, and the unclean by pairs, together with a conjecture (for the greater
facility of the calculation) what proportion each of them may bear, either to a
Beef, or a Sheep, or a Wolf; and then what kind of room may be allotted to the
making of sufficient Stalls for their reception.

Beasts feeding on Hay. Beasts feeding on Fruits, Roots and Insects.
Carnivorous Beasts Number. Name. Proportion to Beeves. Breadth of Stalls
Number. Name Proportion to Sheep. Breadth of the Stalls. Number. Name
Proportion to Wolves. Breadth of their Stalls. feet feet feet 2 Horse 3 20 2
Hog 4 20 2 Lion 4 10 2 Ass 2 12 2 Baboon 2 2 Bear 4 10 2 Camel 4 20 2 Ape 2 2
Tigre 3 8 2 Elephant 8 36 2 Monky 7 2 Pard 3 8 7 Bull 7 40 2 Sloth 2 Ounce 2 6
7 Urus 7 40 2 Porcupine 2 Cat 2 6 7 Bisons 7 40 2 Hedghog 2 Civet-cat 7 Bonasus
7 40 2 Squirril 2 Ferret 3 6 7 Buffalo 7 40 2 Ginny pig 2 Polecat 7 Sheep 1 30
2 Ant-bear 2 2 Martin 7 Stepciseros 1 2 Armadilla 2 2 Stoat 7 Broad-tail 1 2
Tortoise 2 2 Weesle 7 Goat 1 30 2 Castor 7 Stone-buck 1 21 20 2 Otter 7 Shamois
1 2 Dog 2 6 7 Antilope 1 2 Wolf 2 6 7 Elke 7 30 2 Fox 2 6 7 Heart 4 30 2 Badger
7 Buck 3 20 2 Jackall 7 Reindeer 3 20 2 Caraguya 7 Roe 2 36 2 Rhinocerot 8 2
Camelopard 6 30 2 Hare 2 Sheep. 2 Rabbet 2 Marmotto 92 514 27 72

In this enumeration I do not mention the Mule, because it is a mungrel
production, and not to be rekoned as a distinct species. And tho it be most
probable, that the several varieties of Beeves, namely that which is styled
Vrus, Bisons, Bonasus and Buffalo* and those other varieties reckoned under
Sheep and Goats, be not distinct species from Bull, Sheep, and and Goat; There
being much less difference betwixt these, then there is betwixt several Dogs:
And it being known by experience, what various changes are frequently
occasioned in the same species by several countries, diets, and other
accidents: Yet I have ex abundanti to prevent all cavilling, allowed them to be
distinct species, and each of them to be clean Beasts, and consequently such as
were to be received in by sevens. As for the Morse, Seal, Turtle, or
Sea-Tortoise, Crocodile, Senembi, These are usually described to be such kind
of Animals as can abide in the water, and therefore I have not taken them into
the Ark, tho if that were necessary, there would be room enough for them, as
will shortly appear. The Serpentine-kind, Snake, Viper, Slow-worm, Lizard,
Frog, Toad, might have sufficient space for their reception, and for their
nourishment, in the Drein or Sink of the Ark, which was probably three or four
foot under the floor for the standings of the Beasts. As for those lesser
Beasts, Rat Mouse, Mole, as likewise for the several species of Insects, there
can be no reason to question, but that these may find sufficient room in
several parts of the Ark, without having any particular Stalls appointed for
them.

Tho it seem most probable, that before the Flood, both Men, Beasts and Birds
did feed only upon Vegetables, as may appear from that place, Genesis 1.29, 30.
And God said, Behold I have given you every herb bearing seed which is upon the
face of all the earth, and every tree in which is the fruit of a tree yelding
seed, to you it shall be for meat. And to every beast of the earth, and to
every fowl of the air, and to every thing that creeps upon the earth, wherein
there is life, I have given every green herb for meat, compared with chap. 9.3.
Where after the Flood, when the productions of the Earth were become of less
efficacy and vigor, and consequently less fit for nourishment, God says to
Noah, Every moving thing that lives, shall be meat for you, even as the green
herb have I given you all things. Yet because this proof is not so very cogent
to convince a captious Adversary, but that he may still be apt to question,
whether the Rapacious kinds of Beasts and Birds, who in the natural frame of
their parts are peculiarly fitted for the catching and devouring of their prey,
did ever feed upon herbs and fruits; Therefore to prevent such Cavils, I shall
be content to suppose that those Animals which are now Praedatory were so from
the beginning: upon which, it will be necessary to enquire, what kind of food
might be proper and sufficient for them, during their abode in the Ark. Now
it is commonly known, that the ruminant kind are most usually the prey for the
rapacious kind of beasts.

It appears by the foregoing tables, that the beasts of the rapacious
carnivorous kinds, to be brought into the Ark by pairs, were but forty in all,
or twenty pairs, which upon a fair calculation are supposed equivalent, as to
the bulk of their bodies and their food, unto twenty seven Wolves; but for
greater certainty, let them be supposed equal to thirty Wolves: and let it be
further supposed, that six Wolves will every day devour a whole Sheep, which
all Men will readily grant to be more then sufficient for their necessary
sustenance: According to this computation, five Sheep must be allotted to be
devoured for food each day of the year, which amounts in the whole to 1825.

Upon these suppositions there must be convenient room in the lower story of
the Ark to contein the forementioned sorts of beasts which were to be preserved
for the propagating of their kinds, besides 1825. Sheep, which were to be taken
in as food for the rapacious Beasts.

And tho there might seem no just ground of exception, if these beasts should
be stowed close together, as is now usual in Ships, when they are to be
transported for any long voyage; yet I shall not take any such advantage, but
afford them such fair Stalls or Cabins as may be abundantly sufficient for them
in any kind of posture, either standing, or lying, or turning themselves, as
likewise to receive all the dung that should proceed from them for a whole year.

And that the Ark was of a sufficient capacity for these purposes, will appear
from the following Diagram. In which there is a partition at each end of the
Ark, marked AA, of fifteen foot wide, and the breadth of the Ark being seventy
five foot; these partitions must contein in them five Areas of fifteen foot
square, and an Area of five foot square, being sufficient to contein four
Sheep, therefore one of fifteen foot square must be capable of thirty six
Sheep; Allowing one of these Areas at each end for stairs, there will eight of
them remain, ( viz. four at each end) to be reckoned upon for the containing of
Sheep; which eight will be capable of receiving 288 Sheep.

Besides these partitions, at the end there are five several passages marked
BB, of seven foot wide for the more convenient access to the several Stalls;
the four Areas on the side marked CC, designed for Stalls, are each of them
eighteen foot wide, and about two hundred foot long. And the two middle Areas
marked DD, are each of them twenty five foot wide, and about two hundred foot
long.

Supposing the two middle Areas to be designed for Sheep; an Area of twenty
five foot square must be capable of a hundred, and there being sixteen of
these, they must be capable of 1600 Sheep, which being added to the former
number of 288 will make 1888. somewhat more then 1825 the number assigned for
those that were to be taken in for food.

The four side Areas marked CC, being each of them eighteen foot wide, and two
hundred foot long, will be more then sufficient to contein the several beasts
which were to be preserved for the propagating of their kind; for which in the
foregoing Tables their is allotted to the length of their Stalls only six
hundred and six foot, besides the largeness of the Stalls allotted to each of
them. So that there will be near upon two hundred foot overplus, for the
reception of any other beasts, not yet enumerated or discovered.

As for that fashion of the Keel of Ships now in use, whereby they are fitted
for passage through the Waters, and to endure the motion of the Waves: This
would not have been convenient for the business here designed; The Ark being
intended only for a kind of Float to swim above water, the flatness of its
bottom, did render it much more capacious for the reception of those many
living Creatures, which were to be contained in it. And tho toward the end of
the Flood when it began to abate, God is said to Make a wind to pass over the
Earth, whereby the waters were assuaged, Genesis 8.1. Yet it is not likely that in
the time of the deluge, when the whole Earth was overflowed, that there should
be any such rough and boisterous winds as might endanger a Ves^el of this
Figure; such winds usually proceeding from dry Land.



From hence it may be evident, that there was sufficient room in the lower
story for the convenient reception of all the sorts of beasts that are yet
known, and probably for those other kinds that are yet unknown to these parts
of the World,

The next thing to be cleared up, is the capacity of the second story for
containing a years provision of food. In order to which it is to be observed,
that the several beasts feeding on hay, were before upon a fair calculation
supposed equal to ninety two Beeves: but to prevent all kind of Cavils which
may be made at the proportioning of them, let them be as a hundred, besides the
1825. Sheep taken in for food. But now because these are to be devoured by five
per diem, therefore the years provision to be made for them, is to be reckoned
but as for half that number, viz. 912. These being divided by seven to bring
them unto a proportion with the Beeves, will amount to 180, which added to the
former hundred make 280, suppose three hundred. So then according to this
supposition, there must be sufficient provision of hay in the second story to
sustein three hundred Beeves for a whole year.

Now it is observed (says Buteo) by Columella, who was very well versed in the
experiments of Husbandry, that thirty or forty pound of hay is ordinarily
sufficient for an Ox for one day, reckoning twelve ounces in the pound. But we
will suppose forty of our pounds. And it is asserted by Buteo upon his own trial
and experience, that a solid cubit of dried hay, compressed, as it uses to be,
when it has lain any considerable time in Mows or Reeks, does weigh about
forty pound; so that for three hundred Beeves for a whole year there must be
109500. such cubits of hay, ( i. e.) 365. multiplied by 300. Now the second
story being ten cubits high, three hundred long, and fifty broad, must contein
150000. solid cubits, which is more by 40500. then what is necessary for so
much compressed hay; and will allow space enough both for any kind of beams and
pillars necessary for the fabric, as likewise for other repositories, for such
fruits, roots, grain or seed, as may be proper for the nourishment of any of
the other Animals. And likewise for such convenient passages and apertures in
the floor as might be necessary for the putting down of the hay to the Stalls
in the lower story. From which it is manifest that the second story was
sufficiently capacious of all those things designed for it^

And then as for the third story; there can be no color of doubt, but that one
half of it will be abundantly sufficient for all the species of birds, tho they
should be twice as many as are enumerated in the foregoing tables, together
with food sufficient for their sustenance, because they are generally but of
small bulk, and may easily be kept in several partitions or Cages over one
another. Nor is there any reason to question, but that the other half would
afford space enough both for Noah's family and utensils.

Upon the whole matter, it does of the two, appear more difficult to assign a
sufficient number and bulk of necessary things, to answer the capacity of the
Ark, rather then to find sufficient room for those several species of Animals
already known. But because it may be reasonably presumed, that there are
several other species of beasts and birds, especially in the undiscovered parts
of the world, besides those here enumerated, therefore it is but reasonable to
suppose the Ark to be of a bigger capacity, then what may be sufficient for the
things already known, and upon this account it may be asserted, that if such
persons who are most expert in Philosophy or Mathematics, were now to assign
the proportions of a Vessel that might be suitable to the ends here proposed,
they could not (all things considered) find out any more accommodate to these
purposes, then those here mentioned.

From what has been said it may appear, that the measure and capacity of the
Ark, which some Atheistical irreligious men make use of, as an argument against
the Scripture, ought rather to be esteemed a most rational confirmation of the
truth and divine authority of it. Especially if it be well considered, that in
those first and ruder ages of the World, when men were less versed in Arts and
Philosophy, and therefore probably more obnoxious to vulgar prejudices then now
they are, yet the capacity and proportions of the Ark are so well adjusted to
the things it was to contein; whereas if it had been a mere humane invention,
it is most probable, that it would have been contrived according to those wild
apprehensions, which (as I said before) do naturally arise from a more confused
and general view of things, as much too big, as now such men are apt to think
it too little, for those ends and purposes to which it was designed.

CHAP. VI. The Parts of Animate Bodies; whether I. More Peculiar, or II. More
General.
. I.
UNder this Head of PECULIAR PARTS of Animate Bodies are comprehended all the
Parts that belong to the whole kind of Plants: PECULIAR PARTS of Animate Bodies.
But as to Animals, it contains only such as are peculiar to some of them, not
common to all. And these are comprehended with the others under the same Head,
because I could not otherwise place them conveniently to my purpose. They are
distinguishable by their relation to Plants; as being LASTING PARTS. I. ANNUAL
PARTS. II. KINDS OF FRUIT. III.
Animals; belonging chiefly unto SWIMMING Animals. IV. FLYING Animals. V. GOING
Animals. VI.



I. By LASTING PARTS of Plants are meant such as do usually continue during the
life of the Plant, and are not renewed every year. I. LASTING PARTS of Plants.
And because the chief of these is styled WOOD, therefore may that be here
adjoined by way of affinity. These are distinguishable by their Fabric and
Consistence, together with their Position and Shape; being either more Hard and
Solid; considered according to the Position; as to the Earth, wherein Plants do
grow; being either Within it; to which may be adjoined those parts in the body
of the Plant which have some analogy to Roots. 1.
ROOT, Radical, radicate, eradicate. KNOT, Knurle, Knag.
Without it; the upright part above ground; either the greater, upon, and from
which the branches do grow: or the lesser, growing up from the same root. 2.
STOCK, Stem, Trunk, Body, Stalk, Stub, Stump. SUCKER, Shoot.

Plant it self, shooting from the Stem of it; whether greater and spread: or
less, and pointed, being common likewise to Fishes, etc. 3.
BRANCH, Sprig, Sion, young Shoot, Graft, Bough, Arm of a Tree, Slip, Lop.
THORN, Prickle, spinous.

Shape and Figure; more cylindrical and stiff: or more taper and flexile. 4.
STICK, Staff, Stake, Cudgel, Scepter, Mace, Cros^er, Virg, Leading-staff,
Truncheon, Battoon, Rest, Scatch, Crutch, Helve, Perch, Tally. WAND, Twig, Rod,
Switch, Pole.

Soft. Not dissolvable; outward: or inward. 5.
RIND, Bark, Pill. PITH.
Dissolvable, by Water, or by Fire; being either of an aqueous: or an unctuous
nature. 6.
GUM. RESIN.

Liquid; of a more watery: or more unctuous consistence. 7.
JUICE, Sap, succulent. BALSAM.



II. ANNUAL patts of Plants.
II. By ANNUAL Parts are meant such as are renewed every year; which are either
More principal; those parts whereby Plants do propagate their kinds. Antecedent
to the Seed; either that most tender part of a Plant, considerable for its
beauty and color, adhering to the first rudiments of the Seed: or that which
is answerable to this in Willows and Nut-trees, etc. 1.
FLOWER, Blossom, Bloom, blown, Nosegay, Posey. CATKIN, Palm.
The Seed it self; in respect of the Parts belonging to it, and encompassing
it; either the most Soft and succulent; betwixt the outward Skin and the inward
Seed vessel: or the most hard crustaceous part containing the Seed. 2.
PULP. STONE, Shell.
Thin part, for Covering: or Oblong, for Defense. 3.
HUSK, Hull, Shell, Skin, Chaff, Boled. BEARD.

Aggregate of Fruit or Seed; of a Figure more gross and confused: or more
narrow, oblong, and taper. 4.
CLUSTER, Bunch, Pannicle. EAR, Spike, Spire, Bent.


Less principal; to be further distinguished by the Figure, in respect of
Thickness or Thinness; either such as are more thick, namely the first little
swellings in the growth of a Plant, or of the parts of it: or such as are more
thin, namely those laminated parts, belonging either to Plants themselves, or
to their flowers. 5.
SPROUT, Bud, shoot, burgeon, pullutate, repullutate, germinate, put forth,
spring forth. LEAF, Foliags, Blade.
Length; whether such as are Proper to the Flower; the greater, standing up
singly in the middle of the flower: or the lesser, being small threddy
filaments within the flower, whereof there are usually many together. 6.
STYLE. STAMEN, tuft.
Common to other parts of the plant; either those small stemms, upon which
flowers and leaves do grow: or those kinds of threddy shoots, by which climbing
Plants do take hold of and twist about the things that stand next to them 7.
STALK, Footstalk, shank. TENDREL, Clasper.

Hollowness; containing within it, either the leaves of the flower: or the
fruit. 8.
CUP, Perianthium. PERICARPIUM.




III. By FRUITS are meant those more Succulent parts of Plants, which are
either the Receptacles of Seed, or else the Seeds themselves; III. Kinds of
FRUITS.
to which may be adjoined* by way of affinity, the general name denoting the
EXCRESCENCES of Plants, as Galls are of Oken leaves, etc.

Fruits may be distinguished into such as are Receptacles of Seed. Eaten
commonly by men; whose eatable part is covered with a Soft Skin. Without
Stones; being generally a larger fruit. 1.
APPLE, Pomiferous.
With Stones; either the greater kind, containing one single stone encompassed
with an esculent pulp: or the less, growing either in Clusters, or dispersedly
on Trees, Shrubs and Herbs, containing generally several small seeds or stones
in the pulp or husk of it. 2.
PLUM, Pruin, Pruniferous. BERRY, Bacciferous.

Hard Shell; namely that kind of fruit, whose only esculent part is enclosed in
a hard covering. 3.
NUT, Nuciferous.

Not eaten commonly by men, but by beasts. Consisting of one only Seed, in a
Seed-vessel; roundish: or flat-figured. 4.
MAST, Acorn, Pannage. KEY.
Containing several Seeds; being more solid: or hollow. 5.
CONE, Apple. COD, Husk, Pod, Shell, shale, siliquous.


Seed; being the most minute kind of Fruit, whereby Plants propagate their
Kinds; or the Inmost parts of Seeds. 6.
GRAIN, Corn, Kern. KERNEL.



The Peculiar parts of Animals here enumerated are said to be such as belong
chiefly, not only, to the several kinds of Swimming, Flying, Going Animals;
because there are some under each Head that belong also to other Animals. So
Spawn and Crust belong to Insects, and some Beasts, as well as to Fish. So
Trunk or Proboscis, and Egg do belong to some Going Animals, as well as to
Flying. So does Embroyo to a Bat and all Viviparous Fish, as well as to Going
Animals. But these Parts are more commonly and generally found amongst those
Kinds under which they are listed.

IV. Parts peculiar To SWIMMING ANIMALS.
IV. Those Parts peculiar chiefly to SWIMMING ANIMALS, to which Custom has
ascribed distinct names, do serve either for their Outward Covering; with
respect to different Magnitudes. Lesser; being a Thin lamin. 1.
SCALE.
Greater; opening usually upon a Joint, as in Oisters, etc. or an entire
Armature, without such opening, as in Lobsters, etc. 2.
SHELL, Testaceous. CRUST- aceous, Shell.

Respiration; those Opening parts on the sides of the Head, which are thought
to supply the place of Lungs. 3.
GILL.
Progressive motion; serving either to Direct this motion; by feeling such
objects as lie in the way, being long prominencies, standing off from the head,
common to several Insects. 4.
FEELERS, Horns, Antennae.
Assist in this motion; whether of Swimming; as in most kinds of skinned and
scaly fish. Internal; a thin membrane filled with air, by the help of which
Fishes poise themselves in the water. 5.
SWIMMING BLADDER.
External; either those thin broad substances, standing off from the body of
the Fish: or those long slender parts belonging to these 6.
FINN. RAY, Radius, Pinnula.

Going; as in crustaceous exanguious Animals. 7.
CLAW..


Procreation; belonging either to the Males: or Females. 8.
MILT, Soft row. SPAWN, Hard row.



V. The Parts peculiar TO FLYING ANIMALS are either V. Parts peculiar TO FLYING
ANIMALS.
Not fleshy; such as serve for Outward covering, which is done by small oblong
bodies, with hair-like branches growing from both sides of them, the bottom of
which is a kind of a hollow Cylinder like a reed. 1.
FEATHER, Plume, callow, fledge, pluck. QUILL.
Progressive motion; which in such kind of Creatures is twofold. Flying; which
is done by those parts fastened on the shoulders, by the motion of which they
strike the Air: These are generally an aggregate of Feathers; but in Bats and
Flies of a Skinny consistence. To which may be adjoined that aggregate of
hindermost Feathers, whereby they steer themselves in their Flight. 2.
WING. TRAIN, Tail.
Going; by a Foot with several Toes divided: or united by some film for their
better help in Swimming. 3.
TALON, Pounce, Claw, Clutch. FLAT FOOT, Palmipede.

Feeding and Fighting; the mouth of a Bird: or a kind of hollow tube through
which some things suck their nourishment. 4.
BEAK, Bill. TRUNK, Proboscis, Snout.
Fighting only; of a sharp figure; either on the side of the Leg: or in the
Tail, counted poisonous. 5.
SPUR. STING, Prickle.
Procreation; a roundish body covered with a Shell: or a yellowish case.
containing a Maggot, which is transmuted into a Moth or Butterfly. 6.
EGG, Nit, Flyblow. CHRYSALITE, Aurelia.

Fleshy; belonging to the Forepart; and placed either on the top of the head:
or under the Iaw. 7.
COMB, Crest. GILL, Wattle.
Hinder-part; either that Protuberance about the end of the Backbone: or that
Cavity or Glandule in it containing an unctuous substance for the suppling of
the Feathers. 8.
RUMP. OIL-BOX.




VI. Parts peculiar TO GOING ANIMALS.
VI. The Parts peculiar belonging TO GOING ANIMAL^ are such as serve for Outward
covering; considerable according to the More general name; denoting a small
oblong flexile body, growing Plant-like out of the skin: or Aggregates of
these, growing thick together and curled. 1.
HAIR. WOOL.
Particular kinds; either a more big and stiff kind of hair: or the more small
and softer kinds of hairy substances, sometimes ascribed to Feathers. 2.
BRISTLE^ DOWN, Lint.
Aggregates; more proper to Hair: or to Wool. 3.
FURR, Ermin, Minivor, etc. Timber. FLEECE, Flu.
Hairy parts; on the Chin or Face: or on the Neck. 4.
BEARD, Mustach, Whisker. MANE, Crest.

Progressive motion; whether in whole or cloven-footed Animals: or in
multifidous or clawed Animals. 5.
HOOF. NAIL, Claw.
Fighting; the foremost part serving for offense against greater Animals: or
the hindermost part serving for defense against Insects. 6.
HORN, Head, goring. TAIL, Scut, Dock, Crupper, Single of Deer.
Procreation; the young in the Womb before its birth: or the bag wherein it is
contained. 7.
EMBRYO, Child in the Womb. SECUNDINE, Afterbirth.



Of GENERAL PARTS.
. II.
BY GENERAL PARTS of Animals are meant such as are more common to the whole
kind, or at least the more perfect kinds, as Beasts and Men; there being
several parts enumerated under this head, as Milk, Marrow, Bone, Gristle,
Tooth, Dug, Rib, Navel, all under the fifth Difference, and some under the
sixth, which are not common to all sorts of Insects, Fishes, and Birds. These
are distinguishable into Homogeneous. CONTAINED. I. CONTAINING. II.
Heterogeneus. External. HEAD. III. TRUNK. IV. LIMM. V.
INTERNAL. VI.



I. CONTAINED HOMOGENEOUS PARTS are such kind of fluid Bodies as are
distinguishable by their various Consistences and Uses, I. CONTAINED
HOMOGENEOUS PARTS.
and not by any difference of Shape or Figure; because, being liquid, they have
no Shape of their own, but must be contained termino alieno. They are either
more Thin and Aerial. 1.
SPIRIT- uous.
Liquid and Fluid; being either More limpid; and of an aqueous transparency,
for diluting and attenuating the Humors: or a prepared Juice for nourishing the
several parts. 2.
SERUM, Whey. SUCCUS NUTRITIOUS.
More opacous and thick. Not generally diffused; being useful either for
Nutrition; a whitish humor in the Mesentery extracted from the food before
Sanguification: or receiving a farther digestion in the breasts for the
nourishment of the Foetus. 3.
CHYLE. MILK, Cream, Beestings, milch, Dairy.
Generation; common to both Sexes: to which may be adjoined that
excrementitious moisture proper to some Females. 4.
SPERM, Seed, seminal. MENSTRUA, Courses.

Diffused through the whole, and mixed together in one Mass; considered either
according to the General name; denoting that red juice in the bodies of the
more perfect Animals 5.
BLOOD, Crimson.
Particular kinds; of which this whole mass is said to consist, commonly styled
the four Humors, and according to the old Theory, esteemed to be either Hot;
and moist: or dry. 6.
BLOOD, Sanguin. CHOLER, Gall.
Cold; and moist: or dry. 7.
PHLEGM, pituitous. MELANCHOLY, Choler adust.




More consistent; in the Head, the organ of the inward Senses: or in the Cavity
of the Bones, for the moistning of them. 8.
BRAIN. MARROW, medullary.



II. CONTAINING HOMOGENEOUS PARTS are distinguishable by their Qualities of
Hardness and Softness, II. CONTAINING HOMOGENEOUS PARTS.
or by their Figures and Uses; being either of a More hard Consistence; For
strengthening of the Fabric; either the most hard and dry: or less hard; both
devoid of Sense 1.
BONE, Skull. GRISTLE, Cartilage.
For uniting of the Bones and Muscles; either oblong: or the extremity of the
Muscle affixed to the part which is to be moved. 2.
LIGAMENT. TENDON.

More soft Consistence; being either Thin and broad; for covering of the
outward parts: or the inward parts. 3.
SKIN, Cuticle, Fell, Hide, Pelt, Slough, flay, excoriate, gall. MEMBRANE,
Film, Pannicle, Tunicle, Skin, Pericardium, Pericranium, Peritonaeum.
Oblong and narrow; Hollow; for conveyance of the Blood to the Heart: or from
the Heart. 4
VEIN, Venal. ARTERY- all.
Solid; for conveyance of the Spirits, serving for Sense: or those small
hair-like-bodies of which the Muscles consist. 5.
NERVE, Sinew. FIBER, Grain, Filament.

Crass; of no determinate Figure; useful for Motion; according to the name,
more general: or particular. 6.
FLESH, Parenchyma, carnal, Carnosity, incarnate. MUSCLE, Brawn.
Preserving from Heat and Cold: or the Percolation of some humors. 7.
FAT, Suet, Tallow. GLANDULE, Kernel, Emunctory, Almond, Bur, Sweetbread, Nut.





III. Amongst External containing Heterogeneous parts, that which is the chief,
being the Seat and Residence of the Soul, is the HEAD: III. Of the HEAD.
To which may be opposed the other part styled BODY, Carcass.

The parts of the Head are either More general; either the forepart less
hairy: or the hinder-part more hairy. 1.
FACE, Visage, Aspect, Countenance, Favor, Look, Minc, Physiognomy, Feature,
Vizzard, Mask. PATE, Scalp, Noddle, Sconce, Scull, Brain-pan.
More particular parts of the Head and Face are either More properly Organical;
for Sense; whether such parts as are External; used for Seeing, or Hearing. 2.
EY, Ocular, optic, see, view, look, kenn, behold, gaze, pore. EAR, Lug, hear,
hearken, ^uricular.
Tasting, or Smelling: either that Scissure of the Face through which we breath
and receive our nourishment: or that hollow prominence, through which we breath
and smell. 3.
MOUTH* Chaps, muzzle, oral, devour. NOSE, Snowt, Nostril, smell.

Internal; used for
Tasting, Speaking, or Eating; Unequal; either that of a soft Fleshy substance,
whereof there is but one: or that of a most hard and dry consistence, whereof
there are many. 4.
TONGUE, lick. TOOTH, Fang, Tusk, bite, gnaw, nibble, Holders, Grinders.
Concave; either the upper inward part of the Mouth: or the open passage
through the Neck into the middle region of the Body. 5.
PALATE, Roof. THROAT, guttural, jugular.


Less properly Organical; but contributing to the making up the Fabric of the
Face; distinguishable by their various Positions into Upper and fore-right;
Extremity of the Face: or Protuberance over the Eye. 6.
FOREHEAD, Brow, Front. EY-BROW.
Lateral; toward the middle: or toward the upper parts. 7.
CHEEK, Iole. TEMPLES.
Lower; Fore-right; either the upper and lower Extremity of that Scissure which
makes the Mouth: or the Extremity of the Face. 8.
LIP. CHIN.
Lateral; 9.
JAW, Chap, Mandible, Iole. PLACE OF TONSILLAE.






IV. Of the TRUNK.
IV. By TRUNK is meant the middle part of the Body, considered abstractly from
Head and Limms. The Parts of the Trunk are distinguishable by their various
Positions, being either Upper; toward the top of the Trunk. Not determined to
fore or hinder part, but common to both; the Stem-like of the Head: or the
upper Convexity of Breast and Back. 1.
NECK, Nape, Dulap. SHOULDER, Scapulary.
Determined to the Forepart; more general: or more specially the glandulous
part designed for milk in females. 2.
BREAST, Pectoral, Bosom. DUG, Vdder, Teat, Nipple, Pap, Breast.
Hinder part; more general: or more specially the Bones of it. 3.
BACK. VERTEBRA, Spondyl, spinal, Chine.


Middle. Hinder-part; the direct Muscles: or transverse Bones. 4.
LOIN, Chine. RIB.
Side-part; more general: or more specially the lower part of it. 5.
SIDE, Lateral, collateral. FLANK, Rand.
Forepart; more general: or more specially the concave middle part of it. 6.
BELLY, Paunch, Panel, Peritenaeum. NAVEL, Vmbilical.

Lower; Forepart; the concave part between the belly and thighs: or seat of
the Privities between the thighs. 7.
GROIN. SHARE, Twist.
Hinder-part; more general: or specially the Cavity. 8.
BUTTOCK, Breech, Haunch, Ham. FUNDAMENT, Dock.




V. By LIMM or Member is meant any special part designed for Action, V. Of the
LIMMS.
moveable upon, and distinguishable by its Ioints: for which reason the word
JOINT may be annexed to it by way of affinity, one being the thing moved, and
the other the thing upon which the motion is made.

They are either Upper Limm. Innermost: or next to the Trunk, with its Joint. 1.
ARM. SHOULDER.
Middlemost. 2.
CUBIT. ELBOW, Pinion.
Outermost. 3.
HAND- le, wield, Manual, manage, Palm, Fist, Clutch, Grasp, Haft, Hilt, Glove.
WRIST.

Lower Limm. Innermost: or next to the Trunk. 4.
THIGH, Hip, Ham, Haunch, Pestle. HUCKLE.
Middlemost. 5.
SHANK, Leg, Shin, Calf. KNEE.
Outermost. 6.
FOOT, Hock, Trotter, tread, trample, stamp, Instep. HEEL, Calcitrate, kick,
Pastern.

Common both to upper and lower Limm; the Joints of which may be distinguished
by the order of first, second, or third: or innermost, middlemost, or
outermost. 7.
FINGER, Toe, Thumb. KNUCKLE.



VI. Of the INWARDS.
VI. Containing Heterogeneous Internal parts, called INWARDS, Entrals, Bowels,
Foy, Pluck, Purtenance, Vmbels, Hastlet, Garbage, Giblets, reckoning from the
uppermost, may be distinguished by their Order, Shape and Uses, into Upper;
toward the Summity of the Body. Hollow and oblong; for the conveyance of the
Nourishment: or of the Breath. 1.
GULLET. WINDPIPE, Rough Artery, Weasand.
Massy and more solid; within the Breast; for Bloud-making: or Breathing. 2.
HEART, Cordial, Core, Pericardium. LUNGS, Lights.
Thin and broad; for partition transverse, betwixt the upper and lower Belly:
or direct, betwixt the Lobes of the Lungs. 3.
DIA^HRAGM, Midriff. M^DIASTINE.

Lower; distinguishable Both by their Shapes and Uses. Hollow; wide, but not
long, for containing* and digesting of Food: long, but not wide, for conveying
of the Food and Excrement. 4.
STOMACH, Maw, Paunch, Ventricle, Craw, Crop, Gorge, Pouch, Gizzard, Tripe.
GUT, Entrails, Bowels, Garbage, Chitterling, Colon.
Massy and solid; for separating of Choler: or of Melancholy. 5.
LIVER, Hepatic. SPLEEN, Milt.
Thin and broad; by which the Guts are connected: or covered. 6.
MESENTERY. CAUL, Kell.

By their Uses alone, as being for Separating the Urine: or containing the
Urine or the Gall. 7.
KIDNEY, Reins. BLADDER, Vesicle.
Generation; denoting the parts for Generation: or the Glandules for preparing
the Sperm. 8.
PRIVITIES, Genitals, Pizzle, Yard, Foreskin, Prepuce. TESTICLE, Stone, geld,
spay, Eunuch.
Conception in Females, namely, the part containing the Faetus. 9.
WOMB, Mother, Matrix, hysterical, uterine.





CHAP. VII. Concerning the Predicament of Quantity, viz. I. Magnitude. II.
Space; and III. Measure.
THe chief notions belonging to the Predicament of Quantity are reducible to
these general Heads; MAGNITUDE. SPACE. MEASURE.


Of MAGNITUDE.
The word MAGNITUDE is intended to signify all the notions of continued
Quantity:. I*
to which may be adjoined by way of affinity the word EXTENSION, by which is
meant that kind of Quantity whereby a thing is said to have partem extra
partem, one part out of another, being the same thing with the former under
another Consideration.

Magnitudes are distinguishable according to their DIMENSIONS. I. MUTUAL
RELATIONS to one another. II. AFFECTIONS, in respect of Figure; whether SIMPLE.
III. Compound; either LINEARY. IV. PLANARY. V. SOLIDARY. VI.




As for Oration, which is enumerated in the usual Systems as one of the Species
of Quantity; that is now by common consent acknowledged to be very improperly
styled Quantity; and therefore it is left out here, and referred to another
place.

I. That kind of Quantity whereby the Magnitude of Bodies is to be measured, is
called DIMENSION. I. DIMENSION.
To which may be adjoined upon account of Affinity, That notion of Quantity,
whereby a thing is capable of being separated into several parts, DIVISION,
distribute, part.

Dimensions are of a fourfold difference.

The least of Magnitudes, so styled by those who write de Indivisibilibus, as
being in their account infinitely little.

1. POINT, Prick, Tittle, Punctilio, Ace, Jot, Whit.

The second kind, described by the flux of a point, or composed of infinite
such points, is styled.

2. LINE, delineate, rule.

The third, described by the draught of a line, or composed of infinite such
lines.

3. SUPERFICIES, Plain, Surface. To which may be annexed, that more particular
notion of Superficies, called AREA, Plot; Bed, Page.

The fourth, described by the lifting up a Superficies, or composed of infinite
Superficies.

4. SOLID, Body, Bulk.

By these may be expressed those Algebraical notions of Absolute, Lineary,
Quadratic, Cubic; and so, continuing this Table, Quadrato-Quadratic,
Quadrato-Cubic, Cubo-Cubic, Quadrato-Cubo-Cubic, etc. as far as one pleases.

II. The MUTUAL RELATIONS of one Dimension to another are either of II. MUTUAL
RELATIONS.
Point to line; as being either in the midst: or extremities of it. 1.
CENTER. POLE, Zenith, Nadyr.
Point to Lines, or Line to Plains; which do mutually either meet: or
intersect. 2.
VERTEX. INTERSECTION, Cut.
Line to Plain; or Plain to Solid. Angular; being either in the midst: or the
extremities of it. 3.
DIAGONAL. SIDE.
Round; being either Extern; touching: or cutting it. 4.
TANGENT. SECANT.
Intern; Central; either more general, passing from side to side: or
particularly that which passes from Pole to Pole. 5.
DIAMETER, Ray. AXIS.
Not central; either from Periphery to Diameter: or from Periphery to
Periphery. 6.
SINE. CHORD.



Line to Line, Plain to Plain, or Solid to Solid; having Bare respect to one
another in regard of Distance; either being aequidistant: or else removing
farther: or approaching nearer. 7.
PARALLEL. DIVERGING, Reclining. CONVERGING, inclining.

Position; making an Angle, oblique: or right: or parallel. 8.
OBLIQUE, a-skue, a-slope, awry, Declivity, shelving, slaunt, splay, skue,
slope, wry, steep, incline, lean, glance, swagg, asquint, leer. DIRECT, Erect,
upright, perpendicular, advance, precipitate, headlong, downright, up an end,
set up, prick up. TRANSVERSE, Cross, overthwart, thwart, traverse, point blank.


Mutual Contact; either returning from the other: or cutting through the
other.. 9.
REFLECTED, Bound, rebound, recoil, repercussion, reverberate* rebuff.
REFRACTED.




III. To the Affections of Magnitudes, III. SIMPLE FIGURE.
in respect of more SIMPLE FIGURE, may be adjoined the general notion of
FIGURE, Shape, Feature, Fashion, Form, Frame, Scheme, Lineament, the Make, well
set, or proportioned, transform, transfigure, deface, disfigure.

These Affections may be distinguished in^o such as belong Only to Lines drawn
from point to point; the nearest way: or not the nearest way 1.
STRAIGHTNESS, Right, direct, point blank. CROOKEDNESS, Curve, a-wry, hooked,
bow, bend, wry, embow, winding, indirect, fetch a compass.
To lines and Plains; whether considered Absolutely; in General; contained
within one line, whose every part is equally distant from the same Center: or
three or more lines, whose extremities touch one another. 2.
CIRCLE, Periphery, Circumference, environ, encircle, surround, Ring, Rund^e,
Epicycle. ANGLE, Corner, Coin, Nook, Elbow, Polygon.
Special; of the Angular, whether of ninety degrees: or more: or less. 3.
RIGHT ANGLE. OBTUSE, blunt, dull, ACUTE, sharp, keen, whet.


Respectively; in Bodies whose superficies is composed either all of straight
lines: or of lines bending in the midst, outward: or inward. 4.
PLAIN, level, flat, even. UNEQUAL, prominent, gibbous, protuberant, turgid,
embowed. CONCAVE, Hollow, Cavity, Pit, Hole.


To Plains or Solids, of Simple Figure; whose superficies is Circular: or
Angular of equal sides. 5.
SPHERE, Orb, Globe, Ball, Bullet, Round, Bullet, Pomander, Pommel, Bid CUBE,
Die.
Mixed Figures; described either by the Lifting up of a Circle: or of an
Angular plain. 6.
CYLINDER, Bar, Column, Cann, Cannon, Role. PRISM, Bar, Wedge.
Laying on, in progression from a Point, infinite Plains circular: or angular.
7.
CONE, Taper, Spire, Steeple, Shaft, Pinnacle. PYRAMID, Spire, Steeple, Shaft,
Pinnacle, Obelisk.


To Lines, or Plains, or Solids; denoting either The dif^erent Sections of a
Cone, being cut either parallel to the sides of it: or besides the Parallel
either way. 8.
PARABOLA- icall. HYPERBOLE. ELLIPSIS, oval.

The revolution of a Line about a Cone: or Cylinder. 9.
SPIRAL, Serpentine, turbinated, wreath, coyling, worn. HELIX, Winding.




IV. Compound Figures LINEARY.
IV. COMPOUND FIGURES of Magnitude LINEARY by unclosed Lines, are either More
Simple; by One Line; whether solid: or hollow. 1.
PIN, Gad. Nail, Peg, Tag, Tack, Tenter. Needle, Probe. HOLE, Hollow, Pore,
Vent, Meash, Orifice, Meuse, punch, perforate, run thorough.
Two lines; The end of one meeting with the end of the other; either unequal: or
concave. Sharp; 2.
TOOTH, Cusp, Point, Neb, Scrag, Tine, Tenon, Cog, ingrail, indented. NOTCH,
Nick, Nock, crenated, Gap, hatched, inveck, indented.
Blunt. 3.
PROTUBERANCE, Prominence, Process, Stud, Boss, Excrescence, Gibbous, ^rump,
Bunch, Knob, Rub, jutting, rising, tuberous, standing out, stick out, goggle,
copped, turgid, Brow, Hillock, Knob, Knot, Node, Cragg, Scrag, Lobe,
gorbellied, heave, swell, strut. DENT, Dimple, Sinking, Dock, Crease, indent,
Hole, Pit.

The end of one with the midst of the other meeting: or the midst of one with
the midst of the other cutting. 4.
FIGURE of the letter T, Crutch. CROSS, Decussation, athwart, Turn-stile.

Three Lines; at Several points making Angles; either on the same side: or on
diverse sides. 5.
STAPLE. WINDLE.
The same point meeting, or cutting; which is applicable likewise to more lines
then three. 6.
TUFT* Lock, Tassel, Tresses, Thrum, Hassock, Nap, Rug, Fringe. ASTERISC.


More Compounded; Distinctly; Pin with versatil Pin: or with versatil Lamin. 7.
WHIP, Flail, Scourge. FLAG, Fane, Banroll, Penon.
Pin with Tooth or Protuberance, etc. or with Notch or Dent. 8.
HOOK, Crook, Clasp, Hasp, Tatches, Flook, Tenter, Cramp-iron. FORK, Prong,
horned.

Mixedly, with some kind of Alternation; either with Protuberance and Dent: or
with Staple and its reverse. 9.
UNDULATED, waved, winding. CRENATED, Battlement.




V. Compound Figures of Magnitude PLANARY, V. Compound Figures PLANARY.
expressible by closed Lines, may be distinguished into such as do either
Comprehend Superficies. Straight; either of three: or of four Angles. 1.
TRIANGLE. SQUARE, Quadrangle, Quadrate, Diamond figure, Rhomb-oid, Lozenge,
Parallellogram.
Curve; either Round: or Oblong. 2.
RING, Ferule, Hoop, Annulet, Collet, Rundle, Rowel. LOOP, Button hole, Eye,
Link, Noose, Halter.
Mixed; being either part of a Ring with one straight: or a whole Ring with
several Diameters. 3.
BOW. WHEEL.

Consist in being Superficies; as the precedent Figures fluxed into breadth. So
the Flux of a Pin: or a Hole, do make 4.
LAMIN, Flake, Leaf, Board, Plank, Lath, Plate, Schedule, Scrole, Sheet, Wafer,
Cake, Leant, Flap, Label, Coit. CHINK, Crevise, Fissure, Cleft, Crack, Cranny,
Chap, Flaw, Rift, Split, Slit, Loop-hole, cleave, spring a leak.
The FIGURE T or Cross and Asterisc, do make 5.
TRESSEL, Table. PINION, Nut.
Cusp: or Notch, do make. 6.
EDG, Sharp. GVTTER, Chamfer.
Protuberance: and Dent. 7.
RIDGE, Bank, Dam, Bridge, Edg, Ledg. FVRROW, Ditch, Dike, Kennel, Channel,
Fosse, Trench, Dock, Drein, Cut, Dimple, Rivel, Shrivel, Wrinkle, rumple,
pucker, Pleit.
Staple and Windle 8.
FORM. STEP, Grees.
Square and Ring. 9.
TUBE SQUARE. TUBE ROUND, or Pipe, Spout, Trunck, Tunnel.




VI. Compound Figures of Magnitude Solidary, VI Compound Figures SOLIDARY.
may be distinguished into such as are either Intern; denoting the inner parts
of a Magnitude to be either full of small Cavities: or to be one great Cavity:
or to have no Cavity. 1.
POROUSNESS, Spunginess, fungous, sinking, hollow. HOLLOWNESS, Cavity, concave,
Grot, Cave, Den. MASSINESS, solid, Bulk.

Extern; compounded either of Sphere or Cube, with Cylinder: or with Cone. 2.
BOTTLE, Button, Bolt-head. PIN, headed.
Cylinder or Prism, with Diverse Figures; whether Cube and Pyramid: or Cone and
Pyramid. 3.
PEDESTAL. TURRET or Tent, Tower, Pinnacle.
Another of the same kind; either perpendicular: or transverse. 4.
GUDGEON. MALLET.

Cone with Cone; having Base to Base: or Vertex to Vertex. 5.
BUOY FIGURE. HOURGLASS FIGURE.
Elliptic; representing the figure of a Sphere crushed, either about the midst
by a Hoop: or at the ends by two opposite Plains. 6.
OVAL, Elliptical. BOWL.
Spirals: or Helixes. 7.
BOTTOM, Clue, glomerate, wind about. SKEIN, Hanke, Reel.




Of SPACE.
THe word SPACE, Scope, Room, Compass, Interim, Interval, (according to the
common use of it) is a name importing the more general notion of that wherein
any thing is contained or done;. II.
Comprehending both Time. Place. Situation.


I. TIME.
I. By TIME, Tract, Tide, Process, Opportunity, Season, Continuance, is meant
continued successive Quantity, having for its common term, INSTANT, Moment,
Trice, Nick.

This is distinguishable according to the Simple differences of it. 1.
PRESENT, at this time, now, immediately, instantly* current, ready. PAST,
expired, former, foregoing, ago, already, even now, heretofore, gone, over,
out, a-late, erewhile, long since. FVTVRE, time to come, after-time, hereafter,
presently, anon, by and by, shortly, straitway, ere long, henceforth, process
of time, after a long while.

Mixed relations of it. Comparative; betwixt The Existings of several things;
whether both together in the same time: or whether in diverse times, so that
one is before or after the other. 2.
SIMULTANEOUS, of the same time, Synchronism* contemporary, compatible,
consist, together, concomitant. DISTANT, PRECEDING, antecedent, former,
foregoing, previous, Priority, before, take place, get the start, Predecessor,
premise. SVCCEEDING, latter, Posteriority, succedaneous, hinder, follow, go
after, Successor.

The Considerations of the same thing at several times; whether Past; little:
or much. 3.
NEWNESS, Renovation, innovate, renew, anew, Neoteric, Neophyte, novel, Novice,
Puny, modern, fresh, upstart, green, late, last, a little while ago. OLDNESS,
ancient, Antiquity, pristin, senior, stale, inveterate, of long standing, yore,
obsolete, out of date, a long while ago.
Future; little: or much 4.
SOONNESS, sudden, early, rath, betimes, forthwith, shortly, presently,
eftsoon, quickly, in a trice, out of hand, imminent, immediate, incontinent,
instant, ready, anticipate, accelerate, put on, rid way, in the turning of a
hand, twinkling of an eye, timely, speedily, in have, after a little time.
LATENESS, tardy, last, adjourn, defer, delay, put off, out of date, dilatory,
procrastinate, prolong, prorogue, protract, respite, retard, after a long
while, far in the day.


Absolute; Particular; Determinate; expressing at what time a thing was: or
from whence it is to be reckoned. 5.
DATE. EPOCH, Hegira.
Indeterminate; expressing only the Continuing of it; a great: or little time.
6.
PERMANENCY, lasting, abiding, continuing, durable, stay, remain, persevere,
enduring, incessant, indelible, perennial, tedious, hold out, of standing.
TRANSITORINESS, fading, flitting, frail, glance, transient, temporary, short,
for a spirt, for a little while, quickly gone.
Recurring of it; many: or few times. 7.
FREQUENCY, often, ever and anon, thick, rife, common, recourse, resort.
SELDOMNESS, rare, scarce, strange, unusual, thin, desuetude.


Universal; Collective; when a thing continues throughout the whole time: or
only some intermediate parts of it. 8.
PERPETUITY, continual, incessant, still, at all times, always. AT TIMES,
temporary, by snatches, by fits, bout, ever and anon, now and then, respit,
sometimes.
Distributive; when a thing exists in every part of time: or not in any part of
it. 9.
EVERNESS, Eternity, endless, for ever and ever, always. NEVERNESS.






II. PLACE.
II. The Space wherein any thing is contained, is called PLACE, Room, local,
standing, station, precinct, set, put, position, lay, dispose, pitch, plant
Guns, dislocate, Prospect.

It is distinguishable, as the former, according to the more Simple differences
of it; denoting that place; wherein we are: or out of which we are. 1.
PRESENCE, face to face, at hand, here, hand to hand, confront, ready,
residence. ABSENCE, Mich, away, non-residence.
Mixed relations of it. Comparative; betwixt the Existence of several things;
whether both together in the same place: or in diverse places. 2.
CONTIGUITY, touch, contact, hit, join, close, grazing. DISTANCE, off, keep
off, bear off, stave off, way off, set farther, stand away.
Consideration of Distance or Place interposed, according to the differences of
Little: or Much. 3.
NEARNESS, Vicinity, Propinquity, Proximity, nigh, next close, adjacent,
adjoyn, neighbor, imminent, impendent, immediate, ready at hand, accost, draw
on, approach, at, by, hard-by, besides, hithermost. REMOTENESS, far, farther,
aloof, wide of, distant, outmost, ultimate, great way off.

Absolute; Particular. Determinate; expressing what is the particular place to
which a thing belongs: or whence it began. 4.
HOME, Scene. RISE, Source, Country, Original, Spring, Root.
Indeterminate; ^xpressing only The taking up of a great: or little place. 5.
AMPLENESS, spacious, large, burly, wide, vast. NARROWNESS, close, scantness,
strictness, restrained.
The occurring in many: or few places. 6.
OBVIOUSNESS, common, rise, thick. RARENESS, seldom, scarce, thin.


Universal. Collective; when a thing is continued throughout the whole place:
or is only in some parts of it. 7.
CONTINUANCE, produce, subsist, along, close. DISCONTINUANCE, by coasts,
sparsim, cease, pause, respit, break off, intermit, interrupt.
Distributive; when a thing is in every place: or none. 8.
UBIQUITY, Omnipresence. NVLLIBIETY.






III. The mixed Notion made up of Position and Place, III. SITUATION.
or the Application of the parts of a Body to the parts of Place, respectively,
is styled SITUATION, Seat, set, site, lying, standing, pitch, plant, Position,
placing; to which may be annexed, by way of affinity, that respect of the
imaginary face of a thing toward some other thing or place, called VERGENCY,
tending, leaning, inclining, hanker, toward, upon that hand, Rhombe.

These are either more General; respecting the Universe: or the four chief
terms of it. 1.
EAST Orient. WEST, Occidental.
2.
NORTH, Septentrional, Arctic. SOVTH, Meridional, Antarctic.
Special; with relation to the several parts of any thing, considered as a
Line; the interjacent part: or those which are most remote from each other. 3.
MIDDLE, Intermediate, Mean, Core, Heart, Wast, main body, Noon, between both,
Interim, Interval. EXTREME, Term, last, end, utter, utmost. END, final, last,
extremity, ultimate, surcease, terminate, expire, in fine. BEGINNING, First.

Superficies; the outmost parts of which, being considered either with relation
to the thing it self: or some other thing to which it is adjoined, is commonly
styled 4.
SIDE, Flank, Wing, Cheek, lateral, collateral, Limb, Rim, Brim, Brink,
Edge-wise, Hem, Ridg, Skirt, Lift, Selvage, Welt, Guard, Eaves, Battlement.
MARGIN, Limit, Marchess, Border, Verge, Mere, Bound, Term, Front-ier,
Landmark, adjacent, abutt, confine, Purliew.
Body; In general; either as to such parts as are Higher: or Lower. 5
UPPER-SIDE, Ridge, above, vertical. VNDER-SIDE, lower, nether, bottom.
Within: or Without. 6.
INSIDE, internal, intrinsecal, inward, inner, inmost, intestine, OVT-SIDE,
external, extrinsecal, outward, outmost, utter, utmost, Surface, superficial,
exterior, ambient.

Living Bodies; specially men, with relation either to The Head: or Foot. 7.
TOP, Tip, Head, Crown, Upper end, Knap, Apex, Vertical, Chapter. BOTTOM,
Base, Lower end, Pedestal, Foot, Sole.
The Face: or Back. 8.
FOREPART, Front, Frontispiece, Prow, Van-tguard, Vanward, foreward.
HINDER-PART, Back, Rere, rereward, endorse, last, Poop, Posterior,
The right hand: or left hand. 9
RIGHT SIDE, Dexter, Starrbord. LEFT SIDE, Sinister, Larrbord.






Of MEASURE.
. III.
THose several relations of Quantity, whereby men use to judge of the Multitude
or Greatness of things, MEASURE.
are styled by the name of MEASURE, Dimension, mete, survey, Rule; to which the
relative term of PROPORTION, Portion, Rate, Tax, Size, Scantling, Pittance,
Share, Dose, Mess, Symetry, Analogy, commensurate, dispense, allot, adapt, is
of some Affinity, signifying an equality or similitude of the respects that
several things or quantities have to one another. They are distinguishable into
such as respect either MULTITUDE. I. MAGNITUDE. II. GRAVITY. III. VALOR. IV.
Duration. More GENERALLY CONSIDERED. V. As RESTRAINED TO LIVING CREATURES. VI.



I. MULTITUDE.
I To the Measure whereby we judge of the MULTITUDE of things may be annexed
NUMBER, enumerate, reckon, compute, muster, count, re-count, Tale, tell,
Arithmetic, Cyphering. If the way of Numeration were now to be stated, it would
seem more convenient to determine the first Period or Stand at the number
Eight, and not at Ten; because the way of Dichotomy or Bipartition being the
most natural and easy kind of Division, that Number is capable of this down to
an Unite, and according to this should be the several denominations of all
other kinds of Measures, whether of Capacity, Gravity, Valor, Duration. So
eight Farthings would make a Penny, eight Pence a Shilling, eight Shillings an
Angel, eight Angels a Pound. So eight Grains should make a Scruple, eight
Scruples a Dram, eight Drams an Ounce, eight Ounces a Pound, etc. But because
general custom has already agreed upon the decimal way, therefore I shall not
insist upon the change of it.

The different degrees of Number generally received, are these.

1 ONE, Ace, Unite, Once, First, Imprimis, Single. 2 TWO, a Couple, a Brace, a
Pair, a Yoke, Second-ly, Twice, Double, Twofold, Bipartite. 3 THREE, a Leash,
Ternary, Trey, Third-ly, Tertian, Thrice, Treble, Threefold, Tripartite,
Trine-ity. 4 FOUR, Fourth-ly, Quartan, Quaternion, Fourfold, Quadruple,
Quadrupartite. Quartile. 5 FIVE, Fifth-ly, Quintuple, Fivefold. 6 SIX,
Sixth-ly, Sixfold, Sextuple, Sextile, Senary. 7 SEVEN, Seventh-ly, Septuple,
Sevenfold. 8 EIGHT, Eighth-ly, Octuple, Eightfold. 9 NINE, Ninth-ly, Ninefold.
How other numbers besides these here enumerated may be expressed both in
writing and speech, see hereafter, Chap.

II. Measures of Magnitude do comprehend both those of Length, II. MAGNITUDE.
and of Superficies or Area, together with those of Solidity; both comprehended
in that which is adjoined, viz. the word CAPACITY, hold, contain. The several
Nations of the World do not more differ in their Languages, then in the various
kinds and proportions of these Measures. And it is not without great
difficulty, that the Measures observed by all those different Nations who
traffic together, are reduced to that which is commonly known and received by
any one of them; which labor would be much abbreviated, if they were all of
them fixed to any one certain Standard. To which purpose, it were most
desirable to find out some natural Standard, or universal Measure, which has
been esteemed by Learned men as one of the desiderata in Philosophy. If this
could be done in Longitude, the other Measures might be easily fixed from
thence.

This was heretofore aimed at and endeavored after in all those various
Measures, derived from natural things, though none of them do sufficiently
answer this end. As for that of a Barley corn, which is made the common ground
and original of the rest, the magnitude and weight of it may be so various in
several times and places, as will render it incapable of serving for this
purpose; which is true likewise of those other Measures, an Inch, Palm, Span,
Cubit, Fathom, a Foot, Pace; etc. none of which can be determined to any
sufficient certainty.

Some have conceived that this might be better done by subdividing a Degree
upon the Earth: But there would be so much difficulty and uncertainty in this
way as would render it unpracticable. Others have thought, it might be derived
from the Quicksilver experiment: But the unequal gravity and thickness of the
Atmosphere, together with the various tempers of Air in several places and
seasons, would expose that also to much uncertainty.

The most probable way for the effecting of this, is that which was first
suggested by Doctor Christopher Wren, namely, by Vibration of a Pendulum: Time
it self being a natural Measure, depending upon a revolution of the Heaven or
the Earth, which is supposed to be everywhere equal and uniform. If any way
could be found out to make Longitude commensurable to Time, this might be the
foundation of a natural Standard. In order to which,

Let there be a solid Ball exactly round, of some of the heaviest metals: Let
there be a String to hang it upon, the smallest, limberest, and least subject
to retch: Let this Ball be suspended by this String, being extended to such a
length, that the space of every Vibration may be equal to a second Minute of
time, the String being, by frequent trials, either lengthned or shortened, till
it attain to this equality: These Vibrations should be the smallest, that can
last a sufficient space of time, to afford a considerable number of them,
either 6, or 500 at least; for which end, its passing an arch of five or six
degrees at the first, may be sufficient. The Pendulum being so ordered as to
have every one of its Vibrations equal to a second minute of time, which is to
be adjusted with much care and exactness; then measure the length of this
String, from its place of suspension to the Center of the Ball; which Measure
must be taken as it hangs free in its perpendicular posture, and not otherwise,
because of stretching: which being done, there are given these two Lengths,
viz. of the String, and of the Radius of the Ball, to which a third
Proportional must be found out; which must be, as the length of the String from
the point of Suspension to the Center of the Ball is to the Radius of the Ball,
so must the said Radius be to this third: which being so found, let two fifths
of this third Proportional be set off from the Center downwards, and that will
give the Measure desired. And this (according to the discovery and observation
of those two excellent persons, the Lord Viscount Brouncker, President of the
Royal Society, and Mon. Huygens, a worthy Member of it) will prove to be 38
Rhinland Inches, or (which is all one) 39 Inches and a quarter, according to
our London Standard.

Let this Length therefore be called the Standard; let one Tenth of it be
called a Foot; one Tenth of a Foot, an Inch; one Tenth of an Inch, a Line. And
so upward, Ten Standards should be a Perch; Ten Pearches, a Furlong; Ten
Furlongs, a Mile; Ten Miles, a League, etc.

And so for Measures of Capacity: The cubical content of this Standard may be
called the Bushel: the Tenth part of the Bushel, the Peck; the Tenth part of a
Peck, a Quart; and the Tenth of that, a Pint, etc. And so for as many other
Measures upwards as shall be thought expedient for use.

As for Measures of Weight; Let this cubical content of distilled Rainwater be
the Hundred; the Tenth part of that, a Stone; the Tenth part of a Stone, a
Pound; the Tenth of a Pound, an Ounce; the Tenth of an Ounce, a Dram; the Tenth
of a Dram, a Scruple; the Tenth of a Scruple, a Grain, etc. And so upwards; Ten
of these cubical Measures may be called a Thousand, and Ten of these Thousand
may be called a Tun, etc.

As for the Measures of Money, it is requisite that they should be determined by
the different Quantities of those two natural Metals which are the most usual
materials of it, viz. Gold and Silver, considered in their Purity without any
allay. A Cube of this Standard of either of these Metals may be styled a
Thousand or a Talent of each; the Tenth part of this weight, a Hundred; the
Tenth of a Hundred, a Pound; the Tenth of a Pound, an Angel; the Tenth of an
Angel, a Shilling; the Tenth of a Shilling, a Penny; the Tenth of a Penny, a
Farthing.

I mention these particulars, not out of any hope or expectation that the World
will ever make use of them* but only to show the possibility of reducing all
Measures to one determined certainty.

These measures of MAGNITUDE (to which may be annexed the Notion of CONTENT)
may be reduced to these Heads.

1 Line. 2 INCH. 3 FOOT. 4 STANDARD. 5 PERCH. 6 FURLONG. 7 MILE. 8 LEAGUE. 9
DEGREE.
Each of which is applicable either to Longitude, Area, or Bulk: the last of
which comprehends the Measures of Capacity.

III. GRAVITY.
III. Measures of GRAVITY (to which may be annexed for affinity the thing by
which Gravity is measured, styled WEIGHT, Poize, counterpoise, Plummet,) may be
distributed into these kinds.

1 GRAIN. 2 SCRUPLE. 3 DRAM. 4 OUNCE. 5 POUND. 6 STONE 7 HUNDRED. 8 THOUSAND. 9
TUN.
IV. The Gradual differences of that common Measure of the VALUATION or worth
of all vendible things (to which may be adjoined that which is used as this
common Measure, styled MONEY, Cash, Coin, IV. VALOR*
Bank, Treasure, pecuniary, Mint, Stamp, Medal, Counter, Purse,) may be
distinguished into 1 FARTHING, Dodkin. 2 PENNY. 3 SHILLING. 4 ANGEL. 5 POUND. 6
HUNDRED. 7 THOUSAND.


V. Unto the Measure of TIME may be adjoined for its affinity the word which
signifies the Permanency of any thing in its existence, V. TIME:
from its beginning to its end, DURATION, abide, continue, persist, endure,
hold out, last long, persevere, everlasting, survive.

Time is usually distributed by the Revolution of the heavenly Bodies, or
rather of the Earth and Moon, into such Spaces as are required to a revolution
of the Earth in its Orb; according to the Whole 1.
YEAR, Twelvemonth, Anniversary, Annual, Biennial, etc.
Parts; considerable as being the proper seasons for the Growth and ripening of
Vegetables. 2.
SPRING, Vernal. SUMMER.
Decaying of Vegetables, according to a lesser: or greater degree. 3.
AUTUMN, Fall of the Leaf, Harvest. WINTER, Hybernal, hyemal.


Moon in its own proper course about the Earth: to which may be adjoined the
usual name given to the fourth part of this. 4.
MONTH, Menstrual. WEEK, Sennight, Fortnight.
Earth about its Axis; according to the Whole 5.
DAY NATURAL, Quotidian.
Parts; Greater; Time while the Sun continues above: or below the Horizon. 6.
DAY ARTIFICIAL, Diurnal. NIGHT, Nocturnal, Pernoctation, lodge.
Part of the day artificial, former: or later. 7.
MORNING, Mattins, early, dawning, betimes. AFTERNOON, Evening.

Lesser parts of time; being each of them the 24th part of a natural day,
called an Hour: or the 60th part of an hour. 8.
HOUR, Horary. MINUTE.





VI. Lifetime, or the AGE of LIVING Creatures, (as particularly applied to
Men, VI. AGE.
to which there is something answerable in other Animals; to which may be
adjoined the word SECULUM, Age, Estate, Generation,) is, according to common
use, distinguished by such Terms as do denote the gradual differences of it.

The first and most imperfect State, when destitute of the use of reason: or
having but little use of it* comprehending the two first ten years. 1.
INFANCY, Babe, Child, Cub. CHILDHOOD, Boy, Girl, Wench, green years^
The less imperfect Age, subject to the sway of Passions; either more, or less,
containing the third and fourth ten years. 2.
ADOLESCENCY, adult, Lad, Springal, Stripling, Youth, Lass, Damosel, Wench.
YOUTH, Iuvenile, Younker.
The perfect Age as to the Body: or the declining Age of the Body, but most
perfect for the Mind, styled vergens aetas, or the Age of Wisdom; the former
comprehending the space betwixt the 40th and the 50th, and the latter
containing the space betwixt the 50th and the 60th year. 3.
MANHOOD, virile, middle age. DECLINING AGE, elderly.
The last and most imperfect Age, by reason of the decay of Vigor, which
commonly happens both in Body and Mind, either according to the first and
better part of it: or the last and worst part of this State, reaching from the
60th to the 70th, and from thence for the time after. 4.
OLD AGE. DECREPIDNESS, Crone.

CHAP. VIII. Concerning the Predicament of Quality; the several Genus's
belonging to it, namely, I. Natural Power. II. Habit. III. Manners. IV.
Sensible quality. V. Disease; with the various Differences and Species under
each of these.
WHether many of those things now called Quality, be not reducible to Motion
and Figure, and the Situation of the parts of Bodies, is a question which I
shall not at present consider. It Is sufficient that the particulars here
specified are most commonly known and apprehended under that notion as they are
here represented, and are still like to be called by the same names, whatever
new Theory may be found out of the causes of them.

The several Genus's under this Predicament are such kinds of Qualities as are
either Internal; whether Innate; NATURAL POWER. Superinduced; considered more
Generally; styled by the common name of HABIT. Specially; with respect to the
customary Actions of men considered as voluntary MANNERS.

External; denoting either Those more general affections of bodies which are
the objects of sense. SENSIBLE QUALITY.
Those special impotencies of living bodies, whereby they are disabled for
their natural functions. SICKNESS.




As for Figure, which by the common Theory is reduced under this Predicament,
that, being a Qualification or Modification of Quantity, may more properly be
referred thither.

Of NATURAL POWER.
THose kinds of Natural innate Qualities,. I.
whereby things are rendered able or unable to act or resist, according to their
peculiar natures, are styled NATURAL POWERS, Faculty, Capacity, Endowment,
Talent, Gift, Ability, Strength, Energy, Force, Virtue, may, can. IMPOTENCIES,
Disability, Incapacity, invalid, unable, weak, infirm, lame, dead.


These Natural Powers may be distributed into such as are More particular; viz.
the Faculties that are RATIONAL. I. Sensitive. INWARD. II. OUTWARD. III.

More general; being either SPIRITUAL. IV. Corporeal; relating to the good of
the INDIVIDUUM. V. SPECIES. VI.




I. Those Faculties whereby we are enabled to apprehend and compare the general
natures of things as to Truth and Falsehood, Good and Evil, I. RATIONAL
FACULTIES.
and to demean our selves accordingly toward them, are styled RATIONAL,
Reasonable, Ratiocination. IRRATIONAL, Unreasonable, brutish.


These may be distinguished into Apprehensive; whereby we are rendered able or
unable to Know and apprehend knowable things, Generals as well as Particulars,
respecting in them Truth and Falsehood. 1.
UNDERSTANDING, Intellect, Mind, mental, apprehend, comprehend, perceive,
conceive, reach, resent, Sentiment. IDIOTICALNESS, being as a natural Fool,
Changeling, Innocent
Compound and compare Notions together, so as to make a right estimate of
things and consequences. 2.
JUDGMENT, Judicious. INIUDICIOVSNESS, Simple, Silly.
Apply general Principles to particular cases, being a kind of practical
Judgment or Memory relating to matters of Duty. 3.
CONSCIENCE. VNCONSCIONABLENESS, Searedness, Profligateness, moral,
Insensibility.

Motive; whereby we do rationally follow any thing as good, or fly it as evil:
or being without any such motion. 4.
WILL, Desire, List, Option, Vote, Wish, Mind, Pleasure, covet, voluntary.
LISTLESNESS, no mind to.



II. INTERNAL SENSES are so styled, because they belong to the interior parts,
II. INTERNAL SENSES.
and are conversant about internal and absent as well as present things.
Whether there be any such real Faculties in the Soul as are mentioned under
this and the preceding Head, is not here to be debated. It Is sufficient that
common experience does acquaint us with such various operations of the Mind,
and that general custom has agreed upon such names for the expressing of them.

These are likewise distinguishable into Apprehensive; whereby we are rendered
able or unable for the Receiving of impressions from the outward Senses. 1.
COMMON SENSE, perceive, discern, apprehend, Senti^ent, resent, conceive,
discover, find. STV^OR, Numness, amaze, astonish, narcotic, amuze, asleep, set
on edge.
Compounding and comparing what is communicated from the outward Senses. 2.
FANCY, Imagination, Conceit, fantastical, capricious, Phantasm. DOTAGE,
Delirium, Dizzard, Sot, besot.
Retaining such impressions. 3.
MEMORY, recollect, re-call, commemorate, remember, call or come to mind, put
in mind* suggest, record, recount, con over, getting by heart, by rote, without
book, at ones fingers end, memorable, memorial, Memorandum, mindful.
FORGETFVLNESS, Oblivion, Vnmindfulness, overslip.

Motive; whereby, in order to our own Conservation, we follow or fly what is by
the judgment of the Senses represented as good or evil. 4.
APPETITE, Desire, Inclination, Concupiscence, Stomach, Longing, Lust, having a
mind to. LOATHING, fulsome, nauseate, glut, cloy, go against, queasie,
squeamish, wambling, qualm, detest.



III. EXTERNAL SENSES.
III. EXTERNAL SENSES are so styled, because they reside in the exterior parts
of the body, and do apprehend only external present things; which common
opinion has determined to the number of Five: amongst which some are said to
be Commodious For Discipline; whereby we discern Light and Color. 1.
SIGHT, Vision, View, ken, Optic, descry, discern, epsy, spy, peep, pry,
see, perceive, look upon, behold, Glimpse, Spectacle, Spectator, Inspection,
Revise, Prospect, first blush, visible, conspicuous. BLINDNESS, Dimness, dark,
poreblind, put out ones eyes.
Sounds. 2.
HEARING, attend, hearken, listen, give ear, audible. DEAFNESS, surd.

For the trial of our Food at a distance. 3.
SMELL, Odor, Savor, Sent, Pomander, Perfume.

Necessary for the Immediate trial of our Food. 4.
TASTE, Gust, Savor, Relish, Smack, Smatch, Tang, toothsom.
Perception of tangible things. 5.
TOUCH, feel, contact, tactile, palpable, grope. NVMNESS, Stupor, dead, torpid,
asleep.




Though common Language have not affixed particular names to the impotencies of
some of these, yet they ought to be provided for as well as the rest.

IV. Those natural Habitudes of the Soul or Spirit which render it fit or unfit
for its proper functions, IV. TEMPERS OF SPIRIT.
are styled by that general name of TEMPER - ature, -ament, Disposition,
Spirit, Genius, Fancy, Humor, Vein, Quality, Condition, Constitution, Nature.

These may be distinguished into such as are more General; chiefly of moral
disposition, denoting the goodness: or badness of it. 1.
INGENUITY, Good nature, Candor, candid, free, liberal, clear. DISINGENVITY,
Ill nature, Perverseness, thwart, cross, froward, untoward, wayward, awkward,
refractory, untractable, wilful, stubborn, sullen, dogged, sturdy, stiff,
restif.
Particular; as to Action; denoting Ability, or disability; aptitude, or
ineptitude for it. 2.
SPRIGHTLINESS, Wit, Vivacity, ingenious, brisk, lively, quick, acute, sharp,
debonair, Mercurial, pregnant, presentness of mind. DVLNESS, Stupidity, gross
witted, hard-headed, torpid, soft, thick, heavy, dazzle, dolt, Block-head,
Logger-head, Dunce, Sot, indocil, dreaming.
Attention: or levity of mind in it. 3.
SERIOUSNESS, earnest, grave, sober, staid, sad, substantial, solemn.
WANTONNESS, lightness, aerie, playward, gamesom, dallying sportful, trifling,
lascivious, giddy, petulant, skittish, toying, Ramp, Gigg, Rigg, Gambol
Aptitude or Ineptitude to moderate the Irascible appetite. 4.
GENTLENESS, Tameness, Mildness, Meekness, Lenity, break, reclaim, tame, come
to hand. FIERCENESS, Wildness, Haggard, Savage, barbarous, curstness, surly,
eager, furious, dire, fell, grim, rough, source, keen, untamed.
Concupiscible appetite. 5
OPPOSITE TO RAPACITY, not rapacious. RAPACITY, ravenous, voracious, greedy,
Harpy, devour, preying.

Ability or disability to attempt or resist difficulties. 6.
STOUTNESS, Boldness, manful, redoubted, daring, sturdy, strenuous. LAZINESS,
sluggish, lither, lurden, Drone, dull, soft.

Action and Passion, denoting an ability or disability to endure and hold out
both in acting and suffering. 7.
HARDINESS, Tolerance, strenuous, robust, stout, sturdy, industrious, painful.
NICENESS, Softness, Tenderness, Delicateness, Curiosity, fine, squeamish,
effeminate, finical, dainty.




V. TEMPERS OF BODY FOR THE INDIVIDUUM.
V. Those CORPOREAL HABITUDES, whereby things are rendered able or unable to act
or resist for the good of the INDIVIDUUM, are usually styled by those general
names of Temper, Complexion, Frame, State, Constitution, Disposition, Nature.

These are distinguishable into such as concern, The just number of the parts;
having all: or wanting some. 1.
WHOLENESS, Intireness, perfect, safe and sound, tite, consolidate, of one
piece. MVTILOVSNESS, maimed, mangle, lame, lopped, crippled.
The nature of the whole or parts; being either Negative or Positive of
Corruption. 2.
SOUNDNESS, Sanity, Healthiness, hail, heal, whole, clearness. ROTTENNESS,
Putridness, Corruption, purulent, tainted, unsound, moulder, festered, addle,
Matter, rankle, suppurate* putrefie, Carrion
Trouble to the sense of Feeling. 3.
INDOLENCE, Ease, lenitive, relaxation, clearness, lighten. PAIN, Ach, smart,
ail, anguish, grief, ill at ease, sore, pang, through, torment, torture, ache,
excruciate, twing, twitch, fret, gripe, gird, racking.

Positive or Negative; General; relating to the state of the body, good: or
ill. 4.
VIGOR, Vivacity, thriving, vegetous, flourishing, lusty, lively, sprightly,
florid, quick, fresh, in heart, in good plight, in proof, pert, smart, crank,
sturdy, revive. DECAYING, consume, wear, wast, drooping, fading, out of heart,
flagging, languish, break, fail, going down, fall away, bring down or low,
decline, impair, quail, abate, molder, pine, wither, perish, spend, corrupt.
Special; respecting the Plight of the fleshy parts, full: or sparing. 5.
FATNESS, plump* pampered, burly, corpulent, gross, foggy, pursie, battle.
LEANNESS, macilent, meagre, Starveling, flue, poor, bare, spare, thin, lank,
gaunt, Rascal, scraggy, ghastly, pine, emaciate, fall away, Carrion, skin and
bone.
Figure and color of the external parts, right: or wrong. 6.
BEAUTY - fullness, Handsomness, Pulchritude, Comeliness, Elegance, Decency,
fair, goodly, well-favoured, seemly, polite, quaint, pretty, graceful, lovely,
personable. DEFORMITY, unhandsome, ill-favored, ugly, uncomely, misbecoming,
Indecorum, absurd, unseemly, misshapen, foul, squalid, Hagg, deface, disfigure.
Ability, or disability for Action or Passion. 7.
STRENGTH, Force, Might, Validity, Puissance, robust, strenuous, stout, sturdy,
in heart, main, corroborate, fortify, recruit. WEAKNESS, Feebleness, Debility,
Imbecility, Infirmity, disabled, faint, languid, dead, frail, out of heart,
heartless, flagging, invalid, small, bring down or low, enervate, decline,
enfeeble.
Aptitude or ineptitude for Motion, In a place. 8.
AGILITY, Nimbleness, Activity, Lightness, Volubility, quick, dexterous,
Mercurial, restive, handy, man of his hands. LVMPISHNESS, Vnweildiness,
dullness, gross, heavy, pursie* Lob, Lubber, Slugg, Lozel.
To a place. 9.
SWIFTNESS, Fleetness, Celerity, Speed, fast, apace, sudden, quick, rapid,
hurry, accelerate, hasten, cursory, hy, expedite, run, send, whisk, post.
SLOWNESS, Heaviness, slackness, dull, Slug, tardy, leisurely, softly, dilatory,
retard, foreslow, delay, Lob, Lubber, lumpish, Lurdan, torpid, unwieldy,
gingerly.







VI. Such corporeal Habitudes as do concern the Propagation of the Species, VI.
TEMPERS FOR PROPAGATION OF THE SPECIES.
do refer either to the Kinds of things apt for Propagation, according to the
General name. 1. SEX, Kind, Gender, Epicene, Hermaphrodite.
Particular distribution into more, or less noble. 2.
MALE, masculine, Buck, Bore, Dog, Gib, Cock, Milter, He. FEMALE, feminine,
Do, Sow, Bitch, Hen, Spawner, She.

Disposition of things for, or against Propagation. 3.
FRUITFULNESS, fertile-ity, foecund, prolifi^^^^ fructify, rank, produce
fruit. BARRENNESS, Sterility, Vnfruitfulness, infertile, blasting, blite.
State of things generated, when they have attained the perfection they ought
to have: or else are in a state of imperfection, by reason of excess, or
defect. 4.
RIPENESS, Maturity, mellow, Precocity, stale, hatch. OVER-RIPENESS, fading,
decaying, withering. VNRIPENESS, immature, green.




Of HABIT.
. II.
SUch superinduced Qualities, whether infused or acquired, whereby the natural
Faculties are perfected, and rendered more ready and vigorous in the exercise of
their several Acts, according to the more or less perfect Degrees of them, are
styled by the name of HABIT, Endowment, enure, qualify, Gift, Talent.
DISPOSITION, Propensity, Proclivity, Promptitude, Proneness, Inclination,
readiness, given to, addiction, fitness, aptitude.


To the more general consideration of Habit may appertain Those States or
Conditions of life which either reward or enable men for virtuous Actions;
comprehending the ENDS OR REWARD OF VIRTUE. I. INSTRUMENTS OF VIRTUE. II.
Those Qualifications, which, though they are not properly Virtues, yet do
prepare for, and dispose unto, and, in other respects, circumstantiate Virtue
it self, both in the Habit and Operations of it, and are therefore styled
AFFECTIONS OF VIRTUE, either INTELLECTUAL. III. MORAL. IV.
The Kinds of virtuous Habits, whether INFUSED* ^^th Intellectual and Moral. V.
ACQUIR^^ INTELLECTUAL. VI.



I. REWARDS OF VIRTUE.
I. Those things which are due to the merit of Virtue or Vice, are styled
REWARD, Guerdon, Meed, Prize, Recompense. PUNISHMENT, Penalty, Penance,
Judgment, Plague, Vengeance, inflict, suffer, impunity, scotfree.


These may be distinguished into such as are either more General; viz. that
state wherein a thing injoys as much perfection as it is capable of. 1.
HAPPINESS, Felicity, Bliss, Blessedness, Beatitude, good, weal, welfare.
MISERY, Unhappiness, Infelicity, Extremity, Calamity, Woe, Distress, Disaster,
Affliction, Tribulation, Trouble, Plague, Judgment, Caitiff, Wretch, poor,
pitiful, deplorable.
Particular; relating to the reward of Moral Virtue; in the enjoyment of those
things that conduce to our been esse. External; 3.
PROSPERITY, flourishing, thriving, auspicious, fortunate, happy, good luck,
success, speed. ADVERSITY, Affliction, distress, tribulation, cross, disaster,
infelicity, suffering, persecution, duress, fall, pressure, mischance, mishap,
misadventure, misfortune, unfortunate, unluckie, unprosperous, inauspicious,
sinister, dismal, ill luck or success.
Internal; quiet, or disquiet of the Affections. 3.
CONTENTATION, Tranquillity, Contentment, Serenity, Hearts-ease, Equanimity,
Sedateness, Rest, be satisfied, acquiesce. ANXIETY, Discontent, (...) taking,
dump, trouble, anguish, disquiet, vexation, perplexity, straight, pinch.

Christian Virtues and Graces; consisting in an everlasting Vision and Fruition
of God. 4.
SALVATION, Beatifical Vision, Heaven, Glory. DAMNATION, Condemnation Hell,
perdition.




II. The INSTRUMENTS OF VIRTUE, commonly styled the Goods of Fortune, II.
INSTRUMENTS OF VIRTUE.
requisite to the due exercise of the Acts of many Virtues, and one kind of
Reward belonging to it, do concern either Our Persons, and the being at our own
disposal. 1.
LIBERTY, Freedom, at large, deliver, release, inlar^e, set free, rid,
dispatch, ransom, redeem, manumise, emancipate, give one his head, scope,
arbitrary, undetermined, unconfined, may, may choose. RESTRAINT, confine,
streighten, repress.
Our Possessions; being either sufficient, or insufficient, for our occasions
and conveniences, according to that rank and station wherein we are placed. 2.
RICHES, Wealth, Opulence, Pelf, Means, Fortunes, Estate, thrive, Treasure,
make, enrich, worth, well to pass. POVERTY, Necessity, Penury, Indigence, Need,
Want, poor, empoverish, ruin.
The sutableness of the things which we have or do, and that satisfaction which
we receive by them. 3.
PLEASURE, Delight, Delectation, Enjoyment. VNPLEASANTNESS, Grief, Trouble,
displeasing.
Our Names, and the esteem we have amongst good men. 4.
REPUTATION, Credit, Countenance, Applause, Name, Honor* Vogue, report, Fame,
redoubted, of Note, Glory, Renown, well-sounding. INFAMY, Disgrace, discredit,
dishonor, disparage, defame, discountenance, shame, ignominy, Stein, Blot,
Blemish, Slur, inglorious, illiberal, ignoble, notorious, ill reflection, or
sound, or name.
Our Degrees, and the quality of our Conditions in relation to others; being
either considerably above them, or below them. 5.
DIGNITY, Promotion, Preferment, Advancement, Honor, Worship, Greatness,
State, Port, Title, preeminence, upper-hand, High place, raise, exalt,
illustrious. MEANNESS, Lowness, Obscurity, Baseness, Vileness, ignoble, plain,
abase, debase, degrade, Abjectness.
Our Ability to protect our selves and others from injury, which is the usual
result or consequent of the rest. 6.
POWER- full, Potent-ate, Greatness, Interest, Strength, Might, Puissance,
Mastery, Prevalence, Predominance, over-sway, rule-the roast, bear a stroke.
IMPOTENCE, weak, inconsiderable.



III. AFFECTIONS OF INTELLECTUAL VIRTUE.
III. AFFECTIONS of INTELLECTUAL VIRTUE, may be distinguished by their reference
to those two Faculties in the Rational Soul, employed for the gaining of
Knowledge, viz. Invention; which is rightly, or ^^^ongly disposed by 1.
SAGACITY, Perspicacity, Sha^pness, Subtilty, Dexterity Wit, clear, quick,
acute, searching, piercing, docil, towardly, apt, prompt. DVLNESS, Stupidity,
Heaviness, gross-witted, indocil, dreaming, Dolt, Dunce, Blockhead.
Judgment; which is well disposed, by such a temper of mind as does incline a
man to assent unto things upon such evidence as is in it self sufficient, or
ill disposed, by such a temper as inclines a man either to assent unto things
upon such evidence as is insufficient, or not to assent upon such ^s is
sufficient. 2.
FAITH, Docility, Teachableness, Towardliness, Aptness. CREDVLITY, Easiness,
light or rash of belief, facil. INCREDVLITY, Vnteachableness, Vntowardliness,
Scepticalness, Scrupulousness, Unbelief.


Sensitive Soul, which are apt to hinder us from Knowledge. Fancy; which is
well, or ill disposed by 3.
SOBRIETY, discreet, grave, serious, staid, steady, settled, sage.
CONCEITEDNESS, Affectation, Singularity, fantastical, vagary, wild, light,
aerie, giddy, freakish, whimsical, hair-brained, brainsick, Humorist,
Opiniaster.
App^tite; which is fitly regulated by our being concerned for any Truth
according to a due measure; and not either more or less then the evidence and
importance of it, does require. 4.
MODERATION, Temper, Measure, Gentle-ness, qualify, reduce to reason.
SLIGHTNESS, Slackness, negligence, remissness, Neutrality, frigid, cold,
indifferent, unconcerned, slatering, superficial, cursory, overly, perfunctory,
faint. FIERCENESS, Fanaticalness, vehemence, violence, eagerness, earnest,
furious, heady, immoderate, dogmatical, Opiniaster, boisterous, rough, sour,
keen.





IV. The Affections of MORAL and HOMILETICAL Virtues, IV. AFFECTIONS OF MORAL
AND HOMILETICAL VIRTUE.
do concern either The Temper and Frame of our Minds, as to their due
Attention; For any kind of Advantage, or Expedient. 1.
CONSIDERATION, Advisedness, deliberate, ruminate, forecast, of or on purpose.
CVNCTATION, Loitering, Delay, slack, trifling, linger, lag, while off, drive
off, put off. RASHNESS, Hastiness, Temerity, heady, hair-brained, foolhardy,
cursory, headlong, precipitate, unadvised, incogitancy, inconsiderateness,
presumption.

Against any kind of Evil, Danger or Impediment. 2.
HEEDFULNESS, Wariness, Care, Cantelousness, Watchfulness, Attention,
Intention, Caution, minding, circumspection, chary, vigilant, cautious* shie,
advised, aware, beware, intend, look to or about, see to, take heed, be
thoughtful, take thought, take warning, narrowly. CARKING, Solicitude, Anxiety,
over-thoughtful. CARELESSNESS, Heedlesness, incogitancie, negligence* slatering,
slightness, lightness, supineness, inconsiderate, oscitation, overly,
perfunctory, superficial, secure, unwary, retchless, cursory, idle, slothful,
sluggardly, slubbering, dissolute, uncircumspect, hand over head, not regard,
overslip.


Freedom and Readiness of our Faculties about any thing. 3.
ALACRITY, Cheerfulness, readiness, forwardness, with all ones heart, with a
good will, free, glad, promptness, propensity, rather. GRVDGING, maunder,
murmr, mutter, repine, regret, querulous, go against, with an ill will.
Reality of our Intentions, suitable to our outward Pretenses. 4.
SINCERITY, Vprightness, reality, cordialness, heartiness, downright, honest,
plain, simple, unfeigned, sound, clear, incorrupt. HYPOCRISY, Dissimulation,
double tongue or heart, hollow-hearted, feigning, false, counterfeit,
sophistical, pretend.

The Vigorousness of our Endeavors in the prosecution of fitting means. 5.
DILIGENCE, Assiduity, Sedulity, Industry, Attention, Care, Labor, Study,
instant, elaborate, ply, bestir, stickle, lay about him, earnest,
indefatigable, take pains. DOVBLE-DILIGENCE, overdoing, busy* pragmatical,
fain, meddling. SLOTH, Idleness, laziness, carelessness, lither, loose,
retchless, dreaming, Drone, Sluggard, Truant, loiter.

The Universality required to virtuous Actions, in respect of the Object. 6.
INTEGRITY, Honesty, entire, equal, impartial, incorrupt, upright. PARTIALITY,
unequal, making a difference, accepting of persons.
Time of continuance* 7.
CONSTANCY, ^erseverance, Stability, Steadiness, steadfast, firm, fixed, sure,
certain, resolute, inflexible, unchangeable, abide, persist, hold out, stand
out, stay by, stick to, unwearied, indefatigable. PERTINACY, Obstinacy,
Contumacy, pervicacious, peremptory, stiff, wilful, inexorable, inflexible.
LIGHTNESS, Inconstancy, fickleness, levity, instability, mutability, uncertain,
unsteddy, unstable, unstedfast, unsettled, unstaid, wavering, diverse, dodging,
shittle, shuttle, slippery, variable, mutable, changeable, trifling, giddy,
freakish, paltring, fast and loose.





V. INFUSED HABITS.
V. Those are styled INFUSED HABITS, to which the Divine favor and assistance
is required after a more especial manner; which are therefore styled by the
general name of GRACE, Gift.

To which may be opposed UNGRACIOUSNESS, Impiety, graceless, ungodly, carnal,
wicked, sinful.

These are either General; consisting in A change of mind from evil to good. 1.
REPENTANCE, Penitence, compunction, relent, remorse, contrition, rue, return,
reclaim, renew, regeneration, penance. IMPENITENCE, Obdurateness,
Hard-heartedness.
An habitual frame of mind, whereby we are fitted for virtuous actions, and
more especially for the Duties of Religion. 2.
HOLINESS, Sanctity, Godliness, Piety, Devotion, Righteousness, Sanctification,
sacred, Pureness. UNHOLINESS, Wickedness, Iniquity, Impiety, Ungodliness,
Profaneness, Corruption, Sin, Miscreant, graceless, Caitiffe.
An enlargement of Soul, to desire and endeavor public general good, and
taking it off from being immersed in narrow selfish designs. 3.
SELF-DENIAL, Christian Magnanimity, Generosity, Public-spiritedness, Greatness
of mind, Resignation. SELFISHNESS, Narrowness, Pedanticalness, Littleness of
mind, Worldling.

Particular; styled Theological Virtues; respecting Truth and Falsehood; a
readiness to yield an effectual assent unto revealed Truths upon such grounds
as their natures are capable of, and such as are sufficient to prevail with any
such prudent teachable man as is free from any affected Captiousness. 4.
FAITH, Belief, Believer, Creed. INFIDELITY, Unbelief, Miscreant.
Good and Evil. Future; being an acquiescence of the mind in the expectation of
such Promises as are revealed. 5.
HOPE, Trust, Affiance, Reliance, Re^^mbency. DESPAIR, Despondency, out of
heart, forlorn, hopeless, past hope, deadness of heart.
General; wishing well, and endeavoring to be helpful and serviceable unto
all, according to the due proportion we are obliged to by natural or revealed
Light. 6.
CHARITY, Love. INCHARITABLENESS, Maliciousness.





VI. Those are styled ACQUIRED INTELLECTUAL HABITS which may be gotten by
Industry, VI. ACQUIRED INTELLECTUAL HABITS.
and tend to the perfecting of the Mind or Understanding. They are
distinguishable by their Objects; being either Speculative; furnishing the mind
with due Notions and conceptions concerning the Nature of things, their Causes,
Differences, Relations and Dependencies. 1.
SCIENCE, Knowledge, Skill, Theory, Learning, Insight. CVRIOSITY. IGNORANCE,
rude, untaught.

Active; denoting Skill in men and business, whereby we are enabled to judge
what is fit and convenient, according to various cases and circumstances. 2.
WISDOM, Prudence, Discretion, Sapience, wise, sage, politic. CRAFT, Cunning,
Subtilty, Shiness, Policy, Device, Quirk, Slight, Fetch, Wile, Trick, sly,
shrewd, Knave, Shark, Shift, come over one, over reach. FOLLY, Fool-ishness,
Simplicity, Silly-ness, Imprudence, Indiscretion, witless, unwise, absurd,
shallow, Noddy, Ninny, Sot, infatuate, Foppery.

Effective; implying Skill in those several Operations and Works which concern
Humane life. 3.
ART, Skill, Dexterity, Craft, Cunning, Insight, Knack, expert, well-seen in,
good at, artificial, Workman, Artist. VNSKILFVLNESS, bungling, blundering,
botching, fumbling, cobling, slubber, smatter, ignorant, silly, rude, gross,
jejune, inexpert, inartificial, awkward, Freshman, Novice.

The manner of acquiring them; whether by Our own Observation, and repeated
Trials. 4.
EXPERIENCE, Practice, Exercise, Knowledge, conversant, versed, expert,
Experiment, Empyric. INEXPERIENCE, inexpert, raw, to seek, Puny, Novice,
Freshman, unverst.
The Teaching of others, either viva voce, or ex scriptis. 5.
LEARNING, Literature, Scholarship, scholastic, Liberal Science, Skill,
indoctinate* VNLEARNEDNESS, illiterate, unlettered, rude, simple.




Of MANNERS.
. III.
THe Customary and habitual Actions of men considered as voluntary, and as they
are capable of Good or Evil, Reward or Punishment, are styled by the name of
MANNERS, Ethic, Moral-ity.

To which may be adjoined the general name of such customary Actions as are
mutual betwixt man and man, styled CONVERSATION, Carriage, Demeanor,
Comportment, homiletical, Communication, lead, life, living, sociable, behave.

The Virtues belonging to these do comprehend all those Habits which concern
the regulating both of our Wills and Affections, and of our Conversations. They
are distinguishable by the Faculties which they moderate, and the Objects they
are conversant about, into such as do more immediately concern the regulating
of our Wills and Affections, and that Rectitude of mind which we are obliged
unto with reference to our selves, considered more separately, according to
those principal parts of which we consist, viz. Soul and Body, Reason and
sense, together with the things we possess, being either More GENERAL. I. More
Particular, relating to Our BODIES. II. Our ESTATES or DIGNITIES. III.

Conversations, or the right Demeanor of our selves considered as Members of
Society, in our converse with others; the due managing of the common Affairs
and Businesses of life, according to the relations wherein we stand toward
those whom we are to deal with. These are commonly called Homiletical Virtues,
being either More GENERAL and Common. IV. More Particular, toward SUPERIORS.
V. INFERIORS. VI.




I. VIRTUE.
I. Those kind of Moral habits which serve for the regulating of our Wills and
Affections more General, are commonly styled by the name of VIRTUE, Honesty,
Probity, Righteousness, brave; denoting such Habits whereby we are inclined and
enabled to observe a due Mediocrity in our Actions. To this is properly opposed
the notion of VICE, Sin, Crime, Dishonesty, Trespass, Transgression, Fault,
Failing, Infirmity, Oversight, wicked, Improbity, Turpitude, unrighteous,
unjust, bad, naught, vile, base, loose, evil, ill, corrupt, venial, heinous,
debauched, lewd, lawless, licencious, foul, flagitious, enormous, profligate,
Miscreant, Ruffian, Caitiff, Villain, Rakehell, Libertine, defile, pollute.
These may be distinguished into such as relate to the Inclination of our Minds,
either In Debitis; in such things as are due from us By Law; 1.
JUSTICE, Righteous-ness, right, square dealing, upright dealing. INIVSTICE,
Unrighteousness, Wrong. RIGOVR, rigid, extreme, severity, overstrict.
REMISSION, Over-sparing.

Right Reason. More general; respecting our Actions toward others, in such
cases as the Lawgiver (could he have foreseen) would have provided for;
whereby a man is willing to recede from his own strict right, and the utmost
extremities of things, and to take the most amicable way in the accommodating
of Differences, supplying that by right Reason which is not provided for in the
words of the written Law. 2.
EQUITY, Moderation, reasonable, conscionable, Chancery, fair dealing, in
reason. SVMMVM IVS, Rigidness, sourness, unreasonableness, iniquity, unequal.
More particular; in our Thoughts concerning other men's words or actions, being
ready to interpret every thing in the best sense, when there is no evident
reason to the contrary. 3.
CANDOR, fair, ingenuous, candid, fair dealing. CENSORIOVSNESS, Sinister
suspicion, captiousness, controling, carping* find fault.


In Gratuitis; respecting chiefly the Benefactor; being either More general;
denoting a propension of mind to do good to other^, together with external
actions suitable thereto. 4.
GOODNESS, Benignity, benevolence, benificence, kindness, good turn, beholding
gratify. MISCHIEVOVSNESS, Maleficence, ill turn.
More particular; respecting such as are in a state of misery. 5.
MERCY, tenderhearted, pitiful, propitious, soft. CRVELTY, Immanity, inhumane,
hard-hearted, pittiless, savage, dire, tr^culent, barbarous.

Beneficiary; namely, a propension of mind to put a just esteem upon the
Favors we receive, and to take all occasions of acknowledging and requiting
them. 6.
GRATITUDE, Thank-fulness, give or render thanks. INGRATITVDE, Unthankfulness,
ungrateful.

In arduis; whether things Hard to be done; whereby we are made duly resolute
against all such difficulties either of Fear or Discouragement as may hinder us
in our duty. 7.
FORTITUDE, Valor, Courage, Manhood, Prowess, Puissance, stout, redoubted,
undaunted, bold, daring, valiant, resolute, in heart, of spirit, manly, manful,
sturdy. RASHNESS, Temerity, fool-hardiness, audacity, desperate, heady,
hair-brained, boisterous, precipitate. COWARDICE, timorous; faint-hearted,
fearful, soft, Craven, Dastard, Poltron, Recreant, out of heart, to flinch, to
cow.

Hard to be suffered; in respect of Pain. 8.
PATIENCE, Long-suffering, forbearance, abide, bear, brook, endure, sustein,
tolerate, weather it out. OBSTINACY, stubborn, sturdy, peremptory. SOFTNESS,
Tenderness; Impatience, relent, mollify.

Provocation to Anger and Revenge, in which we are to observe a due Mediocrity.
9.
MEEKNESS, Mildness, long-suffering, gentleness, clemency, lenity, calm, put
up. LENTITVDE, Stupor, Insensibility. RASH ANGER, cursed, hasty, pettish,
peevish, snappish, testy.






II. Virtues relating to our BODIES.
II. The more special Virtues for the regulating of our Wills and Affections in
things relating to our BODIES, whose Object is Iucundum or Vtile, are either.

Of a more large extent; denoting an Ability to withstand all such temptations
of allurement whereby we may be hindered in our Duty. 1.
TEMPERANCE. SENSVALITY, Voluptuousness, Intemperance, debauched, dissolute,
effeminate, Epicure.
Of a lesser extent; concerning the Moderating of our natural Appetites toward
things which concern the Preservation of the Individuum; either More necessary;
as in Meats. 2.
ABSTINENCE, abstemious, fasting. MACERATION. GLVTTONY, Surfeit, voracity,
gormandizing, pampering, ravenous, sated, Gully-gut.

Drinks. 3.
SOBRIETY, Abstemiousness. DRVNKENNESS, Sot, besot, inebriate, heady,
intoxicate, fox, ca^rouse, overtaken, whittled, fuddled, tipsie, Tipler,
Soaker, Pot-companion, Toss-pot.
Sleep. 4.
VIGILANCE, Watchfulness. SLVGGARDLINESS, Sloth, Drowziness, Sleepiness.

Less necessary; which concern Refreshments from Labor. 5.
MODERATENESS IN RECREATION. IMMODERATENESS IN RECREATION.
External Decorum and Ornament. 6.
CLEANLINESS, Neatness, smugg, terse. NICENESS, Finicalness, Delicateness,
Daintiness, Curiosity, dapper. SLOVENLINESS, Uncleanness, Nastiness, sordid,
filthy, squalid, foul, Sloven, Slut, slubber.



Species; as Venery. 7.
CHASTITY, Continence, Honesty. UNCHASTITY, Incontinence, Wantonness,
lascivious, unclean, obscene, ribaldry, bawdy, lewd, light, dishonest, corrupt,
defile, deflowr, incest, rape, ravish, viciate.


III. Virtues relating to the due moderating of our Affections toward the
things which concern our ESTATES and DIGNITIES, III. Virtues relating to our
ESATES and DIGNITIES.
whose Object is Profit or Esteem, may be distinguished into such as do more
particularly concern our Estates and Possessions; being either More general;
denoting a Mediocrity about getting, or keeping, or spending. 1.
LIBERALITY, Bounty, Munificence, open-handed, free, generous, frank, large.
PRODIGALITY, Prof^seness, wastful, lavish, riotous, embezil, lash out Havoc,
run out. COVETOVSNESS, Avarice, Worldliness.

More special; in Getting. 2.
PROVIDENCE. SCRAPING, Rapacity, greedy, craving, griping, ravenous. SLATERING,
Improvidence.

Keeping. 3.
FRUGALITY, Parcimony, thriftiness, good-husbandry, saving, sparing, near.
PENVRIOVSNESS, crib, hard, close-fisted, hide-bound* over-thrifty, tenacity,
pinching, pinch^peny, Churl, Niggard, Miser, close, near. SQVANDRING,
flying-out, ill-husbandry* unthriftiness, spend-thrift, wast, embezzil,
mis^spend.

Spending; distinguished by its Objects; either The Public. 4.
GENEROSITY, Magnificence, Bounty, Grandeur, stately, pompous, sumptuous,
brave, noble, heroic. RIOTOVSNESS, Profuseness, Luxuriousness, blade-it,
debauch, Roister. SORDIDNESS, Baseness, unworthy, penurious.

The Poor; relieving the wants of others. 5.
ALMSGIVING, Charity, Dole, Alms, relieve, Pensioner, Bedes-man, Eleemosynary,
Hospital. CHVRLISHNESS, uncharitable, rough, Niggard.
Strangers. 6.
HOSPITALITY, harbor, entertain, treat, open-house. INHOSPITABLENESS.



Dignities and Esteem; in respect of the Avoiding or suffering of Disgrace. 7.
MODESTY, Bashfulness. SHEEPISHNESS, Shamefacedness, over-bashful, sneaking,
softness. IMPVDENCE, Shamelesness, Audacity, saucy, immodest.

Seeking or bearing of Honor; as putting a just value upon things, (having but
a little esteem for little things,) as likewise upon himself, and his own
merits; and not either Less then he ought. 8.
MAGNANIMITY, brave, noble, heroic, generous, greatness of mind. INSOLENCE,
arrogance, haughtines, presumption, vaunting, vaporing. PVSILLANIMITY,
Baseness, sordid, pedantical.

More then he ought. 9.
MODESTY. ABIECTNESS, Sneaking, narrowness and littleness of mind, base,
AMBITION, Presumption, High-mindedness, Vainglory, Arrogance, aspire,
overweening, Rodomontade, affectation of Empire.






IV. HOMILETICAL COMMON ^ertues.
IV. HOMILETICAL Virtues more COMMON, are such virtuous habits as are required
in men of all degrees and conditions for the regulating of their mutual
Conversations. Not that the other Virtues before specified, are not likewise
necessary to this end: but that they do not so directly and immediately tend to
it as these others do which are styled HOMILETICAL. To which may be opposed
INSOCIABLENESS, Barbarism.

These are distinguishable into such as render our Conversation; either
Profitable to each other: which may be considered according to the Matter; such
as tend to the preservation of Truth; either in our Declarations or Assertions.
1.
VERACITY, Truth. LYING, Leasing, forge, fib, flam, false, perjury.
OVER-SAYING, Hyperbole, Boasting, Ostentation, vapor, crack, brag, vaunt,
swagger, ^odomontade. VNDER-SAYING, Detraction, Diminution, disparage, traduce,
depreciate.

Obligations or Promises. 2.
FIDELITY, trusty, true, loyal. VNFAITHFVLNESS. OFFICIOVSNESS, Fawning.
TREACHERY, perfidious, false, faithless, unfaithful, untrusty, disloyal,
Recreant, Traitor, Ambodex^er, betray, falter, undermine, prevaricate.


Peace. 3.
PEACEABLENESS, Quietness, Concord Accord* Agreement, Union, appease, atone,
pacify, reconcile, compose, take up, compromize, still, calm, set at peace,
part a fray. VNPEACEABLENESS. TAMENESS. CONTENTIOVSNESS, Strife, Dissension,
Discord, Variance, Controversy, Difference, Broils, Contest, Combustion,
Debate, Division, Bickering, litigious, quarrel, wrangle, clash, jarr, brabble,
jangle, Garboil, Odds, Brangling, Conflict, Squabble, Brawling, Cavilling,
captious, Incendiary, Barreter, Bontefew, Shrew, Scold.


Manner; such as regulate our Carriage with a due respect of Things; in Saying
what is fit to be said. 4.
FRANKNESS, Freeness, plain, open-hearted. TOO MVCH OPENNESS, Tell-tale, Blab,
RESERVEDNESS, shy, nice, coy, demure, staunch, wary, close.

Concealing what is fit to be concealed. 5.
TACITURNITY, staunch, close, still, counsel-keeping, secrecy, silence.
LOQVACITY, Babbling, Garrulity, talkative, babble, blab, chatter, gabbling,
tattle, prate-ttle.

Persons; in observing a just Decorum. 6.
GRAVITY, Seriousness, sober, demure, sage* stayed, earnest, settled, solid.
VANITY, FORMALNESS, Coxcomb, fond, foppish. LIGHTNESS, flashy, Freak, Levity,
Petulance.



Pleasant to each other; serving to regulate Our Outward carriage toward
others, both Actions and Speeches, as to a Facility for Converse, together with
our desires and endeavors by all honest ways to please others, and care, not
to offend them. 7.
COURTESY, Comity, mannerliness, civility, affability, kindness, humanity,
gentle, fair, humane, benign, tractable, smooth. FAWNING, Assentation,
Adulation, obsequious, smooth, glavering, gloze, cogg, cajole, curry favor,
collogue, wheedle, crouch, creeping, scraping, flatter, sooth, clawing,
Blandishment, Parasite, Sycophant, Claw-back. MOROSENESS, cursed, crabbed,
cynical, froward, churlish, uncivil, boisterous, rude, sullen, surly,
unmannerly, hard to please, humorsome, rough, harsh, sour, testy, snappish,
dogged, currish, waspish, tetchy, wayward, peevish, pettish.

Our Words and Speeches; either in More serious debates; making due allowances
to others, affording them just liberty. 8.
COMPLACENCY, Civility, smooth, soft, popular, ASSENTATION, Flattery, glozing,
soothing, fawning, mealy-mouthed, trencher-friend. MAGISTERIALNESS, Arrogance,
Imperiousness, Lordliness, masterly, pedantical, rough, over-bear, Roister.

Less serious matters; by such honest mirth whereby Conversation is to be
sweetened. 9.
URBANITY, Facetiousness, Raillery, Drollery, jocular, jocund, merry, Conceit,
Jest, Squib, Clinch, Quibble, Wagg. SCVRRILITY, Buffoonry, Abusiveness,
Pasquil, Zany, Vice. RVSTICITY, Clownishness, boisterous, blunt, barbarous,
rough, rude, Kerne, homebred, Slouch, uncivil, unmannerly, dirty.






V. HOMIL. VERT. toward SUPERIORS.
V. HOMILETICAL VIRTUES whereby we are to regulate our Demeanor toward our
SUPERIORS, may be distinguished into such as are More general; denoting the
Habit of behaving our selves as we ought toward all in a superior relation. 1.
DUTIFULNESS, submissive. VNDVTIFVLNESS, Sturdiness, stiff, untoward,
untractable.
More special; ex part Subjecti; as Inferiors, and at a distance from them. 2.
HUMILITY, Lowliness, abase, humble, gentle, submission, demisness. PRIDE,
Haughtiness, Loftiness, high-minded, Lordly, elate, stately, perk,
self-conceit, arrogance, magisterialness, presumption, overween, puff up, look
big.
Objecti; as to Superiors in Place. 3.
REVERENCE, Honor, regard, respect, veneration, awe, dread, Worship.
IRREVERENCE, Petulance, Sauciness, malapert, perk, presumptuous.
Gifts. 4.
RESPECT, Grace, Honor, deference, civility, esteem, observe, veil to.
DISREPECT, Dishonor, neglect, slighting, undervaluing, disregard, vilify.
Authority; General. 5.
SUBJECTION, Homage, Loyalty, Allegiance, at ones command, serve under.
REBELLION.
Special; as Governing. 6.
LOYALTY, Allegiance, Fealty, Homage. TREACHERY, betray, Traitor, disloyal.
Commanding. 7.
OBEDIENCE, obsequious, observant, pliable, submissive, tractable, towardly,
Conformity, follow, serve, be subject to. DISOBEDIENCE, Contumacy, Obstinacy,
refractory, self-willed, unruly, untoward, transgress, trespass, break,
violate, take head, stiff-necked, wilful, masterless, restive.
Punishing; submitting to Justice, and suing for Mercy, or contr^. 8.
SUBMISSION, give place to, give way, yield, resign, surrender, at discretion
of. CONTVMACY, Obstinacy, Self-will, stubborn, sullen, stiff, untractable,
wayward, stout, stiff-necked, refractory.







VI. HOMILETICAL VIRTUES whereby we are to regulate our Demeanor toward our
INFERIORS, VI. HOMIL. VERT. toward INFERIORS.
may be distinguished into such as are More general. 1.
GRACIOUSNESS, Favor, Indulgence, gentle, kind, mild, serene, soft, benign,
propitious. HARSHNESS, Ruggedness, sourness, roughness.
More particular; ex part Subjecti; in respect of our Superiority, from which
we are ready upon occasion to yield and stoop down. 2.
CONDESCENSION, deign, vouchsafe, bear with, suffer. INSOLENCE,
Magisterialness, imperiousness, roughness, strictness, stately, domineer,
insult, swagger, Roister, Ruffian.
Objecti; as to Inferiors, in Place or Gifts. 3.
AFFABILITY, Courtesy, gentleness, facil, fair, demeanor. SVPERCILIOVSNESS,
roughness, stern, sour, scornful, stately, surly, arrogant.
Authority; in General; preserving such in their just rights, or invading of
them. 4.
PROTECTION, Shelter, defense, guard, patronage, refuge. TYRANNY.
Special; as Governing. 5.
GOOD GOVERNANCE, Discipline, Regiment. MALADMINISTRATION, misgoverning, ill
governance.
Commanding. 6.
REASONABLENESS. UNREASONABLENESS.
Punishing when one ought. 7.
SEVERITY, strict. FONDNESS, Indulgence, cocker, do^e, make much of, tender,
chary.
Remitting, when there is just occasion. 8.
CLEMENCY, Gentleness, favourableness, lenity, mildness. AVSTERITY, stern,
strict, inflexible, asperity, rigor, stiff, rigid, harsh, sharp, tart, rough,
crabbed.







Though several of the Virtues and Vices enumerated under this and the former
Head, may be ascribed sometimes to persons in other capacities; yet they do
primarily and originally appertain to the Relations of Superiors and
Inferiors.

Of SENSIBLE QUALITY.
. IV.
BY SENSIBLE QUALITY is meant such kind of Quality as falls under our outward
Senses, or the Affections of Bodies considered as they are the Objects of
Sense: To which may be opposed the Notion of OCCULT QUALITY. These do relate
either to the Eye and things visible. Primary, LIGHT. I. Secondary, COLOR. II.
Ear, SOUND. III. TASTE and SMELL. IV. Touch; viz. such Qualities as are more
ACTIVE. V. PASSIVE. VI.



In this distribution of Sensible Qualities, those that are Visible and
Tangible are, both because of their Number and Variety, each of them reduced
under double Differences. Whereas those that belong to the Senses of Taste and
Smell are, for the contrary reason, contracted under one. The gradual
Differences belonging to every one of these are so very numerous, that no
Language does, or indeed can, provide for them; but we are fain to denominate
each of them from that subject in which it is most commonly found and known.
And, for the farther help of the common defect of Languages as to such things,
I have in the following Tables (where it could conveniently be done) reduced
things to double Opposites, which, with the addition of the transcendental
points of Augmentative and Diminutive, will much facilitate the expression of
the several degrees of these things.

I. LIGHT.
I. That is styled PRIMARY VISIBLE, by the help of which we are enabled to see
other things; being inherent chiefly either in The Air; according to the more
General Nature of it; denoting the intermediate or extremes, the latter of
which is properly a total Privation. 1.
TWILIGHT, Dawning. LIGHT, Lux, lightsome, illuminate, enlighten, glimmer,
glimpse, flash. DARKNESS, gloomy, close, dim, duskie, Eclipse, obscure, sad,
swart, brown.

Particular Kind or Degree; the Opposite to which does suppose some secondary
Light. 2.
LIGHT, Lumen, lucid, Luminary, irradiate, Sunshine. SHADOW, Shade, Vmbrage,
adumbrate, Screen, Canopy, Curtain.

The Superficies of solid Bodies; from which a strong or weak reflection is
styled. 3.
BRIGHTNESS, Luster, splendour, refulgence, glister, glitter, dazzling, shine,
coruscation, clear, fair, orient, polite, gloss, respl^ndent, illustrious,
furbish, polish, burnish, irradiate. DIMNESS, gloomy, cloudy, blink.
The Bulk and Solidity of Bodies; according to their capacity, or incapacity of
conveying Light. 4.
TRANSPARENCY, Perspicuity, pellucid, diaphanous, clear, thin: OPACIIY, Thick.
Both the Superficies and Bulk of Bodies; signifying a freedom from: or
liableness unto, any single or interspersed impediment. 5.
CLEARNESS, fair, immaculate, unspotted, clarify. SPOTTEDNESS, Blemish, Blot,
Blur, Mote, Mole, Freckle, Speck, Stain, Soil.



II. Secondary Visible Qualities, II. COLOR.
are by a general name styled COLORS, Tincture, Hue, Complexion, Stain, Tinge;
by which are meant those various Appearances in the Superficies of Bodies which
do more immediately affect the Eye.

They are distinguishable into those that are more Simple; and counted either
Primary; whether the intermediate, or the two extremes. 1.
GRAYNESS, Freez, grisly, hoary, russet. WHITENESS, blank, blanch, bleach.
BLACKNESS, sable, sad, swart, brown, Negro.

Secondary; most considerable according to their order in the Rainbow: the
usual Color of Blood: or of Gold. 2.
REDNESS, Crimson, Vermilion, Scarlet, Stammel, ruddy, M^rrey, Gules.
YELLOWNESS, Sallow, Tawny.
Vegetables: or the appearing Color of the Heavens. 3.
GREENNESS, Verdure. BLEWNESS, Azure, Watchet.
Juice of the Fish Murex. 4.
PURPLE.


Mixed; according to the more General names. 5.
VARIEGATEDNESS, motly, pyed, parti-colored, diverse colors, embroider, inlay.
CHANGEABLENESS.
Particular kinds; being made either by Points: or Lines* 6.
SPECKLEDNESS, Freckled. STRIATEDNESS, brindled, streaked, striped.
Roundles, or Squares, 7.
DAPPLEDNESS. CHECQUEREDNESS.





III. SOUND.
III. Sensible Quality perceptible by the Ear, together with the Privation of
it, is styled by the name of SOUND, Noise, resound, Report, Coil, Rout, Racket,
blow, loud, dinn, quetch, Echo, Euphony. To which may be adjoined those natural
words ( fictitia a sono) bounce, buz, chatter, chink, clack* clap, clash,
clatter, click, clink, crash, crush, ferk, hum, hiss, jar, jingle, jerk* knock,
rattle, ruffle, rumble, russle, clutter, lash, pipe, ring, scream, shriek,
snap, squeak, squall, roar, thump, toot, twang, thwack, tinkle, wheez, whimper,
whip, whine, whistle, yell. SILENCE, Stilness, hush, hold ones peace, muni,
tacit, quash, quiet, whist, 'st.


The several Notions belonging to this Head, to which different names are
assigned, do concern either the Causes of it; considered Formally; according to
which several Sounds are made; either by an intermediate, or a stronger and
quicker: or weaker and slower percussion of the Air. 1.
MEAN, Tenor, Counter tenor. ACVTE, shrill, Treble, Canto. GRAVE, low, Base,
deep

Materially; when it is made by things Metalline, or other solid brittle
bodies; either clear: (...) interrupted by some discontinuity of the parts. 2.
RINGING, jingle, tinkle, Bell, tole, chime, Peal, Knell. JARRING, Clattering.
Animal; being either. More general to the more perfect Animals: or to Man. 3.
VOICE, vocal, call, cry, invocate, Tone. ARTICULATE* Voice, speak, eloquution,
pronounce,
More special, and peculiar to some brute Creatures; which may likewise be
imitated with artificial Instruments, by the forcible compression of Air
through a rimule: or through an equable concavity. 4.
HISSING, Whizzing. WHISTLING.



Relations; as a Single perfect Sound: or near half more or less then such a
Sound. 5.
NOTE, Tone, Key. SHARP. FLAT.

Perfect Series of Notes: or aggregate of such Series. 6.
TUNE, Lesson, Chime, Air, Strain. CONSORT.

Affections; either of Single Notes; being either full and perfect: or impedite
and imperfect. 7.
CLEARNESS, shrill. HOARSNESS, Harshness.
Notes together; in respect of their agreement: or disagreement. 8.
CONCORD, Symphony. DISCORD, Dissonance, untunable
Tunes together; in respect of their agreement: or disagreement. 9.
HARMONY, Melody, Music. IANGLING, Tintamar.




IV. The Sensible Qualities belonging to the TASTE and SMELL, IV. TASTE and SMELL.
are of so near affinity, that several Languages do assign to them the same
names.

They are distinguishable into the More general and extreme, as to the
agreeableness: or disagreeableness of them to the Palate or Nose. 1.
SWEETNESS, Pleasant, luscious, toothsom, fragrant, odoriferous, Perfume.
VNSAVOVRINESS, Stink, Stench, foetid, noisome, fulsom, rank.
More special and middle; from Thin and warm matter, like that of Oil or
Butter: or that of Pepper. 2.
FATTINESS, Oily, unctuous, gross, greasy. ACRIMONIOUSNESS, biting, keen,
cutting.
Cooling and constringing matter, like that in Green fruit: or in Galls. 3.
AUSTERENESS, Harshness, sour, tart. ACERBITY, Astringency, styptic.
Penetrating vellicating matter, like that of Vinegar and Limons: or that of
Aloes and Wormwood. 4.
ACIDITY, Sharpness, eager, hard. BITTERNESS.
Matter of a moderate consistency: apt to corrode by its siccity. 5.
SALTISHNESS, saline, brackish, briny, seasoned. FRESHNESS, unsalted, flashy.
The vividness: or decay of the Spirits in any thing. 6.
FRESHNESS, Smartness, brisk, quick, lively, spirituous. DEADNESS, vapid,
decayed, insipid, wearish, flashy.
The beginning: or farther degree of Putrefaction. 7.
MUSTINESS, Moldiness, vinewed, fusty. ROTTENNESS, addle, putrid.




V. ACTIVE TACTILE QUALITIES.
V. Tactile Qualities more ACTIVE are commonly distinguished by their being
Primary, from whence the others proceed; being either the intermediate: or the
extremes of that Quality, whereby Homogeneous or Heterogeneous things are
congregated, or separated. 1.
TEMPERATENESS, Warmness, Tepidness, lukewarm. HEAT, hot, soultry, ardent,
torrid, fervent, swelter, inflame, scald, Parch, Scorch. COLDNSSS, bleak,
piercing, biting, chill, cool, frigid, refrigerate.

A Body is easily bounded by it self: or conformed to any other Body, wherein
it may be contained. 2
MOISTNESS, dank, damp. WETNESS, Humidity, liquid, mash, slabber, daggle.
DRYNESS, Siccity, exsic^ate, arid, sear, parch.


Secondary, such as are derived from the first; referring either to The Texture
of parts, as to nearer: or farther distance. 3.
CLOSENESS, shrink, Constipation, consolidate, compact. DENSITY, Crassitude,
Thickness, Condense-ation, thronged, pressed. RARITY, Thinness, attenuate,
rare-ifie.

Inclination to Motion downwards: or upwards. 4.
WEIGHTINESS, massy. GRAVITY, Ponderousness, Heaviness, lumpish, weighing,
pressing down. LEVITY, Lightness.

Aptitude or Ineptitude to Motion. Common to Liquids and Solids. 5.
CONSISTENCY, congeal, stand. HARDNESS, indurate, callous, brawny. FLVIDITY,
liquid, flow, dissolve.

Proper to Solids. 6.
FLEXIBLENESS, Pliableness, pliant, bend, bow, stoop. LIMBERNESS, supple, lank,
lith, ling, gentle, pliant, pliable, slack, flagging. STIFNESS, stark, tite,
rigid, harsh, inflexible.






VI. Tactile Qualities more PASSIVE, are distinguishable by their denoting
either the Giving way to: or resisting of the Touch. 1.
YIELDINGNESS, give place. SOFTNESS, Tenderness, mollify, relent, give.
HARDNESS, obdurate, indurate, callous.

Fabric of Bodies, as to their Superficies; being more: or less plain. 2.
EVENNESS, plain, level. SMOOTHNESS, Sleekness, glibbery, slippery, terse,
polite, polish, burnish, Calender. ROVGHNESS, Asperity, Ruggedness, uneven,
harsh, ruffle, rumple, puckered, cragged.

Bulk, being in its self, or in its parts, of an indifferent: or of a greater
or smaller magnitude. 3.
ORDINARINESS, of the most usual and common size: COVRSNESS, gross, thick.
FINENESS, Tenuity, Subtilty, thin, attenuate.


Adhesion of parts, in Fluids. 4.
SLIMINESS, mucilaginous, roping. CLAMMINESS, viscous, adhering, stick to,
cling, cleaving, glutinous, Bird-lime. VNCTVOVSNESS, Slipperiness, Lubricity,
glib.

Solids. 5.
FIRMNESS, Fastness. TOVGHNESS, ductile, malleable. BRITTLENESS, Friableness,
crisp, short, frail, fragil.


Ineptitude or aptitude to Local motion, chiefly in Solids. 6.
STEDDINESS, establish, Stability, FASTNESS, Fixedness, Firmness, steadfast,
wistly, set, settle, clenching, Rivet, stick in. LOOSENESS, sleasie, Slackness,
unfastned, unfixed, unsteddy, unstedfast, unsettled, Luxation.




Of SICKNESS.
THose kind of Impotencies of the Body, as to its natural Functions, which are
usually accompanied with Pain,. V.
are styled by the common name of SICKNESS, Disease, ill, Malady, Relapse,
unhealthy, unwholsom, crazy, Distemper, Indisposition, ail, Fit, mortality,
taken with, Spittle.

To which is opposed HEALTH, Sanity, Soundness, heal, incurable, wholesome,
recover, safe and sound, well, clear, how do you.

The principal Notions referring to this Head may be distinguished into such as
signify either The more general CAUSES OF DISEASE. I. The Diseases themselves;
whether Common to the whole Body, and the various parts of it, in respect of
DISTEMPERS. II. TUMORS. III.
Peculiar to some parts; either the HEAD, or ARISING THENCE. IV. MIDDLE REGION,
the Breast, or its parts. V. LOWER BELLY or Bowels. VI.




Besides the Diseases enumerated in the following Tables, there are diverse
others not here provided for, because they may be otherwise sufficiently
expressed: As for instance, those that belong to the Appetite, may be expressed
by the notes of Excess, Defect, Depravation.

And thus likewise may it be with those other Functions of Concoction,
Sanguification, Nutrition, Augmentation, etc.

Those that belong to the Organical parts, in respect of any Imperfection as to
their just Number, Magnitude, Conformation, Site, Connection, etc. may also be
otherwise sufficiently expressed.

I. GENERAL CAUSES OF DISEASE.
I. The GENERAL CAUSES OF DISEASE, may be distinguished into such as are either
Extrinsecal, and without the body; whether from Other bodies of a malignant
dangerous quality, either spreading their efficacy by insensible Effluvia: or
such as being taken in a small quantity, prove destructive to life. 1.
CONTAGION, Infection, taint, catching, run, spread, diffuse. POISON, Venom,
envenom, virulent.
Violent motion; causing either a dissolution of continuity: or too great a
pressure upon the parts, when the skin is not cut. 2.
WOUND, Hurt* Sore, vulnerary, cut, break ones head, Scarr. BRUISE, Contusion,
crush, batter, shatter.

Intrinsecal; with relation to the Humors; whether as to the error of Excess:
or bad disposition. 3.
PLETHORA, Fullness. CACOCHYMIA, Ill humors.
Qualities; according to the general name, denoting Excess or Defect: or that
particular Indisposition which is most frequent, namely, too much Heat. 4.
DISTEMPER. INFLAMMATION.
Parts and Vessels; with respect to the Stopping, or blowing of them up. 5.
OBSTRUCTION, Oppilation. INFLATION, puffed up, flatulent, windy.
Putrefying, of them; considered according to the usual Antecedent, or Cause; a
Collection of putrid matter. 6.
ABSCESSUS, Aposteme.
Consequent, or Effect; in relation to the Aperture or Cavity made by the
Corrosion of this putrid matter; being either roundish, or oblong. 7.
ULCER, Sore, Botch, Canker. FISTULA.
Defect of animal spirits, whereby Sense and Motion is to be communicated, so
as a part becomes cadaverous and mortified, according to a lesser: or greater
degree. 8
GANGRENE. SPHACELUS.







II. Diseases belonging to the whole Body, or the various parts of it, II.
DISTEMPERS of Body.
in respect of DISTEMPER, are distinguishable into such as do arise either From
some putrid matter, causing a preternatural heat; being either Not infectious;
seated in the Humors; whether continuing: or intermitting, according to certain
seasons. 1.
FEVER, Calenture. AGUE, quotidian, tertian, quartan.
Habit of the Body, which is usually accompanied by a wasting away of the
parts. 2.
HECTIC. CONSUMPTION, tabid.

Infectious; by Effluvia; being usually accompanied with Spots in the skin,
according to a lesser: or greater degree of danger. 3.
MALIGNANT FEVER, Spotted fever, Purples. PLAGUE, Pestilence, Pest,
pestiferous, pestilential, the Sickness, Murrain.
Breakings out in the skin. More dangerous; according to degrees greater: or
lesser. 4.
POX. MEASLES.
Less dangerous; accompanied with pain of itching and burning, from bilious
matter; either that which does usually overspread the whole body: or that which
is commonly only in some parts, being apt to diffuse it self gradually, being
accompanied with redness and scurfiness. 5.
ITCH, Mange. TETTER, Ring-worm, Shingles.

Roughness in the skin. 6.
LEPROSY, Lazer, Leper. SCURF, Morphew, Scald.

Contact in Venery. 7.
LUES VENEREA, French Pox.


From some humor not in it self corrupted, but by its superfluity distending
the inward membranes of the Bones, the Muscles or Nerves: or discoloring by
Redness, and heating the outward skin; being a thin light matter that may be
easily discussed. 8.
GOUT, Arthritis. ERYSIPELAS, St. Anthony's fire.



III. TUMORS.
III. Those Diseases by which the parts are swelled and distended beyond their
due proportion, are styled TUMORS, Rising, swell, turgid, node.

These may be distinguished into such Tumors as are either in the Cuticle, or
upper skin, with little or no pain; being small collections of watery matter
hindered from transpiring: to which may be adjoined that which is subsequent
upon the drying of this and such other putrid matter, causing a roughness upon
the skin with little exulceration. 1.
PUSTULE, Wheal, Whelk, Pimple, Push, Sty. SCAB.
Skin it self and Flesh. With purulent matter. Not poisonous: either of a
bigger magnitude, and apt to pass from one part to another, of more difficult
cure: or of a lesser magnitude, more frequent, and less dangerous. 2.
KING'S EVIL, Scrophula, Struma. BOIL, Blain, Sore, Whitlow, Ancome.
Poisonous and corroding; being either hard and unequal, discoloring the skin
by paleness or blackness, with Veins about it resembling the Leg of a Crab, and
exceeding difficult in the Cure: or else a collection of thick putrid blood
violently hot, with fretting and malignity. 3.
CANCER, Wolf. CARBUNCLE, Sore, Plaegue-sore.

Without purulent matter. Not discoloring the skin; whether of a Bigger
magnitude; either soft: or hard. 4.
WEN. SCIRRHUS.
Lesser magnitude; being kinds of Plants rooted in the skin: or below it. 5.
WART CORN.

Discoloring the skin with redness, and occasioned by Cold. 6.
CHILDBLANE. Kibe.


Veins or Arteries immoderately distended. 7.
VARIX. ANEURISMA.
Tendons. 8.
GANGLION, Spavin.



IV. The DISEASES belonging to the HEAD, or NERVES, IV. DISEASES of the HEAD
and NERVES.
or arising thence, may be distinguished into such as relate more Immediately
to the Brain it self, the seat and organ of the principal Faculties; either in
regard of its Substance; when it is indisposed for the More principal and noble
Faculties; either by some hot Vapor or Humor diffused: or from some
particular Hurt or Inflammation, causing a depravation of the Intellectuals,
Fancy and Memory; either with a Fever, or without. 1.
FRENSY, Delirium, frantic, lightheaded, phrenetic. MADNESS, out of ones wits,
raving, distraction, besides ones self, wood, brainsick, crack-brained,
crazed, lunatic.
Less principal Faculties; by the Superfluity of cold pituitous matter, causing
excessive drowsiness: or by crass crude vapors rising from the stomach,
working a kind of Suffocation in sleeping by a sense of weight upon the Breast.
2.
VETERNUS, Sopor. EPHIALTES, Nightmare, Incubus.
Corruption of some crass phlegmatic humor, either in the Brain, causing much
drowsiness and deliration: or in the Arteries which should convey the spirits
to the Brain, causing first a giddiness, and then an abolition of Sense and
Motion. 3.
LETHARGY. APOPLEXY.
Defluxion of Humors (which are sometimes salt or sharp) either on the Lungs:
or other parts of the Body, Limms, or Joints. 4.
CATARRH, Distillation, Rheum, Defluxion. RHEUMATISM.


Ventricles; when any hot Vapor does agitate and disturb the motion of the
spirits, so as objects seem to turn round: or when any cold phlegmatic humor
does obstruct their motion, causing a privation of Sense, with convulsive
motions in several parts. 5.
VERTIGO, Giddiness, Swimming in the head, Dizziness, Scotomy. EPILEPSY,
Falling Sickness.

Mediately to the Nerves; which may be either Obstructed; whether the
greater-Nerves, and for a longer continuance: or the lesser Branches, for a
shorter space, whereby Sense and Motion is hindered. 6.
PALSY, paralytic. NUMNESS, Stupor, asleep.
Contracted more generally: or distended in some particular part. 7.
CONVULSION. CRAMP, Stitch.
Oppressed with superfluous moisture, causing an unequal growth of the parts,
specially the Head and Joints. 8.
RICKETS, Rachitis.

Throat; by such an inward Swelling and Inflammation as does hinder Swallowing
and Respiration. 9.
SQUINANCY, Quinsie.




V. DISEASE^ of the MIDDLE REGION.
V. The Diseases belonging to the MIDDLE REGION and its parts, may refer either
to the Lungs; in their being Obstructed by some crass phlegmatic matter
adhering to the sides of the Pipes, from whence follows Too frequent
Respiration. 1.
SHORTNESS OF BREATH, Anhelatio, Panting, Pursiness.
Difficulty of Breathing, according to a lesser, or greater degree: by the
latter of which men cannot fetch their breath, unless in an upright posture. 2.
ASTHMA, Tissick, broken-winded, wheeze. ORTHOPNOEA.

Vlcerated, and by degrees putrefying; from whence sometimes does proceed much
purulent matter to fill up the cavity of the Thorax. 3.
CONSUMPTION, Phthisis. EMPYEMA.

Heart; by some noxious vapors or humors, which do either Provoke to too
frequent and vehement motion for the freeing it self from them. 4.
PALPITATION.
Hinder the motion of it; according to a lesser: or greater degree. 5.
FAINTING, Failing, languish, Qualm. SWOUNING, Swound, Leipothymia.

Side; from some Inflammation within the Membranes covering the inside of the
Ribs, causing difficulty of breathing, and provocation to coughing, upon which
great pain follows, accompanied with a Fever. 6.
PLEURISY.



VI. DISEASES of the BOWELS.
VI. Diseases belonging to the LOWER BELLY or Bowels, may be distinguished into
such as do concern the Stomach; by sharp humors corroding the mouth of it,
causing sometimes Fainting and cold Sweats. 1.
CARDIALGIA, Heart-burning.
Liver and Gall; being caused by some impotence in them for the doing of their
Functions, in not digesting and distributing the humors belonging to them;
causing either Paleness of color, Faintness, Indisposition to stir: or
Yellowness and Swarthiness of color, accompanied with faintness and
nauseousness. 2.
GREEN SICKNESS, Cachexie. JAUNDISE, Yellow-jaundise, Black-jaundise.
Stomach and Liver, and other Bowels jointly; which, being defective in the
works of Concoction and Distribution, do occasion a superfluity of serous
matter distending the skin of the belly and other parts of the body,
accompanied with some wind: and sometimes a windy vapor, accompanied with some
watery humors, stretching the belly. 3.
DROPSY, hydropical. TYMPANY.
Spleen; by its dispersing sour and feculent humors: or noxious vapors, into
other parts of the body; the former of which is usually accompanied with
faintness, weariness, looseness of teeth, spots on the body, and specially on
the legs. 4.
SCURVY, Scorbute. HYPOCHONDRIACAL VAPORS, Spleneti^.
Guts; from some sharp humor that corrodes, or vapor that distends the Colon:
or from some hardened excrement, or some other like matter, stopping the Ilia or
smaller Guts. 5.
COLIC, Belly-ach. ILIAC PASSION.
Faculties of excretion; whether by Stool; either as to the excess of this: or
the voiding of blood. 6.
DIARRHAEA, Lax, Looseness, Flux. DISENTERY, Bloody-flix.
Urine; either by some stony concretion in the Kidneys or Bladder: or a
continual involuntary urining by drops. 7.
STONE. STRANGURY.

Lower part of the belly or Scrotum; by a breach of the internal Membranes, or
too much distention of it, or by superfluity of waterish or windy matter: or in
the Veins about the Fundament. 8.
RUPTURE, Hernia, Burst, Broken-belly. HAEMORROIDS, Piles.
Mother or Womb; by causing convulsive motions: or stopping of the Breath. 9.
HYSTERICAL PASSION, Mother. SUFFOCATION.



CHAP. IX. Concerning the Predicament of Action; the several kinds of it. I.
Spiritual. II. Corporeal. III. Motion. IV. Operation.
NExt to the Predicament of Quality may succeed that of Action; the several
kinds of which may be distributed into such as have for their Agent a Spirit,
or spiritual faculty, called SPIRITUAL ACTION. Body, or material substance,
respecting chiefly either the Actions of Animate bodies, called here CORPOREAL
ACTION. Passage of bodies from one place to another, styled MOTION. Sundry
kinds of works, about which men of several callings use to employ themselves,
styled OPERATION.



SPIRITUAL ACTION.
THe Genus of SPIRITUAL ACTIONS,. I.
may be distributed into such as do belong either to GOD. I. The Soul, with
reference to the Understanding. SPECULATIVE. II. PRACTICAL. III.
WILL. IV. Fancy or Appetite; the Actions of which are styled Affections or
Passions, and may be distinguished into such as are either more SIMPLE. V.
MIXED. VI.




I. ACTIONS OF GOD.
I. By ACTIONS OF GOD in this place, are meant only his transient Actions, which
are terminated in the Creatures. As for his immanent Actions, because we can
frame no other conceptions of these but such as are suitable to the acts of our
own minds, therefore may they be sufficiently expressed by those that follow in
the next Differences. These transient Acts here enumerated, do primarily belong
to the Divine Nature; though some of them may in a secondary manner, and by way
of allusion and participation, be sometimes ascribed to other things: To which
may be annexed upon the account of Affinity the general name of those Actions
which do exceed all Natural power, MIRACLE, Wonder, supernatural.

These are distinguishable into such as do concern either the Putting of things
into their first being: or reducing them to nothing. 1.
CREATION, Making, Creator, Creature, ANNIHILATION, Annul, disannul, abolish,
extinguish, bring to naught, call-in, cancel, put out.
Government or disposal of things; More general; whereby he does most freely
and wisely take care of, and provide for all things: To which may be opposed by
some Analogy such a necessary Concatenation and unalterable order amongst
things as does not admit of any liberty: or such a blind contingency of things
as excludes all wisdom, expressed usually by the word^, 2.
PROVIDENCE, Foresight, Forecast. FATE, Destiny. FORTUNE, Chance, Accident,
Venture, Adventure, casual, ^ap, Luck, Hazard, fortuitous, a Hit, peradventure,
perhaps.

More special; belonging either to Animate Creatures; by Contributing to their
well: or ill being. 3.
BLESSING, Beatitude, Benediction. CVRSING, accurse, ban; Malediction,
Execration.
Continuing them in their particular kinds of Being: or depriving them of it. 4.
PRESERVATION, Conservation, Protection, Keeping, maintain, save, Savior,
shelter, guard, keep, cherish. DESTRVCTION, Perdition, Confusion, Bane,
Devastation, Loss, pernicious, subvert, undo, ruin, confound, extirpate,
abolish, bring to naught, stroy, destroy, cast away, perish, cut off, wast,
consume, dissolve, exterminate, extinguish, fall, gone.
Keeping or taking them from any evil felt or feared: or leaving them to it. 5.
DELIVERANCE, Rescue, Save-iour, Salvation, free, quit, rid, clear, exempt.
DERELICTION, destitute, forlorn, deserting, give up, relinquish, cast off,
deliver up, forsake, leave, forgo.

Rational Creatures; as to their Minds; by discovering to them, or impressing
upon them, in an extraordinary way, such Truths or Inclinations as humane
industry could not of it self attain to. 6.
REVELATION, open, disclose, discover, Vision, Enthusiasm, Fanatic, Oracle.
INSPIRATION, infuse.
States by delivering them from a condition of servitude and misery. 7.
REDEMPTION, deliver, save, ransom, rescue.






II. ACTIONS of the UNDERSTANDING and Judgment SPECULATIVE, Contemplation,
Theory, II. SPECULATIVE ACTIONS of the Understanding.
are such as do concern the various exercise of our Understandings about the
Truth and Falsehood of things, with respect either to the Understanding; being
either Preparative; in the first Objectization of a thing: or the reflexive
Thought about it, together with what else one knows of that kind. 1.
THINKING, Cogitation, bethink, deem, imagine, esteem, Conceit, Notion,
Thought-ful, pensive, mind it, suggest, put in ones head, MEDITATING, Study,
considering, cast about in ones mind, muse, contemplate, Elucubration, think,
fore think, premeditate, ponder, extempore.
Operative; in the comparing of things to find out what is Truth: or the
Thought resulting from such comparison. 2.
INQUISITION, Examination, Search, Scrutiny* exploration, investigate,
Disquisition, seek, discuss, hunt, canvase, cast water, Quest, Inquest.
DISCOVERY, detect, find, perceive, lift out* pick out, Invention, excogitate,
Author, Inventor, tell, inkling, it is out.

Judgment; Primary; in judging such discovery agreeable to Truth: or
disagreeable. More general. 3.
ASSENT, Consent, accord, agree, concur, allow, acknowledge, yield, suffrage,
Voice, Vote, of the same mind, think good. DISSENT, differ, disagree, of
another mind, Discord.
More special; according to its arguments; as Proceeding from Causes
Extrinsecal; Testimony sufficient: or insufficient. 4.
BELIEVING, Credit, credible, Faith, Trust. DISBELIEVING, Discredit,
incredible, Distrust.
Intrinsecal in the thing it self; that it is conclusive: or not so conclusive
but that it may be otherwise. 5.
KNOWING, Cognition, conscious, wist, witting, aware, privy, Intelligence,
learn, inform, acquaint, cognizance, notice, inkling prescience, omniscient.
DOVBTING, misdoubt, mistrust, distrust, suspense, hanging staggering, hesitate,
pendulous, dubious, ambiguous, at a stand, stick at, Quandary, Scruple,
Skeptic, uncertain, Apocryphal, it is a question.

Productive of these Effects in higher, or lower degrees. 6
CERTAINTY, Assurance, sure, evince, convince, demonstrate, evidence,
undoubted, out of doubt, without doubt, doubtless, infallible. OPINION,
Conceit, Judgment, Sentiment, Mind, Tenet, think, suppose, surmise, ween,
overween, unanimous, likely, probable, prejudice, apprehend, fancy, repute,
deem, Verdict, Sentence, shoot ones bolt.


Secondary; judging of Truth found, as to the Consequence of it, in respect of
other things to be concluded from it, or to follow upon it; in Thesi: or in
Hypothesi 7.
REASONING, Discussing, Arguing, Ratiocination, Logic. CONJECTURING, Guessing,
surmise, divine, mind gives, conceit, Presumption, probable.
Importance: or frivolousness of it. 8.
ESTEEMING, accounting, prizing, valuing, rating, regard, respect, repute,
count of, care for, think well of, set by, stand upon, credit, prefer.
CONTEMNING, despising, slighting, undervaluing, disregarding, set at naught,
scorn, disdain, abjectness, despicable, vilify, disesteem, neglect, set light
by, make nothing of, I pass not for it, Nickname, pish.





III. ACTIONS of the UNDERSTANDING and Judgment PRACTICAL, III. PRACTICAL
ACTIONS of the Understand^ng.
do concern the enquiry after and taking notice of the Nature of things, with
reference to their Goodness or Fitness to any purpose. They are
distinguishable, as the former, by their respect to the Understanding; being
either Preparative, in the first Objectization of a business: or the reflexive
Thought about it, together with what else one knows of that kind. 1.
DELIBERATING, ponder, weigh, forecast. OBSERVING, advert, animadvert, give
ear, attend to, heed, regard, give ones mind to, look to, mark, note, mind,
pry, peep, watch, take notice, notable, remarkable, oversee, overlook.
Operative, in the comparing of means to find which is expedient: or the
Thought resulting from such comparison. 2.
CONSIDERATION, revolve, scan, advise, forecast, recognize, premeditate ponder,
peruse, study, recount, reflect, review, revise, weigh, bethink, consult, cast
in ones mind, retrospection, ruminate. INVENTION, devising, excogitate, find
out, make, Author.

Judgment; Primary; in judging the thing found to be agreeable to its end: or
disagreeable. More general. 3.
APPROVING, liking, allowing, think good, take well, fancy him, find a Bill,
current. DISAPPROVING, disliking, disallowing, disavow, mislike, condemn,
explode, reprobate.
More special; according to its motives; as Proceeding from Causes Extrinsecal;
Warranty sufficient: or insufficient. 4.
TRUST, Confidence, betrust, entrust, rely, repose, enfeoff, recommend, credit,
charge, rest upon. DISTRVST, Mistrust, Diffidence, Suspicion, Surmize,
Jealousy, Vmbrage, call in question, misgive.
Intrinsecal in the means it self; conclusive that it is so: or not so
conclusive but that it may be otherwise. 5.
SATISFACTION, Content, acquiesce, resolve. SCRVPLE, Doubt, dissatisfie.

Productive of these Effects; in higher: or lower degrees. 6.
ASSURANCE, Confidence, sure, certain, resolved, secure, confirm. PERSUASION,
think, believe.


Secondary; in judging of expedients found, as to the use of them, how they are
to be ordered and managed: or what is like to be the event of them. 7.
CONTRIVING, projecting frame, machinate, plot, forecast, cast about, or in
ones mind, find a way, devise, Conveyance. EXPECTING, look for, wait, gaping
after, mind gives me, make account, stay for, watch for.




IV. ACTIONS OF THE WILL.
IV. ACTIONS OF THE WILL. Under this Head are to be considered the Kinds of such
Actions; belonging either to the End as future; comprehending Acts more Simple;
Imperfect and diminute; for: or against one thing rather then another. 1.
INCLINATION, Propensity, Proclivity, Proneness, Forwardness, hankering, having
a mind to, Prejudice for, bent, addicted. AVERSION, Prejudice against,
unwillingness, coyness, stand off.
Impedite and conditional; for: or against a thing, if left to it self. 2.
VELLEITY, Woulding, Wishing, Desire, List, Vote, Will, Mind, Option, rather.
NOLLEITY, Backwardness, go against, grudge, loath, Regret, Reluctance, think
much, rather not, unwilling, with an ill will.
Perfect; denoting the determining of it self to do, or not to do: or the
taking of farther time to consider. 3.
PURPOSING, Intention, Decree, destine, determine, appoint, design, resolve,
ordain, mean, nonce, bent, minded, set himself, set ones mind, predestinate,
preordain. DEMURRING, hesitating, hanging, suspense, stick at, Quandary.

Complicate; toward an object considered as difficult, signifying the purpose
of doing it notwithstanding such Difficulties: or doubting because of such
Difficulties. 4.
RESOLUTION, Fixedness, determined. WAVERING, fluctuate, hanging, suspense,
irresolute, staggering.

Means; Antecedently; determining what to take: or leave. 5.
ELECTION, choosing, select, Choice, cull, picking, prefer, set aside, Option,
Pre-election, predestinate, rather. REIECTION, refuse, Preterition, pass by,
cast off, cast aside, cast away, reprobate, repudiate, renounce, explode,
outcast:
Consequently; continuing in the purpose of using such means: or ceasing such
purpose. 6.
PROSECUTING, persevere, persist, hold on. DESISTING, giving off, leaving,
cease, surcease, end, terminate, determine, stay, rest, pause, forbear,
withdraw, falter, supersede, break off, go out, give over, lay aside, or down.

End obtained; as to the resting: or not resting of the Will in it as good.
DELECTATION, Fruition, Rejoicing, Joy, Gladness, Delight, Comfort, Complacence,
Pleasure, Solace, Satisfaction, Content, placid, please, affect, acceptable,
delicious, sweet, welcome. DISPLACENCE, Sorrow, Grief, Discomfort, unpleasant,
irksom, grievous, Offence-ive, Disgust, Dislike, Distaste, stomach, unacceptable
grating, malecontent.

Affections; either of the Will it self in its actings; consisting in its
having a power of applying it self to the doing or not doing this or that: or
not having such power. 8
LIBERTY, arbitrary, free, may, may choose. DETERMINATION TO ONE, must, cannot
choose but, limit, Necessity.
Actions of the Will; denoting the doing of things according to the free
inclinations of our own minds: or the being necessitated by some external
impediments to do any thing against such inclinations. 9.
SPONTANEITY, of ones own accord, freely, willing, voluntary, with a good will,
unbidden, gratis, ready. CO ACTION, Compu^sion, Constraint, Force, enforce,
Violence, unwillingness, maugre, perforce, extort, wrench, wrest, in spite,
will or nill, driving, pressing, bear down, overawe.




V. SIMPLE PASSIONS.
V. Acts of the Sensitive part, namely of the Fancy, and chiefly of the
Appetite, whereby the mind is moved and disturbed with the apprehensions of
things, are styled PASSIONS, Affection, Perturbation, pathetic.

Those amongst these are called more SIMPLE which consist only of one single
Act. They are distinguishable into such as concern things under the notion of
New unexpected surprising: or else things over-common and too much repeated;
without respect to the good or evil of them, being chiefly a disturbance of the
Fancy; styled 1.
ADMIRATION, marvel, wonder, amaze, astonish. TAEDIVM, glut, loathing, cloy,
dawl, nauseate.
Good or Evil which we Wish to happen to them. 2.
FAVOR, Benevolence, Benignity, Grace, Good will, kind propitious, ingratiate,
Favorite, Dilling, Well-wisher, make much of. MALIGNITY, Malice, Spite, Pique,
Grudge, Prejudice, Despite, Discourtesie, Disfavour, sinister, virulent,
malevolent, ill will, ill minded.
Apprehend to be in them; whether Absolute; flowing from our general
apprehensions of the Worth of things, and our need of them: or the Evil, and
our being hurt by them. 3.
LOVE, Affection, inamour, dote on smitten, amiable, besotted, amorous, dear,
endear, Darling, Minion, Paramour, well-beloved, Likings, Fancy, Philtre.
HATRED, Malice, Rancour, Spite, Virulence, odious, abhor, abominate, detest,
cannot endure, Grudge, Pique, Heart-burning, cankered, exulcerate.
Relative to different notions concerning Both Good and Evil; considered as
Present. 4.
MIRTH, Glee, Solace, Cheerfulness, Sport, blithe, blissom, buxom, frolic,
jolly, jocund, jovial, merry, exhilarate, glad, crank, debonair, comical,
pleasant, sanguin, Iubile. GRIEF, Sadness, Sorrow, Melancholy, Heaviness,
doleful, deplorable, disconsolate, bitter, pensive, dejected, tragical, ruful,
amort, moan, bemoan, wail, bewail, lament, Dump, cast down, vex, trouble, cut,
take on, whimper, pule, woe, agony, anguish, mourn, Plaint, Cry, take heavily.
Absent and possible. 5.
DESIRE, Affection, covet, crave, fain, long for, lust, greedy, Inclination to,
hankering, wish, Concupiscence, eager, earnest, importunate, thirst after, have
a mind to. AVERSATION, Antipathy, Regret, Reluctance, Distaste, irksom, eschew*
shun, avoid, abhor, loath, execrate, cannot endure, or abide,
Absent and probable; as to The nature of the Act. 6.
HOPE, Trust, Recumbency, Affiance, Rely. FEAR, Awe, Dread, Terror, Horror,
Consternation, hideous, dismal, afraid, aghast, formidable, horrible, terrible,
fright, fray, terrify, scare, startle, daunt, deterr, dismay, amate, appale,
dare not, terrible, Bugbear, Hobgoblin.
The greater: or lesser degree of this Probability. 7.
CONFIDENCE, Affiance, Trust, build upon, rest upon, rely, repose, secure,
pert, in heart, dare, presume, take to. DIFFIDENCE, Suspicion, Jealousy,
Mistrust, Distrust, out of heart, faint-hearted, cast down, heartless,
misdoubt, misgive.
The issue and event; which as it is represented to have Difficulties in it
either superable: or insuperable; so it excites. 8.
BOLDNESS, Courage, Audacity, daring, sturdy, hardy, stout, venturous, pert,
malapert, embolden, presume. DESPAIR, Despondency, forlorn, hopeless, dash,
cast down, deadness of heart, heartless, past hope.


Evil alone, or opposition from others, wherein there is contempt: to which may
be annexed by way of affinity (though it be not properly a simple Passion) that
particular desire of making such actions whereby others have been injurious to
us, to become hurtful to themselves, so as they may be sensible of it. 9.
ANGER, Ire, Passion-ate, Wrath, Sharpness, Rage, Outrage, Pett, Choler, Gall,
fume, storm, fret, pelt, chafe, vex, take on, inflame, kindle, irritate,
inrage, exasperate, incense, provoke, move, sullen, hasty, furious, outrageous,
mad, look big, placable, appease, stomach, Animosity, heart-burning, irascible,
rough, hot, cursed, snappish, snarle, snuffle. REVENGE, avenge, Vengeance,
vindictive, wreak.






VI. MIXED PASSIONS, are such as do not consist of any single Act, but are made
up of more then one, VI. MIXED PASSIONS.
to be distinguished by the Object they are conversant about, and by the Simple
Passions of which they consist, into such as are Determined either to Good or
Evil; with respect to The particular interest of Repute; being conversant about
Good, which we apprehend to be in it self honorable and worthy, implying
Confidence and Love in the promoting of it: or Confidence and Joy in the owning
of it. 1.
ZEAL, ardent, Devotion, earnest, fervent, hot, warm* intent, eager, Zel^t.
GLORYING, Triumph, Exultation, boast brag, Eravado, Rodomontado, Thrasonical,
crack, crow, vapor, vaunt, Ostentation swagger, vainglory, flourishing, take a
pride.
Evil, which we apprehend to be in it self dishonorable and unworthy; implying
a mixture of Hatred and Aversation against the committing of it: or Sorrow and
Diffidence for the committing of it. 2.
SCORN, set light by, slight, despise, contemn. SHAME- faced-full-less, abash,
bashful, ashamed, out of countenance* confound, quash, dash, Impudence,
Turpitude, put to shame.

The more general interests belonging to Our selves; respecting either Good
that is dear to us, implying a mixture of Love, Anger, and Hope, that we may
excel others in it: or a mixture of Love, Anger, and Fear, lest we should by
others be deprived of it. 3.
EMULATION, vy, strive, struggle. JEALOUSY, Suspicion, surmize.
Evil; whether as done By our selves; being either a mixture of Sorrow and Fear
upon dissatisfaction in having committed it: or Sorrow and Desire, as wishing
it had not been committed. 4.
REMORSE, Compunction, Contrition, relent, beshrew, trouble of mind.
REPENTANCE, Penitence, rue.
By others; either a vile thing by any person, or any evil by a vile person;
implying a mixture of Anger and Hatred: or of Anger and Aversation. 5.
INDIGNATION, Scorn, dudgeon, fume, murmr. DISDAIN, Scorn.


Others; in respect of the Good befalling them, (as we think) worthily, or
unworthily; implying a mixture of Love and Joy: or Hate and Grief. 6.
JOY FOR THE GOOD OF OTHERS, Gratulation, congratulate, Sympathy. ENVY,
Spite-full, invidious, grudge, repine, malign.
Evil befalling them, (as we think) worthily, or unworthily; implying a mixture
of Hate and Joy: or of Love and Grief. 7.
(...) Joy for the evil of others. PITY, Compassion, commiserate, condole,
relent, ruthful, tender, woeful, yearn, Bowels* bemoan, bewail, lament, deplore,
Sympathy, fellow-feeling.



Indetermined either as to Good or Evil, but concerning both consisting in a
distraction of the Mind by a conflict of any two contrary Passions: to which
may be opposed (though not so proper to this place) the transport of the Mind,
being wholly possessed with one Passion: styled 8.
AGONY. ECSTASY, Transport, Amazement, Consternation, Maze, Trance, Rupture,
ravish, astonish, extatical.



CORPOREAL ACTION.
BY CORPOREAL ACTIONS are meant such Actions whose Agent is a Body or Material
substance.. II.
They are distinguishable into such as are More peculiar to Living creatures;
either more Absolute; belonging to VEGETATIVES. I. SENSITIVES. II. RATIONALS.
III.
Relative to the Outward SIGNS OF PASSION. IV. GENERAL Notions belonging to
DEMEANOR. V.

Common with them to other things, to which by Analogy they are ascribed, the
different kinds of GESTURE. VI.


I. Corporeal ACTIONS belonging chiefly to VEGETATIVE Bodies, I. ACTIONS
VEGETATIVE.
may be distinguished into such as are either.

Primary and more general; denoting the making: or unmaking of a thing; the
motion toward a new form: or from the precedent form; styled 1.
GENERATION, get, beget, procreate, propagate, breeding, engender, Genesis.
CORRVPTION, Dissolution, consume^tion.
Secondary and more particular; relating unto the Conveying, or receiving in
that first matter which is to be formed into an animate Body. 2.
IMPREGNATION, beget, pregnant, breeding, teeming, conceived, get with child,
big, great with child, or egg. CONCEPTION, with child, Superfetation.
Bringing forth what has been thus conceived; either in due time: or too soon.
3.
PARTURITION, Bearing, Birth, Nativity, bringing forth, travail, groaning, in
labor, lying in, Childbirth, ea^ing, farrowing, kindling, foling, whelping,
deliver, Midwife, brought to bed, cry out, lay egg. ABORTION, miscarry,
Mischance, cast young, Castling, untimely birth, Slink, still-born.
Improvement of what is thus brought forth; either Peculiar to the Young;
implying that more then ordinary tenderness to be used toward things in that
state, whether more general: or that which is proper to viviparous Animals. 4.
FOTION, cherishing, foster, foment, brood, Incubation, hatching. LACTATION,
giving suck, suckle,
Common to Young and Old; Antecedent; the taking in of suitable and sufficient
aliment: or the fitting of this aliment by fermentation. 5.
FEEDING, living upon, Aliment, Food. DIGESTING, Concoction, put over.
Consequent from the Union of the Aliment to the body: and its improving
thereby. 6.
NOURISHING, Nutrition, maintain, Nutriment. GROWING, come up, increase,
improve, thrive, Spring, Proficient
Union: or disunion, of the Body and Soul. 7.
LIVING, Life, quick, alive, enliven, vivifie, revive, survive. vital,
Resurrection. DYING, Death, dead-ly, mortal, fatal, die, decease, depart,
expire, give up the ghost, defunct, kill, slay, mortify, dispatch, Slaughter,
Mortality, capital.





II. ACTIONS SENSITIVE.
II. Corporeal ACTIONS belonging to SENSITIVE Bodies, may be distinguished into
such as are either More principal and natural; denoting the kinds of natural
Appetite, together with such Actions as tend to the satisfying of them;
relating to the Preservation of the Individuum, as to the desire of
Nourishment, for the supply of Decays; and that either by Food: or Meat. 1.
HUNGER, Appetite, Stomach, eager, greedy, ravenous, Famine, sharp-set. EATING,
devour, gorging, fall to, Meal, Repast, Refection, Food, Meat, Aliment, edible,
Viands, Victuals, fall to ones Meat.
Liquor. 2.
THIRST, dry. DRINKING, Potion, potulent, potable, quaff, soop, soaking, lap,
swill, carouse, sip, tipple, bibble, guzzle, Draught, Drench, Water, Butler,
Buttery, Cellar.

Rest and refreshment after labor and weariness; comprehending the Appetite or
inclination after this: or the Satisfaction of such Appetite, consisting in a
cessation from all Actions of the outward Senses, by a relaxation of the
Nerves. 3.
DROWSINESS, Heaviness. SLEEPING, asleep, dormant, a Nap, lull, Slumber,
narcotic, roost.
State supposed, belonging to this Appetite, or the Satisfaction of it,
denoting the general Action of the Senses: or the working of the Fancy in
sleep. 4.
WAKING, awake, watch, Reveiles, raise from sleep. DREAMING.


Propagation of the Species. 5.
LUST, Salacity, Lechery, Venery, Concupiscence, libidinous, carnal, fleshly,
blissom, clicket, proud. COITION, coupling, gendring, lie with, know carnally,
Copulation, rutting, tread, venery

Less principal and preternatural; referring to several affections of the
Touch, and different kinds of Pain; being either Proper to the Skin and outward
parts; caused by an agitation of some thin Vapors stopped in their expiration,
which is remedied by such a kind of affriction with an edge as does open the
Pores, that the Vapors may transpire. 6.
ITCHING. SCRATCHING, Scraping, clawing, Scalping-iron.
Common to other parts; and caused by Distention or compression of the parts:
or sharpness of humors. 7.
ACHING, Ach. PRICKING, Crick, pungent, sharp, Stitch.
Diss^pation of the Spirits in the softer parts by a light touch: or corrosion
of the membranous parts. 8.
TICKLING, Titillation. SMARTING, piercing.
Obstruction either in the Nerves or Muscles; causing some vellications in the
Nerves: or a hot pungent pain in the Muscles. 9.
TWITCHING, Vellication, Pinching. TINGLING.





III. The Corporeal ACTIONS peculiar to Men, III. ACTIONS PECULIAR TO MEN.
or the several ways of expressing their mental Conceptions, are either by
Articulate sounds; considered according to The general name, together with the
privation of it. 1.
SPEAKING, talk, utter-ance, mentioning, Elocution, pronounce, express,
deliver, Prolation, Spokes-man, effable, voluble, fluent, say, tell, mutter,
mumble, jabber, jargon, vein, Grammar, Rhetoric, Oratory, Eloquence,
Prolocutor, nuncupative, by word of mouth. MVTENESS, dumb, speechless, silent,
blank, tongue-tied.
The defects of speaking, as to the continuity of speech: or the prolation of
some particular letters. 2.
STUTTERING, Stammering, falter, hammer. LISPING.
The degrees of loudness in speaking; either without any vocal sound: or with
much noise. 3.
WHISPERING, mutter, round in the ear. EXCLAMATION, Acclamation, hollow, hoot,
hoop, shout, baul, clamor, cry, Lure, Outcry, roar, screech, scream, squeak,
squeal, loud, lift up ones voice, set out ones throat.
The particular kinds of speaking; referring To such words as we see before us;
either more perfect: or imperfect. 4.
READING, Lecture, Lesson, legible, peruse. SPELLING.
To the manner of ordering our voice according to musical Tunes; either the
more perfect: or the more imperfect attempt. 5.
SINGING, Song, Ditty, Ballad, Carol, Canticle, Lay, Ode, Madrigal, Eclogue,
canorous, Modulation, chant, Chorister, Quire: CHIRPING, questing, quittle.

The several relations of speaking; when we say that to another which we expect
should be repeated: or written by him. 6.
DICTATING, prompting, suggest. ENDITING.

Figures representing either words or things, and made either immediately by
men's hands: or by the impression of Types. 7.
WRITING, penning, drawing, engrossing, Hand, Manuscript, subscribe,
superscribe, inscribe, transcribe, Postscript, interline, indorse, scrawle,
scrible, rude draught, Penman, Scribe, Writer, Scrivener, Secretary, Clerk,
Note, Ticket, Docket, Shorthand, Tachygraphy, Brachygraphy, Cryptography, set
ones hand, set down, take or put in writing, enter into book, write out fair.
PRINTING, Imprint, Impression, typographical, Type, Press, put in Print.



IV. SIGNS OF PAS^IONS.
IV. The OUTWARD SIGNS OF our inward PASSIONS, are either More peculiar to some
single Passions; as to Admiration: or Sating; Straining the eyes: or the brows.
1.
STARING. MOVING THE BROWS.
Love: or Hate; expansion: or contraction of the Muscles of the Face. 2.
SMILING, sm^rking, snearing, simper: LOWERING, powting, scowling, frowning,
grinning, look sour.
Mirth: or Sorrow. 3.
LAUGHING, deride, ridiculous, giggle, chuckle, tihi, flicker. WEEPING, mourn,
cry, Tears, wailing, Plaint, bemoan, bewail, lament, blubber, shed tears,
whining.
Desire: or Aversation; scruing the body: or wagging the head. 4.
WRIGLING. MOVING THE HEAD, Nodd.
Hope: or Fear; expressed either by the Body or parts of it; being moved once
and quick: or often and continuedly: or deprived of motion. 5.
STARTING, flinching. TREMBLING, quaking, shaking, shudering, Trepidation,
quivering, shiver, quaver, chatter. RIGOR, Horror, Stifness.

Breath; emitted short and quick: or emitted slow and long: or sucked up
suddenly. 6.
HUFFING, snuff, puff. SIGHING, Sobbing. SVCKING up the breath, sniff.


Confidence and Diffidence: or Boldness and Despair; setting the hands against
the sides: or heaving up the shoulders. 7.
KEMBOING. SPANISH SHRUG.

Anger: or Revenge; by emission of the breath; either vocal, but not
articulate: or articulate, but not distinctly intelligible. 8.
GROANING. GRUMBLING.
More common to several Passions; by discoloring the countenance with a
greater degree of Redness then does belong to the natural hue; appertaining
either to Joy, Love, Desire, but chiefly to Shame: or else with Whiteness;
belonging to those more violent perturbations of Grief, Anger, etc. but chiefly
to Fear. 9.
BLUSHING, flush. PALENESS, wan, ghastly, pallid, appale.



V. The general notions belonging to DEMEANOR, Carriage, V. DEMEANOR.
Comportment, Deportment, Garb, behave, or the manner of our conversing toward
one another in respect of such Corporeal Actions as either custom or common
opinion has put a decency and fitness upon, are considerable; either according
to the More general kinds; denoting The endeavor to express our respect to
others, by going to them: or staying by them or for them. 1.
VISITING, go to see. WAITING, Attend-ance, serve, Retinue, Train, Valet, Page,
Lacquey, stay for, tarry for, tend.
The congress or meeting of others, in respect of our applying our selves to
them: or their receiving or using of us. 2.
ADDRESSING, accost. ENTERTAINING, treat, entreat, usage, reception, welcome.
The kinds of gesture, or words, signifying respect. 3.
SALUTATION, caressing, accost, greet, hail, commendations.

More special kinds; consisting in Gestures. At a distance; by bowing of the
Body: or Knees. 4.
CONGEEING, cringe, duck, make a leg, crouch. CURCHEEING, Genuflexion.
Near; either more* Rustic. 5.
CLAPPING. SHAKING HANDS.
Gentile; by joining of the Body: or Face. 6.
EMBRACING, clasping, clip, coll, grasp, hug, twine. KISSING, Smack.


Words; whereby we express Our esteem of others: or our business with them. 7.
COMPLEMENTING, Courtliness, Caressing. CONFERRING, commune, parley, talk,
treat, speak with, Dialogue.
Our good wishes to others; either at our first meeting: or parting. 8.
SALVEDICTION, accost, greet, hail. VALEDICTION, adieu, farewell, take leave.





VI. GESTURE.
VI. GESTURE, Action, Behavior, Gesticulation, Mimic, does denote such an
Animal action or motion as alters the situation of the whole or parts of the
body: To which the word POSTURE, Position, may be annexed by way of affinity;
signifying the situation in which such motion is determined. The several kinds
of these Gestures and Postures (which are applicable likewise to inanimate
things) do refer either to the weights being incumbent upon something.

Below it: And these are distinguished according to the imaginary progress of
that body or the parts of it, Upward; either more Direct. 1.
RISING, arise, raise, rouse, ly up, sit up, stand up, rear, elevate, lift up,
erect, exalt, Resurrection STANDING, Station-ary, Footing, Perch, Rampant,
Oblique. Keeping the height, and Enlarging the terms. 2.
STRETCHING, retching, extending, Distention, Expansion, produce, sprein,
strein, draw out. SPREAD, square.
Narrowing the terms. 3.
SHRINKING, contracting, Coar^tation, couch, gather up. CRUMPLE, snudge.

Altering the height, by motion of the Trunk. 4.
STOOPING, crouch, bow, bend, couring. LEANING, lolling, Recumbency, stay or
rest upon*
Lower Limms. Hipps. 5.
SITTING, set, sedentary, seat SAT, squat.
Knees. 6.
KNEELING, Genuflexion, fall on knees. ON KNEES.




Downward; either more Direct. 7.
FALLING, fell, cast down, sink. LYING, Prostration, grovelling, lay, along, all
along, flat, level, couch.
Oblique. 8.
TURNING. REVERSE, inverted.


Above it; whether partly: or wholly; each of which is either motion or rest. 9.
CLINGING. HANGING, pendent, suspended, dangling.

MOTION.
THat Action whereby things do pass from one place to another is styled MOTION,
move, remove, stir,, wag, shake, quetch, shog, jog, start, jerk,. III.
budge, dislodge, flitting, shuffle, shuttle, rummage, agitation, going,
passing, transferr, place, make a stir.

REST, Quiet, still, unmoved, repose, sedate, settle, stand, stay, stand or ly
still, Requiem, ease, Pause, acquiesce, settle, sit, lodge, lull, Sabbath, dead
of the night, take rest.

By the word Motion here is meant Local Motion, which does always accompany
Corporeal Action, upon which account many of the Species under this Head might,
if there were convenient room for them, be reckoned under the former; but their
places here may serve sufficiently to express and distinguish them. This Local
Motion of bodies may be distinguished into Natural. Of the whole; more General,
respecting the Kinds of Animal PROGRESSIVE MOTION. I. Particular, referring to
the VARIOUS NOTIONS OF GOING. II. Of the parts; considered More largely; as
belonging to ANIMAL ACTION IN COMMON. III As restrained to the Acts of
PURGATION. IV. EXERCISE. V.


VIOLENT MOTION according to the several kinds of it. VI.


I. Kinds of ANIMAL PROGRESSION, I. ANIMAL PROGRESSION.
may refer either to Beasts; more perfect: or imperfect. 1.
GOING, gressive, a Step, Pace, Gate. HALTING, Cripple, lame, limp, hobble,
foundred.
Birds; in the Air; by the motion of the wings: to which may be annexed that
other kind of Motion of the wings whereby Birds use to keep themselves up in
the same place with little or no Progression. 2.
FLYING, fluttering, soar, volatile, toure. HOVERING.
Water; either upon it: or into and under it. 3.
FLOTING. DIVING, duck, plunge.

Fish; either more generally within the water: or more specially downwards into
it. 4.
SWIMMING, launch. SINKING.
Insects; as Grasshoppers and Fleas, etc. the more perfect: or imperfect. 5.
LEAPING, skipping, jump, frisk, spring, caper, curvet, bound. HOPPING.
Ants* or Worms, etc. 6.
CREEPING, crawl, sprawl, reptile. WRIGLING, insinuate, scrue or wind himself
in.




Though each of these Motions do principally belong to such kinds of living
Creatures, yet are they not so to be restrained to them but that they may be
truly ascribed to others.

II. MODES OF GOING.
II. The several MODES OF GOING; may be distinguished into The Self-motion or
Ition of Animals; On an ordinary Plain or declivity; according to the Lesser:
or greater degrees of Velocity. 1.
WALKING, Ambulation, Procession, Perambulation, go, wade, Ford, waddle,
Lacquey, Path, foot it, trip along. RUNNING, galloping, Career, Course, Race,
start, Goal, outstrip, Footman.
Different Motion of the four legs; when either those of one side move
together: or when they move cross and diagonally. 2.
AMBLING, pacing, thorough-paced. TROTTING, prancing.
Different Extensions of the body according to height: or of the legs according
to wideness. 3.
STALKING, jetting* strutt, portly going. STRADLING, stride, a-stride,
div^ricate.
Different Modes, whether more regular: or irregular. 4.
STEADY. STAGGERING, reeling, Vacillation, Tottering.

On a very smooth Plain. 5.
SLIDING, glide, slipping. STUMBLING, Titubation, blunder, falter, lapse, slip,
trip.
On a difficult Declivity, upwards: or downwards. 6.
CLIMBING, clambering, foaling. TUMBLING.

The being carried by something else; on the Land: or Water. 7.
RIDING, being horsed or mounted, taking horse, Post-ilion. SAILING,
Navigation, Voyage, launch, take water or ship, embark, wast



III. Animal MOTIONS belonging to the various parts, III. MOTIONS OF THE PARTS.
are either More principal; Of the Heart originally, and from thence of the
Blood in the Arteries: to which may be adjoined the Motion of the Guts. 1.
PULSE, throb, beat. PERISTALTIC.
Of the Lungs, more general, or the Sound made by some impediment of breathing
through the Nose. 2.
RESPIRATION, breathing, fetch wind, draw breath, take breath. SNORTING,
snoring.

Less principal; of the Mouth and Thorax; by the forcible emission, or
attraction of Breath. 3.
BLOWING, puffing, blast. SVCTION, supping* sip, soop, drawing, emulgent, snuff
up.
Diaphragm or Stomach; agitated by a convulsive Motion upwards, or downwards. 4.
SOBBING. HICCOUGH, Yex.
Iaws; by a Repeated Motion in the first, or second preparation of Food. 5.
MASTICATION, chewing, champ, gnawing, browzing, mumble. RUMINATION, chewing
the cud.
Single Motion; to which may be annexed that Motion of the musculous parts of
the body, caused by some flatulent vapors. 6*
YAWNING, gape, Oscitation, gasp. PANDICULATION, retching, stretching.

Tongue, or Throat. 7.
LICKING, lap, slap. SWALLOWING, gulp, ingurgitate, devour, pouch, gobble.




IV. Those kinds of Actions whereby several Animals do cast off such
excrementitious parts as are offensive to nature are styled PURGATION, voiding,
evacuating, Excrement, fluxing: IV. PURGATION.
to which may be opposed the Notion of BINDING, costive, styptic, restringent,
astringent.

These Motions may be distinguished by the kinds of parts so amoved; either the
more Vaporous and windy; from the Head. 1.
SNEEZING, neeze, Sternutation.
Stomach upwards, or Guts downwards. 2.
BELCHING, parbreak, breaking wind upwards. FARTING, breaking wind downwards,
Escape.

Serous and watery; from the Whole habit of the body. 3.
SWEATING, Exudation, diaphoretic, sudorific, all in a water. TRANSPIRATION,
breathing, Evaporation, Effluvium, Perspiration.
Head. 4.
SPITTING, Salivate^ion, Spittle, bespit, spawl, bespawl, slaver, drivel, Flux.
BLOWING THE NOSE, mucous, Snivel, Snot.
Lungs and Chest. 5.
COUGHING. EXCREATION, haking, hemming.
Greater or lesser Veins. 6.
BLEEDING, opening a Vein, Phlebotomy, let blood, draw blood, Lancet.
SCARIFYING, lance.
Skin. 7.
BLISTERING, Vesication, caustic. CUPPING.
Bladder. 8.
URINING, piss, make water, hold ones water, stale, diuretic, Diabetes, Dysury.

Consistent and gross parts; from the Stomach upwards, or the Guts downwards.
VOMITING, spewing, casting, disgorging, puke, regurgitate, retching. DUNGING,
purging by siege, going to stool, scour, Draught, Lask, laxative, Looseness,
muting, soluble, solutive, Muck, Ordure, Siege, Stool, Sir-reverence,
excrement, easment, ease the belly, Iakes, Privy, House of office..



V. By RECREATION, Diversion, Pastime, Sport, Exercise, V. RECREATION.
are meant those several kinds of Actions which are used for divertisement or
Exercise: to which may be annexed the word GAME, Play, Prize, signifying such
kind of Exercises, wherein there is an endeavor for Mastery. These are either
of the Mind; depending upon Chance only; according to the more general name:
or that particular kind which is most frequent by marked Cubes. 1.
LOT, Sortition, Cuts, Ballot, cast or draw Lots. DICE, a Die, cock-all, rifle.
Chance and Skill. 2.
CHARTS. TABLES.
Skill only. 3.
CHESS. DRAUGHTS.

Body; in respect of The whole; requiring Strength and Skill. 4.
BOWLING. BALLING, Tennis, Foot ball, Stool-ball, Sto-Ball. Pel-mel.
Agility and Skill. 5.
DANCING, Masking, Revels, a Ball, Morice, Mumming. VAULTING.
Strength Agility and Skill. 6.
WRESTLING, grapling, struggling, striving, handy gripes, strike up ones heels.
FENCING, Gladiator, Tilting, Tournament, justling, play at weapon or foils.

The Eye, or the Ear. 7.
SIGHTS, Shows, Theater, Amphitheatre, Pageants, Spectacle. MUSIC, Serenade,
strein, aer, tune, prelude, Waits, Crowd, Fiddle-er, Minstrel, play on an
Instrument.




VI. The general kinds of VIOLENT MOTION, may be distributed according to the
effects upon the thing moved, VI. VIOLENT MOTION.
into such as denote Translation into a new place; comprehending Motion
together; when the Mover sustains the thing moved: to which may be annexed by
way of affinity that other Action, by which one thing sustains, or hinders the
falling of another. 1.
CARRYING, bring, convey, bear, serve, import, waft, wear about one, portable,
portage, porter, baggage, vehicle, fare, beer, packhorse. BEARING, supporting,
sustain, hold up, prop, shore up, stay up, uphold, carry, stand under, shoulder
up, bolster up.
Amotion, when the Mover and Moved do at the beginning cease to be contiguous:
or Admotion, when the thing moved does end in a contiguity of something else. 2.
CASTING, throwing, fling, hurl, project, inject, eject, ding, pelt, toss,
coit, sling. CATCHING, apprehend, lay hold, snatch, lay hands on, grapple,
graspe, scamble.

Often returns into the same place; according to greater or less degrees. 3.
SWINGING, Vibration, waving, brandish, agitate, exagitate, to and fro,
flourish, rock, sway, dangling, pendulous, wield. SHAKING, Quassation,
Concussion, jogging, agitate, dandle, wag, swag, sway, jolt, totter, flutter,
shatter, waving.
Some impression from the Mover; according to the more General name: or that
which is from an obtuse hard body. 4.
STRIKING, Percussion, smite, bang, beat, bast, buffet, cuff, dash, hit,
swinge, thump, thwack, Blow, Stripe, slap, flap, rap, tap, kick, wince, spurn,
bob, box, fillip, whirret, yerke, pummel, punch, rebuff, repercussion,
collision, gnash, skittish, interfere, let fly at, KNOCKING, beating, Blow,
butt, Mallet, battering, jobbing, Ramm.
Particular kind; by the end of a thing, more obtuse, or acute. 5
POUNDING, braying, Contusion, stamp. PECKING, Mattock, Pick-ax.

Dissolution of Union in the same body; according to The Stiffness, or
Limberness of the body wherein it is made. 6.
BREAKING, Fracture, Rupture, burst, Crack, Crash, Squash, Dash, Flaw, Shatter,
shiver, crumble. TEARING* torn, dilacerate, rend, rent, ragged, tattered,
flittered, jagged, pull in pieces.
The Figure of the body by which it is made; either an edge, or a point. 7.
CUTTING, Incision gash, slash, hack, hew, chop, rip, chip, snip, slice,
section, segment, carve, dissect, whittle, barb, pare, top, lop, curtail, dock,
sharp, keen, Hatchet, Pole-ax. PRICKING, stabbing, Goad, pungent, runn in
thrust in, goar.




OPERATION.
THe sundry kinds of works about which men of several Callings use to employ
themselves,. IV.
are usually styled by the name of OPERATION, Labor-ious, Pains, Travail, Toil,
moil, Turmoile, drudg, droil, work, handiwork, Ply, cooperate, take pains, lay
about him. PLAY, Sport, lusory, dally.


These are either More Common and general; relating to MECHANICAL FACULTIES. I.
MIXED MECHANICAL Operations. II.
More Particular; belonging to the providing of Food, AGRICULTURE. III. Houses,
or Utensils, FABRILE Arts IV. Clothing, SARTORIAN Trades V. Physic, CHEMICAL,
Pharmaceutical Operations. VI.



I. OPERATIONS belonging to the MECHANICAL Faculties, I. MECHANICAL OPERATIONS.
are either such as do refer to the Lever; for the forcible motion of a thing
upwards, or downwards. 1.
LIFTING, heave, hoise, advance, elevate, exalt, Lever, Crow, Crane.
DEPRESSING, strein, stress, weigh down.
Balance; for trial of the weight of things, or the preponderating of one side.
2.
LIBRATING, balancing. BIASSING, preponderate.
Wedge; for the dividing of hard tough bodies; to which may be opposed the
thrusting of them close together. 3.
CLEAVING, rive, slit, sp^it, Cle^t, Chink, Chap, Crevise. COMPRESSING, crib,
gripe, pinching, press, squeezing, straining, wring, nip, twing throng, crowd,
crush, Constipation, bulge.
Pully; when the mover and moved continue their Contiguity in admotion, or
amotion. 4.
PULLING, pluck, tow, tug, lugg, twing, twitch, draw, drag, Draught, hale,
Revulsion, vellication, distract. THRVSTING, push, shove, drive, rush, justle,
repel, extrude, intrude, press, throng, crowd, cramm. farce, wedge in, vennue,
run at, foin at.
Wheel; by continued turning about, or rolling backward or forward. 5.
VERTIGINATING, turning round, Revolution, wheeling, Rotation, twirl, whirl,
spinn, role round. VOLUTATION, tumbling, rolling, wallow, welter, rock,
trundle, waddle.
Screw; to which may be adjoined for some affinity the action of that concave
Instrument used for the projection of water. 6.
SCREWING, Winch. SYRINGING, squirting, spirt, spouting.
Spring; wherein there is a motion of restitution: to which may be annexed for
its affinity the forcible putting a thing out of its natural tension and
posture. 7.
SPRINGING, elastical, fillip. BENDING, bow, warp, crook.



II. Those are styled MIXED MECHANICAL OPERATIONS, which are not appropriate to
any one kind of Art, II. MIXED MECHANICAL OPERATIONS.
but are general and common to many. These do concern the.

Uniting or seperating of several bodies; considered more Simply. 1.
BINDING, gird, Band, Bond, Bundle, Packet, Fardle, sheafe, faggot, tack, lace,
swaddle, swa^hing, trussing, girt, surcingle. LOOSENING, unbind, undo, solve,
lax, slack* relaxation.
Relatively to the affections of binding; viz. fastening of the bond by a knot,
or confused kinds of knots. 2.
TYING, Knot, Node, bracing, buckling, coupling fastening, knit, furling.
TANGLING, entangle, hamper, ravel, perplex, snarled, felter, intricate,
involved, Intrigues, extricate, complicate, ensnare, Labyrinth.

Concealing, or manifesting; either more Common. 3.
COVERING, heal, Veil, shroud, hide, whelm, stop, Canopy, Hood, Lid, palliate,
cloak, overlay, overrun, overshadow. UNCOVERING, open, expose, discover, show,
reveal, naked, unmask, unveil.
Special; relating to Containing bodies. 4.
SHUTTING, stop, close, enclosing, immure, exclude, seclude, recluse, obstruct,
Wink, fold up, pinn up, sow up, seal up, cork up, lute up, lock up, put to
the door. OPENING, breaking up, disclose, display, Expansion, gap, Slade,
Aperture, unstop, expose, lay or set open.

Putting of things nearer together, or farther asunder; either More general. 5.
GATHERING, Collect-ion, assemble, convene, compile, levy, raise men or money,
Receiver, rake or scrape together, rally, glean, pick up. SCATTERING, discuss,
disperse, dissipate, sprinkle, strew, inspersion.
More particular; with reference to the Capacity of Consistent bodies, and such
as are not supposed to be contained. 6.
HEAPING, accumulate, amass, lay up, stow, pile, Stack, Mow, Cock, Rick, Shock,
Drift, Dunghill, mixen. SPREADING, diffuse, Expansion, display, Suffusion,
strew, run, plash, lay cloth.
Fluid Bodies, and such as are supposed to be contained in something. 7.
FILLING, replenish, Repletion, full, plenary, sated, stow, cram, stuff, farse,
recruit. EMPTYING, evacuate, vacant, Vacuity, rid, void, exhaust, Chasm, clear,
lanke, lave, draw dry.

Motion of bodies, chiefly fluids; according to the more general name: or that
which is involuntary, and besides intention. 8.
POURING, Effusion, Infusion, gush, guggling, yewer, Tunnel. SPILLING,
shedding, run out, s^eth over.



III. OPERATIONS belonging to AGRICULTURE, III. AGRICULTURE.
do concern either The Ground, or Land; in respect of Loosning it; either by
single persons: or by the help of drawing Beasts. 1.
DIGGING, delve, break up, spit, spade. PLOWING, tilling, breaking up, coulter,
share.
Breaking the clods, and smoothing the surface. 2.
HARROWING. ROLLING.
Helping or directing the Fertility of the ground, by adding some new matter*
or removing the impediments of noxious Plants. 3.
MANURING, cultivate, dunging, marling, soiling, Tilth, culture. WEEDING.

The Grane or Seed, chiefly of Herbs; in respect of Putting it into the ground,
or taking it off from the ground upon its maturity. 4.
SOWING, seminate. REAPING, mowing, Crop, Harvest, Sith, Sickle, stubble,
swarth.
Separating of it from the straw, or lesser husks. 5.
THRESHING, Flail. WINNOWING, Fan, Ventilation.

The Propagation of Trees or Shrubs chiefly, by Putting the Root of the Plant
in the ground; to which may be adjoined the putting of Grain segregately into
the ground, which is sometimes used for Pulse. 6.
PLANTING, implant. SETTING.
Joining a part of one Plant to another; either to the top of the body, or some
branch being cut, or to the sides of the body. 7.
GRAFTING, ingraft, Imp. INOCOLATING.
Cutting off superfluous Branches; to which may be adjoined the cutting down of
the whole. 8.
PRUNING, dressing, cutting, coping. FELLING, grubb, wood-fall.




IV. By FABRILE OPERATIONS, ( Smith, Carpenter, Mason, etc.) are meant all such
kind of works as do primarily concern our Houses or Utensils, IV. FABRILE
OPERATIONS.
whether for necessity, or ornament: to which may be adjoined those Operations
which concern the making of Earthen ware, styled FIGULATORY, Potter. These are
distinguishable into such as denote Dissolution of Continuity; either by
Seperating of some thin parts from the surface of a body by rubbing with an
edge: or breaking the body it self into minute parts by percussion with some
obtuse body. 1.
SHAVING, scraping, raze, razour. CONTUSION, bruising, pounding, stamping,
braying, mortar, pestle,
Dividing from a body some small parts; either by affriction upon a stone, or
with an iron instrument. 2.
GRINDING, attrition, Grist, Querne, Mill. FILING, Raspe.
Dividing the parts of a body, by cutting it, either in roundish cavities, or
in oblong scissures. 3.
BORING, perforate, foraminate, pierce, Bodkin, Dril, Awle, Gimlet, Wimble,
Trepann, Awgre. SAWING, Saw, whipsaw, etc.

Uniting either of metalline or other bodies by some third body adhering. 4.
SODERING, Cement, luting. GLUING, cementing, glutinous, conglutinate.
Shaping of bodies into particular figures; either by Hammering, or melting. 5.
FORGING. CASTING, melt, founding, fusile, molde.
Cutting, either a solid and bulky, or a flat figure. 6.
CARVING, Sculpture. GRAVING, ingrave, etching.
Compressing of a soft body; or circumagitating either a soft: or hard body. 7.
KNEADING, moulding, plastic. TURNING, Lath.

Adorning the surface of the body; either by variety of colors: or adding an
external luster to it. 8.
PAINTING, limn, draw, enamel, fucus, pensil. VARNISHING, size.



V. SARTORIAN OPERATIONS do concern either the V. SARTORIAN OPERATIONS.
Preparation of stuffs; by Making several vegetable or animal substances into
Thread. 1.
TWISTING, tortion, wreath, writhing, twine, winding. SPINNING, Spinster, Rock,
Distaff.
Joining such Threads together into Cloth. 2.
WEAVING, Texture, Contexture, Loom, Web, braid, woven, Hurdle, Shuttle,
Wicker, Matt. KNITTING.
Thickning and coloring such Cloth. 3.
FULLING, milling, Fuller. DYING, stain, Tincture, tinge, in grain.

Making of Stuffs into Vests; either by Uniting necessary, and cutting off
unnecessary parts. 4.
SOWING, Stitch, Seam-ster, Suture, Welt, Needle, dearn, quilt, draw cloth,
rip. CLIPPING, Scissors, shear, shorn, cut.
Placing together the parts in greater, or lesser plicatures. 5.
FOLDING, wrap, lap, pleit, clinching, clutching, doubling, invelop. CURLING,
crisping, frizling, furling.

Preserving of such Stuffs or Vests clean; common likewise to other things. By
the help of Water or liquor; either when Things are put into, and agitated in
the water; to which may be opposed the putting upon them other bodies of a more
gross consistence; styled 6.
WASHING, scouring, Lotion, rince, Laver, Laundress, gargling. SMEARING,
daubing, anoint, ointment, Unction, greaze, chrism; and many with [ be] as
bespaul, spit, spue, sprinkle.
Water is imbibed and communicated to the thing; to which may be adjoined, for
its affinity, the putting of things into liquor, in order to the communicating
of some new quality to such liquor. 7.
SOAKING, steeping, embrewing, macerating, watering Land, etc. bathing, imbibe,
sink, sop, brewis, embrew. INFUSION, watering Fish, etc. macerate, Decoction,
impregnate.

By external Motion of or upon them, more, or less violent. 8.
RUBBING, scrape, Friction, Frication, scrub, chafe, Attrition, fret, gall,
scowr, taw, grate. WIPING, stroke, terse, handkerchief, towel, napkin.
By Instruments to separate those minuter bodies which adhere to the
superficies. 9.
BRUSHING, sweeping, Beesom, Whisk, Brush, Broom, Maukin. COMBING, carding,
currying.




VI. By CHEMICAL OPERATIONS are meant such kind of works as tend to the
changing of bodies, VI. CHEMICAL OPERATIONS.
with respect to the Position and Figure of their minuter parts. By this,
amongst other ends, Medicaments are usually prepared; for which reason, those
kind of Operations styled PHARMACEUTICAL, belonging to the Apothecary, may be
hereunto annexed.

The Operations belonging to this Head, do concern the changing and preparing
of Bodies; either by Instruments, for the reduction of them into minute parts;
by compression and affriction betwixt two hard bodies: or by separating the
parts so reduced, through a porous Plain. 1.
GRINDING. SIFTING, bolting, Sieve, siercing, ranging.
Liquors; either Changing the Consistence of bodies; by reducing them into a
more liquid: or a more dry consistence. 2.
DISSOLUTION, melt, liquefie dissolve, thaw, fusil, flux, run about.
COAGVLATION, congealing, Clod, Curd, Gelly, Clot-tered, Gore, Concretion,
grumous.
Dividing hard bodies into minute parts; by an acid liquor, through which such
parts are dispersed: or the sinking down of such parts to the bottom, by the
mixture of some other liquor. 3.
CORROSION, eating, fretting, gnawing, caustic. PRECIPITATION, settling.
Separating of these parts from the liquor; by passing them through a porous
body; either downward: or both upward and downward. 4.
STRAINING, Percolation, squeeze, Colender. FILTRATION, filtre.

Heat; applicable chiefly either to Liquid bodies; which being kept for some
considerable time in a gentle heat, upon this usually follows; either the
Loosning the inward parts of such bodies, so as by agitation they work one upon
another; styled 5.
DIGESTION. FERMENTATION, work, fret, Leven, Yeast, Barm, Rennet.
Separating of the finer parts* by raising them up in the form of a Liquor: or
the farther separating of the more spirituous from the watery parts of this
liquor. 6.
DISTILLATION, Still, Limbeck, cohobation. RECTIFYING.

Hard and solid bodies; either by Driving away the more watery and volatile
parts, and leaving the more solid: or raising the volatile parts in the form of
a Salt. 7.
CHARRING, chark, Tinder. SUBLIMING, Sublimation.
Burning away the combustible parts of a body: or turning the parts remaining
after such burning into a liquor. 8.
CALCINATION. LIXIVIATION, deliquiate, Lie, Buck.





CHAP. X. Concerning Relation more private, namely, I. Oeconomical or Family
Relation, together with the several kinds of things relating to those in that
capacity, either as, II. Possessions; or, III. Provisions.
THE Species of Relation are the most numerous amongst the Tables of Accidents,
by reason of their mixed natures, comprehending both Substances, Qualities and
Actions, as they are circumstantiated by some peculiar respects, according to
which they are here considered.

More private Relation may be distinguished into such as denote; either Those
Personal respects or Actions, which belong to the first kind of Association of
Men into Families; called OECONOMICAL RELATION. Those things which are
necessary to the well being of Families, either as POSSESSIONS. PROVISIONS.



OECONOMICAL RELATION.
THat respect wherein one man may stand to another, according to the first and
most natural kind of association of men into Families,. I.
is styled OECONOMICAL RELATION, Family, Household, domestic, menial, House,
Home.

The Notions belonging to this Head, may be distinguished into such as
signify; either Personal Relations, of CONSANGUINITY. I. AFFINITY. II.
SUPERIORITY, or Inferiority. III. EQUALITY. IV.
Oeconomical Duties referring to Education; consisting either in WORDS. V.
DEEDS. VI.



I. Those who partake of the same Blood, I. CONSANGUINITY.
are styled Relations of CONSANGUINITY, Kin, kindred, Blood, House, Stem, Stock.

These are distinguishable into such as are; either more General; denoting such
as have preceded, or succeeded. 1.
PROGENITOR, Ancestor, Forefather, Extraction, Parentage, Elders, Pedigree,
Genealogy. DESCENDANT, Lineage, Offspring, Race, Issue, Progeny, Generation,
Posterity, Stock, Breed, Kind, Extraction, Stem, spring from.
Special; whether Direct; ascending, or Descending. 2.
PARENT, Sire, Father, Mother, Dam, paternal, maternal, Grandsire, etc. Orphan.
CHILD, Issue, Son, Daughter, Brood, Litter, filial, adopt, Posthume.
Lateral; either Ascending, or descending. 3.
UNCLE, Aunt. NEPHEW, Niece.
Equal. Immediate; whether by both Parents, or by one 4.
BROTHER, Sister-hood. HALF BROTHER.
Mediate; either Brothers Children, or their Descendants. 5.
FIRST COUSIN, - German. COUSIN.






II. Those respects which do either refer unto or arise from a state of
Marriage, II. AFFINITY.
whereby persons are mutually engaged to Fidelity and Constancy, are styled
Relations of AFFINITY, Alliance, Kindred.

These are distinguishable into such as do concern either That state preceding
whereby persons are rendered capable of it as to their not being married: or not
having coupled with any other person. 1.
COELEBS, Single life, Bachelour, Damosel, Maid. VIRGIN, Maid.
The endeavor after Marriage; wherein, if several persons stand in
competition, there does thence arise this double Relation. 2.
SUTER, Paramor, Sweetheart, Mistress, Servant, woo, canvase court, make love*
RIVAL, Corrival, Competitor.
The first beginning of this Affiance, by a mutual Promise in order to the
consummating of it. 3.
BETROTHED, contracted, Spouse, espouse, Affiance, sure.
The full completing of it by all its Solemnities. 4.
MARRIED, Matrimony, Wed-ding, Match, Mate, nuptial, conjugal, Husband, Wife,
Yoke Fellow, Spouse, Bridegroom, Bains, Dower, Bygamy, Polygamy, Hymen,
Epithalamium.
The state resulting from a dissolution of it by Death. 5.
WIDOWER, Dowager, Relict, Iointer.



III. SUPERIORITY.
III. Relations of SUPERIORITY, Betters, and INFERIORITY, Underlings, do
originally belong to Families, in which was the first kind of Government, and
from thence are derived all the secondary Relations which follow; respecting
either Minors; as to their Souls and Religion. 1.
GODFATHER, Godmother, Gossip, stand for. GODCHILD.
Bodies; in respect of nourishing: or being nourished. 2.
FOSTERER, Nurse, educate. NVRSLING.
Minds; instructing: or being instructed in any Science or Art. 3.
TEACHER, Master, Tutor, institute, instruct, inform, indoctrinate, Doctrine,
Document, docil, Lecture, Lesson, train, discipline, enter, read to, Rabbi.
LEARNER, Apprentice, Disciple, Pupil, Scholar, Puny, Neophyte, young beginner,
Student.
Estates. 4.
GUARDIAN, Tutor, Tuition. PUPIL, Minority, Ward-ship, under-age, nonage.

Majors or Minors; in respect of Habitation; as supreme: or subordinate;
whether in a relation More fixed. 5.
MASTER OF THE FAMILY, House-wife, Good man of the house. DOMESTIC, of the
household, menial.
More occasional. 6.
HOST, Landlord, board, tabling, sojourn, entertain, Inn, Hospitality,
Inholder. GVEST, Boorder, Sojourner, quarter, lodge, lie, tabling, at livery.

Power to command: or Duty to obey. 7.
MASTER, Lord, Sir, Mistress, Dame, Madam, Lady* SERVANT, Servitor, Minister,
Man, Maid, Handmaid, servile, administer, Hind, Iourneyman, Prentice, Waiter,
Lacquey, Footman, Page, Livery.
Benefits conferred: or received. 8.
BENEFACTOR, Courtesy, Kindness, Favor, Service, Good turn, Pleasure,
gratify, oblige, engage, good office, Patron. BENEFICIARY, beholding, bound,
obliged, engaged humble Servant.
General obligation of protecting others: or being under such Protection. 9
PATRON- age, support, dedicate. DEPENDANT, Retainer, Cadet, Client, Follower,
Retinue, wait.




IV. Relations of EQUALITY or Fellowship (as was said concerning those of the
former Difference) do originally belong to persons in an Oeconomical capacity;
IV. EQUALITY.
though they are not in the strictest sense to be so confined, but they are
likewise applicable to persons upon other considerations.

These are founded; either upon Mutual Love: or Hatred, which should be chiefly
upon the account of Virtue: or Vice. 1.
FRIEND- ship, Confident, Privado, intimate, all one, being in with, Amity,
amicable, befriend, great with, strike in with, kind* atone. ENEMY, Adversary,
Foe, Antagonist, Opposite, Opponent, Feud, Hostility, Odds, Spite, Enmity,
being out with, fall out with, adverse party.
Conversation with others, chiefly upon the account of Pleasure; or Segregation
from others. 2.
COMPANION, Compeer, Associate, Fellow, Match, Mate, Consort, Society,
Sociable-ness, Comrade, Colleague, Complice, Concomitant, Gossip, associate,
accompany, Crew, Gang, keep company with. SOLITARY, lonesom, alone, only,
recluse, sole, single, Solitude, by it self, retired, desolate, several, aside.
Near: or remote Habitation. 3.
NEIGHBOR, adjacent, vicinity. FOREINER, Alien, exotic, extraneous, peregrine,
outlandish.
Particular Knowledge: or Ignorance of others. 4.
ACQUAINTANCE, Familiar-ity, conversant. STRANGER, strange, alienate,
unacquainted, uncouth, alien.
Dealings with others. Jointly; as one party. 5.
PARTNER, Copartner, Partizan, Sharer, impart, join, communicate, Communion,
halves, joynt-stock, partake.
Mutually; as party and party. 6.
CUSTOMER.




V. The chief Oeconomical Duties (which are likewise applicable to other
Relations) are those which concern the due Government of persons in this
capacity, V. EDUCATION specially relating to WORDS.
chiefly of the inferior and younger sort, styled by the general name of
EDUCATION, institute, train, breed, bring up, seminary.

Education Duties consisting in WORDS do respect either A thing to be done, or
forborne; expressing to others our Desires, or their Duties. Simply; to persons
Inferior; for it: or against it. 1.
COMMAND, require, bid, impose, charge, enjoin, exact, appoint, prescribe,
Mandate, Precept, Injunction, Commandment, Imperative, Warrant, will. FORBID,
Prohibit-ion, interdict, inhibit, bar, contraband, countermand.
Equal; for it: or against it. 2.
PERSUADE, exhort, suasory, move, press, win, cajole, Motive, Inducement,
ductile, exorable, pliable, flexible, draw in, Eloquence. DISSVADE, dehort.
Superior; for it: or against it. 3.
ENTREAT, beseech, pray, desire, crave, ask, petition, supplicate, Postulation,
invite, implore, Obtestation, Obsecration, request, sue, supplicate, solicit,
press, urge, instant, Importunity, conjure, exorable, inexorable. DEPRECATE.

Argumentatively; (i.) with reasons representing it chiefly as Honest: or
dishonest. 4.
ADVISE, counsel, consult, wish one. WARN, admonish, Monition, advertise,
Caution, Item, Precaution, premonish, notify, Proviso, Caveat, forewarn.
Pleasant: or unpleasant. 5.
ALLURE, tempt, tice, entice, till, drill, inveigle, move, draw, lull, lure,
lead, tole, train, egg on, win, trepan, bait, stale. DETERR, dishearten, fright.
Profitable: or hurtful. 6.
PROMISE. THREATEN, Commination, menace, denounce*


A thing already done; expressing our liking: or dislike of it; whether To
themselves, in their presence. 7.
COMMEND, applaud, extol, magnify, hem, recommend. REPREHEND, reprove,
rebuke, chide, blame, check, snib, quip, rate, rattle, control, take up,
shent, find fault, shrive, Redargution, culpable, Satyr, scold.
To others, in their absence. 8.
PRAISE, Fame, Glory, Renown, Encomium, extol, exalt, laudable, plausible,
applaud, commend, Doxology, Panegyric. DISPRAISE, discommend.




VI. Oeconomical Duties of EDUCATION consisting chiefly in DEEDS, VI. EDUCATION
DEEDS.
may be distinguished into such as are either Precedent; signifying the
assisting: or hindering another in the Way of doing 1.
DIRECT, steer, guide, lead, govern. SEDVCE, tempt, err-or, astray, mislead,
deceive, delude, pervert, beguile, debauch, inveigle, Mistake, Oversight,
Fallacy, Sophistry, draw in, lead aside, Fools Paradise.
Will of doing. 2.
ENCOURAGE, animate, hearten, comfort, solace, abett, back, cheer, cherish,
countenance, set on, stand by, patronize, quicken, excite. DISCOVRAGE,
dishearten, disanimate, weaken, discomfort, baulk, daunt, droop, quail, out of
heart, crest-faln, exanimate.

Concomitant; supporting against Evil. Past: or present. 3.
COMFORT, Consolation, solace. DISCOMFORT, disconsolate, uncomfortable.
Present, or future; whether of Want; either in whole: or in part. 4.
MAINTAIN, sustain, support, find, keep, provide for, Subsistence, Livelihood.
STIPENDATE, Allowance, Exhibition, Pension, Annuity, Scholarship.
Danger. 5.
DEFENDING, standing to or by one, guard, ward, preserve, shelter, protect,
save, fence, keep, tutelary. DESERTING, leave, destitute, forsake, quit,
flinch, relinquish.


Consequent; relating to the Persons; endeavoring to better them by
punishments while there is hope: or ceasing to punish them as being past hope.
6.
CORRECTING, chastising, discipline, inflict. GIVING OVER, leave.
Event of such dealings; by making them better: or worse. 7.
REFORM, reclaiming, mend, convert, correct. HARDEN, incorrigible, indurate,
obdurate, seared.




OECONOMICAL POSSESSIONS.
. II.
BY OECONOMICAL POSSESSIONS. Estate, Goods, Substance, Stock, Ability, Chattels,
hold, enjoy, seized of, occupy, indow, in hand enter upon, are intended such
kinds of things as are necessary upon several accounts for the use,
preservation, and well-being of a Family. And though diverse of these things, as
Land, Buildings, etc. be common as well to Political and Ecclesiastical Bodies,
yet do they (as was said before) originally belong to Families, to which all
other Associations were subsequent, and in which they were founded. To this may
be adjoined that other Notion signifying the benefit accruing to us by our
Possessions, styled REVENUE, Income, Intrado, Patrimony, Rent, Profit,
Endowment, Steward, Fee, Vails, Perquisites, the proceed.

These Possessions do refer either to things Natural, as LAND. I. Artificial;
whether Buildings, considered according to their KINDS. II. Parts. GREATER.
III. LESSER. IV.

Things serviceable for CARRIAGE. V. FURNITURE, Vtensils. VI.




I. Possessions of LANDS.
I. That part of the Earth wherein any man has a propriety, is styled LAND,
Earth. And if he commonly resides upon it, it is called his DWELLING,
Habitation, Mansion, Home, inhabit, reside, Inmate, Desert, Wilderness,
Solitude, abide, settle, stay.

The several Notions belonging to this, may be distinguished into such as
signify Both Land and Habitation, sufficient for one Family: or a small
aggregate of such. 1.
FARM, Grange, Mesuage, Tenement, Tenant, Copyhold. MANOR, Lordship, Village,
Thorp, Homage, Tithing, Liberty.
Land alone; according to the General name: or the name denoting a larger
extent of it. 2.
FIELD, Grounds, Croft. FOREST, Chase, Verderer, Purliew.
Particular kinds; distinguishable according to their Uses; either for Herbs:
or Fruit Trees. 3.
GARDEN. ORCHARD, Nursery.
Corn: or Hay. 4.
ARABLE, tilled Land, ear Land, Fallow* Lay Land. MEADOW, Mead.
Tame Beasts: or wild Beasts. 5.
PASTURE, Down, Lawn, Herbage, Hayward, Lease, Panage. PARK, Warren, Paddock,
Keeper.
Fish: or Fowl. 6
POND* Stew. DECOY.
Fuel; greater: or less. 7.
WOODS, Sylvan, Thicket, Cops, Grove. HEATH.

Qualities; being either of Equal wetness; from fresh: or from salt Water. 8.
FEN. MARSH.
Unequal wetness; whereof the excess is either on the surface: or under the
surface, within the Land. 9.
MOOR, plashy, slabb. BOGG, Quagmire, Slough, Fastness.






II. Those kinds of Helps or Contrivances whereby men preserve the Places of
their abode from the Injuries of Weather, II. BUILDINGS.
and other Inconveniences, are styled by the common name of BUILDINGS,
Edifice, Structure, Fabric, erect, Architecture, Superstructure, Substruction.

To which may be opposed the Notion of buildings decayed, called RUINS,
dilapidate, demolish, raze, Dissolution, Wrack, Rubble, Rubbish, fall, break,
subvert, throw down, lay wast.

These may be distinguished, according to their Uses, into such as are for
Ordinary habitation; whether immovable: or moveable. 1.
HOUSE, Mansion, Mesuage, Cote, Cottage, Hut, Shed, Hovel, Lodge, Place,
domestic, Ining. TENT, Tabernacle, Pavilion, Booth, Bower.
Grandeur: or Strength. 2.
PALACE, Seraglio. CASTLE, Citadel.
Height and beauty; either with a flat: or sharp top. 3.
TOWER, Turret. STEEPLE, Pinnacle, Shaft, Spire.
Religious worship; for Invocation or Preaching: or for Sacrifice. 4.
TEMPLE, Church, Chapel, Sanctuary, Synagogue, Mosque, Cathedral, Chancel,
Quire. ALTAR.
Warmth, Cleanliness or Health; whether by warm Air: or Water. 5.
STOVE, Hot house. BATH, Stew, Bain, drencht.
Passage; either Above ground; over the Water: or over dry Land. 6.
BRIDGE, Pontage. SCAFFOLD, Stage.
Upon the ground; denoting a paved passage betwixt Buildings: to which may be
annexed the more general term of the passage place. 7.
STREET, Piazza, Lane, Ally. WAY, Rode, Causway, Course, Avenue, convey,
egress, Ally, Path, Passage.
Under ground. For Persons. 8.
VAULT, Grott.
For Water; useful: or superfluous. 9.
AQUAEDUCT, Conduit, Watercourse. SINK, Sewer, Kennel.





III. Greater parts of BUILDINGS.
III. To the GREATER PARTS OF which BUILDINGS do consist, and into which they
may be distributed, may be adjoined that usual kind of division styled BAY.

These are either More general; concerning the Main design of the Timber-work:
or the dividing part. 1.
FRAME, Compages, Skeleton. PARTITION, Wall.
Principal places; whether segregate: or aggregate. 2.
ROOM, Chamber, Cabin, Cell, Hall, Parlour, etc. Kennel, Sty, Stable, etc.
Lobby, Loft, etc. APARTMENT.
Vacancies or Passages; without: or within. 3.
COURT, Yard, Backside. ENTRY, Passage, enter.

More particular; distinguished according to their Uses and Situations; being
either for Support. Intern. Lower; whether erect: or transverse. 4.
FOUNDATION, Groundwork, Substruction, Base, Bottom, fundamental,
underpinning, ground-pinning. FLOOR, Ground, Deck, Contignation.
Higher; erect: or transverse. Oblong and narrow. 5.
PILLAR, Column, Post, Iambe, Pile, Pillester. BEAM, Sparr, Rafter, Mantle,
Transom, Summer.
Flat: or Curve. 6.
WALL, Sepiment, immure, countermure, mural ARCH, Vault, embowed.


Extern; put to: or built to the part which it supports. 7.
PROP, till, support, uphold, stay up, shore up, shoulder up, under-prop,
under-set. BUTTRESS.

Covering; whether highest: or subordinate. 8.
ROOF, Covering, Tilt, Penthouse, Leads, Thatch, Tiling, Slate, Shingles.
SIELING.
Warmth* either Simple: or with a Tube to it for passage of the Smoke. 9.
HEARTH. CHIMNEY, Tunnel, Mantle.




IV. Lesser parts of BUILDINGS.
IV. LESSER PARTS OF BUILDINGS are distinguishable into such as are serviceable;
either for Passage upwards and downwards; being either immovable: or moveable.
1.
STAIRS. LADDER, Scale.
Passage in and out; either of Persons: or fresh Air; considered according to
the Whole. 2.
DOOR* Gate, Port-er, Wicket, Postern, Hatch, Porch, Portal. WINDOW, Casement,
Balcony.
Parts relating to a Door chiefly, or Window. Without it; above: or below. 3.
THRESHOLD, Sill, Groundsill. LINTEL.
Upon it; for the Opening and shutting of it. More artificial; the fixed: or
loose part. 4.
LOCK, Padlock. KEY.
More simple; to open from within only: or both ways. 5.
BOLT, Bar, Sparr. LATCH.

Motion of it; concave: or unequal. 6.
HINGE. STAPLE, Hook.






V. By CARRIAGE is meant the Conveyance of things from one place to another: V.
Things for CARRIAGE.
to which may be annexed by way of affinity the Notion of the Heavy thing to be
carried, BURDEN, ( Load, lade, ouerate, Far^, Freight, charge, surcharge,
Luggage, Lumber, disburthen, exonerate, overcharge,

The provisions of this kind do relate to things considered as ( overload.)

Whole; being used for the Carriage either of Persons or Goods, and moving
either With Wheels; Four Wheels; either the more elegant: or the more plain. 1.
COACH, Chariot. WAIN, Wagon.
Two Wheels; either the more elegant: or the more plain. 2.
CHARIOT. CART; Carr, Dray, Tumbrel.

Without Wheels; being either to be Carried between the Movers; either the more
elegant: or the more plain. 3.
SEDAN, Litter. BARROW.
Drawn along after them. 4.
SLED. WELSH CART.


Parts of the thing upon which the weight is drawn or carried; serving either
for Fastening to the Animals which draw or carry; used either double: or single.
5.
SHAFT, Thills. POLE.
Motion; being for figure and situation Round and erect: or oblong and
transverse. 6.
WHEEL, Truckle, Trundle. AXIS, Spindle.
The central: or semidiametral parts of the Wheel. 7.
NAVE. SPOKE, Fellow.


Furniture of the Animals which draw or carry; either for Supporting of the
Trunc: or the Feet of the burden. 8.
SADDLE, Pack-saddle, Pad, Panel, Pillion. STIRRUP.
Directing the Motion; by the Head: or Sides. 9.
BRIDLE, Rein, Headstall, Curb, Snaffle, Bit. TRACE.


VI. By FURNITURE ( Vtensils, Implements, Household Stuff, Movables, Goods, VI.
FURNITURE.
furnish, fit* provide, procure, ready,) is meant those moveable things of
various kinds requisite to the several uses of a Family. These are either More
simple, intended chiefly for Action, according to The general name. 1.
INSTRUMENT, Implement, Tool.
Some special kinds of Instruments; for cutting: or for knocking. 2.
KNIFE, Razor. HAMMER, Sledge, Mallet, malleable, ductile, Beetle, Poleax.

Less simple, being made up of several parts joined together; according to The
general name: or that kind used for the drawing up of water. 3.
JUGAMENT, Frame. PUMP.
Some special kinds; being used for Putting things upon; being either moveable:
or fixed. 4.
TABLE, Stall, Dresser, Board, Cupbord. SHELF.
Sitting upon only; to which may be annexed by way of affinity, that other
Utensil intended for the ease and softness of sitting or lying. 5.
STOOL, Seat, Fourm, Bench. CUSHION, Pillow, Boulster, Pillion.
Sitting and leaning: or sitting and lying upon. 6.
CHAIR, Throne, Settle. COUCH.
Lying and sleeping upon; to which that may be annexed of the same affinity as
in the Fifth. 7.
BEDSTED, Settle, Cradle, Testor. BED, Pallet, Hammock, Mattress, Nest, Kennel,
Litter, Vpholster.


More complicate, by reason of the mixture with Wheels or Screws, etc.
according to The general name: or that particular kind used for the taking of
Animals. 8.
MACHIN, Engine, Frame, Gin. TRAP, Gin, Spring, Pitfal, Toil, Wear, We Will,
Buck, Net, Ins^are.
Some special kinds; for grinding of Corn, etc. or distinguishing of Hours. 9.
MILL, Querne. CLOCK, Watch.




PROVISIONS.
. III.
UNder this Head of PROVISIONS ( Accommodations, Equipage, furnish, provide,
procure, purvey,) are comprehended some of the same kinds of things as under
the former, with this peculiar Difference, That several of the particulars
under this are more occasional and transient, and not of such continual
usefulness as those under the other. These are distinguishable into such as
Have particular references, either to Food, as to The kinds of it. ORDINARY. I.
EXTRAORDINARY. II.
The manner of PREPARING it. III.
CLOTHING. IV. VESSELS. V.
Are of a COMMON MIXED Nature. VI.


I. By SUSTENTATION ORDINARY ( Commons, Fare, Cheer, Diet, Meat, Viands,
sustenance, Victuals, Manciple, Caterer, Pantry, I SUSTENTATION ORDINARY.
) is intended such kind of Food as is usual for ordinary persons, and ordinary
times; either according to the General name; whether greater, more stated,
constant and usual: or less, and more occasional. 1.
MEAL, Dinner, Supper, Refectory. REFECTION, Bait, Bever, Breakfast,
Collation, Repast, Nunchion.
Particular kinds; distinguishable according to the matter; whether Solid and
consistent; being made either of Grain or some Vegetable, baked in a drier
substance without any considerable mixture, of all other the most common and
necessary: or else being made up and mixed with some other eatable substance. 2.
BREAD, Loaf, Manchet, Cake, Dough, Biscuit, Past, Batch, Pantry, Pantler.
PUDDING, Haggis, Sausage, Dumpling, Link.
Milk condensed in the finer part: or of Milk coagulated and pressed. 3.
BUTTER. CHEESE.
Animal musculary substance; either alone: or put into some bready substance,
which is likewise capable of some other ingredients. 4.
FLESH. PIE, Pasty, Tart, Custard, Flawn, Past, Pastry, Pastler.

Liquid; either for Eating; consisting of Water boiled with some other
ingredients, for the strengthening of it for Food: or for the coagulating of
it. 5.
BROTH, Pottage, Porridge, Caudle, Cullice, Grout, Gruel, Panado, Posset,
Ptisane, Frumenty, Hogwash, Potherbe. GELLY, congeal.
Fatty juice of several Vegetables, and sometimes of Animals, eaten with other
things, and useful for Medicine; to which may be adjoined the watery juice of
dressed Flesh. 6.
OIL. GRAVY, Juice.

Drinking; the infusion of Burly or some other Grain first macerated; either
without Hopps: or with Hopps. 7.
ALE, Whort, Brew. BEER, Drink, Whort, Brew.





II. SUSTENTATION EXTRAORDINARY ( Cates, Delicates, Dainties, II. SUSTENTATION
EXTRAORDINARY.
Liccorous,) may be considered according to the General name; signifying
abundance, variety and delicacy; either of more substantial Meats: or of
Sweetmeats. 1.
FEAST, Gaudy. BANQUET, Iuncket, Sweet-meat, Desert.
Particular kinds; used for Eating; comprehending Common requisites, for the
better relishing of other Food; to which may be adjoined the various mixtures
of things, to render them grateful to the Palate. 2.
SAUCE, Sallet. CONFECTION, Conserve, Comfit, Sucket.
Usual ingredients of Sauce; being either for the Taste Sweet; viz. the juice of
the sweet Cane, concreted: or deliquiated or dissolved into a liquor of a thick
consistence. 3.
SUGAR. SYRUP.
Of hot and savory Gust and Smell. 4.
SPICE, Aromatic, Grocery.
Sour; the juice of Grapes, or infusion of Barley being eager: or the juice of
Crabs. 5.
VINEGAR. VERJUICE.


Drinking; whether more Natural; being either more simple: or the juice of
Fruits, chiefly Grapes: or other drinks made by mixture. 6.
WINE, Sider, Perry, Stum, Must, Vintage, Vintner, Sack, Claret, etc. BEVERAGE,
Syllabub, Mede, Wassal.
Artificial, by distillation with fire; according to the more general name: or
that particular kind most in use. 7.
SPIRITS. BRANDY.





III. Actions relating to the PREPARATION OF FOOD ( dressing, crude, III.
PREPARATION OF FOOD.
raw,) are either General and antecedaneous; signifying either the killing and
dividing of Beasts for Food: or the more common notion of fitting both Flesh
and other proper Materials, in order to their being eaten. 1.
BUTCHERING, Shambles, Slaughterhouse. COOKING, dressing, Kitchen, Scullion,
dress Meat.
Special and subsequent; denoting the several kinds of Cookery; either More
principal; the preparing and dressing things. Wet; in a wider, or closer
vessel; in a greater, or lesser quantity. 2.
BOILING, Decoction, Seething, sod, Ebullition, parboil, poach. STEWING.
Dry; by holding it to, or turning it about near the Fire: or by laying it on a
hot Hearth, or in some close heated Cavity. 3.
ROASTING, Tosting, Spit, Broach, Jack. BAKING, Baker, Oven, Pastry, Batch.
Mixed, part being wet and part dry; either in an open broad vessel: or by
laying it on the Fire. 4.
FRYING* Fricace, Fritter, Steak. BROILING, Carbonadoing, Grilliade, Gridiron,
Rasher.

Less principal; relating to the Preparing of it; by Cutting, Into; punctim or
caesim, pointwise or edgewise. 5.
PINKING, Pouncing, Pricking. SLASHING, gashing, hashing, carbonado, jagg.
Through; either in laminated: or more minute particles. 6.
SLICING, Collop, Hash. MINCING, shred, chop, cut small.

Application of other things; either wet: or dry. 7.
BASTING, Dripping, sprinkle, Inspersion. FLOWRING, powdering, corning, spicing.
Mixed, (i.) both cutting and application. 8.
STRATIFY, Lair, interlacing, interlard, lay in. LARD, prick in, stick in,
interlarding.

Preserving; either in wet: or in dry. 9.
PICKLING, soucing. CONDITING, preserving, embalming, candying, seasoning,
Mummy.





IV. Such things as are requisite for the covering of our nakedness, IV.
CLOTHING.
and the preserving of us from the injuries of weather, are styled by the name
of CLOTHING, Vest, Apparel, attire, Array, Garment, Raiment, Habit, Garb,
Stole, Robe, Weed, accoutred, clad, dight, dressing, make ready, wear, invest,
Livery, put on or off, naked, stripped, bare, Taylour, Wardrope.

To which may be adjoined, for its affinity, the usual name of those other
things of the like use amongst men upon particular occasions, and more
generally required for laboring beasts; ARMAMENT, Harness, Tackle, Array,
Habiliment, Trappings, accoutred, Furniture, Traces.

The several particulars under this Head may refer; either to The matter of
which Vests are made; which is either Some Animal substance; either of Beasts.
The hairy parts. 1.
WOOLLEN, Cloth. HAIRY, Stuff, Sackcloth.
The Skins of Beasts prepared. 2.
LEATHER, Buff, Cheverel, etc. Tann, Curry.

Insects, viz. the Silkworm. 3.
SILK, Mercer, Satin, Velvet, Plush, Taffety, etc.

Some Vegetable substance; either the Rind of Plants, as Hemp, Flax, Nettle,
etc. or growing upon Trees. 4.
LINEN, Canvase, Lawn, Damask, Diaper, etc. COTTON, Bombast, Fustian.

The use and fashion; either for Ornament only; being elegantly distinguished
with Apertures and Intercisions. 5.
LACE, guarded, galloon, etc. PURLE.
Ornament and binding; being a Long Lamin; narrower: or broader. 6.
RIBBAND, Fillet, Tape, Favor, Knot, Hairlace. SCARF, Garter.
Long Pin; slenderer: or thicker. 7.
THREAD, Line, Wire, Yarn, Packthred. CORD, String, Halter, Rope, Slip, Line,
Rein,
Lamin; specially of Leather: or Loop and Pin. 8.
THONG, Latchet, Strap. BUCKLE.

Ornament and covering of the outside: or the inside. 9.
FACING. LINING.




V. VESSELS.
V. Such kind of Vtensils as serve to contain other things, are usually called
VESSELS, Cask, Receptacle, Pan, Plate, etc.

These are distinguishable by their Matter, Shapes and Uses, into such as serve
for the Keeping and carriage of things; being either Pliable to the things they
contain; whether more loose: or more close. 1.
BAG, Sack, Budget, Pocket, Pouch, Purse, Sachel, Scrip, Wallet, Poke, Male,
Knapsack, Portmantue, Cloak-bag. CASE, Sheath, Scabbard, Shrine, Covering,
Quiver, Tike, Pillowbear.
Stiff; for Arid; being made either of bords: or twigs. 2.
BOX, Chest, Trunk, Ark, Coffer, Cabinet, Casket, Bin, Clapper, Cupbord, Hutch,
Locker, Safe, Spence, Press, Pyx, Coffin, Sumpter, Desk, Flash, Till, Drawer,
Cap-case. BASKET, Flasket, Maund, Frail, Hamper, Pannier, Scuttle, Weel, Dorser.
Liquids; in Greater quantities; either closed at both ends: or open at one. 3.
BARREL, Cask, Fat, Firkin, Keg, Hogshead, Kilderkin, Pipe, Tun, Butt, Rundlet,
Cooper. TUB, Bucket, Coul, Vate, Cistern, Pale, Piggin.
Less quantities; whether Shallow; being made either of Metal: or other
materials, Wood, Earth, etc. 4.
DISH, Platter, Pan, Charger, Voider, Basin, Laver, Patin, Plate, Porringer,
Saucer. TRAY, Pan, Boul, Trough.
Deep; of a bigger: or lesser aperture. 5.
POT, Flagon, Tankard, Jack, Iar, Pitcher, Iugg, Mugg, Noggin, Postnet, Vrne.
BOTTLE, Crewet, Iugg, Cruse.




Dressing or boiling of Meat; either without: or with feet. 6.
KETTLE, Caldron, Copper, Furnace. SKILLET, Pipkin.
Spending; either by Taking out, the Tube of effusion: to which may be adjoined
the instrument for stopping it. 7.
FAUCET, Spout. TAP, Spiggot, Stopple.
Receiving in; whether of a roundish: or oblong Cavity. 8.
SPOON, Ladle, Scummer. SCOOP, Shovel, laving.
Laying on of Meat: or pouring out of Drink. 9.
TRENCHER, Plate. CUP, Boul, Goblet, Beaker, Cann, Chalice, Mazer, Glass.




VI. The last Head of COMMON MIXED Materials, must be acknowledged to be a very
Heterogeneous heap. VI. COMMON, MIXED MATERIALS.
But the several particulars under it being very necessary in their kinds, and
not reducible to any of the other Heads, I am forced to put them together here,
not knowing at present how to reduce them more properly. They are
distinguishable by their Ends or Uses; being such Provisions as concern Food
for Cattle; either of dried Grass: or dried stems of Grain. 1.
HAY, Fodder. STRAW, Fodder, Halm, Litter, Thatch.
Warmth, and preparing of Food for men. 2.
FUEL, Firing, Logg, Collier, Woodmonger.
Giving of Light; being made either of the dried Fat of Animals: or of Oil. 3.
CANDLE, Link, Taper, Torch, Light, Lanthorn. LAMP.
Curing of Wounds or Sores by outward application, being a Confection of
Medicaments, which is sometimes spread upon some Vest matter. 4.
SALVE, Unguent, Ointment. PLASTER, Cataplasm, Serecloth, Poultis.
Cleansing or stiffening of Clothes. 5.
SOAP. STARCH.
Communication by Writing; denoting either the Instrument: or Liquor to write
with. 6.
PEN. INK.
Matter to write on; considered either simply in its nature: or as it is
compacted in Aggregates. 7.
PAPER, Parchment, Vellum, Schedule, Bill-et, Ticket, Stationer. BOOK, Volume,
Tome, Treatise, Manuel, compile, compose, Library, Tract, Pamphlet, Manuscript,
Stationer.

Ornament; by representation of the likeness of things in plain: or in solid. 8.
PICTURE, Pourtraiture, Effigies, Draught, Map, Chart, Landscap, Emblem, Image,
Projection, Scheme, Diagram, Analem, Arras, Enammel. IMAGE, Statue, Puppet,
Idol, Coloss, Crucifix.



CHAP. XI. Concerning Relation more public, whether I. Civil. II. Judiciary.
III. Military. IV. Naval. V. Ecclesiastical.
MOre public relation may be distributed into such as do concern those several
respects, Actions and Things; belonging either to Several Families associated
under Government, CIVIL RELATION. Courts of Judicature, and matters of Law,
JUDICIAL RELATION. A state of War, MILITARY RELATION. Men's Affairs and
Traffic on the Water, NAVAL RELATION. Matters of Religion and Worship,
ECCLESIASTICAL RELATION.


CIVIL RELATION.
THat Relation arising from the associating of Families under Government for
mutual benefit and defense, is styled Political or CIVIL, Republic,. I.
Commonwealth, State, political, secular.

To which may be opposed ANARCHY, Confusion.

The Notions belonging to this do refer either to Persons in a political
capacity, considered according to their DEGREES. I. PROFESSIONS or Vocations.
II. CONVENTIONS. III.
Things or businesses, relating to RIGHTS. IV. CONTRACTS for the Alienation of
our Rights. V. OBLIGATIONS for the Confirmation of Contracts. VI.



I. Those differences whereby men under a Political Relation, are distinguished
from one another, I. DEGREES OF MEN.
according to their several ranks, are styled, DEGREES, Place, Quality, Rank,
Order, Scutcheon, Coat of Arms, Herald.

To which may be opposed the word PARITY, Levelling.

These are either More general; according to the first common Difference of
governing, namely such to whom does belong the power and care of directing
others in their duty, and rewarding or punishing them accordingly: or governed,
namely such as are under this Power. 1.
MAGISTRATE, Rector, Governor, Regent, Rule-er, Dominion, Sway, Consul,
President, Provost, Warden, Head, Territory, Seigniory, Major, Baylif, Syndic,
States, Jurisdiction. SUBJECT- ion, Vassal, submit, Homage, Liegeman, Private
person, truckle, Underling.
More particular; relating to Kinds of principal Magistrates; which have great
variety of Titles in several Countries, not necessary to be distinctly provided
for here, excepting only such as are either; Sovereign: or Homagers to some
other. 2.
KING, Sovereign, Emperor, Imperial, Monarch, Queen, regal, royal, Majesty,
reign, Kingdom, Lord, Dynasty, Sultan, Cham, Liege Lord, Regent, Realm, Diadem,
Crown, Coronation, Scepter, Throne, enthrone, Viceroy. PRINCE, Potentate.
Orders of Subjects. Higher. More general; comprehending the greater: or lesser
Nobility. 3.
LORD, Peer, Nobleman, honorable, Patrician, Duke, Marquess, Earl, Count,
Viscount, Baron. GENTLEMAN, Gentry, Knight, Esquire, Sir, Madam, Worship-ful,
Gentil-ity, Wellborn.
More special; with relation to the Degrees in liberal Professions; either
perfect: or inchoate. 4.
GRADUATE, commence, Degree, Doctor, Master, Rabbi. CANDIDATE, Bachelor,
Inceptor, canvas, sue, stand for.

Middle; considered Aggregately. 5.
PEOPLE, Folk, Commonalty, Community, mean, obscure, ignoble, Plebeian,
Populacie, popular, populous.
Segregately; as they are Inhabitants either in Cities: or the Country 6.
CITIZEN, Freeman, enfranchise, Denizon, Townsman. YEOMAN.

Lower sort; considered Aggregately. 7.
RABBLE, Vulgus, Tag-rag, base.
Segregately; according to their want of Dignity: or Wealth. 8.
VILLAIN, Varlet, Rascal, Peasant, Boor, servile, Sirrah, Vassal, base. BEGGAR,
Rogue, Mendicant, Shake-ragg.


Conditions of men; as having a right to dispose of themselves: or not. 9.
FREEMAN, liberal, enfranchise, Burgess, SLAVE, emancipate, manumit, servile,
illiberal, Bondsman, Bondage, Thraldom, enthrall, enslave, serve, Droyl, Drudge.




II. That course of life about which one is usually employed, II. PROFESSIONS.
and to which he applies himself for the getting of a Subsistence, is styled
his PROFESSION, Vocation, Calling, Trade, Function, Occupation, Course of life,
Craft, Mystery.

To which may be adjoined the word denoting the actual Use of such Callings,
PRACTICE, Exercise, Use, follow, put in ure.

These may be distinguished, into such as are either More necessary and
beneficial to humane life; whether Liberal Professions, such as become free and
generous men; relating either to Things. Sacred; as discovered by revelation:
or as the knowledge of them is* attainable by nature. 1.
DIVINE, Theology, Clerk, Schoolman. PHILOSOPHER.
Civil and political; namely, the more generally received Laws and
Constitutions: or those belonging to a particular Nation. 2.
CIVIL LAWYER. COMMON LAWYER, Pettifogger.
Natural; with particular reference to the diseases of men's bodies and their
cure; either by direction: or by manual operation. 3.
PHYSICIAN, Medicine, Patient, Empiric, Mountebank, Quack salver, Farrier,
Leach, Receipt. SURGEON, dress a wound.

Words or Language: or the ornaments of discourse. 4.
PHILOLOGER, Critic. POET- ry, Poem, Bard, Muse.

Illiberal; belonging more peculiarly To a Town; consisting of Trades of
exchange: or manufacture. 5.
MERCHANT, Market, Peddler, Huckster, Bodger, Hawker, Regrater, Shopkeeper,
Traffic, Dealing, Merchandise, Fair, Mart. MECHANIC, Handicraft, Artificer,
Manufacture; Artizan, Work house.
To the Country; relating to the most ancient Professions of Tilling the
ground: or feeding of Cattle. 6.
HUSBANDMAN, georgic, Hind, Agriculture, Tillage, Bayliffe. HERDSMAN,
Shepherd, Pastor, Cow-herd, Hog-herd.
Catching of wild Animals. 7.
HUNTSMAN, Hunt-er, Fowler, Fisher, chase, trace, course, Venison, Game, Pocher.

Both to Town and Country; for the carriage of things by Water: or Land. 8.
MARINER. CARRIER, Ripier, Cargo.


Not necessary; comprehending those several Professions which tend to the
diversion of others; by acting or personating some particular Story or Fiction:
or by amusing of men by the Agility of body or hand. 9.
PLAYER, Actor, Comedian, Tragedian, Play, Stage, Theater, Interlude,
Personate. PRESTIGIATOR, Shewer of tricks, juggle, Legerdemain, Hocas pocas,
Tumbler, Dancer on the ropes, etc. Mountebank.



III. The several Aggregates of men under Political Government, are usually
styled either by that more general: III. CONVENTION*
or special name.

CONVENTION, Assembly, Meeting, Congregation, Convocation, Company, Rendezvous,
Concourse, Confluence, Quire, Chapter, Committee, Club, Hall, convene,
Conventicle, Sessions, Assize, flock or gather together. SOCIETY, Gyld, Gang,
Tribe, Clan, Fraternity, Club, Knot, Crew, Fellowship, Company^
These are either such as have the same General inducements; in respect of
Language and supreme Government; whether primitively: or derivatively. 1.
NATION- al, epidemical, naturalize, People, Country, vernacular, Patriot.
COLONY, Plantation.
Place of Habitation; considered according to the General name; denoting such
as inhabit more dispersedly in the open fields: or more close together, usually
within fenced places. 2.
COUNTRY, rural, rustic, Peasant, Boor, Hind, Kern, Swain, Clown, Tike. TOWN,
Borough.
Special kinds; signifying all that part of a Nation under the same Subordinate
Government; dwelling more at large: or such as dwell close together, with
peculiar Liberties and Privileges in common amongst them. 3.
PROVINCE, Circuit. CITY, Suburbs, Metropolis, See, Borough, municipal.
Lowest Government; whether with: or without Jurisdiction. 4.
SHIRE, County, Tribe, District, Riding. PARISH, parochial, Parson, Vicar,
Thorpe, Village.



Special inducements; for Attendance on Governors: or advice in the
Government. 5.
COURT- ier, aulical. COUNCIL, Senate, Parliament, Diet, Conclave, Consistory,
Sanhedrim, Synod, Committee.
Education in Learning; either of the Adult, with a power to license them for
the Liberal professions: or only of Children or young beginners. 6.
UNIVERSITY, Academy, School. SCHOOL.
Regulating the affairs of some Trade: or Profession; especially if they
cohabit for those ends in a kind of Political family. 7.
CORPORATION, Gyld, Brotherhood, Fraternity, Company, Society, community,
municipal, incorporate. COLLEGE- iate, Fellow.
Driving on of some design; in general: or with particular reference to the
opposing of what is legally established. 8.
LEAGUE, Confederacy, Combination, Alliance, Complice, Partisan, Party, side
with, join, hold together, Pack, compact. FACTION, Sect, Iuncto, Gang,
conspire, side with, combine, Party-zan, Oligarchy.




IV. The things which in Justice or Equity* do belong to persons, IV. RIGHTS.
are called RIGHTS, Title, Interest, Estate, Tenure* Holding, Freehold, Gift,
Collation, Reversion, Landlord, Paramount, endow, enfeoff. To which may be
adjoined the word LIBERTIES, denoting whatsoever is permitted, or not forbidden
to them.

These are considerable according to their Original; being either Primary and
unwritten. Not voluntary; but according to the condition of its first being: or
common practice and continuance. 1.
NATURE. CUSTOM, accustom, Use, Wont, Guise, Fashion, Rite, Usage, usual,
current, common, ordinary, ure, enure, Habit, Practice, Haunt, prescribe,
unusual, obsolete, familiar, received, conversant, Habit, manner, course, Hank,
Exercise, Prescription, Desuetude.
Voluntary; according to the choice of the Will: or a determined order. 2.
ELECTION, Choice. SUCCESSION, devolve, follow, Place.

Secondary and written. General; whether perpetual: or temporal. 3.
LAW, Act, Statute, Decree, Sanction, Constitution, Canon, Rule, legal,
legitimate, enact, ordain, order, abrogate, repeal, prescribe, Legislator.
EDICT, Ordinance, Proclamation, Order, Breve, Bull, Act, Rule, Sanction,
Rescript.
Special; conferring Right to have: or Right to do. 4.
PATENT, Charter, Brief, Letters Patents, Placard. COMMISSION, Brief.


parts; consisting in* Power over that which is One's own; either totally: or
as to the use of it. 5.
PROPRIETY, Concern, Owner, Proprietary. USUS-FRUCTUS.
Another's; either as to his person: or his affairs. 6.
AUTHORITY, Power, Dominion, Prefect, President, Head, Provost, Master,
Plenipotentiary, authentic, classic, govern, ratify, Rule, sway, inspection,
dispose, Precinct, Territory. OFFICE, Place, Cure, overlook, officiate,
superintend, surveigh, oversight, charge, conduct, Commissary, Prefect,
Colleague, Groom.

Liberty; with respect to Advantages by special Law; either of the supreme
Magistrate: or of some particular rank of Subjects. 7.
PREROGATIVE, Royalty. PRIVILEGE, Franchise, enfranchise, freedom, Grace,
preeminence.
Remission or exemption from the rigor of a general Law, in its Commanding: or
prohibiting. 8.
DISPENSATION. LICENSE, Permission, Sufferance, Leave, allowance, Faculty,
Connivence, Placard, Prattick, let, may, suffer, admit, dispense, Passport,
Safe conduct, Letters of Mart.
Punishing: or imposing burdens. 9.
TOLERATION, Connivence, suffer, let alone, Quarter. IMMUNITY, free, Discharge,
Exemption, Quarter, scot-free.






V. The mutual negotiating betwixt men in their ordinary converse with one
another is styled CONTRACT, V. CONTRACT.
Commerce, Intercourse, Traffic, Trade, Negotiation: to which may be annexed
for affinity the most general occasion for such Intercourse, namely, the
parting with one thing for the getting of another, called EXCHANGE, barter,
chaffer, cope, swap, truck, chop, Commutation, Scoursing, Bargain, Match.

The principal matters belonging to this Head do either refer to Actions;
General; whether Absolute; transferring a thing from one to another; whether
for his use to whom it is transferred: or for his use that transfers. 1.
ASSIGNING, consigning, conveying, resigning, deliver, put over. DEPOSITING,
Trustee, Feoffee, enfeoff, charge, commend, recommend, entrust, commit,
Fiduciary, Sequestration.
Conditional* giving: or having right to an Estate after the death of him who
disposes of it. 2.
BEQUEATHING, devising, Legacy, Testament, Will, Executor, Intestate.
INHERITING, Heir, hereditary, Heritage, Patrimony, Fee-simple, Entail,
disherit, Hereditament, Portion, Primogeniture.

Special; either by Parting with: or procuring propriety in any thing, upon the
consideration for something else to be taken or given in exchange. 3.
SELLING, vent, utter, Ware, Commodity, Sale-able, venal, vendible, staple, put
off, retail, afford, handsel, monopoly, make money of, serve one with. BUYING,
purchase, Cater, Chapman, Customer, engrossing, ransom, redeem, regrate,
forestal, interlope, preemption, the refusing.
Parting with: or procuring the temporary use of something belonging to
another; according to The more general name. 4.
LENDING, Loan, Creditor, prostitute, trust. BORROWING, take up.
The particular kind* relating to some temporary reward to be taken, and given.
5.
DEMISING, let, let out, let to farm, lease, Lessor, Landlord, Broker, Rent,
Principal, Interest, put to use. HIRING, farming, backney, mercenary,
prostitute, Tenant, Lessee, Lease, Rent, Interest, Use, at livery, Gratis.

Bestowing skill or labor about any business: or compensating of it. 6.
EARNING, Merit, Desert, Meed, Demerit, supererogate. WAGES, Fee, Salary,
Pension, Stipend, Vails, fare, freight, gratis.


Things; whether more Private; to be exhibited by the Buyer; either the whole
value: or a part of it, for assurance of the rest. 7.
PRICE, Rate, Value, Worth, Ransom, stand in, cost, cheap, dear, precious,
sumptuous, rich, inhaunce, depreciate. EARNEST, Gage, Pledge.
Seller; either the thing bought: or some part, for security of the whole. 8.
BARGAIN, Ware, Commodity. SEISIN, Livery, install, admit, Entry, inthrone,
inaugurate, invest.

Public; toward defraying the charge of Government; whether ordinary: or
occasional. 9.
TRIBUTE, Custom; Annates, Gabel, Excise, Toll, Impost, Publicane. TAX, Rate,
Contribution, Collection, assess, Publicane, Subsidy, Tunnage, pontage,
pannage, Pole, Collector, Scot, Sesment.




VI. Those several kinds of Assurances which men offer concerning what they
intend to give or do, are styled, OBLIGATIONS, plight, VI. OBLIGATIONS.
engage, Deed, bind, Bond, Bill, evidence, etc. undertake for.

And when such Obligations are reciprocal, they are then called PACTIONS,
Agreement, Compact, Covenant, Bargain, Condition, indent, Match, Stipulation,
Sponsion, Warranty, Article, strike up a bargain.

These are either Imperfect; or degrees toward Contracts more Remote; in the
first overtures of a Contract; whether as begun by one: or mutual betwixt both.
1.
BESPEAKING, Retain. TREATING, driving a Bargain, capitulate, chaffer, parley,
cheapen, huck, haggle.
Near; in proposal of those terms according to which one obliges himself to
buy: or sell. 2.
BID, offer, huck, haggle. DEMAND, cheapen, ask, exact.

Perfect; either in Words; Spoken. Common; engaging our Veracity, sometimes
with the addition of such solemn expressions as may testify our reality. 3.
PROMISE, Word, Parol, plight, Covenant, League, undertake for, pass ones word.
PROTESTATION, Asseveration, averr, vouch, stand in, Attestation.
Sacred; engaging our Religion, and appealing to God as a Witness, and as a
Judge, to punish us upon our falsehood. 4.
SWEARING, Oath, deposing, abjure, Perjury, adjure, purge upon Oath.
IMPRECATION, Execration, Malediction, Cursing.

Written; attested with our peculiar name, or Mark: or Impressing some figure
in Wax, or some like matter 5.
SIGNING, Obligation, Deed, Evidence, Bill, Indenture, Instrument, Writing,
Muniment, Conveyance, Policy, subscribe, under ones hand, set ones hand.
SEALING, Seal, Signet, Sigil, Bond, specialty.

Security; Personal: whether express, by promising for another, and making
himself liable to the same Penalty upon the other's failing: or implicit, by
speaking in one's behalf. 6.
SPONSION, Stipulation, Bail, vouch, undertake for, Surety-ship, Hostage,
Security, Warrant, Caution, engage, responsible for. INTERCESSION, Mediate or,
interpose, speak for.
Real, of ones Goods; either Absolute; by engaging for the truth of a Promise
either the Goods in specie, or only his right to them. 7.
PAWN, Pledge, gage, engage. MORGAGE, Security, Statute, Caution, engage.
Relative; by engaging them for the success of a thing contingent, either as
Principal, or as Accessory. 8.
WAGER, Stake, vy, lay, prize. BET, Stake, vy, revy.






JUDICIAL RELATION.
THe several Notions referring to matters of Law and Courts of Judicature,. II.
are comprehended under that which is styled JUDICIAL RELATION, forensical,
Court, Hall, extrajudicial.

These are distinguishable into such as concern PERSONS. I. CAUSES and Actions.
II. Faults. CAPITAL. III. NOT CAPITAL. IV.
Punishments, CAPITAL. V. NOT CAPITAL. VI.



I. PERSONS.
I. PERSONS considerable under this Head of Judicial Relation, may be
distinguished into such as are either More principal. Persons judging. Legally
constituted; Principal: or Accessory. 1.
JUDGE, Chancellor, Commissary, Censor, Moderator, Official, Jury, Inquest,
Doom, Sentence, decide, determine, censure, Iudicatory, judicial, Court, Bench,
Tribunal. ASSESSOR, Syndic, Bencher, Alderman, Canons, ^rebends, Chapter,
Fellows, assist, Sides-men.
Voluntarily consented to by the parties; to determine the Suit: or cease the
Enmity between them. 2.
ARBITRATOR, Vmpire, Days-man, comprimize, Referree, award MEDIATOR,
Incercessor, deal-between, intermediate, Mean.

Persons judged; whether active: or passive; in Criminals. 3.
ACCUSER, Informer, challenge, Endite-ment, charge, attaint, peach, empeach*
arraign, tax, lay to ones charge, call in question, Presentment, Bill,
prosecute, Promooter. PRISONER, or reputed Criminal, Delinquent, Malefactor,
Defendant.
Judicials. 4.
PLAINTIFF, Accuser, complain, blame. DEFENDANT, Apology, excuse, vindicate.


Less principal; relating either to the Judges; for Writing: or saying
publicly. 5.
NOTARY, Register, Remembrancer, Secretary, Clerk, Scribe, Protonotary, Rolls,
en^oll. CRIER.
Fetching: or keeping. 6.
PURSEVANT, Messenger, Catchpole, Sergeant. MARSHAL, Keeper, Iailour.

Parties; to advise and speak in behalf of either party: or to declare the
truth indifferently betwixt both of them. 7.
ADVOCATE, Counsel, Pleader, maintain, defend, vindicate, Lawyer, Barresier,
Proctor, Clyent. WITNESS, Evidence, attest, testify, Testimony, Affidavit.




II. To the more general words of Actions or PROCEEDINGS, II. PROCEEDINGS.
Causes, in Judicial Affairs, may be annexed those less general words of SUIT,
Controversy, implead, commence, Case, Cause, Action, go to law, wage law,
prefer a Bill, Barrester, Brabble.

These are either Antecedent; on the part of the Plaintiff; in giving legal
notice: or seizing on the person or goods of his Adversary. 1.
CITATION, Subpoena, Process, call, warn, summon, Sumner, Apparitor, Bailiff,
Beadle. ARREST, attach, apprehend, distrein, seize, lay hold on, Embargo,
Sergeant, Baily, Catchpole, Beadle, Replevy.
Defendant; giving assurance of answering in Court: or coming himself, or by
his Substitute, to answer it accordingly. 2.
BAIL. APPEARANCE, forthcoming.

Concomitant. Preparatory; by the Parties; active: or passive. 3.
ACTION, Endictment, Bill, Process, arraign, implead, sue, commence suit, wage
law, Barretor. PLEA, Apology.
Judges; in their taking notice of and hearing the Cause: or making search into
the merits of it. 4.
COGNIZANCE, Hearing. EXAMINATION, Trial, sift out, Hearing Inquisition,
interrogate, Scrutiny, scann, view, review, revise, canvase, gage, pumpe out.

Decisive. Common; agreeing upon the state of the Question: or determining what
the merit is. 5.
JOINING ISSUE* SENTENCING, Doom, Judgment, Verdict, Censure, Decree, Order,
adjudge, decide, determine, award, definitive.
Passive, in the parties; as they are found not to have transgressed the Law:
or having transgressed it. 6.
INNOCENT, clear, blameless, harmless, justifie-cation, vindicate, discharge,
cleanse, purge, compurgation. GVI^TY, nocent, delinquent, peccant, convict,
culpable, faulty, tardy, Offender, Transgressor, propitiate, expiate.
Active, in the Judge; pronouncing the party either free from: or obnoxious to
Punishment. 7.
ACQUITTING, absolving, assoil, clear, discharge, loosing* purging, quit,
release. CONDEMNING, cast, damn.


Consequent; in the Parties; expressly declining the Judgment: or referring the
Cause to some higher Judicature. 8.
PROTESTING. APPEALING.
Judges; by inflicting the Punishment: or freeing from it. 9.
EXECUTING, inflict, suffer, Executioner, Hangman. PARDONING, forgiving, remit,
release, venial, Indulgence, put up.




III CRIMES CAPITAL.
III CRIMES CAPITAL, ( Enormity, facinorous, criminal, Malefactor.) such as are
or ought to be punished with Death, may be distinguished into such Offenses as
are more immediately against God and Religion; namely, the confederating with
evil spirits; to which may be adjoined for affinity (though not counted
capital) the pretending to discover secret, and foretell future things by
foolish forbidden Arts. 1.
WITCHCRAFT, Conjuring, Necromancy, Sorcery, Black-art, Magic, enchant,
fascinate, fore speak, Charm Spell, Cunning-man. WIZARDING, Manteia, Divining,
Gypsy, Fortune-telling, Soothsaying, Sorcery, Augury, Astrology, Geomancy,
Pyromancy, Physiognomy, Cheiromancy, Palmistry, Sigil, Talisman.
Man; whether A public person, or Magistrate. More general; implying declared
hostility against him: or exposing him to his enemies. 2.
TREASON, Traitor, betray. CONSPIRACY, betraying.
More particular; a forcible opposing of him by Arms: or occasioning some
illegal tumultuous dissension in the Multitude. 3.
REBELLION, Rising, Insurrection, Defection, Revolt, take head. SEDITION,
Commotion, Combustion, Riot, Vproar, Mutiny, Tumult, Hurly-burly, Scuffle,
Stirrs* Quoil, Racket, Boute-feu, Incendiary, turbulent.

Any private person; according to the General name; by which it is called in
our English Laws. 4.
FELONY.
Particular kinds; distinguishable by their Objects, as being against Life; by
taking it away illegally. 5.
MURDER, Assassin-ate, Homicide, Manslaughter, Massacre, Parricide,
cutthroat, blood-thirsty.
Chastity; by unnatural coition, either with Beasts: or Males. 6.
BESTIALITY, Buggery. SODOMY, Buggery, Catamite.
Estate; with respect to another's. Goods; taking them away either openly and
forcibly: or secretly and by craft. 7.
ROBBERY, Rapine, Sacrilege, Thief, Bandito, Pyrate, Pickeroon, pillage, take a
purse. THEFT, steal, purloin, lurch, fi^ch, pilser, nim, surreptitious,
Plagiary, Sacrilege, Cutpurse, Pick-pocket, light-fingered, Larceny.
Habitation; by burning it: or breaking into it. 8.
HOUSE-BURNING, Incendiary. BURGLARY, House-breaking.







IV. Crimes or FAULTS NOT CAPITAL, IV. FAULTS NOT CAPITAL.
may be distinguished into such as are General; any action against ones Right,
especially with contempt of the Person. 1.
INJURY, Wrong, Harm, Trespass, Hurt, Grievance, Abuse, Damage. AFFRONT,
Contumely, Outrage, Slur, Despite, Indignity, put a trick on.
Special; against. Chastity; whether by a single: or a married person. 2.
FORNICATION, Whore^dom, Courtesan, Concubine, Harlot, Trull. Punk, Leman,
Queen, Drab, Strumpet, prostitute, deflour, stuprate, vitiate, wenching,
Brothel, Stews, Bawd, Pander. ADULTERY, Concubine.
Estate; General; by unjust getting: or keeping of another's Right. 3.
USURPATION, incroach, entrench, grow upon, invade, intrude, thrust in.
DETENTION, withholding, keep back.
Particular, as to the manner of it; by abusing Skill; in taking advantage of
another man's ignorance, especially in actions of Commerce: or misusing his own
skill in the falsifying of a thing. 4.
FRAUD, Deceit, Guile, Cozening, Delusion, Collusion, Illusion, dodge, trepan,
overreach, prevaricate, circumvent, go-beyond, impose, gull, beguile, defraud,
Imposture, Knave, Rook, Cheat, Shift, Shark, cog, slur, wheedle, come over one,
supplant. FORGERY, counterfeit, false, adulterate, sophisticate, coin, devise,
forge, falsify, foisting, Interpolation, Impostor, supposititious,
surreptitious.
Power; by taking advantage of another man's necessity or impotence: or
exceeding the allowance of the Law. 5.
OPPRESSION, Force, Violence, exact, overcharge* EXTORTION, Exaction, Rapine,
Rapacity, wresting, wring, griping, ravin, poling, pilling.
Course of Law; by endeavoring to corrupt the Officers of Justice: or the
Witnesses. 6.
BRIBERY, Corruption, dawbing. SUBORNATION.


Good name; endeavoring to render another Criminal; by accusations not true:
or made unlawfully against an absent person. 7.
CALUMNY, Obloquy, Slander, Aspersion, opprobrious, Detraction, False
accusation, carping, belie, defame, disparage, traduce. BACKBITING, Libel,
Talebearer, Tell-tale, Whispering, Pick-thank.
Infamous; by objecting another's failings: or our own favors. 8.
REPROCHING, nip, taunt, scoff, twit, Opprobry, obloquy, tax, traduce.
UPBRAIDING, cast in one's teeth, exprobrate, twit.
Odious: or ridiculous. 9.
REVILING, rail, scold, brawl, Contumely, inveigh, invective, foul-mouthed,
Cucking-stool. MOCKING, deride, flout, jeer, scoff, twit, gibe, quip, gird,
frump, bob, taunt, wipe, jerk, Sarcasm, Pasquil, Irrision, Illusion, Satyr,
Burlesque, play upon.





V. PUNISHMENTS CAPITAL.
V. By Punishment is meant the evil of Suffering, inflicted for the evil of
Doing; to which may be adjoined the loss or ^^^^inction of a man's Right in a
thing which he formerly enjoyed, styled FORFEITURE.

PUNISHMENTS CAPITAL are the various manners of putting men to death in a
judicial way, which in several Nations are or have been either Simple; by
Separation of the parts; Head from Body: or Member from Member. 1.
BEHEADING, strike of ones head. QUARTERING, Dissecting.
Wound. At distance; whether from Hand: or from Instrument, as Gun, Bow, etc. 2.
STONING, Pelting. SHOOTING.
At hand; either by Weight; of something else: or one's own. 3.
PRESSING. PRECIPITATING, throwing or casting headlong.
Weapon; any way: or direct upwards. 4.
STABBING. EMPALING.


Taking away necessary Diet: or giving that which is noxious. 5.
STARVING, famishing. POISONING, Venom, envenom, virulent.
Interception of the Air; at the Mouth; distinguished according to the place of
the party, in the Air: or in the Earth 6.
STIFLING, smoother, suffocate. BURYING ALIVE.
Water: or Fire, 7.
DROWNING. BURNING ALIVE.

Throat; by weight of a man's own body: ^r the strength of others. 8.
HANGING. STRANGLING, throttle, choke, suffocate.


Mixed of wounding and starving; the body being erect: or lying on a Wheel. 9.
CRUCIFYING, Cross. BREAKING ON THE WHEEL.



VI. PUNISHMENTS NOT CAPITAL are distinguished by the things or subjects
receiving detriment by them, VI. PUNISHMENTS NOT CAPITAL.
as being either of the Body; according to the General name; signifying great
pain. 1.
TORTURE, Torment, excruciate.
Special kinds; by Striking; with a limber: or a stiff Instrument. 2.
WHIPPING, lashing, scourging, leashing, jerk, Rod, slash, Switch, stripe,
Beadle. CUDGELLING, bastinado, baste, swinge, swaddle, shrubb, slapp, thwack.
Stretching of the limms violently; the body being laid along for that purpose:
or listed up into the Air. 3.
RACK. STRAPPADO.


Liberty; of which one is deprived by Restraint Into a place: or instrument for
custody. 4.
IMPRISONMENT, Incarceration, Durance, Custody, Ward, clap up, commit, confine,
mue, Pound, Pinfold, Gaol our, Counter, Cage, Coop, Toleboth, Dungeon, Marshal,
release, secure, set fast. BONDS, Fetters, Gyves, Shackles, Manicles, Pinnion,
Chains.
Out of a place or country; whether with allowance of any other: or confinement
to one other. 5.
EXILE, Banish-ment, exterminate, prescribe, eject, expel, outlawed.
RELEGATION.

Repute; whether more gently: or more severely by burning marks in one's flesh.
6.
INFAMATION, Ignominy, Pillory. STIGMATIZATION, Branding, Cauterizing, burning
in the hand, Mark.
Estate; whether in part: or in whole. 7.
MULCT, Fine, amerce, sconce. CONFISCATION, Forfeiture.
Dignity and power; by depriving one of his Degree: or his capacity to bear
Office. 8.
DEGRADING, deposing, depriving. INCAPACITATING, cashier, disable, discard,
depose, disfranchize.



MILITARY RELATION.
THis Head of MILITARY RELATION, is intended to contain such Notions as concern
the various respects and capacities belonging to a state of War.. III.
The using of the united Force and Arms of many against others, is styled WAR-
fare, martial, polemical, Militia, Chivalry.

And the being without mutual opposition is called Peace.

The Notions appertaining to this Head, do relate either to Military ACTIONS.
I. EVENTS. II. Persons. SEGREGATE. III. AGGREGATE. IV.
Instruments necessary to War, AMMUNITION. V. PLACES. VI.


I. MILITARY ACTIONS.
I. Military ACTIONS may be distinguished according to the General name;
denoting the endeavor of doing hurt: or preserving from hurt. 1.
OFFENDING, Offence-ive, Annoy-ance. DEFENDING protect, guard, shelter* shroud
ward* preserve, keep, maintain, make good, tutelary.
Particular kinds or degrees; whether such as are Opposite and in several.
Declaring enmity on the offensive: or defensive side. 2.
PROVOKING, challenge, irritate, invite, bait, stir up, dare, vy. DEFYING, dare
Beginning of actual offense: or defense. 3.
ASSAULTING, assail, attaque, invade, encounter, Onset, set upon, charge,
Inrode, Rencounter, Incursion* fall on, run upon. RESISTING, withstand, stand
against, bear up against, turn head, struggle with, Antiperistatis.
Endeavoring to dispossess one of his place: or to frustrate such endeavors;
either by Keeping from necessaries: or supplying with necessaries. 4.
BESIEGING, Siege, beleaguer, beset, block up, hem in, lay siege. RELIEVING,
succor, supply, help, recruit, reinforce, subsidiary, Aid.
Vnderdigging the Sepiment; either to make a breach in it: or to hinder the
making of such a breach. 5.
MINING, undermine, Sapping. COUNTERMINING.
Entering forcibly to assault the besieged: or going out to assault the
besiegers. 6.
STORMING, assaulting, boarding, attaque, scaling, on-slaught. SALLYING, issue
out


Reciprocal and in common; whether by ways of Force; viz. the mutual
endeavors of corporeal mischief to one another; according to the General name:
or that which is betwixt two. 7.
FIGHTING, Combat, Conflict, encounter, cope, bicker, Fray, impugn, scuffle,
List. DUELLING, Single combat, Champion, List.
Special kinds, betwixt numerous parties, according to set order and
appointment; either of some part of the Army: or the whole 8.
SKIRMISHING, Fray, Velitation* pickeer. BATTELLING, Set fight, Set battle,
join battle, Shock.

Skill, or some secret art to deceive an Enemy; according to the general name:
or by concealing Soldiers for the sudden surprisal of others. 9.
STRATAGEM, ensnare, Device, Trick, Train, surprise. AMBUSH, Ambuscado,
insidiate, lay wait, lurk, way lay, surprise.





II. MILITARY EVENTS.
II. Military EVENTS may be distinguished into such as are either Of Importance;
when one keeps as before: or gains from the other: or loses his own; relating
to the Condition usually befalling such as are equal: or stronger: or weaker. 1.
COMING OFF UPON EQUAL TERMS. VICTOR, overcome, defeat, discomfit, beat, win,
vanquish, get the day, -the better, -the upper hand, quell, predominant,
prevail, subdue, suppress, over-bear, -master. OVERTHROWN, subdued, foiled,
suppressed, routed, worsted, beaten, defeated, discomfited, brought under.

Place of fighting. 2.
STAND HIS GROUND. ADVANCE, get ground. RETIRE, retreat, give back, shrink,
recede, recoyle.

Country of fighting. 3.
KEEP THE FIELD. PVRSVE, chas, course, follow, pros^cute, Hue and Cry. FLY, run
away rout, fugitive, take ones heels, put to flight.

Town assaulted. 4.
HOLD OUT, make good, maintain, stand out, hold tack. TAKE, win. LOSE, yield,
surrender, Rendition.

Goods of those that fight. 5.
SAVE ONE'S OWN. BOOTIES, Forage, Plunder, Pillage, Quarry, Prey, Prize,
Free-booter, Letters of Mart, Letters of Reprize. SPOILS, harras, havoc,
ravage, rifle, sack, ransack, Wreck, Devastation, Ruin, Wast, depopulate.

Persons concerned. 6.
ESCAPE, evade, escape eschew, get rid, get quit off, get off, shift away, get
clear. CAPTIVATE, take prisoner. YIELD, give up, render, surrender, resign,
deliver.

Final issue of the War. 7.
SAVE. CONQUER, bring under, master, mate, quel, vanquish, repress, suppress,
tame subdue, win. SVBMIT, give up, humble, yield, surrender, come in.


Of Show on the Victor's side, (for the conquered makes none;) either by some
solemn Actions to be publicly performed: or Things and Structures to remain in
memory of the Victory. 8.
TRIUMPH, exult, crow, exultation, Bonfire. TROPHEE.



III. Military PERSONS ( Soldier, Warrier, Reformado, serve, press, III.
Military PERSONS SEGREGATE.
) segregate, may be distinguished by those several employments for which they
are designed; being either for Fighting; on foot: or on horseback 1
FOOTMAN, Infantry, Lance-knight. HORSMAN, Cavalry, Light Horse, Curasier,
Dragoons, Trooper, Reister, Rider
Signs to the Army; belonging either to Foot: or Horse. Visible. 2.
ENSIGN, Ancient, Colors, Standard, Pennon, Banner. CORNET, Banner, Colors.
Audible. 3.
DRUMMER, Drum, Tabor, Tabret. TRUMPETER, Trumpet.

Distributing Orders; ordinary, belonging to each aggregate part: or
extraordinary, belonging to the Army. 4.
SERGEANT. ADJUTANT.
Discovery; either of the Country in general: or amongst the Enemies. 5.
SCOUT, crusing, descry. SPY, Emissary, Setter, Intelligence.
Prevention of danger that might happen either to Persons: or Places. 6.
GUARD, Convoy, custody, keep, ward, keep guard, relieve the guard, Corpse du
guard WATCH, Ward, Corporal.
Both Discovery and Prevention; denoting such a one as stands and examines: or
lies on the ground to listen and observe 7.
SENTINEL, Sentry. PERDUE.
Digging: or other servil works; denoting such Servants of the Army as follow
the Baggage. 8.
PIONER. CALO, Pedec, Black guard.



IV. Military PERSONS AGGREGATE.
IV. Military PERSONS AGGREGATE ( Party of Soldiers, Forces, disband) may be
distributed according to such different names as do denote either the Whole;
being an armed Multitude fit to assault or resist, consisting of many
subordinate divisions. 1
ARMY, Host, Forces, Battalia.
Parts; according to The first: or the second greatest subdivisions. 2.
BRIGADE, Battalion, Terce. REGIMENT, Legion, Tribune, Colonel.
The third: or fourth subdivision, belonging both to Horse and Foot. 3.
COMPANY, Troop, Band, Captain, Centurion. SQUADRON.

Order and Situation; whether with the side of every one toward the side of
the next: or the face of every one toward the back of the next, 4.
RANK. FILE, Roe.
Uses and Services for which such persons are designed; whether To march before
the Army, for clearing of the way: or to follow after, for help and supply in
case of necessity. 5.
VANCURRIER. RESERVE.
To begin the Fight: or to engage in the most difficult services, being usually
a selected Company. 6.
FORLORN HOPE. COMMANDED PARTY.
To take care of and defend the Baggage. 7.
TRAIN.




V. AMM^NITION.
V. The Provisions necessary for Offense and Defense are styled by the general
name of AMMUNITION, Magazin, charge, discharge, Arcenal.

To which may be adjoined the word BAGGAGE, Impediments, Luggage, Lumber.

They are distinguishable according to their Shapes, and those several Uses for
which they are designed, into such as are more General; denoting the common
names belonging to things of this nature; whether such as are offensive: or
defensive. 1.
WEAPON, Arms offensive. ARMOR, defensive Arms, Mail, Headpiece, Helmet,
Scull, Gorget, Gauntl^t, Habergeon, etc. Armorer, Armory.
Special; for Offense. Comminus, near hand; being either for Striking chiefly;
whether bruising: or cutting. 2.
CLUB, Bat, Batoon, Battle-ax, Mace, Pole-ax, Cudgel. SWORD, Scimitar, Hanger,
Rapier, Tuck, Poniard, Stilletto, Dagger, Fauchion, Glave, Cutler.
Thrusting chiefly; of which the latter is sometimes used for striking. 3.
PIKE, Spear, Lance, Iavelin, run at tilt. HALBERT, Partizan, Trident.

Eminus, at a distance; whether Ancient and less artificial; denoting either
the Instrument giving the force, being of a curved figure and elastical power;
to be held in the hand, either immediately: or by the stock to which it is
fixed. 4.
BOW, shoot, Archer, Fletcher. CROSS-BOW, shoot.
Instrument or Weapon projected; whether immediately out of the hand: or
mediately from something else. 5.
DART, Iavelin, Harping-iron. ARROW, Shaft, Bolt.

Modern and more artificial, (i.) Firearms; denoting either the Vessels giving
the force; according to the name of the whole kind: or of the bigger kind. 6.
GUN, shoot, Snaphance, Fire-lock, Musket, Carbine, Blunderbuss, Piece,
Arquebus, Petronel, Pistol, Dagg, Potgun, play upon. ORDNANCE, Cannon,
Artillery, Saker, Minion, Basilisk, Drake, etc. shoot.
Vtensils; signifying the thing enkindling: or enkindled. 7.
MATCH, Tinder, Touchwood, Spunk. POWDER, Gunpowder.
Things discharged; either so^^d: or hollow. 8.
BULLET, Ball, Pellet, Shot. GRANADO, Petard.



Defense: 9.
BUCKLER, Shield, Target.




VI. Such kind of Places, together with such kind of Contrivances belonging to
them, as relate to a state of War, VI. MILITARY PLACES.
may be styled MILITARY PLACES or Works, (Munitions, Fortifications, fenced,
Hold, dismantle.)

To which may be adjoined for its affinity the common notion of such things as
are used for the fencing of Places; SEPIMENT, Wall, Pale, Fence, Enclosure,
Fold, Mound.

These may be distinguished into such as are More principal; Comprehending the
Area contained within them. Greater; in Country: or Town. 1.
CAMP, encamp, quarter. GARRISON.
Less; more independent: or dependent. 2.
SCONCE, Fortress, Platform, Fort. BLOCK-HOUSE, Fort, Bastion, Strong-hold.

Not comprehending the Area contained within them. General; denoting a Sepiment
Ridge-like of Earth: or Furrow-like in the Earth. 3.
RAMPIRE, Wall, Bulwark, Line, Counterscarf, Mound, Out-work. DITCH, Dike,
Fosse, Trench, Mote.
Special; signifying the outward: or inward Wall. 4.
VAUMURE. LINING.


Less principal; whether Parts. G^eater; either of a round: or many-angled
figure. 5.
HALF MOON. HORN-WORK.
Lesser; either angular to defend the sides of a place: or the straight sides
to be so defended. 6.
REDOUBT. FLANKER.

Accessions; belonging to the Out-parts* being a series of great Pins erected:
or Holes dug in the earth. 7.
PALLISADO. FURNACE-HOLE.
Entrance; Military Doors to shut transverse: or to let down direct. 8.
TURNPIKE. PORTCULLIS.
Walls; signifying an erect crenated Margo upon the Walls; either built upon
them: or made by setting on Baskets filled with earth. 9.
PARAPET. GABION.





NAVAL RELATION.
. IV.
THe Head of Naval Relation is intended to comprehend the various Notions and
Expressions, belonging to men's affairs and traffic on the Waters; respecting
either Things. KINDS OF VESSELS used for Passage. I. Parts of Vessels; relating
to such as serve for Containing; HULL. II. PROGRESSIVE MOTION OR STAYING. III.
RIGGING. IV.

PERSONS. V. ACTIONS. VI.


^ KINDS OF VESSELS.
I. The KINDS OF VESSELS which are used for passage on the Waters, are in
several Countries of so great variety and names, by reason of their being
distinguished by some little accidental Differences, that it will be very
difficult for the most expert person to give a sufficient enumeration of them:
and therefore I shall in this place distribute them only according to their
various Magnitudes, and the Uses for which they are designed: according to
which they may be distinguished into such as are denoted under the General
name; belonging to the lesser, or greater kind. 1.
BOAT, Oars, Wherry, Sculler, Canoe, Cockboat, Waterman. SHIP, Pink, Pinnace,
Shallop, Sail, Vessel, Navy, Fleet, naval.
Particular kinds; either Lesser for the Sea, or greater for Rivers. 2.
KETCH, Bark, Flyboat.. BARGE, Lighter, Gallyfoist, Brigandine, etc.
Greater; being moved either by Sails and Oars. 3.
GALLY.
Sails only; and used chiefly for Burden. 4.
GALEOT, Caramosil, Carrack, Caravel.
Traffic and Merchandise. 5.
MERCHANT-MAN, Bottom.
Fighting. 6.
MAN OF WAR, Frigot, Caper, Armada, Privateer.
Passage. 7.
PACQUET-BOAT.






II. By HULL is meant the main Bulk or Body of the Ship, considered abstractly
from its Masts and Rigging. II. HULL.
The parts of which may be distinguished into such as relate to Timbers. Fixed
at the Bottom of the Ship; lying either direct, or transverse. 1.
KEEL. RUNG.
End; either the former, or hinder part. 2.
STEM, Prow. STERN, Poop.

Movable upon a Center or Hindge; for lifting up the Anchor or any great
weight: or for stearing the Ship. 3.
CAPSTAIN. RUDDER, Helm, Steer.

Places or rooms; relating to the Former, or hinder part above. 4.
FORE-CASTLE. ROUND-HOUSE.
Middle space; betwixt the Main mast and Fore-castle, or the rooms built above
this toward the Stem. 5.
WAST. HALF-DECK.

Apertures; in the Floor or Deck, supplying the office of Doors and Windows;
greater, or lesser. 6.
HATCHES. SCUTTLE, Gratings.
Sides; for putting out the Ordnance, or for passage of Water from the Deck, 7.
PORTHOLE. SCUPPER.

Interstices; betwixt the edges of the planks, or the side-timbers of the Ship.
8.
SEAM. SPURKET.
Shape or figure of the Hull; with respect to the gathering or joining together
of the planks upon the Ship's quarter under water, or so much of the Hull as
hangs over both ends of the Keel; styled 9.
RAKE OF POST, Tuck. RAKE OF STEM.



III. Parts of Vessels serving chiefly for the PROGRESSIVE MOTION or Staying of
them, may be distinguished, by the matter of which they consist, III. Parts for
PROGRESSIVE MOTION.
into such as are of Wood; according to the more General names; denoting such
woody parts as are either Fixed and upright; or the upper parts of these, round
and prominent. 1.
MAST. TOP, Boul.
Moveable and transverse; applied either to the top, or bottom of the Sail. 2.
YARD. BOOM.
Separate; serving for thrusting against the Water, or the Earth. 3.
OAR, row. POLE.

Particular kinds of Masts; (applicable likewise to Top, Yard, and Sails,)
being placed either in the Forepart; whether leaning, or upright. 4.
BOUL-SPRIT. FOREMAST.
Middle, or hinder-part. 5.
MAINMAST. MIZZEN-MAST.


Cloth; serving for the Catching and opposing the Wind; either principally, or
additionally. 6.
SAIL, Course. BONNET, Drabler.
Distinction of Nations, or the several Officers of a Navy; set up either
above, on the Masts, or below, at the Stern. 7.
FLAG. ANCIENT.
Ornament and show, or used to mark out the Wind's quarter. 8.
STREAMER. JACK.

Iron; for staying and holding the Ship, or the fastening of it to other Ships.
9.
ANCHOR, Kedger. GRAPPLE.



IV. RIGGING
IV. By RIGGING is meant the several kinds of Cordage belonging to a Ship; in
respect of the Masts; serving either for the Keeping them upright; namely, that
are more declive on either side of the Masts: or those that are more
transverse. 1.
SHROUDS, Puttocks. STAYS.
Ascent up to them; those smaller ropes which cross the Shrouds as the rounds
of a Ladder. 2.
RATLINGS.

Yards; serving for the Tying of them: or the pulling of them to and fro. 3.
PARREL. JEARS.
Squaring or transversing: or making them to hang higher or lower. 4.
BRACES. LIFTS.

Sails; serving for the Tying of them to the Yards: or the pulling them to and
fro. 5.
ROBINS. SHEATS.
Furling them across: or to raise up the bunt or protuberant part of the Sail.
6.
BRALE. BUNT-LINE.
Making of them to stand closer by a wind; being fastened either to the Clew or
corner of the Sail: or the middle part of it. 7.
TACKS. BOWLINE.

Anchor; according to the more general name: or the name belonging to the
lesser kind of such ropes. 8.
CABLE. HAWSER, Halser.



V NAVAL PERSONS.
V. PERSONS belonging to the management of NAVAL Affairs, Mariners,
Seafaring-men, may be distributed into such whose Charge does concern the
Defense of the Ship by fighting; either More principal; the Chief, who in Fight
is to make good the Half-deck: or his Deputy, whose place in Fight is the
Fore-castle. 1.
CAPTAIN. LIEUTENANT.
Less principal; having the charge of the Squadrons for the Watch: or being to
take care for the setting and relieving of the Watch, and that the Soldiers
keep their Arms clean. 2.
QUARTERMASTER. CORPORAL.
Ordnance, Shot, Powder, etc. 3.
GUNNER.


Sailing of the Ship, and the care of its parts and Lading; either More
principal; whose charge it is to Direct the course, and command all the
Sailors: or to bring the Ship safe to harbor. 4.
MASTER. PILOT.
Keep account of the Goods, what is received and delivered. 5.
CAPE-MERCHANT. PURSER.
Preserve the Rigging and Tackle and the Longboat: or to attend the Skiff with
a peculiar gang to go to and fro upon occasion. 6.
BOATSWAIN. COCKSWAIN.

Less principal; serving to Keep the Decks clean. 7.
SWABBER.
Manage the Sails below: or to ascend for taking in the Topsails, etc. 8.
SAILERS, Mid-ship-men, Skipper. YONKERS, Fore-mast-men.





VI. NAVAL ACTIONS may be distinguished into such as are done VI. NAVAL ACTIONS.
To the Ship; for the Securing of the Seams betwixt the Planks; either by
beating in of Okum, (i.) pieces of old Ropes or hards of Flax: or putting a
list of Canvas along the Seam, and then pouring hot Pitch upon it. 1.
CALKING. PARSLING.
Smoothing the outside; by washing or burning off all the filth with REEDS or
Broom; or smearing over so much of the Ship as is to be in the water with a
mixture of Tallow, Soap and Brimstone, boiled together, to preserve the
Calking, and to make the Vessel more slippery for passage. 2.
BROMING, Breaming. GRAVING.
Defending it against Worms; by casing that part of the Hull within water with
Tar and Hair, and then nailing over thin Boards: or enlarging the Breadth, by
ripping off some of the Planks; and then, having added other Timbers, to put on
the Planks again, styled 3.
SHEATHING. FURRING.
Varying the Position of a Ship; either for the mending of it, by making it to
lie on one side, the better to come at its lower parts: or for the motion of
it, by so ordering the Lading and Rigging that it may be in the best condition
for sailing. 4.
CAREENING. TRIMMING.

By the Ship; either Resting; when it is staid by the Anchor: or laid leaning to
one side. 5.
RIDING AT ANCHOR. HULLING.
In motion; either more Direct; when it goes as it should: or runs its head in
the wind more or less then it should. 6.
KEEPING A WIND. GRIPING. FALLING TO THE LEEWARD.

Lateral; when it does lean too much on one side: or does turn too much on each
side. 7.
HEELING, seeling. ROLLING.





ECCLESIASTICAL RELATION.
. V.
UNder this Head of ECCLESIASTICAL RELATION ( Clergy, Spiritual, Church,) are
comprehended the several Notions and respects belonging to a Church State. By
Church is meant a Society of men as agreeing in the same kind of inward
apprehensions of, and external demeanor toward, the Divine Nature: to which
may be opposed the word TEMPORAL, Civil, Humane, Secular, Lay, Profane.

Notions of this kind, may be distinguished into such as do denote KINDS OF
RELIGION. I. Persons; in regard of their ECCLESIASTICAL CALLINGS. II. STATES OF
RELIGION. III.
Actions; belonging to WORSHIP. IV. DISCIPLINE. V.

INSTITUTIONS. VI.


I. RELIGION.
I. That habit of reverence toward the Divine nature, whereby we are enabled
and inclined to serve and worship him after such a manner as we conceive most
acceptable to him, is called RELIGION, Piety, Godliness. The Privation of which
is styled ATHEISM, Irreligion, Impiety.

Men are distinguished by their kinds of Religion into such as Are wholly
without any revelation of the true God and his Worship; but that knowledge
which they have is either Simple, from the dictates of mere Reason. 1.
NATURAL RELIGION.
Mixed, and corrupted with the worship of false gods. 2.
PAGANISM, Heathenism, Ethnic, Infidel, Gentil, Painim.

Have revelations: or pretend to them; whether by Moses, in which they rest. 3.
JUDAISM, Iudaical, Jew.
Christ and his Apostles, added to Moses. 4
CHRISTIANITY.
Mahomet, superadded to the rest. 5.
MAHOMETISM, Turcism.




II. Those who apply themselves to the businesses of Religion as their
particular Calling, may be styled ECCLESIASTICAL PERSONS, II. ECCLESIASTICAL
PERSONS.
Clergy, Churchman, spiritual, Hierarchy.

To which may be opposed, TEMPORAL, Lay-ic, civil, secular, profane.

These may be distinguished into such as are Enjoined; being set apart to some
peculiar function in the Church, and by way of office devoted to assist in the
duties of Religion, whether such as were in use Before the Law; being the chief
Administrators of religious Services, as Masters of Families: or such others as
then and since were extraordinarily called and gifted to foretell future
things. 1.
PATRIARCH. PROPHET- ical, divine, prophecy, foretell, presage, prognosticate,
Prediction, Seer, Sibyl.
Under the Law; appointed for the principal works of divine Service: or such as
were subordinate and assistant to them. 2.
PRIEST. LEVITE- ical.
Under the Gospel; being either Temporary; who were first endued with the power
of Miracles, of whom there were only twelve: or such others as these took in
for their help, to travel up and down for the spreading of Christianity. 3.
APOSTLES- ical. EVANGELISTS- ical, Gospel.
Permanent, and to be continued; whether More principal; denoting the chief
Ecclesiastical Officer of a Province, with several Cities: or some particular
City and the Territory adjoining. 4.
PRIMATE, Arch bishop, Metropolitan, Mufty, Patriarch, Province. BISHOP,
Prelate, Ordinary, Episcopal-acy, Suffragan, Superintendent, Pontificial,
Diocese, See, Cathedral, Mitre, Crosyer, Hierarchy.
Less principal; such as are the chief Officers of particular Parish-churches:
or others subordinate and assistant to these. 5.
PRESBYTER, Priest, Elder, Minister, Incumbent, Curate, Chaplain, Parson.
DEACON, Minister.



Not enjoined; but voluntary, to be further distinguished, according to the
General name; denoting those that are under a vow of Poverty, Coelibate, and
obedience to their Superiors, to whom may be adjoined for affinity, such
others as oblige themselves to certain offices with them. 6.
REGULAR, Religious Person, order, rule. PENITENTS, Confraternity, Convert.
Particular kinds; such as live either together in Society: or alone by
themselves. 7.
MONK, Frier-ry, Nunn-ery, Novice, Abbot, Abbess, Abbey, Prior-ry, General,
Provincial, Guardian, Monastic, Monastery, Minster, Cloister, Covent, Society,
Cowle, Father. HERMIT, Anchorite, Cell, Recluse.




III. STATES OF RELIGION.
III. Persons considered according to their several STATES and Conditions in
respect OF RELIGION, may be distinguished either by their Faith and Judgments;
whether true, or false, as to the essential points of Religion. 1.
ORTHODOX, Believer. HERETIC- al, Heresy, Miscreant.
Charity to and communion with the body of those that agreee in the same
Profession: or being the faulty cause of the breach of such Communion. 2.
CATHOLIC, Communicant, Communion, Son of the Church. SCHISMATIC,
Schism-atical, Sect-ary, Recusant, Separate.
Suffering upon the account of Religion; being either Great, but not unto
Death. 3.
CONFESSOR.
Great unto Death. To which may be opposed the inflicter of sufferings upon
account of Religion. 4.
MARTYR- dom. PERSEQUUTOR:
Eminent degrees of Religiousness: or Irreligiousness. 5.
SAINT, Hero-ical, canonize. SCANDAL- ous, profligate, Offense.
Former state, in respect of the several terms from which and to which men are
changed; either from bad to good: or from good to bad. 6.
CONVERT, Proselyte, regenerate, reclaim, turn, come over. APOSTATE,
Back-slider, Renegado, Defection, revolt, draw back, turn, forsake, fall away,
relapse, Fugitive, Tergiversation.



IV. That inward and outward reverence whereby we acknowledge the Esteem due to
the Superiority and Excellency of another, IV. WORSHIP.
together with the two extremes of this, viz. Redundant, when men give this to
such things as they ought not for the Matter, or in such a degree as they ought
not for the Measure; and Deficient, when men do either contemn or neglect
sacred things and duties, are styled WORSHIP, Adoration, Veneration, Devotion,
devout, Liturgy, Divine service, Mattins, Vespers, Even-song. SUPERSTITION,
Bigot. PROFANENESS, Impiety, impious, ungodly.



The more special acts of Worship may be distinguished into such as are more
Ordinary and constant; whereby we Apply our selves to God; whether more
General; whereby we address to him for relief in all our wants and fears, upon
the belief of his infinite Goodness and Power: or making solemn and religious
promises to him. 1.
PRAYER, Invocation, Collect, Orizon, Oratory, Ejaculation, call upon. VOW,
Votary, devoted.
Special; whereby we do either Acknowledge our own faults and deserts: or
entreat his favor and help. 2.
CONFESSION, acknowledge, Shreeve. PETITION, supplicate, sue, beg, Litany,
crave, request, Supplyant, Bedes-man, Boon.
Return our acknowledgements to him for the good things we enjoy; either more
general: or by Singing. 3.
THANKSGIVING, praise, magnify, extol, Grace. PSALM, Hymn, Anthem.


Instruct others publicly, or excite them to religious duties; either in a more
continued solemn Discourse: or by the asking and answering of Questions in the
plainest manner about the most necessary points of Religion. 4.
PREACHING, Homily, Sermon, Postil, Pulpit. CATECHIZING, Catechism.

Occasional; relating unto Solemnities of joy: or sadness. 5.
FESTIVITY, Festival, Holy Day, High-day, Sabbath, Iubilee, Wake, genial, good
time. FASTING, Humiliation, Ember-week, Lent, Vigil, Eve.
Ritual Offices observed amongst Christians; pertaining to Entrance into the
state of Wedlock: or dissolving of that state. 6.
MARRIAGE, Wedd-ing, Matrimony, nuptial, Bridegroom, Hymen. DIVORCE.
Return into the Congregation after Parturition. 7.
CHURCHING.
Actual taking upon themselves the Obligation made by their Sponsors in
Baptism. 8.
CONFIRMATION.
Performing the Rites due to the Dead by putting their bodies into the ground:
or under some Monument, to preserve the memorial of them. 9.
BURYING, interr, Grave, Funeral, Obit, Obsequies, Hearse, Sepulture,
Churchyard, Charnel-house. ENTOMBING, Tomb, Sepulcher, Monument, Epitaph.





V. DISCIPLINE.
V. Actions relating to Ecclesiastical Authority or DISCIPLINE, do concern the
due ordering of the circumstances of Ecclesiastical or Sacred things to the
best convenience. The Notions belonging to this Head, do refer either to the
work of, Setting things aside to a peculiar use; according to the More general
Notion belonging to Things, and Times, and Places, as well as Persons; namely,
the separating of them from common use: or abusing them as being but common. 1.
CONSECRATION, sacred, sanctify, hallow, devote, dedica^e, Holiness.
PROFANATION, unhallowed, impious, common, Lustration.
More particular kind, appropriated to Persons. 2.
ORDINATION, Consecration, DEPRIVATION, depose.

Regulating of abuses in Ecclesiastical matters; according to the more General
name. 3.
CENSURE.
Particular kinds; consisting in a Temporary privation of Church Priviledges. 4.
SUSPENSION.
Permanent, being the highest Ecclesiastical punishment; by a cutting off from
all Church Communion and privileges: or the restoring one so cut off. 5.
EXCOMMUNICATION, Anathema, Curse, cut off, separate. ABSOLVTION, loosing,
discharge, assoile, purge, clear pardon, acquit.





VI. INSTITUTIONS.
VI. By INSTITUTIONS or Ordinan^^s are properly meant such kinds of things or
duties as we could not have known or been obliged unto without particular
Revelation. These may be distinguished into Rules for our Instruction in
Religion; which, according to the several manners of conveyance, were either
written: or unwritten. 1.
SCRIPTURE, Bible, Word of God, Holy Writ, Text, Testament. TRADITION,
Delivery, Cabala.
Services to be done; according to the more General name; consisting in our
offering or giving things unto God. 2.
OBLATION, Offering, Offertory.
Particular kind, proper to the times under the Law; which required the
offering of such things by Fire as were either for Food: or for Perfume. 3.
SACRIFICE, Victim, Holocaust, Host, Oblation, Hecatombe. INCENSE, Censor.

Certain external signs and means for the signifying and conveying of internal
spiritual Grace; according to the more General name. 4.
SACRAMENT- al.
Particular kinds. Under the Law; for the initiating: or confirming men in that
Religion. 5.
CIRCUMCISION, Cutting off the foreskin. PASSOVER. Paschal, Easter.
Under the Gospel; whether for initiating: or confirming. 6.
BAPTISM, Christen, Font, Paedobaptism EUCHARIST, Communion, the Lord's Supper,
The Sacrament, Host, Mass, Missal.





CHAP. XII. I. A general Explication of the design of the foregoing Tables. II.
Particular Instances in the six principal heads of it. III. Some things to be
noted concerning Opposites and Synonyma. IV. An enumeration of what kinds of
things are not to be particularly provided for in such tables.
THe principal design aimed at in these Tables, is to give a sufficient
enumeration of all such things and notions,. I*
as are to have names assigned to them, and withal so to contrive these as to
their order, that the place of every thing may contribute to a description of
the nature of it. Denoting both the General and the Particular head under which
it is placed; and the Common difference whereby it is distinguished from other
things of the same kind.

It would indeed be much more convenient and advantageous, if these Tables
could be so contrived, that every difference amongst the Predicaments might
have a transcendental denomination, and not depend at all upon a numerical
institution. But I much doubt, whether that Theory of things already received,
will admit of it; nor does Language afford convenient terms, by which to
express several differences.

It were likewise desirable to a perfect definition of each species, that the
immediate form which gives the particular essence to every thing might be
expressed; but this form being a thing which men do not know, it cannot be
expected that it should be described. And therefore in the stead of it, there
is reason why men should be content with such a description by properties and
circumstances, as may be sufficien^ to determine the primary sense of the thing
defined.

Of these descriptions I shall ^^re give an instance under each of the six
Principal Heads.. II.


The word Goodness is a transcendental, TRANSCENDENTAL.
one of the General differences of things, or affections of entity, implying a
respect to something without it self, namely, to the Will, by agreement to
which things are rendered lovely and desirable, as by their disagreement they
are rendered hateful and avoidable, which is the opposite notion of Evil.

The word Diamond does by its place in the Tables appear to be a Substance, a
Stone, a precious Stone, transparent, colorless, SUBSTANCE.
most hard and bright.

The word Flower or blossom is one of the peculiar parts, belonging to Plants,
an annual part, more principal, antecedent to the seed, considerable for its
beauty and color.

The words Newness and Oldness do signify notions belonging to Quantity, to
space, to time, and more particularly to time past, QUANTITY.
according to the degrees of less or greater, as the next pair, soonness and
lateness, does relate to time future, according to the same degrees of Less or
Greater.

The word Moderation is a Quality, a Habit, QUALITY.
an Affection of intellectual virtue, whereby we are concerned for any truth*
according to a due measure, not more or less then the evidence and importance
of it does require, to which the notion of fierceness or fanaticalness is
opposed as the d^ficient extreme.

ACTION.
The word Pity, does by its place denote an Action, spiritual, of the soul in
respect of the Appetite, whose actions are commonly styled Affections or
Passions: It Is a mixed Passion, consisting of Grief and Love, occasioned by
some evil, which (as we think) does unworthily befall others. As Envy does of
Grief and Hate upon account of some good befalling others (as we think)
unworthily.

RELATION.
The word Parent by the place of it in the Tables, does denote the thing thereby
signified* to be a Relation, Oeconomical, of Consanguinity, direct ascending;
as Child is direct descending.

And thus is it with all those other particulars, which are placed either
directly or collaterally, either by way of Opposition or of Affinity.

Only it is here to be noted.

. III.
1. That some of those which are placed as Opposites, do not always fall out to
be under the same Predicament or Genus with those things to which they are
adjoined; as it must be in such things as are privatively opposed, as
Blindness, Deafness, Darkness, etc. And so likewise for some of those species
which are put in for their affinity, as Point, Center, Pole, and such other
things as are not directly, but reductively only under any predicament.

2. That some Radixes, besides the redundant and deficient extremes, have
likewise an Opposite common; so to the word Justice, there is opposed an
Opposite common, Injustice, besides the excess Rigor, and the defect Remission.
So to Veracity, the Opposite common is lying; which may be either by way of
Excess, over-saying, boasting, flattering: or of Defect, under-saying,
detraction. So to Equality, the Opposite common is Inequality, imparity,
disparity; the excess of which is Superiority, and the defect Inferiority. This
is natural to all Radixes that have double Opposites, though instituted
Languages have not provided words to express it.

3. Many of the Synonymous word^ put to the Radixes, are referred to more heads
then one, upon account of their various equivocal acceptions. And besides such
words or phrases as are more plainly Synonymous, there is likewise an addition
of such other, as are either more immediate derivations, whether Adjectives,
Verbs, Adverbs: or more mediate, being by composition to be made off from those
Radixes to which they are adjoined: Of which I shall give an instance or two,
under each of the six general Heads.

TRANSCENDENTALS.
In the Table of Transcendentals, T. III. 2. the Radical is GOODNESS, to which
these other words are adjoined, Weal, welfare, right, regular, well, rectify,
better, best. Amongst which, the words Weal, welfare, are mentioned as
Synonoma, denoting such a state of being as is desirable, and are supposed to
be Substantives Neuter. Well-doing or Good action, is the Substan. Act. The
words Good, right, regular, are the Positive adjectives from the root. Better,
best, are the Comparative and Superlative adjectives. Well, right, etc. are the
Adverbs. Rectify is good make, and to be expressed by composition with the
Transcendental particle of Cause.

So for the Opposite to this, EVI^NESS to which these words are adjoined, Ill,
bad, naught, wrong, amiss, shrewd, scurvy, lewd, horrid, horrible, corrupt,
pravity, deprave, sin, fault, trespass, transgress-ion, Peccadillo, worse.
Amongst which, the words Badness, pravity, are Synonymous to the Radicals, and
supposed to be Substantives newter. The words Sin, fault, trespass,
trangression, will be Substan. Act. which being compounded with the
Transcendental Particle, Diminutive or Augmentative, will denote a Peccadillo
or small fault, or an Enormity or heinous crime. The words Evil ill, bad,
naught, wrong, corrupt, are Adjectives of this root, and being compounded with
the Transcendental Particle of Augmentative, will be of the same importance
with those other words, Shrewd, scurvy, lewd, horrid, horrible, etc. The words
Ill, amiss, wrong, badly, naughtily, are the Adverbs. The words denoting to
sin, trespass, transgress, are the Verb. Act. which being compounded with the
Transcendental Particle of Cause, will signify Corrupt, deprave.

So in the Tables of Substance, Be. II. 1. the Radical is KINE, SUBSTANCE.
signifying the Bovinum genus; the other words reduced to it are, Bull, Cow,
Ox, Calf, Heifer, Bullock, Steer, Beef, Veal, Runt, Bellow, Low, Heard,
Cowheard. Some of which are to be made off from this root by compositions with
the Transcendental Particles. So the Root Kine with the Transcendent. Part.
will signify Male. Bull, Bullock, Steer. Female. COW, Heifer, Steer. Young.
Calf. Voice Bellow, Low. Dimin. Runt. Aggregate Heard. Officer. Cowheard.
The rest are to be made off by other Compositions: So Ox is untesticled or
gelt Bull; Beef, Veal, is the flesh of Kine or Calf.

Be. II. 2 The Radical is SHEEP; to which are adjoined the words, Ram, Yew,
Lamb, Weather, Mutton, Bleat, Fold, Flock, Shepherd. Each of which words are
to be made off from this radical, ^y some kind of compositions. The word Sheep
being compounded with the Transcend. Particle of will signify Male. Ram.
Female. Yew. Young. Lamb. Voice. Bleating. Sepiment. Fold, Sheepfold.
Aggregate. Flock. Officer. Shepherd.
Gelt Ram is Weather, Flesh of Sheep is Mutton.

Mag. III. A. the Radical is FIGURE, QUANTITY.
to which these other words are annexed, viz. Shape, Feature, Fashion, Form,
Frame, Scheme, Lineament, the make, well set or proportioned, transform,
transfigure, deface, disfigure. Amongst which the former words, Shape, Feature,
Fashion, Form, Frame, Scheme, Lineament, the make, are, according to one of
those senses wherein each of them is commonly used, the more mediate Synonyma,
the rest are to be made off by composition, either with Transcendental
particles of the word change, transform, transfigure. Perfective, well-set or
proportioned. Corruptive, defaced, disfigured.



Sp. I. 1. The Radical is PRESENT, to which is adjoined, at this time, now,
immediately, instantly, current, ready. The more immediate Synonyma are, This
time or instant. The words Current, ready, are Adjectives. Now, immediately,
instantly, are the Adverbs of this root.

One of the Opposites to this Radical, is PAST, or time past; to which these
other words are put, Expired, former, foregone, ago, already, even now,
heretofore gone, over, out, a-late, erewhile, long since, which are thus to be
made off. The words Expired, former, foregone, over, out, are the Adjectives of
this root. The words already, heretofore, out, are the Adverbs, which being
compounded with the Transcendental Particle.

Augment. will signify. A great while ago, long since. Dimin. will signify.
Even now, a-late, erewhile, a little while ago.
The other Opposite is FUTURE, to which these words are adjoined, Time to come,
after time, hereafter, presently, anon, by and by, shortly* straitway, ere
long, henceforth, process of time, after a long while. Amongst which these
words or phrases, Time to come, after time, process of time, are Synonymous
substantives. Hereafter, henceforth, are Adverbs, which being compounded with
the Transcendental Particle of Augment* will signify After a long while.
Diminut. will signify Presently, by and by, anon, shortly, straitway, ere long.


Sp. II. 3. is the Radical NEARNESS, to which these other words are added,
Vicinity, Propinquity, Proximity, nigh, next* close, adjacent, adjoyn,
neighboring, imminent, impendent, immediate, ready at hand, accost, draw on,
approach, at, by, hard by, beside, hithermost. Amongst which, the words
Vicinity, Propinquity, Proximity, are Synonymous substantives. Nigh, close,
adjacent, adjoining, neighboring, imminent, impendent, immediate, next,
hithermost, are Adjectives. By, hard by, at, at hand, besides, are Adverbs.
Approach, accost, draw near or on, are Verbs.

So for the Opposite to this, REMOTENESS, to which are adjoined the words,
far, farther, aloof, wide of, distant, utmost, ultimate, great way off.
Amongst which the words, far, farther, distant, utmost, ultimate, are
Adjectives. Aloof, wide of, a great way off, are Adverbs.

QUALITY.
NP. II. 3. the radical word is MEMORY, to which these other words are adjoined,
Recollect, recall commemorate, remember, call or come to mind, put in mind,
suggest, record, recount, con over, getting by heart, by rote, without book, at
ones fingers ends, memorable, Memorial, Memorandum, mindful. Amongst which the
words, Remember, commemorate, record, recount, are Verbs, which being
compounded with the Transc. Particle. Cause, will signify Suggest, put in
mind, or cause to remember. Endeavor. will signify. For the present, Recall,
recollect, call to mind. Endeavor. will signify. For the future, Con over,
get by heart, by rote, etc.
Mindful is an Adject. Neut. Memorable is an Adj. Pass. Abstr. Memorandum,
Memorial, is to be compounded with the Transcend. Part. Sign, denoting a Sign
for remembrance.

NP. V. 9. the Radical is SWIFTNESS, to which these other words are adjoined,
Fleetness, Celerity, Speed, fast, apace, quick, sudden, rapid, hurry,
accelerate, hasten, cursory, hye, expedite, run, scud, whisk, post. Amongst
which the words, Fleetness, Celerity, Speed, are Synonymous subst. Quick,
sudden, fast, rapid, expedite, cursory, are Adj. Apace, quickly-er, are
Adverbs. Hye, hasten, run, post, hurry, scud, whisk, are Verbs. Accelerate,
expedite, as also hasten, hurry, when they denote a Transitive efficiency, are
to be expressed by composition with the Transc. ^article of Cause or make.

So for the Opposite to this, SLOWNESS; to which are adjoined the words,
Heaviness, slackness, dull, slugg, tardy, leasurely, softly, dilatory, retard,
foreslow, delay, Lob, Lubber, lumpish, Lurdan, torpid, unwieldy, gingerly. The
words, Slackness, heaviness, are Synonymous substantives. Dull, sluggish,
tardy, lumpish, torpid, unwieldy, dilatory, are the Adjectives of this root;
which being compounded with the Transc. partic. of Person, will be of the same
signification with those other words, Slugg, Lob, Lubber, Lurdan.

The words, Slowly, leasurely, softly, gingerly, are the Adverbs of this
Radical. Retard, soreslow, delay, are the Verbs.

So Man. I. O. the Radical word is VICE; to which these other words are
reduced, Sin, Crime, Dishonesty, Improbity, Trespass, Transgression, Fault,
Failing, Infirmity, oversight, turpitude, unrighteous, unjust, vile, base,
loose, evil, ill, bad, naught, corrupt, venial, wicked, heinous, debaucht,
lewd, lawless, licentious, fowl, flagitious, enormous, Profligate, Miscreant,
Ruffian, Caitiff, Villain, Rakehell, Libertine, defile, pollute, which are thus
to be made off from this root.

The words Sin, Dishonesty, Improbity, are Subst. N. Trespass, Transgression,
are Substant. Ad. which Substantives being compounded with the Transcendental
Particle. Augment will signify Crime, Enormity, Turpitude. Dim will signify
Fault, Infirmity, Failing, Oversight.
Evil, ill, bad, naught, corrupt, vicious, unrighteous, unjust, are the
Adject. Neut. which being compounded with the Transcend. Particle, Augment.
will be of the same importance with those other words, Base, Foul, Lewd,
Filthy, debauched, flagitious, Enormious, profligate, heinous, mortal. If it
be compounded with the Transcendental Particle Dim* it will signify Venial. If
with the Transc. Partic. for Person, it signifies, Ruffian, Villain, Rake-hell,
Libertine, Miscreant, Caitiffe. Corrupt, defile, pollute, debauch, are the Verb
compounded with the Transcendental Particle of Cause, or Make.


In the Tables of Action. AS. V.4. O. The Radical is GRIEF; ACTION*
to which are adjoined the words, Sadness, Sorrow, Melancholy, Heaviness,
doleful, deplorable, disconsolate, bitter, pensive, dejected, tragical,
rufull, amort, moan, bemoan, wail, bewail, lament, dump, cast down, vex,
trouble, Cut, take on, whimper, pule, woe, agony, anguish, mourn, cry, take
heavily. Which are thus to be made off from the Root.

The Words. Sadness, sorrow, Heaviness, Melancholy, Trouble, are Synonymous
Subst. which being compounded with the Transc. Particle Augmentative, will
express those other words, Anguish, woe, Agony. Pensive, sad, Heavy,
Melancholy, sorrowful, dejected, disconsolate, cast down, are Adjectives;
which being compounded as the former, will be of the same importance with those
other words, Doleful, rufull, bitter, tragical. Deplorable, doleful, may be
the Adject. P. Abst. Moan, bemoan, wail, bewail, lament, mourn, cry, plain, are
the Verb of this Root, which in some Acceptions is to be compounded with the
Transcendental Particle of Sign. Take on, take heavily, Verbs to be compounded
with the Transcendental Particle Augment. whimper, pule, whine, Verbs to be
compounded with the Transcendental Particle Dimin.
Vex, Cut, cast down, are Verbs Active. Dump, all amort, to be compounded with
the Transc. Partic. Impetus.


AC. I. 7. O. The Radical is DYING; to which these other words are adjoined,
Death, deadly, mortal, fatal, dye, decease, depart* expire* give up the
ghost, defunct, kill, slay, mortify, dispatch, slaughter, mortality, Capital;
which are thus to be made off.

Death is Subst. N. Mortality is Subst. N. Abst. Slaughter is the Subst.
compounded with the Particle Cause. Dead, defunct, is Adj N. Deadly, fatal,
mortal, capital, is Adj. A. Abst. Dye, decease, depart, expire, give up the
Ghost, is the Verb; which being compounded with the Transcendental Particle
Cause or make, will signify to Kill, slay, dispatch, mortify.
AC. III. 1. The Radical is SPEAKING; to which these words are adjoined, Talk,
utter-ance, mention, Elocution, pronounce, express, deliver, Prolation,
Spokesman, effable, voluble, fluent say, tell, mutter, mumble, jabber, jargon,
Vein, Grammar, Rhetoric, Oratory, Eloquence, Prolocutor, nuncupative, by word
of mouth.

Talking, Telling, Saying, Expressing, Delivering, Mentioning, are Substant.
Synonymous to the Radical; which being compounded with the Transc. Particle of
Manner, will denote the sense of those other words which denote a respect to
the mode of speaking, viz. Elocution, Pronunciation, Utterance, Vien: And being
compounded with the Particle Officer, it signifies, Proloquutor. If with the
Particle Art, it may denote the several Acts of speaking. So the Art of
speaking congruously is Grammar; ornately is Rhetoric, Eloquence; Perswadingly
is Oratory, Eloquence. If with the Particle Corruptive, it may signify,
Muttering, Mumbling, Iabber, Iargon. The words Fluency, Volubility, are the
Subst. Abst. Act. with the Particle Perfective. Nuncupative-ly, by word of
mouth, are the Adj. and Adv. of this root. Talk, tell, say, utter, are the
Verbs. Spokesman, is the pro, or instead, speaking person.

AC. III. 7. The Radical is WRITING; to which these other words are annexed,
Penning, Drawing, Engrossing, Hand, Manuscript, subscribe, superscribe,
inscribe, transcribe, postscript, interline, indorse, scrawle, scrible, Penman,
Scribe, Scrivener, Secretary, Clerk, Note, Ticket, Docket, Shorthand,
Tachygraphy, Brachygraphy, Cryptography, set ones hand, set down, take or put
in writing, enter into book.

Which words are thus to be made off from this root. The words Penning,
drawing, and the Phrases, set ones hand, take or put in writing, enter into
book, are the more immediate Synonyma of the Radical. Hand, Manuscript,
draught, are the Substantive Passive.

The Words Scribe, Penman, Writer Adj. Act. Secretary, Clerk, Scribe Adj. Act.
Scrivener. Adj. Act. Note, Ticket, Docket Adject. Pas. Shorthand,
Brachygraphy, Stenography Subst. Tachygraphy Subst. Cryptography Subst.
Engr^ss, write out fair Verb Scrible, scrawl Verb Subscribe, superscribe,
inscribe, etc. are the Verb, compounded with the Prepositions* Sub, super, in,
etc.
with the Transc. Partic. Person Officer Mechanic Thing Art of Short W Speedy W
Secret W
Perfective Corruptive


In the Tables of Relation. TO. I. 2. The Radical is PARENT; RELATION.
to which are adjoined the words Sire, Father, Mother, Damm, paternal,
maternal, Grandsire, etc. Orphan, which are thus to be expressed, Sire, Father
are Parent Male Mother, Damm are Parent Female Paternal, Maternal, are the
Adjectives of Father, Mother; Grandsire
is Fathers Father, or second Father; Orphan is un-parented.

So for the Opposite Radical CHILD; to which these other words are adjoined,
Issue, Son, Daughter, Brood, Litter, filial, adopt, posthume, which are thus to
be expressed.

Issue, Brood, Litter By composition with the Transcendental Partic. Kind Son
By composition with the Transcendental Partic. Male Daughter By composition
with the Transcendental Partic. Female Adopt By composition with the
Transcendental Partic. Cause
Filial is the Adj. Posthume is a Child born after the Parents Death.

RC. I. 2. The Radical is KING; to which these words are adjoined, Sovereign,
Emperor, Imperial, Monarch, Queen, regal, royal-ty, Majesty, Reign, Kingdom,
Lord, Dynasty* Sultan, Cham, Liege Lord, Regent, Realm, Diadem, Crown,
Coronation, Scepter, Throne, inthrone, Viceroy.

Which are thus to be made off. The Radical being a Substantive of the Person,
these other words must be Synonymous to it, viz. Sovereign, Monarch* Emperor,
Lord, Liege Lord, Sultan, Cham, Regent. The word Emperor being sometimes used
for such a one as has other Kings under his Dominion, may according to this
notion of it, be expressed by composition, with the Transc. Particle of
Augmentative. Queen by the Particle Foem. Majesty, Royalty, are Subst. Abst.
Regal, royal, Sovereign, Imperial, are the Adject. N. Realm, Kingdom, are the
Adj. Pass. with the Particle, Thing. The Reign is the Subst. Act. To Reign is
the Verb. Viceroy, Regent, is Adj Act. with Trans. Part. Person and the
Preposition Pro, or instead. Crown, Diadem, is Head-Sign of Majesty. Scepter is
Staff-Sign of Majesty. Throne is Royal Seat. Coronation, inthroning, is
solemnity of King-making, or King-declaring.

By these Instances, it may appear, what course is to be taken, with that great
variey of Words, adjoined to other Radicals.

The things and notions provided for in these Tables,. IV.
are such only as are of a more simple nature; others that are of a more mixed
and complicated signification, are to be expressed periphrastically, as may be
seen in the Dictionary. Such words only, are absolutely necessary for such a
design, as are purely simple; which if they could be acurately distinguished,
would be much fewer then those here enumerated; But for the preventing of
frequent and large periphrases, it may be convenient to take in some others
that are not purely simple.

There are some kinds of things that are not capable of being provided for in a
Character and Language, proposed for Universal use, as namely all such as are
appropiated to particular Places or Times.

I. Such as are peculiar to some particular place or Nation, As

1. Titles of Honor, Duke, Marquess, Earl, Viscount, Baron, Baronet, Knight,
Esquire, etc. Which are to be expressed by the several degrees which they
belong to in the Nobilitas Major, or Minor.

2. Titles of Office and Pl^ce, as Sheriff, Mayor, Bailiff, etc. Master,
Warden, President, Provost, Principal, Rector, etc. which are all to be
expressed by the common notion of Prefecture.

3. Degrees in Professions, Doctor, Master, Bachelour, Sergeant at Law,
Barrister, etc.

4. Law Terms of Tenures, Writ, etc. Copyhold, Freehold, Knights-service, etc.
Habeas corpus, nisi prius, Defeasance, Certiorari, Replevin, supersedeas,
Subpaena, etc.

5. To which may be added the several terms of Heraldry, as Fess, Chevron, etc.
which are not common to all Nations.

II. Such as are continually altering, according to several ages and times, As

1. Vests and Garments, to which there are every day new names assigned,
according as several fashions do arise.

2. Kinds of Stuffs, as Baise, Flannel, Serge, Kersey, Grograin, Tammy, Tabby,
Satin, Plush, Velvet, Tiffany, Lawn, Douless, Canvas, Buckrom, etc. Diaper,
Damask, etc. which are to be periphrastically expressed by their matter and
figure.

3. Games and Plays, of which the old ones do continually grow into disuse, and
every age produces new kinds.

4. Drinks, The Wines of several Countries, and Grapes, as Malmsey Muskadell,
etc. And so for other made Drink, as Tei, Coffi, Chocolate, Rambuze, Syllabub,
etc.

5. Meats, as several prepared Dishes, Cullace, Bisk, Oglia, etc. The variety
of Breads, Biscuit, Cracknel, Bunn, Simnel, etc. Several confections, as
Marmalade, Codigny, etc. Confections in Physic, as Diascordium, Mithridate,
etc.

6. Tunes for Music, or Dancing, as Coranto, Galliard, Sarabrand, Jig, Pavan,
Almain, etc And so for the various kinds of Musical Instrustruments, Sackbut,
Hauboy, Cornet, Lute, Theorbo, Viol, Cittern, etc.

7. The names of several Tools belonging to Trades, which are not the same in
all Nations, and are every day multiplied.

8. To which may be added the names of diverse sects, whether Philosophical,
Political, or Religious; which are various according to several places and
Times, many of them being derived from the names of Persons, and therefore not
to be provided for in such a Theory of things as is proposed for Universal use.
But as any of these may be periphrastically expressed in the Latin, or in the
Language of any other Nation, which has no one word for them; so may they
likewise, with the same facility be described in a Philosophical Character or
Language.

PART. III. Concerning Natural Grammar.
CHAP. I. 1. Concerning the several kinds and Parts of Grammar. 2. Of
Etymology, the general Scheme of Integralls and Particles. 3. Of Nouns in
general. 4. Of Substantives Common, denoting either Things, Actions, or
Persons. 5. Rules concerning Nouns of Action. 6. Of Substantive abstracts. 7.
Of Adjectives according to the true Philosophical notion of them. 8. The true
notion of a Verb. 9. Of derived Adverbs. 10. A general Scheme of the
forementioned Derivations.
HAving now dispatched the second thing proposed to be treated of, namely, the
Scientifical part, I.
containing a regular enumeration and description of such things and notions,
as are to be known, and to which names are to be assigned, which may be styled
Universal Philosophy; I proceed in the next place to the Organical part, or an
enquiry after such kind of necessary helps, whereby as by instruments we must
be assisted in the forming these more simple notions into complex Propositions
and Discourses, which may be styled Grammar, containing the Art of Words or
Discourse.

Grammar may be distinguished into two kinds; 1. Natural, and General; 2.
Instituted and Particular.

1. Natural Grammar, (which may likewise be styled Philosophical, Rational, and
Universal) should contain all such Grounds and Rules, as do naturally and
necessarily belong to the Philosophy of letters and speech in the General.

2. Instituted and Particular Grammar, does deliver the rules which are proper
and peculiar to any one Language in Particular; as about the Inflexion of
words, and the Government of cases, etc. In the Latin, Greek, De Causis L. L.
Cap. 76.
etc. and is defined by Scaliger to be scientia loquendi ex usu.

The first of these only is upon this occasion to be considered. It has been
treated of but by few, which makes our Learned Verulam put it among his
Desiderata; I do not know any more that have purposely written of it, but
Scotus in his Grammatica speculativa, and Caramuel in his Grammatica Audax, and
Campanella in his Grammatica Philosophica. (As for Schioppius his Grammar, of
this title, that does wholly concern the Latin tongue;) Besides which,
something has been occasionally spoken of it, by Scaliger in his book de
causis linguae latinae; and by Vossius in his Aristarchus. But to me it seems,
that all these Authors in some measure (though some more then others) were so
far prejudiced by the common Theory of the languages they were acquainted with,
that they did not sufficiently abstract their rules according to Nature. In
which I do not hope, that this which is now to be delivered can be faultless;
it being very hard, (if not impossible) wholly to escape such prejudices: yet I
am apt to think it less erroneous in this respect then the rest.

The parts of Grammar are principally these three.

1. Concerning the kinds of words, or those several modes and respects,
according to which the names of things may be varied in their Acceptions; being
made either derivative Nouns, or Adverbs; together with their several
inflexions and compositions; which may be styled Etymology.

2. Concerning the proper union or right construction of these into
Propositions or sentences; which is called Syntax.

3. Concerning the most convenient marks or sounds for the expression of such
names or words; whether by writing, Orthography; or by speech, Orthoepy.

II.
The first of these concerning the Doctrine of Words, may refer either, 1. To
the formal differences or kinds of them; or, 2. To the Accidental changes of
them, in respect of Inflection, Derivation, Composition.

Words, according to their formal differences and kinds, may be thus
distributed.

All words are either Integrals Nouns Substantives Neuter. Active. Passive.
Adjectives Neuter. Active. Passive.

Adverbs derived Passive.

Particles Grammatical Essential and perpetual in every complete sentence. The
Copula. Not essential, but occasional, Substitutive in the room of some
Integral, Pronoun. Sentence, or complex part of it Interjection.
Connexive, expressing the Construction of word with word, Preposition.
Contexture of sentence with sentence Adverb. Conjunction.

Declarative of some Accident belonging to Integral, Article. Copula, Mode.
Integral or Cop. Tense.


Transcendental. See Chap. 6.



By Integrals or Principal words, I mean such as signify some entire thing or
notion: whether the Ens or Thing it self, or the Essence of a thing, as Nouns
Neuters, whether concrete or abstract; or the Doing or Suffering of a thing as
Nouns Active or Passive; or the manner and affection of it, as Derived Adverds.

III.
Those instituted words which men do agree upon for the names and appellations
of things, are styled Nouns.

Every Noun which in conjunction with a Verb makes a complete sentence, and
signifies simply, and per modum subsistentis per se, is called a Substantive.
That which signifies per modum Adjuncti, or adjacentis alteri, is called an
Adjective.

Substantives belong either to one, called Proper: or to many, and are
therefore styled Common.

The former of these are not to be brought under the rules of any science,
because Individuals are Infinite; and therefore such proper names as pertain
each to one only, should be esteemed as so many Articulate voices, to be
expressed by such particular vowels and consonants as will make such respective
sounds.

Noun Substantives Common are such names as are assigned to the several kinds
or species of things or notions; which, IV.
though they are very numerous, yet are they capable of being stated and fixed
according to a Philosophical method, as is endeavored in the foregoing
Tables. Concerning which these rules are to be observed.

1. Every Radical word in the Tables is supposed to be a Substantive; though
they could not all of them be so expressed, because of the defect of proper
words for them in the present Languages; upon which account there is a
necessity of expressing some of them by Adjectives, and some by an Aggregate of
words: but they are all of them to be understood as being simple Substantives.

2. These Radical Substantives may be of various kinds, either 1. Of the Thing.
2. Of the Action or Passion. Or, 3. Of the Person, Besides those other kind of
Substantives which proceed from these; whether Abstracts Neuter, as Deity,
Regality, etc. or such other Abstracts, whether Active or Passive, as denote a
proclivity or capacity, as Amorousness, Amiableness, etc. which are provided
for by the Transcendental Particles.

3. When the Radical is a Noun Substantive of the Thing, the most immediate
derivations from it, are the Substantives Active and Passive, to be expressed
by the mark of Active or Passive upon the Radical. And the Substantive of the
person, whether Agent or Patient, by the Adjective, Active or Passive in the
Aorist Tense, with the Transcendental mark of Person; So Dux and Calor, Light
and Heat, are Substantives of the Thing* Illuminatio and Calefactio,
Enlightening, Heating, are the Substantives Active, or of the Action; (...)
illuminari, calesieri, the being Enlightened and Heated are Substantives
Passive: or of the Passion; Illuminator, Calefactor, or illuminans and
calefaciens persona, the Enlightner and Heater, are Substantives of the Person
agent; Illuminatus and Calefactus, the Illuminated or Heated, are Substantives
of the Person Patient.

4. When the Radical is a Substantive of the Action, then the Substantive of
the Person, is to be expressed as in the former rule; so Ligatio, Pastio,
Salivatio; Binding, Feeding, Spitting, are Substantives of the Action; Ligator,
Pastor, Salivator; Binder, Feeder, Spitter, are Substantives of the Agent; and
Ligatus, Pastus, Salivatus; Bound, Fed, Bespit, are the Substantives of the
Patient. And the Substantive of the Thing whether Active or Passive, is in this
case to be expressed, by the Adjective, Active or Passive in the Aorist Tense,
with the Transcendental mark of Thing. So Ligans res, a binding thing, is
Ligamentum, a Bond or String; and nutriens or pascens res, a nourishing or
feeding thing, is nutrimentum, food or nourishment; so ligata res, a bound
thing, is Ligatum, a Bundle or Fardle; so excreta or salivata res, is
Excrementum, or Saliva, Excrement or Spittle.

5. When the Radical is a Substantive of the Person, then the Substantive of
the Action or Passion (as was said before) are the most immediate derivations
from it, and to be expressed by the Mark of Active or Passive upon the Radical;
So Magistratus, Rex, Iudex, etc. Magistrate, King, Judge, etc. are Radicals of
the Person; The Substantives of Action belonging to each of these, are
Gubernatio, Regnatio, Iudicatio, Governing, Reigning, Judging; And the
Substantive of the Thing whether Active or Passive, is to be expressed by the
Adjective Active or Passive in the Aorist Tense, with the Transcendental note
of Thing; So Gubernans res a governing thing; regens res a reigning thing; and
judicans res a judging thing, viz. A Canon or Rule by which we judge of
straight and crooked, right and wrong; So Gubernata res, the governed thing, is
Ditio, Territory, Dominion, Jurisdiction; Regnata res, is Regnum the Kingdom;
Iudicata res, is Iudicium, Judgment.

As those names which are assigned to signify things themselves, and do not
denote either Action or Passion, are styled Nouns neuter: so those names which
are assigned to signify the Doing or Suffering of things are styled Active or
Passive. The same notion which in the Greek and Latin is expressed by the
Infinitive Mode Active or Passive, is that which I here intend by the
Substantive Active or Passive; and that it may properly be so styled, I shall
endeavor to prove afterward.

Though every Noun Substantive have not an Active or Passive belonging to it
either in the Greek, Latin, English, etc. yet according to the Nature and
Philosophy of things, whatsoever has an Essence, must likewise have an Act;
either of Being or becoming: or of Doing or being done: or of making or being
made: to be, or do. And consequently every Radical Substantive which is capable
of Action, should have an Active or Passive formed from it, which is commonly
called a Verb.

As for such things which have not of their own any proper Act of Doing, they
are not capable of the derivation of Active and Passive, ob defectum materiae;
as in the words Stone, Mettle, etc. But the Verbs belonging to such Radicals
can be only Neuter, denoting the Act of Being or becoming; unless when they are
compounded with the Transcendental mark of Causatio, which will add to them a
Transitive sense, as Petrifie, Metallifie, etc.

V.
As for such other Radicals as are capable of Action or Passion, these Rules are
to be observed concerning them.

1. More Generally these two.

1. Things which according to common acception have belonging to them any one
proper Act of Doing; their Verbs Actives will denote this Act: For instance,
the Verb or Substantive Active of the words Fire, Water, etc. is to burn, wet;
and so for those Acts of the several parts, Tongue, Tooth, Mouth, Throat, Foot,
Heel, whose active by this Rule will be to lick, bite, devour, swallow,
trample, kick, and the Active of Bow, Gun, is to Shoot as with a Bow, Gun.

2. Things which have not, according to common acception, any one kind of
peculiar Act of Doing appropriate to them; the Actives belonging to such
things, will signify in the General to Act or do according to the nature of
such things.

2. More Particularly these four.

1. The Actives belonging to such Radicals as are Substances, whether Absolute
or Relative, do signify to Act according to the nature of such Substances; so
in absolute Substances, the Active of God, Spirit, Man, will signify to Act as
God, Spirit, Man; and so in Relative Substances, the Active of Father, Judge,
Magistrate, is to Act as a Father, Judge, Magistrate.

2. The Actives of Quality, whether Predicamental or Transcendental, do denote
the Acts of those species, with particular reference to the differences under
which they are placed; So the Active of East, West, Obliquity, etc. being under
the difference of Situation, must signify to situate a thing Easterly,
Westerly, Obliquely. The words of Line, Surface, Body, being under the
difference of Dimension; the Active belonging to them must signify to
Dimensionate as either of these.

The words under the differences of Figure, must in their Actives signify to
Figure according to such particular shapes.

Those under the difference of Time, the Actives of Present, Simultaneous,
Newness, Oldness, Sooness, etc. must signify to Act with such respects of Time.

The Actives of the Differences and Species under Measure, should regularly
signify to Measure by Number, Magnitude, Gravity, Valor, Duration. The Active
of Inch, Foot, Pace, Fathom, is to Measure by Inch, Foot, etc. and so for those
other Species of Grane, Dram, etc. Farthing, Penny, etc.

The Active of Minute, Hour, Day, Night, etc. will signify to continue for
such portions or measures of time, according to the sense of the Difference,
Duration, under which these species are placed.

The Active of Infancy, Childhood, Adolescency, etc. may signify to pass the
time of one's Infancy, Childhood, Adolescency, etc.

3. The Active of such Radicals as are Qualities, whether Predicamental or
Transcendental, signify to do or deal according to the signification of the
said qualities; So the Active of Fidelity, Severity, etc. will signify to deal
or Act, Faithfully, Severely, etc. The Active of Goodness, Evilness, etc. will
signify to Act or Do well or ill, etc.

4. The Active of such Radicals as denote Actions, need no other explication
but this, that some of them are Active Absolute, which in the usual Grammars
are styled Neuter; as Sto, Sedeo, Curro; others Transitive, denoting a
transient efficiency; into which latter kind, the former of these may be
changed (as was said before) by composition with the Transcendental mark of
Causation.

There are several English Verbs, which, without admitting any change by
Composition or Inflexion, have both a Neuter and a Transitive signification; as
Corrupt, Feed, Starve, Famish, Move, Rest, Hang, Extend, Shrink, Stagger, Stay,
etc. whose sense is to be distinguished by the construction.

There are some Verbs of the same Natural Philosophical Radix, which are yet
expressed by different words, as Laugh, Deride, Weep, Bemoan, must, need,
Necessitate, etc. And the different notion of these and such like Verbs, is not
capable of being expressed by the Transcendental point of causation: but by
placing after them such a Noun Substantive, or Pronoun Substantive, as may
denote the object of those several acts. So the word Laugh, being put without
any Substantive following, does signify in the Neuter sense the bare act of
Laughing; but if the word me or him, etc. does immediately follow the Verb,
then it is to be rendered deride or laugh at, me, him, etc.

VI.
Besides those Concrete Substantives, which signify the Ens or thing it self,
there are other Substantives which denote the Essence of things, styled
Abstracts. And these may likewise be distinguished into, Neuter, Active,
Passive.

That is styled Neuter which denotes the naked Essence of a thing, without any
inclination to Action or Passion, as Deity, Regality.

That is styled an Abstract Active, which implies a proclivity to Action, as
Regnativity, Amativeness, or Amorousness.

That is called Passive, which denotes a capacity or fitness for receiving or
suffering of Action, as Regibility, Amiableness.

Such Radicals as are Concretes, are capable (according to the nature of the
things denoted by them) to have all these three kinds of Abstracts formed from
them. Whereas such Radicals, as are themselves Abstracts Neuter, (as namely
several of those under the Genus's and Differences of Quality and Action) are
capable only of the two latter kinds to be formed from them.

VII.
As Noun Substantives are the names which are given to things, considered
simply, and as subsisting by themselves: So Noun Adjectives are the names which
are given to the Adjunct natures of things, the notion of them consisting in
this, that they signify, the subject or thing to which they are ascribed, to
have in it something belonging to the nature or quality of those Adjectives,
which are predicated of it, or limited by it.

And besides this common notion, they do sometimes likewise in the instituted
Languages refer to other notions; as, 1. To abundance, so the words populous,
precious, sumptuous, etc. so in Latin, fluvius piscosus, aquosa regio. 2. To
likeness, so the word dogged, currish, waspish, Seraphicus, Angelicus, etc. 3.
To Possession, so Domus regia, a royal house. 4. To the matter of which any
thing does consist; so scutum aheneum, A brazen shield. But each of these
notions may be otherwise more distinctly provided for. The two first by the
Transcendental marks of Augmentative and Like; and the two next by the
prepositions of Possessor and Material cause. And so the true genuine sense of
a Noun Adjective will be fixed to consist in this, that it imports this general
notion of Pertaining to, or being Affected with.

Those Adjectives are styled Neuters which do not denote either Action or
Passion; as Calidus, Lucidus, Hot, Light.

Those are styled Active or Passive, which denote the Action or Passion of the
Adjunct thing or Essence. And because these according to the common Theory do
Participate both of Noun and Verb; therefore are they by Grammarians styled
Participles; Active, as Calefaciens, Illuminans, Heating, Enlightening: or
Passive, Calefactus, Illuminatus, Heated, Illuminated.

And as Abstract Substantives, may be formed from the Concrete; so likewise may
Adjectives, which are also distinguishable into Neuters Active, Passive.

That part of speech, which by our Common Grammarians is styled a Verb,
(whether Neuter, VIII.
Active or Passive) ought to have no distinct place amongst Integrals in a
Philosophical Grammar; because it is really no other then an Adjective, and the
Copula sum affixed to it or contained in it: So Caleo, Calefacio, Calefio, is
the same with sum Calidus. Calefaciens. Calefactus.
Concerning which Copula, and the use of it; more shall be said hereafter.

That kind of word, which is commonly adjoined to a Verb, to signify the
quality and affection of the Action or Passion, IX.
is styled an Adverb; which may be distinguished into Derived and Vnderived.
The former of these is here particularly intended, and does generally belong to
Languages. The latter is afterward treated of amongst the Particles.

As every Radical is supposed naturally to have its Adjective, so likewise its
Adverb; and though no Language in use does admit of so general a derivation of
Adverbs, yet the true reason of this is from their imperfection and deficiency;
for the Signs ought always to be adequate unto the things or notions to be
signified by them.

As Adjectives were before distinguished into Neuter, Active, Passive, so
likewise ought Adverbs to be. And as every Adverb is immediately derived from
some Adjective, so every kind of Adjective has some kind of Adverb derived
from it.

For the more easy understanding of these things, I shall here adjoyn a
general Scheme of the forementioned derivations; wherein I shall be
necessitated to form several new words according to common analogy.

All Integrals are either. X.


Concrete. Substantive. Neuters (...) calere vel calor. Lucere vel lux. Heat.
Light. Active. Calefactio. A. Illuminatio. Heating. Enlightening. Passive.
Calefactio. P. Illuminari. Being Heated. Enlightened.
Adjective. Neuter. Calidus. Lucidus. Hot. Light. Active. Calefaciens.
Illuminans. Heating. Enlightening. Passive. Calefactus. Illuminatus. Heated.
Enlightened.
Adverb. Neuter. Calide. Lucide. Hotly. Lightly. Active. Calefacienter.
Illuminanter. Heatingly. Illuminatingly. Passive. Calefacte. Illuminate.
Heatedly. Illuminatedly.

Abstract.
Substantive. Neuter. Caloritas. Luciditas. Hotness. Lightness. Active.
Calefactivitas. Illuminativitas. Calefactivity. Illuminativity. Passive.
Calefactibilitas. Illuminabilitas. Calefactibility. Illuminability.
Adjective. Neuter. Caloritativus. Luciditativus. Caloritative. Luciditative.
Active. Calefactivus. Illuminativus. Calefactive. Illuminative. Passive.
Calefactibilis. Illuminabilis. Calefactible. Illuminable.
Adverb. Neuter. Caloritative. Luciditative. Caloritatively. Luciditatively.
Active. Calefactive. Illuminative. Calefactively. Illuminatatively. Passive.
Calefactibiliter. Illuminabiliter. Calefactibly. Illuminably.

CHAP. II. 1. Of Particles in general. 2. Of the Copula. 3. Of Pronouns more
generally. 4. More Particularly. 5. Of Interjections more generally. 6. More
Particularly.
I.
HAving thus explained what is meant by Integral words, which signify entire
things and notions, with the several kinds of them. I proceed in the next place
to treat, concerning Particles, or less principal words, which may be said to
consignifie, serving to circumstantiate and modifie those Integral words, with
which they are joined, being styled by the Hebrew Grammarians Dictiones.

The words of this kind are exceeding numerous and equivocal in all Languages,
and add much to the difficulty of learning them. It being a very hard matter to
establish the just number, of such as in all kinds are necessary, and to fix to
them their proper significations, which yet ought to be done in a Philosophical
Grammar. I shall in this Essay, select out of Instituted Languages, such of the
several sorts, as I conceive sufficient for this purpose.

These were before distinguished, into such as refer, either to Grammatical, or
Transcendental notion.

Those are styled Grammatical, which supposing words to retain their primary
sense, do serve for the circumstantiating of them, either by union,
abbreviation, inflexion, or some other way for the qualifying of their
significations or constructions.

The most necessary amongst all the rest, which is essential and perpetual in
every complete sentence, II.
is styled the Copula; which serves for the uniting of the Subject and
Predicate in every Proposition. The word Subject I use, as the Logicians do,
for all that which goes before the Copula; which if it consist of only one
word, then it is the same which Grammarians call the Nominative case. By the
word Predicate, I mean likewise all that which follows the Copula in the same
sentence, whereof the Adjective (if any such there be) immediately next after
the Copula, is commonly incorporated with it in instituted Languages, and both
together make up that which Grammarians call a Verb.

Amongst those Particles which are not essential and perpetual, but used
according to occasion, some are styled Substitutive; because they supply the
room either, 1* Of some Integral word, as Pronouns, or 2. Of some Sentence or
complex part of it, as Interjections.

As Nouns are notes or signs of things, so Pronouns are of Nouns; III.
and are therefore called Pronomina, quasi vice Nominum, Jul. Scalig. de cause.
L. L. Cap. 127.
as being placed commonly instead of Nouns. They represent things either

1. Immediately and in kind, without respect to the names of those things. So
when its said, I exhort thee or him: The Pronoun I represent to our thoughts
the person speaking, suppose John; and the words thee, him, the person spoken
to or of, suppose William or Thomas.

2. Mediately by their names, which are either

1. Expressed with the Pronoun, as commonly it happens upon the first intimation
or mention of the thing; as this or that man or book, and in these cases the
Pronouns are commonly called Demonstrative.

2. Supplied by the Pronouns, as is usual for Brevities sake, at the repeating
of the mention of a thing lately before spoken of; as he, it, etc. and then the
Pronoun is called Relative. Examples of both sorts are to be had in the
Grammars of Instituted Languages.

More commodiously for our purpose, the Pronouns are to be considered either
according to their, 1. Number. 2. Modifications.

1. As to their Number; there are twelve which may be styled simple Pronouns,
and three other that are Compound.

The Simple Pronouns, for the better convenience of and compliance with the
Characters, are reduced into these three combinations; whereof the first and
last combinations are single, the other double.

I. Thou. He.
This. Same. Certain one.
That. Another. Some one.
Any one. Every one. All.


Of all which it is to be observed, that they are in some kind or other,
Quantitatives; that is to say, every one of these Pronouns makes the whole
Proposition, or at least that part of the Proposition, which is affected with
it, according to its own nature, to be either Singular, Indefinite, Particular
or Universal.

2. The Modifications of Pronouns, whereby they are varied into different
significations, are of two kinds.

1. Possessive, denoting a relation of Propriety or Possession unto the person
or thing spoken of, which is applicable to all Pronouns, as I, Mine; Who,
Whose, etc.

2. Reduplicative, denoting a particular Emphasis, whereby a word is raised and
intended in its signification; as I my self, Thou thy self, etc.

Moreover it is to be observed, that the Personal Pronouns, and any of the rest
being used Substantively, are capable of Number and Case; and that all other
Pronouns beside the Personal, are capable of Composition with the
Transcendentals of Person and Thing, of Place, Time and Manner.

All these Pronouns I have thought fit to represent more largely under four
combinations in these following Tables.

IV.
The first Combination of Pronouns denoting the three Persons are Substantives,
and for their Quantity singular, and cannot properly represent any other then
Individual being* I have here adjoined to them their plurals, for the sake of
their Possessives; ours, yours, theirs, which without them cannot be so
conveniently expressed.

Sing. Numb.
I. Ego me.
1. I. me Meus.
Poss. My, Mine. Egomet.
Redup. Even I. I my self. Ego ipse.
Poss. Red. my own.
Tu te.
2. THOU. Thee. Tuus.
P. Thy. Thine. Tu ipse, temet.
R. Thy self, even thou. P. R. Thy own.
Ille, iste.
3. HE. Him. She. Her. Suus, ejus.
P. His. Hers. Ipse, se.
R. He himself, even he. P. R. His own, her own.


Plur. Numb.
We, us. Nos.
Ours Noster.
We our selves. Nos ipsi, nosmet.
Our own.
Ye, you. Vos.
Yours. Vester.
Your selves. Vos ipsi, vosmet.
Your own.
They, them, those. Illi.
Theirs. Suus, eorum.
They themselves. Illi ipsi, Ssee.
Their own.

The second Combination of Pronouns as likewise the rest that follow, are
properly Adjectives, though by reason of Ellipsis they are sometimes used
Substantively. The three first of them, this, that, the same, are for their
Quantities singulars, and do denote several relations of Identity; The three
last, viz. Another, A certain one, Some one, are for their Quantities,
Singulars or Particulars indeterminate. The first of them implies the Relation
of Diversity.

II.
Hic.
1. THIS. Hujus.
P. Belonging to this Person. Thing.
Hic ipse.
R. This very P. T. Hic.
Pl. Here. Nunc.
T. Now. Hujusmodi.
M. This manner
Idem.
2. THE SAME. Ejusdem.
P. Belonging to the same. R. Self-same. Ibidem.
Pl. T. M.
Quidam.
3. A CERTAIN. P. Belonging to a certain P.T. P. L. A certain place. T. A
certain time. M. A certain manner.

THAT. Ille, is, iste.
Belonging to that, it. Illius.
That very. Ille, ipse.
There. Illic, ibi, istic
Then. Tunc.
That manner. Istiusmodi.

ANOTHER, other, else. Alius.
Another. Alterius.
Wholly or quite another. Elsewhere. Alibi.
Otherwhile. Alias.
Otherwise. Aliter.

SOME. Aliquis.
Somebodies. Somewhere. Alicubi.
Some time. Aliquando.
Some manner. Some wise. Quodammodo.


The third Combination of Pronouns are III.
General or Particular indefinite; Vllus.
1. ANY, ought, ever a. P. Any ones, any bodies. Vllibi, usquam.
Pl. Any where. Vnquam.
T. Any time. Vllo modo.
M. Any manner.

General distributive; Vnusquisque
2. EVERY ONE. P. Every ones, belonging to, or concerning every one, Person,
Thing. Pl. Every where. T. Every time. M. Every manner.

General Collective; Omnis.
3. ALL. P. Belonging to all, Persons, Things. Vbique
Pl. All places. Semper.
T. Always, all times. Omnimodo.
M. All manner of ways.




The fourth and last Combination is of the mixed or compound Pronouns; so
styled, because they are made up of some of the other Pronouns, compounded with
the three first and most simple of the Conjunctions. The first of them Quis?
WHO? is the Pronoun All, taken in pieces, with an interrogation; For he that
enquires who did this, means, doubting of all, did such a one? or such a one?
etc. of all them that were capable to do it: but he that doubts only of one,
enquires, did he do this? where Quis is plainly resolved into a Pronoun
incorporated with a Conjunction Interrogative. And as for the second of these,
Qui it is commonly translated And he. And the third Whosoever is the same as If
any one. They may be distinguished into, IV.
1. Interrogative; WHO? which? what? Quis?
P. Whose? Cujus?
Pl. Where? Vbi?
T. When? Quando?
M. How? Quomodo?

2. Relative; WHO, which, that. Qui.
P. Whose. Cujus.
Pl. Where. Vbi.
T. When. Quando.
M. After which manner. Quomodo.

3. Reduplicative; WHOSOEVER, whomsoever, Quisquis, Quicunque
whichsoever, whatsoever. P. Whosesoever. Cujuscunque
Pl. Wheresoever Vbicunque
T. Whenever. Quandocunque
M. Howsoever, after what manner soever. Quomodo cunqu;





And thus much may serve for stating the number, nature, signification and use
of this second kind of Grammatical Particle styled Pronoun.

V.
Those Substitutive Particles, which serve to supply the room of some sentence
or complex part of it, are styled Interjections. These are by some denied to be
words, or any part of distinct speech, but only natural signs of our mental
notions, or passions, expressed by such rude incondite sounds, several of which
are common with us to Brute Creatures. And as all Nations of men do agree in
these kind of natural passions, so likewise do they very much agree in the
signs or indications of their mirth, sorrow, love, hatred, etc.

These kind of Particles are generally expressed by aspirated sounds, affectum
enim notant, Scalig. L. L. Cap. 13.
and ideo confertus editur spiritus, because of that affection and vehemence,
which is commonly denoted by them.

The kinds of these may be very numerous, according to the various motions and
passions of the mind; but those that are of the most frequent and general use,
may be reduced under these three combinations, whereof the first only is
single, the other two double.

The two first Combinations may be styled Solitary and Passive, being used by
us when we are alone, VI.
or not so directly tending to discourse with others, in which the Party speaks
as suffering some mutation in himself. They are the result, either of a
surprised.

I.
Judgment, denoting either 1. Admiration. Heigh. 2. Doubting or considering.
Hem, Hm, Hy. 3. Despising. Pish, Shy, Tysh. Affection; moved by the
Apprehension of Good or Evil.
II.
Past; 1.
Mirth. Ha, ha, he. Sorrow. Hoi, oh, oh, ah.
Present; 2.
Love, and pity, Ah, alack, alas. Hate, and anger, vauh, hau.
Future; 3.
Utinam, ^ si.
Desire, O, o that. Aversation, Phy.

The last Combination may be styled Social and Active, being never used by us
when we are alone, but immediately tending to discourse with others, in which
the party speaks with design to procure some mutation in his Hearers. These may
be distinguished into such as are III.
Precedaneous to discourse. 1.
Exclaiming. Oh, Soho. Silencing. St, Hush.
Beginning of discourse. General; to dispose the senses of the Hearer. 2.
Bespeaking attention. Ho, Oh. Expressing attention. Ha.
Special; to dispose the Affections of the Hearer by way of 3.
Insinuation or blandishment. (...) Eia, Now. Threatening. (...) Vae, Woe.




CHAP. III. I. Of Prepositions in General. II. The particular kinds of them.
III. Explication of the four last Combinations of them, relating to Place, or
Time.
THose are styled Connexive Particles, whose proper use is to express, I.
either 1. The Construction of word with word called Preposition; or 2. The
Contexture of sentence with sentence, called Adverb and Conjunction.

Prepositions are such Particles, whose proper office it is to join Integral
with Integral on the same side of the Copula; signifying some respect of Cause,
Place, Time, or other circumstance either Positively or Privatively. These
having such a subserviency to Nouns, in respect of which, they are by some
styled Adnomia, or Adnomina and Praenomina, as Adverbs have to Verbs. They are
therefore here treated of before Adverbs, whose office is chiefly to wait upon
Verbs.

There are thirty six Prepositions or eighteen paires of them, or six
Combinations, which may, with much less equivocalness then is found in
instituted Languages, suffice to express those various respects, which are to
be signified by the kind of Particle.

The two first Combinations of Prepositions, do comprehend such as are used to
express Causality, and may be styled Causal. II.


The first Combination of Causal Prepositions are either, I.
More General, denoting either the Author, Subject, or Possessor of any thing;
expressed in the Latin by the Genitive case: or the Formal, or Instrumental
cause, or Manner of doing, expressed in the Latin by the Ablative case: Neither
of them having any Particle in that Language appointed for them. 1.
OF Cas. Genesis Cas. Abl.
WITH, By
More Particular; denoting either The Efficient, or the Final cause. 2.
BY Ab. a. per. Ob, pro, propter.
FOR
The Material cause, ex qua, or circa quam. 3.
OVT OF Ex, e. De, circa.
CONCERNING, upon.


The second Combination of Causal Prepositions does contain such as do relate
either to the notion of II.
Ideal and exemplary, or Substitutive 1.
ACCORDING TO Inster, secundum. Pro, vice.
INSTEAD
Social or circumstance of society; Affirmed, or Denied. 2.
WITH Cum, Sine, absque
WITHOUT, void of
Adjuvant and agreement with: or opposing and enmity against 3.
Pro, Contra.
FOR, on this side. AGAINST, opposite unto.



The rest of the Prepositions do primarily refer to Place and Situation;
Secondarily to time; And some of them, by way of Analogy, to Comparison. Some
of these are Absolutely determined, either to Motion, or to Rest, or the
Terminus of motion. Others are relatively applicable to both; Concerning which
this rule is to be observed. That those which belong to motion, cannot signify
rest: But those which belong to rest, may likewise signify motion in the
Terminus.

The third Combination does consist of such as respect space in general being
either III.
Absolutely determined to Motion; either of Coming, or Going 1.
Ad. A.
TO FROM
Rest; or the Terms of this motions, denoting either; Nearness and contiguity:
to Distance 2.
Apud. Procul.
AT OFF

Relative both to motion and rest, with respect to the Intermediate space
betwixt those Terms, either Direct, or Indirect. 3.
OVER Trans. Circum.
ABOUT



The fourth Combination does consist of such Prepositions, as respect Space,
with a particular restriction to the notion of Containing, being either. IV.
Absolutely determined to Motion; whether of Ingress, or Egress 1.
INTO In. Ex.
OVT OF
Rest or the Terms of these Motions. 2.
WITHIN Intra. Extra.
WITHOUT

Relative both to Motion and Rest, with respect to the Intermediate space
either Direct or Indirect. 4.
THOROVGH Per. Praeter.
BESIDE



The fifth Combination does contain such Prepositions as relate to the
Imaginary parts of a thing, whether the V.
Head or Feet, being absolutely determined to Motion; either Ascent or Descent,
1.
Sursum. Deorsum.
UPWARDS DOWNWARDS
Rest or the Terms of these motions, 2.
Supra. Infra.
ABOVE BELOW

Face or Back, being Relative both to Motion and Rest. 3.
BEFORE Ante. Post.
AFTER



The sixth Combination does comprehend such Prepositions as are applicable both
to Motion and Rest, relating to the situation of some third thing spoken of,
which the Speaker considers as being VI.
Higher or Lower then that third thing, denoting a contiguity or nearness to it
1.
UPON Super. Sub.
UNDER
Nearer to it, or Farther from it 2.
ON THIS SIDE Citra. Ultra.
BEYOND
In the intermediate space unto two other things, or opposite to one of them. 3.
BETWIXT, Inter Adversus.
between AGAINST, over against.



For the clearer explication of these Local Prepositions, I shall refer to this
following Diagram. III.
In which by the Oval Figures are represented the Prepositions determined to
Motion, wherein the Acuter part does point out the tendency of that motion. The
squares are intended to signify rest or the Term of Motion. And by the round
figures are represented such relative Prepositions, as may indifferently refer
either to Motion or Rest.



Some of these Prepositions, viz. Above, Below, Before, After, are by common
Analogy applicable to signify comparison, which use being generally received,
and the words having in them a natural sutableness to this purpose, there is no
danger of any ambiguity.

Several of the Prepositions are sometimes used Adverbially, as Ante, Post,
Praeter, Contra, Inter, Infra, etc. which use when it happens, the sense will
easily distinguish. The difference between these two parts of speech,
Prepositions and Adverbs, being so nice, that it is hard in some cases to
distinguish them; upon which it is questioned, whether every Preposition as it
compounds a Verb, do not put on the nature of an Adverb; and it seems to be so,
because it Modifies the Act after the same manner as Adverbs do, as in the
words Praeficio, Benefacio, etc.

CHAP. IV. I. Of Adverbs in General. II. The Particular kinds of them. III. Of
Conjunctions.
I.
THose two kinds of Connexive Particles which serve for the contexture of
sentence with sentence, are called Adverbs and Conjunctions. Chap. 1. Sect. 8.
The first of these are commonly described to be such kind of words as are for
the most part adjoined to Verbs to signify some kind of Mode or Circumstance,
belonging either intrinsecally or extrinsecally to them.

Of Aduerbs derived from Integrals, enough has been said in the Chapter of
Integrals. The rest of those words which are commonly called Adverbs, according
to their true Original, are either derived from As. So. From. This. That.
Pronouns, or else they are Yea. Nay. Perhaps. Truly.
Modes of Verbs, or else they are Rather. Than.
Conjunctions; And some of them may be periphrastically expressed by Radicals.
So that according to the true Philosophy of speech, I cannot conceive this kind
of words to be properly a distinct part of speech, as they are commonly called.
But until they can be distributed into their proper places, I have so far
complied with the Grammars of instituted Languages, as to place them here
together, and to branch them under the five following Combinations.

II.
Whereof the first does consist of such Adverbs as denote I.
The manner of our Apprehension of Complex things, or the nexus betwixt the
several terms of a Proposition; whether more Ita, immo, maxim. Non, nequaquam,
minime.
Simple; Affirming or Denying 1.
YEA, I, NAY, not, no,
Mixed; applicable both to Affirmation and Negation; either Conjectural
doubtful and contingent: or Certain and confident, implying a kind of
attestation or something superadded to bare Affirming or Denying. 2.
Forte, forsan. Profecto.
PERHAPS, perchance, TRVLY, indeed, surely, in truth, verily.

Similitude; the former being Comparative General, the other the Redditive of
it. 3.
AS, Ut. Sic.
even as SO Semblably.



The second Combination are all of them Comparative, either of II.
Equality; the latter being the Redditive of the former 1.
HOW Quam. Tam.
SO
Inequality; according to several degrees Greater; 2.
MORE Magis. Maxim.
MOST
Lesser; 3.
LESS Minus. Minime.
LEAST




The third Combination does consist of such as are; either III.
Elective; whether of Prelation and preference: or Preterition and postponency.
1.
RATHER THAN Potius. Quam.

Local and Temporal, implying a respect betwixt something absent and past;
either to that which is present: or to that which is at distance and future. 2.
YET, still, hitherto, Adhuc, hactaenus. Done^.
UNTIL
Temporal only; the former representing time existing and present, the other
implying a relation of posteriority after lapsing and expiring of some time. 3.
WHILST Dum. Tandem.
AT LENGTH



The fourth Combination does contein such as denote the Circumstance of IV.
Society, Affirmed, or Denied; Conjunction or Exclusion 1.
TOGETHER Una, simul. Tantum.
ONLY, alone,
Repetition, or resemblance and equivalence 2.
AGAIN Iterum. Quasi.
AS IF
Privation or Restitution; the former signifying the devesting a thing of its
form; the other the re-investing of it with its precedent form; the first of
these has no Particle that is used simply for it, but only in Composition,
both in Latin and English: the latter we sometimes express in English by Back:
3.
UN, Un. dis. Re, retro
dis. RE, back.



The fifth and last Combination does consist of three single Particles,
denoting Proximity or nearness; being either V.
Definite and determinate; whether Affirming some little defect or Imperfection
1.
ALMOST, even, well-nigh, toward, Fere.
within a little of
Denying the utmost perfection 2.
SCARCE, Vix.
hardly

Indefinite, and indeterminate to more or less, over or under; but affirming a
nearness to the chief term Circiter.
3.
THEREABOVTS, under or over.



III.
Conjunctions are such Particles as serve for the joining together of words, or
rather of sentences. Of these there may be reckoned these four Combinations, or
twelve pair; though all of them be not alike simple and of equal necessity,
yet there is none of them without its particular convenience.

The first Combination does consist of such as are either I.
Interrogative, Affirmative, or Negative. 1.
An. Noune.
WHETHER YEA? WHETHER NO?
Conjunctive, Affirmative, or Negative, 2.
Et, atque Nec.
AND NEITHER
Conditional, Affirmative, or Negative, 3.
Si. Nisi.
IF, so that, UNLESS.



The second Combination does contain such as are either II.
Approbative, or Discretive and restrictive, 1.
INDEED Equidem. Sed.
BUT
Concessive, or Exceptive 2.
ALTHOUGH Etsi. Tamen.
YET
Disjunctive, Definite, or Indefinite, 3.
OR Vel. Sive.
EITHER.



The third Combination are all of them Causal; either III.
Adjunctive of the end; whether cause or Event; Affirmative or Negative, 1.
THAT, to the end that, Ut. Ne.
LEAST THAT
Ratiocinative, belonging to the Antecedent; whether that which makes it follow
the Consequent: or that which may indifferently precede or follow. 2.
Nam. Quia.
FOR BECAUSE
Ratiocinative belonging to the Consequent; whether interrogative and
indefinite: or illative, and demonstrative, 3.
WHY, wherefore, what is the cause or reason, Cur. Ergo.
THEREFORE.



The last Combination does consist of such as are either IV.
Declarative; whether of the cause, or of the event, 1.
WHEREAS, seeing that, since that, Quum. Exinde.
THEREUPON
Additional, and transitional, whether continuative, or suppletive, 2.
LIKEWISE, also, together with, moreover, Etiam. E^caet.
AND SO FORTH, etc.
Expositive; either by Synonyme, or by Instance, 3.
Videlicet, nempe. Exemp. gr.
TO WIT, viz. FOR EXAMPLE, EXGR.



The three last of these are not properly Particles or single words, but rather
the Contractions of several words, they are here added to the rest for greater
convenience, partly for completing the number and filling up the vacancies;
and partly in Compliance with the use of most vulgar Languages, when they write
contractedly.

CHAP. V. I. Of Articles. II. Of Modes. III. Of Tenses. IV. The most distinct
way of expressing the differences of Time.
BEsides these forementioned Particles which may be called more Absolute;
there are others more servile and auxiliary, I.
serving for the fuller expression of some Accident belonging to a word. These
were before distinguished into such as do belong either, 1. To an Integral
alone, as Articles. 2. To the Copula alone, as the Modes. or 3. Both to
Integral and Copula as the Tenses. Each of which are in some Languages taken
in, or involved in the inflexion of words: But in others, they are provided for
by distinct words to express them.

Articles are usually prefixed before Substantives for the more full and
distinct expression of them, they may be distinguished into

Enuntiative, which may be used indifferently before any Substantive, not
already pos^est with the Demonstrative. A. An.

Demonstrative, which gives a peculiar Emphasis to its Substantive, and is
applied only to such a Person or Thing, as the hearer knows, or has reason to
know, because of its eminence or some precedent mention of it. The

Though these be not absolutely necessary to a Language, because the Latin is
without them; yet are they so convenient for the greater distinctness of
speech, that upon this account, both the Hebrew, Greek, Slavonick, and most
other Languages have them.

To show in what manner the subject is to be joined with his Predicate, the
Copula between them is affected with a Particle, II.
which from the use of it, is called Modus, the Manner or Mode.

Now the Subject and Predicate may be joined together either Simply, or with
some kind of Limitation, and accordingly these Modes are either Primary or
Secondary.

The Primary Modes are called by Grammarians Indicative, and Imperative.

When the Matter is declared to be so, or at least when it seems in the
speakers power to have it be so, as the bare union of Subject and Predicate
would import; then the Copula is nakedly expressed without any variation: And
this manner of expressing it, is called the Indicative Mode.

When it is neither declared to be so, nor seems to be immediately in the
speakers power to have it so; then he can do no more in words but make out the
expression of his will to him that has the thing in his power, namely to his
Superior by Petition Equal by Persuasion Inferior by Command
And the manner of these affecting the Copula (Be it so, or sine esse, let it
be so) is called the Imperative Mode; of which there are these three varieties,
very fit to be distinctly provided for. As for th^^ other use of the Imperative
Mode, when it signifies Permission; this may be sufficiently expressed by the
Secondary Mode of Liberty. You may do it.

The Secondary Modes are such, as when the Copula is affected with any of them,
make the sentence to be (as Logicians call it) a Modal Proposition.

This happens when the Matter in discourse, namely, the being or doing or
suffering of a thing, is considered not simply by it self, but gradually in its
causes from which it proceeds either Contingently or Necessarily.

Then a thing seems to be left as Contingent, when the speaker expresses only
the Possibility of it, or his own Liberty to it.

1. The Possibility of a thing depends upon the power of its cause, and may be
expressed when Absolute by the Particle CAN Conditional by the Particle COVLD.


2. The Liberty of a thing, depends upon a freedom from all Obstacles either
within or without, and is usually expressed in our Language, when Absolute by
the Particle MAY Conditional by the Particle MIGHT.


Then a thing seems to be of Necessity, when the speaker expresses the
resolution of his own will, or some other obligation upon him from without.

3. The Inclination of the will is expressed, if Absolute by the Particles WILL
Conditional by the Particles WOULD.


4. The Necessity of a thing, from some external obligation, whether Natural or
Moral which we call duty, is expressed, if Absolute by the Particle MVST,
ought, shall, Conditional by the Particle MVST, ought, should.


III.
That kind of servile Particle which does belong both to the Integral and the
Copula, is styled Tense.

Tho Tenses in instituted Languages are appropriated only to Verbs, yet it is
very plain that according to the true Philosophy of speech, they should
likewise be ascribed to Substantives; And that this would in many respects be a
great advantage to Language. As there is Amatio, so there should be Amavitio
and Amaturitio, etc.

These kind of Auxiliary Particles, styled Modes and Tenses, are in the Modern
Languages expressed by such servile words, as do not signify any complete Act,
but rather some respects and circumstances belonging to other Acts; and by that
means have in them a natural fitness to be subservient to the inflexion of
other Integral words. So the Conditional Modes are supplied by the words Possum
or Possible, Licet, Libet, Volo; Necesse, Oportet, Debeo. And so are the
Tenses, by those servile words of Facio, Habeo, besides the Copula, sum.

The Tenses are usually distinguished into Present Active. Do, do, does,
Passive. Am, art, is, are.
Past Imperfect Active. Did, did, Passive. Was, were, were.
Perfect Active. Have, have, has, Passive. Have been, have been, has been.
Pluperfect Active. Had, had, Passive. Had been, had been.

Future Active. Shall, will, shall, wilt, Passive. Shall be, will be, shall be,
wilt be.



But the most distinct and explicit way of expressing any Proposition, is by
affixing these Tenses, both to the Copula, and the Predicate; IV.
the latter of which will show the time of the Action, etc. whether past,
present, or future: and the former, the state of the Person or Subject, who
does this Action, whether he Has been, either Past that Action, Is now, either
Acting in it, Shall be hereafter. either Yet to do it.


And a Proposition thus expressed, is in the very expressing of it, resolved
into its parts of Subject, Copula, and Predicate, according to these following
examples.

I Have been Hot Calui I Am Hot Caleo I Shall be Hot Calebo I Have been having
been Hot Calebam I Am having been Hot Calueram I Shall be having been Hot
Caluero I Have been to be hot hereafter Fui caliturus I Am to be hot hereafter
Sum caliturus I Shall be to be hot hereafter Ero caliturus I Have been Heating
Calefeci I Am Heating Calefacio, or sum calefaciens I Shall be Heating
Calefaciam I Have been Having heated Calefeceram I Am Having heated
Calefaciebam, sum qui calefecit I Shall be Having heated Calefecero I Have been
to Heat hereafter Fui calefacturus I Am to Heat hereafter Sum Calefacturus I
Shall be to Heat hereafter Ero calefacturus I Have been Heated Fui Calefactus I
Am Heated Calefio, velsum calefactus I Shall be Heated Calefiam, velero
calefactus I Have been having been Heated Fueram calefactus I Am having been
Heated Calefiebam I Shall be having been Heated Fuero calefactus I Have been to
be Heated hereafter Fui Calefaciendus. I Am to be Heated hereafter Sum
Calefaciendus. I Shall be to be Heated hereafter Ero Calefaciendus.
But if any should conceive this way needless or too laborious, as being too
much distant from the manner of Instit^ted Languages; he may by putting the
Copula in the place of the Tense, as well express his mind in thi^, as in any
other Instituted Language.

CHAP. VI. I. Of Transcendental Particles, The end and use of them. II. The
usual ways for enlarging the sense of words in Instituted Languages. III. The
General Heads of Transcendental Particles.
THose Particles are here styled Transcendental, which do circumstantiate words
in respect of some M^taphysical notion; either by enlarging the acception of
them to some more general signification, then does belong to the restrained
sense of their places: or denoting a relation to some other Predicament or
Genus, under which they are not originally placed.

Whereas in a Philosophical Language, every word ought in strictness to have
but one prope^ sense and acception, to prevent equivocalness; which sense is to
be restrained according to that place and relation, which the words have in the
Tables: And yet on the other side, it would much promo^^ copiousness and
elegancy, if there might be any way so to change and vary the sense of any
word, as may with all, leave it free from ambig^ity. For this purpose, as
likewise for the Abbreviating of Language are these Transcendental notes
suggested.

There are two ways used in Instituted Languages, specially in Latin for
varying the sense of words; ^^ther by Tropes: or by such a kind of Composition
as does alter the terminations of them.

1. The sense of a word is varyed by Trope; either in respect of some Agreement
and convenience, which it has with the word for which it is used; whether more
General; as in Metaphore Special; when the Whole, whether Universal, Essential,
Integral, is put for any of the respective parts, or contrary wise, Synecdoche.
Subject, Object, Cause, etc. is put for the Adjunct, Adject, Effect, etc, or
contrary wise, Metonymy.

Opposition; when one Opposite is put for the other, Irony.


Of all which there are store of examples in the common books of Rhetoric; And
there will be occasion to cite several of them in the following Chapter,
amongst the instances that are given of the Transcendental Particles.

Words are varied by changing their Terminations many ways; of which these that
follow are some of the Principal in the Latin.

1. Preparatives or Meditatives; are expressed by the Termination (urio)
Scripturio, Esurio, Parturio, Micturio.

2. Inceptives; by the termination (sco) Lucesco, Calesco, Senesco.

3. Frequentatives; by the termination (ito) Clamito, Agito.

4. Augmentatives; by the termination (osus) Aquosus, Fluviosus, Piscosus.

5. Diminutives; by the terminations (lo, lus, la, lum, aster) Cantillo,
Scribillo, Libellus, Lapillus, Homunculus, Mercatulus, Vesicula* Corpusculum,
Corculum, Crepusculum, Surdaster, Medicaster, Grammaticaster.

6. The Notion of Segregate; by the termination (tim) Viritim, Verbatim,
Gradatim.

7. Power and Propensity Active; by (ivus, ivitas) Activus, Activitas.

8. Power and Propensity Passive; by (ilis, ilitas) Possibilis, Possibilitas.

9. Cause; by composition with Facio, Mortifico, Magnifico, Prolificum, etc.

10. Kind; by ( plex and farius and genus) Simplex, Duplex, Multiplex,
Bifarius, Multifarius, Omnigenus, Multigenus.

11. The notions of Officer, and Tradesman* whether Merchant or Mechanic
promiscuously, are commonly expressed by the termination ( arius) which does
originally and properly signify the notion of belonging to, but is thus
limited by reason of the words, Officiarius, Mercator, Faber, understood.

Apiarius, Armentarius, Caprarius, Equarius, Accipitarius, Librarius, etc.

Lanarius, Linarius, Piscarius, Aviarius, Pomarius, Lactarius, etc.

Arcuarius, Armamentarius, Aurarius, Doliarius, etc.

12. Instrument or Iugament; by the termination (trum) Haustrum, Aratrum,
Plaustrum, Rastrum, etc.

13. Vessel; by (bulum) Thuribulum, Infundibulum.

14. House; by (i will, ale, arium) Equile, Ovile, Bubile, Caseale, Aviarium,
Columbarium, Gallinarium.

15. Chamber or Room; by (ina, arium, terium) Officina, Textrina, Tonstrina,
Sutrina, Popina, Vestiarium, Carnarium, Apodyterium, Conisterium,
Sphaeristerium.

16. Place in General; by (arium, etum) Vivarium, Aquarium, Pomarium,
Colluviarium, Frutetum, Dumetum, Arundinetum, Ericetum, etc.

17. Person or Agent; by the termination (or) Pastor, Fossor* Frondator,
Vindemiator, Arator, Messor, etc.

Now if all other respects and circumstances, which are capable and proper to
be expressed by these kind of Particles, were in some such way provided for;
this would exceedingly abbreviate the number of words, prevent much
circumlocution, contribute to perspicuity and distinctness, and very much
promote the elegance and significancy of speech.

What may be the most convenient number of such Transcendental Particles, is
not easy to determine; But those mentioned* in the eight following
Combinations, (though not all of the same extent and comprehensiveness) have
each of them some peculiar pretense of being listed under this number.

These may be distributed into such as are more General. Essential. I.
Circumstantial. II.
Special, whether belonging to Substance. III. Quantity. IV. Quality. V.
Action. VI. Relation, with respect to Quality and Action. VII. Affections of
Animals. VIII.




The first Combination does comprehend such General Essential respects, as are
either I.
Comparative; denoting similitude and resemblance; whether that which consists
chieflly in words or in things 1.
METAPHOR LIKE
Positive; denoting the nature or essence of the subject spoken of, as to those
common notions of General beings, either the common essence, or common
circumstances 2.
KIND MANNER
Individual beings, whether irra^ional or rational 3.
THING PERSON




The second Combination does contein such General Circumstantial respects as
are; either more II.
Absolute; signifying, Position or Duration 1.
PLACE TIME
Relative; as to Effecting or Representing 2.
CAUSE SIGN
Being in conjunction with others, or separate from others 3.
AGGREGATE SEGREGATE.




The third Combination does contain such kind of Special respects, belonging to
Substance, as result from their Application to other Substances, and the uses
for which they are designed; namely, for Enclosure and service, whether of III.
Places; or Things 1.
SEPIMENT ARMAMENT
Men; either such coverings as are Contiguous and fitted to their bodies,
serving for defense, against Weather or Enemies 2.
VEST ARMOVR
More remote, according to the more General, or Special kind or part 3.
HOUSE ROOM




The fourth Combination does comprehend some of those Special respects
belonging to Corporeal things, which do chiefly concern the Figure of them,
whether IV.
Shape alone; Broad and Flat, or Slender and Long 1.
LAMIN PIN
Shape and Use More Simple; designed, either for Operation or Containing 2.
INSTRVMENT VESSEL
Less simple; whether such as are not necessarily designed for motion, being of
a less complicate figure; or such as are designed for motion, whose figure is
more complicate 3.
IVGAMENT MACHIN




The fifth Combination does contain such kind of Notions as relate to the
Quality of Things or Persons, whether considered more V.
Abstractly; either the more General Quality, whereby the natural Powers are
perfected, or more special relating to Practical matters 1.
HABIT ART
Concretely; denoting personal Qualifications, whether Degrees and Business; or
Faculty and Skill 2.
OFFICER ARTIST
Professions of Manufacture or Exchange 3.
MECHANIC MERCHANT




The sixth Combination does contain such imperfect servile notions, as belong
to Action or Passion, with respect to the VI.
Ability, or Disposition of a thing 1.
POWER APTITVDE
Beginning or Repeating of an Action 2.
INCEPTIVE FREQVENTATIVE
Application of the Power; whether in a common and ordinary, or in some sudden
and vehement degree 3.
ENDEAVOVR IMPETVS



The seventh Combination does contain such kind of servile Relative notions, as
are common both to Quality and Action; denoting either the VII.
Measures and degrees of things Great or Little 1.
AVGMENTATIVE DIMINVTIVE
Too much, or too little 2.
EXCESSIVE DEFECTIVE

Manner of a Thing or Action, whether as it should be, or as it should not be 3.
PERFECTIVE CORRVPTIVE



The eighth and last Combination does relate to some Affections of Animals,
either VIII.
Sounds made by them, whether inarticulate, or articulate 1.
VOICE LANGVAGE
Sexes of them 2.
MALE FEMALE
The first most impotent and imperfect Age; to which may ^e adjoined, that more
general name belonging to any (...) which is likewise applicable to inanimate
beings. 3.
YOUNG PART.



CHAP. VII. Instances of the great usefulness of these Transcendental
Particles, with directions how they are to be applied.
FOR the better explaining of what great use and advantage these Particles may
be to Language, I shall give some examples severally to each pair of them,
according to the order premised: Beginning with the first.

I.
1. METAPHORICAL LIKE

These two are paired together because of their affinity, each of them denoting
an enlargement of the sense of the word; the first more general; the other with
reference to Similitude, properly so called.

The note of Metaphorical affixed to any Character, Metaphor.
will signify the enlarging the sense of that word, from that strict
restrained acception which it had in the Tables, to a more universal
comprehensive signification: By this, common Metaphors may be legitimated,
retaining their elegancy, and being freed from their ambiguity. So These words,
with this note will signify Element Rudiment, Principle Root Original Way
Means Thick Gross Thin Subtle Straight Upright Crooked Perverse Obtuse Dull
Acute Quick Ripe Perfect Immature Imperfect Fertile Fruitful as to invention,
etc. Barren Unfruitful Beautiful Decent, Comely Deformed Absurd, Indecent
Ornate Elegant, Quaint Homely Rude Light Evident, Plain Dark Mystical, Obscure
These words, with this note will signify Shining Illustrious Hypocritical
Counterfeit Banish Expel Companying Being together Strengthen Fortify, fence
Wrigle in Insinuate Prophecy Prediction Consecrate Dedicate Suitor Candidate
Woo Canvase Rival Competitor Raise Prefer, Advance


So in the Tables of Action; those Acts which are primarily ascribed unto God,
as Preserving, Destroying, Delivering, Forsaking, Blessing, Cursing, etc.
because they may by analogy be applied to other things, therefore this mark
will enlarge their acception. So for those other Acts belonging to the rational
soul; as, Thinking, Believing, Knowing, Observing, Expecting, Consenting,
Dissenting, Esteeming, Contemning, Willing, Nilling, Fruition, Delectation,
Election, Rejection, etc. though they are primarily acts of the Rational Soul;
yet because there is somewhat analogous to them in other Creatures; therefore
such words with this mark may without ambiguity be used in such a general sense.

So in Judicial Relation; Accuse, Complain, Excuse, Witness, Register,
Citation, etc. So likewise in Military Relation; Offend, Defend, Provoke,
Resist, Besiege, Assault, Skirmish, Fight, Stratagem, Overcome, Yield, Fly,
Pursue, Escape, etc. Each of these and many other words may by this note (when
there is just occasion to apply it) be made more copious, and yet preserved
distinct in their significations.

The other Particle, Like, being affixed to any word, does denote a varying of
the sense of that word, Like.
upon the Account of some similitude, whether in respect of Quality and
disposition, Resemblance, effect, and manner of doing, or outward shape and
situation.

1. This similitude may sometimes refer to the Quality and disposition of a
thing; in which sense it is frequently expressed in our English Tongue by
Adjectives, with the Termination (ish) Devilish, Brutish, Currish, Waspish,
Apish: and sometimes without it; as Angelical, Dogged, Cynical, Viperous,
Serpentine, etc. which do not always signify according to the strict
derivation of such Adjectives, but do many times denote only a similitude.

2. After the same manner are the several varieties of Colors to be expressed,
namely, by their resemblance to other things commonly known. So Ashes-like, or
Cineritius, is Ash Color. So Flesh-like is Carnation; Blood-like is Crimson;
Lyon-like is Tawny. So for those other resemblances to the Sky, to Gold, Grass,
Straw. So Piceus, or Pitch-like, is a deep black; Coracinus, or Crow-like, is a
shining black. So for Milky, Snowy, Ivory, kinds of White, etc. And thus
likewise is it for the variety of Tastes and Smells; the differences of which
are not provided for with distinct words in any Language, but may this way be
sufficiently expressed; namely, by their likeness to such other things as are
commonly known.

3. Sometimes it may refer to some kind of Resemblance in respect of effect,
according to which sense these words are frequently used; Inflame, Sparkle,
Cloud, Exhalation, Fumes, Vapor.

4. Sometimes to the manner of doing; so to speak Infant-like, is to Iabler; to
graft-like Feathers is to Impe; to dart-like water, is to Spirt, Squirt; to
tremble-like with the voice, is to Warble, Thrill; Dog-like crying, is Whining;
Stealing-like, is Surreptitious, etc.

5. This Particle is likewise applicable in respect of shape and situation. So
These words with this note will signify Down Thistle Down Lint of Linen
Hoariness of Mold
Fiber Grain of Wood Apple Pomander, Pommel Bullet Pellet Arm Arm of Tree,
Sea Trunc Hulk of a Ship Beak Stemm of a Ship Foot Pedestal Bridge Bridge of a
Musical instrument Money Medal, Counter.


I.
2. KIND MANNER

The first of these may be compounded with words of Number, to make them
signify under the notion of Multiplicative, Kind.
which the Latins express by the Termination (plex) Simplex, Duplex, Multiplex,
etc. And the English by the Termination (fold) Twofold, Threefold, Manifold.

In its composition with other Characters, it will serve to express those words
which are used to signify the general or special kinds of things; and being
affixed to any of the differences, will make them signify as a Genus or
Species. It is applicable both to Substantives and Adjectives.

Some of our English words of this sense, are expressed by the Termination (
age) as Herbage, Pascuage, Foliage, Vintage, Cordage, Stoage, etc. that is the
kind of Herbs, Pasture, etc.

These words with this note will signify People Populacy, Folk, Commonalty,
Parent Parentage Child Offspring, Progeny Foot Soldier Infantry Horse Sold.
Cavalry
These words thus marked will signify Bisule Cattle Stag Red Deer Buck Fallow
Deer Hog Swine Domestic bird Poultry Guns Artillery
There are several Adjectives likewise expressible this way; as Multifarious,
Homogeneous, or Similar, Heterogeneous, or Dissimular, etc.

2. The use of the second Particle is by its composition with Relative and
Quantitative Pronouns, to express such words as these; Manner.
Quomodo, how or after what manner; Hujusmodi after this manner; Ejusmodi after
that manner, etc. It is applicable likewise unto Adverbia moris, Meatim,
Tuatim, Suatim (i) Meo, Tuo, Suo More. The Ancients were wont to say, Canatim,
Suatim, Bovatim, that is, after the manner of Dogs, of Swine, etc. And it is
still in use to say Humanitus, after the manner of men.

The Composition with this Particle may likewise be useful in expressing those
words which do in their proper notion contain a reference to the Mode of
things. So This mark upon the word will make it signify Loquution
Pronunciation Sentence Phrase, Style Joining Connection Using Usage Right Tenure
Good, Well Right Evil Wrong
These words thus marked will signify Height Stature Feeding Diet Vest Garb,
Tire Face Aspect, Countenance Air Weather Sound Tone


I.
3. THING PERSON

Each of these may be compounded with the Relative or Quantitative Pronouns,
serving to distinguish such as refer to Things, from those that belong to
Persons. This, That, The same, Another, A certain, Some. Thing or Person.

Thing.
The former of these being affixed to any word in the Tables belonging to the
Predicament of Quality, Action, Relation, or to any other word which does
primarily denote a person, will determine the sense of that word to a
Substantive of the Thing; as it has been already declared in the Doctrine of
Substantives.

This note may be affixed 1. To Adjectives Neuter. So The words with this mark
will signify Obscure Mystery Seeming Semblance Prestig^^tory Trick Frivolous
Triflle.
2. To Adjectives Active, commonly called Participles Active. So The words with
this mark will signify Nutrient Nutriment or Aliment Medicating Medicament or
Medicine Purging Purge Binding Bond or String Buying Price
3. To Adjectives or Participles Passive, in the Aorist Tense. So The words
will signify Created Creature Acted Fact Believed Fides quae Fancied Phantasm
Prophesied Prophecy Tied Knot Bound Bundle, Fardle Tried Experiment Weaved Web
The words will signify Inherited Inheritance, Patrimony Seen Spectacle
Urinated Urin Dunged Dung Spit Spittle Seemed Pretense, Pretext Drunk Drink
Eaten Food, Meat Eleemosynated Alms



So the Adjectives Passive of the words Teaching, Learning, Reading, Singing,
Selling, with this affix, will signify Doctrine, Lesson, Lecture, Song, Ware.

The second of these Particles may refer either to, Person.
1. The Quality and relation; or 2. The Agency; or 3. The Patiency of the
Person.

If to the first of these; it must be affixed to an Adjective Neuter; if to the
second or third, it must be affixed to an Adjective Active or Passive.

Of the first kind are such examples as these.

The words will signify Vile Rascal, Varlet Miserable Wretch, Caitiff
Perfidious Villain, Traitor Crafty Knave Idiotical Fool, Idiot Wandering
Vagrant, Vagabond Licentious Royster, Blade Uncleanly Sloven Slow Lob, Lubber
Idle Truant
The words will signify Flattering Parasite Facetious Jester, Wag Fornicating
Whore, Harlot Rustic Boor, Peasant Military Soldier Ecclesiastic Clerk, Clergy
Secular Lay Proposititious (i) put in substitution Attorney, Surrogate Aulical
Courtier Art Artizan, Artist Nullus Nemo
Of the second are such examples as these.

The words will signify Acting Actor Creating Creator Farming Farmer Lending
Creditor Owing Debtor Pronegotiating Factor Beneficencing Benefactor
Interpreting Truch-man
The words will signify Conveying Convoy Vowing Votary Giving Donor Receiving
Receiver Beginning Inceptor, Novice Traveling Traveller, Passenger Seeing
Spectator Hearing Auditor, Hearer
Of the third are such examples as these.

Sent Messenger Eleemosynated Eleemosynary Beneficenced Beneficiary Tried
Probationer
II.
1. PLACE TIME

This first pair in the second Combination of Transcendental Particles, are of
more then ordinary extent and usefulness, because they may be serviceable to
compound other words besides Integrals.

The first of them may be Compounded with Pronouns, Place.
as was showed before in the doctrine concerning Pronouns; and so serve to
express Adverbs of place, as in this, that, every, etc. here, there, every.
where.

Besides which, the Composition with this Particle may be proper to express
other names of Places, which are commonly derived, either from, 1. The things
contained in them. 2. The uses to which they are designed. 3. The Relations by
which they are bounded.


Of the first kind are such as these.

The words will signify Metal Mine Tin Stannary Stone Quarry Deer Park Conies
Warren Trees Wood, Grove Shrubs Coppice Fruit Trees Orchard Vines Vineyard
The words will signify Hops Hopyard Flowers Garden Fire Hearth Smoke Chimney
Ship resting Harbor, Haven, Rode Stream Channel, Kennel Abjectaneous Water
Sink
Of the second kind are such examples as these.

The words will signify Ambulation Tectised
Cloister High Terrace Baking-hollow Oven Fire-hollow Furnace Protection
Asylum, refuge Hiding Covert Meeting Rendezvous Sacrificing Altar Preaching
Pulpit
The words will signify Dwelling Mansion, Message Washing Bath Flesh-selling
Shambles Public Spectacle Theater Deers Lying Laire Birds Sleeping Roost
Ship-making Dock Unshipping Wares Key, Wharf
Of the third kind are such instances as these.

These words will signify Authority Territory, Signiory Kings Authority
Kingdom, Realm Tribe County, Shire Academical Academy, University Archbishops
Authority Province Bishops Authority Diocese Presbyters Authority Parish
Time.
The second of these Particles, namely, Time, may be Compounded

1. With Numbers, to make them signify as Adverbs Cardinals; as Semel, bis,
ter, etc. Decies, vicies, centies, millies, multoties, etc. Once, twice,
thrice, ten times, twenty times, a hundred times, a thousand times, many times,
etc.

2. With Pronouns, to express Adverbs of time; as in this, that, all, Now,
Then, Always, etc.

3. With Integrals; as in such examples.

These words will signify Festival Holy time Paschal Easter Nativity of Christ
Christmas Coming of the Holy Ghost Whitsuntide Grape gathering Vintage
Forinsical Term Non-Forinsical Vacation
II.
2. CAUSE, or make SIGN.

When words are in their significations to be more peculiarly determined to
their Transitive efficiency, then is this first note to be affixed. Cause.
It is frequently in Latin expressed by a Composition with facio subjoyned, and
sometimes in English by a Composition with ( be) prefixed; as in the words,
Befool, Besot, etc.

The instances of this kind do frequently occur, and are very numerous. So
These words will signify Know Acquaint, Advertise Certain Certify, assure
Wonder Amaze, astonish Anger Provoke, incense Fear Fright, daunt, dismay Love
Enamour, endear Shame Abash Humble Abase Contender Boutefeu, incendiary
Boldness Embolden Powerful Enable Impotent Disable Great Magnify, aggravate
Little Diminish, abate Healthy Cure, heal Dye Kill, slay, mortal Live Enliven,
quicken Fade Wear out, consume Rise Raise, rouse, start Fall Fell, throw down
These words will signify Sit Set Lie Lay Sweat Sudorific Urine Diuretic Child
Adopt Ignoble Attaint Free Enfranchize Slave Enslave Money Mint, coin Err
Seduce Evil Deprave, mar Exceed Cloy Stay Detain, hold at bay Go Set packing
Bleed Let blood Shine Burnish, polish Manifest Illustrate, clear Sparkle Strike
fire Lose Endamage


This mark is applicable both to Substantives and Adjectives, as in Adoption,
Adopting, Adopted, Sudorification, Sudorific, etc.

Sign.
The other Transcendental note of Sign is adjoined to the former, by reason of
some kind of affinity (though somewhat remote) which there is betwixt them. As
the former Particle does import the notion of efficiency or making; so does
this of Representing or signifying. It is applicable both to Substantives and
Adjectives. So These words will signify Anchor Buoy Foot Footstep, track Wound
Scar Percussion Vibex, Black and Blew Vest service Livery Wind Weathercock Fane
Family, or Nobility Coat of Arms Regality Crown Magistracy Mace
These words will signify Arming or incursion pass. Alarm Jugam. Invas.
Beacon Future event Evil Great evil
Ominous Inauspicious Portentous
Terminal or Limit Mere, landmark To head or hand Becken To grief Lament,
deplore To praise Applaud


II.
3. AGGREGATE SEGREGATE

Aggregate.
The first of these does denote a multitude in Society, unto which common speech
does needlessly assign several distinct names; whereas the Natural (...) the
same in all of them; and therefore such various names may justly be reckoned
amongst the redundancies of Language. So These words will signify Assessors
Bench Soldiers Party Traveling Merchants Caravan Waiters Train, retinue Ships
Navy, Fleet Military Ships Armado Sheep Geese
Flock Cows Deer Hoggs
Heard Drove
Drawing horses Teame Hunting dogs Pack Partridge Covey Bees Swarm
These words will signify Young Dogs Foxes Pigs
Litter Hawks Airy Ducks Team Chickens Brood Fish Scour, Fry Scull Trees Wood,
Grove Small trees Coppice Shrubs Thicket Fern Brake Hay Straw Fuel wood
Reek, Stack Cock Pile
Twigs Bavin


And so likewise may it be for those others words Jewels Carcanet Feathers
Plume Berries Cluster, Bunch Counters Set Cards Pack Dice Silk, Cloth, etc. Bale


So the words Selling, or Hiring, with this mark, will signify to sell by
whole sale, and to hire by the Great.

The second of these being opposite to the former, Segregate.
will signify things under the notion of distribution; and being segregated,
which we commonly express by the words Each and Every; it is applicable to the
Numbers to make them distributives: Singuli, Bini, Trini, etc. Each one, every
two, every three, or one by one, by twos, by threes, etc. And so for all other
things capable of the like notion. The Latins express it by the Termination (
tim) as was said before. So Sigillatim One by one Viritim Man by man Ostiatim
Door by door Verbatim Word by word Paulatim By little and little Pedetentim
Foot by Foot Gradatim By degrees Seriatim By ranks or classes.


The English, besides the abovementioned peculiar way of Phraseology, does
sometimes express this notion by compounding with the Termination ( ly) as
Hourly, Daily, Weekly, Monthly, Annually, etc.

It is applicable likewise to Nouns of Action, or Verbs. So These words will
signify Giving Distributing, Dispensing Gathering Picking up Selling Retailing
Hiring Hiring by the day


III.
1. LAMIN PIN

The first pair in the third Combination do properly refer to the Figure of
things; and the note of these, added to the name of the matter of which they
consist, will be useful to supply the words for several things.

The former of these does denote a broad and flat Figure.

These words will signify Wood Board, Plank Glass Pane Paper Leaf, Sheet
Metal Plate Lead Sheet Iron supertinn'd Latin
These words will signify Fire Leam Ice, Snow Flake Pudding fried Pancake
Bread Sippet, Tossed, Wafer Staff Lath
The second denotes a round and long Figure, Pin.
and being affixed to the word signifying the matter of it, or the thing about
which it is used, it may serve for the expression of several names. So Iron
Nail Wood Peg Vest Pin String Tag Cuspidated Tine


III.
2. INSTRVMENT VESSEL

This pair is intended to signify the General Names belonging to each of the
two principal kinds of Vtensils.

Instrument.
By Instrument, is meant such a kind of Vtensil, as is of a more simple figure,
and properly designed for Operation. This mark is to be affixed to the
Character of that particular Action or Operation, in which such instruments are
used; and whereas there may be several kinds of instruments, that may be useful
for the same kind of operation; they are to be farther distinguished by their
Matter, Figure, Bigness, or some other circumstance. So These words will
signify Foraminating Little Great
Aule, Piercer Drill, Bodkin Gimlet, Wimbel Auger
Digging Spade, Shovel Cuspidate Pick-ax, Mattock Reaping, Great Little
Sithe Syckle
Fuel supporting Little Great
Dog, Creeper Andiron, Cobiron
Striking, Cutting Little Great
Hatchet Axe
Lifting Leaver Weighing Balance Cleaving Wedge Wheeling Wheel Screwing Screw
Springing Spring Threshing Flaile Gathering Rake Scattering Fork Cribrating Sive
These words will signify Shaving Razor Filing File Sawing Saw Graving Graver,
style Planing Plane Contusion Pestle Painting Pencil Writing Pen Candle
supporting Candlestick Weaving Shuttle Clipping Shears Brushing Brush, Beasom
Combing Comb Horary Dyal Star measure Astrolabe Sub-forging Anvil Ringing Bell
Whipping Scourge, Rod Rosting Spit Vision Spectacles Signifer Colors,
Ancient, Cornet, Banner


Vessel.
Under this second Particle ( Vessel) are comprehended such kind of simple
Utensils, whose proper use is to contain; they are distinguishable either 1. By
the things which they are designed to hold and contain. 2. By the operations
and actions for which they are used. 3. By the matter of which they consist,
together with their several figures and quantities.


Of the first kind are such instances as these. So The words will signify
Water Cistern Oil Glass Earth
Cruet, Cruce Jarr
Drink Little Great Earthen Wooden Leather
Cup, Pot, Chalice Goblet Pitcher Bowl Jack
Pottage Porringer Sauce Saucer Table fire Chafing Dish Candle Lanthorn Ink
Inke-horn Urine Chamber Pot


Of the second are such as these. So The words will signify Washing Little
Great
Basin Laver
Boiling Little Great Earthen
Skillet Caldron, Kettle Copper, Furnace Pipkin
Frying Drying Pan
The words will signify Melting Crucible Distilling Still, Alembick Straining
Colander Infusion Tunnel, Funnel Exfusion Ewer Contusion Mortar Incense Censor,
Perfumers pot Baptism Font


Of the third sort there are such examples as these. So The words will signify
Earthen Narrow Broad
Pot Urne Pan
Wooden Oblong Great
Trough Vatt
Glassy Vial


III.
3. IVGAMENT MACHIN

This next pair is put to signify such kind of Utensils as are of a less
simple figure then the former.

Jugament.
The word Iugament does comprehend such kind of form^ as are distensoria longa;
consisting of several distinct parts united by Art, being more complex then
instrument, and less then Machin. The mark of it is to be affixed, either to
the name of the Action or the Thing about which they are used: as in these
examples.

The words will signify Carriage of Persons Barrow Carriage of Persons Dead
Bier Carriage of Persons Living, by Men Sedan Carriage of Persons Living, by
Horses Litter Traction Tumbrel Plowing Plow Harrowing Harrow Winnowing Fan
Weaving Loom Beasts Food Rack, Cratch Bird restraining Coop, Pen, Cage Fish
catching We Will Stream stopping Sluice Roling Roler Shadowing Canopy, umbrella,
Screen
The words will signify Printing Press Holding Pincers Suspension Gallows,
Gibbet Extension Rack Feet imprison Stocks Head imprison Pillory Neck Yoke
Sub-foot Pattin Broyling Gridiron Fuel Grate Session Stool, Settle Bed
Bedstead Clipping Cizzars Circle making Compass Wind music Organ
Machin.
By the second are intended such Utensils as are of a more complicate figure,
being mixed either with Wheels, Scrues, or Pullies, and designed for motion.
The mark is to be affixed unto the Character of the Action for which they are
used. So The words will signify Hour Signing Sounding Portatile
Watch Clock Pocket watch
Grinding Mill Little Quern
The words will signify Rosting Jack Up-pulling Crane Holding Vice Compressing
Press Way-measuring Way-wiser


IV.
1. SEPIMENT ARMAMENT

Sepiment.
The first of these may serve to express and describe those several kinds of
things and names which are used for Enclosure. So These words will signify
Wood Lamin Pale Staff or Beam Rail Shrub Hedge Earth Bank
These words will signify Water Mote Sheep Sheepfold Military of basket
Line, outwork, etc. Gabion
Transverse shutting Barricado


The second mark for ARMAMENT or Tackle, Armament.
will serve to describe sufficiently several things of that nature, without
affording distinct names for them, to be applied unto the Character of the
Action or Part to which it belongs.

These words will signify Horse, cohibiting Bridle instigating Spur Head
Head-stall Mouth Bitt, Snaffle Neck Collar Tail Crupper Foot Horse-shooe
These words will signify Horse back Saddle Rustic Panel Pack-saddle
Riders foot Stirrup Leg Gambado Circumligating Surcingle, girdle Finger for
sowing Thimble
IV.
2. VEST ARMOVR

The first of these will help to describe those various names that are given ^o
several sorts of Garments, according to the Parts, Things, or other
circumstances most considerable in their use. So These words will signify Head
Margined Low Reticulate
Cap Hat Bonnet Cawl
Bishops head Miter Votaries head Cowl Forehead Linen Frontlet, cross-cloth
Face Mask Chin Muffler Neck Band Trunc Doublet Sub-trunc Wastcoat Super-trunc
Jerkin, Coat Loose super humeral Hood Inmost Linen Shirt, Shift Outmost Linen
Surplice, Frock Bishops Linen Stole Bishops Silk Rochet Service signing Livery
Chamber Hanging Table Woollen Carpet Linen Table cloth
These words will signify Breast Stomacher Bib, Biggin Arm Sleeve Hand Woollen
Glove Mitten
Belly Apron Thighs close Loose
Breeches Petticoat
Leg Leather
Stocken, Hose Boot
Foot Loose Inner
Shoe Slipper Pantofle Sock
Upper loose Close
Cloak Cassock
Long loose Gown Bed woollen Linen Covering
Blanket Sheet Coverlet, counterpane
Pensil shadowing Concealing
Curtain Mantle, Veil



The second Particle is designed only for defensive Armor, Armor.
which bears some Analogy to Vests. The note of it may be affixed to the
several Parts. So These words will signify Head Helmet, murrion Headpiece
Neck Gorget Trum Habergeon, Corslat Breast Breast Plate Back Back-piece
These words will signify Hand Gauntlet Leg Greaves, Jambeaux Defensive to be
handed Shield, Buckler Target.


IV.
3. HOUSE ROOM

House.
The first of these will by its composition serve to express those various names
which are given to Houses, in reference to the several things or uses they are
designed for. So These words will signify Corn threshed Not threshed
Granary Barn
Hogs Sty Dogs Kennel Horses Stable Hawks Mew Pigeons Dove-cote Bees Hive Conny
Borough Lions or Bears Den Ammunition Arsenal Magazine Bones of dead Charnel
Water Conduit
These words will signify Public hospitating Sale of Wine Ale
Inn Tavern Alehouse
Votaries Abbey, Cloister Covent, Monastery Sick persons Spittle, Hospital
Eleemosynated Almshouse Mad Bethlehem Idlers Bridewel Imprisonment Goal,
Prison Forinsic Hall Discipling School Fornicat. Stews, Brothel Bordel


Room.
As the former Particle may be useful for the expression of the names of several
Houses; so will this second for particular Rooms or Chambers. So These words
will signify Conventus Hall Eating Dining room Discourse Parlour Sleeping
Bedchamber Dormitory Walking Gallery Privacy Closet Books Library Meat
Preparing Keeping Baking
Kitchen Larder Pastry
Potation Buttery Potus Cellar Dunging Jakes, Privy
These words will signify Cloths Wardrobe Clothing Vestry Armory Armor
Selling Shop Preserving Repository Drying Kill, drying loft Exter. dimin. Lobby
Way Passage, room Upper Loft, Garret Naval Cabin Bees Cell Counsel Secret
Ecclesiastic
Conclave Consistory



V. Habit.

1. HABIT ART

Each of these are applicable to Nouns. The use of the first Particle, is to
denote the Habitualness of any such thing whose Radix is not primarily under
that Genus of Habit. So these words Rejoicing, Worshipping, Obedient,
Disobedience, etc. with this mark, will be determined to the Habit of
Cheerfulness, Devotion, Obedience, Contumacy, etc.

There are many Radical words under other Predicaments, as that of Action,
Love, Zeal, Compassion, Envy, etc. Singing, Writing, etc. That of Relation, as
Governing, Bargaining, Thieving, Whordom, Deceiving, etc. which when they are
to be used under the notion of Habits, must be marked with this affix.

The chief use of the second Particle, Art.
is to supply the place of those several names which are commonly given to Arts
and Sciences. So These words will signify Quantity Mathematic Magnitude
Geometry Number Arithmetic World Cosmography Star motion Astronomy Land
Geography Times Cronology Harmony Music Vision Optic, perspective
These words will signify Weight Static Building Architecture Wars Military
order
Chivalry Tactic
Swording Fencing Language Grammar Oration Oratory Arguing Logic Manners Ethic
Transcendent Metaphysic


And so for those other cheating Arts of Manteia or Wizarding, with which the
world always has been and will be abused. In the naming of these it would be
convenient to add the word Manteia, the better to distinguish these from such
as are true Arts and Sciences. So The Art of is Star mant. Astrology Hand mant.
Chiromancy Face mant. Physiognomy Fire mant. Pyromancy Water mant. Hydromancy


V.
2. OFFICER. ARTIST

Though this second pair be not of any great affinity, yet are they here
united, upon account, that they both denote personal respects.

Officer.
The first of them affixed to any single Character, will signify the notion of
Prefecture in any kind of place, employment, relation; whether Honorable, or
mean and Servile, as the Integral shall denote: But if the Integral be
compounded with the Preposition Pro, or Vice, or instead of, which signifies
the notion of Substitution, it will then express the Deputy or substituted
officer; if with the Preposition Sub or Under, it will then denote the
Inferior or subordinate officer of that kind. So These words will signify
Navy Admiral, Vice Admiral Arms General, Lieuten-Gen. Brigade Major General
Regiment Colonel, Tribune Company Captain, Centurion Military Provision
Commissary Ten Soldiers Corporal, Sergeant Tribe Sheriff, Undersheriff City
Major University Chancellor, Vice-chan. College Master, Warden, President,
Provost, Rector, Principal. Abbey Abbot, Prior Manners Censor Alms Almner,
Subalmner Accounts Auditor Money Bursar, Treasurer Revenue Steward Gathering
Collector Market Clerk of Market Poor Overseer Temple Churchwarden Book
Librarian Parturition Midwife Singing Chorister Cleansing Sexton
These words will signify Street Scavinger Citing Sumner, Apparitor Peace
Justice, Constable Degrees Herald Writing Secretary, Clerk Speaking Prolocutor
Ante-ambulant Usher, Beadle Pro-Presbyt. Curate Sub-Presbyt. Clerk Pasture
Hayward Sheep Shepherd Cows Cow-herd Hogs Hog-herd Deer Keeper Conies Warrenner
Hawks Falconer Provision Steward, Manciple, Caterer Meat ordering Sewer Drink
Butler Door Porter Chamber Chamberlain Horse Groom, Hostler Agriculture Bailiff
Arresting Baily, Beadle, Sergeant, Catchpole Imprisoning Jailour, Warder
Whipping Beadle Executing Executioner Fornicating Pander, Bawd


The other Affix for ARTIST, Artist.
is not of so much use or necessity as the rest, because it may be sufficiently
expressed by those two Particles of Art and Person. It is here put in, because
I could not think of any more convenient notion of the like affinity to supply
this place. So These words will signify Quantity Mathematician Magnitude
Geometrician Number Arithmetician World Cosmographer Star Astronomer, etc.


V.
3. MECHANIC MERCHANT

The last pair in this Combination may properly serve to express those words
which are commonly given to Persons from their several Trades and Occupations.

The first, for the Trades of Manufacture, Mechanic.
according to the several employments or object matters about which such Trades
are conversant; some of which will be capable of composition with the
Preposition Sub or Under. So These words will signify Stone Mason Wood
Carpenter Metal Smith Gold Goldsmiths Iron Blacksmith Lead Plummer Pewter
Pewterer Brass Brasier Gems Lapidary Statues Statuary Painting Painter Music
Minstrel Medicine Apothecary Printing Printer Writing Scrivener Cord Roper
These words will signify Leather Tanner Cloth Clothier Cloth thickning Fuller
Vest Tailor Foot-vest Shoemaker Head-vest Hatter Hand-vest Glover Spinning
Spinster Sowing Sempster Washing Laundress Bed Upholster Tub Cooper Knife
Cutler Bow Fletcher Candle Chaundler Book Book-binder


And so for other particular Trades which belong to other matters, as Gun,
Lock, Clock, Watch, etc.

Merchant.
The second for the trades of Exchange, many of which were wont in their English
names to be compounded with the Termination Monger; as Wood-monger,
Iron-monger, Fish-monger, etc. From the old Latin word Mango, which signifies a
Seller. So These words will signify Flesh Butcher Cattle Grasier Spice Grosser
Wine Vintner Victuals Victualer Medicament Drugster
These words will signify Linen L. Draper Woollen W. Draper Head-vest
Haberdasher Old-vest Broker Silk Mercer Book Stationer.


VI.
1. POWER or Ability APTITVDE or Proneness.

Betwixt these two there is an evident affinity, both of them being common
servile notions, and of very general extent; they are applicable to an Integral
both Substantive and Adjective, and capable both of an Active and Passive
sense: Being expressed in Latin by the Termination ( tivus and bilis) and in
English by the Termination ( tive and ble) And when the words to which they are
affixed are compounded with any Adverb of a Negative or Privative sense, they
are by that Adverb made to signify, Impotence or Ineptitude, either Active or
Passive.

Though the derivations of Abstracts beforementioned may serve well enough for
several of the following instances, yet to prevent the ambiguity that may
otherwise happen in some of these derivations, it will be proper to make use of
these Particles. We have not actually indeed such variety of words as may be
suited to these notions; but this is from the defect of Language, for the things
themselves are naturally capable of this kind of inflexion.

Power.
The first of these may signify either Affirmatively Substantive, denoting
Ability Active, to do, Sensitiveness, Visiveness Passive, to be done,
Sensibleness, Visibleness
Adjective, or Able Active, to do, Sensitive, Visive Passive, to be done,
Sensible, Visible

Negatively Substantive, denoting Inability Active, to do, Insensitiveness,
Invisiveness Passive, to be done, Insensibleness, Invisibility
Adjective, or Unable Active, to do, Insensitive, Invisive Passive, to be done,
Insensible, Invisible




By this Particle are all these common words to be expressed, Capable, Effable,
Audible, Accessible, Comprehensible, Evitable, Fallible, etc. which being
compounded with the Negative Particle ( in) will signify the opposite, as,
Incapable, etc.

In this sense, to render a man Vnresponsive, is to Confound, Poze, Puzzle,
Nonplus. A person insolutive, or (as we commonly say) insolvent, is a
Bankrupt; Vnwalkative, is a Cripple; Non-surrective, is Bedrid; Vnfattable, is
Flue, etc.

The second of these may likewise signify, Aptitude.
either Affirmatively, whether affixed to Substantive, denoting Aptness Active,
to do, Amorousness, Credulousness Passive, to be done, Amiableness, Credibleness
Adjective, Apt Active, to do, Amorous, Credulous Passive, to be done, Amiable,
Credible

Negatively, whether affixed to a Substantive, Vnaptness Active, to do,
Vnamorousness, Incredulousness Passive, to be done, Vnamiableness,
Incredibleness
Adjective, Unapt Active, to do, Vnamourous, Incredulous Passive, to be done,
Vnamiable, Incredible




There are great variety of Integrals, to which these notes are applicable. So
These words will signify Motion Agile, Nimble-ness Fear Timorous, Terrible
Shame Bashful-ness Anger Hasty, Touchy, Peevish, Froward, Choleric, Te^ty,
Pettish, Snappish, etc. Contention Captious-ness, Quarrelsom Contempt Scornful,
Despicable Lust Salacity, Libidinous Inventiveness Sagacity Play Wanton,
Gamesome
These words will signify Evaporative Volatile Imitative Mimical Cleanse
Abstersive Corrode Corrosive Sickness Crazy Sickly
Sleep Drowsy Grudge Querulous Kick Skittish Break Frail Brittle
Correction Corrigible Associate Sociable To be found Obvious Inhabit Habitable
Trouble Troublesome


There are some words in our English Tongue which are used promiscuously, both
Actively and Passively; as Changeable, Mutable, Alterable, Pitiful, Fearful,
Mortal, etc. whereby they are liable to mistake, which may be prevented by
these Particles, being duly applied either to a Substantive or Adjective,
Active or Passive, as the sense shall require.

VI.
2. INCEPTIVE FREQVENTATIVE

Inceptive.
The first signifies the beginning of Actions or Things; which being a kind of
Mode or imperfect notion, is therefore fit to be joined as a servile and
auxiliary. It Is commonly expressed in English, by the word Wax or Grow; And in
Latin (as was observed before) by the Termination sco, Senesco, Lucesco,
Calesco; Wax old, Wax light, Wax hot, etc. There are in our Language some
peculiar words and phrases, which do only import this notion, and by this mark
will be rendered needless and redundant. So These words will signify Fire
Kindle, Tind, Light Break Crack Usurp Encroach Navigate Take shipping, Launch
Itinerate Set forth Proceed Set forward
These words will signify Possess Take Livery and Seisin Repent Relent Trade
Set up Work Set to work Hold Take hold Effluviate Tap, Broach


So the word Morning, with this note will signify, Dawning, Dayspring, Aurora,
Diluculum; And the word day or night, with this mark will signify,
Crepusculum, Twilight.

Frequentative.
The second of these does signify the repetition or wontedness of Actions,
which is such a kind of servile notion as the former, and therefore fit to be
this way provided for. It is of a very large exten^ in the use of it, being (as
the other notion of inceptive likewise (...)) applicable to most Verbs; And
there are some words in our English which will by this note be rendered
needless. So These words will signify Drink Bibble, Tipple Talk Babble Move in
Water Dabble Come Haunt, Resort Repeat Inculcate
These words will signify Demand Solicit, Dunne Sigh Sob Disappear Twinckle
Pull Vellicate Bite Gnaw


It may be worthy consideration to enquire, whether the opposite to each of
these, viz. Desinative and Raritive or seldom, ought not to be particularly
provided for in this kind.

VI.
3. ENDEAVOVR IMPETVS

Both these may contribute to the Abbreviating of Language, when they are
compounded as serviles; there being several distinct words and phrases, which
by such composition will be rendered needless, their true notions being
sufficiently expressable by the use of these Particles.

The first denotes the Application of a Man's self to the doing of any thing.
Endeavor.
So These words will signify Hear Listen, Hearken, Attend, Give Ear See Pry,
Peep Feel Grope Lift Heave Catch Catch at
These words will signify Strike Strike at Strike thrustingly Foine at Obtain
Reach after Provide Purvey Sell Set to Sale


The second does denote the particular fit, Impetus.
or sudden violence of any Action or Thing. So These words will signify Motion
Start, Jerk Thrust Rush Pull Twitch Percussion Rap Catch Snatch Bite Snap
Exclamation Shout, Squeak, Squeal, Screan, Shreek
These words will signify Running Career Anger Fury Melancholy Dump Flame
Flash Wind Flaw, Gust Rain Storm Battle Shock Disease Fit, Paroxysm


VII.
1. AVGMENTATIVE DIMINVTIVE

These are of very general comprehensive usefulness in Language.

The former of them does properly denote Transcendental Greatness, both
Extensive and Intensive. When it is applied to Bodies, Augmentative.
it is of the same import with those usual words, Great, Huge, Vast, Main: and
is by the Latins often expressed in Adjectives by the Termination ( osus)
whereby they signify the notion of Abounding.

When it is applied to Qualities or Actions, it denotes Intention of Degrees,
being equivalent with those Articles, very, much, hard, sore, stark, sound,
greatly; Valde, multum, oppido, magnopere, perquam, admodum, vehementer,
cumprimis, etc.

It is applicable likewise by way of Allusion to the Amplitude, Grandeur, and
eminency of any thing in its kind, which being a general Metaphor, may
therefore fitly and safely be this way provided for: As the words Man,
Physician, Merchant, with the note of Diminutive affixed to them, do signify,
meanness and contemptibleness: So the same words with this mark of
Augmentative, will denote eminency and considerableness, being proper to
commend and set forth any thing for extraordinariness in its kind.

1. This mark may be applied to the names of Bodies. So These words will
signify Sea Ocean Wave Billow, Surge Staff Stake, Batt Twig Pole Branch Bow,
Arm of Tree
These words will signify Cord Cable, Rope Dish Charger Spoon Ladle Hammer
Sledge Wooden hammer Beetle


2. It may be applied to such names as signify Qualities or Actions.

These words will signify Hate Abhor, Abominate, Detest Fear Aghast, Hideous,
Dread, Terror, Anger Rage, Wrath, Fury, Rave, Grieve Take on Shame Confusion
Wonder Astonish Consternation
Malice Rancor Care Anxiety, Solicitude Willing Forward Desire Long for Known
Notorious Ask Adjure, Urge Labor Toil, Moile, Drudge Endeavor Bestir,
Stickle, Strive, Coil, Ado, Contend Affirm Averr, Avouch, Vouch Deny Renounce
Sound Loudness, Noise Voice Clamor, Roar, Cry
These words will signify Past Antique, of old Oblique Steep Vicious
Flagitious, Heinous, Profligate Hunger Greadiness, Eagerness Eat Devour,
Voracious Drink Carouse, Quaff, Swill Spit Spawl Hot Torrid, Swelter, Soultry
Pain Torment, Torture Price Precious, Costly, Sumptuous, Dear Adorned Brave,
Gallant, Gorgeous, Splendid, Spark Beat Swing Pull Tug Prove Demonstrate
Reprove Rate Solemnity Grandeur Fame Renown
Diminutive.
The second of these being directly opposite to the first, is of like extent and
usefulness, and will not need any further explication but only by Instances.

1. It Is applicable to bodies and things. So These words will signify Horse
Nag Pike Pickerell, Jack House Cottage Bed Pallet Door Wicket Rain Mizling,
drizling Skin Tunicle, Cuticle Bladder Vesicle Dust Atome, Mote Branch Sprig
Images Babies, Puppets,
These words will signify Chamber Cell, Cabin Tower Turret Sword Dagger,
Poniard, Stilletto Gun Pistol, Dagg Stream Brook, Rivulet Prominence Stud Fosse
Wrinkle Script Ticket, Scrole Schedule Piece Scrap, Crum


2. It Is applicable to Qualities and Actions. So These words will signify Hot
Tepid, Lukewarm Moist Damp, Dank Light Glimmering Spot Speck Wild Skittish Gust
Smack, Tang Sound Quatch Skill Smattering Handsome Pretty More Great Many
A little Greater More
Price Cheap Move Wag Stumble Trip Halt Limp Fight Fray, Scuffle Bite Nibble
These words will signify Drink Bibb, Sip Cognition Hint, inkling, intimation
Doubt Scruple Sin Peccadillo, Failing Vomit Puke Burn Parch, Scorch, Sweal Boil
Parboil, rear Play Dally Sleep Slumber, Nap Ringing Jingle, Tinkle Prayer
Ejaculation Comment Gloss, Notes, Annotation Contention Jarring, Bickering Past
Alate Future Shortly, soon Oblique Steep, slope Sum Driblet Proportion
Pittance, Scantling Aggregate Parcel


3. This note may sometimes be applied in a Metaphorical sense to signify
contemptibleness or littleness of value, as well as littleness of bulk. So the
word Man with this note may signify either Dandiprat, Dwarf, Elf, Zany, Pigmy;
or else Seru^, Sorry fellow, Companion, Jack. So the word Physician with this
note, will signify Mountebank, Quacksalver, Empyrick: And the word Merchant
being so noted, will signify Peddler, Huckster, etc.

VII.
2. EXCESSIVE DEFECTIVE

Excess.
These are joined upon account of opposition, the meaning of each being very
obvious.

The former denoting all kind of excess; Particularly, 1. The redundant extreme
in all Qualities, or Virtues together. 2. With such other notions as bear some
kind of Analogy or resemblance to these in other things. As likewise, 3. The
Nimiety of any Quality or Action.

1. Of the first kind are such instances as these. So These words will signify
Diligence Double diligence Consideration Cunctation Heedfulness Carking
Patience Obstinacy Constancy Pertinacy Knowledge Curiosity Prudence Craft
Moderation Slightness, Neutrality Justice Rigor Fortitude Rashness Magnanimity
Insolence Meekness Lentitude, stupor
These words will signify Modesty Abjectness Abstinence Maceration Cleanliness
Finicalness Frugality Penuriousness Liberality Prodigality Magnificence
Luxuriousness Courtesy Fawning Taciturnity Shiness Urbanity Scurrility Gravity
Formality Faith Credulity Hope Presumption


2. Of the second kind, these are some Instances. So These words will signify
Plane Mountain Oblique Direct Present Past Simultaneous Preceding Flet Gibbous
These words will signify Parabola Hyperbole Mean Acute Ripeness Over-ripe
Equal Superior Sufficiency Excess


3. Of the third kind, there are these Instances. So These words will signify
Esteem Overvalue Opinionate Over-weene Great Overgrown Load Over-charge
Surcharge
Adorned Gay, Gaudy Sweet Luscious Laugh Giggle Hasten Precipitate Chide Scold
These words will signify Long Tedious, prolix Old Stale Extension Sprain
Dunging Scowring Soon Over-soon Repetition Battology, Tautology Baked
Over-baked Boiled Over-boiled Roasted Over-roasted


The mark of Defect is in each particular correspondent to the former, Defect.
denoting either

1. The deficient extreme in all kind Acts, Habits, Virtues, as may be seen by
the opposites to those beforementioned.

Diligence Idleness Consideration Rashness Heedfulness Carelessness
2. Some kind of resemblance to this in other things.

Plane Valley Oblique Transverse Present Future, etc.
3. The deficiency of any Action, or the under-doing of a thing.

Esteem Under-value Opinionate Under-weene Great Not sufficiently big, etc.
Baked Under-baked Boiled Under-boyled.
VII.
3. PERFECTIVE CORRVPTIVE

This pair may be of very general use for all kind of Actions and Things.

Besides those general notions referring to the measure and degrees of things
in the two former pairs, it may be requisite to provide the like way for
expressing the manner of them, as to Well or Ill; Right or Wrong; as it should
be, as it should not be. The first of these is in many Greek words expressed by
the composition with (...) and (...), Perfective.
and in English by Well and Right. So These words will signify Figured
Well-favoured Come Well come Advised Well advised Healthy Well in health Put
Set right Understand Understand aright Use Use aright Time Opportunity, Season,
Good time
These words will signify Event Prosper, Succeed, Speed, Fortunate, Lucky,
Auspicious State Good plight Humor Debonair Voice Euphony Lettering
Orthography Prove Demonstrate


Corruptive.
The second of these is sometimes expressed in English by composition with those
Particles Dis. or Mis. or Un. So These words will signify Color Dis-colour
Figure Dis-figure Place Dis-place Order Dis-order Proportion Dis-proportion
Service Dis-service Temper Distemper Esteem Mis-prision Opinion Mistake Become
Mis-become
These words will signify Conster Mis-conster Use Mis-use, Abuse Lead
Mis-lead, Seduce Name Mis-call, Nic-name Event Misfortune Mis-chance Mis-hap
Mis-adventure

These words will signify Timely Unseasonable, Untimely Figured Unfashioned,
Defaced Event Unlucky, Unprosperous, Unhappy, Unfortunate, Unsuccessful,
Sinister, Adverse


This mark may likewise serve to express the true notion of several other
words, which are not usually thus compounded.

These words will signify Fancy Caprichious, Freakish, Conceited Ancestor
Degenerate Jester Buffoon Temper Humorist
These words will signify Horse Jade Write Scribble Cut, Carve Whittle, Hack
Content Malcontent
VIII.
1. VOICE LANGVAGE

The first of these will by its composition serve to express those several
words which are used for the Voices of diverse Animals: or for the voices that
are used in expressing sundry Actions or Affections. So.

These words will signify Lion Roaring Horse Neighing Ass Braying Bull
Bellowing Cow Lowing Sheep Bleating Wolf Howling Yelling Hen Cackle Chicken
Peep Swallow Chatter
These words will signify Sparrow Chirp Hog Grunting Dog anger
Barking Snarling
Whelp Yelping Frog Croking Cock Crowing Goose Gaggle Owl Hoot Be Buz, Hum
This note may likewise be applied to such kind of voices as belong to several
affections. So These words will signify Grudging Mutter, grumble, murmur Grief
Wail, mourn, moan Anger Chafe, storm Contention Brangle, brawl, wrangle Praise
Plaudit


The second particular is paired with the former for its affinity to it.
Language.
The proper use of it is by its composition with the names or characters of
several Countries or Nations, to express the notion of the Languages spoken by
them. So the Character or word of English, Spanish, French, Italian, German,
etc. with this affix, will determine these words to the signification of those
Tongues or Languages: And the same note affixed to the name of any Tribe, may
signify the Dialect of it. There seems to be least necessity of this Particle;
and it might well be spared, if any more proper could be thought of, to supply
the place of it.

VIII.
2. MALE FEMALE

The second pair in this last Combination is for the distinction of such things
as have Sex. And all those names of Animals or Relations, which are
distinguishable only by their Sex, ought not to have any other distinction in
their appellations but that of their Sex: So that whereas we say, Ram, Yew,
Boar, Sow, etc. Father, Mother, Son, Daughter, etc. It would be more agreeable
to the Philosophy of Speech, if these things were to be expressed a male sheep,
a female sheep, a male or female swine; a male or female Parent or Child, etc.

These marks are applicable

1. To kinds of Animals; of which there are such instances as these.

These words will signify Man Woman Lion Lioness Horse Mare Bull Cow Stag Hind
Buck Do
These words will signify Dog Bitch Cock Hen Drake Duck Gander Goose Drone Be
Milter Spawner
2. To Relations of Persons; as in these instances. So The words will signify
Brother Sister Uncle Aunt Nephew Niece Suitor Servant
Mistress Sweetheart
Bridegroom Bride Husband Wife Batchelour Maid
The words will signify Widower Widow King Queen Lord Lady Master Mistress,
Dame Manservant Maidservant Abbot Abbess Friar Nun Sloven Slut Whoremonger
Whore, Strumpet


VIII.
3. YOUNG PART

Young.
By the first of these is meant the young ones or brood of any sorts of Animals,
for which we have no proper word in English. So These words will signify Horse
Colt, Foal, Filly Cow Calf Deer Fawn Sheep Lamb Goat Kid Hog Pig Bear Cub
These words will signify Dog Puppy, Whelp Cat Kitlin, Chitt Cony Rabbet Hare
Leveret Hen Chicken Frog Tadpole Herring Sprat


Part.
By the second of these may be expressed such kind of names as do comprehend in
them the notion of Part, under the several relations of 1. Situation. 2.
Proportion. 3. Figure or Color. 4. Use.

1. Of the first kind there are such examples as these. So These words will
signify Ship Fore Hinder
Prow, Beak Poop, Stern
Army Fore Middle Hinder Side
Van, Vauntguard, Front Main Battle Rere, Rereward Wing
Oration Fore Hinder
Preamble, Preface, Proem, Prologue Epilogue, Conclusion



2. Of the second are such instances as these.

A second Half A fourth Quarter A tenth Tithe, etc.
And so a fourth part of a Circle is a Quadrant, a sixth part is a Sextant, etc.

3. Of the third kind there are such instances as these.

Hand Unequal Concave
Back Palm
Leg Fore Hinder
Shin Calf
Egg White Yellow
White Yolk
Off-cut Segment
4. Of the fourth kind there are such examples as these.

These words will signify Covering Lid Stopping Stopple To be handed Handle,
Haft, Helve, Hilt Bell striking Clapper Gun striking Cock Shoo-fastning Latchet
It may happen sometimes that two of these Transcendental Particles should
concur to the composition of some words: In which case it will be worth
consideration, whether it may not be more distinct to express one of them by an
Integral, and the other by an Affix.

It may likewise deserve some farther inquiry, whether some of these Particles
here nominated, may not be spared to make room for others more useful; as
particularly those servile general notions of Continuing Discontinuing
Permitting Hindering
Facility Difficulty; as likewise, Flower, Fruits, Disease, etc.


I have been somewhat the longer in treating concerning these Transcendental
Particles; because being for the most part new, and not all of them used in any
one Language, they do thereupon stand in greater need of being more
particularly and fully explained and discussed.

I have now done with the first part of Etymology; namely, concerning the
formal differences or kinds of words, whether Integrals Particles.


CHAP. VIII. Of the Accidental Difference of words. I. Inflexion. II.
Derivation. III. Composition.
THE next thing to be treated of, is concerning the Accidental Differences of
words; and amongst these

. I.
1. Concerning the Inflexion of them, which does consist in the several ways of
varying the same word to sundry modes of signification. This is not arbitrary,
as it is used in several Languages; much less should the rules to this purpose,
which belong to the Latin, be applied to Vulgar Tongues, to which they are not
suited (as many Grammarians use to do) but it ought to be founded upon the
Philosophy of speech and such Natural grounds, as do necessarily belong to
Language.

Integral words are all capable of Inflexion.

1. Noun Substantives are inflected in a threefold respect.

1. By Number, Singural and Plural, which being more Intrinsecal to them, ought
to be provided for in the Character or word it self, and not by an Affix.

2. By Gender, in things that are capable of Sex, which are naturally but two,
Masculine and Feminine: These being less Intrinsical to the primary notion of
the word, may be more properly expressed by affixes; and then the kind or
species of every Animal (abstractedly from the respective Sexes of it) may be
signified by the Radical word it self, without any sign of Sex, which will
prevent much equivocalness.

3. By Cases, which is not so essential and natural to Substantives, as to be
provided for in the word it self, by varying the Terminations of it; For though
this course has been used in the Greek and Latin: yet neither do the Oriental
Tongues, Hebrew, Chaldee, Arabic, etc. nor those Occidental of French, Italian,
Spanish; nor I think does any Modern Tongue in the world this way express them.

The true notion of the Nominative Case, is that which precedes the Verb, and
the Accusative, that which follows the Verb; of which in speech that is suited
to natural Structure and Syntax, there ought to be no other sign or note then
the very order. As for the Genitive Case, the proper notion of that, is its
following another Substantive in regimine: But because the following
Substantive is not always governed by that which precedes; as Vrbs Roma, Rhenus
Fluvius, Taxus arbor, etc. therefore it is proper to have a Particle or
Preposition for it, as our English (Of) and (De) in the French, Italian,
Spanish, which was treated of before. The Dative Case is expressed by the
Preposition (To) the Vocative by the Interjection of bespeaking (O) and the
Ablative Case by such a Preposition as denotes Formal or Instrumental cause, or
manner of Doing. So that the true notion of the Genitive, Dative, Ablative
Case, is nothing else but that obliquity in the sense of a Substantive, which
is caused and signified by some Preposition annexed to it, as the Vocative is
by an Interjection.

And besides these three ways of Inflexion, I have showed before how
Substantives are capable likewise of Active and Passive voice, and of Tenses.

Noun Adjectives need not have any note to express Number, Gender, Case,
because in all these they agree with their Substantives; unless such Adjectives
as are used Substantively, by reason of their composition with the
Transcendental marks of Person, Thing, Time, Place, etc. In which case they
have the same kinds of Inflexion with Substantives. But there is belonging to
them,

1. A transverse Inflexion by degrees of Comparison, which may be best denoted
by the extrinsical affixes of more, most; less, least.

2. An Inflexion by Voice Active and Passive, which makes them of the same
nature with those words which we call Participles.

3. An Inflexion by Tenses. And though usually in the Latin there are but two
Tenses, viz. Present and Future, in each voice of the Participle, Amans,
Legens: Amaturus, Lecturus: Amatus, Lectus: Amandus, Legendus: excepting in
some few words, Sequens, Sequutus, Sequuturus; Gaudens, Gavisus, Gavisurus: and
of Coenatum, which is used promiscuously both Actively and Passively; yet this
is a defect in the Latin Tongue: For the natural notion does render Participles
as well capable of the Preter Tense; and accordingly the Greeks have (...): He
that beats, he that has beaten, he that will beat; he that is beaten, he that
has been beaten, he that will be beaten. The like would have been in Latin, if
the Philosophy of Speech had been as well observed in the Institution of that
Language.

Derived Adverbs are capable of Inflexion by degrees of Comparison.

Amongst the Particles, there are only two that are capable of Inflexion; viz.
the Copula, and Pronouns.

The Copula is inflected by Mode and by Tense; which I have sufficiently
explained before: Only it is here to be noted, Chap. 5.
that besides those definite notions of time past, present, and to come, there
is likewise Tempus Aoristicum, or indefinite time; and that whenever the Copula
is used in materia necessaria, it ought to be understood as being indeterminate
to any of those differences of time. So for such sayings, Homo est animal, Deus
vivit, etc. there is no kind of time, whether past, present, or future, wherein
these sayings are not equally true; so that the sense of such sayings is est,
fuit, erit; vivit, vixit, vivet. And therefore it would be convenient to make
some distinction for expressing this indefinite time.

Pronoun Substantives are inflected by Number and Gender, and by Case, as Noun
Substantives are; besides that kind of improper Inflection, whereby they are
made Possessives; which is rather a kind of Derivation, and reduplicative,
which consists only in the doubling of them for the greater Emphasis.

The other Particles are not capable of Inflexion, because they do not denote
any Essence or Act, which is capable of several modes or respects, as
Integrals, and two of the Particles do: but only the Circumstances or
Modifications of other words; and therefore may be styled indeclinable or
invariable.

II.
As to Derivation, there ought naturally to be but one kind of Root, from which
the several differences of Integrals should be derived; and this should be a
Noun Substantive which signifies the Thing, or the Essence. If it be a Noun
Substantive Neuter, then the first branches of it are Substantives Active and
Passive; after which succeed the Adjectives belonging to each of them, and then
the Adverbs, which denote the Quality or Manner of being or doing. All which
belong to one branch. Another branch is the Substantives Abstract, which have
the same kind of derivations from them, Chap. I. XI.
as the former; as is more distinctly explained before.

III.
As to the last accidental difference of words, viz. Composition. It Is to be
noted, that the words of a Philosophical Language should be so suited unto
natural notions, that there should be little need of other compositions,
besides those by Prepositions, Adverbs, and Transcendental Particles. But if
this were desired for greater elegance and copiousness of Speech, it should be
capable of any composition whatsoever, which may be signified in writing by
some Hyphen or mark of Union, to join the words compounded; and in Speech by
pronouncing them together as one word, without changing the nature of either.
So the word Idolatry is Idol-worship, etc.

CHAP. IX. Of the second part of Grammar called Syntax.
AS the first part of Grammar does treat concerning the nature and differences
of particular words: So the second part of Grammar styled Syntax, does concern
the proper way of Union or right Construction of words, into Propositions, or
continued Speech. And this may be distinguished into two kinds. 1. That which
is Customary and figurative: or 2. That which is Natural and regular.

1. That structure may be styled Customary and figurative, which is used in the
Phraseologies or forms of Speech, peculiar to several Languages, wherein words
are put together according to a Metaphorical and tralatitious sense of them; as
in those Latin Phrases, Redigere in ordinem, which signifies, Privare
magistratu; E medio tollere, for Occidere. And so for those English Phrases of
Breaking a jest, Hedging in a Debt, Taking ones heels and flying away, Being
brought to bed, Lying in, Being in Labor or Travail, etc. All which ought to
be rendered according to the natural sense and meaning intended by those
Phrases; which is observed in the regular Translation of any Language. And he
that would go about to render such forms of Speech, according to the strict and
natural sense of the words, could not reasonably expect to be understood in any
other Language.

But besides these kind of Metaphors which are peculiar to some Tongues, there
are others of a more general use, which may be well enough retained in a
Philosophical Language.

2. That structure may be called Regular, which is according to the natural
sense and order of the words.

The General Rule for this order amongst Integrals is, That which governs
should precede; The Nominative Case before the Verb, and the Accusative after;
The Substantive before the Adjective: Only Adjective Pronouns being Particles
and affixed, may without inconvenience be put indifferently either before or
after. Derived Adverbs should follow that which is called the Verb, as denoting
the quality or manner of the Act.

As for the Grammatical Particles, those which serve for the Inflexion or
Composition of words should naturally precede; and so likewise should other
Adverbs, and Prepositions.

Transcendental Particles are to be joined in composition at the ends of words,
to vary their termination.

Besides the order required in Syntax* something ought to be subjoyned
concerning the Quantity of Vowels or Syllables, together with the several
distinctions or interpunctions to be observed betwixt words and sentences.

As for that part usually treated of in instituted Grammars, styled Prosodia,
concerning the quantity of Vowels, there needs not any thing to be said unto
that here; because in a Philosophical Language every Vowel is supposed to be in
the writing sufficiently distinguished in this respect; every long Vowel having
a note or mark to signify its prolation.

The expressing of any one syllable in a word, with a little higher tune, and
longer time then others, is to be expressed by an accent; as in the words,
Consent, Contrive, Compose, Having, Wisdom, Fortune, Profit, Parentage,
Privilege, Consider, Determine, etc.

The distinctions to be observed betwixt words and sentences, may refer either
to 1. The time; or 2. The manner of pronouncing.

1. The first concerns those Pauses or intervals of rest to be observed in
Pronouncing, which were anciently distinguished into three kinds; namely,
Comma, Colon, Period. The first of these being marked with a point by the
middle of the Letter; The second at the top; The last at the bottom. Unto
these, later times have added two others; namely, a mark to signify something
intermediate betwixt Comma and Colon, styled Semicolon; and something more then
a full point, which is usually expressed by a greater distance betwixt the words,
or by a Breach in the line.

The use of these Points is to direct what kind of pause is to be observed, and
how the tenor or tone of the voice is either to be continued or to fall.

2. The manner of pronouncing words does sometimes give them a different sense
and meaning, and Writing being the Picture or Image of Speech, ought to be
adapted unto all the material circumstances of it, and consequently must have
some marks to denote these various manners of Pronunciation; which may be
sufficiently done by these seven kinds of marks or Interpunctions.

1. Parenthesis. 2. Parathesis, or Exposition. 3. Erotesis, or Interrogation.
4. Ecphonesis, Exclamation or wonder. 5. Emphasis. 6. Irony. 7. Hyphen.
1. Parenthesis serves for the distinction of such an additional part of a
sentence as is not necessary to perfect the sense of it, and is usually
expressed in our Western Languages by the enclosing of such words betwixt two
curve lines ()

2. Parathesis, or Exposition, is used for distinction of such words as are
added by way of explication of something preceding, and is usually expressed by
enclosing such words between two angular lines; as []

3. Erotesis, or Interrogation, is a kind of Period for the distinction of such
sentences as are proposed by way of Question, and is usually thus marked?

4. Ecphonesis, or Wonder and Exclamation, is a note of direction for raising
the tone, upon occasion of such words as denote some vehement passion, and is
noted thus!

5. Emphasis is used for the distinction of such word or words, wherein the
force of the sense does more peculiarly consist, and is usually expressed by
putting such words into another kind of Character, as suppose the Italic.

6. Irony is for the distinction of the meaning and intention of any words,
when they are to be understood by way of Sarcasm or scoff, or in a contrary
sense to that which they naturally signify: And though there be not (for ought
I know) any note designed for this in any of the Instituted Languages, yet that
is from their deficiency and imperfection: For if the chief force of Ironies do
consist in Pronunciation, it will plainly follow, that there ought to be some
mark for direction, when things are to be so pronounced.

7. Hyphen is a note that signifies the uniting of two syllables or words into
one, and may properly be used when two words are to be compounded together: It
is usually expressed by two little strokes, thus (^)

CHAP. X. Of Orthography. I. Concerning the doctrine of Letters: the Authors
who have treated of this Subject. II. A brief Table of such simple sounds as
can be framed by men. III. A further explication of this Table, as to the
Organs of Speech, and as to the letters framed by these Organs.
ORthography is that part of Grammar, I.
which concerns the doctrine of Letters, which being the most simple Elements
of Speech, it ought therefore to be so stated, that there may be a sufficient
number of them to express all Articulate sounds, and not more then are
necessary to this end. Much consideration is requisite to the right
establishment of these; upon which account this subject has been largely
debated, by several Authors of great names and reputation for Learning: Besides
those Famous Emperors, Cajus Caesar, and Octavius Augustus, who both writ upon
this subject: ^arro likewise, and Appion, and Quintilian, and Priscian, did
bestow much pains upon the same enquiry, concerning the just number of Letters.
And in later times, it has been treated of with great variety of Opinions, by
Erasmus, both the Scaligers, Lipsius, Salmasius, Vossius* Iacobus Matthias*
Adolphus Metkerchus, Bernardus Malinchot, etc. Beside several of our own
Countrymen, Sir Thomas Smith, Bullokar, Alexander Gill, and Doctor Wallis; the
last of whom, amongst all that I have seen published, seems to me, with
greatest Accurateness and subtlety to have considered the Philosophy of
Articulate sounds. But besides such (whose considerations upon this subject are
made public) I must not forget to acknowledge the favor and good hap I have
had, to peruse from their private papers, Dr. William Holder. Mr. Lodowick.
the distinct Theories of some other Learned and Ingenious persons, who have
with great judgment applied their thoughts to this enquiry; in each of who^e
Papers, there are several suggestions that are new, out of the common rode, and
very considerable.

Letters may be considered according to their Essence Accidents Names Order
Affinity Figure Pronunciation



The Essence of Letters does consist in their Power or proper sound, which may
be naturally fixed and stated, from the manner of forming them by the
instruments of speech; and either is, or should be the same in all Languages.

What variety there is of these, may appear from the Distribution of them into
their several kinds, according to the following Table; wherein it is
endeavored and aimed at, to give a rational account of all the simple sounds
that are, or can be framed by the mouths of men.

Letters may be considered according to The organs by which they are framed,
whether Their Natures Breathless Breathing through the Nose Mouth Intercepted
Free Proceeding from Made by The middle of the mouth. Each side of the Mouth.
Trepidation of the Tongue Whistling Active Passive Dense Subtle Of a middle
nature Vowels Tongue Root Inmost palate C G Ngh Ng Ch Gh 11^
H Top Foremost palate, or Root of the Teeth. T D Nh N Th Dh Lh L Rh R Sh Zh S
Z Hy i e a a One Lip The other Lip Tops of the Teeth.
P B mh m F V Hw ou o u Mute Sonorous Mute. Sonorous Mute Sonorous Mute
Sonorous Mute Sonorous Mute Sonorous Mute Sonorous Mute Sonorous

For the better explication of this Table, there are these two things to be
considered: 1. The Causes of these Letters. III.
2. The Letters themselves.

1. In the Causes of Letters there are observable The Organs by which they are
formed, either more Common; Lungs, Throat, Mouth, Nose. Peculiar. Passive
Palate; according to the parts Inmost or middle Foremost
Teeth; either the Root or inner gums Top
Lip Upper Lower

Active; whether the Tongue; according to the Root or middle Top
Lips


The Actions of these Organs, whether by Appulse; of the Lips; either To one
another To the tops of the teeth
Tongue; in respect of the Top of it; to the Teeth, their Tops Roots or gums
Root or middle of it, to the Palate

Trepidation, or vibration; either of the Lips Tongue; whether Top Root or
middle of it

Percolation of the breath, between the Lips contracted Tongue; either the Top
of it, applied to the Tops Roots of the Teeth
Root or middle of it, applied to the inward palate.





These I conceive to be all the kinds of Actions and Configurations which the
organs are capable of, in order to Speech.

What kind of Letters are framed by these, will appear in the next Table.

All simple letters may be distinguished into such as are; either Apert and
free, according to degrees Greater; styled most properly Vowels, which may be
distinguished into Labial, being framed by an emission of the breath through
the Lips contracted, Less. (o) More, with the help of the Tongue put into a
concave posture long ways, the Whistling or French (u)
Lingual; the breath being emitted, when the Tongue is put into a posture More
concave, and removed at some distance from the palate (a) Less concave or
plain, and brought nearer the palate ( a) Somewhat unequal toward the palate (
e)

Lesser; being either Sonorous; of which it may be said, that they do somewhat
approach to the nature of Consonants, and are mediae potestatis; because when
they are joined with any Vowel to compose that which we call a Dipthong, they
put on the nature of Consonants; and when they are not so joined, but used
singly, they retain the nature of Vowels, which is the reason why it has been
so much disputed amongst some Learned Men, whether they are to be reckoned
amongst Vowels or Consonants. These may be distinguished into Labial; by an
emission of the breath through the Lips, more Contracted (ou) Lingual; when the
breath is emitted betwixt the middle of the Tongue in a more Unequal posture,
and the palate (i) Guttural; by a free emission of the breath from the Throat ()
Mute; When the breath is emitted through the Organs of speech, being in the
same position as before: but without voice, to be distinguished as their three
preceding correspondents, into Labial (hou) or (ou h) Lingual (hi) Guttural (h)


Intercepted and shut; according to degrees Lesser; which because they have
something Vowelish in them, are therefore by some styled Semivowels, being
spiritous and breathed, whether Labial; being pronounced through the Mouth; by
Appulse of either lip to the opposite teeth, framing V. Sonorous F. Mute
Trepidation of the Lips, like that sound which is used in the driving of Cows,
to which there is a correspondent mute, sometimes used as an Interjection of
disdain. Percolation of the breath, betwixt both the Lips contracted
round-wise, which makes the vocal whistling sound, to which likewise there is a
correspondent mute whistling: But neither of these two last pairs being of use
in Language, they need not therefore have any Marks or Letters assigned to them.
Nose; by an appulse; either of the Lips against one another: or against the
top of the Teeth, framing M. Sonorous. HM. Mute.

Lingual; either in respect of the Top of the Tongue; being pronounced through
the Mouth; by Appulse, of the top of the Tongue, to the Top of the Teeth; the
breath being emitted through the middle of the Mouth, framing Dh sonorous. Th
mute.
Foremost part of the Palate; the breath being emit-through the Corners of the
mouth, framing L sonorous. H l mute.


Trepidation or Vibration; against the inmost part of of the Palate, framing R.
sonorous. HR. mute.
Percolation of the breath; between the top of the the Tongue, and the roots of
the Teeth, whether more Subtle, framing Z. sonorous. S. mute.
Dense, framing Zh. sonorous. Sh. mute.


Nose; by an appulse of the top of the Tongue to the roots of the Teeth,
framing N. sonorous. HN. mute.

Root or middle of the Tongue; being pronounced through the Mouth; by Appulse;
to the inward Palate, framing Gh. sonorous. Chapter mute.
Trepidation; which will frame a sound like the snarling of a dog, to which
there is a correspondent mute, like that motion which we make in haaking, not
necessary to be provided for by any Letter for Language. Percolation of the
breath between the root of the tongue and the inward palate; to which there is
a correspondent mute, which makes a sound like the hissing of a Goose, not
necessary to be provided for by any mark assigned to them for Letters.
Nose; by an appulse of the root of the tongue to the inward palate, framing NG
sonorous. NGH. mute.



Greater; which do most partake of the nature of Consonants, and may be styled
non-spiritous or breathless, to be distinguished according to the active
instruments of speech into Labial; Intercepting of the breath by closure of the
Lips, framing B. sonorous. P. mute.
Lingual; in respect of the Top, intercepting the breath, by an appulse to the
bottom of the Teeth, framing D. sonorous. T. mute.
Root, intercepting the breath, by an appulse to the inmost palate; framing G.
sonorous. C. mute.






These I conceive (so far as I can judge at present) to be all the simple
sounds that can be framed by the Organs of Speech.

CHAP. XI. Of Vowels.
THose Letters are called Vocales, Vowels, in pronouncing of which by the
Instruments of Speech, the breath is freely emitted; and they are therefore
styled Apert or open Letters. These may be distinguished either, 1. Formally,
by their several Apertions, and the manner of configuration in the instruments
of Speech required to the framing of them, which constitutes the distinct
species of Vowels; or 2. Accidentally, by the quantity of time required to
their prolation, by which the same Vowel is made either long or short.

There are (I conceive) eight simple different species of Vowels, easily
distinguishable, whose powers are commonly used. I cannot deny, but that some
other intermediate sounds might be found; but they would, by reason of their
proximity to those others, prove of so difficult distinction, as would render
them useless; these eight seeming to be the principal and most remarkable
periods, amongst the degrees of Apert sounds.

As for the third of the Labials, the u Gallicum, or whistling u, though it
cannot be denied to be a distinct simple vowel; yet it is of so laborious and
difficult pronunciation to all those Nations amongst whom it is not used (as to
the English) especially in the distinction of long and short, and framing of
Dipthongs, that though I have enumerated it with the rest, and shall make
provision for the expression of it, yet shall I make less use of it, than of
the others; and for that reason, not proceed to any further explication of it.

It will be difficult to express the several powers of these Vowels by writing;
Pronuntiation being such a thing, quae nec scribitur, nec pingitur, nec hauriri
eam fas est, nisi viva voce. Lipsius de rect. Pronuntiatione L. Lat. cap. 3.
And therefore the best way for the explaining of them, is by such known words
as may be given for the instance of each of them. And as for the figure or
writing of those four, which are not commonly esteemed to be distinct species
of Vowels, I shall make choice to represent them by such Characters, as may
seem least strange. What kind of power or sound that is, which is peculiar to
each of these seven Vowels, may be easily understood by these following
Instances: a Short Bot- tom Fol- ly Fot Mot Pol Rod a Long Bought Fall Fought
Paul Rawd a Short Batt Val- ley Fatt Mat Pal Rad- nor a Long Bate Vale Fate
Mate Pale TRade e Short Bett Fell Fet Met Pell Red e Long Beat Veale Feate
Meat Peale Read i Short Bitt Fill Fit Mit- ten Pill Rid i Long Beete Feel
Feet Meet Peele Reed o Short o Long Bote Foale Vote Mote Pole Rode ou Short
Full Fut Pull ou Long Boot Fool Foot Moote Poole Roode Short But Full Futt
Mutt- on Pull Rudd- er Long Amongst

Amongst these, the Vowels not commonly owned by us in writing, are these four,
a.i.ou.. But that they are distinct species of Vowels, and have peculiar powers
of their own, not expressible by any other Letters, (supposing every Letter (as
it ought) to be determined to one particular sound) may sufficiently appear
from the above mentioned, and several other Instances. And that those two which
are commonly used with us for distinct Vowels; namely, the third and the fifth,
I, and V; as in the words Light, Lute, are not simple Vowels, but Dipthongs, I
shall show afterward.

Though the Vowel ( O) do not admit of any instance in our Language, wherein it
is used Short, nor the Vowel () wherein it is used Long; yet there are
naturally such differences of these Vowels, as well as of the rest. Suppose a
long Vowel to be divided into two parts; as Bo-ote, pronounce it then with half
the time, and it must make the short Vowel Bote. And thus on the contrary,
doubling the time of a short Vowel, as B-t, will render it Long: which may
serve to explain how these Vowels naturally are capable of being made both long
and short; Though by reason of general disuse amongst us, such differences
would at first seem somewhat difficult, and not easily distinguishable.

The Vowel (a) is placed first; (...) partly in conformity with other
Alphabets, and because it is the most Apert amongst the Lingua-palatal Vowels.
It Is expressed by this Character, because being one of the Greek Letters, it is
more commonly known. It Is framed by an emission of the Breath, betwixt the
Tongue and the Palate; the tongue being put into a more concave posture, and
removed further off from the palate.

The Vowel ( a) is framed by an emission of the Breath, betwixt the tongue and
the concave of the palate; the upper superficies of the tongue being rendered
less concave, and at a less distance from the palate.

The Vowel ( e) is framed by an emission of the Breath, betwixt the tongue and
the concave of the palate, the upper superficies of the tongue being brought to
some small degree of convexity.

The Vowel (t) is expressed by this Character, because it is the most simple
figure; and therefore does best suit with the most acute Letter; as likewise,
because this Letter, amongst many other Nations is already used and pronounced
according to the sound which is here intended. It Is framed by an emission of
the Breath betwixt the tongue and the concave of the palate, the upper
superficies of the tongue being put into a more unequal posture, and thrust up
near the palate.

The Vowel ( o) is the first, and most apert of the Labials; being framed by an
emission of the Breath, betwixt the Lips, a little drawn together and
contracted.

The Vowel (ou) is the second of the Labials, requiring a greater contraction
of the Lips. It Is expressed by this Character, which is used in Greek for o
Dipthong; because commonly that Dipthong, as also the French ou is pronounced
in the sound of this simple Vowel.

The Vowel () is wholly Guttural, being an emission of the breath from the
throat, without any particular motion of the tongue or lips. It Is expressed by
this Character which is already appropriated by the Welsh for the picture of
this sound.

The difference betwixt long and short Vowels, should always be written as
well as pronounced, that is, there should be some Note or Mark to express when
a Vowel is to be used long.

These eight Letters before enumerated, I conceive to be so many distinct
species of Vowels, formally different in respect of their Powers; and though I
cannot at present think of any other besides, yet having formerly, upon new
considerations, and suggestions, so often changed my thoughts upon this
enquiry, I dare not be dogmatical about it, or assert confidently, that there
neither are, nor can be any more: For who knows how many other minute
differences of Apertion may be now used, or hereafter found out, by others,
which practice and custom may make as easy and distinguishable to them, as
these are to us? Besides that the measure of Apertion (as is well observed)
must be like continued quantity, divisibilis in infinitum. Only this (I think)
may be safely affirmed, that the establishment of Vowels here mentioned, will
serve much better to express all articulate sounds, than can be done by any of
the ordinary Alphabets now in use.

I cannot but animadvert here on the by, upon that Argument which Capellus, and
others do much insist upon, De Antiquitate Punctorum, l. 1.
against the Antiquity of the Hebrew Points, or Vowels; Because (say they) the
making of so many, is an injudicious, and irrational invention, for which there
is no real ground; there being in nature, and amongst other Languages, but five
distinct Vowels, and not fourteen: And therefore they conclude the Invention of
them to be new, and not of any great Antiquity.

To speak freely in this case (without in^^rposing as to the main state of the
Question) This Reason does not seem to be of any force. Though the Conclusion
they infer should be true, yet this Argument urged for it, is false, both as to
the Consequence, and Antecedent. The Imperfections and Defects of any
Invention, do rather argue the Antiquity, than the Novelty of it; there being
much time and experience required to the perfecting any invention: And it would
rather follow, that because they are imperfect, therefore are they more like to
be Ancient. But besides, the Hebrew Vowels will upon consideration, be found to
be a contrivance full of more than ordinary Accurateness, founded upon the
Philosophy of Articulate sounds, and may without any force be applied to the
number here established: Excepting the French (u).

a Long (...) a Long (...) e Long (...) i Long (...) a Short (...) a Short
(...) e Short (...) i Short (...) o Long (...) ou Long (...) Long o Short (...)
ou Short Short (...)

And though there be no distinct Character for ou short, and long, perhaps that
Language as well as the English seldom using such distinction in those sounds;
yet is ((...)) sometimes in that Language used in stead of a short Vowel, and
((...)) for a long Vowel.

The use of Scheva in the Hebrew, is to direct the joining of such Consonants
together, as would otherwise be of very difficult, pronunciation, and not
easily unite, as in the words (...) and (...) which should be pronounced lmodh
and mloch, but because LM and ML, will not of themselves coalesce, therefore is
Schevah interposed, which being rapidly pronounced (and that probably as our
short) does not seem to make any distinct Syllable.

So that it seems much more colorable to infer the Novelty of the Hebrew
Points, from the Accurateness, than from the injudiciousness of their
contrivance.

CHAP. XII. Of Consonants.
THose Letters are styled Consonants, in the pronouncing of which the Breath is
intercepted, by some Collision or Closure, amongst the Instruments of Speech:
And for this reason are they styled Clausae Literae, as the Vowels are Apertae.

The common distinction of these into Semi-vowels and Mutes, will not upon a
strict enquiry be adaequate. And therefore I do rather choose to distribute them
into these three kinds; 1. (...), Spiritous, or Breathed. 2. (...), (if I may
use that word) Semi-spiritous, or half Breathed. 3. (...), Non-spiritous, or
Breathless.


1. By Spiritous, or Breathed, are meant such Consonants, as require to the
framing of them a more strong emission of the Breath, either through the Nose.
Mouth.


1. The Consonants which are to be breathed only through the Nose, may be again
distinguished into 1. Sonorous, as M. N. Ng. 2. Mute, as hm. hn. hng.


Both these kinds, as likewise those that follow through the Mouth, have some
imperfect sound of their own, without the joining of any Vowel with them;
though the sonorous only be Vocal; and the mute sort are only a kind of Whisper.

By Sonorous, are meant, such as require some voice or vocal sound, to the
framing of them.

By the Mutes of these, are meant other Letters of the same configuration,
pronounced with a strong emission of the Breath, without any Vocal sound.

( m) is mugitus, the natural sound of Lowing, when the Lips are shut, and the
sound proceeds out of the Nose. It Is counted of difficult pronunciation in the
end of words: For which reason, the Latin Poets cut it off in Verse, when it
comes before a Vowel in the next words: And the Greeks do not terminate any
word with it.

( N) is Tinnitus, when the breath is sent out, the Limbus of the Tongue being
fixed toward the Gums, or bottom of the upper Foreteeth. In the pronouncing of
this, the breath is emitted only out of the Nose, which makes it differ from (
L). It Is counted a pleasant and easy Letter, which may perhaps be the reason
why this Letter N, and L, and R, are for the most part, both in Greek and Latin
immutable, both in Declensions and Conjugations.

(Ng) is framed by an appulse of the Root of the Tongue toward the inner part
of the Palate. The sound of it may be continued simple, as well as any other;
which makes it evident to be a single letter, and not a compound of n, and g,
as we usually write it: Thus the word Anguis, in the true spelling of it,
should be writ A, ng, G, ou, i, s. The Hebrew (...) is supposed by diverse
Authors, but I think groundlesly, to be of this power. I know several things
may be said, to render it probable, that the power here intended, may be
sufficiently expressed, by a more soft and slight manner of pronouncing the
letters N and G compounded together: But I rather incline to reckon it a simple
and distinct Letter.

To the Sonorous letters of this kind, there are three Mutes of affinity, hm,
hn, hng; which are formed when the breath is emitted through the Instruments of
Speech, in the same position respectively as in the former, but without any
Vocal Sound. The two first of these are in use amongst the Welsh and Irish: And
the last of them, in the opinion of Bellarmine, and some other Grammarians, is
rather the true sound of the Hebrew (...).

2. The Spiritous Consonants to be breathed through the Mouth, are likewise of
two kinds, Sonorous, V. Dh. L. R. Z. Zh. Mute, F. Th. hL. hR. S. Sh.


(V) is the same with that which we call V Consonant: It Is of the same power
which is commonly ascribed to B asperated, or rather incrassated. So the
Western Jews pronounce their Letter ((...)) when not Dageshated. And it is
observed that in Ancient Monuments amongst the Latins, these two Letters have
been often put for one another: And that in some words, Scaliger de Causis L.
L. cap. 28.
where the sense has been very much varied by this change; so Acerbus for
Acervus: Veneficium for Beneficium. The power of this Letter was first
expressed among the Latins by the Digamma Aeolicum, ((...)) (so styled for its
Figure, not its Sound) which is now the Character for the Letter (F) but had at
first the power of the Consonant (V) and was written in Claudius his time
invertedly, as DIFAI, AMPLIAFIT. Vossius Gram. lib. 1. cap. 15.
This Letter is framed by a kind of straining or percolation of the Breath,
through a Chink between the lower lip and upper teeth, with some kind of
Murmr.

( F) is the correspondent Mute to this: It Is framed by the same kind of
position of the Lip and Teeth, and percolation of the Breath betwixt them, with
this only difference, that as the former was with some kind of Vocal Sound, so
this is wholly mute. This seems to be such an incrassation of the Letter (P) as
(V) is of (B). It Is answerable to the Greek (ph). And though several of the
Greek words with (ph) are rendered in Latin by Ph, as Philosophia, Sophista,
etc. yet the Italians write Filosofo, Sofista, etc. and some other words are so
rendered in Latin, as (...), fuga, (...) fama. What that diluteness is, ibid.
which Vossius says is more proper to F, than to ph, I understand not; nor is
it easy to guess at the meaning of that in Cicero, concerning Fundanius, and
Phundanius, unless perhaps it be, as Lipsius guesses, of pronouncing it as
Pfhundanius, or else as P-hundanius.

( Dh) and its correspondent Mute ( Th) are of that power which we commonly
ascribe to the Letters D, and T, aspirated or incrassated. And though these two
Powers are commonly used by us without any provision for them by distinct
Characters, yet our Ancestors the Saxons had several Letters to express them.
They represented (Dh) by this mark (th) as in Father, Mother, the, that, then:
And ( Th) by this mark (th) as theif* thick, faith. And it is most evident that
the sounds of them (though we usually confound them, under the same manner of
writing) are in themselves very distinguishable, as in these Examples.

Dh.
Thee, this, there, thence, that, those, though, thou, thy, thine. Father,
Mother, Brother, Leather, Weather, Feather. Smooth, Sees, Wreath, Bequeath.
Th.
Think, thine, thigh, thing, thistle, thesis, thanks, thought, throng, thrive,
thrust. Does, death, wrath, length, strength, Loves, Teaches, etc.
These Letters are framed by a percolation of the Breath through a kind of
Chink betwixt the tongue and upper teeth, the first with some kind of vocal
sound, the other wholly mute.

( Gh) and its Correspondent ( Ch) are both of them framed by a vibration of
the root or middle of the tongue against the Palate, the former being vocal,
and the other mute. They are each of them of difficult pronuntiation: The first
is now used by the Irish, and was perhaps heretofore intended by the spelling
of those English words, Right, Light, Daughter, Enough, Thorough, etc. Though
this kind of sound be now by disuse lost amongst us, the latter of them (Ch) is
now used amongst the Welsh, and was perhaps heretofore intended by the Greek
Letter (ch.) Neither of them is easily imitable by any mouth not trained up to
the practice of them.

(L) is Clangor. It Is formed by an appulse of the Tip of the tongue to the
Palate, and then forcing out the Breath. It Is esteemed facillima and
liquidissima Literarum; in the pronouncing of which, most Nations do agree.

(Lh) or ( hL) the correspondent Mute to this, is much used by the Welsh: They
seem to form it as the other ( L) only by abstaining the voice, and a more
forcible emission of the Breath, as is used in all other mute letters of the
Spiritous kind.

( R) is stridor vel susurrus: It Is called from the snarling of Dogs, Litera
Canina: It Is made by a quick trepidation of the tip of the tongue being
vibrated against the palate; for which, they who are disabled, by reason of the
natural infirmity of their tongues, which is called (...), Balbuties, do
commonly pronounce in stead of it, the letter ( L) which is of a more soft and
easy sound. Demosthenes, Alcibiades, Aristotle, Scaliger, the Fathers, are
said to have labored under this Infirmity.

( Rh) or ( hR) the correspondent mute to this, is made by a forcible emission
of the breath, through the instruments of Speech in the same position as for
the Letter ( R) but without any vocal sound. It Is the same with the Greek
((...)) and much in use amongst the Welsh.

(Z) is by some styled ( S) molle. It Is properly the Greek ((...)) and the
Hebrew ((...)). It Is framed by an appulse of the tongue toward the upper Teeth
or Gums, and then forcing out the breath from betwixt the tongue and the upper
teeth, with a vocal sound, which makes a more dense kind of hissing, mixed with
some kind of murmur, apumque susurro persimilem: It Is of the same affinity with
S, as B with P, D with T, and G with C. That double Letter in the Hebrew
((...)) which is by some accounted equivolent to this, is of a quite different
power, as were easy to illustrate by several examples.

(S) the correspondent mute (though it be commonly reckoned for a semivowel) is
framed as the former, but without any vocal sound. It Is styled Sibilus. The
power of it is the natural sound of Hissing; for which reason it is called
Litera Serpentina. The Hebrews have two Characters for this Letter, besides two
others for its Allies. Among the Persians all words that signify Grandeur and
Magnificence, are said to be terminated with it: Though others condemn it for a
harsh, unpleasing, quarelling Letter. Messala Corvinus, a great man, and a
famous Orator among the Romans, is said to have writ a particular Treatise
against this Letter, much esteemed of amongst learned men. And Pindar likewise
writ an Ode against it, versus (...), wherein there was no word that had any S
in it. The disability of pronouncing this Letter, is called Blaesitas, Lisping,
when it is corruptly sounded like (th).

(Zh) the sonorous Consonant, and ( Sh) its correspondent mute, are framed by a
percolation of the breath, betwixt the tongue rendered concave, and the teeth
both upper and lower: The first being vocal, the other mute. Though they are
not provided for commonly by distinct and simple Characters, yet are they
distinct and simple letters; both of them facil and common: The first amongst
the French, who express it by I, as in the word Iean, etc. and is easily
imitable by us: Judges 12.6.
And though the other did once cost 42000 men their lives, for not being able
to pronounce it, yet is it of common use with many Nations.

2. By Semispiritous or half breathed Consonants, are meant such as are
accompanied with some kind of vocal murmr, as B, D, G. whereas

3. Those are styled non-spiritous or breathless, which are wholly mute; as, P,
T, C.

( B and P) are framed when the breath is intercepted by the closure of the
Lips; the first of them being more soft, with some kind of murmr, the other
more hard and wholly mute.

( D and T) are commonly framed, by an appulse or collision of the top of the
tongue against the teeth, or upper gums; the first being more soft and gentle,
with some kind of murmr, the other wholly mute.

( G and C) are framed more inwardly, by an interception of the breath toward
the throat, by the middle or root of the tongue, with such a kind of difference
between them, as there is betwixt the two former pairs.

CHAP. XIII. Of Compound Letters, whether Vowels, Consonants,
BEsides these simple Letters before enumerated, there are others commonly
used, which may be styled Compound, both Vowels. Consonants.


The Compound Vowels are called commonly Dipthongs, or Tripthongs, or Bissona
in Latin; but because the signification of those words may as well agree with
double Consonants, therefore others would have them styled Bivocales, or
Trivocales. Iacobus Matthias in his Treatise de Literis, and our learned
Gataker, in a particular Discourse to this purpose, do earnestly contend that
there are no such things as Dipthongs. Their principal Arguments depend upon
this Supposition, That (i and ou) (which are necessary Ingredients to the
framing of all usual Dipthongs) are Consonants, the same with y and w. Others
would have them to be of a middle nature, betwixt Vowels and Consonants;
according to which Opinion I have already described them: From whence the
Reason is clear, why these Vowels concur to the making of Dipthongs, because
being the most contract of Vowels (as i^ also the Vowel () of which more
hereafter) They do therefore approach very near to the nature of Literae
clausae, or Consonants; there being no Transition amongst these, either from
one another, or to the other intermediate sounds, without such a kind of motion
amongst the Instruments of speech, by reason of these different Apertions, as
does somewhat resemble that kind of Collision required to the framing of
Consonants.

Several Languages use several kinds of these Dipthongs, but how many there are
in nature, may be easily collected by the former division of Vowels (supposing
that to be according to nature) One of these two Vowels i or ou must be an
ingredient into all usual Dipthongs, either as Preposed. Subjoyned.


1. These Vowels i and ou may be preposed in this mixture before each of the
other; in which case they will have the same power that we commonly ascribe to
y and w, and will frame these twelve Dipthongs.

ia yall, yawne ia yate yarrow ie yet yellow io yoke iu i young oua wall oua
wale oue well ouo woe ouu ou wunn, worse.
2. They may be subjoyned to each of the other; as in these Instances: ai boy
ai Ay ei o^ ui i our English (i) in bite aou aw aou eou hew oou uou ou owr,
owl.


3. They may be both preposed and subjoyned to themselves and to one another.

ii ye ouou woo iou you oui we
As for the other intermediate Vowels being preposed before one another, they
will not afford any coalescing sounds that are easily distinguishable. E being
preposed before a, a, o,, will scarce be distinguished from ia, ia, io, i. A,
before E, will be but as a^, before a, o, u, it will not coalesce into a plain
sound. The same likewise may be said of the other Vowels, a, o. So that of this
kind the whole number is twenty four. And this I conceive to be a sufficient
enumeration of the natural Dipthongs.

I cannot deny but that other Dipthongs may be made by the mixture of the Vowel
() which were perhaps in use amongst the Jews, and expressed by ((...)) But being
now, as I think, generally disused amongst other Nations, and for that reason
very difficult to be pronounced, I shall not therefore take any further notice
of them.

When two Vowels are put together by way of Dipthong, so as to coalesce in one
Syllable, it is necessary that there should be some Note or Mark in their
Characters, to signify their conjunction, as is usual in some of the Greek and
Latin Dipthongs; as (...). -- oe, ae, Otherwise there can be no certainty,
whether the word be to be pronounced as a Monosyllable, or Dissyllable, as in
D-u-el, Duel. Sw-et, Swet.

It Is a common Assertion amongst Grammarians, Priscian, Quintilian, and others,
That no one syllable can consist of three Vowels, and consequently that there
can be no Tripthongs; which I conceive to be founded upon the former mistake;
namely, that i and ou are to be used as Consonants: For it is evident, that each
of these may coalesce with every one of the first Dipthongs, as iaou, yaw,
ouai, way, i^ou yew, oui, in wile, wight, qui, etc.

The compound Consonants are usually distinguished into such as are Asperated.
Double.


1. Those are styled aspirated, which seem to be mixed with (H) and are usually
so written; as th, ^, ch, (...). But in propriety of speech, if aspiration be
defined to be an impetus of Breathing, then these Consonants cannot so fitly be
said to be aspirated, but rather incrassated by compression of the breath in
framing of them. Though not only the Europaean Nations do at this present
express them by this mixture of (H,) but it was likewise the opinion of the
Ancients, as may appear; because before those Letters ^, ph, ch, were invented
by Palamedes, the Grecians were wont to express the power of them, by adding
the aspiration H, Vossius de Gram. cap. 16.
to T, P, K. Yet it is very plain, that each of these Consonants esteemed to be
aspirated, are simple Letters; because in the prolation of them, the same sound
does still continue, and therefore they ought not to be reckoned amongst the
mixed Letters.

2. Double Consonants are such as are compounded of some of the other Letters,
and for the Compendium of writing, are in several Languages expressed by single
Characters, and reckoned in the Alphabet as if they were distinct species of
simple Letters. Such are in the Latin Alphabet Q, X, and the double Letter Z,
whose power is the same as DS. or TS. To which Claudius Caesar would have added
an Antisigma in this form ((...)) which should have had the power of the Greek
ps, Scaliger de de Causis L.* L. cap. 21.
or PS.

As for the Letter Q, It Is commonly granted to be a Compound of C and U;
Vossius Gram. cap. 27.
for which reason, in many ancient Books, the Letter V was not written after Q,
as being involved in it; so qis, qae, qid. But what kind of V this should be,
is much debated. Some would have it to be the Consonant, against which Joseph
Scaliger argues, that then it would not be pronounceable, Diatribe de varia
literarum pronuntiatione.
being of near affinity to F, qfis, for quis. But upon consideration, it will
be found to be the Letter ^ coalescing into a Dipthong with the subsequent
Vowel, couam, being the same with quam.

What the true Original is of (J) Consonant, and that power which we give to
(Ch) in the words Charity, Cheese, Chosen, Chink, etc. is a question men have
much differed about. It Is evident that neither of them are single Letters,
because in the prolation of them, we do not end with the same sound with which
we begin. As for that Conjecture, Alex. Gyll, Gram. cap. 1.
that I Consonant may be expressed by dzy, dzyindzyer, Ginger, dzyudzy, Judge:
or else that this sound is compounded of the Consonants die, D^ Wallis Gram.
as dyoy for joy, dyentle, gentle, lodying for lodging. And so for the power
that we ascribe to Ch, that it may be sufficiently expressed by Ty, as ortyard,
for Orchard, rityes, for riches: These I think need not any particular
refutation. It seems to be plain, that J Consonant is a Compound of D, and Zh;
and Ch of T, and Sh.

As for the other three Consonants, that are reckoned in the common Alphabet,
K, W, Y, enough has been said to prove them unnecessary. If C be used always
in its proper power (as every Letter ought) then K must needs be superfluous;
and therefore the Welsh who use C only for one kind of sound, have no K. And as
for the Letters W, Y, their power is the same with that of the Vowels ou, and
i, as will evidently appear when they are rapidly pronounced before any other
Vowel by way of Dipthong, so as to make but one Syllable; oui, we ouarr war,
souim swim, ies yes, ioke yoke, iouth youth. The words young and younker being
originally of the Dutch, are by them written junk junker.

And as for the Aspirations, wheel, where, when, etc. our Forefathers the
Saxons, did anciently prefix the Aspirations before the vowels; as houil,
houer, houen, which will in pronunciation be of the very same sound and power,
wherein these words are now used, and therefore is more natural and proper than
the common way of writing.

According to this establishment, the simple Letters will be thirty four,
whereof eight are Vowels, and twenty six Consonants, besides twenty four
Dipthongs.

The Greek Letters are said to have been at first only 16; namely, A,, G, D, E,
I, K, L,, N, O, P, P, S, T, Y. Vossius de Gram. cap. 18.
To which Palamedes is said to have added the three Aspirates TH, PH X.
Epicharmus the Sicilian the double Letters Z, x, PS. and Simonides the two long
Vowels e and o Notwithstanding which, that Alphabet is still in several
respects defective.

What Theodorus Bibliander suggests in his Tract de ratione communi omnium
Linguarum, that all sounds both articulate, and inarticulate, may sufficiently
be expressed by 13 Letters, and an Aspiration, viz. the five ordinary Vowels,
and B, G, D, L, M, N, R, S, is so very irrational, that I cannot think it needs
any particular confutation.

As for those other new Alphabets that are proposed by Sir Thomas Smith,
Bullokar, Alex. Gill, they do none of them give a just enumeration of the
simple Elements of speech, but what by the mixture of long and short Vowels,
which do not differ specifically, together with the insertion of double
Letters, they do too much increase the number of them. Besides that some other
Letters are left out and omitted.

According to this establishment of Letters, if the Lords Prayer or Creed were
to be written according to our present pronunciation of it, they should be each
of them thus Lettered.

The Lords Prayer.
our fadher houitsh art in heven, halloed by dhi nam, dhi cingdm cm, dhi ouill
by dn, in earth az it iz in heven, giv s dhis dai our daili bred, and fargiv s
our trespassez az oui fargiv dhem dhat trespass against s, and led s not intou
temptasian, bt deliver s fram ivil, far dhn iz dhe cingdim, dhe pouer and dhe
glari, far ever and ever, Amen.

The Creed.
i biliv in Gad dhe fadher almiti maker af heven and earth, and in Dzhess Crist
hiz only sn our Lard, houou ouaz canseved by dhe holy Ghost, barn af dhe Virgin
Mari, sffered nder Pansis Pilat, ou^z criousified ded and bried. Hi dessended
m^ou hell, dhe thrd dai hi ros again fram dhe ded. Hi assended intou heven,
houer hi sits at dhe rit hand af Gad dhe fadher, fram houens hi shall cm tou
dzhdzh dhe couic and dhe ded. i biliv in dhe holy Ghost, dhe holy catholic
tshrtsh, dhe cammiouni^^ af Saints, dhe fargivnes af sinz, de resrrecsion af
dhe bady, and lif everlasting. Amen.

Thus much may suffice, concerning the Forms, Essences, or Powers of the
several Letters.

CHAP. XIV. Of the Accidents of Letters. 1. Their Names. 2. Their Order. 3.
Their Affinities and Opposition. 4. Their Figure, with a twofold Instance of a
more regular Character for the Letters, the latter of which may be styled
Natural. 5. Of Pronunciation. 6. Of the several letters disused by several
Nations.
SOmething ought briefly to be added concerning the Accidents of Letters, viz.
their 1. Names. 2. Order. 3. Affinity. 4. Figure. 5. Pronunciation.

1. Of their Names. Letters being of themselves the most simple Elements of
Speech, I.
ought therefore to be expressed by the most simple names, Names
and such as do signify their several Powers: In which respect, the Roman
Alphabet used in these Western parts of the world, has an advantage above
other learned Languages, wherein the Vowels are no otherwise named than by
their own sounds, as A, not Aleph or Alpha; much less have they distinct names
for long and short Vowels, as Kamets, Kametscatuph, etc. And those which they
reckon as the two kinds of Consonants, Semi-vowels and Mutes, are likewise
distinguished in their very Names. The Vowels being preposed in those which
they call Semi-vowels, el, em, en, ar, and subjoyned in the Mutes, be, ce, de,
ge, pe, te.

As for the other Letters before mentioned, which have a Right to be put in the
Alphabet, they may be thus named: The sonorous ones, Eng, EV, Edh, Egh, EZ,
EZh. The Mute ones, Hme, Hne, Hnge, Fe, The, Che, HLE, HRE, SE, She.

II.
2. The most proper and natural Order of the Letters, I conceive to be the same
in which they have been before treated of. Vowels should be reckoned up by
themselves, Order.
as being a distinct kind, and first, both for their priority in Nature,
Necessity, and Dignity. If the order of these were to be regulated from the
Instruments of speech, then u, o, ou, should be first, as being Labial, and a,
a, e, i, next, as Lingual, or Linguapalatal, De causis Ling. Lat. cap. 38.
and last, as being Guttural. Scaliger would have A and O to be acknowledged
for the first Vowels, as being Soni amplissimi, The next E, I, as being of a
middle sound, and the last U, as being soni obscurissimi. That which to me
seems the most proper Method, is to reckon them up according to their degrees
of Apertion: Only in conformity with the common Alphabets, I begin with the
Linguals, a, a, e, i, o, ou, u,.

Amongst the Consonants, the Sonorous should precede, as approaching nearest to
the nature of Vowels. And amongst them, if those that are breathed through the
Nose do precede, M must be the first, as being Labial; N next, as being Dental;
and then NG, as being Lingua-palatal. Next, those that are breathed through the
Mouth, according to this order, V, Dh, Gh, L, R, Z, Zh. The first being Labial,
the next Dental, the others Lingua-dental, or Lingua-palatal. Next should
follow the Spiritous Consonants that are Mutes; and first those pronounced
through the Nose, HM, HN, HNG, then those pronounced through the Mouth, F, TH,
CH, hl, hr, S, Sh. Then the semi-spiritous Consonants, B, D, G. And lastly, the
non-spiritous, or breathless Consonants, P, T, C.

3. The Affinity of Vowels each to other is not difficul to determine, a and a
of a middle sound, e and i of a more acute, 3.
o and ou of a more grave tone. If they were to be opposed to one another,
Affinity.
this distribution would be most natural, (ai) (ao) (eou) (vu) and so vice
versa, (ich) (^a) (oue) (uv.)

The Affinity amongst the Consonants most obvious is this, (M, HM) (N, HN,)
(NG, HNG,) (V, F,) (Dh, Th,) (Gh, Ch,) (L, HL,) (R, HR,) (Z, S,) (Zh, Sh,) (BP)
(DT) (GC.)

4. Though all Nations do or should agree in the same power and sound of the
Letters, 4.
yet they differ very much in those Figures and Characters, Figure.
whereby they represent them in writing according to those diverse Alphabets
that are received in the world: Amongst which, though some are much more
convenient than others, yet none of them seem contrived upon a Philosophical
ground. In the framing of such a Literal Character, these Conditions ought to
be observed.

1. They should be the most simple and facil, and yet elegant and comely as to
the shape of them.

2. They must be sufficiently distinguished from one another.

3. There should be some kind of sutableness, or correspondency of the figure
to the nature and kind of the Letters which they express.

It is not either necessary or convenient in the framing of a Language; to make
use of all the Letters belonging to the Alphabet; but it is sufficient that such
only be made choice of, as are most easy and pleasant in the pronunciation and
sound of them. But though it be not needful to introduce all the Letters into
the common use of a Language* yet it is most necessary that some way should be
provided for representing the powers of all the simple Letters, because without
this, there can be no way to express the proper names used in several
Languages, whether of Places, or Persons, etc. as England, London, Oxford,
John, Mary, etc. There being frequent occasion in discourse to mention the
names of such Individuals: And these being nothing else but such words or
sounds as men have agreed upon to signify such particular places or persons,
must therefore be expressed by such Letters as make up these sounds. And though
this real Character here treated of (as it is made effable) may serve for most
of them, yet because there are several others not this way provided for,
therefore may it be proper to offer some distinct Alphabet of Letters. Of
which, I had provided several Instances and Examples agreeable to the Rules
above mentioned. But I shall at present (because I would not too much digress)
set down only two; which to me seem considerable in their several kinds. The
former being more facil and simple, the other more complicate; but with this
advantage, that it has in the shape of it some resemblance to that
Configuration which there is in the Organs of speech upon the framing of
several Letters. Upon which account it may deserve the name of a Natural
Character of the Letters.

The Letters according to the first design, are represented in the following
Table, consisting of 31 Ranks and 15 Columns.



The first Rank does contain the Characters for the six more simple Vowels,
both preposed and subjoyned according to a threefold place, at the top, the
middle, and the bottom of the Character, the former three being mere Rounds,
the other Hooks. Those of a middle power, because they are necessary
Ingredients to the making of all the usual Dipthongs, therefore have they a
larger Character assigned to them, to which any of the other Vowels may be
affixed, when they are to coalesce into Dipthongs. And though the Letter Y, be
properly (as it is reckoned) one of those that are mediae potestatis, and may
be compounded into a Dipthong with any of the other Vowels, yet because it is
not now (for ought I know) made use of to this purpose, in any of those
Languages that are commonly known and used amongst us; therefore is it at
present reckoned only amongst the Vowels.

The second Column (besides the marks for those three Letters H, ou, i,) does
contain likewise the Characters for all the Consonants, according to their
several affinities; where the Non spiritous Consonants are expressed by
straight lines, the Spiritous Consonants of affinity to them being
distinguished by a little hook affixed at one end. The other Consonants by
curve lines, with the like distinction for their correspondent Mutes. The rest
of the Ranks and Columns consisting of mixed Letters, either the mixtures of
the Vowels with H, ou, or I, or else the incorporating the Character for each
of the six Vowels with that of the Consonant, the Vowel being preposed in the
3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8. Columns, and subjoined in the other.

As for the Characters that serve for Interpunction, the Comma may be expressed
by a small, straight, oblique line (,) The Semicolon, Colon and Period, may
continue as they are now used by most of the Europeans; there being nothing in
their figure, of any such near resemblance to the other Characters, as may make
them liable to mistake. And so likewise may those other Notes, which serve to
distinguish the various manners of Pronuntiation, whether Explication []
Interrogation? Wonder! Irony i only the two curve Lines for Parenthesis ()
being here used for the Letters L, and R, may be supplied by these []

At the bottom of this Table there is an Instance of the Lords Prayer, being
lettered sutably to our present pronuntiation of it.

The Letters according to the second design may be thus contrived;

The first Column does contain the Vowels, as they are distinguished into
Labial; being framed by an emission of the Breath through the Lips, whether
Less contracted; O. More contracted, and somewhat compressed Downwards, ou.
Upwards, U.

Lingual; the Tongue being put into a posture More concave; and removed, at
some distance from the Palate, a. Less concave; or plain, and brought nearer to
the Palate, a. Somewhat unequal, toward the Palate, e. More unequal, i.
Guttural,.


The other Columns do contain the Consonants, as they are distinguished into
Labial; whether such as are Breathless; Sonorous B. Mute P.
Breathing; through the Mouth; Sonorous V. Mute F.
Nose; Sonorous M. Mute HM


Lingual; either in respect of the Top of the Tongue, whether such as are
Breathless; Sonorous D Mute T
Breathing, through the Mouth; by Appulse, of the top of the Tongue to the Top
of the Teeth, the breath being emitted through the midst of the mouth, Sonorous
Dh Mute Th
Foremost part of the Palate, the breath being emitted through the corners of
the mouth Sonorous L Mute HL.

Trepidation or Vibration, against the inward part of the Palate, Sonorous R.
Mute HR.
Percolation of the Breath betwixt the top of the Tongue and the roots of the
Teeth, whether more Subtle, Sonorous Z. Mute S.
Dense, Sonorous Zh. Mute Sh.


Nose; by appulse of the top of the Tongue to the Root of the Teeth, Sonorous
N. Mute HN.



Root or middle of the Tongue appulsed to the Inward Palate, whether such as
are Breathless; Sonorous G. Mute C.
Breathing; through the Mouth, Sonorous GH. Mute CHAPTER
Nose, Sonorous NG. Mute HNG.






Unto each of the Letters represented by a Face, there is adjoined a lesser
Figure, consisting only of the chief out-lines representing the Organs of
speech.

The Labials are represented by two curve Figures for the Lips. The Linguals by
the Figure of the Tongue, according to its various applications; either of the
Top or Root, to the several parts of the Palate, or of the Teeth.

The Sonorous Consonants, of each kind, are distinguished from the Mutes, by
the addition of (^) to represent the motion of the Epiglottis, by which sound
is made.

The Breathing or Spiritous Consonants are represented by a longer undulated
Line, passing through the Mouth in some of them, either betwixt the Lips, in F,
V. or between the Tongue and Palate, in Dh, Th, Gh, Ch, R, HR. In the two last
of which, the top of the Tongue is divided, to represent that Trepidation or
Vibration, in the framing of these Letters. Or by the sides of the Tongue in L,
HL. Or betwixt the Top of the Tongue and the Teeth, in Z, S, Zh, Sh. In the two
last of which, the undulated Line is doubled, to represent that more dense
Percolation of breath, used in the framing of those Letters.

Those that are breathed through the Nose, have this undulated line above the
Palate, as in M, HM, N, HN, NG, HNG.

I propose these only as being natural Pictures of the Letters, without any
Design of common use, for which they are less fit, by reason of their being so
complicated.

5. Though each of the Letters have their distinct powers naturally fixed, yet
that difference which there is in the various manner of Pronunciation, 5.
does somewhat alter the Sound of them. And there are no two Nations in the
world that do exactly agree in the same way of pronouncing any one Language
(suppose the Latin) Amongst persons of the same Nation, Pronunciation.
some pronounce more fully and strongly, others more slightly, some more
flatly, others more broadly, others more mincingly. And in the hearing of
foreign Languages, we are apt to think, that none of the Letters we are
acquainted with, can frame such strange sounds as they seem to make: But this
does principally proceed from the several modes of Pronunciation; the variety
of which may well enough consist with the distinct power of the Letters. It Is
obvious to any one to observe, what great difference there will be in the same
words, when spoken slowly and treatably, and when tumbled out in a rapid
precipitate manner. And this is one kind of difference in the pronunciation of
several Nations; The Spaniards and Italians pronouncing more slowly and
Majestically, the French more volubly and hastily, the English in a middle way
betwixt both. Another different mode of Pronunciation betwixt several Nations,
may be in regard of strength and distinctness of pronouncing, which will
specially appear in those kind of Letters which do most abound in a Language.
Some pronounce more deeply Guttural, as the Welsh, and the Eastern people, the
Hebrews, and Arabians, etc. Others seem to thrust their words more forwards,
toward the outward parts of the mouth, as the English; others more inward
toward the palate, as the French; Prolegomena in Biblia Polyglot.
some speak with stronger collisions, and more vehement aspirations, as the
Northern people generally, by reason of their abundance of spirits and inward
heat; others more lightly and softly, as the Southern Nations, their internal
spirits being more weak, by reason of the outward heat.

One principal Reason of the various sounds in the pronunciation of several
Languages does depend upon the nature of those Letters, of which they do
chiefly consist and are ^ramed. Upon which account, the Greek, which abounds in
Vowels and Dipthongs, is more smooth. And though the Latin have fewer Vowels,
yet it is so equally mixed with them, as to be rendered facil and pleasant;
whereas the Hebrew does abound in some harsh Consonants, Aspirations and
Gutturals.

I cannot here omit the Censure which an ingenious person gives concerning the
difference of many of our European Languages, R. C. of Anthony in Cambd.
Remains.
in respect of their pronunciation. The Italian (says he) is in pronunciation,
pleasant, but without Sinews, as a still flowing water; the French delicate,
but inward and nice, like a woman that dares scarce open her mouth, for fear of
marring her Countenance. The Spanish, Majestical, but withal somewhat terrible
and fulsom, by the too much affectation of the Letter O. The Dutch manly, but
withal harsh and quarrelsom. Whereas our English (says he) has what is comely
and Euphonical in each of these, without any of their Inconveniences. It Is
usual for men to be most favorable toward the Language unto which they have
been most accustomed. It Is likely that Foreigners may be as apt to complain of
several Defects in our Language as we are of theirs.

That which does generally seem most difficult to Strangers in our English
Tongue, is the pronouncing of certain Aspirations (as they are styled) very
frequently and familiarly used amongst us, but hardly imitable by others,
though these are but few; these five words (as it is said) comprehending all of
them. What think the chosen Judges? Which a little practice might overcome.

It were desirable in a new invented Language, to make use chiefly of such
Letters and Syllables, as are of general practice, 6.
and universally facil in Pronunciation: But the custom of several Nations is
so exceeding various in this respect, that it is very difficult to find out what
these are; most of the Letters being disused, and not acknowledged for Letters,
in several Countries.

(a) is frequently used by other Nations, but not owned with a distinct
Character by the English.

(a) is frequently used by us Englishmen, but not so much by other Nations.

(e) is generally received, but very ambiguously pronounced.

(i) is not owned by us for a distinct Vowel, though we frequently use the
power of it. Purchase. lib. 5. Chap. 9.
And the Mexicans are said not to use the Letter (y) which is the same with
this (as was showed before.)

Bp Walton Introduction.
(o) is not in the Armenian Alphabet, nor do the Syrians own it, but use (u) or
(aw) instead of it. Some of the Ancient Cities in Italy, those of the Vmbri and
Tusci did not use this Vowel, Idem Proleg. 13.5.
but u instead of it, (says Priscian.)

(ou) according to the true power of it, is not owned by us, nor by many other
Nations with a distinct Character.

() is scarce acknowledged by any Nation except the Welsh.

(u) is (I think) proper to the French, and used by none else.

(M and N) are so general, that I have not yet met with an Account of any
Nation by whom they are not used.

(NG) is not owned for a Letter by any, except perhaps the Hebrews.

(V) is not pronounced by the Mexicans, Arabians, Persians, Saxons.

(Dh) seems difficult to most Nations, though frequently used by us Englishmen.

(Gh) is not any where, except amongst the Irish.

(L) is not used by the Vincent le Blanc. Part 3.16.
Brasileans, nor the men of Alex. Rhodes Diction. Anim. cap. 1.
Iapan. Many of the Italians, especially the Florentines, do seem to dislike
this Letter, though others style it the sweetest of all the rest, says De
recta scriptione Linguae Anglicanae.
Sir Thomas Smith.

(R) is not used by the Mexicans, Brasileans, or the men of China, (say several
of the same Authors) The Americans near New England, pronounce neither L, nor
R; but use N instead of both, pronouncing Nobstan for Lobstan.

Alex. Rhodes ibid.
(Z) is not owned for a Letter by the Inhabitants of CochinChina.

(Zh) is not owned for a distinct Letter, either by us English, or almost any
other,

(HM, HN, HNG) are not, for ought I know) owned by any, excepting only the
Welsh and Irish, and the last perhaps by the Jews.

(F) is not pronounced by the Brasileans.

(Th) seems difficult to many Nations, and is owned by very few, to be a
distinct Letter.

(Ch) is not used by any (for ought I can find) except the Grecians and the
Welsh.

(HL) is almost proper to the Welsh, and scarce used by others.

(HR) though frequent amongst the Grecians, yet is rarely used by others.

Purchase. lib. 5. cap. 9.
(S) is not used by the Mexicans.

(Sh) That this was not universal among the Jews, may appear by the Scripture
Story of Shiboleth, nor is it either in the Greek or Latin.

Idem l. 10. c. 3. Item. vol. 5. c. 18. Sect. 6. Vossius de Gr. cap. 27.
(B) is not pronounced by the men of China or Iapan.

(D) is not used amongst the Inhabitants of China.

(G) is not pronounced by the Mexicans.

(P) is not acknowleded in the Arabic, nor was this used amongst the Jews
before the Invention of Points.

(T) is not used by the Inhabitants of Iapan.

(C) as restrained to the power of K, is for ought I know, of general use.

It Is not improbable but that there may be a difficulty and disuse of every one
of these Letters in several Nations of the world; upon which account it is
excusable, if in the framing of a Language, it be proposed to make use of all
the Letters, without any particular choice of some, and seclusion of others. Or
if any be excluded, they ought in reason to be such, as seem most difficult to
those, amongst whom this Language has its first Rise and Original. And such
others should be most frequently used, as are generally esteemed most easy and
pleasant.

These 34 Letters before enumerated, will suffice to express all those
articulate sounds, which are commonly known and used in these parts of the
World. I dare not be over-peremptory in asserting that these are all the
Articulate Sounds, which either are, or can be in Nature; it being perhaps as
impossible to reckon up all such, as to determine the just number of Colors or
Tastes: But I think that these are all the principal Heads of them, and that as
much may be done by these (if not ^^re) as by any other Alphabet now known.

PART IV. Concerning a Real Character, and a Philosophical Language.
CHAP. I. The Proposal of one kind of Real Character (amongst many others which
might be offered) both for the Integrals, whether Genus's, Differences or
Species, together with the Derivatio^s and Inflexions belonging to them, as
likewise for all the several kinds of Particles.
THe next Enquiry should be, what kind of Character or Language may be fixed
upon, as most convenient for the expression of all those Particulars above
mentioned, belonging to the Philosophy of Speech; in order to which it may
seem, that the first Enquiry should be concerning Language; Because Writing is
but the figure of Articulate sound, and therefore subsequent to it: But though
it be true, that men did first speak before they did write, and consequently
writing is but the figure of Speech, and therefore in order of time subsequent
to it; yet in order of Nature there is no priority between these: But voice and
sounds may be as well assigned to Figure, as Figures may be to Sounds. And I do
the rather begin with treating concerning a common Character or Letter, because
this will conduce more to that great end of Facility, whereby (as I first
proposed) men are to be invited to the Learning of it. To proceed from the
Language to the Character, would require the learning of both; which being of
greater difficulty, than to learn one alone, is not therefore so suitable to
that intention of engaging men by the Facility of it. And because men that do
retain their several Tongues, may yet communicate by a Real Character, which
shall be legible in all Languages; therefore I conceive it most proper to treat
of this in the first place, and shall afterward show how this Character may be
made effable, in a distinct Language.

All Characters signify either Naturally, or by Institution. Natural
Characters are either the Pictures of things, or some other Symbolical
Representations of them, the framing and applying of which, though it were in
some degree feasible, as to the general kinds of things; yet in most of the
particular species, it would be very difficult, and in some perhaps impossible.
It were exceeding desirable that the Names of things might consist of such
Sounds, as should bear in them some Analogy to their Natures; and the Figure or
Character of these Names should bear some proper resemblance to those Sounds,
that men might easily guess at the sense or meaning of any name or word, upon
the first hearing or sight of it. But how this can be done in all the
particular species of things, I understand not; and therefore shall take it for
granted, that this Character must be by Institution. In the framing of which,
there are these four properties to be endeavored after.

1. They should be most simple and easy for the Figure, to be described by one
Ductus of the pen, or at the most by two.

2. They must be sufficiently distinguishable from one another to prevent
mistake.

3. They ought to be comely and graceful for the shape of them to the eye.

4. They should be Methodical, Those of the same common nature, having some
kind of sutableness and correspondence with one another; All which
qualifications would be very advantageous, both for Understanding, Memory and
Use.

Those Characters must represent either Integrals Radicals. Derivations.
Inflections.
Particles Grammatical. Transcendental.



The first thing to be enquired after, is to find out fitting Marks for the
common Genus's or Heads in the former Tables of Integrals, which are there
reduced to the number of forty. It were not difficult to offer several
Varieties of these Marks or Generical Characters, with their different
Advantages and Conveniences; to which purpose I had prepared sundry kinds of
them, which I once thought to have inserted here: but upon further
consideration, I shall mention only one of them, which I have chosen out of the
rest, as seeming to me to be in all respects the most convenient amongst them.

Transcend. General ^ Rel. mixed ^ Rel. of Action ^
Discourse ^ God ^ World ^ Element ^ Stone ^ Metal ^ Herb consid. accord. to
the Leaf ^ Flower ^ Seed-vessel ^
Shrub ^ Tree ^ Animals Exanguious ^ Fish ^ Bird ^ Beast ^
Parts Peculiar ^ General ^
Quantity Magnitude ^ Space ^ Measure ^
Quality Power Not. ^ Habit ^ Manners ^ Quality sensible ^ Disease ^
Action Spiritual ^ Corporeal ^ Motion ^ Operation ^
Relation Oecon. ^ Posses. ^ Provis. ^ Civil ^ Judicial ^ Military ^ Naval ^
Eccles. ^

The Differences are to be affixed unto that end which is on the left side of
the Character, according to this order; 1 ^ 2 ^ 3 ^ 4 ^ 5 ^ 6 ^ 7 ^ 8 ^ 9 ^


The Species should be affixed at the other end of the Character according to
the like order.

1 ^ 2 ^ 3 ^ 4 ^ 5 ^ 6 ^ 7 ^ 8 ^ 9 ^
And whereas several of the Species of Vegetables and Animals, do according to
this present constitution, amount to more than Nine, in such cases the number
of them is to be distributed into two or three Nines, which may be
distinguished from one another by doubling the stroke in some one or more parts
of the Character; as suppose after this manner, ^. If the first and most simple
Character be made use of, the Species that are affixed to it, will belong to
the first combination of Nine; if the other, they will belong according to the
order of them, unto the second Combination.

Those Radicals which are paired to others upon account of Opposition, may be
expressed by a Loop, or (o) at the left end of the Character, after this
manner, ^

Those that are paired upon the account of Affinity, are to be expressed by the
like Mark at the other end of the Character, thus, ^

The double Opposites of Excess or Defect, are to be described by the
Transcendental points, denoting Excess or Defect, to be placed over the
Character, as shall be showed after.

Adjectives should be expressed by a Hook at the right end of the Character in
Genus's or Differences, thus ^ Species ^


Adverbs (being very near of kin to adjectives) may be expressed by a Loop in
the same place. In Genus's and Diff. ^ Species ^


Abstracts may be expressed by a Hook at the left end of the Character. In
Genus's ^ Differences and Species ^


The Active and Passive voice may be expressed, one of them by a Hook, and the
other by a Loop, at the left end of the Character, after this manner, in
Genus's Active ^ Passive ^
Differences or Species Active ^ Passive ^



The Plural Number may be expressed by a hook at the right end of the
Character, after this manner, in Genus's and Differences ^ Species ^


The Characters of the Particles should each of them be of a less figure, and
capable of being varied to a threefold place. The Grammatical Particles, being
applied to the sides of the Character, and the Transcendental Particles to the
top of it.

These Grammatical Particles are here contrived to such a kind of distinct
sutableness, so as each of the several kinds of them, has a several kind of
Character assigned to them.

1. The Copula, by the mark of (^) 2. Pronouns, by Points. (^) 3. Interjections
by upright Lines straight or hooked, (^) 4. Prepositions, by small curved
Figures ^ ^ ^
5. Adverbs, by a right angled Character ^ ^ ^
6. Conjunctions by an acute angled Character ^ ^
7. Articles by two oblique Lines to be placed toward the top of the Character
^
8. Modes by circular Figures mixed ^ ^ ^ ^
9. Tenses by a small straight transverse Line (-)
Amongst these Grammatical Particles the first six are more principal and
absolute, viz.

1. The Copula, being the Verb Sum, according to a threefold difference of time.

^
Have been, have been, has been. Am, art, is, are. Shall be.
2. Pronouns. ^
I Thou He
^
We Ye They
^
This, That The same, Another A certain, Some body
^
Any Every All
^
Who? Which. Whosoever.


If one of these Pronouns, suppose ^ be placed at the side of the Character
before it, ^ it signifies the first Person ( I.) If at the middle, ^ it
signifies the second person ( Thou.) If at the bottom, ^ it signifies the third
person ( He.) And if they are thus affixed after a Character that signifies
Action, they will then denote the Accusative Case, Me, Thee, Him. so (...) is,
I love him.

If any of the Pronouns are to be rendered in their Possessive sense, this is
to be expressed by a little curve Line under them, as ((...)) So (...) is My,
or Mine, ((...)) is Ours, ((...)) is Thy or Thine, ((...) is His. And ((...))
is Theirs.

The Reduplicative Notion of Pronouns may most naturally be expressed by a
doubling of their Character with a Fulcrum or Arrectarius interposed. So (...)
is I me, that is, I my self. (...) is Thou thee, Thou thy self. (...) He him,
He himself. And so for the Possessives that are reduplicative (...) Mine mine,
that is, My own, etc.

And whereas several of the Pronouns were before said to be applicable both
unto Place, Time, and Manner, this ought to be expressed in writing by the help
of an Arrectarius, with the Transcendental Marks of PI. T. M. So (...) is,
Which place. Thus (...) is, What place, or Where? (...) is, What time, or When?
(...) is, What manner, or How?

Interjections may be thus expressed; ^
Admiring Doubting Despising
^
Love, Hatred Mirth, Sorrow Desire, Aversation
^
Exclamation, Silence Bespeaking, Expressing attention Insinuation, Threatening


The Marks for Prepositions may be thus applied; ^
Of, With By, For Out of, Concerning
^
According, Instead With, Without For, Against
^
To, At From, Off Over, About
^
Into, In Out of, Without Thorough, Beside
^
Upwards, Above Downwards, Below Before, Behind
^
Upon, Under On this side, Beyond Betwixt, Against


The Marks for Adverbs may be thus applied; ^
Yea, Nay Perhaps, Truly As, So
^
How, So More, Most Less, Least
^
Rather, Than Yet, Until Whilst, At length
^
Together, Only Again, As if Un, Re
^
Almost. Scarce. Thereabout.


The Marks for Conjunctions may be thus applied; ^
Whether yea, Whether no And, Neither If Unless
^
Indeed, But Although, Notwithstanding Or, Either
^
That, Least that For, Because Wherefore, Therefore
^
Whereas, Thereupon Also, etc. viz. e. g.


The other three kinds of Particles are more servile and auxiliary.

The Articles may be expressed (as was said before) by two oblique Lines to be
placed toward the top of the Character A ^ The ^


The Mark for the Imperative Mood, according as it is applied to several places
of the Character, may express the mode of ^ Petition ^ Persuasion ^ Command


The Secondary Moods may have their Marks thus applied to them; Power Can ^
Could ^
Liberty May ^ Might ^
Will Will ^ Would ^
Necessity Must, shall ^ Must, should ^



Several of these Secondary Modes, will according to their places, toward the
top, middle, and bottom of the Character, comprehend in them the several
differences of time; so ^ is I would have writ.

The Mark for the Tenses, Past, Present, and Future, may be thus applied; ^
Have been, have been, has been. Am, art, is. Shall be.


The Transcendental Marks to be put in three places over the head of the
Character, may be thus applied; ^
Metaphor Like Kind Manner Thing Person
^
Place Time Cause Sign Aggregate Segregate
^
Lamin Pinn Instrument Vessel Jugament Machin
^
Sepiment Armament Vest Armor House Chamber
^
Habit Art Officer Artist Mechanic Merchant
^
Ability Proneness Inceptive Frequentative Endeavor Impetus
^
Augmentative Diminutive Excess Defect Perfective Corruptive
^
Voice Language Male Female Young Part


Whereas there is somewhat peculiar in the nature of Numbers, distinct from any
of the other Heads, by reason of their great multitude, and various kinds; It
may seem therefore necessary to offer some more particular directions for the
expression of them, both as to the Numbers themselves, and as to the
Grammatical Variations of them.

Numbers are usually expressed in Writing either by words at length, or by
Figures.

The Character here proposed under the first difference of Measure, is that
which does answer to the writing of Numbers in words at length, And because the
Species enumerated under that difference, are but nine, for the nine Digits;
therefore will it be convenient in the first place, to explain the manner how
all other numbers above nine, are to be expressed in this Character; which may
be done by affixing some of these four Marks, (^) put after the Character,
closer to the Body of it than ordinary, to denote those round Numbers, Ten,
Hundred, Thousand, Million.

(...) Ten. (...) Hundred. (...) Thousand. (...) Million. (...) 20 (...) 200
(...) 2000 (...) 2000000 (...) 30 (...) 300 (...) 3000 (...) 3000000
But because those common Figures now in use, borrowed from the Arabians, are
so generally known, and a kind of Universal Character already received;
therefore it may be most convenient still to retain the use of them, as being
much better fitted for all the Arithmetical Operations, of Addition,
Subtraction, Multiplication and Division, etc. than either that Numerical
Character mentioned before, or the way of Numeration by Letters, or any other
way that I can think of.

As for those Variations of which Numbers are capable, and according to which
Grammarians do commonly distinguish them, they may be thus expressed.

1. Those which are called Cardinal Numbers, One, Two, Three, etc. are the
Radical Numbers themselves.

2. Ordinals, as First, second* third, etc. are Adjectives Neuter. Firstly,
secondly, thirdly, etc. are the Adverbs Neuter.


3. Distributives may be expressed by the Substantive Neuter, with the
Transcendental Mark of Segregate, the Substantive it self being put for one
sort of Distributive in the singular Number, as sing. 3. (segr. will denote
three, one by one; or for another sort of Distributive, being put in the plural
number, as plural 3. (segr. will signify by threes, or three by three.

4. Collectives may be expressed by the Substantive Neuter, with the Adverb
together before it, with the transcendental Mark of Aggregate over it, as
together-three, or three (Aggr. is a ternary, a leash, etc.

5. Multiplying a Number may be expressed by the Active of it, as a. three is
trebling, and being multiplied by the Passive of it, as p. three being trebled.

6. Dividing a Number into parts, may be expressed by the Active with the
transcendental Mark ( Part. as a. three (part) is dividing into 3 parts, or
active tripartition. Being divided into parts, may be expressed by the Passive
with the mark of part; as p. three (part) is being divided into 3 parts, or
passive tripartition. If this Division be into equal parts, one may express it
by adding the Adverb equally.

7. A Fraction may be expressed; If it be the Aliquot part of a Number, by the
Adjective Neuter, with the Transcendental Mark of Part, as adj. three (part) a
third part, and it may be written thus, 3) 1; If it be not the Aliquot part of
a Number, it may be expressed by both the Numbers which are to be considered in
it, as three sevenths may be called a seventh part of three, and it may be
written thus, 7) 3.

8. A Ration may be expressed likewise by both the Numbers which are to be
considered in it, in speaking thus; as three to seven, in writing ^/7

9. Number of Species or Sorts, may be expressed by the Number with the
Transcendental Mark of (kind) as threefold, 3 (kind.

10. Number of Times or Places likewise, by the Transcendental Marks of Time or
Place respectively, as once, twice, etc. in one time place
in two times places
in three times places
etc.

11. Abstract Numbers, as Unity, Duality, Trinity, may be expressed by adding the
Mark of Abstract upon the Character.

If the Question be how these Grammatical Variations may be contrived in the
use of the ordinary Figures for Number, this may be done by affixing such
variations upon a Transverse Line over the head of the Figure, So 1. 2. 3. will
be the Adjective, first, second, and third, etc. So 1. 2. 3 will be the Adverb,
Firstly, secondly, thirdly, So 2. 3. 4. will be twofold, threefold, fourfold,
etc So 1. 2. 3. etc. will be once, twice, thrice, etc.

The Characters that serve for Interpunction, may be thus contrived; Comma ^
Colon ^ Period ^


Those other Notes to distinguish the various manners of Pronuntiation may be
Charactered after this manner; Hyphen ^ Parenthesis () Explication []
Interrogation? Wonder! Irony i


These Marks having not any such near resemblance to the other Real Characters,
appointed either for Integrals or Particles, need not therefore be changed,

The Note for Emphasis, may be expressed either by a reduplication of the
Characters, if it consist in one word; or by some variety in the shape of the
Characters, if it consist in several words, as is usual in that way of printing
Words in an Italic Letter

The meaning of these things will appear more plainly by an Example: To which
purpose I shall set down the Lords Prayer, and the Creed written in this
Character, which I shall afterward explain and resolve according to the
forementioned Rules.

CHAP. II. Instances of this Real Character in the Lords Prayer and the Creed.
FOr the better explaining of what has been before delivered concerning a Real
Character, it will be necessary to give some Example and Instance of it, which
I shall do in the Lords Prayer and the Creed: First setting each of them down
after such a manner as they are ordinarily to be written. Then the Characters
at a greater distance from one another, for the more convenient figuring and
interlining of them. And lastly, a Particular Explication of each Character out
of the Philosphical Tables, with a Verbal Interpretation of them in the Margin.

The Lords Prayer.
(...)

(...)1 (...)2 (...)3 (...)4 (...)5 (...)6 (...)7 (...)8 (...)9 (...)10 (...)11
Our Parent who art in Heaven, Thy Name be Hallowed, Thy (...)12 (...)13 (...)14
(...)15 (...)16 (...)17 (...)18 (...)19 (...)20 (...)21 (...)22 (...)23 (...)24
(...)25 (...)26 Kingdom come, Thy Will be done, so in Earth as in Heaven, Give
(...)27 (...)28 (...)29 (...)30 (...)31 (...)32 (...)33 (...)34 (...)35 (...)36
(...)37 (...)38 (...)39 (...)40 (...)41 (...)42 (...)43 to us on this day our
bread expedient and forgive us our trespasses as (...)44 (...)45 (...)46
(...)47 (...)48 (...)49 (...)50 (...)51 (...)52 (...)53 (...)54 (...)55 (...)56
(...)57 (...)58 we forgive them who trespass against us, and lead us not into
(...)59 (...)60 (...)61 (...)62 (...)63 (...)64 (...)65 (...)66 (...)67 (...)68
(...)69 (...)70 temptation, but deliver us from evil, for the Kingdom and the
(...)71 (...)72 (...)73 (...)74 (...)75 (...)76 (...)77 (...)78 (...)79
(...)80. Power and the Glory is thine, for ever and ever, Amen. So be it.

Our
1. ((...)) The first Particle being expressed by Points, does denote the thing
thereby signified to be a Pronoun: And whereas there are two Points placed
level, toward the upper side of the Character, they must therefore (according
to the Directions premised) signify the first Person Plural Number, viz. We.
And because there is a curve Line under these Points, that denotes this Pronoun
to be here used Possessively, and consequently to signify Our.

Parent
2. ((...)) This next Character being of a bigger proportion, must therefore
represent some Integral Notion. The Genus of it, viz. ((...)) is appointed to
signify Oeconomical Relation. And whereas the Transverse Line at the end
toward the left hand, has an affix, making an acute Angle, with the upper
side of the Line, therefore does it refer to the first Difference of that
Genus, which according to the Tables, is relation of Consanguinity: And there
being an Affix making a right Angle at the other end of the same Line,
therefore does it signify the second Species under this Difference, viz.
Direct ascending, by which the Notion of Parent is defined. And this being
originally a Noun of Person, does not the need therefore Transc. Note of Person
to be affixed to it. If it were to be rendered Father in the strictest sense, it
would be necessary that the Transcendental Note of Male should be joined to it,
being a little hook on the top, over the middle of the Character, after this
manner ((...)*) The word Father in the most Philosophical and proper sense of
it, denoting a Male Parent. And because the word Parent is not here used
according to the strictest sense, but Metaphorically; therefore might the
Transcendental Note of Metaphor, be put over the head of it, after this manner,
((...).) But this being such a Metaphor as is generally received in other
Languages, therefore there will be no necessity of using this mark.

3. ((...)) This Character consisting of Points, must therefore denote a
Pronoun; Who
and because it consists of three Points, therefore must it denote one of the
Compound Pronouns, and being placed toward the middle of the Character,
therefore must it signify Who personal, or Which real.

Art
4. ((...)) This Particle, being a small Round, does therefore denote the
Copula, and being placed toward the middle of the Character, it must therefore
signify the present tense of it, Am, art, is, are, and being joined with a
Noun of the second person, is therefore in English to be rendered (Art.)

5. ((...)) This Particle being of a curved figure, must therefore refer to
Prepositions. In
And by the shape of it, it must belong to one of the Opposites in the fourth
Combination of Prepositions, and by the place of it, being toward the upper
end of the Character, it is determined to the Preposition ( In.)

6. ((...)) This Generical Character is assigned to signify World, the right
angled affix on the left side, Heaven.
denoting the second Difference under that Genus, namely Heaven, which is
defined to import either a place or state of the greatest perfection and
happiness; and because there is no affix at the other end, therefore does it
signify the Difference it self, and not any Species.

7. ((...)) This Particle, Thy
for the Reason before mentioned ( Numb. 1.) is a possessive Pronoun, for its
consisting of a single Point, it must be of the singular number; and for its
place toward the middle of the Character, it must relate to the second Person,
viz. Thy, or Thine.

8. ((...)) The Genus denoted by this Character is Transcendental General; the
affix to the end on the left side, Name
does signify the first Difference under that Genus, viz. the Kinds of Things
and Notions, or those essential Communities wherein the things of different
natures do agree. The affix at the other end of the same Line, making an obtuse
angle with the lower side of it, does signify the fourth Species under that
Difference, viz. Name* which according to its primary sense is described to be
the word assigned for the signifying any thing or notion.

9. ((...)) This Particle is appointed to signify that which is called the
Imperative Mode by way of Petition, or May it be, May it be
or we pray that it may be.

10. ((...)) This Generical Character does signify Ecclesiastical Relation:
Hallowed
The affix making a right angle with the under part of the Genus, does denote
the fifth Difference, which refers to Discipline, or the due ordering of the
Circumstances of Ecclesiastical or sacred things to the best advantage; under
which the first Species denoted by the acute Angle on the other end and side,
does signify the more general notion of separating things from their
Commonness, and setting them apart by way of Honor to a more peculiar use,
which is called Consecrating or Hallowing. By the Loop on the affix for the
Difference, is signified the Passive Voice; and by the Hook on the other affix,
the notion of Adjective.

11. ((...)) as Numb. 7. Thy


12. ((...)) This Generical Character does signify Civil or Political
Relation. The affix on the left side, Regnation, or (...) regnare.
does signify the first Difference under tha^ Genus which is Degrees of
Persons. The affix on the Species side, does refer to the second Species, which
is King, defined to be the most principal and absolute amongst the kinds of
Magistrates. The Hook at the end of the Difference affix does signify Action:
So that the proper notion expressed by this Character is Regnation, or (...)
regnare, which is the Substantive of Action, as King is of Person.

13. ((...)) as Numb. 9. May it be


14. ((...)) The Genus denoted by this Character is Transcendental Action; the
affix on the Difference side, coming.
making an acute Angle with the lower side, does signify the sixth Difference,
which according to the Tables does refer to Ition, going, or passing; the affix
on the Species side, being the first, does according to the Tables, refer to
the word Coming, which is described to be motion to a place nearer to us: The
Hook on the Difference does signify Active voice, and the Hook on the other
affix, the notion of Adjective, viz. Coming.

Thy
15. ((...)) as Numb. 7.

Will
16. ((...)) This Generical Character does signify the first Genus in Quality,
which according to the Tables is Natural Power. The affix for the Difference,
making an acute Angle, with the upper side of the Genus, must signify Rational
Faculty. The affix on the Species side, making an obtuse Angle with the lower
side, must signify the fourth Species, which is that Faculty we call Will,
whereby we do rationally follow after that which is good, and fly what is evil.
The hook on the left side upon the Difference affix, denotes the Active voice.
So that the proper Signification of this Character is Volition, or (...) velle.

May it be
17. ((...)) as Numb. 9.

Done
18. ((...)) The same Generical Character with Numb. 14. denoting Transcendental
Action. The obtuse angle on the left side signifies the third Difference, viz.
General Actions relating to Business. The acute Angle at the other end,
signifies the sixth Species, viz. the doing or effecting what we undertake and
design, which we call performing or accomplishing; the Loop at the end of the
Difference does denote the Passive voice, and the Hook upon the other affix,
the notion of Adjective; so that this Character signifies the Adjective
Passive, of perform, viz. performed or done.

So
19. ((...)) This Character being a right angled Particle, does denote some
Adverb; and by its shape it appears to be one of the Opposites in the first
Combination, and by its place toward the lower end of the Character, it is
determined to the Particle ( So.)

In
20. ((...)) as numb. 5.

21. ((...)) The same Generical Character as numb. 6. signifying World, Earth
the affix making a right Angle, does denote the second difference under that
Genus, namely, the Celestial parts of it in general, amongst which, this Globe
of Sea and Land whereon we live, is reckoned as the seventh Species, denoted by
the affix at the other end.

As
22. ((...)) This Particle being opposite to that numb. 19. signifying So, must
therefore signify As, the one being the Redditive of the other.

In
23. ((...)) as numb. 5.

Heaven
24 ((...)) as numb. 6.

May thou be
25. ((...)) The same as numb. 9. but being here joined with a word Active of
the second Person, it must be rendered in English, May thou be.

26. ((...)) The Genus of this Character is the same with number 14, and 18.
denoting Transcendental Action; The affix on the left hand, Giving.
making an obtuse Angle with the lower side of the Genus, does therefore
signify the fourth Difference, which concerns Actions relating to Commerce:
and the affix at the other end making such an obtuse angle, does therefore
signify the fourth Species, which according to the Tables, is Giving,
described to be the parting with something to another, to which we our selves
have a right. The Hook at the end of the Difference affix, does signify
Active, and the other, Adjective, viz. Giving.

27. ((...)) This Particle, by the figure of it, To.
must signify a Preposition of the third Combination, and by its place at the
upper side of the Character, it is determined to signify the Preposition (To.)

28. ((...)) This Particle consisting of Points, Us.
does therefore denote a Pronoun; and because there are two Points placed in a
Level toward the top of the Character, therefore must it signify the first
Person plural, as numb. 1. And coming after a Verb, it is to be rendered in
English as we do the Accusative Case, ( Us.)

29. ((...)) as numb. 5. In


30. ((...)) This Pronoun particle consisting of two points placed obliquely
from the bottom toward the top, This
does therefore signify one of the Relative Pronouns; and being placed at the
top of the Character, it must signify (This.)

31. ((...)) This Generical Character is appointed to signify the Genus of
Measure. The affix on the left hand, Day
making a right angle with the lower side of the Line, signifies the fifth
Difference, which is Measure of Time. The affix at the other end, making the
like angle, does denote the fifth Species, viz. Day Natural, which is described
to be the time of the Suns motion from any one Meridian to the same again.

32. ((...)) as numb. 1. Our


33. ((...)) This Character is appointed to signify the Genus of Oeconomical
Provisions, of which, Bread
the first Difference denoted by the affix on the left hand, does refer to
Sustentation ordinary, and the first Species at the other end, does refer to
such kind of ordinary food as is of a more solid consistence, made of Grain, or
some other Vegetable baked, without any considerable mixture, being of all
other kinds of Food most necessary and common, which is Bread.

34. ((...)) The Genus of this Character does signify Transcendental General.
as before, N. 8. The affix on the left hand being the fifth, Expedient
does denote the Differences of things relating to means; where the seventh
Species, denoted by the affix at the other end, does signify that kind of
usefulness, which may probably promote the end, which we call Expediency; and
because the Hook at the end of the Species affix does denote adjective;
therefore this Character must signify expedient.

And
35. ((...)) The Particle represented by an acute angled figure, must therefore
refer to Conjunctions. By the position of the Angle downwards, and by the
situation of it toward the middle of the Character, it must denote the
Conjunction, And.

May thou be
36. ((...)) as numb. 9.

Forgiving
37. ((...)) The Genus of this Character does signify Judicial Relation. The
affix on the Difference side, making a right angle with the upper side of the
Genus, does therefore signify the second Difference, viz. Judicial Actions.
The affix for the Species being the ninth, does signify that kind of Forinsic
Action, which is consequent with respect to the Judges, inflicting the
punishment or freeing from it; the first of which is executing, to which is
opposed (signified in the Character by the Loop on the left hand) Pardoning, or
forgiving. The Hook upon the affix for the Difference, denoting the Active
voice, and that upon the other affix, the Adjective.

To
38. ((...)) as numb. 27.

Us
39. ((...)) as numb. 28.

Our
40. ((...)) as numb. 1.

Trespasses
41. ((...)) The same Generical Character as numb. 8, and 34. signifying
Transcendental General. The obtuse angle on the left side does signify the
third Difference, viz. the more common and absolute Differences of things. The
affix at the other end, making a right Angle with the upper side, does signify
the second Species, namely, that Difference of things which does include a
respect to the Will, as to their agreement or disagreement with that Faculty,
whereby they are rendered desirable, or avoydable; which we call Goodness or
Evilness. The Loop toward the left hand, at the joining of the Affix, does
denote the Opposite in the Tables, namely, Evilness: The Hook at the other end
of the same Affix* does signify the Active voice; and the hook on the other
side, the Plural Number: So that the true importance of this Character must be
evil actions, which is the same with that which we style Trespasses.

As
42. ((...)) as numb. 19.

We
43. ((...)) as numb. 24.

Are
44. ((...)) as numb. 4. But being here used with a word of the plural number,
it must be rendered Are.

Forgiving
45. ((...)) as numb. 37.

To
46. ((...)) as numb. 27,

Them
47. ((...)) This Particle Pronoun consisting of two points placed level, must
signify the Plural Number of one of the Personal Pronouns, and being at the
lower end of the Character, it must signify They, and coming after the Verb,
it must be rendered Them.

Who
48. ((...)) as numb. 3.

49. ((...)) as numb. 44. But being here placed toward the upper part of the
Character, it must signify the Copula in the Preter Tense, Have been
Have been.

50. ((...)) The same Radical as numb. 41. Only the Hook on the Species affix,
is on that side which signifies the notion of Adjective, Transgressing
viz. Transgressing.

51. ((...)) This Particle does by its figure appear to be one of the opposite
Prepositions of the second Combination, Against
and by its position toward the bottom of the Character, it is determined to (
Against.)

52. ((...)) as Numb. 24. Us


53. ((...)) as Numb. 31. And


54. ((...)) This Particle by the figure of it, must be one of the Opposites of
the first Combination of Adverbs, and by the place of it, Not
it must be the Negative Particle No, or Not.

55. ((...)) as Numb. 9. May thou be


56. ((...)) The same Generical Character as Numb. 14, 18.26. signifying
Transcendental Action, The Difference on the left hand, Leading
being the same as Numb. 14. Namely, the sixth, denoting Ition; where the fifth
Species signified by the right angled affix at the other end, does by the
Tables signify Leading, which is described to be the causing of another thing
to come after. The Hook on the Difference affix, does signify Active, and the
other Hook Adjective. viz. Leading.

57, ((...)) as Numb. 28. Us


58. ((...)) This Particle by the place and shape of it, must be opposite to
that, Numb. 5. And consequently, according to the Tables, Into
must signify ( Into.)

59. ((...)) The Generical Character the same with that, N. 14, 18, 26, 56. The
right Angle on the left side denoting the second Difference, Temptation
viz. General Relations of Actions Comparate: The right Angle at the other end
and side, signifying the fifth Species, which in the Tables, is Comparing; to
which is adjoined by way of Affinity (signified by the Loop) the Notion of
Trying, or the Examining of things, for the distinguishing of their Truth and
Goodness. And because this is in it self of an indifferent nature, and
consequently not to be deprecated; therefore the true Notion of it in this
place, must be confined to such kind of Temptations or Trials as may be
hurtful, which is expressed by the Transcendental Particle of Corruptive, set
on the top of the Character toward the right hand.

60. ((...)) This Particle by the figure of it, must denote a Conjunction, and
an Opposite belonging to the second Combination, But
and by the place of it toward the upper end of the Character, it is
determined to the Conjunction, (But.)

May thou be
61. ((...)) as Numb. 9.

Delivering
62. ((...)) This Generical Character does signify Spiritual Action, under
which the first Difference denoted by the acute Angle on the left side, does
refer to the Actions of God, ( i. e.) such kind of Actions as do primarily
belong to the Divine Nature; though some of them may in a secondary manner, and
by way of participation be ascribed to other things. The right Angle made by
the other affix, does denote the fifth Species, which is defined to be the
keeping or taking one from any kind of evil; which we call Delivering. The
Hooks upon each affix (as has been often said before) must denote Active, and
Adjective.

Us.
63. ((...)) as Numb. 24.

64. ((...)) A Preposition of the third Combination, and by its place at the
middle of the Character, From
it is determined to the Preposition From.

65. ((...)) The same Radical Character as Numb, 41, 50. The little upright
stroke on the top toward the right hand, Evil
being the Transcendental Note of Thing.

For
66. ((...)) This Particle, by the shape of it, must be a Conjunction of the
third Combination, and by the position of it about the middle of the Character,
it must be the Causal Particle For, or Because.

The
67. ((...)) This oblique stroke toward the top is appointed to signify one of
the Articles subservient to Substantives; and because the obliquity of it, is
from the bottom upwards toward the right hand, therefore does it denote the
Demonstrative Article The.

Regnation, or (...) regnare.
68. ((...)) as Numb. 12.

And
69. ((...)) as Numb. 35.

The
70. ((...)) as Numb. 67.

Power
71. ((...)) This Generical Character does signify Habit; the right angle on
the left side, denoting the second Difference, which comprehends the
Instruments of Virtue, commonly styled the Goods of Fortune: the right angle at
the other end, signifying the fifth Species, which is Power, described to
consist in an ability to protect our selves and others from Injury.

And
72. ((...)) as Numb. 35.

The
73. ((...)) as Numb. 67.

Glory
74. ((...)) The same Character, both as to the Genus and Difference with Numb.
71. The affix toward the right hand signifying the second Species, which is
Reputation, which by the transcendental mark of Augmentative over the Character
toward the right hand, does import the Notion of Glory, viz. the greatest kind
and degree of Reputation.

75. ((...)) as Numb. 4. Is


76. ((...)) as Numb. 7. Thine


77. ((...)) This Generical Character, Everly
does signify the Genus of Space. The acute angle on the left side to the top,
does denote the first Difference, which is Time. The other affix signifies the
ninth species under this Difference, which is Everness. The Loop at the end of
this affix denotes the word to be used adverbially; so that the sense of it
must be the same which we express by that phrase, For ever and ever.

78. () The word Amen in the Literal Character. Amen


79. ((...)) as Numb. 19. So


80. ((...)) as Numb. 9. May it be.


The Creed.
(...)

(...)1 (...)2 (...)3 (...)4 (...)5 (...)6 (...)7 (...)8 (...)9 (...)10 (...)11
I believe in God the Father Almighty Maker of Heaven and (...)12 (...)13
(...)14 (...)15 (...)16 (...)17 (...)18 (...)19 (...)20 (...)21 (...)22 of
Earth, and in Jesus Christ his Son only our Lord, who was (...)23 (...)24
(...)25 (...)26 (...)27 (...)28 (...)29 (...)30 (...)31 (...)32 conceived by
the Holy Ghost, born of the Virgin Mary, suffered (...)33 (...)34 (...)35
(...)36 (...)37 (...)38 (...)39 (...)40 (...)41 (...)42 under Pontius Pilate,
was crucified, dead, and buried, he descended (...)43 (...)44 (...)45 (...)46
(...)47 (...)48 (...)49 (...)50 (...)51 (...)52 (...)53 (...)54 (...)55 (...)56
(...)57 (...)58 into hell, he did rise from the dead in the day third, He
ascended (...)59 (...)60 (...)61 (...)62 (...)63 (...)64 (...)65 (...)66
(...)67 (...)68 (...)69 (...)70 into heaven, where he sits at the right hand
of God the Father, (...)71 (...)72 (...)73 (...)74 (...)75 (...)76 (...)77
(...)78 (...)79 (...)80 (...)81 (...)82 (...)83 (...)84 (...)85 (...)86 from
whence he shall come to judge the Quick and the dead. I believe (...)87 (...)88
(...)89 (...)90 (...)91 (...)92 (...)93 (...)94 in the Holy Ghost, the Church
holy Catholic, the Communion of (...)95 (...)96 (...)97 (...)98 (...)99
(...)100 (...)101 (...)102 (...)103 (...)104 (...)105 (...)106 (...)107 Saints,
the forgiveness of sins, the resurrection of the body, and the (...)108
(...)109 life everlasting.

1. ((...)) This Particle being a single point, I
must denote one of the demonstrative Pronouns in the singular Number: And by
its place toward the upper end of the Character, and before the Verb, the
Nominative Case of the first Person, viz. I.

2. ((...)) This Particle being a Round, must signify the Copula, Am
and being placed toward the middle, and joined with the Nominative case of
the first person, it must be rendered ( Am.)

3. ((...)) This Generical Character is appointed to signify the Genus of
Habit. Believing
The affix on the left hand making a right angle with the lower side, does
signify the fifth Difference under that Genus, which according to the Tables,
is Infused Habit. The other affix making an obtuse angle, does signify the
fourth Species, viz. Faith; which is defined to consist in a readiness of mind
to yield an effectual assent (without any affected captiousness) unto revealed
Truths, upon such Grounds as their natures are capable of, and such as are in
themselves sufficient to prevail with a prudent teachable man. The Hook upon
the Difference denotes the Active voice, and the hook upon the Species, the
Adjective, viz. Believing.

The Word Believe being of an equivocal sense, may likewise be expressed by the
Genus of Spiritual Action, the second difference, relating to the Acts of the
Speculative Judgment, and the affinis of the second Species, which is
Believing, described to be an assent to any thing as truth upon the credit of
others by whom it is related. But I rather choose the former, as being more
proper to this place.

4. ((...)) A straight Line being the most simple, God the Father
is put for the Character of God. The acute angle on the left side does denote
the first Person of the Blessed Trinity, namely, God the Father; which by
following the Verb, is supposed to be in the Object case. And this may better
express the true notion of Credo in Deum, than by using the Preposition In, as
the sense of that Particle is determined in the foregoing Tables.

5. ((...)) This Character does by the two strokes denoting an Hyphen, appear
to be a Compound. Almighty
The two Points denote a Pronoun of the third Combination, and by the place of
them at the bottom, they must signify the Universal Collective, viz. All. The
Integral Character with which this is compounded, is the Genus of Natural
Power. The Hook at the end signifies the Grammatical notion of Adjective. So
that this compound Character may be rendered All-powerful, Omnipotent, or
Almighty.

6. ((...)) This Particle does signify the Demonstrative Article The. The


7. ((...)) This Particle being a small transverse Line placed at the side,
Having been
must denote one of the Tenses, and being placed toward the upper part, it
must signify the Preter Tense.

8. ((...)) The Genus of this Character is appointed to signify Spiritual
Creating person
Action, or the Action of a Spirit, or Spiritual Faculty. The affix on the
left, and that likewise on the right side, making acute angles with the upper
side, must therefore signify the first difference under that Genus which
refers to Actions of God, and the first Species of that Difference, namely,
Creation; which is defined to be, the putting of things into their first being.
The hook at the end of the Difference affix, does signify Active, and the
other Adjective. The transcendental mark, of a little flat Line on the top
toward the right hand, does denote Person; so that this Character with the
precedent affixes, does properly signify, the having been Creating Person.

Of
9. ((...)) This Particle does by its figure appear to be one of the
Prepositions of the first Combination, and by its position toward the top of
the Character, it is determined to be the first of them, which in Latin and
Greek is expressed by the Genitive case, and in English by the Particle Of.

Heaven.
10. ((...)) The Genus of this Character signifies World. The affix on the left
side denoting the second Difference, is Heaven.

And
11. ((...)) This Particle, by the shape of it, appears to be a Conjunction of
the first combination, and by the position of it toward the middle of the
Character, it must be the second of them, viz. the Conjunction Affirmative,
namely, And.

Of
12. ((...)) as Numb. 9.

Earth
13. ((...)) The same Character as to Genus and difference with Numb. 10. The
affix for the Species making an acute Angle, and passing below the middle line,
does denote the seventh Species, which according to the Tables, is this Globe
of Sea and Land.

And
14. ((...)) as Numb. 11.

Jesus Christ
15. ((...)) The same Generical Character as Numb. 4. The right Angle denoting
the second Person in the Blessed Trinity, viz. Jesus Christ.

His
16. ((...)) This Particle being a single point, must denote one of the
Demonstrative Pronouns in the singular number; and by its place toward the
bottom of the Character, it must signify the third Person, or He; and being
made possessive by the curve line under it, it must be rendered His.

Son
17. ((...)) The Genus of this Character does denote Oeconomical Relation. By
the acute angle on the left side, is signified the first Difference, which is
Relation of Consanguinity. By the right angle at the other end, is denoted the
second Species, which is described to be Direct Ascending, namely, Parent; to
which is opposed Direct Descending, namely, Child, which opposition is denoted
by the Loop on the left side of the Character.

Only
18. ((...)) The same Genus with the former, the fourth Difference, denoting
Relations of Equality; the second Species signifying that particular Relation
which is founded upon our Conversing with others, namely, Companion. To which
the opposite (signified by the Loop at the joining of the difference affix) is
being in a state of Segregation from others. The hook upon the Species affix,
denoting Adjective, viz. Alone, or Only.

19. ((...)) These two Points standing level, must signify one of the
Demonstrative Pronouns, in the Plural number. Our
By the place of them toward the upper side of the Character, they must denote
the first Person, We; which being by the curve line rendered Possessive, must
signify Our.

20. ((...)) The Genus of this Character is assigned to signify Civil
Relation; Sovereign
of which the first difference does denote Degrees of Persons. The second
Species signifying the supreme Magistrate, to whom others owe Subjection and
Obedience, viz. King, Lord, Sovereign.

21. ((...)) This Particle consisting of three Points, must therefore signify
one of the Compound Pronouns. Who
By the position of it toward the middle of the Character, it denotes the
second of them, to be rendered Who, when we speak of a Person: and Which, when
we speak of a Thing.

22. ((...)) The Copula, as Numb. 2. but being here placed toward the top of
the Character, it must be rendered in the Preter tense, Was
viz. Has been, or Was.

23. ((...)) The Genus of this Character is assigned to Corporeal Action. The
acute angle on the left side, denoting the first Difference, Conceived
namely, such corporeal actions as belong primarily to Vegetative and living
bodies. The right angle at the other end, signifies the second Species, which
in the Tables is Impregnation; to which the Word Conception is adjoined by way
of Affinity, signified by the Loop on the right side. The Loop on the
Difference affix, signifying the Passive voice; and the Hook upon the Species
affix, Adjective.

24. ((...)) This Particle, by the figure and position of it, must be the
second in the first combination of Prepositions, By
relating to the Efficient Cause, which we render By.

25. ((...)) as Numb. 6. The


26. ((...)) The same Genus with numb. 4, and 15. Holy Ghost
The obtuse angle signifying the third Person of the Blessed Trinity, viz. Holy
Ghost.

27. ((...)) The same Genus and Difference as numb. 23. The affix toward the
right hand making an obtuse angle with the upper side must signify the third
Species, which is Parturition, or bringing forth. Borne
The Loop at the end of the difference affix, denoting Passive voice, and the
Hook on the other side, Adjective, viz. Borne.

28. ((...)) This Particle, by the figure and position of it, Of
does appear to be the third of the first combination of Prepositions, relating
to the Material Cause, ex qua (Of)

The
29. ((...)) as numb. 6.

Virgin
30. ((...)) The same Genus as numb. 17, and 18. The affix toward the left
hand, denoting the second Difference, which is Relation of Affinity; the other
affix denoting the first Species, viz. that preceding state, whereby persons
are rendered capable of Marriage, namely, Celibate, to which the notion of
Virgin is joined as an affinis (denoted by the Loop on the right side)
described to be one that has not coupled with any other.

Mary
31. ((...)) The name Mari in the Literal Character, as being a proper name.

Capitally punished
32. ((...)) The Genus of this Character does belong to Judicial Relation; the
difference affix being the fifth, must denote Capital punishment; the Loop upon
the Difference affix signifying Passive, and the hook upon the other affix,
Adjective.

Under
33. ((...)) This Particle, by the figure and position of it, must be the first
Opposite in the sixth combination of Prepositions, namely, Under.

34. ((...)) These being proper Names, are to be expressed only by a Literal
Character, Pontius Pilate
according to our English pronunciation.

Was
35. ((...)) as numb. 22.

Crucified
36. ((...)) The same Genus and Difference with numb. 32. Under which Crucifying
is reckoned as the ninth Species. The Loop on the Difference affix does denote
the notion of Passive voice; and the Hook at the other end, the notion of
Adjective, Crucified.

Dead
37. ((...)) The same Genus and Difference with numb. 23, and 27. signifying
such corporeal Actions as do primarily belong to Vegetatives. The affix on the
right side, making an acute angle with the upper part of the transverse, and
passing below it, does signify the seventh Species, which is Living; to which
Dying is opposed. And that the Opposite is here intended, may appear by the
Loop at the joining of the Difference affix; the hook on the Species affix
signifying Adjective.

And
38. ((...)) as numb. 11.

Buried
39. ((...)) The Genus of this Character is assigned to Ecclesiastical Relation;
the fourth Difference comprehending the more common Actions belonging to
Religion: the affix at the other end, being a thorough stroke, and making an
obtuse angle to the upper side, must denote the ninth Species, which is
Burying, described in the Tables to be one of those Ritual Offices consisting
in performance of the Rites due to the dead, by putting their Bodies into the
Ground. The Loop on the Difference affix, does signify (as before) Passive,
and the other Hook Adjective.

40. ((...)) A Pronoun of the third person, singular number, viz. He. He


41. ((...)) as numb. 22. Was


42. ((...)) This appears by the Hyphen, Descending
to be a compound Character. The Particle in this composition, does by the
figure and position, denote the Opposite to the first of the fifth Combination
of Prepositions, viz. Downward. The Genus of the Integral Character, is
Transcendental Action. The affix on the left side, making an acute angle with
the bottom of the Line, does denote the sixth Difference, which is Ition, or
the passing of things from one place or state to another; and because there is
no affix at the other end, therefore this Character must denote the Difference
it self. The Hooks on each side, do signify Active and Adjective.

43. ((...)) This Particle does by the figure and position of it, Into
appear to be the first of the fourth Combination of Prepositions, and
consequently to signify Into.

44. ((...)) This Character is the same for Genus and Difference with numb. 10.
which does there signify Heaven; Hell
and whereas here there is a Loop at the joining of the Difference affix;
therefore must it denote that which is opposite to the former; namely, Hell.
This Clause might perhaps be more properly expressed thus; He became in the
state, or he passed into the Invisible place, of the having died persons.

45. ((...)) as numb. 40. He


46. ((...)) as numb. 22. Was


47. ((...)) The same Genus with numb. 23, 27, and 37. Denoting Corporeal
Action. The acute angle on the left side, Rising
does denote the sixth Difference, which is Gesture; namely, such animal motion
whereby the situation of the Whole or Parts is altered. The acute angle at the
other end to the upper side, does denote the first Species, which is motion
upwards direct; namely, Rising. The Hooks on each affix denote Active and
Adjective.

48. ((...)) This Particle, by the figure and position of it, must be the
second of the third combination of Prepositions, viz. From. From


49. ((...)) as numb. 6. The


50. ((...)) as numb. 7. Having been


51. ((...)) This Charcter is in all respects the same with numb. 37. Excepting
only, Dead persons
that there is another hook upon the Species affix to signify Plural Number,
together with the transcendental Note of Person at the top of the Character
toward the right hand, which makes the importance of this Character, with the
two preceding Particles to be, The having died Persons.

On
52. ((...)) Though this Preposition be properly local signifying in, as being
opposite to numb. 43. Yet it is applicable, as the others of the same kind are,
to Time; in which case it may be rendered On.

The
53. ((...)) as numb. 6.

Day
54. ((...)) The Character is the Genus of Measure. The affix both on the left
and right side, denote the fifth Difference, which is Measure of Time, and the
fifth Species, which is Day Natural.

Third
55. ((...)) The same Genus with the former, denoting Measure. The Difference
affix making an acute angle with the upper side of the transverse, does denote
the first Difference, which refers to Number. The obtuse angle at the other end
of the transverse, denoting the third Species, which according to the Tables,
is the number Three. The Hook on this affix, shows this Word to be used
adjectively, viz. Third.

He
56. ((...)) as numb. 40.

Was
57. ((...)) as numb. 22.

58. ((...)) Such a Compound as numb. 42. Only the Preposition here, Ascending
being the first of the fifth Combination, must signify Upwards; and
consequently, as the numb. 42. did signify Descending: so this must be the
Opposite to it; namely, Ascending.

Into
59. ((...)) as numb. 43.

Heaven
60. ((...)) as numb. 10.

In
61. ((...)) as numb. 52.

Which place
62. ((...)) A Compound of the Pronoun Which, and the transcendental Mark of
Place, viz. Which place.

He
63. ((...)) as numb. 4.

64. ((...)) The Copula in the present tense, which being applied to the third
Person singular, Is
must be rendered ( is.)

Sitting
65. ((...)) The same Character, both as to Genus and Difference, with that,
numb. 47. The species affix making a right angle with the bottom of the
transverse, must denote the fifth Species; namely, sitting; the hook upon this
affix, signifying the notion of Adjective.

66. ((...)) This Particle, by the figure and position of it, does appear to be
the first Opposite in the third combination of Prepositions, At
and to signify At.

The
67. ((...)) as numb. 6.

Right hand
68. ((...)) The Genus of Space. The obtuse angle on the left side, denoting the
third Difference under that Genus; namely, Situation: the oblique line at the
other end of the transverse, passing by both sides of it, does denote the ninth
Species under that Difference, viz. Right Side, or Right Hand.

69. ((...)) as numb. 9. Of


70. ((...)) as numb. 4. God the Father


71. ((...)) as numb. 48. From


72. ((...)) as numb. 62. Which place


73. ((...)) as numb. 40. He


74. ((...)) The Copula in the Future tense, signifying, Shall be. Shall be


75. ((...)) The Genus of transcendental Action, Coming
the sixth Difference, as before, numb. 42, 58. The first Species, viz. Come.
The hooks on each affix, denoting Active, Adjective, viz. Coming.

76. ((...)) This Particle, by the figure and position of it, For
does appear to be the second opposite in the first combination, and to
signify a respect to the final Causes in Latin, ob, propter, in English, For.

77. ((...)) The Genus of Judicial Relation. The first Difference, Judging
which is Forinsic Persons; and the first Species, which is Judge. The hook
upon the difference affix, denotes this to be a Noun of Action, viz.
Judication, or Judging.

78. ((...)) as numb. 6. The


79. ((...)) as numb. 51. Only, Quick
there wants the Note of Opposite; so that as that signified dead persons, this
must signify living persons.

80. ((...)) as numb. 11. And


81. ((...)) as numb. 6. The


82. ((...)) as numb. 7. Having


83. ((...)) as numb. 51. Died persons


84. ((...)) as numb. 1. I


85. ((...)) as numb. 2. Am


86. ((...)) as numb. 3. Believing


87. ((...)) as numb. 6. The Holy Ghost


88. ((...)) as numb. 26. The


89. ((...)) The Genus of Ecclesiastical Relation; Church
the transcendental mark 'over it, denoting Aggregate, which is the proper
notion of Church.

Holy
90. ((...)) The same Genus and Difference, as numb. 3. Denoting Infused Habit;
the second Species being Holiness, described to be that habitual frame, whereby
one is fitted for virtuous actions; more especially for the duties of Religion:
the hook upon the Species affix, denoting the Notion of Adjective, viz. Holy.

Universal
91 ((...)) The Genus of this Character is assigned to signify Transcendental
Relation mixed; the obtuse angle at each end, must denote the third difference,
and the third species: the third difference under that Genus, containing such
transcendental relations as concern Number. The third species, being that more
distinct relation of one Indeterminate, or All, viz. Particularity, or
Universality. The Loop at the joining of the difference affix, denoting an
Opposite, does determine the Character to the second of these: And the Hook at
the end of the species affix, does make it signify as an Adjective, viz.
Universal, Catholic.

The
92. ((...)) as numb. 6.

Communion
93. ((...)) The Genus of Ecclesiastical Relation, as numb. 89. The third
Difference, concerning states of Religion; the second species, Catholic, or
Communicant, which is described to be one that is in a state of Charity with
the body of those that agree in the same profession: the Abstract of which,
denoted by the hook upon the difference affix, is Communion.

Of
94. ((...)) as numb. 9.

Saints
95. ((...)) The same Genus and difference, as numb. 93. The fifth species
denoting such as are eminently religious; the hook upon the species affix,
signifying the Plural Number, viz. Saints.

The
96. ((...)) as numb. 6.

97. ((...)) The Genus of Judicial Relation, as numb. 77. The second difference
denoting Judicial Actions. Being forgiven
The ninth species signifying that kind of Judicial Action, which concerns the
inflicting of punishment, or freeing from it, Executing, or Pardoning. The
Loop, at the joining of the difference affix, denotes this to be an Opposite,
viz. Pardoning or Forgiving. The Loop upon the top of this affix, signifies the
passive voice, viz. the being forgiven.

Of
98. ((...)) as numb. 9.

99. ((...)) The Genus of Transcendental General; the third difference
respecting the more common and absolute differences of things; Sins
the second species denoting that difference of things, which does include a
respect to the Will, as to the agreement or disagreement of things with that
Faculty, styled Goodness or Evilness. The Loop toward the left hand, at the
joining of the affix, denoting opposite, viz. Evilness; the hook at the other
end of the same affix, does signify the Active voice; and the hook upon the
other affix, does denote the plural number: So that the meaning of this
Character, must be evil actions, the same as Trespasses, or Sins.

100. ((...)) as numb. 6. The


101. ((...)) The mark of Future tense. Future


102. ((...)) A compound Character. The Particle, does by the figure and the
position of it, Relife, or living again
appear to be the third Opposite in the fourth Combination of Adverbs, which is
Re, denoting Restitution to what was before. The Integral Character signifies
Life; as numb. 79.

103. ((...)) as numb. 9. Of


104. ((...)) as numb. 9. The


105. ((...)) The same Genus as numb. 10. signifying World. Body
The first difference under that Genus, being Spirit. The Opposite to which,
denoted by the Loop at the joining of the Affix, is Body.

106. ((...)) as numb. 11. And


107. ((...)) as numb. 6. The


108. ((...)) as numb. 101. Future


109. ((...)) The same Integral as 102. Life


110. ((...)) A compound with the Pronoun All, as numb. 5. Everlasting
The Genus of the Integral being the same with numb. 54, 55. does denote
Measure; the fifth difference of which, does signify measure of time, to which
the word Duration is adjoined by way of Affinity, signified by the Loop at the
right side, where the hook denotes Adjective: So that the true sense of this
Character, is All-during, or Everlasting.

I forbear any other Examples out of Aristotle, Euclid, Tully, Terence, which I
once thought to have subjoyned; because if what has been already delivered, be
sufficiently understood, it will appear easy enough to render any thing out of
those Authors, in this Character.

I shall only add concerning the Character here proposed, that besides the
Facility, Comeliness and Distinctness of it, containing a Description of what is
to be expressed by it, both as to the nature of the things, and the Grammatical
Variation of the words; it is likewise a much shorter way of writing, than that
by Letters: and by the great Variety which it is capable of, would afford the
surest way for Cryptography or secret Writing.

CHAP. III. How this Real Character may be made effable in a distinct Language,
and what kind of Letters or Syllables may be conveniently assigned to each
Character.
BY what has been already delivered, it may sufficiently appear, how any thing
or Notion, which falls under humane Discourse, may be expressed by such a
Character as shall be legible to men of all Nations and Languages.

I come now to show how this Universal Character may be made effable in a
distinct Language: The unfolding of which (supposing what has been said about
the Character and Grammar, to be well understood) will need but little time and
pains.

The Qualifications desirable in a Language, should have some analogy and
proportion to those before mentioned concerning a Character or way of Writing;
Namely,

1. The words of it should be brief, not exceeding two or three Syllables; the
Particles consisting but of one Syllable.

2. They should be plain and facil to be taught and learnt.

3. They should be sufficiently distinguishable from one another, to prevent
mistake and equivocalness; and withal significant and copious, answerable to
the conceits of our mind.

4. They should be Euphonical, of a pleasant and graceful sound.

5. They should be Methodical; those of an agreeable or opposite sense, having
somewhat correspondent in the sounds of them. The order to be observed in the
assigning of Letters and Sounds to these Characters, must be after the same
manner with the Method before made use of, in treating concerning these
Characters: Beginning first with Integrals, according to their several
Varieties, and then proceeding to the Particles.

The Integrals may be considered, either as they are Radicals, placed in the
Tables, either more direct, whether Genus, Difference, or Species; or else
Laterally, either by way of Affinity or Opposition.

And next to the Words or Sounds appointed for each of these Radicals, it is to
be considered, by what kind of Changes or Varieties, the several Derivations
and Inflections may be expressed.

The first thing to be stated in such an Institution, is to assign several
Letters and sounds for the 40 Genus's. It were not difficult to offer great
variety of these; but to pitch upon that which upon all accounts would be the
best, will require so much consideration, and practice, and so many Trials as I
cannot pretend unto.

That which at present seems most convenient to me, is this; Transcend. General
Ba Rel. mixed Ba Rel. of Action Be
Discourse By God Da World Da Element De Stone Di Metal Do Herb consid. accord.
to the Leaf Ga Flower Ga Seed-vessel Ge
Shrub Gi Tree Go Animals Exanguious Za Fish Za Bird Ze Beast Zi
Parts Peculiar Pa General Pa
Quantity Magnitude Pe Space Pi Measure Po
Quality Power Not. Ta Habit Ta Manners Te Quality sensible Ti Disease To
Action Spiritual Ca Corporeal Ca Motion Ce Operation Ci
Relation Oecon. Co Posses. C Provis. Sa
Civil Sa Judicial Se Military Si Naval So Eccles. S



The Differences under each of these Genus's, may be expressed by these
Consonants in this order; B, D, G, P, T, C, Z, S, N. 1 2 3 4 5 6 7.8 9.


The Species may be expressed by putting one of the seven Vowels after the
Consonant, for the Difference; to which may be added (to make up the number)
two of the Dipthongs, according to this order a, a, e, i, o, ou,, i, ou. 1 2 3
4 5 6 7 8 9.


For instance, If (De) signify Element, then (Deb) must signify the first
difference; which (according to the Tables) is Fire: and (Deba) will denote the
first Species, which is Flame. (Det) will be the fifth difference under that
Genus, which is, Appearing Meteor; (Deta) the first Species, viz. Rainbow;
(Det^) the second, viz. Halo.

Thus, if (Ti) signify the Genus of Sensible Quality, then (Tid) must denote
the second difference, which comprehends Colors; and (Tida) must signify the
second Species under that difference, viz. Redness: (Tide) the third Species,
which is Greenness, etc.

Thus likewise, if (Be) be put for the Genus of Transcendental Relation of
Action, then (Bec) must denote the sixth difference, which is Ition; and
(Becou) will signify the sixth Species, which is Following.

As for those Species under Plants and Animals, which do exceed the number of
Nine, they may be expressed by adding the Letters L, or R, after the first
Consonant, to denote the second or third of such Combinations. Thus, if Gade be
Tulip, viz. the third Species in the first Nine, then Glade must signify
Ramson, viz. the third in the second Nine, or the twelfth Species under that
Difference. So if Zana be Salmon, viz. the second species in the first Nine,
them Zlana must signify Gudgeon, viz. the second in the second Nine; or the
eleventh Species under that Difference.

It must be granted, that there is one inconvenience in this Contrivance for
the supernumerary Species, namely, that according to this way of expressing
them, they are scarce capable of the derivation of Adjective: But this is more
tolerable, because in such matters, where this will happen, there is no
necessary occasion for this derivation.

Those Radicals which are joined to others by way of Affinity, may be
expressed; 1. In Monosyllables, by repeating the Radical Vowel before the
Consonant. For example, if (De) signifies Element, then (Ede) must signify
that which is joined to it by way of affinity, viz. Meteor. If (Di) be Stone,
then (Idi) will signify Concretions, etc. 2. In Dyssyllables, by repeating the
second Radical Consonant after the last Vowel: Thus, if (Dade) be Planet,
(Daded) will signify Comet. If (Dego) be Ice, (Degog) will signify Snow, etc.

Those Radicals which are paired together upon the account of single
Opposition, may be expressed,

1. In Monosyllables, by putting the opposite Vowel before the first Consonant,
according to that order of Opposition before set down; namely, of a a e
to i o ou
or.

Thus, if (Da) be put to signify God, then (ida) must signify that which is
opposed, namely, Idol. If (Dab) be Spirit, (odab) will be Body. If (Dad) be
Heaven, (odad) will signify Hell.

2. In Dyssyllables, by adding the Letter (S) to the last Vowel: Thus if (Pida)
be Presence, (Pidas) will be Absence. If (Tadou) be Power, then (Tadous) will
be Impotence.

As for those double Opposites by way of Excess or Defect, which sometimes
occur, as they are to be represented in writing by the Transcendental Points of
Excess or Defect, on the top of the Character, so are they to be expressed in
speaking by those Syllables appointed to these Characters, which must be added
to the termination of the word: Thus if (Teba) be Justice, (Tebas) will
signify the Opposite Common; namely, Injustice: And (Tebasla) the Opposite by
way of Excess; namely, Rigor, and (Tebaslo) the Opposite by way of Defect, viz.
Remission.

Tepa Veracity. Tepas Lying. Tepasla Over-saying. Tepaslo Vnder-saying,
Detracting.
Adjectives should be expressed by changing the first radical Consonant,
according to this establishment; B, D, G, P, T, C; Z, S, N. V, Dou, Gou, F,
Tou, Cou, Zh, Sh, Ng.
Thus, if, Da De Do
do signify God Element Stone
then Doua Dove Douo
must signify Divine. Elementary Stony.


Adverbs may be expressed by turning the first Radical Vowel into a Dipthong.
So Dai is Divinely. (Sib) is Religiously. (Sigas) is Schismatically.

Abstracts may be expressed, 1. In Monosyllables of the Genus, by adding the
Letter (r) after the first Radical Vowel. So Dar is Deity or Divinity.

In Monosyllables of the Difference, and Dissyllables of the Species, by
changing the second Radical Character Consonant thus; B, D, G, P, T, C, Z, S,
N. V, Dh, Dzh, F, Th, Tsh, Zh, Sh, Ng.


The Letters Dzh, and Tsh, being the same power which we Englishmen give to the
Letters G, and Ch, in the words Ginger, and Charity. Thus (Bad) is Cause;
(Badh) is Causality. (Saba) is King, (Sava) is Regality or Majesty.


There are only two things noted in the Character belonging to the Inflection
of words; namely,

1. The Active and Passive voice, to be expressed by the Letters L, and N,
after the first Vowel: thus (Salba) is Regnation; and (Samba) is (...) regnari.

2. The Plural Number in Substantives, which is sometimes likewise affixed to
Adjectives, when they are used substantively, by reason of any transcendental
Mark joined to them. And this may be done by prolonging the first Vowel, which
upon all other occasions, is to be pronounced as being short. But because it
will be difficult to prolong this Vowel in Monosyllables of the Genus, when no
Consonant does follow; therefore in this case it may be proper to add the Vowel
ou to the Radical Vowel. So if Da be God, Daou will be Gods.

According to this establishment, every Radical Genus Difference and Species,
may be expressed by such words as are facil and pleasant. Those words that are
most harsh and difficult, will happen amongst such of the Derivations as are
seldom used; as in some of the Active or Passive Adverbs, and in some of the
Abstracts.

By these Instances it will be easy to understand all the rest.

The Particles may be expressed either by simple Vowels or Dipthongs, or by
some of those Monosyllables, not used for any of the Genus's or Differences.

Amongst the Grammatical Particles, the more principal are, the Copula,
Pronouns, Interjections, Prepositions, Adverbs, Conjunctions.

1. The Copula, or Verb Sum, according to its threefold place in the Character,
may be expressed by these Dipthongs ^ ia. ^ ia. ^ ie.


2. The Pronouns, according to their several kinds, may be expressed by these
Vowels and Dipthongs; ^ a ^ ai ^ i ^ o ^ aou oi. ^ a ^ ai ^ ou ^ ^ aou ouou. ^
e ^ ei ^ i ^ ou ^ eou i i

Possessive Pronouns by prefixing (H.) Reduplicative, by interposing (L.) So Ha
is mine, Hala is my own.

3. The Interjections, being Natural sounds themselves, need not have any
assigned to the Characters of them, than what are General. So ^
Heigh Hm, Hu. Pish, Shu, Tush
^
Ah, alack, alas. Ha, ha, he. O, O that.
^
Vauh, Hau. Hoi, ah, oh. Phy.
^
Oh, soho. Ho, oh. Eja, now.
^
St, hush, mum, whist. Ha. Vae, woe.


4. The Prepositions may be expressed by Monosyllables framed of L, and R;
after this manner. ^
La, Li. La, Lo. Le, Lou.
^
Ra, Ri. Ra, To. Re, Rou
^
Lal, Lil Lal, Lol Lel, Loul
^
Ral, Ril Ral, Roll Rel, Roll
^
Lar, Lir Lar, Lor Ler, Lour
^
Rar, Rir Rar, Ror Rer, Rour


5. Adverbs may be expressed by Monosyllables, with the initial Letter M. after
this manner; ^
Ma, Mi Ma, Mo Me, Mou
^
Mal, Mil Mal, Mol Mel, Moul
^
Mar, Mir Mar, Mor Mer, Mour
^
Mas, Mis Mas, Mos Mes, Mous
^
M. Mi. Mou


6. Conjunctions may be expressed by Monosyllables, with the Initial Letter N,
after this manner; ^
Na, Ni Na, No Ne, Nou
^
Nal, Nil Nal, Nol Nel, Noul
^
Nar, Nir Nar, Nor Ner, Nour
^
Nas, Nis Nas, Nos Nes, Nous


The more servile Particles are of three kinds; Articles, Modes, Tenses.

1. The Articles being but two, may be thus expressed, ^ el. ^ al.


2. The Imperative Mode, according to its threefold difference of Petition,
Persuasion, Command, may be expressed by these Dipthongs, io, iou, i.

The Secondary Modes, by Dipthongs or Tripthongs, according to their
differences of Absolute or Conditional. So the Mode of Power Liberty Will
Necessity
whether Absolute or Conditional, is to be expressed by oua, ouai. oua, ouai.
oue, ouei. ouo, ouoi.


3. The Tenses, Past, Present, and Future, may be expressed by these Dipthongs,
oui, ou, oui.

The Transcendental Particles, to be added by way of Composition in the
termination of words, may be expressed by these Syllables, ^
ia, ia, ie iou, io, i
^
oua, oua, oue oui, ouo, ou
^
Ma, Ma, Me Mi, Mo, Mou
^
Mal, Mal, Mel Mil, Mol, Moul
^
Na, Na, Ne Ni, No. Nou
^
Nal, Nal, Nel Nil, Nol, Noul
^
La, la, le Li, Lo, Lou
^
Ra, Ra, Re Ri, To, Rou


In which Constitution, the Marks made use of before, either for Prepositions,
Adverbs, or Conjunctions, have the same Syllables assigned to them.

It is here to be noted, that as Numbers are provided for in writing, by
distinct Characters from the rest, so should they likewise have some suitable
provision in speaking. And because there are two ways before suggested for the
expression of Numbers by writing, namely, either by words at length, or by
Figures, there should therefore be some provision answerable to each of these
for speaking.

1. The Words at length for the nine Digits, are to be made off from the Tables
after the same manner as all other Species are; and as for the other Numbers
above this, viz. Ten, Hundred* Thousand, Million, they may be expressed by
adding the Letters L, R, M, N. after the last Vowel; according to these
Examples: Pobal 10. Pobal 20. Pobel 30. Pobar 100. Pobar 200. Pober 300. Pobam
1000. Pobam 2000. Pobem 3000. Poban 1000000 Poban 2000000. Poben 3000000, etc.
Pobam Pobour Poboul Pobou. One thousand Six hundred Sixty Six.

2. The Figures of Numbers, may be most conveniently expressed in Speech,
Arithmet. Pract. cap. 17.
in that way suggested by Herrigon; namely, by assigning one Vowel or Dipthong,
and one Consonant to each of the Digits, suppose after this manner, 1, 2, 3, 4,
5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 0. a, a, e, i, o, ou,, iou, i, ou. b, d, g, p, t, c, l, m, n, r.


According to which constitution, a word of so many Letters, may serve to
express a number of so many places. Thus either of these words, acouc, aoucou,
boucou, will signify 1666; which is as much a better and briefer way for the
expressing of these numbers in speech, as that other is for writing, betwixt
Figures and Words at l^ngth.

The Grammatical Variations belonging to Number, whether Derivations or
Inflexions, may for the nine Digits be framed according to common Analogy. For
greater Numbers, it may be convenient to prefix the Difference denoting number
in general; namely, Pob before the wo^d* for any Particular; as suppose acouc
be the word for the number, let it be made Pobacouc Pobacoul
for the Cardinal Number 1666 1667
then Fobacouc Fobacoul
will be the Ordinal, or Adjective Neuter, denoting the 1666th 1667th etc.


By what has been said, it is easy to conceive, how this Character may be
made effable as to all the Species of things, together with their Derivations
and Inflexions. As for Individuals, I have showed before, how the names of them
are to be expressed by a Literal Character.

But these things will more distinctly appear by instance of something written
in this Language: In Order to which, I shall offer an Example of it in the
Lords Prayer and the Creed.

CHAP. IV. An Instance of the Philosophical Language, both in the Lords Prayer
and the Creed. A Comparison of the Language here proposed, with fifty others,
as to the Facility and Euphonicalness of it.
AS I have before given Instances of the Real Character, so I shall here in the
like method, set down the same Instances for the Philosophical Language. I
shall be more brief in the particular explication of each Word; because that
was sufficiently done before, in treating concerning the Character.

The Lords Prayer.
Hai coba ouou ia ril dad, ha babi io soumta, ha salba io velca, ha talbi io
vemgou, mou ril dady me ^il dad io velpi ra^ ai ril i poto hai saba vat, na io
soueldou^ lal ai hai balgas me ai ia soueldous lal ei ouou ia valgas rou ai na
mi io velco ai, ral bedodlou nil io coualbo ai lal vagasie, nor al salba, na al
tado, na al tadala ia ha pioubou (...) mou io.

1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 Hai coba ouou ia ril dad, ha babi io soumta ha Our
Father who art in Heaven, Thy Name be Hallowed, Thy 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20
21 22 23 24 25 26 salba io velca, ha talbi io vemgou, mou ril dad me ril dad,
io velpi Kingdom come, Thy Will be done, so in Earth as in Heaven, Give 27 28
29 30 31 32 33 34 35 36 37 38 39 40 41 ral ai ril i poto hai saba vat, na io
soueldious lal ai hai balgas to us on this day our bread expedient and forgive
to us our trespasses 42 43 44 45 46 47 48 49 50 51 52 53 54 55 56 57 58 me ai
ia soueldous lal ei ouou ia valgas rou ai, na mi io velco ai ral as we forgive
them who trespass against us, and lead us not into 59 60 61 62 63 64 65 6^ 67
68 69 70 71 72 bedodlou nil io coualbo ai lal vagasie nor al salba, na al tado,
na temptation but deliver us from evil for the Kingdom, and the power, and 73
74 75 76 77 78 79 80. al tadala io ha pioubou (...) mou io. the Glory is thine,
for ever and ever. Amen. So be it.

Our
1. (Hai) This Dipthong (ai) is assigned to signify the first Person plural
amongst the Pronouns, viz. We. The Letter h prefixed to it, does denote that
Pronoun to be used possessively, viz. Our.

Parent
2. (Coba) Co does denote the Genus of Oeconomical Relation; the Letter (b)
signifying the first difference under that Genus, which is Relation of
Consanguinity; the Vowel (a) the second Species, which is Direct ascending;
namely, Parent.

Who
3. (ouou) This Dipthong is appointed to signify the second of the compound
Pronouns, Who, personal; or Which, Real.

Art
4. (ia) This dipthong is appointed to signify the present tense of the Copula
( est) and being spoken of the second person, is to be rendered Art.

In
(ril) is a Preposition, the first Opposite of the fourth combination; and
therefore must signify ( in.)

Heaven
6. (dad) The Syllable (da) is appointed to signify the Genus of World; the
addition of the Letter (d) does denote the second difference under that Genus,
which is Heaven.

Thy
7. (ha) The Vowel (a) is assigned to signify a Pronoun of the singular number,
and second person. The Letter (h) before it, does denote it to be understood
possessively, and to signify ( Thy) or ( Thine.)

Name
8. (babi) The Syllable (ba) does denote the Genus of Transcendental General.
The Letter (b) does denote the first difference, and the Vowel (i) the fourth
Species, which is Name.

9. (io) This Dipthong is appointed to signify that kind of Imperative Mode
(as it is commonly styled) which is by way of Petition; May it be
the sense of it being, I pray that it may be.

Hallowed
10. (Soumta (S) is put for the Genus of Ecclesiastical Relation. The Consonant
(t) for the fifth difference, and the Vowel (a) for the first species, which
according to the tables, is, Consecration, or Hallowing. The Addition of the
Vowel (ou) to (S) does signify the notion of Adjective; and the addition of
the Letter (m) at the end of the first Syllable, signifies the Passive voice,
viz. Hallowed.

11. (ha.) as numb. 7. Thy


12. (Salba) (Sa) is Civil Relation; (b) denotes the first difference, Kingdom
or Regnation
which is degrees of persons; and (a) is the second species, which, according
to the tables, is King; the addition of (l) to the first Syllable, does denote
a word of Action, viz. Regnation.

13. (io) as numb. 9. May it be


14. (Velca) (Be) is the Genus of transcendental action; Coming.
(c) denotes the sixth difference under that Genus, and (a) the first species,
which signifies Coming: the turning of (b) into (v) denotes this word to be an
Adjective, and the Letter (L) to be an Active.

15. (ha) as numb. 7. Thy


16. (^albi) (ta) does denote the Genus of Natural Power, Will or volition
(b) the first difference, and (i) the fourth Species; namely, Will: the Letter
(l) denoting a Noun of Action, viz. Volition.

17. (io) as numb. 10. May it be


18. (vemgou) (be) is the Genus of Transcendental Action; Done or accomplished
(g) denotes the third difference, and (ou) the sixth species; which is,
Performing, or Accomplishing: the change of (b into v) denoting this word to be
an Adjective, and (m) Passive, Performed.

19. (mou) This Monosyllable with (m) must denote an Adverb, So
and the last opposite of the first Combination; which is, So.

20 (ril) as numb. 5. In


21. (dad) (da) is the Genus of World, Earth
(d) is the second difference, which is Heaven; the Vowel signifying the
seventh species under that difference, which is this Earth, or the Globe of
Land and Sea, whereon we inhabit.

22. (me) Paired with numb. 19. and therefore must signify, As
As.

23. (ril) as numb. 5. In


24. (dad) as numb. 6. Heaven


25. (io) The same Particle as numb. 9. May thou be
But being here joined with a word active, and relating to the second person,
it must be rendered, May thou be.

26. (velpi) (be) is Transcendental Action (p) the fourth difference, and (i)
the fourth species, which is Giving: Giving.
b changed into v, denoting adjective, and (l) active.

To.
27. (lal) A Preposition of the first Combination, signifying To.

Us
28. (ai) A Pronoun, first person, plural number; namely, We, or Us.

In
29. (ril) as numb. 5.

This
30. (i) The first of the relative Pronouns, signifying This.

Day
31. (poto) po is the Genus of Measure, (t) the fifth difference, and (o) the
fifth species, which is Day.

Our
32. (hai) as numb. 1.

Bread
33. (Saba) Sa denotes the Genus of Oeconomical Provisions, (b) the first
difference, and (a) the second species, which is Bread.

Expedient
34. (Vat) (ba) is the Genus of Transcendental General, (t) the fifth
difference, the seventh species; the change of b into v, denotes this Word to
be an Adjective, and to signify Expedient.

And
35. (Na) A Conjunction, the second of the first Combination, viz And.

May thou be
36. (io) as numb. 25.

Forgiving
37. (Soueldous) Se is the Genus of Judicial Relation d, the second difference,
ou the ninth species, which is Forgiving: ou joined to the first Consonant,
signifying the notion of Adjective, and l, of Active, (s) the Opposite.

To
38. (lal) as numb. 27.

Us
39. (ai) as numb. 28.

Our
40. (hai) as numb. 1.

41. (balgas) (ba) the Genus of transcendental general, (g) the third
difference, Trespasses or Male-actions
(a) the second species, (s) at the end, denoting the word hereby signified, to
be placed in the Tables as an Opposite, and the Letter (l) in the first
syllable, signifying the Active voice, and the prolonging of the first Vowel,
expressed by the Accent over it, denoting the Plural Number.

As
42. (Me) as numb. 22.

We
43. (ai) as numb. 28.

Are
44. (ia) as numb. 4. But being here adjoined to a word of the first Person
Plural, it must be rendered, Are.

Forgiving
45. (soueldous) as numb. 37.

To
46. (lal) as numb. 27.

Them
47. (ei) A Pronoun, third person, plural number, They, or Them.

38. (ouou) as numb. 3. Who


49. (ia) the preter tense of the Copula. Have been


50. (Valgas) as numb. 41. Only that was a substantive of Action, Transgressing
and of the plural number, denoted by the length of the first Radical Vowel;
whereas this is an Adjective, signified by (v.)

51. (iou) A Preposition being the last Opposite of the second Combination; and
therefore must signify, Against. Against


52. (ai) as numb. 28. Us.


53. (na) as numb. 35. And


54. (mi) An Adverb, the first Opposite of the first combination, Not
signifying No, or Not.

55. (io) as numb. 25. May thou be


56. (Velco) (be) is the Genus of Transcendental Action. Leading
(c) denotes the sixth difference, and (o) the fifth species, which is Leading;
the Letters (v) and (l) signifying: Adjective Active.

57. (ai) as numb. 28. Us


58. (ral) a Preposition, the first of the fourth Combination; and therefore
must signify, Into. Into


59. (bedodlou) (be) is transcendental action, Temptation
(d) denotes the second difference, (o) the fifth species, which is Trying; the
second (d) does denote this word to be joined in the Tables as an affinis: the
last syllable (lou) signifies the transcendental particle Corruptive, which in
composition, must denote the worst sense of a word, and here it must signify
such temptation or trial sas ought not to be.

60. (ril) a Conjunction, But
the first opposite of the second combination, signifying, But.

61. (io) as numb. 25. May thou be


62. (coualbo) (ca) is the Genus of Spiritual Action, Delivering
(b) signifies the first difference, and (o) the fifth species, which is,
Delivering; the Letters ou and l signifying Adjective Active.

63. (ai) as numb. 28. Us


64. (lal) a Preposition, the second of the third combination; From
and therefore must signify, From.

65. (vagasie) as numb. 41. Only the b is turned into v, Evil
to denote Adjective, and the (l) is here left out, which signifies action, and
the transcendental Particle (ie) is here added, to denote Evil thing.

66. (nor) a Conjunction, For
the second Opposite in the third combination, signifying, For.

The
67. (al) The demonstrative Article, viz. The.

Kingdom
68. (Salba) as numb. 12.

And
69. (na) as numb. 35.

The
70. (al) as numb. 68.

Power
71. (tado) (ta) is the Genus of Habit, (d) is the second difference, and (o)
the fifth species, which is Power.

And
72. (na) as numb. 35.

The
73. (al) as numb. 68.

Glory
74. (Tadala) (tad) is the same Genus and Difference with numb. 72. the second
(a) denoting the second species, which is Reputation or Fame; the last syllable
(la) being added to the termination, does signify the first of the seventh
combination, amongst transcendental notions, viz. Augmentative, the highest
kind or degree of Reputation, which is, Glory.

I^
75. (ia) as numb. 4. But being here applied to the third person, and singular
number, is to be rendered Is.

Thine
76. (ha) as numb. 11.

Everlastingly
77. (Pioubou (Pi) does denote the Genus of Space, (b) the first difference,
(ou) the ninth species, which is (Everness,) the adding of the Vowel (ou) to
make a Dipthong with the first Vowel, signifies the word to be an Adverb,
Everlastingly.

Amen
78. ((...)) the word Amen in the Literal Character.

So
79. (mou) as numb. 19.

May it be.
80. (io) as numb. 9.

The Creed.
a ia toualti dab eou-toua, al oui coualbaiou la dad na la dad, na dad he cobas
couopas hai saba, ouou ia couambab la al Dag, couambe le al codad (...), souemt
^ir (...), ia souemtou, couabs, na soumpou, e ia lir-velc ral odad, e ia
coualca lal al oui couabsiou, ril al poto fobe, e ia lar-velc ral dad, ril
ouou-oua e ia coualco lil al pigou la dab, lal ouou-oua e ie velca lo selba al
couabiou na al oui couabsiou. a ia toualti Dag, al s-oue touata vages, al sdzha
la sgo al semd la balgas al oui mous-calb la al odab na al oui cab eou^ft.

1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 a ia toualti dab eou-toua al oui coualbaiou la dad na
I am believing God the Father Almighty Maker of Heaven an^ 12 13 14 15 16 17 18
19 20 21 22 la dad na dad he cobas couopas hai saba ouou ia of Earth, and in
Jesus Christ his Son only our Lord, who was 23 24 25 26 27 28 29 30 31 32
couambab la al Dag couambe le al codad souemt conceived by the Holy Ghost, born
of the Virgin Mary, suffered 33 34 35 36 37 38 39 40 41 42 rir (...), ia
souemtou couab na soumpou e ia lir-velc under Pontius Pilate, was crucified,
dead, and buried, he descended 43 44 45 46 47 48 49 50 51 52 53 54 55 56 57 ral
odad e ia coualca lal al oui couabsiou ril al poto fobe, e ia into hell, he did
rise from the dead in the day third, He was 58 59 60 61 62 63 64 65 66 67 68 69
70 lar-velc ral dad ril ouou-oua e ia coualco lil al pigou la Dab ascending
into heaven, in which place he is sitting at the right hand of God the Father
71 72 73 74 75 76 77 78 79 80 81 82 83 84 85 86 lal ouou-oua e ie velca lo
selba al couabiou na al oui couabsioua ia from whence he shall come to judge
the Quick and the dead. I am 87 88 89 90 91 92 93 94 toualti Dag al s-oue
touata vages al sdzha la believing in the Holy Ghost, the Church holy
Catholic, the Communion of 95 96 97 98 99 100 101 102 103 104 105 106 107 sgo
al semd la balgas al oui mous-calb la al odab na al Saints, the forgiveness of
sins, the resurrection of the body, and the 108 109 110 oui cab cou-ft. (...)
life everlasting.

I
1. (a) a Pronoun of the first person, and singular number, I.

Am
2. (ia.) The copula, est, in the present tense, which being used with the first
person, does signify Am.

3. (toualti) (ta) denotes the Genus of Habit t the fifth difference, i,
Believing
the fourth species, which is Faith; the adding of ou to t, denotes the word to
be an adjective, and the Letter l signifies the active voice, Believing.

4. (Dab) The Monosyllable Da is appointed to signify God, or the divine
nature; God the Father
the addition of the Consonant b, will denote the first person in the Blessed
Trinity.

5. (eou-toua) A Compound of a Particle, and an Integral, the Particle being a
dipthong, Almighty
appointed to signify All. The Syllable ta, denoting the Genus of Power; the
addition of ou, makes it to be an adjective, viz. potent, or powerful.

The
6. (al) the demonstrative Article, The.

Having been
(oui) the sign of the preter tense.

8. (coualbaiou) (ca) is the Genus of spiritual action (b) denotes the first
difference, Creating person
and a the first species, which is Creation; the addition of ou to c, signifies
adjective, and the Letter (l) active; the last dipthong (iou) denotes the
transcendental composition of Person. So that this word with the two preceding
Particles, does import, the having Created Person.

9. (la) the first Preposition, signifying Of. Of


10. (dad) (da) the Genus of World, and (d) the second difference, Heaven.
which is Heaven.

11. (na) the second Conjunction of the first Combination, And
signifying And.

12. (la) as numb. 9. Of


13. (dad) The same Genus and difference, as numb. 10. The Vowel signifying the
seventh species, which is, This Earth. Earth


14. (na) as numb. 11. And


15. (dad) the second person of the Blessed Trinity. Jesus Christ


16. (he) the Vowel e signifies a Pronoun of the third person, His
and singular number, the Letter h prefixed, shows it to be used possessively,
for His.

17. (cobas) the syllable (co) is assigned to the Genus of Oeconomical
Relation, the Letter (b) to the first difference, Son
and the Vowel (a) for the second species, the Letter (s) denoting the word
hereby signified, to be an Opposite, viz. Son.

18. (couopas) the same Genus as the former (p) signifying the fourth
difference, and (a) the second species, and the Letter (ou) an Opposite* Only
viz. Alone, or Only.

19. (hai) A Pronoun, first person possessive, plural number. Our


20. (Saba) (Sa) the Genus of Civil Relation, (b) the first difference, viz.
Degrees of persons, (a) the second species, Sovereign
which is Sovereign, or Lord, to whom we owe Obedience, or subjection.

21. (ouou) the second of the compound Pronouns, signifying Who, or Which. Who


22. (ia) The Copula Est, in the preter tense. Was


23. (couambab) (ca) is the Genus of corporeal action, Conceived
(b) the first difference, and (a) the second species; the adding of the second
Radical Consonant (b,) denotes this word to be adjoined in the tables, by way
of affinity, and consequently to signify Conception, (ou) signifying
Adjective, and (m) Passive.

24. (la) the second Preposition in the first Combination, By
(By)

25. (al) as numb. 6. The


26. (Dag) the third Person in the Blessed Trinity. Holy Ghost


27. (couambe) the same Genus and Difference with numb. 23. (e) signifying the
third species, Borne
which is Parturition (ou) denoting Adjective, and (m) Passive.

Of
28. (le) the third Preposition in the first Combination, relating to the
Material Cause, Of.

The
29. (al) as numb. 6. The

Virgin
30, (codad) the syllable (co) as was said before, is assigned to Oeconomical
Relation, (d) is the second difference, and (a) is the first species; the
repeating of the second Radical Consonant at the end, makes this word to denote
something adjoined by way of Affinity, viz. Virgin.

Mary
31. () the name Mari in the literal Character.

Capitally punished
32. (souemt) the syllable (se) is for Judicial Relation, the Letter (t) is the
fifth difference, viz. Capital punishment, (ou) is Adjective, and (m) Passive,

33. (rir) A Preposition, the first opposite of the sixth Combination, viz.
Under. Un^er


Pontius Pilate
34. ((...)) the name Pontius Pilate, in the Literal Character.

Was
35. (ia) as numb. 22.

Crucified
36. (souemtou) the same Genus and Difference as numb. 32. the last Dipthong
(ou) denoting the ninth difference, which is Crucifying, the first (ou) being
the mark for Adjective, and the Letter (m) for Passive.

37. (couabs) the same as to genus and difference, with numb. 23, and 27. the
Vowel () signifying the seventh species, Dead
the Letter (s) an opposite, and the vowel (ou) adjective.

And
38. (Na) as numb. 11.

Buried
39. (soumpou) The syllable (s) is Ecclesiastical Relation, (p) the fourth
difference, and (ou) the ninth species, which is Burial; the first (ou) being
the sign of adjective, and (m) of passive.

He
40. (e) Pronoun of the third person, singular number, viz. He.

Was
41. (ia) as numb. 22.

42. (lir-velc) This word is a Compound, the first syllable (lir) is a
Preposition, Descending
the first opposite of the fifth Combination, signifying downwards; (be) is the
Genus of transcendental action, the Letter (c) the sixth difference, which is
Ition, (ou) the adjective, and (l) the active, Down-going, or Descending.

43. (ral) a Preposition, the first of the fourth Combination, signifying Into.
Into


44. (odad) (da) is the Genus of World, Hell
(d) is the second difference, which is Heaven, the vowel (o) which is opposite
to (a) being prefixed, denotes this to be the word opposite to Heaven, viz. Hell.

45. (e) as numb. 40. He. He


46. (ia) as numb. 22. Has been


47. (coualca) (ca) is Corporeal Action, (c) is the sixth difference, Rising
and (a) the first species, viz. Rise, (ou) the adjective, and (l) the active.

48. (lal) a Preposition, the second of the third Combination, From
From.

49. (al) as numb. 6. The. The


50. (oui) as numb. 7. Having been


51. (couabsiou) The same radical word with numb. 41. the Dipthong (iou) being
a transcendental composition, denoting Person. Dying persons


52. (ril) a Preposition, On
the first opposite of the fourth Combination, signifying In.

53. (al) as numb. 6. The


54. (Poto) the syllable (po) does stand for the Genus of Measure, (t) the
fifth Difference, and (o) the fifth Species, which is Day. Day


55. (fobe) The same Genus as the former, (b) the first Difference, relating to
Number, (e) the third Species, the turning p into f, Third
signifying adjective, viz. Third.

56. (e) as numb. 40. He


57. (ia) as numb. 22. Was


58. (lar-velc) a Compound as numb. 42. Ascending
Only the Preposition here, being the first of the fifth Combination, must
signify Upwards; and the word Ascending.

59. (ral) as numb. 43. Into


60. (dad) as numb. 10. Heaven


61. (ril) as numb. 52. In


62. (ouou-oua) A Compound of the Pronoun Which, Which place
and the transcendental Mark of Place.

63. (e) as numb 40. He


64. (ia) as numb. 2. Is
But being here spoken of a third Person in the singular number, must be
rendered ( is.)

Sitting
65. (coualco) The same Genus and Difference as numb. 47. (o) being the fifth
Difference, which is Sitting, (ou) adjective, and (l) active.

At
66. (lil) a Preposition, the first Opposite in the third combination,
signifying At.

The
67. (al) as numb. 6.

Right hand
68. (pigyou) (pi) is the Genus of Space, (g) the third Difference, and (ou) the
ninth species, which is Right hand.

Of
69. (la) as numb. 9.

God the Father
70. (Dab) as numb. 4.

From
71. (lal) a Preposition, the second of the third Combination, signifying From,

Which place
72. (ouou-oua) as numb. 70.

He
73. (e) as numb. 45.

Shall be
74. (ie) the Copula in the future tense, Shall be.

Coming
75. (velca) be is the Genus of transcendental Action, c the sixth difference,
and a the first species, which is Come, the turning of b into v, denoting
adjective, and l Active.

76. (lo) a Preposition, the second opposite of the first Combination, viz.
For. For


Judging
77. (Selba) (Se) is Judicial relation b the first difference, and a the first
species, which is Judge; the Letter l signifies a Noun of action, viz. Judging,
or Iudication.

The
78. (al) as numb. 6.

Quick
79. (couabiou) ca is the Genus of corporeal action, b the first difference, and
the seventh species, which is Life, the vowel ou signifying adjective, viz.
Living, iou being the transcendental composition for Person.

And
80. (na) as numb. 11.

The
81. (al) as numb. 6.

Having
82. (oui) as numb. 7.

Died persons
83. (couabsiou) as numb. 51.

I
84. (a) as numb. 1.

Am
85. (ia) as numb. 2.

Believing
86. (toualti) as numb. 3.

The Holy Ghost
87. (Dag) as numb. 27.

88. (al) as numb. 6.

The Church
89. (s-oue) the syllable s is put for the Genus of Ecclesiastical Relation, the
Dipthong (oue) being the transcendental for Aggregate.

90. (touata) Ta is the Genus of Habit, t the fifth difference, Holy
and a the second species, which is Holiness; the addition of (ou) to the first
Radical, does signify the word to be an adjective, viz. Holy.

91. (vages) (ba) is the Genus of Transcendental Relation mixed, g the third
difference, and e the third species, Universal
(s) the note of opposite, ou the sign of adjective, viz. Universal.

92. (al) as numb. 6. The


93. (Sdzha) S the Genus of Ecclesiastical Relation, Communion
g the third difference, a the second species, which is Communicant, or
Catholic; the turning of g into the same power that we give to J consonant,
signifies this word to be an Abstract, viz. Communion.

94. (la) as numb. 9. Of


95. (Sgo) S is Ecclesiastical Relation, g the third difference, Saints
o the fifth species, which is Saint, the prolonging of the first Vowel denotes
the plural number.

96. (al) as numb. 6. The


97. (semd) Se is the Genus of Judicial Relation, d the second difference, and
the seventh species, which is Remission, Being forgiven
or Forgiveness, m denotes the passive voice.

98. (la) as numb. 9. Of


99. (balgas) ba is transcendental general, g the third difference, Sins
a the second species, s denotes an opposite, l a Noun of action, and the
prolonging of the first Radical Vowel, the plural number.

100. (al) as numb. 6. The


101. (oui) the Future Tense. Future


102. (mous-calb) a compound, the Particle mous signifying re, Relife, or
living again
or again, (cab) being before rendered Life, l denoting Active.

103. (la) as numb. 9. Of


104. (al) as numb. 6. The


105. (odab) Da is the World, dab is Spirit, to which is opposed Body,
signified by prefixing the Vowel o, which is opposite to a. Body


106. (^a) as numb. 11. And


107. (al) as numb. 6. The


108. (ouyi) as numb. 101. Future


109. (cab) the same Radical as numb. 37, and 102. Life
Only this is not an Opposite, nor an Adjective.

Everlasting
110. (eou-ft) (eou) is all, as numb. 5. (p) is the Genus of Measure, (t) the
fifth difference, which is measure of time, the affinis to which, (here
denoted, by preposing the Radical Vowel) is Duration, p being turned into f,
signifies Adjective, i e. All-during, or Everlasting.

I am sensible that this Contrivance for the Language is not ordered (as to the
facility and pleasantness of the sound) to so good an advantage as it might
have been upon further consideration and practice: But as it is, I think it may
(even in these respects) come into comparison with any of the Languages now
known. For the better trial of which, I shall give several Instances of the
Lords Prayer, as it is rendered in fifty several Languages, and written in our
common Letter; most of which, I have taken out of Gesner, Mithridates, and
Megiserus his Specimen, as they have collected and lettered them to my hands.
For the rest, I am beholding to other Books, and the assistance of some
particular Friends.

English 1. Our father who art in heaven Hallowed be thy Name Hebrew 2. Abinu
Shebbaschamaim Iikkadesch schemecha Arabic 3. Ya Abanalladi phissamawati.
Yatakaddasu smoca Syriac 4. Abun dbashmajo Nethkadesh shmoch Aethiop 5. Abuna
xabashamajath Yithkadash shimacha Greek 6. Pater hemon ho en tois our anois
Hagiastheto to onoma sou Copti 7. Peniot etchennipheoui Mareftoubonje pecran
Latin 8. Pater noster qui es in coelis Sanctificetur nomen tuum Spanish 9.
Padre nuestro que estas en loscielos Sanctificato sea el tu nombre Porteguese
10. Padre nosso que stas nos ceos Sanctificado seja o teu nome French 11.
Nostre pere qui es es cieulx Ton nom soit sanctify Italian 12. Padre nostro
che sei ne' cieli Sia sanctificato il nome tuo Friulian 13. Pari nestri ch'ees
in cijl See santificaat la to nom Sardinian of the City 14. Pare nostre che ses
en loscels Sia sanctificat lo nom teu Sardinian of the Country 15. Babu nostru
sughale ses in soschelus Santufiada su nomine tuo Grysons 16. Bab nos quel tii
is it in eschil Santifichio saia ilgtes number Germ. ancient 17. Pater unser du in
himel bist Din namo werde geheyligot Germ. modern 18. Unser Uatter der du bist
im Himmel Geheyliget werde dein nahm Old Saxon 19. Uren fader thic arth in
heofnas Sic gehalgud thin noma Dutch 20. Onse vader die in den hemelin (zijt
Uwen naem werde geheylight Danish 21. Pader vor du some est i himmelen Helligt
vorde dit naff^ Megiserus Island 22. Bader vor sun ert ai himmum helgikt bitt
nam ti M. Lappian 23. Isa meidhen joko oledh taju ahissa Puliettu olkohon siun
nimes^ M. Suedish 24. Fadher war some est i himlom helghat ward titt nampn M.
Gothic 25. Atta unsar thu in Himmina Wihnai namo thein M. Carnish 26. Ozha nash
kir si v'nebesih Posvezhenu bodi iime tvoie M. Dalmatian 27. Otsce nas koyi
yessina nebissih Szvetisse gyme tvoye Hungarian 28. Miattynackki vagy
azmenyegbe Megh stentel tessek az te newed. M. Croatian 29. Ozhe nash ishe
esina nebesih Svetise jme tuoe M. Servian 30. Otze nash ishe jesi v' nebesih
Posvetise jme twoje M. Walachian 31. Tatal nostru cineresti in ceriu
Sfincinschase numelie teu M. Bohemian 32. O^ozie nass genz syna nebesich
Oszwiet se meno twe Gesnerus Lusatian 33. Wosch nasch Kensch sy nanebebu Wss
weschone bushy me twove M. Polonian 34. Ocziecz nasch ktory jestosz wniebye
Swyecz sie gymye two G. Lituanian 35. Tewe musu kursey esi danguy Szweskis
wardas tawo Livonian 36. Abes mus kas tu es eek sckan debbessis Schwetitz tows
waarcz M. Russian 37. Oche nash Izghae yease nanaebaesaegh Da sueatesa Ima
tuoae Tartarian 38. Atcha wyzom hhy hokta sen algusch Ludor senug adongkel suom
M. Turkish 39. Babamoz hanghe gugtesson Chuduss olssum ssenungh adun M.
Armenian 40. Hair mer or iercins des Surb eglizzi anun cho M. Persian 41. Ai
pader makeh dar osman Pak bashoud nam tou Chinish 42. Ngo tem fu^ che tsay
thiaen Ng^ tem yuen ul niun chim xim Welsh 43. Ein Tad yr hwn wit in y nefoedd
Sancteiddier die enw Irish 44. Air nathir ataigh air nin Nabz far hanimti
Megiserus Biscan 45. Gure aita cerue tan aicena Sanctifica bedi hire icena
Frisian 46. Ws haita derstu biste yne hymil Din name wird heiligt M. Madagascar
47. Amproy antsica izau hanautangh and anghitsi Angharanau hofissahots Poconchi
48. Catat taxah vilcat Avi nim ta incaharcihi New England 49. Nooshun kesukquot
Quittiana ta munach koowesuonk Philos. Language 51. Hai coba ouou ia ril dad Ha
babi io souymta 52. our fadher houitsh art in heven: Halloed by dhi nam English
1. Thy Kingdom come Thy Will be done Hebrew 2. Tabo malcutecha Teasaeh
rezonecha Arabic 3. Tati malacutoca Tacuno mashiatoca Syriac 4. Thithe
malcuthoch Nehue zebionoch Aethiop 5. Thymtsa mangystcha Yichun phachadacha
Greek 6. Eltheto he Basileia sou Genetheto t^ thelema sou Copti 7. Maresinje
tecme touro Netehnacmarefshopi Latin 8. Adveniat regnum tuum Fiat Voluntas tua
Spanish 9. Venga el tu reyno Fagase tu voluntad Porteguese 10. Venna a nos o
teu reyno Seja ferta a tua voluntade French 11. Ton royaume advenie Ta volunte
soit fact Italian 12. Venga il regno tuo Si a fatta la volunta tua Friulian
13. Vigna lu to ream See fatta la too voluntaat Sardinian of the City 14. Venga
lo regne teu Fasase la voluntat tua Sardinian of the Country 15. Bengiad su
rennu tuo Faciadsi sa voluntade tua Grysons 16. Ilgtes ariginam uigna ter nus
^a thia uoeglia d' uainta Germ. ancient 17. Din rich chome Din wi llo gescehe
Germ. modern 18. Dein Reich komme Dein Will geschehe Old Saxon 19. To cymeth
thin rye Sic thin Willa sue Dutch 20. Uw Coninckrijcke icome Uwen Will
geschicde Megiserus. Danish 21. Til komme dit Rige Board din Bilie M. Island
22. Komi tit ricke Uerdi tinn vile M. Lappian 23. Tulkohon siun waltakunta. Si
oskohon siun tahiosi M. Suedish 24. Till komme titt rike Stee tin Wily M.
Gothic 25. Uimai thiudinassus theins Werthe Wilga theins M. Carnish 26. Pridi
k' nam kraylestvu tvoie S' idise volia tvoia Dalmatian 27. Pridi kralyess tvo
tvoze ^udi volya tvoya M. Hungarian 28. Iujonel az te orssagod Legyen te
akarat^d Croatian 29. Pridi cesa rastvo tvuoe Budi volia tvoja M. Servian 30.
Pridi Krailestvo tuoie Budi volia tuoia M. Walachian 31. Seuie imparacia ta
Suse fie voia ta Gesnerus. ^ohemian 32. Przid kralowstwii twe Bud wule two M.
Lusatian 33. Poshish knam krailestwo twoio Sostany woli twoia G. Polonian 34.
Przydzy two kroliestwo Bandz wolya two Lituanian 35. Ateyk karaliste tawo ^uk
wala tawo M. Livonian 36. Enack mums tows walstibe Tows praatz buska Russian
37. Da predet Tzaazstuia tuoae Da boodet Volya tuoya M. Tartarian 38.
Chanluchong bell sun senung arkchueg Alei gier dauk M. Turkish 39. Gelson
ssenung memlechetun Olsum sshenung issted gunh M. Armenian 40. Eceszzae
archaiuthai cho Eglizzin camch cho Persian 41. Bayaid padshah tou Shoud howast
tou Chinish 42. ul gue lin ul chi chim him Welsh 43. D^ued die deyrnas Bid die
evvyllys Irish 44. Tigiuh da riatiathe Deanturda hoilamhuoil M. ^iscan 45. Et
hor bedi hire rehuma E guin bedi hire vorondatea Frisian 46. Din ryck to komme
Din Will moet schoen Madagascar 47. Uahoijachanau honui aminay Fiteiannau
hocfaizangh M. Poconchi 48. Avihauri inchalita pan cana Nava invanivita New
England 49. peyaumooutch kukketassootamoonk Kuttenantamoonk Philos. Language
50. Ha salba io velca Ha talbi io vemgou 51. Dhi cingdm cm. Dhi ouil by dn
English 1. In earth as it is in Heaven Give us this day our daily bread Hebrew
2. Ci basschamaim u baarez Lachmenu temidi ten lanu bajom Arabic 3. Cama
phissamai wa ala'l ardi Chubzana 'iladi lil gadi ahtinaol yaum Syriac 4. Aikano
dbashmajo hocano oph barao Havlan lachmo dsunkonan jaumomo Aethiop 5. Bachama
bashamai wabamdyrni Shishajana zalala ylathana habana yom Greek 6. Hos en
ourano kai epi tes ges Ton arton ^emon ton epiousion dos hemin semero ^ Copti
7. Phredichentphenemhi jenpicahi Penoiki terasti meisnanphoou Latin 8. Sicut in
coelo sic etiam in terra P^nem nostrum quotidianum da nobis hodie Spanish 9.
Assy en el cielo, como en la tierra Nuestro pan cotidiano dad le a nosotros oy
Porteguese 10. Assi nos ceos, come na terra O pao no sso de cadadia dano lo oie
nesto dia French 11. Ainsi en la terre, comme au cieulx Nostre pain quotidiain
done nous aviourdhuy Italian 12. Si come in cielo cosi in terra Dacci heggi^l
nostre pane quotidiano Friulian 13. Sice' in cijl et in tierra Da nus hu'el
nestri pa^ cotidian Sardinian of the City 14. Axicom en lo cel i en la terra Lo
pa nostre cotidia dona anosaltres hui Sardinian of the Country. 15. Comenti in
chelo et in sa terra Su pane nostru dogniedie dona anosateros hoc Grysons 16.
In terra sco la fo in cschil Do a nus nos paun houtz and in miinchia di German
ancient 17. In erde also in Himele Unser cagolicha brot cib uns hinto Germ.
modern 18. Auf erden, wic im Himmel Unser taglich brot gib uns heut Old Saxon
19. Is in heofnas and in eortho Uren hlaf ofer wirtlic sell us to daeg Dutch 20.
Gelijck in den hemel oockop der actden Ons daghelijcks broot gheeft ons heden
Danish 21. Saa paa jorden some hander i himmelen Giff oz i dag vort daglige Brod
Isleland 22. Suoms ai himme so aipodn Burt vort daglgt geb tu oz i dag
Megiserus Lappian 23. Kwuin-tai vahissa nyn man' palla Meidhen joka paiwen
leipa mehilen tana paiwane M. Suedish 24. Sa lom i himmelen saock pa jordenne
Wart dagligha brod giff oss idagh M. Gothic 25. Sue in himmina gah ana art Ll
laef vnsatana thana senteinam gif unss himmadaga M. Carnish 26. Kakor nanebi
taku nasemlij Kruh na^h usak dainii dai nam dones M. Dalmatian 27. Kako na nebu
tako i na zemlyi Kruh nas ssvagdanyni day nam danass M. Hungarian 28. Mi keben
menyben azon kepen it ezse old ounis. Mi kenyerunk and minden napyat adgyad
neke unk ma M. Croatian 29. Jako na niebesih j tako nasemlij Hlib nash usag
danni dai nam danas M. Servian 30. Kako vnebi i takos nafemlij H^ib nash usak
danii dai nam danas M. Walachian 31. Cum in cerin usa prepo mortu Puine noa de
tote zilelle dene noba astazi M. Bohemian 32. Yakona nebi tak y na zemi Chleb
nasz wezdeyssi dey nam dnes Gesnerus Lusatian 33. Takhak nanebu tak heu nasemu
Klib nasch schidni d^ynam shensa M. Polonian 34. Yako wniebi y na zemii Chlieb
nasch pow schedny day nam dzy say G. Lituanian 35. Kayp and dangaus teyp ir
andziam es Donos musu wisu dienu dok mumus szedien M. Livonian 36. Kasch kan
debbes ta wursan sums Musse denische mayse duth mums schodeen Russian 37.
Yaco na nebesoe Jnazemlee Ghlaeb nash nasou schneei dazgd nam dnaes M.
Tartarian 38. Achtaver visungundaluch Ot make chu musen vougon M. Turkish 39.
Nicse gugthe ule gyrde Echame gumozi hergun on vere bize bugun M. Armenian 40.
Orpes jercins en jercri Zhazt mer hanapazord rue mez aisaur Persian 41.
hamzienankeh dar osman niz dar zamin Bedih marah amrouz nan kefaf rouz mara
Chinish 42. You ty su sim thyaen Ngo teng uwang uul kyu jun ngo ngo zie jong
learg Welsh 43. Ar y ddaiar, megis y mae in y nefoedd Dyro i ni heddyw cin bara
bennyddiol Megiserus Irish 44. Air nimh agis air thalamhi Air naran ^aidhthuil
tabha^r dhuin a niomh Biscan 45. Cervan be cala lurrean e^e Gure eguneco oguia
igue egun M. Frisian 46. Opt yrtrick as yne hymil Ws deilix bre jovws juved
Madagascar 47. An tanetona and anghits^ Mahon mehohanau anrou anion abinaihane
antsica Poconchi 48. Yah uir vach a call he invan taxah Chaye runa tahunun ta
quih vije New England 49. Nen nach ohkeit neane kesukqut Nummectiuongash
asekesukokish assam^^jnean yeuyeu kesukod Philos. Language 50. Mou ril dady me
ril dad Io velpi ral ai ril poto i hai saba vaty 51. In earth az it is in heven
Giv s dhis dai our daili bred English 1. And forgive us our trespasses As we
forgive them that trespass against us Hebrew 2. Uslach lanu eth cobothenu
Caascher anachnu solechim lebaale chobothenu Arabic 3. Waghphir lana ma aleina
Cama naghphiro nahno liman lana alcihi Syriac 4. Vashbuk lan chaubain Aikano
doph chanan shbakan Ichaibeian Aethiop 5. Hydyg lana abashana Chama nyhhnani
nyhadyg laxa abasha lana Greek 6. Kai aphes hemin ta ophilemata hemon Hos kai
hemis aphiemen tois ophiletais hemon Copti 7. Ouohchanieteron nanebolmphretitio
Tenchoebol neete Latin 8. Et remitte nobis debita nostra Sicut and nos
remittimus debitoribus nostris Spanish 9. Y perdona nos nuestras deudas Assi
como nosotros perdonamos a nuestros deudores Porteguese 10. E perdoa nos
sennoras nossas dividas Assi como nos perdoamos aos nossos dividores French 11.
Et pardonne nous noz faults Comme nous pardonnons a ceulx qui nous ont
offenzes Italian 12. Et perdonaci i nostri debiti Si com^ noi perdoniamo a
debitori nostri Friulian 13. Et perdonni nus glu nestris debiz Sicu no perduin
agl nestris debitoors Sardinian of the City. 14. I dexia anosaltres losdeutres
nostres Axicom i nosaltres dexiam als deutois nostres Sardinian of the
Country. 15. Et lassa anosateros is debitus nostrus Comente e nosateros a
isdebitores nostrus Grysons 16. Parduna a nus nos dbits Sco aus fain a
dbitaduors German ancient 17. Unde unsere sculde belas uns Als auch were
belasendt unseren sculdigen Germ. modern 18. Und vergib uns unsre schuld Als
wir auch vergeben unsern sculdigern Old Saxon 19. And forget us scylda urna Sue
we forgefen scyldgum urum Dutch 20. End vergheeft ons onse schulden Gelijck
vock wy vergheven onsen schuldenaren Megiserus. Danish 21. De forlad oz vor
skyld S^m wi forlade vore shyldener M. Isleland 22. Og bergeb oz skulden vorn
Suofem vi bergebunsku Idun vorn M. Lappian 23. ja anna anteixe meiden syndia
Kwin more annamma vastahan rickoillen M. Suedish 24. Och forlat oss wara skuld
Sasom ock wy forlate them oz sky^d^gh aro M. Gothic ^4. Gah aflet unsthatei
sculanssigaima Sua sue gah weiz afletam thaim skulam vnsarem M. Carnish 26. inu
odpusti nam dulge nashe Kakor tud^mi odpustimo dulshnikom nashim Dalmatian 27.
Jod pussti naam duge nase Kako i my odpuschyamo duxnikom nassim M Hungarian 28.
Es bochasdmegh neck eunkaz mi vetkeynketmi Kepen meg bochatunk ellen wnck
vetetteknek M. Croatian 29. Jodpusti nam dlgi nashe Jaco she imi odpushzhamo
dlshnikom nashim M. Servian 30. Jodpusti nam duge nashe Kako imi otpushzhamo
dushnikom nashim Gesnerus. Walachian 31. Sunc jerta gresalelle nostre Cum sunoi
jerta ma gresitilor nostri M. Bohemian 32. Y odpust nam nasse winy Yako y my
odpaustime nassim winikom G. Lusatian 33. Awoday nam wyni nashe Ack my
wodawamij winikam nashim polonian 34. A odpus^z nam uyny nascha Yako y my
odpusczamy winowaytzom naschym M. Lituanian 35. Ir atlayisk mums musu kaltes
Kayp ir mes atlaydziam sawiemus kaltiemus Livonian 36. Pamniate mums musse
grake ka mess pammart musse partadveken M. Russian 37. Jo staue nam dolghij
nasha Yaco Imwee Ostauelayem dolzgnecom nashim M. Tartarian 38. Kai visum ja
sachen Alen bisdacha kaielbe rin bisum jasoch namasin Turkish 39. Hem bassa
bize borsligomozi Nycse bizde baslaruz borse tigleremozi M. Armenian 40. Eu
thogl mez zpaartis mer Orpas eu mech thoglumch merozt partpanazt Persian 41.
Wodar kedsar mara konahan ma Chenankeh ma niz mikedsarim orman mara Chinish 42.
uul myaen ong-o tsi ay Ziu ngo ije ssa t^u' ngo tso ay tsie Welsh 43. A maddeu
i ni ein dyledion Fell y maddewn ni in dyled* wyr M. Irish 44. Agis math duin
dairfhiacha ammnil Agis mathum vid dar feuthunuim Biscan 45. E^a quitta
jetrague gure corrac Nola guere gure cordun^y quittatzen baitra vegu M. Frisian
46. In veriov ws vvs schylden As wy vejac ws Schyldnirs Madagascar 47.
amanhanau manghafaca hanay ota antsica Tonazahai manghafaca hota aurcomanonanay
Poconchi 48. Nachach ta camac he incachachve quimac Xim acquivi chi quih New
England 49. Kah ahquontamaijnneau numat cheseongash Neane matchenehu queagig
nuta quontamounnonog Philos. Language 51. na io soueldyous lal ai hai balgas me
(...) soueldyous lal ei ouou valgas rou ai 52. and fargiv s our trespassez az
oui fargiv dhem dhat trespass against s. English 1. And lead us not into
temptation, But deliver us from evil, Amen. Hebrew 2. Veal tebienu lenissajon,
Ella Hazzilenu mera, Amen. Arabic 3. Wala tudkilna hagiarib, Lakin nagjinna
minnash shirriri. Syriac 4. Ulotalaan Inesiuno Elo pazzan men visho. Amin.
Aethiop 5. Waithabyana wysh tha manshuthi, Ala adychnana balhhanana ymkul^
ychui, Greek 6. Kai me isenenkes hemas is pirasmon, Alla rhysai hemas apo tou
ponerou, Amen. Copti 7. Ouo omper tenechou epirasmos, Alla nah menebolch
enpipethmou. Latin 8. Et ne nos inducas in tentationem, S^d libera nos a malo,
Amen. Spanish 9. Y no nos dexes caer en la tentation, Nas libra nos de mal,
Amen. Porteguese 10. E nao nos dexes cahir in tentacao, Mas libra nos do mal.
Amen. French 11. Et ne nous induy point en tentation, Mais deliure nous de mal,
Amen. Italian 12. Et non c' indurre in tentatione, Ma liberaci dal male. Amen.
Friulian 13. E no nus menaa in tentation, Ma libora nus dal mal. Sardinian of
the City. 14. I no nos iuduescas en la tentatio, Mas liura nos del mal.
Sardinian of the Country. 15. E no nos portis in sa tentatione. Impero libera
nos da su male. Grysons 16. Nun ens mener in mel aprouaimaint, Dimpersemaing
spendra nus da tuots mels German ancient 17. And in chorunga uit leitest du
unsich Un belose unsich fone ubelc Germ. modern 18. Und fuhreuns nicht in
versuchung Sondern erlose uns vom bosen Old Saxon 19. And no inlead usith in
custnung Ah gefrig urich from isle Dutch 20. End en leydtons niet i
verweekinghe. Maer verloft ons van den bosen. Danish 21. Oc leed oz icke vdi
fristelse Men frels oz fra out. Megiserus. Isleland 22. Ant leidt oz e ki
breizlni Helldur brelsa oz ver illu M. Lappian 23. Ia ale sata mei ta kin
sauxen Mutta paasta meite pahasta M. Suedish 24. Och inleedh oss ickei
frestelse Uchan frels oss ifram ondo M. Gothic 25. Gah ni brigges vns in
fraestub Ak lauzii uns af thamma oblin. M. Carnish 26. Inu neupelai nas v'
iskushno Tamazh reshi nass od slega M. Dalmatian 27. Ine naass uvediu-napasst
Da osslobodi naas od assla. Hungarian 28. Es ne vigy mynket az kesertet Ben de
szabaditz megh minket azgonosztul M. Croatian 29. Ine isbavi nas od nepriasni
Servian 30. Ine vauedi nas v' napast Dais bavi nas od sla M. Walachian 31. Sunu
ne duce prenoi in Kale deispirra Sune men tu jaste preroi de reu. M. Bohemian
32. Y ne uwod nasz do pokussenii Ale zbaw nas od zleho. Gesnerus. Lusatian 33.
Neweshi nass dospi towana A le wimoshi nas wot slego, Amen. M. Polonian 34.
Nyewodz nasz napokus chenye Alye zbaw nasz od zlego. G. Lituanian 35. Ir newesk
musu ing pagundynima Bet giaf bekmus nog pikto, Amen. Livonian 36. Ne wedde
mums louna badeckle Pet passatza mums nuwusse loune M. Russian 37. Ineuedi nas
fpapast No Jzbaue nas ot loocauaho, Ameen. Tartarian 38. Datcha koima visn
sunan acha Illa garta visenn gemandam. M. Turkish 39. Hem yedma bizege heneme
De churtule bizy jaramazdan. M. Armenian 40. Eu mi tanir zmezi phorxuthai Ail
pharceai zmez i zarae. M. Persian 41. Wodar azmaish minadar mara Leikan halats
kon mara az sharir, Amin. Chinish 42. Yeeu' pu ngo chiu chi eu iu' ieau^ caan
Nay kyeea ngo yu' chiu' o. Welsh 43. Ac nac arwain ni i brofedigaeth Either
gwared ni rhag drwg, Amen^ Irish 44. Agis na trilaic astoch sin anau seu Ac sar
sino ole, Amen. M. Biscan 45. Eta ezgai zala sar eraci tentationetan Baina
delivra gaitzac gaich totic. Frisian 46. In lied ws nact in versicking Din fry
ws vin it quaed. M: Madagascar 47. Aman hanau aca mahatetseanay abin
fivetsevetse ratsi Fcha hanau metezahahanay tabin harats^ian abi. Poconchi 48.
Macoacana chipan catacchihi Coavecata china unche tsiri, Amen. New England 49.
Ahque sagkompagunainnean en qutchhuaonganit Webe pohquohwussinean wutch
machitut, Amen. Philos. Language 50. Na mi io velco ai ral bedodlou. Nil io
coualbo ai lal vagasie, Amen. 51. And led s not intou temptasian Bt deliver s
fram ivil,

It would be convenient, that every one of these Instances should be
Philosophically Lettered, according to the true pronunciation used in each
Language; but this being a thing of too great difficulty, I do not attempt it.
It Is probable that the doing of this, would make most strange Languages seem
more harsh and uncouth, than now they do; as appears by that Instance of the
English, this way written, which I have subjoyned in the last place, for the
more accurate comparing it with the Philosophical Language.

In the comparing of these Languages, it may be granted that some few words of
each Language may seem preferrible to others in this: But take it altogether,
and in the whole, and it may at least stand in competition with the best of
them, as to its facility and pleasantness. It Is most likely, that the
generality of Readers will be apt in the comparing of these Instances, to give
the precedence to those Languages they are acquainted with. I should desire no
more from them, but that they would be content to permit this new Language to
come in the next place, which would be a sufficient testimony for it.

But then for the Philosophy of this Language, it has many great advantages
above any other. Every Word being a description of the thing signified by it;
Every Letter being significant, either as to the Nature of the Thing, or the
Grammatical Variations of the Word, which cannot be said of any of the rest;
besides the constant Analogy observed in all kind of Derivations and Inflexions.

CHAP. V. Directions for the more easy Learning of this Character and
Language, together with a brief Table containing the Radicals, both Integrals
and Particles; together with the Character and Language by which each of these
is to be expressed.
IF any Man shall think it worth his time and pains to learn this Character;
the most facil and natural order to be observed in this, will be, to begin with
the 40 common Heads or Genus's, which should be learnt out of that General
Scheme, Part II. Chap. I. where there is expressed some reason of their order;
the understanding of which will much facilitate the fixing of them in the
memory.

Next to these, he may proceed to the Differences belonging to each Genus,
which though they are in the Character expressed by that numerical institution
of First, Second, and Third, etc. yet are they to be committed to memory from
their real significations. So the First, Second, and Third differences under
the Genus of Beast, are to be learned and remembered, not as First, Second, and
Third, etc. but as Whole-footed, Cloven-footed, and Clawed, etc. (not
Rapacious, Rapacious Dog-kind, Rapacious Cat-kind) and Oviparous. Thus when we
see any of the differences belonging to Measure, we are not to name them by
their numerical order of 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, but by the things which they denote,
as Measure of Multitude, Magnitude, Gravity, Valor, Duration, Age. And to this
end all the differences are to be learned out of the larger Tables, where there
is some reason to be seen for the order of most of them.

Next to these, the several Species are to be learned, belonging to each
Difference, at least so many of them as are like most frequently to occur in
discourse. As for the various kinds of Meteors, Stones, Herbs, Shrubs, Trees,
Exanguious Animals, Fishes, Birds, Beasts, and the kinds of Diseases, though
they are to be provided for in the Tables, that they may be written when there
shall be occasion for the mention of them; yet it is not ordinarily necessary to
commit them all to memory, because those who are most expert in any Language,
may not yet be able to remember all the names of such things. But as for such
Species as are fit to be remembered, they are to be learned out of the first and
larger Tables, where they are each of them described and determined, as to
their primary significations, and some reason is attempted of their number and
order, the understanding of which will make them more easily remembered.

After these the Particles are to be learned, which should be likewise out of
the first Tables, where the meaning of them is described and determined.

But for the better helping of the memory in cases of doubt or forgetfulness,
it may be proper to have recourse to the Synopsis here adjoined, by which it is
easy at the first or second view to find out the true place of any Integral or
Particle, together with the Derivations and Inflexions belonging to the
Radicals.

It Is here to be noted concerning this briefer Scheme or Table, that in several
of the Genus's pertaining to Substance, there are only some few of the first
Species or Pairs of them mentioned under each difference as instances; the rest
being to be sought for in the larger Table. Those that are paired by way of
opposition, are put in a distinct Character.

The first Part, and the former half of the second, do contain a Philosophical
Dictionary for all Integral, Radical words: The remaining Part does contain all
the Particles necessary to Speech, besides a Summary of the whole Grammar, with
reference both to the Character and Language; which I conceive to be so plainly
set down, as not to need any particular explication.

But now because there is no more general inclination amongst persons of all
Ages and Qualities, then that of Gaming, which Men can continue at for a long
time with much pleasure, and are least apt to be weary of: Therefore the
reducing of the Learning of this Character to a Game, may be a special help and
furtherance to it. In order to which it were not difficult to show, how it
might be brought into several Games, like to those either at Dice or Cards. Of
the former of which I had once thought to have given an instance, with relation
to the Particles, by which it would be easy to understand how the like might
be done for all the rest: But upon second thoughts I do at present forbear it.

TRANS. G. PREDIC.
I
Kind^ Species 1 Being Nothing 2 Thing Appearance 3 Notion Fiction 4 Name
Person 5 Substance Accident 6 Quantity Quality 7 Action Passion 8 Relation
Absoluteness
II
Cause ^^^fect 1 Efficient Instrument 2 Impulsive Cohibitive 3 Exemplar Type 4
Condition Occasion 5 Adjuvant Impedient 6 F^nd Means 7 Matter Form
III
Dive^sity (...) 1 Truth Falsehood 2 Goodness Evilness 3 Positiveness
Privativeness 4 Genuineness Spuriousness 5 Actualness Potentialness 6
^^niteness Infiniteness 7 Naturalness Factitiousness ^ Simplicity Mixedness ^
Perfection Imperfection
IV
Dit^e^ence Convenience 1 Profitableness Hurtfulness 2 Pleasantness
Vnpleasantness 3 Dueness Vndueness 4 Possibility Impossibility 5 Importance
Vanity ^ Worthiness Unworthiness
V Dif. rel. to the Means
1 Lawfulness Indifferency 2 Decency Indecency 3 Safety Danger 4 Easiness
Difficulty 5 Gentleness Violence 6 Congruity Contrariety 7 Expediency
Inconveniency 8 Necessity Contingence
VI
M^de 1 ^ubject Adjunct 2 Object 3 Circumstance Solemnity 4 State 5 Sign 6
Room as Suc. Stead as Subst. 7 Degree Impetus 8 Turn Reciprocation 9 Cognation
Opposition
TRANS. REL MIX.
I
Of Quan. more Ger. 1 Indifferent Greatness little. 2 Mediocrity Abund. scarcity
3 Sufficiency Ex. deficiency 4 Indifferent Excel. sorry 5 Equal Superior
infer. 6 Equivalency Betternes wors. 7 At a stand Increase dimin. 8 Just temper
Intention remis. 9 Keep at a stay Mending mar.
II
Of Contin. Quan. 1 Length Shortness 2 Breadth Narrowness 3 Deepness Shallowness
4 Highness Lowness 5 Thickness Thinness
III
Disco^tin. Quan. 1 Multitude Fewness 2 Singularity Plurality 3 Particularity
Universality 4 Specialness Generalness 5 Evenness Odness 6 Segregateness
Aggregateness 7 Series Catalogue 8 Suit
IV
Of Qual. more largely 1 Primitiveness Derivativeness 2 Immediatenes
Mediateness 3 Absoluteness Dependency 4 Principalness Accessoriness 5
Pertinency Impertinency 6 Properness Commonness
V
(...) more strictly 1 Likeness Vnlikeness 2 Order Confusion 3 Ordinariness
Extraordinari. 4 Regularness Exorbitancy 5 Publickness Privateness 6 Ornateness
Homeliness 7 Purity Defilement
VI
Of Whole Part 1 Best part Worst part 2 Say Vantage 3 Scum Sediment 4 Lump
Powder 5 Chip Fragment 6 Additum Sum 7 Ablatum Residue 8 Multiplier Product 9
Divisor Quotient
TRANS. REL. of ACT.
I
Belonging to sing. things 1 Putting Altering 2 Apropriating Alienating 3
Claiming Abdicating 4 Taking Leaving 5 Having Wanting 6 Holding Letting go 7
Seeking Finding 8 Showing Concealing 9 Manifesting Seeming
II
To diverse things 1 Joining Separating 2 Adhering Abandoning 3 Applying
Abstracting 4 Comprehend. Exempting 5 Comparing Trying 6 Repeating Changing 7
Restoring compensating 8 Representing Imitating 9 Repairing Spoiling
III
Business Leisure 1 Designing Undertaking 2 Preparing Furnishing 3 Beginning
Offering 4 Endeavoring Essaying 5 Dispatching Protracting 6 Performing
Violating 7 Finishing Miscarrying 8 Erring Omitting 9 Preventing Remedying
IV
Commerce 1 Yielding Submitting to 2 Offering Demanding 3 Delivering Receiving
4 Giving Accepting 5 Disbursing Refunding 6 Reckoning Ballancing 7 Being Credi.
Being debtor 8 Paying Failing 9 Acquitting Forgiving
V
Event 1 Obtaining Frustrating 2 Gaining Losing 3 Saving Spending 4 Laying up
Squandering 5 Keeping Loosing 6 Using Abstaining 7 Enjoying Being sick of 8
Refreshing Wearying 9 Quieting Troubling
VI
^^^on Stap^^g 1 Coming Going 2 Proceeding Turning 3 Traveling Wandering 4
Sending Fetching 5 Leading Driving 6 Following Overtaking 7 Meeting Avoiding
DISCOURSE. LANG.
Elements 1 Letter Character 2 Vowell Consonant 3 Syllable Dypthong 4
Interpunction Hyphen 5 Comma Semicolon 6 Colon Period 7 Parenthesis Parathesis
8 Emphasis Irony. 9 Accent P. Accent. E.
II
Word Me^ning 1 Integrall Particle 2 Abstract Concrete 3 Substantive Adjective
4 Verb Adverbe deri. 5 Subject Predicate 6 Copula 7 Pronoun Interjection 8
Preposition Article 9 Adverb und. Conjunction
III
Complex. Gram. parts 1 Clause Sentence 2 Verse Section 3 Chapter Book 4 Prose
Verse 5 Meetre Rythm 6 Proper Tralatitions 7 Simple Figurate 8 Express
Understood 9 Plain Obscure
IV
Comp. Log. parts 1 Distinction Equivocation 2 Limitation Ampliation 3
Definition Description 4 Division Partition 5 Rule Exception 6 ^rgumentation
Illation 7 Syllogism Enthymem 8 Induction Example ^ Quotation Allusion
V
Mixed 1 Proposition Adage 2 Oration Epistle 3 Narration Rumor 4
Interpretation 5 Translation Paraphrase 6 Commentary 7 Epitome 8 Prologue
Epilogue 9 Transition Digression
VI
Mo^^s o^ Disc. 1 Question Answer 2 Affirmation Negation 3 Supposition
Concession 4 Opposition Contradiction 5 Objection Solution 6 Probation
Confirmation 7 Confutation Retortion 8 Posing Conviction 9 Confession
Recantation
BIRD
I
Carnivorous Birds 1 Eagle Vulture 2 Hawk Kite 3 Cuckoe Butcher b. 4 Owl
horned Owl not h. 5 Raven Crow 6 Daw Chough, etc.
II
Phytiv. of short Wings 1 Cock 2 Peacock Turkey 3 Pheasant Attagen. 4 Bustard
Anas came. bell. 5 Cock of thew Heath cock 6 Partridge Red Partr. etc
III
Phytiv. of long Wings 1 Pidgeon Ringdove 2 Stock-dove Turtle 3 Mislle b.
Thrush 4 Stare Merula sax. 5 Feldefare Redwing 6 Black bird Passer soli. etc.
IV
Graniv. of thick B^lls 1 Bunting 2 Yellow hamer Hortulane 3 Sparrow Mountain
sp. 4 Cocothraustes Cocoth. crista. 5 Bullfinch Shell apple 6 Greenfinch Canary
b. etc.
V
Insectivorous greater 1 Swallow Swift 2 Martin Sand martin 3 Nightingale 4
Lark Titlarke 5 Redbrest Red start 6 Beccafigo Wheat ear, etc
VI
Insectivorous lesser 1 Ligurinus Serinus 2 Citrinella 3 Wron 4 Regulus crist.
Reg. non crist. 5 Humming by. 6 Great titmous etc.
vii
Aquatic. near wet places 1 Lapwing 2 Green plover Gray plover 3 Dotterell Sea
lark 4 Redshank Ruff 5 Tringa ma. Tringa mi. 6 Knot Stint etc.
viii
Aquatic. ^iss^^ed. 1 Crane Stork 2 Phaenicopter Grus Balear. 3 Hearne Ard.
cin. min. 5 Great white h. Less w. Hearn 6 Bittour Brasilean, etc.
IX
Aquatic Palmipede 1 Swan Goose 2 Sheldrake Drake 3 Widgin Teale 4 Solan goose
Pelican etc.
BEAST
I
Whole footed 1 Horse 2 Ass Mule 3 Camel 4 Elephant
II
^^o^en footed 1 Kine 2 Sheep Goat 3 Elke Stagg 4 Buck Rein deer 5 Roe buck 6
Rhinocerot 7 Camelopard 8 Hogg
III
Clawed not r^paceous 1 Baboon Ape 2 Monkey Sloth 3 Hare 4 Conny Marmotto 5
Porcupine Hedghogg 6 Squirrell Ginny pigg 7 Ratt Mouse 8 Mole
IV
Rapaceous Ca^kind 1 Lion Bear 2 Tygre Pard 3 Ounce 4 Catt Civet catt 5 Ferret
Polecatt 6 Martin 7 Stoat Weasle 8 Castor Otter
V
Rapaceous Dog-kind 1 Dog Wolf 2 Fox Badger 3 Morse Seal 4 Jackall 5 Ant
Bear Armadillo 6 Caraguya
VI
Ovinatous Feast 1 Tortoise Turtle 2 Frogg Toade 3 Crocodile Senembi 4 Lizard
Chamaelion 5 Land salam. Water salam. 6 Serpent 7 Snake Viper 8 Slow-worm
PARTS PECUL.
I
Last p. of pl. Wood 1 Root Knot 2 Stock Sucker 3 Branch Thorn 4 Stick Wand 5
Rind Pith Gumm Resin 7 Juice Balsam
II
Annual parts 1 Flower Catkin 2 Pulpe Stone 3 Husk Beard 4 Cluster Ear 5
Sprout Leaf 6 Style Stamen 7 Stalk Tendril 8 Cup Pericarpium
III
Fruit Excre^cences 1 Apple 2 Plum Berry 3 Nut 4 Mast Key 5 Cone Cod 6 Grane
Kernel
IV
Of swim. Animals chiefly 1 Scale 2 Shell Crust 3 Gill 4 Feeler 5 Swim. bladdr
6 Finn Ray 7 Claw 8 Milt Spawne
V
Of flyin^ Animals chiefly 1 Feather Quill 2 Wing Train 3 Talon Palmipes 4
Beak Trunk 5 Spurr Sting 6 Egg Chrysolite 7 Comb Gill 8 Rump Oil-box
VI
Of going Animals chapter 1 Hair Wool 2 Bristle Down 3 Furr Fleece 4 Beard Mane 5
Hoof Nail 6 Horn Tail 7 Embrio Secondine
PARTS GENESIS
I
Contain Homogen. parts 1 Spirit 2 Serum Succus nutri. 3 Chyle Milk 4 Sperm
Menstrua 5 Blood 6 Blood Choler 7 Phlegm Melancholy 8 Brain Marrow
II
Containing Homog. 1 Bone Gristle 2 Ligament Tendon 3 Skin Membrane 4 Vein
Artery 5 Nerve Fiber 6 Flesh Muscle 7 Fatt Glandule
III
Head 1 Face Pate 2 Eye Ear 3 Mouth Nose 4 Tongue Tooth 5 Palate Throat 6
Forehead Ey-brow 7 Cheek Temple 8 Lip Chin 9 Jaw Place of Tons.
IV
Trunk 1 Neck Shoulder 2 Breast Dugg 3 Back Vertebra 4 Loine Ribb 5 Side Flank
6 Belly Navel 7 Grojn Share 8 Buttock Fundament
V
Limb Joint 1 Arm Shoulder 2 Cubit Elbow 3 Hand Wrist 4 Thigh Huckle 5 Shank
Knee 6 Foot Heel 7 Finger Knuckle
VI
Inwards 1 Gullet Windpipe 2 Heart Lungs 3 Diaphragm Mediastine 4 Stomach Gutt
5 Liver Spleen 6 Mesentery Cawle 7 Kidney Bladder 8 Privities Testicle 9 Womb
GOD IDOL
I Father II Son III Holy Ghost
WORLD
I
Spirit Body 1 Angel 2 Good-angel Devil 3 Soul 4 Vegetative 5 Sensitive 6
Rational
II
Heaven Hell 1 Starr 2 Fixed-starr Sun 3 Planet Comet 4 Saturn Jupiter 5 Mars
Venus 6 Mercury 7 Globe of earth 8 Moon Satelles
III
Earth Countr^y 1 Plain Mount. Valley 2 Continent Island 3 Rock Cliff 4
Promontory Pen-isle 5 ^sthmus Bank 6 Shore Washes 7 Quicksands Oaz
IV
Water Sea 1 Aequor Wave, whirlpool 2 Ocean Lake 3 Well Spring 4 Bay Pene-lake
5 Fretum Channel 6 Shore Tide 7 Stream Staguum
V
Animate parts 1 Mineral 2 Plant 3 Herb Grass 4 Animal 5 Man
VI
Imag. Circle^. Or^e 1 Horizon 2 Equator 3 Ecliptic Zodiac 4 Meridian Azimuth 5
Artic Antartic 6 Tropic of Tropic of 7 Parallel Almacantor
ELEMENT METEOR
I
Fire 1 Flame Spark 2 Comet Falling-starr 3 Lightning Thunder 4 Beam Dart, etc.
II
A^r 1 Ether Atmosphere 2 Exhalation Vapor 3 Fume Smoke 4 Wind Whirlwi. etc.
III
Water 1 Drop Bubble 2 Cloud Mist 3 Rain Dew 4 Frost Snow, etc
IV
Earth 1 Dust 2 Dirt 3 Ashes Soot 4 Clay Mortar, etc.
V
Appea^. Meteors 1 Rainbow 2 Halo 3 Parelius Paraselene, etc.
VI
Weather 1 Clearness Haziness 2 Mizzling Shower 3 Spout 4 Storm Sleet, etc.
STONE CONCRET.
I
Uulgar 1 Freestone Brick 2 Ragg 3 Flint Marchasite 4 Pibble, etc.
II
Mid^le prized 1 Alabaster 2 Marble Agat 3 Jaspis Lazul. 4 Crystal Glass, etc
III
Gemm less transparent 1 Opal Cats-eyes 2 Pearl 3 Sardius, etc^
IV
Gemm more transparent 1 Diamond Wh. Sapphire 2 Ruby Granate 3 Chrysolite Topaz,
etc.
V
Concretions dissolvib^e 1 Salt Nitre 2 Alum Sal gemmae 3 Vitriol 4 Tartar
Alcali, etc.
VI
Concretions not dissolvible 1 Chalk Marle 2 Yellow-Oker Red-Oker 3 Get
Pitcoal 4 Orpiment Arssnic, etc.
METAL
I
Natural 1 Gold 2 Silver 3 Tinn 4 Copper 5 Lead 6 Iron
II
Factitious 1 Brass 2 Pewter 3 Steel
III
Imperfect kinds 1 Mercury 2 Antimony 3 Bismute 4 Spelter 5 Cinnabar Vermilion
6 Black Lead
IV
^^cremen^^^^^us parts 1 Litharge 2 Spodium Pompholyx 3 Scoria 4 Rust 5
Verdigreece Ceruse
HERB accord to the LEAF
I
Imperfect 1 Mushrome Molde 2 Trubs Fuzball, etc.
II
Frumentaceous 1 Wheat Ry 2 Maiz etc.
III
Gramineous not frumentac. 1 Canary Grass Panic 2 Fox tail Cats tail, etc
IV
Gram. H. of Bulbous routs 1 Crown Imperial 2 Lilly Martagon, etc.
V
H. of Affin. to Bulbous 1 Kings spear Spider wort 2 Dogs tooth etc.
VI
Round leaved Herbs 1 Colts foot Butter burr 2 Great Burdoc Little bur. etc
vii
Nervous leaved Herbs 1 W. Hellebore Helleborine 2 Plantain Bucksth. etc.
viii
Succulent Herbs 1 Housleek Aloe 2 Orpine Rosewort, etc.
IX
Superficies of the Leaf 1 Burrage Bugloss 2 Alkanet Vipers grass
HERB accor. to the Flow.
I
S^ammeous 1 Rubarbe Dock 2 Sorrel French S. etc.
II
Fol^aceous not pappous 1 Sun Flower Hierus. Harti. 2 Marigold etc.
III
Fol^. Pappous 1 Thistle Hartichoke 2 Blew Bottle A. Sneezw. etc.
IV
Umbellif. broader leaves 1 Annis. Coriander 2 Bast. stone parsley, etc.
V
Umbel. Narrower leaves 1 Fennel Dill 2 Hogs Fennel Sampire, etc.
VI
Uerticilla^e fruticose 1 Sage 2 Germander. Tree Ger. 3 Mastic Goats ma. etc.
VII
Uert. not fruticose 1 Mint Catmint 2 Balm Calamint, etc.
viii
Spicate 1 Teasil Fringo 2 Globe Thistle Shep. rod, etc.
IX
Button-like head 1 Wild Tansey Avens 2 Cinquefoil Tormentil etc
HERB acc to the SEEDV.
I
Corniculate 1 Peiony Fraxinella 2 Larks heel Columbine etc
II
Papilion. Climbers 1 Kidney-Beane 2 Bean of the An. Pease, etc.
III
Panil. not climbers 1 Bean Lupin 2 Chich pease etc.
IV
Not Papil. Tetrapetala 1 Stock Gilly F. Wall F. 2 Dames violet Toothwort etc
V
Capsulate Pentapetala 1 Gilly Flower Pink 2 Campion Catchfly, etc.
VI
Tripetala and Tetrapetela 1 Fre. wa. sold. Arrow head 2 Bulbonach Madwort,
etc.
VII
Monopet. Campanulate 1 Pompeon Melon 2 Gourd Citrul. etc.
viii
Mon. not companulate 1 Primrose Paigle 2 Bears ear Birds eye, etc.
IX
Bacciferous 1 Strawberries 2 Apple of love Mad apple, etc
MAGNIT. EXTENS;
I
Dimension. Division 1 Point 2 Line 3 Superficies Area 4 Solid
II
Rel. of Dimens. 1 Center Pole 2 Vertex Intersection 3 Diagonal Side 4 Tangent
Secant 5 Diameter Axis 6 Sign Chord 7 Parallel Diverg. Conver. 8 Oblique
D^rect. Transv. 9 Reflected Refracted
III
Affect. of Mag. more simple 1 Streightness Crookedness 2 Circle Angle 3 Right
angle Obtuse, Acute 4 Plain Unequal, concave 5 Sphere Cube 6 Cylinder Prisme 7
Cone Pyramid 8 Parabola Hyperb. Ellipsis 9 Spiral Helix
IV
Compound fig. Linear 1 Pinn Hole 2 Tooth Notch 3 Protuberance Dent 4 Figure T
Cross 5 Staple Windle 6 Tuft Asterisk 7 Whip Flagg 8 Hook Fork 9 Undulated
Crenated
V
Comp. sig. Planary 1 Triangle Square 2 Ring Loop 3 Bow Wheel 4 Lamin Chink 5
Tressel Pinion 6 Edge Gutter 7 Ridge Furrow 8 Form Step 9 Tube square Tube
round
VI
Comp. sig. Solidary 1 Porousness Hollow. Massin. 2 Bottle Pinn 3 Pedestal
Turret 4 Gudgeon Mallet 5 Buoy Hour glass 6 Ovall Bowl 7 Bottom Skein
SPACE
I
Time Instant 1 Present Past Future 2 Simult. Did. Proceed Succ. 3 Newness
Oldness 4 Soonness Lateness 5 Date Epoch 6 Permanency Transitoriness 7
Frequency Seldomness 8 Perpetuity At times 9 Everness Neverness
II
Place 1 Presence Absence 2 Contigu. Did. On this side, B^y. 3 Neerness
Remoteness 4 Home Rise 5 Ampleness Narrowness 6 Obviousness Rareness 7
Continuance Discontinuance 8 Ubiquity Nullibiety
III
Situation Uergency 1 East West 2 North South 3 Middle, Ex^re. End, Begi^. 4
Side Margin 5 Upper Under 6 Inside Outside 7 Top Bottom 8 Forepart Hinder part
9 Righthand si. Left hand side
MEASURE PROPOR.
I
Multitude. Number 1 One 2 Two 3 Three ^ Four 5 Five 6 Six 7 Seven 8 Eight 9
Nine
II
Magnitude. Capacity 1 Line 2 Inch 3 Foot 4 Standard 5 Perch 6 Furlong 7 Mile 8
League 9 Degree
III
Gravity. Weight 1 Grain 2 Scruple 3 Dramm 4 Ounce 5 Pound 6 Stone 7 Hundred 8
Thousand 9 Tunn
IV
Ualor. Money 1 Farthing 2 Penny 3 Shilling 4 Angel 5 Pound 6 Hundred 7
Thousand
V
Time. Duration 1 Year 2 Spring Summer 3 Autumn Winter 4 Month Week 5 Day
Natural 6 Day Artificial Night 7 Morning Afternoon 8 Hour Minute
VI
Life time. Seculum 1 Infancy Chilehood 2 Adolescency Youth 3 Manhood Declining
age 4 Old age Decrepidness
N. POWER IMPOT.
I
Rational Irrational 1 Understand. Idioticalness 2 Judgment Injudiciousness 3
Conscience Vnconscionabl. 4 Will Listlesness
II
Sensitive Internal 1 Com. sense Stupor 2 Fancy Dotage 3 Memory Forgetfulness 4
Appetite Loathing
III
Sensitive External 1 Sight Blindness 2 Hearing Deafness 3 Smelling 4 Taste 5
Touch Numness
IV
Tempers of Mind 1 Ingenuity Disingenuity 2 Sprightliness Dullness 3 Seriousness
Wantoness 4 Gentleness Fierceness 5 Op. to Rapaci. Rapacity 6 Stoutness
Laziness 7 Hardiness Niceness
V
Corp. Te^p. resp. the Individ. 1 Wholeness Mutilousness 2 Soundness Rottenness
3 Indolence Pain 4 Vigor Decaying 5 Fatness Leaness 6 Beauty Deformity 7
Strength Weakness 8 Agility Lumpishness 9 Swiftness Slowness
VI
Corp. Tem. res propag of Sp. 1 Sex 2 Male Female 3 Fruitfulness Barrenness 4
Ripeness Overripe, unripe
SHRUB
I
Baceit decid. Spinous 1 Rasberry Bramble 2 Rose Bryar 3 Goosberry White thorn
4 Sloe tree Barbery 5 Purging thor. 6 Christ's thorn Box thorn 7 Bucks thorn
II
Bac. decid. not Spinous 1 Vine Curran 2 Bilberry 3 Wayfaring T. Wh. beam T. 4
Dogberry T. 5 Birds cherry Wild rock chapter 6 Dwarf medl. Sweet whort 7 Berry
bearing Alder 8 Woodbine Upright woo. 9 Pepper etc.
III
Bac^. Evergreen 1 True Balsom. Thorny. Bur. 2 Dwarf palm 3 Phyllyraea Green
Privet 4 Strawbery T. Greenthorn 5 Spurg Laurel 6 Spurg olive Widow wail 7
Laurel of Al. Horsetongue 8 Butchers broom 9 Wild bay etc.
IV
Siliquous 1 Lilach 2 Caper Thorny broo. 3 Bean tref. Shrub Trefoil 4 Sena
Bastard Sena 5 Licorice 6 Binding bea. t. Locust Tr. 7 Humble plant 8 Broom
Furz 9 Goats thorn Doryenium
V
Gra^^^cious De^^duous 1 Chaste tree Spik'd willow 2 Tamarisk 3 Jessamine White
pipe tr 4 Shrub mallow 5 Galls Red Symach 6 Tree spurge 7 Clematis Travelers
joy 8 Virginian climber
VI
Grani^. E^erotes 1 Holy rose Oleander 2 Sana munda Guttwort 3 Herb terrible 4
Rosemary Sage mullein 6 Hartwort Sw. moun. To. 5 Sea purslain Silver bush 7
Heath 8 Rose of Jerico
TREE
I
^ointrerous 1 Apple 2 Pear Quince 3 Medlar Lazarole 4 True Service Com.
service 5 Figg 6 Pomegranate 7 Orange Adams ap. etc.
II
Pru^^tecous 1 Peach Nectarine 2 Apricok Plumm 3 Cherry Cornelian 4 Olive Date
5 Mirobalane Sebesten 6 White Jujub Common Juj.
III
Bacciferous 1 Mulberry 2 Elder Symach 3 Quicken Tr. Turpentin tr. 4 Nettle
tree 5 Bay Laurel 6 Yew Holly 7 Box etc.
IV
Nuciferous 1 Wallnut Almond 2 Pistachio Storax 3 Filbert Small nut 4 Chestnut
Beech 5 Bladder nut 6 Coco Nutmeg 7 Chocolate Coffi, etc
V
Glandif. or Con^^^rous 1 Oak Bitter oak 2 Holme Cork tr. 3 Alder Larch tr. 4
Cedar Pine 5 Male Firr Fem. firr 6 Cypress Tree of life
VI
Of single ^egum. 1 Carob 2 Cassia Tamarind 3 Judas tree 4 Elm Hornbeam 5 Ash
6 Maple Sycamore 7 Birch Aspin, etc.
vii
Woods or Barks 1 Aloe tree 2 Guaiacum Snakewood 3 Red Saunders Yellow saun. 4
Lign. Nephrit. Rosewood 5 Brasill wood Logwood 6 Ebony Princes w. etc.
v^i^
Gumms or Rosins 1 Myrrh 2 Gum Arabic Sarcocolla 3 Frankincense Gum Elemi 4 Gum
Animae Copal 5 Caranna Benjamin 6 Camphire etc.
EXANG. INSECT.
I
^^sect not winged 1 Earthworm Belly worm 2 Leech Snail 3 Ascarides Botts 4
Fluke Asilus 5 Glowworm Meal worm 6 Proscarab. etc.
I
^ns. wing. or more then b. ^. 1 Locust Mantis 2 Crichet Fenn cricket 3 Cimex
silv. Wing. cockro. 4 Water spider Cicada aquat. 5 Spider Scorpion 6 Tick
Punice, etc.
III
Anoma^* Insect. 1 Maggot 2 Be mag. Shining fly m. 3 Gentil Wasp fly mag. 4
Libella worcester. Cadew. 5 Beetle hexap. Whirl worm 6 Caterpillar Silkworm etc.
IV
Naked Winged 1 Be Humble Be 2 Waspe Hornet 3 Be like fly Wasp like fly 4
Flesh fly Dung fly 5 Ant Gnat 6 Cicada Papil. fly, etc.
V
Sheathed wing. or Beetle 1 Rhinocerot Weevil 2 Stag beetle Bull beetle 3 Goat
chafer Knobbl. hor. b. 4 Common beet. Dung b. 5 Dorr Green chafer 6 Death watch
Ladycow, etc.
VI
Gr. Crustaceous 1 Lobster Long oyster 2 Sea bear 3 Craifish 4 Shrimp Squilla
mant. 5 Hermit fish 6 Common crab Sea cock, etc.
vii
Testaceous tur^inated 1 Nautilus Water snaile 2 Murex Purpura 3 Cylindroides
Aporrhais 4 Sea snaile Nerites 5 Buccinum Turbo 6 Trochus Periwincle etc
viii
Testac. not turbinated 1 Limpet Center fish 2 Button fish Mermaids h. 3 Mother
of pe. Galades 4 Oyster Spondyl 5 Scollop Cockle, etc.
IX
Soft Erang. 1 Pourcontrel. Sweet polyp. 2 Cuttle Lesser cuttle 3 Sleve Less
sleve 4 Sea hare Holothyr etc.
FISH
I
Ui^ip. ^^long 1 Whale Porpoise 2 Sawfish Swordfish 3 Sharke Glaucus 4
Houndfish Spotted H. F. 5 Thornback d. Hogfish 6 Great dogfish Less. D. F. etc.
II
Ui^ip. not long 1 Pastinaca Aquila 2 Flare Thornback 3 Maid Squatino raia 4
Crampfish Toadfish 5 Scate 6 Mole Lump
III
Ovi^: of s^te flu^s 1 Codfish Colefish 2 Haddock Whiting 3 Ling Haak 4 Tunny
Pelamis 5 Mackerell 6 Kitefish Swallow fi. etc
IV
Of two fin^s, (...) and (...) 1 Amia Glaucus 2 Coracinus Umbra 3 Lupus Engl.
mullet 4 Red gournet Gray gourn. 5 Tubfish Lyra Rondel. 6 True mullet Lesser
mul. etc
V
Of one sin 1 Guilt head Sparus 2 Cantharus Salpa 3 Sargus Mormylus 4 Pagrus
Rubellio 5 Melanurus Dentex 6 Gr. scorpion Less scorp. etc
VI
Eel figured 1 Conger Muraena 2 Sea serpent Ophidion Pli 3 Taenia maj. Taenia
mi. 4 Tinca mar. Sandeele; 5 Lamprey Lampern 6 Sheat fish Eele pout, etc.
vii
Flat fish^ 1 Common sole Spotted sole 2 Pole 3 Turbut Halibut 4 Bret 5 Plais
Flounder
vii^
Of Crustaceous Ski^ns 1 Globe fish Hairy orb. 2 Orbis Murie. Orbis Echin. 3
Triang. fish Horned Tr. F. 4 Holosteus 5 Acus Arist. Hippocam. etc
IX
Squamous River fish 1 Pike 2 Salmon Smelt 3 Trout Charr 4 Grailing Umber. etc.
HABIT DISPOS.
I
Reward Punishment 1 Happiness Misery 2 Prosperity Adversity 3 Contentation
Anxiety 4 Salvation Damnation
II
Instr. of Uirtue 1 Liberty Restraint 2 Riches Poverty 3 Pleasure
Vnpleasantness 4 Reputation Infamy 5 Dignity Meanness 6 Power Impotence
III
Affect. of Intellect. Uirtue 1 Sagacity Dullness 2 Faith Credul. Incred. 3
Sobriety Conceitedness 4 Moderation Slight. F^erce.
IV
Affect. of Moral Uirtue 1 Consideration Cuncta. Rash. 2 Heedfulness Cark.
Careless. 3 Alacrity Grudging 4 Sincerity Hypocrisy 5 Diligence Double Dil.
Sloth 6 Integrity Partiality 7 Constancy Pertina. Light.
V
^ufus. hab. Ungracious 1 Repentance Impenitence 2 Holiness Unholiness 3
Self-denial Selfishness 4 Faith Infidelity 5 Hope Despair 6 Charity
Vncharitabl.
VI
Acquired Intell. hab. 1 Science Curios. Ignor. 2 Wisdom Craft, Folly 3 Art
Unskillfulness 4 Experience Inexperience 5 Learning Vnlearnedness
MANNERS CONVERS.
I
^^^tue Genesis Vice 1 Justice, Injust. Rigor, Remissi. 2 Equity Summum Ius 3
Candor Censoriousness 4 Goodness Mischievousnes 5 Mercy Cruelty 6 Gratitude
Ingratitude 7 Fortitude Rashness Cowa. 8 Patience, Imp. Obstinacy, Soft. 9
Meekness Lentitude R. an.
II
Resp. our Bodies 1 Temperance Sensuality 2 Abstinence Maceration, Gl. 3
Sobriety Drunkenness 4 Vigilance Sluggardliness 5 Mod. in Recre. Immod in Recr.
6 Cleanliness Niceness, Slov. 7 Chastity Unchastity
III
Resp. our Estates and dignities 1 Liberality Prodigal. Covet. 2 Providence
Scraping, Slatt. 3 Frugality Penurio. Squa. 4 Generosity Riotous. Sordid 5
Almsgiving Churlishness 6 Hospitality Inhospitableness 7 Modesty Sheepish.
Impat. 8 Magnanimity Insolence, Pusil. ^ Modesty Abject. Ambition
IV
H^milet. Com. Insociableness 1 Veracity, Lyin. Oversay, Vnde. 2 Fidelity, Vnf.
Officious, Treach. 3 Peaceabl Vnp Tameness, Cont. 4 Frankness Openess, Reserv 5
Taciturnity Loquacity 6 Gravity, Van. Formal. Lightn. 7 Courtesy Fawning Moro
8 Complaisance Assenta. Magis. 9 Urbanity Scurril, Rusti.
V
Hom. to Super 1 Dutifulness Vndutifulness 2 Humility Pride 3 Reverence
Irreverence 4 Respect Disrespect 5 Subjection Rebellion 6 Loyalty Treachery 7
Obedience Disobedience 8 Submission Contumacy
VI
Hom. to Infer. 1 Graciousness Harshness 2 Condescent. Insolence 3 Affability
Superciliousness 4 Protection Tyranny 5 Good-gover. Maladministr. 6
Reasonablenes Unreasonable. 7 Severity Fondness 8 Clemency Austerity
SENS. QUALITY
I
Primary Uisible 1 Twilight Light, Darkness 2 Light Shadow 3 Brightness Dimness
4 Transparency Opacity 5 Clearness Spottedness
II
Secondary visible Color 1 Greines White. Black. 2 Redness Yellowness 3
Greeness Blueness 4 Purple 5 Variegatednes Unchangabl. 6 Spleckledness
Striatedness 7 Dappledness Chequerdness
III
Sound Silence 1 Mean Acute, Grave 2 Ringing Jarring 3 Voice Articulate 4
Hissing Whistling 5 Note Sharp, Flat 6 Tune Consort 7 Clearness Hoarsness 8
Concord Discord 9 Harmony Iangling
IV
Belonging to ^ast or Smel^ 1 Sweetness Vnsavoriness 2 Fattiness Acrimonious. 3
Austereness Acerbity 4 Acidity Bitterness 5 Saltishness Freshness 6 Freshness
Dadness 7 Mustiness Rottenness
V
Tact. Qu more Active 1 Temperateness Heat, Cold 2 Moistness Wetness, Dryness 3
Closeness Density, Rarity 4 Weightiness Gravity, Levity 5 Consistency Hard.
Fluidness 6 Flexibleness Limber. Stiffnes
VI
Tact Qu. more Passive 1 Yieldingness Softness, Hard. 2 Eveness Smooth. Rough.
3 Ordinariness Coursness, Fine. 4 Sliminess Clamm. Vnctu. 5 Firmness Toughn.
Brittle. 6 Steddiness Fastness, Loos.
SICKNESS HEALTH
I
General Cau^. o^ Sick. 1 Contagion 2 Wound Bruise 3 Plethora Cacochymia 4
Distemper Inflammation 5 Obstruction Inflation 6 Abscessus 7 Ulcer Fistula 8
Gangrene Sphacelus
II
Distempers 1 Fever Ague 2 Hectic Consumption 3 Malign. Fever Plague 4 Pox
Measils 5 Itch Tetter 6 Leprosy Scurf 7 Lues Venerea 8 Gout Erysipelas
III
Tumors 1 Pustule Scab 2 King's evil Boil 3 Cancer Carbuncle 4 Wen Schirrus 5
Wart C^rn 6 Childblane 7 Varix Aneurisma 8 Ganglion
IV
Of Head and Nerves 1 Frenzy Madness 2 Veternus Ephialtes 3 Lethargy Apoplexy 4
Catarrh Rheumatism 5 Vertigo Epilepsy 6 Palsy Numness 7 Convulsion Cramp 8
Rachitis 9 Squinancy
V
O^ Middle Region 1 Shortness of Br. 2 Asthma Or^hopnoea 3 Consumption Empyema
4 Palpitation 5 Fainting Swouning 6 Pleurisy
VI
Of the Bowels 1 Cardialgia 2 Green-sick. Jaundise 3 Dropsy Timpany 4 Scorbute
Hypocon. Vap. 5 Colic Iliac passion 6 Diarrhaea Dysentery 7 Hernia Haemorrhoids
8 Hysteric. pass. Suffocation 9 Stone Strangury
CHAP. VI. The Appendix, containing a comparison betwixt this Natural
Philosophical Grammar, and that of other instituted Languages, particularly the
Latin, in respect of the multitude of unnecessary Rules, and of Anomalisms.
Concerning the China Character. The several Attempts and Proposals made by
others toward a new kind of Character, and Language. The advantage in respect
of Facility, which this Philosophical Language has above the Latin.
HAving thus briefly laid the Foundations of a Philosophical Grammar; I am in
the next place to show the many great advantages both for significancy,
perspicuity, brevity, and consequently facility, which a Character or Language
founded upon these Rules, must needs have above any other way of communication,
now commonly known or used. And because the Latin does in these parts of the
world supply the place of a Common Tongue, therefore I shall chiefly insist
upon the comparison with that.

1. As for the first part of Latin Grammar concerning Orthography, it will be
needless here to speak any thing further to this, having before mentioned the
imperfections of that Alphabet; the redundancy of it in some respects, and the
deficiency of it in others; the incongruity of giving several powers to the
same Letters, etc. which particulars are further manifested by what has been
delivered concerning natural Orthography.

As to the other parts of the Latin Grammar Etymol. Syntax.
I shall endeavor to prove that they do exceedingly abound with unnecessary
Rules, besides a vast multitude of Anomalisms and exceptions, which must needs
render it exceedingly perplexed and difficult to the Learner.

2. In the second part concerning Etymology. 1. There is a great imperfection
as to the just number and true sense of Radical words.

1. In some respects too many, by reason of the Synonima's which do very much
abound in it.

2. In other respects too few. There is a common word for the notion of Parent,
abstracted from either Sex, Father or Mother. And so for Child, Liber. But none
for the relation of Brother, Sister, Husband, and Wife, Uncle, Aunt, Nephew,
Niece, etc. And so for the names of s^^eral Plants, and Living Creatures of
every kind, which no Dictionary does sufficiently express. And though the Latin
does provide for some of those notions expressed by the Transcendental
Particles, yet is not their number sufficient, there being several others (not
provided for) which may as conveniently be in like manner expressed. And, which
is another great incongruity, as to the indistinctness of those which are thus
provided for; neither are all words of the like notion expressible by such
terminations, nor does the same termination always express the same notion.

3. The words of it are exceeding Aequivocal, scarce one amongst them which
has not diverse significations, either absolutely, or in phrase, or both ways;
from which Homonimy, those Particles which occur most frequently in discourse
are not free, ut, pro, etc.

2. There are many improper and preternatural Rules concerning Inflexion.

1. As to Noun Substantives, both in respect of Genders, Cases, Declensions.


1. In respect of Genders, which are needlessly multiplied, there being but two
in nature; nothing properly having Gender but what has Sex. That which is
called the Neuter, does by its very name signify that it is no Gender; and
besides these Genders are irrationally applied.

1. Things that have no Sex are expressed by words, Masculine, Gladius, Arcus,
Foeminine. Vagina. Sagitta.


2. Things that have Sex are denoted, 1. Sometimes by words of the Neuter
Gender, Scortum, Amasium, etc. 2. Those words whose significations are common
to Male and Female, are sometimes rendered only in the Masculine Gender, as Fur,
Latro, Homicida, etc. and sometimes only in the Foeminine, as Proles, Soboles,
etc. and sometimes only in the Neuter, as Animal, Mancipium, etc. 3. Many words
which signify the same thing, and are Synonimous, are yet used in several
Genders Appetitus, Aviditas, Desiderium. Sermo, Oration. Domus, Domicilium.
Crinis, Coma. Capillus, Caesaries, etc.
He that would see more of this kind, may consult Nonius Marcellus, de
indiscretis generibus: Where he reckons up abundance of words, which according
to Ancient Authors, were used both in the Masculine, Foeminine, and Neuter
Gender.

2. In respect of Cases, which are not so conveniently expressed by varying Nouns
with Terminations, which is the Latin way as by placing them in the natural
order of Construction and Affixing Prepositions to them (as was said before.)

3. In respect of Declensions, of which the Latin has five, which add no small
difficulty and trouble to the learning of that Language* Now if the expression
of Cases by varying the Termination be unnecessary and inconvenient, these are
much more so; because they are but several ways of varying such Cases.

2. As to Noun Adjectives, neither Number, nor Gender, nor Case, nor Declension
do naturally pertain to them; but they are sufficiently qualifyed in all those
respects by the Substantives to which they belong: As for their inflexion by
degrees of comparison, which is proper to them; it is not so natural that these
should be expressed in the Terminations of the words, as by Auxiliary
Particles. The Adverbs of more, and most, less, and least, being upon other
accounts necessary, and sufficient to express this notion in Adjectives,
therefore the other way must needs be superfluous. Which is likewise applicable
unto the comparison of Participles, and derived Adverbs.

3. As to Verbs, there are very many unnecessary Rules concerning their Kinds,
Inflexion,
in respect of Conjugations, Number, Persons and Tense in the Termination,
Modes, Gerunds, Supines.


1. For their Kinds; it is not according to the Philosophy of speech to
distinguish Verbs into Active, Passive, Neuter, Deponent, and Common, or into
Personal, and Impersonal.

1. Those sorts of Verbs which they call Active, Passive, Neuter, and which are
properly to be expressed by the Verb Sum, and the Adjective Active, Passive,
Neuter,
are all the distinct kinds of Verbs.

2. As for those that are styled Deponents and Common, they are acknowledged to
be but irregularities and kinds of exceptions from the common rule of Verbs.

3. All Verbs are naturally capable of Persons, though in some Verbs the Latin
does not admit this, It Is proper to say, I ought, Scaliger de causis L. L. cap.
124.
I am ashamed, etc. as well as Oportet, Pudet.

2. As to the inflexion of Verbs.

1. The several Conjugations, of which there are four in Latin, are such a
preternatural encumbrance, as Declensions are in Nouns, being but several ways
of varying those Terminations or Cases of the Verb, which in themselves are
needless and troublesome.

2. Number does not naturally belong to Verbs, but only quia Verbum a nomine
dependet, as Scaliger speaks; Ibid. cap. 121.
upon which account it might as well have Gender too, as it is in the Hebrew,
Syriack, Chaldee, Arabic, Aethiopick, which yet we account very superfluous
and improper.

3. The expression of the Persons and Tenses by the Terminations of the words,
is both unnecessary and improper, because there is in other respects a
necessity of using those Pronouns by which these Persons are expressed. And
supposing that a man must therefore learn Ego, Tu, Ille, Nos, Vos, Illi. It
would much facilitate and contract Grammatical Rules, if the Verbs themselves
might remain invariable. The same may likewise be said of Tenses, which may
properly be expressed by auxiliary Particles.

3. For Modes, (to say nothing of the distribution of them, which is quite
irrational) the expression of the Optative and Subjective is most naturally
made out by Auxiliary Particles. That which is called the Infinitive Mode,
should according to the true Analogy of that speech be styled a Participle
Substantive.

There has been formerly much dispute amongst some Learned Men, whether the
notion called the Infinitive Mode, ought to be reduced according to the
Philosophy of speech. Some would have it to be the prime and principal Verb, as
signifying more directly the notion of Action; and then the other varieties of
the Verb, should be but the Inflexions of this. Others queston whether the
Infinitive Mode be a Verb or no, because in the Greek it receives Articles as a
Noun. De causis L. L. Cap. 117.
Scaliger in the stating of this question, concludes it to be a a Verb; because
it signifies with Time, but will not allow it to be a Mode; because it is
without Person or Number. To which Vossius adds, that though it be not Modus
actu, De Analogia lib. 3. cap. 8.
yet it is Modus in potentia, because it is resolveable into other Modes. e. g.
Laetor me venisse, (i.) quod venerim. And so are other Modes resolveable into
this, Est miserorum ut malevolentes sint and invideant, Plaut. Capt.
(i.) male velle and invidere bonis.

All which difficulties will he most clearly stated by asserting it to be a
Substantive Participle. For which this reason is to be given; because it has
all the signs both of a Noun Substantive and a Verb.

The Properties or Criteria whereby a Substantive is to be known are these four;

1. That it is capable of the Articles A, or The, to be prefixed before it,
which is ordinary in the Greek for the Infinitive Mode, and does well enough
agree to the natural notion of it in other Languages.

2. It Is capable of that kind of Obliquity by prefixing Prepositions, which is
commonly styled variation by Cases. The Gerunds in di, do, dum, being in the
true notion of them, but the Cases of that which we call the Infinitive Mode.

3. It may be joined in construction with Adjectives or Pronouns Possessive.

4. It Is capable of Number in the natural notion of it, though it be not so
used in Languages; the words Actiones and Lectiones, being but the Plural
number of Agere, Legere.

The signs or Properties whereby a Verb may be known, are these three;

1. In our English tongue the Particle ( To) may be prefixed before it.

2. It signifies with time.

3. It has two voices, Active and Passive.

And therefore being both a Substantive, and a Verb, it should according to the
Theory of the Latin be styled a Participle Substantive. To which may be added,
that it is in the true notion of it, frequently resolveable into a Noun
Substantive, as in these Instances. Virtus est vitium fugere, (i.) Fuga vitii
est virtus. Magis paratus servire quam imperare. (i.) servituti quam imperio.
Dignus Amari. (i.) Amore.

As for the Imperative Mode, that is in this respect defective, because it
makes no distinct Provision for those different notions to be expressed by it,
viz. Petition, Persuasion, Command.

Vossius de Analog. Lib. 3. cap. 9. and 11.
5. Gerunds and Supines are unnecessary inflexions of Verbs, the notion of them
being expressible by the Infinitive Mode, whose Cases they are. Venio Spectatum
(i.) Spectare. Turpe dictu (i.) dici. Caesar venit ad oppugnandum urbem (i.)
oppugnare. And sometimes by a Noun that signifies Action. Defessus ambulando
(i.) ambulatione.

De Lingua Latina, Lib. 5.
I cannot here omit the mentioning of what Varro has observed, that the
inflexions of a Verb through its several voices of Active, Passive, together
with Modes, Tenses, etc. amount to about five hundred several Cases of
inflexion. Now there being four distinct ways of conjugating Verbs, these
variations may upon that account be reckoned to be two thousand, the learning
of which (though all Verbs were regular) would be no small labor and
difficulty. But then consider the vast multitude of Anomalisms and exceptions
in the inflexions of Verbs, and that will more than double this difficulty and
labor.

2. As to the derivation of Latin words; whereas the Radix should according to
Philosophy be only a Noun Substantive, it is here sometimes a Verb, a
Participle, an Adverb, a Preposition, which is unnatural and improper. And then
besides, there is no certain Analogy amongst these; a Scribo, Scriptor; but
they do not say, a Bibo, Biptor, but Bibax, etc.

3. The Rules of Composition are not fixed to any certain Analogy. It Is
Aenobarbus, not Aenibarbus, and yet they say, Magniloquus, not Magnoloquus. The
same Prepositions, when in Composition, do sometimes increase and augment the
force of the word, as in Infractus, Incavus, Incurvus. per Perfidelis,
Perfruor. de Deamo, Demiror. ex Exclamo, Exaggero. dis Discupio.


Again, the same Prepositions do sometimes in Composition import a denial or
privation of the sense of the word.

in Indoctus, Improbus. per Perfidus, Pervicax. de Demens. ex Excors, Exanguis.
dis Diffido.
So the Particle re does in Composition sometimes signify repetition, as
retego; and sometimes privation, as revelo, than which nothing can be more
irrational and incongruous.

Unnecessary Rules in the Latin Syntax.
That is called figurative and irregular Syntax, which customary use, and not
any natural p^opriety does make significative; wherein there are some words
a^way^ either redundant, or deficient, or transposed, or changed, from their
proper notion. These Phraseologies are to be accounted an imperfection of
Language, and one degree added to the curse of the confusion; because they do
exceedingly increase the difficulty of Learning Tongues, and do not add to the
brevity or perspicuity of expression, but rather cumber and darken it with
ambiguities.

The regular Syntax of the Latin does consist in Concord, Regimen.


1. Concord is the agreement of several words in some accidents and
circumstances; as betwixt, 1. Substantives and Adjectives. 2. Two Substantives.
3. Substantives and Verbs. 4. Antecedent and Relative. Concerning which there
are so many difficult perplexed Rules, as are enough to tire out and discourage
any young Learner, most of them being founded upon such principles as are not
natural to the Philosophy of speech.

3. The Regimen of words does concern their government of others in respect of
Case, Mode.


1. There are a great multitude of Rules that concern Substantives, Adjectives,
Pronouns, in reference to their governing of the Genitive, Dative, Accusative,
Ablative Case.

2. So for Verbs, that some of them must govern the Nominative, others the
Genitive, others the Dative, others the Accusative, and others the Ablative
Case; some promiscuously both Genitive, Accusative,
Genitive, Ablative,
Accusative, Ablative.
Besides the several Rules concerning those diverse Cases which may precede the
Infinitive Mode; some words requi^ing a Nominative* others a Dative, others an
Accusative. To which may be added those various Rules about Gerunds, Supines,
Participles, in reference to the several Cases, Genitive, Accusative, Ablative,
governed by them.

3. There are several Rules that concern the Regimen of Adverbs, both as to
Cases, Nomin. Genesis Dat. Accus. Ablat. Modes, Indicat. Imperat. Optat. Subjunct.


4. Other Rules refer to the Regimen of Prepositions, some of which govern the
Accusative, others the Ablative Case, and some both.

5. Other Rules refer to the Regimen of Conjunctions, both as to Cases and
Modes.

6. Others to Interjections, diverse of which are said to govern the Nominative,
Dative, Accusative, Vocative Case.

Beside these for Syntax, there is a great multitude of Rules in the Latin
Prosodia, about the Accenting and quantity of words: whereof some are General,
referring to the nature of Letters and Syllables; others more particular,
concerning the first or middle Syllables in any word, amongst which there is no
certain and constant Analogy: They say, Hecto^rem, and Praeto^rem.

It cannot be denied but that all these Rules are necessary to the Latin
Tongue; but this argues the imperfection of that Language, that it should stand
in need of such and so many Rules as have no foundation in the Philosophy of
speech. I am no^ ig^orant that our Learned Verulam, De Augment. Scient. lib. 6.
cap. 1.
speaking concerning the inflexions used in the more Ancient Languages by
Cases, Modes, Tenses, etc. in which the modern Languages are very sparing,
supplying them by auxiliary particles; from thence infers, ingenia priorum
seculorum nostris fuisse multo acutiora and subtiliora. But with reverence to
the judgment of that incomparable Man, though it must be granted, that the
Language being so, there was great wit in reducing the inflexions of words to
such Rules of Art; yet if these Rules be not necessary to Language, and
according to nature, but that words may signify sufficiently and in some
respects better without them, then there is greater judgment showed in laying
them aside, or framing a Language without them.

If all these Rules were general and constant, yet the multitude and variety of
them would add much difficulty to the Latin: But now the exceptions and
Anomalisms to these Rules are so very numerous, that there is much more pains
required for the remembering of them, than of the Rules themselves; insomuch
that many eminent Grammarians have written against Analogy, both in Greek and
Latin.

I shall offer a very brief view of them.

As to the inflexions of Nouns in respect,

1. Of Number; there are abundance of Substantives, whose sense and
signification is naturally capable of both Numbers; Vossius de Anal. Lib. 1.
Cap. 39. ad Cap. 44.
some of which want a singular, others a plural number.

2. In respect of Gender; the Rules to discover the Genders of words by their
Terminations, are not without multitude of exceptions. There are diverse words
that are of one Gender in the singular, and another in the plural number.
Tartarus, Tartara. Locus, Loci, and Loca. Carbasus, Carbasa. Supellex,
Supellectilia. Coelum, Coeli. Epulum, Epulae, etc.

3. In respect of Cases; some words abound in C^ses. Avaritia, Avarities.
Araneus, Aranea. Antidotus, Antidotum, etc. Others have no Cases, and are
styled Aclita, or Aptota; as Sinapi, Pondo, Nequam, Cornu, Quatuor, Quinque
Sex, Septem, Octo, Novem, December, Viginti, Triginta, etc. Centum, Mill, etc.
Others called Monoptota, have ^ut one oblique Case, which in some is the
Genitive, as Hujusmodi, Ejusmodi; in others an Accusative, as Inficias; in
others the Ablative, Vossius de Anal. Lib. 1. Cap. 47.48. Lib. 2. a 1o ad
vicessimum caput.
Promptu, Iussu, Injussu, etc. Other Nouns have but two Cases, and are
therefore styled Diptota, as Necesse, Necessum; Suppetiae, and Suppetias. And
there are diverse others that are Triptota, Tetraptota, Pentaptota.

4. In respect of Declensions; the Terminations of the Cases both in the
singular and plural number in diverse Declensions are not without many
exceptions, as Musis, Filiabus, etc. Some words are of several Declensions, as
Pascha, Paschae, Paschatis.

2. As to the inflexions of Adjectives by the degrees of comparison; there are
many words which signify quality, and are naturally capable of increase, and
decrease, and consequently of this inflexion, which are yet exempted from it:
So Cicur, Opimus, Clandus, Egenus, Ibid. Lib. 2. Cap. 22.
Almus, etc.

Some want only a Positive, as Prior Primus, Vlterior Vltimus: Others a
Comparative, as Novus Novissimus, Falsus Falsissimus, Pius Piissimus. Others a
Superlative, as Iuvenis Junior, Senex, Senior, etc. Besides that those which
are inflected through all degrees, have several irregularities in the manner of
it; Similis Simillimus, not Similissimus. Bonus, Malus, Magnus, Parvus.

3. As to the inflexion of Verbs; Ibid. Cap. 3.5.
many Verbs of the Active voice are sometimes used in a Passive signification,
and several others of the Passive voice used Actively. The exceptions about the
Conjugations of Verbs, especially those referring to the praeter tense and
supines, Ibid. a Cap. 19. ad Cap. 47.
are so exceeding numerous, that it is not easy to recite them: Some are
wholly without them, others have them without any Analogy; as Fleo Flevi, Sero
Sevi, Fero Tuli. Vbi a Dissimilibus Similia, a Similibus Dissimilia.

Sometimes diverse Verbs have the same Praeter tense, as Cresco, Crevi. Cerno,
Crevi. Luceo, Luxi. Lugeo, Luxi. Fulgeo, Fulsi, etc. Fulceo, Fulsi, etc.


And so for Supines, Cresco, Cretum. Cerno, Cretum. Pando, Passum. Patior,
Passum. Vinco, Victum, etc. Vivo, Victum, etc.
Some Verbs are of several conjugations, aggero ras, Dico ris, Dico Dicas, etc.
Dicis, etc.
Some are of none of the four conjugations; as Sum, Volo, Fio, Eo, etc. Others
are defective in respect of Modes and Tenses; as Aio, Ave, Dari, Fari, Forem,
etc.

Those particular Terminations which signify a Verb to be Inchoative,
Frequentative, Diminutive, are not without many exceptions.

As for the several Anomalisms in Syntax, referring either to Concord or
Regimen; they are so exceeding numerous, that it would be too tedious to recite
them: And they may be seen in every Grammar.

Add to these the several exceptions in the Rules of Prosodia, about the right
accenting and quantity of words.

And from all these particulars put together, it is sufficiently evident that
there may be very many and great advantages in a Philosophical Language, above
that of the Latin Tongue; especially in these two respects, that this has no
unnecessary Rules, no Exceptions.


As for the China Character and Language so much talked of in the world, if it
be rightly represented by those that have lived in that Country, and pretend to
understand the Language, there are many considerable faults in it, which make
it come far short of the advantages which may be in such a Philosophical
Language as is here designed.

1. The multitude of Characters and Words, of which there are about 80000.
others say 120000. and of these a man must have in readiness about eight or ten
thousand before he is to be counted one that can write the Character,
Trigaltius Hist. Sinensis, Lib. 1. Cap. 5. Semedo Hist. of China, Part 1. Cap.
5.
or judged fit to express his mind by it.

2. These Characters are strangely complicated and difficult as to the Figure
of them, as may sufficiently appear by the following instance of the Lords
Prayer in this Character: The Manuscript of which, together with a Catechism in
the China Character and Language, was communicated to me by that Ingenious, and
Inquisitive Person, Mr. Lodowick; in which there was both the Creed and Ten
Commandments, with several Questions and Answers about the Principles of
Christian Religion: The Language being writ on one side of the Character in our
common Letters; and a verbal Translation in Latin on the other side. I did
purpose out of this to have inserted the Lords Prayer as it was in that Copy;
in order to which I procured a Cut to be made of the Character: but this
Manuscript being destroyed in the late Fire, and not knowing where to procure a
supply of it, I am necessitated to offer the Characters without the Verbal
Interpretations of them. Their way of reading is known to be from the top on
the right side downwards.

Chiu (...) tsi (...) ngo (...) lin (...) Ngo (...) o (...) ay (...) ngo (...)
ul (...) tem (...) (...) tsie (...) zie (...) chi (...) fu' (...) (...) yee'u
(...) jong (...) chim (...) che (...) (...) pu (...) leang (...) him (...) tsay
(...) (...) ngo (...) 'u'ul (...) y'u (...) thiaen (...) (...) chiu (...) myen
(...) ty (...) ngo (...) (...) chi (...) ong-o (...) s'u (...) tem (...) (...)
eu (...) tsi (...) sim (...) (...) (...) ju' (...) ay (...) thyaen (...) yuen
(...) (...) jedu^ (...) ziu (...) ngo (...) ul (...) (...) caan (...) ngo (...)
teng (...) nium (...) (...) nay (...) ye (...) u^wang (...) chim (...) (...)
kyeea (...) ssa (...) u'ul (...) xim (...) (...) ngo (...) tou' (...) kyn (...)
ul (...) yu' (...) ngo (...) jun (...) gue (...)

Besides the difficulty and perplexedness of these Characters, there does not
seem to be any kind of Analogy (so far as I am able to judge) betwixt the shape
of the Characters, and the things represented by them, as to the Affinity or
Opposition betwixt them, nor any tolerable provision for necessary derivations.

Theoph. Spizelius de Reliteraria Sinensium, lately Published 1661. Sect. 6.
Histor. Chinae, Part 2. Cap. 2.
3. To this may be added the great Aequivocalness of the Language, every word
having diverse significations, some of them no less than twenty or thirty
several senses; upon which account Alvarez Semedo affirms it to be more
difficult than any other Language in the World.

4. The difficulty of pronouncing it, every Syllable (as this of Ko) has no
less than ten several ways of pronunciation, as says one Author; and it has
more than thirty several significations in the Anamitish Language, as Alexander
Rhodes observes in his Dictionary. Such various Accents they are necessitated
to make use of, as other people cannot imitate. Lingua Anamitica, cap. 2.
The Syllable Ba, according to its various Accents, has six several senses, of
no kind of affinity or nearness to one another. And the most expert Men among
themselves are not able so exactly to distinguish in pronunciation, without
using several attempts and repetitions to explain what they mean; or sometime
by making the Figure of the Character they would express with their Fingers in
the Air, or upon a Wall, or Table.

Hist. Part 1. Cap. 6.
5. Though in some particulars they seem to found their Character upon the
Philosophy of things, yet it is not so in others. The Character put for a
precious Stone (says Semedo) must be used with additions to it for several
kinds of Gems, as Pearls, etc. So the Character for any kind of Tree, must have
joined to it, the Character for Wood; and the letter that signifies Metals,
must be annexed to the Character of Iron, Copper, Steel, etc. The meeting with
which passage, was no small satisfaction to me, in reference to that way which
I had before pitched upon for the most natural expression of things. But this
(says he) is no constant Rule amongst them. It should seem to be observed only
in some few species of nature which are most obvious, there being reason to
doubt whether they had any such general Theory of Philosophy, as might serve
for all other things and notions.

Ibid.
In this it is to be acknowledged that they have a great advantage above the
Latin, because their words are not declined by Terminations, but by Particles,
which makes their Grammar much more easy than that of the Latin.

To this I might add something concerning the advantage of this Philosophical
way, above those attempts toward a Universal Character which have been made by
others. That of Marks or Letters by Cicero; that of numbers by an Ingenious
Countryman of our own, Mr. Beck of Ipswich.
followed since by Beckerus, and by Athanasius Kircher; together with that
other attempt toward an Universal Language, by Philip Labbe. All which are in
this one respect defective, because they are not Philosophical; upon which
account they are much more difficult, and less distinct.

These things being premised concerning the many needless Rules, and great
variety of exceptions in the Latin; it will not be very difficult to make a
comparison betwixt that, and the Character and Language here proposed.

For the right estimating of the difficulty which there is in the Learning of
any Language, these two things are to be enquired into. 1. The multitude of
words. And 2. The Grammatical Rules belonging to such a Language.

1. As to the first of these, De origin Scribendi, Cap 4. Bp Walton, Davies.
Boxhornius.
Hermannus Hugo asserts that no Language has so few as 100000 words; and Varro
is frequently quoted by diverse Learned Men, as if he affirmed that there are in
the Latin no less than five hundred thousand. But upon enquiry into the scope
of that place they relate to, it will appear that he does not there design to
give an account of the just number of words in the Latin, but only to show the
great variety which is made by the Inflexion and Composition of Verbs: To which
purpose the first thing he lays down is, That there are about one thousand
Radical Verbs in the Latin. And then Secondly, That every Verb in the
Declensions of it, has about five hundred several varieties or Cases of
Inflexion, which make up the number of five hundred thousand. And then Thirdly,
He supposes each of these to be compounded with nine Prepositions, as for
instance, the word Cessit, Recessit, Accessit, Abscessit, Incessit, Excessit,
Successit, Decessit, Concessit, Processit; this will raise the whole number to
five millions: in which account he reckons only the Cases and Compositions of
Verbs, and takes no notice of the Particles of speech, nor such other words as
are not radically Verbs, which are very numerous.

Of all other Languages, the Greek is looked upon to be one of the most
copious; the Radixes of which are esteemed to be about 3244. But then it does
exceedingly abound in Composition, in which the Latin Tongue being more
sparing, must therefore upon that account have more Radicals. What the
particular number of these may be, is not easy to determine; because Learned
Men do not agree about many of them, whether they are Radicals, or Derivatives.
They may be by moderate computation estimated to be about ten thousand, most of
which are either absolutely, or in phrase, or both ways equivocal. Notavi ex
Varrone, Nounio and Festo, non extare vocabulum apud Latinos quod plures
significationes non habet, says Campanella. Many of them have no less than
twenty distinct significations, and some more. Now for every several sense,
Grammar. Philosoph. Lib. 1. Cap. 1.
we may justly reckon so many several words, which will much augment the former
number. But suppose them only to treble it, and then the Latin words are to be
reckoned thirty thousand.

2. Now for the Latin Grammar, it does in the common way of Teaching take up
several of our first years, not without great toil and vexation of the mind,
under the hard tyranny of the School, before we arrive to a tolerable skill in
it. And this is chiefly occasioned from that great multitude of such Rules as
are not necessary to the Philosophy of speech, together with the Anomalisms and
exceptions that belong to them; the difficulty of which may well be computed
equal to the pains of Learning one third part of the words; according to which
the labor required to the attaining of the Latin, may be estimated equal to
the pains of Learning forty thousand words.

Now in the way here proposed, the words necessary for communication are not
three thousand, and those so ordered by the help of natural method, that they
may be more easily learned and remembered than a thousand words otherwise
disposed of; upon which account they may be reckoned but as one thousand. And
as for such Rules as are natural to Grammar, they were not charged in the
former account, and therefore are not to be allowed for here.

So that by this it appears, that in point of easiness betwixt this and the
Latin, there is the proportion of one to forty; that is, a man of an ordinary
capacity may more easily learn to express himself this way in one Month, than
he can by the Latin in forty Months.

This I take to be a kind of Demonstration a Priori; and for an Argument a
Posteriori, namely, from Experiment. Though I have not as yet had opportunity
of making any trials, yet I doubt not, but that one of a good Capacity and
Memory, may in one Months space attain to a good readiness of expressing his
mind this way, either in the Character or Language.

FINIS.
AN ALPHABETICAL DICTIONARY, Wherein all ENGLISH WORDS According to their
VARIOUS SIGNIFICATIONS, Are either referred to their Places in the
PHILOSOPHICAL TABLES, Or explained by such Words as are in those TABLES.

LONDON, Printed by I. M. for Samuel Gellibrand and John Martin, 1668.

AN ADVERTISEMENT TO THE READER.
FOr the better understanding of the References in the following Dictionary,
the Reader is desired to take notice, that the Abbreviations therein used, are
thus to be explained; A. Affinis. a. active AC. Action Corporeal adj. adjective
Adv. Adverb underived adv. adverb derived (aggr. aggregate (apt aptitude, or
proneness. AS. Action Spiritual (arm. armament (aug. augmentative Be. Beast By.
Bird Conj. Conjunction (corr. corruptive D. Deficient extreme D. Discourse
(def. defective (dim. diminutive E. Exceeding extreme El. Element (end.
endeavor Ex. Exanguious (ex. excessive (fem. female Fi. Fish (freq.
frequentative G. God Ha. Habit HF. Herb considered according to the Flower
Leaf Seed-vessel HL. Herb considered according to the Flower Leaf Seed-vessel
HS. Herb considered according to the Flower Leaf Seed-vessel (inc. inceptive
(imp. impetus, or fit (instr. instrument Int. Interjection (jug. jugament (lam.
lamin (match machin. Mag. Magnitude Man. Manners Mea. Measure (mech mechanic
(merc. merchant Met. Metal Mo. Motion NP. Natural Power O. Operation O.
Opposite (off. Officer p. passive (perf. perfective PG. Parts General Po.
Possessions (pot. Power, or ability PP. Parts Peculiar Pr. Provisions Pre.
Preposition Pro. Pronoun Q. Quality sensible RC. Relation Civil RE. Relation
Ecclesiastical RJ. Relation Judicial RM. Relation Military RN. Relation Naval
TO. Relation Oeconomical S. Sickness (segr. segregate Sh. Shrub Sp. Space sp.
specially St. Stone T. or TG. Transcend. General TA. Transcendental Action TM.
Transcendental Mixed Tr. Tree v. verb W. World


The Literal Figures, as I, II, V, etc. denote the order of the Differences
under each Genus; and the other Figures, the order of the the Species under
each Difference. So the word Sheep in the Dictionary is marked Be. II.2. The
meaning of which is, That the thing signified by that word is described in the
Philosophical Tables under the Genus of BEAST, the second difference, and the
second Species. And Goat is Be. II.2. A. ( i. e.) it is joined as an Affinis to
the same Species.

The Design of the Philosophical Tables is to enumerate and describe all kinds
of Things and Notions: And the Design of this Dictionary, is to reckon up and
explain all kinds of words, or names of things.

And that the Reader may the better understand the usefulness of having all
words set down according to their different Acceptions, and by what kind of
Analogy they come to be used in such various senses (which is one of the
particular advantages of this Dictionary) I shall here select out of it one
particular Instance, for each of these several kinds of words, viz. a
Substantive, an Adjective, a Verb, a Particle; by which it will be easy to
understand any of the rest.

So the word CORRVPTION, according to that Notion of it which is Primary and
proper, does denote the Being, or Making of a thing, evil, or worse, whether by
Admixtion with that which is bad, and then it is of the same importance with
the word Defiling. Privation, as to a thing Being, so corruption is destroying.
Usefulness, so corruption is spoiling.

Secondary, as applied to things Natural, so Corruption will denote according
to the Degree of it, either Infection, or Decay, or Putrefaction. Moral,
whether more General, so it denotes the Evilness of the mind or manners,
Unholiness, Viciousness. Special, so it is peculiarly applied to Unchastity and
Bribery.




So the word CLEAR, may signify either Entire of it self; so clearly is
wholly. Not mingled with others; so Clear is Simple. specially not with worse;
so Clear is Pure. Being free from impediments, or not being hindered from
Being, doing, or receiving, which notion of Clear may be often expressed by the
Transcendental mark of Perfective. There may be Instances of it given in every
Genus; as particularly, Quality, whether Natural Power, so a clear sight or
understanding is a good s. or u. It is applied to the Mind, as a clear Wit, or
Spirit. Body, so we say one is clear of sickness or pain, has a clear skin, etc.
Habit, as a clear Reputation, that is a good R. sp. Sagacity and Sincerity are
thus called Clearness. Manners, as Clear Dealing, that is Candor or Frankness.
Sensible Quality. Visible, as clear weather, or sky or water, etc. Audible, as
clear sound.
Sickness, as clear of any disease (i. e.) not Infected, or not Diseased.
Relation. Civil, as a Clear Estate. Judicial, as Clear of any Crime. Military,
as Clear Coast. Ecclesiastic, as Clear of any Censure.

Being Done, so Clear is Easy, or not difficult; Being Known, so Clear is
Plain or manifest; Being come to, or Passed through, so Clear is Accessible, or
Passable, or Empty.



So the word DELIVER, according to its primary sense, is the motion (Met.) or
the passing of a thing, or of the Possession of it, or of the Power over it,
from one to another. It is commonly used in relation either to the Subject, or
thing delivered, whether Things; so Deliver may signify Depositing, Paying,
Resigning. Words, as to the Matter, whether concerning Fact, so Delivering is
Narration Doctrine, so Delivering is Teaching
Manner, whether Immediately by Mouth, so to deliver, is to speak. Pen, so to
deliver, is to write
Mediately, so Delivering is Tradition


Terms of this motion, either from a Better condition to a worse, being used
Passively, so Delivering is Dereliction Actively, whether Involuntary, so
Delivering is yielding Voluntary, so Delivering is Betraying

Worse condition to a better. Temporal, whether by way of Prevention, so
Delivering is Preserving, or Causing to escape: Remedy, from Captivity, so to
deliver, is to Vncaptivate. Bondage, so to deliver, is to Vnslave. Prison, so
to deliver, is to Vnimprison. Danger of Childbirth, so to deliver, is the
Active of Parturition.

Eternal, so delivering is Redemption.




So the Particle BY, is sometimes used in the sense of an Integral, signifying
the notion of Digression or Accessory, as on the by; and is of the same
importance with such kind of Negatives, as not principal, not pertinent, not
public, not ordinary; as a By-way: And sometimes it is used to denote a common
speech implying something of contempt, as a By word. Preposition Causal,
Efficient, By such an Author. Instrumental, Slain by the sword. Final, or end,
By reason of, etc.
Local or Temporal, being sometimes used in that same sense with those other
Prepositions. Before, as, By God, ( i.) before God. At, as, Come by, ( i.)
obtain, or come at. In, as, by day, ( i.) in the day time. Through, as, by such
a street, ( i.) through such a street. Besides, as, by the mark, ( i.) besides.

Adverbs denoting the Circumstance of Nearness, whether Local. So By, or hard
by, is near such a Place. Temporal. So By and by, is nearness in Time,
signifying future (dim.)



Besides those Phraseologies wherein the Particle is used to signify the
Manner of things, as, By the By, By the Great, By Retail, By it self, etc.
Which Phrases are to be expressed by the Adverbs Neuter of Digression,
Aggregate, Segregate, Solitary, etc. So those Forms of Speech, By course, By
the day, or day by day, By degrees, By turns, House by House, Year by Year,
etc. are to be expressed by the Adverbs of Course, Day, Degree, Turn, House,
Year, with the Transcendental Note of Segregate.

The Alphabetical DICTIONARY.
A
A Article, 1. Abandon. T A. II. 2. O. Abase. [a. Lowness,] T M. II. 4. O. [a.
Meanness,] Ha. II. 5. O. [a. Humility,] Man. V. 2.
Abash, [a. Shame.] AS. VI. 2. A. Abate [a. Little,] TM. I. 1. D. [a.
Diminution,] TM. I. 7. D. [a. Remission,] TM. I. 8. D. [a. Subduction,] TM. VI.
7.
Abbat, [Abby's (Officer.] Abbie, [Colledge of Monks.] Abbreviate, [a.
Brevity,] TM. II. 1. O. [a. Epitome,] D. V. 6.
Abridge, [a. Abbreviate.] Abdicate, TA. I. 3. O. Abecedarian, [Learner of
elements,] D. I. Abed, [in bed,] brought, [adj. pret. parturition.] Abet. [v.
Accessory,] TM. IV. 4. O. [v. Encourage,] TO. VI. 2. [a. Help.] T. II. 5.
Abhor. [v. Hate, AS. V. 3. O. (augm.] [v. Aversation, AS. V. 5. O. (augm.]
Abide. [continue.] [v. Duration,] Mea. V. A. [v. Permanent,] Sp. I. 6. [v.
Constancy,] Ha. IV. 7. [v. stay] TA. VI. O. [dwell] Po. I. A. suffer. [v.
Passion,] T. I. 7. O. [v. Patience,] Man. I. 8.
Abject. [Mean,] Ha. II. 5. O. (augm.) [Contemptible,] AS. II. 8. O. (augm.)
excess of modesty, Man. III. 9. E.
Ability. [Potentialness] T. III. 5. O. [Nat. Power] NP. per tot. [Possessions]
Po.
Abjure, [Swear. RC. VI. 4. (against.] Ablatum, TM. VI. 7. Able, [adj.
Ability.] Abode, vid. Abide. Abolish. [a. Nothing] T. I. 1. O. [Annihilate] AS.
I. 1. O. [Destroy] AS. I. 4. O. -- Law [v. Law (un.] -- Act [v. Act (un.]

Abominate. [v. Hate] AS. V. 3. O. (aug.) [Aversation] AS. V. 5. O. (aug.)
Aboard [into, or in Ship.] Abortion, AC. I. 3. O. Above, Prep. V. 1. O. [adv.
Upper] Sp. III. 5. [More then, etc.]
Abound, v. TM. I. 2. E. [v. Redundance,] TM. I. 3. E.
About, as round -- Prep. III. 3. O. [more or less] Adv. V. 3. [concerning]
Prep. I. 3. O.
Abroad, [out of] Prep. IV. 2. [without] Prep. IV. 2. O. [in public] adv. TM.
V. 4.
Abrogate [un-law.] RC. IV. 3. Abrupt. [confused] TM. V. 2. O. sp. ended
confusedly.] discontinued confusedly.]


Absence, Sp. II. 1. O. Absolving. [Acquitting,] RJ. II. 7. [un-excommunicate,]
RE. V. 5.
Absolute. [perfect] T. III. 9. op. to dependent, TM. IV. 3. O. op. to
relative, T. I. 8. O.
Absolution, vid. Absolve. Abstein, TA. V. 6. O. [v. Abstinence] Man. II. 2.
Abstemious, [adj. Abstinence,] Man. II. 2. sp. from Wine.
Abstersive, adj. [a. purgation (dim.] [a. purity] TM. V. 6.
Abstinence, TA. V. 6. O. virtue, Man. II. 2.
Abstract, D. II. 2. [epitome] D. V. 7.
Abstruse. [obscure] D. III. 9. O. [concealed] TA. I. 8. O.
Absurd. [foolish] HA. VI. 2. D. [nor congruous] T. V. 5.
Abundance, TM. I. 2. E. Abuse, [Use, TA. V. 6. (corr.] [speak Injuriously] RJ.
IV. 1.
Abusiveness. [proneness to abuse.] [scurrility] Man. IV. 9. E.
Abutt [v. Margin,] Sp. III. 4. A. Abyss [Deep] TM. II. 3. (aug.) Academy, RC.
III. 6. Acara, Fi. V. 8. A. Accelerate. [a. Swift] NP. V. 9. [a. Soon] Sp. I.
4.
Accent, D. I. 9. Accept, TA. IV. 4. A. Acceptable. [adj. p. Accept,] TA. IV.
4. A. sp. (apt.]
[delighting] AS. IV. 7.
Acception of a word. [meaning] D. II. A.
Access. [v. Come] TA. VI. 1. [power of a p to come.] [leave of a p to come.]
[opportunity of a p to come.]
Accessory, TM. IV. 4. O. Accident. op. to Subst. T. I. 5. O. [adj. Contingent]
T. V. 8. O. (thing.) [adj. Fortune] AS. I. 2. D. (thing) sp. Event. TA. V.
Acclamation. AC. III. 3. O. [Exclamation through Joy] of Praise]

Accommodate. [a. Congruous, T. V. 6. (make] [a. Means] T. II. 6. O. [a.
Provision] Pr.
Accompany. [v. Companion] TO. IV. 2. [v. Being, T. I. 1. with or together] [v.
Going, TA. VI. with or together]
Accomplish. [a. Perfect] T. III. 9. (make) [Perform] TA. III. 6. [Finish] TA.
III. 7.
Accord. [a. Assent] AS. II. 3. [a. Congruous] T. V. 5. Of one -- [with
simultaneous Spontaneity] Of ones own -- [adv. Spontaneous,] AS. IV. 9
According. [adv. Congruous,] T. V. 5. -- as. Adv. I. 3. -- to. Prep. II. 1.
Accordingly. Adv. I. 3. O. Accost. [a. Near] Sp. II. 3. [Address] AC. V. 2.
[Salute] AC. V. 3.
Accounting. [Reckoning] TA. IV. 6. [Esteeming] AS. II. 8.
Accoutred. [Clothed] Pr. IV. [Armamented] Pr. IV. A.
Accrue. [p. Effect] T. II. O. [v. Event] TA. V.
Accumulate, [a. Heap] O. II. 6. Accurate. adj. Perfect. T. III. 9. Accurse
[Curse] AS. I. 3. O. Accuse. [as Informer] RJ. I. 3. [as Plaintiff] RJ. I. 4.
-- falsely. a. Calumny. RJ. IV. 7.
Accustom. a. Custom. RC. IV. 1. A. -- to do, etc. a. do, etc. (frequent)
Ace. [One,] Mea. II. 1. [Point] Mag. I. 1.
Acerbity. Q. IV. 3. A. Ach [Pain] NP. V. 3. O. Achieve. [a. Perfect] T. III.
9. [Perform] TA. III. 6. [a. Action] T. 1. 7.
Acid. Q. IV. 4. Acknowledge. [Assent] AS. II. 3. [Concession] D. VI. 3. A.
[Confess] D. VI. 9.
Aconite. (Woolv's-bane] Winter. HS. I. 3.
Acorn [Mast of the Oak.] Acquaint. [Know (make] Acquaintance. TO. IV. 4.
Acquiesce. [v. Rest.] Mo. O. [v. Content] Ha. I. 3.
Acquire. [Obtain] TA. V. 1. [Gain] TA. V. 2.
Acquitting. -- of debt. TA. IV. 9. -- of guilt. RJ. II. 7.
Acre. [Area of 160 Pole square.] Acrimony. Q. IV. 2. O. Act. [Action] T. I. 7.
[Chapter] (as an act in a Play) D. III. 3. [Law] RC. IV. 3. [Edict] RC. IV. 3.
A.
[real existence] T. III. 5. to -- a. Action. -- in a Play. RC. III. 9.

Action. T. 1. 7. Spiritual -- AS -- of God. AS. I. -- of the Speculative
Vnderderstanding. AS. II. -- of the Practical Understanding. AS. III. -- of the
Will. AS. IV. Corporeal -- AC. -- of Vegetative. AC. I. -- of Sensitive. AC.
II. -- of Man. AC. III. [Gesture] AC. VI. A. Judicial. -- RJ. II. [Suit] RJ.
II. A.

Active. [adj. Action (apt.] [adj. Business, (apt.] [adj. Nimbleness] N P. V.
8.
Actual. T. III. 5. Acus Aristotelis, Fi. VIII. 5. Acute. Sharp. [adj. cut.
(apt] -- angle. Mag. III. 3. O. [Intense] TM. I. 8. E. [Sprightly] NP. IV. 2.
-- Sound. Q. III. 1. E. [Sagacious] Ha. III. 1.
Adage D. V. 1. A. Adamant [Diamond] St. IV. 1. Adapt. [a. Proportion (perf.]
[a. Congruous.]
Add. [to -- pur.] [together -- pur.] [adj. Sum (make] [adj. Aggregate, (make]
[Find [reckon Sum] Aggregate]
Adder, [Viper] Be. VI. 7. A. -- s B^lt. Ex. IV. 7. -- s Tongue. HL. I. 9. A.
Addice. [Cuting Hammer -- of Barrel mech.] Instrument of Barrel mech.]

Addict. [v. Incline naturally] habitually]
Addition. TM. VI. 6. vid. Add. Addle [Putrid] NP. V. 2. Address. AC. V. 2.
Adequate. adj. Equality. TM. I. 5. Adhere. TA. II. 2. Adherent, [adj. a. TA.
II. 2.] [Accessary] TM. IV. 4. O.
Adjacent. [Margining] Sp. III. 4. A. [Near] Sp. II. 3.
Adjective. D. II. 3. O. Adieu, [Valediction.] AC. V. 8. O. Adjoin. [Join] TA.
II. 1. [Margin] Sp. III. 4. A. [Near] Sp. II. 3.
Adjourn. [discontinue till a set day] [a. Late. Sp. I. 4. O.] by
discontinuing. TM. III.
Adjudge to -- a. Sentence. RJ. II. 5. A. Adjunct. T. VI. 1. O. Adjure. [a.
Swear] RC. VI. 4. (make) [Entreat [Command
for God's sake. Adjust. [a. Equal] TM. I. 5. (make) [a. Congruous] T. V. 5.
(make) [Balance] TA. IV. 6. A.
Adjutant. RM. III. 4. A. Adjuvant. T. II. 5. Administer. [Serve] [Yield] TA.
IV. 1. [Give] TA. IV. 4.
Administration, [Vice-Executorship to -- sentenced.] Male -- Man. VI. 5.

Admiral, [Navy (Officer.] Admiring. AS. V. I. Admit. [Permit] sp. to enter.]
[Concession] D. VI. 3. A. [Allow of]
Admonish, Warn. TO. V. 4. A. Adolescence. Me. VI. 2. Adonis-flower. HF. IX. 5.
Ado^, [Endeavour.] TA. III. 4. Adopt. [instead-a. child, TO. I. 2. O. (make]
Adore, [worship.] RE. IV. Adorn, [a. ornate.] TM. V. 5. Advance. [go forward]
RM. II. 2. E. [a. Direct. Mag. II. 8. E. (make] [a. Lift] O. I. 1. A. [a.
Upper] Sp. III. 5. [a. Superiority [a. High] TM. II. 4. TM. I. 5. E. TO. III.
Prefer. [a. Dignity.] H. II. 5.

Advantage. [Superiority] TM. I. 5. E. [Gain] TA. V. 2. [Occasion] T. II. 4. A.
Advent, [to-Coming.] TA. VI. 1. Adv^ntitious. [besides Intention Sp. Casual.]
Expectation. Sp. Casual.]
[Accessory] TM. IV. 4. O.
Adventure. [Contingency] T. V. 7. O. [Fortune] AS. I. 2. D. [Essay] TA. III.
4. A. [Danger] T. V. 3. O. [Out-sent, adj. Commerce thing] At- [without fear of
the event.]
Adverb. Derived. D. II. 4. Vnderived. D. II. 9.
Adverse. [Opposite] T. VI. 8. O. [Contrary] T. V. 5. O. [Enemy] TO. IV. 1. O.
[Adversity] Ha. I. 2. O.
Adversary, [Enemy] TO. IV. 1. O. Adversity. Ha. I. 2. O. Advert, [observe] AS.
III. 1. A. Advertise. [Know, AS. II. 5. (make] [Warn] TO. V. 4. A.
Advise. Giving -- [a. Advice.] TO. V. 4. Taking -- [p. Advice.] TO. V. 4.
Advised. [adj. p. Advise.] [adj. Considerate] Ha. IV. 1. [adj. Heedful] Ha.
IV. 2.
Adulation, [Fawning] Man. IV. 7. E. Adult, [adj. Adolescence.] Me. VI. 2.
Adulterate, [Forgery] RJ. IV. 4. A. Adultery. RJ. IV. 2. A. Adumbrate, [a.
Shadow.] Q. I. 2. O. Advocate. [Pleader] RJ. I. 7. [Mediator] RJ. I. 2. A.
Advowson, [Right RC. IV. of future giving Presbyters (place] Adust. [adj. p.
preter. Fire.] Afar. [adv. Remote.] Sp. II. 3. O. Affable. [adj. Man. VI. 3.]
[adj. Courtesie] Man. IV. 7.
Affair. [adj. p. fur. Do (thing) [Business] TA. III. [Thing] T. I. 2.
Affect. [v. Affectation.] [v. Affection.] [Delight] AS. IV. 7.
Affectation., [Conceitedness.] HA. III. 3. O. -- of Empire [Ambition.] MA.
III. 9. D.
Affection. Passion, AS. V. and AS. VI. [Desire] AS. V. 4. [Love] AS. V. 2.
Affiance. [^etrothing] TO. II. 3. [Confidence] AS. V. 6.
Affidavit, [Sworn Testimony.] RJ. I. 7. A. Affinity. TO. II. Affirming, D. VI.
2. Affix [to fasten.] Put.]
Afflict, [a. Adversity,] Ha. I. 2. O. Affluence, [Abundance.] TM. II. 2. E.
Afford, [permit to have.] [Yield] TA. IV. 1. [Grant] D. VI. 3. A. [Give] TA.
IV. 4. [Sell] RC. V. 3.
Afraid, [adj. Fear.] AS. V. 5. O. Affront, RJ. IV. 1. A. Afresh. [adv. New.
Sp. I. 3. Repeated. TA. II. 6.
[again] Adv. IV. 2.
After. [op. to before] [behind] Prep. V. 3. O. [adv. Posterior] [adv. Follow]
[According to] As by pattern. Prep. II. 1. [adv. Congruous to]
-- Birth, [secundine.] PP. VI. 7. A. -- Noon, [after -- adj. noon. (time.] --
Time, [adj. Future.] Sp. I. 1. D. (Time.]
Again. Adv. IV. 2. [adv. p repeating.] TA. II. 6.
Against. Prep. II 3. O. Over -- Prep. VI. 3. O.
Agaric, [Fungus of Larix-tree.] Aghast, [adj. Fear. AS* V. 5. O. (augm.] Agat.
St. II. 1. A. Age. [Life-time] Mea. VI. of what -- [adj. preter. Age, how many
years?] under -- [of Pupillar age.] of full -- [Un-pupilled by Age] [adj. pret.
Adolescence.] middle -- [Manhood.] Me. VI. 3. Declining -- Mea. VI. 3. A Old --
Mea. VI. 4. Decrepit -- Mea. VI. 4. A. [Generation] Mea. VI. A.
Agent. [adj. a. Action. (person] [pro -- adj. Business, TA. III. (Officer.]
(Person.]
Aggravate. [a. Great] TM. I. 1. E. [a. Intension] TM. I. 8. E.
Aggregate. TM. III. 6. O. Agility. Nimble, NP. V. 8. [Swift] NP. V. 9.
Agitate [Move] Mo. (freq.) [Drive] TA. VI. 5. O. [Swing] Mo. VI. 3. [a.
vice-business. TA. III.

Aglet, [round Lamin. (dim.] Agnus-Castus. Sh. I. 6. A. Ago, [adv. Past.] Sp.
^. 1. E. Agony, AS. VI. 8. [Grief (Impetus.] [Anger (Impetus.]
Agree. [v. Congruous] T. V. 5. [a. Contract] RC. V. -- to [Consent] AS. II. 3.
[Grant] D. VI. 3. O. -- together. V. Man. IV. 3.
Agreeable. [Congruous] T. V. 5. [Expedient,] T. V. 6.
Agriculture. O. III. Agrimony, HF. VIII. 3. Dutch -- HF. III. 8.
Aground on earth] contiguous to the earth.]
Ague, S. II. 1. A. Ah, Interject. sp. Love. Sorrow. Desire. Insinuation.
Ay, [adv. Ever.] Sp. I. 1. Aid, [Adjuvant.] T. II. 5. Ail. [v. Passion] T. I.
7. O. [v. Impot.] NP. V. O. [v. Want] TA. I. 5. O.
Aim. [Object] T. VI. 2. [End] T. II. 6.
Air, El. II. -- Ethereal, El. II. 1. -- of face, [Figure, (modus] [Tune.]
Wood, [Maple tuberous (augm.) to -- abroad, [put in the Air.]
Airy. [adj. Air.] [Wanton] NP. IV. 3. O. [Conceited] Ha. III. 3. O. -- of
Hawks, [Younglings (aggreg.) of Hawks.]

Ache, AC. II. 7. Akorn, [Mast of the Oak.] Alabaster, St. II. 1. Alacrity, Ha.
IV. 3. Alarm. [Arming (sign] [Assaulting (sign]
Alas, Interject. II. 1. Alate, [Past. Sp. I. 1. E. (dim.] Alaternus, Sh. IV.
4. Albeit, [Although.] Conj. II. 2. Alchimy, [Chimic.] O. VI. Alcoran,
[Scripture of Mahometans.] Alcyon [King-fisher.] By. III. 9. Alder, Tr. V. 3.
Berry bearing, -- Sh. II. 7.
Alderman, [Assessor of Corporation (Officer.] Ale, Pr. I. 7. Ale-cost, HF. II.
4. Ale-hoof, [Ground-Ivy] HL. VI. 11. Alehouse, [adj. Selling (house) of Ale.]
Alembick, [adj. Distillation (vessel.] Alexanders, HF. IV. 4. Algebra, [adj.
Invention (art) in quantity (Science.] Alien, [Foreiner.] TO. IV. 3. O.
Alienate, Po. O. [un- a. Propriety from himself.] [a. Stranger] R^. IV. 4. O.
Alight. [un- Ride] Sit]
Down-go] TA. VI.
Alike. [adv. Like.] TM. V. 1. [adv. Equal] TM. I. 5.
Aliment, [adj. Nutrition. AC. I. 6. (thing] Alimony, [Proportioned (thing) for
Provisions.] Alisanders, H^. IV. 4. Alive, [adj. AC. I. 7.] -- Cole, [n. adj.
Fire cole.]
Alkakengi, [Winter-cherry.] HS. IX. 8. Alkanet, HL. IX. 2. All, Pron. V. 3. at
-- [adv. Any.] -- be it Conj. II. 2. -- though Conj. II. 2. -- one, [Equal.]
TM. I. 5. -- ready, vid. Already. -- together. [adv. Total] TM. VI. [adv.
Aggregate] TM. III. 6. O. [adv. Perfect] TM. III. 9.
-- ways in all (times) adv. all (times)
Sp. in all times when it ought to be.]
Allay. [a. Remiss] TM. I. 8. D. [a. Little] TM. I. 1. D. [v. more-remiss,
etc.]
Allege. [a. Argumentation.] [a. Quotation.]
Allegiance. [Loyalty] Man. V. 6. [Duty of Subjection.]
Allegory, [continued Trope,] sp. Metaphor.] Alley. [narrow Street Way Area
All-heal, HF. V. 8. Hercules -- HF. IV. 10.
Alligator [Crocodile] B^. VI. 3. Ally, vid. Alliance. Alliance. [League] RC.
III. 8. [Affinity] TO. II.
Alloy Stiffen by mixture] un-price by mixture]
Allot, [Appoint Measure] Proportion]
Allow. [Appoint sp. Measure] [Permit sp. Proportion] [Stipendiate] TO. VI. 4.
A. [Give] TA. IV. 4. [Yield] TA. IV. 1. [Grant] D. VI. 3. A. [Approve] AS. III.
3. [Consent] AS. II. 3.
Allowance. [appointed Measure] [Permitted Proportion] [Stipend] TO. VI. 4. A.
[Maintenance] TO. VI. 4.
Allude, [a. Allusion.] D. IV. 9. A. Allure. TO. V. 5. Allusion. D. IV. 9. A.
Almanac, [adj. Year-book, of pl. Series of Days, of every Month,] Alms,
[adj. p. Almsgiving (thing] -- giving. the Virtue, Man. III. 5. the Act, [a.
Almsgiving.] Man. III. 5.

Almicantar. W. VI. 7. A. Almighty, [all-adj. Power.] Ha. II. 6. Almner, [Alms
(officer] Almond. Tree, Tr. IV. 1. A. Fruit, Tr. IV. 1. A. (Fruit) [Glandule]
PG. II. 7. Place of them, PG. III. 9. A.
Almost. Adv. V. 1. Aloe. Herb, HL. VIII. 1. A. Tree, Tr. VIII. 1.
Aloft [Adv. High.] TM. II. 4. Alone. [Solitary] TO. IV. 2. O. [Only] Adv. IV.
1. O.
Along. [on this side] Prep. VI. 2. [beside] Prep. IV. 3. O. [adv. p.
continue.] all -- [adv. Lying] AC. VI. 7. A.
Aloof [adv. Remote.] Sp. II. 3. O. Aloud [adv. Sound. Q. III. (aug.] Alpe
[Bullfinch] By. III. 5. Alphabet Series of Letters.] Catalogue of Letters.]
Already. [having been before] [adv. preter. Past.] Sp. I. 1. E. [which is now]
[before this time]
Also. Conj. IV. 2. Altar, Sacrificing (place.) Po. II. 4. A. Alter, [Change.]
TA. II. 6. A. Altercation, [Contentiousness.] Man. IV. 3. D. Alternation,
[Turn.] T. VI. 7. Althaea, HF. IX. 7. Altitude, [Height.] TM. II. 4. Alum. St.
V. 2. Am. [v. Being] T. I. 1. Copula.
Amain, [adv. Intension.] TM. I. 8. E. Amalgama, Mingle with Quicksilver.
Amaranthus. [Princes Feather] HF. I. 15. A. Amass, [a. Heap.] O. II. 6. Amate,
[a. Fear.] AS. V. 6. O. Amaze. [a. Extasie] AS. VI. 8. A. [a. Stupor] NP. II.
1. O. with admiration, AS. V. 1.
Ambages, [about -- Wandering Speeches.] Embassage. [Political RC. Sending] TA.
VI. 4.
Amber St. II. 8 A. -- gris. St. V. 9.
Ambient. [about the outside] Sp. III. 6. O. [adj. Periphery]
Ambiguous, [adj. p. abst. Doubt.] [adj. Equivocation.]
Ambition, Man* III. 9. E. Ambling, Mo. II. 2. Ambedexter. [using equally all
his hands.] [seeming of all parties.]
Ambulatory, [adj Walk] Mo. II. 1. Ambush. RM. I. 9. A. Amen [it Imper. Being]
Copula.]
Amend, [v. Better.] TM. I. 9. E. make -- s [v. compens.] TA. II. 7. A.
Amerce, [Mulct.] RJ. VI. 7. Amethyst, St. IV. 6. Amia* Fi. IV. 1. Amiable
[adj. p. Love (abstr.] Amicable, [adj. a. Friend.] TO. IV. 1 Amiss. adv. adv.
Evil.] T. III. 2 O. Err.] TA. III. 8.
Transc. (corruptiue]
Amity, [a. Friend TO. IV. 1. (abst.) Ammi, [Bishops-weed.] HF. V. 4. A.
Ammunition. RM. V. Amomum. Among, [betwixt.] Prep. VI. 3. Amorous, [adj. a
Love. AS. V. 3. (Abstr.] Amort, [adj Grief. AS. V. 4. O. (impetus] Amount, [p
Sum.] TM. VI. 6. A Amphibious, [Inhabiting Lan^ and Water.] Amphiboly,
[Doubtfulness of sense.] Amphitheatre, [Round building for Shows.] Ample. Wide,
Sp. II. 5. [Great] TM. I. 1. E. [Broad] TM. II. 2.
Ampliation. D. IV. 2. O. Amplify, a. D. IV. 2. O. Amulet, [adj. a. Physician
(thing) with -- adj. p. carry (abstr.) adj. hang at neck, etc.]
An Article. I. Anabaptist, [Rebaptizing Schismatic.] Anacardium. Tr. IV. 8. A.
Anagram, [Play of changing the orders of Letters.] Analem, [Representing
(thing) by lines;] sp. of the Sphere imaginary.] Analogy, [Proportion.] Me. O.
Analysis, [Artificial Segregation.] Anarch^. R^. O. Anas Campestris Bell^rii.
By. II. 4. A. Anathema, [Excommunication.] RE. V. 5. Anatomy. Cutting up,
[Segregation by cutting.] Body cut up, [Body segregated by cutting.]
Ancestor. [Progenitor.] TO. I. 1. Anchor. RN. III. 9. Anchorite, [Hermit. RE.
II. 7. A. circumsepimented.] Anchove. Fi. III. 12. Ancient. [adj. Old] Sp. I.
3. O. [adj. Old Age.] Mea. VI. 4. [Ensign] RM. III. 2. -- of ^hip. RN. III. 7.
A.
Anckle, [Protuberant end of the Leg-bone.] Ancome, [Porous bile.] And, Conj.
I. 2. Andiron. [Fewel-supporting (Instrument.] Anemony, H^. IX. 3. Aneuresma.
S. III. 8. A. Anew. [adv. New. Sp. I. 3. Repeat. TA. II. 6.
[again] Adv. IV. 2.
Angel. [Spirit.] W. I. 1. Good -- W. I. 2. Bad -- W. I. 2. O. In money, Mea.
IV. 4. Fish. [Scate] Fi. II. 5.
Angelica. HF. IV. 5. Anger. AS. V. 9. vi^ious -- Man. I. 9. D.
Angle. Mag. III. 2. O. right -- Mag. III. 3. obtuse -- Mag. III. 3. E. acute
-- Mag. III. 3. D. to -- [Hunt Fish with Wand and Line.]
A^guish. [Anxiety.] Ha. I. 3. O. [Pain] NP. V. 3. O. (augm.) [Grief] AS. V. 4.
O. (augm.) [Trouble] TA. V. 9. O. (aug.)
Angular, [adj. Angle.] Mag. III. 2. O. Any. the particular, Pron. II. 3. O.
the Indefinite, Pron. III. 1. -- whither, [to any (place] -- where, [in any
(place.]
Animadversion, [Observation.] AS. III. 1. A. Animal. W. V. 4. Animate parts of
the world. W. V. to -- [Encourage] TO. VI. 2.
Animosity old anger.] perverse anger.]
Aniseed. HF. IV. 1. Ankle, vid. Anckle. Annals, [adj. Year (segr.] History]
Annats [Tribute out of the Years Revenue.] Annex, [to-joyn.] TA. II. 1.
Annihilate. AS. I. 1. O. Anniversary. [adj. Year (segr.] sp. Solemnity.]
Annoy. [a. Hurt] T. IV. 1. O. [a. Trouble] TA. V. 9. O.
Annotations, [Comment.] D. V. 6. D. Annual. [adj. Year (segreg.] Annuity.
[adj. year (segr.) Payment.] Rent.] Stipend.]

Annull. [a. Nothing] T. I. 1. O. [Annihilate] AS. I. 1. O. [un-do]
Annulet, Mag. V. 2. (dim.) Annunciation, [Narration] D. V. 3. An^int, [smear]
O. V. 6. A. Anomalous. [not- (adj. p.) Rule] D. IV. 5. [exorbitant]
Anon, [Adv. Futur. Sp. I. 1. O.] Anonymous, [not- (adj. p.) name.] T. I. 4.
Another. Pron. V. I. and diff. T. III. Answer. D. VI. 1. O. -- able. [adj.
Congruity] T. V. 5. [adj. Fur. Reckoning] TA. IV. 6.
Ant. EX. IV. 5. -- bear, Be. V. 5.
Antagonist. [Enemy] TO. IV. 1. O. [Contrary] T. V. 5. O. [Opposite] T. VI. 8.
O.
Antarctic. -- Circle. W. VI. 5. O. -- Pole. [adj. South pole.]
Antecedent, [Preceding.] Sp. I. 2. E. Antedate, [before- a. date.] Sp. I. 5.
Anthem. RE. IV. 2. A. St. Anthony's fire, [Erysipelas.] S. II. 7. A. Antic,
[Old] Sp. I. 3. O. Corrupt.] Manner.]
Antichrist, G. 2. O. Anticipate. [Prevent] TA. III. 9. [v. Soon] Sp. I. 4. E.
Antidote, [adj. against-poyson (thing.] Antilope, [goat (kind) having straight
wreathed horns.] Antimony, Met. III. 2. Antipathy, [natural Aversation.] AS. V.
5. O. Antiperistasis, [Resistance of contrary quality.] Antipodes, [Over
against- sited in the remotest parts of the Globe diametrically opposite]
Antiquary, [Learned (Artist) in Old (things.] Antiquated, [Annull'd by being
un-custom'd.] Antique, vid. Antic. Antiquity. [Oldness] Sp. I. 3. O. [Old-age]
Me. VI. 4.
Antithesis, [Opposition.] T. VI. 8. O. Antitype, [typed. T. II. 3. A. (thing]
Anvil, [the Iron supporting (Instr.) of the hammered (thing.] Anxiety, HA. I.
3. O. Apace, [adv. Swift.] NP. V. 9. Apart. [adv. Segregate] TM. III. 6.
Transc. (Segreg.)
Ape. Be. III. 1. A. Aper. Fi. IV. 9. A. Aphorism. [brief Rule] D. IV. 5.
[Authentic sentence] D. III. 1. A.
Aphua gobites. Fi. III. 9. Apocryphal, [doubtfully authorized.] Apologue.
[Fictitious example] [Instructive Fiction]
Apology, [Plea.] RJ. II. 3. A. Apophthegm, [wise Sentence.] Apoplexy. S. IV.
3. A. Aporrhais. EX. VII. 3. A. Apostasy. RE. III. 6. O. Apostem. S. I. 6. A.
Apostle. RE. II. 3. Apothecary. O. VI. A. Appale. a. Pale. AC. IV. 9. O.] a.
Fear. AS. V. 6. O.]
Apparel. Pr. IV. Appearance. [seeming] TA. I. 9. A. -- at Law. RJ. II. 2. A. [
ens apparens] T. I. 2. O.
Apparent. [adj. Seeming] TA. I. 9. A. [adj. Manifest.] TA. I. 9.
Apparition, [p. See] of Spirits.. Apparitor, [adj. a. Citation. RJ. II. 1.
(Officer.] Appartment. Po. III. 2. A. Appeal. RJ. II. 8. A. Appear. [v. as
Thing] T. I. 2. O. [v. Manifest] TA. I. 9. [v. Seeming] TA. I. 9. O. [ --
Iudicially] RJ. II. 2. A.
Appearing Meteor. El. V. Appease, [un -- a. Anger] AS. V. 9. Appendage, [adj.
Accessory. (thing.] TM. IV. 4. O. Appertein, [v. Pertinence.] TM. IV. 5.
Appetite. NP. II. 4. Applaud. Commend. TO. V. 7. (sign.] Praise. TO. V. 8.
(augm.]
Apple. Tree, Tr. I. 1. Fruit, PP. III. 1. Thorn. -- HS. VII. 7. A. -- of Love.
HS. IX. 2. Adams, -- Tr. I. 7. A.
Mad -- HS. IX. 2. A. -- of the Eye [Black (part) of the Eye.]

Apply. TA. II. 3. [Together-joyn] TA. I. 1.
Appoint. [Intend] AS. IV. 3. [Design] TA. HI. 1. [a. Command] TO. V. 1.
Apposite [Congruous. T. V. 5. [Pertinent. TM. IV. 5.
Apprehend. [understand] NP. I. 1. [a. common Sense] NP. II. 1. [a. Opinion]
AS. II. 6. O. [arrest] R J. II. 1. A.
Apprentice. [Learner. TO. III. 3. O (Merchant.] (Mechanic.]

Approach, [v. Near.] Sp. II. 3. Approbation* AS. III. 3. Appropriate. TA. I. 2.
[a. Proper, T M. IV. 6. (make]
Approve. AS. III. 3. Appurtenance. [Pertinent] TM. IV. 5. [Accessory] TM. IV.
4. O.
Apricock. Tr. II. 2. April, [the fourth Month.] Apron, [hanging (Vest) before
the Belly.] Apt. Transc. (abstr.) [adj. Congruous] T. V. 5. [adj p.
Disposition] HA. O.
Aptitude. [Congruity] T. III. 5. [Sagacity] Ha. III. ^. [Alacrity] [Disciple
(abstr.]
Aquarius, [11th. of the 12 parts of the Zodiac.] Aqueduct. Po. II. 8. A.
Aquila, Fi. II. 1. A, Aquosity, [Water (abstr.] Arable, Po I. 4. Array. [Cloath]
Pr. IV. [Order] TM. V.. 2.
Arbalist, [adj. a. Crosbow. RM. V. 4. A. (person] Arbitrary, [adj. Liberty.]
AS. IV. 8. Arbitrator. RJ. I. 2. Arbitrament, v. RJ. I. 2. Arbor [Room of
Trees.] Arbutus, [Strawberry Tree] Sh. III. 4. Arch [Principal.] an Arch, Po.
III. 6. A. -- of Circle, [part of adj. Circle-line.]
Archangel, [Principal Angel.] dead Nettle, HF. VIII. 10.
Archbishop, [Primat.] RE. II. 4. Archdeacon, [Bishops Substitute.] Archer,
[adj. a. Bow. RM. V. 4. (person.] Architecture, [a. Buildings. (Art.]
Architrave, [Chief beam.] Archives, [Store (place) of old Writings.] Arctic,
[adj. North.] -- Circle, W. VI. 5. -- Pole, [adj. North pole.]
Ardent. [adj. Fire] El. I. [adj. Heat, Q. V. 1. E. (aug.] [adj. Zeal] AS. VI.
1.
Area, [Surface.] Mag. I. 3. Argent, [of Silver Color.] Argu^. v. D. IV. 6.
Argument. [Matter] T. II. 7. [Object] T. VI. 2. [adj. a. Argumentation, D. IV.
6. (thing.]
Arid, [Dry.] Q. V. 2. D. Aries, [first of the 12 parts of the Zodiac.] Aright.
Transc. (Perf.) [adv. Good] T. III. 2.
Arise. AC. VI. 1. as Sun [above- adj. Horizon (incept.] as Hill [upward-
Oblique.] Mag. II. 8.
Aristocracy, [Government by the Nobles.] Aristolochy, [Birth-wort.]
Arithmetic, [Numbring (art] Ark, (Box.] Pr. V. 2. Arm. -- of Man. PG. V. 1. --
of the Sea. [Bay.] -- of a Tree, [Branch.] PP. I. 3. to -- [Arms.]
Armada, [Army of Ships.] Armadillo, Be. V. 5. A. Armament. Pr. IV. a. Army,
RM. IV. 1. Armor, Arms defensive, RM. V. 1. A. Armorer, [Arms (mechanic.]
Armory, [Arms (place.] Arms. offensive [Weapons] RM. V. I. defensive. RM. V. 1.
A. man at -- [armed (pft) Horseman.] as in a Scutcheon [adj. Degree RC. I.
(sign) picture.]

Aromatic. [adj. Spice.] Pr. II. 4. Arquebus, [RM. V. 6. (augm.] Array, vid.
Array. Arraign, [a. Bill.] RJ. II. 3. Arrant, [Genuin.] T. III. 4. Arras, [Room
(vest) weaved picture (like.] Arrear, [Residue Debt.] Arrest. RJ. II. 1. A.
Arrive, [to- come.] TA. VI. 1, Arrogance. [Pride] Man. V. 2. O.
[Magisterialness] Man. IV. 8. D. [Supercisiousness] Man. VI. 3. O.
Arrogate, [Claim.] TA. I. 3. Arrow. RM. V. 5. A. -- head. HS. VI. 1. A.
Arse, [Buttock.] PG. IV. 6. Arsenal, [Ammunition (place.] Arsenick. St. VI. 4.
A. Arsmart. HF. VIII. 6. codded -- HS. VIII. 9.
Art. Ha VI. 3. Artemisia, [Mugwort.] HF. II. 2. A. Artery. PG. II. 4. A. rough
-- [Wind-pipe.] PG. VI. 1. A.
Artichoke. HF. III. 1. A. Article. [Section] D. III. 2. A. [Pact] RC. VI. A.
[adj. Accusation, RJ. I. 3. (thing] as, A. The D. II. 8. A.
Articulate. Q. III. 3. A. Artificer. RC. II. 5. A. Artificial. [adj. Art] Ha.
VI. 3. [Factitious] T. III. 7. O.
Artillery, [Ordnance. RM. V. 6. A. (aggreg.] Artist, [adj. Art. Ha. VI. 3.
(person.] Artizan. RC. II. 5. A. As. opp. to So, Adv. I. 3. -- Ear -- -- Long
-- -- Much -- -So far how far long how long much how much
-- for, [concerning] Prep. I. 3. O. -- for example, [ex. gr.] Con. IV. 3. O.
-- if Adv. III. 2. O. -- it were Adv. III. 2. O. -- though Adv. III. 2. O.
where -- Conj. IV. 1. for -- much Conj. IV. 1. [whilst] adv. III. 1.
Asarabacca HL. VI. 6. Ascarides. Ex. I. 3. Ascend, [upward. Prep. V. 1. Ition*
TA. 6.] Ascertain, [v. Certain. AS. II. 6. A. (make] Ascribe. [a. Predicate] D.
II. 8. O. [Claim] TA. I. 3.
Ash. Tr. VI. 5. -- color, [adj. ashes. El. IV. 3. (color.]
Ashamed, [adj. Shame.] AS. VI. 2. A. Ashes. El. IV. 3. Ashore, [on- shore]
Aside. [adv. Separation] TA. II. 1. O Solitary] TO. IV. 2. O.. Lay -- or cast
-- Rejection] AS. IV. 5. O. Desist] AS. IV. 6. O. Intermit]



Asilus. Ex. I. 4. A. Ask. (Enquire [a. Question.] D. VI. 1 Require Necessary
Expedient
make] Entreat] TO. V. 3. Beg. [a. Beggar.] RC. I. 8. A. Demand. as price, RC.
VI. 2. O. as due, TA. IV 2. A,
[Command] TO. V. 1.
Askew, [Oblique] Mag. II. 8. Asleep, [adj. Sleep,] AC. II. 3. O. numbed, [adj.
p. Stupor] NP. II. 1. O. Aslope, [Oblique] Mag. II. 8. Asp. Serpent, [Viper]
Be. VI. 7. A. Tree, [White poplar] Tr. VI. 7. A.
Asparagus. HL. IX. 6. Aspect, [Face, PG. III. 1. (manner] Asperity.
[roughness] Q. VI. 2. D. [austereness] Man. VI. 8. O.
Aspersion, [Calumny] RJ. IV. 7. Asphodel, [Kings-spear] HL. V. 1. Aspiration,
[Respiration. Mo. III. 2. (Impetus.] Aspire [a. Ambition.] Man. III. 9. E.
Asquint, [Oblique (corrupt) Vision (manner] Ass* ^e. I. 2. Assa foetida, [the
gum of Lazarwort.] Assay. [Essay] TA. III. 4. A. [Endeavour] TA. III. 4.
Assail, [Assault.] RM. I. 3. Assassin, [a. Murder, RI. III. 4. sp. under
pretense of Religion.] Assault, RM. I. 3. Assemble, [a. Convention.] RC. III.
Assent. AS. II. 3. Assentation, [Fawning] Man. IV. 8. E. Assertion,
[Affirmation.] D. VI 2. Assess. [a. Tax] RC. V. 9. O. [Impose, adv.
Proportion.]
Assessor. -- in Judgment, RJ. I. 1. A. -- of Taxes, [v. Assess (Officer]
Asseveration, [Affirmation. D. VI. 2. (augm.] Assiduity, [Diligence.] Ha. IV.
5. Assign. Transfer right. RC. V. 1. [Design] TA. III. 1.
Assimilate, [a. Likeness. TM. V. 1. (make] Assist. [v Adjuvant] T. II. 5. [v.
Assessor] RJ. I. 1. A.
Assize. Judgment [adj. Shire, Judicial Convention.] [adj. Law Authority
Measure]

Associate, [a. Companion. TO. IV. 2. (make] Assoil, [Absolve.] RJ. II. 7.
Assume. to -- take] TA. I. 4. together-take] TA. I. 4.
Assure. [v. Certain] AS. II. 6. [v. Assurance] AS. III. 6.
Assuage, [v. Remission.] TM. I. 8. D. Asterisk. Mag. IV. 6. A. Asthma. S. V.
2. Astonish. [a. Wonder, (augm.) AS. V. 1. (make] [a. Ecstasy. AS. VI. 8. A.
(make] [Stupifie with Wonder.] Fear.]

Astray. [adj. Err] TA. III. 8. Wander] TA. VI. 3. A.

Astride, [adj. Stride.] Mo. II. 3. O. Astringent. -- in Virtue, [Binding.] Mo.
IV. O. in Taste, [Austere] Q. IV. 3.
Astrolabe, [Star-measuring (Instr.] Ast^ology, [Conjecturing (Art) by the
stars.] Astronomy, Measuring (Art) of Heavenly (things] Asunder. [adv.
Segregate] TM. III. 6. [adv. Separate] TA. II. 1. O.
At. [N^ar, augm.] Prep. III. 1. O. [In] Prep. IV. 1. O. -- all. [in any Thing.
Manner.
-- last Adv. III. 3. O. -- length Adv. III. 3. O. -- last adv. last. -- least
adv. least. -- most adv. most. -- once adv. One.] in one (time] with one blow,
etc.

Atchieve. [a. Action] T. I. 7. [Perform] TA. III. 6. [a. Perfect. T. III. 9.
(make]
Atheism. RE. I. O. Atmosphere. El. II. 1. A. [Sphere of Vapors.]
Atom, [Indivisible body (dim.] Atone. [un -- Enemy TO. IV. 1. O. (make] [a.
Friend, TO. IV. 1. (make]
Attac. [Besiege] RM. I. 4. [Assault] RM. I. 3. A.
Attach, [Arrest] RJ. II. 2. Attagen. By. II. 3. A. Attein: [Obtein] TA. V. 1.
Atteint. [a. Accuser] RJ. I. 3. [un-a. Noble, RC. I. 3. (make]
Attempt, [Essay] TA. III. 4. A. Attend. [Continue expecting] [Wait] AC. V. 1.
A. Hearken [Hear (endeavor] -- unto, [a. Observe.] AS. III. 1. A.
Attention, vid. Attend. Heedfulness*] Ha. IV. 2. Diligence] Ha. IV. 5.
Attenuate [a. Rarity. Q. V. 3. D. (make] Attest. [a. witness] RJ. I. 7. A. [a.
Protestation]
Attire, [Clothing.] Pr. 4. Attorney, [for -- businessing (person] sp.
Lawyer.] Attract, [to -- draw.] Attribute, [Predicate.] D. II. 8. O. Attrition.
[Rubbing] O. V. 8. [Grinding] upon a body, O. IV. 2. between bodies, O. VI. 1.
[Decay, NP. V. 4. O. by use.]
Avail. [a. Adjuvant] T. II. 5. [a. Profit] T. IV. 1.
Avaunt, [from -- Imperat. Ition.] TA. VI. Avarice, [Covetousness] Man. III. 1.
D. Audacity, [Boldness.] AS. V. 8. Audible, [adj. p. Hear (apt.] -- Quality. Q.
III.
Audience. [Hearing] [Convention for Hearing.] [Hearers (Aggreg.]
Audit, [Convention for reckoning.] to -- [a. reckon.] TA. IV. 2.
Auditor. Hearer [hearing (person] Accountant [reckoning. TA. IV. 6. (Officer]
Auditory, vid. Audience. Avenge, [Revenge.] AS. V. 9. A. Avens. HF. IX. 1. A.
Avenue, [to -- way.] Averr, [Affirm D. VI. 2. (augm.] Aversation. AS. V. 5. O.
Aversion. AS. IV. 1. O. Avert, [from-turn.] TA. VI. 2. O. Auger, [great Boring.
O. IV. 3. (instr.] Augment. [increase] Great (make] Intense (make] more Great
(make] more Intense (make]
Augury, [Divination by Birds.] August, [eighth Month.] Aunt, [Uncle.] TO. I.
3. (fem.] Avocetta, [long reversed bill-gull (kind] Avoid. TA. VI. 7. O. [a.
Aversation] AS. V. 5. O.
Avouch, [Affirm solemnly.] Avow, [Affirm solemnly.] Avrelia [Chrysolite.] PP.
V. 6. A. Auricular, [adj. Ear.] Auspicious, [Prosperous.] Ha. I. 2. Austerity.
Taste. Q. IV. 3. Vice, Man. VI. 8. O.
Authentic, [adj. Authority.] RC. IV. 6. Author. [Efficient] T. II. 1. [adj. a.
preter. Invention.] AS. III. 2. O.
Authority. [Right] RC. IV. 6. [Testimony] sp. Credible.]
Autumn. Me. V. 3. Auxiliary, [Adjuvant.] T. II. 5. Aw. [Fear] AS. V. 6. O.
[Reverence] Man. V. 3. -- full, [adj. Fearing (apt.]
Away. [From] Prep. III. 2. [Off] Prep. III. 2. A. [Absent] Sp. II. 1. O. [From
-- Imper. Go.] TA. VI. 1. O. -- with, [Off] Prep. III. 2. O. sp. with an
Imperative.]
Fling -- [From -- go Hastily.] Angrily.]
Stand -- [Be more distant.]
Awake, [adj. AC. II. 4. to -- [un-sleep.]
Award, [Sentence.] RJ. II. 5. A. sp. of Arbitrators.]
Aware. [Before-knowing] [adj. Heedfulness] Ha. IV. 2.
Awkward. [not Skilful.] Agil.]
[Perverse] NP. IV. 1. O.
Awle, [adj. Iron (dim.) boring (Instr.] Awry. [Oblique] Mag. II. 8. [Crooked]
Mag. III. 1. O. [adj. Err] TA. III. 8.
Ax, [Carpenters (Instr.) for to cut strikingly.] Battle- Cutting Club.] RM. V.
2.] Hammer.
Pole -- Cutting Club.] RM. V. 2.] Hammer.
Pick -- [hammer for pecking.]
Axiom. [adj. p. Authority Sentence] D. III. 1. A. [Rule] D. IV. 5.
Axis Axle-tree. -- of Globe. Mag. II. 5. A. -- of Cart. Po. V. 6. A.
Ay, [Sloth] Be. III. 2. A. Azimuth. W. VI. 4. A. Azure. [Blew.] Q. II. 3. A.
-- Stone. St. II. 3. A.

B
BAbble, [a. Loquacity.] Man IV. 5. D. Babe, [adj. Infancy (person.] Me. VI. 1.
Baby, [Factitious Man. (dim.] Babble, [adj. Vanity. T. IV. 5. (thing] Baboon,
Be. III. 1. Bachelor, [adj. Coelibat. TO. II. 1. (person] -- of Arts, [having
the first Academical degree.] -- s Button, [Campion.] HS. V. 2.
Back. Noun. -- of Body. [Hinder part] Sp. III. 8. O.
-- of Animal. PG. IV. 3.
Adverb. [Un] Adv. IV. 3. [Re] Adv. IV. 3. O. -- to the same Place Person
Condition
again
Preposition. [From] Prep. III. 2. [ to -- one.

[a. Accessory] TM. IV. 4. O. [Incourage] TO. VI. 2. [a. Adjuvant] T. II. 5.
give -- [Retire] RM. II. 2. D. Keep -- Abstein] TA. V. 6. O. Detein]
Keep one -- Abstein] Abstein] TA. V. 6. O. Detein]
[a. Cohibit] T. II. 2. O. [a. Hinder] T. II. 5. O. -- door.
[adj. hinder-part door] [door of the hinder part of the house.] -- friend,
[Conceal'd Enemy.]


Backbite. RJ. IV. 7. A. Back-slide, [a. Apostate.] RE. III. 6. O. Backward.
[adj. Backwardness] toward- the hinder part] to -- the hinder part]
Backwardness. [Aversation] AS. V. 5. O. [Nolleity] AS. IV. 1. O. (dim.)
Bacon, [Condited Hogs-flesh.] Bad, [Evil.] T. III. 2. O. Badge, [Sign] T. VI.
5. Badger. Beast, Be. V. 2. A. [Merchant] (corr.) of Corn]
Bag, Pr. V. 1. cloak -- [behind-riding bag.] -- pipe, Musical (Instr.) of
Pipes and Bag.]
Baggage, [Carried (things) adj. a. hinder (apt] [utensils of the Army.] RM. V.
A.
Bay. -- tree, Tr. III. 5. Rose -- [Oleander] Sh. VI. 1. A. Wild -- Sh. III. 9.
-- color, [Chesnut color.] brown -- [black. Q. II. 1. O. (dim) adj. Chestnut
color.]
-- in Water, [Transverse bank.] -- of Sea. W. IV. 4. -- of Building. Po. III.
A. -- windows, [Prominent windows.] to -- at [against-a. Dog (voice]
Bail. RJ. II. 2. Baily, Bailiff. Magistrate [adj. Town (officer.] Sergeant
[adj. Citation (Officer.] Arresting (Officer.]
Servant. [adj. Agriculture (Officer.]
Bain, [Bath.] Po. II. 5. A. Bait, [Sustenance.] Pr. I. sp. adj. Hunting.] to
-- [Refresh] TA. V. 8. sp. with Sustenance in journey.] [Allure] TO. V. 5 sp.
with Sustenance. as Hook or Trap, [make adj. allure (apt.]
[Provoke] RM. I. 2.

Bake. Pr. III. 5. A. -- er, [Baking (Officer.] (Mechanic.]

Balad, [Plebeian Song.] Balance, [adj. librating O. I. 2. (jug.] to --
[Librating] O. I. 2. [Equal the weight] [a. Equal (make) Even Accounts. TA. IV.
2. A.


Balast, [Weight, un- adj. a. roll (apt] Balcony, [Prominent doored window.]
Bald. [Un-hair'd] [not-ornate] [not-congruous]
Bale. [Heap. together-bound.] [Aggregate together-bound.]
Balk. -- of Earth, [Area not ploughed.] to --
[Omit] TA. III. 8. A. [Discourage] TO. VI. 2. A.
Ball. [Balling. Mo. V. 4. A. (Instr.] [Sphere] Mag. III. 5. sp. (dim.]
[Convention for dancing]
Balloting, [a. Suffrage (sign) with Balls.] Balm. Herb. HF. VII. 2. Assyrian
-- HF. VII. 3. Juice. PP. I. 7. A.
Balsam. Plant. Male -- HS VII. 5. True -- SH. III. 1. Juice. PP. I. 7. A.
Balsamum. Peruvianum. Tr. VIII. 9. A.
Ban. [Curse] AS. I. 3. O. -- role, [Flag.] Mag. IV. 7. A.
Band. [adj. a. Bind (thing) [Obligation] RC. VI. [writing Obligatory] RC. VI.
5. [Company] RM. IV. 3.
Bandy, [Cast alternly.] sp. various waies]
Bandito. Proscribed (person.] Military robbing (person.]
Bandog, [Dog tied for Guard.] Bane. [Destruction] AS. I. 4. O. ratts --
[Arsenic] St, VI. 4. A.
Banes. [Promulgation of fut. Marriage]
Bang, [Strike.] Mo. VI. 4. Banish* [a Exile.] RJ. VI. 5. Bank. [Oblong,
more-high (part] [Ridge] Mag. V. 7. [Shore] W. IV. 6. [Shelf] W. III. 5. A.
[Series] TM. III. 7. -- of Money, [Mony (Aggr.) sp. to be let (segreg.)]
Banker, [adj demising (person (Merchant
of Money.] Banquet. Pr. II. 1. A. Bankrout, [adj. failing (person] [Debtor
Declared sentenced
not-solutive]
Banner. [adj. Ensign. RM. III. 2. Cornet. RM. III. 2. A.
(thing]
Banquet. Pr. II. 1. A. Banstickle. Fi. IX. 13. A. Baptism. RE. VI. 5. Bar.
[Bolt] Po. IV. 5. -- of, etc. Cylinder, Mag. III. 6. of etc. Prism. Mag. III.
6. A. of etc. [adj. Impedient (thing) [adj. Pleading] RJ. I. 7. (place] to --
[a. Impedient] T. II. 5. O. [a. Forbid] TO. V. 1. O.
Barb. [Back-diverging Cuspis] to -- the Hair. [a. Figure (Perf.) by cutting.]
sp. the Beard.]

Barbarism Man. IV. O. Barbarous. [adj. Barbarism] Man. IV. O. [adj. Rusticity]
Man. IV. 9. D. [adj. Fierceness] NP. IV. 4. O. [adj. Cruelty] Man. I. 5. O.
Barber, [Hair cutting (Mechanic.] Barbery. Sh. I. 4. A. Barbil. Fi. IX. 8.
Bard, [Old (manner) Poet.] Bare. [not-clothed] [Lean] NP. V. ^. O. [Scarce] TM.
I. 2. D. to --
[un-clothe]
Bargain. Contract.] RC. V. Thing dealt for, RC. V. 8.
Barge. RN. I. 2. Bark. [Rinde] PP. I. 5. [Ship] RN. I. 2. A. to --
Peel [un-rinde.] Yelp, as Dog. Fox. to a. Dog (voice] to a. Fox (voice]



Barley. HL. II. 3. wild -- HL. III. 4. A.
Barm. [adj. a. ferment (thing) of Beer.
Barn, [House for Straw.] Barnacle. Fish. Ex. VIII. 9. Instrument [Nose
Compressing (instr.]
Baron. [Noble (person.] sp. of the fifth degree downward] -- of Exchequer,
[Judge of Court for King's Revenue.]

Baronet, [Gentleman of the first Degree.] Barrel. Vessel, Pr. V. 3. Measure.
Me. II. 4.
Barrenness. NP. VI. 3. O. Barren-wort. HS. VI. 7. Barreter, [Contentious
(person) adj. a. Suit. RJ. II. A. (apt] Barricado, [Transvers shutting
(sepiment] Barriers, [Sepimented end of Race (place] Barrister, [Pleading
Lawyer.] Barrow, [un-testicled Hog] Jugament. Po. V. 3. A.
Barter, [Exchange.] RC. V. A. Base. Subst. -- of Column, [Bottom.] Sp. III. 7.
O. -- in Song, [Grave] Q. III. 1. D. Adj. [Low] TM. II. 4. O. [Ignoble]
[Rabble] RC. I. 7. [Villain] RC. I. 8.
[Spurious*] T. III. 4. O. [Vitious] Man. I. O. [Pusillanimous] Man. III. 8. D.
[Sordid] Man. III. 4. D.

Bashful. adj. Shame (habit)] AS. VI. 2. A. Abjectness] Man. III. 9. E.

Basil. HF. VII. 5. Stone -- HF. VII. 5. A. Cow -- HS. V. 6.
Basilisk. [Serpent killing by seeing] [Great Ordnance]
Basket. Pr. V. 2. A. Basin, [Dish. Pr. V. 4. deep.] Bass. [Bed. Po. VI. 7. A.
of rushes.] Bastard. [Spurious] T. III. 4. O. [begot of Parents not
together-married.]
Baste, a. [Whip] RJ. VI. 2. [Cudgel] RJ. VI. 2. A. Moisten. Pr. III. 7.
Baston. Staff.] PP. I. 4. Club.] RM. V. 2.
Bastonade, [Cudgelling.] RJ. VI. 2. A. Bat. [Club] RM. V. 2. Bird flying-Mouse
(kind.) -- fowling, [Hunting Birds by Night.]
Batch, [Bread. (Aggreg.] sp. in one (time) baking.]
Bath Po. II. 5. A. -- ing, [Soking*] O. III. 5. O.
Battaglia, [ordered Army.] Battle. Part of Army. Action. RM. I. 8. A. -- ax.
[Cutting Club] Hammer]

Batter, [Bruise by Striking.] Knocking.] a -- y, [Assault with Cannon.]

Battle, [adj. Fat^.] NP. V. 5. to -- [Score for Diet (segreg.]
Battle-door, [Lamin (Instr.) for striking.] Battlements. Figure. Mag. IV. 9.
A. [Margin (sepiment) of the Roof.]
Bavin* [together bound (aggreg) of Twigs.] Bawd, [adj. Fornication (Merchant.]
Bawdy, [adj. Unchaste.] Man. II. 7. O. Bawl, [Exclaim.] AC. III. 3. O. Bdellium.
Tr. VIII. 7. Beach. Sh. IV. 2. A. Beacon, [adj. Fire (sign) of p. invaded.]
Bead. [Sphere (dim) perforated.] [Cube (dim) perforated.] -- s-man. [for
praying (person] [adj. p. Alms (person]
Bede-tree. Tr. III. 9. A. Beadle. [Before-walking (Officer] [adj. a. Citation
(Officer] [Arresting RJ. II. 1. A. (Officer.] [Whipping (Officer]
Beagle. [Dog (dim) hunting Beasts by smell.]
Beak. -- of a Bird. PP. V. 4. -- of a Ship.
Beaker, [Cylinder (manner) Cup.] Beam. -- of an house. Po. III. 5. A. -- of a
Cart. [Pole] Pr. V. 5. A. -- of Balance, [Transverse (part, of B.] Weavers --
Transverse line of Wood.] -- of the Sun, [Line of Light.] Meteor. El. I. 4.
Beam-tree. White -- Sh. II. 3. A.
Bean. HS. III. 3. French -- HS. II. 1. Ginny -- HS. II. 1. Kidney -- HS. II.
1. -- of the Ancients. HS. II. 2. binding -- tree. Sh. IV. 6. -- trefoile. Sh.
II. 7. A.
Bear. v. Be. IV. 1. A. -- s foot. Sea -- Ex. VI. 2. -- s breech [brank ursin]
HS. VIII. 8. -- s-ear. HS. VIII. 2. -- Sanicle. HS. VIII. 3.
Bear. v. Support. Mo. VI. 1. A. [Carry] Mo. VI. 1. [Parturition] AC. I. 3.
Suffer. [a Passion] T. I. 7. O. [a. Patience] Man. I. 8.
-- down. [Fall (make)] [Compel to grant]
-- off. [adj. a. distant (endeavour] [Suffer (endeavour]
-- out. [adj. a. Safety (make]
-- up against. [Continue Suffering] [Continue Resisting]
-- with. [a. Patience] Man. I. 8. [a. Condescention] Man. VI. 2. -- Company
Companion -- Respect v. Respect -- Sway Sway -- Witness Witness.
-- ones self, [a. Demeanor.]
Beard. -- of Animal. PP. VI. 4. -- of Corn. PP. II. 3. A.
Bearded Creeper. HF. III. 5. Beast Be. Beastly, [adj. Beast. (Metaph.] Beat.
[Knock] Mo. VI. 4. A. [Strike] Mo. VI. 4. [Overcome] -- back. [back- Drive.
Put. by Striking.] Fighting.]



-- the Price. RC. VI. 1. A.
Beatitude. [Happiness] Ha. I. 1. sp. Blessing] AS. I. 3.

Beaver. (Castor] Be. IV. 8. Beauty. NP. V. 6. Becalm, [Quiet.] TA. V. 9.
Because. Conj. III. 2. O. Beccafigo. By. V. 6. Beckon [v. Head (sign] Becomes.
Transc. (Inceptive) is done [is, adj. p. Action.] is made. [is, adj. p.
Efficient] [is Effect] T. II. O. [is Event] TA. V. [is decent] T. V. 2.

Bed. Household Stuff. Po. V. 7. A. -- sted. Po. V. 7. -- rid, [not-adj. rise
(pot) out of -- ] -- of Earth, [Superficies.] Mag. I. 3. Ladies Bedstraw. HL.
IX. 6. A.
Bedaub, [a. Defilement.] TM. V. 6. O. Bedding, [adj. Bed. (things] Bedewed,
[adj. p. Dew. (make] Bedlam, [Prison of mad (persons.] Be. Ex. IV. 1. humble.
Ex. IV. 1. A. -- like fly. Ex. IV. 3. -- eater. By. III. 9. -- flower. [orchis]
HL. IV. 8. to -- [v. Being] T. I. 1. Copula.

Beech. Tr. IV. 4. A. Beef, [Beev's flesh.] Being. T. I. 1. as -- [as] Adv. I.
3.
Beer. [Drink] Pr. I. 7. A. [adj. Carrying (jug.) for dead bodies.]
Beestings. [Milk of adv. new adj. preter. parturition.]
Beet. HF. I. 10. Beetle. [Insect] Ex. V. Common -- Ex. V. 4. Dung -- Ex. V. 4.
A. Knobbed horned -- Ex. V. 3. A. Instrument [wooden Mallet (augm.]

Befall [v. Event.] TA* V. Befool, [a. Fool. (make] Before. -- in place. Prep.
V. 3. -- in comparison, [more then.] -- in time, [adv, Preceding] Sp. I. 2. E.
-- hand. [Having Gained] TA. V. 2. Prepared] TA. III. 2. Prevented] TA. III. 9.

Beg. [a. Begger] RC. I. 8. A. [Entreat. TO. V. 3. (augm.] -- ger. RC. I. 8. A.
Beget. [a. Generation] AC. I. 1. [a. Efficient] T. II. 1.
Begin. TA. III. 3. Transc. (Incep.)
Beginning. Sp. III. 3. D. Beguile, [a. Fraud.] RJ. IV. 4. Behave. [a.
Conversation] Man. A. [a. Demeanour] AC. V. [a. Gesture] AC. VI.
Behead. RJ. V. 1. Behind. Prep. V. 3. O. [Hinder part] Sp. III. 8. O. left --
[Staying] TA. VI. O. [Remaining]
[Residue] TM. VI. 7. O. -- in Arrears, [Debtor.] TA. IV. 7. O. [Inferior] TM.
I. 5. D. -- hand, [having Lost] TA. V. 2. O. not-prepared.] been Prevented.]

Behold. [a. Eye] See] Observe]

Beholding. [Beneficiary] TO. III. 8. D. [Owing thanks]
Beh^ve. [v. Expedient] T. V. 6. it -- ed, etc. [etc ought] Mood II. 2. --
full, [Expedient.] T. V. 6.
Bell, [adj. Ringing. Q. III. 2. (Instr.] -- fry, [adj. Convention (place) for
adj. a. Ringing (persons.] -- flower. HF. VII. 9. A.
Belching. Mo. IV. 2. Beldame, [Old (corr.) man. (foem.] Beleaguer, [Besiege]
RM. I. 4. Belly, [a. Calumny.] RJ, IV. 7. Believe. AS. II. 4. Easiness to --
[Credulity.] Ha. III. 2. E.
Belly. PG. IV. 6. -- Worm. Ex. I. 1. A.
Bellis, [Daisie] HF. II. 3. A. Bellow, [a. Bull (voice] Bellows, [adj. a. Wind
(Instr.] Belluine, [adj. Beast (Metaph.] Belong, [v. Pertinent.] TM. IV. 5.
Beloved, [adj. p. Love.] AS. V. 2. Below. [Beneath] Prep. V. 2. O. [Inferior]
TM. I. 5. D.
Belt, [to-binding (Armament) Sword] Bemoning. with sorrow (sign] for sorrow
(sign] sp. With Voice.]
Bench. [long fixed Seat] [adj. Judge. (place)] RJ. I. 1. [Assessors, (aggr.]
RJ. I. 1. A.
Bencher, [Assessor in College of Relation Judicial (person.] Bend. O. I. 7. A.
[adj. a. Crooked] Mag. III. 1. O. [Shrink] AC. VI. 3. [be crumpled] AC. VI. 3.
A. [p. Oblique] Mag. II. 8. -- ones fist, [together-fold.] O. V. 5.
Beneath. [Inferior] TM. I. 5. D. [Below] Prep. V. 2. O.
Benediction, [Blessing.] AS. I. 3. Benefactor. TO. III. 8. Benefice,
[Presbyter's (place] Beneficence. Virtue, [Goodness] Man. I. 4. Action, [a.
Benefactor.]
Beneficial, [a. Benefactor.] Beneficiary. TO. III. 8. O. Benefit, [adj. a.
Benefactor (thing] Benevolence, [Favour] AS. V. 9. Benjamin. Tr. VIII. 5. A.
Benighted. Benignity. [Favour] AS. V. 9. [Courtesie] Man. IV. 7. [Gratiousness]
Man. VI. 1.
Bent. [adj p. bend.] [adj. pret. purposing] AS. IV. 3. -- of Grass, [Ear] PP.
II. 4. A.
Benum, [a. Stupor.] NP. II. 1. O. Bequ^ath. RC. V. 2. Beray, [a. Defile.] TM.
V. 6. O. Berbery. Sh. III. 4. Bereave, [a. Privative.] T. III. 3. O. Berry. PP.
III. 2. A. one -- [Herb true love] HS. IX. 5. A.
Beseech. [Entreat. TO. V. 3. humbly.] Beseeging. RM. I. 4. Beseem, [adj.
Decency.] Beset. [About-gard] [Besiege] RM. I. 4.
Beshrew. [a. remorse.] [a. Velleity Miscarrying.] Event (corr.]

Beside. [Near] Prep. IV. 3. O. [not to at etc.
-- the mark, Erring from] Wandering from] -- himself, [Mad.]

[Also] Conj. IV. 2. Redundant.
Besmear, [Defile.] TM. V. 6. O. Besom, [adj. sweeping (instr.] Besot. [a.
Dotage. NP. II. 2. O. (make] [sp. with Love, (Excess] Drunkenness.]

Bespawl. [Defile with upon-spitting.]
Bespeak. RC. VI. 1. Besprinkle, [Wet (make) with Drops.] Bespue. [Defile with
upon-spuing]
Best, [most-good.] T. III. 2. -- part. TM. VI. 1. do ones --
[most-endeavour.] TA. III. 4.
Bestiality. RJ. III. 6. Bestir. [Move (aug.] Mo. [Endeavour] TA. III. 4.
[Diligence] Ha. IV. 5.
Bestow. [Give] TA. IV. 4. [Disburse] TA. IV. 5. [Spend]
Bet. RC. VI. 8. A. Betake. [to-Ition] TA. VI. sp. for Safety.]

Bethink. Cogitation, AS. II. 1. [Consider] AS. III. 2.
Betide, [v. Event.] TA. V. Betime. [adv. Soon] Sp. I. 4. [adv. Morn] Me. V. 7.
Betoken, [before-sign] T. VI. 5. Betony. AF. VII. 15. Betraying. Evil. [a.
Treachery] Man. V. 2. D. [a. Perfidiousness] Man. V. 6. O. [a. Treason] RJ.
III. 2.
Indiff. [Shewing] TA. I. 8. [Manifesting] TA. I. 9.

Betrothed,] TO. II. 3. Better, [more-good.] TM. I. 6. E. [Victory.] RM. II. 1.
[Superiority] TM. I. 5. E. Ones -- s. TO. III.

Between. Prep. VI. 3. -- themselves. [Privately] adv. TM. V. 4.
-- Both. [Middle.] SP. III. 3. [Indifferent.]

Bever. [Refection] Pr. I. 1. A. Beast, [Castor] Hat, [Head (vest) of Fur of
Bever.] Armor, [For-head (Armor]
Beverage. Pr. II. 6. A. Bevy. [Aggreg.] Bewail. [for-grief (sign] sp. with
Exclaiming.]

Beware. [adj. a Heedfulness] Ha. IV. 2. [a. Aversation] AS. V. 4. O.
Bewitch. RJ. III. 1. Bewray. [Shew] TA. I. 8. [Manifest] TA. I. 9.
Beyond. Prep. VI 2. O. [Superior] TM. I. 5. E.
Bezoar. [Contra-poison] sp. Stone of the Persian Goat.]

By. the -- [Digression] D. V. 9. A. Adjective. [adj. Digression] D. V. 9. A.
[adj. Accessory.] TM. IV. 9. O. -- word, [accessary (thing) of common
discourse] sp. with contempt.]

[not. adj. Principal.] Pertinent.] Public.] Ordinary.]
Preposition. Efficient. Pre. I. 2. Instrument. Pre. I. 1. A. End. -- reason
of. Pre. I. 2. A. Local Temporal [before] -- God.
[at] come -- [obtein] TA. V. 1.
[in] -- day.
[through] [beside] [Adverb] Local [nigh.] Temporal [nigh.] -- and -- Nearly
after.] adv. future (dim.]
Manner. -- the by Adverb [by the by (1) [Digression] -- great Adverb [by g.
(1.) [Aggregate.] -- retail Adverb [by r. (1) [Segregate.] -- it self Adverb
[by it s. (1) [Solitary.] Segregation.
-- course [c (Segr.] -- the day [d (Segr.] -- degrees [d (Segr.] -- turns [^
(Segr.] Day -- day [d. (Segr.] House -- house [h. (Segr.] Year -- year [y.
(Segr.]

Bib. a -- [Child's breast (vest] to -- [Drink, AC. II. 2. A. (freq.]
Bible, [Book of Scripture.] Bicker. [a. Fight, RM* I. 7. (dim.] [a.
Contention. Man. IV. 3. D.
Bid. [Command] TO. V. 1. Invite [Intreat to come.] -- Banes publish b. fut.]
-- Festival publish f. fut.] -- Battle [Offer b.] -- Defiance [Offer d.] --
Money [Offer m.] -- Prayer, [Exhort to together-pray.] -- Price. RC. VI. 2.
Biennial. During 2 years] Returning 2 years]
Big. [Great] TM. I. 1. E. -- with Child, [adj. p. Great through having been
impregnated.] to look -- [to look angrily.] AS. V. 8. proudly.] Man. V. 2. O.

Bigamy, [Having together-two Marrieds.] Biggin, [adj. Linen Head (vest.]
Bilberry. Sh. II. 2. Bile. S. III. 3. A. Bill. -- of Bird, [Beak.] PP. V. 4
Hook, [Cutting-hook.] Scroll, [Lamin of Paper.] [Catalogue] TM. III. 7. A.
[Accusation, etc.] RJ. II. 3. [Obligation.] RC. VI. 5.
-- of Exchange, [Bill for Exch.] RC. V. A.

Billet. -- of Paper, [adj. Paper (Lamin.] Appointment for Lodging]
-- of Wood, [Stick (aug.) sp. for Fuel.]
Billow, [Wave.] W. IV. 1. E. Bin. [Box, Pr. V. 2. sp. for Bread.]
Bind. [Ty] O. II. 1. [a. Bonds] RJ. VI. 4. A. make Costive [a. binding] Mo.
IV. O, [Oblige] v. RC. VI. -- by Script. RC. VI. 5.
-- a Book, [a. Mechanic -- ]
Bindweed. HS. VII. 6. Sea -- HL. VI. 13. A. black -- HF. I. 3. A. prickly --
HS. IX. 7.
Biographer, [a. History (person) of Lives.] Bipartite, [divided into two
parts.] Birch. Tr. VI. 7. Bird. By. -- lime, [Viscous (thing) for taking
Birds.] -- 's-Cherry. Sh. II. 8. -- 's-Ey. HS. VIII. 2. A. -- 's-Foot. HS. III.
9. -- 's-nest. HL. V. 7. HF. V. 6. A.

Birt, [Turbut.] Fi. V. 2. Birth. Extraction, [p. Progenitor.] TO. I. 1.
Nativity, [p. Parturition.] AC. I. 3. Bearing, [a. Parturition.] that is born,
[adj. p. Parturition.] AC. I. 3. after -- [Secundine] PP. VI. 7. A.
-- wort. AS. VIII. 5.
Bishop. RE. II. 4. A. -- 's-weed. HF. V. 4. A.
Biscuit. [Bread baked for duration] [dried, Bread (Lamin)
Bismute. Met. III. 3. Bisons, [Bull (kind) having a bunch on the back]
Bissextile, [Excedent fourth year.] Bistort. [Snakeweed] HL. VII. 3. Bit.
[piece] from-broken (part)] -- of Bridle, [Horse-restreining (Armament)]
Bitch, [Dog. Be. III. 1. (^em.] Biting. as with Teeth, [a. Tooth.] -- in,
[un-speak (endeavor.] as in Taste or Smell [a. Acrimonious]

Bitter. -- in Taste. Q. IV. 3. O. [Austere] Man. VI. 8 O. Doleful, [adj. a.
Grief, AS. V. 3. O. (cause]
Bittour. By. VIII. 5. Brasileen -- By. VIII. 5. A.
Bitumen. St. V. 8. Blab. [adj. a. Loquacity] Man. IV. 5. O.
Black. Q. II. 1. D. -- art, [Witchcraft.] RJ. III. 1. -- berry, [Berry of
Bramble.] -- bird. By. III. 6. -- and blew, [Blew Black.] as Bruise (sign)
Bladder. PG. VI. 7. A. swimming -- PP. IV. 5. -- nut. Tr. IV. 7. A.
Blade, [Lamin.) Mag. V. 4. -- of Plant, [Leaf] PP. II. 5. A. One -- HM. VI. 22.
Twy -- HM. VI. 22. A. -- of Shoulder, [Flat bone of Shoulder.] to -- it [a.
Riotousness.]
Blain [Boil] S. III. 3. A. -- worm
Blame, [Impute fault.] -- less, [Innocent.] RJ. II. 6.
Blanch, [a. White.] Q. II. 1. E. Blandishment, [a. Fawning.] Man. IV. 7. E.
Blank. [White.] Q. II. 1. E. [not upon-written] AC. III. 7. a -- to -- [a.
Mute.] AC. III. 1. O.
Blanket. [woollen Covering (thing.] Bed (vest.]

Blaspheme. [Speak Evil of God.] Injury of Princes.]

Blast. [Decay. NP. IV. 4. O. (make.] Vapor. El. VI. 5. [Blowing. Mo. III. 3.
(impetus.] [Wind. El. II. 4. (impetus.]
Blatta foetida. In. III. 4. A. Blaze. [a. Flame.] El. I. 1. [adj. a. Public.]
TM. V. 4.
Blazing-star, [Comet] El. I. 2. Blazon. [adj. a. Public (make] [a. Description
adj. Degree (sign]
Blea, [Bleak] Fi. IX. 10. A. Bleach, [open to the Wind. Sun. sp. for white
(make]

Bleak. [Piercing Cold] Fish. F. IX. 10. A.
Bleared, [Diseased by Inflammation of the Membranes.] Bleat. a. Sheep (voice.]
Goat (voice.]
Bleed. [a. Bloud] PG. I. 5. Phlebotomy. Mo. IV. 6.
Blemish, [a. Spotted.] Q. I. 5. O. Blend, [Mix] T. III. 8. O. Blenn. Fi. III.
14. Blessedness, [Happiness.] Ha. I. 1. Blessing. AS. I. 3. Blew. Q. II. 3. A.
-- bottle. HF. III. 2.
Blight. Vapor, El. VI. 5. Decay, NP. V. 4. O.
Blind. NP. I. 1. O. a -- [False pretence]
Blink. [Dim] Q. I. 3. O. [Tremble with the Eye-lids]
Bliss, [Happiness.] Ha. I. 1. Blissom, [a. Lust.] sp. of Sheep.]
Blister. Mo. IV. 7. Blite. HF. I. 15. Blitheness, [Mirth.] AS. V. 3. Block.
[Stock] PP. I. 2. -- of Wood, [Thick piece -- ] -- head, [Dull] Ha. III. 1. O.
-- house, RM. VI. 2. A. to -- up, [Besiege. RM. I. 4. remotely.]
Blood, vide Blood. Bloom, [Flower.] PP. II. 1. Blossom, [Flower.] PP. II. 1.
Blot, [adj. a. Spot. Q I. 5, O. (thing.] -- out. Destroy Writing.] Null
Writing.]

Blote. a. Swell with Smoke] a. Condite (dim.) with Smoke]
Blood. Proper. Red juice of perfect Animals. PG. I. 5. One of the four humors.
PG. I. 6. -- bound, [Dog. adj. hunt (apt) men by sent.] -- shot, [Spotted with
Blood within the Tunicle.] -- stone, [Cornelian.] -- thirsty [adj. a. Murder.
Kill.
(apt] -- wort. HA. II. 10. let -- a. Mo. IV. 6.
[Descendent (kinde] [Consanguinity] TO. I. of the whole [adj. Consang. by both
Parents.] of the half- [adj. Consang. by one Parent.]
[Murther] RJ. III. 4.
Bloody Flix. [Dysentery] S. VI. 6. A.
Blow a -- [Stroke] Mo. VI. 4. [Knock] Mo. VI. 4. A.
to -- [a. Breath] Mo. III. 3.
[a. Winde] -- an Horn, [a. Sound.] Q. III (make] -- one's Nose. Mo. IV. 4. A.
[a. Flower] PP. II. 1.

Blubber. Fish. Ex. IX. 5. [Fat of Whale.] to -- [wet with weeping]
Blunder. [adj. Unskilful] Ha. VI. 3. [adj. Stumble. Mo. II. 3. A, (freq.]
[Confused (make]
Blunt. [Dull] NP. IV. 2. O. [Rustic.] Man. IV. 9. D. [not-adj. a. Cut (apt.)
[Obtuse.]
Blur. [a. Spot. Q. I. 5. O. (freq.]
Blush. AC. IV. 9. at first- appearance.] p. See.]

Bluster, [a. Wind violently.] Boar, vid. Bore. Board. Plank, [adj. Wood
(Lamin.] Entertainment, [v. Host.] TO IV. 5. -- er, [Guest.] TO. IV. 5. O. to
-- a Ship, [into-goe.] sp. by Storm.

Boast. [Glorying] AS. VI. 1. O. [Oversaying] Man. IV. 1. E.
Boat. RN. I. 1. -- Swain, RN. V. 6.
Bob. [Strike (dim.) with hand. [Mock (dim.)
Bode [before Shew] Sign]
Body. Op. to Spirit. W. I. O. [Solid] Mag. I. 4.
Op. to Head. PG. III. O. [Trunk.] PG. IV. -- of Tree, [Stock] PP. I. 2. -- of
Army, [adj. Middle (part]


Bodkin, [adj Boring (Instr.) Cone] Bog. Po. I. 9. A. Boy, [adj. Childhood
(male] Boil. Pr. III. 2. a -- S. III. 3. A.
Boisterous, [adj. Tempest] W. VI. 7. A Fierceness] Stoutness, (corr.]

Boldness. Temper, [Stoutness.] NP. IV. 6. Affection, AS. V. 8. Virtue,
[Fortitude] Man. I. 7.
Bole, [Lump.] TM. VI. 4. -- ammoniac.
Bolled, [adj. Husk.] Bolster, [Bed (dim.] sp. for the Head] -- up. [Bear] Mo.
VI. 1. A. [Encourage] TO. VI. 2.


Bolt, Bar. Po. IV. 5. prisoners -- [Pin of fetters] [obtuse Arrow.] to shoot
ones --
[Declare ones Opinion.]
thunder, -- [pibble (kind] -- upright, [adj. Direct.] to -- Meal. [Sift, m. --
through Bag.] Linen Sive.]

Bond. [Obligation] RC. VI. 5. -- s. RJ. VI. 4. A.
Bondage, [Slave. (abstr.] Bondsman, [Slave.] TO. III. 6. O. Bone. PG. II. 1.
Bone-fire, [Fire built for Joy.] adj. Festival.]
Bon-grace, [Shadowing (Vest) for the Forehead.] Bonnet Low Head (vest.] Flat
Head (vest.] -- of Sail. RN. III. 6. A.

Book. aggr. of Leaves. Pr. VI. 7. O. without -- [adv. Memory]
-- binder, [adj. Book (Mechanic] -- seller, [adj. Book (Merchant] agg. of
Chapters. D. III. 3. A.
Boom. [Stick] [Pole] [Beam] [Tree] -- of Sail. RN. III. 2. -- on Shore,
[Direct beam for flat (signe]
Boon, [adj. p. Petition. (thing] Boope. Fi. V. 12. A. Boot. [adj. Leather.
(vest) for Leg and Foot] [Vantage] TM. VI 2. A. what boots it? Profit?] Help?]
[what does it Profit?] Help?]
Fire -- Materials permitted for f.] Gate -- Materials permitted for g.]
Plough. Materials permitted for p.]
Booth, [Tent.] Po. II. 1. A. Booty. RM. II. 5. E. make -- of, [Take for -- ]
Borage. HA. II. 9. Borax, [Chrysocolla.] St. V. 6. A. Board, vid. Board.
Bordell, [adj. Fornication (house] Border, [Margin.] Sp. III. 4. A. Bore, [Hog.
Be. II. 4. (male] to -- O. IV. 3.
Born, [adj. p. Parturition.] Borne, [adj. p. Bear] Borough, [Town] RC. III. 2.
A. [City] RC. III. 3. A.
Borrow. RC. V. 4. O. Bosom. Space betwixt Clothes and Breast.] [Space between
the Dugs.
Boss, [Protuberance] Mag. IV. 3. Botanic, [adj. Herb (Science.] Botargo,
[Condited Spawn of Mullet.] Botch. [Swoln Ulcer] [Piece unskilfully joined to
Mend] Fill] to -- [v. Unskilfulness] Ha. VI. 3. O.


Both. -- this and that, [and -- ] -- ways, [All -- ]
Botrys. HP. VI. 12. Bots, Ex. I. 3. A. Bottle. [Pot with narrow mouth] Figure.
Mag. VI. 2.
-- nose, [adj. Protuberance (augm.) -- ] -- flower. HP. I. 7.
blew -- -- of hay, [about-tied (aggr.)-]
Bottom. Lowest part. Sp. III. 7. O. -- of the Heart, [Inmost (part)-]
[Foundation] Po. III. 4. -- of Thread. Mag. VI. 7. [Ship.]


Bouget, [Bag (dim.] sp. adj. Leather.]
Bough [Branch] PP. I. 3: Bought, [adj. p. Buy.] Boule. Figure. Mag. VI. 6. A.
[adj. Bouling (Instr.] Mo. V. 4.
Bounce. Knock (Impetus) Sound (Impetus)
Bound. [adj. p. Bind] [Beholding] [Beneficiary] TO. III. 8. O. [Owing thanks]
[Limit] [Common, Margin] Sp. III. 4. A. [adj. End (Place.] (Thing.] (Sign.]

[Motion, adj. Reflection.]
Bounty, [Liberality.] Man. III. 1. Bourn, [River (dim.) Bout, [Course.]
Boutefew, [a. Contention Sedition
(make.] Bow. [Bend] O. I. 7. A. [a. Crooked. Mag. III. 1. O. (make.] --
outward, [a. Unequal (make] -- inward, [a. Concave (make]


Bow. Weapon RM. V. 4. Cross -- RM. V. 4. A.
Figure. Mag. V. 3. rain -- El. V. 1, saddle -- [Convex (part) of the Saddle.]

Bowell, [Gutt.] PG. VI. 4. A. Bower. [adj. a. Shadow (thing)] [Tent of Leaves
and Branches.] Ladies -- Sh. II. 2. A. Virgins -- HM. I. 7. A.

Bowl. Mag. VI. 6. A. to -- Mo. V. 4.
Bowl, [Wide Cup.] Bowline. RN. IV. 7. A. Bowsprit. RN. III. 4. Bowyer, [adj.
Bow (Mechanic.] Box. Tree. Tr. III. 7. Chest. Pr. V. 2. Stroke, [Striking with
flat hand.]
Brabble, [Contention in words.] sp. about Contracts.]
Brace. Buckle, [Together-ty.] Couple, [Together-two.] -- s of a Ship. RN. IV.
4.
Bracelet, [Ornament of the Wrist.] Brach, [Dog (fem.] Brachygraphy,
[short-Writing (art] Bracket, [Up-bearing piece.] Brackishness. Q IV. 5. Brag.
AS. VI. 1. O. Bragget, [Ale made with Spice.] Bray. [Pound] Mo. VI. 5. Voice.
[a Ass Elephant etc.
(voice.]
Braid, [Weave with fingers.] Brail. RN. IV. 6. Brain. PG. I. 8. -- pan, [Bone
that conteins the Brain.] -- sick. [adj. a. fancy (Excess) (Disease)
[Mad, (dim) hair -- [adj. Ha. IV. 1. D.]

Brake. [Aggr. of Fern] HL. I. 4. [Breaking (Jugament) for Flax] Hemp]

Bramble. Sh. I. 1. A. Brambling. By. VI. 7. A. Bran, [Courser (Part) of ground
Corn.] Branch. PP. I. 3. Brand. fire -- [Fire wood.] Mark [Stigmatization
(sign] to -- [Stigmatize] RJ. VI. 6. A


Brandy. Pr. II. 7. A. Brandish, [Swing.] Mo. VI. 3. Brangle, [a. Contention
(voice] Brank, [Buck-wheat] HF. I. 3. Brank Vrsin. HS. VIII. 8. Brant goose,
[black headed goose (kind.] Brasil. Tr. VII. 5. Brass, Met. II. 1. Bravado,
[Glorying (impet.) of his a. fut. Action.] Brave. Heroic. [adj. Virtue. (aug.]
Noble. [adj. Generosity.] Gaudy. [adj. Ornate, (aug.]
Brawl, [a. Contention (voice.] Brawn. [hard Muscle] Fleshy (part)]
[Bore's flesh soused.]
Braze, [adj. p. Superficies (make) with Brass.] Brazier, [Brass (Mechanic.]
Breach. vid. Break. Bread. white -- [fine -- ] brown -- [course -- ] sweet --
[principal Glandule.]
Breadth. TM. II. 2. Break, discontinue the parts, adv. impetus. Break. Proper.
Mo. VI. 6. -- ones neck. RJ. V. 3. A. -- on the Wheel. RJ. V. 9. A.

[Tear] Mo. VI. 6. A. -- one's belly, [-one's peritonaeum.] -- one's wind
[-one's diaphragm.] [adj. p. Asthma. (make]
[Violate] TA. III. 6. O. -- Covenant violate c.] -- Law violate l.] -- Oath
violate o.] -- Promise violate p.] Discontinue, [adj. p. TM. III. (make.] --
Company discont. c.] -- Course discont. c.] -- Custom. [Reclaim] -- an Horse,
[un-adj. fierce (make.] [Cease] -- fast, [Cease to -- ] -- up, as Convention
Ill weather etc.
[Cease confusedly.] [Fail] TA. IV. 8. O.
-- State [Decay] -- with Age Sorrow [decay with Age.] Sorrow]



[Ruine] -- one's heart. -- one's wind, [a. Perish.] -- Superficies. -- out in
botches. [Discont. the skin with, etc. [Wound] -- one's head. [Wound the skin
of -- ] [Plow] [Dig.] etc. -- up land. [Open] -- one's mind. -- up a letter.
[Appear] -- out as Fire. Light. Sickness.
[a. Impetus] -- a Jest [a. Jest. (imp.] -- in, [In-ition. (imp.] -- open, [a.
Open. (imp.] -- out, [Out-ition. (imp.] -- wind, [a. Wind. (imp.] -- upward.
Mo. IV. 2. -- downward. Mo. IV. 2. A.

Breakfast, [adj. Morning refection.] Bream. Fi. IX. 9. Sea -- [Gilt-head] Fi.
V. 1.
Breast, vid. Breast. Breath. [adj. p. Respiration. Mo. III. 2. (thing.] Sucking
up the -- AC. IV. 6. A.
[Air] [Fume] [Vapor] -- ing.
[Respiration.] Mo. III. 2. -- sweat, [Sweat (remiss.]

Breech. PG. IV. 6. -- es, [Vest for the lower (part) of Trunk.] Bear's -- HM.
IV. 2. A.
Breed. Engender, [a. Generation.] [p. Impregnate] [Educate] TO. VI. a --
[Kind] [Race] [descendent (aggreg.) (kind)

Breef. Adj. [Shortness] TM. II. 1. O. [p. Epitome] D. V. 7. Subst. [Edict]
[Commission] RC. IV. 4. A.
Breez. Insect Gentle Wind, El. VI. 6.
Breast. PG IV. 2. [Dugg] PG. IV. 2. A. -- plate, [adj. Breast (armor]
Bret. Fi. VII. 3. A. Breviary, [Epitome.] D. V. 7. Breviature. [Shortning]
[Shrinking]
Brevity, [Shortness.] TM. II. 1. O. Brew. Beer (make) Ale (make) [Mingle] T.
III. 8. O.
Brewes, [Lamins of Bread steeped.] sp. in Fat of boiled meat.]
Bribe. RJ. IV. 6. Brick. St. I. 1. A. Bride, [adj. present Marriage (fem.] --
groom, [adj. pres. Marriage (male.] -- maid, [Companion (fem.) of the
Bridegroom.] -- man, [Companion (male) of the Bride.]
Bridal, [adj. Marriage Solemnity.] Bridewell, [Public. adj. Correction
(house.] Bridge. Po. II. 6. -- of Lute, [Ridge supporting the Strings.] -- of
Nose, [Prominent Gristle.]
Bridle. Po. V. 9. to -- [a. Cohibit.] T. II. 2. O.
Brier. Sh. I. 2. A. Brigade. RM. IV. 2. Brigandine. [Coat of Male.] [Ship adj.
a. Booty (apt.]
Brightness. Q. I. 3. Brim [Margin.] Sp. III. 4. O. Brimstone. St. V. 4. Brine,
[Salt dissolved.] -- y taste, [Saltishness.] Q. IV. 5.
Bring, [Cause to with- go. come. Bring, [with- go. (make.] come. (make.]
[to- carry.] drive.] lead.] go to -- [fetch.] TA. VI. 4. A.

[Cause,] [Cause to be. go. come.
-- down. [adj. a. Low Inferior Under
(make] [diminish] TM. I. 7. O. [weaken] NP. V. 7. O.
-- forth. [a. Parturition.] AC. I. 3.
-- low. [diminish] TM. I. 7. D. [decay]
-- to naught. [adj. p. ruin (make.] [a. destroy] AS. I. 4. O. [annihilate.]
AS. I. 1. O.
-- to pass. [a. Cause] T. II. [a. Efficient.] T. II. 1.
-- under. [overcome] RM. II. 1. E. [conquer] RM. II. 7. E.
-- up. [begin] TA. III. 3. [educate] TO. VI.
[with- go. come.
-- on the way. [accompany in Travel (incept.]
-- to bed. [assist in parturition.]
-- word, [ -- Narration.]

Brink, [Margin.] SP. III. 4. O. Briony. white -- HS. IX. 6. black -- HS. IX.
6. A.
Brisk, [Sprightly.] NP. IV. 2. Bristle. PP. VI. 2. to -- [a. direct (make)
one's Bristles.]
Bristow Non-such. HS. V. 4. A. Brittleness. Q. VI. 5. D. Broach, [adj. Rosting
(instr.] to -- [a. un-barrel (incept.]
Broad, [adj. Breadth.] speak -- [Plain corr.] [pronounce Rurally] sp. opening
(augm.) one's mouth.] [a. openness.]


-- awake, [Perfectly -- ]
Brock, [Badger.] Be. V. 2. A. Brocket, [Hart (male) of the second year.]
Broil. Pr. III. 4. A. Broils. [Contentions] Man. IV. 3. D. [Troubles] TA. V. 9.
O.
Broken-winded, [adj. p. Asthma.] Broker. [Substitute (Merc.] [Merchant of old
things]
Brooch, [Gemmed Ornament.] Brood. [Children (aggr.) [Aggregate (young) to --
[a. Fotion by over-sitting]
Brook, [River (dim.) -- lime. HS. VI. 10. garden -- HL. VIII. 3. A. to --
[adj. a. Patience.] Man. I. 8.
Broom. Sh. IV. 8. butchers -- Sh. III. 8. thorny -- Sh. IV. 2. A. -- Rape. HL.
V. 8. a -- [Brushing (instr.] -- ing. RN. VI. 2.
Broth. Pr. I. 5. Brothel [Fornication (house.] Brother. TO. I. 4. half -- TO.
I. 4. A. -- in Law, [Brother by Affinity.] -- hood. [Brother (abstr.]
[Corporation] RC. III. 7.
Brow, [Forehead.] PG. III. 6. Moving the -- AC. IV. 1. O. -- of an Hill.
[Protuberance.] Mag. IV. 3. --
Brown [Dark (dim.] [Black (dim.]
Browzing. [Mastication] Mo. III. 5. sp. of Boughs.]

Bruise. [Contusion] O. IV. 1. A. Hurt. S. I. 1. A.
Brunt, [Impetus.] T. VI. 6. A. Brush. [Branch. PP. I. 3. (dim.] instrument.
[Brushing (instr.) clothes.] [Painting (instr.]
to -- O. V. 9.
Brute. [Animal] W. V. 3. [Rumor] D. V. 3.
Brutish. [adj. Beast (like] [adj. Irrational]
Bubble. El. III. 1. A. Buccinum. Ex. VII. 5. Buck. [Deer] Be. II. 4. sp. adult
(Male.] -- of Clothes. [Clothes (aggr.) for washing by Lixiviation.]
-- for fishing, [adj. take (match.] of Fish.] -- s horn. HL. VIII. 2. A. -- s
thorn. Sh. I. 7. -- mast, [Mast of Beech.] -- weed. -- wheat. HA. V. 5. A.


Bucket. [Tub, adj. p. carry (apt) by handle.]
Buckle. Pr. IV. ^. A. Buckler. RM. V. 9. Buckram, [Canvas stiffened.] Bucksom,
[adj. Vigor face (manner.] Bud, [Sprout.] PP. II. 5. Budge. to -- [Move (dim.]
Budget [Bag (dim] sp. adj Leather]
Buff, [adj. Leather (Arms.] sp. of Buffals Skin limber.]
Buffal, [Bull. (kind) having flat rugged horns.] Buffet, [Strike with hand
together-folded.] Buffoon, [adj. Scurrility (person.] Bug. In. II. 1. A.
Bugbear, [adj. a. Fear, (apt.) adj. Fiction (thing.] Buggery. RJ. III. 5. A.
Bugle. [adj. Glass-bead] [Horn (dim.) for sounding] Herb. HF. VII. 16. A.
Bugloss. HL. IX. 1. A. Vipers -- HL. IX. 2. A. Wall --
Buying. RC. V. 3. O. Build. -- ing. Po. II. Greater parts of -- Po. III.
Lesser parts of -- Po IV.
-- upon, [Be confident of.]
Bull, vid. Bull. Bulbocastanon. Bulbonach. HS. VI. 2. Bulbous, HL. IV.
Bulfinch. By. IV. 3. Bulge, [Mar. by in-crushing.] Bulk [Massiness] [Solid]
Mag. I. 4. [Total] TM. VI. [Aggregate] TM. III. 6. O.
Bull. [Beast, Be. II. 1. (male*] Writing, [Edict.] RC. IV. 3. O. sp. of Pope.]
-- Beetle. Ex. V. 2. A.
-- finch. By. IV. 5. -- head* [Miller's thumb.] Fi* IX. 12. -- rush, [Great
(kind) rush.]
Bullace, [Plum of Black-thorn.] Bullet. RM. V. 8. Bullion Gold not-coin'd]
Silver not-coin'd]
Bullock, [Bull, Be. II. 1. (dim.] Bulwark, [Rampier] RM. VI. 3. Bumbast. [adj.
Cotton stuffing (thing] [not-necessary (thing) inthrusted.] [affected words]
Bunch. [Protuberance] Mag. IV. 3. [Cluster] PP. II. 4. [Aggregate] adj. TM.
III. 6. O. (thing.] sp. together-tied.]

Bundle, [adj. aggregate. TM. III. 6. O. (thing.] sp. together-tied.]
Bung. [Upper Orifice of the Barrel] sp. for Infusion.]

Bungling, [Unskilfulness.] Ha. VI. 3. O. Bunting. By. IV. 1. Bunt-line. RN.
IV. 6. A. Buoy. Figure. Mag. VI. 5. [Anchor, (sign)
Bur. [Principal G^andule] -- of the Ear, [Lower Protuberance -- ] -- of Dock,
[Ear] PP. II. 4. A. Butter -- HL. VI. 1. A. -- reed. HL. III. 15. A. Great --
HL. VI. 2. Little -- HL. VI. 2. A.
Burden. -- of a Song, [Repeated verse] Load, Po. V. A. to -- [adj. a. Heavy
(make) upon, etc.]
Burgeon, [Sprout] PP. II. 5. Burgess Magistrate of a Town.] Freeman of a
Town.]
Burglary. RJ. III. 8. A. Bury. RE. IV. 8. -- alive. RJ. V. 6. A.
Burl, [Pick the knots and motes out of Cloth.] Burlesque. [Facetious imitation
(corr.] [Mocking imitation of Poem.]
Burly. [adj. Ample.] Sp. II. 5. [adj. Fat. (augm.]
Burnet. HF. VIII 4. Thorny -- Sh. III. 1. A.
Burning. Proper, [adj. a. Fire.] El. 1. house -- RJ. III. 7.
-- alive. RJ. V. 7. A. -- in the hand, [Stigmat.] RJ. VI. 6. -- -- Lance,
[Dart] El. I. 4. A. [Improper] [Rosting (Exc.] -- Fever. S. II. 1. Sun -- [adj.
p. Coloring (corr.) by the Sun.]

Burnish Smooth by rubbing] Brighten by rubbing]
Burrage. HL. IX. 1. Burrow, [Hole in the Earth.] Cony -- [Cony's (house.]
Burser, (adj. disbursing (off.] Burst, vid. Break. -- Cow, [Blain-worm.]
Burstenness, [hernia.] Burt. [Turbut.] Fi. V. 2. Bush Shrubs (aggr.] Hairs
(aggr.] Silver -- Sh. VI. 6. A.

Bushel [8 Gallons.] Busy. [adj. a. Business] [adj. a. Double diligence] Ha.
IV. 5. E. -- body, [adj. a. Diligence (corr.]
Business. Employment, TA. III. [adj. a. Troubling (thing]
Busk, Lamin for Woman's breast (vest.] Buskin, [Vest until middle of Leg.]
Bustard. By. II. 4. But. Conjunction. but. Conj. II. 1. O.
-- [indeed] Conj. II. 1. as, but lately, etc. -- [onely] Adv. IV. 1. O. --
that, [unless.] Conj. I. 3. O. -- yet. [notwithstanding] Conj. II. 2. O.

Preposition. [beside] Prep. IV. 3. O.
a -- [thick extremity] sp. of Stock.]
[Barrel (augm.] [measure]
[Mark] [Bank at-adj. p. shoot (apt.] [Sign, adj. p. aim (apt.]
to -- [knock thrusting] sp. with Forehead.]


Butcher, [Butchering (Mechanic.] -- ing. Pr. III. 1. -- bird. By. I. 3. A. --
's broom. Sh. IV. 5. A.
Butler, [adj. Provisions (Officer] for adj. p. drink (thing.]
Butter. Pr. I. 3. -- milk, [Milk after Butter (make.] -- fly. Ex. IV. 9. Hawke
-- Ex. IV. 10.
-- bur. HL. VI. 1. A. -- wort. HL. VI.
Buttery, [adj. Drinking (room.] Buttock. PG. IV. 8. Button. Mag. VI. 2. --
hole. Mag. V. 2. A. -- Fish. Ex. VIII, 2. Batchelour's -- [Campion] HS. V. 2.
Buttress. Po, III. 7. A. Butwin. Buz, [a. Be (voice.] Buzzard, [^ite] By. I.
2. A. bald -- [White-headed -- ]

C
CAbala, [Tradition.] RE. VI. 1. A. Cabbage. HS. IV. 6. -- Tree. Tr. VII. 8.
Cabin, [Chamber (dim.] sp. in a Ship.]
Cabinet. [Box for precious most esteemed
things]
Cable. RN. IV. 8. Cacao. [Chocolate] Tr. IV. 7. Cackle, [a. Hen (voice.]
Cacochymia. S. I. 3. A. Cade. [Lamb educated in house.]
Cadence, [adj. Concluding Sound.] Cadet, [Dependent.] Cadew. Ex. III. 4. A.
Cage. [Imprisonment (room.] sp. for Birds.]
Cayman [Crocodile] Be. VI. 3. Cajole. [perswade by Craft.] Flattering.]

Caitiff. Wicked (augm.) Miserable (augm.)
Cake, [Flat bread.] Calaminaris. St. II. 7. A. Calamint. HF. VII. 2. A.
Calamity, [Misery.] Calcine. O. VI. 8. Calculate, [Reckon.] TA. IV. 6.
Calendar, [adj. Year-book of Series of days of every month.] Calender, [a.
smoothness] sp. of Cloth. a -- [adj. calendring (mech.]
Calends, [First day of the month.] Calenture, [Feaver (augm.] Calf, Beast.
[Bull, Be. II. 1. (young.]
-- 's snout [Snap-dragon.] HS. VIII. 6. [Hart (male) of the first year.] Sea
-- [Seal.] Be. V. 3. A. -- of the Leg. [Protuberance behind the Leg.] [Hinder
Muscles of the Leg.]

Calif. [Successor of Mahomet.] Calk. RN. VI. 1. Call. [a. Voice] [a. Name]
[Summon] -- to mind, [re-a. memory.] -- to witness, [a. Witness (make.] -- in,
[un-public] [a. annihilation]
-- upon, [Invocate.] -- ing,] Profession.]

Callous. [Hard skin.] Muscle.]

Callow. [Downy] [not-feathered]
Calm. El. VI. 6. A. [adj. Peaceableness] [adj. Meekness]
Calo. RM. III. 8. A. Caltrops. Iron (instr.) having four points most distant
from each other. land -- HS. III. 9 A. water -- HL. VII. 8. A.
Calumny. RJ. IV. 7. Cambuge, [Concrete juice purgative.] Camel. Be. I. 3. --
's Hay. HL. III. 11. A.
Camelopard, [Giraffa.] Be. II. 7. Camerade. [adj. Chamber Companion]
Cammock, [Rest-harrow.] HS. III. 14. Camomil. HF. II. 8. Camp. RM. VI. 1. --
master, [adj. Camp. (Officer.]
Campania, [Plain.] [Summers war.]
Camphire, Tree. Tr. VIII. 6. Gum. [Gum of Camphire tree.
Campion. HS. III. 2. Can. Active. [adj. Potentialness] [adj. Natural Power]
[adj. Power.]
Pass. [adj. Possibility.] [May] Mod. I. 1. a -- [Footless Cup]


Canary. -- bird. By. IV. 6. A. -- grass. HL III. 1. -- wine, [Wine of the
Canaries.]
Cancel. [a. Annihilation] [a. Spoil] [un -- ]
Cancer. Ulcer. S. III. 4. Constellation, [Star (aggr.) called the Crab.] Sign
[the fourth of the twelve parts of the Zodiac.] tropic of -- W* VI. 5.
Cancer Majus. Ex. VI. 7. Candy, [Condite with Sugar.] -- Alexander. HF. IV. 13.
Candid. [adj. Candor.] Candidate. RC. I. 4. A. Candle. Pr. VI. 3. -- stick,
[Supporting (vess.) for Candle.]
Candor. Man. I. 3. Cane. HL. III. 13. Canel. -- bone, [Bone next to the
Weasand.] -- tree, [Cinamon] Tr. VIII. 8.
Canibal, [adj. Eating (person) of men.] Canis. -- major, [Stars (aggr) called
Greater Dog.] -- minor, [Stars (aggr.) called Lesser Dog.]
Canker. [Vlcer,] sp. within the mouth.] [Rust] Met. IV. 5. sp. of Brass.]
Worm, [Caterpiller.]
Cankered, [adj. p Canker.] -- stomach. [Old Wrath] Hatred.]


Cannibal, [adj. Eating (person) of men.] Canons. -- of breeches, etc. [Hollow
Cylinders -- ] -- of a Cathedral, [Assessors of the Bishop.] Rules, [adj. RE.
Laws.] [Ordnance] RM. VI. 5. A.

Canonize. Make one a Saint] Sentence one a Saint] Declare one a Saint]
Canoo, [Boat of one Tree.] Canopy, [over-adj. Head.] adj. Shadowing Covering
(thing.]
Canorous, [adj. a. Sing. (apt.] Cantharides. Ex. V. 9. Cantharus. Fi. V. 2.
Canticle, [adj. p. Sing (thing.] sp. Little, etc.
Cantle, [Fragment.] TM. VI. 5. A. Canto, [Treble (part) of a Song.] Cantonize,
[Divide into little Governments.] Canvas, [Linnen of Hemp.] -- ing. a. Suter
for suffrages.] Contend for suffrages.] [Examin (augm.]

Cap. [adj Head (vest] sp. Congruous to the Head]
-- case, [Box (dim] to -- [un-vest the Head.] [Wooden (jug.) fastening Topmast
to the Mast] Flag-staff to the Mast]
-- a pe, [from head to foot.] -- Verses, [Play at repeating Verses.]
Capable. [adj. a. Receive (pot.] [adj. Subject (pot] [adj. Passion (pot]
Capacity. Subject (pot.] Receive (pot.] Passion (pot.]
Caparison, [adj. Ornat. (armam.) of Saddle.] Cape. -- of Cloak, [adj. p. fold
(Lamin.] [Promontory] W. III. 4. -- Merchant. RN. V. 5.
Ca^er. [Leap] sp. with trembling (like) of the Legs.] Fruit. Sh. IV. 2. Ship.
[Private man of War] [Ship praedatory.]

Capital. [adj. Head.] [adj. a. Die (apt.] crime, [cr. punishable with dying
(make]
[Cheef] TM. IV. 4.
Capitulate, [Treat about Conditions.] Capon., [un-testicled Cock.] Capra
saltans. El. I. 5 Caprichious, [Fantastic] (corr. Capricorn, [Tenth of the 12
parts of the Zodiac*] tropic of -- W. VI. 5.
Capriscus. Fi. IV. 9. Capstain. RN. II. 3. Captain. -- of Foot, [adj. Company
(Officer.] -- of Horse, [adj. Troop (Offi.] -- of a Ship. RN. V. 1.
Captious. [Censorious] [prone to be displeased dispute quarrel

Captivate. RM. II. 6. E. Captive, [adj. p. Captivate (person.] Caput Mort
[Sediment remaining of distilled (thing] Car, [Cart.] Caract, [Eighteenth part
of a Dram.] Caraguia. Be. V. 6. Caramosel. RN. I. 4. Caranna. Tr. VIII. 5.
Caravan, [Travelling (aggr.) of Merchants.] Caravel, [Ship (augm.] Caraway. HF.
V. 7. Carbine, [Gun (augm.) of Horseman.] Carbonado, [Broil'd adj. p. flashing]
Pr. III. 5. Carbuncle. Sore. S. III. 4. A. Gem, [Ruby (augm.]
Card playing -- [adj. Card. Mo. V. 2. (Instr.] playing at -- s [Mo. V. 2.
Geographic -- [Description by picture.] to -- wool. [Un-intangle by Comb] O. V.
9. A. [Prepare for Spinning by Combing]



Cardamom. Cardialgia. S. VI. 1. Cardinal, [Principal.] Chief, [Clergy of Rome]
-- points, [East, West, North, and South.]
Care, [Thinking (augm.] Carefulness. [Heedfulness] Ha. IV. 2. sp. with
Trouble.] Affliction.]

[Diligence]
Carelessness. [Heedlesness] Ha. IV. 2. D. [Sloth]
Caressing, [a. Seem. (sign) love (augm] Cargo, [Catalogue of Ships
merchandise.] Carine. RN. VI. 4. Cark. Ha. IV. 2. E. Carkanet, [Jewel (aggr.)
Carcass, [Dead body.] of a Fowl, [Trunk.]
Carnal. [adj. Flesh] [Natural] [Worldly] [adj. Lust] [Ungracious]
Carnation, [adj. Flesh-colors.] Carnosity, [Flesh abstr.] a -- [Excrescence,
adj. Flesh.]
Carob. Tr. VI. 1. Caroll, [Joyful Song.] Carowse [Drink (aug.] Carp. Fi. IX.
7. to -- [Calumniate words] [Except contentiously.]

Carpenter. [adj. House faber] [adj. Wood (Mechanic.]
Carpet. [Woolen Ornament Vest
for Table.]
Carract, [Eighteenth part of a Dram.] Carraway. HF. V. 7. Carreer, [Running
(imp.] Carrot. HF. V. 6. wild. HF. V. 6. A.
Carry. Go supporting. Mo. VI. 1. er. -- RC. II. 8. A. Instruments for -- ing.
Po. V. [a. Demeanour] [a. Converse] [Support] Mo. VI. 1. A.
Carriage. [adj. p. Carry (thing) [adj. a. Carry (manner) [Demeanour] AC. V.
[Converse] Man. A.
Carrick. RN. I. 4. Carrion. [Dead body] sp. putrid.] [Lean (augm.]
Cart. Po. V. II. A. welsh -- Po. V. 4. A.
Cartilage, [Gristle.] PG. II. 1. A. Carve. O. IV. 6. -- meat. Unjoint the
Limbs.] Segregate the Limbs.] Distribute the Limbs.]

Carvel. Case. Condition of dubitable Event [Condition] T. II. 4. [State.] T.
VI. 4. [Doubtful (thing]
[Question] [adj. p. Doubt Question
(thing] [State* sp. of Question.] -- of Conscience, [Moral Question] in Law.
[Questionable Action (kind.] [Cause of Suit]
[Supposition] D. VI. 3. in -- [If] in no -- [Not redupl.] put -- [imp.
Suppose.]
[Event] TA. V. [sp. Doubtful Supposed
Vessel. Pr. V. 1. A. -- of a word. Obliquity of termination.] Change of
termination.]


Casement, [Door of Window.] Cash, [Present Money.] -- keeper, [Private Money
(Officer.]
Cashire. [un-a. Soldier (make) penally.] [a. Incapacitating] sp. a.
Soldier.]
Cask, [Vessel] Pr. V. sp. Barrel.] Pr. V. 3.
Casket. [Vessel (dim.] [Box for precious (things.]
Cassaware. By. II. 9. A. Cassia. Tr. VI. 2. Shrub -- Sh. II. 11. A.
Cassidony. HF. VI. 5. A. Cassock, [Upper close (vest.] Cast. adj. p. Motion
(make.) sp. Impetuously. and sp. from the Contiguity p. Support Capacity.
of its mover.
throwing, Mo. VI. 2. as Metal. O. IV. 5. A. as Guilty, [Condemn.] as Nauseous,
[Vomit] -- about. Think AS. II. 1. Consider AS. III. 1. Contrive AS. III. 7.
-- away. vid. -- off. -- down, [down-cast.] Sorrowful (make.] Despondent
(make.]
-- in ones mind, vid. -- about. -- in ones teeth, [Upraid.] RJ. IV. 8. A. --
into form a. Form sp. by casting.] a. Figure sp. by casting.]
-- into Sleep, [adj. a. Sleeping (make.] -- off. [a. Reject] AS..V. 5. O. [a.
Abdicate] TA. I. 3. O. [a. Abandon] TA. II. 2. O. [a. Dereliction] AS. I 5. O.
-- up. -- into heap, [a. Heap,] -- into sum, [a. Sum.]
-- clothes, [not-fut. used cl.] -- dice, [a. Dice] -- lots, [a. Lots] -- skin.
[adj. a. Let go. Ta. I. 6. O -- ] [adj. a. Change. TA. II. 6. O -- ]
-- water. [a. Inquisition. RJ. II, 2. -- ] [a. Try. RJ. II. 4. A. -- ]
-- Young, [a. Abortion.]
Castle. Po. II. 2. A. Castor. Be. IV. 8. Castrate, [Un- adj. a. testicle
(make.] Castrel, vid. Kestrel. Casual, [adj. Fortune. AS. I. 2. D.] Casuist.
[Teacher of moral Doctrine.] [Solver of moral Doubts]
Cat. Be. IV. 4. Civet -- Be. IV. 4. A. -- mint, -- s-tail. HL. II. 3. A..
Catalogue. TM. III. 7. A. Catamite, [adj. p. Sodomy (person.] Cataplasm
[Plaster.] Pro. VI. 4. A. Cataract, [Direct fall of River.] -- in the eye,
[Opacous (thing) in the water of the Eye.]
Catarrh. S. IV. 4. Catastrophe, [adj. a. Altering Conclusion.] sp. Altering to
worse.]
Catch. [adj. p. Rest (make) sp. Impetuously. and sp. in its Comprehension.
Catch, Mo. VI. 2. O. [Arrest] RJ. II. 1. A.

-- poll, [Arresting (Officer] [Pursevant] RJ. I. 6. [Obtain] as Fire, [a. Fire
(imp.] as Infection, [p. Contagion.]
[Take] TA. I. 4. -- at. desire to get] endeavor to take] offer to Catch]

[Overtake] TA. VI. 6. A. -- fly. HS. V. 2. A.

Cate. [Pr. II. (thing] Catechizing. RE. IV. 3. A. Category, [Predicament.] TA.
Categorical, [absolute.] Cater, [Buy provisions.] Caterpiller. Ex. III. 6.
Flower, HS. III. 12. A.
Cathedral, [Temple of Bishop's (place.] Catholic. RE. III. 2. Catmint. HF.
VII. 1. A. Cattle, [Beasts] sp. Cloven footed.]
Cavalry. [Horsemen (kind (aggreg.

Candle, [Broth of Egg, Wine, etc.] Cave, [Cavity in the Earth.) [Under-ground
Room] House] Hole
(aug.]
Caveare, [Condited spawn of Sturgeons.] Caveat, [Caution (sign.] Cavern, vid.
Cave. Caught, [adj. p. Catch.] Cavil. Objection Contentious] (corr.] Dispute
Contentious] (corr.]
Cavity, [Hollowness.] Mag. VI. 1. E. Caul. PG. VI. 6. A. -- for the head,
[adj. Net (figure) head (vest.]
Cauldron, [Kettle (aug.] Cause. Proper. T. II. [Efficient] T. II. 1.
[Impulsive] T. II. 2. [Occasion] T. II. 4. [End] T. II. 6.
In discourse. [Reason] [adj a. Argumentation (thing]

In Law. [Cause of Suit] [Suit] RJ. II. A. [Proceeding] RJ. II.

Causey. [Factitious way] [Way paved with Stones]
Causti^ a. Burning Medicine.] a. Corroding Medicine.]
Cautelousness, [Heedfulness.] Ha. IV. 2. Cauterizing, [Stigmatize.] RJ. VI. 6.
A. Caution [a Heedfulness.] -- money, [Stipulatory-money before-paid.]
Cautiousness, [Heedfulness.] Ha. IV. 2. Ceas^ Discontinue.] Desist.]
Cecily, vid. Ciceley. Cedar. Tr. V. 4. Cell, [Room (dim.] [ Regular's (^oom]
Celandine. HS IV. 10. A. Celebrate, [a. Solemnity] Celebs. TO. II. 1.
Celerity. [Swiftness] NP. V. 9. [Dispatch] TA. III. 5.
Celestial, [adj. Heaven.] W. II. Celibate, [Celebs (abstr.] Cellar, [adj.
Store (room) for adj. p. Drink (thing.] Cement, [Glue of Stones.] Censer, [adj.
Burning (vessel) of Incense.] Censor, [Judge] sp. of manners.] Censorious. Man.
I. 3. O. Censure, [a. -- Judge.] Sentence.] -- ecclesiastic. RE. V. 3.

Centaur, [adj. Fiction Horseman.] Center. Mag. II. 1. Center-fish. Ex. VIII.
1. A. Centon. [adj. aggregate (thing) of diverse fragments] Cent^ry. Greater --
HF. III. 3 A. Lesser -- HS. V. 5.
Century. 100. Centurion, [adj. Company (Officer.] Cerecloth, [Plaster'd
cloth.] Ceremony, [Circumstance] sp. solemn.] Certain. [Sure] adj. AS. II. 6.
-- ly. Adv. I. 2. O. [Manifest] [Some] Pron. II. 3.
Certainty. AS. II. 6. Certify. [adj. Certainty (make] [adj. a. Know (make]
Ceruse. Met. IV. 5. A. Cess [tax] sp. according to-his proportion]
Cessation Discontinue. Desist.
Chas Recrement of winnowed Grain Husks of winnowed Grain
Chafe. [Heat by rubbing.] [Ruo] O. V. 8. [Heat] Q. V. 1. E. -- ing-dish, [adj.
Table (vessel) for Fire.]
Stomach, [adj. Angry (aug.]
Chafer. [Bay Scarab] Goat -- Ex. V. 3. Green -- Ex. V. 5. A.

Chaffer. [Treat concerning the Price] [Exchange]
Chaffinch. By. IV. 7. Chain, [Cord of Loops for Binding.] Ornament.]
Chair. Po. VI. 6. Chalcedony. St. V. 6. Chalcis. Fi. III. 12. A. Chaldron,
[36. Bushels.] Challenge. [Claim] [Provoke] [Accuse]
Chalice, [Footed drinking (vessel.] Chalk. St. VI. 1. Chama. Ex. VIII. 6.
Chamaecyparissus. Chamber, [Room] sp. Sleeping (room]
Chamberlein. [adj. Chamber (Off.] [adj. City money (Off.]
Chameleon. Be. VI. 4. A. Chamfer, [Gutter (freq.) Chamomil. HF. II. 8. Champ,
[Mastication] Champain, [Plain.] W. III. 1. E. Champion, [Instead-fighting
(person.] Chance, [Fortune.] Chancel, [Chief adj. Temple (Room.] Chancellor,
[Judge of Equity.] Chancery, [Court of Equity.] Chandler, [Candle (Mech. (Merch.
Chanel. W. IV. 5. A. Change. [Alter] TA. I. 1. O. Mutation, TA. II. 6. A.
-- of the Moon. [Time when the Moon ends one Course, and begins another]
[Exchange]
Changeable. Mutable, [adj. Change (apt.] Of diverse Colors. Q. II. 5. A.
Changeling. [Instead-put] [Idiot]
Channa. Fi. V. 11. A. Chant, [Sing.] Chanter, [Chief Singer.] Chantry,
[Ecclesiastical singing (place.] Chaos, [Unformed matter.] Chap. [Chink] Mag.
V. 4. O. -- of mouth. [Jaw] sp. Bone of it.]

Chape, [End (arm.) of the Swords case.] Chaplain Domestic Presbyter.] Private
Presbyter.]
Chaplet, [Wreath of Flowers for the head.] Chapman, [adj. a. Buying (person.]
Chapel, [Temple (dim. accessory.
Chapter. -- of book. D. III. 3. -- of Cathedral. [Bishop's Assessors (aggr.]
[Their Convention] [And Convention-house.] -- of Pillar, [Top of Column.]

Character. D. I. 1. A. [Description]
Charcole, [Cole made by charking.] Chare, [Business (dim.] [Instead-business]
Charge, Proper [Load] Po. V. A. -- a Gun. [adj. p. Ammunition (make]
In Oeconomic. [Command]
In Civil sense. [Trust] have -- of, Be entrusted with.
[Office] Cost, [Expence]
In Judicial. [Accuse] Lay to one's -- [a. Accuser.]

In Military. [Assault]

Charger, [Dish (aug.) for Esculents.] Chary. [adj. Indulgence] [Heedful for]
[Loth that it should suffer]
Chariot. Po. V. 2. Charity. Ha. V. 6. Chark. O. VI. 7. Charleswain, [Stars
(aggr.) called, etc.] Charlock. HS. IV. 9. A. Charm Witch with words. Wizard
with words.
Charnel, [Room for dead bodies.] Charr. Fi. IX. 3. A. Charring. O. VI. 7.
Charter, [Patent] sp. For grant of Privilege]
Chase. [Treey Country] sp. for Deer.
[Forrest] Po. I. 2. A. to --
[Hunt] [Drive] [Persue]
Chasm, [Emptiness.] -- in the Sky. El. V. 5.
Chaste, [adj. Chastity.] -- ^ree* Sh. V. 1.
Chastise, [Correct.] Chatt, [Loquacity.] Chattels, [Goods not inheritable.]
Chatter. with ones Tongue. as Birds. a. Swallow voice] a. Pie voice]
[Prate] with ones Teeth. [Tremble -- ] sp. with Sound (aug.]


Cheap. [adj. Price Value
(dim.] [Sorry] TM. I. 4. D.
Cheapen, [Treat concerning the price.] Cheat, [Fraud.] Check. [Interrupt
Motion] [Hinder] [Cohibit] [Reprove]
Checker, vid. Exchequer. -- 'd with Colors. Q. II. 7.
Cheef, [Principal.] Cheek. PG. III. 7. [Side] Sp. III. 4.
Cheer. Diet, [Quantity of Food.] [Face (manner] to -- [Encourage] [Merry
(make.] [Cheerful (make.]


Cheerfulness, [Alacrity.] Ha. IV. 3. Cheese. Pro. I. 3. A. Cheeslip, [Sow.]
Ex. II. 9. Cheesrunning [Ladies bedstraw] HL. IX. 6. A. Cherish. [a. Fotion]
AC. I. 4. [Preserve indulgently]
Cherry. Tr. II. 3. Birds -- Sh. II. 5. Winter -- HS. IX. 8. Wildrock -- of
Austria. Sh. II. 5. A.
Cherub. [Angel] [Image of Angel]
Chervil. HF. V. 8. A. Chesil. [Prism. for Cutting Carving

Chess-playing. Mo. V. 3. Chest. [Box] Pr. V. 2. of the Body.
[Trunk] sp. the Cavity of it.]

Chestnut. Tr. IV. 4. Cheverel, [Leather of Gote's skin.] Cheveron, [Tooth
(like) lines.] Chevin, [Chub.] Fi. IX. 8. A. Chew, [Mastication.] -- the Cud,
[Re-masticate.]
Chibbol, [Young Onion.] Chickling. HS. II. 5. underground -- HS. II. 7.
Chick, [Hen (young.] -- weed. HS. V. 9. A. Bastard -- HS. V. 10. berry bearing
-- HS. IX. 8. A.
Chide, [Reprove angrily.] Chill, [Cold (dim] Chilblain. S. III. 7. Child. By
Relation. Natural. TO. I. 2. O. to be with -- [to have conceived.] -- in the
womb, [Embryo.] -- birth, [Parturition] -- bed, [the Bed in which adj. a. pret.
Part^^ition lies.] in -- [adj. a. pret. Parturition.] Adventitious. Foster --
TO. III 2. O.
God -- TO. III. 1. O. Ward -- TO. III. 4. O.


By Age. [Infant] Boy.


Childhood. [Infancy] Mea. VI. 1. Boy's age, Mea. VI. 1. A.

Childish, [adj. Child (like.] Childless, [Not-parent.] Chime. [Tune with the
Bells] [Ring melodiously]
Chimaera, [adj. Fiction (thing.] Chimist. [O. VI. (mech.] Chimny. Po. III. 9.
A. Chin. PG. III. 8. A. China, [root of an Indian climbing plant.] Chine, [Bone
of the Back.] Chin-cough, [adj. a. pret. Duration (aug.) Cough.] Chink, Chap.
Mag. V. 4. O. Chip. TM. VI. 5. to -- [Cut into Chips.] [From-cut the outside.]

Chiromancy, [Wizarding by the sight of hand.] Chirp. dim. Singing. AC. III. 5.
A. Voice of Birds, [a. Sparrow (voice]
Surgeon. [adj. RC. III. 2. (person] Chit, [Cat (young] Chitterling,
[Smallest gu^s.] Chivalry, [War (art.] sp. adj. Horseman.]
Chives, vid. Cive. Chocolate. Tr. IV. 7. Choice. Subst. [Election] RC. IV. 2.
[Diversity] [Many of diverse Kinds.] Valors.]

Adject. [Excellent]
Choke, [Strangle.] RC. V. 8. Choler. PG. I. 6. A. -- adust, [melancholy]
Choleric. [adj. Choler] [adj. Anger (apt.]
Choose, [a. Election.] As to do. AS. IV. 5. As to Office. RC. IV. 2. may --
[is adj. Liberty.] cannot -- but, [is adj. p. Determination.]

Chop. [Mince] Pr. III. 6. A. -- ing knife, [Mincing (inst.] -- ing block.
[Supporting (inst.) for the chopped (thing.]
[Cut by striking] -- of mutton. [From cut (part) -- ] sp. adj. Proportion.]
-- in, [Come sudden.] [Exchange]

Chord. Mag. II. 6. A. Chorister, [adj. Singing (Off.] Chorus.
[together-Singers (Aggr.] [Players together-speaking (aggr.]
Chough. By. I. 6. A. Chrism, [Anointing.] Christ. G. II. Christen, [Baptize.]
Christendom, [World of Christians.] Christianity. RE. I. 4. Christmas,
[Festival (time) of Christ's birth.] -- day, [Festival day of Christ's birth.]
Chromis. Fi. V. 7. Chronicle. [Relation of things done according to the Series
of times.]
Chronology. [History of times.] [Computing (art) of times]
Chrysocoll, [Borax] Chrysolite. PP. V. 6. A. Chub. Fi. IX. 8. A. Chuckle,
[Laugh (augm.] sp. Inwardly.]
Church. Society, [RE. (aggr.] Temple. Po. II. 4. -- warden, [adj. Temple
(Off.] -- yard, [Court of Temple]

Churching. RE. IV. 6. Churl, [adj. Churlishness (person.] Churlishness.
[Rusticity] Man. IV. 9. D. [Moroseness] Man. IV. 7. D. op. to Alms. Man. III.
5. D.
[Roughness]
Churn, [Motion (freq.) vicissitudinary.] Chur-worm. [Fen-Cricket.] Ex. II. 2.
A. Chyle. PG. I. 3. Chymic Operation. O. VI. Cicada. Ex. IV. 6. -- aquatica.
EX. II. 4. A.
Cicely. Sweet -- HF. IV. 3. wi^d -- HF. IV. 3. A.
Cicutaria. Cider, [Wine of Apples.] Cimex, [Punice] Ex. II. 6. A. --
sylvestris. Ex. II. 3.
Cinders, [Fiery ashes] -- of Sea-cole, [Charred remainders -- ]
Cinnabar. Met. III. 5. Cinna^ion, Tr. VII. 8. Cinqfoil. HF. IX. 2. Cipher.
[adj. Number (sign) Character.] [Character] [Secret Character]
[Number] to -- [adj. a. Number (art.]

[Nothing (sign) Character.]
Cypres, [Transparent Linen.] -- Tr. V. 6.
Circle. Mag. III. 2. By which the World is divided. W. VI.
Circuit. [Region] [Margin of Circle]
Circular, [adj. Circle.] Circulate, [About-going] Circumcision. RE. VI. 5.
Circumference, [Circle about- adj. Margin.] Circumflex, [Long sounding.]
Circumlocution, [Express by many words.] [Paraphrase] D. V. 5. A.
Circumscribe, [About -- a. compass.] Circumspect, [Cautious.] Circumstance. T.
VI. 3. Circumvent, [a. Fraud.] Cistern, [a. Keeping (vessel) for Water.]
Citadel, [Castle.] Po. II. 2. Citation. Summons RJ. II. 1. [Quotation] D. IV.
9.
Citerior. Sp. II. 2. E. City. RC. III. 3. A. Citizen. RC. I. 6. Citrine, [adj.
Citron color.] Citrinella. By. VI. 2. Citron. Tr. I. 8. Citrull. HS. VII. 2.
A. Cittern, [Little musical (instr.) having brass strings.] Citysus. Sh. II. 6.
A. Cive, HL. IV. 10. A. Civet, [Sweat of the Civet Cat.] -- Cat. Be. IV. 4. A.
Civil. [adj. Civility] [adj. City] [adj. Civil relation] -- Relation. RC. --
Lawyer. RC. II. 2. -- War. [War between men of the same Nation.] Commonwealth.]


Civility. [Courtesie] Man. IV. 7. [Complaisance] Man. IV. 8.
Clack, [Knock (freq.) sound.] a -- [adj. Knock (machin.]
Clad, [Clothed] Clay. El. IV. 4. Claim. TA. I. 3. Clamber, [Climbe adv.
Difficult.] (corr.]

Clamminess. Q. VI. 4. E. Clamor, [Exclaim] AC. III. 3. O. Clancular, [Secret.]
Clandestine, [Secret.] Clap. AC. V. 5. -- up. [Finish adv. sudden] [Imprison]
sp. suddenly.
-- of thunder, [sound (imp.) of th.]

Clapboard, [Oaken (lamins) for lining Rooms.] Clapper. [Box] Pr. V. 2.
Instrument, [Striking (part) of ringing (instr.]

Claret, [Red French Wine] Clary. HF. VII. 10. Wild -- HF. VII. 10. A.
Clarify. [Separating the course (parts.] [a. Clear (make.]^
Clash. [against-Strike] sp. reciprocally.]
[a. Contention]
Clasp. [Hook] [Embrace]
Clasper, [Tendril.] PP. II. 7. A. Class, [Series.] Classic, [Authentic.]
Clatter, [Jarring.] Clause. D. III. 1. Claw. as of man, [Nail.] a -- back,
[Fawner.] as of Beast. PP. VI. 5. A. as of Bird. PP. V. 3. as of Shellfish.
PP. IV. 7.
to -- [Scratch.]
Clean. [Pure] TM. V. 6. Quite and -- perfectly] Totally]

Cleanliness. Man. II. 6. Cleanse. [Clean (make.] [a. Innocent (make.]
[Vndefiled (make.] [Un a. guilty (make.]

Clear. Entire of it self. -- ly. [Wholly.] Not mingled with other. [Simple.]
sp. not with worse. [Pure] [Not hindered from being doing Receiving
(perf.]
E.g. in any genus, as of Quality or Relation NP. -- understanding, [Und.
(perf.] -- sight, [Sight (perf.] as to Mind. [Ingenuous] [Sprightly]
as to the Body. [Sound] [Indolent] [Beautiful]

Ha. -- repute, [Rep. (perf.] sp. [Sagacious] [Sincere]

Man. [Candid] [Frank]
Quality. Visible. [Lightsom]

-- weather. El. VI. 1. [Bright] [Transparent] Unspotted. Q I. 5.

Audible. -- sound. Q. III. 7.
RC. [Not in Debt] TA. IV. 9. RJ. [Not in Guilt] RJ. II. ^ RM. [Not in War] RM.
II. 7. RE [Not under Censure] RE. V. 5. O. S. [Not Infected.] Diseased.]
Not hindered from being done. [Easie]
Not hindered from being known. [Plain] [Manifest]
Not hinderd from being Come to. Passed through. [Accessible] [Empty] [Passable]



Cleaver. [Cleaving (instr.] [Knife (augm.) to strike with]
Cleavers. [goose-grass] HL. IX. 9. A. Cleaving. Sticking. [a. Clammy]
[Adhering]
Chapping, [apj. p. Chink.] as with a Wedge. O. I. 3. Cloven-footed.

Clear, vid. Clear. Cleft. [Chink] Mag. V. 4. O. [adj. p. Cleave]
Clematis. Sh. V. 7. Clemency. Man. VI. 8. Clergy. RE. II. Clerk. [adj. Church-
Writing
(Officer.] [adj. Clergy (person] [adj Church (off.] -- of Church, [Minister's
subordinate (officer.] [adj. Writing (offic] -- of Exchequer. -- of Rolls.
Gentleman's -- -- of Market. [adj. Market (off.]
Clew, [Bottom.] Click, [a. Sound as Watch.] Clicket, [Lust.] sp. of Rabbets.]
Client. [Dependent] [adj. p. Advocate (person]
Cliff. W. III. 3. A. Climacteric, [adj. a. Altering (apt.) seventh year.]
Climate, [adj. p. Latitude (place) of 13 hours, 13 and a half, etc] Climb. Mo.
II. 5. Climber of Virginia. Sh. V. 8. Clinch. -- a Nail, [Fix it by re-knocking
folding
the point of it.] -- ones Fist, [Fold the hand.] a -- [Urbanity (endeavor) by
similitude of words.]
Cling. AC. VI. 9. Clink, [a. Sound as Chains.] Clip. [Cut] O. V. 4. A.
[Embrace]
Clock. Po. VI. 6. A. what is it of -- [what hour is it according to the -- ]
Clod, [Lump.] Clog, [Hinder.] Cloy. [adj. p. Excess (make] [adj. a. Nauseate
with abundance.]
Cloister. [House of Monks] [Roofed walking (place]
Cloak, [Wide outer (Vest] to -- [Cover] [Pretence] [Conceal]

Cloke-bag, [Sack to be tied behind the Saddle.] Closeness, Nearness impeditive
of Penetration. Nearness of thing to thing.
[Nearness] [Contiguity] [Continuity] of the parts of a thing. The Extremes.
[Narrowness]

The Middle parts. Closeness, Q. V. 3. [Densness] Q. V. 3. E.

Impeditive as to the Surface. to close. [adj. Hide.] [adj. Conceal]

Periphery. to close. [adj. a. Sepiment]
a Close. [adj. p. Sepiment (place]

Top. to close. with its own. [adj. Shut] [adj. p. Whole] as a Wound.
with another. [adj. Cover]


Side. to close. [Together-join] [Together-fold] as a Letter.

End. to close, [adj. a. Finish.] Of Penetration; by

Ey, [Darkness] as of weather. Ear, [Silence.] Reservedness.] Hand, etc.
[Fastness] [Penuriousness]


Closet, Room (dim.) for privacy] Clot. -- bird. -- burr.
Cloth. Stuff for Clothing [adj. Clothing thing] Cotton -- Pr. IV. 4. A. Hair
-- Pr. IV. 1. A. Linn^n -- Pr. IV. 4. Woollen -- Pro. IV. 1.
-- worker, [adj. cloth (Mechanic.]
Clothe. [make Cloth] put on [adj. p. Clothing (make]

Clothing. Pr. IV. Clottered, [Coagulated] Cloud. El. III. 2. Clove. -- of
Garlic, [Bulb of the root] -- tree. Tr. III. 9.
Cloun, vid. Clown. Clout. [Fragment of Cloth] [adj. Mending (thing] to --
[Mend by addition.] [Strengthen by addition.]
Clown. [adj Country (corr.] [adj. Rusticity (person] -- ishness, [Rusticity.]

Clu, [Bottom.] Mag. VI. 7. Club. Weapon, RM. V. 2. [Society.]
Cluck, as a Hen. [Calling (voice]
Clung. [adj. a. preter. Cling] [together-adhering]
Cluster. PP. II. 4. [adj. aggregate (thing]
Clutch. [Talon. PP. V. 3. (Aggreg.] [Hand] PG. V. 3. Holding. TA. V. 5.
(augm.] to -- [Shrink] AC. V. 5. O. [Together-fold] O. III. 5. [Hold (corr.]


Clutter. [Confused Motion] Sound]

Clyster, [Medicinal drink for fundament.] Coach. Po. V. 1. -- man, [Coach
(Officer.] -- box, [Seat of Coach (Officer.]
Coaction. AS. IV. 9. O. C^adjutor, [With-helper.] Coagulating. O. VI. 2. A.
Coalition [a. Uniting. [p. Uniting.
Coarctation. [together-joyning (augm.] [Shrinking]
Coast. Quarter, [Country near.] Seacoast, [nigh- adj. Sea Country.] to --
[Travail (end.) by conjecture.]
Coat. Garment, [Outward close (vest.] -- of Male, [Woven (like) armor.] -- of
Arms, [Nobility [Gentility
(sign. Cottage, [Rustic house (dim.]
Cobble. [Mend, (corr.] [a. Unskilful] Ha. VI. 3. O.
Cob-iron, [Supporting (instr.) for Spit.] Cobbler, [Mending (mech.) of Leather
(vest) for foot.] Cobweb, [Spider's woven (thing] Cock [Male] sp. bird] [Bird,
By. II. 1. (male] -- 's comb. HS. VIII. 7. -- 's head. HS. III. 5. A. heath --
By. II. 5. A. -- of the wood. By. II. 5.

Exanguious. Sea -- Ex. VI. 6. A. -- Roches. Ex. I. 7. A. winged -- Ex. II. 3.
A.

Instrument. -- of Dial, [Pin -- ] -- of Gun-lock. [adj. a. Fire (machin.] --
for Water, [Lock of Pipe.] Weather -- [Winde (sign) instrument.] -- of Hay,
[Heap -- ] -- boat, [Boat (dim.]

-- swain. RN. V. 6. A.

Cockall, [Dicing with heelbones.] Cockatrice, [Serpent killing by Sight.]
Cocker, [adj. a. Fondness.] Man. VI. 7. D. Cocket, [Writing of Tribute (off.)
for impor^ export
of wares]
Cockle. Fish. Ex. VIII. 5 A. Herb. HS. V. 6. A.
Cockrel, [Hen (male) (young.] Coco. Tr. IV. 6. Cocothraustes. By. IV. 4. --
Cristatus. By. IV. 4. A.
Cod. Fish. Fi. III. 1. -- of Plant. PP. III. 5. A. -- of Animal, [Testicles
(vessel.] -- piece, [adj. Privities (vest.]

Codicil, [Added writing.] Coequal, [Equal.] Coerce, [Cohibit.] Coessential,
[Of the same Essence.] Coetaneous, [Together in Age.] Coeternal,
[Together-eternal.] Coexistent, [Together-existent.] Coffee. Tr. IV. 7. A.
Coffer, [Chest.] -- er, [Keeping (off.) of Treasure.]
Coffi. Tr. IV. 7. A. Coffin. [Receiving (vessel] [Box for dead body]
Cog. -- of Mill, [Tooth of wheel.] to -- [Fawn.] [a. Fraud.]

Cogitation, [Thinking] Cognation of things. T. VI. 8. Cognizance.
[Acknowledging] of Cause. RJ. II. 4. Badge, [Service (sign.]
Coheir, [Together-heir.] Coherent. [Together Sticking.] Joining.]
[adj. Congruity]
Cohibitive cause T. II. 2. O. Cohobation, [Repeated Distillation.] Cohort,
[Troop.] Coy, [adj. Aversation (apt.] Ooif, [Close adj. head (vest.] Coil,
[Confused Motion.] Sound.]
to -- a rope, [a. Spiral.]
Coin* -- of a Wall., [Corner -- ] [Mony] to --
[a. Money (make] [a. Print] sp. in Metal] [a. Fiction] [a. Forgery]
Coincident, [Together-adj. Event] Coistrel, [adj. Adolescence (male.] Coit.
[Lamin. adj. p. cast (apt.] Coition. AC. II. 5. A. Colander, [adj. Streining
(vess.] Cold. -- to sense. Q. V. 1. D. [Remiss]
a -- [Disease from cold]
Cole. Live -- [Fired fuel (Part] Dead -- [un-fired fuel (part] Sea -- St. VI.
3. A. -- black, [Black (augm.]

Cole-rake, Instr. Cole-mouse. By. VI. 7. A. Cole-wort, [Cabbage.] HS. IV. 6.
Colet, Concave (place of Ring. Gem (place of Ring.
Colic S. VI. 5. Coll, [Embrace.] Collar, [Environing (armam.] for neck.]
Collateral. [of the same Series] [Accessary]
Collation. [Giving] [Right of giving] [Refection. Pr. I. 1. A.] [Comparing.
TA. II. 5.]
Collect, [adj. Epitome prayer.] Collection. [a. Gathering] [adj. p. Gathering
(thing.]
Collective. [Together-gathering] [adj. Aggregate]
Collector, [adj. a. Gathering Person.] Officer.]
College. RC. III. 7* A. sp. of Scholars.]
Colleague. [Companion.] [Together adj. p. Leag.] adj. p. College.] Officer.]

Collier, [Fuel (mech.] (merc.]
Colli-flower, [Cabbage] Collision. [Together striking.] [Reciprocal striking.]
Collogue, [Fawn.] Collop. [Chip] [Slice]
Colloquy, [Together-discourse.] Collusion, [Agreeing to cheat.] Colon. [adj.
Fundament Gut.] Period. D. I. 6.
Colonel, [Regiment (Off.] Colony. RC. III. 1. A. Coloquintida. HS. VII. 4.
Color. Q. II. [Pretext] -- s [adj. Ensign Cornet
(thing]
Coloss, [Image (augm.] Colt Horse (young] Ass (young]
-- s-foot. HL. VI. 1. mountain -[Horse foot] HL. VI. 3.
Columbine. HS. I. 2. A. Column, [Pillar Poss. III. 5.] Colure, [Meridian
through Tropics.] Comb. [Combing (instr.] to -- O. V. 9. A. Crest. PP. V. 7.
Cox -- Herb. [adj. Folly (person] [adj. Formalness, Man. IV. 6. E. (person]
Honey -- [Bees Chambers (aggr.]
Combat, [Fighting.] Comber. [Burthen] [Trouble] [Hinder.]
Combine. [Together-a, join.] league.] faction.]

Combustion. [Burning.] [Contention] [Sedition.]
Come. Motion toward to
TA. VI. 1. sp. from a remoter term to a nearer. -- about, [Turn.] -- after,
[Follow.] -- again, [Return.] -- at a thing, [Obtain.] a person, [Assault.]
-- back* [Return.] -- by, [Obtain.] -- forth. [become visible.] known.]
[be manifested] -- forward Proceed.] p. Increase.]
-- in, [Submit.] -- off, [p. Event.] -- upon equal terms. RM. II. 1. --
Victor. RM. II. 1. E. -- Loser. RM. II. 1. D. -- on, [Proceed.] -- over, [P.
Convert.] -- a person, a. Craft.] a* Fraud.]
-- out. [become visible.] known.]
[be manifested.] -- to v. Event.] p. Sum.]
-- to good, [v. Event. (perf.] -- to hand, [v. Event -- ] -- to light* p.
Manifest.] p. Public.]
-- to Mind, [adj. p. Memory.] -- to naught, [v. Event] (corr.] nothing.]
-- to pass, [v. Event.] -- to self, [Return to former Condition.] -- up,
Become visible.] Grow visible.]
-- upon, [Assault.] -- with, [Bring.] Being.
[future.] to -- [adj. future.]
[near.] [present.] (inc.) [adv. End.] -- short. [v. Defect adv. End.] -- to,
[p. Sum adv. End.]
[adv. Total.] -- to, [p. Total.]
Being the Effect. -- of it, [Be the Effect -- ]
Being the Event. Vide supra.
Appearing. Forth -- ing, [adj. fut. Appear.]
Parturition.
Comedy, [Play with merry Conclusion.] Comely. [Decent] [Handsom]
Comet. W. II. 3. A. Meteor. El. I. 2.
Comfet, [adj. p. Confection (thing) with Sugar.] Comfort. TO. VI. 3. Comfrey.
HL. IX. 4. Comical, [adj. Comedy] [adj. Mirth]
Comity, [Courtesie.] Man. IV. 7. Comma. D. I. 5. Command. v. Precept. TO. V.
1. [a. Master] [a. Magistrate] at ones -- [adj. p. Command Govern
by one.] a commanded Party. RM. IV. 6.

Commander. [Commanding (Person. (Off.
[adj. Wood (instr.) for indriving Columns]
Commemorate [Re- a. memory (make.] [a. Memory solemnly.]
Commence. [Begin] [Take a Degree] [Be made -- Doctor.] Master.]
-- an Action, [a. Action.] RJ. II. O.

Commend. [Praise.] -- to self. TO. V. 7. -- to others. TO. V. 8. Entrust,
[Deposit]
[Speak ones Salutations to remembrance
(another.]
Commendations. To do ones -- Speak ones Love.] Be Messenger of ones
Salutation.] Instead-salute.]
Letters o- Praise. a. Trust (make.

Commensurate, [Together-proportioned.] Comment. D. V. 6. -- ary. D. V. 6.
Commerce. TA. IV. Commination, [Threat.] TO. V. 6. O. Commiserate, [a. Pity.]
AS. VI. 7. O. Commissary, [Officer.] Ecclesiastic, [Instead-Judge Eccles.]
Military, [adj. Provisions (off.]
Commission. RC. IV. 4. A. -- er, [Commission'd (person.]
Commit. [Doe] fp. as Fault.]
[Entrust] as Prisoner, [a. Imprisonment.]

Committee, [Authorized persons (aggr.] [Council (dim.]
Commixtion. [Mixture] [Together-mixture]
Commodious. [Congruous] [Convenient] [Profitable]
Commodity. [Convenience] [Profit] [Ware]
Common. [adj. All Every Many
Op. to Proper. TM. IV. 6. O [Public.] TM. V. 4. [adj. People] -- wealth. [adj.
RC. (thing] [Common Prosperity.] [Government by the People.]

[Obvious] [Frequent] [Usual] [Not-consecrated]
Commonalty, [People (kind] Commons, [not-Lords.] -- of Victual. [Proportioned
Food. Provisions
-- for Ca^tel. [Common Pasture] [Peoples Pasture]
Commotion. [Motion] [Sedition] [Trouble]
Commune, [Confer.] AC. V. 7. A. Communicate. [Common (make] [Partnership
(make] [Known (make]
Communication. [Conversation] [Conference] AC. V. 7. A. [Discourse]
Communion. [Together -- Union.] Partnership.]
[Lord's Supper.] RE. VI. 6. A.
Community, [Common (kinde] Commutation. [Commerce] [Exchange]
Compact. [Together-join (augm.] [Close (augm.] [Agreement] [Together-league]
[Covenant]
Company. [Together Being Going Traveling
[Companion (abst.] [adj. aggregate (thing] [adj. Multitude (aggr.] [Society]
[Convention] [Corporation] of Soldiers. RM. IV. 2.
To -- [Together- Be Go Travel

Companion. Fellow. TO. IV. 2. [Accessary (person] [Urbane (person] [Sorry
(person]
Compare. TA. II. 5. In Comparison of, [Being compared with]
Compass. [About-goe] [Goe about the out-side] fetch -- [Go, adv. Curve]
[About-sepiment] [v. Circle] Mariners -- [Box to direct Navigation] [adj.
Magnet (Jug.) (Vess.)

Pair of -- [Writing (instr.) of Circles.] [Comprehend] [Obtain] -- of a year,
etc. [Space -- etc.]
Compassion, [Pity] TA. VI. 7. O. Compatible [Together- agreeing. adj.
Congruous.
Compeer. [Like] [Companion]
Compel, [a. Coaction] Compellation, [a. Name.] Compendious. [adj. Shortness]
[adj. p. Epitome]
Compendium. [Epitome] [Short method]
Compensate. TA. II. 7. A. Competent, [Sufficient.] Competitor, [Rival.]
Compile. [Compound] [a. Book (make]
Complacence. [Delight] AS. IV. 7. Virtue. Man. IV. 8.
Complain. [Grief (sign] [a. Accuser]
Complaisance. Man. IV. 8. Complementing. AC. V. 7. Complete. [Perfect] [adj.
p. Finishing]
Complexion. [Aggregate] [Composition] [Temper] [Colour of Face]
Complie. [v. Congruity] [Follow] [Imitate] [Please by v. Congruity.]
Complicated, [Together aggregated entangled Mingled.
Accomplices. [Together-leagued (persons] [Companions] [Accessories]
Comportment. [Gesture] [Demeanor] [Conversation (manner]
Compose. [Together-put] -- a Book, [a. Book Verse, [a. Verse
(make
[a. Order (perf.] [Un-confused (make]
[adj. a. Agree (make] [a. Quiet]

Compound. [Together put join
[Make of many parts] [a. Mixture] [Covenant to pay Less than ones debt.]

Comprehend. a. Capacity. TA. II. 4. [Understand All Perfectly Totally

Compression. O. I. 3. O. Comprize, vid. Comprehend. Compromise,
[together-submit to Arbitration] Compulsion, [Coaction] Compunction. [Remorse]
[Repentance (inc.]
Compurgation. [a. Innocent by witness]
Computation. [Account] [Numbring]
Con-over, [again-say (freq.) for remembering.] Concatenation,
[Together-chaining.] Concave. Mag. III. 4. D. Conceal. TA. I. 8. O. Conceit.
[Fancy] [Opinion] [Witty saying]
Conceitedness, Ha. III. 3. D* Conceiving. [a. Common sense] [a. Fancy] [a.
Understanding] [a. Thought] -- with young. AC. I. 2. A.
Concentre, together -- centre] adv. Same centre]
Conception. AC. I. 2. A. Concern, [v. Pertinent.] Proper.] Profitable.]
Concerning. [Pertinent] [Of]
Concession. D. VI. 3. A. Concillator, [Reconciler.] Concise, [adj. Shortness.]
Concitation, [Impulsion.] Conclave [Chamber sp. Secret.] [Council sp. Secret.]
Conclude. [End] [Finish] [Determine] [v. Inference]
Concoct, [a. Digestion.] Concomitant. [adj. Simultaneity] [Together-being]
Concord. [Agreeing] Symphony. Q. III. 8.
Concordance, [Catalog. for finding of words] things]
Concorporate, [Together- a. Body a. Corporation
Concourse. [Together-coming (augm.] [Convention (augm.]
Concrete. [Coagulate] op. to Abstract. D. II. 2. O.

Concubine. Appropriated Whore] instead-Wife]
Concupiscence. [Appetite.] [Desire] [Lust] [Nature (corr.] [Original Sin]
Concur. [Meet] [Together -- be agree come

Concussion, [Shaking] Condemn. Sentence. RJ. II. 7. O. [Blame] [Disapprove]
Condense, [dense.] Condescend. [a. Man. VI. 2.] [Permit]
Condescension. Man. VI. 2. Condign [Worthy] Conditing. Pr. III. 9. A.
Condition. T. II. 4. [Quality] [Disposition] Capacity. TA. II. 4. [State]
[Supposition] [Covenant]
Condole, [Together-grieve] Conduce, [a. Help.] Conduct. [Leading] TA. VI. ^.
[a. Officer] Safe -- [Licence of safe going]
Conduit, [Aqueduct] Po. II. 8. A. Cone. Mag. III. 7. Fruit. PP. III. 5.
Confection. Pr. II. 2. A. Confederacy, [League] RC. III. 8. Confer. [Give] TA.
IV. 4. [Compare.] TA. II. 5. Discourse together. AC. V. 7. A.
Confess. [Acknowledge] another praise. our own. Sin. RE. IV. 2. Error. D. VI.
9.


Confessor. adj. Hearing (Person (Officer
for confession of Sins]
Sufferer for Religion. RE. III. 3.
Confidence. Affection. AS. V. 7. [Assuredness] AS. III. 6.
Confident, [adj. Confidence.] ones -- [ones adj. a. counsel adj. p. trust
friend]
Confine. [a. Finite] [a. Cohibit] TA. II. 2. O. [a. Imprisonment]
Confines, [Margining Countries] Confirm. [Strengthen] sp. More strengthen.]
[More-assure] [a. Witness.] -- ation. D. VI. 6. A.
-- Ecclesiastic. RE. IV. 8.
Confiscation. RJ. VI. 7. A. Conflict. [Fight] RM. I. 7. [a. Contention]
Confluence [Together- Coming (aug. Convention
Conform. [adv. Congruous-do] [So-do] [a. Obedience]
Confound. [adj. p. Confused (make] [Mingle] [adj. p. Shame (make] [Posing] D.
VI. 8. [Destroy] AS. I. 4. O.
Confraternity. [Colledge] [Corporation] [Penitents, (aggr.] RE. II. 6. A.
Confront, [a. Opposite present] Confused, [adj. Confusion.] Confusion.
Disorder, TM. V. 2. O. [Shame (augm.] [Destruction] AS. I. 4. O.
Confutation. D. VI. 7. Confute, [a. Confutation.] Congeal. [a. Coagulate] [a.
Gelly Ice
(make]
Congee. AC. V. 4. Conger. Fi. VI. 1. Conglutinate, [together- glue] join]
Congratulate, [a. Joy for good of others.] AS. VI. 6 Congregation,
[Convention] Congruous, [adj. T. V. 5.] Conic [adj. Cone.] Conie. Be. III. 4.
Conjecture. -- ing. AS. II. 7. A.
Conjugal, [adj. Marriage] Conjugate. [Together-derived] Conjugation, [Forming
(manner) of endings of Verbs] Conjunction. [Joining] Particle. D. II. 9. A. --
of Planets [neerness]
Conjure. [a. Witchcraft] [a. Entreat (augm.]
Conjurer, [a. Witchcraft (person.] Connection, [Joyning (manner] Connive.
[Tolerate secretly] [Not hinder] [Not-punish]
Conquer. RM. II. 7. E. Consanguinity. TO. I. Conscience. NP. I. 3. Stupidity
of -- NP. I. 3. O.
Conscientious, [adj. Conscience (perf.] Conscionable. [According to
Conscience] [adj. Equity]
Conscious. [Knowing] [Together-knowing] [Accessory]
Consecration. RE. V. I. -- of Bishop, [a. Bishop (make]
Consectary [Inference Additional] Accessory]
Consent. AS. II 3. with one -- [Together-Adv. IV. 1. consenting]
Consequence. [Illation] [Importance] sp. Future]

Consequent, [Inference] Conserve. [Confection] Pr. II. 2. A. to -- [Preserve]
[Confect] -- ation. AS. I. 4.
Consider. Think. AS. III. 2. [Compensate] TA. II. 7. A. -- ing. AS. III. 2. --
that, [Whereas] Con. IV. 1.
Considerable, [Important.] Considerateness. Ha. IV. 1. Consideration.
[Impulsive] [Respect] [Compensation]
Consign, [Assign] RC. V. 1. Consist. [adj. p. Simultaneous] [Agree] -- ence.
Tactil Quality. Q. V. 5.

Consistory. Council Council (place sp. Ecclesiastic.] sp. Of Bishops.]

Consolation, [Comfort] Consolidate. [a. Wholeness] [a. Closeness]
Consonant. [Congruous] Letter. D. I. 2. A.
Consort. [Companion] [Harmony] -- of Music. Q. III. 6. A.
Conspicuous. [adj. p. See (apt.] [adj. Manifest (augm.]
Conspire, [a. Faction] Constable, [Subordinate adj. a. peace (Off.] Constancy.
Ha. IV. 7. Constellation, [Stars (aggr.] Consternation. [Fear (augm.] [Extasie]
sp. through Fear.]

Constipation. [Together-thrusting] [a. Close]
Constitute. [a* Cause] [a. Efficient]
Constitution. [a. Efficient] [Appointment] [Law] [Edict]
[Mixture] [Disposition] [Temper of mind] NP. IV. [Temper of body] NP. V.

Constrain, [a. Coaction] Construction. [a. Efficient] [a.Interpret]
Consul, [Magistrate of City.] Consult. [Together- Consider] Counsel*]
[Ask advice] [Take advice]
Consume, vid. Consumption. Consummate. [a. Perfect] [a Finish]
Consumption. [a. Decay (make] [Diminish] [Spoil] [Destroy] [Corruption]
Disease. S. II. 2. A. -- of the Lungs. S. V. 3.
Contact. [Touch] [Contiguity]
Contagion. S. I. 1. Contaminate, [Defile.] Contein. [Comprehend] TA. II. 4.
[Keep chast]
Contemn. AS. II. 8. O. Contemplate, [Meditate.] AS. II. 1. A. Contemporary,
[adj. Simultaneity.] Contemptible, [adj. p. Contemn (apt.] Contend, [a.
Contention.] Content. [Capacity] [Contentation] Ha. I. 3. [Satisfaction] AS.
III. 5.
Contentation. Ha. I. 3. Contentiousness. Man IV. 3 D. Contest, [Contention in
words] Contexture, [Together -- Weaving] Joining]
Contignation, [Together joining of Floors.] Contiguity. Sp. II. 2. Continence,
[Chastity] Continent. [adj. Chastity] Land. W. III. 2.
Contingent. T. V. 7. O. Continue. [a. Permanence] [a. Duration] [Stay] -- ed
-- Quantity. TM. II.
Continual. [Permanent] [Perpetual]
Continuance. -- of Place. Sp. II. 7. -- of Time, [Permanence.] In -- of Time.
[After much Time] [At length]


Contrabanded, [Forbidden to be imported.) Contract. [Together-draw] [Bargain]
RC. V. [Betroth] [Obtain] -- a disease, [adj. p. Disease.]
Contradiction. D. VI. 4. A. Contradictory, [adj. Contradiction] Contrary. T.
V. 5. O. Contribution. [Giving] sp. Proportionable] sp. Free.]

[Tax]
Contrition, [Remorse] Contrive. AS. III. 7. Control. [Observe Faults]
[Censure Faults] [Reprehend] [Cohibit] -- er, [adj. Cohibiting (Off.]
Controversy. [Dispute] [Suit]
Contumacy. Constancy (Exc.) Ha. IV. 7. E. op to Obedience Man. V. 8. D.
Contumely, [Affront.] Contusion O. IV. 1. A. [Bruise] S. I. 1. A.
Convey. [v. Way] [Lead] [Carry] [Send] -- ance. [Carriage] [Sending]
[Contrivement] [Alienating Writing]
Convene. [a. Citation] [v. Convention]
Convenience. Agreeableness. T. IV. O. [Congruity] [Expedience]
Convenient. [Congruous] [Expedient]
Conventicle, [Secret Convention (corr.] Convention. RC. III. Converging. Mag.
II. 7. D. Conversant. [adj. Conversation] [Accustomed] [Expert]
Conversation. Man. A. Qualification for -- Man. IV.
Convert. [Turn (make] [Apply] [Proselyte] RE. III. 6. [Penitent] RE. II. 6. A.
[Reform] TO. VI. 7.
Unequal. Mag. III. 4. E. Conviction. D. VI. 8. A. -- by Law, [Prove Guilty.]
Convocation, [Convention Ecclesiastic.] Convoy, [Travelling Guard.]
Convulsion, S. IV. 7. Cook, [Cookery (mech.] -- ery. Pr. III. 1. A.
Cool, [Cold (dim.] [a. Cold]
Coop, [Prison of Parallel Sticks] to -- [Imprison] [Environ]
Cooper, [adj. Barrel (mec.] Cooperate, [Together-operate] Coordinate, [Of
equal Height] Degree]
Coo^. By. VIII. 8. Copal. Tr. VIII. 4 A. Copartner. [Partner] [Accessary]
Cope. [Change] [Fight] [Prune] Priest's --
Copy. Original. T. II. 3 Set a -- [a. T. II. 3.]
Transcript. T. II. 3. O. -- out. [a. T. II. 3. O.] -- hold [Estate for life]
[Tenement for life]


Copious, [Abundant] Copped. [Sharp topped] [adj. p. Point]
Copper. Metal. Met. I. 4. [Kettle]
Copperas, [Vitriol.] St. V. 2. A. Coppis, [Place of Trees (dim.] Copula. D.
II. 6. Copulation, [Coition.] Copulative, [Joining.] Coracinus. Fi. IV. 2.
Coral. St. II. 6. Cord Pr. IV. 7. A. Cordage, [Cord (kind] Cordial. [adj.
Heart] [Heart-strengthning Medicin] [adj. Sincerity.]
Cordylus [Lizard (kind) having a tail annulated with scales.] Core. [Heart
(like) part] [Middle (part] sp. Hardest part]

Coriander. HF. IV. 1. A. Cork. Tree. Tr. V. 2. A. [Wood of Cork Tree] [Stopple
of Cork-wood]
Cormorant. By. IX. 5. Corn. [Plant for adj. Bread] Standing -- [Not-reaped] --
field, [Field of -- ] -- flagg. HL. IV. 6. A. [Seed for Bread] [Grain] PP. III.
^. -- on the Toe. S. III. 6. A. [Powder] TM. VI. 4. A. To -- [a. Powder] Pr.
III. 7. A. sp. with Salt.]


Cornel-tree. Tr. II. 3. A. Cornelian, [Sardius] St. III. ^. Corner. [Angle]
Mag. III. 2. A. [Tooth] Mag. IV. 2. [Notch] Mag. IV. 2. O. -- of the eye, [Dent
-- ] [adj. Hiding (place]
Corner. Ensign. RM. III. 2. A. Music, [Bass pipe.]
Corollary, [Inference additional.] Coronation, [Solemnity of a King (make.]
Coroner, [Enquiring (Off.) of Murder.] Coronet, [Head-environing,
Nobility-sign, Ornament.] Corporal, [adj. Body.] -- of Soldiers, [Subordinate,
adj. Watch (Off.] -- of a Ship RN. V. 2. A.
Corporation. RC. III. 7. Corporeal [adj. W. I. Op.] Corpse, [Body.] -- dugard,
[Gard (aggr.]
Corpulent. [Having great Body] [Fat (augm.]
Correct. End or Effect. General. [Repair] TA. II. 9. [a. Right] [Mend] TM. I.
9. E.

Moral. [Reform] TO. VI. 7.
Means or Instrument. Words. [Reprehend] TO. V. 7. O.
Deeds. [Punish] Ha. I. O. Chastise. TO. VI. 6.

Correlative, [Together-relative.] Correspond. [a. Congruity] [a.
Reciprocation] [adv. Reciprocal Congruity] Friendship] Known (make]

Corrival, [Rival] Corroborate. [Strengthen] [Confirm]
Corrode. O. VI. 3. Corrosive, [adj. a. Corroding (apt.] Corruption. General,
[a. Evil] T. III. 2. O. [a. Worse] TM. I. 9. D.
By Admi^^tion. [Defiling] TM. V. 6. O.
By Privation. Of its Being. [Destruction] AS. I. 4. O.
Of its Usefulness. [Spoiling] TA. II. 9. O.

Natural. [Infection] S. I. 1. [Decay] NP. V. 4. O. [Putrefaction] NP. V. ^. O.
Moral. General. [Unholiness] Ha. V. ^. O. [Vice] Man. I. 1. O.
Special. [Unchastness] Man. II. 7. O. [Bribery] RJ. IV. 6.

Corslet. [adj. Trunk (armour] [Pike-man]
Cortex. -- febrifugus Per^vin^us. Tr. VII. 9. -- Winterianus. Tr. VII. 9. ^.
Coruscation. [Flame (imp.] [Brightness] sp. Trembling (like.]
Cosmography, [Science of the World.] Cost. [Expence] [Price]
Costard, [Apple.] Costive, [adj. p. Binding.] Costly, [adj. Cost (augm.]
Costmary, [Ale-cost.] HF. II. 4. Cottage, [House (dim.] Cotton. -- tree. Tr.
IV. 8.. -- cloth. Pr. IV. 4. A. -- weed [Cudweed] HF. II. 5. A
Couch. [Contrive together] [adj. a. Prostrate.] sp. Shrinking] [ a -- Po. VI.
6. A.

-- weed, [Dogs grass] HL. III. 3. A
Covenant, [Paction.] Covent, [House of Monks.] Coventry Bell. HS. VII. 7.
Cover. [un-seen (make.] Put over. O. II. 3. [a. Clothing] Pr. IV. -- a book,
[a. Book (mech.] [a. Coition] AC. II. 5. A. [Un-seen (make] [Conceal]
Coverlet, [Upper Vest Covering
of Bed.] Covert, Hiding (place.] Protection (place.] Defense (place.]
Coverture, [Protection.] Covet, [a. Desire.] Covetousness. Man. III. 1. D.
Cough. Mo. IV. 5. Covie, [Birds (aggr.] Coul. [Tub] Monk's -- [ -- head (vest.]

Could, [Mood. II. 1.] Coulter, [a. Ploughing iron (inst.] Council. RC. III. ^.
A. Counsel, [Advise.] TO. V. 4. keep -- [a. Taciturnity.]
Count. Earl, [Third degree of Nobility.] to -- [Esteem] [Reckon] TA. IV. 6.
[a. Sum]


Countenance [Face (Habit.] (Manner.]
out of -- [not knowing which way to look.] [Posed] [Ashamed] to --
[Encourage] [adj. p. Reputation (mak^]
Counter. [Mony (like) of base Metal] [Prison for Offenders (dim.] Debtors
(dim.]
[adv. Contrary.] -- b^nd, [Bond for indemnifying-Surety.] -- charge, [Accuse
adv. Reciprocation.]

Counterfeit. [a. Likeness] [Imitate] sp. Fraudulently.]
[a. ^eem (make] [a. Feign] [a. Forge] [a. Hypocrisie]
Countermand, [Command contrary.] Countermine. RM. I. 5. O. Counterm^re,
[Opposite wall.] Counterpane, [Upper (vest) for bed] Counterpart, [Other
Example.] Copy.]
Counterpoint, [Congruous part in Music,] Counterpoise, [Oppositely weigh]
Counterpoison, [Medicin against poison.] Counter-scarf, [Opposite Rampire.]
Counter-tenor, [High Mean] Countervail, [Compensate equally.] Countess, [Earl
(^em.] County, [Shire,] Country. op. to Town. RC. III. 2. [Region] W. III. A.
ones own -- [Ones Nation (place]

Countryman, vid. Country. Couple. [Together-two] sp. Joined.]
[Necks -- joining Bonds.] Armam.]
[Unite] [Join-two] [a. Coition]
Courage, [Fortitude.] Courier, [Messenger for dispatch.] Course. Subst. [Way]
Water -- [Stream] [Journey] [Running] [Hunting] [Persuit]
[Order] [Series] first -- [ -- dishes (aggr.]
[Turn] [Sail]
[Custom] words of -- [adj. Custom words]
[Manner] -- of life Doing Living
(manner.
Adj. [Profession] Gross. Q. VI. 3. D. [Sorry.] TM. I. 4. D.


Courser. [adj. p. ride (apt) horse] [Horse for running]
Courses, [Menstruum.] PG. I. 4. A. Court. -- yard. Po. III. 3. [King's Family]
^C. III. 5. [King's House] [Judgment (place] [Judicial Convention] -- days,
[Daies of judicial Convention.] to -- [a. Suito^]
Courteous, [adj. Courtesy.] Courtesan. [Common Whore] Courtesy. Virtue.
[Civility] Man. IV. 7. [Affability] Man. VI. ^.
Thing, [adj. a. Benefactor (thing] Salutation. AC. V. 4. A.

Courtier. [King's domestic.] [adj. Courtesy (augm.] Complement (person]

Courtliness, [Complement (ab^tr.] Courtship, [Converse adj. Complement (augm.]
Cosen. TO. I. 5. A. first -- TO. I. 5. to -- [a. Fraud]
Cow, [^ull. ^e. II. 1. (fem.] -- with Ca^f, [Pregnant Cow.] -- heard, [adj.
Cow (Off.] to -- [a. Coward (make.]
Cowardice. Man. I. 7. D. Cowcumber. HS. VII. 3. wild -- HS. VII. ^. A.
Cow^ing, [Stooping] Cowslip. HS. VIII. 1. A. Cow wheat. HS. VIII. 8. A.
C^^co^b, [adj. Man. IV. 6. E. (person.] Crab. -- fish. Ex. VI. 6. Mol^c^a --
Ex. VI. 7. A. Little -- Ex. VI. 4.
-- louse, [Crab (like) -- ] -- tree, [Sour Apple Tree.] Fruit, [Sour Apple.]
Crabbed. [Austere face (manner] [^orose] [Difficult]
Crack. [Break] sp Incept.] [Chink]
[Sound as of Breaking] [^rag] -- brained, [Mad (dim.]
Crackle, [Sound (freq.) of breaking (inc.] Cradle. [Bed^^ead (dim.) adj. p.
Volutation (apt.]
Crafish. Ex. VI. 3. Craft. Cunning. Ha. VI. 2. E. [Mechanic (art.]
Crag, [Rough augm. Rock.] Rocky hill.]
Cram, [Fill (augm.] sp. by thrusting.]
Cramp. S. IV. 7. A. -- fish, [Torpedo.] Fi. II. 4. -- iron, [Iron hooks for
joining.]
Crane. Bird. By. VIII. 1. -- fly. Ex. IV. ^. -- 's bill. HS. I. 5. Machin,
[Great listing (machin.]
Crank. [Vigorous] [adj. Mirth]
Cranny, [Chink.] Crash, [Break.] [Sound of breaking]
[Fit]
Crassitude. [Thickness] TM. II. 5. [Density] Q. V. 3. E. [Courseness]
Cratch, [Vessel in which (...) feeds.] Crave. [a. Desire] [Entreat] [Petition]
Craven, [Coward.] Cravingness, Covetousness] Scrapingness]
Craw, [Stomach] sp. of Bird.]
Crawling, Creeping] Mo. I. 6. Wriggling]
Craze, [Bruise.] sp. the Superficies.]
Crazy, [adj. Sickness (apt.] Creak, [Acute sound of solid bodies mutually
rubbing.] Cream, [Best Part.] sp. of Milk.]
Create. Proper. AS. I. 1. [a. Efficient]
Creature, [adj. p. Create (^hing] Credence, [Belief] Credible, [adj. p.
Believe (pot.] Credit. [Believe] AS. II. 4. [Esteem] AS. II. 8. [Repu^ation]
^a. II. 4. [Trust.] AS. III. 4.
Creditor. TA. IV. 7. Credulity. Ha. III. 2. E. -- in Religion. Ha. V. 4. E.
Creed, [Epitome of adj. p. ought-believe (things.] sp. in Christianity.]
Creek, [Bay (dim.] Creep. Crawl. Mo. I. 6. [Wriggle] Mo. I. 6. A. as Ivy,
[Grow contiguous.] [a. Fawning] -- in, [Get in Secretly.] Gradually.]

Crescent, [Increasing.] sp. Moon.]
Cresses. garden. -- HS. VI. 5. Indian -- HL. VI. 12. Sciatica -- HS. VI. 5. A.
Sw^^es -- HS. VI. 6. A. Water -- HS. IV. 15. Winter -- HS. IV. 7. A.
Crescet. Supporting (j^g.) for boiling vess.] -- light, [Not-cover'd Lantern.]
Crest. [Comb] PP. V. 7. -- fallen, [Discouraged (augm.] -- of Helmet, [Comb
(like) -- ] -- of Arms, [The Gentry (sign) upon the head (armor.] [Mane] PP.
VI. 4. A.
Crevit [Chink] [Crafish]
Crew, [Companions (aggr.] Crewet, [adj. Glass-pot (dim.] Cry. [Grief] [Weep]
AC. IV. 3. O.
Vocal. [Exclaim] AC. III. 3. -- out, [a. Part^rition (inc.] -- out upon
[Accuse publicly. [Blame publicly.
-- mercy, [Entreat for pardon.] -- quittance, [compensate] Proclaim, [a.
Crier.]

Crib. Pinch] [Penurious (person]
[Oxe's Eating (place]
Crick, [Pricking] A^. II. 7. sp. through Cold]
Cricket. Ex. II. 2. Fen -- [Eve-(...).] Ex. II. 2. A.
Crier. RJ. I. 5. A. Crime. RJ. III. -- not-capital. RJ. IV.
Crimson, [Red adj. blood (like.] Cringe, Congee (augm.] (freq]
Cripple, [adj. p. Impotence in Limbs.] Crisis, [adj. Judgment (time] (sign]
Crisping, [Curling.] O. V. 5. A. Critic. [Judger of words] Critical, [adj.
Judge (apt.] Crochet, vid. Crotchet. Crocodile. Be. VI. 3. Crocus. HL. IV. 7.
A. Croft, [Field (dim.] Croke. [a. Toad Raven
(voice] As the Bowels, [Sound through wind enclosed.]
Crone, [adj. Decrepit person.] Crook. a -- [adj. Crookedness (thing] Mag. III.
1. O.
[Hook] [Saddle of sticks curved upward.] to --
[adj. a. Bend] [adj. p. crooked (make] [Hook (make]
Crookedness. Mag. III. 1. O. Crop. -- of Bird, [first Stomach -- ] -- of Corn,
[adj. p. Heap (aggr.) -- ] to -- [Off- pluck*] tear.] break.]

Crosier, [adj. Bishop's Staff.] Cross. Figure or Site. [Oblique] Mag. II. 8.
[Transverse] Mag. II. 8. D. -- cloth, [adj. Transverse forehead (vest.] to -- a
River, [To go over a River.] Decussated. Mag. IV. 4. A. -- of wood, etc. [adj.
Crucifying (jug) -- etc.] sp. adj. Cross (fig.]
[Image of adj. Crucifying (jug.] to -- himself, [To a. Cross (sign) upon -- ]
-- bow. RM. V. 4. A. -- way, [adj. Cross-way]

Quality. transcendent. [Contrary] [Opposite]
moral. [Perverse] [Contentious]
[Morose] [Disobedient]

Event (corr.) [adversity] of action. to -- [Frustrate.]
of instrument. to -- [Spoil] sp. with transverse line.]



Crossbill. By. IV. 5. A. Crosswort. HL. IX. 8. A. Crotchet. [Hook (dim.] [adj.
Music Letter] [Invention (corr.] [a. Craft (dim.]
Crouch. [Stoop] AC. VI. 4. sp. Adoration (sign.] [Fawn]
Crowd. Throng, [Togeth^r-thrusted (aggr.] Fiddle, [Music (instr.) adj.] p.
strike sound
with Bow]

Crow. Bird. By. I. 5. A. -- 's foot. HF. IX. 4.
Instrument, [adj. iron adj. lifting (instr.] to --
[a. Cock (voice] [a. Triumph (voice] [a. Boast (corr.]
Crown. Diadem, [Head-environing Kingship (sign) Ornament] -- of the head, [Top
-- ] -- imperial. HL. IV. 1.
Money, [5 shillings (aggr.]
Crucible, [Vessel for melting of metals by Fire.] Crucify. RJ. V. 8.
Crucifix, [Image of Christ crucified.] Crude, [not boiled prepared digested
Pr. III. O. Cruelty. Man. I. 5.. D. Cruet, [Small Glass (vess.) for oil, etc.]
Crum, [Powder] -- of bread, [adj. Inside (part) -- ]
Crumble, [Crums (make] Crump, [Sinew-contracted.] -- foot, [Shrunk -- ] --
shoulder, [Prominent -- ]
Crumpled. HC. VI. 3. A. Crupper. [Rump] [Hinder stay of Saddle] [adj. Rump
(armam.]
Cruse. [Bottle (dim.) of Glass.] to -- [a. Scout.]
sp. for Booty.]
Crushing, [Bruising.] sp. by Compression.]
Crust. -- of Shel-fish. PP. IV. 2. A. -- of Bread, [Out-side -- ] sp. Hard.]
Crustaceous [adj. PP. IV. 2. A.] Crutch. [fig. T] Mag. IV. 4. Staff of lame
(person]
Cryptography, [Secret writing art.] Crystal. St. II. 4. Cu. [Sign] [Beginning
(sign]
[Foot (armam.) for Ox]
Cub Bear (young.] Fox (dim.]
Cube. Mag. III. 5. O. Cubeb. Cubit. Limb. PG. V. 2. Measure, [Length from
Elbow to fingers top.]
Cucking-stool, [adj. a. Diving (jug.) of Scolds.] Cuck^ld, [Husband of
Adulteress] Cucko^. By. I. 3. -- flower. HS. IV. 15. A.
Cuckquean, [Wife of Adulterer] Cucumber. HS. VII. 3. Cud, [Upper Stomach.]
chew the -- [Again-masticate, adj. p. pret. Swallowed (thing.]
Cudgel. [Staff] [Club (dim.] [Cudgelling (instr.] -- ing. RJ. VI. 2. A.
Cudwort. HF. II. 5. A. Cuff, [Ornament for Handwrist.] to -- [Strike with
folded hand.]
Cuirase. [adj. Trunk (armor.] Cull, [Elect] sp. to have.] Cullis, [Broth of
Poultry.] Culpable, [adj. p. Blame Reprehend
(apt.]
Cultivate, [Manure.] Culture, [Manure.] Culver, [Pigeon] Culverin, [Great
Ordnance (kind] Cumber. [a. Burthen] [a. Trouble] [a. Hinder]
Cummin. HF. V. 7. A. Cunctation. Ha. IV. 1. E. Cunny. Be. III. 4. Cunning.
[Art] [Craft]
Cup. Pr. V. 9. A. -- bearer. [adj. Cup (Off.] -- of a flower. PP. II. 8. to --
Mo. IV. 7. A.
Cupboard [Table [Box
sp. for Cups] Cur, [Dog of ignoble breed, good only to accompany.] Curasier,
[Armed (perf.) Horseman.] Curate, adj. Parish Priest] Subordinate Priest]
Instead- Priest]
Curb. [Cohibiting (part) of Bridle] [Cohibiting (augm.) Bridle] to -- [Cohibit]

Curdle, [Coagulate.] Cure, [Re-health] -- of Souls, [Officership for Souls.]
Curiosity. [Perfection] [Excellence] [Beauty (augm.] [Diligence (augm.] op. to
Science. Ha. VI. 1. E.
[Niceness] Man. II. 6. E. [Intemperance. Man. II. O. as to Ornaments] Dainties]


Curlew. By. VIII. 9. Curling. O. V. 5. A. Curr, vid. Cur. Currants. Sh. I. 1.
A. Current. Subst. [Stream]
Adj. [Genuine] [Perfect] [Approved] [Adj. Custom] RC. IV. 1. A. [Common] TM.
IV. 6. A. [Ordinary] TM. V. 3. Year -- [ -- present]

Curry. [Comb] O. V. 9. O. sp. Horse.]
-- comb, [adj. Combing (inst.) for Horse.] [Prepare Leather.] -- favor.
[Fawn for -- ] [Endeavour (corr.] for -- ]
Currish [Dog (like.] Curse. Action of God. AS. I. 3. O. Action of man.
[Excommunicate] [Imprecate]

Cursy. AC. V. 4. A. Cursory. [Swift] [Rash] [Slight]
Cursed. [Execrable] [Fierce] NP. IV. 4. O. [Angry] Man. I. 9. D. [Morose]
Curtain. [Shadowing (vest) before- adj. hang (apt] sp. about Bed.]

Curtal. [Off-cut Tail] [adj. a. Brevity]
Curtesan, [Common adj. Fornicator (fem.] Curtle-ax, [Short Sword.] Curve.
[Crooked.] Mag. III. 1. O. Curvet. [Go leaping.] Cushion. Po. VI. 5. A. Cusp,
[Point.] Mag. IV. 2. Custard, [Pie of Milk and Eggs, etc.] Custody. [Keeping]
[Garding] [Imprisonment]
Custom. Use. RC. IV. 1. A. [Habit] [Manners] [Tribute upon Merchandise.] --
er. In buying or selling. TO. IV. 6.


Cut. Discontinue. sp. by edged (thing) interposed. Body, sp. Consistent. Mo.
VI. 7. Earth. [Dig] water -- [Furrow for -- ]
[Plough]
Stone, etc. [Carve] [Grave]
Plant. [Fell] [Prune]
Animal. [Wound] horse -- s [-wounds himself.]
[Un -- a. Testicle]
Parts excrementitious. [Pare] [Shave] [Clip]
Flesh, etc. [Mince] [Chip] [Slice] [Slash]
Plain or Line, [a. Intersection.] Room, [a. Partition] -- a caper, [Leap with
Legs trembling (like.]
Hurt. Sense. -- ing, [Acrimonious.] [Intense]


Mind. [a. Grief (augm] [a. Anger (augm]
Estate, [a. Fraud.] Diminish. [a. Short] [Dispatch]

Separate. -- off, [a. Separate.] [Excommunicate.] [Destroy.]

-- purse, [Thief] -- throat, [Murtherer.] [Lot]

Cuticle, [Skin. PG. II. 3. outermost] Cutler. [Sword (mech.] [Fabrile (mech)
of cutting (instr]
Cutter, [Robber.] [Swaggerer]
Cuttle-fish Ex. IX. 2. Lesser -- Ex. IX. 2. A.
Cycle. -- of Sun, [Revolution of 28 years, in which the Dominical Letter
returns to be the same.] -- of Moon, [Revolution of 19 years, in which the same
Lunations return.]
Cygnet, [Swan (young.] Cylinder. Mag. III. 6. Cylindroides. Ex. VII. 3.
Cymbal, [Round brazen Music (instr.] Cynical. [adj. Dog (like.] [Morose]
Cypress. Tr. V. 6.
D.
DAbble, [Move (freq.) in wet (thing.] Dabchick [Dydapper] By. VIII. 7. Dace.
Fi. IX. 10. Daffadil. HL. IV. 4. Dag, [Gun (dim.] Dagger, [Short Sword (dim.]
Daggle, [adj. a. Dirt (dim.] sp. the Margin.]
Day. 24 hours. Mea. V. 5. holy -- [adj. Festivity.]
to -- [In this -- ] Time of Light. Mea. V. 6.^ -- break, [Day (inc.] -- time,
[Day (time.] broad -- [adj. Perfect Manifest
-- ] far -- [Late in the -- ] [Victory] RM. II. 1. E.

Days-man, [Arbitrator.] Daily, [adj. days (segr.] Dainty, [Nice] -- s,
[Sustenance extraordinary.] Pr. II.
Dairy. [adj. Milk (kind.] [adj. Milk (room.]
Dale, [Valley.] Dally. [Playing] O. O. [a. Fondness] Man. VI. 7. O. [a.
Wanton] NP. IV. 3. O. [Protract] TA. III. 5. O.
Dam. [Parent (fem.] Impedient ridge] adj. Stay (make ridge] to -- up adj. a.
Impedient a. Stay
with ridge]
Dame, adj. Noble fem.] adj Gentle fem.]
Mistress, [Master (^em.]
Damage. [Loss] [Hurt]
Dammask, [Fine Linen of Damascus] to -- [a. Damascus (manner.]
Damn. as God -- Ha. I. 4. O. as man -- [Condemn.]
Damnifie, ]a. Damage.] Damosel, [Young Celebs (fem.] Damp. Subst. -- fiery.
El. I. 7. -- watery. El. II. 5. A. Adj. [Moist] Q. V. 2. (dim.)
Damsin, [Plum adj. Damascus] Dancing. Mo. V. 5. Dandelion. HF. III. 12. A.
Dandiprat, [Little (dim.) man.] Dandle, [Shaking (dim.) in ones arms.] Dandraf,
[Scurf of the head.] Daneswort. HS. IX. 9. Danger. T. V. 3. O. Dangle, [Hang
swinging.] Dank, [Moist] Q. V. 2. Dapper, [Little nimble] Dapple. Q. II. 7. A.
Dare. Fish [Dase] Fi. IX. 10. Venture. [adj. Fortitude] [adj. Bold] AS. V. 8.
-- not, [Fear*]
[Challenge] RM. I. 2. -- larks, [a. Fear (make.]
Darkness. to the Sight. Q. I. 1. D. to the Understanding. D. III. 9. O.
Darling, [Most beloved] Darn, [Sow knitting (like.] Darnel. HL. III. 5. Dart.
RM. V. 5. Meteor. El. I. 4. A.
Dase. Fi. IX. 10. Dash. Action. [Motion (imp.] sp. Fluid against hard.] or
Hard against fluid.] [Cast] Mo. VI. 2. [Strike] Mo. VI. 4. [Write (imp.]
[Mixture] sp. with worse.]

Effect. [a. Fall] [a. Hurt] [Break] [Scatter parts (dim.] [Spoil] [Destroy]
[adj. Shame Despair
(make]

Dastard, [Coward.] Date. Fruit. Tr. II. 4. A. Time. Sp. I. 5. out of- [Old
[Late
(exc.]

Daub, vid. Dawb. Daucus, [Wild Carret] Daughter, [Child (fem.] -- in Law.
[Child (fem.) by Affinity.] Husband's Daughter] Wife's Daughter] [Sons Wife]



Daunt. [Fear (make] [Discourage]
Daw. By. I. 6. Dawb. [Plastering] [Smearing] [Defiling by Smearing]
[Bribing]
Dawl, [Dull with weariness.] Dawning, [Morning (incept.] Dazy. HF. II. 3. A.
great -- HF. III. 3. blew -- HF.II. 14.
Dazzle, [a. Dull with Light (exc.] Deacon. RE. II. 5. A. Dead deprived Being.
Power. Action.
Wanting Being. Power. Action. -- Being. [adj. pret. Dying] -- pay, [pay of the
Dead.] -- place, [place of the Dead.] [Not-adj. living]

-- Power. Natural [Impotent] Sense. [num'd] [extasied] sp. with fear.]

-- asleep [Dead (like) through -- drunk [Dead (like) through Sleep]
Drunkenness]
Vigor, [Dull] Strength, [Weak.] Transcendent, [Remiss.]
-- Action. Motion. -- water, [adj. Pool -- ]
Affecting the Sense. Sight.
-- Color, [Remiss. -- ] Hearing. -- of the night, [Quiet (time) -- ] Taste Q.
IV. 6. O^ Smell Q. IV. 6. O^ Feeling. -- cole, [Unfired -- ] -- wall, [adj.
Yielding Q. VI. 1. -- ] -- nettle, [Archangel]





Deadly. (adj. Dying (make] [Not-adj. p. end (pot.) until death]
Deafness. NP. III. 2. O. Deal. do [adj. Action] [a. Conversation] [a.
Business] sp. (merc.] -- between, [a. Mediator.]
distribute, [Give (segr.] a -- [Quantity] [Fir board]

Dean. [Chief of Bishop's Assessors] [College (Off.]
Dear. [adj. p. Love (augm.] [adj. Price (augm.]
Dearn, [Sow knitting (like.] Dearth, [Scarcity.] TM. I. 2. D. Death. Proper.
AC. I. 7. O. Put to -- [adj. a. Die (make] [a. Punishment capital]
[Cessation] [Decay]

Death-watch. Ex. V. 6. Debarr, [a: Impedient.] Debase, [a. lowness meanness
(make] Debate. [a. Contention] [a, Dispute]
Debauch, [adj. Vice Sensuality Riotousness
(make]
Debilitate, [a. Weakness.] Deboist, adj. Vice Sensuality Riotousness
Debonair. [adj. Temper. NP. II. (perf.] [Sprightly] [Merry]
Debt. TA. IV. 7. O. Decad, [Ten] Decalogue, [the Ten Commands of God.]
Decaying. NP. V. 4. O. Decease. AC. I. 7. O. Deceive. [a. Fraud] [a. Error
(make] [Frustrating] sp. ones Expectation]
[doe Beside- Contra-
expectation.]
December, [Twelfth month.] Decent. T. V. 2. Deception, vid. Deceive. Decide.
[a. Sentence] [Finish] sp. Suit]

Decimation, [Tenthing] Decipher. interpret obscure Characters.] Explain
obscure Characters.] read obscure Characters.] [Un-conceal]
Deck, [Floor of Ship.] to -- [a. Ornate (make.]
Declaim, [a. Oration for.] against.]
Delare. [Interpret] [Shewing] [a. Manifest] [a. Public] -- for, [Own
publicly.]
Declension, [Changing (manner of the ends of Nouns] Decline. [a. Diverge] --
ing Dial, [Erect Plain whose Surface is not situated toward North or South.]
[Avoid] [Decay] -- ing age. Mea. VI. 3. A. -- a Noune, [a. Declension.]
Declivity. [Obliqueness] sp. Downward verging]

Decoction. [Boiling] [Boil'd (thing] sp. Infusion]

Decoy. Po. I. 6. A. Decorum, [Decency] Decrease, [Diminish] Decree* [Purpose*]
[Sentence*] [Edict]
Decrement. [Diminution] [Loss]
Decrepit, [adj. p. Stooping.] sp. with Age.] -- age. Mea. VI. 4. A.

Decretal, [adj. Decree.] Decuple, [Ten-fold] Decussation, [Crossing] Mag. IV.
4. A. Dedicate. As to God, [Consecrate.] RE, V. 1. As to Man, [Give to the
Honor Patronage
of -- ]
Deduce, [a. Illation.] Deduct, [a. Ablatum.] Deed. [Action.] T. I. 7. in very
-- [Truly]
[Writing] RC. VI. 5.
Deem. [a. Opinion] [a. Thought]
Deep, whose bottom is far from its top. Natural as the whole. deep. [adj. TM.
II. 3.] the -- [Sea] thick. [adj. TM. II. 5.] Six -- [Six in file]

as a part. [adj. Inward]
-- color, [Dark (dim.) -- ] -- Sound. Q. III. 1. D. -- Notion [hidden]
[obscure]
[adj. under] [adj. bottom]
Transcendental, [adj. Intense] -- sleep, [Sleep (int.]

Deer. fallow -- Be. II. 4. red -- Be. II. 3.
Deface. [Un-a* Figure] [Spoil] [a. Deform] [Destroy]
Defalk, [a. Ablatum] Defame. [adj. Infamy (make] [a. Calumny]
Default, [Defect] -- of appearance, [Not appearance.]
Defeat. [Frustration] [Overthrow]
Defecation.. [a. Pure (make] [Un-worst part.]
Defect. TM. I. 3. D. Defection. [Apostasie] [Rebellion]
Defense, vid. Defend. Defend. Oppose. RM. I. 1. O. Protection. TO. VI. 5. [a.
Prisoner] RJ. I. 3. O.- [a. Defendent] RJ I. 4. O. [a. Advocate] RJ. I. 7.
Defendent. RJ. I. 4. O. Defensive, [adj. Defend.] -- arms. RM. V. 1. A.
Defer. [a. Late (make] -- before Action, [Respite] -- in Action, [Protract.]
Deferenoe, [Respect.] Defy. RM. I. 2. O. Deficient. TM. I. 3. D. Defile. TM.
V. 6. O. [a. Vice.] [adj. Vice (make] [a. Unchast]

Define. [a. Definition] [a. Sentence]
Definite. [Finite] [Express]
Definition. D. IV. 3. Definitive. [Express] [adj. a. Sentence] [adj.
Finishing]
Deflour. [a. Fornication] Defluxion [Distilling] [Catarrh]
Deformity. NP. V. 6. O. Defray. [Disburse] [Pay]
Defraud, [a. Fraud] Defunct, [adj. a. pret. Dying.] Degenerate. [Not-ancestor
(like] [Spurious]
Degrade. RJ VI. 8. Degree. T. VI. 6. -- of person. RC. I. -- in University,
[Graduate (thing]
Measure. Mea. I. 9.
Dehort. [Dissuade] Deject. [Down-cast] [a. Sorrow] [a. Despair]
Deify, [a. God (make] Deign, [a. Condescension.] Deity, [God (abstr.] Delay.
[a. Late Slow
(make] disposition, [Cunctation] -- before Action, [Respite] -- in Action
[Protract]
Delectation. AS. IV. 7. Delegate* [adj. p. Substitute (person] [Instead -- Put
Sent Judging
(person.]
Deliberate. AS. III. 1. -- ness. [Considerateness] Ha. IV. 1. [Slowness] NP.
V. 9. O.

Deliberation, vid. Deliberate. with -- [Considerately] [Slowly]

Delicate. [adj. a. Delight (apt.] [adj. Pr. II.] Tender, [adj. NP. IV. 7. O.]
[Over-neat] Man. II. 6. E. -- s, [adj. Pr. II. (thing]
Delicious, [adj. Delectation Pleasure
(aug.] Delight. AS. IV. 7. Delineate. [a. Line] [a. Description. D. IV. 3.]
sp. by Lines]

Delinquent. [Guilty] [Prisoner]
Delirium. [Dotage] NP. II. 2. O. [Frenzy] S. IV. 1.
Deliver, [Motion (met.) of the Possession of Power over
a thing] from one person to another.]
-- things. TA. IV. 13. as Intrusting, [Deposite] as Paying, [Pay] as
Disclaiming, [Resign] -- words of Fact, [Narration] Doctrine, [a. Teacher]
-- immediately. -- by Mouth, [Speak] -- by Pen [Write.] -- mediately,
[Tradition] RE. VI. 1. A. -- from better to worse] Passively. [Dereliction] AS.
I. 5. O.
Actively. Involuntary, [Yielding] Voluntary, [Betraying]
-- from worse to better] Temporal. [AS I. 5.] Preventing. [Preserve] [a.
Escape]

Remedying. [Un-captivate] [Un-slave] [Un-imprison] [a. Parturition] to be --
ed, [Parturition]
Eternal, [Redemption.] AS. I. 7.
Delve, [Dig.] Delude, [Deceive] Deluge, [Over-flowing.] Delusion, vid. Delude.
Demand. -- to know, [a. Question.] -- to have. TA. IV. 2. O. -- as Price. RC.
VI. 2. A.

Demean. [Land which the Lord of the Manor uses.] [a. Demeanour]
Demeanor. AC. V. Demerit. [Worthy (abstr.] [Earning]
Demi, [Half] Demi-cannon. Demi-god, [God (dim.] Demi-lance. Demise. RC. V. 5.
Demiss. [Low] [Humble] [Abject]
Democracy, [Government by the People.] Demolish. [a. Ruin.] Demon, [Spirit]
sp. Devil] Demoniac, [Inhabited by Devils.] Demonstrate. [Shew] [a. Certain by
Argument]
Demur. Hesitate. AS. IV. 3. O. [Ask more time for considering] before
answering.]

Demure. [Grave] [Formal]
Den, [Cavity under- adj. ground] Lion's etc. -- [Lion's etc. (house]
Deny, D. VI. 2. O. self -- Ha. V. 3.
Denison, [Admitted member of Nation.] Corporation]
Denominate, [adj. p. Name (make.] Denote, [a. Meaning.] Denounce. [Publish]
[Threaten]
Density. Q. V. 3. E. Dent. Mag. IV. 3. O. Dentex. Fi. V. 5. A. Dentifrice,
[Teeth-cleansing (thing.] sp. Powder.]
Deodand, [adj. p. ought Almsgiving (thing] Depart. [Go] TA. VI. 1. O. [From-go]
[Die]
Dependent. Op. to Absolute. TM. IV. 3. O. Op. to Patron. TO. III. 5. O.
Deplorable. [adj. a. Grief (apt] [adj. Misery (augm.]
Deplorate, [adj. p. Despair.] Deplore. [Sorrow (aug.) for] [Shew sorrow (aug.]
for]
Depopulate, [Un-people.] Deportation, [Carrying into Exile] Deportment,
[Demeanour] Depose. [Down Put Lay
[a. Privative] -- from Dignity, [Degrade] -- from Office, [Incapacitate] --
from Orders, [Deprive] [Swear] sp. before Magistrate]
Deposite. RC. V. 1. A. Deprave, [a. Evil make.] Deprecate. TO. V. 3. A.
Depreciate. [Un-a. valor] [Diminish the worth]
Depression. Down-forcing. O. I. 1. O. [Shallowness] TM. II. 3. O.
Deprive. [a. Privative] -- of Possession, [Un-possess.] -- of orders. RE. V.
2. O.
Depth, vid. Deep. TM. II. 3. Depuration. [a. Pureness] [Un -- a. Scum] a.
Sediment]

Deputy, [adj. Substitute (person] Dereliction. [Abandoning] TA. II. 2. O. --
to Evil. AS. I. 5. O.
Deride, [Mock.] RJ. IV. 9. A. Derision, [Mocking.] RJ. IV. 9. A. Derive, [a.
Derivative] Derivative. TM. IV. 1. O. Derogate. [From-take] [Diminish] sp.
Praise.] Reputation]


Descant, [a. Paraphrase.] Descend, [Down-ition.] Descendent. TO. I. 1. O.
Descent. [Down-ition.] as of Ground, [Down-obliquity.]
[Descendent. TO. I. 1. O (abstr.] [Extraction]
Descry. [See (inc.] [Finde by Sight] sp. From far.]

Describe, [a. Description.] Description. D. IV. 3. A. Desert. Merit. [adj.
Worthy (thing] (abstr.]
[adj. p. Earn (thing.]
Wilderness. [Not-inhabited] [Not-inhabitable country] [Banket] Pr. II. 1. A.
to -- [Forsake]
Desertion [Forsaking] Deserve. [a. Worthy] [a. Earn]
Designing. Internal. TA. III. 1. External [Appoint]
Desire. In Affection. AS. V. 5. In Words. [Intreat] TO. V. 3.
Desist. AS. IV. 6. O. Desk. [Supporting (jug.) for Book] [Box to write upon]
Desolate. [Solitary (augm.] [Not-inhabited] [adj. Grief (augm.]
Despair. Affection. AS. V. 8. O. Sin. Ha. V. 5. O.
Desperate. [adj. p. Despair.] [Rash (augm.]
Desperation. Affection. AS. V. 8. O. Sin. Ha. V. 5. O.
Despicable. [adj. p. Contempt (apt] [Sorry]
Despise, [Contemn] Despite. [Contempt] [Malignity] [Done (thing) for to anger
one.] [Affront]
Despondency, [Despair,] (inc.] (dim.]
Destine. [a. Purpose] [a. Fate.]
Destiny, [Fate] Destitute. [adj. Defect] [adj. p. Forsake]
Destroy, [a. Destruction] Destruction. Action of God. AS. I. 4. A. [Spoiling]
Desuetude, [Un- a. custom.] Detect. [Discover] [Un-conceal] [Manifest]
Detein. [Hold] -- unjustly. RJ. IV. 3. A.
[Stay (make]
Determine. [Finish] [a. Desist] -- the Liberty of the Will. AS. IV. 8. O. --
by ones own [a. Purpose] AS. IV. 3. -- by another [Sentence] RJ. II. 5. A.

Deter. TO. V. 5. O. Detest. [Loath (augm.] [Hate (augm.]
Detract. [a. Ablatum] sp. From Reputation.] [Under-say] Man. IV. 1. D.
[Calumny]
Detriment. [Loss] [Diminishing]
Devastation. [Destruction] [Spoiling]
Divest, un-a. clothe] a. privativeness]
Deviate, un-a. clothe] a. privativeness]
[Wander] [Err]
Devil. W. I. 2. O. -- 's bit. HF. II. 13. A. -- 's dirt, [adj. Vitriol earth]
-- 's milk, [Spurge.] HS. V. 2.
Devilish, [adj. Devil.] Devise. [Invent] [Contrive] By Will, [Bequeath]
[Feign] [Forge] a --,
[adj. Craft (thing] [Stratagem]
[Posy]
Devoir. [Endeavour] [Duty]
Devolve. [Successive to -- Putting] [Final to -- Ition]
Devoted. [adj. p. Vow] [Consecrated] [adj. Zeal]
Devotion. [Worship (hab.] [Zeal]
Devour. [a. Ravenous. NP. IV. 5. O.] [a. Glutton] [Eat up all] greedily]

Devout, [adj. Devotion.] Dew. El. III. 3. A. -- claw, [adj. Heel-claw.] --
grass, [Grass (kind) a. Seed (apt) millet (like] -- lap, [Loose skin of the
neck.]
Dexterity. [Agility] [Art. (perf.]
Die. [v. Death*] vid. Death. a. Color. O. V. 3. A. a -- [adj. Dicing*
(instr.]
Diabetes, [Disease of Pissing (exc.] Diabolical, [adj. Devil. W. I. 2. O.]
Diadem, [Head-environing King (sign) Ornament.] Diagonal. Ma. II. 3. Diagram,
[Lined figure.] picture.]
Dial. [Time-shewing (instr.] sp. By shadow.]

Dialect, [Language (manner.] Dialogue, Discourse altern.] Conference altern.]
Diameter. Ma. II. 5. Diamond. Stone. St. IV. 1. Figure, [Square] sp. of
not-right Angles.]

Diaper, [Linen] Diaphanous, [Transparent] Diaphoretic, [adj. a. Sweet (make].
Diaphragm. PG. VI. 3. Diary, [Narration of days (segr.] Diarrhaea. S. VI. 6.
Dibble, [adj. Setting (instr.] Dicacity, [Loquacity.] Dice, [adj. Mo. V. 1. A.
(instr.] to play at -- Mo. V. 1. A. -- ore.
Dichotomy, [Division into two.] Dicker, [Ten skins of Leather.] Dictate, AC.
III. 6. Dictator, [Chief adj. Authority (Off.] Dictionary, [Book for words.]
Didapper, [Dabchick] By. VIII. 7. Dier. [adj. Dying [art.] -- 's weed. HF. I.
11.
Diet. [Regulated victual (manner] [Council] RJ. III. 5. A.
Differ, [v. Difference.] Difference. Proper. T. IV. [Diversity] T. III.
[Dissent] [a. Contention] making a --
[Distinction] [Partiality]
Difficult. T. V. 4. O. Diffident. AS. V. 7. O. Diffuse. [Spread] [Infect]
Dig. O. III. 1. Digest. Natural. AC. I. 5. A. Chymic. O. VI. 5. [a. Order]
Dight. [Clothing] [Adorning]
Digit. [Inch] [Inch (like]
Dignifie, [a. Dignity.] Dignity. [Worthiness] T. IV. 6. High degree. Ha. II.
5.
Digression. D. V. 9. A. Dike. [Ditch] [Gutter] [Furrow]
Dil. HF. V. 1. A. Dilacerate, [Tear] Dilapidate. [Ruin] [Suffer to decay*]
Dilate. [a. Breadth] [a. Ampliation]
Dilatory, [adj. Delay] Dilemma, [Argument adj. a. retort (apt.) against both
answers] Diligence. Ha. IV. 5. Double -- Ha. IV. 5. E.
Dilling, [adj. p. Favor (aug.] Dilucidate, [Interpret.] Dilute, [Remiss.]
Dim. [Blind (dim.] [Dark (dim.] -- ness. [Sight (Corr.] (Dim.]
op. to brightness. Q. I. 3. O

Dimension. Ma. I. [a. Measure.]
Diminishing. [a. Little* TM. I. 1. D.] [v. Remission. TM. I. 8. D.] [a. Few.
TM. III. 1. D.] [More- a. little. T. I. 7. D.] [More- a. remiss] [More- a. few]
Diminutive, [adj. Littleness.] Dimple. [Furrow (dim.] [Dent (dim.]
Din, [Sound (augm.] Dine, [adj. Noon-meal.] Ding, [Cast.] Dinner, [Dine.]
Dint, [Impetus.] Diocese, [Bishop's Precinct] (Place]
Dip [into- adj. a. Water.] [under- adj. a. Water.]
Dipthong. D. I. 3. A. Dire. [Fierce] [Cruel]
Direct. [Straight] Ma. III. 1. Upright. Ma. II. 8. E. to -- TO. VI. 1.
Dirge, [Prayer for the Dead] Dirt. El. IV. 2. Disable. [Un-a. able (make.] [a.
Impotence] [a. Weakness] [Incapacitate]
Disabuse. [Un- a. wrong (make]
Disadvantage. [Hindrance] [Loss] [Hurt]
Disagree. [Dissent] [Unpeaceable]
Disallow, [Disapprove.] AS. III. 3. O. Disanimate, [Discourage.] Disannul.
[Annihilate] [Spoil]
Disappoint. [Un-appoint] [Frustrate]
Disapprove. AS. III. 3. O. Disarm. [Un-armour] [Take away Arms]
Disaster, [Adversity] Disavow. [Disapprove] [Deny] [abdicate]
Disband, [Un -- RM IV.] Disbelieve. AS. II. 4. O. Disburse. TA. IV. 5.
Disburthen, [Unlode] Discamp, [Un- a. camp.] Discard. [Out-put Cards]
[Incapacitate]
Discern See the difference] Seen (make the difference]
[See] [a. Common sense]
[a. Difference]
Discharge. [Unlode] -- a Gun, [Un- adj. p. ammunition (make) -- ] [Un-oblige]
From Duty. [Perform] [a. Immunity]
From Debt. [Pay] [Acquit]
From Guilt. [a. Innocent] [Acquit] [Absolve]


Disciple, [Learner.] TO. III. 3. Discipline. [a. Teacher] [Good Government]
Man. VI. 5. Church -- RE. V. [Correction]

Disclaim, [Abdicate] Disclose. [Un-conceal] [Reveal] AS. I. 6.
[Un-cover] O. II. 3. O. [Shew] TA. I. 8.
[Open] O. II. 4. O.
Discolor, [a. Color (corr.] Discomfit, [Overthrow.] Discomfort. TO. VI. 3.
O. Discommend, [Dispraise.] Discommodity. [Inconvenience] [Hurt]
Disconsolate. [adj. Discomfort] [adj. Grief (augm.]
Discontent. [Not-content] [adj. Anxiety]
Discontinue, [a. Discontinued.] [Leave for some while.] [Absent for some
while.] [Un- a. custom]
-- ed. -- Quantity. TM. III. -- in Place, Here and there. Sp. II. 7. O. -- in
Time, Now and then. Sp. I. 7. O.

Disconvenient, [Inconvenient] Discord. [Not-congruity] -- in Music. Q III. 8.
O. [Dissent] [a. Unpeaceableness] [a. Contention]

Discover. AS. II. 2. A. [Un-conceal] [Reveal] [Perceive (inc.]
[Uncover] [Shew]

Discountenance, [Un- a. reputation.] Discourage. TO. VI. 2. O. Discourse.
Elements of -- D. I. Words -- D. II. Complex parts of -- Grammatical. D. III.
Logical. D. IV. Mixed. D. V.
Modes of -- D. VI.
Discourtesie. [a. Courtesy. Man. IV. 7. O.] [a. Malignity. AS. V. 2. O.]
Discredit. [Disbelieve] [Infamy]
Discreet. [Prudent] Ha. VI. 2. [Grave] Man. IV. 6. [Sober] Ha. III. 3.
Discrepant, [Different] Discretion, vid. Discreet. at the -- of, [To be
disposed according to the will of]
Discriminate. [a. Difference] [a. Distinction]
Discuss. [Off -- shake] [Apart -- shake] [Scatter] [Inquisition] sp. by
Disputing.]

Disdein. AS. VI. 5. A. Disease. S. to -- [a. Disease] [a. Pain] [Trouble]

Disengage. [Un-oblige] [Un-entangle]
Disentangle, [Un-entangle] Disesteem, [Esteem (corr.] Disfavour, [Un-favour.]
Disfigure. [a. Figure (corr.] [a. Deformity]
Disfranchise, [Un-privilege] Disfurnish, [Un-furnish.] Disgorge, [Vomit.]
Disgrace, [Infamy.] Disguise, [Un- a. seem (make] Disgust, [Displicence.] Dish.
Vessel. Pr. V. 4. Chafing -- [adj. Table (vess.) for Fire.] -- Clout, Linen for
cleansing Dishes.] -- washer, [Wagtail.] By. III. 8. A. -- of meat, (Meat
(aggr.] sp. dished]

Dishearten, [Discourage] Disheveled, [adj. p. Confusion.] sp. Hairs.]
Dishonest. [adj. Vice] [Unchast]
Dishonor. [Infamy] [Disrespect]
Disimbarque Go out of Ship.] Take out of Ship.]
Disinchant, [Un- a. Witchcraft.] Disingenuity, NP. IV. 1. O. Disinherit,
[Un-inherit (make] Disjoin, ]Un-join] Disjoint, [Un-joint] Disjunctive, [adj.
Separate] Dislike. [Disapprove] [Displicence]
Dislocate. [Un-place] [Place (corr.]
Dislodge, [Remove out of his Lodging.] Disloyal. Man. V. 6. O. Dismay, [a.
Fear (make] Dismal, [adj. Adversity (augm.] Dismantle, [Un-fortifie.]
Dismember. [Separate Member from Member.] [Tear]
Dismiss. [Send away] [Permit to depart]
Dismount. [Un-a. ride] [Un-a. jugament]
Disobedience. Man. V. 7. D. Disobey, [a. Man. V. 7. D. Disoblige. [Un-a.
oblige] [Un-a. friend]
Disorder. [Confusion] [Un-a. Series] [Irregularity]
Disown, [Abdicate] Disparage. [a. Infamy] [a. Calumny]
Disparity, [Unequality] Dispark, [Un- a. Park (make] Dispatch, [Doe soon and
perfectly.] [Doe] [Perform] -- soon. Hasten. TA. III. 5.
-- perfectly. Finish Send away Deliver a. Free (make Destroy Kill


Dispend. TA. V. 3. Dispense. Give [a. Segregate a. Proportion [Give adv.
Proportion*] [a. Segregate adv. Proportion*] Relax from Law. RC. IV. 8.
License. RC. IV. 8. A.
Dispensatory, [Book of Pharmaceutical Compositions (manner.] Dispeople, [a.
empty of Dwellers] Disperse, [Scatter] Displace, [Un-place] Display. [Un-fold]
[Open]
Displant. [Un-plant] [Remove]
Displease. AS. IV. 7. O. Displeasure, [Displeasing] to do one a -- do adj.
displicent (thing] adj. hurt (thing]


Dispose, [a. Disposition.] Disposition. [Quality] T. I. 6. A. Natural.
[Temperament] -- of the Mind. NP. IV. -- of the Body. resp. Individ. NP. V.
resp. Species. NP. VI.


Actual. [Inclination] AS. IV. 1. [Habit] (inc.) Ha. A. Habit] Ha.
Action.] T. I. 7. Cause] T. II. a. Authority] Appoint] Prepare] a. Efficient]
Give] [a. Segregate] [a. Order] [a. Series] [a. Place]


Dispossess, [Un- adj. a. possess (make.] Dispraise. TO. V. 8. O. Disprofit.
[adj. Hurtful (thing] [Loss]
Disproportion. [Proportion (corr.] [Unequality]
Disprove. [Against-prove] [Confute]
Dispute, [a. Argumentation.] Disquiet. [Anxiety] [Trouble]
Disquisition, [Inquisition] sp. by Argument.]
Disrank. [Un-a. rank] [Un-a. Series] [Un-a. Order]
Disregard, [Not-esteeming] Disrespect. Man. V. 4. D. Dissatisfie, [Not-
Satisfie] [Un- Satisfie]
Dissect. [Separate by cutting] [Cut (segr.]
Disseize, [Un-a. possess (make] Dissemble. [Conceal] [a. Hypocrisie]
Dissension, [a. Contention] Dissenting. AS. II. 3. O. Dissertation, [Book
argumentative.] Disservice. [Service (corr.] [Impedient (thing]
Dissever. [Separate] [a. Segregate]
Dissimular, [Unlike.] Dissimulation, [Hypocrisie.] Dissipate, [Scatter.]
Dissolve. a. Loose] Q. VI. 6. D. [a. Fluid] Q. V. 5. D. Melt. O. VI. 2.
[Separate] [Un-convention] [Destroy] [Corruption] [a. Ruine]
Dissolute. [Careless] [Sensual]
Dissolution, vid. Dissolve. Dissonant, [Different] sp. in sound.]
Dissuade. TO. V. 2. O. Dissyllable, [Of a Syllables] Distaff, [Staff of
spinning (machin.] -- thistle.
Distance. -- of time. Sp. I. 2. O. -- of place. Sp. II. 2. O.
Distaste. [Tast (corr.] [Aversation] [Displicence]
Distemper. S. I. 4. [Temper (corr.] Sickliness. S. I. 4.
Distention, [Stretching.] Distich, [Two Verses.] Distillation. Rheum, [Disease
of dropping (dim.] Chymic. O. VI. 6.
Distinct. [adj. p. distinction (perf.] [Differenced] [Separated] [Ordered
(perf.] [Plain]
Distinction. D. IV. 1. Distinguish. [a. Distinction] [a. Difference]
[Separate] [a. Period]
[a. Order (perf.] [a. Plain.] [a. Judge] sp. (segr.]

Distortion, [Twisting] [a. Place (corr.] [a. Deformity]
Distract. [Pull several waies] [Separate] [Divide] [a. Waver (make] [Mad]
Distrein, [Arrest] sp. Goods]
Distress. [Adversity] [Trouble (aug.] [Arresting] sp. of Goods. [Goods
arrested]

Distribute. [Give (segr.] [Deliver (segr.] [a. Division] [a. Partition. [a.
Kind (segr.] [a. Part (segr.] [a. Segregate]
District. [Region] [Government (place]
Distrust In the Judgment. AS. III. 4. O. In the Affection, [Diffidence]
Disturb. [Molest] TA. V. 9. O. [a. Impedient] T. II. 5. O.
Disunite. [Un-unite] [Separate]
Disuse. [Un- a. custom] [Discontinue Use] Custom]

Ditch. [Furrow] [Gutter]
Dittander. HF. VII. 6. Dittany. HF. VII. 6. bastard -- [Fraxinella] HS. I. 1.
A.
Ditty, [Words adj. p. sing. (apt.] Divaricate. [Straddle (make] [Separate]
Dive. Mo. I. 3. A. Devil, vid. Devil. Diver. By. IX. 8. dunn -- By. IX. 8. A.
Diverging. Ma. II. 7. E. Diverse. Various. T. III. Manifold, [Many (kind]
[Unlike]. TM. V. 1. O. [Light] adj. Ha. IV. 7. D. [Morose] adj. Man. IV. 7. D.
Diversifie, [a. Diversity] Diversion, [Beside-turn] [Digression] [Recreation]
Diversity. T. III. Divide, vid. Division. Dividend, [adj. p. Divisor (thing]
Divine, [adj. God] a -- [adj. RC. II. 1. person] -- 's profession. RC. II. 1.
to -- [Wizarding,] RJ. III. 1. A. [Conjecturing] AS. II. 7.
Divinity [God. (abst.] [RC. II. 1. (Science]
Division. Into kinds. Exactly. D. IV. 4. Not exactly. D. IV. 4. A.
Into parts.] [a. Part] [a. Segregate]
Into Parties. [Un-a. Society] [a. Contention]
Into Places. [a. Separation] [a. Distance]
In Arithmetic, [a. Divisor.] In Music, [a. Paraphrase tune]
Divisor. TM. VI. 9. Divorce. RE. IV. 5. Diuretic, [adj. a. Urining (make]
Diurnal, [adj. Day] a -- [adj. Narration (thing) of News]
Divulge, [a. Public (make] Dizzard, [adj. Doting (person] Dizzy, [adj. Giddy.
S. IV. 5.] Do, vid. Do. Do, [Buck. Be. II. 4. (fem.] Docil. [adj. Learn (apt.]
[adj. Sagacity]
Dock. [Dent] Man. IV. 3. O. For Shipping. [Haven (dim.] [adj. Building (place)
for Ships.]
In the posteriors, [Dent -- ]
[Tail] PP. VI. 6. A. to -- [Off-cut the Tail] [a. Short]

Herb. HF. I. 1. A. bur -- great. -- HL. VI. 2. little -- HL. VI. 2. A.

Docket, [Accessory writing.] Doctor, [Highest Graduate] Doctrine, [Taught
(thing] Document [Thing to be Learned.] Observed.]
Dodder. HF. VII. 17. Dodge, [a. Lightness.] Ha. IV 7. D. Dodkin, [Least Money.]
Do. [a. pres.] How -- you? [How are you?] sp. in Health.]

[a. Action] Business]
Have to -- with, [a. Business with] [a. Commerce with]

a -- [Deer (fem.]
Doings Action Preparation
Dog. Beast. Be. V. 1. -- 's bane. HS. IV. 14. upright -- HS. IV. 8. -- berrry.
Sh. II. 4. -- 's grass. HL. III. 5. A. -- 's tongue. HL. IX. 4. A. -- 's tooth.
HL. V. 2. [Andiron] [Supporting (jug.) for fuel]
to -- [Follow privately] -- Fish. Greater. Fi. I. 6. Lesser. Fi. I. 6. A.
Star. [Star called the -- ] [Star (aggr.] called, etc.]
-- days, [Daies in which the Sun rises with the Dog Star.]
Dogged. [Perverse] [Morose]
Doggrel, [Sorry.] Dogmatical [Fierce] Ha. III. 4. D. Dole, [adj. p. Alms
(thing] -- full, adj. Grief]
Dolor. [Grief] [Pain]
Dolphin. Fi. I. 1. A. Dolt, [Dull. Ha. III. 1. O. (person] Domestic. [adj.
House] [adj. TO.] adj. Family. TO. III. 5. O.
Domineer, [a. Insolence.] Dominion. [Power] [Authority]
Donation, [Giving] Donative, [adj. p. Give.] Done, [adj. p. Action.] I have --
[I am adj. pret. Action.] Finishing.]

Donor, [adj. a. Give (person] Doom. [a. Judge] [a. Sentence]
Door. Po. IV. 2. -- keeper, [Guard at door] within -- s [Within the house]
without -- s. [Without the house]
Dor, [Beetle] Ex. V. 5. Doree. Fi. IV. 12. Dormant. [Sleeping] [Not- acting]
shewn]
a -- [Beam]
Dormouse. [Mouse (kind) adj. sleeping (int.] (apt.]

Dorser, [Basket.] sp. to be carried on the back.] Dorter, [adj. Sleeping
(room] Dorychnium. Sh. IV. 9. A. Dose, [Proportion] sp. of Medicine]
Dotage, NP. II. 2. O. Dotal, [adj. Dowry.] Dotard, [adj. Doting (person] Tree.
Dote, [a. Dotage.] -- on, [a. Love (exc.]
Dotterel. By. VII. 3. Double. [Two (kind.] -- diligence. Ha. IV. 5. E. --
leaf, [Twy-blade.] -- tongue, [Horse tongue.] -- tongue, Hypocrisy.] -- heart
Hypocrisy.] to --
[a. Double] as Hare, [Back-goe in the same way.]

Doublet. [Close (vest) for upper part of the trunk.] [Counterfeit gem]
Doublings of vest, [Foldings -- ] Doubt. AS. II. 5. O. -- full, [adj. p. Doubt
(apt.] -- less, [adv. Certain]
Doucet. -- of Deer.
Dove, [Pidgeon] By. III. 1. Ring -- By. III. 1. A. Stock -- By. III. 2.
Doughty, [Valiant] Douzen, [Twelve.] Dowager, [Widow] Dowe. [Bread not baked]
-- baked, [Scarce baked] [adj. p. Future bread]
Dower, [Wife's revenue.] Down. [Downward vergent] [Toward- Underside.] Bottom.]
Prep. V. 2. Bear -- [Down b.] Break -- [Down b.] Go -- [Down g.] Pull -- [Down
p.]
Sit -- [Sit]

-- look [Downward [Guilty
look] -- right. [adj. Perpendicular] [adj. Sincere]
-- Stream [With the Stream.] [Decay] [Hill] [Sheep pasture]
Moss of Hair. PP. VI. 2. A.

Dowry, [Wife's estate] Doxy, [adj. a. Fornication (fem.] Doxology, [Sentence
of praise] Drab, [Wicked Woman.] [Unchast Woman.]
Draco volans. El. I. 4. Dracunculus. Fi. III. 8. A. Draffe. [Meat for Swine]
[Worst part] [adj. a. Defilement (thing]
Drag, [Pull.] O. I. 4. sp. Behind After
it. -- net. [Net (instr.) for fishing, adj. p. draw (apt.]
Draggle-tail, [Slut.] Dragon. Fish. Insect. -- fly, Ex. IV. 7. Plant. -- tree.
Tr. III. 8. A. -- wort. HL. V. 9. -- 's blood. [Juice of -- Tree] biting --
[Tarragon.] Snap -- HS. VIII. 6. Fire -- El. I. 4. -- 's head, [Intersection
point of Ecliptic by Planet toward adj. a. North.] -- 's tail, [Intersection
point of Ecliptic by Planet toward adj. a. South.]
Dray, [Cart.] Drain, [Trench for water.] to -- [Un- a. water]
Drake. Bird, [Duck (male.] Gun, [Least Ordnance.] Fire -- El. I. 4.
Dram. Mea. III. 3. Draper, [adj. Cloth (merch.] Draught. [Drawing] [Drawn
(thing] [Exemplar] [Picture] Ships -- [Depth of Ship under water.]
Jakes, [Dunging (room] game of -- s. Mo. V. 3. A.
Draw, a. Move a. Move (end toward it self. to it self. Corporeal. Pull] O. I.
4. Pull (end] -- cart [Lead pulling -- ] -- net [Lead pulling -- ]
[Lift] -- bridge, [Lift by pulling.] -- plants, [Un a. root, etc.] -- water,
[Lift, etc.] Ship -- s, [ -- is deep in the water.]
Take into it self. [Breathe] Mo. III. 2. [Suck up breath] AS. IV. 6. D. [Snuf]
-- after, [Hunt by Smell.]
[Suck] Mo. III. 3. O. [Drink] AS. II. 2. O. Take out of another it is place.
-- blood, [a. Bleed] -- lots, [a. Lot.] -- money. out-take -- ] -- purse
out-take -- ] -- sword, [Un-sheath.] -- tooth, [Out-pull.] -- wine.
Virtual. [a. Exhalation]
Metonym. Effect by Motion. -- of the Fingers. -- money [Tell -- ]
-- of the Needle. -- cloth
-- of Pen or Pencil. -- a Copy. -- a Picture. -- writing, [a. Writing.] -- up
writing, [a. Writing.] -- dry, [Empt. (perf.] -- fowl, [Un-a. gutt] -- out.
[Extend] [Protract]


Transcendental. Cause. -- blood, [a. Bleed.] [Occasion] [Impulsive] [Persuade]
[Entice] [Lead] [Seduce] [Obtein]
Beginning. -- back. [Retreat (inc.] [Apostasie (inc.]
-- near [near (inc.] -- on [near (inc.] -- to an issue, [Finish (inc.]




Drawer. [adj. Drawing (person] [Box (dim.) to be out-pull'd and in-thrust]
Drawers, [Inner thigh (vest.] Dread, [Fear] sp. (augm.)
Dream, [adj. p. AC. II. 4. A. (thing] mdash; ing. AC. II. 4. A. -- ness,
[Dulness] [Sloth]

Dregs. [Worst part] TM. VI. 1. O. [Sediment] TM. VI. 3. O.
Drench. [Medicinal drink] to -- [Drink (make) by pouring into the mouth]
[Bathe]
Dress. [Prepare] -- meat, a. Butchery a. Cookery

[Cleanse] -- a Horse. a. Clothe a. Ornate Prune a. Surgery
Dresser, [Cook's table.] Dry. A^id. adj. Q. V. 2. D. [Thirsty] adj. AC. II. 2.
[Penurious] adj. Man. III. 3. E. [Reserv'd] adj. Man. IV. 4. D^ -- jest. [adv.
concealed ^. Urbanity.]

Driblet. [Sum (dim.] [Part (dim.]
Drift. [Driving] -- of Snow [Heap of -- together blown] go a -- [Be driven]
[End]
Drill. to -- [bore] [Entice]
a -- [Boaring (instr.] [Baboon] Be. III. 1.

Drink, [adj. p. drinking (thing] -- ing. AC. II. 2. A. a -- [Refection]

Drip. [a. Drop] [Baste] -- ing. [adj. basting (thing]
Drive, move from before
it self. Contiguous, [Thrust.] sp. with knocking]
Not contiguous. TA. VI. 5. A^ -- away, [From -- ] -- back, [a. Retire (make]
-- bees, [a Move B.] -- out, [Out -- ] The Ship -- s, [The Ship is driven.] sp.
when the Anchor lets -- go.]

Metaphor. [Coaction] AS. IV. 9. O.
-- off, [Protract.] Metonym. [Scatter]
Drivel, [Dropping Spittle.] to -- Let go the Spittle out of ones mouth.]
Drizzle, [Rain drops (dim.] Droil. [a. Operation (augm.] [Servant, adj. a.
operation (aug.]
Droll, [a. Urbanity.] Dromedary, [Camel.] Be. I. 3. Drone. [Bee (male] [Idle
(person]
Droop. [a. Decay] [p. Discouragement (inc.]
Drop. El. II. 1. Dropsy. S. VI. 3. Dropwort. HF. V. 10. A. water -- HF. V. 14.
Dross. [worst part.] sp. of Metal]
Drove, [adj. p. drive (aggr.] sp. of Cattle.]
Drover, [Cattel-driving (person] Drought, vid. Dry. Drown. Kill. RJ. V. 7.
[Cover with water]
Drowzy. AC. II. 3. Drudge, [a. Operation (augm.] sp. Servant.]
Drug. [adj. O. VI. A. (thing] [adj. Sorry (thing.]
Druggist, [Merchant of unprepared medicinal (things] Drum, [adj. Drummer
(instr.] -- of the Ear, [Drum (like.] -- mer. RM. III. 3.
Drunk, [adj. a. Drunkenness] -- ard, [adj. Drunkenness (person.] -- enness.
Man. II. 3. D.
Due. T. IV. 3. [adj. Debtor (thing]
Dub. [Knock] sp. with Fist.]

Dubious, [adj. Doubt.] Duchess, [Duke (fem.] Duchy. [Duke's (place.] Duck. By.
IX. 2. A. -- 's meat. HL. I. 10. to -- [Bow the head] as Duck. [Congee (augm.]
[Dive] -- and Drake [Reflect (freq) from the Water.]
Ductil. [adj. p. figure (apt.) by hammering.] [adj. p. Persuade (apt.]
Dudgeon. [Indignation] [Root of Box.] -- dagger, [Short Sword whose handle is
of the root of Box.]
Duel. RM. I. 7. A. Dug. PG. IV. 2. A. Duke, [Noble-man of highest degree.]
Dull, [Obtuse.] Op. to Sprightly. NP. IV. 2. O. Strenuous [Lazy] Nimble
[Lumpish] Swift [Slow]
Op. to Sagacity. Ha. III. 1. O, Blunt, [Not adj. a. Cut (apt.] [Remiss]
Duscimer, Musical (instr.) Dumb [Mute] AC. III. 1. O. [Not-speaking]
Dump* [Meditation (int.] [Anxiety (imp.] [Grief (imp.]
Dun, [Colour of Mouse.] etc.
to -- [Come and demand (freq.]
Dunce, [Dull. Ha. III. 1. O. (person.] -- down, [Cat's tail.]
Dung, [adj. p. Dung (thing.] -- fly. Ex. IV. 4. A. to -- Mo. IV. 9. A. --
land, [Manure with Dung]
Dungeon [Dark prison] Duplicate, [Correspondent type] Durable, [Permanent]
Durance, [Imprisonment] Duration. Mea. V. A. Dure, [v. Duration] -- ing my
stay, [While I stay]
Duress, [Affliction of body] Dirt. El. IV. 2. Durty. [adj. Dirt.] [Rustic]
Dusk, [Dark (dim.] Dust. Earth. El. IV. 1. [Powder] TM. VI. 4. A. Pin --
[Powder of filed pins] Saw -- [Powder of sawed (thing]
Duty, [Due (thing.] Dutifulness. Man. V. I. Dwarf, [adj. Little.] sp.
(person.] -- elder, [Danes-wort.]
Dwell. Po. I. A. Dynasty, [Series of Governors of one Kind.] Nation.]
Family.]
Dysentery. S. VI. 6. A. Dysury, [Disease of pissing (def.]
E.
EAch, [Every (segr.] -- other, [Every one reciprocally.]
Eager. [Fierce] Ha. III. 4. D. [Desirous (int.] [Hungry] AC. II. 1. [Acid] Q.
IV. 4. [Intense]
Eagle. By. I. 1. Eaglet, [Eagle (young] Ean, [a. Parturition.] sp. as Sheep]
Ear. -- of Animal. PG. III. 2. A. give -- [Hear (end.] [Observe (end.]

-- of Pot, [adj. Hand (part.] -- of Plant. PP. II. 4. A. to -- as Corn, [To
grow up to an Ear.] -- land, [a. Arable.] Sea -- Ex. VII. 8.

Earewig. Ex. V. 7. A. Earl, [Noble man of third Degree.] Early. [Soon] [adj.
Morning Mea. V. 7.]
Earn. RC. V. 6. Earnest. Adj. [Serious] [Intense] [Diligent] [Zealous]
Subst. Pledge. RC. V. 7. A. in -- [Truly.]

Earth. Globe of -- W. II. 7. Element of -- El. IV. -- nut. HF. V. 10. --
quake. El. II. 5. -- worm. Ex. I. 1. to -- [into-a. Earth]
Earthen Vessel, [adj. O. IV. A. (vess.] Ease. [Indolence] -- the Belly. [a.
Dung]
[Rest] [Leisure]
Easement. [a. Indolence] [Dunging] [adj. Dunging (place]

Easy. [adj. Easiness] -- to etc. [adj. etc. (apt.]
Easiness. Facility. T. V. 4. [Plainness] D. III. 9. [Credulity] -- to, etc.
[etc. (apt.]
East. Sp. III. 1. Easter, [Passover (time.] Eat. Feed. AC. II. 1. A. [Corr^de]
O. VI. 3.
Eaves, [Margin of Roof.] -- dropper, [Concealed (person) hearing (end]
Eb. [Down-tide] [a. Low]
Ebony. Tr. VIII. 6. Ebullition, [Bubbling] Eccentric. Ecclesiastic, [adj. RE.]
-- Relation. RE. -- Officers. RE. II. -- Discipline. RE. V. -- Institutions.
RE. VI.
Echo, [Reflex sound.] Eclipse, [Obscuring by interposition.] sp. of Sun.]
Moon.]

Ecliptic. W. VI. 3. Eclog, [pastoral dialog. Song.] Edacity, [Gluttony.]
Eddy, [Re-flow.] Edge. [Margin] Sp. III. 4. O. [Ridge] Mag. V. 6. [Cutting
(apt.] Set ones teeth on -- [Stupifie -- ]
-- wise, [adv. Side.]
Edible, [adj. p. Eat (abstr.] Edict, RC. IV. 3. A. Edify. [a. Building] [a.
Bettering]
Edifice, [Building,] Po. II. Edition, [a. Public. (make.] Education, [a.
Nurse.] -- words. TO. V. -- deeds. TO. VI.
Eel. Fi. VI. 7. sand -- Fi. VI. 4. A. -- pout Fi. VI. 6. A.
Effable, [adj. p. Speak (abstr.] Effect. T. II. O. to this -- [ -- end] of no
-- [adj. Frustrate] to -- [Efficient.] to take -- [Event (perf.]
Effectual, [adj. a. Efficient (apt.] Effeminate, [Woman (like.] [Tender] NP.
IV. 7. O. [Nice] Man. II. 6. E.
Efficacy, [a. Efficient (abstr.] Efficient, T. II. 1. Effigies, [Picture.]
Effluvium, [adj. p. Exhalation (thing.] Effort, [Endeavour (imp.] Effusion,
[Out -- pouring] [Forth -- pouring]
Eftsoon, (At times.] Sp. I. 8. O. Egg, DP. V. 6. with Egg, [Impregnated with
Egg.] to -- [a. Impulsive]
Eglantine, [Rose (kind.] Egregious, [Excellent.] Egress. [Going out] [Way out]
Egret, [Eagle (kind.] Egyptian, [Wandring wizard.] Eye, vid. Ey. Ejaculation,
[Prayer (dim.] sp. Sudden.]
Eject [Out-cast] [Un-etc.]
Eight. Mea. II. 8. -- teen. -- ty. -- hundred, etc.
Either. [Any of the two] [Or]
Eke, [Also] Eke out, [Lengthen by Addition.] Enlarge by Addition.]
Elaborate, [adj. p. Diligence.] Elate, [adj. Insolence.] Elaterium, [concrete
juice of the wild Cowcumber.] Elbow. PG. V. 2. A. [Angle]
Elder. [More-old] [Priest] [Fore-father]
Tree. Tr. III. 2. water -- Sh. II. 12. A.

Elecampane, HF. III. 6. A. Elect. -- to do. AS. IV. 5. -- to Office, etc. RC.
IV. 2.
Electuary, [Moist consistent medicinal mixture.] Eleemosynary, [adj. Alms.]
Elegancy. [Beauty] [Ornateness]
Elegy, [adj. Grief verse (aggr.] Element. El. [Principles] -- of Discourse. D.
I.
Elephant. Be. I. 4. Elevate, [Lift.] -- ion of the Pole.
Eleven. Elf, [Little sorry (thing.] Eligible, [adj. p. Elect. (^^t.] Elixir,
[Best part.] sp. adj. Chymic.]
Elk. Be. II. 3. Ell, [Three foot and 9 inches] Ellipsis. Mag. III. 8. D. Elm.
Tr. VI. 4. Elocution, [Speaking Manner.] [Articulation Manner.] sp. Artificial.]

Eloquence, [Speaking (art) Ornately.] Perswasively.]
Else. [adv. Other] [Beside] -- where, [In other place.]
Elucidate, [Interpret.] Elude, avoid] frustrate]
Elucubrate, [Diligent study.] Ematiate, [adj. Lean (make.] Emanation,
[Out-flowing.] Emancipate, [Un-slave.] Embalm, [Preserve by Conditing.] Embark,
[Into-go.] sp. Into Ship.]
Ambassador, [adj. RC. sent (Officer.] Embellish, [a. Ornate (make.]
Ember-week, [Fasting week for Ordination.] [adj. Ordination (time.]
Embers, [Fired ashes.] Embezil, [a. Prodigality.] Emblem, [Signifying
picture.] sp. Moral.]
Embody, [a. Body.] Embolden, [a. Bold (make.] Emboss, [Adorn with
protuberances.] Embowed, [Arched.] Embowel, [Un-bowel.] Embrace. AC. V. 6.
Embrew, [Soke.] Embroider, [Variegate by sowing.] Embryon. PP. VI. 7.
Emendation. [Mending] [Repairing]
Emergent. [adj. Event] [adj. p. Occasion]
Emerod. Stone. St. IV. 4. [Vein in the Fundament] -- s [Tumors about those
veins. -- ]
Emew, [Cassaware.] By. II. 9. A Eminence, [Excellence.] Emissary. [Sent
(person] [Spy]
Emission, [Out-sending.] Emmet, [Ant.] Ex. IV. 5. Emolument, [Profit.] Empair.
[a. Worse] [Marring]
Empale. RJ. V. 4. A. Empannel, [a. Catalog.] Empeach, [a. Accuser.] Emperor,
[King (augm.] Emphasis. D. I. 8. Empire. [King (place] [King (abstr.]
Empiric, [Physitian (corr.] Employ. [a. Business TA. III.] [Use. TA. V. 6.]
Empoverish, [a. Poverty (make.] Empress, [Emperor (fem.] Emptying. O. II. 7.
O. Empyema. S. V. 3. A. Emry. St. I. 7. A. Emulation. AS. VI. 3. Emulgent,
[adj. Sucking.] Emulsion, [Milk (like) Medicine.] Emunctory, [Glandule] PG. II
7 A. Enable, [a. Able (make.] Enact, [a. Law (make.] Enamel, [Paint with melted
Colors.] Enamored, [adj. a. Love.] Encamp, [a. Camp.] Enchant, [a. Witch with
words.] Encircle, [About-a. circle.] Incline. [a. Oblique] [a. Vergency] [adj.
p Disposition] AS. IV. 1.
Enclose. [Shut] [Contein]
Enclosure. [a. Enclosing] [Fence]
Encomium, [Praise.] [adj. a. Praise Oration.]
Encompass, [about- Ition.] Putting.]
Encounter. [Assault mutual] [Meeting]
Encourage. TO. VI. 2. Increase. TM. I. 7. Encroach [Usurpation (inc.] (dim.]
Encumber. [Hinder sp. with confused multitude.] [Trouble sp. with confused
multitude.]
End. Part. [Extreme] [Top] [Bottom] -- less. [Eternal] [Infinite]

Cause. T. II. 6. to the -- that. Conj. III. 1. Action. [Desist] [Finish]
[Event]
Endamage. [a. Loss (make] [a. Hurt]
Endanger, [a. Dangerous] Endeavor. TA. III. 4. Endite. [a. Word] sp.
Writing.] AC. III. 6. A.
[Accuse] sp. by Writing] RJ. II. 3. A.

Endive. HF. II. 16. Endorse, [Write on the backside.] Endowment. [Quality] sp.
NP.
[Habit] [Revenue.]
Endue, [v. Quality.] Endure. Suffer. [v. Passion]
[v. Patience] cannot -- [a. Aversation]
Last, [a. Duration.]
Enemy. TO. IV. 1. O. Energy. [Efficient Faculty] Act]

Enervate, [a. Weakness. NP. V. 7. O.] Enfeeble, [a. Weakness. NP. V. 7. O.
Enfeof. [a. Right] [Deposit] RC. V. 1. A.
Inflame. [a. Flame] [a. Heat (exc.]
Enforce, [Coaction.] Enfranchise, [a. Privilege.] Engage. [a. Obligation] [a.
Sponsion] [a. Pawn] [a. Morgage] [a. Debtor (make] [p. Business (make]
Engender, [Generation] Engine, [Machin] English. Engraft, [Graft] Engrave,
[Grave] O. IV. 6. A. Engross. -- writing, [Write (perf.] -- commodities. [Buy
all] [Appropriate] TA. I. 2.
Enhaunce. [a. Intension] sp. the price.]

Enigmatical, [Obscured with Figures] Enjoying. Fruition. TA. V. 7.
[Possession]
Enjoin, [Command] Enlarge, [Large (make] [Ampliation] D. IV. 2. O. [More-a.
large (make] [Increase] TM. I. 7. E.
Enlighten, [a. Light.] Enmity, [Enemy (abstr.] Ennoble, [a. Noble (make.]
Enormity. [Wrong (int.] [Vice (abstr.] [Crime (augm.]
Enough, [Sufficiency.] -- and to spare, [Abundance.]
Enquiring, [a. Inquisition.] Enrage, [adj. a. Anger (make.] Enrich, [adj. a.
Rich (make.] Enroll. [a. Catalog.] [a. Register.]
Ensign. [Sign] Colors. RM. III. 2.
Ensnare. [Intangle by craft] [Take by Stratagem]
Enstall. [a. Seizin solemnly] sp. in Seat.]

Ensue. [Follow] [Event]
Entail, [a. Inherit (make) adv. Series.] Entangle. O. II. 2. A. Enter. [Into-
go] Put]
[Direct] [Begin] TA. III. 3. [a. Teacher (inc.]
-- in a book, [Write -- ] -- into bond, [adj. p. bond.] -- upon. [Possession
(inc.] [Seizing]

Enterchangeable, [adj. Reciprocation.] Intercourse. [Reciprocal Passage]
Converse] Business]

Enterfeir, [Strike reciprocally.] sp. with Heels or Ankles.]
Enterlace. [Between-put] [Stratifie]
Enterline, [Write between the lines.] Interlude, [Player (thing.] Entermeddle,
[a. Business.] Entermingle, [adj. a. Mixed (make.] Enterprise, [Essay.] Enterr,
[Bury.] Entertain. [Receive] [a. Host] Treat. AC. V. 2. A.
Enthrall, [a. Slave (make.] Enthrone, [a. Seizin solemnly.] sp. in King
(place.]
Enthusiasm, [Counterfeited Inspiration.] Enthymem. D. IV. 7. A. Entice,
[Allure.] Entire. [Total] TM. VI. [Whole] NP. V. 1. [adj. Integrity. Ha. IV.6.]
Entity, [Being (abst.] Entitle, [p. Right (make] [a. Name.]
Entomb. RE. IV. 9. Entrals, [Gutts.] PG. VI. 4. A. Entrance, [a. Enter.]
Entrap, [Take.] sp. in Machin.]
Entreat. Pray. TO. V. 3. [Entertain] AC. V. 2. A.
Entrench. [a. Ditch (make] [Usurp]
Entry. [Entring (place] -- into house, etc. Po. III. 3. A.
Entrust. [Deposit] [Instead-p-right (make]
Envenom, [Poisoned (make.] Envy. AS. VI. 6. O. Environ. [About be] put]

Enumerate, [a. Number] Enunciation, [Proposition.] Enure, [a. Custom.] Enwrap,
[In-wrap.] Eolipyle, [adj. a. Wind (vessel) by Rarefaction.] Epact,
[Difference between Solar and Lunar year.] Ephemerides, [Book of adj. days
(thing.] Ephialtes. S. IV. 2. A. Epicen, [Of both Sexes.] Epicure, [adj.
Sensuality (person.] Epicycle, [Accessory Circle.] sp. Whose Center is within
the Circumference of another Circle..
Epidemical, [adj. Nation.] Epigram, [Short Poem.] Epilepsie. S. IV. 5. A.
Epilog. D. V. 8. O. Epiphany, [Festival of the Star's apparition] Episcopal,
[adj. Bishop.] Epistle. D. V. 2. A. Epitaph, [Writing on Tomb.] Epithalamium,
[adj. Marriage-song.] Epithet, [Adjunct word] Epitomy. D. V. 7. Epoch. Sp. I.
5. A. Equal. adj. TM. I. 5. Relation of -- s. TO. IV. Coming off upon -- terms.
RM. II. 1.
Equality. TM. I. 5. [Equity]
Equanimity. [Equity] [Content] Ha. I. 3.

Equator. W. VI. 2. Equilateral, [Having its sides equal.] Equinoctial. --
time, [Time of equal night and day] -- Circle, [Equator]
Equipollent. [Of equal Power] Efficacy]

Equippage, [Furniture (manner.] Equitable, [adj. Equity.] Equity. Man. I. 2.
Equivalent TM. I. 6. Equivocation. D. IV. 1. O. Equor. W IV. 1. Er, vid. Err.
Eradicate, [Un-root] Ere. [Before] -- long, [Future (dim.] -- while. [At some
time] Sp. I. 8. Lately, [adv. past (dim.]

Rather then]
Erect. [a. Direct. Ma. II. 8. E.] [a. Build. Po. II.]
Eringo. HF. VIII. 1. A. Vmbelliferous -- HF. IV. 12. A.
Ermin. Beast, [Stoate] Be. IV. 7. Fur, [Fur of Ermin]
Err. TA III. 8. Errant. [Genuine] [Wandring] [Sent (thing) sp. entrusted.]
Erroneous. [adj. Err] [False]
Eruption, [Out-breaking.] Erysipelas. S. VII. A. Escape. Avoid being taken.
RM. II.6. [Pass not observed]
Escheat. [To- event] confiscation]

Eschew. [Avoid] [Aversation]
Especial, [Principal] Espy, Spy] See]
Espouse, [a. Spouse] Esquire, [Gentleman of the middle rank] Essay. TA. III.
4. A. Essence. [Being (abstr.] [Best part extracted by Distillation.]
Essential. [adj. Being] [adj. Importance]
Essoin. [Excuse for not appearing.]
Establish. [adj. Steady make] [Confirm]
Estate. [State] [Condition] [Age] [Degree] sp. of Nobleness] Gentility]

[Dignity] [Revenues (aggr.] [Right]
[Possession.]
Esteem. [Think] [Jugde] Value. AS. II. 8. [Respect]
Estimation, [Esteem] Estival, [adj. Summer.] Estrange, [Alienate.] Estreat.
Estridge. By. II. 9. Estuate. [Move vehemently.]
Etching, [Graving with corroding moist (thing.] Eternal, [adj. Everness]
Eternity, [Everness] Either. El. II. 1. Ethic, [adj. Manners (art.] Ethiopian,
[adj. Black (person.] Ethnic, [Pagan] Etymology. [Derivation of words]
[Derivation (art.]
Evacuate. [a. Empty] [a. Purge]
Evade. [Avoid] [Escape]
Evangelist. RE. II. 3. Evaporate, [Out-vapor] Evasion, [Evading] Eucharist.
RE. VI. 6. A. Eve. [Before-day] sp. before Festival]

Evechurr. Ex. II. 2. A. Even. Adj. [Equal] [Of the same Quantity] Number]
Strength]
Quitts; [Having compensated] op. to Od. TM. III. 5. [Plain] Q. VI. 2.

[Self.] Adv.
[Yea] Expletive. -- as, [As.] adv. I. 3. -- now [Now] [Adv. past (dim.]

Evening. Mea. V. 7. O. Even-song, [adj. Evening worship.] Event. End. TA. V.
[Effect] T. II. O.
-- of War. RM. II.
Ever. All times. Sp. I. 9. for -- [adj. sp. I. 9.]
-- since, [From that (time.] -- lasting, [adj. Sp. I. 9.] Life -- lasting,
[Gnaphalium.]
Some times. -- and anon. [Frequently] [At times.] Sp. II. 8. O.
or -- [Before that]

Every. -- one, Pron. III. 2. -- where, [In every Place.] -- whit, [adv.
Total.]
Evet, [Salamander] Be. VI. 5. Evict. [Prove] [Convince]
Evidence, Adj. Manifest. [Plainness] [Certainty] sp. manifest] [Probation] D.
VI. 6. [Testimony] [Writing.] RC. VI. 5.



Evil. T. III. 2. O. -- at ease, [Not-indolent] King's -- S. III. 3.
Evince, [Prove] sp. Plainly.]
Eunuch, [Un-testicled (person] Euphony, [Sound (perf.] Euphorbium, [Concrete
juice of a (plant] Ew. -- tree. Tr. III. 6. -- sheep [Sheep (fem.]
Ewer, [Vessel for pouring water on hands] Exact. Adj. [adj. Rigor.] [adj.
Perfect]
to -- [a. Rigor] [Demand Unmercifully] The utmost]
[a. Oppression]

Exaggerate. [a. Great] [a. Intension] [add Provocation] [More-angry (make]
Exagitate. [Swing] [Vex (endeavour]
Exa^t. [Lift] [Praise (augm.] [adj, a. Dignity (make]
Examine. [Inquisition] AS. II. 2. [a. Question] [Trial] TA. II. 5. A.
Judicially. RJ. II. 4. A.

Example. [Exemplar] Instance. D. IV. 8. A. as for -- [e. g.] Conj. IV. 3. O.

Exanguious Animal. Ex. Exanimate. [Discourage (augm.]
Exasperate. [a. Intension] [More-angry (make]
Exauthorize, [a. Un-authority.] Exceed. [Excell] [Abound] [Augment] [Intense]
[v. Excess]
Excel. [v. Excellent] [v. Superior] [v. Victory] -- lent. TM. I. 4. E.
Except. Adv. [Beside] [Unless]
-- ion. [Exemption] -- to rule. D. IV. 5. O. take -- [Be displeased]

Excess. Too-much. TM. I. 3. E. Vicious. Man. II. E. [Gluttony] [Drunkenness]
Exchange. Bartering. RC. V. A. [Merchant's Convention (place.]
Exchequer, [Court of Chief Magistrate's revenue.] Excise, [Tax upon
vendibles.] Excite, [Impulse.] Exclaim. AC. III. 3. O. Exclude. [Out-shut]
[Exempt] TA. II. 4. [Except]
Exclusive, [Excluding the extreams] Excogitate, [Invent] Excommunicate. RE. V.
5. Excoriate, [Un-skin.] Excreation. Mo. IV. 5. A. Excrement. [Out-purged
(thing.] [adj. dunged (thing.]
Excrescence. [Out-growing gibbous (thing] Fruit-like. PP. III. A.
Excruciate, [Torture.] Excursion. [Out-running] [Digression]
Excuse, [Defendent (thing.] Execrable, [adj. p. Ought aversation (augm.]
Execration. [Cursing] [Renounce with Cursing]
Execution, [Performing.] -- of Sentence in Law. RJ. II. 9. -- Capital. RJ. V.
-- not Capital. RJ. VI.
-- er, [adj. Execution (Off.]
Executor, [I^trusted (person) with Will.] Exemplar. T. II. 3. Exemplify.
[Give Copy] Instance]

Exempt. TA. II. 4. O. [a. Immunity]
Exercise. [Practise] [Doe] [Custom to doe] [a. Experience]
[Use] [a. Motion] [a. Recreation]
Exercitation, vid. Exercise. Exhalation. Met. II. 2. [Vapor] Met. II. 2. A.
[Fume] Met. II. 3.
Exhaust. [Out-draw] [Empty]
Exhibit. [Represent] [Offer] [Give]
Exhibition, [adj. p. Stipend (thing.] Exhilerate, [a. Mirth.] AS. V.4. Exhort,
[Persuade] TO. V. 2. Exhortation, [a. Persuade.] Exiccation, [a. Dryness.] Q.
V. 2. D. Exigent. [Occasion] T. II. 4. A. [Expediency] T. V. 6. [Need]
Exile. RJ. VI. 5. Eximious, [adj. Excellent.] T. I.4. E. Existence, [Being. T.
I. 1. (abstr.] sp. Actual.]
Exonerate, [Un-lode.] Exorable, [adj. p. Entreat (abstr.] Exorbitance. TM. V.
4. O. Exorcist, [Un-adj. a. Devil (Off.] Exotic, [adj. Forein] TO. IV.3.
Expansion. [Stretching] [Spreading] [Opening]
Expatiate, [Walk abroad.] Expect. AS. III. 7. A. Expedient. T. V. 6. an --
[Means] T. II. 6. A.
Expedition. [Dispatching] TA. III. 5. [Travel] TA. VI. 3. sp. Military,]

Expel, [Out-drive.] TA. VI. 5. A. Expense, [adj. p. Spend (thing.] Expend.
[Spend] [Disburse]
Experience. [Essay] TA. III. 4. A. Habit. Ha. VI. 4.
Experiment. [a. Experience (end] [adj. p. Essay (thing.]
Expert, [adj. Experience.] Expiate. [Satisfie for Guilt.] [Un- a. Guilty
(make] sp. by Sacrifice.]

Expire. [Die] [End] time -- d, [Time ended.] past.]


Explain, [Plain (make.] Explicate, [Plain (make.] Explicit, [Express,] D. III.
8. Explode. [Disapprove (augm.] [Reject disgracefully]
Exploit. [Action (augm.] [adj. p. Perform (thing.]
Exploration. [Inquisition] AS. II. 2. sp. by Essay.]

Expose. [Out-put] [Un-cover] [adj. p. Danger (make]
Exposition. [a. Plain] [Interpretation]
Expostulate. [Ask accusingly] [Complain]
Expound. [a. Plain] [Interpretation]
Express. D. III. 8. -- ion, [Speech (manner.]
Exprobrate, [Upbraid.] RJ. IV. 8. A. Expulsion, vid. Expel. Expunge,
[Un-write.] Exquisite, [adj. Perfectness.] Extant. [adj. Being] [Actual] [Adj.
p. See (abstr.] [Public.]
Ecstasy. AS. VI. 8. A. Extempore, [Without premeditation.] Extend, [Stretch.]
Extension. Ma. A. Posture, [Stretch]
Extent. Ma. A. Extenuate. [adj. a. Little.] [adj. a. Thin] [Excuse in part]
Exterior, [adj. Outside.] Exterminate, [Exile.] External, [adj. Outside.]
Sp. III. 6. O. Extinguish. [Un-fire] [Annihilate]
Extirpate. [Un-root] [Destroy]
Extol. [Praise (augm]
Extort, [From-gain violently] -- ion. RJ. IV. 5. A.
Extract. [Out-bring] [From-proceed (make] sp. by Chymic operation.]
an -- [Copy] [Epitome] -- ion [adj. Descendent (kind) TO. I. 1. O.]
Extrajudicial, [Not-judicial] Extraneous, [adj. Foreiner] Extraordinary. adj.
TM. V. 3. O. Extravagant. [Exorbitant] [Impertinent] [adj* Digression]
Extreme. op. to Middle. Sp. III. 3. O. op. to Mediocrity. T. I. 2. O.
[Excessive] Utmost. [Most-adj. greatness.] [Rigid] Man. I. 1. E. [Defective]


Extremity. [End] Sp. III. 3. O. [Misery] [Trouble (aug.]
Extricate, [Un-tangle.] Extrinsecal, [adj. Outside.] Extrusion,
[Out-thrusting.] Exuberant, [Abundance.] TM. I. 2. E. Exudation,
[Out-sweating.] Exulcerate, [adj. p. Ulcer (make] Exultation, [Triumph.] Ey.
Member. PG. III. 2. blear-ed sore -- ed goggle-ed prominent -- ed pink-ed
little (dim. -- ed Apple of the -- [adj. Black (thing) of the Ey.] -- brow. PG.
III. 6. A. -- lid, [adj. a. Cover (thing) of the Ey.] -- service, [Seeming
(end.) to serve] -- bright. HS. VIII. 7. A. [Loop.] Mag. V. 2. A.

F.
FAble. [adj. p. Fiction narration] [Lie]
Fabric, [Building.] Fabrile Operation. O. IV. Fabulous, [adj. Fiction.] Face.
Subst. Member. PG. III. 1. make -- s, [Change Face (manner] [Presence]

to -- -- as Person, etc. [Over against stand] -- as Garment, Pr. IV. 9. --
about, [Turn.] -- out a ly. [a Ly impudently.] pertinaciously.]



Facetiousness, [Urbanity.] Facil. [Easie] [Credulous] [Affable]
Facilitate, [a. Easiness.] Facinorous, [Crime (augm.] Fact. [Done (thing.]
Faction. ^C. III. 8. A. Factious, [adj. Faction Sedition
(apt.]
Factitious. T. III. 7. O. Factor, [Instead-Merchant] Faculty. [Natural Power]
[Licence]
Fade. [p. Transitoriness] [v. Decay]
Fag, [End (corr.] Faggot, [Sticks (aggr.) together-bound.] Fail. [p. Frustrate]
TA. V. 1. O. [Miscarry] TA. III. 7. O. [Omit] TA. III. 8. A. [Defect] [Faint]
Insolvent. TA. IV. 8. O.

Fain. [Fiction] [a. Seem] [a. Hypocrisie]
I would -- have it, [I desire (augm.]
Faint. -- ing. S. V. 5. [Weary] [Weak] [Remiss]
[Slight] -- hearted. [Coward] [Diffident]
Fair. Adj. [Beautiful] [Clean] [Clear]
-- dealing. [Equity] [Candor]
-- demeanor. [Courtesie] [Affability]
-- way, [Not-durty -- ] -- Weather, [Weather not rainy.] -- Weather, [Weather
not cloudy.] -- wind, [Prosperous -- ] Subst. Mart, [Convention for Commerce.]
-- ing, [Given (thing) at Fair.]
Fairy, [Feign'd man (like) Devil.] Faith. [Belief] -- rational. Ha. III. 2. --
religious. Ha. V. 4. -- full.
[adj. Fidelity.] [adj. Ha. V. 4.] -- less.
[Perfidious] [Not-adj. Faith]
Falchion, [Short crooked Sword] Falcon, Hawk (kind.) Falconer, [adj. Hawk
(Off.] Falling. Motion proper. -- down, Downfall.] Navigate with the Stream.]
-- in, [Come (imp.] -- with, [Together-come (imp.] sp. in Fight.]

-- off, [Go (imp.] -- on, [Assault.] -- to -- Leeward. RN. VI. 6. D.
Motion metaph. Begin. -- in hand with, [Begin.] -- to ones meat, [Eat (inc.]
Event. sp. adj. Fortune.
-- in love with. -- out, [Event.] -- with one, [Un-friend.]
-- from higher to lower. -- ing. -- on knees. AC. VI. 6. -- all along. AC. VI.
7.
-- en. -- on knees. AC. VI. 6. A. -- all along. AC. VI. 7. A. -- ing Star. El.
I. 2. A. water -- s, [a. More-low (inc.] wood -- s, [w. adj. p. Felling]

-- from greater to less, [Diminish.] Flesh -- s. -- Hair -- s. -- Leaf -- s.
-- of the Leaf, [Autumn.] Price -- s. Water -- s, [p. Shallow.] Wind -- s, [p.
Diminish.]
-- from better to worse. Sin.] Apostasie] [Adversity] [Sickness] -- ing
Sickness, [Epilepsie] S. IV. 5. A. -- ing back. [Again sickning.]
[Destruction]

Fallacy, [adj. a. Erring (apt.) Argument.] Fallible, [adj. Err. (pot.] Fallow,
[Not-plow'd.] to -- [First plowing] -- deer. Be. II. 4.
False. Untrue. [adj. T. III. 1. O.] [ly]
[Wrong] [Spurious] [Forged] [Trecherous]
Falsehood. T. III. 1. O. Falsify, [a. False.] Falter, vid. Faulter. Fame.
[Common Narration] Rumor.]
[Common Praise (augm.] Reputation]

Family. [oeconomic relation] TO. [Kin] TO. I. [Houshold][House (aggr.]
Familiar. [adj. Acquaintance] [adj. Custom] -- Spirit, [ -- devil.]

Famine. [Food (def.] [Want of food] [Hunger]
Famish, [Starve.] Famous, [adj. p. Fame.] Fan, [adj. a. Wind (jug.] -- for
Corn. [adj. winnowing (jug.]
Fanaticalness. [Pretending Enthusiasms] [Fierceness in Religion (cor.]
Fancy. Faculty. NP. II. 2. [adj. Fancy representation]
[Irrational (imp.] [Disposition (imp.] (corr.]
[Opinion] sp. (corr.]
Approbation] Delectation] Love]
Fane, [Index (instr.) of wind.] Fang, [Long tooth.] Fantasy. NP. II. 2.
Fantasm, [Fancied (thing.] Fantastic. [adj. Fancy (corr.] Indulging fancy.]
Following fancy.] [Conceitedness]
Far. [adj. Distance] [Remote] -- into [Deep into]
[Averse]
[Much] -- day [Much day being past] [Late]
as -- as, [Until.] so -- as, [So much as]

Farce, vid. Farse. [Mixture of into -- thrusted (things.] [Pudding of mixed
(things] [Scurril Comedy (corr.]
Farcy, Disease. Fard. [Paint] Fardle, [Aggregated (thing] sp. by p. tied.]
Fare. Diet. Pr. I. [Event] -- well [I. valediction.] [Carriage] sp. by Water.]
[Carried (aggr.] (persons]
[Wages for Carriage] [Tower for direction of Navigators.]
Farm. Po. I. 1. take to -- [Hiring] let to -- [Demising]
Farra. Fi. IX. 5. Farrier, [Physitian for horses.] Farrow, [a. Parturition.]
sp. of Swine.]
Farse, [Fill. By into-thrusting] (Corr.]
Fart. Mo. IV. 2. A. Farther, vid. Further. [More-far] -- most. Sp. II. 2. D.
[More] [Also]
Farthest, vid. Furthest. [Most-far] [Last] [Most]
Farthing. Mea. IV. 1. Fascinate, [a. Witchcraft.] sp. By look.]
Fashion. [Figure] [Manner] [Custom] sp. Common] -- of Clothes, [Figure of
Clothes.] sp. Commonly accustomed.]

Fashions, Disease of Horse. Fast. Adj. Fixed. Q. VI. 6. E. -- and loose,
Light. [adj. Ha. IV. 7. D.]

-- asleep hold -- [asleep (int.] [hold (int.] [tie (int.]
ty --
Firm. Q. VI. 5. [Swift] NP. V. 9. Subst. [Absteining from feeding.] Religious.
RE. IV. 5. O.

Fasten. [Fast (make] [Tie] [Bite]
Fastness, [Place inaccessible.] sp. through bogs.]
Fastidious. [adj. a. nauseate contemn scorn
(apt.]
Fat. -- of Animal. PG. II. 7. -- Constitution. NP. V. 5. -- Taste or Smell. Q.
IV. 2.
[Vessel] vid. Vat.
Fate. AS. I. 2. E. Fatal. [adj. Fate (abstr.] [adj. a. Death.]
Father. Parent. TO. I. 2. (male.] -- monk. RE. II. 7. -- ly* [adj. Father.] --
less, [Un-fathered.]
-- in law, [Father by Affinity.] fore -- [Progenitor.] TO. I. 1. Foster -- TO.
III. 2. God -- TO. III. 1. God the -- G. I.

Fathom [6. Foot.] Fatigue, [a. Weariness (thing.] Faucet. Pr. V. 7. A.
Fauchion, [Broad short (sword.] Faucon, vid. Falcon.] Fault. [Defect (corr.]
[Evil action] -- capital. RJ. III. -- not capital. RJ. IV.
find -- [a. Censoriousness] [Reprehend] [Blame]

Faulter. [Stammer] [Stumble] [Err] [Fail] Desist timorously.] unfaithfully.]
Omit timorously.] unfaithfully.] Forsake timorously.] unfaithfully.]

Faulty. [adj. Fault] [adj. Wrong]
Faun, vid. Fawn. Favor. Affection. AS. V. 2. [Favor (sign] sp. Ornament.] sp.
Riband.]
Countenance. [Face (manner] (fig.]


Favorite, [adj. p. Favor (person.] Fautor, [adj. a. Favor (person.] Fawn.
[Assentation] Man. IV. 7. E. sp. By gesture.]
[Buck. Be. II. 4. (young]
Fealty. [Fidelity] [Fidelity (sign]
Fear. AS. V. 6. O. for -- [Left that]
Fearfulness. Timidity, [Fear apt.] Terribleness, [a. Fear (apt.]
Fearn. HL. I. 4. Oak -- HL. I. 4. A.
Feast. Thing. Pr. II. 1. Time, [Festival]
Feat. [Fact [Done (thing] [Handsome (dim.]
Feather. Single. PP. V. 1. Plume [Feathers (aggr.) for Ornament.]
Feature, [Figure (man.] sp. Of face.]
February, [Second month.] Fecible. [adj. p. do (pot.] [Possible]
Feculent, [adj. Sediment.] Fecundity, [Fruitfulness.] Fee. [Revenue] sp. of
Office.] [Wages] [Stipend] -- simple. Hereditary right] Absolute right]
-- farm. [Inheritance obnoxious to Rent.]

Feebleness, [Weakness.] Feed. AC. I. 5. -- upon, [Be fed with.]
Feeling. Sense. NP. III. 5. -- for, [For-search by -- ]
[Suffering] fellow -- [Compassion] -- Feelers. PP.. IV. 4.

Feign, vid. Fain Fell. [Feirce] NP. IV. 4. O. to -- [a. Fall] sp. With striking.]
-- trees, etc. O. III. 8. A. a -- [Skin] sp. With fleece.]
-- monger. [Skin (Mech.] (Mer.]

-- wort, [Gentian] HL. VII. 6.
Fellow. Like] Equal] [adj. TO. IV. (person]
[Companion.] The -- of it, [The other congruous to it.] -- worker, [Together
-- ] -- of College, [Assessor of adj. College (off.] [Sorry (person.]
[Spoke.] Po. V. 7. A.
Fellowship. [Fellow (abstr.] [Society] [Communion]
Felon. [adj. Felony (person] [Apostem at the root of the nail]
Felony. RJ. III. 4. Felt. [adj. p. Feel] [Head (vest) woollen with broad
margin] to -- [a. Cloth (make) by kneading]
Felter, [Entangle.] Female NP. VI. 2. O. Feminine NP. VI. 2. O. Fen. Po. I. 8.
Fence, [Enclosure] [Fortifie] [Defend]
Exercise. Mo. V. 6. A.
Fenegreek. HS. III. 13. A. Fennel. HF. V. 1. Hogs -- HF. V. 2. Giant -- HF. V.
3. Scorching -- HF. V. 11. A. -- flower. HS. V. 13. A.
Feodary. Feoff, vid. Enfeoff. Fermenting. O. VI. 5. A. Fern, vid. Fearn.
Ferret. Be. IV. 5. to -- [Search (int.] -- out, [Out-drive (int.] -- silk.
Ferry. [Boat for traveling over River] [Boating (place) over River.]
Fertility, [Fruitfulness.] Fervent. [Hot (augm.] [Zealous*]
Ferule. Stone, [Together-coagulated Gravel.] Metalline, [Ring (fig.) lamin.]
Wood, [adj. Cudgelling (instrum.) for hand]
Fescu, [Pin (instr.) for showing the Letters.] Fess, [Transverse lamin (fig.)
in the middle of the Scutcheon.] Fester, Putrefie.] Festival, [adj. Festivity
(time.] Festivity. RE. IV. 5. Fetch. to -- TA. VI. 4. A. -- breath, [In-take --
] -- out, [Cause to come out.] -- up, [Overtake.]
a -- [Invention] [Craftied (thing]

Fetid, [Stinking.] Fetter, [Bonds for Legs.] Feud, [Old enmity.] Fever. S. II.
2. malignant -- S. II. 3.
Feverfew. HF. II. 9. Fuel, vid. Fuel. Fewness. TM. III. 1. O. Fie. Interj. II.
3. O. Fib, [Lie (dim.] Fiber. PG. II. 5. A. Fickleness, [Lightness.] Ha. IV. 7.
D. Fiction. T. I. 3. A. Fiddle, [Music (instr.) stringed] -- stick, [Bow for
Music (instr.] -- ing. [a. Music with instrument.] [a. Vanity]

Fidelity. Man. IV. 2. Fidge, [Vain ition (freq.] Fiduciary, [adj. Deposit
(person.] Field. [Grounds.] Po. I. 2. Keep the -- RM. II. 3. Win the -- RM. II.
1. E. Quit the -- RM. II. 3. D.
Fieldfare. By. III. 5. Fiend. W. I. 2. O. Fierce. NP. IV. 4. O. Wild, [adj.
NP. IV. 4. O.] op. to Moderate, [adj. Ha. III. 4. D.] op. to Meek, [adj. Man.
I. 9. D.]
Fife, [Musical Pipe.] Fifteen. Fifty. Fig. Tr. I. 5. Indian -- Tr. I. 9* A. --
wort. HS. VIII. 5. A.
Fight. RM. I. 7. Figment, [adj. Fiction (thing.] Figulation. O. IV. A. Figure.
Shape. Mag III. A. Scheme line pictured
fig.] Rhetorical. D. III. 7. A.
Fill. O. II. 7. Filament, [Fibre.] Filberd. Tr. IV. 3. Filch, [Theft (dim.]
File. -- ing. O. IV. 2. A. a -- Instrument, [adj. filing (instr.] As of
Soldiers. RM. IV. 4. A.

Filial, (adj. Son.] Filipendula, [Dropwort.] Fill. O. II. 7. Fillet. [Riband]
sp. adj. Linen.]
-- of Beast. -- of Pillar, [Square (part.]
Filly, [young horse (sem.] Fillip, [Strike with the nail of the finger
springingly.] Film, [Thin Membrane.] PG. II. 3. A. Filthy. [adj. a. Defile
(abstr.] [adj. Slovenliness (augm.] a -- deal, [Much (corr.]
Filtring. O. VI. 4. A. Fin. PP. IV. 6. Final, [adj. End.] Finch. Chaff -- By.
IV. 7. Bull -- By. IV. 5. Gold -- By. Green -- By. IV. 6.
Find. -- by Seeking. TA. I. 7. O. Perceive, [a. Common sense.] Discover.] AS.
II. 2. A. Invent.] AS. III. 2. A. Contrive.] AS. III. 7.

-- by Experience. [Discover by Essaying.] [a, Experience] Ha. VI. 4. -- the
Bill, [Approve the Bill.] -- Fault. [a* Censoriousness] [Blame] [Reprehend]

-- without seeking. [a. Fortune to see.] have.] etc.

[Obtein] TA. V. 1. [Maintein] TO. VI. 4.
Fine. Adj. [Simple.] -- force, [Simple. f.]
[Pure] [adj. TM. V. 6.] [Refined] [Un-adj. p. Worst part.] Sediment.]

[Thin.] [adj. TM. II. 5. O.] -- linen, [Thin (augm.) -- ]
[Soft] [adj. Man. I. 8. D.] [Tender] [adj. NP. IV. 7. O.] [Nice] [adj. Man.
II. 6. E.] [adj. a. Dainties (apt.] [adj. Ornateness]
[Crafry.]
Subst. [Mulct] RJ. VI. 7, in -- [In the End.]

Finger. PG. V. 7. Fore -- [Second -- ] Middle -- [Third -- ] Ring -- [Fourth
-- ] Little -- [Fifth -- ] at ones -- 's end, [adv. Memory (perf.] light -- 'd,
[adj. Theft (apt.] -- fern. Ladies -- HS. III. 4.
Finical. Nice, [adj. Man. II. 6. E.] [Conceited. adj. Ha. III. O.]
Finish. TA. III. 7. Finite. T. III. 6. Fir. male -- Tr. V. 5. female -- Tr. V.
5. A.
Fire. Proper. El. I. bone -- [Fire built for Joy.] Triumph.]
light -- [adj. Flame -- ] wild -- [Confection of Powder, adj. a. Fire (apt.]
-- works. -- brand. -- Fork F. Shovel Sh.
for -- ] -- lock.

Meteor. -- drake. El. I. 4. licking -- El. I. 6. A. Disease. St. Anthonie's --
[Erysipelas.]

Firestone, [Marchasite] St. I. 3. A. Firing, [Fuell.] Firkin. [Barrel (dim.]
Measure.
Firm. Fast, [adj. Q. VI. 5.] -- land, [Continent.] W. III. 2. Constant, [adj.
Ha. IV. 7.]
Firmament. [Starry heaven] W. II. [Ether] El. II. 1.
First. In Number, [adj. Mea. II. 1.] In Dignity. [Principal.]
Fiscal, [adj. Exchequer.] Fisgig. Fish. Fi. -- hook, [Hook for -- ] -- monger,
[adj. Fish (merc.] -- pond. Po. I. 6. to -- [Hunt Fish] [a. Confess (end]

Fisherman, [Hunting (artist) of Fish.] Fisk. [Mo. II. (corr.] Fist, [Hand
Folded.] Contracted.]
Fistic, [Pistach.] Fistula. S. I. 7. A. Fit. [adj. Congruity. T. V. 5.]
[Congruously proportion'd] disposed] prepared] furnished]
Opportune [adj. Time (perf.] [Decent] [Expedient]
a -- T. VI. 6. A. -- of sickness, [a. Sickness.] -- of the mother. S. VI. 7.
to -- [a. Fit.] -- with the like, [Compensate.]
Fitch, vid. Vetch. Fitcher. Mo. II. (freq.) cross --
Fitchow, [Polecat.] Be. IV. 5. A. Fitting, vid. Fit. adj. Five. Mea. II. 5. --
hundred, etc.
Fixed. Fast, [adj. Q. VI. 6. E.] [Not adj. p. move (apt.] [Observing (int.]
Flag. Figure. Mag. IV. 7. A. -- of a Ship. RN. III. 7. -- Ship. [Sedge.]
-- flower, [Iris.] to -- [Be weak] [Decay] [Be limber] sp. Through Weakness.]
Decay.]
[Hang adv. limber]

Flagitious, [Vitious (augm.] Flagon, [Cylindrical pot.] Flagrant. [Intense]
[Manifest]
Flay, [Un-skin.] Flail, [adj. a. Threshing (instr.] Flake, [Lamin.] Flam,
[Ly,] Flame. El. I. 1. Flank. Side. -- of Animal. PG. IV. 5. A. to -- [a.
Side.]
Flanker. RM. VI. 6. A. Flap. vid. Flag. [Strike] sp. with Lamin.]
a -- [adj. Limber (lam.] sp. Hanging.]
fly -- [Flap to drive away Flies.] Throat -- Cover (thing) of the rough
Artery.]
Flash. [Impetus.] -- of fire, [Flame (imp.] -- of water, [Stream (imp.] -- y.
Taste. Waterish, [adj. Water (like.]

[Fresh] Q. IV. 5. O.
Discourse, [Light.] Man. IV. 6. D.
Flask. [Box for Gunpowder.] [Carriage for Ordnance]
Flasket, [Long Basket without Lid.] Flat. Corpor. [Plain] W. III. 1. [adj.
Lamin] [Shallow] TM. II. 3. O. [Low] TM. II.4. O. [adj. Lying] AC. VI. 7. O.
-- foot. PP. V. 3. A. Transcendent [Manifest] Absolute, [adj. T. I. 8. O.]
[Sorry. TM. I. 4. D.]
a -- -- in the Sea, [Shallow (place) in the Sea.]
-- in Music. Q. III. 5. D.

Flattery. [Fawning] [Assentation]
Flatulent, [adj. a. Wind Inflation
make] Flaunt, [adj p. Ornate (exc.] Flaw. [Break (dim. Outside.
[Notch] [Bruise] [Spot] -- of wind, [Wind (imp.]
Flawn, [Py of Milk and Eggs.] Flax. HS. V. 12. Toad's --
Flea, Ex. I. 8. A. -- bane. HF. III. 9. A. -- wort. HL. VII. 4* A. Sea -- Ex.
II. 2. A. to -- [Un-skin.]
Fleam. Vid. Phlegm. [adj. Phlebotomy (instr.]
Fled, [adj. pret. Fly.] Fledge, [Feathered*] Flee, vid. Fly. Fleece. PP. VI.
3. to -- [Un-fleece.]
Fleet, [Swift] to -- vid. Flit. a -- Navy, [Ships (aggr.]
Flegmatic, adj. Phlegm.] Flesh. PG. II. 6. -- ly. vid. Carnal. Natural]
Worldly] [adj. Lust] AC. II. 5.
-- y [adj. Flesh] [Having much Flesh]
to -- one, [Encourage.]
Fletcher, [adj. Bow (mech.] Flew. [adj. pret. Flie] Vid. Flu.
Flexible. [adj. Q. V. 6.] [adj. p Persuade (apt.]
Fly. As Bird. Mo. I. 2. As routed. RM. II. 3. D. -- out. [a Excess] [a.
Squander]
Let -- [Shoot] [Strike at]
a -- [Flying Insect] Crane -- Ex. IV. 8. Dung -- Ex. IV. 4. A. Flesh -- Ex.
IV. 4. Shepherd's -- [Crane-fly.] Spanish -- [Cantharides] Ex. V. 9. Catch --
HS. V. 2. A. -- boat.
Flicker, vid. Flutter. Flight, vid. Fly. Flinch. [Start] AC. IV. 5. intermit
timorously forsake unfaithfully abandon cowardly
Fling. [Cast] Mo. VI. 2. -- away, [Away-goe suddenly.]
Kick, [Strike with the heel.]
Flint. St. I. 3. Flirt. [Impetus] [Woman (corr.]
Flit. [Remove] [Depart] [Transitory]
Flitch, [Half the Trunk and Limms.] sp. of a Hogg.]
Flitter, [Torn fragment.] -- mouse, [Bat.]
Flittern. Flix, [Disease of Dunging (exc.] bloody -- [Disentery] -- weed. HS.
IV. 11.
Flock. Aggregate. -- together, [a. Convention]
-- of Wool. [Course part of -- ] [Curls of Fleece.]

Flook, [Barb of Anchor.] Floor. Po. III. 4. A. Florentine. Florid. [adj.
Beauty] Vigor]
[adj. Flourishing] Ornament]

Flosculous. [adj. Flower] [adj. Ornateness]
Flote. Mo. I. 3. a -- [Boat (like) of together tied timber.]
Flood. [River] [Water (exc.] [Inundation] -- gate. [^oor for floud] [^ate to
in-shut water]
Flounder. Fi. VII. 4. A. Flour. [Best part] TM. VI. ^. sp. of ground com.]
Blossom. PP. II. 1. -- gentle. our Lady's --
-- de luce, [Iris] -- bulbous. HL. IV. 6. -- tuberous. HL. V. 3. A.
to -- [a. Powder] Pr. III. 7. A. a. Blossom. PP. II. 1.

Flourish. [a. Flour] [a. Vigor.] a. Prosper] Discourse ornately] Boast]
Prelude, [Preparatory Music.] [Vibrate]
Flout, [Mock.] -- cream.
Flow. [a. River] -- ing tide, [Upward-tide.]
[Abound]
Flower, vid Flour. Flu, [Not-adj. p. fat (pot.] the -- of a rabbet, [-Fleece
-- ]
Fluctuate. [a. Wave] [Waver] AS. IV. 4. O.
Fluellin. HS. VIII. 9. A. Fluent. [abounding] [adj. Discourse (apt.]
Fluidness. Q. V. 5. D. Fluke. Ex. I. 4. Flung. [adj. pret. Fling.] Flurt, vid.
Flirt. Flush. [Abundance] [Mellow] [Blush (like] [Wholly of the same colour]
Flute, [pipe] sp. Musical.]
Flutter, [Fly (end.] [Shake (freq.) the wings.]
Flux. vid. Flix. [Streaming] to -- [Melt] [Purge] sp. by Salivation.]

Fluxion. [Flowing] [Fluxing]
Foe, [Enemy] Fodder Hay Straw
Eatable.] Fog, [Thick mist.] -- gy, [Fat (exc.]
Foil. [Overthrow (dim.] [Accessory beauty] sp. by Worse Contrary
compared with it.]
Play at -- s, [Fence with blunt Weapons.]
Foin, [Prick (end) by thrusting (imp.] Foist. to -- [adv. Silent. Mo. IV. 2.
A.] [Forge] -- in [Add secretly.] fraudulently.] forgingly.]


Gally -- [Predatory Ship (dim.]
Fold. Pleit. O. V. 5. [Shut] Sheep -- [Sepiment for Sh.]

Fool, [Horse (young.] to -- [Parturition^] sp. of Mare.]

Foliage, [Leaf (aggr.] sp. Factitious.]
Folio, [Biggest book (figure.] Folk. [Person (kinde] [Man (aggr.]
Folly. Ha. VI. 2. D. Follow. Go after. TA. VI. 6. As Enemy. Persue] Hunt]
As dependent. TO. III. 5. O. [Wait] AC. V. 1. A. Obey Imitate Practise] Be
diligent about]
As consequent [p. Inference.] As Successor, [Succeed.]
Foam, [Bubbles (aggr.] Foment, [a. Fotion] [Supple by soking] sp. In hot
(remiss.]

Fondness. Indulgence. Man. VI. 7. D. Vainness] Man. IV. 6. O. [Folly] Ha. VI
2. D.
Font, [adj. Baptism (vessel] Food. [Feeding (thing] [Nourishing (thing]
Fool. [adj. Folly (person] -- hardy, [Rash.] Man. I. 7. E.
natural -- [adj. NP. I. 1. O. (person.] to -- one, [a. Fraud.] to -- with one,
[a. Wantonness.]
Foolishness, [Folly.] Foord. [Shallow (part) of River] sp. over-adj. p. travel
(pot.)

Foot. -- of Animal. PG. V. 6. -- ball, [Play of Striking Ball with Foot.]
[Ball for play by, and^
-- cloth. -- man, [adj. Running (apt) Servant]
-- soldier. RM. III. 1. -- stall, [adj. Foot (armam.] -- step, [Foot (sign.]
-- stool, [Foot-supporting (armam.]
by -- [By Foot (sign.] Crump -- ed, [Shrunk -- ed.] Flat -- ed. PP. V. 3. A.
Splay -- ed, [Divergingly -- ^ ed.] to -- it, [Travel on his Feet.] -- of Cup
[Foot like -- ] -- of Pillar [Foot like -- ] Measure. -- of Length. Mea. I. 3.
-- of Verse [Verse part.]

Footing. [a. Foot (place]
Foppery. [Vanity] T. IV. 5. O. M. IV. 6. O.
[Folly] Ha. VI. 2. D.
For. Prep. [Because of] Prep. I. 2. A. if it had not been -- [Unless it had
been -- ]
[Concerning] Prep. I. 3. O. as -- me [ -- me] let him -- me, [Let him -- me.]
[Instead of] Prep. II. 1. A. op. to Against.]
Adv. -- a time, [adv. Transitory.] -- ever, [adv. Ever.]
Conj. [Because] Conj. III. 2. -- all that, [Notwithstanding] Conj. II.2. A. --
fear, [Lest that.] Conj. III. 1. O. -- as much as, [Whereas.] Conj. IV. 1. --
Example, [e. g.] Conj. IV. 3. O.


Forage. [Provisions] sp. for Horses.]
[Booty] to -- [Goe forth to bring in Provisions.] [a. Booty]
Forbear. [Abstein] Omit] Desist] Spare] a. Patience]
Forbid. TO. V. 1. O. God -- [Let God Prevent] Hinder]
[Be it not that]

Force. Coaction] iolence] Strength] Ability] Efficientness] Importance] of --
[adv. Necessity] -- s. RM. IV.
Forcer. [adj. a. Force (Person (Instr.

Fore. [Before] [adv. Preventing]
Fore-appoint, [Before-appoint.] Fore-arm, [Before-arm.] Forecast. [Before.
Consider] Contrive]
[Providence] Man. III. 2.
Fore-castle. RN. II. 4. Fore-conceiv'd, [Before-conceived] [Meditated]
Fore-deem. Before judge.] Preventingly judge.]
Fore-door, [adj. Forepart-door.] Fore-father* TO. I. 1. Fore-foot, [adj.
Forepart-foot.] Forefront, [Fore-part] Foregoing, [Preceding] Fore-hand.
[Fore-part] [Prevent]
Forehead. PG. III. 6. Fore-judge. Before -- judge] Preventingly -- judge]
Foreknow, [Before-know.] Fore-land. W. III. 4. Foreman, [First (person.]
[Principal (person.]
Foremast. RN. III. 4. A Fore-noon, [Preceding part of the day.] Fore-ordein,
[Before-ordein.] Forepart. Sp. III. 8. Fore-run. [Before- Go] Run]
[a. Van-currier]
Fore-sail, [Mizzen-sail.] Foresee, [Before- See] Know]
Fore-shew, [Before-shew.] Foresight. [Fore-seeing] [Providence]
Foreskin, [adj. Forepart-skin.] Fore-sleeve, [Sleeve from the elbow to the
wrist.] [adj. cubit (vest]
Fore-slow. [a. Slow] [Protract] [Hinder]
Fore-speak. [Before-speak of] [Witch with words]
Fore-stall. Before -- buy] Preventingly -- buy]
Fore-teeth, [adj. Forepart-teeth.] Foretell, [Before-tell.] [a. Prophet]
Fore-think, [Before- Think] Meditate]

Forethought, adj. a. pret. adj. p. Fore-think.]

Fore-token, [Before a. Sign.] Fore-top, [adj. Forepart-hair.] sp. Above the
Forehead.]
Fore-warn, [Before-warm.] Forfeit. [un-adj. p. right] [Lose right] sp.
Penally.]
[Lose by confiscation]
Forge. to -- Fabricate. O. IV. 5. Falsify. RJ. IV. 4. A. Feign, [adj. a.
Fiction.]
a -- [Fabricating (room) (place)
of adj. Iron (mech.]
Forget, [a. NP. II. 3. O] -- fullness. NP. II. 3. O.
Forgive. As Crime. RJ. II. 2. O. As Debt. TA. IV. 9 O.
Forgo, [Be un-adj. p. Possession of] Voluntarily, [Let go.] TA. I. 6. O. Begin
to be so, [p. Dereliction.] Continue so, [Abandon.] Unvoluntarily, [Lose.]
Fork. Figure. Mag. IV. 8. A. Instrument, [adj. Fork (instr.] pitch --
[Preparing (instr.) of Hay.]

Forlorn. [adj. p. Destruction] [adj. p. Despair.] [adj. p. Dereliction.] --
hope. RM. IV. 6. A.

Form. Cause. T. II. 7. A. [Manner] set -- [Determined expression (manner.]

[Figure] [Hare's (Bed] (Place]

Seat. Mag. V.8.
Formal. -- c^^se. T. II. 7. A. [adj. Formality]
Formality. [Form, (manner.] Vice. Man. IV. 6. E.
Former. [Preceding] -- ly, [adv. Preceding (time.] [Past]
Formidable, [adj p. Fear (abstr.] Foremost, [First.] Formulary. [Set-form]
[Epitome]
Fornication. RJ. IV.2. Forage, vid. Forage. Foreign, [adj. TO. IV. 3. O.] --
er. TO. IV. 3. O.
Forest. Po. I. 2. A. -- er, [adj. Forest (Off.]
Forsake. As God, [Dereliction.] As Man. [Desertion.] -- the Right, [Abdicate.]
-- the Possession, [Forgo.] -- his Religion, [Apostasie.]

Forsooth. Truly. Adv. I. 2. O. Ironic. Int. I. 3.
Forswear. Abjure. Against-swear] [Deny] with Oath.] [Renounce] with Oath.]
[Swear false]
Fort, [Sconse.] RM. VI. 2. Forth. Out of] Prep. IV. 2. [Without] Prep. IV. 2.
A. [Public] -- coming. [Forth-adj. p. bring (pot.] [Ready to be brought forth]
-- with, [Soon]
Forty. Fortify. Strengthen] [adj. a. RM. VI.]
Fortitude. Man. I. 7. Fortress, [Sconse.] Fortuitous, vid. Casual.
Fortunateness. adj. Fortune (perf.] [adj. Prosperity]
Fortune. AS. I. 2. D. -- teller, [Before-telling (person) of events] to --
[adj. p. Event]
Forward. adj. Forepart] adj. Alacrity] adj. Incline (augm.] adj. p. Prepared
Begin
(perf. adj. pret. Proceed] to -- adj. a. Adjuvant] Proceed make] Dispatch] egg
-- [a. Impulsive.] going -- Ition adj. a. forepart] Proceed]

Fosse. Furrow] [Ditch]
Fosset. Pr. V. 7. A. Foster. [Nurse] -- father. TO. III. 2. -- child. TO. III.
2. O. -- brother, [Together-foster-child.]
[Fotion] [Educate]
Fotion. AC. I. 4. Fought, vid. Fight. Foul. [adj. p. Defilement] [Deformed]
[Vitious] [Slovenly] [Sordid] a -- deal, [Much (corr.] [Birds] to -- [a. Foul
(make] [Hunt Birds]
Found. adj. p. find] pret. find] to -- [a. Foundation] [Cast] O. IV. 5.
Foundation. Po. III. 4. Founder. [adj. a. Found (person] (Mech.]
to -- [a. Impotent in going (apt.] [Un-make adj. going (apt.]
Foundling, [adj. p. find (person.] Fountain. W. IV. 3. A. Four. Mea. II. 4. --
fold, [four] -- score, [Eighty.] -- square, [Square.] Mag. V. 1. A.
Fourm, vid. Form. Fowl, vid. Foul. Fox. Beast. Be. V. 2. -- Fish. Fi. I. 7. A.
-- glove. HS. VII. 10. -- tail. HL. III. 2. [a. Drunkenness]
Fraction, [Breaking] Fracture, [Breaking] Fragment. TM. VI. 5. A. Fragrant,
[Sweet] Q. IV.1. Fray. [Skirmish] [Fight (dim.] to -- adj. a. Fear (make.]
Freight. [Burthen] sp. for Ship]1 [Wages for Carriage]
Frail. [Brittle] Q. VI. 5. D. [Transitory] a -- [Spherical Basket] sp. of
Rushes.]

Frame. -- of Building. Po. III.1. Figure. in -- [adj. p. Order* (perf.] out of
-- [adj. p. Confusion] Machin.] Jugament.] to -- [a. Efficient] [Feign]
[Contrive] [a. Build] [v. Congruity]
Franchise, [privilege.] Frank. Man. IV. 4. Frankincense. Tree. Tr. VIII. 3.
[Resin of Frankincense-tree]
Frantic, [Mad.] S. IV. 1. Fraternity, [Corporation.] Fraud. RJ. IV. 4.
Fraudulent, [ad. Fraud.] Fraught. [Loaded] [Full]
Fraxinella. HS. I. 1. A. Freak. ^^dj. Conceitedness (thing] [adj. Lightness
(thing]
(...), [Spot (dim.) yellow.] Free. [adj. Liberty Ha. II. 1. AS. IV. 8. [not-
Prisoner] Slave]
[adj. p. Deliver] AS. I. 5. -- from, [Without.]

[adj. Spontaneity] AS. IV. 9. [adj. Alacrity] [Not-recompensed] [Liberal]
Frank [adj. Man. IV. 4.] -- booter, [adj. a. Booty (person.] -- hold, [Right
not-rented.] -- man. [Not-villain] [Citizen] [adj. Immunity Privilege
person.]

Freedom. [Liberty] [Ingenuity] [Immunity] [Privilege]
Fre-Mason, [adj. Freestone (mech.] Freestone. S^. I. 1. Freez. Color,
[Gray.] ^loth, [Napt (augm.]
to -- [a. Frost] Ice]

Freight, vid. Fraught. Frenzy. S. IV. 1. Frequent. Sp. I. 7. to -- [To come
(freq.]
Fresh. [New] -- air, [Breez.] -- man. [New-comer] [Unexpert (person]
[adj. Vigor] -- taste. Q. IV. 6.
Un-salted. Q. IV. 5. O. a -- [adv. Repeating] Adv. IV. 2.
Fresh water soldier. HS. VI. 1. Fret. [Rub] O. V. 8. -- of musical
instrument. [Under-touching (apt.) transverse (thing.]
[Corrode] O. VI. 3. Wine -- s.
Un-skin by rubbing] Pain by corrosion] -- Work, Spirally, etc. [Graving
Spirally, etc. Vex, [a. Anger.]
Fretum. W. IV. 5. Fry. [Children (aggr.] sp. Of Fish.]
to -- Pr. III. 4.
Fricass, [adj. p. Fry (thing.] Frication, Rubbing.] Friction, Rubbing.]
Friday, [The sixth day of the Week.] Friend. TO. IV. 1. a -- ship, [adj.
Benefactor (thing.]
Friar, [Monk] RE. II. 7. Friars cowl* Broad leaved -- HL. V. 10. Narrow leaved
-- HL. V. 10. A.

Frigate [Man of War.] Fright, [adj. a. Fear (make.] Frigid. [Cold] [Slight]
Frigot, [Man of War.] Fringe, [Tufted line.] Frippery, [adj. Sorry (thing.]
Frisk, [Leap Nimble.] (freq.]
Fritter, [Fried pudding (like.] Frittillary. HL. IV. 3. A. Frivolousness,
[Vanity.] T. IV. 5. O. Frize, vid. Freez: Frizle, [Curl^(augm.] Fro. Prep. vid.
From. to and -- [Forward and Backward.] a -- [Man (fem.]
Frock, [Upper vest of Horse (Off.] Frog. BE. VI. 2. Frolic, [adj. Mirth.]
From. Prep. III. 2. -- henceforth. [From this time] [At all times after this]

Front. [Forehead] [Forepart]
Frontier, [Margin.] Frontispice, [Forepart] Frontlet, [Forehead (vest.] Frost.
El. III. 4. -- nail, [Nail un-adj. a. slide (apt.]
Froth, [Bubble (aggr.] Frowardness. [Disingeniousness] [Moroseness]
Frown. AC. IV. 2. O. Frozen, [adj. p. Freez.] Fructify, [adj. a. Fruitful.]
Frugality. Man. III. 3. Fruit. PP. III. Effect] Event] Profit] -- fullness NP.
VI. 3. -- less, Unprofitable.] Vain.]


Fruiterer, [Fruit (merch.] Fruition, [Enjoying.] TA. V. ^. Frumenty, [Pottage
of Wheat.]* Frump, [Mock (dim.] Frustrate. TA. V. 1. O. Fucus, [Paint] sp. for
the Face.]
Fuddle, [a. Drunkenness.] Fuel. Pr. VI. 2. Fugitive. [Flying] [Apostate]
Full. [adj. p. Fill] [Whole] [Sufficient] [Perfect]
-- moon, [Moon in the midst of her month] to -- Cloth. O. V. 3.
Fulfill. [Perform] [Finish]
Fuliginous, [adj. Soot.] El. IV. 3. A. Fuller, [Fulling (mech.] Fulsom.
[Sweet, exc.] [Nauseative] NP. II. 4. O.
Fumaria, [Hollow-root.] Fumble, [a. Hand (corr.] Fume. [Smoak] [Exhalation]
[Indignation]
Fumigation, [Smoking.] Fumitory. HS. III. 4. A. Function. [Calling] [Action in
ones Calling]
Fundament. PG. IV. 8. A. Fundamental. [adj. Foundation] [Chief]
Funeral, [adj. Burial.] sp. the Solemnity.]
Fungous, [Porous.] Funnel, Cone (vessel) for through-pouring.] [adj.
Fur. PP. VI. 3. to -- RN. VI. 3. A.
Furbish, [a. Bright (make] Fury, [Anger (augm.] the -- es, [Devils (fem.]
Furious. [adj. Anger (augm.] [Fierce (augm.]
Furling, [Tying loose.] Furlong. Mea. I. 6. Furnace. [Concave (place) to build
Fire (in.] [Kettle (aug.] -- hole in Fortification. RM. VI. 7. A.
Furnish TA. III. 2. A. Furniture, [adj. Furnishing (thing] [Provisions]
[Tackle.] [Utensils]
Furrier, [adj. Fur (mech.] (merch.]
Furrow. Mag. V. 7. O. Further, vid. Farther. -- more, [Also.] to -- [adj. a*
Adjuvant]
Furthest, vid. Farthest. Furz, [Sh. IV. 8. A. Fuse, [Cone notched spirally.]
Fusil. [Notched] [adj. p. Cast] [Meltable]
Fusty, [Musty.] Q. IV. 7. Fustian. [Course Cotton-cloth] [Sorry mixed (thing]
Fustick. Future. Sp. L. 1. D. Fuzbal. HL. I. 2. A.
G.
GAbardin, [Sorry (garment.] Gabble, [a. Loquacity not intelligible.] Gabel,
[Tribute.] Gabion. RM. VI. 9. A. Gable-end, [End of roof.] Gad. [Pin] -- be.
to -- [Wander]
Gag, [a. Gaping (instr.] Gage. [Pledge] to -- Essay Depth] Essay Capacity]

Gaggle [Goose (voice.] Gay, [adj. p. Ornateness (exc.] Gain. Lucre. TA. V. 2.
[Obtain] [Increase]
Gainsay. [Against-say] Deny] Contradict]

Galades. Ex. VIII. 3. A. Galangal. HL. III. 12. Galaxy. Galbanum, [Concrete
juice of Giant Fennel.] Galbula. By. III. 8. Gale. gentle -- El. VI. 6. stiff
-- El. VI. 7.
Galeass. Galcot. RN. I. 4. Galingale. HL. III. 12. Gall. [Choler] [Bladder of
-- ]
Excrescence of Oak. PP. III. O. to -- Un-skin] Hurt] Anger] sp. by Rubbing]
Wearing.]



Gallant. [Ornate (augm.] [Excellent]
Galley. RN. I. 3. -- foist. -- pot
Gallery, [adj. p. walking (room.] Gallimaufry, [Confused mixture.] Gallinula
serica. By. VIII. 9. A. Gallion. Galliot. RN. I. 4. Galloche, [Outermost foot
(vest.] Gallon. Galloon. Lace. Gallop, [Run.] Gallows, [Jugament for hanging.]
Galls. Sh. V. 5. Gambado, [Leg (arm.) for riding.] Gambol. [a. Activity] sp.
with Legs.] Wanton Vain (thing]



Game. Play. Mo. V. A. -- ster, [Game (mech.] [Hunting.] -- some, [Wanton.]

Gammon, [Leg of Hog.] sp. Smok'd.]
Ganch, [Precipitating on hooks.] Gander, [Goose (male.] Gang. [Society]
[Faction]
Ganglion. S. III. 9. Gangrel, [Long (corr.] Gangrene. S. I. 8. Gantlet, [Armor
for the ^and.] Gantlope. Gap, [Notch.] Gape. [Open (augm.] sp. the mouth.]
-- after, (augm.] [Expect (earnestly.] [Yawning]
[Chasm]
Garb, [Manner.] sp. of Garments.] Demeanor.]

Garbage, [Entrails] [Worst part]
Garble, [Un- a. worst-part.] sp. Spice.]
Garboil. [Contention] [Trouble]
Guard. -- of Soldiers. RM. III. 6. to -- Defend] Protect] Safe (make.]
Princes- Servants for safety.] Officers for safety.]

-- of vestment, [Margin strengthened.] sp. with Lace.]

Garden. Po. I. 3. Guardian. TO. III. 4. [Monks (off.]
Gargane, [White headed Teale (kind.] Gargarism, [Gargling.] Gargle, [Gullet^
to -- [Wash the top of the Gullet.] Windpipe.]

Garish, [adj. p. Ornate (exe.] Garland, [Head-environing, Joy-sign ornament.]
Garlic. HL. IV. 11. Garment, [adj. Clothing (thing.] Garner, [adj. a. Keeping
(room) for Corn.] Garnish, [adj. a. Ornate.] Garret, [Highest (room.] Garrison.
RM. VI. 1. A. Garrulity, [Loquacity.] Garter. [Ribband for Leg] [Binding
(vest.]
Gash, [Slash.] Pr. III. 5. A. Gasp, [Gape for breath.] Ghastly, [adj. a. Fear
(make.] [Pale] AC. IV. 9. O. (exe.]
Gate. [Dore] Poss. IV. 2. [Going (manner] Mo. I. 1.
Gather. [a. Aggregate] [a. Convention] Collect. O. II. 5. -- as Curd,
[Coagulate.] -- as Fruits, [Take F.] -- as Wind, [adj. p. wind.]
[Contract] -- up his Gown, etc. [Lift contracted,]
Calv's -- [Cal'vs PG. VI.]
Gaud. [Mock] Vain, [adj. T. IV. 5. O. (thing.] -- y. [Ornate (exc.] [Feast]


Gavelkind, [Distribution of Inheritance equally.] Gaul, vid. Gall. Gaunch,
[Precipitate on hooks.] Gaunt, [Lean (augm.] Gauntlet, [adj. Hand (arm.] Gaze,
[Look intently.] -- hound, [Dog hunting by Sight.]
Gazel, [Antilope.] Gazet, [adj. Narration (thing) of News.] Gear, [Thing
(corr.] Geese, [Goose plural.] Geld, vid. Gueld. Gelder rose, [Sh. II. 12.]
Gelly. Pr. I. 5. A. Gem. St. III. Gemini [Third Constellation [Third Twelfth
part of the Zodiac.]

Gender, [Sex.] to -- [a. Generation.]
Genealogy, [Catalogue of Ancestors.] General. Op. to* Special. TM. III. 4.
[adj. Genus] [All] [Common] [Total.] [Universal] a -- [Army* (Off.] [Monks
chief (Off.]
Generation. Begetting AC. I. 1. [Descendent (aggr.] TO. I. 1. O. [Age] Mea.
VI. O. ^
Generative facu^ty. NP. VI. Generousness. Man. III. 4. Genesis, [Generation.]
Genet, [Spanish Horse.] [Martin]
Genial, [Festival.] Genitals, [Privities.] PG. VI. 8. Genius. [Temper of mind]
[Disposition] good -- [Proper Angel] evil -- [Proper Devil]
Gentian. HL. VII. 6. Dwarf -- HL. VII. 6. A.
Gentil. [Pagan] [Maggot] Ex. I. 5. A.
Gentile, [adj. Gentleman] Gentle. T. V. 5. [Tame] NP. IV. 4. Courteous]
Clement] Gracious] Affable]
[Easie] [Remiss] -- man. RC. I. 3. A. -- woman. RC. I. 3. A. (fem. [Maggot]

Gentry. RC. I. 3. A. (kind.] Gentry. RC. I. 3. A. (aggr.] Genuflexion.
[Bending knee] AC. VI. 6. [Kneeling] AC. VI. 6. A.
Genuin. T. III. 4. Genus, [Kind.] T. I. Geography, [Science of the World.]
Geomancy, [Wizarding by the Earth.] Geometra. Ex. III. 7. Geometry. [Science of
Magnitude.] Georgic, [adj. Agriculture.] German. Cousin -- TO. I. 5.
Germander. HF. VI. 2. Tree -- HF. VI. 2. A. water -- HF. VII. 9. wild -- HS.
VI. 11. A.
Germinate, [v. Sprout.] PP. II. 5. Gerund, [Case of Participle Substantive.]
Gesses, [Foot-bonds for Hawk.] Gesticulation, [Gesturing (augm.] (exc.]

Gesture. AC. VI. Get. [Gain] TA. V. 2. [Obtain] TA. V. 1. [Obtain to be] doe]
-- before Obtain to be before.] Prevent.]
-- by Heart, [Obtain to remember] -- out. -- from person, [Obtain to be out,
etc.] -- a nail, [Pull out a nail.]
-- with child, [Impregnate] -- Children, [Generate ch.] -- clear, Obtain to
be freeed.] Escape]
-- gone, [From-goe.] TA. VI. 1. O. -- rid of, [Obtain to be freed from.]
[Mineral.] St. VI. 3.
Gewgaw, [adj. Vanity. T. IV. 5. O. (thing.] Ghess, [Conjecture.] Ghost,
[Spirit.] give up the -- [Dy.] holy -- G. III.
-- root.
Giant, [Great (augm.) person.] Gib, [Cat (male.] Gibberish, [Speech
not-intelligible.] Gibbet, [adj. hanging (jug.) with one stem.] Gibbous, [adj.
Protuberance.] Gibe, [Mock.] Giblets, [Entrals.] PG. VI. sp. Edible.]
Giddy. [adj. Vertigo] [adj. Fancy (corr.] [Wanton] [Conceited] [adj. Light]
Ha. IV. 7. O.
Giddiness, [Vertigo.] Gift. [adj. Give (thing] -- of God. spiritual. Ha. V.

Gig. [Cone adj. horn to be vertiginated with whipping.] [Whimzy] [adj.
Conceitedness (thing.]

Gigantic, [Great (augm.] (exc.]
Giggle, [Laugh (augm.] (freq.] (exc.]
Gigglet, [adj. Laugh (apt.] Gild, [Colour with Gold.] Gilden-pole. Gill. -- of
Bird. PP. V. 7. A. -- of Fish. PP. IV. 3.
Gilliflower. HS. V. 1. Sea -- HF. II. 14. A. Stock -- HS. IV. 1. Wall -- HS.
IV. 1. A.
Gilt-head. Fi. V. 1. Gimlet, [Little-boring (instr.] Gimmal, [Factitious
joint.] Gimp, [Shamois.] Gin. [Machin] [Trap]
Ginger, [Root of an Indian Iris of a hot biting taste.] -- ly Gently Slowly
without noise.]
Gingle. [Ringing (dim.] [Affect sound of Words]
Ginny. -- hen, [adj. Ginny-hen.] -- pig, Be. III. 6. A.
Gypsy. Giraffa. Be. II. 7. Gird, vid. Guird. Girdle, vid. Guirdle. Girl,
[Child (fem.] Girn, vid. Grin. Girt, uid. Guirt. Gith, [Nigella] Gittern, vid.
Guittern. Give. -- back, [Retire] -- over. [Desist] [Abandon] Correct no more.
TO. VI. 6. O.
-- up. [Yield] [Submit]
-- alms, [a. Alms.] -- ear. [Hear (end.] [Observe with Ear]
-- law, [a. Law.] -- name, [a. Name.] -- ones mind self to, adj. p.
Disposition (augm.]

-- oath. [Swear (make] [Oblige by oath]
-- place. -- way. -- to understand, [a. Know (make.] mind -- 's me. [I
conjecture] [I expect]
table -- s. weather -- s.
Gives, [Bonds for legs] Gizzard, [Second musculous stomach of Bird.] Glad.
[adj. Mirth] [adj. Alacrity] [adj. Delectation]
Gladden. Glade, [Open (place) through a Wood.] Gladiator, [adj. Fencing
(person.] Gladiolus, [Corn-flagg] Glaive, [Long Sword.] Glance. [Oblique (imp.]
a. Ey (imp.] a. Object (imp.] sp. adv. Accessory.] Digression.]

[Allusion (dim.] witty -- [Urbane (dim.]
Glandule. PG. II. 7. A. Glans. [Mast.] PP. III. 4. Glass. St. II. 4. A.
drinking -- [adj. Glass-cup.] looking -- [Face-shewing (instr.) by reflection.]
-- wort. HL. VIII. 7. [Splendor]
Glaucus. Fi. I. 3. A. Fi. IV. 1. A.
Glave, [Long Sword.] Glavering, [Fawning] Glaze. [a. Glass.] [To Shut Wall
with Glass.]
[a. brightness]
Glazier, [adj. a. Glass (mech.] Glean, [Gather the left things.] scattered
Ears.]
Glebe, [Land.] sp. Priest's.] Glede, [Kite.] By. I. 2. A. Glee. [Mirth] [adj.
Mirth Song]
Gleek. [Three] [Play]
Glib. [Smooth] Q. VI. 2. E. [Slippery]
Glide, [Kite.] By. I. 2. A. to -- [Slide] Mo. II. 4.
Glimmer, [Trembling light (imp.] Glimps, [Sudden Light Sight
(dim.] Glistering, [Trembling (like) brightness.] Glitter, [Bright] Globe,
[Sphere] Mag. III. 5. -- fish. Fi. VIII. 1.
Gloomy. [Cloudy] [Dark (dim.] [Dim] Q I. 3. A.
Glory, Public Praise. Universal Reputation. to -- AS. VI. 1. A.

Glorify, [a. Glory.] Gloss. [Comment (dim.] [Brightness (dim.]
Glote, [Look obliquely.] Glove, [adj. Hand (vest,] Fox -- HS. VII. 10.
Glow. [Be hot] [Shine white] [Shine fire-like] -- worm* Ex. I. 5. -- fly. Ex.
V. 9. A.
Gloze, [Assentation] Glue, [adj. Gluing (thing.] -- ing. O. IV. 4. A. -- y,
[Clammy (augm.]
Glut. [Fill (augm.] (exc.]
[Loathe (make) with abundance]
Glutinous. [adj. Glue] [Clammy]
Gluttony. Man. II. 2. E. Glyster, [Medicinal drink for the Fundament.] Gnash.
[Together-strike teeth.] [noise (make) with teeth.]
Gnat. Ex. IV. 5. A. -- snapper.
Gnaw. [Mastication] [Bite (end] [Corrode]
Gnomon, [Hour-shewing pin.] Go. Proper. [Ition] TA. VI. -- of Animal. Mo. I.
sp. On legs. Mo. II. -- on toes, [Stalk.] Mo. II. 3.
[Walk] Mo. II. 1. Depart. TA. VI. 1. O. Figurate. [Move] [Event] -- about,
[Endeavour (inc.] -- about [Begin] -- in hand with [Begin] -- after, [v.
Succeed.] -- against me. [I a. Nolleity] [I grudge it] [I loath it] [I nauseate
it]
-- astray, [Err] -- back, [Retire] -- ward [v. Worse] -- before, [v. Precede]
-- beyond one. [Superior] [Defraud]
-- down, [a. Downward.] -- forward, [Proceed.] -- on, [Proceed] -- out,
[Cease.] [ quick, [a. Quick,] -- through with it, [Finish.] -- to. Int. -- up,
[a. Upward.]
Goad, [Long pricking (instr.) to drive with.] Goal. [adj. p. Object (place]
sp. of Race.]
[End] T. II. 6.
Goat. Be. II. 2. A. -- 's beard. HF. III. 13. -- Chafer. Ex. V. 3. -- sucker,
[Owle of a short small Bill, and wide mouth.] -- 's thorn. skipping -- El. I. 5.
Gobbet. [Lump] [Fragment]
Gobble, [Swallow greedily.] Gobius marinus. Fi. III. 7. Goblet, [Cup (augm.]
Goblin, [Devil (like) fiction] God. G. -- head, [God (abstr.] Action of -- AS.
^.
-- the Father. G. I. -- the Son. G. II. -- the Holy Ghost. G. III.
God-child. TO. III. 1. O. Godfather. TO. III. 1. God-mother. TO. III. 1.
(fem.) Godless, [Ungodly.] Godliness. [Holiness] [Religion (perf.] [Worship
(perf.]
Godwit. By. VII. 8. A. Goggle-eyed, [Protuberantly eyed.] Gold. Met. I. 1. --
mine. [ -- (place] -- oar Crude g. not-prepared
g. -- smith, [g. (mech.] (merch.]
-- of Pleasure. HS. VI. 8. A. -- en locks. -- rod. HF. III. 8. A.
Gome, [Grease black'd by agitation.] Gone. [adj. p. a. pret.
go] [adj. Excess] [Spoil'd] [Destroy'd]
Good. Proper. T. III. 2. Profitable Sufficient Convenient
[Perfect] [Happy] -- against, [Medicinal against] -- at, [adj. Art in.] --
for, [Profitable to.] -- face. [Face (perf.] [Handsom]
-- fellow. -- luck, [Prosperity.] -- man of the House, [Master of the Family.]
-- success, [Event (perf.] -- turn, [adj. Benefactor (thing.] -- will, [Favor.]
make. -- [Perform] [Repair] [Compensate] find -- [Approve] think -- [Approve]
Goodly, [Handsom.] Goodness. Man. I. 4. Goods. [Possessions] [Houshold-stuff]
Googe. Goose. By. IX. 1. A. green -- [young -- ] stubble -- [autumnal -- ]
Soland -- By. IX. 4. -- berry. Sh. I. 3. -- foot. HF. I. 9. A. -- grass. HL.
IX. 9. A. -- nest.
Gorbe^^ied, [Protuberantly bellied.] Gore, Congealed blood] Coagulated blood]
Gellied blood] to -- [Prick (augm.] sp. with Horn.]


Gorge. [Gullet] [Stomach] sp. of Bird.]
to -- [Feed] [Fill]

Gorgeous, [Ornamented (augm.] (exc.]
Gorget. [adj. Neck (armor] [Linen (vest) for shoulder]
Gors, [Furz.] Gosling, [Goose (young.] Gospel, [adj. Evangelist (thing.]
Gosshawk, [Biggest long winged Hawk.] Gossip. [Child's Godfather] [Companion
for mirth] -- ing, [Women's Convention for mirth.]

Govern. [v. Magistrate] [Authority] [Direction]
good -- ance. Man. VI. 5. ill -- ance. Man. VI. 5. O.
Governor, [adj. Govern (person.] Gougeon. Fi. IX. 11. Gourd. HS. VII. 2.
Gourmandize [v. Gluttony] [Eat gluttonously]
Gournet Red -- Fi. IV. 4. Gray -- Fi. IV. 4. A.
Gout. S. II. 7. Gown, [Loose long (vest] Gozling, [Goose (young.] Grace.
Favour] Respect] a. Graciousness] Privilege] Elegance] Ornament] Infused habit.
Ha. V. -- less, [Ungracious] -- Before meat. -- After meat. [Thanksgiving] RE.
IV.

Gracious. [adj. p. Favour] -- ness. Man. VI. 1.
Gradation, [Degree (segr.] Gradual, [adj. Degree.] Graduate. RC. I. 4.
Graffing. O. III. 7. Gray. Q. II. 1. Hoary, [White (inc.) with age.] a --
[Badger] Be. V. 2. A.
Grayhound, [Dog-hunting beast by swiftness.] Grayling. Fi. IX. 4. Grain. Corn.
PP. III. 6* -- s, [Infused Corns of Malt.]
Weight. Mea. III. 1. [Berry] sp. of Spice.] -- s of Paradise, [Cardamoms.] in
-- [Died with Alkermes] [Powder] TM. VI. 4. A. -- of Leather, [Crenated
Superficies] -- of wood, [Fibres -- ]

Gramercy, [Thanks (augm.] Grammar, [Art of speaking properly] -- parts of
discourse. D. III.
Grammarian, [adj. Grammar (artist.] Granado. RM. V. 8. Granary, [adj. Grain
(room.] Granat-pome. Tr. I. 6. Grand, [Great] Grandame, [Grandmother]
Grandchild, [Child's Child] Grandeur. [Solemnity (augm.] Generosity]
Magnanimity]

Grandfather, [Parent's Parent (male] Grandmother, [Parent's Parent (fem.]
Grandsire, [Parent's Parent (male.] Grange, [Farm] Grant. [Concession] [Yield]
[Give.]
Grape, [Berry of Vine.] Shrub. Sh. II. 1. Sea -- Sh. II. 14.

Graphical, [figured (perf.] Plain] Express]
Grapple. RN. III. 9. A. to -- [Catch with hands] [Wrestle]

Grasp. [About-hand] [Embrace]
Grass. W. V. 3. A. Cotton -- HL. III. 14. A. Crested -- HL. III. 6. Dogs --
HL. III. 5. A. Feather -- HL. III. 14. Finger -- HL. III. 8. A. Goose -- HL.
IX. 9. A. Hairy -- HL. III. 9. A Knot -- HF. I. 4. Meadow -- HL. III. 10. Oate
-- HL. III. 8. Pearl -- HL. III. 9. Quaking -- HL. III. 9. Scorpion -- HS.
III. 12. Scurvy -- HL. VI. 13 Silk -- HS. IV. 3. A. -- of Parnassus. HL. VI. 7.
A. -- hopper, [Locust] Ex. II. 1.
Grate. a -- [Squares (plain] [Fewel (jug.) of parallel pins (augm.) Net (like]
to -- [Rub] Powder with rubbing.] Un-skin with rubbing.]
[a. Displeasing]

Grateful, [adj. Gratitude.] Gratify. [Merit thanks] [a. Benefactor] [a.
Complaisance]
Gratings, [adj. Net (fig.) Scuttle.] Gratis. [Not-hired] [Without wages]
Gratitude, Man. I. 6. Gratuity, [Gift] Gratulate, AS. VI. 6. Grave. --
Disposition. NP. IV. 3. -- Converse. Man. IV. 6. [Old (like]
-- Sound. Q. III. 1. D. -- ing O. IV. 6. A. RN. VI. 2. A.
a -- [Burial (room]
Gravel. St. I. 8. A. to -- [make not adj. a. travel (abstr.]
Gravy, Pr. I. 6. A. Gravity, Weight. Q V. 4. E. [Seriousness] NP. IV. 3.
Discreet carriage. Man. IV. 6.
Graze. [Eat Grass] -- ier, [Merchant of fat Cattle.]
[Touch with reflecting.]
Greas. [Soft fat] [Worst parts of fat]
Great. adj. Magnitude. TM. I. 1. E. -- with Child, [adj. p. impregnate.] --
with one, [Familiar (aug.] how -- [Of what magnitude] the -- [Total-work to be
done] [adj. Dignity] Power]
[Transc augm. Intense
-- many, [Many (augm.]
Greave, [Leg-armor.] Greaze, [Smear with fat.] Greazy, [Fatty] Greedy. Hungry
(corr.] Ravenous] Desire (augm.] Scraping] Man. III. 2. E.
Greef. Sorrow. AS. V. 4. O. op, to Pleasure. Ha. II. 3. op. to Ease. NP. V. 3.
Green. -- color'd. Q. II. 3. -- Chafer. Ex. V. 5. A. -- finch. By. IV. 6. --
sickness. S. VI. 2. Unripe] New]
-- cheese, [New cheese.] -- wound, [New w.] [adj. Childe] -- goose, [Young --
] -- fish.
Grees. [Hog (young] [Step]
Greet. [Salute] [Gravel]
Greeve. [a. Grief] [a. ^isplicence]
Greevance. [adj. Displicence] [Injury]
Greevous. [adj a. Grieve (abstr.] [Unpleasant]
Grice. [Hog (young]
Gridiron, [adj. Broiling (jug.] Griffon, [Fiction] Grig, [Marsh-eele.]
Grilliade, [Broil'd (thing] Grim. Fierce Face Frighting (manner] [Austere] --
the Collier, [Hieracium.]

Grin, [Snare.] to -- [Lowr dog (like] [Shew the teeth angrily]

Grind. -- ing. -- Fabrile. O. IV. 2. -- Chymic. O. VI. 1.
-- ers, [Inmost teeth]
Griping. [Grasping] Distention] Compression]
[Pain by-, etc.] Scraping. Man. III. 2. E. -- of a Ship. RN. VI. 6. E.
Grist, [adj. p. Grind (thing] Gristle. PG. II. 1. A. Grit, [Sand] Grizly.
[Gray] [Grim]
Groat, [Four pence] Groats, [Oatmeal] Grocer, [Spice (merc.] Grograin, [Stuff
of grain (augm.] Groin. PG. IV. 7. Gromel. HL. IX. 5. Groaning. Voice. AC. IV.
8. [Parturition]

Groom, [Horse (Off.] -of the Chamber, [Chamber (Off.]
Grope, [Search by feeling] Gross. Thick] Great] Course] Lumpish] Fat] Dull]
Unskilfull] a -- [12 dozen] the -- [Total]
Grot, [Subterrane Cavity] Room]

Grotes, [Course Oatmeal] Grove, [Trees (aggr.] (place]

Grovelling, [Lying] AC. VI. 7. A. Ground. Earth] Field. Po. I. 2. stand ones --
RM. II. 2. get -- RM. II. 2. E. loose -- RM. II. 2. D. -- Ivy -- work,
[Foundation] [Foundation] [Cause] sp. Impulsive] [Element] [Sediment]

Ground, [adj. p. Grinde] Groundling, [Loach] Fi. IX. 11. A. Ground Pine. HF.
VII. 7. stinking -- HF. I. 17. A.
Groundsil. [Threshold] Herb. HF. III. 7.
Grous. By. II. 5. A. Grout. Thick. broth] Consistent broth] [Millet.] HL. II.
6. A.

Grout-head, [Having a great head.] Grow. adj. Accretion. AC. I. 6. A. --
forth, [ -- into being visible.] -- to the ribs -- or, etc. [Be continued by
growth to, etc.]

[adj. Vegetation] Become, [Be Effect] Event] sp. (incept.]


[Begin to be] be made] -- in years [Old (inc.] -- old [Old (inc.] -- out of
kind, [Unkind (inc.] -- out of use, [Un-custom (inc.]


[Increase] sp. adv. degree.] -- upon Usurp Get Increase
Gradually.]

Growth, [Growing.] Grub. [Maggot] [Worm of a Flie] to -- [Un-root]
Grudge. [Nolleity] op. to Alacrity. Ha. IV. 3. D.
[Malignity] an old -- [Old hatred]
-- of a disease, [Impetus (dim.]
Gruel. [Broth of Corn.] Grumble. AC. IV. ^. A. Grummel. HL. IX. 5. Grumous.
[adj. Lump] [Coagulated]
Grunsil. HF. III. 7. Grunt, [a. Hog (voice] Grus Balearica. By. VIII. 2. A.
Gryffin. Guaiacum. Tr. VII. 2. Guaperua. Fi. III. 17. A. Guara Brasileana. By.
VII. 9. A. Guard, vid. Guard. Gubbins. Gudgeon. Fish. Fi. IX. 11. Figure. Mag.
VI. 4.
Gueld, [Un-testicle.] Guelding, [Untesticled horse] Guerdon, [Reward] Guess,
[Conjecture] Guest. TO. III. 9. O. Gugaw, [adj. Vanity (thing] Guggle, [Pouring
(like) sound] Guide. [Direct] [Lead] [Govern]
Guidon, [Commander's Staff] Guild. [Corporation] -- hall, [Convention (place]
of Corporation.]
to -- [Colour with Gold]
Guile, [Fraud] Guillam. By. IX. 7. A. Guilt. [Guilty (abstr.] [Guilded] --
head. Fi. V. 1.

Guilty, [adj. RJ. II. 6. O.] Guinny. -- hen, [Hen of Guinny*] -- pig. Be. III.
6. A.
Guird. [Bind about] [Twinge] [Mock]
Guirdle, [About-binding (arm.] Guirl, [Child (fem.] Guirt. [Guirded] [Compass]
Horse -- [ -- Girdle]
Guise. Manner] Custom] [adj. Custom (manner]
Guittar. Guittern. Gulch, [Short fat (augm.] Gules, [Red] Gulf. [Bay]
[Whirl-pool]
Gull. Fish, [Miller's-thumb] Fi. IX. 12. Bird. By. IX. 9. [Goose (young]
[Young (person) adj. p. fraud (apt.]

to -- [a. Fraud]
Gulle^. Weasand. PG. VI. 1. [Stream (dim.]
Gul^igut, [Glutton] Gulp. [Swallow (imp.] Gum. -- of tree. PP. I. 6. --
Ammoniac, [Concrete juice of Giant Fennel] -- Animae. Tr. VIII. 4. -- Arabic.
Tr. VIII. 2. -- Dragon, [Gum of Goat's thorn.] -- Elemi. Tr. VIII. 3. the -- s,
[Parenchyma of the Teeth.]
Gummy, [Stiff] sp. with p. Gumming.]
Gun* RM. V. 6. -- ner. RN. V. 3. -- powder. RM. V. 7. A.
Gurgions, [Worst part of Meal.] Gurnard, vid. Gournet. Gush, [a. River* (imp.]
Gusset, [Quadrangular (thing) to be between-sow'd] Gust. Sense. NP. III. 4.
Quality. Q. III. -- of wind [Wind (imp.]

Gutt. PG. VI. 4. A. -- wort. Sh. VI. 2. A.
Gutter. Mag. V. 6. O. Guttural, [adj. Throat] Guzzle, [Drink (augm.] Gypsy,
[Wandring wizard] Gyrfalcon, [Hawk for Herons]
H.
HAak. Fi. III. 3. A. Haberdasher. -- of Hats, [Merchant of head (vest.] -- of
small wares.
Haberdin. Habergeon, [Armor for trunk] Habiliment, [Armament] Habit, Quality
adj. custom.] Condition adj. custom.] Quality. Ha. of the mind. Infused. Ha. V.
Acquired. Intellectual. Ha. VI. Moral. Man. I.
of the body, [Temperament of the body.] of Clothes, [Clothes (manner]
[Condition] [Custom]


Habitable, [adj. p. Dwelling. (abstr.] Habitation, [Dwelling.] Habitual, [adj.
Habit.] Habitude, [Relation.] Hack, Cut, sp. (corr.] (ruggedly]
Hackney, [Hired (freq.] Had. [Was, pret.] [pret. Have]
Haddock, Fi. III. 2. Haft, [adj. p. Hand (part.] Hag, [Old deformed woman.]
Haggard, [Wilde.] sp. Hawk.]
Haggess, [Pudding of Flesh minced.] Haggle, Treat sp. cor.] Commerce sp. cor.]
Hay. Pr. VI. 1. [Net]
Hail. Meteor. El. III. 5. Sound. NP. V. 2. to -- [Salute]

Haillard, [Rope for hoising the mizzen Sail.] Hair. PP. VI. 1. -- Cloth. Pr.
IV. 1. A. -- Lace, [Ribband for binding the hair of the head.] -- brained,
[Conceited.] -- y river weed. HL. I. 10. A. Maiden --
Haiward, [adj. Pasture (Off.] Hake, [Spit (end) out of the Throat.] Halbard.
RM. V. 3. A. Halcyon, [King-fisher.] -- days. [adj. Calm -- ] [adj. Peace -- ]

Hale, [Pull] Half. go -- [Equal partner.] -- moon, Fortification. RM. VI. 5.
Halibut. Fi. VII. 5. Halimus. Sh. VI. 6. Hall. [First room (augm.] [adj.
Convention (room] [Civil convention] -- day, [Day of Convention.]

Hallow. [Consecrate] [Exclaim]
Halm, [Straw.] sp. of Pease.]
Halo. El. V. 2. Halfer, [adj. Ship- adj. drawing (arm.] Halt. Mo. I. 1. A.
make a -- [Stay]
Halter, [Cord with Loop in the end (part] [adj. Hanging (arm.] [adj.
Neck-bonds]
Ham, [Hollow (part) behind the Knee.] Hamlet, [Houses (agg.] Hammer. Po. VI.
2. A. to -- [a. Hammer] [a. Speak (manner) difficultly.]

Hammock, [Hanging bed] Hamper, [Basket (augm.] To -- [Tangle]
Hanch, [Breech.] PG. IV. 6. Hand. PG. V. 3. -- basket, [B. adj. p. carry
(apt.) in hand.] -- breadth, [Measure of h. b.] -- full, [Capacity of the
hand.] -- gun, g. (dim.) adj. p. use (apt.) with hand.] -- kerchief, k. (dim.)
adj. p. use (apt.) with hand.] -- mill, m (dim.) adj. p. use (apt.) with hand.]
-- saw, s. (dim.) adj. p. use (apt.) with hand.] -- vice, v. (dim.) adj. p. use
(apt.) with hand.] -- kerchief, [adj. wiping (linen] -- maid, [Servant (fem.]
-- over head, [adv Carelessness.] -- to -- [adj. Contiguous (pot.] at --
Present] Near]
at no -- [Not, not] before -- [adv. Preventing.] by -- from -- to mouth, [adv.
Necessary (segr.] in -- Present] Possessed]
in -- with adj. pret. Begin] Endeavouring]
bear in -- Seem make] Believe make]
go in -- with, [Begin.] take in -- [Undertake] in the turning of an -- [While
one could turn his -- ] out of -- [Soon (augm.] come to -- To-event] Be tame]
get the -- of one, [a. Victory] left -- l side] right -- r side] Set ones --
to Sign] Assist]
under -- Inferior] Secret]
under ones -- [Signed by one] upper -- [Victory] on both -- s, parts] Sides]
man of his -- s, [Nimble] lay -- s on, [Arrest] shake -- s, AC. V. 5. A. -- of
a clock, Pin for showing the hour.] Finger for showing the hour.]
-- at Cards, [adj. p. event adj. a. Card (things]

Handy, Nimble. adj. Operation (apt.] -- craft, [adj. Mechanic (art.] --
gripes, Contiguously fighting.] Wrestling]
-- work, [Work of hands.] own.]


Handle. a -- [adj. p. hand (thing] (part]
to -- [a. Hand] [Feel]
[a. Object (make] Speak of.] Discourse of.] Write of.] Entertain] Treat] Use]


Handsel, [First selling] using]
Handsome. [Decent] [Beautiful]
Hang. Posture. AC. VI. 9. A. -- by, [Accessory] -- down ones head, [a.
downward the head] -- together, [Together-adhere.] -- ^p, [a Hang] -- ing of
the hill, [Declivity.]
Punishment. RJ. V. 8. -- man, [Execution (mec.]
Being in suspense. Doubting] Demurring] Wavering]
As a room, Clothe the walls] Line the walls]

Hanger. [Short crooked Sword] [Loop for tying the Sword] pot -- [Iron (instr.)
for hanging pot.]
Hank. -- of thread, [Skein -- ] [Haunt]
Hanker, Vergency] Incline]
Hanse, [Corporation] Hap. [Fortune] [Contingence] [Event]
Happen, [v. Hap] Happy, [adj. Happiness] -- ness. Ha. I. 1. -- ly, [adj.
Fortune]
Harang, [Oration] Harbinger, [Before-going (Off.) for preparing entertainment]
Harbor. [adj. Hospitality (place.] [Port] W. II. 5.
Hard. op. to Fluid. O. V. 5. E. op. to Yielding. Q. VI. 1. D. op. to Easy,
[Difficult] -- to be understood, [Obscure] -- headed, [Dull]
-- to be pleased, [Morose] -- to give, [Penurious] -- to forgive. -- to
repent. -- hearted, Cruel.] Impenitent.]
-- drink, [Sowr'd.] -- ly, [Scarce.] -- by, [adj. Near.]
to fo^low -- [Follow (augm.]
Harden. [Hard (make] Incorrigible. TO. VI. 7. O.
Hardy. Disposition. NP. IV. 7. Affection, [Bold.] Virtue, [Valiant.] fool --
[Rash.]

Hare. Beast. Be. III. 3. -- brained, [Rash] -- lipp'd, [Cloven-lipp'd] -- 's
foot. HF. VIII. 5. -- 's ear. HF. IV. 14. A.

Sea -- Ex. IX. 4.
Harken, [Hear (end.] Harlot, [adj. Fornication (fem.] Harm, [Hurt] -- less,
Innocent.] Not adj. p. Hurt]

Harmony. Q. III. 9. -- in sound. Q. III. 9.
Harness, [Armament] Harp, [Music (instr.) hollow arch with strings.] -- ing
iron, [Barbed dart]
Harpie, [Ravenous (person] Harpsichord. Harquebus, [Foot-mans gun (augm.]
Harras, Booty] Spoil*]
Harrow, [adj. Harrowing (instr.] -- ing. O. III. 2.
Harsh. In general, [Unpleasant.] To Sense Austere] Hoarse] Rough] Stiff]
To Manners Morose] Man. VI. 1. D. Austere]

Heart. Be. II. 3. A. -- 's tongue. HL. I. 8. A. -- wort HF. V. 5. Sh. VI. 5.

Hartichoak. HF. III. 1. A. Jerusalem -- HF. II. 1. A.
Harvest, [Reaping] -- time, [Autumn]
Hash, [Sliced flesh] Haslet, [Inwards] Hasp, [Hook] Hassock, [Tuft] sp. of
Rushes.]
Have, [Havest] Haste. sp. through Business.] in -- [Swiftness]
to -- en Dispatch (augm.] v. Soon]


Hasty. [Sudden] [Rash] [adj. a. Anger (apt.]
Hat, [adj. head (vest) with broad margin] Hatch. [Half door] -- of a ship. RN.
II. 6.
to -- -- eggs. [Ripen eggs by Fotion] [a. Parturition]
-- flax. -- hilt. [Notch (freq.]

Hatchet, [adj. a. Cut (instr.) by striking.] Hate. AS. V. 3. O. Have. [Pret.]
[TA. I. 6.] -- ing, adj. Have] Scraping]


Haven, W. II. 5. Haver. Haughty, [adj. Pride] Haunch, [Breech] PG. IV. 6.
Haunt, [adj. Custom (place] Havoc. [Spoil] Haut. Be. III. 2. A. Haw, [Berry.]
-- in the eye, [Spot -- ] -- thorn, [White -- ] Sh. I. 3. A. Cumberland --
[White Bean-tree] Sh. II. 3. A.
Hawk. By. I. 2. -- fish. Haak. -- weed. HF. III. 12.
Hawker, [Merchant (corr.] Hawser. RN. IV. 8. A. Hazard, [Danger] -- at Tennis.
Hazy. El. VI. 1. O. Hazle. -- hen. By. II. 7. -- nut, [Small-nut. [Tr. III. 1.
-- wort.
He, Pron. I. 3. Head. PG. III. Proper. shake the -- AC. IV. 4. A. give one his
-- [adj. a. Liberty (make.] take a -- [a. Liberty]
Top. [Horns] nail -- [N. top]
Forepart. -- of a barrel, [adj. Forepart circle (plain) -- ] all a -- [All to
the forepart.]
Root. -- of an onyon, [Bulbous root -- ]
Protuberant (part.) -- land, [Promontory.]
Fountain. Conduit -- [Fountain] River -- [Fountain]
Chief. [Magistrate] to -- [v. Commander.]
Sum. draw to a --

Heady. [Rash] [Fierce]
[adj. a. Drunkenness (apt.] [Fuming (augm.]

Headlines. Headlong. [with Head first] adj. p. precipitate] Direct] [Rash.]
Headpiece. [Head] [adj. Head (armor]
Headstall, [Head (arm.] Headstrong. [Rash] [Fierce] [Not adj. p. Persuade
(apt.]
Heal. [a. Sound (make] [Cover]
Health. op. to Sickness. S. O. op. to Rottenness. NP. V. 2. [Remembrance in
drinking*]
Heap. O. II. 6. Hear. Sense. NP. III. 2. -- judicially, Cognizance.] Trial]
-- say, [Rumor]
Heart. Proper. PG. VI. 2. -- burning, [Cardialgia.] S. VI. 1.
-- spoon. next ones- [First doing eating etc. sp. in the Morning.] -- 's ease.
[Contentment] Herb [Parsly] HL. VI. 5. A.


[Middle] [Best (part] Strength] Vigor] in -- adj. Vigor] out of -- [adj.
Weakness]
[Courage] in -- [adj. Courage.] out of -- Cowardly] adj. Diffidence]
Discouraged]

[Affection] sweet -- [Suitor] with all ones -- [adv. Alacrity] -- burning [Old
anger] Hatred]
by -- [adv. Memory]


Hearten, [Encourage] Hearth. Po. III 9. Hearty. [adj. Heart] Sincere] Willing]
Courage]

Heartless. [Weak] [Diffident] [Formal]
Heat. Proper. Q. V. 1. E. [Anger] [Zeal]
Heath. Plant. Sh. VI. 7. Place. Po. I. 7. A.
Heathcock. By. II. 5. A. Heathen, [Pagan] Heave. Lift (end] Protuberant (make]
sp by Up-thrusting.]

Heaven. W. II. Heavy. [adj. Gravity] [Dull] [Lumpish] [Drowzy] [adj. Grief]
Hecatomb, [Sacrifice of 100 Beasts.] Hectic, [adj. Habit.] -- fever. S. II. 1.
Hedge. [Sepiment of Branches, etc.] -- clerk, [Sorry C.] to -- in a debt,
[Sure (make) d.]
Hedgehog. Be. III. 5. A. -- trefoile. HS. III. 15. A.
Hedge-sparrow. By. V. 8. A. Heed. [Observe] [Be cautious]. -- fullness. Ha. IV.
2. -- lesness. Ha. IV. 2. D.
Heel. PG. V. 6. A. -- ling of a Ship. RN. VI. 7.
Hegira, [Mahometan's Epoch.] Hey-net. Heifer, [Cow adj. youth] Heigh. Int. I.
1. Height. TM. II. 4. Heinous, Vicious (augm.] adj. Displicence (augm.]
Heir,\ [adj. Inheriting (person.] Held, prec. hold] adj. p. hold]
Helebore. white. -- HL. VII. 1. bastard -- [Helleborine]
Heleborine. HL. VII. 1. A. Helical figure. Mag. III. 9. A. Heliotrope. HL. IX.
5. A. Hell. W. II. O. Helm, [adj. p. hand (part) of Rudder.] Helmet, [Armor for
(head.] Help. [a. Adjuvant] [a. Relieve] [a. Remedy] -- one to a thing,
[Furnish]
Helve, [Staff of Hatchet] Hem. Int. I. 2. to -- [Hake] [a. Acclamation]

[Margent] -- in [About Sepiment] Inviron]



Hemicycle, [Half circle] Hemisphere. Hemlock. HF. V. 9. water -- HF. V. 9. A.
Hemorrhoid. S. VI. 8. A. Hemp. HF. I. 5. Hen, [Bird (fem.] Henbane. HS. VII.
11. A. Hence. [From this place] [imp. Go] [Away] -- forth, From this time]
After this time]

Hep, vid. Hip. Hepatic, [adj. Liver.] Hepatica. Herald, [adj. Degrees (Off.]
Herb. W. V. 3. Considered according to their -- Leaf. HL. -- Flower. HF. --
Seed-vessel. HS. -- Christopher. HS. IX. 5. -- Frankincense of Galen. HF. V. 3.
A. -- of Theophrastus. HF. IV. 6. A. -- of Grace, [Rue] HS. V. 13. -- Terrible.
Sh. VI. 3. -- True love. HS. IX. 5. A. -- two pence, [mony-wort] HL. VI. 11. A.
[Leaf]

Herbage, [Pasture] Herbal, [Book concerning Herbs.] Herbalist, [Herb (artist]
Herd, [aggregate (thing] -- 's man. RC. II. 6.
Here. [In this place] [adj. Present] -- and there [In some diverse
places -- of, [Of this]
Hereafter. [After this time] [adv. Future]
Hereditament, [adj. p. Inherit (thing] Hereditary, [adj. Inheriting.] Heresy.
RE. III. 1. O. Heretic, [adj. Heresy (person] Heretofore. [Before this time]
[adv. Past]
Hericano, [Whirlwind (augm.] Hering, vid. Herring. Heritage, [adj. p. Inherit
(thing] Hermaphrodite, [Of all Sexes.] Hermit. RE. II. 7. A. Hermit fish. Ex
VI. 5. Hermodactyl, [Root of an exotic Colchicum] Hernia. S. VI. 8. Hero.
[Excellent in virtue] [adj. Magnanimity (person]
Heroical, [adj. Hero.] Heron. By. VIII. 3. Great white -- By. VIII. 4. Little
white -- By. VIII. 4. A. -- 's bill. Herb.
Herring. Fi. III. 10. red -- [Dry salted smoked
h.] white -- [Moist salted]
Hearse, [Box of dead body.] Hesitate, Doubt] Demur]
Heteroclite, [Irregular.] Heter^dox, [Not-orthodox] Heterogeneous, [Of diverse
kinds.] Hew. [Colour] [Cut striking] rough -- [Cut rough.]
Hy, Hasten.] Dispatch]
Hickcough. Mo. III. 4. A. Hickwall, [Woodpecker] By. I. 9. Hide. [Skin] --
bound. [Disease of skin cleaving to the flesh.] [Penurious]
to -- Conceal] Cover]

Hideous, [adj. a. Fear (apt.] Hierarchy, [Ecclesiastical Magistracy.]
Hieroglyphic, Sacred Sculpture] Secret Paint]
High. Tall, [adj. TM. II. 4. O.] [Deep] -- shoes, [Shoes to the ankle.] --
water, [Deep overflowing tide]
Much] Transcendent (augm.] -- wind, [Winde (augm.]
[Ample] -- forehead, [Ample f.]
[Public] -- way, [Public w.] adj. Dignity] Excellent] -- day, [Festival d.]
[Principal] -- priest, [Primate of P.] -- minded Proud] Ambitious]

[Until] breast -- [Until the br.]

Hill. W. III. 1. E. Hillock, [Protuberance] Hilt, [adj. hand (part) of Sword.]
Him. Pron. I. 3. -- self, [Him him.]

Hind. [Hart] Be. II. 3. A. (fem.] [adj. Agriculture servant]
Hinder. -- part. Sp. III. 8. O. -- most. [adj. Hinder part] [Succeeding]
to -- [a. Impedient] [a. Trouble] [a. Loss]

Hinge. Po. IV. 6. [Entrails]
Hint, Expression (dim.] Narration (obscure]
Hip. [Thigh] PG. V. 4. [Berry of the wild Rose]
Hippocampus. Fi. VIII. 5. A. Hippocras, [adj. p. Spice wine.] Hire, [Hiring
(thing.] -- ing. RC. V. 5. O.
His. [adj. Pron. I. 3.] -- own, [Pron. redup.]
Hiss. Q. III. 4. History, [Narration] Hit. [a. Contiguity] [a. Strike] [a.
Fortune]
Hither. To this place.] Till this place.] -- most, [Nearest] -- side, Sp. II.
2. E. -- to, To this place.] Till this time]
-- ward, [Toward this place]

Hive, [Bees (house] Hm. Int. I. 2. Ho. Int. III. 1. no -- [No cohibition.] not
-- [For not-a. Providence for.]
Hoar-frost, [Rime] El. III. 5. A. Hoary. -- with Frost, [White -- ] -- with
Age [Gray -- ] -- with ^^ustiness, [Mossie -- ]
Hoarseness. Q. III. 8. O. Host, vid. Host. Hob, [adj. Rusticity (person]
Hobby. Horse, [Ambling horse (dim] -- horse [Horse (like) staff.]
Hawk, [Hawk for Larks.]
Hobble, [Run lame (like.] Hobgoblin, [adj a. Fear (apt.] adj. p. Fiction
(thing]
Hoboy. Hock, [Foot.] Hocus-pocus, [Prestigiator.] Hod, [adj. Po. V. (jug.]
Hodge-podge, [Mixture (corr.] Hog. Proper. Be. II. 8. -- 's bread. -- 's fennel.
-- fish. Fi. I. 5. A. -- louse, [Sow] -- 's head Barrel (augm.] Measure [36
gallons.]
-- Sheep.
Hoise, [Lift] Hold. Not let go. TA. I. 6. -- fast, [Hold (augm.] [Contain] --
water, [c. w.]

Have] Possess] Right (manner.] [Esteem] -- blameless, [Esteem b.]
[Continue]
-- at a bay, [a. Stay] -- back, [Cohibit.] -- in, [Cohibit.] -- off. -- out,
[Continue permanent.] -- a town. RM. II. 4. -- ones peace, [a. Silence.] [
together, [Continue leagued.] up, [Support.] [Expletive] [ counsel, [Together
advise]
[Not loose] [Abstain] -- ones breath, [Not-breath]
-- ones hand Abstain] Omit]
-- ones water. [Not- a. Urine]
the -- -- of a Ship, [Lowest room (augm.) -- ] lay -- Catch] take -- Arrest]
Strong -- RM. VI.
Holder. [adj. Holding (person] [Longest tooth]
Hole. Through. Mag. IV. 1. O. [Not through Dent] Cavity]
lurking -- [adj. Hiding Place.]
Holy, [adj. Holiness.] -- day, [adj. Festivity-day] -- ghost. G. III.
Holiness. Habit. Ha. V. 2. [p. Consecration]
Holly. -- oak. HF. IX. 6. A. -- tree. Tr. III. 6. A. Sea -- [Eringo]
Hollow. Empty, [adj. Mag. VI. 1. E.] -- hearted, [adj. Hypocrisy.]
[Concave] -- eyed, [Deep-eyed]
As Sponge, [adj. Porousness.]
Holm, [Holly] -- oak.
Holosteus. Fi. VIII. 4. Holothyrius. Ex. IX. 4. A. Helped, [adj. p. Help.]
Homage, Duty of Subjection] Acknowledgment of Subjection]
Home, [Dwelling (place] Sp. II. 4. -- bred, [Rusticly educated] come short --
[a. Defect finally.] of home.]
hit him Strike (augm.] a. Contiguity (perf.]

Homeliness. Not ornate. TM. V. 5. O. [Rusticity]
Homicide, [Man-killing] Homiletical, [adj. Conversation] -- Virtue. -- Common.
Man. IV. -- Belonging to Superiors. Man. V. -- Belonging to Inferiors. Man. VI.

Homily, adj. p. preaching (thing] sp. Commanded.]
Homogeneal, [Of the same kind.] Homonymy. D. IV. 1. O. Honesty. [Vertue]
[Chastity] [Integrity] Flower, [Bulbonach] HS VI. 1.
Honey. -- apple, [Sweet apple (kind] -- comb, [Bees (rooms] -- dew, [adj. Honey
dew] -- moon, [First month after Marriage] -- suckle, [Woodbine] Sh. II. 8.
French-suckle. HS. III. 5. Trefoil. HS. III. 10. A.
-- wort. HL. IX. 3. A.
Honor. [Reputation] [Dignity] [Respect (augm.] -- able. [adj. Honor (abstr.]
[adj. Nobility]
Honourary, [adj. Honor (sign] Hood, [adj. Cover (vest] -- for head,
[Face-covering head (vest.] -- wink, [Cover the eyes.]
Token of Degree, [Loose adj. shoulder (vest.]
Hoof. PP. VI. 5. to -- [Un-hoof]
Hook. Mag. IV. 8. By -- or by crook, [By right or wrong.] -- ed, [Curve.]
Hoop, [Ring (augm.) of Wood.] Iron, etc.] Bird. By. III. 8. A.

Hooper, [Wild swan] By. IX. 1. Hooping, [Acute exclamation.] Hoord, [Lay up]
TA. V. 4. Hooting, vid. Hooping. Hop. Plant. HF. I. 5. A. [Leaping] Mo. I. 5.
-- on one leg. Mo. I. 5. A.

Hope. Affection. AS. 5.6. past- [adj. a. p.
Despair.] Grace. Ha. V. 5.
Hopeless, [adj. a. p.
Despair.] Hopper. Horary, [adj. Hour.] Horde, [Lay up] Ta. V. 4. Horebound.
Base -- HF. VII. 2. Black -- HF. VII. 11. A. White -- HF. VII. 6. A.
Horines, [Mould] HL. I. 1. A. Horizon. W. VI. 1. Horn. Proper. PP. VI. 6.
[Angle] -- owl. By. I. 4. -- work. RM. VI. 5. A.

Horn-beam. Tr. VI. 4. A. Hornet. Ex. IV. 2. A. Horoscope. Horrible, adj. a.
Fear Evil (augm.
Horrid, adj. a. Fear Evil (augm.
Horror. [Fear (augm. [Rigor through Fear]
Horse. Be. I. 1. sp. (male] to -- -- a man, [Ride (make.] sp. on Horse.]
-- a Mare, [a. Coition with Mare.]
on -- back, [On horse] -- cloth, [Horse's vest] -- courser, [Horse (Merc.] --
foal, [Young horse (male] -- leach. [Physician for Horse] Insect. Ex. I. 2.
-- litter, [Sedan adj. p. carried between Horses.] -- man. [Rider] Soldier.
RM. III. 1. A.
-- hoof. HL. VI. 3. -- tail. HL. IX. 7. -- tongue. Sh. III. 7. A. -- fly. --
mint. -- radish. -- shoe. HS. III. 6. A. Sea -- [Morse] Be. V. 3. Wooden --
[Horse (like) jugament.]

Hortulane. ^i. IV. 2. A. Hose. [Leg (vest] [Breeches]
Hofier, [adj. Hose (merc.] Hospitable, [adj. Hospitality.] Hospital, Sick
men's house.] Poor men's house.]
Hospitality. Man. III. 6. Hostage, [adj. Pledge (person] Host. [adj.
Eucharist bread] [Army] op. to Guest. TO. III. 9. to -- [a. Guest]

Hostility, [Enemy (abstr.] Hostler, [Horse (Off.] Hostry, [adj. Host (house]
Hot, [adj. Heat Hot, [adj. Zeal -- house, [Stove]
Hotchpotch, [Mixture (corr.] Hovel, [House (dim.] sp. not walled.]
Hovering. Mo. I. 2. A. Hough, vid. Hoof, [Lower joint of hinder Leg.] Houl*
[adj. Weeping (voice.] Houlet, [Owl.] Hound, [Dog hunting wild beasts by
smell.] -- fish. Fi I. 4. spotted -- Fi. I. 4. A. -- 's tongue. HL. IX. 4. A.
Hour. Mea. V. 8. -- glass. Mag. VI. 5. A.
House. Building. Po. II. 1. -- breaking. RJ. III. 8. A. -- burning. RJ. III.
8. to -- [a. House] -- ed, [Possessing houses.] [Family] [Kindred]
Household, [Together-adj. house (aggr.] -- bread, [Course bread] -- stuff,
[Utensils.]
Housekeeping, [Family-office.] Housleek, HL. VIII. 1. Hout, [Exclamation.]
sp. a. Mocking.]
How. [In what manner] -- then, [-therefore.]
op. to So. Adv. II. 1.
Howbeit, [Although] Howsoever, [How, how.] Hu, [Colour.] Hu and cry, [Pursuit
successive] Huck, [Treat, (augm.] Huck, [Treat, (corr.] Hucklebone. PG. V. 4.
A. Huckster, [Merchant (corr.] Huddle, Gather (corr.] Heap (confusedly.]
Huffing. AC. IV. 6. Hug, [Embrace] Huge, [Great (augm.] Hugger-mugger, [Secret
(corr.] Hul. -- of a Ship. RN. II. -- ing. RN. VI. 5. A. -- lying at RN. VI. 5.
A.
-- of Corn, [Husk]
Hulch, [Protuberance] Hulk, [Trunk] Hulver, [Holly] Hum. [Indistinct noise]
[Bees (voice] [Approve (voice]
Humane. [adj. Man] -- learning, Worldly Lay
Sciences.] [Courteous]
Humble. -- ness. Man. V. 2. -- be. Ex. IV. 1. A. -- plant. Sh. IV. 7. to --
Low Humble Submit
(make]
Humid, [Moist] Humiliation a. Humility.] Fasting.]
Humility. Man. V. 2. Humming bird. By. VI. 5. Humor. Liquor, [adj. a.
Moistness (thing] Temper of mind. [a. Complacence (end.] [a. Conceitedness]
Humorist. Conceited] Seeming of diverse dispositions]. -- physician.

Humorous, [adj. Humor (corr.] Humorsome, [Morose] Hundred. Weight. Mea. III.
7. -- pound in money. Mea. IV. 6.

Hung, pret. hang] Hung, adj. p. hang] Hunger. AC. II. 1. Hunt. [a. Hunts-man]
-- 's man. RC. II. 7. 's up
Hurdle, [adj. p. Weave (thing) of sticks.] Hurl, [Cast] Hurlbat,] Club adj. p.
cast (apt.) Hurlyburly, [Confusion] sp. Seditious]
Hurry. Swift imp.] Dispatch imp.] sp. with Confusion.]

Hurt. [a. Hurtful.] -- full. T. IV. 1. O. a. Injury] a. Loss] a. Wound]


Hurtleberry, vid. Whittle. Husband. [adj. Married (male.] to -- [a. Frugal.]
good -- [Frugal (person] ill -- [adj. Squandring (person]
-- man. RC. II. 6. A.
Husbandry. Profession RC. II. 6. A. Work, [Agriculture] good -- [Frugality]
ill -- [Squandring]
Hush, [adj. Silence] Husk. PP. II. 3. Huso. Fi. I. 8. A. Huswife. [Mistress of
the house] [Frugal (fem.]
Hut, [House (dim.] sp. of Boughs.]
Hutch, [Box.] Huzz, (a. Be (voice.] Hyacinth. HL. IV. 4. A. Indian. -- HL. V.
5.
Hybernal, [adj. Winter.] Hydra, [adj. Water-serpent.] Hydrography, [Water's
science.] Hydropic, [adj. Dropsy.] Hyena. Hymen, [Marriage.] Hymn. RE. IV. 2.
A. Hyperbole. Mathemat. Mag. III. 8. E. Rhetor. [fig. of Expression (exc.]
Hyphen. D, I. 4. A. Hypochondriac. S. VI. 4. A. Hypocrisy. Ha. IV. 4. O.
Hypotenuse, [Side over against the right Angle.] Hypothesis, [Supposition.]
Hypothetic, [adj. Supposition.] Hyssop. HF. VI. 7. Hedge -- HF. VII. 14.
Hysterical, [adj. Womb.] PG. VI. 9. Disease. S. VI. 9.
Hysteron proteron.
I.
I. Pron. I. 1. Iabber, [Pronounce Child (like.] Imperfectly] Indistinctly]
Iacinth, vid. Hyacinth. Jack. Sorry person] sp. (male.] Man (corr.] -- anapes,
vid. Ape. -- Daw, vid. Daw. Fish. [Pike] Fi. IX. 1. -- of the Hedge,
[Alliaria.] -- with a lantern. El. I. 6. -- of a Ship. RN. III. 9. A. [adj.
Back (armor] leathern -- [leathern Pot] Pr. V. 5. -- to turn spit,
[Vertiginating (machin) of rosting (instr.]
Iackall. Be. V. 4. Iacket, [Short loose (vest) for Trunk.] Jade, [Sorry] sp.
Horse.]
Iag, Slasht margin.] Torn margin.]
Iaguraca. Fi. V. 8. Iay. By. I. 8. A. Iail, [adj. Prison (place.] -- er. [adj.
Prison (Off.]
Iakes, [adj. Dunging (room.] -- farmer, [Emptying (mech.) of Jakes.]
Iamb, [adj. Side column.] St. Iames-wort. Iangle. Q. III. 9. O. [a. Contention]
Iannock, [Flat bread of Oats.] January, [First month] Iar. [Earthen pot for
Oil] Sound. Q. III. 2. A. [a. Contention]
Iargon, [a. Fiction Language.] Iasmin. vid. Iessamin. Jasper. St. II. 3.
Iavelin, [Dart.] Iaundies. S. VI. 2. A. Iaunt, [Going (augm.] Iaw. PG. III. 9.
Ice. El. III. 4. Idea. T. II. 3. Identity. T. III. O. Idiom, [Property of
Language.] Idiot. NP. I. 1. O. (corr.] Idle. [adj. Sloth] [Negligent]
[Not-busie] [Not-pertinent]
Idol, Picture adj. p. Worship (person] Image adj. p. Worship (person]
Idolatry, [Worship of Picture Idolatry, [Worship Image] Jealousy. AS. VI. 3.
A.] Ieat. St. VI. 3. Ieer, [Mock] Iejune, [adj. Scarcity of.] Ielly. Pr. I. 5.
A. Iennet, [Spanish nimble horse.] Ieopardy, [Danger] Ierfalcon. Ierk. [a.
Motion (imp.] [Whip] RM. VI. 2.
Ierkin, [Short loose (vest) for Trunk.] Iessamin. Sh. V. 3. Yellow -- Sh. II.
13.
Iesses, [Foot-bonds for Hawks] Jest. [Not-serious] [adj. Urbanity (thing]
Jesuits powder, [Cortex febrisugus Peruv.] Tr. VII. 9. Iet. St. VI. 3. [adv.
proud (like) going (manner]
Jew. RE. I. 3. (person] -- 's-ear, [Fungus of Elder.]
Jewel. [Gem] [Gemms (aggr.]
[Precious (thing]
Iewry, [Dwelling (place) of Jews.] If. -- not, [Unless.] -- it had not been
for, etc. [Without, etc.]
as -- Adv. IV. 2. O.
Ignis fatuus. El. I. 6. -- lambens. El. I. 6. A.
Ignoble. [Not-noble] [adj Mean (augm.]
Ignominy. [Infamy] [Infamation]
Ignorance. Natural. NP. I. 1. O. op. to Science. Ha. VI. 1. D. op. to Art. Ha.
VI. 3. D.
Iguana, [Senembi] Be. VI. 3. A. Iig, [Walk wantonly] [Trick.]
Iill. Sorry (fem.] Woman (corr.] [Half pint]
Iingle. [Ringing (dim.] [Affectation of sounds of words.]
Island. W. III. 2. O. Iliac-passion. S. VI. 5. A. Ill. adj. [Evil] [Sick] -- at
ease, Pained] Not-indolent]
-- favored, [Deformed] -- man, [Vicious man] -- name, [Infamy] -- will,
[Malignity] with an -- will, [adv. Nolleity]

adv. [adv. Evil] [adv. Difficult]

Illation. D. IV. 6. A. Illegal, Not -- adj. Law] Against- adj. Law]
Illegitimate, Begotten not adv. Law.] Spurious.]
Illiberal, [Not- adj. Reputation.] Illiterate. Ha. VI. 4. D. Illuminate, [a.
Light.] Illusion. [Deceit] [Mocking] [Diabolical Apparition]
Illustrate, [a. Plain (make] Illustrious. [Bright] [Noble] [adj. Dignity]
Image. Pr. VI. 8. A. Whether painted im. graven im. carved im. molded im.
molten im.
Statue, [Solid Image]
Imagine. [a. Fansie] [Think] [Invent]
Imbargo, [Arrest of Ships.] Wares.]
Imbark, [Into- a. Ship.] Imbase, Depreciate by mixture.] Defile.]
Imbattel, [a. Order for Battle.] Imbaulm, [Condite] Imbecility, [Weakness]
Imbellish, [a. Ornate.] Imbezil, Spoil] a.. Prodigal]
Imbibe, Drink] Soke]
Imbolden, a. Boldness.] Encourage]
Imboss, [Adorn with Protuberances.] Imbroider, [Variegate by sowing.] Imbrue,
[Soke] Imbue, [adj. p. Quality (make] Imburse, [Receive into purse.] Imitate.
TA. II. 8. A. Immaculate, [Clear.] Immanent, [adj. Action adv. inside.]
Immanity, [Cruelty (augm.] Immatureness. NP. VI. 4. D. Immediate. TM. IV. 2.
[Next] [Soon]
Immense, Infinite.] Great (augm.]
Immerse, [Into-ition.] Imminent, Near.] Soon.]
Immoderate. [adj. Excess.] [Fierce] Ha. III. 4. E.
Immodest, Not -- modest Against -- modest
Immortal. [Not-adj. die (abstr.] [adj. Ever.]
Immovable. [Not moveable.] Immunity. RC. IV. 9. A. Immure, Sepiment with
walls.] Shut up with walls.]
Immutable. [Not- adj. p. alter (abstr.] Imp, Graft.] Lengthen by Grafting]
Impair, [a. Worse.] Impale. RJ. V. 4. A. [Sepiment with Pales] Impannel, [a.
Catalogue.] sp. Names.]

Imparity. [Inequality] [Odness]
Impark, [a. Park (make] Impart. [adj. Partner (make] [a. Narration]
Impartial, [Not-partial] Impassible, [Not- adj. suffer (pot.] Impatience. Man.
I. 8. O. Impeach, [Accuse.] Impedient. T. II. 5. O. Impediment, [adj. a
Impedient (thing.] Impell, [a. Impulsive] Impendent, [Over-hanging]
Impenetrable, [Not-adj. p. pierce (abstr.] Impenitence. Ha. V. 1. O.
Imperative, [adj. a. Command (manner.] Imperceptible, [Not- adj. p. common
sense (pot.] Imperfect. T. III. 9. O. Imperial, [adj. King] Crown --
Imperiousness. [Insolence] [Magisterialness]
Impertinency. TM. IV. 5. O. Impetrate, [Obtain] sp. by Entreaty.]
Impetuous, [adj. Impetus] Impetus. T. VI. 6. A. Impiety. [Gracelesness]
[Atheism] [Prophaneness]
Implacable. [Not un- adj. p. anger (abst.] [adv. Pertinaciously angry.]
Implant, [In-plant] Implead, [a. Suit.] Implements, [Utensils] Imply,
Comprehend by consequence] Infer by consequence]
Implicit. [Comprehended] TA. II. 4. [Understood] D. III. 8. O. -- faith, [a.
Belief (abstr.) with ignorance of the things to be believed.]
Employ. [Business] [Use]
Implore, [Intreat (augm.] humbly]

Import. [In-carry] [Meaning] [Importance]
Importance. T. IV. 5. Importune, [Intreat, (augm.] Importunate, [adj. Desire
Entreat
(aug.]
Impose. [Upon-pat] [Injoin] [a. Fraud]
Impossible. T. IV. 4. O. Impost, [Tax of imported (things] Imposthume,
[Aposteme] Imposture. [Deceit] [Forgery] [Fraud]
Impotence. op. to Natural power. NP. O. op. to Acquired power. Ha. II 6. O.
[Not-coition (apt.]
Impotent. [adj. Impotence] [adj. p. Passion (exc.]
Impoverish, [adj. Poverty (make] Impound, [Imprison in Pound.] Imprecate. RC.
VI. 4. A. Impregnable, [Not-takeable.] Impregnation. Getting with Child. AC. I.
2. [Infusion] O. V. 7. A.
Impress. [Print] [Appropriate sentence]
Impression. Influence] During effect] a. Printing] Sign]
Imprimis, [adv. First.] Imprint. [Print] [Leave sign]
Imprisonment. RJ. VI. 4. Improbable, [Not- true (like] proveable] opinable]
Improove. [Mend] [Increase] [a. Better] [Use (perf.]
Improper. [Not-proper] [Spurious] [Figurate]
Impropriation, [Inheritance of Priest's revenue.] Improvidence. Man. III. 2.
D. Imprudence. Ha. VI. 2. D. Impudence. Man. III. 7. D. Impugn. [Fight] [a.
Opposition] [a. Obiection]
Impulse, [a. T. II. 2. (abstr.] -- ive cause. T. II. 2.
Impunity, [Not- p. punishment.] Impure, Defiled] Impute, Claim] Predicate]
In. Rest. Prep. IV. 1. O. -- to. Prep. IV. 1. -- as much as, [Whereas] Conj.
IV. 1.
[Eng^^^d] [Fri^^^] Motion, [Into] Prep. IV. 1. drive -- Into -- drive] drop --
Into -- drop]
-- pieces, [Into pieces.]
Inability, [Impotence] Inaccessible, [Not- adj. p. come (abstr.] Inamissable,
[Not- adj. p. lose [abstr.] Inamour, [adj. a. Love (make] Inanimate, [Not- adj.
life] Inaugurate, [Admission adv. solemnity] Inauspicious, [adj. Adversity
(sign] Inbred, [In-natural] Incamp, [a. Camp] Incapacitating. Punishment. RJ.
VI. 8. A.
Incapacity, [Impotence] Incarnate, [adj. p. Flesh] to -- [a. Flesh] As a wound
healing, [Again-flesh.]
Incendiary. [House-burner] adj. RJ. III. 7. (person] [adj. a. Contention
(make]
Incense. RE. VI. 3. to -- [adj. Anger (make]
Incentive, [Impulsive] Inceptor. [adj. Begin (person] [Candidate]
Incessant, [Permanent] Incest, [Unchastity with Kin.] Inch. Mea. I. 2.
Inchant, [a. Witch by words] Inchoate, [adj. p. begin] Incident. adj.
Contingency] adj. p. Event]
Incision, [Cutting] Incite, [a. Impulsive] Incivility, [Rusticity]
Inclination. [Down-obliquing its superficies] -- toward, [Vergency] Sp. III. A.
[Disposition] -- of the will. AS. IV. 1. -- of the affection. [Favor] AS. V.
2.

Enclose. [In-sepiment] [Shut] [Comprehend]
Include, [Comprehend] Inclusive, [Comprehending the Extremes.] Incogitancy.
[Not-thinking] [Heedlesness]
Incombustible, [Not- adj. p. burn (pot.] Income, [Revenue] Incommensurable,
[Not with- adj. p. Measure Proportion
(pot.] Incommodious, [Not- profitable] convenient]
Incommunicable, [Not-communicable] Incomparable. [Most excellent] [Not- adj.
p. Like adj. p. Equal
(pot]
Incompatible. [Not -- adj. p. Join adj. p. Simultaneous.
(pot.]
Incompetent, [Not-competent] Incomprehensible, [Not- adj. p. know (pot.)
totally.] Incongruous, [adj. Contrariety] Inconsiderate, [Careless]
Inconsistent, [Not- adj. p. Simultaneity (pot.] Inconstancy. Ha. IV. 7. D.
Incontinent, [Unchast] -- ly. [Soon (augm.]
Inconvenient. T. V. 5. O. Incorporate, [Join into one body.] Incorporeal,
[Not- adj. body] Incorrigible. [Not-adj. p. better (pot.) by Correction] [adj.
p. Harden (apt.]
Incorruptible, [Not- adj. p. corruption (pot.] Encounter. [Meet] [Fight]
Encourage. TO. VI. 2. Incrassate, [adj. a. Thick] Increase. TM. I. 7. E. [v.
Great] TM. I. 1. E, Intense] TM. I. 8. E.
[v. More-Great, etc.] [Many] TM. III. 1. [Abundant] TM. I. 2. E.
Incredible, [Not- adj. p. believe (pot.] Incredulous. Ha. III. 2. D.
Increment, [Increase] Incroach, [Usurp] Incubus, [Ephialtes] S. IV. 2. A.
Inculcate, [Repeat (freq.] Inculpable, [Not- adj. p. blame (pot.] Incumbent.
[Church (Off.] sp. Parish Priest]
-- on, [Pertinent to]
Incumber, Hinder sp. with confused multitude] Trouble sp. with confused
multitude]
Incurable, [Not re- adj. p. soundness (pot.] Incurr, adj. p. Object] adj. p.
Dangerous]
Incursion, [Assault] Indammage, [a. Loss] Hurt]

Endanger, [a. Dangerous] Indebt, [a. Debt] Indecent. T. V. 2. O. Indeclinable,
[Not- adj. p. decline (pot.] Indecorum, [adj. Indecency (thing.] Indeed.
[Truly] Adv. I. 2. A. [adv. Thing]
Indeer, [adj. p. Love (make] Indefatigable, [Not- adj. p. weary (pot.]
Indefinite. [Not- distinct] [Not-limited]
Indeleble, [Not-deleble] Indemnifie, [Preserve from adj. p. hurt] Indemnity,
[Not- p. Hurt] Indent. [a. Notch Dent
(line] [a. Paction]
Indentures, [Bonds of reciprocal Obligation] Independent, [Absolute] TM. IV. 3
Indeterminate, [Infinite] T. III. 6. O. Endeavor. TA. III. 4. Index. [Sign]
[Catalogue]
Indication, [a. Sign] Indiction, [Space of 15 years] Indifferent. Between
Great and little. TM. I. 1. Excellent and sorry. TM. I. 4. Intense and remiss.]
TM. I. 8.
[Not-unlawful] T. V. 1. A. [adj. Moderation] [Not- adj. zeal] party]

Indigent. [Poor] [Deficient] [Wanting]
Indigestion, [Not-digesting] Indign, [Unworthy] Indignation. AS. VI. 5.
Indignity, Disgraceful injury] Affront]
Indirect. [Not-straight] [Wrong]
Indiscretion, [Folly] Indisposition. [Disposition (corr.] [Not-health]
Indissoluble, [Not- adj. p. loosing (pot.] Indistinct. [Not-distinct]
[Confused]
Individual, [Singular.] Indivisible, [Not- adj. p. divide (pot.] Indocil,
Dull. Ha. III. 1. O. Not-adj. p. learn (apt.]
Indoctrinate a. Teacher] a. Learning]
Indolence. NP. V. 3. Indorse, [Write on the hind-part] Indow. [Give] sp.
permanently.]
[adj. a. Possessions (make]
Indue, [adj. a. Quality.] Inducement. [adj. Impulsive (thing] [adj. Persuading
(thing]
Induction. D. IV. 8. -- into a Benefice.
Indulgence. [Graciousness] [Fondness] Pope's -- [P. Pardon]
Indurate, [a. Hard (make] Industry, [Diligence] Inebriate, [adj. p.
Drunkenness (make] Ineffable, [Not- adj. p. speak (pot.] Inequality, T. I. 5.
O. Inestimable, [Not adj. p. value (pot.] Inevitable, [Not- adj. p. avoid
(pot.] Inexcusable, [Not-adj. p. excuse (pot.] Inexhaustible, [Not-adj. p.
emptying (pot.] Inexorable. [Not-adj. p. Intreat] Persuade]

Inexperience. Ha. VI. 4. D. Inexpiable, [Not Un-adj. p. guilty (pot.]
Inexplicable, [Not- adj. p. plain (pot.] Inextricable, [Not Un- adj. p. tangle
(pot.] Infallible, [Not- adj. err (pot.] Infamation. RJ. VI. 6. Infamy. Ha.
II. 4. O. Infancy. Mea. VI. 1. Infantry. [Footmen] RM. III. 1. (kind)
Infatuate, [adj. a. Folly (make] Infect. S. I. 1. Infeeble, [adj. a. Weakness
(make.] Infelicity, [Adversity] Infeoff. [Assign] [Deposite]
Infer, [a. Inference.] Inference. D. IV. 6. A. Inferiority. op. to Equality.
TM. I. 5. D. Relation of -- TO. III. O.
Infernal, [adj. Hell] W. II. O. Infertile, [Barren] Infest, [Trouble] Infidel,
[adj. Infidelity (person] Infidelity. Ha. V. 4. O. Infinite. T. III. 6. O.
Infirm, [Weak] Infix, [In-fix] Inflame. [a. Flame (make] [a. Worse (make]
Inflammation. S. I. 4. A. Inflate, [Swell with Wind] Inflation. S. I. 5. A.
Inflexibleness. [Not- adj. p. bend (pot.] [Stiffness] Constancy] Pertinacy]
Inflict. [a. Action] sp. adv. Punishment]
[Execute]
Influence. Efficiency] Effectivity] sp. Secret] sp. of Heavenly bodies]


Infold, [In-fold] Enforce, [a. Coaction] Inform. [Tell] sp. Privately]
[Teach] [Accuse]
Unfortunate, adj. Fortune (corr.] Adverse]
Infringe, [Violate] Infuse. [Steep] O. V. 7. O. [Inspire] -- ed habit. Ha. V.

Engage, [Oblige] Ingeminate [Repeat (freq.] Engender, [a. Generation]
Ingenious, adj. Fancy (perf.] Sprightly]
Ingenuous. NP. IV. 1. Ingestion, [In-putting] Ingle. Inglorious, [Not- adj. p.
reputation] Ingot, [Lump (dim.] sp. of Fined metal]
Ingraft. O. III. 7. Ingrail, [a. Tooth Mag. IV. 2. (line.] Ingratiate, [adj.
p. Favor (make] Ingratitude. Man. I. 6. D. Ingredient. [Simple (part) of
Composition] [adj. a. Compounding (thing]
Ingress. [Into-goe] [License of into-going]
Ingross. [Write (perf.] [Buy all]
Ingulf, [a. Whirl-pool] Ingurgitate, [In-swallow (aug] Inhabit, [Dwell]
Inherent. [In-being] [Adjunct]
Inherit. RC. V. 2. A. Inhesion. [In-being] [Adjunct (abstr.]
Inhibit. [Forbid] [Cohibit]
Inholder, [Common Host] Inhospitable. Man. III. 6. D. Inhumane. Not- adj. Man]
Against- adj. Man] Cruel]
Inject, [Into-cast.] sp. with Syringe] Inimitable, [Not-adj. p. imitate (pot.]
Enjoy. TA. V. 7. Enjoin, [Command] Iniquity. op. to Equity. Man. I. 2.
[Unholiness]
Initiate, Begin.] Admit.]
Injudiciousness. NP. I. 2. O. Injunction, [Command] Injury. RJ. IV. 1.
Injustice. Man. I. 1. O. Ink. Pr. VI. 6. A. -- horn, [adj. p. carry (apt.)
Vessel for Ink.]
Inkling. Discovery (dim.] obscure]
Narration (dim.] obscure]
Expression (dim.] obscure]

Inlay, [Variegate the superficies with in-put (things.] Enlarge, vid. Enlarge.
Inlighten, [a. Light.] Inmate, [Subordinate dweller.] Inmost. [Most-adj.
inside.] Inn, [Common Host (place] -- keeper, [Common Host] to -- Corn, [Into-
a. house Corn.]
Innate, [In-natural] Innavigable* [Not- adj. p. navigation (pot.] Inner, [adj.
Inside] Innocent. op. to Guilty. RJ. II. 6. [Harmless] Idiot] Infant]

Innovate. [a. New] [Begin a Custom^
Innoxious. [Not-hurtful] [Innocent]
Innumerable, [Not- adj. p. number (pot.] Inoculate. O. III. 7. A. Inofficious,
[Not- adj. complaisance] In-ordinate, Wrong] Irregular]
Inquest, [adj. a. Inquisition (Off.])agg.]
Inquination, [Defilement] Inquire, [a. Inquisition] Inquisition. AS. II. 2.
[Examine] [Ask]
Enrich, [adj. Riches (make] Inrode, [Assault Country] Inroll, [In- a
catalogue] Insatiable, [Not-adj. p. suffice (pot.] Inscribe, [On-write]
Inscription, [Name] Inscrutable, [Not- adj. p. find (pot.] Insculption, [On-
carving.] Insect. [Exang. (dim.] Insensible, [Not-adj. p. sense (pot.]
Inseparable, [not- adj. p. separate (pot.] Insert, [In add.] put.]

Inside. Sp. III. 6. Insidiate. [a. Ambush] [a. Snare]
Insidious. [adj. Ambush]
Insight. [Into-seeing] [Science] [Art.]
Insinuate. [Into-wriggle] [Flatter.]
Insipid, [Not- adj. p. taste (pot.] Insist, [Upon-stay] Insociable. op. to
Homiletic Virtue, [adj. Man. IV. O.] Not- adj. Society] Against adj. Society]

Insolent. op. to Magnanimity. Man. III. 8. E. op. to Condescension. Man. VI.
2. D.
Insoluble, [Not- adj. p. loosing (pot.] Insomuch, [So.] Adv. II. 1. O.
Inspection. [Seeing] [Oversight]
Inspersion. [On- sprinkling] scattering]

Inspiration of God. AS. I. 6. A. Instable, [adj. Lightness.] Hab. IV. 7. D.
Install. [Admit solemnly] [Consecrate]
Instance. [Example] [Earnest intreaty]
Instant. Sp. I. O. [Near] -- ly, [adv. Soon Diligently
augm.]
Instauration, [Re- newing.] mending]

Instep, [Convex of foot-joint.] Instigation. [Impulsion] Instill, [In-drop]
Instinct, [Natural disposition.] impulsion.]
Institute, [a. Institution.] Institutes. [Commands] [Ordinances]
Institution. [Instruction] [Ordinance] -- religious. RE. VI.
Instruction, [Know (make] [a. Teacher] -- s. [Directive precepts]
Instrument. Cause. T. II. 1. A. -- of Virtue, Ha. II. -- mechanical. Po. VI.
1. -- of Music, [adj. Music, (instr.] -- written, [Bond.]
[Substitute] [Transc. (instr.]
Insufficient. [Not-sufficient] [Defective]
Insular, [adj. Island] Insult, [a. Insolence.] Insuperable, [Not-adj. p.
overcome (pot.] Insupportable. [Not-adj. p. support (pot.] Insurrection.
[Sedition] [Rebellion (inc.]
Intail, vid. Entail. Entangle, [Tangle] Integer, [Whole] sp. Number:]
Integral, [Whole] -- word. D. II. 1.
Integrity. Ha. IV. 6. Intellect. NP. I. 1. Intelligence. [Knowledge]
[Narration] sp. Private.]

Intemperance. [Sensuality] Man. II. 1. D. [Excess]
Intend. [Purpose] [Heed] [a. Intense (make]
Intenseness. TM. I. 8. E. Intent. [Purpose] [End]
Intentive. [Heedfull] [Seriously disposed to] [Earnestly disposed to]
Intercalation, [Between-putting. Intercede. RC. VI. 6. A, Intercept. [Take
in-coming] [Not-seen (make) by between-being]
Intercession. RC. VI. 6. A. Interchangeable, [Reciprocal.] Intercourse,
[Commerce] Intercurrent, [Between- adj. ition.] Interdict, [Forbid] Interest.
[Concernment] [adj. Pertinent] [Proper profit]
[Right] Usury. [Rent of mony]
Interfere, [Strike mutually.] sp. Hurt Hinder
by strik. m.]
Interjacent, [Between-being] Interjection. D. II. 7. A. Interim,
[Between-space.] Interior, [adj. Inside] Interlace. [Mingle] [Stratifie]
Interlard, [a. Stratifie Interline. [Between a. line.] [a. Stratifie]
Interlocution. Interlope, [a. Prevent] sp. in Buying.]
Interlude, [Stage-play] Intermeddle. [With-mingle] [Between a. business.]
Intermediate. [Middle] [Mediator]
Intermingle, [a. Mixture] Intermit, [adj. p. Discontinue (make] Intermix, [a.
Mixture.] Internal, [adj. Inside] Interpellation. [adj. p. Discontinue (make)
discourse by between-speaking.]
Interpolation. [Between-put] sp. adj. p. Forgery (thing]

Interpose. [Between-put] [a. Intercession]
Interpretation. D. V. 4. Interpunction. D. I. 4. Interr, [Bury] Interreign,
[Between-time of two a. Kings.] Interrogation, [Question] Interrogatory, [adj.
p. Question (thing.] Interrupt. [adj. p. Discontinue (make] [Hinder]
Intersection. Ma. II. 2. A. Interval, [Between-space] Intervene, [Between- a.
event] Intestate, [Not- adj. a. preter. bequeathing.] Intestine, [adj. Inside]
Inthrall, [a Slave (make] Inthroning, [On-seating] sp. for Admission (sign]
Entice, [Allure] Intimate. [a. Narration concealedly] obscurely]
-- friend, [Friend (augm.]
Entire. [Total] [Whole] [adj. Integrity]
Entitle. [adj. Right (make] [Name]
Into. Prep. IV. 1. Intolerable. [Not- adj. p. suffer Permit
pot.]
Intoxicate. [a. Fume (augm.] [adj. p. Drunkenness (make]
Intractable, [Perverse] Intrada, [Revenue] Intralls. PG. VI. Entrap, [a. Trap]
Entreat. [Pray] TO. V. 3. [Entertain]
Entrench, [a. Trench] Intricate. [Tangle] [a. Difficult (make]
Intrigue. [adj. p. Concealed (thing] [adj. Obscure (thing]
Intrinsecal, [adj. Inside*] Introduction. [In-bringing] [Prologue]
Intrude, [Into-thrust.] Entrust. [Instead- a. right] [Deposite]
Intuition. [Seeing.] sp. distinct.]
Invade. [Assault] [Usurp]
Invalid. [Impotent] [Weak] [Defective]
Invasion. Inveck, [a. Notch (line] Invective, [adj. Reviling (thing] Inveigh,
[a. Revile] Inveigle, [Allure] sp. to Evil.]
Invelop, [a. Wrap] Invenomed, [adj. p. Poison] Inventing. AS. III. 2. A.
Inventory, [Catalogue] sp. of Possessions.]
Invert. [Turn] AC. VI. 8. sp. adv. Contrary.]
[Retort]
Invest, [a. Admision solemnly.] Investigation, [Inquisition] Inveterate, [Old]
Invincible, [Not- adj. p. overcome (pot.] Inviolable, [Not- adj. p. violate
(pot.] Inviron, [About-margin] Invisible, [Not- adj. p. see (pot.] Invite.
[Intreat to come] [Provoke]
Inundation, [Overflowing] Invocate. [Call] [Pray]
Involve, Comprehend] Intangle]
Involuntary, [Not- adj. p. will.] Invulnerable, [Not-adj. p. wound (pot.]
Inward, [adj. Inside] -- s. PG. VI.
Job. [Operation (dim.] [Knock (dim.]
Job's tears. HL. III. 7. A. Iocular, [adj. Urbanity] Iocund. [adj. Mirth]
[adj. Urbanity]
Iog. a. Motion (imp.] a. Shaking (imp.] be -- ing, [From-go] TA. VI. 1. O.
St. John's wort, HS. V. 7. St. John's Bread, [Carob] Tr. VI. 1. Poor John,
[Haak] Fi. III. 3. A Joy. [Mirth] AS. V. 3. -- for good of others. AS. VI. 6.
-- for evil of others. AS. VI. 7.
to -- joy one of, etc. [Congratulate one for, etc.]
Ioin. Together-put. TA. II. 1. a. Nearness] a. Contiguity] a. Continuity]
Associate] a. Partner] a. League]
-- battle, [a. Battle.] -- company, [With- sit. travel, etc.]
-- er, [adj Fabrile (mech.) of wooden Utensils.]
Joint. [adj. p. Join] -- ly, [Together.]
Limm. PG. V. [Knitting] out of -- [Having its Joint unplaced.] to -- [Cut the
Joints.]

Iointure, [Widow's Revenue.] Iole, [Head.] sp. Cheek.]
Jolly, [adj. Mirth.] Iolt, [Shake (imp.] sp. by Leaping (like.]
Jot. Point] Little (thing]
Jove, vid. Jupiter. Jovial, [adj. Mirth.] Iournal, [Narration of daily
[things.] Journey, [Travel] -- man, [Hired subordinate (mech.] (merc.]

Ioros. Fi. III. 8. Irascible, [adj. Angry (apt.] Ire, [Anger] Iris, HL. IV. 6.
HL. V. 3. A.
Irksome. [adj. Displicence (augm.] [adj. Aversation (augm.]
Iron. Met. I. 6. -- monger, [adj. Iron (mer.] -- wort. HF. VII. 12. A.
Irony. D. I. 8. A. Irradiation, [ad^ Bright (make] Irrational. NP. I. O.
Irreconcilable, [Not re- adj. p. Friend (pot.] Irrefragable [Not- adj. p. deny
(pot.] adj. p. confute (pot.]

Irregularity. TM. V. 4. A. Irreligious. [Atheistical.] Irremissible, [Not-
adj. p. forgive (pot.] Irreparable. [Not-adj. p. compensate amend
(pot.]
Irresolute, [adj. Wavering] Irreverence. Man. V. 3. D. Irrevocable. [Not
again-adj. p. get back-adj. p. call
(pot.]
Irrision, [Mocking] Irritate, Provoke] a. Impulsive]
Irruption, [Violent into-ition] Is, a. Being] Copula]
Ischury, [Disease of not-adj. a. Urin (pot.] Ise. El. III. 4. Isicle, [Frozen
drop.] Ising-glass, [Selenites] Issue, [Out-goe.] [a. Stream (dim.] [Sally]
Offspring, Children (aggr.) TO. I. 2. O.] Descendents (aggr.) TO. I. 1. O*]
[Event] -- at Law. RJ. II. 5. to join -- [adj. p. Issue (make]

Isthmus. W. III. 3. It. Pron. I. 3. Itch. AC. II. 6. Disease. S. III. 2.
Item. [adj. p. Reckon Add
(thing] Admonition (dim.] Narration (dim.]
Iterate, [Repeat] Itinerant, [adj. a. Travel] Itinerary, [adj. Travel] Ition.
TA. VI. Iubile. [adj. Festivity-year.] [Mirth (augm.]
Iucca. HL. V. 4. A. Judaism. RE. I. 3. Iudas-tree. Tr. VI. 3. Judge. RJ. I. 1.
Judgment. Faculty. NP. I. 2. [Opinion] [RJ. (thing] [Sentence] -- of God,
Punishment from God.] Cursing. AS. I. 3. O.

Iudicatory, [adj. RJ.] sp. Place.]
Judicial Relation. RJ. Persons in -- R^. I. Proceedings in -- RJ. II.
Judicious, [adj. Judgment (perf.] Iug, [Narrow-neck'd pot.] sp. of Earth.]
Iugament. Po. VI. 3. Iuggle, [a. Prestigiator] Iuggler. RC. III. 9. A.
Iugular, [adj. Throat] Ivy. Sh. III. 12. ground -- HL. VI. 11. Virginian -- Sh.
V. 8.
Juice. PP. I. 7. Iujub, Common. Tr. II. 6. white -- Tr. II. 6. A.
Iulap, [Cooling Potion] July, [Seventh month] Iulis. Fi. V. 9. A. Iulus. Ex.
II. 19. A. Iumble, [a. Confused.] Iump, [Leap (imp.] Iuncto, [Faction]
Iuncture, [Present state of things.] June, [Sixth month] Juniper. Sh. III. 10.
Iunket, [adj. Banquet (thing] Ivory, [Elephant's horn] tooth]

Jupiter. W. II. 4. A. Jury, [Equals sworn to judge.] Jurisdiction, Judges
(place.] Magistrates. (place.]
Just. [adj. Justice] [adj. Perfection] -- temper. TM. I. 8. -- so, All so.] So
so.]
to -- [Game of mutual assaulting with Spears.]

Justice. Man. I. 1. -- of Peace, [adj. Justice (Off.]
Justify. [a. Just] Innocent]
Pronounce Just] Declare Innocent]
Iustle, [Thrust (imp.] sp. with Shoulders.] Elbows.] etc.

Iut out, [a. Protuberant.] Iuvenile, [adj. Youth,]
K.
KAlend, [First day of the month.] Calendar, [Book of months] Kank, [Muscovia
glass.] Katkin. PP. II. 1. A. Kecks, [Hollow stalk.] Kedger, [Anchor (dim.]
Keel. RN. II. 1. Keeling. Fish. Keen. [adj. a. Cut (apt.] [Acrimonious]
[Intense]
Keep. In Good. [Preserue] [Maintain]
Out of Evil. Hurtful, [Deliver.] Dangerous, [Defend.]
[a. Permanent] In Quantity. -- at a stay. TM. I. 9.
In Quality. -- dry [a. permanent dr.] -- warm, [a. permanent w.
In Place, [Stay.] -- close, a. Permanent Stay
(close.] -- one's bed a. Pernent Stay
in one's bed.] -- ones ground. RM. II. 2. -- the field. RM. II. 3. -- the
town. RM. II. 4.
In Possession. [Hold] TA. I. 6. Not lose. TA. V. 5. [Not change] -- one's
course. -- a wind. RN. VI. 6. [Not violate] -- command, Perform com.] --
promise, Perform pro.] -- word, Perform word.] -- holy day Perform h.d.] --
away from, [Absent be] make]

-- back, [Cohibit.] -- in, [Cohibit.] -- off, Be Make
distant] -- to it, [v. Permanent doing,] etc.]
-- under, [v. Permanent restraining.] subjecting.]
-- company, a. companion.] together-go.]
-- counsel, [a. Taciturnity] -- house, [a. TO. III. 5.] -- a good house, [a.
TO. III. 5. liberally.] -- silence, [a. Silence.] -- watch, [a. Guard.]


Keeper. Keeping (Off.] Guarding (Off.] [Park (Off.]
Keg. [Barrel (dim.] Measure.
Key. -- of door. Po. IV. 4. A. -- of Music, [Principal note] Fruit. PP. III.
4. A. [Haven]
Kell. PG. VI. 6. A. Kemb, vid. Comh. Kemboing the arm^. AC. IV. 7. Ken, [See]
sp. From remote (place.]
Kennel. [Bed] [Room] [Sink] [Receptacle of filth] [Gutter for filth]
Kerchief, [adj. Linen (vest) for head.] Kern. [Grain] [adj. Rusticity (person]
Kernel. Fruit. PP. III. 6. A. [Glandule] PP. II. 7. A.

Kersy. Kestrel, [Hovering Hawk] Ketch. RN. I. 2. A. Kettle. Pr. V. 6. Kibe,
[Chilblane.] S. III. 7. Kick, [Strike with foot] heel]
Kid, [Goat] Be. II. 2. A. (young] to -- as Pease. [a. PP. III. 5. A.]
Kidney. PG. VI. 7. Kill. a -- [Arched fire (place] to -- [a. die (make]
Kilderkin, [Barrel (dim.] Kin. [Consanguinity] TO. I. [Affinity] TO. II.
Kine. Be. II. 1. Kind. Genus. T. I. [Species] T. I. A. a -- of, etc. out of
-- [worse than its ancestors] it has been.]

[Sex] [Manner] [adj. Kindness] -- ly, eat -- taste (perf.] ripen -- ripen
(perf.]

Kindeness. [Favour] [Courtesie] [Graciousness]
Kindle. [a. Fire (inc.] [a. Anger (inc.]
Kindred. [Consanguinity] TO. I. [Affinity] TO. II.
King. Monarch. RC. I. 2. -- dom, [King (place] -- 's evil, S. III. 3.
-- at arms, [Principal Herald.] -- fisher, By. III. 9. A. -- spear, [Asphodel]
HL. V. 1.
Kiss. AC. V. 6. A. Kitchen, [adj. Cookery (room.] Kite By. I. 2. A. -- fish.
Fi. III. 6.
Kitlin, [Cat (young] Knack, [adj. Vanity (thing] Knag, [Knurl] PP. I. 1. A.
Knap, [Top] sp. tufted.] -- sack, [adj. Travel (bag.] -- weed. HF. III. 4.
Silver -- HF. III. 4. A.

Knave. adj. Crafty (person] adj. a. Cheat (person]
Kneading. O. IV. 7. Knee. PG. V. 5. A. -- pan, [Bone defending the
Knee-joint.] being on his -- s. AC. VI. 6. A.
Kneel. AC. VI. 6. Knell, [Ringing for pret. dying (sign.] Knife. Po. VI. 2.
Knight, [Gentleman of highest degree.] Knit. -- knot, bind.] tie.]
-- stockings. O. V. 2. A.
Knob, [adj. Protuberance (thing] Knock. Mo. VI. 4. A. Knoll. [Hill (dim.]
[adj. Protuberance (thing]
Knop, [adj. Protuberance (thing] sp. tufted.]
Knot. [adj. p. Knit (part] [Ribbands (aggr.) tied for ornament] -- in garden,
[Area figured for ornament] Crew, [adj. aggregate] sp. (corr.)
-- of a tree. PP. I. 1. A. -- in grass, [joint (like -- ] -- grass. HF. I. 4.
Bird. By. VII. 6. [Difficulty] to -- [a. Bud] [a. Coagulate]

Know. -- mentally. AS. II. 5. -- carnally, [Coition.] to be known of, Claim.]
Confess.]

Knowledge, [Knowing] [Science.] Ha. VI. 1. [Experience.] Ha. VI. 4.
Knuckle. PG. V. 7. A. Knurl, [Knot] PP. I. 1. A.
L.
LAbel, [Lamin.] sp. of skin upon -- p. writing (apt.] sp. Ac^essory.]

Labor. [Operation] [Endeavor (augm.] [Diligence] ^ to be in -- [a.
Parturition] [adj. p. Pain by Parturition]


Laborer, [adj. Operation (person.] Laborious. Labyrinth, [Buildind adj. a.
tangle Wander
(apt.] Lac, [Wax of Ants.] Lace. Pr. IV. 5. to -- [a. Face with Lace.] to --
together, [Together-bind. sp. with Lace.]

Laceration, [Tearing] Lack. [Not-have] [Scarcity] [Defect]
[Want]
Lacky, [adj. a. Foot-servant] Laconism, [Brief sentencing (manner.] Lactation.
AC. I. 4. A. Lad, [adj. Adolescence (person.] Ladanum, [Concrete exudation of
the holy rose] Ladder. Po. IV. 1. A. Lade, [a. Burden.] -- ing, [adj.
Burden-(thing]
Lady. adj. Noble (fem.] adj. Gentle (fem.] -- cow. Ex. V. 6. A. -- laces,
[Striped grass] 's Bedstraw. HF. IX. 6. A. -- 's Bower. -- 's Glove. HL. IX. ^.
-- 's Mantle. HL. VI. 9. A. -- 's Milk, [White Thistle] -- 's Seal, [Black
Briony] -- 's Slipper. -- 's Smock. HS. IV. 15. A. -- 's Thistle. [White Th.]
Ladle, [Spoon (augm.] Lag. [Protract]
Lagopus. By. II. 7. A. Lay. [Pasture, [adj. lying (make.] Condition (put]
Place (put] -- about him, (augm.] a. Operation a. Diligence]
-- aside. [a. Desist] [Un- a. Officer (make]
-- down, [Defist] -- on, [On-put] -- out for Take (end] Get (end] Disburse
for]
-- to one's charge, [a. Accuse.] -- to ones Wrist, [Apply] -- together, [a.
Summe] -- up. TA. V. 4. -- land, [a. Rest from plowing.] -- a cloth, Put Spread
on table.] -- egg, [a. Parturition*] foundation, [a. Foundation.]
-- hands on, Catch] Arrest]
-- hold on, Catch] Arrest]
-- level, [a. Level (make] -- open, [a. Open (make] -- siege to, [Besiege] --
wager, [a. Wager] -- wait, [a. Ambush] a -- -- land, [adj. Rest land] -- man,
[adj. RE. O. (person.] [Song] [Wagering] Rank] Course]
Laic, [Temporal] Laire. [Deer's lying (place] [Stratifie]
Lake. W. IV. 2. A. Tree. Tr. VIII. 8.
Lamb, [Sheep] Be. II. 2. (young) to -- [v. Parturition]
Lame. [Mutilated] [adj. Halt (apt.]
Lament. [Grief, (augm.] (sign]

Lamin. Mag. V. 4. Lamm, [adj. Cudgelling] Lamp. Pr. VI. 3. A. Lamprey. Fish.
Fi. VI. 5. Disease.
Lamprill. Fi. VI. 5. A. Lanar, Woolly feathered Hawk.] Soft feathered Hawk.]
-- et, [Lanar (male.]

Lance. [Short Pike] Burning -- [Dart.] El. I. 4. A. to -- Scarifie] Cut] Open
by cutting]

Lancea ardens, [Dart] El. I. 4. A. Lance-knight, [Foot-souldier] Lancepresado,
[adj. Military (Off.) over 10.] Lancet, vid. Launcet. Lanch, [a. Navigation
(inc.] Land. [Earth] [Field] Po. I. arable -- Po I. 4.
[Countrey] RC. III. 2. -- loper, [adj. Wander (person.] -- mark, [adj. Margin
(sign.] to -- Come Bring
on shore.]
Landlord adj. pret. Demising (person of House.] Land.]
adj. p. Right (person of House.] Land.]
[Host]
Landress, [adj. Washing (mech.] (fem.]
Landscape, [Picture of Country.] Lane, [Narrow Street] adj. Travel (place.] by
-- [Not usual -- ]

Language. D. A. good, g. Discourse (manner.] ill, ill. Discourse (manner.]
Languid, [adj. Weakness.] Languish, [Decay] Lank, Lean] Empty] Limber]
Lantern, [adj Candle (room.] Lap. -- of garment, Corner Margin
of Vest.] [Space upon the knees]
-- dog, [Little Dog kept only for delight.] -- of ear. to -- as a Dog, [Drink
by licking.] -- up warm, Fold Clothe
for warmth.]

Lapidary, [adj. Gem (merc.] Lapse. Stumble (dim.] Fall] [Lose by omission]
Lapwing, By. VII. 1. Larboord [Left side] Larceny, [Theft.] Larch-tree. Tr. V.
3. A. Lard, [Fat of Swine] to -- Pr. III. 8. -- er, [adj. Flesh (room.]
Large. Ample] Broad] Great] [Abundant] [Liberal] at -- [Not -- cohibited]
imprison'd] [adj. Liberty]



Largess, [Gift (augm.] Larix tree. Tr. V. 3. A. Lark. By. V. 4. Sea -- By.
VII. 3. A. Tit -- By. V. 4. A. -- 's heel. HS. I. 2.
Lasciviousness. [Wantonness] [Unchastness]
Lash, [Whip] to -- out, [a. Irregularity] Excess] Prodigality]

Laserwort. HF. IV. 6. Lask, [adj. Excess dunging (apt.] Lass, [adj.
Adolescence (fem.] Lassitude, [p. Weary (abstr.] Last- [Most. New] Late]
Remotest] Hindermost] adj. Finishing] End] a -- [Exemplar] sp. for Foot vest]
to -- v. Duration] v. Permanent]


Latch. Po. IV. 5. A. -- et, [Thong] sp. for Foot vest.]

Late. op. to Old. Sp. I. 3. op. to Soon. Sp. I. 4. O.
Latent, Concealed] H^d]
Lath, [Lamin] sp. of Wood] Lathe, [adj. Turning (jug.] Latin, [Language of
Romans] Latitude. [Breadth] [Distance from the Equator]
Latter, [Succeeding] Lattin, [adj. Iron (Lamin) tinned.] Lattis, [Oblique
Crosses (plain.] Lavarettus. Fi. IX. 5. A. Laudable, [adj. p. Praise (apt.]
Lave, [Empty by out-scooping.] Lavender. HF. VI. 5. French -- [Cassidony] HF.
VI. 5. A. Sea -- HS. VI. 9. A. -- Cotton. HF. II. 10. A.
Laver, [adj. Washing (vessel] Laugh. AC. IV. 3. -- to scorn, [Laugh
Contemning.] Mocking.]

Lavish, [Prodigal] Lance, vid. Lance. Launch, [a. Swim (inc.] sp. Ship.]
Laundress, [adj. a. Washing (mech.] Laurel. Tr. III. 5. A. Alexandrian -- Sh.
III. 7.
Law, RC. IV. 3. -- of nature. RC. VI. 2. -- positive. RC. VI. 3. Civil --
[Roman Law] Father in -- [Father by affinity.] go to -- [a. Suit.] -- day, [a.
Cause-day.] -- full. T. V. 1. -- less Licencious.] Without Law.]

Lawyer. Civil -- RC. II. 2. Common -- RC. II. 2. A.
Lawn. [Linnen fine (augm.] [Treey pasture.]
Lax. [Tied (dim.] [Loose]
Laxative, [adj. a. Dung (apt.] Lazer, [adj. Leprosy (person.] Lazerole. Tr.
I. 3. A. Lazy. op. to Stout. NP. IV. 6. O. [adj. Sloth]
Lazul stone. St. II. 3. A. Leach. [Physitian]
Lead. Met. I. 5. Black -- Met. III. 6. Red -- White -- [Ceruse] Met. IV. 6. --
s of house, [Leaden roof of -- ] -- wort
Lead. Go before. TA. VI. 5. [Begin] [Direct] [Allure] - ing case, [Example]
D. IV. 8. - aside, Lead (corr.] Err. (make.] Seduce.]
- life, a. Conversation] a. Life]

Leaf. -- of Plant. PP. II. 5. A. -- of Paper, [Lamin.] -- of Fat, [Fat next
the ribs.] sp. of Hogs.]
-- of Gold, [Lamin -- ]
League. Confederacy. RC. III. 8. Measure. Mea. I. 8.
Leaguer, [Siege.] Leak. [Into-receive water] spring a -- [into-receive (inc.)
water.]
Leam, [Lamin of flame.] Leaning. Posture. AC. VI. 4. A. [Obliquing] -- toward,
[Vergency]

Leanness. NP. V. 5. O. Leap. -- ing. AC. I. 5. [a. Coition]
-- year, [Year of 366 days.]
Learn, a. Learner] Know (inc.] -- er. TO. III. 3. O. -- ing. Ha. VI. 5.

Lease. [Obligation of hire] [Pasture] to -- let a -- [Demise by ^^ligation of
hire] Glean, [Gather the left ears.] Ly, [a. Man. IV. 1.

Leash. [Three] [Dog-couple] [Whip]
Least, [Most-little] at -- adv. Most-little] Not less]
-- that. Conj. III. 1. O.
Leisure. TA. III. O. -- ly, Slow.] adj. Degrees (segr.]

Leather. Pr. IV. 2. Leave. [License] Take ones -- [a. Valediction]
to -- Not take. TA. I. 4. O. Abandon] [a. Residue] a. Dereliction] a.
Desertion] Give over] Omit] Desist]

Leaven, [adj. a. Ferment (thing] sp. of Bread.]
Leaver, [adj. Lifting (instr.] Lechery, [adj. Lust (apt.] Leccia Salviani. Fi.
IV. 1. Lecture, [adj. p. Read (thing] Lecture, [adj. p. Read (thing] Teacher]

Ledge, [Transverse protuberant (thing.] Lee. [Sediment] [Cover'd from wind]
Fall to Leeward. RN. VI 6. D.

Leech. Ex. I. 2. Vid. Leach.
Leek. HL. IV. 9. A. House -- [Sedum]
Leer, [Look obliquely] deceitfully]
Leese, [Lose] Leet, [Law-day] Left. pret. Leave. adj. p. Leave. [Residue] TM.
VI. 7. O. Sinister. Sp. III. 9. O.
Leg, [Shank] PG. V. 5. - of Mutton, [Thigh of sheep.] to make a leg, [a.
Congee.]
Legacy, [adj. p. Bequeathing (thing.] Legal, [adj. Law] Legate, [Public adj.
p. send (person.] Legend, [Fabulous Narration.] Legerdemain, [adj. Prestigiator
(thing.] Legible, [adj. p. read (pot.] Legion, [Regiment.] Legislative, [adj.
a. Law (make.] Legitimate, adj. Law.] Genuine.] to -- [Un-a Bastard.]

Legumen, [Pulse.] Leman, [adj. Fornication (fem.] Lemon. Tr. I. 8. A. Lend.
RC. V. 4. Length. TM. II. 1. at -- [After all this] Adv. III. 3. O.
Lengthen, a. Length.] Protract.]
Lenity, Clemency.] Meekness.]
Lenitive, Un -- adj. a. Pain (apt] adj. a. Indolence (apt.]
Lent. pret. Lend.] adj. p. Lend.] [adj. Fasting (time.]
Lentils. HS. II. 3. A. Lentisk, [Mastic-tree.] Lentitude, [Excess of Meekness]
(...). I. 9, E.
Leo, [Fifth of the 12. parts of the Zodiac.] Leopard. Be. IV. 2. A. -- s bane.
HF. III. 6.
Leper, [adj. Leprosy (person.] Leprosy. S. II. 5. Less, [More-little.]
Lessee, [adj. a. Hire (person.] Lessen, [Diminish.] Lesson, [adj. p. Read
Teacher
(thing.] Lessor, [adj. a. Demising (person] Let Licence] Permit] - alone, [Not
hinder.] - blood, [a. Bleeding.] - down, Cause Help. Suffer
to descend] - go. TA. I. 6. O. - in, Suffer to in- out-
go] - out, Suffer to in- out-
go] - pass, [Omit.] - slip, [Omit.] [Impedient.] [Demise.]
Lethargy. S. IV. ^. Letter. [Element.] D. I. 1. [Epistle] [Bond] s patents,
[Patent.]

Lettice. HF. III. 11. Lambs --
Level. [Lying] Plain] Equal] Smooth] [Plainness-trying (instr.] Aim, Toward
Against.
direct.] op. to Degrees of persons. RC. I. O.
Leven, vid. Leaven. Leveret, [Hare (young.] Leviathan, [Crocodile] Be. IV. 3.
Levy, [Gather.] Levite. RE. II. 2. A. Levity. Tactil quality. Q. V. 4. D.
Inconstancy. Ha. IV. 7. D. Vainness. Man. IV. 6. D.
Lewd. [Evil (augm.] [Vicious (augm.] [Unchast]
Lexicon, [Catalogue of interpreted words.] Ly [v. Situation] -- near to, [v.
Near.] -- next to, [v. Near.] v. Prostrate.] AC. VI. 7. A. a. Guest.] TO. III.
6. A. a. Permanent.] Sp. I. 6. -- down. AC. VI. 7. A. -- from home, Be all the
night a Guest
(from home.] -- in childbed, [Be Shut up In bed
after (parturition.] -- in wait, [a. Ambush] -- together, [together- a. a.
Coition] a. Bed]
-- under, Under-ly] adj. p. Subject]
-- up, [Rise] -- with, [With- a. Coition.] a. Bed.
-- bedrid, [Be un-adj. a. Rise (pot.) by sickness.] -- hid, [adj. p. Conceal.]
-- open, [adj. p. Opening.] -- still, [adj. Rest.] [a. Lying] Man. IV. 1. O.
tell a -- [a. Man. IV. 1. O. a -- [a. Lying]

Ly [adj. a. Lixiviation [thing] Lyingness. Man. IV. 1. O. Liable, [adj. p.
Object (pot.] Lib, [Un- a. Testicle] Libbard, [Leopard.] Libel, [adj. Book
(dim.] sp. Backbiting.]
Libella worm. Ex. III. 5. Lib-ral. [adj. Free-man] -- Science, [Learning] Ha.
VI. 4. [adj. Liberality]
Liberality. Man. III. 1. Liberty. RC. IV. A. -- of converse, [Frankness] -- of
will, AS. IV. 8. at -- adj. Liberty] Un- adj. p. Slave.] Imprisonment.]


Libertin, [Not-cohibited adj. Vice (person] Libidinous, [adj. a. Lust (apt.]
Libra, [Seventh part of the Zodiac] Library, [adj. Books (House.] (Room.]
(aggr.]
Libration. O. I. 2. Lice, [pl. Lowse] -- bane.
License. RC. IV. 8. A. Licentiousness. [Liberty, (exc.] corr.]
[Not cohibited Vice (abstr.]
Lick. Mo. III. 7. -- (...). El. I. 6. A.
Licorice. Sh. IV. 5. wild -- HS. III. 3.
Licourous, [Intemperate in banquetting] Lid, [adj. Covering (instr.] ey --
[Covering (part) of the Ey.]
Liege, [adj. Law] -- lord [Proper King] -- man, [Proper Subject]
Lieger. Resident Ordinary
Ambassador
Lieu, [Substitute (abstr.] in -- of. Prep. II. 1. A.
Lieutenant, [adj. Substitute (person] (Off.]
-- of a ship. RN. V. 1. A.
Life. [Living (abstr.] to the -- [Living (like] Tree of -- Sh. IV. 6. A.. --
everlasting, [Gnaphalium] -- time. Mea. VI. -- of Cicero, [Narration of etc.]
Of -- and death, [adj. Capital] [Vigour]
Lift. Move upward. O I. 1. [Exalt, a. High.] a. Higher]
-- up ones voice, [Exclaim.] -- of a Ship. RN. IV. 4. A.
Ligament. PG. II. 2. Light. Subst. Primary -- Q. I. 1. E. Secondary -- Q. I.
2. [Brightness] [adj. a. Light (instr.] as Candle, etc.

to -- a fire, [a. Fire (inc.] [adj. Lightness] -- ness. op. to Heaviness. Q V.
4. D. -- headed, [Vertiginous] [Agility] -- horse, [adj. Warhorse.]
op. to Seriousness. NP. IV. 3. O. Constancy. Ha. IV. 7. D. Gravity. Man. IV.
6. D. Chastity. Man. II. 7. D.
[Easiness] -- of belief, [Credulity]
[Frivolousness] [Remisseness] make -- of, [Contemn]
to -- as Bird Descend] Settle on feet]
-- from horse, [Descend -- ] Happen [a. Event]
-- on, [Happen to find]

Lighten. [a. Light] [Un- a. Burden] Pain]
[a. Lightning]
Lightening. El. I. 3. Lighter, [Boat for burden (aug.] Lights, [Lungs] PG. VI.
2. A. Lightsome, [adj. Light.] Lignum Aloes. Lignum Nephriticum, Tr. VII. 4.
Lignum Rhodium. Ligurious. By. VI. 1. Like. [adj. Likeness] -- as, [As] --
wise, [adv. Like] [adj. Equality] -- for -- [Compensate] I -- it, [I Approve
Love
it.]
Likely, Probable] True (like]
Likeness* TM. V. 1. Liking. Condition] State] Approbation] Love]
Lilach. Sh. IV. 1. Lilly. HL. IV. 2. day -- HL. V. 3. water -- HL. VI. 4, --
of the valley. HL. VII. 7. A.
Limb. [Joint] [Part]
Limbeck, [Vessel for hot distilling] Limberness. Q. V. 6. E. Limbus, [Margin]
Lime. El. IV. 5. Bird -- [Glue to catch entangle
Birds.] sp. Prepared juice of Misleto] -- hound. -- tree. Tr. VI. 10.
Limit. [Finiting (Sign] (Thing] (Place] Side] Margin]
to -- [a. [Limitation] [Determination] [pohibit] [Apoint precisely]


Limitation. D. IV. 2. Limn, [Paint with Watercolors.] Limon. Limp, [Halt]
Limpet. E^. VIII. 1. Lineage, [Descendents (aggr.] TO. I. 1. O. Linchpin. Linden
tree. Line. Dimension. Mag. I. 1. -- of writing. the -- [Equator] W. VI. 1.
Measure. Mea. I. 1. [Thred] Fishing -- [String of hairs for fishing] plumb --
[String for measuring.] [Series] to -- Pr. IV. 9. A. to -- one Fortification
with another. RM. VI. 4. A. -- a hedge with, [Within garrison with Series of]
[a. Coition] sp. of Dog.]

Lineal, [adj. Line.] Lineament, [Figure] Ling. Fish. Fi. III. 3. [Heath]
Linger, [Protract] [Delay]
Linguist, [adj. language (artist.] Lingwort. Link. [Candle of pitched Tow]
[Loop] to -- together Knit] to -- together Joyn]
[Sausage]
Linen. Pr. IV. 4. -- draper, [adj. Linen (merc.]
Linnet. By. IV. 8. Red -- By. IV. 8. A.
Linseed, [Seed of Flax] Linsey-woolsey. [Woven (thing) of Linen and Woollen]
[Mixture (corr.]
Lint, [Down (like) Shaving Scraping
of Linnen] Lintel. Po. IV. 3. A. Lion. Be. IV. 1. -- s tooth, [Dandelion]
Lip. PG. III. 8. Liquid, [adj. Moistness] Q. V. 2. Liquid amber. Tr. VIII. 9.
Liquor, [adj. a. (thing Moistness Wet
Lisping. AC. III. 2. A. List. [Catalogue] -- of cloth, [Margin] the -- s,
[Combate (place] as he -- eth, [as he willeth]
Listen. [Hear (end] [Observe with Ear]
Listlesness. NP. I. 4. O. Litany, [Brief vicissitudinary Prayers] Literal,
[adj. Letter] Literature, [Learning] Ha. VI. 4. Litharge. Met. IV. 1.
Litheness, [Limberness] Q. V. 6. E. Lither. lazy] Idle] [Slow]
Litigious, [adj. Contentious] Litter. Birth [Children (aggr.) of one
parturition.] Straw [Bed for Horse] horse -- [Sedan to be carried between
Horses]
Little. TM. I 1. D. by -- and -- [adv. Degrees (dim.] -- ones, [Young children]
Liturgy, [Public Manner Form
of Worship] Live. Proper. AC. I. 7. [Be] -- in exile [Be banisht] [Feed] --
upon, [Feed upon] [a. Conversation]
Lively, [adj. Sprightliness] Vigour]
-- hood, [Maintenance]
Live-long. [Total] [Orpine]
Liver. [adj. Living (person] Part. PG. VI. 5. -- wort. HL. I. 3. A. Noble --
[Hepatica]


Livery. [adj. Service (sign) garment] [Delivering] TA. IV. 5. sp. of
possession.] -- and seisin. RC. V. 8. A.
Horse at -- [H. at hired guesting]
Living. Vid. Live. [Maintenance]
Lixiviation. O. VI. 8. Lizard. Be. VI. 4. Lo, [Imp. Look.] Loach. Fi. IX. 11.
A. Loaf, [Bread] Loath, [adj. Nolleity] Loathe. op. to Appetite. NP. II. 4. O.
[Aversation] AS. V. 5. O. [Being cloy'd] AS. V. 1. O.
Loathsome, [Loathed (apt.] Lob, [adj. Lumpish (person] sp. Great.]
Lobby, [Outer room (dim.] Lobe, [Protuberant (part] Lobster. Ex. VI. 1. Local,
[adj. Place.] Loch. Fish. Fi. IX. 11. A. [adj. p. Lick (apt.) Medicin]
Lock. [adj, Shutting (jug.] -- on door, etc. Po. IV. 4. -- on a River,
[Water-course-narrowing (jug.] [Tuft] -- of Hair. -- of Wool.
Locker, [Chest] Locomotion, [Motion from place to place.] Locust. Ex. II. 1.
-- tree. Sh. IV. 6. A.
Lode. [Burden] to -- O. VI. 7.
[Leading] -- star, adj. Pole Directing
Star.] -- stone. St. II. 7.
Lodge. [v. Night] [a. Rest] sp. by night]
[a. Guest] a -- [House (dim.]
Loft, [Upper room] Lofty. [High (augm.] [Proud]
Log. Thick wood] Part of trunk] sp. for Fuel.] -- line, [Way-measuring line]
sp. of Mariners.]


Logarithm. Loggerhead. [Great (corr.) head] [Dull (augm.]
Logic, [adj. a. Reason (art.] -- parts of Discourse. D. IV. chop -- [Dispute
(corr.]
Logistic, [adj. a. Computation (art.] Logwood. Tr. VII. 5. A. Lohoch,
[Medicament to be licked] Loial. Man. V. 6. Loin. PC. IV. 4. Loiter. [a.
Cunctation] [a. Slattering time]
Lolling, [a. Lean (corr.] Lome, [Mortar] London tuft. HS. V. 4. Lone,
[Lending] Lonesome, [Solitary] Long. a. Length] ^. Duration] -- suffering,
Meekness] Patience]
-- time, [Permanent (aug.] to -- a. Desire (augm.] a. Appetite (augm.]

Long Oyster. Ex. VI. 1. A. Longaevity, Long life] Permanence (aug.]
Longitude. [Length] [Distance from first Merid.]
Looby, [Great (corr.) person] Look. [a. Ey] [Face, (State] (Manner] to -- [a.
Ey]

-- about, [a. Heedfulness] -- for, [Expect] -- on, [a. Ey] -- to, a.
Heedfulness] a. Observing]

Looking-glass, [Sight-reflecting (instr.] Loom, [adj. Weaving (jug.] Loop.
Mag. V. 2. A. -- hole, [Chink]
Loose. Not-fixt. Q. VI. 6. D. Not cohibited] Irregular] [Remiss] Negligent]
Careless] [Vicious] -- in one's body. [Diarrhaea.] S. VI. 6. to -- Unty. O. II.
1. O. [Absolve] RE. V. 5. O.

Loose strife. codded -- HS. IV. 3. hooded -- HF. VII. 14. A. purple -- HF.
VII. 15. A. yellow -- HS. V. 12. A.
Looverhole, [Open place in the roof.] Lop, Off-cut branches] Un-branch]
Loquacity. Man. VI. 5. D. Lord. [Baron] RC. I. 3. [Master] TO. III. 7.
Lordan, [Lazy (person] Lorldy. [adj. Lord (like] Proud] Magisterial]
Lordship. [Lord (abstr.] Manor. Po. I. 1. A.
Lose. op. to gain. TA. V. 2. O. op. to hold, [Let go] op. to keep. TA. V. 5.
O. as Garrison. RM. II. 4. D.

Lost. [adj. p. Lose] [adj. p. Destruction]
Lot, [adj. a. Mo. V. 1. (thing] to cast -- s Mo. V. 1.
Loathe, vid. Loathe. Lotion, [Washing] Lottery. Lotus. HS. III. 13. Lovage. HF.
IV. 4. A. Loud, vid. Loud. Love, Affection. AS. V. 3. in -- [adj. Love (augm.]
make -- [a. Suitour] Apple of -- [Charity]
Lovely, [adj. p. Love (apt.] Lour. AC. IV. 2. O. Lout, [adj. Rusticity
(person] to -- AC. IV. 2. O.
Low, [a. Cow (voice] Lowbell, [Bell to Ecstasy Hunt
Birds] Loud, [adj. Sound (augm.] Low. [adj. TM. II. 4. O.] [adj. Inferiority]
Meanness]
[adj. Under-part] [adj. Bottom]
-- water, Shallow w.] Down-tide]
-- sound, [Grave s.]
Lowermost, [Most-lowe] Lowly, [Humble] Lowre. AC. IV. 2. O. Lowse. Ex. I. 8.
-- wort. Hog -- [Sow] Sea -- Ex. II. 11. Wall -- [Punice]
Lowt, vid. Lout. Lozange, [Quadrat whose opposite Angles are equal, but not
right.] Lozell, [Great lumpish (person] Lubber, Lubricity. [Unctuousness]
Lucid, [adj. Light] Luck, Fortune] Event] sp. Prosperous.] Good --
[Prosperity] Ill -- [Adversity]

Lucre, [Gain] Lucubration, [adj. night Study] Work]
Lug, [Ear (corr.] Sad-worm. to -- [Pull]
Luggage. [Burden.] Poss. V. O. [Impediment] T. II. 5. O. [Utensils (corr.]
[Baggage] RM. V. O.
Lugubrious, [adj. Grief] Lukewarm. [Neither hot nor cold] [Temperate]
Lull, [Allure to rest] -- asleep, [a. Sleep]
Lumber, vid. Luggage. Luminary, [adj. a. Light (thing] Lump. TM. VI. 4. --
fish. Fi. II. 6. A.
Lumpish. NP. V. 8. O. Lunar, [adj. Moon] Lunatic, [Mad] sp. monthly] Lunchion,
[Fragment (augm.] Lungs. PG. VI. 2. A. Lungwort. Lupin. HS. III. 1. A.
Everlasting --
Lupus. Fi. IV. 3. -- marinus Schonfeldii. Fi. III. 16.
Lurch, [a. Theft] -- er, [Dog hunting lesser beasts by swiftness.]
Lure. [adj Alluring (thing] [a. Exclaiming]
Lurk. [Lie concealed] [a. Ambush]
Luscious, [Sweet (exc] Lust. Appetite] Desire] sp. of Coition. AC. II. 5.

Lusty, [adj. Vigor.] Luster, [Space of 5 years] Lustration, [Un-prophane] sp.
by Sacrifice.]
Luster, [Brightness] Lute, [Music (instr.) of gutstrings to be struck with
fingers.] to -- Shut by sodering] Join by sodering]

Luxation, [a. Loose] Q. VI. 6. D. Luxury. Man. III. 4. E. Luxuriant, [adj.
Excess] Luxuriousness, [Riotousness.] Man. III. 4. E. Lynx, [Ounce] Be. IV. 3.
Lyra altera Rondeletii. Fi. IV. 5. A* Lyric, [Verse for song.]
M
MAcarone. [Pudding (like) of Almonds, etc.] [Confused Mixture]
Mace. Staff, [Magistracy (sign) club. Spice, [Husk of Nutmeg] Reed -- HL. III.
15.
Maccaph, [Hyphen] D. I. 4. A. Macerate. Infuse] Soke] Pine. Man. II. 2. E.
Machin. Po. VI. 8. Machinate. [a. Machin] Design] Contrive]
Macilent, [Lean] Mackerel. Fi. III. 5. Mad. -- ness. S. IV. 1. A. [Frenzy] S.
IV. 1. [Anger (augm.]
-- wort. HS. VI. 2. A.
Madder. HL. IX. 8. bastard -- HL. IX. 9.
Made. pret. p. Make] adj. p. Make] -- by art, [Factitious] T. III 7. O.

Madrigal, [Song adj. Shepherd.] Maenas. Fi. V. 12. Magazine, [Ammunition
(House] (Room]
Maggot. Ex. III. 1. Be -- Ex. III. 2. Wasp fly -- Ex. III. 3. A.
Magic. [Science of obscure Natural (things] [Witchcraft]
Magisterialness. Man. IV. 8. D. Magistrate. RC. I. 1. Magnanimity. Man. III.
8. Magnet. St. II. 7. Magnify, a. Greatness.] a. Praise (augm.]
Magnificence, [Generosity] Man. III. 4. Magnitude. Mag. Magpy. By. I. 8.
Mahometanism. RE. I. 5. May. [Fissh Month.] -- fly. Ex. IV. 7. A. -- weed. HF.
II. 8. A. [Have Ability] Liberty]

Maid. [Virgin] [Servant (fem.] Fish, [Ray] Fi. II. 3. Mer -- [Man (like)
Fish.] -- en hair. black -- HL. I. 5. A. English black -- HL. I. 7. white --
HL. I. 5.
Majesty, [King (abstr.] Majestic, [adj. King (like] Mail, [Woven (like)
armour] Maim, [a. Mutilation] Main. [Great] -- land, [Continent] -- sea, [Ocean]
-- mast. RN. III. 5. [Principal] -- battle, [Middle b.] -- chance, [Chief
Stock] Concernment]

[Intense] -- strength, [Strength (augm.]
Maintain. Keep TO. VI. 4. [Defend] TO. VI. 5. Justify, [a. Advocate]
Major. [Greater] [Un-adj. p. Pupil (apt.] Sergeant -- [adj. Regiment (Off.)
that gives orders]
Mayor, [Chief Town (Off.] Maiz, [Indian Bread-corn] HL. II. 2. Make. the --
[Figure] to -- a. Cause] a. Efficient] Create] Change into] Invent] Feign]
[Enrich] [Prepare] -- a bed, [Prepare a bed] [Esteem] -- account, [Esteem] --
way, [Prepare way] -- much.
[Esteem much] Indulge] Favor (sign] -- nothing of, [Contemn]
[Sell for] -- money of, [Sell for money.] -- the most, [Sell to the
most-bidder.] -- better, Better (make] Fire (make]
-- fire, Better (make] Fire (make]
-- good. Compensate] Repair] Defend] Hold out] -- his ground. RM. II. 2.
-- have, [Dispatch] -- a league, [League (make] -- out, [Plain (make] --
ready, Prepare] Clothe]
-- reckoning, [Expect] -- as if, [Seem (make] -- sale, [sell] -- show, [Seem
(make] -- shift, [Obtain difficultly] -- a stand, [Stand] -- a stir, [Stir] --
a verse, [a. Verse] -- up, [a. Reconcile] Repair] Perfect]
-- use of, [Use]
Malady, [Disease] Mal-administration. Man. VI. 5. O. Mal^pert. [Ill-tutor'd]
[Irreverent] [Bold (corr.]
Male. -- sex. NP. VI. 2. [Riding-bag] Coat of -- [Woven (like) armour]
Malecontent, [Not-content] Malediction, [Cursing.] AS. I. 3. O. Malefactor.
[adj. a. pret. Evil (person.] [adj. Criminal (person]
Maleficence, [Mischievousness] Malevolence, [Malignity] AS. V. 2. O. Malice,
Malignity sp. old] Hatred sp. old]
Malign. [a. Malignity] [a. Envy]
Malignant fever. S. II. 3. Malignity. AS. V. 2. O. Mall, [Mallet (augm.] to --
[Beat (augm.]
Mallard. [Duck (male] Malleable, [adj. p. Knocking (pot.] Mallet, [Wooden
hammer] -- figure. Mag. VI. 4. A.
Mallow. HF. IX. 6. Marsh -- HF. IX. 7. Shrub -- Sh. V. 4. Tree -- HF. IX. 7.
A. Vervain -- HF. IX. 8.
Malmsey, [Wine of Malvasia] Malt, [adj. p. pret. Fermenting Barley] Mammock.
[Lump] [Fragment]
Man. Kind. W. V. 5. Sex, [Man (male] [Servant (male] If a -- [If any one]
Chess -- [adj. Chess (Instr.] -- of war. RN. I. 6.
Manacles, [Bonds for the hands.] Manage, [a. Business] Using] Governing]
Manchet, [Bread of Flowr.] Manciple, [Buying (Off.) of Victual (things.]
Mandate, [Command] sp. Sent.]
Mandible, [Bone of the jaw.] Mandilion, [Loose upper vest] Mandrake. HS. IX.
4. A. Mane. PP. VI. 4. A. Manner, vid. Manner. Manfull, adj. Manhood] Stout]
Mange, [Itch] Manger, [Horses provender (vess.] Mangy, [adj. Itch] Mangle.
[Mutilate] [a. Fragment (segr.]
Manhood. [Valour] Age. Mea. VI. 3.
Many, [adj. Multitude] Manifest. TA. I. 9. Manifesto, [Public Declaration]
Manifold, [adj. Multitude (kind] Manly. [Man (like] [Stout] [adj. Fortitude]
Manna. El. III. 6. Manna sold in shops, [Concrete Exudation from the wild
Ash.] Manner. [Mode.] T. V. In a -- Almost] Thereabout]
in some -- [adv. some] of what -- [What manner]
[Quality] [State] [Custom]
Mannerly, [adj. Civility] Respect]
Manners. [Civility] [Respect]
Mannish. [Man (like] [Familiar (apt.) with man]
Mansion. Staying (place] Dwelling (place] [House]
Manslaughter, [Man-killing] Mantel, [Beam of Chimney] Mantle. [Garment to cast
about one] [Upper loose vest] to -- [a. Froth]
Mantis. Ex. II. 1. A. Manual. [adj. Hand] [Book (dim.]
Manucodiota. Py (kind) Manuduction, [Leading] Manufacture, [adj. p. Mechanic
(thing] Manumise. [Un-villain] [Un-slave]
Manuring. [Agriculture] O. III. Soiling. O. III. 3.
Manuscript, [Written Book) Map, [Picture of Country] Maple. Tr. VI. 6. Mar,
vid. Mar. Marble. St. II. 1. March. [Third Month] to -- [Travel] sp. as
Soldier.] -- es, [adj. Margin country]
Merchant, vid. Merchant. Marchasite.* St. I. 3. A. Marchioness, [Marquess
(fem.] Marchpane, [adj. Pr. II. Bread] Mare, [Horse (fem.] Night -- [Ephialtes]
S. IV. 2. A.
Margin. Sp. III. 4. A. Mary, vid. Marry. Marigold. HF. II. 2. African -- HF.
II. 7. Gorn -- HF. II. 6. marsh -- HL. VI. 4. A.
Marine, [adj. Sea] Mariner. Navigator. RC. II. 8. [Seaman] RN. V.
Marjoram. HF. VII. 4. Goats -- HF. VI. 3. A. wild -- HF. VII. 4. A.
Marish. Po. I. 8. A. Maritim, [adj. Sea] Mark. [Sign] Brand, [Stigmatization
(sign] Boundary, [Margin (sign] Goal, [adj. p. Object (place] (thing]

Weight, [8 Ounces] Money, [13 s. -- 4 d.] to -- [a. Sign] [Stigmatize]
[Observe]


Market, [a. Merchant] -- place, [adj. Merchant (place]
Marl, [Chalky clay for manuring] Marlin. Marmalet. [adj. Pr. II. (thing) of
boiled Quince.] Marmosit, [Monkey (dim.] Marmotto. Be. III. 4. A. Marquess.
[adj. Limit (Off.] [Next the highest Noble. man.]
Marring. TM. I. 9. D. Marry. RE. IV. 6. -- ed. TO. II. 4.
Marrow. PG. I. 8. A. Mars. W. II. 5. Marshal. Provost -- RC. I. 6. A. to --
[a. Order]
Mart, [Convention for Merchandise] Letters of -- [Licence of naval prepation]
Martagon. HL. IV. 2. A. Martern, [Fur of Marten] Martial, [adj. War. RM.]
Martin. Be. IV. 6. By. V. 2. sand -- By. V. 2. A.
Martingal, [Horse (arm.) down-holding head] Martlet, [Swift] By. V. 1. A.
Martyr. RE. III. 4. Martyrology, [History of Martyrs.] Marvel, vid. Mervail.
Mascarade, [Antic dance of disguised (persons] Masculine, [adj. Male] Mash,
[Mixture] sp. of moist consistence] sp. made by Mastication.]

Mask, [Dance of disguised (persons.] -- for face, [adj. Conceal vest for face]
Mason, [adj. Stone Wall (mech.]
Mass. Great Body] Total Body] [Lump] [Eucharist]
Massacre, Promiscuous killing General killing]
Massy. [adj. Mass] [Weighty] Q. V. 4. [adj. Ma^siness] -- ness. Mag. VI. 1. D.

Mast. Fruit. PP. III. 4. -- of ship. RN. III. 1. Fore -- RN. III. 4. A. Main
-- RN. III. 5. Middle -- RN. III. 5. A. Top --

Master. [adj. Authority (person] Power (person] -- of servant. TO. III. 7. --
of family. TO. III. 5. -- of a ship. RN. V. 4.

[Teacher] TO. III. 3. -- of arts, [Graduate in the arts]
[Chief] -- beam, Principal b.] -- piece, Principal p.]
to -- [Get the power over] [Conquer] [Cohibit] [Govern]

Masterless, Disobedient] Licencious]
Masterly, [Magisterial] Masterwort. HF. IV. 5. A. Mastic, [Gum of the
Mastic-tree] -- tree. Tr. III. 8.
Mastication. Mo. III. 5. Mastive, [Dog kept for watch] Mat, [Woven (thing) of
Rushes] Straw] -- weed. HL. III. 4.

Match. [Equal] [Companion] Contract] Paction] [Marriage]
[adj. p. Brimstone (instr.) for a. fire.] -- for Gun. RM. V. 7.
Mate. [Companion] [Married] [Conquest]

Material. [adj. Matter] [Pertinent] [Important]
Maternal, [adj. Mother] Mathematic, [Quantity (Science] Matriculate. [a.
Catalogue] [Admit into University]
Matrimony, [Marriage] RE. IV. 6. Matrix, [Womb] PG. VI. 9. Matron. Married
Grave (fem.] [Housholder (fem.]
Matter. Material cause. T. II. 7. Subject] Object] Thing] Business] makes no
-- [Is not important] [Bloud rotted in the flesh]
Mattins, [Morning worship] Mattock, [adj. Mallet (fig.) pecking (instr.]
Mattress, [Bed stiffen'd with sowing (augm.] Maturity, Ripeness] Perfection]
Maugre. [In enmity of] [adv. Coaction]
Mavis, [Thrush] By. III. 3. A. Maukin. [adj. Man (like) engine] [Oven-sweeping
(instr.]
Maul, vid. Mall. Maund, [Basket] Maunder, [Grudging (voice] Maw, [Stomach] PG.
VI. 4. Maxim, [Rule] Maze. [Extasie] Structure full of perplex Windings]
Turnings
Place full of perplex Windings Turnings]

Mazer, [Cup (augm] Me, [ I accusat.] Mead. [Medow] [Wine of honey]
Meagre, [Lean] Meal. [Ground corn] Eating. Pr. I. 1. -- worm. Ex. I. 5. A.
Mean. [adj. Mediocrity] [Low] adj. Ha. II. 5. O. Plebeian, [adj. People
(kinde] a -- [Mediator] [Between -- space] -- among sounds. Q. III. 1. -- s. T.
II. 6. A. [Riches]

-- ing. Signification. D. II. A. [Purpose]

Measure. Proper. Mea. -- of Magnitude. Mea. I. -- of Number. Mea. II. -- of
Gravity. Mea III. -- of Valor. Mea. IV. -- of Time. Mea. V. [Moderation]

Meash, [Hole.] Meat. [Sustentation] [p. Eating (thing] Sweet -- s Pr. II.
White -- s [Meats of milk]

Meazles. S. II. 4. A. Mechanic. -- work. O. I. -- profession. RC. II. 5. A.
Mechoacan. Medal. [Ancient money] [Money (like]
Meddle. [Mingle] Action] Business] [a. Diligence (corr.] -- with, [a. Object.]
Mediastine. PG. V. 3. A. Mediateness. TM. IV. 2. O. Mediator. RJ. I. 2. A.
Medicine, [adj. a. Medicating (thing] Mediocrity. TM. I. 2. Meditate. AS. II.
1. A. Meddle, vid. Meddle. Medley, [Mixture] Medler. Tr. I. 5. Meadow. Po. I. 4.
A. -- sweet. HF. IV. 8. A.
Me, [ I accusat.] Meed, Earning] Reward]
Meekness. Man. I. 9. Mere. [Simple] [Lake (augm.] [Limit (sign]
Meet. [Congruous] [Expedient] to -- Come together. TA. VI. 7.
[a. Convention] -- with, [Compensate.]
Meeter. D. III. 5. Megrim. Melancholy. Humor. PG. I. 7. A. [Grief] sp.
(Habit]
Melanurus. Fi. V. 5. Meldew, [Honey-dew] Melilot. HS. III. 10. Mellifluous,
[Sweet] Mellow, [Ripe (augm.] Melody, [Harmony] Melon. HS. VII. 1. A. Melt,
[Dissolve] O. VI. 2. Member. [Limb] [Part]
Membrane. PG. II. 3. A. Memorable, [adj. p. Memory (apt.] Memorandum, [adj. p.
ought memory (thing] Memory. NP. II. 3. Memorial, [adj. a. Memory (sign]
Menace, [Threaten.] Mend. [Repair] [Better] TM. I. 9. E.

Mendacity, [Lyingness] Mendicant, [Begging] Menial, [Domestic] Menstruum. PG
I. 4. A. Meant, vid. Mint. Mental, [adj. Mind] Mention. [of-speaking] [a.
Express]
Mercenary, [adj. p. Hire (person,] Mercer, [adj. Silk Pr. IV. 3. (merc.]
Merchandise, [adj. p. Merchant (thing] Merchant. Profession. RC. II. 5. --
ship. RN. I. 5.
Mercy. Man. I. 5. Mercury. Planet. W. II. 6. Metal. Met. III. 1. Herb. HF. I.
6. childing -- HF. I. 6. A. Dogs -- HF. I. 7. English -- HF. I. 8.
Mercurial. [adj. Mercury] Nimble] Sprightly]

Meridian. W. VI. 4. Meridional, [adj. South] Merit. [Earning] [Worthy (thing]
Merlin, [Hawk for Finches] Mermaid. Mermaids head. Ex. VIII. 2. A. Merry,
[adj. Mirth] Urbanity]
Mervail, [a. Admiration] -- of Peru. HS. VII. 8.
Merula. -- montana. By. III. 7. A. -- saxatilis. By. III. 4. -- torquata. By.
III. 7.
Mes, vid. Mess. Mesentery. PG. VI. 6. Mesh, [Hole] Meslin, [Mingled corn]
Mess, [Proportioned part] sp. of Meat.]
Message, [Word sent] Messenger, [Sent (person] (Off.]

Messiah, [Anointed (person] Message. [House] [Farm]
Metal. Met. Natural -- Met. I. Factitious -- Met. II. Imperfect -- Met. III.
Metamorphosis, [Altering] sp. of kinde] Metaphor. Metaphysic, [Science of
Transcendents.] Mete, [Measure] Metempsychosis. Meteor. El. A. Metheglin, [Wine
of honey] Method, [Order] Metonymy. Metrical, [adj. Moeter.] Metropolitan.
[adj. Principal] [Primate]
Mew. By. IX. 9. Mezereon. Sh. II. 10. My. Mich. [a. Absent] [a. Conceal] [a.
Penuriousness]
Microcosm, [World (dim.] Microscope, [Glass for seeing little (things] Mid.
[Middle] Middle. Sp. III. 3. Mid^if. PG. VI. 3. Midwife, [Parturition (Off.]
(mech.]
Might, Strength] Power] (Mod. Cond.) -- y, [adj. Strength Power
(aug.]


Milch, [adj. a. Milk] Mildness. [Gentleness] Meekness] Graciousness] Clemency]
[Not-austereness]
Mile. Mea. I. 7. Military Relation. RM. Persons Segregate. RM. III. Aggregate.
RM. IV.
Action. RM. I. Events. RM. II. Ammunition. RM. V. Places. RM. VI.
Militia. [RM. (thing] Milk. PG. I. 3. A. -- wort. HS. III. 11.
Mill. Po. VI. 9. Millefoil. HF. II. 12. water -- HF. V. 13. horned -- HL. IX.
7. A.
Millers-thumb. Fi. IX. 12. Millet. HL. II. 6. A. Indian -- HL. II. 6.
Million, [1000000] Milt, [Spleen] PP. IV. 5. A. -- wort, [Spleenwort] HL. I 7.
A. Sperme of male fishes. PP. IV. 8.
Milter, [Fish (male] Mimic. [adj. Player] [adj. a. imitate] sp. with gesture
(corr.]

Mince. Pr. III. 6. A. -- ing Wanton (dim.) gate Conceited gesture (mode]
Mind. [Soul] W. I. 6. Rational -- NP. I. [Understanding] [Thought] sp. (freq.]
[Opinion] [Observing] [a. Heedfulness]
cast in one's -- [Consider]
[Will] [Inclination] [Velleity] [Purpose] fully -- ed, [adj. pret. Resolution]
high -- ed, [Proud] ill -- ed, Ill-purposing] adj. Malignity]

well -- ed, [Well affectioned] set one's -- [a. Purpose]

Sensitive internal. [Fancy] [Memory] call to -- [a. Memory] put in -- [a.
Memory (make]
[Appetite] [Desire] have a -- to, [a. Desire.]


Mindful. [adj. Memory] Mine. [adj. I] [Metal (place] [Face (manner] to -- RM.
I. 5.
Mineral. W. V. 1. Minew, vid. Minnow. Mingle, [a. Mixture] Minion. [Love
(augm.] [Ordnance (kind]
Minister. [Servant] [Clergyman] [Presbyter] to -- [Serve] [a. Adjuvant] [Give
to]
Miniver, [Fur of Squirrels Weasels
bellies. Minks, [adj. Conceitedness (fem] Minnow. Fi. IX. 13. Minority, [Age
Pupillary] Not-virile]

Minster, [Monks College] [Monks House]

Minstrel, [adj. Music (mech.] Mint. Herb. HF. VII. 1. Cat -- HF. VII. 1. A.
[Place of a. Money (mech.] to -- [a. Money (make] [a. Fiction]
Minute. [Small (dim.] -- of time. Mea. V. 8. A.
Miracle. Mire, [Durt] Quag -- [Bog]
Mirobalan. Tr. II. 5. Mirror. [Looking-glass] [adj. Excelling (thing]
Mirth. AS. V. 4. Mis, vid. Miss. Misadventure. [Fortune (corr.] [Adversity]
Misapply, [Apply (corr.] Misbecome, [Indecent] Misbegot, [Begot not in
marriage] Misbehave, [Demeanor (corr.] Misbelief, [Belief (corr.] Miscall,
[Name (corr.] Miscarry. TA. III. 7. -- with child, [a. Abortion]
Miscellany, [adj. Mixture] Mischance. Event (corr.] adj. Adversity (thing]
[Abortion]
Mischief. [a. Mischievousness] [Hurt]
Mischievousness. Man. I. 4. D. Misconstrue. [Understand (corr.] [Interpret
(corr.]
Miscreant. [Believer (corr.] [Heretic] [Unholy (person]
Misdeed, [Ill deed] Misdemeanour, [Demeanour (corr.] Misdoing, [Action
(corr..] Misdoubt. [Suspect] [Distrust]
Miser, [Penurious (person] Misery. Ha. I. 1. O. Misfortune. [Fortune (corr.]
[a. Adversity]
Misgive, [Doubt (make] Misgovern, [Govern (corr.] M^shap. [Fortune (corr.] [a.
Adversity]
Misinterpret, Understand Interpret
(corr.] Mislead. [Lead (corr.] [Seduce]
Mislike, [Disapprove] Misname, [Name wrong] [Name (corr.]

Misplace, [Place wrong] (corr.]

Misprision, [Suspition] Misreckon, [Reckon (corr.] Miss. [Err] [Omit] [Want]
[Discover want]
Missal, [Mass-book] Misshapen. [Figur'd (corr.] [Deformed]
Mission, [Sending] Missive, [Sent (thing] Mispend, [Spend (corr.] Mist. El.
III. 2. A. Mistake. Wrong] Errour] [Opinion (corr.]
Mistle-thrush. By. III. 3. Mistleto. Sh. III. 12. A. Mistress. [Master (fem.]
[Suitor'd (fem.]
Mistrust. [Doubt] [Distrust] [Suspition]
Misuse, [Use (corr.] Mite. Insect. Ex. II. 7. Money.
Miter, [adj. Bishop (sign) head vest.] Mitigate. [Diminish] [a. Remills]
[Un-anger]
Mittens, [Woollen hand (vest] Mix, [a. Mixture] Mixen. [Dunghill] [Heap of
Dung]
Mixture. T. III. 8. O. Mizen-mast. RN. III. 3. A. Mizzle. El. VI. 2. Mobility.
[Motion (abstr.] [Unconstancy]
Mock. Scoff. RJ. IV. 9. A. [Deceive]
Mode of thing. T. VI. Model. [Description by lines) [Example (dim.] [Epitome]
Moderation. [a Mediocrity] -- in opinions. Ha. III. 4. -- in recreations, Man.
II. 5. Govern] Cohibit]
Moderator, [Judge] Modern, [New] Modesty. -- about disgraces. Man. III. 7. --
about honors. Man. III. 9.
Modicum, [Little] Modulation, [Warbling] Moil. [Operation (augm.] [a.
Defilement]
Moistness. Q. V. 3. Moity, [Half] Mold, vid. Mould. Mole. [Bank factitious]
[Spot] Beast. Be. III. 8. Fish. Fi. II. 6.
Molest, [Troubling] TA. V. 9. O. Indian Molle. Tr. III. 10. A.
Mollify, [a. Soft] Molten Melted] Cast]
Moly. HL. IV. 11. A. Moment. -- of time, [Instant] [Importance]
Monarch, [Sole King] Monastery, [Monk's College] [Monk's House]

Monastical, [adj. Monk] Moan, [Grief (sign] [Grief (voice]

Money. Mea. IV. A. -- wort. HL. VI. 11. A.
Month. Mea. V. 4. Mongrel. [Of mingled extraction] [Spurious]
Monition [Warning] Monk. RE. II. 7. Monky. Be. IV. 4. A. Monoceros Clusii. Fi.
IV. 10. A. Monopoly Privilege of sole Appropriated
selling] Monosyllable, [Of one syllable] Monster, [Beside-natural (thing]
Month. Mea. V. 4. Monument. [adj. a. Memory (sign] [Tomb]
Mood. [Manner] T. VI. [Disposition]
Moon. Planet. W. II. 8. New -- [ -- Beginning her monthly course] appearing
-- [ -- (like) Meteor.] -- wort. HL. I. 9. Half -- Fortification. RM. VI. 5.

Moor. Man, [Tawny man] Land. Po. I. 9. -- hen. By. VIII. 9. to -- a ship.
Moot, [Discourse on Law-case.] Moral, [adj. Manners] -- Philosophy, [Ph.
concerning manners.] a -- [Signification belonging to manners]
Moralize, [Apply to manners] More. [Superiour] Adv. II. 2. -- over, [Also]
Morfew, [Disease of Scurf on the skin] Morgage. RC. VI. 7. Mormylus. Fi. V. 3.
A. Morning. Mea. V. 7. Moroseness. Man. IV. 7. D. Morris, [a. Moor's dance]
Morrow. [Day Next after] following]
Good -- [adj. Morning salutation.]
Morse. Be. V. 3. Morsel, [Fragment] sp. off-bitten.] Mortal. [adj. Dying
(pot.] [adj. a. Dying (apt.] [Capital] -- ity. [Dying (pot.] [Dying (apt.]
[Killing infection]
Mortar. For building. El. IV. 4. A. [adj. Contusion (vess.]
Mortify. [a. Death] [a. Repentance]
Mortiss, [Hole in beam.] sp. in side of it.] Mortmain. Mortuary, [Payment for
the dead.] Mosaic work. Mosque, [Temple] sp. of Mahometans.] Moss. HL. I. 3.
Most. Adv. II. 2. A. for the -- part, [adv. Most]
[Chiefly]
Mote. [Ditch (augm.] Atom, [Powder (dim.]
Moth, Ex. II. 8. Ex. IV. 9. A. -- mullein. HS. VIII. 4. A.

Mother. [Parent (fem.] -- tongue, [Language of one's own nation] -- of pearl.
Ex. VIII. 3.
[Womb] PG. VI. 9. [Disease] S. VI. 7. -- wort. HF. VII. 13.
[Sediment]
Motion. [Locomotion] Mo. -- of Animals Progressive. Mo. I. -- of the parts of
Animals. Mo. III. Violent -- Mo. VI.
[Inclination] AS. IV. 1.
Motive. [adj. Move (apt.] [Impulsive]
Motley, [Variegated] Motto, [Appropriated sentence] D. III. 1. A. Move. [a.
Motion] -- the brows. AC. IV. 1. A. the head. AC. IV. 4. A.
[Offer] TA. IV. 2. [a. Impulsive] [Persuade] [Allure] [Angry (make]
Moveable, [adj. p. Motion (pot.] (apt.] -- s, [Utensils]

Mould. [Earth] [Type] sp. convex] Casting (vess. of melted bodies] Figuring
(vess. of melted bodies] -- of the head, [Dent of the upper part of the head]
to -- a. Knead] a. Type]

Moulder. [p. Powder by putrefaction] -- away, [Decay]
Mouldiness. HL. I. 1. A. [Mustiness] [Down (like) rottenness]
Moulter, [Un-feathered (make] Mound. [Sepiment] [Bank] [Rampire]
Mount. [Mountain] [Factitious hill] to -- [Ascend] -- a horse, [Ascend upon a
horse] ill -- -- ed [Riding on horse (perf.] well- -- ed [Riding on horse
(corr.] -- a cannon, [Lift a cannon to his carriage]
Mountain. W. III. 1. E. Mountebank. Wandering Physician] Juggling Physician]
Mourn. [Shew grief] [Grief (sign) sp. with (voice] in -- ing, [adj. p. Vest
adv. grief (sign]
Mouse. Be. III. 7. A. Dor -- [adj. a. sleep (apt.) Mouse (kind] Field -- [Long
snouted venomous mouse (kind] Flitter -- [Bat] -- ear. HF. III. 13. A. -- tail.
HL. III. 16. codded -- HS. IV. 12. A.
Mouth. Proper. PG. III. 3. -- full, [adj. Mouth capacity] foul -- 'd.
[Speaking (apt) indecent (things] [Reviling (apt.]

mealy -- 'd, [not- adj. reproof (apt.] Orifice [Mouth (like] [Entry] to -- [a.
Reviling]
Mouthy, [adj. Reviling (apt.] Mow. [Heap] sp. of Corn.] [Mock] sp. with face
(manner]
Mow, [Reap] Mue. [a. Imprisonment] -- feathers, [Let go f.]

Much. Great] Many] as -- [Equal] for so -- as Conj. IV. 1. make -- of, [a.
Courtesy (augm.] too -- [Excessive] very -- [Abundant] [Transc. (augm.]
(intens.]

Mucilaginous, [Slimy] Muck. Mucus. Dung] Snivel] [Excrement]
Mucketer, [adj. Wiping (thing] Mud, [Macerated durt] Muff, [Tube for warming
the hands] Muffle, [Conceal (vest) sp. face] Muffler, [Mouth (vest] Muf^y,
[Mahometan chief Primate] Mug, [Pot for drink] Mugwort. HF. II. 11. A.
Mulberry. Tr. III. 1. Mule. Be. I. 2. A. -- fearne. HL. I. 8.
Muletier, [adj. Mule (Off.] Mullein. HS. VIII. 4. moth -- HS. VIII. 4. A. Sage
-- Sh. VI. 4. A.
Mullet. Fi. IV. 6. English -- Fi. IV. 3. A. Lesser -- Fi. IV. 6. A.
Mult. RJ. VI. 7. Multifarious, [Many (kind] Multifidous beasts. -- of the
biggest sort. Be. III. -- of the middle sort. Be. IV. -- of the least sort. Be
V.
Multiply. a. Many] Increase] [a. Multiplier]
Multiplicity, [Variety] Multiplier. TM. VI. 8. Multitude. TM. III. 1. Mum.
[Beer in which husks of Walnuts are infused] [st'] Interj. III. 1. O. -- ing,
[Dance of Silents] -- ing, [Dance of Disgui^ed]
Mumble. [Mastication (corr.] Voice confusedly] Speak confusedly]
Mummy, [Gum (like) embalmed flesh] sp. of Man] Mump, [Move (corr.) the mouth]
Mumps, [Disease swelling of the chaps] Monday, [Second day of the week]
Mundane, [adj. World] Municipal, [adj. City] Corporation]

Munificence, [Liberality] sp. in gifts]
Muniment, [Deed] RJ. VI. 5. Munition. [Fortification] [Ammunition]
Muraena. Fi. VI. 1. Mural, [adj. Wall] Murder. RJ. III. 4. Murex. Ex. VII. 2.
Murmur, Grudging Discontent Indignation
sp. (voice] Murr, [Disease of hoarseness through cold distillation] Murrain,
Disease infectious Plague
of (beasts] Murry, Dark red] Rust colour]
Murrion, [Head (armor.] Murder. RJ. III. 5. Muscle. PG. II. 6. A. Fish. Ex.
VIII. 7. A.
Musculous, [adj. Muscle] Muse. [a. Verse (art.] [Feign'd Goddess of verse (art]
[Hole through hedge] to -- [Meditate]
Mushrom. HL. I. 1. Music. Sound. Mo. V. 7. A. [Harmony] Art. Mo. V. 7. A.
(art.)
Musk, [Sweet (thing) of Muskcat] -- cat. Herb.
Muskadell. Musket. Hawk, [Sparhawk (male] Gun, [Footman's gun (augm.]
Mussle, vid. Muscle. Must. Mood of Necessity [Determination] AS. IV. 8.
[Necessity] T. V. 7. [Wine not yet fermented]
Mustaches, [Upper beard] Mustard. Common. HS. IV. 9. [Sauce of Mustard]
Tower -- HS. IV. 12. Yellow Arabian -- HS. IV. 13. A.
Muster. [adj. a. Number] [Catalogue] adj. a. TM. III. 7. O.
Mustiness. Q. IV. 7. Mutable. [adj. Alter (apt] [Light] Ha. IV. 7. D.
Muteness. AC. III. 1. O. Muting, [Dunging] Mutilous, NP. V. 1. O. Mutiny,
[Sedition] Mutter, [Speak indistinctly] confusedly] grudgingly]
Mutton, [Flesh of sheep] Mutual, [Reciprocal] Muzzle. [Bonds of mouth] [a.
Silence (make]
Myriad, [10000] Myrrh. Tr. VIII 1. Myrtle. Sh. III. 11. -- Symach. Sh. III.
11. A.
Mystery. Obscure (thing] Concealed (thing] [Trade]
Mythology, [Interpretation of feigned Narrations.
N.
NAdir, [Under- adj. Horizon pole] Nag, [Gelded horse (dim.] Nay, [Not] say --
[Deny]
Nail. -- of Animal. PP. VI. 5. A. Iron pin to be driven in by knocking] Brass
pin to be driven in by knocking]

Naked, Not- clothed Un- covered
Name. Word. T. I. 4. -- ly, Conj. IV. 3. nick -- [Name (corr.] [Reputation]
Nap. [Tufted superficies] [Sleep (fit]
Nape, [Hinder part of the neck] Naphew. HS. IV. 4. A. Naphtha. St. V. 5. A.
Napkin, [Linen for wiping] Nappy. Narciss, [Daffadil] HL. IV. 4. Narcotic.
[adj. a. Sleep] [adj. A. Stupor]
Nard. Narration. D. V. 3. Narrow. op. to Ample, [adj. Sp. II. 5. O.] op. to
Broad, [adj. TM. II. 2. O] -- ly, [adv. Heedfulness]
Nastiness, [Slovenliness (augm.] Nation. RC. III. 1. Native, [adj. Birth]
Nativity. [Birth] [Birth (time]
Natural. [adj. T. III. 7.] -- ly, [adv. Spontaneity] -- power. NP. -- fool,
[adj. Idiot (person]
Naturalist, [adj. Nature (artist] Naturalize, [a. Nation] Nature. [Natural
(abstr.] Law of -- RC. IV. 1.
[Temper of Mind] Body]
[Disposition]
Naval, [adj. Ship.] Nave. -- of a Church, [Greatest Temple (room] -- of cart,
etc. Po. V. 7.
Navel. PG. IV. 6. A. -- wort. HL. VIII. 6. Sea -- HL. I. 11. A.
Navew. HS. IV. 4. A. Naught. [Nothing] come to -- [Be annihilated] set at --
[Contemn] [Evil] -- for, [Hurtful to.]
Navy. [Ships (aggr.] [Army of ships]
Navigation, [Sailing] Nauseate. [a. AS. V. I. O.] Nauseousness, [Lothing] NP.
II. 4. O. Nautic, [adj. Ship.] Nautilus. Ex. VII. 1. Neap-tide, [Shallowest
tide] Neast, vid. Nest. Neat. Beast. Be. II. 1. [adj. Neatness] -- ness.
[Pureness] [Cleanliness] [Decentness (augm] [Ornateness]
Neb, [Tooth] Mag. IV. 2. Nebulous, [adj. Mist.] Necessary, [adj. Necessity]
Necessity. Proper. T. V. 7. [Want] [Poverty] [Determination]

Necessitous, [Needy] Neck. PG. IV. 1. -- of land, [Isthmus]
Necromancy, [Witchcraft by the dead] Nectar, [Drink of the feigned Gods]
Nectarine. Tr. II. 1. A. Niece, [Nephew (fem.] Need, [Want] sp. of necessaries]
must -- s, [Must (augm.]
Needfulness. [Necessity] [Expedience]
Neediness, [Poverty] Needle, [Sowing* pin] -- fish. Fi. III. 13. (p. Magnet]
Mariners -- [adj. iron pin. adj. Shepherds -- [Venus combe] HF. I. 5. A.
Needless, [Abundant] Near. adj. neerness] adv. neerness] well -- [Almost]
[Beside] -- ness. Nighness. Sp. II. 3. [Frugality] [Penuriousness]

Neeze, [Sneez] Neezing-wort, [White Hellebore] HL. VII. 1. Nefarious, [Vicious
(augm.] Negation. D. VI. 2. O. Neglect, [a. Negligence] Omission] Contemning]
Negligence. Ha. IV. 5. D. Negotiate. [a. Business] [a. Commerce]
Negro, [Black man] Neigh, [a. Horse (voice] Neighbor. TO. IV. 3. [Neer] sp.
dwelling]
Neither. [None of the two] [Nor]
Neophyte, [New Disciple] Neoter^o, New [adj. Sp. I. 3. O. Nep, [Cat-mint]
Nephew. TO. I. 3. O. Nerites. Ex. VII. 4. A. Nerve. PG. II. 5. Nest, [Room sp.
of bird] [Bed sp. of bird]
Nestling, [Bird (young) taken out of the nest] Net, [Squares (plain) of the
thred] sp. for hunting]
Nether. [More-low] [Inferiour] -- most, [Most low]
N^^^le. MF. I. 14. dead -- [Archangel] HF. VII. 11 -- tree, [Lotus] Tr. III.
4. Sea -- Ex. IX. 6. A.
Never. Sp. I. 9. O. -- so much, [How much soever] -- the less. Conj. II. 2. O.
Neuter, [Of no Faction]. Neutrality. [Slightness] Ha. III. 4. E. [Being of no
Faction]
New. Sp. I. 3. -- of the Moon, [Beginning of Moon's monthly course] -- s,
[New Narration]
Newt, [Lizard] Be. VI. 5. Next. [Most ^sar] [Preceding] [Following]
[Immediate]
Nibble, [Gnaw (dim.] Niceness. op. to Hardiness. NP. IV. 7. O.
Over-cleanliness. Man. II. 6. E.
Niche, [Dent] Nick, [Notch] -- name, [Name (corr.) sp. adj. Contempt] in the
-- [In the instant of time (perf.] to --
Niess, [Hawk] Nigella. HS. V. 13. A. Niggard, [Penurious (person] Nigh, [Near]
Night. Mea. V. 6. O. -- crow. -- mare, [Ephialtes] -- shade. HS. IX. 4.
Enchanters -- HF. VIII. 3. A.
Nightingale. By. V. 3. Nightly, [adj. Night (segr.] Nilling. NP. I. 4. O. AS.
IV. O.
Nim, [a. Theft (dim.] Nimbleness, [Agility] NP. V. 8. Nimis, [Excess] Nine.
Mea. II. 9. -- ty. -- hundred, etc.
Ninny, [Fool] Nip. [Pinch between the tops of the fingers] [Bite (dim.] [Mock
(dim.]
Nipple, [Protuberance (dim.) of Dug.] -- wort. HF. III. 14. A.
Nit, [Egg of Louse] Nitre. St. V. 1. A. No. [None] [adj. Nothing] [Not any]
-- body, [No man] -- where, [Sp. II. 8. O.] [Not]
Nobility, [Lord (abstr.] Noble, adj. Lord. RC. I. 3. Money [6 s. -- 8 d.]
Nocent, Guilty] Hurtful]
Nock, [Notch] Nocturnal, [adj. Night] Nod, [Move the head] AC. IV. 4. A.
Noddy, [Fool] Noddle, [Hinder part of the head] Node. [Protuberance] [Tumour]
Noggin, [Pot (augm.) for drink.] Noise. [Sound (augm.] [Rumour (augm.]
Noisome. [Hurtful] [adj. Molesting (apt.]
Nolleity. AS. IV. 2. O. Nomenclator. [Teacher of Names] [Dictionary]
Nominate. [a. Name] [Appoint]
Nonage, [Pupillary age] Nonce, [Purpose] None, [adj. Nothing] Nones, [Days of
the month next after the first] Nonplus, [Posing] D. VI. 8. Non-resident, [Not
dwelling] Nonsuch, [Campion] Nonsuited, [adj. p. Desist plaintiffing] Nook,
[Angle] Noon, [Mid-day] Nooze, [Loop] sp. of snare] Nope, [Bulfinch] By. IV. 5.
Nor. Conj. I. 2. O. North. Sp. III. 2. Nose. PG. III. 3. A. Nosegay, [Flowers
(aggr.] Nosthril, [Hole of the nose] Not. Adv. I. 1. O. -- withstanding. Conj.
II. 2. O. if -- [Unless] to --
-- Sheep.
Notable. [Extraordinary] [Excellent]
Notary. RJ. I. 5. Notation, [Derivation of word.] Notch. Mag. IV. 2. O. Note.
[Sign] [Character] [Comment (dim.] Tone. Q. III. 5.
[Extraordinariness] of -- [Extraordinary] to -- [Observe]

Nothing. T. I. 1. O. Notice. Knowledge] Warning] give -- Known (make] Warn]
take -- Observe] Show to know]

Notify, Known (make] Warn]
Notion. T. I. 3. Notorious. [Extraordinary] [Manifest] [Publicly known]
Novacula Fi. III. 15. A. Novel, [New] a -- [New narration]
Novelty, [Newness] November, [Eleventh moneth] Naught, vid. Naught. Novice.
[New Disciple] [Not-expert]
Noun. [Name] [Integral]
Nourish. [Nutrition] AC. I. 6. [Feeding]
Now, [At this time] -- a days, [In these times] -- and then, [At some times]
Noxious, [Hurtful] Nuisance, [Hurtful (thing] Nullity, [Frustration] Number.
Mea. II. A. Numerous, [adj. Multitude] Numness. Impotence. NP. III. 5. O.
Disease. S. IV. 6. A.
Nun, [Monke (fem.] ^ird, [Titmouse]
Nunchion, [Refection in the afternoon] Nuncupative, [Spoken] Nuptial, [adj.
Marriage] Nurse. TO. III. 2. (fem.) -- child. TO. III. 2. O.
Nursery. [Children (aggr.] [Young trees (aggr.]
Nuisance, [Hurtful (thing] Nut. Fruit. PP. III. 3. Bladder -- Tr. IV. 5. Chest
-- Tr. IV. 4. earth -- HF. V. 10.
Fistic -- [Pistach] Tr. IV. 2. Hazle -- Tr. IV. 3. A. Small -- Tr. IV. 3. A.
Wall -- Tr. IV. 1. -- cracker, [Nut-breaking (jug.] -- of a bow, [Retaining
(jug.) of the string.] -- of the thigh, [Fat Glandule of the -- ]
Nut-hatch. By. I. 9. A. Nutmeg, [Fruit of the Nutmegtree.] -- tree. Tr. IV. 6.
A.
Nutriment, [adj. Nourishing (thing.] Nutrition. AC. I. 6. Nymph, [Feign'd
Goddess of Woods.] Rivers, etc.]

O
OAr. -- of ship. RN. III. 3. -- of metal, [Crude m.]
Oath. RC. VI. 4. Oats. HL. II. 4. Obdurate. [Hard] [Impenitent]
Obedience. Man. V. 7. Obey, [a. Obedience] Obelisk, [Round Pyramid] Object. T.
VI. 2. Objection. D. VI. 5. Obit, [Funeral solemnity] Oblation. RE. VI. 2.
Obligation. RC. VI. Written RC. VI. 5.
Oblique. Ma. II. 8. Obliterate, [Un-write] Oblivion, [Forgetfulness] Oblong,
[More long than broad] Obloquy, [Reproch] Obnoxious, [adj. p. Object (apt.]
Obnubilate. [a. Cloud] [Darken]
Obscene, [Unchast] Obscure. [Dark] op. to Plain. D. III. 9. Plebeian, [adj.
People (kind]
Obsecration, [Intreating (augm.] Obsequies, [Solemnity of burial.] Obsequious,
[adj. Obedience (augm.] Observe. Mark. AS. III. 1. A. [Perform] [a. Respect]
Observant. [adj. Respect] [adj. Obedience]
Obsolete, [Unaccustom'd] Obstacle, [adj. Impedient (thing] Obstetrication,
[Assisting Parturition] Obstinate. Patience (exc.) Man. I. 8 E. Constancy
(exc.) Ha. IV. 7. E.
Obstruction. [Hindering] [Stopping up] Disease. S. I. 4.
Obtain. TA. V. 1. Obtestation, [Entreating (augm.] Obtrude, [On- thrust] put]

Obtuse, [Blunt] -- angle. Mag. III. 3. E.
Obvious. Sp. II. 6. Obumbration, [Shadowing] Occasion. T. II. 4. A.
Occidental, [adj. West] Occult, [adj. p. Conceal] Occupation. [Business]
[Profession]
Occupy. [a. Business] [a. Possession]
Occur. [p. Event] [Meet]
Ocean. W. IV. 2. Ockam, [Tow for calking of ships.] Octave, [Eighth day after]
Octavo, [Third figure of books] October, [Tenth moneth] Ocular, [adj. Ey] PG.
III. 2. Odd ends, [Residue] Odds, [Superiority] at -- Enemies] a. Contention]

Ode, [Song] Odious. [adj. p. Hate (apt.]
Odness. op. to Evenness. TM. III. 5. O. [Extraordinariness]
Odor, [Smell] Odoriferous, [Sweet] Ods, vid. Odds. Oeconomic. TO. Ecumenical.
[adj. World] [Universal]
Of. Genitive. Prep. I. 1. [By.] Prep. I. 2. [Concerning] Prep. I. 3. A. out --
Prep. I. 3. South -- [S- from]
Of. [Distant] Prep. III. 2. A. Cut -- from- c.] Drive -- from- d.]
Offal, [Worst part] TM. VI. I. O. sp. adj. Residue.
Offend. Displease] Hurt] [Sin] -- in fighting. RM. I, 1.
Offensive. [Displeasing] [Hurtful]
Offer. -- to do. TA. III. 3. A. -- to give. TA. IV. 2. [Bid]
[Give to God] [a. Oblation] [a. Sacrifice] [a. Incense]

Offertory, [a. Oblation] Office. Trust. RC. IV. 6. A. [Employment] TA. III.
good -- [Benefit] house of -- [adj. Dunging (house] (room]

Officer, [adj. Office (person] Ecclesiastical -- RE. II.
Official, [Ecclesiastical Judge] Officious. Man. IV. 2. E. [adj. Complaisanc^]
Offspring, [Descendents (aggr.] TO. I. 1. O. Often, [adv. Frequent] Oh.
Interj. Oil Pr. I. 6. -- box of a Bird. PP. V. 8. A. -- of corn, [Beard -- ]
Oilet, [Hole] sp. for Button] Ointment. [adj. Anointing (thing] [Salve]
Oister. Ex. VIII. 4. -- weed. HL. I. 13. A.
Okam, [Tow for calking of ships] Oak. TR. V. 1. bitter -- Tr. V. I. A. holme
-- Tr. V. 2. Holy -- HF. IX. 6. A. Scarlet -- [Holm] -- fearn. HL. I. 4. A. --
of Cappado^ia. HF. I. 13. A. -- of Jerusalem. HF. I. 13.
Oker. Yellow -- St. VI. 2. Red -- St. VI. 2. A.
Old. [adj. Age] how -- [of what age] -- age. Mea. VI. 4. [Decrepit] adj. Mea.
VI. 4. A.
op. to New. Sp. I. 3. A. -- clothes, [Decayed c.] -- fashion, [Unaccustom'd
f.] -- soldier, [Experienc'd s.] -- time, [T. past (augm.]
Oleander. Sh. VI. 1. Olibanum, [Frankincense] Tr. VIII. 3. ^ Oligarchy,
[Government by a Faction] Olive. Tr. II. 4. Ominous, [Before-signing] Omitting.
TA. III. 8. A. Omnipotency, [All-mightiness] Omnipresence, [adv. Ubiquity
presence] Omniscient. [All-knowing] On. -- the contrary, [adv. contrary] --
fire, [adj. p. Fire] [Toward] -- the left hand, [Towards -- ] right hand,
[Towards -- ]

Concerning] In] agree -- [Agree In] Concerning]
[Forward] come -- [Proceed] fight -- [Prosecute fighting.] hold -- [Prosecute]
set -- a. Assault] a. Impulsive]
[To] a. Assault] a. Impulsive]
happen -- [H. to.] [Upon] Prep. VI. 1.
Once. [One (time] [In past time] all at -- [Together-all]
One. Proper. Mea. II. 1. -- by -- [adv. Segregateness] -- another, [adv.
Reciprocation] -- for another, [Compensation] -- with another, [adv. Mixture]
Confusedness]

[Any] Pron. III. 1. some -- Pron. II. 3 A. certain -- Pron. II. 3.
[Onely] TO. IV. 2. O. [The same] all -- Equal] Alike]


One blade. HL. VII. 5. Only. Adv. IV. 1. O. [Alone] TO. IV. 2. O.
Onerate, [Lode] O. VI. 7. Onion. HL. IV. 9. Onset, [Assault] Onslaught.
[Storming] Onyx. St. III. 4. Opacity. Q. I. 4. O. Opal-stone. St. III. 1. Open.
-- ing. Unshut. O. II. 2. O. Uncover. O. II. 3. O. Unfold, [Spread] Un- adj. p.
Seal (make] Un adj. p. Impedient (make] Un-adj. p. Obstruction (make]
Un-conceal Reveal] Manifest]
Un-adj. Publicness (make.] Un-obscure, [a. Plain] Un-implicit, [a. Express]
[adj. p. Opening] -- air, [Clear air] -- handed, [Liberal] -- hearted. Frank,
[adj. Man. IV. 4.] In excess, [adj. Man. IV. 4. E]
-- house, [Hospitality for all comers.] -- war, [Manifested war] -- weather,
[W. not cloudy] frosty]

Operation. Mechanic. O. I. in General. O. II. in Agriculture. O. III. in
Fabrile. O. IV. in Sartorian. O. V. in Chymic. O. VI. in Pharmaceutic. O. VI. A.
[a. Efficient]
Ophidion Plinii. Fi. VI. 4. A. Opiniastre. [Conceited] [Wilful] [Obstinate]
Opinion AS. II. 6. O. Opium, [Soporative juice of Poppy] Opopanax, [Gummy
juice of the root of Hercules Allheel] Oppilation, [Obstruction] S. I. 5.
Opponent, [adj. Opposition (person] Opportunity. [Time (perf.] Occasion (time]
adj. Congruity (time]

Oppose, [a. Opposition] Opposition. T. VI. ^. O. -- of proposition. D. VI. 4.
in -- [distant of a great Circle]
Oppression. RJ. IV. 5. Opprobry, [Reproch] Oppugn, [Oppose] Optic. [adj.
Seeing] [Seeing (art]
Optimacy, [Government by the chief (persons] Option. [Choice] [Wish]
Opulent. [Rich] [Abundant]
Or. Conj. II. 3.. -- else, [adv. Other]
Oracle, [adj. p. Speaking revelation] Orage. HF. I. 9. Oral, [adj. Mouth]
Orange. Tr. I. 7. A. Oration. D. V. 2. Orator, [adj. Oration Entreaty
(person]
Oratory. [Oration (art.] [Prayer (place]
Orb. [Sphere] -- Imaginary. W. VI. A.
Orbicular, [adj. Sphere] Orbis. -- Echinatus. Fi. VIII. 2. A. -- hirsu^us. Fi.
VIII. 1. A. -- maricatus. Fi. VIII. 2. -- scutatus. Fi. VIII. 1.
Orchard. Po. I. 3. A. Orchis. HL. IV. 8. Ordain. [Appoint] [a. Ordinance] [a.
Ordination]
Order. TM. V. 2. Method. TM. V. 2. [Government] [Decree] -- ly. [adj. Order
(perf.] [adj. Manners Homiletic] [adj. a. Subjection]
Orders. [plur. Order] [adj. Ordination (thing]
Ordinance. [Decree] [Law] [Edict] [Institution] RE. VI. Cannon, etc. RM. V. 6.
A.
Ordinary. Usual. TM. V. 3.] Between course and fine. Q. VI. 3. [Bishop]
Ordination. RE. V. 2. Ordure. [Dung] [Filth]
Ore, [Metal not yet prepared] Over, [Over] Organ, [Instrument] Musical --
Organy, [Wild Marjoram] HF. VII. 4. A. Orient. [East] [Bright]
Orifice, Hole] Mouth (like]
Origany. HF. VII. 4. A. Original. Primitive] First] [Beginning] [Rise] --
copy, [Exemplar]
Orizon, [Prayer] Ornament, [adj. a. Ornateness (thing] Ornateness. TM. V. 6.
Orphan, [Un-parented] Orpiment. St. VI. 4. Orpin. HL. VIII. 2. Orrage. HF. I 9.
Ort, [Fragment adj. Residue] Orthodox. RE. III. 1. Orthography, [a. Letter
(perf.] Orthopnoea. S. V 2. A. Oscitation. [Yawning] [Carelesness]
Osmund. Osprey, [Bone-breaking Eagle] Ostentation. [Over-saying] [Glorying]
Ostler, [Common horse (Off.] Ostrich. By. II. 9. Otes. HL. II. 4. Oath. RC.
VI. 4. Other. adj. Diversity] Pron. II. 2. O. -- wise, [adv. Other] -- whiles,
[In some (times] -- where, [In other (places] every, -- [Every second] the --
[The rest]
Otter. Be. IV. 8. A. Oval. Mag. VI. 6. Ouch, [Ornament of gemms] Oven, [adj.
a. Baking (place] Over. [adj. Superiority] [adj. Power] Authority]
[adj. Abundance] Excess]
-- bold, [B. (Exc.] -- much, [Excess] adv. Vantage] Besides] -- and above.
more -- [Also] [Above] Prep. V. 1. -- thwart. Prep. III. 3. [Throughout] Prep.
IV. 3. -- again, [Through it again] all -- [Through all] all is -- [All is
past] give -- [Desist] read --
[Beyond] Prep. VI. 2. A. -- against. Prep. VI. 3. O.
Overaw. [a. Fear (make] [Coaction by fear]
Overbear. [a. Submit (make] [a. Magisterialness]
Overbid, [Bid More then.] (exc.]

Overbold, [Bold (exc.] Overburden, [Burden (exc.] Overbuy, [Buy dear (exc.]
Overcast, Cover] ^hadow]
Overcatch. Overcharge, [Burden (exc.] Overcome, [a. Victory] Overfill, [Fill
(exc.] Overflow. [Over-flow] [v. Abundance]
Overglut, [Glut (exc.] Overgone, [pret. Gone (exc.] Overgrow. [Grow more than,
etc.] (exc.]
[Cover by growing]
Overhasty, [Hasty (exc.] Overhear, [adv. Concealed hear] Overheavy, [Heavy
(exc.] Overlay. [Cover (exc.] [Kill by covering]
Overly, [adv. Slightness] Sloth]

Overload, [Load (exc.] Overlong, [Long (exc.] Overlook. a. Ey another's doing]
Observe the thing doing done
[Look too high] [adv. Omitting]
Overmaster, [a. Victory] Overmatch, [a. Superiour] Overmeasure, [Excess]
Overmuch, [Excess] Overpass. [Omit] [Excel]
Overplus. [Redundant (thing] [Vantage] [Residue]
Overrate, [Tax more than proportion] Overreach, Overtake] a. Fraud]
Overreck^n, [Reckon (exc.] Overripe. NP. VI. 4. E. Overrule. [v. Superiour]
TO. III. [Yield (make] ^p. by Authority] [Overcome]
Overrun. [Fill (exc.] [Cover with multitude]
Oversaying. Man. IV. 1. E. Oversee, [a. Oversight] Overshadow, [Cover with
shadow] Overshoot, [Beyond shoot] go] -- himself, [a. Excess]


Oversight. [Office.] sp. of observing what others do in their offices]
[Errour]
Overskip. Omit Lose sp. by neglect.]

Overslip. [Omit] Neglect] Forget]
Overspread, [Over-spread] Overt, [Manifest] Overtake. TA. VI. 6. A. -- n with
wine, [p. Drunkenness -- ]
Overthrow, a. Transverse (make] a. Victory] to receive an -- RM. II. 1. D.

Overthwart, Transverse] Prep. III. 3.
Overtoil, [Toil (exc.] Overture, [adj. p. Offer] sp. Proposition]
Overturn, [a. Transverse] Overvalue, [Value (exc.] Overween, [a. Arrogance]
Overweigh, [Weigh more than] Overweight, [More than weight] Overwhelm, [Cover
(augm.] Ought. v. Dueness] Mood of duty] [Any thing]
Ounce. Weight. Mea. III. 4. Beast. Be. IV. 3.
Our, [adj. plur. Pron. I. 1.] Out. Material. Prep. I. 3. Local. Of Motion.
Prep. IV. 2. get -- [Obtain] sp. to be without]
scrape --
Of Rest. Prep. IV. 2. A. all is -- Past] Finisht] Spent] Extinct] Discovered]
Public] the secret is --
he is -- [He erreth] they are -- [They are enemies]
-- of date, [Un- custom'd] autoritied]

-- of doors, [Without d.] -- of doubt, [Without d.] -- of fashion,
[Un-custom'd] -- of frame, [Confused] -- of hand, [adv. Sudden] -- of heart,
[Discouraged] -- of joint, [Un-joynted] -- of kind, [Degenerous] -- of order,
[Confused] -- of patience, [Vn-patienced] -- of sight, [Not-visible] -- of use,
[Not-used] -- of wits, [Mad] -- upon. Int. II. 1. O. Int. II. 3. O.

Outcast. [Rejected] [Banished]
Outcry, [Exclamation] Outgo. [(...) faster] beyond]
[v. Superiority]
Outlandish, [adj. Foreiner] Outlawed. Un-adj. Suit (pot.] Proscribed]
Outlet, [Out-ition (place] Outlive, [Live longer than] after]

Outmost, [Most adj. outside] Outpass, [a. Superiority] Outrage, [Injury
(augm.] Outrageous, [adj. Excess (augm.] sp. in Anger.]
Outside. Sp. III. 6. O. Outstand, [a. Duration after] Outstrip, [Run faster
than] Outward, [adj. Outside] Outwork. [adj. Outside. RM. VI.] [Rampier] RM. VI
3.
Owe. as Debt, [a. Debtor] as Duty, [a. Dueness]
Owl. Horned. By. I. 4. Not Horned. By. I. 4. A.
Own. my -- [adj. I, adj. I.] one's -- man, [Rational (perf.] -- er, [adj.
Propriety (person.] to -- Appropriate] Claim]

Owze. W. III. 7. A. Owzle, [Black bird] Ox, Bull. Be. II. 1. [untesticled]
Oxey. Herb. HF. II. 6. A. Bird. [Woodpecker (kind] By. I. 9. A.

Ozier, [Sallow] Tr. VI. 9. A.
P.
PAce. [Mode of going] Mo. II. [Step] [Five foot]
[Degree of swiftness] [Measure in dancing] -- ing, [Ambling] Mo. II. 2.
Pacify, a. Peaceable (make] Un-anger]
Pack, Aggregate. TM. III. 8. sp. together tied] -- horse, [H. for carriage of
pack] -- saddle, [S. for carriage of pack] -- thread, [Course thread for tying]
to -- a. Aggregate by together tying] to -- Heap and bind] -- away, [Depart
with one's goods] -- cards, [Order C. fraudulently] -- Jury, [Chuse partially a
Jury] to set -- ing, [Depart (make]
Packet, [Aggregate (dim.] sp. together tied] -- boat. RN. I. 8.
Paction. RC. VI. A. Pad. [Saddle (dim.] -- nag, [adj. p. Riding (apt.) horse]
-- lock, [adj. p. Hanging (apt.]
Paddle, [Spade (like) staff] to -- [a. Hand (freq.] sp. in water.]

Paddock. [Frog] [Park (dim.]
Paedobaptism, [Baptism of Infants.] Paganellus. Fi. III. 7. A. Paganism. RE.
I. 2. Page. [Servant for waiting] -- of paper, Side Area
of paper]
Pageant, [Arch for ^ights] Pagrus. Fi. V. 4. Pay, [adj. a. Paying (thing] --
master, [adj. Paying (Off.] put out of -- Soldiers -- [S. hire] -- ing. TA.
IV. 8. [Compensating]
Paigle. HS. VIII. 1. A. Pail, [Tub (dim) with handle] Pain. [a. Punishment]
op. to Ease. NP. V. 3. O. [a. Torture] RJ. VI. 1. [Aking, etc.] AC. II. 7.
op. to Pleasure, [a. Unpleasantness.] [Grief] -- s, a. Operation] a. Diligence]
-- fullness, [a. Pain Pains
(apt.]


Painim, [adj. Paganism (person.] Painting. O. IV. 8. Pair. [Equal] [Companion]
[Two] [Aggregate (thing] -- of bellows, [B.] -- of cards [Suit of c.]
Palace. Po. II. 2. Palate. Roof. PG. III. 5. [Ta^t]
Palatine, [adj. Palace] Pale. -- ness. AC. IV. 9. A. a -- [Lamin] sp. of wood]
Pales, [Sepiment of Lamins erect.] Palinody, [Recanting] D. VI. 9. A.
Palisado. RM. VI. 7. Pall. Pallet, [Bed (dim.) to be laid on the floor.]
Palliate, Seem (make] Cover (corr.]
Palm. -- of hand, [Concave (part] Tree, [Date] dwarf -- Sh. III. 2. [Carkin]
PP. II. 1. A.
Palmer. [Pilgrim] -- worm, [Caterpillar]
Palme^to royal [Cabbidg tree] Tr. VII. 7. Palmistry, [Wizarding by inspection
of the hand.] Palpaple. [adj. p. Feeling (apt.] [Manifest (augm.]
Palpitation. S. V. 4. Palsy. S. IV. 6. Palter, [a. Sloth] Lightness]

Paltry, [Sorry] Pamper, [a. Fat (augm.] Pamphlet, [Sorry book (dim.] Pan,
[Shallow wide (vess.] sp. earthen] Brain- [Concave bone covering the brain]
Knee- [Convex bone covering the knee] Warming- [adj. Warming (vess.] Frying-
[adj. Frying (vess.] -- cake, [Fry'd Pudding (Lamin.]

Panade, [Broth of boiled bread] Panage, [Feeding for hogs under the deciduous
trees.] Panch. Stomach] Belly] [Earthen Tray]
Pander, [adj. Fornication (merc.] Pandiculation. Mo. III. 6. A. Pane, [Lamin]
Panegyric, [adj. a. Praise oration] Panel. [Lamin (dim.] [Catalogue of names]
[Saddle for burdens] -- of Hawk, [Belly -- ]
Pang, [Impetus] sp. pain (imp.] Panic. [Corn] HL. II. 5. -- grass. HL. III. 1.
A. -- fear, [Causeless universal f.]
Panier, [Basket.] sp. for carriage on horse. Pannage, [Tax on cloth] Pannicle,
[Membrane] Pannier, vid. Panier. Pansy. HL. VI. 5. A. Pant. S. V. 1. Panther,
[Pard] Be. IV. 2. A. Pantler, [adj. Bread (Off.] Pantofle, [Loose foot (vest]
Pantry, [adj. Bread Victual
(room]
Pap. [Water adj. p. consistence with bread.] -- of an apple, [adj. p.
consistence pulp -- ] [Dug]
Papal, [adj. Pope] Paper. Reed. Factitious. Pr. VI. 7.
Papilionaceous fly. Ex. IV. 6. A. Papist, [Of the Pope's faction] Parable,
[Tralatitious Narration] Parabola. Mag. III. 8. Parade, [a. Preparation]
Paradise, [Pleasure (place] Bird of -- Fools -- [Deceiving Hope] Delight]

Paradox, [Against common opinion] Paragon, [Excellent] Paragraph, [Section]
Parallax, [Difference between the true place and the seeming.] Parallel. Mag.
II. 7. Parallels. W. VI. 7. Parallelogram, [Quadrangle, whose opposite sides
are parallels] Paralogism, [Syllogism (corr.] Paralytic, [adj. Palsy] S. IV. 6.
Paramor, Suitor Lover sp. (corr.)

Paramount, [adv. Chief adj. right] Parapet. RM. VI. 9. Paraphrase. D. V. 5. A.
Paraqueto. By. I. 7. A. Paraselene. El. V. 3. A. Parasite, [Flatterer] sp. for
victuals] Parathesis. D. I. 7. A. Parboil, [Boil (dim.] Parbreak, [Vomit]
Parcel, Part] Aggregate (dim.] to -- [a. Segregate]
Parch, [Dry (exc.) with heating] Parchment, [Paper of skin] Parcimony,
[Frugality] Parcity, [Sparingness] Pard. Be. IV. 2. A. Pardon. RE. II. 9. --
fault. [Absolution] -- debt. TA. IV. 9. A.
Pare, [From-cut Superficies] Extremity]
Parelius. El. V. 3. Parenchyma. [Flesh] PG. II. 6. Parent. TO. I. 2. -- age,
[Parent (kind]
Parenthesis. D. I. 7. Parget, [Plastering] Parish. RC. III. 4. A. Parity.
[Equalness] [Evenness] Levelling. RC. I. O.
Park. Po. I. 5. A. -- leaves, [Tutsan] HS. V. ^.
Parliament, [National Council] Parley, Confer] Treat]
Parlour, [adj. Discourse (room] Parching. RN. VI. 1. A. Parochial, [adj.
Parish] Parole, Word] Parole, Promise]
Paroxysm, [Impetus] Parrhesy, [Frankness] Parricide, [Murder of near kin]
Parrot. By. I. 7. Parsimony, [Frugality] Parsley. HF. IV. 9. Bastard -- HF. V.
12. A. milky -- HF. V. 13 A. Stone -- HF. IV. 2.
Parsnip. HF. IV. 2. Cow -- HF. IV. 15. Water -- HF. IV. 15. A.
Parson, adj. Parish-Priest] Possessor of Priest's revenue]
Part. Portion TM. VI. O. Member TM. VI. O. Best -- TM. VI. 1. Worst -- TM. VI.
1. O. Person] Faction] Interest] for my -- [Concerning my Person] Interest]

for the most -- Concerning most persons] adv. Most]
on all -- s, [By all Persons] Factions]
take one's -- [Assist, etc.] Quality] Action] Duty] one of excellent -- s, [
-- Qualities] good ill -- of him g. action] good ill -- of him i. action] to
take in good -- [Accept (perf.] to take in ill -- [Accept (corr.] to -- [a.
Division] Partition] Segregateness]
[a. Open] Separate]
[Depart] -- a fray, [Un-a. Contention] Fight]

Partake. [a. Partner] Accessory]

Party. Person] Faction] [Aggregate] -- of soldiers. a commanded -- RM. IV. 6.
-- colored, [adv. Variety colour'd] -- per pale, [Alternly] [Accessory]
Partiality, Ha. II. 6. O. Participate, [a. Partner] Accessory]

Participle. D. II. 3. A. Particle, [Part (dim.] Word. D. II. ^. A.
Particular. op. to Universal, [adj. TM. III. 3.] op. to General. [adj. TM.
III. 4. a -- [Catalogue]
-- ize, [a. Induction] Example]

Partisan. [Partaker] [Halbert]
Partition. -- in a building. Po. III. 1. A. -- in discourse. D. IV. 4. A.
Partner. TO. IV. 5. Partridge. By. II. 6. red -- By. II. 6. A.
Parturition. AC. I. 3. Paru. Fi. III. 17. Pasch, [Passover] -- flower,
[Pussatilla] HF. IX. 3. A.
Paschal, [adj. Passover] Pasquil, [adj. Mocking writing] Pass. [a. Ition]
Coming] Going] Proceeding] Travelling] sp. Beside] Over] Beyond] -by Omit]
Not-observe]
-over, a. Omission] a. Transition]
-one's life, [Live] word, [Promise]
-as bell, [a. Dying (sign]



[a. Past] -away. -one's right, [Alienate] -the time.
bring to -- Effect] Perform]
come to -- [adj. p. Event] let it -- I will -- [I will desist]

Suffice] Exceed] Excell] I -- not for it, [I esteem it not] a -- [way] sp.
over river] [State] brought to that --
Venue, Thrust (imp.] Prick (end]
[Written License for travelling]

Passable, [Indifferent] TM. I. 4. Passage. [Going] way] Entry]
[Fare] -- boat.
[Transaction] [Clause]
Passenger, [adj. Traveling (person] Passer solitarius. By. III. 6. A.
Passion. Suffering. T. I. 7. O. Affection. AS. V. [sp. Anger] Corp. action sign
into it. AC. IV.


Passive, [adj. Passion] Passover. RE. VI. 5. A. Passport, [Written License of
travelling] Past, [adj. Past time] -- time. Sp. I. 1. E.
Paste. [Raw bread] [Glue of ground corn]
Pasteler, [adj. a. Py (mech] Pastern, [Cavity of the heel] Pasty, [Py (augm,]
Pastime. Recreation] Mirth]
Pastinaca. Fi. II. 1. Pastor. Shepherd] Priest]
Pastry. [adj. Store-room for adj. py (things] [a. py (art.]
Pasture. Po. I. 5. Pat, [Congruous] Patch, [Fragment] to -- [Repair with
fragments] -- with, [a. Fraud]
Pate. PG. III. 1. A. Patent. RC. IV. 4. Paternal, [adj. Father] Paternity,
[Father (abstr.] Path, [adj. p. pret. Walk (place] Pathetic, [adj. a. Passion
(apt.] Patible quality. Q. Patience. Virtue. Man. I. 8. Herb.
Patient. [adj. Passion] Patience]
a -- [adj. p. Physician (person]
Patin, Wide shallow dish] Cover of cup]
Patriarch. Before Christ. RE. II. 1. [Primate]
Patrician, [Noble] Patrimony, [adj. p. Inherit (thing] Patriot, Lover of one's
Nation.] Benefactour of one's Nation.]
Patron, of Dependent. TO. III. 9. of Slave, [Master] of Church-living, [adj.
Giving (pot.]
Patronage, [a. Patron] Patronize. [a. Patron] [Protect]
Patronymic, [adj. Family (name] Pattern. [Example] [Type]
Pattin* vid. Patin. [Under-adj. foot (jug.]
Paucity, [Fewness] Pave, [a. Floor] sp. with stones] Pavement, [adj.
Stone-floor] Pavillion. [Tent (augm.] Paw, [Multifidous foot] Pawn. RC. VI. 7.
Pawnage, vid. Panage. Pawnch, Belly] PG. IV. 6. Guts (aggr.] to -- [Un-a. bowel]

Pawse, Discontinue] Rest] a -- [Period]

Peace. RM. O. -- ableness. Man. IV. 3. to hold one's -- [a. Taciturnity]
Silence]

Peach. Tr. II. 1. to -- [Accuse]
Peacock, [Bi. II. 2. sp. (male] Peahen, [Peacock (fem.] Peal, [Tunable
ringing] Pear. Tr. I. 2. Peasant, Rustic (person] Villain (person]
Pease. HS. II. 2. A. Chich -- HS. III. 2. Winged wild -- HS. II. 5. A. --
Earth-nuts. HS. II. 7. A.
Peasecod, [Cod of Pease] Peccadillo, [Sin (dim.] Peccant, adj. a. Sin] Guilty]
Peck, [Two gallons] to -- Mo. VI. 5. A.
Pectoral, [adj. Breast] Peculiar, [Proper] Pecuniary, [adj. Money] Pedal.
Pedant, Teacher (corr.) of children] adj. Pusillanimity (person]
Pedee. RM. III. 8. A. Pedigree, [Series of Ancestors] Pedestal. Mag. V. 3.
Peddler, [Wandring Merchant (corr.] Pedling, Sorry (dim.] Little (corr.]
Pedobaptism, [Baptism of Infants] Peeble. St. I. 2. Piece. [Part] Chip]
Fragment] -- meal, [adv. Part (segr.] all to -- s, [In parts]
[Total] of one- Entire] Continued]

[Gun] [20 s.] to -- [Repair] sp. by adding fragment] -together, [Together-joyn]

Peel, vid. Pill. Bakers -- [Staff with Lamin at the end]
Peep. -- of day, [Day (inc.] to -- [See (end) secretly] [Cry as Bird (young]

Peer. [Equal] -- less, [Not adj. p. Equal (pot.]
[Nobleman] [Factitious bank]
Peevishness, [Moroseness] Peg, [Pin] sp. for fastning] Peiony, HS. I. 1.
Pelamis. Fi. III. 4. A. Pelf, [Riches (corr.] Pelican. BY. IX. 4. A. Pellet.
[Bullet (like] Pellitory. -- of Spain. HF. V. 11. -- of the wall. HF. I. 16.
Pellucid, [Transparent] Pelmel. [Game of striking bowl (dim.) through a hole]
[adv. Mixture] Confusion]

Pelt. Sheeps -- [Sh. skin] Shepherds -- [Sh. (vest.] to -- [Chafe*] [Cast
stones]

Pen. [Coop] [adj. Writing (instr.] -man, [adj. Writing (person] (Off.]
-knife, [K. for pens] to -- Sepiment] Write]


Penal, [adj. Punishment] Penalty, [Punishment] Penance. [Punishment]
[Repentance]
Pence, [plur. Penny] Pencil, [adj. Painting (instr.] Pendant. [p. Hanging
thing] [Flag]
Pendulous, adj. a. Swing] Doubtful]
Penetrate, Into -- ition] Through- ition] Out -- ition]
Penguin. By. IX. 6. A. Penisle. W. III. 4. O. Penitent, [adj. Repentance]
Penner, [adj. Pen (vess] Writing (person]
Penny. Mea. IV. 2. -- father, [Penurious (person] -- worth, [Price (manner]
Pennyroyal. HF. VII. 8. Pennywort. Wall -- HL. VIII. 6.
Pennon, [Flag (dim.] Pension, [adj. a. Stipendiating (thing] -- er, [adj. p.
Stipendiated (person]
Pensive, [adj. Grief Thinking
(apt.] Pent, [adj. p. Sepiment] Pentagon, [Figure with five angles] Pentecost,
[Festival for descension of the Holy Ghost] Penthouse, [Protuberant margin of
roof.] Penuriousness. op. to Liberality. Man. III. 3. E. op. to Magnificence,
[Sordidness.]
Penury. Poverty Want.
People. [Nation] Common -- RC. I. 5. to -- Fill Furnish
with men]
Pepper. Sh. II. 9. -- wort. HS. VI. 6. Ginny -- HS. IV. 8. A. Wall -- HL.
VIII. 5. A.
Peradventure, [adv. Fortune] Contingence]
Perambulation, About -- walking] Through- walking]
Perce, vid. Pi^rce. Perceive. a. Sense sp. inc.] See. sp. inc.] Understand sp.
inc.]
Perceptible, [adj. p. Perceive (pot.] Perch. [Transverse stick] to -- [Sit
upon a stick] Measure. Mea. I. 5. Fish. Fi. IX. 6. Sea -- Fi. V. 10.
Percolation, [Straining] O. VI. 4. Percussion, [Striking] Perdition,
Destruction] Loss]
Perdue. RM. III. 7. A. Peregrination, [Travelling] sp. forein]
Peregrine, [adj. Foreiner] Peremptory, Absolute] Obstinate]
Perennial, [During through the year] Perfect. T. III. 9. [Finished] [adj.
Integrity] [adj. Art] Experience]

Perfidiousness, [Treachery] Perforate. [a. Hole (make] [Through-bore]
Perforce, [adj. Coaction] Perform. TA. III. 6. Perfume, [adj. a. Sweetness
(thing] Perfunctory. [Slight] [Heedless] [Negligent]
Perhaps, [adv. Fortune] Contingence] Adv. I. 2.

Periacantha. Sh. IV. 5. Perianthium, [C^p] PP. II. 8. Pericardium, [Skin about
the heart] Pericarpium. PP. II. 8. A. Pericranium, [Skin about the skull]
Peril, [Danger] T. V. 1. O. Perineum, [Under-privities (part] Period. [a.
Ceasing] [End] [Sentence] D. III. 1. A.. Point. D. I. 6. A. Interpunction. D.
I. 4.
Periodical, [Returning at certain times] Periphery, Line about the extremity]
Circle*] Mag. III. 2.
Periphrasi^, [Paraphrase] D. V. 5. A Periploca* Sh. I. 7. A. Perish, Decay] p.
Destruction]
Perista^i^ motion. Mo. III. 1. A. Peritonaeum, [Membrane of the belly]
Perjury, [Swearing a Lie] Periwig, [Factitious hair (aggr.] Periwinkle. Shrub.
HS. VIII. 10. Fish. Ex. VII. 6. A.
Perk, [Proudly lift himself] Perl. Gem. St. III. 2. Mother of -- [Shell of the
adj. a. Perl-oyster] -- in the ey, [Perl (like) spot in the ey]
Permanent, [adj. Sp. I. 6.] Permit. [Not-forbid] [Not-hinder] [Yielding] TA.
IV. 1. [a. Licence]
Permutati^n, [Change] Pernicious, [adj. ^. Destruction] Pernoctation [a.
Night] Perora^ion, [Conclusion of oration] Perpendicular, [Direct] Perpetrate.
[Doe] [Perform]
Perpetual. Sp. I. 8. Perpetuity] Perplex, [Tangle] -- ity. [Tangling (apt.)
difficulty] [Anxiety]
Perquisite, Necessary] Expedient] -- s, [adj. Event profits]

Perry, [Wine of Pears] Perriwig, [Factitious hair (aggr.] Persecute. [Pursue]
[Afflict] For Religion. RE. III. 4. O.

Perseverance, [Constancy] Persevere, [a. Constancy] Persian shell. Ex. VII. 7.
A. Persist, [a. Constancy] Duration]

Persly, vid. Parsley. Person. T. I. 4. A. -- Judicial. RJ. I. -- Military. RM.
III. Degrees of -- RC. I.
Personable, [Figured (perf.] Personage, Person] (manner]
Personal presence. Sp. II. 1. Personate, [Imitate as Player] Perspective,
[Seeing (art.] Perspicacity, [Sagacity] Perspicuity, [Plainness] Perspiration,
[Transpiration] Persuade. TO. V. 2. Persuasion. AS. III. 6. A. Pert. Sprightly]
Vigorous] (Confident]
Pertein, vid. Pertinence. Pertinacy. Ha. IV. 7. E. Pertinence. TM. IV. 5.
Perturbation. Molesting sp. by affection (augm.) Confusion sp. by affection
(augm.)
Perverseness. NP. IV. 1. O. Pervert. [Seduce] [Wrest]
Pervicacy. [Pertinacy] Peruse, Through- consider] All- consider]
Perwinkle, vid. Periwinkle. Pesant, Rustic (person] Villain]
Pest, [Plague] Pester, [Molest] sp. (freq.] Pestiferous, adj. a. Plague]
Hurtful (augm.]
Pestilence, [Plague] S. II. 3. A. Pestle, [Br^ying (instr.) Cylindrical (fig.]
-- of Pork, [Thigh -- ]
Pet, [Anger (imp.] Petard, [Ordnance (like) machin for breaking gate] St.
Peter's fish, [Doree] Fi. IV. 12. St. Peter's wort. HS. V. 7. A. Petition
[Entreaty] Religious. RE. IV. 2. A.
Petrifie, [a. Stone (make] Petronel, [Horseman's gun] Petty, Little] Sorry]
Petticoat, [Loose thigh (vest] Pettifogger, [Lawyer (corr.] Pettishness,
[Moroseness] Petulance, [Impudent wantonness] Pew, [About-sepimented seat]
Pewter. Met. II. 2. Phantasy, [Fancy] Phantasm, [Seeming (thing) to fancy
(corr.] Phantastic, adj. a. Fancy (corr.] Conceited]
Pharmaceutical operation. O. VI. A Phenicopter. By. VIII. 2. Phoenix. Phesant.
By. II. 3. Phyllyrea. Sh. III. 3. Philologer. RC. II. 4. Philosopher. RC. I. 1.
A. Philtre, [adj. a. Love (make] medicin] Phlebotomy. Mo. IV. 6. Phlegm. PG. I.
6. Pholas. Ex. VIII. 8. Phrase, Sentence (manner] Instead-word]
Phrenetic, [adj. Frenzy] Phylactery, [Written (lam.) to be worn] Physic, [adj.
a Physician (thing] Physician. RC. II. 3. Physiognomy. [Face (manner]
[Wizarding by inspection of the face.]
Physis. Fi. V. 11. Py. Provision. Pr. I. 4. A. Bird. Mag -- By. I. 8. Sea --
[Sea-mew] By. VII. 8.

Piacular, [That ought to be expiated by sacrifice] Piazza, [About-housed
Area.] Pibble. St. I. 4. Pick. [Peck] [Pluck] [Open] -- a lock.
[Discover] -- out. -- a secret.

[Chuse] -- out, [a. Election]
[Gather] -- up.
[Gain] -- out of one, [Gain from one] -- a quarrel, [Obtain (end) an occasion
of q.] -- a thank, [Obtain (end) thanks [sp. by accusing]
[Pilfer] -- Pocket, [a. Theft out of p.] -- Purse, [a. Theft out of p.]
[Cleanse] -- a bo^e one's ear one's teeth, [Cleanse b.] -- a bo^e one's ear
one's teeth, [Cleanse e] -- a bo^e one's ear one's teeth, [Cleanse t]

Pickax, [adj. a. Pecking hammer] Picked, [adj. p. Tooth] Mag. IV. 2. Pickeer,
[a. Skirmish] Pickerel, [Pike (dim.] Pickeroon, [adj. a. Bootying ship.]
Pickle, [adj, a. Pickling (things] [State (corr.] Pickling. Pr. III. 9.
Pickrel, [Pike (dim] Picture. Pr. VI. 8. Pied, [Variegated] Pierce. Into --
ition] thrusting]
[Boring] -- a vessel, [Broach a v.] -- ing pain, Pricking] Smarting]
-- er, [Boring (instr.]
Piety. to God, [Religion (hab.] to Parents, [Gratitude]
Pig, [Hog (young] Be. II. 4. Ginny -- Be III. 6. A. -- of lead, [Cast (thing)
of Lead.]
Pigeon. By. III. 1. Piggin, [Tub (dim.] Pike. [Spear] RM. V. 3. Fish. Fi. IX.
1.
Pilchard Fi. III. 10. A. Pile. [Post] [Heap] [Emroid] -- wort. HF. IX. 4. A.
Pilfer, [a. Theft (dim.] Pilgrim, [Vow'd traveller for Religion.] Pill. a --
[Ball (dim.] [Rinde]
to -- Strip, rinde] clothe]
[Un-a. rinde] clothe]
[Rob]

Pillage. [Robbery] [Booty]
Pillar. Po. III. 5. Pillaster, [Pillar (dim.] Pillion, [Woman's riding
cushion] Pillory, [Imprisoning (jug.) for head and hands] Pillow, [Cushion for
the head] -- beer, [Case of Pillow]
Pilot. RN. V. 4. A. Pimpernel. HS. V. 10. A. Pimple, [Pustule] S. III. 1. Pin.
Figure. -- without head. Mag. IV. 1. -- with head. Mag. VI. 2. A. -- fish. Fi.
VI. 2. A. -- and web, [Suffusion in the ey.] -- fold, [Imprisoning (sep.) for
beasts.] to -- Bolt] Shut]
-- a house, [Under-fill the foundation]

Pincer, [adj. Pinching (jug.] Pinch. [a* Compression] as pain, [Twitch]
[a. Narrow (make] -- penny, [Penurious (person]
[a. Anxiety]
Pine. Tr. V. 4. A. -- apple, [Nut of the Pinetree] to -- [a. Decaying] Lean
(augm.]

Pink. Flower. HS. V. 1. A. [Ship (dim.] to -- Pr. III. 5. -- eyed, [Narrow ey]
Pinna. Ex. VIII. 7. Pinnace, [Ship (dim.] Pinnacle, [Turret for ornament]
Pinnion. Figure. Mag. V. 5. A. -- of wing, [Elbow -- ] to -- [a. Bonds for the
arms]
Pint. Pioneer. RM. III. 8. Piony. HS. I. 1. Pious, [adj. Piety] Pip. [Point]
[Disease]
Pipe. [Tube] Square. Mag. V. 9. Round. Mag. V. 9. A.
[Barrel] Measure. Wind -- PG. VI. 1. A. -- tree. Sh. IV. 1. White -- Sh. V. 3.
A. to -- [a. Music with pipe] Acuteness]

Piper, [Tub-fish] Fi. IV. 5. Pipkin, [Earthen (dim.) adj. boiling (vess.]
Pippin. Pique, Malignity sp. secret] Hatred sp. secret]
Pirate, [adj. Sea-robber.] Pisces, [Last of the 12 parts of the Zodiac.]
Piscis triangularis. Fi. VIII. 3. -- Cornutus. Fi. VIII. 3. A.
Pish, [Int. of Contempt] Aversation]
Pismire, [Ant] Ex. IV. 5. Pissing. Mo. IV. 8. Pistach. Tr. IV. 2. Pistol.
[adj. Hand-gun (dim.] Money.
Pit, [Dent] Arm -- [Concave (part) under the arm] -- fall, [Concave (place) in
the earth for catching birds]
Pitch. [Height] -- of a hill, [Obliquity (inc.) -- ]
[Tar boiled to a consistence] to -- [Smear with Pitch] -- Camp, Place c.] --
Net, Direct n.] -- Tens, Fix t.] -- a floor, [a. Floor with stones]

Pitcher, [Earthen pot.] Pitchfork, [Fork] Piteous, vid. Pitiful. Pith. PP. I.
5. A. Pithy. [adj. Pith] Importance]

Pittance, Part (dim.] Proportion (dim.]
Pittty. AS. IV. 7. O. Pitiful, [adj. a. Pity (apt.] p. Pity (apt.]

Pittiless. [Not-adj. a. Pitty] [Cruel]
Pituitous, [adj. Phlegm.] Pizzle, [Genital (male] Placable, [Un-adj. p. anger
(apt.] Placard, Patent] Edict]
Place. Proper. Sp. II. [Situation] -- Military. RM. VI. [House (augment.]
[Order] [Dignity] [Degree] RC. I. [Office] [Stead]
to -- a. Place] Put]
choose in ones's -- [a. Substitute (make] Successor (make]

give -- Yield Superiority (sign] Take Superiority (sign]
take -- Yield Superiority (sign] Take Superiority (sign]

Placid, [Meek] Plagiary. [Stealer of Men] Writings]

Plague. [Pestilence] S. II. 3 A. [Adversity (augm.] to -- Afflict] Punish]

Play. op. to Work. O. A. -- fellow, [Companion in play.] -- with,
[Together-play] Imitate] a. Action] -- fast and loose, [a. Lightness.] -- the
Coward, [a. C. the Fool, [a. F. the Hypocrite, [a. H. the Truant, [a. T. the
Wanton, [a. W. -- er. RC. II. 9. Stage -- [adj. p. Player (thing] a.
Recreation] Mo. V. a. Game] Mo. V. A. -- at a game, [a. Game] -- at Dice, etc.
[a. Dice, etc.] -- at single Rapier, etc. [a. Fence at s. etc.] -- upon an
instrument, [a. Music.] -- upon a man, [a. Mock a man.] -- upon with guns, [a.
Gun]
Plaice. Fi. VII. 4. Plain. Plain. Mag. III. 4. Even.] Q. VI. 2. Champain. W.
III. 1. Carpenter's -- [adj. a. Even (instr.] Not-obscure. D. III. 9. Manifest]
TA. I. 9. Simple] Mean] Homely] Sincere] Frank]
Plaint, [Complaint] Plaintiff. RJ. I. 4. Plais. Fi. VII. 4. Plaster, vid.
Plaster. Plait, vid. Pleit. Plancher, [Room for fatting of Boar] Plane. Tr. VI.
10. A. [adj. a. Even (instr.]
Planet. W. II. 3. -- struck.
Planisphere, [Picture of sphere in plain] Plank, [Thick adj. wood (lamin] to
-- [a. Floor with wood (lamin]
Plant. W. V. 2. to -- Q. III. 6. -- guns, [Place guns on bank] -- a Country,
[a. Colony]
-- of foot, [Bottom -- ]
Plaintain. Herb. HL. VII. 2. Sea -- HL. VII. 4. Tree. Tr. I. 9.
Plantation. [Planting] [Colony] RC. III. 1. A.
Plash, [Spread boughs] -- of water, [Lake (dim.] -- y, [adj. Lake dim.]
Plaster. Medecin. Pr. VI. 4. A. Mortar. El. IV. 5. A. -- er, [adj. Mortar
(mech.]
Plastic, [Figuring (art.] sp. by Carving] Moulding]

Plat, vid. Pleit. Plate. [Lamin] sp. Metal (lam.] [Vessel] sp. of Silver or
Gold] [Shallow dish]

Platform. Exemplar] Description by lines] Sconce]
Platter, [Shallow dish (augm.] Plaudite Praise (voice] Joy (voice]
Plausible, [adj. p. Praise (apt] Plea, RJ. II. 3. A. Pleader. RJ. I. 7.
Pleasant. T. IV. 2. [adj. a. Delectation (apt.] [adj. Mirth] [adj. Urbanity]
Pleasing. [Delectation] [Appeasing]
Pleasure. Ha. II. 3. [Delectation] [Will] at one's -- [According to ones will]
to -- one, [a. Benefactor] Complacence]

Plebeian, [adj. People (kinde] Pledge, [Pawn] to -- one, [Answer in drinking]
Pleit Fold in wrinkles] Weave with the fingers]
Plenary, Full] Totall] Perfect]
Plenipotentiary, [Perfectly authorized] Plenty, [Abundance] Pleonasm,
[Abounding (manner) of sentence] Plethory. S. I. 3. Pleurisy. S. V. 6. Ply,
[a. Diligence] Operation]

Pliable [adj. Limberness] a. Obedience (apt.] p. Persuasion (apt.]

Pliant, [adj. Limberness] a. Obedience (apt.] p. Persuasion (apt.]

Plight, [Oblige] [State] in good -- [adj. Vigour]

Plot. Area] Description by lines] [Design]
Plover. green -- By. VII. 2. gray -- By. VII. 2. A.
Plow, [adj. Plowing (jug.] -- ing. O. III. 1. A.
Pluck, Pull] Draw]
-- a Bird, [Un a. feather] Sheeps -- [Sh. PG. VI.]
Plug, (Wooden adj. stopping (thing] Plum. PP. III. 2. -- tree. Tr. II. 2. A.
Plumb, [Perpendicular] -- rule, Perpendicularness measuring (instr.]
Transversness measuring (instr.]

Plume, [Feather] PP. V. 1. [Feathers (aggr.) for ornament] to -- Un- a.
Feather] a. Order (perf.) the feathers]

Plummer, [adj. Lead (mech.] Plummet, [Weight (dim.] Carpenter's -- [Weight for
measuring perpendicularness.]
Plump. [Fat] [Convex (perf.) with fatness]
Plunder, [Booty] Plunge, Dive (make] Difficulty (imp.]
Plural, [adj. Plurality] -- ity. TM. III. 2. O.
Pluff, [Silk adj. p. superficies with long tuft] Poche. [Hunt (corr.] -- egg,
[a. Consistence by boiling] sp. unshelled]
Pock. Small -- S. II. 4. -- hole, [Concave Pox (sign] French -- S. II. 6. --
wood [Guaiacum] Tr. VII. 2.
Pocket, [adj. Garment (bag] Pod, [Cod] PP. III. 5. A. Poem, [adj. p. Poet
(thing] Poet. RC. II. 4. A. Poetry, [adj. Poet (art.] Poinard, [adj. Pricking
(apt.) sword (dim.] Point. Title. Mag. I. 1. -- blank, [Transverse] Full --
[Period]

[Instant] -- of death.
[Tooth] Mag. IV. 2. -- in the compass, [A two and thirtieth part of the
circle.] -- in Tables, [A four and twentieth part of the Area.] -- of land,
[Promontory]
[Cord (dim.] [Part] in every -- it is a -- of
[State] it is come to that --
[Proposition] [Case] [Question] -- in controversy.
to -- [a. Point] [Shew with finger] [Distinguish with Period]

Poise. [Try the gravity] [Weigh equally]
Poisoning. RJ. V. 5. A. Poke, [Bag] Pole, vid. Poll. [Staff (augm.] -- ax,
[Cutting Club] Hammer]
-- of Cart. Po. V. 5. A. -- of a ship. RN. III. 3. A.
-- of a globe. Mag. II. 1. A. Measure. Mea. I. 5. Fish. Fi. VII. 2.
Polecat. Be. IV. 5. Polemic [adj. RM.] Disputation]

Policy. [Wisdom] [Government] Civil -- [adj. RC. (art.] -- of assurance, [Bond
against loss]
Polipus. Ex. IX. 1. sweet -- Ex. IX. 1. A.
Polish. [a. Smooth] [Brighten]
Polite, Beautiful] Adorn'd]
Political Relation* RC. Poll, vid. Pole. [Hinder part of the neck] by the --
[adv. Persons (segr.] to -- [Cut (perf.) the hair] [a. Tax] Oppress] Impoverish
by taxes]


Pollard. [Deer (male) adj. pret. let go his horns] [Lopped tree]
Pollute, [Defile] Poltron, [Coward] Polygamy, [Having many wives] Polygon,
[Having many angles] Polymountain. HF. VI. 6. Polypody. HL. I. 6. Polysyllable,
[Having many syllables] Pomander, Sphere of perfumes] Apple (like] of perfumes]
Pomecitron, [Apple of the Citron-tree] Pomegranat. -- tree. Tr. I 6.
Pomel, [adj. Sphere (part] to -- [Bear]
Pomp, [Solemnity] Pompholyx. Met. IV. 2. A. Pompion. HS. VII. 1. Pompousness,
Solemnity (augm.] Magnificence]
Pond, [Lake. W. IV. 7. A. (dim.] -- weed. HL. VII. 8. narrow leaved -- HF.
VIII. 6. A. Fish -- Po. I. 6.
Ponder. [Deliberate] [Meditate] [Consider]
Ponderousness, [Heaviness] Poniard, vid. Poinard] Pontage, [Tax for bridge]
Pontificial. [adj. Bishop] Primate]

Pool. W. IV. 7. A. Poop, [Hinder part of ship] Poor. [adj. Poverty] Needy,
[adj. wanting] [Lean] [Little] [Sorry] [adj. p. Pity (apt.] -- ness, [Poverty]
Pop, Bladder] Sound of breaking of bladder] -- gun, [Gun (like) Tube]

Pope. [Father] [Bishop] sp. of Rome]
Popinjay, [Parrot] Poplar black -- Tr. VI. 8. white -- Tr. VI. 8. A.
Poppet, [Statue (dim.] Poppy. HS. VI. 4. bastard -- HS. VI. 4. A. horned --
HS. IV. 10.
Populace, [People (kind] Popular. [adj. People] [Beloved by the people]
Populous, [adj. p. People (aug.] Porcellane. Herb. HL. VIII. 3. Vessel.
Porch, [adj. Door (room.] Porcupine. Be. III 5. Pore. Mag. VI. 1. -- blind. to
-- [Look near] fixedly]

Pork, [Hog's flesh] Porker, [Young hog] Porphyry, [Reddish Marble] Porpois.
Fi. I. 1. A. Porrage, vid. Pottage. Porringer, vid. Pottinger. Port. [Haven]
[Gate] -- hole. RN. II. 7. [adj. outside Dignity]
Portable, [adj. p. Carry (pot.] (apt.]
Portage, [Payment for carriage] Portal, [Door (room] Portcullis. RM. VI. 8. A.
Portentous, [Fore-signing some evil (augm.] Porter, [adj. Door (Off.] [Bearer]
Porthole. RN. II. 7. Portion. [Part] [adj. Proportion (part] Wife's -- [W.
part of the Inheritance]
Portmantean, [adj. Riding-bag] Portray, a. Description] a. Picture]
Portsale, [Public sale] Pose. [Try] sp. by questions Nonplus. D. VI. 8.
Posie, Flowers (aggr.] Sentence upon-written]
Position. Proposition] Affirmation] Site] Posture]
Positive. T. III. 3. Positure, [Posture] Posnet, [Standing pot with a handle]
Possess, Have] Hold] a. Possession]
-- ion. Po. Prescription, [Custom of possession]
take -- (Possess (inc.]
Posset, [Broth of coagulated milk] Possibility. T. IV. 4. Post. [Wooden
column] [Swift, Carrier] Messenger] ride -- [Ride on diverse horses successively]

to -- [adv. Swiftness (ition.] sp. Riding] [Publish by writing on column]
-- accounts [Write the sums in another page] book]

Post-date, [Date after pret. writing] Posteriority, [Succeeding (abstr.]
Posterity, [Descendents (aggr.] TO. I. 1. O. Postern, [adj. Hinder-part (door]
Posthumous, [Born after Father's death] Postil, [adj. p. Preaching (thing]
Postilion, [Before-riding (person] Postpone, [Less esteem] Postscript, After-
written (thing] Under- written (thing]
Postulation, [Demand] Posture. AC. VI. A. Pot. Pr. V. 5. -- companions, [adj.
a. Drunkenness c.] -- hangers, [adj. a. Hanging (jug.) for pot.] -- herb, [H.
for broth] -- lid, [adj. Covering (thing) for pot.] -- sherd, [Fragment of
earthen (vess.]
Potable, [adj. p. Drink (apt.] Potato. HS. IX. 3^. Potent, [adj. Power]
Potentate, Powerful (person] Prince]
Potential, T. III. 5. O. Potgun. [Gun (like) Tube] Potion, [Potable (thing]
sp. Medicinal]
Potsherd, [Fragment of earthen (vess.] Pottage, [Broth] Potter, [adj. O. IV.
A. (mech.] Pottinger, [Dish for broth] Pottle, [Two quarts] Potulent, [adj. p.
Drink (apt.] Pouch. [Bag (dim.] [Stomach]. ^o -- [Swallow]
Powder. TM. VI. 4. A. gun -- RM. V. 7. A. to -- [a. Powder (make] Sprinkle.
Pr. III. 7. A. sp. with salt]


Poverty. Ha. II. 2. O. Poult, [Grouse] Poultice, [Soft plaster] Poultry, [Cock
By. II. 1. (kinde] Pounce, [Claw of bird] to -- [Pink]
Pound. Weight. Mea. III. 5. Money. Mea. IV. 5. Pinfold, [Imprisoning (sep.)
for beasts.] to -- [Imprison] [Bray with Cylinder] Mo. VI. ^.
Poundage, Tax adv. Pound (segr.] Payment adv. Pound (segr.]
Pourcontrel. Ex. IX. 1. Pouring. O. II 8. Pourtraicture, [Picture] Pout,
[Angry mouth (manner] to -- AC. IV. 2. O. Eel -- Fi. VI. 6. A. [Heathcock] By.
II. 5.
Power. Natural -- NP. Might] Ha. II. 6. Authority] -- full, [adj. a. Power] in
one's -- [adj. p. Power]
Pox. French -- S. II. 6. Small -- S. II. 4.
Practice. RC. II. A. -- Law RC. II. A. L.] -- Physic RC. II. A. P.] Action]
Endeavour] Essay] Exercise] -- ed, [Expert]
Pragmaticalness, [Diligent (corr.] Pray. RE. IV. 1. Prayer, [adj. RE. IV. 1.
(thing] Praise. TO. V. 8. Prance, Go proudly] Trot]
Prank. [Extraordinary action] to -- [a. Ornate (make]
Prate, [a. Loquacity] Pratic, [Licence to trade] Prattle, [a. Loquacity]
Pravity, [Evil (abstr.] Prawn, [Shrimp] Ex. VI. 4. Preach. RE. IV. 4. Preamble,
[Prologue] Prebendary, [Assessor of Cathedral Collegiate
Church] Precaution, [Warning] Precedence. Sp, I. 2. E. Precedent. [Exemplar]
[Preceding]
Precellence, [Excellence] Precept, [Command] Precinct, [Authority (place]
Precious, [adj. Price (augm.] -- stone, [Gem]
Precipice, [Steep (place] Precipitate. Chymic. O. VI. 3. A. Capital
punishment. RJ. V. 3. A. [Hast (exc.] [a. Rashness]
Precise. Perfect (augm.] Regular (augm.] [Scrupulous]
Precocity, [Soon (exc.) Ripeness. Precognition, [Before-knowing] Precontract,
[Before-contract] Predatory, [adj. a. Booty] Predecessor, [adj. Preceding
(person] Predestinate, [Before determine] appoint]

Predicable, [adj. p. Predicate (apt.] Predicament. TA. Predicate, D. II. 5. A.
Predication, [a. Predicate] Prediction, Before-telling] Prophecy]
Predominant, More powerful] adj. a. Victory]
Pre-election. [Rather-chusing] Pre-eminence. SuperIority] Excellence] Dignity]
Privilege]
Preemption, Before-buying.] First-buying.]
Preexistence, [Before-actualness] Preface, [Prologue] Prefect, [adj. Authority
Office
(person] -- ure, Authority] Office]

Prefer. More- esteem] Before- chuse] -- person, [adj. a. Dignity] Power]
-- bill, [adj. a. Bill]
Prefigure, [Before adj. a. type] Prefix, [Before- adj. a. Fasten] Appoint]
Pregnant, Full] Important]
Prey, [Booty] Prejudice, [Before-opinion (corr.] -- ial, Hurtful] Impedient]

Prejudicate, [Before- a. Sentence] Condemn]

Preke, [Pourcontrel] Ex. IX. 1. Prelate, [Bishop] RE. II. 4. A. Prelude, [adj.
Preparation play] Premeditate, [Before-meditate] Premise, [Before- put] suppose]

Premonish, [Before-warn] Praemunire, [Forfeiture of goods and liberty] Prentice
[Disciple (merc.] (mech.]

Preoccupation, [Before-possess] Preordain, [Before-ordain] Prepare. TA. III.
2. -- food. Pr. III.
Preponderate, [More-weigh] Preposition. D. II. 8. Preposterous,
[Against-order'd] Prepuce, [Skin to be cut off in Circumcision] Prerogative.
RC. IV. 7. Presage, [Before-sign] Presbyter. RE. II. 5. A. Prescience,
[Before-knowing] Prescribe. [Before-appoint] -- by Law, [a. Law] -- by Custom,
[a. Right (make) by pret. custom]
Presence. -- in place. Sp. II. 1. -- chamber, [Room for King's presence] -- in
time. Sp. I. 1. [Sprightliness]
Present, [adj. Presence] to -- [Represent] [Accuse]
a -- [Gift] Prntation Right of giving Giving of right
Priest's (place]
Presently adv. Present] adv. Future (dim.]
Preserv, Keep] Defend] Condite] Action of God. AS. I. 4.

Preservative, [adj. a. Preserve (thing) President. [Prefect] [Example]
Press. Thrusting] a. Compression] -- to death. RJ. V. 3. Printer's -- [adj. a.
Printing (jug.] Wine -- [adj. Wine (jug] [a. Dense Fast Hard Heavy
make] [a. Necessity] Coaction] -- soldiers, [a. Soldier (make) by coaction]

[a. Persuade Entreat
(augm.] a -- Throng, [Dense Multitude] Aggregate]
-- for Apparel Books
[Box -- ]
Pressure, Pressing] Necessity] Affliction]
Pressed, [Ready] Prestigiator. RC. II. 9. A. Presume. [a. Boldness] Confidence]
[a. Hope (corr.]
Presumption. [Presuming] [Strong argument] sp, Conjectural]

Presumptuousness. [Hope (corr.] [Rashness] Irreverence] Arrogance]
Presuppose, [Before-suppose] Pretense. Seeming cause] Feigned cause]
Pretend. [Seem (make] [Dissemble]
Preterition, [Omission] Pretermit, [Omit] Pretext. Seeming cause] Feigned
cause]
Pretty. [Handsom (dim.] [adj. Mediocrity]
Prevail. [a. Superiour] Victory]
[Obtain]
Prevarication. [Betraying by pleading] [Deceitful, Action] Speech]

Prevent. TA. III. 9. Previous, [adj. Preceding] Preparation]

Pry, See (end] a. Spy]
Priapism. Disease. Price. RC. V. 7. Prick. [Point]. Mark^ [adj. p. Object
(thing] Tooth] Mag. IV. 2. Prickle, [Thorn] PP. I. 3. A. -- ing. Mo. VI. 7. A.
-- pain. AC. II. 7. A. -- forward, [a. Impulsive] -- on, [a. Impulsive] -- in,
[a. Plant] up, [a. Direct] -- wood. Sh. I. 4. A.
Pricket, [Buck. Be. II. 6. of the second year.] Prickle, [Thorn] PP. I. 3. A.
Pride. Man. V. 2. D. Priest. Jewish -- RE. II. 2. Christian -- RE. II. 5.
Primary, [Chief] Primate. RE. II. 4. Prime, First] Chief]
Primitive. TM. IV. 1. Primogeniture, [First birth (abstr.] Primrose. HS. VIII.
1. Prince. RC. I. 2. A. [King's Son] -- 's feather. HF. I. 15. A. -- 's wood.
Tr. VII. 6. A.
Principal. [Chief] [Governour] [Money demised] disbursed]
-- ness. TM. IV. 4.
Principality. [Government (place] Principle. [Cause] [Rule] [Element]
Print. [Mark] [Impression] -- ing. AC. III. 7. A.
Prior, [Abby (Off.] Priority, [Preceding (abstr.] Prism. Mag. III. 6. O.
Prison, [Imprisonment (place] Prisoner. Reputed Criminal. RJ. I. 3. O. [adj. p.
Imprison (person]
Pristin, Former] Old]
Privado, [Friend (augm.] Private. op, to Public, [adj. TM. V. 5. O.
[Concealed] -- man, [Not-magistrate]

Privateer, [Private man of war.] Privation, [a. Privative] Privative. T. III.
3. O. Privet. Sh. II. 11. Ever-green -- Sh. III. 3. A. Mock -- Sh. III. 3.
Privy. [Knowing] [Accessory] [Hidden] [Secret] -- parts. PG. VI. ^.
Jakes, [Dunging (room]
Privilege. RC. IV. 7. A. -- ed place, [p. Immunity (place]
Privities. PG. VI. 8. Prize. [Booty] [Reward of victory] Fighting sp. for
wager] Gaming sp. for wager] to -- [a. Price] Value]
[Esteem]
Probable, [adj. Opinion Probation
(apt.]
Probation. D. VI. 6. -- er, [adj. p. Essaying (person]
Probe, [Depth measure (pin] Problem, Proposition to be disputed] Question to
be disputed]
Proboscis, [Trunk] PP. V. 4. A. Proceed. TA. VI. 2. - from, [adj. p. Cause
Birth Being
from] - ings, [Series of actions.] - Judicial. RJ. II.
the -- Gain] Revenue]

Process. [a. Proceeding] [Series] -- of a bone, [Protuberant (part] -- of
time, [After some much
time] -- in law, [Citation] sp. written]

Procession. [Proceeding] [Solemn about-walking]
Proclaim, [Publish] sp. solemnly] Proclamation Publishing] Edict]
Proclivity, [Inclinableness] Procrastinate Delay sp. till next day.] Protract
sp. till next day.]
Procreate, [Generate] Proctor. [Substitute] [Advocate]
Procuration. [adj. Proctor (make] sp. writing]
[Procuring]
Procure. [Cause] [Furnish] [Obtain]
Prodigality. Man. III. 1. E. Prodigy, Preter-natural (thing] Extraordinary
(thing] sp. before-signing a. adversity]

Prodigious. [adj. Prodigy] [Great (augm.]
Produce. [Out-take] sp. from concealing (place.] [a. Cause] -- fruit, [a.
Fruit] -- by Multiplication, [a. Product] [Known (make] Extend] Long (make]
Continue]
Product. TM. VI. 8. O. Proem, [Prologue] Profane. Irreligious, [adj. RE. IV.
D.] [Not-consecrated] to --, RE. V. 1. O.
Profess [a. Profession] -- ion [Acknowledgment] Calling. RC. II.
Proffer, [Offer] Proficient, [adj. Profit] Profit. [adj. Profitable (thing]
[Gain] [Revenue] -- able. T. IV. 1. to -- [a. Profit] -- in learning, [Increase
-- ]
Profligate. [Driven away] [Vicious (augm.]
Profound. [Deep] [Obscure]
Profundity. [Depth] [Obscureness]
Profuse, Prodigal] Squandering]
Progeny, [Descendents (kinde] (aggr.]
Progenitor. TO. I. 1. Prognosticate. [Before- know] tell]

Progress. Proceeding] Journey] [Increase] -- ion. [Proceeding] -- of Animals.
Mo. I. Continuing] Joyning]

Prohibit. [Forbid] [Hinder]
Projecting. [Designing] [Contriving]
Projection. -- Chymic, [a. Factitious Gold] -- of sphere, [Repressing it upon
a Plain]
Prolation, [Articulation] Prole, [Wander seeking] Prolifical, [Fruitful]
Prolix, [Long (augm.] [Ample]
Prolocutor, [adj. Speaking (Off.] sp. First Chief
Speaker]
Prologue. D. V. 8. Prolong. [Lengthen] [Delay]
Prominent, [Protuberant] Promiscuous, Mixed] Confused]
Promise. TO. V. 6. -- to God, [Vow] -- in contract. TO. VI. 3. -- for another,
[Stipulate] Espouse. TO. II. 3.
Promontory, W. III. 4. Promooter, [adj. Accusing (Off.] Promote. [a. Help] [a.
Dignity]
Prompt. [adj. Dispatch] Alacrity]
[adj. p. Disciple (apt.] [adj. Sagacity] to -- [Dictate secretly]
Promptuary, [adj. Laying-up (place] Promulgate, [Publish] Prone, [adj. p.
Disposition] Inclination]

Prong, [adj. Pricking (apt.) Fork] Pronoun. D. II. 7. Pronounce, [v.
Articulate] Proof. [Probation] [Essaying] of -- [adj. p. Essaying] in -- [Fat]

Prove. Probation] Confirmation] [Essay] [Become]
Prop. Po. III. 7. Propagate, [v. Multitude (kind] Propensity, Alacrity]
Inclination (apt.]
Proper. op. to Common. [adj. TM. IV. 6.] op. to Figurate [adj. D. III. 6.
[Tall]
Property. [Proper (thing] [Propriety]
Profane. Irreligious. [adj. RE. IV. D.] [Not-consecrated] to -- RE. V. 1. O.
Prophecy, [a. Prophet] Prophet. RE. II. 1. A. Propinquity, [Nearness]
Propitiation, Un-enemy] Un-guilty] Un-anger] sp. by Sacrifice]

Propitious, [adj. Favour] Proportion. Mea. A. -- Arithmetical, [Equality of
differences] well -- ed, [Figured (perf-]
Propose. [a. Proposition] [Offer]
Proposition. D. V. 1. Propound, vid. Propose. Proprietary, [Proper owner]
Propriety. RC. IV. 5. Prorogue, [a. Stay till another time] Proscarab. Ex. I.
6. Proscribe, [Publish Command Permission
to kill] Prose. D. III. 4. Prosecute. AS. IV. 6. -- judicially, [Continue adj.
a. Accuser]
Proselyte, [Convert] Prosodia, [Measuring (art) of quantities of syllables]
Prospect, [adj. p. See (pot.] (Place] (Area] -- ive glass, [Glass (instr.) for
seeing remote (things]

Prosperity. Ha. I. 2. Prostitute, [adj. p. object (make) adv. common] sp. to
a. Unchastness] a -- [Commona. unchaste (fem]

Prostrate, [Lying] AC. VI. 7. O. Prosyllogism, [Preceding Syllogism.] Protect.
Man. VI. 4. [Conservation] [Defending]
Protest. RC. VI. 3. A. -- against. RJ. II. 8.
Protonotary, First notary] Chief notary]
Prototype, First type.] Chief type.]
Protract. TA. III. 5. O. Protuberance. Mag. IV. 3. Proud, [adj. Pride] --
bitch, [adj. Coition (apt) b.]
Prove, vid. Prove. Provender, [Corn for horses] Proverb, [Adage] Provide. [a.
Providence] [Furnish] - for, [a. Heedfulness against] -- ed that, Conditionally
that.] If.]

Providence. -- of God. AS. I. 2. -- of Man. Man. III. 2.
Provident, [adj. a. Providence] Province. RC. III. 3. -- Eccesiastical,
[Primate's (place]
Provincial, [adj. Province] a -- [Chief (Off.) of a Province]
Provision. [a. Providence] Necessaries. Pr.
Proviso, [adv. Condition] Provoke. [a. Cause] Impulsive]
[Angry (make] Challenge. RM. I. 2.
Provost, [adj. Authority Office
(person] Prow, [Fore-part of a ship] Prowess, [a. Fortitude] Proxy,
[Substituted (person] Proximity, [Nearness] Prudence, [Wisdom.] Prune. [Plum]
to -- O. III. 8.
Prunel. Psalm. RE. IV. 3. A. Psalter, [Book of Psalms] Ptisan, [Broth of
Barley] sp. Medicinal.]
Publican, [adj. Tax (Off.] Publicness. TM. V. 5. Publish, [a. Publicness
(make] Pucker, [Un- a. Evenness by shrinking] Puck-fist, [Fuzball] HL. I. 2. A.
Pudding. Pr. I. 2. A. -- grass, [Penny-royal]
Puddle, [Stagnum] W. IV. 7. A. [Durty water] to -- [a. Durty (make]
Puet, [Lapwing] By. VII. 1. Puff. Wind (imp.] Breath (imp.] [Swell] sp. with
wind] S. I. 5. A. -- up, [a. Proud (make]
Puffin. By. IX. 6. Pug, [Monkey] Puissance, [Power] Puke, [Vomit.]
Pulchritude, [Beauty] Pule, [Acute grief (voice] Pull. O. I. 4. sp. looking
toward the object.] sp. without success] -- bird, [Un- a. feather b.] -- down,
Diminish] Weaken]
-- in pieces, [Tear into fragments]
Pullein, [Cock By. II. 1. (kinde] (aggr.]
Pullet, [Young hen] Pully, [adj. O. I. 3. (jug.] Pullulate, [Sprout (inc.]
Pulp. Pulpit, [Preaching (place] Pulse. Motion. Mo. III. 1. [Legumen] oily
purging -- HS. VII. 10. A.
Pulverize, [a. Powder (make] Pumice. St. I. 7. Pump. Po. VI. 3. A. Shoe,
[limber-bottom'd adj. foot (vest.] to -- out, [Know (end) by questioning]
Pumpion. Punaise, [Wall-louse] Ex. II. 6. A. Punch, [Thrust (imp.] [adj. p.
Hole (make) by striking] [Drink of Brandy and Water]
Punctilio, [Point (dim.] Punctual, [Perfect] Pungent, [Pricking] Puny, New]
sp. Learner] Unexpert]
Punishment. Ha. I. O. -- Capital. RJ. V. -- not Capital. RJ. VI.
Punk, [adj. Unchaste (fem.] Pupil. TO. III. 4. O. Puppet, [Image (dim.) of man]
Puppy, [Dog. Be. III, 1. (young] Purblind, [Not-adj. a. See (pot.) remote
(things] Purchase, [Buy] Pure. [Simple] [Clean] -- ness. TM. V. 7. [Holy]
Purgation. Mo. IV. vid. Purge.
Purgatory, [Punishment (place) for purging from sin] Purge. Evacuation. Mo.
IV. [Dunging] sp. by Physic] [Cleanse] [Pure (make] Expiating [Unguilty (make]
[Absolving] -- upon oath, [Swear (make) innocence] a -- [a. Dunging medecin.]
Purify, [a. Pure (make] Purity, vid. Pureness. Purle. ^ of lace. Pr. IV. 5.
A. [Mixture of drinks] sp. with wormwood.]
Purloin, [a. Theft] Purlue, [Margin of Forrest] Purple. Fish. Fi. Ex. VII. 2.
A. Color. Q. II. 4. -- s, [adj. a. Purple fever]
Purport, [Meaning] Purpose. Intention. AS. IV. 3. [Design] full --
[Resolution] beside the -- [Impertinent] of -- [adv. Design] on -- [adv.
Considerate] to the -- [adv. Congruous] Pertinent] Perfect]
to no -- [adv. Frustration] Frivolous]
to what -- [For what end]
Purpura. Ex. VII. 2. A. Purse, [Bag for money] -- er. RN. V. 5. A. -- net,
[Net bag (like] Shepherd's --
Pursevant. RJ. I. 6. Pursy, Asthmatical] Fat (corr.]
Purslane. HL. VIII. 3. -- tree, [Halimus] Sh. VI. 6.
Pursue, [Follow] -- ing. RM. II. 3. E.
Purvey, [Provide] Purulent, [Mattery] Push. Tumor (dim. S. III. 1. to --
[Thrust (imp.]
Pusillanimity. Man. III. 8. D. Puss, [Cat] Pustule. S. III. 1. Put. Proper.
TA. I. 1. a. Place] [a. Cause] -- away, [Abdicate] -- back, [Retire (make] --
by, [a. Frustration] -- down, [Un-a. Power] Authority] Office]
-- forth. Publish] P^llulate] Un-a. Authority] Power] Office]
-- in, [a. Inside] -- bail, [a. Stipulation] -- a box, [Into a box] --
execution, [a. Execute] -- fear, [a. Fear (make] -- one's head, [a. Think
(make] -- hope, [a. Hope (make] -- mind, [a. Remember (make] -- order, [a.
Order] -- practice, [a. Practice] -- print, [a. Print] -- remembrance, [a.
Memory (make] -- writing, [a. Write] -- off, Delay] Sell]
-- ones clothes, [Un- a. clothe] -- on, Hasten] a. Impulsive]
-- one's clothes, [a. clothe] -- over, [a. Digestion] Assign]
-- out, Quench] Annihilate] Publish]
-- of doors, [a. Exile] -- of office, [Un- a. Office] -- of order, [a.
Confusion] -- one's eyes, a. Blindness] Un- a. Eye]
-- to Adde] Apply] Arbitrator (make] Shut]
-- be done, [Appoint to be d.] -- be kept, [Appoint to be k.] -- death, a. Dy]
a. Capital punishment]
-- flight, [a. Fly (make] -- shame, [a. Shame] -- shift, [a. Difficulty] --
it, [a. Difficulty] -- sword, [a. Sword] -- venture, [a. Essay] -- use, [a.
Usury] -- together, [Together* put] -- up. -- a hare, [a. Motion h.] --
petition, [a. Petition] -- sword, [a. sheath s.] -- wrong, [Not-revenge w.] --
upon, [a. Impulsive] -- case, [Suppose] -- an end to, [a. End] -- trick on, [a.
Affront] Mock]

Putrefaction, [Rottenness] Putrefie, [a. Rotten (make] Putrid, [Rotten]
Puttock, [Kite (kinde] Puzzle, [Pose] Pygmy, [Man (dim.] Pyramid. Mag. III. 7.
O. Pyromancy, [Wizarding by inspection of fire] Pyx, [Box]
Q
QVacksalver, [Physician (corr.] Quadrangle, [Four-angled Area.] Quadrant, [The
fourth part of a Circle] Quadrate, [Square] Mag. V. 1. A. Quadrature,
[Squaring] Quadripartite, [Divided into four parts] Quadruple, [Fourfold]
Quaff, [Drink (augm.] Quagmire, [Bog] Quail. By. II. 8. to -- [adj. p.
Discouragement]
Quaint. Beautiful (augm.] Ornate (augm.] Perfect (augm.]
Quake, [Tremble] Qualify, [a. Quality] Moderate] Quiet]
Qualification. Quality] Condition]
Quality. T. I. 6. A. Transcendental Relation of -- TM. V. Sensible. Q. Visible
-- Q. I. Audible -- Q. III. Belonging to Taste or Smell. Q. IV. Tactile -- more
Active. Q. V. more Passive. Q. VI.
[Disposition] [Habit] [Manners] [State] [Degree]
Qualm. Nauseousness (imp.] Fainting (imp.]
Quandary. [Doubt] [Musing]
Quantity, T. I. 6. Relation of in General. TM. I Continued. TM. II.
Discontinued. TM. III.

Quarrel, [a. Contention] -- of glass, [adj. Glass (lam.]
Quarry. [Stones (place] [Booty]
Quart. Quartan, [Ague returning every fourth day] Quarter. [Fourth part] -- of
the Moon, [The fourth part of her monthly course] -- of corn. -- of timber,
[The fourth part of a tree cut long-wise] -- staff. -- of Mutton, [The fourth
part of the body of sheep] to -- [Cut into quarters] Capital punishment. RJ. V.
1. A.

[Coast] [a. Guest]
-- master. RN. V. 2. [Immunity from killing]
Quartile, [Distance of ^/4 of great -- Circle.] Quarto, [Second figure of
book] Quash, [a. Shame Despair
(make] Herb, [Pompion] HS. VII. 1.
Quave, [Tremble] sp. a^ bog]
Quaver. [Tremble] [Modulation]
Queen, [adj. Unchaste (fem.] Queazy, [adj. Nauseousness (apt.] Queen, King
(fem.] King's Wife]
Queest, [Ringdove] By. III. 1. Quell, [a. Conquer] Quench, [Un-a fire] --
thirst, [Un-thirst]
Querister, [adj. Singing (Off.] Quern. [Grinding mill.] Querulous, [adj. a.
Grudge Complain
(apt.] Quest, [Seeking] [Sworn adj. searching (Off.]
Question. D. VI. 1. to call in -- Accuse (inc.] Suspected (make]
it is a -- ['Tis a doubted disputed
(thing]
Quetch, Motion (dim.] Noise (dim.]
Quibble, [a Urbanity in sound of words] Quick. [Alive] Sprightly] Vegete] --
of apprehension, [adj. Sagacity] Nimble] Swift] Soon (augm.] Transitory (augm.]
[adj. Dispatch] -- sands. W. III. 7. -- set, [Growing sepiment] -- silver. Met.
III. 1.
Quicken, [a. Quick] Quicken-tree. Tr. III. 3. Quiddity, [Being (abstr.] Quiet.
op. to Motion. Mo. O. [adj. Silence] [Peaceable] op. to Molest. TA. V. 9.
[Without care]
Quill. PP. V. 1. A. [Pin] sp. concave]
Quillet, [a. Frivolousness (dim.] Quilt. [Satiate] [Stiffen with sowing]
Quince. Tr. I. 2. A. Quintal, [100 pound] Quintessence, [Best part] sp.
extracted Chimically]
Quintin. Quipp, [Secret Scoff] Reproof]
Quire. -- of Church, [Chief Temple (part] -- of people, [Singers (aggr.] -- of
paper, [Four and twenty sheets]
Quirk, [Little ftivolous (thing] Quit. to be -- with, [adj. a. pret.
Compensate] to -- Acquit] Absolve] [Forsake]

Quitch, [Dogs grass] HL. III. 5. A. Quite, [adv. Total] -- and clean. [adv.
Total]
Quittance, [adj. Acquitting (thing] sp. writing] Quiver, [Case for arrows] to
-- [Tremble]
Quoil, Confused noise] Endeavor (augm.]
Quoit, [adj. p. cast (apt) stone (lamin.] Quotation. D. IV. 9. Quoth, [Saith]
Q^^tidian, [adj. Days (segr.] Quotient. Number TM. VI. 9.
R.
RAbbet, [Cony] Be. III. 4. Rabbin, [Jewish Teacher] Graduate]
Rabble. RC. I. 7. Race. [a. Running] [adj. Running (place]
[Series] [Descendents (aggr.] TO. I. 1. O. to -- [Spoil] vid. Raze.
Rack. [Jugament of parallel pins (augm.] -- for horse, etc. [Rack for Hay] --
for spit, [Spit-supporting (jug.] -- for torment, [adj. RJ. VI. 3. (jug.]
-- bone. PG. IV. 3. to --
[Extend violently] Torment. RJ. VI. 3. -- wine, [Separate it from the Lees]

Racket. [adj. Net (instr.) for a. balling] [Tumult]
Radiation, [a. Shining adv. line (figure] Radical, [adj. Root] Radicate. [a.
Root]
Radish. HS. IV. 5. Raff, [Worst part] Raft, [Ship (like) of together-tied
Timbers] Rafter, [Wooden column (dim.] Rag, [Off-torn fragment] -- stone. St.
I. 2. -- wort. HF. III. 7.
Rage. [Violence (augm.] sp. of anger]

Ragged, [adj. p. Rough] sp. by tearing] Raya Oxyrinchos. Fi. II. 3. Ray. Fish.
Maid.] [Half diameter] Beam [Line of light] [Leaf of metal] -- in battle,
[adj. p. Order for battel] -- of a Fish. PP. IV. 6. A.
Ray-weed, [Darnel] Rail. [Bar] Bird. By. II. 8. A. to -- [Revile]
Raillery, [a. Urbanity] Raiment, [Clothing] Rain. Water. El. III. 3. -- bow.
El. V. 1.
Raise. Lift] Rise (make] -- Devils, [Appear (make) D.] -- from sleep, [Waken]
-- siege, [Un- a. siege] -- up, [Up-raise] [High (make] [a. Dignity] [a. Cause]
-- a bank, [a. Bank (make] -- men, Gather -- ] -- money, Gather -- ] -- war,
[War (make] [a. Intension Augmentation
sp. more-] -- one's voice, [More-a. voice]
Raisin, [Dried grape] Rake, [Staples (line] -- of a ship. RN. II. 9. A. [adj.
Staples (line) together adj. gathering (instr.] -- hell, [Vicious (augm.)
person] to -- [Gather with Rake] -- up together, [Gather as with Rake]
[a. Pain adv. scratching (like]
Rally, [Again- a. gather] a. order]
Ram. [Sheep. Be. II. 2. (male] [Stinking adv. Goat (like]
to -- [a. Dense] Fast] sp. by down-knocking]

-- Into, [Into-ram]
-- mer, [a. Dense Fast
(instr.] sp. by knocking]

Ramage. Ramp, [Leap] -- ant, [Standing on the hinder legs] a -- [Wanton adj.
a. Rusticity (fem.]
Rampire. RM. VI. 3. Rampion. HS. VII. 7. Ramson. HL. IV. 12. mountain -- HL.
IV. 12. A.
Rana piscatrix, [Toad-fish] Rancour, [Hatred (augm.] sp. old] Rand. -- of
beef, [Flank -- ] -- of leather, [Long (part -- ]
Random, [Wandering] -- shot, [Not-aimed]
Range. [Sift] [a. Order] Wander] About-v. journey]
Rank. [Excessive] [Leafed (exc.]
[Rammish] [Genuine (corr.] a -- [Order] [Series] [Line]
op. to File. RM. IV. 4. [Degree] sp. of person] RJ. I.


Rankle, [Rot] Ransack. [Booty] [Search (augm.]
Ransom, [Price for un- slaving] captivating]
to^ [Un- a. slave captive
sp. with price]
Rap, [Little striking (imp.] Rapacity. Greediness. NP. IV. 5. [Scraping] Man.
III. 2. E.
Rape. [Wild Turnip] [Force] [Forcible stupration]
Rapid, [Swift (augm.] Rapier, [Sword adj. pricking (apt.] Rapine, [a.
Scrapingness] sp. by violence] extortion]

Rapture, [Extasie] Rare, [adj. Rarity] [Thin] [Seldom] [Excellent]
Rarifie, [a. Q. V. 3. D.] Rarity. [Seldomness] Sp. II. 6. O. [Excellence]
Tactil quality. Q. V. 3. D.
Rasbury. Sh. I. 1. Rascal. [Lean] [Sorry]
Rasher, [Broil'd (lamin] Rashness. op. to Fortitude. Man. I. 7. E. op. to
Considerate. Ha. IV. 1. D.
Rasp, [adj. Filing (instr.) adj. teeth (plain] Raspis. Sh. I. 1. Rat. Be. III.
7. -- 's bane, [Arsenic]
Rate. [Proportion] [Price] [Tax] [Chide]
Rathe. [Soon] [Early]
Rather, [More] sp. More-willingly] I had- [I more will] before chuse]


Ratify. [a. Authority] [Confirm]
Ratiocination. [a. Rational] [Discourse]
Rational. [adj. NP. I.] -- Power. NP. I. -- Soul. W. I. 6.
Rattle, [adj. Rattling (instr.] Rattling. [Noise by mutual striking of solids
(dim.] [Reproving (augm.] -- of ship. RN. IV. 2.
Ravage, [a. Booty] Rave. S. IV. 1. A. Ravel, [Tangle] [a. Confusion]
Ravelin. Raven. Bird. By. I. 5. to -- [a. Rapacity] [a. Scrapingness]
Extortion]
[a. Booty]

Raving. S. IV. 1. A. Ravish. Take violently] Stuprate violently] [a. Extasie]
Raw. [Un-skinn'd] Not-cook'd. adj. Pr. III. O. [Not-digested] [Unexpert]
Raze. [a. Ruine] [a. Destruction] Spoiling] sp. by shaving]


Razor. [Shaving (instr.] [Knife for shaving] Fish. Ex. VIII. ^. A. Bird
-- bill. By. IX. 7.
Re. Ad. III. 3. A. Reach. [Extend] AC. VI. 2. -- out. [Extend one's arm]
[Deliver with extended arm]
a. Pandiculation] Vomit (end]
[v. Continuance until] Take] Obtain] -- after, [Take (end]
[Understand] a -- -- of a river, (curve (part) of stream] End] Design]

Reachless. [Careless] [Idle]
Read. AC. III. 4. -- ing, [Learning] Ha. VI. 4. -- to, [a. Teacher]
Ready. [Present] Soon] Near] [Easie] Willing] Inclined] [adj. Alacrity]
Prepared] Furnish'd] Clothed] [Dispatch'd] -- to die, [Almost adj. fut. dying]
Readmit, [Again-admit] Reality. [Thing (abstr.] [Sincerity]
Realm, [King's (place] Ream, [Twenty quires] Reap. O. III. 4. A. Rear. [Raise]
[a. Direct (make]
Reason. [Cause] sp. Impulsive] Final]
[Argument] Faculty. NP. I. Moderation] Equity] by -- of. Prep. I. 2. O. in --
[adv. Equity] out of -- [Excessively] to -- -- in one's mind. Discourse]
Dispute] -- for, [a. Probation (end] -- against, [Confute (end]

Reasonable, [adj. Reason] Mediocrity]
-- government. Man. VI. 6.
Reassemble, [Again-assemble] Reave, [Un-knit] Rebaptize, [Again-baptize]
Rebate, [Diminish adv. proportion] Rebeck. Rebellion. Vice. Man. V. 5. D.
Crime. RJ. III. 3.
Rebound, [Leap reflexly] Rebuff, [Back-striking] Rebuild, [Again-build]
Rebuke, [Reprove] Rebus, [Expression (manner) of Name Sentence
by picture] Recall, Back-call] Recant]
Recantation. D. VI. 9. A. Recapitulate, [Repeat the sum] Recede. [Back-go]
[Retire]
Receipt. [Receiving] [Direction of Physic] [adj. Acquitting (thing]
Receive. Proper. TA. IV. 3. O. [Accept] [Entertain]
-- er. [adj. Receiving (person] [adj. Gathering (Off.] -- ed, adj. p. Receive]
Customary]


Receptacle. Receiving (thing] Containing (vess.]
Reception, [Receiving] Recess. [Receding] [adj. Concealing (place]
Rech, vid. Reach. Recidivation, [Relapse] Reciprocation. T. VI. 7. O. Recite.
[Repeat] [Again-say] [a. Narration]
Reckon. [Esteem] [a. Number] [Account.] TA. IV. 6. -- up, [a. Number] over --
Number (exc.] Account too-much]
the -- ing, [adj. p. ought pay (thing]

Reclaim. [a. Gentle (make] [Turn] -- from error, [Convert] -- from vice,
[Repent (make]

Recline, [Down-oblique the superficies] Recluse. [Shut up] [Solitary]
Recognize. [Consider again] [Acknowledge]
Recognizance, [Bond acknowledged before Magistrate] Recoil. [Reflect] [Retire]
Recommend. [Offer] [Entrust] sp. adv. Commending]

Recompense. [Compensate] [Reward]
Reconcile. [Un-a. Enemy] Contention]
[a. Peace (make]
Reconquer, [Back-conquer] Record. [a. Memory] [a. Notary] take to- [a. Notary
(make]
-- er. Notary] RJ. I. 5. Judge assistant to the City (Off.]
[adj. Music pipe]
Recover. [Back-come] [Again- obtain] Gain]
[Possess again] [Repair] [Again- v. Healthy]
Recount. [a. Narration] [Consider]
Recourse, [To-coming] sp. often]
Recreant, [Perfidious] sp. through Cowardise]
Recreation. Mo. V. Moderateness in it. Man. II. 5. Immoderateness in it. Man.
II. 5. D.
Recrement, [Worst part] -- of Metals. Met. IV.
Recriminate, [Retort accusation] Recruit, [Again- strengthen] fill]
Rect. op. to Curve.] -- angle, [Square having four right angles.]
Rectifying, [a. Right (make] Chemical -- O. VI. 6. A.
Rector, [Governour] Recumbency, Leaning] Trust]
Recusant. [adj. Refusing (person] [Schismatic]
Red. Q. II. 2. -- breast. By. V. 5. -- lead, [Cinnabar] -- start. By. V. 5. A.
Redargution, [Reproof] Redbreast. By. V. 5. Redeem. Action of God. AS. I. 7.
[Back-buy] [Buy liberty] [Un-captivate] [Un- a. slave]
Redeliver, [Back-deliver] Redemand, [Back-demand] Redemption, [Redeeming] AS.
I. 7. Redolent, [Sweet] Redouble, a. Double] Repeat]
Redoubt. RM. VI. 6. -- ed, [Excellent] sp. in Reputation] sp. for Fortitude]

Redound, [a. Event] Redress. Remedy] Amendment]
Redshank. By. VII. 4. Redstart. By. V. 5. A. Redwing. By. III. 5. A. Reduce.
[Cause] Make] Again-make] [Bring back]
Redundant. [adj. Excess] [Superfluous]
Reduplicate. [a. Double] [Repeat]
Reed. HL. III. 7. Burr -- HL. III. 15. A. flowring -- HL. V. 4. sweet smelling
-- HL. III. 11. -- mace. HL. III. 15.
Re-edifie, [Again-build] Reek. [Heap] [Vapour]
Reel. [Stagger] Mo. II. 4. O. [a. Skein] a -- [adj. a. Skein (instr.] (jug.]

Re-entry, Again -- entry] Back -- entry]
Re-establish, Again -- establish] back -- establish]
Refection. [Refreshment] Feeding. Pr. I. 1. A.
Refectory, [adj. meal (place] Refell, [Gonfute] Refer. [a. Relation] [a.
Arbitrator (make]
Reference, [a. Arbitrator (make] Refine. [a. Pure (make] [Un- a. sediment]
Reflect, [a. Mag. II. 9.] [Look back] [Again-consider]
Reflection, Reflecting] a. Reputation (corr.]
Reflux, [Ebbing] Reform* TO. VI. 7. Reformado, [adj. pret. Military (Off.]
Refracted. Mag. II. 9. A. Refractoriness. [Perversness] [Contumacy]
Refrain, [Abstain] Refrane, [Proverb] Refresh. op. to weariness. TA. V. 8.
[Mend] [Renew]
Refrigerate, [Cool] Refuge, [To-flying] sp. for safety] Place, [adj. Safe
Protection
(place]
Refulgent, [Shining] Refund. TA. IV. 5. A. Refuse. [Denying] [Rejecting]
[Abdicating] [Power of first buying] the -- [Worst part]
Refute, [Confute] Regal, [adj. King] Regard. [a. Relation] in that --
[Therefore] Conj. III. 3. A. in -- of. Pron. I. 2.
[Esteem] [Respect] [Observe] -- less, [Careless]
Regenerate, Again beget] a. Ha. V.]
Regent, [Instead-King] Regiment. [Government] [Militia] as a -- of soldiers.
RM. IV 2. A.

Region, [Country] W. III. A. -- of the air, [Part]
Register, [Notary] Regrate, [Buy to sell (corr.] Regerss, [Again-come] Regret.
[Grudging] [Nolleity] [Aversation]
Regular. RE. II. 6. Regularity. TM. V. 4. Regulate, [a. Rule] Regulus
Cristatus. By. VI. 4. -- non cristatus. By. VI. 4. A.
Rehearse. [Repeat] [Again-say] [a. Narration]
Reject. AS. IV. 5. O. [Abdicate]
Reign. [a. King] [King's (time]
Reimbark, [Into a. ship again] Reimburse, [Pay] Rein. Horse -- [adj.
Cohibiting (arm] [Cord of Bridle] [Kidney] PG. VI. 7. Running of the -- [Flux]
Reindeer. Be. II. 4. A. Reinforce, [Again-strengthen] Reinvest, [Again-invest]
Rejoice, [v. Joy] Rejoinder, [Again-answer] Reister, [Horseman] Reiterate,
[Repeat] Relapse, Again -- fall] Back -- fall]
[Again-sicken] [a. Apostasie]
Relate. [a. Relation] [Tell] [Pertain to]
Relation. T. I. 8. -- Oeconomic. TO. -- of Consanguinity. TO. I. -- of
Affinity. TO. II. -- of Superiority and Inferiority. TO. III. -- of Equality.
TO. IV. -- Civil. RC. -- Judicial. RJ. -- Military. RM. -- Naval. RN. --
Ecclesiastic. RE. [Narration] [Report]

Relative, [adj. Relation] Relaxation. [Loosning] [Ease] [Refreshing]
Release. [adj. a. Liberty] [Un-ty] [Un-imprison] [Un-captivate] [Acquit]
Releef, [Relieving] High- [Protuberance (augm.] Low- [Protuberance (dim.]
Relegation. RJ. VI. 5. A. Relent. [Soften] a. Pity (inc.] a. Repent (inc.]
Rely, [v. Confidence] Relick, [Residue (thing] Relict. [Residue] [Widow]
Relief, vid. Releef. Relieve. [a. Adjuvant] [Refresh] [a. Alms] -- guard,
[Renew g.] -- town. RM. I. 4. O.
Religion. RE. II. Natural -- RE. II. 1. Gentil -- RE. II. 2. Jewish -- RE. II.
3. Christian -- RE. II. 4. Mohammedan -- RE. II. 5.
Religious, [adj. Religion (hab.] a -- person. Regular. RE. II. 6.
Relinquish. Leave] Let go] Abandon] [a. Desertion] Dereliction]

Relish, [Tast] Reluctance. [Nolleity] [Aversation]
Remain. [a. Permanent] Residue]
[Stay]
Remainder, [Residue] Remark, [Observe] -- able, Observable] Excellent]

Remedy. TA. III. 9. A. Remember. [a. Memory] [a. Express]
Remission. -- of fault. RJ. II. 9. O. -- of debt, TA. IV. 9. O.
Remisseness. op. to Intenseness. TM. I. 8. D. [Slightness] Ha. III. 4. E.
[Sloth] Ha. IV. 5. D. Defect of justice. Man. I. 1. D.
Remit, [Send] sp. back] [v. Remission] Remisseness]

Remnant, [Residue] Remonstrance, [adj. a. Publicness (make) writing] Remora.
Fi. VI. 8. A. [adj. a. Impedient Staying
(thing]
Remorse. AS. VI. 4. Remoteness. Sp. II. 3. O. Remove, [From- motion] ition]
Remunerate, [Reward] Rencounter, [Meeting] sp. sudden]
Rend, [Tear] Render. [a. Efficient] [Yield] -- as taken. RM. II. 6. D.
[Give] [Back-give] [Repeat] -- lesson, [Repeat l.]
[Compensate] -- like for like, [Compensate]
[Translate] -- account, [a. Account] -- a reason, [Shew reason] -- thanks, [a.
Gratitude]
Rendezvous. [Convention] sp. Military] [Convention (place]
Renegado. [Revolter] [Apostate]
Renegue, [Abdicate] Renew. [a. New] [Repair] [Repeat]
Rennet, [adj. a. Fermenting (thing) of Calf's stomach] Renovation, [Renewing]
Renown. Reputation (augm.] Fame (augm.]
Renounce. [Abdication] [Rejection]
Rens, [Wash (dim.] Rent. [Tear] [Revenue] [Hire]
Renverse, [Reverse] Repay, Un-disburse] Back-pay]
Repair. Restore] Mend] TA. II. 9. Compensate] [Go] in good -- [In g. state]
Reparation, [Repairing] to give -- [Compensate]
Repast, Eating] Refection]
Repeal, [Un-law] Repeat. TA. II. 6. A. -- lesson, [Say I.]
Repel, [Back-drive] Repentance. AS. VI. 4. A. Repeople, [Again-inhabited
(make] Repercussion, Back-strike] a. Reflex]
Repete, vid. Repeat. Repetition, [Repeat] Repine, op. to Alacrity] Aversation
(augm.]
Replenish, [Fill] Repletion, [Filling] Replevy, [Un-arrest] Reply,
[Again-answer] Report. [Rumour] [Narration] [Reputation] -- of a gun, [Sound of
gun]
Repose. [Put] [Lay down] [Rest] [v. Confidence]
Repository, [adj. Laying-up (place] Reprehension. TO. V. 7. O. Represent. TA.
II. 8. Repress. [Restrain] [Subdue]
Reprieve, [Procrastinate Execution] Reprize, [Diminution of payment] Letters
of -- [Commission for Compensation for losses by bootying]
Reprobate, [Rejected] Reproach. RJ. IV. 8. Reproving, [Reprehension] Reptile,
[adj. Creeping (thing] Republic, [adj. RC (thing] Repudiate. [Reject]
[Abdicate] [Un-marry]
Repugnant, Opposite] Contrary]
Repullulate. Repulse. [Back-driving] [Denial]
Reputation. Ha. II. 4. Repute. [a. Opinion] [Esteem]
Request, [Petition] Master of -- s, [Receiving (Off.) of Petitions]
Requiem, [Rest] Require. [Demand] [Command]
Requisite, Necessary] Expedient]
Requite* [Compensate] Rere, [Hinder-part] Rere-boil'd, [Boil'd (dim.]
Reremouse, [Bat] Rereward, [Hinder part of army] Rescind, [Spoil] Rescript,
[Edict] Rescue. [Deliver] [Un- captive] prisoner]

Resemble. [Like] [Compare]
Resent, [a. Apprehension] Reserch, [Inquisition] Reserve. [Keep, part] till
another time]
[Except] a -- -- of soldiers. RM. IV. 5. A. -- edness. Man. IV. 4. D.
Reside. [Inhabit] [v. Present]
Residue. TM. VI. 7. O. Resign. [Let go] [Assign] [Yield] [Deliver] -- to God,
[a. Self-denial]
Resin. PP. I. 6. A. Resisting. RM. I. 3. O. Resolve. [Un- a. doubt (make] [a.
Solution] Answer]
[Purpose] AS. IV. 4. [a. Result]
Resolute, [adj. pret. Resolve] Constancy] Fortitude]
Resolution. [Resolving] [Resoluteness]
Resort, [Come (freq.] Resound, [Sound (augm.] Resource, [Again-rising]
Respect. [Relation] Deference. Man. V. 4. in -- of, [For] Prep. I. 2. A.
Respiration. Mo. III. 2. Respite, Time of Intermission] At times] Interval]
Sp. I. 8. O. sp. of ease] to -- [Protract]
Resplendent, [Shining] Responsal, [Answer] Responsible, [adj. Paying (pot.] I
will be -- for, [I stipulate for]
Rest. op. to Motion. M. O. Stay] Desist] a. Period] -- in Music, Silence
(sign] Period (dim.]
-- of gun, [Stick for supporting gun.] to be at -- P. Quieting] to set at --
a. Quieting] -- upon, Lean] a. Confidence] Trust]

the -- [The residue]
Restoration. [Restoring] [Mending]
Restharrow. [Cammock] HS. III. 14.
Resty. vid. Restive.
Restitution. [Restoring] TA. II. 7. [Compensating] TA. II. 7. A.
Restiveness. [Disingenuity] [Disobedience] [Contumacy]
Restorative, [adj. a. Restoring (apt.) Medecine] Restore. TA. II. 7. -- to
Estate [re- adj. p. Estate Favor [re- adj. p. Favor Health [re- adj. p. Health
Liberty [re- adj. p. Liberty Life [re- adj. p. Life
(make]
Restrein. [Diminish] sp. Liberty] Ha. II. 1. O.
[a. Cohibit] Impedient]
[a. Shortness] Narrowness]
holding] exempting] limiting] excepting]
Restreint, a. restreining] p. restreining] [Imprisonment (dim.]

Restriction, [Limitation] Restringent, [Binding] Mo. IV. O. Result. [Event]
[Summe] [Illation]
Resume. [Again -- take] [Back -- take] [Again- begin] [Re -- begin] [Repete]
Resurrection, Again- Re --
life] Retail, [Sell parts (segr.] Retaliation, [Compensation] Retard, [a. Late
Slow
make] Retching, [Stretching] [Pandiculation] [Vomiting (end]
Retchlesness. [Improvidence] Man. III. 2. O. [Carelesness] [Sloth]
Retein. [Hold] [Keep] TA. V. 5. as his Lawyer, [Bespeak] sp. with earnest]
-- to adj. Pertinence] Dependent]

Reteiner, [Dependent] Retention, Holding] Keeping]
Retentive faculty, Holding Keeping
(pot.] Retinue, Waiters Dependants
(agg.] Retire. [Back-go] [Go] TA. VI. 1. O. -- for safety] RM. II. 2. D. --
for Concealment] Privacy] Solitariness]


Retired, [adj. pret. retir^] [Solitary]
Retirement. [a. Retire] [adj. Retire (place]
Retort. to -- D. VI. 7. A. a -- [Crooked (vess.) adj Bottle (fig.]
Retract. [Back-draw] [Recant] D. VI. 9. O. sp. part]
Retreat. [a. Retire] [adj. Retire (place]
Retrench. [From-cut] sp. part.]
[a. Ablatum] Diminution]

Retribution [Compensate] Retrive, again- find re -- find
Retrogade, [back-going] Retrospection, [Considering past (thing] Return. [re-
be] come] go] [Repent]
[again- be] come] go]
[a. Turn] T. VI. 8. Reciprocation] T. VI. 8. A.
Answer] Retort] [Repeat] Restore] Compensate] Refund] Pay] -- Money, [Lend m.
to be paid in another (place] -- to life, [re-live] [re- cause] doe] give]

Reveal. [Revelation] AS. I. 6. [Shewing] TA. 1.8.
Reveils, Sound (fig.) for waking Music (fig.) for waking
(make] Revelation. AS. I. 6. Revel, a. Man. II. 5. O.] a. Riotousness] sp.
Late in the night -- rout, [Sound (augm.) of a. riot] -- s, [adj. Night
recreations] sp. of dancing]

Revenge. AS. V. 9. A. Revenue. Po. A. Reverberate. [Re-strike] [Reflect (make]
Reverence. Man. V. 3. Sir -- [Dung]
Reverend, [adj. p. Reverence (apt.] Reverse. to -- Annull, [Un- law] decree]
sentence]
[Turn] AC. VI. 8. A. the -- [Hinder part]
Reversion. Right of fut, possession] Potentialness] [Residue]
Revert. [Return] [Be right of fut. possession]
Revy, [More-bet] Review, [again See] Consider] Examin]
Revile. RJ. IV. 9. Revise, [Again See] Consider] Examin]
Revive, [re-a. Life] Vigor]
Reunion, [re-a. One] Reunite, [re-a. One] Wholeness]
Revoke. [Recall] [Recant] [a. Nothing] -- law [Un-law] sentence a. sentence]
Revolt. [a. Apostate] [a. Rebellion]
Revolve, [Consider (freq.] (augm.]

Revolution. [Vertigination] sp. till the same situation]
[Altering]
Revulsion [From- pulling] motion]
Reward. Ha. I. Rhapsody [Confused mixture] Rhetoric, [Speaking (art.) adv
Ornate] Rhetorician, [Teaching (artist) of speaking ornately] Rheubarb, vid.
Rubarb. Rheum, [Catarrh] Rheumatic, [adj. Catarrh] Rheumatism. S. IV. 4. A.
Rhinocerot. Be. II. 6. -- Fly Ex. V. 1.
Rhomb. Line, [Line of Vergency] Figure, [Square having all its sides equal,
but no right Angles]
Rhomboide, [Square having its 2 opposite Angles equal, but not all its sides
equal] Ry. HL. II. 1. A. Rial. Rib. -- of Animal. PG. IV. 4. A. -- of Ship,
[Direct beam of Ship.]
Ribaldry, [Unchastity] Riband. Pr. IV. 6. Rives, [Red Goosberries] Rice.
Plant. HL. II. 3. A. Jugament, [adj. a. Skein (jugament] [Branch smeared with
Bird-lime]
Rich. [adj. Riches] [adj. Price (augm.]
Riches. Ha. II. 2. Rick, [Heap] Rickets. S. IV. 8. Rid. [adj. pret. riding] to
-- [Empty] O. II. 7. O. [Un- burden] tangle]
[a. Liberty] Ha. II. 1. [Deliver] AS. I. 5.
get- Escape] Obtein liberty]
[Dispatch] TA. IV. 5. -- way, [Dispatch his journey]


Riddance, a. rid] p. rid]
Ridden, [adj. p. ride] Riddle [Speech obscured with figure] Ride. -- on horse,
etc. Mo. II. 7. -- at anchor. RN. VI. 5.
Rider. [adj. riding (person] [Lowest adj. horse (Off.] Money (kinde]
Ridge. Bank. Mag. V.7. -- bone, [Back bone] [Upper Margin] Side]

Ridiculous, [adj. p. Laugh (apt.] Ridgeling, [Having only one testicle]
Riding, vid. Ride. [Shire (part]
Rise, Frequent] Obvious]
Riffraff. [Worst part. TM. VI. 1. O. [Sorry (augm.) discourse]
Rifle. [Spoil] RM. II. 5. E. Dice.
Rift, [Chink through cleaving] Rig. [a. Rigging] [Wanton (fem.]
Rigging. RN. IV. Right. Subst. RC. IV. Adj. [Streight] Mag. III. 10 adj.
Justice] Equity]
True] Good] Genuine] Natural] Simple] Perfect] Due] Worthy] Lawful] Congruous]
Regular] Pure] -- angle. Mag. III. 3. -- hand, [adj. right side h.] -- side.
Sp. II. 9. make -- [Repair] Set (to -- S.) [Repair] adv. Right. -- in the nick,
[adv. perfect in the nick] etc.

Righteousness. [Holiness] Ha. V. 3. [Vertue moral] Man. I. Justice] Equity]

Rightful, [adj. Justice] Equity]
Rigid, [adj. Rigor] Rigor. Stiffness. AC. IV. 5. D. op. to Justice. Man. I. 1.
E. Equity. Man. I. 2. O.
op. to Gratiousness Man. VI. 1. O. Clemency. Man. VI. 8. O.

Rill, [Stream (dim] Rimm, [Margin] -- of the belly, [Membrane of the b.]
Rhyme. Verse D. III. 5. A. [Mist that freezes in falling] El. III. 5. A.
Rince, [Wash (dim.] Rind. PP. I. 5. Ring. to -- Neuter. Q. III. 2. Active, [a.
Ring.] -- all in, [a* Ring the last (time] -- in peal, [a. Ring adv. [Harmony]
-- out, [a. Ring (augm.] a -- of bells, [Suit of bells] a -- figure. Mag. V. 2.
-- bone, [Bone in Horses foot] -- dove* By. III. 1. A. -- finger, [Fourth
finger] -- leader, [Principal] -- tail, [Buzzard having white streak on his
train] -- worm, [Tetter] all in a -- [adj. Circle (fig.] hog -- [Pin adj. p.
Circle (fig.] ride the -- [Ride adv. Circle (fig.]

Rinse. [Wash (dim.] Riot. [a. Riotousness] [Sedition]
Riotousness. Man. III. 4. E. Rip. [Unsow] [Open by cutting]
Ripeness. NP. VI. 4. Ripier, [Carrier of fish] Rise. the -- Source. Sp. II. 4.
A. to -- [v. Rising] Upward-go] More-adj. p. High] arise. AC. VI. 1. [adj. p.
Birth] Beginning] Being] Increase]
[Grow] as Hill, [Upward-adj. oblique] as Fountain, [Spring] as Sun, appear
(inc.) above Horizon] above-adj. Horizon (inc.]


Rising, [v. Rise] Protuberance] Mag. IV. 3. Top] Sp. III. 7. -- of a hill,
[Oblique (part) of h.]
Hill, [Mountain (dim.] Tumor] S. III. Inflation] S. I. 5. A. Barm, [adj. a.
Fermenting (thing] Insurrection, [Rebellion (inc.] Resurrection, [Re-life]
Risk, Essaying] Danger]
Rite, [Circumstance] sp. Customary] sp. Solemn]
Ritual, [Book of Ceremonies] Rival. TO. II. 2. A. Rive, [Cleave] Rivel,
Wrinkle] Furrow]
River, W. IV. 7. Rivet, [Fasten pin by flatting the point of it] Rivulet,
[Stream (dim.] To. Of Fish. Soft -- [Milt] hard -- [Spawn]
Beast. Be. II. 5.
Roan horse. Rob. RJ. III. 7. Robe, [Loose upper (vest] sp. Solemn]
Robin red breast. By. V. 5. Robins. RN. IV. 5. Robustious, Strong] Hardy]
Rock. a -- Stone. W. III. 3. [Staff of adj. Spinning (machin] to -- [a.
Volutation]
Roch. Fi. IX. 9. A. -- Alum, [Allum of the rock]
Rochet. Fish, [Red Gournet] Vest, [Bishops upper adj. Linen (vest]
Rocket. HS. IV. 7. base -- HF. I. 11. A. double -- [Dames Violet] HS.IV.2.
Rod. [Wand] PP. I. 4. A. Measure, [16 foot and ] [adj. Whipping (instr.] of
branches (aggr.]
Rode. [Public way] -- for Ships, [adj. Resting (place) for ships]
Rodomontade, Oversaying Glorying
Rogation, [Week of walking about the bounds] Rogue. [Begger] [adj. Wandering
(person] Vice (person] Fraud (person]
[adj. Scurril (person]
Roial, [adj. King] the -- s of a Stag.
Roialty, [Prerogative] sp. of King]
Roister, [a. Riotousness] Insolence] Magisterialness]
Roll. to -- [a. Vertigination] -- land. O. III. 2. A. -- a Swathe about one,
[Clothe adv. Helical]

[a. Volutation] as Ship -- RN. VI. 7. A.
a -- adj. a. Rolling (instr.] adj. p. Roll (thing] [Cylinder] -- of paper,
etc. [Paper, etc. adj. p. Cylinder (fig.) by Vertigination] [Catalogue]
[adj. Ring (fig.) ornament] sp. adj. p. Twist.]

Roller, [Cylinder] sp. adj. p. Vertigination (apt.] sp. for rolling] O. III.
2. A.

Rolling [Sub. role] [Adj. role]
-- eye [adj. motion (apt. eye] -- tongue [adj. motion (apt. tongue.] -- Press,
[adj. rolling (machin) for Printing]
Rolls. [Catalogue of judicial causes and proceedings] [adj. Notary (things]
Notary (place] Master of the --

Romb, vid. Rhomb. Romance, [Feigned Narration] Rome, [Wander] Rood. [Stick]
Measure, [16 foot and ]
[Wooden pillar] [Wooden Image of Christ crucified]
Roof. -- of house. PO. III. 8. -- trees, [Rafters that support the roof] -- of
mouth, [Palat] PG. III. 5.
Rook. to -- [a. Fraud] a -- [Crow that feeds on corn] Chess.

Room. Space] Place] sp. Sufficient] to make -- [Prepare place]
in a house. Po. III. 2. of Predecessor. TG. VI. 6.
Roost, [Birds adj. sleeping (place] Root. Proper. PP. I. 1. to -- [v. Root] to
take -- [v. Root] -- out [out pluck the Roots] -- up [out pluck the Roots]

-- of a number the Number which multiplied by it self produces that other
number.] the side] Mag. II. 3. A
Extraction of --
-- of the tongue, [bottom of t.] Hebrew -- [Primitive H. word]
Rope. a -- [Cord (augm] -- of onions, [Onions (aggr.] to -- [v. Sliminess]
Ropy, [adj. Sliminess] Rore, Sound Exclamation
(augm.] Ros Solis, [Sun-dew] Rosary. Rose. Sh. I. 2. -- Cake, [Caput mort. of
distilled roses.] -- water, [distilled w. of roses] Guelder -- Sh. II. 12. holy
-- Sh. VI. 1. our Ladies -- Sh. VI. 8. Sweet mountain -- Sh. VI. 5. A. -- Bay,
[Oleander] Sh. VI. 1. A -- Campion. Sh. III. 2. -- of Jericho. Sh. VI. 8.
Rosemary. Sh. VI. 4. Rose noble, Money (kind] Rosewood. Tr. VII. 4. A.
Rosewort. HL. VIII. 2. A. Rosy, [adj. Rose] Rosin. PP. I. 6. A. Roast. -- ing.
Pr. III. 3. rule the -- [a. Power] Authority]

Rot. to -- [v. Rottenness] the -- among sheep]
Rota. Rotation, Vertigination] Wheeling]
Rote. by -- [Without- Rules] a. Reason]

Rottenness. Putrefaction. NP. V. 2. O. Taste or Smell. Q. IV. 7. O.
Rotundation, [From cutting the less parts] sp. the parts not-aliquot]
Rotundity, [Roundness] Rove, [Wander] Rover, [Wanderer] at -- s [Not adj. a.
Object]
[adj. Sea. adj. Robbing (person]
Rough. Proper. -- to feeling, Having unequal Surface] Q. VI. 2. D. -- cast,
[Rough p. plaster] -- draught, [First Picturing] Writing]
-- hew, [First cutting] -- mason.
-- Sea, [adj. p. wave (aug.) Sea.] -- way.
[Hairy] -- footed.
-- to taste. Q. IV. 3. Moral. [Fierce] Rigorous] Churlish] Morose] Magisterial]
Rustic] Insolent] Supercilious] Harsh] Austere]
[Angry]
Transc. Unpleasant] Violent] T. V. 5. O. Not-wrought] Homely]

to -- u^ [Reprehend adv. Anger (like]

Rouncival, [Great (augm.] Round Proper, [not-adj. p. angle] More perfect.
[adj. Sphere (fig.] Oval (fig.] Bowl (fig.]
-- hill, [Hill whose top is adj. Sphere (fig.] Oval (fig.] Bowl (fig.]
[adj. Cylinder (fig.] Tube (fig.]
[adj. Cone (fig.] [adj. Circle (fig.] Ring (fig.] Wheel (fig.]
[adj. Spiral (fig.] Helix (fig.]
Less Perfect. [Crooked] [adj. Bow (fig.] [adj. Parabola (fig.] Hyperbole
(fig.] Ellipsis (fig.]

adv. -- about, [On every side] turn -- Vertiginate] Turn adv. Vertigination]
Wind
to -- -- hair, [adj. equal (make) by clipping] -- a place, [about-go]

Round improper. [Perfect] -- blow, [b. (augm.] -- number. -- Sum, [Sum (augm.]
adv. tell him -- ly, [Tell h. plainly] go -- ly on, [Proceed without Let]
Haesitation]

to -- one in the ear, [Whisper] a -- in music, [Continued circling (like)
Song] a -- of a ladder, [Step of l.]
Roundelay. Roundhouse. RN. II. 4. A. Roundish, [Round (dim.] Rounds. Rouse.
[Rise (make] [a. Impulsive]
Rout. [Confused multitude] [Overthrow] to -- Fly (make] Unorder Army] [Snore]
-- as hog, [Un-root plants]
Rowze, vid. Rouse. Row. of Fish. hard -- [Spawn] soft -- [Milt]
of bodies, [Series] [Rank] [File]
to -- [a. Motion (make) with Oats] Pole]
a -- Barge.
Rowel. a -- [adj. Wheel (fig.) adj. pricking (jug.] to -- a horse.
Rowen hay, [Second mowen hay] Roll, vid. Roll. Ru. Herb, vid. Rue. to -- a.
Repentance] Wish un-done]

Rub. a -- [adj. Impedient (thing] [adj. Promberance (thing]
to -- Scrub. O. V.8. -- along, [Go] sp. adv. difficulty*] -- off, [From rub]

-- at Cards.
Rubarb. HF. I. 1. Monk's -- [Patience]
Rubbers, [Two Games] Rubbish Rubble [Confused ruine] [Worst part]
Rubellio. Fi. V. 4. A. Ruby. St. IV. 2. Rubric, [Rules for direction in red
Letters] Rudder. RN. II. 3. A. Ruddy, [Red (dim.] Ruddle Red Oker] Cinnabar]
Ruddock, [Red brest] By. V. 5* Rude. [Homely] Not-taught] Unlearned] Ignorant]
Unskilful] Morose] Rustic]
Rudiment, Element. D. I. adv. First adj. p. Learner (thing]
Rue. HS. V. 13. Goats -- HS. III. 8. Meadow -- HF. I 12.
Ruff. Vest. Bird. By. VII. 4. A. Fish. Fi. IX. 6. A. at cards. to --

Ruffian. Bawd] Ribald] [Swagger]
Ruffle. [a. Roughness Confusion
(make] [a. Sound of Silk (vest]
Ruful, [adj. a. Grief Pity
(make] Rug, [Tusted bed (vest] Rugged, vid. Rough. Ruin, [a. Ruines]
Destruction] Poverty]
-- s. Po. II. O.
Ruinous, [adj. Ruine] Rule. Sentence. D. IV. 5. Law] Edict] -- ed case,
[Condition adj. p. rule (ought) according to exemplar.] according to --
[Regular] Power] Authority] to -- Direct] Govern]
instrument, [adj. a. Measuring (instr.] to -- [a. Line with adj. a. measuring
(instr.]

Ruler. [Magistrate] [adj. a. Measuring (instr.]
Rumb, vid. Rhomb. Rumble, [Confused noise] sp. as of rolling]
Ruminate. Mo. III. 5. A. [Consider]
Rummage, [Move things for seeking] Rumor. D. V. 3. A. Rump, [Bone at the end
of the Vertebrae] -- of bird. PP. V. 8. -- of beef.
Rumple, Unsmooth] a. Furrow]
Run [ition swift] sp. of Animal]
Proper. Mo. II. 1. A. [Fly] RM. II. 3. D.
Ition] -- the adventure to-ition essay risk submit to
the danger] [Become] -- a ground. -- ashore. -- mad.
[Continue] -- his course.
[Proceed] [Increase] as weeds -- [a. Contagion]
[Abound] [Exceed] as tongue -- s
[Spread] O. II. 6. O. Stream] as -- ing water Weep] as -- ing eye Drop as --
ing nose Let go as -- ing nose
[Spend]
[Finish] has -- his course. v. Swiftness.
-- a division [Swiftly Sing Play
a division]
[Thrust (imp.] [Dispatch] -- about -- all -- [Spread, sp. by adj. p.
dissolving]
-- after after-ition] follow (augm.] Pursue]
-- against run thrust (imp.
against] -- at thrust (imp. at] assault]
-- large, [Abound] random, [v. Exorbitancy] tilt, [Fence with (spears]

-- away, [Fly] -- before Become before] Prevent]
-- down, [a. Falling by thrusting (imp.] -- in discourse, [Posing] -- with
blood, [Streaming with b.] -- forth, Let-go] Spill]
-- in, [Prick] -- debt Become Increase
being debtor] -- upon one, Thrust (imp.] Storm]

-- off, From-ition] Digression]
-- on Proceed] Increase]
-- over Through-ition swiftly] Let-go] Sp. through fullness (exc.]
-- out. -- as Prodigal [Spend (exc.] -- as Vessel, [Let-go] -- in discourse,
[Abound] -- his course [Finish] his length,

-- through, [a. hole by thrusting (imp.] -- to ruin, [Become ruinous] -- up,
[Increase] sp. adv. Soon] -- upon, Begin hastily] Storm]

Runagate, [Apostate] Runaway, [Fugitive] Rundle, [Round thing] sp. Circle]
Ring]

Rundlet, [Barrel (dim.] Rung. RN. II.1. A. Runner. Bird. [Upper stone of Mill]
Runt, [Bull (dim.] Rupture, [Breaking] a -- S. VI. 8. -- wort. HF. I. 17.
Rural, [adj. Country] Rush. HL. III. 12. A. Flowering. -- HL. V. 6. to -- [a.
Running Thrusting
(imp.]
Russet, [Gray] sp. adv. Natural]
Rust. Mea. IV. 4. -- of bacon [Rottenness (inc.]
Rustic, [adj. Country] Rusticity]
Rusticity. Man. IV. 9. D. Rustle, [Sound of confused motion] Ruthful, [adj. a.
Pity Grief
(apt] Ruthless, [Pitiless] Rut of Cart, [Sign of Wheel having gone] Rutting,
[Coition] sp. of Deer]
S.
SAbbath, Day of rest] Festivity]
sp. Weekly]
Jewish -- [The 7th. day of the week] Christian -- [The first day of the week]
Sabbatical year, [7th year] Sable. [Black Martin] [Skin of Black Martin]
[Black]
Sacerdota^, [adj. Priest] Sack, [Bag (augm.] [Course hairy-cloth] -- cloth.
[Spanish Wine] to -- [Spoile] RM. II. 5. E.
Sackbut. Sachel, [bag (dim.] Sachettus. Fi. V. 10. A. Sacrament. RE. VI. 4.
the -- [Eucharist]
Sacred, Holy] Consecrated]
Sacrifice. RE. VI. 3. ^^criledge, Theft of consecrated (things] Robbery of
consecrated (things]
Sad. -- Disposition] [adj. Melancholy] [adj. Seriousness] [adj. Dulness]
Lumpishness]
[adj. Grief] -- color, Dark Black
(dim.] -- bread, [Dense (exc.]
Saddle. Po. V. 8. -- backed, [Hollow backed] -- tree, [adj. wood (part) of S.]
Pack -- [Saddle for burdens (augm.]
Saddler, [adj. Saddle (mech.] Safe. [adj. Safety] -- and sound, Healthy] Whole]
-- Conduct Compact of safe return (pot.] License for safe passing]
-- guard, [Safety] Woman's -- [Uppermost adj. riding (vest) of woman]
a -- [Box]
Safety. T. V. 3. Saffron, [Crocus] HL. IV. 7. A. bastard -- HF. III. 5. meadow
-- HL. IV. 7.
Sag, [Move (dim.] sp. backward]
Sagacity. Ha. III. 1. Sagapenum, [Concrete juice of Giant Fennel] Sage. Herb.
HF. VI. 1. -- of Jerusalem. HL. IX. 3. Wood -- HF. VII. A.
[adj. Wise] Sober]

Sagittarius, [Ninth of the 12 parts of the Zodiac] Say. to -- [Speak] AC. III.
1. -- by heart, [Say adv. memory.] -- less than true, [Undersay] -- more than
true, [Oversay] -- nay, [a. Negation] -- nothing, [a. Silence] that is to --
Conj. IV. 3. [Essay] TA. III. 4. A. Subst. [Adage] Part. TM. VI. 3. Stuff.

Saying, adj. Spoken (thing] Sentence]
Sail. a -- of Ship, etc. RN. II. 6. -- yard. RN. III. 2. main -- [Principal S.
of Ship.] mizzen -- [S. of hinder (part) of Ship] Sprit -- [S. of forepart of
ship] top, -- [Highest S.] hoise -- [Up-lift S.] strike -- [a. fall the S.]
[Ship] to -- Mo. II. 7. A.
Sailer. RN. V. 8. Saim, [Soft fat of hog] Sainfom. HS. III. 5. A. Saint. RE.
III. 5. -- s bell.
Sake [end] T. II. 6. for the -- of. Prop. I. 2. A.
Saker. Hawk. Ordinance.
Sal, vide Salt. -- ammoniac. St. V. 6. -- Gemma. St. V. 2. A.
Salable, [adj. p. Sell (apt.] Salacity, [Lust (Pron.] Salad. [Sawce of herbs]
[adj. head (armor]
Salamander. Land -- Be. VI. 5. Water -- Be. VI. 5. A.
Salary, [Wages] Sale, [Sell.] Saleable, (Fit to) adj. p. Sell (apt.] Saligot.
[Water-Nut] Saline, [adj. Salt] Saltishness]

Salivate, Spit (make] Drivel (make]
Sallet, vid. Salad. Sally. RM. I. 6. A. Sallow. Tree. Tr. VI. 9. A. Color,
[yellow (dim.) adj. Sallow (like]
Salmon. Fi. IX. 2. Salomons Seal. HL. VII. 7. Salpa. Fi. V. 2. A. Salt, vid.
Sal. Subst. St. V. 1. A. -- Ammoniac. St. V. 6. -- Peeter, [Nitre] St. V. 1. --
wort, [Gl^sswort] Bay -- [Coursest S. (kind] Drinous -- St. V. 5.
Vessel. -- Sellar, [adj. Table, adj. Salt vessel] Trencher -- [adj. Trencher.
adj. Salt (vessel]
adj. -- taste, [adj. Q. IV. 5. -- Marshes, [Marshes]

Saltive. Salve. Pr. VI. 4. to -- [a. sound (make]
Salvation. [Deliverance] [Safety] Everlasting bliss. Ha. I. 4.
Salvediction. AC. V. 8. Salvo, Exempting] Exception]
Salute. AC. V. 3. -- at meeting. AC. V. 8. -- at parting. AC. V. 8. A.
Samarre, [Upper most loose adj. Woman (vest] Same. Pron* II. 2. -- ness,
[Identity] of the -- time, [Simultaneous]
Samphier. HF. V. ^. A. Golden flowred -- HF. III. 10. A,
Sample Exemplar. T. II. 3. Sampler Exemplar. T. II. 3. Sanamunda. Sh. VI. 2.
Sanctify. [adj. Holiness (make] [Consecrate]
Sanction, Law] Edict]
Sanctity, [Holiness] Sanctuary. [Temple] sp. Inner (part) of it]
[adj. a. Safety (place) for offenders]
Sand. St. I. 8. -- eeles. Fi. VI. 4. A. the -- s, Strand. W. III. 6. Quick --
s. W. III.7. -- blind.
Sandal, [Lamin for the bottom of foot] Sandarach. St. VI. 5. Sanders. Red --
Tr. VII. 3. Yellow -- Tr. VII. 3. A.
Sandover, [Scum of glass] Sanguin. [adj. Blood] PG. I. 6. [Merry]
Sanguinary, [adj. a. RJ. III.] Sanhedrin, [Council] Sanicle. HL. VI. 9. bears
ear -- HS. VIII. 3. Spotted -- HL. VIII. 4. Yorkshire -- [Butterwort] HL. VI. 7.
Sanity. [Health] [Soundness]
Sap. Subst. [Juice] PP. I. 7. -- of tree, [adj. juice (part) of tree]
to -- [Undermine]
Saphena vein, [Vein at the Ankle] Sapphire. St. IV. 5. White -- St. IV. 1. A.
Sapience, [Wisdom] Saphic. Saracens Con^ound [Comfrey] HL. IX. 4. Sarcasm.
[Mock] Sarcocolla. Tr. VIII. 2. A. Sarda, [Chalcis] Fi. III. 12. A. Sardius.
St. III. 3. Sardonix. Sarg^s. Fi. V. 3. Sarplier,, [adj. packing cloth]
Sarsaparilla, [Root of herb* like pricking Bindweed] Sartorian Operation. O. V.
Sassafras. Tr. III. 10. Satan, [Devil] W. I. 2. O. Sat. AC. VI. 5. A. Sated,
[adj. p. fill (augm.] (exc.]
Satelles. W. II. 8. A. Saturday, [Seventh day] Satiate, [a. Sufficience]
Satiety, [a. Sufficience] Satisfaction. [Sufficience] Mind-quieting. AS. III.
5. [Conviction] [Payment] [Restitution]
Satisfy, [a. Satisfaction] Satin. [Smooth shining Silk] Herb [Bulbonach] HS.
VI. 2.
Saturn. W. II. 4. Satyr. [adj. Mocking Reproving
Verse (aggr.] [Baboon] Be. III. 1.
Saty^ion, [Orchis] HL. IV. 8. Savage, Fierce] Cruel]
Sauce. Pr. II. 2. Sauce alone HS. IV. 8. Saucer, [Shallow dish] sp. for Sauce]
Saucy, Impudent] ^reverent]
Saucidge, vid. Sausage. Save. General. -- from danger, [a. Safety] T. V. 3. --
from loss Preserve] AS. hurt I. 4. -- one's oath, [pr* himself from perjury]
incumbent, [Deliver] AS. I. 5. imminent. as to it, [prevent] TA. III. 9. as to
him Defend] ^O. VI. 5. Protect] a. Man. VI. 4

Special, as to Estate, Lay up] TA. V. 4. Keep] TA. V. 5. from spoiling. ^M.
II. 5. from spending. Ta. V. 3.

Liberty. RM. II. 6. Event of War. RM. II. 7. Soul. from Sin, [Redemption] AS.
I. 7. from Hell, [Salvation] Ha. I. 4.

Comparate. [Exempt] TA. II. 7. O. [Except] D. IV. ^. O.
Conj. [Unless] Prep. [Besides]


Savin. Sh. III. 10. A. Saving, vid. Save. Savingness, [Frugality] Savior,
[adj. a Save (person] Savor. [Tast] Q. IV. [Smell] Q. IV. A.
Savory. [adj. Savor (pers. Winter -- HF. VI. 7. A.
Saurus. Fi. IV. 7. A. Sausage, [Pudding of minced Hogg's flesh] Saw. to -- O.
IV. 3. A. -- dust, [Powder made by Pawing] a -- [adj. Sawing (instr.] -- wort.
HF. III. 3. Fish. Fi. I. 2.

an old -- [Adage] I -- [I am adj. pret. See]
Sawyer, [adj. Sawing (mech.] Saxifr^ge. Burnet -- HF. IV. 12. Golden -- HL.
VI. 10. A. White -- HL. VI. 10.
Scab. S. III. 1. A. Scabbard, [Case for Sword] Scab^ous. HF. II. 13. Scaffold.
Po. II. 6. A. Scalad^, [Storming with Ladders] Scalde. [a. Heat (excess] sp.
with Liquor] [Un-a. skin feather hair with hot liquor.]

-- head, [Un-haired head] sp. with scurf]

Scale. -- of fish. PP. IV. 1. -- of bone, [Scale (like) Fragment Chip of bone]

-- of metal. Met. IV. 3. to -- [Un-adj. a. Scale]
[Dish of the librating (jug.] Pair of -- s, [Librating (jug.]
[Ladder] -- as of miles, etc. [Line adj. p. part for measuring distances] to
-- Climb] Storm] sp. with Ladder.]




Scallion, [Onion (dim.] Scalp, [Pate] PG. III. 1. A. -- ing iron, [adj. Iron.
adj. Scratching (instr.]
Scamble. [Catch (end) adv. Confusion] [a. Confusion by curting (corr.]
Scamony. HS. VII. 6. A. Scan. Consider] Examin] -- verse [a. M^^sure v.]
Scandal, Tempting] Occasioning to sin]

Scandalous. RE. III. 5. O. Scant, [adj. Scarcity] Deficience] Narrowness]
adv. [Scarce] adv. V. 2.
Scantling. [Little] [Say] TM. VI. 2. [Measure] Mea. II. [Proportion]
Escape, [Escape] a -- [Fart]
Scapula, [Shoulder] PG. IV. I. Scar, [pret. p. Wound (sign] Scarab Ex. V.
Scarabee Ex. V. great water -- Ex. V. 8. little water -- Ex. V. 8. A.

Scarce. [adj. Scarcity] Seldomness] Rareness]
[adv. Adv. V. 2.] adv. Difficulty]

Scarcity. TM. I. 2. D. Scare, [a. Fear] -- crow, [adj. Vanity (thing) for a.
fear]
Scarf. Pr. IV. 6. A. Scarlet, [Bright red] -- Oak, [Holm]
Scorrifie. Mo. IV. 6. A. Scatches, [Leg-lengthning sticks] Scate. Fi. II. 5.
Scath, [Hurt] Scatter. O. II. 5. O. Come in -- ing, [Come (segr.]
Scavel, [adj. hungry (exc.] Scavinger, [adj. a. Cleanliness (Off.) of streets]
Sceleton, [Frame of dead bones] Scene. [a. Player (room] [The place
represented] [The home of any action]

[Chapter of adj. p. Player (thing]
Scepter, [adj. King (sign) Stick] Skeptic, [adj. Incredulity] Doubting (apt.]

Schedule, [Paper (lam.] Scheme, [Figure] sp. Lined] Pictured]

Schism, [Schismatic (thing] Schismatic. RE. III. 2. O. Scholar. [Learner]
[adj. Learning (person] -- of a College, [S^pe^diated Learner] -- ship,
[Learning]
Scholastic, [Learned (like] Scholast, [adj. a Commentary (dim.] School.
Greater place, [University] -- man, [adj. University Divine] Lesser place, [RC.
III. ^. A.] -- boy, [Learner at School] -- master, [Teacher of School] [Sect]
Schreight, [Missle bild] ^l. III. 3. Sciatic^, [Gout in the Hip] Science, [Ha.
VI. 1. A. Liberal -- [adj. Learning Science]
Scimiter, [Crooked Sword] Scink, [Small-headed Lizard (kind] Scintilla
volantes. El. ^. ^. A. Sciolist, [adj. Science (dim.] Scion, [Branch] PP. I. 3.
Schir^bus. S. III. 4. A. Scissors, [adj. Clipping instr. Scecheon, vid.
Sc^^cheo^. Scoff, Reproch] Mock]
Scold, a. Contention (voice] Reprove (ex^^]
Scole, [Fishes (aggr.] Scolop. Ex. VIII. 5. Scolopendra. Ex. II. 10. Sconse.
[Mult] Military place. RM. ^I. 2. [adj. Hanging adj. supporting (instr.) for
Candle] Pate] adj. Head (vest]
Scoop, Pr. V. 7. A. Scope. End] T. II. 6. Object] T. VI. 2. Liberty
Sufficient] Space Sufficient] Place Sufficient]
Scorbutica [Scurvy] Scorch, [adj. a. Fire Heat (exc.
the outside]
Scordium. HF. VII. 8. Score. [adj. Reckoning (thing] [Stick notched (freq.)
for reckoning] in -- [Debtor] upon -[Debtor] -- up. quit -- s * [Ballancing]

[Twenty]

Scoria. Met. IV. 3. Scorn, Contemn] AS. IV. 2. a. Indignation]
Scornfulness, [Superciliousness] Scorpana. Fi. IV. 11. A. Scorpi^ides. Fi.
III. 14. A. Scorpion. Ex. II. 5. A. -- grass. HS. III. 12. water -- Ex. I. 9.
Fish. greater -- Fi. V. 6. lesser -- Fi. V. 6. A. Constellation [8th. (part) of
the Zodiac.]

Scot. [Shot] [Tax]
Scotfree. [adj. p. Immunity from payment] [not-adj. p. Hurt] Punishment]

Scotomy, [Vertigo] S. IV. 5. Scoul, [Lowring] Scoundrel, [adj. Sorry (person]
Scour. a -- [Shallow (part) of swift river] to -- Wash (augm.] Rub (augm.]
[adj. a. Purity] Brightness] sp. by Washing (augm. Rubbing (augm.

[Dung (exc.]

Scourge, [Whip] a -- [adj. Whipping (instr.]
Scourse, [Exchange] Scout. RM. III. 5. Scrag, Tooth] Rough protuberance]
Scraggy, [Lea^ (augm.] Scray, [Sea Swallow] By. IX. 9. A. Scrall, [Write
(corr.] Scramble, [Climbe (corr.] Scrap, Residue] Fragment]
Scrape, Rub] Scratch] Shave (corr.] -- for favor, [Fawning] -- out, Spoil as
Nothing by scratching]

-- together, [Gather adv. Scrapingness] Rapaciously.]
a -- [Trap]
Scrapingness. Man. III. 2. E. Scra^, [Of both sexes] Scratch. AC. II. 6. A.
the -- es [Disease in horse's heels]
Scrawl, [Writing (corr.] Scream, Acute Voice (augm.] Exclamation
Screech, [v. acute exclamation (augm.] -- Owl, [Owl]
Screeking, [acute sound of Solids rubbing together] Screen, [adj. a. shadow
(jug.] Screw, vid. Scrue. Scribble, [Write (corr.] sp. swiftly] Scribe, Notary
adj. writing (Off.]
Scrip, [Bag] Scripture. RE. VI. 1. Scrivener, [adj. Writing (mech.] Scrole,
[Paper (Iam.] [Catalogue]
Scrophula, [King's Evil] Scrophularia, [Pilewort] Scrue. O. I. 6. -- into,
[Into-wriggle] -- out, [Obtain by-a. Craft]
Scrub, [Rub (augm.] a -- [Sorry (person]
Scruple. Weight. Mea. III. 2. [Doubt (dim.] practical. AS. III. 5. O. (Pron.]
Scrupulousness, Doubting Scruple Incredulity]
Scrutiny, Inquisition] Examining]
Scud, [v. Ition swiftly] Scuffle, [Confused Mutiny] fighting (dim.]
Scull. [Bone of Head] Pate] [adj. Head (armor] Pa^e (armor]


-- of fish, [Fishes (aggr.]
Sculk, [v. Concealing] Sculler, [Boat adj. p. Oa^ by one man] Scullory, [adj.
Washing (room) of adj. Cookery vessel] Scullion, [Cook's Servant] Sculpture,
[Carving] Scum. TM. VI. 3. a -- [Sorry (person]
Scummer, [Spoon for taking away the Scum] to -- [Dung]
Scooper. RN. II. 7. A. Scurf. S. II. 6. A. Scurrility. Man. IV. 9. F. Scurvy.
Disease. S. VI. 4. -- grass. HL. VI. 13. adj. Sorry] Evil]

Scut, [Tail] PP. VI. 6. A. Scutcheon. [Picture of shield] [Area of painted
degree] -- in building. (sign]

Scuttle. [Basket] -- of Ship. RN. II. 6. A. to -- water, [Un-defile w. by
motion]
Sea. W. IV. A. -- bat, [Flying fish] -- bells HL. VI. 13. A. -- bindweed HL.
VI. 13. A. -- Calf. Be. V. 3. A. -- Card. -- Coast, [adj. Shore Country.] --
Cob. By. IX. 9. -- Cole. Herb. HE. VI. 13. A. Stone. St. VI. 3. A.
-- Coot. -- Cormoran^^ -- Devil. Fi. II. 4. A. -- dragon. Fi. IV. 8. -- drake,
[Cormorant] -- ear. Animal. Ex. VII. 8. Plant. HL. I. 13.
-- fan. HL. I. 15. -- fa^ing man. RN. V. -- frog. Fi. II. 4. A. -- grass. HL.
I. 14. -- green, [Green adj. Sea (like] -- gull. By. IX. 9. -- hog, [Porpois]
-- lettice. HL. I. 12. -- man. RN. V. -- mew. By. IX. 9. -- moss. HL. I. 12. --
navelwort. HL. I. 11. A. -- nettle. Ex. IX. 6. A. -- onion. HL. IV. 13. --
raven, [Cormorant] -- sick, [Sick through motion upon the sea.] -- swallow. By.
IX. 9. A. -- toad. Fi. II. 4. A. -- weed, [S. moss] -- withywinde. HI. VI. 13.
A. arm of the -- [Bay] W. IV. 4. [Fretum] W. IV. 5. calm -- W. IV. 1. narrow --
[Fretum] W. IV. 5.
Seal, [adj. RC. VI. 5. (instr.] Fish, [Sea-calf] Be. V. 3. A.
Sealing. RC. VI. 5. A. Seam, [adj. p. sowing (thing] -- of the head. -- of
Ship. RN. II. 8.
[Hog's fat]
Seamster, [adj. Sowing (mech.] Sear, [Dry (exc.] to -- [Harden with a. fire]
-- ed Conscience, [Unconscionableness.]

Searce, [Sift] O. VI. 1. A. [adj. Sift (instr.]
Search. [Seek] [a. Inquisition] [Try] Transc. TA. II. 5. A. Judic. RJ. II. 4.
A.
-- ing, [Sagacity]
Season. [Time] adj. Congruity (time] Time (perf.] in -- [adv. Perfect] out of
- [adv. Corrupt]
-- of the year, [Year (part] sp. adj. Congruity]
to -- a. Salt] Q. IV. 5. a. Condite] Pr. III. 9. A.

Seasonable, [adj. Season] Seat. [adj. p. Sitting (^^g.] Stool] Po. VI. 5.
Chair] P. VI. 6.
[Situation] sp. III.
Sebesten. Tr. II. 5. A. Secant. Mag. II. 4. Secession, [Separation] Seclude,
Out-shut Exempt Except
Second. [adj. Two] Every -- [Every adv. turn adj. two]
Subst. -- of a degree. in Magn [3600th (part) of a Degree] in Time, [60th part
of a Minute] [adj. Accessoriness, Fighter] Speaker] Doer of any thing]

to -- [Do any thing adv. Accessoriness] Immediate after]

Secondary, [adj. Two (kind] Secondine. PP. VI. 7. A. Secrecy, Concealing]
Taciturnity]
Secret. Concealed] adj. p. Taciturnity]
Secretary, Notary] adj. Writing (Off.]
Sect, Faction] Schism]
Sectary, [Schismatic] Section, [adj. p. Cut (part] Part of Book. D. III. 2. A.
Sector. Secular. [Temporal] RE. O. [Laic] RE. II. O. [Not-regular. TO. IV. 6.]
Secundine. PP. VI. 7. A. Secure. [Safe] Confident] Assured] Fearless]
Heedless] Careless] to -- [a. Security] [a. Imprisonment]

Security, Safety] Confidence] etc. Sponsion] Morgage]
Sedan. Po. V. 3. Sedate, [adj. p. Quiet] Content] Satisfaction]
Sedentary, [adj. Sitting] Sedge, Flagg] Reed]
Sediment. TM. VI. 3. A. Sedition. RJ. III. 3. A. Seduce. TO. VI. 1. O.
Sedulity, [Diligence] See. v. Sight] a. Heedfulness] -- to, [a. Heedfulness] --
you do it, [a. Heedfulness that you do it] fair to -- to, [Beautiful] go to --
[Visit] a -- [Bishops City]
Seed. -- of Plants. PP. III. 6. -- plot, [adj. p. Sowing (place] -- time,
[adj. Sowing (time] run to, [a. Seed] -- of Animal. PG. I. 4.
Seeing. Sight. NP. III. 1. [adj. a. Sight] -- that, [Whereas]
Seek. TA. I. 7. -- to do Inquisition to do] Design to do] Endeavor to do]
-- to him, [Intreat him]
Seeling. of Room. Po. III. 8. A. of Ship, [Heeling] RN. VI.7. -- birds eye,
[Sow together the Eyelids]
Seem. TA. I. 9. A. Seemly, Beautiful] Decent]
Seen, [adj. p. Sight] to be -- Shew] Manifest]
by Shew] Manifest]
well -- in, [Skilled (perf.]
Seer, [Prophet] Sees, [Boyl] -- over, [Spill by Seething]
Segment, [From-adj. p. Cut (part] Segregate. TM. III. 6. -- ing, [Separate]
TA. II. 1. O.
Seigniory, [Magistrate (place] Seize, Take to possess] Arrest]
Seizin. RC. V. 8. A. Seldom. Sp. I. 7. O. [Rare] Sp. II. 6. O.
Select, [Elect] Selenite. St. II. 5. Sell. RC. V. 3. Self. him -- [Him him]
beside -[adj. Dotage] Frenzy] Madness]

my -- [Me me] thy -- [Thee thee] by it -- [Solitary] he is him -- [He is adj.
Understanding (perf.] In State (perf.]


Selfconceit, Pride] Esteem (exc.) of self]
Selfdenial. Ha. V. 3. Selfends, [Selfishness] Selfheal. HF. VII. 16.
Selfishness. Ha. V. 3. O. Selflove, [Love of Self] Selfwill, Disobedience]
Contumacy] Pertinacy]
Selvage, [Margin of ^loth] Semblable, [Like] Semblably, So] Also] Accordingly]
Semblance, Seeming] Likeness]
Sembreef. Semicircle, [Half Circle] Semicolon. D. I. 5. A. Seminary. [Seed
(place] [Education (place]
Semination, [Sowing] Sena. Sh. IV. 4. bastard -- Sh. IV. 4. A.
Senary, [Six] Senate, [Council] Send. TA. VI. 4. -- for one, [Call by one sent]
Senembi. Be. VI. 3. A. Seneschal, [Steward] Sengreen, [House-seek] HL. VIII.1.
Indented -- HL. VIII. 4. A.
Senior. [More old] [Superior] sp. through more age]

Sennight, [Week] Sense. -- of a word, [Meaning] Faculty. -- internal. NP. II.
common -- NP. II. 1.
-- external. NP. III. Sp. [Feeling]


Sensible. [adj. a. Common sense Understanding
(apt. [adj. p. Common sense Understanding
(pot.] -- Quality. Q.
Sensitive. -- Soul. W. I. 5. -- faculty. Internal. NP. II. External. NP. III.
-- plant. HS. III. 8. A.

-- action. AC. II.
Senseless. [adj. Stupor] [Not adj. p. Understanding (pot.]
Sensual, [adj. Sensuality] Sensuality. Man. II. 1. O. Sent. pret. Send] adj.
p. Send] [Smell]
Sentence. [Opinion] Clause. D. III. 1. A. -- in Court. RJ. II. 5. A.
Sententious, [Abounding in short sentences.] Sentiment. Understanding Common
sense Apprehension Opinion Sentinel RM. III. 7. Sentry RM. III. 7.

Senvi, [Mustard seed] Separate. TA. II. 1. O. Segregate Abstract a.
Schismatic] Excommunicate]
Separatists, [Schismatic] Sepiment. RM. VI. 4. Seps Serpt. September, [9th
month] Septenary, [Seven] Septuagint, [Seventy Translators] Septuple,
[Sevenfold] Sepulcher, [adj. Intombing (thing] (place]
Sepulture, [Burying] Sequel, Following] Event] Illation]
Sequence, [Following adv. Series] Sequestration, [Depositing with not-party]
Seraglio, [Palace of the Mohammedan King] Seraphin, [Angel] Serenade, [a. Music
near ones adj. sleeping (place] Serene. Clear] Bright] [Gracious] adj. Man. VI.
1.
Serjant. [pursevant] RJ. III. 6. -- at arms, [Most adj. Superiority. RJ. III.
6.] -- of Law, [Most adj* Superiority Graduate of common Lawyers] [Chief
pleader (kind] [Highest degree of Pleaders (kind] -- of foot. RM. III. 4.
Series. TM. III. 7. Serinus. By. VI. 1. A. Seriousness. The Disposition. NP.
IV. 3. The Virtue Sobriety] Gravity]

Sermon, [adj.-p. Preaching (thing] Sermountain. HF. IV. 7. Serous, [adj.
Serum] Serpent. Be. VI. 6. Sea -- Fi. VI. 2.
Serpentine, [adj. Serpent] -- Line, Spiral] Mag. III. 9. Helix] Mag. III. 9. A.

Serve. [v. Slave] Servant] Souldier] -- as to wages. [adj. p. Hiring]


as to work, [a. Slave] Servant] Souldier]
[a. Subjection] Obedience] -- God, [a. Obedience Worship God]



[Wait] Carry] Deliver] -- Process. -- up to Table. -- wine.
Furnish] Sell] -- one with ware, [Sell w. to one*]
as to use, Transc. [Action] -- one, a trick in his kind

[v. adj. Adjuvant] Profitable]
v. adj. Congruous] Convenient]* -- when time -- s.

[v. adj. Stead] -- for instead of
[v. adj. Sufficience] Pertinence]
-- for such a use.
Servant. TO. III. 7. O. [Suitor] TO. III. 2. [Beneficiary] TO. III. 8. O.
Service. [v. Servant] [a. Souldier] [a. Obedience] divine -- [d. worship]
Waiting. first [meats (aggr. carried adv. first] second [meats (aggr. carried
adv. second] [v. adj. Adjuvant] Profitable] [a. Benefactor] -- doing one a [p.
Use]


[Berry of Service-tree] -- Tree. Tr. I. 4. Common -- Tr. I. 4. A.


Serviceable, [adj. Service (pot.] (pron.]
Servile, [adj. Servant] Slave] Villain]
Servingman, [Servant for waiting] Servitor, [Servant] Servitude, [p. Slave
(thing] Serum. PG. I. 2. Seseli, [Ha^twort] Sessions, [Convention] RC. III. sp.
for RJ.
Set. [Cause, sp. by motion] to be in a Place sp. of Rest] to be in a Situation
sp. of Rest] [Cause to be so] -- a copy, [a. Exemplar (make] -- a song, [a.
Tune (make) for a s.] -- fast, [Fast (make] -- free, [a. Liberty (make] --
open, [Open (make] -- packing, [From-go (make] -- Right, Put (perf.] adj. Right
(make]
-- upright, [Upright (make] Design] Appoint] sp. according to Contract.]
-- an allowance, [appoint an all.] -- a fine on, [Appoint, etc.] -- a form,
[appoint a form] [Offer] sp. for p. Hire] Sell]

[Esteem] AS. II. 8. -- Light by, [Contemn] AS. II. 8. A.
a. Place] Put] -- himself, a. place h.] Purpose (augm.]

-- ones hand to Put ones, etc a. Adjuvant] Write under]
- Birds observe the place of B.] - Travelers, etc. observe the place of Tr.]
[a. Scituation] Figure] -- a bone Place (perf.] Situate (perf.]
-- a bowl. -- a Ruff, [a. Situation (perf Figure (perf


[Motion] Mo. as Current, [v. Motion] as Boatman [Thrust (imp) with hands] as
Horse [Thrust (imp) with feet] [a. ition (make]

[Rest] Mo. O. Plant. the Root. O. III. 6. the Grain. O. III. 6. A.

[Sit (make] [a. Steadiness] Q. VI. 6. Fastness] Q. VI 6. E. -- fast, a. Fast
(make] Imprison]


-- about [a. Begin] [a. Endeavor (inc.]
against, [v. opposite] [a. opposite]
-- apart a. Segregate] Reserve] Appropriate]
-- aside, a. Segregate] Exempt] Except] Reject Forsake]
-- at [a. Impulsive] -- at liberty, [adj. a. Liberty (make] -- naught,
[Contemn] -- ods, [Un-a. peaceable (make] -- peace, [Un- War (make] Fight
(make] Contention (make]

-- by [Esteem] -- the ears, [a. contention (make]
-- down -- Down-ition (make] Write]
-- farther off, [More-distant (make] -- forth, Vid. out. [v. Go (inc.] [a.
Travel (inc.] Manifest] a. Public (make] [a. Ornate (make] [Praise]
-- forward [v. Travel (inc.] [a. Proceed (inc.]
-- in [Begin] -- order, [a. Order]
-- off, vid. forth. -- farther off, [More-distant (make]
-- on, vid. upon Impulsive] Incourage] -- edge, adj. a. edge (make] a. Stupor
-- fire, [a. fire (make] -- foot, Begin] Cause (inc.]
-- over the fire, [Place above the fire] -- a fine on, [a. Mulct]

-- out, vid. forth. [Out-ition (make] -- Ship [furnish and send Sh.] Soldier
[furnish and send So.]
-- to To-put] Operate (end]
-- Hire] Sale]
-- work, a. Operate (make] Operate (inc.]
-- ones hand.
-- together, Joyn] a. One (make] -- by the ears, [a Contention (make]

-- up, [Begun] -- again, Repeat] Restore]
-- a building, [Build] -- a fashion. -- a trade. -- one instead of another,
[a. Room] -- upon his Legs, Lift] a. Upright]

-- upon, vid. on. -- a person, etc. Assault] Offend (end]
-- a thing Resolve] Undertake] Attempt]

Subst Aggregate] Series] Suit] [Game] -- at Cards. Dice.



Sun -- [Under-a. Horizon] Adj. Purposed] Designed] Appointed] sp. by consent]
-- allowance. -- Battle. -- Company. -- Fight. -- Form. -- Place. -- Price. --
Purpose. -- Resolution. -- Speech -- Time.
He is -- [Has lost the game] Sun is -- [S. is under the Horizon] Well -- [adj.
p. figure (perf.]
Setter. [adj. Setting (person] Theefs -- spy] [Dog. adj. Observing (apt.) the
place of Birds]
Settle. v. a. Cause] Confirm] [adj. Permanence] -- ones estate, [Assign the
sut. right of it] sp. by sealed adj. Obligation (thing]
-- to a business, Prepare for permanence in a b] Permanent (inc) in it.]
Staying] Dwelling] as Bird, Rest] Stand]

[adj. Staiedness] Fastness] as grounds Precipitate] Sediment]

[Habit] Sobriety] Gravity]
Subst. [Long Chair] -- bedstead, [Bedstead adj. p. folding (apt.]



Settling, vid. Settle. [Sediment]
Seven. Mea. I. 7. Sevenfold, [Seven (kind] Sevennight, [Week] Seventeen. 17.
Seventh, [adj. Seven] Seventy. 70. Sever. Separate] Segregate] [adj. Solitary
(make] [a. Difference] Diversity]

Several. [adj. Difference] Diversity]
[adj. p. Sever]
Severity. Man. VI. 7. [Rigor]
Sewee. [adj. a. Order (Off.) of meats] Suit (Off.) of meats]
[Sink] Po. II. 9. A.
Sewer, Hard Fat] Dried Fat]
Sex. NP. VI. 1. Sextant, [Sixth part of Circle] Sextary, [Roman measure] about
a pint] Sextile, [Distance (...) of a great Circle] Sexton, [adj. Sweeping
(Off.) of Temple] Sextuple, [Sixfold] Shackles, [Bonds] Shad. Fi. III.11. Shade
Q. I. 2. Shadow Q. I. 2. -- in painting, [Shadow (like]
Shaft. [Cylinder] [Arrow] Cone] Pyramid] [Steeple] of Coach, etc. Po. V. 5.
Shagg, [Rough hair] Bird. By. IX. 5. A.
Shake. Proper. Mo. VI. 3. A. -- Hands. AC. V. 5. A. -- down, [Down-a. ition
(make) with shaking] -- off, [Abandon] -- in pieces, [Break with shaking] -- to
pieces, [Break with shaking] -- up, [Reprehend severely] [Tremble]
Shake-rag, Clothed (freq.) with torn (vest] Beggar]
Shall. fut. Shale. a -- [Pod] PP. III. 5. A. to -- [Un-a. pod]
Shallop, [Ship (dim.] Shalot. HL. IV. 10. Shallow. Not deep. TM. II. 3. A. a-
Shallow (place in the sea] Bank] W. III. 5. A.
Not wise, [adj. Folly]
Shalm, [adj. Tube adj. Music inst.] Shamble, [adj. Butchering (place] Shame.
Affection. AS. VI. 2. A. Cause, [Infamy]
Shamefaced, [adj. Shame (apt.] Modesty] Sheepishness]
Shameful, [adj. Shame] Shameless, [adj. Impudence] Shamois, [Goat* (kind)
having small horns hooked at the end] Shank. of Animal. PG. V. 5. of Plant,
[Stalk]
Shape, [Figure] Share. [Part] sp. adj. Proportioned] to -- Divide] Distribute]
Partner (make]

Pubes. PG. IV. 7. A. -- bone, [Bone of the sh.]
Plow -- [adj. Cutting (part) of the adj. plowing (jug.]
Sharer, [Partner] Shark. Fish. Fi. I. 3. [adj. a. Fraud (person] sp.
impudently spending anothers]

Sharp. [adj. Acute Angle] [adj. Point] Edge] [adj. Cutting] Pricking (apt.]



of Animal, [adj. Vigor] -- sighted. -- of hearing] -- voice, [Shrill] -- in
music. Q III. 5. E.
of taste. Q. IV. 4. [Hungry]
of mind [Sprightly] [Sagacious] Severe] Austere] Cruel]

Sharpen, [a. Sharp (make] Sharpling, [Stickleback] Shatter, Shake into parts
(dim.] Bruise (freq.]
Shave. O. IV. 1. -- grass, [Horse tail]
Shaver, [adj. Shaving (person] a notable -- [Extraordinary (corr.]
Sheaf, [Aggregated (thing] sp. by together-p. bind]
Shear, [Clip] Shears, [adj. Clipping (instr.] Sheard, Fragment of earthen
vessel Piece of earthen vessel
Sheat. Rope. RN. IV. 5. A. -- Anchor, [Last anch.] -- fish. Fi. VI. 6. [Young
hog]
Sheath. a -- [Case] -- fish. Ex. VIII. 8. A. -- flies wing, [Crust of fly w.]
to -- [into-a-case] -- a ship. RN. VI. 3.
Shed. Lose. Let go. Spill. Lose. -- tears Drop tears] Weep]
-- water, [Spill w.] a -- [House (dim.) sp. not walled]
She, He (fem.] Female]
Sheep. Be. II. 2. -- Cote, [House for sheep] -- Fold, [About-sepimented
(place) for sheep] -- Hook, [Shepherds Hook]
Sheepishness. Man. III. 7. E. Sheere, [Clip] -- water, [Simple water] -- wind,
[adj. Cutting (like) wind]
Sheet, [Lamin] -- of Linen, [adj. l. Bed (vest]
Shell. of Animal. of Oyster, etc. PP. IV. 2. of Lobster, [Crust] PP. IV. 2. A.
Egg -- [Crust of Egg]
of Vegetable. -- of Nut, [Stone] PP. II. 2. A. -- of Bean, etc. [Cod] PP. III.
5. A. -- of Grain, [Husk] PP. III. 3.

Shellaple. By. IV. 5. A. Sheldrake. By. IX. 2. Shelf. Board. Po. VI. 4. A.
Flat in the Sea, [Bank] W. III. 5.
Shelter. [adj. a. Safety (place] [adj. a. Protection] Defence] sp. (place]


Shelving, [Oblique] Shent, [adj. p. Reprehend] Shepherd, [Herdsman of sheep]
-- s bodkin, [Cranes bill] -- s fly. Ex. IV. 8. -- s needle, [Venus comb] HS.
I. 5. A. -- s purse. HS. VI. 3. A. -- s rod. HF. VIII. 2. A.
Sheriff, [adj. Shire (Off.] Show. General, a. Know (make TA. I. 8. Un-a.
Conceal TA. I. 8.
Perfect, [Manifest] TA. I. 9. Public, [a. Public (make] -- what is not* [a.
Appearance] -- Otherwise than it is a. Seeming TA. I. 9. A. a. Hypocrisy
to sense. by signs, [a. sign] [a. Finger (sign]
by like, [Represent] to the ear. [Narration] [Interpretation] [Probation]
to the eye Offer to be seen] a. See (make] -- sights, [a. Sights] -- tricks,
[a. Prestigiator]

to the mind, [Revelation] Improper, Do] Give] -- mercy, [a. Mercy]



Shy, [adj. Reservedness] Shide of wood, [Thick piece of w.] Shield, [Buckler]
to -- Defend] Protect]
-- of Brawn.
Shift. a -- [Means] sp. (corr.] [a. Craft] Fraud]
make -- to [Obtain to] Put to his -- s, [Necessitated to difficult (things]
to -- Change] Alter] -- place, [Go] -- person, Escape] Deliver]
-- thing, Prevent Remedy
(altering] -- for, [Provide for] -- off Delay] Avoid] Frustrate] sp. adv.
Craft]




Shifter, [Crafty person] sp. Living by craft]
Shilling. Mea. IV. 3. Shin, [Forepart of Leg] Shine, [a. Brightness] Shingle,
[adj. wood (lamin) for (roof] -- s [Tetter]
Ship. RN. I. 1. A. -- wrack Destruction Ruin
of ship] -- wright, [adj. Ship (mech.]
Shire. RC. III. 4. Shirt, [Inmost Linen (vest] Shittle, [Inconstant] vid.
Shuttle.
Shive, [Chip] Shiver. to -- [Tremble] -- in pieces Shake Break
into chips]
a -- [Chip]
Shock. -- of Corn, [Heap of c.] -- of battle, [Battel (imp.]
Shod, adj. pret. Shoo] adj. p. Shoo]
Shog, [Move (imp.] Shole. [Shallow (place] [Fishes (aggr.]
Shoo. [adj. Leather adj. Foot (vest] -- ing horn, [On-drawing (instr.) for
shoo.] horse -- [Under-foot (armam.) for horse]
Shook, [adj. p. pret. Shake] Shoot. Move swiftly] Fly swiftly] Out -- Cast]
Powre]
as Bow Gun [a. b.] g.] o.]
Ordinance
-- one. RJ. V. 2. A.
as Star [fall Suddenly] Swiftly]
as Plant, [a. Sprout] -- off, Desist] a. Gunner]
-- up, [Grow swiftly] a -- Sprout] PP. II. 5. Branch] PP. I. 3. Sucker] PP. I.
2. A. Hog (young]

Shop, [adj. [a. Mechanic Merchant
room] -- keeper, [Merchant]
Shore. of land. W. III. 6. of water. W. IV. 6. bird. By. V. 2. to -- up, [a.
Prop]
Shorn, [adj. Clip] Short. op. to long, [adj. TM. II. 1. O] Low] Little] Less]
[adj. Epitome] Soon] Transitory] -- ly, [adv. Soon.] Future (dim.]

-- breathing S. V.1. -- windedness S. V.1. be -- with a. Fewness a. Harshness
words] come -- fall -- v. long (def.] v. short (exc.] [adj. Defect] [be more
short] sp. than it was expected]

keep -- [a. Co^ibiting]
Shorten, [a. Short (make] Shot. adj* p. pret. Shoot] adj. p. Shoot] [Bullet]
[adj. a. pay (thing] -- free, [adj. p. Immunity from paying]
Shotten, [Having spawned] Shove, [Thrust] -- net, [Net for catching fish] sp.
by thrusting and lifting it.]

Shovel, [Up-takeing (vas) Fluid Granulous
(things] -- er. By. VIII. 6.

Should, [Mood of Duty) Necessity]
Shoulder. of trunk. PG. IV. 1. A. -- blade, [Broad bone of -- ]
Joint. PG. V. 1. A. to -- [Thrust up with shoulder] -- up, [a. Prop] Support
(end.]


Shower. El. VI. 2. O. Shout. [Voice (augm.] [Exclamation (imp.] sp. for joy]

Show, vid. Show. Shread, [Mince] Po. III. 6. A. a -- [Chip (dim.]
Shreek, [Acute exclamation (imp.] Shreeve, a. Confess (make] Examine for a.
confess (make] sp. adv. Solitary to Priest]
Shrew, [adj. Moroseness Contention
(fem.] -- mouse, [Long-snouted venomous mouse (kind]
Shrewd. [Crafty] [Hurtful] -- turn, [a. Hurtfulness]

Shrift, [a. Shreeve] Shrill, [adv. acute adj. Sound (augm.] Exclamation]
Shrimp. [Little] Fish. Ex. VI.4. River -- Ex. II. 11. A.
Shrine, [Case] sp. of Image]
Shrink. Gesture. AC. VI. 3. Posture. AC. VI. 3. A. [adj. Density] [adj.
Diminish] [Back-draw] [Retire]
Shrivel, [Wrinkle] Shroud. -- of a Ship. RN. IV. 1. [adj. Shrouding (thing]
[Outmost adj. Linen (vest) of the dead] to -- [Cover] sp. for protection]

Shrovetide. [adj. Shreeving (time] [adj. Feast (time) next before Lent]
Shrub. Sh. to -- [a. Cudgel]
Shrugging. AC. IV. 7. A. Shuddering, [Trembling] Shuffle, [Mingle confusedly]
sp. by motion (freq.]
Shun, [Avoid (end.] Shut, vid. Close. -- ing. O. II. 4. -- in of the day,
[Evening] -- up, Shutting (augm.] a. Conclusion]


Shuttle. [adj. p. Cast (apt.) adj. Weaving (instr.] [adj. p. Motion (apt.] --
Cock. -- headed, [Inconstant]

Sybil, [adj. Paganism Prophet (fem.] Sick, [adj. Sickness] Sickle, [adj.
Reaping (instr.] Sickly, [adj. Sickness (apt.] (freq.]
Sickness. in body. S. the -- [Plague]
in mind. TA. V. 7. O.
Side. Part. Sp. III. 4. -- of a Figure. Ma. II. 3. A. -- of ones body. PG. IV.
5. Page, [Surface] [Margin] -- blow adj. oblique striking]
-- long, [adj. Side] -- ways, [adj. Aside] Obliquity]
-- of the Country, [Part of the Country] -- of the hill, [Oblique (part) of
the h.] -- of River Sea
[Shore] kin by the Mothers -- [Kin by the Mother] on this -- Citerio^] Prep.
VI. 2.
on that -- Ulterior] Prep. VI. 2. O.]
on the other -- Opposite] Prep. VI. 3. O.]
on every -- Environing] Prep. III. 3. O.
on my -- [For (Prep. II. 3.) inc.] to -- [a. Faction] League] Accessory]



Sider, [Wine of Apples] Sidesmen, [Churchwardens adj. adjuvant (Off.] Siege.
Leaguer. RM. I. 4. [a. Dunging]
Sift. Searce. O. VI. 1. A. [Examin] -- out, [Find by examining]
Sigh. AC. IV. 6. E. Sight. Sense. NP. III. 1. a. Seeing] -- of the eye, [adj.
Seeing (part) of eye] -- of a gun, [Through-adj. p. See (apt.) gun (part]
Seeing -- s. Mo. V. 7.
Sigil, [adj. Wizarding seal] Signature, [a. Sign] Sign. Mark. T. VI. 5* -- of
an affection, AC. IV. [Constellation] -- in the Zodiac, 1^/12 of the Zodiac]

to -- RC. VI. 5.
Signet, [Seal (dim.] Signify. [a. Sign] [a. Meaning] [Narrate]
Silence. op. to Sound. Q. III. O. Virtue, [Taciturnity]
Silk. Pr. IV. 3. -- man, [adj. Silk (merc.] -- worm. Ex. III. 6. A. -- Grass,
[Upright Dogs-bane] HS. IV. 3. A.

Sill, [adj. Foundation Beam] Sillabub, [Drink of milk coagulated with wine]
etc.]
Silly, [adj. Folly] Silver. Met. I. 2. quick -- Met. III.1. -- weed, [Wild
Tansey]
Silurus. Fi. VI. 6. Similar, [All of one kind] Simile, [adj. Translatitious
(thing] Similitude, [Likeness] Simnel. Simony, [Buying (corr.) of religious
(thing] Simper, [Smile] Simple. [adj. Simpleness] -- figure. Mag. III.
[Simple medicinal (thing] sp. Herb]
to -- [Know (end.) the growing herbs]
Simpleness Simplicity Singleness] Primitiveness] op. to mixture. T. III. 8.
Purity] Homeliness] Sorriness] op. to figurateness. D. III. 7. O. [Sincerity]
Folly] Unskilfulness] Unlearnedness] Unexpertness]
Simulation, [a. Hypocrisie] Simultaneous. Sp. I. 2. Sin v. a.
Ungraciousness] Unholiness] [Vice] [Evil action]
Since. [Before this time] [After this time] -- that, [Whereas]
Sincerity. Ha. IV. 4. Sine. Mag. II. 6. Sinew. PG. II. 5. Sinful, Ungracious]
Unholy] Vicious]
Sing. AC. III. 5. as the ears -- [Ring (like]
Singe [Burn (incept.] Outside] Hair]
Single. One (kind] Simple] [Singular] Solitary] Onely] -- combat, [Duelling]
-- life, [Coelibate] TO. II 2. A.
a -- [Tail of Deer]
Singular. Excellent] Unlike all others] -- number. TM. III. 2.
Singularity, Affectation of being unlike others] Conceitedness]
Sinister. [Left side] [Malign] [Censoriousness]
[adj. Adversity]

Sink, [Down-ition under water.] Proper. Mo. I. 4. O. [Soke] -- into ones mind,
[Be fixed in ones m.] -- ing paper, [Porous (augm.]
[Drown]
Improper, [Fall] sp. (inc.] -- under the burden. [adj. p. Dent] [Diminution]
[Ruining (inc.]

a -- Po. II. 9. A.
Sinnet, [Cord (augm.) of three Cords together twisted] Sinople. Subst.
[Cinnabar] adj. [Green]
Sip. [Drink (dim.] [Suck (dim.]
Sippet, [Bread (lam.) adj. p. Soke (apt.] Siquis, [adj Paper (lam.) published
for finding lost (things] Sir, [Voc. adj. Dignity (person] Sire, [Parent (male]
Surname, [adj. Parent name] Sir, [Voc. Mean (person] Sise, [Six] Siskin,
[Finch green] Sister, [Brother (fem.] Sisterhood, [Corporation (fem.] Sitting.
Gesture. AC. VI. 5. Posture. AC. VI. 5. A. -- as Commissioners, [Together
sitting] -- as a hen, [a. Fotion by upon sitting.] -- down. [Sitting] -- out,
[Not-playing] -- up, Rising] adj. Permanence out of bed.]
as Bird, Rest] Stand]
[Permanence] -- hard at it, [adj. a. Diligence. adv. permanence]

Site Sp. III. Situation Sp. III. Since that, [Whereas] Sith, [adj. Reaping
(instr.] Sive, [adj. Sifting (instr.] Sivet, [Sweat of the Civet Cat] -- cat.
Be. IV. 4. A.
Six. Mea. I. 6. Sixfold, [Six (kind] Sixth. [adj. Six] Sixteen, 16. Sixty, 60.
Size. Proportion Measure Gummy liquor, [adj. a. varnish (thing] sp. of boiled
Leather]
to -- [a. Size] [Sear the Seams]
assize, [Convention of shire for adj. ^ J (things]
Sizers, [adj. Clipping (instr.] Skein. Mag. VI. 7. A. Skeleton, [Frame of
bones] Skew, [Oblique] Sky. [Aether] El. II. 1.. [Heaven]
Skill. [Science] [Art] [Learning] it -- eth not, [It is not adj. importance]

Skillet. Pr. V. 6. A. Skim, [Unskum] Skin. Hide. PG. II. 3. -- and bone, [Lean
(ex^.] to -- Un-a. skin] Cover with skin]

Membrane] PG. II. 3. A. [Husk] PP. II. 3.
Skink, [Scink] to -- [Powre for p. drinking]
Skinker, [adj. Waiting (Off.) that skinketh] Skinner, [adj. Skin (merc.] Skip.
[Leap] -- Jack, [Sorry man (dim.]
[Omit]
Skipper, Sailer] RN. V. 8. Master] RN. V. 4.
Skirmish. RM. I. 8. Skirret. HF. IV. 11. A. Skirt, [Margent] -- of doublet,
[Lower Margent of d.]
Skittish. [adj. Leap Kick
(pron.] Disingenious] Wanton]
Skreen. -- for corn, [adj. Seperating (jug.] -- between Rooms, [adj.
Separating (sep.]
Sku, [Oblique] Slab, [adj. Moor Bog
(place] Slabber. [Let-go Spittle] [Wet (corr.] [Defile]
Slack. Loose] Limber] [adj. Remission] Diminution]
[adj. Slight] Neglect]
[adj. a. Slow] Protract]
[adj. a. Cunctation]
Slay, [a. Die (make] -- of weavers loom.
Slake, [a. Remission] -- fire Un- a. fire (dim] -- thirst Un- a. thirst (dim]
Slander* [Calumny] Slank. [Thin] Herb, [Wrack]
Slant, [Oblique] Slap, Strike] Cudgel]
-- up Eat greedily] Lick (corr.]

Slash. Cut in many places. Pr. III. 5. A. [Cut deep]
[Whip]
Slate. St. I. 5. Slattering. [a. Slightness] [Carelesness] Improvidence] Man.
III. 2. D.
Slave. RC. I. 9. O. Slaver, vid. Slabber. Slaughter, [a. Die (make] -- house,
[adj. Butchering (room]
Slander, [Calumny] Sleave. -- silk, [Not-spun S.] -- fish. Ex. IX. 3. red --
Ex. IX. 3. A.
Sleazy, [Loose] Sled. Po. V. 4. Sledge, [Hammer (augm.] Sleek, [Smooth (augm.]
-- stone, [adj. stone adj. a. smoothing (instr.]
Sleep. AC. II. 3. A. [Numness]
Sleepy, [adj. Sleep (apt.] Sluggardliness]
Sleering, [Crafty oblique a. eye manner] Sleet. El. VI. 4. A. Sleeve, [adj.
arm (vest] Sleeveless Impertinent] Vain]
Slight, vid. Slight. [a. Craft] Art]

Slender. [Thin] TM. II. 5. O. Remiss] Not sufficient]
Sleve. -- silk, [Not-spun S. -- fish. Ex. IX. 3. red -- Ex. IX. 3. A.
Sly, Crafty] Reserved]
Sliceing. Cut. Pr. III. 6. a -- From-sliced (part] Chip] sp. Thin]

iron --
to -- [D^ng]
Sliding, [Motion swift whose parts are not seen] Proper. Mo. II. 5. -- knot,
[k. un-adj. p. ty (apt.) by pulling]
-- as water, [a. Stream adv. silence] away from -ition adv. silence] - back
back -ition adv. concealing] - by [beside -ition adv. silence] - over [over
-ition adv. concealing]
Slight, vid. Slight. [Thin (augm.] Little] Deficient] [Loose]
Sorry] Remiss] [adj. Vanity] [Homely] Moral, [adj. Ha. III. 4. E.]
[Careless] to --
[Contemn] [a. Disrespect] -- works, [Spoil w.]
Slim, [Long thin] Slime, [adj. a. Sliminess (thing] Sliminess. Q. VI. 4.
Sling, [adj. Casting (instr.] pair of -- s. [adj. Lifting (instr.) for
Carriage] sp. of Barrels]

Slink, [Abortive Bull (young] -- away [from -ition adv. Concealing] -- back
[back -ition adv. Concealing]
Slip. Proper, [Slide (dim.] [Stumble through sliding (dim.] [Err] [Omit]
- away, [From -ition adv. Concealing] - back, [Back -ition adv. Concealing] -
by, [Beside -ition adv. Concealing] - off, [From- ition, etc.] - on, [Upon --
ition, etc.] -- Clothes cloth (swiftly] -- Clothes un-cloth (swiftly]
give one the -- [From ition adv. Concealing] let -- Omit] Let go] Lose]
sp. through Carelesness]
a -- [v. Slip] -- of plant, [Branch] to -- [From Cut] Pull]

[Cord with Loop in the end] -- knot, [Tied (part) for a Loop (make]



Slipper, [adj. Foot (vest) not adj. p. ty (pot.]
Slipperiness. Smoothness] Unctuousness] [adj. Let go (pron.] [Lightness.] Ha.
IV. 7. D.
Slit Cleft] Chink]
to -- Cleave] a. Chink]

Slive, [Chip] Slo, [Plum of Slow tree] -- tree. Sh. I. 4.
Slop, [Loose adj. Thigh (vest] Slopeing, [Oblique] Slot, [adj. Foot (sign) of
stag] Sloth. [Laziness] NP. IV. 6. O. Negligence. Ha. IV. 5. D.
[Sluggardliness] Man. II. 4. O. Beast. Be. III. 2. A.
Sloven, [adj. Slovenliness (male] -- liness. Man. II. 6. O.
Slouch Great (corr.] adj. Rusticity (person]
Slough. [Bog] [Abandoned skin]
Slow. op. to swift. NP. V. 9. O. op. to soon, [Late] [adj. Protracting]

Slow worm. Be. VI. 8. Slubber, [a. Negligence] Unskilfulness] Slovenliness]
-- over, [Perform Negligently] Unskilfully] Slovenly]

Sluice, [Stream stopping (jug.] Slug, [adj. Sluggishness] Sluggardliness]
Slowness]
-- abed, [adj. Man. II. 4. D. (person]
Sluggard, [adj. Sluggardliness (person] Sluggardliness. Proper. Man. II. 4. O.
[Negligence] [Slowness]

Sluggishness, Sluggardliness] Laziness] Lumpishness (dim.]
Slumber, [Sleep, (dim.] (inc.]
Slung, adj. a. pret. sling] adj. p. sling]
Slunk, adj. a. pret. slink.] adj. p. slink.]
Slur, Fraud.] Affront]
Slurry, Disgrace] Defile]
Slut. [Woman (corr.] [adj. Sluttishness (fem.]
Sluttishness. Man. II. 6. D. Smack. [Sound of separating the lips] [Kiss]
[Tast. Q. IV. (dim.] a -- of it, [p. adjunct (dim.]
Small. [Little] -- nut. Tr. III. I. [Fine] cut -- Cut into pieces (dim] Mince]

-- as -- beer, [Weak] -- number, [Few] -- wares, Wares (dim.] Little (things)
of value (dim]

Smallage. HF. IV. 9. A. Smaragd, [Emerald] Smart. AC. II. 8. A. -- in
discourse, [adj. Vigor] -- of taste, [adj. Vigor] Freshness]

Smatch* [Tast (dim.] Smatter, [Skill (dim.] Smear. O. V. 6. A. [a. Defiled
(make]
Smell. Sense* NP. III. 3. -- out, [Find by sm.] a -- feast, [Flatterer for p.
feast]
Object. Q. IV. [a. Unsavoriness]

Smelt. pret. Smell] adj. p. Smell] Fish. Fi. IX. 2. A.
Smile. AC. XIV. 2. Smirking, [Smiling adv. mirth] Smite, [Strike] Smith, [adj.
a. Fabrile (person] Smock, [Inmost linen (vest] sp. of man (fem.]
Smoke. El. II. 3. A. [Fume] Exhalation] Vapor]
Smooth. Proper, [adj. Q. VI. 2. E.] of behavior, [adj. Courtesie*]
Complaisance]

Smother, [Stifle] Smug, Cleanly (augm.] Ornate (augm.]
Smut [Defile with black (dim.] Smutch [Defile with black (dim.] Smutty,
[Defiled with black (dim. Snacket, [Hasp of Casement] Snaffle, [Bridle] Snail.
Ex. I. 2. A. -- Trefoil. HS. III. 15. water -- Ex. VII. 1. A. Sea -- Ex. VII. 4.
Snake. Be. VI. 7. -- weed. HL. VII. 3. -- wood. Tr. VII. 2. A.
Snap. [Bite (imp.] [Sound of bite (imp.] -- dragon. HS. VIII. 6.
Snaphans, [Gun with Firelock] Snappish, [adj. Rash anger] adj. Biting (apt.]
Morose]

Snare, [Loop for entangling] [Trap]
Snarle. [adj. Anger (voice) of Dog] [adv. a. Confusion, Knit] Entangle]

Snatch, [Catch (imp.] by -- es, [Sp. I. 8. O. (imp.]
Sneak, Look adv. Concealing (end.] Go adv. Concealing (end.] into corners,
[adj. p. Conceal (end.]

Sneakingness. Sheepishness] Abjectness]
Sneering, Dissembling Smiling] Crafty Smiling]
Sneezing. Mo. IV. 1. [White Hellebore] -- wort. HL. VII. 1. HF. II. 10.
Austrian -- HF. III. 2. A.
Snib, Secret reprehend] Short reprehend]
Sniff, [Suck-up breath (imp.) with nose] Snip, [Chip] to -- From-cut chip] a.
Tuft margent by cutting]

Snipe By. VII. 7. A. Snite By. VII. 7. A. Snivel, [Fluid excrement of the
nose] Snore Mo. III. 2. A. Snort Mo. III. 2. A. Snot, [Consistent excrement of
the nose] Snow. El. III. 4. A. -- drop, [Bulbous violet] HL. IV. 5. A.
Snout. [Nose] P^. III. 3. A. [Trunk] PP. V. 4. A.
Snudge. [Crumpled]
Snuff, [Suck up the breath with nose] [Huff] AC. IV. 6. take in -- [Be
Displeased Angry
(with] -- of Candle, [Burning end of the Wick of Candle] to -- [From- cut the
adj. Ashes Shadowing
(end of. etc.]
Snuffers, [adj. Bright (instr.] Snuffle, [a. Voice through the nose] So. op.
to as, Adv. I. 3. O. -- that If] Conditionally that]

op. to how, Adv. II. 1. O. -- Long. -- Many. -- Much. -- Often. And -- forth.
Conj. IV. 2. O. So so, [Indifferently]


Soake, vid. Soke. Soar, [Fly high] Sob. Mo. III. 4. Sober, [adj. Sobriety]
Sobriety. in temper, [Seriousness] In Judgment. Ha. III. 3. In drink. Man. II.
3. In conversation, [Gravity]
Soccage. Sociable. [adj. Homiletical vertue] [adj. Companion Society
(apt.]
Society. [Companion (abst.] Community. RC. III. A. [Corporation]
Sock, [Inner adj. foot (vest] Socket, [Hollow (part) for containing] Sod,
[adj. p. Boil] a -- [Lump covered with grass]
Sudden, vid. Sudden. Sodering. O. IV. 4. Sodomy. RJ. III. 6. A. Soft. Proper,
[adj. Q. VI. 1. E. [Gentle] Merciful] Meek] Courteous] Complaisant] Gracious]
Clement] Dull] Lazy] Nice] Weak] Slow] [Foolish] Cowardly] Impatient] Sheepish]
Pusilsanimous]

Soho. Int. III. 1. Soil. Land] Land (kind] [adj. a. Manuring (thing] to --
[Manure]
[adj. a. Defiling (thing] to -- [adj. a. Defiled Spotted
(make] -- of Boar, [adj. Foot (sign) of Boar adj. pret. going]
take -- as Deer, [Go into water] Sojourn, [a. Guest]


Soke. Steep. O. V. 7. [Drink (augm.] [a. Drunkenness]

Solace. [Comfort] [Mirth]
Soland Goose. By. IX. 4. Solar, [adj. Sun] W. II. 2. A. Sold, adj. a. pr^t.
Sell] adj. p. Sell]
Soldier. RM. III. Sole* alone; [Solitary] -- of foot [Bottom (part] -- of shoo
[Bottom (part] Fish. Fi. VIII. 1.
Spotted -- Fi. VII. 1. A. to --
-- a bowl, [a. b. (place) for volutation (inc.] -- ones ear, [Pull (augm.) --
] -- a shoo, [to- sow bottom (part]
Solecism, [a. Grammar (corr.] Solemn, [adj. T. VI. 3. A.] -- look, [adj.
Gravity, face (manner]
Solemnity. T. VI. 3. A. Solemnize. a. T. VI. 3. A. Solicit. [Instead- a.
Action] Business]
[Intreat, augm.] freq.]

Solicitous, [adj. Carking] Solicitude, [Carking] Solid. Body. Ma. I. 4.
[Massie] [Sufficient] Judicious] Grave]
Soliloqu^, [Alone-speaking] Solitary. TO. IV. 2. O. Solitude. [Solitary
(abstr.] [Not-inhabited Countrey]
Solstice, [Motion (time) of Sun in Tropic] Solve, [a. Solution] Soluble. [adj.
Dunging (apr.] [adj. p. Solution (pot.]
Solution. D. VI. 5. O. Solutive, [adj. a. Dunging (apt.] Some. -- one. Pron.
II. 3. O. -- certain. Pron. II. 3. -- body, [ -- (person] -- time. [in some
(time] [adv. at times] Sp. I. 8. O.
-- what [ -- (thing] Little (part] (dim.]
-- while [Through some (time] [adv. Permanence (dim.]

Son. [Child] sp. (male] -- in Law, [adv. Affinity Son] God the* -- G. II.

Song, [adj. p. Sing (thing] sp. verses (aggr.]
Sonorous, [adj. Sound (augm.] Sontic. [Hurtful (augm.] [adj. a. Impotent]
Soon. Sp. I. 4. -- at night, [in the evening]
Soop, [Drink by sucking (imp.] Soot. El. IV. 3. A. Sooth, [Truth] Soothing,
[Assentation] Soothsayer, [adj. Wizarding (person] sp. by signes]
Sop, [Soked bread (lam.] to -- [Soke]
Soap, Pr. VI. 5. -- wort. HL. VII. 3. A.
Sophism, [a. Argumentation (corr.] Sophisticate. a. Spurious] Forge] [Make
worse by mixture]
Sophistry, [adj. Seduce (apt.) a. argumentation (Art] (Manner]
Sorb, [Service] Sorcery, Witchcraft sp. by a. Lots] Wizarding sp. by a. Lots]
Sordidness. [Slovenliness, [Man. II. 6. D. Baseness. Man. III. 4. D.
[Pusillanimity] Man. III. 8. D.
Sore. [adj. Pain] [Fierce] (augm. -- afraid, [afr. (augm.] to -- [Fly high] a
-- [Ulcer] [Deer (male) of the fourth year]

Sorel, [Deer (male) of the third year] Sorites, [Syllogism (aggr.] Sorrel. HF.
I. 2. -- color. French -- HF. I. 2. A.
Sorry. [adj. Grief] Contemptible. TM. I. 4. D.
Sorrow, [Grief] Sort. Kind] Species] to -- [a. Kinds Species
(segr.]
[Manner] after a -- [in some Manner] Relation]


Sortition, [a. Lots] Sot. [Fool (augm.] [Dull (augm.] [adj. Dotage (person]
[Drunkard]
Souce, [Pickle] Soverain. [Chief] [King] [Excellent]
Sought, adj. a. pret. Seek] adj. p. Seek]
Soldier. RM. III. -- fish. Ex. VI. 5.
Soul. W. I. 3. Vegetative -- W. I. 4. Sensitive -- W. I. 5. Rational -- W. I.
6.
Sound. adj. Sanity, [adj. NP. V. 2.] [adj. Health] [Whole] Perfect] Great]
[Solid] [Sincere] a --
Noise. Q. III. Articulate. Q. III. 3. A.
Fretum. W* IV. 5. [Condited stomach of Codfish] to --
[Sound (make] -- w^ll [a Reputation] -- ill [a Infamy]
[Essay for knowing the depth] [Essay for knowing by conference]
Sour. as Vinegar, [adj. Q. IV. 4.] as green Fruit* [adj. Q. IV. 3.] [Morose]
Look -- [Lowr]
Source. [Original] [Fountain] [Rise]
South. Sp. III. 2. O. -- ern wood. HF. II. 10.
Sow. [Hog. Be. II. 4. (fem.] -- gelder, [Un-adj. a. Testicle (mech.] -- 's
bred. HL. VI. 6. A. -- thistle. HF. III. 14. Insect. Ex. II. 9. -- of Lead.
[Cast (thing) -- ]
Sow. as Land, etc. O. III. 4. as Cloth, etc. O. V. 4. -- up, Shut by sowing]
Join by sowing]


Souse, [Pickle] Sowter, [adj. Mending (mech.) for adj. Foot (vest.]
Sowthistle. HF. III. 14. Space. Sp. Interval, [Between -- space]
Spacious, [Ample] Spade, [adj. lamin adj. digging (instr.] Spada marina. Fi.
VI. 8. Spay, [Un-a. testicle] Spaid, [Red Deer (male) of the third year] Spalt,
[Spelter] Met. III. 4. Span. [Measure by extending the fingers] [Prepare adj.
Gun (machin) by a. vertiginating]
Spangle, [Little round adj. metal (lamin] Spaniel, [Dog hunting birds by
smell] Spanish picktooth. HF. V. 12. Spar. [Lapis Selenites] or [Muscovia
glass] [Bolt (augm.]
Spare. Not-used] Abundant] -- time, [adj. Leisure (time] [adj. Lean] -- ribs.
to --
Not-punish, [a. Clemency] Not-spend, [Save] TA. V. 3. Not-use, [Abstain]
Leave] Want]
Sparingness, [Frugality] Spark. El. I. 1. A. [Gallant (person]
Sparkle. El. I. 1. A. Sparrow. By. IV. 3. Mountain -- By. IV. 3. A. -- bill,
[Pin (dim.] -- hawk, [Least long winged h.] -- mouthed, [Wide-mouth'd]
Sparus. Fi. V. I. A. Spathula, [adj. a. spreading (lamin. Spatterdashes, [adj.
outward-buttoned Leg (vest] Spavin. S. III. 9. Spawl, Spit (augm.] Spawn. PP.
IV. 8. A. -- er, [Fish (fem.]
Speaking. AC. III. 1. -- against, [a. Contradiction] -- for, [Intercession] --
in the nose, [a. Voice through the n.] -- with, [Conference]
Speaker. [adj. Speaking (person] -- in Parliament, [Speaking (Off.]
Spear. [Pike] boar -- [Pike for hunting b.] fish -- [Pike for hunting f.]
Kings -- [Asphodel] -- mint.
Special. [Principal] [Particular] op. to general, [adj. TM. III. 4.]
Specialty, [Bond] RC. VI. 5. Species. T. I. A. Specify. [Name the
particulars] [a. Example] D. IV. 8. A.
Specifical, [adj. a. Species] Specious, [adj. Seeming (perf.] Speck, [Spot
(dim.] Speckled. Q. II. 6. Spectacle. [Sight] Mo. V. 7. [adj. Glass (instr.)
for helping the fight]
Spectator. [adj. Seeing (person] [adj Mo. V. 7. (person]
Speculation, Meditation] Inquisition]
Speech. Speaking] Spoken (thing] -- less, [Not-adj. Speak (pot.] [Oration]
[Language]
Speed. Swiftness] Soonness] Dispatch] [Event (kind] good -- [Prosperity]
-- well. HS. VI. 11. Female -- well. HS. VIII. 9. A.
Speight, [Woodpecker] Spell. [Charm] to -- AC. III. 4. A.
Spelt. Spelter. Met. III. 4. Spence Room for adj. sustentation ord. (things]
Box for adj. sustentation ord. (things]
Spend. TA. V. 3. O. [a. Decay (make] [a. Diminution] -- Time -- [v. Time.]

Spendthrift, [adj. Squandring (person] Sperage. Sperme. PG. I. 4. Spermaceti.
Spew, [Vomit] Sphacelus. S. I. 8. Sphere. Mag. III. 5. Celestial, [Orb] W. VI.
A.
Sphyraena. Fi. IV. 7. Spy. a -- RM. III. 5. A. to -- [a. Spy] a. Eye.] Sight]
Observe] sp. adv. Concealed]


Spice. Pr. II. 4. to -- [Powder] sp. with Spice]
a -- of a disease, Beginning -- Degree (dim.) (of disease]

Spicknel. HF. V. 4. Spider. Ex. II. 5. -- wort. HL. V. 1. A. Crustaceous --
Ex. VI. 9. A. Sea -- Ex. VI. 9. Water -- Ex. II. 4.

Spignel. HF. V. 4. Spigot, [Tap] Spike, [Lavender] Spikenard. Spill. Shed. O.
II. 8. O. [Mar]
Spin. O. V. 1. A. -- out time, [Protract] as a top, [p. Vertiginate]
Spinach. HF. I. 8. Spinal, [adj. Backbone] Spindle, [adj. Vertiginating adj.
axis (pin) of adj. spinning (match.] -- tree. Sh. II. 10. A.
Spink, [Chaffinch] Spinster, [adj. Spinning (mech.] Spiral. Mag. III. 9. Spire
Cone] Pyramid] [Steeple] to -- as corn, [v. ear (inc.]

Spirit. Immaterial substance. W. I. holy -- G. III. Angel] Devil] [Soul]
Animal -- PG. I. 1. -- s extracted. Pr. II. 7. Disposition] Temper]
Sprightliness] Vigor]

Spiritual. [adj. Spirit] Ecclesiastical. RE. -- Persons Eccl. RE. II.
Spirituous. [adj. Spirit. PG. I. 1.] [adj. Freshness]
Spirt, [Syringe] O. I. 6. A. for a -- [adv. Transitoriness (imp.]
Spit. Excretion. Mo. IV. 4. [Rosting (instr.] -- Fish, [Lucius Marinus] --
deep, [Deep the length of adj. digging (lam.]
Spite, Malignity] Hatred] Envy] in- [adv. Enemy] Contempt*]
-- of Contrary to ones will] adj. Coaction]


Spittle. [adj. p. Spit (thing] [House of sick (persons]
Spitter, [Smooth horned Red Deer (young] Splayfooted, [adj. Oblique footed]
Spleen. PG. VI. 5. A. -- wort. HL. I. 7. A. Rough -- HL. I. 6. A.
Splendid, [Bright] Splendour, [Brightness] Splenetic. [Sick in the Spleen]
[Hypochondriac] [Adj. Anger]
Spindletree. Sh. II. 10. A. Splent. [Lamin] sp. adj. Furrow (fig.]
[Chip]
Splinter, [Chip] Split, [Cleave] [Chink]
Spodium. Met. V. 2. Spoil. [Mar] -- for use. TA. II. 9. O. Harras. RM. II. 5.
D.
Spoke. [adj. pret. p.
speak] -- of wheel. Po. V. 7. A.
Spokesman, [Instead-speaker] Spondyl. Ex. VIII. 4. A. [Vertebra] PG. IV. 3. A.
Fish. Ex. VIII. 4. A.
Sponk, [Touchwood] Sponsion. [Paction] Suretiship. RC. VI. 6.
Spontaneity. AS. IV. 9. Spool of weaver. Spoon. Pr. V. 8. -- bill. Ei. VIII. 6.
Sport. [a. Wanton] [Play] [Recreation] [Game]
[Mirth]
Sportful, [Wanton] Spot, [adj. a. Spottedness (thing] Spotted, [adj. Q. I. 5.
O.] -- fever, [Malignant f.]
Spouse, Betrothed (fem.] Married (fem.]
Spout. Concave (thing Tube for out-streaming] Narrow (vas for out-streaming]
[Faucet] -- of Rain. El. VI. 3. to -- Power Syringe
Stream (dim.]
Sprain, [a. place (corr.] sp. by stretching (exc.]
Sprat, [Herring (young] Sprawling. [Creeping] Lying] Reverse]
Spread. Unheap. O. II. 6. O. Stretch] AC. VI. 2. Be extended] AC. VI. 2. A [a.
Public (make] A. [a. Contagion]
Sprig, [Branch (dim] PP. I. 3. Sprightliness. NP. IV. 2. Spring. [adj.
Beginning (part] -- of the year. Mea. V. a. Day -- [Day (incept.]
[Rise] Sp. II. 4. A. -- Fount. W. IV. 3. A. [Increase] - Tide, [Tide at the
New Full
of the Moon] Motion. O. I. 7. - of Lock, [adj. Spring (inst.]
to -- Sprout] Grow] [Leap] Mo. I. 5.
-- forth, [Being (inc.] -- from, [be Effect] Descendent]
-- a leak, v. Chink v. Crack
(inc.] -- a mine, [Find a m.] -- Partridges, Rise Fly
(make) Partr.]
Springal; [adj. Adolescency male] Spring, [Trap of threads] Sprinkle.
[Scatter drop] Baste] Powder]
Sprit. Boul -- (RN. II. 4.) -- Sail.

Sprout. PP. II. 5. Spruce, [Ornate (augm.] Sprung, a. pret. Spring] adj. p.
Spring]
Spu, [Vomit] Spud, [Short Knife] Spume, [Froth] Spun, a. pret. Spin] adj. p.
Spin]
Sponge. HL. I. 11. Spungy, [Porous] Spunk, [Match] Spur. -- of Bird. PP. V. 5.
-of a boo^, [adj. heel (arm.) of horseman] to -- [Impulsive]
Spurge. HS. V. 11. -- Laurel. Sh. III. 5. -- Olive. Sh. III. 6. Tree. Sh. IV.
6.
Spurket. RN. II. 8. A. Spurious. adj. T. III. 4. op. Spurn, [Strike with foot]
Spurry. HL. IX. 10. A. Spurt, vid. Spirt. Squab, [adj. Fat (augm.] to --
[Break] sp. by down casting]

Squabble, [a. Contention (corr.] Squadron. RM. III. 4. A. Squall,
[Exclamation] Squalid, Slovenly] Defiled]
Squander. in spending. Man. III. 3. D. not lay up. TA. V. 4. O.
Square. Proper Plain. Mag. V. 1. A. Solid, [Cube] Carpenters -- [c. adj.
Squaring instr.]

Improper. [Spread] AC. IV. 2. A.
-- out of -- [Exorbitant] -- dealing, [a. Justice]
to -- [a. square (make] -- with, [a. Congruous]
Squash, [Break] sp. by down (...)]
Squat. [Sit] a -- [Sate] [Bruise] sp. by down casting*]
adj. [Thick short]

Squatino-Raia. Fi. II. 3. A. Squeak v. Exclamation acute] Squeal v.
Exclamation acute] Squeamish. [adj. Loathing (apt.] sp. of meats]
[adj. Niceness]
Squeezing Compressing] Straining]
Squib. [adj. Gunpowder (instr.) for (sound] [Jest]
Squill. HL. IV. 13. Squilla Mantis. Ex. VI. 4. A. Squinancy. S. IV. 9.
Squinant, [Camels-hay] Squint, [a. Eye (manner) oblique (corr.] Squire, [Middle
(kind) of Gentleman] Squirrel. Be. III. 6. Squirt, [a. Syringing] Squirting,
[Sorry] St. Int. III. 1. O. Stab. RJ. V. 4. Stability. Steadiness] Fastness]
[Constancy]
Stable. [adj. Stability] [adj. Horse (room]
Stablish. [adj. Stability (make] [a. Confirmation]
Stack, [Heap] Stachas. Golden -- HF. II. 5.
Staff, [Stick] PP. I. 4. -- of a Song, [Section of S.]
Stag. Be. II. 3. A. -- Beetle. Ex. V. 1. A.
Stage. [Scaffold] [adj. a. Player Room] -- Play, [adj. Player fight]
[Journey] [adj. Staying (place]

Staggering. Mo. II. 4. O. Doubting] Wavering]
Staggers. Staggerwort, [Ragwort] Stagnate, [v. Stagnum] Stagnum. W. IV. 7. A.
Stay, u. Continue rest] a. Discontinue motion]
Continue, [Duration] -- Little while, [Transitoriness] -- Long time,
[Permanence] -- for ever, [Perpetuity] the same being. T. I. 7. the same
^^gree. T. I. 8. the sa^e goodness. T* I. 9. the same place. TA. VI. O. [Stand
his ground] RM. II. 2. [Keep the field] RM. II. 3. [Home] sp. II. 4. [Dwelling]
Po. I. A. [Rest] Mo. O.
Discontinue. Cohibitive] Impedient] [Obstruction] Hold] Keep] -- Injuriously.
RJ. IV. 3. A.
[Protract] [Desist]
-- by, Adhere] Constancy]
-- for, [Wait expecting] -- up, Bear] Prop]
-- upon* [Lean] a -- [adj. a. Stay ^^thing] great -- to one Adjuvant]
Refreshing]
Bring to that -- [a. state] Keep at a -- TM. I. 9.

Staid, Serious] Sober] Grave]
Stays. -- of a ship. RN. IV. 1. A.
Stain. [Dying] O. V. 3. A. [a. Spottedness] [a. Color (corr.] [Defile]
[Infamy]


Stairs. Po. IV. 1. Stake. [Stick] PP. I. 4. [Wager] -- down, [a. wager in
present money, etc.]
Stale. [Old] sp. corr.] -- Beer, [B. ripe (augm.]
[Urine] sp. Old u.]
[adj. Alluring (thing]
Stalk. a -- -- of plant, [Stock] PP. I. 2. -- of leaf or flower. PP. II. 7. to
-- Walk lofty. Mo. II. 3. [Go Covered] Concealed]

Stall. Room] Table] sp* for selling things]
Head -- [adj. head (part) of bridle]
Stallion, [Horse kept for generation] Stamen* PP. II. 6. A. Stammel, [Red
(dim.] Stammer, [Stutter] Stamp. [Pound] Mo. VI. 5. -- with foot, [Pound with
sole of foot] [Contusion]
[Print] AC. III. 7. A. Coin, [^. money with strikeing]
Stanch. Cohibit] Desist (make] sp. Dropping] Streaming]

[adj. Taciturnity] Reservedness]

Stand, Be for some time, unmoved, in posture direct. AC. VI. 1. A. [Being]
[Duration] -- little while, [Transitoriness] -- long time, [Permanence] -- of
long -- ing, [ad]
[Rest] -- still* [Stay]
-- ones ground. RM. II. 2. [Stagnate]
-- ing water, [Stagnum]
[Consist] Q. V. 5. Place] Situation] Posture] [Direct] Mag. II. 8. E. [Grow]
-- er, [Tree left for growth] -- ing corn, [Not reaped] -- about, [Protract]
-- against, [Resist] - by, Help] Defend]
-- er by, [Not-concerned (person]
-- for, [adj. Faction] -- child, [Be Godfather] -- degree, [Be Candidate] --
preferment, [Obtain (end) p.]
-- in [p. Price] [adj. Permanence] Constancy] Obstinacy]
sp. in affirming]
-- Doubt, [adj. Doubt] -- Fear, [adj. Fear] -- good-stead Adjuvant] Useful]
-- the way, [Impedient]
-- off, adj. aversion] Demurring]
-- out. [Be constant] sp. Opposing] Resisting]
Not-yield] Hold-out]
[Be protuberant]
-- to [Be constant] Assist] Defend] Compensate] Refund]
-- under, [Bear] -- up, Stand] Rise]
-- upon. Esteem] Value] [adj. Permanence disputing]

-- with, [adj. Permanence treating] a -- [adj. Standing (place] -- for drink,
[adj. bearing (jug.] -- of Pikes, [RM. IV. of p.] Beat a -- TM. I. 7. Stand
Doubting] Stay Doubting]
Keep at a -- TM. I. 9. ^^ke a -- [Stay (imp.]

Standard. [adj. Standing] [Ensign] sp. adj. King]
-- bearer, [Ensign] RM. III. 2. sp. adj. King]

[adj. Permanence] Measure. Mea. II. 4.

Standergrass, [Satyrion] Standish, [adj. Ink (vess] sp. Not-adj. p. carry
(apt.]
Stannery, [adj. Tin (place] Stanza, [Section of Poem] Staphylinus. Ex. V. 7.
Staple. for bolt, etc. Po. IV. 6. A. figure. Mag. IV. 5.
[Publick sale]
Star. Proper. W. II. 1. fixed -- W. II. 2. wandering -- [Planet] day -- [Venus]
Morning -- [Venus] Evening -- [Venus]

Blazing -- Star. W. II. 3. A. Meteor. El. I. 2. falling -- El. I. 2. A. Herb.
- of Bethlehem, [Ornithogalon] - wort. HF. III. 9. Sea -- HF. III. 10. Fish.
Fl. VIII. 6. -- in forehead, [Star (like) sign in foreh.]


Starboard, [Right side] Starch. Pr. VI. 5. A. Stare. By. III. 4. to -- AC. IV.
1. as hair [Direct] sp. adv. Confusion]


Stareling, [Stare] By. III. 4. Stark. [Stiff] (aug.]
-- Dead, [Whole dead]
Start, [Move (imp.) sp. through Fear] Admiration]
Passion sign. AC. IV. 5. [Move (imp.] [Run (inc.] -- a Hare, [Raise a H.)
-- aside [a. Levity] -- back [a. Levity] Abandon] Forsake]
-- up, [Rise (imp.] get the -- [Obtain Precedence] Superiority]

Starter, [adj. a. Levity (person] Starting hole, [Way of escape] Startle,
[Fright (imp.] Startup, [Outmost Leg (vest) for warmth] Starve. RJ. V. 5.
Starveling, [Lean (augm.] Starwort. HF. III. 9. Sea -- HF. III. 10.
State. General. [Quality] [Condition] [Circumstances] Extraordinary,
[Solemnity] All together. T. VI. 4.
Personal. [Age] Disposition] Temperament] [Dignity] [Degree] sp. of Nobility]
Gentility]

Take -- upon him, [Arrogate, etc.] [Revenues (aggr.] Right] Possession]

Civil. RC. the -- s, [Chief Magistrates (aggr.]
Ecclesiasticals. RE. -- of Religion. RE. III.

Stately. [Noble] [adj. Solemnity]
[adj. Generosity] Proud] Supercilious]
Static, [adj. Measuring (art.] Station, Resting (place] Standing (place]
Stationary, [adj. Standing] Stationer, [adj. Paper Book
(Merc.] Statue, [Image] Statuary, [adj. Image (mech.] Stature, [Height
(manner] Statute. [Law] [Morgage]
Stave. -- a barrel, [Unbottom a b.] -- off, Off-keep] a. Distance]
sp. with staff.]

Stavesacre. HS. I. 4. A. Stead. as Successor. T. VI. 6. as Substitute. T. VI.
6. A. in -- of. Prep. II. 1. A.
in no -- [Not Helpful] Useful]

Steadfast. Steady] Fast] To look -- ly, [a. Eye adv. heedfulness]
Constant]
Steady. Not-loose. Q. VI. 6. go -- Mo. II^ 4* Not light, [Constant]
Steake, [Fried flesh] Steal. [a. Theft] Come (adv. Concealing] Go (adv.
Concealing]
Stealth, [Theft] To come by -- [Come adv. Concealing]
Steam, [Exhalation] El. II. 2. Steed, [Horse (perf.] Steel. Met. II. 3. a --
[adj. Steel (Instr.]
Steep Oblique (dim.] Almost-perpendicular]
to -- [Soke]
Steeple. Po. II. 3. A. -- figure, Cone] Pyramid]

Steer, [Bull (young] to -- a ship, [Direct with the Rudder]
Steerage, [adj. Rudder (room] Stellion, [Spotted Lizard] Stem. [Descendants,
(aggr.] (kind]
-- of a plant, [Stock] PP. I. 2. -- of a ship. RN. II. 2. [Austere]
Stench, [Unsavoriness] Step. a. Motion] a. Going] Mo. I. 1. -- in, Come Enter
sp. suddenly] foot -- [adj. foot (sign]
a -- figure. Mag. V. 8. A. -- father Father adv. affinity] Mother's husband]
-- mother Mother adv. affinity] Father's wife]


Sterility, [Barrenness] Sterling, [adj. p. Authority by Law] Stern. [Austere]
sp. Face (manner]
-- of a ship. RN. II. 2. A.
Stew. Pr. III. 2. A. a -- [adj. Bathing (room] [adj Keeping (place) for fish]

Steward, [adj. Revenue (Off.] Stews, [adj. Fornication (house] Sty. [adj. Hog
(house] [Pustle within the eye-lid]
Stibium, [Glass (like) O. VI. of Antimony] Stick. to -- [a. Clamminess] Gluing]
Stay. -- at Doubt] Demur]
-- in, [into-fasten] -- out, [Protuberance] -- through, Prick] Stab]
-- to adhere] v. Constant]
-- with Cloves, etc. [Lard with cl. etc.

a -- PP. I. 4.
Stickadove, [Cassidony] HF. VI. 5. A. Stickle, Endeavor (augm.] a. Business]
a. Intercession]
-- back. Fi. IX. 13. A.
Stiff. op. to Limber. Q V. 6. D. -- gale of wind. El. VI. T. [adj. Rigor] AC.
IV. 5. D. [Stout] Zealous] [Rigid] [Pertinacious] -- necked. Disobedient]
Contumacious]


Stifle. RJ. V. 6. Stigmatize. RJ. VI. 6. A. Style, [Transverse sepiment for
over-p^ition] Still. [Calm] [Gentle] [adj. Silence] Taciturnity]
Peaceable] adj. Quieting] [adv. Permanence] Perpetuity]
[Yet]
[Distill]
Stilborn, [Abortive] Stilletto, [Short sword (dim.] Stilts, [Leg-lengthning
sticks] Stimulate, [a. Impulsive] Sting. PP. V. 5. A. Stink, [a. Unsavoriness]
Stint. Cohibit] Limit] [Remit] [Cease] Bird. By. VII. 6. A.
Stipend, [Wages] to -- TO. VI. 4. A.
Stipulation, [Sponsion] Stir. [Move] [Endeavour] [Provoke] -- up, [a.
Impulsive] -- s Troubles] Sedition]


Stirrup. Po. V. 8. A. Stitch. Disease, [Cramp] Pain, [Pricking] [Sowing]
through -- Totally Perfectly
-- wort. HS. V. 9.

Stithy, [Supporting (instr.) of hammered (thing] Stoat. Be. IV. 7. Stoccado.
Stock. -- of plant. PP. I. 2. [Descendents. (aggr. TO. I. 1. O. (kind. TO. I.
1. O.
[Chief Revenue] Possessions]
[adj. a. Gain (thing] Laughing -- [adj. p. Laugh (thing]
Stockdove. By. III. 2. Stockfish. Stockgilliflower. HS. IV. 1. Stockings,
[adj. Leg (vest] Stocks, [Prison for the feet] Stoic. Stole. adj. a. pret.
Steal] adj. p. Steal] [Long loose (vest]
Stolidity, [Folly] Stolen, [adj. p. Theft] Stomach. Ventricle. PG. VI. 4.
[Appetite] Anger] Courage]
Stomacher, [adj. Breast (vest] Stone. St. Common -- St. I. middle sort of --
St. II. Precious -- -- less transparent. St. III. -- more transparent. St. IV.
Weight. Mea. III. 6. -- pitch, [Hard p.] Disease. S. VI. 7. -- of a plum. PP.
II. 2. A. Testicle. PG. VI. 8. A. to -- one, [Throw stones at one] -- to death.
RJ. V. 2.
Stonebow, [Cross-bow (dim.] Stonebuck [Goat (kind) having angular knotted
horns] Stonecrop. HL. VIII. 5. Stonefern. Stonesmiche. By. V. 8. Stonewort.
Stool. Seat. Po. VI. 5. Close -- [Stool (like) adj. dunging (vess.] going to --
[a. Dunging]
Stoop. AC. VI. 4. -- as Barrel, [a. Oblique]
Stop. [Stay] [a. Impedient] [a. Binding] Obstruction]
[Fill] -- up [Shut]
[a. Period] to make a -- Stay (make] Hinder]

Stopple, adj. Stopping. (pin] Tap]
Storax. Tr. IV. 2. A. Store. [Provisions] Multitude] Abundance] to -- [Lay up]
Story, [adj. p. Narration (thing] of building* [Degree of rooms]
Stork. By. VIII. 1. A. Storm. El. VI. 4. to -- Chafe, Be angry (augm.] v.
Anger (voice]
[Assault] RM. I. 6.

Stote. Be. IV. 7. Stove. Room. Po. II. 5. [Box for Heating] Drying]

Stout. Active. NP. IV. 6. Strong] adj. Fortitude] Hardy] Obstinate] [Perverse]
NP. IV. 1. O. [Proud] [Contumacious]
Stow, Lay up] Heap]
Stradle. Mo. II. 3. A. Straggle, [Wander] Stray, Wander] Err.
Straight, vid. Straight. Strain, vid. Strein. Struck, [Variegating line] -- of
Cart-wheel, [Ring -- ]
Strand, [Shore] W. III. 6. Strange. Not-adj. Custom] Extraordinary] [Seldom]
[Not-expected] [New] [adj. Stranger]
Stranger. TO. IV. 4. O. Strangle. RJ. V. 8. A. Strangury. S. VI. 7. A. Strap,
[adj. Leather thong] -- of Boot, [Loop for on-drawing]
Strappado. RJ. VI. 3. A. Stratagem. RM. I. 9, Stratifying. Pr. III. 8. Straw.
Pr. V. 1. A. -- worm, [Cadew] Ex. III. 4. A. to -- Scatter] Spread]

Strawberry. HS. IX. 1. -- tree. Sh. III. 4.
Streak, Line. -- of Cart-wheel, [Ring -- ] -- s in the sky. El. V. 4.
Stream. W. IV. 7. -- er. RN. III. 8.
Street. Po. II. 7. Straight. op. to crooked, [adj. Ma. III. 1.] [Narrow]
Strict, [adj. Rigor] -- against. Prep. VI. 3. A. -- forward. [adj. Proceeding
adv. -- ] -- way, [adv. fut. (dim.] a -- [Perplex difficulty] Necessity]
Distress] [Fretum] W. IV. 5.
Strein. a. Intend] Endeavor (augm.] [Hurt by endeavoring (aug.] Depress
(augm.] Compress] [Arrest goods] Percolate. O. VI. 4. a -- [Degree] -- of
music, [Part of tune]
Strength. [Power] -- of body. -- Vigor] Strength] NP. V. 7.

-- of mind. -- Sprightliness] Fortitude]

Military. Forces] RM. IV. Places] RM. VI.
Importance] Intenseness] Taste (augm.] Smell (augm.]
[a. Drunkenness (apt.]
Strenuous. [adj. Stoutness] Diligence]
[adj. Strength] Fortitude]

Stress, Endeavor (augm.] Depression] Gravity]
Stretch. Extend] AC. VI. 2. Pandiculation] Mo. III. 6. O. Long (make] Broad
(make] Ample (make] Coaction] Wrest]
Strewing, Scattering] Powdering]
Striated. Q. II. 6. A. Stricken, [adj. p. strike] in Age, [Old] adj. Mea. VI.
4. Love, [adj. Love (augm.] Years, [Old (augm.]
with amazement, [Extasied]
Strict. Perfect] Regular (augm.] Rigorous] Severe]
Stricture. [Touch (dim.] [Comment (dim.]
Stride, [Stradle] Strife, [a. Contention] Emulation] loose -- yellow -- HS. V.
12. A.



Strike. Proper. Mo. VI. 4. Knock] Pound] Peck] Stab] Cudgel]

Cause (imp.] Move (imp.] as Sail, a. Downward] Fall (make]

-- a bargain, [a. Paction] -- blind, [Blind (make] -- a color, [cause a c.]
-- corn, [a. Even the surface] sp. by upon motion of straight (thing]
-- fire, [Cause to sparkle] -- heat, [Cause h.] -- in, vid. Stricken. Come
Suddenly] v. Friend Suddenly] Bargain Suddenly]
[Stab] -- off. -- account, Ballance] Acquit]
-- ones head, [Behead] -- out. [Spoil] [Unwrite]
-- to the heart. [a. Passion (augm.] [Stab]
-- up. [Begin] sp. Music.] [a. Paction] -- ones heels, [Fall (make] sp. by
wrestling]

-- with, vid. Stricken] a -- [Bushel] [Stick for a. Even (make]

String. [Cord] [Fibre]
Strip. [Un- a. Skin] Clothe]
[a. Privative]
Stripe, [Stroke] -- ed, [Variegated with lines]
Stripling, [adj. Adolescence (male] Strive. [a. Contention] Emulation]
Endeavor (augm.] a. Diligence] -- against, [Resist] -- for, [Obtain (end]
Stroy, [Destroy] Stroke. a -- [Striking] bear a. great [adj. power]
to -- [Wipe with hand]
Stromateus. Fi. III. 15. Strong. [adj. Strength] -- hold. RM. VI.
Strew, [Scatter] Struck, vid. Stricken. Structure, [Building] Struggle.
[Wrestle] [Strive]
Strumpet, [adj. Fornication (fem.] Strung, adj. a. pret. String] adj. p.
String]
Strut. [Swell with fullness] [Stalk] [Go proudly]
Stub. [Bottom (part) of stock] [Fragment of stick]
Stubble. Stalk, [adj. p. residue after reaping] -- goose, [adj. Autumn fatted
Goose]
Stubborn. [Contumacious] [Obstinate] [Perverse]
Stuck, adj. a. pret. Stick] adj. p. Stick]
Stud, [Protuberance (dim.] Student, [adj. a. Learning (end] Study. Endeavour]
a. Diligence] Meditation.] a. Considerateness] Closet, [adj. meditation (room]
Studious, [adj. Study (apt.] Stuff. [Matter] -- of clothing. woollen -- Pr.
IV. 1. Hairy -- Pr. IV. 1. A.
[Utensils]
[adj. Filling (thing] to -- [Fill by into-thrusting]

Stum, [Wine not-adj. pret. Fermenting] Stumble. Mo. II. 5. A. Stump. [adj.
Residue (part) after Cutting] Felling]

Stupidity. [Dulness] [Numness] S. IV. 6. A. Op. to common sense. NP. II. 1. O.
Stupifie, [adj. a. Stupidity (make] Stupor, [Numness] S. IV. 6. A. Stuprate,
[adj. a. Fornication] Sturdy. Bold] Valiant] [Obstinate] [Strong]
Sturgeon. Fi. I. 8. Stutter. AC. III. 2. Stygian, [adj. Hell] Style, Discourse
(manner] Writing (manner] Sentence (manner] to -- [Name] sp. of Dignity] of a
flower. PP. II. 6.

Styptic. [Astringent] [adj. Acerbity]
Su. Intreat] Petition] for Marriage, [a. Sutor] Preferment, [a. Candidate]
[in law, [a. Action]
Suasory, [adj. Persuade] Subaltern, [Inferior] Subcontrary [Opposite
together-true (pot.] Subdeacon, [Next RE. II. under deacon] Subdivide, [divide
the Parts] Species]
Subdue, a. Victory] Conquer
Subduction, [a. Ablatum] Subject. op. to praed. D. II. 5. op. to adjunct. T.
VI. 1. Liable, [adj. p. Subject (pot.]
op. to. Governor. RC. I. 1. O. [adj. a. Subjection] [adj. a. Obedience]
Submission]


Subjection. Man. V. 5. Subjoin, [After-join] Subjunctive. Subliming, O. VI. 7.
Sublimation, O. VI. 7. Sublime. Sublimity, [Height] Submission. [Humility]
[Subjection] op. to conquest. RM. II. 7. D. to Action. TA. IV. 1. A. Suffering.
Man. V. 8.

Submissive, [adj. Submission] Submit, [a. Submission] Subordinate, [Inferior]
sp. in Series.]
Suborn. RJ. IV. 6. A. Subpoena, [Citation with express threatning] Subscribe.
[Under-write] [Sign]
Subsidy, [Tax] Subsidiary, [adj. Adjuvant] Relieving]
Subsist. [Being] sp. Absolute] sp. Permanent]
[v. Substance] [Maintain himself]
Substance. [Predicament. T. I. 5. [Matter] T. II. 7. [Possessions] Po.
Substantial. [adj. Substance] [adj. p. matter (perfect] [Of sufficient Wisdom]
Possessions]

Substitute, [adj. Stead. TG. VI. 6. A. (person] Substract, a. Ablatum]
Diminish]
Substruction, [Under-building] Subterfuge, Escape] Solution (corr.]
Subterraneous, [Under-adj. earth] Subtle. [Fineness] [a. Craftiness]
Subvert. [Destroy] [Ruine]
Suburb. [City (part) without the walls]
Suck. Proper. Mo. III. 3. A. -- in, [Suck] -- up. -- the breath. AC. IV. 6. D.
give -- [Lactation]
Succedaneous, Instead-of coming] adj. Succeed]
Succeed. Be after, Mag. I. 2. D. Be Successor, [a. T. VI. 6.] Come by
Succession. RC. IV. 2. A. [Be Event] -- ill, [adj. Adversity] -- well, [adj.
Prosperity]

Success. [Effect] [Event] -- of war. RM. II.
[Prospering]
Succession. RC. IV. 2. A. Successive, [adj. Succeed, adv. Series] Successor,
[adj. a. Succeed (person] Succinct, Brief (perf.] adj. Epitomy]
Succor, [adj. Adjuvant] Relieve]

Succory. HF. II. 16. A. Gum -- HF. III. 11. A.
Succuba, [adj. Coition (fem.] Succulent, [adj. Juice] Succus nutritious. PG. I.
2. A. Such. [of that Quality] Quantity]
[of the same quality] like quantity]
-- as it is, [Such so ever]
Suck, vid. Suc. [a. Suction] -- up the breath. AC. IV. 6. D. give --
[Lactation]
Sucker. Branch. PP. I. 2. A. -- of a Pump, [adj. Sucking (part]
Sucket, [Confection] Suckle, [Lactation] Suction. Mo. III. 3. A. Sud, [Froth]
Soap -- s.
Sudden. [Soon] [Swift] [adj. Dispatch]
Sudorific, [adj. a. Sweat (make] Suet, [Hard Fat] Suffer. [Passion] --
affliction, [adj. p. affliction] -- persecution, [adj. p. Persecution] --
punishment, [adj. p. punishment] -- execution, [adj. p. Execution]
Licence] Toleration] Not-hinder] -- to take, [Yield] TA. IV. 1* -- to do,
[Submit] TA. IV. 1. A.
Meekness] Condescension] Patience] Submission]
Sufferance, Licence] Toleration]
Suffice, [adj. Sufficience] Sufficience. TM. I. 3. Sufficient, [adj.
Sufficience] -- man, [Of Suff. Wisdom] Riches]

Suffocate. [Stifle] [Strangle]
Suffocation of the womb. S. VI. 9. A. Suffragan, [Instead Bishop] Suffrage,
[Consent (sign] Suffumigation, [Fuming] Suffusion, [Spreading] Sug, [Sea-^lea]
Ex. II. 11. A. Sugar. Pr. II. 3. Suggest. Think (make] Remember (make]
[Dictate]
Suit. Intreaty] Petition] -- in law, [Action]
Aggregate. TM. III. 8. to -- with, [adj. v. Congruity]
Suitable, [adj. Conveniency] Congruity]

Suitor. [adj. Entreating (person] Petitioning (person] -- for marriage. TO.
II. 2. [Candidate] RC. I. 4. A.


Sullen. [Disingenuous] [Morose] [Contumacious]
Sully. [a. Color (corr.] [Defile]
Sulphur. St. V. 7. -- wort, [Peucedanum]
Sultan, [King] Sultry, [Hot (exc.] Sum. -- of money, [Money (aggr.] total --
TM. VI. 6. A.
Sumach. Tr. III. 2. A. Red -- Sh. V. 5. A.
Summary, [Epitome] -- ly, [Briefly]
Summer. Mea. V. 2. A. [Principal beam]
Summersault, Leap] Vault]
Summon, [a. Citation] Summum jus. Man. I. 2. O. Sumner, [adj. Citation (Off.]
Sumpter, [adj. Riding (apt.) box] Sumptuary, [adj. Spend] Sumptuous. [adj.
Spend (augm.] Price (augm.]
[Generous]
Sun. True. W. II. 2. A. -- Shine, [Brightness] to -- [Open to the Sun]
appearing -- [Parelius]
Sunday, [First day of the week] Sunder, [Separate] Sundew. HL. VI. 8. A.
Sundry, [adj. Diversity] Sunflower, HF. II. 1. Sung, a. pret. Sing] adj. p.
Sing]
Sunk, a. pret. Sink] adj. p. Sink]
Sup. [Suction] [Drink adv. Suction] [adj. Evening meal]
Superabound, [more-abound] Superciliousness. Man. VI. 3. O. Supereminence,
[Superiority] Supererogation, a. good more-than duty] Deserve for others]
Superfetation, [Again-conception of impregnated (fem.] Superficial. [adj.
Superficies] Slight] Careless]
Superficies. Surface] [Outside]
Superfine, [Fine (augm.] Superfluity, Excess] Abundance]
Superinducing, [Again-marrying of married (person] Superintend. [adj. p
Office] sp. to observe what others do in their Offices]

Superintendent. [adj. Superintending (person] [Bishop] Superiority. TM I. 5.
E. Relation of -- TO. III.
Superlative. [Most -- Great] Excellent]
[Principal]
Supernal, [adj. Upper side] Top]

Supernatation, [Upon-swimming] Supernatural, Above- adj. nature] adj. Miracle]
Supernumerary, [Beside the due number] Superscription, [Upon-write] Supersede,
Desist] Omit]
Superstition. RE. IV. E. Superstructure, [Upon-building] Supervene,
[Whilst-event] Supine, [Careless] Supper, [adj. Evening meal] -- of the Lord,
[Eucharist]
Supplant. [a. Fraud] [Dispossess by fraud]
Supple, Soft] Limber]
Supplement, adj. Supplying (thing] Vantage]
Supply. a. Adjuvant] adj. a. Perfect] [Un-deficient (make] [Again-fill]
[Relieve] Compensate] Repair] [a. Room] T. VI. 6.
Suppliant, [adj. a. Petition (person] Supplicate. [Intreat] [a. Petition]
Support. [Bear] [a. Adjuvant] [a. Patron] [Maintain]


Supposing. [Thinking] [v. Opinion]
[v. Supposition]
Supposition. D. VI. 3. Supposititious, [Forged] Suppository, [Cylinder (dim.)
Medicinal] Suppress. a. Victory] Conquer] [Conceal]
Suppuration, [Ripening of rotten (thing] Supremacy, [Right of being most
principal] Supreme, [Most principal] Surbate, Un-skin Bruise
by motion (freq.] Surcease, [Desist] Surcharge, [Burden (exc.] Surcingle,
[About-adj. p. binding (arm.] sp. for horse]
Surcoat, [adj. Upper (vest] Surd, [adj. Deafness] -- number, [Root
not-expressible by numbers]
Sure. Certain] Assured] [Betrothed] Constant] Faithful]
[Fast] [Safe]

Surely, [Truly] adv. I. 2. O. Surety, [adj. (Sponsion (person] Surface,
[Superficies] [Outside]
Surfeit. [Sickness through Eating (exc.] Drinking (exc.] Labor (exc.]
[Excess] [Gluttony]
Surge, [Wave* (augm.] Surgeon. RC. II. 3. A. Surly, Fierce] Morose]
Supercilious]
Surmise. [Opinion] [Conjecture] Distrust] Jealousie]
Surmount, [v. Superior] Surname, [adj. Family name] Surpass. [a. Excess]
Excell] Superiority] Better]
Surplice, [Upper linen (vest) of Ecclesiastic (person] Surplus. [Residue]
[Vantage]
Surprise, Take Unexpectedly] Arrest Unexpectedly] sp. by Stratagem] sp. by
Ambush]

Surquedry, Pride] Insolence]
Surrender. [Let go] Yield] Submit] [Deliver]
Surreptitious, [adj. Theft] Forgery]

Surrogate, [Substitute] Surround, About-go] a. Circle]
Survey. [a. Eye] [Consider] [Measure]
Surveyer. [Officer for observing others] sp. in building]
[adj. Measuring (artist]
Survive, [Continue after-living] Suspect. [Distrust] Diffidence] Jealousie]
[a. Censoriousness]
Suspense, [Doubtful Expectarion] Demurring] Wavering]
Suspend. RE. V. 4. Suspicion, vid. Suspect. Sustein. [Bear] [Maintain]
[Suffer] [a. Patience]
Sustenance, [adj. nourishing (thing] Sustentation, [adj. nourishing (thing]
Ordinary. Pr. I. Extraordinary. Pr. II.
Suitable, [Congruous] Suture -- [Sowed Series] Line]

Swabber. RN. V. 7. Swaddle, [About-bind adj. bottom (like] [Cudgel]
Swag, [adj. p. Oblique] sp. with shaking (imp.]
Swage, [a. Remission] Swagger. [a. Insolence] [a. Glorying (corr.]
Sway. Power] Authority] Direction] [a. Magistrate]
[a. Oblique (make]
Swain. [adj. Country (person] Swallow. Bird. By. V. 1. -- tail, [adj. Mag. IV.
4. end of beam]*
-- wort. HS. IV. 14. A. Sea -- BY. IX. 9. A. -- fish. Fi. III. 6. A.
-- ing. Mo. III. 7. A. [Gulf]
Swan. By. IX. 1. Swap, [Exchange] Swarm, [adj. Aggregate (thing] Multitude
(thing]

Swart, [Dark (dim.] Swarth, [Ridge of mowen grass, etc.] Swashbuckler, [adj.
Boasting (person) of fighting] Swathe, [About-bind adv. bottom (like] Swear.
RC. VI. 4. Sweat. Mo. IV. 3. Sweeping, [Brushing] Sweet. Proper. Q. IV. 1. --
bread, [Glandule] PG. II. 7. A. -- meats, [Banquet (thing]
[adj. p. Love] Delectation] -- heart, [Suter]

[adj. a. Pleasure] -- music. [adj. a. Courtesie]

Swell. [Tumor] [v. Protuberance]
Swelter, [a. heat (exc.] Swerve, [Err] Swift, [adj. Swiftness] Bird. By. V. 14.
Swiftness. NP. V. 9. Swill, [Drink (augm.] -- for swine, [Drink for swine]
Swimming. Mo. I. 4. Disease, [Vertigo]
Swine, [Hog (kind] -- s bread, [Sow-bread] -- s grass, [Knot-grass] -- Pipe,
[Redwing] By. III. 5. A.
Swing. Mo. VI. 3. Swinging, Striking (aug.] Whipping (aug.] Cudgelling (aug.]
adj. [Great (augm.]

Swingle, [adj. Striking (part) of adj. threshing (instr.] Swipe, [adj. Lifting
(instr.) on direct Pole] Switch, [Wand] PP. I. 4. A. to -- [Cudgel with wand]
Swivel, [Wheel] Swollen, [adj. p. Swell] Swoon. S. V. 5. A. Sword. Proper. RM.
V. 2. A. Put to the -- [a. Die (make) with sword] -- of Bacon. [Skin of Bacon]
-- fish. Fi. I. 2. A. green -- [Grassie land]
Sworn, [adj. p. Swear] pret. Swear]

Swum, [pret. Swim] Swung, [pret. Swing] Sycamore. Tr. VI. 6. A. Sycophant.
[adj. Fawning Accuser] Syllable. D. I. 3. Syllogism. D. IV. 7. Sylvan, [adj.
Woods. (person] Symbol, [Sign] sp. adj. Private] sp. adj. Obscure] sp. adj. p.
Concealing]
Symbolizing, [adj. Congruity] Symmetry, [Proportion (perf.] Sympathy,
Congruity (pron.] Friendship] (pron.] Together-suffering] (pron.] Pity]
Congratulation] sp. Concealed]

Symphony, Concord] Harmony]
Symptom, [Simultaneous sign] sp. corr.] Synagogue, [adj. Jews Church]
Convention Ecclesiastic] Temple]

Synchronism, [Narration of simultaneous (things] Syndic, [Magistrates
Assessor] Synedrium, [adj. Jews principal Council] Synod, [Council
Ecclesiastic] Synonym, [Of same meaning] Synopsis, [Epitome] Syntax,
[Together-joyning of Integrals] Siren. Syringe, [Tube for syringing] Syringing.
O. I. 6. A. Syrt, [Quicksands] W. III. 7. Syrup. Pr. II. 3. A. System,
[Epitome]
T.
Tobacco. HS. VII. 11. Tabernacle, [Tent] Tabid, [adj. Consumption] Table,
Lamin sp. adj. Tressel (fig. sp. for a. meal. Lamin. for upon-writing. -- Book,
[Book of Lamins upon-adj. p. writing (apt.] [Catalogue]
for upon-playing. Pair of -- s, [adj. Mo. V. 2. A. (jug.] -- man, [adj. Mo. V.
2. A. (instr.] Play at -- s. Mo- V. 2. A.


Adj. Tressel (fig.) Po. VI. 4. Meat. Plentiful -- to -- [a. Host] Guest]



Tabler, [Guest] Tablet, [Flat Gem] Tabor [Drum (dim.] Tabret [Drum (dim.] Taca
mahaca. Tr. VIII. 7. A. Tachygraphy, [Swift writing (art.] Tach, Hook] Loop]
Tacit. [adj. Silence] [Understood] adj. D. III. 8. O.
Taciturnity. Man. IV. 5. Tack. [Pin (dim.] hold- [Hold out] RM. II. 4. to --
[Fasten] sp. with pin (dim.]

[Turn]
Tacks of ship. RN. IV. 7. Tackling, [Armament] -- of ship, [Rigging]
Tactic, [War (art] sp. of Ordering. RM. IV.
Tactil, [adj. Feeling] -- Quality. Q. V.
Tadpole, [Toad (young] Taedium. AS. V. 1. O. Taenia major. Fi. VI. 3. --
minor. Fi. VI. 3. A.
Taffety, [Silk adj. Sound (apt.) in p. motion] Tag, [Pin of string] -- and --
rag, [Rabb^e]
Tail. PP. VI. 6. A. to -- [Tie by the tail]
Tailor, [adj. Clothing (mech.] Taint. [a. Contagion] [adj. Rottenness (make]
[Defile]
Take, Cause to be out of another and -- in ones own possession] Proper.
without consent. TA. I. 4. Judicially. Person or Goods, [a. Arrest] Part for
Whole, [a. Seisin]
Injuriously, [Usurp] Militarily. Person, [Captivate] Place. RM. II. 4. E.
Goods, [a. Booty]
with consent. Receive] Accept]
Improper. Undertake] Think] Esteem] [Elect] [Find] To -- ition] Into-ition]
[Obtein] sp. its end] [Please]
[Have] [Use]

-- account, [Reckon (make] -- the air, [Go into the open Air] -- Breath, [a.
Breath] -- Exceptions, Except] adj. v. Displicence]
-- fire, [adj. v. fire (inc.] -- Head, adj. p. Power (inc.] adj. Disobedience
(inc.]
-- Heart, [adj. p. Encouragement] -- Heavily, [adj. a. Grief for] -- Heed, a.
Heedfulness] Observe]
-- his heels, [Fly] -- the height, [Measure the h.] -- hold, [a. Hand (inc.]
-- horse. as a man, [Up-ition upon his h.] as mare, [v. Coition]
-- ill, v. Displicence] Esteem not-adj. friend]
-- Leave, [a. Valediction] -- Notice, [Observe] -- Oath, [Swear] -- pains, a.
Diligence] Operation (augm.]
-- place, [Precede] -- a pride, [Glorying] -- Prisoner, [Captivate] -- a
Purse. [Steal a purse] [Rob money]
-- Root, [a. Root] -- shipping, [into a. ship] -- tardy, Discover defect] Find
adj. pres. action]
-- warning, [adj. p. Warning] Heedfulness]
-- Water. [Into-take water] [Go into water] [Navigate (inc.]
-- well, [adj. p. Delectation] Consent]
-- away. [a. Privative] Diminish] a. Ablatum]
-- forth, Imitate] Proceed to learn]
-- in. -- a town. RM. II. 4. E. -- hand, Undertake] Attempt]
-- Pieces, [Separate the parts] -- Writing, [Write]
-- off From-take] Diminish]
-- on. [a. Grief (sign] Anger (sign]
-- to, To-ition] Confidence]
-- Mercy, [Be merciful to] -- Wife, [Marry]
-- up. [Lifting take] [Reprehend] sp. angerly] -- Cloth, [Buy c. etc. without
paying] -- money, [Borrow money] -- a quarrel, [Un-adj. a. contention (make] --
his rest, [Rest] -- time, [Spend t.]
-- upon him, [Claim]


Taken, [adj. p. Take] -- for, [Instead -- Thought] Judged]
-- with. as with diseases, [Sick] as with pleasure, [Pleased with (augm.]

Talc. St. II. 5. A. Tale. [Narration] sp. adj. fiction] [Number] -- bearer,
[Backbiter]
Talent. [Natural power] [Acquired Habit]
Talio, [Compensation] Talisman, [adj. Wizarding Image] Talk, Speech]
Conferring] Discourse]
Talkative, [adj. Loquacity] Tall, [High] -- wood [Blocks]
Tally, [Notched stick for reckoning] Tallow, [Hard Fat] sp. for Candle (make]
Talon, [Claw] PP. V. 3. Tamarind. Tr. VI. 2. A. Tamarisk. Sh. V. 2. Tame,
[adj. Tameness] to -- Tame (make] Conquer]

Tameness. Disposition, [Gentleness] Vice. op. to Fortitude, [Cowardize] op. to
Peaceableness. Man. IV. 3. E.

Tan. [a. Yellowness (corr.] Make Leather by juice of Oak] Prepare Leather by
juice of Brasil] etc.

Tang, [Tast (dim.] sp. Unsavoriness (dim.]
Tangent. Mag. II. 4. Tangible, [adj. p. touch (pot.] Tangle. O. II. 2. A.
Tankard, [Pot having cover] Tanner, [adj. a. Leather (mech.] Tansy. HF. II. 12.
Maudlin -- HF. II. 4. A. Wild -- HF. IX. 1.
Tap. [Striking (dim.] to -- [Strike (dim.]
Spiggot. Pr. V. 7. -- House, [adj. Selling (House of Ale] -- House, [adj.
Selling (Room of Ale] to -- [Stream (make] sp. by into-thrusting faucet]

Tape, [Narrow Ribbon] Taper. [adj. Wax candle] [Conical]
Tapestry, [adj. Room (vest) woven with pictures] Tapster, [adj. Selling (Off.)
of Beer, etc.] Tar, [Black liquid Rosin of Fir Pine etc. trees outdrawn by
fire] Tarantula, [Spider (aug.) adj. poison (apt.) by bi^eing] Tardy. Slow]
Late] [Guilty] take -- [Find adj. pres. action]
Tare, [Worst part] Tares. HL. III. 5. Target, [Buckler] Tarragon. HF. II. 10.
A. Tarras. [adj. Walking (place) on Building] [Courser plaster adj. p. hard
(apt.) in water]
Tarry. [Stay] -- for, [Wait]
Delay] Protract]
Tart. [adj. Austereness] Q. IV. 3. a -- [Py of fruits] sp. of sour f.]

Severe] Austere Man. VI. 8. O.
Tartar. St. V. 4. Task, Appointed operation] Undertaken business] -- work,
[adv. Aggregate (segr.]
Tassel, Tuft] Tufted Button] -- of hawk, vid. Teircel]
Taste. the Sense. NP. III. 4. Sensible quality. Q. IV. to -- a. Tast] a. Essay]
sp. by tasting]
-- er. [before adj. tasting (off.] [Cup (dim.) for essaying by tast]

Tatter, [adj. Tear freq.] augm.] a -- [Fragment from adj. p. tear]
Tattle, [a. Loquacity] sp. Uncertain]
Tavern, [adj. Wine (merc.) house] Taught, adj. a. pret. Teach] adj. p. Teach]
Taunt. [Mock] [Reproach] [Reprove adv. Mock] Reproach]

Taurus, [Second of the 12 parts of the Zodiac] Tautology, [Repetition of
words] sp. Vain]
Taw, Beat] Rub] sp. for Limberness (make]
Tawny, [Dark yellow] Tax. [Proportion] Payment public. RC. V. 9. A. [Price] to
-- [a. Tax] [Accuse] [Reproach]

Teach, [a. Teacher] -- er. TO. III. 3.
Teal. By. IX. 3. A. Team, [Series] sp. of drawing beasts] -- of ducks,
[Aggregate of ducks (young]
Tear. a -- [adj. p. Weeping drop] Job's -- s.
-- ing. Mo. VI. 6. A.
Teat, [Dug] PG. IV. 2. A. sp. Nipple of it]
Teazle. HF. VIII. 1. Technical, [adj. Art] Tedious. Irksom, [adj. a. AS. V. 1.
O. (apt.] Tiring, [adj. a. Wearying (apt.] Long (exc.] Slow (exc.]
Teeming, [adj. p. pret. impregnate] Teeth, [plur. Tooth] Teint, vid. Taint.
Telescope, [Tube for seeing remote (things] Tell. [Say to] [a. Narration]
cannot -- [Know not]
[a. Openness] Loquacity]
[a. Discover] Shew]
-- tale Blab] Informer]

[admonish] [a. Number]

Tellina. Ex. VIII. 6. A. Temerity, [Rashness] Temper. natural -- NP. -- of
mind. NP. IV. -- of body. resp. Individ. NP. V. resp. Propagation. NP. VI. Just
-- TM. I. 8.

[Disposition] out of -- [Sick (dim.]
to -- [Mix] [a. Mediocrity (make] [Moderate]


Temperament, ]Temper] Temperance. Man. II. 1. Temperate. [adj. Temperance]
adj. Mediocrity] Moderation] -- Heat, etc. Q. V. 1, etc.

Tempest. El. VI. 7. A. Temple. Po. II. 4. Temples. PG. III. 7. A. Temporal.
[Secular] adj. RE. O. [Transitory] [adj. Temples.]
Temporality, [Secular estate] Temporary, [Transitory] Temporize, adj. a.
Congruity with times] Alter with times]
Tempt. [Try sp* into a. vice] [Allure sp* into a. vice] [Seduce sp* into a.
vice]
Ten. Tenacity. [Keeping (apt.] [Penuriousness]
Tenant, [Hirer of Farm] House] Land]
Tench. Fi. IX. 7. A. Sea -- Fi. VI. 4.
Tend. [v. Tendency] [Wait] [v. Leisure]
Tendency. Sp. III. A. Tender. Soft] Brittle] [adj. p. Hurt (apt.] Gentle]
Nice] Compassionate] Merciful] Courteous (augm.] Clement] Fond] [adj.
Aversation from Hurting Offending
to -- [a. Tender] [Offer]

Tendon. PG. II. 2. A. Tendrel. PP. II. 7. A. Tenement, [Farm] Tenent, [adj.
Affirmed (thing] Tennice, [Balling with adj. net (fig.) striking (instr.]
Tennon, [Protuberance (dim.) in the end of beam] Tenor. Contained (thing] Sum]
[Meaning] -- in music, [next (part) above the Base]
Tent. Tabernacle. Po. II. 1. A. -- work, [White Maiden hair] HL. I. 5.
[Pin of Down (like) for stopping wound]
Tenter, [Hooked Pin] Tenth, [adj. Ten] Tenuity, [Thinness] Tenure, [Right
(kind] Tepid. Q. V. 1. Terce, vid. Tierce. Tergiversation. [Deny] [Forsake] sp.
Cowardly] Unfaithfully]
[Demur]
Term] [Limit] [Time] sp. limited] [adj. (...). (time]
[Word] [Name]
-- s Conditions] State]
Coming off upon equal -- RM. II. 1.

Terminate Desist] End]
Termination, [Ending (part] Ternary, [Three] Terrene, [adj. Earth]
Terrestrial, [adj. Earth] Terrible, [adj. a. fear (make] Herb. Sh. VI. 3.
Terrier. [Catalogue of lands] [Dog for hunting beasts out of holes in the
earth]
Terrify, [adj. a. Fear (make] Territory, [adj. authority* place] Terse.
[Wiped] [Clean] [Smooth]
Tertian, [Returning every second day] Test. [Trial. [Vessel (dim.) for trial
by melting]
Testaceous, [adj. Shell. PP. III. 2. Testament. [adj. Bequeathing writing]
[Scripture] RE. VI. 1.
Testator, [adj. Bequeathing (person]* Testy, [Morose] Testicle. PG. VI. 8. A.
Testify, [a. Witness] Testimony Witnessing (thing] Witnessed (thing]
Testimonial. [adj. Witnessing (thing] sp. Writing]

Testor. [adj. Covering (jug.) of bedstead] [Half shilling]
Tet, vid. Teat. Tether, [adj. tying (thing for the leg] Tethya. Ex. IX. 6.
Tetter. S. III. 2. A. Tew, [Pull (augm.] Text. [adj. Subject writing] [adj.
Scripture sentence]
Texture, [Weaving] sp. (manner]
Thanks, [a. Gratitude] -- fullness, [Gratitude]
Thanksgiving, [a. Gratitude] -- to God. RE. IV. 3.
That. [the] Art. II. [he] Pron. I. 3. that. Pron. II. 1. O. -- Same, [Same]
[Which] Pron. III. 2. A. that. Conj. III. 1.
Thatch, [adj. Straw roof] to -- [a. Roof with straw]
Thaumaturgic, [operation (art) of things adj. p. admiration (apt.] Thawing.
[Un-a. frost] [Dissolving]
The. Art. II. Theater, [adj. Sights a. Player
Place] Thee, [Thou] Thief, [adj. These (person] Theevery RJ. III. 7. A. Theft
-- RJ. III. 7. A. They Pron. I. 3. pl. Them Pron. I. 3. pl. Theme, [Subject
adj. p. Speaking] Writing]
Then. Comparative. Adv. III. 1. O. [at that time] how -- How therefore] what
Next]
if- [If Therefore] Next]

Thence. From that (thing] (time] (place]

Theology, [Divinity] Theologue, [Divine] Theorem, [Rule adj. Theory] Theory,
Meditation] Inquisition] sp. adj. a. Science (apt.]

There, [in that Thing] Place]
-- about. Adv. V. 3. -- fore. Conj. III. 3. O. -- in in it] -- of of it] --
upon [Upon it] [Upon that] Conj. IV. 1. O.

Thesis. [Proposition] [Positive sentence]
Thy, [adj. Thou] Thick. as to magnitude. TM. II. 5. as to number, [adj.
multitude] as to time, [Frequent] [as to place, [Obvious] as to parts. Their
greatness, [adj. Courseness] Their nearness to each other, [adj. Density] the
cause of it. In Arids, [Fulling] In Liquids, [Coagulating]


our sense of them, [adj. Opacity] the sense it self. -- of hearing, [Dull of
hearing]
Thicke^, Shrubs (aggr.] Woods (dim.]
Thigh. PG. V. 4. Thill, [Shafts] Thiller, [The horse between the Shafts]
Thimble, [adj. Finger, (armam. (armor
for sowing] Thin. as to magnitude. TM. II. 5. O. [Lean] as to number, [adj.
Fewness] as to time, [Seldom] as to place, [Rare] as to parts] their nearness,
[Rare] their bigness, [Fine] The cause of it. In Arids. In Liquids, [Dissolving]


Our sense of it, [Transparent]
Thine, [adj. Thou] Thing. T. I. 2. (Thing)
Think. [Cogitation. AS. II. 1. [v. Opinion] me -- s, [I am adj. opinion]
[adj. v. Perswasion] [Consider] [v. Meditation] [Esteem] -- good Approve]
Consent]
-- much, [adj. v. Nolleity] -- well of, [Esteem (aug.] good]

Third, [adj. Three] Thirsting. AC. II. 2. Thirteen. 13. Thirty. 30. This.
Pron. II. 1. Thistle. HF. III. 1. Fullers -- [Tezzle] Globe -- HF. VIII. 2. Sow
-- HF. III. 14.
Thither, [To that place] -- ward, [Toward that place]
Thlaspi. HS. VI. 3. Thong. Pr. IV. 8. Fi. II. 2. A.
Thorn. Prickle. PP. I. 3. A. Tree. Black -- Sh. I. 4. Box -- Sh. I. 6. A.
Bucks -- Sh. I. 7. Christ's -- Sh. I. 6. Ever green -- Sh. III. 4. Goats -- Sh.
IV. 9. Purging -- Sh. I. 5. White -- Sh. I. 3. A. -- Apple. HS. VII. 7. A.
Thornback. Fi. II. 2. A. Thornback Dog. Fi. I. 5. Thorpe, [Village] Those,
[Plur. He] That]
Thou. Pron. I. 2. Though, [Although] Conj. II. 2. Thought, v. [ Thinking] --
Taking Anxiety] Heedfulness]

Thoughtfulness, [Thinking (aug.] Heedfulness] Carking]
Thousand. 1000. -- pound. in weight. Mea. III. 8. in money. Mea. IV. 7.

Thrall, [Slave] Thrasonical, [Boasting Coward] Thrave, [24 Sheaves] Thread. to
-- a needle, [Through-put thred]
Threadbare, Worn to the threads] Un-adj. p. Wool by wearing]
Threatening. TO. V. 6. O. Three. Mea. I. 3. -- Fold, [Three (kind]
Threescore. 60. Thresh. O. III. 5. Threshold. Po. IV. 3. Thrice, [adv. Three]
Thrill. [Bore] [v. Inward trembling (like) sound]
Thrift. [Frugality] Herb. HF. II. 14. A.
Thrifty, [adj. Frugality] Thrive. [adj. p. Prosperity] Increase] Become rich]
Grow] adj. v. Vigour]
Throb, [Pulse of the heart] sp. Pulse (augm.]
Throne, [adj. King Chair] Throng, [Dense multitude] to -- Thrust] a. Density]

Throstle, [Thrush] Throat PG. III. 5. A. Set out -- [Exclamation] -- Boll,
[Protuberance of the (th] -- wort. HS. VII. 7. A.
Throttle, [Protuberance of the Rough Artery] to -- [Strangle] sp. by
compressing throat]

Through. Prep. IV. 3. Perfect] Total] Only] -- and through, [Through both
sides] -- fare, [Through-passage] -- out, [adv. Perfect] Whole]
-- Paced Perfect Only --
ambling] -- stitch, [Perfect] quite -- [Through both sides] [For] Prep. I. 2.
A. [By Impulsion Means
of] [With] Prep. I. 1. A. [Over] Prep. III. 3. [By] Prep. I. 2.

Through wax. HF. IV. 14. Codded -- HS. IV. 6. A.^
Throw. [Cast] Mo. VI. 2. -- a dart, [a. Dart] -- down, [a. Fall] -- Person,
[Precipitate] -- Building, [a. Ruine]
-- forth Unpossess] -- out Unpossess]
Pang, [Pain (imp.]
Thrum, [Tuft] Thrush. By. III. 3. A. Sea -- Fi. V.9.
Thrusting. O. I. 4. O. -- forth [Un-possess] -- out [Un-possess] Himself in,
[Usurp] -- into, Prick] Stab]
-- through, [Through Stab] Wound]

Thumb, First Finger] biggest Finger]
Thump. [Strike] sp. with obtuse (thing]
[Sound of striking]
Thunder. El. I. 3. A. -- Bolt Long (dim.) Pebble (kind] -- stone Long (dim.)
Pebble (kind]
Thursday, [5th day of the week] Thus. [In this manner] -- far, [Until this
(time] (place]

Thwack, Strike] Cudgel]
Thwart. [adj. Transverse] Cross]
[Contrary] [adj. Disingenuity] to -- [Oppose] [Contradict]

Ty. Knit. O. II. 2. [Bind] [Oblige]
Tice, [Allure] Tick, vid. Tike. Ticket, [adj. Written (dim.] Tickling. AC. II.
8. Tide. motion of the Sea. W. IV. 6. A. Season, [Time] good -- [Festival]

Tidings, [Narration] sp. of new (thing]
Tierce, [2/^ of a Hogshead] Tiercel, [Hawk (male] Tiffany. Tigby, [Laugh
(exe.] Tight. [Whole] [Stiff]
Tike. [adj. Country Rusticity
(person] Insect. Ex. II. 6. Sheep -- Ex. II. 6. A.
Bed -- [Case of Bed]
Tile. St. I. 5. A. to -- [a roof with Tiles]
Till. a -- in a Chest, [Box (dim.) adj. drawn (apt.] adv. [Untill] to -- [a.
Prop] [Allure] a. Agriculture] a. Plow] -- ed Land, [Arable]
Tillage, [Agriculture] Tilt. a -- [adj. Cloth roof] to -- [Fence with Spear]
-- a vessel, [adj. a. Oblique v.]
Tilth, [State] sp. of Land] Land in -- [L. adj. p. agriculture (perf.]
Timber [Wood for building] -- of fur [aggregate -- ]
Timbrel, [adj. Music (instr.] Time. Space. Sp. I. -- to come, etc. [ Future,
etc.] at -- s. Sp. I. 8. O. at all -- s. [adv. Perpetuity] often -- s, [adv.
Frequency] Some -- s, [adv. Rarity]
[Date] Duration] Age] for a -- [adv. Transitory] Long -- [adv. Permanence]
-- in music. measure of -- Mea. V. Leisure] Opportunity] in -- adv. time
(perf.] in good -- adv. time (perf.] out of -- [adv. time (corr.]
[Action in the -- ] First, [f. action] the -- s, [adj time (things]


Time. Herb. HF. VI. 4. Timely. [Opportune] [Early]
Timeserving, vid. Temporizing. Timidity, Fear (apt.] Cowardise]
Timorous, [adj. Timidity] Tin. Met. I. 3. -- glass, [Bismute] Met. III. 3. to
-- a. surface with Tin (lam.]
Tinca marina. Fi. VI. 4. Tincture. [Dying] [Coloured Liquor] [Colour]
Tind, [v. Fire (inc.] Tinder, [Charred Linen] Tine, [Toothed (pin] Ting, [Ring
(dim.] sp. adv. acute]
Tingle. AC. II. 9. A. Tinker, [adj. Wandering. adj. metal (mech.] Tinkle, [Ring
(dim.] sp. Acute] Tinsel, [Cloth between-woven with Copper silver (like]
Tintamar, [Jangling sound (augm.] Tip. Sp. III. 7. to -- [a. Tip] [a. Fall by
striking with adj. p. cast (thing]

Tippet. Tippling, Drinking (freq.] a. Drunkenness]
Tipstaff, [Marshal] Tiring. [Wearying] -- for hawk, [adj. a appetite (thing)
by adj. p. pecking]
[a. Clothing] -- woman, [Hair-[adj. a. Order Ornate
(mech.]

Tissick. S. V. 2. Tissue, [Cloth between-woven with Gold] Tit. Bird. crested
-- By. VI. 8. A. long-tail'd -- By. VI. 8.
[Horse (dim.] to -- over, [Fall]
Tithe, [Tenth (part] Tithymal, [Spurge] HS. V. 11. Titillation, [Tickling]
Title. [Name] sp. of Dignity]
[Right]
Titmouse. By. VI. 7. great -- By. VI. 6.
Tittle. [Point] [Most-little (thing] -- tattle, [adj. Loquacity (thing]
Titular, [adj. name] To. Prep. [For] -- the end, [For the e.] -- that, [That]
[In] to day [in this day] morrow [in next day

[Of] Prep. I. 1. according -- Prep. II. 1. in -- Prep. IV. 1. un -- Prep. II.
1. -- and fro, toward to
several places]
Subst. [Finger of foot] -- do Doing etc.] -- say, etc. Saying etc.]
Toad. Beast. Be. VI. 2. A. -- 's flax. HS. VIII. 6. A. -- Stool, [Mushrom] HL.
I. 1.
-- fish. Fi. II. 4. A.
Tobacco. HS. VII. 11. -- pipe. -- fish. Fi. III. 13. A.

Tod, [28 pounds] Together. Adv. IV. 1. -- with. Prep. II. 2.
Toy. [Vain (thing] [adj. Valor (dim.] to -- [a. Wantonness]
Toil.. [Net] [Labour (augm.]
Token. [Sign] [adj. Witness (sign] [Pawn] [Gift] sp. sent]
Told, adj. a. pret. Tell] adj. p. Tell]
Tole, vid. Toll. [adj. Paid (part) out of adj. p. rinding (thing] [Tribute] --
boothe, [Prison]
Tolerable. [adj. p. Patience (apt.] [Indifferent]
Toleration. RC. IV. 9. Toll, vid. Tole. to -- [Ring (dim.] [Allure]

Tomb, [adj. Entombing (place] Tome, [Book] D. III. 3. A. Tone. [Voice (manner]
[Distance between two notes]
Tongue. PG. III. 4. -- tied, [Dumb through not-motion (pot.) of tong] Dogs --
HM. II. 3. [Language] -- of a balance, [Direct pin of ballance]
Tongs, [adj. Taking (jug.) for adj. fire (things] Tonsilla, [Glandules] adj.
PG. III. 9. A. place of them. PG. III. 9. A.
Too. [adv. Excess] [Also] Conj. IV. 2.
Tool, [Instrument] Tooth. PG. III. 4. A. -- and nail, [adv. Diligence]
Fierceness]
-- some, [adj. Taste (perf.] Eye -- [Longest.] figure. Mag. IV. 2. -- wort. HS.
IV. 2. A. -- without Leaves. HL. V. 8. A.
Top. Highest. Sp. III. 7. -- of a ship. RN. III. 1. A. Best part] Principal]
[Cone. adj. p. Vertiginate (apt.) by ad.. p. whipping] to -- [Cut off the top]
[a. Superiority] [a. Stay]

Topaz. St. IV. 3. A. Tophus. St. I. 5. Topic. -- medicine, [m. applicable to
the Sick (part] [adj. Invention (place of argument] [Foundation (like of
argument]
Topsy turvy, [With top adj. p. undermost] Torch, [adj. Wax Candle Pitch (augm.]
Torment Pain (augm.] Torture]
Tormentil. HF. IX. 2. A. Torn, [adj. p. Tear] Tornado. Wind. Torpedo. Fi. II.
1. A. Torpid, Num'd] Dull]
Torrent, [Stream (augm.) sp. transitory] Torrid, [Hot (augm.] Tortion,
[Twisting] Tortois. Be. VI. 1. Torture, RJ. VI.1. Pain (augm.]
Toss, Cast upward] a. Volutation] -- pot, [adj. Drunkenness (person]
Toste, [Roste] sp. without vertigination]
Total, [adj. Whole] Sum]
Totter, Shake] Stagger]
Touch. [Feeling] NP. III. 5. [Sense] Extern. NP. III. Intern. NP. II.
[Anger]
[Tactil quality] -- active. Q. V. -- passive. Q. VI.
[v. Contiguity] Essay] a. Experience] Try]
the -- [p. Experience] -- stone. St. I. 6. A.
[v. Pertinent] -- ing, [Concerning] Prep. I. 3. A. a -- Little] Say]
to -- Speak little of] a. Object (dim.)
-- wood, [Fungus of tree for a. fire (inc.]

Touchy, [Morose] Toughness. Q. VI. 5. E. Touze, [Pull (augm.] Tow, vid. Towe.
Toward. [That adv. way] -- ly, [adj. Learn (apt.] About. Adv.] V. 3. Almost
Adv.] V. 1.
Towe, [Hemp prepared for adj. p. spinning] to -- [Draw with cord]
Towel, [Linnen for wiping] Tower. Po. II. 3. Town. RC. III. 2. A. -- s man
adj. Town (person] Citizen]

Tower, [Fly high] Towze, vid. Touze. Toze, [Loosen by pulling (freq.] Trabs.
El. I. 4. Trace. Harness. Po. V. 9. A. to -- Follow by track] Hunt by track]


Trachurus. Fi. IV. 8. A. Track, [adj. Foot Wheel
sign] Tract. [Country] W. III. A. [Written Discourse] -- of time, [Time
(augm.]
Tractable, Gentle] Courteous] adj. p. Govern (apt]
Trade. [Profession. RC. II. sp. Unlearned] [Art. Ha. VI. 3. sp. Unlearned] to
-- [a. Merchant] -- wind, [Constant w.]
Tradition. [Narration] sp. Successive] Ecclesiastic. RE. VI. 1. A.
Traduce. [Reproach] [Calumniate]
Traffic, [a. Merchant] Commerce]
Tragedy, [Play adv. a. Grief ending] Tragical, [adj. a. Grief] sp. in the
Ending] Tragicomedy, [adj. a. Grief play adv. mirth ending] Tragopogon. HA. I.
8. A. Tray. Pr. V. 4 A. Trail, [Draw on the ground] sp. for a. Sent (make]
Train. -- of garment, [Long hinder part of g.] bird's -- PP. V. 2. A.
Series -- of powder. Aggregate. [Waiters (aggr.]
-- of an Army. RM. IV. 7. [Allurement] to -- a. Teacher] Educate]
[Entice]

Traitor, [adj. Perfidiousness Treason
person] Tralatitious. D. III. 6. O. Tramel, [Net adj. p. carry (apt) between
two (persons] Trample. [on- a. foot] [a. Sound (augm.) with a. foot (augm.]
Trance, [Extasie] Tranquillity. [v. Quieting (abstr.] [Contentation]
Transaction. [a. Business] Transcendent. T. [Excellent]
Transcribe, [a. Type writing] Transfer. Remove] Deliver] Alienate]
Transfigure, [Alter the form] Transgress. [a. Excess] a. Disobey] a. Violate]
[a. Sin]
Transient, [Transitory] Transition. D. V. 9. Transitory. Sp. I. 6. O.
Translation. D. V. 5. vid. Transfer.
Transmarine, [Beyond adj. Sea] Transmigration, [ition from one (place) to
another (place] Transmit, Derive from, etc.] a. ition from, etc.]
Transmutation, [Altering] Transom, [Transverse beam] Transparent. Q. I. 4. --
stone, vid. Stone.

Transpiration. Mo. IV. 3. A. Transplant, [Re-move into another (Place]
(Countrey]
Transport. [Carry into another Countrey] [a. Extasie]
Transpose, Exchange the Place] Alter the Order]
Transubstantiation, [Altering the substance] Transverse. Ma. II. 8. D. Trap.
PO. VI. 8. A. -- door, [Door adj. p. open with lifting]
Trappings, [adj. a. Ornate (arm.] Trash. [Sorry] [Worst part] [Filth]
Travel. [Journey] TA. VI. 3. sp. into foreign Countreys] [Labour]
[Parturition]
Travelers Joy. Sh. V. 7. A. Traverse. to -- [a. Transverse] -- Suit, [Denying
the action].
Treachery. op. to fidelity. Man. IV. 2. D op. to Loyalty. Man. V. 6. D.
Treacle, [Physical mixture of vipers, etc.] Tread. [a. Foot] -- down, [a.
Prostrate by upon- a. foot.]
[Goe] [v. Coition] sp. as bird (male]

Treason. RJ. III. 2. Treasure, Money (place] Riches (aggr.] -- r, [adj.
keeping (Off.) of money]

Treat. [a. Object] [Entertain] in order to a Bargain. RC. VI. 1. A.

Treaty, [a. Treat] Treatise, Written Discourse] Printed Discourse]
Treble. [Threefold] -- in Music. Q. III. 1. E.
Treddle, [Navel of fut. Chick in egg.] Tree. Tr. -- of life. Tr. V. 6. A. --
of saddle, [adj. wood (part) of s.]
Trefoil. bean -- Sh. IV. 3. Hedghog -- HS. III. 15. A. Shrub -- Sh. IV. 3. A.
Snail -- HS. III. 15. Starheaded -- HF. VIII. 5. A.
Trey. Pr. V. 4. A. [Three]
Trembling. AC. IV. 5. E. Trench, [Ditch] Trencher. Pr. V. 9. -- friend,
[Flatterer for victuals] -- man, [Eater]
Trepan. [adj. boring (instr.) for headbone] to -- [allure into p. Hurt] Danger]

Trepidation, [Trembling] sp. through fear]
Trespass. [a. Excess] Disobey] Violate]
[a. Sin] [Injury]
Tress. [Lock of hair] [Tassel (like]
Tressle. Mag. V. 5. Trevet, [Stool with three legs like] Try. Consider]
Examine] TA. II. 5. A. -- at law. RC. II. 4. A. Prove. TA. II. 5. A. Essay] a.
Experience] -- out, [Try the utmost] Refine, [Separate the course parts]
Triangle. Mag. V. 1. Tribe, [Society] sp. from one progenitor]
Tribulation, Adversity] Misery]
Tribunal, [Seat of Judge] Tribune, [adj. Regiment (Off.] Tribute. RC. V. 9.
Trice, [Instant] Trick. [a. Craft] [a. Prestigiator] Action (dim.] thing (corr.]
to -- [a. Ornate]
Trickle, [Drop] sp. adv. Series]
Trident, [Halbert with three teeth] Trifle. [Vain (thing] [Thing of no value]
-- ing, [a Wantonness] [a Sloth] [a Lightness] [a Cunctation]

Trigger. [adj. Staying (instr. of vertigination] Impedient (instr. of
vertigination]
[Sign of standing (place]
Trill, [Tremble (like) with voice] Trim, [adj. Ornate] -- ing a boat, [a.
Ballancing] -- ing a ship -- RN. VI. 4. A.
Trine, [Distance ^ of a great Circle] Tringa. -- major. By. VII. 5. -- minor.
By. VII. 5. A.
Trinity, [Three (abstr.] Trinkets, [Sorry (Instruments] (Things] Utensils]
Trip. [a. Slide (make] [Stumble (dim.] -- along, [Walk nimbly]
Tripe, [Prepared stomach of beast] Tripartite, [Three (kind] Triple,
[Threefold] Trivial. Ordinary] Common] [Sorry] [Vain]
Triumph. RM. II. 8. Triumvirat, Government of together-three (persons]
Magistracy of together-three (persons]
Trochisc, [Round lamin (dim.] Trochus. Ex. VII. 6. Trod, adj. a. pret. Tread]
adj, p. Tread]
Troy weight, [w. of 12 ounces in a pound] Troll, [Ition adv. Smooth] [Hunt
fish with adj. vertiginating (match,]
Troop. Company. RM. IV. 3. [Aggregate]
Trooper, [Horseman] RM. III. 1. A. Trope, [a. Tralatitious] Trophee. RM. II.
8. A. Tropic. -- of Cancer. W. VI. 6. -- of Capricorn. W. VI. 6. A.
Trot. a -- [adj. Decrepit (sem.] to -- Mo. II. 2. A.
Trotter. [Foot] sp. of Sheep]
Trouble. Molest. TA. V. 9. O. in -- [adj. p. TA. V. 9. O.] Adversity] Misery]
Grief] Remorse] Anxiety]
-- water, [Un* a. quiet]

Troublesome, adj. a. Trouble (apt.] Contentious]
Trough, [Long Trey] Trout. Fi. IX. 3. Trowel. [adj. spreading (instr.) of
Mortar] Trowle, vid. Troll. True, [adj. Truth] Genuine]
Truant. [Wanderer] [Slothful (person]
Trub^. HL. I. 2. Truce, Transitory peace Between-space of quiet]
Truchman, [Interpreter] Truck, [Exchange] Truckle, [Wheel of pully] to --
under- Be] Ly]
[Submit]

Truculent, Fierce (augm.] Cruel (augm.]
Trufle, Trubs. HL. I. 2. Truly. Adv. I. 2. O. Trull, [Common adj. fornication
fem.] Trump. [Trumpet] [adj. Victory (kind) of Cards]
Trumpery, Sorry (things] Worst part]
sp. (aggr.] Trumpet, [adj. Trumpeter instr.] Trumpeter. RM. III. 3. A. Fish.
Fi. IV. 10.
Truncheon, Short thick stick] adj. Cudgelling (inst.]
Trundling, [motion Upon wheels] adv. Vertiginating]
Trunk. Body. -- of plant, [Stock] PP. I. 2. -- of animal. PG. IV.
[Box] Chest. sp. with unequal adj. covering (thing] Tube] Snout. PP. V. 4. A.
Truss. Together -- Tie] Up -- Tie] [a-aggregate by tying] -- of hay, [adj. p.
bound (aggr.) of h.]

Trust. [Believe] v. Confidence] AS. III. 4. -- with, [Deposit] -- for, [Lend]

Trusty, [Faithful] Truth. T. III. 1. in -- Adv. I. 2. O.
Tub Pr. V. 3. A. -- fish Fi. IV. 5.
Tube Round -- Mag. V. 9. O. Square -- Mag. V. 9.
Tuberous, [adj. Protuberance (freq.] (Sword]
Tuck, [Long adj. pricking (apt.) of a ship. RN. II. 9. to -- [Fasten the
extremity]
Tuesday, [Third day of the week] Tuff Taffate, [Tufted Taffata] Tuft. Tassel.
Mag. IV. 6. -- of flower. PP. II. 6. [Aggregate]
Tugg, [Pull (augm.] (imp.]
Tuition, [a. Guardian] Teacher]
Tulip. HL. IV. 3. Tumbling. Mo. II. 6. A. Tumbler, [Dog hunting lesser beasts
by agility] [Praestigiator by tumbling]
Tumbrel, [Cart] Tumor. S. III. Tumult. [Sedition] [Confused multitude]
Tumultuary. [Seditious sudden] Tun. [Barrel (augm.] [Measure] Weight. Mea.
III. 9.
Tune. Q. III. 6. to -- [Prepare (perf.] -- able, [adj. Music]
Tunhoof, [Ground-Ivy] HL. VI. 11. Tunicle, [Membrane] Tunnage, [Tribute]
Tunnel, [Concave Cone] -- of Chimney, [Concave (part) of ch.]
Tunny. Fi. III. 4. Turbant, [adj. head (vest] Turbinated, [About -- spirald
adj. Cone] Turbith. Tr. VI. 11. A. Turbith. Turbo. Ex. VII. 5. A. Turbulent,
Seditious] Contentious]
Turbut. Fi. VII. 3. Turcois. St. III. 5. Turdus. Fi. V. 9. Turf, [Grassie
clod] Turgid, [adj. Tumor] Protuberance]
[Full (augm.]
Turks Cap, [Martagon] HL. IV. 2. A. Turkey. By. II. 2. A. Turmoil, Trouble]
Operation (augm.] Business (augm.]
Turn. op. to proceed. TA. VI. 2. O. -- head, [Resist]
Gesture. AC. VI. 8. -- inside out. -- upside-down.
[Fold] -- down. -- up.
[Dig] -- up the ground. Bend] Curve]

[a. Helical] Spinal]
[a. Volutation] [a. Vertigination] -- Spit. -- with a Lave. O. IV. 7. A. --
er, [adj. -- ing (mech.]
[Change] -- into
[Become] [v. Convert] [v. Apostate]
[Translate] -- away, [From -- ] -- back, [Back -- ] -- over -- out, [Eject] --
up a -- [Turning]
[Alteration] at every --
[Office] a good -- [a. Benefactor] an ill -- [Mischief]
Course. T. VI. 7. by -- s, [adv. Course]

Turnament, [Game of horsemen mutually assaulting with spears] Turnep. HS. IV.
4. Turnpike. RM. VI. 8. Turpentine, [Liquid resin of Larch Turpentine Pine
Tree outdrawn by incision] -- tree. Tr. III. 3. A.
Turpitude, [Indecency (augm.] Turnstile, [adj. p. Vertiginate (apt) transverse
cross] Turret. [Tower (dim.] fig. Mag. VI. 3. A.
Turtle. Bird. By. III. 2. A. Beast. Be. V. 1. A.
Tush. Int. I. 3. II. 3. A.
Tusk, [Long Tooth] Tut, vid. Tush. Tutelary, [adj. a. Protection] Defence]
Safety]
Tuty. Tutor, Guardian] Teacher
Tutsan. HS. V. 8. Tutty, [Flowers (aggr.) together-tied] Twayblade. HL. VII.
5. A. Twain, [Two] Twang, [Ring] Tweez, [Box of instruments dim.] Twelve. T --
month, [Year] wenty.
Twibill, [adj. pecking (instr.] Twice, [Two times] Twig, [Wand] PP. I. 4. A.
Twilight. Q. I. 1: Twins, [Two together-born] Twine, Twist sp. mutually.]
Embrace sp. mutually.]
Twinge, Pull (imp.] Pain (imp.]
Twinkle, [Un-appear (freq.] Twirl, [Vertiginate (imp.] Twist. the -- [share]
to -- O. V. 1.
Twit, [Upbraid] Twitch. [Pull (imp.] [Pain] AC. II. 9.
Twittle, [Chirp (dim.] Two. Mea. II. 2. -- fold, [Two (kind]
Tygre. Be. IV. 2. Tympany. S. VI. 3. A. Type. T. II. 3. A. [Letter-printing
(instr.]
Typographical, [adj. Printing] Tyranny. Man. VI. 4. O. Tyrant. [Kingship, adj.
Usurping (person] [adj. Man. VI. 4. O. (person]

V.
VAcant. [Empty] [Not-Furnished] [Not-Used] [adj. Leisure]
Vacation. adj. Leisure (time] not-adj. RC. (time]
Vacillation, [Staggering] Mo. II. 4. O. Vacuity, [Emptiness] Vagabond, [adj.
Wandering (person] Vagary. [v. Wandring] [a. Conceitedness]
Vail, vid. Veil. -- s [adj. Vantage Profits] Revenue]
sp. besides-wages]

Vain. [adj. Vanity] -- glory, [Glorying (corr.] vid. Vein.
Vallens, [About- adj. hanging (vest) of the upper Margin of the Bedsted] Vale,
[Valley] W. III. 1. D. Valediction. AC. V. 8. A. Valerian. HF. IV. 8. Valet,
[adj. Waiting (Off.] Valiant, [adj. Fortitude] Validity, Sufficience (apt.]
Efficience (apt.]
Valley. W. III. 1. D. Valor. Worth. Mea. IV. [Fortitude]
Value. Worth. Mea. IV. to -- [Esteem] a. Valour] a. Price]

Vamp, [Mend by Adding] [Mend by Renewing part]
Van. [Forepart] sp. of army]
[Winnowing (jug.]
Vane, [Flag for showing the vergency of the wind] Vanish, [Un-appear] Vanity.
Frivolousness. T. IV. 5. O. Not-profitableness] Frustrating (abstr.]
Wantonness] Conceitedness] op. to gravity. Man, IV. 6. O.
Vanquish, [a. Victory] Conquest]
Vantage. TM. VI. 2. A. Vantcurrier. RM. IV. 5. Vantgard, [Forepart of army]
Vapor. [Exhalation] El. II. 2. A. [Glorying]
Vardingale. Vary. v. Diversity] [Alter] [a. Contention]
Variable, adj. Alter (apt.] Inconstant]
Variance, [Contention] Variegated. Q. II. 5. Variety, [Diversity] Varix. S.
III. 8. Varlet, [Sorry (person] Varnish. O. IV. 8. A. Varvels, vid. Vervels.
Vassal. [Subject] [Villain]
Vast, [Ample (augm.] Vat Tub (augm.] Barrel (augm.]
Vate Tub (augm.] Barrel (augm.]
Vault. Po. II. 8. to -- [a. Vault] [Leap] Mo. V. 5. A.

Vaunt. [Glorying] sp. corr.]
[a. Insolence] -- guard, vid. Vantgard.
Vauward, [Forepart of army] Vaumure. RM. VI. 4. Vbiquity. S^. II. 9. Vdder,
[Dug] PG. IV. 2. A. Veal. [Calf] [Flesh of Calf]
Veer. [Turn] Let-go more Sail] Out-put more Cord]
Vegetable, [Plant] W. V. 2. Vegetation. [adj. p. Vegetative soul (make] [a.
Vigor]
Vegetative. [Plant] W. V. 2. -- Soul. W. I. 4. its actions. AC. I.


Vegetous, [Vigor] Vehemence. [Intenseness] [Fierceness] Ha. III. 4. D.
Vehicle, [adj. Carrying (thing] Veil. a -- [adj. Covering thing] sp. thin]
to -- [Cover] [a. Respect (sign]

Vein. -- of animal. PG. II. 4. opening a -- [a. Bleeding] Mo. IV. 6.

-- of Metal [Vein (like) line of -- m in the earth] -- of Stone [Vein (like)
line of -- S in the earth] Temper] NP. IV. Disposition] [Style]
Vellam, [Paper of Calves skin] Velleity. AS. IV. 2. Vellication. [Pulling
(frep.] [Twitching] AC. II. 9.
Velvet, [Silk adj. p. surface with short tufts] Venal adj. p. Sell (pot.] adj.
p. Sell (apt.]
Vendible adj. p. Sell (pot.] adj. p. Sell (apt.]
Vending, [Selling] Veneration. [Reverence] [Worship]
Venery. [Coition] [Hunting]
Vengeance. [a. Revenge] [Punishment]
Venial, [adj. p. Forgive (pot.] [adj. p. Forgive (apt.]
Venison, [Flesh of hunted beasts] Venom, [Poison] Vent. Wind] Exhalation]
[Hole for out-a. Wind] [Hole for out-a. Exhal.] [Sent] Q. IV. A. to -- [a.
Vent] in -- ition (make] out- ition (make] sp. Air]

[Sell]
Ventiduct, [adj. a. wind (jug.] [adj. a. wind tube]
Ventilation, [Winnowing] Ventosity, [Wind (abstr.] Ventricle. [Hollow (place]
[Stomach] PG. VI. 4.
Venture. [Danger] [Fortune] [Essay] sp. its danger] sp. ones fortune] at a --
[adv. Essaying its danger] at a -- [adv. Essaying ones fortune]
Venturous. [Dangerous] [adj. Essaying (apt.) danger] [Bold] [Rash]
Venu. [Thrust (imp.] [Stab (end]
Venus. W. II. 5. A. -- comb. HS. I. 5. A. -- flax. -- Looking glase. HS. V. 3.
-- Shell. Ex. VII. 7.
Veracity. Man. IV. 1. Verb. D. II. 3. Verbal, [adj. Word] Verbatim, [adv. Word
(segr.] Verbosity. [a. word (exc.] [Loquacity]
Verderer, [adj. Forest (Off.) assessor] Verdict. [Sentence] [Opinion]
Verdigreece. Met. IV. 5. Verdure. [Greenness] [Vigor]
Verge. [Margin] [Capacity] [Stick]
Verging. Sp. III. A. Verger, [Before -- adj. Walking (Off.] Very. Self] same]
(augm.] True] Genuine] -- ly. Adv. I. 2. O. in -- deed Adv. I. 2. O.
Verify. [a. Truth (make] [Perform] Prove] Confirm]

Verity. T. III. 1. Verjuice. Pr. II. 5. A. Vermilion. Met. III. 5. A. Vermin.
[Insects] sp. Hurtful]
[Hurtful Animals]
Vernacular, [adj. ones Nation (place] [adj. ones Tribe (place]
Vernal. [adj. Spring]
Vernish, [adj. a. Vernishing (thing] -- ing. O. IV. 8. A.
Verse. Part of Book. D. III. 2. op. to Prose. D. III. 4. O.
Versicle, [Verse (dim.] sp. adj. preceding]
Versifie, [a. D. III. 4. O.] Version, [Translation] Vertebra. PG. IV. 3. A.
Vertical. [adj. Top] -- point, [Upper pole of the Horizon]
[adj. Vertex. Ma. II. 2.
Vertiginous. [adj. Vertigo] -- motion. O. I. 5.
Vertigo. S. IV. 5. Virtue. [Habit (perf.] infused. Ha. V. acquired.
intellectual. Ha. VI. moral. Man. I. Respecting the body. Man. II. Respecting
the state and dignity. Man. III. Homiletical. -- Common. Man. IV. -- belonging
to superior. Man. V. -- belonging to Inferior. Man. VI.
Instruments of -- Ha. II. Affections of -- -- Intellectual -- Ha. III. --
Moral -- Ha. III.
[Efficacy]
Verven. HS. V. 9. Vervels, [adj. Leg bonds of Hawk] Verule, [adj. Lamin ring]
Vesicle, [Bladder (dim.] Vespers, [adj. Evening worship] Vessel. General. Pr.
V. -- of animal body, [adj. containing (apt) hollow (parts] -- Heterogeneous.
PG. VI. -- Homogeneous. PG. II.

[Ship]
Vestment, [Clothing] Vestry, [adj. Clothing (room] Vesture, [Clothing] Vetch.
HS. II. 3. bitter -- HS. II. 4. Crimson grass -- HS. III. 7. hatched -- HS.
III. 6. Kidney -- Milk -- HS. III. 3. A. Yellow wild -- HS. II. 6.
Veternus. S. IV. 2. Vex. [a. Angry (make] [a. Grieved (make] [Molest] [a.
Anxiety]
Ugly Deformed (augm.] Indecent (augm.]
Vy. a. Emulation] Provoke] [More -- a. wager]
Vial. [adj. Glass bottle (dim.] [adj. Music (instr.) to be sounded with bow]
Viands, [Victuals] Vibrate, [Swing.] Mo. VI. 3. Viburnum. Sh. I. 5. Vicar.
[Deputy] [Second (kind) Presbyter]
Vice. [Moral] Man. I. O. Feigned fool] adj. Scurrility (person] [adj. Holding
(match.]
Vice -- [instead] Vicegerent, [Substitute] Viceroy, [Instead-King] Vitiate.
[Vitious make] [Unchast (make]
[Mar]
Vicinity. [Neighborhood] [Neerness]
Vicount, [Nobleman of the fourth Degree] Vicissitude. [a. Turn] T. VI. 8.
[Alteration, adj. turn]
Victim, [Sacrifice] Victor, [adj. RM. II. E. (person] Victory, [adj. RM. II.
1. E. (thing] get the -- RM. II. 1. E.
Victualler, [adj. Victuals (Off.] [adj. Victuals (Merc.]
Victualling house, [House of adj. Victuals (merc.] Victuals. Pr. I. fall to
his -- [Eat]
View. [a. ey] PG. III. 2. [Observe] [Examine]
Vigilance. Abstinence. Man. II. 4. [Heedfulness]
Vigils. [a. Vigilance] [adj. p. Wake night before festival] [Day before the
Festival]

Vigor. NP. V. 4. Vile. [adj. Valor (dim.] [Sorry] [Vicious]
Vilify. [a. Disrepect] [Contemn]
Village, [Houses (aggr.] [Parish]
Villain. Lowest degree of Commonalty, RC. I. 8. [Sorry (person] [Wicked
(person]
Vindicate. [a. Defendant] [a. Advocate] [Shew Innocence]
Vindictiveness, [a. Revenge (apt.] Vine. Sh. II. 1. Vinegar. Pr. II. 5.
Vinewd, Mouldy] Musty]
Vintage. [Gathering grapes] [a. Wine (make.]
Vintner, [adj. wine (merc.] sp. adv. segregate]
Vineyard, [Orchard of Vines] Violate, TA. III. 6. O. Violence. T. V. 5. O. in
Motion. Mo. VI. [Coaction] [Fierceness] Ha. III. 4. D.
Violet. HL. VI. 5. bulbous -- HL. IV. 5. A. dames -- HS. IV. 2.
Violin, [Vial (dim] Viol. [adj. Music (instr.) so be sounded with Bow] vid.
Vial.
Viorna, [Travellers Joy] Sh. I. 7. Viper. Be. VI. 7. A. -- s grass,
[Scorsonera]
Virago, [Man (like) woman] Virga, Meteor. El. V. 4. Virgin. [Not-married] TO.
II. 1. [Chast unmarried] TO. II. 1. A. First] New] -- honey, [First h. of Bees]
-- parchment, [p. made of the skin of an abortive] [Undefiled] -- s bower,
[Clematis] Sh. V. 7.
Virginals, [Chest (like) adj. Music (instr.) with metallin string] Virginity.
TO. II. 1. A. (abstr.] Virgo, [6th of the 12 parts of the Zodiac] Virility. age
of manhood. Mea. VI. 3. [Male (abstr.]

Virtue, vid. Virtue. Virulent. [adj. Poison] [adj. Malice]
Visage. Face. PG. III. 1. [Face (manner] [Seen (part]
Visard, [Factitious face] Viscous, [Clammy] Visible, [adj. p. See (pot.]
Vision. [Seeing] adj. appearance (thing] adj. p. See Revelation]
Visit. AC. V. 1. [About-ition for a Discipline]
Visor of Helmet, [Up -- adj. p. fold (apt.) adj. forehead (part] Vital, [adj.
life] Vitiat, vid. Viciat] Vitrifie, [a. Glass (make] Vitriol. St. V. 3.
Vivacity, [Long life (apt.] Vivifie, [a. Live] Viviparous, [adj. parturition
adj. living (thing] Ulcer. S. I. 7. Vlterior. Sp. II. 2. D. Vltimate [Most-
Remote] Latter]
Vmber. Fish. Fi. IX. 4. A. Colour]
Vmbilical, [adj. Navel] PG. IV. 6. A. Vmbles, [Inwards] PG. VI. Vmbra. Fi. IV.
2. A. Vmbrage. [Doubting] Distrust] Jealousie]
Vmbrella, [adj. Shadowing (jug.] Vmpire, [Sole arbitrator] Un -- vid. In --
[Not -- ] [Not-yet]
Unable, [adj. Impotence] Unacceptable. Not -- acceptable] Against acceptable]
[adj. Displicence]
Inaccessible, [Not-adj. p. come] Unaccustomed, [Not-accustomed] Unacquainted,
[Stranger] Unadvised, [Rash] adj. Ha. IV. 1. D. Vnallowed, [Not-allowed]
Unanimous, [adv. Identity -- Opinioned] [adv. Identity -- Minded]
Unappeasable, [Not-adj. p. Peaceableness] [Not-adj. p. Meekness]
Unapt, [Not-apt] Vnapproachable, [Not-adj. p. Neerness] Unarmed, Not- armed]
Un- armed]
Unassured, [Not-assured] Vnasswaged, [Not-asswaged] Unavoidable, [Not adj. p.
escape (pot.] Vnauthorize, [Un- a. Authority] Unawares [Not -- Heeding] [Not --
Expecting] taken at -- [Surprized]
Vnbar, [Un-a. bar] Unbelief. AS. II. 4. O. [Incredulity] Ha. III. 2. D.
[Infidelity] Ha. V. 4. O.
Unbend, [Un-bend] Vnbenum, [Un-a. Stupo^] Vnbeseem, [v. Indecency] Vnbesot,
[Un-a. Dotage] Vnbewitch, [Un-a. Witchcraft] Unbidden, [Not-bidden] [adj.
Spontaneity]
Unbind, [Un-a. bind] Unblameable, [Not-adj. p. blame (pot.] Vnblind, [Un-a.
blind (make] Vnboild, [Not-boild] Vnbolt, [Un-a. bolt] Unbound, [Not-adj. p.
bind] Unbounded, [Not-adj. p. bound] Vnbowel, [Un-a. bowel] Unbrace, [Un-a.
brace] Unbridle, [Un-a. bridle] -- d, [Irregular]
Unbroken, [Not-adj. p. break] Unbuckle, [Un-a. Buckle] Unburden, [Un-a.
burden] Unburied, [Not-adj. p. buried] Vnbutton, [Un-a. button] Uncalled,
[Not-adj. p. call] Incapable, [Not-capable] Uncase, [Un-a. case] Vncaught,
[Not-adj. p. catch] Uncertain. [Not-certain] [Doubtful] [Wavering]
Vnchain, [Un-a. chain] Unchangeable, [Not-adj. p. alter] Incharitableness. Ha.
V. 6. D. Vncharm, [Un-a. Wizard] Vnchastness. Man. II. 7. D. Vnchewed,
[Not-chewed] Uncircumcision, [Not- p. circumcision] Uncircumspect, [Careless]
Uncivil. [Morose] [Rustic]
Uncle TO. I. 3. Vnclasp, [Un-a. clasp] Unclean. [adj. Defilement] [Unchast]
Unclose, [Un-a. close] Unclothed, Not- clothed] Un -- clothed]
Uncomely, [Indecent] Uncomfortable [adj. Discomfort] Uncompounded, [Simple]
Inconceivable, [Not-adj. p. apprehension] Uncondemned, [Not-condemned]
Unconquerable, [Not-adj. p. conquer (pot.] Unconscionable. NP. I. 3. O.
Unconstant. adj. Ha. IV. 7. D. Vnconstreined, [Not-adj. p. coaction] Vncorded,
[Not-adj. p. cord] Uncorrected, [Not-adj. p. correction] Vncorrupt.
[Not-corrupted] [Sincere] [Impartial]
Uncover. O. II. 3. O. Uncouple, [Un-joyn] Discourteous. [Not-courteous]
[Rustic]
Uncouth. [Not-adj. custom] [adj. Stranger] [New (corr.] [Extraordinary (corr]
Unction, Anointing] Vnctuousness. to feeling. Q. VI. 4. D. to taste. Q. IV. 2.
Incurable, [Not-adj. p. cure] (pot.] Undaunted, [Not-adj. p. fear (pot.]
Indecent. adj. T. V. 2. O. Undecided, [Not-decided] Undefiled. [Not-defiled]
[Pure]
Vndefrayed, [Not- Paid] Refunded]
Under. Proper. Prep. VI. 1. O. -- foot -- hand [adv. Private] Concealed]
-- hand and seal, [Under written and sealed] [With in] Contain -- it. [c.
within its capacity]
[Below] -- age [of adj. pupil age] -- years [of adj. pupil age] Less. Too
little
-- bid] -- price. -- sell. -- value.
[Lower] -- leather. -- lid of eye. -- lip. -- side. Sp. III. 5. O. -- woods.
Inferior] Subordinate]
-- Butler. -- Officer. -- Sheriff.
[Dependent] [Subject] bring -- Subject Conquer
(make] Keep --

Undergo, v. Subject] Suffer.
Underhand, [adv. Private] Concealed]
Underlay, [Mend by under-putting] Vnderleather, [Lower Leather] Underling. TO.
III. O. Undermine, RM. I. 5. -- craftily, [a. Treachery]
Undermost, [Most-adj. under part] Underneath. Prep. VI. 1. O. Vnderpart. Sp.
III. 5. O. Vnderpin, [Instead-a. foundation] Underprop, [a-prop] Vndersay. Man.
IV. 1. D. Vndersell, [Sell for less.] Underset, [a. Prop] Vndersheriff,
[Inferior adj. shire (Off.] Vnderside. Sp. III. 5. O. Understand. a. Intellect.
NP. I. 1. give to- Narrate] Know (make]

Omit. D. III. 8. O. [Suppose]
Understanding. Faculty. NP. I. 1. action of the -- Speculative. AS. II.
Practical. AS. III.

Understood. adj.-a. pret. Understand] adj. p. Understand]
Omitted. D. III. 8. O.
Undertake. TA. III. 1. A. -- for, [a. Sponsion] -- to do [Oblige himself by
promise]
Undervalue, Value less than due] Contemn] Underwoods, Lower woods Young woods
Undeserved, [Not-deserved,] Vndeserving, [Unworthy] Undetermined, adj.
Liberty] Not-determined]
Undigested, [Not-digested] Vndischarged, [Not-discharged] Indiscreet,
[Foolish] Vndistinct, [Not-distinct] Undivided, Not-divided] Entire]
Undo. [Un-do] [Un-ty] [Loosen] Spoil] a. poverty (augm.]

Undone. [adj. p. Undo] [Not-done.]
Undoubted, [Not-doubted] Vndress, [Un cloth] Undue. T. IV. 3. O. Vndulate.
Figure. Mag. IV. 9. Motion, [a. Wave] W. IV. 1. E.
Undutiful. Man. V. 1. D. Uneasy, [Difficult] Unequal. [Not-equal]
[Not-equitable]
Inestimable, Not-adj. p. Esteem (pot) Worthily] Sufficiently]
Vnevenness. Q. VI. 2. O. Vnevitable, [Not adj. p. escape pot.] Inexcusable,
[Not-adj. p. excuse pot.] Unexecuted, [Not-executed] Unexpected, [Not-expected]
Inexpert. Ha. VI. 4. D. Unfaithful. Man. IV. 2. O. Unfashioned, Not-figured]
Figured (corr.
Vnfastned, Not-fastned] Un -- fastned]
Unfeathered, Not-feathered] Un -- feathered]
Unfeigned. Not-feigned] Sincere]
Vnfettered, Not-fettered] Un -- fettered]
Vnfinisht, [Not-finished] Unfit* [Not-congruous] Unfitting, [Indecent] Vnfix,
[Un-fix] Unfold, [Un-fold] [Explain]
Unformed, [Not-formed] Unfortified, [Not-fortified] Unfortunate, [adj. Fortune
(corr.] Adversity]
Unfriendly, [Not-adj. friend] Vnfruitfulness. Barrenness. NP. VI. 3. O.
[Unprofitableness]
Unfurnished, Not-furnished] Un -- furnished]
Vngainful, [Not-adj. a. gain (apt.] Vngarnisht, [Not- adj. p. ornate]
Ungentle, [Not^gentle] Vngirded, Not-adj. p. Bound] Un -- adj. p. Bound]
Vnglew, [Un- a. glue] Ungodly. [Graceless] [Unholy]
Vngraciousness. Ha. V. O. Unguent, adj.-anointing thing] Salve]
Uninhabitable, [Not-adj. p. dwelling pot.] Unhallowed [Profaned] [Unholy]
Vnhandsom, Deformed] Indecent]
Unhappiness, [Misery] Vnharness, [Un-a. armament] Unhealthy, [Not-healthy]
Unheard, [Not-adj. p. hearing] Vnheeded, [Not-heeded] Unholy. Ha. V. 2. O.
Unhorse, Down-put from horse Un-a. ride (make]
Unhurt, [Not-hurt] Unhusbanded, [Not-adj. p. agriculture] Unicorn, [One-horned
beast] Uniform, [adv. Identity adj. p. Figure] Manner] Circumstance]
Uniformity, [Identity (manner] Vnimaginable, Not-adj. p. imagination (pot.]
Inimitable, [Not-adj. p. imitation (pot.] Uninhabited, [Not- adj. p. dwelling]
Vnjoyn, [Separate] Vnjoynt. [Un-a. joynt] [Separate the parts]
Union. [a. One] Peaceableness] League]
Unison, [adj. p. Identity adj. a sound] Unit, [One] Unite, [a. one (make]
Unity, [One (abst.] Universe, [Whole world] Universal, adj. Universality]
Whole]
Universality. TM. III. 3. O. University. RC. III. 6. Univocal, [Of one
signification] Unjust, [adj. Injustice] Vnkennel, [Un-a. bed (room] Unkind.
[Uncharitable] [Discourteous] adj. Man. IV. 7. O. [Not-adj. friend]
Uncle. TO. I. 5. Unknit, [Un-ty] Unknown, [Not-known] Unlace, Un -- a. Lace]
Not-a. String]
Unladen, [Un-adj. burdened] Unlawful, Not -- Lawful] Against-Lawful]
Vnlearn, [Un- a. Learner] Unlearned. Ha. VI. 5. D. Unleavened, [Not-leavened]
Unless. Conj. I. 3. O. Unlike, [adj. Unlikeness] -- ness. TM. V. 1. O.
Unlikely, Not -- True like] Against-True like]
Unlimited. Not- Limited] Cohibited] Determined]
[Infinite]
Vnlined, Not-lined] Un-lined]
Unload, [Un-a. burden] Unlock, Un-a. lock] Open-with key
Unlooked for, [Not-expected] Unloose, [Loose] Vnlovely, Not -- adj. p. love
(apt.] Againstadj. p. love (apt.]
Unlucky, [adj. Fortune (corr. Event (corr.
Unmake, [Un- a. Efficient] adj. Creation]
Unmannerly, [adj. Rusticity] Disrespect]
Unmanly, Not -- adj. man (male] Against-adj. man (male]
Vnmannured, [Not-manured] Unmarried. [Not-adj. pret. married] [Divorced] [adj.
Celibate]
Unmask, [Uncover the face] Unmatchable, [Not adj. p. equal (pot.]
Unmeasurable. [Not- adj. Measure (pot.] [Infinite]
Unmeet, [Indecent] Unmerciful, [adj. Cruelty] Unmindful, [Not-adj. remembring]
Unmingled, Simple] Pure]
Immovable, [Not-adj. p. move (pot.] Vnnail'd, Not-nail'd] Un-nail'd]
Unnatural, [Against-natural] Unnecessary, Not-necessary] Vnneedful-
Not-necessary] Unnoble, [Against-noble] Unoccupied, [Not- adj. p. Business] Use]
Unorderly. [Confused] [Irregular]
Vnpacked, Not-bound together] aggregated] Un-bound together] aggregated]
Unpaid, [Not-paid] Unpainted, [Not-painted] Vnpaired, Not- Un-companioned]
sp. (perf.] Unpardonable, [Not adj. p. pardon (pot.] Unpeaceable. Man. IV. 3.
O. Unpeople, [Un-adj. p. Dwelling] Unperformed, [Not-performed] Vnpinned,
Not-fastened with pin] Un-fastened with pin]
Unplanted, Not-planted] Un-planted]
Vnpleasantness, Ha. II. 3. O. T. IV. 2. O.
Unpleasing, [adj. Displicence] Unpolished, [Not-polished] Unpolluted,
[Not-defiled] Unprepared, [Not-prepared] Unprofitable, [Not-profitable]
Unprosperous. [Not-prosperous] [Adverse]
Vnproved, [Not-proved] Unprovided, [Not-provided] Unpunished, [Not-punisht]
Unquenchable, [Not-adj. p. quench (pot.] Unquiet. [Against-quiet] [adj.
Molesting]
Vnranked, Not-ranked] Un-ranked]
Vnravel, [Un-intangle] Unready, [Not- Prepared] Clothed]
Unreasonable. [Irrational] Not -- adj. Equity Against -- adj. Equity in
commanding, [Man. VI. 6. O.]

[Irregular] [adj. Excess]
Vnreclaimed, [Not -- r.] Vnrecompensed* [Not -- r.] Unreconcilable, [Not --
r.] Vnrecoverable, [Not -- r.] Vnredeemed, [Not -- r.] Unregarded, [Not -- r.]
Vnremedied, [Not -- r.] Vnrepaired, [Not -- r.] Vnreproved, [Not -- r.]
Vnrestored, [Not -- r.] Vnreturned, [Not -- r.] Vnrevealed, [Not -- r.]
Vnrevenged, [Not -- r.] Unrewarded, [Not -- r.] Unrighteousness. [Injustice]
[Unholiness]
Vnripeness. NP. VI. 4. D. Vnrivetted, Not-rivetted] Un-rivetted]
Vnroll, Un -- roule] Back-roule]
Vnrooted, Not-r.] Un-r.]
Unruly. [Irregular] Rebellious] Disobedient]
Vnsadled, Not-s.] Un-s.]
Unsafe, [Dangerous] Unsaid. [Not-said] [Recanted]
Unsalted, Not -- s.] Fresh]
Unsaluted, [Not -- s.] Vnsatiated, [Not -- s.] Vnsavoriness. Q IV. 1. O.
Unsealed, Not-s.] Un-s.]
Unsearchable, [Not-adj. p. searched (pot.] Unseasonable, [adj. Time (cor.]
Unseemly, [Indecent] Unseen, [Not -- s.] Unserviceable, Not-adj p. use (pot]
(apt]
Unprofitable]
Unsettled, Not-fast] Loose] Light]
Vnsheath, [Un-a. Case] Unshod, Not-adj. p. Shoo] Un -- adj. p. Shoo]
Vnshorn, [Not-clipped] Unskillfulness. Ha. VI. 3. O. Unlearnedness]
Inexperience]
Unsociable, [adj. Man. IV. O.] Unsound. Not-sound] Rotten]
Unsown, Un -- Sowed] Not-Sowed]
Unspeakable, [Not-adj. p. speak (pot.] Unspent, [Not-spent] Unspotted,
Not-spotted] Clear]
Unstable, Not-constant] Light]
Unstaid, [Light] Unstained, [Not-stained] Vnsteadfast, Not-constant] Light]
Unsteady, [Not-steady] Unstirred, [Not-stirred] Vnstitched, Not -- sowed] Un
-- sowed]
Unstopped, [a. Open] Vnstrung, Not -- Strung] Un -- Strung]
Vnstuffed, Not -- Stuffed] Un -- Stuffed]
Unsubdued, [Not-subdued] Insufferable, [Not-adj. p. suffer (pot.] Unsure,
[Not- Certain] [Not- Safe]
Unsuitable, Not-congruous] Disagreeable]
Vnswathed, Un -- swathed] Not -- swathed]
Vnsworn, [Not-sworn] Untamed, [Fierce] Vntangle, [Un-tangle] Untaught,
Not-taught] Ignorant]
Unteachable, Dull] Incredulous]
Unthankfulness, [Ingratitude] Unthought of, [Not-thought of] Vnthriftiness,
[Squandring] Untied, Not -- Tied] Un -- Tied]
Until. Adv. III. 2. O. -- now, [Until this time]
Untilled, [Not-tilled] Untimely, [Not-timed (perf.] -- birth, [Abortion]
Unto, [To] Untold, [Not-adj. p. Speaking] Narration] Number]
Untouched, [Not-toucht] Untowardness Incredulity Vntractableness Contumacy
Disingenuity] Dulness] Fierceness] Incredulity] Fierceness] Pertinacy]
Undutifulness] Disobedience] Contumacy]
Untrimmed, Not-ornate] Homely]
Untrue, Not-true] False]
Untrussed, Not -- trussed] Un -- trussed]
Untrusty, [Treacherous] Untruth, [Falshood] Untunable, Not-harmonious] adj.
Discord]
Untwined, Not- twisted] Untwisted, Un -- twisted] Invaluable, [Not-adj. p
Value (pot.] [Not-adj. p Price (pot.]
Vnvanquisht, [Not-vanquisht] Vnvaried, [Not-varied] Vnveil, [Uncover] Vnverst,
[adj. Inexperience] Unusual. Extraordinary] Not-customary] Seldom] Not-common]
Unutterable, [Not- adj. p. express (pot.] Unwalled, [Not-walled] Unwary,
[Careless] Unwashed, [Not-washed] Unwasted, [Not-wasted] Unwearied, [Constant]
Vnweaved, [Not-weaved] Vnwelcom, Not-welcom] adj. a. Displicence]
Unweildy. Lumpish] Slow] [Not-adj. p. motion (apt.]
Vnwholsom, [adj. a. sickness (apt.] Unwilling. [adj. Nolleity] Aversion]
[adj. Coaction]
Unwind, [Un-wind] Unwise, [adj. Folly] Vnwisht for, [Not-wisht] Unwitting,
Not-knowing] Ignorant]
Unwonted, [Not-adj. p. Custom] Unworthiness. TG. IV. 6. O. Unwrap, [Un-fold]
Vnwreath, [Un-twist] Vnwrinkle, [Un-wrinkle] Unwritten, [Not-written]
Unwrought, Not-wrought] Homely]
Unyoke, Un-yoke] Separate]
Vocabulary, [adj. Catalogue Book of words] Vocal, [adj. Voice] Vocation,
Calling] Profession]
Vocative, [adj. Calling] Vogue, Reputation] Rumor]
Voyage, Sailing] Travelling]
Voice. Proper. Q. III. 3. Song of 3 -- s, [Song for 3 together-singing
(persons]
Suffrage, [Consent (sign]
Void. adj. [Empty] -- of, [Without]
[Not-possest] [adj. Frustrate] Vanity] Nothing]

to -- [a. Empty] [Un-possess] [Go] [Banish]
[Purge] [Dung] Spoil] adj. Nothing(make]



Voider, [Dish (aug.) Shallow] sp. for carrying adj. meat (things]
Voidance, [Un-possessing.] Volatile. [Flying] [adj. a. Exhalation (apt.]
Volly, [Together-shootings (aggr.] Volubility, [Agility] sp of tongue]
Volum, [Book] Voluntary, [adj. Will] Spontaneity]

Voluptuousnes, [Sensuality] Volutation. O. I. 5. A. Vomiting. Mo. IV. 9.
Voracity, Rapacity] Gluttony]
Vorago, [Whirlpool] Votary, [adj. pret. Vowing (person] Vote. Wish, [Velleity]
Suffrage, [Consent (sign] sp. by speaking]

Vouch. [a. Protestation] [a. Sponsion]
Vouchsafe, [Condescend] Vow. RE. IV. 1. Vowel. D. I. 2. Up, [Upward vergent*
toward Upperside] [Upward vergent* toward Top]
[Direct] -- on end. he is --

[adj. p. pres. motion] Bell is -- b. is in motion] Hare is -- h. is in motion]
Name is -- n. is in motion] from Beginning Part Imperfection
till end] whole] perfection]

Finally] Wholly] Perfectly]
-- and down, to and fro] diverse ways]
-- by the root, [Together with the r.] -- hill, [Upward on the hill] -- to,
[Until at] Barrel -- [Lay up in Barrel] Blow -- a. Tumor] a. Inflation] Upward
cast] Overthrow] sp. by firing Gunpowder]

Bring -- Begin] Educate]
Burn, [b. perfectly] Clap -- Bargain] Finish]
Give -- Yield] Submit] Let-go]
Knit- K. together] Finish]
Lay -- Put on the heap] Store- TA. V. 4.
Lift -- [Lift] Put -- a. case] a. patience]
Rise -- [Rise] Rouse -- [Rise (make] Sit -- [Sit direct] Sow -- Sow together]
Shut by sowing]
Stay -- [Bear] Stand -- [Stand] Stir -- Provoke] a. Impulsive]
Ty -- Together-ty] Shut by tying]

Vpbraid. RJ. IV. 8. A. Uphold, Bear] Prop]
Vpholster, [adj. Bed (mech.] Vpland, [adj. Mountain Countrey] Upon. Accus.
Grow -- [Usurp] Look -- [a. Sight]
[Concerning] agree --
[Toward] -- that hand, [t. that side]
[To] Happen --
Prep. VI. 1. come -- [Assault] Run -- Assault] Storm]

[After] -- this, [after th.] word -- word.

Upper. Proper. -- end, [Top] -- side. Sp. III. 5.
[Superior] -- hand, [adj. Dignity (place] Get the -- [a. Victory]

Upright. [Direct] ly -- [ly adj. reverse]
[adj. Sincerity] Integrity] -- Dealing Equity] Justice]



Vprising, [Rising] Vproar, [Sedition] Vpshot, [Event] Vpside, [Upperside] --
down Lying] Upside down turned]

Vpsitting. [Sitting direct]
Vpstart, [New corr.] Upward. Prep. V. 1. Vranoscopus. Fi. IV. 11. Vrbanity.
Man. IV. 9. Vrchin. [Hedgehog] [Little sorry (person]
Ure. [Custom of useing]
Vreter, [adj. Urining Vein] Urge. [a. Impulsive (augm.] [a. Fierceness]
[Intreat (augm.] [Angry (make]

Urgent. [Intense] [Fierce]
Urine, [Pissed (thing] Salt of -- St. I. 5.
Vrinal, [Glas (vess.) for Urine] Vrn, [adj. Figulatory Pot] sp. for burying
Ashes]
Vrtica. Ex. IX. 6. A. Vrus, [Bull (kind) bearded] Us, [We] Usage. [Use
(manner] [Entertaining (manner] [Custom]
Use. [Using] [Usus fructus] Interest, [Rent of money] Lend upon -- [Lend for
hire] Take upon -- [a. hire]

[Manner] sp. adj. Custom]
[Custom] in -- [adj. Custom] Out of, [Un-adj. Custom]
[Habit] [Practise]
to -- TA. V. 6. [Apply] [Entertein] [Accustom] [Practise]

Usher. [adj. Preceding (Off.] -- in In-bring] Precede]
[Accessory Teacher]

Usual. [adj. p use (freq.] [Customary] Common] Ordinary]
Vsufructuary, [adj. Usus fructus (person] Vsurp. RJ. IV. 3. Usury, [Hire of
money] Vsus fructus. RC. IV. 5. A. Vtensil. Po. VI. Vterine, [adj. Womb] PG.
VI. 9. Vtility, [Profit-ableness] Utmost. [Most-adj. Outside] [Extream] [Most]
[Whole]
Vtopia, [adj. p. Fiction Country (perf.] Utter. [adj. Outside] [adj. Extream]
[Whole] to --
Out-put] Shew] Speak] Express [a. Narration] Alienate] Sell]
Utterance, [Speaking (pot.] (manner]
Uttermost. vid. Utter. Vulgar, [Common] -- People, [Rabble]
Vulnerary, [adj. Wound] Vulture. By. I. 1. A. Uvula, [adj. Flesh Cylinder
(dim.) for shutting the windpipe] Vxorious, [Fond of Wife]
W.
WAd, [adj. heap (thing) together-tied] Waddle, [Walk adv. Volutation] Duck
(like]
Wade, [Walk In -- through
River, etc.
Wafer, [Thin (lamin] sp. of Pudding (kind]
Waft, [Carry over-water] Wag, Motion (dim.] Shaking (dim.] a -- [adj. Urbanity
(person]

Wage. -- Law, [a. Suit] -- Soldiers, [Bargain with S.] -- War, [a. War]
Wager. RC. VI. 8. Wages. RC. V. 6. A. Waggle, [Wag (dim.] Wagon, [Wain] Waife,
[Abandoned (thing] Wagtail, By. V. 7. Yellow. By. V. 7. A.
Way. adj. ition (place] factitious way. Po. II. 7. A. -- faring, [adj.
Travelling] -- man, [adj. Traveling (person] -- Tree. Sh. II. 3.
-- Laying, [a. Ambush] give -- [not -- Resist] Oppose]
[Submit]
go his -- [Go] Lead the- Lead] Before-go]
make -- [Prepare w.] show the -- [Direct in the w.] By the- Accessorily] adj.
Digression]
In the -- [Hindring] Set in the -- [Direct]
on the -- Bring on the -- [Accompany in the beginning of his journey] Go on
his -- [Proceed]
Out of the -- [Beside the scope] Erring] Wandring] [Avoiding] [adj. a. Losing]
[Distance] [ great -- [Remote] -- about, [Curve (augm.] -- off, [Remote (augm.]

[Vergency] many -- s, [adv. Diversity vergent]
Kind] Manner] Means] Method]
Wail, [a. Sorrow (Voice] (sign]
Wain. P. V. 1. A. Wainscot, [Wooden lining of a Room] Wait. [Stay] TA. V. 1.
O. Stay, by With For
one. AC. V. 1. A. as Companion, [a. companion] Dependent, [a. dependent]
Servant, [a. Servant]
Lay -- [a. Ambush]

Waits, [Wakening Music.] Waiward, [adj. Disingenuity] Moroseness]

Wake. awaken. [End sleep] [Begin to wake]
not-sleep. AC. II. 4. [adj. p. Wake night before festival] [adj. Country
festival]
-- Robin. HL. V. 9. A.
Wakeful, adj. p. wake (apt.] [Vigilant] Walk. Proper. Mo. II. 1. a -- [Walking
place] fetch a -- [Go for a walk]
as Ghost, [appear]
Wale, [Ridge of threeds in cloth] Wall. Po. III. 6. [Sepiment] [Rampier]
[Partition] -- creeper, [Woodpecker] of a long slender bill, about the bigness
of a Sparrow] -- eyed, [White eyed] -- flower. HS. IV. 1. A. -- Louse,
[Punaise] Po. III. 6. -- Nut. Tr. IV. 1. A. -- Rue, [White Maiden hair] HL. I.
5. -- wort, [Danewort]

Wallet, [Riding bag] sp. Open in the middle]
Walnut. Tr. IV. 1. Wallowing, [Volutation] Wambling, [Volutation] Loathing
(dim.] Aversation (dim.]
Wan, Pale] Dead like]
Wand. PP. I. 4. A. Wander. TA. VI. 3. A. Wane, [Decrease] Want. [Have occasion
to use] Not have. TA. I. 5. O. [Not have enough] Scarcity] Defect] [Poverty]
-- little of [Almost.] a -- [Mole]
Wantonness. Playwardness. NP. IV. 3. O. [Unchastity]
Wapentake, [Hundred] War. RM. Man of -- [Souldier] Ship. RN. I. 6.
Warbling, [Trembling (like) voice] Ward. Defend] Protect] -- off, [Defend from]
Guard] RM. III 6.: Watch] RM. III. 6. [Together adj. ought, Guard City (part]
[Imprisonment (place]
[Pupil] -- of key, Cavity in the lamin of the key] Notch in the lamin of the
key]
-- of a lock, [Curve (lamin) within L.]

Warden. adj. Keeping (Off.] Magistrate] -- tree, [Pear (kind]

Warder. [adj. Keeping (Off.] [adj. Guard (person] Watch (person]

Wardrobe, [adj. Keeping (Room) of clothing] Ware. [adj. p. Sell (thing] [a.
Imperat-heedfulness]
Warfare, [War] Wariness. [Heedfulness] [Reservedness] [Frugality]
Warlike, [adj. War] Warm. [Temperate] Fierce (dim.] Zealous]
Warn. TO. V. 4. A. -- to appear, [Citation]
Warp. the -- [Direct threed] to -- [Bend]
Warrant. [Written Command] [Sponsion]
Warranty, [Paction for safe (make] Warren, [Park for Rabbets] Warrener, [adj.
Park (Off.) of Rabbets] Warrier, [Souldier] Wart. S. III. 5. Was, [Am having
been] Wash. O. V. 6. -- es. W. III. 6. A. hog -- [Broth for hogs]
Wasp. Ex. IV. 2. -- ish, [Morose] -- like (...). Ex. IV. 3. A.
Wassail, [adj. Country Banquet] Wast. Girdlestead, [Middle (part) of trunk] --
of a ship. RN. II. 5.
Not -- Used] Inhabited]
-- land. [Superfluous] -- water. to -- Decay] Diminish] [Booty]
Mar] Destroy] [a. Ruine] [Spend (corr.] [Squander]


Wastcote, [Thin adj. (...) (vest] Wastful, [adj. Squandering] Watch. to --
[Wake] [a. Vigilance] a. Heedfulness] Observe] a. Guard] Watch] -- for, [Expect
waiting] -- with, [Wait waking]



a -- [a. Watch] -- man, [adj. Watching (person] (Off.]
-for custody of Persons, [Guard] Places. RM. III. 6. A.
-- word, adj. word (sign) of Watch] time (sign) by word]
Clock without Bell] adj. Pocket Clock]

Watchet, [Blue (kind] Watchfulness. (Vigilance] [Heedfulness] [Diligence]
Water. Element. El. III. the -- W. IV. Running -- [Stream] Standing -- [Pool]
by -- Swimming] Sailing]
in a -- [adj. Sweating (aug.] under -- [Covered with -- ]
-- bank. -- beetle. Ex. V. 8. -- Chein, [Chain (dim.] -- Course Stream]
Aqueduct]
-- Furrow, [Trench for drein] -- Hen, [Moorhen] By. VIII. 9. -- Lilly. -- man,
[adj. Rowing (person] -- Nut -- Pepper. -- Rail -- Rat -- Scorpion. Ex. I. 9.
-- Shoot, [Barren branch (dim.] -- Snail. Ex. VII. 1. A. -- Spider. Ex. II. 4.
to -- -- Cattle, [Drink (make) c.] -- garden, [a. Wet (make) the surface with
-- ] -- meat [Soke in with
water]
Vrin. to make -- [v. Vrination] [Out -- [Distilled (thing] [adj. [Washing
(thing] sp* Medicinal] mouth --



Watery adj. Water] Waterish adj. Water] -- blood, [Serous blood] -- taste,
[adj. water (like t.]
Wattle, [a. Weaving sticks (dim.] [Gill] PG. V. 7. A.
Wave. W. IV. 1. E. -- ing. [Undulation] [Shaking (dim.] Aversion] Avoiding]
Waver. AS. IV. 4. O. Wax. Subst. El. III. 7. A. ear -- [Excrement of the ear]
to -- [a. wax] Begin (inc.] [Increase] [v. Event]

Waze, [Wreath] sp. of Straw]
Weakness. [Impotence] Feebleness. NP. V. 7. O. Remisseness] Deficiency]
Weal, Being (perf.] Happiness]
Wealth. [Riches] Common -- [adj. RC. (thing] [Common prosperity] [Government
by the people]
Wean, [Teach to abstain] -- a child, [Un- a. suckle Child]
Weapon. RM. V. 1. Wear. Lessen by use] Worse by use] Decay by use] -- out,
[Spoil by use] -- as clothes, [v. Clothing] Pr. IV. -- in his pocket, [Carry]
Mo. VI. 1. -- as Ring, etc. [with p. Ornate] TM. II. 6.
a -- [adj. Taking (match.) of fish]
Weary. to -- TA. V. 8. O. -- of [Sick of] adj. TA. V. 7. O.
Wearish taste, [Unsavory t.] Weasand, [Wind-pipe] PG. VI. 1. A. Weather. [Guelt
Sheep] Be. II. 2. Temperament of Air. El. VI. -- Cock, [Shewing (jug.) of the
vergency of the wind] -- glass, [adj. Glass (instr.) for showing Heat Cold
of the air]

to -- one, [a. patience]
Weave. -- ing. O. V. 2. -- er. [adj. Weaving (mech.] Fish. Fi. IV. 8.

Web, [Woven (thing] Cob- [Woven (thing) of Spider] [White spot in the eye]
Wed, [a. Marriage] Wedding, [adj. Marriage solemnity] Wedge. [Prism] sp. for
cleaving]
-- of Silver. to -- in. [In-thrust (augm.] [In-fasten] sp. by prisms
in-thrusted about it]
Wedlock, [Marriage] Wednesday, [4th day of the week] We. Prep. I. 1. A. Weed.
[Sorry garment] [Herb] sp. Unprofitable] Hurtful]
-- ing. O. III. 3. A.

Week. -- of time. Mea. V. 4. A. -- of Candle, [adj. p. flame (apt.) string
(part]
Weel,, [adj. Taking (machin) for fish] Weeld. [Handle] [Swing]
Ween, [a. Opinion] [a. Supposition] Over -- [a. Pride]
Weeping. AC. IV. 3. O. Weesel. Be. IV. 7. A. Weevel. Ex. V. 1. A. Weigh. v.
mea. III. -- with Balances. O. I. 2. [Be heavy] v. Q. V. 4. -- anchor, [Lift a.]
-- down. [Depress]
[Consider]
Weight. Gravity. Q. V. 4. E. Measure of. Mea. III. Measuring (instr.) Mea.
III. A.
Gold -- Weight perfectly equal] Standing -- Weight perfectly equal]
[Importance]
Weighty, [adj. Weight] Welk, [Periwinkle] Ex. VII. 6. A. Welkin, [Sky] well.
[adv. Good] Regular] Sufficient]
-- a day. Int. II. 2. O. -- advised, [a. Considerate] -- beloved, [Loved] --
born Noble man] Gentle man]
-- come Accepted (perf.] adj. a. Delectation] to -- one. [Joy. AS. VI. 6.
(sign) for his coming] [Entertain (perf.]


-- fare, [Being (perf.] -- favored, [adj. Decent] (fig.] -- in health, [adj.
Health] -- in years, [adj. Old (dim.] -- nigh, [Almost] Adv. V. 1. -- now Int.
III. 2. O. -- then Int. III. 2. O. -- to pass, [Rich (dim.] -- willing adj.
Favour] -- wishing adj. Favour] as -- Adv. II. 1.
a -- W. IV. 3.
Welt, [Margin] sp. made by sowing]
Welter, [v. Volutation] Wen. S. III. 5. Wench. [adj. Childhood (fem.]
Adolescence (fem.]
[Sorry (fem.] [adj. Fornication (fem.] to -- [a. Fornication]

Went, [adj. pret. go] Wept, [adj. pret. weep] Were. [are having been] it --
[It might be] as it -- Adv. IV. 2. O.

West. Sp. III. 1. O. Wet. Q. V. 2. E. Whale. Fi. I. 1. -- of the river,
[Sheatfish] Fi. VI. 6.
Wharf,, [adj. River haven] Wharfinger, [adj. Wharf (Off.] What. Interrog.
Pron. III. 1. A. Relative. Pron. III. 2. A. -- manner of, [of what manner] kind]
-- soever. Pron. III. 3. A. -- a poor shift, [How sorry a shift]
Wheal. [Pustle] S. III. 1. -- worm. Ex. II. 7. A.
Wheat. HL. II. 1. Buck -- HF. I. 3. Cow -- Indian -- [Maiz] HL. II. 2.
Wheat-ear. By. V. 6. A. Wheat-grass. HL. III. 3. Wheedle. [adj. Fawning adv.
Fraud]
Wheel. Figure Mag. V. 3. A. to -- [Vertiginate] -- about Turn] Go in crooked
(Line]
-- of Curt, etc. Po. V. 6. -- Barrow. [One wheeled Cart] to break on the --
RJ. V. 9. A.


Wheeze, [a. Asthma with sound (augm.] Whey. [Serum] PP. I. 2.
Whelk. [Pustle] S. III. 1.
Whelm. [Cover] (augm.]
Whelp, Dog (yong] Lion (yong] etc. (yong]
When. [At what time] [Whereas] Conj. IV. 1.
Whence. [From what place] -- soever, [From whatsoever place]
Where. What. -- by, [By what] -- in, [in what] -- of, [of what] -- to, [to
what]
-- as. Conj. IV. 1. -- fore. Conj. III. 3.
[in what place] -- soever, [In whatsoever place] any -- [In any place] every
-- Sp. II. 8. no -- Sp. II. 8. O.

Wherl (adj. Vertigination (jug.] Whern (adj. Vertigination (jug.] Wherret,
[Striking] sp. with hand]
Wherry, [Boat adj. p. row (apt.) with 2 Oars] Whether. -- of the two, [Who of
the two] Affirm. Conj. I. 1. Negat. Conj. I. 1. O. -- or no. Conj. I. 1. or
Conj. I. 1. O.
Disjunctive indefinite. Conj. II. 3. A.
Whet. as point adj. p. tooth (make] adj. a. pricking (apt.]
as edge, adj. p. edge (make] adj. a. Cutting (apt.]
-- Stone. St. I. 6.
Why, [Wherefore] Which. Interrog. Pron. III. 1. A. Relative. Pron. III. 2. A.
VVhiffler, [Disguised adj. waiting (Off.) with Candle] VVhig. [Drink of acid
whey]
While. [Time] sp. between] a good -- adv. permanent] a great -- adv.
permanent] a long -- adv. permanent] -- age [adv. old] -- since [adv. old]
a little -- [adv. transitory] a short -- [adv. transitory] -- ago [adv. new]
-- since [adv. new]
mean -- [in the middle time] after a -- [after some time] within a -- [after
some time] after a little -- [adv. soon] within a little -- [adv. soon] after a
long -- [adv. late] within a long -- [adv. late]


to -- Off. a. Cunctation] Delay] Protract]

Whilst. Adv. III. 3. VVhimper, [Acute (dim.) grief (voice] VVhimzy. [a. Fancy
(corr.] [adj. Conceitedness (thing]
VVhin. [Furz]
VVhine, [acute (dim.) desire grief
(voice] Whip. [adj. Whipping (instr.] Figure. Mag. IV. 7.
[adj. hand (part) of Rudde] to -- Punish. RJ. VI. 2.
[a. Agility] [about-wind threed] -- a top, [Vertiginate t. with adj. Mag. IV.
7. (instr,]

VVhipsaw, [Saw (dim.] VVhirl. -- bone, [Bone covering the knee] -- pool. W.
IV. 1. D. -- wind. El. II. 4. A. o -- [Vertiginate (augm.] [Cast adv.
Vertiginating]

VVhirligig. VVhirtle. Sh. III. 3. A. VVhisk. [Move (imp.] [Brush by striking]
VVhisker, [Great] [Mustache]
Whisper. AC. III. ^. -- er, [adj. Whispering Backbiting
(person]
VVhist. Int. III. 1. O. VVhistle. [Whistling (instr.] sp. adj. Tube (fig.]
-- ing. Q. III. 4. A.
Whit, [Least] any -- [adv. any] every -- [adv. all] whole]

White. -- Color. Q. I. 1. E. -- bread, [Fine bread] -- lead, [Ceruse] --
liver'd, [adj. Coward] -- meats, [adj. milk victuals] -- pot, [Fluid Pudding]
-- ing. [White (make] Fish. Fi. III. 2. A.

VVhither. [To what place] -- soever, [To whatsoever place]
VVhitlow. [Bile on the finger] -- grass.
Whitsontide, [adj. Festivity (time) for pret. Descension of the Holy Ghost]
Whitster, [adj. a. white (mech. of Linen] Whittle, [Cut (corr.] -- 'd, [Drunk]
Whizz. [adj. Hissing (voice]
Who. Interrog. pron. III. 1. A. Relative. Pron. III. 2. A. -- So Pron. III. 3.
A. -- soever Pron. III. 3. A.
Whole. Total. TM. VI. Entire] NP. V. 1. adj. Soundness] NP. V. 2. Sum. --
Sale, [Selling adv. aggregate] -- ly [adv. Whole] All]

Wholesome, [adj. Health] So^ndness]

Whom, vid. Who. Whoop, [v. Exclamation (augm.] Whore. [adj. fornication (fem.]
-- dom, [Fornication] -- monger, [adj. fornication (male]

Whortle. Sh. II. 2. Sweet -- Sh. II. 6. A.
Whose, adj. Who] of Who]
Whosoever. Pron. III. 3. A. Wicked, Graceless] Unholy] Vicious (augm.]
Wicker, [Woven (thing) of wands] sp. adj. Ozier]
Wicket. [Door (dim.]
Wide. [Ample] -- open, [Wholly open]
[Remote] -- from the matter, [Impertinent (augm.]

Widgin. By. IX. 3. Widow. TO. II. 5. -- Wail. Sh. III. 6. A.
Wield. [Handle] [Govern]
Wife, [Married (fem.] house -- [Mistress of family] good -- [adj. Providence]
Frugality
(fem.]
[Woman (corr.]
Wight, [Person] Wild. -- ness. Wantonness] Fierceness] Conceitedness]
Lightness] [Riotousness] [Barbarousness] [Irregularness] [Impertinence (augm.]
-- fire, [Confection of wetted Gunpowder] -- plant, [Naturally growing]
Wilderness, [Not-adj. p. Dwelling (place] Wilding, [Naturally growing Apple]
Wile, [a. Craft] Will. Future tense] Mood III.] Faculty. NP. I. 4. Act. AS. IV.
Inclination] Velleity] Purpose] Desire] Command]

Good -- [favour] with a good -- [adv. Alacrity]
Ill -- [Malignity] with an ill -- [adv. Grudging]
[Testament] -- with a Wisp. El. I. 6.

Wilful. [Fierce] [Pertinacious] [adj. Disobedience (apt.] [Not-adj. p.
Persuade Dissuade
(apt.]
Willingness. [Will (abstr.] [Spontaneity] [Alacrity]
Willow. Tree. Tr. VI. 9. Herb. Codded -- HS. IV. 3. Spiked -- Sh. V. 1. A.

Wimble. [adv. p. Vertigination Boring (instr.] Wimple. Win. Obtain] Gain] -- a
Victory, [a. Victory] Take] Conquer] Perswade] Allure]
Wince, [Strike with heels] Winch, [adv. Vertiginated Pulling Scruing
(machin] Wind. Proper. El. II. 4. -- fall, [adj. p. Fall Event
sp. by wind]
-- flower, [Anemony] HF. IX. 3. -- mill, [Mill adj. p. operation (make) by the
wind] Side -- [Oblique -- ] Whirl -- El. II. 4. A. Air (augm.] Vapor] Fume] --
gall. -- in the guts, [Colic]
[Breath] -- pipe. PG. VI. 1. A. fetch -- [a. Respiration] long -- ed] short --
ed] [Sent]
is in the -- of [Discover (inc.] to -- -- a horn, [a. sound h.] [smell] sp.
(inc.] [v. Crooked] v. Parabolical] v. Hyperbolical] v. Elliptical] [Turn] --
ing way. [Fold] -- ing sheet, [adj Linen (vest) for adj. buried (person]

[v. Round] Circular] [Vertiginate]

[v. Undulated] [Wriggle] -- in and out Turn adv. Diversity] Wriggle adv.
Diversity]
-- up and down.
[Insinuate] -- into one. -- one out of

[v. Spiral] Helical] [Twisting]

[v. Bottom] Skein] [Glomerate] -- up, [End] -- a Bottom, [a. Bottom] -- a
Skein, [a. Skein] -- a Watch.





Windle. Mag. IV. 5. A. Windlass, [Pulley] Window. Po. IV. 2. A. Wine. Pr. II.
6. Wing. PP. V. 2. -- of an army, [adj. side (part) of Army]
Wink. [Shut eye] [Sign by shutting eye] -- at. [Seem not to observe] [Not --
Correct] Punish]



Winnow. O. III. 5. A. Winter. Mea. V. 3. A. -- cherry. -- Gillyflower. --
Green. HL. VI. 8. to -- Permanence through the winter] Dwelling] through the
winter]

Wipe. Stroke. O. V. 8. A. -- clean, [a. Clean by wipeing] -- out, Annihilate
by -- ing] Spoil by -- ing]

[a. Fraud] [Jeer]
Wire, [adj. Metal threed] Wise. [Manner] [adj. Wisdom]
Wisdom. Ha. VI. 2. Wish. a. Will] Desire] -- one to do, Advise one etc.
Command one etc.
-- well to [a. Favour]

[a. Velleity]
Wisp. [Wreath] sp. of Straw]
[Inflammation of the eyelid].
Wist, [Pret. know] Wistly, [Steddily]
Wit. [Understanding] [a. Fancy Invention
(person] [Sprightliness] Wisdom] Art] -- less, [Without -- adj. wit] in
ones^s, [adj. Understanding (perf.] out of ones -- s [Mad] little -- [Wit
(def.] Pleasant -- [Facetiousness.] Searching -- [Sagaciousness]

to -- [Conj. IV. 3.
Witch, [adj. RJ. III. 1. (person] -- Craft. RJ. III. 1.
With. Fight -- Run -- [Against] [Fight -- ] [by] Adv. I. 1. A. -- much pain,
[adv. Painful]
together -- Adv. II. 2. -- all With it] Also.

a -- [Twisted Wand]
Withdraw. Abstain Giving] Cease Giving] [Take away] sp. Concealing]
[Remove] [Depart] [Retire] sp. adv. Concealing] - ing Room. [Inner Room]

Wither. [Decay] sp. through Nutrition Moisture
(def.]

Withers of a horse, [Convex (part) between the shoulders] Withhold. Hold]
Detention] [a. Impedient]
Withy. Willow. Tr. IV. 6. Sallow. Tr. IV. 6. A.
Within. [On this side] Prep. VI 2. in. Prep. IV. 1. A. -- a little, [Almost]
Without. Not with. Prep. II. 2. O. -- doubt, [adv. Certain]
Not within. Prep. IV. 2. A. Beyond. Prep. VI. 2. A.
Withstand. Oppose] Resist] [a. Impedient (end]
Withwind. Witness. RJ. I. 7. A. Wittal, [Consenting to his Wifes Adultery]
Witty. [adj. Wit]
Witting. [adj. Knowledge]
Witwal. [Wood speit] By. I. O.
Wizarding. RJ. III. 1. A. Woe. Misery] Grief]
Woad. HS. VI. 8. Woeful [adj. Misery] Grief]

Wolf. Beast. Be. V. 1. A. -- sbane. HS. I. 3. Berry bearing -- [Herb
Christopher] HS. IX. 5. wholesome -- HS. I. 3. A. Winter -- HS. I. 4.

[Cancer] S. III. 4.
Woman, [Man. W. V. 5. [female] -- s, age Man. VI. 2. estate Man. VI. 2.
-- s, Sex. NP. VI. 2. O.
Womb. PG. VI. 9. Wonder. [Admiration]
Wont. [Custom]
Woo. [a. Suitor]
Wood. Part of Tree. PP. I. A. Place of Trees. Po. I. 7. -- man [adj. Po. I. 7.
(Off.] -- ward [adj. Po. I. 7. (Off.]
[Trees (aggr.]
Woodbind. Sh. II. 8. Upright -- Sh. II. 8. A.
Woodcock. By. VII. 7. A. Woodculver, [adj. Wood-pigeon] Wood, Angry (exc.]
Mad]
Woodfretter. Woodlark. By. IV. 1. A. Woodlouse. Woodman. adj. Po. I. 7. A.
Woodpecker. By. IX. 9. Woodpile. [Heaped wood (aggr.]
Woodroof. HL. IX. 10. Woodsear. Woodsorrel. [Three-leav'd Sorrel]
Woodspeight. By. IX. 9. Woodward, [adj. Po. I. 7. (Off.] Woodworm,
[Wood-boring insect (dim.] Woof, [Transverse threeds of woven (thing] Wool. PP.
VI. 1. A. -- en cloth. Pr. IV. 1.
Word. Proper. D. II. at a -- [Briefly] in a -- [Briefly] in -- only, [adv.
Hypocrisie] by -- of mouth, [adv. present speaking]
by -- [Proverb (corr.] [Watchword] [Narration] bring b. [Narration] send s.
[Narration]
[Promise]

Work. a. action] v. efficient] [Operation] O. make -- a. Efficient
more-operation] Do adj. must. undone (things]
[a. Mechanic] sp. for Ornateness]
[Embroider]
[Ferment] a -- [adj. p. work (thing] [Book]

Workman, [adj. Work (person] sp. (perf.] -- ship, [Work]
sp. (perf.]
World. The Universe of Creatures. W. The Globe of earth and waters. W. II. 7.
The earth. W. III. a -- of [adj. Multitude (aug.]
Worldly. [adj. world] [adj. Scraping]
Worldling Graceless (person] Selfish (person] Covetous (person]
Worm. Insect. bear -- Ex. III. 8. A. belly -- Ex. I. 1. A. blain -- churr --
[Evechurr] Ex. II. 2. A. earth -- Ex. I. 1. Gally -- palmer -- Ex. III. 8. A.
Silk -- Ex. III. 6. A. Skipping -- Ex. III. 7. Wheal -- Ex. II. 7. A.
[Spiral Pin]
Wormseed. Treacle -- HS IV. 13.
Wormwood. Sh. V. 3. Worn, adj. a. pret. Wear] adj. p. Wear]
Worry, [Shak in teeth] Worse. TM. I. 6. D. -- and -- [adj. Worse]
Worship. [Dignity] [a. Reverence] adoration. RE. IV.
Worshipful. [adj. Dignity] [Gentleman (kind]
Worst. [Most evil] -- part. TM. VI. 1. O. to -- [Overthrow]
Worsted. [Fine threeds of Wool]
Wort. [Herb] ale [not yet fermented] beer [not yet fermented]
Worth Worthiness] Excellence] [Valor] [Price] [Riches]
Worthiness. TM. IV. 6. Worthless, [Sorry] Wot, [Know] Woven, [adj. p. Weave]
Would. -- ing, [Velleity] -- god, [I wish]
I -- [Have it] [Mood conditional III]
Wound. hurt. S. I. 2. adj. a. pret. Wind] adj. p. Wind]
Wrack. Spoil Ruin sp. of Ship]
go to -- [Wracked (inc.] Herb. HL. I. 14.
Wrangle. [a. Contention] sp. in words]

Wrap, Fold] Cover by folding] -- about, [About fold] -- up. Together-fold]
Cover by folding] [Tangle] [a. Obscure]


Wrath. [Anger (augm.]
Wreath. [Twist] a -- [Cylinder about-spirald]

Wreck, Perform] Execute]
Wren. By. VI. 3. Wrench. [Violently extend] open] sp. by lifting]

[Hurt by violently extending]
Wrest. [Coaction] sp. by twisting]
[Interpret (corr.] -- from. [From-take by wresting] [Extort]

Wrestle. Mo. V. 6. Wretch, [adj. wretchedness (person] VVretchedness.
[Misery] [Penuriousness (augm.] [Sorriness]
VVry. [Oblique] [Crooked] -- neck, [Woodpecker (kind] adj. holding (freq.) his
head adv. oblique]
VVriggle. as Reptils. Mo. I. 6. to denote affection. AC. IV. 4. -- out, Go Get
[out adv. wriggling]
VVrinch, vid. VVrench. Wringing. [a. Compression] sp. adv. Twisting]
-- from one. [From take violently] sp. by wringing]

[Extort] -- pain, [p. as if by wringing]
VVrist. PG. V. 3. A. Writ. [Commission for arresting] [ holy -- [Scripture]
Writing. AC. III. 7. a -- [Written thing] Deed. RC. VI. 5.

VVrithing, vid. VVreathing. VVrong. [Irregular] Evil] Evil (kind] a.
Injustice] Injury] in the -- [adj. erring]
Wroth, vid. Wrath. Wrought adj. a. pret. work] adj. p. work]
VVrung, adj. a. pret. wring] adj. p. wring]

Y.
YArd. [Stick] Sail -- RN. III. 2. [3 foot] -- land.
[Court] Po. III. 3. PG. VI. 8. (male]


Yarn, [Threed adj. p. weave (apt.] Yarrow. [Millefoil]
Yawn. Mo. III. 6. Yea. affirmat. Adv. I. 1. [Rather] Adv. III. 1.
Ye. Pron. I. 2. A. Yield. Suffer to take. TA. IV. 1. Sold for] Demised for]
-- account, [a. Account] -- Fruit, [a. Fruit]
a. Subjection] Submit] Grant] D. VI. 3. O. Assent] AS. II. 3. Confess] D. VI.
9. as Garrison. RM. II. 4. D. as Prisoner. RM. II. 6. D. as Conquered RM. II.
7. D. -- up the Ghost, [Dy]
Diminish] Remit] as in moist weather, [v. moistness] as to the touch, [v.
Yieldingness]
Yeeldingness. [Yield (apt.] [Softness] Q. VI. 1.
Year. Mea. V. in -- s [Old] adj. Mea. VI. 4.
Yeest, [adj. fermenting (thing) of Ale] Beer]

Yell, [Exclaim] Yellow. Q. II. 2. A. the -- s -- hammer. By. IV. 2.
Yelp, [a. voice as dog (young] Yeoman. RC. I. 6. A. -- of the Larder, etc.
[Officer of the L. etc.]
Yerk, Cast (imp.] Strike (imp.]
Yern, [adj. p. Motion] sp. with Pity] Desire]

Yes. Adv. I. 1. Yesterday, [adj. preceding day] Yet. Nevertheless Conj. II. 2.
O. Before this time] Till this time]
Yew, [Sheep Be. II. 2. (fem.] -- tree: Tr. V. 3.
Yex, [Hiccough] Yoke. [Neck-binding (jug.] [Together-two]
Yolk, [Yellow (part) within the Egg] Young, vid. Young] Yonker, [Young (person]
-- of ship. RN. V. 8. A.
Yore, [Old] Sp. I. 3. O. You, Thou Ye
Young. -- of age, [adj. youth] -- ones, [Children] [New] -- beginner, Learner]
Beginner]


Your, [adj. You] Youth. Under age Infancy. Mea. VI. 1. Childhood. Mea. VI. 1.
A.
Of age Adolescence. Mea. VI. 2. Youth. Mea. VI. 2. A.
a -- [adj. Youth (person] -- full, [adj. Youth (like]

Z.
ZAny, [adj. Scurril (person] Zeal. AS. VI. 1. Zedoary. Herb, [Root of an
Indian Iris] Tree. Tr. VI. 11.
Zelot, [adj. Zeal (person] sp. (corr.
Zenith, [Upper Pole of the Horizon] Zink, [Spelter] Met. III. 4. Zodiac. W.
VI. 3. A. Zoilus, [Censurer (corr.] Zone. [Girdle] [Space of earth, etc.]
frigid -- [Space of earth between pole and polar Circle] temperate -- [ Space
of earth between Polar Circle and Tropic] torrid -- [Space of earth between the
two Tropics]

Zoophyte, [Plant-Animal] Zyris.
FINIS.

