IMPRIMATUR.

Ex Aedibus Lamb. Aug. 1. 1685. Jo. Battely RR.P. Dom. Guil. Archiep. Cantuar.
a Sacris Domesticis.

A SERMON Preached on the 26th day of July, 1685. Being the Day of
THANKSGIVING Appointed for His Majesty's Victory Over the REBELS. In the
United Parishes of St. Margaret Pattons, and St. Gabriell Fenchurch, London.

By THO. WAGSTAFFE, Chancellor of the Cathedral Church of Litchfield, and
Rector of the said Parishes.

LONDON, Printed for Walter Kettilby, at the Bishops-head in St. Paul's
Churchyard, 1685.

1 Kings I. 5. Adonijah the Son of Haggith exalted himself, saying, I will be
King, and he prepared him Chariots, and Horsemen, and fifty Men to run before
Him.


THE Throne of David was set up and established by God himself, who (at that
time) reserved to himself the particular appointment of the Kings of Israel and
Judah. He first caused Saul, and then David to be anointed King. And yet,
(notwithstanding God's own appointment) there were several Mutinies, Seditions,
and Rebellions of his Subjects; which is a sure Evidence, that no Right of
Government can be so Just, no Title to the Crown so Unquestionable and firm,
which shall not be liable to the Pretenses, Claims, and Disturbances, of wicked
and Ambitious men. Certainly no man could question Gods Right and Power of
Nomination, or that David was the Person named by him for their King. These
were evident, and undoubted. And yet not only Ishbosheth the Son of Saul, and
Sheba the Son of Bichri, but even two of his own Sons, lay Claim to the
Sovereignty, and rise up in Rebellion against him. A plain Proof, that where
the Conscience is large enough for Rebellion, it will easily slip through all
other ties of Nature and Gratitude. These that could quit themselves of their
Allegiance, easily discharged their Filial Duties. He that can be a Traitor to
the Father of his Country, will not scruple the breach of Fidelity to his
Natural Parents: He that can be a Rebel to his King, will soon make nothing of
being undutiful to his Father. We have a double instance of this in David, who
was an Excellent King, and a most Indulgent Father, and yet, first his Son
Absalom, and here his Son Adonijah, said, I will be King, and he prepared him
Chariots and Horsemen, and fifty Men to run before Him.

He prepared Him Chariots and Horsemen and fifty men to run before him. Whether
these Preparations were matters of State and Magnificence, suitable to that
place of Dignity and Honor he aspired unto, or whether they were Preparations
of Men, Arms, and Ammunition necessary to maintain his Rebellion. The same
words are expressed of Absalom, when he first began to set up for a Rebel, 2 Samuel 15.1. And it came to pass that Absalom prepared him Chariots and Horsemen,
and fifty Men to run before him. Whether therefore these are Instances and
Marks of Majesty, the Royal Attendance, and Equipage, (like the Kings
Lifeguard) and because they claimed to be King's, they would be Royally, and
like Sovereign Princes, attended, and waited on; or whether they were the
joining of other Rebels, a getting together of Men and Arms to Invade the King
and his Subjects; and the preparations of Chariots and Horsemen, were the
forming a Rebellious Army. Which of these two is meant, (by these words) is not
so very certain. But it is certain, that not only Absalom but Adonijah also,
(however these words are meant) did make such preparations, did invite and
procure many of the Kings Subjects, (who were inclinable to Faction and
Rebellion) to abet their Cause, to appear in their behalf, against their Father
and Lawful Sovereign.

In discoursing of these words I shall endeavor,

1. To consider some Circumstances relating to Adonijah's Rebellion parallel to
our own Case, to the late Rebellion.

2. To represent the Iniquity of such and all Rebellious Attempts and Practices.

3. To Apply the whole.

1. Reflect on some Circumstances relating to Adonijah's Rebellion, parallel to
the late Rebellion; as, The Person. The Time of His Rebellion. The Occasion of
it. The Persons associating and assisting. The Defeat.

1. The Person, Adonijah the Son of Haggith. Who this Haggith was, whether
David's Wife, or his Concubine, is not expressed; but it is probable, she was
some obscure woman: And the Reason of this Conjecture is, that when there is
mention made of David's Sons, and of whom born, the Mothers are expressed who
they were in Lineage and Descent, except Haggith, and one more. So we read 2 Samuel 3. and 1 Chronicles. 3. The firstborn was Amnon of Ahinoam the Jezreelitess,
the second Chileab of Abigail the Wife of Nabal the Carmelite, the third
Absalom the Son of Maacha, the Daughter of Talmai King of Geshur, the sixth
Ithream, by Eglah David' s Wife; but when it speaks of Adonijah, and
Shephatiah, it says only that the one was the Son of Haggith, the other of
Abital, without any intimation from whence, or whose Daughters they were. Which
(to me) seems that they were probably his Concubines, or however of some mean
Lineage, and low Extraction, otherwise there can hardly be a Reason assigned,
why the Country, Tribe, or Parentage of these should not be mentioned as well
as the other.

2. The time of Adonijah' s Rebellion, and that was some time before the Death
of his Father, that Father that had been so extremely kind to him, that to
enhance the foulness of his Rebellion, it is said immediately after the Text:
And his Father had not displeased him at any time, in saying, why have thou
done so? Nothing of displeasure, but the highest kindness, the greatest
expressions of tenderness and affection had always been manifested from his
Father. And herein we shall not need to make the Parallel. It only differs,
That the Rebellion we are delivered from, did not break out in the time of the
late King (of ever blessed memory) but it comes thus near, it was hatched then,
and (in all probability) would have then appeared in its own colors, Rebellion
and Treason mixed with the highest ingratitude and ill nature, had it not been
providentially discovered, and seasonably prevented: 'Twas then laid and
contrived, and just ripe for action; but the Providence of God, and the Wisdom
and Vigilance of the King, stifled it, and hindered its further appearance:
'Twas the same then in Intention, and would have been the same (and probably
worse) in Execution, but that the Discovery brought some of the Conspirators to
punishment, and dispersed the rest, who since associated themselves again, and
(upon the Kings Mercy and Indulgence, and the Ruins of the Plot) have built
up, and framed this ungrateful and unnatural Rebellion.

3. The occasion of this Rebellion, and that seems to be, that another had a
better claim to the Government. There was another from God (after David)
declared the rightful Successor of the Crown. God had established it in
Solomon, as David himself openly declares to the People. (1 Chronicles. 6.5. And of
all my Sons, (for the Lord has given me many Sons) he has chosen Solomon my
Son to sit upon the Throne of the Kingdom of the Lord over Israel. 1 Chronicles.
17.11, 12. etc. 22.9.
And this very thing Adonijah himself afterward acknowledges, That the Kingdom
was Solomon's from the Lord. 1 Kings. 2.15.
Could Adonijah have been King after David's decease, it is probable he would
not have molested him in his Life time; but when Solomon was to succeed, when
he had a right from the Lord, before him; this grated his Spirits, and set him
upon Projects, Conspiracies and Associations, to gain that by Fraud or Force,
which he could not have by any Right, Law, or Justice. He had a mind to the
Kingdom, and because God would not give it him, he would endeavor to get it
himself. We do not read indeed of a Black Box to justify his false pretenses,
to make a legitimate Title of a spurious. But in every thing else the Parallel
is too natural.

4. The Persons associating with him, and those are expressed at the 7th Verse.
And he conferred with Joab the Son of Zeruiah, and Abiathar the Priest, and
they following Adonijah helped him. And here I should do a great deal of
injustice to Joab, and especially to Abiathar, if I should compare with them
those two Persons that assisted that late unhappy Gentleman in the Rebellion;
they agree only in this, that the one was a Great Man, and the other a Priest;
but in malignity and mischief, ours, especially the Priest, far exceed them.

Joab indeed was a man of Blood and Treachery, he had basely killed Abner and
Amasa, and now helped Adonijah in his Rebellion; but before he had stood by
King David, and served him against Ishbosheth, and the Rebellion of Absalom and
Sheba, and he had led forth his Armies, and returned victorious from several of
his Enemies. But what Service has the late Peer ever done to the Government?
If to promote a Faction, to incense the Mobile, to mis-lead the King's
Subjects, to be a Conspirator against his Life and Government, and to be
actually in Arms against him; if these be services, then this guilty man may
have been serviceable to his King and Country. And (I conceive) no other
instance, but such as these, appears of good done by him to the Kingdom, except
his being taken; and that indeed is instrumental to the public good, but that
was sorely against his will. And then for,

Abiathar the Priest, it will be matter of the highest Injury, Defamation, and
Indignity to his memory, to parallel with him in any Instance (except this
Rebellion) That perfidious and Rebellious Priest, Contriver, Manager, and
Assistant in the late Rebellion. Abiathar heretofore had been a Good and Loyal
man, true to the Interest of David. And Solomon himself gives him this
Character (2 Kings 2.26.) Thou barest the Ark of the Lord God before David my
Father, and have been afflicted in all wherein my Father was afflicted. And for
that Reason he pardoned him his Life, though (for his Rebellion,) he turned him
out from being Priest of the Lord. But now, where is the man that can tell any
one Instance of Loyalty, Peaceableness, or Goodness, that ever came from the
Mouth or Behavior of this Man? Good Parts (they say) he has, and so had
Achitophel, and so has the Devil; but surely, no Man ever reckoned them the
better for their Cunning: Dexterity of Understanding, Quickness of Mind, and
Policy in Affairs, are good or bad, according as the Uses are they are put to.
If they tend to the Honor of God, the Good of the Church, the Peace of the
Kingdom, or the Benefit of Mankind, they are truly Honorable and Worthy, and
deservedly admired and esteemed; but if they serve to unhinge the Government,
to breed Factions, to disquiet the People, to stir up Sedition, and Rebellion,
they are Infamous and Reproachful; The better they are, the worse they are, and
greater Instruments of Mischief; and if an Ability to do harm, if a Power and
Art to seduce, be matter of Character or Dignity, the great Destroyer and
Tempter, may put in for the greatest share, and first Station. And (I pray) to
what use has this man put his Parts? But to the carrying on the most Infamous
and Vile Purposes. By a Poisonous, and Seditious Cunning, to raise Divisions
and Schisms in the Church, Uproars and Mutinies in the Kingdom; to contrive and
assist in the most Villainous, and Hellish Conspiracy, that ever yet appeared in
the World, and to Design and Abett an open and avowed Invasion and Rebellion.
These are the Fruits of this man's Parts, the Effects of his Skill. And be it
for ever confessed, that he is a Man of Parts, that is, an Artist in his Way; a
Man expert in all the Methods of Treason: And (to do him right) He has refined
Villainy, and improved the Science of Assassination, to a greater Height, than
any that were before Him. Cursed and Cruel Natures there have been, that have
put off Humanity, and thirsted for Blood, yet few ever arrived to the pitch of
this Man: You may think upon Cain and Zimri, upon the Servants of Jehoash and
Amaziah, who conspired against, and slew the Kings their Masters; you may
Reflect upon Cassel, Parry, Garnet, the Murderers of King Charles the First,
and all the Traitors, Conspirators, and King-killers, that have yet appeared in
the World; and amongst them all, you will hardly find his Equal: It Is his
Peculiar Talent, to have raised Treason, and Assassination, to a Degree above
all Men; and let him have the Glory of his Parts, to have set out such a piece
of Mischief, as no Wickedness can parallel, no Cruelty exceed. And as the
Scriptures speak to set forth the Excellency of a Man's Virtue or Wisdom, so
may it be said of such Eminency in Villainy, Before him there have been none
like him, neither after him shall be any such. The Spirits of James Clement and
Ravillac, were doubled on this Man; Each of Them Assassinated one King, but
This was for the Murdering a Royal Family. This was the Man, that was for the
Compendious Way, that is, for the Murdering (any how) at once, the Late and the
Present King; This was the Man, that was so greedy of the Royal Blood, that he
had raised 600 l. to buy Arms for their quick Destruction; This was the Man
that (in Murderous Persuasions and Actions) far out did all the rest of the
Villains; and This was the Man, that proposed the killing five or six of the
Richest Citizens, to give away their Estates, to stop the Mouths of the
multitude, when the first news of the Kings Murder should reach them. And now
are not these admirable Endowments, for a Man that calls himself a Minister of
the Gospel? These are the Doctrines and Exhortations of Abaddon: Such Salvage
and Murderous Principles, will fit out a Chaplin to a Troup of Banditti, or a
Company of Arabian Thieves and Robbers, whose Business and Employment is to
Steal and Murder, or (which is the same thing) to an Army of Rebels. The
Christian Institution is too soft and gentle, too meek and mild for such a
hardened and overgrown Temper. But he may be well qualified for a Priest to
those Heathen Deities, delighted with Humane Sacrifices, who first slay Men,
and then offer up the Flesh and Blood to their Gods. Murder would then be,
(even as now it is) the Exercise of his Religion, and Priestly Function. It is
not in my Nature, to speak hardly or reproachfully of any Man, but who can be
Temperate on such an Occasion? A Man whose Profession is Peace and Piety, to be
Author of the most Abominable Councils, and to be a Minister of the Highest
Wickedness, is a Prodigy and a Monster; A Bloody Villain, in the Shape of
Religion, is a Devil in the Name of God; and there is nothing in this World
comes so near Satan transforming himself into an Angel of Light; as a Man
pretending he is a Minister of Christ, and at the same time to be a Traitor,
and a Rebel, a Murderer, and a Cutthroat.

5. His Defeat: And this was very sudden; for as soon as Adonijah, and his
Associators heard that Solomon was crowned King, that Zadock and Nathan, and
Benaiah, and the Cherethites, and the Pelethites, (Men of Loyalty, Virtue, and
Courage) stood by the Rightful Successor and Lawful King, against the
Pretensions of Adonijah, they were presently dismayed and dispersed. It Is
probable, they expected more of the Kings Subjects to have joined them, that
all the Discontented in the Land, or the Remainders of Absalom's Rebellion,
would have flocked in unto them. But when by the suddenness of Solomon's
Crowning, and the expeditious meeting of the Loyal Party, they saw themselves
overpowered, they broke up their Rebellious Meeting, and every Man went his
way, v. 41. Now the Case before us (in this particular) is not every way
Parallel; the Late Rebels were not so very soon defeated, but (thanks be to
God) it was not long; they did some Mischief first, and killed some Loyal and
Good Men, but the Kings Care and Industry prevented them from doing much: So
soon as they came to a picht Fight, God (whose Name be praised) gave the
Victory to his Majesty's Forces, and the Rebels were totally routed. And This
is the Matter of our Thanksgiving, and the Purpose of this Day. So it is
Parallel in the Compleatness of their Dissipation, though not altogether in the
suddenness of it. It Is Parallel in the cheerful and ready appearance of the
King's Loyal and Dutiful Subjects to Oppose (with their Lives and Fortunes) all
false Claims and Pretensions whatsoever.

And so I have done with the first thing. Reflecting on some Circumstances,
relating to Adonijah's Rebellion, parallel to the Rebellion we have been
delivered from. I have not indeed been so very exact and punctual, as to point
out every parallel, and to compare every particular; but where I have not, the
Things are so very plain and obvious, that they compare themselves, and it
would be needless to do that, which every Man's understanding cannot but supply.

2. To Represent the Iniquity of such, and all Rebellious Attempts and
Practices. And this (I must confess) is more than I can do; they are Evils of
such a Size, as exceed all the Powers I have, and surpass all the
Representation I can make. Some Mischiefs, like some Sorrows, are so great,
that they silence all Expression, they astonish our Faculties, and are too big
for vent. As there are Ecstasies of Joy, and Agonies of Pain, things that may be
felt and conceived, but are so High, that no Description reaches them. So there
are Quintessences of Villainy, a kind of inexpressible Wickedness, which damps
and stupifies, the thoughts of which overcharge the Spirits, and possess us
with a kind of Extatic Horror and Confusion. I can tell you what Fraud and
Injustice is, and I can describe Theft and Murder to you: I can lay open the
Vileness of unnatural Parricide: But all these together, and more; the Dismal
Contrivances of Assassination, the Horrid Consequences of a Seditious Army the
united Mischiefs of Treason and Rebellion; who can tell what to call them? Or
where are words bad enough to express them? They overwhelm our Minds, and are
not so properly Objects of our speech, as of our amazement. I shall not
therefore undertake the full Representation, (for that is more than I can do);
but we may (besides many others) make some Conception of the Mischiefs of it,
in these two following Particulars.

1. As it violates all the Principles of Humane Society.

2. As it is contrary to the Nature and Constitution of Christianity.

1. As it violates the Principles of Humane Society.

The Fundamental Principles of all Humane Society, are the securing every Man's
Right, and the Preservation of the whole. The Prophet speaks of a Time, when
every Man shall sit under his Vine, Micah. 4.4.
and under his Fig Tree, and none shall make them afraid. v. 3.
But when is this? When Men shall beat their Swords into Ploughshares, and
their Spears into Pruning Hooks. But not when there are Rebels in the Land, who
do quite contrary, who beat their Ploughshares into Swords, and their
Pruning-books into Spears. No man can sit under his Vine, can be at ease and
rejoice in his Labors, and reap the Fruits of his Care and Industry, when
Injustice and Spoil lie at the Doors. What can we call our own? Or what
Property can secure us? When there are men of Prey and Violence, that will
seize our Possessions, and take the Meat of our Mouths. What Justice to our
Rights can be expected from these Men? Whose whole Pretense and Business is
invading the Rights of our Sovereign. And this (I doubt not) has been sadly
experimented by many the Inhabitants of those Counties that were the Seat of
the Late Rebellion. We have a Right to our Religion, and to our King. To our
Lives and Possessions. To our Families, and Relations: And all these are
violated by Rebellion. Rebellion is a Comprehensive Evil, and contains in it
all that is Vile. It Is not one single Sin, but all. It Is not only Rebellion,
(and yet that is bad enough) but it is Treason, and Theft, and Murder, and
Perjury besides. Consider therefore what it is to have your God Dishonored,
your King Injured, your Religion Profaned, your Goods Plundered, your Churches
Robbed, your Persons Killed, your Wives Ravished, and your Daughters Deflour'd.
Consider the Tears of Widows and Orphans, the loss of Children, the Demolishing
of Edifices, the Destruction of Corn and Cattle, and all the Ravages and
Devastations of Merciless and Blood-thirsty Men. And These, and all These, and
much more than These, is Rebellion; In short, it is all the Evil the wisest Men
can think, and the worst Men can act.

But yet there is another Right in Humane Society, and that is the King's
Right. For sure the Crown is not a Prize, that every Man may put in and Fight
for, but a Matter of Right, an Ancient and Hereditary Right. It would certainly
be one of the strangest things in the World; That when every Man's Property is
secured, and made so by the King's Laws and Power, and yet He himself should
have none; That every Man should enjoy the Benefit of Laws, and Society, and
the King (the Head of the Society) should be in Hobs's State of Nature, and
every Man had a Right to every thing of His. And if a Man can but get together
Men and Arms, (though he cannot without Injustice to a farthing of any Man's
else, yet) he may lay Claim to the King's Crown and Dignity. It Is Injury and
Theft to desire, or take away but a pennyworth of ours: And is it nothing to
Usurp upon the Government, to Invade the King's Dues, His Patrimony, and
Inheritance? These are, and always have been esteemed the most Sacred and
Inviolable. All Societies have been so extremely tender of the King's Rights,
that the least visible Violation of them, has always (in the Eye of the Laws)
been accounted a Crime of an extraordinary Nature. The Scriptures (in this
particular) confine our very Thoughts, much more all overt Acts. The King has
a Right to our Honor and Esteem, and his Interest and Dignity are wronged by
insolent Thoughts, and undue Estimations; much more sure, by Reproachful Words,
and Rebellious Behavior. There is a kind of Divinity in the Persons of King's,
which breeds Awe and Dread, Distance and Reverence; and there cannot be a
greater Instance of a Profligate Wretch, 2 Pet. 2.10.
than to break down the Pale of Majesty, and not to be afraid to speak Evil of
Dignities. But when there are Men that defy God, and Contemn the Divine
Majesty, it is not to be wondered, if they do as much to his Vicegerent; if
there are State-Atheists, who have so far shaken off all Reverence and Duty, as
impiously to vilify the Persons, and attempt upon the Interests and Safeties
of Kings. But these have been always accounted the Pests of the Earth, who have
violated all the Principles of Humanity, and broke through all the Bonds of
Society; Men who have defied God, Nature, and the Laws. The King's Honor,
Person, Life, and Government, have been always secured by all the Ties and
Fences that Wisdom and Law can make, and an Invasion of Them, is the highest
Sin a Man in Society can be guilty of.

And this is not only the Sense of Mankind, but manifest also from the Nature
of the thing. Without This, Society can never be preserved, the Kingdom and the
Interests of it secured, and the Ends of Government answered. For it is a vain
thing to expect this, where the Supreme and Governing Power is exposed to
Outrage and Violence. How can the Kingdom be secure, if the Government be not?
How should the King protect his People, and administer Justice, and Right among
them? If he himself is not protected, if his own Rights are open to Invasion.
It is necessary therefore for our sakes, as well as for the King's, that his
Rights be maintained. Every Stroke against Him, is a Wound to the whole
Kingdom. Every Injury to Him, is Injustice to all the People. And (whatever
distinctions Republican Men may make between the Court and the Country) the
King's Rights are the best preservative of the Peoples, and the Security of the
Government, is the best Hold any Man has for his own Safety. If the King's
Right be liable to Question and Uncertainty, to be disputed by the Claims, and
Pretenses of every Man that has a Mind to it; like a Disease in the Head, it
affects the whole Body, and the whole Kingdom will be always in Palsies,
Tremblings, and Convulsions, there can be nothing of Peace and Order, all will
be Confusion and Combustion, it will be in a perpetual State of War, and every
Man against every Man.

The King's Security therefore, and the Preservation of his Rights, has the
greatest Influence on the Good of the whole, and is the most necessary
Principle of Public Safety. And Consequently, that must be a very great Evil,
that Infringes or Invades them. For proportionable to the Excellency and
Goodness of a Thing that is Violated, must be the Malignity of that which
Violates it. As words that are but a Scandal, or a threatening against a Common
Man, may be Treason, when spoke against the King, and Blasphemy when against
God. Rebellion therefore is the greatest Offense that can be committed, with
Reference to Humane Society. Both as it is against the Sacred Person of the
King; and also as it undermines that Power, Authority, and Protection, which is
Necessary to the Security of all Public Societies. The Advocates of the Late
Cromwell.
Usurper, make use of this Argument. Hobs Leviathan.
That because he had got the Force and Protection of the Kingdom into his
Hands, he was to be obeyed, and not to be resisted, for that the Attempts
against Him would hazard the public safety, Hall of Richmond of Government and
Obedience.
etc. The strength of which (as it Relates to Usurpation, and the Villainous
Means of attaining the Government) I shall not now examine; White of Obedience
and Government. Dr. J. Goodwin, Quaeries. And generally all that undertook that
vsur pers Cause, ofter his Success.
only infer, that the Argument is much more forcible against Rebellion and
Resistance; when the Power and Government is in the Hands of a Lawful and
undoubted Sovereign.

2. The Nature and Constitution of Christianity. And in the whole Tenor of our
Religion, there is scarce any thing of any kind, but what directly opposes all
Rebellious Attempts and Practices. Let us look upon those Graces that adorn
Christianity, that are the most Eminent in Religion, and we shall find, they
are utterly inconsistent with a Spirit of Rebellion. There is Truth, Humility,
Modesty, Meekness and Justice; And there is Charity, Patience, Forgiveness,
Peaceableness, and Contentedness. And are these Rebellious Virtues? Do these
teach Men to be Unquiet and Seditious? To be Uneasy and Impatient under
Government? To vilify and reproach their Governors? To seek the Rights of
other Men? And to Invade the Crown? Nothing in the whole World is so contrary.
In short, these are Virtues, without which it is impossible to be a Christian,
and with which it is impossible to be a Rebel. And if Religion had done no more
but this, if it had only obliged Men to be Humble and Honest, to be Patient and
Contented, to be Peaceable and Orderly in their Stations; it had been
abundantly sufficient, to restrain any Man, (that had but the least Conscience,
or Sense of Religion) from being Mutinous, Factious, or Rebellious. For let a
Man but Conscientiously observe any one of these Virtues, and it is as
impossible for him, (while he does so) to be a Traitor, as it is for a man (at
the same time) to be a Christian and a Turk. But Christianity has gone much
further; It has not left the Measures of our Obedience in Generals, but has
given particular and express Orders concerning it; and those as Direct,
Peremptory, and Full, as any Laws ever have, or can make. It commands us to
give the King his Dues; and that sure is not by Invading his Birthright; it
enjoins us to pray for Him, and that is not done by Vilifying and Aspersing
Him, by penning and sending forth Reproachful and Treasonable Declarations
against Him. It obliges to obey Him for Conscience sake; and this is not done
by Contemning His Authority, and disowning His Government. It Commands us (if
there be Occasion) to Suffer, but upon no account to Resist; and this sure is
not complied with by bearing of Arms, and rising in Actual Rebellion against
Him. Now these Injunctions of the Gospel are as plain and positive as words can
make them: And it is not possible to find out Words more express and full than
these. Let every Soul be subject unto the Higher Powers: Romans 13.1.2.
Whosoever resists the Power, resists the Ordinance of God, and they that
resist, shall receive to themselves Damnation. These are so plain, that a man
that owns Christianity, must have a strange Conscience, to evade the Force of
them. Those therefore that have had Wickedness enough to Rebel, and would fain
draw in Religion for Countenance, have been very hard put to it, to shift the
Evidence and Strength of these Precepts. They are so clear, that they cannot do
with them, (as they do with some other parts of Scripture) wrest them to a
contrary sense, (for no man can believe that Libelling the King is praying for
Him, or that rising up against him with Swords and Guns is not resisting him.)
They therefore fall foul upon them, and tell you, These were Doctrines
calculated for the first Times, Dr. J. Goodwin Anticavilerisme.
when Christianity was Weak, and the Number of it is Professors few, Observat.
on the P. of Orange. Julyan. Apost. etc.
and not able to engage the Power and Forces of Kings. But are no Rules, and
binding, where is Men, Arms, and strength enough. This indeed makes quick Work
of it, and if it were sufficient, would presently evacuate all the Precepts of
the Gospel; you might be as licentious and Villainous as you pleased, you might
be as Revengeful, Cruel, and Uncharitable as you thought fit; you might Cheat
and Defraud as many as you could; it is but saying, the Precepts of Forgiveness,
Meekness, and Honesty, were accommodated for the first Times, and all is well,
and your Conscience at ease. Suppose a Man had a mind to kill his Father, and
Murder his Master, and possess himself of his Goods, it is but saying, the
Commands of Duty to Parents, and Fidelity to Masters, are Temporary, and there
is no harm done. I know they do not say so; but I know likewise, that no Mortal
Man can give a reason, why the one should be temporary, and not the other;
there is no such limitation expressed in one, more than the other, and if the
Nature of the thing be consulted, there is more Reason for the continual
Obligation to Obedience: For Government is perpetual, and so must Subjection be
too, for they are Relatives. And Obedience to Government is more necessary
(with reference to the welfare of Mankind) than either Common Honesty or Filial
Duty. And I wonder what those (that urge this) can say to that Text, ( Romans
13.5.) Ye must needs be Subject, not only for Wrath, but also for Conscience
sake. Not only for Wrath, that is, not only because the King has a coercive
Power, and can Compel and Punish, (which is the very thing, and all that they
insist upon) but also upon another ground, for Conscience sake, with Respect to
God, and Christ, and the Principles of his Religion; which in another place, is
therefore expressed, for the Lord's sake, 2 Pet. 2.13. Christian Obedience is
founded, not in Force, because the Government is stronger; but in Conscience,
because God commands it. All the Duties of Religion are to be done for
Conscience sake; but it is somewhat remarkable, That (of all the rest) this only
of Subjection to Authority, should be so expressed; which as it evidences the
great Stress the Gospel lays upon this Duty, so it takes away all manner of
tergiversation and subterfuge, (for hereby all Rebellious Distinctions and
Pretenses are obviated.) Conscience is always pretended for Rebellion; and can
there be any thing more plain, than that we must needs be Subject for
Conscience sake; that is, from a Principle of Religion, from the Laws of the
Gospel, the same Principle that is the Guide and Rule of our Consciences? It Is
not therefore the King's Power and Strength, but the Conscience of our Duty to
God, that makes Christians obey. There are two Obligations to Obedience; the
one is Coertion, and this is over Brutes, or Brutish Natures, ungovernable and
Seditious Tempers, that need Force and Compulsion, and must be held as with a
Bridle. The other is Conscience, and this is a Government over Good Men, who
yield a Free and Generous Obedience, as acting under the Laws and Authority of
Christ. Every good Christian lives in Subjection by Virtue of his Religion, and
the Principles of his Conscience. And (to come yet further, to this fulsome
Objection) Christian Religion (which is the Law of Conscience, and the Director
of all Christians actions) is not a fraudulent and deceitful Institution; to
accommodate its Doctrines (as these Men represent it) to Times and Seasons, and
not to the Nature of things, and Rules of Common Equity. To teach Obedience
only to serve a turn with, to order Men to be patient and submissive, till they
could get Numbers to be otherwise, is the most dishonorable and Base, and the
Fowlest thing that can be said of any Institution; it makes it not a staid Rule
of Practice, but a Cheat and Trepan. There may be Evil Men, that can show
Tricks, and make fair Shows, till they have opportunity to do their Mischief.
But this is not possible for a Law, and much less for the best of Laws, the
Gospel, which is always even, and true, always the same to day, to morrow, and
for ever. The first Christians were to obey, and not to Resist their Rulers,
and so are we; and that not for Reasons variable and alterable, according to
Times and Seasons, but by a standing Rule, by Conscience, a perpetual
Principle, binding to us, and to all Christians to the end of the World. The
Law therefore is Good, but there are bad Men, who would fain Transform it into
their own Likeness; They are quiet when they dare not be otherwise, and resolve
to be in Subjection, but till they can get strength to Rebel; and they would
put this Vizor on Religion, and make Christianity as Hypocritical as
themselves. They will obey no longer than there is Force to make them. And
Thanks be to God, the King has been strong enough for them; and God grant He
may always be so, to keep those in their Allegiance by his Power, whom no
Conscience can hold, no Principles of Religion can contain in their Duty.

3. Apply the Whole.

1. Let us dispose our Hearts and Souls, to give unfeigned Thanks and Praise to
the most Gracious God, for Influencing and prospering His Majesty's Forces, and
Defeating our Enemies. For this purpose we are now met together, and to this,
the Nature of the Thing, and the foregoing Discourse engages us. For if
Rebellion be (as you have heard, and as in realitty it is) the worst of Evils,
the most Pernicious to all Governments and Societies: Then let the Sense of our
Deliverance from it, Influence our Hearts, with suitable Affections, and
Devotion to our Deliverer. It Is true, Rebellion and unjust Claims do very
seldom prevail, God (who is the Patron of Right) usually Protects the just
Cause, exerts his Providence in the behalf of the Innocent, and will not suffer
Right to be oppressed by an Usurper, and wrongful Invader. And we (of this
Nation) have had several Instances of God's Power and Goodness, who has often
miraculously appeared in behalf of the Rightful Title to the Crown. But this
should not diminish, but advance our Gratitude: And the more Experience we have
had of Almighty Mercy, the more should we enlarge our selves toward Him in
expressions of Duty. We owe much indeed to the King's Wisdom and Care, to the
Parliaments Pious and Loyal Endeavors, to the Valor and Conduct of the King's
Military Officers, to the Resolution and Courage of the Soldiers. To all which
respectively (in their differing Spheres and Stations) is our praise and thanks
proportionably due. But let God have his Honor also; Men are but Instruments,
God is the Supreme Actor, and all Successes (how wisely soever things are
managed) depend upon His Providence. The Wretches themselves that contrived the
Horrid and Black Rye-Assassination, when they were disappointed by a Wonderful
Providence, Fire at New Market.
could say, that Gods Hand was in it. And let us sure (who reap the Benefit of
that and this present Deliverance) be as forward to see, and also to
acknowledge the Divine Clemency, which rescued our King, and our selves, from
the Hands, and Outrages of Ravenous and Bloody Men. Bs. 121.1.
Let us look unto the Hills from whence comes our help, our help comes from
the Lord, the Lord strong and mighty in Battle. Let us adore that Goodness, and
open our Souls to our Mighty Deliverer, the God of our Salvation. The King
shall rejoice in the Lord, Ps. 63.11.
and let us all come before his Presence with joy, and thanksgiving: For the
Lord has done Mavelous Things, his Right Hand, and his Holy Arm has gotten
him the Victory. Blessed be God that has subdued our Adversaries, and given
Peace to his Kingdom. Blessed be God that has Blasted the Conspiracies and
Attempts against our Lawful Sovereign, and his Government: and Blessed be God
that has preserved us, and all that is dear to us, from becoming a Prey to
Unjust, Cruel, and Merciless Men. O Lord, Ps. 36.6, 7.
thou preservest Man and Beast; How excellent is thy Loving Kindness, O God!
therefore the Children of Men put their trust under the shadow of thy Wings.

2. Let us follow our Thanksgiving home, let us pursue it into our Consciences,
that it may become a principle of Life and Action: They are but cold and empty
Words, sent into the Air, which do not beat back upon our Hearts, and affect us
with Piety and Duty. We then pray right, when our Practices are of the same
Temper with our Prayers. Let our Thanksgiving therefore and our Lives agree,
let us exemplify it in the Loyalty of our Behavior: It Is a Fictitious
Thanksgiving, that does not Influence our Hearts. Let us therefore answer our
Praises to God with an utter Abhorrence and Detestation of all Sedition and
Rebellion Let not a Mutinous, and Vngovernable Thought be found among us; Let
Rebellion be for ever Scattered with the Rebels, and let no Stubbornness and
Faction, no Associating, nor Conspiring against Authority, be any more heard in
our Streets. This is to Cooporate with God in his Mercies. He has preserved
the King, and the Government. Let us do our Parts, and be Conscienciously
Subject. This our Present Thanksgiving, This our True Interest, and This, our
best Religion obliges us to. There cannot be a more Loyal Man in the whole
World, than a Protestant of the Church of England as it is Established by Law.
And he that is really so, cannot have the least Tendency, the least Inclination
to Resistance. Let us therefore do what our God, our King, and our Religion
would have us: Let us keep the Feast, not with the Old Leaven of Faction and
Sedition, but with Sincerity and Truth; With Devotions answerable to the
Mercies we Celebrate, with Hearts inflamed with Holy Gratitude to God, and
Loyal Zeal to the King and his Government. Prove. 24.21
My Son, fear God and the King, and meddle not with them that are given to
Change.

Which Improvement that we may all make of it, God of his Mercy grant, through
Jesus Christ our Lord. To whom, etc.

FINIS.

