(...) CHARACTER OF a GOOD RULER, As it was Recommended in a SERMON preached
before his Excellency the GOVERNOR, and the Honorable Counselors, and
Assembly of the REPRESENTATIVES of the Province of Massachusetts Bay in
NEW ENGLAND.

May 30. 1694.

By Samuel Willard, Teacher of a (...) Boston.

Printed by (...) 1694.

Published by Order of Authority.

TO THE READER
Christian Reader,
I Am not Ignorant that we are fallen into a critical time, in which it is hard
for a man to look or speak, without some odd reflection made upon^ him: I was
therefore far from being ambitious of appearing on the Stage in this juncture,
either in speaking on such an Occasion as produced the following Sermon; or in
committing it to the World in Print; knowing how much I should be Exposed
thereby* Though on the other side, I am not of that sullen Humor, to shun a
Service, wherein I may expect to meet an Affront, when called by God to it, and
an advantage is Offered me of doing good. I am none of these Flatterers that
will paint a Vice with the Vizar of a Virtue upon i^ ^ Nor yet of those Male
Contents whom nothing can please, but they seek to pick an hole in every thing
that is done. I can bless God heart^ly for men in Authority, who seek the weal
of our Israel, making it their Study and Endeavor to Advance the Interest of
Religion and Righteousness among their People: and can remember that they are
men, and may mistake; and endeavor to cover rather than discover their
Infirmities. I do therefore crave your candid Interpretation of the following
Discourse. I counted my self bound in Conscience ^f I spoke any thing, to Level
it to the Occasion; and to that end, reckoned nothing more proper, than to
represent, as in a Glass, the fair face of a Well-ordered Government, with some
of the advantages accruing therefrom, together with ^he inconveniences
naturally consequent on the contrary; that all Ranks of Men in a Civil Capacity
may be helped thereby in what they ought to pursue, and what to avoid. It is a
Rule in Mathematics, Rectum est index sui et obliqui. Here may we see our Du^y
and our Danger; the Psalmist says, Psalm. 119. 105. Thy Word is a Lamp to my
Feet, and a Light to my Path. If any, whether he be in Place of Rule, or under
Subjection, will try himself by this, and amend himself by the direction of it,
I have all I aim at: if he shall improve it to Reflect upon others, the blame
will be his own. I am sensible how unfit I was to Undertake in a thing so much
too big for me: all that I can say, is, that I studied to bring all as near as
I could to the Unerring Scripture; and to husband a short time as profitably as
I might. If what is thus emitted may be for Gods Glory, and the Benefit of his
People in this Province, let him have the whole Praise: To his Blessing I
Commend it,

Who am the least and most unworthy of Gospel Ministers. Samuel Willard.

THE CHARACTER OF A GOOD RULER.
II. SAMUEL XXIII. III. He that Rules over men, must be just, Ruling in the
Fear of God.
WHether the Ordination of Civil Government be an Article of the Law of Nature,
and it should accordingly have been established upon the Multiplication of
Mankind, although they had retained their Primitive Integrity: Or whether i^
have only a Positive right, and was introduced upon man's Apostasy; is a
question about which all are not agreed. The equity of it, to be sure, is
founded in the Law natural, and is to be discovered by the light of Nature,
being accordingly acknowledged by such as are strangers to Scripture
Revelation; and by Christians it is reducible to the first Command in the
Second Table of the Decalogue; which is supposed to be a transcript of the Law
given to Adam at the first, and written upon the Tables of his Heart. For tho*
had man kept his first state, the Moral Image Concreated in him, consisting in,
Knowledge, Righteousness, and True Holiness, would have maintained him in a
perfect understanding of, and Spontaneous Obedience to the whole duty incumbent
on him, without the need of civil Laws to direct him, or a civil Sword to lay
compulsion on him; and it would have been the true Golden Age, which the
Heathen Myth^logists are so Fabulous about. yet even then did the All-Wise God
Ordain Orders of Supe^iority and Inferiority among men, and required an Honor
to be paid accordingly. But since the unhappy fall has Robbed man of that
perfection, and filled his heart with perverse and rebellious principles,
tending to the Subversion of all Order and the reducing of the World to a
Chaos; necessity requires, and the Political happiness of a People is concerned
in the establishment of Civil Government. The want of it has ever been
pernicious, and at^ended on with miserable Circumstances. When there was no
Governor in Israel, but every man did what he would, what horrible outrages,
were then perpetrated, though Holy and Zealous Phinehas was at that time the
High Priest? and we ourselves have had a Specimen of this in the short Anarchy
accompanying our late Revolution. Gods Wisdom therefore, and his goodness is to
be adored in that he has hid in such a relief for the Children of men, against
the mischief which would otherwise devour them; and engraven an inclination on
their hearts, generally to comply with it. But this notwithstanding, men's sins
may put a curse into their Blessings, and render their remedy to be not better,
possibly worse than the Malady. Government is to prevent and cure the disorders
that are ap^ to break forth among the Societies of men; and to promote the
civil peace and prospe^i^y of such a people, as well as to suppress impiety,
and nourish Religion. For this end there are to be both Rulers, and such as are
to be Ruled by them: and the Weal or Woe of a People mainly depends on the
qualifications of those Rulers, by whom we are to be Governed. Hence that
Observation, Eccles. 10. 16, 17. Woe to thee, O Land? when thy King is a Child,
and thy Princes eat in the morning. Blessed art thou, O Land! when thy King is
the Son of Nobles, and thy Princes eat in due season for strength, and not for
Drunkenness. There is then much of Gods Kin^ness or Displeasure to be Read in
his Providential disposing of this Affai^. God says of them, Hos^ 13. 11. I
gave them a King in mine Anger.

We have therefore the Character of a Good RULER Recommended to us in the Word
of GOD, and Exemplified in some who deserved that Epithete, not only to let men
know when GOD favors them with such a Blessing, that they may return Him His
deserved Praise for it; but also, both to Instruct such into whose hands it
falls, how to Demean themselves in their Authority, so as to be a Common Good;
and to direct those unto whose trust it is Committed, what manner of Persons
they ought to introduce, it they would either Please GOD, or Consult their own
and their Peoples Welfare.

Such a Character we find is given in our Text; and we may suppose David
intended for an Instance of it.

The words are Introduced with greatest solemnity, to give them the deeper
impression on the hearts of those that read them, and are concerned in them.
They are the words of David, whom God had exalted to the Government over His
People Israel, and instructed in his Duty: who was Gods own Anointed by an
Extraordinary calling And they are his Last words, Probably not that he ever
spoke, but some of his dying words, and the l^st that he uttered by a Peculiar
Prophetical Inspiration, and they were not his own words, but such as the
Spirit of God dictated to him, and spoke by him, whereof he was only the
Instrument of their being committed to record. They therefore came out of the
Mouth of the God and Rock of Israel: and surely there must be unspeakable
Importance in words Ushered in with so Majestical a Preface. I might here tell
you the diverse readings, occasioned by the curt expression of the Hebrew Text,
but I shall not spend time in it, since the general current of Interpreters
runs the same way with our Translation. And I need but Briefly acquaint you
that the import or sense of the words is variously understood: some apply them
to God himself, and accordingly read the words as a continued description of
him: he that Rules just men; that rules men to fear God. Others apply them to
Christ, as t^pified by David; and take them to be a Prophesy of his Mediatorial
Kingdom: and then they ^ead it, shall be ^ust, ruling the fear of God: i. e.
Divine Instituted worship: pointing to the abrogating of the legal, and
bringing in of the Gospel administrations: but then the Type also must be
respected, at le^st under a shadow: and so they suppose that David's Typical
Government is represented. Others take them according to the sense of our
Transla^ion, not to be a predi^^ion but a precept, giving us to understand what
manner of persons such are required to be, by the Divine Mandate, and that it
was left as a Rule to them who should succeed.

In the words there are two things to be observed.

1 The Subje^t spoken of; He that Rules over men. He that ruleth] The word
Imports one that has any Dominion, right, or authority over either Persons or
things; and is here applicable to all those degrees of men that have any ma^k
of Authority upon them; whether the King as Supreme, or any Ministers under
him, under what Character or title soever:

Over men] the word [ Adam] is frequently used to express the Commonalty, or
People that are to be Governed: but how^^er, there i^ or ought to be a vast
difference between the Government of Men and Beasts; though some Brutish men
may deserve to b^ treated as Brutes. Man is a Reasonable Creature, and of the
same order of being with them that Gove^n him, and ought to be managed
accordingly.

2. The Duty incumbent on such an one: He must be Just, Ruling in the Fear of
God. Some suppose that the double Office of the Civil Magistrate is here
pointed at, who is Custos utriusque Tab^^ae, who is to maintain Justice toward
men, and Piety toward God. Others suppose the latter Expression to be
Exegetical to the former.

[ Just] i. e One that makes Conscience to observe and keep to the Rule of
Right^* ousness in all his Administrations, he ought not to Exert his Power
Illimitedly, and Arbitrarily, but in Conformi^y to the Law of God, and the
Light of Nature, for Gods Honor, and the prom^^ing of the common benefit of
those over whom he bears Authority. And hence,

[ R^ling in the Fear of God.] And if he does not so, he cannot be Just: and by
the Fear of God we may either understand an holy Reverential Fear, entertained
in his heart, which must Govern him, or else he will never Rule well. For
though every good man will not make a good Ruler, yet it is s^arce to be
believed that a man will Acquit this Office well without Piety. Or else it may
be taken Metonimically, for the Rules of Gods Word, and those particular
Precepts which direct men how to carry themselves in every Station: which are
therefore called the Fear of God, because they serve rightly to Regulate our
Fear of him Where it is said [ he must] it does not suppose that all who have
such Authority with them, do so Rule: woeful experience too frequently proves
the contrary: but that it is their Duty, and a matter of great Importance for
them to attend it. Hence.

DOCTRINE
It is of highest Consequence, that Civil Rulers should be Just Men, and such
as Rule in the Fear of God.

Where shall we find any one Text in Scripture U^hered in more remarkably than
this? I may not ^arry here to draw out this Character in its full dimensions,
and give it all its Colors; but must only make some brief Glances.

Civil Rulers are all such as are in the exercise of a rightful Authority over
others. These do not all of them stand in one equal Rank, nor are alike
influential into Government. There are Supreme and Subordinate Powers: and of
these also there are some who have a Legislative, others an Executive Power in
their Hands; which two, though they may sometimes meet in the same persons, yet
are in themselves things of a different Nature. There are Superior Magistrates
in Provinces, and such as are of Council with them, and Assembly men, the
Representatives of the People. There are Judges in Courts, Superious and
Inferior; Justices of the Peace in their several Precincts: and in each of
these Orders there Resides a measure of Authority.

Now, that all these may be Just, it is firstly req^ired, that they have a
Principle of Moral Honesty in them, and Swaying of them: that they Love
Righteousness, and Hate Iniquity: that they be Men of Truth, Exodus 18. 21. for
every man will act in hi^ Relation, according to the P^inciple that Ruler in
him: so that an Unrighteous man will be an Unrighteous Ruler, so far as he has
an Opportunity.

They must also be acquainted with the Rules of Righteousness; they must know
what is Just, and what is Unjust, be Abl^ m^n, Exodus 18. 21. For, though men
may know and not do, yet without Knowledge the Mind cannot be good. Ignorance
is a Foundation ^or Error, and will likely produce it, when the man applies
himself to act: and if he do right at any time, it is but by guess, which is a
very poor Commendation.

Again, he must be one that respects the Cause, and not the persons in all ^is
Administrations, Deuteronomy. 1. 17. Ye shall no^ respect Persons in Judgment, etc. i^
his Affections Oversway his Judgment at any time, they will be a crooked Liass,
that will turn him ou^ of the way, and that shall be Justice in one man's case,
which will not be so in another.

Farthermore, he must be one whom neither Flattery nor B^i^ery may be able to
remove out of his way, Deuteronomy. 16. 19* Thou shall not wrest Judgment, thou shall
not Respect Persons, neither take a Gift; and hence he must be one who hates
both Ambition and Covetousness, Exodus 18. 21 Hating Covetousness; which word
signi^ies, a Greedy Desire, and is applicable to both the fore cited Vices: for
if these Rule him, he will never be a just Ruler.

Finally, he must be one who prefers the public Benefit above all private and
separate Interests whatsoever. Every man in his place, owes himself to the good
of the whole; and if he does not so devote himself, he is unjust: and he who
either to advance himself, or to be Revenged on another, will push on Injurious
Laws, or pervert the true Intention of such as are in Force, is an unjust man:
and he who is under the influence of a Narrow Spirit, will be ready to do so,
as occasion offers.

Nor is this Justice to be looked upon as separate from the Fear of God, but as
influenced and maintained by it. He therefore that Rules in the Fear of God,
is one who Acknowledges God to be his Sovereign, and carries in his heart an
Awful Fear of him: who owns his Commission to be from him, and expects ere long
to be called to give in an Account of his managing of it: which makes him to
study in all things to please him, and to be afraid of doing any thing that
will provoke him.

And accordingly, he is a Student in the Law of God, and Meditates in i^ Day
and Night; making it the Rule into which he ultimately resolves all that he
does in his place. We find that in the Old Law, the King was to write a Copy of
it with his own hand, and to make use of it at all times: Deuteronomy. 17. 18, 19.

If he has any thing to do in the making of Laws, he will consult a good
Conscience, and what may be pleasing of God, and will be far from framing
mischief by a Law. And if he be to execu^e any Laws of men, he will not dare to
give a judgment for such an one as directly Crosses the Command of God, but
counts it ipso facto void, and his Conscience acquitted of his Oath.

Yea the Fear of God will make him not ^o think himself Lawless; nor dare to
bear witness, by Laws and Penalties, against sins in others, which he
countenanceth and encourages by living in the Practice of himself: But to use
utmost endeavors that his own life may be an exemplification of Obedience, and
others may lea^n by Him, what a Veneration he has for the Laws that are
enacted for the good of Mankind.

In a word, he is one that will take care to promote Piety as well as Honesty
among* men; and do his utmost that the true Religion may be countenanced and
established* and that all Ungodliness, as well as Unrighteousness, may have a
due Testimony born against it at all times. So he resolves Psalm. 75. 10. all
the horns of the wicked also will I cut off; but the horns of the righteous
shall be exalted.

It then follows that we enquire of what great moment or consequence it is that
these should be such: and there is a threefold respect in which the high
importance of it is ^o be discovered by us.

I. In respect to the Glory of God.

Civil Rulers are Gods Vi^egerents here upon earth; hence they are som^imes
honored with the ti^le of Gods, Psalm. 82 6. I have said ye are Gods.
Government is Gods Ordinance; and those that are Vested with it, however
mediately* introduced into it, have their right^ul autho^ity from him, Prove. 8.
15, 16. By me Kings Reign, and Princes Decree Justice* By me Princes Rule, and
Nobles, even all the Judges of the Earth, and they that are from him, should be
for him, and ought to seek the Honor of him who is King of Kings, and Lord of
Lords: which they only then do, when they manage their whole Interest and Power
with a Design for his Glory; and accordingly manage themselves in all their
Ministrations by the Statutes of his Kingdom; which none will ever do, but they
that are Just, Ruling in the Fear of God. Righteousness and Religion
flourishing in these, will be as a Torch on an Hill, whose Light and Influence
will be vastly extensive: every one will be advantaged to see their good works,
and to Glorify God for and in them. Their very Example will have the force of
a Law in it, and win many by a powerful Attraction, to the avoiding of sin, and
practicing of Righteousness. They will be a good Copy, that many will be
ambitious to write after: and their faithful Administrations will render them a
Terror ^o Evil Doers, and an Encouragement to them that do well; which will
advance the very and of Government. Whereas the Evil Deportment, and Ill
Management of Rulers, who are unjust, and void of the Fear of God, is an open
scandal, and of a more pernicious tendency than the wickedness of others;
inasmuch as their Example is a discouragement to them that are well disposed,
and animates those that are set in their hea^ts for iniquity, and they are
thereby emboldned to show their heads* and to declare their sin as Sodom: hence
that Remark of the Psalmist, Psalm. 12. 8. ^he wicked walk on every side, when
the vi^est men are exalted. Those that would ^ear their Testimony against
Impiety and Debauchery, are frown^d on and neg^ected; and such as would Nourish
them are Countenanced: and either good Laws to suppress them are not provided,
or they are laid by as things Obsolete, and of no Service: and thus all
Abominations come in upon a People as a Flood, and the Name of God is woefully
dishonored by this means: and hereupon the last and most excellent end of
Government comes to be frustrated, and what is there that we can conceive to be
of greater weight than this? if this be lost, the Glory of such a people is
gone.

2 In regard to the weal of the People over whom they Rule.

A People are not made for Rulers, But Rulers for a People. It is indeed an
Honor which God puts upon some above others* when he takes them from among the
People, and sets them up to Rule over them, but it is for the Peoples sake, and
the Civil felicity of them is the next end of Civil Policy; and the happiness
of Rulers is bound up with theirs in it. Nor can any wise men in authority
think themselves happy in the Misery of their Subjects, to whom they either are
or should be as Children are to to their Fathers: We have the Benefit of
Government expressed, 1. Tim. 2: 2. a quiet Life and a peacable, in all
Godliness and honesty. and it lies espe^ialy with Rulers, under God, to make a
People Happy or Miserable. When men can enjoy their Liberties and Rights
without molestation or oppression; when they can live without fear of being
born down by their more Potent Neighbors; when they are secured against
Violence, and may be Righted against them that offer them any injury, without
fraud; and are encouraged to serve God in their own way, with freedom, and
without being imposed upon contrary to the Gospel precepts; now are they an
happy People. But this is to be expected from none other but men just and
Pious: they that are otherwise, will themselves be oppressor* and they that
are influenced by them, and dependent on them, will add to the g^i^* vance.
They that should look after them Will Do it fast enough: Yea every one will
^surp a License to do so to his Neighbor upon an advantage: and such a people
must needs groan under an intolerable burden. Besides, it is a great Truth,
that the Mercies and Judgments of God come upon a people, according as their
Rulers carry themselves in managing of the Trust which God has committed to
them. Just and Zealous Rulers, are men that Stand in the Gap, and keep off
Judgments from a sinning people; God sought for one such, Ezekiel. 22. 30. they
turn away wrath, when it has made an inroad, so it is recorded of Phinehas
that he did, Ps 106. 30. and God is wont to bless such a People, as He did
Israel and Judah in the days of David, Solomon, Jehoshaphat, Hezekiah, and
Josiah: whereas when these fall into such sins as God is Provoked at, the People
are like to Smart for it. There is such an Influence with the Prevarications of
these men, that, in the righteous judgment of God, those under them suffer
grievously by it. This the Heathen observed in the course of Providence, and
made that remark upon it, Delirant reges, plectuntur Achivi. Thus David numbers
the People, and Seventy Thousand of the men of Israel die for it, 2 Sa* 24. Yea
such may be the influence of the Maladministration of Rulers, though done
without malice, and in an heat of misguided zeal for the People of GOD; as
Saul's act in Slaying the Gibeonites is recorded to have been* 2 Samuel 21 2. that
the Guilt may ^y long upon a Land, and break out in Terrible Judgments a great
while after, and not be expiated till the sin be openly confessed, and the
Atonement sought unto.

3 With Reference to Rulers themselves. It is, as we before Observed, a Dignity
put upon them, to be preferred to Government over their Brethren; to have the
oversight, not of Beasts, but of Men. But as there is a great Trust devolved on
them, so there is an answerable Reckoning which they must be called unto: And
however they are settled in Authority by men, yet GOD, who Rules over all, has
put them in only Durante Been I ^^cito: they are upon their good Behavior;
they are Stewards, and whenever GOD pleases, He will call for a Reckoning,
and put them out. GOD s^ts up, and he pulls down; and he has a respect to men^
Carriages in his dealings with them. Godly and Zealous Phinehas got a Blessing
for himself and his Posterity, Numb. 25. 11. etc. Whereas Sa^l procured for
himself a Rejection, and the laying aside and almost Ex^i^patlon of his Family.
We have this also instanced in Shebna and Eli^^^^ Is^. 22. 15. etc. Yea, what
did Jeroboam, what did Ahab, and many others procure for themselves, by their
ill Government, but the utter rooting out of their Names* and Posterity? The
Fourth Generation may Rue that ever they derived from such Progenitors. The
only sure way for Rulers to build up their own Houses, is to be such in their
places as David was, of whom we have that Testimony, Psalm. 78. 71, 72. He
brought him to Feed Jacob his People, and Israel his Inheritance. So he Fed
them according to the Integrity of his heart, ^ad guided them by the
Skilfulness of his hands. And although GOD does not always peculiarly put a
Brand in this World upon Impious and Unjust Rulers, yet there is a Tribunal
before which they must stand e're long as other men; only their Account will be
so much the more Fearful, and Condemnation more Tremendous, by how much they
have neglected to take their greater advantages to Glorify GOD, and abused
their Power to His Dishonor, by which they had a fairer opportunity than other
men.

USE. All that I have to Offer by way of Improvement, shall be in a Threefold
Commendation of this TRVTH to us.
1. Let me propose it to such in whose hands it is to Appoint the Persons that
are to bear Rule over this People; whether for the making of Laws to Govern by,
or the putting o^ such as are made into Execution: Whether Counselors,
Assembly-Men, or J^stices of the Peace. Let this be your directory in ex^rting
of this right. Civil Government is sea^ed in no particular Persons or Families
by a Natural right, neither has the Light o^ Nature, no^ the Word of GOD
determined in particular, what Form of Government shall be Established among
men, whether Monarchical, Ari^t^c^^tical, or D^mocratical: much less, who are
individually* to be acknowledged in Authority, and accordingly submitted to.
Nevertheless the H^ly Providence of GOD presides in this matter; sometimes, by
a more. Immedi^te, and Extraordinary pointing to the Persons and Families: when
by Revelation he declares his pleasure in it. Thus was Saul set up over the
Kingdom of Israel; and afterward David was thus chosen of God, and an Entail
made o^ the Crown on his Posterity: but this way has long since ceased.
Someitmes it is more mediate and ordinary, and that is, either Forcible, when
God Judi^ially delivers a People ^p to the will of their enemies, and the
Conqueror gives Laws to, and appoints Rulers over such a People at his
pleasure, and they are compelled to accept o^ them, little to their content:
which, as is not Elegi^le, so neither is it wont to be of duration: things
violent us^ not to be Permanent. Or voluntary, which is by the free consent of
a People, orderly, and without Compul^^on establishing the Fundamentals of
Government among themselves, and the methods of introducing Persons into
autho^i^y: which Methods are not prescribed in Scripture, but remain points of
Prudence, and may Lawfully be diverse here and there. There are yet general
Rules which both reason and Religion do point men to attend in this Case; and
the weal or woe o^ a People do very much depend thereupon. And as it is a thing
very grateful to men to have some hand and consent in the appointment of their
own Rulers, so they do either make or mar themselves by the using or abusing of
such a liberty. When this power is Immediately devolved upon some persons, they
have great advantage to procure either the happiness or misery of their People.
Such Electors therefore are under the obligation to be very wary in the
application of themselves to the Nomination of the persons for such a trust. A
good Charter is Doubtless Preferible to a bad one; it is a great Privilege to
be secured from being hurt by any but our selves: but, let Charter Privileges
be never so Excellent, Good Rulers only can make us Happy under them: and if
they are not so, we suffer notwithstanding.

Here then you are told what qualities are to be eyed in those whom you fix
your Choice upon. Whatsoever other Rules discretion may point to be observed in
this affair, yet these must always be of the Quorum. It is true, there are none
without their failings; nor can we expect that the best of men will never do
amiss; but yet the Best are to be preferred, as they that will do i^ s^ldomest,
and never of design. They that Fear God will be afraid wilfully to hurt men;
they that are just will do justice, and that ca^ wrong none. This is it which
advantageth all other gifts, whether natural or acqui^ed, to be truly
serviceable to the promoting of the w^l^^re of a People: without this, the more
that men have of these, they a^^ so much the more advantaged to do (...) There
is no misery greater, or less (...) than what men foolishly bring on
themselves; and none will be equally blamed ^o^ ^^, a^ they who were the guilty
occasions of it, or more deserve it. Choose such men, and then you may expect to
be so Govern^d: if you desire that H^liness, and Righteousness may be promoted
and encouraged, this i^ the best stroke that you can give to i^: if you have a
mind that Profaneness, and Deba^ch^ry should take place, and bear all down,
here is the readiest way for it.

And if you will keep to the Rule pr^scribed in our T^xt, ^eware of being
misguided by Special Favor, Bri^ery or Faction

When Persons shall be crowded in, because they are our Friends, or have gaine^
a room in our affections, without any respec^ to their meetness, out what our
blind passions judge of; or that they may have a way to support themselves by
the Govern^ment; it is easy to tell what is to be expected.

When places of Trust in Governmen^ are bought and sold, and he shall have the^
that will give most for them, we may wel^ con^lude* that such a People are
bought and sold too, and must only serve to make a good Market of.

When a People are divided into Factions* Just, and Wise, and good Men are
renounced, and not thought worthy to be made use of, because they favor not
the Party that can sway; and such as are ho^ly zealous for the design, are
counted, merely by that zeal sufficiently qualified, and to be of all most
worthy; this will not p^omote the Public Good, but only gain to the one side a
little more of advantage to do hurt.

2* Let me humbly offer this as a Copy for all that either are, or may be in
place of Rule, to W^ite after, Allow me the ^iberty to say this from GOD; that
by what^oever Titles of, Excellent, Honorable, or Wor^hipful, you are known;
you not only Rule under such as are your Superiors on Earth* unto whom you are
accountable for what you do; but under GOD also, who is your Great SOVEREIGN.
Your Authority is from Him, and ought therefore to be for Him, else will you be
found false to your Trust. You Rule over His Subjects, and that not only upon a
common account, as the whole World is His Kingdom, but one more Special, as the
People under your Watch, are the Subjects of His GOSPEL KINGDOM: if you do that
which is Right to them, He will be Pleased. but if you should do otherwise,
their APPEAL is open to Him, and there is a COURT that will be called, wherein
their CAUSE shall be Heard, and Adjusted.

Be you entreated, to measure all your ^dministration by this R^l^: Do all
justly and in the fear of God. This is the way to be Blessings in your places,
and to be the Blessed of the Lord. By this course you will make your people an
happy people, and you your selves shall be Established. Thus shall you pull
down a blessing on your own heads, and upon the Land you dwell i^ This is the
way to be the Repairers of breaches, and the Restorers of paths to dwell in.

To this end, be entreated to take care that Religion may Flourish; the True
Fear o^ GOD, and Right Administration of His Ordinances may be Promoted and
Secured: that Righteousness may be done for men, and that Iniquity which
defiles a Land, and pull^ down Wrath, may be Purged away: that Drunkenness, and
Swearing, Fornication, and Sabbath-Prophanation, and whatsoever hastens the
Calamity of a Professing People, may be du^ly bo^n Witness against. Let this be
your Sincere Unb^assed Aim in all that you do.

Carry this with you, and let it Rule in the making of Laws: let the Word of
GOD be consulted, and the Common Utility of the Subject be designed: For,
though there be not a Body of Civil Laws drawn up in the Scriptures, to which
every Pol^ity is to be confined, yet there are sufficient general directions,
and Rules, to be gathered from thence; which may Regulate in this Affair.

Take heed of any Sinister Aims in whatsoever Laws do pass: Laws made do
strengthen a particular separate Interest, never did Good, but Hurt to a
Body-Politick: that which may serve the present turn, may in a little time
prove more Mischievous, than ever it was Advantageous. Remember, you cannot
Repeal such Laws, when you will, or when you have advanced a design with them.
Look then forward to the after Issues. It will be no small Aggravation of our
Trouble, to be Wounded with a Shaft of our own making. Look for Changes in a
World of Mutability, and lay in, as far as innocent Prudence may direct, for
your Own, and your Peoples Safety.

Keep to this also in all your Administration or Application of Laws. Maintain
a good Conscience in it, and let the Fear of God, and a Principle of Justice
make you (...) lay aside all Sinister Respects. Let not Persons but Things Sway
you in all your Dispensations; and when the case is the same, let the same
sentence proceed from ^ou: let neither Riches nor Poverty turn the Scale;
neither Friendship nor Enmity Spoil the Sentence. Take no Gift in secret to
stop or Pervert Justice; nor misapply your power to take private or personal
Revenge. When Cases are plain, do not obscure them; and when they are dubious
Search them out: and let not flattery or Impudence prevail over you, but take
his advice in 2. Chron 16. 9. Thus shall you do in the fear of the Lord,
faithfully, and with a perfect heart, Deal courageously, and the Lord shall be
with the good.

Remember the cause is Gods, and he will have the calling of it over again;
where he will either applaud your fidelity, or condemn your unfaithfulness.

Do so also in your Exemplary conversation. Do not do that your selves, which
you ought in Duty, and oath, to punish in others; Embolden not wicked men to
transgress by your example, and to excuse themselves upon your account. That
Man who Will Violate the Laws which He is to Rule by, will soon neglect to
Exec^^^ them on others, and bring reproach on himself where he does.

3 Let it afford matter of Instruction ^^ us all.

Are these the Eminent Qualifications of good Rulers? it is no small concern
that we have in this affair. It tells us that we ought Earnestly to Pray to God
that we may have such always: and we pray for our selves when we so do.

Whatsoever other influence we may have into the appointment of those that are
to Govern us, there is none that can hinder us of this but our selves. God
Overrules the Let, he Determines the Hearts of men, and he can make men after
his own Heart: he Presides over every Election; and if we can prevail with him
by importunate Prayer, our business is done. It is one of the Blessings that he
will be sought unto for, by the House of Israel.

It calls us to be thankful to him for such when he bestows them upon us. God
^ot a little displays his kindness to a people, when it is thus; and expects
their gratitude to him for so Comprehensive a Mercy: there is nothing will
sooner lose (...) benefit than Ingratitude.

Let us Encourage them that are such, and that by (...) Cheerful acknowledgment
of them, Contentation under them, and candid Interpretation of them.

We are Governed by men of like infirmitis with ourselves, wonder not if
sometimes they discover something of them: but when we know that their cordial
endeavors are to do that which is right, and promote o^r peacable and Godly
Living, let thi^ please us.

And beware of Murmurings; GOD will not take it well of us, and can easily let
us know a difference: and it is an Observation that seldom misseth; That they
who are most addicted to, are soonest weary of Changes.

In a Word, let us beware lest we provoke an Holy and Jealous God to anger so
as to give us men of another Spirit to Rule over us, or to withdraw His Spirit
from them that do, and leave them to do things inconvenient.

Evil Rulers, and the Male-Administrations of good ones, are punishments which
GOD does inflict on a people that have provoked him to Anger against them, GOD
gave Saul to Israel in his Wrath; and he left David to Number the people
because His Anger was kindled against Israel.

If we Apostatise from GOD, and grow weary of his ways, he knows how to Scourge
us after this manner; and has, not seldom, done so by his people on such
occasions.

But if we be a people Fearing GOD and Keeping of His Commandments, He will
Delight in us to Bless us, and to do us Good: and to give us Rulers after his
own Prescription, Just Men, and Ruling ^n the Fear of God.

FINIS.

