A SERMON Preached at the ASSIZES Held in WARWICK, April the 1st. 1690.

By JOHN WILLS, D. D.

Published at the Request of the High Sheriff and Grand Jury, for the County of
Warwick.

LONDON, Printed for R. Sare at Grays-Inn-Gate in Holbourn, and Published by
Randal Tailor. MDCXC.

Imprimatur,

C. Alston.
April 23. 1690.
To the Right Worshipful THOMAS WAGST AFFE, Esquire; High Sheriff of the County of
Warwick; AND TO Sir John Mordaunt Bar. Sir William Boughton Bar. Sir William
Underhill Knight. Sir John Clopton Knight. Sir William Bishop Knight. William Peytoe Esquire;
William Palmer Esquire; Thomas Keyte Esquire; Henry Parker Esquire; Edward Boughton Esquire;
John Comb Esquire; Edward Farmer Esquire; Robert Boyse Esquire; George Fullwood Gent.
Thomas Ayleworth Gent. John Andrews Gent. and William Savage Gent.
Being the Grand Jury at the last Assizes.
Gentlemen,
THOUGH I was ever averse to the Printing of my Sermons, and in the very
composure of them designed them only for the Pulpit, not the Press; to be
heard, not read, and have therefore withstood all Importunities of this nature;
yet since you are now resolved not to be denied, and have agreed in your
Verdict against me, I must submit, you must be obeyed. And indeed your steady
Loyalty in the most difficult Times, your indefatigable Zeal for the Church of
England, your affectionate Union and Agreement amongst your selves; and lastly,
your particular Respects and Friendship toward my self, make it impossible you
should be denied. A Church you reverence which does not affect Novelties and
Change, whose Doctrine is peaceable and uniform, and whose very Rites and
Ceremonies are solemn and ancient. A Church, which sealed with the Blood of
Martyrs, has outlived all the Plots of Hell and Rome, and is still the envy
of her Enemies. A Church which has dashed the hopes and designs of all that
hate her, and plainly showed that no Weapon formed against her shall ever
prosper. And may you long live to maintain and vindicate the Honor of our
Church, to preserve our County in Peace and Union, and suppress Vice and
Faction. And if the Publication of this Sermon may conduce any thing to the
removing of the Evils we either feel or fear; if it may help to make the Age
better, or the Nation happier; if it may make but any one Person either a
better Christian, a better Subject, or a better Neighbor, I shall never repent
of the Commands that you have laid upon,

Gentlemen, Your most Affectionate and Obedient Servant, John Wills.

A SERMON Preached at the ASSIZES Held in WARWICK.
Amos 3. 6. -- Shall there be evil in a City, and the Lord has not done it?
THESE Words are part of the Prophecy of Amos, whom God called from among the
Herdsmen of Tekoah, to be a special Messenger to his People Israel. For though
God usually pitched upon Scholars to be his Prophets, and gave extraordinary
Endowments to such Persons only as had made the best Improvement of their
Natural ones, chose Moses for his Prophet, and St. Paul for his great Apostle,
Men famous in their Generations for their profound Learning; and for a
Succession of Prophets, appointed Schools and Seminaries among the Jews, where
the Sons of the Prophets were bred up, and with Piety and Learning fitted for
the reception of the Divine Schechinah: Yet as Princes upon great and pressing
occasions, send extraordinary Ambassadors with special Credentials; so it
pleased God also upon extraordinary occasions, and especially at such times as
his ordinary Messengers were unfaithful, when his Priests taught for Hire, and
his Prophets prophesied Lies, to inspire a Balaam, or a Saul; send down the
Holy Ghost, as once he did at Pentecost, upon illiterate Fishermen, or as it is
in the instance before us, call Amos from among the Herdsmen of Tekoah, to
instruct Jacob his People, and Israel his Inheritance; to teach the Sanhedrim
Wisdom, and correct the Priests and Prophets at Jerusalem. For so it pleases
God sometimes, to choose the foolish things of the World to confound the wise,
and weak things of the World to confound the mighty, and base things, and
things that are not, to bring to naught the things that are, that no Flesh
should glory in his Presence, 1 Cor. 1. 27, 28, 29.

If Amos therefore was such an extraordinary Prophet, called by God for this
particular Message, and inspired beyond the usual Methods of his Gifts and
Graces, this may justly raise our Expectations, and make us very inquisitive
into the business he was sent about, and the Prophecy he delivered.

Now the principal Scope and Design of his whole Prophecy was this: Though the
Jews had by their Sins provoked God to send many heavy Jugments upon them, yet
were they still so stupid and senseless, as neither to be prevailed upon by
them to amend their Lives, nor so much as once consider whence those Judgments
came. If God sent Fire upon their Cities, they imputed it to a Secret Enemy, or
some ill Accident. If God sent Plague or Pestilence among them, that also was
ascribed only to some unhappy Contagion, or an infectious Air. If God sent
Scarcity or Famine, they looked no further, but that it was for want of Rain.
And after this manner all God's Judgments lost their Designs, were far above,
out of their sight; God was not in all their Thoughts.

Now when God saw all the Instructions of his Judgments neglected, and the
gracious methods of his Providence designed for their Amendment, frustrated; he
sent his Prophets to them, to work in them a true sense of their condition; but
these also were slighted and despised. So God here tells 'em, chap. 2. verse.
11, 12. I raised up of your Sons for Prophets, and of your young Men for
Nazarites; but ye have made the Nazarites drink Wine, and commanded the
Prophets, saying, Prophecy not. And again, chap. 7. v. 12, 13. O thou Seer, go
flee away into the Land of Judah, and prophecy there, but prophecy not any
more at Bethel, for its the Kings Chapel, and the Kings Count.

When God saw the Disease grown desperate, and the Patient not enduring so much
as the fight of a Physician, his Judgments neglected and his Prophets abused,
God himself awoke like a Giant refreshed with Wine; and to make his Power
known, inspired one of the Herdsmen of Tekoah, with such knowledge as was
wonderful for him; and sent him to assure them all, that their Sufferings were
from Heaven, that they were God's Visitation for their Sins, and that nothing
but speedy Repentance could prevent their Ruin. This we find delivered here in
the 4th Chapter, where God thus speaks to them; I have given you cleanness of
teeth in all your Cities, and want of bread in all your Palaces; I have
withheld the Rain from you, and caused it to rain upon one City and not
another; I have smitten you with blasting and mildew, and sent among you the
Pestilence; I have slain your young Men with the Sword, and have taken away
your Horses; I have overthrown some of you as Sodom and Gomorrah, and you were
as a Firebrand plucked out of the burning. And again in my Text the Prophet by
way of question most emphatically assures them, That there is no evil in a
City, and the Lord has not done it. As if he had said, There is no such thing
as Chance or Fate in all your Sufferings; Afflictions do not come forth out of
the Dust, nor do troubles spring out of the Ground; but they are all the effect
of God's overruling Providence, without whose Knowledge and Appointment not
one Hair falls from your Head.

And though this be the plain and genuine Sense of these Words, yet because there
is a Race of Men in the World that can pervert every thing to a bad meaning,
quote God's Word as the Devil did to our Savior, quite contrary to the Design
and Intent of it; and in this very place, from the doubtful signification of
the Hebrew word (...) evil, have made God the Author of their sins. I shall
first clear these Words from this blasphemous abuse of them, and then consider
them in their proper Sense and Design, as I have already explained them.

No sooner had the first Man sinned, but he found out this excuse for himself,
to lay the fault upon God, Genesis 3. 12. The Woman that thou gave me, she gave
me of the Tree and I did eat: And some of his unhappy Offspring have gone yet
further, and thought God altogether such an one as themselves, Psalm 50. 21.
And whoever has worked himself up to this pitch of wickedness, will never be
persuaded that God will punish any one for being like him; but, with some of
the Sea Lucian in (...), Terence in Eunucho August. de Civ. Dei, 1. 2. c. 7.
etc.
Heathens, will be apt to justify his own Villainies, by pretending to follow
so great an Example.

To prevent this dangerous and Fundamental Error, God has taken care
throughout all the Scriptures, to work in us true and proper Notions of
himself, his Justice, Holiness and Mercy, and make us such a discovery of his
own Perfections, as might work us up to the highest degree of Holiness and
Virtue. His Laws, which are his revealed Will, are all holy, just and good,
Romans 7. 12. and have this one principal Design in them to make us so too. All
the Sanctions of his Laws are so many severe Punishments of Sin, and Rewards of
Virtue; and from one end of the Bible to the other, nothing but Godliness has
the promise of this life, and that which is to come, 1 Timothy 4. 8. So that to
make God the Author of Sin, is to make him act contrary to himself and his own
Nature, contrary to his Justice, Holiness and Mercy, which are all essential to
him; contrary to his Laws and revealed Will; and in one word, contrary to the
Scope and Tenor of all Religion in the World, whether natural or revealed.

Let not any one persuade you therefore that God is the Author of Evil in this
Sense, and by his unalterable Decrees compels Mankind to that which himself
hates and detests. Far be these things from God, let him be true and just and
good, and every Man a Liar. I am sure St. Paul tells the Romans (8. 29.) That
whom God foreknew, those he did predestinate, and so makes all God's Decrees to
Punishments or Rewards to be founded upon his Prescience of our doing good or
evil. And then as to God's foreknowledge, that does not at all destroy our
Freedom; God foreknew the sins of the Jews, when by his Prophet he foretold
them, and yet still lays the Fault upon them that they had sinned. Christ knew
from the beginning that Judas would betray him, John 13. 27. and yet Judas
acted out of his own free choice, and in the bitter Agony of his Soul cried
out, That he had sinned in betraying of innocent Blood, Matthew. 27. 4. And
indeed to what purpose are all God's Threats and Exhortations, if we are all
overruled by the fatal Impulse of an irreversible Decree? To what purpose is
God's Solemn Adjuration, Deuteronomy. 30. 19. I call Heaven and Earth to record this
day against you, that I have set before you Life and Death, Blessing and
Cursing, therefore choose Life, that both thou and thy Seed may live? Why does
God tell Israel, That his Destruction is from himself? Hos. 13. 9. and still
lay the Fault upon the wicked that he is so? O Jerusalem, Jerusalem, says
Christ, how often would I have gathered you as a Hen gathers her Chickens under
her Wings, and you would not. And again, Why will you die, O House of Israel?
Ezekiel. 18. 31. Why are the wicked punished for those things they cannot help?
Why were the Jews cut off for their Unbelief? Or why does the Apostle bid the
Christians take care by their Example? Romans 11. And therefore Solomon amidst
all his Knowledge concludes of this as the most certain thing in the whole
World, viz. That God made Man upright, but they have sought out many
Inventions, Eccles. 7. 29.

Give me leave to add this only, that this cannot possibly be the meaning of
the Prophet Amos in my Text, unless he contradicts himself, and the whole
design of his Prophecy. He is here sent to reprove the Israelites for their
sins, to assure them that all the Miseries they suffered were God's Visitation,
and that nothing but Repentance could remove them. Now for the Prophet in
delivering this Message, to tell them, that not they themselves, but God by his
irreversible Decrees was the proper Author of their sins, would be so far from
working in them sincere Repentance, that it would be the most probable Argument
to hinder it, to make them continue in their Sins and in their Sufferings, and
so he would most effectually contradict the whole Design of his Prophecy.

And having thus far cleared the Words, I proceed to consider them in their
genuine and natural Sense, as I have already explained them, viz. That there is
no Evil, no Calamity or Misery in a City or Country, which God is not the
Author of; and therefore in all the Judgments that befall us, we should learn
to see God's Hand, and humble our selves under his Visitation.

And for a more distinct and methodical consideration of the Judgments and
Calamities that befall a Kingdom for their sins, I shall show,

I. That when God first made the World, he so ordered the connection and
dependence of Causes and Effects in the whole course of it, as that very many
sins naturally produce mischief and sorrow to the Authors of them.

II. That when this does not happen, and sins are great and daring, God
sometimes breaks through all the course of Nature, and disturbs the Order of
the World, to make his Power and his Justice known, to vindicate the Honor of
his Providence, and cast Vengeance upon the Sinner.

III. That even the effects of second Causes, and which are produced by an heap
of Circumstances, which seem only casual and accidental, are directed by God to
other special Ends and Designs of his Providence, and made the Executioners of
his Wrath against Sinners.

I begin with the first of these, viz. That when God made the World, he so
ordered the connection and dependence of Causes and Effects in the whole course
of it, as that very many sins naturally produce mischief and sorrow to the
Authors of them. And here I would not be understood of the secret Lashes of a
wounded Conscience, which usually pursue Sin at the Heels, and where God by his
Vicegerent in us, becomes Witness, Judge and Executioner; for these things
being transacted betwixt God and the Sinner, are all in secret from the eye of
the World, and cannot be properly designed by the Prophet Amos in my Text; but
in open and visible Judgments this is true also. Luxury and Drunkenness
naturally tend to impair our Health and our Estates, and either hurry us
untimely to our Graves, or else continue us here in Beggary and Want, unpitied
and unrelieved. Sloth and idleness cloth a man with rags, Prove. 23. 21. and
if you see the Field of the sloathful, behold its grown over with thorns, and
nettles cover the face of it, Prove. 24. 30, 31. And all this, though the usual
consequence of the very order of Nature, is properly ascribed to God the Author
of it, who, as David observes, Psalm 107. 34. makes a fruitful Land barren for
the wickedness (for the idleness) of them that dwell therein. Of Lusts and
Debaucheries St. Paul observed in his time, that they were sins against the
Body, 1 Cor. 6. 18. I am sure they are much more so now; and though never any Man
hated his own Flesh, yet too many in this Age so far poison and destroy it,
till at last they become loathsome to themselves, and all about them, drop by
peace-meals into their Graves, and as far as possible, become living Monuments
and Examples, that the Wages of Sin is Death. A quarrelsom Temper is
continually in Broils and Dangers, and he that is cruel to others troubles his
own flesh, Prove. 11. 17. So that without a Prophetic Spirit, from the natural
course of things we may say with David, Psalm 55. 23. A blood-thirsty man shall
not live out half his days. An old Liar is sure to get this by it, that no body
will believe him; and an old Knave this, that no body will trust him* He that
sows Discord among others, must not expect to live at home in peace, and the
Slanderer usually gets himself a Blot. Envy is the rottenness of the Bones,
Prove. 14. 30. And of these and many other Sins the Wise Man pronounces, that
they who are guilty of them sin against their own Souls. For in all these Cases
the Punishment is the natural effect and consequence of the sin, he sows
iniquity, and reaps vanity, Prove. 22. 8. And what is more natural than for the
Harvest to follow Seeding? He conceives mischief, and brings forth vanity,
says Job, 15. 35. and Sin when its finished brings forth Death, James 1. 15.
And what is more natural than that the Birth should follow Conception? Yea, so
close is the connection betwixt Sin and Punishment, that in most Languages they
have, as in my Text, some one common Name to signify both of them; and even
those Names which signify them distinctly, are in Zech. 14. 9. 2 Cor. 5. 21.
Scripture observed to be very often put for one another.

And thus I have showed, how in many Cases God's Judgments are the natural
consequence of sin, how the very course of things makes the Sinner hated and
despised, as if God, when he made the World, had given Commission to all his
Creatures in their proper Sphere and Order, to be the Instruments of his Anger,
and the Executioners of his Wrath against Sinners.

II. When this does not happen, and sins are great and daring, God sometimes
breaks through all the course of Nature, and disturbs the order of the World,
to make his Power and his Justice known, to vindicate the Honor of his
Providence, and cast Vengeance upon the Sinner. Not that God has any delight
to hurry the World into Confusion, and destroy his own Creatures; but when the
Cry of our Sins, like the Voice of Abel's Blood, goes up to Heaven, and the
Souls from under the Altar cry loud for Vengeance, it is necessary for God to
make himself known by the Judgments that he executes, Psalm. 9. 16. and by the
outgoings of his Power, vindicate the Honor of his Justice. It was this that
moved God to open the Windows of Heaven, and bring in a Flood upon the Ungodly.
It was this that moved the Lord to rain down Fire and Brimstone out of Heaven.
They were the sins of Corah, Dathan and Abiram that provoked the Lord to make
the Earth open her Mouth, and swallow them quick into the Pit. When the
Assyrian Armies reproached the Power of the God of Israel, God sent his Angel
against them, and in one Night destroyed one hundred eighty five thousand of
them. When Belshazzar drinking with his Princes, his Wives and his Concubines,
in the Vessels of the Sanctuary, which his Father carried from Jerusalem, began
to magnify the Gods that himself worshipped, and triumphed over the sacred
Vessels of a conquered God; God wrote his Doom upon the Wall, struck that
haughty Monarch with trembling and confusion, and deprived him of his Throne,
and his Life too the very next Night. And when the Worshipers of Bell at Babylon
thought to get a Victory over the Almighty, and had outlawed Daniel and his
God; then the Lord broke in with Vengeance upon them, reversed the Decree,
which according to the Laws of the Medes and Persians, they thought
unalterable, and tore in pieces the Presidents and Princes with those very
Lions they had prepared for Daniel. Egypt for a long time lived securely, and
her Magicians flourished; but when they began to vie Miracles with Moses, and
set themselves up against God, then God arose in his Wrath, and to throw
contempt upon them, made the Flies, the Lice, and meanest of his Creatures,
baffle all their Magic and Enchantments, and forced them to confess before the
Face of Pharaoh, That it was the Finger of God, Exodus 8. 19. And when they
continued yet in their sins, and still refused Obedience to that God, whom just
before they acknowledged; God spoke to the Sea and it obeyed him, and
overwhelmed them all with so great, so signal, so unexpected an overthrow, that
God seems to Triumph in their Destruction; and as himself says, Got him honor
over Pharaoh, Exodus 14. 17, 18. But because in these Proceedings the Almighty
is forced to break through the Harmony and goodness, which himself saw in his
own Creation, disturb the very course of Nature, which was made good, and very
good, he never makes use of them, but upon great and pressing occasions, when
Sinners become daring and impudent, dafy God and his Providence, and, as it was
in the time of Elijah, there is as it were a Contention betwixt Him and Ball;
or in the Language of an Heathen Poet, Non Deus intersit nisi dignus Vindice
Nodus.

III. God oftentimes by his Wisdom so directs and manages the natural effects
of second Causes, and which are produced by an heap of Circumstances, that seem
only casual and accidental to other special ends, and designs of his
Providence, and makes them become the Executioners of his Wrath against
Sinners; and those Arrows of the Almighty, which to the unthinking World seem
shot at Rovers, like those of Jonathan's to David, have a more particular
design and signification in them. And here it must be observed, that those
things which seem casual to us, cannot be so to God the Author of them. Wives
and Children, Houses and Lands are a Gift and Heritage that comes of the Lord,
Psalm. 127. 2. And again, 1 Timothy 6. 17. Its God that gives us all things to
enjoy. Yea, not a Sparrow falls to the ground, not an hair from your head,
without your Fathers knowledge, says Christ; and the very lot that is cast
into the lap has its whole disposal from the Lord, says Solomon, Prove. 16.
33. If we look upon the History of Joseph, his being sold by his Brethren,
carried into Egypt as a Slave, and there imprisoned by Potiphar, we are apt to
pity his misfortune; but yet all these black Circumstances had a natural chain
and tendency in God's sight to procure his Honor and Promotion: They were
these that brought to pass his Prophetic Dream, and made the Sun, Moon and
Stars bow down before him. And Joseph expressly says to his Brethren, Genesis 45.
5. Be not angry with your selves that ye sold me hither, for God sent me before
you to preserve Life. And again, Genesis 50. 20. Ye thought evil against me, but
God meant it unto good, to bring to pass as it is at this day to save much
people alive. Tho the Patriarch Abraham was banished from Ur, for not
worshipping the Idols of the Chaldeans, as many ancient Judeth. 5. 6, 7, 8.
Joseph. Antiq. l. 1. c. 7* Hieronymi quaest. in Genesis Maimon. More Nev. p. 3. c.
29. and de Cultu Syd. lib. 1.
Authors tell us, yet because God made use of that Banishment of Abraham's to
other purposes and designs, the Scripture tells us, that God called Abraham
thence, Genesis 12. 1. Acts* 7. 3. The Jews Crucified our Savior, Judas betrayed
him, and Pilate condemned him, and yet it was God the Father delivered him up
for us all, Romans 8. 32. It was Christ offered himself, and showed Obedience by
the things that he suffered, Heb. 5. 8. it was he laid down his life, and no
man takes it from him, John 10. 18. And the Jews and Romans did no more than
God's Counsel had before determined, Acts 4. 28. Origin. Hom. 35. in Mat. Deus
non pepercit unico filio, sed pro nobis tradidit illum, in aliis locis, Judas
tradidit illum sed and Satanas tradidit eum, principes and seniores tradiderunt
cum, sed non omnes eodem proposito Deus propter misericordiam, etc.
He that slew Ahab drew a Bow at a venture, 1 Kings 22. 34. but God ordered the
Arrow to kill Ahab, as he had foretold by his Prophet. We read in the History
of the last Siege of Jerusalem, that some Women eat their own sucking Children;
and tho this might seem the casual effect of a long War, yet it was far
otherwise; and this was one of the Woes that Christ had before pronounced
against Jerusalem, Mat. 24. 19. and is agreeable to Levit. 26. 29, 31, 32. and
Deuteronomy. 28. 53. In the History of Job the Sabeans took away his Oxen, the
Chaldeans his Camels, a great Wind blew down one of his Sons Houses and killed
his Children, and yet all these were so peculiarly God's Visitation, that Job
cries out, The Lord gave, and the Lord has taken away, blessed be the Name of
the Lord, Job 1. 21. And so generally does God overruled all that which the
World calls Chance or Fortune; that in the Law of Moses, when any one had
killed another unawares, it is said, That God delivered him into his hand, Exodus
21. 13. and therefore God ordered Sanctuaries for his Refuge. From all which
its evident, That God orders the common Accidents of the World to proper ends
and designs of his Providence; and many of those Evils which seem the effects
only of Chance, are really designed by God as a Punishment for our Sins. Now in
these Cases God's Hand more visibly appears to us.

I. When Judgments are National and Public, Is there any evil in a City, and
the Lord has not done it?

II. When Punishments carry with them a Stamp and Character of the Sin.

I. God's Hand more visibly appears to us in public and national Judgments.
When sins are personal only, and the Infection spreads no farther than their
first Author, the state of Religion is not endangered, and God may let the
Sinner prosper, and yet secure the Honor of his Providence; but when the
Leprosy is spreading, and the Contagion dangerous, when Iniquity is
established by a Law, and sins also become National, then the Lord makes his
Justice known, vindicates the Honor of his Providence, and makes his Judgments
National also. Its true, that there are some sins of so deep a Die, that they
singly infect a Kingdom; and God orders the Land to be cleansed of them, Number.
35. 33. Josh. 7. 11. And as for that Phrase so often used by God in Scripture,
Shall I not visit for these things? Its scarcely ever used but when sins are
national, (as Levit. 18. 25. Jer. 5. 9. etc.) If we look upon good and bad Men
in their private capacities, their temporal Interests are so intermixed, that
its hard to pull up the Tares, and not injure the Wheat also; but as they grow
up, so are usually cut down together; and whilst they live here, partake
mutually of each others happiness of Misery. We rarely find a Plague or Fire
pass by the good Man's Door, but he also is involved in the punishment of his
ill Neighbors Sap^ Di^spiter neglectus incesto addit integrum, Hor. Carm. 2.
30.
Lot was driven out of Sodom, from his House and Home, not for his own, but
their sins; and the same House that fell upon the Philistimes, killed Sampson
also. One guilty Jonas had well nigh drowned a Ship full of Passengers; and one
Religious Paul saved all the Passengers in another from being drowned, Acts 27.
24. And in this as to particular Persons, Solomon is to be understood, when he
tells us, That there is one event to the righteous and to the wicked, Eccles.
9. 2. But the case is far otherwise in Kingdoms and Societies; and though the
Neighborhood of the good may protect single persons that are evil, yet if a
whole Nation is bad, who shall intercede for them? Zoar seems to have been as
wicked as Sodom, yet the Lord was entreated for it by Lot, because it was a
little one; but Abraham himself could not prevail for Sodom. Now National
Judgments are so peculiarly the effects of God's Wrath and Anger that in
Scripture they are emphatically called His, Ezekiel. 14. 21. When I send my four
fore Judgments, the Sword, the Famine, the noysom Beast and the Pestilence. It
was God that gave the Sword a charge against Askalon and Egypt; it was God that
brought Evil upon Jerusalem, and gave his People into the Hands of their
Enemies. Its he that stops the Clouds from dropping their fatness on us, or
sends an Army of Locusts to destroy the Plenty that he had given; yea, even
Fire and Hail, Snow and Vapors, Wind and Storm fulfill his Words, Psalm 148. 4.
It Is not Fate nor Fortune that makes a Nation happy or miserable, but the Piety
or Wickedness of them that dwell therein. We need not consult the Planets to
discover the rise of National Calamities, nothing but sins that are as public
can be the cause of them; and if a Nation fall into Disgrace; its Sin that is
the reproach of any people, Prove. 14. 34. Its this that makes God remove his
Candlestick from a Country, and give his Kingdom to a Nation that will bring
forth Fruit.

II. Calamities appear to be from God, though in private Persons, when they bear
a particular relation to, and oftentimes the very stamp and character of the
sin: And as its usual for Malefactors that are punished, to have their Crimes
written in a Paper and put upon their Breasts; and the Cross heretofore bore
the Inscription of the Faults for which the Persons suffered; so God also many
times so exactly suits the Punishment to the Sin, that all Men shall say this
is Gods Work. Thus when we see the Family of the Sacrilegious come to want and
beggary, as it often happens; and not only other Curses, but Poverty also
pursue those that thought to enrich themselves with holy things; when we see
Corah's Priests, for offering strange Fire, consumed immediately with Fire from
the Lord; and Jehojakim, that denied so much as a decent Burial to the Prophet
he had murdered, himself buried with the burial of an Ass, cast forth out of
the Gates of Jerusalem. When we see Adonibezek with his Thumbs and great Toes
cut off, as he had used to serve others; and Haman hanged upon that very
Gallows he had prepared for Mordecah; we must needs cry out, That it is the
Lords doing, and its mavelous in our Eyes; and confess with the Angel in the
Revelations, That his Judgments are righteous and true. He that reads the
History of Pharaoh's being drowned, must needs reflect upon what he had before
done to the Israelitish Infants: And when we find David's Concubines abused
publicly by his Son, we must needs consider what he had before done to the
Wife of Uriah. If the Spies bring a false Report of the Land of Canaan, after
their forty days Search of it, and the People murmur against God, they must all
wander Forty Years in the Wilderness, before they come to enjoy it. When the
Jews served other Gods, God sent them Captives to the Nations where those Gods
were worshipped, Jer. 5. 19. 2 Chronicles. 12. 5. If they walked contrary to God,
then God walked contrary to them, Levit. 26. 23, 24, 27, 28. and if they
neglected to let the Land have rest in the Sabbatical Years, as God appointed,
the whole Nation is sent to Babylon for 70 Years together, that the Land may
enjoy her Sabbaths, Levit. 26. 34, 35, 43. 2 Chronicles. 36. 21. So that whereas
according to the Hebrew we translate Lam. 1. 7. The Adversaries mocked at their
Sabbaths, the Septuagint translate it, They mocked at their Captivity. If
David's Pride make him number the People, God punishes his Pride by sending a
Plague upon his Subjects, and so making their number less; and though Plagues
scatter a secret Infection, and the Pestilence walks in darkness, yet its so
very obedient to God's Commission, that David of the three Evils offered him,
therefore chose that, because he would fall into the hands of God. And lastly,
it was David's own Observation upon God's Proceedings, Psalm 109. 17. They that
love cursing, it shall come unto them, and they that delight not in Blessing,
it shall be far from them. And thus I have showed, How God is known by the
Judgments that he executes; and when the Footsteps of his Providence are so
plain and visible, we may easily answer the Question in my Text, Are there any
such evils, and the Lord has not done them?

Now as God makes use of a Lex talionis in his own Judgments, so he gives
particular direction to his Judges after the same manner, for instance, to
punish Perjury. Deuteronomy. 19. 16, 17, 18, 19, 21. If a false Witness rise up
against any Man, to testify against him that which is wrong, and the Judges
after diligent Inquisition, shall find that he has testified falsely against
his Brother, then shall ye do unto him as he had thought to have done unto his
Brother; so shall thou put the evil away from among you, thine eye shall not
pity, but life shall go for life, eye for eye, tooth for tooth, hand for hand,
foot for foot. We meet with a famous Instance of the execution of this Law in
the History of Susanma, where the Elders, who by their Perjury would have taken
away her Life, are themselves put to Death for it, v. 62. According to the Law
of Moses they did unto them in such sort as they maliciously intended to do to
their Neighbor, and they put them to death. When Ahab had by the Perjury of
two Sons of Belial first took away the Life, and then possessed himself of the
Field of Naboth, God sent his Prophet to him with this Message, That in the
place where Dogs licked the Blood of Naboth, shall dogs lick they blood, even
thine, 1 King. 21. 19.

And if Perjury be one of the crying sins of this Kingdom which has long
called for Vengeance, and for which our Land mourns, Jer. 23. 10. Its much to
be lamented that the Punishment of this sin is still so slight and trivial. Why
is it thought a lesser Crime to rob a Man of his Estate by two Knights of the
Post at an Assize, than to do it by two High-way-men upon the Road? Why is it a
lesser Crime to take away a Man's Life by a false Oath, than to do it with a
Sword or Dagger? There are men, says David, whose teeth are spears and arrows,
and their tongue a sharp Sword. I can see but this only difference betwixt
them, that he that does it by Perjury is the worse, since, besides the Theft
and the Murder, which is the same in both cases, he pawns his Soul, blasphemes
God, and with an impudent Face defies his Vengeance, at that very time he is
committing of it. I am sure if a Lex talionis be ever just, it is in this case;
and whatever any one by his Perjury measures to another, it should in the same
manner be measured to him again.

And thus I have finished the several Heads I proposed to discourse of, have
discovered the Rise and Origin of all our Evils, whether of Sin, or of
Punishment, and showed that there is no sin but from our selves, no punishment,
but from the Lord; and that as this is always true, so especially in National
Judgments, There is no Evil in a City, and the Lord has not done it. What
remains now but that we a little reflect upon our selves, and see how far we
are concerned in the Subject I have discoursed of.

And has not Destruction been long hovering over our Heads, and a whole Cloud
of Miseries been just ready to break in upon us? Have we not all the while been
rather the worse than the better for them; and tho God's Judgments have been
amongst us, would not learn righteousness? Oh! that we would at length see
God's Hand in all our Sufferings, and humble our selves to God for them; that
we would all lay our Hands upon our Mouths, and say with Daniel, (9. 5, 6.) We
have sinned, we have done wickedly, we have rebelled against thee. O Lord, to
us belongs confusion of Face as at this day, because we have sinned against
thee. Oh! that this Nation would consider at least in this their day the things
that belong to their Peace, before they be hid from us. If this be the time of
God's Visitation, how should we take care that we have nothing left that may
offend him? How should we repent of our sins and forsake them, that God also
may repent of the evils that he has brought upon us? Its in vain for us to
depend upon God's former kindness and protection* over us, and conclude from
thence that he will always save us; God never showed greater kindness to any
Nation under Heaven, than he did* to the Jews; and yet in all the Histories of
the World we never find a Nation that suffered more. Let us not think that our
being Protestants, our being of the true Religion, will secure us; so were the
Jews; and if God spared not the natural Branches, when their sins called for
Judgments, we must not expect that he will spare us. The longer we are suffered
to abuse God's Mercies, the greater will be our ruin when it comes; and the Ax
that has been long lifted up against us, will by all these delays only fetch
the bigger blow. And if we still frustrate all God's gracious designs of Mercy
toward us, in staying thus long for our Repentance, and making all the Nations
round us become a warning to us; we may justly expect the heaviest Judgments of
all, and become our selves a sad example to others. Behold the Fig Tree which
Christ himself cursed for want of Fruit; look upon the Vineyard that God
himself planted, exposed at last to the Wild Beasts of the Forest, because its
Fruit was bad. Do but go to Shiloh, the Prophet, Jer. 7. 12. 14. and see what
God has done to that place for the sins of it. Go to Jerusalem, and see what
Vengeance he has brought upon his own People; go to the Seven Churches of
Asia, and see those once glorious Churches become wast and barbarous; go to
Antioch, where the Disciples were first called Christians, and see that place
become an Heap of Ruins, without one Christian* Church in it Chytraeus de
statu Eccles. in Asia, p. 23, 24.
yea, go to all the Eastern and African Churches, and see there what their Sins
have done to them, and then take Christ's Word for it, That except ye repent,
ye shall all likewise perish, Luke 13. Behold our Savious at this time of Trial
now saying to us, as once he did to Jerusalem, O England, England, how often
would I have gathered you as a Hen gathers her Chickens under her Wings, and
you would not! I dread to add the last part of the Verse, Behold your House is
left unto you desolate.

Now one natural effect of Miseries is to make Men serious and considerate, and
reflect upon the sins that they have committed. When Joseph's Brethren were in
distress, tho twenty years after, they cried out, We are verily guilty
concerning our Brother, in that we saw the anguish of his Soul when he besought
us, and we would not hear, therefore is this Evil come upon us, Genesis 42. 21.
When Antiochus was upon his Deathbed, he then remembered the Evils he had done
to Jerusalem, 1 Macab. 6. 12. And Joram, tho a wicked King, yet when he was in
distress, cried out, This Evil is from the Lord, 2 Kings 6. 33. Let us
therefore conclude likewise, that all the Evils we suffer are from the Lord,
and that our sins have deserved them. Let us remember now at least in this day
of God's Visitation, how often we have slandered and abused the best Church in
the World, even then crying out of it, Popery, Popery, when it was well known
to be the greatest Bulwark in the World against it.

And if the Lord has at this time drawn a Sword against us, let us also
proclaim War against our sins that caused him; always remembering, that as there
is no Evil in a City, but from the Lord, so there is no deliverance but from
him also. If therefore the Perjury, Hypocrisy, and other crying sins of this
Kingdom, have almost ruined it; and nothing but a Repentance as universal as
our sins, can bring deliverance: Let us turn unto the Lord with all our Hearts,
and all our Souls, and he will have mercy upon us; so that if our sins have
produced a Gurse, the Holiness of our Lives may now bring down Blessings on us;
and if our sins have made us a reproach, our righteousness may at last exalt
our Nation. Let us resolve therefore to be religious in good earnest, and by
the holiness of our Lives, call louder to Heaven for Mercies, than ever our
sins have done for Judgments. Let God's Righteousness go before us in all our
Actions, and then shall his Glory be our Reward; then shall God again rejoice
over us to do us good, and the Gates of Hell shall not prevail against us:
Happy are the People that are in such a case; yea, blessed are the People who
have the Lord for their God.

FINIS.

