A SERMON PREACHED At the Funeral of the Right Honble The Lady MARY, Daughter
to Ferdinando late Earl of Huntingdon, AND Wife to WILLIAM JOLIFE of
Caverswell-Castle in the County of Stafford, Esquire; At Ashby-De-la-Zouch, December.
xii. 1678.

By SAMUEL WILLS, M. A. and Preacher at All-hallows in Derby.

IMPRIMATUR.

Guil. Sill.
April 12. 1679.
LONDON, Printed by J. D. for John Baker, at the three Pigeons in St. Paul's
Churchyard. 1679.

To the Right Honble THEOPHILUS Earl of Huntingdon.
MY LORD,
HAD Your Lordship commanded to this performance a Person of Sufficiencies, in
any tolerable measure, suitable to the occasion of it, You had found your self
better served. And more right had been done to the Memory of your Noble Sister,
than the following poor Accounts of her can amount unto; which have nothing to
commend them, but that (as far as they reach) they are true. Nor can I suffer
imputation from any that knew this Excellent Lady, in any degree of intimacy,
but only in having spoken so extreme defectively, and in so mean terms,
concerning her. And yet, perhaps, I have said enough to provoke the Envy of
some others, who love not to hear of any Commendations but what are ascribed to
themselves. To whom I shall only suggest a return of Dr. Donne's upon a not
much different occasion, Let any Lady make Donnes Epist. p. 253.
her self fit for those Praises, and they shall be hers. And I heartily wish I
had been able so to have represented this Illustrious Example (for it needed no
Ornament but bare Narration) as to excite in others a virtuous Emulation. But I
am sensible how short I have fallen of the Dignity of my Subject. And had not
your Lordship's very great and very just Affection to this Incomparable Lady
somewhat imposed upon your Accurate Judgment, your Lordship would never have
sent this Sermon to the Press. But though it must abide (as far better things
daily do) all license of censure; yet if any thing therein shall in the least
assist any good Soul in true Devotion, I shall esteem the Publication
abundantly recompensed to,

My Lord, Your Lordship's most humble and most obedient Servant, Samuel Wills.
DERBY, Apr 6. 1679.
S. LUKE XX. 36. Neither can they die any more; for they are equal unto the
Angles, and are the Children of God, being the Children of the Resurrection.
THESE are our Savior's words, in answer to the Jewish Atheists, the
Sadducees, who (among their other Errors) denied there was any Resurrection of
the Dead. These Men put a Case to our Savior; with a captious and malicious
purpose, to ensnare him in such Absurdities, as they vainly conceived his
Answer would betray him to. The Case was this: A Woman in the course of her
life had seven Husbands successively, and survived them all. Now (supposing a
Resurrection of the Dead) to which of the seven shall this Woman appertain,
when she and they rise again? For she was not more one Man's Wife, than she was
another's: all must have her then, or none. This was their Question: to which
our Lord makes this return, That the Woman at the Resurrection, could be
claimed by none of all her Husbands: For though the Children of this World
marry, and are given in Marriage, Luke 20. 34, 35.
they, which shall be accounted worthy to obtain that World, and the
Resurrection from the dead, neither marry, nor are given in Marriage. None of
the ends for which that state was ordained, having any place there. There being
no need of Procreation, and multiplying and continuing Mankind; nor of any
remedy against Sin; nor of any such help and comfort, which that relation
affords here.

There is no need of Procreation. For the Children of the Resurrection cannot
die any more. And where there is no Death, there is no want of such means to
repair the ruins of Mortality. Those that are to live for ever, cannot need a
succession to fill their room after them, and to continue their kind. Neither
is there any need of a remedy against Sin: For they are equal unto the Angles;
perfectly free from all fleshly inclinations, having glorified Bodies, utterly
incapable of those low desires. They become pure and spiritual by the
Resurrection, as the Angles are by Nature. Nor is there (in the World to come)
the least need of that society, help and comfort, which the relation of
Marriage affords here. For they are the Children of God; like unto him, in a
nearer and more exact resemblance, than the greatest Grace can make us here.
The Children of the Resurrection shall be instated in so full and perfect
Happiness and Glory, as shall render all Assistances of the dearest and most
helpful Relation perfectly needless. What use can there be of such help and
succor in that state, where nothing can be wanting?

In this manner does our blessed Lord refute this idle Cavil of the Sadducees.
But this is not all: For he was pleased here (as elsewhere in the holy Gospel)
to take occasion, from a spiteful and captious Question, to declare and assert
a great and necessary Truth; making such a Reply, as might at once silence
their Malice, and inform their Understanding. And what was delivered for the
conviction of those Gainsayers, is equally useful for the comfort of all
Believers. And accordingly the Text instructs us, in some considerable
instances, what shall be the state of Holy Men at the Resurrection. Such Men
being the Children of the Resurrection; that is to say, partakers of it, (for
so the phrase imports) such as are accounted worthy to obtain the World to
come, and the Resurrection from the Dead; Of these happy Persons our Lord
affirms three things, as eminent parts of their Felicity and Glory.

I. Their perfect Immortality, They can die no more. II. Their similitude to
the Angles, They are equal to them. III. Their resemblance even to God himself;
They are the Children of God.
I. Their perfect Immortality, They cannot die any more. The perfection of
heavenly Glory is the perpetuity of it, and the impossibility of ever losing
it. Otherwise, fear of deprivation would imbitter even that ineffable state.
And the fullness of Joy which is in God's Presence, would be defective, were not
those Pleasures [for evermore.] But they are such, as admit no Interruption,
and fear no Conclusion.

Alas! we find here, that Life, though in the best and most desired enjoyments
and satisfactions of it, has a bitter allay from the thoughts of Death.
Unprepared Men tremble at it: and even the Best and most Holy are, upon
remembrance of Death, stricken into Fear and Apprehension. Nor do we dread
Death only in contemplation of the Victory it must have over our Selves, but
over our Friends too; the dear Companions and Pledges of our Love; the Objects
of our tenderest Affection; the most kind and indulgent Husband, the most
obliging and agreeable Wife, the most hopeful and promising Child, the most
provident and wise Father, the most useful and faithful Friend, (who is as our
own Soul:) These Deuteronomy. 13. 6
are snatched from us by Death, and these dear enjoyments render us the wider
marks for misery and for sorrow. And it cannot but shake us in our highest
satisfactions, to consider how near we stand (for ought we know) to the
extremest loss and disappointment.

But O how happy will that state be, wherein our Joys shall be complete and
perfect; having in them not any, the least mixture of sorrow or misery. In all
worldly delights, either Defect, or Satiety, or Deprivation, or all of them are
great and perpetual diminishings of our content; But none of them have any
place in Heaven. There our desires shall be more fully satisfied, than it is
possible for us now to comprehend: Our capacities of pleasure shall be suitable
to those eternal joys; and no possibility of ever being disturbed in those
unspeakable enjoyments, or deprived of them. There we shall live in the
Ecstasies and Raptures of glorified Communion with the Patriarchs, Prophets,
Apostles, and Martyrs, and all the virtuous and pious Souls, in the Church
Triumphant. And this without the abatements of Ignorance, Envy, or any of those
passions, which molest our correspondencies here. There the Spirits of all just
men shall be made perfect. The glorious Society shall be for ever united in
dearest Love: swallowed up in the contemplation of God, and of all his wondrous
benefits to the sons of men, and in returning those praises and services, which
our exalted souls shall then be able to perform. And this blessed concourse
shall be eternal. Every Member in that glorified Assembly being out of all
possibility of defection or end. They cannot die any more. Death can never find
entrance. The security of that Happiness shall be the Crown of it. That Life
must be eternal: (...), it is not possible they should die any more.

And is it not most just and reasonable, that our Solicitude and Labor to
attain this eternal Life, should be proportionate to the dignity and
excellencies of it? Who would not part with all the Honors and Advancements,
with all the Riches and Possessions, with the gilded follies and vanities of
this World, rather than fall short of a part in this Heavenly Kingdom? We
labor and toil, endure, and comply, and do any thing, and suffer every thing,
for the preservation and continuance of a mortal and perishing Life, howsoever
embitter'd to us; but (Good God!) how little and how coldly are our Thoughts
employed to make sure of everlasting Life? We direct, it may be, some faint
wishes that way, now and then: The fragments of our time perhaps may be
employed a little that way too. And it is possible that some public
Consternation, or some personal Fear may constrain and force in us some,
extraordinary applications toward Heaven for a time. But the motion is
artificial only, and ceases when the weights are taken off. Then we return to
our former indifferency, and all the negligences of delay. We conclude it time
enough to think of another World, when we have served our turns in this.
Religion is a fit employment for melancholy Old Age; when the Blood grows chill
and languid, the Face wrinkled, when the Appetites to Pleasure and Folly
forsake us, when we come to the Staff, and to the Couch, and grow burdensome to
our selves, and to others; when these evil Days are come, Devotion may be a
proper entertainment. Till then, it is but a tormenting us before our time, an
imposing upon the pleasure and gaity of Life.

But certainly a Man must have very mean and vile thoughts of Eternal Life,
that does not esteem it worthy of more early and vigorous endeavors to gain
it: but would embrace it only (when he sees he must depart from hence) as an
expedient to save him from Eternal Miseries. That Man alone is likely to attain
the Joys above, who seeks first the Kingdom of God, who makes it the great
design and pursuit of his whole Life, and who contains all inferior things in
their due distance and subordination. Let us therefore be persuaded to call in
all our straggling Affections, and fix and employ all the powers of our Souls to
the gaining this happy state of Immortality; where we shall find all our
labors and pains, our self-denials and sufferings abundantly recompensed. For
there we shall have Knowledge without Mistake: Possessions without fading:
Riches without care or loss: Honor without Envy. There shall be no Sufferings,
nor no Sins: No more striving between the Flesh and Spirit: Our Souls shall
never desire to have more, nor fear to have less: There we shall enjoy all that
our Hearts can wish, and never grow weary of our wishes. There we shall possess
all that we desire: and still desire the very things we possess. In a word, we
shall be ravished in the beholding God, satisfied in the enjoying him, and all
this without fear of losing him. We shall dwell with the Eternal God in Life
Eternal.

II. The Children of the Resurrection have a similitude to the blessed Angels.
They are equal unto the Angels. Not in all points. Different Natures must have
different Proprieties. Put if the Angels have advantage in some Instances, we
shall have it in others. And particularly in the endearment of Redemption. They
reverence Jesus Christ as God: we, as a Savior also. They adore, we love him.
His Glory affects them, his Mercy us. They desire to look into that Mystery,
which we enjoy. Our fruition is their great Contemplation. Their employment
Heb. 1. last.
here (in part) is to minister for them, who shall be Heirs of Salvation: and
in Heaven, our Salvation fills them with wonder and ecstasy. Lord, what is Man,
that thou art so mindful of him! A poor miserable sinful Wretch, that thou
should so regard him! But so shall it be with the Man, whom the King of
Heaven delights to Honor. Oh the wonders of Divine Love! The miracles of
Redemption! Dust and Ashes, like unto the Angels. Like unto them in Glory: In
fitness to serve God, and in capacity of enjoying him.

1. Like unto the Angels in Glory. And what their Glory is, and what ours shall
be, when we are made like unto them, is impossible to be described any further,
than the holy Scriptures do afford us some intimations of it. The Gospel (Mat.
28. 3.) represents the Angels appearance at the Sepulcher in terms more suited
to our comprehensions, than to his Glory: Yet it is said, His Countenance was
like Lightning, and his Raiment white as Snow: A glorious and amazing Luster
did encompass him: which made Ver. 4.
the Guards shake, and become as dead Men. But as great as it was, this was
still a Glory restrained, such as the Eyes of Men might endure to look upon.
For this Angel spoke to the holy Women, who thereupon Ver. 8.
departed with fear and with great joy. Their fear was not so great at his
Presence, as to extinguish their joy at his Message. But when the Angels Glory
is without check and limitation, in the full splendour of Heavenly Attendance:
then certainly it is beyond expression. Such shall be the Glory of the Children
of the Resurrection. It is sown in Dishonor, Cor. 15. 42.
it is raised in Glory, says St. Paul. Andthus Mat. 13. 43. Then shall the
Righteous shine forth as the Sun, in the Kingdom of their Father. And St. Paul
again, Phil. 3. 21. The Lord Jesus shall change our vile Body, that it may be
fashioned like unto his Glorious Body. All manner of imperfection shall be
excluded, and such a Glory shall succeed it, as may render us fitInhabitants
for Heaven, and partakers of the Bliss of it. But it is not for us as yet to
comprehend it: For it is does not yet appear what we shall be. 1 John 3. 2.


2. The Children of the Resurrection shall be like unto the Angels, in fitnese
to serve God. Whilst we are here in the Flesh, the Soul is disadvantagiously
lodged. Corruption within, and Temptation without are great Impediments, so
that we cannot attend to Service of God without troublesome distractions. When
our Devotion is at the highest, it suffers exceedingly from our Ignorance and
Frailty. The Spirit is held down by the Flesh; and we are so loaded with the
impediments of Nature, that we difficultly attain any tolerable elevation of
Soul, and more difficultly preserve it. But in Heaven we shall be delivered
from all Infirmities of the Flesh, and serve and glorify our God, as Angels
do: with understanding, readinese, vigor, speed, unity, and all other
perfections of Obedience. The Woman ofTekoah, when she would celebrate the
Wisdom of David, went as high as she could in her Comparison: My Lord is Wise
(faith she) according to the Wisdom of 2 Samuel 14. 20.
an Angel of God. The Psalmist says of Angels, that They excel in strength, and
do his Commandments, harkening unto the voice of his Word, Psalm. 103. 20.
Diverse other Excellencies does the holy Scripture ascribe unto these Heavenly
Ministers; which nevertheless do not give them greater Abilities to do service
to God, than we shall enjoy in a glorified Estate. And O how happy will that
Condition be, when separated from all Lusts and Passions, all Sin and
Imperfection, we shall be exalted to Powers and Abilities of serving the Divine
Majesty, as his mighty Angels do! Here our Praises and Adorations are faint and
cold: There they shall be offered in all the Raptures of a glorified Soul. Here
with infinite Toil we gain a defective Knowledge: There we shall have it in
full measure. All the secrets of Providence and of Nature (so far at least as
that Knowledge is worthy of that place) shall be manifested to our
understanding. Here we perform our Duties in a poor scanty fashion, striving
perpetually with the indispositions and reluctancies of Nature: There we shall
readily and perfectly obey the Will of God. Those little sparks of Divine Fire,
which sometimes have touched our Souls, in the exercises of Devotion, shall then
rise to a mighty flame. The enlarged Soul will then pay a Service, suitable to
the God it adores,and to the Presence and Society in which it abides: Angels
and Saints joining in full Chore to sing Praises to the Enternal God for
evermore. United Love, perfect Service, and unspeakable Joy shall be for ever
in that New Jerusalem. And none of those unhappy Distinctions, Separations, and
uncharitable Divisions that wound and deform our Communion here, shall have any
room in that blessed Assembly. But an universal consent shall be for ever
amongst the Members of that glorious Society; all uniting in the most joyful
Adorations of the Deity. And as as we shall then be like unto the Angels, in
our fitness to serve God; so

3. In our Capacities to enjoy him. Now we see through a Glass darkly, but then
Face to Face, 1 Cor. 13. 12. It Is but a Glimps here, a full Manifestation in
Heaven. In this World the Imbecility of Nature cannot sustain any great
discovery of God. Hereafter we shall be made capable of the beatific Vision: We
shall see God, and see him as he is: Not as now, under the vail of a
Similitude; (for all that we know of him here, is taught us by resemblances)
but we shall receive clear apprehensions of him. We shall then have a distinct
knowledge of that Wisdom, Power and Goodness, which God has made appear so
eminently in all his Works. In short, all that the Angles do enjoy of God shall
be vouchsafed to us also; a full participation of supreme Felicity.

If at our return from the public Service of God at Church; if after the
Sacrament devoutly received, if after the fervent performance of the duties of
our Closet, we have found a warmth in our Hearts, our Souls strangely delighted
and raised to an unusual degree of Satisfaction; if the Crumbs, that fall from
the Table do afford us so great a delight, what shall we feel, when we come to
sit down in the Kingdom of God, Luke 13. 19.
at the Heavenly Feast of everlasting Joys and Pleasures? It was one of St.
Augustine's three Wishes, to have seen Jesus Christ in the Flesh: This would
have been in the humility and abasement of His Incarnation. What must it be to
behold him in all the Glories of his Kingdom? And to enjoy him there, to adore
him as God, to love him as a Redeemer; to be united to him the Head of all the
Members in the Church Triumphant? Certainly, in that state, where the Soul
shall be exalted to her utmost possibilities, one of its greatest
entertainments will be the clear discerning and full comprehension of the Love
of the Blessed Jesus, in doing and suffering so much for us Men, and for our
Salvation. And this will fill us with such ardency of Love to him, as shall
transport us with unexpressible Joy and And what can we imagine more conducing
to full and perfect Blessedness, than to understand the wonderful Mysteries of
Divine Love, and to be able to make our returns of Love in so high and noble
proportion. If the Transfiguration did so ravish Saint Peter, as to make him
cry out, Master, it is good being here; what must it be, when our Capacities
shall be enlarged so, as to recive and enjoy the full Tide, the mighty Torrent
of Divine Majesty and Glory?

It is no wonder (since 'every common thing baffles the largest Understanding)
that here, we have such poor and narrow conceptions of God. Can thou by
searching find out God? Can thou find out the Almighty unto Perfection? says
Zophar, Job 11. 7. Should God discover himself to us in any measure suitable to
his infinite Perfection, the Manifestation would oppress and confound us. Our
greatest natural Powers could not bear such a Revelation. But at the
Resurrection we shall be like unto the Angles, endowed with such vast extent of
Capacity, as may fit us to entertain those discoveries of the eternal Trinity,
which shall be the inconceivable fruition of the state of Immortality. And this
may suffice to show (though in a very imperfect manner) the Similitude, which
the Children of the Resurrection have unto the Angles.

III. There remains another instance of their Glory in that happy Condition,
namely, their resemblance even to God himself, which is delivered in these
terms, They are the Children of God. There is no remainder of those frail and
perishing Principles in them, which they derived from their Earthly Parents.

It is usual in the Scriptures of the New Testament to style them, who by Faith
and Repentance are born again, the Children of God. Thus Saint Paul, Gal. 3.
26. Ye are all the Children of God by Faith in Christ Jesus. And this Relation
creates in us a likeness to our Heavenly Father: Our Souls carry resembling 1
Pet. 1. 15.
Lineaments. It makes us holy, as He is holy. But certainly our Savior (in the
Text) intended more, when he makes it a principal part of Heavenly Bliss, that
we are then the Children of God. We shall then be more eminently; more
resemblingly so. If Grace render us like him here, Glory shall much more there.
His Image in us shall be infinitely more express, our likeness to him more
exact. For every thing, which in this Life gives us a resemblance to God, shall
then be raised to Perfection; we shall then attain unto fullness of Stature. And
these imperfect Lines, and first Draughts upon the Soul, shall be filled up and
finished, in that blessed state of Immortality. But in what instances, and in
what manner this shall be, is not for me to describe. For S. John himself
leaves it to future Manifestation. 1 John 3. 2. Beloved, now we are the Sons of
God, and it does not yet appear what we shall be: But we know that when he
shall appear, we shall be like him; for we shall see him as he is. For the
present, most sure it is, that we are the Sons of God: But how much more
perfectly we shall be so at the Resurrection, is not revealed as yet. Only in
general, we shall be like unto God: otherwise it would be impossible for us to
sustain the beatific Vision, to see him as he is, or to enjoy that Blessedness
which he will then impart to us. But no words are significant enough to give
any tolerable account of this happy Future State; which is as unknown to us,
as the offices and entertainments of Life are to the Child in the Womb, till
our Powers and Capacities are come to their perfection. And thus I have
endeavored to explain the Instances, which the Text gives of the Glory we
shall obtain in the Resurrection. Neither can they die any more; for they are
equal unto the Angles, and are the Children of God.

The Consideration whereof does certainly afford us the most powerful and
effectual Consolation, amidst all the Miseries of Humane Life. For we can
suffer nothing here, that can bear the lowest proportion to the Retributions of
another World, when we shall become Immortal, Angelical, and even the Children
of God in Glory. This was St. Paul's Collection, Romans 8. 16, 17, 18. The Spirit
it self bears witness with our spirit, that we are the Children of God. And
if Children, then Heirs, Heirs of God, and Joyntheirs with Chirst: If so be
that we suffer with him, that we may be also glorified together. For I reckon
that the Sufferings of this present Time, are not worthy to be compared with
the Glory which shall be revealed in us. This Apostle's determination, though
expressed in general terms, holds true in all particulars. For example: We want
Health it may be: our Bodies are full of Pains and Languishment: our Days are
uneasy; and our Nights restless; the most orderly Regiment of our selves, and
all the aids of the Physician, can scarce preserve us in that sickly life we
enjoy: But here is our Comfort, that in the Resurrection we shall be freed from
these tormenting Sorrows: This Mortal shall put on Immortality. And though in
this Tabernacle of the Body, we do groan, being burdened with various and
disquieting Maladies, yet the time is coming, when Mortality shall be swallowed
up of Life, 2 Cor. 5. 4. Perhaps we are reduced to Poverty, and put to suffer
the difficult Encumbrances of a needy condition: In which (as is usual) many of
our Friends forsake us; and we have the additional sorrow of finding our selves
Despised and become Ridiculous. But still let us support our selves with the
meditation of Heavenly Treasures laid up for us. So did those Ancient
Christians, Heb. 10. 34. They took joyfully the spoiling of their Goods,
knowing in themselves that they had in Heaven a better and an enduring
Substance: exempted from Moth and Rust, and from Thieves; from Decay and from
Violence. Our lot perchance is to undergo the outrages of Persecution, branded
with Characters of Infamy: Made as the Filth of the World, and the Offscouring
1 Cor. 4. 13.
of all things, and used accordingly. But all this is abundantly recompensed in
this Consideration, that in the Resurrection we shall be owned and avouched as
the Children of God. Whereupon our Lord himself exhorts us thus, Rejoice, and
be exceeding glad, for great is your reward in Heaven, Mat. 5. 12. Death, it
may be, makes breaches upon us, in our Families, or Friends. First one falls,
and then another; and scarce have we gotten over the Grief of one Funeral, but
a second calls us to the same sad Offices. And these alarms of Mortality, put
us into expectations of our own Dissolution. These are black and melancholic
Contemplations, till we bethink our selves that in the other World, they and we
cannot die any more; and though we undergo a short separation, we shall meet
again at the Resurrection, and enjoy a Heavenly Reunion, which shall never be
interrupted, or embitter'd, much less dissolved. It is no doubt an unreasonable
Imposition upon the gentleness of Humane Nature, to forbid those tender
expressions of Sorrow which are common over the Hearses of our Relations and
Friends. But it is withal a mighty alleviation of our Grief, when we have good
reason to believe they died in the Favor and Love of God: That the Angels
attended and conducted their departed Souls to their heavenly Rest; that they
are now out of the danger of Temptation, and having finished their Course, are
gone to receive the Crown. Methinks in the midst of our Lamentations, we should
not forbear even to rejoice, and gratulate the happiness of those dear Souls,
who are possessed of that, which above all other things we most passionately
desired they might attain.

In a word: When we have surveyed all the Afflictions and Troubles, which in
this frail and mortal Life we are subject to, though it is impossible to hinder
their having some troublesome impressions upon our Spirits, yet there are such
infinite Comforts to be derived from the consideration of the future state of
the Blessed, as are sufficient to enable us not only to endure, but to glory in
Tribulations: as knowing that Romans 5. 3.
thereby Grace is promoted, and our Glory enhanced. All the Sufferings which
the most Afflicted Man can undergo in this Life, are not to be mentioned in
comparison with the Joys and Glories of the Life to come; which St. Paul has
expressed in words of strange emphasis and signification: 2 Cor. 4. 17. For our
light Affliction, which is but for a moment, works for us a far more
exceeding and Eternal weight of Glory.

But these things cannot be understood till they are enjoyed. Even this
Excellent Lady (whose Funerals have given occasion to this Discourse) in her
highest, and most ravishing Meditations of Heaven, could but conjecture only,
and that very imperfectly, what God has prepared for her, and for all those
that love him. But she understood and felt so much, as served to engage and
animate her in all the Exercises of holy Living. And she never thought those
Conditions hard, which God requires to make Col. 1. 12.
us meet to be partakers of the Inheritance of the Saints in Light. And this I
shall endeavor to make appear in the following accounts of her; which I have
collected from the happy opportunities I have had for many Years, to make
observation of her holy Life, and from some Memorials, which those who best
knew her, have communicated to me. And if any can be so invidious, as to think
the Character I shall give, can exceed the Subject, I shall say nothing, but
that of the admirable Pliny: That those that neglect the Lib. 3. Epist. 21.
doing Praiseworthy things, look upon all Commendation to Flattery. Nor shall
I fear any Misconstructions, it being an excellent service to Virtue and Piety,
when those Persons who have been the greatest Examples of it, are commended to
Imitation. For an Hundred Sermons and Advices of Religion are not so
persuasive, as a single Example, especially so Illustrious an one, as this most
incomparable Person was.

She was Born within few miles of this Place, being the Fifth Daughter of her
great and Virtuous Parents, of whose Blood and Descent, it is not my design to
give any Account. Nor can it be needful to any, that have the least
acquaintance with the History or Heraldry of the Kingdom. She was educated
under the Care, Precepts, and Examples of her Excellent Mother: And her great
and capacious Soul received and improved those happy Advantages to such a
Degree, that (besides other Qualifications proper to a Person of her Age, Sex,
and Quality) she had very early attained to great measures of Prudence, and of
grave and wise Conduct; and (in the Prophets words) The Child was an Hundred
Years 1 Isa. 65. 20.
old. And this was no defect of Wit or Spirit. Her composedness of Mind
proceeded not from Phlegm: Nor was Dullness excused and concealed under the name
of Gravity. She understood well, and (in its proper season) could entertain her
self and others with all the innocent Ingenuities, and sprightliness of
Conversation. But her great Soul aspired to more suitable Entertainments, to
things Solid, Improving, and Rational. She had then so little of the Levity,
Heats, and Indiscretions common in that time of Life, that she became Example
to her Sex, even in her very young Years; and had thereby the mighty advantages
of setting out at first in a right Course, gaining habits of Virtue, and
exalting her Mind with the noblest Images and Rules of it.

To the gaining these Seize, she had the assistance of a quick and sharp
Understanding, and deep Apprehension, with a Judgment so descerning, as happily
determined her the right Way, when she was at any time to conclude what was
True or False, Good or Evil. For having submitted her innocent and unprejudiced
Soul to the conduct of Virtue, and continually begging of Almighty God the
Illumination and Guidance of the Holy Spirit; she was by this means preserved
from those Errors, into which Pride and Confidence have seduced many others.
Nor was it an inconsiderable Safeguard, that she always had upon her Spirit so
great a sense of Honor. By which I mean not any immoderate remembrance of her
noble Extraction, nor any insolent or haughty Behavior toward others (for
none could be more Humble and Obliging); but I mean a continual regard to
things naturally Great and Honorable, a Circumspection to avoid all that is
base and vile, and unsuitable to the dignity of Nature, and the principles of
Virtue, and to that conditon of Men from whom the Laws and Rules of Demeanor
are expected.

Her Passions and Affections (as is usual in the most elevated Souls) were
great and quick: but under such admirable restraint and command, that one would
have thought it had been Constitution in her, and not Discipline: And that she
had been the Mistress of her Passions by the benevolence of Nature, and not by
Care and Labor. But this latter was manifest. For she was far from being
insensible: And as she understood as well as any, all the Offices of
Friendship; so would her generous Mind resent them. She had none of that
Meanness in her, to study Diminutions of any Act of Kindness, or to suspect a
Design in it; but magnified it to others, and to her self too. She readily
supposed every thing that could greaten the Testimonies of Friendship to her;
and her Recompenses always bore proportion to this Generosity. She was always
jealous her Returns had not been sufficient, and that she had come short of the
just performances of a Friend.

But in case of any neglect or failure toward her, of any unkindness or
disservice (in what measure soever she might apprehend it) all her Resentments
were sealed up. Not that she kept any black Registers of Injuries, or Memento's
against an opportunity of Retaliation: But she considered all that could lessen
the Offense, and where it could not be defended, she made sure to forgive it.
And if any expressed a concernment that she was Injured, she labored to appease
them, by alleging all imaginable Excuses and Extenuations of the Offender's
Fault: Not esteeming any interest of her own worthy the passion of a Friend's
Vindication.

She bore so perfect a hatred to all Vice and Immorality, that the least
approaches toward it in any Person, received from her the reprehension of a
Blush, or a Frown, of (if she judged it expedient) a more direct and open
Confutation. But she had few occasions to exercise this part of her Virtue: For
her presence was awful; and it is a Torment to vain and extravagant Persons, to
be under the Limitation and Confinement which Virtuous Company puts upon them.
It is possible nevertheless, that in many Persons far inferior to her in
Goodness, some actions and behaviors of a resembling Nature may be observed.
But then they are commonly but the Ostentations of a counterfeit Virtue; little
devices and ambushes to get Fame and Commendation. In her they were grown to
Custom: So Habitual and Familiar, that she never expected any Observation ought
to be made of them.

To all these Qualities of a cultivated and enlarged Mind, excellent
Understanding, and a commanding Reason, she supperadded a Holy, Pure, and even
Angelical Life. To know God, and to be like him, was her first and great
Endeavor. She lived always in prospect of Heaven, and thither did her Devout
Spirit evermore aspire. This made those Temptations, which prevail so fatally
upon others, prove only Molestations to her. This World (as it was to Monica,
discoursing of Heaven with her holy Son), S. August. Conf. s. 9. c. 10.
was vile and dispicable in her Eye, whose Contemplations and Longings, were
directed to things Eternal. She wisely concluded, that a meek and quiet Spirit,
a true Devotion and severe Virtue, were more excellent Acquisitions, and more
lovely Ornaments, than any of the gaudy Vanities, wherewith vulgar and narrow
Souls are so unreasonably transported. Nor did she only approve the things that
are Excellent, but she practiced them also, to such a Degree, that in her,
Primitive Christianity was revived; and she lived as those first Christians
did, and as we should. And this (by the Grace of God) preserved her from those
low conceptions of Religion, which many have taken up: Who would make it to
consist in the little badges and cognizances of a Party; in angry Disputings,
and foolish Wranglings; in bringing all things into Question, and projecting
eternal amendments in Spiritual Affairs; in zealous contending about Words and
Names, etc. Talk and Pretense she never esteemed worthy her Consideration; and
was not to be imposed upon by the sleights and ostentation of the Factors for
other Churches. But having upon Principles of Judgment and Conviction, fully
satisfied her self, she conscienciously and devoutly adhered to the Doctrine,
Worship, and Discipline of the Church of England. And though (like Mary in in
the Gospel) she had thus chosen the better part, making Religion her great
Business and Employment; yet she was sensibly offended when she found it taken
notice of, unless it were by Imitation. Her design being to provoke others to
good Works, not to flattering Attributions. Not that she was ashamed of being
thought Religious, but she dreaded the Hypocrisy of a designed Publication that
she was so.

And as a further Evidence that she studied the Power of Godliness, not the
Form of it, she labored most in the retired intimacies of true Religion. This
appeared in the constant frequency of her private Devotions, which she
performed three times a Day at the least: Using to that purpose the most
private Concealments, not only to avoid Disturbance, but (what she more shunned)
Discovery. And to assist, enlarge, and enforce her Devotions, she added to them
frequent Fasts. Wherein she held her self to our Savior's Rule, Mat. 6. 16.
When ye Fast, be not as the Hypocrites, of a sad Countenance: For they
disfigure their Faces, that they may appear unto Men to Fast. But when thou
fastest, anoint thy Head, and wash thy Face, that thou appear not unto Men to
Fast, but unto thy Father, which is in secret; and thy Father, which sees in
secret, shall reward thee openly. Thus upon such occasions, she would seem to
eat, and to take her usual Repast, that she might escape Observation: Nor would
any thing more discompose her, than an inquisition into her Abstinence.

To her Prayers and Fasting, she added (as a necessary Concomitant) Alms to the
Poor, in dispensing whereof she was extermely Kind and Bountiful, and was
somewhat severe to her self oftentimes, that she might be the more Charitable
to them that were in Need. And her Liberality in this kind was always
accompanied with such a condescending and obliging Compassion, as rendered her
Reliefs of the Distressed doubly comforting to them. But in these Pious
Distributions she used such means of secrecy, that no more particular accounts
can be given, than such as can be gathered from those Persons, who to manifest
their Gratitude, have made trespass upon their promises of Concealment.

To sustain and nourish this constant course of Piety and Devotion, she drew
daily Succors from the Holy Scriptures, beginning and concluding every Day
with some Portion of them. And this not as a Task, and to maintain a Custom,
but as a peculiar Delight, and the most agreeable entertainment of her Mind.
Which appeared in her Youthful time, when about Twenty Years since, she resided
here in this Town, the Bell at Four in the Morning (even in the Winter Season)
was her certain Summons to her Devotions, which were seconded by diligent
Reading and Meditating upon the holy Word of God. Wherein she assisted her
self, not only by Public Sermons, but by the best and soundest Expositors,
which our Church affords. And all this, not to give her self a mere
intellectual Improvement and Satisfaction. But she suffered the Divine Law to
pass into Government: It ruled and commanded her in all her Actions; and she
adorned the Doctrine of God our Savior, by a suitable Conversation.

But it is not to be omitted, that the principal of all her Joys, was the
blessed Sacrament. Her devout Soul finding the most satisfying refreshments in
the Spiritual Feast of the most precious Body and Blood of her Savior; which
made her most earnestly embrace every Opportunity she could lay hold on to
partake of that holy Mystery. Accordingly she Communicated once every Month,
since her Residence in London; fitting her self beforehand with all possible
preparations due to the Dignity of that Divine Celebration. And herein she
exercised such Acts of Devotion, and Religious Austerity to her self, as if it
had been the last Act of her Life: And that she were to pass from the Altar to
the Tribunal, from the Table of our Lord to his Judgment Seat. Neither was this
with the neglect of other Duties. For she loved to draw nigh to God, in all the
Ways of approaching him. She attended the Church upon all Occasions, with a
zeal like that of holy Anna, who departed not from the Temple, but Luke 3. 27.
served God with Eastings and Prayers Night and Day. And so much was her Mind
fixed upon the Offices of Religion, that as soon as ever she could obtain
Release from Business, or from Company, she took up some work of Devotion, and
returned to those Spiritual Fruitions, with new Appetites and impatient Desires.

Yet did not all this Retirement, and the Devotional Employments of it,
contract any moroseness of Humor in her. Herein she also imitated her Savior:
Who though He spent whole Nights in Prayer, and lived as became the Son of God,
and the Redeemer of the World; yet was pleased to Converse with infinite
Benignity and Condescension, even to the meanest People. For her Religion was
of such a Complexion, that she never looked upon rigid Sowrness, and censorious
Austerity, to be any Ornament to it. The Holy Spirit (she well knew) produces
Fruits of another kind: Namely, Love, Joy, Peace, Long-suffering, Gentleness,
Goodness, etc. Gal. 5. 22.
Which Fruits, all that had the happiness to know her, will acknowledge were
eminently visible in her Life and Actions.

Thus perpetually exercising upon her self so wise and holy a Discipline, she
arrived to so noble an elevation of Mind, that the assaults of Passion could
not move her. For certainly none ever had a greater evenness of Mind, and
calmness of Spirit, in all Events. Some occasions she met with, that put to
trial her Patience and Contentment: But in her they Produced no visible
alteration. She still preserved her wonted constancy and serenity of Soul. Not
that she was Insensible, but she was Content. Her Philosophy was not Stoical,
but Christian; it was not Apathy, but Resignation.

In short: So uniform was she in the practice of all Christian Virtue, that she
adorned and illustrated every Relation wherein she stood. A Friend she was even
to Supererogation, beyond what could be expected, or without Reluctance
(sometimes) admitted. A most dutiful Daughter even to the highest Degree and
Example. A Wife precisely observant, from the smallest things to the greatest,
provident and careful in all the Concernments of her worthy Husband; studying
and contriving his Interests and Satisfaction in every thing. She was such a
Wife, in whom the Heart of her Husband did safely trust: in whom he had Pro.
31. 11.
all joy and delight. To which he made the most affectionate returns of
Kindness, Love, and tenderest Care. All which are now redoubled upon her little
Daughter, the only pledge of their Conjugal Affection.

For so it pleased Almighty God to order it, That in the midst of this
Excellent Lady's preparation for Communicating at the Lord's Table, she was
seized with that Disease, which soon after became Mortal to her. On the next
Lord's Day in the Morning, she thought her self in condition to leave her Bed,
and pay her Devotions at Church, and to partake of the holy Sacrament, that Day
to be administered. But those vigorous longings of her Soul, made her judge too
well of the state of her Body. For her strength soon failed her: and they that
attended her, found it necessary to continue her in all the accommodations of a
Sick Person. And she her self also was (by this time) so far convinced of the
weak condition of her Body, that she concluded her End was near; and
thenceforth dismissed all Worldly Thoughts and Cares, and every thing that might
give Impediment to her in her preparations for another World. Then it was (when
she had before her the mighty prospect of Eternity) that she severely Arraigned
and Judged her self: examining her Life past with the strictest and most
accurate scrutiny. What past between God and her own Soul, we cannot pretend to
know. But she discovered a trouble, not without bemoaning her self, That she
had not improved her time as she ought to have done. If one that lived such a
holy and severe Life makes such complaints, Good God! what accounts will those
Persons make, whose times is their burden, who call in Pleasures, Vanity,
Folly, and Vice, to drive it away.

One thing more did (it seems) touch her Thoughts, which was this, That she had
set her Heart too much upon her little Child: So jealous was she, lest a just
Natural Affection should grow so immoderate, as to become Criminal, and her
Love to God suffer any abatements by her kindness to an only Child.
Self-accusations of this sort were indications of a very tender Conscience, and
of a very innocent Soul. Happy Saint! That upon her Deathbed had no greater
matter against her self. Who would not purchase such Peace as she then felt, at
any rate whatsoever? Her acquaintance with God, and her interest in Him, were
not then to be made: That had been her early Care, and daily Business. Her Life
came under continual reviews; and she judged her self, to prevent God's judging
her. Her account was always in a readiness to be delivered up: And her hopes of
Heaven were so fixed and ravishing, that the World could not tempt, nor Death
affright her; but she entertained her Dissolution as her Privilege; and (being
Righteous) she had hope in her Death, Prove. 14. 32.

Nor was ant thing of this to be ascribed to her Distemper. Sickness, it is
true, does often stupify the Mind: and the oppression of the Spirits may be
sometimes mistaken for an undisturbed and unsettled Soul. But in her 'twas
manifestly the assurance of Faith, and Christian confidence in the Merits and
Intercession of her dear Lord and Savior. For God continued to her in all the
time of her Sickness, the great mercy of a clear Understanding, and perfect
Sense and Memory to the last: Which she most piously made use of in humble
Resignations, devout Prayers, heavenly Meditations, holy Discourses, and
Advices, and in all suitable entertainments of a departing Soul.

At last, Without Agonies, or any great Pains, without frightful Accidents,
without Fears and Horrors, without the disturbance of Temptations: But in a
sweet Calm of Conscience, in steadfast Faith, and perfect Charity, in joyful
expectation of Eternal Life, she quietly gave up her Soul into the Hands of her
most Merciful Redeemer.

Thus lived, and thus died this Excellent Person, in peace with God, in
Communion with his Church, in Charity with all the World; leaving the Memorial
and Example of her holy Life, to the Imitation of all that desire to excel in
Virtue. And though we mourn and lament her Death, let it not be, without the
consolation of this Remembrance, that She cannot die any more, but is equal
with the Angels, and is a Child of God, being one of the Children of the
Resurrection.

FINIS.

