His Majesty's MOST GRACIOUS LETTER TO THE PARLIAMENT OF SCOTLAND TOGETHER WITH
The Lord high Commissioner and Lord high Chancellors Speeches.

W R
DIEV ET MON DROIT HONI SOIT QUI MAL Y PENSE royal blazon or coat of arms

EDINBVRGH, Printed by the Heirs and Successors of Andrew Anderson, Printer to
the King's most Excellent Majesty, Anno Dom. 1700.

His Majesty's most Gracious Letter to the Parliament of Scotland.
WILLIAM R.
My Lords and Gentlemen,
THe State of Our Affairs Abroad, requiring Our going beyond Seas, was the
Cause of Our Adjourning your Meeting till this time; When we ordered the last
Adjournment by Our Letter then published, We fully expressed Our good Intentions
toward that Our Ancient Kingdom, which We are now ready to make good in this
Session of Parliament.

We have considered the Address you made to Us in the Session of Parliament
School, in behalf of the African Company, representing the same as a National
Concern, and do assure you, that We are very willing to assent to what shall be
reasonably proposed for repairing the Losses, and Supporting and Promoting the
Interest of that COMPANY: And having ever reckoned the Ease and Prosperity of
Our good Subjects Our greatest Honor and Happiness; We are likewise most
willing to agree to all that can be demanded, for maintaining and advancing the
Peace and Welfare of the Kingdom.

And that you and all Our good Subjects may have full and satisfying Assurance
of this Our good Mind; We again Declare, That We are resolved to give Our Royal
Assent to all Acts that shall be offered for the better establishing the true
Protestant Religion, and the Presbyterian Government of the Church, which you
enjoy, for the more effectual preventing the grouth of Popery, for the
repressing of Vice and Immorality, and the Encouragement of Piety and Virtue,
for the preserving and securing of personal Liberty, for the regulating and
advanceing of Trade; And more especially for making up the Losses, and
promoting the Concerns of the African and Indian COMPANY, for the setting
forward and improving Manufactories, and generally, We are ready to give Our
Assent to all other Laws that shall be brought in for the farther clearing and
securing Property and Civil Rights, strengthening and facilitating the
Administration of Justice, restraining and punishing of Crimes, and the
preserving the Peace and Quiet of the Kingdom, so that nothing shall be wanting
on Our part to make Our People both Happy and Contented.

It is truly Our Regrate, that We could not agree to the Asserting of the Right
of the COMPANIES Collony in Darien, and you may be very confident, if it had
not been for invincible Reasons, the pressing Desires of all Our Ministers,
with the Inclination of Our good Subjects therein concerned, had undoubtedly
prevailed, but since We were, and are fully satisfied, that Our yiedling in
that Matter, had infallibly disturbed the general Peace of Christendom, and
brought inevitably upon that Our Ancient Kingdom a heavy War, wherein We could
expect no Assistance; And that now the state of that Affair is quite altered,
We doubt not but you will rest satisfied with these plain Reasons.

We are heartily sorry for the COMPANIES Loss in what has happned, but We
being most willing that the COMPANIES Losses be repaired, and ready to concur
in any new Projects or Design that shall be reasonably proposed for the Good
and Advantage of the Kingdom, We are most confident, the Wisdom of the
Parliament will no longer Stop upon this Obstruction, Having then this happy
Opportunity for the promoving of the Good and Welfare of the Kingdom, you will
certainly lay hold upon it; And seeing you cannot but notice the Designs and
Practices of Persons disaffected both to Our Government and your Peace, and how
Watchful and Ready Our Enemies are, alse well at Home as Abroad, and desireous
of nothing more as that Differences may fall in amongst Us; We are persuaded
you will be no less careful to avoid them. All that We demand is, that you
would provide proper and competent Supplies for such Forces as shall be
necessary for the Kingdoms Security, and to maintain it in it is present happy
Settlement.

We have continued the Duke of Queensberry to be Our Commissioner for
representing Us in this Session of Parliament, as a Person of whose Ability and
Fidelity We have made full Proof, and are assured will be to you acceptable;
And therefore you are to give him full Credit: And We expect that in all things
you will proceed with that Wisdom, Calmness and Unanimity, as that this Session
may be concluded to Our mutual Satisfaction, and to the Joy of all Our good
Subjects: And so We bid you heartily Farewell.

Given at Our Court at Loo the 4th of October 1700. and of Our Reign the 12
Years By His Majesty's Command, Sic subscribitur, TO. PRINGLE.


