THE Sinfulness of Worshipping GOD With Men's INSTITUTIONS As it was Delivered
in a SERMON By Samuel Willard, Teacher of a Church in BOSTON.

1 Cor. 11. 23. For I have received of the Lord, that which I also delivered
unto you. Mat. 28. 20. Teaching them to observe all this whatsoever I have
commanded ye Printed by Benjamin (...) the Londo (...)

The Sinfulness of Worshipping GOD With Men's INSTITUTIONS
Mat. 15. 9. But in vain do they worship me, teaching for Doctrines the
Commandments of Men.
THe Scribes and Pharisces bare inveterate malice against Christ, for his
searching Doctrines, by which he detected them of gross Hypocrisy: and the more
confirmation he gave thereunto by his Miracles, the deeper rooting did their
prejudice take in their hearts; and because his spotless Conversation secured
him from any impeachment, referring to the Law of God: they sought occasion
against him with respect to the Customs of men: accordingly in the beginning of
this chapter, they are brought In picking a quarrel with him because his
Disciples did not wash their hands before they sat down to their meals: the
pretense on which they ground their contest, is, that it was against the
tradition of the Elders; they plead Antiquity for it, and the Authority of the
Sanhedrim, which to neglect, they account a scandal: and they suppose that
Christ was to blame for this Omission of his Disciples, either for prohibiting,
or at least not commanding them: Christ therefore undertakes the Justification
of them and himself; they did well to omit this Ceremony; and that, not only
because it was an indifferent thing, and for that reason it ought not to be
accounted a matter of scandal for any to neglect it: But also, as it was, in
the circumstances of it, a thing unlawful for them to do; as the whole of his
reply carrioth it: This Custom among the Jews was not a thing merely civil, but
was made Religious, and had a Symbolical Holiness affixed to it, and by
prescription, it was now grown a Ceremony in Worship; and men were esteemed
Ceremonially defiled, who did not attend it; and by this means it became
unlawful.

Christ in his reply, uses Arguments ad hominem, and ad rem. 1. Ad hominem;
verse 3. to 7. they of all men, had no reason to be offended, for they were
notorious Offenders, in that they had made void the command of God by their
Traditions: which he exemplifies in the fifth Command, they had their beams in
their own eyes, and therefore very unfit to pluckout Motes in others, if there
were any. 2. Ad rem, where:

1. He discovers the Hypocrisy of their Traditional Worship verse. 7, 8, 9.

2. He instructs the Auditory in the vanity of this particular Tradition, verse.
10, to 21.

In his Taxing them with Hypocrisy, he refers them to the Prophet, who had laid
the same charge to their Forefathers, for the very same reason: and it refers
to, Isa. 29. 13. Here are two things in which this their Hypocrisy is detected.

1. Their putting of God off with Lip Service, whilst their hearts were absent,
ver. 8

2. Their introducing of Humane Institutions into the Worship of God.

In the words then there are two things,

1 The sin which is here reproved; Preaching for Doctrines the Commandments of
men, i. e. introducing Humane Instirutions into, and making them parts of
Divine Worship:

Here observe;

1. The subject matter about which this Sin was conversant; The Commandments of
men; i. e. men's Inventions, by which he does not understand civil laws
respecting civil Government; for they were not wont to be men's Texts to Preach
upon, and as for the Authority of Rulers to Enact such Laws; Christ never
called it into question: Nor yet can he intend the civil Sanctions which are
put upon Divine Institutions by Humane Authority, for this also is to be
accounted warrantable, as well from Scripture-precept, as the Example of Godly
Rulers in all the Ages of the Church of God; but that which he intends, is
things devised by men, and imposed as parts of Worship, which are no where
commanded by God: such a thing was this under debate, viz. the washing of the
hands before meat.

2. The sin which he charge them with on this account, Teaching Doctrines.
The word translated, Teaching, is used in the New Testament for Preaching the
Gospel; and the word translated, Doctrines, is used for the Articles of
Religion, it therefore intends, a Preaching of these up, as matters of
Conscience, and binding them upon men as Duties incumbent on them, on
whatsoever pretext They were the Scribes and Pharisees whom our Savior had now
to do withal; who pretended to be Teachers of others; it was therefore a
special sin they were under the guilt of, that they bound these burdens on men's
Consciences, by pleading men's authority to make Traditions, and impose them
upon others; but he also insinuates, that, as it was their sin to teach such
things to the people; so it was no less a sin in others to receive, and
practice according to such Teachings: for this whose Discourse is brought in to
justify his Disciples for Noncompliance with them; and himself for prohibiting
them so to do.

2. The reproof it self is contained in the sharp censure which he passes upon
this sin; viz. that it is vain worship. The word signifies that which is to no
purpose, frivolous, lost labor, that will do the person no good at all, which
is idle and impertinent; and it may have respect either:

1. To the worship it self, that it is foolish, and therefore not to be
admitted; or,

1. To the Worshippers, that they do spoll their whole Worship by such
Additaments, it makes all the rest to be to little or no purpose; it is a dead
fly in the Ointment.

From the words we may rationally infer this:

DOCTRINE Men's Institutions cannot be admitted and practiced in the Worship of
God, without incurring the guilt of a very great sin.
There is not only a sin committed by them that invent, and appoint them, nor
only by them that preach them up, and tie them upon men's Consciences; of which,
it is not my present business to treat; but it is also no small sin in those
that comply with, and yield conformity to them.

In the clearing up of this Doctrine, we may enquire,

1. What we are here to understand by the Institutions of men?

2. Wherein the sin under consideration does consist?

3. How it appears to be so very great a Sin?

1. What we are here to understand by the Institutions of men?

A. Whatsoever is made a part of Religious Worship wholly by Humane Authority.
Here we must observe,

1. The head which it properly refers to, viz. Religious worship. There are the
ordinances of men, which we are in the Scripture Commanded to yield Obedience
unto, and that for Conscience sake: Civil Government is doubtless of Gods
appointment; and as Rulers ought to make the moral Law the Rule of their
Governing so there are diverse Prudentials about which they have authority from
God, to enact such Laws as are most conducible to the benefit of their
Subjects: but this is of another nature, Now in worship we consider, either the
object of it, and that is God only, or the matter and the Media, and they are
either Natural or Instituted; the latter of these is here specially respected;
viz. those external ways and means by which this Worship is to be paid unto
God: these are in Scripture called Ordinances and Commands, by a special
appropriation: and because they are so, they must depend upon some Authority
that does command them, and this must both appoint and give a Sanction to them.

2. The reference which it bears to this head; it is made a part of it, we are
warily to distinguish between that which is Essential, and that is merely
accidental, or a common adjunct: Man is to be considered, not only as he is
Religious, but also as he is a man: and in this last respect, there are many
things that are inseparable from his actions, and for that reason, are common
to all both natural, civil, and religious: such as time, and place, and what
else of like nature: and therefore their consideration in Religion is not
Essential, but Accidental to it, and that have a mere civil respect in it: and
are directed to by the Law of nature, and common prudence is to direct men in
their usage of them; though these also, when they have a religious respect put
on them, are made essential, and come under the things our Savior here refers
to: But a thing may then be said to be made a part of Worship, when it has
such an Holiness put upon it, as to be reputed a medium of our Communion with
God? and this is not to be judged of, by what men say of it, but by the
necessary consequence of the usage of it: of this nature were all the
Observances of the Ceremonial Law of Old, and they continued to be such, till
such time as Christ abolished them; and such was this usage which he here
condemns in our Context: it was not the washing of their hands at meals, as it
was a point of civility and outward cleanliness, that our Savior was offended
at, or would ever have found fault withal; but it was for their placing of a
Ceremonial Holiness in this Tradition, thinking that God was a great deal more
Honored by them that did it, than by such as omitted it: which Opinion of
their removed it from among Civils, and placed it among religious things.

3 When its being so made depends wholly upon Humane Authority. Natural Worship
is such as the nature of the object to whom, and of the subject by whom it is
to be performed, does require, and is therefore taught by the light of nature:
such is Prayer to God, fearing and reverencing him, etc. But Instituted
Worship, is something that is positive, and must needs therefore depend upon
some Authority: it is for that reason a duty, because it is enjoined, and must
suppose a power in him who does enjoin it, so to do: Now a thing may be said to
be made by the Institutions of men, when not only the injunction, but also the
devising of it proceeds from them. In this respect Jeroboam is said to offer
Sacrifice in a month which he devised in his own heart, 1 Kings 12. ult. not
only the imposition, but the thing imposed derives from men: they first invent,
and then they command it and it may be said thus to be commanded, not only when
lawful authority do pass it into a Ordinance, and give it a Sanction, by
affixing penalties to the neglect of it; but also, when by Custom or Tradition,
it is so brought into practice of a people, that it becomes a scandal to any
that shall omit it, and they are looked upon to be irreligious for not
carefully complying with it; and such was the present case in our Context;

Q. Wherein the sin under our consideration does consist?

A. 1. We may consider it negatively, And here,

1. It does not necessarily suppose a change of the object; though it may be so
interpretatively, for God is not pleased to acknowledge that to be done to him,
which is not done by his order, but still, it may be professedly devoted to the
honor of the true God, so was that feast, Exodus 32. 5. Men may pretend a true
object, and yet use a false medium: it is left as a mark of infamy upon the
Jews, that they offered Sacrifice in the high places, (places which they had
^^nsecrated of their own heads, and put holi^^ss upon;) although it it was only
to the true ^^d, 2 Chronicles. 33. 17.

2. Nor are they only guilty, that wholly lay ^^ide the institutions of God,
and surrogate the ^^ventions of men in their room. The Jews, ^^der their
greatest Apostasy, kept up Templeworship, observed the days that were of Gods
^wn appointment, attended on the stated feasts, ^^fered those sacrifices which
had been appointed them by Moses, (though possibly they were not so careful
and constant in them,) but they ^acked their own Traditions to them, and so
made a mixture of one and the other; men may go to the House of God, and attend
upon his Worship in those Ordinances which he has Instituted, and they may
annex unto them a worship which he never gave any Order about: the men that
offered in the high places, came to the Temple too.

2. Positively, in two things.

1. When men have any manner of fellowship with such a worship as this is. Any
thing wherein we partake with others, in that which is sinful, is a sin, and
renders us guilty of that very sin; hence we have that Dehortation, Ephesians. 5. 11.
Have no fellowship with the unfruitful works of Darkness, and men do contract
such a fellowship, more ways then one; it is done, not only by performing the
same things, our selves, and placing Religion upon them, but by our being
present at such Worship and thereby Joining in it with them that so do, and so
far countenancing of them in it: Our presence being a signal Approbation,
whilst we no ways repro^e it; or by our pleading for such things as lawful in
themselves, and therefore not absolutely to be condemned in those that practice
them, or by our allowing of those that are under our watch and command to give
their attendance on such a Worship as that is.

2. When we pin our faith for any part of Worship that we do perform, on the
authority of men. Suppose the thing it self be really a part of the worship
which is of Divine Institutions, yet if we do not search the Scriptures to see
whether it be indeed so or other-wise, as those Noble Bereans did, for which
they are commended, Acts. 17. 11. but contentedly take it upon trust, and all
the pretense we can plead for our doing of it, is that such and such, Holy,
wise, able, Learned Men so practiced, we incur this censure justly; I know
there is a good respect to be had for such men, and great use to be made of
them; but still, if their authority, and so saying be the Basis on which we lay
the stress of our practice, and the highest reason we can give for it, this is
to worship God, not for his Authority, but on Humane Authority; so that though
it should be Gods Worship in it self, yet it becomes man's institution as it is
attended by us.

3. How it appears to be so very great a Sin?

A. That it is really a sin thus to do, will be evident by making it out to be
a great sin; and that will be cleared by considering of those Rules by which
the greatness of a sin is to be judged of, which I shall here instance only in
three particulars.

1. We may judge of the greatness of it by the dishonor that is done to God by
it: All sin receives its true denomination in that it is against God, and the
malignity of it does properly consist, in that it is a coming short of his
glory: and for this cause, the more he is dishonored by it, the more agravated
it must needs be.

Now there are these considerations that may be had of of this sin in this
respect.

1. That it is a sin against the Second Command of the first Table.

Now All sins that are against the first Table, are more directly against God;
he being the next and immediate object of it, whereas the next object of Second
Table Duties is our Neighbor, all the Duties of this Table are to be done by
us, not only for him as our Lord, and Lawgiver for so are the other also, but
to him, as he on whom they are to Terminate; if then we pray, we must pray to
God, if we fast we are to do it to him; that therefore is the fault found in
them, Zech. 7. 5. that they did it not to him. Now the second command has a
proper aim at instructing us about instituted Worship: In the first we are told
whom we are to Worship; and what is that Natural Worship which is due to him;
in the second, What manner of Worship he will have paid him by us; it therefore
enjoins us to take his Directions in it, and to receive the Command from his
mouth, not daring to add to, or to take away any thing from it, hence there are
so many serious and solemn cautions given about it, Deuteronomy- 4. 2. 12, 32. Prove.
30. 6. and elsewhere.

2 Hence it is a Sin that is directly against the Divine Prerogative: when God
gave his positive Commandment, to his people of old, he was pleased to fet his
name to them, as a King does to his Royal Edicts; I Am the LORD: herein
manifestly intimating that the authority of all such Institutions depends,
entirely upon his Prerogative, that the Obligation of them lies in his being
Lord and Lawgiver to his People, so that for any to undertake in this matter
to make any ordinances of their own heads in worship, and bind them upon men's
Consciences, is an Invasion upon his Sovereignty, of which he is very tender;
and who shall Dare to fetch the warrant for the practicing of any thing of this
nature from any authority inferior unto his? must not this of necessity be to
put men upon Gods, Throne; and what can that be less then an act of Treachery
or Rebellion against the Crown of Heaven? and what deeper died a blemish can
sin have Charged upon it?

3. It calls a great Reproach upon the wisdom of God. He has made no small
displays of his wisdom, in contriving the way wherein he will be worshipped by
his Creatures, suitably and sufficiently to answer his end, by Gaining to
himself Glory, and procuring the Salvation of his Chosen: and for this reason
Israel of old were said to be a wise people; on account of their enjoying his
Ordinances, Deuteronomy. 5 6. but herein we make men wiser than God, whilst our thus
practicing declares us to suppose that they can Meliorate his worship, by their
adding of those things to it, as if men knew better than he, what is most
advantageous to his Glory and our Salvation.

4. It casts a great reflection upon the Faithfulness of Christ in his Church.
Moses was a Type of Christ; and herein does the Apostle make the parallel
between the Type and the Antitype, Heb. 3. 2. that he was Faithful to him that
appointed him, as Moses was in all his House. And this has a peculiar respect
unto Instituted Worship. Now we find that Moses prescribed by Divine
Appointment, the whole of that in the times, of the Law, even to the very Pins
and T^ches, and fillets, of the Tabernacle, and all this Exactly according to
the Pa^te^^^ given him in the Mount, so as that nothing was wanting, or might
be added: and thus must Christ have done in the Gospel Church, or else the
Parallel will not hold, but the Type must outshine the Antitype, which it never
did; that therefore was a Prophesy of Gospel times though delivered in
Old-Testament-Language, Ezekiel. 43. 11. show them the form of the house, and the
fashion thereof, and the goings out thereof, and the comings in thereof, and all
the forms thereof, and all the Ordinances thereof, and all the forms thereof, and
all the Laws thereof, and write it in their sight, that they may keep the whole
form thereof, and all the Ordinances thereof, and do them: whereas thus to do, is
to signify that we acknowledge and believe that Christ has omitted something
that is Essential to his Worship.

5. It is to impose upon God, and that is a great sin. We do nothing less
herein, than to give Laws to the great King, from whose mouth we ought to
receive all. Acts of worship are deligned for Communion between God and his
people; and he has promised to them that do rightly worship him, that he will
be among them and bless them; which is their great encouragement to give
attendance to his Institutions, because there is a blessing in them, but God
has obliged himself no farther than to his own Appointments; whereas in those
things we say, that God shall come and hold Communion with us in Men's
Prescriptions, that these shalld oblige his presence with us; for without this
supposal, Ordinances must lose their proper end; and this must needs be the
highest arrogance that can be.

6. Hence it is a vain Worship, so it is called; Text, and this must needs
denominate it sinful. To do any thing in vain, is folly, but to Worship God in
vain, is gross iniquity; and what less than vain must that of necessity be, in
which we can promise to our selves no fellowship with God, or participation in
his grace, except he will for our pleasure, lay aside his Prerogative, and
submit himself to the prescriptions of men? if men only were imposed upon, it
were not so much; but to think to impose upon God, is in it self-presumption,
and will prove ruin in the event.

2. We may judge of the greatness of this sin, by the Displeasure of God which
appears against it; it can be no little provocation, that God manifests his
sore indignation at, and this discovers it self.

1. In the Jealousy which he entertains on this account Where is it that he
declares himself to be a Jealous God, but in the matters of Instituted Worship?
Exodus 20. 5. Solomon tells us, that Jealousy is the rage of a man; when
therefore God assumes it to himself, it must needs intimate his great
indignation; a person is not wont to be jealous but in something that he
places a very high account upon, and consequently looks upon himself to be
basely abused, if he be touched in that; and thus does God in point of this
Prerogative, to have the acknowledgment from his people, that he alone has the
ordering of every part of his Worship.

2. In the awful Threatenings which he has Denounced against this sin, we find
that he has menaced Generations to come, that they shall feel the smart of
their Fathers prevarication upon this account. Exodus 20. 5. We see therefore
how he threatnens the ten Tribes for making of many Altars, and building of
Temples, Hos 8. 11, 14. the sum is this sin should increase their guilt, till
it had rooted them out; yea, when Israel had made the Golden Calf, which was a
new mode of Worship; and the Feast held to it, is called a Feast to Jehovah,
Exodus 32. 5. God both plagued them at present for it, and also threatens them
to keep it in remembrance against them for afterward, verse 34. The Jews
therefore have an observation, I hat no Judgment ever after fell upon that
people, but it had an Ounce of the Golden Calf in it.

3. In the severe Judgments which he has executed upon men for this sin it is
well to be Remarked, that the first quarrel that ever God had with mankind, was
about Instituted Worship; and a transgression of a positive precept referring
to the Worship of God, in a Sacrament, has filled the world with all the
miseries which to this day it groans under. Nadab and Aothu will offer up
Incense unto God with strange fire, and it brought them to a strange and sudden
end, Gideon's Ephod became a Snare to his house, and it cost the lives of sixty
nine of his Sons. Jeroboam dedicated his golden Calves to the Worship of God,
and it rooted out every branch of his family, and at length carried the whole
Land into Captivity. And these things are written for our Learning; the
Jealousy of God has many times burnt like a fire, and consumed root and
branch of such as have thus tempted him.

3. It may also be seen in the harm that men do to themselves by it; and this
is consequent upon the former. Men sin against their own Souls by thus doing;
and that is a great sin; and this harm will especially appear in three things.

1. They certainly lose all the labor and cost that they lay out upon such
Worship; this also is implied in calling of it Vuin Worship; and this loss
brings unknown damage along with it. In matters of Worship, men are more
peculiarly concerned for the furthering of their own Salvation; it is therefore
a Spiritual Loss that men sustain by this: if they worshipped God aright, how
much might they forward their everlasting good by it? for it would afford them
the opportunity of the nearest Communion with God, that is to be enjoyed before
such time as the Glass shall be removed, and he be seen face to face; but now
they do nothing at all toward this: they do but trifle in matters of Eternity:
and by reason of this they come to sustain an Eternal Loss.

2. It hazards our losing the good of the Institutions of God. The words of our
Text seems to intimate, as if the whole Worship were rendered vain by this
mixture, and truly it cannot be denied to be a Righteous Judgment of God, to
withdraw that blessing from his own Institutions, which has its absolute
dependence upon his Influence, with respect to those that are fond of
interweawing Humane Inventions with them; nay, usually, when they lay
themselves out so much upon these, they too often neglect the right improvement
of the other; and are not seldom punished by God, in being left to fall into
all sorts of Immoralities: this sin very seldom goes alone, but is wont to
have a Train of other grievous sins attending upon it; and this is according to
God's fore warning, Psalm. 81. 11, 12. Israel would none of me, so I gave them
up to their own hearts lusts.

3. Men by thus doing expose themselves to the danger of being deprived of Gods
institutions, when men cannot rest satisfied with Gods appointments, but they
must have more, and such as come out of a mint which has no warrant for the
Coining them; he often Righteously takes these away from them partly by leaving
them gradually to lay them aside, first one, and then another; because it may
be, both cannot be conveniently attended; Men's Commandments, Thrust out Gods
Institutions; The Altar of Damascus justles away the Brozen Altar, and it must
now be put in a corner, and serve only for some private Devotions; partly by
bringing of Desolating Judgments which lay all wast: thus the Kingdom of Judah,
in time lost their Temple, and Altar, and Sacrifices, and were carried into a
fearful Captivity, and this sin was a leading one to the procuring of these
Dismal Calamities.

USE I. For Information in two particulars.
1. That indifferncy in the matter is not sufficient to justify a Tradition in
Worship: for what though the thing it self be not a sin to be done civily; yet
by being made a commandment, which borrows its Authority from men, and so
thrust into the Worship of God as a part of it; it now becomes a piece of vain
Worship: what can be more indifferent than washing one's hands in order to
eating our food; the thing has no harm in it at all; yea, it may sometimes
occasionally be a point of cleanliness and good manners to do it, when the not
doing it would be offensive to our own and others Stomachs: but if this once
come to have Religion put upon it, and it must be accounted a Note of greater
Sanctity in them that do it, and a Token of unholiness in such as neglect it,
exposing them to scandal, now Christ will by no means admit that his Disciples
should practice it: Had it been only a civil custom of the Nation; he would
never have found fault with it such as was offering them water to wash their
feet, he therefore reflects on him: Luke 7. 84 but he censures and condemns
this, and good reason, for it is vain, a man can get no good by it, nor do God
any honor with it; it therefore does not serve to any end of purpose at all,
but wholly falls short of the very design of Worship: a plea therefore from
indifferency in the thing is vain, for the excusing, much more for the
warranting of any Tradition, which by the commandment of men loses its
indifferency, and is tied as a burden on men's Consciences.

2. That a Divine Precept is necessary to warrant every part of Religious
Worship. Instituted Worship must be able to prove its Legitimacy by
Institution, for, because it is not natural but positive, it depends upon
Authority: its obligation therefore can be of no greater strength than the
Authority of its Author can put upon it; and that must be founded in his right
to command it; all instructions derive their Authority either from God, or the
Creature: if it be from God, then he has signified his mind about it in
scripture, and that in particular; for he has no where by any general
indulgence given away this liberty of his to any other Authority in the world,
to have the dominion of the Conciences of men, or to give rules of worship; but
has on the one hand strongly prohibited it and severely threatened any that
shall presume to do it; if then any such derive from men let them show their
Authority, if they expect them to be entertained; The Authorizing of any part
of worship belongs to the second, and not to the fifth Command; and must for
that reason have a Divine Warrant. Hence it follows that there is nothing to be
received by us on this account, but what has God's Scale affixt to it: it is
therefore enough to set us down resolved against any such thing; if we can say
there is a silence about it in the scripture; that God has nowhere Commanded
it in his word, either expressly or by just and necessary consequence, it is no
order of his devising: Scripture silence about any Tradition, gives it a full
condemnation whatever pleas men may bring for the justification of it: although
they may pretend that it is very profitable, that many have bin edified by it;
that it is a very prudent way to secure the Interests of Religion, that many
wise, holy and learned men have pleaded for and practiced it, that there is
much of decency in it, and the thing in it self is no ways harmful: all this is
fully answered with that one word, God has spoken nothing about it, Heh. 7.
14. it never entered into his heart to enjoin it, Jer. 7. 31.

USE II.
This may put us upon asking whether God manageth no part of his controversy
with us upon this account. It is a time wherein God is making discoveries of his
Holy dispeasure against us, in a whole series of frowning Providence that we
are laboring under, witnessing that he is not a little offended at this his
people; it is therefore a time for deep heart searching, and in the doing of
it, it will not be a miss to make a little enquiry for this sin among the rest:
possibly it may be supposed that of all the sins that a people of God are wont
to be charged withal, these Churches are least guilty in this Article, of any:
however if we look narrowly, there may for ought I know be enough to humble us
before God, and put us upon Repentance; it may be we may find some that have
willingly and upon choice, exchanged the more pure worship of God, for that
which is more mixed, and had much rather to serve Him at an high place, than at
the Sanctiuary: are there not they that have observed days of Humane
consecration, and put a title of Holiness upon them, though they have expressed
little of it in the manner of their observation? It may be there are
Traditions, by custom grown into Ordinances, gotten at least into some of our
Churches, which can show no warrant under Christ's hand to authorize them, and
yet it has been an offense not to comply with and cry them up; has there not
been too much of a pinning our Faith on the credit or practice of others,
attended on, with a woeful neglect of seeking to know what is the mind of Christ
in it?

This I am sure of, that an aspiring mind is Natural to Fallen Man, and will be
stirring whilst there is Corruption in us, and this is greatly delighted in
tampering with things that are above us, and particularly to be patching in
Religion; but let us beware to our selves in this, The God we have to do with
is a jealous God; and if there be any such thing, we had need very carefully
look after it and remove it, God will else Charge us sor committing of
Lowdness, and deal with us accordingly.

USE III.
Be we then Exhorted to avoid this sin, so far as there may have bin any Guilt
contracted, if not willingly and knowingly, yet if ignorantly and through
neglect, let us repent of and turn from it, and let us set our selves more
strenuously against it for the time forward: is it a sin so great? let not us
then think it little, or our selves to be out of the danger of falling into it;
and to move us to be the more careful in our endeavors against it, let us
consider,

1. There are no small Temptations to it from within, and from without: the
world and your own corrupt hearts have a great deal to say and plead, which is
suited to the flesh, to insinuate into you unto a compliance with such things:
these things are many of them adapted to the carnal wisdom of men; and are
easily clothed with diverse religious pretenses, and how many ways they are
seemingly advantageous to the promoting of Piety; these all must be withstood,
if you will not be bafled into this sin: besides there are no small arguments,
from the lawfulness of the things in themselves, and scandal apt to arise from
a non compliance with them.

2. Except we thus do, we shall directly vacare our Fathers design in Planting
of this Wilderness. It is certain, that their Errand hither was to sequester
themselves into a quiet corner of the world, where they might enjoy Christ's
unmixed Institutions, and leave them uncorrupted to their Posterity; and if
this design of theirs were unworthy of them, and reproachful to their names;
let it then be buried with them, and forgotten, and no more mention made of it
to stain their memories withal; but if it were worth their parting with so many
comforts and conveniences of a pleasant Land, in which they enjoyed a
considerable share, and the exposing of themselves to the suffering of so many
hardships, and almost unconquerable difficulties of an Uncultivated Desert, and
so many discouragements cast in their way, which were in themselves very
ungratefnl to the minds of men; let us not cast this reproach upon it and them,
which we shall certainly do, if we depart from the strict avoidance of
whatsoever Worship does not derive from the Precept of God, and Appointment of
Jesus Christ: in every such act, we call them fools; and this will rise up in
judgment against us another day.

3. We cannot else stand to our explicit Covenant. That it is lawful and a duty
sor the people of God solemnly to enter into and renew Covenant, and that
frequently referring to the matters of Gods House, and to all duties wherein
they stand obliged to serve him, the Scripture is full, and we have diverse
Examples there Recorded; it being too true, that a Professing People are apt to
forget themselves, and fall under neglects, and for this cause ought to be
doing something to quicken themselves up and bind their Souls to their work:
and what is this for? not to find out any new ways of worshipping God; that
would be a Conspiracy; instead of a Covenant; but it is to reform any thing
that is amiss, to revive any thing that is decayed, to reslore that which is
lost, and to ratify that which ought to be: Now these Churches have declaredly
Covenanted with God, and mutually, that we will serve the Lord with no other
manner of Worship, but that which he has appointed and established in his
Word; and do we think that he will be trifled withal in a Covenant and Vow that
has been made by us before Angels and men?

3. Hence our so doing will leave us under the Guilt of Apostasy: to depart
from any thing which God has required of us, and we have Covenanted with him
to perform, will certainly have this brand upon it: and it will be so much the
more aggravated, by all that light which God has afforded to show us the
sinfulness of so doing; which will take away all Cloaks from us, and there has
been not a little of that, which we have enjoyed the advantage of: yea, and
that which will make it yet more provoking to God, and dangerous for us, is
that this will be an Apostasy in that very thing, which is the Test upon which
God tries the Churches in New-En gland.

FINIS.

