REMARKS Of an University-Man UPON A Late BOOK, Falsely called A Vindication of
the Primitive Fathers, against the Imputations of Gilbert Lord Bishop of Sarum.
Written by Mr. Hill of Killmington.

LONDON: Printed for Ri. Chiswell, at the Rose and Crown in St. Paul's
Churchyard. MDCXCV.

REMARKS UPON A late Book, falsely called A Vindication of the Primitive
Fathers, etc.
THE great Satisfaction I had in reading the Lord Bishop of Sarum' s Four
Discourses to his Clergy, and that especially, concerning the Divinity of our
Savior, (wherein I met with such excellent Arguments, as I had not found in
other Authors, for the Confirmation of that great Article of our Faith,)
obliged me to think that they could not but be received with as general an
Esteem and Approbation, as, in my Judgment, they deserved. And as I was
persuaded they would be extremely useful, so I could not but imagine they would
remain unexcepted against, by the most Malicious and Ill-natured, unless they
were such as denied the very Divinity of our Savior. All which, I was the more
fully convinced of, and believed I might rely upon them, as agreeable to the
true and orthodox Doctrine of the Church, since they appeared in Public with
the Approbation and License of the never enough to be admired Late Archbishop
of Canterbury, whose Sincerity, Clearness, and Strength of Judgment, I was well
assured, would approve of nothing as the Doctrine of the Church, and fit to
believed by its Clergy, which deserved the Censure of a Convocation. And though
there came out some Exceptions against the Second Discourse, which relates to
the Divinity and Death of Christ, as well as against the Archbishop's Sermons,
and one of the Bishop of Worcester' s, by the Socinian Party; yet they appeared
so trifling, (especially since they have been answered by the Bishop of Sarum'
s Letter to Dr. Williams, which is annexed to his Learned Vindication of the
other Two) that they rather confirmed than lessened my Opinion of it. But I
must confess, I was something surprised, and began to distrust my Judgment,
when I saw Mr. Hill's Book come forth with such a Title, as I thought was
almost enough, had there* been nothing more in it, to have made the Bishop's
Second* Discourse, which is the only one aimed at, be censured as Heretical;
and, had it been made good, must have thought it my Duty also, as being a
Member of one of those Bodies, to whose Judgment the Book is referred, as well
as to the Church Universal, the Archbishops and Bishops of the Church of
England, and the next Session of Convocation, to assist at the Solemnity of
condemning the Bishop himself for an Heretic. But when I considered that it
was grown to too general a Custom, for Authors to make large and specious
Titles, to make amends for the emptiness of the Book; and that they oftener give
a Specimen of their own ill Nature, than of any real Errors they discover; I
began to be no more concerned at the Title, than I was at the mighty Quotations
which this Author makes use of; when I considered, that by turning to the
Indexes of the Paris Editions of the Fathers in our Public Library, I could
quote as much, and as little to the Purpose as our Author has done.

I am almost apt to think, it would be labor lost to run through his whole
Book, to detect every Absurdity in it; since I believe those who have read the
Preface to it, were so sufficiently convinced of the weakness of the Author,
that they could not think it worth their while to make any farther search into
it. It Is a great deal of Pity that the Letter, which he mentions to have sent
to his Lordship, did not appear with the Preface; for certainly it must have
proved as great a Satire upon himself, as the Preface appears to be. But I am
too forward in my Censure; for, if you will believe him, the Bishop is mightily
beholding to him for his gentle usage of him, and for not divulging some
Private Practice; which upon fitting terms he is contented to hush up at
present. And therefore his Lordship had not best provoke him, and think of
returning an Answer; for if he does, he shall then be set free from all
Obligations to Secrecy and good Manners; and then Woe betide him. This I take to
be the Sense of what follows, viz. But for the Private Practice objected to
him, I will at present spare him; and if his Lordship will be so kind to
himself, as (...), the Matter shall be hushed up. A trifling and Childish
Insinuation: For had the Bishop been really guilty of any such Private
Practice, as would have been a dishonorable Reflection upon him. I question
not, but we should have heard more of it; since so much Malice could never have
let slip so fair an Occasion, without making the best Improvements of it, had
there been any thing more, that could have advanced the Credit of the other
Aspersions, or have been any support to the weakness of the Cause. The rest of
the Preface is of the same Piece; and thus he concludes it; But as to his
Doctrine, it is gone abroad, and cannot return; and if it be of evil Influence
on young Students, or Men prepared to Irreligion, or of dishonorable
Reflection to the present Reign, or State of Religion; every Man has a just
right, fairly and bravely to oppose it, without fear of Men, or respect of
Persons: And if it be not so, I promise his Lordship the most public
Recantation and Penance. And, supposing he should be obliged to undergo it,
with the utmost severity the Law could inflict, he may remain a lasting and sad
Example, of the Punishment due to all Libellers, and to all malicious Forgers
of Falsehood. For though I have made a very diligent search into the Bishop's
Discourse, and into the Objections this Author has made against it; yet I do
solemnly protest, that I do not find any one of those Charges made good against
it. What he means by these Words of dishonorable Reflection to the present
Reign, I cannot guess; I believe they are not only very rude, but such a
malicious Insinuation, as if it can be understood, deserves a more severe
Answer, and of a different Nature, than I am able to give him. How fairly and
bravely he has opposed any thing that the Bishop has said, or rather, how
fairly and openly he has rendered himself contemptible, is now high time to
consider.

He begins his Book with a great deal of Confidence, and supercilious Contempt;
That he has Two things to urge against the Lord Bishop of Sarum, in his
Discourse on the Divinity and Death of Christ. 1. That the Bishop very
defectively (to say no worse) states our Faith and Doctrine in the Articles of
the Trinity and Incarnation. And 2. That he exposes the Fathers under the same,
and worse Imputations; which is the Second thing, that, he says, offends. All
that the Bishop says of the Fathers, if I mistake him not, is to this purpose;
That though the Fathers might have the same Notions of the Trinity, that we now
have, namely, That every one of the Blessed Three has a peculiar Distinction in
himself, by which he is truly Different from the other Two; yet in their
Explanations of this Doctrine, they often went so far, as might give occasion
to some to think, that they believed an Inequality between the Persons, and a
Subordination of the Second and Third to the First. And their Explanatory
Notions of the Trinity seem sometimes to carry them beyond those Bounds the
Holy Scriptures had set them. By all which, his Lordship could design nothing
more, than to show us, That since some, even of the Fathers, were sometimes
confounded in their Explanations of that Sacred Inconceivable Mystery, it would
be great Presumption in us to offer to explain the Modes, or to pretend to have
any adequate Conceptions of it. That we may not presume to dive into the Depths
of those Mysteries, which the Primitive Ages of the Church could never Fathom.
And if they unhappily failed in the Attempt, it will be great Arrogance in us
to hope of having any better Success. Nor do I find the least Shadow of Reason,
to think Page 2.
that the Bishop in any part of his Discourse, as our Author too falsely and
maliciously insinuates, censures the Catholic and Established Principles of the
Ancients; but only shows us some of their Failures and Imperfections. He denies
not, that the Fathers believed a Trinity, as the Scriptures had revealed it;
but only, that they were at a loss, when they offered to make the manner of it
intelligible, which is to take away the Mysteriousness of it. And I wonder how
our Author has the Confidence to say more.

I will give this parallel Instance, which may serve both to defend and
illustrate what the Bishop has said upon this Subject of the Fathers, which our
pretended Vindicator, where there is the least necessity for it, makes the
greatest noise about. We of the Church of England, do certainly believe, and
can undeniably prove, that the Primitive Church were of the same Doctrine and
Faith with us, concerning the Eucharist, that there was no Corporal, but only a
Sacramental Presence of Christ's Body; yet we also confess, that some of the
Fathers have expressed themselves in some of their Writings, in such high
Strains, and Figurative Raptures, as might give occasion to some to think, that
they meant a Corporal Presence by those lofty Expressions, which only their
height of Devotion drew from them. After the same manner, we may conclude, that
though the Fathers believed the Doctrine of the Trinity, as it is revealed in
Scripture, yet in their Explanations of the Modes and Manner of it, some of
them may have given us Cause to think, that several of those Expressions which
they have let fall about it, as well as of the forementioned Doctrine, went
farther than they were instructed or warranted by God's Word. And this I think
may be sufficient to explain the Bishop's Sense about the Fathers, if I
understand him aright, and to answer all those ill Natured Exceptions, which
our Vindicator has very unjustly framed against it. But I shall have more to
say to him in his due place.

I shall then examine his first Charge against the Bishop, Page ^.
viz. That he foully states the Faith of the Divinity and Incarnation of
Christ, and therein of the Holy Trinity. Of which, says our Author, The Bishop
tells us, there have been three Opinions; the Socinian, Arian, and that which
he would have called the Catholic and Christian Faith. Now where is the Fault
of all this? and yet, as I perceive, this is one of the Chiefest Imputations of
Heresy against the Bishop. I never heard any Man yet so much as spoken
against, for saying that there are Three Opinions about the Eucharist, the
Roman, the Lutheran, and that of the Church of England, with those that believe
the same Doctrine. And if any one should ask me, whether these Opinions were
within, or without the Church, I should justly brand him with the Character of
Impertinent, and think him not worth answering. It is such a common form of
expressing our selves, that I wonder how it could come into any Man's thoughts
to cavil at it. But he adds, That which is more grievously suspicious, (I
wonder how he came to omit Heretical) is, that his Lordship calls the Catholic
Faith, but a mere Opinion, and Persuasion of a Party. With what Confidence he
asserts this, I cannot imagine: He cannot show me where the Bishop says, that
the Catholic Faith is but a mere Opinion; for my part, I can see no such thing
throughout the whole Discourse, no more than I can find that he says, it is the
Persuasion of a Party. I suppose he had a mind that the Bishop should have said
it, and since he has not, he is so kind as to do it for him: For the Bishop in
his Preface calls it, the great Article of Christianity, its most important
Head, and rejects the Pacificatory Doctrines of those who think that a
diversity of Opinions may be endured upon those Heads, without breaking
Communion about them. He says, they seem to be the Fundamentals of
Christianity. And he thus concludes his Discourse upon this Head: This Doctrine
is so plainly set down in the New Testament, that if the Socinians Expositions
are to be admitted, it will be hard to preserve any Respect for it, or to
believe those Books writ with the common Degrees of Honesty and Discretion, not
to speak of Inspiration. And all this is very fully repeated in the Bishop's
Letter to Dr. Williams: So that to infer from his stating this matter at first,
as a Third Opinion, that he thought it to be no more than an Opinion, is a
Strain as unjust, as it is malicious. All that the Bishop says of Opinion, is
no more than this; viz. The third Opinion is, that the Godhead Page 31.
by the Eternal Word, etc. And a little after, by those of this Persuasion,
etc. And then a little after he adds, That this is the Doctrine I intend now to
explain to you. And then, after he has explained it according to the Sense of
the Church of England, he calls it the received Doctrine; by which he can only
mean, (nor can any one else give another Interpretation of it, than) the
Article of our Faith, which we profess to believe and defend. I would willingly
know where is the hurt of all this, in saying (as I before mentioned) that
there are Three Opinions concerning Christ's Presence in the Sacrament, one of
which is that of our Church, which I am fully persuaded, is a Doctrine revealed
in the Scriptures, and confirmed by the Authority of the Primitive Fathers.
Dares any one, I say, after all this, urge that I assert this only as a new
Opinion and Persuasion of a Party? And if the Bishop does not say as much
concerning the Trinity, I desire to lie under no better an Imputation, than our
Author has very justly deserved, of stating other Men's Doctrines falsely and by
halves, according as the Byas of his present Inclinations turned him. I could
not imagine that ever Prejudice or Ill Nature, should so far blind and mislead
a Man, as to hurry him into wilful Errors, against the clearest Convictions
both of Sense and Reason. Don't we say every Day, that there are so many
Opinions about the first Origin of Things, the Aristotelick, Epicurean,
Christian, etc. and yet after all, we acknowledge that the Christian is the
only true Doctrine. God forbid, that every Man that mentions Opinion after that
manner, should commit a Sin. For if he does, I know none that can pronounce
themselves Guiltless. Our Vindicator, after this, spends a Page or two, in
showing the difference between Faith and Opinion; which Paper I think might
have been better spared, since it is nothing to his purpose. For I know no
where that the Bishop asserts Opinion to be Faith; and if he had, he might have
been better and more clearly convinced of his Error, by a few Pages in Bishop
Pearson on the Creed, than in a dark obscure Author. But after all, our
Vindicator acknowledges that his Lordship sometimes calls it Doctrine; but this
term, says he, is Equivocal, and agrees as usually to the Opinions of the
Philosophers. But here I must desire to know of our Critic, whether ever he
met with the Word Doctrine, when it was applied in a Divinity Discourse to the
Tenets of the Church, to be meant of a Philosophical Opinion; or when a Man is
talking of the Doctrine of the Trinity, of the Incarnation and Divinity of
Christ, he can at the same time refer it to the Opinions of Aristotle, Plato,
Epicurus, or Cartesius. But it is the Fate of some of our overgrown Critics,
to catch at Shadows, when they cannot lay hold of the Substance, and to make
themselves appear in their own Colors, rather than say nothing.

In the next Place, our Critic finds fault with the Bishop for saying, That we
believe Points of Doctrine, because Page 6.
that we are persuaded they are revealed to us in Scripture; which, he says, is
so languid and unsafe a Rule, that it will resolve Faith into every Man's
private Fancy and contradictory Opinions. Now I had thought hitherto, that the
Scripture had been the adequate Measure and Rule of Faith, and that whatsoever
we were persuaded was really contained in the Scriptures, we were obliged to
believe it. And though I am beholden to the universal consent of the Church for
my Belief that those Books are the same that were delivered to us from the
Apostles, and Inspired Penmen, yet I am obliged to believe nothing as an
Article of Faith, but what I am persuaded is revealed in Scripture. And
certainly it is much more safe to rely upon the pure Word of God for the Truth
of any Doctrine, if I am convinced that it was Divinely Inspired; than, as our
Author would advise us, to depend upon the best Tradition and most unanimous
Exposition in the World: Since at length I must recur to the Scriptures to
examine that Tradition by, and am no farther concerned to believe this, than I
find it agreeable to the other. It Is true, that it is every Man's Duty to
submit to the unanimous Sense of the Church, rather than to his own private
Interpretation; but yet it is no farther, than he can find that Consent
agreeable to the revealed Will of God. And if this be not admitted as true
Doctrine; I cannot imagine how we could ever have arrived at this Happy
Reformation, which we are now persuaded was absolutely necessary; since it
could never have been effected, unless every Man has the Liberty of judging the
Doctrine he professes, by the Testimony of the Scriptures: Nor are we to
interpret the Scriptures so much by the Judgment of the Fathers and the Church,
as we try these by their Harmony and Consent with the former. And hence it will
follow, that as we are not obliged to believe any thing which we think is
contrary to Scripture; so whatsoever we do or ought to believe as an Article of
Faith, we do it because we are fully and clearly persuaded, that it is revealed
to us in the Scriptures. Else what shall those do, who have no notion of
Tradition, and have no other Rule to guide them, but the plain and direct
Authority of God's Word? And though every Man is not to be his own Interpreter,
yet he is to judge whether the received Interpretation is agreeable to
Scripture or not. If Mr. Hill had not here forgot the express Words of the
Sixth Article of our Church, which tells us, That the Holy Scripture contains
all things necessary for Salvation: So that whatsoever is not read therein, nor
may be proved thereby, is not to be required of any Man, that it should be
believed as an Article of the Faith, or be thought requisite or necessary to
Salvation, he could not have run out so odly from it, or rather against it; it
was the Foundation upon which the whole Reformation was built. If Universal
Tradition in the Third, Fourth, and Fifth Centuries was a good Argument in it
self, then why was not Universal Tradition in the Thirteenth, Fourteenth, and
Fifteenth Centuries as good a one? If the Authority of a Doctrine lies in the
Tradition of it, then all Ages must be alike as to this. Therefore, though it is
a noble Confirmation of our Doctrine, that we can appeal to the first Six Ages
of the Church; yet if the Corruption that happened after the Sixth Century, had
begun as early as the Third, this had not at all changed the Nature of things.
And I believe it will be found a more simple and just way of interpreting
Scripture, by other places of it more easily and plainly expressed, than by any
other Method that can be found out for that purpose. For if I am to judge of
the Sense of Scripture only by Tradition, and the Authority of the Fathers, I
shall be often at a loss, and it will be as difficult to me, to find out their
Sense and meaning, as it was that of the Text I was to enquire after: But of
this enough. When I read this Criticism of our Vindicator's, I was inclined to
think, he was, though perhaps unwittingly, set a work by the Papists, as I
before imagined he was by the Socinians, to make Divisions and Schisms in the
Church. And this I take to be Mr. Hill's Orthodox Doctrine.

But let us carry him to his next Criticism. His Lordship, Page 8.
says he, is not clear in the point of Incarnation, because he tells us, that
by the Union of the Eternal Word with Christ's Humanity, God and Man truly
became One Person. Now here, says our Author, we are not taught, whether there
were three, or any one Person in the Godhead, before the Incarnation. For this
account will admit the Personality of Christ, to be founded first in the Humane
Nature, according to some of his Lordship's Critics, (which he dares not
contradict) who place the foundation of the Sonship, in the lower Nature. This
is strange, when his Lordship says a while after, that Divine Person in whom
dwelt the Eternal* Page 45.
Word; Which makes him as well a Person before the Incarnation, as it does the
second Person in the Blessed Trinity; because by the Eternal Word, is always
understood the second Person. And since his Lordship does allow him to be a
Divine Person, as also to be Eternal, I wonder how any Man can imagine, that
his Lordship does not teach any distinction in the Godhead before the
Incarnation; or that the Personality of Christ, or the foundation of the
Sonship, was first placed in the Humane Nature: Since his calling him the
Eternal Word, makes him a distinct Person from the Father from all Eternity, as
being second of the ever Blessed Trinity; and his styling him a Divine Person,
supposes the Personality of Christ to be first founded in the Godhead. For I
should have thought (had I not been prejudiced by abundance of ill Nature) that
Christ could be called a Divine Person, only upon the account of the Godhead
dwelling in Flesh, and not upon any account of his Manhood: (For else there
would be two Persons in Christ.) And therefore I think, that the Bishop can
mean nothing else, but that he was a Divine Person, only as he was God; and
consequently so, before he was Incarnate, because he was Eternal in the
Bishop's own Expression. And therefore I may positively affirm, that our
Author's Assertion, that the Bishop's plain intention by these words, was to
place Christ's Personality only in his Manhood, to be False and Malicious. Yea,
but says our Author, this description of the Bishop's, (viz. That by the Union
of the Eternal Word with Christ's Humanity, God and Man truly became one
Person) will admit the Patripassian Heresy, of but one Person in the Deity:
For if the Eternal Word were no Person distinct from the Father, the Union
thereof with the Humanity, constitutes the Father an Incarnate Person; or
otherwise by this state of his Lordship's Doctrine, the Father, Son, and the
Holy Ghost, may be conceived as one Incarnate Person. How our Critic came to
think of this Remark, I cannot apprehend. For I never yet met with any Man, that
thought the Eternal Word meant the whole Trinity; but that when the Eternal
Word, or (...), was mentioned, it was always understood of the second Person.
And when we use that Expression, we always think we have explained our selves,
as much as though we had used the Name of tho second Person in the Trinity. And
the Bishop does seem so plainly to mean this by it, that I wonder how any Man
endued with Reason could force another Interpretation of it. Especially, when
his Lordship in the very same Page, calls the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, Page
^^.
three Persons by name, and shows how far they are distinguished the one from
the other: Which Doctrine I presume is impossible ever to admit the
Patripassian Heresy of but one Person in the Deity, or to make the Father,
Son, and Holy Ghost be conceived as one Incarnate Person; when at the same time
the Bishop affirms them to be Three Persons: Which I must leave to our Author
to reconcile. Nay in the same Page he has Person three times repeated, (which
shows that he was not either afraid or unwilling to use that Expression, as our
Author would have us believe) besides that which he applies particularly to the
Incarnate Word; and in every one of these he refers to the Blessed Three. 1. He
tells us of the Name Person being applied to the Three. 2. He shows what is
meant by Person, when it is applied to the Three. 3. He tells us, that by
explaining he does not mean, that be will pretend to tell us, how this is to be
understood, and in what respect these Persons are believed to be One, and in
what respect they are Three. Now can any man after all this affirm, that his
Lordships words would lead one to a Conclusion, or at least a fair Jealousy,
that his Lordship does not believe any Distinction really Personal between the
Father, Word, and Holy Spirit, but that the true and real Personality of
Christ, is proper to the Humane Nature? When he has been all along asserting a
Personal Distinction in the Trinity, and made the Second Person in the Trinity
(that is, the Incarnate Word) Eternal, as plain as words can make it. I shall
add to this, as well as to some other of his bitter and indecent Reflections:
What shall be given unto thee, or what shall be done unto thee thou false
Tongue? Oh deliver my soul, O Lord, from lying lips, and from a deceitful
tongue.

I have not time, or if I had, I should not think it well spent, to take notice
of every trivial Insinuation of our Author's. I see no cause to believe that
his Lordship has used the word Person in any different sense, than what ours
and the whole Catholic Church has ever used it; and if at any time he has
omitted it, when he names the Blessed Three, yet he means as much by it as the
Scripture does, by his endeavoring to follow as much as may be the Scripture
phrase, and makes them as much different as the Church does when she names the
Persons. And it is not only some sly Insinuations, and malicious Suppositions
to the contrary, but direct Proofs and downright Arguments, and solid Reason
that can satisfy any Impartial and Inquisitive Mind. I shall here beg leave to
use the Bishop's own words, which in his Letter to Dr. Williams, he inserts as
a just Reflection upon the odd Comments of the Socinians; Namely, That the
Best, (and I am sure the fairest) rule of Criticism, is to consider the whole
Thread, Strain, and Phraseology of a Book, and not to descant upon the various
significations that the words themselves taken severally may be capable of. Had
our Critic observed this Rule, he would never have troubled the World with his
rude and confused Notions, nor have abused himself, as he has now too
inconsiderately done.

But now let us see what our Vindicator has to urge against the Bishop's
saying, That the Term Person came to Page 11.
be applied to the Three, to discover those, who thought that these Three were
different names of the same thing, which were for the most part, and were
generally called Patripassians, and were expelled as Heretics from the Church.
Now as to this, he takes up two or three Pages to say nothing, only to yield up
the Cause, and yet to censure the Bishop for saying the Truth. He quotes indeed
a passage or two from Tertullian and Athanasius; but for any thing that they
are to his purpose, he might as well have quoted Aristotle or Seneca: He
introduces them, to show that the Term Person was then used, but not to prove
that the occasion of its use, was not upon account of the Patripassiun, or the
like Heresies. Now I would desire him to produce any Author that asserts, that
the word Person was used before some Heresy arose, that enforced the necessity
of it. For if there is nothing more meant by saying that there are three
Different Persons in the Godhead, than what the Scripture means by saying, that
there are Three that bear Witness in Heaven, and elsewhere to the same purpose;
there could be no necessity for using the Word Person to explain it, unless it
was to satisfy and undeceive those, who either doubted it, or denied the
reality of any Personal Distinction. And if all Men had believed exactly, as
the Scripture declares it self, I may well suppose that the Term Person might
not have been made use of, at least there would have been no necessity for it
to this very Day. And though those Heretics that denied any Personal
Distinction in the Godhead, denied the received Doctrine of the Church; yet
does it not follow, as our Author would persuade us, that the Word Person was
before used; since, as was already said, what the Scripture has revealed to us
concerning that sacred Mystery, imports as much as what we mean by a Personal
Distinction. From whence it follows, that since there was no occasion for the
use of it, it is very probable that Term was not, till some Heresies broke out,
introduc't into the Church; and if so, our Vindicator's, and not his Lordship's
Insinuation is false and injurious. Tertullian indeed, charges some with
denying the Eternal Word to be a Substantial, Real Person: But this is only an
interpretation of the Scripture, or seems designed to show in what Sense he
understands it. And if we should grant that he was not the first that used it,
yet it will not follow, but that there were Heretics before, that denied any
distinction in the Godhead which might give occasion for the first use of it. I
deny not, that the Word Person was used regularly in the Church, or that it is
very expressive of the Sense of the Scripture, and very agreeable to it; but
only, that it does not appear that it was made use of, before some Heresies or
Disputes arose about the Meaning of those Places of Scripture, which made the
use of it seem absolutely necessary. And this, and no other, seems to be his
Lordship's plain meaning. But had his Lordship shown any dislike to the use of
it, which I don't any where find in his whole Discourse the least reason to
suspect; yet I find no less an Author than St. Hierom cited (by a late great
Prelate, who always used that Word with a great deal of Approbation and Esteem)
as desiring in some of his Writings to be excused mentioning it. Though I know
this is nothing to the Purpose, yet I wonder our Author would let him escape
without some Mark of Defamation, as seeming to have a greater dislike to that
Term, than the Bishop has any where expressed, and therefore a fitter Subject to
vent his Passion against.

But to go on: In his next Paragraph, he comes to Page 15.
show us, that his Surmises against his Lordship's Integrity are well grounded,
by his Lordship's Explanation of the Term Person. For by Person, says his
Lordship, is only meant, that every one of the Blessed Three, has a peculiar
Distinction in himself, by which he is truly different from the other Two.
Here, says our Author, it is plain, That by using the Term Three so often,
without adding Person, he shuns the Word as much as he dares at present to do,
and assigns a Distinction, which is not any way Personal. Now as to his
shunning the Word Person, I think there is no reason to suspect, when he had
used it but in the same Sentence, that our Author finds fault with; and I may
offer to say, that he could not there have properly used it oftener. But I
suppose our Author would have had his Lordship say, that by, there being Three
Persons in the Godhead, is to be understood that those Persons are Three: For
otherwise, how his Lordship's Explanation is Faulty I cannot see. And if his
Lordship dares not make it his own, or allow it for proper, as the Vindicator
maliciously insinuates, yet there are others that dare. Without doubt, as our
Author would have it, it is the best Definition in the World of Ens, to say it
is Ens, and that an Individuum is an Individuum: How we can otherwise explain,
there being Three Persons in the Godhead, I cannot imagine, but by saying they
are really distinct from each other. And our Author's fine turn of three
Tobacco Pipes, may as well refer to the Apostle's saying, there are Three that
bear witness in Heaven; as to any thing his Lordship has said; and then he
might have added Blasphemy to his Nonsense. Yes, but says our Author, his
Lordship should have added in his Definition of the Term Person, the Words of
Father, Son, and Holy Ghost. Now I can tell our Author that this Answer is to
be made to those who enquire who are the Three that constitute the Godhead, and
not to what we mean by Person, when we apply it to them as such. For when we
consider them as Persons, there is no necessity, that we should in the same
Breath, explain the Relation they bear to each other. And though they are Three
Persons, as being Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, yet that would be no direct
Answer to the Question, What we mean by Person, when we apply it to the Blessed
Three? And if our Vindicator had truly considered this, he might have stopped his
Fury for a Page or two together. When I first read this, I thought it might be
the slip of an angry hasty Pen; but when I considered it was of the same strain
with the rest of the Book, a great deal said upon nothing, I concluded, that it
must proceed either from gross Ignorance, or inveterate Malice. I suspect
something more than should be. I am sure the whole Foundation is rotten, and
more than tacitly imports a Renunciation of all Charity, the greatest Page 17.
Branch of our Christianity.

In his next Paragraph, he comes to give up the Cause; for he tells us, that by
the Bishop's calling them the Blessed Three, he means as much as we do by
Persons; because, (...) and (...), when applied to every of the Three, must
mean the same as we do by Person; and if so, the only quarrel is about Words,
and not the Sense of the thing; and I know no reason why his Lordship should be
censured for not mentioning Person in every Line, when every where he means the
same as we do by it, and has expressed himself in the same Terms as the Scripture
has done. And I much wonder why Mr. Hill did not catechize the Apostle for not
using the Word Person, (as he very ridiculously exposes himself) since there is
as much reason for the one, as the other. But besides, his Lordship has several
times mentioned Person in relation to the Trinity, which none of the Apostles
or Evangelists have ever done: But had he not done it, yet the Reason which he
gives in answer to his Socinian Adversary, may be sufficient to excuse it. And
therefore, I shall here beg leave to transcribe those Words. When Christ
commanded all to be Baptized, in the Name of the Father, Page 99, 100.
Son, and Holy Ghost, he plainly mentioned Three; if therefore I, to adhere to
Scripture Terms, had avoided the frequent use of any other Word but the Three,
I thought how much soever this might offend others, who might apprehend that I
seemed to avoid mentioning of Trinity or Persons (which yet I showed flowed
from no dislike of those Words, but merely that I might stick more exactly to
Scripture Terms) yet I had no reason to think that Men of the other side would
have found such Fault with this: Father, Son, and Holy Ghost are the Three of
whom I discourse; so instead of repeating these Words at every time, I
shortened it, by saying the Blessed Three. Now it is a strain particular to our
Author, who I suppose had it from the Socinian Writer to enlarge on this.

But now let us look into our Author, and see if he is not guilty of as great
Faults or Heresies, as those which he falsely objects against the Bishop. His
Lordship's Page 22, 23.
Words which he censures are these; The Second of this Blessed Three was united
to a perfect Man, (that is, according to our Author's own Interpretation, the
Second Person in the Holy Trinity, took our Flesh, which directly follows from
his Criticism upon (...) and (...) so that from the Humane and Divine Nature
thus united, there did result the Person of the Messiah, who was both God and
Man. This he condemns as false Doctrine, because it denies the Personality of
Christ to be Eternal; but if this be false Doctrine, I deny it too: For I
neither acknowledge or believe, that Christ, who was God and Man, was Eternal:
but only the Second Person in the Trinity, who in the fullness of time took our
Flesh, and by that Union became Christ, our Anointed High Priest, and the
Messiah that was to come into the World. And I dare positively affirm, that
from this Union resulted the Personality of Christ, that is, the Messiah;
though our Vindicator of the Doctrine of the Church, and the Ancient Fathers,
does positively deny it. His Words are these; That though the Character and
Offices of Christ resulted Page 23.
from the Incarnation, yet not the Person or Personality. Now I would desire to
know whether this is the Doctrine of our Church; if not, it is Heresy, and
destroys the reality of the Incarnation. The Athanasian Creed, which we profess
to adhere to, makes Personality to consist in the Union of God and Man: As
thus; Who although he be God and Man, perfect God and perfect Man, God of the
Substance of the Father, and Man of the Substance of his Mother, yet he is not
two, but one Christ. And thus it is explained; For as the reasonable Soul and
Flesh, if separated and taken apart, make two distinct Substances; yet as they
are united, are but one Man or Person; so, that is, after the same manner, God
and Man, (of a reasonable Soul, and humane Flesh subsisting, which takes in the
whole (...) Man) is one Christ. And although he was God, the Second Person from
all Eternity; yet, before he took the Manhood into God, he could not be the
Person Christ Jesus, or the Messiah. Our Author very confidently and
erroneously affirms, that the assumption of the Humane Nature to the Divine,
contributed nothing of Personality to the Messiah: But certainly the Athanasian
Creed, if Words were designed to express the Sense of a thing, teach the
directly contrary Doctrine. For why should it say, that God and Man is one
Christ, if it did not mean that the complete Person of Christ resulted from
that union? I would ask our Author, whether the Man Christ Jesus be a Person or
not? If he be; whether it is only as he is God, or Man, or as he is both? If he
is only as he is God, what becomes of the Man, and of the Substance which he
had of his Mother? For if it does not enter into the Personality, it is
nothing, but an accident that might be destroyed at Pleasure; and yet the
Messiah, that is perfect God, and perfect Man, should remain the same Person
still. Now I wonder with what Confidence, a Man that pretends to vindicate the
Ancient Doctrine of the Church, to censure others for Heresle, and to refer his
Vindications to the Sense and Judgment of the Church Universal, the Archbishops
and Bishops of the Church of England, the two famous Universities, and the next
Session of Convocation; should deny an Ancient Doctrine of the Church, the
direct Sense of the great and most Orthodox Athanasius (which the Creed, so
called, is supposed to be the Sum of) and the present Faith and Persuasion of
our own Church of England; which God grant may long stand fixed and immovable,
in the Simplicity and Purity of its Primitive Doctrine, against all false
Pretenders to Truth, and all uncharitable Censurers of its Faith.

But we have not yet done with his Errors. In the Page 23.
same Paragraph he tells us, That though the Character and Offices of Christ
resulted from the Incarnation, yet not the Person or Personality; for to this
the Humane Nature was assumed or pre-existent. If the Humane Nature was assumed
to Christ, then he was Christ, that is, the Messiah, before he was Incarnate;
which is unintelligible. What he means by the Humane Nature's being
pre-existent to the Personality or Person of Christ, I cannot find. If he
believes that the Humane Nature of Christ did exist before it was united to the
Godhead, I presume it is downright Heresy; for that makes them two distinct
Persons; at least it makes him the Messiah before the union of both Natures.
But besides, as soon as Christ was born, he was styled Christ the Lord, by way
of Eminence; to show that he was then truly God; and that he was Christ our
Savior only by that Union of both Natures in him, and not before. And
therefore I presume, that the Humane Nature did not pre-exist, before he was
one altogether, not by confusion of Substance, but by unity of Person. Whatever
he means by this Term, I can find nothing but downright Absurdity and
Contradiction in it. Now I was much wondering how our Author came to light upon
this Notion; That nothing of the Personality of Christ resulted from the Humane
Nature: But finding by the Thread of his Discourse, that he had read somewhere,
that when two contrary Qualities meet together, that which is the predominant
wholly destroys the other; hereupon he concludes, that in the Union of God and
Man, the former, being the more prevalent; destroyed the latter; and
consequently, there could result no Personality from that Nature which was
destroyed, I was almost brought over to his Opinion; and I found it to be such
a pretty Philosophical Conceit, that I durst not venture to attack it. I shall
conclude this with this Sentence, which is amongst the Works of Athanasius,
though ascribed to another: Siquis confitetur Filium Dei, quasi Phantasma, sic
in Carne visum fuisse, Anathema illi, etc.

But however, we must not yet leave him: Let us therefore Page 25.
see his Remark upon his Lordship's saying, That we believe that Christ was
God, by Virtue of the indwelling of the Eternal Word. The Jews could make no
Objection to this, who knew that their Fathers had Worshipped the Cloud of
Glory, because of God's resting upon it. By which, says our Author, he lays a
Foundation on which we may properly Deifie Christ's Humane Nature. Here I must
inform our Author, that by indwelling, I suppose his Lordship understands the
Presence of God, and not the Place or Habitation where he dwells; and that for
this Reason, because his Lordship had before told us, That a constant and
immediate visible indwelling of the Jehovah, was according to Scripture Phrase
said to be Jehovah, which was applied to nothing else. By which his Lordship
can only mean, that that Appearance was always taken to be God, by which he did
presentiate himself. And if so, as I believe every rational Man that considers
it will imagine, we could have dispensed with our Author's omitting his little
Criticisms upon Habitation, Resident, Residence, and the like. For by the Page
28.
Cloud of Glory, his Lordship seems only to mean the Schechinah, which the
Rabbis, according to our Author's own Confession, interpret that Lucid Glory,
by which God presentiated himself: And if this Interpretation be allowed, as I
know not how it can be denied, I know no reason why Schechinah may not be taken
figuratively for Jehovah. And though Schechinah may be sometimes called the
Glory of the Jehovah; yet there is no reason why it may not in a different
expression signify Jehovah, as well as Infinite Power, Majesty, and the like,
are often used to signify God, though we often call him a God of infinite
Power and Majesty. And though it would be very absurd to say, infinite Power of
Infinite Power, or O Infinite Majesty, show me thy Majesty, as our Author plays
upon Words, yet it would be Sense to say, O Infinite Majesty, show me thy self,
thy Glory; which I take to be meant of God himself; as seems to be plain in
that place where Moses desires to see the Glory of God; which is truly meant of
God himself, notwithstanding all our Author says to the contrary; as is plain
by God's telling him, that he should see his back parts; but his Face should
not be seen; that is, in a direct Answer to part of Moses's Request, that he
should see the back Parts of his Glory; so that if this Sense be admitted, as I
don't see it can be denied, our Critick's impenetrable Syllogism, as he calls
Page 26
it, will vanish, with all his other sophisticated Shows of Arguments.

But now that we may see what a mighty knack at Invention our Author has
attained to; he comes now to make the Bishop speak things, which I believe I
may positively affirm were never in his Thoughts, I am sure they Page 30.
are not in his Book: That is, he has a mind the Bishop should assert such
things; and since he does not, he finds he is able to do it for him, and
therefore he resolves that the Bishop shall own them. It is a very pretty way
of answering an Adversary, to make false Doctrine for him, and then to censure
it: For here he brings in the Bishop to affirm, That in Scripture Phrase,
Jehovah never imports any thing else, but a constant and visible immediate
Inhabitation; and when he has made this Speech for his Lordship, it is easily
imagined into what Absurdities he leads him. Now our Author would have done
fairly, to have told us where the Bishop says this, and to have quoted the
Place from whence he had it: I must confess, I can find no such thing in all
the Bishop's Discourse. It Is true, his Lordship says, that a constant and
immediate visible indwelling of the Jehovah, was according to Scripture Phrase
said to be Jehovah, which was applied to nothing else. But does it hence
follow, that where ever the Name Jehovah is used in Scripture, it is, according
to the Bishop, applied to this Indwelling: Our Author might have as well
argued, and with as much reason, that because every Man is an Animal, therefore
every Animal is a Man: For to me it seems an exact parallel Case. I dare not do
our Author so much Injustice as to call his Logic in question, because he
seems to have a particular knack at Syllogising; but I must needs tell him,
that there is great reason for questioning his Integrity.

I come now to consider another Criticism of our Author's, Page 32.
upon these Words of his Lordship's; viz. That Christ was God by Virtue of the
indwelling of the Eternal Word in him; that the Jehovah dwelt so immediately
and bodily in Christ Jesus, that by that indwelling he was truly Jehovah: And
again, as in another Place, that he was the true Jehovah, by a more perfect
indwelling of the Deity in him, than that had been which was in the Cloud. Now
this, says our Author, must be grounded upon a Principle or Maxim, that
whatsoever the Deity immediately Inhabits, that thing becomes God, and the true
Jehovah, by Virtue of that Inhabitation. I answer, that his Lordship needs not
ground his Assertion upon any such Principle or Maxim, forasmuch as he affirms,
that Christ was the True Jehovah by a more perfect indwelling of the Deity in
him, than that which was in the Cloud: The latter being temporary, and as it
began to be given in the Wilderness, so was to discontinue. But the indwelling
of the Eternal Word in Christ, is Page 35.
Essential and inseparable, and constitutes with the Manhood one and the same
Personality. And I know not how this is Heretical, or can justify Idolatry, as
our Vindicator would insinuate: But if every thing must be Heresy and Idolatry
which an angry Man is resolved to make so, I know nothing but may be perverted
to such a Sense; since the greatest Truths must appear directly contrary, if he
may have the Liberty of putting what Glosses he pleases upon it, and if the
World will be so good natured as to believe that its true and genuine Feature,
which he makes it appear in.

And now it is time to see, upon what account our Vindicator is moved with
Indignation, at his Lordship's saying, that Jehovah was a foederal Name of God,
which being generally translated by (...), in the Septuagint, which Name was
applied to our Savior in the New Testament by way of Eminence, to show that he
was the true Jehovah, who was called (...) always in the Septuagint
Translation. Now though our Author does seem to approve of the Argument drawn
from (...), yet he is angry that his Lordship should call Jehovah a federal
Name of God. And his Reasons are, because he was called Jehovah by Balaam, and
also by Job, who were in no Covenant with him. Now as to Balaam, we may answer,
that he speaks of Jehovah as the God of Israel: And his Words Numb. 23, 21.
are, Jehovah his God is with him; which seem directly to mean, that their God,
who by them is called Jehovah, is with them; and if he did not mean so, why did
he say any thing more, than his God is with him? Whence it seems plain, that he
means by it, that the God who was more peculiarly styled Jehovah amongst them,
was ready to help and defend them: And it is very probable, that the Name was
only known amongst the Jews, by the very signification of it, according to Dr.
Lightfoot, which was faithful in performing what he had promised; that is, in
keeping the Promises made to Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob concerning their Seed.
And though that Name is also mentioned in Job, yet it is certain, that Job
could not come by it, unless he had it from some particular Revelation from
God: And therefore in answer to our Author, I will venture to advance this
probable Account of it; That though Job, as is now generally believed, lived in
the time of the Israelites Bondage in Egypt, and was not in the same Covenant
with them, yet the Jews meeting with the History of him, might change the Name
of God into that of Jehovah, and probably Moses himself might do it: or if the
Author or Translator of that Book was Moses, or one of the Jewish Nation, he to
make the whole Old Testament of a Piece, might call God by the Name of Jehovah,
though neither Job nor his Friends knew any thing of it; as also thereby to show
the Israelites and others, that it was the same Jehovah who was their God, and
in covenant with them, least the People, who were very prone to Idolatry,
should think it was some other God, who had brought such strange things to
pass, and thereupon pay Adoration to him. These are the two chief Arguments our
Author insists upon; All the rest are very little, if at all to his purpose.
And seeing his Page 90.
Lordship in answer to his Socinian Adversary, answered this Objection which
our Vindicator makes, I shall no longer dwell upon it. And if our Author has no
better Objections to urge, I don't see what reason he has to call it a federal
Whimsie. Here I cannot help observing our Page 45.
Author's conclusion of this Paragraph; which may serve as a convincing
Argument, that all our Author says, is the Result of Malice and ill Nature,
which seem to be the only Causes, and not the false Doctrine of his Lordship's
Discourse, that first persuaded him to appear in Public, and to let the World
see what manner of Spirit he was of. And therefore, says he, after all his
Lordship's critical Trifling, he wisely comes to say a great many Good and
Orthodox Truths on this Article, so far as that, that Christ was God, who
manifested himself in our Flesh, which being so dissonant to all his former
Modes of Expressions and avowed Notions (which, what they are, God only knows,
I see nothing contrary to the true Doctrine of the Church) seem to have dropped
from him, either unawares, or for a Color of Defense against a foreseen Charge
of Heresy (which certainly he had no reason to fear, since it does not appear,
that he has hitherto said any thing that looks in the least that way) or
perhaps the singular Providence of God might so overruled the Madness of the
Prophet, to make him speak that for the Christian Faith, which he had no mind
to, that his manifest Inconsistences might render him of no Authority for the
use of Heretics, either in present or future Ages. I think I need make no
Answer to this, or bring against this most uncharitable, and undeserved
Calumny, any railing Accusation, but only say, the Lord rebuke him.

But now, that we may end the first part of this falsely styled Vindication, let
us consider the Answer that he makes to his Lordship's Argument for the Deity
of Christ, 45, 46.
which is, that the Jews and Apostates from Christianity never charged the
Apostles nor Church with Idolatry or Creature Worship, which they would
certainly have done, had the Christian Principles been Arian or Socinian.
Against this our Vindicator urges, that it was the common Opprobrium both of
Jews and Gentiles, and perfect Apostates, that the Christians adored a mere
Malefactor, which was certainly an imputation of Creature Worship: And that the
Jews ever did, Page 47.
and do at this day, charge us with the Worship of a vile Creature, who really
(as they think) had no Deity in him; else, had they also thought him to be God,
they had been, ipso facto, converted to us, the want of this Faith, being the
only Bar to their Conversion, and the Cause why they execrate both our Lord and
us for this very Doctrine. And then he concludes very triumphantly; So unlucky
is his Lordship, even Page 48.
in the fairest part of this Discourse, as if God had laid this Curse on him,
that he that had sophistically handled the Christian Faith in most part of it,
should not have the Glory or Comfort of having served it, in any one
Particular. Certainly, any one that reads this, would imagine that the Bishop
was the most profligate Enemy to the Christian Faith that ever appeared against
it. But if we can find no just ground for such opprobrious Speeches, then
certainly the Author of them has the greater Sin. Now I will readily grant,
with our Author, that the Jews did not believe our Savior to be God, but only
that he was a mere Man; nor do I find that his Lordship denies it: All that I
perceive his Lordship intends by it, is, that the Jews expected their Messiah
should be God; and that upon supposition it was he that was come into the
World, they did not urge it as Idolatry to worship him, which certainly they
would have done, had they thought he would have been a mere Man, or a God only
by Office, as the Socinians would have him, and not from all Eternity
coessential with the Father. Now I leave any Man to judge, if this does not
seem to be a just Account, and a fair Interpretation of his Lordship's
Argument. For I suppose, no one can think, that the Bishop designed by it, to
show that the Jews did really believe our Savior to be the true Messiah, and
at the same time to reject him; but only that if they had not expected their
Mefsias should be God, they would have charged the Apostles and the Church with
Idolatry in worshipping him, whom, though they had granted to be the Messiah,
yet they owned to be no more than Man, as they expected their Messiah to be.
And this seems to be such a convincing Argument for establishing the Deity of
Christ, as the Socinian Author durst not venture to attack it; which
unquestionably he would have done, could he have forced such a Sense on his
Lordship's Words, or have understood them in the same manner, as our Author has
done. And whoever will read the Bishop's Answer to his Socinian Adversary in
his Letter to Dr. Williams, must, I think, be necessarily convinced, that his
Lordship meant no otherwise by that Passage, than I have interpreted it.

And thus have I done with the first part of our Author's pretended
Vindication: I have considered every Objection that he has made, have given it
its full force and weight, that he may not complain of any injustice done him,
or that his Sense has been confounded, or his Meaning represented falsely and by
halves, as he has in several Places, very apparently, and too maliciously
served his Lordship's Discourse. For, as I have no other Aim or Design in this,
but the plain Discovery of Truth, so have I nothing beside that to bias my
Judgment on either side. And now I hope I may leave it to all unprejudiced
Enquirers after Truth, to judge, whether all those hard Sayings, with which he
has so rudely, and unlike a Christian, especially one of his Profession, every
where treated his Lordship, may be applauded as just, or censured both as
uncivil and unchristian. I must confess, that after I had made some progress in
this Answer to his Vindication, I had some Thoughts of laying it aside; for I
found it was so generally looked upon as a Shuffage of scurrilous Expressions,
that it would seem superfluous to answer an Author that I found generally
condemned: But when I considered, there be some who are ill natured enough to
believe any Scandal that is cast upon those, whom they are prejudiced against,
without considering the Causes of it; I thought I might do some Service, by
endeavoring to undeceive those who had been either wilfully prejudiced, or
inconsiderately surpised, into a belief of such ill natured Aspersions.

I come now to consider our Vindicator's Second Part* wherein he talks and
quotes much, and yet, as I can find, nothing to the purpose. I shall pass over
all his unjust and uncharitable Reflections, and only enquire into the Causes
which he grounds them upon. The first thing he carps at, is, his Lordship's
saying, That he will not pretend to inform them, how that Mystery is to be
understood, and in what respect these Persons are said to be One, and in what
respect they are Three. Now what does this intimate, Page 51, 52.
says our Author, but that it is not laid down in Scripture, in what respect
the Persons are One, and in what respect they are Three? If our Author is
resolved that every thing shall be meant according to his Interpretation of it,
I have nothing more to say to him: But it seems obvious enough to me, that his
Lordship only means by it, that he will not pretend to show the Modes of their
Existence, and make the Mystery comprehensible to our Reason; which seems the
direct Sense of those Words of the Bishop's, That he will not pretend to inform
them, how this Mystery is to be understood; and which is also plain enough, by
his Lordship's Words that immediately follow the other before mentioned; viz.
By explaining a Mystery, can only be meant the showing how it is laid down and
revealed in Scripture; for to pretend to give any other Account of it, is to
take away its Mysteriousness, when the manner how it is in it self, is offered
to be made intelligible. I should have wondered how our Author could have
forced any ill Sense from these Words, had I not considered, that what was at
first his Design, at last became his Interest, to make his Writings all of a
Piece, and to discover the same evil Spirit throughout the whole.

The next thing he censures his Lordship for, is, for Page 54.
saying, That too many, both Ancients and Moderns, have perhaps gone beyond due
Bounds, while some were pleased with the Platonical Notions of Emanations, and
a Fecundity in the Divine Essence. Now what Error his Lordship has fallen into
by this, I don't yet apprehend: He does not positively express any dislike to
those Notions, or that they are otherwise than innocent, if they are made use
of by Men of sound and orthodox minds, but only that they may have given
Occasion to some, who are less cautious than others, to form too gross
Conceptions of those things, of which they can never have any adequate Idea.
And, certainly some of the Fathers in this way of explaining this Matter, have
said many things which intimate that they believed an inequality between the
Persons and a subordination of the Second and Third to the First. And this our
Author does dot deny, but cites Dr. Bull to Page 89.
confirm the Assertion of the Fathers, teaching a Personal Gradation and
Subordination in the Deity; which probably these Notions might give the first
rise and occasion to. And if this be so, our Author has only spent his time to
give up a Cause, which he endeavors to defend. I suppose I need give no Answer
to our Author's Reflection, upon what his Lordship says, viz. [That these
thought there was a Production, or rather an Eduction of Two out of the First,
in the same manner that some Philosophers thought that Souls were propagated
from Souls; and the figure by which this was explained, being that of one
Candle being lighted at another, this seems to have given the rise to those
Words, Light of Light.] Since our Author brings in Tertullian, Justin Martyr,
and Tatian, with the same Similies, which I suppose is enough to his Lordship's
purpose, and is an exact Confirmation of what his Lordship has said. And I
wonder, why our Vindicator should find fault with his Lordship for calling them
Conceits, when himself confesses Page 86.
with Dr. Bull, that those Similies are Lame, and such as he will not make out.
I shall not enquire into the Original of that Expression, Light of Light, in
our Nicene Creed; for whatsoever it was that first occasioned it, it is nothing
at all to our present purpose. Yet this is certain, that such like Similies as
the Bishop mentions, were used by the Fathers in their Writings to explain
their Notions of that Mystery by, as well before as after the Nicene Council,
which makes his Lordship's Conjecture very probable.

A great part of what remains of our Author, is spent in vindicating the
Doctrine of the Trinity, against the Charge of Novelty, which he would have the
World believe, the Bishop alleges against it, and to show that the Primitive
Fathers believed it. But since I can find no such thing in all the Bishop's
Discourse, it will be unnecessary to give answer to it. All that I can
understand of the Bishop's Words, is, that the Ancients in their Explanations
of the Trinity, often differed from one another, and that those who came after,
endeavored by other Explanations to supply those Defects, which some who went
before them had been guilty of: Not that he means they believed differently
concerning the Trinity; but only that they made use of different Modes of
explaining their Notions concerning it. And the while Men go about to explain a
thing, of which they can frame no distinct Idea, it is very natural for them to
run out into a vast multiplicity of Words, into great length, and much Darkness
and Confusion: Many improper Similies will be urged, and often impertinent
Reasonings will be made use of. All which are the unavoidable Consequences of a
Man's going about to explain to others, that which he does not distinctly
understand himself. And what is there in all this, that charges the Doctrine of
the Trinity with Novelty?

I cannot but observe our Author's Ingenuity, in saying, that his Lordship, in
his Letter from Zurich, has exposed that Passage in St. John' s First Epistle,
for doubted: There are Three that bear Witness in Heaven, The Father, the Word,
and the Spirit; and these Three are one. Since his Lordship only tells us, that
in some Manuscripts it is to be found, and in others not; in most of which, he
shows plainly that it was the Fault of the Copier that omitted it: And also
seems sufficiently to prove by the Authority of St. Hierom, whose Preface he
there makes mention of, that it was left out by the Arians. But besides, if I
must be said to expose every part of an Author for doubted, by saying, that it
is not to be found in such a MS. which perhaps has all the rest, almost all the
Authors in the World must suffer by it; since I can show our Vindicator some
thousands of MSS. which have only transmitted to us some small parts of
Authors, and have omitted those, which yet by the help of others we can prove
to be genuine.

I shall make no Observation upon this malicious Remark of our Vindicator's. It
may serve as a pregnant Instance with the rest of the Vindication, of the great
Power of Malice and ill Nature of transforming every thing into that peculiar
Shape which they are resolved it should appear in; and also to convince us, how
little Credit we are to give to things, which our selves are not Witnesses of,
since there are so many False Prophets gone out into the World.

I cannot but take notice of the Learned and Ingenious Observation of our
Vindicator upon his Lordship's Simile, which he brought not to explain, but
only to illustrate in some measure the Doctrine of the Trinity, which he has
transcribed at length. I shall only mention those parts of it which our Author
criticizes upon. He denies Page 104.
Understanding and Will, which the Bishop affirms to be different Modes of
Thinking, to be such, either as they are taken as Principles, or as they may be
supposed as Acts of the Mind. Now here I suppose our Vindicator was lost in his
own beloved Notions; and I wish he had read over Mr. Lock' s Essay of Humane
Understanding, and I believe he would, at least might, have expressed himself
less confusedly. For I suppose our Vindicator, like some others of his stamp,
takes Volition to be a distinct Agent in us, which can command, obey, and
perform several Actions as a distinct Being. And no wonder then if it is no
Mode of Thinking. But certainly if we would speak properly, Intellection and
Volition, if they are considered as Principles, if our Vindicator understands
any thing by that Word, are only Powers of the Mind. But if they are reduced to
Acts, they are then properly speaking Modes of Thinking, and nothing more. But
our Vindicator is mightily disturbed at the Bishop's saying, That in Acts of
Memory, Imagination and Discourse, there seems to be a mixture of both
Principles, or a third that results out of them. For we feel a Freedom in one
respect; but as for those Marks that are in our Brain, that set things in our
Memory, or furnish us with Words, we are necessary Agents, they come in our
way, but we do not know how. We cannot call up a Figure of things or Words at
pleasure; some Disorder in our Mechanism hides or flattens them, which when it
goes off, they start up and serve us, but not by any Act of Understanding and
Will. Now says our Critic to this, As for his Mixtures, I leave them purely to
himself; but for his third resulting Principle I am to seek. For it must be
such a Principle that is neither free nor necessary, and such a one as is hard
to be got for Love or Money. Nay, not so hard neither: For Mr. Lock tells us, in
his Chapter of the Modes of Thinking, that this is what the French call
Resvery, but our Language has scarce a Name for it. Which I take to be a good
Authority (to use our Author's own Words) in despite of a bad Judgment and
defective Libraries. Which may teach our Author, if ever he writes more (which
I pray God forbid, unless it be a Retractation of this ill-natured Book) to do
it with more Caution and Consideration. And amongst the rest, this was one
Reason why I first undertook this, since he tells us of another Treatise which
he designs to publish, to beg of him for his own sake, and for the Churches
sake, and for the sake of his Brethren the Clergy, to conceal it: For I think
it is enough for any Man semel insanire, and to expose himself, without any
regard to his own, or the Churches Honor.

I shall not search into our Author's Explication, as he calls it, of the
Sacred Mysteries of the Ever-Blessed Trinity; because, as it is Foreign to the
present purpose, so is it confusedly dressed up with his affected dark way of
Writing, that I could hardly read it with Patience; much less could I spend
much time upon it, in considering every Passage of it.

And now I should have left him, but that I still find him spitting his Venom
at his Lordship, for saying, that some have thought that the Term Son did not
at all belong to the Blessed Three, but only to our Savior, as he was the
Messiah, the Jews having had this Notion of the Messiah, that as he was to be
the King of Israel, so was he to be the Son of God. Now does it appear from
hence, that the Bishop is a Favourer of this Opinion? Or that himself does
believe, that the Jews expected that their Messiah should not be God? As to the
latter, it is plain that his Lordship believes the contrary, by what he has
urged in Defense of our Lord's Divinity, that the Jews never objected Idolatry
to the Christians; which certainly they would have done, had they not expected
their Messiah should be God. Nor does his Lordship assert the former, as is
plain by what he adds, That if this be true, all the Speculations concerning an
Eternal Generation (which is a Doctrine he seems every where to maintain) are
cut off in the strict Sense of the Words. And therefore our Vindicator has no
reason to say, That his Lordship has left this Doctrine in suspense, whether it
be true or no.

His last Criticism is upon his Lordship's Saying, That it may be justly
questioned, whether by these they have made it better to be understood, or more
firmly believed; or whether others have not taken advantage to represent these
Subtilties as Dregs, either of Aeones, of the Valentinians, or of the Platonic
Notions -- And it being long before these Theories were well stated and
settled, it is no wonder if many of the Fathers have not only differed from one
another, but even from themselves in speaking upon this Argument. To this, says
our Critic, after he has emptied himself of his foul Language, which he every
where abounds with, That all these traduced Theories of Faith are universally
professed, and received in the whole Church of God, and have but a very few
Adversaries. To this it may be answered, that the Doctrine of the Trinity has
been, and is, universally received; nor does the Bishop deny it; but that all
those Theories about the Modes and the Explanations of it, which some of the
Fathers have left us, are not, may be very easily evinced. Nor do I think it is
any great Blemish to the Fathers, or any Scandal cast upon their Authority,
which may be of dangerous Consequence to the Searchers into Antiquity, as our
Vindicator would insinuate, to say, that the Fathers could not search into the
depth of that Mystery, and that they were often at a loss in their Explanations
of it, though they might believe it as firmly, and after the same manner, as
the Church Catholic now does. For though perhaps most of us believe that great
Article according to the true Sense of the Church, yet probably if we went to
explain it, we should all follow different Methods, and have far different
Idea's from each other. Which may serve to convince us, how insufficient the
most Rational and Thinking of us are, to form any distinct Notions of those
things, which are so far above our Comprehensions.

I shall say nothing upon his Reflection upon Dr. Burnet's Remarks upon the
Strong-Box Papers; for, as I have them not by me, so I find a great deal of
Reason to mistrust our Author's Integrity in every one of his Quotations, which
I have shown have been very foul and unjust, often took by halves, and as often
perverted to a wrong Sense, directly contrary to the Author's meaning.

And now it may be asked, Why one that has no Knowledge of the Bishop (no more
than from his Works) or of Mr. Hill, should engage himself in a Dispute, in
which he is no way concerned? To this I can only answer, That I had no other
Inducement to it, than the Indignation I had against such an indecent and
unchristian way of Writing, and such false Reasoning as the pretended
Vindication is made up of. I could scarce believe that a Clergyman, had he not
told us he was one in the Title Page, could have been guilty of so much
Uncharitableness, as I every where find in his Book. And I must confess, that I
had much rather be guilty of an Error in my Judgment, than offend in the Breach
of so great a Duty; which is so expressly laid down in Scripture; and which
ought to be one of the greatest Characteristicks of a Christian, especially of
those who are to instruct others in such Fundamental Duties both by Doctrine
and Practice. Because those who cannot find out an Error in our Judgment, can
easily discover those in our Practice; which every one that can read, may see
too openly prostituted in our Author's Vindication. At the horror and just
detestation of which I leave him to the Great Judge of all the Earth, who will
recompense every Man according to his Works; and to the Censures of those who
have the power here committed to them to punish the wrong-doers. Who I hope for
the Churches sake, as well as for the sake of that right Reverend and Learned
Person whom our Author designed to cast a Blot upon, will never suffer so much
breach of Charity, so much malice and ill nature, such groundless Falsities,
and such Unchristian Temper to escape unpunished, unless prevented by as full
and public a Recantation, as his Offense has been notorious.

POSTSCRIPT.
AFter I had sent this up to London, I received a particular or two from a
Gentleman, who assured me he had it from the Bishops own mouth, relating to the
present Dispute, which I thought might be proper to insert. One is, that the
true reason why he avoided repeating of the word Person, is this, that he was
to instruct his Clergy how to deal with Socinians, who acknowledging no
Authority but Scripture, they must be only dealt with according to that
Concession. Therefore every thing was to be avoided, that was not in terminis
in Scripture. Now when this Article is once proved, then the use of the Terms,
Essence, Persons, Hypostasis, and Consubstantial are to be justified, both by
showing that they are not contrary to the Scripture, but agreeing with it, and
also by showing that it is in the power of the Church, when no new Doctrine is
pretended to be added to the Christian Faith, to make use of such terms, as may
be thought fit to prevent and discover all Equivocations. And since even the
Name Persona in Latin may signify a Vizar or Representation; if Heretics had
owned a fraudulent meaning in receiving this, it was in the power of the Church
to have chosen another. So that though the Church can add no new Doctrine to that
which is revealed, yet she may use stricter terms when she finds an abuse in
the use of larger ones.

As for the reason that led him to give an account of the different ways used
by the Ancients in explaining this Mystery, it was only this, that the answer
to the Dean of St. Paul's was writ in so particular a Style, that it was much
read. He feared this might be carried far, to raise a fire in the Church, and
to give the Enemies of the Faith a pleasant Entertainment. So tho his Lordship
was not of the Dean of St. Paul's Opinion, yet he thought it was fit as well as
just, to show that great Authorities from the Ancients might be brought for it.
His chief intent being to lay that heat, and to show the inconvenience of going
too far, or too positively in Explanations. So he mentioned only so much as
might justify that design. This is the foundation of all the stir that our
Author has made, which as I am truly informed the Archbishop of Canterbury, and
the rest of the Bishops look upon as a breach not only of Charity, but of the
Order of the Church. For it is far from their thoughts that either a Bishop, or
even an Archbishop should have a Privilege to corrupt the Faith, and be safe
when he has done it. As they ought to be the chief Conveyors of this Sacred
Depositum, so if any of them should so far betray his trust, as to offer to
corrupt it, he must be used with all severity. But if such a case should
happen, the method of proceeding ought to be a denunciation to the Archbishop,
when it is in the case of a Bishop. This ought to be first made to the
Archbishop in private, and if that will not do, then it ought to be made in
open Court by Articles. If any thing is taught contrary to the Doctrine of the
first Four General Councils, it is by Act of Parliament 1 Eliz. Heresy. And if
it is contrary to the Creeds, then it falls under the Act of Uniformity. The
Three Creeds being parts of the Book of Common Prayer. And if any Doctrine is
contrary to the Thirty nine Articles, then the Proceedings are to be founded on
the Authority of the Church in a Convocation confirmed by the King. This is a
Regular Method, and if Mr. Hill had took this way, he could have met with no
sort of obstruction. But it is certainly intolerable that a Book writ by a
Bishop, and Licensed by an Archbishop, should be thus attacked, and a Bishop be
so openly defamed.

I have one thing more to add, and that is an account of that private Practice
which our Author in his Preface objects against the Bishop as unjust, and that
is only this: When his Lordship came to the Sea of Sarum, he found the Prebends
so scattered up and down England, that there was seldom a Surplice-man to
Preach. The Cathedral was often very ill served. So he resolved to keep the
Dignities of the Church of Sarum within the Diocese, and to oblige those that
left the Diocese to leave the Church likewise, according to the Tenth Canon of
the Council of Chalcedon. Which is this, (...). Beverig. Pandect. Canon. Tom.
1. p. 123.


Non liceat Clerico in duarum Civitatum Ecclesiis eodem tempore in Catalogum
referri: Et in ea qua a principio ordinatus est, and in ea in quam tanquam ad
majorem confugit, propter inanis gloriae cupiditatem. Eos autem qui hoc faciunt
propriae Ecclesiae restitui, in qua ab initio ordinati sunt, ut illic solum
ministrent. Sed si jam quispiam ex alia in aliam Ecclesiam translatus est,
nihil prioris Ecclesiae, vel little quae sub ea sunt Martyriorum vel
Phochotrophiorum vel Xenodochiorum rebus communicare. And elsewhere as well as
in the Scholia upon this Canon they are very express to the same purpose, That
no Bishop shall receive a Clergyman of another Diocese into his Church, under
pain of Excommunication to both. In order to effect this, his Lordship was
advised by an Ancient and Venerable Prelate, I may add, one of the Worthiest
and Learnedest now in the World, to take Bonds of Resignation of those to whom
he gave Prebends, in case they should go out of the Diocese. There is no
General Bond, this Condition is named and no other. This was also the more
necessary, because his Lordship has hitherto generally given the Prebends to
the Ministers in Market Towns, where the Labor is great, and the Provision
mean. So unhandsomely does this Man reproach his Lordship, for a Method that
seems so good and useful to the Church, and which could be compassed no other
way but that which his Lordship made use of.

Postscript to the Stationer.
Sir,
SInce I sent you these Papers, I understand by one, on whose Judgment I can
well depend, that there is another Answer prepared by a very learned Hand; who
has followed Mr. Hill, through all his Pretenses to Learning and the Study of
the Fathers; and discovers that he has just as much Knowledge as he has
Modesty, or good Breeding: Ignorance and ill Nature go often together: For you
know whose Character it is, That he rages and is Confident. I should be sorry
to have sent this to you, when there is another so much perfecter coming to
your Hand. But my Friend comforts me a little, by telling me, we write in such
different ways, that both ma prove acceptable, and make one Complete Answer.

I confess, I was amazed to hear there was so much Learning employed to refute
so poor a Book; but the Answer made me was, that though Mr. Hill's Book did not
deserve it, yet the Bishop's did, and the Cause did it much more. It seemed
necessary to take the Diversion that Mr. Hill's Book has perhaps given to
Libertines and Atheists, (as well as to Socinians, and other ill-natured Men)
out of the way, and to show the World that Mr. Hill was all through, equally
blinded with Ignorance and Malice. There is no hopes that any thing can
convince so awkward a Man, as he seems to be. A short piece of Parchment,
founded on a Certain Statute, is perhaps, the only Answer that can work on him:
Unless his Friends can prevent it, by showing he has a better right to a
Lodging in Moor-Fields, where good Air and Discipline may restore him to
himself. This may seem too pleasant; but it is really the charitablest* Thought
that can be entertained of him: For I am sure if his Head is sound, his Heart
is naught. Such Men as he, are born to be the Pests of their Neighborhood, and
the Plagues of the Church; but I hope he will be so subdued, that the World
shall be no more troubled with him.

Only I will conclude with one pleasant thing concerning him, which I have from
so sure a hand, that you may depend upon it, and publish it: While he was
contriving to midwife this Book into the World, he apprehended, it seems, that
it might raise a Storm; and he hoped to secure himself against that, by writing
another Book in defense of the present Government, and for justifying the
filling the Sees of the deprived Bishops (as he had writ some Years ago, a
Pamphlet, entitled Solomon and Abiathar, upon the same subject) In this, he
attacked Mr. Dod -- ll's Principle with great Fury: This Book he sent up to a
Bishop; and it seems he thought it was such a Performance, and that the
Archbishop of Canterbury and the rest of the Bishops would have been so
sensible of this Service, (which to be sure he thought a signal one) that they
must have abandoned the Bishop of Salisbury to the indignation of such a
Champion. But when he saw that small account was had of that Trifle of his,
(for without seeing it, I can easily believe nothing stronger can come from
such a Pen) and that the Archbishop thought so base a Libel as this, was such
an Injury to the Church, as well as to the Order of Bishops, that he required
him to come and make all due Submissions and Reparation, otherwise he judged
the Bishop of Salisbury ought for the Churches sake, as well as for his own, to
prosecute him; he then resolved to court his old Friends the Jacobites;
(though, I am told, he treats them in that Book with the same brutality of
Style, which he bestows in this on the Bishop.) And therefore he has very
earnestly desired his Book may not be printed, but be sent back to him again:
and then if he had it once in his Hands, he would perhaps as impudently deny
that ever he wrote any such Book, as he begins now to deny that he is the
Author of this; though if the Bishop wants Proofs of it, this place can afford
him a great many.

FINIS.

