His Majesty's MOST GRACIOUS SPEECH To both Houses of PARLIAMENT, On Friday the
Fourth day of November, 1692.

LONDON, Printed by Charles Bill, and the Executrix of Thomas Newcomb deceased;
Printers to the King and Queens most Excellent Majesty's. M.DC.XCII.

His Majesty's MOST GRACIOUS SPEECH To both Houses of PARLIAMENT.
My Lords and Gentlemen,
I AM very Glad to meet you again in Parliament, where I have an Opportunity of
Thanking you for the great Supplies you have given Me for the Prosecution of
this War; and I hope by your Advice and Assistance, which has never failed Me,
to take such Measures, as may be most proper for Supporting Our Common Interest
against the excessive Power of France.

We have great Reason to Rejoice in the happy Victory, which, by the Blessing
of God, We obtained at Sea: And I wish I could tell you that the Success at
Land had been answerable to it: I am sure My own Subjects had so remarkable a
part in both, that their Bravery and Courage must ever be remembered to their
Honor.

The French are Repairing their Losses at Sea with great Diligence, and do
design to augment their Land Forces considerably against the next Campaign;
which makes it absolutely necessary for Our Safety, that at least as great a
Force be maintained at Sea and Land, as We had the last Year; And therefore I
must ask of you, Gentlemen of the House of Commons, a Supply suitable to so
great an Occasion.

I am very sensible how heavy this Charge is upon my People, and it extremely
afflicts Me, that it is not possible to be avoided without Exposing. Our selves
to inevitable Ruin and Destruction: The Inconvenience of sending out of the
Kingdom great Sums of Money for the Payment of the Troops abroad is indeed very
Considerable, and I so much wish it could be remedied, That if you can suggest
to Me any Methods for the Support of them, which may lessen this Inconvenience,
I shall be ready to receive them with all the Satisfaction imaginable.

My Lords and Gentlemen,
None can desire more then I do that a Descent should be made into France, and
therefore notwithstanding the Disappointment of that Design this last Summer, I
intend to Attempt it the next Year with a much more Considerable Force; And so
soon as I shall be Enabled, all possible Care and Application shall be used
toward it.

And upon this Occasion I cannot omit taking Notice of that Signal Deliverance,
which, by the good Providence of God, We received the last Spring, to the
Disappointment and Confusion of Our Enemies Designs and Expectations: This has
sufficiently shown Us how much We are exposed to the Attempts of France, while
that King is in a Condition to make them; Let Us therefore improve the
Advantage, We have at this time, of being joined with most of the Princes and
States of Europe against so dangerous an Enemy; In this surely all Men will
agree, who have any Love for their Country, or any Zeal for Our Religion: I
cannot therefore doubt but you will continue to Support Me in this War against
the declared Enemy of this Nation, and that you will give as speedy Dispatch to
the Affairs before you, as the Nature and Importance of them will admit; that
Our Preparations may be timely and effectual for the Preservation of all that
is Dear and Valuable to Us.

I am sure I can have no Interest but what is yours; We have the same Religion
to Defend, and you cannot be more concerned for the Preservation of your
Liberties and Properties, then I am that you should always remain in the full
Possession and Enjoyment of them; for I have no Aim but to make you a happy
People.

Hitherto I have never spared to Expose my own Person for the Good and Welfare
of this Nation, and I am so sensible of your Good Affections to Me, that I
shall continue to do so with great Cheerfulness upon all Occasions, wherein I
may contribute to the Honor and Advantage of England.

FINIS.

