A Letter, etc.
Gentlemen and Friends,
WE have given you so full, and so true an Account of our Intentions, in this
Expedition, in our Declaration, that as; we can add nothing to it, so we are
sure you can desire nothing more of us. We are come to preserve your Religion,
and to restore and establish your Liberties and Properties, and therefore we
cannot suffer our selves to doubt, but that all true Englishmen will come and
concur with us, in our desire to secure these Nations from POPERY and SLAVERY.
You must all plainly see, that you are only made use of as Instruments to
enslave the Nation, and ruin the Protestant Religion, and when that is done,
you may judge what ye your selves ought to expect, both from the cashiering of
all the Protestant and English Officers and Soldiers in Ireland, and by the
Irish Soldiers being brought over to be put in your places; and of which you
have seen so fresh an instance, that we need not put you in mind of it. You
know how many of your Fellow Officers have been used, for their standing firm
to the Protestant Religion, and to the Laws of England, and you cannot flatter
your selves so far as to expect to be better used, if those who have broke
their word so often, should by your means be brought out of those streights to
which they are reduced at present. We hope likewise, that you will not suffer
your selves to be abused by a false notion of Honor, but that you will in the
first place consider, what you owe to Almighty God and your Religion, to your
Country, to your Selves, and to your Posterity, which you, as Men of Honor,
ought to prefer, to all private Considerations and Engagements whatsoever. We
do therefore expect, that you will consider the Honor that is now set before
you, of being the Instruments of serving your Country, and securing your
Religion, and we will ever remember the Service you shall do us upon this
Occasion, and will promise to you, that we shall place such particular marks of
our favor on every one of you, as your Behavior, at this time, shall deserve
of us, and the Nation; in which, we will make a great distinction, of those
that shall come seasonably, to join their Arms with Ours, and you shall find us
to be

Your Well wishing, and Assured Friend, W.H.P.O.


