W R
DIEV ET MON DROIT HONI SOIT QVI MAL Y PENSE royal blazon or coat of arms
By the King, A PROCLAMATION.
William R.

WHereas by Our Royal Proclamation, bearing Date on the Nineteenth Day of
December last, We did Declare and Command, That from and after the several and
respective Days therein for that Purpose mentioned, no Clipped Crowns or
Half-Crowns, nor Shillings, or other Money, Clipped within the Ring, should
Pass or be Current in any Payments, except only to the Receivers or Collectors
of Our Revenues and Taxes, or upon Loans or Payments into Our Exchequer: And
whereas the Knights, Citizens and Burgesses in Parliament Assembled, have, by
their Humble Address, besought Us to Issue Our Royal Proclamation, to Require
the said Receivers and Collectors of Our Taxes and Revenues to Receive Clipped
Half-Crowns or other Clipped Money, being Sterling Silver, according to Our
said Proclamation: And We bring willing to Comply with the said Address, and
Desirous to Ease Our good Subjects, as much as in Us lies, and to Prevent the
Loss which they may otherwise Sustain by reason of such Clipped Money remaining
in their Hands, and the better to Enable them to Pay Our Taxes and Revenues,
Have thought sit to Declare and Command, and by and with the Advice of Our
Privy Council We do by this Our Royal Proclamation Declare and Command all and
every the Collectors and Receivers of Our Revenues and Taxes, and all other Our
Officers and concerned in the Receipt of Money upon Loans or other Payments
into Our Exchequer, That unto the Third Day of February next ensuing inclusive,
they shall Receive in Payment all Clipped Crowns of Half-Crowns, which are
Sterling Silver, from all or any of Our Loving Subjects, who shall Offer or
Tender the same to them for any of Our Taxes or Revenues, at any Place within
Our City of London, or within Forty Miles Distance of the same, or upon Loans
or Payments unto Our Exchequer; And that unto the Two and twentieth Day of the
said Month of February inclusive, they shall in like manner Receive in Payment
all Clipped Crowns or Half-Crowns, which are Sterling Silver, from all or any
of Our Loving Subjects Tendering the same for any of Our Taxes or Revenues at
any other Place within Our Kingdom of England, Dominion of Wales, or Town of
Berwick upon Tweed. And We do thereby Declare and Strictly Require and Command,
all and every the Receivers and Collectors of Our Revenues and Taxes, and all
other Our Officers concerned in the Receipt of Money upon Loans or other
Payments into Our Exchequer, That unto the Second Day of March next inclusive,
they shall accept in Payment all Pieces of Money, called Shillings, which are
Clipped and are Sterling Silver, from all or any Our Loving Subjects, who shall
Offer or Tender the same to them in Payment for any of Our Revenues or Taxes,
or upon Loans or Payments into Our Exchequer; And that unto the Second Day of
April next inclusive, they shall accept in Payment all other Money whatsoever
Clipped, which is Sterling Silver, from all or any Our Loving Subjects who
shall Offer or Tender the same to them in Payment for any of Our Revenues or
Taxes, or upon Loans or Payments into Our Exchequer. And We do hereby Strictly
Charge and Command all Our Receivers and Collectors of Our Revenues and Taxes,
and all other Our Officers concerned in the Receipt of Money upon Loans or
Payments into Our Exchequer, That they do accept all such Clipped Moneys, that
shall be Sterling Silver, until and upon the several and respective Days and
Times before herein for that Purpose mentioned, as they Tender Our High
Displeasure, and upon Pain of such Punishments as may Law be Inflicted upon all
such as shall Refuse or Neglect to Obey Our Royal Commands therein.

Given at Our Court at Kensington the Fourth Day of January, 1695/6. In the
Seventh Year of Our Reign.
London, Printed by Charles Bill, and the Executrix of Thomas Newcomb,
deceased; Printers to the Kings most Excellent Majesty. 1695/6.


