royal blazon or coat of arms
By the King,
WILLIAM R.

WHereas by an Act made this present Session of Parliament, It is Enacted, That
all and Singular Our Receivers, Collectors, and other Officers concerned in the
Receipt or Collection of any of Our Aids, Taxes, or other Revenues, or of any
Loans to be made to Us, shall, and they and every of them, are thereby Empowered
and Required to Take and Receive in Payment from any of Our Subjects, all such
Hammered Silver Coin as shall be by them Tendered to such Receiver, Collector or
other Officer, upon any Loans to be made to Us, or in Discharge of any Arrears
which shall grow due to Us upon any Aids, Taxes, or other Revenue, at any time
between the Fourteenth Day of November, One thousand six hundred ninety six,
and the First Day of February then next ensuing, at the Rate of Five Shillings
and Eight Pence for every Ounce of such Hammered Silver Coin so Tendered or
Lent, and the Tender, Payment, or Loan of every Ounce of such Hammered Silver
Coin, is by the said Act Declared to be as good a Discharge to the Person,
Tendering, Paying or Lending the same, his Heirs, Executors or Administrators,
for the Sum of Five Shillings and Eight Pence, as though the Sum of Five
Shillings and Eight Pence had been Tendered, Paid or Lent in the Lawful Current
Coin of this Kingdom. And whereas We have received Information, That several of
Our Receivers, Collectors and other Officers concerned in the Receipt and
Collection of Our Aids, Taxes, and other Revenue, have, contrary to the
Direction of the said Act, Refused to Receive from Our Loving Subjects in
Payment of the Taxes and other Revenues Due to Us, such Hammered Silver Coin at
the Rate of Five Shillings and Eight Pence for every Ounce thereof, as by the
said Act is Appointed, which is a manifest Violation of the said Act, and a
great Oppression of Our Loving Subjects. Therefore We being desirous that the
Directions of the said Act should be punctually Observed, and put in Execution
by all Our said Receivers, Collectors and other Officers therein concerned, and
that Our Loving Subjects should receive the full Advantage intended them by the
said Act, and the better to Enable them to Pay Our said Taxes and Revenues,
Have thought fit to Declare and Command, and by and with the Advice of Our
Privy Council, We do, by this Our Royal Proclamation, Declare and Command all
and every the Receivers, Collectors and other Officers concerned in the Receipt
or Collection of any of Our Aids, Taxes or Revenues, or in the Receipt of Loans
to be made to Us, to Take and Receive in Payment from any of Our Loving
Subjects, according to the Directions of the said Act, all such Hammered Silver
Coin as shall be by them Tendered to such Receiver, Collector or other Officer,
upon any Loans to be made to Us, or in Discharge of any Arrears Due, or which
shall grow Due to Us upon any Aids, Taxes or other Revenue, at any time between
the said Fourteenth Day of November, One thousand six hundred ninety six, and
the First Day of February next ensuing, at the Rate of Five Shillings and Eight
Pence for every Ounce of such Hammered Silver Coin so Tendered or Lent. And We
do hereby Strictly Charge and Command all the Receivers, Collectors, and other
Officers of Our Aids, Taxes, or Revenues, or of any Loans to be made to Us,
That they do accept in Payment such Hammered Silver Coin, at the Rate of Five
Shillings and Eight Pence for every Ounce thereof, according to the Directions
of the said recited Act of Parliament, and that they do yield entire Obedience
to the said Act in every other Matter and Thing therein contained, relating to
the Receipt of such Hammered Silver Coin, or otherwise, as they tender Our high
Displeasure, and upon Pain of such Punishment as may by Law be inflicted upon
all such as shall Refuse or Neglect to Observe and Perform what by the said Act
they are Required and Enjoined to do.

Given at Our Court at Kensington the Tenth Day of January, 1696/7. In the
Eight Year of Our Reign. God save the King.
LONDON, Printed by Charles Bill, and the Executrix of Thomas Newcomb,
deceased, Printers to the Kings most Excellent Majesty. 1696/7.


