WR

DIEV ET MON DROIT

HONI SOIT QVI MAL Y PENSE

royal blazon or coat of arms
By the King,
Reciting ye Effect of ye Late Act of Parliamt Corresponding with King James.
24.Januar. 1697/8.
WILLIAM R.

WHereas by an Act made this present Session of Parliament, Entitled, An Act
against Corresponding with the late King James and his Adherents, It is amongst
other things Enacted, That if any of His Majesty's Subjects, who have at any
time since the Eleventh Day of December, One thousand six hundred eighty eight,
Voluntarily gone into France, or any of the French Kings Dominions in Europe,
without License from His Majesty, or Her late deceased Majesty Queen Mary, of
Blessed Memory, or who have at any time, during the late War with France, born
Arms in the Service of the French King, either by Sea or Land, or who have at
any time since the Thirteenth Day of February, One thousand six hundred eighty
eight, been in Arms under the Command, or in the Service of the late King James
in Europe, shall at any time after the Fourteenth Day of January, One thousand
six hundred ninety seven, return into this Kingdom of England, or any other His
Majesty's Dominions, without License from His Majesty, under the Privy Seal,
every Person so Offending, shall (being Lawfully Convicted thereof) be Taken,
Deemed and Adjudged to be Guilty of High Treason, and shall Suffer and Forfeit
as in Cases of High Treason: And that if any of His Majesty's Subjects from and
after the said Fourteenth Day of January, One thousand six hundred ninety
seven, without License from His Majesty, shall within this Realm or without, in
order to give any Aid or Assistance to the late King James, Hold, Entertain or
Keep any Intelligence or Correspondence by Letters, Messages or otherwise with
the late King James, or with any Persons Employed by him, knowing such Person
to be so Employed, or shall without License from His Majesty, by Bill of
Exchange, or otherwise, Remit or Pay any Sum or Sums of Money for the Use or
Service of the late King James, knowing such Money to be for such Use or
Service, such Person so Offending, being lawfully Convicted, shall be Taken,
Deemed and Adjudged to be Guilty of High Treason, and shall Suffer and Forfeit
as in Cases of High Treason: And it is thereby further Enacted, That if any
Person, who since the Eleventh Day of December, in the Year of our Lord, One
thousand six hundred eighty eight, went into France or any of the French Kings
Dominions without License first had from His Majesty or the said late Queen, or
who has been in Arms under the late King James or the French King or in either
of their Services since the said Thirteenth Day of February, One thousand six
hundred eighty eight, has returned into this Realm, without License from His
Majesty, or the said late Queen, such Person shall depart this Realm on or
before the First Day of February, One thousand six hundred ninety seven, unless
such Person shall, before the said First Day of February, One thousand six
hundred ninety seven, obtain His Majesty's License, in manner aforesaid, for
his or her staying here; And in case such Person shall not depart this Realm,
on or before the said First Day of February, One thousand six hundred ninety
seven, or shall after such departure return into this Realm, without His
Majesty's License, as aforesaid, such Person so Offending, being thereof
lawfully Convicted, shall be Taken, Deemed and Adjudged to be Guilty of High
Treason, and shall Suffer and Forfeit as in Cases of High Treason. And whereas
it is thought necessary, in order that no Persons may, on any Account
whatsoever, pretend Ignorance of the said Act, but may in all respects Conform
themselves thereunto, that Public Notice be given thereof; His Majesty
therefore (with Advice of His Privy Council) has thought fit to Publish this
Proclamation, hereby Declaring that all Persons who shall be found Offending
against the said Act, shall be Prosecuted and Punished with the utmost severity
according to Law. And His Majesty does hereby strictly Charge and Command all
His Loving Subjects, that they do no ways Conceal, Harbor or Entertain any
Persons whom they shall know to be Offenders against the said Act, but use
their Endeavors to Take and Apprehend all such Offenders, any to carry them
before the next Justice of the Peace or Chief Magistrate, to the end they may
be Proceeded against according to Law, as they will answer the contrary at
their Perils, and on Pain of being Prosecuted for such Offense according to the
utmost severity of the Law.

Given at Our Court at Kensington the Three and twentieth Day of January, 1697.
In the Ninth Year of Our Reign.
London, Printed by Charles Bill, and the Executrix of Thomas Newcomb,
deceased, Printers to the Kings most Excellent Majesty. 1697.


