A DEFENSE OF THE EXPOSITION of the DOCTRINE OF THE Church of England, Against
the EXCEPTIONS OF Monsieur de MEAVX, Late Bishop of Condom, AND HIS VINDICATOR.
The Contents are in the next Leaf.

LONDON, Printed for Richard Chiswell, at the Rose and Crown in S. Paul's
Churchyard. MDCLXXXVI.

THE CONTENTS.
I. THE Preface: containing a farther account of Monsieur de Meaux's
Exposition, with an Answer to his Exceptions against my former Preface. II. The
Defense of my Exposition; being a full Reply to whatsoever has been alleged
against it by the Vindicator: particularly as to the false citations, he
pretends, of Their Authors, and misrepresentation of their Tenets. III.
Appendix: Being a Collection of some pieces relating to this controversy, viz.
1. The account of Monsieur de Meaux's Pastoral Letter, taken out of the last
Nouvelle, etc. 2. A summary of Father Crassets Doctrine, of the Worship of the
B. Virgin. 3. The Opposition between Card. Bona and Monsieur de Meaux in the
same point. 4. A Copy of Monsieur Imbert's Letter to Monsieur de Meaux, giving
him an account of his beiong persecuted by the A. B. of Bourdeaux, for
maintaining the Doctrine of his Exposition. 5. The Letter of S. Chrysostom to
Caesarius, suppressed by some Doctors of the Sorbonne, for being contrary to
their Canon of Transubstantiation; with an Account of that whole transaction.
6. An account of Authors cited by me, with their Editions, to prevent any new
Calumnies.

THE PREFACE.
MY former Treatise of the Exposition of the Doctrine of the Church of England,
has given so full an account of the Occasion and Design of Monsieur de Meaux 's
Book, as might supersede the Necessity of adding any more upon that subject.
But being called to a necessary justification of what I there advanced, not so
much by the weak defense of his Vindicator, embarked with him in the same
Cause; as by the flat denial of Monsieur de Meaux himself, of the principal
foundation on which that Account was built; I hope I shall need no great
Apology, if upon this Occasion I enter somewhat farther upon a new History
than might otherwise seem absolutely necessary for my defense, and by comparing
this method of Expounding with some others of a different Nature, which have of
late been sent abroad by those of the Roman Communion, endeavor to show what
the real intent of them all has been; and what the design of those who now
pursue the same Method among us, may reasonably be supposed to be.

It is I presume at this time not unknown to any, what great Endeavors have
been used in our neighbor Nation, for the reducing of those of the Reformed
Religion to the Roman Communion. And it must be confessed indeed, they have
omitted nothing that Language and Sophistry could be made to do, for the
Attainment of so great an End.

The Jansenists were some of the first who began this work: and it is not to be
doubted but that Persons of their avowed reputation in point of Learning, and
who seemed to have had this means only left them to regain the favor of their
King, whose design they pursued; would be sure to offer something worthy
themselves, and proportionable at once both to the Work it self, and to their
Engagements to it.

The first Attempt they made was a little piece, that has since given Occasion
to a very long Controversy between Monsieur Arnauld and Monsieur Claude; La
perpetuite de la foy de l'Eglise Catholic, touchant l'Eucharistie. Ann. 1664.
of the Perpetuity of the Faith as to the real Prefence of Christ in the Holy
Eucharist. A Tract which if we regard only the neatness and subtilty of the
composure, it must be avowed scarce any thing ever appeared more worthy that
Applause it met with in the World: And the design, though expressed in one
particular only, yet so applicable to all the rest; that were the Argument
good, the Church of Rome would have needed no other defense for all the
corruptions that had, or could possibly creep into it.

But the Sophistry of this method has been sufficiently exposed in the Volumes
composed on this occasion. And indeed without entering on a particular
Examination, any Man's own reason will tell him at first sight, that a Logical
subtilty advanced against matter of Fact, may be worth the considering for the
curiosity of the undertaking, but like the Philosopher's Argument against
Motion, will never be able to convince any, but such as want Diogenes 's
demonstration to expose its Sophistry.

In effect, the design of this first Method amounted to thus much; That
Transubstantiation (and the same might have been said of any other point in
dispute) was visibly once the common Doctrine of the Church: And it is
impossible it should have been so then, had it ever been otherwise before. And
this to be believed upon the strength of a sophistical Argument, Albertinus de
Eucharistiae Sacramento. Fol.
notwithstanding all the evident instances of matter of Fact, which Monsieur
d'Aubertine and others have at large collected to the contrary.

The next Attempt, and that as useful and universal as the former, was by
another of the same party, and with no less applause, whether we regard the
novelty of the invention, or the neatness of the performance: And his Method
was, Prejugez tegitimes contre les Calvinists. An. 1671.
by advancing certain matters of fact, which he calls just prejudices against
the Calvinists, to show that without entering into dispute about any of the
points in debate, the bare external consideration of the Protestants in the
manner of their Reformation, and some other particulars, was enough to show,
that the truth could not possibly be on their side.

But alas! this too proved an Argument too weak to stand the first examination
that was made of it: and Monsieur Pajon, Examen du livre qui port pour titre,
Prejugez legitimes, etc. An. 1673.
who undertook the defense of his Party against it, has shown that in his proof
he has not only advanced an Argument that might indifferently be brought
against all sides, but which a Monsieur Jurieu Prejugez legitimes contre le
Papisme An. 1685.
late Author has since proved, to be ten times more strong against themselves,
than it could ever be thought to be against us.

I shall not undertake an exact account of all the other Methods that have
succeeded these, with less Applause, and as little Effect. One, as is said by
the same Author, Les Pretendus Reformez convaincus de Schism. 1684.
was published not long since to prove us guilty of Schism in separating from
the Church of Rome, whether we had sufficient grounds or not for our so doing:
And that for this reason, because however the learned Men of our party might
have been convinced of the reasonableness of it, yet the generality being
incapable of forming such a judgment, must have separated without reason, and
so have been Schismatics. And if their Separation was at first unlawful, their
Return will now by consequence be necessary to them.

How far this method might heretofore have concluded with those whom it
principally concerns, the vulgar and ignorant, I cannot tell; but God be
thanked there are few now so ill instructed in their Religion, but what will
have enough to free them from the sin of Schism, if the knowledge of a
sufficient reason of their Separation may be allowed to do it.

Thus much only I will beg leave to observe on occasion of these several
methods that have been proposed for our Conviction, That the great design of
them all has been to prevent the entering on particular Disputes, which had
hithexto been the way, but such as experience had taught them to be the least
favorable of any to them.

And the same is the design of the late peaceable method set forth by Monsieur
Maimbourg; in which from the Authority of the Church in matters of Faith,
confessed, as he says, by us, he proves, That the Church, in which both parties
once were, must then have had this Authority over us all; and to whose decision
in the Council of Trent, we all by consequence ought to submit.

It is not necessary that I should here say any thing to show the Weakness and
Sophistry of these several Methods: That has been the business of those
particular Examinations, that have with success enough been made of them. This
I suppose may at first sight appear upon the bare proposal of them, That they
have more of Ingenuity than of Solidity. in them; and were, no doubt, designed
by their Inventors, to catch the unwary with a plausi le show of that Reason,
which the Wise and Judicious know them to be defective in.

How far we may conclude from hence, as to the Nature and Design of Monsieur de
Meaux's Exposition, I shall leave it to others to consider. This is undeniable,
That as it came out at a time when these kind of Methods were all in repute,
and with a design to help forward the same great business of Conversion then in
agitation; so has it been cried up by those of that Communion as exceeding all
others in order to that End; and if we may believe their reports, been above
all others the most happy and successful in it.

It is not easy to conceive that a Person of Monsieur de Meaux 's Learning,
should seriously believe, That a bare Exposition of their Doctrine should be
sufficient to convince us of the truth of it. He could not but know that our
first Reformers were Persons abundantly qualified to understand the real
profession of a Church in which they had been born and bred; and in which many
of them were admitted to holy Orders, Priests and professors of Divinity. Nor
is the Council of Trent so rare or so obscure, that a mere Exposition of its
Doctrine should work such effects, as neither the Council nor its Catechism
were able to do. In a word Monsieur de Meaux himself confesses, His design was
to represent his Church as favorably as he could; to take off that hideous and
terrible form in which the Ministers, Advertisment Page 2, 4.
he says, were wont to represent Popery in their Pulpits, and expose it in its
natural dress, free from those frightful Idea's, in which it had so long been
disguised by them.

One would imagine by this discourse that the whole business of the Ministers
of the Reformed Religion, was to do nothing but invent new Monsters every day,
and lay them to the Church of Rome: And that after all our pretenses to Peace
and Union, we were really such Enemies to it, that we did all we could, even by
Lies and Calumnies, to keep both our selves and the people from it. But indeed
these hideous Idea's Monsieur de Meaux speaks of, if they are such false
representations as he pretends, they are not the Ministers that invent them;
but their own greatest Zealots, their Schoolmen, their Bishops, their
Cardinals; nay their very Popes themselves that have been the Authors of them.

How far Monsieur de Meaux' s Exposition differs from what they have delivered
us as the Doctrine of their pretended Catholic Church, has been in some
measure shown already, and shall in the following Discourse be more fully
evidenced. And whosoever shall please to consider the Elogies and Approbations,
which these Men have received, no less than Monsieur de Meaux, will be forced
to confess it to be at least a disputable point, Whether the Ministers, from
these Authors, have represented their Church in a hideous and terrible form; or
whether Monsieur de Meaux rather has not, instead of removing the Visor to show
her in her natural dress, a little varnished over her Face to hide her defects,
and make her appear more charming and attractive than her own natural deformity
would otherwise permit her to do.

Now of this a more convincing proof cannot, I think, be desired, than what I
before advanced, and see no reason yet to retract; viz. Exposit. Page 3.
That out of an extraordinary desire of palliating, he had proceeded so far, as
in several points wholly to pervert the Doctrine of his Church. Insomuch that
when his Book was sent to some of the Doctors of the Sorbonne for their
approbation, they corrected so many places in it, that Monsieur de Meaux was
forced to suppress the whole Edition, and change those places that had been
marked by them, and put out a new and more correct Impression, as the first
that had ever been made of it.

This Monsieur de Meaux is pleased to deny as an utter falsity; Vindicat. Page
8, 9.
For that he never sent his Book to the Sorbonne; that their custom is not to
License Books in Body; and that that Venerable company knows better what is due
to Bishops, who are naturally and by their Character the true Doctors of the
Church, than to think they have need of the Approbation of her Doctors. In a
word, that it is a manifest falsity to say that a first Edition of his Book was
suppressed, because the Doctors of the Sorbonne had something to say against
it. That he never did publish, not cause to be printed, any other Edition than
that which is in the hands of every one, to which he never added nor diminished
one syllable; nor ever feared that any Catholic Doctor could find any thing in
it worthy of reprehension.

This is indeed a severe charge against me, and such, as, if true, it cannot be
doubted, but that I have been as great a Calumniator as his Vindicator has
thought Fit to represent me; or, as for ought I know, Monsieur de Meaux himself
will be in danger of being reputed if it should be false. And therefore to
satisfy the World in this main, fundamental point between us, I do hereby
solemnly declare, That there was an Impression of the Exposition, such as I
spoke of; That out of it I transcribed with my own hand, the several Changes
and Alterations that are placed at the end of my Preface; That this Book, with
these differences is at this time in the hands of the Reverend Editor of my
former Treatise, and that whosoever of either Communion is pleased to Examine
them, may when ever he will have free liberty so to do.

This I the rather declare, because Monsieur de Meaux is so positive in it, as
to charge me with no less than the pure Invention of those passages I have
cited from it. Vindicat. Page 12, 13.
As for those passages, says he, which they pretend I have corrected in a
second Edition for fear of offending the Sorbonne, it is as you see a
Chimerical Invention; and I do here once more repeat it, That I neither
published, nor connived at, nor caused to be made, any Edition of my Book, but
that which is well known, in which I never altered any thing. For answer to
which I must beg leave once more to repeat it too; That these passages are for
the most part Chimerical Inventions indeed, but yet such as He once hoped to
have put off as the Doctrine of his Church, and as such sent them into the
World, in that first Edition we are speaking of; out of which I have
transcribed them in as just and proper terms as I was able to put them in; and
I appeal to any one, that shall please to examine them, for the truth and
sincerity that I have used in it.

But here Monsieur de Meaux has got an Evasion, which, if not prevented, may in
some Men's Opinion take off this seeming contradiction betwixt us, and leave us
both at last for the main in the right! It Is true, says he, this little
Treatise being at first given in Writing to some particular Persons for their
Instruction, many Copies of it were dispersed, and IT WAS PRINTED without my
Order or Knowledge. No body found fault with the Doctrine contained in it; and
I my self without changing any thing in it of Importance, and that only as to
the Order, and for the greater neatness of the Discourse and Style, caused it
to be printed as you now see. So that now then it is at last confessed that an
Edition there was, such as I charged them with, different very much from what
we now have. But that it was an Edition printed without Monsieur de Meaux' s
Knowledge; and the changes which he made afterward were only as to the Order,
and for the greater neatness of the Discourse and Style.

As to this last particular, the Reader will best judge of what kind the
differences were, by that short Specimen I have given of them. If to say in
One, Collect. n. ^.
That the Honor which the Church gives to the Blessed Virgin and the Saints is
Religious, nay that it ought to be blamed if it were not Religious; In the
Other, to doubt whether it may even in some sense be called Religious: If to
tell us in the One, Ibid. n. 12.
That the Mass may very reasonably be called a Sacrifice; In the Other, that
there is nothing wanting to it to make it a true Sacrifice. If to strike out
totally in several places, Positions that were absolutely of Doctrine, or
otherwise very material to the Points that were so; as in several instances it
appears he has done; If this were indeed only for the advantage of the Order,
and for the greater neatness of the Discourse and Style, I am contented. I
accuse not Monsieur de Meaux of any other alterations than such as these.

And thus far we can go certainly in Reply to his Allegations, beyond a
possibility of denial: For what remains, though I do not pretend to the like
Evidence of Fact, yet I will offer some Reasons why I cannot assent to his
pretenses even there neither.

That the Impression was made with Monsieur de Meaux' s Knowledge, if not by
his express Order, whoever shall consider the circumstances of Monsieur
Cramoisy who printed it, either as a Person of his Reputation and Estate; or as
Directour of the King's Imprimerie; or finally as Monsieur de Meaux' s own
Bookseller; will hardly believe that he would so far affront a Bishop of his
Church, and one especially of Monsieur de Meaux' s interest and authority at
that time at Court; as to make a surreptitious Edition of a Book, which he
might have had the Author's leave to publish only for the asking.

But further: This pretended surreptitious Edition had the Kings Permission to
it, which could hardly have been obtained without Monsieur de Meaux' s
knowledge. It was approved by the Bishops of France in the very same terms that
the other Editions have been since; which seems more natural to have been
procured by Monsieur de Meaux himself, than by a Printer, underhand, and
without his knowledge and connivance. In a word, so far was Monsieur de Meaux
from resenting this injury, of setting out his Book so uncorrectly, and without
his leave; that the very same Cramoisy, the same Year, Printed the Exposition
with his leave, and has continued to Print all his other Books ever since; and
was never that I could hear of, censured, for such fraudulent dealing, till
this time, by the Bishop or any other. All which put together, I must beg leave
still to believe as I did before; that there was not only a first impression,
which is at length allowed; but that this first impression was not made without
Monsieur de Meaux' s Order or Knowledge.

As for the other Point, and I think the only remaining in this matter,
concerning the occasion I mentioned for the suppressing that first Edition; the
Reader may please to know, That a Person by many relations very intimate with
one of the Mareshal de Turenne' s Family, upon the publishing of the pretended
first Edition of Monsieur de Meaux' s Exposition, first discovered to him the
mystery of the former, and showed him out of the Mareshal' s Library the very
Book which, as he then assured him, had been marked by some of the Doctors of
the Sorbonne, and lent it him for some time as a great Curiosity. The knowledge
of this raised the desire of endeavoring, if it were possible, to retrieve a
Copy of it: But the Edition was so carefully dispatched, that the most that
could be done was to get so many scattered Sheets of it, as to make at last a
perfect Book, except in some few places in which it was transcribed from the
Original of the Mareshal, word for word, page for page, and examined by the
Person himself, who was so kind as to bestow it on me.

This is the Book to which I refer the Reader; and for this I have the
Attestation of the same Person under his hand, at the beginning of the Book;
that it is in every part a perfect Copy of Monsieur de Turenne' s marked by the
Sorbonne Doctors; and I have been besides so just to Monsieur de Meaux, as to
cite scarce any thing out of those places that were in the Manuscript part, but
have chosen such rather where the printed Copy gave me full Assurance and
Authority to do it.

But to argue the improbability of all this, Monsieur de Meaux observes, "That
the Sorbonne is never used to License Books in Body. And I desire Monsieur de
Meaux to tell us, Vindicat. Page 8.
who ever said or thought they did? That that venerable Company knows better
what is due to Bishops, who are naturally and by their Character Doctors of the
Church, than to think they have need of the Approbation of her Doctors. I doubt
not but the Sorbonne very well knows the respect that is due to Bishops: but
that it should be any argument of disrespect to approve a Bishop's Book, when
it was sent to them for that purpose, I cannot conceive. In short, we
understand the Reputation and Authority of that venerable Company too well, to
believe it at all improbable that Monsieur de Meaux should desire their
Approbation; nor are we so little acquainted with their Books, as not to know,
That it is no unheard of thing to see Doctors of the Sorbonne setting their
approbation to a Book, approved and authorized by Bishops before.

The next Exception Monsieur de Meaux makes, is, Vindicat. Page 9.
That I should confirm what had before been urged against him, of a Papist's
answering his Book; in the truth of which I am as little concerned as himself
can be. Only the assurance I have had of it from a Person of undoubted
sincerity, makes me still believe that it was so: and Monsieur de Meaux may
remember that Monsisieur Conrart often professed that he had seen it in
Manuscript; who was not only his old Friend, but as himself characteriseth him,
M. de M's Advert. p. 3.
One endowed with all that the Catholics themselves could desire in a Man,
excepting a better Religion.

For what relates to Father Crasset, it is not for me to contradict Monsieur de
Meaux' s Declaration, Vindicat. page 10.
that he never read his Book; But that he never heard it mentioned that there
was any thing in it contrary to his Exposition: this I must confess is
admirable, whether we consider the notoriety of the thing, as it related to the
Salutary Advertisements and the Bishop of Tournay' s Pastoral Letter, which
made so great a noise in France; or that it was particularly proved, in the
Answer to his own Advertisement dedicated to Monsieur de Ruvigny, above five
Years since, Second Reponse. p. 79, etc.
to be directly opposite to his Exposition. And for the rest, For all this, see
the Appendix. number. 2.
I must beg leave to believe, whatever Monsieur de Meaux flatters himself with;
that that Father would be so far from being troubled that any Body should think
his Principles contrary to Monsieur de Meaux' s, that I dare say he would
rather think his pains but ill spent in Writing of so large a Book, did he not
believe he had convinced the World that he looks upon them, nay and has proved
them too, to be little less than Heretical.

As for Cardinal Capisucchi, Vindicat. page 10.
Monsieur de Meaux tells us, he is so far from being contrary to the Doctrine
of the Exposition, that his express Approbation has been prefixed to it. This
indeed were a good presumption that he should not have any Principles contrary
to Monsieur de Meaux; See Appendix number. 3. where I have showed Cardinal Bona
another of his approvers, to be nevertheless in his own Writings contrary to
Monsieur de M's Exposition.
but if what I have alleged out of his Controversies be really repugnant to
what he approved in the Exposition, it may indeed speak the Cardinal not so
consistent with himself as he should be, but the contradiction will be never
the less a contradiction for his so doing.

The next thing Monsieur de Meaux takes notice of is, The relation of Monsieur
Imbert and Monsieur de Wit. The Stories are matters of Fact, and the Papers
from whence they were collected published by themselves. Vindicat. p. 10, 11.
If they alleged Monsieur de Meaux' s Authority for Principles that he
maintained not, For what concerns Mr. Inbert, see his own Letter to Monsieur de
Meaux, Appendix, number. 4. For Monsieur de Witte's case it has been already
printed, and I have nothing new to add to it.
this concerns not us; nor, whatever the little Comment on the Bishop' s Letter
pretends, was it at all needful to be shown by me that they did not, in the
recital of the propositions held by them. It Is sufficient that they both
declared themselves to stand to Monsieur de Meaux' s Exposition; and were both
condemned, without any regard had to Monsieur de Meaux' s Authority; or being
at all convinced, or so much as told, that they were mistaken in their
pretenses to it.

The last thing Monsieur de Meaux takes notice of is, Vindicat. p. 14.
That I reflect upon him for being fertile enough in producing new Labors, but
steril in answering what is brought against his Works. I do not at all envy
Monsieur de Meaux' s fertility; his productions have not been many, and those
so short, and with such an ingenuous Character of temper and moderation as
ought to be acknowledged even in an Enemy. But I must confess I do admire, as
many others do, that no Reply has been made by him to those Answers that have
been sent abroad not only against his Exposition, but even against the
Advertisement it self, which he says can bear no Reply. See de la B's. Answer
to the Advertisement p. 5.
This we so much the rather wonder at, for that an Answer was openly promised
by Monsieur de Turenne, and not without some kind of boasting too; And that
several of his own Communion were so well satisfied with the pieces that had
been published against Him, as to expect, no less than We, some such
Vindication.

And here I shall take my leave of Monsieur de Meaux, for whom I must yet again
profess, that I still retain all that respect that is due to a Person whose
Character I honor, and whom I hope I have treated with all the caution and
civility that the necessary defense of my self and of the truth would permit me
to do. For what remains, my business now must be wholly with his Vindicator,
who has been pleased to fix such an odious Character upon me, as I hope to make
it appear I have as little deserved, as I shall desire to return it upon him.

Had he charged me with Ignorance, had he loaded me with mistakes arising from
thence; or had he imputed to me the faults only of Carelessness and Incogitancy:
All this might have passed without my Censure; and I should have been so far
from vindicating my self, that I should have been ready, in great measure, to
have acknowledged the Charge, and to have submitted to his reproof. I know how
little fit I am for controversies of this kind; That neither my Age, nor
Learning, nor Opportunities have qualified me for such undertakings, as the
defense of my Religion and my duty to my Superiors have, without any design of
mine, engaged me in. And I doubt not but a Censor less severe, than he who has
thought fit to make himself my Adversary, might have found out more real faults
in my Book, than he has noted pretended Errors.

But for the Calumnies and Misrepresentations, Vindicat. page 22.
for the unsincere dealings and falsifications, he accuses me of, and that in
almost every Article; here I must beg leave to justify my self; and assure the
Vindicator, whoever he be, that my Religion, I thank God, needs not such
defenses, nor would I ever have used these means to assert it, if it did.

We have indeed heard of some that have looked upon these things as not only
lawful, but even pious on such Occasions; that have esteemed the interest of
the Church so sacred, as to be able to sanctify the worst means that can be
made use of to promote it: Had I been bred in their Schools, there might have
been some more plausible grounds for such a suspicion; and what wonder if I did
no more, than what I had been taught was lawful for me to do? But I have not so
learnt Christ. Ephesians. 4.20. Romans 3.8.
I have been taught, and am persuaded, that no Evil may be done that good may
come: I am assured by S. Paul that they who say it may, their damnation is
just: And did I now know of any one instance of those crimes, whereof I am
represented to the World as guilty in almost every Chapter, I should think my
self indispensably obliged to made a public acknowledgement of it, and thank
the Vindicator that has called me to so necessary a duty.

But now that I am not conscious to my self of any thing of all this, all that
I have to reply to this uncharitable way of proceeding is, to entreat him by
the common name of Christian, and those hopes of Eternity, after which I
believe we would all of us be thought sincerely to contend, to consider how
dangerous this way he has taken is; what mischief it will bring, in the opinion
of all good Men, of whatsoever persuasion they be, to the very cause that is
maintained by such means: in a word, what a sad purchase it will prove in the
end, if to lessen the reputation of an unknown, obscure Adversary, he should do
that which shall lose him his own Soul.

But it is time now to clear my self of those Calumnies that are laid to my
charge. And the first is, Vindicat. page 2.
That I endeavor to represent Monsieur de Meaux's Exposition as a Book that
palliates, and prevaricates the Doctrine of his Church; and the very
Approbations of it, as mere artifices to deceive the World, not sincere, much
less authoritative Approbations, either of the nature or principles of Monsieur
de Meaux's Book.

I do not remember I have any where in express terms charged Monsieur de Meaux
with prevaricating the Doctrine of his Church in the latter Editions of his
Book; though others I know have done it. But however, if this be the greatest
of those Calumnies I am guilty of, I am sure all that have ever lived among
them, and seen their practices, and compared them with what he writes, will
easily absolve me: and I shall hereafter show that either Monsieur de Meaux has
palliated, or else the greatest of their Authors have strangely perverted the
Doctrine of the Church.

As to the other part of the Accusation, that I should say that the
Approbations were mere Artifices to deceive the World, it is not my Calumny,
but the Vindicator's mistake. Expos. of the C. E. page 15.
I never thought those Letters Monsieur de Meaux has published any
authoritative Approbations of his Book at all; Indeed in the place which he
cites, I have said somewhat like it of the Of which see more in the Appendix.
n. 3. p. 120.
Popes Brief, and am still of the same mind; and till he shall think fit to
answer the reasons that induced me to believe so, he will hardly persuade me
that this is a Calumny.

But if I am so little satisfied with the Approbations of Monsieur de Meaux 's
Book, Vindicat. page 3.
I should at least have had some more authentic testimonies of what I my self
publish. And he thinks it wonderful, that my Book should have found such a
reception as it did, only from my assuring the World that I had not palliated,
nor prevaricated the Doctrine of the Church of England; but submitted it to her
Censure; and the sight of an Imprimatur; when the Approbations of so many
Learned Men, and even of the Pope himself, are not thought sufficient to secure
Monsieur de Meaux's Treatise.

This indeed were somewhat, if the truth of the Exposition were on either side
to be taken from the number of the Approvers, and not the nature of the
Doctrine. If Monsieur de Meaux has really palliated the Doctrine of the Church
of Rome, it is not any number of Approbations that will be able to render him a
faithful Expositor. If my Exposition be conformable to the Doctrine of the
Church of England; (and if not, let him show us the prevarications;) the want
of a few Letters can at most argue only my interest not to have been so great
as his, or my Vanity less; but will not render the Exposition ever the more
unfaithful. And though an Imprimatur be all the Authority that is usual with us
on such Occasions, yet the Vindicator may believe, by the reception he
acknowledges the Book to have had, that it would have been no difficult matter
to have obtained other Subscriptions than that of the Reverend Person who
Licensed it; and if that will be any satisfaction to him, I do assure him, it
has been approved by several other Persons but little inferior, whether in
Authority or Reputation, to any Monsieur de Meaux has prefixed to his
Exposition.

For what remains of my Preface, two things there are which he supposes worthy
his Animadversion: One, that whereas I accuse Cardinal Capisucchi to have
contradicted the Doctrine of the Exposition, Vindicat. Page 17.
we must take notice, that the Bishop of Condom's intention was not to meddle
with Scholastic Tenets, but purely to deliver that Doctrine of the Church,
which was necessarily and universally received; whereas Cardinal Capisucchi
being obliged to no such strictness, would not, it may be, contradict the
problematical niceties of those Schools in which he had been Educated.

It is the Catholic distinction of this Author throughout his whole
Vindication, if any thing be alleged contrary to his liking, that it is
presently a Scholastic Tenet, and not the necessary and universally to be
received Doctrine of the Church. But that we may, if possible, discern what is
the Doctrine, and what the Scholastic Tenet in the present case, we will take
only what at first sight offers it self, viz. That Cardinal Capisucchi does
positively affirm, To satisfy the Vindicator what the Cardinal's words are, I
will give them at length. Ex his constat and in concilio Nicaeno Secundo, and
in Tridentino, aliisque, Latriam duntaxat Idololatricam Sacris imaginibus
denegari, qualem Gentiles Imaginibus exhibent, ac proinde Latriam illam
interdici quae Imaginibus in seipsis and propter ipsas exhibeatur, quaque
Imagines (...) Numina aut Divinitatem continentia more Gentilium celantur; de
hujusmodi enim Latria controversia erat cum Judaeis and Haereticis, qui haec
ratione nos Imagines colere ass^ebant. Caeterum de Latria illa quae Imaginibus
S. Trinitatis, Christi D. aut Sacratissimae Crucis exhibetur, ratione rei per
eas repraesenratae, and quatenus cum re repraesentat^ unum sunt in esse
repraesentativo, nullamque divinitatem Imaginibus ^^ibuit^aut supponit, nulla
unquamfuit antesse potuit Controversia. Art. 8. p. 647.
That a Divine worship may be paid to Images, upon the account of the thing
which they represent; and that this Doctrine was never doubted of in the
Church, nor denied by the Council of Trent.

Does Monsieur de Meaux allow of this? Does he tells us that a Divine Worship
may upon any account be paid to an Image? Or rather does he not plainly
insinuate that he can hardly allow the Image any honor at all; Monsieur de
Meaux's Expos. page 8.
We do not, says he, so much honor the Image of an Apostle or Martyr, as the
Apostle or Martyr in presence of the Image. Let us then lay aside the barbarous
distinctions by which he would excuse a foul Idolatry; Be it a School nicety,
or whatever you will else, Vindicat. page 19.
Whether the representative Image as representative, be representatively one
and the same with the thing represented: Our Question without this Gibberish is
plain and intelligible; Whether, upon any account whatsoever, the Image of our
Savior or the Holy Cross be to be worshipped with Divine Worship? This the
Cardinal affirms; and this if Monsieur de Meaux does allow, let him speak it
out without mincing; If not, it is plain for all the pretenses of a Scholastic
nicety, that they differ in the Exposition of a very material point of the
Doctrine of the Roman Church.

The other thing which the Vindicator thinks fit to take notice of in my
Preface, Mindicat. p. 16, 17, 19.
is the Consequence which I draw from this, and some other instances of the
like kind, viz. That the Papists think it lawful to set their hands to, and
approve those Books, whose Principles and Doctrine they dislike.

In Answer to which, he again distinguishes between Scholastic Tenets, and
matters of Faith: and then tells us, Every one knows that the Doctrines of a
Church or matters of Faith, being Tenets necessarily and universally received,
ought upon no account to be dissembled or disguised; but as for Scholastic
Opinions, we see not only one Nation commanding one thing to be taught, and
another the quite contrary; but even one University against another in the same
Country, etc.

But if I mistake not, this is not to answer my Conclusion, but to start a new
Question. The Point proposed was, not whether in matters that are not of Faith,
Men may not hold different Opinions, and yet live still in the same common
Church, whereof there can be no doubt, but it was a Conclusion drawn from plain
matter of fact, viz. That those of the Church of Rome think it lawful to set
their hands to, and approve those Books whose principles they dislike. This the
Instances I have brought show plainly they do; If they know it to be a sin, and
yet do it, they condemn themselves; If they think otherwise, then they believe
it to be lawful; which is all I affirmed, and to which the Vindicator has
answered never a word.

There is yet one thing more remaining before I close this; and that is the
remark the Vindicator has made upon the passages collected by me out of
Monsieur de Meaux 's first Edition, Vindicat. page 20.
which have either been altered or omitted in the following Impressions: viz.
That the Bishop in that Edition had been so far from proposing the Doctrine of
the Church of Rome, loosely and favorably, as I pretend; that on the contrary
he rather proposed it with too much strictness: In a word, that he had been so
far from perverting the Doctrine of the Church, that I was not able to propose
one Doctrine so perverted, without a forced interpretation of my own, according
to my wonted way of turning all things to a wrong intention.

As to the first of which, no one ever charged the Bishop with proposing the
Doctrine of the Church of Rome loosely and favorably in every point. We know
well enough that in some, he has kept to the plain Doctrine of his Church, as
in that of the Eucharist: in others proposed it rather with too much
strictness, as in the case of Infants dying unbaptized: All we say is, that in
some other Articles, such as the Invocation of Saints, Worshipping of Images,
Sacrifice of the Mass, etc. he had expounded it more loosely and favorably
than he ought to have done, and that without any gloss or interpretation of
mine to turn things to a wrong intention.

Does not the Church of Rome lay any Obligation on particular persons to join
with her in the Invocation of Saints? Collect. n. 5.
Does she condemn those only who refuse it out of Contempt, and with a spirit
of dissension and revolt? This Monsieur de Meaux once affirmed, and I think
there needs no comment to show, that this is to palliate the Doctrine of their
Church.

Has the Church of Rome ascribed no other virtue to Images, Ibid. n 6.
than to excite in us the remembrance of those they represent? Is that all the
use they make of them? Do they not so much honor the Image of an Apostle or
Martyr, as the Apostle or Martyr in presence of the Image? Or rather, did not
Monsieur de Meaux here also mollify the known Doctrine and practice of his
Church?

In a word: Ibid. n. 12.
Is the Church of Rome contented to teach only that the Mass may very
reasonably be called a Sacrifice? Is that Exposition reconcilable to what we
now read in him, That there is nothing wanting to make it a true Sacrifice. May
I not here at least, without my wonted way of turning all things to a wrong
intention, beg leave to say, that either Monsieur de Meaux palliated the
Doctrine of his Church in that, or he has otherwise perverted it in this?

Had Monsieur de Meaux only retrenched or altered some things in his Book, for
the greater exactness of the Method or neatness of Style; he must have been a
very peevish Adversary indeed, that would have pretended to censure him for
that. But to change not only the words but Doctrine too; to give us one
Exposition of it in one Edition, and a quite contrary in another, this I think
may, if not be represented as a heinous crime, Vindicat. page 21.22.
yet at least deserve a remark; and let the Vindicator do what he can, will I
doubt make the Author pass with all indifferent persons, for such as yet I had
never represented him, had not he himself first made the dilemma, viz. M. de
M's Advert. p. 2.
One that either did not sufficiently understand the Doctrine of his Church, or
that had not sincerity enough to expound it aright.

I should now pass to the consideration of those Exceptions that have been made
against what I have advanced in my Book it self; but before I do this, it will
be requisite that I take notice of those directions, the Vindicator has thought
fit to give me in his Postscript, in order thereunto.

And here, not to deceive either his, Vindicat. page 12^, 12^.
or the Reader's expectation; I must beg leave to excuse my self from entering
any farther into dispute with the Bishop of Condom, than I have already done. I
never designed a direct answer to his Book; and the reflections I have made
upon it in my former Treatise, were more to clear the Doctrine of the Church of
England, than to argue against what he offered in behalf of the Romish Faith.
This has been the undertaking of another Pen, from whom the Vindicator I
suppose may expect, what is reasonably enough refused by me.

But for the other part of his desire, that I would take the pains to peruse my
self the Authors cited by me, Vindicat. page 121.
and not transcribe Quotations, nor take up things by halves; I have been so
scrupulous in observing it, that I doubt I shall receive but little thanks from
himself for it. It cannot be denied but that there have been faults enough
committed on both sides for want of this care, and I do not desire to add to
the number. I have done my best to take nothing of them without a serious
Examination of their sense, Ibid.
and a sincere application of it to the point in Question. How far I have
attained this I must leave it to others to judge; but for the rest, the truth
of my Citations, I have been so cautious in them, that allowing only for the
Errata's of the Press, I desire no favor if I am found faulty in that.

I should indeed stand in need of a large Apology to those, into whose hands
these Papers may chance to fall, that I have in many places run them out into
so great a length: But the Accusation that has been brought against me for want
of doing this before, how unjust soever it be, has obliged me to this Caution
now; and they are so ordered as to be no hindrance to those that are minded to
pass them by.

This benefit at least I shall attain by them, with those who please to compare
them with what the Vindicator alleges; that they will find he might have
spared himself the troublesome, Vindicat. page 122.
and ungentile Office indeed of undertaking what he could not effect, to
demonstrate to the World the unsincerity which I have shown in my Quotations,
and the falsifications of them; His endeavors wherein have been so very
unsuccessful, that I know not whether himself or his Religion will suffer more
by the weakness of his attempt.

A TABLE OF THE ARTICLES Contained in the following TREATISE.
PART I.
I. INtroduction. Page 1 II. That Religious Worship is terminated only in God.
Page 6 III. Invocation of Saints. ibid. IV. Images and Relics. Page 14 V.
Justification. Page 25 VI. Merits. Page 28 VII. 1. Satisfactions. Page 32 2.
Indulgences. Page 35 3. Purgatory. Page 36

PART II.
VIII. Sacraments in General. Page 37 IX. Baptism. ibid. X. Confirmation. Page
39 XI. Penance. Page 41 XII. Extreme Unction. Page 42 XIII. Marriage. Page 52
XIV. Holy Orders. Page 53 XV. etc. Eucharist. Page 54 XIX. Sacrifice of the
Mass. Page 67 XX. Epistle to the Hebrews. Page 69 XXI. Reflections on the
foregoing Doctrine. Page 70 XXII. Communion under both kinds. Page 71
PART III.
XXIII. Of the written and unwritten Word. 75 XXIV. etc. Authority of the
Church. 77 XXVI. Authority of the Holy See. 82 XXVII. The Close. 83
THE EXPOSITION OF THE Doctrine of the Church of England, Vindicated, etc.
ARTICLE I. Introduction.
HE that accuses another of great and heinous crimes, ought to take all prudent
care not to be guilty himself of those faults which he condemns in others. Had
the Author of the Vindication thought fit to govern himself by this rule, he
would have spared a great part of that odious Character he has been pleased to
draw of me, in the beginning of this Article. But it is not my business to
recriminate, nor need I fly to such arts for my justification. Only as to the
advantage he proposes to himself from these endeavors, Vindicat. page 22.
viz. to show that all those Books to which an Imprimatur is prefixed, will not
hereafter be concluded free from Error; He needed not sure have taken such
pains for that: For I believe no one before him ever imagined that a permission
to print a Book, was a mark of its Infallibility; Nor that every nameless
Author, Vindicat. page 22.
who professes to be sincere, should pass for an Oracle. It is not to be
doubted but that faults there might have been in my Book, for all that
privilege; though the Vindicator has had the ill fortune to miss the most of
them. And for ought he has proved to the contrary, I believe it will in the end
appear, that an Imprimatur Car. Alston, is at least as good a mark of
Infallibility as a Permissu Superiorum; and a Church of England Expositor, as
fit to pass for an Oracle, as a Popish Vindicator.

But Calumny and Vnsincerity are now the Catholic cry: And to make it good
against me, I am charged in this one Article to have been guilty of both.
Vindicat. page 23.
My Introduction is Calumny in a high degree, and my state of the Question,
drawn from thence, as unsincere.

I tell them, he says, of adoring Men and Women, Crosses, Images, and Relics;
of setting up their own Merits, and making other propitiatory sacrifices for
sin than that of the Cross: And that these are all contrary to their pretended
principles, that Religious worship is due to God only; That we are to be saved
only by Christ's Merits, and that the death of Christ was a perfect sacrifice.
The Logic of which he is content to own, that the Consequence is good, but the
Accusation, he says, is false, and the charge, Calumniatory.

But if in the following Articles it be made appear, that their own Authors do
allow of all this: If they do give a divine Worship to the Blessed Virgin and
Saints departed; If their very Missab and Pontifical do command them to adore
the Cross; If it appear that their Council of Trent damns all those who deny
the Mass to be a propitiatory sacrifice for the sins of the Dead and Living,
and yet cannot say it is the very same with that of the Cross: If, finally,
their greatest Writers do allow a Merit of Condignity, and that not as a
Scholastic Tenet, but as the Doctrine of their Church, and agreeable to the
intention of their Council they so much talk of; Then I hope the premises may
be as clear of the Calumny they are charged with, as my inference is allowed to
be just, for the consequence I would establish.

In the mean time, Expos. p. 5.
pass we on to the state of the Question, which I propose in these terms; That
we who have been so often charged by the Church of Rome as Innovators in
Religion, are at last by their own confession allowed to hold the ancient and
undoubted foundation of the Christian Faith; And that the Question therefore
between us is not, Whether what we hold, be true? But whether those things
which the Roman Church has added as superstructures to it and which as such we
reject, be not so far from being necessary Articles of Religion, as they
pretend, that they do indeed overthrow that truth which is on both sides
allowed to be divine, and upon that account ought to be forsaken by them?

This the Vindicator says, Vindicat. page 24.
is to state the Question after a new Mode, and represent them as consenting to
it. Let us see therefore what the Old way of stating it is, and wherein the
insincerity he charges me with, consists.

The true state of the Question betwixt us, Ibid. p. 25.
he says, is, Whether the Protestants or Papists do innovate? The Protestants
in refusing to believe those Doctrines which the Church of Rome professes to
have received with the grounds of Christianity, or the Papists in maintaining
their possession: And the dispute is, Whether Roman Catholics ought to
maintain their possession, for which, he says, many Protestants themselves
grant they have a prescription of above 1000 Years? Or whether the Authorities
brought by Protestants against the Roman Catholic Doctrine be so weighty,
Ibid. p. 26.
that every Roman Catholic is obliged to renounce the communion of that Church
in which he was bred up, and quit his prescription and possession.

In all which the only difference that I can find is this; That He presumes for
his Church in the state of the Question, I for mine: I suppose the points in
Controversy to be Superstructures which they have added to the Faith; He, that
they are Doctrines received with the grounds of Christianity. In short, the
point we both put upon the issue is precisely the same; viz. Whether the Roman
Catholics ought to maintain their possessions of these Doctrines, or to quit
them as Erroneous? Whether Protestants to embrace the belief and practice of
them as true and lawful, or to continue, as they are, separate from the Roman
Communion upon the account of them?

But where then is my unsincerity? In this I suppose, that I seem to insinuate
as if the Roman Church granted that we held the ancient and undoubted
foundation of the Christian Faith. What others of that Communion will grant, I
cannot tell; but whosoever shall please to consider Monsieur de Meaux's arguing
from Monsieur Daille's concessions as to this Point, See his Expos.. 2. p. 2.
will find it clear enough that he did; if the Foundation consists of
Fundamental Articles, and that we are on both sides agreed in these, as his
discourse manifestly implies. But the Vindicator, jealous for the Authority of
his Church, and to have whatever she proposes pass for Fundamental, confesses
that we do indeed hold a part, but not all those Articles that are Fundamental.
This therefore we must put upon the issue, in which we shall not doubt to show
them, that those Articles their Church has added, are so far from being
Fundamental Truths, that indeed they are no Truths at all; but do by evident
and undoubted consequence, as I before said, and as the Vindicator himself
confesses, Vindicat. Page 23.
destroy those Truths that are on both sides agreed to be Fundamental.

But if I have not mistaken the Question between the Papists and Protestants,
Vindicat. page 26.
I am sure the Vindicator has that between Him and Me. He tells us our present
Question, which we are to examine in the following Articles, is, Whether
Monsieur de Meaux has faithfully proposed the sense of the Church declared in
the Council of Trent? And thereupon asks me, What it does avail me to tell
them, That I will in the following Articles endeavor to give a clear and free
Account of what we can approve, and what we dislike in their Doctrine? To which
I reply, That it avails very much to the end I propounded in my Book, viz. To
give a true Exposition of the Doctrine of the Church of England in the several
Points proposed by Monsieur de Meaux. So that in reality the Question between
us is this, Not whether Monsieur de Meaux has given a true Exposition of the
Doctrine of the Church of Rome, which it has been the business of others to
examine; but whether I have given a just account of the Doctrine of the Church
of England. This was what I undertook to do, and what this Author ought, if he
could, to have shown I had not done.

ARTICLE II. That Religious Worship is terminated only in God.
IN this Article I am but little concerned. The Vindicator states the Case,
what it is they mean by Religious honor being terminated only in God. He
distinguishes between what they pay Him, and what they give to the Saints; how
truly, or to what purpose, it is not my business to examine. Those who desire
to be satisfied in it, may find a sufficient Account in several late Treatises
written purposely against this part of Monsieur de Meaux's Exposition; and I
shall not repeat what is so fully and clearly established there.

ARTICLE III. Invocation of Saints.
I Might well have passed over this Point altogether, which has been so
learnedly and fully managed, but very lately, in a particular Discourse
concerning the Worship of the B. Virgin and the Saints, in Answer to Monsieur
de Meaux's Appeal to the fourth Age.
Discourse on this Subject. Yet since the Vindicator desires to know what
Authority I have for my Assertion, That the Addresses which Monsieur Daille
allows to have been used by the Fathers of the fourth Century, were rather
innocent wishes and rhetorical flights, than direct Prayers; but especially for
that Accusation which he says I bring against them, viz. That they did herein
begin to depart from the Practice and Tradition of those before them, I am
content to give him that satisfaction.

For the First then: That Monsieur Daille himself looked upon them as no other
than such Addresses as I have characterized, because Expos. Monsieur de Meaux,
page 4.. 3. It will not be unuseful to take notice how those of the P.
Reformation begin to acknowledge, that the custom of Praying to Saints was
established even in the fourth Age of the Church. Monsieur Daille grants thus
much in that Book he published against the Tradition of the Latin Church, about
the Object of Religious Worship.
Monsieur de Meaux has represented him as if he allowed that the custom of
praying to Saints was established in the Church in the fourth Century; I then
cited his Opinion to the contrary, and have now subjoined it in his own words
Monsieur Daille's words are these: Neque eum a vero long aberraturum pato, qui
dixerit hunc fuisse apud Christianos primum ad Sanctos invocandos gradum, cum
calefacti atque inardescentes rerum praeclare ab iis gestarum meditatione,
praedicatione, atque exaggeratione animi, ad eos denique Invocandos
prorumperent. Certe quae de 4o Seculo prima hujus Invocationis afferuntur
Exempla, ea fere sunt hujus generis. Ex Encomiasticis quorundam disertissimorum
and Eruditione Seculari florentissimorum hominum in Sanctos Orationibus
desumpta, Gregorii Nazianzeni in Cyprianum; in Athanasium, in Basilium;
Gregorii Nysseni in Theodorum, qui ambo 4o sed jam praecipiti seculo celebres
habebantur, etc. Adv. Lat. Tradit. de cultas relig. Objecto, l. 3. c. 18. page
454.
.

Secondly: That these Addresses were really of this kind, the several passages
that are usually brought from these Fathers, plainly show: And both the The
Examples I gave were from Greg. Naz. and they are these: 1. Invectiv. in
Julian. page 2. He thus bespeaks Constantius. (...), ((...)) (...). Upon which
the Greek Scholiast observes (...). 2dly. Orat. 11. in Gorgon. p. 189. l D. He
thus addresses to his Sister. (...).
Examples I gave, and the differences I assigned, do abundantly prove it.

That they could not have allowed of such an Invocation as is now practiced in
the Church of Rome, I proved from this plain Argument, The opinion that the
souls of just men do not go staright to Heaven, seems to owe its rise to the
Verses of the Sibylls; which being very ancient (within 140 years after Christ)
and by the most primitive Fathers taken for A thentick, drew the whole stream
of the Writers of those times into the same mistake. Blondel in his Book of the
Sibylline Oracles affirms l. 2. c. 9. p. 103. That all the Authors we have left
us of the Second, and as far as the middle of the Third Age, were of that
Opinion: And adds that even in the following Ages many of those very men
Monsieur de Meaux has alleged for the Invocation of Saints, were involved very
far in the same Error; viz. S. Basil, Ambrose, Chrysostom and S. Augustine.
This is yet more fully shown by Monsieur Daille in his Book de Cult. rel. Obj.
l. 3. c. 22. p. 474. and seq. and in another of his Rooks de Poenis and
Satisfact. where to the Fathers last mentioned He adds S. Jerome l. 5 cap. 4, 5,
6. All which Sixtus Senensis himself confirms, Bib. l. 6. annot. 345. p. 569.
and particularly as to the Fathers in question, S. Ambrose, S. Chrysostom, S.
Augustine. p. 571, 572.
That they believed that the Saints departed, were not admitted to the sight of
God immediately upon their decease; and therefore, by the Papists own Bellarm
de Sanct. beat. l. 1. c. 19. p. 2044. l. D. Not. est; quia ante Christi
adventum Sancti qui moricbantur non intrabant in Coelum, nec Deum videbant, vec
cognoscere poterant ordinary preces supplicantium, ideo non fuisse consuetum
in T. V. ut diceretur S. Abraham Ora pro me. See again c. 20. p. 2060. l. B.
Sect. atque ex his duabus, collat. cum page 2059. l. D. Sect. alii dicunt. The
same is Suarez's Opinion T. 2. in 3. D. Th. disp. 42. Sect. 1. p. 435. col. 1.
l. E. Quod autem aliquis direct^ oraverit Sanctos defunctos ut se adjuvarent,
vel pro se orarent, nusquam legimus. Hic enim modus Orandi est proprius legis
Gratiae, in quo sancti videntes Deum possant etiam in Eo videre Orationes quae
ad ipsos funduntur. And this the common Doctrine of their Writers.
Confession, ought to have believed that they could not be prayed to. To all
which the Vindicator is pleased to return never a word.

In short, That the Fathers of the fourth Century did herein begin to depart
from the Practice and Tradition of the Ages before them, I proved from this,
This I before challenged the Answerer to do, and he has not attempted it.
Bellarmin has but two within the first 300 Years. One of Irenaeus
mis-interpreted, and one of Hilary, as little to the purpose. De Sanct. beat.
l. 1. c. 19. p. 2047, 2043.
That they are not able to produce any one instance of the three first
Centuries of any such Invocation; but rather have So Cardinal Perron himself
Repl. a la rep. du Roy de la grande Eretagre, live. 5. cap 11, 19. Where he is
forced to Monsieur de Meaux's shift of concluding from the following Ages what
he could not prove from the preceding; and at last to confess freely, p. 1009.
Quant aux Autheurs plus proches du siecle Apostolic, des quels la persecution
neusra ravis la pluspart des ecrits, encore qu' il ne s'y trouve pas des
Vestiges de cette coutume (...) ill ^^ffit (...) qu'it ne se trouve rien en
leurs Ecrits de repugnant a l'Eglise de 4. premiers Conciles, pour ce regard.
Which is no more than Monsieur de Meaux himself insinuates, where to this very
Assertion of Monsieur Daille's I have made use of, he has only this to say,
That it is not likely that Monsieur Daille should at this distance understand
the sentiments of the Fathers of the first three Centuries better than those of
the next Age did, Expos. Sect. 3. p. 4. All which he allowed in express terms
in his suppressed Edition. See my Collect. n. 3 p. xxiii.
been forced to confess that nothing of that kind was to be found among them.
Besides that the Maxims of those Fathers concerning I shall mention but two;
1st, That they constantly defined Prayer, as due to God only: (...), says
Basil. (...), Greg. Nyssen. (...), Chrysostom. (...), Damascen etc. And, 2dly,
That it was the great Argument used by S. Athanasius, and the other Fathers of
these Times, to prove our Savior to be God, that he was prayed to.
Prayer were such, as are utterly repugnant to such an Invocation.

These were the Arguments I then offered; to which the Vindicator would have
done more justly to have tried if he could have made some Reply, than after all
this to cry out, as if nothing had been said, What Authority does he bring for
his Assertion? Vindicat. p. 29.
By what Authority does he condemn these Prayers, these innocent Wishes and
holy Raptures, as he calls them, as fond things, vainly invented? etc.

And now that I have satisfied his demand, may I in my turn ask him, Where it
is that I condemn those innocent Wishes, and holy Raptures, of these Fathers,
as fond things, vainly invented? That I do, with our Church, censure their
Invocation of Saints as such, is confessed; but that I pretend to pass any
judgment at all upon these holy Men, is false; nor was it any way necessary
that I should do it.

As for the Authority he requires for our refusal of this Invocation, it were
very easy to show it, Vindicat. p. 30.
had I nothing to do but to repeat things, that have been so often said
already, that the World grows weary of them; and is abundantly satisfied that
they have nothing to reply to them. Every Text of Scripture that appropriates
Divine Worship to God alone, is a demonstration against them; and that one
Passage of St. Paul, Romans 10.14. How shall they call upon him in whom they have
not believed? were not Men willing to be contentious, might end the
Controversy. And for the Antiquity which he speaks of, What can be more
ridiculous, than to pretend prescription for that which has not the least
foundation, neither in Holy Writ, nor Primitive Christianity; of which not one
Instance appears for the first three hundred Years after Christ, but much to
the contrary.

He that desires a fuller satisfaction in these Points, may please to recur to
that excellent Treatise I before mentioned, and which may well excuse me that I
say no more about it. Only because this was one of the Points, in which I
promised to show, that they do adore Men and Women by such an Invocation as
cannot possibly belong to any but God only; and that they make the Merits of
their Saints to run parallel with the Merits of Christ, insomuch as for their
Merits, to desire that their very Sacrifices may be accepted, and their
Sacraments be available to them; I will subjoin a short Specimen of every one
of these out of their Public Rituals, to show that there was neither Falsehood
nor Calumny in my Accusation of them.

Appendix to ARTIC. III. A Specimen of the Church of Rome 's Service to Saints,
taken out of their Public Liturgies.
AS to the Prayers they make to them; we find them thus addressing to the
Blessed Virgin: Sub tum praesidium confugimus S. Dei Genetrix; nostras
deprecationes ne despicias in necessitatibus, sed a periculis cunctis libera
nos semper Virgo gloriosa and benedicta.
We fly to thy Protection, O Holy Mother of God, despise not our Prayers which
we make to thee in our Necessities, but deliver us from all Dangers, O
Ever-glorious and Blessed Virgin. Offic. B. V. p. 84. And in one of their
Antiphona's; Dignare me laudare Te Virgo Sacrata; Da mihi Virtutem contra
hosts tuos.
Vouchsafe me that I may be worthy to praise thee, O Sacred Virgin; Grant me
strength and Power against thine Enemies. Ibid. p. 103. Nos cum prole pia,
benedicat Virgo Maria.
They desire her conjunctly with our Savior, to bless them. Ibid. p. 105. And
in their Alma Redemptoris Matter, quae pervia Coeli Porta manes, and stella
maris, succurre cadenti Surgere qui curat populo; tu quae genuisti Natura
mirante ruum Sanctum Genitorem, Virgo prius ac posterius, Gabrielis ab Ore
Sumens illud Ave, Peccatorum miserere. Offic. B. V p. 122.
Hymns, they address to her in the most formal manner; that she would help them
that fall; that she would have pity upon Sinners; Maria Matter gratiae, Matter
miserecordiae, Tu nos ab host protege, and hora mortis suscipe. Ib. p. 123.
that she would protect them against the Enemy, and receive them at the Hour of
Death. I shall add only one Prayer more, part of which I before mentioned, and
will now repeat it, because Bellarm. I. 1. de Sanct. beat. c. 16. p. 2036. l.
A. reflects upon Calvin in these words. Quinto ibidem dicit, nos rogare
Virginem ut filium Jubeat facere quod petimus. At quis nostrum hoc dicit? Cur
non probat ullo exemplo? I before observed that Cassander owns the Prayer,
Consult. Art. 21. And Monsieur Daille assures us, that in the Missal printed at
Paris but in the Year 1634. in libr. Extrem. p. 81. It is still extant in these
words;
Cardinal Bellarmine, and some others are so ashamed of it, as totally to deny
they have any such Prayer, O foelix Puerpera, nostra pians scelera, Jure Matris
IMPERA REDEMPTORI. Da fidei foedera, Da salutis Opera, Da in vitae vespera Been
mori. And indeed however scrupulous Bellarmine is of this Matter, yet others
among them make no doubt to say, that she does not only entreat her Son as a
Suppliant, but COMMAND him as a Mother. So Peter Damien, Sermon. 1. de Not.
Mariae, speaking to the Virgin, tells her, Accedis ante aureum illud humanae
reconciliationis Altar, non solum rogans sed IMPERANS. For so Father Crasset,
who both cites and approves it, translates the Passage; Thou come before the
Golden Altar of our Reconciliation, not only as a Servant that Prays, but as a
Mother that COMMANDS. And Albertus Magnus, Sermon. 2. de laud. Virg. Pro salute
famulantium sibi, non solum petest filio supplicare, sed etiam potest
Authoritate Materna cidem IMPERARE. That for the Salvation of those that serve
Her, the Virgin cannot only Entreat Her Son, but by the Authority of a Mother
can COMMAND Him. This Father Crasset proves from more of the like stuff, in his
1. Part. Trait. 1. Qu. 8. p. 60, 61. concluding the whole with this admirable
Sentence; Eadem potestas est Matris and Filii, quae ab omni potente Filio
omnipotens facta est: The Power of the Mother and the Son is the same, who by
her OMNIPOTENT Son, is made her self OMNIPOTENT.

This is the last French Divinity, approved by the Society of the Jesuits,
published with the King's Permission; and espoused at a venture by Monsieur de
Meaux in his Epistle.


O Happy Mother, expiating our Sins, By the right of a Mother COMMAND our
Redeemer. Grant us the -- of Faith, Grant us the good Works of Salvation; Grant
us in the End of Lives that we may die well.

Nor is it the Blessed Virgin only to whom they thus address: The Prayer to St.
John is in the same strain: Ut queant laxis resonare fibris, Mira gestorum
famuli tuorum, Solve pollati labii reatwn, Sancte Johannes.
That he would loose the Guilt of their polluted Lips, that the Tongues of his
Servants might sound out his Praise. And in general, thus they address to the
Apostles and Evangelists: Vos saecli justi Judices and vera Mundi lumina, votis
precamur cordium, audite preces supplicum. Qui Coelum verbo clauditis, serasque
ejus solvitis, Nos a peccatis omnibus solvite Jussu quaesumus. Quorum praecepto
subditur salus and languor omnium, Sanate Aegros moribus, Nos reddentes
Virtutibus. Ut cum judex advenerit Christus in fine saeculi, Nos sempiterni
gaudii, Faciat esse compotes. ibid. p. 497.
O ye just Judges, and true Lights of the World, we pray unto you with the
Requests of our Hearts; That you would hear the Prayers of your Suppliants. Ye,
that by your Word shut and open Heaven, We beseech you deliver us, by your
Command, from all our Sins. You, to whose Command is subjected the Health and
Sickness of all Men, Heal us who are sick in our Manners, and restore us to
Virtue; that so when in the end of the World Christ the Judge shall come, He may
make us partakers of Everlasting Joy.

For the next Point, the Merits of their Saints, 'twere infinite to repeat the
Prayers they make of this kind. I will subjoyn two or three. In the Feast of
St. Nicholas, Dec. 6th: Deus qui B. Nicolaum Pontificem innumeris decorasti
miraculis, tribue quaesumus ut ejus Meritis and Precibus a Gehennae incendiis
liberemur.
O God who have adorned thy Bishop, St. Nicholas, with innumerable Miracles,
grant we beseech thee, that by his Merits and Prayers, we may be delivered from
the Fire of Hell. Offic. B. Virg. p. 561. And many there are of this nature all
along their Office.

But since the main question is about their recommending to God their
Offerings, and Sacraments, by the Merits of their Saints; we will see that too.
And for an instance of these we need go no farther than their very first Saint,
Sacrificium nostrum tibi Domine quaesumus B. Andraei Apostoli precatio sancta
conciliet, ut in cujus honor solemniter exhibetur Ejus Meritis efficiatur
acceptum. Per. Missale Romans Fest. Nov. p. 513.
St. Andrew, to whom in their Secretum they thus address. We beseech thee, O
Lord, that the Holy Prayer of the Blessed Apostle, St. Andrew, may procure thy
Favor to our Sacrifice; that as it is solemnly offered in his Honor, so it
may be rendered acceptable by his Merits, through our Lord. He that shall survey
the following Festivals, will find either the Secretum, or Post-communio, to
run in the same strain: I shall instance only in the Saints I formerly
mentioned. Ut haec Munera tibi Domine accepta sint S. Bathildis obtineant
Merita; quae seipsam tibi hostiam vivam, sanctam and beneplacentem exhibuit.
Let the Merits of St. Bathildis, O Lord, prevail, that our Gifts may be
accepted by thee: Praestent nobis quaesumus sumpta Sacramenta praesidium
salutare, and intervenientibus B. Martini Confessoris tui atque Pontificis
Meritis ab omnibus nos absolvant peccatis. See Missale in usum Sarum fol. 9.
and 68. in Fest. Nov.
Let the Sacraments which we have received, we beseech thee, be our saving
Defense, and through the Merits of thy Blessed Martyr, St. Martin interposing,
absolve us from all Sin.

Such is their Service of the Saints; How agreeable to that Duty we owe to God,
or to the very pretenses of Monsieur de Meaux, and the Vindicator, let the
World judge.

ARTICLE IV. Images and Relics.
IN this Article the Vindicator takes notice, Vindicat. p. 31.
and that truly, of my complaining that the approved Doctrine of their most
reputed Writers, should so much contradict what Monsieur de Meaux would have us
think is their only design in that Service. He tells us that properly speaking,
according to the Bishop of Meaux's sense, and that of the Council; The Image of
the Cross is to be looked upon only as a representative, Ibid. p. 32.
or memorative Sign, which is therefore apt to put us in mind of JESUS CHRIST,
who suffered upon the Cross for us; and the Honor which we there show,
precisely speaking, and according to the Ecclesiastical Style, is not properly
to the Cross, but to Jesus Christ represented by that Cross.

To this I opposed the Doctrine of St. Thomas, and the Authority of their own
Rituals, to show that they expressly adored the Cross of Christ, and not only
Jesus Christ represented by that Cross.

In answer to the former of which, Vindicat. p. 38.
the Doctrine of St. Thomas, he tells me, that he is not to maintain every
Opinion held by the Schools: That had I been sincere, I ought to have taken
notice of the reason brought by St. Thomas, and his Followers; which shows,
that it is purely upon the account of Jesus Christ represented, and not upon
the account of the Cross it self, that he allows Adoration to it. In short, He
concludes the Doctrine of St. Thomas to be in effect the same with Monsieur de
Meaux 's Exposition, That it is an Adoration of Jesus Christ represented by the
Crucifix, but not an Adoration of the Crucifix it self. And the same is the
account he gives of the Pontifical, which he confesses admits of an Adoration
in the same sense.

For the business of the Pontifical, we shall see more particularly hereafter:
In the mean time this short instance may serve to show that his Destinction is
purely arbitrary. Pontific. Ord. ad recip. processionaliter Imperat. p. 205.
col. 2 si vero Legatus Apostolicus Imperatorem reciperet, aut cum eo Urbem
intraret, vel alias secum iret vel equitaret, ille qui Gladium Imperatori
praefert, and alius Crucem Legati portans simul ire debent. Crux Legati, Quia
debetur ei Laerla, erit a dextris, and Gladius Imperatoris a sinistris.
In the Order of receiving an Emperor, it is appointed, that if there be a
Legate present, his Cross shall take the upper hand of the Emperors Sword,
because a Divine Worship is due to it.

Thomas 3. p. q. 25. art. 4. Utrum Crux Christi sit adoranda adorationi
LATRLAE? Conclus. Crux Christi in qua Christus crucifixus est, tum propter
repraesentationem, tum propter membrorum Christi contactum, LATRIA ADORANDA
EST: Crucis vero Effigies in alia quavis materia, priori tantum ratione LATRIA
ADORANDA EST. And in the body, Unde utroque modo adoratur eadem adoratione cum
Christo, scil. ADORATIONE LATRIA.
As to St. Thomas, he tells us only this, That the Cross is not to be adored
upon its own acccount, but either as it is the figure of Christ crucified, or
because it touched his Members when he was crucified upon it: That the Wood of
the true Cross is to be worshipped with Divine Adoration upon both these
accounts, but any other Crucifix only upon the former. What does all this avail
to the pretenses of the Vindicator? It shows indeed St. Thomas's grounds for
his Conclusion, but we are little concerned in them; nor was it any unsincerity
in me not to transcribe all his Reveries. The Conclusion he makes is plain and
positive, and neither to be reconciled with the Vindicator's Fancy, nor to be
eluded by his Sophistry; That the CROSS of Christ is to be ADORED with DIVINE
ADORATION. What his reason is, we matter not; sure we are, that no good one can
be brought by him, or any body else, for it.

The next Argument I made use of was, That in the Office of the Benediction of
a new Cross, there are several Passages which clearly show, that they attribute
such things to the Cross, Vindicat. p. 39.
as are directly contrary to Monsieur de Meaux's Pretenses, As that they who
bow down before it, may find health both of Soul and Body by it.

This he cannot deny, but charges me with leaving out two words, that he says
would have explained all, viz. Page 39.
Propter Deum, for the sake of God. It is very certain that I did leave out
these words, as I did several others, I believe, as much to the purpose as
these. But that I may show how little reason there was for my expressing them,
and to convince the World how clearly this passage charges them with Adoring
the Cross, I will now propose it in its full length.

In the form of consecrating a new Cross; Pontificale de benedictione novae
Crucis. page 161. col. 2.
First the Bishop makes several prayers; Rogamus Te Domine pater omnipotens
sempiterne Deus, ut digneris benedicere hoc lignum Crucis tuae, ut fit remedium
salutare generi humano; sit soliditas fidei, bonorum Operum profectus, and
redemptio Animarum; sit solamen and protectio, and tutela contra saeva jacula
Inimicorum. Per.
That God would bless this Wood of the Cross, that it may be a saving Remedy to
Mankind; An Establishemnt of the Faith; for the Increase of good Works, and the
Redemption of Souls; a Comfort and Protection against the cruel Darts of the
Enemy.

After some other Prayers to the same purpose; the Bishop blesses the Incense,
sprinkles the Cross with Holy Water, and incenses it; and then Consecrates it
in these words:

Ibid. p. 162. col. 1. Sanctificetur istud lignum in Nomine Patris, and Filii,
and Spiritus Sancti: Et benedictio illius ligni in quo sancta membra salvatoris
suspensa sunt, sit in isto ligno, ut orantes inclinantesque se [propter Deum]
ante istam Crucem, inveniant Corporis and Animae fanitatem: Per.
Let this Wood be sanctified in the Name of the Father, and of the Son, and of
the Holy Ghost. Let the blessing of that Wood on which the members of our
Savior were hanged, be in this present Wood; that as many as pray and bow down
themselves [for God] before this Cross, may find health both of Soul and Body,
through the same Jesus Christ.

Tum Pontifex flexis ante CRUCEM, genibus ipsam devote ADORAT and osculatur.
Then the Bishop Kneels down before the CROSS, and devoutly ADORES it, and
kisses it.

But if the Cross be of any Metal, or of precious Stone, instead of the former
Prayer, the Bishop is to say another: I shall transcribe only some part of it.

After a long preamble, they beseech God, Ut Sancti^fices tibi hoc signum
Crucis atque cons.cres: -- Illis ergo manibus hanc Crucem accipe, quibus illam
amplexus es; and de sanctitate illius, hanc sanctisica: and sicuti per illam
mundus expiatus est a reatu, ita offerentium famulorum tuorum animae
devotissimae, hujus CRUCIS merito, omni careant perpetrato peccato. P. 162.
That he would sanctify to himself this Cross, and bless it; That our Savior
Christ would embrace this Cross, [which they consecrate] as he did that [on
which he suffered;] and by the holiness of that, sanctify This: That as by that
the World was redeemed from guilt, so the devout Souls who offer it, may by the
Merits of this Cross be freed from all the Sins they have committed.

Tum Pontifex flexis ante CRVCEM genibus EAM devote ADORAT and osculatur: Idem
faciunt quicunque alii voluerint.
Then the Bishop as before, Kneeling down before the CROSS, devoutly ADORES it,
and kisses it.

I hope this length will not seem tedious to any who desire a true information
of the Doctrine and Practice of the Roman Church in this Matter. And I shall
leave it to any one to judge what benefit those two words I omitted, could have
brought to excuse such foul and notorious Idolatry. For the rest of my
Citations, he passes them over so triflingly, as plainly shows he had nothing
to say to them; Vindicat. p. 39.
All the rest of his Expressions, says he, drawn from the Pontifical, are of
the same nature; either lame, or patched up from several places, and therefore
if they make any thing against us, are not worthy our regarding.

For Monsieur de Meaux, I shall only beg leave to remark this One thing; that
if the Church of Rome looks upon the Cross only as a memorative Sign; to what
End is all this Consecration; so many Prayers shall I say, or rather magical
Incantations? And how comes it to pass that a Cross, without all this ado, is
not as fit to call to mind Jesus Christ who suffered upon the Cross, as after
all this superstition, not to say any worse, in the dedication of it?

My third Argument to prove that they Adored the Cross, was from their Good
Fryday's Service: Vindicat. p. 40.
And here I am again accused for not giving All the words of the Church, and of
adding somewhat that was not there, to make it speak my own sense. The words I
cited are these, Behold the Wood of the Cross, Come, let us Adore it. Whereas
their Church intends not that we should Adore it, i.e. The Cross; but come, Let
us Adore, i.e. The Savior of the World thathung upon it.

To judge aright of this Cavil, and yet more expose their Idolatry, I shall
here give a just account from the Missal, of the whole Service of that Day as
to this Point. Note first, That in the Office of the Holy Week, printed in
Latin and English at Paris, 1670, The Title of this Ceremony is, THE ADORATION
OF THE CROSS. page 342.


Missale Romans feria VI. in Parasceve. p. 247. Completis Orationibus Sacerdos
deposita Casula accedit ad cornu Epistolae, and ibi in posteriori part Anguli
altaris, accipit a Diacono Crucem jam in altari praeparatam; quam versa facie
ad populum a summitate parum disco-operit, incipiens solus Antiphonam, Ecce
lignum Crucis, ac deinceps in reliquis juvatur in Cantu a Ministris usque ad
Venite Adoremus. Choro autem cantante, Venite Adoremus, omnes se prosternunt
excepto celebrante. Deinde procedit ad anteriorem partem anguli ejusdem cornu
Epistolae, and disco-operiens brachium dextrum Crucis, elevansque eam
paulisper, altius quam primo incipit, Ecce lignum Crucis; aliis cantantibus and
adorantibus, ut supra.
The Morning Prayers being finished, the Priest receives from the Deacon a
Cross, standing ready on the Altar for that purpose; which he uncovers a little
at the top, turning his face to the people, and begins this Antiphona, Behold
the Wood of the Cross; the People following the rest to Come, let us Adore; at
which all but the Priest that officiates fall upon the ground.

Then the Priest uncovers the right Arm of the Crucifix, and holding it up,
begins louder than before, Behold the Wood of the Cross, the rest singing and
adoring as before.

Then finally the Priest goes to the middle of the Altar, Deinde Sacerdos
procedit ad medium altaris, and discooperiens Crucem totaliter, ac elevans eam,
tertio altius incipit, Ecce lignum Crucis, in quo salus mundi pependit, Venite
Adoremus: aliis cantantibus and adorantibus ut supra. Postea Sacerdos solus
portat Crucem ad locum ante Altar praeparatum, and genu flexus ibidem eam
locat: Mox depositis calceamentis accedit ad ADORANDAM CRVCEM; ter genua
flectens antequam eam deosculetur. Hoc facto revertitur, and accipit
calceamenta and casulam. Postmodum ministri Altaris, deinde alii Clerici and
Laici, bini and bini, ter genibus flexis, ut dictum est, CRUCEM ADORANT.
Interim dum fit ADOEATIO CRUCIS cantantur, etc. -- Deinde cantatur com muniter
Anna^: CRUCEM tuam ADORAMUS Domine. P. 209.
and wholly uncovering the Cross, and lifting it up, begins yet higher, Behold
the Wood of the Cross on which the Savior of the World hung, come, let us
adore: the rest singing and adoring as before.

This done, the Priest alone carries the Cross to a place prepared for it
before the Altar, and kneeling down, leaves it there. Then he puts off his
Shoes, and draws near to ADORE the CROSS, bowing his Knees three times before
he kisses it: which done, he retires and puts on his Shoes. After him the
Ministers of the Altar, then the other Clergy and Laity, two and two, after the
same manner, ADORE the CROSS.

In the mean time while the Cross is Adoring, the Quire sings several Hymns;
one of which begins with these words, We adore thy Cross, O Lord.

This is the Service of that Day. And now whether I had reason or no to apply,
as I did, the Adoration to the Cross, let any reasonable Man consider; and
whether I had not some cause to say then, what I cannot but here repeat again,
That the whole Solemnity of that days Service plainly shows, that the Roman
Church does adore the Cross in the utmost propriety of the phrase.

As for my last Argument from the Hymns of the Church, he acknowledges the
Fact, but tells us, Vindicat. p. 40.
That these are Poetical Expressions; and that the word CROSS, by a Figure,
sufficiently known to Poets, fignifies JESUS CHRIST, to whom they pray in those
Hymns. I shall not ask the Vindicator by what Authority he sends us to the
Poets for interpreting the Churches Hymns: But if he pleases to inform us what
that Figure is which in the same place makes the Cross to signify Christ, in
which it distinguishes Christ from the Cross; and who those Poets are to whom
this Figure is sufficiently known, he will oblige us. For that this is the case
in very many of those Hymns, is apparent: I shall instance only in One, and
that so noted, that St. 3. p. q. 25. art. 4. p. 53. thus argues: Illi exhibemus
Latriae cultum, in quo ponimus spem salutis, sed in Cruce Christi ponimus spem
salutis, Cantat enim Ecclesia, O Crux ave, etc.
Thomas, unacquainted it seems, as well as we, with this Figure, concluded the
Adoration of the Cross, to be the sense of their Church from it. Vexilla Regis
prodeunt,
Fulget Crucis mysterium,
Quo carne carnis Conditor
Suspensus est patibulo.
Arbor decora and fulgida,
Ornata Regis purpura,
Electa digno stipite,
Tam Sancta membra tangere.
Beata cujus brachiis
Soecli pependit pretium.
Statera facta Corporis,
Praedamque tulit Tartari.
O Crux Ave spes unica!
Hoc passionis tempore,
Auge piis Justitiam,
Reisque dona Veniam.
Vid. Breviar. Romans Dom. Passionis. p. 295, 296.
The Banner of our King appears, The Mystery of the Cross shines, Upon which
the Maker of our Flesh was hanged in the Flesh. Beautiful and bright Tree!
Adorned with the Purple of a King, Chosen of a Stock worthy to touch such Holy
Members: Blessed, upon whose Arms, The Price of the World hung. Hail, O Cross,
our only Hope! In this time of the Passion, Increase the Righteousness of the
Just, and give Pardon to the Guilty. Now by what Figure to make the Banner and
the King the same; the Cross upon which the maker of our Flesh hung, not
different from that Flesh that hung upon it; the Tree chosen of a Stock worthy
to touch Christ's Sacred Members, the same with his Sacred Members; What noted
Figure this is which is so well known to the Poets, and yet has been so long
concealed from us, that we are amazed at the very report of such a Figure, The
English Translation in the Office of the Holy Week, is this: O lovely and
refulgent Tree, Adorned with purpled Majesty; Culled from a worthy Stock, to
bear Those Limbs which sanctified were. Blessed Tree, whose happy Branches bore
The Wealth that did the World restore: Hail Cross of Hopes the most sublime,
Now in this mourning Passion Time, Improve Religious Souls in Grace, The Sins
of Criminals efface. Page 355, 356.
and believe it next a kin to Transubstantiation, the Vindicator may please
hereafter to inform us.

In the Point of Relics, OF RELIQVES.
the Council of Trent proceeded so equivocally, that the Vindicator ought not
to think it at all strange, if I endeavored more plainly to distinguish, what
the ambiguity of their Expressions had so much confounded. Con. Tr. Sess. 25.
Affirmantes Sanctorum Reliquiis venerationem atque honorem non deberi,
damnandos esse.
They, says the Council, are to be condemned, who affirm that no Veneration or
Honor is due to the Relics of Saints. To this I replied, that honor them we
do; but that the Council of Trent requires more, not only to honor, but
worship them too: so I render their Venerari, whether well or ill is now the
question.

And first I observe, that in the very Point before us, Thom. 3. p. q. 25. art.
6. page 54.
their own St. Thomas gives the very same interpretation to the same word. For
having proposed the Question in these terms, Whether the Relics of Saints are
to be ADORED? Utrum Reliquiae Sanctorum sint ADORANDAE?
He concludes it in the terms of the Council, Seeing we VENERATE the Saints of
God, we must also VENERATE their Bodies and Relics.

And again, In his second Objection against this Conclusion, Conclus: Cum
Sanctos Dei Veneremur, little quoque corpora and Reliquias Venerari oporter.
Sec. Obj. Stultum videtur rem insensibilem VENERARI. Resp. Ad secund. dicend.
Quod Corpus illud insensibile non ADORAMUS propter scipsum; sed, etc.
he argues against the Adoration of Relics thus; It seems very foolish to
VENERATE an insensible Thing. To which he replies thus; We do not ADORE the
insensible Thing for it self, etc. From all which it is beyond dispute evident,
that by the VENERATION, Thomas understood ADORATION of Relics.

Secondly, That it is the Doctrine of their Church, that RELIQVES are to be
ADORED, their greatest Authors render it beyond denial evident. Vasquez in 3.
p. D. Th. disp. 112. p. 808. proposes this Question: An Corpora and aliae
Sanctorum Reliquiae VENERANDAE sint? To this he answers, c. 2. p. 809. Apud
Catholicos veritas indubitata est, Reliquias Sanctorum, sive fuerint parts
ipsorum, ut Ossa, Carnes, and Cineres; five res aliae quae ipsos tetigerunt,
vel ad ipsos pertineant, ADORANDAS and in honort Sacro habendas esse. And
again, Disp. 113. c. 1. p. 816. Cum ergo jam contra Haereticos constitutum sit,
Reliquias esse ADORANDAS, superest explicare quo genere cultus and honoris eas
VENERARI debeanius.
Vasquez in his Disputations upon Thomas, tell us, It is, says he, among the
[pretended] Catholics, a Truth not to be doubted of, that the RELIQVES of
Saints, whether they be any parts of them, as Bones, Flesh, or Ashes; or any
other Things that have touched them, or belonged to them, ought to be ADORED.
And in conclusion says, That he has proved against Heretics, that Relics are
to be ADORED: And this too in Answer to the Question proposed in the very terms
of the Council, Whether the Bodies, and other RELIQVES of Saints ought to be
VENERATED?

Nor is this a Scholastic Tenet, or to be put off with an impropriety of
Speech. The Messieurs du Port Royal, are by all allowed to have been some of
the most learned Men of their Church, that this last Age has produced; and too
great Critics in the French Tongue, to use any Expressions subject to
ambiguity, which, that Language so particularly avoids. The word ADORE in
French is much more rarely used to signify in general any Honor or Veneration,
than in the Latin; Yet these very Men, in one of their Treatises published by
them, Response a un ecrit publie sur les Miracles de la Saint Espine. Page 15,
18, -- 22, etc. Cited by Monsieur Daille.
Of the Miracles of the Holy Thorn, use this word to express the Veneration
they thought due to them. Thus speaking of one of the Religious that was
troubled with the Palsy, She was carried, say they, to the Port Royal to ADORE
the Holy Thorn. Of another, that having ADORED the Holy Thorn, she was
relieved of her Infirmity. They boast of the great multitudes that frequented
their Church to ADORE the Holy Thorn. And in one of their Prayers which they
teach their Votaries to say before it, We ADORE thy Crown, O Lord.

And now I suppose it is from all these Instances sufficiently evident,
Vindicat. p. 42.
that I had reason to interpret Venerari in the Council, by Worship in my
Exposition. As for the other thing he charges me with; That referring to the
words of the Council I should make it say, That these Sacred Monuments are not
unprofitably revered, but are to be sought unto for the obtaining of their Help
and Assistance: whereas indeed the Council's meaning is, to obtain the Help and
assistance of the Saints, not the Relics: This is not my Invention, but his
own Cavil; And his citation of the words of the Council a Trick to deceive
those who understand it only in his Translation. For whereas he renders it, So
that they who affirm, that no Veneration or Honor is due to the Relics of
Saints, or that those Relics and other Sacred Monuments are unprofitably
honored by the Faithful; or that they do in vain frequent the Memories of the
Saints, to the end they may obtain their Aid (the Aid of the Saints, Eorum) are
to be condemned. He has indeed transposed the Latin, on purpose to raise a
Dust, and deceive his Reader; the true Order being plainly as I before rendered
it; Ita ut Affirmantes Sanctorum Reliquiis Venerationem atque Honorem non
deberi, vel eas aliaque sacra Monumenta inutiliter honorari, atque Eorum opis
impetrandae Causa memorias Sanctorum frustra frequentari, omnino damnandos esse.
So that they who shall Affirm, that no Worship or Honor is due to the
Relics of Saints; or that these and the like Sacred Monuments, are
unprofitably honored; and that for the obtaining of their help (the help of
these Sacred Monuments, Eorum) the Memories of the Saints are unprofitably
frequented, are to be condemned. This is the true sense of the Council; and for
the Instances I added for the Explication of it, they are the same by which
their own Catechism excites them to this Worship, and every Day's Experience
shows how zealously the People follow these Relics, in order to these Ends.

ARTICLE V. Of Justification.
HOW far the true Doctrine of Justification was overrun with such Abuses, as I
mentioned, Vindicat. p. 46.
at the beginning of the Reformation, he must be very ignorant in the Histories
of those Times that needs to be informed. I do not at all wonder that the
Vindicator denies these things, who knows very well how far the Interest of his
Church is concerned in it. But sure I am, a confident denial, which is all the
proof he brings, will satisfy none but those, who think themselves obliged to
receive the Tradition of their Church, with the same blindness in Matters of
Fact, that they are required to do it in Points of Faith.

As to the present Article before us, two things there are that he doubts I
shall be hardly put to prove. Vindicat. p. 47.
One, That it is the Doctrine of our Church to distinguish between
Justification and Sanctification; tho the 11th and 12th Articles of our Church
do clearly imply it; and our Page 12. The very beginning of the Homily: Because
all Men be Sinners and Offenders against God, etc. no Man can by his own Acts,
etc. be justified or made righteous before God: but every Man is constrained to
seek for another Righteousness or Justification to be received at God's Hands,
i. e. the Forgiveness of his Sins and Trespasses in such Things as he has
offended. Edit. Oxon. 1683.
Homily of Salvation, in express words interpret Justification, to be the
Forgiveness of Sins. The Other, That I impose upon them, as if they made their
inward Righteousness a part of Justification, and so by consequence said, that
their Justification it self was wrought by their own Good Works.

As to the former part of which Imposition, as he calls it, it is the very
definition of the Council of Trent; Justificatio, non est sola peccatorum
remissio, sed and sanctificatio and renovatio interioris hominis. C. Tr. Sess.
vi. c. 7. p. 31.
By Justification is to be understood, not only remission of Sins, but
Sanctification, and the renewing of the inward Man: Insomuch that in their 11th
Canon they damn all such as dare to deny it: Siquis dixerit, homines Just
ficari vel sola imputatione justitiae Christi, vel sola peecatorum remissione
exclusa gratia and charitate quae in cordibus Eorum per Spiritum S.
diffundatur, atque illis inhaereat; aut etiam gratiam qui justificamur esse
tantum favorem Dei, Anathema sit. Can. 11. Sess. vi.
If any one shall say that Men are justified, either by the alone Imputation of
Christ's Righteousness, or only by the remission of Sins, excluding Grace and
Charity, which is diffused in our Hearts by the Holy Ghost, and inheres in
them, or that the Grace by which we are justified is only the Favor of God;
let him be Anathema.

And for the other Point, that they esteem their Justification to be wrought,
not only by Christ's Merits, but also by their own good Works; The 32 Can. of
the same Session, is a sufficient proof, where an Anathema is denounced against
him who shall assert, Siquis dixerit hominis justificati bona Opera ita esse
Dona Dei, ut non sint etiam bona ipsius justificati Merita; aut ipsum
Justificatum bonis Operibus quae ab eo per Dei gratiam, and Jesu Christi
Meritum, cujus vivum Membrum est, fuerit, non vere mereri augmentum gratiae,
Vitam aeternam, and ipsius Vitae Aeternae, si tamen in gratia decesserit,
consecutionem, atque etiam gloriae Augmentum, Anathema sit.
the good Works of a justified Person to be so the Gift of God, that they are
not also the Merits of the same justified Person; or that He being justified by
the good Works which are performed by him through the Grace of God, and Merits
of Jesus Christ, whose living Member he is, does not truly merit increase of
Grace and Eternal Life.

Now if those words truly merit, do signify that our good Works do in their own
nature merit a Reward, then it must be confessed, that our Justification is
wrought by them. If they say that they are therefore only meritorious, because
accompanied with the infinite Merits of Christ; What can be more improper than
to affirm, that that which in its own nature has nothing of Merit, should truly
merit only because something which has infinite Merit goes along with it.

It would certainly be more reasonable in the Church of Rome, if they do indeed
believe what these Men seem to grant, that Good Works are not in themselves
meritorious, instead of affirming that they do truly merit Eternal Life, to
confess with us that they have no Merit at all in them; but yet through the
infinite Merits of our Blessed Redeemer, shall, according to God's Promises,
have a most ample Reward bestowed on them.

ARTICLE VI. Of Merits.
IT ought not to be wondered at, Vindicat. p. 48.
if to show the true Doctrine of the Church of Rome as to the Point of Merits,
I recurr'd, not to the Niceties of the Schools, but the Exposition of their
greatest Men; and whose Names were neither less, nor less deservedly celebrated
in their Generations, than Monsieur de Meaux's, or the Vindicators can be now.
The Council of Trent has spoken so uncertainly in this Point, as plainly shows
they either did not know themselves what they would Establish, or were
unwilling that others should. Let the Vindicator think what he pleases of these
Men, and their Opinions, we shall still believe them as able Expositors of the
Council of Trent, as any that have ever undertaken it: And whosoever shall compare
what they say, with what the Council has defined, will find it at least as
agreeable to it, as any of those new Inventions that have been started since.

The Doctrine of Merits, established by the Council, in the Canon I but now
cited, is clearly this; That the Good Works of a justified Person are not so
the Gift of God, Council. Trid. Sess. vi. Can. 32.
that they are not also the Merits of the same Justified Person; That being
justified by the Grace of God, and Merits of Jesus Christ, he does then truly
merit both increase of Grace, and Eternal Life: In a word, the Point of Merit,
as we now consider it, amounts to this, Whether we do truly and properly merit
by our own Good Works? or, Whether whatsoever we receive, be not a Reward that
is given us only through God's Acceptance, and promise in Christ Jesus?

This We affirm, they the Other; and whether the Testimonies I produced for the
further clearing of their Doctrine do prove it or no, is now to be enquired by
us.

1st, Maldon. in Ezekiel. 18.20. p. 425. Ex hoc loco perspicuum est aliquam esse
nostram, ut vocant, inherentem propriamque justitiam, quamvis ex Dei gratia,
and largitate profectam: and nos tam proprie and vere, cum gratia Dei been
agentes praemia mereri, quam sine illa male Agentes supplicia mereamur.
Maldonate is Express, and the Vindicator's Exception utterly impertinent to
us, who dispute not the Principle, but Merit of Good Works: It is very clear,
says he, that there is in us an inherent, as they call it, and proper justice
of our own, tho proceeding from the Grace and Bounty of God; and that we do as
truly and properly when we do well, through God's Grace, merit Rewards, as we
do deserve Punishment when, without this Grace, we do Ill.

2dly, for Bellarmine: De Justif. l. 5. c. 17. Opera bona justorum meritoria
esse ex condigno, non solum ratione pacti, sed etiam ratione Operum.
The title of his Chapter, cited by me, the Vindicator says is something
toward the sense I give it: He would more honestly have said, is word for word
the translation of it: viz. That our Good Works do Merit [Eternal Life]
condignly, not only by reason of God's Covenant and acceptance, but also by
reason of the Work it self.

Meritum ex Condigno tribus modis variari potest. Nam si forte opus aliquod sit
multo inferius mercede ex conventione promissa, ut si dominus Vineae conduceret
Operarios, and non denarium diurnum, sed centum aureos promercede promitteret,
esset ejusmodi. meritum ex condign ratione pacti, non Operis. P. 1299. l. B.
This is his Position: For the explication of it, he tells us, that a Merit of
Condignity may be varied three ways. For, 1st, if the work to be performed
should be very much less than the hire promised by the Agreement; as if the
Lord of the Vineyard instead of a Penny, should have promised the Laborers a
hundred pound a day for their work: this would be a merit of condignity upon
the Account of the Agreement, or Covenant. And this he thinks too little for
our Good Works, and condemns Scotus for holding, Opera justorum esse Bona vtre
and proprie, sed non tam excellentia ut proportionem habeant cum vita aeterna.
Et ideo acceptari quidem a Deo ad justam and dignam mercede^ vitae aeterflae,
sed ex pacto and promissione non ex Operis dignitate. p. 1300. l. A
That the Works of Just Men are truly and properly good, but not so excellent
as to bear a proportion to Eternal Life: and therefore that they are indeed
accepted of God to a just and worthy Reward of Eternal Life, but only by the
Covenant and Promise of God, not for the dignity of the Work it self.

Si Opus fit revera aequale merctdi, vel etiam majus, sed conventio nulla
intervenerit.
Another sort of Condignity is, When the Work is equal, or perhaps greater than
the Reward, but there is no Covenant that the Reward shall be given to it; This
is Condignity upon the account of the Work, not the Covenant. And such Cajetan,
and Soto, esteemed our Good Works; Opera Bona justorum esse meritoria vitae
aeternae ex condigno ratione Operis, etiarusi nulla extaret divina conventio.
p. 1299. D.
Meritorius of Eternal Life upon the account of the Work it self, tho there
were no Covenant that they should be accepted. This also he rejects.

Si and Pactum intercedat, and Opus sit vere par Mercedi; ut cum operarii ad
vineam conducuntur pro denario diurno, id meritum erit ex Condigno ratione
Operis and ratione pacti: And he explains it thus, p. 1300. l. B. Non quidem
quod sine pacto, vel Acceptatione non habeat Opus bonum proportionem ad Vitam
aeternam; sed quia non tenetur Deus acceptare ad illam mercedem Opus bonum,
quamvis par and aequale Mercedi nisi conventio interveniat. Quam sententiam
Conformem esse non dubitamus Concilio Tridentino, etc.
A third sort of Condignity is, If there be both a Covenant, and that the Work
be truly equal to the Reward: as when the Laborers were hired for the Vineyard
at a Penny a day. And thus it is with our Good Works; not that, without any
Covenant, the Good Work does not bear a proportion to the Reward of Eternal
Life; but because, without the Covenant, God would not be bound to accept the
Good Work, in order to that Reward, tho otherwise even or equal to it.

This is so plain an account of their Doctrine of Merits, and so clearly given
us as the sense of the Council of Trent, that I hope the length of it will be
excused by every one but the Vindicator; who possibly does not desire that the
Council should be so freely expounded, as Bellarmine here has done it.

But Vasquez goes yet further: Vasquez in 1, 2dae. q. 114. d. 214. c. 3. p.
802. Jam vero hac nostra Aetate non pauci Theologiae Professores mediam quandam
Viam elegerunt, inter Scoti Opinionem quam primo Cap. memoravimus, and aliorum
sententiam quam nos ut Veram inferius probabimus. Dicuntergo rationem Meriti
perfecti and condigni, quod simpliciter Meritum dicitur, duobus compleri, nempe
and dignitate Operis, and promissione mercedis: which was Bellarmine's Opinion.
1st, He rejects the Opinion of Bellarmine, as too little for their Good Works:
and then proposes his own in the Page 803. The first is that of c. 5. p. 804.
Bona Opera Justorum, absque ulla Acceptatione and pacto, ex se habere
dignitatem Vitae Aeternae. This is against Scotus and the Heretics, whose
Doctrine he thus represents: Opera bona necessaria esse ad Vitam Aeternam; ita
tamen ut Ipsa Justorum Opera non sint digna remuneratione Vitae Aeternae, nisi
Deus benignitate sua dignaretur illa remunerare. Scotus's Opinion he puts down
thus, c. 1. p. 800. Opera Justorum ex se spectata, quatenus procedunt ex
auxilio gratiae Dei, and posita Sanctitate Animae, per quam Spiritus S. in
justis habitat, non habere condignitatem and rationem meriti Vitae Aeternae,
sed totam dignitatem, and totam rationem meriti habere petitam ex promissione
and pacto Dei. The second Conclusion, c. 7. p. 809. is this: Operibus justorum
nullum dignitatis Accrementum provenire ex Meritis aut Persona Christi, quod
alias eadem non haberent, si fierent ex eadem gratia a solo Deo liberaliter
sine Christo collata. The third; which the Vindicator pretends he could not
find, tho the Title and Subject of the very next, c. 8. p. 811. is; Operibus
justorum aecessisse quidem divinam promissionem, eam tamen nullo modo pertinere
ad rationem Meriti, sed potius advenire Operibus, non tantum sam dignis, sed
etiam jam meritoriis.

As for the Conclusion, wherein the Vindicator endeavors to excuse him, it is
this: First he supposes the Merits of Christ to have obtained Grace for us,
whereby we may be enabled to work out our Salvation; and then this supposed, he
affirms, That we have no more need of Christ's Merits to supply our Defects,
but that our own good Works are of themselves sufficient, without any more
imputation of his Righteousness. See this at large, q. 114. art. 8. d. 222. c.
3. n. 30, 31. p. 917.


three Conclusions mentioned by me; to which I must refer the Reader, and leave
him to judge, Whether the little Exceptions the Vindicator has made, be
sufficient to excuse the Doctrine of them. All I have now to observe is, that
the third Conclusion, which the Vindicator complains he could not find, is the
very Subject of the Chapter to which I refer him; and which he could not well
overlook, having found the Second but in the foregoing: And for the rest, that
Vasquez to take away all doubt of his Opinion, does largely show that it is no
way contrary to the Council of See disp. 214. c. 11, 12. p. 819, etc.
Trent, but rather a true and natural Exposition of it.

ARTICLE VII.. 1. Of Satisfactions.
IF the Conc. Trid. Sess. 14. cap. 8. Can. 73.
Council of Trent has expressed it self in such terms, Vindicat. page 54, 55.
as do plainly ascribe to our Endeavors a true and proper Satisfaction,
whatever Monsieur de Meaux or his Vindicator expound to the contrary, we are
not to be blamed for charging them with it.

It Is not enough to say, that they believe Christ to have made an entire
satisfaction for Sin, and that the necessity of that payment which they require
us to make for our selves, does not arise from any defect in that, but from a
certain Order which God has established for a salutary Discipline, and to keep
us from offending. If Christ has made an entire satisfaction for us; I am sure
it must be very improper, if not altogether untrue, to say, that We can make
any for our selves. If God indeed has established any such Order as they
pretend, let them show it to us in Scripture: Otherwise we shall never believe
that God's Justice does at all require it, since for the infinite Merits of a
crucified Savior, that has made an infinite Satisfaction to his Justice, he
may as well forgive Temporal as Eternal Punishment.

That Lib. 1. de purg. c. 10. to this Objection, Si applicatur nobis per nostra
Opera Christi satisfactio, vel sunt duae satisfactiones simul junctae, una
Christi, altera nostra, vel una tantum. Resp. p. 1899. After two other manners
of Explication, he adds; Tertius tamen modus videtur probabilior, quod una
tantum sit actualis satisfactio, eaque nostra. Neque hinc excluditur Christus,
vel satisfactio ejus; nam per ejus satisfactionem habemus gratiam unde
satisfactiamus; and hoc modo dicitur applicari nobis Christi satisfactio; non
quod Immediate ipsa ejus satisfactio tollat poenam temporalem nobis debitam,
sed quod Mediate eam tollat, quatenus, viz. ab ea gratiam habemus sine qua
nibil Valeret nostra satisfactio.
Bellarmine has taught, That it is we who properly satisfy for our own Sins,
and that Christ's Satisfaction serves only to make ours valid. Had the
Vindicator been ingenuous, he would not have thought it sufficient to answer
with the Error of the Press, but have looked into the place where it indeed
was, C. 10. of that Book.

That both As to the Point of Satisfaction, Belarmine distinguishes between a
Satisfaction to Justice, and a Satisfaction to Friendship: And then concludes;
Cum homines peccant in Deum, Amicitiam simul and Justitiam Violant. As to the
former, Non potest homo Deo satisfacere, etc. p. 1675. the Question is, De
satisfactione qua Justitiae restauretur Aequalitas. And because he supposes
that the Guilt being remitted, and we received into Friendship with God, the
Eternity is thereby taken from the Pain, the Question amounts to thus much; An
satisfacere possint homines pro expiando reatu illius Poenae qui interdum
remanet post remissionem culpae? And whether those Works by which it is done;
Sint dicenda proprie satisfactoria ita ut nos dicamur Vere ac proprie domino
satisfacere. Now both these he affirms, and explicates the latter from the
Council thus, C. 7. de poenit. lib. 4. p. 1694. l. C. Per opera illa poenalia
de quibus hactenus locuti sumus vere ac proprie Domino satisfieri pro reatu
poenae, qui post culpam dimissam remanet expiandus.
He and I shall instance only in Vasquez, in 3 p. d. 2. c. 1. p. 11. First he
lays down the Opinion of several of the Schoolmen, Alex. d'Ales, Ricardus,
Ruardus Tapperus, etc. who held, That a mere Man might condignly satisfy for
his own Sins. This he rejects, because he supposes it cannot be done without
God's assisting Grace, to which we forfeited all right by Sin: And so it will
follow; Nostram satisfactionem pro peccato proprio perfectam non esse, ex eo
quod fiat non ex propriis sed ex Acceptis, p. 21. c. 5. n. 53. But now,
Secondly, God's Grace being supposed, he concludes as to Mortal Sins, c. 6. p.
22. n. 58. Nos reipsa nunc satisfacere Deo pro nostro Peccato and Offensa. He
tells us, that some indeed allow that our Contrition may be called a
Satisfaction, tho not a sufficient One, n. 59. Nam qui pro compensatione
exhiber id quod potest; licet minus sufficiens illud sit, dicitur aliquo modo
satisfacere. This Reason Vasquez dislikes; he is content this Satisfaction
should be called Minus sufficiens; but then only upon the account before
mentioned, o its proceeding from the Grace of God: So that, Si Contritio
praecederet infusionem Gratia habitualis ex part Efficientis, non solum
satisfaceret pro macula peccati condign, sed etian condign mereretur Gratiae
habitualis infusionem. And this he Expounds as the Doctrine of the Council of
Trent, N. 62, 63, p. 23. As for Venial Sins, Disp. 3. c. 3. p. 27. Ita concedi
mus (says he) homini justo pro suo peccato Veniali condignam and perfectam
satisfactionem, u ea non indigeat favore Dei condonantis peccatum, vel aliquid
illius, aut acceptantis satisfactionem, sed talis sit ut ex natura sua deleat
maculam and poenam peccati Venialis.
Others of their Communion, have taught it as the Doctrine of their Church,
That we can make a true and proper Satisfaction for Sin, is beyond denial
evident; and it has before been said, that the Council of Trent approves their
Doctrine.

But that Protestants ever assigned this, Vindicat. p. 57.
or any other single Point as the cause of our separating fron their Communion;
That we ever taught that any thing at all should be given to a Sinner, for
saying a bare Lord have mercy upon me; much less more than they pretend to give
by all the Plenary Indulgences of their Church; this is so shameful a Calumny,
that I am confident the Vindicator himself never believed it.

For his last Remark, if it deserves any Answer, That I reflect upon the Bishop
of Meaux, for bringing only, we suppose, to establish this Doctrine, when yet
very often I do no more my self; I have only this to say, that I believe he can
hardly find any one Instance wherein that is the only Argument I bring for our
Doctrine: Not to add, that possibly it would not be very unreasonable to look
upon that as sufficient, not to receive their Innovations, till they can bring
us some better Arguments to prove that we ought to quit our Supposition. They
who pretend to impose such things as these, are the Persons on whom the Proof
will lie; it is enough for us to reject them, that we cannot find any footsteps
of them, either in Scripture or Antiquity; and have good reason to believe, by
the weakness of their Attempts, that there are not any.

ARTICLE VII.. 2. Of Indulgences.
FOR Indulgences, Vindicat. p. 58.
the Vindicator thinks it sufficient to answer all the Difficulties I proposed,
to confess that some Abuses have crept in; that there are indeed many Practices
in the Church of Rome, different from that of the Primitive Church; but these
being neither necessary, nor universally received, he will not quarrel with us
about them.

But are not these Abuses still cherished in his Church? Does not the Pope
still dispatch them abroad, and his Missionaries preach them now as shamefully
almost, as when Luther first rose against them? Is it not necessary, nor
universally received, to believe that these Indulgences satisfy for the
temporal Pain of Sin? Do they not put up Bills over their Church Doors and
Altars, almost every Sunday, to vend them on this Account? Is not his Holiness
still esteemed the Churches Treasurer? And has he not but very lately sent a
This Bull is dated August 11. 1683. and it runs thus: We give and grant, by
virtue of the Presents, a Plenary Indulgence, and entire remission of all Sins.
And that the Confessors absolve them in the Court of Conscience of all Sins,
Excesses, Crimes and Faults, how grievous or enormous soever they have been,
and in what fashion soever they were reserved. And for all this,

The Condition proposed is, To visit some one of the Churches appointed by the
Ordinary, to fast the Wednesday, Friday, and Saturday; to confess their Sins,
and receive the Sacrament, and give somewhat to the Poor. And this the A. B. of
Paris promises the People, in his Instructions for the Jubilee, shall restore
them to the same state they were first put into by Baptism. Instructions pour
Gagner le Jubilee, page 11. Paris, 1683. par Order de Monseigneur l'Archeveque.


Universal Indulgence throughout their whole Church?

When these things are considered, I doubt it will little avail the Vindicator
to put me in mind of my Promise, That whenever the Penances shall be reduced to
their Primitive Practice, we shall be ready to give or receive such an
Indulgence as Monsieur de Meaux has described, and as those first Ages of the
Church allowed of.

Purgatory.. 3.
WHat I have said as to the Design of the Primitive Christians in praying for
the Dead, Vindicat. p. 59.
would have deserved either an ingenuous acknowledgment of the truth of it, or
some reasonable proof of its falseness or impertinence. We cannot but suspect
that he was hard put to it for Arguments, when all the reason he brings us for
the belief of Purgatory, is built upon the Authority of two Councils, neither
of which are very much esteemed by Us; and the eldest of them 1400 Years after
Christ.

If the Vindicator has any thing of moment to offer for it, he shall not fail
of a just Consideration. Otherwise 'twill be as foolish as it is false, to
pretend to tell the World, That we make a Breach in the Church, and condemn
Antiquity upon no other grounds, than a bare supposition that it is injurious
to the Merits of Jesus Christ; and which has no other Proof than our own
Presumption.

PART II.
ARTICLE VIII. Of the Sacraments in General.
AS to the number of the Sacraments, Vindicat. p. 59.
the Vindicator confesses that it is not to be found, either in Scripture or
Antiquity. He thinks it sufficient that the Scripture mentions an Exterior
Ceremony, and an Interior Grace annexed thereunto. He should then have shown
us that all those seven which they receive, have at least such an outward Sign
as he Pretends, and an inward Grace, by Christ's Institution, annexed to it.
And this so much the rather, for that no One of his Church has yet been able to
do it, tho the Council of Trent damns all those that dare to deny it.

ARTICLE IX. Of Baptism.
WE do not complain of the Church of Rome, Vindicat. p. 61.
for not believing that Infants dying unbaptised are certainly Saved: But we
must, and do complain of Monsiur de Meaux, for declaring so positively, what we
judge to be at least as uncertain as it is uncharitable, that they have not any
part in Christ.

If I argued for the more favorable side, I confessed at least that the Church
of England had determined nothing concerning it; But that I went about to
justify a Breach with the Church of Rome on this Account, is a Calumny as
great, as the little reflection of Huguenot or Puritan, before was ridiculous.

That he should be astonished to hear a Church of England Man argue for this
Point, shows how little acquainted he ever was with the Writers of it: I shall
mention only two, who I believe were never suspected as Puritanically inclined,
and yet have argued much more strongly than ever I could have done for it: One
the venerable and judicious Page 275, etc.
Mr. Hooker in his Eccles. Polity. Lib. 5. Sect. 60. The Other the learned
Archbishop Bramhall in a set Discourse, which he thus concludes, A. Bp
Bramhall 's Works, Tom. 4. Disc. 5. p. 983.
This I take to be the Doctrine of the foundest English Divines, and which I
believe to be the Truth: Saving always my Canonical Obedience to my Spiritual
Mother the Church of England, and in a higher degree to the Catholic Church,
when it shall declare it self in a true and free Oecomenical Council. But
neither I, nor any Protestants, do believe that the Church of Rome, including
all Other Churches of that Patriarchate, or of its Communion, is that Catholic
Church.

For the rest, whether his Arguments or mine on this Point are the better, I am
but little concerned, tho he be very much. That which seemed the most to
deserve an Answer, he has thought fit wholly to pass by, viz. that several of
his own Authors had "maintained the same with me; and I persume he will not say
were Puritans or Huguenots for their so doing.

But that the World may see with what rashness these Men talk, I will now be
yet more Express; That whereas Mr. de Meaux, M. de Meaux 's Exp. p. 16.
affirms that this denial of Salvation to Infants dying unbaptized, was a Truth
which never any one before Calvin durst openly call in question, it was so
firmly rooted in the minds of all the Faithful. This is so notoriously false,
that not only the most Learned of their own First we have Cassander, libr. de
Baptismo Infant. p. 762. and he there cites of his side Jo. Gerson, Sermon. in
Not. B. Mariae, par. 3. preached before the Council of Constance, and all the
Fathers there assembled, p. 769. Gabriel Biel in 4. did. 4. q. 2. Cajetan in
3. p. D. Th. q. 68. art. 1, 2, 3. Tilmannus Segebergensis de 7 Sacram. c. 1.
art. 3.
Church as I proved before, but the very Grot. Via ad pacem, p. 290. in art. 9.
Consult. Cassandr. adds to these, Inter Veteres, Scriptorem quaestionum ad
Antiochum quae Athanasio tribuuntur; Nazianzenum de S. Baptismate, duobus
locis; and Scholiastem ejus Nicetam:
Fathers themselves, have many of them declared for this Doctrine; even St. sed
and ipsum Augustinum antequam in certamine cum Pelagio incalesceret, l. 3. de
lib. arb. c. 23. locum Joan. 3. intelligendum de iis qui possunt and contemnunt
baptizari, asserit Lombard. l. 4. did. 4.
Augustine himself not excepted, till his Dispute with Pelagius provoked him to
deny that, which in his cooler thoughts, he had more reasonably allowed before.

ARTICLE X. Of Confirmation.
IN the Article of Confirmation, Vindicat. p. 63.
I affirmed that several of their own Party had denied the Divine Institution
of this pretended Sacrament; and that neither the Council of Trent, or their
Catechism, had offered any thing to prove it.

The Vindicator replies, That my Confession that the Apostles used Imposition
of Hands, and that when our Bishops after their Examples do the like, and pray
for the Blessing of the Holy Spirit upon us, we piously hope that their Prayers
are heard; is a sufficient proof of an outward Visible Sign, of an inward and
Spiritul Grace.

Had I indeed affirmed that the Apostles had instituted this Imposition of
Hands, to be continued in the Church, and promised that the Grace of the Holy
Ghost should certainly descend at their doing of it, for all those great Ends
our Prayers design; this might have made Confirmation look somewhat like a
Sacrament to Us. But to argue from a mere indifferent Ceremony, continued only
in imitation of the Apostles, and to which no blessing is ascribed that may not
equally be allowed to any Other the like Prayer; and then cry out that this
must needs argue the Divine Institution of it, because none but God can promise
Grace to an outward Sign, this is in effect to confess that there is nothing at
all to be said for it.

It is wonderful to see with what confidence those of the Church of Rome, urge
the Apostles Imposition of Hands for proof of Confirmation, as it is now
practiced amongst them; in which there is not any the least resemblance. Our
Bishops lay on Hands after their Example: But for theirs, they anoint, make
Crosses in the Forehead, tie a Fillet about their Heads, give them a box on the
Ear, etc. for which there is neither Promise, Precept, nor Example of the
Apostles: but for Imposition of Hands, the only thing they did, this they have
resolved to be but an So Estius in 4. Sent. did. 7.. 7. p. 81.
Accidental Ceremony, and accordingly have in their So the same Estius proves
from the Council of Florence; In quo, says he, legitur quod loco illius manus
impositionis per quam Apostoli dabant Spiritum S. in Ecclefia datur
Confirmatio, cujus materia est Chrisma. Ex quibus verbis utrumque colligitur,
and initio necessariam fuisse manuum impositionem Sacramenti necessitate, and
eandem ejus necessitatem, signaculo Chrismatis introducto, cessasse.
practice wholly laid it by.

ARTICLE XI. Of Penance.
THat Penance is not truly and properly a Sacrament, Vindicat. p. 64.
nor was ever esteemed so by the Primitive Church, I at large proved in my
Exposition of it: and the Vindicator has not in his Reply advanced any one
thing to answer the Objections that were brought against it.

He allows Public Confession to have been a part of Discipline only, and
alterable at pleasure; Ibid. p. 65.
but then affirms that either Public or Private was always necessary; and this
we are to take of him upon his own word.

In short, he repeats the Sum of their Doctrine to us; Ibid. p. 67.
and then, as if he had done his Business, This, says he, we have always held
and practiced, and this we affirm to be conformable to the practice of the most
Ancient and Orthodox Churches; and adds, that He is astonished at our rejection
of it. All which Stuff is easily said, and may with the same ease and
reasonableness be denied.

And therefore to conclude this in a word; If ever he gets so well out of his
Astonishment, as to come to his Reason again, and will then undertake to prove
Penance to be truly and properly a Sacrament, instituted by Christ, and
necessary to Salvation, either in Act or Desire, he shall not fail of an
ingenuous Reply to his Arguments. In the mean time, I have before shown, that
we do practice it, as far as is either necessary or convenient; and farther
than this we shall not think our selves bound to go, till we are somewhat
better convinced of our Obligations to it, than the Vindicator has hitherto
been willing or able to do.

ARTICLE XII. Of Extreme Unction.
IN explaining the words of St. Vindicat. p. 68.
James brought for this pretended Sacrament, I followed the Interpretation
which both the practice of the Primitive Church naturally leads to; and which
Cardinal Cajetan confesses, and their own public Liturgies show, was for above
800 Years esteemed the undoubted meaning of them.

The Vindicator, from Bellarmine, advances many Things, as he supposes,
contrary to this Exposition; but the greatest part of which are utterly false,
the rest impertinent.

The Grace of curing the Sick, he says, was not given to all Priests and Elders
alike, but only to some select Persons. If this be true, it was then best like
St. James's Intention, that they should send for those Priests to whom it was
given. And however some Others might have this Grace, yet certainly it was
principally at least given to the Priests and Elders, for the honor and
benefit of their Ministry.

These did not only cure the Sick, but the Lame and the Blind. And therefore he
would, I suppose, have had St. James taken notice of these two. He might have
added the Dead likewise; for those who healed the Lame and the Blind, raised
the Dead also. But what if St. James's word be (...) answers to the Hebrew
(...) and signifies all sorts of INfirmities: and (...), is no unheard of
phrase for being Lame.
general, and may very well be extended to all these? Yet since these Gifts
were but rare in the Church, in respect of that the Apostle here speaks of, and
did evidently belong to a greater Power, We deny his Supposition, that those
who ordinarily cured the Sick by anointing, had also the Power to heal the Lame
and the Blind.

Their Power of Miracles was not tied to Unction only: Mark 6.13.
But yet since we find in St. Mark that this was the ordinary Sign, what wonder
if St. James describe it by that which was the most common and frequent amongst
them?

All those that were anointed, were not cured. This is false, Vindicat. p. 69.
and cannot be maintained without dishonor to that Spirit by which they acted:
Neither had all they that were cured by them who had the Gift of Healing, any
assurance by that Cure of the Forgiveness of their Sins. This again is false:
The Sin here promised to be forgiven is that for which the Sickness was sent,
if it was sent for any: Now St. James expressly promise, that in this case,
whenever the Health of the Body was restored, this Sin should be forgiven too;
and therefore it must be false to say it was not.

He adds, lastly, That St. James promises, that the Prayer of Faith shall save
the Sick, and the Lord shall raise him up: Which if it had been meant of bodily
Health, those only would have died in the Apostle's Time, who either neglected
this Advice, or whose Deaths prevented the accomplishment of this Ceremony. And
if it must be understood of the Soul's Health, then it will follow that none
were damned, either then or now, but what neglect this Advice, or whose Deaths
prevent the accomplishment of this Ceremony; concerning the Truth of which the
Vindicator may please to give us his Opinion.

But the Vanity of this Objection proceeds from the want of a true Notion of
the Nature of these Gifts. They who had the greatest measure of them, could not
yet exercise them when they would. The same Spirit that helped them to perform
the Miracle, instructed them also when they should do it. So that they never
attempted it, but when they saw the sick Person had Faith to be healed, and
that it would be for the greater Glory of God to do it. St. Paul had doubtless
this Gift of Healing; and yet he neither cured Timothy of the weakness of his
Stomach, 1 Timothy 5.22.
and his other frequent Infirmities; and left Trophimus at Miletum sick. 2 Timothy
4.20.
That this Gift of Healing was in the Church at this time, is not to be
doubted, though this place should not belong to it. Will the Vindicator argue
against this, that then none died till it went out of the Church, but such as
refused the benefit of it, or died suddenly before they had time to do it?

It may appear by this, Vindicat. p. 69, -- 70.
how little they have to object against the true Design and Interpretation of
this passage: Nec ex verbis, nec ex effectu, verba haec loquuntur de
Sacramentali Unctione Extremae Unctionis: sed magis de Unctione quam instituit
Dominus Jesus, a Discipulis exercendam in aegrotis. Cajet. Annot. in Loc.
For Cardinal Cajetan's Authority, the Vindicator tells us, That had I said
only, that he thought it could not be proved, neither from the Words, nor the
Effect, that St. James speaks of the Sacramental Unction of Extreme Unction;
but rather of that Unction which our Lord Jesus instituted in the Gospel to be
exercised by his Disciples upon the Sick, I had been a faithful Quoter of his
Sense: But to tell us he freely confesses it can belong to no other, is to
impose upon him and the Readers. As if when two Things only are in controversy
for the Cardinal, absolutely to exclude the one, and apply it to the other,
were not in effect (for I designed not to translate his words) to confess, that
it could belong only to that.

But that which is most considerable is, that the Ancient Liturgies of the
Church, and the public practice of it, for above 800 Years, show, that they
esteemed this Unction to belong primarily to bodily Cures, and but secondarily
only to the sickness of the Soul. And because these Rituals are not in every
bodies hands, to argue at once the truth of my Assertion, and show how little
conversant the Vindicator has been in them, I will here insert some particular
proofs of it.

Upon the Thursday in the Holy Week, when this Oil was wont to be consecrated,
they did it with this Prayer:

Ex S. Gregorii Libr. Sacram. p. 66.
Fer. 5. post Palm. Emitte domine Spiritum S. tuum paraclitum de Coelis in hanc
pinguedidem Olivae, quem de Viridi ligno producere dignatus es; ad refectionem
Corporis; ut tua sancta benedictione sit omni hoc unguentum tangenti tutamen
Mentis and Corporis, ad Evacuandos omnes Dolores, omnesque infirmitates, omnem
aegritudinem corporis.

That by this Blessing it might become the Defense both of the Mind and Body;
The same is in effect the Prayer of the Greek Church: (...) ((...)) (...).
Euch. p. 863. Nor is it much different in that published by Thomasius, as P.
Gelasius's Ritual, before P. Gregory's, upon the same day, p. 69. only that he
generally joins Mentis and Corporis.
to cure all Pains and Infirmities, and sickness of the Body: nothing else
mentioned.

In the Office of Visiting the Sick, several Introductory Prayers, all for the
Bodies Recovery, are first said: such as this, page 251, etc.
Ad visitand. infirm. p. 251. Deus qui famulo tuo Hezekiae ter quinos Annos ad
vitam donasti, ita and famulum tuum N. a lecto aegritudinis tua potentia erigat
ad salutem. Per.

O God, who did add to the (...) thy Servant Hezekiah fifteen Years, let thy
Power in like manner raise up this thy Servant from his Bed of Sickness.
Through etc.

Some of these being said, the Priest goes on thus:
Domine Deus, qui per Apostolum locutus es, Infirmatur quis in Vobis, S. James
5.14, 15.
inducat Presbyteros Ecclesiae and orent super eum ungentes eum oleo Sancto in
Nomine Domini, etc. Cura quaesumus Redemptor noster gratia Spiritus Sancti
languores istius Infirmi: and sua sana vulnera, ejusque dimitte peccata, atque
dolores cunctos cordis and corporis expelle, plenamque and interius exteriusque
sanitatem miserecorditer read: ut open miserecordiae tuae restitutus and
Sanatus, ad pristina Pietatis tuae reparetur Officia; Per etc.

O Lord God, who by thy Apostle have said, If any Man be sick, let him call for
the Elders of the Church, and let them pray over him, anointing him with Oil in
the Name of the Lord, etc: Cure we beseech thee, O our Redeemer, by the Grace
of the Holy Spirit, the sickness of this infirm Person: Heal his Wounds, and
forgive his Sins, and expel all the Pains, both of his Heart, and of his Body;
and restore him mercifully to full health, both inward and outward: that being
by thy merciful Aid Recovered and Healed, he may be strengthened to the former
Duties of thy Service; Through etc.

Then the sick Person kneels down upon the right Hand of the Priest, and this
Antiphona is sung:
Dominus locutus est Discipulis suis, In Nomine meo Daemonia ejicite, and super
Infirmos manus vestras imponite and been habebunt. Psalm. Deus Deorum Dominus
locutus est: Et repetit, In Nomine meo etc.

The Lord said unto his Disciples, In my Name cast out Devils; and lay your
hands upon the Sick and they shall Recover. Then the 49 Psalm, The Lord, the
Mighty God, has spoken, etc. After which they repeat again: In my Name etc. as
before.

Then follows this Prayer.
Oremus Dominum nostrum Jesum Christum, and cum omni supplicatione rogemus, ut
hunc famulum suum N. per Angelum Sanctum suum visitare, laetificare, and
confortare dignetur.

Let us pray unto our Lord Jesus Christ, and beseech him with all supplication,
that he would vouchsafe, by his Holy Angel, to visit, make glad, and comfort
this his Servant.

Afterward this Antiphona.
Succurre Domine Infirmo isti N. and Medica eum spirituali Medicamine, ut in
pristina sanitate restitutus, gratiarum tibi sanus referat Actiones.

Succor, O Lord, this Infirm Person N. and heal Him with a spiritual Medicine,
that being restored to his former Health, when he is Well, he may return thanks
unto thee.

Then follows another Psalm, and after it this Antiphona:
Sana Domine infirmum istum cujus Ossa turbata sunt, and cujus Anima turbata
est Valde: sed tu Domine convertere, and sana eum, and eripe animam ejus.

Heal, O Lord, this sick Person whose Bones are troubled, and whose Soul is
very much afflicted: but turn thou, O Lord, and heal him, and deliver his Soul.

After this is said the 6th Psalm, from whence the Antiphona was taken; which
being ended, they anoint the sick Person in several parts, but especially in
that where the pain lies; saying this Prayer:
Inungo te de Oleo sancto in Nomine Patris, and Filii, and Spiritus Sancti: ut
non lateat in Te Spiritus immundus, neque in membris, neque in medullis, neque
in nulla compagine membrorum; sed in te habitet virtus Christi Altissimi and
Spiritus Sancti; quatenus per hujus Operationem Mysterii, atque per hanc
Sacrati Olei Vnctionem, atque nostram deprecationem, virtute Sanctae Trinitatis
medicatus sive fotus, pristinam and immelioratam recipere merearis sanitatem:
Per eundem.

I anoint thee with this Holy Oil, Instead of this, Arcudius gives us this Form
out of a very ancient Manuscript in the Greek Church: (...), etc. And in
another Office; (...). Arcudius de Sac. Ext. Vnct. p. 394. And the Prayers in
the Office of the Euchelaion are all exactly conformable, to what I have here
observed.
in the Name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost; that no
unclean Spirit my remain in thee, but that the virtue of the most highest of
Christ, and the Holy Ghost may dwell in thee: to the End that by the Operation
of this Mystery, and through the Unction of this holy Oil, and our Prayers,
thou may be healed and restored by the Virtue of the Holy Trinity, and
receive thy former and better health, Through the same.

Then follows this Prayer.
Domine Deus Salvator noster, qui es vera salus and Medicina, a quo omnis
Sanitas and Medicamentum venit, quique nos Apostoli documento instruis ut
languentes Olei liquore Orantes tangeremus, respice propitius super hunc
famulum tuum N. and quem languor curvat ad exitum, and virium defectus trahit
ad Occasum, medela tuae gratiae restituat in Salutem. Sana quoque quaesumus
omnium medicator ejus febrium, and cunctorum languorum Cruciatus,
aegritudinemque, and dolorum omnium dissolve tormenta, viscerumque ac cordium
interna Medica: Medullorum quoque and Cogitationum: Sana discrimina ulcerum,
vanitatumque putredines evacua, Conscientiarumque atque plagarum obducito
cicatrices veteres, immensasque remove passiones: Carnis ac Sanguinis materiam
reforma, delictorumque cunctorum veniam tribue; sicque illum tua pietas jugiter
custodiat, ut nec ad Correptionem aliquando Sanitas, nec ad perditionem nunc,
Te auxiliante, perducat Infirmitas; sed fiat illi haec Olei Sacri perunctio,
morbi and languoris praesentis expulsio, atque peccatorum omnium optata
remissio: Per Dominum nostrum.

O Lord God our Savior, who art the true Health and Medicine, and from whom
all Health and Medicine does proceed: who also, by the Instruction of thy Holy
Apostle have taught us, that we should anoint the Sick with Oil, look down we
beseech thee in mercy upon this thy Servant N: and whom his weakness has
brought down to Death, and the decay of his strength draws toward his End, Let
the power of thy Grace restore to Health: Heal, we beseech thee, his Feavours,
etc. -- And let the Holy Unction of this Oil be the Expulsion of his present
Sickness and Infirmity, and the remission of all his Sins: Through.

Then let the Priest give him the Communion of the Body and Blood of Christ:
and if occasion be, let them repeat this seven days; And the Lord shall raise
him up; and IF he be in Sins, they shall be remitted.

The Priest ought also to say the Morning and Evening Service every day to the
Sick Person, adding the Hymn; See the Hymn, Cassaadr Oper. p. 287.
Christ Coelestis Medicina Patris; which is a Prayer entirely for the recovery
of the Bodily Health.

This was the method of their Unction in Pope Gregory's Missal; and which I
suppose shows that it had somewhat more than a bare respect to bodily Cures;
indeed was, as I before affirmed, especially designed for them. It were an easy
matter to show the very same to be the practice of the Greek Church at this
Day; insomuch that Arcud. de Sacram. Extr. Unct. l. 5. c. 5. de forma hujus
Sacramenti.
Arcudius himself could not dissemble it: But I shall close this with one
Observation more which Cassander. Oper. p. 289. where he also cites Cusanus for
the same Remark.
Cassander has given us, that it was anciently the custom to anoint, not only
the Elder Persons, but even Infants, after the same manner; not sure for the
forgiveness of those remains of Sin which the former Sacraments had not
sufficiently cleared, but for the same End for which they then did all others,
the Recovery of their bodily Health.

ARTICLE XIII. Of Marriage.
THat Marriage is not a Sacrament truly and properly so called, Vindicat. p. 70.
as the Council of Trent has defined it, their own Authors sufficiently show.
Cassaud. Consult. Art. 13. de number. Sacram. in fine. De Matrimonio vero non modo
P. Lombardus negavit in eo gratiam conferri, sed long post eum Durandus
diserte inquit, non esse Matrimonium univoce Sacramentum sicut alia Sacramenta
novae legis, nam nec confer gratiam non habenti, nec augere habenti; non esse
itaque Sacramentum proprie ac stricte dictum.
Lombard denies that there is any Grace conferred in it, and affirms it as a
Lib. 4. d. 2. l. C. p. 696. Fuit tamen Conjugium ante Peccatum institutum, non
utique propter Remedium, sed ad Sacramentum. Et d. 26. l. A. Cum alia
Sacramenta post peccatum and propter peccatum exordium sumpserint, Matrimonii
Sacramentum etiam ante peccatum legitur institutum a Domino.
Sacrament, to have been instituted not only before Christ, but even before the
Fall; and therefore was not cited, either for Ostentation, or for the silly
Reason mentioned by the Vindicator.

4 Sent. d. 26. q. 3.
Durandus in express terms declares, that forasmuch as it neither confers Grace
where it is not, nor increases it where it is, it cannot be a Sacrament truly
and properly so called.

It is therefore evidently false to say, that Lombard is against me in this
Matter; and for the torrent of Fathers and For his torrent of Fathers,
Bellarmine has been able to collect but six or seven, of which not one to the
purpose, nor any very ancient: And for the Scriptures, Estius one of the wisest
of their own Party, is forced to confess; Cum igitur hujus Doctrinae non poffit
ex Scripturis haberi probatio, saltem aperta and evidens; consequens est
articulum hunc, Matrimonii Sacramento gratiam conferri, unum esse
extraditionibus Ecclesiae non Scriptis, and ad Virbum Dei non scriptum sed
traditum pertinere. 4 Sent. d. 26.. 7. p. 61.
Scriptures which he talks of, it would have been more to this purpose to have
produced their Authorities, than thus vainly to boast of that which we
certainly know he is not able to perform.

ARTICLE XIV. Of Holy Orders.
IF the Vindicator be truly agreed with Me in this Article, Vindicat. p. 71.
He must then renounce the number of his seven Sacraments. I denied that there
was any Sign instituted by Christ, to which his Grace is annexed: All the
Authority Imposition of Hands has in Scripture, being only the Example of three
or four places, where it was practiced indeed, but no where commanded. I
affirmed that several of his own Church had declared it not to be Essential to
Holy Orders, nor by consequence the outward Sign of a Sacrament in them. In a
word, I said, that the Grace conferred was no Justifying Grace, nor by
consequence such as is requisite to make a true and proper Sacrament: To all
which he has thought fit not to offer one word in Answer.

ARTICLE 15, 16, 17, 18. Of the Eucharist.
AS to the Business of the Eucharist, Vindicat. p. 72.
I had not entered on any Argument about it, had not Monsieur de Meaux here
thought fit to lay aside the Character of an Expositor, to assume that of a
Disputant.

For the words of Institution, which are the principal part of this
Controversy, I proposed two Arguments to confirm the Interpretation which our
Church gives of them: One from the the natural import of the words themselves;
the Other from the intention of our Savior in the institution of this Holy
Sacrament. To the former of these the Vindicator thought he could answer
somewhat; but for the latter, it has been urged chiefly since Bellarmine's
time, and so our Author had nothing to say to it.

For the former then he tells us, Ibid.
first, Of the insincerity of my Attacque; Page 73, 74.
That the Bishop declared there was nothing in the words of Institution
OBLIGING them to take them in a figurative sense; to which I oppose only, That
there are such Grounds in them for a figurative Interpretation, as NATVRALLY
lead to it. It Is true, I have not here used the very word OBLIGED, but yet in
my proof I proceed upon such Grounds as I said would NECESSARILY REQVIRE a
figurative Expos. Chapter of Eng. p. 47.
Interpretation; which is much the same thing. And though I cannot tell what
will Oblige Him to take those words in their true, i. e. figurative sense; yet
if I have proved, That there are such Grounds in those words as Naturally,
indeed necessarily lead to it; any reasonable Man would think, that joined with
the Other proof from the Reason of the thing it self, might be sufficient to
Oblige him to acquiesce in it.

But we will examine his Process, which whether it argues more my unsincerity,
or the falseness of their Interpretation, I shall leave it to the Reader to
judge.

First; He confesses, as to my first Position, Vindicat. p. 73.
that the words themselves do naturally lead to a figurative Interpretation.
Nobody, says he, ever denied but the words as they lie (without considering
the Circumstances and Practice of the Church, delivering the Interpretation of
them down to us) might possibly lead to a figurative Interpretation: Seeing the
like Expressions are frequently found in Scripture: As for Example, I am a
Door, I am a Vine, etc. Which being always taken by the Church in a figurative
sense, we should esteem him a Madman that should think it possible after this,
to persuade all the World they ought to be taken in a literal. And as it would
be a madness to suppose all Mankind might in future Ages be so sottish, as to
renounce this figurative Interpretation of Jesus Christ's being a Door, and a
Vine, and fall so far into the literal sense, as to believe him to be
substantially present in them, and pay the utmost adorations to him there, set
them up in Temples to be Adored, and celebrate Feasts in honor of them; This
is the Pretense of Mr. Arnauld, and at large refuted by Mr. Claude in his
answer to him; whose Works being in English, I shall refer the Reader, who
desires to see the vanity of this Argument exposed, to what he has there said.
So we cannot but think it to be irrational to imagine, that if the Disciples
and whole Church in all Nations, had been once taught these words, This is my
Body, were to be taken in a figurative sense, it could ever have happened that
the Visible Church in all Nations, should agree to teach their Children the
literal, etc.

The meaning of which Discourse, if I understand it aright, is this Concession,
that the words of Institution do in themselves as naturally lead to a
figurative Interpretation, as those other Expressions, I am a Vine, I am a
Door: And the only thing which makes the difference is, that the Church, as he
supposes, has from the beginning interpreted the One according to the Letter,
the Other in a figurative Acceptance.

Secondly, As to my Argument, That if the Relative This, in that Proposition,
this is my Body, referred to the Bread which our Savior held in his Hand, the
natural repugnancy there is betwixt the two things affirmed of one another,
Bread and Christ's Body will NECESSARILY REQVIRE the figurative Interpretation.
This De Euch. l. 1. c. 1. p. 462. l. D. speaking of Carolstrad's Opinion of the
Eucharist; Scripsit, says he, Verba Evangelistae, Hoc est Corpus meum, hunc
facere sensum, Hic Panis est Corpus meum, quae sententia aut accipi debet
tropice, ut Panis sit Corpus Christi significative, aut est plane absurda and
Impossibilis, nec enim fieri potest, ut Panis sit Corpus Christi. Et l. 3. c.
19. p. 747. Non potest fieri ut vera fit propositio in qua Subjectum supponit
pro Pane, praedicatum autem pro Corpore Christi, etc.
Bellarmine, Hoc est impossible quod Panis fit Corpus Christi: de Consecrat.
d. 2. c. 55. p. 2393. in Gloss.
Gratian, and others do confess, and the Vindicator himself seems contented
with it: Only he believes, That all my Logic will never be able to prove that
the Pronoun THIS must necessarily relate to (Panis) In the Ethiopian Church
they give the Holy Eucharist with this Explication, Hic Panis est Corpus meum.
Ludolphi Hist. l. 3. c. 5. n. 56.
Bread, and not to (Corpus) Body. How far my Logic has been able to do this, I
must leave it to others to determine; but for the Vindicator's satisfaction, I
do assure him, that Bellarmine looks upon it to be Good Logic. And because it
is in the middle of the citation I referred to, and which he has almost
entirely transcribed, excepting only the part I am now speaking of, I will not
charge him with unsincerity in the omission, but I must needs say 'twas
indiscreet to put the issue of the Question upon what his Cardinal had so
freely confessed: Bellarm de Euchar. l. 3. c. 19. p. 746. Lit. D. Dominus
accepit in manibus panom, eumque benedixit, and dedit discipulis and de eo ait,
Hoc est Corpus meum. Itaque panem accepit, panem benedixit, panem dedit, and de
Pane dixit, Hoc est corpus meum.
The Lord, says he, took Bread in his hands, and blessed it, and gave it to his
Disciples, and said of it, This is my Body: Therefore he took BREAD, and
blessed BREAD, and gave BREAD to his Disciples, and said of BREAD, This is my
Body. And in Id. l. 1. c. 11. p. 517. Lit. B. Siquis digito aliquid ostendat,
dum Pronomen effert, valde absurdum videtur dicere Pronomine illo non
demonstrari rem praesentem. Atqui Dominus accepit Panem, and Illum porrigens
ait, Hoc est Corpus meum; videtur igitur demonstravisse Panem. Neque obstat
quod propositio non significat nisi in fine totius prolationis. Nam etsi ita
est de propositione quae est Oration quaedam, tamen demonstrativa pronomina mox
indicant certum aliquid, etiam antequam sequantur caeterae voces. Et sane in
illis verbis, Bibite ex hoc omnes, valde durum est non demonstrari, I D. quod
Erat, sed I D. tantum quod futurum erat.
another place, arguing against this very Opinion of the Vindicator, That THIS
in that proposition belongs to BODY, not the BREAD which he held in his hand;
says, That if a Man points with his finger to a thing whilst he utters a
pronoun demonstrative, 'twere absurd to say that any thing else should be
referred to, but that thing. Our Lord took Bread, and reaching it out to them,
said, Take, Eat, THIS is my Body; He seems to have pointed to the BREAD; and
therefore must have shown some certain thing, even before the other words were
pronounced.

From which put together, I think we may frame this Argument:

If the Relative THIS, in that Proposition, This is my Body, belong to the
Bread, so that the meaning is, This Bread is my Body, then it must be
understood Figuratively, or it is plainly absurd and impossible:

But the relative This in that proposition, This is my Body, does belong to the
Bread, forasmuch as Christ took Bread, and blessed Bread, and gave Bread to his
Disciples, and therefore said of Bread, This is my Body: Therefore

That proposition, This is my Body, must be understood figuratively, or it is
plainly absurd and impossible.

How far the Vindicator will approve this Logic, I cannot tell; but the first
proposition is their common concession, and he himself seems contented with it.
The second is Bellarmine's own grant, nay what he contends for, and indeed what
the connection of the Words do evidently require: And then for the conclusion, I
believe a very little Logic will be enough at any time to make good the sequel
of it.

But the Vindicator has an Exception against all this, Vind. p. 75.
and tells us, That it will all argue nothing against them, unless I beg the
Question, and suppose that no real change was made by those words. I presume it
is as much a begging of the Question for him to suppose there was, as for me
that there was not. We do not now enquire how to expound the Proposition,
supposing there were such a change made as they imagine; but the Question is,
Whether these Words do necessarily imply any such change, nay, rather do not
oblige us to take them in a figurative sense to show that there is none?

However he is resolved he will suppose the Question first, and then prove it,
though I must not. We will suppose, says he, and that not incongruously, That our
Blessed Savior in changing the Water into Wine, might have made use of these
words THIS IS WINE, or LET THIS BE WINE. I hope he does not look upon these two
to be one and the same. But in short, If our Savior had said Let this be Wine,
the meaning must have been, Let this which is now Water become Wine. If he had
said, This is Wine, and the conversion not yet made, it would have been false:
If after the conversion, no more than this, This that is contained in these
Pots is Wine; or, This which before was Water, now is Wine.

And so in the point before us; Had our Blessed Savior said, LET THIS BE MY
BODY, and a conversion had been thereupon as truly made, as of the Water into
Wine, we should have made no doubt, but that it was a command for that which
before was Bread to become his Body. If we take the Words as they are, THIS IS
MY BODY, and no conversion made before they were pronounced, the Proposition in
the literal sense must plainly be false. If a real conversion had first been
made, as when the Water was turned into Wine, then would it signify no more
than this, This which before was Bread, is now my Body. So that all this will
as little avail him, as he says the other did us, unless he also beg the
Question, and suppose a real change made by these words, which he knows is the
very thing which we deny; as we shall have reason to do, till they can prove
that what, we are sure, was Bread, is converted into the Body of Christ.

And thus much for his disputing; Vindicat. p. 77, 78, 79, 80.
Before he enters on an Examination of those Authorities I produced to show the
novelty and uncertainty of Trany-substantiation, he is willing to state the
Case, and to that end would fain know what we mean when we say, that Christ is
not Corporeally present in this Sacrament: Or how that which is not the thing
it self, is yet more than a mere figure of it. In answer to which, I shall need
seek no farther than those Testimonies I before alleged out of the public
Acts of our Church to satisfy him. See the Church Catechism.
Our Catechism affirms, That the inward part, or thing signified in this Holy
Supper, is the BODY AND BLOOD OF CHRIST, which are VERILY AND INDEED taken and
received by the faithful in the Lord's Supper: And the meaning of it our 28th
Article 28.
Article expounds thus; The Body of Christ is given, taken, and eaten in the
Lord's Supper, ONLY AFTER A SPIRITVAL AND HEAVENLY MANNER; and the means by
which this is done, is FAITH. So that to such as rightly, and worthily, and
with Faith receive the same, The Bread which we break, is, as St. Paul declares
it, The Communion of the Body of Christ, and the Cup of Blessing which we
bless, The Communion of the Blood of Christ. In a word; We say, that the
faithful do really partake of Christ's Body after such a manner, as those who
are void of Faith cannot, though they may participate the Outward Elements alike;
Whom therefore our Church declares, Article 29.
To receive only the Sacrament of the Body and Blood of Christ, but to be no
way partakers of Christ; but rather as St. Paul again says, to Eat and Drink
their own Damnation, not discerning the Lords Body.

See the Appendix. N. V. in which St. Chrysostom gives the very same account of
it.
These are the Words of our Church; and the meaning is clearly this: Christ is
really present in this Sacrament, inasmuch as they who worthily receive it,
have thereby really conveyed to them our Savior Christ, and all the benefits
of that Body and Blood, whereof the Bread and Wine are the outward Signs. This
great effect, plainly shows it to be more than a mere Figure; yet is it not his
Body after the manner that the Papists imagine, Rubric at the end of the
Communion Office.
Christ's Body being in Heaven, and not on the holy Table; and it being against
the truth of Christ's natural Body, to be at one time in more places than one.

The Sacramental Bread and Wine then remain still in their very natural
Substance; nor is there any corporal Presence of Christ's natural Flesh and
Blood at the holy Altar. The Presence we allow, is Spiritual, and that not only
as to the manner of the Existence Vindicat. p. 77, 78.
, which the Vindicator seems to insinuate (for we suppose it to be a plain
Contradiction, that a Body should have any Existence but what alone is proper
to a Body, That this Exposition is agreeable to the Doctrine of the Chapter of
England, the Authorities already cited, show. See also the Homily concerning
the Sacrament, part 1. p. 283. etc. and the same is the Explication, which all
the other Protestant Confessions have given of it; as is evident by the
Collation of them made by Bishop Cofins, in his History of Transubstantiation,
cap. 2. where he has set down their Words at large, p. 6. etc.
i. e. Corporal) but as to the nature of the thing it self; and yet it is Real
too: The Bread which we receive, being a most real and effectual Communion of
Christ's Body, in that Spiritual and Heavenly manner which St. Paul speaks of,
and in which the Faithful, by their Faith are made partakers of it.

Thus does our Church admit of a real Presence, and yet Vindic. p. 80.
, neither take the Words of Institution in their literal Sense Ibid. p. 79.
, and avoid all those Absurdities we so justly charge them with: As to the
Authorities of their own Writers, which I alleged to show that the Doctrine of
Transubstantiation had no Grounds, neither in Scripture nor Antiquity: He is
content to allow that the Scriptures are not so plain in this matter, but that
it was necessary for the Church to interpret them in order to our understanding
of it. Vind. p. 80, 81.
And for Antiquity, he desires us to observe, 1st, That the Council of Trent
having in the first Canon, Ibid. p. 82.
defined the. true, real, and substantial Presence of the Body and Blood of
Jesus Christ in the most holy Sacrament, brings this Transubstantiation, Sess.
13. Can. 2.
or Conversion of one Substance into another, as the natural Consequence of it.
Can. 2. If any one shall say, That the Substance of Bread and Wine remains in
the most holy Sacrament of the Eucharist, together with the Body and Blood of
our Lord Jesus Christ, and shall deny that wonderful and singular Conversion of
the whole Substance of the Bread into the Body, and of the whole Substance of
the Wine into the Blood, the Species of Bread and Wine only remaining; which
Conversion the Catholic Church does most aptly call Transubstantiation, let
him be Anathema.

The design of the Council in which Canon is evidently this, To define not only
the real and substantial Presence of Christ in the Eucharist, against the
Sacramentaries, which before was done Can. 1.
; but also the manner or mode of his Presence, against the Lutherans, in two
Particulars; 1st, Of the Absence of the Substance of the Bread and Wine. 2ly,
Of the Conversion of their Substance into the Body and Blood of Christ, the
Species only remaining. But this the Vindicator will not allow, but advances an
Exposition so contrary to the design of the Council, and Doctrine of his
Church, that it is wonderful to imagine how he could be so far deceived
himself, or think to impose upon others so vain and fond an Illusion.

It is manifest, Vindic. p. 83.
says he, that the Church does not here intend to fix the manner of that
Conversion, but only to declare the matter, viz. That the Body and Blood of
Jesus Christ becomes truly, really, and substantially Present; the Bread and
Wine ceasing to be there truly, really, and substantially Present, tho the
Appearances thereof remain. Now this is so evidently false, that Suarez doubts
not to say it is HEREST to affirm it, Forasmuch, says he, See Suarez cited below.
as the Council not only determines the Presence of Christ's Body, and Absence
of the Substance of the Bread, but also the true Conversion of the one into the
other; thus establishing, not only the two former, but this last also as an
Article of Faith.

Our dispute therefore, is not only, as this Author pretends, about the real
Presence of Christ's Body, Vindic. p. 83.
and Absence of the Substance of the Bread, which he calls the thing it self;
but also about the Manner, how Jesus Christ is Present; viz. Whether it be by
that WONDERFUL and singular CONVERSION which their Church calls so aptly
TRANSUBSTANTIATION? Now this being that we are to enquire into, let us see
whether the Authorities I have brought, have not the force I pretend against
their Tenets.

And 1. LOMBARD writing about this Conversion, plainly shows it to have been
undetermined in his time. For having first asserted the real Presence in this
Sacrament, and the change which he supposed was made upon that account: He goes
on to that which the Vind. p. 92.
Vindicator is pleased to call a Scholastic Nicety; and it was indeed at that
time no other, tho since become a matter of Faith, Lombard. l. 4. d. 11. lit.
A. p. 736. De modis Conversionis. Si autem quaeritur qualis sit illa Conversio,
an formalis, an substantialis, vel alterius generis, desinire non sustineo:
Quibusdam esse videtur substantia is, etc.
viz. What kind of Conversion is there made? Whether formal or substantial, or
what else? And for this, he tells us freely, He is not able to define it: That
some have thought it to be a SVBSTANTIAL CHANGE; but for his part, he will not
undertake to determine it.

But 2dly, SCOTVS is yet more free Dicendum, says Scotus, quod Ecclesia
declaravit istum intellectum esse de veritate fidei. Si quaeras, quare voluit
Ecclesia eligere istum intellectum ita difficilem hujus Articuli, cum verba
Scripturae possint salvari secundum intellectum facilem, and vericrem secundum
apparentiam; Dico quod eo spiritu expositae sunt Scripturae, quo conditae. See
4. Sent. d. 11. q. 3. p. 63.
. He declares our Interpretation contrary to Transubstantiation, to be the more
easy, and to all appearance the more true: Insomuch, that the Churches
Authority is the And before, in Sect. Quantum ergo, He professed, Principaliter
autem videtur me movere quod sic tenet Romana Ecclesia.

In a Word, Bellarmine himself cites Scotus for this Opinion: Non extare locum
ullum Scripturae, tam expressum, ut sine Ecclesiae declaratione evidenter cogat
Transubstantiationem admittere, Bell. de Euch. l. 3. c. 23. p. 767. L. D.


Principal thing that moved him to receive their Doctrine. And again, p. 768 L.
A. Unum tamen addit Scotus, quod minime probandum est, Ante Lateranense
Concilium non fuisse dogma fidei Transubstantiationem.
He tells us that this Doctrine of Transubstantiation was not very Ancient, nor
any matter of Faith before the Council of Lateran; all which the Vindicator
himself does in effect confess.

The same is, Vind. p. 88.
3ly, affirmed by Suarez in 3 part. D. Th. vol. 3 disp. 50. 1. p. 593.
Sacramentum Eucharistiae conficitur per veram conversionem Panis and Vini in
Corpus and Sanguinem Christi. Haec assertio est de fide: Nam licet sub his
verbis non habeatur in Scriptura, ea tamen docet Ecclesia ab Apostolis edocta;
docens simul ita esse intelligenda Verba formae, and in vero sensu eorum hanc
veritatem contineri. And then p. 594. col. 2. adds, 1mo, Ex hac Fidei Doctrina,
colligitur corrigendos esse Scholasticos qui hanc Doctrinam de Conversione hac,
seu de Transubstantiatione, non admodum antiquam esse dixerunt, inter quos sunt
Scotus and Gabriel Biel, lect. 41. in Can. etc. And then, 2do infero, Siquis
confiteatur praesentiam corporis Christi, and absentiam Panis, neget tamen
veram Conversionem unius in aliud, in HAERESIN labi, quia Ecclesia Catholica,
non solum duo priera, sed etiam hoc tertium definit ac docet.
SVAREZ of GABRIEL, and confessed by the Vindicator; who also, contrary to his
pretenses, calls this manner of Conversion, an Assertion, that is, of Faith;
tho he confesses, it is not expressly to be found in Scripture, but deduced
thence by the Interpretation of the Church. Nay, so opposite is he to the
Opinion and Pretenses of this Man, that he declares in this very place, which
our good Author examined; but amidst all his sincerity, overlooked this
passage, as not much for his purpose; That if any one should confess the real
Presence of Christ's Body, and Absence of the Bread, and yet deny the true
CONVERSION of the one into the other, he would fall into HEREST; forasmuch as
the Church has defined, not only the two former, but also the third likewise.
But,

4thly, The Prevarication of our Author in the next Citation is yet more
unpardonable. I affirmed, That Cardinal Cajetan acknowledged, that had not the
Church declared her self for the proper Sense of the Words, the other might
with as good reason have been received. This he says, is false; Vind. p. 86.
for that Cajetan says no such thing; nay, rather the contrary, as will appear
to any one who reads that Article: And then with wonderful assurance, begins a
rabble of Citations nothing to the purpose, in the very next Words to those in
which mine end.

For the better clearing of this Doctrine, Cajetan in 3. D. Th. q. 75. art. 1.
p. 130. Col. 1. In comment. circa praesentis and sequentium Articulorum
Doctrinam, pro claritate and ampliori intellectu difficultatum, sciendum est ex
Autoritate S. Scripturae de Existentia Corporis Christi in Sacramento
Eucharistiae, nihil aliud haberi express, nisi verbum Salvatoris dicentis, Hoc
est Corpus meum: Oportet enim Verba haec vera esse. Et quoniam verba sacrae
Scripturae, exponuntur dupliciter, vel Proprie vel Metapherice; Primus Error
circa hoc fuit Interpretantium haec Domini Verba Metaphorice; quem magister
Sent. l. 4. d. 10. Tractat. Qui and hoc Articulo reprobatur. Et consistit VIS
Reprobationis in HOC, Quod verba Domini intellecta sunt ab ECCLESIA Proprie,
and PROPTEREA oportet illa verificari proprie Habemus igitur ex veritate
verborum Domini in sensu proprio, etc. Cited by the Vindicator.
says Cajetan, we must know, That as to the Existence of Christ's Body in the
Eucharist, there is nothing to be had expressly from the Authority of the holy
Scripture, but the words of our Savior, saying, This is my Body. For it must
needs be that these words are true; and because the Words of Scripture may be
expounded two ways, either Properly, or Metaphorically; the first Error was of
those who interpret these words Metaphorically, which is rejected in this
Article. And the force of the Rejection consists in this, That the words of our
Savior have been understood in their proper Sense by the Church, and therefore
must be properly true.

This the Vindicator was pleased to pass by, though the very next words to those
he cites: Nay, to say, That Cajetan had no such thing in that Article; and
appeal to any that should read it, for the truth of it. Should a Protestant
have done this, he would, I believe, have found out a great many hard Names for
him, to testify his Zeal against Falsehood and Unsincerity, and show what a
kind of Religion that must be, Vind. p. 222.
that is not maintainable without such sinister doings: But I shall remit him
wholly to the Reader's Censure, and his own Conscience for Correction.

As for my last Assertion, Vindic. p. 88.
That Transubstantiation was no matter of Faith, till the Council of Lateran,
1200 years after Christ: They are the very words of Scotus cited by Bellarmine,
See p. 64.
and all his Sophistry will not be able to prove that they make but little for
my purpose.

Thus, notwithstanding all the little Endeavors of the Vindicator, to evade
the truth of those Concessions made by the greatest of his own Communion in
favor of our Doctrine, my Argument still stands good against them; and
Transubstantiation appears to have been the monstrous Birth of these last Ages,
unknown in the Church for almost 1200 years. Vind. p. 92, 93.
For what remains concerning the Adoration of the Host, since he has thought
fit to leave my Arguments in their full force; I shall not need say any thing
in defense of that, which he has not so much as attempted to destroy.

ARTICLE XIX. Of the Sacrifice of the Mass.
IF I affirmed, Vindic. p. 94.
The Sacrifice of the Mass to be one of those Errors that most offends us; I
said no more than what the Church of England has always thought of it: And had
the Vindicator pleased to have examined my Arguments, instead of admiring them,
he would perhaps have found I had reason to do so.

Canon. 1. Siquis dixerit in Missa non offerri Deo verum and proprium
Sacrificium, aut quod offerri non fit aliud, quam nobis Christum ad manducandum
dari, Anathema fit.
Canon. 3. Siquis dixerit Missae Sacrificium tantum esse laudis and gratiarum
actionis, aut nudam commemorationem Sacrificii in Cruce peracti, non autem
Propitiatorium, vel soliprodesse sumenti, neque pro Vivis and Defunctis, pro
peccatis, paenis, satisfactionibus, and aliis necessitatibus offerri debere,
Anathema sit.
The Council of Trent affirms, Council. Trid. Sess. 22. p. 196. de Missa.
That the Mass is a true and proper Sacrifice offered to God, a Sacrifice not
only of Praise and Thanksgiving, nor yet a bare Commemoration of the Sacrifice
offered on the Cross, but truly Propitiatory for the Dead and the Living, and
for the Sins, Punishments, Satisfactions, and other Necessities of both of
them. Ibid. Cap. 2. p. 191. Una eademque est Hostia, idem nunc offerens
Sacerdotum Ministerio qui seipsum tunc in cruce obtulit, sola offerendi ratione
diversa.
A Sacrifice wherein the same Christ is now offered without Blood, that once
offered himself in that bloody Sacrifice of the Cross, the same Sacrifice, the
same Offerer; Christ by his Priests now, who then did it by himself, offering
himself, only differing in the manner of Oblation.

This is in short, what their Council has defined as to this Mass-Sacrifice,
and what we think we have good reason to be offended at. That there should be
any true and proper Sacrifice, truly and properly Propitiatory, after that of
the Cross; that Christ who once offered up himself upon the Tree for us, should
again be brought down every day from Heaven, to be Sacrificed a new in ten
thousand places at a time on their Altars: And by all these things so great a
dishonor done to our Blessed Lord, as most evidently there is, and our Writers
have unanswerably proved, in the whole design, Practice, and Pretenses of it.

How little the Doctrine of the real Presence, Vindicat. ib.
as understood by the Church of England, will serve to support this Innovation,
is at first sight evident from the Exposition I before gave of it. That those
who are ordained Priests, ought to have power given them to Consecrate the
Sacrament of the Body and Blood of Christ, and make them present in that holy
Eucharist, after such a manner as our Savior appointed, and as at the first
Institution of this Sacred Mystery they certainly were, this we have always
confessed; and our In the ordering of Priests, when the Bishop imposes his
hands, he bids him be a faithful Dispenser of the Word of God, and of his Holy
Sacraments: And again, when he delivers him the Bible, Take thou Authority to
Preach the Word of God, and to minister the Holy Sacraments, etc. Sparrow
Collect. p. 158.
Rituals show that our Priests accordingly have such a Power, by Imposition of
Hands, conferred on them. But that it is necessary to the Evangelical
Priesthood, that they should have power to offer up Christ truly and properly,
as the Council of Trent defines, this we deny; and shall have reason to do so,
till it can be proved to us, that their Mass is indeed such a Sacrifice as they
pretend, and that our Savior left it as an Essential part of their Priesthood
to offer it.

For the rest, Vindic. p. 95.
If with the Council of Trent, he indeed believes the Mass to be a true and
proper Sacrifice, he ought not to blame us for taking it in that Sense in which
they themselves understand it: For certainly, it is impossible for words to
represent a Sacrifice more strictly and properly, than the Council of Trent has
defined this.

ARTICLE XX. Of the Epistle to the Hebrews.
TO elude the authority of this Epistle, Vindicat. p. 96, 97.
the Vindicator, after Monsieur de Meaux, thinks it sufficient to tell us, That
they understand the word Offer when they apply it to the Mass, Mr. de M's
Expos. p 31.
in a larger signification than what the Apostle there gives it; as when we are
said to offer up to God whatever we present before him: And that it is thus they
pretend to offer up the Blessed JESUS to his Father in the Mass, Vind. p. 96.
in which he vouchsafes to render himself present before him.

That this is to prevaricate the true meaning of that phrase, the Doctrine of
the foregoing Article plainly shows. If Christ be in the Mass a true and proper
sacrifice, as was there said, it will necessarily follow that then he must be
truly and properly sacrificed: Sacrificium verum and reale, veram and realem
Occisionem exigit, quando in Occisione ponitur Essentia Sacrificii. Bellarm. de
Miss. l. 1. cap. 27. p. 1663. A.
And one essential Propriety, and which they tell us distinguishes a Sacrifice
from any other Offering, being the true and real destruction of what is
offered; insomuch that where there is not a true and proper destruction,
neither can there be, as they themselves acknowledge, a true and proper
Sacrifice: It must be evidently false in these men to pretend, that by Offering
in this matter is meant only a presenting of Christ before God, and not a real
change and destruction of his Body offered by them.

If in this Exposition of their Doctrine we do indeed misunderstand the meaning
of it, we must at least profess it to be so far from any wilful mistake, that
we do no more than what their greatest men have done before us: And inded it
still seems most reasonable to us, that either this Sacrifice is no true and
proper Sacrifice, as they say it is; or it is truly and properly offered, as we
affirm they understand it to be.

ARTICLE XXI. Reflections upon the foregoing Doctrine.
IF my Reflections in this Article be but as good, Vindicat. p. 97.
as my Exceptions in the foregoing have been just, against their Doctrine; what
the Vindicator has said to these here, will I believe be found as little to the
purpose, as what he endeavored to reply to those before.

Though Christ be acknowledged to be really present after a Divine and Heavenly
manner in this Holy Eucharist, yet will not this warrant the Adoration of the
Host, which is still nevertheless only Bread and Wine, from being what our
Church censures it, Rubric about kneeling at the end of the Communion.
Idolatry to be abhorred of all faithful Christians; nor will such a real
presenting of our Blessed Lord to his Father, to render him propitious to us,
make the Eucharist any more than a metaphorical, not a true and proper
propitiatory Sacrifice.

If these men please to fix upon us any other notion of the real presence than
what has been said, and which alone our Church allows of; we are neither
concerned in the Doctrine, nor shall we think our selves at all obliged to
answer for those consequences they may possibly draw from it.

ARTICLE XXII. Communion under both Species.
TO prove the lawfulness of their denying the Cup to the Laity, Vindicat. p 98.
the Vindicator advances three Arguments from the public Acts of our own
Church: The 1st. false; The 2d. both false and unreasonable: The 3d. nothing to
the purpose.

1st. He says, the Church of England allows the Communion to be given under one
species in case of Necessity: Art. 30. This is FALSE: The Article establishes
both Kinds; and speaks nothing at all of any Case of Necessity, or what may, or
may not be done on that account. See Art. 30. Sparrow 's Collect. page 102, and
219.
The Cup of the Lord is not to be denied to the Lay People, for both the parts
of the Lords Sacrament, by Christ's Ordinance and Commandment, ought to be
administered to all Christian men alike.

2dly. Edward the sixth, he says, in his Proclamation before the order of
Communion, ordains, That the Sacrament of the Body and Blood of our Savior
Jesus Christ, should from thenceforth be commonly delivered and administered
unto all Persons within our Realms of England and Ireland, and other our
Dominions, under both kinds, That is to say of Bread and Wine, except necessity
otherwise require.

This, as it is thus alleged by the Vindicator, is both False and
Unreasonable: FALSE, for that Edward the 6th in that Proclamation does not
ordain any such thing, See Sparrow 's Collect. p. 17.
but only says, That Forasmuch as in his High Court of Parliament lately holden
at Westminster this was ordained, viz. That the most blessed Body and Blood of
our Savior Christ, should from thenceforth be commonly Administered to all
persons under both kinds, etc. He for the greater Decency, and Uniformity of
this Sacred Eucharist, now thought fit to appoint the following Form and Order
for the Administration of it.

Note, That this order of Communion was the first thing of this kind that was
done after the Reformation; The Mass was yet left remaining; and Edward the 6th
afterward published two other Books, in which were considerable Alterations,
and where there is no mention of any thing of this kind.
It is in the next place UNREASONABLE, to argue as to the present state of the
Church of England, from what was allowed only, and that in case of necessity
too, in the very first beginning of the Reformation.

It was indeed the singular Providence of God, That in the 2d year of that
Excellent Prince, things were so far Reformed from those long and inveterate
Errors, in which the Ignorance and Superstition of Several Ages had involved
the Church, That they had allowed, nay, commanded the Holy Sacrament to be
given under both kinds, when for so many years it had been received only under
one. But that laboring still under their former prejudices, they should in
case of Necessity permit that, which had been the universal practice of the
Church, without any necessity at all before; this is neither to be admired in
them then, nor is it reasonable to urge it against us now.

His 3d Argument is not only Unreasonable upon the account we have now said;
but were it never so proper, is absolutely nothing to the purpose. In the
Rubric, at the end of the same Order of the Communion, there is this Remark:
Note that the Bread that shall be consecrated, Sparrow 's Collect. p. 24.
shall be such as heretofore has been accustomed; and every of the said
consecrated Breads shall be broken in two pieces at the least, or more by the
discretion of the Minister, and so distributed. And men must not think less to
be received in part than in the whole, but in each of them the whole Body of
our Savior Jesus Christ. The meaning of which Rubric is very plain; That
whereas the people who had hitherto been accustomed to receive the Wafer
entire, were now to have but a part of it given to them; to prevent any
mis-conceits upon that account, as if because they did not receive the whole
Wafer as they were wont to do, they did not receive the whole Body, i. e. the
Flesh of Christ, (for as to the Blood, that they received afterward in the
Cup:) It was thought fit for the prevention of this scruple, to tell them, That
they must not think less to be received in part than in the whole, but in each
of them the whole Body of Jesus Christ; which what it makes for their denial of
the Cup to the Laity, I cannot very well apprehend.

And now how well this Author has proved it to be the Doctrine of the Church of
England, to dispense with the Cup in the Holy Eucharist, in case of necessity,
I shall leave it to any indifferent person to judge. Though after all, did we
indeed, as some others do, believe that the Church had power to do this; How
will this excuse them, who without any necessary or but reasonable cause deny
it to the people altogether; Council. Trid. Sess. 21. Can. 1, 2.
and damn all those that will not believe they had not only power, but just
cause and reason so to do? And why will it not as well follow, that they may
take away if they please the whole Sacrament from them, and Damn all those that
will not believe that they had just cause and power to do this too; since even
that in Case of Necessity may be dispensed with; and whilst there is no neglect
or contempt of it, prove neither damnable nor dangerous?

PART III.
ARTICLE XXIII. Of the Written and Unwritten Word.
AS to this Article, Vindic. p. 100.
there is indeed an Agreement between Monsieur de Meaux and Me, so far as We
handle the Question, and keep to those general terms, Of the Traditions being
universally received by all Churches, and in all Ages; for in this Case We of
the Church of England are perfectly of the same Opinion with them, and ready to
receive whatever we are thus assured to have come from the Apostles, with a
like Veneration to that we pay to the written Word it self. But, after all
this, there is, as the Vindicator observes, a very material difference betwixt
us, viz. Who shall be judge when this Tradition is Universal?

He tells us, Vind, ibid.
they rely upon the judgment of the present Church of every Age, declaring her
sense, whether by the most General Council of that Age, or by the constant
practice, and uniform voice of her Pastors and People. And this is that to
which he conceives every private person and Church ought to submit, without
presuming to examine how ancient that Tradition does appear to be, or how
agreeable it is to the Written Word of God.

Now here we must own a dissent as to this method of judging of Traditions, for
these two reasons:

1. Because whether there were any such particular Doctrine or Practice
received by the Primitive Church; is a matter of fact, and as such is in many
cases distinctly set down by such Writers as lived in or near that first Age of
the Church. Now where the case is thus, the Accounts that are given by these
Writers, are certainly to those who are able to search into them, a better Rule
whereby to judge what was an Ancient Doctrine and Tradition, than either the
Decree of a Council of a latter Age, or the Voice and Practice of its Pastors
and People. For let these agree as much as they will in voting any Doctrine or
Practice to have been Primitive, yet they can never make it pass for such among
wise and knowing Men, if the authentic Histories and Records of those times
show it to have been otherwise. And this being plainly the case as to several
instances decreed by the Councils, and practiced by the Pastors and People in
the Roman Church; we cannot look upon her late Decrees and Practices to be a
good or a safe Rule for judging of the Antiquity, or Universality of
Church-Traditions. But

2. There is yet a more cogent Reason against this Method, which is, that it is
apt to set up Tradition in competition with the Scriptures, and to give this
Unwritten Word the upper hand of the Written.

For, according to this Method, if the Church in any Age, does but decree in
Council, or does generally Teach and Practice any thing as an ancient
Tradition, then this must obtain and be of force with all its Members, though
many of them should be persuaded that they cannot find it in, nay, that it is
contrary to the Written Word of God.

Now this we cannot but look upon as an high affront to the Holy Scriptures:
And let them attribute as much as they please to the Decrees and Practices of
their Church, We cannot allow that any particular Church or Person, should be
obliged upon these grounds to receive that as a matter of Faith or Doctrine,
which upon a diligent and impartial search appears to them not to be contained
in, nay, to be contrary to the written Word of God. In this Case we think it
reasonable that the Church's Sentence should be made void; and the Voice of her
pretended Traditions be silenced by that more powerful one of the lively
Oracles of God.

ARTICLE XXIV, XXV. Of the Authority of the Church.
IN the two next Articles, Vind. p. 101.
concering the Authority of the Church, I was willing to allow as much, and
come up as near to Mons. de Meaux, as Truth and Reason would permit. This it
seems made the Vindicator to conceive some great hopes from my Concessions. But
these his hopes are soon dashed, when he finds me putting in some Exceptions,
and not willing to swallow the whole Doctrine, as it is laid down in the
Exposition.

Now the Exceptions that seem most to offend him, are these,

1. That the Church of Rome should be taken for a particular, and not the
Catholic Church.

2. That She should be supposed as such, either by Error to have lost, or by
other means to have prevaricated the Faith, even in the necessary points of it.

3. That any other Church should be allowed to examine and judge of the
Decisions of that Church.

4. That it should be left to private or individual Persons to examine and
oppose the Decisions of the whole Church, if they are evidently convinced that
their private belief is founded upon the Authority of God's Holy Word.

These are the Exceptions, at which he is the most offended: Vind. p. 103.
The 1. of these, he calls an Argument to elude the Authority of the Church of
Rome; and to show the Fallacy of it, he thinks it sufficient to say, That they
do not take the Church of Rome, as it is the Suburbican Diocese, to be the
Catholic Church, but all the Christian Churches in Communion with the Bishop
of Rome. Now if this, in truth, be that which they mean, when they style the
Church of Rome the Catholic Church, then surely every other National Church
which is of that Communion, has as good a title to the name of Catholic, as
that of Rome it self. For seeing it is the Purity or Orthodoxness of the Faith,
which is the bond of this Communion, this renders every distinct Church
professing this Faith, equally Catholic with the rest; and reduces the Church
of Rome, as well as others, within its own Suburbican Diocese, and so makes it
only a particular, not the Universal Church.

But now, should we allow the Church of Rome as great an extent as the
Vindicator speaks of, and that it were proper to understand by that name, all
those other Churches which are in Communion with her; yet all this would not
make her the whole or Catholic Church, unless it could be proved, that there
was no other Christian Church in the World besides those in Communion with her;
and that all Christian Churches have in all Ages professed just the same Faith,
and continued just in the same Worship as She has done. And this we conceive
will not easily be made out with reference to the Grecian, Armenian, Abassine
Churches; all which have plainly for several Ages differed from the Church of
Rome, and those in her Communion, in points relating both to Faith and Worship:
So that in respect of these and the like Christian Churches, which were not of
her Communion, She could not be looked upon as a Universal, but only as a
Particular Church.

Now if this be so, then the Vindicator himself allows, Vind. p. 102.
2dly, That a Particular Church, may either by Error lose, or by other means
prevaricate the Faith, even in the necessary points of it. Indeed that promise
of our Savior, Matt. 16.18.
That the gates of Hell should not prevail against his Church; seems on all
hands acknowledged, to refer to his whole Church, not to any one particular
Branch or Portion. And therefore, though the particular Church of Rome should
have fallen into gross Errors both in matters of Faith and Practice; yet the
Catholic Church of Christ may still, as to other of its members, retain so
much Truth and Purity, as to keep it from falling away, or being guilty of an
entire Infidelity. And then for the

3d. Exception, The allowing any other Particular Church to examine and judge of
the Decisions of this Church of Rome: If She her self be but a particular
Church, and has no more Command or Jurisdiction over the Faith of other
Churches, than they have over hers; then every other National Church is as much
impow'red to judge for her self, as She is, and has an equal right to examine
her Decisions, as those of other Churches; and may either receive, or reject
what by Gods Grace directing her, She Judges to agree or disagree with his Holy
Word. Nor does one Branch of Christ's Church in this respect invade the
Prerogative of another; since they do herein only follow the Apostles Rule, in
trying all things, and holding fast that which is good.

But the 4th Exception, he says, Vind. p. 102.
is yet more intolerable than all the rest: That it should be left to every
individual Person, not only to examine the Decisions of the whole Church, but
also to glory in opposing them, if he be but evidently convinced that his own
belief is founded upon the undoubted Authority of God's Holy Word. Ibid. p. 103.
This, he says, is a Doctrine, which if admitted, will maintain all Dissenters
that are, or can be from a Church, and establish as many Religions as there are
Persons in the World.

These indeed, are very ill Consequences, but such as do not directly follow
from this Doctrine as laid down in my Exposition. For 1st, I allow of this
Dissent or Opposition, only in necessary Articles of Faith, where it is every
Man's concern and duty, both to judge for himself, and to make as sound and
sincere a Judgment as he is able: And 2dly, As I take the Holy Scriptures for
the Rule, according to which this Judgment is to be made, so do I suppose these
Scriptures to be so clearly written, as to what concerns those necessary
Articles, that it can hardly happen that any one man, any serious and impartial
Enquirer, " should be found opposite to the whole Church in his Opinion.

Now these two things being supposed, that in matters of Faith, a man is to
judge for himself, and that the Scriptures are a clear and sufficient rule for
him to judge by; it will plainly follow, That if a man be evidently convinced,
upon the best Enquiry he can make, that his particular Belief is founded upon
the Word of God, and that of the Church is not; he is obliged to support and
adhere to his own belief in Opposition to that of the Church. And the Reason of
this must be very evident to all those who own, not the Church, but the
Scriptures, to be the ultimate rule and guide of their Faith. For if this be
so, then individual Persons, as well as Churches, must judge of their Faith,
according to what they find in Scripture. And tho it be highly useful to them,
to be assisted in the making of this Judgment by that Church, of which they are
Members; yet, if after this Instruction, they are still evidently convinced
that there is a disagreement in any necessary point of Faith, between the Voice
of the Church and that of the Scripture, they must stick to the latter rather
than the former, they must follow the superior, not inferior Guide.

And however this method may through the Ignorance or Malice of some men, be
liable to some Abuse; yet certainly, in the main, it is most Just and
Reasonable, and most agreeable to the Constitutions of the Church of England,
which does not take upon her to be Absolute Mistress of the Faith of her
Members, See Article 20.
but allows a higher Place and Authority to the guidance of the Holy Scripture,
than to that of her own Decisions.

As to the Authority, by which I backed this Assertion, viz. that of St.
Athanasius, though it is not doubted but that that Expression, of his being
against the whole World, and the whole World against him, did refer chiefly to
the Eastern Bishops; and was not so literally true as to those of the West;
yet, if we consider what compliances there were even of the Western Bishops, at
Ariminum and Sirmium, and how Pope Liberius himself, though he refused to
subscribe the form of Faith, sent to him from Ariminum, and was for that reason
deposed from his Bishopric, and banished out of Italy; yet afterward, when
the Emperor Constantius sent for him to Sirmium, and required his assent to a
form of Faith, in which the word (...), was purposely omitted, Sozomen Eccl.
Hist. lib. 4. cap. 15.
he yielded thus far, and was thereupon restored to his Bishopric; I say, if
we consider these and the like Particulars related by the Church Historians, we
shall have little reason to believe that the Western Bishops, or even the Pope
himself, did thoroughly adhere to the Faith of St. Athanasius; and therefore,
that neither was He or I much in the wrong, in affirming, That he stood up in
defense of Christ's Divinity, when the Pope, the Councils, and almost the whole
Church fell away.

ARTICLE XXVI. Of the Authority of the Holy See, and of Episcopacy.
IN this Article the Vindicator is pleased to declare that he has nothing to
say against the Opinion of the Church of England; Vindic. p. 106.
only he thinks fit to advise me to enquire, What that Authority is which the
Ancient Councils of the Primitive Church have acknowledged, and the holy
Fathers have always taught the faithful to give the Pope. Indeed, a very little
inquiry will serve the turn to let a man see, that their Pope does at this day,
lay claim to a great deal more than those Councils or Fathers did ever allow
him. And we should be glad he would direct us to those places, either in the
first Councils or the Primitive Fathers, where the Pope is styled the Universal
Bishop, or the Supreme Head on Earth of the whole Christian Church; where it is
said, That he is Christ's immediate Vicar; and that all other Bishops must
derive their Authority from him. These are things which he does now pretend to,
but we can find no Footsteps of them in the first Councils or Fathers of the
Church. On the contrary, we find innumerable passages which plainly show, that
no such Title or Authority was anciently claimed by, or allowed to the Bishop
of Rome: And therefore we say, That these new and groundless pretenses must be
laid aside, before we can be content to yield him that Honor, which has been
sometimes given to his Predecessors.

As to that new Question he has hookt in at the end of this Article, Vindic. p.
106.
Whether the first four General Councils might not be termed neither General
nor Free, with as much reason as the Council of Trent; I suppose it may easily
be answered in the Negative.

1st, It was not so General, because it was not called by so great and just an
Authority as those were: That was an Authority to which Christians of all
Places, and all Ranks, acknowledged themselves bound to submit, and attend
where they were summoned by it; whereas this was a mere Usurpation, and being
so, was not regarded by a great part of the Christian World, who were sensible
that they owed no Subjection to it.

2dly, It was not so Free, because those who had most to say in defense of the
Truth, durst not appear at Trent, being sufficiently forewarned by what others
had lately suffered in a like case at Constance: Add to this, That those who
being present, did set themselves most to oppose Error and Corruption, were
perpetually run down, and outvoted by Shoals of new made Bishops, sent out of
Italy for that purpose. So that such a Council as this, could not with any show
of Reason be termed, either Free or General, much less ought it to be compared
with those first four Councils, which were in all these Respects most opposite
to it.

CLOSE XXVII.
AND now, Vindic. p. 106.
that I have gone through the several Articles of the Vindication, and found
the Pretensions of this Author against me as false, as I think I have shown his
Arguments to have been frivolous; what shall I say more? Shall I complain of
his Injuries, or rather shall I yet again beseech him to consider the little
grounds he had for them; and see whether he has been able in any one Instance,
to make good that infamous Character, which he has told the World, I have
deserved in almost every Article of my Expoposition.

Have I Calumniated them in any thing? Have I Misrepresented their Doctrines? I
have already said, I do not know that I have; I think I may now add, I have
made it appear that I have not.

Where are the Insincere dealings, the Falsifications, the Authors Miscited, or
Misapplied? Excepting only an Error or two, that is the most, of the Press; has
he given any one Example of this? Some words now and then I omitted, because I
thought them impertinent, and was unwilling to burden a short Treatise with
tedious Citations. And I am still persuaded that they were not material, and
that he might as well have found fault with me for not Transcribing the whole
Books, from whence they were produced, as for leaving out those Passages which
he pretends ought to have been inserted. And for this, I appeal to the
foregoing Articles to be my Vindication.

But our Author has well observed That nothing can be so clearly expressed,
Vind. p. 120.
or so firmly established, let me add, or so kindly and charitably performed,
but that a person who intends to cavil, may either form a seeming Objection
against it, or wrest it into a different sense.

I never had the vanity to fancy my Exposition to be Infiallible, or that the
sight of an Imprimatur should make me pass for an Oracle. But yet I was willing
to hope, that amidst the late pretenses to Moderation, such a peaceable
Exposition of the Doctrine of the Church of England might at least have been
received with the same civility by them, as that of the Church of Rome was by
us; and that our new Methodists had not so wholly studied the palliating part
of their Master, as not to have learnt something of his fairness and civility
also.

This I had so much the greater reason to expect, for that it has been esteemed
not the least part of the artifice of Monsieur de Meaux, not only to mollify
the Errors of his Church; but to moderate that passion and heat that for the
most part occurs in the defenders of it: And by the temper and candidness of
his Style, insinuate into his Reader a good Opinion of his Doctrine.

But this is an Artifice that our late Controvertists seem resolved we shall
have no great cause to apprehend. Who therefore have not only wholly laid aside
the Modenation of this Prelate; but have in some of their last Pieces fallen
into such a vein of lightness and scurrility, as if their Zeal for their Church
had made them forget that Religion is the Subject, and Christians and Scholars,
to say no more of them, their Antagonists.

I am ashamed to say, what mean Reflections, and trivial Jestings make up
almost the sum of their latest attempts. The Papist Represented, which seemed
to promise something of seriousness and moderation, expiring in a FANATIC
Sermon; done indeed so naturally, as if the once Protestant Author had dropped
not out of the Church of England; but a Conventicle into Popery. His late
Majesty's Papers Answered with Reason, and (whatever is pretended) with respect
too by Us; instead of being Vindicated, ridiculed in the Reply: In which it is
hard to say, whether the Author has least shown his charity to us, or his
respect to the Persons and Church that he defends. These are the new Methods
that are now taken up; but sure such as neither Church I suppose will be very
well satisfied with: And which seem more accommodated to the Genius of those
Skeptics who divert themselves at the expense of All Religion on both sides,
than designed to satisfy the sober and conscientious of either.

It is not improbable but that some such ingenious Piece may in a little time
come forth against what I have now published; to call me a few ill names, pass
a droll or two upon the Cause, tell the World how many Sheets there were in my
Defense, and put the curious to another Shilling expense, Amicab'e
Accommodation.
as a late Author has very gravely observed. If this be the Case, I hope I
shall need no Apology to men of sense and sobriety, if I here end both their
trouble and my own together. Let those who have been always used to it, rally
on still with Holy things if they think good; for my part I esteem the
Salvation of men's Souls, and the Truth of Religion, to be a more serious
Subject than to be exposed to the levity of a Jest, and made the subject of a
Controversial Lampoon. And if an account shall hereafter be given for every
idle word that we now speak, I profess I cannot but tremble to think what shall
be the judgment of those men, who in the midst of such unhappy differences as
the Church now labors under; whilst our common Mother lies almost dissolved in
tears for the divisions of her Children, and her dutiful Sons on both sides are
praying and endeavoring with all their industry to close them; like an
unnatural offspring, divert themselves in the quarrel, find a harmony in her
groans, and make a droll of that, which had they indeed any true zeal for
Religion, they ought to wish rather they could with their dearest Blood be so
happy as to redress.

For what remains of the Vindication, Vindicat. p. 106, 107.
I shall say but very little to it. He enters upon his Conclusion with a
tragical harangue of the hardships they have suffered, both by, and ever since
our Reformation; and how well we deserve their Excommunication upon that
account. And it is no hard matter when men so well disposed, as this Author
seems to be, to speak evil of us, are to draw our Character, to make it appear
as odious and deformed as they desire.

Were I minded to recriminate, I need not tell those who are but very little
acquainted with the true History of these things, what a fair field I should
have for a requital. The corruptions of the Church when this Reformation begun;
the unchristian lives of those Religious Inhabitants that, he says, were turned
by us into the wide world; the Cheats and Ignorance of the Clergy; the Tricks
and Artifices of their Popes to prevent that Reformation, which many of their
own Party, no less than the Protestants, desired both in the Head and the
Members; And since he mentions Cruelties, the barbarous Butcheries executed on
the Reformed in Savoy, Bohemia, Germany, Ireland; and to say no more, the
proceedings at this day in one of our Neighbor Countries, whereof we have been
our selves Eyewitnesses, and of which, the noble Charity of our Royal
Sovereign toward these poor distressed Christians, See the words of His
Majesty's Brief.
notwithstanding all the vain endeavors of some to hide it, suffers no honest
Englishman now to doubt; All these would furnish out matter enough for a Reply,
and satisfy the World, that were the Reformed as bad as Hell it self could
represent them, the Romanists yet would of all men living have the least cause
to complain of them.

But I desire not to heighten those Animosities, which I so heartily wish were
closed; and would rather such things as these might on all hands be buried in
eternal oblivion, than brought forth to prevent that Union, we had never more
cause to hope for than at this time. And for our Laws which, he says, have been
made against them, he knows well enough what occasion was given to Queen
Elizabeth and King James the 1st to establish them; and I shall rather refer
him to the Sea that and a Vindication of it by the Secular Priests An. 1601.
published with some other pieces in a Collection, called, The Jesuits Loyalty.
4to.
Answer which my Lord Burleigh made above 100 years since to this complaint,
than take the opportunity, he has so fairly given me, to revive the Reasons.

As for those injuries he tells us that Perjury and Faction loaded them with;
Vindicat. p. 111.
we are not concerned in them. It is well known that the Church of England was
no less, if not more, struck at in those times than themselves: If their
present change of fortune makes them indeed neither remember those injuries,
nor desire to revenge them, it shows only that the favor of Providence has not
made them forgetful of their duty; nor their present prosperity unmindful of
their future Interest. This is not our concern, who have never that we know of
injured them, unless to take all fair and lawful ways to defend our Religion as
by Law established, may possibly, in some men's apprehensions, be esteemed an
injury.

The peace and liberty which we enjoy, we do not ascribe to their Civility; it
is Gods Providence and our Sovereign's bounty, whom the Church of England has
ever so Loyally served; whose Rights She asserted in the worst of times, when
to use our Authors own words, Perjury and Faction for this very cause, loaded
her with all the injuries Hell it self could invent. But we gloried to suffer
for our duty to Him then, and shall not fail, should there ever be occasion, to
do it again. And we have this testimony from our King, which no time or malice
shall be able to obliterate, That the Church of England is by principle a
Friend to Monarchy, and I think cannot be charged to have ever been defective
in any thing that might serve to strengthen and support it.

For what remains with reference to the Points in Controversy, the foregoing
Articles are but one continued confutation of his vain pretenses: And I shall
only add this more to them, that whenever he will undertake to make good any
one thing that he has advanced against us, either in his Book or Conclusion; I
will not fail to prove what I now affirm, That there is not a word of truth in
either of them.

In the mean time, before I close this, I cannot but take notice, how much the
state of our controversy with these men has of late been changed; and what
hopes we are willing to conceive from thence, as to the sober part of their
Communion, that those Errors shall in time be reformed, which they already seem
not only to have discovered, but to be ashamed of.

When our Fathers disputed against Popery, the Question then was, Whether it
were lawful to Worship Images; to Invocate Saints; to Adore Relics; to depend
upon our own Merits for Salvation; and satisfy for the pain of our own Sins.
This was their task; and they abundantly discharged it, in proving these things
to be unlawful, contrary to our duty toward God, and to the Authority of Holy
Scripture.

But now in these our days, there is started up a new Generation of men, too
wise to be imposed upon with those illusions, that in blind and barbarous Ages
had led the Church into so much Error and Superstition. These see too clearly,
that such things as these must, if possible, be denied, for that they cannot be
maintained. And they have accordingly undertaken it as the easier task, by
subtle distinctions, and palliating expressions, to wrest the definitions of
their Councils to such a sense as may serve the best to protect them from these
Errors; rather than to go on in vain with their Predecessors, to draw the
Scripture and Fathers into the Party to defend them.

And that it may not be said I speak this at all adventures, I will beg leave
in a short recapitulation of what is largely proved in the foregoing Articles,
to offer a general view of it.

Of Religious Worship.
Old Popery. New Popery. IT IS a wicked and foolish Error of the Lutherans and
Calvinists, to attribute Impius and Imperitus Lutheranorum and Calvinistarum
Error est, nullum nisi Deo Religionis honorem tribuentium. Maldonat in Matt.
5.34. page 126. B. Index Expurgat. in Athanas. Adorari solius Dei est; Creatura
nulla Adoranda est. Dele. page 52.
Religious honor ONLY to God. And therefore such Sentences as these, That God
only is to be adored: That no creature is to be adored, must be put into the
Index Expurgatorius, to be blotted out of S. Athanasius and other Authors in
which they do occurr. REligious honor or worship if taken strictly and
properly is due only to God: Soli Deo honor and gloria. We ought not to deprive
God of any thing that is due to him alone; neither honor, nor worship, nor
prayer, nor thanksgiving, nor sacrifice. We may honor those whom God has
honored; but so as not to elevate them above the state of creatures. And this
may be called a Religious love or honor, when it is done for God's sake, yet
it is but an Extrinsecal Denomination from the cause and motive, not from the
nature of the Act. Vind. p. 27, 28.

Invocation of Saints.
Old Popery. New Popery. Speaking of S. Bernard, he concludes, C'est de
cettegrande Verite qu'il conclut que nous sommes obligez indispensablement de
l'honorer and de la prier; Quia sic est Voluntas dei, qui Totum nos habere
voluit per Mariam. Il veut que Nous ayons par Marie la Grace and la Gloire: And
p. 33. Il veut que tous les hommes soient sauvez par les merits du fills and
par l'intercession de la Mere; d'autant que Dieu a resolu de ne nous fair
aucune Grace qui ne pass par les maines de Marie. Comme on ne peut estre sauve
sans Grace, il faut dire qu'on ne le peut estre que par Marie, qui est le canal
de toutes les Graces qui descendent du Ciel en Terre.
IT is necessary to pray to the Blessed Virgin. It is the intention of God that
we should obtain both Grace and Glory by her: That all men might be saved by
the Merits of the Son, and the Intercession of the Mother. Crasset. p. 30, 31.
Mandat S Synodus omnibus Episcopis, and caeteris docendi munus curamque
sustinentibus, ut -- de Sanctorum -- Invocatione fideles diligenter instruant;
Docentes eos, Sanctos una cum Christo Regnantes Orationes suas pro Hominibus
Deo offerre; Bonum atq, Vtile esse suppliciter eos invocare; and ob beneficia
impetranda a Deo per filium ejus Jesum Christum, ad eorum Orationes, Opem,
Auxiliumque confugere. p. 291, 292.
The Curates therefore shall diligently instruct the people, That the Saints
who reign togegether with Christ, do offer to God their Prayers for Men: good
and profitable in a suppliant manner to invocate them; and recur to their
Prayers, Help, and Assistance, for the obtaining Blessing of God by his Son.

Council. Trid. Sess 25. c. de Invocatione, etc. ss.

Upon this account in all their public service of the Church they address
their Prayers to them, after the same manner that they do to Christ, together
with whom, the Council says, So that if it is necessary to go to Church, it is
necessary to pray to them. They confess their Sins to them; Ord. Commend.
Animae. p. 120.
they dismiss departing Souls out of this World in their Names; they make
direct Addresses to them as the Council speaks, not only for their Prayers, but
also for their Help and Assistance; Merits to be heard by God; and that he
would accept their Sacrifices themselves for the sake of the Saints they
Commemorate; 3d Article of this Treatise is fully to be seen.

FOr Invocation of Saints, lawful to pray to them; Vind. p. 30. That we do it
in the same spirit of Charity, and in the same order of brotherly society with
which we entreat our Friends on Earth to Pray for us.

Monsieur de Meaux, p. 5.

If we mention their Merits, it is only those Victories they had obtained by his
favors, which we beseech him to look upon, and not regard our unworthiness.
Vind. ib.

As to the recommending our Sacrifices to God by their Prayers, as if Christ
who is the Sacrifice, needed any other to recommend him to his Father, we
detest such Thoughts, we abominate such Doctrines.

Vinicat. p. 30.



Worship of Images.
Old Popery. New Popery. Imagines Christi and Sanctorum venerandae sunt non
solum per accidens vel improprie, sed etiam per se and proprie; Ita ut ipsae
terminent Venerationem ut in se consider antur, and non solum ut vicem gerunt
Exemplaris.
THE Images of Christ and the Saints, are to be venerated, not only by accident
and improperly, but properly and by themselves, so as to terminate the Worship
upon them, and that as considered in themselves, and upon their own account,
not only as they are the Representatives of the Original, Bellarin. de Imag. l.
2. p. 2148.

Pont. Romans p. 205. See above, p. 15, 16, 17.
The Wood of the Cross is to be Adored with Divine Adoration; and upon this
account, if the Popes Legate at any time conduct the Emperor into any City, his
Cross must take place of the Emperor's Sword; Because a Divine Worship is due
to it, Pontific. See above, art 4. p. 15.

Missal. Romans feria VI. in Parascev. p. 247.
This Adoration is properly to the Cross, as is evident, in that the Church
invites the People on Good Friday to Adore it; and in its Hymns distinguishes
the Cross from Christ, and addresses to the Cross, as such. See Article 4.
above, ib.

Pontificale de Benedictione no^^ (...)
The Church of Rome in praying to God, that several Virtues may proceed from
the Cross, show it to be their Opinion, that it has other Virtues, than barely
to excite the remembrance of those they represent.

See above in the Consecration of a new Cross. Art. 4. p. 16, 17.

Pictures or Images, is purely as representatives, or memorative Signs, which
call the Originals to our Remembrance.

Vindicat. p. 35.

When the Church pays an Honor to the Image of an Apostle or Martyr, Image, as
to honor the Apostle or Martyr in the presence of the Image. Expos. M. de M.
p. 8.

any other Virtue, but that of exciting in us the remembrance of those they
represent. Id. p. 8. Vind. p. 31.

The Honor we render them, is grounded upon this, that the very seeing of
Jesus Christ crucified, cannot but excite in us a more lively Remembrance of
him, who died upon the Cross for our Redemption: Now whilst this Image before
our Eyes, causes this precious Remembrance in our Souls, we are naturally moved
to testify by some exterior Signs, how far our Gratitude bears us; exterior
Signs are not paid to the Image, but to Jesus Christ represented by that Image.
Vindicat. ib. p. 31.

Mons. de Meaux Expos. p. 8, 9.



Of Relics.
Old Popery. New Popery. Thom. 3. par. qu. 25. Art. 6. p. 54. See above p. 22,
23.
SEeing we Adore the Saints of God, we must also Adore their Relics. Thomas.

This is an undoubted truth amongst Catholics, That the Relics of the
Saints, Vasquez in 3 part. D. Tho. disp. 112. p. 808.
whether they be any parts of them, as Bones, Flesh, Ashes, or some other
things that have touched them, or belonged to them, are to be adored.

Vasques, See above, Art. 4. p. 50.

Ita ut affirmantes Sanctorum Reliquiis Venerationem atque Honorem non deberi,
vel eas aliaque sacra Monumenta a fidelibus inutilitier honorari, atque eorum
opis impetrandae causa, Sanctorum memorias frustra frequentari, omnino damnandi
sunt, p. 292, 293.
Those are to be condemned, who assirm that no Worship or Honor is due to the
Relics of Saints; or that those sacred Monuments are unprofitably revered by
the Faithful; or that for obtaining their Help, men ought not to frequent the
Memories of the Saints. Council. Trid. Sess. 25. c. de Invocat. etc.

WE honor Relics as we do Images, for those whom they belonged to. Vind. p.
40.

Respect and Honor, p. 43. Vind. but it is not Worship, Ib. p. 42.

Aid and Assistance, to cure the Blind, etc. and are therefore falsely charged
with so doing, Vind. p. 41.



Of Justification.
Old Popery. New Popery. Conc. Trid. Sess. 6. Cap. 7. p. 31.
BY Justification is to be understood, not only Remission of Sins, but
Sanctification, and renewing of the inward Man.

Council. Trid.

If any one shall say that men are Justified, either by the alone Imputation of
Christ's Righteousness, or only by the Remission of Sins, excluding Grace and
Charity, which is diffused in our hearts by the Holy Ghost, and inheres in
them; or that the Grace by which we are Justified is only the Favor of God,
Let him be Anathema.

Council. Trid. ib. See above, Art. 5. p. 53.

See above, Art. 5. p. 27.
If any one shall affirm the works of a justified man to be so the gifts of
God, that they are not also the good merits of the justified man himself; or
that he being justified by the good Works which are performed by him, through
the Grace of God, and Merit of Jesus Christ, whose living Member he is, does
not truly merit increase of Grace and Eternal Life; let him be Anathema. Conc.
Trid. Sess. 6. c. 32.

THey impose upon us who say that we make our inward righteousness a part of
Justification; Justification it self is also wrought by our good Works.

Vind. p. 47.



Of Merits.
Old Popery. New Popery. WE do as truly and properly, Maldonat. in Ezekiel. 18,
20. p. 425.
when we do well by Gods Grace merit Rewards, as we do deserve Punishment, when
without his Grace, we do ill. Maldonat.

The Works of just Persons, Bellarmin. de Justificatione lib. 5. cap. 17.
truly equal to the Reward of Eternal Life; as the Work of those who labored
in the Vineyard to the penny which they earned: And God by his Covenant is bound
to accept it for the reward of Eternal Life. This is the Doctrine of the
Council of Trent. Bellarmin. see art. 6. above.

They, Vasquez in D. Th. 12ae. q. 114. disp. 214. p. 800.
therefore, are to be condemned who think our Works of themselves, not to be
worthy of Eternal Life, but to have the whole nature of Merit that is in them,
from the Covenant and Promise of God. This was the Opinion of Scotus, condemned
above Art. 7. p. 31, 31.

Christ indeed, Vasquez ibid. p. 917. etc.
first obtained Grace for us, whereby we might be enabled to work out our own
Salvation; but this being done, we have no more need of Christ's Merits to
supply our defects: But our own good Works are of themselves sufficient to
Salvation, without any Imputation of his righteousness.

Vasquez, See above l. c.

ETernal Life ought to be proposed to the Children of God, as a Grace that is
mercifully promised to them, by the Medition of our Lord Jesus Christ; and a
recompense that is faithfully rendered to their good Works, and Merits,

Expos. M. de M. p. 11.

We ask all things, we hope all things, we render thanks for all things,
through our Lord Jesus Christ, we confess that we are not acceptable to God.,
but in and by him. Ib. p. 12.



Of Satisfactions.
Old Popery. New Popery. TO this Question whether our Works are to be called
truly and properly Satisfactory? Bellarm. de Poenit. lib. 4. cap. 7.
Bellarmin replies, That they are; so that we may be said truly and properly to
satisfy the Lord.

See above, Art. 7.

Bellarm. lib. 1. de Purgat. cap. 10.
It is immediately our Satisfaction, and Christ's only, in as much as we receive
Grace from him, whereby we our selves may be able to satisfy.

Id. ib. Art. 7.

As to mortal Sins, Vasquez in 3 part disp. 2. See above, Art. 7.
Gods Grace being supposed to be given to us in Christ, Vasquez declares, We do
truly satisfy God for our Sins and Offenses. As for venial Sins, we do so
satisfy, as not to need any Grace or Favor of God to forgive our Sins, or
accept our Satisfaction; but our Satisfaction is such, as does in its own
nature blot out both the stain and punishment of Sin. Vasquez above, l.c.

Quidam asserunt, Nos proprie non satisfacere, sed solum facere aliquid cujus
intuitu Deus applicat nobis Christi Satisfactionem: Quae sententia erronea mihi
videtur. Bellarm. de Purg. l. 1. c. 10. p. 1899. A. B.
There are some who say, That we do not properly satisfy, but do somewhat for
the sake of which God applies to us Christ's Satisfaction; This Opinion seems to
me to be Erroneous. Bellarm.

true and proper Satisfaction to God for Sin.

Vindicat. p. 54, 55.

That which we call Satisfaction, but the Application of the infinite
Satisfaction of Jesus Christ.

M. de M. Expos. p. 15.



Of Indulgences.
Old Popery. New Popery. THere being in all Sins a temporal Punishment to be
undergone after the Eternal, Bellarm. de Indulgentiis lib. 1. cap. 1. p. 3.
by the Sacrament of Penance, is remitted; We call Indulgence the Remission of
those Punishments that remain to be undergone after the forgiveness of the
Fault, and Reconciliation obtained by the Sacrament of Penance.

The Foundation of these Indulgences, Ibid. cap. 2.
is the Treasure of the Church, consisting partly of the Merits of Christ, and
partly of the superabundant Sufferings of the Blessed Virgin and the Saints,
who have suffered more than their Sins required.

The Pastors of the Church have obtained from God the power of granting
Indulgences, Ibid. c. 3. p. 19, 27.
and dispensing of the Merits of Christ, and the Saints, for this end, out of
the Sacraments.

The Punishments remitted by these Indulgences, Ibid. c. 7. p. 47.
are all those which are, or might have been enjoined for Sins; and that
whether the Persons be alive or dead.

WE believe there is a Power in the Church of granting Indulgences; which
concern not at all the Remission of Sins, either Mortal or Venial, but only of
some temporal Punishments remaining due after the guilt is remitted. So that
they are nothing else but a Mitigation, or Relaxation, upon just Causes of
Canonical Penances, which are, or may be enjoined by the Pastors of the Church,
on Penitent Sinners, according to their several degrees of demerit.

Papist Represent, n. viii. p. 10. M. de M. Expos. 8. p. 14.



Of the Mass.
Old Popery. New Popery. THe Council. Trid. Sess. 22. Can. 1. and 3. p. 196. and
ibid. c. 2. p. 191.
Mass is a true and proper Sacrifice: A Sacrifice not only Commemoratory of
that of the Cross, but also truly and properly propitiatory for the dead and
the living. Conc. Trent. Art. 16.

Verum and reale Sacrificium. veram and realem mortem aut destructionem rei
immolatae desiderat. Bell. de Missa l. 1. c. 27. p. 1062. C. Vel in Missa fit
vera and realis Christi mactatio, and occisio, vel non fit: Si non fit, non est
verum and reale Sacrificum Missa: Sacrificium enim verum and reale, veram and
realem occisionem exigit, quando in occisione ponitur essentia Sacrificii.
1063. A. And again, Per consecrationem res quae offertur, ad veram, realem, and
externam mutationem and destructionem ordinatur, quod erat necessarium ad
rationem Sacrificii. ib. l. D. Sect. Tertio.
Every true and real Sacrifice requires a true and real Death or Destruction of
the thing sacrificed: So that if in the Mass there be not a true and real
Destruction, on, there is not a true and real Sacrifice.

Bellarmin.

To offer up Christ then in the Eucharist, is not only to present him before
God on the Altar, but really and truly to Sacrifice, i. e. destroy him.

Bellarmin.

Sacrifice of the Mass was instituted only to represent that which was
accomplished on the Cross, to perpetuate the memory of it to the end of the
World, and apply to us the saving Virtue of it, for those Sins which we commit
every day.

Vindicat. page 95.

When we say, That Christ is offered in the Mass, we do not understand the word
Offer in the strictest Sense, but as we are said to Offer to God what we
present before him. And thus the Church does not doubt to say, That She offers
up our Blessed Jesus to his Father in the Eucharist, in which he vouchsafes to
render him himself present before him.

Vindicat. ibid. p. 96.



Of the Popes Authority.
Old Popery. New Popery. WE acknowledge the Holy Catholic, and Roman Church, to
be the Mother and Mistress of all Churches; and we Promise and Swear to the
Bishop of Rome, Successor of St. Peter, Prince of the Apostles, and Vicar of
Jesus Christ, a true Obedience.

Council. Trid. Jur. Pii 4ti p. xliv. in fine.

The Pope has Power to depose Princes, Si dominus temporatis requisitus and
monitus ab Ecclesia, terram suam purgare neglexerit, ab Haeretica foeditate.
Excommunicationis Vinculo innodetur Et si satisfacere contempserit infra annum,
significetur hoc summo Pontifici, ut ex tunc, Ipse Vassallos ab ejus fidelitate
denuntiet absolutos, and terram exponat Catholicis occupandam. -- Salvo jure
Domini Principalis, dummodo super hoc ipse nullum praestet obstaculum, nec
aliquod impedimentum opponat: Eadem nihil ominus lege servata circa EOS qui NON
HABENT DOMINOS PRINCIPALES.
and absolve Subjects from their Allegiance: So the Council of Lateran: If the
Temporal Lord shall neglect to purge his Land of Heresy, let him be
Excommunicated; and if within a year he refuses to make satisfaction to the
Church, let it be signified to the Pope, that from thenceforth, He may declare
his Vassals absolved from their Allegiance; and expose his Land to be seized by
Catholics -- yet so as not to injure the right of the Principal Lord. Provided
that he puts no stop or hindrance to this: And the same Law is to be observed
with reference to those who have no Principal Lords.

Council. Later. 4. Can. 3. de Haeret. p. 147.

This is no Scholastic Tenet, but the Canon of a Council received by the
Church of Rome as General.

WE acknowledge that Primacy which Christ gave to St. Peter, in his Successors;
to whom, for this cause, we owe that Obedience and Submission, which the holy
Councils and Fathers have always taught the faithful.

As for those things which we know are disputed of in the Schools, it is not
necessary we speak of them here, seeing they are not Articles of the Catholic
Faith.

It is sufficient we acknowledge a Head Established by God to conduct his whole
Flock in his Paths, which those who love Concord amongst Brethren, and
Ecclesiastical Unanimity, will most willingly acknowledge.

Expos. Monsieur de Meaux. p. 40.



Such is the difference of the present Controversies between us from what they
were, when it pleased God to discover to our Fathers the Errors they had so
long been involved in. Were I minded to show the division yet greater, there
want not Authors among them, and those approved ones too, from whence to
collect more desperate Conclusions in most of these Points, than any I have now
remarked. And the Practice and Opinion of the people, in those Countries where
these Errors still prevail, is yet more Extravagant than any thing that either
the One or Other have written.

What now remains, but that I earnestly beseech all sober and unprejudiced
Persons of that Communion, seriously to weigh these things; And consider what
just reason we had to quit those Errors, which even their own Teachers are
ashamed to confess, and yet cannot honestly disavow.

It has been the great business of these new Methodists for some years past, to
draw over ignorant men to the Church of Rome, by pretending to them that their
Doctrines are by no means such as they are commonly mis-apprehended to be. This
is popular, and may I believe have prevailed with some weak persons to their
seduction; though we know well enough that all those abroad who pretend to be
Monsieur de Meaux's Proselytes were not so upon the conviction of his Book, but
for the advantages of the Change, and the Patronage of his Person and Authority.

But surely would men seriously weigh this Method, there could be nothing more
strong for our Reformation than this one thing, That the wisest and best men of
the Roman Church esteem it the greatest honor and advantage they can do to
their Religion, to represent it as like ours as is possible; and that their
strongest argument to make Proselytes is this, That were things but rightly
understood, there is but very little or no difference at all betwixt us.

And would to God indeed this were truly so! that these differences were not
only as small as they pretend, but wholly taken away: With what joy should we
embrace the happy return of so many of our lost Brethren into the Arms of their
Mother? How should we go forth with the highest transports to welcome them into
our Communion? And celebrate the joyful festival on Earth, which would create
an Exultation even among the blessed Angels and Saints in Heaven.

And why shall we not hope that this in time shall be the issue? The good work
is already begun; The Errors are many of them discovered, and, what is more,
disavow'd: And wherefore should we then distrust the Mercy of Heaven to hear
our Prayers, which we never make with more real zeal and fervor than in their
behalf; to show them the Truth, and open their Eyes to a perfect Conviction?

Till this be accomplished, Let us, who by God's Grace are already Members of
the Church of England, that is, of the best reformed, and best established
Church in the Christian World, so seriously weigh these things, as not only to
stand steadfast in that Faith which has been delivered to us, but to use our
utmost endeavors to convince others also of the Excellence of it.

Let not any fond pretenses of Antiquity or Possession amuse us. Vindic. p.
112, etc.
Against God and Truth there lies no prescription; nor ought we to be at all
concerned to forsake Errors, though never so Ancient, for more Ancient Truths.

Let no prospect or temptation, whether of worldly evils on the one hand, or
worldly advantages on the other, draw us from our stedfastness. 1 Cor. 10.13.
God is faithful who will not suffer us to be tempted above what we are able:
Matt. 10.33.
And he who for any of these things denies Christ or his Religion on Earth,
shall be denied by Christ before his Father which is in Heaven.

But let us be firm and sincere to God and our own Souls; careful to search
out, and ready to embrace the Truth wherever we find it. So shall our lives be
Orthodox, though perhaps our faith should not; and if in any thing we do err, for
we pretend not to Infallibility, nor is it therefore impossible for us to be
mistaken, yet at least we shall not be HERETICS.

FINIS.
APPENDIX Containing a COLLECTION Of the following PIECES.

I. The Extract of a Letter written from Paris concerning Monsieur de Meaux's
Pastoral Letter. II. An Extract of Father Crasset 's Doctrine concerning the
Worship which the Roman Church allows to the Blessed Virgin. III. Cardinal Bona
's Exposition, and Practice of the same. IV. Monsieur Imbert 's Letter to
Monsieur de Meaux, proving that his Persecution was truly for maintaining the
Doctrine of that Bishop's Exposition. V. The Epistle of St. Chrysostom to
Caesarius, suppressed by some of the Doctors of the Sorbonne, for being
contrary to the Roman Canon of Transubstantiation. VI. A Catalogue of the
Editions made use of by me in my Quotations, to prevent, if it may be, all
future Calumnies.
LONDON, Printed MDCLXXXVI.

ADVERTISEMENT.
THE following Pieces have so near a relation to the present Controversy, and
are in themselves of so great a Moment, that if their length denied them a
place in the Work it self, their Importance has made it necessary not to omit
them here. I have prefixed to every one of them such particular Accounts as may
serve to satisfy the Reader's Curiosity concerning them; and shall, I hope, be
a sufficient Apology for me, that I have so largely insisted upon them.

APPENDIX.
NUMBER. I. The Extract of a Letter written from Paris concerning Monsieur de
Meaux 's Pastoral Letter.
TO show that Monsieur de Meaux does not always so write at first, as not to
stand in need of any Correction afterward, I will beg leave to subjoyn the
Extract of a Letter dated from Paris, concerning his late Pastoral Letter;
which, it is there said, he is about to change somewhat in; whether only for the
better advantage of the Method, and greater neatness of Style (as in his
Exposition) we shall be better able hereafter to judge.

It is in the last Nouvelle Juin 1686. Page 736, 737.

ON ecrit de Paris, que M. de Meaux retranchera de la 2 Edition de sa Lettre
Pastorale l'endroit ou il dit aux nouveaux Catholics de son Dioceze, Qu' ils
n'ont point souffert de Violence en leurs Biens, ni en leurs Persons, and
qu'il a oui dire la meme chose aux autres Eveques.

Je ne scaurois dire precisement si ce sont ces propres mots, car je n'ay point
veu cette Lettre Pastorale, je scai seulement que c'est ce qu'on ecrit de Paris.

Ce Prelat a eu en vue dans sa Lettre, de preparer a la Communion Paschale ces
nouveaux Diocezains. Je ne scai pas ce qu'ils ont fait, mais ailleurs quand on
a presenti les Convertis, on leur a trouve si peu de disposition a communier a
Paques, qu'on n'a pas juge a propos de pousser l'affair.

Dans la dernier Fete-Dieu plusieurs ont mieux aim payer une Amend, que de
tender devant leurs Maisons.

Apres cela, il est apparent que M. de Meaux retranchera l'endroit cidessus
marque, and que les Gens d'honneur se plaindront in petto de ce qu'on se tue de
leur soutenir, que les Huguenots ont sign le Formulaire le plus volontairement
du monde. Bien entendu, que ces gens d'honneur n'auront pas le tour d'Esprit
and de Conscience, du quel nous avons parle ci-dessus, page 471.

They write from Paris, that Monsieur de Meaux will retrench in the second
Edition of his Pastoral Letter the place where he tells the new Converts of his
Diocese, That they have not suffered any Violence either in their Goods, or in
their Persons, and that he heard the other Bishops say the same.

I cannot say precisely whether these were his very words, having neber seen
his Pastoral Letter, I only know this, that thus they write from Paris.

The design of this Prelate in his Letter, was to prepare his new Diocesans to
communicate at Easter. What they did, I cannot tell, but in other parts when
they presented the Converts in order to receive it, they found them so little
disposed to communicate at Easter, that they have not thought fit to force them
to it.

Upon Corpus Christi day last, many of them chose rather to pay a Fine, than
put up Hangings before their houses for the Procession.

After this, it is more than probable that M. de Meaux will strike out the
passage abovementioned, and that men of sense will complain in their minds to
be thus eternally wearied with their pretenses, that the Hugonots have signed
the Formulary with all the readiness in the world. Always provided, that these
men of sense be not endowed with that turn of Wit and Conscience, of which we
have spoken heretofore, page 471. above.

NUMBER. II. An Extract of Father Crasset 's Doctrine concerning the Worship which
the Roman Church allows to the Blessed Virgin.
MOnsieur de Meaux is very much of opinion, that Father Crasset has nothing in
his Book contrary to the Principles of his Exposition. I must transcribe his
whole Book, would I insist upon every thing in it opposite to this Pretense:
But I shall content my self for the present to propose only to Monsieur de
Meaux some of this Fathers Questions; that he may please to tell us whether he
be indeed of the same Opinion with the Father in them. 'Twill be an admirable
Vindication of his Exposition, and we shall not doubt, after that, of its being
a true Representation of the Doctrine of the Roman Church.

Question 1. Whether the Intercession of the Blessed Virgin to God for us, Page
31.
be not only profitable, but necessary to our Salvation?

Resp. 1 Pt. trait. 1. q. 4.
I do not find the Father positive in his assertion here, but at least he
recounts abundance of their Saints that are so: St. Germain, St. Anselme, St.
Bernard, the Abbe de Celles, St. Antonine, and St. Bernardine; whose horrid
Blasphemies see at large repeated and approved.

Qu. 2. Whether a tender and constant Devotion toward the Blessed Virgin, Page
39.
be not a mark of Predestination?

ANSWER. This is what we read in all Books; hear from all Pulpits: There are
but few Catholics but what are of this Opinion, and that this Devotion toward
the Mother of God, is a mark of Salvation, the good Father undertakes to prove
by the Authority of the Scripture, Page 39, 40.
explained by the Fathers, and confirmed by Reason.

Qu. 3. Whether a Christian that is devout toward the Blessed Virgin can be
damned? Page 54.


ANSWER 1. Page 57.
The Servants of the Blessed Virgin have an Assurance, morally infallible, that
they shall be saved.

Qu. 4. Whether God ever refuses any thing to the Blessed Virgin? Ibid.


ANSWER 1. Page 60, 61.
The Prayers of a Mother so humble and respectful, are esteemed a Command by a
Son so sweet and so obedient. 2. Being truly our Savior's Mother as well in
Heaven as she was on Earth, she still retains a kind of natural Authority over
his PERSON, over his GOODS, and over his OMNIPOTENCE: So that as Albertus
Magnus says, she cannot only entreat him for the Salvation of her Servants, but
by her MOTHERLY AUTHORITY can COMMAND him; and as another expresses it, The
Power of the Mother and of the Son is all one, she being by her Omnipotent Son,
made HER SELF OMNIPOTENT.

Qu. 5. What Blessings the Virgin procures for her Servants. Page 91.


ANSWER 1. Page 92.
She preserves them from Error and Heresy, if they are in danger to fall into
it; and recovers them out of it, if they are fallen. 2. Page 98.
She defends and protects them in their Temptations against their Enemy; and
this not only Men, but other Creatures; insomuch that a Bird which a young Lady
had taught to say his Ave Maria, being one day seized by a Hawk, whilst he was
in his Claws, said only his Ave Maria, and the Hawk terrified with the
Salutation, let him go, and so he returned to his Mistress. Page 94.
3. She comforts them in their Distresses, assists them in their Dangers,
counsels them in their Doubts, Ib. 95.
eases them in their Pains, animates them in their Combats, and finally,
procures them a good Death. To this end, 4. She gives them a timely
foreknowledge of their Death, Ib. 96.
that they be not surprised. She sends the Angels to assist them in it, and
sometimes comes her own self in Person. Ib. 97.
5. She obtains them the Grace of Repentance if they are in Sin, and of
Perseverance, Page 98.
if they be in a State of Grace.

Qu. 6. Whether the Blessed Virgin has ever fetched any out of Hell. Page 99.


ANSWER 1. As to Purgatory, it is certain that the Virgin has brought several
Souls from thence, as well as refreshed them whilst they were there. 2. Page
100.
It Is certain she has fetched many out of Hell, i. e. from a State of Damnation
before they were dead. 3. The Virgin can, and has fetched men that were dead in
mortal Sin out of Hell, by restoring them to Life again, that they might
repent; Page 102.
which the Father proves at large, for the Establishment of our FAITH and of
our HOPE.

Qu. 7. What Honor ought we to render to the Blessed Virgin? 2 Part. Page 73.


ANSWER. Page 79.
We ought to render to her a Religious Honor. 2. To honor her Images also
with a Religious Honor, as sacred things; and this the many Miracles done by
them do require. 3. To build Temples to her, Page 92.
which many grave Authors do assure us was done, before her Birth, Page 99.
during her Life, and since her Death and Coronation in Heaven.

Qu. 8. Whether it be good to make Vows and Pilgrimages to the Honor of the
Virgin? Page 138.


ANSWER. It is good to make Vows, and undertake Pilgrimages to the places where
she is specially honored. Ibid.


The Practice of Devotion toward Her.

1. To wear her Scapulary: which whosoever does, Page 315.
shall not be damned, but this Habit shall be for them a Mark of Salvation, a
Safeguard in Dangers, and a Sign of Peace and eternal Alliance.

They that wear this Habit, Page 316.
shall be moreover delivered out of Purgatory the Saturday after their death.

2. To enter into her Congregations. Page 321.


And if any man be minded to save himself, it is impossible for him to find out
any more advantageous means, than to enrol himself into these Companies. Page
322.


3. To devote ones self more immediately to Her Service: Page 339.
For which the Father gives several very grave Forms. Ib. and seq.

These are some of the Heads of Father Crasset's Book. It were infinite to
recount his particular Follies, with which every Page and Sentence is crowded.
And however Monsieur de Meaux is pleased at a Venture to espouse all this, yet
I must still beg leave to believe, that he neither approves this Practice, nor
will receive these Principles. And these things, not only Monsieur de la B --
in his Answer, but the Author of the Preservative at large alleged against
him; which being a Book so well known in France, and mentioned to Monsieur de
Meaux in a particular manner by In his Letter below N. 4.
Monsieur Imbert in his Letter to him, and having caused such Contests between
Reflections sur le Preservatif, etc.
Monsieur Arnauld and the Le Janseniste convaincu de vairie Sophistiquerie.
Artiele 7. page 72. etc.
Vindicator of the Preservative, upon this very account, still increases my
Wonder, that for all this, Monsieur de Meaux should never hear there was any
thing in this Book of Father Crasset's, contrary to his Exposition, nor believe
the Father to be of any Opinion repugnant to his Principles therein established.

The Reader may please to remember, that this Book of Father Crasset's was
licensed by the Provincial, approved by the Fathers of the Society, permitted,
and privileged by the King, and printed by the Archbishop of Paris's Printer,
1679.

NUMBER. III. Cardinal BONA's Doctrine and Practice of this Worship.
IN my Preface to my former Treatise, to show with how little Sincerity many
times those of the Church of Rome will approve Books, whose Principles they
dislike; I observed that Cardinal Capisucchi had in his Controversies plainly
contradicted, in the point of worshipping Images, what he approved in Monsieur
de Meaux's Exposition. This, Monsieur de Meaux says, cannot be, for this
admirable Reason, qu'on trouvera son approbation express parmi celles que j'ai
rapportees; that his express Approbation has been given to his Book.

I have already said what I thought sufficient to the Consequence of this
Answer: But now to satisfy the Reader that Cardinal Capisucchi is not the only
Person that has thus complemented Monsieur de Meaux contrary to his own
Principles and Conscience, I will here offer another plain Instance in M. de
Meaux's learned and holy Cardinal BONA, Avertissement de l'5 Edit. Francoise,
12mo. Paris 1681. page 21.
whose memory, he says, shall be for ever blessed in the Church. This learned
Cardinal was desired by Card. Buillon to examine the Exposition with all
rigor, because that some persons accused it of certain Defects; See Card.
Bona's Answer to Card. Buillen.
and he assures him that he did particolarmente osservare in che potesse esser
ripreso; particularly observe whether there were any Fault in it. The effect of
this particular Observation was very favorable to Monsieur de Meaux: The
Cardinal found nothing but matter of great Satisfaction to himself, and Praise
to the Author; and yet has this man as flatly opposed Monsieur de Meaux's
Principles in the Point of Invocation of Saints, beforementioned, both in his
Doctrine and Practice, as it is well possible for words to do it.

For Monsieur de Meaux's Doctrine, I shall not need say any thing here, after
what I have so fully accounted above: The Reader may please to compare it with
the Extract I shall now offer him out of Cardinal Bona's Works.

In his Dedication which he makes of his Book of DIVINE PSALMODY to the Blessed
Virgin, Oper. Tom. 2.
thus he concludes to her:

Possess me as your own, O Sovereign QUEEN of Heaven! and seeing it has pleased
you in this Oratory dedicated to your Service, to bestow so many Favors upon
distressed Mortals, suffer not me to go hence without some mark of it. Renew
your Tokens, change your Miracles. As you are wont to open the Eyes of the
blind, that they might behold the light, now open the Eyes of my Mind, and fill
them with your brightest light, that I may with a pure Contemplation, behold
the Light of God's Countenance that is impressed upon us. If ever you have
cleared the stopped Ears of the Deaf; Give Joy and Gladness to my inward
Hearing, that I may hear the Voice of the Bridegroom speaking in silence to the
Heart of Jerusalem. If you have here broken the Chains of dumb Tongues, Give to
my Mouth a right and well-sounding Speech, that when I sing the Praises of God,
my Words may be pleasing in the presence of the eternal King. If you have
restored Health to the diseased, heal me who labor under an inveterate
Sickness, that my Mind may in the last day be found entire, without the
Sickness of any evil Affection. This I most humbly beg, here prostrate upon my
Knees, before this wonder-working Image of yours, and upon that solemn day
which your Nativity has rendered venerable to us.

Such is the Entrance he makes upon this Book, and indeed the work that follows
is all of a piece. In his 16. Chapter, Page 551. He gives this account, Tom. 2.
Page 551.
why in all their OFFICES they conclude with a Prayer, or some Complement at
least, to the Blessed Virgin. It is to this end, that if by humane frailty they
have committed any Error in the dreadful Service of God, our Lord being
appeased by her Mediation, may not impute it to them for sin: For She preserves
all those that trust in Her. She reaches out her saving Hand to those, who in
this damnable World are in danger. She restrains the malicious Endeavors of
our Enemies. No Day, no Hour, not a Moment passes, without some Favor of Ders.
Her the Heavenly Host Worship, Hell it self Observes, the World Adores. Her
Majesty the chiefest of the Blessed Spirits tremble at. By Her Order the World
is Governed; the Stars give Light, the Sun shines, the Winds blow, the Gardens
spring, the Woods grow, the Seasons keep their constant revolutions, the
Elements serve our needs. The Ornament of our Manners, the brightness of our
Works, all this we receive from Her Favor, when we Worship and Uenerate Der.
The Church knows of how great danger it is to have her exiled Children divorced
from the Care of their most indulgent Mother, and therefore by a most wise
Counsel has decreed, that they should by a frequent Observance fly to Der
Protection; not only by instituting a special Office to Der, but by addressing
to Her in the end of all her Offices, according as the reason of the times
should require.

This is a short Specimen of what is scattered up and down in all the Parts of
his Book; I need not say how extravagant his Verses are, See especially c. 12.
p. 304. (...)
when the Prose is thus high flown: I will give but one Instance more, which
one would think should contain, if any, a certain account of his Persuasion,
taken out of his Last Will; in which, having commended himself to our Blessed
Savior, he comes in the next place, as is most fit, to the Virgin, and so on
to the rest of his Friends and Patrons above. Page 37. Tom. 3.

And to the also, See his Will in the beginning of the 3. Tom.
O Blessed Virgin MARY, Mother of Mercy, Queen of the World, Comforter of the
Afflicted, Refuge of Sinners, Salvation of those that perish, to thee, O
Fountain of Piety, in this dreadful Hour, I commend my Soul. Help me now that
am afraid; Lift me up that am falling; Direct me that am in Error, Comfort my
Soul that is desolate, and Obtain of thy beloved Son for me, the Mercy which I
have desired. You have always mercifully Assisted me in all my Dangers; O
Forsake me not in this last, on which Eternity depends. --

Holy Michael! Archangel! who came to help the People of God, Prince of the
Heavenly Host -- Deliver me from the Snare of unclean Spirits, and bring my
Soul into a Place of comfort and refreshment.

And thou, Holy Angel, to whose Safeguard and Protection I unworthy Sinner have
been committed, Assist me in this moment, Drive far from me all the Power of
Satan; Save me from the Mouth of the Lion. -- Draw me out of the Snare which
they have laid for me, and Preserve my soul from their evil designs.

Assist me you also, O my Patrons, and turelary Saints! Thou first of all, O
St. JOHN, forerunner of Christ, -- Make my Paths straight, and Direct my way in
the sight of the Lord. Blessed PETER! Key-Bearer of the Heavenly Kingdom!
Prince of the Apostles! by the Power that is committed to thee, Loose thou the
Bonds of my Sins, and Open unto me the Gate of Paradise.

And thou, O Glorious Father of the Monks of St. Benedict! impute not thou unto
me to my Damnation, the innumerable transgressions that I have made of thy
Rule. -- O ye Captains and Heads of the Holy Order of the Cistercians, St.
ROBERT, St. ALBERIC, St. STEPHEN, and St. BERNARD; who have so long patiently
endured me an unfruitful Tree in this your Vineyard. -- O Forsake me not in
this Hour! But Remember that I am your Son, though unworthy the Name. --

The Cardinal goes still further on with the rest of his Patrons; (for he had
taken care to provide enough of them) but I fear I have tired the Reader with
these I have already transcribed. Monsieur de Meaux, I know, will tell us, that
all this is no more than if he had desired as many of the good Company that
were about him at this time, to have done the same; and for his Expressions,
though they are some of them a little Extraordinary, yet the Cardinal's
intention, no doubt, like that of the Church, was to have them all reduced to
this one and the same Catholic meaning, PRAY FOR ME.

And for those who are resolved to believe this fond Pretense, there is no
hopes of conviction.

But for unprejudiced Persons, who see the Vanity, indeed the unreasonableness
and absurdity of this Evasion, I doubt not but they will find a plain
Opposition between Monsieur de Meaux's Principles and the Cardinal's, and that
this good Man needed a very great Apology to his Patrons, for having approved a
Doctrine so derogatory to their Power and Honor, as that of the Exposition in
his Opinion undoubtedly was.

But I shall say no more to show the unsincerity of Cardinal BONA in this
matter: I might have added a yet greater instance, than either of these
Cardinals, of the same pious Fraud, in the Approbation of the POPE himself; See
the Procez verbal de l'Assemblee eatraordinaire des Messeigneurs l'Archeveques
and Eveques en Mars and May 1681. Mr. de Meaux himself was one of this
Assembly, and signed with the rest the Report of the A. B. of Reims, in which
there is abundantly sufficient to show how repugnant his Holiness's Proceedings
were to the Doctrine of the Exposition, approved by him at the very same time
that he was engaged in these attempts so contrary to it. I know not whether it
be worth the observing, that the very same day the Pope sent his complementing
Brief to Monsieur de Meaux, in approbation of his Exposition; he sent another
to the Bishop of Pamiez, to approve his defending the Rights of his Church,
against the King: which was judged in the Assembly, of which Mr. de Meaux was
one, to be an interposing in an Affair, which neither the Holy Councils nor
Fathers had given him any Authority to meddle with.
whose Briefs, with reference to the Affairs of France, and which this Bishop,
who has had so great a part in them, could not be ignorant of, however
published at the same time that he sent his Complement to Mr. de Meaux, do but
ill agree with his Exposition. Indeed, they run in such a strain, as plainly
shows, that were but his Power equal to his Will, he would soon convince the
World, that not this Man's Pretenses, but the Dictates of Pope GREGORY VII. the
UNAM SANCTAM Bull, and the Canon of LATERAN, were the true Exposition of the
Doctrine of the Catholic Church.

And of this I am ready to make an ample proof, from the several pieces set out
by public Authority in France, when ever Mr. de Meaux or his Vindicator shall
think fit to question the truth of what I now say.

NUMBER. IV. Copy d'une Lettre ecrite a Monsieur l'Eveque de Meaux, cy devant
Eveque de Condom.
Au Port de St. Marie ce 13. Juin 1683. Monseigneur,
VOtre Grandeur rapellera, sans doubt, mieux l'Idee de mon nom, lors que je luy
dirai que je suis celuy pour qui elle a eu la bonte de parler il y a environ 16
ans a Madame de Chaune pour avoir son consentement d'une Chapelle, comme
tutrice de Monsieur de -- and j' eus l'Honneur de la voir plusieurs fois a St.
Thomas du Louvre, avec Messeigneurs de Perigueux and de Xainte.

Depuis ce tems la, j'ai souffert la Persecution, and particulierement depuis
l'Exposition de la Foi, que votre grandeur a publiee. Ses Enemis qui n'osent
pas se declarer contre Elle, se declarent contre ceux qui disent la meme chose.
Et aujourdui Monseigneur l' Archeveque de Bourdeaux me fait fair le Process,
pour avoir explique a l' Epargne le jour de Vendredi Saint, Que nous adorions
Jesus Christ crucify en presence de la Croix, and que nous n'adorions rien de
ce que nous voyons. Et parce que le Cure dit sur le champ assez haut Le Bois,
Le Bois; j' ajoutai, Non, non, C'est Jesus Christ, and non pas le Bois. Et
comme il ajouta, Ecce Lignum, Venite, Adoremus; je le relevai en luy disant,
Auquel le Salut du Monde a ete atache. Venez, adorons ce Salut de Monde.

J' ajoutai que le sentiment de l'Eglise etoit, que si par impossible nous
pouvions separer la Divinite da Fills de Dieu d'avec son humanite, nous n'
adorerions pas l'humanite, puis qu'il est certain qu'il n' y a rien d'adorable
que Dieu; and qu' ainsi nous devions nous persuader que nous allions au
Calvaire adorer Jesus Christ, sans nous arreter au Crucifix. Que l'Eglise,
comme une bonne Mere, nous l'avoit done par une saint Invention pour aider a
notre Foi, and pour fraper plus vivement notre imagination, and non pour etre
l'Objet de notre Culte, (...) se termine a Jesus Christ.

Voila, Monseigneur, tout mon crime, and ce que l'on me reproach. J'ai ecrit au
Promoteur and au Vicaire General, and a Monseigneur l'Archeveque. Je leur
expose, que j' ofre a me dedire, si j'ai mal parle; j' ofre a me justifier. Au
prejudice de cela il persiste dans l'interdiction qu' il lacha verbalement sur
le champ. Je me suis pourvu par apel comme d'abus au Parliament de Guienne; j'ai
fait assigner le Promoteur, and bien que j'ay fait toutes les honetetes
possibles a la Justice Ecclesiastique, and rendu toutes les deferences, le dit
Seigneur Archeveque me menace, comme ceux qui luy ont rendu ma Lettre me le
mandent, de Prison perpetuelle, and de Fers aux Pieds.

Votre Grandeur peut connoitre par ce proceed combien il y a de Persons qui
detournent nos Freres separez de rentrer dans l'Eglise. L'on m'objecte, ce que
l'on dit contre votre livre, que j'adoucis, mais que le sentiment de l'Eglise
est contraire. On le verra mieux dans le Process que me sera fait, car je defy
mes Enemis de pouvoir fair des reproaches contre ma vie and moeurs, and de me
reprocher d'autre Doctrine que celle de votre Grandeur, que je tache d'exprimer
dans les memes terms, la trouvant tres conform aux sentimens de l' Eglise
Roman, and ainsi si je suis convaincu d'Heresie, j'ose dire a votre Grandeur
qu' elle doit etre a ma Garentie. Jose pourtant l'assurer, que j'ay assez de
lumiere pour bien defendre cette Doctrine, and pour detruire le Preservatif, si
l'on ne me fait point de Violence. Je defy tous les Docteurs du Monde de
toutes les Religions.

La Grace que je demand a V. G. est que si l' Archeveque se servoit de toute
son Authorite pour m' opprimer, qu' Elle daigne interposer la sienne pour m'
obtenir la liberte de me defendre. Elle voit combien l'honneur de Dieu yest
interesse, dans un tems ou toute la Province est remplie de Missionaires, de
Capucins, and de Jesuits ignorans, qui prechent l' Adoration de la Croix, and
la font fair dans une Province ou tout est remplie de Religionaires, and ou
j'ose promettre 10000 Conversions, si la Religion etoit pratiquee conformement
a votre Exposition. Les Messieurs de la Religion P. R. n'ont autre Objection a
me fair si ce n'est que l'Eglise Roman Vous traite and Me traite
d'Heretique. Je demand Pardon a Votre Grandeur, Monseigneur, si j'ai cru etre
oblige de luy fair connoitre mon Proceed, apres quoi je l'assureray de la
Soumission,

De son tres humble and tres obeissant Serviteur, IMBERT, Prieur.

The Copy of a Letter sent to Monsieur the Bishop of Meaux, formerly Bishop of
Condom.
Port St. Mary, June 13th. 1683. My Lord,
YOur Lordship, without doubt, will better call to mind my Name, when I shall
have told you, that I am the Person for whom you had the goodness, about 16
years since, to speak to Madam de Chaune, to obtain her consent, as Tutress to
Monsieur de -- for a certain Chapel; since which I have had the honor to see
you several times at St. Thomas in the Louvre, with my Lords of Perigueux and
Xainte.

Since that I have suffered Persecution, and especially since the time that
your Lordship has published your Exposition of the Faith. Your Enemies, who
dare not declare themselves against your Lordship, declare themselves against
those who say the same things. And at this instant, the Archbishop of Bourdeaux
has caused a Process to be made against me for having explained upon
Good Friday, That we adore JESUS CHRIST crucified in presence of the Cross, and
that we do not adore any thing of what we see. And forasmuch as the Cure
replied upon the place aloud, " The WOOD, the WOOD; I added, No, no, it is JESUS
CHRIST, and not the WOOD. And when he added, Ecce Lignum, venite, adoremus; I
took him up, saying, On which the Savior of the World hung, come let us adore
this Savior of the World.

I said further, that the Doctrine of the Church was, That if by an impossible
Supposition we could separate the Divinity of the Son of God from his Humanity,
we should not adore his Humanity; forasmuch as it is certain, that there is
nothing adorable but God; and that therefore we ought to think, that we are now
going out of Mount Calvary to adore JESUS CHRIST, without stopping at the
Crucifix. That the Church, like a good Mother, had given that to us by a holy
Invention, to assist our Faith, and make the livelier Impression upon our
Imagination, but not to be the Object of our Worship, which must terminate upon
JESUS CHRIST.

Behold, my Lord, all my Crime, and what I am reproached with, I have writ to
the Promoter, and to the Vicar General, and to the Archbishop himself. I have
offered, if I have spoken any thing amiss, that I will recant it: I have
offered to justify my self: Notwithstanding all this, his Grace still persists
in the verbal Interdict, which he immediately pronounced against me. I have
transferred my Cause by Appeal, as of Abuse, to the Parliament of Guienne: I
have caused the Proctor to be summoned; and though I have used all imaginable
fairness, with reference to the Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction, paid them all
possible deference, nevertheless the said Archbishop threatens me, as I am
informed by those who gave him my Letter, with perpetual Imprisonment and
Chains, for my Offense.

Your Lordship may see by this Proceeding, how many there are that hinder our
separating Brethren from returning to our Communion. They object to me, that
which is also said against your Lordship's Book, That I do mollify, but that
the Doctrine of the Church is quite the contrary. This will more plainly appear
by the Process against me; for I defy my Enemies to reproach me for my Life
and Manners, or for any other Doctrine than that of your Lordship, which I
endeavor to express in the self same Terms, as finding them most agreeable to
the Sentiments of the Roman Church: so that if I am convicted of Heresy, I am
bold to say, your Lordship must be my Surety. But I dare assure you, my Lord,
that I have Knowledge enough to defend this Doctrine, and destroy the An Answer
to Monsieur de Maux's Exposition, entitled, Preservatif contre le changement
de Religion.
Preservative, might I be but secure from Violence: I defy all the Doctors of
the World, of whatsoever Religion they be.

The Favor which I have to beg of your Lordship, is, That if the Archbishop
should make use of his Authority to oppress me, you will please to interpose
yours so far, as to procure me only the Liberty to defend my self. You see how
far the Honor of God is concerned in it, and especially at a time when the
whole Province is filled with Missionaries, Capuchins, ignorant Jesuits, and
others, who preach up the Adoration of the Cross, and cause it to be done in a
Country full of Protestants, and among whom I durst promise 10000 Converts,
were the Practice of our Religion conformable to your Exposition. The
Protestants have hardly any other Objection to make to me, than this, That the
Church of Rome treats both your Lordship and me as Heretics.

I beg your Lordship's Pardon for this; I thought my self obliged to acquaint
you with my Case; after which, I have only remaining to assure you of the
Submission of,

My LORD, Your Lordship's most humble and obedient Servant, IMBERT.

Such was the Account which Monsieur Imbert gave of his Case to M. de Meaux; I
was the more willing to publish it, 42 pages in 4to.
that those who have never seen the Factum which he printed of it, and which is
too long to be inserted here, may at least by this perceive that his Crime was
truly his adhering to M. de Meaux's Exposition; and that he had reason to say,
as he does in this Letter to him, That if he was convicted of Heresy, M. de
Meaux ought to be his warrant for it.

And because the Bishop has been pleased to endeavor to take off the force of
this great Allegation, Vindicat. p. 116. Cet Imbert est un homme sans scavoir,
qui crut justifier ses extravagances. en nommant mon Exposition, etc.
by lessening the Character of the Person, I shall leave it to the indifferent
Reader to judge, whether this Letter carries any thing of the Style of an
extravagant, a man of no learning, as well as of no Renown, such as M. de Meaux
in his Answer pretends him to be.

NUMBER. V. The Epistle of St. Chrysostom to Caesarius, cut by some of the
Doctors of the Sorbonne, out of the Greek Edition of Palladius, published by
Monsieur Bigot, 1680. with a Dissertation premised, containing an Historical
Account of the whole Affair.
IT will perhaps be looked upon by some, as a little unseasonable, to join a
piece of Antiquity so considerable as this Epistle, to a Treatise of so little
Importance as the foregoing Defense may justly be esteemed to be. But since the
main thing I charge M. de Meaux with, is, That a first Edition of his Book was
suppressed for containing some Assertions not so suitable to the Sentiments of
the Sorbonne Doctors, to whom it was sent for their Approbation, to show the
undistinguishing Justice of their Proceedings, and that M. de Meaux is not the
only Bishop they have dealt thus rudely with on these Occasions; I was willing
to communicate to the World one Instance more of the like nature, especially
since the Original Leaves, rased out, and suppressed by them, have here also
fallen into my Hands, and may at any time be seen with the suppressed Edition
of M. de Meaux's Exposition.

It may be some Satisfaction to M. de Meaux to consider, that in this Case, he
has run no other fortune than what is common to him with the great St.
Chrysostom: And possibly the Reader too will from hence begin to find it no
difficult matter to believe, that those who made no scruple to suppress a whole
Epistle of St. Chrysostom, a Patriarch and a Saint, for contradicting their
Doctrine in one only Point, may indeed have made as little of correcting M. de
Meaux's Exposition, though a Bishop's, that had prevaricated their Faith in so
many.

Nor was I less engaged on the Vindicator's account to this Publication; it is
one of his greatest difficulties, and which he seems the most desirous to be
resolved in, how there can be such a thing as the Real Presence in the
Eucharist, without Transubstantiation? I have before told him what I suppose
sufficient to explain this matter. But because I cannot expect that either my
Church or Book should pass pass with him for an Oracle, it may be some
confirmation of the Idea to show him one of their pretended Patrons concurring
with me in the Exposition, and manifestly supposing a Union betwixt the Bread
and Christ's Body in the holy Eucharist, and yet stiffly contending at the same
time, that the Nature of the Bread is not changed in it.

All the danger is, that this holy Father, who, as Monsieur See Mr Bigot's
Preface below.
Bigot observes, has hitherto passed for the great Doctor of the Eucharist, as
St. Austin of Grace, may possibly by this run the hazard of losing his Credit
amongst them; and as it has fared but very lately with Theodoret upon the same
account, that they will henceforth begin to lessen his Reputation, since they
cannot any longer suppress his Doctrine.

But before I offer the Epistle it self, it is fit that I premise something for
the better understanding of it. It was written to Caesarius, a Monk, that had a
little before fallen into the Apollinarian Heresy, to reduce him to the
Catholic Faith. I shall therefore beg leave to begin my Reflections with a
short account of that, as far as may serve to open the way to what we are to
read of it in this.

REFLECTION I. Of APOLLINARIUS and his HERESY.
APOLLINARIVS the younger, from whom this Heresy derives its name, was Son to
the elder Apollinarius, Godefry vie de S. Athanase, livre II. cap. 13. Ex
Basil. Ep 74.
a very learned Man, and never, that we read of, charged with any Heresy. He
was of Alexandria, where he was ordained a Priest, and became deservedly
eminent for this, That when Julian forbad the Christians the reading of human
Writers, being envious of that Reputation which many of the Fathers of the
Church had so justly acquired in that sort of Learning; he with his Son,
Socrat. Eccles. Hist. lib. 3. cap 16. Calvisii Chronol. page 525. an. 362.
repaired in great measure this Disadvantage, by opening of two Schools: The
Father turning the Writings of the Old Testament into Heroic Verse, and
composing several Tragedies of the Historical Parts of them: The Son explaining
the New in Dialogues, after the Platonic manner; and by this means preserving
the Church from that Ignorance, which the Apostate Emperor thought to have
reduced it to.

II. As for the younger Apollinarius, he is on all hands acknowledged to have
been a very extraordinary Man; Sozomen. Eccl. Hist. lib. 6. c. 25. See Epiphan.
Haer. 77. Theophilus l. 1. paschal. Vincen. Lirin. lib. adv. prof. novationes.
Quid illo praestantius acumine, exercitatione, doctrina? Quam multas ille
Haereses multis voluminibus oppresserit, quot inimicos fidei confutaverit
errores, indicio est opus illud 30 non minus librorum, nobilissimum and
maximum, quo insanas Porphyrii calumnias, magna probationum mole confudit.
Longum est universa ipsius opera commemorare, quibus profecto summis
Aedificatoribus Ecclesiae par esse potuisset, nisi profana illa haereticae
curiositatis libidine, novum nescio quod adinvenisset, quo and cunctos labores
suos, velut cujusdam leprae admixtione, foedaret, and committeret, ut doctrina
ejus non tam aedificatio, quam tentatio potius ecclesiastica di^eretur.
eminent for his Learning, and particularly cherished by St. Athanasius, as one
of the most zealous Defenders of the Nicene Faith, whilst he was yet but Reader
in the Church of Laodicea. He wrote against Porphyry in 30 Books; against the
Arrians, Eunomians, Origin, and the other Heretics of those times. In a word,
both his Zeal and his Learning were such, that, if we may take the account
which Vincentius Lirinensis has left of him, had he not fallen into Heresy, he
might justly have been equaled to the chiefest Builders of the Church.

III. The Occasion of his Heresy is diversely reported by Ecclesiastical
Writers. Russin. lib. 2. cap. 20.
Ruffinus tells us, that his extraordinary Facility to write upon all sorts of
Subjects, and his great Understanding in all kinds of Learning, raised in him a
love of Disputation; and that the desire of refuting whatever others said, made
him at last himself become a Heretic. Sozomen lib. 6. c. 25.
Sozomen relates, that St. Athanasius in his Passage through Laodicea, where
Apollinarius then was, contracted so intimate a Friendship with him, that
George, Bishop of that place, and who detested the Communion of St. Athanasius,
as the other Arrians did, excommunicated Petavius says it was for keeping too
much company with the Heathen Epiphanius. See dogm. Theol. T. 4. l. 1. p. 25.
c. 6.
Apollinarius upon this account, and would never be persuaded to receive him,
whatever Instances he could make to that purpose; and that upon this he
conceived so great a discontent, that it carried him in the end to form himself
a new Heresy. And lastly, Theodoret: Eccles. Hist. l. 5 c. 4.
Theodoret differing from both these, tells us, That being rejected from the
Government of the Church, to which in the Contest between Meletius and
Paulinus, he also, as Head of a third Party, aspired; he thereupon began to
spread openly that Heresy he had before invented, and to set himself up for
chief of it.

IV. Whether any, or all these Causes concurred to ruin one of the greatest
Ornaments of the Church, and who had till then been the Admiration of the best
Men, not only St. Athanasius, Basil, etc. who were his Friends, but all the
others, as many as have left us any account of the History of those times,
having constantly represented him in the most advantageous manner that could be
expected: Epiphan. Haer. 77.
Certain it is, that his loss was a very sensible Blow to the Church, and is as
such, exceedingly lamented by Epiphanius in the account of his Heresy.

V. He had now been some time made Godefry places it An. 361. See Bals. Zon
com. in Can 1. Council. O^c. secundi.
Bishop of Laodicea; whether of the great Laodicea in Syria, or of the other in
Phoenicia of Libanus, is not certainly known. It was not long after this
Promotion that he became a Heretic. Athanasius, who died within 10 years
after, having written a long Letter to Epictetus, Bishop of Corinth, against
his Errors; though either his respect to a Person he had so much esteemed, See
this Letter in Epiphan. Haeres. 77.
or being unwilling to exasperate One, whom he so earnestly desired to reduce
to the Catholic Faith, made him that he did not once name him in his whole
Epistle.

VI. But we will come yet nearer; for in the year 362. Athanasius being the
third time returned from Banishment, held a Council at Alexandria; in which,
See this Council in Labbe's Collection, T. 2 p. 816.
among other things, we find the Heresy of Apollinarius expressly condemned,
though no mention made of his Name; whether it were that he was not yet known as
chief of those Heretics, Vid. Binnii not. loc. cit.
or that, as some think, he sent a Renuntiation of his Heresy to the Council
by the Monks that went thither. About ten years after, Anno 373. the same
Heresy was again condemned in another Council at Rome, under Pope Damasus; and
lastly, in the second General Council at Constantinople, Anno 381. He is by
name anathematized among the other Heretics, Can. 1. of that Synod.

VII. As to the Heresy it self, I shall not enter any farther into the search
of it, than may serve for the Explication of that Capital Error, which gave
Occasion to this Epistle of St. Chrysostom. Now this, Photii bibl. in Eulogio
p 850.
to take it in his own words as they are reported by Photius from Eulogius was,
That (...). That God and flesh make up but one Nature, Comment. in Conc. 2.
Occumen. can. 1.
which Balsamon and Zonaras thus explain, (...). That he said, that the Son of
God took indeed an animate Body of the blessed Virgin, but without the Rational
Soul, the Divinity serving instead of that.

VIII. And the same is the account which the other Ecclesiastical Writers have
left of him; Gregory Nazianzen, Theodoret, Epiphanius, Theorianus, etc. all
which unanimously agree in this point of his asserting, Theodoret. Haeres.
Fabul. l 5. c. 11.
(...) That the Body of our Savior was animated, but that he had not the
Rational Soul; for that that Soul was superfluous, where the Divine (...) or
Word was present.

IX. But though this were the last Resolution of his Heresy as to this point,
yet was it not his first Error. It was a part of the Doctrine maintained by
Arrius and Eunomius, That Christ took a Body destitute not only of the Rational
Soul, but altogether inanimate; (...), say; Theodoret, Theodoret. Haeres. Fab.
l. 4. c. 1. and Epist. 124. de Arrio. and Eunomio.
(...). That God the Word took a mere Body, and that himself supplied the want
of the Soul. And the same was the beginning of Apollinarius's Heresy too.
Socrates Hist. Eccl. l. 2. c. 46.
(...), says Socrates, (...). They first asserted, That God at his Incarnation
took upon him Man without any Soul. Afterward, as if they repented, and meant
to correct their Error, they held, That he took indeed the animal Soul, but was
destitute of the Rational, God the Word being instead of that. Both which
Vincentius Lirinensis tells us, Vincent. Lirinens. adv. Haeres. c. 17.
they sometimes joined together, saying, In ipsa Salvatoris nostri carne, aut
animam humanam penitus non fuisse, aut certe talem fuisse cui men's and ratio
non esset; That in the Body of our Savior there was either no Human Soul at
all, or at least such as was not rational.

X. I shall not now enter on any other Points of their Heresy, such as their
making this Flesh not to have been assumed by Christ at his Conception,
Epiphan. Haeres. 77. Theodoret. Eccles. Hist. l. 5. cap. 3. Greg. Naz. Orat.
46. p. 722. etc.
but to have been always with him consubstantial with the Divinity; which
Divinity therefore by consequence suffered, and was mortal; which Epiphanius,
Theodoret, but especially Gregor. Nazianzen has at large related. Only since,
some, for the more distinct conception of the Apollinarian Heresy, have thus
distinguished it from that of Eutyches afterward; that the Eutychian affirmed,
That our blessed Savior took nothing from the blessed Virgin, Theodoret.
Haeretic. Fab. l. 4. c. 13. (...). Eutyches, (...).
but that the very Logos, the Word it self being, as Theodoret expresses it,
immutably converted, and made Flesh, only passed through the Virgin; whereas
Apollinarius supposed the Flesh of Christ, which he took of the Virgin, to be
converted into the Divine Nature: It appears by Gregory Nazianzen, that this
was no certain distinction, forasmuch as the Apollinarian too affirmed
oftentimes the same thing; that, as the Father expresses it in the place I
before cited, Naz. orat. 46. supr. dict. (...), Apollinarius, (...). Page 722.
our Savior was even before he descended, the Son of Man, and descending,
brought his Flesh along with him, which he had whilst he was in Heaven, before
all Ages, and consubstantial with his Essence. Which is what Theodoret long
since observed, when in his 3. Dialogue, speaking with relation to them both,
he says, (...). They who have patcht together this various and many-form'd
Heresy, sometimes say, that the Word is become Flesh, sometimes that the Flesh
is changed into the Word.

Wherefore laying aside these subtleties, this we may undoubtedly conclude,
That whatever their other differences were, whether as to his Body, which we
see is uncertain, or to his Soul, in which the variety was more constant and
more discernable, the Eutychian affirming the Union of the two entire Natures,
the Humane and Divine; whereas the Apollinarian denied that our Savior ever
assumed the reasonable Soul at all: certain it is, for what concerns our
present purpose, See Petav, Dogm. Theolog. Tom. 4. l. 1. c. 15. page 71.. 3.
that they both agreed in this, That after the Union of the Word and Flesh,
there was but one only Nature common to both, the Substance of the two, that
were before, being now confused and permixt; from whence they were both of them
afterward called by Apollinarius by St. Chrysostom, Eutyches by others.
St. Chrysostom and others (...), from their confusion of the two Natures into
one, and making not only one Person, as the Catholic Church did, but one
Nature too alone in Christ.

REFLECTION II. St. Chrysostme's Argument from the Eucharist against the
Apollinarians, considered and explained.
SUch is the Account which the ancient Fathers have left us of the Apollinarian
Heresy, and the same we find to have been the Notion which St. J. Chrysostom
in this Epistle had of it. He proves the divine and humane Natures to be
distinct in Christ; that the Properties of the one, ought no otherwise to be
confounded with the other, than as they are united in the same Person. He
charges the Apollinarians with saying that our Savior's Body is converted into
the Divinity, and upon that account attributing Passion to the Deity: and
finally, he concludes all with this Exhortation to Caesarius, whom he designed
by this Epistle to recover from their Errors. Wherefore, dearly beloved, says
he, laying aside the novel Phrases, and vain Speeches of these men, let us
return to what we have before said; that it is pious, most pious indeed, that
we should confess our Savior Christ, who died for us, to be perfect in the
Godhead, perfect in the Manhood; one only begotten Son, not divided into two,
but bearing in himself together the unmixt proprieties of two distinct Natures.
Not two different Persons, God forbid! But one and the same Lord Jesus, God,
Word; clothed with our Flesh, and that not inanimate, without the rational
Soul, as the wicked Apollinarius pretends. Let us then assent to these things,
let us fly those who would divide him; for though the Natures be distinct, yet
is there but one undivided and indivisible Union to be acknowledged in the same
one Person and Substance of the Son.

II. And now if this be the Catholic Doctrine which this Holy Father here
designs to bring Caesarius to; such the Errors, which by the subtlety of the
Apollinarians he was involved in: It will be very easy to conceive the
Allusion he here makes between the two Natures united in Christ, and the two
Parts, which the Catholic Church has ever acknowledged in the Holy Eucharist;
to the destruction of the Romanists Pretenses of Transubstantiation, and to the
solid Establishment of the real Presence of Christ in this sacred Mystery, such
as the Church of England believes, and has been established by me in the
foregoing Discourse.

III. The Words of St. See below.
Chrysostom in this Epistle are these: Christ is both GOD and MAN; GOD, in
that he is impassible; MAN, for that he suffered. yet but one SON, one LORD; He
the same without doubt, having one Dominion, one Power of two united Natures.
Not that these Natures are consubstantial, forasmuch as either of them, does
without confusion retain its own Properties, and being two, are yet inconfused
in him.

For as [in the Eucharist] before the BREAD is Consecrated, we call it BREAD,
but when the Grace of God by the Priest has consecrated it, it is no longer
called BREAD, but is esseemed worthy to be called the LORD's BODY, although the
Nature of BREAD still remains in it; and we do not say there be TWO BODIES, but
ONE BODY of the Son: So here, the DIVINE NATURE being joined with the [Humane]
BODY, they both together make up but one Son, one Person. But yet they must be
confessed to remain without confusion, after an indivisible manner, not in ONE
NATURE, but in TWO PERFECT NATURES.

IV. In which Passage, whether we consider the Expressions themselves, or the
Application of them, they are utterly destructive of Transubstantiation.

First, as to the Expressions themselves.

They tell us plainly, That the Nature of BREAD remains in the Eucharist after
the Consecration: That our not calling it BREAD, but CHRIST's BODY, does not
therefore intend to signify that the Nature of BREAD is at all changed; for
that the BREAD by Consecration becomes indeed worthy to be CALLED THE LORD's
BODY, but yet still retains its own Nature of BREAD.

V. These are such plain expressions of the Bread's continuing in its own
Nature after Consecration, that the Papists themselves have not been able to
deny it. So that their only Refuge is, that by the BREAD'S retaining still its
own Nature, we are, they say, to understand only this, that its Accidents
remain, but for its Substance, that is changed into the BODY OF CHRIST. See
most of these cited by Albertinus, de Eucharist. l. 2. page 533. in
Chrysostom, c. 1.
Thus Gardener, Turrian, Bellarmine, Gregory de Valentia, Vasquez, Suares,
Perron, Gamachaeus, and last of all, Father Nouet de la presence de Jesus
Christ dans les tres saint Sacrement, live. 4. c. 5. art. 3 p. 285.
Nouet, in his Controversy against Monsieur Claude.

VI. This is indeed to cut the Knot when it was not to be untied; and makes St.
Chrysostom in effect to say thus much, That the Nature of BREAD after the
Consecration, still remains, though indeed the Nature be changed, and only the
Accidents continue. And would it not have been an admirable Similitude, to show
that the Humane Nature of Christ was not changed into the Divine, as the
Appollinarian pretended, to allege the Example of the Eucharist, in which the
Nature of the BREAD was changed into the very Nature of Christ's Body, as the
Papists believe.

VII. But S. Chrysostom was not so absurd, as these men would represent him;
and his other Expressions utterly overthrow this Evasion. 1. He tells us
plainly, that all the Change that was made in the BREAD by Consecration, was in
the Name, See this Argument managed by Monsieur Claude, Rep. a Pere Nouet.
Party 5. c. 6. p. 488.
not the Substance: That whereas before it was called BREAD, by being
consecrated it became worthy to be CALLED THE LORD's BODY. 2. Had St.
Chrysostom believed the BREAD to have been truly changed, and become the very
Body of Christ, would he have said that it became WORTHY to be CALLED the Body
of Christ? and not rather plainly have told us that it became the VERY BODY of
Christ? Do men use to say that the Heaven is worthy to be called the Heaven?
The Sun, worthy to be called the Sun? And why shall we think St. Chrysostom
the only ridiculous man, to use such a Phrase as no man in the World ever did,
or would have done besides? But 3. And to put this point beyond all doubt: When
St. Chrysostom here speaks of the Nature of BREAD, in allusion to the Nature
of CHRIST; if we will have him consistent with himself, we must suppose him to
have used that Expression with reference to both, in the same sense. As
therefore in his Discourse immediately before and after, by Nature, with
reference to CHRIST, he does not mean the Properties only, but the very
Substance of his Humanity and Divinity; so here in his allusion to the
Eucharistical BREAD, he must still mean the same, the Substance of the BREAD,
and not barely the Properties, or Accidents of it; and of this I am persuaded
no indifferent Person will make any doubt.

Secondly, As to the design of this Allusion,

VIII. The Apollinarians, as we have seen, affirmed the Change of one Nature in
Christ into the other; That however, before the Union, they were two distinct
things, yet by being united, the humane Nature became converted, or if you
will, transubstantiated into the Divine.

IX. Now the Falseness of this S. Chrysostom, shows by the Example of the
Eucharist. That as there the BREAD by being consecrated becomes indeed worthy
to be called CHRIST's BODY, yet does not lose its own Nature, but continues the
same BREAD, as to its Substance, that it was before: So here, the Humane Nature
of Christ, being by the Incarnation hypostatically united to the Divine, did
not cease to be a Humane Nature, but still continued what it was before,
however united with the other in one Person.

X. So that as certainly then as the Humane Nature of Christ does now continue
to be a Humane Nature, notwithstanding that Incarnation; so certainly does the
BREAD in the Eucharist continue BREAD after this Consecration. As certainly as
Apollinarius was deceived in supposing the Manhood of Christ to be swallowed up
and changed into the Godhead; so certainly is the Papist deceived in imagining
the Substance of the BREAD to be swallowed up and converted into the Substance
of CHRIST'S BODY, in this Holy Sacrament.

XI. Christ's Humane Nature being united to the Divine, became worthy thereby
to be called, together with it, by the same common Name of Christ, Lord, Jesus,
the Word, the Son of God; the BREAD being by Consecration mystically united to
Christ's BODY, becomes worthy to be called, together with it, THE LORD's BODY;
but that is all, the Humane Nature still continues what it was before; in the
one, the Nature of the BREAD still continues what it was before in the other,
and there is no Transubstantiation made in either.

XII. In a word, in the Hypostatick Union, though there be two distinct
Natures, God and Man, yet there is but one Person, one Son made up of both. So
in the Holy Eucharist, though there be two different things united, the BREAD
and CHRIST's BODY, yet we do not say there be two Bodies, but one mystical Body
of Christ, made up of both; as the King and his Image, to use the Similitude of
the Ancient Fathers, are not two, but one King: Or in the Example of St.
Chrysostom himself, Christ and the Church, are not two, but one Body.

REFLECTION III. Of the Epistle it self, and the Attempts that have been made
against it.
I. ANd now when such is the force of this Epistle, that it utterly destroys
one of the principal Errors of Popery: It is not at all to be wondered at, if
those men who were resolved not to be convinced by it themselves, have used all
imaginable means to provide that others should not.

II. Ann. 1548.
It is now above 100 years, since this passage was first produced by Peter
Martyr, in his Dispute with Gardener, Bishop of Winchester, concerning the
Eucharist. He then professed that he had copied it out of the Florentine MS.
and that the whole Epistle was put by him into Archbishop Cranmer's Library.
Lovanii Confutatio Cavillationum, etc ad Obj. 201.
This Gardener could not deny, who therefore in his Answer to him 1552.
endeavored first to ascribe it to another John of Constantinople, who lived
about the beginning of the 6th Century. Secondly, to elude the force of this
Passage, by that strange interpretation of the Word Nature, I have before
mentioned, and in which all the others have since followed him.

III. Libr. 1. de Euchar. cap. 18.
Turrian, who by his writing seems to show that he had somewhere or other seen
this Epistle, contends in like manner, and if we may believe Vasquez, Vasquez
dis. 180. c. 9. n. 102. Valentia de Transub. cap. 7.. Similiter.
and de Valentia, proves it too, that this Epistle was not Chrysostom's, but
the other John's, to whom the Bishop of Winchester had before ascribed it. But
yet still the Argument recurr'd upon them, forasmuch as this other John was in
the beginning of the 6th Age, and Transubstantiation by consequence was not the
Doctrine of the Church then.

IV. And indeed Gamachaeus is not very unwilling to acknowledge this: for
having with the rest assigned this Epistle to the other John, he tells us,
Excusari posse, quod nec Transubstantiatio ejus temporibus ita perspicue
tradita and explicata fuerat, sicut body. See Albertinus de Euch. p. 533. l.
2. supr. cit.
he is to be excused, for that Transubstantiation was not so plainly delivered
and explained in those days as it is now.

V. But this Perron de l'Eucharistie. p. 381, 382, 383.
Cardinal Perron could not bear, he neither thought fit to rely upon an
Evasion, which he saw would not do their business, nor could he endure to allow
so ancient an Author as either of the two John's, to have been so directly
opposite to their Sentiments in this matter. And therefore flatly accuses Peter
Martyr of Forgery, and uses abundance of Arguments to persuade the World, that
there was never any such Epistle as had been pretended.

VI. Thus stood this Passage, and the whole Epistle for its sake; till about
six years since the learned Bigotius, who had twelve years before brought a
Copy of it from Florence, resolved to ruin all the Endeavors of these Men, by
publishing the very Epistle, which the Cardinal had so loudly proclaimed to be
a Forgery, and proving it to be indeed the Genuine Offspring of St.
Chrysostom, contrary to what the rest had in vain pretended.

VII. And this he accordingly, with great sincerity performed, Ann. 1680. For
in his Edition of Palladius that year, among the other Pieces which he added to
it, this Epistle of St. Chrysostom had one of the first places, and was
strengthened by him with such Attestations, as show it to be beyond all doubt
authentic. In his Preface he declared how he came by it, and made a short
Apology for that passage of it that had caused so great a Contest; but such as
it seems, he was either conscious to himself, not to have been very strong, or
feared at least that his Censors would not esteem it to be so.

VIII. Expostulatio. page iii.
And in this I speak no more than what he himself declared to his Friends,
insomuch that he resolved to reserve privately some few Copies, for fear the
rest should run that risque, which indeed they accordingly did. For being now
quite finished, and just ready to come abroad, some of the Doctors of the
Sorbonne, whereof Monsieur Grandin and Mr. Faure have been charged as the
Principal, caused it to be suppressed, and the printed Leaves cut out of the
Book, without any thing to supply the place of them.

IX. And of this the Edition of Palladius of that year remains a standing
Monument, both in the Preface, S. Anastasii in Hexaemeron lib. 12. Cui
praemissia est expostulatio etc. Land. 1682. 4to.
and in the Book; and it was publicly complained of by a very learned Man, in
an Expostulation prefixed to a piece of Anastasius, published by him about two
years after.

X. But what that Reverend Person could not then obtain, being since fallen
into my hands, I mean the very Leaves cut out by these Doctors, of Mr. Bigot's
Preface, and the Epistle rased out of the Book; I was unwilling to come into a
Part of their Fraud, by detaining any longer that, which both so well deserved,
and had so long since been prepared for a public view.

XI. I hope the learned World, whom I principally design to gratify in this
matter, will accept this never the worse, for that Mr. le Moyne the last year
published this Epistle among his Varia Sacra: Tom. 1.
That learned Man having neither given the Greek Fragments, which I now publish
from Monsieur Bigots own Impression; nor Monsieur Bigots account of it, in the
part of the Preface which was suppressed. Not to add, that the Latin Copy of
Mr. le Moyne is so very false, that it renders the Epistle utterly
unintelligible. I do not pretend to anticipate his design, which he appears so
jealous of: that is too vast to be injured by any thing I can offer; and I
shall be glad if what I now publish may be any way serviceable to it.

XII. As to the Authority of this Piece, I shall need say no more than what
Monsieur Bigot has already done to prove it to be Genuine. So many ancient
Authors have cited it, as St. Chrysostom's Epistle to Caesarius; such Fragments
of it remain in the most ancient Writers as Authentic, that he who after all
these shall call this Piece in question, may with the same reasonableness doubt
of all the rest of his works, which, perhaps upon less grounds, are on all
sides allowed as true and undoubted.

But it is time now to see what account Monsieur Bigot himself gives of it.

Suppressa in Praefatione Emerici Bigotii, de Epistola Chrysostomi ad
Caesarium, Monachum.
HAnc Orationem sequitur Epistola ad Caesarium, Praefat. lit i, ij. page prior.
inter lin. 22, and 23.
Monachum, quae licet nitore suo nativo, id est, Graeco eloquio, destituta,
nihilominus sub velo veteris Latinae Interpretationis mirificos eloquentiae
disertissimi doctoris radios exhibet. Primus qui ultimis temporibus hujus
meminit Epistolae, fuit Petrus Martyr, Florentinus, qui ex ea locum quendam
protulit in locis communibus. Insolitus loquendi de EUCHARISTIA modus, qui ex
ea referebatur, a Johannis Chrysostomi phrasi Lit. i, ii. page altera.
ac genio prorsus alienus lectores in diversas traxit sententias. Aliis
supposititiam esse affirmantibus, aliis pro virili contendentibus, veram esse
ac genuinam; omnes integram videre sum concupivere; dolueruntque Petrum
Martyrem, qui primus de ea mentionem injecerat, minime indicasse qua in
Bibliotheca extaret codex MS. Florentiae delitescere omnium erat suspicio, quia
Florentinus fuit Petrus Martyr, sed ubi, ab omnibus nesciebatur. Mihi quae
fortuna faverat in reperiendo contextu Graeco vitae St. Johannis Chrysostomi,
hic etiam non defuit. Ejus exemplar reperi apud R.R. P.P. Dominicanos, in
monasterio S. Marci. Cujus te in partem (...) venire libens patior; nec expecto
ut mihi succlames in commune, (...), si modo exorari te sinas, ut benigna
interpretatione emollias, quae duriuscule sonant de Eucharistiae Sacramento,
and in memoriam revoces tot and tam insignes locos, in quibus adeo luculenter
de hoc sacro-sancto Mysterio loquitur Joannes noster, ut Doctor Eucharistiae
vocari meruerit, sicut S. Augustinus Doctor Gratiae vulgo praedicatur. Dixi
Petrum Martyrem primum postremis temporibus hujus Epistolae meminisse, quae
antea Graecis Patribus notissima fuerat, utpote qui multa testimonia ex ea
adversus Monophysitas and Acephalos adduxerunt, ut observare licet in Notis,
quas margini apposui, indicando codices ex quibus Textum Graecum apud illos
patres a me inventum descripsi. Caeterum ubi deficiebant verba Graeca, vacua
Columnarum spatia reliqui, nec passus sum ea punctis, aut lineolis, sicut
librariorum mos est, repleri, ut possint inibi viri eruditi verba Graeca
adscribere Lit. i. iij.
siquando ea invenerint. Cum enim experimento noverim, quo casu, quave fortuna
in ea quae attexui testimonia, inciderim, non despero ab aliis alia posse
inveniri. Quisque experiatur cui fortuna erit faventior; and si cui ea
obsecundaverit, is ne publico invideat, neque apud se inventa privatim
detineat. Qui veteres libros tractant, norunt nullam veteris cujuscunque libri
editionem, quae ex unico exemplari fuerit eruta, hucusque prodiisse, omni ex
part perfectam. Manu exarati codices mutuas aliorum exposcunt operas, ut quod
in uno corruptum est, ab alio sanetur; quod in uno vetustas obliteraverit, ab
alio lucem accipiat. Hoc verum esse de codice hujus Epistolae fateri cogor, qui
licet annorum sit 500, parum tamen emendate scriptus est, and opem a Graeco
praecipue codice, aut ab alio saltem Latino, postulat. In eo quem vidi,
aliquando voces continuae sunt, aliquando simplex vocalis E pro diphthongo Ae
scripta fuit; T pro D, and vice versa D pro T; verbis aliquando ita corruptis,
ut ad sanitatem reduci minime possint absque subsidio aliorum codicum. Quae
scribarum incuria deterruit, opinor, Petrum Martyrem ab ea edenda. Taceo
interpretationem, quae minus accurata, imo plane barbara videtur. Ego his
omnibus naevis Lectores benevolos nequaquam offensum iri arbitratus sum; imo
eam libenter excepturos puto quam damus Epistolam, Latin quoquo modo versam,
cujus fragmentum a Petro Martyr editum, eruditorum animos pridem sollicitavit.
Quis enim illud cum legerit, Joannis Chrysostomi mentem percipere possit, ex
eoque animadvertere, qua occasion, quo animo ejus verba Lit. i. iij. page
altera.
scripta sunt? In ea porro Epistola mirari licet summam and insolitam Dei
amantissimi viri charitatem, qui licet innumeris aerumnis oppressus esset,
atque continuis terroribus ob Isaurorum Incursiones, ut ipse scribit in
Epistolis ad Olympiadem, paene exanimaretur; nihilominus cum audisset
Caesarium, Monachum, amicum suum in Apollinaris and (...) Haeresim incidisse,
eum pro incredibili sua bonitate ab Haeresi avertere, atque in sincerae
pietatis viam revocare hac Epistola molitus est. Quantum vero Apollinaris
Haeresis tunc grassaretur, and quam multos invasisset, ex eo colligere licet,
quod contra Apollinaristas and Synusiastas scripserunt Diodorus, Tarsensis
Episcopus, quem supramemoravi, Gregorius Nyssenus, Cyrillus Alexandrinus,
Theodorus Mopsuestenus, Theophilus Antiochensis, ut alios plures omittam. Atque
ut ab eo errore Caesarium revocaret Joannes, eumque ad catholicam fidem, quae
duas in Christo naturas inconfusas sub una persona confitetur, Epistola
reduceret, comparationem ab Eucharistiae Sacramento mutuatur, in quo PANIS post
consecrationem, non jam PANIS, sed CORPUS CHRISTI APPELLARE DIGNUS EFFICITUR;
Etiamsi natura panis, inquit, in ipso permansit, and non duo corpora, sed unum
corpus Filii praedicatur. Quibus verbis sanctus Doctor veram ac realem, ut
vocant, corporis Christi in Eucharistia presentiam supponit, and agnoscit;
alias certe nulla esset cum humana ac divina in Christo natura Eucharistiae
comparatio. Ipse Chrysostomus Homil. 2. ad Populum Antiochensem: (...). Elias
enim pallium reliquit discipulo suo; Dei autem Filius ascendens in coelum,
nobis carnem suam reliquit: sed Elias se exuit, Christus vero and carnem suam
nobis reliquit, ipsamque habens, ascendit. Et Hom. 83. in Matthaeum: (...). Sic
etiam in mysteriis faciamus, non illa quae ante nos jacent, solummodo
aspicientes, sed verba quoque ejus tenentes. Nam verbis ejus defraudari non
possumus, sensus vero noster deceptu facillimus est: illa falsa esse non
possunt, hic saepius atque saepius fallitur. Quoniam ergo ille dixit, Hoc est
corpus meum, obediamus, and credamus, and oculis intellectus id perspiciamus.
Integrum librum conficerem, si ex Chrysostomo locos omnes excerperem, in quibus
de sacratissima Eucharistia similiter loquitur; sed laetius ac salubrius tibi
erit, eos in font legisse.

Thus far Bigotius's Preface: As to the Epistle it self, I have published it
exactly as it was in the Paris Edition, whose Pages I have retained, that those
who please, may see the Defect in that part of Palladius, out of which it was
rased. For the little Notes which I have added, they contain a Collation, 1. Of
the Latin of Bigotius, with the Latin of Mr. le Moyne's Copy, in which I do not
know that I have omitted the least variation, even of a single Letter. 2. Of
the Greek Fragments collected by Bigotius, with some other MSS. that have been
communicated to me. In which, A denotes the Arundel MS. cited by Dr. Cave in
his Chartophylax Eccles. C. one of Monsieur Colbert's Library, examined by the
learned Monsieur Allix. M. the Latin Copy published by Monsieur le Moyne.

EPISTOLA S. JOHAN. CHRYSOSTOM. Page 236. lit. Gg. part. alt. folii ed. Paris.

Praeter Authors a Bigotio laudatos, unde fragmenta Graeca hujus Epistolae
collegit vir eruditissimus; extat alius Nicephori liber MS. in Biblioth.
Colbert. continens quinque diversos tractatus. Ex secundo eorum contra Mamonas
quaedam collegit, and mecum communicavit reverendus D. P. Alix. Titulus autem
in illo MS. ita se habet, page 222. (...). Paulo aliter legitur hic titulus in
antiquo codice Bibliothecae Arundelianae a R. D. D. Cave in Chartoph. Eccles.
nuper edito, p. 69. (...), etc. uti in MS. Colbert.
(...).

(...) Alludit ad hunc locum vetus Author contra Severianos and Acephalos, a
Turriano editus, Bibl. Patr. Edit. 4. Tom. 4. ad fin. ubi post laudatum quendam
Ambrosii locum, subdit, Chrysostomus ad Caesarium Monachum. Haec est haeresis
ipsissima introducentium Mixtionem and Compositionem. Vid. Expostulationem p. X.
(...) Locus hic corruptus videtur: Quid si legamus (...) vel (...), ut sensus
sit, istud admiraberis, vel potius, istud admirari debuisses insani Apollinaris
absurdum; haec quippe est Haeresis ipsissima, etc....
(...).

(...).

(...), f. (...).
(...);

(...) (...).
(...). (...) deest in MS. A.
(...) (...), MS. C.
(...) (...). MS A.
(...), (...), ib. deest.
(...) (...) (...) deest in A.
(...) (...), ib.
(...), (...). ib.
(...). (...) pro (...), ib.
(...) (...) ib.
(...).

INCIPIT Epistola B Johannis Episcopi Constantinopolitani, ad Caesarium,
Monachum, tempore secundi exilii sui.

INSPEXIMUS literas tuae Reverentiae: inspeximus autem Var. lect. MS. M. N.
non Var. lect. MS. M. pter.
praeter Var. lect. MS. M. lachrymas: lachrymabimur.
lachrymas. Quomodo enim Var. lect. MS. M. N.
non Var. lect. MS. M. lachrymas: lachrymabimur.
lachrymabimur, and animam ipsam dolor conficimus, videntes fratrem singularem
vitam a pueritia eligentem, and Var. lect. MS. M. a(...)
(...), id est, consummate circa pietatem se habentem, subito autem Var. lect.
MS. M. Haeredicorum.
haereticorum jactibus pulsum. Anastas. in MS. Colleg. Clarom. Nicephor. C. P.
in Antirrhet. MS. Bibl. Colbert.
Et dicas forsitan ab errore ad id quod melius est venisse Te, and gratiam
confiteri his, qui Var. lect. MS. M. Ammirabilem.
admirabilem illum Var. lect. MS. M. Protulerit.
protulerint librum, quem magnum esse Var. lect. MS. M. Optime.
optima tua nominant scripta, qui splendide praedicat Var. lect. MS. M.
[Concursum essentialem sacrum facta ex Divinitate and Carnis unam autem ex hoc
perfici naturam.]
concursum essentialem and commixtionem sacram factam ex Divinitate and Carne,
unam autem ex hac perfici naturam.] Istud mirabitur insipientis Apollinarii
inconsideratio, Page 237. edir. Paris. G g. iij.
ista eorum qui introducunt MS. M. Contemplationem.
contemperationem and MS. M. (...)
(...), id est, commixtionem impiissima [ MS. M. [Intentioque.]
intentio, quae] procedens immutat quidem Arrii, Apollinarii, MS. M. Et deest.
and Sabellii, MS. M. Et deest.
and Manetis nihil. Passionem autem excogitari and adponi secundum illos
Unigeniti MS. M. emaginatur.
imaginatur Deitati, quod a MS. M. X^^anis.
Christianis alienum est.

Posside igitur Temetipsum iterum, Dilectissime, and ad priorem regredere
ordinem ab abominabili illa abstinens MS. M. [Opinionem and qua Apollinaris and
eorum qui Synusiaste dicuntur ipsa cogitatio assiduae puris, etc.]
opinione, quae est Apollinaris, and eorum qui Synusiastae dicuntur. Impia
cogitatio assidua e puris] influens nocere novit, qui secundum nos sunt
simplicitati conviventes. MS. M. Doctoris.
Ductoris enim eorum est liber, Apollinarii Dico, abest.
dico; Et fi.
etsi hunc sibi tua Reverentia non recte faciens negotiata est. Verum tamen nos
recordantes tuae nobiscum conversationis, sentientes autem ex his quae
scripsistis, errorem subsistere erga tuam dilectionem ex illorum insipientia
non solum erga dispensationis Misterium.
mysterium, magis autem and erga Nominum conjunctionem, excogitavimus Deo
cooperante nostrae infirmitati de omnibus manifestam ostentationem facere, ad
redargutionem quidem Male.
malae opinionis eorum qui Ereticum.
haereticum Tibi protulerunt librum, Edit. Paris. page 238.
correctionem autem tuae venerationis.

Dominum.
Deum ergo quando dicis, Dilectissime, agnovisti id quod simplex est MS. M.
Nature.
naturae, quod incompositum, quod inconvertibile, quod invisibile, quod
immortale, quod incircumscriptibile, quod incomprehensibile, and istis similia.
Hominem autem dicens, significasti id quod naturae est MS. M. In firmum.
infirmum, esuritionem, sitim, super Lazarum lachrymas, MS. M. Meum.
metum, Anastas. in MS. Clarom.
sudoris ejectionem, and his similia, quibus id quod divinum est extra [est.
MS. M. [e^ Xum dn]
Christum autem] quando dicis conjunxisti utrumque, unde and passibilis dicatur
idem ipse and MS. M. Im-passibilis, deficit im, spatio tamen relicto ubi olim
fuerit,
impassibilis, passibilis quidem carne, impassibilis autem Deitate. Eadem ipsa
and de Filio, and MS. M. XPO. and Inu. and dno.
Christo, and Jesu, and Domino praedicantur. Communia enim ista, Edit. Paris.
239. lit. Gg. 4.
and [ MS. M. [Susceptibili avarum]
susceptibilia duarum] Essentiarum nomina sunt; quarum conjunctio in haereticis
quidem errorem facit, proprio pro communi utentes nomine [ MS. M. [XPt unos
autem.]
Christi uno. His autem] communibus istis MS. M. Uti oportet, deest.
uti oportet Nominibus quando dispensationis confitendum est mysterium. Si enim
MS. M. dm.
Deum dixeris pertulisse, qualicunque MS. M. Cogitationem.
cogitatione quod Edit. Paris. page 239.
impossible est, dixisti, id quod Blasphemum est, MS. M. [Et immane sed.]
and in Sic videtur legendum; and in Manetis, and in aliorum Haeresum
declinasti impietatem. Si iterum, etc.
Manetis, and] in aliorum MS. M. Haeresum.
haeresim declinasti. Impietatem, si iterum hominem dixeris qui pertulit,
inveniris purum aedificans templum. Templum Forte melius carnis.
Crucis extra inhabitantem nunquam dicitur, quia jam non est Templum. Joan.
8.40.
Et forsitan dicunt, and quomodo MS. D. le Moyne. Dns.
Dominus dixit, Vt quid me vultis occidere hominem qui veritatem vobis locutus
sum quam audivi a MS. M. le Moyne. do.
Deo? Been and omnino sapienter hoc dicendum est. [ MS M [Neque enim ex
inhabitanti defraudabatur deitate]
Neque enim ex hoc ab Inhabitanti defraudabatur:] sed significare volens
patientem naturam hominis memoriam fecit, propter quod and MS M ds.
Deus and Homo MS M Est Christus, Martyr l. c. in tract. de Euchar. Oxon. MS. M.
Christus: MS M XPS.
Deus propter impassibilitatem, Homo propter Passionem. Unus filius, unus MS M
dns.
Dominus, idem ipse proculdubus unitarum naturarum, unam dominationem, unam
potestatem possidens, MS M Etiam si.
etiamsi non MS M Consubstantialiter Martyr.
consubstantiales existunt, [ MS M [MS.M. Et unaquaeque in quo mixtam
proprietatis conservat agnitionem propter hoc quod inconfusa sunt duo.]
and unaquaeque MS M Incommixta. Martyr. ib.
incommixtam Proprietatis conservat agnitionem, propter hoc quod MS M Inconfusa
sint duo. Id.
inconfusa sunt,
dico.] Sicut enim antequam MS M MS. M. Sci^sicetur,
sanctificetur PANIS PANEM nominamus, divina autem illum Edit. Paris. page 240.
MS M Sci^ficante gra. Id.
Sanctificante Gratia, mediante Sacerdote, liberatus est quidem MS M Ab
Appellati^one. Ibid.
APPELLATIONE PANIS, dignus autem habitus est MS. M. Dominicae.
DOMINICI CORPORIS APPELLATIONE, etiamsi NATURA PANIS in ipso permansit, and
non duo Corpora sed MS. M. Unus,
unum Corpus filii MS. M. Praedicamus.
praedicatur: sic and Hic Martyr loc. cit. Haec. Totum hunc locum post
Turrianum in Edit. Damasceni, sic citat Albertinus de Euch. l. 2. p. 532. Sic
and hic divina (...) insidente corpori natura, etc.
hic Divina MS. M. (...)
(...), Nicephor. Anastas. Joan. Damascen. To. IV. Var. lect. Canibi. p. 211.
id est inundante corporis natura, unum filium, unam personam, utraque haec
fecerunt. Agnoscendum tamen inconfusam and indivisibilem rationem, non in una
solum natura, Theorianus in legatione ad Armenios. p. 74.
sed in duabus perfectis. Si enim unius, quomodo idquod inconfusum est, quomodo
quod indivisibile, quomodo unitio dicitur aliquando? [ MS. M. [Sibimet ipsi
unirique.]
Sibimet ipsi enim uniri quae] una est, aut confundi, aut dividi impossible
est. Quod ergo infernum evomuit, unam in XPO.
Christo naturam dicere putamus Quae sequuntur extant apud Jo. Damascenum.
divinam solam nominantes, non omni modo unam negant, Nam.
nostram, dico, salutem aut humanan retinentes, non divinae abnegationem
faciunt, Dicunt que.
dicuntque perdidit quod proprium erat. Si enim unus est, salva nobis est
unitio Omni modo.
omnimodo, and ea quae unitioni sunt propria, salvari necesse est: Si Edit.
Paris. page 241. lit. Hh.
enim non, nec unitio, sed confusio and abolitio. Mox autem ad Interrogationis
fluctuantes resposionem, ad aliquid aliud exiliunt, quod non sit proprium ad
Interrogationem: and inconstantes emittunt Voces; Pertulit Ds.
Deus and non pertulit, and si petantur modum dicere, ad ignorantiam recedunt,
proserentes; Quomodo Volunt XPI.
voluit Christi apud ipsos memoria fugiente posthaec MS. D. le Moyne.
Vituperati.
vituperari in hoc? Mox dicunt, and MS. D. le Moyne. XPS.
Christus non est MS. D. le Moyne. Ds.
Deus sed and Homo. Et iterum dicunt, Post MS. D. le Moyne. Unitatem.
Unitionem non oportet dicere duas naturas. Attend significationem dicti.
Unitionem dixisti: unius unitionem non invenis fieri, quomodo MS. D. le Moyne.
Prenientes.
praevenientes diximus, Joan. 1.24.
sed Verbum Caro factum est and MS. D. le Moyne. Speculaneorum.
speculare eorum querentur subtilitatem. Intulit enim, and inhabitavit in
nobis. Nunquid non ibi videtur, MS. D. le Moyne. Qui.
quia aliud est quod inhabitat praeter habitationem. Si cognovissent, 1 Cor.
11.8.
nunquam MS. D. le Moyne. D nm.
Dominum gloria crucifixissent. Dominum iterum quando dixeris, non proprium sed
Commune MS. D. le Moyne. Significat.
significatur nomen, Passionis and Impassibilitatis susceptibile. Consueverant
autem and istud Edit. Paris. page 242.
praetendere putamus: Non Corpus MS. D. le Moyne. Di.
dei and sanguinem accipimus, fideliter ac MS.M. Piae.
pie suscipiendum, non quia Corpus and sanguinem possidet id quod divinum est
natura, sed quia MS.M. Ea deest.
ea quae Carnis sunt, propria facit. O inconsideratio! O impia Cogitatio!
periclitatur enim apud ipsos dispensationis Mysterium, and iterum Dominicum
corpus, sicut MS.M. Unum corpus.
verum corpus confiteri non patiuntur: per cogitationem enim dici conversum
MS.M. Eti.
esse hoc in deitatem imaginantur, unam hinc construentes naturam, and ipsam
cujus sit non MS.M. Invenientes.
juvantes dicere, ut passionem divinitati; undique secundum Apollinarium
excogitantes, decidant a MS.M. Pmissis.
praemissis bonis putamus non MS.M. contremescent.
contremiscent ista dicere audientes. Non cogitant aeternum judicium, and MS.M.
dni.
Domini vocem dicentis, Ego sum and non MS.M. Inmutor.
immutor. Malac. 3.6. Mat. xxvi. 41.
Caro infirma MS.M. Sps.
Spiritus autem promptus Ibid. 39.
Pater si possibile est transeat a me calix iste. -- Ibid. 38.
Tristis est anima mea usque ad mortem. Luke 24.39.
Palpate and videte, quia Sps.
Spiritus ^arnem and ossa non habet sicut me videtis habere. Putamus Deitati
ista apta sunt. Audiant and Petrum dicentem Edit. Paris. page 243. Lit. Hh. ij.
Mat. 16.16.
XPO.
Christo pro nobis passo carne, and non dixit Deitate. Et iterum, Tu es
Christus filius Dei vivi: Viventis dixit, non morientis. Et quaecunque his
similia divina nos edocet Scriptura, cui violenti esse Haeretici non desistunt.
Anast. Nicephorus.
Horum istas novitates (...) deest in MS. A.
vocum declinantes, Charissimae.
Charissime, ad id quod praejacet, revertamur; pium and valde pium, XPm.
Christum qui morte circumdatus est, confiteri in divinitate perfectum, and in
humanitate perfectum, unum filium unigenitum, non dividendum in filiorum
dualitatem, XPS.
portantem tamen in semetipso indivisarum duarum naturarum inconvertibiliter
proprietates, non alterum and alterum, absit, sed unum and eundem MS. M. Dnm.
Dominum, MS. M. Ihm.
Jesum, MS. M. dm.
Deum, Verbum, carne nostra amictum, In MS collect. Biblioth. reg. Gall. n.
1026. p. 247.
and ipsa non inanimata, aut irrationabili, sicut impius MS. M. Apollinarius.
Apollinaris dixit. Istis mentem intendamus, fugiamus eos qui dividunt. MS. M.
Nam etsi enim.
Nam etsi duplex natura, veruntamen indivisibilis and indissipabilis unitio,
Edit. Paris. p. 244.
in una filiationis conftenda persona, and una MS. M. Subsistantia.
substantia. Fugiamus qui unam naturam post unitionem prodigaliter dicunt;
unius enim cogitatione impassibili Deo passionem adjungere impelluntur,
dispensationem abnegantes, and Diaboli Gehennam arripientes. Ista propter
mensuram Epistolae sufficere arbitror, ad confirmationem tuae dilectionis, o
magnifice.

Explicit Epistula.
Epistola B. Joannis Episcopi Constantinopolitani ad Caesarium, Monachum,
tempore secundi exilii sui. Amen.



NUMBER. VI. Having, to satisfy the Vindicator, used such exactness in my
Quotations, as to refer, for the most part, to the very Pages where they are;
it was thought fit, if it may be, to prevent all future Cavil, that I should
here subjoyn this following Account of the Editions made use of by me.
A.
AQuinatis summa Theologiae, Fol. Colon. 1662. Articles of the Church of
England. See Sparrow. Arcudius de concordia Ecclesiae Occidentalis and
Orientalis, Fol. Paris 1626. Albertinus de Eucharistia, Fol. Daventriae 1654.
Arnauld Perpetuite de la Foy de l'Eglise Catholic touchant l'Eucharistie, 5
Edit. 8vo. Paris 1672. Amicable Accommodation, etc.
B.
Bellarmini Controversiae 3 Vol. Ingolstadii 1586. Idem de Indulgentiis, 8vo.
Coloniae 1599. Blondel of the Sybilline Oracles, Engl. Fol. Land. 1661.
Breviarium Romanum, 8vo. Antverpiae 1572. Bramhal's Works, Fol. Dublin 1677.
Bigotius vita Chrysostomi per Palladium, G. L. 4to. Paris 1680. Balsamon in
Concilia in Synodico, Oxonii 1672. Bonae Card. opera 3 Vol. 8vo. Paris 1676,
1677. Nouvelles dela repub. de Lettres Mr. B -- Juin 1686.
C.
Crasset, veritable Devotion, etc. 4to. Paris 1679. Card. Capisucchi Capit.
Theol. selec. Concilia Labei 18 Vol. Paris. Common Prayer of the Church of
England. Claude Reponse au pere Nouet, 8vo. Amsterdam 1668. Cosins History of
Popish Transubstantiation, 8vo. Land. 1679. Cassandri opera, Paris 1616. Ejusd.
Consultatio, 8vo. Vid. Grotii via ad pacem. Cajetanus Card. in D. Thomam,
Venetiis 1612. Ejusd. Comment. in S. Scr. Lugduni. Canones, etc. Council.
Trident. 12mo. Coloniae 1679. Calvisii Chronologia, Fol. Francofurti 1650.
Cave, Chartophylax Ecclesiasticus, 8vo. Land. 1685.
D.
Dallaeus adversus Latinorum de cultus religiosi objecto Traditionem. 4to.
Genevae. 1664. Idem de Poenis and Satisfactionibus Amstael. 1649. Durandus in
sententias, Lugduni 1569.
E.
Estius in Sententias, Paris 1672. Euchologium cum Notis Goar. Paris 1647.
Expostulatio de Joan. Chrysostom. Epist. suppressa, Land. 1682. 4to. Epiphanii
opera Gr. Lat. Coloniae 1682. L' Esprit de Mr. Arnauld 2 Vol. 8vo. Deventer.
1684.
F.
Forbesii instructiones Historico-Theologicae, Amst. 1645.
G.
Grotius via ad pacem, cum consult. Cassandri, 8vo. 1642. Gregorii Nazianzeni
opera, Gr. Lat. Paris 1609. -- Invectiva in Julianum, 4to. Etonae 1610.
Gregorii Papae liber Sacrament. Menardi, 4to. Edit. Paris 1642. Gratiani
decretum, Fol. Paris 1585. Gamachaeus: Godefry vie de S. Athanase 2 Vol. 4.
Paris 1679. Idem vie de S. Basile 2 Vol. 4. Paris 1679.
H.
Hookers Ecclesiastical Polity, Fol. Land. 1676. Book of Homilies, Oxford 1683.
I.
Index ex purgatorius, Fol. Madriti 1667. Jesuits Loyalty collect. of several
Treatises, 4to. Land. 1677 Instruction pour gagner le Jubilee, 12mo. Paris 1683.
Jurieux Preservatif contre le Changement de Religion. 8vo. -- Le Janseniste
convaincu de vain Sophstiquerie, Amst. 1683. -- Prejuger legitimes contre le
Papisme, 4to. 1685. Innocent the XI. Bull for an universal Jubilee upon the
relief of Vienna, August 11th. 1683.
L.
Ludolphi Historia Aethiopica Lat. Fol. Francofurti. 1681. Lombardi
sententiarum libri 4. 8vo. Moguntiae 1632.
M.
Maldonate in Prophetas majores, 4to. Moguntiae 1611. -- In Evangelia, Fol.
Moguntiae 1611. Missale Romanum, 8vo. Paris 1616. Missale in usum Sarum, Fol.
1527. Stephani le Moyne varia sacra, 4to. Lugd. Bat. 1685. Petri Martyris de
Eucharistia. Monsieur Maimbourg peaceable Method, Engl. 4to. Monsieur de
Meaux's Exposition, Engl. 4to. 1685. -- French 5 Edition, 12mo. a Paris 1681.
Traite de la Communion sous les deux Especes, 12mo. Paris 1682. -- Pastoral
Letter, Engl. 4to. 1686.
N.
Nouet de la presence de J. C. dans le tres saint Sacrament, 4to. Paris 1666.
Nicole, Prejuges legitimes contre les Calvinistes. Paris 1679 -- Les P. R.
convaincus de schism, 8vo. Paris 1684
O.
Officium B. Virginis, 8vo. Antverpiae 1631. Office of the holy Week, Lat.
English, 8vo. Paris 1670.
P.
Pontificale Romanum, Fol. Venetiis 1561. La Politic du Clerge de France,
12mo. Amst. 1682. Du Perron Replique a la reponse du Roy de la Grande Bretagne,
Fol. Paris 1620. Du Perron de l'Eucharistie, Fol. Paris 1629. Petavius Dogmata
Theologica, Fol. Paris 1650. Papist represented and misrepresented, 1st.
Edition. 1685 Pajon Examen du livre qui portepourtitre Prejugez legitimes
contre les Calvinistes, 2 Vol. 12mo. a Bionne 1673.
R.
Reponse a un ecrit publie contre les Miracles de la Saint Espine. Second
Reponse a Monsieur de Condom, 8vo. 1680. Ruffinus. Rituale Romanum, 4to.
Antverpiae 1620. Reflections Generales sur l'Exposition de Monsieur de Meaux,
8vo. a Cologne de Brandebourg 1685.
S.
Sparrow's Collection of Canons, etc. 4to. Land. 1684. Sexti Senensis
Bibliotheca, Fol. Coloniae 1586. Suarez opera, Fol. Moguntiae 1604. in 3 p. D.
Th. 1610. Scotus in sententias, primitive Letter, Fol. Socrates, Sozomen, Fol.
Paris Edit. Valesii.
T.
Thomasi codex Sacramentorum, 4to. Romae 1680. Theodoret. opera 5 Vol. G. L.
Fol. Paris 1642. Theophilus, Turrianus, citati ab Albertino.
V.
Vasquez in D. Thomam, Ingolstadii 1606. in 3 part. Venetiis 1610. Vindication
of the B. of Condom's Exposition. Vincentius Lirinensis. Gregorius de Valentia,
apud Albertinum.
Z.
Zonaras in Concilia: In synodico Oxoniensi. 1672.
ERRATA.
Page xvii. lin 26. of the read of their. page 1. l. 4. these r. those. page 8.
l. 26. marg. and this is. page 20. l. ult. p. 209. r. 249. page 26. r. hard put
to prove. p. 94. l. 23. p. 50. r. p. 23 page 95. l. 19. Art. 5.27. page 125. l.
8. of r. to. l. 18. I have. page 151. not. lachrimas, lachrimabimur. Some
literal Faults there are besides these, which the Reader may please to correct.

Add to page 114. lin. 24.
But why do I thus long insist upon Probabilities? Monsieur de Meaux himself
owns that he has both seen and read the Preservative; and in his Treatise of
Communion, does particularly encounter what Monsieur Jurieu had therein
advanced against his Exposition: And yet has this man, after all, the
Confidence to tell the World not only that he never read Father Crasset's Book,
Vindicat. p. 10.
which is very improbable, but that he never so much as heard it mentioned,
that there was any thing in it contrary to his Exposition; though that Author, in
that very Book, has spent no less than Page 97, 98, 99, 100, 101, 102, 103.
six or seven Pages on purpose to prove it; not to say any thing of the Such
are among others. M. la B. answer to his Advertisement p 79. Reflections
Generales sur l' Exposition de M de Meaux, p 121, 144. M. Arnaud reponse au
Preservatif. M. Jurieu's Vindication: le Janseniste convaincu de vain
Sophistiquerie, p 72, etc. L' Esprit de M. Arnauld, Vol 2. p. 174. Politic du
Clerge de France, p. 67.
many other Treatises, and some of them Answers to his Exposition too, but all
of them well known in France, that have done the same.

He that can believe this, let him also believe, that M. de Meaux had no hand
in the first Edition of his Exposition; That the Sorbonne Doctors never
corrected it, nor he suppressed it upon that account; That that whole Edition
was condemned only to make some little Alterations for the benefit of the
Method, and the greater neatness of the Discourse and Style. In a word, That
what he has so shamefully asserted in his late Pastoral Letter, p. 3, 4.
Pastoral Letter, as to a certain Point, which I shall beg leave not to name,
but which we can at any time bring him thousands to contradict, he either ever
believed himself, or ever heard any other Bishops say; all which, as they have
been shown to be equally credible, so no doubt are they equally true too.

FINIS.

