A DECLARATION By His Highness the Prince of Orange; for the keeping of the
Peace, etc. in the Kingdom of SCOTLAND.
WILLIAM HENRY, By the Grace of GOD, Prince of Orange, etc.

WHEREAS the Lords and Gentlemen of the Kingdom of Scotland met at Whitehall at
Our Desire, to advise Us what was to be done for Securing the Protestant
Religion and Restoring the Laws and Liberties of that Kingdom, Have desired Us
to call a Meeting of the Estates in March next, and in the mean while to take
upon Us the Administration of public Affairs, both Civil and Military, the
disposal of the public Revenue and Fortresses, and the doing every thing that
is necessary for the preserving of the Peace,

WE being desirous to Omit nothing that may tend to the public Good and
Happiness of that Kingdom, Have (in pursuance of the said Advice) Issued forth
Our Orders for the Calling of the said Meeting of the Estates, And to the end
that in the mean time the public Peace, and the Fortresses may be Secured, and
the Revenue Collected, We Do hereby Will and Require all Persons being
Protestants that are at present in the Possession of the Offices of Sheriffs,
Justices of the Peace, Magistrates of Burghs, Baillies of Regalities, Baillies
of Bailliaries, Stewards of Stewartries, Governors or Lieutenants of
Fortresses, Keepers of Prisons or Prisoners, or in the Possession of any
inferior Offices and places of the like nature, and likewise all Persons being
Protestants that are in the Possession of any Office or Employment, in
Collecting, Receiving, Managing, or Ordering of the public Revenue, to take
upon them, and to continue in the Exercise of the said Offices and Places
respectively, Doing and Ordering every thing, which the Trust reposed in them,
according to the nature of the said Offices, requires to be done, and ordered
in the usual Manner, Form and Method; And We Do in a particular manner
Authorize, Empower and Require; such of them to whom the Care of preserving the
Peace and Quiet of the Nation belongs; To use all Diligence for Suppressing all
Routs, Tumults, Disorders, Violences, and such other Unwarrantable Practices as
are contrary to it: And We do hereby Expressly Prohibit and Discharge all
Disturbances and Violences upon the account of Religion, or the Exercise
thereof, or any such like Pretense, and that no Interruption be made, or if any
has been made, that it Cease in the Free and Peaceable Exercise of Religion,
whether it be in the Churches, or in the Public and Private Meetings, of those
of a different Persuasion. Requiring, Likeas We do hereby Require all
Protestants, as they love the Good of their Country, and Religion, and are
willing in their several Stations, and Capacities to Concur with Us, in Our
Endeavors to bring Matters to a Happy and Desirable Settlement, that they will
live Peaceably together, and without Disquieting or Molesting one another;
Enjoy their several Opinions and Forms of Worship, whether according to Law, or
otherways, with the same Freedom, and in the same manner, in which they did
Enjoy them in the Month of October last, till such time, as by Regular and
Legal Methods a due Temper may be fallen on, for Composing and Settling those
Differences: And to the End, that the Peace may be the more effectually
Secured; We Require all Men, or Numbers of Men in Arms, by virtue of any Order
or Authority, and under any Title and Designation whatsoever, whether they be
standing Forces, or Militia Forces, Modelled into Regular Troops, and kept on
Foot, as standing Forces, to Separat, Dismiss, and Disband themselves. Likeas,
We do hereby Disband them, and appoint them to Retire to their respective
Dwellings, with full assurance to them, that care shall be taken in due time
for their having their Pay, if any shall be found due to them. And We do
further Prohibit and Discharge, all Persons in time coming to take Arms, or to
continue in Arms upon any Pretense whatsoever, without a Commission, or an
express Order from Us, Excepting from what is above Written, Likeas, We do
hereby Except the Garrisons of the Fortresses, and the Company of Foot
entertained by the Town of Edinburgh, for the Guard of the said Town, whom We
do appoint to continue in the Exercise of their Duty (they being Protestants)
in the said Garrisons and Town. And whereas, several Roman Catholics have
been, and are still in the possession of diverse of the Places and Offices
abovementioned; We do hereby Require them to leave the said Offices and
Places, and to retire to their several Dwelling-houses, where We Forbid and
Discharge all Persons to Disquiet, Disturb, or Molest them any manner of way:
And We appoint the next immediate Protestant Officers in the Fortresses, where
Governors, Deputy-Governours, or other Officers are Roman Catholics, to take
upon them the Custody of the said Fortresses, and in the same manner that the
Protestants concerned in the Collecting and Managing of the Revenue, and the
Keeping of the Peace, do Supply by their Diligence, the Vacancies that are, or
may happen to be in places of the like nature; This Our Declaration to be of
force, and to take effect till the said Meeting of the Estates in March next;
and to be without prejudice to any other Orders We may think fit to give to any
Person, or Persons, for the ends abovementioned. And We do further Order this
Our Declaration to be Printed and Published at Edinburgh, and Printed Copies of
the same to be given, or sent to the Sheriffs and Stewart-Clerks of the several
Shires and Stewartries, whom We do hereby Require to Publish the same upon the
first Mercat-day after the receipt thereof, at the Crosses of the Head-Burghs
of their respective Shires and Stewartries, in the due and usual manner.

Given at St. James 's the Sixth day of February, in the Year of our Lord, One
thousand six hundred eighty eight and nine. W. H. Prince of Orange:

EDINBVRGH, Printed in the Year, 1689.


