Imprimatur.

Carolus Alston R. P. D. Hen. Episc. Land. a Sacris Domesticis.
March. 1. 1685/6.
A COLLECTION OF SEVERAL DISCOURSES AGAINST POPERY.

By WILLIAM WAKE, Preacher to the Honorable Society of GRAY'S INN.

LONDON: Printed for Ric. Chiswell, at the Rose and Crown in St. Paul's
Churchyard. MDCLXXXVIII.

A TABLE OF The DISCOURSES contained in this COLLECTION.
I. AN Exposition of the Doctrine of the Church of England, etc. in Answer to
the Bishop of MEAUX. II. A Defense of the Exposition of the Doctrine of the
Church of England, against the Exceptions of Monsr. de MEAUX and his
VINDICATOR. III. A Second Defense of the Exposition of the Doctrine of the
Church of England, against the new Exceptions of Monsr. de MEAUX and his
VINDICATOR. PART I. PART II. PART III.
IV. A Discourse of the HOLY EUCHARIST, in the two great Points of the REAL
PRESENCE, and of the ADORATION OF THE HOST. V. An Historical Account of the
Doctrine of the REAL PRESENCE professed in the Church of England, etc. VI. Two
Discourses of PURGATORY, and PRAYERS FOR THE DEAD. VII. A Discourse of the
Nature of IDOLATRY, in Answer to the Bishop of Oxon's Reasons for Abrogating
the TEST. VIII. The Present State of the Controversy between the Church of
England, and the Church of Rome. IX. A Continuation of the Present State of the
Controversy, etc.
Other Treatises written by the same Author.

X. A Sermon on the xxxth of January, Preached at PARIS, Anno 1684/5. XI.
Preparation for Death: Being a Letter sent to a Young Gentlewoman in France, in
a dangerous Distemper of which She died.
AN EXPOSITION OF THE DOCTRINE OF THE Church of England, IN THE Several
ARTICLES proposed by Monsieur de MEAUX, Late Bishop of Condom, IN HIS
EXPOSITION of the DOCTRINE OF THE Catholic Church.

To which is prefixed a particular account of Monsieur de Meaux's Book.

LONDON, Printed for Richard Chiswell, at the Rose and Crown in St. Paul's
Churchyard. MDCLXXXVI.

THE PREFACE.
THE smalness of this Treatise would hardly justify the solemnity of a
Preface, but that it might be thought too great a rudeness to press without
some Ceremony upon a Book, which both the Merit and Character of the Author,
and the Quality of those Approbations he has prefixed to it, may justly seem to
have fenced from all vulgar attempts, as Sacred and inviolable. It may perhaps
be some satisfaction to the Reader too to know, how it is come to pass that a
Mere Exposition of the Doctrine of the Church of Rome, pretending to contain
nothing but what they have always professed, and in their Council of Trent
plainly declared to be their Doctrine; should have become so considerable, as
not only to be approved by many Persons of the greatest Eminency in that
Church, but even to be recommended by the whole body of the Clergy of France in
their Assembly 1682; Method. 10.
and wherever it has come, done so many Miracles, as not only common report
speaks, but even the Advertisement it self prefixed to it, takes care to tell
us that it has.

The first design of Monsieur de Meaux's Book was either to satisfy or to
seduce the late Marshall de Turenne. How far it contributed thereunto I am not
able to say; but am willing to believe that the change that honorable Person
made of his Religion, was upon some better grounds than the bare Exposition of
a few Articles of the Roman Faith; and that the Author supplied either in his
personal Conferences with him, or by some other Papers to us unknown, what was
wanting to the first draught which we have seen of this.

The Manuscript Copy which then appeared, and for about four Years together
passed up and down in private hands with great applause, wanted all those
Chapters of the Eucharist, Tradition, The Authority of the Church and Pope,
which now make up the most considerable part of it; and in the other points
which it handled, seemed so loosly and favorably to propose the Opinions of
the Church of Rome, that not only many undesigning Persons of that Communion
were offended at it, but the Protestants who saw it, generally believed that
Monsieur de Meaux durst not publicly own, what in his Exposition he privately
pretended to be their Doctrine.

And the Event showed that they were not altogether mistaken. For in the
beginning of the Year 1671 the Exposition being with great care, and after the
consideration of many years reduced into the form in which we now see it; and
to secure all, fortified with the Approbation of the Archbishop of Reims and
nine other Bishops, who profess that Having examined it with all the Care which
the importance of the matter required, they found it conformable to the
Doctrine of the Church, and as such recommended it to the People which God had
committed to their conduct, it was sent to the Press. The impression being
finished and just ready to come abroad; the Author, who desired to appear with
all the Advantage to himself and his Cause that was possible, sent it to some
of the Doctors of the Sorbonne for their Approbation to be joined to that of
the Bishops, that so no Authority, ordinary or extraordinary might be wanting
to assert the Doctrine contained in it, to be so far from the suspicion the
Protestants had conceived of it, that it was truly and without disguise
Catholic, Apostolic, and Roman.

But to the great surprise of Monsieur de Meaux, and those who had so much
cried up his Treatise before, the Doctors of the Sorbonne to whom it was
communicated, instead of the Approbation that was expected, confirmed what the
Protestants had said of it; and, as became their faculty, marked several of the
most considerable parts of it, wherein the Exposition by the too great desire
of palliating, had absolutely perverted the Doctrine of their Church.

To prevent the open Scandal which such a Censure might have caused, with great
Industry, and all the Secrecy possible, the whole Edition was suppressed, and
the several places which the Doctors had marked changed; and the Copy so
speedily sent back to the Press again, that in the end of the same year another
much altered was publicly exposed, as the first Impression that had at all
been made of it.

Yet this could not be so privately carried, but that it soon came to a public
knowledge; insomuch that one of the first Answers that was made to it, charged
Monsieur de Meaux with this change. I do not hear that he has ever yet thought
fit to deny the Relation, either in the Advertisement prefixed to the later
Editions of his Book, wherein yet he replies to some other passages of the same
Treatise, or in any other Vindication; Whether it be that such an imputation
was not considerable enough to be taken notice of, or that it was too true to
be denied, let the Reader judge. But certainly it appears to us not only to
give a clear account of the Design and Genius of the whole Book; but to be a
plain demonstration, how improbable soever Monsieur de Meaux would represent
it, That it is not impossible for a Bishop of the Church of Rome, either not to
be Advertisement Page 1.
sufficiently instructed in his Religion to know what is the Doctrine of it; or
not sufficiently sincere, as without disguise to represent it. And since a Copy
of that very Book so marked, as has been said, by the Doctors of the Sorbonne
is fallen into my hands, I shall gratify the Sea the Collection at the end of
the Preface.
Readers curiosity with a particular View of some of the Changes that have been
made, that so he may judge whether of the Two were the Cause of those great
advances, which the Author in that first Edition had thought fit to make
toward us.

It might perhaps appear a very pardonable curiosity in us, after the knowledge
we have had of the first miscarriage of this Book at the Sorbonne, to enquire
how it comes to pass, that among so many other Approbations as have with great
Industry been procured to the later Editions of it, we do not yet see any
subscription of theirs to it, even now. Monsieur de Meaux could not certainly
be ignorant of what weight the Censure of that Learned Faculty is with us; and
that such an Approbation might not only have been more easily obtained, but
would also more effectually have wiped away the blot cast upon his Book by
their former refusal, than all the Letters and Complements that could come from
the other side the Mountains, and which France it self has taught us, in
matters more considerable than this, not to have too high a Value for: Nor can
we suppose any thing else, than that the fear of a further Correction kept it
from being any more submitted to their Censure; and that the Author would
rather pass without the Honor of their Approbation, than run the hazard of a
second Refusal.

But for this, because we cannot speak any thing certain, we will not pursue
our Conjectures. Certain it is that whatever the judgment of the Sorbonne would
now have been of it, many of the Church of Rome were still dissatisfied with
it. See his Advertisement.
And how improbable soever Monsieur de Meaux would have us think that one of
his Answerers affirms, that a Papist should have written against him; Yet not
only the confessed sincerity of Monsieur Conrart who often declared that he had
seen it, but the undoubted integrity of some others by whom I have been assured
that they had it, in their hands, obliges me to join in the assertion, that
Monsieur M --,one of the Roman Communion had finished an Answer to it, before
any of the Protestants were published, however upon some certain Considerations
it was thought fit to suppress it.

It will perhaps be looked upon, that this confirmation of that Manuscript
Answer deserves as little assent, as Monsieur de Meaux has thought fit to give
to Monsieur de la B -- 's first Assertion of it. And therefore to show that it
is not impossible, nor indeed very improbable, that Papists should write one
against another; and that the Method of the Exposition, how plausible soever to
deceive Protestants, has nevertheless offended the sincere and Undesigning of
the other Communion; I will beg leave to produce two or three undeniable
Witnesses upon some of the first and chiefest Points of it; and which though
not written purposely against it, yet I am persuaded, Monsieur de Meaux himself
will be so just as to confess, that he cannot be altogether unconcerned in them.

For his first Point, The Invocation of Saints; The great moderation of the
Exposition tells us only, That it is useful to pray to them, and that we ought
to do it in the same Spirit of Charity, and in the same Order of Brotherly
Society with which we entreat our Friends on Earth to pray for us: that all the
Prayers of the Church howsoever they may be worded, yet must still be
understood to be reduced to this form, PRAY FOR US.

Now what Monsieur de Meaux here says in general concerning the Invocation of
Saints, another Tract Printed about the same time at Cologne, and entitled
Salutary Advertisements of the Blessed Virgin, to her indiscreet Adorers;
particularly applied to that Service, which with so much superstition [Avis
salutaires de la bien heureuse Vierge a ses Devots indiscrets. This Tract was
published first at Gand in Latin, by Monsieur Widenselt a German, Intendant of
the Affairs of the Prince of Suarzembergh; afterward Translated into French.]
is paid in the Church of Rome to the Mother of Christ.

The Book is every where full of Expressions of Honor and Respect for her; and
only speaks against that Worship which Monsieur de Meaux here declares in the
name of the Council of Trent to be none of theirs. It was sent abroad into the
World with all the Advantage imaginable: It had the Approbation of the Bishop
of Mysia, Suffragan to the Archbishop of Cologne; of the Vicar General of the
place; of the Censure of Gant; of the Canons and Divines of Malines; of the
University of Louvain; and Lastly of Monsieur the Bishop of Tournay, who
recommended it as a Treatise full of solid Piety, and very fit and necessary to
draw people out of those Errors and Abuses into which their Superstition had
led them.

Yet notwithstanding all this Applause, if we enquire what success this Book
had with others, Father Crasset the Jesuit, who wrote purposely against it, See
his Book entitled La veritable devotion envers La St. Vierge. 4o.
his Book Printed at Paris 1679, Licensed by the Provincial, approved by the
three Fathers of the Society appointed to examine it, and Lastly, authorized by
the King's Permission, tells us, La Preface p. 1, 2.
That for fear of giving Scandal to Heretics, he had given a very great one to
(those he calls) Catholics: That the Learned Men of all Nations had written
against him; that the Holy See had condemned him; Spain had banished him out of
its Dominions, and forbid to Read or Print his Book, as containing Propositions
suspected of Error and Impiety, that abused the Holy Scripture, and imposed
upon Catholics, by taking them off from the Piety and Devotion due to the
Mother of God; In a word, from the general Invocation of Saints and Worship of
Images.

I shall not need to say how far the Fathers Zeal carries him in the Answer it
self: It is evident that what Monsieur de Meaux tells us, is only Useful, the
Jesuit declares to be absolutely Necessary: Page 31. etc.
That we are indispensably obliged to pray to her: That it is the intention of
God, that we should obtain both Grace and Glory by her; That all Men should be
saved by the Merits of the Son, and the Intercession of the Mother, and that
forasmuch therefore as God has resolved not to give any Grace but what passes
through the Hands of Mary; as we cannot be saved without Grace, so it must be
confessed that we cannot be saved without her. This is I presume somewhat more
than what Monsieur de Meaux expounds to us; and I shall leave it to any one to
judge whether this Father who has showed himself so zealous against the Author
of the Blessed Virgins Salutary Advertisements, could have been very well
pleased with Monsieur de Meaux's Exposition.

The next Point which the Exposition advances, is concerning The Worship of
Images, Monsieur de Meaux in the Edition suppressed, affirmed, That the Sea the
Collection at the end of the Preface.
Church of Rome does not so much honor the Image of the Apostle or Martyr, as
the Apostle or Martyr in presence of the Image. And though the Censure passed
upon this new fancy, obliged him to speak a little more plainly, yet is it only
thus, even now, that when the Church pays an Honor to the Image of an Apostle
or Martyr, her intention is not so much to honor the Image, as to honor the
Apostle or Martyr in presence of the Image.

Concerning which the Reader may please to observe, that Cardinal Capisucchi
one of the Approvers of Monsieur de Meaux's Exposition, has lately set forth a
Volume of Controversies at Rome, with all the most solemn Permissions and
Approbations that can be desired, in which he formally contradicts the Doctrine
of the same Exposition in this Point; and concludes, That the Church in the
Councils of Art. 8. p. 647.
Nice and Trent forbids only such a Divine Honor to Images as is Idolatrous,
i. e. says he, which is paid to Images in and for themselves; and by which the
Image is worshipped, as if some God or Divinity were contained in it. But for
that Divine Worship which is paid to the Images of the Holy Trinity, of our
Savior Christ and the Holy Cross, upon the account of the things represented
by them, and as they are in that respect one and the same with the thing which
they represent, and ascribes not any Divinity to the Images, there never was,
nor can be any dispute of it.

Monsieur de Meaux may please to consider whether this be not sufficiently
contrary to the Doctrine Expounded by Him; and how we are to reconcile the
Controversies of the Cardinal Capisucchi, with the Letter and Approbation of
the So he was when he wrote to Monsitur de Meaux.
Master of the Sacred Palace. In the mean time I will beg leave to add one
instance more, that is nigher home, and I think still at this time depending;
and which the particular interest Monsieur de Meaux has more ways than one had
in it, will I suppose undoubtedly satisfy him, that notwithstanding the
Assembly of the Clergy have recommended so much both his Book and his Method,
all nevertheless at this day are not very well satisfied, even in France it
self, either with the one or other.

Monsieur The whole of this is taken out of the Factum which he printed of his
Case.
Imbert Priest and Doctor of Divinity in the Province of Bourdeaux was not long
since accused, that upon Good Friday before he proceeded to the solemn service
of that day, which consists chiefly in the Adoration of the Cross; He turned to
the People, and taking occasion from the rashness of some of the Fathers of the
Mission whom he had with grief heard maintain, That the Cross was to be adored
after the very same manner as Jesus Christ in the Sacrament of the Eucharist;
professed to them that he could not enter on the service of that day without
declaring truly to them what the real Doctrine of the Church as to this point
was. That the Church designed not that we should adore the Cross which we see,
but that we should adore Jesus Christ whom we do not see. That there was a
great difference between the Cross and the Holy Sacrament; That in this our
Savior Christ was really present, whereas that was only a simple figure or
representation of him.

This was his Accusation, and he confessed that his Opinion was, That the
Church adored not the Cross, and that the contrary Opinion was not only false
but Idolatrous. That not only the Protestants made their advantage of those who
maintained such Errors, but that he himself was scandalized to converse every
day with the Missionaries and others, whom he had openly heard preach a hundred
times, That we ought to adore the Cross with Jesus Christ, as the Humane nature
of our Savior with the Divine.

Being accused for this, he defended himself with all the strength of Argument
that he was able; yet being still accounted a Heretic for it, he finally
alleged in his defense, That the Exposition of Monsieur de Meaux defended the
very same; that he went upon his principles, whose book was approved by the
Pope and several Cardinals in Italy, by the Bishops and Clergy of France and
others of the greatest note in the Church of Rome.

Nevertheless he was suspended in a manner grievous and extraordinary: He wrote
to Monsieur de Meaux himself about it, who presently sent to the Archbishop of
Bourdeaux in his behalf: He addressed himself besides to many other the most
considerable Persons of the Kingdom; to Monsieur the Chancellor; Monsieur de
Chatteau-neuf; to the Intendant of the Province, only that he might have
justice in a cause, which according to Monsieur de Meaux's principles, was
certainly very favorable;

But I do not hear that he has yet had any other Effect of all his
supplications, and the interest of those Honorable persons in his behalf, than
that they still draw more and severer menaces from his Judges, and threats
either of perpetual Imprisonment, or even death it self for his Offense.

After this clear conviction I may reasonably hope it will appear no improbable
matter to Monsieur de Meaux himself, either that one Papist should have written
against his Book, or that many others should have expressed themselves to be of
a mind very different from the principles and opinions of it. Had it pleased
him to have gratified the World with the sight of Cardinal Buillon's and
Monsieur l'Abbe de Dangeau's letters to Cardinal Bona and Cardinal Chigi, as
well as of their answers to them, they would perhaps have shown, that not only
the Protestants pretended such oppositions of his own party to his Book, but
that Monsieur de Meaux himself was not altogether unsensible of it.

No sooner was the first Impression of the Exposition See the Advertisement.
which was permitted to pass abroad, finished, but presently a Copy was
dispatched to Rome, with Letters and recommendations to prepare the way for its
reception in that Court; and provide against those faults which Cardinal Bona'
s Letter: V. E. mi accenna che alcuni lo, Accusano de qual che mancamento. And
a little after, Ne mi maraviglio che gli habbino trovato a dire, perch tutte
le Opere grande, e che Sormontano l'Ordinario sempre hanno Contradittori --
Answer to Cardinal Buillon.]
some it seems accused it of, if the Contradictors which opposed it at home,
should think fit to pursue it thither.

It is not to be supposed that either the dignity of the Cardinal who sent the
Book, or of him to whom it was addressed, would have permitted them in such a
manner to take notice of the faults and the Contradictors which their Letters
speak of, had they not been both things, and Persons worthy their
consideration. But much less would Monsieur l'Abbe de Dangeau have used his
interest with Cardinal Chigi to gain the Sea the Answer of Cardinal Chigi to
Monsieur L'Abbe de Dangeau; [Parlai al Padre Maestro di S. Palazzo, and al
Secretaris della congregatione dell Indice, e connobbi Veramente che non vi era
stato chi havesse a questi padri parlato in disfavore del medesimo.]
favor of the Master of the Sacred Palace, and of the Congregation del Indice,
if any one had or should speak against it, had there been no cause to apprehend
that any one would attempt either.

What other particular persons were employed upon the like Offices, is a secret
too close for us to be able to penetrate. Only the Advertisement it self gives
us cause to believe that great interest was made even by the French Ambassador
himself to his Holiness about it; and that See Advertisement, etc.
the few Letters we see set out with so much Industry both in the Originals and
their Translation, and the long History of them in the Advertisement, were the
effects of a labor and interest, great as the long term of eight years that
were spent in the procuring of them.

The second Answer to Monsieur de Meaux has so fully examined every one of
these Approbations, and so plainly showed how small account is to be made of
them, that we do not find that in four years that it has been published, any
one has undertaken to reply to it. I will therefore only add in general a
remark or two that may serve to inform those of our own Country who are
unacquainted with such intrigues, what the Method of the Approbations of the
Church of Rome is, and how little stress is to be laid upon them.

It is a long time since it has been resolved by many of their Casuists, that
it is lawful to disguise the sentiments of their Religion, not only in private
Conferences, but in the very Pulpit it self, when there is a sufficient reason
for the doing of it. But I cannot tell whether it be yet so generally known
that it is lawful for them to set their hands to and approve those Books whose
Principles and Doctrine they dislike, by an Art peculiar to themselves, and
which Protestants, who are used to sincere dealing, will find it a little
difficult to believe.

The instance of Cardinal Capisucchi before mentioned is an undeniable proof of
this for Italy; Who about the same time that he sent his Letter and Approbation
to Monsieur de Meaux of his Exposition, wrote, as we have seen, directly
contrary to the Doctrine of it, and had his Book approved with no less
solemnity at Rome, than Monsieur de Meaux can pretend his to have been. And for
France, a Person very justly esteemed both for his great Quality and his own
worth, Monsieur the Procureur General of the Parliament of Paris, having
clearly revealed the mystery of it, I shall beg leave to represent it to the
World, under the advantage of so great and unquestionable an Authority.

Father Thomassin about twenty years since printed a Book which he called Notae
in Concilia; the design whereof was to set up the Authority of the Pope above
all Councils, which he renders in a manner useless to the decision of
Ecclesiastical matters. The Copies of this Book were all seized, and locked up
in a Chamber of the Fathers Oratorians at Paris. Ten or twelve years after,
with some changes to fill up the Leaves that had been censured, and the
Approbation of the Doctors of the Sorbonne, he again attempted to have it
published. But Monsieur the Procureur General opposed it, and told him that but
in consideration of Father Harlay, his near Relation, who interposed for him,
he would have had his Book burnt by the hand of the common Hangman.

The Father justified himself that his Book contained no other Principles than
what were found in Cardinal Bellarmine's Controversies, which had been printed
with authority, and were permitted to be every day publicly sold in France.
The Procureur General replied, That they suffered in France, that an Italian
should write according to the Principles of his Country, and that this ought
not to hinder but that a Book, otherwise good, might be publicly printed and
sold with privilege; but that for a Frenchman to do the same, was another
matter, and would have different consequences: and that in short, The Italians
used the same method toward them.

And indeed the late change of the Jesuits in their Approbations plainly shows,
that it is permitted to those of the Church of Rome to write and approve not so
much according to their own Opinions, as to the Principles and Genius of the
Country in which they live. For which reason the Fathers of the Society do no
longer now, as formerly they were wont, take out their License from the General
of their Order, but from their respective Provincials; who accommodate
themselves to the current Doctrine of the place in which the Book is published;
without which it would be almost impossible for them to write in France, but
they should be subject to the danger of a censure at Rome.

After this general account of the Nature of the Approbations of the Church of
Rome, I shall spare both my self and Reader the trouble of examining the
several Letters before the Exposition, though otherwise they lie open to many
exceptions; only concerning his Holiness s Brief, which Monsieur de Meaux so
much triumphs in, it may not be amiss to observe, that the last Pope, in whose
time the Exposition came first to Rome with great Recommendation, yet never
gave any Approbation to it; and that the present Pope did it upon occasion of
L' Auteur -- fit avec un tres profond respect ses tres humbles remercimens au
Pape par une Lettre du 22. Nov. 1678. don't il recent reponse par un Bres de sa
Saintete du 4 Jan. 79. Avertiss. And in the Brief it self, Devotionem interim
atque Observantiam quam erga sanctam hanc sedem nosque ipsos qui in ea
Catholicae Ecclesiae immerito praesidemus tuae ad Nos Literae luculenter
declarant, mutuae charitatis affectu complectimur.]
a submissive Letter of the Authors to him, and after the reports that he had
heard of the great The Bishop of Strasburgh having accounted to his Holiness
his design of Translating the Exposition into the German Language, Sa Saintete
lu^ fit dire qu'il connoissoit ce livre, and qu'on luy raportoit de tous costez
qu'il faisoit beaucoup de Conversions. Avertissement.
Conversions that were every where made by it, to which such an Approbation
would be likely to add a new force. So plain is the intrigue and design of
this, that were the Popes Briefs otherwise of as great consideration, as the
Papists themselves show them to be of little value, yet this could not be
regarded by us, as any other than a mere Artifice to deceive us, not a sincere,
much less authoritative Approbation either of the Nature or Principles of
Monsieur de Meaux's Book.

But whatever the Opinion either of the Pope or Papists has been of this
Exposition, certain it is the Protestants have openly enough declared their
thoughts concerning it; and the Exposition according to the fate of all other
great and extraordinary things, Card. Bona's Letter.
has found enough on this side to oppose it.

It was but a very little time after the first Edition of it, that Monsieur
Noguier and another Author well known, yet whose name I spare, because he has
not thought fit himself to discover it, wrote against it; and with so much
success, that the Papists themselves confessed, 'That it was an ill Cause
defended extremely well.

Monsieur de Turenne not long before that last Campaign in which he lost his
Life, made great boasts of a Reply that was speedily to be published to them;
but after the long expectation of above eight Years, only an Advertisement was
prefixed to a new Edition of the Book, which neither touches at all the
greatest part of the Exceptions that had been made against it, nor gives any
satisfaction to those it does take notice of.

It has been the constant method of Monsieur de Meaux, having once written, to
leave his Tracts to the World, and take no care to defend them against those
assaults, that seem with success enough to have been sometimes made upon them.
We should think the great Employments, in which he has had the Honor to be
engaged, might have been the cause of this, did not he who takes no care to
defend his old Books, find still time enough to write new. Perhaps he looks
upon his pieces to be of a Spirit and Force sufficient to despise whatever
attempts can be made upon them; but sure he cannot be ignorant, that
Protestants make another and far different Conclusion, and look upon those
Opinions to be certainly indefensible, which so able and eminent an Author is
content so openly, and, if I may be permitted to add it, so shamefully to
forsake.

What other Answers besides those I have now mentioned have been made to it, I
cannot undertake to say; Two others only that I know of have been published;
the Author of the latter of which Monsieur de Brueys having in a very little
time after his writing left his Religion, might have made a new instance of
Monsieur de Meaux's Conquests, did not his inability to answer his own
arguments against the Exposition, give us cause to believe, that some other
Motives than those of that Book induced him so lightly to forsake a Cause,
which he had so soundly and generously defended.

And now after so many Answers yet unreplied to, if any one desires to know
what the design of the present undertaking is, they may please to understand,
that having by a long Converse among the Papists of our own and other Countries
perceived that either by the ignorance or malice of their Instructors, they
have generally very false and imperfect Notions of our Opinions in the matters
in Controversy between us, I have suffered my self to be persuaded to pursue
the Method of Monsieur de Meaux's Exposition as to the Doctrine of the Church
of England; and oppose sincerely to what he pretends is the Opinion of the
Roman Church, that form of Faith that is openly professed and taught without
any disguise or dissimulation among us.

I was not unwilling to take the Method of Monsieur de Meaux for my direction,
as well upon the account of the great Reputation both of the Book and of the
Author, as because it is now some years that it has passed in our Language
without any answer that I know of made to it. Besides, that the late new
Impression made of it, with all the advantages of the Advertisement and
Approbations, which the later French Editions have added to it, seemed
naturally to require some such Consideration.

I do not pretend by any thing of this to treat Monsieur de Meaux as an Enemy,
but rather as both his great Learning, and that Character which I have ever
learnt very highly to reverence, oblige me, to follow him as my Guide. To
render an account to him and to the World what our differences are, and point
out in passing some of those reasons that are the most usually given amongst
us, wherefore we cannot totally assent to what he proposes.

I am persuaded the whole is done with that Charity and Moderation, that there
is nothing in it that can justly offend the most zealous Enemy of our Church.
If I knew of any thing in it that without dissembling the Truth might have been
omitted, I sincerely profess I would most willingly have done it, being
desirous to please all, that so, if it be the will of God, I may by any means
gain some.

For this cause chiefly have I forborne to set my name to it, lest perhaps any
prejudice against my Person, might chance to injure the Excellence of the Cause
which I maintain.

This effect at least, if no other, I would willingly hope such a Treatise may
have upon those of our Country that have been taught to believe very
differently concerning us; That they would please no longer to form such
horrible Ideas of our Profession as they have heretofore been wont to do; at
least till it can be shown that I have either palliated or prevaricated the
Doctrine of the Church of England in this Exposition. Which I am yet so assured
I have not done, that I here entirely submit both my self and it to her
Censure; of whose Communion I esteem it my greatest Happiness that I am, and
for whose preservation and Enlargement I shall never cease, as I ought, to pray.

A Collection of some of those Passages that were corrected in the first
Edition of the EXPOSITION suppressed by Monsieur de Meaux: To which is added,
the Censure of the Faculty of Louvain, upon some part of the Doctrine still
remaining in it.
I.
MOnsieur de Meaux in the very beginning of his Book speaking of the design of
it, had these Words:

1. Edit.
So that it seems then to be very proper to propose to them (the Protestants)
the Doctrine of the Catholic Church, separating those Questions which the
Church has decided, from those which do not belong to Faith. p. 1.

It is evident, the meaning of Monsieur de Meaux in that passage must have been
this; That whatsoever was either not at all contained in his Exposition, or was
otherwise maintained by any particular Authors, beyond the Exposition he gives
us of those Points which are here mentioned, was not to be looked upon by us,
as any of the Church's Decision, nor necessary to be received by us as matter
of Faith.

I shall not need to say how many Doctrines and Decisions, not only of private
Writers, but of the very Council of Trent it self, this would have at once cut
off. It would perhaps have been one of the fairest Advances toward an Union,
that ever the Church of Rome yet offered. But it seems whatever Monsieur de
Meaux supposed, this was thought too great a condescension by others: and he
was therefore obliged, without changing any thing in his Book, to give us a
quite other account of the design of it.

Later Editions.
So that it seems then we can do nothing better, than simply to propose to them
(the Protestants) the sentiments of the Catholic Church, and distinguish them
from those Opinions that have been falsely imputed to her.

Which is but little to the Purpose.

II.
I Edit. p. 7, 8. The same Church teaches, That all Religious Worship ought to
terminate upon God, as its necessary End. So that the Honor which the Church
gives to the Blessed Virgin and to the Saints is religious, only because it
gives them that Honor with relation to God, and for the love of him.

So that then, so far ought one to be from blaming the Honor which we give to
the Saints, as our Adversaries do, because it is Religious, that on the
contrary it ought to be blamed if it were not Religious.

There can be nothing more plain than that Monsieur de Meaux's Opinion, when he
wrote this, was, That the Honor which the Church of Rome pays to the Blessed
Virgin and Saints departed is a Religious Honor; nay would deserve to be
blamed if it were not Religious.

This was by others thought a little too ingenuous, and what would give too
great an advantage to our objections against it. And therefore instead of that
free, honest Confession, That the Church of Rome gives religious Honor to the
Blessed Virgin and Saints departed, he now puts a doubt that insinuates the
direct contrary, The same Church teaches us, that all religious Worship ought
to terminate in God as its necessary End; and if the Honor which she rendereth
to the Blessed Virgin and to the Saints, may in some sense be called Religious,
it is for its necessary relation to God.

So that really then the Honor they give their Saints in Monsieur de Meaux's
opinion is Religious, but it is not fit that we should know it.

III.
Monsieur Daille some years since wrote a Volume of the Tradition of the
Primitive Church, concerning the Object of Religious Worship; in which he
clearly shows that the first 300 years knew nothing of the Invocation of
Saints, the Worship of Images, Crosses, and Relics; of the Adoration of the
Host, etc. Monsieur de Meaux in his first Exposition granted the whole, in
these words since struck out, For Monsieur Daille, says he, he thinks fit to
confine himself to the first three Centuries, in which it is certain that the
Church more exercised in suffering than in writing, has left many things to be
cleared afterward both in its Doctrine and in its Practice. 1 Edit. p. 9.

Now it being evident, notwithstanding this new thought, that the sufferings of
the first 300 years have not hindered, but that we have very large accounts of
its Doctrine and Practice from the Writings of those Fathers who lived in them;
To confess that it is certain, that the Tradition of the Church of Rome fails
in many things both in Doctrine and Practice for the first 300 years, is
doubtless as fair a yielding up the Cause, as to the matter of Tradition, as we
could desire; and therefore however known by Monsieur de Meaux to be most
certainly true, was yet thought too much by others to be confessed to the
World, by a person of so great Learning and Eminence in their Church.

IV.
As to the point of the Invocation of Saints, Monsieur de Meaux still shows us
that he knows not what account to give of the grounds of it. He proposes
several ways how the Saints may possibly know our Prayers, but cannot well tell
us by which it is they do so.

But in the first Edition he showed yet more doubt: Not only which way the
Saints hear them, but whether they hear them at all or no: Not only, whether
they join with them in their Prayers, as they desire them to do, but whether it
is not rather by some other means, yet more unknown to them, and not by their
Intercession, that they receive the benefit of them. The Church, says he,
contents her self to teach with all Antiquity, these prayers to be very
profitable to such who make them; Whether it be the Saints know them by the
Ministry and Communication of Angels, who according to the Testimony of
Scripture know what passes amongst us; being established by Gods order as
administering spirits to cooperate with us in the work of our salvation:
Whether it be that God makes known to them our desires by a particular
revelation: Or whether it be that he discovers the secret to them in his Divine
Essence in which all truth is comprised.

And that in the manner, and according to the measure which he pleases; or
whether lastly by some other way yet more impenetrable and more unknown he
causes us to receive the Fruit of those Prayers which we address to those
blessed Souls. 1 Ed. p. 23.

So that in effect, whether the Saints hear us or no, whether they join with us
in our requests or no, according to Monsieur de Meaux's Exposition, their
Church knows not; which is sure a sufficient prejudice against their
Invocation; and was, it seems, thought so by those who therefore caused all the
latter part of this paragraph to be struck out, for fear of the advantage we
might reasonably make of it.

V.
But if Monsieur de Meaux in his first Exposition freely confessed how
uncertain the grounds of this Invocation were, he no less freely left it to our
choice whether we would practice it or not. He assured us there was no manner
of obligation at all upon us so to do: And that the Church would not condemn us
if we did it not, provided we refused it not out of contempt, or with a Spirit
of dissension and Revolt. Furthermore, says he, there is nothing so unjust as
to accuse the Church of placing all her piety in these devotions to the Saints;
since on the contrary she lays no obligation at all on particular persons to
join in this Practice.

By which it appears clearly that the Church condemns only those who refuse it
out of contempt, and by a Spirit of dissension and revolt. 1 Ed. p. 33, 34.

This was Monsieur de Meaux's first Exposition of the Doctrine of the Catholic
Church in this point: But such as his Correctors it seems would not admit of:
Who therefore obliged him wholly to strike out that passage, That the Church
imposes no obligation at all upon particular persons to practice this
Invocation:

And instead of condemning only those that refuse it out of contempt, or a
Spirit of dissension and revolt, which had freed us wholly from their Anathema,
to expound it now more severely. That she condemns those who refuse this
practice whether out of disrespect or Error.

Which will be sure to bring us under it.

VI.
In the article of Images Monsieur de Meaux having first laid down this
foundation, That the Church of Rome does not attribute to them any other virtue
than that of exciting in us the remembrance of those whom they represent; added
in his first Exposition which was suppressed, It Is in this consists the use and
advantage of Images. 1 Edit. p. 25.

And to assure us yet further how little Honor they had for them, concluded
thus, So that to speak properly, and according to the Ecclesiastical style, we
do not so much honor the Image of an Apostle or Martyr, as we do honor the
Apostle or Martyr in presence of the Image. 1 Edit. p. 26.

Now though we do not doubt but that this is the real opinion of Monsieur de
Meaux, and all which he himself does, yet to say that the Church of Rome does
neither require, nor practice, nor intend any more, was to presume too much
upon our Ignorance; and indeed to give too great a scandal to many of his own
Communion, more zealous than himself for this service: And therefore we find it
now expounded in a manner more conformable to the truth, though still
exceedingly mollified, It Is upon this is founded the Honor which we give to
Images: and again. When we honor the Image of an Apostle or Martyr, our
Intention is not so much to honor the Image, as the Apostle or Martyr in
presence of the Image.

VII.
In the Section of Justification Monsieur de Meaux has omitted this whole
paragraph since his first Edition: The Catholic Church, says he, is no where
more invincible than in this point, and perhaps it would need no long discourse
to show, that the more one searches by the Scriptures into the design of the
redemption. of Mankind, which was to make us Holy, the more one shall approach
to our Doctrine, and the more depart from the opinions of Calvin, which are not
maintainable, nay are contradictory and ruinous of all true and solid piety. 1
Ed. p. 36, 37.

Monsieur de Meaux may please some other time to expound to us, what those
Opinions of Calvin in this matter are which the Church of Rome is so invincible
in, and which all parties among them will agree to be so contradictory, and
ruinous to all true and solid piety, as he then said.

In the mean time we will only beg leave to observe on occasion of this
Correction, that perhaps there are some in the Church of Rome of Mr. Calvin's
mind in the worst of those Principles Monsieur de Meaux refers to, and to
assure him that there are several Protestants in the World that are not; tho
they dare not therefore so severely censure the Opinions of those that are.

IX.
Monsieur de Meaux having in a very few words explained the Doctrine of
Justification, upon which the Council of Trent is so long and perplexed,
assured us in his first Exposition, That that was enough for any Man to know to
make him a through Christian. Thus have you seen what is most necessary in the
Doctrine of Justification; and our Adversaries would be extraordinarily
contentious not to confess, that there is no need to know any more to be a
solid Christian. 1 Ed. p. 47.

This would have been of great advantage to us, and have freed us from the
Anathema's of many other Particulars, of which we more doubt, than of any thing
Monsieur de Meaux has expounded of it; but this others thought too great a
Concession; and the Bishop therefore, without changing any thing in his
Premises, was forced to draw a very different Conclusion from them. Thus have
you seen what is most necessary in the Doctrine of Justification, and our
Adversaries would be very unreasonable if they should not confess, that this
Doctrine suffices to teach Christians, that they ought to refer all the Glory
of their Salvation to God through Jesus Christ.

X.
In the Article of Satisfaction, Monsieur de Meaux speaking of the Temporal and
Eternal Punishment of Sin, and how the one may be retained when the other is
forgiven, had this Paragraph in the first Edition, since struck out. The Church
has always acknowledged these two different manners of applying the Remission
of Sins, which we have proposed; because she saw that in the Scriptures,
besides the first Pardon, and which ought to be the only, if Men were not
ungrateful, and which is pronounced in the terms of a pure Remission, there is
another Absolution, and another Grace, that is proposed in form of a Judgment,
where the Church ought not only to loose and remit, but also to bind and
retain. 1 Edit. p. 54, 55.

The Censure passed upon this, were enough to make one suspect, that either
Monsieur de Meaux, or his Correctors, were sensible upon further Consideration,
that they could not so easily find out these two forms, so distinguished in
holy Scripture, or prove that the Church had always acknowledged them; and
therefore judged it safer not to undertake it.

XI.
In the Article of Confirmation, speaking of the Imposition of Hands, Monsieur
de Meaux insinuated in his first Exposition, that it had always been
accompanied with the use of Chrism ever since the Apostles. Thus, says he, all
Christian Churches have religiously retained this Practice, accompanying it
(the Imposition of Hands) with holy Chrism. 1 Ed. p. 65.

This was too clearly false to be suffered to pass, and therefore it is now
more loose, so as to admit of an Equivocation, and yet seem to say still the
same thing. Thus all Christian Churches since the Apostles times have
religiously retained it, making use also of holy Chrism.

XII.
In the Article of the Sacrifice of the Mass, Monfieur de Meaux having
expounded it according to our Principles, in his first Edition, concluded with
us too. So that it (the Mass) may, says he, be very reasonably called a
Sacrifice: 1 Ed. p. 115.

But since the Correction, the Conclusion is much strengthened, tho the Premises
remain the same: So that there is nothing wanting to it, to make it a true
Sacrifice.

XIII.
As to the point of the Pope's Authority, the first Exposition ran much higher
than it seems the Spirit of the Gallicane Church could bear. So that our
Profession of Faith obliges us as to this point, to believe the Roman Church to
be the Mother and Mistress of all Churches, and to render a true Obedience to
the Pope, the Successor of St. Peter, and Vicar of Jesus Christ. 1 Ed. p. 166.
It is now more loose, and in general thus; We acknowledge a Primacy in the
Successors of the Prince of the Apostles, to whom, for that cause we owe that
Obedience and Submission which the holy Councils and Fathers have always taught
the Faithful. 5 Ed. p. 210. But it may be what was struck out of the Exposition
to please the Correctors, Monsieur de Meaux recompensed in his Letter to
satisfy his Holiness.

XIV.
In the Conclusion, Monsieur de Meaux telling us that none of those Articles he
had expounded, according to our own Principles, destroyed the Foundation of our
Salvation, added in his first Exposition what that Foundation was, viz. The
Adoration of one only God, Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, and the Trust in one
only Savior. 1 Ed. p. 160.

It is hard to say why this was not let pass, for we are unwilling to believe
that the Church of Rome has any other Foundation for Salvation than this. But
it may be to have put down this as the Foundation of Salvation, would have been
too plainly to show, that then we certainly have this, and that without mixture
of any thing destructive thereunto.

XV.
Monsieur de Meaux go's on, in a very candid manner, since struck out; In
effect, says he, in all these Explications, which contain the very bottom of
our Belief, there is not any one word repugnant to these two Principles, either
directly, or by Consequence. So that acknowledging then this, That the Church
of Rome does believe and profess all that is essential to preserve the
substance of the Christian Religion, so that they cannot reasonably impute to
us any Doctrine contrary thereunto, they must at the same time acknowledge, by
their own Principles, that the Church of Rome is a true part of the Church of
Christ, to which every Christian is obliged to unite himself in his Heart, and
in effect as far as in him lies. 1 Ed.

Monsieur de Meaux may please to know, that we do confess the Church of Rome to
be a part of the true Church, tho indeed we think one of the worst; and that we
do with all our Hearts desire a Union with her; and in effect do show it as far
as we are able, by retaining whatever we can of the same Doctrines and
Practices with her.

And if this were all they desired of us, as indeed it is all they ought, and
all we can do: However an absolute Union would not thereby be obtained, yet
might we live at least like Christians and Brethren, in a common Charity with
one another, and so dispose our Minds, as by God's Grace to come in a little
time to some better agreement in the rest too, than ever we are like to do
without it.

These are some of those Passages that gave occasion to the correction we have
spoken of at the Sorbon, and to the suppression of the whole first Edition,
however authorized by the Bishops of France in the same words it now is. I
might have added many more; but instead of it, will beg leave to offer the
Reader one Correction made very lately by another Faculty, that of Louvain; if
not immediately of Monsieur de Meaux's Exposition, yet at least of a Doctrine
which they were beforehand given to understand, was so explained in it.

Monsieur de Wit, Pastor and Dean of St. Mary's, in the City of Mechlin,
having, in a Discourse with some Persons of that City, on the 8th of July last,
maintained the Authority of the Church and Pope, according to the manner of
Monsieur de Meaux's Exposition; complaint was made of him, first to the
Inter-noaen, then to his Holiness himself, and four Propositions drawn up
against him, as the Heads of his Heresy.

Monsieur de Wit maintained his Opinion in several Papers printed to that
end; in the [Intituled, Prosecutio probationis locum Mat. 16. non recte refundi
in Apostolorum principis successores.]
4th of which, after several other Authorities of Persons of their Church
defending the same Doctrine; He tells them, That the Golden Exposition of Faith
of Nihil praeterea, ad sanam Catholicam, and Orthodoxam fidem deposcit aurea
illa Expositio Catholicae fidei Jacobi Episcopi Condomensis, praeter
Illustrissima Clarissimo^um Virorum Elogia, ipsius S. Patris Innocent. xi.
peramantissimis literis comprebata.
Monsieur the Bishop of Condom, required nothing more to the Sound, Catholic,
and Orthodox Faith in this Matter; which Exposition, besides the Elogies of
many other Eminent Persons, was also approved by our Holy Father Innocent the
11th himself, in his kind Letter to him.

But all this could not prevail with them to respect his Doctrine ever the more
for Monsieur de Meaux's Exposition, or his Holinesses Brief. The Faculty of
Divinity, at the command of the Nonce, and with the knowledge, no doubt, and
assent of the Pope, to whom the whole Affair had been communicated, censured
his Propositions, Nov. 3. 1685. and especially the second, in which Monsieur de
Meaux's Exposition of the Catholic Faith was principally concerned, as
scandalous and pernicious. Judicamus eam censurari posse uti scandalosam and
perniciosam.

May those who insist so much on the Fidelity and Authority of Monsieur de
Meaux's Exposition, please calmly to consider these things; and tell us how we
can rely on such an Exposition of their Doctrine, as notwithstanding so many
formal Approbations; first, of the Bishops of France, was yet corrected in so
many places by the Sorbon; and secondly, of the Pope, Cardinals, and others in
Italy, and of the whole Body of the Clergy of France in their Assembly; has yet
so lately been censured, at the command of the Nonce, and with the consent of
his Holiness, by the Faculty of one of their most eminent Universities, to be
scandalous and pernicious.

A TABLE OF THE ARTICLES Contained in this TREATISE.
I. THe Introduction. Page. 3 II. That Religious Worship is to be paid to God
only. 6 III. Of the Invocation of Saints. 9 IV. Of Images and Relics. 13 V. Of
Justification. 19 VI. Of Merits. 21 VII. Of Satisfactions, Purgatory, and
Indulgences. 24
PART II.
VIII. Of the Sacraments in general. 33 IX. Of Baptism. 35 X. Of Confirmation.
39 XI. Of Penance and Confession. 40 XII. Of Extreme Unction. 44 XIII. Of
Marriage. 45 XIV. Of Holy Orders. 46 XV. Of the Eucharist; and first of the
Explication of those words, This is my Body. 47 XVI. Do this in remembrance of
Me. 54 XVII. The Doctrine of the Church of England concerning this holy
Sacrament. 55 XVIII. Of Transubstantiation, and of the Adoration of the Host.
58 XIX. Of the Sacrifice of the Mass. 62 XX. Of the Epistle to the Hebrews. 67
XXI. Reflections upon the foregoing Doctrine. 69 XXII. Of communicating under
one kind. 72
PART III.
XXIII. Of the Word written and unwritten. 75 XXIV. Of the Authority of the
Church. 76 XXV. The Opinion of the Church of England, as to the Authority of
the Church. 80 XXVI. The Authority of the holy See and of Episcopacy. 81 XXVII.
The Close. 82
ERRATA.
PReface] Page xxix the number of the Sections mistaken to the end. P. xxxii.
l. 15. dele 5 Ed. p. 210. P. xxxiv. l. 28. r. Mechlin, ib. l. 33. r.
Inter-nonce. Book.] P. 13. l. 10. r. Practice. P. 20. l. 5. r. works it in us.
P. 22. in the Margin, l. 9. del. 16. P. 23. the same. P. 24. Marg. del. p. 66.
P. 34. l. 18. r. Vertut. P. 36. l. 13. r. Mr. de Meaux. l. 14. Charity. P. 40.
l. 13. r. Virtue. P. 69. Marg. ib. r. ver. 24.

AN EXPOSITION OF THE Doctrine of the Church of England In the several Articles
expounded by Monsieur de MEAUX.
I. The Introduction.
IT has always been esteemed more reasonable to doubt of Principles first, and
then to deny the Conclusions that are drawn from them, than having granted the
Foundation, afterward to cavil at the clear and necessary Deductions from it.

To profess that Religious Worship is due to God only; and at the same time to
say that we ought to adore Men and Women, Crosses and Images, and all that
infinite variety of Follies which these latter Ages have set forth under the
pious name of Relics. To declare, That we are saved only by Christ's Merits;
and yet still continue to teach us that we ought to set up our own. In a word,
to say, That the Death of Christ was a perfect Sacrifice, and one drop of his
Blood more than sufficient for the Redemption of Mankind; and nevertheless go
on to require our Satisfactions as necessary too, and oblige us to believe that
other Propitiatory Sacrifices besides that of the Cross, ought to be offered up
continually to God in his Church, for the Sins both of the Dead and the Living:
This must certainly be the part of a Disputant, either too ignorant to
understand, or too obstinate to submit to any Conviction.

Monsieur de Meaux, the design of whose Exposition seems rather to be an
Apology for the Popish Religion, than a free Assertion and Vindication of its
Errors, is above all things sensible of the Justice of this Reflection: and
therefore endeavors by all means possible in the very entry of his Treatise to
prepare his Reader against it, By showing the Injustice of charging
Consequences upon Men which they do not allow; and that therefore tho their
Superstructure should chance to overthrow their Foundation, yet since they
profess not to know that it does so, they ought not to be taxed with what they
do not believe.

It is not denied but that Consequences may be sometimes either so obscure, or
so far distant, that a Person prejudicate for the Principle, may well be
excused the charge of a Collection, which his Actions show he neither believes
nor approves. But when the Conclusions, as well as Principles, are plain and
confessed, and the Dispute is only about the Name, not the Thing; we must beg
leave to profess, that we cannot choose but say that he believes not as he ought
the infinite Merits of Christ's Sacrifice, who requires any other Offering for
Sin; and that no subtilty of Argument will ever persuade us that those destroy
not their Principle of worshipping God only, whom we see, contrary to his
express Command, prostrate every day before an Image, with Prayers and Hymns to
Creatures that have been subject to like Infirmities with our selves, and that
are perhaps at this very time in a worser Estate, than the most miserable of
those that call upon them for their assistance.

Be it therefore allowed to be as great a Calumny, as Monsieur de Meaux can
suppose it, to accuse Men of Consequences obscure and disavow'd; the Opinions
we charge the Church of Rome with, are plain and confessed, the Practice and
Prescription of the chiefest Authority in it. And to refuse our Charge of them,
is in good earnest nothing else than to protest against a matter of Fact; a
Plea, which even Justice it self has told us, may without Calumny be rejected
as invalid.

However, thus much at least we have got by this Reflection, that it directs us
to the true State of the Controversy between us; and shows, That we, who have
been so often charged by the Church of Rome as Innovators in Religion, are at
last by their own confession, allowed to hold the ancient and undoubted
Foundation of the Christian Faith; and that the Question between us therefore
is not, Whether what we hold be true? which is on all hands agreed, but,
Whether those things which the Roman Church has added as Superstructures to it,
and which, as such, we reject, be not so far from being necessary Articles of
Religion, as they pretend, that they indeed overthrow that Truth which is on
both sides allowed to be Divine; and upon that account ought to be forsaken by
them?

The Declaration of this, not so much by any new proof, as by clearing rather
the true state of those Points which are the subject of our Difference, is the
design of the following Articles; in which I shall endeavor to give a clear
and free account of what we can approve, and what it is that we dislike in
their Doctrine; and as far as the shortness of this Discourse will allow, touch
also upon some of those Reasons that are the most usually given by us for both.

ARTICLE II. That Religious Worship is to be paid to God only.
THat Religious Worship is due to God only, how necessary soever those
Practices of the Roman Church, which we are hereafter to consider, may have
rendered it to Monsieur de Meaux to declare, yet is it, we suppose, but little
necessary for us to say,

We firmly believe, that the inward acknowledgment of his Divine Excellencies
as the Creator and Lord of all things, is a part of the supreme Worship that is
due to him. We believe that all the Powers of our Soul ought to be tied to him
by Faith, Hope, and Charity, as to that God who alone can establish and make us
happy. And tho we do not think that there is now any sensible, or material
Sacrifice to be offered to Him under the Gospel, as there was heretofore under
the Law; yet do we with all Antiquity suppose the Sacrifice of Prayer and
Thanksgiving to be so peculiarly his due, that it cannot, without derogation to
his Honor, be applied to any other.

What our Opinion is of that Worship which the Roman Church pays to the Blessed
Virgin, and Saints departed, we shall hereafter fully show: But certainly great
was the difference of those Holy Men whom Monsieur de Meaux mentions as their
forerunners in this practice, from the present manner of the Popish
Invocation. Gregory Nazianzen in a Rhetorical Apostrophe, called to Constantius
in one, to his Sister Gorgonia in another Oration, but he prayed to neither.
St. Basil; St. Ambrose; St. J. Chrysostom; St. Hierom; St. Augustine; they
desired sometimes that the Martyr or Saint would join with them in their
requests, but they were rather Raptures and Wishes, than direct Prayers; and
their formal Petitions, but especially those of the Church, were only to God
Almighty. They doubted whether the Saints could hear them or no; and were
rather inclined to believe that they could not. The Addresses of the Mind,
which the Church of Rome allows no less than the others to them, they looked
upon to be so peculiarly God's due, that they supposed he did not communicate
them to the very Angels that are in Heaven. They declared against all thoughts
of being assisted by the Merits of their Saints, or that God would ever the
more readily, or indeed so soon accept their Prayers coming by the Intercession
of another, as if they had gone themselves directly to the Throne of Grace. In
a word; they never imagined that this was an Honor due to them; but, on the
contrary, constantly taught that it was a Service belonging only to God
Almighty.

Well therefore might And that it is the most he does; See de Cult. Lat. l. 3.
c. 18.
Monsieur Daille refer the beginnings of this Invocation to these Men, whose
innocent Wishes, and Rhetorical Flights, being still increased by the
Superstition of after-Ages, first gave birth to this Worship. But certainly the
Romanists cannot with any reason allege them in favor of their Error, till it
be shown either that we are mistaken in those differences we have here declared
to be between what they did, and what the Church of Rome now practices; or that
they are otherwise proved to be so inconsiderable, as not to make any notable
alteration in it. And yet that the Ages before knew nothing, even of this, not
only their confessed inability to produce any Proofs from them of this
Superstition, but the contrary Testimonies of the undoubted Writings of
Ignatius, Tertullian, Clemens Alexandrinus, Origin, Novatian, and Others, so
plainly show, that it ought not to be esteemed at all rash at this distance to
assert, that in this very small Change, the Fathers of the fourth Century, did
certainly begin to depart from the Practice and Tradition of those before them.
And if that Reason of the Church of Rome be of any strength, why they prayed
not to the Holy Men under the Old Testament, viz. because they were not then
admitted to the sight of God, and therefore ought not to be prayed to. It seems
to us that not only the greater part of the Primitive Fathers, but even those
very Men Monsieur de Meaux mentions, could not certainly have allowed such an
Invocation as is now used in their Church; the most of them being notoriously
known, and even by their own Writers freely confessed, to have believed the
same, That neither do the Saints and Confessors of the Christian Church any
more enjoy the Presence of God even now.

Thus much was thought fit to be said to remove that Prejudice Monsieur de
Meaux had thrown in the way. We go on now with him to consider the Doctrine it
self, and what our Church's Opinion is of it.

ARTICLE III. Of the Invocation of Saints.
THE Invocation of Saints, as it is stated by Monsieur de Meaux, we look upon
to be one of those Practices which our Church styles, fond things, vainly
invented, and grounded upon no Warrant of Holy Scripture, but indeed repugnant
to God's Word. Artic. xxii.
Monsieur de Meaux himself dares not say that they do or can ordinarily by any
ability in themselves, hear, see, or know, the Wants, State, or Prayers of Men
upon Earth, to be mindful of them unto God in Heaven. Nor can it ever be
proved that by any of those ways which he proposes, but seems himself not to
lay any great stress upon, they are certainly and particuly communicated to
them.

We think therefore, that till this be cleared, it is too great a hazard to
leave a Mediator, who both certainly knows our wants, and has promised to hear
us; that has invited us, nay commanded us to come to him in all our Needs, to
go to Intercessors which God has no where appointed, and which we can never be
sure our Prayers shall come up to. It suffices not that they may know some
things, in some places, at some times, and of some Men extraordinarily, unless
we could tell what Saints, and what things, and in what places, and at what
times, they do know them. When this is cleared, it may then be more reasonable
to desire us to join with them in this Service. In the mean time, tho we should
not charge them with Idolatry merely for this, yet we must needs confess we
cannot but think these Addresses to be too full of hazard and uncertainty to
venture any Requests at all, much less so many as they do every day, upon them.

In vain therefore does Monsieur de Meaux endeavor to defend the Innocence of
this Invocation, whilst he forgets to show us the Reasonableness of it. We
should be pleased indeed to be assured of that; but we cannot be convinced that
we ought to join in the Practice till we are satisfied of the other too. And
yet we cannot but regret, that if their design be truly no more than this, to
entreat the Saints to pray for them, we should find the greatest part of their
Service addressing to them after so contrary a manner; that they would
interpose not only their Intercessions, but their Merits too for their
forgiveness: Not only that they would pray to God for them, but that they would
themselves bless them. That the Angels and Saints would give them Strength,
Grace, Health, and Power. That St. Peter would have Mercy upon them, and open
to them the Gate of Heaven. That the Blessed Virgin would protect them from
their Enemies, and receive them at their Death: In a word, that she would
command her Son to forgive them by that Right, which as This Passage is often
denied: See Cassander Consult. in Art. 21.
a Mother she had over him. All which their very public Rituals so far allow,
that the Service which is paid to God in his Church by the Mediation of Christ,
is infinitely exceeded by the Addresses of this nature, through the Merits of
the Virgin Mary, and of the Saints.

Now if these Prayers signify no more than, as Monsieur de Meaux expounds them,
to entreat the Saints to pray for them, why have we such Scandal given us in
the Practice? If they intend really what we suppose, and what their words do
certainly signify; what Ingenuity can it be to impose upon us in the
Declaration? However at least they will please to excuse us that we have fallen
at so just a stumbling Block; and charged them as derogating from the Merits of
Christ, whilst they have thus cried up the Merits of their Saints, and of a
Presumption unwarrantable, if not wholly Idolatrous, in desiring any but God
alone to help, and succor, and give them those Blessings, which God only has
power to dispense.

1. When therefore we shall be certainly assured that all that infinite number
which the Church of Rome has canonized, are truly and infallibly Saints.

2. When we shall be assured that these Saints do already enjoy the Presence of
God Almighty; a Circumstance which the Papists themselves confess necessary to
warrant their Invocation.

3. When it shall be made undoubtedly appear, that either by their own
Knowledge, or by some other Revelation, they do ordinarily and particularly
understand all the Requests that are made to them; so that we can be as secure
of their hearing us, as when we desire our Brethren upon Earth to pray for us.

4. When the Liturgies of their Church shall be reformed, and all those
dangerous Insinuations of the Merit and Personal Assistance of their Saints be
removed.

5. When those desperate Doctrines, and yet more desperate Addresses of their
Schoolmen and Controvertists, which scandalize the more moderate even of their
own Party, shall be censured.

6. And Men taught to practice this Invocation with such Sobriety, as neither
to make it so freely and publicly their Worship as they do, nor with any
Opinion of being either sooner heard, or more effectually answered by this way
of Address, than by going directly to God by our Savior and only Mediator
Jesus Christ.

7. In a word, when even an Invocation so moderated, shall be shown either to
have been commanded by God Almighty, or to have been advised by his Apostles,
or to have been practiced ordinarily and directly by the most Primitive
Christians: Or lastly, but to be no way injurious to the excellent Goodness of
that Intercessor, who has so kindly invited, and even conjured us to come to
Him in all our needs; Then will we not fail to join our Ora pro Nobis with
them: But till then we must beg leave to conclude with a Charity and
Moderation, which we suppose they themselves cannot but approve in us, That it
is a fond thing, vainly invented, and grounded upon no warrant of Holy
Scripture, but rather indeed contrary thereunto.

And what we have now said of their Prayers, we must in the next place apply to
their Sacrifices too. To mention the Names of the Holy Saints departed in the
Communion; this we look upon to be a Practice as innocent as it is ancient. So
far are we from condemning it in them, that we practice it our selves. We name
them at our Altars, we give God thanks for their Excellencies, and pray to him
for Grace to follow their Examples. But as we allow thus much to their
Memories, so we cannot but condemn that Practice which Monsieur de Meaux seems
to have omitted, tho yet the chief thing that offends us; that they recommend
the Offerings which they make to God, through the Merits of their Saints which
they commemorate, and desire that by their Merits they may become available to
the Churches needs. As if Christ himself, whom they suppose to be the
Sacrifice, needed the Assistance of St. Bathildis or Potentiana, to recommend
him to his Father: Or, that the Merits of an Offering, which they tell us is
the very same with that of the Cross, should desire the joint Deserts of a St.
Martin to obtain our Forgiveness.

They who shall consider these things as they ought, will, we doubt not,
confess that we have some reason to complain, both that they derogate herein
from Christ's Merits, and attribute to their Saints more than they ought to do.
If this Practice be reformed, our Complaint, as to this point, cease. If it
be not, in vain does Monsieur de Meaux endeavor to persuade us, that they only
name their Saints to give God thanks for their Excellencies, whilst their
public Practice avows, that they desire both the pardon of their Sins, and
even the acceptance of their very Sacrifices themselves, by their Mediation.

ARTICLE IV. Of Images and Relics.
What the Opinion of the Church of England is concerning the Worship of Images
and Relics, will need no long Declaration to show, they being joined by her in
the same Article with that of the Invocation of Saints beforementioned, and by
Artic. XXII.
consequence, submitted by her to the same Censure.

But then, as we before complained, that both the Practice of their Church in
the public Liturgies of it, and the approved Doctrine of their most reputed
Writers, should so far contradict what Monsieur de Meaux would have us think is
their only design in that Service; so we cannot but repeat the same Complaints
in this: That if all the use their Church would have made of Images and
Relics, be only to excite the more lively in their Minds the remembrance of
the Originals, not only the People should be suffered to fall into such gross
Mistakes, as it is undeniably evident they do, in their Worship of them; but
even their Teachers be permitted without any Reproof to confirm them in their
Errors.

Has St. Thomas and his Followers, nay, and even their Pontifical it self, ever
yet been censured by them, for maintaining in plain terms, that the Image of
the Cross ought to be worshipped with the same Worship as that Savior who
suffered on it? Have the Jesuits been condemned for teaching Men to swear by
it? Does not their whole Church upon Good Friday yet address her self to it in
these very dangerous words, Behold the Wood of the Cross! Come, let us adore
it. And do not their Actions agree with their Expressions, and the whole
Solemnity of that day's Service plainly show, that they do adore it in the
utmost propriety of the Phrase? Does she not pray to it, that in this time of
the Passion, it would strengthen the Righteous, and give Pardon to the Guilty?
Is the Hymn for the day of the Invention corrected, wherein they profess that
the Cross heals their Sicknesses, ties up the Devil, and gives them Newness of
Life; and thereupon desire it to save its Assembly, gathered together in its
honor? Is the manner of consecrating them changed, in which they entreat God
to bless the Image of the Cross which they there sanctify, that it may be for
the establishment of their Faith, an increase of their good Works, the
Redemption of their Souls, and their Protection against the cruel Darts of the
Enemy? That Christ would embrace this Cross, over which they pray, as he did
that upon which he suffered: That as by that he delivered the whole World from
its Guilt; so by the Merits of this, they who dedicate it may receive remission
of their Sins. In a word, that as many as bow down before it, may find health
both of their Souls and Bodies by it.

And is all this in good earnest no more than to excite more lively in our
minds the remembrance of Him that loved us, and delivered himself to the Death
for us, and to testify by some outward marks our acknowledgment of that
favor, by humbling our selves in presence of the Cross, to declare thereby our
submission to Him that was crucified.

Is not this rather, if not absolutely to fall into, yet certainly too nearly
to approach to that which Monsieur de Meaux himself confesses to be Idolatry,
viz. to trust in the Images as if there were some divinity or virtue joined to
them, and for which they not only show all imaginable marks of outward Worship,
by Kissings, Prostrations, and the like Ceremonies; but make as formal
Addresses to them, and that in the public Service of the Church, as to God
himself?

How this allowed practice can be reconciled with the prohibition of the
Council of Trent, Not to believe any Divinity or Virtue tied to their Images
for which they ought to be adored; nor to demand any Grace of them, nor place
any Trust or Confidence in them; Monsieur de Meaux may please to expound to us.
In the mean time, as we are so far from condemning the making of all sorts of
Images, that we think it not any Crime to have the Histories of the Gospel
carried or painted in our very Churches, which the Walls and Windows of several
of them do declare: As we publicly use the sign of the Cross in one of our
very Sacraments, and censure no Man for practicing it, only without
Superstition, on any other occasion: so we cannot but avow the Scandal that is
given us by those Doctrines and Practices before mentioned; and that we think
that Worship justly to be abolished which the Primitive Church abhorred, and
which at this day scandalizes not only so great a number of Christians, but
even our common Enemy the Jew and Turk: In a word, which is so far from being
commanded by God, that it needs many nice Distinctions to render it not
directly opposite to an express Prohibition; and is therefore if not downright
Idolatry to those who know how to direct their Intention aright, yet to the
Simple and Ignorant, that is, to the much greater number, and the most zealous
practioners of this Service, so very near it, that the Generality of the wisest
Papists, no less than We, complain of it.

For the honor that is due to Relics, no Protestant will ever refuse what
ever the Primitive Church paid them; or may be fit to express the Honor we
ought to retain for those Bodies that by Martyrdom have been made Sacrifices to
God Almighty. If this be all Mr. de Meaux desires of us, we are ready to
profess our Opinion, that we judge it to be neither offensive to God, nor fit to
be scrupled by any good Man.

We believe that according to the Circumstances of the Times, the Church may
testify this Honor by more or less outward Signs and Marks of Respect. And we
do with satisfaction read that Declaration of Mr. de Meaux, That we ought not
to be servilely subjected to these outward Ceremonies, but to be invited by
them to offer up to God that reasonable service, in Spirit and in Truth, which
he requires of us. And if this be the State of the Question, we confess the
Explication of it has taken away a great part of the difficulty.

But what then means the Council of Trent, to tell us, That we are not only to
honor them, but to worship them too? That by doing so, we shall obtain many
Benefits and Graces of God. That these sacred Monuments are not unprofitably
revered, but are to be sought unto for the obtaining their help and assistance;
to cure the Sick, to give Eyes to the Blind, Feet to the Lame, and even Life to
the Dead. How comes it to pass that their Church not only honors them, which
we could allow, but carries them in Processions, makes Offerings to them, gives
Indulgences to such as shall go to visit them; prescribes Pilgrimages to them,
swears by them, touches their Beads, or Hankerchiefs, with them to sanctify
them; thinks to obtain one Blessing by virtue of this Relick, another from
that; and the like superstitious usages, which we suppose we have good reason
with our Church, to conclude to be fond things, vainly invented, and grounded
upon no Authority Art. xxii.
of Holy Scripture, but indeed repugnant thereunto.

When therefore all these Abuses which we have named, and which Monsieur de
Meaux seems content to allow with us to be such, shall be corrected: When in
the matter of Images, 1. The Hymns and Addresses that teach us, so contrary to
the Spirit of Christianity, to demand Graces of them, and to put our Trust in
them, shall be reformed; St. Thomas and his Abettors censured; and all other
Marks of an unwarrantable Worship be forbidden. 2. When the Pictures of God the
Father, and of the holy Trinity, so directly contrary both to the second
Commandment, and to St. Paul's Doctrine, shall be taken away, and those of our
Savior, and the blessed Saints be by all necessary Cautions rendered truly the
Books, not Snares of the Ignorant. When in points of Relics, 3. they shall be
declared to have no sanctifying Virtue in them: 4. Nor that they ought to be
sought to for any Assistance Spiritual or Temporal to be expected from them. 5.
When it shall be resolved to be no matter of Merit to go to visit them: 6. Nor
any more extravagant Indulgences be set forth for Pilgrimages unto them: When
all these things which Monsieur de Meaux passes over, and which yet are
undeniably their Practice and our Scandal, shall be corrected; Then will we
both believe and submit to the rest which he desires of us: We will honor the
Relics of the Saints as the Primitive Church did: we will respect the Images
of our Savior, and the Blessed Virgin: And as some of us now bow toward the
Altar, and all of us are enjoined to do so at the Name of the Lord Jesus; so
will we not fail to testify all due Respect to his Representation. In the mean
time, if the Outcries of their own Church at these Abuses cannot prevail with
them to redress them, yet at least they will confirm us in the Reformation we
have made of them; and whilst we find Hezekiah commended in the holy Scripture
for destroying the Brazen Serpent, tho made by God's express Command, and in
some sort deservedly honorable for that great Deliverance it brought to the
Jews, Because the Children of Israel 2 King. 18.
offered Incense unto it. We shall conclude our selves to be by so much the
more justifiable, in that the Images we have removed were due only to the Folly
and Superstition of Men, and have been more scandalously abused, to a worser
and greater dishonor of God.

ARTIC. V. Of Justification.
THE Doctrine of Justification is one of those Points that deserves our careful
Consideration; as being not only one of the chiefest of those Points wherein we
suppose the Church of Rome to have prevaricated the Faith, but as Monsieur de
Meaux remarks, one of the first that gave occasion to that Reformation that was
made from it.

It is not necessary to say to what an Extravagance the business of Pardons,
Indulgences, and other means of satisfying the Divine Justice, was arrived; and
how much more confidence the People generally put in the Inventions of Men,
than in the Merits and Satisfaction of Christ. If they have been somewhat
better instructed since, they may thank the Reformation for it: tho we fear all
the difference is, that they are somewhat more reserved in exposing these
Follies now, but yet still retain the Foundation of that Doctrine upon which
they are built.

We willingly allow Monsieur de Meaux this honor, that he has reduced the long
Decrees of the Council of Trent to a short and easy Debate; and proposed the
things which contain our Difference with such tenderness, as might invite us to
close with a great part of it, did not the Decrees of the Council seem too
plainly to refuse Monsieur de Meaux's Exposition of them.

We believe with him, That our Sins are freely forgiven by God's Mercy through
Christ; and that none of those things which precede our Justification, whether
our Faith, or our good Works, could merit this Grace.

We are persuaded that our Sins are not only covered, but are entirely done
away by the Blood of Jesus Christ.

We confess that the Righteousness of Jesus Christ is not only imputed, but
actually communicated to the Faithful, through the operation of the holy
Spirit, in so much that they are not only reputed, but made just by his Grace

We deny not that this Righteousness is a true Righteousness, even in the sight
of God; because that it is God who by Charity works in us: only we think it
withal such as is too weak to obtain for us the pardon of our Sins, which
Monsieur de Meaux seems content to confess with us.

We willingly acknowledge that our Righteousness is not perfect in this Life.
Whilst we are in the Body, the Flesh will lust against the Spirit, and in many
things we shall offend all. The Life of a Christian is a continued state of
Repentance: and he must be too much opiniated of himself that refuses to
conclude with St. Augustine; That our Righteousness in this Life, consists
rather in the Remission of our Sins, than in the Perfection of our Virtue.

In a word; the sum of our Difference as to this Point, seems to be this. Our
Church by Justification, understands only the Remission of our Sins: We
distinguish it from Sanctification, which consists in the production of the
Habit of Righteousness in us. We believe our Sins are pardoned only through the
Merits of Christ imputed to us. And for the rest, we say, that this Remission
of Sins is given only to those that repent; that is, in whom the holy Spirit
produces the Grace of Sanctification, for a true Righteousness and Holiness of
Life.

The Church of Rome comprehends under the notion of Justification, not only the
Remission of Sins, but also the production of that inherent Righteousness,
which we call Sanctification. They suppose with us, that our Sins are forgiven
only by the Satisfaction of Jesus Christ. But then as they make that inward
Righteousness a part of Justification too; so by consequence, they say our
Justification it self is wrought also by our own good Works.

It appears by this, that were these things clearly stated, and distinguished
the one from the other, the difference between us, considered only in the Idea,
would not be very great: And that we might safely allow whatsoever Monsieur de
Meaux has advanced upon this point, provided it be but well and rightly
explained; tho in some things he has expressed himself after a manner unusual
among us; and which we suppose not so entirely conformable to the Expressions
of holy Scripture.

The sum of all is this. Christ died, and by that Death satisfied the Justice
of God for us. God therefore through the Merits of his Son, freely forgives us
all our Sins, and offers us a Covenant of Mercy and Grace. By this Covenant,
founded only upon the Death and Merits of Christ, he sends us his Holy Spirit,
and calls us powerfully to Repentance. If we awake and answer this Call, then
God by his free Goodness justifies us; that is, he pardons our Sins past, gives
us Grace more and more to fulfill his Commands for the time to come; and if we
persevere in this Covenant, crowns us finally with Eternal Life. And all this
he is pleased to do, not for any thing which we have, or can perform, but only
through the Merits and Satisfaction of his Son by Faith applied to us.

This is the Foundation wherein Monsieur de Meaux seems content to agree with
us. We go on to see how the following Doctrine will stand upon this Foundation.

ARTIC. VI. Of Merits.
FOR what concerns the Merits of Good Works, we are content to accept of
Monsieur de Meaux's Exposition; That eternal life ought to be proposed to Man
as the Grace of God mercifully bestowed upon us through Jesus Christ, and as a
recompense that is faithfully rendered to their good Works, and to the merits of
them by virtue of Gods Promise.

The word Merit we acknowledge to have been very ancient in the Church; and tho
to prevent those mistakes which many in these latter ages have made on occasion
of that expression, we think it safer to discourse more reservedly of the
Merit, and press more strongly the Necessity of good Works: Yet if it be
understood so as Monsieur de Meaux expounds it, That all our Merit derives its
force only from the Merits of Jesus Christ, who works in us both to will and to
do; and when we have done, renders by the same Merits our good Works acceptable
to God, and available to our Eternal Life, we shall not be difficult to allow
of it.

If this be All the Church of Rome ascribes to Good works, that our
Justification proceeds absolutely from God's Bounty and Mercy, and but
accidentally only (in as much as God has tied himself by his Word and Promise
to reward them) from our own Performances; We need no long exhortations to
receive a Doctrine which we have always defended against such of the Church of
Rome as have opposed it, and are not yet, that we know of, censured for their
so doing.

That which we reject is, That we do as truly and properly merit Rewards when
we do well, as we do merit Punishment when we do ill: so says the Jesuit
Maldonate. That our Good Works do merit Eternal Life Ezekiel. 18. 20.
condignly, not only by reason of God's Covenant and Acceptance, but also by
reason of the Work it self; so says Cardinal Bellarmine. All which Vasquez sums
up in the three De Justif. l. 5. c. 17. Vasqu^z in D. Th. 1, 2ae (...) 114. d.
^14. c. 5.
following Conclusions; 1. That the Good Works of just Persons are of
themselves, without any Covenant or Acceptance, worthy of the reward of
Eternal Life, and have an equal value of Condignity to the obtaining of Eternal
Glory. (...). That there comes no accession of Dignity to 16. c. 7.
the Works of just Persons by the Merits or Person of Christ, which the same
would not otherwise have, if they had been done by the same Grace bestowed
freely by God alone without Christ. 3. That God's Promise is 16. c. 8.
indeed annexed to the Works of just Men, but yet belongs no way to the Merit
of them, but comes rather to the Works themselves, which are already not only
worthy, but meritorious also. From all which he draws this remarkable
Corallary; Seeing the Works of just Disp. 222. c. 3. n. 30, 31.
Men do merit Eternal Life, as an Equal Recompense and Reward, there is no need
that any other condign Merit, such as that of Christ, should interpose, to the
end that Eternal Life might be rendered to them. -- Wherefore we never pray to
God that by the Merits of Christ, the Reward of Eternal Life may be given to
our worthy and meritorious Works; but that Christ's Grace may be given to us,
whereby we may be enabled worthily to merit this Reward.

This is that Doctrine of good Works which we most justly do detest: And if the
Opinion of the Church of Rome be so directly opposite to it as Monsieur de
Meaux professes, we are a little surprised that no Index Expurgatorius, no
authentic Censure, has ever taken notice of so dangerous a Prevarication. But
contrary-wise, these are the great Authors of their Party, approved, embraced,
and almost adored, by the Greatest and most Learned of that Communion.

These are the Principles which we suppose to have been an unwarrantable
derogation to the Grace of God, and directly opposite to the nature of
Justification by Faith in Christ, before established. And tho this point was
far from being the only cause of our Separation from their Communion, yet let
Mr. de Meaux himself please to say, whether such a Doctrine of Merits as this
were not sufficient, if not to engage us wholly to leave a Church that taught
such things, yet at least to dissent from her in these Particulars.

ARTIC. VII, etc. Of Satisfactions, Purgatory, and Indulgences.
THE whole of this Point we think to be the advancement of a Doctrine grounded
upon no Authority of Holy Scripture, but on the contrary, derogatory to God's
Mercy in Jesus Christ, and, as the Doctrine of Merits before considered,
inconsistent with the nature of that Justification we before established.

Monsieur de Meaux was pleased there to tell us, of God's justifying us freely
for Christ's Merits: That our Sins are not only covered, but entirely done away
by his Mercy; and the Sinner not only reputed, but made just by his Grace. We
cannot but be troubled to see our selves so soon deprived of this excellent
Hope; and required our selves to satisfy God's Justice here, which he assured
us was entirely done for us by Christ before.

When Christ, says Monsieur de Meaux, who alone was able to make a sufficient
Satisfaction for our Sins, died for us; having by his Death abundantly
satisfied for See above p. 66.
them, he became capable of applying that Satisfaction to us after two very
different manners; Either by giving us an entire Forgiveness of our Sins,
without reserving any Pains for us to undergo for them; or in changing only a
greater Pain into a lesser, the Eternal Torments of Hell into a Temporal
Punishment.

The former of these being the more entire, and the more agreeable to the
Divine Goodness, he accordingly makes use of it at our Baptism: But we suppose
he gives the second only to them who after Baptism fall again into sin; being
in a manner forced to it through the Ingratitude whereby they have abused his
former Gifts, so that they are to suffer some Temporal pain, tho the eternal be
remitted to them.

This is a very great Doctrine, and ought certainly to have some better Proof
of it, than barely We suppose. However it be, our Church has declared its self
of an opinion directly contrary: That since the absolute forgiving of sin is
Confessed to be the more perfect way, and more becoming the Divine Goodness;
and that God has never, that we know of, revealed any other; but rather has
constantly encouraged us to expect his Pardon after the largest and most ample
manner that it is possible for words to set forth; We are persuaded that
accordingly whenever God does pardon, it is in that way which is the most
suitable to his Divine goodness, and which alone he has declared to us, that
he does it entirely for Christ's merits, not for any Works or Sufferings of our
own.

In vain therefore does Monsieur de Meaux labor to reconcile this Doctrine
with Christ's absolute Satisfaction. We confess that we ought not to dispute
with God the manner of his Dispensations; Nor think it at all strange if he who
shows himself so easy at our Baptism, is afterward more difficult for those
sins which we commit being Baptized. There is nothing in all this but what we
could most readily allow of, were there but any tolerable Arguments to
establish the Doctrine that requires it.

But whilst this is so destitute of all Proof, that it is acknowledged to
introduce a manner of forgiveness neither so entire, nor so befitting Gods
mercy as a total remission of the Punishment, together with the Guilt; whilst
we have the Sufferings of Christ to rely upon, which are so far from needing
any addition of our own, that they are Confessed to have been Super-abundant to
whatever the divine Justice could require of us; Tho we can and do practice the
same Discipline for the other benefits of it, viz. To show our Indignation
against our selves that we have offended, and to keep us from sinning for the
future; yet we cannot be so forgetful of our dear Master, as to pretend to any
part in that Redemption, but only to enjoy the benefits of that forgiveness,
which by his alone Merits he has entirely purchased for us; nor do we see any
reason to believe that Gods Justice will require any more, than what has been
Super-abundantly paid upon the Cross for the Iniquities of mankind.

It Is true, Monsieur de Meaux tells us, That the necessity of this Payment does
not arise from any defect in Christ's Satisfaction, but from a certain Order
which God has established for a salutary Discipline, and to keep us from
offending.

This indeed were something, would either Monsieur de Meaux have been pleased
to show us this Establistment, or had not the Council of Trent declared more,
viz. That the Justice of God requires it; Council. Trid. Sess. 14. c. 8.
and that therefore the Confessors should be charged to Proportion the
Satisfaction to the Crime. From whence Cardinal Bellarmine concludes, That it
is L. 1. de purg. c. 14.
We who properly satisfy for our own sins, and that Christ's Satisfaction
serves only to make ours Valid. This is an Exposition somewhat different from
Monsieur de Meaux's, who will have the Church of Rome believe, That we do not
our selves satisfy in the least for our sins, but only apply the infinite
Satisfaction of Christ to them.

Upon the whole it appears, 1. That these Penances are not only a Salutary
discipline, but a Satisfaction too. 2. They change the Mercy of God into a
forgiveness, that is confessed neither to be in its self Perfect, nor so
becoming the Divine goodness as an entire remission of sin, the Punishment as
well as Guilt, would be. 3. Their Establishment depends only upon a humane
Supposition of its fitness; and derogates from the very Foundation of that
Covenant God has entered into with us by Christ, That he will be merciful to our
unrighteousness, and our Sins and our Iniquites Hebr. c. 8. v. 12.
he will remember no more. Upon all which accounts, tho we Practice this
Discipline for many other benefits of it, and wish it were universally
Established, not only in a more perfect manner than either in Ours or Their
Church it is, but even in a strictness equal to what they tell us it is fallen
from; Catech, conc. Trid.
yet we cannot believe, that by any of these things we are able to make a true
and proper Satisfaction to God for sin; which he only could do, who Himself
bore our sins in his own Body upon the Cross, and by that one suffering, for
ever perfected them that are Hebr. 10. 14.
Sanctified.

ARTICLE VII. Of INDULGENCES.
THE Doctrine of Indulgences the Council of Trent has asserted only, not
explained: Mon^ieur de Meaux has stated it after a manner so favou^able to us,
that I am persuaded he will find more in ^is own Church than in ours to oppose
his Doctrine.

It was the discipline of the Primitive Church, when the Bishops imposed severe
Penances on the Offenders, and that they were almost quite performed, if some
great cause of pity chanced to arrive, or an excellent Repentance, or danger of
death, or that some Martyr pleaded in behalf of the Penitent, the Bishop did
sometimes Indulge him, that is, Did relax the remaining part of his Penance,
and give him Absolution.

Monsieur de Meaux having this Pattern before his Eyes, frames the Indulgences
now used in the Church of Rome exactly according to it. When the Church, says
he, imposes upon sinners hard and laborious Penances, and that with Humility
they undergo them, this we call satisfaction; and when having regard either to
the fervor of the Penitents, or to some other good works which she prescribes,
she relaxes some part of the Punishment yet remaining; This is called
Indulgence.

But to pass by for the present those abuses that are every day made of these
Indulgences, and which both the Council and Monsieur de Meaux seem willing to
have redressed; such essential differences we conceive there are between the
Indulgences of the Primitive, and those of the Roman Church, that tho we
readily enough embrace the One, yet we cannot but renounce and condemn the
Other.

In the Primitive Church these Indulgences were matters of mere discipline, as
the Penances also were; the One to correct the sinner, and to give others
caution that they might not easily offend; the Other to encourage the Penitent
to honor the Martyr that interposed for his Forgiveness, or to prevent his
dying without Absolution. In the Church of Rome they are founded upon an Error
in Doctrine; that as their Penance is not matter of Discipline, only to correct
the sinner, but to be undergone as a satisfaction to be made to God for the
sin; so their Indulgence is not given as Monsieur de Meaux expounds it, upon
any consideration had of the fervor of the Penitent, to admit him to
Absolution which he has already received, but by the application of the Merits
of their Saints who they suppose have undergone more temporal punishments than
their sins have deserved, to take off that pain, which notwithstanding their
Absolution, the sinner should otherwise have remained liable to.

In the Primitive Church the Bishop received the Penitent to Absolution, and
the exemplariness of his Repentance, or the intercession of the Martyr that
supplicated for him, was the only consideration they had for the Indulgence. In
the Church of Rome the Indulgence is to be had from the Pope only, in whose
hands the merits of their Saints lie, the overplus of which are, they say, the
Treasure of the Church, to be dispensed upon all occasions to such as want, and
upon such terms as his Holiness shall think fit to propose.

In the Primitive Church these Indulgences were very rare, given only upon some
special occasions, and the Bishop never relaxed the remainder of the Penance he
had imposed, till the Penitent had performed a considerable part of it, and
showed by his contrition that it had obtained the effect of bringing him to a
sense of his sin, and a hearty repentance for it, which was the end they
designed by all. In the Roman Church they are cried about the Streets, hung up
in Tables over every Church Door, prostituted for Money, offered to all
Customers, for themselves or for their Friends; for the dead as well as the
living; and to visit three Churches, say a Prayer before this Altar, at the
other Saints Monument, in a third Chapel, is without more ado, through the
extraordinary Charity that Church has for sinners, declared sufficient to take
off whatever such Punishment is due for all the sins of a whole Life.

And here then let Monsieur de Meaux in conscience tell us; Is all this no more
than to release some part of the remaining Penance, in consideration of the
fervor of the Penitent in performing the rest? Such Pardons as these we do
certainly with Reason conclude, To be fond things, vainly invented, and
grounded upon no Authority of Holy Scripture, but indeed repugnant See our 22d
Artic.
to Gods Word.But for the rest, We profess our selves so far from being enemies
to the Ancient Discipline of the Church, that we heartily wish to see it
revived; And whenever the Penances shall be reduced to their former practice,
we shall be ready to give or receive such an Indulgence as Monsieur de Meaux
has described, and as the Primitive Ages of the Church allowed of.

ARTICLE VIII. Of PURGATORY.
BUT the Temporal Pains which they suppose due to sin, has yet another Error
consequent upon it. That since every man must undergo them according to the
proportion of his sins, if any one chance to dye before he has so done, he
cannot pass directly into Heaven, but must undergo these punishments first in
the other Life, and the place where these Punishments are undergone, they call
Purgatory.

So that the Doctrine then of Purgatory, relies upon that Satisfaction which we
our selves are to make for our sins, besides what Christ has done for us: And
according to the measure that that is either true or false, certain or
uncertain, this must be so too: Since therefore Monsieur de Meaux tells us
only, that the Church of Rome supposes the former to be true, they can only
suppose the latter in like manner; and therefore till they are able certainly
to assure us of that, we shall still have reason to doubt of this.

That the Primitive Church from the very second Century, made Prayers for the
dead, we do not deny; But that these Prayers were to deliver them out of
Purgatory, this we suppose Monsieur de Meaux himself will not avow; it being
certain that they were made for the best Men, for the Holy Apostles, the
Martyrs and Confessors of the Church, nay for the Blessed Virgin her self, all
which at the same time they thought in happiness, and who the Papists
themselves tell us never touched at Purgatory.

Many were the private Opinions which the particular Christians of old had
concerning the Reason and Benefit of Praying for the dead. Some then, as we do
at this day, only gave thanks to God for their Faith and their Examples. Others
prayed for them, either for the Bodies Resurrection, or for their acquitting at
the final Judgment, as supposing it to be no way unfit to pray to God for those
very Blessings which he has absolutely promised and resolved to give. Some
thought an Increase of Glory might be obtained to the Righteous by their
Prayers. All believed this, that it testified their hope of them, and
manifested their Faith of that Future Resurrection which they waited for; and
in the mean time maintained a kind of Fellowship and Communion between the
Members of Christ yet alive, and those who were departed only, not lost by
death.

But then it is to be observed, that when they most ordinarily prayed for the
dead, yet was there nothing determined as to this Point; all was left to the
Piety and Opinion of particular men, nor durst they absolutely resolve whether
the dead received any benefit by them; as both the learned of the Church of
Rome themselves Confess, and the Writings of Primitive Antiquity, even to St.
Augustine himself, undoubtedly show.

Now as there is none of us that will condemn the Charity of any man, to pray,
or fast, or afflict himself for the Pardon and Forgiveness of his Friends, his
Country, or his Church, so it be done without any fond Opinion of Merit or
Satisfaction, and to hope too by such Prayers to obtain God's mercy for them:
So if any one will put up his particular Requests for the dead too, for any of
those ends for which the Primitive Christians did, we shall not condemn him.
Only let not that be made an Article of our Faith which we can never be assured
of, and which when it was most Practiced, was received only as a private
Opinion, and in a Sense far different from what is now asserted; And for the
rest We shall not refuse to Consent to any Liberty whereby Peace may be
obtained, and our free Justification by Faith in Christ not injured.

PART II. OF THE SACRAMENTS.
ARTICLE IX. Of the Sacraments in General.
THE Doctrine of the Sacraments has always been esteemed one of the most
considerable obstacles to our union with the Church of Rome. We cannot imagine
why Monsieur de Meaux should insinuate as if our disputes about these, except
it be in the point of the Eucharist, were not so great as about other matters,
unless it be to serve for an excuse for his own passing so lightly over them,
or to make us less careful in examining their Doctrine.

The Sacraments of the New Testament, in that proper sense in which we now take
the word, we have always looked upon to be not only Holy Signs to represent and
confirm to us the Grace of God, but also effectual Tokens of his good Will to
us, by which he does work invisibly in us, and strengthen and confirm our Faith
in him.

To obtain the benefit of the Holy Sacraments, we cannot believe it to be
enough that we have no ill disposition, but do suppose that it is a sufficient
Obstacle if we have not a good one. We confess that the Faith Artic. 25. of the
Chapter of En.
of the Church, and those who present them to Baptism, is all that is required
to prepare Infants to receive the spiritual Regeneration which that Sacrament
confers. But for those who by age are capable of it, we suppose both in Baptism
and in the holy Eucharist, an actual faith of Gods Promise annexed to the
outward signs which we receive, to be indispensably necessary for the partaking
of their effects.

And tho if the rest be agreed, we shall not desire to determine any man's
belief, as to the manner how the Sacraments confer that Grace which God has
promised by them; yet we judge it more agreeable to the Analogy of our Faith to
say, That upon the performance of the outward Ceremony, God bestows the inward
Blessing; than that the Blessing is conferred by Virtue of the Words which are
pronounced, and the action which is done to us, as Monsieur de Meaux has
expounded it.

We do not by this at all take off from the necessity of the outward signs. We
confess, That besides the inward Preparation, there is required for our
Sanctification a special operation of the holy Spirit, and an application of
Christ's Merits by the means of the holy Sacraments. This we are so persuaded
of, that we profess them to be So our Chu. Catechism.
necessary to Salvation, insomuch that whosoever either carelessly neglects, or
presumptuously despises the use of them, will in vain expect it by any other
means.

For the number of the Sacraments, we acknowledge only two as generally
necessary to Salvation; and are surprised to see the Council of Trent damning
all such as will not receive a number, which neither has the Scripture any
where declared; nor was it, that we know of, till the very 12th Century ever
heard of in the Church. De Cerm. Ec. etc. l. 1. c. 12.
Hugo de St. Victor is the first that we can find it in, 1130 Years after
Christ; Lib. 4. Sent. Did. 2.
Lombard and the Schoolmen followed him. Pope Ann. 1439. in Conc. Flor.
Eugenius in his instructions to the Armenians gave yet more countenance to it;
but that all those Ceremonies which the Church of Rome now receives are truly
and properly Sacraments, and that there be neither more nor less than Seven,
never any one absolutely determined, till the Council of Trent first
Canonically decreed it, and commanded the Church under an Anathema to receive
it.

The special consideration of their five pretended Sacraments, will give us an
opportunity more particularly to establish that number we our selves propose.

This presumption of the truth we must not omit here, That not only the Ancient
Fathers of the Church when they speak of the Sacraments properly as we now do,
mention only Baptism and the Lords Supper; but even the Papists themselves who
establish more, yet confess these to be so far the Principal, that our own
Article says but little more, than what their greatest Schoolmen have
voluntarily confessed.

ARTICLE X. Of BAPTISM.
HOW strict our Church is in maintaining the necessity of Baptism, the very
Office by which we do administer it, sufficiently shows. We declare that all
men are conceived and born in sin, and that See our Office Of Pub. Bapt
none can enter into the Kingdom of God, except he be regenerate and born anew
of Water, and of the Spirit. This is the Law of Christ which the Eternal Truth
has established; and whosoever shall presume to oppose it, let him be Anathema.

But now as all other Laws, so this of Christ, must, we think, be interpreted
according to the rules of natural Equity. The Ancient Church constantly
professed her belief, that Martyrdom excused the defect of Baptism. Many of the
Papists themselves suppose, that the desire of it, when by some unavoidable
necessity the Sacrament its self cannot be obtained, shall be reputed for it.
Monsieur de Meaux insinuates that the Acts of Faith, Hope, and Charity, may
supply the want of it. Ep. 70. if it be indeed his.
St. Bernard plainly concludes the same, If, says he, a man desirous of Baptism
be suddenly cut off by Death, in whom there wanted neither found Faith, nor
devout Hope, nor sincere Charity; God be Merciful unto me, and pardon me if I
err, but verily of such a Ones Salvation in whom there is no other defect but
his faultless lack of Baptism, despair I cannot, nor induce my mind to think
his Faith void, his Hope confounded, and his Charity fallen to nothing, only
because he has not that which not contempt, but impossibility withholds.

When therefore so many ways have been allowed to excuse the defect of Baptism,
tho our Church has rather taken all imaginable care that Infants shall not die
without it, than presumed rashly to determine what shall become of them if they
do; yet we cannot but condemn the uncharitableness of the Church of Rome in
Excluding them from all Part in Jesus Christ, and denying that Mercy to a
tender and impotent Age, which they so liberally extend to those of Riper years.

If not the Want but the Contempt of this Sacrament be the only thing that is
damnable, to be sure no Contempt of Baptism can be in them. If the desire of
Baptism in those that are capable of it, is by many of the Church confessed to
be reputed for Baptism; why shall we not hope that God who is all merciful,
will accept the Desire of the Church and of their Parents in their behalf, who
by their Age are not capable to have any of their own. By Monsieur de Meaux,
see before.
If Faith, Hope and Charity, as Monsieur de Meaux himself implies, may excuse
them who actually have these Graces, tho they want this Sacrament; why may not
that Faith, that Hope, that Charity of the Church, which being imputed to them
renders them capable of Baptism, be as effectual to stand instead of it to
them, as their own proper Faith for Others, if a necessity which could not be
avoided prevents it?

In a word, Since such is the Mercy of God, that to things altogether
impossible he binds no man; but where what he Commands cannot be performed,
accepts of our Will to do it instead of the Deed. 2. Seeing God's Grace is
not so absolutely tied to the Sacraments, but that many exceptions have been,
and are still Confessed to be sufficient to obtain it, without the external
Application of them: Seeing, 3. St. Paul has told us that the Seed of faithful
Parentage is Holy 1 Cor. 7.
from the very Birth, as being born within the Covenant of Grace; Tho we
determine nothing, yet we think it the part of Charity, not only to take all
the Care we can to Present our Infants to Baptism whilst they live, but if by
any unavoidable necessity they should die without it, See Cassan. Consult. Art.
9. and de Bapt. Infant. Where he cites many others of the C. of R. of the same
Opinion.
to Hope well of them: Remembering that Judgment of God, Exodus 4. who when Moses
neglected to Circumcise his Son, spared the Child in that he was innocent, but
sought to kill Moses for his Carelessness in the Omission.

A necessity therefore of Baptism we constantly maintain; but absolutely to
determine that all those who die without it, are excluded from the Grace of
Christ, neither will Monsieur de Meaux presume to do of Men, nor dare we much
less to affirm it of Infants. The Lutherans condem the Anabaptists for refusing
Baptism altogether to Children, which we also condemn in them. But that
therefore they make no allowance for extraordinary Cases, where both the Church
and the Parents desired to have Baptized them, only that some unavoidable
Accident prevented it, neither did Cassander believe, nor do the terms of their
Confession at all require. For the Calvinists, so far were Consult. Art. 9.
they from being the Authors of this charitable opinion toward Infants dying
unbaptized, That many of the most Eminent men of the Church of Gerson. Gabriel
Biel, Cajetan, and others.
Rome have long before them maintained the same.

To conclude, If Monsieur de Meaux himself does in good earnest believe the
danger so great as he pretends; may he then please to consider, What we are to
Judge of those who in so many places have not left any Ministers at all to
confer this Sacrament. For our parts we freely declare their hazard to be
infinitely greater than either the Childrens or their Parents; who are so far
from that indifference Monsieur de Meaux most injuriously charges them with,
that in places where public Ministers reside, that they have the opportunity
to do it, they fail not with all imaginable Care to Present them in the
Ambassadors Chapels to Baptism, if they have but the least apprehension that
they are not in a Condition to be carried to their own Temples.

ARTICLE XI. Of CONFIRMATION.
TO clear our way to that particular Examination that is necessary of the
following pretended Sacraments of the Roman Church, it will be necessary to
observe, that by their own Confession these three things are absolutely
required to the Essence of a true Sacrament. 1. Christ's Institution. 2. An
outward and visible Sign. 3. An inward and spiritual Grace by Christ's promise
annexed to that Sign.

We cannot but admire, that neither in the Council of Trent, or in the
Catechism made by its Order, is there any Attempt to prove either of these from
the Holy Scripture as to the Point of Confirmation. It was so much the more
necessary to have done this, in that Many of the greatest Note in the Roman
Church had denied the Divine Institution of it; and some of them were approved
by the Holy See its self that did it. The outward Sign had been none of the
least Controversies that have exercised their own Pens: and indeed since they
have laid aside that of Imposition of hands which they confess the Apostles
used; it was but reasonable to have shown us some Authority for that other they
have established in its stead. What Monsieur de Meaux expounds, is a clear
Vindication of our Practice, but defends nothing of their own Doctrine.

That we think it to have been an Ancient custom in the Church, and which the
very Apostles themselves Practiced, to lay hands on those that had been
Baptized; and in imitation whereof we our selves at this day do the like, the
Practice of our Church sufficiently declares.

We Confess that the use of Chrism in Confirmation was very Ancient, yet such
as we deny to have been Apostolical. We do not our selves use it, yet were that
all the difference between us, we should be far from judging those that did.

The Discipline of our Church allows none that is not of the Episcopal Order to
Confirm. And for the benefit of it, as the Bishop prays to God for his Holy
Spirit to assist us in the way of Virtue and Religion, to Arm us against
Temptation, and to enable us to keep our Baptismal Covenant which we then (our
selves repeat, and) in the Presence of the Church-openly ratify and confirm:
So we Piously hope that the Blessing of the Holy Spirit descends upon us,
through his Prayer, for all these great Ends; both to strengthen the Grace we
already have, and to increase it in us to a more plentiful degree.

ARTICLE XII. Of Penance and Confession.
FOR Penance and Confession, we wish our Discipline were both more strictly
required, and more duly observed than it is. The Canons of our Church do
perhaps require as much as the Primitive Christians themselves did: and it is
more the decay of Piety in the People, than any want of Care in her, that they
are not as well and regularly Practiced.

We do not believe Penance to be a Sacrament after the same manner that Baptism
and the Holy Eucharist are; because neither do we find any Divine Command for
it, nor is there any Sign in it established by Christ, to which his Grace is
annexed. We suppose that if the Ancient Church had esteemed it any thing more
than a part of Christian Discipline, they would not have presumed to make such
changes in it, as in the several Ages it is evident they did.

The Primitive Christians interpreting those places of Mat. 18. 18. John 20. 23.
St. Matthew and St. John which Monsieur de Meaux mentions, of public
Discipine, and to which we suppose with them they principally at least, if not
only refer, at first Practiced no other. For private faults, they exhorted
their Penitents to Confess them to God, and unless some particular
Circumstances required the Communication of them to the Priest, plainly
signified that that Confession was not only in its self sufficient, but in
effect was more agreeable to Holy Scripture, than any other.

If the Conscience indeed were too much burdened by some Great fault; or that
the Crime committed was notoriously Scandalous, then they advised a Confession
to the Priest too. But this was not to every Priest, nor for him just to hear
the Confession, and then without more ado to say I absolve thee; They
prescribed in every Church some Wise Physician of the Soul on purpose for this
great Charge, that might pray with the Penitent; might direct him what to do to
obtain Gods favor; might assist him in it; and finally, after a long
Experience, and a severe Judgment, give him Absolution.

This was the Practice of the Eastern Church; till upon occasion of a certain
scandal, Nectarius first began to weaken it in his Church at Constantinople;
and St. J. Chrysostom his Successor seconded him in it. They reduced the
Practice to what it had been in the Beginning; that open and scandalous Sins
should be openly punished by the public Discipline of the Church, and the
private be Confessed only to God Almighty.

Yet still the public Confession remained in the Practice of the Western
Church. Pope Leo I. to take away the occasions of Fear and Shame that kept many
from the exercise of it, first ordered, that it should be sufficient to Confess
to God and the Priest only; which is the first plausible Pretense offered by
them for Auricular Confession.

Thus this Practice, now set up for a Sacrament instituted by our Savior, and
absolutely necessary to obtain God's pardon, first began. But the Performance
of it was yet left to every Man's liberty. About 1215 Years after Christ, the
Council of Lateran first Commanded it to be of necessary observance: But we do
not find that till the Council of Trent in the last Age, it was ever required
to be received absolutely as a Sacrament of Divine Institution, and necessary
to Salvation.

This short View of the Practice of Antiquity in this point, may be sufficient
to show, that unless it were the public power of the Church to censure open
and scandalous Offenders, which was the Key of Discipline our Blessed Savior
left to it; for the rest, several Churches and Ages had their several
Practices. They advised private Confession as upon many accounts which Monsieur
de Meaux Remarks, and which we willingly allow, very useful to the Penitent:
but it was not for above a 1000 Years ever looked upon as absolutely necessary,
nor by Consequence as Sacramental.

The Church of England refuses no sort of Confession either public or private,
which may be any way necessary to the quieting of men's Consciences; or to the
exercising of that Power of binding and loosing, which our Savior Christ has
left to his Church.

We have our Penitential Canons for public Offenders: We exhort men if they
have any the least doubt or scruple, nay sometimes tho they have none, but
especially before they receive the Holy Sacrament, to Confess their sins. We
propose to them the benefit not only of Ghostly Advice how to manage their
Repentance, but the great comfort of Absolution too, as soon as they shall have
completed it.

Our form of Absolution after the manner of the Eastern Church at this day, and
of the Universal Church for above 1200 Years, is Declarative rather than
Absolute. Whilst we are unable to search the Hearts of men, and thereby
infallibly to discern the sincerely contrite, from those that are not; we think
it Rashness to pronounce a definitive Sentence in God's Name, which we cannot
be sure that God will always confirm.

When we visit our Sick, we never fail to exhort them to make a special
Confession of their sins to him that Ministers to them: And when they have done
it, the Absolution is so full, that the Church of Rome its self could not
desire to add any thing to it.

For the rest; We think it an unnecessary Rack to men's Consciences to oblige
them where there is no scruple, to reveal to their Confessor every the most
secret fault, even of Wish or Desire, which the Church of Rome exacts: Nor dare
we pronounce this Discipline Sacramental, and necessary to Salvation; so that a
contrite Sinner, who has made his Confession to God Almighty, shall not receive
a Pardon, unless he repeat it to the Priest too.

This we must beg leave with assurance to say is directly contrary to the
Tradition of the Church, and to many plain and undoubted places of Holy
Scripture. And if this be all our Reformation be guilty of, That we advise not
that which may Torment and Distract, but is no way apt to settle men's
Consciences; nor require that as indispensably necessary to Salvation, which we
find no where commanded by God as such, we assure Monsieur de Meaux we see no
cause at all either to regret the Loss, or to be ashamed of the Change.

ARTICLE XIII. Of Extreme Unction.
OF all those pretended Sacraments of the Roman Church that have no foundation
in holy Scripture, this seems to stand the fairest for it. Here is both an
outward and visible Sign, and an inward and spiritual Grace tied to it.
Insomuch that Monsieur de Meaux himself, who never attempted to say any thing
of it in the two foregoing Instances, yet fails not to put us in mind of it in
this.

To interpret rightly that place of St. James which is 1 James 5. 6, 14. 13.
alleged to prove it, we must remark, that anointing with Oil was one of those
Ceremonies used by the Apostles in working their miraculous Cures, Mark 6. 13.
They cast out devils, says the Evangelist, and anointed many sick persons with
Oil, and cured them. Sometimes they used only Imposition of hands, and
sometimes they did it without either.

Together with these outward signs they usually added Prayer too, some
Invocation at least in the name of Jesus Christ, as the more substantial and
more effectual Assistance.

So that St. James' Direction there, If any man be sick let him call for the
Elders of the Church, and let them pray over him, anointing him with Oil in the
name of the Lord, and the Prayer of Faith shall save the sick, and the Lord
shall raise him up; referring as is evident to those miraculous cures which the
Apostles and their Successors in the Primitive Church wrought by such
anointing: We look upon it, that the advice, in as much as it belonged to that,
could neither have been the Institution of a Sacrament at all; and that
together with the miraculous power of healing, it is now long since ceased in
the Church.

Monsieur de Meaux ought not to refuse this Interpretation: (...) Vid. Sacram.
Grge. p. 66 Et Rursus 251. and serqq. Menard. annot. 3 MSS. (...) alia ejusd.
opin.
The Ancient Rituals of the Roman Church for above 800 Years after Christ, show
that they esteemed this to be the meaning of it; they understand it plainly of
bodily Cures, and Cardinal Cajetan himself freely confesses Cajet. Annot. in
loc.
that it can belong to no other.

Our Savior and his Apostles, when they thus miraculously healed the infirmity
of the Body, at the same time forgave the sin of the soul too; For this cause
St James adds, And if he have committed sins, they shall be forgiven him.

Tho this extraordinary Power be now ceased both in the One and the other kind,
yet we still endeavor to perform whatever we are capable of on these
occasions; We send for the Elders of the Church when we are sick, they pray
over us; if we stand charged with any private sins, or public Censures, we
confess them to them, and they fail not by their Absolution, as far as in them
lies, to forgive us.

This is all, we think, is now remaining for us to fulfill of what this Text
requires; We anoint not our sick for the recovery of their bodily health, as
St. James here prescribed, because the miraculous power of healing, to which
that Ceremony ministered, is ceased in the Church. We pray over them if it
please God for the recovery of their present Health, but especially for their
Eternal Salvation: We exercise the power of the Keys to the forgiveness of
their sins, because the benefit of this is the same now that ever it was;
Christ's Promise remains, and whilst we piously make use of the same means, we
doubt not but it shall be to the like Effect.

ARTICLE XIV. Of MARRIAGE.
FOR the point of Marriage, Monsieur de Meaux says nothing but what we
willingly allow of: We deny that it is a Lomb. of our side. See Cassand. Con.
Sacrament after the same manner that Baptism and the holy Eucharist are,
because it both wants an outward sign to which by Christ's Promise a Blessing is
annexed; and is so far from being generally necessary to Salvation, as they
are, and as we suppose all true and proper Sacraments ought to be, that the
Church of Rome has thought fit to deny one of the most considerable parts of
their Communion altogether the use of it.

ARTICLE XV. Of Holy Orders.
THE Imposition of Hands in holy Orders, being accompanied with a Blessing of
the Holy Spirit, may perhaps upon that account be called a kind of Particular
Sacrament. Yet since that Grace which is thereby conferred, whatever it be, is
not common to all Christians, nor by consequence any part of that foederal
Blessing which our Blessed Savior has purchased for us; but only a separation
of him who receives it to a special Employ; we think it ought not to be
esteemed a common Sacrament of the whole Church, as Baptism and the Lords
Supper are.

The outward sign of it we confess to have been usually Imposition of hands,
and as such we our selves observe it; Yet as we do not read that Christ himself
instituted that sign, much less tied the promise of any certain Grace to it; so
Monsieur de Meaux may please to consider, that there are many of his own
Communion, that do not think it to be essential to holy Orders, nor by
consequence the outward sign of a Sacrament in them.

We confess that no man ought to exercise the Ministerial Office till he be
first consecrated to it. We believe that it is the Bishops part only to Ordain.
We maintain the distinction of the several Orders in the Church; and tho we
have none of those below a Deacon, because we do not read that the Apostles had
any, yet we acknowledge the rest to have been anciently received in the Church,
and shall not therefore raise any controversy about them.

ARTICLE XVI. Of the EUCHARIST.
And first of the Explication of those Words, This is my Body.

IN our entry upon this Point, we cannot but testify our just regret, That
this holy Sacrament which was designed by our Blessed Savior not only to be
the greatest assurance of his love to us, but the strongest Engagement of our
Charity to one another, should have become the chiefest subject of our
contentions, and widened that breach which it ought to have closed.

Monsieur de Meaux who grounds his opinion of the Corporeal presence of Christ
in this Holy Eucharist, upon the words of Institution, which he contends ought
to be literally understood, yet proposes two Cases wherein he seems to allow
it might have been lawful to forsake the Letter. We will join issue with him
upon his own terms, and show, 1. That there are such grounds in those words for
a figurative interpretation, as naturally lead to it. 2. That when we come to
consider the Intention of our Savior in this holy Sacrament, we are yet more
strongly confirmed in it.

It is confessed by the greatest Authors of the Church of Rome, that if the
relative This in that proposition, This is my Body, refers to that Bread which
our Savior Christ held in his hand at the time when he spoke those Words, the
natural repugnancy there is between the two things affirmed of one another,
Bread and Christ's Body, will necessarily require the figurative interpretation.
For this is impossible, says Gratian de Consecrat. d. 2. c. 55.
Gratian, That Bread should be the Body of Christ. It cannot be, says L. 3. de
Euch. c. 19. SS. Primum.
Card. Bellarmine, That that proposition should be true, the former part
whereof designeth Bread, the latter the Body of Christ. Id. ib. l. 1. c. 1.
So that if the Sense be, This Bread is the Body of Christ, either it must be
taken Figuratively thus, This Bread signifies the Body of Christ, or it is
plainly absurd and Impossible. The whole difficulty therefore as to our first
point consists in this, Whether our Savior Christ when he said, This is my
Body, meant any thing else to be his Body, than that Bread which was before him.

Now for this, the Connection of his discourse seems to us an evident
Demonstration. Our Savior Christ took Bread, and gave Thanks, and brake it,
and gave it to his Disciples, saying, Take, Eat, This is my Body which is given
for you; do this in Remembrance of me. Luke ^2. 19.


For what did he demonstrate here, and say was his Body, but that which he gave
to his Disciples? What did he give to his Disciples, but that which He brake?
What brake he, but that which he took? And St. Luke says expressly he took Bread.

What Jesus took in his hands, that He blessed: what He blessed, the same He
brake and gave to his Disciples: What he gave to his Disciples, of that he
said, This is my Body: But Jesus, says the Text, took Bread; of the Bread
therefore he said, This is my Body.

In a word; Forasmuch as the Papists themselves believe the Bread to be turned
into the substance of Christ's Body, because Christ said This is my Body:
Either those words refer to the Bread, and then by their own Confession they
will require our Interpretation; or if they do not, it is evident that then
from these words they can have no Grounds to conclude their own pretended
change.

So necessarily do both the words themselves and their own Confession, lead us
to the Exposition which we make of them. And what these prepare us to receive,
the same, 2dly. The Intention of our Savior in this Holy Sacrament, does yet
more strongly confirm to us.

When God delivered the Children of Israel out of Egypt, he instituted the
Passover to be a continual Remembrance Exodus 12.
of that great deliverance. In like manner our Blessed Savior being now about
to work out a much greater deliverance for us, by offering up himself upon the
Cross for our Redemption, he designed by this Sacrament to continue the memory
of this Blessing, That as often 1 Cor. 11. 26
as we eat of this Bread, and drink of this Cup, we might show forth the Lords
Death till his Coming.

That this Sacrament instituted for the like end which the Passover had been,
and now for ever to succeed in its place, might be both the better understood,
and the easier received by them, it pleased our Blessed Lord to accommodate
himself as near as was possible to the Ceremonies and Phrases they had before
been used to. He retained the Symbols, and even the Expressions they had so
long been acquainted with; only he changed the application of them to a new and
more excellent Remembrance.

In the Jewish Passover, the Master of the House took Bread, and brake it, and
gave it to them, saying, This is the Bread of Affliction, which our Fathers eat
in Egypt. In this holy Sacrament, our Savior after the very same manner, took
Bread, and brake it, and gave it to them, saying, This is my Body which is
broken for you; Do this in remembrance of Me.

Now as it is evident, that that Bread which the Jews every Year took, and
brake, and said, This is the Bread of Affliction which our Fathers eat in
Egypt, was not that very Bread which their Ancestors so many Generations before
had eaten there; but was designed only to be the Type or Figure of it: so
neither could our Saviors Disciples to whom he spoke, and who, as being Jews,
had so long been acquainted with that Phrase, ever believe, That the Bread
which he held in his hand, which he brake and gave them, saying, This is my
Body which is broken for you, Do this in remembrance of me, was the very,
actual, real Body of Christ which they saw before them at the Table. They
understood it, no doubt, to be the Type and Figure of that Body which was now
about to be broken for them; as that Bread which the Master of the Feast, after
the very same manner, was wont to break to them, was the Type of that Bread of
Affliction which their Fathers had eaten in Egypt.

Nor does the Phrase, My Body, at all weaken, but rather confirm this Idea, as
being the ordinary expression among the Jews, whereby they called the Passover,
The body of the Passover, The body of the Paschal Lamb. It was therefore used
here by our Savior with that allusion, the more expressly to signify, that he
was the true Passover now to be sacrificed for us, by whose Blood we were to be
delivered 1 Cor. 5. 7.
from the destroying Angel, and for the Remembrance whereof, we were therefore
to keep this Ceremony, as the Jews had done their Passover for the other.

This we suppose to be the undoubted Interpretation of this place. Monsieur de
Meaux ought the less to except against it, in that it was the original remark,
not of any Protestant, or of any other Party of Christians differing from the
Church of Rome in this matter, but was objected to them by the verv Jews
themselves long before the Reformation, upon the same account. They showed by
it, that in the Doctrine of this pretended Change, the Church of Rome had
evidently opposed the design of our Saviors Institution, and advanced an
Interpretation, which no one accustomed to the Jewish Notions, as the Apostles
were, could ever have understood to be his meaning.

The design of this discourse permits me not to proceed to any more particular
vindication of this Exposition, nor to mention many other Arguments more
usually proposed; and wherein it has clearly been shown, that they have not
only the holy Scripture, and the design of our Blessed Savior in this
Sacrament, but Sense, Reason, Antiquity, whatsoever is able to furnish an
Argument, all unanimously against them: It remains only to examine whether what
Monsieur de Meaux has proposed, be any thing more reasonable, that so we may go
on to the Consequences established upon this foundation.

Where first we cannot conceive why Monsieur de Meaux designing to establish
the Exposition of the holy Eucharist upon the Analogy which it has to the
Jewish Sacrifices, should fly off to the natureof their Sacrifices in general,
where the parallel is neither so clear, nor so uncontroverted, as to produce
any necessary consequence from the allusion. It would certainly have been more
reasonable to compare it, as we have done, with that particular Sacrifice of
the Passover to which it succeeded, and from which therefore, if any, must be
showed the design of it. But we will clear the whole difficulty in a reflection
or two, and prove, that what has been offered to us as a convincing Argument,
is, upon a nearer view, a mere fallacy.

And 1. We desire it may be observed, That the Peace Offerings under the Law
were designed as an acknowledgment on the peoples part, for those temporal
blessings which it pleased God to bestow upon them. And because after the
sacrifice of Isaac, God first entered into the Covenant with Abraham, and
promised him his Blessing, and to be his God, Genesis 22. 16, etc.
and the God of his Seed after him; it seems to have been further their
intention in all these Sacrifices, to call to remembrance that Offering of
Isaac as the foundation of all those blessings for which these Sacrifices were
appointed as a testimony of their Gratitude.

2. That tho the Passover, like the Sacrifice of the Cross, was first offered
as a sin-offering for the delivery of the firstborn in the land of Egypt; yet
that yearly remembrance of it, which God afterward established, was always
esteemed a Peace Offering; and indeed, the perpetual order of their Sacrifices
clearly demonstrates that it could be no other.

So that the Parallel therefore, for the explaining the nature of the holy
Eucharist, must be this:

1. That as the Jews ate of their Peace Offerings in General, to call to mind
the Sacrifice of Isaac, and give God thanks for those blessings which they
received by it, and of that of the Passover in particular, in memory of Gods
delivering them out of Egypt; So the Christians partake of this blessed
Sacrament, in memory of that deliverance which the Sacrifice of the Cross of
Christ, whom both Isaac and the Paschal Lamb slain in Egypt typified, has
purchased for them.

2. That as the Peace Offering which the Jews eat, was not changed into the
Substance of that first Sacrifice whereof it was the remembrance, but was eaten
as a figure or commemoration of it; so the Christians in their Sacrament are
not to think the Bread and Wine which Christ has appointed to be our
Peace Offering, should be changed into the very substance of that Body which
was offered for us upon the Cross, but to be received only as Types of it. For
thus was the Peace Offering in general, a Type of Isaac, and the Passover in
particular, the Type of that first Lamb, which was slain for their deliverance
in the Land of Egypt.

When therefore Monsieur de Meaux tells us, that the Jews ate the proper flesh
of their Peace Offering; we answer, that so do we the proper substance of ours;
we eat the Bread which Christ appointed to be the remembrance of that
deliverance which he has purchased for us, as the body of the Lamb was
commanded by God to be the remembrance of theirs.

Monsieur de Meaux adds, That the Jews were forbidden to partake of the proper
flesh of their Sin-offering, and of the Blood, because that a perfect Remission
was not then obtained, and that therefore by the rule of contraries, we ought
now to eat of Ours, because a full satisfaction is now made by Christ.

For Reply to which, it might suffice to say, that this rule of contraries,
should we follow it according to the Letter, would lead Monsieur de Meaux into
so many absurdities, that he would be forced himself to abjure his own
Principle. According to this rule, the Apostles could not have eaten the flesh
of Christ before his Resurrection; the Priests under the Law being commanded
not to eat of the Sin-offering after the third day, and therefore by the rule
of contraries they could not partake of it before.

Monsieur de Meaux may please to consider how far he will approve of this
Conclusion: In the mean time as to his Objection, we have before said, that the
remembrance we make in the holy Eucharist, like that of the Paschal Feast among
the Jews, shows it to be a Peace Offering; and for the rest, if, as Monsieur de
Meaux pretends, this Blood was mystically forbid under the Law, to show that a
perfect remission of sins was not then obtained; It will follow, that for the
contrary reason, Christ appointed the Cup to be received in this holy
Sacrament, to testify that full remission which his blood has purchased for
us. The Church of Rome therefore in refusing the Cup to the people, not only
violates the express command of our Blessed Savior; but according to Monsieur
de Meaux's Principles, teaches them by it, that a full remission of sins is not
yet obtained, even by the precious Blood of Christ himself.

It may by this appear what little advantage Monsieur de Meaux can get to
justify their Doctrine of the corporeal Presence of Christ in the Eucharist,
from the Analogy of the ancient Sacrifices, which do clearly and necessarily
establish the contrary. For what remains of this discourse we are but little
concerned in it.

We Confess this Sacrament to be somewhat more than a mere Figure; but we deny
that therefore it must be his very Body. We acknowledge the power of God, to do
whatever he pleases: Yet Monsieur de Meaux may please to consider, that
Contradictions, such as to be and not to be at the same time, are even in their
own Schools usually excepted. Monsieur de Meaux supposes, that because Christ
did not explain his words in the figurative Sense, the Apostles must needs have
understood them in the Literal. But we have before showed, that the Jews, who
are certainly the best Judges, are of a quite contrary opinion, viz. That his
Apostles knowing his allusion, could never have understood them otherwise than
in a Figure. In a word, for his last Remark, That the Laws of discourse, which
perm^, that where there is a just Proportion between the Sign and the thing
signified, the one may be put for the other; Yet suffer it not to be so, when a
Morsel of Bread, for instance, is set to represent the Body of a Man: We must
beg leave to say, that neither is the Proportion so small betwixt the Bread
broken and Christ's Body broken, as Monsieur de Meaux would suggest; Or, that if
there were, yet since our Saviors institution has set the one to represent to
us the other; we think that designation ought to be of more Authority with us,
than all their new Laws of Discourse; invented purposely only to set the fairer
Gloss upon so great and apparent an Error.

ARTICLE XVII. Do this in Remembrance of Me.
THE Explication of the preceding Article, having engaged us to a length
extraordinary, we will endeavor to recompense it by our shortness in this.

We are entirely agreed, that the Intention of the Son of God was to oblige us
by these words to commemorate that death which he underwent for our Salvation.
We Confess, that that real Presence which we suppose in the Communion, does not
at all contradict the Nature of this Commemoration. We are persuaded, that as
the Jews eating of their Peace Offering, which was the remembrance of God's
Covenant, and particularly of the Passover, the Type of that Paschal Lamb that
was offered for them in Egypt, called to mind the Sacrifice of Isaac, and that
great Deliverance God had wrought for them, in bringing them up out of the Land
of Bondage: So whilst we Eat of those Holy Elements which our Savior Christ
has instituted like the Peace Offering aamong the Jews, to perpetuate the
Memory of his death, We call to mind the more lively, that great deliverance
which He has wrought for us, and render thanks for it, and by faith and
repentance apply to our selves the Merits of it.

Thus whilst we receive these Holy signs which he has instituted for our
Memorial, we need no real descent of the Son of God from Heaven; no new
Crucifying of the Lord of Glory to raise in our Souls those just resentments we
ought to have of so excellent a Blessing. But as a Child cannot but recollect
the kindness and affection of a dear Father, as often as he beholds the
Monument where his dead Body lies interred: So we much more, cannot choose but
excite our Love to our blessed Redeemer, as often as we see before our eyes
these Sacred Elements under which he is veiled. Nor is it necessary for this,
that this Mystic Tomb, as Monsieur de Meaux phrases it, should any more be
changed into the very real Body of our Savior to raise this remembrance, than
that natural One into the dead Corpse of the Father, to recall the tender
Affections of his Child at the sight of it.

In a word; As we will not now move any Argument from the nature of this
remembrance, to oppose that substantial change, which we have before combated
on more solid grounds; so we suppose muchless ought Monsieur de Meaux from the
sole opinion of that more lively remembrance, which he imagines the actual
eating of the very Flesh of Christ would raise in us, then only to do it in a
figure, to conclude him to be substantially there. It is evident, that they who
believe this change, and they who believe it not, receive him entirely alike.
They see, and taste, and feel the same thing: It is Faith alone which works in
both, and makes the one believing him spirituarlly present, to remember him
with the same love, to honor him with the same reverence, and embrace him with
the same hope, as the other, who thinks him corporeally, but yet after a manner
altogether unperceivable, contained under the sacred Elements that are
presented to him.

ARTICLE XVIII. The Doctrine of the Church of England, concerning this Holy
Sacrament.
THe sum of our belief as to the nature of this holy Sacrament is this:

We esteem it designed by Christ to be a perpetual memorial of his suffering
for us: That so often as we eat of this Bread, and Drink of this Cup, we might
show forth the 1 Cor. 11. 26.
Lords Death, till his coming.

We believe that in this Communion, we do not only remember, but effectually
partake our Blessed Savior, and all the benefits of his passion; Insomuch that
to such as rightly, See our 28. Article.
and worthily, and with Faith receive the same, the bread which we break is a
partaking of the body of Christ, and likewise the Cup of the blessing, is a
partaking of the blood of Christ.

For the manner of this Participation, We believe that the Body and Blood of
Christ, are given, taken, and eaten in this See t he same Article.
Supper, only after a heavenly and spiritual manner; and that the means whereby
this is done, is Faith.

We believe that the wicked and such as are void of Faith, tho they may visibly
and carnally press with their teeth, as St. The same Article.
Augustine says, the Sacrament of the Body and Blood of Christ, yet are no way
partakers of Christ, but rather as St. Paul tells us, eat and drink their own
damnation, not discerning the Lords body. 1 Cor. 11.


In a word, We believe that Transubstantiation, or the change of the substance
of Bread and Wine into the substance of The same Article.
Christ's Body and Blood, can never be proved by Holy Scripture, but is
repugnant thereunto; contrary to the intention of our Blessed Savior, and to
the nature of this Holy Sacrament; and has given cause to many great abuses, As
in the following Article, we shall have occasion more particularly to show.

This is our Faith of this holy Eucharist: And in this Faith we are confirmed
not only by those unanswerable proofs, which our Writers have given, and some
of which we have before touched upon; but also from those irreconcilable
differences, which this Error has thrown the Writers of the Church of Rome
into. In effect we find every party exposing the falseness and impossibility of
every ones Hypothesis but his own. Their greatest men confess the uncertainty
of their own proofs. That there is not in Scripture any formal proof of
Transubstantiation: So Lomb. 4. sent. did. 10.
Lombard, Scotus 4. did. 2. q. 11.
Scotus, and many others, That there is not any, that without the declaration
of the Church would be able to evince it: Bellarm. de Euchar. l. 3. c. 23. ss.
secundo dicit. Where he cites many others of the same Opinion.
So Cardinal Bellarmine himself confesses. That had not the Church declared her
self for the proper sense of the words, the other might with as good warrant
have been received: So says In 3. D. Th. q. 75. art. 1.
Cardinal Cajetan. That if the words of Consecration refer to the Bread, which
is changed by them, then they must be taken in our sense: So the generality of
that Communion confess. In a word, See Scotus cited by Bellar. l. 3. de Euch.
c. 23. ss Unum tamen. So also Gabriel cited by Suarez, T. 3. disp. 50. sect. 1.
So Lombard. l. 4. sent. did. (...). lit. A.
That this Doctrine was no matter of Faith till the Council of Lateran, 1200
years after Christ, and that had not that and the Council of Trent since
interposed, it would not have been so to this very day.

And here who can choose but admire the Power of Truth? That after so many
Outcries against us, for Opposing a Doctrine which they would make the World
believe it is as clear as if it were written with a Ray of the Sun; after so
many Anathema's against us for Heretics, and Schismatics, and ten thousand
repetitions of their great Scriptum est, This is my Body: they should at last
be forced to confess, That they are not, cannot, nor are ever like to be agreed
in the Explication of them. That they contain nothing in them necessary to
prove this change. That had not the Church declared its self for the Litteral
meaning; the Figurative interpretation might with as good Reason have been
received. That for 1200 years this Doctrine was no matter of Faith, and but for
the Council of Lateran had not been then. In short, that if the words of
Institution refer to the Bread, then are we doubtless in the right; and if they
do not, how will they ever prove the change which they pretend is made of the
Bread into the Body of Christ by them?

Certainly confessions, such as these, ought to awake every Papist careful of
his own Salvation, into an unprejudiced Examination at least of these things.
To consider what Foundation there really is for this Doctrine, and what
desperate Consequences, unknown to Antiquity, contrary to the formal words of
Holy Scripture, and without Gods infinite Mercy, absolutely destructive of
their eternal Salvation, have been built upon it.

As we hope that these declarations have been permitted by God to fall from the
greatest, and most Esteemed of their Church, not only to confirm us in our
Faith, but also to prepare the way for their return to that Catholic truth,
from which they have so long erred; so we doubt not, by Gods blessing, but that
they will in time attain to it, when being sensible of that Tyrannical
usurpation that has been made over their Consciences, and resolved to use that
Knowledge God has given them, to search the Scriptures, and examine their Faith,
and not servily follow every Guide that will but pretend to lead them: They
shall seriously and indifferently weigh all these things, and find that
therefore only they have thought us in darkness, because their own Eyes were
shut that they might not discern the light.

ARTICLE XIX. Of Transubstantiation, and of the Adoration of the Host.
WHat remains of this Subject of the Holy Eucharist, being wholly consequent
upon the foregoing mistaken interpretation of the Words of our Blessed Savior
before considered; we should have passed them over as things we have in effect
already declared, that the Church of England receives not; but that we are
persuaded the particular consideration of them will yet more fully show the
falsness of that Foundation upon which they are built.

Monsieur de Meaux in proving the Corporeal presence of Christ in the Holy
Eucharist, from the Words of institution, This is my Body: had something that
at least seemed to favor his mistake; but to produce them here for
Transubstantiation, that is, not only to argue the presence of Christ's
substance, but also the change of the substance of the Bread and Wine into it,
he has not the least appearance of the Text for him.

Indeed were there no other way for Christ to be present in the Eucharist, but
only by this change; it might then be allowed that having, as he imagines,
proved the one, he had in effect established the other. But the number of those
who interpret the Words in like manner according to the Letter, yet are as
great enemies as our selves to this change; and suppose Christ's Body to be
present by a Union of it to the Bread, rather then by a Conversion of the Bread
into it; not only shows that there is no necessary consequence at all between
the real presence, and Transubstantiation, but that there is another manner of
Christ's presence, both more agreeable to Holy Scripture, than that which they
advance; and that takes off infinite difficulties which their
Transubstantiation involves them in.

That the Substance of the Sacred Figures remains in this Sacrament after the
Consecration, those clear expressions of St. Paul, wherein he so often calls
them 1 Cor. 10. 16. etc. -- 11. 26.
Bread and Wine after it, seem to us plainly to show: Acts 2. 46. etc.
To break Bread, the Holy Scripture tells us was the usual Phrase all the time
of the Apostles, for receiving the Holy Communion; and which the Blessed Spirit
himself dictated. These passages Monsieur de Meaux certainly ought not to put
off with a Figurative meaning, unless he can give us some good reason why he
follows the High road of the Literal interpretation in the one, to establish
the Substance of Christ's Body in the Sacrament; and forsakes it in the other,
to take away the Presence of the Bread from it.

For the Adoration of the Host, The Church of England consequently to her
Principles of the Bread and Wine's remaining in their natural substances,
professes that she thinks it to be Idolatry, and to be See her Rubric at the
end of the Communion Office.
abhorred of all faithful Christians.

Monsieur de Meaux, in Conformity to theirs, tells us, That the presence of
Christ's Body in the Eucharist ought to carry all such as believe it without all
scruple to the Adoration of it. This therefore being taken as a Principle
acknowledged by them; it may not be amiss to observe, that since it is certain,
that neither Christ nor his Apostles appointed or practiced, nor the Church for
above 1000 Years required or taught any Adoration of this Holy Sacrament;
neither could they, according to Monsieur de Meaux's Principles, have believed
the Corporeal Presence of our Blessed Savior in it.

Is there any of the Evangelists that mentions it? They all tell us, Take, Eat;
Do this in remembrance of me. But does any one add, This is my Body, fall down
and Worship it?

When St. Paul reproved the Corinthians for violating 1 Cor. 11. 20, etc.
this Holy Sacrament; is it possible he could have omitted so obvious a Remark,
and so much to his purpose; That in profaning this Holy Sacrament, they were
not only guilty of the Body and Blood of Christ, which it was instituted to
represent to us; but even directly affronted their Blessed Master corporally
present there; and whom instead of profaning, they ought, as they had been
taught, to Adore in it?

With what simplicity do the Ancient Fathers speak of this Communion in all
their Writings? The Elevation of the Sacred Symbols was not heard of till the
Seventh Century; and then used only to represent the lifting up of Christ upon
the Cross, not to expose it to the People to adore it. The Bell, the Feast of
the St. Sacrament, the Pomp of carrying it through the Streets, all the other
Circumstances of this Worship, are inventions of yesterday. The exposing of it
upon the Altar to make their Prayers before it; their Addresses to it in times
and cases of Necessity; their performing the chiefest acts of Religion in its
presence, never mentioned in Antiquity.

Nay, instead of this Worship, they did many things utterly inconsistent with
it. They disputed with the Heathens for worshipping Gods their own Hands had
made. Was it ever objected to them, that they themselves did the same: Worship
a Deity whose substance they first formed, and then spoke it into a God? They
burnt in some Churches what remained of the Holy Sacrament. They permitted the
People to carry it home, that had Communicated: They sent it abroad by Sea, by
Land, without any the least regard that we can find had to its Worship: They
buried it with their Dead; they made Plasters of the Bread, they mixed the
Wine with their Ink. These certainly were no instances of Adoration: Nor can we
ever suppose that they who did such things as these, ever believed that it was
the very Body and Blood of their dear Master, whom they so much loved; and whom
doubtless they would have been as ready to have worshipped, had they so
believed; as both Monsieur de Meaux supposes they ought to have been, and as we
see others for the rest no more pious than those Primitive Christians were, now
to do it.

ARTICLE XX. Of the Sacrifice of the Mass.
A Third Consequence of the Corporeal Presence of Christ in the Holy Eucharist,
is the Sacrifice of the Mass: In which we ought to proceed with all the Caution
such a Point requires, as both makes up the chiefest part of the Popish
Worship, and is justly esteemed one of the greatest and most dangerous Errors
that offends us.

Monsieur de Meaux has represented it to us with so much tenderness, that
except perhaps it be his Foundation of the Corporeal Presence, on which he
builds, and his Consequence that this Service is a true and real Propitiatory
Sacrifice, which his manner of expounding it we are persuaded will never bear;
there is little in it besides but what we could readily assent to.

We distinguish the two Acts, which he mentions, from one another. By the
Consecration we apply the Elements, before common, to a Sacred use; by the
Manducation, we fulfill our Savior's Command; We take, and eat, and Do this in
remembrance of Him.

This Consecration being separately made of his Body broken, his Blood spilt
for our Redemption, we suppose represents to us our Blessed Lord in the figure
of his Death, which these holy Symbols were instituted to continue the memory
of. And whilst thus with Faith we represent to God the Death of his Son, for
the pardon of our sins; we are persuaded, that we incline his Mercy the more
readily to forgive them.

We do not therefore doubt, but that this presenting to God Almighty the
Sacrifice of our Blessed Lord, is a most effectual manner of applying his
Merits to us. Were this all the Church of Rome meant by her Propitiatory
Sacrifice, there is not certainly any Protestant that would oppose her in it.

Where is that Christian that does not by Faith unite himself to his Savior in
this holy Communion? That does not present him to God as his only Sacrifice and
Propitiation? That does not protest that he has nothing to offer him but Jesus
Christ, and the Merits of his Death? That consecrates not all his prayers by
this Divine Offering; and whilst he thus presents to God the Sacrifice of his
Son, does not learn thereby to present also himself a lively Sacrifice, holy,
and acceptable in his sight?

This is, no doubt, a Sacrifice worthy a Christian, infinitely exceeding all
the Sacrifices of the Law. Where the Knife is the Word, the Blood shed not but
in a figure, nor is there any Death but in Representation. A Sacrifice so far
from taking us off from that of the Cross, that it unites us the more closely
to it; represents it to us, and derives all its Virtue and Efficacy from it.

This is, if any other, truly The Doctrine of the Catholic Church, and such as
the Church of England has never refused: and except it be our doubt of the
Corporeal Presence, Monsieur de Meaux had certainly reason to expect, that
there was nothing in this we could justly except against.

But now that all this is sufficient to prove the Mass to be a True and Proper
Sacrifice, truly and properly Council. Trident. Sess. 22.
propitiatory for the sins and punishments, the satisfactions and necessities
of the dead and the living; and that to offer this true and proper Sacrifice,
our Savior Christ instituted a true and proper Priesthood, when he said, Do
this in Remembrance of Me: This is what we cannot yet understand, and what we
think we ought not ever to allow of.

We know indeed, that the Primitive Church, called the holy Eucharist a
Sacrifice, in that large extent of the Expression, whereby the holy Scripture
styles every religious performance, our Prayers, our Thanksgivings, our
Virtues, our very Selves, Sacrifices to God: And accordingly in our own
Liturgy, we do, without all scruple, do the same. But when it comes to be set
in Opposition to a Sacrament, and to be considered in the true and proper
signification of the Word; we must, with all Antiquity, needs profess, That we
neither have, nor can we after that of Christ admit of any.

Hence it is, that our Church following the Doctrine of the Holy Apostles and
Primitive Christians, teaches, That the Offering of Christ once made, is See
Article 31.
that proper Redemption, Propitiation, and Satisfaction for all the sins of the
whole World; and that there is no other Satisfaction for sin but that alone.
That the Application of Christ's Death by Faith in the Holy Eucharist, is made
to all such as with true Repentance receive the same, we undoubtedly believe.
We are persuaded, that by our Prayers, which in this holy Solemnity we never
fail to offer for the wants and necessities, the pardon and forgiveness not of
our selves only, but of all Mankind; of those who have not yet known the Faith
of Christ; or that knowing it, have prevaricated from the right way, we incline
Gods Mercy to become propitious unto them. Only we deny, that by this holy
Eucharist, as by a true and proper Propitiatory Sacrifice, we can appease Gods
Wrath for the sins of the whole World; can fulfill the satisfactions, and supply
the necessities of other men; of the dead and the living; of them that are
absent, and partake not of it. This we attribute to the Sacrifice of the Cross
only; and are persuaded that it cannot, without derogation to the Merits of
that most absolute Redemption which was there purchased for us, be applied to
any other.

When we examine the first Institution of this holy Communion, we cannot
perceive either in the words or action of our Blessed Savior, any Sacrifical
Act or Expression. He took bread, and brake it, and gave it to his Disciples,
saying, Take, Eat, This is my Body which is given for you: Do this in
Remembrance of Me.

Monsieur de Meaux seems to imply, that the Consecration made it a Sacrifice.
But this Vasquez tells us, that others think to be only a preparation to it,
because In. 3. D. Th. disp. 222. c. 1.
till after the Consecration Christ is not there, and by Consequence cannot be
offered.

The Council of Trent seems to refer it to the Oblation: This Bellarmine
opposes, because neither Christ L. 1. de Miss. c. 27.
nor his Apostles used any.

Bellarmine is positive, that either Christ sacrificed in Eating, or there is
no other action in which he can Ibid.
be said to have done it. Yet even this the greatest part of that Communion
reject; because Eating is not Offering: and in the Ordination where the Priest
receives the power of Sacrificing, not any mention is made of it. In Effect,
Reason will tell us, That this is to partake of the Offering, not to offer it;
and Monsieur de Meaux himself accordingly distinguishes the Two Acts of
Consecration and Manducation from one another, and refers the Sacrifice wholly
to the former.

If we consider the Nature of a true and proper Sacrifice, they universally
agree, that these Four Things are necessarily required to it: 1. That what is
Offered be something that is Visible: 2. That of profane, which it was before,
it be now made sacred: 3. That it be offered to God: And 4. by that offering
suffer an essential destruction.

Now we suppose, that the greatest part of these Conditions are evidently
wanting to this pretended Sacrifice of Christ's Body in the Mass. 1. It is
Invisible: They confess it. 2. It was never profane, that it should be made
sacred: They will not presume to say that it was. 3. It suffers no Essential
destruction: The Blood is not spilt but in a Mystery, says Monsieur de Meaux,
nor is there any Death but in Representation.

As therefore none of these things truly and properly agree to this holy
Eucharist, so we suppose, that neither can it be truly and properly a
Sacrifice. We are persuaded, that the Offering its self, like the necessary and
essential Properties of it, must be only in Figure and Representation. This is
what we willingly allow Monsieur de Meaux, and what their own Principles do
undoubtedly prove.

For what our Savior adds, Do this in Remembrance of Me: However the Council
of Trent has Canonically resolved it to be the Institution of a true and proper
Priesthood, to offer this Sacrifice; yet that it has no such Proof, the
preceding Discourse See Sess. 22. cap. 1.
evidently shows. Our Savior Christ commanding his Apostles to Do this,
commanded them to Do no more than what himself had done: So that if he
therefore did not Sacrifice himself, neither did he give any Authority to them,
or to their Successors to Sacrifice.

ARTICLE XXI. Of the Epistle to the Hebrews.
THE Epistle to the Hebrews so clearly establishes our Doctrine, in Opposition
to the pretended Sacrifice of the Mass, that Monsieur de Meaux had certainly
reason to enter on a particular consideration of it. We will, after his
Example, follow the same Method, and show the whole Design of that Sacred Book
to be directly contrary to the Principles of the Roman Church.

Monsieur de Meaux observes, that the Author of this Epistle concludes, that
there ought not only no other Victim to be offered for sin after that of
Christ, but that even Christ himself ought not to be any more Offered. Now, the
reason which the Apostle gives, is this; Because that otherwise, says he,
Christ must often Heb. 9. 25, 26.
have suffered: Plainly implying, that there can be no true Offering without
Suffering. So that in the Mass then, either Christ must Suffer, which Monsieur
de Meaux denies, or he is not Offered, which we affirm.

This is so evidently the meaning of that place, and so often repeated, That
without Blood, there is Heb. 9. 22.
no Remission; that Monsieur de Meaux is forced freely to declare, that if we
take the word Offer as it is used in that Epistle, they must profess to the
whole World, that Christ is no more Offered, either in the Mass, or any other
way. Now, how these things can stand together, that the Epistle to the Hebrews
contradicts not the Offering of the Mass, and yet that the same Epistle
absolutely declares, that Christ can no more be Offered, because he can no more
Suffer; nor any more become a Propitiatory Sacrifice, because without Blood
there is no Propitiation: All which Monsieur de Meaux allows, and professes to
the whole World, that in the Notion of the Epistle to the Hebrews, Christ is
not offered in the Mass, nor can be any where else, we are not very well able
to comprehend.

But that Epistle goes yet further. It tells us, that Christ ought to be but
once offered, because by that one Offering he has fully satisfied for our sins,
and Heb. 10. 14.
has perfected for ever them that are Sanctified. If therefore by that first
Offering he has fully satisfied for our sins, there is then no more need of
any Offering for sin: If by that first Sacrifice he has perfected Ibid. v. 18.
for ever them that are Sanctified, the Mass certainly must be altogether
needless to make any addition to that which is already perfect. In a word, if
Ibid. v. 2.
the Sacrifices of the Law were therefore repeated, as this Epistle tells us,
because they were imperfect; and had they been otherwise, they should have
ceased to have been offered. What can we conclude, but the Church of Rome then,
in every Mass she Offers, does violence to the Cross of Christ; and in more
than one sense, Crucifies to her self the Lord of Glory.

Lastly, The Council of Trent declares, that because there is a new and proper
Sacrifice to be offered, it was necessary that our Savior Christ should
institute a new and proper Priesthood to offer it. And so they say he did,
after the Order of Melchisedeck, in Hebr. 7. 3.
opposition to that after the order of Aaron under the Law. Now certainly
nothing can be more contrary to this Epistle than such an assertion: Both whose
description of this Priesthood shows it can agree only to our Blessed Lord; and
which indeed in express terms declares it to be peculiar to him. It calls it an
unchangeble Ibid. v. 2^.
Priesthood, that passes not to any other, as that of Aaron did from Father to
Son, but continues in him only, because that he also himself continues for
evermore.

ARTICLE XXII. Reflections on the foregoing Doctrine.
ANd here then let us conjure our Brethren of the Church of Rome seriously to
consider these things; and into what desperate consequences that great Error
of the Corporeal presence has insensibly led them.

Can any thing be more rash or more uncharitable, even the Literal
interpretation of this Holy Eucharist being allowed, than their Canon of
Tra^substantiation? To cut off from their Communion the greatest and most
Orthodox part of the Christian Church, only for a Nicety; a manner of presence,
which neither has the Scripture any where revealed, and which they themselves
never understood.

Is it possible for men to fall into a grosser or more dangerous Error, than to
set up a Wafer for their God, and pay a divine Worship to a Morsel of Bread?
Shall their good Intentions secure them? Had not the Israelites a good
Intention to hold a feast unto Exodus 32. 5.
the Lord, when they Worshipped the Molten Calf? Were they therefore not
Idolaters for it? Had this been a sufficient excuse, Nadab and Abihu had not
been punished: Their intention was certainly good to burn Incence to the Lord.
The Jews had a good Lev. 10.
intention even in Crucifying the Lord of glory: St. Paul thought it Zeal to
presecute his Disciples. Our Blessed Savior has foretold, and we live to see
it accomplished, that the time should come when Men should kill their Brethren,
and think they did God good service. The Church of Rome may do well to Joh. 16.
2.
consider whether their good intention will justify them that do it; and
whether both in this, and that, they do not run a desperate hazard, if it
appear that they have no other plea than a well meant mistake to excuse them.

For our parts we must needs profess that these things give us not only a
scandal but a horror for their Religion. Monsieur de Meaux had certainly
reason to say, that this is the Chiefest and most important of all our
controversies, and wherein we are at the farthest distance from one another.
And would to God they had only offended us by these Errors; and had not
exposed our common Name to the reproach of the very Heathen; who have been
confirmed by them in their Idolatry, and thought it more rational to adore a
Stock or a Stone, than with the Christians to Worship this moment what they Eat
the very next.

But Monsieur de Meaux thinks we have no reason to appear so obstinate against
them, who declare our selves so favorably toward the Lutherans, who yet are
involved in the same Error. It Is true we believe the Lutherans mistaken in their
Literal interpretation of this Holy Sacrament. But we are persuaded they are
infinitely less so, and less dangerously than the Papists.

They confess that there is no change made in the Substance of the Sacred
Elements. They believe that the Bread and Wine continue in their proper
Natures, and that Christ's Body is present only when he is received. They adore
not the Holy Eucharist: They found no Propitiatory Sacrifices upon it: They say
no Masses for the sins and satisfactions, for the wants and necessities of the
Dead and the Living: They deny not the Cup to the People; their Error in one
word, whatsoever it be, is only a matter of simple belief; has no ill
consequences attending it, nor do they damn us for not receiving it.

Let the Church of Rome do all this: Let them raze their Anathema's out of
their Councils, and banish their Masses and Adorations out of their Churches;
Let them no longer scandalize us with any unwarrantable practices, nor desire
to enslave our Consciences by submitting them to their own inventions; and
though we shall still think Transubstantiation to be the greater Error, yet
will we receive them with the same charity we do the Lutherans: We will pray to
God to give them a better understanding, but will not drive them from our
Communion, for matters of simple belief, and which are only to themselves, though
they be wrong.

But till then, in vain does Monsieur de Meaux exhort us to consider the ways
of providence to bring us to a Union, which God knows we could be glad to have
on any terms but the loss of truth. In the mean time if the Church of Rome in
good earnest thinks, that as we tolerate the foundation of all these Errors,
the Corporeal presence in the Lutherans, so we ought to bear the consequences
of it in them: Let them at least do what the Lutherans have done; let them
embrace our Communion; let them leave off to persecute us where they have
power, and damn us where they have not; let them receive us as Brethren, not
Lord it over us as our Masters. This will make us hope that they are sincere
when they conjure us to be at peace with them, and they may justly then accuse
us of partiality, if we continue to repute them as Enemies, when they will be
thus content to love, and receive, and deal with us as friends.

ARTICLE. XXIII. Of Communicating only under one kind.
THis is the last of those consequences that give us a just detestation for
that great Error of the Corporeal presence on which they are founded. It is so
plainly contrary to the express command of our Blessed Savior, that we are
persuaded it has pleased God to suffer them to fall into it, on purpose to
correct that vanity whereby they have so proudly aspired to an Opinion of
Infallibility: That whilst they Lord it over men's Consciences, and will not so
much as give them leave to ask them a Reason of what they do, they might here
at last be surprised in an Error which the most vulgar Eye is able to discern.

The Church of England conformably to all Antiquity declares, That the Cup
ought not to be denied to the Sea our 30th Article.
Lay People; forasmuch as both parts of the Lords Sacrament by Christ's
Ordinance and Commandment, ought to be ministered to all Christian men alike.

For indeed, Did not he who said of the Bread, Take, Eat, this is my Body, say
also of the Wine, with the same expressness, Drink ye all of this, for this is
my Blood of the New Testament which is shed for you for the remission of sins?

Did not he who commanded them, Do this in Remembrance of Me, for the Bread,
even according to their own Construction, Take and Consecrate, and give to
Others, as I have done to you; command them for the Cup in like manner, Do
this; i. e. consecrate, and give it to Others, as I have done to you, in
remembrance of Me?

We confess, That the Grace of God is not tied to the outward signs: Yet we
think withal, that without taking the outward and visible signs, we can have no
pretense to the inward and spiritual Grace of that holy Sacrament; which
deriving all its Effect from our Savior's Promise, we can have no security
that it shall have any good one to them, who do not receive it according to his
Institution.

Had Christ esteemed it sufficient for us to receive the Blood in the body, we
suppose he would not have consecrated the Cup afterward. But if it was our
Savior's pleasure, that to commemorate the more lively his Passion, we should
take his Blood as it was spilt for our Redemption, separate from his Body; we
think it an unwarrantable presumption for us to make our selves wiser than God,
and say, that it is sufficient to participate of Both in One.

Monsieur de Meaux has received so full an Answer upon this point, from the
Reply made to his Treatise written purposely on this Subject, that he will have
no cause to complain of us for not repeating here, what has been so fully and
so successfully handled there.

Only as to that Negligence of these latter Ages, which he is pleased to
allege as the reason of this change; We must needs say, that God be thanked,
we cannot observe any such Negligence of this holy Communion in our Churches,
where yet this holy Sacrament is administered to as large Congregations, and
with as great frequency as any where among Them. Both our Priests and the
People, give and receive it with that Care and Reverence, that we find as
little grounds for any such pretense, as there is reason in it, were it never
so true, to justify so great and unwarrantable a Change.

PART III. OF THE CHURCH.
ARTICLE XXIV. Of the Word Written and Unwritten.
OUR Blessed Savior having founded his Church upon the Word which He preached,
we confess, that the unwritten Word, as to that Gospel which he preached, was
the first Rule of Christians. But God Almighty foreseeing how liable such a
Rule must have been to infinite Inconveniences, thought fit to have that Word
which was first spoken by Mouth, afterward consigned to Writing. By which
means the Word written and unwritten were not Two different Rules, but as to
all necessary matters of Faith, one and the same: And the unwritten Word so far
from losing its Authority, that it was indeed the more firmly Established, by
being thus delivered to us by the holy Apostles and Evangelists.

We receive with the same Veneration whatsoever comes from the Apostles,
whether by Scripture or Tradition, provided that we can be assured that it
comes from them. And if it can be made appear, that any Tradition which the
Written Word contains not, has been received by All Churches, and in All Ages,
we are ready to embrace it, as coming from the Apostles.

Monsieur de Meaux therefore ought not to charge us as Enemies to Tradition, or
obstinate, to receive what is so delivered. Our Church rejects not Tradition,
but only those things which they pretend to have received by it: But which we
suppose to be so far from being the Doctrine of the Apostles, or of All
Churches in All Ages, that we are persuaded they are many of them directly
contrary to the Written Word, which is by Themselves confessed to be the
Apostles Doctrine, and which the best and purest Ages of the Church adhered to.

ARTICLE XXV. Of the Churches Authority.
THE Church; i. e. The Universal Church in All Ages, having been Established by
God, the Guardian of the Holy Scriptures, and of Tradition, we receive from her
the Canonical Books of Scripture. It is upon this Authority, that we receive
principally the Song of Solomon as Canonical, and reject other Books as
Apochryphal, which we might perhaps with as much readiness otherwise receive.
By this Authority we reverence these Books, even before by our own reading of
them, we perceive the Spirit of God in them: And when by our reading them, we
find all things conformable to so Excellent a Spirit, we are yet more confirmed
in the belief and reverence we before had of them.

This Authority therefore we freely allow the Church, that by her hands in the
succession of the several Ages, we have received the Holy Scriptures. And if as
universal and uncontroverted a Tradition had descended for the Interpretation
of the Scriptures, as for the receiving of them, we should have been as ready
to accept of that too. Such a declaration of the sense of Holy Scripture as had
been received by all Churches, and in all Ages, the Church of England would
never refuse: But then as we profess not to receive the Scriptures themselves
only, or perhaps principally upon the Authority of the Roman Church, which has
in all Ages made up but a part, and that not always the greatest neither, of
this Tradition; so neither can we think it reasonable to receive the sense of
them only from her, though she profess never so much, to invent nothing of her
self, but only to declare, the Divine Revelation made to her by the Holy Ghost,
which she supposes has been given to her for her direction: Whilst we are
persuaded, that neither has any Promise at all been made to any particular
Church of such an infallible direction; and have such good cause to believe
that this particular Church too often, instead of the divine Revelations,
declares only her own Inventions.

When the dispute arose about the Ceremonies of the Law, Acts 15. the Apostles
assembled at Jerusalem, for the determination of it. When any Doubts arise in
the Church now, we always esteem it the best Method to decide them after the
same manner. That the Church has Authority not only in matters of Order and
Discipline, but even of Faith too, we never denied: But that therefore any
Church so assembled, can with the same Authority say now, as the Apostles did
then, It has seemed good to the Holy Ghost, and to Acts 15. 28.
Us: This we think not only an unwarrantable presumption, for which there is
not any sufficient ground in Holy Scripture, but evidently in its self untrue,
seeing that many such Councils are by the Papists themselves confessed to have
erred.

Hence it is that we cannot suppose it reasonable to forbid Men the Examination
of the Churches Decisions, which may err, when the Holy Apostles, nay our
Savior Christ himself, not only permitted, but exhorted their Disciples to
search the Truth of their Doctrine, which was certainly Infallible. Yet if the
determination be matter of Order or Government, as not to Eat of things offered
to Idols, etc. or of plain and undoubted Precept, as to abstain from
Fornication, and the like: Here we fail not after the Example of Paul and
Silas, to declare to the faithful what her decision has been; and instead of
permitting them to judge of what has been so resolved, teach them throughout all
places to keep the Ordinances of the Apostles. Acts 16. 4.


Thus is it that we acquiesce in the judgment of the Church; and professing in
our Creed a Holy Catholic Church, we profess to believe not only that there
was a Church planted by our Savior at the beginning, that has hitherto been
preserved by him, and ever shall be to the end of the World; but do by
consequence undoubtedly believe too, that this Universal Church is so secured
by the Promises of Christ, that there shall always be retained so much Truth in
it, the want of which would argue that there could be no such Church. We do not
fear that ever the Catholic Church should fall into this entire Infidelity:
But that any particular Church, such as that of Rome, may not either by Error
lose, or by other means prevaricate the Faith, even in the necessary Points of
it; this we suppose not to be at all contrary to the Promise of God Almighty,
and we wish we had not too great cause to fear, that the Church of Rome has in
effect done both.

It is not therefore of the Catholic Church truly such, that we either fear
this infidelity, or complain that she has endeavored to render her self
Mistress of our Faith. But for that particular Communion, to which Monsieur de
Meaux is pleased to give the Name, tho she professes never so much to submit
her self to the Holy Scripture, and to follow the Tradition of the Fathers in
all Ages; yet whilst she usurps the absolute Interpretation both of Scripture
and Fathers, and forbids us to examine whether she does it rightly or no, we
must needs complain that her Protestations are invalid, whilst her Actions
speak the contrary: For that if this be not to render her self Mistress of our
Faith, we cannot conceive what is.

In a word, tho we suppose the Scriptures are so clearly written, that it can
very hardly happen, that in the necessary Articles of Faith any one man should
be found opposite to the whole Church in his Opinion: Yet if such a one were
evidently convinced that his Belief was founded upon the undoubted Authority of
Gods Holy Word, so far would it be from any Horror to support it, that it is at
this day the greatest glory of S. Athanasius, that he stood up alone against
the whole World in defense of Christ's Divinity, when the Pope, the Councils,
the whole Church fell away.

Conclude we therefore, that God, who has made us, and knows what is best and
most proper for us, as he has subjected us to the Government and Direction of
his Church for our Peace and Welfare, so to secure our Faith, he has given us
his Holy Word, to be the last resort, the final, infallible Rule, by which both
we and the Church its self must be directed: And from this therefore if any one
shall endeavor to turn us aside, or preach any other Gospel unto us than what
we have therein received, tho he were an Apostle from Gal. 1. 8, 9.
the Grave, or even an Angel from Heaven, let him be Anathema.

ARTICLE XXVI. The Opinion of the Church of England, as to the Authority of the
Church.
FOR the two last Articles of Monsieur de Meaux's Exposition, I might very well
have passed them by. The Church of England, whose Doctrine I pretend to
explain, is but very little concerned in them. Therefore only in a word, That
we allow the Church a just Authority in matters of Faith, both the declaration
of our xxth. Article, and the subscription we make to the whole 39 show: Such a
deference we allow to her decisions, that we make them our directions what
Doctrine we may, or may not, publicly maintain and teach in her Communion: In
effect, we show whatever Submission we can to her Authority, without violating
that of God, declared to us in his Holy Scriptures.

Whatsoever deference we allow to a National Church or Council, the same we
think in a much greater degree due to a General. And whenever such a one,
which we much desire, shall be freely and lawfully assembled, to determine the
Differences of the Catholic Church, none shall be more ready both to assist in
it, and submit to it.

ARTICLE XXVII. Of the Authority of the Holy See, and of Episcopacy.
FOR the Pope's Authority, though we suppose no good Consequence can be drawn
from that Primacy we are content to allow St. Peter among the Apostles, for
that exorbitant Power which has of late been pretended to: Yet when other
Differences shall be agreed, and the true Bounds set to his Pretenses, we shall
be content to yield him whatsoever Authority the Ancient Councils of the
Primitive Church have acknowledged, and the Holy Fathers have always taught the
faithful to give him.

This Monsieur de Meaux ought to be contented with; who himself absolves us
from yielding to those pretenses, that have indeed very justly rendered this
Authority, not only odious, but intolerable to the World.

Let those who are Enemies to Episcopacy, and who deny any due respect to the
Chair of St. Peter, answer for themselves. The Church of England has both
retained the one, and will be ready according to what we have before declared,
when ever it shall be requisite, to acknowledge the other.

THE CLOSE.
SUCH is the Doctrine of the Church of England in those points which Monsieur
de Meaux has thought fit to propose, as the principal matters in debate betwixt
us. May it please the unprejudiced Papist to say, what he can find in All
these, to warrant that bitter and unchristian hatred they have conceived
against us. To cut us off, as much as in them lies, from the Communion of
Christ's Church on Earth, and to deny us all part of his promises in Heaven.

We firmly believe the Holy Scriptures, and whatsoever they teach or command,
we receive and submit to, as to the Word of God. We embrace all the ancient
Creeds, and in them all that Faith which the Primitive Christians supposed, and
which the Religious Emperors, by their Advice, decreed should be sufficient to
entitle us to the common name of Catholics.

What new Donatists, Gentlemen, are you, to presume to exclude us from this
Character? And may we not justly demand of you, what S. Augustine once did of
them on the same occasion; You say that Christ is Heir of no Lands, but where
Donatus is Coheir. De unitate Eclesiae, c. 6.
Read this to us out of the Law and the Prophets, out of the Psalms, out of the
Gospel, out of the Sacred Epistles: Read it to us, and we will believe.

We accept the Tradition of Primitive Antiquity truly such, with a Veneration
we dare confidently say greater than your selves. We have showed, that the very
grounds of our difference is, that you require us to believe and practice such
things as the Holy Scripture forbids us, and the Primitive Church never knew.

You command us to worship Images: Is it not evident See Article 4.
that both the Law and the Gospel have forbid it? and is it not confessed, that
both the Apostles and their Successors abhorred the very name?

You command us to communicate only under one Article 23.
kind: That is in our Opinion, nay, it is in yours too, to contradict the
Institution of our Blessed Savior, and the practice of the very Roman Church
for above a Thousand years, and of all other Christians to this very day.

You command us to pray to Saints and Angels: Does Article 3. Col. 2. v. 18.
Rev. 19. 10. -- 22. 9.
not St. Paul forbid it? Did not the holy Angel twice refuse it from St. John?
And many Centuries pass without One probable Instance of any that did it?

You command us under pain of your Anathema to Article 19.
believe Transubstantiation? Do you your selves understand what you mean by it?
Is it any where written? Was it ever mentioned for above a Thousand years?

You bid us Adore the Holy Sacrament: Has Christ Article 19.
prescribed it? Have his holy Apostles written it? Did not here also above a
Thousand years pass before any one attempted it?

You require us to believe the blessed Eucharist to be a true and real
Propitiatory Sacrifice for the sins and satisfactions Article 20.
both of the Dead and of the Living. Have ye any probable proof of it? Are ye
yet, or ever like to be agreed among your selves about it? Do not your own
principles evidently show the contrary?

Men and Brethren: Consider, we conjure you, these things: And if you please,
consider us too, what we are, and what our Manners and Conversation among you
has been: Believe us, at least, that we have no other End but Truth in these
Enquiries: No other Interest but to save our souls, and go the surest and
directest way to Heaven.

The Proofs we offer, they are not vain Conjectures; they are clear, we think,
convincing Arguments. And though the design of this little Treatise has been
rather to show you what our Doctrine is, than to give a just account of those
Reasons that detain us in it: Yet perhaps even in this there may be somewhat to
show, that we do not altogether build in the Air; but deserve certainly to have
our Articles and our Canons, both better understood, and better answered, if it
may be, than they have ever hitherto been.

For to resume yet once more some few of our differences.

You think you ought to invocate the Blessed Virgin and the Holy Saints. Now
not to repeat what we have Article 3.
before said of the Unlawfulness of it, This we suppose to be first needless,
because we know we have a more excellent and powerful Media or, that has
commanded us to come to him; and next Uncertain, because you are not able to
tell us how, nay, not to secure us that by whatever way it be, our Prayers do
always and certainly come up to them. If we are mistaken, at least we run no
hazard in it: We address our selves continually to the Throne of Grace, where
we are secure that we shall be both heard and answered. But now should you err,
consider we beseech you how many Prayers you every day lose, and what a
dishonor you put upon your divine Mediator. And if you please, consider too
how unjust you are to damn us for not joining with you in a practice, that has
so great danger, so little assurance, and not any advantage.

You suppose we ought to fall down before your Images. Article 4.
Not to do this is to be sure no sin, you dare not say it is. To do it may be,
and you can never secure us it is not abominable Idolatry, odious to God, and
contrary to that holy Faith into which we have been Baptized.

You damn us for doubting of the number of your seven Article 10.
Sacraments. Has God revealed it to you? Have the Holy Scriptures defined it?
Or even Tradition its self delivered it to you. If it be true; Can you yet
escape the charge of rashness and uncharitableness, to damn whole Churches for
so needless a matter? should it be false, how will you escape that Anathema
your selves; you have then so falsely as well as uncharitably denounced against
us?

You require us to believe that children dying unbaptized, Article 10.
are excluded the Grace of Christ for ever. To what purpose this? For what
benefit? Were it as evident as it is indeed uncertain, and we are persuaded
false; our modesty is safe in deciding nothing; the Error of such among us as
believe it not is charitable; founded upon the sure Mercies and Goodness of
God, who never inflicts any punishment where there is no fault; and in a word,
has not any the least ill consequence upon it. We take as great care to Baptize
our Infants, as you can do who most believe it. But now if your Opinion should
be false; What answer will you ever be able to make to God, for peremptorily
defining what was so uncertain and uncharitable? and for damning us, only
because we dare not venture to cut off those from Christ for whom he died, and
whom we hope he will in mercy receive to him?

Lastly, You deny us the entire Communion; you Article 23.
pronounce an Anathema against us, because we will not confess that one part
alone is sufficient. Is it not certain that if we err, we have yet both Christ's
Institution, and the practice and Opinion of many Ages to absolve us? But have
you any thing to excuse you, if you are mistaken? To take it as we do, you
confess can have no danger, are you sure that to deny it as you do, may not be
a Sacrilege?

And what shall I say more? For the time would fail me to speak of every one of
those other points Monsieur de Meaux mentions, much more to add many others,
and of no less consequence, which he has thought fit to pass by. In all which
we have at least this undeniable advantage over you; that besides the clearest
Arguments that we are in the right, the hazard we run is not very great if we
should not be: Whereas for you, neither is there any tolerable proof of the
contrary Errors, and an infinite danger should you chance to be mistaken.

These things, as both the Character of the Book we have now examined, and the
Style of many other your latter most considerable Authors, give us cause to
hope, begin to be no longer totally hid from your Eyes; so shall we never cease
in all our Prayers to make mention of you, that you may be perfectly enlightened
to discern, and impartially disposed, to receive and to embrace the Truth.

In the mean time, whilst both you and we mutually address our selves to the
Eternal Truth for his assistance; whilst as we ought, we implore his mercy,
that he would give us a right understanding in all things; remembering this that
we are all but Men, and that it is not therefore impossible for either of us to
err: That it may be strength of Passion, or prejudice of Education, or even
vehemence of affection, more than the light of Reason, has hitherto kept us in
a too fond partiality for our own Opinions: Let us at least, we beseech you,
agree in that mutual Charity which alone can secure us amidst all our Errors;
which will both best dispose Gods mercy to show us what is right, and will best
incline our Minds to that sincerity which we all pretend to, and I hope all
really have to embrace it.

If we cannot yet agree in all the points of our Religion; let us consider,
that neither are the dearest friends entirely of the same opinion in every
thing. Let us wait Gods pleasure; if it be his will to reveal even this also
unto us: Nevertheless whereunto we have already Philip. 3. 15, 16.
attained, let us walk by the same rule, let us mind the same thing.

We believe in the same God; we rely on the same Redeemer; we embrace the same
Creeds; we attend the same hopes of an Everlasting Salvation: And in all these,
amidst all our other Differences, have at least an entire agreement in what is
most necessary, and shall we hope to the Honest and sincere among us, be
sufficient for our Eternal Security.

Let these things engage us to have the same love too: to be more sparing in
our Anathema's, and more zealous in our Prayers for one another, to seek and to
maintain the Truth, but to do it so as not to violate our Charity. In a word,
whether we write, or speak, to do both as Men who in a little time expect to be
brought before a divine Tribunal, where we must render a severe account for all
these things; and one Word spoken with this excellent spirit, to close those
Divisions that so long have separated us, shall be preferred to ten thousand
Volumes of endless and uncharitable controversies, that serve only to widen our
breaches, and heigthen our Animosities.

FINIS.
AN ADVERTISEMENT Of Books lately Printed for Richard Chiswell.
THE APOLOGY of the Church of England; And an Epistle to one Signior Scipio, a
Venetian Gentleman, concerning the Council of Trent. Written both in Latin, by
the Right Reverend Father in God, JOHN JEWEL Lord Bishop of Sarisbury. Made
English by a Person of Quality. To which is added, The Life of the said Bishop;
Collected and Written by the same Hand. 8o.

The LETTER writ by the last Assembly General of the Clergy of France to the
Protestants, inviting them to return to their Communion. Together with the
Methods proposed by them for their Conviction. Translated into English, and
Examined by GILBEBT BURNET, D. D. 8o.

The Life of WILLIAM BEDEL D. D. Bishop of Kilmore in Ireland; Together with
Certain Letters which passed betwixt him and James Waddesworth (a late
Pensioner of the Holy Inquisition in Sevil,) in matter of Religion, concerning
the General Motives to the Roman Obedience. 8o.

The Decree made at Rome the second of March 1679. condemning some Opinions of
the Jesuits and other Casuists.

A Discourse concerning the necessity of Reformation, with respect to the
Errors and Corruptions of the Church of Rome. 4o.

A Discourse concerning the Celebration of Divine Service in an Unknown Tongue.
4o.

A PAPIST not Misrepresented by PROTESTANTS. Being a Reply to the Reflections
upon the Answer to [A Papist Misrepresented and Represented.] 4o.

Imprimatur.

Carolus Alston R. P. D. Hen. Episc. Land. a Sacris Domesticis.
Aug. 6. 1686.
A DEFENSE OF THE EXPOSITION of the DOCTRINE OF THE Church of England, Against
the EXCEPTIONS OF Monsieur de MEAUX, Late Bishop of Condom, AND HIS VINDICATOR.

The Contents are in the next Leaf.

LONDON, Printed for Richard Chiswell, at the Rose and Crown in S. Paul's
Churchyard. MDCLXXXVI.

THE CONTENTS.
I. THE Preface: containing a farther account of Monsieur de Meaux's
Exposition, with an Answer to his Exceptions against my former Preface. II. The
Defense of my Exposition; being a full Reply to whatsoever has been alleged
against it by the Vindicator: particularly as to the false citations, he
pretends, of Their Authors, and misrepresentation of their Tenets. III.
Appendix: Being a Collection of some pieces relating to this controversy, viz.
1. The account of Monsieur de Meaux's Pastoral Letter, taken out of the last
Nouvelle, etc. 2. A summary of Father Crassets Doctrine, of the Worship of the
B. Virgin. 3. The Opposition between Card. Bona and Monsieur de Meaux in the
same point. 4. A Copy of Monsieur Imbert's Letter to Monsieur de Meaux, giving
him an account of his being persecuted by the A. B. of Bourdeaux, for
maintaining the Doctrine of his Exposition. 5. The Letter of S. Chrysostom to
Caesarius, suppressed by some Doctors of the Sorbonne, for being contrary to
their Canon of Transubstantiation; with an Account of that whole transaction.
6. An account of Authors cited by me, with their Editions, to prevent any new
Calumnies.
THE PREFACE.
MY former Treatise of the Exposition of the Doctrine of the Church of England,
has given so full an account of the Occasion and Design of Monsieur de Meaux' s
Book, as might supersede the Necessity of adding any more upon that subject.
But being called to a necessary justification of what I there advanced, not so
much by the weak defense of his Vindicator, embarked with him in the same
Cause; as by the flat denial of Monsieur de Meaux himself, of the principal
foundation on which that Account was built; I hope I shall need no great
Apology, if upon this Occasion I enter somewhat farther upon a new History
than might otherwise seem absolutely necessary for my defense, and by comparing
this method of Expounding with some others of a different Nature, which have of
late been sent abroad by those of the Roman Communion, endeavor to show what
the real intent of them all has been; and what the design of those who now
pursue the same Method among us, may reasonably be supposed to be.

It is I presume at this time not unknown to any, what great Endeavors have
been used in our neighbor Nation, for the reducing of those of the Reformed
Religion to the Roman Communion. And it must be confessed indeed, they have
omitted nothing that Language and Sophistry could be made to do, for the
Attainment of so great an End.

The Jansenists were some of the first who began this work: and it is not to be
doubted but that Persons of their avowed reputation in point of Learning, and
who seemed to have had this means only left them to regain the favor of their
King, whose design they pursued; would be sure to offer something worthy
themselves, and proportionable at once both to the Work it self, and to their
Engagements to it.

The first Attempt they made was a little piece, that has since given Occasion
to a very long Controversy between Monsieur Arnauld and Monsieur Claude; La
perpetuite de la foy de l'Eglise Catholic, touchant l'Eucharistie. Ann. 1664.
of the Perpetuity of the Faith as to the real Presence of Christ in the Holy
Eucharist. A Tract which if we regard only the neatness and subtilty of the
composure, it must be avowed scarce any thing ever appeared more worthy that
Applause it met with in the World: And the design, though expressed in one
particular only, yet so applicable to all the rest; that were the Argument
good, the Church of Rome would have needed no other defense for all the
corruptions that had, or could possibly creep into it.

But the Sophistry of this method has been sufficiently exposed in the Volumes
composed on this occasion. And indeed without entering on a particular
Examination, any Man's own reason will tell him at first sight, that a Logical
subtilty advanced against matter of Fact, may be worth the considering for the
curiosity of the undertaking, but like the Philosopher's Argument against
Motion, will never be able to convince any, but such as want* Diogenes' s
demonstration to expose its Sophistry.

In effect, the design of this first Method amounted to thus much; That
Transubstantiation (and the same might have been said of any other point in
dispute) was visibly once the common Doctrine of the Church: And it is
impossible it should have been so then, had it ever been otherwise before. And
this to be believed upon the strength of a sophistical Argument,
notwithstanding Albertinus de Eucharistiae Sacramento. Fol.
all the evident instances of matter of Fact, which Monsieur d'Aubertine and
others have at large collected to the contrary.

The next Attempt, and that as useful and universal as the former, was by
another of the same party, and with no less applause, whether we regard the
novelty of the invention, or the neatness of the performance: And his Method
was, by advancing certain matters of fact, which he calls just prejudices
Prejugez legitimes contre* ^es Calvinists. An. 1671.
against the Calvinists, to show that without entering into dispute about any of
the points in debate, the bare external consideration of the Protestants in the
manner of their Reformation, and some other particulars, was enough to show,
that the truth could not possibly be on their side.

But alas! this too proved an Argument too weak to stand the first examination
that was made of it: and Monsieur Pajon, who undertook the defense Examen du
livre qui port pour titre, Prejugez legitimes, etc. An. 1673.
of his Party against it, has shown that in his proof he has not only advanced
an Argument that might indifferently be brought against all sides, but which a
Monsieur Jurieu Prejugez legitimes contr^ le Papisme An. 1685.
late Author has since proved, to be ten times more strong against themselves,
than it could ever be thought to be against us.

I shall not undertake an exact account of all the other Methods that have
succeeded these, with less Applause, and as little Effect. One, as is said by
the same Author, was published not long since to prove us guilty of Schism in
separating from the Les Pretendus Reformez convaineus de Schism. 1684.
Church of Rome, whether we had sufficient grounds or not for our so doing: And
that for this reason, because however the learned Men of our party might have
been convinced of the reasonableness of it, yet the generality being incapable
of forming such a judgment, must have separated without reason, and so have
been Schismatics. And if their Separation was at first unlawful, their Return
will now by consequence be necessary to them.

How far this method might heretofore have concluded with those whom it
principally concerns, the vulgar and ignorant, I cannot tell; but God be
thanked there are few now so ill instructed in their Religion, but what will
have enough to free them from the sin of Schism, if the knowledge of a
sufficient reason of their Separation may be allowed to do it.

Thus much only I will beg leave to observe on occasion of these several
methods that have been proposed for our Conviction, That the great design of
them all has been to prevent the entering on particular Disputes, which had
hitherto been the way, but such as experience had taught them to be the least
favorable of any to them.

And the same is the design of the late peaceable method set forth by Monsieur
Maimbourg; in which from the Authority of the Church in matters of Faith,
confessed, as he says, by us, he proves, That the Church, in which both parties
once were, must then have had this Authority over us all; and to whose decision
in the Council of Trent, we all by consequence ought to submit.

It is not necessary that I should here say any thing to show the Weakness and
Sophistry of these several Methods: That has been the business of those
particular Examinations, that have with success enough been made of them. This
I suppose may at first sight appear upon the bare proposal of them, That they
have more of Ingenuity than of Solidity in them; and were, no doubt, designed
by their Inventors, to catch the unwary with a plausible show of that Reason,
which the Wise and Judicious know them to be defective in.

How far we may conclude from hence, as to the Nature and Design of Monsieur de
Meaux's Exposition, I shall leave it to others to consider. This is undeniable,
That as it came out at a time when these kind of Methods were all in repute,
and with a design to help forward the same great business of Conversion then in
agitation; so has it been cried up by those of that Communion as exceeding all
others in order to that End; and if we may believe their reports, been above
all others the most happy and successful in it.

It is not easy to conceive that a Person of Monsieur de Meaux' s Learning,
should seriously believe, That a bare Exposition of their Doctrine should be
sufficient to convince us of the truth of it. He could not but know that our
first Reformers were Persons abundantly qualified to understand the real
profession of a Church in which they had been born and bred; and in which many
of them were admitted to holy Orders, Priests and professors of Divinity. Nor
is the Council of Trent so rare or so obscure, that a mere Exposition of its
Doctrine should work such effects, as neither the Council nor its Catechism
were able to do. In a word Monsieur de Meaux himself confesses, His design was
to represent his Church as favorably as he could; to take off that hideous and
terrible form in which the Ministers, he says, were wont to represent Popery
Advertisment Page 2, 4.
in their Pulpits, and expose it in its natural dress, free from those
frightful Idea's, in which it had so long been disguised by them.

One would imagine by this discourse that the whole business of the Ministers
of the Reformed Religion, was to do nothing but invent new Monsters every day,
and lay them to the Church of Rome: And that after all our pretenses to Peace
and Union, we were really such Enemies to it, that we did all we could, even by
Lies and Calumnies, to keep both our selves and the people from it. But indeed
these hideous Idea's Monsieur de Meaux speaks of, if they are such false
representations as he pretends, they are not the Ministers that invent them;
but their own greatest Zealots, their Schoolmen, their Bishops, their
Cardinals; nay their very Popes themselves that have been the Authors of them.

How far Monsieur de Meaux's Exposition differs from what they have delivered
us as the Doctrine of their pretended Catholic Church, has been in some
measure shown already, and shall in the following Discourse be more fully
evidenced. And whosoever shall please to consider the Elogies and Approbations,
which these Men have received, no less than Monsieur de Meaux, will be forced
to confess it to be at least a disputable point, Whether the Ministers, from
these Authors, have represented their Church in a hideous and terrible form; or
whether Monsieur de Meaux rather has not, instead of removing the Visor to show
her in her natural dress, a little varnished over her Face to hide her defects,
and make her appear more charming and attractive than her own natural deformity
would otherwise permit her to do.

Now of this a more convincing proof cannot, I think, be desired, than what I
before advanced, and see no reason yet to retract; viz. That out of an Exposit.
Page 3.
extraordinary desire of palliating, he had proceeded so far, as in several
points wholly to pervert the Doctrine of his Church. Insomuch that when his
Book was sent to some of the Doctors of the Sorbonne for their approbation,
they corrected so many places in it, that Monsieur de Meaux was forced to
suppress the whole Edition, and change those places that had been marked by
them, and put out a new and more correct Impression, as the first that had ever
been made of it.

This Monsieur de Meaux is pleased to deny as an utter falsity; For that he
never sent his Book Vindicat. Page 8, 9.
to the Sorbonne; that their custom is not to License Books in Body; and that
that Venerable company knows better what is due to Bishops, who are naturally
and by their Character the true Doctors of the Church, than to think they have
need of the Approbation of her Doctors. In a word, that it is a manifest
falsity to say that a first Edition of his Book was suppressed, because the
Doctors of the Sorbonne had something to say against it. That he never did
publish, nor cause to be printed, any other Edition than that which is in the
hands of every one, to which he never added nor diminished one syllable; nor
ever feared that any Catholic Doctor could find any thing in it worthy of
reprehension.

This is indeed a severe charge against me, and such, as, if true, it cannot be
doubted, but that I have been as great a Calumniator as his Vindicator has
thought fit to represent me; or, as for ought I know, Monsieur de Meaux himself
will be in danger of being reputed if it should be false. And therefore to
satisfy the World in this main, fundamental point between us, I do hereby
solemnly declare, That there was an Impression of the Exposition, such as I
spoke of; That out of it I transcribed with my own hand, the several Changes
and Alterations that are placed at the end of my Preface; That this Book, with
these differences is at this time in the hands of the Reverend Editor of my
former Treatise, and that whosoever of either Communion is pleased to Examine
them, may when ever he will have free liberty so to do.

This I the rather declare, because Monsieur de Meaux is so positive in it, as
to charge me with no less than the pure Invention of those passages I have
cited from it. As for those passages, says he, which Vindicat. Page 12, 13.
they pretend I have corrected in a second Edition for fear of offending the
Sorbonne, it is as you see a Chimerical Invention; and I do here once more
repeat it, That I neither published, nor connived at, nor caused to be made,
any Edition of my Book, but that which is well known, in which I never altered
any thing. For answer to which I must beg leave once more to repeat it too;
That these passages are for the most part Chimerical Inventions indeed, but yet
such as He once hoped to have put off as the Doctrine of his Church, and as
such sent them into the World, in that first Edition we are speaking of; out of
which I have transcribed them in as just and proper terms as I was able to put
them in; and I appeal to any one, that shall please to examine them, for the
truth and sincerity that I have used in it.

But here Monsieur de Meaux has got an Evasion, which, if not prevented, may in
some Men's Opinion take off this seeming contradiction betwixt us, and leave us
both at last for the main in the right! It Is true, says he, this little
Treatise being at first given in Writing to some particular Persons for their
Instruction, many Copies of it were dispersed, and IT WAS PRINTED without my
Order or Knowledge. No body found fault with the Doctrine contained in it; and
I my self without changing any thing in it of Importance, and that only as to
the Order, and for the greater neatness of the Discourse and Style, caused it
to be printed as you now see. So that now then it is at last confessed that an
Edition there was, such as I charged them with, different very much from what
we now have. But that it was an Edition printed without Monsieur de Meaux' s
Knowledge; and the changes which he made afterward were only as to the Order,
and for the greater neatness of the Discourse and Style.

As to this last particular, the Reader will best judge of what kind the
differences were, by that short Specimen I have given of them. If to say in
One, That the Honor which the Church gives to Collect. n. (...)
the Blessed Virgin and the Saints is Religious, nay that it ought to be blamed
if it were not Religious; In the Other, to doubt whether it may even in some
sense be called Religious: If to tell us in the One, That the Mass may very
reasonably Ibid. n. 12.
be called a Sacrifice; In the Other, that there is nothing wanting to it to
make it a true Sacrifice. If to strike out totally in several places, Positions
that were absolutely of Doctrine, or otherwise very material to the Points that
were so; as in several instances it appears he has done; If this were indeed
only for the advantage of the Order, and for the greater neatness of the
Discourse and Style, I am contented. I accuse not Monsieur de Meaux of any
other alterations than such as these.

And thus far we can go certainly in Reply to his Allegations, beyond a
possibility of denial: For what remains, though I do not pretend to the like
Evidence of Fact, yet I will offer some Reasons why I cannot assent to his
pretenses even there neither.

That the Impression was made with Monsieur de Meaux' s Knowledge, if not by
his express Order, whoever shall consider the circumstances of Monsieur
Cramoisy who printed it, either as a Person of his Reputation and Estate; or as
Directour of the King's Imprimerie; or finally as Monsieur de Meaux' s own
Bookseller; will hardly believe that he would so far affront a Bishop of his
Church, and one especially of Monsieur de Meaux' s interest and authority at
that time at Court; as to make a surreptitious Edition of a Book, which he
might have had the Author's leave to publish only for the asking.

But further: This pretended surreptitious Edition had the Kings Permission to
it, which could hardly have been obtained without Monsieur de Meaux' s
knowledge. It was approved by the Bishops of France in the very same terms that
the other Editions have been since; which seems more natural to have been
procured by Monsieur de Meaux himself, than by a Printer, underhand, and
without his knowledge and connivance. In a word, so far was Monsieur de Meaux
from resenting this injury, of setting out his Book so uncorrectly, and without
his leave; that the very same Cramoisy, the same Year, Printed the Exposition
with his leave, and has continued to Print all his other Books ever since; and
was never that I could hear of, censured, for such fraudulent dealing, till
this time, by the Bishop or any other. All which put together, I must beg leave
still to believe as I did before; that there was not only a first impression,
which is at length allowed; but that this first impression was not made without
Monsieur de Meaux's Order or Knowledge.

As for the other Point, and I think the only remaining in this matter,
concerning the occasion I mentioned for the suppressing that first Edition; the
Reader may please to know, That a Person by many relations very intimate with
one of the Mareshal de Turenne' s Family, upon the publishing of the pretended
first Edition of Monsieur de Meaux's Exposition, first discovered to him the
mystery of the former, and showed him out of the Mareshal's Library the very
Book which, as he then assured him, had been marked by some of the Doctors of
the Sorbonne, and lent it him for some time as a great Curiosity. The knowledge
of this raised the desire of endeavoring, if it were possible, to retrieve a
Copy of it: But the Edition was so carefully dispatched, that the most that
could be done was to get so many scattered Sheets of it, as to make at last a
perfect Book, except in some few places in which it was transcribed from the
Original of the Mareshal, word for word, page for page, and examined by the
Person himself, who was so kind as to bestow it on me.

This is the Book to which I refer the Reader; and for this I have the
Attestation of the same Person under his hand, at the beginning of the Book;
that it is in every part a perfect Copy of Monsieur de Turenne' s marked by the
Sorbonne Doctors; and I have been besides so just to Monsieur de Meaux, as to
cite scarce any thing out of those places that were in the Manuscript part, but
have chosen such rather where the printed Copy gave me full Assurance and
Authority to do it.

But to argue the improbability of all this, Monsieur de Meaux observes, That
the Sorbonne is never used to License Books in Body. And I desire Monsieur de
Meaux to tell us, who ever said or thought Vindicat. Page 8.
they did? That that venerable Company knows better what is due to Bishops, who
are naturally and by their Character Doctors of the Church, than to think they
have need of the Approbation of her Doctors. I doubt not but the Sorbonne very
well knows the respect that is due to Bishops: but that it should be any
argument of disrespect to approve a Bishop's Book, when it was sent to them for
that purpose, I cannot conceive. In short, we understand the Reputation and
Authority of that venerable Company too well, to believe it at all improbable
that Monsieur de Meaux should desire their Approbation; nor are we so little
acquainted with their Books, as not to know, That it is no unheard of thing to
see Doctors of the Sorbonne setting their approbation to a Book, approved and
authorized by Bishops before.

The next Exception Monsieur de Meaux makes, is, Vindicat. Page 9.
That I should confirm what had before been urged against him, of a Papist's
answering his Book; in the truth of which I am as little concerned as himself
can be. Only the assurance I have had of it from a Person of undoubted
sincerity, makes me still believe that it was so: and Monsieur de Meaux may
remember that Monsisieur Conrart often professed that he had seen it in
Manuscript; who was not only his old Friend, but as himself characteriseth him,
One endowed with all M. de M's Advert. p. 3.
that the Catholics themselves could desire in a Man, excepting a better
Religion.

For what relates to Father Crasset, it is not for me to contradict Monsieur de
Meaux' s Declaration, that Vindicat. page 10.
he never read his Book; But that he never heard it mentioned that there was
any thing in it contrary to his Exposition: this I must confess is admirable,
whether we consider the notoriety of the thing, as it related to the Salutary
Advertisements and the Bishop of Tournay' s Pastoral Letter, which made so
great a noise in France; or that it was particularly proved, in the Answer to
his own Advertisement dedicated to Monsieur Second Reponse. p. 79, etc.
de Ruvigny, above five Years since, to be directly opposite to his Exposition.
And for the rest, I must For all this, see the Appendix. number. 2.
beg leave to believe, whatever Monsieur de Meaux flatters himself with; that
that Father would be so far from being troubled that any Body should think his
Principles contrary to Monsieur de Meaux' s, that I dare say he would rather
think his pains but ill spent in Writing of so large a Book, did he not believe
he had convinced the World that he looks upon them, nay and has proved them
too, to be little less than Heretical.

As for Cardinal Capisucchi, Monsieur de Meaux Vindicat. page 10.
tells us, he is so far from being contrary to the Doctrine of the Exposition,
that his express Approbation has been prefixed to it. This indeed were a good
presumption that he should not have any Principles contrary to Monsieur de
Meaux; but if what I have alleged out See Appendix number. 3. where I have showed
Cardinal Bona another of his approvers, to be nevertheless in his own Writings
contrary to Monsieur de M's Exposition.
of his Controversies be really repugnant to what he approved in the
Exposition, it may indeed speak the Cardinal not so consistent with himself as
he should be, but the contradiction will be never the less a contradiction for
his so doing.

The next thing Monsieur de Meaux takes notice of is, The relation of Monsieur
Imbert and Monsieur de Wit. The Stories are matters of Fact, and the Papers
from whence they were collected published by themselves. Vindicat. p. 10, 11.
If they alleged Monsieur de Meaux' s Authority for Principles that he
maintained not, this concerns For what concerns Mr. Imbert, see his own Letter
to Monsieur de Meaux, Appendix, number. 4. For Monsieur de Witte's case it has
been already printed, and I have nothing new to add to it.
not us; nor, whatever the little Comment on the Bishop' s Letter pretends, was
it at all needful to be shown by me that they did not, in the recital of the
propositions held by them. It Is sufficient that they both declared themselves
to stand to Monsieur de Meaux' s Exposition; and were both condemned, without
any regard had to Monsieur de Meaux' s Authority; or being at all convinced, or
so much as told, that they were mistaken in their pretenses to it.

The last thing Monsieur de Meaux takes notice of is, That I reflect upon him
for being fertile enough Vindicat. p. 14.
in producing new Labors, but steril in answering what is brought against his
Works. I do not at all envy Monsieur de Meaux' s fertility; his productions
have not been many, and those so short, and with such an ingenuous Character of
temper and moderation as ought to be acknowledged even in an Enemy. But I must
confess I do admire, as many others do, that no Reply has been made by him to
those Answers that have been sent abroad not only against his Exposition, but
even against the Advertisement it self, which he says can bear no Reply. This
we so much See de la B's. Answer to the Advertisement. p. 5.
the rather wonder at, for that an Answer was openly promised by Monsieur de
Turenne, and not without some kind of boasting too; And that several of his own
Communion were so well satisfied with the pieces that had been published
against Him, as to expect, no less than We, some such Vindication.

And here I shall take my leave of Monsieur de Meaux, for whom I must yet again
profess, that I still retain all that respect that is due to a Person whose
Character I honor, and whom I hope I have treated with all the caution and
civility that the necessary defense of my self and of the truth would permit me
to do. For what remains, my business now must be wholly with his Vindicator,
who has been pleased to fix such an Odious Character upon me, as I hope to make
it appear I have as little deserved, as I shall desire to return it upon him.

Had he charged me with Ignorance, had he loaded me with mistakes arising from
thence; or had he imputed to me the faults only of Carelessness and Incogitancy:
All this might have passed without my Censure; and I should have been so far
from vindicating my self, that I should have been ready, in great measure, to
have acknowledged the Charge, and to have submitted to his reproof. I know how
little fit I am for controversies of this kind; That neither my Age, nor
Learning, nor Opportunities have qualified me for such undertakings, as the
defense of my Religion and my duty to my Superiors have, without any design of
mine, engaged me in. And I doubt not but a Censor less severe, than he who has
thought fit to make himself my Adversary, might have found out more real faults
in my Book, than he has noted pretended Errors.

But for the Calumnies and Misrepresentations, Vindicat. page 22.
for the unsincere dealings and falsifications, he ascuses me of, and that in
almost every Article; here I must beg leave to justify my self; and assure the
Vindicator, whoever he be, that my Religion, I thank God, needs not such
defenses, nor would I ever have used these means to assert it, if it did.

We have indeed heard of some that have looked upon these things as not only
lawful, but even pious on such Occasions; that have esteemed the interest of
the Church so sacred, as to be able to sanctify the worst means that can be
made use of to promote it: Had I been bred in their Schools, there might have
been some more plausible grounds for such a suspicion; and what wonder if I did
no more, than what I had been taught was lawful for me to do? But I have not so
learnt Christ. I have been taught, and am Ephesians. 4. 20. Romans 3. 8.
persuaded, that no Evil may be done that good may come: I am assured by S.
Paul that they who say it may, their damnation is just: And did I now know of
any one ^nstance of those crimes, whereof I am represented to the World as
guilty in almost every Chapter, I should think my self indispensably obliged to
made a public acknowledgement of it, and thank the Vindicator that has called
me to so necessary a duty.

But now that I am not conscious to my self of any thing of all this, all that
I have to reply to this uncharitable way of proceeding is, to entreat him by
the common name of Christian, and those hopes of Eternity, after which I
believe we would all of us be thought sincerely to contend, to consider how
dangerous this way he has taken is; what mischief it will bring, in the opinion
of all good Men, of whatsoever persuasion they be, to the very cause that is
maintained by such means: in a word, what a sad purchase it will prove in the
end, if to lessen the reputation of an unknown, obscure Adversary, he should do
that which shall lose him his own Soul.

But it is time now to clear my self of those Calumnies Vindicat. page 2.
that are laid to my charge. And the first is, That I endeavor to represent
Monsieur de Meaux's Exposition as a Book that palliates, and prevaricates the
Doctrine of his Church; and the very Approbations of it, as mere artifices to
deceive the World, not sincere, much less authoritative Approbations, either of
the nature or principles of Monsieur de Meaux's Book.

I do not remember I have any where in express terms charged Monsieur de Meaux
with prevaricating the Doctrine of his Church in the latter Editions of his
Book; though others I know have done it. But however, if this be the greatest
of those Calumnies I am guilty of, I am sure all that have ever lived among
them, and seen their practices, and compared them with what he writes, will
easily absolve me: and I shall hereafter show that either Monsieur de Meaux has
palliated, or else the greatest of their Authors have strangely perverted the
Doctrine of the Church.

As to the other part of the Accusation, that I should say that the
Approbations were mere Artifices to deceive the World, it is not my Calumny,
but the Vindicator's mistake. I never thought those Letters Expos. of the C. E.
page 15.
Monsieur de Meaux has published any authoritative Approbations of his Book at
all; Indeed in the place which he cites, I have said somewhat like it of the Of
which see more in the Appendix. n. 3. p. 120.
Popes Brief, and am still of the same mind; and till he shall think fit to
answer the reasons that induced me to believe so, he will hardly persuade me
that this is a Calumny.

But if I am so little satisfied with the Approbations of Monsieur de Meaux's
Book, I should at Vindicat. page 3.
least have had some more authentic testimonies of what I my self publish. And
he thinks it wonderful, that my Book should have found such a reception as it
did, only from my assuring the World that I had not palliated, nor prevaricated
the Doctrine of the Church of England; but submitted it to her Censure; and the
sight of an Imprimatur; when the Approbations of so many Learned Men, and even
of the Pope himself, are not thought sufficient to secure Monsieur de Meaux's
Treatise.

This indeed were somewhat, if the truth of the Exposition were on either side
to be taken from the number of the Approvers, and not the nature of the
Doctrine. If Monsieur de Meaux has really palliated the Doctrine of the Church
of Rome, it is not any number of Approbations that will be able to render him a
faithful Expositor. If my Exposition be conformable to the Doctrine of the
Church of England; (and if not, let him show us the prevarications;) the want
of a few Letters can at most argue only my interest not to have been so great
as his, or my Vanity less; but will not render the Exposition ever the more
unfaithful. And though an Imprimatur be all the Authority that is usual with us
on such Occasions, yet the Vindicator may believe, by the reception he
acknowledges the Book to have had, that it would have been no difficult matter
to have obtained other Subscriptions than that of the Reverend Person who
Licensed it; and if that will be any satisfaction to him, I do assure him, it
has been approved by several other Persons but little inferior, whether in
Authority or Reputation, to any Monsieur de Meaux has prefixed to his
Exposition.

For what remains of my Preface, two things there are which he supposes worthy
his Animadversion: One, that whereas I accuse Cardinal Capisucchi to have
contradicted Vindicat. Page 17.
the Doctrine of the Exposition, we must take notice, that the Bishop of
Condom's intention was not to meddle with Scholastic Tenets, but purely to
deliver that Doctrine of the Church, which was necessarily and universally
received; whereas Cardinal Capisucchi being obliged to no such strictness,
would not, it may be, contradict the problematical niceties of those Schools in
which he had been Educated.

It is the Catholic distinction of this Author throughout his whole
Vindication, if any thing be alleged contrary to his liking, that it is
presently a Scholastic Tenet, and not the necessary and universally to be
received Doctrine of the Church. But that we may, if possible, discern what is
the Doctrine, and what the Scholastic Tenet in the present case, we will take
only what at first sight offers it self, viz. That Cardinal Capisucchi does
positively affirm, To satisfy the Vindicator what the Cardinal's words are, I
will give them at length. Ex his constat and in concilio Nicaeno Secundo, and
in Tridentino, aliisque, Latriam duntaxat Idololatricam Sacris imaginibus
denegari, qualem Gentiles Imaginibus exhibent, ac proinde Latriam illam
interdici quae Imaginibus in seipsis and propter ipsas exhibeatur, quoque
Imagines seu Numina aut Divinitatem continentia more Gentilium colantur; de
hujusmodi enim Latria controversia erat cum Judaeis and Haereticis, qui h^c
ratione nos Imagines colere asserebant. Caeterum de Latria illa quae Imaginibus
S. Trinitatis, Christi D. aut Sacratissimae Crucis exhibetur, ratione rei per
eas repraesentatae, and quatenus eum re repraesentata unum sunt in esse
repraesentativo, nullamque divinitatem Imaginibus tribuit aut supponit, nulla
unquam fuit aut esse potuit Controversia. Art. 8. p. 647.
That a Divine worship may be paid to Images, upon the account of the thing
which they represent; and that this Doctrine was never doubted of in the
Church, nor denied by the Council of Trent.

Does Monsieur de Meaux allow of this? Does he tells us that a Divine Worship
may upon any account be paid to an Image? Or rather does he not plainly
insinuate that he can hardly allow the Image any honor at all; We do not, says
he, so much honor the Monsieur de Meaux' s Expos. page 8.
Image of an Apostle or Martyr, as the Apostle or Martyr in presence of the
Image. Let us then lay aside the barbarous distinctions by which he would
excuse a foul Idolatry; Be it a School nicety, or whatever you will else,
Whether the representative Image Vindicat. page 19.
as representative, be representatively one and the same with the thing
represented: Our Question without this Gibberish is plain and intelligible;
Whether, upon any account whatsoever, the Image of our Savior or the Holy
Cross be to be worshipped with Divine Worship? This the Cardinal affirms; and
this if Monsieur de Meaux does allow, let him speak it out without mincing; If
not, it is plain for all the pretenses of a Scholastic nicety, that they differ
in the Exposition of a very material point of the Doctrine of the Roman Church.

The other thing which the Vindicator thinks fit to Virdicat. p. 16, 17, 19.
take notice of in my Preface, is the Consequence which I draw from this, and
some other instances of the like kind, viz. That the Papists think it lawful to
set their hands to, and approve those Books, whose Principles and Doctrine they
dislike.

In Answer to which, he again distinguishes between Scholastic Tenets, and
matters of Faith: and then tells us, Every one knows that the Doctrines of a
Church or matters of Faith, being Tenets necessarily and universally received,
ought upon no account to be dissembled or disguised; but as for Scholastic
Opinions, we see not only one Nation commanding one thing to be taught, and
another the quite contrary; but even one University against another in the same
Country, etc.

But if I mistake not, this is not to answer my Conclusion, but to start a new
Question. The Point proposed was, not whether in matters that are not of Faith,
Men may not hold different Opinions, and yet live still in the same common
Church, whereof there can be no doubt, but it was a Conclusion drawn from plain
matter of fact, viz. That those of the Church of Rome think it lawful to set
their hands to, and approve those Books whose principles they dislike. This the
Instances I have brought show plainly they do; If they know it to be a sin, and
yet do it, they condemn themselves; If they think otherwise, then they believe
it to be lawful; which is all I affirmed, and to which the Vindicator has
answered never a word.

There is yet one thing more remaining before I close this; and that is the
remark the Vindicator has made upon the passages collected by me out of
Monsieur de Meaux' s first Edition, which have either been altered Vindicat.
page 20.
or omitted in the following Impressions: viz. That the Bishop in that Edition
had been so far from proposing the Doctrine of the Church of Rome, loosely and
favorably, as I pretend; that on the contrary he rather proposed it with too
much strictness: In a word, that he had been so far from perverting the
Doctrine of the Church, that I was not able to propose one Doctrine so
perverted, without a forced interpretation of my own, according to my wonted
way of turning all things to a wrong intention.

As to the first of which, no one ever charged the Bishop with proposing the
Doctrine of the Church of Rome loosely and favorably in every point. We know
well enough that in some, he has kept to the plain Doctrine of his Church, as
in that of the Eucharist: in others proposed it rather with too much
strictness, as in the case of Infants dying unbaptized: All we say is, that in
some other Articles, such as the Invocation of Saints, Worshipping of Images,
Sacrifice of the Mass, etc. he had expounded it more loosely and favorably
than he ought to have done, and that without any gloss or interpretation of
mine to turn things to a wrong intention.

Does not the Church of Rome lay any Obligation on particular persons to join
with her in the Invocation Collect. n. 5.
of Saints? Does she condemn those only who refuse it out of Contempt, and with
a spirit of dissension and revolt? This Monsieur de Meaux once affirmed, and I
think there needs no comment to show, that this is to palliate the Doctrine of
their Church.

Has the Church of Rome ascribed no other virtue Ibid. n 6.
to Images, than to excite in us the remembrance of those they represent? Is
that all the use they make of them? Do they not so much honor the Image of an
Apostle or Martyr, as the Apostle or Martyr in presence of the Image? Or
rather, did not Monsieur de Meaux here also mollify the known Doctrine and
practice of his Church?

In a word: Is the Church of Rome contented to Ibid. n. 12.
teach only that the Mass may very reasonably be called a Sacrifice? Is that
Exposition reconcilable to what we now read in him, That there is nothing
wanting to make it a true Sacrifice. May I not here at least, without my wonted
way of turning all things to a wrong intention, beg leave to say, that either
Monsieur de Meaux palliated the Doctrine of his Church in that, or he has
otherwise perverted it in this?

Had Monsieur de Meaux only retrenched or altered some things in his Book, for
the greater exactness of the Method or neatness of Style; he must have been a
very peevish Adversary indeed, that would have pretended to censure him for
that. But to change not only the words but Doctrine too; to give us one
Exposition of it in one Edition, and a quite contrary in another, this I think
may, if not be represented as a heinous crime, yet at Vindicat. page 21. 22.
least deserve a remark; and let the Vindicator do what he can, will I doubt
make the Author pass with all indifferent persons, for such as yet I had never
represented him, had not he himself first made the dilemma, viz. One that
either did not sufficiently M. de M's Advert. p. 2.
understand the Doctrine of his Church, or that had not sincerity enough to
expound it aright.

I should now pass to the consideration of those Exceptions that have been made
against what I have advanced in my Book it self; but before I do this, it will
be requisite that I take notice of those directions, the Vindicator has thought
fit to give me in his Postscript, in order thereunto.

And here, not to deceive either his, or the Reader's Vindicat. page 120, 121.
expectation; I must beg leave to excuse my self from entering any farther into
dispute with the Bishop of Condom, than I have already done. I never designed a
direct answer to his Book; and the reflections I have made upon it in my former
Treatise, were more to clear the Doctrine of the Church of England, than to
argue against what he offered in behalf of the Romish Faith. This has been the
undertaking of another Pen, from whom the Vindicator I suppose may expect, what
is reasonably enough refused by me.

But for the other part of his desire, that I would take the pains to peruse my
self the Authors cited Vindicat. page 121.
by me, and not transcribe Quotations, nor take up things by halves; I have
been so scrupulous in observing it, that I doubt I shall receive but little
thanks from himself for it. It cannot be denied but that there have been faults
enough committed on both sides for want of this care, and I do not desire to
add to the number. I have done my best to take nothing of them without a
serious Examination of their sense, and a sincere application Ibid.
of it to the point in Question. How far I have attained this I must leave it
to others to judge; but for the rest, the truth of my Citations, I have been so
cautious in them, that allowing only for the Errata's of the Press, I desire no
favor if I am found faulty in that.

I should indeed stand in need of a large Apology to those, into whose hands
these Papers may chance to fall, that I have in many places run them out into
so great a length: But the Accusation that has been brought against me for want
of doing this before, how unjust soever it be, has obliged me to this Caution
now; and they are so ordered as to be no hindrance to those that are minded to
pass them by.

This benefit at least I shall attain by them, with those who please to compare
them with what the Vindicator alleges; that they will find he might have
spared himself the troublesome, and ungentile Office indeed of Vindicat. page
122.
undertaking what he could not effect, to demonstrate to the World the
unsincerity which I have shown in my Quotations, and the falsifications of
them; His endeavors wherein have been so very unsuccessful, that I know not
whether himself or his Religion will suffer more by the weakness of his attempt.

A TABLE OF THE ARTICLES Contained in the following TREATISE.
PART I.
I. INtroduction. Page 1 II. That Religious Worship is terminated only in God.
6 III. Invocation of Saints. ibid. IV. Images and Relics. 14 V.
Justification. 25 VI. Merits. 28 VII. 1. Satisfactions. 32 -- 2. Indulgences.
35 -- 3. Purgatory. 36
PART II.
VIII. Sacraments in General. Page 37 IX. Baptism. ibid. X. Confirmation. 39
XI. Penance. 41 XII. Extreme Unction. 42 XIII. Marriage. 52 XIV. Holy Orders.
53 XV. etc. Eucharist. 54 XIX. Sacrifice of the Mass. 67 XX. Epistle to the
Hebrews. 69 XXI. Reflections on the foregoing Doctrine. 70 XXII. Communion
under both kinds. 71
PART III.
XXIII. Of the written and unwritten Word. 75 XXIV. etc. Authority of the
Church. 77 XXVI. Authority of the Holy See. 82 XXVII. The Close. 83
THE EXPOSITION OF THE Doctrine of the Church of England, Vindicated, etc.
ARTICLE I. Introduction.
HE that accuses another of great and heinous crimes, ought to take all prudent
care not to be guilty himself of these faults which he condemns in others. Had
the Author of the Vindication thought fit to govern himself by this rule, he
would have spared a great part of that odious Character he has been pleased to
draw of me, in the beginning of this Article. But it is not my business to
recriminate, nor need I fly to such arts for my justification. Only as to the
advantage he proposes to himself from these endeavors, viz. to show that all
those Books to Vindicat. page 22.
which an Imprimatur is prefixed, will not hereafter be concluded free from
Error; He needed not sure have taken such pains for that: For I believe no one
before him ever imagined that a permission to print a Book, was a mark of its
Infallibility; Nor that every nameless Author, who professes Vindicat. page 22.
to be sincere, should pass for an Oracle. It is not to be doubted but that
faults there might have been in my Book, for all that privilege; though the
Vindicator has had the ill fortune to miss the most of them. And for ought he
has proved to the contrary, I believe it will in the end appear, that an
Imprimatur Car. Alston, is at least as good a mark of Infallibility as a
Permissu Superiorum; and a Church of England Expositor, as fit to pass for an
Oracle, as a Popish Vindicator.

But Calumny and Unsincerity are now the Catholic cry: And to make it good
against me, I am charged in this one Article to have been guilty of both. My
Vindicat. page 23.
Introduction is Calumny in a high degree, and my state of the Question, drawn
from thence, as unsincere.

I tell them, he says, of adoring Men and Women, Crosses, Images, and Relics;
of setting up their own Merits, and making other propitiatory sacrifices for
sin than that of the Cross: And that these are all contrary to their pretended
principles, that Religious worship is due to God only; That we are to be saved
only by Christ's Merits, and that the death of Christ was a perfect sacrifice.
The Logic of which he is content to own, that the Consequence is good, but the
Accusation, he says, is false, and the charge, Calumniatory.

But if in the following Articles it be made appear, that their own Authors do
allow of all this: If they do give a divine Worship to the Blessed Virgin and
Saints departed; If their very Missal and Pontifical do command them to adore
the Cross; If it appear that their Council of Trent damns all those who deny
the Mass to be a propitiatory sacrifice for the sins of the Dead and Living,
and yet cannot say it is the very same with that of the Cross: If, finally,
their greatest Writers do allow a Merit of Condignity, and that not as a
Scholastic Tenet, but as the Doctrine of their Church, and agreeable to the
intention of their Council they so much talk of; Then I hope the premises may
be as clear of the Calumny they are charged with, as my inference is allowed to
be just, for the consequence I would establish.

In the mean time, pass we on to the state of Expos. p. 5.
the Question, which I propose in these terms; That we who have been so often
charged by the Church of Rome as Innovators in Religion, are at last by their
own confession allowed to hold the ancient and undoubted foundation of the
Christian Faith; And that the Question therefore between us is not, Whether
what we hold, be true? But whether those things which the Roman Church has
added as superstructures to it, and which as such we reject, be not so far from
being necessary Articles of Religion, as they pretend, that they do indeed
overthrow that truth which is on both sides allowed to be divine, and upon that
account ought to be forsaken by them?

This the Vindicator says, is to state the Question Vindicat. page 24.
after a new Mode, and represent them as consenting to it. Let us see therefore
what the Old way of stating it is, and wherein the insincerity he charges me
with, consists.

The true state of the Question betwixt us, he Ibid. p. 25.
says, is, Whether the Protestants or Papists do innovate? The Protestants in
refusing to believe those Doctrines which the Church of Rome professes to have
received with the grounds of Christianity, or the Papists in maintaining their
possession: And the dispute is, Whether Roman Catholics ought to maintain
their possession, for which, he says, many Protestants themselves grant they
have a prescription of above 1000 Years? Or whether the Authorities brought by
Protestants Ibid. p. 26.
against the Roman Catholic Doctrine be so weighty, that every Roman Catholic
is obliged to renounce the communion of that Church in which he was bred up,
and quit his prescription and possession.

In all which the only difference that I can find is this; That He presumes for
his Church in the state of the Question, I for mine: I suppose the points in
Controversy to be Superstructures which they have added to the Faith; He, that
they are Doctrines received with the grounds of Christianity. In short, the
point we both put upon the issue is precisely the same; viz. Whether the Roman
Catholics ought to maintain their possessions of these Doctrines, or to quit
them as Erroneous? Whether Protestants to embrace the belief and practice of
them as true and lawful, or to continue, as they are, separate from the Roman
Communion upon the account of them?

But where then is my unsincerity? In this I suppose, that I seem to insinuate
as if the Roman Church granted that we held the ancient and undoubted
foundation of the Christian Faith. What others of that Communion will grant, I
cannot tell; but whosoever shall please to consider Monsieur de Meaux's arguing
from Monsieur Daille's concessions as to this Point, will find it clear enough
See his Expos.. 2. p. 2.
that he did; if the Foundation consists of Fundamental Articles, and that we
are on both sides agreed in these, as his discourse manifestly implies. But the
Vindicator, jealous for the Authority of his Church, and to have whatever she
proposes pass for Fundamental, confesses that we do indeed hold a part, but not
all those Articles that are Fundamental. This therefore we must put upon the
issue, in which we shall not doubt to show them, that those Articles their
Church has added, are so far from being Fundamental Truths, that indeed they
are no Truths at all; but do by evident and undoubted consequence, as I before
said, and as the Vindicator himself confesses, destroy those Truths that are on
both sides agreed Vindicat. Page 23.
to be Fundamental.

But if I have not mistaken the Question between the Papists and Protestants, I
am sure the Vindicator has that between Him and Me. He Vindicat. page 26.
tells us our present Question, which we are to examine in the following
Articles, is, Whether Monsieur de Meaux has faithfully proposed the sense of
the Church declared in the Council of Trent? And thereupon asks me, What it
does avail me to tell them, That I will in the following Articles endeavor to
give a clear and free Account of what we can approve, and what we dislike in
their Doctrine? To which I reply, That it avails very much to the end I
propounded in my Book, viz. To give a true Exposition of the Doctrine of the
Church of England in the several Points proposed by Monsieur de Meaux. So that
in reality the Question between us is this, Not whether Monsieur de Meaux has
given a true Exposition of the Doctrine of the Church of Rome, which it has
been the business of others to examine; but whether I have given a just account
of the Doctrine of the Church of England. This was what I undertook to do, and
what this Author ought, if he could, to have shown I had not done.

ARTICLE II. That Religious Worship is terminated only in God.
IN this Article I am but little concerned. The Vindicator states the Case,
what it is they mean by Religious honor being terminated only in God. He
distinguishes between what they pay Him, and what they give to the Saints; how
truly, or to what purpose, it is not my business to examine. Those who desire
to be satisfied in it, may find a sufficient Account in several late Treatises
written purposely against this part of Monsieur de Meaux's Exposition; and I
shall not repeat what is so fully and clearly established there.

ARTICLE III. Invocation of Saints.
I Might well have passed over this Point altogether, which has been so
learnedly and fully managed, but very lately, in a particular Discourse
concerning the Worship of the B. Virgin and the Saints, in Answer to Monsieur
de Meaux's Appeal to the fourth Age.
Discourse on this Subject. Yet since the Vindicator desires to know what
Authority I have for my Assertion, That the Addresses which Monsieur Daille
allows to have been used by the Fathers of the fourth Century, were rather
innocent wishes and rhetorical flights, than direct Prayers; but especially for
that Accusation which he says I bring Vindicat. Page 29.
against them, viz. That they did herein begin to depart from the Practice and
Tradition of those before them, I am content to give him that satisfaction.

For the First then: That Monsieur Daille himself looked upon them as no other
than such Addresses as I have characterized, becuase Expos. Monsieur de Meaux,
page 4.. 3. It will not be unuseful to take notice how those of the P.
Reformation begin to acknowledge, that the custom of Praying to Saints was
established even in the fourth Age of the Church. Monsieur Daille grants thus
much in that Book he published against the Tradition of the Latin Church, about
the Object of Religious Worship.
Monsieur de Meaux has represented him as if he allowed that the custom of
praying to Saints was established in the Church in the fourth Century; I then
cited his Opinion to the contrary, and have now subjoined it in his own words
Monsieur Daille's words are these: Neque eum a vero long aberraturum puto, qui
dixerit hunc fuisse apud Christianos primum ad Sanctos invocandos gradum, cum
calefacti atque inardescentes rerum praeclare ab iis gestarum meditatione,
praedicatione, atque exaggeratione animi, ad eos denique Invocandos
prorumperent. Certe quae de 4o Seculo prima hujus Invocationis afferuntur
Exempla, ea fere sunt hujus generis. Ex Encomiasticis quorundam disertissimorum
and Eruditione Seculari florentissimorum hominum in Sanctos Orationibus
desumpta, Gregorii Nazianzeni in Cyprianum; in Athanasium, in Basilium;
Gregorii Nysseni in Theodorum, qui ambo 4o sed jam praecipiti seculo celebres
habebantur, etc. Adv. Lat. Tradit. de cultus relig. Objecto, l. 3. c. 18. page
454.
.

Secondly: That these Addresses were really of this kind, the several passages
that are usually brought from these Fathers, plainly show: And both the The
Examples I gave were from Greg. Naz. and they are these: 1. Invectiv. in
Julian. page 2. He thus bespeaks Constantius. (...). Upon which the Greek
Scholiast observes (...). 2dly. Orat. 11. in Gorgon. p. 189. l D. He thus
addresses to his Sister. (...).
Examples I gave, and the differences I assigned, do abundantly prove it.

That they could not have allowed of such an Invocation as is now practiced in
the Church of Rome, I proved from this plain Argument, The opinion that the
souls of just men do not go staright to Heaven, seems to owe its rise to the
Verses of the Sibylls; which being very ancient (within 140 years after Christ)
and by the most primitive Fathers taken for A^thentick, drew the whole stream
of the Writers of those times into the same mistake. Blondel in his Book of the
Sibylline Oracles affirms l. 2. c. 9. p. 103. That all the Authors we have left
us of the Second, and as far as the middle of the Third Age, were of that
Opinion: And adds that even in the following Ages many of those very men
Monsieur de Meaux has alleged for the Invocation of Saints, were involved very
far in the same Error; viz. S. Basil, Ambrose, Chrysostom and S. Augustine.
This is yet more fully shown by Monsieur Daille in his Book de Cult. rel. Obj.
l. 3. c. 22. p. 474. and seq. and in another of his Rooks de Poenis and
Satisfact. where to the Fathers last mentioned He adds S. Jerome l. 5. cap. 4,
5, 6. All which Sixtus Senensis himself confirms, Bibl. l. 6. annot. 345. p.
569. and particularly as to the Fathers in question, S. Ambrose, S. Chrysostom,
S. Augustine. p. 571, 572.
That they believed that the Saints departed, were not admitted to the sight of
God immediately upon their decease; and therefore, by the Papists own Bellarm.
de Sanct. beat. l. 1. c. 19. p. 2044. l. D. Not. est; quia ante Christi
adventum Sancti qui moriebantur non intrabant in Coelum, nec Deum videbant, nec
cognoscere poterant ordinary preces supplicantium, ideo non fuisse consuetum
in T. V. ut diceretur S. Abraham Ora pro me. See again c. 20. p. 2060. l. B.
Sect. atque ex his duabus, collat. cum page 2059. l. D. Sect. alii dicunt. The
same is Suarez's Opinion T. 2. in 3. D. Th. disp. 42. Sect. 1. p. 435. col. 1.
l. E. Quod autem aliquis direct oraverit Sanctos defunctos ut se adjuvarent,
vel pro se orarent, nusquam legimus. Hic enim modus Orandi est proprius legis
Gratiae, in quosancti videntes Deum passunt etiam in Eo videre Orationes que ad
ipsos funduntur. And this the common Doctrine of their Writers.
Confession, ought to have believed that they could not be prayed to. To all
which the Vindicator is pleased to return never a word.

In short, That the Fathers of the fourth Century did herein begin to depart
from the Practice and Tradition of the Ages before them, I proved from this,
This I before challenged the Answerer to do, and he has not attempted it.
Bellarmin has but two within the first 300 Years. One of Irenaeus
mis-interpreted, and one of Hilary, as little to the purpose. De Sanct. beat.
l. 1. c. 19. p. 2047, 2048.
That they are not able to produce any one instance of the three first
Centuries of any such Invocation; but rather have So Cardinal Perron himself
Repl. a la rep. du Roy de la grande Bretagne, live. 5. cap. 11, 19. Where he is
forced to Monsieur de Meaux's shift of concluding from the following Ages what
he could not prove from the preceding; and at last to confess freely, p. 1009.
Quant aux Autheurs plus proches du siecle Apostolic, des quels la persecution
nous a ravis la pluspart des ecrits, encore qu' il ne s'y trouve pas des
Vestiges de cette coutume -- ill suffit -- qu'it ne se trouve rien en leurs
Ecrits de repugnant a l'Eglise de 4. premiers Conciles, pour ce regard. Which
is no more than Monsieur de Meaux himself insinuates, where to this very
Assertion of Monsieur Daille's I have made use of, he has only this to say,
That it is not likely that Monsieur Daille should at this distance understand
the sentiments of the Fathers of the first three Centuries better than those of
the next Age did, Expos. Sect. 3. p. 4. All which he allowed in express terms
in his suppressed Edition. See my Collect. n. 3. p. xxiii.
been forced to confess that nothing of that kind was to be found among them.
Besides that the Maxims of those Fathers concerning I shall mention but two;
1st, That they constantly defined Prayer, as due to God only: (...), says
Basil. (...), Greg. Nyssen. (...), Chrysostom. (...), Damascen etc. And, 2dly,
That it was the great Argument used by S. Athanasius, and the other Fathers of
these Times, to prove our Savior to be God, that he was prayed to.
Prayer were such, as are utterly repugnant to such an Invocation.

These were the Arguments I then offered; to which the Vindicator would have
done more justly to have tried if he could have made some Reply, than after all
this to cry out, as if nothing had been said, What Authority does he bring for
his Assertion? Vindicat. p. 29.
By what Authority does he condemn these Prayers, these innocent Wishes and
holy Raptures, as he calls them, as fond things, vainly invented? etc.

And now that I have satisfied his demand, may I in my turn ask him, Where it
is that I condemn those innocent Wishes, and holy Raptures, of these Fathers,
as fond things, vainly invented? That I do, with our Church, censure their
Invocation of Saints as such, is confessed; but that I pretend to pass any
judgment at all upon these holy Men, is false; nor was it any way necessary
that I should do it.

As for the Authority he requires for our refusal Vindicat. p. 30.
of this Invocation, it were very easy to show it, had I nothing to do but to
repeat things, that have been so often said already, that the World grows weary
of them; and is abundantly satisfied that they have nothing to reply to them.
Every Text of Scripture that appropriates Divine Worship to God alone, is a
demonstration against them; and that one Passage of St. Paul, Romans 10. 14. How
shall they call upon him in whom they have not believed? were not Men willing
to be contentious, might end the Controversy. And for the Antiquity which he
speaks of, What can be more ridiculous, than to pretend prescription for that
which has not the least foundation, neither in Holy Writ, nor Primitive
Christianity; of which not one Instance appears for the first three hundred
Years after Christ, but much to the contrary.

He that desires a fuller satisfaction in these Points, may please to recur to
that excellent Treatise I before mentioned, and which may well excuse me that I
say no more about it. Only because this was one of the Points, in which I
promised to show, that they do adore Men and Women by such an Invocation as
cannot possibly belong to any but God only; and that they make the Merits of
their Saints to run parallel with the Merits of Christ, insomuch as for their
Merits, to desire that their very Sacrifices may be accepted, and their
Sacraments be available to them; I will subjoin a short Specimen of every one
of these out of their Public Rituals, to show that there was neither Falsehood
nor Calumny in my Accusation of them.

Appendix to ARTIC. III. A Specimen of the Church of Rome's Service to Saints,
taken out of their Public Liturgies.
AS to the Prayers they make to them; we find them thus addressing to the
Blessed Virgin: Sub tuum praesidium consugimus S. Dei Genetrix; nostras
deprecationes ne despicias in necessitatibus, sed a periculis cunctis libera
nos semper Virgo gloriosa and benedicta.
We fly to thy Protection, O Holy Mother of God, despise not our Prayers which
we make to thee in our Necessities, but deliver us from all Dangers, O
Ever-glorious and Blessed Virgin. Offic. B. V. p. 84. And in one of their
Antiphona's; Dignare me laudare Te Virgo Sacrata; Da mihi Virtutem contra
hosts tuos.
Vouchsafe me that I may be worthy to praise thee, O Sacred Virgin; Grant me
strength and Power against thine Enemies. Ibid. p. 103. Nos cum prole pia,
benedicat Virgo Maria.
They desire her conjunctly with our Savior, to bless them. Ibid. p. 105. And
in their Alma Redemptoris Matter, quae pervia Coeli Porta manes, and stella
maris, succurre cadenti Surgere qui curat populo; tu quae genuisti Natura
miran^e tuum Sanctum Genitorem, Virgo prius ac posterius, Gabrielis ab Ore
Sumens illud Ave, Peccatorum miserere. Offic. B. V p. 122.
Hymns, they address to her in the most formal manner; that she would help them
that fall; that she would have pity upon Sinners; Maria Matter gratiae, Matter
miserecordiae, Tu nos ab host protege, and hora mortis suscipe. Ib. p. 123.
that she would protect them against the Enemy, and receive them at the Hour of
Death. I shall add only one Prayer more, part of which I before mentioned, and
will now repeat it, because Bellarm. l. 1. de Sanct. beat. c. 16. p. 2036. l.
A. reflects upon Calvin in these words. Quinto ibidem dicit, nos rogare
Virginem ut filium Jubeat facere quod petimus. At quis nostrum hoc dicit? Cur
non probat ullo exemplo? I before observed that Cassander owns the Prayer,
Consult. Art. 21. And Monsieur Daille assures us, that in the Missal printed at
Paris but in the Year 1634. in libr. Extrem. p. 81. It is still extant in these
words;
Cardinal Bellarmine, and some others are so ashamed of it, as totally to deny
they have any such Prayer, O'foelix Puerpera, nostra pians scelera, Jure Matris
IMPERA REDEMPTORI. Da fidei foedera, Da salutis Opera, Da in vitae vespera Been
mori. And indeed however scrupulous Bellarmine is of this Matter, yet others
among them make no doubt to say, that she does not only entreat her Son as a
Suppliant, but COMMAND him as a Mother. So Peter Damien, Sermon. 1. de Not.
Mariae, speaking to the Virgin, tells her, Accedis ante aureum illud humanae
reconciliationis Altar, non solum rogans sed IMPERANS. For so Father Crasset,
who both cites and approves it, translates the Passage; Thou come before the
Golden Altar of our Reconciliation, not only as a Servant that Prays, but as a
Mother that COMMANDS. And Albertus Magnus, Sermon. 2. de laud. Virg. Pro salute
famulantium sibi, non solum potest filio supplicare, sed etiam potest
Authoritate Materna eidem IMPERARE. That for the Salvation of those that serve
Her, the Virgin cannot only Entreat Her Son, but by the Authority of a Mother
can COMMAND Him. This Father Crasset proves from more of the like stuff, in his
1. Part. Trait. 1. Qu. 8. p. 60, 61. concluding the whole with this admirable
Sentence; Eadem potestas est Matris and Filii, quae ab omni potente Filio
omnipotens facta est: The Power of the Mother and the Son is the same, who by
her OMNIPOTENT Son, is made her self OMNIPOTENT. This is the last French
Divinity, approved by the Society of the Jesuits, published with the King's
Permission; and espoused at a venture by Monsieur de Meaux in his Epistle.
O Happy Mother, expiating our Sins, By the right of a Mother COMMAND our
Redeemer. Grant us the -- of Faith, Grant us the good Works of Salvation; Grant
us in the End of our Lives that we may die well.

Nor is it the Blessed Virgin only to whom they thus address: The Prayer to St.
John is in the same strain: Ut queant laxis resonare fibris, Mira gestorum
famuli tuorum, Solve polluti labii reatum, Sancte Johannes.
That he would loose the Guilt of their polluted Lips, that the Tongues of his
Servants might sound out his Praise. And in general, thus they address to the
Apostles and Evangelists: Vos saecli justi Judices and vera Mundi lumina, votis
precamur cordium, audite preces supplicum. Qui Coelum verbo clauditis, serasque
ejus solvitis, Nos a peccatis omnibus solvite Jussu quaesumus. Quorum praecepto
subditur salus and languor omnium, Sanate Aegros moribus, Nos reddentes
Virtutibus. Ut cum judex adveneric Christus in fine saeculi, Nos sempiterni
gaudii, Faciat esse compotes. ibid. p. 497.
O ye just Judges, and true Lights of the World, we pray unto you with the
Requests of our Hearts; That you would hear the Prayers of your Suppliants. Ye,
that by your Word shut and open Heaven, We beseech you deliver us, by your
Command, from all our Sins. You, to whose Command is subjected the Health and
Sickness of all Men, Heal us who are sick in our Manners, and restore us to
Virtue; that so when in the end of the World Christ the Judge shall come, He may
make us partakers of Everlasting Joy.

For the next Point, the Merits of their Saints, 'twere infinite to repeat the
Prayers they make of this kind. I will subjoyn two or three. In the Feast of
St. Nicholas, Dec. 6th: Deus qui B. Nicolaum Pontificem innumeris decorasti
miraculis, tribue quaesumus ut ejus Meritis and Precibus a Gehennae incendiis
liberemur.
O God who have adorned thy Bishop, St. Nicholas, with innumerable Miracles,
grant we beseech thee, that by his Merits and Prayers, we may be delivered from
the Fire of Hell. Offic. B. Virg. p. 561. And many there are of this nature all
along their Office.

But since the main question is about their recommending to God their
Offerings, and Sacraments, by the Merits of their Saints; we will see that too.
And for an instance of these we need go no farther than their very first Saint,
Sacrificium nostrum tibi Domine quaesumus B. Andraei Apostoli precatio sancta
conciliet, ut in cujus honor solemniter exhibetur Ejus Meritis efficiatur
acceptum. Per. Missale Romans Fest. Nov. p. 513.
St. Andrew, to whom in their Secretum they thus address. We beseech thee, O
Lord, that the Holy Prayer of the Blessed Apostle, St. Andrew, may procure thy
Favor to our Sacrifice; that as it is solemnly offered in his Honor, so it
may be rendered acceptable by his Merits, through our Lord. He that shall survey
the following Festivals, will find either the Secretum, or Post-communio, to
run in the same strain: I shall instance only in the Saints I formerly
mentioned. Ut haec Munera tibi Domine accepta sint S. Bathildis obtineant
Merita; quae seipsam tibi hostiam vivam, sanctam and beneplacentem exhibuit.
Let the Merits of St. Bathildis, O Lord, prevail, that our Gifts may be
accepted by thee: Praestent nobis quaesumus sumpta Sacrament a praesidium
salutare, and intervenientibus B. Martini Confessoris tui atque Pontificis
Meritis ab omnibus nos absolvant peccatis. See Missale in usum Sarum fol. 9.
and 68. in Fest. Nov.
Let the Sacraments which we have received, we beseech thee, be our saving
Defense, and through the Merits of thy Blessed Martyr, St. Martin interposing,
absolve us from all Sin.

Such is their Service of the Saints; How agreeable to that Duty we owe to God,
or to the very pretenses of Monsieur de Meaux, and the Vindicator, let the
World judge.

ARTICLE IV. Images and Relics.
IN this Article the Vindicator takes notice, and that truly, of my complaining
that the approved Doctrine Vindicat. p. 31.
of their most reputed Writers, should so much contradict what Monsieur de
Meaux would have us think is their only design in that Service. He tells us
that properly speaking, according to the Bishop of Meaux's sense, and that of
the Council; The Image of the Cross is to be looked upon only as a
representative, Ibid. p. 32.
or memorative Sign, which is therefore apt to put us in mind of JESUS CHRIST,
who suffered upon the Cross for us; and the Honor which we there show,
precisely speaking, and according to the Ecclesiastical Style, is not properly
to the Cross, but to Jesus Christ represented by that Cross.

To this I opposed the Doctrine of St. Thomas, and the Authority of their own
Rituals, to show that they expressly adored the Cross of Christ, and not only
Jesus Christ represented by that Cross.

In answer to the former of which, the Doctrine of Vindicat. p. 38.
St. Thomas, he tells me, that he is not to maintain every Opinion held by the
Schools: That had I been sincere, I ought to have taken notice of the reason
brought by St. Thomas, and his Followers; which shows, that it is purely upon
the account of Jesus Christ represented, and not upon the account of the Cross
it self, that he allows Adoration to it. In short, He concludes the Doctrine of
St. Thomas to be in effect the same with Monsieur de Meaux' s Exposition, That
it is an Adoration of Jesus Christ represented by the Crucifix, but not an
Adoration of the Crucifix it self. And the same is the account he gives of the
Pontifical, which he confesses admits of an Adoration in the same sense.

For the business of the Pontifical, we shall see more particularly hereafter:
In the mean time this short instance may serve to show that his Destinction is
purely arbitrary. Pontific. Ord. ad recip. processionaliter Imperat. p. 205.
col. 2 si vero Legatus Apostolicus Imperatorem reciperet, aut cum eo Urbem
intraret, vel alias secum iret vel equitaret, ille qui Gladium Imperatori
praefert, and alius Crucem Legati portans simul ire debent. Cr^^ Legati, Quia
debetur ^i Latria, erit a dextris, and Gladius Imperatoris a ^inistria.
In the Order of receiving an Emperor, it is appointed, that if there be a
Legate present, his Cross shall take the upper hand of the Emperors Sword,
because a Divine Worship is due to it.

Thomas 3. p. q. 25. art. 4. Utrum Crux Christi sit adoranda adoratione
LATRIAE? Conclus. Crux Christi in qua Christus crucifixus est, tum propter
repraesentationem, tum propter membrorum Christi contactum, LATRIA ADORANDA
EST: Crucis vero Effigies in alia quavis materia, priori tantum ratione LATRIA
ADORANDA EST. And in the body, Unde utroque modo adoratur eadem adoratione cum
Christo, scil. ADORATIONE LATRIA.
As to St. Thomas, he tells us only this, That the Cross is not to be adored
upon its own account, but either as it is the figure of Christ crucified, or
because it touched his Members when he was crucified upon it: That the Wood of
the true Cross is to be worshipped with Divine Adoration upon both these
accounts, but any other Crucifix only upon the former. What does all this avail
to the pretenses of the Vindicator? It shows indeed St. Thomas's grounds for
his Conclusion, but we are little concerned in them; nor was it any unsincerity
in me not to transcribe all his Reveries. The Conclusion he makes is plain and
positive, and neither to be reconciled with the Vindicator's Fancy, nor to be
eluded by his Sophistry; That the CROSS of Christ is to be ADORED with DIVINE
ADORATION. What his reason is, we matter not; sure we are, that no good one can
be brought by him, or any body else, for it.

The next Argument I made use of was, That in the Office of the Benediction of
a new Cross, there are several Passages which clearly show, that they attribute
such things to the Cross, as are directly contrary to Vindicat. p. 39.
Monsieur de Meaux's Pretenses, As that they who bow down before it, may find
health both of Soul and Body by it.

This he cannot deny, but charges me with leaving out two words, that he says
would have explained all, viz. Propter Deum, for the sake of God. It is very
Page 39.
certain that I did leave out these words, as I did several others, I believe,
as much to the purpose as these. But that I may show how little reason there
was for my expressing them, and to convince the World how clearly this passage
charges them with Adoring the Cross, I will now propose it in its full length.

In the form of consecrating a new Cross; First the Pontificale de benedictione
novae Crucis. page 161. col. 2.
Bishop makes several prayers; Rogamus Te Domine pater omnipotens sempiterne
Deus, ut digneris benedicere hoc lignum Crucis tuae, ut sit remedium salutare
generi humane; sit soliditas fidei, bonorum Operum profectus, and redemptio
Animarum; sit solamen and protectio, and tutela contra saeva jacula Inimicorum.
Per.
That God would bless this Wood of the Cross, that it may be a saving Remedy to
Mankind; An Establishemnt of the Faith; for the Increase of good Works, and the
Redemption of Souls; a Comfort and Protection against the cruel Darts of the
Enemy.

After some other Prayers to the same purpose; the Bishop blesses the Incense,
sprinkles the Cross with Holy Water, and incenses it; and then Consecrates it
in these words:

Ibid. p. 162. col. 1. Sanctificetur istud lignum in Nomine Patris, and Filii,
and Spiritus Sancti: Et benedictio illius ligni in quo sancta membra salvatoris
suspensa sunt, sit in isto ligno, ut orantes inclinantesque se [propter Deum]
ante istam Crucem, inveniant Corporis and Animae fanitatem: Per.
Let this Wood be sanctified in the Name of the Father, and of the Son, and of
the Holy Ghost. Let the blessing of that Wood on which the members of our
Savior were hanged, be in this present Wood; that as many as pray and bow down
themselves [for God] before this Cross, may find health both of Soul and Body,
through the same Jesus Christ.

Tum Pontifex flexis ante CRUCEM, genibus ipsam devote ADORAT and osculatur.
Then the Bishop Kneels down before the CROSS, and devoutly ADORES it, and
kisses it.

But if the Cross be of any Metal, or of precious Stone, instead of the former
Prayer, the Bishop is to say another: I shall transcribe only some part of it.

After a long preamble, they beseech God, Ut Sanctifices tibi hoc signum Crucis
atque consecres: -- Illis ergo manibus hanc Crucem accipe, quibus illam
amplexus es; and de sanctitate illius, hanc sanctifica: and sicuti per illam
mundus expiatus est a reatu, ita offerentium famulorum tuorum animae
devotissimae, hujus CRUCIS merito, omni careant perpetrato peccato. P. 162.
That he would sanctify to himself this Cross, and bless it; That our Savior
Christ would embrace this Cross, [which they consecrate] as he did that [on
which he suffered;] and by the holiness of that, sanctify This: That as by that
the World was redeemed from guilt, so the devout Souls who offer it, may by the
Merits of this Cross be freed from all the Sins they have committed.

Tum Pontifex flexis ante CRUCEM genibus EAM devote ADORAT, and osculatur: Idem
faciunt quicunque alii voluerint.
Then the Bishop as before, Kneeling down before the CROSS, devoutly ADORES it,
and kisses it.

I hope this length will not seem tedious to any who desire a true information
of the Doctrine and Practice of the Roman Church in this Matter. And I shall
leave it to any one to judge what benefit those two words I omitted, could have
brought to excuse such foul and notorious Idolatry. For the rest of my
Citations, he passes them over so triflingly, as plainly shows he had nothing
to say to them; All the Vindicat. p. 39.
rest of his Expressions, says he, drawn from the Pontifical, are of the same
nature; either lame, or patched up from several places, and therefore if they
make any thing against us, are not worthy our regarding.

For Monsieur de Meaux, I shall only beg leave to remark this One thing; that
if the Church of Rome looks upon the Cross only as a memorative Sign; to what
End is all this Consecration; so many Prayers shall I say, or rather magical
Incantations? And how comes it to pass that a Cross, without all this ado, is
not as fit to call to mind Jesus Christ who suffered upon the Cross, as after
all this superstition, not to say any worse, in the dedication of it?

My third Argument to prove that they Adored the Cross, was from their Good
Fryday's Service: And Vindicat. p. 40.
here I am again accused for not giving All the words of the Church, and of
adding somewhat that was not there, to make it speak my own sense. The words I
cited are these, Behold the Wood of the Cross, Come, let us Adore it. Whereas
their Church intends not that we should Adore it, i. e. The Cross; but come,
Let us Adore, i. e. The Savior of the World that hung upon it.

To judge aright of this Cavil, and yet more expose their Idolatry, I shall
here give a just account from the Missal, of the whole Service of that Day as
to this Point. Note first, That in the Office of the Holy Week, printed in
Latin and English at Paris, 1670, The Title of this Ceremony is, THE ADORATION
OF THE CROSS. page 342.


Missale Romans feria VI. in Parasceve. p. 247. Completis Orationibus Sacerdos
deposita Casula accedit ad cornu Epistolae, and ibi in posteriori part Anguli
altaris, accipit a Diacono Crucem jam in altari praeparatam; quam versa facie
ad populum a summitate parum disco-operit, incipiens solus Antiphonam, Ecce
lignum Crucis, ac deinceps in reliquis juvatur in Cantu a Ministris usque ad
Venite Adoremus. Choro autem cantante, Venite Adoremus, omnes se prosternunt
excepto celebrante. Deinde procedit ad anteriorem partem anguli ejusdem cornu
Epistolae, and disco-operiens brachium dextrum Crucis, elevansque eam
paulisper, altius quam primo incipit, Ecce lignum Crucis; aliis cantantibus and
adorantibus, ut supra.
The Morning Prayers being finished, the Priest receives from the Deacon a
Cross, standing ready on the Altar for that purpose; which he uncovers a little
at the top, turning his face to the people, and begins this Antiphona, Behold
the Wood of the Cross; the People following the rest to Come, let us Adore; at
which all but the Priest that officiates fall upon the ground.

Then the Priest uncovers the right Arm of the Crucifix, and holding it up,
begins louder than before, Behold the Wood of the Cross, the rest singing and
adoring as before.

Then finally the Priest goes to the middle of the Altar, and wholly uncovering
the Cross, and lifting it up, begins yet higher, Behold the Wood of the Cross
Deinde Sacerdos procedit ad medium altaris, and discooperiens Crucem totaliter,
ac elevans eam, tertio altius incipit, Ecce lignum Crucis, in quo salus mundi
pependit, Venite Adoremus: aliis cantantibus and adorantibus ut supra. Postea
Sacerdos folus portat Crucem ad locum ante Altar praeparatum, and genu flexus
ibidem eam locat: Mox depositis calceamentis accedit ad ADORANDAM CRUCEM; ter
genua flectens antequam eam deosculetur. Hoc facto revertitur, and accipit
calceamenta and casulam. Postmodum ministri Altaris, deinde alii Clerici and
Laici, bini and bini, ter genibus flexis, ut dictum est, CRUCEM ADORANT.
Interim dum fit ADORATIO CRUCIS cantantur, etc. -- Deinde cantatur communiter
Anna^: CRUCEM tuam ADORAMUS Domine. P. 209.
on which the Savior of the World hung, come, let us adore: the rest singing
and adoring as before.

This done, the Priest alone carries the Cross to a place prepared for it
before the Altar, and kneeling down, leaves it there. Then he puts off his
Shoes, and draws near to ADORE the CROSS, bowing his Knees three times before
he kisses it: which done, he retires and puts on his Shoes. After him the
Ministers of the Altar, then the other Clergy and Laity, two and two, after the
same manner, ADORE the CROSS.

In the mean time while the Cross is Adoring, the Quire sings several Hymns;
one of which begins with these words, We adore thy Cross, O Lord.

This is the Service of that Day. And now whether I had reason or no to apply,
as I did, the Adoration to the Cross, let any reasonable Man consider; and
whether I had not some cause to say then, what I cannot but here repeat again,
That the whole Solemnity of that days Service plainly shows, that the Roman
Church does adore the Cross in the utmost propriety of the phrase.

As for my last Argument from the Hymns of the Vindicat. p. 40.
Church, he acknowledges the Fact, but tells us, That these are Poetical
Expressions; and that the word CROSS, by a Figure, sufficiently known to Poets,
fignifies JESUS CHRIST, to whom they pray in those Hymns.I shall not ask the
Vindicator by what Authority he sends us to the Poets for interpreting the
Churches Hymns: But if he pleases to inform us what that Figure is which in the
same place makes the Cross to signify Christ, in which it distinguishes Christ
from the Cross; and who those Poets are to whom this Figure is sufficiently
known, he will oblige us. For that this is the case in very many of those
Hymns, is apparent: I shall instance only in One, and that so noted, that St.
3. p. q. 25. art. 4. p. 53. thus argues: Illi exhibemus Latriae cultum, in quo
ponimus spem salutis, sed in Cruce Christi ponimus spem salutis, Cantat enim
Ecclesia, O Crux ave, etc.
Thomas, unacquainted it seems, as well as we, with this Figure, concluded the
Adoration of the Cross, to be the sense of their Church from it. Vexilla Regis
prodeunt, Fulget Crucis mysterium, Quo carne carnis Condito^ Suspensus est
patibulo.
The Banner of our King appears, The Mystery of the Cross shines, Upon which
the Maker of our Flesh was hanged in the Flesh. Beautiful and bright Tree!
Adorned with the Purple of a King, Chosen of a Stock worthy to touch Arbor
decora and fulgida, Ornata Regis purpura, Electa digno stipite, Tam Sancta
membra tangere.
such Holy Members: Blessed, upon whose Arms, The Price of the World hung.
Hail, O Cross, our only Hope! In this time of Beata cujus brachiis Soecli
pependit pretium. Statera facta Corporis, Praedamque tulit Tartari.
the Passion, Increase the Righteousness of the Just, and give Pardon to the
Guilty. Now by what Figure to make the Banner O Crux Ave spes unica! Hoc
passionis tempore, Auge piis Justitiam, Reisque dona Veniam.
and the King the same; the Cross upon which the maker of our Flesh hung, not
different from that Flesh that hung upon it; Vid. Breviar. Romans Dom. Passionis.
p. 295, 296.
the Tree chosen of a Stock worthy to touch Christ's Sacred Members, the same
with his Sacred Members; What noted Figure this is which is so well known to
the Poets, and yet has been so long concealed from us, that we are amazed at
the very report of such a Figure, and believe it next a kin to The English
Translation in the Office of the Holy Week, is this: O lovely and refulgent
Tree, Adorned with purpled Majesty; Culled from a worthy Stock, to bear Those
Limbs which sanctified were. Blessed Tree, whose happy Branches bore The Wealth
that did the World restore: Hail Cross of Hopes the most sublime, Now in this
mourning Passion Time, Improve Religious Souls in Grace, The Sins of Criminals
efface. Page 355, 356.
Transubstantiation, the Vindicator may please hereafter to inform us.

In the Point of Relics, the Council of Trent proceeded OF RELICS.
so equivocally, that the Vindicator ought not to think it at all strange, if I
endeavored more plainly to distinguish, what the ambiguity of their
Expressions had so much confounded. Con. Tr. Sess. 25. Affirmantes Sanctorum
Reliquiis venerationem atque honorem non deberi, damnandos esse.
They, says the Council, are to be condemned, who affirm that no Veneration or
Honor is due to the Relics of Saints. To this I replied, that honor them we
do; but that the Council of Trent requires more, not only to honor, but
worship them too: so I render their Venerari, whether well or ill is now the
question.

And first I observe, that in the very Point before us, their own St. Thomas
gives the very same interpretation Thom. 3. p. q. 25. art. 6. page 54.
to the same word. For having proposed the Question in these terms, Whether the
Relics of Saints are to be ADORED? He concludes it in the terms of the
Council, Seeing we VENERATE Utrum Reliquiae Sanctorum sint ADORANDAE? Conclus:
Cum Sanctos Dei Veneremur, eorum quoque corpora and Reliquias Venerari oportet.
Sec. Obj. Stultum videtur rem insensibilem VENERARI. Resp. Ad secund. dicend.
Quod Corpus illud insensibile non ADORAMUS propter seipsum; sed, etc.
the Saints of God, we must also VENERATE their Bodies and Relics.

And again, In his second Objection against this Conclusion, he argues against
the Adoration of Relics thus; It seems very foolish to VENERATE an insensible
Thing. To which he replies thus; We do not ADORE the insensible Thing for it
self, etc. From all which it is beyond dispute evident, that by the VENERATION,
Thomas understood ADORATION of Relics.

Secondly, That it is the Doctrine of their Church, that RELICS are to be
ADORED, their greatest Authors render it beyond denial evident. Vasquez in 3.
p. D. Th. disp. 112. p. 808. proposes this Question: An Corpora and aliae
Sanctorum Reliquiae VENERANDAE sint? To this he answers, c. 2. p. 809. Apud
Catholicos veritas indubitata est, Reliquias Sanctorum, sive fuerint parts
ipsorum, ut Ossa, Carnes, and Cineres; sive res aliae, quae ipsos tetigerunt,
vel ad ipsos pertineant, ADORANDAS and in honor Sacra habendas esse. And
again, Disp. 113. c. 1. p. 816. Cum ergo jam contra Haereticos constitutum sit,
Reliquias esse ADORANDAS, superest explicare quo genere cultus and honoris eas
VENERARI debeamus.
Vasquez in his Disputations upon Thomas, tell us, It is, says he, among the
[pretended] Catholics, a Truth not to be doubted of, that the RELICS of
Saints, whether they be any parts of them, as Bones, Flesh, or Ashes; or any
other Things that have touched them, or belonged to them, ought to be ADORED.
And in conclusion says, That he has proved against Heretics, that Relics are
to be ADORED: And this too in Answer to the Question proposed in the very terms
of the Council, Whether the Bodies, and other RELICS of Saints ought to be
VENERATED?

Nor is this a Scholastic Tenet, or to be put off with an impropriety of
Speech. The Messieurs du Port Royal, are by all allowed to have been some of
the most learned Men of their Church, that this last Age has produced; and too
great Critics in the French Tongue, to use any Expressions subject to
ambiguity, which, that Language so particularly avoids. The word ADORE in
French is much more rarely used to signify in general any Honor or Veneration,
than in the Latin; Yet these very Men, in one of their Treatises published by
them, Response a un ecrit publie sur les Miracles de la Saint Espine. Page 15,
18, -- 22, etc. Cited by Monsieur Daille.
Of the Miracles of the Holy Thorn, use this word to express the Veneration
they thought due to them. Thus speaking of one of the Religious that was
troubled with the Palsy, She was carried, say they, to the Port Royal to ADORE
the Holy Thorn. Of another, that having ADORED the Holy Thorn, she was
relieved of her Infirmity. They boast of the great multitudes that frequented
their Church to ADORE the Holy Thorn. And in one of their Prayers which they
teach their Votaries to say before it, We ADORE thy Crown, O Lord.

And now I suppose it is from all these Instances Vindicat. p. 42.
sufficiently evident, that I had reason to interpret Uenerari in the Council,
by Worship in my Exposition. As for the other thing he charges me with; That
referring to the words of the Council I should make it say, That these Sacred
Monuments are not unprofitably revered, but are to be sought unto for the
obtaining of their Help and Assistance: whereas indeed the Council's meaning
is, to obtain the Help and assistance of the Saints, not the Relics: This is
not my Invention, but his own Cavil; And his citation of the words of the
Council a Trick to deceive those who understand it only in his Translation. For
whereas he renders it, So that they who affirm, that no Veneration or Honor is
due to the Relics of Saints, or that those Relics and other Sacred
Monuments are unprofitably honored by the Faithful; or that they do in vain
frequent the Memories of the Saints, to the end they may obtain their Aid (the
Aid of the Saints, Eorum) are to be condemned. He has indeed transposed the
Latin, on purpose to raise a Dust, and deceive his Reader; the true Order being
plainly as I before rendered it; Ita ut Affirmantes Sanctorum Reliquiis
Venerationem atque Honorem non deberi, vel eas aliaque sacra Monumenta
inutiliter honorari, atque Eorum opis impetrandae Causa memorias Sanctorum
frustra frequentari, omnino damnandos esse.
So that they who shall Affirm, that no Worship or Honor is due to the
Relics of Saints; or that these and the like Sacred Monuments, are
unprofitably honored; and that for the obtaining of their help (the help of
these Sacred Monuments, Eorum) the Memories of the Saints are unprofitably
frequented, are to be condemned. This is the true sense of the Council; and for
the Instances I added for the Explication of it, they are the same by which
their own Catechism excites them to this Worship, and every Day's Experience
shows how zealously the People follow these Relics, in order to these Ends.

ARTICLE V. Of Justification.
HOW far the true Doctrine of Justification was Vindicat. p. 46.
overrun with such Abuses, as I mentioned, at the beginning of the
Reformation, he must be very ignorant in the Histories of those Times that
needs to be informed. I do not at all wonder that the Vindicator denies these
things, who knows very well how far the Interest of his Church is concerned in
it. But sure I am, a confident denial, which is all the proof he brings, will
satisfy none but those, who think themselves obliged to receive the Tradition
of their Church, with the same blindness in Matters of Fact, that they are
required to do it in Points of Faith.

As to the present Article before us, two things there are that he doubts I
shall be hardly put to prove. Vindicat. p. 47.
One, That it is the Doctrine of our Church to distinguish between
Justification and Sanctification; tho the 11th and 12th Articles of our Church
do clearly imply it; and our Page 12. The very beginning of the Homily: Because
all Men be Sinners and Offenders against God, etc. no Man can by his own Acts,
etc. be justified or made righteous before God: but every Man is constrained to
seek for another Righteousness or Justification to be received at God's Hands,
i. e. the Forgiveness of his Sins and Trespasses in such Things as he has
offended. Edit. Oxon. 1683.
Homily of Salvation, in express words interpret Justification, to be the
Forgiveness of Sins. The Other, That I impose upon them, as if they made their
inward Righteousness a part of Justification, and so by consequence said, that
their Justification it self was wrought by their own Good Works.

As to the former part of which Imposition, as he calls it, it is the very
definition of the Council of Trent; Justificatio, non est sola peccatorum
remissio, sed and sanctificatio and renovatio interioris hominis. C. Tr. Sess.
vi. c. 7. p. 31.
By Justification is to be understood, not only remission of Sins, but
Sanctification, and the renewing of the inward Man: Insomuch that in their 11th
Canon they damn all such as dare to deny it: Siquis dixerit, homines
Justificari vel sola imputatione justitiae Christi, vel sola peccatorum
remissione exclusa gratia and charitate quae in cordibus Eorum per Spiritum S.
diffundatur, atque illis inhaereat; aut etiam gratiam qua justificamur esse
tantum favorem Dei, Anathema sit. Can. 11. Sess. vi.
If any one shall say that Men are justified, either by the alone Imputation of
Christ's Righteousness, or only by the remission of Sins, excluding Grace and
Charity, which is diffused in our Hearts by the Holy Ghost, and inheres in
them, or that the Grace by which we are justified is only the Favor of God;
let him be Anathema.

And for the other Point, that they esteem their Justification to be wrought,
not only by Christ's Merits, but also by their own good Works; The 32 Can. of
the same Session, is a sufficient proof, where an Anathema is denounced against
him who shall assert, Siquis dixerit hominis justificati bona Opera ita esse
Dona Dei, ut non sint etiam bona ipsius justificati Merita; aut ipsum
Justificatum bonis Operibus quae ab eo per Dei gratiam, and Jesu Christi
Meritum, cujus vivum Membrum est, fuerit, non vere mereri augmentum gratiae,
Vitam aeternam, and ipsius Vitae Aeternae, si tamen in gratia decesserit,
consecutionem, atque etiam gloriae Augmentum, Anathema sit.
the good Works of a justified Person to be so the Gift of God, that they are
not also the Merits of the same justified Person; or that He being justified by
the good Works which are performed by him through the Grace of God, and Merits
of Jesus Christ, whose living Member he is, does not truly merit increase of
Grace and Eternal Life.

Now if those words truly merit, do signify that our good Works do in their own
nature merit a Reward, then it must be confessed, that our Justification is
wrought by them. If they say that they are therefore only meritorious, because
accompanied with the infinite Merits of Christ; What can be more improper than
to affirm, that that which in its own nature has nothing of Merit, should truly
merit only because something which has infinite Merit goes along with it.

It would certainly be more reasonable in the Church of Rome, if they do indeed
believe what these Men seem to grant, that Good Works are not in themselves
meritorious, instead of affirming that they do truly merit Eternal Life, to
confess with us that they have no Merit at all in them; but yet through the
infinite Merits of our Blessed Redeemer, shall, according to God's Promises,
have a most ample Reward bestowed on them.

ARTICLE VI. Of Merits.
IT ought not to be wondered at, if to show the true Vindicat. p. 48.
Doctrine of the Church of Rome as to the Point of Merits, I recurr'd, not to
the Niceties of the Schools, but the Exposition of their greatest Men; and
whose Names were neither less, nor less deservedly celebrated in their
Generations, than Monsieur de Meaux's, or the Vindicators can be now. The
Council of Trent has spoken so uncertainly in this Point, as plainly shows they
either did not know themselves what they would Establish, or were unwilling
that others should. Let the Vindicator think what he pleases of these Men, and
their Opinions, we shall still believe them as able Expositors of the Council
of Trent, as any that have ever undertaken it: And whosoever shall compare what
they say, with what the Council has defined, will find it at least as agreeable
to it, as any of those new Inventions that have been started since.

The Doctrine of Merits, established by the Council, in the Canon I but now
cited, is clearly this; That the Good Works of a justified Person are not so
the Gift of God, that they are not also the Merits Council. Trid. Sess. vi. Can.
32.
of the same Justified Person; That being justified by the Grace of God, and
Merits of Jesus Christ, he does then truly merit both increase of Grace, and
Eternal Life: In a word, the Point of Merit, as we now consider it, amounts to
this, Whether we do truly and properly merit by our own Good Works? or, Whether
whatsoever we receive, be not a Reward that is given us only through God's
Acceptance, and promise in Christ Jesus?

This We affirm, they the Other; and whether the Testimonies I produced for the
further clearing of their Doctrine do prove it or no, is now to be enquired by
us.

1st, Maldon. in Ezekiel. 18. 20. p. 425. Ex hoc loco perspicuum est aliquam esse
nostram, ut vocant, inherentem propriamque justitiam, quamvis ex Dei gratia,
and largitate profectam: and nos tam proprie and vere, cum gratia Dei been
agentes praemia mereri, quam sine illa male Agentes supplicia mereamur.
Maldonate is Express, and the Vindicator's Exception utterly impertinent to
us, who dispute not the Principle, but Merit of Good Works: It is very clear,
says he, that there is in us an inherent, as they call it, and proper justice
of our own, tho proceeding from the Grace and Bounty of God; and that we do as
truly and properly when we do well, through God's Grace, merit Rewards, as we
do deserve Punishment when, without this Grace, we do Ill.

2dly, for Bellarmine: De Justis. l. 5. c. 17. Opera bona justorum meritoria
esse ex condigno, non solum ratione pacti, sed etiam ratione Operum.
The title of his Chapter, cited by me, the Vindicator says is something
toward the sense I give it: He would more honestly have said, is word for word
the translation of it: viz. That our Good Works do Merit [Eternal Life]
condignly, not only by reason of God's Covenant and acceptance, but also by
reason of the Work it self.

Meritum ex Condigno tribus modis variari potest. Nam si forte opus aliquod sit
multo inferius mercede ex conventione promissa, ut si dominus Vineae conduceret
Operarios, and non denarium diurnum, sed centum aureos promercede promitteret,
esset ejusmodi meritum ex condign ratione pacti, non Operis. P. 1299. l. B.
This is his Position: For the explication of it, he tells us, that a Merit of
Condignity may be varied three ways. For, 1st, if the work to be performed
should be very much less than the hire promised by the Agreement; as if the
Lord of the Vineyard instead of a Penny, should have promised the Laborers a
hundred pound a day for their work: this would be a merit of condignity upon
the Account of the Agreement, or Covenant. And this he thinks too little for
our Good Works, and condemns Scotus for holding, Opera justorum esse Bonae vere
and proprie, sed non tan excellentia ut proportionem habeant cum vita aeterna.
Et ideo acceptari quidem a Deo ad justam and dignam mercede^ vitae aeternae,
sed ex pacto and promissione non ex Operis dignitate. p. 1300. l. A
That the Works of Just Men are truly and properly good, but not so excellent
as to bear a proportion to Eternal Life: and therefore that they are indeed
accepted of God to a just and worthy Reward of Eternal Life, but only by the
Covenant and Promise of God, not for the dignity of the Work it self.

Si Opus sit revera aequale mercedi, vel etiam majus, sed conventio nulla
intervenerit.
Another sort of Condignity is, When the Work is equal, or perhaps greater than
the Reward, but there is no Covenant that the Reward shall be given to it; This
is Condignity upon the account of the Work, not the Covenant. And such Cajetan,
and Soto, esteemed our Good Works; Opera Bona justorum esse meritoria vitae
aeternae ex condigno ratione Operis, etiamsi nulla extaret divina conventio. p.
1299. D.
Meritorius of Eternal Life upon the account of the Work it self, tho there
were no Covenant that they should be accepted. This also he rejects.

Si and Pactum intercedat, and Opus sit vere par Mercedi; ut cum operarii ad
vineam conducuntur pro denario diurno, id meritum erit ex Condigno ratione
Operis and ratione pacti: And he explains it thus, p. 1300. l. B. Non quidem
quod sine pacto, vel Acceptatione non habeat Opus bonum proportionem ad Vitam
aeternam; sed quia non tenetur Deus acceptare ad illam mercedem Opus bonum,
quamvis par and aequale Mercedi nisi conventio interveniat. Quam sententiam
Conformem esse non dubitamus Concilio Tridentino, etc.
A third sort of Condignity is, If there be both a Covenant, and that the Work
be truly equal to the Reward: as when the Laborers were hired for the Vineyard
at a Penny a day. And thus it is with our Good Works; not that, without any
Covenant, the Good Work does not bear a proportion to the Reward of Eternal
Life; but because, without the Covenant, God would not be bound to accept the
Good Work, in order to that Reward, tho otherwise even or equal to it.

This is so plain an account of their Doctrine of Merits, and so clearly given
us as the sense of the Council of Trent, that I hope the length of it will be
excused by every one but the Vindicator; who possibly does not desire that the
Council should be so freely expounded, as Bellarmine here has done it.

But Vasquez goes yet further: Vasquez in 1, 2dae. q. 114. d. 214. c. 3. p.
802. Jam vero hac nostra Aetate non pauci Theologiae Professores mediam quandam
Viam elegerunt, inter Scoti Opinionem quam primo Cap. memoravimus, and aliorum
sententiam quam nos ut Veram inferius probabimus. Dicunt ergo rationem Meriti
perfecti and condigni, quod simpliciter Meritum dicitur, duobus compleri, nempe
and dignitate Operis, and promissione mercedis: which was Bellarmine's Opinion.
1st, He rejects the Opinion of Bellarmine, as too little for their Good Works:
and then proposes his own in the Page 803. The first is that of c. 5. p. 804.
Bona Opera Justorum, absque ull^ Acceptatione and pacto, ex se habere
dignitatem Vitae Aeternae. This is against Scotus and the Heretics, whose
Doctrine he thus represents: Opera bona necessaria esse ad Vitam Aeternam; ita
tamen ut Ipsa Justorum Opera non sint digna remuneratione Vitae Aeternae, nisi
Deus benignitute sua dignaretur illa remunerare. Scotus's Opinion he puts down
thus, c. 1. p. 800. Opera Justorum ex se spectata, quatenus procedunt ex
auxilio gratiae Dei, and posita Sanctitate Animae, per quam Spiritus S. in
justis habitat; non habere condignitatem and rationem meriti Vitae Aeternae,
sed totam dignitatem, and totam rationem meriti habere petitam ex promissione
and pacto Dei. The second Conclusion, c. 7. p. 809. is this: Operibus justorum
nullum dignitatis Accrementum provenire ex Meritis aut Persona Christi, quod
alias eadem non haberent, si fierent ex eadem gratia a sobo Deo liberaliter
sine Christo collata. The third; which the Vindicator pretends he could not
find, tho the Title and Subject of the very next, c. 8. p. 811. is; Operibus
justorum aocessisse quidem divinam promissionem, eam tamen nullo modo pertinere
ad rationem Meriti, sed potius advenire Operibus, non tantum jam dignis, sed
etiam jam meritoriis. As for the Conclusion, wherein the Vindicator endeavors
to excuse him, it is this: First he supposes the Merits of Christ to have
obtained Grace for us, whereby we may be enabled to work out our Salvation; and
then this supposed, he affirms, That we have no more need of Christ's Merits to
supply our Defects, but that our own good Works are of themselves sufficient,
without any more imputation of his Righteousness. See this at large, q. 114.
art. 8. d. 222. c. 3. n. 30, 31. p. 917.
three Conclusions mentioned by me; to which I must refer the Reader, and leave
him to judge, Whether the little Exceptions the Vindicator has made, be
sufficient to excuse the Doctrine of them. All I have now to observe is, that
the third Conclusion, which the Vindicator complains he could not find, is the
very Subject of the Chapter to which I refer him; and which he could not well
overlook, having found the Second but in the foregoing: And for the rest, that
Vasquez to take away all doubt of his Opinion, does largely show that it is no
way contrary to the Council of See disp. 214. c. 11, 12. p. 819, etc.
Trent, but rather a true and natural Exposition of it.

ARTICLE VII.
. 1. Of Satisfactions.
IF the Conc. Trid. Sess. 14. cap. 8. Can. 73.
Council of Trent has expressed it self in such Vindicat. page 54, 55.
terms, as do plainly ascribe to our Endeavors a true and proper Satisfaction,
whatever Monsieur de Meaux or his Vindicator expound to the contrary, we are
not to be blamed for charging them with it.

It Is not enough to say, that they believe Christ to have made an entire
satisfaction for Sin, and that the necessity of that payment which they require
us to make for our selves, does not arise from any defect in that, but from a
certain Order which God has established for a salutary Discipline, and to keep
us from offending. If Christ has made an entire satisfaction for us; I am sure
it must be very improper, if not altogether untrue, to say, that We can make
any for our selves. If God indeed has established any such Order as they
pretend, let them show it to us in Scripture: Otherwise we shall never believe
that God's Justice does at all require it, since for the insinite Merits of a
crucified Savior, that has made an infinite Satisfaction to his Justice, he
may as well forgive Temporal as Eternal Punishment.

That Lib. 1. de purg. c. 10. to this Objection, Si applicatur nobis per nostra
Opera Christi satisfactio, vel sunt duae satisfactiones simul junctae, una
Christi, altera nostra, vel una tantum. Resp. p. 1899. After two other manners
of Explication, he adds; Tertius tamen modus videtur probabilior, quod una
tantum sit actualis satisfactio, eaque nostra. Neque hinc excluditur Christus,
vel satisfactio ejus; nam per ejus satisfactionem habemus gratiam unde
satisfaciamus; and hoc modo dicitur applicari nobis Christi satisfactio; non
quod Immediate ipsa ejus satisfactio tollat poenam temporalem nobis debitam,
sed quod Mediate eam tollat, quatenus, viz. ab ea gratiam habemus sine qua
nihil Valeret nostra satisfactio.
Bellarmine has taught, That it is we who properly satisfy for our own Sins,
and that Christ's Satisfaction serves only to make ours valid. Had the
Vindicator been ingenuous, he would not have thought it sufficient to answer
with the Error of the Press, but have looked into the place where it indeed
was, C. 10. of that Book.

That both As to the Point of Satisfaction, Belarmine distinguishes between a
Satisfaction to Justice, and a Satisfaction to Friendship: And then concludes;
Cum homines peccant in Deum, Amicitiam simul and Justitiam Violant. As to the
former, Non potest homo Deo satisfacere, etc. p. 1675. the Question is, De
satisfactione qua Justitiae restauretur Aequalitas. And because he supposes
that the Guilt being remitted, and we received into Friendship with God, the
Eternity is thereby taken from the Pain, the Question amounts to thus much; An
satisfacere possint homines pro expiando reatu illius Poenae qui interdum
remanet post remissionem culpae? And whether those Works by which it is done;
Sint dicenda proprie satisfactoria ita ut nos dicamur Vere ac proprie domino
satisfacere. Now both these he affirms, and explicates the latter from the
Council thus, C. 7. de poenit. lib. 4. p. 1694. l. C. Per opera illa poenalia
de quibus hactenus locuti sumus vere ac proprie Domino satisfieri pro reatu
poenae, qui post culpam dimissam remanet expiandus.
He and I shall instance only in Vasquez, in 3 p. d. 2. c. 1. p. 11. First he
lays down the Opinion of several of the Schoolmen, Alex. d' Ales, Ricardus,
Ruardus Tapperus, etc. who held, That a mere Man might condignly satisfy for
his own Sins. This he rejects, because he supposes it cannot be done without
God's assisting Grace, to which we forfeited all right by Sin: And so it will
follow; Nostram satisfactionem pro peccato proprio perfectam non esse, ex eo
quod fiat non ex propriis sed ex Acceptis, p. 21. c. 5. n. 53. But now,
Secondly, God's Grace being supposed, he concludes as to Mortal Sins, c. 6. p.
22. n. 58. Nos reipsa nunc satisfacere Deo pro nostro Peccato and Offensa. He
tells us, that some indeed allow that our Contrition may be called a
Satisfaction, tho not a sufficient One, n. 59. Nam qui pro compensatione
exhibet id quod potest; licet minus sufficiens illud sit, dicitur aliquo modo
satisfacere. This Reason Vasqutz dislikes; he is content this Satisfaction
should be called Minus sufficiens; but then only upon the account before
mentioned, of its proceeding from the Grace of God: So that, Si Contritio
praecederet infusionem Gratiae habitualis ex part Efficientis, non solum
satisfaceret pro macula peccati condign, sed etiam condign mereretur Gratiae
habitualis infusionem. And this he Expounds as the Doctrine of the Council of
Trent, N. 62, 63, p. 23. As for Venial Sins, Disp. 3. c. 3. p. 27. Ita
concedimus (says he) homini justo pro suo peccato Veniali condignam and
perfectam satisfactionem, ut ea non indigeat favore Dei condonantis peccatum,
vel aliquid illius, aut acceptantis satisfactionem, sed talis sit ut ex natura
sua deleat maculam and poenam peccati Venialis.
Others of their Communion, have taught it as the Doctrine of their Church,
That we can make a true and proper Satisfaction for Sin, is beyond denial
evident; and it has before been said, that the Council of Trent approves their
Doctrine.

But that Protestants ever assigned this, or any other Vindicat. p. 57.
single Point as the cause of our separating from their Communion; That we ever
taught that any thing at all should be given to a Sinner, for saying a bare
Lord have mercy upon me; much less more than they pretend to give by all the
Plenary Indulgences of their Church; this is so shameful a Calumny, that I am
confident the Vindicator himself never believed it.

For his last Remark, if it deserves any Answer, That I reflect upon the Bishop
of Meaux, for bringing only, we suppose, to establish this Doctrine, when yet
very often I do no more my self; I have only this to say, that I believe he can
hardly find any one Instance wherein that is the only Argument I bring for our
Doctrine: Not to add, that possibly it would not be very unreasonable to look
upon that as sufficient, not to receive their Innovations, till they can bring
us some better Arguments to prove that we ought to quit our Supposition. They
who pretend to impose such things as these, are the Persons on whom the Proof
will lie; it is enough for us to reject them, that we cannot find any footsteps
of them, either in Scripture or Antiquity; and have good reason to believe, by
the weakness of their Attempts, that there are not any.

ARTICLE VII.
. 2. Of Indulgences.
FOR Indulgences, the Vindicator thinks it sufficient Vindicat. p. 58.
to answer all the Difficulties I proposed, to confess that some Abuses have
crept in; that there are indeed many Practices in the Church of Rome, different
from that of the Primitive Church; but these being neither necessary, nor
universally received, he will not quarrel with us about them.

But are not these Abuses still cherished in his Church? Does not the Pope
still dispatch them abroad, and his Missionaries preach them now as shamefully
almost, as when Luther first rose against them? Is it not necessary, nor
universally received, to believe that these Indulgences satisfy for the
temporal Pain of Sin? Do they not put up Bills over their Church Doors and
Altars, almost every Sunday, to vend them on this Account? Is not his Holiness
still esteemed the Churches Treasurer? And has he not but very lately sent a
This Bull is dated August 11. 1683. and it runs thus: We give and grant, by
virtue of the Presents, a Plenary Indulgence, and entire remission of all Sins.
And that the Confessors absolve them in the Court of Conscience of all Sins,
Excesses, Crimes and Faults, how grievous or enormous soever they have been,
and in what fashion soever they were reserved. And for all this, The Condition
proposed is, To visit some one of the Churches appointed by the Ordinary, to
fast the Wednesday, Friday, and Saturday; to confess their Sins, and receive
the Sacrament, and give somewhat to the Poor. And this the A. B. of Paris
promises the People, in his Instructions for the Jubilee, shall restore them to
the same state they were first put into by Baptism. Instructions pour Gagner le
Jubilee, page 11. Paris, 1683. par Order de Monseigneur l' Archeveque.
Universal Indulgence throughout their whole Church?

When these things are considered, I doubt it will little avail the Vindicator
to put me in mind of my Promise, That whenever the Penances shall be reduced to
their Primitive Practice, we shall be ready to give or receive such an
Indulgence as Monsieur de Meaux has described, and as those first Ages of the
Church allowed of.

Purgatory.. 3.
WHat I have said as to the Design of the Primitive Vindicat. p. 59.
Christians in praying for the Dead, would have deserved either an ingenuous
acknowledgment of the truth of it, or some reasonable proof of its falseness or
impertinence. We cannot but suspect that he was hard put to it for Arguments,
when all the reason he brings us for the belief of Purgatory, is built upon the
Authority of two Councils, neither of which are very much esteemed by Us; and
the eldest of them 1400 Years after Christ.

If the Vindicator has any thing of moment to offer for it, he shall not fail
of a just Consideration. Otherwise 'twill be as foolish as it is false, to
pretend to tell the World, That we make a Breach in the Church, and condemn
Antiquity upon no other grounds, than a bare supposition that it is injurious
to the Merits of Jesus Christ; and which has no other Proof than our own
Presumption.

PART II.
ARTICLE VIII. Of the Sacraments in General.
AS to the number of the Sacraments, the Vindicator Vindicat. p. 59.
confesses that it is not to be found, either in Scripture or Antiquity. He
thinks it sufficient that the Scripture mentions an Exterior Ceremony, and an
Interior Grace annexed thereunto. He should then have shown us that all those
seven which they receive, have at least such an outward Sign as he Pretends,
and an inward Grace, by Christ's Institution, annexed to it. And this so much
the rather, for that no One of his Church has yet been able to do it, tho the
Council of Trent damns all those that dare to deny it.

ARTICLE IX. Of Baptism.
WE do not complain of the Church of Rome, for Vindicat. p. 61.
not believing that Infants dying unbaptised are certainly Saved: But we must,
and do complain of Monsiur de Meaux, for declaring so positively, what we judge
to be at least as uncertain as it is uncharitable, that they have not any part
in Christ.

If I argued for the more favorable side, I confessed at least that the Church
of England had determined nothing concerning it; But that I went about to
justify a Breach with the Church of Rome on this Account, is a Calumny as
great, as the little reflection of Huguenot or Puritan, before was ridiculous.

That he should be astonished to hear a Church of England Man argue for this
Point, shows how little acquainted he ever was with the Writers of it: I shall
mention only two, who I believe were never suspected as Puritanically inclined,
and yet have argued much more strongly than ever I could have done for it: One
the venerable and judicious Page 275, etc.
Mr. Hooker in his Eccles. Polity. Lib. 5. Sect. 60. The Other the learned
Archbishop Bramhall in a set Discourse, which he thus concludes, This I take
to be the Doctrine of the soundest English Divines, and which I believe A. Bp
Bramhall' s Works, Tom. 4. Disc. 5. p. 983.
to be the Truth: Saving always my Canonical Obedience to my Spiritual Mother
the Church of England, and in a higher degree to the Catholic Church, when it
shall declare it self in a true and free Oecomenical Council. But neither I,
nor any Protestants, do believe that the Church of Rome, including all Other
Churches of that Patriarchate, or of its Communion, is that Catholic Church.

For the rest, whether his Arguments or mine on this Point are the better, I am
but little concerned, tho he be very much. That which seemed the most to
deserve an Answer, he has thought fit wholly to pass by, viz. that several of
his own Authors had maintained the same with me; and I persume he will not say
were Puritans or Huguenots for their so doing.

But that the World may see with what rashness these Men talk, I will now be
yet more Express; That whereas Mr. de Meaux, affirms that this denial M. de
Meaux' s Exp. p. 16.
of Salvation to Infants dying unbaptized, was a Truth which never any one
before Calvin durst openly call in question, it was so firmly rooted in the
minds of all the Faithful. This is so notoriously false, that not only the most
Learned of their own First we have Cassander, libr. de Baptismo Infant. p. 762.
and he there cites of his side Jo. Gerson, Sermon. in Not. B. Mariae, par. 3.
preached before the Council of Constance, and all the Fathers there assembled,
p. 769. Gabriel Biel in 4. did. 4. q. 2. Cajetan in 3. p. D. Th. q. 68. art.
1, 2, 3. Tilmannus Segebergensis de 7 Sacram. c. 1. art. 3.
Church as I proved before, but the very Grot. Via ad pacem, p. 290. in art. 9.
Consult. Cassandr. adds to these, Inter Veteres, Scriptorem quaestionum ad
Antiochum quae Athanasio tribuuntur; Nazianzenum de S. Baptismate, duobus
locis; and Scholiastem ejus Nicetam:
Fathers themselves, have many of them declared for this Doctrine; even St. sed
and ipsum Augustinum antequam in certamine cum Pelagio incalesceret, l. 3. de
lib. arb. c. 23. locum Joan. 3. intelligendum de iis qui possunt and contemnunt
baptizari, asserit Lombard. l. 4. did. 4.
Augustine himself not excepted, till his Dispute with Pelagius provoked him to
deny that, which in his cooler thoughts, he had more reasonably allowed before.

ARTICLE X. Of Confirmation.
IN the Article of Confirmation, I affirmed that several Vindicat. p. 63.
of their own Party had denied the Divine Institution of this pretended
Sacrament; and that neither the Council of Trent, or their Catechism, had
offered any thing to prove it.

The Vindicator replies, That my Confession that the Apostles used Imposition
of Hands, and that when our Bishops after their Examples do the like, and pray
for the Blessing of the Holy Spirit upon us, we piously hope that their Prayers
are heard; is a sufficient proof of an outward Visible Sign, of an inward and
Spiritul Grace.

Had I indeed affirmed that the Apostles had instituted this Imposition of
Hands, to be continued in the Church, and promised that the Grace of the Holy
Ghost should certainly descend at their doing of it, for all those great Ends
our Prayers design; this might have made Confirmation look somewhat like a
Sacrament to Us. But to argue from a mere indifferent Ceremony, continued only
in imitation of the Apostles, and to which no blessing is ascribed that may not
equally be allowed to any Other the like Prayer; and then cry out that this
must needs argue the Divine Institution of it, because none but God can promise
Grace to an outward Sign, this is in effect to confess that there is nothing at
all to be said for it.

It is wonderful to see with what confidence those of the Church of Rome, urge
the Apostles Imposition of Hands for proof of Confirmation, as it is now
practiced amongst them; in which there is not any the least resemblance. Our
Bishops lay on Hands after their Example: But for theirs, they anoint, make
Crosses in the Forehead, tie a Fillet about their Heads, give them a box on the
Ear, etc. for which there is neither Promise, Precept, nor Example of the
Apostles: but for Imposition of Hands, the only thing they did, this they have
resolved to be but an So Estius in 4. Sent. did. 7.. 7. p. 81.
Accidental Ceremony, and accordingly have in their So the same Estius proves
from the Council of Florence; In quo, says he, legitur quod loco illius manus
impositionis per quam Apostoli dabant Spiritum S. in Ecclesia datur
Confirmatio, cujus materia est Chrisma. Ex quibus verbis utrumque colligitur,
and initio necessariam fuisse manuum impositionem Sacramenti necessitate, and
eandem ejus necessitatem, signaculo Chrismatis introducto, cessasse.
practice wholly laid it by.

ARTICLE XI. Of Penance.
THat Penance is not truly and properly a Sacrament, Vindicat. p. 64.
nor was ever esteemed so by the Primitive Church, I at large proved in my
Exposition of it: and the Vindicator has not in his Reply advanced any one
thing to answer the Objections that were brought against it.

He allows Public Confession to have been a part Ibid. p. 65.
of Discipline only, and alterable at pleasure; but then affirms that either
Public or Private was always necessary; and this we are to take of him upon
his own word.

In short, he repeats the Sum of their Doctrine to us; Ibid. p. 67.
and then, as if he had done his Business, This, says he, we have always held
and practiced, and this we affirm to be conformable to the practice of the most
Ancient and Orthodox Churches; and adds, that He is astonished at our rejection
of it. All which Stuff is easily said, and may with the same ease and
reasonableness be denied.

And therefore to conclude this in a word; If ever he gets so well out of his
Astonishment, as to come to his Reason again, and will then undertake to prove
Penance to be truly and properly a Sacrament, instituted by Christ, and
necessary to Salvation, either in Act or Desire, he shall not fail of an
ingenuous Reply to his Arguments. In the mean time, I have before shown, that
we do practice it, as far as is either necessary or convenient; and farther
than this we shall not think our selves bound to go, till we are somewhat
better convinced of our Obligations to it, than the Vindicator has hitherto
been willing or able to do.

ARTICLE XII. Of Extreme Unction.
IN explaining the words of St. James brought for Vindicat. p. 68.
this pretended Sacrament, I followed the Interpretation which both the
practice of the Primitive Church naturally leads to; and which Cardinal Cajetan
confesses, and their own public Liturgies show, was for above 800 Years
esteemed the undoubted meaning of them.

The Vindicator, from Bellarmine, advances many Things, as he supposes,
contrary to this Exposition; but the greatest part of which are utterly false,
the rest impertinent.

The Grace of curing the Sick, he says, was not given to all Priests and Elders
alike, but only to some select Persons. If this be true, it was then best like
St. James's Intention, that they should send for those Priests to whom it was
given. And however some Others might have this Grace, yet certainly it was
principally at least given to the Priests and Elders, for the honor and
benefit of their Ministry.

These did not only cure the Sick, but the Lame and the Blind.And therefore he
would, I suppose, have had St. James taken notice of these two. He might have
added the Dead likewise; for those who healed the Lame and the Blind, raised
the Dead also. But what if St. James's word be (...) answers to the Hebrew
(...) and signifies all sorts of Infirmities: and (...), is no unheard of
phrase for being Lame.
general, and may very well be extended to all these? Yet since these Gifts
were but rare in the Church, in respect of that the Apostle here speaks of, and
did evidently belong to a greater Power, We deny his Supposition, that those
who ordinarily cured the Sick by anointing, had also the Power to heal the Lame
and the Blind.

Their Power of Miracles was not tied to Unction only: But yet since we find in
St. Mark that this Mark 6. 13.
was the ordinary Sign, what wonder if St. James describe it by that which was
the most common and frequent amongst them?

All those that were anointed, were not cured. This is false, and cannot be
maintained without dishonor to that Spirit by which they acted: Neither
Vindicat. p. 69.
had all they that were cured by them who had the Gift of Healing, any
assurance by that Cure of the Forgiveness of their Sins. This again is false:
The Sin here promised to be forgiven, is that for which the Sickness was sent,
if it was sent for any: Now St. James expressly promises, that in this case,
whenever the Health of the Body was restored, this Sin should be forgiven too;
and therefore it must be false to say it was not.

He adds, lastly, That St. James promises, that the Prayer of Faith shall save
the Sick, and the Lord shall raise him up: Which if it had been meant of bodily
Health, those only would have died in the Apostle's Time, who either neglected
this Advice, or whose Deaths prevented the accomplishment of this Ceremony. And
if it must be understood of the Soul's Health, then it will follow that none
were damned, either then or now, but what neglect this Advice, or whose Deaths
prevent the accomplishment of this Ceremony; concerning the Truth of which the
Vindicator may please to give us his Opinion.

But the Vanity of this Objection proceeds from the want of a true Notion of
the Nature of these Gifts. They who had the greatest measure of them, could not
yet exercise them when they would. The same Spirit that helped them to perform
the Miracle, instructed them also when they should do it. So that they never
attempted it, but when they saw the sick Person had Faith to be healed, and
that it would be for the greater Glory of God to do it. St. Paul had doubtless
this Gift of Healing; and yet he neither cured Timothy of the weakness of his
Stomach, 1 Timothy 5. 22.
and his other frequent Infirmities; and left Trophimus at Miletum sick. That
this Gift of Healing 2 Timothy 4. 20.
was in the Church at this time, is not to be doubted, though this place should
not belong to it. Will the Vindicator argue against this, that then none died
till it went out of the Church, but such as refused the benefit of it, or died
suddenly before they had time to do it?

It may appear by this, how little they have to object against the true Design
and Interpretation of Vindicat. p. 69, -- 70.
thi^ passage: For Cardinal Cajetan's Authority, the Vindicator tells us, That
had I said only, that he Nec ex verbis, nec ex effectu, verba haec loquuntur de
Sacramentali Unctione Extremae Unctionis: sed magis de Unctione quam instituit
Dominus Jesus, a Discipulis exercendam in aegrotis. Cajet. Annot. in Loc.
thought it could not be proved, neither from the Words, nor the Effect, that
St. James speaks of the Sacramental Unction of Extreme Unction; but rather of
that Unction which our Lord Jesus instituted in the Gospel to be exercised by
his Disciples upon the Sick, I had been a faithful Quoter of his Sense: But to
tell us he freely confesses it can belong to no other, is to impose upon him
and the Readers. As if when two Things only are in controversy for the
Cardinal, absolutely to exclude the one, and apply it to the other, were not in
effect (for I designed not to translate his words) to confess, that it could
belong only to that.

But that which is most considerable is, that the Ancient Liturgies of the
Church, and the public practice of it, for above 800 Years, show, that they
esteemed this Unction to belong primarily to bodily Cures, and but secondarily
only to the sickness of the Soul. And because these Rituals are not in every
bodies hands, to argue at once the truth of my Assertion, and show how little
conversant the Vindicator has been in them, I will here insert some particular
proofs of it.

Upon the Thursday in the Holy Week, when this Oil was wont to be consecrated,
they did it with this Prayer:

Ex S. Gregorii Libr. Sacram. p. 66. The same is in effect the Prayer of the
Greek Church: (...) Euch. p. 863. Nor is it much different in that published by
Thomasius, as P. Gelasius's Ritual, before P. Gregory's, upon the same day, p.
69. only that he generally joins Mentis and Corporis.

Fer. 5. post Palm. Emitte domine Spiritum S. tuum paraclitum de Coelis in hanc
pinguedidem Olivae, quem de Viridi ligno producere dignatus es; ad refectionem
Corporis; ut tua sancta benedictione sit omni hoc unguentum tangenti tutamen
Mentis and Corporis, ad Evacuandos omnes Dolores, omnesque infirmitates, omnem
aegritudinem corporis.

That by this Blessing it might become the Defense both of the Mind and Body;
to cure all Pains and Infirmities, and sickness of the Body: nothing else
mentioned.

In the Office of Visiting the Sick, several Introductory Prayers, all for the
Bodies Recovery, are first said: such as this, page 251, etc.

Ad visit and. infirm. p. 251. Deus qui famulo tuo Hezekiae ter quinos Annos ad
vitam donasti, ita and famulum tuum N. a lecto aegritudinis tua potentia erigat
ad salutem. Per.

O God, who did add to the Life of thy Servant Hezekiah fifteen Years, let
thy Power in like manner raise up this thy Servant from his Bed of Sickness.
Through etc.

Some of these being said, the Priest goes on thus:

Domine Deus, qui per Apostolum locutus es, Infirmatur quis in Vobis, S. James
5. 14, 15.
inducat Presbyteros Ecclesiae and orent super eum ungentes eum oleo Sancto in
Nomine Domini, etc. Cura quaesumus Redemptor noster gratia Spiritus Sancti
languores istius Infirmi: and sua sana vulnera, ejusque dimitte peccata, atque
dolores cunctos cordis and corporis expelle, plenamque and interius exteriusque
sanitatem miserecorditer read: ut open miserecordiae tuae restitutus and
Sanatus, ad pristina Pietatis tuae reparetur Officia; Per etc.

O Lord God, who by thy Apostle have said, If any Man be sick, let him call for
the Elders of the Church, and let them pray over him, anointing him with Oil in
the Name of the Lord, etc: Cure we beseech thee, O our Redeemer, by the Grace
of the Holy Spirit, the sickness of this infirm Person: Heal his Wounds, and
forgive his Sins, and expel all the Pains, both of his Heart, and of his Body;
and restore him mercifully to full health, both inward and outward: that being
by thy merciful Aid Recovered and Healed, he may be strengthened to the former
Duties of thy Service; Through etc.

Then the sick Person kneels down upon the right Hand of the Priest, and this
Antiphona is sung:

Dominus locutus est Discipulis suis, In Nomine meo Daemonia ejicite, and super
Infirmos manus vestras imponite and been habebunt. Psalm. Deus Deorum Dominus
locutus est: Et repetit, In Nomine meo etc.

The Lord said unto his Disciples, In my Name cast out Devils; and lay your
hands upon the Sick and they shall Recover. Then the 49 Psalm, The Lord, the
Mighty God, has spoken, etc. After which they repeat again: In my Name etc. as
before.

Then follows this Prayer.

Oremus Dominum nostrum Jesum Christum, and cum omni supplicatione rogemus, ut
hunc famulum suum N. per Angelum Sanctum suum visitare, laetificare, and
confortare dignetur.

Let us pray unto our Lord Jesus Christ, and beseech him with all supplication,
that he would vouchsafe, by his Holy Angel, to visit, make glad, and comfort
this his Servant.

Afterward this Antiphona.

Succurre Domine Infirmo isti N. and Medica eum spirituali Medicamine, ut in
pristina sanitate restitutus, gratiarum tibi sanus referat Actiones.

Succor, O Lord, this Infirm Person N. and heal Him with a spiritual Medicine,
that being restored to his former Health, when he is Well, he may return thanks
unto thee.

Then follows another Psalm, and after it this Antiphona:

Sana Domine infirmum istum cujus Ossa turbata sunt, and cujus Anima turbata
est Valde: sed tu Domine convertere, and sana eum, and eripe animam ejus.

Heal, O Lord, this sick Person whose Bones are troubled, and whose Soul is
very much afflicted: but turn thou, O Lord, and heal him, and deliver his Soul.

After this is said the 6th Psalm, from whence the Antiphona was taken; which
being ended, they anoint the sick Person in several parts, but especially in
that where the pain lies; saying this Prayer:

Inungo te de Oleo sancto in Nomine Patris, and Filii, and Spiritus Sancti: ut
non lateat in Te Spiritus immundus, neque in membris, neque in medullis, neque
in nulla compagine membrorum; sed in te habitet virtus Christi Altissimi and
Spiritus Sancti; quatenus per hujus Operationem Mysterii, atque per hanc
Sacrati Olei Unctionem, atque nostram deprecationem, virtute Sanctae Trinitatis
medicatus sive fotus, pristinam and immelioratam recipere merearis sanitatem:
Per eundem.

I anoint thee with this Instead of this, Arcudius gives us this Form out of a
very ancient Manuscript in the Greek Church: (...), etc. And in another Office;
(...). Arcudius de Sac. Ext. Unct. p. 394. And the Prayers in the Office of the
Euchelaion are all exactly conformable, to what I have here observed.
Holy Oil, in the Name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost;
that no unclean Spirit may remain in thee, but that the virtue of the most
highest of Christ, and the Holy Ghost may dwell in thee: to the End that by the
Operation of this Mystery, and through the Unction of this holy Oil, and our
Prayers, thou may be healed and restored by the Virtue of the Holy Trinity,
and receive thy former and better health, Through the same.

Then follows this Prayer.

Domine Deus Salvator noster, qui es vera salus and Medicina, a quo omnis
Sanitas and Medicamentum venit, quique nos Apostoli documento instruis ut
languentes Olei liquore Orantes tangeremus, respice propitius super hunc
famulum tuum N. and quem languor curvat ad exitum, and virium defectus trahit
ad Occasum, medela tuae gratiae restituat in Salutem. Sana quoque quaesumus
omnium medicator ejus febrium, and cunctorum languorum Cruciatus,
aegritudinemque, and dolorum omnium dissolve tormenta, viscerumque ac cordium
interna Medica: Medullorum quoque and Cogitationum: Sana discrimina ulcerum,
vanitatumque putredines evacua, Conscientiarumque atque plagarum obducito
cicatrices veteres, immensasque remove passiones: Carnis ac Sanguinis materiam
reforma, delictorumque cunctorum veniam tribue; sicque illum tua pietas jugiter
custodiat, ut nec ad Correptionem aliquando Sanitas, nec ad perditionem nunc,
Te auxiliante, perducat Infirmitas; sed fiat illi haec Olei Sacri perunctio,
morbi and languoris praesentis expulsio, atque peccatorum omnium optata
remissio: Per Dominum nostrum.

O Lord God our Savior, who art the true Health and Medicine, and from whom
all Health and Medicine does proceed: who also, by the Instruction of thy Holy
Apostle have taught us, that we should anoint the Sick with Oil, look down we
beseech thee in mercy upon this thy Servant N: and whom his weakness has
brought down to Death, and the decay of his strength draws toward his End, Let
the power of thy Grace restore to Health: Heal, we beseech thee, his Feavours,
etc. -- And let the Holy Unction of this Oil be the Expulsion of his present
Sickness and Infirmity, and the remission of all his Sins: Through.

Then let the Priest give him the Communion of the Body and Blood of Christ:
and if occasion be, let them repeat this seven days; And the Lord shall raise
him up; and I F he be in Sins, they shall be remitted.

The Priest ought also to say the Morning and Evening Service every day to the
Sick Person, adding the Hymn; See the Hymn, Cassandr Oper. p. 287.
Christ Coelestis Medicina Patris; which is a Prayer entirely for the recovery
of the Bodily Health.

This was the method of their Unction in Pope Gregory's Missal; and which I
suppose shows that it had somewhat more than a bare respect to bodily Cures;
indeed was, as I before affirmed, especially designed for them. It were an easy
matter to show the very same to be the practice of the Greek Church at this
Day; insomuch that Arcud. de Sacram. Extr. Unct. l. 5. c. 5. de forma hujus
Sacramenti.
Arcudius himself could not dissemble it: But I shall close this with one
Observation more which Cassander. Oper. p. 289. where he also cites Cusanus for
the same Remark.
Cassander has given us, that it was anciently the custom to anoint, not only
the Elder Persons, but even Infants, after the same manner; not sure for the
forgiveness of those remains of Sin which the former Sacraments had not
sufficiently cleared, but for the same End for which they then did all others,
the Recovery of their bodily Health.

ARTICLE XIII. Of Marriage.
THat Marriage is not a Sacrament truly and properly Vindicat. p. 70.
so called, as the Council of Trent has defined it, their own Authors
sufficiently show. Cassand. Consult. Art. 13. de number. Sacram. in fine. De
Matrimonio vero non modo P. Lombardus negavit in eo gratiam conferri, sed long
post eum Durandus diserte inquit, non esse Matrimonium univoce Sacramentum
sicut alia Sacramenta novae legis, nam nec confer gratiam non habenti, nec
augere habenti; non esse itaque Sacramentum proprie ac stricte dictum.
Lombard denies that there is any Grace conferred in it, and affirms it as a
Lib. 4. d. 2. l. C. p. 696. Fuit tamen Conjugium ante Peccatum institutum, non
utique propter Remedium, sed ad Sacramentum. Et d. 26. l. A. Cum alia
Sacramenta post peccatum and propter peccatum exordium sumpserint, Matrimonii
Sacramentum etiam ante peccatum legitur institutum a Domino.
Sacrament, to have been instituted not only before Christ, but even before the
Fall; and therefore was not cited, either for Ostentation, or for the silly
Reason mentioned by the Vindicator.

4 Sent. d. 26. q. 3.
Durandus in express terms declares, that forasmuch as it neither confers Grace
where it is not, nor increases it where it is, it cannot be a Sacrament truly
and properly so called.

It is therefore evidently false to say, that Lombard is against me in this
Matter; and for the torrent of Fathers and For his torrent of Fathers,
Bellarmine has been able to collect but six or seven, of which not one to the
purpose, nor any very ancient: And for the Scriptures, Estius one of the wisest
of their own Party, is forced to confess; Cum igitur hujus Doctrinae non poffit
ex Scripturis haberi probatio, saltem aperta and evidens; consequens est
articulum hunc, Matrimonii Sacramento gratiam conferri, unum esse ex
traditionibus Ecclesiae non Scriptis, and ad Verbum Dei non scriptum sed
traditum pertinere. 4 Sent. d. 26.. 7. p. 61.
Scriptures which he talks of, it would have been more to this purpose to have
produced their Authorities, than thus vainly to boast of that which we
certainly know he is not able to perform.

ARTICLE XIV. Of Holy Orders.
IF the Vindicator be truly agreed with Me in this Vindicat. p. 71.
Article, He must then renounce the number of his seven Sacraments. I denied
that there was any Sign instituted by Christ, to which his Grace is annexed:
All the Authority Imposition of Hands has in Scripture, being only the Example
of three or four places, where it was practiced indeed, but no where commanded.
I affirmed that several of his own Church had declared it not to be Essential
to Holy Orders, nor by consequence the outward Sign of a Sacrament in them. In
a word, I said, that the Grace conferred was no Justifying Grace, nor by
consequence such as is requisite to make a true and proper Sacrament: To all
which he has thought fit not to offer one word in Answer.

ARTICLE 15, 16, 17, 18. Of the Eucharist.
AS to the Business of the Eucharist, I had not Vindicat. p. 72.
entered on any Argument about it, had not Monsieur de Meaux here thought fit to
lay aside the Character of an Expositor, to assume that of a Disputant.

For the words of Institution, which are the principal part of this
Controversy, I proposed two Arguments to confirm the Interpretation which our
Church gives of them: One from the the natural import of the words themselves;
the Other from the intention of our Savior in the institution of this Holy
Sacrament- To the former of these the Vindicator thought he could answer
somewhat; but for the latter, it has been urged chiefly since Bellarmine's
time, and so our Author had nothing to say to it.

For the former then he tells us, first, Of the insincerity Ibid.
of my Attacque; That the Bishop declared there was nothing in the words of
Institution OBLIGING Page 73, 74.
them to take them in a figurative sense; to which I oppose only, That there
are such Grounds in them for a figurative Interpretation, as NATURALLY lead to
it.'It Is true, I have not here used the very word OBLIGED, but yet in my proof I
proceed upon such Grounds as I said would Expos. Chapter of Eng. p. 47.
NECESSARILY REQUIRE a figurative Interpretation; which is much the same thing.
And though I cannot tell what will Oblige Him to take those words in their
true, i. e. figurative sense; yet if I have proved, That there are such Grounds
in those words as Naturally, indeed necessarily lead to it; any reasonable Man
would think, that joined with the Other proof from the Reason of the thing it
self, might be sufficient to Oblige him to acquiesce in it.

But we will examine his Process, which whether it argues more my unsincerity,
or the falseness of their Interpretation, I shall leave it to the Reader to
judge.

First; He confesses, as to my first Position, that Vindicat. p. 73.
the words themselves do naturally lead to a figurative Interpretation. No
Body, says he, ever denied but the words as they lie (without considering the
Circumstances and Practice of the Church, delivering the Interpretation of them
down to us) might possibly lead to a figurative Interpretation: Seeing the like
Expressions are frequently found in Scripture: As for Example, I am a Door, I
am a Vine, etc. Which being always taken by the Church in a figurative sense,
we should esteem him a Madman that should think it possible after this, to
persuade all the World they ought to be taken in a literal. And as it would be
a madness to suppose all Mankind might in future Ages be so sottish, as to
renounce this figurative Interpretation of Jesus Christ's being a Door, and a
Vine, and fall so far into the literal sense, as to believe him to be
substantially present in them, and pay the utmost adorations to him there, set
them up in Temples to be Adored, and celebrate Feasts in honor of them; This
is the Pretense of Mr. Arnauld, and at large refuted by Mr. Claude in his
answer to him; whose Works being in English, I shall refer the Reader, who
desires to see the vanity of this Argument exposed, to what he has there said.
So we cannot but think it to be irrational to imagine, that if the Disciples
and whole Church in all Nations, had been once taught these words, This is my
Body, were to be taken in a figurative sense, it could ever have happened that
the Visible Church in all Nations, should agree to teach their Children the
literal, etc.

The meaning of which Discourse, if I understand it aright, is this Concession,
that the words of Institution do in themselves as naturally lead to a
figurative Interpretation, as those other Expressions, I am a Vine, I am a
Door: And the only thing which makes the difference is, that the Church, as he
supposes, has from the beginning interpreted the One according to the Letter,
the Other in a figurative Acceptance.

Secondly, As to my Argument, That if the Relative This, in that Proposition,
this is my Body, referred to the Bread which our Savior held in his Hand, the
natural repugnancy there is betwixt the two things affirmed of one another,
Bread and Christ's Body will NECESSARILY REQUIRE the figurative Interpretation.
This De Euch. l. 1. c. 1. p. 462. l. D. speaking of Carolstrad's Opinion of the
Eucharist; Scripsit, says he, Verba Evangelistae, Hoc est Corpus meum, hunc
facere sensum, Hic Panis est Corpus meum, quae sententia aut accipi debet
tropice, ut Panis sit Corpus Christi significative, aut est plane absurda and
Impossibilis, nec enim fieri potest, ut Panis sit Corpus Christi. Et l. 3. c.
19. p. 747. Non potest fieri ut vera sit propositio in qui Subjectum supponit
pro Pane, praedicatum autem pro Corpore Christi, etc.
Bellarmine, Hoc est impossible quod Panis sit Corpus Christi: de Consecrat.
d. 2. c. 55. p. 2393. in Gloss.
Gratian, and others do confess, and the Vindicator himself seems contented
with it: Only he believes, That all my Logic will never be able to prove that
the Pronoun THIS must necessarily relate to (Panis) In the Ethiopian Church
they give the Holy Eucharist with this Explication, Hic Panis est Corpus meum.
Ludolphi Hist. l. 3. c. 5. n. 56.
Bread, and not to (Corpus) Body. How far my Logic has been able to do this, I
must leave it to others to determine; but for the Vindicator's satisfaction, I
do assure him, that Bellarmine looks upon it to be Good Logic. And because it
is in the middle of the citation I referred to, and which he has almost
entirely transcribed, excepting only the part I am now speaking of, I will not
charge him with unsincerity in the omission, but I must needs say 'twas
indiscreet to put the issue of the Question upon what his Cardinal had so
freely confessed: Bellarm. de Euchar. l. 3. c. 19. p. 746. Lit. D. Dominus
accepit in manibus panem, eumque benedixit, and dedit discipulis and de eo ait,
Hoc est Corpus meum. Itaque panem accepit, panem benedixit, panem dedit, and de
Pane dixit, Hoc est corpus meum.
The Lord, says he, took Bread in his hands, and blessed it, and gave it to his
Disciples, and said of it, This is my Body: Therefore he took BREAD, and
blessed BREAD, and gave BREAD to his Disciples, and said of BREAD, This is my
Body. And in Id. l. 1. c. 11. p. 517. Lit. B. Siquis digito aliquid ostendat,
dum Pronomen effert, valde absurdum videtur dicere Pronomine illo non
demonstrari rem praesentem. Atqui Dominus accepit Panem, and Illum porrigens
ait, Hoc est Corpus meum; videtur igitur demonstravisse Panem. Neque obstat
quod propositio non significat nisi in fine totius prolationis. Nam etsi ita
est de propositione quae est Oration quaedam, tamen demonstrativa pronomina mox
indicant certum aliquid, etiam antequam sequantur caeterae voces. Et sane in
illis verbis, Bibite ex hoc omnes, valde durum est non demonstrari, I D. quod
Erat, sed I D. tantum quod futurum erat.
another place, arguing against this very Opinion of the Vindicator, That THIS
in that proposition belongs to BODY, not the BREAD which he held in his hand;
says, That if a Man points with his finger to a thing whilst he utters a
pronoun demonstrative, 'twere absurd to say that any thing else should be
referred to, but that thing. Our Lord took Bread, and reaching it out to them,
said, Take, Eat, THIS is my Body; He seems to have pointed to the BREAD; and
therefore must have shown some certain thing, even before the other words were
pronounced.

From which put together, I think we may frame this Argument:

If the Relative THIS, in that Proposition, This is my Body, belong to the
Bread, so that the meaning is, This Bread is my Body, then it must be
understood Figuratively, or it is plainly absurd and impossible:

But the relative This in that proposition, This is my Body, does belong to the
Bread, forasmuch as Christ took Bread, and blessed Bread, and gave Bread to his
Disciples, and therefore said of Bread, This is my Body: Therefore

That proposition, This is my Body, must be understood figuratively, or it is
plainly absurd and impossible.

How far the Vindicator will approve this Logic, I cannot tell; but the first
proposition is their common concession, and he himself seems contented with it.
The second is Bellarmine's own grant, nay what he contends for, and indeed what
the connection of the Words do evidently require: And then for the conclusion, I
believe a very little Logic will be enough at any time to make good the sequel
of it.

But the Vindicator has an Exception against all this, and tells us, That it
will all argue nothing Vind. p. 75.
against them, unless I beg the Question, and suppose that no real change was
made by those words.I presume it is as much a begging of the Question for him
to suppose there was, as for me that there was not. We do not now enquire how
to expound the Proposition, supposing there were such a change made as they
imagine; but the Question is, Whether these Words do necessarily imply any such
change, nay, rather do not oblige us to take them in a figurative sense to show
that there is none?

However he is resolved he will suppose the Question first, and then prove it,
though I must not. We will suppose, says he, and that not incongruously, That our
Blessed Savior in changing the Water into Wine, might have made use of these
words THIS IS WINE, or LET THIS BE WINE. I hope he does not look upon these two
to be one and the same. But in short, If our Savior had said Let this be Wine,
the meaning must have been, Let this which is now Water become Wine. If he had
said, This is Wine, and the conversion not yet made, it would have been false:
If after the conversion, no more than this, This that is contained in these
Pots is Wine; or, This which before was Water, now is Wine.

And so in the point before us; Had our Blessed Savior said, LET THIS BE MY
BODY, and a conversion had been thereupon as truly made, as of the Water into
Wine, we should have made no doubt, but that it was a command for that which
before was Bread to become his Body. If we take the Words as they are, THIS IS
MY BODY, and no conversion made before they were pronounced, the Proposition in
the literal sense must plainly be false. If a real conversion had first been
made, as when the Water was turned into Wine, then would it signify no more
than this, This which before was Bread, is now my Body. So that all this will
as little avail him, as he says the other did us, unless he also beg the
Question, and suppose a real change made by these words, which he knows is the
very thing which we deny; as we shall have reason to do, till they can prove
that what, we are sure, was Bread, is converted into the Body of Christ.

And thus much for his disputing; Before he enters Vindicat. p. 77, 78, 79, 80.
on an Examination of those Authorities I produced to show the novelty and
uncertainty of Trans-substantiation, he is willing to state the Case, and to
that end would fain know what we mean when we say, that Christ is not
Corporeally present in this Sacrament: Or how that which is not the thing it
self, is yet more than a mere figure of it. In answer to which, I shall need
seek no farther than those Testimonies I before alleged out of the public
Acts of our Church to satisfy him. Our Catechism affirms, That the inward
part, or thing signified in this Holy Supper, is the BODY See the Church
Catechism.
AND BLOOD OF CHRIST, which are VERILY AND INDEED taken and received by the
faithful in the Lord's Supper: And the meaning of it our 28th Article 28.
Article expounds thus; The Body of Christ is given, taken, and eaten in the
Lord's Supper, ONLY AFTER A SPIRITUAL AND HEAVENLY MANNER; and the means by
which this is done, is FAITH. So that to such as rightly, and worthily, and
with Faith receive the same, The Bread which we break, is, as St. Paul declares
it, The Communion of the Body of Christ, and the Cup of Blessing which we
bless, The Communion of the Blood of Christ. In a word; We say, that the
faithful do really partake of Christ's Body after such a manner, as those who
are void of Faith cannot, though they may participate the Outward Elements alike;
Whom therefore our Church declares, Article 29.
To receive only the Sacrament of the Body and Blood of Christ, but to be no
way partakers of Christ; but rather as St. Paul again says, to Eat and Drink
their own Damnation, not discerning the Lords Body.

See the Appendix. N. V. in which St. Chrysostom gives the very same account of
it.
These are the Words of our Church; and the meaning is clearly this: Christ is
really present in this Sacrament, inasmuch as they who worthily receive it,
have thereby really conveyed to them our Savior Christ, and all the benefits
of that Body and Blood, whereof the Bread and Wine are the outward Signs. This
great effect, plainly shows it to be more than a mere Figure; yet is it not his
Body after the manner that the Papists imagine, Rubric at the end of the
Communion Office.
Christ's Body being in Heaven, and not on the holy Table; and it being against
the truth of Christ's natural Body, to be at one time in more places than one.

The Sacramental Bread and Wine then remain still in their very natural
Substance; nor is there any corporal Presence of Christ's natural Flesh and
Blood at the holy Altar. The Presence we allow, is Spiritual, and that not only
as to the manner of the Existence Vindicat. p. 77, 78.
, which the Vindicator seems to insinuate (for we suppose it to be a plain
Contradiction, that a Body should have any Existence but what alone is proper
to a Body, i. e. Corporal) but as to the nature of the thing it That this
Exposition is agreeable to the Doctrine of the Chapter of England, the Authorities
already cited, show. See also the Homily concerning the Sacrament, part 1. p.
283. etc. and the same is the Explication, which all the other Protestant
Confessions have given of it; as is evident by the Collation of them made by
Bishop Cosins, in his History of Transubstantiation, cap. 2. where he has set
down their Words at large, p. 6. etc.
self; and yet it is Real too: The Bread which we receive, being a most real
and effectual Communion of Christ's Body, in that Spiritual and Heavenly manner
which St. Paul speaks of, and in which the Faithful, by their Faith are made
partakers of it.

Thus does our Church admit of a real Presence, and yet Vindic. p. 80.
, neither take the Words of Institution in their literal Sense Ibid. p. 79.
, and avoid all those Absurdities we so justly charge them with: As to the
Authorities of their own Writers, which I alleged to show that the Doctrine of
Transubstantiation had no Grounds, neither in Scripture nor Antiquity: He is
content to allow that the Scriptures are not so plain in this matter, but that
it was necessary for the Church to interpret Vind. p. 80, 81.
them in order to our understanding of it. And for Antiquity, he desires us to
observe, Is It, That the Council of Trent having in the first Canon, defined the
Ibid. p. 82.
true, real, and substantial Presence of the Body and Blood of Jesus Christ in
the most holy Sacrament, brings this Transubstantiation, or Conversion of one
Substance Sess. 13. Can. 2.
into another, as the natural Consequence of it. Can. 2. If any one shall say,
That the Substance of Bread and Wine remains in the most holy Sacrament of the
Eucharist, together with the Body and Blood of our Lord Jesus Christ, and shall
deny that wonderful and singular Conversion of the whole Substance of the Bread
into the Body, and of the whole Substance of the Wine into the Blood, the
Species of Bread and Wine only remaining; which Conversion the Catholic Church
does most aptly call Transubstantiation, let him be Anathema.

The design of the Council in which Canon is evidently this, To define not only
the real and substantial Presence of Christ in the Eucharist, against the
Sacramentaries, which before was done Can. 1.
; but also the manner or mode of his Presence, against the Lutherans, in two
Particulars; 1st, Of the Absence of the Substance of the Bread and Wine. 2ly,
Of the Conversion of their Substance into the Body and Blood of Christ, the
Species only remaining. But this the Vindicator will not allow, but advances an
Exposition so contrary to the design of the Council, and Doctrine of his
Church, that it is wonderful to imagine how he could be so far deceived
himself, or think to impose upon others so vain and fond an Illusion.

It is manifest, says he, that the Church does not here intend to fix the
manner of that Conversion, but only Vindic. p. 83.
to declare the matter, viz. That the Body and Blood of Jesus Christ becomes
truly, really, and substantially Present; the Bread and Wine ceasing to be
there truly, really, and substantially Present, tho the Appearances thereof
remain. Now this is so evidently false, that Suarez doubts not to say it is
HEREST to affirm it, Forasmuch, says he, as the Council not only determines See
Suarez cited below.
the Presence of Christ's Body, and Absence of the Substance of the Bread, but
also the true Conversion of the one into the other; thus establishing, not only
the two former, but this last also as an Article of Faith.

Our dispute therefore, is not only, as this Author pretends, about the real
Presence of Christ's Body, and Vindic. p. 83.
Absence of the Substance of the Bread, which he calls the thing it self; but
also about the Manner, how Jesus Christ is Present; viz. Whether it be by that
WONDERFUL and singular CONVERSION which their Church calls so aptly
TRANSUBSTANTIATION? Now this being that we are to enquire into, let us see
whether the Authorities I have brought, have not the force I pretend against
their Tenets.

And 1. LOMBARD writing about this Conversion, plainly shows it to have been
undetermined in his time. For having first asserted the real Presence in this
Sacrament, and the change which he supposed was made upon that account: He goes
on to that which the Vind. p. 92.
Vindicator is pleased to call a Scholastic Nicety; and it was indeed at that
time no other, tho since become a matter of Faith, viz. What kind of Lombard.
l. 4. d. 11. lit. A. p. 736. De modis Conversionis. Si autem quaeritur qualis
sit illa Conversio, an formalis, an substantialis, vel alterius generis,
definire non sustineo: Quibusdam esse videtur substantialis, etc.
Conversion is there made? Whether formal or substantial, or what else? And for
this, he tells us freely, He is not able to define it: That some have thought
it to be a SUBSTANTIAL CHANGE; but for his part, he will not undertake to
determine it.

But 2dly, SCOTUS is yet more free Dicendum, says Scotus, quod Ecclesia
declaravit istum intellectum esse de veritate fidei. Si quaeras, quare voluit
Ecclesia eligere istum intellectum ita difficilem hujus Articuli, cum verba
Scripturae possint salvari secundum intellectum facilem, and veriorem secundum
apparentiam; Dico quod eo spiritu expositae sunt Scripturae, quo conditae. See
4. Sent. d. 11. q. 3. p. 63.
He declares our Interpretation contrary to Transubstantiation, to be the more
easy, and to all appearance the more true: Insomuch, that the Churches
Authority is the And before, in Sect. Quantum ergo, He professed, Principaliter
autem videtur me movere quod sic tenet Romana Ecclesia. In a Word, Bellarmine
himself cites Scotus for this Opinion: Non extare locum ullum Scripturae, tam
expressum, ut sine Ecclesiae declaratione evidenter cogat Transubstantiationem
admittere, Bell. de Euch. l. 3. c. 23. p. 767. L. D.


Principal thing that moved him to receive their Doctrine. And again, p. 768.
L. A. Unum tamen addit Scotus, quod minime probandum est, Ante Lateranense
Concilium non fuisse dogma fidei Transubstantiationem. Vind. p. 88.
He tells us that this Doctrine of Transubstantiation was not very Ancient, nor
any matter of Faith before the Council of Lateran; all which the Vindicator
himself does in effect confess.

The same is, 3ly, affirmed by Suarez in 3 part. D. Th. vol. 3. disp. 50. 1. p.
593. Sacramentum Eucharistiae conficitur per veram conversionem Panis and Vini
in Corpus and Sanguinem Christi. Haec assertio est de fide: Nam licet sub his
verbis non habeatur in Scriptura, ea tamen docet Ecclesia ab Apostolis edocta;
docens simul ita esse intelligenda Verba formae, and in vero sensu eorum hanc
veritatem contineri. And then p. 594. col. 2. adds,. 1. Ex hac Fidei Doctrina,
colligitur corrigendos esse Scholasticos qui hanc Doctrinam de Conversione hac,
seu de Transubstantiatione, non admodum antiquam esse dixerunt, inter quos sunt
Scotus and Gabriel Biel, lect. 41. in Can. etc. And then, 2do infero, Siquis
confiteatur praesentiam corporis Christi, and absentiam Panis, neget tamen
veram Conversionem unius in aliud, in HAERESIN labi, quia Ecclesia Catholica,
non solum duo priora, sed etiam hoc tertium definit ac docet.
SUAREZ of GABRIEL, and confessed by the Vindicator; who also, contrary to his
pretenses, calls this manner of Conversion, an Assertion, that is, of Faith;
tho he confesses, it is not expressly to be found in Scripture, but deduced
thence by the Interpretation of the Church. Nay, so opposite is he to the
Opinion and Pretenses of this Man, that he declares in this very place, which
our good Author examined; but amidst all his sincerity, overlooked this
passage, as not much for his purpose; That if any one should confess the real
Presence of Christ's Body, and Absence of the Bread, and yet deny the true
CONVERSION of the one into the other, he would fall into HEREST; forasmuch as
the Church has defined, not only the two former, but also the third
likewise.But,

4thly, The Prevarication of our Author in the next Citation is yet more
unpardonable. I affirmed, That Cardinal Cajetan acknowledged, that had not the
Church declared her self for the proper Sense of the Words, the Vind. p. 86.
other might with as good reason have been received. This he says, is false;
for that Cajetan says no such thing; nay, rather the contrary, as will appear
to any one who reads that Article: And then with wonderful assurance, begins a
rabble of Citations nothing to the purpose, in the very next Words to those in
which mine end.

For the better clearing of this Doctrine, says Cajetan in 3. D. Th. q. 75.
art. 1. p. 130. Col. 1. In comment. circa praesentis and sequentium Articulorum
Doctrinam, pro claritate and ampliori intellectu difficultatum, sciendum est ex
Autoritate S. Scripturae de Existentia Corporis Christi in Sacramento
Eucharistiae, nihil aliud haberi express, nisi verbum Salvatoris dicentis, Hoc
est Corpus meum: Oportet enim Verba haec vera esse. Et quoniam verba sacrae
Scripturae, exponuntur dupliciter, vel Proprie vel Metaphorice; Primus Error
circa hoc fuit Interpretantium haec Domini Verba Metaphorice; quem magister
Sent. l. 4. d. 10. Tractat. Qui and hoc Articulo reprobatur. Et consistit VIS
Reprobationis in HOC, Quod verba Domini intellecta sunt ab ECCLESIA Proprie,
and PROPTEREA oportet illa verificari proprie Habemus igitur ex veritate
verborum Domini in sensu proprio, etc. Cited by the Vindicator.
Cajetan, we must know, That as to the Existence of Christ's Body in the
Eucharist, there is nothing to be had expressly from the Authority of the holy
Scripture, but the words of our Savior, saying, This is my Body. For it must
needs be that these words are true; and because the Words of Scripture may be
expounded two ways, either Properly, or Metaphorically; the first Error was of
those who interpret these words Metaphorically, which is rejected in this
Article. And the force of the Rejection consists in this, That the words of our
Savior have been understood in their proper Sense by the Church, and therefore
must be properly true.

This the Vindicator was pleased to pass by, though the very next words to those
he cites: Nay, to say, That Cajetan had no such thing in that Article; and
appeal to any that should read it, for the truth of it. Should a Protestant
have done this, he would, I believe, have found out a great many hard Names for
him, to testify his Zeal against Falsehood and Unsincerity, and show what a
kind of Religion that must be, that is not Vind. p. 222.
maintainable without such sinister doings: But I shall remit him wholly to the
Reader's Censure, and his own Conscience for Correction.

As for my last Assertion, That Transubstantiation Vindic. p. 88.
was no matter of Faith, till the Council of Lateran, 1200 years after Christ:
They are the very words of Scotus cited by Bellarmine, and all his Sophistry
will See p. 64.
not be able to prove that they make but little for my purpose.

Thus, notwithstanding all the little Endeavors of the Vindicator, to evade
the truth of those Concessions made by the greatest of his own Communion in
favor of our Doctrine, my Argument still stands good against them; and
Transubstantiation appears to have been the monstrous Birth of these last Ages,
unknown in the Church for almost 1200 years. For what remains Vind. p. 92, 93.
concerning the Adoration of the Host, since he has thought fit to leave my
Arguments in their full force; I shall not need say any thing in defense of
that, which he has not so much as attempted to destroy.

ARTICLE XIX. Of the Sacrifice of the Mass.
IF I affirmed, The Sacrifice of the Mass to be one of those Errors that most
offends us; I said no more Vindic. p. 94.
than what the Church of England has always thought of it: And had the
Vindicator pleased to have examined my Arguments, instead of admiring them, he
would perhaps have found I had reason to do so.

Canon. 1. Siquis dixerit in Missa non offerri Deo verum and proprium
Sacrificium, aut quod offerri non sit aliud, quam nobis Christum ad manducandum
dari, Anathema sit.
Canon. 3. Siquis dixerit Missae Sacrificium tantum esse laudis and gratiarum
actionis, aut nudam commemorationem Sacrificii in Cruce peracti, non autem
Propitiatorium, vel soliprodesse sumenti, neque pro Vivis and Defunctis, pro
peccatis, poenis, satisfactionibus, and aliis necessitatibus offerri debere,
Anathema sit.
The Council of Trent affirms, That the Mass is Council. Trid. Sess. 22. p. 196.
de Missa.
a true and proper Sacrifice offered to God, a Sacrifice not only of Praise and
Thanksgiving, nor yet a bare Commemoration of the Sacrifice offered on the
Cross, but truly Propitiatory for the Dead and the Living, and for the Sins,
Punishments, Satisfactions, and other Necessities of both of them. Ibid. Cap.
2. p. 191. Una eademque est Hostia, idem nunc offerens Sacerdotum Ministerio
qui seipsum tunc in cruce obtulit, sola offerendi ratione diversa.
A Sacrifice wherein the same Christ is now offered without Blood, that once
offered himself in that bloody Sacrifice of the Cross, the same Sacrifice, the
same Offerer; Christ by his Priests now, who then did it by himself, offering
himself, only differing in the manner of Oblation.

This is in short, what their Council has defined as to this Mass-Sacrifice,
and what we think we have good reason to be offended at. That there should be
any true and proper Sacrifice, truly and properly Propitiatory, after that of
the Cross; that Christ who once offered up himself upon the Tree for us, should
again be brought down every day from Heaven, to be Sacrificed a new in ten
thousand places at a time on their Altars: And by all these things so great a
dishonor done to our Blessed Lord, as most evidently there is, and our Writers
have unanswerably proved, in the whole design, Practice, and Pretenses of it.

How little the Doctrine of the real Presence, as understood Vindicat. ib.
by the Church of England, will serve to support this Innovation, is at first
sight evident from the Exposition I before gave of it. That those who are
ordained Priests, ought to have power given them to Consecrate the Sacrament of
the Body and Blood of Christ, and make them present in that holy Eucharist,
after such a manner as our Savior appointed, and as at the first Institution
of this Sacred Mystery they certainly were, this we have always confessed; and
our In the ordering of Priests, when the Bishop imposes his hands, be bids him
be a faithful Dispenser of the Word of God, and of his Holy Sacraments: And
again, when he delivers him the Bible, Take thou Authority to Preach the Word
of God, and to minister the Holy Sacraments, etc. Sparrow Collect. p. 158.
Rituals show that our Priests accordingly have such a Power, by Imposition of
Hands, conferred on them. But that it is necessary to the Evangelical
Priesthood, that they should have power to offer up Christ truly and properly,
as the Council of Trent defines, this we deny; and shall have reason to do so,
till it can be proved to us, that their Mass is indeed such a Sacrifice as they
pretend, and that our Savior left it as an Essential part of their Priesthood
to offer it.

For the rest, If with the Council of Trent, he indeed Vindic. p. 95.
believes the Mass to be a true and proper Sacrifice, he ought not to blame us
for taking it in that Sense in which they themselves understand it: For
certainly, it is impossible for words to represent a Sacrifice more strictly
and properly, than the Council of Trent has defined this.

ARTICLE XX. Of the Epistle to the Hebrews.
TO elude the authority of this Epistle, the Vindicator, after Monsieur de
Meaux, thinks it sufficient Vindicat. p. 96, 97.
to tell us, That they understand the word Offer when they apply it to the
Mass, in a larger signification than what the Apostle there gives it; as Mr. de
M's Expos. p. 31.
when we are said to offer up to God whatever we present before him: And that
it is thus they pretend to offer up the Blessed JESUS to his Father in the Mass,
in which he vouchsafes to render himself Vind. p. 96.
present before him.

That this is to prevaricate the true meaning of that phrase, the Doctrine of
the foregoing Article plainly shows. If Christ be in the Mass a true and proper
sacrifice, as was there said, it will necessarily follow that then he must be
truly and properly sacrificed: Sacrificium verum and reale, veram and realem
Occisionem exigit, quando in Occisione ponitur Essentia Sacrificii. Bellarm. de
Miss. l. 1. cap. 27. p. 1663. A.
And one essential Propriety, and which they tell us distinguishes a Sacrifice
from any other Offering, being the true and real destruction of what is
offered; insomuch that where there is not a true and proper destruction,
neither can there be, as they themselves acknowledge, a true and proper
Sacrifice: It must be evidently false in these men to pretend, that by Offering
in this matter is meant only a presenting of Christ before God, and not a real
change and destruction of his Body offered by them.

If in this Exposition of their Doctrine we do indeed misunderstand the meaning
of it, we must at least profess it to be so far from any wilful mistake, that
we do no more than what their greatest men have done before us: And indeed it
still seems most reasonable to us, that either this Sacrifice is no true and
proper Sacrifice, as they say it is; or it is truly and properly offered, as we
affirm they understand it to be.

ARTICLE XXI. Reflections upon the foregoing Doctrine.
IF my Reflections in this Article be but as good, as Vindicat. p. 97.
my Exceptions in the foregoing have been just, against their Doctrine; what
the Vindicator has said to these here, will I believe be found as little to the
purpose, as what he endeavored to reply to those before.

Though Christ be acknowledged to be really present after a Divine and Heavenly
manner in this Holy Eucharist, yet will not this warrant the Adoration of the
Host, which is still nevertheless only Bread and Wine, from being what our
Church censures it, Idolatry to be abhorred of all faithful Christians; nor
will such a Rubric about kneeling at the end of the Communion.
real presenting of our Blessed Lord to his Father, to render him propitious to
us, make the Eucharist any more than a metaphorical, not a true and proper
propitiatory Sacrifice.

If these men please to fix upon us any other notion of the real presence than
what has been said, and which alone our Church allows of; we are neither
concerned in the Doctrine, nor shall we think our selves at all obliged to
answer for those consequences they may possibly draw from it.

ARTICLE XXII. Communion under both Species.
TO prove the lawfulness of their denying the Cup Vindicat. p. 98.
to the Laity, the Vindicator advances three Arguments from the public Acts of
our own Church: The 1st. false; The 2d. both false and unreasonable: The 3d.
nothing to the purpose.

1st. He says, the Church of England allows the Communion to be given under one
species in case of Necessity: Art. 30. This is FALSE: The Article establishes
both Kinds; and speaks nothing at all of any Case of Necessity, or what may, or
may not be done on that account. The Cup of the Lord is not to be See Art. 30.
Sparrow' s Collect. page 102, and 219.
denied to the Lay People, for both the parts of the Lords Sacrament, by
Christ's Ordinance and Commandment, ought to be administered to all Christian
men alike.

2dly. Edward the sixth, he says, in his Proclamation before the order of
Communion, ordains, That the Sacrament of the Body and Blood of our Savior
Jesus Christ, should from thenceforth be commonly delivered and administered
unto all Persons within our Realms of England and Ireland, and other our
Dominions, under both kinds, That is to say of Bread and Wine, except necessity
otherwise require.

This, as it is thus alleged by the Vindicator, is both False and
Unreasonable: FALSE, for that Edward the 6th in that Proclamation does not
ordain any such thing, but only says, That Forasmuch as in his See Sparrow' s
Collect. p. 17.
High Court of Parliament lately holden at Westminster this was ordained, viz.
That the most blessed Body and Blood of our Savior Christ, should from
thenceforth be commonly Administered to all persons under both kinds, etc.He for
the greater Decency, and Uniformity of this Sacred Eucharist, now thought fit
to appoint the following Form and Order for the Administration of it.

Note, That this order of Communion was the first thing of this kind that was
done after the Reformation; The Mass was yet left remaining; and Edward the 6th
afterward published two other Books, in which were considerable Alterations,
and where there is no mention of any thing of this kind.
It is in the next place UNREASONABLE, to argue as to the present state of the
Church of England, from what was allowed only, and that in case of necessity
too, in the very first beginning of the Reformation.

It was indeed the singular Providence of God, That in the 2d year of that
Excellent Prince, things were so far Reformed from those long and inveterate
Errors, in which the Ignorance and Superstition of Several Ages had involved
the Church, That they had allowed, nay, commanded the Holy Sacrament to be
given under both kinds, when for so many years it had been received only under
one. But that laboring still under their former prejudices, they should in
case of Necessity permit that, which had been the universal practice of the
Church, without any necessity at all before; this is neither to be admired in
them then, nor is it reasonable to urge it against us now.

His 3d Argument is not only Unreasonable upon the account we have now said;
but were it never so proper, is absolutely nothing to the purpose. In the
Rubric, at the end of the same Order of the Communion, there is this Remark:

Note that the Bread that shall be consecrated, shall be such as heretofore
has been accustomed; Sparrow' s Collect. p. 24.
and every of the said consecrated Breads shall be broken in two pieces at the
least, or more by the discretion of the Minister, and so distributed. And men
must not think less to be received in part than in the whole, but in each of
them the whole Body of our Savior Jesus Christ.

The meaning of which Rubric is very plain; That whereas the people who had
hitherto been accustomed to receive the Wafer entire, were now to have but a
part of it given to them; to prevent any mis-conceits upon that account, as if
because they did not receive the whole Wafer as they were wont to do, they did
not receive the whole Body, i. e. the Flesh of Christ, (for as to the Blood,
that they received afterward in the Cup:) It was thought fit for the
prevention of this scruple, to tell them, That they must not think less to be
received in part than in the whole, but in each of them the whole Body of Jesus
Christ; which what it makes for their denial of the Cup to the Laity, I cannot
very well apprehend.

And now how well this Author has proved it to be the Doctrine of the Church of
England, to dispense with the Cup in the Holy Eucharist, in case of necessity,
I shall leave it to any indifferent person to judge. Though after all, did we
indeed, as some others do, believe that the Church had power to do this; How
will this excuse them, who without any necessary or but reasonable cause deny
it to the people altogether; and damn all those that will not believe they had
not Council. Trid. Sess. 21. Can. 1, 2.
only power, but just cause and reason so to do? And why will it not as well
follow, that they may take away if they please the whole Sacrament from them,
and Damn all those that will not believe that they had just cause and power to
do this too; since even that in Case of Necessity may be dispensed with; and
whilst there is no neglect or contempt of it, prove neither damnable nor
dangerous?

PART III.
ARTICLE XXIII. Of the Written and Unwritten Word.
AS to this Article, there is indeed an Agreement between Monsieur de Meaux and
Me, Vindic. p. 100.
so far as We handle the Question, and keep to those general terms, Of the
Traditions being universally received by all Churches, and in all Ages; for in
this Case We of the Church of England are perfectly of the same Opinion with
them, and ready to receive whatever we are thus assured to have come from the
Apostles, with a like Veneration to that we pay to the written Word it self.
But, after all this, there is, as the Vindicator observes, a very material
difference betwixt us, viz. Who shall be judge when this Tradition is Universal?

He tells us, they rely upon the judgment of the present Vind. ibid.
Church of every Age, declaring her sense, whether by the most General Council
of that Age, or by the constant practice, and uniform voice of her Pastors and
People. And this is that to which he conceives every private person and Church
ought to submit, without presuming to examine how ancient that Tradition does
appear to be, or how agreeable it is to the Written Word of God.

Now here we must own a dissent as to this method of judging of Traditions, for
these two reasons:

1. Because whether there were any such particular Doctrine or Practice
received by the Primitive Church, is a matter of fact, and as such is in many
cases distinctly set down by such Writers as lived in or near that first Age of
the Church. Now where the case is thus, the Accounts that are given by these
Writers, are certainly to those who are able to search into them, a better Rule
whereby to judge what was an Ancient Doctrine and Tradition, than either the
Decree of a Council of a latter Age, or the Voice and Practice of its Pastors
and People. For let these agree as much as they will in voting any Doctrine or
Practice to have been Primitive, yet they can never make it pass for such among
wise and knowing Men, if the authentic Histories and Records of those times
show it to have been otherwise. And this being plainly the case as to several
instances decreed by the Councils, and practiced by the Pastors and People in
the Roman Church; we cannot look upon her late Decrees and Practices to be a
good or a safe Rule for judging of the Antiquity, or Universality of
Church-Traditions. But

2. There is yet a more cogent Reason against this Method, which is, that it is
apt to set up Tradition in competition with the Scriptures, and to give this
Unwritten Word the upper hand of the Written.

For, according to this Method, if the Church in any Age, does but decree in
Council, or does generally Teach and Practice any thing as an ancient
Tradition, then this must obtain and be of force with all its Members, though
many of them should be persuaded that they cannot find it in, nay, that it is
contrary to the Written Word of God.

Now this we cannot but look upon as an high affront to the Holy Scriptures:
And let them attribute as much as they please to the Decrees and Practices of
their Church, We cannot allow that any particular Church or Person, should be
obliged upon these grounds to receive that as a matter of Faith or Doctrine,
which upon a diligent and impartial search appears to them not to be contained
in, nay, to be contrary to the written Word of God. In this Case we think it
reasonable that the Church's Sentence should be made void; and the Voice of her
pretended Traditions be silenced by that more powerful one of (...) lively
Oracles of God.

ARTICLE XXIV, XXV. Of the Authority of the Church.
IN the two next Articles, concerning the Authority Vind. p. 101:
of the Church, I was willing to allow as much, and come up as near to Mons. de
Meaux, as Truth and Reason would permit. This it seems made the Vindicator to
conceive some great hopes from my Concessions. But these his hopes are soon
dashed, when he finds me putting in some Exceptions, and not willing to swallow
the whole Doctrine, as it is laid down in the Exposition.

Now the Exceptions that seem most to offend him, are these,

1. That the Church of Rome should be taken for a particular, and not the
Catholic Church.

2. That She should be supposed as such, either by Error to have lost, or by
other means to have prevaricated the Faith, even in the necessary points of it.

3. That any other Church should be allowed to examine and judge of the
Decisions of that Church.

4. That it should be left to private or individual Persons to examine and
oppose the Decisions of the whole Church, if they are evidently convinced that
their private belief is founded upon the Authority of God's Holy Word.

These are the Exceptions, at which he is the most offended: The 1. of these,
he calls an Argument to Vind. p. 103.
elude the Authority of the Church of Rome; and to show the Fallacy of it, he
thinks it sufficient to say, That they do not take the Church of Rome, as it is
the Suburbican Diocese, to be the Catholic Church, but all the Christian
Churches in Communion with the Bishop of Rome. Now if this, in truth, be that
which they mean, when they style the Church of Rome the Catholic Church, then
surely every other National Church which is of that Communion, has as good a
title to the name of Catholic, as that of Rome it self. For seeing it is the
Purity or Orthodoxness of the Faith, which is the bond of this Communion, this
renders every distinct Church professing this Faith, equally Catholic with the
rest; and reduces the Church of Rome, as well as others, within its own
Suburbican Diocese, and so makes it only a particular, not the Universal Church.

But now, should we allow the Church of Rome as great an extent as the
Vindicator speaks of, and that it were proper to understand by that name, all
those other Churches which are in Communion with her; yet all this would not
make her the whole or Catholic Church, unless it could be proved, that there
was no other Christian Church in the World besides those in Communion with her;
and that all Christian Churches have in all Ages professed just the same Faith,
and continued just in the same Worship as She has done. And this we conceive
will not easily be made out with reference to the Grecian, Armenian, Abassine
Churches; all which have plainly for several Ages differed from the Church of
Rome, and those in her Communion, in points relating both to Faith and Worship:
So that in respect of these and the like Christian Churches, which were not of
her Communion, She could not be looked upon as a Universal, but only as a
Particular Church.

Now if this be so, then the Vindicator himself allows, Vind. p. 102
2dly, That a Particular Church, may either by Error lose, or by other means
prevaricate the Faith, even in the necessary points of it. Indeed that promise
of our Savior, That the gates of Hell should not prevail against Matt. 16. 18.
his Church; seems on all hands acknowledged, to refer to his whole Church, not
to any one particular Branch or Portion. And therefore, though the particular
Church of Rome should have fallen into gross Errors both in matters of Faith
and Practice; yet the Catholic Church of Christ may still, as to other of its
members, retain so much Truth and Purity, as to keep it from falling away, or
being guilty of an entire Infidelity. And then for the

3d. Exception, The allowing any other Particular Church to examine and judge of
the Decisions of this Church of Rome: If She her self be but a particular
Church, and has no more Command or Jurisdiction over the Faith of other
Churches, than they have over hers; then every other National Church is as much
impow'red to judge for her self, as She is, and has an equal right to examine
her Decisions, as those of other Churches; and may either receive, or reject
what by Gods Grace directing her, She Judges to agree or disagree with his Holy
Word. Nor does one Branch of Christ's Church in this respect invade the
Prerogative of another; since they do herein only follow the Apostles Rule, in
trying all things, and holding fast that which is good.

But the 4th Exception, he says, is yet more intolerable than all the rest:
That it should be left to every Vind. p. 102.
individual Person, not only to examine the Decisions of the whole Church, but
also to glory in opposing them, if he be but evidently convinced that his own
belief is founded upon the undoubted Authority of God's Holy Word. This, Ibid.
p. 103.
he says, is a Doctrine, which if admitted, will maintain all Dissenters that
are, or can be from a Church, and establish as many Religions as there are
Persons in the World.

These indeed, are very ill Consequences, but such as do not directly follow
from this Doctrine as laid down in my Exposition. For 1st, I allow of this
Dissent or Opposition, only in necessary Articles of Faith, where it is every
Man's concern and duty, both to judge for himself, and to make as sound and
sincere a Judgment as he is able: And 2dly, As I take the Holy Scriptures for
the Rule, according to which this Judgment is to be made, so do I suppose these
Scriptures to be so clearly written, as to what concerns those necessary
Articles, that it can hardly happen that any one man, any serious and impartial
Enquirer, should be found opposite to the whole Church in his Opinion.

Now these two things being supposed, that in matters of Faith, a man is to
judge for himself, and that the Scriptures are a clear and sufficient rule for
him to judge by; it will plainly follow, That if a man be evidently convinced,
upon the best Enquiry he can make, that his particular Belief is founded upon
the Word of God, and that of the Church is not; he is obliged to support and
adhere to his own belief in Opposition to that of the Church. And the Reason of
this must be very evident to all those who own, not the Church, but the
Scriptures, to be the ultimate rule and guide of their Faith. For if this be
so, then individual Persons, as well as Churches, must judge of their Faith,
according to what they find in Scripture. And tho it be highly useful to them,
to be assisted in the making of this Judgment by that Church, of which they are
Members; yet, if after this Instruction, they are still evidently convinced
that there is a disagreement in any necessary point of Faith, between the Voice
of the Church and that of the Scripture, they must stick to the latter rather
than the former, they must follow the superior, not inferior Guide.

And however this method may through the Ignorance or Malice of some men, be
liable to some Abuse; yet certainly, in the main, it is most Just and
Reasonable, and most agreeable to the Constitutions of the Church of England,
which does not take upon her to be Absolute Mistress of the Faith of her
Members, but allows See Article 20.
a higher Place and Authority to the guidance of the Holy Scripture, than to
that of her own Decisions.

As to the Authority, by which I backed this Assertion, viz. that of St.
Athanasius, though it is not doubted but that that Expression, of his being
against the whole World, and the whole World against him, did refer chiefly to
the Eastern Bishops; and was not so literally true as to those of the West;
yet, if we consider what compliances there were even of the Western Bishops, at
Ariminum and Sirmium, and how Pope Liberius himself, though he refused to
subscribe the form of Faith, sent to him from Ariminum, and was for that reason
deposed from his Bishopric, and banished out of Italy; yet afterward, when
the Emperor Constantius sent for him to Sirmium, and required his assent to a
form of Faith, in which the word (...), was purposely omitted, he Sozomen Eccl.
Hist. lib. 4. cap. 15.
yielded thus far, and was thereupon restored to his Bishopric; I say, if we
consider these and the like Particulars related by the Church Historians, we
shall have little reason to believe that the Western Bishops, or even the Pope
himself, did thoroughly adhere to the Faith of St. Athanasius; and therefore,
that neither was He or I much in the wrong, in affirming, That he stood up in
defense of Christ's Divinity, when the Pope, the Councils, and almost the whole
Church fell away.

ARTICLE XXVI. Of the Authority of the Holy See, and of Episcopacy.
IN this Article the Vindicator is pleased to declare Vindic. p. 106.
that he has nothing to say against the Opinion of the Church of England; only
he thinks fit to advise me to enquire, What that Authority is which the Ancient
Councils of the Primitive Church have acknowledged, and the holy Fathers have
always taught the faithful to give the Pope. Indeed, a very little inquiry will
serve the turn to let a man see, that their Pope does at this day, lay claim to
a great deal more than those Councils or Fathers did ever allow him. And we
should be glad he would direct us to those places, either in the first Councils
or the Primitive Fathers, where the Pope is styled the Universal Bishop, or the
Supreme Head on Earth of the whole Christian Church; where it is said, That he
is Christ's immediate Vicar; and that all other Bishops must derive their
Authority from him. These are things which he does now pretend to, but we can
find no Footsteps of them in the first Councils or Fathers of the Church. On
the contrary, we find innumerable passages which plainly show, that no such
Title or Authority was anciently claimed by, or allowed to the Bishop of Rome:
And therefore we say, That these new and groundless pretenses must be laid
aside, before we can be content to yield him that Honor, which has been
sometimes given to his Predecessors.

As to that new Question he has hookt in at the end of this Article, Whether
the first four General Councils Vindic. p. 106.
might not be termed neither General nor Free, with as much reason as the
Council of Trent; I suppose it may easily be answered in the Negative.

1st, It was not so General, because it was not called by so great and just an
Authority as those were: That was an Authority to which Christians of all
Places, and all Ranks, acknowledged themselves bound to submit, and attend
where they were summoned by it; whereas this was a mere Usurpation, and being
so, was not regarded by a great part of the Christian World, who were sensible
that they owed no Subjection to it.

2dly, It was not so Free, because those who had most to say in defense of the
Truth, durst not appear at Trent, being sufficiently forewarned by what others
had lately suffered in a like case at Constance: Add to this, That those who
being present, did set themselves most to oppose Error and Corruption, were
perpetually run down, and outvoted by Shoals of new made Bishops, sent out of
Italy for that purpose. So that such a Council as this, could not with any show
of Reason be termed, either Free or General, much less ought it to be compared
with those first four Councils, which were in all these Respects most opposite
to it.

CLOSE XXVII.
AND now, that I have gone through the several Vindic. p. 106.
Articles of the Vindication, and found the Pretensions of this Author against
me as false, as I think I have shown his Arguments to have been frivolous; what
shall I say more? Shall I complain of his Injuries, or rather shall I yet again
beseech him to consider the little grounds he had for them; and see whether he
has been able in any one Instance, to make good that infamous Character, which
he has told the World, I have deserved in almost every Article of my
Expoposition.

Have I Calumniated them in any thing? Have I Misrepresented their Doctrines? I
have already said, I do not know that I have; I think I may now add, I have
made it appear that I have not.

Where are the Unsincere dealings, the Falsifications, the Authors Miscited, or
Misapplied? Excepting only an Error or two, that is the most, of the Press; has
he given any one Example of this? Some words now and then I omitted, because I
thought them impertinent, and was unwilling to burden a short Treatise with
tedious Citations. And I am still persuaded that they were not material, and
that he might as well have found fault with me for not Transcribing the whole
Books, from whence they were produced, as for leaving out those Passages which
he pretends ought to have been inserted. And for this, I appeal to the
foregoing Articles to be my Vindication.

But our Author has well observed That nothing Vind. p. 120.
can be so clearly expressed, or so firmly established, let me add, or so
kindly and charitably performed, but that a person who intends to cavil, may
either form a seeming Objection against it, or wrest it into a different sense.

I never had the vanity to fancy my Exposition to be Infiallible, or that the
sight of an Imprimatur should make me pass for an Oracle. But yet I was willing
to hope, that amidst the late pretenses to Moderation, such a peaceable
Exposition of the Doctrine of the Church of England might at least have been
received with the same civility by them, as that of the Church of Rome was by
us; and that our new Methodists had not so wholly studied the palliating part
of their Master, as not to have learnt something of his fairness and civility
also.

This I had so much the greater reason to expect, for that it has been esteemed
not the least part of the artifice of Monsieur de Meaux, not only to mollify
the Errors of his Church; but to moderate that passion and heat that for the
most part occurs in the defenders of it: And by the temper and candidness of
his Style, insinuate into his Reader a good Opinion of his Doctrine.

But this is an Artifice that our late Controvertists seem resolved we shall
have no great cause to apprehend. Who therefore have not only wholly laid aside
the Moderation of this Prelate; but have in some of their last Pieces fallen
into such a vein of lightness and scurrility, as if their Zeal for their Church
had made them forget that Religion is the Subject, and Christians and Scholars,
to say no more of them, their Antagonists.

I am ashamed to say, what mean Reflections, and trivial Jestings make up
almost the sum of their latest attempts. The Papist Represented, which seemed
to promise something of seriousness and moderation, expiring in a FANATIC
Sermon; done indeed so naturally, as if the once Protestant Author had dropped
not out of the Church of England; but a Conventicle into Popery. His late
Majesty's Papers Answered with Reason, and (whatever is pretended) with respect
too by Us; instead of being Vindicated, ridiculed in the Reply: In which it is
hard to say, whether the Author has least shown his charity to us, or his
respect to the Persons and Church that he defends. These are the new Methods
that are now taken up; but sure such as neither Church I suppose will be very
well satisfied with: And which seem more accommodated to the Genius of those
Skeptics who divert themselves at the expense of All Religion on both sides,
than designed to satisfy the sober and conscientious of either.

It is not improbable but that some such ingenious Piece may in a little time
come forth against what I have now published; to call me a few ill names, pass
a droll or two upon the Cause, tell the World how many Sheets there were in my
Defense, and put the curious to another Shilling expense, as a late Author has
Amicable Accommodation.
very gravely observed. If this be the Case, I hope I shall need no Apology to
men of sense and sobriety, if I here end both their trouble and my own
together. Let those who have been always used to it, rally on still with Holy
things if they think good; for my part I esteem the Salvation of men's Souls,
and the Truth of Religion, to be a more serious Subject than to be exposed to
the levity of a Jest, and made the subject of a Controversial Lampoon. And if
an account shall hereafter be given for every idle word that we now speak, I
profess I cannot but tremble to think what shall be the judgment of those men,
who in the midst of such unhappy differences as the Church now labors under;
whilst our common Mother lies almost dissolved in tears for the divisions of
her Children, and her dutiful Sons on both sides are praying and endeavoring
with all their industry to close them; like an unnatural offspring, divert
themselves in the quarrel, find a harmony in her groans, and make a droll of
that, which had they indeed any true zeal for Religion, they ought to wish
rather they could with their dearest Blood be so happy as to redress.

For what remains of the Vindication, I shall say but Vindicat. p. 106, 107.
very little to it. He enters upon his Conclusion with a tragical harangue of
the hardships they have suffered, both by, and ever since our Reformation; and
how well we deserve their Excommunication upon that account. And it is no hard
matter when men so well disposed, as this Author seems to be, to speak evil of
us, are to draw our Character, to make it appear as odious and deformed as they
desire.

Were I minded to recriminate, I need not tell those who are but very little
acquainted with the true History of these things, what a fair field I should
have for a requital. The corruptions of the Church when this Reformation begun;
the unchristian lives of those Religious Inhabitants that, he says, were turned
by us into the wide world; the Cheats and Ignorance of the Clergy; the Tricks
and Artifices of their Popes to prevent that Reformation, which many of their
own Party, no less than the Protestants, desired both in the Head and the
Members; And since he mentions Cruelties, the barbarous Butcheries executed on
the Reformed in Savoy, Bohemia, Germany, Ireland; and to say no more, the
proceedings at this day in one of our Neighbor Countries, whereof we have been
our selves Eyewitnesses, and of which, the noble Charity of our Royal
Sovereign toward these poor distressed Christians, See the words of His
Majesty's Brief.
notwithstanding all the vain endeavors of some to hide it, suffers no honest
Englishman now to doubt; All these would furnish out matter enough for a Reply,
and satisfy the World, that were the Reformed as bad as Hell it self could
represent them, the Romanists yet would of all men living have the least cause
to complain of them.

But I desire not to heighten those Animosities, which I so heartily wish were
closed; and would rather such things as these might on all hands be buried in
eternal oblivion, than brought forth to prevent that Union, we had never more
cause to hope for than at this time. And for our Laws which, he says, have been
made against them, he knows well enough what occasion was given to Queen
Elizabeth and King James the 1st to establish them; and I shall rather refer
him to the Sea that and a Vindication of it by the Secular Priests An. 1601.
published with some other pieces in a Collection called, The Jesuits Loyalty.
4to.
Answer which my Lord Burleigh made above 100 years since to this complaint,
than take the opportunity, he has so fairly given me, to revive the Reasons.

As for those injuries he tells us that Perjury and Faction Vindicat. p. 111.
loaded them with; we are not concerned in them. It is well known that the
Church of England was no less, if not more, struck at in those times than
themselves: If their present change of fortune makes them indeed neither
remember those injuries, nor desire to revenge them, it shows only that the
favor of Providence has not made them forgetful of their duty; nor their
present prosperity unmindful of their future Interest. This is not our concern,
who have never that we know of injured them, unless to take all fair and lawful
ways to defend our Religion as by Law established, may possibly, in some men's
apprehensions, be esteemed an injury.

The peace and liberty which we enjoy, we do not ascribe to their Civility; it
is Gods Providence and our Sovereign's bounty, whom the Church of England has
ever so Loyally served; whose Rights She asserted in the worst of times, when
to use our Authors own words, Perjury and Faction for this very cause, loaded
her with all the injuries Hell it self could invent. But we gloried to suffer
for our duty to Him then, and shall not fail, should there ever be occasion, to
do it again. And we have this testimony from our King, which no time or malice
shall be able to obliterate, That the Church of England is by principle a
Friend to Monarchy, and I think cannot be charged to have ever been defective
in any thing that might serve to strengthen and support it.

For what remains with reference to the Points in Controversy, the foregoing
Articles are but one continued confutation of his vain pretenses: And I shall
only add this more to them, that whenever he will undertake to make good any
one thing that he has advanced against us, either in his Book or Conclusion; I
will not fail to prove what I now affirm, That there is not a word of truth in
either of them.

In the mean time, before I close this, I cannot but take notice, how much the
state of our controversy with these men has of late been changed; and what
hopes we are willing to conceive from thence, as to the sober part of their
Communion, that those Errors shall in time be reformed, which they already seem
not only to have discovered, but to be ashamed of.

When our Fathers disputed against Popery, the Question then was, Whether it
were lawful to Worship Images; to Invocate Saints; to Adore Relics; to depend
upon our own Merits for Salvation; and satisfy for the pain of our own Sins.
This was their task; and they abundantly discharged it, in proving these things
to be unlawful, contrary to our duty toward God, and to the Authority of Holy
Scripture.

But now in these our days, there is started up a new Generation of men, too
wise to be imposed upon with those illusions, that in blind and barbarous Ages
had led the Church into so much Error and Superstition. These see too clearly,
that such things as these must, if possible, be denied, for that they cannot be
maintained. And they have accordingly undertaken it as the easier task, by
subtle distinctions, and palliating expressions, to wrest the definitions of
their Councils to such a sense as may serve the best to protect them from these
Errors; rather than to go on in vain with their Predecessors, to draw the
Scripture and Fathers into the Party to defend them.

And that it may not be said I speak this at all adventures, I will beg leave
in a short recapitulation of what is largely proved in the foregoing Articles,
to offer a general view of it.

Of Religious Worship.
Old Popery.
IT IS a wicked and foolish Error of the Lutherans and Calvinists, to attribute
Impius and Imperitus Lutheranorum and Calvinistarum Error est, nullum nisi Deo
Religionis honorem tribuentium. Maldonat in Matt. 5. 34. page 126. B. Index
Expurgat. in Athanas. Adorari solius Dei est; Creatura nulla Adoranda est.
Dele. page 52.
Religious honor ONLY to God. And therefore such Sentences as these, That God
only is to be adored: That no creature is to be adored, must be put into the
Index Expurgatorius, to be blotted out of S. Athanasius and other Authors in
which they do occurr.

New Popery.
REligious honor or worship if taken strictly and properly is due only to God:
Soli Deo honor and gloria. We ought not to deprive God of any thing that is due
to him alone; neither honor, nor worship, nor prayer, nor thanksgiving, nor
sacrifice. We may honor those whom God has honored; but so as not to elevate
them above the state of creatures. And this may be called a Religious love or
honor, when it is done for God's sake, yet it is but an Extrinsecal
Denomination from the cause and motive, not from the nature of the Act. Vind.
p. 27, 28.


Invocation of Saints.
Old Popery.
Speaking of S. Bernard, he concludes, C'est de cettegrande Verite qu'il
conclut que nous sommes obligez indispensablement de l'honorer and de la prier;
Quia sic est Voluntas dei, qui Totum nos habere voluit per Mariam. Il veut que
Nous ayons par Marie la Grace and la Gloire: And p. 33. Il veut que tous les
hommes soient sauvez par les merits du fills and par l' intercession de la
Mere; d' autant que Dieu a resolu de ne nous fair aucune Grace qui ne pass
par les maines de Marie. Comme on ne peut estre sauve sans Grace, il faut dire
qu'on ne le peut estre que par Marie, qui est le canal de toutes les Graces qui
descendent du Ciel en Terre.
IT is necessary to It is the intention of God that we should obtain both Grace
and Glory by her: That all men might be saved by the Merits of the Son, and the
Intercession of the Mother. * Crasset. p. 30, 31.


Mandat S. Synodus omnibus Episcopis, and caeteris docendi munus curamque
sustinentibus, ut -- de Sanctorum -- Invocatione fideles diligenter instruant;
Docentes eos, Sanctos una cum Christo Regnantes Orationes suas pro Hominibus
Deo offerre: Bonum atque Utile esse suppliciter eos invocare; and ob beneficia
impetranda a Deo per fi^ium ejus Jesum Christum, ad eorum Orationes, Opem,
Auxiliumque confugere. p. 291, 292.
The Curates therefore shall diligently instruct the people, That the Saints
who reign togegether with Christ, do offer to God their Prayers for Men: That
it is good in a suppliant manner to invocate them; and recur to their Prayers,
Help, and Assistance, for the obtaining Blessing of God by his Son. Council.
Trid. Self. 25. c. de Invocatione, etc. ss.


Upon this account in all their public service of the Church they address
their Prayers to them, after the same manner that they do to Christ, together
with whom, the Council says, They Reign in Heaven: So that if it is necessary to
go to Church, it is necessary to pray to them. They confess their Sins to them;
Ord. Commend. Animae. p. 120.
they dismiss departing Souls out of this World in their Names; they make
direct Addresses to them as the Council speaks, not only for their Prayers, but
also for their Help and Assistance; they desire for their Merits to be heard by
God; and that he would accept their Sacrifices themselves for the sake of the
Saints they Commemorate; as in the 3d Article of this Treatise is fully to be
seen.

New Popery.
FOr Invocation of Saints, lawful to pray to them; Vind. p. 30. That we do it
in the same spirit of Charity, and in the same order of brotherly society with
which we entreat our Friends on Earth to Pray for us. Monsieur de Meaux, p. 5.


If we mention their Merits, it is only those Victories they had obtained by his
favors, which we beseech him to look upon, and not regard our unworthiness.
Vind. ib.


As to the recommending Sacrifices to God by their Prayers, as if Christ who is
the Sacrifice, needed any other to recommend him to his Father, we detest such
Thoughts, we abominate such Doctrines. Vindicat. p. 30.


Worship of Images.
Old Popery.
THE Images of Imagines Christi and Sanctorum venerandae sunt non solum per
accidens vel improprie, sed etiam per se and proprie; Ita ut ipsae terminent
Venerationem ut in se considerantur, and non solum ut vicem gerunt Exemplaris.
Christ and the Saints, are to be venerated, not only by accident and
improperly, but properly and by themselves, so as to terminate the Worship upon
them, and that as considered in themselves, and upon their own account, not
only as they are the Representatives of the Original, Bellarm. de Imag. l. 2.
p. 2148.


Pont. Romans p. 205. See above, p. 15, 16, 17.
The Wood of the is to be Adored with Divine Adoration; and upon this account,
if the Popes Legate at any time conduct the Emperor into any City, his Cross
must take place of the Emperor's Sword; Because a Divine Worship is due to it,
Pontific. See above, art 4. p. 15.


Missal. Romans feria VI. in Parascev. p. 247.
This Adoration is as is evident, in that the Church invites the People on Good
Friday to Adore it; and in its Hymns distinguishes the Cross from Christ, and
addresses to the Cross, as such. See Article 4. above, ib.


Pontificale de Benedictione novae Crucis, p. 161.
The Church of Rome in praying to God, that several Virtues may proceed from
the Cross, show it to be their Opinion, that it has other Virtues, than barely
to excite the remembrance of those they represent. See above in the
Consecration of a new Cross. Art. 4. p. 16, 17.


New Popery.
THe use we make of Pictures or Images, is purely as representatives, or
memorative Signs, which call the Originals to our Remembrance. Vindicat. p. 35.


When the Church pays an Honor to the Image of an Apostle or Martyr, her
Image, as to honor the Apostle or Martyr in the presence of the Image. Expos.
M. de M. p. 8.


Nor do we attribute to any other Virtue, but that of exciting in us the
remembrance of those they represent. Id. p. 8. Vind. p. 31.


The Honor we render them, is grounded upon this, that the very seeing of
Jesus Christ crucified, cannot but excite in us a more lively Remembrance of
him, who died upon the Cross for our Redemption: Now whilst this Image before
our Eyes, causes this precious Remembrance in our Souls, we are naturally moved
to testify by some exterior Signs, how far our Gratitude bears us; which
exterior Signs are not paid to the Image, but to Jesus Christ represented by
that Image. Vindicat. ib. p. 31. Mons. de Meaux Expos. p. 8, 9.


Of Relics.
Old Popery.
Thom. 3. par. qu. 25. Art. 6. p. 54. See above p. 22, 23.
SEeing we Adore the Saints of God, we must also Adore their Relics. Thomas.


This is an undoubted truth amongst Catholics, That the Relics of the
Saints, whether they be any Vasquez in 3 part. D. Tho. disp. 112. p. 808.
parts of them, as Bones, Flesh, Ashes, or some other things that have touched
them, or belonged to them, are to be adored. Vasques, See above, Art. 4. p. 50.


New Popery.
WE honor Relics as we do Images, for those whom they belonged to. Vind. p.
40.


We will not quarrel Respect and Honor, p. 43. Vind.
but it is not Worship, Ib. p. 42.


We seek not to them Aid and Assistance, to cure the Blind, etc. and are
therefore falsely charged with so doing, Vind. p. 41.


Ita ut affirmantes Sanctorum Reliquiis Venerationem atque Honorem non deberi,
vel eas aliaque sacra Monumenta a fidelibus inutiliter honorari, atque eorum
opis impetrandae causa, Sanctorum memorias frustra frequentari, omnino damnandi
sunt, p. 292, 293.
Those are to be condemned, who affirm that no Worship or Honor is due to the
Relics of Saints; or that those sacred, Monuments are unprofitably revered or
that for obtaining their Help, men ought not to frequent the Memories of the
Saints. Council. Trid. Sess. 25. c. de Invocat. etc.


Of Justification.
Old Popery.
Conc. Trid. Sess. 6. Cap. 7. p. 31.
BY Justification is to be understood, not only Remission of Sins, but
Sanctification, and renewing of the inward Council. Trid.


If any one shall say that men are Justified, either by the alone Imputation of
Christ's Righteousness, or only by the Remission of Sins, excluding Grace and
Charity, which is diffused in our hearts by the Holy Ghost, and inheres in
them; or that the Grace by which we are Justified is only the Favor of God,
Let him be Anathema. Council. Trid. ib. See above, Art. 5. p. 53.


See above, Art. 5. p. 27.
If any one shall affirm the works of a justified man to be so the gifts of
God, that they are not also the good merits of the justified man himself; or
that he being justified by the good Works which are performed by him, through
the Grace of God, and Merit of Jesus Christ, whose living Member he is, does
not truly merit increase of Grace and Eternal Life; let him be Anathema. Conc.
Trid. Sess. 6. c. 32.


New Popery.
THey impose upon us who say that we make our inward righteousness a part of
Justification; Justification it self is also wrought by our good Works. Vind.
p. 47.


Of Merits.
Old Popery.
WE do as truly Maldonat. in Ezekiel. 18, 20. p. 425.
and properly, when we do well by Gods Grace merit Rewards, as we do deserve
Punishment, when without his Grace, we do ill. Maldonat.

The Works of just Persons, Bellarmin. de Justificatione lib. 5. cap. 17.
are truly equal to as the Work of those who labored in the Vineyard to the
penny which they earned: And God by his Covenant is bound to accept it for the
reward of Eternal Life. This is the Doctrine of the Council of Trent.
Bellarmin. see art. 6. above.


They, therefore, are to be condemned who think our Works of themselves, not to
be worthy of Eternal Vasquez in D. Th. 12ae. q. 114. disp. 214. p. 800.
Life, but to have the whole nature of Merit that is in them, from the Covenant
and Promise of God. This was the Opinion of Scotus, condemned above Art. 7. p.
31, 32.


Christ indeed, first obtained Grace for us, whereby we might be enabled to
work out our own Salvation; Vasquez ibid. p. 917. etc.
but this being done, we have no more need of Christ's Merits to supply our
defects: But our own good Works are of themselves sufficient to Salvation,
without any Imputation of his righteousness. Vasquez, See above l. c.


New Popery.
ETernal Life ought to Grace that is mercifully promised to them, by the
Medition of our Lord Jesus Christ; and a recompense that is faithfully rendered
to their good Works, and Merits, in Virtue of this Promise. Expos. M. de M. p.
11.


We ask all things, we hope all things, we render thanks for all things,
through our Lord Jesus Christ, we confess that we are not acceptable to God,
but in and by him. Ib. p. 12.


Of Satisfactions.
Old Popery.
TO this Question whether our Works are to be called truly and properly
Satisfactory? Bellarm. de Poenit. lib. 4. cap. 7.
Bellarmin replies, That they are; so that we may be said truly and properly to
satisfy the Lord. See above, Art. 7.


Bellarm. lib. 1. de Purgat. cap. 10.
It is immediately our Satisfaction, and Christ's only, in as much as we receive
Grace from him, whereby we our selves may be able to satisfy. Id. ib. Art. 7.


As to mortal Sins, Gods Grace being supposed to be Vasquez in 3 part disp. 2.
See above, Art. 7.
given to us in Christ, Vasquez declares, We do truly satisfy God for our Sins
and Offenses. As for venial Sins, we do so satisfy, as not to need any Grace
or Favor of God to forgive our Sins, or accept our Satisfaction; but our
Satisfaction is such, as does in its own nature blot out both the stain and
punishment of Sin. Vasquez above, l. c.


Quidam asserunt, Nos proprie non satisfacere, sed solum facere aliquid cujus
intuitu Deus applicat nobis Christi Satisfactionem: Quae sententia erronea mihi
videtur. Bellarm. de Purg. l. 1. c. 10. p. 1899. A. B.
There are some who say, That we do not properly satisfy, but do somewhat for
the sake of which God applies to us Christ's Satisfaction; This Opinion seems to
me to be Erroneous. Bellarm.

New Popery.
THey impose upon us, true and proper Satisfaction to God for Sin. Vindicat. p.
54, 55.


That which we call Satisfaction, but the Application of the infinite
Satisfaction of Jesus Christ. M. de M. Expos. p. 15.


Of Indulgences.
Old Popery.
THere being in all Sins a temporal Punishment Bellarm. de Indulgentiis lib. 1.
cap. 1. p. 3.
to be undergone after the Eternal, by the Sacrament of Penance, is remitted;
We call Indulgence the Remission of those Punishments that remain to be
undergone after the forgiveness of the Fault, and Reconciliation obtained by
the Sacrament of Penance.

The Foundation of these Indulgences, is the Treasure Ibid. cap. 2.
of the Church, consisting partly of the Merits of Christ, and partly of the
superabundant Sufferings of the Blessed Virgin and the Saints, who have
suffered more than their Sins required.

The Pastors of the Church have obtained from God Ibid. c. 3. p. 19, 27.
the power of granting Indulgences, and dispensing of the Merits of Christ, and
the Saints, for this end, out of the Sacraments.

The Punishments remitted by these Indulgences, Ibid. c. 7. p. 47.
are all those which are, or might have been enjoined for Sins; and that
whether the Persons be alive or dead.

New Popery.
WE believe there is a Power in the Church of granting Indulgences; which
concern not at all the Remission of Sins, either Mortal or Venial, but only of
some temporal Punishments remaining due after the guilt is remitted. So that
they are nothing else but a Mitigation, or Relaxation, upon just Causes of
Canonical Penances, which are, or may be enjoined by the Pastors of the Church,
on Penitent Sinners, according to their several degrees of demerit. Papist
Represent, n. viii. p. 10. M. de M. Expos. 8. p. 14.


Of the Mass.
Old Popery.
THe Council. Trid. Sess. 22. Can. 1. etc. p. 196. and ibid. c. 2. p. 191.
Mass is a true and proper Sacrifice: A Sacrifice not only Commemoratory of
that of the Cross, but also truly and properly propitiatory for the dead and
the living. Conc. Trent. Art. 16.


Verum and reale Sacrificium, veram and realem mortem aut destructionem rei
immolatae desiderat. Bell. de Missa l. 1. c. 27. p. 1062. C. Vel in Missa fit
vera and realis Christi mactatio, and occisio, vel non fit: Si non fit, non est
verum and reale Sacrificium Missa: Sacrificium enim verum and reale, veram and
realem occisionem exigit, quando in occisione ponitur essentia Sacrificii.
1063. A. And again, Per consecrationem res quae offertur, ad veram, realem, and
externam mutationem and destructionem ordinatur, quod erat necessarium ad
rationem Sacrificii. ib. I. D. Sect. Tertio.
Every true and real Sacrifice requires a and real Death or Destruction of the
thing sacrificed: So that if in the Mass there be not a true and real
Destruction, there is not a true and real Sacrifice. Bellarmin.


To offer up Christ then in the Eucharist, is not only to present him before
God on the Altar, but really and truly to Sacrifice, i. e. destroy him.
Bellarmin.


New Popery.
THe Sacrifice of the Mass only to represent that which was accomplished on the
Cross, to perpetuate the memory of it to the end of the World, and apply to us
the saving Virtue of it, for those Sins which we commit every day. Vindicat.
page 95.


When we say, That Christ is offered in the Mass, we do not understand the word
Offer in the strictest Sense, but as we are said to Offer to God what we
present before him. And thus the Church does not doubt to say, That She offers
up our Blessed Jesus to his Father in the Eucharist, in which he vouchsafes to
render him himself present before him. Vindicat. ibid. p. 96.


Of the Popes Authority.
Old Popery.
WE acknowledge the Holy Catholic, and Roman Church, to be the Mother and
Mistress of all Churches; and we Promise and Swear to the Bishop of Rome,
Successor of St. Peter, Prince of the Apostles, and Vicar of Jesus Christ, a
true Obedience. Council. Trid. Jur. Pii 4ti p. xliv. in fine.


The Pope has Power to Si dominus temporatis requisitus and monitus ab
Ecclesia, terram suam purgare neglexerit, ab Haeretica foeditate.
Excommunicationis Vinculo innodetur. Et si satisfacere contempserit infra
annum, significetur hoc summo Pontifici, ut ex tunc, Ipse Vassallos ab ejus
fidelitate denuntiet absolutos, and terram exponat Catholicis occupandam. --
Salvo jure Domini Principalis, dummodo super hoc ipse nullum praestet
obstaculum, nec aliquod impedimentum opponat: Eadem nihil ominus lege servata
circa EOS qui NON HABENT DOMINOS PRINCIPALES.
depose Princes, and absolve Subjects from their Allegiance: So the Council of
Lateran: If the Temporal Lord shall neglect to purge his Land of Heresy, let
him be Excommunicated; and if within a year he refuses to make satisfaction to
the Church, let it be signified to the Pope, that from thenceforth, He may
declare his Vassals absolved from their Allegiance; and expose his Land to be
seized by Catholics -- yet so as not to injure the right of the Principal
Lord. Provided that he puts no stop or hindrance to this: And the same Law is
to be observed with reference to those who have no Principal Lords. Council.
Later. 4. Can. 3. de Haeret. p. 147.


New Popery.
WE acknowledge that Primacy which Christ gave to St. Peter, in his Successors;
to whom, for this cause, we owe that Obedience and Submission, which the holy
Councils and Fathers have always taught the faithful.

As for those things which we know are disputed of in the Schools, it is not
necessary we speak of them here, seeing they are not Articles of the Catholic
Faith.

It is sufficient we acknowledge a Head Established by God to conduct his whole
Flock in his Paths, which those who love Concord amongst Brethren, and
Ecclesiastical Unanimity, will most willingly acknowledge. Expos. Monsieur de
Meaux. p. 40.


This is no Scholastic Tenet, but the Canon of a Council received by the
Church of Rome as General.

Such is the difference of the present Controversies between us from what they
were, when it pleased God to discover to our Fathers the Errors they had so
long been involved in. Were I minded to show the division yet greater, there
want not Authors among them, and those approved ones too, from whence to
collect more desperate Conclusions in most of these Points, than any I have now
remarked. And the Practice and Opinion of the people, in those Countries where
these Errors still prevail, is yet more Extravagant than any thing that either
the One or Other have written.

What now remains, but that I earnestly beseech all sober and unprejudiced
Persons of that Communion, seriously to weigh these things; And consider what
just reason we had to quit those Errors, which even their own Teachers are
ashamed to confess, and yet cannot honestly disavow.

It has been the great business of these new Methodists for some years past, to
draw over ignorant men to the Church of Rome, by pretending to them that their
Doctrines are by no means such as they are commonly mis-apprehended to be. This
is popular, and may I believe have prevailed with some weak persons to their
seduction; though we know well enough that all those abroad who pretend to be
Monsieur de Meaux's Proselytes were not so upon the conviction of his Book, but
for the advantages of the Change, and the Patronage of his Person and Authority.

But surely would men seriously weigh this Method, there could be nothing more
strong for our Reformation than this one thing, That the wisest and best men of
the Roman Church esteem it the greatest honor and advantage they can do to
their Religion, to represent it as like ours as is possible; and that their
strongest argument to make Proselytes is this, That were things but rightly
understood, there is but very little or no difference at all betwixt us.

And would to God indeed this were truly so! that these differences were not
only as small as they pretend, but wholly taken away: With what joy should we
embrace the happy return of so many of our lost Brethren into the Arms of their
Mother? How should we go forth with the highest transports to welcome them into
our Communion? And celebrate the joyful festival on Earth, which would create
an Exultation even among the blessed Angels and Saints in Heaven.

And why shall we not hope that this in time shall be the issue? The good work
is already begun; The Errors are many of them discovered, and, what is more,
disavow'd: And wherefore should we then distrust the Mercy of Heaven to hear
our Prayers, which we never make with more real zeal and fervor than in their
behalf; to show them the Truth, and open their Eyes to a perfect Conviction?

Till this be accomplished, Let us, who by God's Grace are already Members of
the Church of England, that is, of the best reformed, and best established
Church in the Christian World, so seriously weigh these things, as not only to
stand steadfast in that Faith which has been delivered to us, but to use our
utmost endeavors to convince others also of the Excellence of it.

Let not any fond pretenses of Antiquity or Possession Vindic. p. 112, etc.
amuse us. Against God and Truth there lies no prescription; nor ought we to be
at all concerned to forsake Errors, though never so Ancient, for more Ancient
Truths.

Let no prospect or temptation, whether of worldly evils on the one hand, or
worldly advantages on the other, draw us from our stedfastness. God is faithful
1 Cor. 10. 13.
who will not suffer us to be tempted above what we are able: And he who for
any of these things denies Christ Matt. 10. 33.
or his Religion on Earth, shall be denied by Christ before his Father which is
in Heaven.

But let us be firm and sincere to God and our own Souls; careful to search
out, and ready to embrace the Truth wherever we find it. So shall our lives be
Orthodox, though perhaps our faith should not; and if in any thing we do err, for
we pretend not to Infallibility, nor is it therefore impossible for us to be
mistaken, yet at least we shall not be HERETICS.

FINIS.
APPENDIX Containing a COLLECTION Of the following PIECES. I. The Extract of a
Letter written from Paris concerning Monsieur de Meaux's Pastoral Letter. II.
An Extract of Father Crasset' s Doctrine concerning the Worship which the Roman
Church allows to the Blessed Virgin. III. Cardinal Bona's Exposition, and
Practice of the same. IV. Monsieur Imbert' s Letter to Monsieur de Meaux,
proving that his Persecution was truly for maintaining the Doctrine of that
Bishop's Exposition. V. The Epistle of St. Chrysostom to Caesarius, suppressed
by some of the Doctors of the Sorbonne, for being contrary to the Roman Canon
of Transubstantiation. VI. A Catalogue of the Editions made use of by me in my
Quotations, to prevent, if it may be, all future Calumnies.


LONDON, Printed MDCLXXXVI.

ADVERTISEMENT.
THE following Pieces have so near a relation to the present Controversy, and
are in themselves of so great a Moment, that if their length denied them a
place in the Work it self, their Importance has made it necessary not to omit
them here. I have prefixed to every one of them such particular Accounts as may
serve to satisfy the Reader's Curiosity concerning them; and shall, I hope, be
a sufficient Apology for me, that I have so largely insisted upon them.

APPENDIX.
NUMBER. I. The Extract of a Letter written from Paris concerning Monsieur de
Meaux's Pastoral Letter.
TO show that Monsieur de Meaux does not always so write at first, as not to
stand in need of any Correction afterward, I will beg leave to subjoyn the
Extract of a Letter dated from Paris, concerning his late Pastoral Letter;
which, it is there said, he is about to change somewhat in; whether only for the
better advantage of the Method, and greater neatness of Style (as in his
Exposition) we shall be better able hereafter to judge.

It is in the last Nouvelle Juin 1686. Page 736, 737. ON ecrit de Paris, que M.
de Meaux retranchera de la 2 Edition de sa Lettre Pastorale l' endroit ou il
dit aux nouveaux Catholics de son Dioceze, Qu'ils n'ont point souffert de
Violence en leurs Biens, ni en leurs Persons, and qu'il a oui dire la meme
chose aux autres Eveques.

Je ne scaurois dire precisement si ce sont ces propres mots, car je n'ay point
veu cette Lettre Pastorale, je scai seulement que c'est ce qu'on ecrit de Paris.

Ce Prelat a eu en vue dans sa Lettre, de preparer a la Communion Paschale ces
nouveaux Diocezains. Je ne scai pas ce qu'ils ont fait, mais ailleurs quand on
a presenti les Convertis, on leur a trouve si peu de disposition a communier a
Paques, qu'on n'a pas juge a propos de pousser l'affair.

Dans la dernier Fete-Dieu plusieurs ont mieux aim payer une Amend, que de
tender devant leurs Maisons.

Apres cela, il est apparent que M. de Meaux retranchera l'endroit cidessus
marque, and que les Gens d'honneur se plaindront in petto de ce qu'on se tue de
leur soutenir, que les Huguenots ont sign le Formulaire le plus volontairement
du monde. Bien entendu, que ces gens d'honneur n'auront pas le tour d' Esprit
and de Conscience, du quel nous avons parle ci-dessus, page 471.

They write from Paris, that Monsieur de Meaux will retrench in the second
Edition of his Pastoral Letter the place where he tells the new Converts of his
Diocese, That they have not suffered any Violence either in their Goods, or in
their Persons, and that he heard the other Bishops say the same.

I cannot say precisely whether these were his very words, having never seen
his Pastoral Letter, I only know this, that thus they write from Paris.

The design of this Prelate in his Letter, was to prepare his new Diocesans to
communicate at Easter. What they did, I cannot tell, but in other parts when
they presented the Converts in order to receive it, they found them so little
disposed to communicate at Easter, that they have not thought fit to force them
to it.

Upon Corpus Christi day last, many of them chose rather to pay a Fine, than
put up Hangings before their Houses for the Procession.

After this, it is more than probable that M. de Meaux will strike out the
passage abovementioned, and that men of sense will complain in their minds to
be thus eternally wearied with their pretenses, that the Hugonots have signed
the Formulary with all the readiness in the world. Always provided, that these
men of sense be not endowed with that turn of Wit and Conscience, of which we
have spoken heretofore, page 471. above.


NUMBER. II. An Extract of Father Crasset's Doctrine concerning the Worship which
the Roman Church allows to the Blessed Virgin.
MOnsieur de Meaux is very much of opinion, that Father Crasset has nothing in
his Book contrary to the Principles of his Exposition. I must transcribe his
whole Book, would I insist upon every thing in it opposite to this Pretense:
But I shall content my self for the present to propose only to Monsieur de
Meaux some of this Fathers Questions; that he may please to tell us whether he
be indeed of the same Opinion with the Father in them. 'Twill be an admirable
Vindication of his Exposition, and we shall not doubt, after that, of its being
a true Representation of the Doctrine of the Roman Church.

Question 1. Whether the Intercession of the Blessed Virgin Page 31.
to God for us, be not only profitable, but necessary to our Salvation?

Resp. I do not find the Father positive in his assertion here, but at least he
recounts abundance of 1 P^. trait. 1. q. 4.
their Saints that are so: St. Germain, St. Anselme, St. Bernard, the Abbe de
Celles, St. Antonine, and St. Bernardine; whose horrid Blasphemies see at large
repeated and approved.

Qu. 2. Whether a tender and constant Devotion toward Page 39.
the Blessed Virgin, be not a mark of Predestination?

ANSWER This is what we read in all Books; hear from all Pulpits: There are but
few Catholics but what are of this Opinion, and that this Devotion toward the
Mother of God, is a mark of Salvation, the good Father undertakes to prove by
the Authority of the Scripture, explained Page 39, 40.
by the Fathers, and confirmed by Reason.

Qu. 3. Whether a Christian that is devout toward the Page 54.
Blessed Virgin can be damned?

ANSWER. The Servants of the Blessed Virgin Page 57.
have an Assurance, morally infallible, that they shall be saved.

Qu. 4. Whether God ever refuses any thing to the Blessed Ibid.
Virgin?

ANSWER 1. The Prayers of a Mother so humble Page 60, 61.
and respectful, are esteemed a Command by a Son so sweet and so obedient. 2.
Being truly our Savior's Mother as well in Heaven as she was on Earth, she
still retains a kind of natural Authority over his PERSON, over his GOODS, and
over his OMNIPOTENCE: So that as Albertus Magnus says, she cannot only entreat
him for the Salvation of her Servants, but by her MOTHERLY AUTHORITY can
COMMAND him; and as another expresses it, The Power of the Mother and of the
Son is all one, she being by her Omnipotent Son, made HER SELF OMNIPOTENT.

Qu. 5. What Blessings the Virgin procures for her Page 91.
Servants.

ANSWER 1. She preserves them from Error and Page 92.
Heresy, if they are in danger to fall into it; and recovers them out of it,
if they are fallen. 2. She Page 93.
defends and protects them in their Temptations against their Enemy; and this
not only Men, but other Creatures; insomuch that a Bird which a young Lady had
taught to say his Ave Maria, being one day seized by a Hawk, whilst he was in
his Claws, said only his Ave Maria, and the Hawk terrified with the Salutation,
let him go, and so he returned to his Mistress. 3. She comforts them Page 94.
in their Distresses, assists them in their Dangers, counsels them in their
Doubts, eases them in their Ib. 95.
Pains, animates them in their Combats, and finally, procures them a good
Death. To this end, 4. She gives them a timely foreknowledge of their Death,
that they be not surprised. She Ib. 96.
sends the Angels to assist them in it, and sometimes comes her own self in
Person. 5. She obtains Ib. 97.
them the Grace of Repentance if they are in Sin, and of Perseverance, if they
be in a State of Page 98.
Grace.

Qu. 6. Whether the Blessed Virgin has ever fetched any out of Hell. Page 99.


ANSWER 1. As to Purgatory, it is certain that the Virgin has brought several
Souls from thence, as well as refreshed them whilst they were there. 2. It Is
certain she has fetched many out of Hell, i. e. Page 100.
from a State of Damnation before they were dead. 3. The Virgin can, and has
fetched men that were dead in mortal Sin out of Hell, by restoring them to Life
again, that they might repent; which the Father proves at large, for the
Establishment of our FAITH and of our HOPE. Page 102.


Qu. 7. What Honor ought we to render to the Blessed 2 Part. Page 73.
Virgin?

ANSWER. We ought to render to her a Religious Page 79.
Honor. 2. To honor her Images also with a Religious Honor, as sacred
things; and this the many Miracles done by them do require. 3. To build Temples
to her, which many grave Page 92.
Authors do assure us was done, before her Birth, during her Life, and since
her Death and Coronation Page 99.
in Heaven.

Qu. 8. Whether it be good to make Vows and Pilgrimages Page 138.
to the Honor of the Virgin?

ANSWER. It is good to make Vows, and undertake Pilgrimages to the places where
she is specially honored. Ibid.


The Practice of Devotion toward Her.

1. To wear her Scapulary: which whosoever does, Page 315.
shall not be damned, but this Habit shall be for them a Mark of Salvation, a
Safeguard in Dangers, and a Sign of Peace and eternal Alliance.

They that wear this Habit, shall be moreover delivered out of Purgatory the
Saturday after their Page 316.
death.

2. To enter into her Congregations. Page 321.


And if any man be minded to save himself, it is impossible for him to find out
any more advantageous Page 322.
means, than to enrol himself into these Companies.

3. To devote ones self more immediately to Her Page 339.
Service: For which the Father gives several very grave Forms. Ib. and seq.

These are some of the Heads of Father Crasset's Book. It were infinite to
recount his particular Follies, with which every Page and Sentence is crowded.
And however Monsieur de Meaux is pleased at a Venture to espouse all this, yet
I must still beg leave to believe, that he neither approves this Practice, nor
will receive these Principles. And these things, not only Monsieur de la B --
in his Answer, but the Author of the Preservative at large alleged against
him; which being a Book so well known in France, and mentioned to Monsieur de
Meaux in a particular manner by In his Letter below N. 4.
Monsieur Imbert in his Letter to him, and having caused such Contests between
Reflections sur le Preservatif, etc.
Monsieur Arnauld and the Le Janseniste convaincu de vairie Sophistiquerie.
Article 7. page 72. etc.
Vindicator of the Preservative, upon this very account, still increases my
Wonder, that for all this, Monsieur de Meaux should never hear there was any
thing in this Book of Father Crasset's, contrary to his Exposition, nor believe
the Father to be of any Opinion repugnant to his Principles therein established.

The Reader may please to remember, that this Book of Father Crasset's was
licensed by the Provincial, approved by the Fathers of the Society, permitted,
and privileged by the King, and printed by the Archbishop of Paris's Printer,
1679.

NUMBER. III. Cardinal BONA's Doctrine and Practice of this Worship.
IN my Preface to my former Treatise, to show with how little Sincerity many
times those of the Church of Rome will approve Books, whose Principles they
dislike; I observed that Cardinal Capisucchi had in his Controversies plainly
contradicted, in the point of worshipping Images, what he approved in Monsieur
de Meaux's Exposition. This, Monsieur de Meaux says, cannot be, for this
admirable Reason, qu'on trouvera son approbation express parmi celles que j'ai
rapportees; that his express Approbation has been given to his Book.

I have already said what I thought sufficient to the Consequence of this
Answer: But now to satisfy the Reader that Cardinal Capisucchi is not the only
Person that has thus complemented Monsieur de Meaux contrary to his own
Principles and Conscience, I will here offer another plain Instance in M. de
Meaux's learned and holy Cardinal BONA, Avertissement de l' 5 Edit. Francoise,
12mo. Paris 1681. page 21.
whose memory, he says, shall be for ever blessed in the Church. This learned
Cardinal was desired by Card. Buillon to examine the Exposition with all
rigor, because that some persons accused it of certain Defects; and he assures
him that he did particolarmente See Card. Bona's Answer to Card. Buillon.
osservare in che potesse esser ripreso; particularly observe whether there
were any Fault in it. The effect of this particular Observation was very
favorable to Monsieur de Meaux: The Cardinal found nothing but matter of great
Satisfaction to himself, and Praise to the Author; and yet has this man as
flatly opposed Monsieur de Meaux's Principles in the Point of Invocation of
Saints, beforementioned, both in his Doctrine and Practice, as it is well
possible for words to do it.

For Monsieur de Meaux's Doctrine, I shall not need say any thing here, after
what I have so fully accounted above: The Reader may please to compare it with
the Extract I shall now offer him out of Cardinal Bona's Works.

In his Dedication which he makes of his Book Oper. Tom. 2.
of DIVINE PSALMODY to the Blessed Virgin, thus he concludes to her:

Possess me as your own, O Sovereign QUEEN of Heaven! and seeing it has pleased
you in this Oratory dedicated to your Service, to bestow so many Favors upon
distressed Mortals, suffer not me to go hence without some mark of it. Renew
your Tokens, change your Miracles. As you are wont to open the Eyes of the
blind, that they might behold the light, now open the Eyes of my Mind, and fill
them with your brightest light, that I may with a pure Contemplation, behold
the Light of God's Countenance that is impressed upon us. If ever you have
cleared the stopped Ears of the Deaf; Give Joy and Gladness to my inward
Hearing, that I may hear the Voice of the Bridegroom speaking in silence to the
Heart of Jerusalem. If you have here broken the Chains of dumb Tongues, Give to
my Mouth a right and well-sounding Speech, that when I sing the Praises of God,
my Words may be pleasing in the presence of the eternal King. If you have
restored Health to the diseased, heal me who labor under an inveterate
Sickness, that my Mind may in the last day be found entire, without the
Sickness of any evil Affection. This I most humbly beg, here prostrate upon my
Knees, before this wonder-working Image of yours, and upon that solemn day
which your Nativity has rendered venerable to us.

Such is the Entrance he makes upon this Book, and indeed the work that follows
is all of a piece. In his 16. Chapter, Page 551. He gives this account, Tom. 2.
Page 551.
why in all their OFFICES they conclude with a Prayer, or some Complement at
least, to the Blessed Virgin. It is to this end, that if by humane frailty they
have committed any Error in the dreadful Service of God, our Lord being
appeased by her Mediation, may not impute it to them for sin: For She preserves
all those that trust in Her. She reaches out her saving Hand to those, who in
this damnable World are in danger. She restrains the malicious Endeavors of
our Enemies. No Day, no Hour, not a Moment passes, without some Favor of Hers.
Her the Heavenly Host Worship, Hell it self Observes, the World Adores. Her
Majesty the chiefest of the Blessed Spirits tremble at. By Her Order the World
is Governed; the Stars give Light, the Sun shines, the Winds blow, the Gardens
spring, the Woods grow, the Seasons keep their constant revolutions, the
Elements serve our needs. The Ornament of our Manners, the brightness of our
Works, all this we receive from Her Favor, when we Worship and Uenerate Her.
The Church knows of how great danger it is to have her exiled Children divorced
from the Care of their most indulgent Mother, and therefore by a most wise
Counsel has decreed, that they should by a frequent Observance fly to Her
Protection; not only by instituting a special Office to Her, but by addressing
to Her in the end of all her Offices, according as the reason of the times
should require.

This is a short Specimen of what is scattered up and down in all the Parts of
his Book; I need not say how extravagant his Verses are, when the Prose is See
especially c. 12. p. 304. etc.
thus high flown: I will give but one Instance more, which one would think
should contain, if any, a certain account of his Persuasion, taken out of his
Last Will; in which, having commended himself to our Blessed Savior, he comes
in the next place, as is most fit, to the Virgin, and so on to the rest of his
Friends and Patrons above. Page 37. Tom. 3.

And to thee also, O Blessed Virgin MARY, Mother of See his Will in the
beginning of the 3. Tome.
Mercy, Queen of the World, Comforter of the Afflicted, Refuge of Sinners,
Salvation of those that perish, to thee, O Fountain of Piety, in this dreadful
Hour, I commend my Soul. Help me now that am afraid; Lift me up that am
falling; Direct me that am in Error, Comfort my Soul that is desolate, and
Obtain of thy beloved Son for me, the Mercy which I have desired. You have
always mercifully Assisted me in all my Dangers; O Forsake me not in this last,
on which Eternity depends. --

Holy Michael! Archangel! who came to help the People of God, Prince of the
Heavenly Host -- Deliver me from the Snare of unclean Spirits, and bring my
Soul into a Place of comfort and refreshment.

And thou, Holy Angel, to whose Safeguard and Protection I unworthy Sinner have
been committed, Assist me in this moment, Drive for from me all the Power of
Satan; Save me from the Mouth of the Lion. -- Draw me out of the Snare which
they have laid for me, and Preserve my soul from their evil designs.

Assist me you also, O my Patrons, and tutelary Saints! Thou first of all, O
St. JOHN, forerunner of Christ, -- Make my Paths straight, and Direct my way in
the sight of the Lord. Blessed PETER! Key-Bearer of the Heavenly Kingdom!
Prince of the Apostles! by the Power that is committed to thee, Loose thou the
Bonds of my Sins, and Open unto me the Gate of Paradise.

And thou, O Glorious Father of the Monks of St. Benedict! impute not thou unto
me to my Damnation, the innumerable transgressions that I have made of thy
Rule. -- O ye Captains and Heads of the Holy Order of the Cistercians, St.
ROBERT, St. ALBERIC, St. STEPHEN, and St. BERNARD; who have so long patiently
endured me an unfruitful Tree in this your Vineyard. -- O Forsake me not in
this Hour! But Remember that I am your Son, though unworthy the Name. --

The Cardinal goes still further on with the rest of his Patrons; (for he had
taken care to provide enough of them) but I fear I have tired the Reader with
these I have already transcribed. Monsieur de Meaux, I know, will tell us, that
all this is no more than if he had desired as many of the good Company that
were about him at this time, to have done the same; and for his Expressions,
though they are some of them a little Extraordinary, yet the Cardinal's
intention, no doubt, like that of the Church, was to have them all reduced to
this one and the same Catholic meaning, PRAY FOR ME.

And for those who are resolved to believe this fond Pretense, there is no
hopes of conviction.

But for unprejudiced Persons, who see the Vanity, indeed the unreasonableness
and absurdity of this Evasion, I doubt not but they will find a plain
Opposition between Monsieur de Meaux's Principles and the Cardinal's, and that
this good Man needed a very great Apology to his Patrons, for having approved a
Doctrine so derogatory to their Power and Honor, as that of the Exposition in
his Opinion undoubtedly was.

But I shall say no more to show the unsincerity of Cardinal BONA in this
matter: I might have added a yet greater instance, than either of these
Cardinals, of the same pious Fraud, in the Approbation of the POPE himself; See
the Procez verbal de (...) Assemblee extraordinaire des Messeigneurs l'
Archeveques and Eveques en Mars and May 1681. Mr. de Meaux himself was one of
this Assembly, and signed with the rest the Report of the A. B. of Reims, in
which there is abundantly sufficient to show how repugnant his Holiness's
Proceedings were to the Doctrine of the Exposition, approved by him at the very
same time that he was engaged in these attempts so contrary to it. I know not
whether it be worth the observing, that the very same day the Pope sent his
complementing Brief to Monsieur de Meaux, in approbation of his Exposition; he
sent another to the Bishop of Pamiez, to approve his defending the Rights of
his Church, against the King: which was judged in the Assembly, of which Mr. de
Meaux was one, to be an interposing in an Affair, which neither the Holy
Councils nor Fathers had given him any Authority to meddle with.
whose Briefs, with reference to the Affairs of France, and which this Bishop,
who has had so great a part in them, could not be ignorant of, however
published at the same time that he sent his Complement to Mr. de Meaux, do but
ill agree with his Exposition. Indeed, they run in such a strain, as plainly
shows, that were but his Power equal to his Will, he would soon convince the
World, that not this Man's Pretenses, but the Dictates of Pope GREGORY VII. the
UNAM SANCTAM Bull, and the Canon of LATERAN, were the true Exposition of the
Doctrine of the Catholic Church.

And of this I am ready to make an ample proof, from the several pieces set out
by public Authority in France, when ever Mr. de Meaux or his Vindicator shall
think fit to question the truth of what I now say.

NUMBER. IV.
Copy d'une Lettre ecrite a Monsieur l'Eveque de Meaux, cy devant Eveque de
Condom.
Au Port de St. Marie ce 13. Juin 1683. Monseigneur,
VOtre Grandeur rapellera, sans doubt, mieux l' Idee de mon nom, lors que je
luy dirai que je suis celuy pour qui elle a eu la bonte de parler il y a
environ 16 ans a Madame de Chaune pour avoir son consentement d'une Chapelle,
comme tutrice de Monsieur de -- and j' eus l' Honneur de la voir plusieurs fois
a St. Thomas du Louvre, avec Messeigneurs de Perigueux and de Xainte.

Depuis ce tems la, j'ai souffert la Persecution, and particulierement depuis
l' Exposition de la Foi, que votre grandeur a publiee. Ses Enemis qui n'osent
pas se declarer contre Elle, se declarent contre ceux qui disent la meme chose.
Et aujourdui Monseigneur l' Archeveque de Bourdeaux me fait fair le Process,
pour avoir explique a l' Epargne le jour de Vendredi Saint, Que nous adorions
Jesus Christ crueifie en presence de la Croix, and que nous n' adorions rien de
ce que nous voyons. Et parce que le Cure dit sur le champ assez haut Le Bois,
Le Bois; j' ajoutai, Non, non, C'est Jesus Christ, and non pas le Bois. Et
comme il ajouta, Ecce Lignum, Venite, Adoremus; je le relevai en luy disant,
Auquel le Salut du Monde a ete atache. Venez, adorons ce Salut de Monde.

J' ajoutai que le sentiment de l' Eglise etoit, que si par impossible nous
pouvions separer la Divinite du Fills de Dieu d'avec son humanite, nous n'
adorerions pas l' humanite, puis qu'il est certain qu'il n'y a rien d' adorable
que Dieu; and qu' ainsi nous devions nous persuader que nous allions au
Calvaire adorer Jesus Christ, sans nous arreter au Crucifix. Que l' Eglise,
comme une bonne Mere, nous l'avoit done par une saint Invention pour aider a
notre Foi, and pour fraper plus vivement notre imagination, and non pour etre
l' Objet de notre Culte, qui se termine a Jesus Christ.

Voila, Monseigneur, tout mon crime, and ce que l'on me reproach. J'ai ecrit au
Promoteur and au Vicaire General, and a Monseigneur l'Archeveque. Je leur
expose, que j' ofre a me dedire, si j'ai mal parle; j' ofre a ^e justifier. Au
prejudice de cela il persiste dans l' interdiction qu' il lacha verbalement sur
le champ. Je me suis pourvu par apel comme d' abus au Parliament de Guienne;
j'ai fait assigner le Promoteur, and bien que j'ay fait toutes les honetetes
possibles a la Justice Ecclesiastique, and rendu toutes les deferences, le dit
Seigneur Archeveque me menace, comme ceux qui luy ont rendu ma Lettre me le
mandent, de Prison perpetuelle, and de Fers aux Pieds.

Votre Grandeur peut connoitre par ce proceed combien il y a de Persons qui
detournent nos Freres separez de rentrer dans l' Eglise. L'on m'objecte, ce que
l'on dit contre votre livre, que j'adoucis, mais que le sentiment de l' Eglise
est contraire. On le verra mieux dans le Process que me sera fait, car je defy
mes Enemis de pouvoir fair des reproaches contre ma vie and moeurs, and de me
reprocher d'autre Doctrine que celle de votre Grandeur, que je tache d'
exprimer dans les memes terms, la trouvant tres conform aux sentimens de l'
Eglise Roman, and ainsi si je suis convaincu d' Heresy, j'ose dire a votre
Grandeur qu' elle doit etre a ma Garentie. J'ose pourtant l' assurer, que j'ay
assez de lumiere pour bien defendre cette Doctrine, and pour detruire le
Preservatif, si l'on ne me fait point de Violence. Je defy tous les Docteurs
du Monde de toutes les Religions.

La Grace que je demand a V. G. est que si l' Archeveque se servoit de toute
son Authorite pour m' opprimer, qu' Elle daigne interposer la sienne pour m'
obtenir la liberte de me defendre. Elle voit combien l' honneur de Dieu y est
interesse, dans un tems ou toute la Province est remplie de Missionaires, de
Capucins, and de Jesuits ignorans, qui prechent l' Adoration de la Croix, and
la font fair dans une Province ou tout est remplie de Religionaires, and ou
j'ose promettre 10000 Conversions, si la Religion etoit pratiquee conformement
a votre Exposition. Les Messieurs de la Religion P. R. n'ont autre Objection a
me fair si ce n'est que l'Eglise Roman Vous traite and Me traite
d'Heretique. Je demand Pardon a Votre Grandeur, Monseigneur, si j'ai cru etre
oblige de luy fair connoitre mon Proceed, apres quoi je l'assureray de la
Soumission,.

De son tres humble and tres obeissant Serviteur, IMBERT, Prieur.


The Copy of a Letter sent to Monsieur the Bishop of Meaux, formerly Bishop of
Condom.
Port St. Mary, June 13th. 1683. My Lord,
YOur Lordship, without doubt, will better call to mind my Name, when I shall
have told you, that I am the Person for whom you had the goodness, about 16
years since, to speak to Madam de Chaune, to obtain her consent, as Tutress to
Monsieur de -- for a certain Chapel; since which I have had the honor to see
you several times at St. Thomas in the Louvre, with my Lords of Perigueux and
Xainte.

Since that I have suffered Persecution, and especially since the time that
your Lordship has published your Exposition of the Faith. Your Enemies, who
dare not declare themselves against your Lordship, declare themselves against
those who say the same things. And at this instant, the Archbishop of Bourdeaux
has caused a Process to be made against me for having explained upon
Good Friday, That we adore JESUS CHRIST crucified in presence of the Cross, and
that we do not adore any thing of what we see. And forasmuch as the Cure
replied upon the place aloud, The WOOD, the WOOD; I added, No, no, it is JESUS
CHRIST, and not the WOOD. And when he added, Ecce Lignum, venite, adoremus; I
took him up, saying, On which the Savior of the World hung, come let us adore
this Savior of the World.

I said further, that the Doctrine of the Church was, That if by an impossible
Supposition we could separate the Divinity of the Son of God from his Humanity,
we should not adore his Humanity; forasmuch as it is certain, that there is
nothing adorable but God; and that therefore we ought to think, that we are now
going out of Mount Calvary to adore JESUS CHRIST, without stopping at the
Crucifix. That the Church, like a good Mother, had given that to us by a holy
Invention, to assist our Faith, and make the livelier Impression upon our
Imagination, but not to be the Object of our Worship, which must terminate upon
JESUS CHRIST.

Behold, my Lord, all my Crime, and what I am reproached with, I have writ to
the Promoter, and to the Vicar General, and to the Archbishop himself. I have
offered, if I have spoken any thing amiss, that I will recant it: I have
offered to justify my self: Notwithstanding all this, his Grace still persists
in the verbal Interdict, which he immediately pronounced against me. I have
transferred my Cause by Appeal, as of Abuse, to the Parliament of Guienne: I
have caused the Proctor to be summoned; and though I have used all imaginable
fairness, with reference to the Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction, paid them all
possible deference, nevertheless the said Archbishop threatens me, as I am
informed by those who gave him my Letter, with perpetual Imprisonment and
Chains, for my Offense.

Your Lordship may see by this Proceeding, how many there are that hinder our
separating Brethren from returning to our Communion. They object to me, that
which is also said against your Lordship's Book, That I do mollify, but that
the Doctrine of the Church is quite the contrary. This will more plainly appear
by the Process against me; for I defy my Enemies to reproach me for my Life
and Manners, or for any other Doctrine than that of your Lordship, which I
endeavor to express in the self same Terms, as finding them most agreeable to
the Sentiments of the Roman Church: so that if I am convicted of Heresy, I am
bold to say, your Lordship must be my Surety. But I dare assure you, my Lord,
that I have Knowledge enough to defend this Doctrine, and destroy the An Answer
to Monsieur de Maux's Exposition, entitled, Preservatif contre le changement
de Religion.
Preservative, might I be but secure from Violence: I defy all the Doctors of
the World, of whatsoever Religion they be.

The Favor which I have to beg of your Lordship, is, That if the Archbishop
should make use of his Authority to oppress me, you will please to interpose
yours so far, as to procure me only the Liberty to defend my self. You see how
far the Honor of God is concerned in it, and especially at a time when the
whole Province is filled with Missionaries, Capuchins, ignorant Jesuits, and
others, who preach up the Adoration of the Cross, and cause it to be done in a
Country full of Protestants, and among whom I durst promise 10000 Converts,
were the Practice of our Religion conformable to your Exposition. The
Protestants have hardly any other Objection to make to me, than this, That the
Church of Rome treats both your Lordship and me as Heretics.

I beg your Lordship's Pardon for this; I thought my self obliged to acquaint
you with my Case; after which, I have only remaining to assure you of the
Submission of,

My LORD, Your Lordship's most humble and obedient Servant, IMBERT.


Such was the Account which Monsieur Imbert gave of his Case to M. de Meaux; I
was the more willing to publish it, that those who have never seen the Factum
which he printed of it, and which is 42 pages in 4to.
too long to be inserted here, may at least by this perceive that his Crime was
truly his adhering to M. de Meaux's Exposition; and that he had reason to say,
as he does in this Letter to him, That if he was convicted of Heresy, M. de
Meaux ought to be his warrant for it.

And because the Bishop has been pleased to endeavor to take off the force of
this great Allegation, Vindicat. p. 116. Cet Imbert est un homme sans scavoir,
qui crut justifier ses extravagances - en nommant mon Exposition, etc.
by lessening the Character of the Person, I shall leave it to the indifferent
Reader to judge, whether this Letter carries any thing of the Style of an
extravagant, a man of no learning, as well as of no Renown, such as M. de Meaux
in his Answer pretends him to be.

NUMBER. V.
The Epistle of St. Chrysostom to Caesarius, cut by some of the Doctors of the
Sorbonne, out of the Greek Edition of Palladius, published by Monsieur Bigot,
1680. with a Dissertation premised, containing an Historical Account of the
whole Affair.

IT will perhaps be looked upon by some, as a little unseasonable, to join a
piece of Antiquity so considerable as this Epistle, to a Treatise of so little
Importance as the foregoing Defense may justly be esteemed to be. But since the
main thing I charge M. de Meaux with, is, That a first Edition of his Book was
suppressed for containing some Assertions not so suitable to the Sentiments of
the Sorbonne Doctors, to whom it was sent for their Approbation, to show the
undistinguishing Justice of their Proceedings, and that M. de Meaux is not the
only Bishop they have dealt thus rudely with on these Occasions; I was willing
to communicate to the World one Instance more of the like nature, especially
since the Original Leaves, rased out, and suppressed by them, have here also
fallen into my Hands, and may at any time be seen with the suppressed Edition
of M. de Meaux's Exposition.

It may be some Satisfaction to M. de Meaux to consider, that in this Case, he
has run no other fortune than what is common to him with the great St.
Chrysostom: And possibly the Reader too will from hence begin to find it no
difficult matter to believe, that those who made no scruple to suppress a whole
Epistle of St. Chrysostom, a Patriarch and a Saint, for contradicting their
Doctrine in one only Point, may indeed have made as little of correcting M. de
Meaux's Exposition, though a Bishop's, that had prevaricated their Faith in so
many.

Nor was I less engaged on the Vindicator's account to this Publication; it is
one of his greatest difficulties, and which he seems the most desirous to be
resolved in, how there can be such a thing as the Real Presence in the
Eucharist, without Transubstantiation? I have before told him what I suppose
sufficient to explain this matter. But because I cannot expect that either my
Church or Book should pass pass with him for an Oracle, it may be some
confirmation of the Idea to show him one of their pretended Patrons concurring
with me in the Exposition, and manifestly supposing a Union betwixt the Bread
and Christ's Body in the holy Eucharist, and yet stiffly contending at the same
time, that the Nature of the Bread is not changed in it.

All the danger is, that this holy Father, who, as Monsieur See Mr Bigot's
Preface below.
Bigot observes, has hitherto passed for the great Doctor of the Eucharist, as
St. Austin of Grace, may possibly by this run the hazard of losing his Credit
amongst them; and as it has fared but very lately with Theodoret upon the same
account, that they will henceforth begin to lessen his Reputation, since they
cannot any longer suppress his Doctrine.

But before I offer the Epistle it self, it is fit that I premise something for
the better understanding of it. It was written to Caesarius, a Monk, that had a
little before fallen into the Apollinarian Heresy, to reduce him to the
Catholic Faith. I shall therefore beg leave to begin my Reflections with a
short account of that, as far as may serve to open the way to what we are to
read of it in this.

REFLECTION I.
Of APOLLINARIUS and his HERESY.

APOLLINARIUS the younger, from whom this Heresy derives its name, was Son to
the elder Apollinarius, a very learned Man, and never, that we read of, charged
with any Heresy. Godefry vie de S. Athanase, livre II. cap. 13. Ex Basil. Ep.
74.
He was of Alexandria, where he was ordained a Priest, and became deservedly
eminent for this, That when Julian forbad the Christians the reading of human
Writers, being envious of that Reputation which many of the Fathers of the
Church had so justly acquired in that sort of Learning; he with his Son,
repaired in great measure this Disadvantage, by opening of two Schools: The
Father Socrat. Eccles. Hist. lib. 3. cap 16. Calvisii Chronol. page 525. an.
362.
turning the Writings of the Old Testament into Heroic Verse, and composing
several Tragedies of the Historical Parts of them: The Son explaining the New
in Dialogues, after the Platonic manner; and by this means preserving the
Church from that Ignorance, which the Apostate Emperor thought to have reduced
it to.

II. As for the younger Apollinarius, he is on all hands acknowledged to have
been a very extraordinary Man; eminent for his Learning, and particularly
cherished by St. Athanasius, as one of the Sozomen. Eccl. Hist. lib. 6. c. 25.
See Epiphan. Haer. 77. Theophilus l. 1. paschal. Vincen. Lirin. lib. adv. prof.
novationes. Quid illo praestantius acumine, exercitatione, doctrina? Quam
multas ille Haereses multis voluminibus oppresserit, quot inimicos fidei
confutaverit errores, indicio est opus illud 30 non minus librorum,
nobilissimum and maximum, quo insanas Porphyrii calumnias, magna probationum
mole confudit. Longum est universa ipsius opera commemorare, quibus profecto
summis Aedificatoribus. Ecclesiae par esse potuisset, nisi profana illa
haereticae curiositatis libidine, novum nescio quod adinvenisset, quo and
cunctos labores suos, velut cujusdam leprae admixtione, foedaret, and
committeret, ut doctrina ejus non tam aedificatio, quam tentatio potius
ecclesiastica diceretur.
most zealous Defenders of the Nicene Faith, whilst he was yet but Reader in
the Church of Laodicea. He wrote against Porphyry in 30 Books; against the
Arrians, Eunomians, Origin, and the other Heretics of those times. In a word,
both his Zeal and his Learning were such, that, if we may take the account
which Vincentius Lirinensis has left of him, had he not fallen into Heresy, he
might justly have been equaled to the chiefest Builders of the Church.

III. The Occasion of his Heresy is diversely reported by Ecclesiastical
Writers. Ruffin. lib. 2. cap. 20.
Ruffinus tells us, that his extraordinary Facility to write upon all sorts of
Subjects, and his great Understanding in all kinds of Learning, raised in him a
love of Disputation; and that the desire of refuting whatever others said, made
him at last himself become a Heretic. Sozomen lib. 6. c. 25.
Sozomen relates, that St. Athanasius in his Passage through Laodicea, where
Apollinarius then was, contracted so intimate a Friendship with him, that
George, Bishop of that place, and who detested the Communion of St. Athanasius,
as the other Arrians did, excommunicated Petavius says it was for keeping too
much company with the Heathen Epiphanius. See dogm. Theol. T. 4. l. 1. p 25. c.
6.
Apollinarius upon this account, and would never be persuaded to receive him,
whatever Instances he could make to that purpose; and that upon this he
conceived so great a discontent, that it carried him in the end to form himself
a new Heresy. And lastly, Theodoret: Eccles. Hist. l. 5 c. 4.
Theodoret differing from both these, tells us, That being rejected from the
Government of the Church, to which in the Contest between Meletius and
Paulinus, he also, as Head of a third Party, aspired; he thereupon began to
spread openly that Heresy he had before invented, and to set himself up for
chief of it.

IV. Whether any, or all these Causes concurred to ruin one of the greatest
Ornaments of the Church, and who had till then been the Admiration of the best
Men, not only St. Athanasius, Basil, etc. who were his Friends, but all the
others, as many as have left us any account of the History of those times,
having constantly represented him in the most advantageous manner that could be
expected: Certain it is, that his loss was a very sensible Blow to the Church,
and is as such, exceedingly lamented Epiphan. Haer. 77.
by Epiphanius in the account of his Heresy.

V. He had now been some time made Godefry places it An. 361. See Bals. Zon.
com. in Can 1. Council. Oec. secundi.
Bishop of Laodicea; whether of the great Laodicea in Syria, or of the other in
Phoenicia of Libanus, is not certainly known. It was not long after this
Promotion that he became a Heretic. Athanasius, who died within 10 years
after, having written a long Letter to Epictetus, Bishop of Corinth, against
his Errors; though either his respect to a Person he had so much esteemed, or
being unwilling to exasperate One, whom he so earnestly desired to reduce See
this Letter in Epiphan. Haeres. 77.
to the Catholic Faith, made him that he did not once name him in his whole
Epistle.

VI. But we will come yet nearer; for in the year 362. Athanasius being the
third time returned from Banishment, held a Council at Alexandria; in which,
among other things, we find the Heresy See this Council in Labbe's Collection,
T. 2. p. 816.
of Apollinarius expressly condemned, though no mention made of his Name; whether
it were that he was not yet known as chief of those Heretics, or that, as some
think, he sent a Renuntiation of his Vid. Binnii not. loc. cit.
Heresy to the Council by the Monks that went thither. About ten years after,
Anno 373. the same Heresy was again condemned in another Council at Rome,
under Pope Damasus; and lastly, in the second General Council at
Constantinople, Anno 381. He is by name anathematized among the other
Heretics, Can. 1. of that Synod.

VII. As to the Heresy it self, I shall not enter any farther into the search
of it, than may serve for the Explication of that Capital Error, which gave
Occasion to this Epistle of St. Chrysostom. Now this, to take it in his own
words as they Photii bibl. in Eulogio p. 850.
are reported by Photius from Eulogius, was, That (...), That God and flesh
make up but one Nature, which Balsamon and Zonaras Comment. in Conc. 2.
Oecumen. can. 1.
thus explain, (...). That he said, that the Son of God took indeed an animate
Body of the blessed Virgin, but without the Rational Soul, the Divinity serving
instead of that.

VIII. And the same is the account which the other Ecclesiastical Writers have
left of him; Gregory Nazianzen, Theodoret, Epiphanius, Theorianus, etc. all
which unanimously agree in this point of his asserting, (...) Theodoret.
Haeres. Fabul. l 5. c. 11.
(...). That the Body of our Savior was animated, but that he had not the
Rational Soul; for that that Soul was superfluous, where the Divine (...) or
Word was present.

IX. But though this were the last Resolution of his Heresy as to this point,
yet was it not his first Error. It was a part of the Doctrine maintained by
Arrius and Eunomius, That Christ took a Body destitute not only of the Rational
Soul, but altogether inanimate; (...), says Theodoret, Theodoret. Haeres. Fab.
l. 4. c. 1. and Epist. 104. de Arrio, and Eu^.
(...). That God the Word took a mere Body, and that himself supplied the want
of the Soul. And the same was the beginning of Apollinarius's Heresy too.
(...), says Socrates, (...) Socrates Hist. Eccl. l. 2. c. 46.
(...). They first asserted, That God at his Incarnation took upon him Man
without any Soul. Afterward, as if they repented, and meant to correct their
Error, they held, That he took indeed the animal Soul, but was destitute of the
Rational, God the Word being instead of that. Both which Vincentius Lirinensis
tells us, they sometimes joined together, saying, In ipsa Salvatoris nostri
carne, Vincent. Lirinens. adv. Haeres. c. 17.
aut animam humanam penitus non fuisse, aut certe talem fuisse cui men's and
ratio non esset; That in the Body of our Savior there was either no Human Soul
at all, or at least such as was not rational.

X. I shall not now enter on any other Points of their Heresy, such as their
making this Flesh not to have been assumed by Christ at his Conception, but to
have been always with him consubstantial with the Epiphan. Haeres. 77.
Theodoret. Eccles. Hist. l. 5. cap. 3. Greg. Naz. Orat. 46. p. 722. etc.
Divinity; which Divinity therefore by consequence suffered, and was mortal;
which Epiphanius, Theodoret, but especially Gregor. Nazianzen has at large
related. Only since, some, for the more distinct conception of the Apollinarian
Heresy, have thus distinguished it from that of Eutyches afterward; that the
Eutychian affirmed, That our blessed Savior took nothing from the blessed
Virgin, but that the very Logos, the Word it self being, as Theodoret
Theodoret. Haeretic. Fab. l. 4. c. 13. (...), Eutyches, (...).
expresses it, immutably converted, and made Flesh, only passed through the
Virgin; whereas Apollinarius supposed the Flesh of Christ, which he took of the
Virgin, to be converted into the Divine Nature: It appears by Gregory
Nazianzen, that this was no certain distinction, forasmuch as the Apollinarian
too affirmed oftentimes the same thing; that, as the Father expresses it in the
place I before cited, our Savior was even before he descended, the Son of Naz.
orat. 46. supr. dict. (...), Apollinarius, (...). Page 722.
Man, and descending, brought his. Flesh along with him, which he had whilst he
was in Heaven, before all Ages, and consubstantial with his Essence. Which is
what Theodoret long since observed, when in his 3. Dialogue, speaking with
relation to them both, he says, (...). They who have patcht together this
various and many-form'd Heresy, sometimes say, that the Word is become Flesh,
sometimes that the Flesh is changed into the Word.

Wherefore laying aside these subtleties, this we may undoubtedly conclude,
That whatever their other differences were, whether as to his Body, which we
see is uncertain, or to his Soul, in which the variety was more constant and
more discernable; the Eutychian affirming the Union of the two entire Natures,
the Humane and Divine; whereas the Apollinarian denied that our Savior ever
assumed the reasonable Soul at all: certain it is, for what concerns our
present purpose, that they both agreed in this, That after the Union of the
Word See Petav. Dogm. Theolog. Tom. 4. l. 1. c. 15. page 71.. 3.
and Flesh, there was but one only Nature common to both, the Substance of the
two, that were before, being now confused and permixt; from whence they were
both of them afterward called by Apollinarius by St. Chrysostom, Eutyches by
others.
St. Chrysostom and others (...), from their confusion of the two Natures into
one, and making not only one Person, as the Catholic Church did, but one
Nature too alone in Christ.

REFLECTION II.
St. Chrysostme's Argument from the Eucharist against the Apollinarians,
considered and explained.

SUch is the Account which the ancient Fathers have left us of the Apollinarian
Heresy, and the same we find to have been the Notion which St. J. Chrysostom
in this Epistle had of it. He proves the divine and Humane Natures to be
distinct in Christ; that the Properties of the one, ought no otherwise to be
confounded with the other, than as they are united in the same Person. He
charges the Apollinarians with saying that our Savior's Body is converted into
the Divinity, and upon that account attributing Passion to the Deity: and
finally, he concludes all with this Exhortation to Caesarius, whom he designed
by this Epistle to recover from their Errors. Wherefore, dearly beloved, says
he, laying aside the novel Phrases, and vain Speeches of these men, let us
return to what we have before said; that it is pious, most pious indeed, that
we should confess our Savior Christ, who died for us, to be perfect in the
Godhead, perfect in the Manhood; one only begotten Son, not divided into two,
but bearing in himself together the unmixt proprieties of two distinct Natures.
Not two different Persons, God forbid! But one and the same Lord Jesus, God,
Word; clothed with our Flesh, and that not inanimate, without the rational
Soul, as the wicked Apollinarius pretends. Let us then assent to these things,
let us fly those who would divide him; for though the Natures be distinct, yet
is there but one undivided and indivisible Union to be acknowledged in the same
one Person and Substance of the Son.

II. And now if this be the Catholic Doctrine which this Holy Father here
designs to bring Caesarius to; such the Errors, which by the subtlety of the
Apollinarians he was involved in: It will be very easy to conceive the
Allusion he here makes between the two Natures united in Christ, and the two
Parts, which the Catholic Church has ever acknowledged in the Holy Eucharist;
to the destruction of the Romanists Pretenses of Transubstantiation, and to the
solid Establishment of the real Presence of Christ in this sacred Mystery, such
as the Church of England believes, and has been established by me in the
foregoing Discourse.

III. The Words of St. Chrysostom in this Epistle See below.
are these: Christ is both GOD and MAN; GOD, in that he is impassible; MAN, for
that he suffered. yet but one SON, one LORD: He the same without doubt, having
one Dominion, one Power of two united Natures. Not that these Natures are
consubstantial, forasmuch as either of them, does without confusion retain its
own Properties, and being two, are yet inconfused in him.

For as [in the Eucharist] before the BREAD is Consecrated, we call it BREAD,
but when the Grace of God by the Priest has consecrated it, it is no longer
called BREAD, but is esteemed worthy to be called the LORD's BODY, although the
Nature of BREAD still remains in it; and we do not say there be TWO BODIES, but
ONE BODY of the Son: So here, the DIVINE NATURE being joined with the [Humane]
BODY, they both together make up but one Son, one Person. But yet they must be
confessed to remain without confusion, after an indivisible manner, not in ONE
NATURE, but in TWO PERFECT NATURES.

IV. In which Passage, whether we consider the Expressions themselves, or the
Application of them, they are utterly destructive of Transubstantiation. First,
as to the Expressions themselves.


They tell us plainly, That the Nature of BREAD remains in the Eucharist after
the Consecration: That our not calling it BREAD, but CHRIST's BODY, does not
therefore intend to signify that the Nature of BREAD is at all changed; for
that the BREAD by Consecration becomes indeed worthy to be CALLED THE LORD's
BODY, but yet still retains its own Nature of BREAD.

V. These are such plain expressions of the Bread's continuing in its own
Nature after Consecration, that the Papists themselves have not been able to
deny it. So that their only Refuge is, that by the BREAD'S retaining still its
own Nature, we are, they say, to understand only this, that its Accidents
remain, but for its Substance, that is changed into the BODY OF CHRIST. See
most of these cited by Albertinus, de Eucharist. l. 2. page 533. in
Chrysostomo, c. 1.
Thus Gardener, Turrian, Bellarmine, Gregory de Valentia, Vasquez, Suares,
Perron, Gamachaeus, and last of all, Father Nouet de la presence de Jesus
Christ dans les tres saint Sacrement, live. 4. c. 5. art. 3 p. 285.
Nouet, in his Controversy against Monsieur Claude.

VI. This is indeed to cut the Knot when it was not to be untied; and makes St.
Chrysostom in effect to say thus much, That the Nature of BREAD after the
Consecration, still remains, though indeed the Nature be changed, and only the
Accidents continue. And would it not have been an admirable Similitude, to show
that the Humane Nature of Christ was not changed into the Divine, as the
Appollinarian pretended, to allege the Example of the Eucharist, in which the
Nature of the BREAD was changed into the very Nature of Christ's Body, as the
Papists believe.

VII. But S. Chrysostom was not so absurd, as these men would represent him;
and his other Expressions utterly overthrow this Evasion. 1. He tells us
plainly, that all the Change that was made in the BREAD by Consecration, was in
the Name, not See this Argument managed by Monsieur Claude, Rep. a Pere Nouet.
Party 5. c. 6. p. 488.
the Substance: That whereas before it was called BREAD, by being consecrated
it became worthy to be CALLED THE LORD's BODY. 2. Had St. Chrysostom believed
the BREAD to have been truly changed, and become the very Body of Christ, would
he have said that it became WORTHY to be CALLED the Body of Christ? and not
rather plainly have told us that it became the VERY BODY of Christ? Do men use
to say that the Heaven is worthy to be called the Heaven? The Sun, worthy to be
called the Sun? And why shall we think St. Chrysostom the only ridiculous man,
to use such a Phrase as no man in the World ever did, or would have done
besides? But 3. And to put this point beyond al doubt: When St. Chrysostom
here speaks of the Nature of BREAD, in allusion to the Nature of CHRIST; if we
will have him consistent with himself, we must suppose him to have used that
Expression with reference to both, in the same sense. As therefore in his
Discourse immediately before and after, by Nature, with reference to CHRIST, he
does not mean the Properties only, but the very Substance of his Humanity and
Divinity; so here in his allusion to the Eucharistical BREAD, he must still
mean the same, the Substance of the BREAD, and not barely the Properties, or
Accidents of it; and of this I am persuaded no indifferent Person will make any
doubt.

Secondly, As to the design of this Allusion,

VIII. The Apollinarians, as we have seen, affirmed the Change of one Nature in
Christ into the other; That however, before the Union, they were two distinct
things, yet by being united, the humane Nature became converted, or if you
will, transubstantiated into the Divine.

IX. Now the Falseness of this S. Chrysostom, shows by the Example of the
Eucharist. That as there the BREAD by being consecrated becomes indeed worthy
to be called CHRIST's BODY, yet does not lose its own Nature, but continues the
same BREAD, as to its Substance, that it was before: So here, the Humane Nature
of Christ, being by the Incarnation hypostatically united to the Divine, did
not cease to be a Humane Nature, but still continued what it was before,
however united with the other in one Person.

X. So that as certainly then as the Humane Nature of Christ does now continue
to be a Humane Nature, notwithstanding that Incarnation; so certainly does the
BREAD in the Eucharist continue BREAD after this Consecration. As certainly as
Apollinarius was deceived in supposing the Manhood of Christ to be swallowed up
and changed into the Godhead; so certainly is the Papist deceived in imagining
the Substance of the BREAD to be swallowed up and converted into the Substance
of CHRIST'S BODY, in this Holy Sacrament.

XI. Christ's Humane Nature being united to the Divine, became worthy thereby
to be called, together with it, by the same common Name of Christ, Lord, Jesus,
the Word, the Son of God; the BREAD being by Consecration mystically united to
Christ's BODY, becomes worthy to be called, together with it, THE LORD's BODY;
but that is all, the Humane Nature still continues what it was before; in the
one, the Nature of the BREAD still continues what it was before in the other,
and there is no Transubstantiation made in either.

XII. In a word, in the Hypostatick Union, though there be two distinct
Natures, God and Man, yet there is but one Person, one Son made up of both. So
in the Holy Eucharist, though there be two different things united, the BREAD
and CHRIST's BODY, yet we do not say there be two Bodies, but one mystical Body
of Christ, made up of both; as the King and his Image, to use the Similitude of
the Ancient Fathers, are not two, but one King: Or in the Example of St.
Chrysostom himself, Christ (...) (...) ^y.

REFLECTION III.
Of the Epistle it self, and the Attempts that have been made against it.

I. ANd now when such is the force of this Epistle, that it utterly destroys
one of the principal Errors of Popery: It is not at all to be wondered at, if
those men who were resolved not to be convinced by it themselves, have used all
imaginable means to provide that others should not.

II. It is now above 100 years, since this passage was first produced by Peter
Martyr, in his Dispute Ann. 1548.
with Gardener, Bishop of Winchester, concerning the Eucharist. He then
professed that he had copied it out of the Florentine MS. and that the whole
Epistle was put by him into Archbishop Cranmer's Library. Lovanii Confutatio
Cavillationum, etc. ad Obj. 201.
This Gardener could not deny, who therefore in his Answer to him 1552.
endeavored first to ascribe it to another John of Constantinople, who lived
about the beginning of the 6th Century. Secondly, to elude the force of this
Passage, by that strange interpretation of the Word Nature, I have before
mentioned, and in which all the others have since followed him.

III. Libr. 1. de Euchar. cap. 18.
Turrian, who by his writing seems to show that he had somewhere or other seen
this Epistle, contends in like manner, and if we may believe Vasquez, and de
Valentia, proves it too, that Vasquez dis. 180. c. 9. n. 102. Valentia de
Transub. cap. 7.. Similiter.
this Epistle was not Chrysostom's, but the other John's, to whom the Bishop of
Winchester had before ascribed it. But yet still the Argument recurr'd upon
them, forasmuch as this other John was in the beginning of the 6th Age, and
Transubstantiation by consequence was not the Doctrine of the Church then.

IV. And indeed Gamachaeus is not very unwilling to acknowledge this: for
having with the rest assigned this Epistle to the other John, he tells us,
Excusari posse, quod nec Transubstantiatio ejus temporibus ita perspicue
tradita and explicata fuerat, sicut hodie. See Albertinus de Euch. p. 533. l.
2. supr. cit.
he is to be excused, for that Transubstantiation was not so plainly delivered
and explained in those days as it is now.

V. But this Perron de (...) Eucharistie. p. 381, 382, 383.
Cardinal Perron could not bear, he neither thought fit to rely upon an
Evasion, which he saw would not do their business, nor could he endure to allow
so ancient an Author as either of the two John's, to have been so directly
opposite to their Sentiments in this matter. And therefore flatly accuses Peter
Martyr of Forgery, and uses abundance of Arguments to persuade the World, that
there was never any such Epistle as had been pretended.

VI. Thus stood this Passage, and the whole Epistle for its sake; till about
six years since the learned Bigotius, who had twelve years before brought a
Copy of it from Florence, resolved to ruin all the Endeavors of these Men, by
publishing the very Epistle, which the Cardinal had so loudly proclaimed to be
a Forgery, and proving it to be indeed the Genuine Offspring of St.
Chrysostom, contrary to what the rest had in vain pretended.

VII. And this he accordingly, with great sincerity performed, Ann. 1680. For
in his Edition of Palladius that year, among the other Pieces which he added to
it, this Epistle of St. Chrysostom had one of the first places, and was
strengthened by him with such Attestations, as show it to be beyond all doubt
authentic. In his Preface he declared how he came by it, and made a short
Apology for that passage of it that had caused so great a Contest; but such as
it seems, he was either conscious to himself, not to have been very strong, or
feared at least that his Censors would not esteem it to be so.

VIII. And in this I speak no more than what he himself declared to his
Friends, insomuch that he Expostulatio. page iii.
resolved to reserve privately some few Copies, for fear the rest should run
that risque, which indeed they accordingly did. For being now quite finished,
and just ready to come abroad, some of the Doctors of the Sorbonne, whereof
Monsieur Grandin and Mr. Faure have been charged as the Principal, caused it to
be suppressed, and the printed Leaves cut out of the Book, without any thing to
supply the place of them.

IX. And of this the Edition of Palladius of that year remains a standing
Monument, both in the Preface, and in the Book; and it was publicly S.
Anastasii in Hexaemeron lib. 12. Cui praemissia est expostulatio etc. Land.
1682. 410.
complained of by a very learned Man, in an Expostulation prefixed to a piece
of Anastasius, published by him about two years after.

X. But what that Reverend Person could not then obtain, being since fallen
into my hands, I mean the very Leaves cut out by these Doctors, of Mr. Bigot's
Preface, and the Epistle rased out of the Book; I was unwilling to come into a
Part of their Fraud, by detaining any longer that, which both so well deserved,
and had so long since been prepared for a public view.

XI. I hope the learned World, whom I principally design to gratify in this
matter, will accept this never the worse, for that Mr. le Moyne the last year
published this Epistle among his Varia Sacra: That learned Man having neither
given Tom. 1.
the Greek Fragments, which I now publish from Monsieur Bigots own Impression;
nor Monsieur Bigots account of it, in the part of the Preface which was
suppressed. Not to add, that the Latin Copy of Mr. le Moyne is so very false,
that it renders the Epistle utterly unintelligible. I do not pretend to
anticipate his design, which he appears so jealous of: that is too vast to be
injured by any thing I can offer; and I shall be glad if what I now publish may
be any way serviceable to it.

XII. As to the Authority of this Piece, I shall need say no more than what
Monsieur Bigot has already done to prove it to be Genuine. So many ancient
Authors have cited it, as St. Chrysostom's Epistle to Caesarius; such Fragments
of it remain in the most ancient Writers as Authentic, that he who after all
these shall call this Piece in question, may with the same reasonableness doubt
of all the rest of his works, which, perhaps upon less grounds, are on all
sides allowed as true and undoubted.

But it is time now to see what account Monsieur Bigot himself gives of it.

Suppressa in Praefatione Emerici Bigotii, de Epistola Chrysostomi ad
Caesarium, Monachum.
HAnc Orationem sequitur Epistola ad Caesarium, Praefat. lit i, ij. page prior.
inter lin. 22, and 23.
Monachum, quae licet nitore suo nativo, id est, Graeco eloquio, destituta,
nihilominus sub velo veteris Latinae Interpretationis mirificos eloquentiae
disertissimi doctoris radios exhibet. Primus qui ultimis temporibus hujus
meminit Epistolae, fuit Petrus Martyr, Florentinus, qui ex ea locum quendam
protulit in locis communibus. Insolitus loquendi de EUCHARISTIA modus, qui ex
ea referebatur, a Johannis Chrysostomi phrasi Lit. i, ij. page altera.
ac genio prorfus alienus lectores in diversas traxit sententias. Aliis
supposititiam esse affirmantibus, aliis pro virili contendentibus, veram esse
as genuinam; omnes integram videre sum concupivere; dolueruntque Petrum
Martyrem, qui primus de ea mentionem injecerat, minime indicasse quae in
Bibliotheca extaret codex MS. Florentiae delitescere omnium erat suspicio, quia
Florentinus fuit Petrus Martyr, sed ubi, ab omnibus nesciebatur. Mihi quae
fortuna faverat in reperiendo contextu Graeco vitae St. Johannis Chrysostomi,
hic etiam non defuit. Ejus exemplar reperi apud R. R. P. P. Dominicanos, in
monasterio S. Marci. Cujus te in partem (...) venire libens patior; nec expecto
ut mihi succlames in commune, (...), si mode exorari te sinas, ut benigna
interpretatione emollias, quae duriuscule sonant de Eucharistiae Sacramento,
and in memoriam revoces tot and tam insignes locos, in quibus adeo luculenter
de hoc sacro-sancto Mysterio loquitur Joannes noster, ut Doctor Eucharistiae
vocari meruerit, sicut S. Augustinus Doctor Gratiae vulgo praedicatur. Dixi
Petrum Martyrem primum postremis temporibus hujus Epistolae meminisse, quae
antea Graecis Patribus notissima fuerat, utpote qui multa testimonia ex ea
adversus Monophysitas and Acephalos adduxerunt, ut observare licet in Notis,
quas margini apposui, indicando codices ex quibus Textum Graecum apud illos
patres a me inventum descripst. Caeterum ubi deficiebant verba Graeca, vacua
Columnarum spatia reliqui, nec passus sum ea punctis, aut lineolis, sicut
librariorum mos est, repleri, ut possint inibi viri eruditi verba Graeca
adscribere Lit. i. iij.
siquando ea invenerint. Cum enim experimento noverim, quo casu, quave fortuna
in ea quae attexui testimonia, inciderim, non despero ab aliis alia posse
inveniri. Quisque experiatur cui fortuna erit faventior; and si cui ea
obsecundaverit, is ne publico invideat, neque apud se inventa privatim
detineat. Qui veteres libros tractant, norunt nullam veteris cujuscunque libri
editionem, quae ex unico exemplari fuerit eruta, hucusque prodiisse, omni ex
part perfectam. Manu exarati codices mutuas aliorum exposcunt operas, ut quod
in uno corruptum est, ab alio sanetur; quod in une vetustas obliteraverit, ab
alio lucem accipiat. Hoc verum esse de codice hujus Epistolae fateri cogor, qui
licet annorum sit 500, parum tamen emendate scriptus est, and opem a Graeco
praecipue codice, aut ab alio saltem Latino, postulat. In eo quem vidi,
aliquando voces continuae sunt, aliquando simplex vocalis E pro diphthongo AE
scripta fuit; T pro D, and vice versa D pro T; verbis aliquando ita corruptis,
ut ad sanitatem reduci minime possint absque subsidio aliorum codicum. Quae
scribarum incuria deterruit, opinor, Petrum Martyrem ab ea edenda. Taceo
interpretationem, quae minus accurata, imo plane barbara videtur. Ego his
omnibus naevis Lectores benevolos nequaquam offensum iri arbitratus sum; imo
eam libenter excepturos puto quam damus Epistolam, Latin quoquo modo versam,
cujus fragmentum a Petro Martyr editum, eruditorum animos pridem sollicitavit.
Quis enim illud cum legerit, Joannis Chrysostomi mentem percipere possit, ex
eoque animadvertere, qua occasion, quo animo ejus verba Lit. i. iij. page
altera.
scripta sunt? In ea porro Epistola mirari licet summam and insolitam Dei
amantissimi viri charitatem, qui licet innumeris aerumnis oppressus esset,
atque continuis terroribus ob Isaurorum Incursiones, ut ipse scribit in
Epistolis ad Olympiadem, paene exanimaretur; nihilominus cum audisset
Caesarium, Monachum, amicum suum in Apollinaris and (...) Haeresim incidisse,
eum pro incredibili sua bonitate ab Haeresi avertere, atque in sincerae
pietatis viam revocare hac Epistola molitus est. Quantum vero Apollinaris
Haeresis tunc grassaretur, and quam multos invafisset, ex eo colligere licet,
quod contra Apollinaristas and Synusiastas scripserunt Diodorus, Tarsensis
Episcopus, quem supra memoravi, Gregorius Nyssenus, Cyrillus Alexandrinus,
Theodorus Mopsuestenus, Theophilus Antiochensis, ut alios plures omittam. Atque
ut ab eo errore Caesarium revocaret Joannes, eumque ad catholicam fidem, quae
duas in Christo naturas inconfusas sub una persona confitetur, Epistola
reduceret, comparationem ab Eucharistiae Sacramento mutuatur, in quo PANIS post
consecrationem, non jam PANIS, sed CORPUS CHRISTI APPELLARE DIGNUS EFFICITUR;
Etiamsi natura panis, inquit, in ipso permansit, and non duo corpora, sed unum
corpus Filii praedicatur. Quibus verbis sanctus Doctor veram ac realem, ut
vocant, corporis Christi in Eucharistia presentiam supponit, and agnoscit;
alias certe nulla esset cum humana ac divina in Christo natura Eucharistiae
comparatio. Ips: Chrysostomus Homil. 2. ad Populum Antiochensem: (...). Elias
enim pallium reliquit discipulo suo; Dei autem Filius ascendens in coelum,
nobis carnem suam reliquit: sed Elias se exuit, Christus vero and carnem suam
nobis reliquit, ipsamque habens, ascendit. Et Hom. 83. in Matthaeum: (...) Sic
etiam in mysteriis faciamus, non illa quae ante nos jacent, solummodo
aspicientes, sed verba quoque ejus tenentes. Nam verbis ejus defraudari non
possumus, sensus vero noster deceptu facillimus est: illa falsa esse non
possunt, hic saepius atque saepius fallitur. Quoniam ergo ille dixit, Hoc est
corpus menum, obediamus, and credamus, and oculis intellectus id perspiciamus.
Integrum librum consicerem, si ex Chrysostomo locos omnes excerperem, in quibus
de sacratissima Eucharistia similiter loquitur; sed laetius ac salubrius tibi
erit, eos in font legisse.

Thus far Bigotius's Preface: As to the Epistle it self, I have published it
exactly as it was in the Paris Edition, whose Pages I have retained, that those
who please, may see the Defect in that part of Palladius, out of which it was
rased. For the little Notes which I have added, they contain a Collation, 1. Of
the Latin of Bigotius, with the Latin of Mr. le Moyne's Copy, in which I do not
know that I have omitted the least variation, even of a single Letter. 2. Of
the Greek Fragments collected by Bigotius, with some other MSS. that have been
communicated to me. In which, A denotes the Arundel MS. cited by Dr. Cave in
his Chartophylax Eccles. C. one of Monsieur Colbert's Library, examined by the
learned Monsieur Allix. M. the Latin Copy published by Monsieur le Moyne.

EPISTOLA S. JOHAN. CHRYSOSTOM.
Praeter Authors a Bigotio laudatos, unde fragmenta Graeca hujus Epistolae
collegit vir eruditissimus; extat alius Nicephori liber MS. in Biblioth.
Colbert. continens quinque diversos tractatus. Ex secundo eorum contra Mamonas
quaedam collegit, and mecum communicavit reverendus D. P. Alix. Titulus autem
in illo MS. ita se habet, page 222. (...). Paulo aliter legitur hic titulus in
antiquo codice Bibliothecae Arundelianae a R. D. D. Cave in Chartoph. Eccles.
nuper edito, p. 69. (...), etc. uti in MS. Colbert.
(...) Page 236. lit. Gg. part. alt. folii ed. Paris.
(...).

(...) Anastas. in MS. Colleg. Clarom. Nicephor. C. P. in Antirrhet. MS. Bibl.
Colbert.
(...) Alludit ad hunc locum vetus Author contra Severianos and Acephalos, a
Turriano editus, Bibl. Patr. Edit. 4. Tom. 4. ad fin. ubi post laudarum quendam
Ambrosii locum, subdit, Chrysostomus ad Caesarium Monachum. Haec est haeresis
ipsissima introduceritium Mixtionem and Compositionem. Vid. Expostulationem p.
X.
(...) Var. lect. MS. M.


Locus hic corruptus videtur: Quid si legamus (...) vel (...), ut sensus sit,
istud admiraberis, vel potius, istud admirari debuisses insani Apollinaris
absurdum; haec quippe est Haeresis ipsissima, etc.
(...) Page 237. edit. Paris. Gg. iij.
(...). MS. M.


(...) Anastas. in MS. Clarom.
(...)

(...) Nicephor. Anastas. Joan. Damascen. To. IV. Var. lect. Canisii. p. 211.
(...) (...)
(...) Theorianus in legatione ad Armenios. p. 74.
(...); MS. M.
MS. M.


(...) (...).
(...) Anast. Nicephorus.
(...). (...) deest in MS. A.
(...) (...), MS. C.
(...) (...). MS. A.
(...), (...), ib. deest.
(...)

(...) (...) deest in A.
(...) (...), ib.
(...), (...). ib.
(...). (...) pro (...), ib.
(...) In MS collect. Biblioth. reg. Gall. n. 1026. p. 247.
(...) (...) ib.
(...) Edit. Paris. p. 244.
(...).

INCIPIT Epistola B Johannis Episcopi Constantinopolitani, ad Caesarium,
Monachum, tempore secundi exilii sui.

INSPEXIMUS literas tuae Reverentiae: inspeximus autem N.
non pter.
praeter lachrymas: lachrymabimur.
lachrymas. Quomodo enim N.
non lachrymas: lachrymabimur.
lachrymabimur, and animam ipsam dolor conficimus, videntes fratrem singularem
vitam a pueritia eligentem, and (...).
(...), id est, consummate circa pietatem se habentem, subito autem
Haeredicorum.
haereticorum jactibus pulsum. Et dicas forsitan ab errore ad id quod melius
est venis, se Te, and gratiam confiteri his, qui Ammirabilem.
admirabilem illum Proculerit.
protulerint librum, quem magnum esse Optime.
optima tua nominant scripta, qui splendide praedicat [ Concursum essentialem
sacrum facta ex Divinitate and Carnis unam autem ex hoc perfici naturam.
concursum essentialem and commixtionem sacram factam ex Divinitate and Carne,
unam autem ex hac, perfici naturam.] Istud mirabitur insipientis. Apollinarii
inconsideratio, ista eorum qui introducunt Contemplationem.
contemperationem and (...).
(...), id est, commixtionem impiissima [ Intentioque.
intentio, quae] procedens immutat quidem Arrii, Apollinarii, Et deest.
and Sabellii, Et deest.
and Manetis nihil. Passionem autem excogitari and adponi secundum illos
Unigeniti emaginatur.
imaginatur Deitati, quod a (...).
Christianis alienum est.

Posside igitur. Temetipsum iterum, Dilectissime, and ad priorem regredere
ordinem ab abominabili illa abstinens [ Opinionem and qua Apollinaris and eorum
qui Synusiaste dicuntur ipsa cogitatio assiduae puris, etc.
opinione, quae est Apollinaris, and eorum qui Synusiastae dicuntur. Impia
cogitatio assidua e puris] influens nocere novit, qui secundum nos sunt
simplicitati conviventes. MS. M. Doctoris.
Ductoris enim eorum est liber, Apollinarii Dico, abest.
dico; Et si.
etsi hunc sibi tua Reverentia non recte faciens negotiata est. Verum tamen nos
recordantes tuae nobiscum conversationis, sentientes autem ex his quae
scripsistis, errorem subsistere erga tuam dilectionem ex illorum insipientia
non solum erga dispensationis Misterium.
mysterium, magis autem and erga Nominum conjunctionem, excogitavimus Deo
cooperante nostrae infirmitati de omnibus manifestam ostentationem facere, ad
redargutionem quidem Male.
malae opinionis eorum qui Ereticum.
haereticum Tibi protulerunt librum, Edit. Paris. page 238.
correctionem autem tuae venerationis.

Dominum.
Deum ergo quando dicis, Dilectissime, agnovisti id quod simplex est Nature.
naturae, quod incompositum, quod inconvertibile, quod invisible, quod
immortale, quod incircumscriptibile, quod incomprehensibile, and istis similia.
Hominem autem dicens, significasti id quod naturae est In firmum.
infirmum, esuritionem, sitim, super Lazarum lachrymas, Meum.
metum, sudoris ejectionem, and his similia, quibus id quod divinum est extra
[est. e^ Xu^m dn]
Christum autem] quando dicis conjunxisti utrumque, unde and passibilis dicatur
idem ipse and Im-passibilis, deficit i^, spatio tamen relicto ubi olim fuerit.
impassibilis, passibilis quidem carne, impassibilis autem Deitate. Eadem ipsa
and de Filio, and XPO. and Inu^. and dno^.
Christo, and Jesu, and Domino praedicantur. Communia enim ista, and [
Susceptibili avarum]
susceptibilia duarum] Essentiarum nomina sunt; quarum conjunctio in haereticis
MS. M.
quidem errorem facit, proprio pro communi utentes nomine [ XP^ unos autem.]
Christi uno. His autem] communibus istis Uti oportet, deest.
uti oportet Nominibus quando dispensationis confitendum est mysterium. Si enim
dm.
Deum dixeris pertulisse, qualicunque Cogitationem.
cogitatione quod Edit. Paris. page 239.
impossible est, dixisti, id quod Blasphemum est, [ Et immane sed.]
and in Sic videtur legendum; and in Manetis, and in aliorum Haeresum
declinasti impietatem. Si iterum, etc.
Manetis, and] in aliorum Haeresum.
haeresim declinasti. Impietatem, si iterum hominem dixeris qui pertulit,
inveniris purum aedificans templum. Templum Forte melius carnis. MS. D. le
Moyne.
Crucis extra inhabitantem nunquam dicitur, quia iam non est Templum. Et
forsitan dicunt, and quomodo Dns.
Dominus dixit, Vt quid me Joan. 8. 40.
vultis occidere hominem qui veritatem vobis locutus sum quam audivi a do^.
Deo? Benand egrave; and omnino MS. M.
sapienter hoc dicendum est. [ Neque enim ex inhabitanti defraudabatur deitare]
Neque enim ex hoc ab Inhabitanti defraudabatur:] sed significare volens
patientem naturam hominis memoriam fecit, propter quod and ds.
Deus and Homo Est Christus, Martyrl. c. in tract. de Euchar. Oxon. MS. M.
Christus: ds.
Deus propter impassibilitatem, Homo propter Passionem. Unus filius, unus dns.
Dominus, idem ipse proculdubus unitarum naturarum, unam dominationem, unam
potestatem possidens, Etiam si.
etiamsi non Consubstantialiter Martyr.
consubstantiales existunt, [ MS M. Et unaquaeque in quo mixtam proprietatis
conservat agnitionem propter hoc quod inconfusa sunt duo.]
and unaquaeque Incommixta. Martyr. ib.
incommixtam Proprietatis conservat agnitionem, propter hoc quod Inconfusa sint
duo. Id.
inconfusa sunt, dico.] Sicut
enim antequam MS. M. Scificetur.
sanctificetur PANIS PANEM nominamus, divina autem illum Edit. Paris. page 240.
Scificante gra^. Id.
Sanctificante Gratia, mediante Sacerdote, liberatus est quidem Ab
Appellatio^ne. Ibid.
APPELLATIONE MS M
XPS.
PANIS, dignus autem habitus est Dominicae.
DOMINICI CORPORIS APPELLATIONE, etiamsi NATURA PANIS in ipso permansit, and
non duo Corpora sed Unus,
unum Corpus filii Praedicamus.
praedicatur: sic and Hic Martyr loc. cit. Haec. Totum hunc locum post
Turrianum in Edit. Damasceni, sic citat Albertinus de Euch. l. 2. p. 532. Sic
and hic divina (...) insidente corpori natura, etc.
hic Divina (...).
(...), id est inundante corporis natura, unum filium, unam personam, utraque
haec fecerunt. Agnoscendum tamen inconfusam and indivisibilem rationem, non in
una solum natura, sed in duabus perfectis. Si enim unius, quomodo idquod
inconfusum est, quomodo quod indivisibile, quomodo unitio dicitur aliquando? [
Sibimet ipsi unirique.]
Sibimet ipsi enim uniri quae] una est, aut confundi, aut dividi impossible
est. Quod ergo infernum evomuit, unam in XPO.
Christo naturam dicere putamus Quae sequuntur extant apud Jo. Damascenum.
divinam solam nominantes, non omni modo unam negant, Nam.
nostram, dico, salutem aut humanan retinentes, non divinae abnegationem
faciunt, Dicunt que.
dicuntque perdidit quod proprium erat. Si enim unus est, salva nobis est
unitio Omni modo.
omnimodo, and ea quae unitioni sunt propria, salvari necesse est: Si Edit.
Paris. page 241. lit. Hh.
enim non, nec unitio, sed confusio and abolitio.Mox autem ad Interrogationis
fluctuantes resposionem, ad aliquid aliud exiliunt, quod non sit proprium ad
Interrogationem: and inconstantes emittunt Voces; Pertulit Ds.
Deus and non pertulit, and si petantur modum dicere, ad ignorantiam recedunt,
proserentes; Quomodo Volunt XPI.
voluit Christi apud ipsos memoria fugiente posthaec Vituperari.
vituperari in hoc? Mox dicunt, and XPS.
Christus non est Ds.
Deus sed and Homo. Et iterum dicunt, Post Unitatem.
Unitionem non oportet dicere duas naturas. Attend significationem dicti.
Unitionem dixisti: unius unitionem non invenis fieri, quomodo Prenientes.
praevenientes diximus, sed Verbum Caro Joan. 1. 24.
factum est and Speculaneorum.
speculare eorum querentur subtilitatem. Intulit enim, and inhabitavit in
nobis. Nunquid non ibi videtur, Qui.
quia aliud est quod inhabitat praeter habitationem. Si cognovissent, 1 Cor.
11. 8.
nunquam Dnm.
Dominum gloria crucifixissent. Dominum iterum quando dixeris, non proprium sed
Commune* Significat.
significatur nomen, Passionis and Impassibilitatis susceptibile. Consueverant
autem and istud Edit. Paris. page 242.
praetendere putamus: Non Corpus Di.
dei and sanguinem accipimus, MS. D. le Moyne.
fideliter ac Piae.
pie suscipiendum, non quia Corpus and sanguinem possidet id quod divinum est
natura, sed quia Ea deest.
ea quae Carnis sunt, propria facit. O inconsideratio! O impia Cogitatio!
periclitatur enim apud ipsos dispensationis Mysterium, and iterum Dominicum
corpus, sicut Unum corpus.
verum corpus confiteri non patiuntur: per cogitationem enim dici conversum Eti.
esse hoc in deitatem imaginantur, unam hinc construentes naturam, and ipsam
cujus sit non Invenientes.
juvantes dicere, ut passionem divinitati; undique secundum Apollinarium
excogitantes, decidant a Pmissis.
praemissis bonis putamus non contremescent.
contremiscent ista dicere audientes. Non cogitant aeternum judicium, and dni.
Domini vocem dicentis, Ego sum and non Inmutor.
immutor. Caro infirma Sps.
Spiritus Malac. 3. 6. Mat. xxvi. 41.
MS. M.
autem promptus Ibid. 39.
Pater si possibile est transeat a me calix iste. -- Ibid. 38.
Tristis est anima mea usque ad mortem. Luke 24. 39.
Palpate and videte, quia Sps.
Spiritus carnem and ossa non habet sicut me videtis habere. Putamus Deitati
ista apta sunt. Audiant and Petrum dicentem Edit. Paris. page 243. Lit. Hh. ij.
Mat. 16. 16.
XPO.
Christo pro nobis passo carne, and non dixit Deitate. Et iterum, Tu es
Christus filius Dei vivi: Viventis dixit, non morientis. Et quaecunque his
similia divina nos edocet Scriptura, cui violenti esse Haeretici non desistunt.
Horum istas novitates* vocum declinantes, Charissimae.
Charissime, ad id quod praejacet, revertamur; pium and valde pium, XPm.
Christum qui morte circumdatus est, confiteri in divinitate perfectum, and in
humanitate perfectum, unum filium unigenitum, non dividendum in filiorum
dualitatem, XPS.
portantem tamen in semetipso indivisarum duarum naturarum inconvertibiliter
proprietates, non alterum and alterum, absit, sed unum and eundem Dnm.
Dominum, Ihm.
Jesum, dm.
Deum, Verbum, carne nostra amictum, and ipsa non inanimata, aut irrationabili,
sicut impius Apollinarius.
Apollinaris dixit. Istis mentem intendamus, fugiamus eos qui dividunt. Nam
etsi enim.
Nam etsi duplex natura, veruntamen indivisibilis and indissipabilis unitio, in
una filiationis confitenda persona, and una Subsistantia.
substantia. Fugiamus qui unam naturam post unitionem prodigaliter dicunt;
unius enim cogitatione impassibili Deo passionem adjungere impelluntur,
difpensationem abnegantes, and Diaboli Gehennam arripientes. Ista propter
mensuram Epistolae sufficere arbitror, ad confirmationem tuae dilectionis, o
magnifice. MS. M.


Explicit Epistula.
Epistola B. Joannis Episcopi Constantinopolitani ad Caesarium, Monachum,
tempore secundi exilii sui.

Amen.

NUMBER. VI.
Having, to satisfy the Vindicator, used such exactness in my Quotations, as
to refer, for the most part, to the very Pages where they are; it was thought
fit, if it may be, to prevent all future Cavil, that I should here subjoyn this
following Account of the Editions made use of by me.

A.
AQuinatis summa Theologiae, Fol. Colon. 1662. Articles of the Church of
England. See Sparrow. Arcudius de concordia Ecclesiae Occidentalis and
Orientalis, Fol. Paris 1626. Albertinus de Eucharistia, Fol. Daventriae 1654.
Arnauld Perpetuite de la Foy de Eglise Catholic touchant l'Eucharistie, 5
Edit. 8vo. Paris 1672. Amicable Accommodation, etc.
B.
Bellarmini Controversiae 3 Vol. Ingolstadii 1586. Idem de Indulgentiis, 8vo.
Coloniae 1599. Blondel of the Sybilline Oracles, Engl. Fol. Land. 1661.
Breviarium Romanum, 8vo. Antverpiae 1572. Bramhal's Works, Fol. Dublin 1677.
Bigotius vita Chrysostomi per Palladium, G. L. 4to. Paris 1680. Balsamon in
Concilia in Synodico, Oxonii 1672. Bonae Card. opera 3 Vol. 8vo. Paris 1676,
1677. Nouvelles dela repub. de Lettres Mr. B -- Juin 1686.
C.
Crasset, veritable Devotion, etc. 4to. Paris 1679. Card. Capisucchi Capit.
Theol. selec. Concilia Labei 18 Vol. Paris. Common Prayer of the Church of
England. Claude Reponse au pere Nouet, 8vo. Amsterdam 1668. Cosins History of
Popish Transubstantiation, 8vo. Land. 1679. Cassandri opera, Paris 1616. Ejusd.
Consultatio, 8vo. Vid. Grotii via ad pacem. Cajetanus Card. in D. Thomam,
Venetiis 1612. Ejusd. Comment. in S. Scr. Lugduni. Canones, etc. Council.
Trident. 12mo. Coloniae 1679. Calvisii Chronologia, Fol. Francofurti 1650.
Cave, Chartophylax Ecclesiasticus, 8vo. Land. 1685.
D.
Dallaeus adversus Latinorum de cultus religiosi objecto Traditionem. 4to.
Genevae. 1664. Idem de Poenis and Satisfactionibus Amstael. 1649. Durandus in
sententias, Lugduni 1569.
E.
Estius in Sententias, Paris 1672. Euchologium cum Notis Goar. Paris 1647.
Expostulatio de Joan. Chrysostom. Epist. suppressa, Land. 1682. 4to. Epiphanii
opera Gr. Lat. Coloniae 1682. L' Esprit de Mr. Arnauld 2 Vol. 8vo. Deventer.
1684.
F.
Forbesii instructiones Historico-Theologicae, Amst. 1645.
G.
Grotius via ad pacem, cum consult. Cassandri, 8vo. 1642. Gregorii Nazianzeni
opera, Gr. Lat. Paris 1609. -- Invectiva in Julianum, 4to. Etonae 1610.
Gregorii Papae liber Sacrament. Menardi, 4to. Edit. Paris 1642. Gratiani
decretum, Fol. Paris 1585. Gamachaeus. Godefry vie de S. Athanase 2 Vol. 4.
Paris 1679. Idem vie de S. Basile 2 Vol. 4. Paris 1679.
H.
Hookers Ecclesiastical Polity, Fol. Land. 1676. Book of Homilies, Oxford 1683.
I.
Index ex purgatorius, Fol. Madriti 1667. Jesuits Loyalty collect. of several
Treatises, 4to. Land. 1677 Instruction pour gagner le Jubilee, 12mo. Paris 1683.
Jurieux Preservatif contre le Changement de Religion. 8vo. -- Le Janseniste
convaincu de vain Sophstiquerie, Amst. 1683. -- Prejuger legitimes contre le
Papisme, 4to. 1685. Innocent the XI. Bull for an universal Jubilee upon the
relief of Vienna, August 11th. 1683.
L.
Ludolphi Historia Aethiopica Lat. Fol. Francofurti. 1681. Lombardi
sententiarum libri 4. 8vo. Moguntiae 1632.
M.
Maldonate in Prophetas majores, 4to. Moguntiae 1611. -- In Evangelia, Fol.
Moguntiae 1611. Missale Romanum, 8vo. Paris 1616. Missale in usum Sarum, Fol.
1527. Stephani le Moyne varia sacra, 4to. Lugd. Bat. 1685. Petri Martyris de
Eucharistia. Monsieur Maimbourg peaceable Method, Engl. 4to. Monsieur de
Meaux's Exposition, Engl. 4to. 1685. -- French 5 Edition, 12mo. a Paris 1681.
Traite de la Communion sous les deux Especes, 12mo. Paris 1682. -- Pastoral
Letter, Engl. 4to. 1686.
N.
Nouet de la presence de J. C. dans le tres saint Sacrament, 4to. Paris 1666.
Nicole, Prejuges legitimes contre les Calvinistes. Paris 1679 -- Les P. R.
convaincus de schism, 8vo. Paris 1684
O.
Officium B. Virginis, 8vo. Antverpiae 1631. Office of the holy Week, Lat.
English, 8vo. Paris 1670.
P.
Pontificale Romanum, Fol. Venetiis 1561. La Politic du Clerge de France,
12mo. Amst. 1682. Du Perron Replique a la reponse du Roy de la Grande Bretagne,
Fol. Paris 1620. Du Perron de l'Eucharistie, Fol. Paris 1629. Petavius Dogmata
Theologica, Fol. Paris 1650. Papist represented and misrepresented, 1st.
Edition. 1685 Pajon Examen du livre qui portepourtitre Prejugez legitimes
contre les Calvinistes, 2 Vol. 12mo. a Bionne 1673.
R.
Reponse a un ecrit publie contre les Miracles de la Saint Espine. Second
Reponse a Monsieur de Condom, 8vo. 1680. Ruffinus. Rituale Romanum, 4to.
Antverpiae 1620. Reflections Generales fur l' Exposition de Monsieur de Meaux,
8vo. a Cologne de Brandebourg 1685.
S.
Sparrow's Collection of Canons, etc. 4to. Land. 1684. Sexti Senensis
Bibliotheca, Fol. Coloniae 1586. Suarez opera, Fol. Moguntiae 1604. in 3 p. D.
Th. 1610. Scotus in sententias, primitive Letter, Fol. Socrates, Sozomen, Fol.
Paris Edit. Valesii.
T.
Thomasi codex Sacramentorum, 4to. Romae 1680. Theodoret. opera 5 Vol. G. L.
Fol. Paris 1642. Theophilus, Turrianus, citati ab Albertino.
V.
Vasquez in D. Thomam, Ingolstadii 1606. in 3 part. Venetiis 1610. Vindication
of the B. of Condom's Exposition. Vincentius Lirinensis. Gregorius de Valentia,
apud Albertinum.
Z.
Zonaras in Concilia: In synodico Oxoniensi. 1672.
ERRATA.
Page xvii. lin 26. of the read of their, page 1. l. 4. these r. those, page 8.
l. 26. marg. and this is. page 20. l. ult. p. 209. r. 249. page 26. r. hard put
to prove. p. 94. l. 23. p. 50. r. p. 23. page 95. l. 19. Art. 5. 27. page 125.
l. 8. of r. to. l. 18. I have. page 151. not. lachrimas, lachrimabimur. Some
literal Faults there are besides these, which the Reader may please to correct.

Add to page 114. lin. 24.
But why do I thus long insist upon Probabilities? Monsieur de Meaux himself
owns that he has both seen and read the Preservative; and in his Treatise of
Communion, does particularly encounter what Monsieur Jurien had therein
advanced against his Exposition: And yet has this man, after all, the
Confidence to tell the World not only that he never read Father Crasset's Book,
which is very improbable, Vindicat. p. 10.
but that he never so much as heard it mentioned, that there was any thing in
it contrary to his Exposition; though that Author, in that very Book, has spent
no less than Page 97, 98, 99, 100, 101, 102, 103.
six or seven Pages on purpose to prove it; not to say any thing of the Such
are among others. M. la B. answer to his Advertisement p. 79. Reflections
Generales sur l'Exposition de M. de Meaux, p 121, 144. M. Arnaud reponse au
Preservatif. M. Jurieu's Vindication: le Janseniste convaincu de vain
Sophistiquerie, p 72, etc. L'Esprit de M. Arnauld, Vol. 2. p. 174. Politic du
Clerge de France, p. 67.
many other Treatises, and some of them Answers to his Exposition too, but all
of them well known in France, that have done the same.

He that can believe this, let him also believe, that M. de Meaux had no hand
in the first Edition of his Exposition; That the Sorbonne Doctors never
corrected it, nor he suppressed it upon that account; That that whole Edition
was condemned only to make some little Alterations for the benefit of the
Method, and the greater neatness of the Discourse and Style. In a word, That
what he has so shamefully asserted in his late Pastoral Letter, p. 3, 4.
Pastoral Letter, as to a certain Point, which I shall beg leave not to name,
but which we can at any time bring him thousands to contradict, he either ever
believed himself, or ever heard any other Bishops say; all which, as they have
been shown to be equally credible, so no doubt are they equally true too.

FINIS.
A SECOND DEFENSE Against the BISHOP of CONDOM.

Imprimatur,

Liber cui titulus [A Second Defense of the Exposition of the Church of
England, etc Part I]

November. 16. 1687. H. Maurice, Reverendissimo in Christo P. D. Wilhelmo
Archiepiscopo Cant. a Sacris.

A SECOND DEFENSE OF THE EXPOSITION of the DOCTRINE OF THE Church of England:
Against the New EXCEPTIONS OF Monsieur de MEAUX, Late Bishop of CONDOM, AND HIS
VINDICATOR.

The First Part.

In which the ACCOUNT that has been given of the Bishop of MEAUX's Exposition,
is fully vindicated; the Distinction of OLD and NEW POPERY Historically
asserted; and the Doctrine of the Church of Rome in point of IMAGE WORSHIP more
particularly considered.

LONDON, Printed for Richard Chiswell, at the Rose and Crown in St. Paul's
Churchyard. MDCLXXXVII.

THE TABLE OF THIS FIRST PART.
I. AN ADDRESS to the Vindicator, laying down the Method of the following
Defense. II. The PREFACE; in which is contained, 1. An Historical Vindication
of the Distinction of Old and New Popery. p. iii. 2. An Enquiry, how far we may
judge of the Doctrine of the Church of Rome, from the PRACTICES and OPINIONS of
the Particular Members of it. p. xii
III. The DEFENSE: divided into Three General SECTIONS. p. I
SECT. I.
After a short Introduction, considers the Bishop of MEAUX'S second Letter, in
an Address to the said Bishop. p. 5 The Bishop of MEAUX's Exposition written
for the Conversion of the Mareshall de Turenne. p. 8 The several parts of the
Letter examined. p. 9 1. That there was an Edition of the Exposition suppressd,
different from what we now see. p. 9 2. That these Differences were in Points
considerable, and not only for the greater neatness of the Style, as the Bishop
pretends. p. 15 3. Of St. Chrysostom's Epistle to Caesarius. p. 20 4. That
MONSIEUR M -- did answer the Bishop of CONDOM's Exposition. ib. 5. 1. That
Father CRASSET's Principles are not to be reconciled with the Bishop of
CONDOM's Exposition, as is pretended. p. 21 2. Concerning the Persecution in
the Diocese of MEAUX, and the Bishop's repeated DENIAL of it shown to be a
wretched Prevarication. p. 24
6. Cardinal CAPISUCCHI's Doctrine in point of Image worship, utterly
inconsistent with the Bishop of CONDOM's Exposition. p. 31 His Opinion at large
considered, and compared with the Principles of Monsieur de MEAUX and his
VINDICATOR. p. 34
7. Monsieur IMBERT's Case examined. That he was prosecuted by the Archbishop
of BOURDEAUX, for maintaining the Doctrine of the Bishop of CONDOM and the
VINDICATOR. p. 39 8. Of Cardinal BONA -- p. 45 Monsieur de WIT, and -- p. 46
The POPE's Brief -- ibid.
The CLOSE. p. 47

SECT. II.
Being an Answer to those false Imputations which the VINDICATOR has cast upon
me, and the rest of my Brethren of the Church of England. p. 49 The
Reasonableness of this Consideration. ib. The Sum of this Section divided into
Three Parts.
PART I.
In which it is shown with what Spirit and Design the VINDICATOR took this
Course to defame us. p. 51 1. That the Principles of many of the Casuists of
the Roman Church do allow the defaming of an Adversary by such Accusations as
they KNOW to be FALSE. p. 51 2. That we have just Cause to believe, that the
VINDICATOR has proceeded according to these Principles, Shown. 1. From the
Accusations themselves, which he brings against me; of which several Instances
are collected by way of Specimen, whereby to judge of the rest. p. 54 2. From
his laying hold on the lightest, and most pitiful occasions to run out into the
most grievous Accusations against me. p. 56 3. For that the Allegations he
advances, are many of them such as he can never be sure are TRUE. p. 59 4. And
some such as he certainly knew were FALSE. p. 61


PART II.
In which his Reflections are particularly considered, and refuted: in Two
Points. p. 62 1. A Refutation of those scandalous Reflections which he has cast
upon the Generality of the Church of England. p. 63 A Summary of them.
1. That we have misrepresented the Doctrines of the Church of Rome, reviled,
blackened, and calumniated its Members, and ridiculed its Ceremonies. Answered.
p. 65 2. That we have done this out of Malice and Interest, and kept the People
by Ignorance to our Party. p. 66 This Calumny answered, in its several parts,
of Malice -- p. 67 Interest -- ibid. Ignorance. p. 69
3. That we have been estranged from Devotion, and are therefore scandalized at
their Ceremonies, because we have not the Zeal that those of their Church have.
Answered. p. 70 4. That many of our Church are so biased in their Affections
to us, that they will scarce allow themselves their common Senses in the Examen
of things, but pass their Votes against any thing that tends toward Popery,
tho against JUSTICE, EQUITY, and CONSCIENCE. Answered. p. 74 5. That some
factious Spirits have animated the Pulpits Zeal; and that by this means the
Parliament was hindered from proceeding in its Loyalty as it began. Answered. p.
75 6. That we manage things against them upon politic Motives; that we have
Designs, and leading-men, and certain persons to gratify by what we do; and
that this will bring ill CONSEQUENCES upon the KINGDOM, etc. p. 76
II. An Answer to those Imputations that he has laid upon my self in
particular. p. 78 1. To the ill Names that he gives me. ib. 2. To his charges
of wilful Faults committed by me in the Defense. p. 79 3. To his Reflections
that have no manner of reference to the Subject of our Dispute; but were
brought in merely for Reflection-sake. p. 80 As to my Preaching. p. 80 --
Popularity. 81
4. To His CATALOGUE of Faults drawn up against Me at the beginning of His
Reply. p. 82 5. To His Charge of Ill Language, with reference 1. To the Bishop
of MEAUX. p. 84 2. To Others, in which are Justified those 3 Expressions so
much cavill'd at; of 1. St. Thomas's Reveries. p. 86 2. Of some of their new
Saints horrid Blasphemies. p. 89 3. Of some of their Churches Addresses, being
more like Magical Incantations, than Christian Prayers. p. 92




PART III.
In which is shown by above XL Instances of Books yet unanswered, that we have
fully obviated all their Arguments beyond the possibility of a fair Reply;
which might justly excuse me from entering any more on a particular review of
the several Articles in debate; though I shall nevertheless in a SECOND PART of
my DEFENSE, pass through All again with him. p. 94
TO The Reverend the AUTHOR OF THE VINDICATION Of the Bishop of MEAUX's
EXPOSITION, etc.
SIR,
AFTER two such obliging Addresses, Vindication p. 120. The Reply, p. 171.
as I have now had the honor to receive from you, I should be very much
wanting in my Respects to a Person who has shown so near a Concern for my
Salvation, should I any longer neglect my Return to you; and might reasonably
expect to have my Rudeness and Incivility mustered up to increase my Damnation
in the next Catalogue your Charity shall prompt you to publish of my Sins.
Reply at the end of the Preface.


I cannot indeed tell whether I may not be defective in my Gratitude, by
sending my Thanks to your self alone; and your great Caution in the Close of
your Vindication made me once think that Vindic. p. 120.
I ought to have returned you your own Inscription, To the Author, or Authorsof
those excellent Vindic. p. 120.
Pieces you have been pleased to oblige the World with on my account. For I
have some reason to believe, that whatever you were as to the first, yet you
are not the only Person concerned in the second Reply. But yet since your Books
run altogether in the singular Number, and that whoever gathered your Materials
first, or supervised them after, yet I doubt not but you were the only
Architect your self, and alone concerned in those immediate Addresses to Me; I
am confident I shall not be much mistaken in my particular Return to you, or at
least that you will have the goodness to excuse so easy, and so involuntary an
Error.

And first, Sir, I desire to return you my Acknowledgments for your great Care
of my future Reply p. 171.
State. I do beseech you to believe, that it is exceeding dear to Me; and that
I am sensible that your Advice is very just and reasonable that you give Me for
it. And though I shall show you in what follows, that for what concerns either
your self or your Church, I had no great need of it; yet it pleases me very
much to hope that when I shall have fully proved by Gods Grace, where the Fault
lies, one who is so forward to preach to others, 1 Cor IX. 27.
will certainly take great heed that he does not in the mean time himself
become a CASTAWAY.

It were perhaps too much to expect that Condescension from you, which you are
pleased to recommend to Me, viz. To make a public Acknowledgment Reply p. 172.
of the Calumnies you have thrown not upon my self alone, but upon the
Generality of our Church, and to retract the false witness you have Ib. p. 173.
born against your Neighbors; especially since this, Sir, cannot, you know, be
done without acknowledging the Insincerity (for I am willing to give all things
the softest Names I am able) of your late Attempts in the new Methods of
Conversion. And indeed some Experience makes me think I may without
uncharitableness presume, that the Pride of Nature is as powerful on your side
to Ib. p. 174*
hinder Persons from retracting what they have once advanced, as it is on ours:
And the Principles of your Church do much more indispose you to confess your
Errors, than, God be thanked, ours do us. But sure, if any one, you, Sir, who
so much consider that Eternity is at stake, and that an Injustice which will
render us miserable for that Eternity, Ibid.
cannot be expiated without making satisfaction, will not find it so difficult
to acknowledge your mistake; no, not tho it should have been WILFUL; (which I
dare not yet say of yours, however you, in Charity no doubt to my Soul, judge
mine to be so;) rather than run into inevitable Damnation. And I pray God give
you this serious Thought and Resolution.

Having thus performed this first Duty, I must in the next place, Sir, thank
you for what, next to my Salvation, has always been most dear to Me, the Care
you have had of my REPUTATION. It may perhaps be thought by some that are not
sensible how great my Obligations in this particular are to you, that I might
well enough have spared this Complement; especially since your Modesty makes
Reply p. 4. 172. etc.
you utterly disavow any such Tenderness of it. Indeed, Sir, as to your
Expressions, it must be confess d you are very free with Me. You not only still
adhere to your first Charge of Calumnies, Vindic. p 22. Reply p. 172.
Misrepresentations, unsincere Dealings, Falsifications, every thing that you
could think of that might serve to bespatter Me, but only false Quotations,
which I do not now find you so ready to insist upon; but that your Reader might
be sure to take notice of them, you draw them up into a Catalogue at the
beginning of your Reply, and all along Reply at the end of the Preface.
in your Margin you put him in mind to remark them: But yet, Sir, after all
this, I cannot but own to you, that your Books have done more to secure my
Reputation among all those whose Esteem I value, viz. the honest and judicious
Readers, than any thing my best Friends could have done for Me.

I need not, Sir, tell you, that my Exposition first, and then my Defense, made
some noise among very great numbers of both Churches. I had discovered such
Secrets as perhaps few could have done besides; such as startled many worthy
Persons of your own Communion; and which some even of our own side, who did not
know what Evidence I had ready to produce for them, could hardly almost
believe. Whilst great enquiry was made about them, some of your Religion knew
not what to think, others flatly denied all that had been said; you, Sir, more
kind, procure Me a Letter from that worthy Person the Bishop of Meaux himself;
pretending indeed to disavow, but really acknowledging all that I had said with
reference to his Exposition. A Favor for which, now I am discharging these
kind of Debts, I shall not fail to publish to the World my Engagements to him.

It was not long before my Defense made a new noise, and but little inferior
to that of my Exposition. For besides that, it confirmed all my former
Allegations with new Proofs; it gave me opportunity moreover to make some
further Discoveries, both of your Church's Worship, and of your own Sincerity.

And this, Sir, you tell me did induce many others Reply, p. 173.
to an imitation of those Calumnies I there threw upon you; but I must beg
leave to mind you of another Inducement too, and that is, That it did induce
the Generality of your side to calumniate Me, as one who had uttered nothing
but downright Untruths, and charged you with such things as were not to be
found either in your Books, or in your Practice. But I may now reasonably
presume that they will from henceforth retract this Calumny too, (if at least
you will allow it to be a Calumny to accuse falsely one of our Religion;) since
you have here satisfied the World, that these things you do write and practice,
though indeed for want of an Infallible Interpreter, we who judge according to
the Principles of Reason, are not able rightly to understand the meaning of
them. And therefore, Sir, though your Words still style me Criminal, yet your
Allegations every where protest against them; and I desire no other Advocate
than your self to plead my Innocence.

There is, Sir, yet a Favor which I ought not to pass by, though I could not a
long time divine the meaning of it; and it is your great Self-denial, which
prompted you, I suppose, through all your Book, as well as in that single
place, where you your self have been pleased to remark it, not to Reply, p. 172.
take too much satisfaction in having your Adversary at an Advantage. It was
indeed generously done of you; though some (considering the Nature of your
Church,) will be apt to think it was not merely an Excess of Charity that made
you treat your Adversary with so much Favor, but either the insuperable ilness
of the Cause you had to maintain, or some other Defect, which I shall beg leave
not to name. However it puts me in mind of the supererrogating Merits of many
of your Saints, to whose Honor the prudent VVriters of their Lives, have
remembered it, that they were wont to counterfeit themselves mad or foolish,
and do a thousand ridiculous and extravagant things, that being laughed at, and
despised by all the World for them, they might thereby have the better
Opportunity of exercising their Christian Humility and Self-denial. But, Sir, I
fear by this time my Civility may begin to grow more troublesome to you than my
Rudeness would have been, should I have dispensed with my self, as to this
Point of Ceremony. And indeed I have so much to say in order to yours and the
Worlds satisfaction, that I ought not to spend too much time in unnecessary
Preliminaries. Three things there are, which I would willingly do in the
following Defense, and which I think will comprise all that can reasonably be
desired of Me, viz.

I. To discharge my Obligations to the Bishop of Meaux. II. To vindicate my
self against such Imputations as do immediately concern my own particular, but
do not at all affect the Cause I am to maintain. III. To consider what you have
further offered to clear your Church of those great Exceptions I had brought
against it.
And in all these I should be heartily glad I might acquit my self to yours;
but however I hope I shall do it to my Readers Satisfaction, and to whom
therefore I must now beg leave to address my self, as to whose Examen (if I may
presume to borrow your own Phrase) I freely commit Reply, p. 1.
it to judge betwixt us.

THE PREFACE.
WHEN I consider the Nature of those Methods that have of late been made use of
by many of the Church of Rome to propagate their Errors; with what Industry
they conceal the Real Doctrine of their Church, and by complaining loudly
against others for misrepresenting their Opinions, endeavor to keep Men from
suspecting that the Juggle indeed lies at their own Doors. I cannot but call to
mind the Complaint of an ancient Father against the Heathen Philosophers, and
in Apology for the Christian Religion: Arnob. adv. Gent. lib. vi. p. 197.
Utinam liceret introspicere sensus vestros, recessusque ipsos mentis, quibus
varias volvitis atque initis obscurissimas cogitationes! Reperiremus and vos
ipsos eadem sentire, quae nos -- Sed studiis facere quid pervicacibus possumus?
Quid intentantibus Gladios, novasque excogitantibus ^poenas? [Animantis.]
Would to God, says he, we could but look into your own Opinions, into the
secret Recesses of your Mind in which you turn and devise various and hidden
Thoughts. We should find that you your selves think the very same with us. But
what can be done to Men that are obstinately bent to serve a Cause? --
A^^eritis malam scientissimi Causam, and quod semel sine ratione fecistis, ne
videamini aliquando nescisse, defenditis; meliusque putatis non vinci, quam
confessae cedere atque annuere veritati -- Lugd. Batav. 1651.
Ye know that ye maintain an ill Cause, and what ye have once done without
reason, that ye defend, lest ye should otherwise seem to have been once
mistaken, and think it better not to be overcome, than to assent to that which
you cannot but confess to be the Truth.

I shall perhaps be thought by some to assume too great a Liberty, in applying
this to those with whom I have now to do. But yet when I see Men so industrious
in expounding the Doctrine of their Church into a Sense that may come as near
the Reformation as is possible; when for the doing of this they are forced to
so many Shifts as plainly show there is something of Violence in the
Undertaking: Bp. Meaux's Expos. p. 5. IV.
Words forced from their natural Signification to speak that which they call
the Church's Sense; Vind. p. 42. Rep. p. 43.
the Order of Sentences inverted; Vind. p. 40. Repl. p. 39, 41.
Figures pretended that were never heard of in the World; the Irrefragable,
Angelical, Subtle, Seraphical, Invincible, Illuminate, Illustrious Doctors,
whose Sentences and Sums our Fathers so much admired, now laid aside, as
containing only Vind. p. 19, 38. Reply, p. 3. 29, etc.
Scholastic Opinions, and not the necessary and universally received Doctrine
of the Church; the rest of their Writers thrown off as private Men, and for
whose Opinions the Church is not to be responsible: I cannot then but think,
that these Men Reply, p. 3, 4.
are certainly conscious to themselves, that they have been in the wrong, and
that there was reason in our Reformation; though it is neither safe nor convenient
for the Members of a Church that has so long been used to damn us as Heretics
on this account, and would be thought infallible in her Decisions, to own it to
the World.

It is one of my chiefest Crimes, and for which I perceive there is no
Indulgence to be expected, that I have in some measure endeavored to bring
these Designs to light; to show that all this is indeed but a Lure to draw Men
in, and that when once they are ensnared, they will then find things to be far
otherwise than they are made at first to believe: Or that if they are in good
earnest in their present Pretenses, then they herein plainly depart from what
their Church once held, and are upon that very account esteemed by others of
their Communion at this day, to be little better than Protestant Heretics.

How far the Allegations I have heretofore brought to prove this, have been
invalidated by what our Author has endeavored this second time to return to
them, I shall then consider, when I come particularly to examine the several
Articles of his Reply. In the mean time I cannot but observe, that how much
soever the Vindicator may dislike Reply, p. 171.
the distinction I made of OLD and NEW POPERY, it is yet no other than what I
found in effect made to my hand in some of the Bishop of Meaux' s own Converts,
and in Books which are said to have undergone his particular perusal before
they were permitted to come into the World.

It Is this which we find in plain terms avowed by Monsieur Brueys, in his
Examen des raisons qui ont done lieu a la Separation des Protestants. A la
Hay, 1683.
Examination of the Reasons which occasioned the Separation of the Protestants
from the Church of Rome. For having expounded his new Faith so scrupulously
according to Monsieur de Meaux' s Principles, that as himself tells us, Aussi
je ne dis rien dans cet Examen qu'il (Monsieur l'Eveque de Meaux) ne m'ait
inspire: je ne fais presque que copier ses Sentimens, and redire au public ce
qu'il m'a dit en particulier, ou ce que ces Ouvrages m'oat persuade.
Avertissement.
He says nothing but what that Bishop had inspired into him; so that he did in
a manner but copy his Sentiments, and repeat in public what he had learnt in
private from him; he finally exhorts the Protestants to return now from their
odious Separation, since the Doctrine of the Church was so expounded, as none
of their Forefathers had ever understood it; nor, if they had, would ever have
separated from it. I say return now, (they are Monsieur La Raison, la Charity,
la Gloire de Dieu, la Paix de l'Eglise, le Bien de l'Etat, and l'Interest de
leur Salut demandent qu'ils reviennent aujourd'huy de cette Separation odieuse,
en remettant les chooses en l'Estat ou else estoient auparavant. Je dis
aujourd'huy: car on doit avouer sincerement qu'on n'avoit jamais si nettement
expose les dogmes and les cultes de l'Eglise Catholic qu'on l'a fait de nos
jours. Et je ne scaurois m'empescher de croire que si nos Peers avoient cru les
chooses tells qu'elles sont en Eff^t, and qu'on nous les propose aujourd'huy,
ils ne se seroient jamais separez de sa Communion. Ibid. p. 106.
Brueys' s own words) for it must be sincerely confessed that the Doctrine and
Worship of the Roman Church was never so cleanly expounded as in these our
days. And I cannot but think, that had our Fathers believed things to be, as in
Effect they are, and as they are now proposed to us, they would never have
separated from its Communion.

I do not at all question, but that our Fathers, who undoubtedly understood the
Doctrine and Worship of a Church in which they had been born and bred, and were
many of them admitted to Places of chiefest Honor and Dignity in it, could
they now rise up from their Graves, would stand amazed to see with what
Insincerity it is now expounded to us in these days. And though it has been so
fully shown, that no one has cared to give us an Answer to it, that even taking
the First Answer to the Papist misrepres. Answer to the Conclus. But especially
in the Answer to the Papists protesting against Protectant Popery.
Roman Doctrine according to their own Exposition, we are not yet able to
embrace it; yet it must be acknowledged we should have much less to say to
justify our Separation, had it been always such us it is now represented to us.

But this is not the only Person that has given us grounds for this
Distinction; for however we confess that Popery is more cleanly expounded now
than it was heretofore; yet even in these happy expounding days of ours, there
are still some who repine to see the good Old Popery so much run down, and give
us very different Interpretations both of the Doctrine and Worship of their
pretended Catholic Church.

And of this the Author of the wholesome Advices of the blessed Virgin to her
indiscreet Worshippers will afford us a notable Example; who having given such
a cleanly Exposition of the Church's Doctrine in the Points of the Invocation
of Saints, and Worship of Images, as the Bishop of Meaux, and his Vindicator
now do; though approved with all the Solemnity I have heretofore shown, and
Expos. of the C. E. Pref. page VI, VII.
may now more fully be seen in the Edition that has since been made of it in
our own Language, was nevertheless condemned in the most violent manner that
can well be imagined, and that by the Authority of the Pope himself; and drew
the Zeal of Father Crasset to overwhelm him with a whole Volume of Doctors and
Saints that lived in the former days of Superstition and Sincerity, before
these new Expositors had by pretending to interpret, indeed corrupted their
Faith.

Father Crasset having thus defended the Honor of the Blessed Virgin, and
justified the Old Popery to be the true and standing Doctrine of his Church,
his Authority was soon alleged by the Preservatif. p. 97, etc.
Protestants in Opposition to the Bishop of Condom's Exposition. Reflections sur
le Preservatif. A Anvers. 1682.
Monsieur Arnaud, who undertook the Defense of the Bishop, and it seems could
not foresee how by the metamorphosing Power of a cleanly Exposition, even this
Father's Book should come one day to be perfectly reconciled to Monsieur de
Meaux' s, freely gives up the Author for a P. 19. V. Reflex. le livre d'un
pitoiable Jesuit, nomme le Pere Crasset.
pitiful Jesuit, and whose Authotity was not fit to be compared with that of a
Bishop, supported with the Approbations of so many other Bishops and Cardinals,
and in short, of the Pope himself.

It is not then only in our Calumnies that this reflecting Distinction of Old
and New Popery is to be found, but Reply, p. 171.
in the real Disagreement of those of their own Communion, who all equally
pretend to understand the Doctrine of their Church, and the Decisions of the
Council of Trent. But to put this matter, if it be possible, out of all doubt,
I will here subjoyn the Copy of a Letter written by an eminent Convert upon his
Change, in which this Distinction is plainly expressed, and the Bishop of
Condom's Popery evidently distinguished from that of the People, and of the
Bigots, or (as he calls them) the Tartuffes of that Church. The Person who
wrote it was Monsieur Ranchin, a Counselor of the Parliament of Toulouse, to
Monsieur Ranchin his Kinsman, and Counselor in the Court of Accounts, Aids,
and Finances of Montpellier.

Toulouse, April 27. 1680.
I Am not much concerned, my dear Cousin, to think that my Conversion has
caused so general a Joy, as you are willing to make me believe it has. It is
sufficient to me that our Family, and particularly your self, has taken some
part in my Change: And I most humbly thank you for the obliging Testimony you
have given me of it in the Letter which you have done me the Honor to write to
me. But, Sir, I ought a little to complain of your accusing me to have tarried
so long out of Interest in the P. R. Religion. This might indeed be said in
Enggland or in Holland, but that in France one should be of the P. R. Religion
out of Interest, is what I never heard before. As for my own particular, I can
truly say, that my professing that Religion has been the ruin of my Family.
But I am become a Catholic, because I thought that I might obtain Salvation in
that Communion.

It is the Book of Monsieur the Bishop of Condom that has convinced me; that
admirable Book approved of late by the Pope. If you have not yet seen it, I
advise you to get it, and read it all your life. I do also in part owe my
Conversion to another little Book composed by one in Flanders, entitled,
Wholesome Advices of the blessed Virgin to her indiscreet Worshippers; and to
the Pastoral Letter of the Bishop of Tournay, in form of an Apology, dedicated
to the People of his Diocese, and which is also truly a Golden Book. For were
the Faith of the Church such as the People and the Tartuffes practice it, I
would never have gone where I am; and I have learnt from these Books, that the
pure Belief of the Church is quite different from their practice. You will
comprehend by this, my dear Cousin, that these Books are no less necessary to
the Catholics, than to the P. R. But I consider too late, that instead of a
Letter I am writing a Treatise of Religion. I hasten to conclude, and to assure
you that I am, etc.


Were I minded to indulge my self the liberty of commenting upon this Letter, I
should not want Occasions from a piece so very extraordinary, to make some rare
and useful Remarks. But I shall confine my self to the particular for which I
alleged it. Monsieur Ranchin was one of the Counselors of the Chamber of the
Edict of Languedoc, whilst it subsisted. The King having suppressed that
Chamber, and incorporated the Officers into the Parliament, Monsieur Ranchin
soon perceived that things would not stop there, but that those of the reformed
Religion must expect in a little time to be turned out of all their Places. He
had a great Family, and but a small Estate for a Person of his Quality. And now
it was that the Exposition of the Bishop of Meaux began first to open his Eyes:
He perceived the Roman Religion to be quite different from what he had hitherto
thought it; insomuch that from henceforth he became disposed to embrace it, not
by way of ABJURATION of what he held before, but by way of ADDITION, i. e. by
adding the Roman Superstitions to it.

This was easily consented to by those of the other Party; he insisted upon
having the Communion in both kinds, but that was denied him; but the principal
matters were agreed to, viz. That for the Change he was to make, he should have
10000 Crowns in hand, and a Pension of a 1000 more per Annum, together with the
assurance of his Place to himself and his Son after him, besides the hopes of
higher Advancement.

And thus our new Convert enters into the Bosom of the Catholic Church, not
that the disliked his own Religion, or thought the other better; no, his Letter
evidently implies the contrary; but he thought that by the help of the Bishop
of Meaux's Exposition he might make a shift to be saved in it. He saw the
Abuses that were in that Church, and he loudly declares against them: He
professes he was so far from being of the Religion of the People, and of the
Tartuffes of the Church of Rome, that nothing, no not ready money in hand, and
a good Place and Pension for the future, should have been able to carry him to
it. He advises his Kinsman to read those golden Books (He had indeed reason to
call them so, for so they were to Him) that had so well expounded the Doctrine
of the Catholic Church; and were no less necessary for the Roman Catholics
than for the Protestants instruction: that according to these he did hope he
might be saved in the Church of Rome; but for the People and the Tartuffes,
that are not yet so happy as to understand these Expositions, there is no
Salvation to be had for them.

And here at least I think it cannot be denied, but that we have two sorts of
Popery very openly and freely avowed: One such as that a man may be saved in
the profession of it, viz. That of the Bishops of Meaux and Tournay, and of the
wholesome Advices of the blessed Virgin to her indiscreet Worshippers: the
other of the People and the Tartuffes, or Zealots of that Church, and for whom
Monsieur Ranchin it seems had no great hopes. Nor let it be thought so very
extraordinary in this Person that he entered into the Roman Communion at the
same time that he saw and condemned the Excesses of it. This has been but too
common in those parts. Dial. enter Photin and Irenee. A Mayence. 1685.
And my Author from whom I have borrowed the foregoing Account, gives us a
notable instance of another, one Part. 2. Dial. iii. page 105.
Monsieur Pawlet, a Minister of his own Acquaintance; how being convicted in
one of their Synods of such Crimes as rendered him unworthy of his Charge, he
endeavored to cover his Infamy by changing his Religion; and was wont
afterward frequently to declare, when he came among those of his former
Profession, That he could not but very much blame such as followed his Example;
that for his own part, he knew the Secret how to save himself, notwithstanding
his Change; but for the other Revolters who were ignorant of it, they would all
infallibly be damned.

But the Resolution of the Inhabitants of Montauban is yet more extraordinary;
who being by the missionary Dragoons convinced that it was their Duty to obey
their Prince in changing their Religion, did it with this Declaration; We
acknowledge that the Abuses which are imputed to the Ibid. part. 2. page 352.
Nous reconnoissons, que les Abus qu'on impute a l'Eglise, ne sufisoient pas
pour obliger nos Peers a s'en separer: C'est pourquoi nous nous re^nissons a
l'Eglise; sans prejudice de Remonstrances qu'il nous sera permis de fair au
Clerge pour repurger l'Eglise. Roman de beaucoup d'Abus.
Church, were not sufficient to oblige our Ancestors to separate from it:
Wherefore we do now reunite our selves to the Church, but yet so as not to
prejudice thereby those Remonstrances which we shall be permitted to make to
the Clergy to purge the Roman Church from many Abuses.

I need not sure repeat what I have already said with reference to Monsieur
Imbert's Case. For however the Bishop of Meaux may endeavor to lessen the
Reputation of that Man, yet since he cannot deny the truth of my relation
(which is indeed no other than what he himself published both in his Letter and
Factum of it) we may thereby plainly see how his Exposition of the Faith agreed
neither with the Missionaries Preaching, nor with the Peoples Practice. And let
the Vindicator cry out Reply, p. 35, 36, 37. See in the Margin.
CALUMNY as much as he pleases in his Answer to my Account of their
Good-Friday-Service, and tell the World that I Defense of the Expos. of the C.
E. page 121, 124. Append.
FALSIFY their Words, because I render their Venite Adoremus, Behold the Wood
of the Cross, come let us adore IT; the Dispute between that unfortunate Man
and the Curate upon that very occasion, Monsieur Imbert insisting upon the same
Exposition the Vindicator does now; whilst the other cried out, THE WOOD, THE
WOOD, Come let us adore IT, sufficiently shows that all were not agreed on the
New Popery Interpretation: and the hard usage he has met with from his Diocesan
since, for supporting that Exposition the Vindicator so much contends for, may
satisfy the World, that not only the Cure, but even the Archbishop of
Bourdeaux himself thought there was neither CALUMNY nor FALSIFICATION in the
Application I made of that day's Service. I am sure poor Monsieur Imbert has
been made but too sensible of it, and I shall rather be content the Vindicator
should still esteem me a Falsifier and a Calumniator, than be so uncharitable
as to wish him the like Conviction.

It may perhaps be thought a little too late, since the new Alliance struck up
between Father Crasset and the Bishop of Meaux, to remember the Quarrel between
the Wholesome Advices of the Blessed Virgin to her indiscreet Worshippers, and
the true Devotion toward the Blessed Virgin established and defended; that is
to say in other Words, between the New Popery and the Old. But though Father
Crasset be now become an Expounder too, yet may I not beg leave to remark from
the Subject of those Advices against which he wrote, That there are, it seems,
some in the Church of Rome, Who persuade themselves that though they See the
Advices of the B. Virgin. Adv. I.
live sinful lives, yet they may be assured of their Salvation, if they do but
perform some Devotion to the Blessed Virgin? -- nay, that think that though they
have no Advice V.
love for God, yet they may be saved by supplicating our Lady: -- Who pray to
the holy Virgin, as if she had Advice VII.
more Goodness and Mercy than Jesus Christ, and so put more confidence in her
Intercession, than in the Merits of her Son: -- Who pay their homage to the
holy Virgin, Advice VIII.
as to some inferior Divinity, and believe that without her there is no
approaching God, even through Jesus Christ himself: -- Who make the Virgin Mary
Mediatrix Advice IX.
between Men and Jesus Christ, as if she had some Merit in her self which she
had not received from her Son: -- Who give the same Titles of Honor to the
Advice X.
Virgin Mary, which ought to be given to God only; -- nay, and even make her
equal with God and Jesus Christ: -- Who Advice XI. Advice XII. Advice XIV.
depend so much on the Virgin Mary, that they never have recourse to Jesus
Christ; -- preferring their Devotion to the Virgin, before their love to God:
Who as to the point of Images put their trust in them, as if there Advice XVII.
were some divine Power in them; imagining that there is a great difference
between some of the Images of the Virgin, and that some are better than others;
and that it is no longer ago than See Father Crasset's Devotion, envers la
S^inte Vierge. Pref. Paris 1679.
1679. that it was thought a Crime to be condemned, not only by a Pope and a
King, but by the Learned of all Nations, a Crime worthy of Banishment in this
Life, and of Damnation in the other, but only to advise them better.

It may be the Vindicator will here cry out, That these are only private men,
and that the Church is not to answer Reply. p. 3. 29.
for their Extravagancies: but yet still this at least shows that there is an
Old and New Popery amongst them, and that 'twas none of my fiction to oppose
them to one another.

But however, because he is concerned that I took no notice of his Admonition,
and may otherwise in his next Reply Reply, p 3, 4.
clap a new Note of CALUMNY in his Margin, to prevent, if it may be, not so
much my own Defamation as his Sin, may I humbly beg leave to enquire what at
last this thing called the Church's Sense is, and how we may come to the
Knowledge of it.

If the Pope and all the States of the Church, if the large Dominions of his
Catholic Majesty, if the Learned of all Nations, if not the simple People
only, but the most holy Bishops and most learned Doctors, nay, and even the
Fathers themselves be sufficient to declare a Doctrine of the Church, See his
Preface.
all these Father Crasset has assured us do maintain that Honor of the Blessed
Virgin, which this Adviser writes against, and which is utterly destructive of
the Bishop of Meaux' s Pretenses.

But if all these be but private men's Opinions, and the Church is not concerned
to answer for them, how then comes the Bishop of Condom to be so Catholic an
Expositor, that whatsoever he delivers, must presently pass for the Sense of
the Church, but what all others say, only for Scholastic Niceties, or the
Doctrines of particular Persons, and which the Church is not obliged to
maintain?

Now this I so much the rather desire to be informed of for that,

I. As to Number; it is certain that the Patrons of Old Popery in Italy, Spain,
Flanders, and Germany, among the Tartuffes and common People in general, as
Monsieur Ranchin is pleased to assure us, do very much exceed both the French
Expositors, and their late Disciples, the English Representers and Vindicators.

II. As to the Expressions, not only of the public Service and Rituals of
their Church, but even of the Council of Trent its self; they are so plain on
their side, that it needs a great deal of Artifice in these new Undertakers to
reduce them to what they call the Church' s, but is indeed their own Sense.

The Council of Trent directs them with reference to the Sess. XXV. -- ad eorum
Orationes, Opem, Auxiliumque confugere.
Saints themselves, to fly not only to their Prayers, but to their Aid and
Assistance too; that is, says our Advertisement, page 11.
Infallible Expositor and his Reply, p. 22.
Vindicator, to the Aid and Assistance of their Prayers: But others, with less
Art indeed, but with more Sincerity, and in the very words of the Council, to
their Prayers, Aid, and Assistance.

As to their Relics; the Council of Trent declares, That those who affirm
that Veneration and Honor is not due to the Relics of Saints, or that the
said Relics, and other sacred Monuments are unprofitably honored by the
faithful; or that for the imploring of their Aid, the Memories of the Saints
are in vain frequented, are to be condemned. This the Council decrees; and the
Old Popery men accordingly do go to these Relics, these sacred Monuments, to
receive the benefit of them: Some, to sanctify their Handkerchiefs, or Beads,
or Rings; some to procure Health and Strength by Virtue of them; others for
other benefits which they hope to obtain by them: All which is so undoubtedly
their Practice, that the Papist repres. etc. Part. I. chapter IV.
Representer himself is content to allow of it: Since, as he expresses it, God
has made them the Instruments of many evident Miracles which he has visibly
worked by them, as is manifest upon undeniable Record: But this, says the
Reply, p. 42.
Vindicator, is a FALSE TRANSLATION; for we do not seek to those sacred
Monuments for the obtaining of their Help and Assistance, no, that is not the
Council' s Ibid.
meaning; but we seek for the help of the Saints at their Monuments: and be
either the Words of the Council, or the Practice and Belief of the People never
so against it, yet our Infallible Interpreter assures us upon his word, that
the SENSE OF THE CHURCH is what he expounds to us.

Concerning Images; Conc. Trent. Sess. 25.
The Council of Trent determines, That the Images of Christ, the blessed
Virgin, and the Saints, should be bad, and retained in Temples, and that due
Honor and Veneration be given to them. Upon this the Old Popery-men dispute
what this due Honor and Veneration is: Some will have it only an inferior
Cult, but more to be the same, whatever it is, that is given to the Proto-type:
And these are so positive, that theirs is the Church's Sense, that Cardinal
Capisucchi however approving Monsieur de Meaux's Exposition, yet can hardly
forbear passing very severe Censures on those who deny it. I shall hereafter
more fully show his Opinion as to this Point; suffice it to add here that
Instance which he gives us of Capisucchi Controv. Theol. p. 649.
Aegidius Magistralis, Canon of Sevil in Spain, who was forced to abjure, among
others, these two Propositions as Heretical, viz. 1st. That the Images of
Saints are not to be adored with the same Adoration with which the Proto-types
are adored. 2ly. That the Cross is to be worshipped only with an inferior
Worship; which Proposition, says he, is heretical, and I retract it. Then he
declares with S. Thomas, that the Cross is to be worshipped with a supreme
Adoration. So that this, it seems, is not thought a mere Scholastic Nicety in
Spain, whatever it be in France or Reply, p. 29.
England; but so much the Church's Sense, that it was declared to be Heresy to
oppose it.

But what now does our Catholic Expositor say to all this? why, truly, that
these men quarrel with one another to very little purpose, seeing that after
all their Disputings, to speak Bishop of Meaux's Expos.. V. p. 8.
precisely, and according to the Ecclesiastical style, when we honor the Image
of an Apostle or Martyr, our intention is not so much to honor the Image, as
to honor the Apostle or Martyr in presence of the Image. Which his Reverend
Vindicator thus paraphrases: The Vindic. p. 32.
Cross, whether taken as Wood or Stone, or moreover as the Image of Jesus
Christ crucified, is not properly the Object of our Worship, but is a help to
recall our wandering Thoughts back to a Consideratirn of the benefits we have
received by his dying for us: and whilst we have these good Thoughts in our
minds, our Affections are inflamed, and we in presence of that Image, which
occasioned these pious Affections, show by some exterior act what are our
inward Sentiments, and pay our Adorations to our Redeemer, but NOT TO THE IMAGE
that represents him. This is the pure and innocent Doctrine of the Church,
without the mixture of Scholastic Niceties.

That here are two very different Expositions of the same Council, is not to be
denied; and whether is most agreeable to its decision, and by consequence to be
esteemed the Church's Sense; whether that due Honor is to be given them, as
St. Thomas and the Schools say; or that See before. And Reply. Preface.
none at all, as the Vindicator, or none in effect, as Monsieur de Meaux says,
it is, I think, easy to determine. And the Abjuration of Aegidius Magistralis
who favored this new Doctrine, but was forced to retract it as heretical; not
to remember the hard fortune of poor Monsieur Imbert any more, may in Ib. p.
649.
Cardinal Capisucchi' s Phrase, be at once both a Caution and a Conviction to
them.

As to the Service of the Church; and which one would think should certainly
speak the Church's Sense, that is so clear against our new Expositors, that the
Vindicator is put to great shifts to reconcile its Offices to their
Interpretations. In those the Saints are prayed to, to help and deliver them,
to open to them the Gates of Heaven; to command that See the Defense of my
Expos. App. ad Art. 3.
they be loosed from their sins; to loose their polluted Lips, that they may
pray as they ought to do; to receive them at the dreadful hour of death, and by
their Merits to pardon their Transgressions. And all this the People and the
Tartuffes, i. e. the false Zealots of their Church in the Simplicity of their
hearts believe that they do for them. But our new Expositors assure us they are
all grossly mistaken; for however the words do indeed in their own natures
signify all this, yet the Sense of the Church is but one; and be the
Expressions what they will, yet after all, we must understand by them no more
than this, PRAY FOR US. But wherefore this extravagan^t Exposition must pass
for the Church's Sense, or how their Declaration makes it become so, when that
of so many others that interpret all these Phrases according to their proper
meaning, is to be looked upon only as the Opinion of private men, we are yet to
learn.

In their Addresses to the CROSS, they cry out, We adore thy Cross, O Lord;
they fall down before it, and adore it; and this, not only the People and the
whole Church does, but for endeavoring to mollify the design of it, one man
is imprisoned another banished, a third recants and abjures his Opinion as
heretical; yet still it is CALUMNY, it is FALSIFICATION, MISINTERPRETATION, and
what Reply, p. 37.
not, for us to presume to say that they do adore the Cross, or that the
Church's Sense is any other than to adore, not the Cross, but Jesus Christ
represented by that Image. Let us add to all this,

III. That not only the Expressions of their Councils and Rituals more visibly
favor the Old Popery, but the allowed Practice of the Church, most evidently
confirms it. It Is well known that a great part of the Devotion of Italy and
some other Countries, consists in these things. With what Zeal they enrol
themselves under the more immediate Protection of the blessed Virgin, to love,
honor, and serve her all their lives; and what Confidence they repose in her,
as I have before observed; how every Place, and Person, and Trade, and Company,
have their tutelary Saints to guard, and to defend them; every Disease for Man
and Beast, its proper Physician above to cure it. How they flock to such Images
as have been eminent, whether for some pretended Miracles, or any other Virtues
above others; and with what ardor they accompany them, if they chance at any
time to be carried abroad in Procession; what a Value extraordinary they put
upon any thing that has but touched the Shrines in which are kept the Relics
of their Saints, as being sanctified thereby; and how much Devotion they esteem
it to go ^o the places where they are kept to visit and adore them: How many
excellent things they are taught an Agnus Dei is good for, not only to secure
them against Thunder and Lightning at land, against Storms and Tempests at Sea,
but if Pope Urban the Vth. may be believed, even to break sin, as if it were
the Blood of Christ; not to mention any more of their Superstitions. Now as
this cannot be denied to be their Practice, so we desire to be informed how it
comes to pass, That if the Church's Sense be indeed so contrary to it, these
things are not only thus universally tolerated, but encouraged, and there
especially where one would think the Roman Religion should best be understood;
I mean in those places where there has been the least mixture of Protestant
Heresy to corrupt it; where the vigilant Eye of Christ's Vicar does more
immediately watch over it; and above all, the sacred Authority of the holy
Inquisition, that Rock upon which the Church is built, has hitherto defended it
against such reforming Expositors as we have here to do with.

It may, I think, by this time appear how unwarrantable a Presumption it is in
these upstart Interpreters to run down all others of their Church that do
differ from them as only private men, and at the same time to forget that
themselves are no more. And he must certainly be very willing to be deceived,
who knows any thing of these matters, that can believe that after all the
Disputes of so many learned Men on both sides, as have heretofore labored in
this Controversy, nevertheless the true Doctrine of the Church of Rome was
never rightly understood till these new Cato's dropped down from Heaven to
publish to the World their Expositions of it. It is, doubtless, much more
reasonable to expound the Doctrine of any Church according to the general and
allowed Practice of it, than according to the singular notions of a few private
men, tho pretending to deliver nothing but the Church's Sense. A neat Turn, and
a happy Invention may palliate the foulest things, and make them appear in the
Idea exceeding innocent; but what a general Practice confirms, no Color can
disguise; and let men say never so many fine things in their defense, yet all
reasonable Persons will still believe, that the Church of Rome does certainly
approve that which its most zealous Votaries so universally follow.

And indeed after all, Monsieur de Meaux himself must acknowledge this to be
most reasonable: so that if his Exposition does differ from what is generally
practiced in his Church, all his Pretenses of its agreement with the Council of
Trent, will not suffice to justify his sincerity. It is upon this very
Principle, that himself in his Discourse of universal History attacks the
Heathens. He presses them with the public Practice of the People toward their
Gods, and values not what the Poets or Philosophers said with great pomp of
words concerning the Divine Nature, whilst he saw the others involved in such
gross Superstitions. Nor is this my Reflection, it was made by one of his own
Communion, not long since, upon this very Occasion. And because it may serve at
once, both to clear what I am now showing, and more fully satisfy the World,
that this Bishop's Exposition, how much soever pretending to deliver to us the
true Doctrine of the Catholic Church, yet was not thought at all conformable,
even by those of his own Religion, to the general Practice of it, I will beg
leave to offer it in his own Words.

As for what I have said, that we must judge of the Pagan Lettre a Monsieur L.
A. D. C. touchant les Cometes. page 372. and seqq. de l'Edition de Rotterdam.
1683. And in the considerations sur le livre de Monfieur Brueys. page 65. etc.
Rotterdam. 1684.
Religion not from the Impertinencies of the Poets, or the specious Discourses
of the Philosophers, but from the Worship which was practiced by public
Authority, I do not see what any one can reasonably except against it. For it
is most certain, that it is this alone which must justify or condemn any
Religion. And it is from this that the ancient Fathers heretofore run down the
Heathens. Monsieur de Condom himself, who seems not to approve this Method, but
pretends that we ought to impute nothing to the Catholic Religion, but the
mere decisions of Councils, has nevertheless thought sit to impute to the Pagan
Religion those Abuses that were publicly committed amongst them. He decries it
upon this Principle, That its Mysteries, its Feasts, its Sacrifices, the Hymns
which they sung to their Gods, their Paintings, which they consecrated in their
Temples; all these had relation to the Loves, and Cruelties, and Jealousies of
their Gods.

The same Monsieur de Condom (says he) decries Paganism upon this account, That
they consecrated to their Gods the Impurities of the Theaters, and the bloody
Spectacles of their Gladiators; that is to say, whatever can be imagined most
corrupt, and most barbarous; and he laughs at the EXPOSITIONS and SOFTNINGS
which the Philosophers brought to all this, when they were to encounter the
Objections of the Christians.

He has reason (continues our Author) so to do; but yet this shows, that the
Method which himself has taken to render the Catholic Religion fair and
agreeable to the Protestants, is not to be maintained. For what is it to us,
may they say, whether the Abuses and Superstitions that offend us in the Church
of Rome, be to be found in the Decisions of their Councils, or not? As long as
we see them publicly and solemnly authorized by it, and that their Worship
consists in them, it is enough for us to keep our selves from its Communion.
For might not the Heathens have defended themselves the very same way? Might
they not have said, that those things which we reproached them with, were
indeed Abuses into which the People was insensibly fallen by the connivance of
the Magistrates, and by the Ignorance or Avarice of the Priests; but that we
could never be able to prove, that the College of Pontifs, and of the Church
duly assembled, had decided these things?

There is no doubt but the Heathens might have made these Excuses, had they
been as subtle and ingenious as Monsieur de Condom, But what should we have
answered? that certainly they must take us to be very Fools to defend
themselves after such a manner. Suppose a man should invite another to settle
himself in a City where Robbery and Murder should be evidently and publicly
tolerated, by showing him that there was not to be found among all the Laws of
that City, any one Statute that ordered men either to kill or rob, would he not
have reason to laugh at him? What is it to me, would he say, whether there be
any Law that commands you to murder or rob, or no? It Is sufficient to me to
keep me from dwelling there, that they do without Contradiction rob and kill.
Confess we then (says he) that the Heretics may make the same answer to
Monsieur de Condom, and that therefore the true and only means to free our
Religion from their Exceptions, is to show that it does not tolerate any thing
but what is good: And that not only the Decisions of its Councils are orthodox,
but also that the public Worship, the Customs and Doctrines authorized in it,
are just and holy.

And here then let us fix our selves: Upon this Principle be it resolved,
whether I have FALSIFIED and CALUMNIATED; or whether Monsieur de Meaux and his
Vindicator have not rather palliated and prevaricated the Doctrine of the
Church of Rome. If what these men EXPOUND to us be indeed, in our Vindicator' s
Phrase, the Universally RECEIVED Doctrine of that Communion; if it is according
to these Softnings, not that a few Converts, whose very Character carries a
design in it; but the Pope himself proceeds; the Inquisition judges; the most
Catholic Countries (where there is no design to be served by these
Mollifyings) Italy and Spain believe, the People practice, and their chiefest
Saints have gone to Heaven, and are now honored there: If this be the
Exposition which their Books of Controversy follow in stating of the Points in
difference between us (and where one would think they should certainly deliver
the Church's Sense against us) which their public Rituals in their natural and
most proper meaning speak; which their Treatises of Devotion recommend; and
which by all these several ways the Church publicly authorizes; be it then
confessed that we do indeed misrepresent them to the World.

But if otherwise these Softnings be only the Inventions of some few Persons,
who, it is much to be feared, see well enough the Errors of their Church, but
want either the Courage or the Honesty to avow it; if they are so far from
being universally received, that as we have seen they are openly opposed, nay,
condemned; and those who have endeavored to support them, imprisoned,
banished, forced to recant, and abjure their Opinions as Heretical, I hope it
will not be thought at all unreasonable in us to let the World know wherefore
we suspect these Expositors, who, by whatsoever Name we shall distinguish them,
whether they be Condomists, Representers, or what else you will, they are
indeed all of them but a sort of Half-Reformers, seeing the others have so much
a more just pretense both for Number and Authority, to be esteemed, what in
truth they are, the Old Romanists.

I shall close all with that Reflection which Monsieur Maimbourg makes in
general upon these kind of Expositions, on the occasion of that Paper which
Monsieur Granvelle, by order of the Emperor Charles the Vth. did present to
Cardinal Contarini, the Pope's Legate in the Diet of Ratisbone, 1541. and which
was by him afterward, with some little Alterations, sent to Rome, as a Model
of Union between the Romanists and Protestants. It may be observed, says he,
that in all times these pretended Accommodations and Managements of Religion,
which have been contrived to reunite the Heretics with the Catholics,
Histoire de Lutheranisme, live. III. page 253.
in these PRETENDED EXPOSITIONS OF THE FAITH, which either suppress, or
dissemble, or express in doubtful terms, or too much soften some part of the
Doctrine of the Church, have never satisfied either the one or other Party: But
they have both equally complained, that men should not deal sincerely in a
matter so delicate as the Faith is, where it is impossible to fail in one Point,
without being defective in the whole.

How far not only I may beg leave to apply all this to the Bishop of Meaux's
Exposition, but even Monsieur Maimbourg himself designed hereby to reflect upon
it, I shall leave it to those to judge, who know how far that Author took all
occasions, under the pretense of writing the Histories of past-times, to make
particular Reflections upon the Men and Actions of the present. I am persuaded
that at least, it is the true Character of it; and I hope, before I have done,
to satisfy the unprejudiced Reader, that I have good reason to think so. But
if after all, some there shall be, whom no Reason can prevail with, who in
Monsieur de Meaux's own Phrase, take pains to blind themselves, and will not
see the light at Noonday; I shall only say to them, ^eply, P. 178.
what Tertullian once did to some Heretics in his time; That it is not so much
for want of Evidence that they are not satisfied, as because their Cause
requires that they should not: For if men once resolve not to be persuaded,
it is then necessary for them not to acknowledge those ^ario (...) agno^a per
(...) Tertull. de Praescrip. Haer. cap. XVII. page 208. Ed. Paris. 1675.
things by which they are confuted.

A SECOND DEFENSE OF THE EXPOSITION of the DOCTRINE OF THE CHURCH of ENGLAND,
AGAINST The New Exceptions of Monsieur de Meaux and his VINDICATOR. Addressed
to the Reverend Vindicator.
AND thus far have I cleared the way to my Defense, and shown both that there
is at this day an Old and New Popery in the Church of Rome, and how we are to
proceed in order to the finding out which is the true and genuine Sense of that
Church. I must now remember the Method I before laid down, and shall from
henceforth carefully pursue.

Two things there are, which I shall chiefly aim at in this Undertaking, viz.
Clearness and Sincerity; and in either of which, but especially in the latter,
if I prove defective, I shall neither be able to satisfy my own Conscience,
nor my Reader's Expectation.

As for the former of these, I have made such a Division of my Discourse, as
seemed to me most proper for this end. I have resolved to give every thing its
due weight, by separating what belongs to my self alone, from what concerns the
Cause I am to maintain. And to the end that nothing of Passion or Frowardness
may arise to hinder me from weighing all things with that indifference I
desire, I shall first distinctly consider what is fit to be replied to those
severe, for I will not yet call them unjust, Reflections you have so
industriously made upon me, that so I may afterward have nothing to do, but
freely to examine the force of your Arguments; without being diverted by the
Reproaches that accompany them.

And for the latter, I do here promise you to make it sincerely my Endeavor,
not only that what I defend be the Truth, but to defend it only with Truth. You
may think of me as hardly as you please, or as your furious Zeal shall prompt
you to do; but I assure you I never will endeavor to persuade that to others,
of Truth, of which I am not first my self convinced. So that, if then you have
indeed discovered in my Book any of those ill Things you charge me with in your
Reply, you shall not fail to find me as ready to acknowledge my Faults, as, I
bless God, I always have been; and if I may be allowed to know my own Heart,
still am unwilling to commit them: Or if this will not satisfy you, I will
add, As you have been to discover them. Believe me, good Sir, my desire is to
go the right way to Eternal Happiness: but whether this Way lie on the
right hand, or on the left, or Mr. Chill. Pref.
straight-forward, to me it is indifferent. And however you have thought fit,
according to your usual Charity toward those that differ from you, to assume
to your self the Prerogative of God in judging the Secrets of my Soul, and to
affirm, as you most rashly and unchristianly do, what you can never be sure is
true, and what I am sure is undoubtedly otherwise, That if I would Reply, p. 21.
speak my Conscience, I KNOW that what I say is false; yet give me leave to
tell you that my Conscience is so far from accusing me in this matter, that I
have hitherto felt no other motions at the reading of these bitter Reproaches,
than what fill me with Wonder and Indignation at your Presumption; at the same
time that they engage me not only to forgive you my self, but earnestly to
beseech God to forgive you too.

And for your other Reflections, wherein you seem to have taken a particular
satisfaction to blacken me all you can; (you being, as I shall hereafter show,
much more sollicitous about your Calumnies than your Arguments:) Though you have
been so scrupulously careful not to allow, no, not for the smallest Errors,
that you have often taken the liberty to invent there where you could not
otherwise find whereof to accuse me; yet so far shall I be from returning any
thing of this upon you, that on the contrary, I will show you that your Example
is not contagious where your Principles do not prevail; and that I am therefore
as far from being moved by your Calumnies, as I hitherto see any reason to be
convinced by your Arguments.

But of these things more particularly hereafter. I must now pass to the first
thing I proposed to do which was to discharge my Obligations to the Bishop of
Meaux, whom, you tell me, I have endeavored to Reply, Pref.
expose, by my contemptible Raillery, to my own Confusion among thinking Men.
To which all that I shall say at present, is, That for the contemptible
Raillery you speak of, it is none of my Talent. I have heretofore shown you
some of your own Friends, who have Defense, p. 85, 86.
indeed attained to a Perfection in it, and it is pity they should lose that
Reputation, seeing they have so very little to pretend to besides. I have
treated the Bishop of Meaux, and by the help of God always will treat him as
his Character requires me to do. I have neither laughed at him, nor mocked him,
nor sharpened what I have said with any light, Satirical Pleasantry, to render
either his Person, or his Exposition ridiculous: And these are the only Notions
of Raillery that I know of, or that I believe your better Seize in the
French Language will be able to discover. No, Sir, be assured that what I have
said, was serious Truth, and delivered in such a manner, as I believe no one
but your self ever mistook it for Raillery. And if from what I shall now
further remark it does appear, that even by that Bishop's own Confession I have
spoken nothing without good grounds for it, I shall then leave it to any of
your thinking Men, be their Faith what it will, freely to judge where the
Confusion ought to lie.

SECT. I.
An Answer to the Bishop of Meaux's Second Letter; addressed to the said Bishop.

My Lord;
THO I do not see any such great Difference between your former Letter and
this, I am now about to consider, but that the Answer I had given to that,
might have excused me from saying any thing to this; yet my respect to your
Character, which I cannot but reverence, be the Person what he will that bears
it, engages me to pay that to the Dignity of your Place, which I should not
have thought due to the weight of your Arguments.

I could wish that our Controversy had been so managed from the beginning,
that I might have addressed my self to you without an Interpreter, either in
your own Tongue, or in the Language of the Church: But it being now become the
Subject of a popular Debate, I must leave it to those from whom you received
the former, to send you an Account of my present Defense; though I cannot but
apprehend that they who have committed so many Mistakes in communicating your
Letter to the World, will not be infallible Interpreters of mine to you.

Your Vindicator accuses me in his Reply to my Defense, Reply, Pref.
of having endeavored to expose you by my contemptible Raillery. It is not
improbable but that he who has the Confidence to lay so unseemly a Behavior to
my charge, in the face of so many Persons as have read my Books, and must
therefore know it to be a false and groundless Imputation, may also have
represented my Demeanor to your Lordship much otherwise than indeed it has
been. But, my Lord, I know better what I owe to your Character, than to fail in
any due Reverence toward it; and if I may be permitted to add it, am too
sensible how you ought to have respected it your self, to be guilty of any
Rudeness that may seem farther to lessen it. I believe indeed, I may have said
things that have been very ungrateful to you, but I am persuaded I have done it
in such a manner, that you your self cannot justly complain of any want of
Civility in me. And I will now, as I have hitherto done, be by so much the more
careful not to offend you in my Expressions, by how much the more I apprehend
that I must displease you in my Allegations.

It is indeed a thing to be lamented, that one, whom God has called to so high
a Dignity in his Church; whom he has endowed with all the Accomplishments of
Nature and Art, that might fit him to do some eminent Good in his Generation;
to whom he has given Favor in the sight of one of the greatest Princes of
Christendom, and whose Eyes he has opened to see many of those Errors, to which
others of his Communion are still blind, should not attempt something worthy
both his own Character, and all these great Opportunities: That the Knowledge
he has of some at least of those Superstitions which his Church is involved in,
should not yet provoke his Zeal to do somewhat that might effectually deliver
it from them.

I have heard, my Lord, of the Endeavors you use to reform these things in
your own Diocese; and I am persuaded you would be glad to see your Exposition
established, not by a few vain Complements, which you know signify nothing;
but by the effectual Practice and Decision of your Church to become indeed an
Exposition of the Faith of it. And though, were it as Authentically ratified as
it is now pompously approved, we should not even so be in a Condition of
returning to you; yet we should then despair, but that being once sensible you
could Err, God Almighty who disposed you to go thus far, He would not suffer
you to stop there; but would incline your Hearts totally to embrace that truly
Catholic Faith, from whence you have departed, and to which you now seem
willing again to return.

Think I beseech you what an Honor it would be to your See, if as the last
Reformation in France began there, so now a new and more lasting One might
spring up, not from a poor Tradesman as before, but from whence it ought to
come; the supreme Pastor of it. And if any secular Hopes or Fears have
hitherto kept you from employing those Advantages, I before mentioned, to this
great End; and for which perhaps it was that God has given them to you; be
persuaded at least yet to consider your Dignity; and what your People, your
Religion, your own Soul requires of you? It Is yet in your power to redeem all,
and by your Courage and sincerity now at the last, not only to blot out all
that Scandal you have hitherto given us; but if it shall please God to bless
your Endeavors, to render your Name Honorable to the present, and your Memory
precious to all future Generations.

But if none of these Considerations shall be able to stir you up to so
glorious an enterprise; If you are still so tender of the Credit of your
Exposition, that you will not be persuaded to pursue any Reformation, but by a
Method which you ought by this time to see will never accomplish it: You must
then excuse us if we endeavor to lay open your Designs to the World; and keep
you from doing any hurt, if you will not be persuaded to do all the Good that
you ought.

The first thing I said concerning your Exposition was, That it was designed
either to satisfy or to seduce the Marshall Expos. C. E. II.
de Turenne. This your Vindicator confirms with an Authority which shall to me
remain unquestionable. And though when I consider how many Points Reply, pref.
were wanting to that first draught which appeared of it, I must still believe
that either your personal Conferences Expos. C. E. ib.
with Him, or some other Papers to us unknown did perfect his Conversion; yet I
will not doubt, but that it was the Exposition that prepared the way to it. Nor
do I hereby at all pretend to undervalue the Efficacy of your Book: It is
certainly neither for your Lordship's nor the Mareschal's Reputation, to have
it thought that He parted so easily with His Religion, as He must have done, if
the mere reading of an Exposition of some few matters, and those none of the
most considerable in debate betwixt us, were all the care that He took about
it. But it may be the Vindicator judges of your Lordship's pains in converting
Heretics, by the little they take who now labor in this design among us: and
which I cannot more nearly compare with any thing than that Method Tertul Adv.
Valent. c. II. p. 250. N^ discipulis quidem propriis ante committunt, quam suos
fecerint. Habent Artificium quo prius persuadent quam ^ant. Veritas autem
docendo persuedet, non suadendo docet. C.
whereby Tertullian tells us, the Valentinians were wont heretofore to make
Proselytes to their Faction: They trust not, says he, their own Disciples,
before they have made sure of them: They have an Artifice by which they
persuade them before they instruct them: But Truth persuades by teaching, not
teaches by persuading.

I. But I return to your Lordship's Letter: Where the Reply p. 185.
first thing you except against is what I mentioned in my Expos. C. E. p. III.
Exposition, Concerning a private Edition of your Book which was suppressed,
because the Sorbonne Doctors, to whom it was sent for their Approbation,
excepted against some things in it.

Now this, as it was none of my Invention, but communicated to me by a Person
of undoubted integrity, and who came to the knowledge of it by the means
Defense of the Expos. p. XI.
I have heretofore said; so I thought I had the more reason to credit the
Relation, because in your Advertisement wherein you take notice of the other
Objections of Monsieur de la B --, you pass over in profound silence all that
he had charged you with concerning this suppressed Edition; though a Point
certainly considerable enough to have had some notice taken of it, had it not
been a little too hazardous, especially in your own Country, so soon to deny
it. And I must confess I was inclined to conclude, as I formerly told you, that
you Expos. C. E. p. III, IV.
therefore took no notice of it, because you were sensible it would not have
then been safe to disown it.

But now it seems you thought you might securely disavow it. And therefore in
your former Letter you solemnly declare, that you never did publish nor cause
to be printed Vindic. p. 9. 12, 13.
any other Edition than that which is in the hands of every One, to which you
never added nor diminished one Syllable.

In return to which I have also declared, that there was Def. p. VIII.
an Edition, such as I spoke of, differing in many particulars from what we now
see; that a Copy of this Edition was in my own Hands, and free for any One that
pleased to examine it.

But it seems you durst not trust to your first Denial, and therefore you were
pleased upon second thoughts to confess in effect what you had twice before
denied; That Vindis. p. 13.
it is true indeed there was such an Impression, as I said; but that it was made
without your Order or Knowledge.

To this I answered, That it was Printed by your own Def. p. X, XI.
Bookseller, a Person of great Credit and Estate; with the King's permission
and Approbation; all which could not well be done without your knowledge, nor
would Monsieur Cramoisy have presumed to do it without your Order.

And what has your Lordship now to except against this? Can you say that these
Presumptions are not reasonable against you? No, that you do not pretend. Can
you deny the Fact? Neither dare you put it upon that issue. But how then will
you clear your self? Why, you persist to affirm, that there never was any such
Edition owned and avowed by you: No, my Lord, that we Reply, p. 185.
know; you were so far from owning and avowing it, that you endeavored with
all possible Care to suppress it. But did you never make such an impression,
though you did not, nor do not yet care to own it? And if Somebody (you say)
has been pleased to tack the King's Ibid.
Approbation and privilege with the Name of Cramoisy to some other Edition, it
is but a weak Argument to give the lie to what you say.

Behold the vain presumption that is brought to oppose so plain a matter of
Fact. Here is a Book printed, Cramoisy's name, and the King's Approbation to
it: This Edition is collected from Monsieur Cramoisy's own Printing House;
collated with another of Monsieur de Turenne's that cannot be doubted to be
Authentic; attested by the person that compared them, to be the very same; and
if this be so, the Bishop of Meaux remains actually convinced of being privy to
the Impression which he confesses was made, but, as he pretends, without his
Order or Knowledge; and to all this, he has only this to say, That it may be
some body has tacked Cramoisy' s name, and the King's Approbation to an Edition
that they do not of right belong to.

Judge, my Lord, your self, if you can but for one moment sequester your
thoughts from your own concern in this matter, whether so poor a supposal be
sufficient to overthrow such positive evidence against you: and do not force me
to appeal to any other to judge betwixt us. I shall be thought perhaps to
undervalue my better Authorities in this matter, should I say that those who
are acquainted with Monsieur Cramoisy's Letter, will soon discern whether my
Book came not out of his Imprimerie. But if it be not sufficient to confound
your supposal, that it was gathered up from your own Printers; Collated with
Monsieur de Turenne's Copy; to which I am sure you will not say these things
were falsely tacked; and Attested to be the same: I will then add only this
more; That whenever your Lordship will help us to a Copy of that Impression you
speak of, made without your Knowledge or Order; that we may compare it with
what we have; and give us some good Assurance, that neither did Cramoisy Print
it, nor any other with your Consent; if it does upon collation appear that ours
is one of that stolen Edition, I will no longer insist upon the Authority of
it.

In the mean time, your Lordship, subjoyns two suppositions, which very much
confirm me in all that I have said of this matter. But what if I had Reply, p.
185.
taken out some Leaves and put in others in the room of them (for so the French
signifies) after the Book Mais quand l'aurois adjouste des Cartons a une
impression deja faite? p. 179. Translated, p. 185. But what if I had made some
Additions to a printed Impressions?
was printed, before it was made public; what if I had corrected in it what I
thought fit, or if they please altogether changed it? What consequence can they
draw from thence against me upon account of those Alterations? Let us put the
case also, if they please, that some body should have been so vainly curious as
to take the trouble to find out THIS IMPRESSION, before I had thus Corrected it?

O, my Lord! may I not here at least beg leave to think, that out of the
abundance of your heart, your hand wrote this? Would your Lordship have made
such supposals in our favor, had not your Conscience here got the better of
your Reason? Suppose, you say, before the Book was published, some Leaves had
been cut out, and you had corrected what you thought fit, or it may be
altogether changed it. Is not this the very thing we charge you with, and which
you have been so weakly endeavoring to persuade the World you did not do? And
if I may be allowed to answer one supposal with another; What if you did do
this upon the Corrections that were made by those Sorbonne Doctors, to whom it
was sent for their Approbation? Again: Suppose, you say, some one was so vainly
curious, as to take the trouble to find out THIS IMPRESSION before you had
Corrected it. I reply, That then it is very possible, that the person from whom
I obtained my Copy was One of these; and if so, then both Monsieur Cramoisy's
name, and the King's Privilege may honestly belong to it; and my Book be one
of those that was FIRST PRINTED, and that with your Knowledge and Approbation;
before these Leaves you speak of were changed in it.

You see, my Lord, of what advantage these supposals are to us; and I doubt not
but this will make you hereafter assure us that they were only Cases put, for
discourse sake, not that you really did this. And to this you may be sure there
is no Reply; all I shall desire is, that if you intended no more by them than
so, why you could not have as well made the supposal in the very terms of our
Charge; which would have been much more proper than to alter them to another
very like it; For my part I cannot but think, that as I said before, your Heart
here guided your Hand, and the conscience of what you knew you had done, led
you to make this supposal of it.

But here the Vindicator desires to come in with his supposal too; and that is
yet nearer to what we say. Suppose, says he, the Bishop had permitted an
Impression Reply, Pref.
to be made, or (WHICH IT MAY BE WAS ALL HE DID) had caused a dozen or fourteen
Copies to be printed off; to show them to his Friends, before he would put the
last hand to his Book: nay (if you will) let us suppose, that some of the
Doctors of the Sorbonne were of the number of those Friends to whom he
communicated these Copies, and that they had made some Corrections,
Observations, or Additions. Why truly, Sir, I say then, that supposing you had
the Bishop's Authority to write this, you have fairly given away his Cause and
Credit together; by confessing that there was, as we affirm, a private Edition
made, that it was communicated to some of the Doctors of the Sorbonne; that
these Doctors did Correct it, and that then it was reprinted as we now see it.

But I have more to observe from this passage, and it may be that which will
unriddle this whole Intrigue. 1. Whereas the Vindicator having supposed that
the Bishop caused a few Copies to be printed for his Friends, he then
immediately changes his style from a supposal to a kind of affirmation of it;
Which, says he, it may be WAS ALL THAT THE BISHOP DID. 2. He supposes that some
of the Sorbonne Doctors might be of the number of those Friends, and might have
made some Corrections and Observations in it. 3. He doubts, whether a few such
Copies could be PROPERLY CALLED AN IMPRESSION: And now to add my supposal to
all the rest, What if this were the Case? The Bishop Ibid.
prints a few Copies of his Book; but they being but a very few, and designed
only for his Friends, not the public; He does not think that this could
PROPERLY be called an IMPRESSION: And therefore whereas we charge him with a
private Impression, he readily denis that he had made any. For so few Copies
cannot PROPERLY BE CALLED AN IMPRESSION.

He sends it to some Doctors of the Sorbonne, and they make Corrections in it.
But these Doctors he sent it to as Friends not Doctors, and therefore when we
charge him with sending it to the Sorbonne for their Approbation; He assures us
he never did any such thing, because he designed only their private judgment as
his Friends, not to prefix their public Approbation as Doctors to it.

I do not say that this is the Case; but however I thought I might make such a
supposal of it upon the grounds that were so fairly offered to me; and I shall
submit it to the Reader to think what probability there may be in it.

But to return from this digression, to the Vindicator: You will tell me, it
may be, that you did not intend I should make this Use of your Suppositions;
that which you would know, is, What all this signifies to the Book Reply, Pref.
as it is at present? And this, my Lord, is your Lordships Question too.

I answer; That this shows, as I said in that place where I first produced this
Allegation, that those Protestants were not mistaken, who thought the Doctrine
of Expos. C. E. p. (...).
your Exposition as it was first drawn up by you, would never pass among th^se
of your own party. And when your Lordship considers how you insult over them in
your Advertisement for this belief, you will see some reason to own that it was
neither to Ceux qui de bitent avec tant de soin des Chooses si veins, cherchent
des chicanes and non pas la Verite. Reply, p. 175.
cavil with you, as you express your self; nor to juggle and perplex the World
with tricks,as your Translator makes you speak, that I mentioned these things;
but to seek and show the Truth, and let the World see how this new Mystery
wrought. And this, my Lord, to the first point: I go on with you to the

II. Second; where you say, You do really acknowledge, Reply, p. 186.
that the Edition of your Book which you published, differs in some things from
your, MS. -- And for the same reason you doubt not but we may find in the
Edition (or as the Bishop's Letter has it, the Dans les Editions. Reply, p. 179.
Editions; for I know not whether the Vindicator has corrupted the One, or
false-translated the Other;) which you did not approve, some things not
agreeing word for word with the true One: But that a little justice must needs
make us acknowledge the difference to regard only the Beauty or Conciseness of
the style, and not at all the substance of the Faith.

In all which I find nothing more than what you had before said, in your former
Letter; and the Examples of some of your Changes which I offered in answer to
this Defense, p. IX, X.
pretense then, may still serve to satisfy the World what Credit is to be
given to the same Assertion now.

But because you desire your Reverend Father to remember the Occasion of this
Difference, we ought not by any means to forget it: Viz. That it was made for
the instruction of some particular Persons, and NOT TO Reply, ibid.
BE PRINTED: I shall take it for granted, that these particular Persons for
whom it was made, were either your new Converts, or such as you desired to have
so. Now the Exposition being framed for their Instruction, and NOT TO BE
PRINTED; is it not very natural to believe that you might have softened things
in it to serve that design, somewhat more than you could afterward justify
when you came to publish it; and that the Alterations therefore might be such
as our Copy shows in things that concern the substance of the Faith as well as
the Beauty and Conciseness of the style?

And for this I have yet another presumption. The MS. Copy which at first went
abroad, and was that Rep. de Monsieur de la B -- Avertissement, p. 5.
which I suppose you drew up for the particular Persons you speak of, ended at
the Article of the Eucharist. Now. I cannot but observe that the most
considerable Alterations do end there too: For however indeed in the point of
the Eucharist you had omitted the name of Transubstantiation, yet in effect you
asserted the thing; In the Adoration of the Host, Communion in One kind, and
the following Articles, we find Changes indeed, but rather in the style, than,
as you say, in the substance of the Faith: The business of the Mass was the
only considerable instance in which you prevaricated. From whence I conclude,
that those first Articles were written, as you say, for the instruction of
particular Persons, and NOT TO BE PRINTED; and therefore you thought you might
take the liberty to write them as you pleased, and as your design led you to
do: but when you came to add the others in order to the publishing your
Exposition, though you were still exceedingly careful to mollify things all
you could, and sometimes more than was thought fitting, yet you were forced to
proceed with greater Circumspection.

But your Lordship desires to have our pretended Reply, p. 186.
Edition put into the hands of some Person of Credit; where you may have it
seen by some of your Friends; and you do then engage your self either to show
the manifest falsity of it, or if it has been truly printed after your MS. to
make appear as clear as the day, that the differences we so much magnisie
deserve not even to be thought upon.

This indeed, my Lord, is an extraordinary favor, considering that you have
suffered an Extract made out of this very Book by Monsieur de la B -- of twenty
Changes to pass now almost this xv. years without any Reply. And because I
would not be too importunate, be pleased only at your leisure to show us in
them, whether it may be worth our while to put you to the trouble of
Considering any more. But if you succeed no better in the other xix. than you
have done in this One, wherein you have first made the Experiment, it will be
neither for your Credit nor our Satisfaction to disturb your self about it. The
point is, concerning the Honoring the Blessed Virgin and the Saints: The Case
lies thus,

In both your Editions you lay down this Principle; That all Religious Worship
ought to terminate upon God, as its necessary End. -- From this you infer:

I. Edit. Therefore the Honor which the Church Expos. C. E. p. XXII.
gives to the Blessed Virgin and the Saints I S RELIGIOUS, because it gives
them that Honor with relation to God, and for the love of Him;

And therefore again,

I. Edit. So far ought one to be from blaming the Ibid, p. XXIII
Honor which we give to the Saints, as our Adversaries do, because it IS
RELIGIOUS, that on the contrary, it ought to be blamed if it were NOT RELIGIOUS.

I am not now to question the reasonableness of this Consequence; but to
observe the New turn that you give it in your Second Edition: where the
Principle remaining the same, you infer thus, directly Opposite to the former
Conclusion.

II. Edit. Therefore IF the Honor which it (the Church) renders to the Blessed
Virgin and the Saints may in some sense be called RELIGIOUS, it is for its
necessary Relation to God.

This is the Case; let us see how you Answer it. You tell us that at the bottom
what you said at first was true:Very likely, but that is not our Question:
Reply, p. 186.
that which we expect is that you show us, as clear as the day, that the
difference is only in the Style, not the Substance of Faith. You add therefore;
That if afterward you gave it Another turn, it was only that you might speak
with more Brevity, and avoid the pitiful Equivocations which are every day
made upon the Word Religious. And this is all you have to say to it.

To which I answer: First, Though it be not Material, yet that it is not true,
that your New turn was that you might speak with more Brevity; for whereas you
had before said, that this Honor was Religious, you now put in a few other
words, which do not indeed add much to the length, but makes a great deal of
difference as to the Sense, If it may in some Sense be called Religious. But,
2dly, The reason you give does not at all satisfy us: We come not now to hear
the distinctions of the Schools, but to read an Exposition of the necessary
Doctrine of the Church; and in which you tell us, that One word ill rendered
would spoil all.

What then is the Churches sense concerning that Honor Advertisement to your
Expos. p. 5, 6.
which it renders to the Saints departed? You pronounce Dogmatically: First, It
is A RELIGIOUS HONOR, and were to BE BLAMED if it were NOT RELIGIOUS. Then
comes out a new Edition, and having considered better of the matter, you doubt
whether it may even in SOME SENSE be called a RELIGIOUS HONOR. Reply, p. 9.
Your Vindicator comes after you, and with another Turn sets all right again,
that it cannot be called a Civil Honor, and therefore it must be a Religious.
And which of these, or whether they be all of them the Churches sense, we are
yet to learn.

Had you, my Lord, distinguished in your Exposition as you would be thought to
do now: Had you told us, that this Honor as it refers to God, and is done out
of Love to Him, is Religious, but in any Other respect (if there be any other)
you could not well tell what it was; we had then understood yours, if we had
not the Churches sense of it. But to tell us without any distinction in One
Edition that it is Religious, and in Another to doubt, whether it may in any
Sense be called Religious, this is such a kind of turn as He once gave to the
Canon Law, who being to Expound a certain Decree which began WE COMMAND; that
is, says the Gloss, WE FORBID: and I think plainly shows, that either here you
did not well know the Sense of your Church, or you did not care that we should.

And thus much to your Second Remark. As for the

III. Point; I shall not need to insist upon it. It neither Reply, p. 186.
belongs to your Lordship, nor is there any difference between us concerning
it. Since you freely confess that the Epistle of St. Chrysostom ought not to
have been stifled; and See this Epistle reprinted by Monsieur Bas^age,
Rotterdam, 1687. p. 34. Reply, p. 187.
Monsieur de le Faure himself, who gave the Advice by which it was suppressed,
afterward repented of it. As to the

IV. Objection; concerning Monsieur M -- s writing against your Exposition, I
am not at all concerned whether your Lordship will believe it or no: Though for
the sake of truth I will add thus much, that Monsieur M -- has again owned it,
since the publishing of my Defense, to a Person of great worth, who at my
desire enquired about it. And for the Conclusion we would draw from it, your
Lordship must needs have seen it, had the Person who informed you of these
things given you so full an account of these things as He ought to have done;
viz. to show that all even of your own Communion were not satisfied with your
Exposition; and to confirm by the Testimony of a second Witness what Monsieur
Conrart had before declared concerning it.

And now I mention the Name of your old Friend Monsieur Conrart, I could wish
for the sake of that good Opinion you have so worthily testified of Him in your
Advertisement, you had given some other character of Him in your Letter. For
however I am persuaded you meant no more by your Monsieur de Meaux's expression
is, enteste de la Religion: Hotheaded of his Religion: Reply, p. 181. 187.
Expression than to signify that firm persuasion He had of the truth of his
Religion; yet your Translator has from thence taken Occasion to represent Him
to the World as a Hotheaded Man, which you know to have been far from the true
Character of a Person so Sober, however opiniated of his Faith, as Monsieur
Conrart was. The

V. Objection is this. In the Preface to my Expositi^n, Reply, p. 187.
I had observed, How Father Crasset in his Answer to the Wholesome Advices of
the Blessed Virgin to Her indisereet Worshippers, had in that opposed your
Lordship's Expos. C. E. p. VI, VII.
Exposition. To this you return this Answer in your former Letter. I have not
read that Book, but neither Vindicat. p. 10.
did I EVER HEAR IT MENTIONED, there was any thing in it contrary to mine.

This in my Defense, I told you was very strange, considering Def. p. XIII. and
114.
that not only Monsieur de la B -- in his Answer to your Advertisement, and
Monsieur Arnauld in Defense of your Exposition, had taken notice of it; but
even Monsieur Jurieux in his Preservative had Objected it to you: Which Book I
supposed you must have read, because you Answer a part of it in your Treatise
of Communion in One Kind.

What does your Lordship now offer to excuse your Prevarication in so clear a
matter? Reply, 187.
I still continue to say that I never read Father Crasset' s Book which they
bring against Me. I KNOW well indeed that Monsieur Jurieux objected it to Me.
So your Translator renders you; I suppose that the Charitable Reader might
believe, that you do now know it, since I put you in mind of it; and not
believe a Person of your Lordship's Character, would so openly confess that you
did know that, which you so utterly denied to have ever heard mentioned before.
But alas! This is no such great matter with your Lordship; and therefore to set
things right as they ought to be, and show at once both yours and your
Translator's sincerity, I must desire the Reader to cast his Eye upon the
French Original, where he will find your Words to be these; J'ay bien sceu, a
la Verite, que Mr. Jurieux (...) opposoit. Reply, p. 181.
Reply, p. 181.
It Is true, indeed, I KNEW WELL ENOUGH that Monsieur Jurieux objected it to Me:
And therefore in Conscience, my Lord, what did you do when you told us in your
Other Letter, that you NEVER HEARD IT MENTIONED, that there was any thing in it
Contrary to your Exposition.

O my Lord! think a little upon these things: and do not imagine that a
trifling flourish will secure you either against Gods judgment, or the Worlds
Censure. For what if Monsieur Jurieux were such a One as you pretend? Ibid.
That was wont to mingle true, false, and doubtful things together:Yet since
you confess you did read in Him that Father Crasset had contradicted your
Exposition, will that excuse you from being guilty of an Offense against Truth,
in saying that you had never heard any such thing mentioned?But, my Lord, I
must go farther with you; He did not barely say it, He proved it too, and that
by a very large extract out of his Book: And be Monsieur Jurieux's credit never
so small with your Lordship, yet your own reason could not but tell you when
you read those passages, that in this at least He was certainly in the right.
And I once more Appeal to your own Conscience, whether you never read in
Monsieur de la B's? Answer to your Advertisement, nor in Monsieur Arnaud's
Defense of your Exposition, the very same: And whether these also will not One
day rise up in Judgment against you, for so positively denying that you had
ever heard of any such thing?

But you go on: Father Crasset Himself troubled Ibid.
( Le Pere Crasset touch de ce, etc. Father Crasset touched or troubled, etc.
Reply, p. 181.
as for the Offended, that is a piece of the Translator's liberality) That any
One should report his Doctrine to be different from mine, has made his
Complaints to me; and in a Preface to the second Edition of his Book, has
declared that he varied in nothing from Me, unless perhaps in the manner of
Expression: And this you say you leave to them to Examine, who shall please to
give themselves the trouble. The truth is you saw by what Monsieur Jurieux had
copied from Him, that should you read his Book you must give him up for a
pitiful Jesuit: and therefore thought it the best way to stand Neuter, and not
be engaged to say any thing about Him. Think not, my Lord, Reflections sur le
Preservatif: le livre d'an pitiable Jesuit nomme le Pere Crasset. V. Reflex. p.
19. le miserable livre d'un Pere Crasset, p. 44. Pourquoy veut il que nous
sassions de difficulte de dire q'un Pere Crasset ^'est trompe p. 47.
the Expression too slighting: Your own Defender is my precedent for it; who
finding it impossible to reconcile the Extravagancies of his Book with the
Doctrine of your Exposition, utterly disclaims both it and the Author in the
very terms I have mentioned, and with greater contempt than I am willing to
transcribe from Him.

But since you are resolved you will not interest your self in this matter, I
must here address to Father Crasset Himself; and since his Doctrine is, He
says, the same with that of your Exposition, desire Him that he will please to
inform us wherein it is that that Heretical, banish^d, condemned Author of the
Wholesome Advices, against whom he writes, differs from it. Is it that He blames
those who pay their Homage to the Blessed Virgin as to some inferior Divinity,
and believe that without Her there is no approaching to God even by Jesus
Christ? But this, Reverend Father, the Bishop of Meaux blames no less than He.

Is it that He advises the Worshippers of the Holy Virgin, not to think that
she has any Merit but what she received from her Son? -- that they ought not to
give the same Titles to Her as to God; -- nor make her Equal with God and Jesus
Christ? * Is it that He condemns Those who depend so much on the Blessed Virgin
that they have no recourse to Christ; and prefer their devotion to Her before
the Love of God? * Is it that He advises the people not to put any trust in
Images, as if there were any Divine power in them, and it were not in Effect
all One to worship the Blessed Virgin in any place or before any Image? This,
my Father, is that Authors Doctrine whom you oppose, and if the Bishop of Meaux
will disown all, or any part of this Doctrine as contrary to his Exposition
too, I shall for my part be content that then your True devotion toward the
Blessed Virgin pass as agreeable to the Principles of it.

You will, it may be, tell us, that though you oppose His Book, yet you are not
his Enemy in Every One of these Particulars: Nor will I affirm that you are.
But yet since you charge Him as an Enemy to the Honor of the Blessed Virgin,
and to the Worship of Images, you ought to show us what those Principles are,
in which you esteem Him as such; and then we shall soon see whether the Bishop
of Meaux's Exposition does not maintain the very same Doctrine.

Good God! To what a state are we arrived? That men can presume in the Face of
the World to deliver such falsities? Judge, Reader, whoever thou art, Are these
men fit to be trusted to deliver to us the Principles of Faith, that in the
plainest matters of Fact, show so little a concern for Truth; even when they
know it is impossible for them to hide their Confusion?

And here, my Lord, I could have wished I might have finished these Remarks:
Sorrow and Anguish are in the next Consideration, more than in all I have yet
delivered: And I cannot without confusion repeat, what you would be thought to
have written without blushing. But I must follow whither your self have led Me;
and speak those things which if you have yet any regard to your own Dignity,
any Sense even of common Christianity it self, will certainly bring upon you
the most sensible perplexity of mind, and great confusion of Face.

In your Pastoral Letter to the New Converts of your Past. Letter, p. 3, 4.
Diocese, you tell them, I do not marvel, my dearest Brethren, that you are
returned in Troops and with so great Ease to the Church where your Ancestors
served God. NOT ONE OF YOU HAS SUFFERED VIOLENCE EITHER IN HIS PERSON OR
GOODS. Let them not bring you these deceitful Letters which are Addressed from
Strangers transformed into Pastors, under the Title of Pastoral Letters to the
Protestants of France that are fallen by the force of Torments. So far have you
been from suffering Torments, that you have not so much as heard them
Mentioned. YOU ARE RETURNED PEACEABLY TO US, YOU KNOW IT.

This you now again confirm, as to what has passed Reply, 187, 188.
in the Diocese of Meaux, and several Others, as you were informed by the
Bishops your Brethren and your Friends: [ Don't les Eveques, mes Confreres and
mes amiss, m'avoient fait le recit, p. 181.
for so your words are, not and Other your Friends, as your Translator renders
you.] And you do again assert in the Presence of God who is to judge the living
and the dead, that YOU SPOKE NOTHING BUT THE TRUTH.

And believe Me, my Lord, that God whom you call to Witness has heard you; and
will One day bring you to Judgment for it.

For tell me, Good my Lord; Have those Edicts which the Sea all this in the
Collection made by the Kings Authority, and dedicated to Him by Monsieur le
Fevre Dr. of Sorbon; Called Nouveau Re^il de tout ce qui ^'est fait pour and
contre les Protestants ea France. a Paris, 1686.
King has published against the Protestants of France; and in which He involves
not only his own Subjects, but as far as He can all the Other Protestants of
Europe, made any Exception for the Diocese of Meaux? Have not their Churches
been pulled down, their Ministers banished; their Children ravished out of
their Bosoms; their Sick forced into your Hospitals, exposed to the rudeness of
the Magistrates and Clergy; their Shops shut up; their Offices and Employs
taken from them; and all Opportunities of the public service of God been
precluded there as well as in Other places?

See, my Lord, that black Collection which Monsieur le Fevre has lately
published with the King's Privilege of those Edicts, whereby, as he confesses,
the Reformed have in effect been persecuted for these xxx. years. Has your
Diocese escaped the rigor but of any one of these? Or is there nothing of
Violence either to Men's Persons or Goods in them?

Your Lordship, I perceive by some of your private Letters, is not a stranger
to Monsieur le Suer, and to whom I have had the Honor for some Years to be
particularly known. Was not he driven from la Ferte even before the Edict of
Nantes was revoked? And was there nothing of Violence in all this? Was that
poor Man forced to forsake all that he had, and seek for refuge in foreign
Countries, first in England, then in Holland, and did he yet (with his numerous
Family) suffer nothing neither in his Person nor Goods? And might I not say the
same of the other Ministers his Brethren in your Diocese, were I as well
acquainted with their Conditions?

But it may be you will Expound your self of those who remained behind, and
changed their Religion. And can you in Conscience say that they RETURNED
PEACEABLY TO YOU? Does a Town that holds out as long as it can, and when it is
just ready to be carried by Storm, then capitulates, yield it self up peaceably
to the Will of the Conqueror? They saw Desolation every where surround them;
the Fire was come even to their very Doors. The Dragoons were arrived at your
own City of Meaux. Before they were quartered upon the poor People, you call
them for the last Trial to a Conference. Here you appear moderate even beyond
your own Exposition; and ready to receive them upon any terms. What should they
now do? Change they must; the deliberation was only whether they should do it a
few days sooner, and prevent their ruin, or be exposed to the merciless fury
of these new Converters. Upon this follows the effect you mention; The Holy
Spirit operated upon your preaching, as it heretofore wrought in the Council of
Trents Decision. When the Courrier arrived from Rome, then presently the
Fathers became enlightened; and It seemed good to the Holy Ghost and them. When
the Dragoons stood armed to ruin them if they did not yield; then they
returned in Troops, and WITH GREAT Ibid.
EASE, to the Church, where their Ancestors served God.

And yet after all, Has no one, my Lord, even of these, suffered Violence
either in his Person or Goods? Judge, I pray you, by the Extract I will here
give you of a Letter which I received in Answer to my particular desires of
being informed How things passed in your Diocese.

It is true that the Dragoons were not lodged in Extract of a Letter concerning
the State of the Protestants in the Diocese off Meaux.
the Diocese of Meaux; but they came to their Doors, and the People being just
ready to be ruined, yielded to their fears. Insomuch that seeing afterward the
Pastoral Letter, they would not give any heed to it; saying, That seeing it was
so VISIBLY FALSE in an Article of such importance, it did not deserve to be
believed by them in the rest. One only Gentleman of the Bishopric of Meaux,
Louis Seguier, Lord of Charmois, a Relation of the late Chancellors of the same
name; had the Dragoons. It Is true that after he had signed, he was repaired in
some part of the loss he had sustained. But it happened that he did not
afterward discharge the part of a Good Catholic. He was therefore put in
Prison, first in his own Country; but it being impossible there to deprive him
of all sort of commerce, to take him absolutely from it, He has since been
transferred to the Tour of Guise, where he is at present. Two other Gentlemen
of the same Country, are also Prisoners on the same Account.

But there is an answer to your Pastoral Letter Reponse a la Lettre pastorale
de Monsi^ur de Meaux: a Amsterdam, chez pierre Savoret. 1686. page 20, etc.
which goes yet farther. He tells you of Monsieur Monceau, a Man of 77. Years
of Age, shut up in a Convent: of the cruelties exercised upon two Orphan
Children of Monsieur Mirat, the one but of 9. the other 10. Years old, at la
Ferte sous Jouarre: Nay, my Lord, he adds how even your Lordship who in the
Conference appeared so moderate, in the Visitation of your Diocese, 3. Months
after threatened those who would not go to Mass; that continued to read their
Protestant Books, or to sing their Psalms. And will you yet say there has been
nothing of Violence in your Diocese? You are returned peaceably to us, you know
it. Pastor. Letter. Ibid. La seduction eludee: ou Lettres de Monsieur (...)
Eveque de Meaux a un de ses Diocesains, qui (...) est sauve de la persecution.


I must then descend to the last sort of conviction, and out of your own Mouth
you shall be judged. Your Lordship will easily see what it is I mean. The
Copies of your own Letters to Monsieur U -- who was forced to fly from his
Country, and out of your Diocese upon the account of the Persecution you now
deny, and which were Printed the last year at Bearne in Switzerland, have
sufficiently satisfied the World of your sincerity in this point.

Your first Letter is dated at Meaux, October 17. 1685. In this, after having
exhorted him to return to you, by assuring him, That he should find your Arms
open to receive him; and again, Vous me trouverez toujours les bras ouverts: --
Je ne ce^seray de vous rapeller par mes Voeux and par mes prieres; etant
cordialement, and av^c (...) Esprit d' un Veritable pasteur, Votre, etc. p. 10.
that he should meet in you the Spirit of a true Pastor; among other things you
tell him, That we ought not to please our selves that we suffer persecution,
Songez qu'il ne ^aut point se complaire quand on souffre persecution, si (...)
on n'est bien asseure que ce soit pour la. justice. p. 11.
unless we are well assured that it is for righteousness sake. It was too much
to deny the persecution to one who was just escaped out of it, and therefore
you thought it better to flourish upon it.

Ibid. p. 16, 17.
To this he replies, Jan. 28. 1685. That he pleased himself so little in the
Persecution, that it was to avoid those places where it reigned, that according
to the precept of the Gospel, he was fled into another. And then goes on to
testify the just Scandal which the Persecution had given him against your
Religion.

Your Answer to this was of April 3. 1686. or rather not so much to this, as to
one he had sent about the same time to his Lady, and wherein he had it seems
again declared how scandalized he was at the Persecution. And here you enter in
good earnest on the Argument. Instead of denying the Persecution, you defend
it. And though you seem to testify in your reasons as little regard to the
truth of the ancient History of the Church, as in your Pastoral Letter to the
condition of the present; yet you sufficiently show of what manner of Spirit
you are of; since for your part Ibid. page 22, 23, 24. Dites moi en quel
endroit de l' Ecriture les Here iques and les Schismatiq^es sont exceptez du
nombre de ces malsaiteurs contre lesquels St. Paul a dit que Dieu m^ a arm les
Princes. p. 24.
you cannot, you say, find where Heretics and Schismatics are excepted out of
the number of those Evil doers, against whom St. Paul tells us, That God has
Armed Christian Princes.

And here, my Lord, I shall stop, and not multiply proofs in a matter so clear
as this. Only let me remember you that there is but Lettre Pastorale March 24.
Lettre a Monsieur de U. April 3.
10. days difference between the date of this and of your Pastoral Letter; too
little a while to have made so great a Change. But I suppose we ought to
remember here, what you told us before of the MS. Copy of your Exposition: that
these private letters were designed only for the Instruction of a particular
Person, and NOT TO BE PRINTED; whereas that other which you Reply, p. 186.
Addressed to your Diocese was intended to be published, and therefore required
ANOTHER TURN.

As for the Bishops your Brethren and Friends, who have, you say, affirmed the
same thing; your Lordship would do us a singular pleasure to let us know
whether they were not some of those that approved your Exposition. It was pity
they did not set their Reverend Names to your Pastoral Letter too. We should
then have been abundantly convinced of their integrity; and that they are as
fit to approve such Tracts, as your Lordship to write them. And he must be very
unreasonable that would not have been convinced by their Authority, that your
Exposition gives as true an account of the Doctrine of your Church, as your
Pastoral Letter does of the state of your Diocese.

You will excuse me, my Lord, that I have insisted thus long upon these
reflections. If you are indeed sensible of what you have done, no shame that
can from hence arise to you will seem too much; and if you are not, I am sure
none can be enough. I beseech God, whom you call to witness against your own
Soul, to give you a due sense of all these things; and then I may hope that you
will read this with the same resentiments of sorrow and regret, as I can truly
assure you I have written it. This to the 5th. Objection.

The Occasion of the next was this.

VI. In the Preface to my Exposition I had observed, that Cardinal Capisucchi,
one of the Approvers of your Expos. C. E. VIII, IX.
Exposition, had in his own writings contradicted your Doctrine as to the point
of Image Worship. To this you reply in your former Letter, That he is so far
from being contrary to the Doctrine you have Vindic. p. 10.
taught, that he had on the contrary expressly approved your Book. I answered in
my Defense, That this Defense, p. XIV.
was a good presumption that he should not have any principles contrary to
yours; but yet that if what I had alleged out of his Controversies were really
repugnant to what you taught in your Exposition, it might indeed speak the
Cardinal not so consistent with himself as he should be, but that the
Contradiction would be never the less a Contradiction for his so doing.

To this therefore you now rejoyn, That it is a Reply, p. 188.
weak Objection, which runs upon the Equivocation of the word Latria;
concerning an Absolute and Relative Worship. And falls so visibly into a
dispute about words, that you cannot imagine how Men of sense, can amuse
themselves about it. That for your part, you never engaged your self to defend
the Expressions of the School, though never so easy to be explicated, but only
the Language of the Church in her decisions of Faith. In short; That Cardinal
Capisucchi has written an express Treatise about Images, and SAID NOTHING IN
THE WHOLE THAT CONTRADICTS YOU.

I am very glad, my Lord, you refer us to the Treatise of Cardinal Capisucchi
that you mention; though I am apt to believe you did it out of a presumption
that I could not procure it to examine your pretenses. For indeed the whole
design of it is so expressly against you, that one would stand amazed to think
that a Christian and a Bishop, and what is perhaps yet more to you, an
Expounder of the Catholic Faith, that would pass with the World for a person
of Honesty and Integrity, should venture his, reputation on such self-evident
falsities.

For to examine the Comparison:

I. The Doctrine of your Exposition concerning Images is this:

That all the Honor which is given to them should Exposition, Sect. V. p. 8, 9.
be referred to the Saints themselves who are Represented by them.

The Honor we render Images is grounded upon this. No Man, for Example, can
deny but that when we look upon the figure of Jesus Christ Crucified, it
excites in us a more lively remembrance of him who loved us so as to deliver
himself up to Death for us. Whilst this Image being present before our Eyes
causes so precious a Remembrance in our Souls, we are moved to testify by some
exterior signs, how far our Gratitude bears us; and by humbling our selves
before the Image, we show what is our submission to our Savior. So that to
speak precisely, and according to the Ecclesiastical style, when we Honor the
Image of an Apostle or Martyr, our intention is not so much to Honor the
Image, as to Honor the Apostle or the Martyr in presence of the Image.

In fine, One may know with what Intention the Church Honors Images, by that
Honor which she renders to the Cross and to the Bible. All the World sees very
well that before the Cross she Adores him who bore our Iniquities upon the
Wood: and that if her Children bow the head before the Bible, if they rise up
out of respect when it is carried before them, and if they Kiss it reverently,
all this Honor is referred to the Eternal verity which it proposes to us.

We do not Worship Images, God forbid: but we Advertisement, p. 12.
make Use of Images to put us in Mind of the Originals. Our Council teaches us
no other use of them.

All which your Vindicator thus plainly and Dogmatically delivers to us, in the
four following Propositions, Reply: Preface, p. 17, 18.
in the Preface to his Reply:

1. We have a Veneration for Images as for sacred Utensils dedicated to God and
the Churches Service; and that too in a lesser Degree than for our Chalices,
etc.

2. In the Presence of them, we pay our Respect to the P. 18.
Persons whom they represent: Honor to whom Honor, Adoration to whom
Adoration; but NOT TO THE IMAGES THEMSELVES, who can claim nothing of that
Nature, viz. Honor or Adoration, from us.

3. That the hard Expressions of the Schools, as of Absolute Ibid.
and Relative Latria, MAY PERHAPS BE DEFENDED in the Sense meant by them; (it
seems it is a doubtful Case whether these Men can be excused from being guilty
of Idolatry or not; and one of these is Cardinal Capisucchi; but ought not to
be the Subject of our present Controversy, because they are not Points that
are universally and necessarily received.

4. In Answer to my demand, Whether upon ANY ACCOUNT WHATSOEVER the Image of
our Savior and of the Holy Cross were to be worshipped with Divine Worship? He
replies freely and plainly without any of the School Errantry; That the Image
of our Savior or the Holy Cross, is upon NO ACCOUNT WHATSOEVER to be
WORSHIPPED with DIVINE WORSHIP.

This is the Doctrine of your Exposition, and your Vindicator's Interpretation
of it. Let us see

IIdly; Whether Cardinal Capisucchi in that Treatise to which you Appeal, has
nothing that contradicts this: That so we may from hence too learn how far we
are to credit your Alegations: And

First, Whereas your Lordship affirms, that all the Honor which is given to
Images should be referred to the Saints themselves; that is as your Vindicator
expounds, it, that in the presence of them you pay your Respect to the Persons
whom they represent, but NOT TO the IMAGES themselves who can challenge nothing
of that Nature from us; Card. Capisucchi Controversiae Theologicae Selectae,
^ol. Romae, 1677. Controver. XXVI. Quest. 1. Paragraph, 9. p. 605.
Cardinal Capisucchi on the contrary lays down this express Position, That the
Holy Images are to be Worshipped, and are rightly worshipped by the Faithful;
nay, so as that the Worship should Page 627. 648.
TERMINATE upon them. -- Paragr. 9. 606.
For as inanimate things, though in themselves they are not Holy, yet in Order
to Another to which Holiness does primarily agree, they are called Holy, and in
relation to that Other thing, may and ought justly to be Adored with it: So
Images, though of themselves they are not Holy, yet they See above.
are Holy in Order to the Exemplar which they represent, and They may and ought
to be ADORED in Order to that, and together with it.

Secondly, Having thus resolved against your first foundation, that Images are
to be Adored; He next enquires, Ibid. Quest. II. Page 624.
what Worship is to be paid to them?

Your Lordship's position is this: We do not Worship Images, God forbid: But we
make use of Images to put us in mind of the Originals. Our Council teaches us
No other use of them. Which your Vindicator thus more plainly delivers; That
the Image of our Savior or the Holy Cross, is upon NO ACCOUNT WHATSOEVER to be
WORSHIPPED with Divine Worship.

Let us see if there be nothing in the Cardinal's Treatise that contradicts
this. And here,

First, He rejects the Opinion of Durandus, That properly Paragr. I. page 625.
speaking, Images are NOT TO be ADORED, but because they resemble things worthy
of Adoration, which by remembrance are Adored in presence of the Images;
therefore the Images themselves improperly are, and are said to be Adored. Are
not these, my Lord, almost the very words of your Exposition? Hear then what
the Cardinal says to them. This Opinion, says he, is to be rejected. And I
beseech you consider the reason He gives for it. Because, says He, in truth it
takes away the Worship of Images; and teaches that they ought only improperly
to be Adored. But if we must hearken to your Exposition, this can be no reason,
unless it be to establish the Opinion which He pretends to Combat. For
according to your Lordship, The Church does not Worship Images; God forbid. But
to go on with the Cardinal;

Whence Raphael de Turre says, that this Opinion is DANGEROUS, RASH, and
savouring the HERESY of those who oppose Images. An admirable Character of
your Lordships Exposition. For several Councils, says He, have defined, and the
Holy Fathers taught, that Images are to be Adored, by a Tradition kept from the
times of the Apostles unto our days; But now if Images should be Venerated only
Improperly, as this Opinion (let me add, and your Exposition) asserts; then the
Images would not be truly Adored; And therefore this Opinion does truly savor
the HERESY of the Enemies of Images. -- The same is asserted by Ferdinandus
Velosillus; who therefore concludes this Opinion to be not only FALSE, but RASH
and ERRONEOUS, especially since the Definition of the Council of Trent.

Behold, my Lord, the wonderful Concord between the Cardinal and your Lordship;
for tell me now I beseech you, is there nothing in all this that contradicts
you? Or rather, do you not here see what you deliver so Magisterially as the
Churches Sense, condemned as Dangerous, Rash, Erroneous, and savouring of
Heresy, and contrary to the Definition of the Council of Trent? But ^. 2dly,
In the next Paragraph, he lays down the Opinion of Vasquez: and if the Other
did not allow Images Ibid. Paragr. II. page 625.
as much Honor as you pretend to, I hope this Man did. The Opinion, says He,
of Vasquez is, that Images are no otherwise to be Adored, but because in the
Presence of them, and about them are exhibited those External signs of Honor,
as Kneeling, Kissing, uncovering the Head, and the like: (I think this, my
Lord, will come up to your instance of the respect that you pay to the Bible,
and from which you explicate your Doctrine;) But that the inward Veneration is
by no means to be directed to the Image, but only to the thing represented by
the Image. -- This Opinion, says the Cardinal, is in effect Ibid. p. 626.
the same with the foregoing; for since Vasquez does assert that the Inward A^t
of the Adorer terminates ONLY on the thing represented by the Image, He does by
consequence affirm, (what your Lordship and your Vindicator would have us
believe to be the Doctrine of the Church) that the Images themselves are not
truly and properly to be Adored.

You see, my Lord, the Cardinal still sticks to his Principle, that The IMAGES
THEMSELVES ARE TRULY AND PROPERLY TO BE ADORED. -- But let us hear Him out.
Ibid. p. 627.
Vazquez tells us that the Council [of Trent] does not much care how the
Adoration of Images is called, whether Salutation, or Embracing; or Adoration,
provided We do but grant that out of Affection to what they represent (see my
Lord your own Principle) the Images themselves are to be kissed, the Head to be
bared to them, and Other Signs of Submission to be paid, concerning which the
Controversy was with the Enemies of Images. -- In which, says the Cardinal, he
involves many Falsities. For it is both DEFINED in our COUNCILS that the HOLY
IMAGES are truly and PROPERLY to be ADORED, and therefore that even the INWARD
ACT OF ADORATION is to be TERMINATED upon the Images; and the Controversy with
the Opposers of Images, was not only about giving to Images the External signs
of Honor, but concerning the true and proper Adoration, which therefore
concerns the inward Act of Veneration.

And a little lower, He repeats and commends these words of Lorca; This
Proposition, That Honor and Adoration is due to the Image, is so certain and
firm Ibid. p. 627.
among All the Faithful (and I hope your Lordship would be thought at least,
one of them) that the contrary cannot without SCANDAL be admitted. Nor is it
Lawful for any One to deny this Proposition, and hold the Opposite at pleasure,
though He does add, that Images are to be kissed; because from the Doctrine of
the Councils and Fathers it appears, not only that Images are to be kissed, but
we are taught expressly, that they are to be Venerated and Adored.

Behold, my Lord, another instance, of the the Admirable agreement between the
Cardinals Treatise and your Exposition; whose Doctrine he is so far from
admitting as the Churches sense, that He tells you plainly, it is contrary to
your Councils Decrees, and therefore may not be held at pleasure; indeed that
it is such as cannot without SCANDAL be Admitted.

Thirdly, Having thus refuted these New Popery Expositions Paragr. VII. p. 639.
of your Churches Doctrine, he now comes to lay down the true Opinion, and
which therefore I suppose must be the Churches, as he shows it to be the
Council of Trents Sense. And it is this: That the worship of the Image and of
the Exemplar is one and the same -- So that the Image of Christ (contrary to
the Vindicators 4th. position) is to be Adored with the supreme worship that
Christ himself is -- That for the Images considered in themselves, as they are
Gold, Silver, Ibid. 640.
Brass, Iron, Stone, Wood, etc. no reverence is to be given to them: But as
they are the Images of Christ or some Saint, so they are to be worshipped with
the same Adoration as the Person whose Image it is. Nay, he adds, That this
supreme worship TERMINATES upon the Image, whereas your Lordship lays it down
as Ibid. 648.
a fundamental principle, That all religious worship terminates in GOD ALONE.
It Is true he adds, That this is not for any Excellence in the Image, but upon
the account of Christ represented in it; and from hence he thinks to free your
Church from Idolatry. But as to this, I do still say I am not at present
concerned; my business being not to examine the reasons that are offered to
justify this worship, but to clear the Matter of Fact, viz. Whether the Church
of Rome (whatever her reason be) does hold that Images are truly and properly
to be worshipped? And to this I think the Cardinal has spoken very honestly and
plainly. And I shall leave it to your Lordship and to the World to consider,
whether there was either Conscience or Truth in that Assertion, which has
occasioned this search, That Cardinal Capisucchi Reply, p. 188.
has said nothing in all this Treatise that contradicts you.

But of these things more particularly when I come to the Article it self to
which they belong. I go on in the mean time to the

VII. Objection: In my Exposition I told you that Expos. C. E. p. IX, X.
Monsieur Imbert, a Doctor of Divinity, of the Province of Bourdeaux, was clapped
in Prison by order of the Archbishop for having instructed the People in the
Good Friday service, that they ought to apply their Adoration to Christ, and
not to the Cross which was there exposed to them. And that although he alleged
your Exposition in his Defense, and upon that account your self had written to
the Archbishop in his behalf, yet was not all this sufficient to avail for his
deliverance.

To this you reply in your former Letter, That this Vindic. p. 11.
Imbert was a Man of no renown as well as of no Learning, who thought to
justify his Extravagancies before the Archbishop of Bourdeaux his Superior,
by alleging your Exposition to this Prelate. But that all Mankind saw very
well that Heaven and Earth was not more Opposite than your Doctrine, from that
which this daring Person had presumed to broach.

It would have been, my Lord, more for your own Honor as well as the Worlds
satisfaction in this matter, to have told us a little what this Extravagant
Doctrine was, which this daring Person had presumed to broach, so contrary to
your Exposition. At least you should have given us some Evidence to let us see
that he had been convinced by his Superior of having abused your Authority;
that your Exposition did by no means favor any such Extravagancies as he
alleged it for, and that it was a daring presumption in him by such pretenses
to abuse so Catholic an Exposition of the Churches Faith. That he produced
your Exposition for his Warrant of what he had taught, you do not, cannot deny.
That he was ever convinced of pretending falsely to the Authority of it, we
never heard: and if your Lordship means to have it believed, you must really
begin to produce some better Authority now a days, than your bare word to
assure us of it.

And indeed, my Lord, I am apt to think you will never be able to do this. The
Factum of his Case was too long to be Printed, and is too well known to need a
new publication. Instead of that I chose rather to communicate to the World the
Letter he wrote to your Lordship on this Occasion. And here we have a full
account what that daring Doctrine he had broached was; and how little reason
you had to disclaim it as contrary to your Exposition. The Archbishop of
Bourdeaux, Def. p. 124, 125.
says he, has caused a process to be made against me, for having explained upon
Good Friday, That we adore Jesus Christ Crucified in presence of the Cross, and
that we do not Adore any thing of what we see: -- That therefore we ought to
think that we are now going out to Mount Calvary, to Adore Jesus Christ,
without stopping at the Crucifix. That the Church like a good Mother had given
that to us by a holy invention to assist our Faith, and make the livelier
impression upon our Imagination; but not to be the Object of our Worship, which
must terminate upon Jesus Christ. And this, he tells you, is all his Crime; He
defies his Enemies to reproach, if they can, his Life and Manners, or to tax
him with any other Doctrine than that of your Lordship, and which he
endeavored to express in the self same Terms.

And is this then in your Opinion such daring Doctrine? Or can you with any
shadow of sincerity say, that this is as opposite to your Exposition, as Heaven
and Earth to one another? Your Lordship may pretend what you please, but I
doubt your Vindicator will hardly allow that there is any Heresy in the
Explication he here gives of your Good Frydays service. But let us see what you
now say further to this. You confess the Letter and the Contents of it: Only
you say, You did not believe him, because you were too well acquainted with my
Lord the Archbishop of Bourdeaux his Diocesan, of whom he made his complaint.
And in this you had certainly reason: For it is not easily to be believed that
so great a Prelate, who, as you observe, had not very long before himself
Approved your Exposition, should now prosecute a poor Man with such Violence
only for teaching the Doctrine of it.

But as you had always lived in a strict Correspondence and Friendship with
that Archbishop, you wrote to him on this Subject, and understood that this
Monsieur Imbert was an odd kind of Man (the translator calls him Une test
malfaite, Reply, p. 182.
Hotheaded) who had done even in the Church very remarkable Extravagancies,
which he was more Cautious than to boast of to you. His conduct had been
tainted with many other irregularities, which indeed hindered you from
interesting your self for him any farther in the business, or to intercede for
one in whom at first Ou d'Abord je n'avois cru que de la foi^lesse and de l'
Ignoraace. Reply, p. 182. In whom I had found nothing but weakness mixed with
Ignorance. p. 188.
you thought there had been nothing but weakness and ignorance: (for so I choose
to transcribe you, and not to follow your Translator's blunders.)

Concerning Monsieur Imbert's other faults I am wholly ignorant, and therefore
cannot pretend to answer for them. But as we are by nature exceedingly apt to
pity the Miserable, so I cannot but compassionate this poor Man's misfortunes,
and till I see the contrary made out by some better Evidence than your Lordship
has yet given us, I must beg leave to believe him to have been an Honest Worthy
Man. In the mean time I do not find that in all this you deny the cause of his
Prosecution and Imprisonment to have been what he declared to your self and to
the whole World, viz. that he maintained the Doctrine before mentioned. If his
Diocesan indeed persecuted him, not for asserting this Doctrine, but for those
other Irregularities you pretend he was guilty of, prove this and you do
something. But else, were the Man as bad as you represent him, yet if he
suffered for teaching that Faith which you expound to us; If he produced your
Book for his warrant, and yet still was persecuted; all his other faults will
not hinder but that your Lordship's Doctrine was condemned and punished in him.

And though I am an utter stranger to his Conduct; yet if this matter did pass
so as it appears to have done, I will be bold to say the worst of his
Irregularities was a Venial Sin in comparison of the Archbishop his Diocesan's
insincerity; to prosecute one of his Clergy for teaching that Doctrine, which
in the General Assembly of 1682. he had, as you tell us, himself Approved.

And here I cannot but observe the Progress you make in lessening this poor
Man. At first you only say, and that nothing to your purpose, that He was a Man
of no Learning nor Renown. When I had published his Letter, and which I will
again say was not written by a Fool or an Idiot; so that this was not found
sufficient to take off the force of a Matter of Fact of such importance; next,
His Conduct is questioned; You charge him with irregularities, but prove none;
nor can you say that he was prosecuted for any Other Crime but this One, that
he relied too much upon your Authority, and so taught that for the Catholic
Faith, which he has since to his cost learnt not to be Universal. Judge, my
Lord, if this be a Generous way of Defense; much less becoming the Charity of a
Christian, and the Dignity of a Bishop.

But there is One Presumption against all this in your former Letter, and which
ought therefore to be considered. Monfieur Imbert had said in his Factum,
Expos. C. E.] p. X.
That His Opinion was that the Church Adored not the Cross; and that the
Contrary Opinion was not only false but Idolatrous. That not only the
Protestants made their Advantage of those who maintained such Errors, but that
He Himself was scandalized to converse every day with the Missionaries and
Others, whom He had heard openly preach a Hundred times, That we ought to Adore
the Cross with Jesus Christ, as the humane Nature of our Savior with the
Divine.

From hence your Lordship raises this Argument to Vindic. p. 11^ 12.
lessen his Credit. That it never entered into the Mind of any Catholic, that
the Cross was to be Adored with Jesus Christ, as the Humane Nature of our
Savior with the Divine in the Person of the Son of God: And if this Man, say
you, gives out, he is condemned for denying those Errors, which No body ever
maintained.
sustained, he shows his Malice to be as great as his Ignorance.

Now certainly, my Lord, it is a very bold undertaking to Answer for all the
Catholics of the World, that such or such a thing never entered into their
Heads, especially when a Person here positively declares, that He had heard it
openly preached above a hundred times: Unless it may be, you esteem this to be
an Assertion of such Malignity, that a Man cannot have it enter into his mind
without the Forfeiture of his Catholicism. I do indeed confess it is a most
Extravagant Notion; and such as, One would think, should never enter into any
Christians thoughts; but we know too well what excesses those whom you call
Catholics are capable of falling into, and especially your Missionaries, to
look upon this Assertion to be at all incredible.

But since you are so sure that this never entered into the Mind of any
Catholic, what does your Lordship think of your Friend Cardinal Capisucchi. I
suppose a Cardinal and Master of the Sacred Palace may be allowed to pass with
you for a good Catholic; and yet in the very Tract to which your Lordship
appealed, behold the very thing you here so confidently deny: As the humane
Nature of Christ, though it be Capisucchi, libr. cit. page ^48.
a Creature, is Adored with supreme Adoration, because it is united to the
Person of the Word, and with the Person of the Word makes up One Christ: So the
Image of Christ being in its representative Essence one and the same with
Christ, is Adored with the same Adoration with which Christ is Adored. Here, my
Lord, is One Catholic into whose Mind this Error has entered; and I may presume
to say, I know another Catholic of the same mind, even the Bishop of Meaux
himself; unless you will retract here what you before asserted, That there is
nothing in this Treatise of Cardinal Capisucchi, that contradicts your
Sentiments. Thus you see how rash you were in your presumption against Monsieur
Imbert's Assertion; and were I minded to retort your own Conclusion upon you,
it would, I believe, be hard to say whether of those two very ill things you
impute to Him were greater in this reflection.

And now, Reverend Father, to close this Objection almost in your own Words,
let your heart be truly grieved to see such Objections brought against you; and
consider, if you yet can, in the Anguish of your Soul, how by your own fault
you have suffered your self to be brought into such Snares, as too much show to
what weak and miserable shifts, wise Men will sometimes be reduced, when they
do not act by a steady Principle of Truth and Integrity.

Your next Point concerns those Extracts I made Reply, p. 189.
from Cardinal Bona about praying to Saints; the common difficulty so often
Tant rebat^^e Reply, p. 182.
repeated (not, as your Translator has it, proposed) by Protestants. You give
us some pretended Evasions of the difficulty raised by them; and then,
according to your wonted tenderness, conclude, that it troubles a Christians
heart to see, though the Sense of the Church be made never so evident in her
Decisions, people should still continue thus to cavil (and as your Translator
adds, no doubt, for the greater, Beauty of the style, to juggle) with you about
Words.

But all this I shall rather consider in its proper place, where your
Vindicator objects the same things, than enter into any Disputes here. I will
only observe, that my Extracts from Cardinal Bona, were neither out of his
Hymns, nor any Other Poetical Works; but out of his Discourse upon your
Offices, out of his last Will and Testament, and in which certainly, if any
where, one would think, He should have written with the greatest Exactness. And
yet are they so irreconcilable with your pretended Exposition of the Catholic
Faith, that I shall leave it to any One that has ever read them, to be deluded
by you if he can.

You tell me, you will say nothing about Monsieur de Wit, because you find
nothing in that objection that Ibid.
concerns You in particular. Nor will I say any more of it than to re-mind you,
that if your Exposition does concern you, then his Case does so too: for He
alleged your Exposition, as I have shown in his Defense, and Expos. C. E. p.
XXXIV.
yet was censured by the Faculty of Louvain, without ever being showed that He
alleged it wrongfully.

And because I doubt not, but you would have your General Expressions
concerning the Pope's Authority expounded by the IV. Propositions of the Clergy
of France, 1682. in which your Lordship, with the Bishops of Tournay, S. Mal^,
de la Vaur, de Chalons, and d' Alet, had the chief hand; I must put you in mind
that the Archbishop of Strigonia with His Clergy has censured these
Propositions, and in them, your Lordships Exposition, as to that Point too, as
not delivering the true Doctrine of the Catholic Church.

Concerning the Pope's Brief to your Lordship, I observed Reply. Ibid.
this: That the very same day, that he dated his Brief to you in Approbation of
your Exposition, he dated another to the late Bishop of Pamier in Approbation
of the Defense he made of his Authority in the business of the Regale. Now if
your Exposition gives his Holiness all that Power he pretends to over the
Gallicane Church, he had as much reason to approve your Book, as Monsieur de
Pamier's Actions. But if in expounding the point of his Authority you give him
no such power as he pretends to; nay if you your self at that very time
actually joined with the other Bishops of France in opposition to it, what
insincerity must it be in the Head of the Church, Christ's Vicar upon Earth, at
the same time to claim an Authority which neither your Book allows, and you
your self opposed, and yet with the same Pen sign one Brief to you in
Approbation of your Doctrine, and another to Monsieur de Pamier, to thank him
for his opposing of it.

And thus have I passed through the several parts of your Lordships Letter. I
could have been very well pleased I might have been freed of so ungrateful an
undertaking, had not your new reviving of all these things forced me once more
to lay open those faults, which I am both sorry and ashamed, that any one of
your Dignity should ever have committed.

I have only remaining here in the Close of all, earnestly to beseech you by
the bowels and mercy of Christ Jesus our Savior, seriously to consider these
things. Think on that account which both you and I must shortly give of what we
are now doing before the Eternal Tribunal.

If I have willingly and knowingly varied in the least tittle from the Truth;
If I have standred your Lordship in any thing; Nay, if I have but taken any
pleasure in discovering the weakness of a Person of your place and Character in
the Church; Be I then responsible for it to God, and let mine Enemies triumph
in my Confusion.

But if I have spoken nothing but in the necessary Defense of the Truth, and in
a Spirit of Charity remonstrated to you your prevarications: If your own
Conscience be a thousand Witnesses, to tell you that these things are indeed
so, as I have now exposed them to yours and the Worlds Consideration; O, my
Lord, think then upon these things. Whilst you have yet the time, give God the
glory. Take that shame and Confusion to your self now, which may prevent an
Eternal Confusion hereafter.

Consult, consider, and be wise; and take it not in scorn that I have shown you
the way to surmount all these reproaches. To exchange that Scandal which you
have given to the Church, for a Name that shall never be forgotten. Declare
only what in truth you are. Put off those disguises you have hitherto walked
in, and confess once for all that your Church has erred, and stands in need of
a Reformation. It Is in vain to palliate, what your Books, your practice, all
declare to us. Your Errors, in short, may be reformed, but they are too
notorious to be denied, too gross to be justified.

SECT. II.
Wherein are considered those false Imputations which the Vindicator has cast
upon me, and upon the rest of my Brethren of the Church of England.

HItherto I have been considering the weak defenses of an insincere yet
moderate Adversary. I must now shift the Scene, and prepare from henceforth to
encounter nothing but Rudeness and Incivility. So much easier is it esteemed by
some Men to blacken an Enemy, than to Answer him; and what they cannot do by
confuting his Reasons, they hope to make up by lessening his Reputation.

It was the consideration of St. Cyprian in his answer to such another
Antagonist as I have now to do with, That though he had before thought it
better Ad Dem^^rianum, p. 185, 186. Ed. Oxon.
with silence to despise his Ignorance, than by speaking to provoke his
Madness, remembering that Advice of Solomon, Prove. XXIII. 9. Speak not in the
ears of a fool, for he will despise the Wisdom of thy words: and again Chap.
XXVI. 4. Answer not a Fool according to his folly, lest thou also be like unto
him; Yet when he began to Calumniate the Christians, as the Authors of all the
Evils that befell the World; he then esteemed himself obliged to speak; lest
his silence should now be imputed not so much to his Modesty, as to his
diffidence, and whilst he scorned to refute his false Accusations, he should
seem to acknowledge the faults with which they had been charged.

Had this Gentleman, who has thought fit to make himself my Adversary, so laid
his Reproaches upon me, as not to have wounded through my sides the common
interests of the Church of England; I should have judged it as unnecessary to
take notice of his Revilings, as I esteem it to be unchristian to return them:
And have contented my self with that general Answer which the Archangel once
gave to the Father of Lies, The LORD rebuke thee. But now St. Jude 9.
that I am marked out not so much as a private person, as the Defender of a
public Cause; now that the rest of my Brethren are all represented, as guilty
of the same Ills that I am charged with; and our very Religion it self
impeached as needing SUCH DEFENSES, as both That and We detest and condemn; It
would be want of Charity to the Church I am of, rather than any breach of it
toward such an Enemy, to decline a just defense; I shall therefore take up the
example of this Holy Father, as mine Adversary has done that of his Antagonist;
Lest if I scorn to refute his false Accusations, I should seem to acknowledge
the faults See St. Cypr. before.
with which we are charged.

. I.
IT has ever been esteemed the first step to invalidate the Credit of such kind
of imputations, to show a Calumniating Spirit in the Author of them. Here
therefore I will begin my Defense; And were I to prove this to him only who has
been the Author of these reproaches, I am persuaded I need only appeal to his
own Conscience to bear witness against him. But since I can expect but little
justice from one from whom I have already received so great an injury, and am
now by a public Scandal, called forth (against my will) to as public a
Vindication; you must excuse me, Sir, if I take all the Christian ways of a
fair Defense which Charity allows me; and show your Testimony in this matter to
be so very suspicious, that though the Jury be not packed, nor the Vulgar
called Reply, p. 37.
in to give their Verdict, yet I doubt not but all reasonable Men will confess
that you are a very unfit Witness to be credited against me.

And first; Though I perceive I shall displease you in the Allegation, yet I
must beg leave to repeat what I before said in my Defense, That some men do
think that any thing Defense, p. XVI.
may be done against a Heretic; and that lying and Calumny are but venial
Sins, when committed with a good intention to serve the Church, and to blacken
an Adversary. You are pleased indeed with great assurance to deny this; and
tell us, with your usual sincerity, That you Reply, p. 43.
have heard some Roman Catholics accused as if they taught such Doctrines; but
that you always found the Calumny to stand at the Accuser's Doors, whose art
was only (according to your, gentile way of expressing things) to cry WHORE
first.

I could wish that not only for the sake of your Old Casuists, but of some at
least of your New Converts, you had not been so very positive in this
particular. For believe me, Sir, I could tell you the Men who are not ashamed
at this day publicly to own what you so confidently deny. And indeed it were
better that you your self believed it too, unless you would resolve to leave
off to practice it. It being more tolerable to do evil by following the
guidance of an Erroneous Conscience, than to know a thing to be sinful, and yet
to commit it.

But you deny that any of your Church have ever held any such Doctrine? I pray,
Sir, of what Church were those who in their solemn Theses publicly defended,
(and that in the most formal terms;) That it is but a venial Sin by false
Accusations to lessen the Authority of one that detracts from us, if it be like
to prove hurtful to us. This was openly maintained in the University of
Louvain, in the Year 1645. And I Provincial Letter, XV.
cannot choose but think, that in your Opinion at least, I may be one of those
that are meant by it. You tell me often that I have detracted from you, and my
Authority therefore, if it be not lessened, may be hurtful to you; And how
shall I be sure that you esteem it more than a venial Sin, by false Accusations
to detract from me? I shall not need to multiply Authorities from your
particular Casuists to prove this; since the condemnation that was made of this
very Doctrine in the Decree of the present Pope, no longer ago than 1679, will
satisfy the World that such things have been taught in your Church; and a Man
must have a great deal of Charity to suppose, that after so solemn an Act as
this, you could indeed be ignorant of it. You may consult at your leisure the
43d. and 44th. Opinions there mentioned, and consider the meaning of this
Doctrine contained in them. That it is only a Venial Sin in any to lessen the
great Authority of another which is hurtful to himself, by charging him with
some false Crime -- It is probable that he does not sin Mortally who fastens a
false Crime upon another that he may defend his own Justice and Honor: and if
this be not probable, there is scarce any Opinion probable in Divinity.

And now, Sir, I am pretty confident that, if not for my sake, yet in duty to
his Holiness's Decree you will a little mollify your charge of Calumny against
me for this assertion: and if you desire any farther conviction, you may please
when you write next to the Bishop of Meaux, to engage him to enquire of his new
Disciple Father Crasset, whether he never heard of one who for practicing this
Doctrine in the very Pulpit, was by Ordinance of the Bishop of Orleans, Sept.
9. 1656. forbid to preach in his Diocese, and Provincial Letters, L. XV.
the People to hear him under the pain of a Mortal Disobedience. Really, Sir,
when I consider with what assurance you deny a matter so well known to all the
World, and compare it with the Maxims by which you have proceeded against me
in your Reply, I cannot but fear that after all your pretenses this Doctrine
may have had some influence upon you: However, seeing it is plain, that you
make so little scruple to practice it, you should not have been so very
positive in denying it.

But this is only a general presumption: and I shall be content that it be no
farther remembered against you, than I shall hereafter make it appear your
Actions do deserve. I must now come more closely to you; and because I would
not trespass too much upon either yours or the Reader's patience by making any
tedious Proof of that which I am confident you know, and the other will soon
see, does not need any: I will offer only three or four Considerations, out of
many that occur to Me, to invalidate your Authority.

And here not to mention, 1st, That great Care you seem industriously to have
taken that your Reproa^hes might not be lost, (whatever became of your
Arguments) by summing them up into a Catalogue at the beginning of your Reply,
and afterward filling all along your Margin with the like scandalous
Reflections: To pass by, 2ly. Your nauseous Repetitions of the very same
Charges not only in the same place, but almost in the very same Words; as if my
faults were to increase in Proportion to your Repetitions of them: To say
nothing, 3dly, of those general Accusations, you often bring not against my
self alone, but the rest of my Brethren of the Church of England, without so
much as the least shadow of a Proof of them; What less than an unquestionable
Argument of a detracting Spirit can arise.

1st. From those obliging Titles you every where bestow upon me, even where you
have not so much as a pretense for it; and that scandalous Idea you would from
thence give your Reader of Me.

Shall I gratify your Ear with a Repetition of some few of them: Hear then
those Strains of Rhetoric you so delight in. A Doctor of the Populace: p. 31.
A pretended Son of Peace, p. 76. A pretended Lover of Peace and Unity, but
indeed a Multiplier of Accusations to hinder such good Effects, p. 60. One that
courts the Applause of the Vulgar, p. 25. and has learnt a Machiavilian Trick
to keep them from seeing what is as clear as the Sun, by casting a thick mist
of Calumnies before their Eyes, p. 36. One who is willing to let Himself be
persuaded of any thing that but renders the Papists odious, p. 28. That has a
willingness to show at least some kind of Opposition to every thing that is
said, p. 61. Rash and Bold in his Assertions, p. 64. Far from agreeing to any
thing that has once been esteemed a Difficulty, p. 81. Having no intention to
contribute any thing to the Healing of the Church in any Punctilio, ib. Whose
whole business is nothing but Shifts, p. 82. One that is loath to trouble
himself with such distinctions as make for Peace, p. 126. That is Conscious to
himself that He cannot defend his Cause, and yet has not SINCERITY enough to
REPENT, p. 155. One that says such things as would he speak his CONSCIENCE he
KNOWS not to be True, p. 21. One that is WILFUL in his MISTAKES, and KNOWS them
well enough if he would be but so ingenuous as to acknowledge it, p. 22. In
short, One that does not believe himself what He writes, though He is willing
that Others should believe him, p. 54, 55. I pass by your more common
Appellations; of Falsifier; Caviller; Unchristian and Unscholar-like
Calumniator; Perverter of the Churches Sense; Wilfully blind; Wilful
prevaricator; Wilful mistaker of your Doctrine; Unsincere, etc. All which you
either in express terms call me, or at least plainly insinuate me to be; and of
which we must discourse a little by and by. For indeed I think what I have
already mentioned may be sufficient to satisfy any sober Man how well versed
you are in the Controversial Dialect of your Party: And whether you were not
exceedingly desirous that something should stick, when you took all this pains,
Reply, p. 4.
in your own Phrase, to Cast so much Dirt upon Me.

2dly, Nor does it less betray the true Nature of your Spirit to consider what
pitiful, light Occasions you lay hold on, to run out into the most terrible
Out-crys against Me.

Thus in the Article of Satisfactions, the Bishop of Meaux distinguishes
between two sorts of Remission of sins; the One, wherein God entirely forgives
us, without reserving any punishment; the Other a partial Remission Expos.
Sect. VIII. p. 14.
Only, wherein He changes a greater Punishment into a Less, that is, an Eternal
pain into a Temporal. This first manner, says the Bishop, being more complete,
and more conformable to his GOODNESS, he makes use of it immediately in
Baptism: but WE SUPPOSE He makes use of the second in the Pardon he grants to
those that fall after Baptism.

In my Exposition, I tell him, That this is a very great Doctrine, and ought to
be tendered to us with some better Argument, than a bare, WE SUPPOSE.

Upon this you make a Tragical Outcry against me Reply, p. 54.
for an incorrigible FALSIFIER, that though you had before told me of my
prevaricating, yet I still take no Notice of it; for that the Bishop of Meaux
says no such thing. What not as WE SUPPOSE? No; But what then does He say;
Consider, Reader, the FALSIFICATION; and be astonished at His Cavil; He says
only, WE BELIEVE. And now let any One from henceforth trust me that can: that
am so plainly caught in so important a Cheat.

But pray, Sir, bating that it serves to fill up your Catalogue and Margin with
a hard word against me; what is the great difference now between saying WE
SUPPOSE that God does not remit the whole punishment, and WE BELIEVE that he
does not. You tell us this latter phrase was conformable to his design of an
Exposition, not a Proof. And is not, WE SUPPOSE, as conformable to the design
of an Exposition, and as little fit for a proof, as WE BELIEVE? Really, Sir, I
am persuaded the Reader will think that had you marked this observation with A
CAVIL in your Margin, you would have expressed your self more properly, than by
putting a FALSIFICATION to it. And yet, though it be hardly worth the while, I
will tell you what I presume might be the occasion of this little difference;
for really I am not yet convinced that it deserves to be called a mistake.

In my Edition of Monsieur de Meaux's Exposition, which I have so often had
occasion to speak of, the word is neither exactly as you, or I, render it; but
another to the same sense, WE ESTEEM. Now this being no very proper English
phrase, and having not yet set Eyes on your Translation, when I wrote my
Exposition, I chose rather the word WE SUPPOSE, as bearing the same sense, and
being on this Occasion more generally used amongst us. This, Sir, I believe was
the grounds of our difference; and one that had not a huge mind to find faults,
would have been ashamed to inscribe so great a Crime as FALSIFICATION, to a
trifle that all Men of sense will despise, and that I ought to Apologize but
only for taking notice of. Though yet perhaps I have taken the only way to make
it considerable, by observing from it, what Spirit and Disposition you are of.

Another opportunity of clamor that you lay hold on is this; and for meaness
Cousin German to the foregoing. In the point of the Mass, the Bishop of Meaux
willing to take off the Argument which the Epistle to the Hebrews raises
against it; observes that the Apostle concludes, That we ought not only to
offer up no more Victims after Jesus Christ, but that Jesus Christ himself
ought to be but once offered up to Death for us.

In my Exposition I thus quote him: Monsieur de Meaux observes, that the Author
of this Epistle concludes, Page 67. Art. xxi.
That there ought not only no other victim to be offered for sin after that of
Christ, but that even Christ himself ought not to be any more offered. Now the
reason which the Apostle gives is this, Because that otherwise (says he) Christ
must often have suffered, Hebr. IX. 25. Plainly implying that there can be no
TRUE OFFERING without SUFFERING; so that in the Mass then, either Christ must
SUFFER, which Monsieur de Meaux denis, or he is not OFFERED, which we affirm.

But where now is the FALSIFICATION; why I make advantage, you say, of the
Bishop's words by Reply, p. 126.
an imperfect Quotation; For had I added but the next words, that would have
solved the difficulty. The next words you mean are these; That Christ ought to
be but once OFFERED UP TO DEATH FOR US. The difficulty was this; Christ can be
but ONCE OFFERED, because he can no more SUFFER: Monsieur de Meaux confesses
that Christ can no MORE SUFFER; (which I think is the meaning of his words,
that he can be but once offered up TO DEATH FOR US;) therefore he ought to
confess, that he can be no more OFFERED. Good Sir, enlighten us a little in
this matter: for I assure you By OFFERING I meant OFFERING TO DEATH, the only
kind of offering that I know of a true and proper Sacrifice; and the
interposing of those words are so far from clearing the difficulty, as you
pretend, that without either them, or some other equivalent to them, my
Argument is utterly lost. And now, let the Reader judge, whether that Man be
not fond of Calumniating his Adversary, that can have the face to call this A
FALSIFICATION.

And hitherto I have offered some presumptions to show with what Spirit you
write against us: I will now come to such proofs as shall put it beyond all
doubt; and show you to be, what I am sure ought to lessen your Credit against
us, a most false and unjust Accuser of your Brethren. For,

3dly. What else can be said of those Charges you bring against me, of such
Crimes as without some Divine revelation you can never be sure of. And though I
think Enthusiasm no more than Miracles is not yet ceased in your Church, yet
you tell me that you do Reply, Pref. p. 24.
not your self pretend to be inspired, and I do not hear that you have at this
time any Hypochondriack Lady amongst you, to deliver Oracles to you upon these
Occasions.

You reflect upon Me as one, who am conscious that I cannot defend my Cause,
yet have not the sincerity to REPENT: That I speak such things, as would I
deliver my Conscience I KNOW to be FALSE: that I am willful in my mistakes, and
do not my self believe what I write, though I am willing that others should.
Thus you charge me with a sin somewhat like the sin against the Holy Ghost;
that knowing the way of Truth, I not only refuse to embrace it my self, but (as
you sometimes insinuate too) keep as many others as I can out of it.

But this, Sir, I take it, is to divine, not to reason; should I tell you in
return, that I have some cause to believe, that if you do indeed credit your
own Calumnies, it is because you measure my insincerity by the sense you have
of your own Hypocrisy, I should not perhaps be altogether out in my
conjecture. But, Sir, I shall leave you rather to the Judgment of God, to whom
alone these secrets are known: And to return to my own Defense; Tell me I
beseech you, Sir, (if you can) what occasion my Life and Manners have given you
for such reflections? Are my interests in the Church of England so great, or my
expectations otherwise so low in the World; as to prompt me to such Villainy? Is
Conversion so certain a way to ruin, that a Man should rather damn himself for
ever, than follow the Dictates of his Conscience, at this time of day
especially, to embrace your Religion?

It is well known to several of your own Church (and whose Civilities to me I
shall always most thankfully acknowledge) with what readiness I have at all
times pursued the means of Instruction. Let them tell you, Sir, if ever they
found me inclined to such Perverseness or Hypocrisy, as you here most
unchristianly suggest against me. They know my Conduct whilst I was amongst
them; and from what some of them very honorably have done, I ought not to
doubt but that the rest will at any time justify Me against such scandalous
insinuations. So free I was in my enquiries, so desirous of understanding both
your Religion and your Reasons to the bottom; that many of your Church were
inclined to think, what I hear others did not stick confidently to report, That
I designed to come over to you. And though after a most impartial examination
of your Arguments I remained more convinced than ever, both of the purity of my
own, and of the dangerous corruptions of your Church; yet I assure you, Sir, I
am the same indifferent person I ever was. Not willing indeed to be deluded
with Sophistry, nor to follow every Guide that will without any reason pretend
to lead me; but most willing to yield to Truth wherever I find it. And however
you may uncharitably represent me to the World; yet I faithfully promise you
that if even in this reproachful Book of yours, there should be any thing to
convince me that I have been mistaken, I will not fail ingenuously to
acknowledge it; and where I am not convinced, you may suddenly expect to
receive my reasons of it.

There is now but one thing more remaining to make a Demonstrative proof of a
calumniating Spirit and Design in you; and that is,

Lastly; To show, that you accuse me not only of such things as you can never
be sure are True; but of such as you know to be evidently false; nay of such as
I have shown you already to be so, and that so clearly, that you have nothing
to return to it, and yet still you persist in your Calumny against Me.

This I think is the last degree of proof; and I shall leave it to your self to
judge whether I do not make it good against you.

In the Article of Extreme Unction, I expounded those words of St. James, c. v.
14, 15. Of the Miraculous Cures which were in those days common in the Church;
and added in confirmation of it That Card. Cajetane Expos. C. E. p. 44. Art.
xiii. Vindic. p. 70.
himself freely confessed they could belong to no other. -- To this you reply
in your Vindication, that Had I said that Card. Cajetane thought it could not
be proved neither from the Words, nor from the effect, that the Words of St.
James speak of the Sacramental Unction of Extreme Unction, but rather of that
Unction which our Lord Jesus instituted in the Gospel to be exercised by his
Disciples upon the sick; I had been a faithful Quoter of his sense; But to say
that he freely confesses it can belong to no other, is to impose upon my
Readers.

In my Defense I show the Vanity of this Cavil: That seeing there were but two
interpretations proposed of these Words, either to refer them to Extreme
Unction, or to Miraculous Cures, for the Cardinal utterly to exclude the
former, and apply them to the latter, was certainly in effect (for I pretended
not to give his words) to confess that they could belong to no Other.

Instead of answering this, you again charge me both in your Catalogue and in
your Margin with FALSIFICATION as to this Point. I told Him, say you, that
Cardinal Cajetane did not positively say as He affirmed He did: And then
presently, as if your Conscience had given your Reflection the Lie; you go on,
But what if He Had? Why truly, Sir, then any one may see that it was not any
concern for Truth, but a mere desire to defame Me, that here inspired you to
lay so great a Crime to my Charge; and your own Conscience at the same time
seems to have told you, that you did not your self believe me to be guilty of
it.

. II.
AND thus have I shown from the very Nature of your Reply, with what Design it
is that you write against Us. I might now go on to consider your Arguments,
without troubling my self to return any more particular Answer to your
Reproaches. But it is fit the World should be fully satisfied of your
Character: and indeed the Reasonings of your Reply are not so dangerous, but
that we may venture to let them lie, whilst we go on to consider your Revilings.

I shall need no other Apology for this undertaking than what your selfhave
already made for Me. It is I confess an ungrateful employment to expose the
Vices even of an Enemy. But where a public Challenge is made, and the greatest
of Crimes charged upon those who abhor such Villainies: In your own Words,
Where so great a concern as the Reputation of an Innocent Reply, p. 4.
Church is joined with the single Honor of such an Adversary as you are; I
think I may be excused if I let the Dirt fall where it ought, when by wiping it
off from the One, it must necessarily stick upon the Other.

Your Reflections are of two kinds: Either such as strike at the Generality of
our Church; or such as concern my self only, I shall take a View of both in
their Order. And,

Is It. Your Reflections on the Generality of the Church of England,

Are such as these. That they are Men whose Interest Reply, Preface.
and Malice prompt them to defame you. I. VI. Who, whenever any Argument
pinches them, fall to reviling; and make it their business to Misrepresent your
Doctrines; to Calumniate your Practices, and to Ridicule your Ceremonies. V.
From whom nothing is to be expected but Clamor, Insincerity, and
Misrepresentation. XII. Who seem to have no other End in all their
Controversial Books or Sermons, but to cry down Popery at any rate, least they
should suffer prejudice by its increase. XXIII. Who keep their People in
Ignorance, and pretending to be their Guides, show themselves by their Writing
to be Blind, or which is worse, Malicious. XXV. Men, who from their very
Pulpits second the Common cry. XIII. Least Reply.
people should open their Eyes, and see the Truth; and so whilst they pretend
to be Lovers of Peace and Unity, yet resolve to multiply Accusations to hinder
such good Effects, p. 60. Men who cannot endure that any of their Party should
seem to Close with Rome, as those who live by breaking the Churches peace, 80.
Men who have been estranged from Devotion, 37. And are so far biased, many of
them, in their Affections to their Party, that they will scarce allow
themselves their Common Senses in the Examen of things, but pass their Votes
against any thing that leads toward Popery; tho against JUSTICE EQUITY, and
CONSCIENCE, 115. 155. Factious Spirits, who have animated the Pulpits Zeal, to
hinder the Parliament from going on to testify its Loyalty as it had begun, by
throwing Fears and Jealousies into the Minds of those who were bigoted in
their Religion. XI. Men, in short, who manage things upon POLITIC MOTIVES to
gratify SOME PERSONS at this Juncture, least there should appear a possibility
of Union with the Church of Rome. 46. Who have something more in the bottom,
than what appears at first sight, in being thus Zealous against Popery. As Q.
Elizabeth had, who being Conscious of Her Mother's Marriage, and Her own Birth,
run out against the Pope, to secure her TITLE to the CROWN OF ENGLAND; not
foreseeing the ILL CONSEQUENCES that WILL FOLLOW in the NATION, 5. By keeping
open our bleeding Divisions to the RUIN both of CHURCH and STATE, 123.

This, Sir, is your Charge; and such as either They or You must resolve to sink
under the burden of it. The truth is, I cannot but wonder, that a Person who so
gravely exhorts others, To consider what rash Judgment Reply, p. 28.
is, and what Punishment God has reserved for those that are guilty of it,
should be able to speak of so excellent a Body of Men, in so infamous a manner.
For certainly greater Crimes than these can hardly be imputed to the Devil
himself; and I am verily persuaded that in all this Scandalous Catalogue there
is not one single Allegation either in its self true; or which (now, Sir, that
you are hereby publicly Challenged to it) you shall ever be able to make good
against us. But I must be more particular. And,

1st. The first Charge against us is, That whenever your Arguments pinch us, we
fall to Revilings, and make it our business to Blacken and Calumniate you; to
Misrepresent your Doctrines, and to Ridicule your Ceremonies.

I will not here in return to this Clamor, desire the World to consider how
unfit a Preacher you are of Honesty and Civility, who have shown your self in
this Reply to have observed but very little any Measures of either. I will
rather entreat you to reflect, how unfortunately this Charge has been managed
by the first Undertaker The Misrepresenter.
of it; who having advanced such a Charge against us in 37 Particulars, and
being fully answered to every one, never durst vindicate his Calumny against
the first Attack, though the Challenge still lies against him to do See below.
Close.
it. And methinks whilst those large Defenses remain yet without a Vindication
it is a great Assurance and Indiscretion too in you, by reviving the Calumny,
to put the World in Mind where it has been shown to lie. I know not what
Opinions you may have of your Church and of your Arguments. But we have always
found so much to censure in the One, and so little to press us in the Others,
that we have never had the least Temptation to run to such Shifts, as you here
accuse us of. But what can be done, when Men dissemble their Doctrines,
misrepresent their Practices, and outface the plainest Matters of Fact; and
then cry out nothing but Calumny and Falsification, if any one goes about to
discover their Hypcorisie. But,

IIdly. your next charge is yet more grievous; You tax us with Malice and
Interest to defame you; and say, That by the Methods by which we carry on
Disputes, we give you cause to think, that we have no other end in all our
Controversial Books or Sermons but to cry down Popery at any rate, LEAST WE
SHOULD SUFFER PREJUDICE BY ITS INCREASE.

That is, in other Words, that those of the Church of England, who oppose your
Designs, are all of them a pack of Atheists and Hypocrites; who value nothing
but their Temporal Interests; and therefore seem resolved at any rate to run
down Popery, least they should suffer prejudice by its increase. A Character so
Vile and Scandalous; so void of all appearance of Truth as well as of Modesty,
as sufficiently shows what manner of Spirit it was that assisted you in the
Writing it. And whosoever he be to whom it belongs; Tros Rutulusve fuat; Let
him be Anathema.

But I reply to this Calumny: 1. That this is a charge which you can no
otherwise pretend to make good than by our outward Actions; for I am confident
you never received any assurances of this kind in Confession from us. Now then,
tell me, I beseech you; or rather, Sir, tell the World, before which you have
traduced us, from which of our Actions is it that you presume to pass so
uncharitable a Censure against us? Are our Lives so scandalous, or our Writings
so destitute of all sense of Religion, as to speak us to be governed only by
Malice and Int^rest? Do we no longer preach up the Doctrines of Piety in our
Sermons; nor profess in our Assemblies the belief of a future Judgment, and an
Eternal State of Life or Death after this? Either make good this Charge against
us, or resolve to fall under the weight of that Infamy you thought to have cast
upon us. And remember what you tell Me (and what I know not any one in the
World on whom I can more properly bestow it than your self) of a certain
necessary Duty both to God and Men; viz. of making a Reply, p (...).
public Acknowledgment of those Calumnies you have thrown upon us, and without
which, according to your own Sentence, you cannot expect your Sin should be
forgiven you. But,

2dly, You affirm that it is out of Malice and Interest that we oppose you. As
to the former of these, I confess indeed your Principles and your Actions too,
against those you call Heretics, are such, as might almost tempt a Good Man to
Malice against you. But, Sir, those Principles and those Practices are so
contrary to Christianity too, that no man need be acted by Malice, whilst it is
so much his Duty to Oppose you. You may call our firmness, (as you do our
Religion) what you please: It Is easy to give ill Names to the best Things. But
whilst our Arguments stand good against you, no Man can, without great
Uncharitableness, say, That it is out of Malice that we Oppose you; seeing those
show, that it is a well-grounded Zeal for the Truth and Purity of the Gospel,
that moves us against such Corrupters of it as you are, and which shall, I
trust, make us steady even to the death against you.

For the other part of your Charge, Interest: Were a Christian capable of being
led by so base a Motive, yet how comes this to inspire us against you? 1st. Is
there so much less of Interest to be carried on in the Church of Rome than in
the Church of England? Have not the Clergy on your side as great a Command over
the Consciences and over the Purses too of their Flock, as on Ours? Where would
our Interests suffer by preaching up the Golden Doctrines of Satisfactions,
Purgatory, Indulgences, Masses, and Prayers for the Dead; of the necessity of
Auricular Confession, and of the Priests Power to forgive Sins? Certainly, Sir,
you forgot your self when you imputed our Firmness to this Motive. It has
indeed been an Objection against you, that in most of those Points wherein you
differ from us, you have Secular Interests to serve by them: But I never yet
heard that the Divines of the Church of England had any such Interest to oppose
these Corruptions.

2. Again; Those who have been so Honest, (in your Opinion at least) as to lay
aside their Malice and follow a Good Conscience in embracing of your Religion,
have their Temporal Interests sustained any Loss by it? Much more would All
those who now write or speak against you, come over to you, wherein I pray
would their Worldly Concerns lose by their so doing?

3. But it may be we gain something by being firm to our Principles: As to the
Other World no doubt we do; but will you say, Sir, that they who are the most
steadfast against Popery, do take the readiest Course to advance their Fortunes
by it in this? In short, Were we so wicked as to be governed by so mean a
Consideration, I do assure you we are not so blind as not to see whither
Interest would lead us. And I shall leave it to the World to judge, whether it
has not pleased God here to direct your Malice to your own Confusion, in
choosing out such a Topic as this, whereby to Calumniate our Stedfastness. But,

3dly, There is yet a third thing which you insinuate as another means, we use
to keep our Party firm against Reply, Pref.
you, and that is Ignorance. You desire them to read your Book, that they may
see how much they have been kept in Ignorance by Us: Pref. you mean, I suppose,
as to the Points wherein we differ from you, and which are many of them very
Considerable. Now were this indeed so, yet methinks it is not very decent for a
Guide of the Church of Rome to complain of it. The truth is, we do give our
People all the Instruction that we can: We put the Holy Scriptures into their
Hands in their own Tongue; we exhort them to read them; and we know who they
are, that not only do not do this, but blame us for doing it. We instruct them
with all diligence, by Writing, Preaching, Catechizing, etc. And as ignorant as
they are, yet we find them (and so do you too) too wise to be deluded by such
Seducers as would fain draw them away from us. There is no one so Ignorant, but
what can at least give you an Orthodox Summary of his Belief; can say Amen,
with understanding, to the Public Service; and in short, can tell you, Sir,
that which all your Learning; or, because that is not much, I may add, and all
the Learning of your Church will never be able to answer; That God spoke these
Words and said 1. Thou shall have none OTHER GODS but Me, 2. Thou shall not
make to thy self any GRAVEN IMAGE nor the LIKENESS of any thing in Heaven
above, or in the Earth beneath, or in the Water under the Earth; Thou shall not
BOW DOWN to them nor WORSHIP them.

As for those rare Mysteries of Ave Maria's and Pater Noster's; of the
extraordinary Virtues of Holy Water, and Agnus dei's; of St. Francis's Girdle,
St. Dominick's Beads, and Simon Stock's Scapulary; Of the Reply, p. 66.
great significancy of Oil and Balsam, of White Fillets and Boxes on the Ear;
of Ashes and Incense; of lighted Tapers, and naked Images; of the several ways
of lifting up Hands, and Crossing and Knocking Breasts; of standing, bowing,
creeping, etc. in these I confess our people have (for us) been kept in
Ignorance; and I hope they will never have Occasion of being instructed in
them. But for any Ignorance of any thing that is worth their knowledge even in
your Religion, (which I suppose you here especially aim at) for any designed
Concealment of your true Doctrine from them; much more for any thing generally
necessary, or but profitable to their Salvation, we must beg leave to justify
our selves in the Words of St. Paul, That we have not Act. 20. 29, 27.
shunned to declare unto them all the Counsel of God.

III. Your next Charge is, That we have been Reply, p. 37.
estranged from Devotion. And indeed, what wonder is it, if Men, who, as you
say, are acted only by the influences of Malice and Interest, are not much
acquainted with the Ardours of Devotion? But, Sir, setting Calumny apart,
Whence is it that you derive this Charge against us? Have we no Service of God
in our Churches? Or is our Liturgy so unapt to excite Devotion in those who
duly attend upon its Offices? Have you never, Sir, your self heard us recommend
with all Earnestness, the practice of this Piety to our Congregations? Should
we put our Prayers into an unknown Tongue, that if not the Zeal, yet at least
the Wonder and Astonishment of the People might be increased? Instead of
reading our Service aloud, would you have us turn our backs to the Assembly,
and whisper they know not what between our Hands into a Corner, that no body
may hear us? Or what is it, Sir, that we must do to satisfy you, that we are
not utterly estranged from Devotion? In short, all the pretense I find you have
for this Charge, is, That we think many of your Ceremonies uncouth; and you
tell us Reply, p. 3^.
it is because we are unacquainted with Devotion: But we will take your own
words, for indeed they are very extraordinary, and it is pity they should be
lost, The case you say is this, As the Church of England in general Ib. 38.
for Gravity and Reverend Behavior exceeds the Conventicles, or other Reformed
Churches; so the Cathedrals of the Church, we confess, are more solemn than the
Country Churches; the Catholics, as it is fit, far beyond the English
Cathedrals; and what is the issue? The Churches of England are censured as
superstitious by the Kirkmen and Conventiclers; the Cathedrals are censured as
such by the Parish Churches; and the Catholic is censured also by the Reformed
Cathedral: Still the more solemn and devout Church is censured by the less.

So that here now is a Religious War; and the Conventicles, the Parish
Churches, the Cathedrals, and the Mass-Houses are in their respective Synods
assembled to Damn and Anathematize one another; and you as a Catholic
Moderator thus decide the Controversy: There is a little Devotion (and but
very little) in the Conventicles; there is somewhat more in the Parish
Churches; there is a pretty deal more in the Cathedrals; only in the Mass-House
is to be found the perfection of Piety, the ne plus ultra of Devotion upon
Earth.

Is not this rare stuff? And will not the world, think you, be strangely
edified at so demonstrative a proof that we are (God be thanked not totally,
but yet, especially when we go to our Parish Churches, very much) estranged
from Devotion?

But pray, Sir, where is the necessity, that because we have not so much
Ceremony as you, we must be further estranged from Devotion too? If you will
allow our Savior and his Apostles; if you will grant that the Primitive
Christians were devout without all this Ceremony, why may not we be so too? And
if we may, how will you justify your self from being grossly uncharitable in
thus insinuating upon so slender a ground, that we are not? We want nothing
that may serve for Decency and Order in Gods Service; the Ceremonies we have
cast off are only those useless ones, of whose burden, St. Austin even in his
time complained, who was yet I hope no stranger to Devotion.

To go no further than those Ceremonies upon which you thus traduce us. In your
Good Friday Service, The Priest takes a Cross, and standing on one side of the
Altar Missale Romans
uncovers a little of it from the top, and then sings, Behold the Wood of the
Cross, the people answering, Come, let us Adore, and at the same time falling
down upon their faces; then he goes to the other side of the Altar, and
uncovers the right arm of it, and sings, whilst the people answer and fall
down, as before; then he comes to the middle of the Altar, and quite uncovers
it, and so they all fall down and sing as before; then he sets it up on a place
before the Altar, and pulls off his Shoes, and comes up to Adore the Cross,
bending his Knee three times before he kisses it; after this the rest of the
Priests, and the People two and two do the like.

This is the manner of that Service; and to say the truth, it does seem to us
very uncouth, and to have but little of the true Spirit of Devotion in it; but
however, let us for one moment suppose it to be a reasonable Service; pray,
Sir, why might not there have been as much Piety, tho there had been less
Ceremony? For instance; What if the Priest had uncovered the Cross all at once?
What if he had stood all the while in the same place, and not uncovered one
part at one end of the Altar, a second at the other, the rest in the middle?
Might not the people have had the same zeal by beholding the Cross, to adore
him that suffered upon it? Suppose the Priest and the Congregation had gone
with their Shoes on to the place where the Cross stood (as I believe verily
they might have done, for all Gods command to Moses to put his Shoes Reply, p.
37.
from off his feet, because the place on which he stood, was by Gods Presence
made Holy Ground). Nay, what if instead of bending their Knees three times
before they kissed it, they had done it but once, or not at all? I confess in
this case a great deal of the state of the business had been lost, and the
people would not have been half so agreeably entertained; but I cannot see why
they might not have had the same true, inward Devotion toward our Savior for
all any such defect.

To conclude this: If you can prove that we have no regard to Decency or Order
in Gods Service; if you can show that we despise Prayer, or neglect to exhort
our People to the practice of it; if we do, like you, amuse them only with
noise and show, instead of a reasonable, intelligible Service; sometimes
whisper the Prayers, that they cannot always speak them in such a language that
the ignorant among you do not know how to improve their zeal by them; then on
Gods name continue to revile us; but if you cannot say we do any thing of this
kind, I must then plainly tell you that you have most unchristianly judged us;
and I beseech you, as ever you would free your self from being thought a
Calumniator, give us but any one Argument that an honest man shall not blush to
read, to prove us, as you say, estranged from Devotion.

IV. And hitherto you have aimed especially at the Clergy of the Church of
England; your next Reflection is upon the Laity; and indeed it was but fit that
having set forth the Guides as men of no Religion, you should represent the
Flock to have neither Justice, Equity, nor Conscience. But we will take it in
your Reply, p. 115.
own words.

You tell us then of some among us, That are so biassed in their Affections to
our Party, that they will scarce allow themselves their common Senses in the
Examen, but pass their Votes against any thing that tends toward Popery, tho
against JUSTICE, EQUITY, and CONSCIENCE.

This, Sir, is another of those severe Reproaches, which without the least
shadow of a Proof you cast on many of our Church; and for which, till you shall
think fit by some very good Arguments to clear your self, I must again beg
leave to esteem you a Calumniator.

In the mean time, till you shall think fit to remove that Reproach, you may
please to know, that men so prejudiced and obstinate, as you speak of, whatever
they may pretend, yet really are none of our Disciples: We direct all men, as
you very well know, to use both their Senses and their Reason in examining
their Religion: And you can sometimes alter your note, and inveigh against us
for our so doing. And we should be heartily sorry that any of our friends
should be so nigh to a perversion, as to have abandoned the use of any of these
faculties.

They pass their votes, you say, against any thing that tends toward Popery,
tho against JUSTICE, EQUITY, and CONSCIENCE. This I am sure they never learnt
of us. We have always directed Men to act according to Justice, Equity and
Conscience: and not to be afraid of any thing that is good, because a Papist
does it. Indeed, Sir, I have heard of some who when they receive a Proselyte
into their Church, make him swear, That he will never by ANY PERSUASIONS,
Pontific. Ord. reconc. Haeret. vel Schismat. p. 200. Ed. Venet. Ann. 1561.
or by ANY OTHER MEANS be drawn off from it: And if by ANY OCCASION or ARGUMENT
he shall fall away, he wishes that incurring the Guilt of his Perjury, he may
be found obliged to ETERNAL PUNISHMENT: And this we have always blamed in them
as most Unwarrantable and Unchristian. But the Truth is, you have here, as in
most of your other Reflections, taken up our Objectious against you; and what
we with Truth lay to your Charge, you most detractingly, because most falsely,
return upon us. But,

V. You have yet more to accuse us of. You tell us Reply, Pref.
of certain factious spirits that have animated the Pulpits Zeal, to throw
fears and jealousies into the minds of those who were bigoted in their
Religion, to the hindering of the Parliament from proceeding in its Loyalty as
it had begun.

I do not very well understand, what liberty this is you take to censure the
Loyalty of so. Great a Body as the Lords Spiritual and Temporal, and the
Members of the Honorable House of Commons amount to: But sure I am, it is not
such a Pen as yours that can blast their Reputation. As for the factious
spirits that animated the Pulpits Zeal, when you dare speak openly what you
mean by it, you may be sure of an Answer either from Them or Me. In the mean
time, God be thanked the Pulpits Zeal has ever been employed to keep up in the
Subjects that Duty which by Gods command they owe to their Prince; and nothing
is at this day, next to our Zeal for our Religion, more our desire and our
endeavor, than to make men Loyal to their Sovereign. Our Pulpits still speak
the same principles of Subjection they ever did. We are neither ashamed of the
Doctrine of Passive Obedience, nor afraid of its Practice; tho some of your
Acquaintance have endeavored to laugh both that and us out of Countenance for
its sake. Our steadiness to our Religion, shall never make us fail in our Duty
to our King. In one word, we will both by our Preaching and Actions make it our
business to fulfill that great Evangelieal precept, Of rendering unto Coesar the
things that are Coesars; and unto God the things that are Gods. Mat. XXII. 21.


But, Sir, since you mention fears and jealousies, I will show you who they are
that have alarmed the Nation with them: For,

VI. Thus finally, you reflect upon us, That we are men who manage things upon
POLITIC MOTIVES to gratify some Persons at this juncture. You insinuate as if
Reply, p. 45.
there were something more in the bottom of our Opposing Page 5.
you, than what appears at first sight: You tell us a very dangerous Story of
Q. Elizabeth, how that doubting the Goodness of HER TITLE to the CROWN OF
ENGLAND, Books were filled with revilings against the Church of Rome, the
better to secure it. Then you speak again of Designs, and of leading-men; and
of ill consequences that will follow in the Nation, to the ruin Page 123.
both of Church and State, if we keep open these Divisions.

I would willingly believe that you had no other meaning in all this, but only
to insinuate once more to the World that we are a sort of Mercenary Creatures
that have indeed no Religion, but are acted only by Politic Motives, to
gratify I know not whom at this juncture. And that the Hints that follow, Of
something more being in the bottom than at first sight appears; of Q.
Elizabeth's Title to the Crown; Of designs, and leading Men; Of ill
consequences to the Nation, etc. are but words put together, without any other
intention than to render your little Reflection the more considerable. But,
Sir, all Men do not make so favorable a construction; they think there is
somewhat alluded to in that History, which if you dare justify, we need not be
ashamed of giving you an Answer. They desire you to speak out, How you apply
all these things: Whether there be any body now living to answer to Queen
Elizabeth; Whether those words of her Mothers Marriage, and Her own Birth,
making her Title doubtful to the Crown of England, have any signification; How
our zeal against Popery is to bring such ill consequences upon the Nation; and
whether here you threaten or prognosticate only these things to us; and who
gave you authority to do either? When you shall have explained your self as to
all these Particulars, you may then expect a further Answer: In the mean time
give me leave to tell you, that whether you have any meaning in it or no, the
very mention of these things is dishonest; and may raise such fears and
jealousies in the people, as all our zeal for peace shall not be able to allay:
And I know not well what I ought to think of those Men who at the same time
that his Sacred Majesty proclaims a public Peace to his Subjects, whatever
their Persuasions be; and particularly declares in favor of the Church of
England, That he will protect and maintain it in the free exercise King's
Indulgence.
of our Religion, as by Law established; and in the quiet and full enjoyment of
all our Possessions, without any Molestation or Disturbance whatsoever;
nevertheless dare threaten us with ruin and destruction.

Reply, p. 3, 123.
You speak of the ILL CONSEQUENCES that will follow in the Nation by our
opposing you; p. 3. of keeping open divisions to the RUIN both of CHURCH and
STATE, p. 123. New Test of the C. of E. Loyalty, p. 8.
Another tells us of His Majesty's withdrawing his ROYAL PROTECTION from us.
Answer to the Conferences about the Eucharist.
A third in plain words declares that the Church of Rome will TRIUMPH, when
perchance a certain Divine of the Church of England MAY SMART for having
attempted its destruction. These are such insinuations as the Pulpits zeal
would never have presumed to throw into the minds of their Auditors; and they
certainly deserve to be some other way taken notice of than I am authorized to
do it. But it is well that having shown how small your charity is to us, you now
let us see, that your Duty is not much greater to your Prince. And before you
shall next think fit to charge us with raising of fears and jealousies in Men's
minds, I desire you to consider how you will be able to purge your selves, from
being by these kind of insinuations, indeed the greatest Incendiaries.

And thus have I offered what seems to Me to be sufficient to vindicate those
of our Church from your false and scandalous Aspersions. I shall detain you but
a very little while in the other Part: wherein I am

II. To consider those Imputations you have brought against my self in
Particular.

For indeed it was not for these that I entered at all on this ungrateful
Employment of laying you open to the World; and if my Church, and its more
worthy Members be but clear of your censures, it is no great matter how much
such an inconsiderable part of it as I am, suffer by them. Something yet I will
add, that I may not seem wanting to my own Defense, and give credit to your
Censures, by neglecting to refute them.

And first, to all the hard names you have so liberally bestowed upon Me, and
the Crimes for which you have not offered the least shadow of a proof; I shall
only say, The Lord forgive you. Call me, if you please, a Doctor of See before.
the Populace; tell the World that I court the applause of the vulgar: That I
am but a pretended Son of Peace: That my business is nothing but shifts: Say
that I am wilfully blind, a wilful prevaricator, a wilful mistaker of your
Doctrine: Call me Unsincere, Caviller, and as many other Names of the like kind
as I have either now forgot, or you shall be able hereafter to invent: My
Answer shall still be the same to them all, Lord lay not this sin to your
charge.

Secondly, To your several Reflections, whereby you represent me to the World
as a Wilful prevaricator in many instances, I have already said that this is
what you can never be sure is true, and what I am sure is utterly false: And I
do not know by which of my Actions I have ever given you a cause for so
unchristian and slanderous an Imputation. Believe me, Sir, it is not a light
matter that you here lay to my charge: To be conscious to my self that I cannot
DEFEND my CAUSE, and yet not to have the SINCERITY to REPENT, must imply a most
incorrigible spirit in Me; and if I may guess by your Reply, you have not found
my Defense so weak as to justify such an Imputation To mistake is Humane, and
I shall be far from pretending an exemption from that to which we are all by
Nature subject; but to do it wilfully, and being admonished of it, nevertheless
still to persevere, and put such things upon the World, as in my conscience I
know not to be true: To endeavor to make others believe what I do not believe
my self; these are Crimes for which no Apology is to be made, nor therefore
ought any one, without very convincing Reasons, to be presumed guilty of them.
But to undertake positively to charge another with them, as you have done Me;
and upon such slender proofs, and with such repeated assertitions: This Sir,
must proceed from an uncharitable spirit; and will, I am persuaded, much more
prejudice you than me, in the opinion of all considering Men. However, as I
shall in my Reflections upon your Reply, particularly answer your pretenses
(where you have any) for these Censures; so I do now assure you, that whatever
mistakes you may think you have discovered either in my Exposition, or my
Defense, they are sins of Ignorance, and not voluntary Errors, as you most
rashly pronounce them to be.

Thirdly, For those Reflections which have no relation to the Cause in Hand,
but are drawn in merely to defame Me without the least provocation; tho I might
pass them by as foreign to my present design, yet I will stop so long as to
give some Answer to them. Two of these especially there are; and of neither of
which (excuse me, Sir, this little vanity which your Reflections force me to) I
think I need to be ashamed. The

1. Concerns my Preaching; in which not only I my self, but all those whom you
call by way of scoff, (and with more disrespect than so Honorable an Assembly
deserves) my LEARNED AUDITORY are involved together Reply, p. 20. Ibid. 21.
with Me. You say that you hear, and in that you speak properly, (for I Am told
that you your self have vouchsafed sometimes to make up a Part of my then, I
hope, truly LEARNED AUDITORY,) that I tell my Congregation, that you give
Divine Worship to Saints; that Page 56.
I speak many things ad faciendum Populum, and my LEARNED AUDITORS admire my
Learning, and applaud my Eloquence. Other Reflections of this kind you have,
and to which I shall only say, That I have never delivered any thing on those
Occasions, but what I have firmly believed to be the Truth; and which, had I
not been so persuaded, I should never have durst to utter in that Holy place.
And if this be all the effect of those Critical Sunday-nights Conferences, in
which (if I am rightly informed) my Sermons have sometimes been put upon the
rack by you; I may now conclude that I have not much transgressed, in those few
things I have therein spoken against you.

2. The other thing for which you sometimes reflect upon Me, is Popularity. You
call me a Doctor of the Populacy, p. 31. you tell the World, That I court the
Applause of the Vulgar, p. 25. And it seems have had the good fortune to obtain
it, p. 36. Now this, Sir, may be a fault, if you can say that I have done any
thing that is ill for it; or that in any of my Actions I have managed my self
otherwise than I ought to have done in consideration of it. But if it should
chance to be only your Envy or Concern at any thing of a Reputation you may
think I have got in the World, that prompts you to give it so invidious a Name,
I must then tell you that whilst I know my Innocence of any wicked designs in
it, or Endeavors after it; I shall be no more ashamed of, that I pretend to
what you call Popularity; and I will endeavor, Sir, if I can, to be still more
Popular; that so I may have the greater influence upon men's Minds, to persuade
them to their Duty, and confirm them in that steadiness, from which such false
Teachers as you are, would endeavor to draw them off. But for the rest, I have
neither Courted any ones applanse, nor gone one step out of the way in which my
Duty and my Conscience have led me, to gain an esteem or interest in the World.
In this Method by Gods Grace I shall always walk; and I make no doubt but my
Learned Auditors, and my Friends the Vulgar, will approve my resolutions. And
as I have nothing but this Integrity whereby to deserve their Regard, so whilst
I keep firm to it, I shall not fear to lose their Esteem. The approbation that
is founded on any other bottom often changes: But where Good men value, and
Honesty is the only Ground of the Esteem, there it is impossible it should ever
fail, till either the one or the other fall from their principles.

Fourthly, For those Reflections which are involved in the course of your
Reply, and cannot well be separated from it, I shall examine them as they lie
in their several places there, and not follow the Catalogue into which you have
collected them against Me. There I shall show you, that what you call
CALUMNIES, are indeed most undoubted TRUTHS: The FALSIFICATIONS you tax me
with, either your Mistake, if you indeed thought them so, or your crime if you
did not. That in my whole Defense there is but one thing that can any ways be
called an Error in the TRANSLATION of all those numerous passages I have
brought against you, and that such as no one else would, and you (who are so
obnoxious to such mistakes as to commit above a dozen in the Translation of a
short Letter) ought certainly the least of any to have censured. There you
shall see the UNSINCERITIES shown to lie at your own door: The UNCHARITABLE
ACCUSATIONS, proved to be, if not the New, yet the Old Doctrine of your Church.
The WILFUL MISTAKES, and AFFECTED MISAPPLICATIONS of EQUIVOCAL WORDS to be no
Mistakes, nor Misapplications at all: What you call a FALSE IMPOSITION in Me,
to be indeed a bold denial of your own Words: The AUTHORS you pretend to be
MISAPPLIED, if there be any such, (for I have yet found them no where but in
your Catalogue) speaking properly what they were brought for: And the PLAIN
CONTRADICTIONS no where to be found but in your own undistinguishing Brain. In
the mean time I have this only with you to entreat the Judicious Reader, That
he will suspend his Judgment till these things are Reply, Pref. i.
examined, and not take all for Gospel, that is said with Confidence.

There is now only one Charge more remaining, and from which I ought, before I
proceed farther, to defend my self against your Reflections; and that is,

V. Concerning the Ill Language you pretend I have used in my Defense; a fault
which I assure you no man more disapproves, nor is more scrupulously careful to
avoid than my self; but then I must confess that perhaps I do not think all to
be Ill Language that you shall please to call so; for tho I esteem it generally
the best to use the softest Expressions that may be, yet there is a necessity
in some cases of speaking plain, and of calling evil things by their proper
names; and really Sir, when we have to do with such a Cause as yours, and such
Vindicators of it as your self, let us do what we can, we must appear to write
a Satyr.

You are, for instance, very much offended that I should charge your Church
with Idolatry; that I should represent some of your Saints as speaking Horrid
Blasphemies; that I call St. Thomas's Notions in defense of Image Worship,
Reveries; and the Addresses with which you consecrate them, rather Magical
Incantations, than Christian Prayers; These, Sir, are hard words, I do confess;
and if I have no Grounds for them, Unjust Reproaches, Calumnies, or what else
you please of the like kind; but yet till you answer my Reasons, and convince
me of my Error, that these things are indeed not such as I suppose, I cannot
imagine how I should change my style; or what other words to find out that
might express my sense, and yet not offend your Ears.

Again: It Is possible, you will hereafter say, that in these very Reflections
wherein I complain of you for calling us Falsifiers, Calumniatars, Cavillers,
Misrepresenters, and the like, I do yet sometimes my self return the very same
language upon you; this indeed is true, but then here is the difference, you
accuse us of these things without Reason, often without any Occasion, and
therefore do CALUMNIATE, whereas I never (that I know of) return them upon you,
till I have first shown a just Cause for the doing it; and tho it be Calumny to
call an Honest man, a Knave, or a dishonest man, yet I know not what other kind
of Name we can give to him that is truly so.

This, Sir, is my Notion of these things; and if I am out, I shall be most
willing to stand corrected by you; in the mean time let us see whereon it is
that you ground this Charge against me. Two places there are in which you
accuse me of it. The

I. Refers to the Rishop of Meaux, whom as you pretend, I have endeavored to
expose by my Contemptible Reply, Pref.
Raillery. To this I have already replied, That I know not wherein I have been
guilty of any thing that looks like Raillery in all my treatment of that
Bishop, having always been mindful of his Character in every thing I have
written against him: That I am sorry the necessary Defense of Truth has forced
me to speak what I have done concerning him; and if after all, I should chance
in my pursuit of his Unsincerities, (let not that word offend you, I have
proved before, what I now say, and much more) to have dropped any Expression that
looks like Raillery, as I cannot yet find upon a diligent Examination, that I
have done it, so neither will I justify my self in it, whenever you shall be
able to prove your Allegation: But, Sir, this is not the only Instance in which
you give me occasion to complain (in a very mild Word), of your Groundless
Accusations.

II. The other place in which you charge me with this Fault, is more
considerable, because there you do (what you have seldom done any where else)
bring some Instances of it; and out of respect to so extraordinary a piece of
Justice, I will neither call them by any hard name, nor any further insist upon
your undue Repetition of them. The Expressions you accuse me of are these Three.

I. That I call St. Thomas's Opinions, Reveries. II. The Rhetorical Expressions
of the Greatest Saints, Horrid Blasphemies: And III. The pious and significant
Ceremonies of the Church, Magical Incantations.
In every part of which Charge you are a little Mistaken.

For 1. They are not S. Thomas's Opinions, but the Arguments and Distinctions
with which he endeavors to defend your Churches Opinions, that I called
Reveries. 2. Nor are there any of the Greatest Saints, tho some of them I
confess were pious men, whose Expressions I styled Horrid Blasphemies. Nor 3.
Are they the Pious and significant Ceremonies of Christ's Holy Catholic Church;
but the Prayers of a Church, usurping those Titles of Holy and Catholic, that
can the least belong to her of any Church in the Christian World; they are, I
say, the Prayers of that Church, which in just indignation to so great a
Superstition as the consecrating Stocks and Stones, in the name of the Father,
Son, and Holy Ghost, I said, looked more like Magical Incantations than
Prayers. It may be you will think these Remarks might well have been spared;
but we live in a critical Age, wherein men, you know, cannot endure to have
things Misrepresented; and when you charge me with speaking reproachfully of
your Church, you should have been very careful to see that in the charge of it
you did not speak (tho but a little) Falsely of me. But

I. It displeases you that I should call some of Thomas Aquinas's Notions,
REVERIES.

It was indeed a bold thing in me to fail in my Respects to a Doctor, who as
you tell me former times have styled Angelical; I wonder you did not add out of
your Breviary, that he was one too who attained to all his Knowledge, not by
Study and Labor, but by Divine Inspiration; Brev. Romans in Fest. vii. Martii.
for this would have added much to my offense; nay, to whom (if all that is
there said, be true) a certain Crucifix once upon a time declared, That all he
had written concerning him was well; and one part of that was this very thing
before us, That the Wood of the Crucifix was to be Adored with the same
Adoration as Christ himself; and after the attestation of it by so notable a
Miracle, I cannot but wonder how you dare to question it. But then, Sir, you
ought to have considered whether you were sure there was any dis-respect in my
Expression: Now had you not been too little acqainted with the French Tongue,
(as I shall hereafter show you are with some others) to turn Critique in it;
you would have known that Reverie is not necessarily a word of Reproach, but
used very innocently to signify a deep thought, a profound Meditation, and
from thence secondarily, the Productions themselves that come from such
Reflections: And therefore you ought not, without all distinction, to say that
I affront St. Thomas in calling his Notions Reveries, for so the best men's
works may without Affrout be called; but since this displeases you, whatever I
may do to others, yet I assure you I never will so far Affront you, as even in
my thoughts to suppose you to be a Reverie, i. e. a man of profound thought,
and deep meditation.

And thus were I minded to Cavil, I might end this Objection. But, Sir, to
satisfy your little Remark, I do confess, I did not mean that Expression in
this best sense; no, the Subject upon which I spoke it, was too bad, not to
reflect some of its illness upon the very words that are used about it; and
when I said, That I did not think my self obliged to transcribe all St.
Thomas's Reveries; I did indeed mean, what I now call them in plainer words,
his Vain and Trifling Reasons, which he brings to justify that wicked Doctrine
of your Church, That the CROSS of Christ is to be ADORED with a SUPREME DIVINE
WORSHIP. This I understood by that Expression, and such I take his Discourse
there to be; and I will now leave it to the world to judge, what else they can
make of such Profound Nonsense as this.

Honor or Reverence is not (primarily) due to any Aquinas sum. 3. part. Q.
xxv. Art. 4.
but a rational Nature; but to an insensible Creature, Honor or Reverence is
not due, but with respect to a rational Nature: And this may happen two ways;
One, Upon the account of its Representing a rational Nature: The Other, because
it is some way joined to it: By the First Means, we Worship the Image of a
King; by the Second, his Garments; and we Venerate both with the same
Veneration, with which we Venerate the King himself. --

Is not this, think you, wonderful Reasoning? And was I not horribly to blame,
to call such fine Notions, Reveries? But now for the Application.

-- If therefore we speak of that Cross upon which Christ was Crucified, it is
to be Adored upon both Accounts by us, both as it represents Christ, and as it
touched his Members, and was sprinkled with his Blood; and upon both these
Accounts with the same supreme Worship with which Christ is Adored; and hence
it is that we SPEAK to the CROSS, and PRAY to IT as if it were CHRIST. --

I doubt, Sir, you will think this last looks something like a REVERIE, because
(as I remember) it crosses your Notions. But we will go on:

But if we speak of the Image of Christ in any other Matter, so we Adore the
Cross only as the Image of Christ, which we Adore with Divine Adoration.

These are Aquinas's Notions on this Point; and these I called his Reveries, i.
e. His vain Fancies and Imaginations; and so I still esteem them to be; if you
think otherwise, and that these Dreams and Shadows of Reason, are indeed
Conclusive Proofs, why then do you reject this Doctrine, Reply, pref. p. xviii.
and tell us, that perhaps it MAYBE defended; and not speak out boldly that it
is good and Orthodox, and what we ought to follow; but if you like this arguing
really no better than I do, wherefore do you expose me for calling that a vain
Fancy, which, after all, you your self look upon as no other?

To conclude; I am persuaded that no one among you has a juster respect for St.
Thomas than I have; I have always esteemed him an excellent Doctor, and
profited by his Works; but what can the best man do, when he has not Truth on
his side? Error may be palliated, and a greatdeal of Thought be spent, and Wit
shown to give it the Appearance of Truth, but when all is done it is Error
still; and the Arguments that are brought to support it, how fine and subtle
soever they may seem, are yet but Reveries, i. e. Visions, Shadows of Reason,
not Rational and Conclusive Proofs; and upon this Ground, tho not only an
Angelical Doctor, or a Crucifix from a Wall, but even an Angel from Heaven,
should argue in this sort, I should not be ashamed of the Expression, if I had
called it Ra^ing. But

II. The next Thing you find fault with, is; That I call some of the
Expressions of your Saints, with reference to the Virgin Mary, HORRID
BLASPHEMIES.

And here you put me upon a very ungrateful work, to rake into the Ashes of
Good, but Superstitious Men, and who falling into Corrupt Times, were by their
Piety carried into Vain and Extravagant Expressions of it: But as I hope God
has pardoned their well-meant, tho very indiscreet Zeal; so I desire that what
I here repeat in my Defense, may not be a means to lead any one to Triumph in
their Weakness, whose Virtues otherwise we few of us perhaps shall be able to
come up to; and this I say of some of those I am to mention; for however your
Church has thought fit indifferently to Canonize them, yet I hope Saints as
well as Stars, may differ from one another both in their Goodness and in their
Glory.

The 1. you mention is St. Germain, Whose Expressions to the Blessed Virgin, or
as you call them, Rhetorical Flights, will I think justify the worst that can
be said of them: O Mother of God, says he, your Defense is Immortal; your
Intercession is the Life; your Protection Crasset veritable Devotion p. 31.
is Security; if you do not teach us the Way, no one can become Spiritual, nor
Adore God in Spirit. -- O Most Holy Virgin! No one can have the Knowledge of God
but by you: O Mother of God! No one can be saved but by you: O Virgin Mother!
No one can be delivered from Dangers but by you: O Favored of God! No one can
obtain any Gift or Grace, but by you.

The second is St. Anselm. His Expressions of this kind are numerous; and I
will mention only some of them: O Blessed Virgin! says he, as it is necessary
that every Crasset. p. 49.
one who is hated and despised by you, should perish, so is it impossible that
he whom you regard should be lost. -- Only be it your will that we should be
saved, and then we cannot but be saved. -- Ibid. 56.
Hence he elsewhere calls Her, The Repairer of the lost Ibid. 234.
World: and adds, that as God creating all things by his power, is become God
and Father of all; so Mary Ibid. 235.
the Blessed Mother of God by restoring all things, is become the Mother and
Lady of all. In one of his Addresses to her, he says, That God has given this
to Her in common with Himself, that with Her all things Ibid.
should be possible. And to go yet one step farther, he tells us in plain
terms, That a man is sometimes sooner saved in calling upon the name of Mary,
than by calling upon the name of Christ. Ibid. 112.


3ly, Your next Saint is St. Bernard: And he too is Voluminous in his
Expressions. Thus he also makes her Redemptrix of the World: We have, says he,
sent before Crasser, p. 30.
us from Earth to Heaven an Advocate, who being Mother of our Judge, and Mother
of Mercy, will treat sincerely and with efficacy the business of our Salvation?
It Is She that has obtained the Reparation of the whole World, and the
Salvation of all men. -- It must be confessed Ibid. p. 31.
that one man, and one woman have done us a great deal of harm; but another
man, and another woman, have repaired with advantage all the ill which the
former had done us. I acknowledge that Jesus Christ is sufficient to save us;
but it was not expedient that Man should be alone; it was more congruous, that
both the one and the other sex should come in to our Reparation, seeing neither
of them was wanting to our destruction. -- Consider Ibid. 32.
then more deeply with how great an affection of piety God would have us adore
Her, who has put the whole fullness of Good in Mary: so that if there be any
hope in us, if any Grace, if any salvation, we should know that it proceeds
from Her. -- And therefore he elsewhere Ibid. 74.
calls Her, The Ladder of Sinners; His Great Trust, and the whole foundation of
his Hope. But I must not insist too largely.

The next you name is, Fourthly, The Abbot of Celles; Crasset, p. 33, 34.
I will produce but one passage from him: Approach, says he, by a devout
contemplation of spirit toward the Blessed Virgin, because through Her, and
with Her, and in Her, and from Her, the world both has, and will have all that
is Good. -- She is our Advocate to Her Son, as the Son to the Father. She
sollicites for us both the Father and the Son. Oftentimes those whom the
Justice of the Son might condemn, the Mercy of the Mother delivers. -- In
short, As our Savior once said, That no one could come unto him (whilst he was
on Earth) unless the Father drew him; so dare I (says he) in some sort affirm,
that no one comes now to thy Glorified Son, unless thou by thy Holy assistance
drawest him.

5thly, As it is impossible (says St. Antonine, from St. Crasset, Ib.
Anselm) that those from whom the V. Mary turns the Eyes of her Mercy should be
saved; so is it necessary that those toward whom she turns Her eyes,
interceding for them, should be justified and Glorified.

6thly, From the time, says St. Bernardine, that the Crasset. 37.
Virgin Mother conceived in her Womb the Word of God, She obtained, as I may
say, a certain jurisdiction and authority over all the Temporal processions of
the Holy Ghost. So that no creature has obtained any Grace or virtue of God,
but according to the dispensation of his Holy Mother.

He that desires more of this, may see in Dr. J. C's Apology for his
Contemplations on the Life and Glory of Holy Land. 1687.
Mary; who tho he be not yet a Saint, yet may for his zeal deserve hereafter to
be Canonized; and make as great a figure one day in the Church, as any that I
have named.

These, Sir, are some of the Expressions to which I referred: You may think as
you please of them, and give what dexterous Expositions your Wit shall enable
you, to free them from Censure: But I dare venture it to all sober Men now to
judge, Whether I was much out in my Expression, when I said in my Defense, that
they were HORRID BLASPHEMIES.

3dly, Your last Censure is, That I said of those Collects which you use in the
Consecration of a Cross, that they seemed to be MAGICAL INCANTATIONS rather
than Prayers.

And I would to God, Sir, we had not too good Grounds for such a Censure: I
should most willingly retract my Expression. But in the mean time, till you
will learn to be ashamed of doing such things, I see no cause wherefore I
should be confounded for giving them their proper Names.

You pray to God, that he would bless the Wood of the Cross; to what purpose, I
pray, give a blessing to the Stock of a Tree? That it may be a saving Remedy to
mankind; an Establishment of the Faith; for the increase of good Works; and the
Redemption of Souls; for a Comfort and Protection against the cruel Darts of
the Enemy. Is not this, Sir, a most edifying Prayer for a Church, calling her
self Catholic, to use? To desire the blessing of God upon that which he has
expressly forbidden us to make, for any such purpose as that, for which it is
here consecrated? But to go on with the Ceremony:

You incense it, you sprinkle it with holy Water; you Consecrate it, In the
Name of the FATHER, and of the SON, and of the HOLY GHOST: You pray again, that
as by the Cross upon which Christ suffered, the World was redeemed from Guilt;
so by the Merits of this Cross, the Souls of those who offer it, may be freed
from all the Sins which they have committed. And now the work is done; and it
is fit for you to FALL DOWN before it, and WORSHIP it.

Consider, Sir, I beseech you, in the Spirit of a Christian, what it is about
which these Prayers are bestowed; and what it is you beg in them. And seeing
you desire that such Benefits may be derived to you from a senseless, inanimate
Creature; think what the import of Magical Incantations is, and tell me if
these requests do not look more like Charms, than Prayers; and whether I was
very much out, when in a just Indignation at so wretched an Abuse of the Name
of the Holy Trinity, I said, they seemed rather the one than the other.

But if my Expression still offends you, consider then, how much more justly
these Practices scandalize us. Do not tell the World that I reproach Christ's
Holy Catholic Church, as guilty of Magical Incantations: No, it is your Church,
the corrupted Roman Church alone, that I charge as coming in these things too
nearly to the Practices of the Heathens: God be thanked, Christ has other
Churches that are freed from such Abuses, as all his faithful Servants lament
in you, and earnestly desire you would your selves learn at last to be ashamed
of.

I will add but one Word more, and it is this: That before you Censure me any
farther for this Expression, you will please to remember, that there is another
Practice in your Church, which I might have mentioned in my Defense, called
Exorcizing; but far distant from the Ancient Ceremony designed by that word.
This your Ritual Authorizes; and for the fuller Practice of it, directs us to
your approved Authors; such as Mengus, and some others. The plain English of
that hard word, you know is Conjuring, and the thing does not at all belie the
Name. You may force me to speak of this if you think fit; and to add to this,
your other Ceremonies of Christening of Bells, Consecrating Water; Agnus Dei's,
and the like; and what wonderful Benefits you pretend to derive from thence.
But I had rather if you please be prevented in this design, than vindicate my
self so much to your Churches scandal.

SECT. III.
AND here I shall finish my present Reflections; and might, I think, have
concluded my whole Defense. For having justified the Distinction I had advanced
of Old and New Popery; having shown you, that it is not merely from the Decrees
of your Councils, but from your private Authors and common Practice, that we
are to interpret your Churches Doctrine: Having particularly answered all the
Bishop of Meaux's Pretenses, and I hope sufficiently Vindicated (even in your
Opinion) my Self and Brethren from your unjust and scandalous Imputations;
nothing now remains, but to consider the Doctrine of your Reply; and that has
been already so fully done, that neither can you Answer it, nor am I able to
add any thing to it. But you have always had a particular Gift, to advance
again without Blushing, those Objections to day, which but yesterday were
confuted beyond a possibility of Reply.

1. You charge us with Misrepresenting your Doctrines Reply pref.
; you speak largely of a certain Book that undertook to prove this to the
World; but you forget to tell us, that a learned The Doctrines and Practices of
the Church of Rome truly represented. Never Answered. See the View of the whole
Controversy, which has plainly shown that the business of the Reflections was
to decline an Answer.
Man of our Church, went along with this Book through all the several
particulars, and showed you the contrary. And thus the Calumny goes on; but the
Defense we have made, is never like to be considered.

2. You seem concerned, that I Reply, Art. ii. p. 6.
took so little notice of your second Article about the Nature and Object of
Religious Worship; but you do not acknowledge that my Reason was, because it had
been fully done in several A Discourse concerning the Object of Religious
Worship. Unanswered. Answer to Papists protesting against Protestant Popery,
etc. Unanswered. See for this, also the View of the whole Controversy, which
the Representer ha^ now shown, is never like to be fairly Answered.
Treatises on that very Subject, and which lie still unreplied to.

3. You run out into a great length Reply Art. iii. p. 10.
about the Invocation of Saints: But is it to Answer any thing we had replied
to your Arguments on that Subject? No, tho I directed you to a Speculum B.
Virginis. Unanswered. A Discourse concerning the Worship of the B. Virgin, and
the Saints, in Answer to Mons. de Meaux's Appeal to the 4th Age. Unanswered. A
Discourse concerning Invocation of Saints. Unanswered.
Book purposely written on this Subject, wherein all your Objections are
obviated, and from which I have reason to believe you borrowed some of your
Quotations against me; yet you neither take care to prevent the same Replies
that have been there made, nor have the Ingenuity so much as once to confess by
whom you have profited.

4. Concerning Images, much has passed since my Defense came out; the Catholic
Representer, 1st and 2d, 5th and 6th Sheets.
Representer tried all his strength to defend them, but was content to leave
the Field: What do you now do? You take his Arguments, you follow his Evasions;
but make no new Advance, nor seem at all concerned to own, that they have been
fully Answer to these Sheets; the last yet Unanswered. Three Letters to a
Person of Quality, about Images; the last Unanswered. The Fallibility of the
Roman Church, out of the second Nicene and Trent Councils about Images.
Unanswered.
Answered some Months since.

5. In the Article of Purgatory, you talk with great assurance about Reply,
Art. vii. p. 59.
the Intention of the Primitive Church in Praying for the Dead: Which I said in
my Exposition, was no proof that they believed a Purgatory. You reply, that
those who have been Abused by Me, and others of my Coat, need only read the
Fathers, or look into the Nubes Testium for Satisfaction. But, Sir, what must I
call this, to be sent to a Book, that has been on that very point Two
Discourses of Purgatory and Prayers for the Dead. Unanswered. An Answer is
lately published to the whole Book; and we fear will remain like the rest,
Unanswered.
answered in every one of his Pretenses; and no one has yet appeared in his
Vindication?

6. In the Article of Extreme Unction, you have a A Discourse concerning the
pretended Sacrament of Extreme Unction. Unanswered.
Challenge sent you; and which I am commissioned once more to desire that you
will be pleased to accept. In consideration whereof you will not be
dissatisfied if I return but little on that subject to you.

7. An Historical Treatise of Transubstantiation, by one of the C. R. Defense
of the Dublin Letter. Veteres Vindicati, in Answer to Mr. Sclater. Plain
Representation of Transubstantiation. Dialogues concerning the Trinity and
Transubstantiation. Answer to the Oxford Discourses. Paraphrase upon the VI. of
St. John. Six Conferences published by Dr. Tenison.
The Holy Eucharist has in every respect been fully considered. Scripture,
Antiquity, Sense, and Reason, all produced against you. What have you here
done? You have put together the common Arguments we have a hundred times
baffled; and improved nothing to obviate the same Replies. But you, Sir, may
expect All Unanswered.
from Me, what some others will suddenly have from a much better Hand, a full
satisfaction to your pretenses; tho in truth neither you nor they could
reasonably expect it.

8. For the Page 122. Reply.
Adoration of the Host, you refer us to the two Oxford Discourses; but you
never observe that there have been A Reply to Two Discourses concerning, etc.
from Oxford. Unanswered. A Discourse concerning the Holy Eucharist in the two
great Points of the Real Presence, and the Adoration of the Host. Unanswered.
two Answers made to them. And a A Discourse concerning the Adoration of the
Host, etc. Unanswered.
Particular Discourse has past now some time upon this Subject, in which most
of your Allegations are prevented, and yet you take no notice of it, but bait
us eternally with the same repeated Crambe!

9. As to the Point of the Mass, you may expect a full A Discourse concerning
the Sacrifice of the Mass. Unanswered.
Answer before you receive this. And,

10. A Discourse of Communion in one kind, in Answer to the Bishop of Meaux.
For Communion in one kind, when you can either bring some other Arguments than
what the Bishop of Meaux has done, or Unanswered.
Vindicate those from our Answer to him, you may expect to be considered; but
else it is a great confidence in you to expect it.

11. A Discourse about Tradition. The Catholic Balance. Unanswered.
As to the Point of Tradition, I do not find that any one has yet confuted a
particular Treatise about it.

12. Of a Guide in matters of Faith. The Protestant Resolution of Faith. Answer
to Reason and Authority, etc. A Discourse concerning a Judge in Controversies. A
Plain Discourse concerning the Catholic Church. Of the Authority of Councils,
and the Rule of Faith. Two Discourses of Schism and Heresy. The difference
betwixt the Protestant and Socinian methods. The Pillar and Ground of the
Truth. Vindication of the Answer to certain Papers. All Unanswered.
For the Authority of the Church to which you seem particularly to desire my
Reply, I do promise you that in due time you shall have it. But because I would
not deceive your Expectations, I must tell you freely, I can say nothing but
what you have had already in those Excellent Discourses to which I refer you;
and which we are apt to think you have found to be more than enough.

3. Sermon upon St. Peter's Day. Sure and Honest means for the Conversion of
all Heretics. The Catholic Balance.
For the remaining Points, The Authority of the Holy See, and of the Council of
Trent; methinks you should be ashamed Summary of the Controversies between the
C. of E. and the R. C. Dr. Barrow of the Popes Supremacy. The Necessity of
Reformation, par. 2.
to desire any Answer to them, till you first return some Reply to those
Learned Men that have so lately written upon them. All Unanswered


14. A Discourse concerning Auricular Confession. The Doctrines and Practices
of the Church of Rome truly Represented.
For the other Articles which I have passed by, it is not because there has not
been enough said to them, but because what has been said, is to be found in
those Unanswered.
other Treatises to which I have already referred; and I believe when I come to
examine your Discourse more particularly, I shall not find any one thing,
except a few Cavils, (which indeed are all your own) that will need my
Consideration; and those do not deserve it.

You see, Sir, how reasonable a Pretense I might here have to take my leave of
you, and not insist any longer on these Points, till you shall think fit, by
giving us a Substantial Answer to what has been already offered, to encourage
us to make some new Advances against you. But I will not insist upon any of
these Things; nor give you cause by my declining a particular Examination of
your Reply, to think any better of your Arguments, than I hope by this time you
may do of your Reproaches. I will travel with you once more through every
Article; and tho in Confideration of these Excellent Treatises I have now
mentioned, and which are almost in every bodies hand, I shall only reflect upon
your Arguments, and not insist so as if I were particularly to state every
Point again; yet I will do it in such a Manner as you shall have no cause to
say, I either declined your Difficulties, or was unwilling, if you have any
Strength, to Examine it to the Bottom.

And of this you may expect an Account in a little Time. In the mean while, I
commend my present Reflections to yours, and both them and you to the Reader's
Consideration.

ERRATA.
PAGE xx. l. 27. r. Converters. p. 2. l. 17. r. the Truth. p. 7. l. 10. r.
should not then. p. 15. l. 17. r. readily. p. 22. marg. l. 5. r. me l'. p. 27.
l. 14. r. decisions. p. 81. l. 19. r. than. p. 85. l. 19. r. than. p. 85. l.
19. r. they. p. 87. l. 3. r. Rever. Qu. Besides a few literal Faults which the
Reader is desired to excuse.

FINIS.
POSTSCRIPT.
Being a Full Answer to a Pamphlet Published the Last Night, called, A Third
Part of a Papist Misrepresented.
Ecce Iterum Crispinus --

I Little thought when this Last Sheet was sent to the Press, that I should
have deprived the World of a more useful Advertisement of the late Tracts that
have been Published, for the inglorious Undertaking of Refuting so trifling a
Book. But since it is now become the Mode to draw up Full Answers to the most
solid Discourses in Single Half-Sheets, I know not why an Author that has
nothing in him, may not be exposed in much less Room.

The Sum of his Defense is this, That we do without all Grounds advance against
them a Distinction of Old Pref. p. 14, etc.
and New Popery, to make the World believe that it is they who Dissemble their
Doctrine, not we that Misrepresent it. Now this I have at large Answered in the
foregoing Discourse, and thereby destroyed the whole Foundation both of his and
his Parties present Pretenses; and since he observes the Ill Luck his last
Adversary had to suppose they had forsaken their Charge, when at that very time
the Vindicator was Printing his Reply in Defense Ib. p. 19.
of it; I cannot but take notice, that himself is not much more fortunate, to
establish the whole stress of his Cause upon the denial of a Distinction, which
is at the same instant shown by undoubted matter of Fact, to be most just and
well-grounded.

For his beloved Elegancies of Bartholomewfair-Booths; false Cards; and
Cogging-Dice; of the pretty slights of Legerdemain; of Skrewing Mouths,
Distorting Noses, and Ib. p. 1.
drawing in Cheeks; for the wonderful tricks of his Friend the Posture-Master
in the Pall Mall, etc. whereby he here, as usually, embellishes his Periods;
they sufficiently Page 13.
show how very serious this Gentleman esteems the matter of Religion to be, and
how well the fineness of a Merry-Andrew's Wit, agrees with the profoundness of
a Representers reasoning.

And tho such a Character-maker as this, (who never yet knew what it was to
answer an Adversary with good sense, and but seldom with good manners; and has
here (I know not how) fallen even below his own self), be more fit to be
despised than confuted; yet to satisfy him that his Adversary designed not any
retreat at all by the Method he took of dealing with him, and therefore not
Pref. p. 22.
an Honorable one (as he pretends:) I do hereby promise him, that he shall not
pass, as he deserves, without a consideration: But may expect that which shall
abundantly satisfy the World, that he ought, tho there be no great reason to
expect that he will at this time of day begin to be ashamed of his Undertaking.

IMPRIMATUR.

Liber cui Titulus, A Second Defense of the Exposition of the Church of
England.

H. Maurice Rmo in Christo P. D. Wilhelmo Arciepiscopo Cant. a Sacris.
Jan. 24. 1687.
A SECOND DEFENSE OF THE EXPOSITION of the DOCTRINE OF THE Church of England,
Against the New EXCEPTIONS Of Monsieur de MEAUX, AND HIS VINDICATOR.

The Second Part.

LONDON: Printed for Richard Chiswell, at the Rose and Crown in St. Paul's
Churchyard, MDCLXXXVIII.

THE CONTENTS.
THE ANSWER to the PREFACE.
What little Cause those of the Church of Rome have to complain of the Evils of
Heresy and Schism? number. 2, 3. Whether Papists or Protestants have sought the
most advantageous Means for the redressing of them? n. 4. The Holy Scripture
the only sure Foundation whereon to build our Faith, n. 6. How vain the
Attempts of those of the Church of Rome have been in their Disputes against us?
n. 9. Of the several Methods that they have taken in them. n. 10. Their
Complaints of our Misrepresenting their Doctrines and Practices, groundless, n.
18. Of the first CONVERSION of the English by AUSTIN the Monk, n. 22. 47. That
neither did Austin teach, nor the British Churches believe or Practice as the
Church of Rome does now. n. 24. That for a long time after Austin, both their
Belief and Practice was different from that of the Church of Rome at this day,
n. 28. Of King HENRY VIIIth, EDWARD VIth, Q. MARY, Q. ELIZABETH, and the State
of Religion in their days, n. 35. That the Papists have been underhand the
Causes of our Divisions, n. 42. Of the State of Religion under K. CHARLES Is It,
n. 45. How far we allow that Salvation is to be had in the Church of Rome? n.
48. Of the Original of our CIVIL WARS in K. CHARLES Ist's time, n. 51. Of the
State of Religion under K. CHARLES IId, and K. JAMES IId, and what was the
occasion, of our present Controversies and how they have been carried on? n.
52. What use our READERS ought to make of these Discourses, n. 60. And the
Method of my present DEFENSE, n. 64. The Vindicators Apology for their NEW
FRIENDS, n. 67. And his Presumption why they cannot be supposed to palliate
their Doctrine, considered, and refuted, n. 68. The OATH to be taken by a NEW
CONVERT, at his admission into the Church of Rome, n. 77.
Introduction.
THat our Adversaries advance nothing New against us, but repeat the same
things over and over, without taking the least notice of the Answers that have
been given to them.
The ANSWER TO THE First ARTICLE.
THe VINDICATOR an Instance of this. His first Article entirely stolen out of
T. G. and confuted by Dr. Stillingfleet above 11 Years since; page 45. number. 1.
That the true and genuine Sons of the Church of England, have constantly
charged those of the Church of Rome with IDOLATRY, n. 3. In particular those
whom he quotes to the contrary, viz. Dr. Jackson, n. 5. Dr. Field. A. B. Laud.
Dr. Heylin, Mr. Thorndyke, n. 7, 8. and Dr. Hammond, n. 9. His other little
Cavils as to this Point considered, n. 12. And the Authority of the Book of
HOMILIES asserted, n. 13. His particular Exceptions against my DEFENSE as to
this Article answered: And his shuffling exposed, n. 19, etc.
The ANSWER TO THE Second ARTICLE.
COncerning the Object of Religious Worship. p. 55. That the VINDICATOR has in
vain new modelled the B. of MEAUX' s Position, n. 2. The Scheme which he has
laid down to justify the Doctrine and Practice of the Chapter of Rome in giving
Religious Worship to others besides God considered, in some short Reflections
upon the several Parts of it.
The ANSWER TO THE Fourth ARTICLE.
OF the INVOCATION of SAINTS. Of the State of the Question between us, and the
VINDICATOR' s, three Positions for the clearing of it, page 65. n. 1, 2. The
Sum of this Article reduced to II. General Points.
I. POINT.
Whether it be lawful to pray to the Saints to PRAY FOR US? Our Adversaries
confess it not to be necessary, n. 4. That it is unlawful upon the VINDICATOR'
s, own Principle so to do, viz. That we may not give any religious Service
strictly and properly so called, to any other than God ONLY, n. 5, 6. That the
Act of invoking the Saints is strictly and properly a Religious Act: shown,
Is It, From the very Nature of the Act it self, n. 7. It is not an Act of the
same kind with that of desiring of our living Brethren to pray for us, n. 8.
But attributes to the Creature the Perfections proper to God. ib. The Bp of
Meaux' s shuffling upon this occasion more particularly laid open, n. 11. 2dly,
From the Circumstances of it, n. 15. Of the Time, Place, and Manner in which
the Romanists invoke their Saints, n. 16. Of their offering up the Mass to
their HONOR; and desiring its Acceptance through their MERITS, n. 17, etc. Of
their making VOWS to the Saints, n. 19, etc.
II. POINT.
What the true Doctrine and Practice of the Church of Rome is, as to the Point
of INVOCATION of SAINTS. The Sum of this Part reduced to IV Considerations.
SECT. I.
Whether all the Prayers that are made to the Saints by those of the Church of
Rome, can fairly be reduced to this One Sense, PRAY FOR US? That they cannot,
shown; 1st, From the Doctrine of the Council of Trent, and of its Catechism, n.
25. 2dly, From the Opinion which those of the Church of Rome have, of the State
and Power of the Saints departed, n. 30. 3dly, From the neglect of the Council
of Trent, and of the Governors of the Church of Rome, either to establish any
such Interpretation, or to Censure those that have taught otherwise. n. 33.
4thly, From the words of the Prayers themselves, which utterly refuse such an
Exposition. n. 35. And from the other Service which the Church of Rome allows
to the Saints, and which cannot be reconciled with these Pretenses. n. 39.
5thly. From the Opinions and Practice of some of the greatest Saints in the
Roman Calendar; and of other Persons of especial Note amongst them. n. 40.
Examples of all this. n. 41, etc. That the Holy Scripture is in vain alleged
to countenance this Superstition. n. 46.
SECT. II.
After what manner it is that the Church of Rome prays to God through the
Merits of her SAINTS. The VINDICATOR's Pretenses. n. 49. That the Church of
Rome does truly pray to God for Mercies, through the Merits of her Saints, n.
51. The VINDICATOR's Excuses for this, considered and exploded. n. 53. That the
Holy Scripture does by no means countenance any such Practice. n. 54.
SECT. III.
In which the VINDICATOR's Arguments for the Establishing of this Worship are
particularly considered, and their Weakness laid open. page 102. That the
practice of Invocation of Saints, ^s not to be proved by Holy Scripture. n. 55.
Nor has it the Antiquity that is pretended: shown in two periods.
1st PERIOD.
That the Custom of Praying to Saints, had no being in the Church for the
first 300 Years. v. 57. The VINDICATOR's Proofs particularly examined, and
shown to be either False, or Ridiculous n. 59. That the Fathers of the first
three Centuries prayed to God ONLY. n. 66. My presumption heretofore alleged
for this; viz. That those Fathers did not believe that the souls of the Just
went immediately to Heaven; justified: and the VINDCATOR's Answer shown to be
insufficient. n. 73. Sixt^ Senensis in vain Misrepres^d by Him. n. 76. That
this practice did not pass quietly in the following Ages. n. 82. His pretense
that the Fourth General Council prayed to Flavian both false and impertinent.
n. 80. His little exception of the few Writings that remain of the Primitive
Fathers, neither true, nor to the purpose. n. 78, 85. How this Practice by
degrees crept into the Church? n. 89.
IId. PERIOD.
What Grounds this Superstition had in the Fourth Century? That most of the
Addresses of this Age were rather Rhetorical Flights, than formal Invocations.
n. 92. Eight differences, proposed between what the Fathers of the Fourth Age
did, and what those of the Church of Rome do now, as to this Matter. n. 96.
That the Invocation of Saints was never salemnly established in the Church
before the latter End of the 8th Century. n. 97. etc.
SECT. IV.
What our Reasons are against this Service. The true state of the difference
betwixt us as to this matter. n. 105. That the Church of Rome does exact a
compliance in this Practice, and ANATHEMATIZE those who Oppose it. n. 106. That
this is, 1st, Repugnant to God's Holy Word. n. 111. 2dly, Contrary to
Antiquity. n. 119. 3dly, Unreasonable in the Constitution. n. 126. Because,
They are neither certain that the Saints hear their Prayers. n. 127. Nor that
those whom they Pray to are indeed Saints. n. 128. And Pray to many as such,
that never lived in the World. n. 130. Such were, S. George. n. 130. S.
Lazarus. S. Longinus. S. Christopher. S. Ursula, etc. A brief Account of whose
Acts is offered, and their falseness observed. A pleasant Relation of a Bishop
and Martyr, made out of two words of an ancient Inscription; and the great
Miracles that were wrought at his Monument. n. 134. That the wiser Papists
complain of this Extravagance. 4thly. That it is unprofitable and Impious in
the Practice. n. 139. That it is Unprofitable. n. 139. That it is Impious. n.
143. Several remakable Instances of Impiety in this practice. n. 147, etc. The
whole conluded with an account of the PROCESSION of the JESUITS of LUXEMBOURG,
May 20. 1685. n. 157, etc.
The ANSWER TO THE Fourth ARTICLE. Of IMAGES and RELICS.
THE Sum of this Chapter reduced to three General Considerations.
SECT. I.
Of the Benefit of Pictures and Images. n. 4. Concerning which it is observed:
1st, That the VINDICATOR ought not at this time to confound PICTURES and IMAGES
together. n. 6. 2dly, Nor single Figures, and Historical Representations.
Ibid.. 2. 3dly, That it is impertinent to this Point to discourse of the
BENEFIT, where the Dispute is concerning the WORSHIP of Images. Ibid.. 3. For
that, 4thly, No Benefit, were it ever so great, would be able to excuse this.
Ibid.. 4. 5thly, That Images are not useful to the Ignorant, as is pretended.
Ibid.. 5. 6thly, But on the contrary, very pernicious and injurious. Ibid.. 9.
An Account of Horrible Abuses in many of their Images and Pictures; Viz. Of GOD
the FATHER. n. 7, 8. Of the HOLY TRINITY. n. 9. Of our SAVIOR CHRIST. n. 10.
And of the B. VIRGIN. Ibid. etc. The Pretense, that there is now no danger of
IDOLATRY in all this, proposed; and the way opened to the refuting of it. n.
15, 16.
SECT. II.
The Charge of Image Worship made Good; and the Evasions answered, by which the
VINDICATOR endeavors to excuse his Church from the Guilt of it. n. 17. This is
done in three Particulars. Is It, The Voice of the Chapter of Rome proposed, in Her
Definitions as to this Matter. n. 18, 19. IIdly, This Voice interpreted by
Card. CAPISUCCHI, who approved Monsieur de MEAUX' s Exposition; and to whose
Book Mr. de MEAUX himself appeals. n. 20. After rejecting several Opinions,
which in the Cardinal's Judgment did not allow sufficient Honor to Images. n.
21, etc. He concludes it to be the CHURCHES SENSE, that the SAME Worship is to
be given to the IMAGES, as is given to the THINGS represented by them. n. 26.
That Aquinas allowed Supreme Divine Worship to the CROSS; contrary to the
VINDICATOR's Pretenses. n. 27. Some Reflections upon what this Cardinal has
said, with reference to the Point before us. n. 28, etc. An Account of one of
the Roman Church lately put into the INQUISITION, for denying the Worship of
Images, recommended to the VINDICATOR's Consideration. n. 32, 33. IIIdly, This
farther shown to be the Sense of the Church of Rome, from those Authorized
Practices I alleged in my DEFENSE. 1. The Instance from the Order of Receiving
an Emperor, justified. n. 35. 2dly, The Argument from the Office of
CONSECRATING A NEW CROSS made Good; and the VINDICATOR's Evasions shown to be
inconsistent with the Design of it. n. 36. Of their AGNUS DEI's; and the
Superstition that is committed in the Design and Consecration of them. n. 44,
45. Of HOLY WATER; and the Superstition committed in the Design and Use of it.
n. 47. Of INCENSE. n. 51. That the Primitive Church used Incense. n. 51. But
that this is no Plea for what the Church of Rome does now. The Consecrating and
Burning of Incense in that Church; Superstitious. n. 52. Idolatrous. n. 54.
3dly, The Instance of the GOOD FRIDAY Service farther vindicated: And the
Exceptions made against it shown to be frivolous. n. 56. That those of the
Church of Rome do suppose this to be a good Proof of their paying Divine
Worship to the CROSS. n. 60. Two extravagant Proofs to excuse this Worship from
being Idolatrous, proposed and answered. n. 61, 62, 63, etc. 4thly, The
Argument taken from the HYMNS of the Church of Rome justified. n. 65. And the
VINDICATOR's Interpretation of them, shown to be absurd. n. 69.
SECT. III.
That the Church of Rome thus worshipping of Images, is truly and properly
guilty of IDOLATRY. This made good in two Points, n. 76.
I. POINT.
Of the true Nature of IDOLATRY. The late Notion of IDOLATRY proposed; and that
in this sense we do not charge the Church of Rome with it, n. 77. What
IDOLATRY, according, to the Scripture is; shown in two Particulars: Is It, Q.
Whether according to the Scripture-Notion of IDOLATRY, those may not be guilty
of it, who yet both know and worship the One True GOD? n. 78. That they may,
made manifest from the Instances; 1st, Of the Golden Calf; n. 80. 2dly, Of the
Calves of Dan and Bethel, n. 86. Other Arguments to make good the Affirmative
of this Question: n. 93. That this was the Notion of the Primitive Fathers, n.
94. And is confessed by the principal Authors of the Church of Rome it self, n.
97. IIdly, Q. How this may be done by them? Two ways proposed from what has
before been said, viz. 1st, By worshipping the true God after an Idolatrous
manner, n. 101. 2dly, By giving Divine Worship to any other besides Him, n.
103.
II. POINT.
That the Church of Rome in the Worship of Images is truly and properly guilty
of IDOLATRY. This shown according to the VINDICATOR's desire in two different
respects: Is It, With reference to those who hold that Images are to be
worshipped with the same Worship as the things which they represent, n. 108.
IIdly, As it concerns their Opinions, who denying, this, yet allow an
inferior, Honor to them, n. 113.
OF RELICS.
Two things proposed to be proved in answer to the VINDICATOR's Exceptions:
Is It, That those of the Church of Rome do truly and properly worship the
RELICS of their Saints. For their Expressions it is undeniable, n. 121. That
their Practice is agreeable to their Words; shown, 1st, In the instance of that
Worship which they give to the Wood of the true Cross, n. 122. 2dly, To all the
other RELICS that have ever touched our Savior Christ, n. 124. 3dly, From
their allowed practice of swearing by them, n. 125. A famous Story of S. GURIA
for the illustrating of this matter, n. 126. 4thly, From their other Practices;
especially their carrying of them in Procession, an instance whereof is given
from the Roman Pontifical, n. 127, etc. IIdly, That they do seek to them for
Help and Assistance. My Interpretation of the Council of Trent in reference to
this Point made good, against the new Pretenses of the VINDICATOR, n. 129. The
thing it self justified from the Public Prayers of that Church, n. 130. And
from a memorable Instance of a Prince of the Family of the Dukes of Radzevil;
with which the whole is concluded.
ERRATA.
PAge 3. of the Contents, for Fourth Article, read Third Article. P. 6. number. 9.
line 4. r. our Schism. P. 8. n. 14. l. 5. r. Err. P. 11. n. 21. l. 3.
uncertain, r. unsincere. P. 18. n. 35. l. 17. r. Their Usurpations. P. 25. l.
9. r. were now. P. 32. n. 57. l. 7. del. after all. P. 48. n. 9. l. 6. Images,
r. Angels. P. 87. l. 1. r. recising. P. 114. Marg. Expos. r. Def. of the Expos.
P. 120. Marg. r. lib. Carol. P. 127. Marg. r. Reg. Moral. 80. P. 133. l. 27.
For and I, del. and. P. 137. n. 154. l. 5. r. Moliri. Pervicacia. P. 138. l. 4.
r. Curarum. P. 167. l. ult. for V. r. Vlth Cent. P. 187. n. 119. l. 3. r. upon
a verbal. P. 190. n. 124. l. 15. Cloth with which. P. 194. l. 25. and only,
del. and. P. 196. n. 132. l. 1. r. Radzevil.

The Pages are interrupted in two places, page 60. and p. 160.

AN ANSWER TO THE PREFACE.
THE Design of your Preface seems reducible to these two Points, viz.

I. Of the State of the Controversy between the Papists and Protestants in
general. And, II. Of the Disputes that have heretofore been, and are at this
day managed against you, by Us of this Church in particular.
2. Ad page 1.] The former of these you introduce with a short harangue of the
Mischief which Heresy and Schism bring along with them, not only to the
individual Persons that are guilty of them, but also to the Nations in which
they are propagated. You represent to us the miserable Broils, and other worse
Consequences that have attended these Controversies of Religion in this and the
last Age: And from thence you conclude, how much they are to be commended who
labor to establish Truth and Unity, and those to be condemned, who seek all
means possible to obscure the one and obstruct the other.

3. Answ.] To all which I have only this to reply; that we need no Arguments to
convince us of these things. There are none more sensible of the Mischiefs of
Schism and Heresy than we are; or that do more truly lament the Divisions that
are in the Church, or would more heartily contribute, what in us lies, to the
closing of them. But then as we have good cause to believe both from the
Authority of Holy Scripture, and from the Nature of Mankind, that whilst there
is a Devil in Hell, and Men of Interest and Designs upon Earth, there shall
also be Heresies, that they who are approved may be made manifest: So we 1 Cor.
xi. 19.
cannot but complain that those should be the most forward to charge us both
with the Guilt and Mischief of them, at whose doors the Crime, and therefore
the Evil Consequences of it, will one day be found to lie. The former of these,
it will be the business of the following Discourse to make good: And for the
latter, whosoever shall impartially consider the Origin of those Broils with
which the World has, you say, been agitated in this and the last Age upon the
account of Religion; not to mention those other Mischiefs of Treasons, Plots,
Massacres, Persecutions, and the like, will soon be convinced who they are that
have cause to complain of these Evils. For what you add,

4. Ibid.] That they who will but impartially consider matters, will find that
Catholics have upon all occasions sought the most Advantageous Means to
procure this Christian Peace; tho to their grief they have still been hindered
from effecting this Good Work.

Answ.] I do not well know what you design by it. If by the most Advantageous
Means, you understand those Means of Knowledge which God has given us whereby to
come to discern the Truth of Religion; such as, 1. A diligent reading of the
Holy Scriptures, the using of all imaginable Assistances for the understanding
the sense of them, by studying the Original Languages in which they were
written, searching of Antiquity, collating parallel places, and the like. 2.
The divesting of our selves of our Prejudices, and forming in our Minds an
impartial desire to find out the Truth, with an honest readiness to embrace it,
on what side soever it lies. And lastly, to all this add our earnest Prayer to
God for his Grace to bless and prosper our Endeavors; these I confess are the
best Means to discover Christian Truth; and to exhort all others to the use of
them, the most advantageous way to promote it. But then I cannot imagine why
you should seem to appropriate these Means to your selves, as if you only
sought Truth and Peace by them; seeing it cannot be denied but that We have
employed all these with as great diligence as you can pretend to have done it.
But now some other Means indeed there are, which you have pursued, and which it
may be you understand by this Expression: and then We neither deny your
Assertion, nor envy you the Glory of being singular in your Endeavors of
procuring Peace by them. Such are, 1. The Means of Force and Violence; your
Holy Leagues, and private Treacheries, your Inquisitions, Plots, Persecutions,
and such like. 2. The Means of Fraud and Deceit, your false Expositions and
Misrepresentations of your Doctrine to deceive the ignorant and unwary, till
you get them into your Nets. 3. The Means of Confidence and Uncharitableness,
your bold Anathema's and vain thundrings of Damnation against all that differ
from you, your assuming the Name and Privileges of the Church Catholic to
your single Communion, and excluding all others out of it, as Schismatics and
Heretics. And lastly, to mention no more, the Means of gross Ignorance, and
blind Obedience; by depriving Men of their liberty of reading the Holy
Scripture, by keeping your Service in an unknown Tongue, by teaching Men to
depend entirely upon your Churches Dictates, and not to depart from them, tho
Sense, Reason, Scripture, all be contrary to them. These are, I confess, some
of those peculiar Means whereby you have sought to procure Christian Peace; and
Experience tells you, that they are indeed the most advantageous of any to the
Cause you have to defend. And if these be the Means which you say we have
opposed, I hope we shall always continue so to do, and rather bear all the
Evils of these Divisions, than either buy Peace upon such Terms, or pursue it
by such Means as these.

5. Ad p. 2, 3.] To what I observed from the late Methods that had been taken
up in our Neighbor Country to avoid the entering upon particular Disputes,
which I said you were sensible had been the least favorable of any to your
Cause, you reply, That you have never declined fighting with us at any Weapon:
which how true it is, the account before given of your managing the present
Controversy with us sufficiently declares. And indeed you seem in some sort to
have been sensible of it; and therefore recur to your Ancient Authors for proof
of your Assertion. The Sum of what you say is this:

6. Reply.] That there have been three sorts of Protestants since the
Reformation; 1. Some who appealed to Scripture only, neither would they admit
of Primitive Fathers nor Councils. 2. Others who perceived that they could not
maintain several Tenets and Practices of their own by the bare words of
Scripture, and despairing of Fathers and Councils of latter Ages, pretended at
least to admit of the first four General Councils, and of the Fathers of the
first three or four hundred Years. 3. Others finally who ventured to name
Tradition as a useful Means to arrive at the true Faith. And all these you say
you have convinced of their Errors.

7. Answ.] It has always been your way to multiply Sects and Divisions among
Protestants as much as ever you were able, and then to complain against us upon
the account of them; and here you have given us a notable Instance of it. The
three Opinions you have drawn out as so many different Parties amongst us, do
all resolve into the very same Principle: That the Holy Scripture is the only,
perfect, and sufficient Rule of Faith: So that all other Authorities, whether
of Fathers, or Councils, or unwritten Tradition, are to be examined by it, and
no farther to be admitted by us than they agree with it. This is in effect the
common belief of all Protestants whatsoever, as appears from their several
Confessions, and might easily be shown out of the Writings of our first
Reformers, and the most eminent of those who have lived since, and built their
Faith upon the same Foundation. It is true indeed, there have been some who,
the better to maintain their Separation from the Church of England, have from
this sound Principle, That nothing is to be received by us as a Matter of
Faith, but what is either plainly expressed in the Holy Scripture, or can
Evidently be proved by it, drawn a very ill Consequence, viz. That nothing
might lawfully be done or used in the Worship of God, unless there were some
Command or Example for it in Scripture; and have by this means run themselves
into great Inconveniences. But the Rule of Faith, which an uninterrupted
Tradition, by the common consent of all Parties of Christians; however
otherwise disagreeing in other Points, has brought down to us, and delivered
into our hands as the Word of God, this has among all Protestants been ever the
same, viz. The Holy Scripture. And if for the farther proof of the Truth of our
Doctrine, we have at any time put the issue of our Cause to the decision of the
Church of the first three or four hundred Years, it is not because we suppose
that those Fathers who then lived; have any more right to judge us, or determine
our Faith, than those that followed after; but because upon examination we find
them to have yet continued (at least as to the common Belief received and
established amongst them) in their Purity; and that what was generally
established and practiced by them, was indeed conformable both to their and our
Rule, the Word of God.

8. This then is our Common Principle, and this you cannot deny to be most
reasonable. For whatsoever Authority you would have us give to those Holy
Fathers, yet it cannot be doubted, but that,

1st, Being Durandus. l. 4. Sent. d. 7. q. 4. de S. Gregorio; Nescio cur non
possit dici quod Gregorius cum fuerit Homo, non Deus, potuerit Errare.
Men subject to the same Infirmities with our selves, they were by consequence
obnoxious to Errors as well as we; and therefore may not without all
examination be securely followed by us.

Especially if we consider, 2dly, That we are expressly forbid in Holy
Scripture, to rely on any Persons whatsoever without enquiry, whether what they
teach be true or not: Dearly Beloved, (says St. John) believe not every Spirit,
but 1 John 4. 1.
try the Spirits whether they be of God or no. The same is St. Paul's Doctrine,
To prove all things, and then hold fast that which is good. 1 Thessalonians. 5. 21.
St. Peter exhorts all Christians to be ready to give a reason of the 1 Pet. 3.
15.
Hope that is in them: And our Blessed Savior himself once gave the same
encouragement, of examining even his own Doctrine; And why (says he) of your
selves do you not judge that which is Luke 12. 57.
right?

Nay but, 3dly, these Holy Fathers were not only capable of Erring, but in many
things they actually did Err, and are forsaken by you upon that account. The
Millenary Opinion was generally received in the first Ages of the Church. They
derived it from St. John to Papias, from him to Justin Martyr, Irenaeus,
Melito, Tertullian, etc. Yet is this Opinion now rejected by you. The Doctrine
of the necessity of Communicating Infants, was the Common Doctrine of the
Fathers in S. Austin's Time; and is confessed by your most Learned Men,
Cardinal Perron and Others to have been generally practiced in the Church for
the first six hundred Years: Yet have you Anathematized Council. Trid. Sess. 21.
Can. 4.
those who shall now assert, with those Fathers, that there is any necessity at
all of communicating Children before they come to Years of discretion. I need
not say what Heats arose between One of your own Popes and St. Cyprian about
rebaptizing of Heretics; and both of them in the wrong. The Ancient Fathers
generally believed, that the Souls of the Blessed do not yet enjoy the Vision
of God: But from the time of Pope John the XXII. the contrary is become the
Catholic Doctrine among you. The necessity of communicating in both kinds, was
believed in the Time of Pope Gelasius, and the Council of Constance, De
Consecr. Did. 2. Sess. 13.
in that very Canon in which it took away the Cup from the Laity, yet confessed
that Christ had established it in both kinds, and the Church constantly
administered and received in both kinds, Conc. Trid. Sess. 21. Can. 1.
in obedience to his Institution: but it is now no less than damnation to say,
that one kind alone is not sufficient. In the primitive Church it was generally
received, that the Souls of the Faithful, after they are delivered from the
burden of the Flesh, are in Joy and Felicity. Now you teach that they go first
to Purgatory, a place of Pain and Sorrow, inferior in nothing but the duration,
to Hell it self.

Other Instances I might add to show, that you your selves do no otherwise
follow the Fathers, than as you esteem them to have followed the Truth, and
therefore have thought fit to forsake them in the several Points I before
mentioned: And therefore certainly you ought not to condemn us, if we pay no
other deference to them: nor appeal to them but only as Witnesses of the
Doctrine of the Church in those Times, not as Judges and Masters of our Faith.

9. Ad Page IV.] Reply. And in all these several ways you say you have shown us
to be Mistaken, insomuch that there has not been any thing like an Argument
produced against your Faith, or to justify your Schism, but what has been
abundantly Answered and Refuted.

10. Answ.] This, Sir, is a Boast which I believe the World will think you
might very well have spared at this time. I need not send you back, as you have
done us, to our Ancient Authors; and desire you once more to consider what has
been offered, both from Scripture and Antiquity, by Monsieur de Mornay,
Aubertine, Chamiere, Blondell, Daille, Larrogue, and Others abroad; by Bishop
Jewel, Bishop Morton, A. B. Usher, Dr. J. Forbes, Dr. White, Dr. Barrow, and
many more of our own Country: and whose Names among the wisest even of your own
Church are much more valued, than for a Coccius or a Brerely to be able to
obscure them. I appeal only to the present Times to witness against you; and
would entreat you, before you tell us any more of your Performances, to give
some good Reply to that Catalogue I have sent you of above forty Treatises
lately published in all these kinds of Arguments that you speak of; and your
declining of which does not very well suit with such vain Pretenses.

11. Ibid.] You add; That you have so far complied with the Infirmities of your
Adversaries, that you have left no Stone unturned to reduce them to the Unity
of the Faith, and that by meekness as well as powerful Reasoning.

12. Answ.] It must be confessed indeed that you have not been wanting in your
Endeavors to convert us. Your Zeal has even equaled that which our Savior
Christ once remarked, or rather reproved in your Predecessors the Scribes and
Pharisees: and I would to God it had not too often produced the same Effect
also. As for the Means that you have made use of for the carrying on of this
Work, I have already in part recounted them to you. And shall only now add,
that if your Meekness has been no greater, than your Arguments have been
powerful, we shall have as little cause to applaud the One, as we have hitherto
had to be convinced by the Other. And indeed whosoever shall consider your
behavior toward those you call Heretics; will find that some Other word
would better have suited your Character than that of Meekness. If there be any,
who deluded by your present pretenses of Moderation doubt this, let them look
only upon the Actions of a neighbor Kingdom, and whose Clergy has ever been
esteemed the most moderate of your Church. For if such a deportment as theirs
toward our Brethren, be the Meekness you boast of; I shall only beg leave to
say with Solomon, that then the tender Mercies of some Prove. 12. 10.
Men are Cruel. But you go on to show us wherein you have made a testimony of
this Meekness: You say,

13. Ibid.] You have not only condescended to satisfy the curiousity of them
that have more leisure by writing large Volumes upon every particular
Controversy -- but you have gone a shorter way to work; and to some have
manifested the unerrable Authority of the Church of Christ, against which he
had promised that the Gates of Hell should not prevail. Others you have showed
it from the nature of Truth and Error, and the Impossibility that a Universal
Tradition could fail, especially when God had promised that the Words He would
put into their Mouths, should not depart out of their mouths, nor out of the
Mouths of their Seed, nor out of the Mouth of their Seeds seed, from hence
forth and for Ever. To others you have proved the Innocence and Antiquity of
your Doctrine from the testimony of learned Protestants themselves.

14. Answ.] This indeed was a great Condeseension; that being so well satisfied
on all these accounts that you had the Truth your selves, you should so far
vouchsafe, as for our sakes, to prove that you had so. But truly, unless you
can produce some better proof that your Church cannot Error than this, that our
Savior once said of his Church, That the Gates of Hell should not prevail
against it, you will never satisfy any reasonable Man of it. How often, Sir,
have you been told, that here is something indeed to establish the Perpetuity
of the Church, but nothing of its Infallibility. Unless you will suppose (what
you know we utterly deny) that the Church cannot subfist except it be
infallible in every Point. The Church may fall into many Errors, and yet
continue a Church still. A Man is never the less a Man, because he has an Ague,
or some other Distemper upon Him. And whilst the Church thus subsists, Christ's
Promise is made good, that the Gates of Hell should not prevail against it.
Though now, 2dly, Were the Infallibility of the Church in this Text clear to a
Demonstration, yet still the main Thing would be wanting, how to prove your
Church to be the Catholic Church, and to have alone the right to this Promise,
which for ought appears from this Passage any Other may pretend to upon as good
grounds as She.

15. Again; As to the Point of Tradition, With what confidence can you say it
is impossible that should fail, seeing the Instances I have before given of
your departure from the Tradition of the Primitive Fathers in so many
particulars, plainly show that it has failed? For your argument which you
allege from Isa. 59. 20. It has the same Faults with the foregoing, and one
more. For that passage; 1st, If it speaks any thing at All of these Matters, it
is for the Perpetuity, not Infallibility of the Church. 2dly, That there is not
One word in it of any privilege, either in the One or the Other kind bestowed
upon your Church in particular; and the Greek, or any other Church may as
reasonably argue from it as your selves. Nay, 3dly, It Is plain from the Context
that it does not belong to any of us, the Covenant here spoken of being made
with Zion, and those that turn from Transgression in Jacob; that is (as St.
Paul himself applies it, Romans 11.) to the Covert Jews, when they shall come in
and embrace the Gospel of Christ.

16. And for your last Method, the Concessions of Protestants themselves, this
will but little avail you: seeing if it could be proved that any of our
particular Writers had said some things in favor of your Doctrine, this would
be of no force against any but themselves, any farther than their Arguments
shall upon Examination be found to warrant their Assertions. We have often told
you, that our Faith depends not on any Humane Authority. Such Concessions may
show the weakness or Error of him that made them, but they are nothing
available to prescribe against the Truth of the Gospel. And this, I say,
supposing that you could produce the Opinions of Protestants (as you pretend)
in favor of your Doctrines! But now let me tell you, the Collection to which
you refer us, has been found so very insincere by those who have had occasion
to examine it, that should we allow these kind of Authorities to be as
conclusive against us as you can desire, you would not yet be able either to
advantage your selves, or to convince any others by them.

17. Ad Page 5.] You see, Sir, what little reason we have to expect very much
from these Methods, which in your great Humility you have condescended to make
use of in order to our Conversion. And we cannot but congratulate our good
Fortune, that you seem to tell us you have yet some better Arguments in
reserve; those which you say MIGHT have been brought to prove the Authority of
your Church. And though you think us so fond of flying off to particular
Disputes, that no Arguments can keep us from them; yet I do hereby promise you,
that whenever you shall have clearly made out this Proposition, That the
Church of Rome is Infallible, and whatsoever she proposes to be received by us
is the truly Catholic Faith, without which there is no Salvation; and then
show me, How I shall infallibly know, amidst so many different Proposals of her
Doctrine, what that Faith is which this Church teaches as necessary to that
End; I will from thenceforth become as blindly obedient a Disciple, as the most
implicit Believer whose Credulity you have ever yet imposed upon with these
Pretenses.

18. Ibid.] For your next Allegation, That you could never get us to take your
Doctrine aright, if what I have heretofore said be not sufficient; I will once
more put you in mind that you must first resolve to answer from Point to Point,
the Doctrines and Practices of the Church of Rome truly Represented, before you
can expect to be credited by us. And if from what we have truly said concerning
you, you are indeed grown to be looked upon (in your own words) to be as bad as
Devils, and your Doctrines as the Dictates of Hell it self; though I believe in
this excess you do something misrepresent both your selves and us; you may
attribute it if you please to our Calumnies against you, but I believe all
indifferent Persons will be able to find out some better Reasons for it.

19. Ad Page 6.] As for your Expositions which you from hence thought fit to
publish to the World, as your last reserve for our Conversion; the World is
sufficiently satisfied with what sincerity you have proceeded in them. And for
what you add, in the close of this first Point, concerning the Character of the
Times that we are fallen into, such as you say S. Paul foretold, in which Men
will not endure sound Doctrine; it is indeed too true, but withal it is such a
Complaint as is equally made on all hands, whilst every one thinks his own way
the best. But I will, in return, send you to another Character of the same
Apostle concerning these Days, which is all your own, 2 Thessalonians. 2. verse. 3, to
the 13th; and I think it is so plain, that you may without an infallible
Interpreter understand the meaning of it.

20. And thus far you pursue the former Consideration, of the state of the
Controversy between the Papists and Protestants in general. Your next work is
to give some accounts of your Disputes with us of this Church in particular.

21. You begin with the History of the first Conversion of the English by
Augustine the Monk, sent hither by Pope Gregory the Great. But your account of
it is so very uncertain, that I would willingly hope, however you quote Bid
for it, yet that you never read one word of him, but took it upon the Credit of
one of your New Converts, whose Errors in this Point you Reason and Authority.
have as blindly embraced, as his Book testifies him to have most implicitly
taken up your Prevarications.

22. Ad Page 7.] Reply. You tell us, That notwithstanding the long want of
intercourse with Rome, and the Members of that Communion, occasioned by great
Oppressions and Persecutions during the reign of Pagan Kings, yet had there not
many Errors crept into this Christian part of the Nation. For S. Augustine
found only two Customs amongst them which he could not tolerate, the One their
keeping Easter at a wrong time, and the Other some Errors in the Ceremonies in
Administering Baptism. These two he earnestly solicited them to Amend, but they
were Obstinate, and would not suffer any Reformation in those two Points, TILL
God was pleased to testify his Mission, and the Authority he came with, by the
Authentic Seal of Miracles.

22. Answ.] In which Relation you are many ways mistaken. For, 1st, As to the
intercourse that you say was a long time lost between Rome and the British
Churches, by reason of the Persecutions of Pagan Kings; this is not easy to be
credited: It being the middle of the 5th Century e're the Romans left this
Island, and the Saxons were called into it. It was near the middle of the 6th
before the Britains were disposses'd of the rest of their Country, and forced
to retrench themselves within the Mountains of Wales. During all this time
their intercourse with Rome, if they had any, might well have continued; and it
was not fifty Years after, that Austin the Monk came into England. 2dly, you
say, that Austin found only two Customs among the Christians here that he could
not tolerate. It Is true indeed, upon the second meeting that he had with the
British Bishops, he told them, That though in many things they were contrary
to the custom of his Church, yet if in those two mentioned Eede Lib. 2. c. 2.
they would obey him, and join with him in preaching the Gospel to the Saxons,
he would bear with them in the rest: But did they therefore acknowledge his
Authority in complying with his Desires? so you would make us believe. They
were Obstinate, say you, TILL God was pleased to testify his Mission, and the
Authority he came with by the Authentic Seal of Miracles. As for his Miracles,
we have no great Opinion of their Authority, since we read in the passage to
which I just now referred you, that Antichrist himself shall come with this
Attestation. It is the Doctrine that must give credit to the Miracles, not
these to the Doctrine. Should an Angel from Heaven Gal. (...). 9.
preach any other Gospel than that which we have received, St. Paul has
commanded us, for all the Wonder, to bid him be Anathema. But I return to the
History, in which you so notoriously prevaricate, that I cannot imagine how one
that pretends in this inquisitive Age to deliver the Antiquities of his own
Country, durst betray himself so notoriously ignorant of it. See, Sir, the
words of your own Author Bid, expressly contrary to Bid. Loc. cit.
your Allegation. But they answered, that they would do nothing of all this,
nor receive him for an Archbishop. Insomuch that Austin came to high words
with them, threatening them with that Destruction which they afterward, to
their cost, met with from his new Saxon Converts. And your illustrious Annalist
Card. Baronius, cannot forbear making some severe Reflections upon the State of
our Island at that Time, as if God Baron. Annal. Tom. 8. An. 604.
had therefore given it into the hands of the Barbarians, because of the
refractory and schismatical Minds of these Bishops.

23. Ibid.] Reply. Your Adversaries (you say) acknowledge, that when St. Austin
came into England, he taught most, if not all the same Doctrines the Roman
Catholic Church now teaches, etc.

24. Answ.] If S. Austin (as you call him) taught the same Doctrine which Pope
Gregory the Great taught, who sent him hither, and whose Disciple we are told
he was, I must then put you in Mind that a very Learned Man has lately showed
you (and I may reasonably presume you could not but know it) that he did not
teach most, much less all the Doctrines which you now teach. No, Sir, the
Mystery of Iniquity was not yet come to Perfection; and tho your Church had
even then in many things declined from its first Faith, yet was it much more
pure than now it is. Had you when you took this Pretense from Protestants
Apology, p. 57, etc. 2d Edit.
your Friend Mr. Brerely, looked into the Answer that was at large made to it;
I am persuaded you would have been ashamed to have again advanced so false and
trifling an Objection. Look, Sir, I beseech you into the Protestants Appeal, or
if that Prot. Appeal, lib. 1. cap. 2.
be too much for one of your Employments, look into the Treatise to which I
refer you: There you will find, 1. That the Vind. of the Answ. of some late
Pape^s, p. 72, etc.
Scripture was yet received as a perfect Rule of Faith. 2. The Books of the
Maccabees, which you now put into your Canon, rejected then as Apochryphal. 3.
That Good Works were not yet esteemed meritorious: Nor, 4. Auricular Confession
a Sacrament. That, 5. Solitary Masses were disallowed by him: And, 6.
Transubstantiation yet unborn. That 7. The Sacrament of the Eucharist was
hitherto administered in both kinds: And, 8. Purgatory it self not brought
either to certainty or to perfection. That by consequence, 9. Masses for the
Dead were not intended to deliver Souls from those Torments: Nor, 10. Images
allowed for any other purpose than for Ornament and Instruction. 11. That the
Sacrament of Extreme Unction was yet unformed; and even 12. The Pope's
Supremacy so far from being then established as it now is, that Pope Gregory
thought it to be the fore-running of Antichrist, for one Bishop to set himself
above all the rest. These are the Instances in which you have been shown the
vast difference there is between Pope Gregory's Doctrine, and that of the
Council of Trent; and which may serve for a Specimen to satisfy the World with
what Truth you pretend, that we acknowledge that S. Austin when he came into
England, taught most, if not all the same Doctrines that you now teach. And
this may also suffice for your next Argument founded upon it, viz.

25. Add page 7, 8.] Reply: That these Doctrines and Practices were either then
taught and exercised by the British Christians also, or they were not. If they
were not taught by them, certainly we should not have found them so easily
submitting to them. If they were taught by the British Bishops also, then they
were of a longer standing than S. Austin' s time: and we must either grant they
were introduced by the first Preachers of the Gospel here, or evidently show
some other time before St. Austin when this Church embraced them.

26. Answ.] A Dilemma is a terrible thing with Sense and Truth, but without
them it is a ridiculous one; as I take this to be. For,

1. It is evident from what I have before said, that Austin did not teach the
same Doctrines, nor establish the same Practices that you do now teach and
establish; but did indeed in most of your Corruptions differ from you. So that
like the unwise Builder, you have erected a stately Fabric, and founded it
upon the Sand.

2. Had he been as very a Romish Missionary as your self, yet is your Argument
still inconclusive. For whereas you suppose the British Bishops submitted to
him, they were on the contrary so far from either obeying his Authority, or
following his Prescriptions, that, as I have shown you, they utterly rejected
both: and I will presently add, that for above a hundred Years after his Death,
they utterly refused so much as to communicate with his Proselytes, nor
esteemed them any more than Pagans. So that I may now turn your own Argument
upon you, that seeing they had such an Abhorrence for Austin and his Followers,
that they looked upon them no better than Heathens, it very probably was,
because they neither approved what he taught, nor saw any cause to submit to
that Authority to which he pretended. You see, Sir, what an admirable Argument
you here flourish with; and how little cause we have to expect any great
Sincerity from you in other matters, when in the very History of your own
Country you so wretchedly prevaricate, and against the express Authority of
that very Person whom you quote for your Relation.

27. Having thus given us a proof either of your Skill or your Integrity in the
account of the first Conversion of our Island under Pope Gregory the Great; you
next make a very large step as to the progress of your Religion, and such as
still confirms me more and more, how very unfit you are to turn Historian.

28. Add page 8.] Reply. This Faith and these Exercises (say you) taught and
practiced by St. Austin were propagated down even till King Henry the VIIIth's
time.

Answ.] In which account, whether we are to complain of your Ignorance or your
Unsincerity, be it your part to determine; this I am sure, they cannot both be
excused.

29. I have already shown you that that Faith which was found in the Church of
England in King Henry the VIIIth's time could not have been propagated down
from the time of Austin's coming hither, seeing that Monk neither taught nor
practiced the greatest part of those Corruptions which were afterward by
degrees brought into ours, as well as into the other Churches of the Roman
Communion. But however not to insist upon this Fundamental Mistake: Can you,
Sir, with any Conscience affirm, that the Doctrine which you now teach was till
King Henry the VIIIth's time without interruption received and practiced in
this Country?

30. First; For the British Bishops whom you before bring in as submitting
themselves to Austin; your own Author Bid expressly declares that in his time
(which was an hundred Years after the Death of Austin) they entertained no
Communion with them. Seeing (says he) to this very day it is the Custom of Lib.
2. cap. 20.
the Britains to have no value for the Faith and Religion of the English, nor
to communicate with them any more than with Pagans. Which Henry of Huntingdon
thus confirms: That neither Lib. 3. Hist.
the Britains nor Scots, (i. e. Irish) would communicate with the English, or
with Austin their Bishop any more than with Pagans. So that for one Age, at
least, the British Bishops then neither owned the Authority of your Church, nor
had any manner of Communion with the Members of it. But,

31. Secondly; Have you never heard of some other Kings of England, who, with
their Parliaments, have most stiffly opposed the Pretenses of the Pope, and
refused all Messages from Him, and made it no less than High Treason for any
one to bring his Orders or Interdicts into the Kingdom? What think you of
another Henry, no less brave than his Successor, whom you so revile, in his
Defense of himself against his Rebellious Subject, but your Saint, Thomas a
Becket? I could add many Acts of Parliament made long before King Henry the
VIIIth's time to show you, that tho he indeed proved the most successful in his
Attempts to shake off the Pope's Authority, yet that several other of our
Princes had shown him the way, and that the Usurpations of that See were
neither quietly owned, nor patiently submitted to by his Royal Predecessors.
And then,

32. Thirdly; For the matter of your Doctrine, it must certainly be a great
piece of Confidence in you to pretend that this came down such as you now
believe and practice, from the time of Austin the Monk, to King Henry the
VIIIth's days. I speak not now of the great Opposition that was made to it by
Wickleffe, tho supported by the Duke of Lancaster, the Lord Marshall of
England, and diverse others of chiefest note in this Kingdom, in the time of
Edward the Third, and Richard the Second. I need not say in how many Points he
stood up against the Doctrine of your Church; what a mighty Interest he had to
support him against the Authority of the Pope, and the Rage of the Bishop of
London and his other Enemies on that account; so as both freely to preach
against your Errors, and yet die in Peace in a good old Age. The number of his
Followers was almost infinite, and tho severe Laws were afterward made against
them, yet could they hardly ever be utterly rooted out. But yet, least you
should say that Wickleffe was only a Schismatic from your Church, which
constantly held against him; I will rather show you in a few Instances, that
even the Church of England it self, which you suppose to have been so
conformable to your present Tenets, was in truth utterly opposite to your
Sentiments in many Particulars. And because I may not run out into too great a
length, I will insist only upon two, but those very considerable Points.

33. The first is the Doctrine of Transubstantiation: which as it came but late
into the Roman Church, so did it by Consequence into ours too. Certain it is,
that in the 10th Century the contrary Faith was publicly taught among us. Now,
not to insist upon the Authority of Bid, who in several parts of his Works,
plainly shows how little he believed your Doctrine of Trans^bstantiation; this
is undeniably evident from the Saxon Homily translated by Aelfrick, and
appointed in the Saxons time to be read to the People at Easter before they
received the Holy Communion; and which is from one end to the other directly
opposite to the Doctrine of the Real Presence as established by your Council of
Trent. And the same Aelfrick in his Letters to Wulfine Bishop of Scyrburne, and
to Wulfstane Archbishop of York, shows his own Notions to have been exactly
correspondent to what that Homily taught. The Housell (says he) is Christ's
Body not bodily, but ghostlye. Not the Body which he suffered in, but the
Body of which he spoke when he blessed Bread and Wine to Housell a night
before his suffering, and said by the blessed Bread, This is my Body, and
again by the holy Wine, This is my Blood which is shedd for many in
forgiveness of Sins. Understand now that the Lord who could turn that Bread
before his suffering to his Body, and that Wine to his Blood ghostlye, that
the selfsame Lord blesses daily through the Priests hands Bread and Wine to
his ghostlye Body and to his ghostlye Blood. All which he more fully explains
in his other Letter. Nay it appears H. de Knyghton de Event. Anglice l. 5. p.
2647, 2648.
by a Recantation of Wickleffe mentioned by Knyghton, that even in the latter
time of that Man's Life there was no such Doctrine then in England as
Transubstantiation publicly imposed as an Article of Faith. By all which it is
evident that your great Doctrine of the Real Presence with all its necessary
Appendages, was not, as you pretend, propagated down from Austin's to King
Henry the Eight's time, but brought in to the Church some hundreds of Years
after that Monk died.

34. The other Instance I shall offer to overthrow your Pretenses is no less
considerable, viz. the Worship of Images. It is well known what Opposition was
made not only by the Emperor Charles the Great, and the Fathers of the Synod of
Franckfort, but by the French Clergy in their Synod at Paris, and by almost all
the rest of the Bishops of the Western Church against your pretended General
Council of Nice, wherein this Doctrine was first established. The Definitions
of this Council being sent to the Emperor out of the East, he transmitted a
Copy of them into England. Hereupon Alcuinus, who had formerly been his
Schoolmaster, wrote an Answer to him in the Name of the Clergy of England, to
declare their dislike of this Doctrine: and the account of which our ancient
Histories give us in these words. In the Year from the Incarnation of our Lord
792 Charles King of France sent to Britain a Synod Hoveden. Annal. ad Ann.
792. Simeon Dunelm. Hist. p. 111. Mat. West. ad An. 793. Spelm. Conc. Tom. 1.
p. 306.
Book which was directed unto him from Constantinople: in the which Book alas!
many things unconvenient and contrary to the true Faith were found: in
especial, that it was establyshed with a whole consent almost of all the
Learned of the East, no less than of three hundredth Bishops or more, that Men
ought to worship Images, the which the Church of God DOES UTTERLYE ABHOR.
Against the which Alcuine wrote an Epistle wonderouslye proved by the
Authority of Holy Scripture, and brought that Epistle with the same Book, and
Names of our Bishops and Princes to the King of France. And thus neither was
this Doctrine nor Practice propagated down from Austin to King Henry the
Eighth; but on the contrary unknown to Austin, and rejected as you see by the
Church of England, almost 200 Years after his first Conversion of it.

35. Ibid.] And this may suffice to show both your Skill in Church History, and
the little pretense you have for that vain and most false Assertion, that your
Religion was taught and practiced by S. Austin, and propagated down even to
King Henry the Eighth' s time; whereas indeed it is made up of such Corruptions
as crept into it long after his Decease. Your next business is to rail at King
Henry the Eighth, which you do very heartily, tho let me tell you that better
Men than See ^h^anus.
you are, even of your own Commuion, and who were much more acquainted with the
Affairs of those Times, speak better things of him. And had he been as bad as
you are able to represent him, yet I could send you to some of the Heads of
your Church, who have as far excelled him in Wickedness as ever any of your
Canonists have pretended they did in Authority. But the Merits of Princes, as
well as ordinary Persons, are measured by some Men, not according to their real
worth, but as they have served their Interests, or opposed the Usurpations. And
tho King Henry the Eighth be now such a Monster, yet had he not thrown off the
Pope's Supremacy, you would have made no difficulty to have forgiven him all
his other Sins whilst he lived, and would have found out somewhat to justify
his Memory now he is dead. We know how one of the best Popes of this last
thousand Years called Heaven and Earth to celebrate the Praises of a Traitor
that had murdered his Master, and possessed himself of his Empire. And Cromwell
himself, tho a Usurper, and Heretic, yet wanted not his Panegyrists among
those pretenders to Loyalty, who now cannot afford a good word to the Honor of
a Prince, from whose Royal Line their present Sovereign at this day derives his
Right to the Crown he wears.

36. But however, were the Vices of that Prince otherwise never so detestable;
yet I shall leave it to the World to judge who proceeded with the most Care and
Sincerity in the Point you insist upon of his Divorce with Q. Catherine: the
King who consulted almost all the Learned Men, as well as the most famous
Universities of Europe, and then acted according to their Determination: Or the
Pope who by his notorious juggling with him in the whole process of that Affair,
showed that he resolved to decide it not by any Laws of God or the Church, but
merely as his greater Interests with the Emperor or the King should move him to
do.

37. Ibid.] The next step you make is from King Henry, to his Son King Edward
the Sixth. And here you tell us,

Reply, p. 8.] That as Schism is commonly followed with Heresy, so now the
Protector, who was tainted with Zuinglianism, a Reform from Luther, endeavored
to set it up here in England.

In which you again discover your Zeal against us, but not according to
Understanding. There is hardly any one that knows any thing of the beginning of
this Reformation, but will be able to tell you that the chief Instrument of it
was one whom you have not once mentioned, Archbishop Cranmer. I will not deny
but that the Protector concurred with him in his design, but whether he was
Zuinglian, or what else, neither you nor I can tell. Dr. Heylin, who on this
occasion is usually See your Hist. Coll. p. 103.
your Oracle, seems rather to think he was a Lutheran, tho easy to be molded
into any form. But this I know, that had you been so well versed in these
things, as one who pretends to Hosp. Hist. Sacram. par. 2. p. 33. Lampadius
par. 3. p. 439. Scultetus Annal. ad. An. 1516.
write Historical Remarks ought to be, you would have spared that idle
Reflection of Zuinglius's being a Reform from Luther, it being evident to those
who understand his History, that neither himself, nor the Cantons in which he
preached were ever Lutherans. But on the contrary, whereas Luther appeared but
in the Year 1517, Zuinglius began to preach against the Corruptions of the
Church of Rome some Years before, when the very Name of Luther was not yet
heard of: And had several Conferences with Cardinal Matthews then in
Switzerland to this purpose, before ever the other appeared in public against
them. So unfortunate a thing is it for Men to pretend to be witty upon others,
without considering their own blind side. But you go on;

38. Ad page 9.] Reply. And from that time the Catholic Doctrine which had
been taught by our first Apostles, and propagated till then, began to be
rejected and accused as Erroneons, Super stitious, and Idolatrous, and they who
professed it, persecuted.

Answ.] This is still of the same kind, as false, as it is malicious. How false
it is that the Doctrine you now profess was either planted here by our first
Apostles, or propagated till this time in the Church of England, I have already
shown. And for the Persecution you speak of, methinks you should have been
ashamed to mention that word, being to name Q. Mary's Reign in the very next
Line. But what at last did this Persecution amount to? Were any Roman
Catholics banished, or put to death for their Religion? Were the Laws turned
against them; or any Dragoons sent to convert them? No; Bonner and Fisher, and
two others, Heath Bishop of Worcester, and Day Bishop of Chichester were
deprived of their Bishoprics, and the three first imprisoned. A very few of
the inferior Clergy suffered in the same manner, and all after much
provocation. This was the very utmost of what you call Persecution: and soon
after we meet other kind of Trials: For this King dying,

39. Ibid.] Reply. You tell us The Catholic Religion began again to bud forth
under Q. Mary.

Answ.] And then as if you were afraid of burning your Fingers in those Fires
which Her See Dr. Burnet's Cont. of his Refl. ^n Varillas p. 4, 5.
Persecution kindled against us; you immediately pass to Her Sister's
Succession: And to whose Reign I will so far comply with you, as to pass
without one word of reflection, which you know I might here have occasion
enough to make.

40. Ibid.] Reply. But that Bud being early nipped by her Death, Queen
Elizabeth, by the Advice of the new Council which she chose, and to secure her
self in the Throne, resolved to destroy the Catholic Interest, and set up a
Prelatick Protestancy, which might have the Face of a Church. But other
pretended Reformers opposed her Prelates, and called their Orders
Antichristian, and would needs have the Rags and Remnants of Popery, as they
called them, taken away: Telling them, that if the Word of God was to be the
sole Rule of Reformation, such things as were not to be found in that Rule were
certainly to be rejected.

Answ.] The Method by which Queen Elizabeth proceeded in her Reformation, was
such as will sufficiently justify both her Piety and Prudence in the choice of
it. Never was more care taken that nothing should be done out of Interest or
Passion; but all things be established upon the best and surest Foundations.
And had not some misguided Zealots, out of a too great Affection to those
Models they had seen abroad, run into unreasonable Oppositions at Home, the
Church of England had at this day been the most flourishing, as it is the most
Primitive Church in the World.

41. But though this then be a Matter justly to be lamented by Us, yet
certainly you have no cause to complain of that great Queen's proceedings
toward you. It is well known how many Years passed before any severe Laws were
made against Recusants; and how the Attempts of the Pope, and the King of Spain
from Abroad, and of your Brethren in compliance with them at Home, forced her
to that Severity, which was afterward, but with great Moderation, used against
you. Bonner, though infamous for his Cruelties in Queen Mary's days, was yet
suffered to go in safety now. Heath lived not only in great security, but even
in favor with the Queen her self. Tonstal and Thirleby, found a Retreat with
the Archbishop at Lambeth: The rest of the Bishops continued in quiet amongst
us; only three chose to retire beyond Sea. When the High Commission was
established for visiting the Churches of England, they were expressly ordered by
her Majesty's Injunctions to reserve Pensions for those that refused to
continue in their Benefices: And the Reformation it self appeared so reasonable
to them, that of nine thousand four hundred beneficed Men in England, there
were but fourteen Bishops, six Abbots, twelve Deans, twelve Archdeacons,
fifteen Heads of Colleges, fifteen Prebendaries, and eighty Rectors of
Parishes that left their Benefices upon the account of Religion. Consider, Sir,
this procedure, and then compare it with that of the Queen her Sister; or if
these things be too far out of your reach, look upon the Methods that have been
used in our Neighbor Country, and that not in the severe Accounts of any
particular Persons, but in the public Edicts, in the Report which one of your
own Party, Monsieur le Fevre has published with the King's Permission; and then
say freely, which has most in it of the true Spirit of Christianity, the
meekness whereby this Princess established the Truth in her Kingdoms, or that
furious Zeal which has been employed to root it out of this Other.

42. Ad Page 9.] Reply. From that time (you say) the Nation has been variously
agitated with Disputes.

Answ.] And give me leave to tell you we are in great measure to thank you for
it. They were your Brethren, that creeping into Chambers and Conventicles,
under pretense of a purer Reformation, endeavored to divide us among our
selves, and especially to draw as many as they could from the Established
Religion, which you have ever the most hated. Such was Faithful Commin in the
9th Year See Foxes and Firebrands, Part 1, and 2. See Camden's Eliz. ad Annum
1568.
: Father Heath in the 10th of that Queen's Reign: and both discovered to be
Priests in Masquerade. And it was in this very Year 1568 that the Puritans
chiefly began to appear: And the Heads of them which our Historians mention,
Hallingham, Coleman, and Benson, are named in a Letter that dropped out of Father
Heath's Pocket, to have been some of your Emissaries. How far the same Policies
Foxes and Firebrands, Part 1. p. 37. Ed. 80. See A. B. Bramhall's Letter to A.
B. Usher. p. 611.
have kept open our Divisions since it is now no longer a Mystery. We know how
Provision has been made to tutor up Scholars, not only in Learning, but in
Handy-craft Trades too, in Italy, France, Germany, and Spain: How they have
been taught twice a Week regularly to dispute pro and con, concerning
Presbytery, Independency, Anabaptism, Atheism; every one to take his part among
us, according as his Fancy or Genius leads him. Who was it but a St. Omer's
Josuit that confessed Foxes and Firebrands, Part 1, p. 7.
(as we are credibly informed) that they were twenty Years in hammering out the
Sect of the Quakers? And indeed the Principle they go upon to refuse all Oaths,
is a neat Contrivance for Priests and Jesuits to avoid the Oaths of Allegiance
and Supremacy, without a possibility of being discovered. But this may suffice
to show how unreasonable you are to complain of those Divisions which your
selves have in great measure been the Authors of amongst us: and shall, I hope,
make us hereafter better understand one another, than to give you any longer
the opportunity of keeping up these Differences amongst us, and then I am sure
we need not much fear whatever you can do in your own Shapes to ruin us.

43. Ibid.] During this Time, you say, all things were carried to an Extremity
against you: so furious was our rage against the Truth.

Answ. But certainly you here again make History, and do not report things as
they truly passed in those Days. I am sure if we may conclude any thing, either
from the Writings or Actions of those Times, nothing can be more moderate than
we shall find them both to have been. It was then our XXXIX Articles were drawn
up, and in which I am confident you will not have the face to say, that things
were carried to any undue excess against you. And if the Homilies in some
Particulars may seem somewhat severe, yet I believe there are but few
Expressions in them that you have not very well deserved. But this first Dream
gives you occasion in the next Paragraph to run into a contrary Extravagance,
and that as groundless as the foregoing: For you add,

44. Ad page 9, 10.] Reply. That things growing calmer in King James and King
Charles the first Time, such Calumnies and Accusations (as had before been
used) were looked upon by the more Learned Party as the Effects of Passion; and
Moderation taught them to acknowledge the Church of Rome to be a Mother Church,
and that Salvation was to be had in Her. That many of those Accusations which
were brought against Her, were but the Dreams of distracted Brains; and the
more moderate Persons begun to look upon Her with a more favorable Eye.

45. Answ.] I wish you had here given us some Proofs of what you say, that so
we might have known who these Learned Men were, and what those Charges that
they begun to leave off against you. It is well known how earnestly King James
wrote against your Church; King Charles the first was your avowed Enemy even to
his Death: The most Learned Men of those Times have left such Volumes against
you as you never were, nor ever will be able to Answer: and I shall hereafter
show you, that even those whom you allege as excusing you from Idolatry (which
is I believe in your own Estimation, our severest charge against you) are for
all your Preten^ far from thinking that there is either Falsehood or Calum^ in
such an Accusation.

46. It is therefore great Confidence in you, without the least shadow of
Authority for what you do, to represent such Eminent Persons as Favorers of
your Doctrine. But ^s has been ever your way, and we ought not to wonder at it,
seeing we can remember the time that we our selves were reported to be Popishly
affected: and it is but a few Months since that some of you put out a book to
show an Agreement at this day between the Church of England, and the Church of
Rome; though I suppose he may by this time begin to repent of an undertaking,
which has brought nothing but infamy to the Author of so false and scandalous
an Attempt.

47. What you mean by our acknowledging your Church to be a Mother Church, I do
not very well comprehend. We confess indeed it was a Roman Missionary that
especially contributed to the Conversion of the Saxons: and this I believe no
Man ever denied; but let me tell you, that if your own Historian Bid be to be
Judge, our Country was much more beholden to the Labors and Prudence of the
Scots and French, than to the Romans. Look into Answer to Reason and Authority
page 83, etc.
the Account that has lately been given by a Learned Person of our Church in
His Answer to One of your New Converts. There you will find that they were
Columba, Aidan, Ced, Ceadda, Finan, Colman, Trumhere, Agilbertus, and Felix,
that restored Christianity and propagated it among the Saxons; when the
planting of it by Austin was almost lost. Insomuch that at the Death of
Deus-dedit Archbishop of Canterbury, there was in all Britain but one Bishop
of Roman Ordination, remaining; viz. Wini, who called in two British Bishops
to his Assistance for the Ordaining of Ceadda to be Archbishop of York. And to
show what great Obligations we have to own the Church of Rome as a
Mother Church; when things are now in peace, and the Paschal Controversy laid
aside, and great Hopes that all things would come to a right understanding,
Wilfrid returning from Rome, revived again the Old Quarrels, and forced Colman
and his followers to retire into Ireland; St. Chad to leave his Bishopric of
York; and so deprived our Country of the benefit of so many excellent Pastors,
as Bede himself, no Friend to them, could not choose but give an extraordinary
Character of them. But that you may see what little reason we have to
acknowledge See Masox de Minist. Angl. l. 2. cap. 4. Bid. l. 3. c. 6. Ibid. l.
2. c. 2.
your Church above all Others to be our Mother Church, I will lay this whole
Affair in short before you. Our whole Island heretofore was divided into four
Languages; of Britains, Scots, Picts, and English. As for the Britains, they
were so far from being Converted by Austin, that at his coming he found an
Established Church amongst them, and that utterly refused to have any thing to
do with Him. For the Scots, they were Ibid. l. 1. c. 13.
established Christians before Austin's Time, under Palladius their Bishop; and
your own Annalist carries their Conversion yet Baron. ad Ann. 429.
higher. The Picts embraced our Faith at the preaching of Columbanus, who came
hither out of Ireland, 32 Years before Austin's arrival. And lastly, for the
English, tho we are far Bid. l. 3. c. 4.
from detracting any thing from the Labors of S. Austin, yet neither may we
forget that the Glory even of their Conversion is not his alone; but must be
ascribed to those other Holy Men who were His Fellow-workers in the Gospel,
Felix, Aidan, Ceadda, Lethardus, etc. and some of which had begun before Him,
and prepared the way for that success which afterward attended his Preaching.

48. As to what you add, that they began to confess then too, that Salvation
was to be had amongst you; it is what we do not any more deny at this day. We
do hope that some Men amongst you may be saved, because we hope there may be
some in your Church who live in a more excusable Ignorance of the Truth, and
that these holding still the Foundation, and being ready to submit to any
Conviction that should be offered, may by God's Grace, and a general
Repentance, even for their very Errors among the rest of their unknown Sins, be
saved through Faith in Christ Jesus. But yet that you may not mistake our
Charity, give me leave to tell you,

(1.) That we think it much more difficult for any one to be saved in your
Church now, than it was before the Reformation; because that then your Errors
were neither so well known, nor so fully refuted as they have been since: and
therefore Ignorance was in those Days much more invincible, and by consequence
more fit to excuse than it is now.

(2.) That for those who live, as you do, in a Country where you might, would
you sincerely apply your selves to it, find sufficient means of Instruction, it
is yet more dangerous than in those Parts where these Helps are wanting.

But especially (3.) will this hold good against you whom God has called to be
the Pastors of his Church, and whose Character engages them to be in an
especial manner, sedulous and inquisitive; Earnest in their Prayers, and
unprejudiced in their Desires to know the Truth, more than against the
Lay-members of your Church. So that however we will not judge you, yet neither
can we with any comfort say that God will acquit you.

And (4.) for those whom by this Argument you endeavor to draw away from us;
That we confess that Men in your Church may be saved, but that you utterly deny
that they can be in Ours, and therefore it is best for them to be on Yours,
that is, the safer Side. If they do indeed use all possible means to be
satisfied in the Points in debate betwixt us; if they indifferently apply
themselves to the examination of them; and after a diligent trial, remain at
last convinced in their Consciences that yours is the best and purest Church;
we shall then be encouraged to hope well of them, as we do of others of your
Communion, notwithstanding such a change. But now, should Interest, or
Prejudice, or any Humane Motives chance to have interposed to bias their
Judgments; if they choose your Religion, without this diligent, and impartial
Examination, and suffer themselves without Reason to be seduced by you: We must
freely profess our Charity in this Assertion is not meant for them; nor do we
think your Church in this Case any way of Salvation at all to such Converts,
much less a safer than that of the Church of England. In short, the Sum of this
Matter is; We hope honest Men may be saved in your Communion; but we are sure
they shall be in Ours. Whether God will condemn you for professing Errors that
you do not know to be such, we cannot tell, we believe he will not; Sure we are
he would damn us, should we who are convinced of your Corruptions, be seduced
by any base Motives to go over to you. And this is enough for us to know; The
Other is your Concern, and do you look to it. But you go on, and tell us;

49. Ibid.] Reply. That the Aversion which the People had imbibed from so long
continued Slanders, could not be removed; and the arising Factions in the State
blew up the Coals afresh, and pretended this Moderation was nothing but an
inclination to Popery, which so frighted the Mobile, that they were ready to
join with any Party that pretended to suppress such a Monster as they thought
it to be: From hence came Rebellions, and the horrid Murder of King Charles the
First.

50. Answ.] That the People had an Aversion to Popery then, I can easily
believe, from what I have the satisfaction to find in them at this day. But
that this Aversion sprung from any Slanders that had been laid upon you
heretofore, I no more believe, than I do that it proceeds from our
Misrepresenting your Doctrine now. No, Sir, believe me, there is enough in
Popery to make an honest Man hate it, without raising any Calumnies against it
to render it the more odious: and I do not find since your Endeavors to
vindicate your selves against us, that it begins to be at all more liked than
it was before.

51. For what you mention of the Original of the Civil Wars in King Charles the
First's Reign, I readily grant that the fears of Popery contributed much to
blow up the People into Rebellion. But I am persuaded we must look somewhat
farther, if we mean to rise up to the true Authors of them. Shall I tell you
freely what I think? I do believe there was more at the bottom of those Civil
Wars, than either the People did then believe, or it may be the wisest Men are
at this day able sufficiently to dive into. But yet thus much we do all know,

1st, That the King himself in the very first breaking out of them, observed,
that the Fanatics proceeded upon Popish Principles against him. Their Maxims
(says he) are the same See the King's large Declar* about the Scotch Troubles,
p. 3, 4.
with the Jesuits; their Preachers Sermons have been delivered in the very
Phrase and Style of Becanus, Scioppius, and Eudaemon Johannes. Their poor
Arguments which they have delivered in their Seditious Pamphlets printed or
written, are taken almost verbatim out of Bellarmine and Suarez; and the means
which they have used to induce a Credit of their Conclusions with their
Proselytes, are purely and merely Jesuitical Fables, See his Majesty's
Declarat. after the Battle at Edg-Hill. Kings Works, part 2. page 213.
false Reports, false Prophesies, pretended Inspirations and Divinations of the
weaker Sex; As if now Herod and Pilate were once again reconciled for the ruin
of Christ and of his true Religion and Worship.

2. That in the Year 1640, there was discovered to the Archbishop of
Canterbury a Design, in which the Pope, Cardinal Richlieu, many of the English
Papists, but especially the Jesuits, were concerned in stirring up those
Divisions that had just before broke out in Scotland, for the Ruin of the King
and of the Arch Bishop. This may be seen at large in the Histories of those
Times, and the very Papers themselves may be Vol. 3. p. 1310, etc.
found in Mr. Rushworth's Collections.

3. That Sir William Boswell, his Majesty's Resident at that Time at the Hague,
and to whom this Discovery was first made; did find out that the Romish Clergy
gulled the misled party of our English Nation under a Puritanical Dress. That
See in the Life of A. B. Usher, Append. p. 27. Letter 17.
they had received Indulgences from the Sea of Rome and Council of Cardinals,
to educate their Scholars in Principles and Tenets contrary to the Episcopacy
of the Church of England. That within the compass of two Years, above sixty of
the Romish Clergy were gone out of France, to preach up the Scotch Covenant,
and to pull down the English Episcopacy, as being the chief support of the
Imperial Crown of our Nation.

4. That Archbishop Bramhal being in France, some time after the King's Death,
did there learn how all these things were managed: That in the Year 1646, above
an hundred See Bp Usher's Life, 293. Letter, p. 611.
Romish Clergy were sent over into England; who were most of them Soldiers in
the Parliament Army; and were daily to correspond with the Romanists in the
King's Army: That in the Year 1647. they had a Consult with one another,
wherein they discoursed about the Death of the King, and England's being a
Commonwealth; that hereupon the Romish Orders wrote to their several Convents,
but especially to the Sorbonists, to know whether it might be lawful to make
away the King and the Prince? In short, that the Sorbonists returned, That it
was lawful for Roman Catholics to work Changes in Governments for the
Mother-Churches Advancement, and chiefly in an Heretical Kingdom, and so
lawfully make away the King.

5. Salmonet Hist. des troubles d'Angleterre, live. 3. p. 165.
That after the Engagement at Edgehill, several Romish Priests were found
among the slain of the Parliament Army. This Father Salmonet declares in his
History of those Civil Wars, printed in France, with the allowance of the King:
and adds, that the Parliament had two Companies of Walloons, besides others of
that Religion in their Army.

6. When the Rebellion broke out in Ireland, it was we know blessed with his
Holinesses Letters, and assisted by his Nuntio, whom he sent on purpose thither
for that Service.

Answer to Philanax Anglicus. page 61.
Lastly; that Monsieur du Moulin has confirmed this with several plain
Instances, which he declared himself ready to make a legal Proof of before his
Judges, and after 17 Years attendance, in a new Edition of his Book desired
once more that he might be called to account for it, and yet died without being
ever attempted to be disproved.

These things, I say, we know of this Matter, and therefore tho I do confess
that the Fears of Popery was the pretense to blow up the People, yet whether
there might not be some other Persons and Designs at the bottom, I shall leave
it to the Reader to consider what Credit he will think fit to give these
Relations, and then judge as he sees Cause.

52. Ad page 10.] Reply. During this War, there was (you say) a good
understanding between the Papists and the Prelatick Party, which was the cause
of a no less pleasing Union after the Restoration of King Charles the Second
till Shaftsbury and his Adherents invented a malicious Calumny, laying a
pretended Plot to their Charge -- The Truth of which being detected by a
subsequent real One, the more moderate of the Church of England again began to
favor them: Only still the Laws enacted against them being in force, there
were Persons enough ready to put them in Execution.

Answ.] To all which I have nothing more to say, but that being come now to the
Affairs of our own Times, I suppose every Man is already satisfied what to
believe as to these things: Or, if he be not, I am sure there is nothing here
to direct him. The accounts of these Transactions have been published by
Authority; and those who desire more nearly to consider them, may recur to the
History of the latter of the Plots mentioned; and to the several Trials and
Narratives, especially to Mr. Coleman's Letters, for his Information in the
former.

53. Ad page 11.] Reply. In this posture were Affairs, when it pleased God to
take to himself his late Majesty: No sooner was his present Majesty ascended
upon the Throne, but he declared Himself a Catholic: yet was pleased to
declare that he looked upon the Church of England as proceeding upon Loyal
Principles, and that he would protect Her. This gained the Hearts of that
Party, and had so much Power over the Parliament, that notwithstanding the
Conclusion of a Sermon preached before them, in which it was declared, that an
English Man might be Loyal, but not a Papist, that Parliament testified its
Loyalty to such a degree as shall never be forgotten.

And thus after a long Story nothing to the purpose, and that too fraught (as
we have seen) with many Falsifications, we are at last come to the Point to be
considered, of the Controversies that are now depending betwixt the two
Churches, and the Original whereof you here recount to us.

54. Ad page 11, 12.] Reply. This was the occasion of our following
Controversies, and the first thing that appeared in Print against the Roman
Catholics, tho the Author of the Present State of the Controversies would not
take notice of it. And the more considering Men of your Party (you say) looked
upon it as the throwing out of the Gauntlet, and bidding defiance to all the
Catholics of England. This produced a Remonstrance from you, and that an
Answer from the Doctor, and there (as almost all our Controversies have done
since) it ended, tho a Reply was prepared and approved of. But it was thought
fit by those (who were to be obeyed) to let the Controversy die, rather than
stir up a Religious Litigation upon a Point which not only the Protestations of
Catholics, but their Practices had justified them in.

55. Answ.] What you thought of that Passage in Dr. Sherlock's Sermon I cannot
tell; but others think that by your Clamours against it you have given the
Doctor occasion to satisfy the World that what he had said was but too true.
And since you tell us that there is an Answer ready prepared and approved, and
that the Controversial Spirit is now let loose, so that our Quarrels will not
be much increased by such an Accession, I dare say the Doctor will be very glad
to see that Answer, and whether it has force enough to convince him of his
Mistake. As for your pretense why you declined engaging any farther in this
Dispute, viz. That it was a Point, which not only your Protestations, but your
Practices had justified you in; tho I readily acknowledge that the Englishman
has in many of your Communion been too strong for the Papist, (and far be it
from us to detract from their worth) Yet as to your Assertion in the general,
that both your Protestations and Practices have sufficiently justified you in
this Point, give me leave to tell you that we are not very forward to credit
the One, because we have known too much of the Other. We cannot so soon forget
the Names of Mariana, Suarez, Bellarmine, of Parsons, Stapleton; and many
others of your Communion, as not to remember what sort of Loyalty has sometimes
been taught in your Schools. Who were they that Sainted Thomas a Becket, and
have applauded even the Assassines of some Princes since, but the venerable
Heads of your Church? And in what esteem Campian and Garnet are at this day
among you, we are not ignorant. When that wicked Wretch J. Castle assaulted
Henry the Fourth of France, he found an Apologist among you; and the Arrest of
the Parliament of Paris against him, stands at this day among the prohibited
Books in the last Index set forth at Rome. They were these things that moved
our King James the First, to set out his Admonition to all Christian Princes
against you; and even that your Card. Bellarmine was not ashamed to answer, in
defense of his Doctrine of the Popes Authority over Kings: In short, he that
would know what Credit is to be given to you in your Assertion as to this
matter, need only recur to Mr. Foulis Collection, and I am confident he will
then confess that the distinction the Doctor made in behalf of his Countrymen
of your Religion, is the best Apology that can be offered, and the most to the
Honor of our Nation, tho it may be not so much for the Credit of your Church,
viz. that your Principles considered, the English Man may be, I will add, and
has often been found Loyal, but then he has laid aside the Papist to be so.

56. Ad p. 12.] Reply. You tell us, That this Imputation of the Doctor's,
joined with the Mistakes that most Men had conceived of your Doctrine, gave
occasion to the Representer to show your Doctrines truly as they are in
themselves, without the mixture of the particular Opinions of the Schoolmen, or
the Practices which are neither universally nor necessarily received.

Answ.] And this Book, tho it produced not any manner of Authority for its
Representations, and was contrary in most Points to the Opinions of the
chiefest Writers of your Church, soon received an Answer in every particular.
There your Doctrine was truly stated from your own Authors, his false Colors
detected, and to your shame never replied to. For I suppose no one will be so
far mistaken, as to think that Tristle that came out against it deserves the
Name of an Answer.

57. Ad page 13.] And whilst this Book yet subsists in its full force, and that
we have so effectually shown you the Opinions of the most Eminent Divines of
your Church, the Practice of the Generality amongst you, and the very words of
your Councils and Liturgies, to be utterly inconsistent with your new
Representations, that you are not able to make any reasonable Defense of the
one, and are forced utterly to reject after all the other; What a Forehead must
that Man have that can tell the World as you do, That we CANNOT DENY (what yet
you complain of Me in this very Book for denying) that all Catholics do
believe according to that Doctrine which the Representer expresses, and which
you in vain endeavor (as I shall hereafter show you) to defend.

58. Ad page 14.] Reply. During this Dispute two Books (you say) were
published, with the same Intention: The first, The Acts of the Clergy of France
in their General Assembly, 1685. in which was shown in one Column the Doctrine
of your Church from the words of the Council of Trent, in the other the
Calumnies of Protestants against you, from the very words of their Authors. And
this you think to have been so clear a Proof of what the Representer had said,
that you suppose his Adversaries would not think fit to contest it longer
against such plain and ample Testimonies.

Answ.] And here you think you have found out somewhat to boast of: A Wonder
indeed not every day to be seen; a Book never yet answered by us. It Is true, I
do not know of any one here at home, that has taken the pains to examine the
Clergy's Quotations, as the Answer to Papists protesting against Protestant
Popery has done, for the Instances there offered by their Humble Imitator the
Representer. But then the discovery that was made by that worthy Author of the
whole Cheat, by distinguishing Matters of Dispute, from Matters of
Representation, has abundantly confuted all their Pretenses. We charge you (for
Instance) with Idolatry, for worshipping of Images, Praying to Saints, and for
adoring the Host. If you do not worship Images, nor pray to Saints, nor adore
the Host, then indeed we Misrepresent you. But now for the other Point, that
therefore you commit Idolatry, this is our Consequence which we draw from those
Practices, and must be put to the Trial betwixt us. If our Reasons be good, our
Conclusion will be so too: If they are not, we are then mistaken in our
Opinion, and you may say we are in an Error, but we do not therefore
misrepresent you. We never yet pretended that you thought Idolatry to be
lawful; or that you confessed that you committed it: We accuse you of it only
as a thing which upon the Premises before mentioned, we conclude you to be
guilty of; and in that certainly, if we misrepresent any Body, it must be our
selves, not you. Now this one thing being observed, the Book you mention is
utterly overthrown, and both the Artifice and the Evidence fall together.

59. Ibid.] The other Book you tell us you published was the Bishop of Meaux's
Exposition, and what has been done on this occasion is very well known, and I
shall not need to give any account of it.

60. Ad page 17.] And thus have we done with the two Points to which I reduced
the Sum of your Preface: What farther remains is your Advice to the Readers of
our Books, what they are to take notice of, and what to pass over in them. You
tell them that you will lay down the true State of the difference betwixt us,
and that whatever they find written by us that does not immediately oppose some
of those Tenets, they should pass it over, tho never so plausible or pleasing.

61. Now how Politic such an Advice as this may be to hinder the good effect
of our Writing, I will not dispute; but sure I am it is highly unreasonable.
For what if the very Subject of the Controversy should be (as indeed at this
time it is) whether those things which you here lay down be your Churches
Doctrine, or only your private Exposition of it? Ought not the judicious Reader
in this case to consider our Allegations, and see whether we have not reason to
say that you do endeavor to delude them, by pretending that to be your Belief,
which in truth is not received by the Generality of your Church as such? As for
instance: You positively deny that the Holy Cross is upon ANY ACCOUNT
WHATSOEVER to be worshipped with DIVINE WORSHIP. Now this we deny too, and
therefore as to this Point there can be no Dispute betwixt us. But now what if
I should undertake to show, that you here impose upon your Reader, and that
whatsoever you pretend, yet your Church does teach, that the Holy Cross IS TO
BE WORSHIPPED with DIVINE WORSHIP, and Practices accordingly? Is not this think
you fit to be considered by him? Or is the Bishop of Meaux's Exposition become
so far the Guide in Controversy in France and England, that all other
Expositions are to be looked upon as superannuated, and this only to contain
the true Interpretation of your pretended Catholic Faith.

62. But indeed I do not wonder that you would persuade your Proselytes not to
read our Books, since you easily guess that those things may well stagger them,
which were not your Obstinacy or your Prejudices too strong, for your Reason
and Conscience to grapple with, must long e're this have convinced, as they
have sufficiently confuted, your own selves.

63. Ad page 27.] And because you are not willing to prolong Disputes, you do
here declare, that if the Defender do meddle hereafter with such Points as
those which are not of necessary Faith, you shall not think your self obliged
to answer him, tho after that he may perhaps boast how he had the last Word.

Answ.] That is to say, the great business of the Defender has been to discover
your true Doctrine, and yours to dissemble it. Now if the Defender makes any
Answer at all to your Reply, it must be to maintain those Doctrines to be yours
which he had laid to your Charge, and which you deny; And this if he does, you
here declare you will have done with him: Which I think is plainly to confess,
that you have had enough of this Argument.

64. But, Sir, the Defender has such a kindness for his Subject, and such a
respect for You, that he is resolved not to part either with you or it. And
therefore, for what concerns his Subject, he will still make good in the
several Points in which he advanced it, his distinction of Old and New Popery
against you, and which in your last Defense you have been shown your self to
allow of: He will prove that you do palliate the ancient Doctrine of your
Church; and that greater Men than any either the Bishop of Meaux or your self,
have and do interpret your Churches Sense in a much other manner than you
represent it. And to this you may return or not, as you think fit. For your
self, he is resolved to be so far your Humble Servant as to join issue with you
upon your own terms, and show you how you have abused the World to no purpose
at all; for that even taking your Doctrine as you misrepresent it, yet still we
are not able nevertheless to embrace it. But then for your other proposal, of
throwing aside all the rest of our Points, only for the sake of those t^o which
you mention, here he desires to be excused: It being much more for the
Edification of his Friends the Populace (and whose Applause you know he courts)
to give them a full prospect of your Doctrine, and your Misrepresentations of
it, than to run the Circle with you in the single Point of the Churches
Authority, in which they may more easily be amused and deluded by you. But you
say,

65. Ad page 24.] Reply. That you may be bold to foretell without pretending to
be a Prophet, that nothing of this will be done by Me, but that I shall either
still fly to the Tenets and Practices of Particulars, or misrepresent your
Doctrine, or fob off your Arguments with such an Answer as I think sufficient
to Monsieur Arnaud's Perpetuite, which I said wanted only Diogenes' s
Demonstration to confute it.

Answ.] I am very glad, Sir, you profess your self to be no Prophet, (and I
have long been convinced that you are no Conjurer) for if your Arguments be no
better than your Guesses, I shall have a very easy Task of it. I have already
told you what Method I resolve to proceed in, and I hope you will comply so far
with me as to excuse one part of it, seeing I go utterly besides my measures to
gratify your Desires in the other. As for your fear that I should fob off your
Arguments, by which I suppose you mean that I shall endeavor to elude them
with some imperfect Answer, I do promise you it is groundless; I will very
carefully sift your Reply to the bottom, and not let any thing, that is not
very impertinent, pass my Examination. But shall I beg leave now that I have
satisfied yours, to confess my own Fears; and that is, that as far as I can yet
judge by what I have hitherto read of your Reply, I shall find but few Arguments
in it either to fob off, or to answer. For having already considered your
Calumnies, I much doubt by that time I have rectified your Mistakes too, I
shall have little more remaining to encounter.

66. As to Monsieur Arnaud's Perpetuite, I do still say that Diogenes's
Demonstration is the best Confutation of it. The Case in short is this;
Monsieur Aubertine has shown in the first Ages of the Church, that the Doctrine
which we now embrace of the Holy Eucharist contrary to Transubstantiation, was
the ancient Catholic Doctrine of the Church. This he confirms by a multitude
of clear Testimonies drawn out of the Writings of those Fathers who lived in
those Times. Now for Monsieur Arnaud after this to think to confute this
Evidence by a Logical Argument, that had not the Doctrine of Transubstantiation
been the Doctrine of the Church at the beginning, it could never have become so
afterward; and that such a little shift is sufficient to overthrow all those
Testimonies, this must certainly be a mere Reverie, (you will I hope excuse me
that Expression, now you know the meaning of it) and needs no other
Confutation, than to show him that the Matter of Fact is evidently opposite to
his Pretenses.

67. Ad Page 25.] Reply. But such things as these (you say) are now adays put
upon the World without a blush: and they who are this day Ingenuous, Learned,
Honest Men, shall be to morrow Time-servers, Blockheads, and Knaves, if they
chance to cast but a favorable Eye toward Popery.

Answ.] O Tempora! O Mores! To what a sad State are we arrived, that Men should
be able to do such ill things, and yet not blush at them! But what now is the
Matter? Why, Men who were yesterday esteemed very honest Men, are the next
found out to be Knaves and Time-servers. Good Sir, be not too hasty; it is
possible this may be done, and yet no cause of blushing neither, unless for
those Persons who are so found out. For, 1. What if we mistook those Men for
Honest Men, who at the bottom were not so? And when we saw our Error, altered
our Opinion? And as every thing that is done, must be done some day or other;
What if we took them for honest Men to day, and to morrow find that they were
not so honest? Is it any Crime for one upon good grounds to change his Mind in
this Case? Again, 2. There is a certain Season when the worst Man first begins
to be so. Now, what if one that had hitherto done nothing to forfeit his
Reputation, should begin to do such notorious ill things as to deserve our
Censure? Here we had both reason to believe him an honest Man whilst he was so,
and as much reason to believe him otherwise, since his Actions have declared
his Change. So that then, for ought I can find, we must come at last to the
grounds of these Charges, before we can judge of them. And for that, whenever
you will please to give us your Instances of the Persons who have been thus
censured by us; that have been heretofore esteemed honest, ingenuous Men, and
are now found out to be Knaves and Blockheads; though I shall have no occasion
to justify any such censure, till you can prove that I have been concerned in
passing of it; yet I doubt not but those who have done this, will be able to
give you abundant satisfaction for it.

68. Ibid.] Reply. You conclude all with an Insinuation, the most likely to
catch those that are not well acquainted with you, of any thing in your whole
Book: That it is not likely you should palliate your Doctrine to gain
Proselytes, seeing that Proselyte the first time he should see you practice
contrary to your Doctrine, would be sure to return and expose your Villainy.

Answ.] But yet to this I Answer; 1st, That it is possible you may palliate your
Doctrine, and your Proselyte never discover it. It is no such strange thing for
Men to profess one thing and do another; and yet by subtle distinctions justify
themselves to those who are prepared to deny Sense and Reason, rather than not
believe them. You tell us for instance, that the Holy Cross is upon no account
whatsoever to be worshipped; And yet certainly your Good Friday Service
directly leads you to it. But then if your new Proselyte begins to enquire what
this means; presently you tell him a Story of Absolute and Relative Worship;
and he who knows nothing more of the Matter than you are pleased to let him,
humbly submits himself to yours and the Church's Judgment.

69. If we urge your Expressions against you, and he fortunes to get something
of this by the end; Either you confidently deny that you have any such words,
(a Case which has happened to my self in this very Allegation) or if you are
baffled there; then it is not (for instance) Come, let us Adore the Cross; but,
Come, let us adore Christ who suffered on it: concerning which we must
discourse a little by and by.

70. If this too fails, and we show you plainly that you say, We adore thy
Cross, O Lord: So that our Savior is himself distinguished from his Cross
which you worship; then the Cross there is put to signify Christ's Passion;
though I am afraid the Adoring of Christ's Passion is something like that which
you call Jargon, and we in plain English, Nonsense.

71. If even this be beaten off, and other Hymns produced in which that Cross
is plainly specified which bore Christ's Sacred Members; the Tree upon whose
Arms the Price of the World hung: then you have your Figures ready, it is a
Metonymie in one line, a Prosopopaeia in the next; in the third a conjunction
of both together: And with these Quirks the poor Implicit Proselyte's Head is
turned round. He believes there is something meant by all these hard words,
though he knows nothing of the Matter; and his Opinion of your Integrity,
joined with the good assurance with which you pronounce your Oracles, and
thunder out your Anathema's against us as Heretics and Schismatics;
Calumniators, Falsifiers, Misrepresenters, and what not? makes him that he no
longer questions your Pretenses.

72. As for your Authors he knows nothing of them; or if he did, yet those who
have so many tricks to elude such clear Expressions of their public Rituals,
could not want distinctions enough to expound them. Or however a general
outcry against them as private Men, and for whose Opinions the Church is not
to Answer, will at once silence all such Allegations that they shall not make
any the least impression upon them. By all which it appears that you may (as we
affirm you do) palliate your Doctrine, and yet your Proselyte be never the
wiser for it.

73. But now, 2dly, if he should discover something of this kind, yet is it not
necessary, that he should therefore presently return and expose your Villainy. I
will suppose that those few Proselytes you have made, may all be reduced to
these two kinds; Men of Conscience, or Men of Interest and Design. For the
latter of these, whilst they serve their Interests by the Change, there is no
great fear of their making any such dangerous Discoveries. Religion is not
their Concern; and whether it be New Popery or Old that they embrace, they
neither know, nor care: it is to them indifferent; and they understand, as well
as value, both alike. As to the Conscientious Converts, (allowing for their
Capacities, and that they are able to overcome all the forementioned
Difficulties, and to discover the Cheat, which I fear is what the much greatest
part of these are not able to do): It is indeed hard to say what a terrible
Conflict this will be apt to make in them. But yet the Point of Reputation, the
Opinion of the World, shame of Return. and the dangers those commonly run who
venture to reveal such Sacred Mysteries; these Considerations have sometimes
kept good Men a longer time in suspense, than any of your Proselytes have yet
had to resolve upon a return to us. And who can tell, what Time and Changes may
one day bring forth?

74. Again: We know there have been many in your Church, who though they have
discovered these Prevarications, yet have thought, that as long as they did not
themselves join in your Errors, they might hold their Tongues, and live quietly
in an External Communion with you: and their Eyes have been so dazzled with the
Splendour, Succession, Extent, etc. of your Church, that they have preferred it
with all its Faults to Others who seem to them to want these Advantages. Such
were the famous George Cassander, Father Barnes, and others that I might
mention. Nay, it is no very long time, since a Person yet living, Monsieur
Ferrand, has published a Book to show, that were the Church of Rome as corrupt
as we pretend it to be, yet we ought not nevertheless to separate from it. And
should any of your Converts be of this Persuasion, they may still continue to
all appearance in your Church, though they see the Errors, and your
falsifications of the true Doctrine of it.

75. But, 3dly, though I do affirm that what you publish is not the Ancient
Doctrine of your Church, yet I do not deny but it is that which you endeavor
to make pass with your Converts as such. This you teach your Proselytes, the
Bishop of Meaux his Dioces; and they rarely meet with any one that maintains
the contrary. But this does not hinder, that because this is the Popery of a
few English Missionaries, and French Expositors; that therefore it has been all
along the Common Doctrine of your Church; or is conformable to the practice of
other Countries at this day. And all Men have not the leisure to go into Italy
or Spain; or the ability to read over your several Authors for satisfaction in
it.

76. But, 4thly, to quit all these Suppositions; yet since you make it no less
than a Mortal Sin to have any Doubts of your Religion; you are sure, as soon as
any such arise in their Minds to hear of it in Confession from them. Being thus
acquainted with the first Motions of this kind, you presently take all the ways
imaginable to stifle them, and hinder them from coming to an open defection
from you. So that though your Proselyte should begin to stagger; yet unless he
utterly abandon your Party without ever consulting you in it, (which Men of
Conscience will never do) he is almost under an Impossibility of ever doing it
at all.

77. To all which I will add but this farther: Which well may, and I am
persuaded does keep many from telling of Tales, and exposing (as you call it)
your Villainy; and that is, that when you receive a new Convert into your
Church, you require a terrible Oath from him, never by any Argument to leave or
to forsake you, upon pain of Perjury and Damnation if he does. And to the end
the Reader may know, what is the last step he is to make, if he has any
thoughts that way; and to convince him what little force there is in your
Suggestion, I will here transcribe it from your Pontifical, in its full length.

The Oath that is ordered by the Church of Rome to be administered to a New
Convert. (Pontif. Romans Ord. ad reconc. Apost. Schism. vel Haeret.)
I. N. having found out the Snare of Division with which I was held, after a
long and diligent deliberation with my self, am, by the Grace of God, returned
with a forward and ready Will, to unity of the Apostolic See: And lest I
should be thought to have returned not with a pure Mind, but only in show, I do
hereby promise, under the pain of falling from my Order, and under the
Obligation of an Anathema to thee Bishop of such a Place; and by thee to Peter
Prince of the Apostles, and to the most Holy Father in Christ our Lord N. Pope,
and to his Successors, that I will never through the Persuasions of any Persons
whatsoever, or BY ANY OTHER MEANS return to that Schism, from which by the
Grace of our Redeemer freeing Me, I am delivered: But that I will always remain
in all things in the Unity of the Catholic Church, and in the Communion of the
Bishop of Rome; and therefore I do say upon my Oath, by GOD ALMIGHTY and these
SACRED GOSPELS, that I will without wavering remain in the Unity and Communion
aforesaid; And if (which God forbid) I shall BY ANY OCCASION or ARGUMENT divide
my self from this Unity, MAY I INCURRING THE GUILT OF PERJURY, BE FOUND
CONDEMNED TO ETERNAL PUNISHMENT, AND HAVE MY PORTION WITH THE AUTHOR OF SCHISM
IN THE WORLD TO COME. -- So help me God, etc.

Thus does your new Proselyte swear himself firm to your Party; at least I Am
sure he is here required to do it. And now you may as well expect that a fellow
Conspirator should discover the Treason he is to commit, as a Convert thus
engaged to you, (though he should find it out) expose your Villainy.

AN ANSWER TO THE REPLY, etc. Being a further Defense of the EXPOSITION of the
DOCTRINE of the Church of England.
INTRODUCTION.
IT was the Opinion of a late Author concerning a very short Treatise that he
had published upon most of the Points in Controversy between us and the Church
of Rome; that tho he had neither put himself to the expense of any new
Arguments against us; nor produced the Authority of either Ancient Fathers, or
even of Modern Writers to back his Assertions; he had nevertheless answered in
that one Treatise, not only all those late Discourses that had just before been
published by our Divines on those Subjects, but a great part of all the Books
and Sermons that had ever been writ or preached against his Church. Tho I am
not very fond of following any Copy which that Author can set me, and in this
especially do think his Vanity so ridiculous, that he is rather to be pitied
than imitated; yet being once more called upon for a farther Vindication of my
self, to another review of the most considerable Articles wherein we differ
from those of the other Communion, I cannot but observe, that not only my
present Adversary has not advanced in this new Attempt one jot beyond what I
had before confuted, but that in all their Books, their whole Business is
merely to transcribe one another; so that from the Sea the Reply, Pres. p. vi.
Bishop of Condom's Exposition, even to the The Original whereof was first
published in Spanish, Anno 1616.
Eye Catechism, there is nothing new; but the same Answer that is made to one,
does really in effect overthrow them all.

2. It Is this has put me upon the troublesome design, not only of resuming and
collating the Bishop of Meaux's Exposition, and the Vindication of it, with the
Reply that is now before me on every Article; But to search all those other
Treatises that have been published since the Representer first broke the Peace
with us: To convince the World that Matters are now driven as far as they can
go; so that in reading any one of their Books they may really find as much, as
when they shall have taken the pains to consult them all. If this will not
engage them to produce something more than they have yet done to answer our
Arguments, it shall at least I hope excuse us, if we from henceforth dispense
with our selves the trouble of large Confutations; so that instead of
transcribing again our own Books, as often as they shall please to furnish out
a new Title to their old Objections, we shall need only to direct them to those
Replies that have been already made; and in which their Pretensions have been
confuted before they were published.

3. It was the Complaint of S. Austin against such kind of Antagonists as these
in his Time; That whether out of too much St. Austin. de Civit. Dei. lib. 2. c.
1.
blindness, by which even the clearest things are not seen; or out of an
obstinate stubbornness, whereby even those things which are seen, are not
endured, they would defend their own unreasonable Notions after a full Answer
had been given to them, as if it were Reason and Truth it self that they
maintained. -- And therefore (says he) what End shall there be of Disputing,
what measure of speaking, if we must always answer those that answer us? For
they who either cannot understand what is said, or are so hardened with a
Spirit of Opposition, that tho they did understand, yet would they not submit;
they answer, as it is written, and they speak Iniquity, and are indefatigably
vain. Whose contrary sayings if we should as often refute, as they have
resolved with an invincible Forehead not to care what they say, so they do but
by any means contradict our Disputations; who does not see how infinite, and
troublesome, and fruitless this would be?

The ANSWER to the FIRST ARTICLE.
YOU will excuse, Sir, this little Address to my Reader; I shall from
henceforth keep close to your Reply, and notwithstanding Reply p. 1.
St. Austin's Insinuation to the contrary, attend you once more whithersoever
you shall please to lead Me. And to show how exactly applicable what I have
before said of your Books in general, is to your Reply above any in particular;
the first Observation I have to make is, that for what concerns the common
Cause of Religion in this first Article, you have entirely taken, or rather
indeed stolen it (since I do not remember that you have once mentioned your
Author) out of T. G's Discourse against Dr. Stillingfleet, and which that most
Learned Man had fully answered some Years since. And yet you neither take
notice of his Answers, nor offer any one thing to prevent the same Replies from
being made by me to the same Objections.

2. You begin your Vindic. p. 22.
Vindication with a scandalous Charge of Calumnies, Misrepresentations, etc.
This you persist in in your Reply p. 2.
Reply; and so does T. G's first Answ. Pref. page 3.
T. G. against his Adversary. He tells him how in the prosecution of his
Argument, he should be forced to lay open his frequent Contradictions,
Calumnies, and Misrepresentations: By which the Reader may now see that you
meant me no Harm in all these hard words against me; but you found them in your
Author, and you transcribed the railing with as little Judgment as you have
done the Reason of his Books. After this short and civil Preface, you tell Me,

3. Ad page 2.] Reply. That there was a time in which the Reply p. 2.
T. G's first Answ. Pre^. page 15.
Genuine Sons of the Church of England, excused the Roman Catholic Church of
that odious Imputation of Idolatry; and * SOME of them (never T. G' s secon^
Answ. p. 1^.
excommunicated nor censured by the Church of England for it) maintained, that
We cannot defend the Charge of Idolatry against the Church of Rome, without
denying that Church to be a true Church, and by Consequence without
contradicting our selves, and going against the intention of the Reformation,
which was not to make a new Church, but to restore a sick Church to its
Soundness, a corrupt Church to its Purity, etc. [See T. G. first Answer, Pref.
p. 7.]

Answ.] Had you but ingenuously owned from whence you had taken this Objection
against our Church, the Reader would presently have known whither to have gone
for the Confutation of it. But seeing you are resolved to make it your own, I
shall answer two things;

1st, That what you have said is false. 2dly, That you either did, or ought to
have known it to be so.
4. First, It is false that those whom from T. G. you are pleased to style the
Genuine Sons of the Church of England, have excused your Church of that odious
Imputation of Idolatry, or by consequence did think that we could not defend it
against you without contradicting our selves, and going against the intention
of the Reformation.

5. Your first Author is Dr. Jackson; and he so far from excusing you in this
Point, as you most wretchedly assert, that Dr. Jackson, see his Works, 3 vol.
Fol. Land. An. 1673.
in a set Discourse under this very Title, Tom. 1.
Of the Identity or Aequivalency of Superstition in Rome Heathen, and Rome
Christian, he spends above 17 Sheets on purpose to prove the Charge of Idolatry
upon you: and answers all your Evasions, by which you endeavor in vain to
clear your selves of the Guilt of it. The very Subject of his first Chapter is
to show, That Rome Christian in latter Years, sought rather to allay than to
abrogate the Idolatry of Rome Heathen; p. 933. In his 25th Chapter, having
mentioned that Conclusion of your Church, Page 946.
That Saints are to be worshipped with Religious Worship: He pronounces
Sentence against you in these very words, * This we say is formal Idolatry. The
Title of his 27th Chapter is positive, Ibid. p. 954.
That the same Expression of our respect or observance toward Saints or Angels
locally present, cannot without Superstition or Idolatry be made to them in
their Absence. And in the 28th Chapter, speaking of your form of commending a
departing Soul;

[ Ibid. p. 961.
Depart out of this World in the Name of God the Father Almighty who has
created thee, in the Name of Jesus Christ the Son of God, who suffered for
thee; in the Name of Breviarium Roman. de Ord. Commendationis animae Deo.
the Holy Ghost, who was poured forth upon thee; in the Name of Angels and
Archangels; in the Name of Thrones and Dominions; in the Name of
Principalities and Powers; in the Name of Cherubims and Seraphims; in the Name
of Patriarchs and Prophets; in the Name of Holy Apostles and Evangelists; in
the Name of Holy Martyrs and Confessors; in the Name of Holy Monks and
Hermites; in the Name of Virgins, and of all God's Saints and Saintesses; This
day let thy Soul be in Peace, and thy Habitation in Holy Sion.]

If (says he) thus they pray with their Lips only, they mock God as well as the
Saints. If thus they pray with internal Affection of Heart and Spirit, they
really worship Saints with the selfsame Honor wherewith they honor God --
They might with less Impiety admit a Christian Soul into the Church Militant,
than translate it into the Church Triumphant in other Names besides the
Trinity. They might better baptize them only in the Name of God the Father, and
of S. Francis, S. Benedict, and S. Dominick, etc. without any mention of God
the Son and Holy Ghost, rather than join these, as Commissioners with them in
dismissing Souls out of their Bodies. To censure this part of their Liturgy as
it deserves, it is no Prayer but a CHARM, conceived out of the Dregs and
Relics of HEATHENISH IDOLATRY, which cannot be brought forth but in
BLASPHEMY, nor be applied to any sick Soul without SORCERY See more in express
words, cap. 24. 8. p. 943. cap. 27. 2. p. 956. Tom. 1.
.

6. This is the first of our Churchmen that you say excused you from the
odious imputation of Idolatry. And since I perceive his Authority is of some
weight with you, as being one of the Genuine Sons of the Church of England,
which T. G. would not allow his Adversary, nor it may be will you therefore
esteem Me to be; I hope you will for his sake, who here charges your Offices
with CHARMS and SORCERY, as well as with Superstition and Idolatry, be from
henceforth a little more favorable to my Reflection on another occasion of
your Which he also in express words charges your Adoration of the Cross with,
cap. 24.. 4. p. 941. oper. Tom. 1.
MAGICAL INCANTATIONS.

7. I have been detained a little longer than I designed in this first Author;
but I will make amends for it, by referring you for the Dr. F^ILD. A. B. LAUD.
Dr. HEYLIN.
three next to the like account which See in the Preface to his first Book
concerning the Idolatry of the C. R. and his general Pref. to the several late
Treatises, etc. Land. 1673.
Dr. St. gave to your Friend T. G. from their own words: As for Mr. THORNDIKE.
Mr. Thorndyke, it is confessed he was once in the Opinion that you mention;
but you knew very well that he changed his Mind before his Death. You may see
by an Extract that has lately been Mr. Pulton considered. Land. 1687.
published out of his Will, what an ill Notion he had of your Church in
general, and for the Point before us, T. G's Reverend and Learned Adversary
eight Years ago published a Paper from Dr. Sti^ling. Conferences against T. G.
Land. 1679. page 89.
Mr. Thorndyke's own hand, in which, among other Exceptions against you, he
makes this his 12th: To pray to Saints departed for those things which only God
can give (AS ALL PAPISTS DO) is by the proper Sense of their words DOWNRIGHT
IDOLATRY. If they say their meaning is by a Figure, only to desire them to
procure their Requests of God; how dare any Christian trust his Soul with that
Church, which teaches that which must needs be IDOLATRY in all that understand
not the Figure.

8. Such was the last Judgment of this Learned and Pious Man in this matter. If
after this it be necessary to say any thing to his former Opinion; I will only
observe, that the ground of it was this Mistake, viz. Just Weights and
Measures, p. 6. Edit. Land. 1662. cap. 1.
That a Christian Church without renouncing the Profession of the true God,
cannot be guilty of IDOLATRY. Now this De Imag. lib. 2. cap. 24. page 2153.
Card. Bellarmine himself, and others of your Church, do utterly deny: For
(says he) it is Idolatry, not only when one adores an Idol leaving God, but
also when an Idol is adored together with God.

9. The last of your Divines whom you cite as excusing you from Idolatry, is
the Reverend Dr. HAMMOND Pract. Disc. Land. 1674. 44. p. 351. Sect. 50. p. 353,
354.
Dr. Hammond: but your falseness is as notorious in him as in all the rest. For
in a particular Discourse of Idolatry, 44. He approves and explains the design
of our Homilies against the peril of Idolatry:. 50. He says, That your
worshipping of Images in the most moderate way that can be, is for ought he
knows a kind of Idol-Worship, but to be sure a prohibited Act:. 54. That to put
up those Petitions to the Blessed Virgin which are terminated in her self,
Sect. 54. p. 354.
(as many Forms, if not her whole Office may appear to be) are Acts parallel to
the Old Idolatry.. 56. That your worshipping of Images, notwithstanding all
your distinctions of worshipping Sect. 56. p. 355.
God mediante Imagine, or relative, etc. is Idolatry.. 64. That Sect. 64. p.
357.
the Worship of the Bread in the Sacrament must certainly be Idolatry. That
your Error about Transubstantiation, and your good design of worshipping Christ
there may, he hopes, be some excuse for you; but that your Opinion will not
hinder it from being at least material Idolatry, and the worshipping of
something that is not God.

10. So that now upon the whole it remains, that there is not so much as a
shadow of Truth in your Assertion, that the true and genuine Sons of the Church
of England have excused your Church of the odious Imputation of Idolatry. My
next business is to show, that you did or ought to have known that there was
not one word of Truth in what you said.

11. Now this will depend upon the Answer which I shall leave any honest Man to
give to these two plain Questions. 1. Whether when you stole all this out of T.
G. you either did not, or ought not to have known, that Dr. St. had answered
all these Cavils many Years since, and shown that there was no Truth nor
Sincerity in them? 2. Whether a Man that quotes but six Authors for an
Assertion derogatory to the Establishment of their Church, and contrary to the
public Doctrine of the Homilies and Injunctions; and to the private Opinions
of the Generality of the Divines of it, ought not to have been sure that those
Authors at least did affirm that which he pretends they did? The latter of
these will conclude against you, that you ought to have known that what you
here say is false, because you ought to have examined these Authors, and then
you would have known it to be so. And for the former (were not your Conscience
unfit to be appealed to in a matter of Truth against your self) I durst appeal
to your own Soul, whether you did not know, that the Learned Man I have so
often mentioned, had shown T. G. how false these Pretenses were? But I go on
with you to your next Paragraph: where you tell Me,

12. Ad page 2.] Reply. You would gladly know, wherefore at this time I charge
you with the odious Imputation of adoring Men and Women, Crosses and Images,
etc.

Answ.] To satisfy you in which Demand, I reply, 1. That I charge you with
this, because it is true, and I have both shown it already, and will yet
farther show it to be so. 2. I do it at this time, because at this time you
have the Confidence to deny it, nay to charge us with Calumny, and
Misrepresentation for having ever accused you of it. So that your wise Question
is in effect but this; We the Vindicators and Representers of New Popery have
publicly exposed you to the World as a pack of Knaves, that have
misrepresented our Doctrine, and wherefore do you go about to vindicate your
selves, and not suffer us to make silly People believe in quiet that what we
say is true?

13. Ibid.] Reply. Where (say you) do I find any thing of this in the 39
Articles? and for the Book of Homilies, I must be little versed in our own
Doctrine not to know, that several eminent Divines of our own Church, do not
allow that Book to contain in every part of it the dogmatical Doctrine of the
Church of England [Thus T. G. speaks into your Mouth, and you, as his Engine,
echo them to us. T. G's first Answer to Dr. St. Pref. p. 8, 9.]

Answ.] Now to this you should have known that Dr St. gave this Answer. That
the Articles of our Church have confirmed Answer to several late Treatises; by
Dr. Still. Land. 1673. The general Preface.
those Homilies; That these Articles were not only allowed and approved by the
Queen, but subscribed by the whole Clergy in Convocation, Anno. 1571. Now (says
the Dean) I desire T. G. to resolve me whether Men of any common understanding
would have subscribed to this Book of Homilies in this manner, if they had
believed the main Doctrine and design of one of them had been false and
pernicious, as they must have done, if they had thought the Practice of the
Roman Church to be free from Idolatry. I will put the Case that any of the
Bishops then had thought that the Charge of Idolatry had been unjust, and that
it had subverted the Foundation of Ecclesiastical Authority: that there could
have been no Church or Right of Ordination, if the Roman Church had been guilty
of Idolatry; would they have inserted this into the Articles when it was in
their power to have left it out? And that the Homilies contained a wholesome and
Godly Doctrine, which in their Consciences they believed to be false and
pernicious? I might as well think that the Council of Trent would have allowed
Calvin's Institutions as containing a wholesome and Godly Doctrine, as that Men
so persuaded would have allowed it the Homily against the Peril of Idolatry.

14. For your Objection from T. G' s first Answer to Dr. Still. Pref. page 9,
10.
T. G. That several eminent Divines of our Church, do not allow that Book to
contain in every part of it the public dogmatical Doctrine of the Church of
England; and three of whose Names (from * T. G. still) you adorn your Margin
with. He answers, Dr. Still. ibid.
Be it so: Surely there is a great deal of difference, between some particular
Passages and Expressions in these Homilies, and that which is the main Design
and Foundation of one of them. But in this case we are to observe, that they
who deny the Church of Rome to be guilty of Idolatry, do not only look on the
Charge as false, but as of dangerous consequence, and therefore although Men may
subscribe to a Book in general as containing wholesome and Godly Doctrine, tho
they be not so certain of the Truth of every Passage in it, yet they can never
do it with a good Conscience, if they believe any great and considerable part
of the Doctrine therein contained to be false and dangerous.

15. Thus did this Reverend Person confute your Oracle: If you had offered any
thing to prevent the same Answer from being returned to you, I should have been
far from complaining against you for advancing of an old Argument with new
Strength: But when you saw how unable See Dr. Still. Conferences against T. G.
p. 22, etc.
T. G. was to defend these Cavils, nevertheless still to produce them; and tho
you could not but be conscious to your self at the same time that they were not
to be maintained; I shall only say, that it serves to convince me of the Truth
of what an ancient Greek Poet once observed, and the meaning of whose words you
may enquire among the Learned at your leisure; (...).

16. Ad page 3.] Reply. Your next Paragraph consists of a Story of Q.
Elizabeth, and that too echoed form T. G's Inspiration: T. G's Dialogues
against Dr. Still. p. 17.
But to this I have already returned my Answer, and when you shall think fit to
speak out what you mean by it, you shall not fail of a farther Consideration
from me, if I be not prevented by your receiving it from a more proper hand.

17. And thus have we done with what concerns the general Cause, in this
Introduction; and the Sum of all is this; That of four Paragraphs of which it
consists; the first is Calumny; the second false (and I am reasonably persuaded
known by you to be so): the third impertinent, and long since answered (as was
also the foregoing) by the Reverend Dr. St. the last seditious: I go on to the
following part of this first Article, to examine what relates to my self in it.

18. Where first you except against my quoting your particular Authors to find
out your Churches meaning, and call it Calumny, tho what Calumny it is to say
that those Authors, whom you cannot deny but that I truly cite, have expounded
your Churches Sense otherwise than you and some others do, I cannot imagine:
But however you tell us;

Ad p. 3, 4. Reply.] That you have nothing to do with the Doctrine of the
Schools: That I must take your Doctrine from your Councils; the public,
authentic, and universally recieved Definitions and Decisions of the Church.

Answ.] And in this you still follow your old Guide T. G. Dial. against Dr.
Still. p. 56, 57.
T. G. But I have First Part Preface.
already shown you the weakness of this Pretense; and for your next supposal
that even those Authors do not say what I affirm they do, if your Proofs are as
convincing as your Assertion is confident, I have already promised you all you
can desire, That I will not fail to confess that you deserve not so ill a
Character as I thought. Repl. p. 4.


Ad page 4.] Reply. Your next Paragraph charges me with UNSINCERITY in stating
the Question betwixt Catholics (as you call them) and Protestants, for that I
represented you as allowing us to hold the ancient and undoubted Foundation of
the Christian Faith.

Answ.] And is it not the ancient and undoubted Foundation of the Christian
Faith which we hold, and which has been delivered down to us in those very
Creeds which your selves profess, and into the Faith of which you still baptize
your Children? Nay, do not you your self confess this to be true in the very
place where you cavil against me for this Assertion Vindic. Art. 1. p. 24.
Vindic. p. 24. where you grant, that what we hold is the ancient and undoubted
Foundation, and only deny that it is entirely so? And again, in this very Reply
in which you repeat your Accusation; Reply, Art. 1. page 4.
P. 4. I told him (say you) that we do not allow that Proposition, ESPECIALLY
IF HE MEAN all Fundamentals. So that then the Unsincerity lies not in my saying
that what we hold is fundamental; for this you tell me (Vindicat. p. 24.) NO
BODY EVER DENIED, but for pretending that you allowed that we held ALL which
you esteemed to be fundamental. Now for this I must observe,

1st, That you dare not say positively that I affirmed any such thing, Reply;
See before.
I told him (say you) that we do not allow that Proposition, IF he mean ALL
Fundamentals. So that you positively charge me with Unsincerity for pretending
that you granted what you do not, upon supposition that I MEANT any such thing.

2dly, That to make something of this charge, you are forced to go back from
your own Concession: For whereas in your Vindication you had said plainly, that
tho you do not allow us Vindic. p. 24.
to hold all Fundamentals, yet no body ever denied that we held some of them;
here you clap in an Insinuation even against this too: I told him that we do
not allow. that they hold the ancient Reply p. 3.
and undoubted Foundation; ESPECIALLY, if he meant ALL Fundamentals. So that
tho you do deny it ESPECIALLY if we mean ALL Fundamentals, yet you do not
altogether allow even that what we hold is fundamental.

But, 3dly, Where at last do you find that I ever said, that you granted that
we held ALL which you esteem to be fundamental? In my Exposition, I tell you,
in the very next words to those you cavil at, that this was the thing to be put
upon the issue; Whether those Articles which you had added to this ancient and
undoubted Foundation as Superstructures to it, Expos. C. E. p. 5.
were not so far from being NECESSARY Articles of Religion, as YOU PRETEND,
that they indeed overthrow that Faith which is on both sides allowed to be
Divine. And when in your Vindication you first made this little Exception; I
again repeated it in these very words, which you take no notice of in your
Reply: But the Vindicator, jealous for the Defen. of the Expos. p. 5.
Authority of his Church, and to have whatsoever she proposes pass for
fundamental, confesses that we do indeed hold a PART, but not ALL those
Articles that are fundamental. THIS therefore must be put upon the issue. -- So
that whereas you accuse me of perverting the Bishop of Meaux's Sense, it is
indeed you that have (I fear wilfully) perverted mine. What I said, both of you
acknowledge, viz. that what we hold is the ancient and undoubted Truth; and you
cannot deny the State of the Question to be just as I have said, Whether what
you farther advance, and what we reject, be not so far from being Fundamental
Truth, that it is indeed no Truth at all, but rather contrary to, and
destructive of that Truth which is on both sides allowed to be Divine?

20. Ad p. 5.] Reply. But you go yet farther in this Point against me; and
accuse me in the next place of perverting your own Sense too, by saying that
you confess that those Articles which you hold, and we contradict, do by
evident and undoubted Consequence destroy those Truths that are on both sides
agreed to be fundamental. And you wonder with what Spectacles I read this.

Answ.] The Spectacles I use are p'ain Honesty and plain Reason; if you have
better, I envy you not. In stating the Question between us, I said Expos. C. E.
p. 5. Def. p. 5.
the thing to be put upon the issue was, Whether those Additions which the
Church of Rome has made to the ancient and undoubted faith, were not so far
from being Fundamental Truths, that they do, even by your own Confession,
overthrow those Truths that are on both sides allowed to be Fundamental? This
you deny you ever said, and yet in the very next word^ you confess the
contrary: Reply p. 5. Vindicat. p. 23.
It Is true (say you) I tell him, that were the Doctrines and Practices which HE
ALLEGES the plain and confessed Doctrines and Practices of the Church of Rome,
he would have reason to say that they contradict our Principles: But I tell him
also that we renounce these Doctrines and Practices. But this is not now the
Question, whether you renounce these Doctrines and Practices or no: Did not you
confess that those Doctrines which I charge you with do overthrow the Truths
that are on both sides allowed to be Divine? This you cannot, nay you do not
deny: And this was what I asserted, and for which you most injuriously accuse
me of perverting your Sense. As to your denial of these things, that I have
already show to be a groundless Pretense, and shall yet farther prove you to
be as guilty of prevaricating in your Evasion, as it is evident you have been
in your accusing of me.

21. Ibid.] For the Parallel you add between our charging you as guilty of
Idolatry upon the account of your Worship, and the Fanatick's Clamours against
us for our Ceremonies, and against the Justice of which you think we have
little to say, it still more confirms me that the ancient Poet I before
mentioned was a wise Man: For after so full a Confutation as has been given to
this Parallel by Answer to the Amicable Accommodation -- The View of the whole
Controversy, etc.
two several Hands, for you to presume still to say, that we have little to
reply to it; this would certainly have made any other Creature in the World
blush, but a Man that has taken his leave of Modesty.

22. Ad page 6.] For your last little Reflection, which you have dubbed with
the Title of Protestant Charity and Moderation; I shall only tell you, that to
charge you with adoring Men and Women, Crosses, Images and Relics, is no more
a breach of Charity, than it would be to charge a Man with Murder or Theft whom
I actually saw killing his Neighbor, or stealing away his Goods. If you are
indeed guilty of doing this, it is Charity to admonish those of their danger,
whom you might otherwise ensnare by your confident denying of it. But the truth
is, it is the Justice of this Reflection that so much troubles you: and you
could be well enough content we should accuse you of doing this, if you could
but find out any means to prevent our proving of it.

The ANSWER to the SECOND ARTICLE.
That Religious Worship terminates ultimately in God alone.

1. AD p. 6.] Reply. In the beginning of this Article you seem a little
concerned that I took no more notice of what you had said in your Vindication,
concerning your Distinctions of Religious Worship: You pretend that I did not
do it, because if I had, all my Quotations out of your Liturgies would have
signified just nothing; neither could I have made so plausible an Excuse for my
Calumnies and Falsifications: And you conjure me not to obstruct the Hopes of a
Christian Unity by a future Misapplication of these Terms.

2. Answ.] It is perhaps none of the least Instances of that Perplexity, into
which Sin and Error commonly lead those who have been involved in them, to
consider what a multiplicity of obscure and barbarous Terms the Iniquity of
these latter Ages has invented to confound those things, which are otherwise in
themselves of the greatest Clearness and Evidence. Whilst Men kept to that
Primitive Rule of the Gospel, Mat. iv. 10.
Thou shall worship the Lord thy God, and him ONLY shall thou serve; the Law
was simple and easy, and there was no need of any Distinctions, either to
excuse or to condemn the Worship of any other besides him. The Command was so
plain, that the Devil himself had nothing to say to it: As for the Sophistry we
are now to encounter, (and by which you would have been able to have taken that
offer which our Savior refused, and yet have salved your Conscience of any
breach of the Precept too) he was either yet to learn it, or else it appeared
to him so thin and contemptible, that however he has since inspired others with
it, yet he was ashamed himself to insist upon it. But however, seeing Men's
words are their own, and let them express their Conceptions after what manner
they please, it is enough for us that we understand their meaning; I shall
content my self to draw up a short Summary of what you here offer, and which
indeed is all that your Party has to insist upon on this occasion, and we shall
hereafter see when you come to the Application of these Distinctions, whether
there be any thing in them to excuse you of that Guilt we here charge you with.

3. But before I enter upon this Enquiry, I cannot but observe the Change you
make in the Title of this Article. Hitherto we have had it in these words,
Monsieur de M. Expos. Art. 3. Vindic. Art. 2.
Religious Worship is terminated only in God: Now you add another Restriction,
Reply, Art. 2.
That Religious Worship terminates ultimately in God alone: By which you would
seem to imply, that Religious Worship may terminate upon the Objects to which
you pay it, as Saints or Angels; (and wherein you certainly depart from your
own and the Bishop of Meaux's former Principle) but that ultimately it must end
in God alone. But the truth is, ( Answer to Papists Protesting, p. 29, etc.
Sect. III.
what you have been already told) all Worship does properly terminate in the
Object to which it is given. You may honor a Saint for God's Sake, and it is
an honor to God by accident so to do: but when all is done, still the proper
Honor that is given to the Saint terminates in him, and does not pass to any
other. And this you must confess, unless you will spoil all your own
Distinctions. For whatever the Honor be that you give to the Saints, either it
must finally terminate in them, and then your new Addition is useless; or if it
pass on to God, you must either dishonor God if you give him such an inferior
Honor as you do the Saints, and which is altogether unsuitable to his infinite
Nature and Majesty; or if you give the Saints the same Honor you do God, then
you raise them up into a state above the condition of mere Creatures, and so
yet more dishonor God, by setting up Competitors with him in his Service. So
that then your new modelling of this Position will stand you in no stead: and
you must after all say, either that no Religious Honor must be given to any
other but God, (as our Savior has declared, and as we affirm) if you do truly
believe that all Religious Honor ought to terminate in Him alone; or you must
confess, that Religious Worship may be terminated, and that ultimately, upon
the Creature; which indeed your Practice shows you do believe, and for which we
justly accuse you of Idolatry.

4. But we will examine your own Scheme, that so we may the better understand
your Pretenses. And,

Ad Page 7, 8.] Reply. 1st, As to the words (you say) That Honor, and Worship,
and Adoration, may admit of different Senses, and according to them be
differently applied. There is a Divine Worship proper to God, and there is a
Civil Worship that is paid to Men; and a Dulia, or inferior sort of Religious
Worship, that you give to Saints Angels, and Holy Things. 2dly, That as to the
outward Actions of the Body, whether Bowing, Kneeling, etc. there may be a
difference in these two; they being not so appropriated to God, but that they
may be paid to the Creature also. That therefore, 3dly, both the Actions and
Expressions are to be distinguished, according to the Excellency of the Object
on which they are terminated. If the Excellency be natural, or naturally
acquired; then the Honor that is paid is Civil or Humane. If it be
Supernatural, then the Honor is Religious. And this Religious Honor is either
a Sovereign Honor proper to God alone, called Latria; Or it is Inferior, and
of which there are several degrees according to the several measures in which
God bestows his supernatural Gifts upon his Servants; and is that you call
Dulia. And this inferior religious Honor may be paid, not only to rational
Natures, but sometimes also to inanimate Things.

5. Answ.] This I think is the sum of what you desire me to take notice of; and
I will now return you a few general Reflections upon it. And,

1st, Though we are contented to take all these hard words in your own Sense,
yet I must observe to prevent any misapplication of them to the Passages of
either Holy Scripture, or Primitive Antiquity, before St. Austin's Time. That
for what concerns the Hebrew Phrases of the Old Testament, by which this
Worship is expressed, they are all of them promiscuous, and indifferently used
with reference both to God and the Creatures. But now with the Greek Phrases in
the New Testament it is otherwise. One of them indeed, viz. that from whence
you derive your term Dulia, is ambiguous; but for the other two, (...) and Mat.
18. 26.
(...), the former is never at all, the latter never but once, and that too in
a parabolical sentence, applied to any other Worship than that of God only; not
to any Humane or Civil respect.

2dly, As to the distinction you make between Civil and Religious Honor
properly so called, we readily embrace it: and we do confess, that the
difference must be taken from the diversity of excellency in the Objects on
which they are terminated. Reply, p. 7.
From which we infer, that there must be therefore the same proportion between
Civil and Religious Worship, as there is between God and Men. Seeing then there
can be no Analogy between these two, neither can there be any between the
Worship that is paid to the One, and to the Other. By consequence, that
properly speaking, there can be no other Honor attributed to a Creature but
what is Civil, and which must be diversified, according to the different
Excellencies of those to whom it is given. And this you your self allow in your
Vindication, [p. 28, 29.] where you declare that this Honor is but an
extrinsecal Denomination from the Cause and Motive, not from the Nature of the
Act; and that you do renounce any other sort of Religious Worship which is so
from the Nature of the Act, and by consequence only due to God. And here again
in your Reply you found the Appellation of Religious Honor with reference to
the Saints, either upon the Motive of it, which is religious; or, Ibid. p. 8.
because it ultimately refers to God, for whose sake, and upon account of whose
Gifts we honor them. Now taking this then to be not only your own private
Opinion, but the Sense of your Church; and that you may see, I desire to close
as far as possibly I can with your Notions, I add,

3dly, That as to the first of these, The Religious Motive; We are content in
this respect to allow the denomination of Religious Worship to others besides
God. Such is the Honor we render to our Parents, to Civil Magistrates, etc.
upon the account of God's Command so to do. And thus the two terms of Civil and
Religious are not opposite, but coordinate, and consistent with one another.
Secondly, For the other Grounds on which you call this Honor, Religious,
namely upon the account of those Supernatural Gifts or Excellencies which God
has bestowed upon his Creatures; We are ready to allow of this too. And thus we
confess, that the Honor which we, as well as you, pay to the Saints, may be
called Religious; when we bless God for their Excellencies, and pray to him for
Grace to follow their Examples. We never denied but that godly and religious
Men were to be reverenced, not only for their other Qualities, but yet more
especially for their Sanctity and Devotion. But then,

4thly, As for Religious Honor properly so called, and as it respects not
merely the Religious Motive, or the Supernatural Gifts which God has bestowed
upon his Servants, but the very Nature and Quality of the Act it self; such
Acts by which we pay not only all that worship which may be due to the
Excellencies of a pure Creature, but the proper Exercises of Religion, as
Prayer, Confession, and such like; and these with all the Circumstances of a
proper, religious Worship; in the House of God, in the midst of his Solemn
Service; it may be in the same Breath and Form in which we address to the
Creator; this is that religious Worship which we constantly affirm, and which
you your self confess may not without impiety be given to any but God only; and
it is for this we charge you with that, which by your own acknowledgment none
of your Distinctions reach to, nor will therefore excuse you of, viz. Idolatry.

5thly, As for the outward Expressions of this Honor by bodily Actions, as
Bowing, Kneeling, Prostrating, etc. these we confess are ambiguous, and must be
determined by the other Circumstances. But then we deny that they are to be
interpreted merely according to the intention of him that performs them. There
is an External Adoration, which no Internal Act of the Understanding or Will
can excuse, if it be applied to any besides God. Such as is performed with
those Circumstances of a Religious Worship before mentioned, as to Time, Place,
Words, and the like. In short, it is, we say, Idolatry by any External Act
whatsoever, to show that we do attribute Religious Honor to any other but God
alone.

6thly, And for the rest, we do affirm, That there are some other kind of
External Actions so peculiarly appropriate to God, that they cannot without
Idolatry be attributed to any other. Such as, 1st, Sacrifice Bp of Meaux's
Expos. Sect. III. p. 4.
, by your own Confession: See this prosecuted at large in Dr. Still. first
Answer to T. G. p. 190, to 283.
to which I will, 2dly, add all those other things of the like kind which God
appropriated to himself under the Law; as Religious Adoration, Erection of
Temples and Altars, Burning of Incense in token of Divine Worship, Solemn
Invocation, and Vows; in all which neither our Savior nor his Apostles having
made the least alteration, we ought certainly (as both the Jews and Primitive
Christians most undoubtedly did) to esteem them still his own peculiar
Prerogative.

Having thus established in General our Notion of Religious Worship; let us see
if any of these Distinctions will (as you pretend) excuse you of that
imputation which has been laid upon you.

ANSWER TO THE THIRD ARTICLE, OF THE INVOCATION of SAINTS.
IN the beginning of this Article I cannot but acknowledge Reply, p. 10.
a commendable Endeavor in you to clear the true State of the Question betwixt
us: And tho I am not absolutely of your mind, nor do I see any Cause for your
Supposal that Mr. P. 11.
Thorndyke spoke the Sense of the Church of England in every one of those
Particulars mentioned by you in Order thereunto, yet I will not enter into any
Controversy with you about them.

1. And first, Be it allowed that the Words Prayer, Invocation, Calling upon,
Address, etc. are or may be Equivocal; i. e. (as that Learned Man phrases it)
that we may make use of the same Expressions in signifying our Requests to God
and to Man; tho yet for the two first of these, viz. Prayer and Invocation,
they are seldom Applied to any Other than a Religious Sense. This T. G. long
since observed, and you have now borrowed it from Him; and you may make what
use of this Remark you please in managing of this Controversy.

2. We do not deny but that we ought to Honor the Saints departed, as well as
Holy Men upon Earth; Only we desire that that Honor be such as becomes them to
receive, and us to pay. We honor them when we praise, and much more when we
follow their Faith and Patience. And because the Reason and End of this Honor
is Religious, you may without being contradicted by me call the Honor it self
Religious too; seeing you explain your self to mean no more by it, than an an
External Denomination from the Cause and Motive, but not Vind. p. 28, 29.
from the Nature of the Act its self.

3. Nor will I dispute with you, lastly, Whether the Saints in Happiness do not
in General pray for the Church Militant: For it is to as little purpose to deny
what cannot be disproved, as to affirm what one cannot prove. I have as great
an Honor as any Man for Mr. Thorndyke's Memory; but yet I cannot see the Proof
even of this in those Scriptures which (as you say) He proves it by. Some
Fathers I know have said Reply, P. 11.
so; but their saying it is not to Me a sufficient Proof of a Point of
Doctrine. When all is done, the Congruity of the thing is the best that can be
brought for it. And if upon this account you are resolved to call them
Advocates or Intercessors between God and us, you will I hope excuse me if I do
Ibid.
not comply with you in it. That they are full of Charity toward us who are
Members of the same Body with them, I make not the least Question: But how they
express it I do not certainly know, because many Particulars there are from
whence such a Matter is to be concluded, which are all hidden from my
Knowledge. One thing I know, That we have a Mediator at the Right Hand of God,
who knows all our Wants, which I see no reason to believe the greatest Saint in
Heaven does. I am likewise assured that his Right to intercede for us is
founded upon the Sacrifice of his Death. And since the Gospel gives this Honor
and Prerogative to Him ONLY, to appear in the Presence of God for us, I shall
never whilst I live help forward an Ambiguity in those Titles, of a Mediator
with God, or an Advocate with the Father, or an Intercessor in Heaven, by
attributing of them to any Saint whatsoever. These Expressions so applied are
dangerous, and scandalous; and it is but a frivolous Pretense for the doing of
it, that possibly the Saints may do something for us in Heaven, upon the
account of which the Titles of our Redeemer may in some sense be given to them.

2. As for the State of the Question which you next propose, you should know by
this time that we are by no Means Reply, p. 11.
agreed that the only thing in dispute betwixt us is, Whether it be lawful for
us to Pray to the Saints that they would Pray for us? and, Whether such kind of
Addresses as these are of such a Nature as to make Gods (for so you tell me I
very disrespectfully Ibid.
call them; tho I believe you will find it is your Misrepresenter's Phrase, and
not Mine) of Men and Women. You do indeed with your Guides T. G. and the Bishop
of Meaux tell us, that all the Prayers of your Church, be their Words never so
repugnant, must yet be reduced to this sense, PRAY FOR US: But you have often
been told, that this is utterly disallowed by us. However, to take off all
occasion of Cavil, as far as is possible, I will offer you the State of the
Question in such Terms as you shall have no just cause to except against it;
viz.

Whether it be Lawful to pray to the Saints, after the manner that is at this
day prescribed and practiced in the Church of Rome?

And I will so far comply with you, as to consider it in both respects: 1.
According to your own Representation of it: 2. According to that which is
indeed your Practice, and fre^ly acknowledged by the greatest Men of your
Church to be so.

I. POINT.
Whether it be Lawful to pray to the Saints, to PRAY FOR US?

3. This is the least that can possibly be made of this Matter: And because I
would bring the Point to the fairest Issue that may be, as I have proposed the
Question according to your own desire, so I will dispute it with you upon your
own Principles.

4. And first; for what concerns the Terms of the Question, they are exactly
taken from your own Words: You tell us in your Vindication, that all you say
is, That it is Vindic. p. 30.
LAWFUL to Pray to the Saints; and here in your Reply, That the Difference
between us is Whether it be LAWFUL Reply, p. 11.
for us to Pray to them? In which yet you seem to fall a little below even the
Bishop of Meaux Himself, who tells us, That your Church teaches that it is
PROFITABLE at least Exposit. Sect. IV. p. 5.
to Pray to them. But however such is our Security according to Both of you,
that neither You nor He care to say it is our Duty so to do, or that we run any
Danger in the neglect of it. Whatever therefore be the Issue of this Dispute,
it is wholly your Concern to look to it; thus much we are Agreed in, That there
is no Sin in our Omission. For where there is no Law, there is no Transgression.

5. But I will now presume to go farther: And since you dare not say that such
an Invocation is Necessary, I will undertake to affirm, that neither is it
Profitable, nor indeed Lawful, but utterly forbidden. And for proof of this, I
shall lay down no Other Foundation than what you have your self established;
viz. That Religious Honor or Worship may be taken in a double Sense: First,
Strictly, and so is due Only See Vidicat. p. 27.
to God: Secondly, More largely, and so may be paid to Creatures. And what you
mean by these Terms, you thus more fully express: That by Religious Honor in
this latter Ibid. p. 28, 29.
sense, and as you apply it to the Saints, you understand only an Honor so
called by an extrinsecal Denomination from the CAUSE and MOTIVE, but not from
the NATURE of the ACT it self. That is such an Honor as may be in it self
Civil, and is only CALLED Religious because it is done for God's sake, and in
Obedience to God's Commands. But for a strict and proper Religious Worship,
such as is in its own Nature so, this you confess with us to be due to God
ONLY. From whence I conclude, That to give such a Worship to any Creature, must
be to pay that Service to the Creature which is due only to the Creator; and
that is, in Our Sense, to Commit Idolatry.

6. And now from this Principle which you have your self laid down, and which
you think will be alone sufficient to Vindic. p. 28.
Answer all Objections brought against your Doctrine; I take leave to infer,
That if even such an Invocation as you confess you pay to the Saints, be
strictly a Religious Honor, in the very Nature of the Act it self, and not
barely by an Extrinsecal Denomination from the Cause and Motive of it; it will
then remain that you are guilty in this Service of giving that Worship to the
Saints which is due only to God, and are by Consequence therein guilty of
Idolatry And this I shall show,

I. From the very Nature of the Act it self. II. From the Circumstances of it.
I. That the very Nature of the Act it self of Invocating the Saints, does
show, that it is strictly and properly a Religious Worship.

7. This is what I know Monsieur de Meaux denies: He tells us, That when you
pray to the Saints, you do it in the same Expos. Artic. IV.
Spirit of Charity, and according to the same Order of Brotherly Society, which
moves us to demand Assistance of our Brethren living upon Earth. Thus he
smooths your Invocation of Saints departed, to make it lie even with our
desires of one another prayers. But did he in good earnest believe, that
nothing but a Spirit of Charity, and the Order of Brotherly Society, is to be
discerned in the Act of calling upon departed Saints to pray for us? We have
indeed that Charity for them, as to believe, that they have Charity for us: and
though they are highly advanced above us, we yet take them to be our Brethren.
But is this all that is implied in the Act of calling upon them to pray for us?
For my part, I cannot but believe, that Monsieur de Meaux himself was sensible
of a vast difference in the Case, as appears by his endeavoring to blind it
afterward. And I shall now offer some Reasons, that may perhaps convince
others, as they have fully satisfied my self about it.

8. For 1. If the Nature of that Act of Invoking the Saints in Heaven, be the
same with that of desiring my Christian Brother to pray for me upon Earth, then
on the other hand this is also of the same Nature with that. And by
consequence, I may as well fall down upon my Knees here in London, and desire
my Christian Brother, who is now, it may be, in Japan, or somewhere in the East
Indies, or perhaps on his return homewards, to pray for me, as do the like to
S. Peter or S. Paul, who, for any thing I can tell, are at a vastly greater
distance from me, than my Friend upon Earth is. But if there be something more
than a Spirit of Charity, or an acknowledgment of Brotherhood, in calling upon
my living friend, who is out of all natural distance of hearing, there is also
something more than this in calling upon the dead, who it may be are a thousand
times farther from me, than the living can be from one another. Would not such
an Invocation of my Friend, think you, suppose him to be more than a Brother,
or a Man? Would not the Nature of the Act ascribe to him not only the praise of
Charity, but likewise the power of hearing and knowing all that is said upon
Earth, at any distance whatsoever? I grant, that if this were indeed no more
than according to the Order of Fraternal Society; neither would it be any more
than so for you to call upon the Saints deceased to pray for you. But if the
former would be more, when you have said all that you can, the latter must
necessarily be so too: And you do thereby Elevate the Saints above the
condition of Creatures. For whether you believe them to be Omnipresent or not,
the very Act of invoking them indifferently in any place, and their being
called upon in several places at the same time, does imply their Omnipresence,
unless you could give us some other ground of certainty, that they hear you,
besides this, that wherever they are when they are spoken to, and wherever you
are when you speak to them, it is all one, they do as surely know what you say,
as if they stood within the common distance of hearing. Now that Action, which
in the very Nature of it ascribes an Immensity of presence to the Object, about
which it is conversant, is religious in the very Nature of the Act. And then I
leave it to you to determine whether it be Idolatrous or not, if it be paid to
any thing that is not God. But,

9. Secondly, If you are not yet satisfied, I would desire to know, whether
prayer to God, which you will not deny to be in its own Nature a religious Act,
be not so upon this account as well as others, that it is an Acknowledgment of
his Immense Presence. But how is it such an acknowledgment, otherwise than as
we do in all places, and at all times call upon him. Since therefore you do in
all places, and at all times call upon the Saints as well as upon God, I pray
tell us why this Invocation should not also be in its own Nature religious
Worship. If you allow this, then you have already passed sentence upon your
self: If you do not, I should be glad you would find a little leisure to show
us the difference. This is an Argument that has been often enough urged to be
taken notice of; and if you shall still go on to say nothing to it, we shall
conclude the reason to be, that indeed you have nothing to object against it.

10. And what I have now said of this Invocation, upon the account of the
distance of the Saints from us, that they are now out of the compass of all
Civil Commerce; and therefore to pray to them must be properly a Religious
Worship, will be yet further confirmed, Thirdly, by another of your practices;
in that your Church allows not only Vocal, but even Mental Prayer to be made to
them. Now this can be no Act of Civil Honor, seeing no creature, such as Man
(the Object of all Civil Honor) is, can be capable of searching the Heart, so
as to find out the secrets of it. For God, even God only knows the secrets 1
Kings VIII. 31.
of all the Children of Men. And therefore to pray in our minds to the Saints,
to offer up the secret aspirations of our Souls, in Honor to any Creature,
this must be an Act of Religious Worship, and such therefore as by your own
acknowledgment is due to God only.

11. Now that you could not be ignorant of these things, and by consequence are
the more inexcusable in this your Worship, appears from what Monsieur de Meaux
has told us; viz. That by addressing Prayers to the Saints, and honoring
Expos. Sect. IV.
them all the World over as present, you do not attribute to them a certain
kind of Immensity, nor the Knowledge of the Secrets of the Heart, which God has
reserved to Himself; seeing it is manifest, that to say a Creature may have the
Knowledge of these things by a Light communicated to Him by God, is not to
elevate a Creature above his Condition. Thus he gives that to the Saints in the
Close, which He denied in the Beginning. They have not a kind of Immensity, nor
do they know the Secrets of our Hearts; No, by no means, for that is necessary
to be said to save your selves from giving Divine Honor to the Saints: But for
all that they have the Knowledge of these things by a Light communicated to
them by God; and this is also necessary to be said, to save your Invocation of
them from being a foolish and absurd Devotion. And for the same reason he
supposed before, that some Grounds, which He would not examine, might be had to
attribute to the Saints some certain Degree of Knowledge as to those things
that are acted amongst us, as also of our secret Thoughts. Thus he doubles, and
treads with fear, like a Man that has lost his Way in a dark Night, and is
afraid of a Ditch every Step he takes. To say that the Saints know All our
Wants and Desires, and the Secrets of our Hearts, is to give them a certain
kind of Immensity which He dares not say they have; and therefore those Words
are slipped in, that some Grounds may be had to attribute to them a certain
Degree of Knowledge, as to these things. Now a certain Degree of Knowledge,
seems not to be a certain kind of Immensity; and so you are for a while safe on
that side. Well, but a certain Degree of Knowledge as to these things, will not
serve to make all the Prayers of All Men, at any time, and in any place, to
this or that Saint, wise and profitable Prayers. For a certain Degree is but a
Degree; And to answer all that is, or that you would have to be done in this
kind, nothing will serve but a certain kind of Immensity. And therefore on the
Other hand, a Creature may have the Knowledge of these things, i. e. of ALL
these things. So that now the Prayers are profitable again; but then what shall
we do to keep off Immensity from being attributed to the Creature? He has a
Trick for that, and it is this; viz. That this kind of Immensity or Knowledge
of all Prayers that are or can be any where offered to them, is communicated to
them by God, and as long as God has made them thus immense, we may do so too.

12. And thus he represents the Saints as Dii facti, Made Gods, and that by the
Almighty himself; which being done with respect to Omnipresence, may, whenever
a wretched Cause requires it, be done as well with respect to Omnipotence, and
all the other Divine Perfections; and in one word leads to such Consequences,
as cannot but stir up the Indignation of all good Men. Nothing should be
maintained in the Minds of Christian People with more care than the distinct
Notion they ought to have of God and his Creatures. But your Doctrine and
Practice in this kind does so confound these Apprehensions of the One and the
Other, that they cannot tell what Prerogative, as to the matter of hearing
Prayers, God has above his Saints; since they hear all, as well as He. Prayer
to God every where is that which principally supports in the Minds of Men the
apprehension of his being every where present: And tho much of it is due to the
natural Impressions which God has left of himself in our Souls, yet the
Reflections we make upon it, are chiefly owing to the frequent Addresses we make
every where, publicly and privately, to the Invisible Being, the Lord of All,
of whom we have some knowledge by Nature, and more by Christian Instruction.
But when Prayer is made to other Invisible Beings as generally as to God, how
can it be otherwise, but that the People should conceive them to be as
Omnipresent as God himself is? Especially if it be considered, that when their
Educated and Philosophical Men, come to vindicate their Practice and Doctrine
from this imputation, they cannot so much as speak sense about it, but with all
their Art, talk more meanly and confusedly than mere Nature would instruct an
Honest man to do. The difference between the People and the blind guides on the
one side, and between the Seers on the other, being only this, That the
Worship, and the Notions of the former go together, and are of a piece; but the
latter, with as bad a Worship, have better Notions; and give that Honor to the
Saints by their Practice, which their Notions (as they would have us think at
least) deny to them. But for that reason they are the more to blame; and tho
their Idolatry be not so gross as the Peoples, yet it is more inexcusable.

13. And yet if we may judge of their thoughts by their words, some of the
refined Controvertists do not come much behind the Common People in this
stupidity. If they think otherwise than they say, they are to answer to God for
that too. Cardinal Bellarmine, and others, who had none of these De Cultu
(...). lib. iii. c. 9.
Expounding designs to carry on, speak out freely, and tell us, that the Saints
are Dii per participationem, God's by participation; and upon that account he
justifies the Practice of the Church of Rome, in swearing by them, and making
Vows to them. Nor Expos.. IV. p. 7.
indeed do I see how that differs very much from Monsieur de Meaux's giving
them the Knowledge which the hearing of all Prayers requires, as by a light
communicated to them by God. For what is that but to say, that God has (in
effect) made them partakers of his Immensity? Nay, the Representer (if we may
conclude any thing from his arguing) seems plainly to yield, that the Saints
have a Natural Knowledge of our Prayers: For (says Part 1.. ii. p. 3.
he) Abraham heard the Petition of Dives, who was yet at a greater distance
from him (than the Saints are from us), even in Hell: and told him likewise the
manner of his living whilst as yet on Earth. Nay, since it is generally allowed,
that the very Devils hear those desperate Wretches who call on them, why should
we doubt that the Saints want this privilege?

14. No wonder therefore if Bellarmine makes a greater difference between the
Prayers to the Saints, and our desires of good men's Prayers upon Earth, than
Monsieur de Meaux seems willing to acknowledge; and looks upon it to be a
Worship due to them, thus (in the words of your Synod of Trent) suppliantly to
call upon them: For what can be more reasonable than Conc. Trid. Sess. ult.
to esteem that Prayer, the Invocation of Suppliants, and the Worship of
Invocation, which is made with such deference of respect from the very Nature
of the Act, as is due to God the only Omnipresent Being? And what more
unreasonable and foolish, than to call our desires of each others Prayers by
such Titles as these?

And hitherto have I shown, that in the very Act of praying to the Saints,
without any regard had to the form or substance of your Petitions, or the
circumstances with which you call upon them, you give proper, religious Worship
to them, which you acknowledge it is unlawful for you to do. I proceed,
Secondly, to show this yet more plainly,

II. From the Circumstances of it.

15. And here to avoid, if it be possible, all your little Cavils so usual upon
this occasion, as in speaking to the former part of this Argument, I have
managed it so as not to concern my self with any of your distinctions of
Supreme and Inferior Reply, p. 7.
Religious Worship; so here I will not insist on those Exterior Actions of the
Body, which you tell me are Equivocal, and of which Monsieur de Meaux roundly
affirms, That the Nature of Expos. p. 8.
that Exterior Honor which you render to the Saints, must be judged from the
internal Sentiments of the Mind. The Circumstances I shall now insist upon are
such, as are not liable to any of these Evasions; but will, if not silence a
Contentious Spirit, yet I am confident, satisfy any unprejudiced Christian,
that the Prayers which you make to the Saints are properly a Religious Act, and
not only called so by an external denomination from the Cause and Motive of
them.

16. For 1. What else can be gathered from those outward Circumstances, of the
Place, Time and Manner (to say nothing of the Gestures of the Body) with which
you call upon them? Do not all these speak plainly to us what the Nature of
this Worship is? You pray (for instance) to the Saints in the House of God, it
may be, in a Temple which you have consecrated at once to the Service of God,
and to the Honor of the Saint whom you invoke. You accompany these Prayers
with Incense smoking before their Images; a Circumstance which was once
reckoned as a peculiar instance of External Religious Adoration; and which was
therefore thought so appropriate an Act of Divine Worship among the Primitive
Christians, that they chose to die rather than to throw a little Incense into
the fire upon the Heathen Altars. You call at the same instant upon the One and
upon the other, and too often place them in an equal rank with one another.
Thus, if you confess your Missal. R. in ord. Miss.
sins, you do it to God Almighty, to the B. Virgin, to St. Michael the
Archangel, to S. John Baptist, to the Holy Apostles S. Peter and S. Paul, and
in short, to All the Saints: If you commend a departing Soul, you bid him go
out in the Name Rituale R. Ord. Comm. An.
of God the Father Almighty, who created him; and of Jesus Christ, Son of the
living God, who suffered for him; and in the Name of the Holy Ghost, who was
poured out upon him; in the Name of Angels and Archangels, of Apostles,
Evangelists, etc. If you conjure a Tempest, you call upon God and Ritual. Fr.
de S^les. p. 77. in sin.
the Holy Angels; you adjure the Evil Spirit, you contradict him, by the Virtue
of our Lord Jesus Christ, and the Blessed Virgin Mary. In the Offices of the
Church, your Addresses to God, and the Blessed Virgin, are so inter-woven with
each other, that there is no alteration but only in the manner of the
Expression, and very often not in that neither: As when you pray (for instance)
That the Virgin Mary and Her Son Offic. B. V. page 84.
would Bless you. In the Doxologies of your greatest Men at the End of their
Works, nothing more frequent than to see Glory and Praise returned to God and
the Blessed Virgin; and in your ordinary Conversation no exclamation more
frequent than that of Jesu-Maria. Even your solemn Excommunications Pontific.
R. Ord. Excom. and Absolv. p. 196, 197.
and Absolutions are made in the Name and Authority of the Holy Trinity, the
Blessed Virgin, and all the Saints; and the Passion of Christ joined in equal
rank with the Merits of the Virgin Mary for the remission of their sins. By all
which it undoubtedly appears, that either your Invocation of God himself is not
properly a Religious ^t; or if that be strictly a Religious Worship, the other
will be so also.

17. Secondly, Another Circumstance which plainly shows your Invocation of
Saints to be in the very Nature of the Act a Religious Service, is, that you
offer not only your Prayers, but your very Sacrifice too to their Honor and
Veneration: And this I am sure you will not deny to be truly a Religious Act.
Thus in the Missal of Salisbury.

Accept, O Holy Trinity, this Oblation, which I, unworthy sinner, offer in
Honor of thee, and of the Blessed Virgin In Ord. Missae. fol. 146.
Mary, and of All Saints.

And in the Common Roman Missal,

Accept, O Holy Trinity, this Oblation which we offer to thee in memory of the
Passion. Resurrection, and Ascension Ord. Miss. p. 311. Paris. 1616.
of our Lord Jesus Christ, and in Honor of the ever Blessed Virgin Mary, and
of the Blessed John the Baptist; and of the Holy Apostles Peter and Paul.

And in the Post-Communio of the Mass of the B. Virgin.

Having received, O Lord, the defense of our salvation, Rituale Fr. de Sales.
par. post. p. 19. Lion. 1632.
grant, we beseech thee, that we may every where be defended by the Patronage
of the Blessed Virgin, for whose Veneration we have offered this to thy
Majesty.

Now, not to enter on an Enquiry, how far these Expressions will in some
measure apply the very Sacrifice it self to those Saints; it being hardly
intelligible otherwise what Honor can be done to the Saints, by a Sacrifice
offered solely to God; it cannot be doubted, but that this being confessedly a
proper Religious Act, whatever Honor is hereby done the Saints, must be
strictly and properly a Religious Honor; not merely in denomination, but in
the very Nature of the thing it self. And I desire Monsieur de Meaux to tell
us, whether this too be done with the same Spirit of Charity, and in the same
Order of Brotherly Society with which we entreat our Brethren upon Earth to
pray for us. And what would be thought of him, that out of kindness or respect
to his fellow Christian, should offer up the Son of God for his Honor, or (as
the last Prayer has it) in his Veneration.

I do not pretend that this is properly an Act of Prayer to Saints; and
therefore I propose it only as a Circumstance from whence to conclude what the
true Nature of your Invocation of them is. For if it appear, that the other
parts of that Worship you pay to the Saints, are properly Religious Acts, it
will not be doubted but that your praying to them is certainly so too. And tho
you have restrained the terms of our Question to this one particular Instance,
of calling upon them, yet it suffices me in general to conclude against you,
that you do give proper Religious Honor to others besides God, if it appear,
that any part of that Worship you pay to the Saints is such.

18. Nor is it by any means to be forgot here, that in almost every one of
these Masses you desire to be accepted by the MERITS of that Saint in whose
Honor or Veneration the Mass it self is offered. I will give you an instance
or two of this.

Regard, we most humbly beseech thee, O Lord, these things Missale in usum
Sarum. Fest. Januarii. fol. x.
which we offer to thee: and by the MERITS of thy Blessed Bishop Julian,
deliver us from all sin.

Let the MERITS of S. Bathildis obtain, that these gifts may be accepted by
thee.

We load thy Table, O Lord, with mystical gifts, in commemoration Ibid. fol.
xiii.
of S. Agatha thy Virgin and Martyr; humbly beseeching thy Majesty, that by the
help of HER MERITS we may be freed from all Contagions.

Thus (as I have heretofore observed) do you join the MERITS of Christ, whom
you suppose to be the Offering, with the MERITS of your Saints; and make a
Bathildis or a Julian, joint Intercessors with the Son of God for your
forgiveness. What is this but truly to ascribe to the Creature the Honor of
the Creator, and to worship them with a Religious Worship, in the utmost
propriety of the Expression?

19. I shall add but one Circumstance more, and that of another sort of Service
with which you sometimes accompany your Prayers to the Saints, and which I
think will undeniably convince you, that you do give them the most strict Acts
of Religious Service; and that is, Your making of Vows to them. That this is a
proper Act of Religion, both the Holy Scripture Numb. XXX. Deutr. XXIII.
evidently shows, and the reason of the thing it self declares; A Vow being in
its own Nature nothing else than a Promise made to God; and such by which he is
acknowledged to be the Searcher of the Heart, and the just Avenger of all
perfidious Promisers, as he is the bountiful Rewarder of those who are faithful
in his Service. And your own Authors unanimously acknowledge Aquinas 22ae. Qu.
88. A. 5.
it to be an Act, not only of Proper, but of Supreme Religious Worship.

20. And yet even this too is paid by you to the Saints: and I desire you to
consider what you then did, when at the entry into your Order (if you herein,
as I suppose, agree with the manner of your Brethren the Dominicans), you
solemnly Vid. Annot. Cajet. in D. Th. Qu. 88. Ar. 5. p. 313. Lugd. 1562.
vowed to God, to the B. Virgin, to S. Benedict, and to All the Saints, that
you would be obedient to your Superiors. Now this I the rather remark, because
the Answer that is made by your Writers, to justify this Practice, plainly
condemns you (not only in this Point, but in that of your Prayers too) upon
your own Principle, as Idolaters. They acknowledge the Act to be PROPERLY
RELIGIOUS; That these Vows are made after the very SAME MANNER to God and the
Saints. And Card. Cajetane anticipating Ibid.
this Objection, That to Vow is an Act of Supreme Religious Worship; and how
then may it be given to the Saints? Answers, That it is an Act of the same kind
to VOW and to PRAY; but (says he) We pray to the Saints in Order to God, and
therefore in the same manner we Vow to them too. And the main Excuse which He
makes for both, is the utter ruin of yours and Monsieur de Meaux's Pretenses,
viz. That the Saints are GODS BY PARTICIPATION. A Remark which Card. Bellarmine
Bellarm. de Cult. SS. Lib. iii. c. 9. p. 2235. D.
thought so considerable, that He from thence distinguishes between the
Promises that are made to Men on Earth, and to the Saints in Heaven; so that
the former are Only Promises, the latter are Vows; Because a Vow does not agree
Otherwise to the Saints, than as they are GODS BY PARTICIPATION.

21. The Consequence of all is this plain Conclusion, That if a Vow be strictly
and properly an Act of Religious Worship, and not only called so by an
extrinsecal Denomination from the Cause and Motive of it; and Prayer (as Card.
Cajetane says) be an Act of the same kind with it; then are they both Acts, by
your own Acknowledgment, due only to God: And therefore it must be a Sin to
give them to any Other; and being a Sin in a matter of Religious Worship,
whereby that Honor is given to the Creature which is due only to God, it
remains, according to our Notion, that it must be Idolatry.

22. And thus have I hitherto argued against that Worship you pay to the
Saints, upon your own Principle, and according to your own Proposal: I shall
only add, to close this First Point, That whether these Arguments shall be
thought of force sufficient to convict you of what I am persuaded you are
guilty in this Service, it is your Concern alone to weight. If they are, I need
not say any thing to exaggerate your Offense which you commit in this Matter:
If they are not, yet whilst we are neither defective in our Veneration toward
those Blessed Souls, but pay them all that Honor (as I have before shown) of
which they are now Capable; whilst we transgress no Command of God in our
Omission of these Superstitions; nor fail continually to Address our selves to
the Throne of Grace, through our Great and Only Mediator Jesus Christ; We are
not only sure of his Intercession, who we know is able both to Hear and Help
us; but also in a most likely way of obtaining the Charitable Assistances of
those Holy Souls too, who, if they have any Knowledge of us, or Concern for
what passes Here below, will doubtless need no Solicitation to be kind to us;
but without our Entreaty offer up their Prayers to God, for all those who thus
serve him in Sincerity and Truth.

23. But I must now go much farther, and bring my Charge more closely against
you, by showing, secondly,

II. POINT.
What the True Doctrine and Practice of the Church of Rome is, as to the Point
of INVOCATION of SAINTS?

Now the Sum of this Point may I think best be reduced to these Four
Considerations, by which you endeavor in your Reply to justify your selves in
this Particular.

For, I. As to the Prayers themselves, you cannot deny but that in the natural
Sense of them they do imply a proper and formal Invocation of the Saints to
whom you Address: But then you tell us, That the Churches Sense is much
otherwise; and therefore that whatever their Words may seem to imply, yet the
Intention of them all is One and the Same, viz. PRAY FOR US.

II. That as to what We object concerning the MERITS of the Saints, your
concluding of All your Prayers in this Form, Through Jesus Christ our Lord,
plainly shows, that you mean no more by it than this, That God Reply, Art.
iii.. 18. p. 23.
would vouchsafe to call to mind the glorious Actions and Sufferings of his
Saints, performed in and by His Grace, and upon those Accounts accept your
Sacrifices, or hear your Prayers.

III. That for those Addresses you have the Warrant both of Scripture and
Antiquity. Whereas,

IV. We have neither against them: Those Pretensions I offered in my Defense
being either false or deceitful; or at least not conclusive enough to engage
you to lay aside a Practice which has been so many hundred Years in the Church,
and that by our own Confession.

This is the Sum of what is said on this Occasion, not only by your self, but
by the generality of your Party: And to this I shall answer with all the
Plainness and Candor that I am able.

SECT. I.
Whether all the Prayers that are made to the Saints by those of the Church of
Rome, are fairly to be reduced to this One Sense, PRAY FOR US?

24. For thus it is that you Expound your selves.

That in what Terms soever those Prayers which you address Reply, Art. iii.
sect. 16. p. 22.
to the Saints are Couched, the Intention of your Church reduces them always to
this Form, PRAY FOR US. You charge me with VOLUNTARY fixing the Words of your
Addresses, which are Equivocal, to a Univocal Sense; and that Had I either as
became a Christian or a Scholar taken notice of this Direction laid down by the
Bishop of Condom, both in his Book, and in his Advertisement, I should have
saved my self the labor of Amassing such an Appendix as I have made to this
Article, and the Reader the trouble of perusing it to as little purpose. Since
tho your Church does indeed make her Addresses to the Saints for Protection and
Power against your Enemies; for Help and Assistance, and the like; yet it does
Appear manifestly to any one Who is not WILFUL in his MISTAKES, that all these
are reduced to an Ora pro nobis; it being a kind of Aid, Succor, and
Protection, to recommend the Miserable to Him who alone can succor them.

25. Answer.] Such then are your Pretenses. To your Reflections I have spoken
Already; I come now to examine your Reasons: And to convince Others, if not
You, that I was not WILFUL in my MISTAKES as to the meaning of your Prayers,
but that you are a sort of Miserable Shufflers, in your pretended Expositions
of them. For tell me now, I beseech you, by what Authority is it that your New
Guides Answer to Dr. St. p. 399, 406, 407.
T. G. and the Bishop of Meaux undertake thus to detort the plain Expressions
of your Addresses to a Signification utterly repugnant to the natural Meaning
of them? Have any of your General approved Councils positively defined this to
be all your Full Answer, p. 6.
Design in them? And if they have not, are you not, according to your own
Language, in your accusing of me on this Ibid. p. 7.
Occasion, a Falsifier, a Calumniator, and a Misrepresenter TOO? Does the
Council of Trent, where it decrees this Service is to be paid to them, say that
this shall be the Universal, Ecclesiastical Sense of these Devotions? Nay, does
but so much as One single Rubric in all your Offices give us the least
Intimation of it?

26. It is, I know, pretended by Monsieur de Meaux, That Catechism. Conc. Trid.
Part. IV. p. 345. Tit. Quis Orandus sit?
your Catechism authorizes this Exposition of them; where it teaches the
Difference there is between your Praying to God and to the Saints. For that you
pray to God either that He would give you Good things, or that He would deliver
you from Evil, but to the Saints, that they would undertake your Patronage, and
obtain for you those things you stand in need of. That from Hence arises two
different Forms of Prayer; for that to God you say properly Have mercy upon us,
or Hear our Prayers; but to the Saints, Pray for us.

27. Such are that Bishops Pretenses, and it must be confessed they have
something that is plausible in them; tho what will soon vanish when it comes to
be examined to the Bottom. For be it allowed, as He desires, that there are
here proposed two different Forms of Prayer; for indeed we do not deny but that
in General you may pray with other Sentiments to God, than to the Saints; tho
too often in your Prayers themselves we find no great care taken to distinguish
them: To God, as to the First and Supreme Dispenser of All Good; to the Saints
only as His Ministers, and inferior Distributers of it. But does this
therefore reduce all the Prayers you make to the Saints, in whatever Terms they
are conceived, to this One Form, PRAY FOR US? Judge, I beseech you, by those
Words which immediately follow in the Catechism, but were not for the turn of
an Expounder, and therefore His Lordship thought good to omit them: Although it be
Lawful, Catechism. ibid.
IN ANOTHER MANNER, to ask of the Saints themselves that THEY WOULD HAVE MERCY
UPON US, for they are very Merciful.

28. If this be ANOTHER MANNER from the foregoing then I am sure all the
Prayers of your Church are not to be reduced to that One Form, Pray for us. But
what is this Other Manner? We may pray (says the Catechism) that Ibid.
being moved at the Misery of our Condition, they would Help us with their
FAVOR and DEPRECATION with God. So that Here then is somewhat more, at least
in the opinion of your own Catechism, than a mere praying for us; Here is
Encouragement to ask not only their Prayers, but also their Favor and Interest
too. But indeed the Catechism goes yet farther: For giving a Reason why Angels
are to be invocated, They are (says the Catechism) to be prayed to, Pars iii.
de Cultu and Invocatione SS. n. 19, 20. p. 255.
because they both continually look upon God, and most willingly undertake the
Patronage of our Salvation which IS COMMITTED to them: And from thence in the
next Section it infers the like Necessity of Honoring the Saints.

29. This is plain dealing, and gives us an Authentic Exposition of that
Passage in the Council of Trent, whose Sense you no less pervert than that of
your Liturgies; viz. That for Council. Trid. Sess. xxv. de Invocat. etc. p. 292.
Obtaining the Benefits of God by his Son Jesus Christ, you should betake your
selves to their (the Saints) Prayers, Aid, and Assistance: And to this End,
that you should not barely invoke them, but invoke them in a suppliant manner;
as those who reign now with Christ. A Circumstance this which was not put in by
Chance, but was thought so considerable as to be mentioned in Pope Pius's
Profession of Faith, where nothing superfluous was to be admitted; and where
you declare, That you firmly believe that the Saints who REIGN together with
Christ, are to be Venerated and Invoked. Insomuch that (as I have before
observed) your great Cardinals, Cajetane and Bellarmine, doubt not to call them
Gods by Participation; and to deliver it as the Catholic Doctrine (and we know
how conformable the Catholic Practice is to it amongst you) That the Saints
are set over us, and take Bellarm. de SS. beat. L. I. c. 18, 20.
care of us, and that the Faithful here on Earth are RULED and GOVERNED by
them. By all which it appears with what Sincerity you pretend that all your
Church teaches is only to pray to to the Saints in the same Spirit of Charity,
Bishop of Meaux's Expos. Sect. IV.
and according to the same Order of Fraternal Society, with which you demand
the Assistance of your Brethren living upon Earth. And how false it is, that
you are taught to reduce all the Forms of your Addresses to this One Meaning,
Pray for us; seeing you both direct the Faithful to recur to them for their
Prayers, Aid, and Assistance; and suppose them capable as Reigning together
with Christ, and Gods by Participation, but especially as having the Care of
the Faithful committed to them, to Rule and Govern them, to lend you Other Help
and Assistance besides that of their Prayers, and (as I shall presently show)
pray to them accordingly so to do.

30. But Secondly, We will examine this Point a little further; for indeed the
whole Mystery of this Service in the Church of Rome depends upon a right
understanding of what Notion they have of the Saints above. And because I will
do this without any suspicion of Falsity, I will deliver nothing but from Card.
Bellarmine's own Words. In his Book of the Eternal Felicity of the Saints,
among Other Reasons that De aeterna felicitate SS. lib. 1. cap. 4.
he gives why the Place and State of the Blessed should be called the Kingdom
of Heaven, He has this for one, Because all the Blessed in Heaven are Kings,
and all the Qualities of Kings do most properly agree to them. The Just (says
He) in the Kingdom of their Father, shall be themselves Kings of the Kingdom of
Heaven; for they shall be Partakers of his Kingly Dignity, and of the Power,
and Riches, and other Goods that are in the Kingdom of Heaven. Which is, I
suppose, a plain Paraphrase of what he elsewhere says, That they are Gods by
Participation, or Partakers of the Dignity See before.
and Power of God.

31. Having thus established His Foundation, He now goes on to the practical
Demonstration of it. The Goods (says He) of an Earthly Kingdom are usually
reckoned to be these Lib. 1. cap. 5. p. 20. Colon. 16 26.
Four, Power, Honor, Riches, and Pleasure. An Earthly King has Power to
command His Subjects; If they do not obey Him, He can punish them with Bonds,
Imprisonment, Exile, Scourging, Death. Again; Kings will be Honored with an
Honor almost above the Nature of Men; for they will be adored upon the Knee;
nor will they vouchsafe oftentimes to hear those that speak to them, unless in
this bended posture, and with their Face down to the Ground. But yet (as He
afterward shows) this Power is mixed with Infirmity; this Honor oftentimes
changed into Disgrace. But with the Saints above it is much otherwise: For
their Power is exceeding great, and without any mixture Ibid. page 26.
of Infirmity. This He illustrates with a Story, which at once shows what their
Power is with reference to us, and How they are prayed to in the Church of Rome
upon presumption of it.

St. Gregory (says he) relates in his Book of Dialogues, That Lib. iii. cap. 36.
a certain Holy Man, being just ready to be slain by the Hangman, whose Arm was
stretched out, and Sword drawn for that purpose, cried out in that Instant,
Saint John hold him; and immediately his Hand withered, that he could neither
put it down again, nor so much as move it. S. John therefore (continues the
Cardinal) from the highest Heaven heard the Voice of his Client, and struck his
Executioner with this Infirmity so suddenly, as to hinder the Stroke already
begun. This is the Power of those Heavenly Kings, that neither the almost
infinite distance of Place, nor the Solitariness of a poor and unarmed
Righteous Man, nor the multitude of Armed Enemies, could prevent S. John from
delivering his SUPPLIANT from the Danger of Death.

32. I shall not need to transcribe what He in the next place adds concerning
the Worship that upon this and other accounts is paid to the Saints, beyond
that of any Earthly Monarch. But from what has been said, I conclude, That it
is the Opinion of those in the Church of Rome, that (as the Council of Trent
expresses it) The Saints reign together with Christ; and, are Gods by
Participation; that is, are made Partakers of the Dignity and Power of God. 2.
That therefore whatever Intercourse the Faithful upon Earth may have with them,
it must be vastly different from what they have with their Brethren here below,
who are neither admitted to such a Dignity, nor Partakers of this Power. 3.
That since the Saints are thus Kings in Heaven, when those of the Roman Church
address to them in a SUPPLIANT manner, as their CLIENTS, for Help and
Assistance, they do not do this in the same Spirit of Charity, nor after the
same Order of Fraternal Expos. Mr. de Meaux, sect. IV.
Society with which they would desire the Prayers of their Fellow Christians
yet living. And, 4. That seeing the Blessed in Heaven have Power together with
God of taking Care of us, and bestowing Blessings upon us; there is neither
Truth nor Reason in that vain Pretense, That all the Prayers that are made
Reply, p. 22.
to them, must be reduced to this One form, PRAY FOR US; but that we ought
indeed to understand them to desire of the Saints, what both their Principles
allow them to do, and their Words declare that they do desire; viz. THEIR HELP
and ASSISTANCE, as reigning TOGETHER WITH Christ.

33. But, Thirdly, I have yet more to say in Answer to this Evasion. It is well
known how much those Prayers you make to the Saints, scandalized many of the
most Eminent Men of your Church. Wicelius doubted not to say of one of your In
Elencho Abusuum.
Hymns, that it was full of downright Blasphemy, and horrible Superstition; of
others, that they were wholly inexcusable. Ludovicus Vives professed, that he
found little difference in the Lud. Vives Comm. in S. August. de Civ. dei. lib.
viii. cap. 27.
Peoples Opinion of their Saints, in many things, from what the Heathens had of
their Gods: and that numbers in your Church worshipped them no otherwise than
God. Now this the Council of Trent could not but know, and it then lay before
them to redress it. If therefore those Fathers had thought, that there was no
other form of Invocation allowable to the Saints, than (as you now pretend) to
Pray to them to Pray for us, is it to be imagined, that at such a juncture as
this they would have taken no care about a thing so justly scandalous, not only
to the Protestants, whom they desired to reduce, but even to many of their own
Communion? How easy had it been for them to say, That to satisfy the
complaints of these Learned Men, and of their Enemies; and to prevent any
mistakes of the like kind for the future, it seemed good to the Holy Ghost and
to them to declare, that in what terms soever the Prayers of their Church were
conceived, yet that the Ecclesiastical sense of them was in all one and the
same, viz. Pray for us. But now instead of such a declaration, and which such
wise men in this case would never have omitted, they regard no Complaints that
were made against this Service; but roundly decree an Invocation to be due to
them, and establish it upon the Old Foundation beforementioned, and which had
given rise to all these excesses, viz. that the Saints REIGN TOGETHER WITH
CHRIST; and were therefore in A SUPLIANT MANNER to be called upon; and that for
the obtaining benefits of God, they were to fly, not only to their Prayers, but
also to their Help and Assistance: And when according to their Order for
reciting the Missals and Breviaries, they were again set out, the one Four, the
other Six years after the Council was ended: the Hymns and Prayers were left
still as we see, and not so much as the least Note in a Rubric, for a right
Exposition of them.

34. Nay, I will go yet farther: There was not only no Care taken then, but at
this day men are suffered to run, without Censure, into the same Excesses. We
know to what Extravagance Card. Bona, Father Crasset, and but the other day
Doctor J. C. our own Countryman, have gone; and no One of your Church censures
them for it. Cassander immediately after the Council, no less complained of
these things than Vives and Wicelius before; and that too was disregarded. On
the contrary, whilst the Extravagances of these Votaries are encouraged, the
moderation of the others is censured by the highest Authority of your Church.
The Psalter of S. Bonaventure goes abroad with permission, but the Comments of
Lud. Vives are put in the Expurgatory Index, and George Cassander's Works
absolutely prohibited. If Advices are given from the Blessed Virgin Crasset
devotion veritable, pref. p. 2.
to her indiscreet Worshippers, All the Servants of the B. Virgin run to Arms
to encounter him: The Learned of All Nations write against him, the Holy See
condemns him, Spain banishes him out of all its Dominions, and forbids to Read
or Print his Book, as impious and Erroneous. But if a Crasset in his Zeal for
the Mother of God, runs into such blasphemous Excesses as no pious Ears can
hear, without indignation; If he rake together all that the Folly and
Superstition of former Ages has said or done the most excessively on this
Subject, to make up a Volumn scandalous to that Church and Society that endures
him; not only the Divines of his Order approve it, but his Provincial licenses
it to be Printed; the King's Permission is obtained for (...); and the
Expounders themselves are so very good natured, that they cannot see any harm
in it. And then let the World judge what your true Doctrine, as to the
Invocation of Saints, must be. For,

35. Fourthly, Had the Council of Trent been of the same Opinion with Monsieur
de Meaux, I shall leave it to any reasonable man, that will but be at the pains
to examine your Offices, to say, whether there was not great need of some such
Advertisement as I before said. As for example: In the Office of the Blessed
Virgin you thus address to Her:

We fly to your protection, O Holy Mother of God; despise not our Prayers which
we make to you in our Necessities; but Officium B. Virg. p. 84. Antw. 1631.
deliver us from all dangers, O Glorious and ever Blessed Virgin. -- And again,

Vouchsafe that I may be worthy to praise thee, O Sacred Virgin: Give me
strength and power against thine Enemies. Ibid. p. 103.


Now that these Prayers are conceived in as formal terms as any can be to God
himself, is not to be denied: I desire you therefore to tell me by what Rules
of Interpretation, by what Public and Authentic Decree of your Church, we are
to expound a Prayer made to the Blessed Virgin, that She would give strength
and power, into a desire that she would pray to God that He would do this?

36. But however, let us for one moment suppose this to be reasonable, and try
whither such a method of interpreting will carry us. For instance, thus you
Ibid. p. 497.
Pray to the Apostles.

O ye just Judges and true Lights of the World, we pray unto you with the
Requests of our Hearts, that ye would hear the Prayers of your Suppliants.

That is to say, We do desire you in a friendly way, and only after the Order
of Brotherly Society, though in complement we call our selves indeed your
Suppliants, and entreat you to hear our Prayers, that you would Pray for us.

Ye that by your Word shut and open Heaven, deliver us, we beseech you by your
COMMAND from all our sins.

That is, you who by your Prayers to God are able to incline him either to shut
or open H^aven, we entreat you, that by YOUR COMMAND, meaning only your
Prayers, you would deliver us; that is to say, would Pray to God, that He would
deliver us --, from all our sins.

You to whose COMMAND the Health and Sickness of all men are submitted, Heal us
who are sick in cur Manners, and restore us to virtue.

That is to say, O ye Holy Apostles, to whose command, as far as Prayers may be
so called, the Health and Sickness of all is subjected; forasmuch as your
Requests can prevail with God to submit it to you: Heal us, i. e. Pray to God
that He would Heal us, who are sick in our manners; and Restore us; that is to
say, entreat God, that He would restore us to Virtue.

37. Such, according to your Principles, is the Paraphrase of this Prayer. If
this be a natural way of Expounding, then be also your Pretenses allowed of:
But if to pray in such words as these, meaning no more than what I have
expressed, be a downright mocking both of God and his Saints, then let the
World judge what we are to think of your Interpretations.

38. But however, for once let us allow even this too: What shall we do with
those Prayers where God and the Saints are both joined together in the same
Request. As for instance, Let Mary and Her Son bless us. Officium B. Virg. page
105.



Here, I doubt, it will be something difficult to reduce them to what you call
the Churches Sense, PRAY FOR US, unless you pray to God too as well as to the
Saints, to pray (to whom I cannot imagine) for you.

39. I shall add but one Consideration more, from your Service of the Saints,
to overthrow your new Expositions; but that such as I shall be very glad to
receive an Honest Answer to. For be it that in defiance of all Sense and
Reason, your Prayers to the Saints, in what terms soever they be conceived,
must all be interpreted, as you pretend. Yet what shall we do in those Cases
where the very Nature of the Service utterly refuses such kind of Colors? As,

I. When in your Vows, you vowed (as I before observed),

To God, and the Blessed Virgin, and to St. Benedict, and to all the Saints,
that you would be obedient to your Superiors.

II. When in your Doxologies, you give

Glory to God, and the B. Virgin Mary, and last of all to Jesus Christ. So
Greg. de Valencia.

Praise be to God, and the Virgin Mother Mary, also to God Jesus Christ, the
Eternal Son of the Eternal Father, be Praise and Glory. So Card. Bellarmine
closes this very Dispute of the Worship of Saints.

Honor and Glory be to God, and to the most Holy Virgin Mary, and to all the
Saints. So your Collector of the Lives of the Saints.

Verse. Open my lips, O Mother of JESUS.

Resp. And my soul shall speak forth thy Praise. Contemplat. page 23.


Verse. Divine Lady, be intent to my aid.

Resp. Graciously make haste to help me.

Verse. Glory be to JESUS and MARY.

Resp. As it WAS, IS, and ever SHALL be.

So Dr. J. C. Now what you will think of all this I cannot tell, but sure I am
S. Athanasius pronounces it to be downright Idolatry, and what no good
Christian would ever be See below.
guilty of.

III. When in your Commendation of a departing Soul, you bid him,

Depart out of the World, in the Name of the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost; of
Angels and Archangels, of Patriarchs, Rit. Romans Ord. Comm. Anim.
Prophets, Apostles, and of all Saints, as I have before at large recited it.

IV. When in the Confession of your sins, you confess,

To God Almighty, and the Blessed Virgin Mary, to S. Michael, Missale R. in
Ord. Miss.
the Archangel, to S. John Baptist, to the Holy Apostles Peter and Paul, and to
all the Saints.

V. When in absolving your Penitents from them, you join,

The Passion of our Lord Jesus Christ, and the Merits of Rituale Romans deSacr.
Poenir.
the Blessed Virgin, and of all the Saints; together, for the remission of all
his sins.

VI. When in your Conjurings against storms,

You contradict the Evil Spirit by the Virtue of our Lord Rituale Fr. de Sales.
p. 77.
Jesus Christ, and of the Blessed Virgin.

VII. When in your Excommunications, you shut men out of the Church,

In the Authority of God Almighty, the Father, Son, and Pontific. Romans Ord.
Excom. and Absol.
Holy Ghost, and of the Blessed Apostles, Peter and Paul, and of all the
Saints.

VIII. When in Absolving them from this Sentence, you

Remit this bond, in the same Authority of God Almighty, Ibid.
and of the Blessed Apostles, Peter and Paul.

Lastly, When in consecrating of a Church or Altar, you

Bid this stone be Sanctified, and Consecrated, in the Ibid. de Consecrat.
Ecclesiae. p. 124.
Name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost; and of the Glorious
Virgin Mary, and of all the Saints. And again,

Let this Church be Sanctified, and Consecrated, in Ibid. p. 127.
the Name of Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost; to the Honor of
God, and of the Glorious Virgin Mary, and of all the Saints.

Now in all these several instances, there is no room for any such
interpretation as you pretend in the Case of your Prayers; but here either your
hearts join in what your lips utter, and then it is plain you give as Proper
Divine Worship to the Saints as you do to God, which you confess to be
unlawful: Or if they do not, what is this but to speak words of Vanity in your
most Solemn Service, and in which you ought especially to take heed not to
offend?

40. Thus do the very Words of your Liturgies utterly refuse such an Exposition
as you pretend to be your only meaning in all your Prayers to the Saints. I
will add yet one Consideration more, to show the insincerity of it, Fifthly,
from the concurrent Practice of the most eminent Persons of your Church, and
whose Authority you cannot with any justice except against.

41. Now of this the famous Psalter of S. Bonaventure, may alone serve for a
sufficient Evidence; which as it has been publicly set forth, and authorized
amongst you, so I need not tell you, that the design of it was to apply all the
Addresses that are made to God in the Psalms and Hymns of the Church; nay, and
even the very Creeds to the Blessed Virgin.

Come unto Mary all ye that labor and are heavy laden, and Psalterium S.
Bonavent. Psalm 2.
she shall refresh your Souls. Come unto Her in your temptations, and the
Serenity of Her Countenance shall establish you.

When I called upon thee thou heardest me, O Lady, and from thy high Throne
did vouchsafe to remember me. Blessed Psalm. iv.
art thou, O Lady, for ever, and let thy Majesty be exalted for evermore.

O Lady, in thee do I put my trust, deliver my Soul from mine Enemies. O give
thanks unto the Lord, for he is good: O Psalm. vii. -- cvii.
give thanks unto His Mother, for her Mercy endures for ever.

42. I might pass at this rate through all the other Psalms, and to these add
the Te Deum, Benedicite, Athanasian Creed, etc. all burlesqued to He^ Honor:
But there has been so many large Speculum B. Virginis, etc.
Collections of these already published, that I shall subjoin only one Prayer
at the close of all.

O my Holy Lady Mary! I commend to thy blessed Trust and especial Custody, and
into the Bosom of thy Mercy, this day and every day, and in the hour of my
Death, both my Soul and Body: I commit all my Hope and Consolation, all my
Troubles and my Miseries, my Life and the End of my Life, to thee; that by thy
most Holy Intercession and Merits all my Works may be directed and disposed,
according to THINE and THY SONS Will. Amen.

43. I will not now insist upon this, that this Book has been often Printed
among you with License and Commendation, and particularly my Editions of it;
the one Italian and Latin, Printed at Genoa, 1606. with the License of the
Superiors, and submitted by the Translator Giovan Battista Pinello to the
Censure of the Church; the other at Liege in the same Year, by le Sage: But
this last had the Honor of being particularly commended by the Vicar of that
Church, and Censor of Permiss. Jo. Chapeaville. Leodii 17. Nov. 1606.
Books, as a Piece that was profitable to be Printed, and very piously and
commendably to be recited by all Men in their private Prayers, to the Honor of
the B. Virgin. The Author of it is at this time a Canonized Saint in your
Church, and is now in his turn Worshipped by you. If therefore you approve
these Addresses (as I presume you must) be pleased to try, ('twill be a pretty
expounding Task) how you can reduce all these Hymns and Prayers to this One
Sense of your Church, PRAY FOR US. But if you disallow these Addresses, as
(what in truth they are) Scandalous and Idolatrous, what then shall we say if
you pray to those as in Heaven now, who whilst they lived were guilty of such
desperate Superstitions?

44. And now I am instancing in your Saints, I cannot forbear presenting you
with a Strain or two of your Pious, but very Superstitious and Indiscreet St.
Bernard: and this too to try your Faculty of Expounding.

To thee, O Holy Virgin Mary, as to the Ark of God, as Vid. in Psalm. S. Bonav.
Leodii, 1606. p. 238.
to the Cause of Things, as to the Business of Ages, do all look that are both
in Heaven and Hell; both they that have gone before us, and we who now live,
and they who shall hereafter be born. -- All Generations shall call thee
Blessed, O Mother of God! -- In thee the Angels have found Joy, the Righteous
Grace, and Sinners Pardon for Ever. Worthily do the Eyes of the whole Creation
look upon thee, because in thee, and by thee, and of thee the kind Hand of the
Almighty has re-created whatever he had created. We embrace thy Footsteps, O
Mary, and with most devout Supplication we fall down before thy blessed Feet.
We will hold thee, and not let thee go till thou shall bless us. For thou art
able, etc.

45. But I insist too long upon these Matters; and therefore Defense, Append.
2. Def. part 1. p. 89.
in stead of multiplying new Instances, shall refer you to those I have already
offered: And from your Saints descend to the Heads of your Church; One of which
thus piously Greg. VII. Baron. Ann. ad an. 1080. T. xi. p. 532. See Platina in
his Life.
called upon S. Peter and S. Paul at the Head of a Synod, in Excommunicating
the Emperor Henry IV. Anno 1080. in these Words.

Blessed Peter, Prince of the Apostles, and thou O Blessed Paul, Doctor of the
Gentiles; Vouchsafe, I beseech you, mercifully to incline your Ears unto me,
and hear me. And then, after some Particulars too large to be transcribed, He
thus goes on: Go to now I beseech you, O Fathers and Holy Princes, that all the
World may know and understand, that as you have in Heaven the Power of Binding
and Loosing, you have also on Earth Power over Empires, Kingdoms,
Principalities, etc. For you have often taken away Patriarchates, etc. from the
Wicked and Unworthy, and have given them to Religious Men. Let the Kings and
all the Princes of the World now learn how great you are, and how much you can
do, and fear to undervalue the Command of your Church: And execute Judgment on
the aforesaid Henry so suddenly, that all Men may know that he shall fall, not
by Chance, but by your Power.

This is a blessed Prayer for a Pope to make; and I doubt will be found to
signify somewhat more than to pray to those Saints to pray for Him. If you
think otherwise, let us see your Paraphrase, and then we shall be able the
better to judge of it. To conclude, Let any Man but read over the late Books of
Father Crasset, and Dr. J. C. and then I will leave Him to believe if He can,
that all you mean in your Invocation of Saints, is only to desire them to pray
for you.

46. And this may suffice to your first Pretense, of the Interpretation you
would put upon these Addresses. As for the Authority you would be thought to
have from Holy Scripture, for them, it is so very trifling, as not to deserve a
Consideration. For who would not laugh at that Man that should seriously argue
after this manner?

1. When the Children of Israel were under Oppression, Judges iii. 9.
God raised up a Deliverer or Savior for them, who delivered them: Therefore
it is lawful to pray to Saints as our Saviors in Heaven. Again,

2. St. Stephen calls Moses a Ruler and a Deliverer of the Acts vii. 35. Galat.
iii. 19.
Children of Israel; and St. Paul a Mediator, because at the delivery of the
Law God sent it by his Hands to them: Therefore we may now give the Titles of
Mediators and Redeemers to the Saints departed, with reference to our Spiritual
and Eternal Concerns, tho they neither are, nor have been, either Redeemers or
Mediators to us.

3. St. Paul tells Timothy, That if he discharged the part of 1 Timothy iv. 16.
a faithful Pastor, as He exhorted him to do, He should be a blessed Instrument
of Salvation both to Himself and Others: Therefore we may now pray to Timothy
as our Savior in Heaven.

47. Are not these, Sir, weighty Arguments? And were you not resolved utterly
to confound us, when you alleged such Proof out of Holy Scripture as this? But
you have one Passage at least that will do our Work.

Grace and Peace are the proper Gifts of God: But this Revel. i. 4.
St. John wishes to the Seven Churches of Asia, not only from God, but also
from the Seven Spirits which are before the Throne: Therefore We may
warrantably pray to the Blessed Virgin, Let the Virgin Mary and Her Son bless
us.

A notable Proof this, and almost as terrible as that which follows: The Holy
Scripture says of Princes, That they are Gods; therefore we may pray to the
Saints as Gods too. But we will consider every part of it. Grace and Peace are
the proper Gifts of God. This is confessed: What will you infer from thence?
But these St. John wishes not only from God, but also from the Seven Spirits. I
answer, 1. If your own Gloss be good, those Seven Spirits are set to signify
the Gloss. Ord. in loc. Rhemists Test. p. 700.
Seven fold Gifts of the Holy Ghost; and your own Rhemists in their Annotations
(from whence I am apt to believe you borrowed this Argument) confess it may be
well understood so. But, 2. Not to deal too strictly with you; Let us allow
these Seven Spirits to signify Created Angels; What will be the Consequence?
St. John wishes all Grace and Peace to the Churches of Asia from God, by the
ministration of his Holy Angels, whose Ministry He employs in dispensing His
Graces and Blessings for the Preservation of His Church: Therefore we may wish
to the Church now, Grace and Peace from Christ and the Blessed Virgin, who is
neither Angel nor Ministering Spirit, nor that we know of any way employed by
God for the Service of it. Nay, but this will not do yet: We must carry it yet
further. St. John wishes all Peace and Happiness from God and his Holy Angels
to the Church: Therefore We may not only Wish the like from God by their
Ministration, but may solemnly pray to Saints and Angels themselves, together
with God, for Grace and Peace. And if this be your way of Arguing from Holy
Scripture, it is well you have Infallibility of your Side, for I am confident
otherwise you would never persuade any Man, by way of reasoning, to submit to
your Conclusions.

48. But the Representer has yet a Passage to justify the utmost Extravagance
of former Times, and prove even that Prayer, which Bellarmine was fain to deny
they ever used, Of the Virgins commanding our Savior by the Right which as a
Mother she had over Him, to be most agreeable to Holy Writ. For does not the
Scripture say of Joshua, c. X. 14. That He spoke to the Sun, and it stood
still, the Lord OBEYING the Voice of a Man? This is an Argument that must be
carefully looked to, or, like Wit that depends upon a turn of Expression,
'twill be utterly lost. And therefore in the Vulgar Latin and Doway Bibles,
this is a good Proof; but in our own, it is none at all. For as we render it, it
would be a most wild Inference thus to conclude; Joshua prayed unto God that
the Sun might stand still; and God hearkened unto his voice, and answered his
Request: Therefore we may pray to the Blessed Virgin by the Right of a Mother
to command her Son.

But be it as he desires; God obeyed the voice of Joshua; i. e. as the Chaldee
Paraphrast has it, He accepted his Prayer; as the Doway Bible it self expounds
it, He condescended to work Doway Bible in loc. p. 488.
so great a Miracle at the Instance of his Servant: How will it even thence
follow, that we may desire the Blessed Virgin to command our Savior by the
Right of a Mother over him? But such Twigs as these must be laid hold on, when
Men are resolved to keep to their Conclusion, tho at the same time they have
not so much as the shadow of a Proof to support it.

SECT. II.
After what manner it is that the Church of Rome Reply, sect. xviii. p. 23, 24.
prays to God through the Merits of Her Saints?

This is the next Point to be considered by us; and thus you establish it.

49. Reply, p. 23.] You tell us, that the Word Merit is Equivocal, and
misapplied by Me: That the Truth of your Doctrine is, I. To reduce all your
Prayers to this Form, That God would be pleased not to regard your
Unworthiness, but (the Merits of our Redeemer ever supposed) respect the Merits
of his Saints also, and for their sakes hear your Prayers, and accept your
Sacrifices. II. That this is plainly shown in your solemn concluding of All
your Addresses in this manner, Through Jesus Christ our Lord. Whereby it
appears, that you mean no more, than to beg of God Almighty that he would
vouchsafe to call to mind the glorious Actions and Sufferings of his Saints,
performed in and by his Grace, and upon these Accounts accept you. III. And
finally, That for this you have the Authority of the Holy Scripture it self.

50. Answ.] For Answer to which Discourse, I must first desire you to come a
little out of the Clouds, and not play with us in ambiguous Terms, whilst you
charge Me with it. The word Merit, you say, is Equivocal; and the two Senses
you give it are, First, To signify that We do by our own Natural force alone
deserve the Reward of Grace and Glory. And in which Sense if you pretend that
we charge you with pleading your own Merits, you do certainly most falsely
accuse us. The other Sense you give the word is, That our Good Works may be
said to Merit, because they apply the Merits of Jesus Christ to us, and are the
Means by which we attain Eternal Life, in virtue of the Promises of God, and
Merits of our Blessed Redeemer. In which were you sincere (for all the
impropriety of the Speech) yet we should not be far from agreeing with you. But
now what is all this, to your praying to God to hear you by the Merits of the
Saints? This may do well in its proper Article; but here it serves only to
amuse the Reader with that which is nothing to the purpose, that so he may be
disposed to forget what you were to prove. Jam dic Posthume de tribus Capellis.

51. You tell us then, in the next Paragraph, That you pray, that God would not
respect your own Unworthiness, but regard Reply, p. 24.
the Merits of his Saints, and for their Sakes, i. e. for their Merits, Hear
your Prayers, or accept your Sacrifices. But where then is the
Misrepresentation? For this is the very thing we charge you with, viz. That not
content to Address your selves to God, in the Name and through the Merits of
our ONLY Mediator Jesus Christ, you have sought out to your selves other
Intercessors, in whose Name, and through whose Merits to offer up both your
Prayers and Sacrifices to God. And whether we do not in this very justly accuse
you, let your Addresses themselves satisfy the World.

O Blessed John the Baptist, reach out thy Hand to us, and be to us continually
a Holy Intercessor, to the Clemency of the most High Judge, that through THY
MERITS we may DESERVE to be freed from all Tribulation.

O God! by whose Grace we celebrate the Memories of thy Saints Saturninus and
Sisinnius, Grant that by THEIR MERIT we may be helped, through our Lord.

Mercifully accept, O God, our Offerings which we have made unto thee, for the
SAKE of the Passion of thy Blessed Martyrs Saturninus and Sisinnius; that by
their Intercession they may be made acceptable to thy Majesty.

And in the Breviary of Salisbury, we find this to be a part of the Constant
Service:

Be propitious we beseech thee, O Lord, unto us thy Servants, Breviarium in
usum Sarum in Servit. B. Virg. par. 2.
through the glorious Merits of thy Saints whose Relics are contained in this
Church; that by their pious Intercession we may be protected in all Adversities.

Grant we beseech thee, Almighty God, that the Merits of thy Saints whose
Relics are contained in this Church may protect us, etc.

It were infinite to recount all the other Prayers which run in the same strain
throughout all your Offices, insomuch that the very Missal. Romans p. 367.
Canon of the Mass is infected with it. I will mention only one Instance more,
which is indeed a singular one; not so much because of the Expression of it,
wherein the General word of Merit is restrained to the particular Merit of his
Death, as because it was made to one who died in Actual Rebellion against his
Prince; and concerning whom therefore it was for some time debated amongst you,
Whether he were damned or saved?

BY the BLOOD of Thomas (a Becket) which he SHED Mornay de la Mess, p. 826.
Saumur, 1604.
for THEE, make us to ascend to Heaven whither He is gone.

52. It remains then, that you do recur to the Saints not merely for their
Prayers, but that by their Merits and Intercession they would obtain Grace and
Pardon of God for you. This is the Doctrine of your Catechism: That the Saints
help Catech. Trid. par. iij. p 256. de Invoc SS. n. 24. tit. Sa^cti suis
Meritis nos adjuvant.
us by their own Merits, and are therefore the rather to be worshipped and
invoked, because they both pray continually for the Salvation of Men, and that
God bestows many Benefits upon us by their Merit and Favor. It Is from hence
that the Master of the Sentences interprets your praying for their
Intercession, to be the same thing as to pray that by their Merits they would
help you. And Aquinas, We pray to the Aquin. 22dae. q. 83. art. 4.
Saints (says he) not to inform God of our Petitions by them, but that by their
PRAYERS and MERITS our Prayers may become effectual. We may say to the Saints
(says Card. Bellarmine) Bellarm. de Bear. SS. l. 1. c. 17.
Save me, or Give me This or That; provided we understand, Give it me by thy
Prayers or Merits. So that in all this we say no more of you, than what both
your Doctrine and Practice warrant us to do.

53. Let us see therefore how you excuse your selves in this Matter. You say,
That your Concluding of all your Prayers Through Jesus Christ our Lord, shows
that you desire all at last by his Merits. But indeed this is but a poor Shift;
and as a very Learned Man has long since told you, that Close Dr. Jackson, Tom.
1. p. 941.
comes in in your Addresses, much after the same manner that the mention of a
certain Sum of Money does in Deeds of Trust, only pro forma: And you are never
the less guilty, for this Conclusion, of what we charge you with, viz. That you
join the Merits and Intercession of the Saints, with the Merits and
Intercession of Christ for Pardon and Acceptance. And to the end that you may
see what senseless Petitions you hereby make to God in these Addresses, I will
only take one of your Prayers in the literal meaning of it, and apply it in a
plain Paraphrase Idem. ib.
to your Pretensions, by way of Petition to some Earthly Prince. Thus then you
pray upon the Third of May.

Grant we beseech thee, Almighty God, that we who Adore the Nativity of thy
Saints, Alexander, etc. may by their Intercession be delivered from all Evils
that hang over us, through Jesus Christ our Lord.

Now changing only the Names, this, according to your Exposition, will be the
Paraphrase of it.

I beseech your Sacred Majesty that you would vouchsafe to pardon my Offenses
against you, and deliver me from those Evils that hang over me for them, at the
Intercession of your Lord Chancellor, etc. and in Honor of this his Birthday;
and that for the Sake of the Prince your Son, our Royal Lord and Master.

In this extravagant Petition, the very Transcript of the foregoing Prayer, he
must be blind who sees not that the Conclusion of it, for the Princes sake,
etc. is very impertinent, and does not at all hinder but that the Request is
formally made by the Interest of my Lord Chancellor, and in Honor of his
Birthday: And therefore that notwithstanding this Conclusion (which is really
the Remains of your Old Forms, before ever any New Intercessors were put into
them) you remain justly chargeable with what I accused you of, That you make
the Saints joint Intercessors with Christ to God; and desire not only through
his Merits, but by theirs also, to obtain your Requests.

54. As for your last Pretense of Holy Scripture for this Practice, it is every
jot as little to the purpose in this, as I have shown it to be in the foregoing
Point.

1. God tells Isaac (say you) that he would bless him, for Reply, p. 25.
his Father Abraham's sake. Moses, praying for the People, desires God to
remember Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, i. e.

Because God, in pursuance of his Covenant made with Abraham, blessed his Son,
and Moses put him in mind of that Covenant, to appease his Anger, that he
should not destroy the Israelites; Therefore it is lawful now to pray to God
not only by the Merits of Christ (the only Mediator of God's Covenant with us)
but also of the Saints too, for Pardon and Salvation

2. God, in remembrance of his Promise made to David, Reply, ib.
showed Mercy unto Solomon for his Sake: Therefore Solomon might have urged to
God the Merits of David for Pardon of his Sins; and therefore we (who have
another, and better, and only Advocate) may address to God by the Merits and
Intercession of the Saints for Forgiveness.

I wonder you did not put in the City Jerusalems Merits too, to prove that we
may not only pray through the Merits of the Saints, but of their Cities also:
For the Text seems as express in this, as in the other: I Kings xi. 32. But he
shall have one Tribe for my Servant David's sake, and for Jerusulems sake, the
City which I have chosen out of all the Tribes of Israel

3. What you mean by your last Passage, I must confess I Reply, ib.
cannot divine; unless you think that because Elijah, who was sent by God's
express Command to make a Proof of his Divinity before all the People of
Israel, who were gone after Baal, began his Prayer with that usual Character of
his being the God of Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob; it was therefore through their
Merits that the Fire came down from Heaven, and burnt up his Sacrifice.

SECT. III.
In which the Arguments offered by the Vindicator for the Establishing of this
Worship are particularly Considered, and their Weakness laid open.

55. Hitherto we have been clearing the matter of Fact, what your Practice in
this Invocation of Saints is; I come now in the next place to examine your
Arguments, and see what grounds you have to support so great a Superstition.

And First, for what concerns the Holy Scripture, I find you do not much care
to be tried by that: You plead Possession for your Warrant, and are resolved
that shall be sufficient, till we by some better right can throw you out of it.
Now in this I cannot but commend your discretion; for indeed those who go about
to found this Article upon the Authority of Holy Writ, do in the Opinion of
many of your own Church but loose their Labor, since (as they tell us) for the
Old Testament, the Holy See Defense of the Expos. p. 8. in annot.
Patriarchs and Prophets that lived before Christ's Incarnation were not yet
admitted into Heaven, and therefore were not Capable of being prayed to; and
for the New, it was not expressed there for fear of Scandalizing the Jews, and
least the Gentiles should have been thereby moved to think, that the Worship of
new Gods had been proposed to them.

56. Wherefore passing by the Holy Scripture, which you look upon as unfit to
be appealed to in this Case, let us come to the Possession you so much boast
of; And see how you defend it against those Arguments I offered to prove That
this Custom Defense ibid.
of Calling upon the Saints had no footing in the Church before the latter End
of the IV. Century; and was then but beginning to creep into it. And to reduce
your Confusion to the clearest Method I can, I will distinctly consider your
Allegations in these two Periods.

First, Of the first 300 Years, wherein I affirm that there was no such
prac^ice in the Church.

Secondly, Of the F^urth Century; towa^ds the latter End of which I confess it
began to appear; though still with very great difference from what you now
Practice.

I. PERIOD.
That the Custom of Praying to Saints had no being in the Church for the First
300 Years.

57. Now for this I showed you in my Defense, That the Defense of the Expos.
Art. 3. p. 6.
Fathers of the IV. Century did certainly herein depart from the Practice and
Tradition of the Ages before them; because * That you were not able to produce
so much as One Instance out of the first three Centuries of any such
Invocation: * But rather were forced to Confess, that nothing of that kind was
to be found amongst them. * That this was in effect what your greatest Authors,
Card. du Perron, Card. Bellarmine, and even the Bishop of Meaux himself had
done: * And that indeed your own Principles oblige you to this Acknowledgment;
seeing you both allow that without believing that the Saints departed go
forthwith to Heaven, they could not have prayed to them; and yet cannot but say
that this, the Holy Fathers of the first three Ages did utterly deny. These
were my Arguments; let us see how you clear your Possession from the force of
them.

58. First, You clap a Marginal Note upon my Assertion (in earnest of your
future Civility) Primitive Fathers Reply. p. 17.. 13.
CALUMNIATED by the Defender: And to wipe off this Calumny you undertake to
show that they did Pray to the Saints within the First 300 Years. This is I
confess to the purpose, and if you can do it, let the Note of Calumny stick
upon Me; but indeed I rather think that this Undertaking will fix another, and
a much more proper Note upon You. But let us hear your Proofs.

Ibid.] And first you say, My Brethren the Centurists of Magdeburg acknowledge
that Origin prayed to Job, and admitted the Invocation of Angels.

59. Answer] If this be true, then, Sir, I tell you in one word, that my
Brethren the Centurists were mistaken; and that, (considering the time they
wrote in) is no great Wonder. But now did you never hear in your Life, that
your Brethren, Erasmus, Sixtus Senensis, Possevin, Bellarmine, Baronius, Labbe,
Du Pin, etc. have all confessed, that neither the Tracts, nor Comments upon Job
were Origen's? Has no one ever told you, Secondly, that another of your
Brethren Card. du Perron, has Replique au roy de la Grande Bretagne live. v. c.
13. p. 982.
utterly rejected the Authority of Origin, as an incompetent Witness in matter
of fact, and that especially in the very Point before us? Were you indeed so
ignorant, Thirdly, as not to know how opposite this Father is to you (as I
shall presently show) in his undoubtedly genuine Works as to this matter? As
for the other Passages you quote, Fourthly, out of his Comments upon Ezekiel;
besides that He there supposes the Angel present with Him: Could you look upon
this place and not see that another of your Brethren, your own Editor, calls it
an Apostrophe to His Guardian Angel; and I desire you to try if you can make
any more of it. And Lastly, for what you finally allege out of his
Lamentations; did you in good earnest not know that it was a Book marked, not
by your Brethren only, but by your Holy Father Pope Gelasius as Apchryphal; and
rejected as such by all the Learned Men of your own Communion? So unfortunate,
or rather unfaithful have you been in your first Entry upon Antiquity. It may
be you will go on a little better.

Reply.] You tell us in the next place a story of one Justina, Reply p. 17. n.
14.
how being in danger of making Shipwreck of her Chastity by the Magical Art of
St. Cyprian, she had recourse to the Intercession of the Blessed Virgin Mary,
begging of Her to assist Her whose Virginity was in danger.

60. Answer.] If by this Story you design to prove the Invocation of Saints to
have been the Practice of the Church within the first 300 Years, (and indeed it
is for this you do produce it,) I must then again complain of your Unsincerity;
seeing it is both acknowledged by your own Authors, and indeed Reply p. 17.
confessed by your own self, that Gregory Nazianzen was mistaken in the
relation, and attributed that to the great St. Cyprian, Bishop of Carthage,
which could not belong to Him. As for the other Cyprian to whom Card. du
Perron, Baronius, etc. apply it, He is not pretended to have lived See Baron
Mart. ad 26. Sept. p. 376. Edit. Paris 1613. Et annal. ad ann. 250. n. 5.
within that Period, and so your Proof is without the Compass of what you
undertook to show.

61. But Secondly, Had there been any truth in this Story, even with reference
to this other Cyprian, how comes it to pass that none of the ancient
Martyrologies, no not your own Breviary, since the Reformation of it, makes the
least mention of any such thing: Would all these have omitted so Considerable a
Passage had there been any grounds of certainty in it.

62. To Reply therefore to this Instance, I say, It is more than probable that
St. Gregory took up this Story either from some flying report, or out of some
Counterfeit Acts: For one part of it, at least that which relates to St.
Cyprian Bishop of Carthage, you confess your Baronius calls it Explodenda
fabula. ad ann. 250. n. 5. Billius Caecutiisse hic Gregorium in Orat. annot.
Vid in Martyr. ubi supr.
selves that in this he was certainly mistaken. And if any other Cyprian we
hear nothing either in Eusebius, or any other Historian or Writer of that Age.
The first Cardinal Baronius has produced being Beda and Adelhelmus, who lived
not till the Eighth, and Metaphrastes in the latter end of the Ninth Century.
But however let us see even what they say of this matter. They tell us that the
Cyprian here meant was Bishop of Antioch, and suffered Martyrdom at Nicomedia
with St. Justina: And thus it stood in your own Breviary too till the
Reformation of it by the Order of the Council of Trent. But now it is beyond
dispute evident Vid in Brev. Eccles. Sarisb. ad 26. Sept.
that this is utterly false; for that in those times there was no such Bishop
of Antioch, both the accounts of the Succession of that Sea given us both by
ancient and modern Historians plainly show; and Card. Baronius himself
confesses it: Who is therefore forced for the credit of the business contrary
both to his own Authors, and to your Ancient Brevaries, Ibid.
to degrade him from a Bishop to a Deacon. And for this He has no Authority. So
evident does it remain, that this whole matter is what the Card. calls, one
part of it at least, a Fable to be exploded by all Wise Men. And this is
another Proof either of your integrity or ability in Church History. But we
will hope the next may be better.

63. Reply.] And thus you go on with your Undertaking, You tell Me you will not
cite Dionysius the Areopagite, Reply ibid. page 19.
because it may be I will not allow Him to be the Author of the Book under his
Name: Nor Justin Martyr, because I shall be apt to say he does not speak plain
enough: Nor Irenaeus, though He says plainly that the Virgin Mary was made an
Advocate for the Virgin Eve (I presume you mean that Eve prayed to the Virgin
Mary 4000 years before she was born, as Father Crasset says they built Temples
Crasset par. 2. Trait. 4. qu. 3. p. 99.
to Her ere she came into the World) because it may be I shall find out an
Evasion for that too.

64. Answ.] Quid dignum tanto feret hic promissor Hiatu?

You will not insist upon Dionysius, nor upon Justin Martyr, Horace de Art.
poet.
nor upon Irenaeus: But what then will you insist upon? for you have said
nothing at all to the purpose yet.

After all this Gaping, we have two Testimonies only offered to us for the
practice of 300 years: One a passage of Origin already rejected as Spurious:
And the other out of a Tract of Methodius, if not certainly Spurious, yet
justly suspected by your own Critick's, being neither quoted by any of the
Ancients, nor mentioned by Photius; and of a Style more Luxuriant than that
Fathers other Writings are; and that speaks so clearly of the Mystery of the
Trinity, of the Incarnation, and Divinity of the Word, whom He calls, in a
Phrase not well known in his time, CONSUBSTANTIAL with the Father; of the
Trisagion never heard of for above 100 years after His death; of the Virginity
of Mary after Her Conception; and of Orginal Sin; that your late Critic
Monsieur du Bibliotheque. T. 1. page 530.
Pin had certainly reason to place it among his Spurious Works, however it be
now cited with such assurance by you.

65. But to quit this Exception against the Book: The very Passage it self is
so manifest a piece of Oratory, that had you ever consulted it, in the Greek
set out by Combefis, you could not have doubted of it. He had begun his
Apostrophe two or three Pages before what you produce; and he ushered it in
with this express Introduction, to prepare us for it, That he Methodius Gl.
Edit. Combefis. Paris cum S. Amphilochio. 1644.
would conclude his Speech with an Address to the City of the great King, and
to all his Brethren and Fathers there, as if they were now present with him;
and accordingly he Apostrophe's the City Jerusalem, p. 426. The whole Catholic
Church, p. 428. A. All the People of God, ibid. B. The Blessed Virgin, ibid. C.
Holy Simeon, p. 429. B. And so concludes all, joining with that Blessed Man in
his Address to our Savior Christ. And tho his Expressions may be very high,
(as the whole Sermon is) yet we cannot but think it very unreasonable to
conclude the dogmatical Sense of the Church from the Rhetorical flights of a
single Man, were the Piece otherwise never so Genuine: But indeed it is
worthily rejected (for the reasons before mentioned) by the Learned Critics
both of your and our Communion.

66. This then is the sum of your Arguments to Establish this Practice in the
first three Centuries. Were it necessary, after what has been done by so many
better hands, to recount the Opinions of those Holy Fathers as to this Point, I
should certainly be able to make some better Proof of the Antiquity of our
praying to God only, than you have been able to do of your Addressing to the
Blessed Virgin and to the Saints.

67. In the Epistle of the Church of Smyrna concerning the death of Polycarp,
Anno 167. we find that the Jews had persuaded the Heathens, that if they
suffered the Christians to have the body of that Holy Martyr, they would leave
Christ, to Worship Polycarp: Not knowing (says that Letter) that Apud Eusebius.
Eccles. Hist. lib. iv. c. 15. p. 109. B. Ed. 2. Vales. Paris. 1678.
it is not possible for us to leave Christ, who has suffered for the Salvation
of all those that are saved in the World; nor to serve or religiously Adore any
other. For as for Jesus Christ, We Adore Him as being the Son of God. But as
for the Martyrs we love them as the Disciples and Imitators of the Lord. And
that very justly considering their insuperable Zeal which they bore to their
King and Master, and God grant that we may be both the Disciples of their
Piety, and partakers of their Glory.

68. This is indeed the true Spirit of Christianity, and the exact account of
the Honor we now pay to the Saints. We Adore only our Savior Christ, as the
Son of God, and therefore (as the Ancient Latin Translation of this Letter
reads it) Edit. Usser.
we pray to no other. But for the Saints, we Love and Honor them; we recite
and magnify their noble Acts: We encourage our selves by their Examples to the
like performances, as those who earnestly desire to be partakers of their
Glory. This is all the Honor they are now capable of receiving; and this was
all that the Primitive Church in those best Ages, was ever known to have given
to them. Irenaeus lib. ii. c. 57. p. 218. Ed. Paris. 1675.


69. The Church of Christ (says Irenaeus) does nothing by the Invocation of
Angels, nor by any other perverse Curiosity; but by addressing her Prayers
purely, and only, and openly to the Lord who has made all things.

70. In Romans l. viii. c. 10. Tertull. de Orat. cap. 1. Cypr. de Orat. Dom.
Origin tell us, that to Invocate the Lord, and to Adore God, are the same
thing. So do Tertullian and Cyprian, using the words to Pray and to Adore
promiscuously in the same signification. In a word, this was the constant
Doctrine of those first Ages; and I will choose to deliver it in the words of
that Father whom you have especially alleged to the contrary: We Worship (says
Orig. contr. Cells. lib. viii. page 386. Ed. Cantabr anno. 1658.
Origin) the one only God, and his one only Son, and Word, and Similitude, with
our utmost Supplications and Honors; bringing our Prayers to the God of all
things, through his only begotten Son; -- Ibid. 395.
We must pray to God only, who is over all, and to his only begotten Son the
first born of every Creature, and beseech Him as our High Priest to carry our
Prayers which we make to Him, to his God and our God, to his Father, and the
Father of all those that live according to the Word of God. -- Ibid. page 400.
This is our Profession of Faith, which we constantly maintain as long as we
live, by the blessing of God, and of his only Son Jesus Christ, who was
manifested amongst us. As for the favor of others, (if that be to be looked
after) We know that thousands of thousands stand before him, and ten thousand
times ten thousand minister unto Him. These as our Brethren and Friends when
they see us imitating their Piety toward God, work together to the Salvation
of those that CALL UPON GOD, and PRAY as they OUGHT to do.

71. I will add but one Testimony more in a matter both so plain in its self,
and so often insisted upon by others, and it is of Novatian proving the
Divinity of Christ, from the Churches Novatian de Trinitate. c. xiii. p. 17. A.
Ibid. C. D. ad fin. Tertull. Paris 1675.
praying to him, For none but God (says he) knows the Secrets of the Heart as
our Savior did -- If Christ be only a Man, how is He every where present to
those that Call upon him? Seeing this is not the Nature of a Man, but of God,
to be able to be present in every place. If Christ be only Man, why is a Man
called upon as a Mediator in Prayers, seeing the calling upon a Man is judged
of no value to give Salvation? If Christ be only Man, why is any Hope put in
Him, seeing that Hope is represented as Accursed that is placed in Man?

72. Such was the Opinion of the Church in the first three Centuries: As for
that extraordinary discovery you are pleased next to make, That all you do in
your Liturgies is, to beg of Reply p. 19.. 14.
God to hear the Prayers of his Saints, and that for this you are able to
furnish Me with many Examples out of the ancient Liturgies and Fathers within
the first 100 Years; it is so false an Assertion, and so vain an Undertaking,
that either you must be ignorant even to astonishment both in the Doctrine of
your own Church, and in the Acts of Primitive Antiquity, or else most certainly
you never believed, either what you say or what you promise.

73. But tho you are not then able to answer my Challenge of producing any
Warrant from the Fathers of the first 300 years for this Doctrine and Practice;
it may be you are able at least to answer my Presumption from those times
against it: viz. That those Fathers did not believe that the Souls of the Just
went straight to Heaven, and therefore by your own Principles could not have
believed that they ought to be prayed to as there.

74. Reply] To this you say, That you are not bound to defend Reply p. 15.. 12.
every Argument that Bellarmine and Suarez bring, especially when Others of
your Writers think them unconclusive. In short, you cannot deny the matter of
Fact, tho you would be thought to suppose rather than allow it to be true; And
all you have to say is, That whatever they believed besides, sure you are they
did pray to the Saints.

75. Answ.] That the Fathers about the latter end of the IV. Century began to
Invocate the Saints we do not deny; though it were rather in the way of a
Rhetorical Compellation, than of a formal Address. And if herein they
contradicted any other of their Principles, we know they were but Men, and as
such might possibly in their Religious heats do some things not entirely
consonant to themselves in their Cooler hours. Now then taking it for granted
that those Fathers I heretofore mentioned did teach, that the Saints departed
do not yet enjoy the Beatifick Vision, I say with those great Men of your
Church, whom you here forsake, that they could not reasonably pray to them.
Since it is upon this Vision, especially, that you found your Opinion of that
particular knowledge you suppose they Ordinarily and Constantly have of those
things that are done here below, and without which it would be Vain and Absurd
to call upon them. And therefore tho you have no regard to Bellarmine's or
Suarez's Authority, yet for the sake of Sense and Reason answer their
Arguments; and tell us a little (upon your own Principles) how those Fathers
could think the Saints were fit to be prayed to, if by denying them to be yet
in Heaven, they by consequence must have denied them to have any ordinary and
certain knowledge of what is done here upon Earth?

76. Reply.] But Sixtus Senensis (you say) after all concludes, Reply, p. 16.
That those Fathers do not intend to exclude the Saints departed from the
Beatifick Vision, but only from that Perfect Happiness which we shall enjoy
after the Resurrection. And it would have been much more Christianlike in Me,
to have imitated his Example, than to argue as I do against their Praying to
Saints from this Principle.

77. Answ.] Had I been crampt, as he was, with a Defininimus of my Church, I
might possibly have been tempted to make Excuses for those Fathers, as he did.
But a Man need only look upon their Words, as they are cited by him, to see how
little such shuffling will avail, to reduce their Doctrine to your Pretenses.
And the truth is, this Sixtus Senensis was so Honest as to confess, tho you
were not so Honest as to take notice of it. For having offered that Exposition
of their Words which you mention, he immediately subjoins, Thus (says he) have
I interpreted the Expressions of S. Ambrose, Austin, and Chrysostom. But if
there be some Sayings of the Holy Authors which CANNOT suffer such an
Interpretation, yet we should at least remember that this ERROR ought not to
prejudice the Learning and Piety of such Illustrious Fathers, seeing the Church
in their time had not yet determined any thing Certain to be believed in this
Matter. Thus Sixtus Senensis; ingenuously confessing how the Case stood. And
this you cannot be presumed not to have seen in him, seeing they are in the
very same place with what you transcribed from him. And what then must I think
of such a One, as values not how he reports things, so he may but by any means
seem to say somewhat; tho he knows at the same time, that he cannot expect long
to triumph in his Unsincerity.

78. And now there is but one thing more remaining, to get over this unlucky
Period of the First 300 Years.

Reply.] For what if the few Writings of the Ancients of the First 300 Years
which remain, be silent in this Particular, does it Reply, p. 18. sect. 14.
follow that they approved not the Practice?

Answ.] No, Sir, this in not the Case: We do not pretend to a bare Silence of
those Holy Fathers, but we produce their express Authorities against you: And
that I hope is a good Argument that our Possession is at least 300 Years better
than yours; and that you, not we, have been Innovators in this Particular.

79. Reply.] Had this Custom of Praying to Saints been only Ibid.
introduced in the Fourth Age, and been so dangerous as Moderns would persuade
the World that it is, certainly the succeeding General Councils would have
taken notice of it, or some One of the Fathers would have written against it.
But, on the contrary, we find the Fourth General Council allowing this
Invocation in the Third Person, Let Flavian the Martyr Pray for us.

80. Answ.] To your Instance from the Fourth General Council, I reply, That
besides that you your self confess that it is nothing to the purpose, there
being a mighty difference between wishing that the Saints would pray for us,
and praying to the Saints for their Aid and Succor, you should have known that
this Council was held in the middle of the Fifth Age, and so is without the
compass of what I am here to consider.

81. But I will go yet farther with you as to this Instance; and to that end I
must tell you, that your Authors have very much deceived you in their Accounts
of it. For first, It was not the Synod, but only a Party in that Synod, that
cried out, Let Flavian the Martyr pray for us. And secondly, Even they that did
cry out thus, were as far from designing to pray to Flavian at all, as you were
from understanding the meaning of their Exclamation. The Occasion of those
Words in short Labbe Conc. Tom. iv. Act. xi. p. 697. B.
was this: In the Eleventh and Twelfth Actions of that Council there arose a
difficult Debate concerning Bassianus and Stephanus, whether of the two was
lawful Bishop of Ephesus. Bassian had this Plea, That he had held it quietly
Four years; that Proclus and his Successors, Bishops of Constantinople, had
communicated with him as lawful Bishop of that See; among whom was Flavianus
but lately deceased. Upon this the Fathers that were of Bassianus Party urged
to the Synod, that Flavian by communicating with him, had acknowledged him to
be lawful Bishop of Ephesus: And thereupon press the Holy Bishops to have this
respect to Flavian a Catholic and Martyr, as to acknowledge Bassianus to be
the true Bishop, seeing he had Communicated with him as such. And here comes in
among other Expressions, this that is the Subject of our present Debate. The
Bishops and Clergy of Constantinople cry out, in Honor of their late Martyr,
This is the truth; this we all say: Let the Memory of Flavian be eternal; let
the Memory of the Orthodox Flavian be eternal: Flavian lives after his Death;
Let the Martyr pray (or entreat) for us; Flavian judges with us. This was the
Occasion of those words; and it plainly shows, that all they meant by them was,
That the Judgment of Flavian, a Holy Bishop and Martyr, should prevail with the
Synod to judge of Bassianus side, with whom He had Communicated.

82. As for your Argument, That had this Custom of Praying to Saints been
introduced in the Fourth Age, it would certainly have been condemned in the
following: I reply, First, That this is at most but a mere Presumption, against
plain and undoubted Matter of Fact, and such as not only this, but too many
other Corruptions which have crept into the Church, without any notable
Opposition for some time made to them, abundantly overthrows. But, Secondly,
Tho your Argument therefore (if we should allow it) would be good for little;
yet it has another Misfortune too, which most of your Proofs labor under, that
it is as false as it is unconclusive. For, Good Sir, did you never, in your
Enquiry into these Matters, hear of such a Canon as the Thirty fifth of the
Council of Laodicea, Anno 364. expressly condemning the Worship of Angels? Did
you never meet with such an Order as that of the Third Council of Carthage in
S. Austin's time, commanding all the Prayers Can. 23.
that were made at the Altar to be directed to the Father? At least I am
confident you cannot be ignorant what Vigilantius did in opposition to this
Superstition; and whose Piety S. Hierome himself (tho his hot Antagonist) could
not but acknowledge. Nor was he alone in this Quarrel: S. Jerome speaks of
several Bishops that were of his Party, and joined with him in his Endeavors
against this growing Evil. Even S. Austin himself, as appears from many Places
of his Works, spoke not a little contrary to it, and plainly insinuates he Vid.
Epist. ad Januar. Ep. 119.
would have done more, had not this Practice already so possessed Men's Minds,
that it was not safe so to do.

83. But to quit all these, The public Declaration which Epiphanius made
against the Collyridians (a sort of Women in those days Superstitious in their
Honor of the Blessed Virgin) is alone enough to show that this practice did
not pass without Opposition in those times. It Is true (says he) the body of
Mary was holy, but She Epiphan. Haeres 79. page 1061. C. D.
was not therefore God. She was a Virgin, and highly honored but She was not
set forth to us to be worshipped; but She her self worshipped him who was born
of her flesh. And therefore the holy Gospel has herein armed us before hand;
our Lord himself saying, Joh. 2.
Woman, what have I to do with thee? Wherefore does he say this? But only least
some should think of the Blessed Virgin more highly than they ought; He called
her Woman, as it were foretelling those Schisms and Heresies that should arise
upon Her account. -- But neither is Elias to be adored, tho he be yet alive:
Nor is St. John to be adored; nor Tecla; nor any of the Saints -- Ib. 1062. C.
If God will not permit us to worship Angels how much less the daughter of
Anna? -- Let Mary be held in Honor, but let the Ib. 1064. D.
Father, Son, and Holy Ghost be worshipped. Let no one worship Ib. 1065. B.
Mary. For tho She were most fair, and Holy, and Honorable; yet She is not
therefore to be adored. In a word; Let Ib. 1066. D.
Mary be held in Honor, but let God be Adored.

84 To conclude this Point you tell us;

Reply] That it seems most extravagant to you that Protestants Reply, page 18.
should demand of you to show them some testimonies of the Fathers of the first
Three Hundred years, who lived under persecution, few of whose Writings remain,
the greatest part being lost and destroyed, and yet reject the Fathers of the
IVth. Age who wrote when the Church began first to be in a flourishing
Condition. Can any one imagine that the Church when in Grots and Caverns taught
one thing, and when She came into the light practiced another?

85. Answ. What mere Harangue is this? But we must be contented where better is
not to be had. And therefore I reply, 1st. As to your insinuation, which since
Cardinal Perron first invented it, has been the constant common place of the
little crowd of Controvertists that have followed after, viz. That the Fathers
of the first Three Hundred years lived under persecution, and therefore wrote
but little, and of that little the greatest part was lost too; tho I can easily
excuse this in you as a Sin of Ignorance, yet I must needs say of the Cardinal
and Others, that they have herein greatly injured those Holy Men; who were
neither so lazy nor fearful as they have represented them to have been.

86. For not to say any thing of the foundation of all our Religion, the Holy
Scriptures, which were written within this period; how large a Catalogue has
Eusebius alone preserved of the works of those Holy Fathers: And yet how many
of the Latin Church has he omitted: Look into his History, and there you will
find those great names, Clemens Romanus, Papias, Quadratus, Aristides,
Hegesippus, Justin Martyr, Dionysius of Corinth, Pinytus, Apollinarius, Melito,
Modestus, Irenaeus, Theophilus, Tatian, Bardesanes, Clemens Alexandrinus,
Rhodo, Miltiades, Apollonius, Serapion, Heraclitus, Moscarinus, Candidus,
Sextus, and Arabien; all to have been Writers of the Second Century:
Tertullian, Judas, Beryllus, Hippolytus, Caius, Africanus, Dionysius
Alexandrinus, Nepos, Cyprian, Origin; in the Third. And the Writings of which
last Author only were said to have amounted to Six Thousand Volumes; and which
tho St. Jerome retrenched to a third part, yet still he left Two Thousand to
him.

87. In what sort of Writings were these Holy Men defective? Some published
Apologies for our Religion; Others disputed against the Heathens, the Jews, the
Heretick's of those times. Some wrote of the Discipline of the Church; Others
moral Discourses, for the direction of Men's Lives and Manners. Their Histories,
their Accounts of the Holy Men, who suffered for the Faith; their Comments on
the holy Scripture, their Sermons are yet upon Record: And when such was their
diligence, why should it be insinuated as if living under persecution they
wrote but little; and therefore that it is unreasonable to appeal to them?

88. Nor is your next pretense any better: that their Writings are lost and
destroyed: For tho it be indeed in great measure true, that in respect of what
they wrote there is but a small part brought down to us (and we have some
reason to believe that the Opposition they made to your Corruptions has been in
some See Def. of the Expos. p. 127. etc.
measure the Cause of it;) yet have we still enough to show us what the Faith
of those times was, and how vastly you have declined from it. And when both the
Writings of Holy Scripture, and of those Fathers that do remain speak so
plainly against you, we have no great reason to believe that those which are
lost were at all more favorable to you.

89. But can any one Imagine, that the Church when in Grots and Reply. p. 18.
Caverns should teach one thing, and when it came into the light practice
another? I answer, yes; this is very easy to be imagined. Affliction keeps men
close to their duty, whereas Prosperity too often corrupts the best manners.
When it pleased God to convert the Empire to Christianity, there were but too
many instances of Heathen Customs, accommodated to the principles of the
Gospel; and this was one. Whether it were that they could not so soon forget
their ancient Rites; or that they thought it a religious policy to extend the
pale of the Church by suiting Christianity as much to the Heathen Ceremonies as
it was possible, and to dispose men thereby the more readily to embrace it; Or
whether finally, that simplicity of the Gospel which suited well enough with a
State of persecution, was now thought too mean for an Established Church, the
Religion of the Emperor, and they were therefore willing to render it more
pompous, and set it off with greater luster in the Eyes of Men, tho in so doing
they a little departed from the purity of their lower and better State.

90. Let us add to this, the Opinion which then began to prevail among those
Holy Fathers, of the particular intercession of the Saints for us; and which
both the prayers that were made in those days at the memories of the Martyrs,
and the Miracles God was sometimes pleased to work there; not to say any thing
of the Visions and Apparitions that were sometimes thought to be seen there,
very much confirmed them in. Now this naturally prepared the way for the
Invocation which followed upon it. For now the Poets began instead of their
Muses, to call (more Christianly) upon the Saints and Martyrs to assist them.
The Orators, following the Genius of the Age, indulged themselves all the
liberty of their Eloquence, in Apostrophe's to the Saints at their Memories.
And as things seldom stop in their first beginnings, by degrees through the
Ignorance of some, and superstition of more; they fell into a formal
Invocation, about the beginning of the Vth. Century.

91. But here another accident fell out for the carrying on of this Service.
For about this time Nestorius began to teach that men ought not to call the
Blessed Virgin the Mother of God. Now this made some think his design was
secretly to revive the Heresy of Arrius or Sabellius under a new Cover; and
their Zeal for the Divinity of Christ made them in the Council of Ephesus, Anno
431 condemn his Opinion as Heretical; and in Opposition to Him they fell into
the contrary extreme, of an immoderate magnifying of Her; though (as I shall
presently show) they still continued within much better bounds than you do now:
It being almost Three Hundred years after this, before ever the Invocation of
Her or the Saints, was publicly Established in the Church. And this brings me
to my next Proposal; which was Secondly;

II. PERIOD.
To consider what Grounds this Superstition had in the IVth. Century.

92. And here, first, to what I said concerning the first beginnings of this
Invocation, viz. That the most part of your Allegations from this Age were
rather Rhetorical flights than formal prayers; you return very pleasantly.

Reply.] That the Rhetoric lies wholly at my door, who fly to so poor a shift.
That these passages are some of the duriores loci more difficult places which
some only nibbled at; Others could not digest; and I shift off under the notion
of Rhetorical Flights or Novelties.

93. Answ. One would think by this Droll you had been lately reading the
judgment of your University of Doway concerning Bertram. Although (say they) we do
not much value that Book, yet since he has been often Printed and is read by
many, and that in other ancient Catholick's we tolerate many Errors, and
extenuate, or excuse them; often times find out some contrivance or other to
deny them, or to set a convenient Gloss upon them when they are Opposed to us
in disputes, or in engaging with our Adversaries; we do not see why we should
not allow the same Equity to Bertram.

94. But what now is this shifting? Why I said that, which all the learned Men
in the World must allow to be true, viz. That the Fathers of the IVth. Age were
many of them great Orators, and made use of Rhetorical Addresses to the Saints.
And that from those conditions they sometimes expressly put into their Writings,
(...), etc. If thou have any sense, If thou have any concern for what is done
here below, and the like; we may reasonably conclude, that this was all they
meant, even where they do not express any such thing.

95. But did not those Fathers do somewhat more than this? Can all their
Expressions be fairly reduced to such Apostrophe's? To this I have already
said, that We do acknowledge that about the latter end of this Century, S.
Basil, Gregory Nazianzen, Gregory Nyssen, amongst the Greeks, and their great
Imitator S. Ambrose among the Latins, did begin to Invocate the Saints. And had
you thought fit to consult that Excellent Treatise to Discourse of Worship of
Saints in Answer to Mr. de Meaux's Appeal to the IV. Age.
which I referred you, or rather to take notice of what was said there, (for I
am apt to believe you did Consult it) I should not have been troubled with
these impertinences here. And therefore tho it were not difficult to find some
considerable faults with those few passages you have alleged from those Holy
Men; (as when you say that S. Basil exhorts those who are in Tribulatian to
fly to the Saints, those who are in joy to have recourse to them, whereas He
only Historically relates what they did do, He (says he) who is afflicted flies
to them, He who is in joy runs to them) yet I shall quit all to you, and
without either shifting or nibling leave you to make the most you can of them.

96. But then that you may not put any more such Crude notes upon your Reader
as you have done here, where you say, That Protestants grant Praying to Saints
to have been established in the IVth. Age: I will very briefly transcribe from
two Learned Men of our Church some considerable differences between what the*
Fathers of this Century did, and what you do now; and of which if you will not
yet be persuaded to take any notice, I hope at least all indifferent persons
will see by them how impertinently you allege their Authority for your Excuse.

First, That in your Church, Prayer to Saints is looked upon Ushers answer to a
challenge. P. 409.
as a part of Worship that is due to them; insomuch that (as I have shown)
Cardinal Bellarmine places it among one of those Advantages that accrues to
them upon their Canonization: But this those Holy Fathers never believed; on
the contrary they absolutely define prayer, as a service proper to God only,
and argued against the Arrians upon this very Topic, that Christ must needs be
God, because the Church prayed to him.

If you pretend that there are two sorts of Prayers, one proper to God, another
that is not: I reply, 1. That this is false, because (as we have seen) all
Prayer is a Religious Worship, and therefore proper to God only. Secondly, It
concludes nothing; because you offer the most proper sort of Prayer for Help
and Assistance to the Saints, that you can do to God himself.

Secondly, In your Church you allow mental Prayer as well as Vocal to be made
to the Saints: But in the Primitive, this P. 401.
was reserved as peculiar to Him who searches the Heart, and alone knows the
Secrets of all the Children of Men.

Thirdly, In your Church it is resolved that the Saints are capable of hearing
and knowing your requests: In the Primitive this P. Ibid. etc.
was never determined, and the contrary seems to have been the most generally
received.

Fourthly, In your Church formal Prayers are made to the Saints; But the
Addresses of these Holy Fathers were either wishes P. 405.
only, or requests of the same nature with those which are in this kind usually
made to the living; where they who are requested, be evermore accounted in the
Number of those that pray for us, but none of those that are prayed unto by us.

Fifthly, In your Church the Saints are made not only joint Petitioners with
us, but Advocates too; and that to plead not only P. 408.
Christ's Merits, but their own likewise. But against this these Fathers openly
protested as an open derogation to the high prerogative of our Saviors
meritorious Intercession, and a manifest encroachment upon his Great Office of
Mediation.

Sixthly, In your Church it is thought a more proper way of access, and a surer
means of obtaining your requests to address by P. 410: 416.
some Saint to God, than to go immediately to the Throne of Grace, through our
Savior Christ. But this those Fathers earnestly opposed, exhorting all men to
go directly to God by his Son Jesus Christ.

Seventhly, In your Church the Saints are indifferently called upon all the
World over; which does in effect attribute a Divine Discourse in Answer to Mr.
de Meaux's Appeal to the IVth. Age. p. 82. etc.
perfection, viz. That of Omnipresence to them: But in the Primitive Church,
those who sought the Intercession of the Saints, limited their presence to some
determinate places, as particularly to their Memories, where they thought them
within Hearing; and did not call upon them indifferently every where.

Eighthly, This in your Church is an established practice; they who oppose it
are declared to do wickedly, and an Anathema is pronounced against them on that
account. But in the Primitive there was no Rule, or Order for it; it was the
effect of a private and voluntary Zeal, encouraged it may be by the Guides of
the Church, but no part of the established Service of it.

97. And this may suffice to show how vain your pretenses to the Antiquity even
of this Age are to warrant your Superstition; and upon what slender grounds you
affirm, after your Master the Bishop of Meaux, that this Invocation of Saints
was Established, nay that we grant it was Established in the Fourth Age. But to
convince you yet more with what little reason you either boast of this, or tax
us with receding from our old principle of being tried by the Fathers of the
First Four General Councils; upon this account I will now make you a more
Liberal offer; and that is to prove if you can any Authentic Establishment of
this Service in the Church. I do not say now in the Sixth Century; but in the
Seventh: Nay or even before the latter end of the Eighth: In short, I do affirm
that the first solemn Establishment of it was in the Second Council of Nice
787. and indeed that Synod which decreed the Worship of Images in opposition to
the Second Commandment, was the most proper to define the Religious Invocation
of Saints contrary to the First: And because there is something almost as bad
in the manner of the Establishment, as in the thing it self, I will close all
with a brief account of it.

98. About the end of the Sixth Century both the Worship of Images, and the
Invocation of Saints, having taken deep root in the minds of many Superstitious
persons; Controversies began to arise about them; and generally the same
persons were found to be either Friends or Enemies to both.

In the year 754 Constantine Copronymus called a Synod of Baron ad Ann. 754. N.
38. Spondane. Ibid. N. 6.
338 Bishops, to Examine into these matters, and both the Invocation of Saints,
and Worship of Images were utterly condemned by them.

99. Thirty years after this Council the Abettors of these Superstitions
Binnius in Syn. Constable. p. 1663. T. VI. Council. Labbe.
prevailing, another Anti-Synod was convened by the Au^hority of the Empress
Irene at Nice. In Action. VI.
this the Acts of the former Council of Constantinople were recited, and
instead of the Canons which they made in condemnation of this Worship; Defin.
XV. XVII.
two others were read in their Names, Establishing of it. How this came to pass
it is not known; but this the Annot. Epi-Phan. in def. XVII.
Nicene Fathers themselves acknowledge that the other Synod had established the
quite contrary: Nay they were such Enemies to this Invocation, that Binius
tells us, they exacted a solemn Binnius Annot. in Council. Constable. T. VI. p.
1663. Baron. l. c.
Oath of all their party, That they would never invocate the Saints, Apostles,
Martyrs, or the Blessed Virgin. And yet have these good Fathers transmitted
down to Posterity those two spurious Canons of the Council of Constantinople,
as approving that very Worship, which the Council in the true definitions of it
had utterly disclaimed.

100. As for the Synod of Nice its self; if the definitions there made were of
any force; that of Frankford, seven years after, has utterly taken it away; in
which it was so wholly abrogated, Act. Council. Franc. in lib. Cant. praef. in
l. 1.
and annulled, as not to be placed in the number of Synods, or be any otherwise
esteemed of than that of Ariminum. And I should beglad you would find me any
other (but pretended) establishment of it, before your Synod of Trent in the
very last Age.

I have only now remaining in the last place to show;

SECT. IV.
What our Reasons are against this Service?

101. You had asked me in your Vindication, What Authority have you to oppose
us? You say that [to invocate Saints] is repugnant to Gods Word: Show that
word, if you cannot we are in possession, and the Antiquity and
Un-interruptedness of our Doctrine, Vindic. p. 30.
besides the reasonableness and innocence of it, confirms us in our belief.

102. To this I answered; That every text of Scripture that appropriated Divine
Worship to God alone was a demonstration Def. page 9.
against you: And that that one passage of St. Paul, Romans X. 14. How shall they
call upon him in whom they have not believed? were not men willing to be
contentious, might End the Controversy. And for the Authority you speak of,
that it was rediculous to pretend prescription for that, which has not the
least foundation neither in Holy Writ nor in Primitive Christianity; of which
not one instance appears for the first Three Hundred years after Christ, and
much to the contrary.

103. To this you now reply in your Margin with great Assurance; Reply p. 21..
16.
Protestants destitute of Scripture Proofs against the Doctrine of Invocation
of Saints: But all you have to say in the Book is, That you do not give Divine
Worship to the Saints, nor call upon them in that strict sense in which they
are Duties only to be paid to God. That is to say, you play with Words, and
make use of such distinctions as if they were allowed, a man might evacuate any
other of Gods Commands, without a possibility of being confuted. And I desire
you to tell me what answer you would make an Impudent Woman that should give
her Husbands Bed to another, and being charged by you for breaking the Seventh
Commandment, should tell you that you were not to be so uncharitable as to
judge of what she did by the External Act, that the Law forbad only lying with
another man, as with her Husband; and that in this strict sense she was still
Innocent, by reserving that highest Degree of Conjugal affection to him only,
the giving whereof to another would make her guilty.

104. But since you are so desirous to know what our Reasons against this
Invocation are, I will now very freely lay them before you, if you will first
give me leave only to prepare the way for them, by stating truly the difference
between us in this matter, which you are wonderfully apt either to mistake or
to palliate.

105. You tell us in your Vindication, That All you say, is that it is lawful
to pray to the Saints; and so again in your Reply. Vind. p. 30. Repl. p. 11.
Expos. Sect. IV. p. 5. Papist Repl. N. 2. p. 2.
The difference (you say) between us is, Whether it be lawful for us to beseech
or entreat them to pray for us? Monsieur de Meaux in the same moderate way
tells us, that the Church teaches that it is profitable to pray to the Saints:
And the Representer (from the Council of Trent) says of a true Papist, That his
Church teaches him (and he believes) that it is Good and profitable, to desire
the intercession of the Saints, reigning with Christ in Heaven. In your
Discourses with those of our Communion, there is nothing more Ordinary with
you, than to make them believe, that you value not praying to the Saints, nor
Condemn any for not doing it. That if this be all they scruple in your
Religion, they shall be received freely by you, and never pray to a Saint as
long as they live. Nay I have heard of some who have gone so far in this
matter, as to venture their Religion upon it, that you do not necessarily
require the practice or profession of this service at all; nor pronounce any
Anathema against us for opposing of it.

106. But this is not ingenuous; nor as becomes the Disciples of Christ. For
tell me now I beseech you: If we unite our selves to your Church, will you not
oblige us to go to Mass with you? Or can you dare for our sakes to alter your
Service, and leave out all those things that relate to the Blessed Virgin and
to the Saints in it? Shall we be excused from having any thing to do with your
Litanies and Processions, your Vespers or your Salves? Or will you purge all
these too in Order to our Conversion? When we lie in our last Agonies, will you
be content to Anoint us in the Name of the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost; and
leave the Angels, Archangels, Patriarchs, Prophets, and Apostles, Martyrs,
Confessors, Virgins, and all the Saints out of the Commission? And when our
Souls are now expiring, shall we be sure you will not then at least trouble us
with that long Beadroll which your Office prescribes to be called upon in that
Ceremony? If you have indeed the Liberty to do this, why do ye not use it, and
remove so great a stumbling block as this out of our way? But if you cannot
dispense with these things for our common Conversion, how shall we believe that
you can do it to satisfy a private Proselyte?

107. The truth is Invocation of Saints in your Church is not esteemed so
indifferent a matter as you would have it thought to be. It is a Worship you
suppose due to them: And to which they acquire a right by their Canonization.
So Cardinal Bellarmine informs us: And therefore in your Profession of Faith
set forth by the order of Pope Pius IVth. you are obliged with a firm Faith to
believe and profess, that the Saints, who reign together with Christ, are to be
Venerated and Invoked. And tho the Alarm which the Council of Trent was in upon
the News of the Popes sickness, and the haste which thereupon they made to
conclude that Synod permitted them not to frame any Canons in this last, as
they had done in the other Sessions; yet the materials put together in the
Chapter shows us what Anathema's would have been thundered against us. For to
take it only as it lies in that Session. Council. Trid. Sess. 25.
There we find the Bishops and Pastors of the Church commanded to teach (what
therefore I hope is undoubtedly the Churches sense in this point) That the
Saints who Reign together with Christ offer up their Prayers to God for Men:
That it is Good and Profitable in a suppliant manner to call upon them: And
that for the obtaining benefits of God by his Son Jesus Christ our Lord, who is
our only Savior and Redeemer, we should fly to their Prayers, Aid and
Assistance. They declare that those who deny (which you know we all do) that
the Saints who enjoy Eternal Happiness in Heaven are not to be invoked, or say
that this Invocation is Idolatry (as we generally believe it to be) or that it
is contrary to the Word of God; or derogatory to the Honor of the One Mediator
between God and Man Christ Jesus; or that it is foolish to supplicate those who
Reign in Heaven in word or in mind; do think WICKEDLY.

108. These are the words of your Council. If therefore you permit your
Prosolytes to profess what they do not believe; if you receive those as good
Catholics into your Church, whom nevertheless you know to remain still
infected with wicked Opinions, contrary to the Doctrine and Practice
established amongst you; If you allow them to assist at your prayers, without
any intention to join in them, nay in an Opinion that they could not pray with
you, without committing a grievous sin; Then go on to make folks believe, as
you do, that you oblige no body to pray to the Saints, and that they may be of
your Church, and yet still believe or do what they please in this matter. But
if otherwise this be all gross Hypocrisy, if there be nothing but cheat and
design in these pretenses; then may I humbly desire all sincere Members of our
Communion to beware of such Guides, as value not how they charge ours, or
palliate their own Religion, so they may but by any means draw unwary men into
their Net.

109. But the Council of Trent goes yet further: It does not only Establish
this Doctrine, but in express terms Anathematises those who oppose it: For in
the close of that Chapter I but now mentioned, Council. Trid. Ibid.
thus it decrees: If any one shall teach or THINK contrary to these Decrees:
let him be ANATHEMA. All which your Epitomator Caranza thus delivers in short,
The Synod commands Caranza Sum. Sess. XXV. Conc. Trid. p. 482. Lovami 1681.
(all those who have the care of Souls) that they should teach the Invocation
of Saints; the Honor of Relics; and the Use of Images; and that those who
teach otherwise do think WICKEDLY. And if any one shall teach or think contrary
to these Decrees, Let him be ANATHEMA.

110. It remains therefore that your Church does teach and require of all its
Members both the profession and practice of such an Invocation, as I have
before explained: And of which I now undertake to show:

1. That it is repugnant to Gods Holy word. 2. Contrary to Antiquity. 3. That
is unreasonable in the constitution; and 4. Unprofitable and unlawful in the
Practice.
I. It is repugnant to Gods Holy Word.
111. And here, First I will not doubt once more to tell you that to pray to
Saints after the manner that it is now done in the Church of Rome, is contrary
to all those passages of Holy Scripture which attribute Religious Worship to
God only; such as Deuteronomy. VI. 13. Thou shall fear the Lord thy God and serve Him,
and swear by his Name; and again Chap. X. 12, 20. XIII. 4. etc. All which our
Savior Christ has taught us to interpret with such a restrictive term, as
excludes all others from a share in our Service. Mat. IV. 10. It is Written,
Thou shall Worship the Lord thy God, and Him ONLY shall thou serve. I have
already shown that all Prayer made to a person that is absent, with a
Confidence that he is able both to know our wants, and to hear our Prayers, and
to answer our desires, is in its own nature a Religious Worship. Now then from
these places of Holy Scripture, I thus argue: It is repugnant to Gods Word to
give any proper Acts of Religious Worship to any but God only; but all such
prayer as is made in your Church to the Saints departed, are proper Acts of
Religious Worship; and therefore it must be contrary to Gods Word to pray to
any but God only.

112. Nor am I here at all concerned in your distinctions of a Supreme and an
Inferior Religious Honor; seeing both you and I are agreed that all Honor
properly Religious (such as Prayer) is comprised under these prohibitions. If I
were, I would then tell you that the Devil here did not require of Christ such
a Supreme Worship, but on the contrary acknowledged himself to have a Superior,
from whom He derived his Power of disposing of all the Kingdoms of the Earth,
and the Glories of them. All he desired was to have some Religious Honor paid
to Him. And our Savior by alleging this Sentence of the Law against it,
Evidently shows that it is not only such a supreme Religious worship as some of
you pretend, but that all such Honor in general, is the peculiar service of
God alone. But this (if you stand to your own principles) you cannot object,
and for others, what I have now said may suffice to obviate their pretenses.

113. Secondly, What I have now concluded from this general Principle of Holy
Scripture, I will in the next place more particularly enforce from these other
passages, where the worship of Creatures is expressly prohibited. In the Xth. of
the Acts, when Cornelius fell down at St. Peter's feet, and would have
worshipped him, he took him up saying, I my self also am a man. It Acts X. 25.
is a poor shift here to say, that Cornelius would have worshipped St. Peter
with a supreme divine worship; he was not certainly so ignorant as to think,
that when the Angel bid him send to Joppa for Simon Peter, who lodged with
Simon a Tanner, he meant he should send for the great God that had made Heaven
and Earth. Nor is it of any more moment which others amongst you suggest, viz.
That Cornelius did well to adore him, but that St. Peter out of modesty refused
it. And the answer he gave, I my self also am a man, utterly overthrows all
such insinuations; being as much as if he had said, that no Man whatsoever was
to be worshipped.

114. But this will more evidently appear in another instance, viz. that of St.
John, Revel. XIX. 10. who when in his Ecstacy Rev. XIX. 10. XXII. 8.
he fell down and would have worshipped the Angel that discoursed with him, the
blessed Spirit utterly forbad him; See (says he) thou do it not, for I am thy
fellow servant: WORSHIP GOD. In which words are plainly established these two
Conclusions against this service; 1st. That Angels (and so likewise the Saints)
being our fellow Servants are not to be worshipped: 2dly, That God only is to
be adored.

115. But St. Paul is yet more plain: He exhorts the Colossians in general, and
in them us: Colos. II. 18. Let no man beguile Colos. II. 1^.
you of your reward in a voluntary humility and worshipping of Angels. It is
answered by some among you, that this was said in Opposition to the Heresy of
Simon Magus who would have Sacrifice offered to the Angels: Or at least of some
Others, who thought that though Christ had abolished the Law, yet was it still to
be observed out of respect to the Angels by whom it had been delivered. But
besides that I do not find any such thing charged by any of the Ancients upon
Simon Magus, as is pretended; had S. Paul designed only to forbid one
particular Act of Religious Worship being paid to them, would he in General
have said that they were not to be Worshipped? Or had he intended to signify
the abolishing of the Law, would he not have said so here, as well as in his
other Epistles; and not have given such an obscure insinuation of it, as when
he meant to forewarn them against observing the Law, to bid them have a care of
worshipping Angels. But the truth is the meaning of the Text is too plain to be
thus eluded. And I shall give it to you in the words of an ancient Father who
lived in those very times in which you yet pretend such a service was
established: Those who maintained an Observance of the Law together Theoderet
in loc.
with the Gospel, taught also that Angels were to be worshipped; saying that
the Law was given by them. This Custom remained a long time in Phrygia and
Pisidia. Upon which account the Synod of Laodicea in Phrygia, forbad them by a
Law to PRAY TO ANGELS. But.

116. Thirdly, And to come more immediately to the Worship of Invocation. The
same Apostle in that Question, Romans X. 14. Romans X. 14.
How shall they call upon Him in whom they have not believed? furnishes us with
another maxim of Holy Scripture against all such Prayers; viz. That no one is
to be invoked in our religious addresses, but He only in whom we believe. But
now Reason, Scripture, the Common Creeds of all Christians show that we are to
believe ONLY in God the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, and therefore upon Him
ONLY must we Call. As for your distinction that this indeed in one sense is
very true, but then in another and secondary sense Others besides God may be
both believed Reply. p. 21.
in, and called upon; if you mean in a civil respect, it is indeed very true,
but nothing to your purpose, seeing in this sense we can no more believe in
than we can call upon such persons as are absent from us, and know nothing at
all of us, which is the Case of the Saints departed. But for believing in a
religious sense, as it is properly an Act of Divine Faith, and the foundation
of that Assurance with which we call upon God by our Savior Jesus Christ; this
admits of no distinction, nor may it by any means, or in any measure be
applied, without Sin, to any other than God alone.

117. I will add but one principle more of Holy Scripture against this Service,
and so close this first Point. Romans XIV. 23. Romans XIV. 23.
That whatsoever is not of Faith is Sin. But now those Prayers which have no
foundation in Holy Scripture cannot be of Faith; for (says the same Apostle
Romans X. 17.) Faith comes by Hearing, and Hearing by the word of God; And
therefore such Prayers must be Sin. If God has any where revealed it to you,
that you may lawfully give such a religious Worship to the Saints, show this,
and our dispute is ended. But if you cannot do this, nor by consequence cannot
pray to them with any well grounded persuasion of Conscience, that this is what
God allows, and what the Saints are capable of receiving, I do not see how it
can be avoided but that to you it must be sin so to do. (...), S. Basil. Reg.
Miral. 78. cap. 22.
(...). As an ancient Father argues from this very principle in the like manner.

118. For the Other part of this Service, the intercession of the Saints for
us; I might to this Oppose all those passages of the New Testament, where
Christ is set forth to us as our only Mediator. But I shall content my self
with one single text, 1. Tim. II. 5, 6. There is one God, and one Mediator
between God 1 Timothy II. 5. 6.
and Men, the Man Christ Jesus, who gave himself a Ransom for all. Now if
there be but one Mediator, then Saints and Angels are not Mediators as you
pretend. If the foundation of Christ's Mediatorship be this, That he gave
himself a Ransom for all; then seeing the Saints have not done this, it must
follow that neither can they be our Mediators. And this cuts off your new
distinction of a Mediator of Intercession, and a Mediator of Redemption; which
besides that it is the issue of your own Brains, and was invented only to
support a tottering Cause, is here utterly destroyed; seeing the Foundation of
Christ's Mediating now in Heaven, and appearing in the presence of God for us,
is by virtue of His being our Mediator of Redemption upon Earth; and he
therefore is become our intercessor there, because He shed his blood for our
Expiation here. This is that great Argument upon which the Author to the
Hebrews so much insists, Chap. IX. X. And the Analogy of the High Priest under
the Law, making first the Expiatory Sacrifice for the people, and then Entering
into the Holiest to appear before God for them, most evidently confirms it to
us. And this may suffice for the 1st. Point, That this Service is contrary to
the principles of Holy Scripture.

II. It is Contrary to Antiquity.
119. And here I am fallen into a vast Ocean; and should never have ended,
should I go about particularly to show how vain your pretenses are to
possession for this superstition. It shall suffice me at present only to point
out to you a few of those Remarks which others have more largely pursued; and
which do abundantly declare how little conformable the best and highest
Antiquity has been to what you now practice.

120. I have already given some short account of the first three Centuries: And
how little able you are to lay any claim to the Authority of them. You have
there seen what the Opinion was of those Holy Fathers, touching the State of
the Saints departed: How they thought that they do not yet enjoy the Beatifick
Vision, and by consequence were not in a condition to be called upon by the
Church on Earth. I have shown you the Fathers arguing against the Arrians for
the Divinity of Christ from the Churches praying to Him; and which evidently
proves that they thought none but God was capable of such a service. I have
offered you the definition which those Holy Men gave of Prayer; viz. That it
was an Address to God, a Conversing with God, and the like; and in all which
they still restrained it to Him as His own peculiar prerogative. There we find
no mention of any calling upon the Blessed Virgin or the Saints. No distinction
of supreme and inferior religious Worship; of Mediators of Redemption and
Intercession: in short none of those Evasions with which all your discourses on
this Point are now filled; and without which indeed, according to your
principles, it is impossible to explain it.

121. But I will now add yet more. It was a general custom in the third and
following Ages (concerning which we are particularly to enquire) to pray for
the Saints departed, for Martyrs and Confessors, nay for the Blessed Virgin her
self, as has been elsewhere fully proved, and I suppose you will not have
Discourse of Purgatory and Prayers for the dead.
the confidence to deny it. Now let me appeal to any reasonable man to say;
could the Church in those times have prayed in a suppliant manner to the
Saints, as Reigning with God, nay and Gods themselves by participation, to aid,
and assist them, when on the contrary they thought them in such a State as to
need prayers to God for them? Is it to be believed, that they Addressed to
those as Mediators and Intercessors with God, for whom they themselves
interceded to God? It is a memorable remark that has been made to confirm the
force of this Argument, that since the prevalency of this praying to Saints in
the Church of Rome, your public rituals have had a notable change. Those very
Saints which in your ancient Missals you prayed for, being now a la Mode prayed
to. Thus upon IV. Kalends of July in the Sacramentary of Pope Gregory I. above
600 years after Christ we find Sacrament. Greg. p. 112.
this Prayer made in behalf of S. Leo, one of your Popes.

Grant O Lord that this Oblation may be profitable to the Soul of thy Servant
Leo.

But in the present Roman Missal, the Collect is changed, and Missale Romans page
612.
the Address made by the Intercession of the Saint now, that was formerly made
by way of Intercession for Him.

Grant to us, O Lord, that by the Intercession of Blessed Leo, this Offering
may be profitable to US.

And of this change, Pope Innocent the 3d. gives this honest Decret lib. 3.
tit. 41. p. 1372, 1373.
account: Viz. That the Authority of Holy Scripture says, that he injures a
Martyr, that prays for a Martyr; (wherein yet his Infallibility mislead him, it
being S. Austin and not the Scripture that said so) and they do not want our
Prayers, but we theirs. Which the Gloss thus more fully expresses; It was
changed (viz. this prayer for Pope Leo) because anciently they prayed FOR Him,
but now TO Him. And from whence therefore we may warrantably infer, that in
those first Ages praying TO Saints was not established, seeing it was then the
general Custom to pray FOR them.

112. The truth is, the whole face of the Ancient Church seems clearly opposite
to the present practice: Some doubted whether the holy Saints departed, do at
all concern themselves for us, or conduce any thing to our Salvation. So
Origin. And these to be sure never prayed to them. Others made open opposition
to such service. So the Council of Laodicea; S. Epiphanius, Vigilantius, and
others before mentioned. Now you Canonize Saints, and esteem it necessary so to
do, to prevent men's praying to those in Heaven, who are it may be at this time
tormenting in Hell. But in those first Ages we find none of these Apotheoses;
and Bellarmine himself could not find out any instance of any Saint De beatit.
SS. lib. 1. C. 8.
that was Canonized before the VIIIth. Century. If we go into your Churches, we
find them filled with Altars and Chapels, Images and Relics of the Saints:
Candles are lighted up before them; Incense is burned to their Honor: But in
those Primitive Ages, not the least shadow is to be met with of any such
Superstitions. Your Books of Devotion are now filled with little else than
advises how to pray to the Blessed Virgin; to list your selves into her
service; to vow your selves to her Worship; her Psalter, and Rosary, and
Salutation is in every part of your performances. Even the Catechism of the
Council of Trent it self, the most Cautious Book that has been set forth for
some Ages in your Church, having taught you first how to pray to God, fails not
to instruct you that you must in the next place have recourse to the Saints,
and make Prayers to them.

How comes it to pass, if this were the primitive practice too, that none of
those Holy Fathers, in any of their practical discourses have ever treated of
these things? Nay on the contrary, they every where thunder in our Ears, that
Protestant, Heretical Maxim, that we must pray to GOD ONLY, and that we ought
not to address our selves to any other.

123. In all your Sermons, you call upon the Blessed Virgin for assistance. In
the Ends of your Books, her Name seldom fails of standing in the same return of
praise in which God and our Savior are Glorified. Your public service, and
private prayers, are all overrun with this superstition. But is there any
thing of this in the Primitive Rituals? Look I beseech you into the account
that has been given us of the public service of the Ancient Church by Justin
Martyr, Tertullian, nay by the Clementine Constitutions themselves: Consult the
Relation which Pliny made to the Emperor Trajan of their Manners. Try those
famous Liturgies of the Church within the first 100 years, which no body has
the Reply. p. 19.
happiness to be acquainted with but your self; see if you can pick us up but
one instance, but some shadow of an instance to flourish with on this occasion.

124. What are the Lives of your Saints, but continued Histories of their
Devotion to the Blessed Virgin, and the Saints, and the favors which upon that
account they received from them? But in the ancient Compilers of such kind of
Discourses, we find only dry accounts of their Piety toward God; of their Zeal
and Constancy in the Faith; of their patience in suffering any thing, rather
than submit to such superstitious practices as these, which the Heathens indeed
would have drawn them to, but which the Church utterly abhorred. But for their
knight errantry in Honor of the Blessed Virgin; for watching whole Nights
before her Images; or in her Chapels; for turning Vagabonds in order to the
visiting her Chamber at Loretto; or fetching a Feather from Compostella; of
this New Method of Piety there are not the least traces.

125. I might run out these remarks into almost infinite Examples, were they
not things as well known, as your contrary superstition is notorious. But I
shall reserve these, and some other Observations of the like kind, till you
think fit to call me to account for them. In the mean time I conclude from this
short specimen I have here given, that certainly the face of the Church must be
very much changed as to these things; Or otherwise that so great a difference
could not possibly be found in the Lives, the Writings, the Actions, the
Customs, the Opinions, the Expressions, Prayers, Practices, of those holy
Fathers, from what we see and lament in your Church at this day. I go on
thirdly to show;

III. The Unreasonableness of this Service.
126. And for that I shall offer only this one plain Argument; If the Saints
cannot ordinarily hear your prayers, nor are able to attend distinctly to those
Addresses that are made to them: If those whom you Canonize are not indeed such
as you suppose, but many at this day tormented in Hell, upon whom you call for
assistance in Heaven: If some of those to whom you pray never had any being,
but either in the Heralds Office, or in the fruitful Womb of a Legendaries
Brain: Then it cannot be doubted but that to pray to the Saints must be the
most unreasonable Devotion in the World; you speak to the Wind, and call upon
them to as little purpose as if you should here in England make an Address to a
Man in China or Tartary; and you might as well have continued the Deities, as
you do the practice of the ancient Heathens in this service: It being
altogether as wise a Devotion to pray to a Jupiter or an Apollo that never
lived in the World, as to a St. George or a St. Christopher that never had any
more being in it than they. And yet were we now to inquire into these
Circumstances, without a full knowledge of which this Invocation can never be a
reasonable service, what uncertain accounts should we receive from you. For,

127. First. As to the main foundation of all Whether the In his suppressed
Edition. Expos. of Mr. de Meaux. Sect. IV. p. 7.
Saints hear your prayers? In what doubt is your Bishop of Meaux still in his
Exposition, and you know he was once in a great deall more? All he has to say
is that you teach That your prayers to the Saints are very profitable, Whether
it be that they know them by the Ministry and Communication of the Angels; or
whether it be that God himself makes known to them our desires by a particular
Revelation; or whether it be that he discovers the secret to them in his Divine
Essence in which all truth is Comprised. If we enquire of your more Ancient
Authors, we shall find all full of Uncertainty. Lombard thought it was not
incredible to suppose Lombard sent. lib. IV. did. 45. Scotus ibid. Qu. 4.
Gabr. Biel. in Can. Miss. l. 31.
that the Saints might know the prayers that were addressed to them. Scotus
went a little farther, and judged it to be probable that God revealed these
things to them: And so did Gabriel Biel. Those who pretend to more certainty
yet are able to give but very little reason why; Bellarm. de Eccles. Triumph.
l. 1. cap. 20.
unless you will take this for a reason, that their Church generally belives
so, and that otherwise it would be vain and absurd to pray to them. In short,
how the Saints hear your prayers you do not pretend to know; and I desire you
to give Me but one rational Argument to convince me that (by whatever means it
is) they do ordinarily, and constantly, and certainly, and particularly,
understand the Addresses that you make to them. For to deal freely with you, I
never yet met with any thing that but inclined me to believe this, but much to
the contrary.

128. Secondly, Concerning the Canonization of your Saints, may I beg leave to
ask you: Are you sure that all those whom your Church has placed in Heaven are
truly there? if you are not, I am sure you do very unreasonably to pray to
them. Now this I the rather desire to be satisfied in because here again I find
your Authors very much unresolved what to say.

First, It is but the common Opinion, (no matter of Faith) Bellarm. l. 1. de.
Beat. SS. c. 8. 9. Vasquez. l 1. de Ador. disp. V. c. 3.
that the power of Canonizing Saints belongs to the Pope; and therefore it
cannot be without all doubt whether those whom he Canonizes are infallibly
Saints or no.

Secondly, The Jesuit Vasquez tells us, there are Catholics (He means those of
your Communion) who do not think it without doubt that all whom your Church has
Canonized are indeed Saints: And he mentions no less a man than Cardinal
Cajetane. libr. de Indulg. c. 8. Canus loc. Theol. lib. 5: c. 5. Gerson de 4:
dom. cons. 2. etc. de Exam. doctr. cons. 1. See Bishop Taylours Polem. disc.
page 333.
Cajetane for one. And that Cardinal in the book to which Vasquez refers,
alleges the great Doctor of your Schools S. Thomas for another. To these I
will add Melchior Canus, Antoninus, and Gerson, who at most esteem it but
piously credible, not absolutely certain. But Augustinus Triumphus goes
farther; and doubts not freely to declare that all who are Canonized by the
Pope cannot be in Heaven. And Prateolus tells us that Herman the Author of the
Heresy of the Fratricelli was for twenty years together after his death
honored as a Saint, and then his body was taken up and burnt for a Heretic.
And now if you are not yet sensible of the danger you run by this means, whilst
you not only call upon a damned soul for aid and assistance, but (as in some of
your prayers you do) pray unto God so to give you Grace on Earth as he has
glorified them in Heaven; I shall leave it De SS. beat. l. 1. c. 9. Sect.
secundo.
to your own Cardinal Bellarmine to inform you of it.

Thirdly, It is confessed by those of your own Church that among your Canonized
Saints, some there have been whose Lives were not to be commended: Others whose
Opinions have been condemned as Heretical; and for my part, when I consider the
Character of some to whom you pray, such as Thomas a Becket, Dominick, etc. I
cannot but say, that if these be the men whom you place in Heaven, what the
poor Indians did of the Spaniards, that then the other is certainly the more
desirable portion. For, and I am persuaded that were but S. Martin again alive
to summon their Souls before him, as he once did that of a supposed Saint in
his time, they would make the same Confession that Vid Bellar. de beat. SS. l.
1. cap. 7.
wretched Spirit is reported to have done, and prove much more worthy your
Compassion than your Adoration. Now that which the more increases this danger is

Fourthly, The almost infinite Number of Saints that have been received amongst
you, and whose Consecration depending wholly on matter of Fact, in which you do
not pretend the Pope to be Infallible, it can hardly be supposed but that he
must have very often proved mistaken. For to keep only to your own Order; a
late Author of yours tells us, that your Domestic Saints Calendarium
Benedictinum ad 26. Dec.
alone did long since by computation amount to forty four thousand. And I find
another Dr. Jackson T. 1. p. 937.
list increasing them to fifty thousand. Now to consider all the Arts and
Intrigues that are used to procure these Canonizations; by what Popes many of
them have been placed in Heaven; what Characters several among them have in
your own Histories of their Lives; these and many other Reflections would I
confess prompt me, were I otherwise as well satisfied of the Innocence of this
Worship, as I am fully convinced of the unlawfulness of it, yet to pray to the
greatest part of your Saints, as he once did to Saint Cutbert; Si Sanctus sis,
Ora pro me: IF THOU ART A SAINT, pray for me.

129. It is I know, the last refuge of many, who consider this uncertainty, to
say, That at least your good intention shall render these Prayers acceptable to
God; for what (says the Learned Vossius These. Theol. p. 106.
Erasmus) if the Saints do not perceive our desires, yet Christ does know them,
and will for them give us what we ask? But yet still this will not make it a
reasonable Service; nor can you with a firm Faith call upon those in Heaven, of
whom you have at most, but a Pious Credulity that they are there: And though some
of your Authors do believe, that your own Piety shall excuse you, yet others
utterly deny it, and doubt not to say, that you may as well excuse the Heathens
themselves, who in worshipping the parts of the World, supposed (according to
Varro's Divinity) Catherinus Annot. in Cajet. dogm. de Canoniz. page 135.
that they Worshipped the Divine Nature, that was diffused through it. But

130. Thirdly, That which is the worst of all, is, that you have not only no
certainty of the Happiness of those Saints whom you Canonize, but you pray to
some who (for ought appears) never had any Being in the World.

Now among these, I shall not doubt in the first place, to account our own
Country Saint and Champion St. George, and of whom our English Legends still
recount so many Miracles; though Cardinal Baronius himself has confessed that
they are for the most Baron in Martyr. R. Apr. 23.
part absolutely false. In the Roman Breviary since the Reformation of it by
Pope Pius V. there is no account at all of his Life; and your own Ribadeneira.
ad 23. April.
Authors tells us the reason is, because there is no certain truth of any of
those things that are extant concerning him. And indeed, if the Ancient
Histories of this Saint were justly censured by Pope Gelasius, as Apocryphal,
we have no great reason to believe, that the latter Legends deserve any better
reception. As for the famous Story which still continues in those equally Books
of the Ignorant, The English Lives of the Saints, and the Sign Posts; where we
see this great Champion, like another Perseus, mounted to deliver the fair
Andromeda from the Dragons Mouth; Baronius charges Jacobus a Voragine with the
pure Invention of it, and almost every Body now, but our English Compiler, is
grown ashamed of it. In short, if there be any Foundation at all in Antiquity
for this Story, it is but little for the satisfaction of those who Worship this
Saint. Your own Authors confess, that this George lived about the time of
Dioclesian, that he was by Birth a Cappadocian; that he had Encounters with
Athanasius a Magician: Now all this seems to persuade us, that our S. George
was no other, than George the Arrian Bishop, who was also a Cappadocian by
Birth, who had Encounters with S. Athanasius, whom the Arrians called a
Magician; and who was Deified by those Heretics, after his violent Death in
the time of Julian. And in Memory of which perhaps it was, that they first
mounted him upon a Camel, (being led through the Streets upon one) and then for
greater decency changed it into a Horse; to which Jacobus a Voragine added the
Dragon and the Lady; with the Warlike Equipage of Cask and Lance: And thus is
our Tutelary Saint, brought under suspicion of being, if any thing at all, a
wicked Heretic; that persecuted one of the greatest Bishops of his time, for
asserting the Divinity of the Son of God; and yet is this Man still prayed to
in your Church; and I have now by me an Ancient Ritual in which he is seen
Armed at all points, his Spear in the Dragons Mouth, the Lady by him on her
Knees: and these Prayers addressed to him. Saint GEORGE, famous Martyr; Praise
and Glory become thee: By whom the princely Lady being grieved by a wicked
Dragon, was preserved.

Almighty and Everlasting God, who mercifully hear the prayers of those who
call upon thee; we humbly beseech thy Majesty, that as for the honor of thy
Blessed and Glorious Martyr S. George thou causedst the Dragon to be overcome
by a Maid, so by his Intercession thou would vouchsafe to defend us against
all our Enemies visible and invisible, that they may not be able to hurt us,
through Jesus Christ our Lord.



Now what is this but to mock God in his solemn service? To pray to him through
the Intercession of a man that either never lived in the World, or it may be
was one of his most hated Enemies; and deified by a crew of wretched Heretics,
for his fury in opposing the Eternal Generation of the Savior of us all.

131. And what I have thus chosen more particularly to insist upon in this
Example, I might show in several others not a whit less fabulous. Our Savior
in S. Luke gives a parabolical account of the different States of men in the
other World, under the names of Dives and Lazarus. As for the former there was
no great danger of making him a Saint. But for Lazarus he is transubstantiated
into a real man. Temples are built among you to his Honor: Anniversary
solemnites are Consecrated to Baron. Ann. ad Ann. 3.. 44.
his memory, and because he was represented in Scripture as full of sores, he
is now made the Patron of the Lepers in Heaven. From the Greek word signifying
a Spear, you have first found out a name for the Centurion that ranour Blessed
Lord into the Side; and having metamorphosed the Spear into a Man, it was no
hard matter to make the Man a Saint: And now upon the 15th. of March, who so
much Honored, as S. Longinus. Nay Baron. Not. in Mart. XV. March.
what is yet more pleasant, Baronius assures us that his Venerable Body is kept
in the Church of St. Austin at Rome.

132. S. Christopher is another of your Saints that never lived. He is
pretended to have suffered under Dagnus King of Lycia, who also never was in
the World; and being of a Giantly stature to have dwelt by a River side where
there was no Bridge, and there he made it his business in Charity to carry over
all that passed that way: Which our Savior so much approved as to suffer him
once upon a time to carry himself over upon his shoulders. Now all this
Cardinal Baronius confesses to Not. ad Martyrol. Jul. 25.
be a mere Legend; but our thorough paced English-Irish Collector, tho he
confesses he never saw any approved Author that said it, yet for the Pictures
sake which are so common amongst you, declares generously that he was resolved
to believe it. And the ancient Ritual I before mentioned, prays to our Savior
that in consideration of his riding over the River upon S. Christophers back,
he would deliver you from all dangers.

133. I should never have done should I insist on this manner upon all the
other Imaginary Saints whom you Worship. Such were our own Country-woman again,
S. Ursula and her 11000 Virgins; who is pretended to have been Daughter to
Dionet King of Cornwall, in the time of Marcian, when there was no such King in
England; and to have been Martyred at Cologn, whither she went by Ship, being
the first and last that ever sailed thither; and yet this Lady makes no mean
Figure in your Church. She is Patroness under God and the Blessed Virgin, of a
whole Religious Society; and with great Devotion prayed to, December 21. I
might to this Visionary Saintess, add others of the same Sex; S. Catharine, S.
Margaret, etc. But I shall content my self with one Memorable Instance, not so
commonly known, which may suffice to show with what uncertainty you pray to
many in these Devotions. The account is given by one of your own Communion, and
who himself discovered the mistake.

134. About eight Miles from Evora a City of Portugal, there Ressendii Epist.
ad Barthol. Kebedium. page 168.
is a place which they call the Cave of the Martyrs; where they pretend were
slain a great number of Christians with their Bishop and his two Sisters; to
one of which, called Columba, there was a Chapel erected, and in the place
where the other was slain, there issued out a Spring of sweet Water, called to
this day, Holy-well, and very good for curing a weak sight. The Sepulcher of
the Bishop himself is in a Church of the Blessed Virgins, empty, and open. Over
it is a Table of Stone supported by four Pillars, so that a Man might go under
it. Hither came all those that had Pains in their Loins, and imploring the aid
of this Martyr, they went away certainly Cured. There was also the Picture of
this Bishop: and upon this Stone Table they Sacrificed the Mass, in Honor to
him, calling him by his proper Name VIARIUS.

135. This was the ancient Tradition, and Worship. When Ressendius, who relates
this Story, came hither, in order to the publishing the Life of this Saint,
among others he was then Writing; he desired the Priest who had given him this
account of their Martyr, to show him if there were any ancient Records, or
Inscriptions, that confirmed it. Upon this he brought him to the Altar
beforementioned, and there he found this Inscription.

S. Q. JVL. CLARO. C. V. IIII. VI TO VIARVM CVRANDA RVM ANN. XXI.

Q. JVL. NEPOTIANO. C. I.

IIII. VIRO. VIARVM CVRAN DARVM. ANN. XX.

CALP. SABINA. FILIIS.

The Priest pointing with his Finger to these Words VIARUM CVRANDARUM, See
(says he) the proper Name of the Martyr VIARIUS: And for CURANDARUM, it is as
much as to say Cura Cutarum, i. e. a Bishop. As for the other Names (continued
he) I suppose they may be the proper Names of the other Martyrs that suffered
with him.

136. Ressendius held his Countenance as well as ever he could, but went
immediately away to Cardinal Alphonsus, who was at that time Bishop of Evora,
and told him all that had passed, and how a couple of Heathens, Overseers of
the Highways, had been Worshipped there for Christians, and Martyrs. The
Cardinal commanded the Tomb to be stopped up, to the great discontent of the
people, who had been wont to receive mighty relief by their Addresses to this
Viarius; and cursed the Learning and Curiosity of Ressendius, that had deprived
them of so great and useful a Saint.

137. I shall make no other Application of this Story, than what I find in the
complaint of another Learned man of your Church, Cassander Consult. p. 971.
as to this very matter. There is also (says he) another Error, not uncommon;
that neglecting, in a manner, the ancient and known Saints, the common People
Worship more ardently, and diligently, the new and unknown; of whose Holiness
we have but little assurance, and some of which are known to us only by
Revelation; insomuch that of several of them it is justly doubted, Whether EVER
THERE WERE ANY SUCH PERSONS IN THE WORLD.

138. From all these Considerations, I now conclude against the reasonableness
of this Invocation. 1. No Man can reasonably pray in Faith to such Persons, as
he can never be sure are able either to hear his Prayers, or to answer his
desires: But you can never be sure that your Saints are able to do either of
these; and therefore you cannot reasonably pray with any good assurance to
them. 2. It is unreasonable to pray to those as Saints, who, it may be, are not
in Heaven, nor ever shall be there: But this is very probably the Case of many
of your Saints, and you cannot be sure it is otherwise, when you address to
them; and therefore it is unreasonable in you to pray to them. 3. To pray to
those who never were in the World, is the most unreasonable thing that can be
imagined; but in your Prayers to many of your Saints, you address to those that
never were in the World; and therefore upon this, and upon all the foregoing
Accounts, I conclude it very unreasonable to pray to the Saints at all.

There is yet one thing more remaining to finish this whole Subject of
Invocation of Saints, viz.

IV. That it is Unprofitable, and Impious in the Practice.
First, That it is Unprofitable.

139. And if the former consideration stand good; this will necessarily follow
from it. For if either those whom you pray to are mere figments of your own
brain, that have neither Truth nor Existence; or if tho they do Exist, yet they
are not Saints as you suppose; or tho they should be Saints too, yet have no
means ordinarily and particularly to hear your prayers, nor can attend to those
numberless addresses that are at the same time from all the parts of the World
put up to them; it must then be a most unprofitable, as well as a most
senseless practice to pray to them; and what our Savior once objected to the
Samaritans, will be found no less true of you, that ye worship ye know not
what, nor why.

140. But let us allow that you invoke none but what have lived, and are
sanctified: Let us also grant that which yet the Holy Fathers so much doubted
of, that the Saints do already enjoy the Beatifick Vision; and therefore
(according to your Divinity) are capable of understanding your prayers, by
whatsoever way it be that they do so: I dare yet ask of you, what profit is
there in this service? For tell me now, I beseech you, O ye Worshippers of dead
men? Have we not an Advocate in Heaven, Jesus Christ the righteous, who is the
sole and full propitiation of our 1 John II. 1.
sins? Has he not promised that whatsoever we ask the Father in HIS NAME, we
shall receive it? Has he not told us that he Jo. XIV. 13. Ib. VI. 6.
is the Way, the Truth, and the Life? And that no one can come to the Father
but by him? Is it not he that has set us an Example how we ought to pray; when
ye pray say, Our Father which art in Heaven: Show us if you can any precept, or
encouragement, or Example, for going to any other. Is it that our Savior
Christ has not compassion enough for us, that you go to others as more
merciful? Thus some of you I know have said: But on the contrary the Scripture
tells us That we have not a High Priest Heb. IV. 15, 16.
which cannot be touched with the feeling of our Infirmities, but was in all
points tempted like as we are: And from thence presently infers Let us
therefore come boldly unto the Throne of Grace, that we may obtain mercy, and
find Grace to help in time of need. Or is it finally, that the interest of the
Blessed Jesus is not great enough with his Father; unless you add a mad
Francis, a bloody Dominick, a Rebellious Becket, an enthusiastic Ignatius, to
be joint Advocates with him? If these indeed be your thoughts, let us plainly
know the impiety of them? And upon what unchristian foundations the benefit of
this practice is established by you? But if you dare not say that any Saint in
Heaven can prevail, where Christ alone cannot; if you are ashamed to own, that
you think any one can love us more dearly, than he who gave himself for us, and
redeemed us with his own most precious Blood; or by consequence can be more
ready to hear and intercede for us: Tell me then, what profit is it, that
having this fountain of living water, you run to the broken Cisterns of the
merits and intercession of your fellow Creatures, which can hold no Water.

141. But I will go yet further, to show you the unprofitableness of this
service. It was objected by a great Man of your own Church; If (says he) the
Saints know our necessities, and Durand. in sent. IV. d. 45. q. 4.
those defects which we express in our Prayers: How comes it to pass that we do
not oftener find our selves relieved by them? To this he answers; That although the
Saints in Heaven have doubtless the greatest Charity imaginable for us, yet
they have withal their Wills so entirely conformed to the Will of God, as not
to lend any assistance to us, but according to what they see the Knowledge and
Will of God disposed toward us. An excellent reflection certainly; and which no
one can doubt to be most true. But then it will follow from it, that you do in
vain solicit the Saints, who cannot lend you any assistance, till God is
pleased to permit himself to be entreated for you. Whilst our Heavenly Father
is our Enemy, all the Host of Heaven are so too. We must first be reconciled to
him, before ever we can expect any favor or acceptance with them. In short, it
was the Conclusion of an ancient Father, whom I before mentioned, That the only
way to make the Angels and Saints our Friends, is to make God so first: And
though we know little of what those blessed Spirits above do for us, yet we have
all the reason in the World to believe that they Love and Hate according to the
Divine Pleasure; and if they do pray for us, the most ready way to obtain their
Prayers, is to be constant, and zealous, and persevering both in our Prayers
and Piety toward God, through his Son Jesus Christ our Lord.

142. I shall conclude this with the words of S. Austin, Let it not De vera
Religione. p 290. Lugd. 1664.
be any matter of Religion to us to Worship dead Men; because if they have
lived well, they desire no such Honor, but rather that we should Worship him;
by whose Illumination they rejoice, that we are Companions of their Piety. They
are therefore to be Honored for our Imitation, not to be Worshipped out of
Religion -- And the same let us think of Angels; that they above all things,
desire that we should, together with them, Worship God only, in whose Vision
they are happy -- Tying our Souls to him alone, from which Religion derives its
very Name, let us lay aside all Superstition. Behold I Worship one God, the One
principle of all things -- Whatsoever Angel loves this God, I am sure that he
loves me too. Whosoever remains in him, and can understand the Prayers of Men,
in him he hears me. Whosoever has God for his Good, does in him help me -- Let
the Adorers of the parts of the Universe tell me: What good person is there
that he does not reconcile to himself, who Worships him only whom every good
person loves, and in whose knowledge he rejoices, and by recurring to which
principle, he becomes good. Let therefore Religion bind us to the One God
Almighty, etc. But I insist too long on these Reflections: I add only,

Secondly, To close all, That this Invocation of Saints departed, is as
Impious, as it is Unprofitable.

143. For First, To take this Practice in the most Moderate Sense that may be,
yet to pray to any Creature after the manner that you do to the Saints
departed, is to make them the Objects of a proper Religious Worship, and to pay
that Service to the Creature, which is due only to the Creator; and this
certainly cannot be done without a very great Impiety.

144. Secondly, To pray to the Saints but only as Intercessors, even this does
usurp upon the peculiar Prerogative of our Blessed Savior, who is our only
Mediator, and whose singular Privilege it is to appear in the presence of God
for us. And to join others with Christ in his great Office and Employment, to
make to our selves new Mediators; what is this but tacitly (at least) to
imply, that we dare not trust either his Mercy, or his Interest; in the concern
of our Everlasting Salvation. But then

145. Thirdly, To pray, as you evidently do, not only that the Saints would
intercede for you, but that God would be merciful to you, not only through the
Merits of Christ, but of the Saint whose Memory you celebrate; this is a
downright undervaluing of our Savior's Blood, and does despite unto the
Covenant of Grace.

146. Fourthly, To pray to the Saints, (as if we may be allowed to understand
the meaning of plain words you do) as the Arbitrary Dispensers of Benefits to
you, that they would themselves grant you those things which you ask of them;
this makes your Service yet more intolerable. And though you seek to evade the
justice of this Censure by those unreasonable Expositions of your prayers, I
have before refuted, yet I am sure it ought to be more than enough to make us
avoid that practice which cannot be excused but by such forced Interpretations,
as should men use the like on other Occasions, all Society must be overthrown,
and Men's Words be no longer relied upon as sufficient to declare the Sense of
their Minds.

147. Fifthly, As to what concerns the practice of the people in this point, it
cannot be denied; nay, it is by some of your own Church openly complained of,
how much their hope and confidence, their Love and Service are hereby lessened
toward God; and what greater signs of Zeal appear in them toward the Blessed
Virgin, than toward our Savior Christ himself. And indeed, you who ought to
have better informed them, are the very Persons that have especially helped to
mislead them. It Is from you they have learnt, as a great practice of piety, to
salute her ten times, for God's once. It Is you that have taught them to join
Mary still with Jesus in their Mouths: Insomuch, as if it be possible, to let
her Name be the last Expression of their dying Breath. It Is you that have told
them, that to list themselves into her Fraternity, is one of the surest means
in the World to ascertain their Salvation. From you they learn in all their
prayers to call upon her: at the sound of a Bell thrice every day wherever they
are, or whatever they are about, to fall down upon their Knees and salute her.
Your Confessions, Absolutions, Excommunications, Vows, Thanksgivings,
Visitations, Commendations, Conjurations, are all transacted in her Name, as
well as in the Name of the Holy Trinity. Whilst our Savior Christ is
represented by you either as still in the state of Pupillage, an Infant in her
Arms, or expiring upon his Cross, she has her Crown, and Glory about her Head;
sometimes the Moon under her feet, and not seldom the whole Trinity joining to
set forth her Honor. Her Titles in all your Offices are Excessive: The Queen
of Heaven, the Mother of Divine Grace, the Mirror of Righteousness, the Seat
of Wisdom, the Cause of our joy, the Tower of David, the Ark of the Covenant,
the Gate of Heaven, the Refuge of Sinners, the Help of Christians, the Queen of
Angels, Patriarchs, Prophets, Apostles, Martyrs, Confessors, and all Saints:
These are the common Names you give her, in your Hymns, your Litanies and
Prayers to her. And what Impression all this must make upon untutored minds;
how much greater value they will be hereby apt to set upon her than upon Christ
himself, every man's reason will soon tell him, and a sad experience confirms it
to us.

148. But indeed Sixthly, It is here (in the Words of the Isaia XXIV. 2.
Prophet) As with the people so with the Priest: Your Superstition is not at
all less, tho much more inexcusable than theirs. Witness those great Names for
whom you have appeared to be so much concerned; St. Bernard, St. Germain, St.
Anselme, St. Antonine, St. Bernardine, etc. And whose Blasphemous Devotion I
have before exposed to the World. Let the Writings of Card. Bona, and Father
Crasset, the Contemplations of the Blessed Virgin, and the late Apology for
them in our own Language be considered. For I am very much mistaken, if it be
possible for the most ignorant Zealot to be more unreasonably extravagant, than
these Learned Men have approved themselves to be.

149. Nor may you turn off these with your old distinction, that they are but
private persons, and for whose Excesses therefore your Church is not to Answer.
They were approved in what they did, and many of them are at this day
Worshipped by you as Canonized Saints; and 'twas this Superstition that
especially contributed to their Exaltation. Who was it that composed that
exorbitant Hymn, yet used in your Church, Ave Maris Stella, but your devout St.
Bernard? S. Herman, another of your own Order, made those others neither less
extravagant, nor less authorized by you, Salve Regina, Alma Redemptoris Matter,
and Ave Regina Caelorum. And the late Editor of his Life tells us, That being
Lame in Calendar. Benediction. To. 3. Jul. 19.
Body, and Dullin Mind, he prayed earnestly to the Blessed Virgin in this
Romantic manner: Help, O help, the doubly wretched Herman. His Prayer smote
the tender hearted Virgin, and immediately she appeared to him, and offered him
his choice, whether he would have firmness of Body, or Accuteness of Mind. He
chose the latter, and expressed his Gratitude to his great Benefactress, by
composing those famous Hymns beforementioned to her Honor.

150. It was another of the same Order, and that had in your Opinion two the
greatest Characters any Man can pretend to; a Pope in the Church Militant, and
now a Saint in the Church Triumphant, Pope Urban 11. Ibid. Jul. 29.
who appointed the three Solemn [Devotions I have spoken of, to be every day
paid to the Blessed Virgin at the sound of a Bell, and composed the Course of
the Virgin, that what was done before by the Monks only, might from thenceforth
become the Public Service of the Church to her.

151. What is the great Commendation that is given of S. Gerard, and he too a
Saint of your own Order. But that having caused an Image of the Blessed Virgin
to be curiously wrought, he set it up Ibid. Sept. 24:
in a Chapel built on purpose for it, and appointed Incense and sweet Odours
to be every day for ever burnt to it. That he taught the Hungarians to call her
their Lady, having persuaded their King Stephen to make his Kingdom Tributary
to her. In short, that he never heard the Name of Mary pronounced, but he
Worshipped it, bowing his Face toward the Ground.

152. 'Twas this was the great thing for which yet another Call. Ben. To. 4.
Sept. 30.
of your Order St. Joscio was Canonized. Whose Piety to the Virgin whilst he
lived, was rewarded with a notable Miracle at his death. For no sooner was he
dead, but there grew five Roses of an extraordinary sweetness out of his Head,
two out of his Eyes, two out of his Ears, and one out of his Mouth; and upon
every one of them a Letter of the Virgin Mary's name; so that the whole M. A.
R. I. A. was composed by them.

153. Thus has this devotion to the Saints, almost wholly overcome your piety
toward God. Your Devotions, your Histories, your Lives, your Miracles, are all
framed to promote it. And now I am mentioning those Evils which from these kind
of Legends have been derived to corrupt both the Opinions and Practice of those
who are acquainted with little else than these Fables: I will refer it to your
self to tell me, whether you can endure to see the Dignity of our Savior, and
the Majesty of God himself, so lessened as it is by many of your Communion, to
increase the Veneration of the Saints.

154. When St. Gothardus was chosen by the Emperor Henry to Ibid. ad IV. Maii,
p. 3^0. To. 2.
succeed Bernard in the Bishopric of Hildersheim, and the Monk modestly
declined that Honor; the Blessed Virgin the same night appears to him, and
sharply reproves him in this Ranting Rhetoric, Scito Imperatorem MEO id JUSSU
motiri. Peccasti penicacia tua in ME and filium. Know (says she) that the
Emperor has done this at MY COMMAND; Thou have sinned by thy obstinacy, against
ME and MY SON. This indeed was as became the Queen of Heaven; and one would
think by it, that she still maintained the RIGHT of a MOTHER over Her Son.

155. But you have dealt yet worse with our Savior than this; your Writers
represent him at this day as a little Child in Heaven, as if he were ever to
continue in the same impotent State, in which your Pictures and Images express
him. Thus we read in the Life of St. Paula, That the Blessed Virgin appeared to
Call. Ben. To. 1. Jan. 5.
her with her LITTLE BOY, who kissed Paula, and squeezed some of his Mothers Milk
into her Mouth. Nor was this any thing extraordinary; The Writer of her Life
assures us, that she was often wont to take him into Her Arms and play with
him. And the like happened to many other of your Saints; as for instance, Saint
Ibid. Mart. 30.
Aldegundis, St. Francisca, of whom we are told, that being committed to the
care of an Archangel, she did oftentimes read the Office of the Blessed Virgin
in the night, by the Light that proceeded Ib. Mart. 9.
from his Rays: And was for her diligence in it so acceptable to the Virgin,
that she several times came down from Heaven to refresh her, and offered her
Son to be kissed, and embraced by her.

156. But the Favors of the Blessed Virgin to St. Ida were of all Tom. IV. p.
590. Dec. XI.
others the most considerable. For coming down into Her Cell with her INFANT
JESUS; Behold (says she) O Ida! thy Love: Take Him into thy Lap, and satisfy
thy self with the Kisses and Embraces of him whom thou love. -- My Author
goes on beyond all bounds even of common decency: But I must stop here, and not
repeat those Blasphemies, which cannot be read without trembling. But, O
Blessed Jesus! How long will thou suffer this dishonor? and permit an
unbounded Superstition to run to these Excesses? I appeal to all the Christians
of the World, what mean, dishonorable Notions must they have of the God of
Heaven and Earth, that in such a discerning Age can presume to publish such
Romances? These Stories might indeed become a Homer, or a Virgil; But what is
fancy in them, being applied to a Venus and a Cupid, is an unpardonable
Blasphemy to be thus used of the Savior of the World, who is God over all
blessed for ever.

157. These are the effects of this Superstition: I might add many other
Examples no less Horrible, in which our Blessed Lord has been diminished to
make up the Honor of his Servants. But I shall shut up all with an Impiety of
another kind, though the effect of this Worship; and which ought the more to be
taken notice of, both because it was done by a Society which would be thought
at least the most zealous of any for their Faith; and was exposed publicly in
the sight of the Sun, and before the Eyes of many to whom I now write. The
thing I mean is the late Procession of the Jesuits at Luxemburg, May 20. 1685.
designed for the Sea the Account published by that Society: La Ste Vierge
Patron Honoree and Bienfaisante dans la France and dans le Luxembourg.
Glory of the Blessed Virgin the Honored and Affectionate Patroness of France
and Luxembourg.

The Procession indeed was singularly extravagant; and it needed the skill of
that Learned Society, to put Profaneness into so Scholastic a dress. Heathenism
and Christianity walked together, as if the Fathers of the Society had equally
reverenced the Ancient Deities of the One, as the Modern Deities of the Other.

On the one side were carried the Image of the Blessed Virgin, and the Holy
Sacrament. On the other, Mars, Vulcan, the Cyclops and Nayades, Ceres, Flora,
Pomona, etc. And these too with all the Pomp, and even under the Names of GODS
and DIVINITIES.

At several Stations, where the Procession was to rest, Theaters were erected,
to serve to inspire agreeably (say the Learned Fathers in the Account which
they printed of this days Work) a Piety toward our Lady of Consolation. So the
Blessed Virgin there is called.

The second of these Theaters, was for the GOD MARS; who commands his Warriors
to take heed not to commit any insult from henceforth upon the Chapel of our
Lady of Consolation. This is Mars's care: And the Device for the GOD Mars, was
Procul, o, procul ite profani. Virg.
In the third Theater, Ceres, Flora, Pomona, etc. rejoice at the return of our
Lady of Consolation. And their Motto, still under the Title of Divinities, was
Jam redit and Virgo, redeunt Saturnia Regna.


It were too long to transcribe all the other Follies and Impieties of this
days Solemnity, in which the Holy Scripture found no room; the Sacrament but
very little: The whole Piety was designed to the Blessed Virgin; and because
Christianity had not Gods enough in it, to set forth her Glory, all the Poetic
Deities were revived, to inspire agreeably a Devotion into the People for Her.
This was indeed a Masterpiece of Contrivance; and what Invention shall next be
had, to excite a Devotion to her, we may expect to see the first time the
Gentlemen of the Society shall have Occasion to make their complying
Consciences do something extraordinary, for the Flattery of a Prince so much
their Friend, and therefore so much their Favorite as he, for whose Honor
this Solemn Procession was in great measure designed. In the mean time, I shall
leave it to the Reader seriously to consider, what sad Effects such a Devotion
as this has given birth to; and what just Cause we have to oppose a
Superstition, contrary to the Holy Scripture, unknown to the best and most
Primitive Antiquity; unreasonable in its self, and which is worst of all, not
only, very Unprofitable, but very Wicked too in its Practice.

ANSWER TO THE FOURTH ARTICLE, OF IMAGES and RELICS.
IN the beginning of this Article you tell me (but with very Reply, p. 25.
little reason) that you might have past over this point without any further
consideration; the best Argument you bring for it, being, if I mistake not,
this, That you are not obliged to defend what I had advanced against you upon
it. And indeed tho the reason be but a poor one, yet I am persuaded you had
done better both for the interest of your Cause, and for your own credit, to
have contented your self with it, and have past over this Article altogether;
rather than by giving such loose Answers to my Allegations, to have satisfied
the World, that you have no just Exceptions to make against them.

2. Were I minded in return to excuse my self the trouble of any farther Answer
to you, I could, I believe, give you some more plausible pretenses for it. I
might tell you, (1st,) That your Distinctions are now so well known, and have
been so often exploded by us, that there is no longer any danger that even my
Reply, Ibid.
friends the Vulgar should be circumvented by them. I might add, (2dly,) And
that with great truth, that this whole subject has been utterly exhausted by
that Learned Man, I have so often mentioned, in his Defense of the Charge of
Idolatry against T. G. and from whom you have here again borrowed your chiefest
strength. I might mind you, (3ly,) How after two endeavors to reply to him, T.
G. was forced to give over; and it is now above eight years since neither he
nor any of your Church has thought fit to carry on the Dispute. I might desire
you, (4thly,) To compare your performances upon this point with what the
Representer ventured not above a year since to make a flourish with; and see if
you could find out but any one thing in all you here repeat, that his learned
and judicious Adversary had not utterly confuted. But he too has forsaken the
Cause; and I am now called upon to give you the same Answers that have been
made to both these, and then without pretending to be a Prophet, I dare be bold
Reply, Pref.
to say for all your blustering, you will go off the Stage as tamely and
quietly, as any of your Predecessors have done before you. There is a certain
Circle of Shifts and Distinctions which you all run; and no sooner are those
spent, but your bolt is shot; you drop the Question, and begin again upon a new
score.

3. These and many other reasons I might offer to decline any farther
Examination of this Point; but I have promised you before, that I would neither
misrepresent your Doctrine, nor FOBB Reply, Pref.
OFF your Arguments. And I will here perform it with such exactness, that^even
your Incense and Holy Water shall not be forgotten. And if for our diversion
you shall think fit the next time you write to add to these all your other
follies, of Holy Ashes, Consecrated Candles, Agnus Dei's, and in one word,
whatever Superstitions of the like kind, your Pontifical, Ceremonial, Missal,
Breviary, Office of the Blessed Virgin, with all the Rationals and Comments
that have ever been written upon them can furnish you with, I do once more
promise you, that no pretense of their Impertinence shall hinder me from
sifting both them and you to the Bottom. As to the present subject, I shall
observe this plain Method:

I. I will make good the Charge of Image Worship against you. II. I will show
you, that in this service too, you are truly and properly guilty of Idolatry.
4. But before I enter upon these Particulars, I must stop so long as to
consider the new Introduction you endeavor to amuse your Reader with: viz.

SECT. I.
Of the Benefit of Pictures and Images. Reply, p. 26.


AND which brings to my mind what Tully (reckoning up the several Opinions of
the Philosophers concerning the Nature of Tusc. Qu. l. 1. Sect. 17.
the Soul) said once of Aristoxenus, who of a Fiddler became a Philosopher, and
asserted the Soul to be a Harmony; Hic ab artificio suo non recessit, and tamen
aliquid dixit. You tell us then,

5. Reply,. 19.] That they are the Books of the Ignorant, silent Reply, p. 26,
27.
Orators, apt to increase in us the love of God and his Saints, and (O
Elegant!) BLOW UP the DYING COALS of our AFFECTIONS into a FLAME of DEVOTION,
That the representations of Holy persons, and of their glorious actions, do by
their powerful Eloquence inflame us toward an imitation of their Graces and
Virtues, and renew in us afresh the memory of the persons whom they represent,
with a reverence and respect for them.

6. Answ.] In all which tho you fight with your own shadow, and say nothing
that either contradicts our Principles concerning Worship, or justifies your
practices; yet have you been so unhappy as to offer just matter for our
Animadversion: For,

1st. It is no small mistake in you, thus to join Pictures and Images together,
as if they were all one; when yet both your own Superstition, and the Opinion
both of the Jews and Gentiles (as to the point of worshipping of them) have
always made a very great difference between them. As for the ancient Heathens,
they adored their (...), Statues, or Graven Images; because they conceived them
most apt to be animated by their Gods, of which they were the resemblances.
Whereas Pictures were not thought so capable of receiving that animation. The
same was the distinction of the Jews too, who upon this very account have
always looked upon the former sort of (...) Maimon. See Dr. Hamm. of Idolatry,
Sect. 40.
Sculptures to be the thing especially forbidden in the second Commandment;
insomuch that they thought it unlawful to have them even for Ornament; but for
(...) Id. Ibid.
Pictures painted or woven, those they did not esteem to have been absolutely
forbidden to them. And at this day in your Church, your Images are set up with
solemn Consecrations to receive your Adoration. But I do not know that any
Pictures are dedicated for Altar-pieces, or other uses, with the like solemnity.

2. Another Confusion of the like kind you make in what follows, in speaking of
the Pictures not only of Holy Persons, but of their Actions too. For every body
knows how much more use there may be, and how much less danger there certainly
is in Historical Representations, than in single Figures, but especially Carved
Images.

3. Were the benefit of Images never so great, yet you know this is neither
that which we dispute with you, nor for which they are set up in your Churches.
Your Trent Synod expressly defines that due Veneration is to be paid to them.
Your Catechism says that they are to be had not only for Instruction, but for
Worship. And this is the Point in Controversy betwixt us. We retain Pictures,
and sometimes even Images too in our Churches for Ornament, and (if there be
such Uses to be made of them) for all the other Benefits you have now been
mentioning. Only we deny that any service is to be paid to them; or any solemn
Prayers to be made at their Consecration, for any Divine Virtues, or indeed for
any Virtues at all, to proceed from them. This is our Business; the rest is all
Impertinence in such Discourses as these, where men are to dispute, not
harangue. And for Images set up in Churches, with these Ceremonies, and for
this purpose, I add

4. That were the benefits of them otherwise never so great, yet will not this
be any manner of Excuse to you for the violating of God's Law, seeing, as you
have been often told, and indeed do your self confess, No Evil is to be done,
for any Good whatsoever that may come of it. Tho now

5. I am not altogether satisfied of the great usefulness of Images for the
instruction of the Ignorant. They may indeed serve to call Good things and
Persons to their remembrance, when they have before been instructed, and by
consequence in that respect are no longer ignorant of what is represented by
them. But let a man, that is properly Ignorant, i. e. who never heard of the
XIIth (for Rev. XII. 1.
instance) of the Revelations, see the Virgin Mary ten thousand times painted
with a Half Moon under her feet, I do not believe he would become one jot the
Wiser for it. Nay,

6. In opposition to your Pretenses, though all this is out of the way, yet I
dare affirm, lastly, that for such Images and Pictures as are too often ^d both
in your Churches and ^ouses, they are so far from serving to any of those Uses
you pretend, that on the contrary, if Men are not very well instructed, they
will be apt to beget in them most pernicious Notions, contrary to the Honor of
God, to the Nature of our Savior Christ, and to the Covenant of His Gospel.

7. For tell me, I beseech you; Was not this the great reason wherefore God
forbad any Resemblance to be made of Himself under Deuteronomy. IV. 15. Isa. XI. 18.
the Law, that it was a lessening and debasing of his Nature so to do? And does
not St. Paul urge this very consideration against the Athenian Idolatry? Acts
XVII. 29. And is not the Divine Nature Act. XVII. 29.
as excellent now, and as much debased by yours, as ever it was by their
Representations of it? I need not tell you of the frequent Pictures of God the
Father in the shape of an Old Man, and commonly in a Pope's Dress; and the
meaning of which (if one may conjecture the design of this by the Natural
tendency of it) can be no other than this, viz. to persuade the Ignorant, that
as you sometimes call the Pope a God on Earth, so God is no other than the Pope
of Heaven.

8. And this, were it only in some Sacred Places, would yet be too profane for
any Pious Christian to endure. But alas! you have not been so reserved. Every
Office carries this Abuse in it; Hardly a Psalter or Catechism without it: Nay,
I will add, what I should hardly be credited in, had not thousands among us
with indignation beheld it, that in the open Streets of your Cities, we may see
That God who is over all blessed for ever, exposed to the scorn and meanness of
a Sign-post.

9. How miserably have you by these Pictures, abused the Mystery of the Sacred
Trinity; sometimes you make it a Monster; As where you paint one Body with
three Heads; One Head with three Faces; sometimes one Body with two Heads, and
a Pigeon in the midst; of which Card. Capisucchi makes mention. The Sacred
Capisucchi, page 613. Gerson.
Trinity in the Belly of the Virgn, which Gerson says, He saw with his own Eyes
in a Church of the Carmelites; the most ordinary Figures are, Either an Old Man
holding a Crucifix in his Hands, and a Pigeon upon his Shoulder; Or, (as in
your Eye-Catechism) on one side an Old Man with a Globe, on the other a Younger
with a Cross upon his Shoulder, and a Dove betwixt them: And what is all this
but to debase the glorious Godhead? In St. Paul's Phrase, to Romans I. 23, 25.
change the truth of God into a lie, by representing the Incorruptible God by
an Image made like unto a Corruptible Man? And where is there a Christian so
insensible of that dishonor that is hereby done to the Majesty of that God,
whom the wiser Heathens themselves never debased to the likeness of any created
Being, as not with the same Apostle to have his Spirit stirred within him, at
the sight of such Impiety? Acts xvii.


10. Nor are you at all less excusable in your Representations of our Blessed
Savior, and the Holy Virgin; not to descend to any other of the Saints. For
besides that such Similitudes exhibit only one, and that his inferior Nature,
viz. his Manhood; how do these Pictures insensibly breed a mean Opinion of him,
in the minds of the Ignorant and Unwary? As 1st, Nothing is more ordinary in
the most solemn Places of your Worship, than to see our Blessed Lord still set
forth as a Child, in the Arms of his Mother. And what Notions this has bred in
many of your Communion, I would to God the greater esteem they seem to have for
the Virgin, than for Christ, did not too plainly show. But that which renders
this more intolerable, is, that you thus represent him not only upon Earth,
but at this time even in Heaven; and indeed, seeing in your Legends, you speak
of him as a Child still, I do not wonder if in your Pictures, you represent him
too as such.

11. Thus in one of your Eye-Catechisms, set forth in Portugal, for the
Instruction of the People; the latter part of the Ave-Maria, is set in this
manner before them. All sorts of Men and Women upon Earth, are drawn in an open
Scene, upon their Knees, and Hands lifted up to Heaven, and in the Clouds over
them, the Blessed Virgin in Glory with our Savior (as a Child) in Her Arms;
and under it this Inscription, O Holy Mary, Mother of God, pray for us Sinners
now, and in the hour of Death. Amen. Jesus.

12. In the Calender of the Saints of your Order, There is a Figure of St.
Odilo, devoting himself to the blessed Virgin in this Tom. 1. Jan. 1.
manner. O most Holy Virgin, and Mother of the Savior of all Ages, receive me
from this day forward as your Servant, and in all my Causes, be my most
merciful Advocate. For from this time, after God, I set nothing before thee,
but voluntarily deliver my self for ever to be your Possession, as your proper
Servant. Amen. Above Him sits the Blessed Virgin in Glory, with our Savior in
her Arms, holding her about the Neck, after the manner of a little Child. Many
of the like kind are there in those Volumes; but I may not insist upon them; I
will add only some of those Figures, in which the whole Trinity are made to
concur to her Honor. Thus in the Office in the Virgin, printed at Antwerp. She
is set forth in Glory in Heaven, with God the Father on the one side, and God
the Son on the other, holding a Crown over her Head, the Holy Ghost above
overshadowing Her, and all the People on the Earth below Adoring.

13. I will not deny, but that these may be very good Instructions for Father
Crasset's, or Doctor J. C's Disciples. But I cannot see how any of the
Expounding and Representing Party, will be able to prove such Pictures as
these, to be much for the Edification of the People. I shall finish these
Remarks, (which have already run out into a greater length than I designed, tho
I might have added much more) with the account which the Learned Gerard Vossius
gives us, of a Picture over an Altar in Flanders, in which that blasphemous
Epigram is expressed of Men's doubting whether they should run to the Blood of
Christ, in which alone there is Redemption to be obtained; or to the Milk of
the Virgin. This is certainly to contradict the very Foundation of the Gospel;
and to lead the Ignorant into Error in that Point, in which it is of all others
the most dangerous to be mistaken; viz. Whether they ought to place the Hopes
of their Salvation in the Redemption of Christ, or in the Mercy and Interest of
his Mother.

14. You may at your leisure consider how to improve these things into Helps of
Devotion, and useful Instructions for the illiterate Populace. I might have
added, what has lately been elsewhere observed, of the Profaneness of many (in
Italy especially) in this Point: Where the most celebrated Madonna's, are the
Pictures of the Painters Whores, set up in their Churches, as Objects of the
Peoples Veneration. But this and other Excesses of the like kind I purposely
forbear, lest I should be thought to please my self in your Impieties, which I
heartily lament, and earnestly bebeseech God to reform in you. Nor should I
have said thus much, but only to show how little Reason you had to enter on
this new and most Impertinent Subject of the Benefit of Images; and that were
our Cause to be tried by this alone, we might even so expect to carry it
against you. And this to your first Pretense.

15. The next thing you offer in favor of your Images, is Reply 20.] That
there is no now danger of Idolatry in this Practice, seeing all Persons are
taught that there is but one God, to whom Adoration is only due; and therefore,
that they cannot be capable of erring so grossly, as to give Divine Honor to an
Image, or to think any Virtue annexed to them for which they ought to be
adored. In short, it is (you say) by the subtilty of the Devil (who hates any
thing that excites Devotion) that these helps to Piety, are now branded with
the horrid Note of Idolatry, and Catholics represented, as if they paid the Act
of Adoration to the Images themselves.

16. Answ.] That the Devil is an Enemy to Piety, and to all those things that
may any way serve to promote it, I can easily believe; but that it is He, who
upon this account stirs up us to oppose your Idolatry, I shall hardly Credit,
tho you should give me as good an assurance of it, as ever your Brother the old
Monk did the second Council of Nice, when he told them that the Devil himself
had confessed to him, how much he hated your Holy and Venerable Images. I am
sure Tertullian was so far from this, that De Idololatria
he thought 'twas the Devil that instigated Men to bring them into the World,
and not to help to cast them out. But to overthrow at once, both your
Reflection and Argument together, I do here roundly affirm, That what you say
is so far from being true, That there is now no danger of Idolatry in the
Worship of Images, that on the contrary I will show, that in the Worship of
them publicly authorized and practiced amongst you, you do actually commit it.
And then every Body will see what Spirit it is that Acts us in opposition to
this Service; and who it is that blinds you so far, as to make you contend for
that, which both the Holy Scripture condemns, and the Primitive Christians
neither knew, nor would have endured. And this brings me to my first Proposal;
wherein I am

SECT. II.
To make good the Charge of Image Worship against you, and Answer those
Evasions, by which you endavour to clear your selves of it.

17. NOW that you give Religious Worship to Images, has been so fully proved in
that Learned Book I have before referred you to, in Answer to T. G. both from
the Definitions of your Councils of Nice and Trent, and from the unanimous
Voice of almost all the great Men of your Church, who have written any things
of this matter, that I shall need say but very little here in Confirmation of
it. And therefore not to multiply Quotations by transcribing what has been
already collected as to this matter, I shall content my self with this plain,
and I think unexceptionable manner of proceeding against you;

1st, I will propose to you the Voice of your Church in her Definitions. 2dly,
I will give you the Interpretation of her Sense in these Definitions, from
Card. Capisucchi only; and out of that Book to which Mons. de Meaux himself
appeals. 3dly, I will from both vindicate the Account I have given of the
Practice of your Church, in Conformity to these Principles.
18. 1st, For what concerns the first of these, the Voice of your Church, as to
this Point; the Council of Trent declares, That the Images of Christ, of the
Blessed Virgin, and of the Saints, are more especially to be had and retained
in Temples, and that due Honor and Veneration is to be paid to them. Not that
it should be believed that there is any Divinity or Virtue in them, for which
they are to be Worshipped; or that any thing is to be Asked of them, or that
any Trust is to be put in Images; but because the Honor which is given to
them, is referred to the Proto-types which they Represent; so that by the
Images which you Kiss, and before which you uncover your Heads, and fall down;
you Adore Christ, and Worship the Saints which they Represent.

19. Thus that wary Synod; Neither determining what Honor should be given to
Images, nor yet setting any bounds to any. But then, as it expressly allows them
the external Marks of Divine Worship, so by fixing the Grounds of this Honor
to be the passing of it to the Proto-type, not only Soto, Turrian, and
Naclantus, three great Divines concerned in that Synod, but also the Generality
of those who have treated since of this matter, have concluded, that the same
Adoration is to be paid to the Image, and the Proto-type; So that if Christ
himself be worshipped with Divine Worship, then must the Crucifix also be
worshipped with the very same. But this will better appear,

19. 2dly, From the Account I am to give of the Doctrine of your Church, as to
this Worship, from Cardinal Capisucchi.

And to whose Book since Mons. de Meaux has thought fit to Appeal, I am content
to submit the Decision of this Controversy to his Sentence, and shall leave the
World to judge whether I have Misrepresented, or whether the Bishop and You have
not departed from the Doctrine of the Council of Trent.

20. Now that we may know precisely, what in his Opinion, that due Honor and
Veneration is, which you pay to Images, and which the Council so cautiously
declined the telling us; we will consider first of all, what was thought to be
so by them, whose Opinions he rejects, as not fully delivering your Churches
Sense. Such were

21. First of all Durandus; Who thought that properly speaking, Card. Capis.
Controv. p. 624, 625.
the Images are not to be Adored; but because they resemble things worthy
Adoration, which by remembrance are Adored in Presence of the Images, therefore
the Images themselves improperly are, and may be said to be Adored. Now this he
Rejects, because (says he) in truth, it takes away the Worship of Images; Ibid.
625.
and concludes it with another of your great Men, Raphael de Tuire, to be
Dangerous, Rash, and savouring of Haeresy; or as Ferdinandus Velosillus phrases
it, False, Rash, and Erroneous; but especially, since the Definition of the
Council of Trent

22. The next whose Opinion he Rejects, is Vasquez; Who Card. Capis. Ibid. par.
ii. p. 625.
taught that the Images themselves were no otherwise to be Adored, but because
in the Presence of them, and about them, are exhibited the external Signs of
Honor, such as Kneeling, Kissing, uncovering the Head, etc. But that for the
inward Act of Adoration, this was by no means to be directed to the Image, but
to the thing represented by the Image. And this too he Rejects upon the same
Grounds that he did the foregoing, viz. Because that by Asserting, that the
inward Act of the Adorer terminates only upon the thing represented by the
Image; he does by consequence affirm, that the Images themselves are not TRULY
and PROPERLY to be ADORED.

23. The next Opinion which he rejects, is that whereby an Inferior Honor is
supposed due to Images, and not an Honor of the Id. par. iv. p. 634, 635.
same kind with that which is paid to the Exemplar. And this has been proposed
with some variety. Catherine and Peresius thought that no other Worship besides
this inferior, honorary respect, was due to them. Sanders distinguished, That
the Images considered by themselves, and without any regard had to the
Exemplars, deserved only an inferior Honor; but being considered conjunctly
with the Exemplar, were to be worshipped with the very same Worship that the
Exemplars themselves were. And this was also the opinion of Suarez, That Images
considered only as Sacred Utensils, were to have no other Honor than was
usually given to any other the like holy things; but that being considered as
Images, they were to have the very same Worship with the Proto-types whom they
represented. Lorca delivered his Opinion yet more subtly: 1. That the Image
of Christ might by accident be adored with the same adoration as Christ
himself; but that this was only improperly called the Adoration of the Image,
it being Christ himself that alone was truly and properly adored. 2. That for
that Adoration which terminates on the Image, it is an Adoration much inferior
to that wherewith Christ himself is adored. 3. That tho the Adoration wherewith
the Image of Christ is adored, be in the kind of the Act different from that
with which Christ himself is worshipped; yet that it proceeds from the same
habit, the virtue of Religion, from which the Adoration of Christ himself
proceeds, and upon that account may be called by the same name with it. And all
these Opinions the Cardinal still rejects upon his old principle, That the
Image is adored with the very same Act with which Christ himself is adored, and
by consequence must be worshipped with the same Divine Worship.

24. The next whose opinion he refutes, is Card. Bellarmine; Capis. Par. V.
page 636.
who supposed that, The Worship which is properly given to an Image, is not the
same with that which (for instance) is given to Christ Himself; but a sort of
imperfect Worship, which may by a certain analogy be reduced to the same kind
of Worship that is paid to the Exemplar. But yet that the Image may by accident
be worshipped with the same Worship as the Exemplar, when the Exemplar is
considered as shining forth in its Image. This also he refutes, utterly denying
that any inferior honor is to be given to an Image, which requires properly,
and in its own nature the very same Worship that is paid to the Exemplar which
it Represents.

25. Lastly, Cardinal Lugo's Opinion was, that the Image and Ibid. Par. VI.
page 637.
the Exemplar were to be adored as two distinct Objects of Adoration; as when a
man sees the Son of his friend, he at the same time loves both the Son and the
Father, not together with the very same Act, yet both directly: The Son for the
Father's sake, and the Father accidentally upon the occasion of the Son's
bringing him to his remembrance. Thus in the present case, When a Christian
beholds the Image of Christ, presently he calls his Blessed Savior to mind,
and directly worships both the Image for Christ's sake, and Christ for his own.
And this also the Cardinal rejects, not so much for that it does not give
sufficient Honor to the Image; for Lugo also held that the same Divine Honor
was to be given both to Christ and his Image, as because it distinguished the
Objects; whereas according to Card. Capisucchi, Christ and his Image are to be
Adored not only with the same Act, but also as the same Object of Worship.

26. Having thus rejected all those several Opinions, he finally concludes,
That the true Opinion, and which ought to be held, is, Card. Capis. contr. par.
VII p. 639.
that the worship of the Images and the Exemplars, is one and the same; so that
the worship of the Images is not distinct from that of the Exemplars, but they
are both worshipped together. This he proves to be the CHURCHES SENSE by a
Cloud of Witnesses, from St. Thomas to this day; and shows it to be what both
the second Council of Nice, and the later Synod of Trent designed in their
definitions. And then finally, closes all with the instance of Aegidius
Magistralis, I heretofore mentioned, who having denied that Divine Worship was
to be paid to Images, was forced by the Inquisition to recant and abjure it as
Heretical; and exhorts all those to consider it who find fault with St. Thomas
for saying that the CROSS and IMAGES of CHRIST were to be ADORED Vid. p. 649.
with SUPREME DIVINE WORSHIP.

27. And this may suffice by the way to answer your Exception against the
Authority of Aquinas; who as you see allowed a true and proper worship to be
paid to the Cross as well as to Reply, p. 29, 30, 31.
Christ. And that you may not shift off this REPLY (as you have done my former
Answer) only with scorn and derision, I must mind you, that it is not now a
Doctor of the Populace whom you think incapable of penetrating into the
profound Mysteries of Scholastic Niceties, that says this; but Card.
Capisucchi, a Schoolman Reply, p. 31.
and Disciple himself of St. Thomas, and whom perhaps you will allow to have as
deep a reach as your self in these matters. For Vasquez having brought the very
same interpretation of Aquinas's Doctrine that you now insist upon against me,
the Cardinal thus roundly answers him, That according to St. Thomas the Image
of Capis. contr. p. 630.
Christ is absolutely and simply to be adored with the same Adoration with
which Christ is adored. -- And that therefore the same Adoration which is given
to Christ, ought to be given to his Image also.

27. And thus have I in short laid before you the sum of this Cardinal's
Doctrine, who both approved M. de Meaux's Exposition, and to whom Monsieur de
Meaux himself appeals for the Vindication of this very part of it. I have
already sufficiently shown how inconsistent these two are with one another; I
will now only apply what I have here further added to my former account of this
matter, to the point before us. And,

28. First, It may not be amiss to observe what great diversity of Opinions
there has been in stating of that Worship which is paid by you to Images, and
what difficulty you have found to defend your practice against that Charge of
Idolatry we have so justly brought against you upon the account of it. How the
Caution of some, and the distinctions of others amongst you, have been branded
by the rest as Scandalous and Erroneous; and one forced to abjure as Heretical,
what others have set up as the only true Exposition and Representation of the
Churches sense. And this you will give me leave the rather to remark, because
you are so often pleased to reflect upon our divisions, which yet are neither
so frequent nor dangerous, as among you who pretend not only to Truth, but
Infallibility in all you believe. And if the consequence you are wont from
thence to draw against us, That because we differ in some things, therefore we
have no certainty in any, be good, (as you say it is) you may now see that it
will equally fall upon your selves too; and by so much the more heavily, by how
much your pretenses in this matter are greater than ours. But,

29. Secondly, Tho there be then such a diversity of Opinions amongst you as to
this Worship; yet it is to be remarked that they who have allowed the least
Honor to Images, have yet still confessed that some Honor was due to them. In
this (says Capisucchi) Capisucchi, lb. page 605.
all Catholics do agree that Images are to be worshipped, and are rightly
worshipped by the faithful. Even Durandus himself, who disapproves the Images
of the Holy Trinity, yet allowing both the use and Worship of other Holy
Images. From whence therefore I conclude, That those in this Cardinal's
opinion, are no Catholics who tell us that, All the Honor they have for them,
is only such a Reply, Pre^. p. 17, 18.
respect as they pay to any other Sacred Utensils. That if they seem to act in
their presence some external signs of Veneration, this is meant ONLY to the
persons whom they represent, but NOT to the Images themselves, which can claim
NOTHING of that KIND from us. In short, as Monsieur de Meaux expounds it, That
they do NOT WORSHIP the Images; No, GOD FORBID; but ONLY make use of them to
call to mind the Originals. The Council of Trent teaches NO OTHER USE of them.

30. Thirdly, It may from hence farther appear, that the Worship which this
Cardinal thought due to Inages, was not an improper, accidental, abusive
Worship, but a true, proper, and real Adoration; the Image being to be adored
in the very same act with which the Exemplar was. So that now according to this
Exposition, the Cross of Christ is to be worshipped truly and properly with a
Supreme Divine Adoration. And that not only as to the outward acts, but by the
inward sense of the Soul too; all which are so to be paid to Christ, as to
terminate at once both upon him, and upon the Crucifix by which he is to be
adored. And this,

31. Fourthly, We are to look upon, not as a private opinion, or a mere
Scholastic Nicety, but as the true and proper sense of the Church, and to be
held of all. So the Cardinal expressly declares; as being the Doctrine of the
Councils both of Nice and Trent; and for denying of which, Aegidius Magistralis
was by the Inquisition forced to recant, and renounce his Doctrine contrary
thereunto, as Heretical.

32. This is an Instance which with Card. Capisucchi I will take the liberty to
recommend to your consideration. For certainly if what he says be true, you who
deny that the Cross is upon any account whatsoever to be worshipped with Divine
Worship, can be no otherwise Reply, Pref.
than a downright Heretic. And tho you are at present secure in a happy
Expounding Country, where you may safely make what representation of your
Doctrine you please, or rather that the necessity of your present circumstances
moves you to do, without any other danger than that of losing your credit with
honest and inquisitive men, which you do not seem much to value; yet should
time and other circumstances invite you hereafter into a hotter Climate, you
might run some worser hazards among those who have not given themselves up to
follow your Innovations. It happened not many years since, that a French
Gentleman being traveling Relation del' Inquisition de Goa, page 14, 15. cap.
2, 21. cap. 3.
in the East Indies, fell into some company at Goa, and there discoursing about
matters of Religion according to your Principles, maintained, That the Crucifix
was no otherwise to be adored, than by reporting all the Honor to our Savior
Christ represented by that Image. And another time, he fortuned to say of an
Ivory Crucifix which hung up at his Beds-head, that it was only a piece of
Ivory. For this he was clapped into the Inquisition, and after some years
imprisonment for his Heretical Sayings, hardly escaped the fire, with this
Sentence, that He was declared Excommunicate; Ibid. cap. 27. page 151, 152.
Edit. Leyd. 1687.
that for reparation of his fault, all his Goods should he confiscated; Himself
banished the Indies; and condemned to serve in the Galleys (or public Prisons)
of Portugal five years; and further accomplish those Other Penances which
should more particularly be enjoined Him by the Inquisitors. As for his Crime,
it is thus set forth in the Preamble to his Sentence, That he had said that we
ought NOT to ADORE IMAGES; and had BLASPHEMED against that of a certain
Crucifix, by saying of a Crucifix of Ivory, that it was a piece of Ivory.

33. This was plain dealing, and a sensible convicton that it is not merely a
Scholastic Nicety with the Fathers of the Inquisition, that the CROSS is to be
worshipped with DIVINE WORSHIP. The truth is, the contrary Opinion of Durandus,
Holcot, Mirandula, and some others, (and who allowed all the Acts of external
Honor to be paid to them, only they denied them that inward Veneration which
makes it properly a religious Worship) has been always esteemed as false and
scandalous, and savouring of Heresy; and is expressly censured as such by those
great Men, Suarez, Medina, Victoria, Catherine, Arriaga, Cabrera, Raphael de
Turre, Vellosillus, and many others at large, collected by Cardinal Capisucchi
on this occasion, as Abettors with himself, of a true Divine Adoration to be
paid to the Holy Cross, and other Images of God, and the Blessed Trinity. I go
on finally from these Principles,

34. Thirdly, To vindicate the Account I have heretofore given of your
Practices in consequence to this Doctrine.

And first, I observed that in the solemn Procession made at the reception of
the Emperor, the Legat's Cross is appointed by the Pontifical to take place of
the Emperor's Sword, because LATRIA or DIVINE WORSHIP is due to it.

35. This you cannot deny to be faithfully quoted out of your Pontifical: but
you say there is some kind of impropriety in the Reply, p. 31.
Speech; and we must understand it so, not as if Divine Worship were due to the
Cross, but to Christ crucified upon it. A strange liberty of interpreting this,
which turns plain Affirmatives into downright Negatives; and this contrary to
the sense, not only of your greatest Authors, (as I have shown) but in their
opinion contrary to the sense of your Church too. These all say with the
Rubric, that a Divine Worship is due to the Cross; you declare it is no such
thing; No, God forbid. Such Worship is upon NO ACCOUNT WHATSOEVER to be given
to the Cross, but only to Christ represented by the Cross. I will not desire
you to consider what wise arguing you make of what your Pontifical here says;
That the Cross must take place of the Emperor's Sword, because Christ is to be
worshipped with Divine Worship: It shall suffice me to leave you to the Censures
of your own Learned Writers and Inquisitors, who have already pronounced this
Exposition to be false, scandalous, and savouring of Heresy. Only let me once
more caution you to remember the hard fate of poor Monsieur Imbert, of Aegidius
Magistralis, and the French Traveller I just now mentioned; For however it may
be safe enough to dissemble with us here, yet will it behove you to take great
heed that you alter your tone, if ever you should chance to fall into those
Parts, where the Old Popery Doctrine is still the measure of the Inquisitors
Proceedings.

36. My next Instance was from your form of blessing a New Cross: To your Cavil
about my omitting some words, I have said enough heretofore; but the dear
Calumny must be continued, tho not only those two words were added, but so many
more set down, that you seem as much dissatisfied with my length here, as you
pretended to be with my brevity before.

37. You pray, That the Wood of the Cross which you bless, may be a wholesome
remedy to mankind: a strengthner of Faith; an increaser of Good Works; the
Redemption of Souls; a Comfort, Protection, and Defense against the Cruel Darts
of the Enemy.

You incense it; you sprinkle it with Holy Water; you sanctify it in the name
of the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost; and then both the Bishop and People
devoutly ADORE it, and Kiss it.

38. This is in short the sum of that Ceremony; In which you desire to know
what is Amiss? I answer; That take this whole Office together, with the
Ceremonies, Prayers, and other Circumstances of it, and it is Superstitious and
Idolatrous; and I shall not doubt once more to repeat, what before so much
offended you, That the Addresses you here make, look more like Magical
Incantations, than Christian Prayers. For,

39. First, If we enquire into the design of this Ceremony; it is to Consecrate
a piece of Wood or Stone, that it may become a fit Object of Adoration: which
being directy contrary to the Second Commandment, cannot be done without a very
great Sin.

40. 2dly. To this End, secondly, you pray that several benefits may proceed
from this Wood of the Cross; and if those words signify any thing, whereby you
beseech God, that it may be a wholesome remedy to Mankind, a strengthner of
Faith, etc. We must then look upon it, that you do believe, that by this
Consecration there is a Virtue, if not residing in it for all these purposes,
yet at least proceeding from it; which your Council of Trent confesses was one
of the things that made the Worship of Images among the Heathens to be
Idolatrous. Nor will your little Evasion here stand you in any stead; that you
pray only that the Cross may be a means for Reply, p. 32.
the obtaining all these Benefits; and that this is no more than a Preacher may
desire for his Sermon, or the Author of a good Book for what he is about to
publish: For, 1. A piece of Wood or Stone, carve it into what Figure or Shape
you please, is not certainly so proper a means for the conveying of such
Benefits to men, as a good Book or a good Sermon are: And therefore what may be
very naturally desired for the One, cannot without great Superstition be
applied to the Other. I may, and I heartily do pray, that what I am now writing
may be a saving remedy to you, by correcting your Faith, and increasing your
Charity; because I am persuaded here are Arguments proper to such an End, if it
shall please God to dispose you impartially to consider them; but now, I
believe, you would think me very Extravagant, should I pray to God to sanctify
the Paper on which it is printed, or my Bookseller's Sign that sells it, as you
pray to God to sanctify the WOOD of the Cross; that as often as you see the
leaves of this Book, or look upon the Rose and Crown in St. Paul's Churchyard,
these good effects may be wrought in you.

41. Again, 2. As the thing it self is not a proper means of producing these
Effects in us; so the manner by which you pray it may be done, renders it yet
more Superstitious. To get instruction by hearing or reading; to have ones
Faith confirmed, or Charity enlarged, or Zeal heightened, by pious
Considerations, or powerful Motives, all this is very natural; and we may
therefore lawfully pray to God for to bless them to us in order to these Ends.
But to pray to God, that by bowing our selves down before a Cross, we may find
health of Soul and Body; to sanctify a piece of Wood, that by ITS MERITS it may
free men from all the Sins they have committed, this must be more than a
natural Effect, neither the thing nor action being proper to produce it; and
whether such Requests be not more like Magical Incantations than Christian
Prayers, I shall leave it to any indifferent person to consider.

42. But 3dly, That this which you pretend, is not all that your Church designs
by those Prayers, is evident, in that this Exposition cannot possibly be
applied to several of those things which you ask of God in those Addresses. For
instance, you pray, That the blessing of the Wood upon which our Savior hung,
may be in the Wood of the Cross which you consecrate; and that by the Holiness
of that, he would Sanctify this; that as by that Cross, the World was delivered
from Guilt, so by the Merits of this, the devout Souls who offer it, may be
free from all the Sins they have committed. Now tell me in Conscience, if you
dare speak the truth; Is not all this somewhat more, than to pray that the
Cross may accidentally become a means of working good Effects in you, by
putting you in mind of the price of your Redemption? Do you not Reply p. 32, 33.
here see somewhat, which your Council of Trent calls the Idolatry of the
Gentiles? viz. an encouragement to Worship the Cross, as if some Divine Virtue
were in it, for which it ought to be Adored. For, so certainly he must do, who
believes that by these Prayers, the blessing of that Cross, on which our
Savior hung, is in this which he Worships; and that bowing down before it, he
shall find Health both of Soul and Body. Nay, but

43. 4thly, I must once more ask you that Question, I before proposed on this
Occasion; and which, tho you heartily rail at, yet you shift it off without
answering one wise word to it. If you design no real Virtue to proceed from the
Cross which you thus consecrate, nor allow any Adoration to be paid to it, but
intend it merely for a memorative Sign, and no more: To what purpose all these
Prayers, and Sprinklings, and Smokings, and Blessings, and other Ceremonies for
the Consecration of it? As to your Question, why we dedicate our Churches to
God? I will then allow it to be a Parallel, when you can prove that we pray
that God would Sanctify the Walls or Seats of them, That they may become a
wholesome Remedy to Mankind, and by their Merits free us from all the Sins we
have committed. In the mean time it shall suffice to tell you, that as all we
design in those Ceremonies, is no more than a solemn setting of it apart for
Prayer and Devotion to God only; so all we desire, is, that God would vouchsafe
favorably to accept our Offering of that Place to his Service, and give a
blessing to those Holy Offices that are from thenceforth to be peformed in it.

44. But 5thly; and to conclude this Point; He that would know what your
Intention in these Prayers is, need only consider what Prayers you make in
behalf of other things of the same Nature: And in which you so evidently desire
a Divine Virtue may proceed from the very things themselves which you Sanctify,
that there is no doubt to be made of it. I shall give but one Instance of this,
viz. the Prayer you make at the Consecration of your Agnus Dei's; in which you
thus Address your selves to God.

Do thou vouchsafe to Bless, Sanctify, and Consecrate Sacrar. Cerem. Lib. I.
(...). de Consecr. Agn. Dei.
them, that being sanctified by thy liberal Benediction, they may receive the
same Virtue against all diabolical Subtilties, and the deceits of the evil
Spirit; that for those who carry them devoutly about them, no tempest may
prevail against them, no Adversity may get the Dominion over them, no pestilent
Breath, no Corruption of the Air, no Falling Sickness, no Storm at Sea, no
Fire, nor any Iniquity may overcome them, or prevail against them.

45. Such are the admirable Virtues which you desire may proceed from these
little Images; and by the Prayers you make at the Consecrating of these, we may
easilly understand how to interpret your Addresses for the same purpose in the
other. But now to make your Practice exactly parallel with the old Heathen
Superstition; I must observe, That it is not enough that you carry these Agnus
Dei's devoutly about you, but they must be Worshipped too; For so your Prayer
of Consecration says;

Bles, and Sanctify these blessed things, that through the VENERATION and
HONOR of them, the Crimes of us thy Servants may be blotted out.

And now I shall leave it to you, to try once more your gift of Expounding, and
see if you can bring all this to your new Sense: And for your Encouragement in
it, I will promise you if you can, to give you something more of this matter,
which will be more difficult, and which I forbear at present to insist upon.

46. I should now go on to the next Instance; but I must entreat the Reader's
excuse, if I stop one moment to follow your rambling Discourse in two Points,
as little to your purpose, as the handling of them will appear to have been for
your Reputation.

47. I. The first is concerning the Use of Holy Water.

Reply] Which you tell us was established by Pope Alexander the I. Reply p. 33.
An. 121. and is good for dispelling Incantations and Magic Frauds, rather than
introducing them; and has been famed for sundry Miracles, which God has been
pleased to work thereby in several Ages.

48. Answ.] For the Antiquity of this Usage, I wonder you should stop at Pope
Alexander I. when had you but looked into the Clementine Constitutions (a much
more authentic Piece than Lib. VIII. cap. 35.
your Decretal Epistle) you might have found St. Matthew to have been the
Author of it. And the one would have been as easily believed as the other.

49. Nor have you been less defective in setting out the Benefits of it, than
you were in your account of its Antiquity. And therefore to spare your Modesty,
I will help to publish them for you. Holy Water then (if all be true that is in
Print) is good, not only to drive away Evil Spirits, but more over to cure
Infirmities; to wipe See Domenico Magri Notizia de Vocaboli Ecclesiastici in
aqua Benedicta. Marsilius Columna Hydragiolog. Sect. 3. c. 2.
out Venial Sins; to cleanse the Pollutions of defiled Consciences; to cure
Distractions; to elevate the Mind, and dispose it for Devotion; to obtain
Grace, and dispose Men for the Holy Sacrament. It cures Barrenness, preserves
the Health, purges the Air from Pestilential Vapors; besides a great many
other good things that are not so fit to be named. All the mischief is, that it
is nor certain it does any of these things; because (as De Cultu ss. l. 3. c.
7. p. 2226. B.
Bellarmine well observes) there is no Promise of God made to it; but yet being
sanctified by the Prayers of the Church for these ends, you may as securely
believe it, as many other things that have no better a Foundation.

50. And are not these now rare Follies for a Man to force us to publish
whether we will or no? Did ever any Mountebank set out his false Ware with
greater Vanity, than those of the Church of Rome have here done theirs? And
indeed was there ever less reason to believe his Remedies, than in this Case
there is to Credit your Pretenses? In short, seeing you sanctify Water in the
Name of God, by Prayer for these Ends, either show us some Promise, some
Warrant at least from the Holy Spirit of God so to do; or all reasonable Men
will look upon this after all you have said for it, as none of the least both
of your Follies, and of your Superstitions.

II. The other thing you mention is your Incense.

51. And this is indeed to our purpose; and I shall presently show you how
little you considered your own interest in the mention of it. I pass by your
pretended significations of it, as impertinent in a Discourse where Truth only
is sought. For the Antiquity of it you refer us to Dionysius and St. Ambrose;
in which you again show your skill in Church History. The one of these being an
Author that lived not till the latter end of the Fourth Century, and the other
probably much later. But now the use of Incense, in the Greek Church
especially, was of a much earlier date. The Apostolical Canons speak expressly
of it: And if that Oration of Hyppolitus about the End of the World, be truly
his, as from St. Jerome's mentioning of it in his Catalogue it seems to be; we
have then two considerable instances to assure us that it was in use in the
Greek Church even in the Third Century. You see how far I am from detracting
any thing from the force of your Argument: But yet now after all, without fear
of censuring Primitive Antiquity in this matter, whose Innocence I as freely
acknowledge, as I heartily honor its piety; I shall not doubt to say that the
present usage of it in your Church is so far from being innocent, that it is in
truth Superstitious and Idolatrous.

52. First, it is Superstitious. For indeed what else can we make of your
praying to God, (as in this very Ceremony of Consecrating a Pontifical. Rom de
Benedict. Nov. Cruc.
Cross you do) that, He would Bless, and Sanctify this Creature of Incense,
that all weaknesses and infirmities, and all the snares of the Enemy perceiving
its smell, may fly and be separated from his Creatures; that they may never be
hurt by the biting of the Old Serpent, who have been redeemed with the precious
blood of his Son.

53. Now if you make this prayer in faith, that it is pleasing to God, and have
a confidence that it shall be accepted by him, you must then show us some
grounds, some security in the Word of God for it. But if you cannot do this,
what is it but Superstition, that is, a vain and fond service, to entreat the
favor of God in the usage of a thing to which he has neither annexed any
promise, nor for the doing whereof has he any where given us the least
encouragement. But,

54. Secondly, The Use you make of this Incense, is yet worse than the
Consecration of it. You offer it up to Creatures, nay to the very Images which
you worship; and in doing of which I do not see how you will excuse your selves
of being guilty of Idolatry. That the burning of Incense was part of that
Religious Worship under the Law, which God was pleased to appropriate to
Himself only, is not to be denied. It was indeed a more peculiar act of Divine
Worship, than that of bloody Sacrifices themselves. And therefore both the
Altar on which it was offered was covered with Gold, and it stood in a more
Holy place than that of the Burnt-offerings; and is in a more singular manner
said to be Most Holy unto the LORD, Exodus XX. 8, 10. Hence it was that Exodus
XX. 8, 10. 2 King. XVIII. 4. Bellarm. de SS. Beatit. l. 1. p. 2026. c. 13. D.
Vasquez. in 3. Vol. 1. q. 25. Disp. 104. Art. 3. c. 5. p. 735.
King Hezekiah immediately brake to pieces the Brazen Serpent, as soon as he
considered that the children of Israel burnt Incense before it. And yet if we
enquire into the use that is made of it in your Church, we shall find it
offered not only to the Saints, but even to their very Images and Relics.
Vasquez ingenuously confesses, that the Israelites gave no other Worship to the
Brazen Serpent than what you give to your Images at this day; and that Hezekias
therefore commanded it to be broken in pieces, not that he thought the people
adored it as a God, but because he saw such a Divine Worship paid to it. It is
one of the chief things remarked by your own Writers in the Life of a great
Saint of your Order, St. Gerard Bishop of Chanade in Hungary, whom you
Commemorate Vie des Sts. Calend. Ben. ad Sept. 24.
September. 24. That he caused a Church to be built in Chanade, His Episcopal
See; and in it dedicated a Chapel to the Honor of the Blessed Virgn; where
having set up her Statue, He every day offered Incense to the Figure, and took
care by an Ordinance which He made, that Her Altar should never be without fine
Odours upon it, which should continually smoke to Her Honor.

55. Now this being the undoubted Practice of your Church, and such as you
cannot deny to be contrary to the express Command of God under the Law;
insomuch, that Cardinal Bellarmine Bellarm. de Imag. SS. l. 2. c. 17. p. 2144.
freely confesses it would have been Criminal in a Jew to have offered Incense
to any besides God only; either you must evidently prove to us, That those Acts
which were then appropriate Acts of Divine Worship, are not so now, but remain
indifferent to be paid to the Creature, as well as the Creator; or you must
give us leave to conclude, that you do in this, attribute that Honor to an
Image, which God has reserved as peculiar to Himself; and are by so doing,
guilty of Idolatry.

56. And thus have I dispatched the two Things you called me, without any
Provocation of mine, to examine; and which it may be you will now begin to
think you might as well have let alone: I return to my Defense, in which I am
next to consider, what you have to except against my third Argument, which I
brought to show, that you do truly and properly Adore the Cross; and that was
from your Good Friday Service.

Reply.] To this you Answer, That you bad here also shown my Reply p. 35.
UNSINCERE TRICKS, in adding and diminishing Words, to make your Church speak
as I would have it. And you pronounce me once more a CALUMNIATOR, for saying,
that this proves that your Church does Adore the Cross, in the utmost propriety
of the Phrase.

57. Answ.] These are hard Words; but I have always observed, that men are most
uneasy when Truth touches them to the quick. If you are not yet sensible that
it was indeed a pitiful Cavil to pretend I had false translated your Service,
by what I have offered in my former part from Mons. Imbert's Case, and who for
opposing that Interpretation of those Words which I delivered, was used after
the manner that I have declared; I am confident you are the only Person even of
your own Church, that needs to be convinced of it. In all the French
Translations of your Missal, I have ever seen, it is rendered in the very words
that I gave it, Behold the Wood of the Cross, come let us Adore IT: And
particularly in that of Mons Voisin, approved by those of your Church, even to
excess, you will find it in these express terms, Voila le Bois de la Croix, R.
venez Adorons LE.

58. In the Missal of Salisbury, the Determination of that Address to the
Cross, is undeniably evident. The Priests uncover the Cross, and sing the whole
Antiphone, Behold the Wood of the Cross, come let us Adore; to which the Quire
kneeling down, answer; We adore thy CROSS, O Lord. And I cannot but observe,
that when Jo. Aegidius Canon of Sevil (of whom I have so often spoken) was
forced to retract, as Heretical, his denial of Supreme Divine Worship to the
Cross; Ludovicus de Paramo tells us, Lud. de Par. de Orig. S. Inquis. l. 2.
tit. 3. c. 8. n. 19.
that the Fathers of the Inquisition convicted him of his Heresy, especially by
this Argument, taken from your Good Friday Service; viz. That the Church on
that solemn day did truly and properly Adore the Cross, when it said, We Adore
thy CROSS, O Lord.

59. And this may by the way suffice, to show how falsely you Reply p. 37, 38.
expound even those Words, not to signify the Cross of Christ, but his
Passion. Which besides, that it is foreign to the Ceremony of Worshipping the
Cross, which you are then about; and not a little Nonsense into the bargin; is
here interpreted, not only by me, but by the Fathers of the Inquisition, of the
Cross properly so called; and whose Authority I presume you will not care to
despise. And now I shall leave it to any Jury that you please, to judge of my
Translation; and what Character you deserve for your Reply p. 38.
little Reflection upon me. And I do assure you withal, that I will never from
henceforward so far distrust my Reader's Memory, as to say the same things
again, tho you should give me the same occasion.

60. For the other Point; That this does plainly show, that your Church Adores
the Cross in the utmost propriety of the Phrase; If you will allow those great
Men I before quoted, to understand the Sense of your Church in this Point, then
it is plain, that my Assertion must stand good. You see they freely confess it;
nay, what is more, they pronounce you a Heretic for denying it. As for your
applying of this Worship to our Savior Christ; if you mean thereby to signify
that Christ only is worshipped in this Ceremony, exclusive to the Cross; it is
evidently false, seeing the whole Action, as well as Words, show, that the
Cross is at least worshipped together with him; or rather (to speak more
precisely) Christ is worshipped together with the Cross. Nor will Cardinal
Bellarmine, to whom you direct me, stand you in any stead. For even he allows
the Cross to be improperly and accidentally Worshipped with the same kind of
Worship that Christ himself is. And if you please to let me send you to another
Cardinal, and who being Card. Capis. ib. ub supr. and par. XVI. page 670.
both a great Schoolman himself, and Master of the Sacred Palace, may be
presumed to know somewhat of your Churches Sense; he will tell you, that your
Cardinal Bellarmin was too wary in his Distinctions: And that he ought without
any of those softning Limitations, freely to have asserted, That the Cross was
truly and properly to be worshipped with Divine Adoration. And that I think, is
much the same with what I said, That you do Worship the Cross in the utmost
propriety of the Phrase.

61. But you have here two singular Arguments to excuse this Service from the
charge of Idolatry, and which ought not to be forgot. For,

Reply.] First, St. Paul (you say) looked upon it to be no Superstition, Reply
p. 38.
to fall on our Face in the assembly, and Worship GOD, 1 Cor. XIV. 25.

Answ.] Ergo (o Lepidum Caput!) If St. Paul may be Judge, it is no Idolatry in
you to fall on your Faces in the Assembly, and worship the CROSS. What would T.
G. have given to have met with such a Consequence in his Learned Adversary? But
indeed we needed not this Proof to convince us (in that Gentleman's Phrase)
that you never looked over Aristotle's Threshold, however your ill Genius has
prompted you to become a Controvertist.

62. Well, ^t if St. Paul wont do, yet at least you are sure the Primitive
Christians were on your side. And you prove it by an Instance most fit to keep
company with the foregoing Argument. The Case in short is this.

Reply.] St. Athanasius relates how some Jews in his time, in Reply p. 38.
the City of Berthus (Berytus) in Syria, used great Indignities to a Crucifix,
which a Christian had accidentally left behind him, when he removed from his
Lodgings. And you desire your Antagonist to answer you this Question: Whether I
would have excused those Jews, because they did those Actions to an inanimate
Being; or would not rather have interpreted their Intention, as passing from
the Cross to our Blessed Savior.

63. Answ. This is indeed a most melting Argument, and which as I remember, set
all the good Fathers of the second Council of Nice, a crying. But Sir, be not
you too much affected with it, for I will venture to give you that Consolation,
which one of your De la conformite des merveilles anciens avec les moderns,
Par. 1. Chapter 25. P.
Brethren once did his Congregation in France; when having preached in a most
Tragical manner about the Passion, not of a Crucifix, but of our Blessed
Savior himself, insomuch, that the whole Assembly was in Tears at it; the good
Father bid them not weep, for that, after all, it may be it was not true. For

1st, As to the Book which you cite for this goodly Story, it is certain it was
written above 420 years after Athanasius was in his Grave, and is of no manner
of Credit among the Learned.

2dly, As to the Story: It was invented in the time of Irene the Empress, when
all the World was set upon making and finding out Fables and Miracles, for
establishing the Worship of Images.

3dly, All the Authority we have, that ever there was any such thing done, and
that it was not a mere Invention (as were many others of the like kind at that
time) is that of Sigebert, whose Chronicle besides, that it was written yet
another 400 years after this supposed Insult upon the Crucifix, was also an
Bell. de Scrip. Eccles. p. 283.
Author whom Bellarmin himself confesses, is not to be credited in every thing
he says. And especially, when in all probability he had no other Warrant for
it, than the Acts of the Council of Nice, and the pretended Treatise of St.
Athanasius, which you quote for it. So unlucky a thing is it for you to meddle
with Church History.

64. But whether the Relation be Truth or Fable; The Question is put, and must
be Answered: Would I not have thought that these Jews hereby intended to
affront our Savior Christ? I answer, Yes; No doubt they did. And why then (say
you) should I not in like manner interpret this Service of yours to terminate
not upon the Crucifix, but to tend to him who suffered upon the Cross? I
answer, 1. That had you put your Question as you ought, you should have asked,
Why then we do not look upon your Intention to be to Honor, not the Cross, but
Him that suffered upon it. Now there is a very great Difference between these
two. And however your Friend T. G. supposes, That Actions must necessarily go
whither they are intended; yet I think both he and you ought by this time, to
be satisfied of the falseness of that Maxim? And therefore should we allow your
Intention to be only to worship Christ, and not the Cross, yet it does not
thence follow that all your worship must by the Interpretation of Gods Law
terminate upon him. But now, 2. I have shown, that for all your Pretenses, it
is not your Intention that your Worship should so terminate upon Christ, as not
to terminate also upon the Cross together with him. 3. If it were, yet for all
your intention you would nevertheless be far from Honoring Christ: seeing that
to worship Christ by an Image is a prohibited Act; and God cannot be Honored
in the very same Act in which he is disobeyed. And though an intention to
dishonor Christ, by abusing his Image, is sufficient to do it, (as in all
other Cases, one ill Circumstance will make the whole Action to be Evil;) yet a
good intention alone is not sufficient to make an Act good, nor by consequence
for the glory of God, unless that Intention it self be also governed by the
Rules of His Commandments. For otherwise a man might do the worst things with a
Good intention, and that should be sufficient to sanctify all his Villainies. So
far have you hitherto been from producing the least shadow of an Answer to
overthrow the force of my Allegations. My Last Instance was:

65. Fourthly; From the Hymns of your Church. In which I Reply, p. 39.
showed that you address your selves to the Cross, and beg spiritual Graces of
it; and that you could not say the Cross was here put by a Figure to signify
Christ crucified upon it; because the very words of the Hymns show, that it is
the Material Cross as distinguished from Christ, of which they speak.

66. And here you are in a great distress; you catch at every thing that comes
near you; but for the most part without considering whether it be to any
purpose or no. As for instance: You observe, First, That I am brisk and
confident, and have a mind to expose your Literature as well as your Idolatry.
But, Sir, may I beg leave to ask you on this Occasion the very same Question
that Ib. p. 40*
you do Me. Who is it you mean, when you say, I have a mind to expose YOUR
Literature? If you understand that of your Party, I must tell you I am so far
from exposing it, that I shall presently show you that they are the most
Learned Men of your Church whom I follow in the Application of that Hymn I
alleged. But if by YOUR Literature you meant your own, you have then made a
most unlucky piece of Work of it, in joining your Literature and your Churches
Idolatry together; and I doubt your Brethren will have but little cause to
applaud the Comparison. For do but grant it to be as easy to Prove the One, as
it is to Expose the Other, and I will never desire a fairer Advantage against
both, than you have here offered to Me. For,

67. Secondly, You say I must confess that your Churches Hymns were made by
Poets, unless I will be so great a Hypocrite as to deny that Prudentius and
Fortunatus were Poets. I suppose Prudentius and Fortunatus clubb'd together to
make the Hymn that I refer to: Only the mischef is, that the One lived in the
End of the IVth, the other not till about the middle of the Vth Century. Nay,
but what now if neither of these were Author of that Hymn? I am sure Gretser, a
very inquisitive Man in these matters, speaks very doubtfully of it, and leaves
it in Question, whether Venantius Lib. 1. de Cruce, c. 35.
Fortunatus, or Theodulphus Bishop of Orleans, was the Author of it; and He
lived yet later, about the beginning of the IXth Century. But to let this pass;
and consider,

68. Thirdly, How you prove these Men to be Poets, for indeed it is very
remarkable. You tell me, that if I will but look into the Corpus Poetarum, I
shall find them to have had a place among the Poets. A most undoubted way this,
to find out whether an Author were a Poet or a Schoolman; And I dare say you
were beholden to no man's Literature but your own for this Remark.

69. Well, but to grant that which I perceive you do not know very well how to
go about to prove, that the Author of this Hymn, whoever he was, was a Poet;
what will follow? Why then you say, Fourthly, I shall presently find the Figure
he there uses; his Title being not Of the CROSS, but of the PASSION of our
LORD. And then you take a great deal of pains to prove, what no man ever
denied, that the Cross in Holy Scripture is oftentime put to signify, the
Force, Effects, and Merits of Christ's Death and Passion. Now if this be any
thing to the purpose, as all that drops from a Person of your Literature must
be supposed to be; then I must conclude, that seeing the Title of that Hymn is
Of the Passion of our Lord, wherever I meet the word CROSS in it, I am to
understand it not of the Material Cross, but of Christ's PASSION. This you must
mean, or else all this ado is mere Reverie, and Impertinence. Now then let us
see what mad work we shall according to this new Exposition make of that Hymn.

The PASSION of our King comes forth; The mystery of the PASSION shines; upon
which PASSION the Maker of our Flesh was hanged in the Flesh.

Beautiful and bright PASSION! Adorned with the purple of a King. Chosen of a
fit Stock to touch such sacred Members.

Blessed PASSION! upon whose Arms the price of the World hung. Hail, O Passion!
our only Hope; In this time of the PASSION, increase righteousness in the
Godly, and give pardon to the Guilty.

70. Now this I am confident a man of so much Literature as you are, will not
allow to be a proper paraphrase of this Hymn: And if instead of the Passion,
you put Christ for the Cross, this will yet more increase the Nonsense and
Confusion. In short; If all the Corpus Poetarum were alive, and should lay
their Heads together with you, they could not find out any of their Figures
that would do the business; but must have some new Ecclesiastical Figure found
out to make the Cross signify Christ and his Passion, at the same time, and in
the same place in which it distinguishes both from the Cross. And such a Figure
I do say would be as Great a Mystery, in Verse, as Transubstantiation is in
Prose. And I desire you, if you can, to give me but one parallel Text of
Scripture, in which the Cross is at once taken both literally for that Cross on
which Christ suffered; and figuratively, for Christ and his Sufferings upon it.

71. In the mean time it shall suffice me Once more to mind you of what I
perceive you have nothing to say to; viz. That Aquinas and his Followers, who
have been sometimes reckoned men of Literature in your Church, have understood
this Hymn according to the plain and literal meaning of it: and that so
confidently as to conclude from it, that your Church holds Divine Honor to be
due to the Cross. We ought to worship the Images themselves (says Soto) for the
Church does not say, We worship THEE, O Christ; Soto de Just. and Jure. l. 2.
q. 3. Art. 2. Cathar. de Cult and Ador. Imag. p. 133.
But, We adore thy CROSS, O Christ. And again, O CRUX AVE, etc. We direct our
Words and signs of Adoration to the Images, (says Catherine) to which likewise
we burn Incense: as when we say to the CROSS, O Crux Ave. And to the same
purpose, Marsilius ab Ingen; Ludovieus de Paramo; Philippus Gamachaeus, etc.
See Dr. St. Answer to T. G. Part 2.

72. But if all this will not yet satisfy you, but you are still resolved to
adhere to your new Figure, I will then give you another Instance, and which I
believe may be Prose, for I do not remember I ever saw it in the Corpus
Poetarum, though this I shall leave to your Literature to determine: And I pray
be pleased to send us the Paraphrase of this Antiphone, according to your New
Method of Expounding:

O CROSS! brighter than all the Stars; famous in the World; Breviar. Romans May
3. p. 797. Paris 1643.
exceeding amiable to Men; more holy than all things; which alone have been
thought worthy to bear the weight of the World. Sweet Wood! bearing the sweet
Nails, and sweet burdens; SAVE the present Company gathered together this day
to THY PRAISE. And this may serve for the Second Point; which was, To make good
the Charge I had brought against you, of giving Divine Worship to Images. I
proceed now finally to show;

SECT. III.
That the Church of Rome thus Worshipping of Images is truly and properly
guilty of Idolatry.

73. THERE is nothing in all our Disputes with those of the Church of Rome that
seems so much to offend them, as this Charge. They think it not only
unreasonable to suppose that men in the clear light of Christianity should be
capable of falling into Idolatry, but even destructive of the very nature of a
Church, and by consequence contrary to all those Promises of Christ in his
Gospel, That the Gates of Hell should never prevail against it; And indeed were
our Notion of Idolatry the same with what some of their late Advocates have set
forth as the true and only Notion of it, I should not Reasons for Abrogating
the Test, p. 80, 81.
at all wonder at their resentments; but rather confess that we had justly
deserved all those Reproaches which their intemperate Pens have of late
bestowed upon us.

74. But whatever their opinion of the true and only Notion of Idolatry be, yet
common equity should have taught them to confess, that we mean no more in our
charge of it against them, than this, That those of the Church of Rome, in
their worship of the Host, of Saints and Images, do give that Honor to the
Creature, which ought to be given only to God. We do not pretend that you have
either renounced the Worship of the Supreme Deity; or that you do adore either
the Sun, Moon and Stars; or even Angels and Saints as such. And therefore
howsoever you may dislike our Notion of Idolatry, yet you ought not to revile
us for fixing a false Charge against you, but to show that we give an ill Name
to a true Charge. And because I now desire not to be mis-understood, I do first
of all declare, that by my present Conclusion I intend no more than this, That
you do give the proper Acts of Divine Worship to Images, as I have already
showed you do to Saints; and that this is truly and properly Idolatry.

75. To discharge therefore this last part of my Undertaking as I ought to do;
I will proceed distinctly upon these two things,

Is It. To fix our Notion of Idolatry, against those New Idea's that have of late
been given of it.

IIdly. To show, that according to the true Notion of it, the Church of Rome in
her Worship of Images is guilty of Idolatry.

I. POINT.
I. Of the true Nature of Idolatry.

76. This is what you desire me to reflect upon, and I hope it Reply, p. 29.
will not be thought amiss if I here with all imaginable tenderness communicate
my Reflections to you.

Reply, p. 28.] Three things (you say) there are required to make that Honor
which we do pay to any thing, become Idolatrous. 1st, The Understanding must
acknowledge an Excellency in the Object truly Divine, and worthy of Adoration
in the strictest sense, where really there is no such Excellency. 2dly, The
Will must have a propension and inclination to it as such, and pay that Honor
to it. And Lastly, the Body must pay the exterior Obeisance, of bowing,
kneeling, prostrating, kissing, etc. in pursuance of this interior Love and
Knowledge.

77. Ans. That is to say, that no One is an Idolater, but what takes somewhat
to be God that indeed is not so, and upon that account gives the Worship due to
the Supreme God to a Created Being. And this explains what you had said before;
that you wonder how it Reply, p. 27.
could enter into the Minds of Men of common sense to conceive it possible,
that in the clear light of Christianity, where all Persons are taught there is
but One God to whom Adoration is only due, they should yet fall down and Adore
a Stock or a Stone, and pay divine Honor to it. That the Idolatry of the
ancient Jews and Heathens consisted in believing Ibid. p. 28.
a plurality of Gods, and adoring them as such: So that in short, let men but
keep to the Knowledge of the One true God, and not worship Saints, or Images,
as such; and then there is no danger of Idolatry for any Other Worship that may
be paid to them.

78. And now let Idolatry be as stabbing and cutthroat a word as Reasons for
Abrogating the Test, p. 71, etc.
it will; Be its punishment, if it were possible, greater than what a Reverend
Author has lately told us is its least, Death and Damnation; If this be the
only Idolatry, viz. to worship somewhat else besides God, as supposing it to be
very God; I dare confidently affirm in behalf of all those Popular Divines that
have ever used that scolding word, That the Church of Rome is not Idolatrous in
the worship of Saints or Images, nor has it in this sense ever been charged by
us as such. But to show the Vanity of this Pretense; and yet more clearly
express what we mean by this Charge, I will now very plainly examine these two
things:

I. Whether, according to the Scripture-Notion of Idolatry, those may not be
guilty of it, who yet both Know and Worship the One true God?

II. How such Persons may become Guilty of it?

I. Whether, according to the Scripture-Notion of Idolatry, those may not be
guilty of it, who yet both Know and Worship the One true God?

79. And here it is not my design to enter on any large Discourse about the
general Nature of Idolatry; but still remembering the particular Point before
me, to prove it only in such Instances, as are more immediately applicable to
it. And such are especially these two:

1st, The Idolatry of the Golden Calf. 2dly, Of the Calves of Dan and Bethel.
80. As to the former of these, it has of late been suggested, Reasons for
Abrog the Test, p. 85.
That it was made by Aaron as the Symbol of the Egyptian Apis or Osyris; and to
whose Idolatry the Israelites now returned in the Worship of it. But this is
indeed a very weak Suggestion; and whosoever will but consider the
Circumstances of what was done by that People on this occasion, will presently
see, that they designed that Calf to be the Symbol not of any Egyptian Deity,
but of the true God, whom accordingly they worshipped in presence of it. And
this will appear;

81. 1st, From the occasion of this Idolatry; which was not any Infidelity as
to the true God, or that they had now any better Reasons given them for the
Worship of others besides him; but because Moses delayed to come down from the
Mount, therefore they urged Aaron to make them a God, that might go before
them. They had now Exodus XXXII.
rested a long time in that place, and were impatient to go on toward the Land
of Promise. But having now no Moses to enquire of Gods Pleasure, they wanted an
Oracle to consult upon these Occasions. And therefore they cried out unto
Aaron, Up, make us Gods that shall go before us, for as for this Moses the man
that brought us up out of the Land of Egypt, we wot not what is become of him.

82. Now that this was all they intended by it, will appear, 2dly, From the
Character which the People presently gave to the Calf, as soon as it was made:
This is thy God; or as the Chaldee Ibid. ver. 4.
Paraphrast renders it, This is thy Fear, O Israel, which brought thee up out
of the Land of Egypt. For sure the People were not so stupid as to think it was
either that Image which had brought them up out of Egypt; or that the Gods of
Egypt had plagued their own People for their sakes, and with a high hand
delivered them out of their Power. No, doubtless they understood by it their
God, Exodus XX.
who but just before at the delivery of the Law, had assumed this as his own
peculiar Character, I am the LORD thy God, which have brought thee out of the
Land of Egypt, and out of the house of Bondage. And this naturally Suggests to
me a third Evidence of this Truth.

83. From the Title which Aaron himself gave to that God, of which this Calf
was the Symbol. Ver. 5. And when Aaron saw it, Ibid 5.
he built an Altar before it; and Aaron made Proclamation and said, To morrow
is a feast unto the LORD. This was the peculiar and incommunicable name of the
God of Israel, which he assumed unto himself, Exodus VI. 2. when he renewed his
Covenant with them; and we do not find any one place in all the Holy Scripture,
where it has ever been attributed to any other.

84. 4thly, Had the People hereby designed this to be the Symbol of the
Egyptian Deities; how comes it to pass, that (as we read in the next Verse)
they offered Burnt-offerings, and Peace Offerings unto Ver. 6.
it. For this, both the Scripture tells us, was an Abomination to the
Egyptians; and a late Advocate for you, freely confesses, that Reasons for Abr.
the Test, p. 114, etc.
they esteemed Bullocks and Rams to be Sacred Animals, and therefore never
offered any of them to their Gods.

85. Lastly, The Scripture plainly distinguishes this Idolatry from that of the
Egyptians, and makes the one to have been the Punishment of the other. It is
confessed, or rather contended for by the Author I but now mentioned, that the
Egyptian Idolatry consisted in worshipping the Sun, Moon and Stars, as the
Supreme Deity: Now, this St. Stephen tells us, that God afterward permitted
them to fall into, and therefore it must have been some other Idolatry, which
in this Case they were Guilty of; For speaking of their setting up the Golden
Calf, Acts VII. 41. He thus goes on, ver. 42. THEN God turned, and gave them up
to worship the Host of Heaven.

86. As for the other Instance I proposed to consider; The Calves of Dan and
Bethel; the Occasion of their making, was this. When the ten Tribes had thrown
off Rehoboam from being their King, and had chosen Jeroboam to Reign over them;
This new Usurper, fearing lest if the People went up at the yearly Sacrifices
to Jerusalem, where Rehoboam still Reigned over the other two Tribes, it might
in time occasion their falling away from him, set up two Calves in Dan and
Bethel, and made Altars before them, and persuaded the People, saying, It is
too much for you to go up to Jerusalem: Behold thy Gods, O Israel, which
brought thee up out 1 Kings XII. 28.
of the Land of Egypt.

87. Now that Jeroboam intended these Calves to be Symbols of the God of
Israel, appears, 1st, From most of those Reflections I before made. He gives
them the same Character by which they constantly understood the God of Israel;
Behold (says he) thy God, that brought thee up out of the Land of Egypt. He
offered Sacrifies before them, and consecrated the Priests that Ministered unto
them, with a young Bullock and seven Rams. All which is exactly agreeable 2 Chronicles XIII. 9.
to what God required of them, but was utterly inconsistent with the Idolatry
of Egypt. But

88. 2dly, We have some more peculiar Proofs of this matter. I speak not now of
the readiness of the People in complying with him, which it is not imaginable
they would so easily have done, had he intended to lead them to the Worship of
strange Gods. Nor will I insist upon the danger, which so sudden an Innovation
might have brought to this new King, and who was not so little a Politician, as
to attempt such an Alteration at a time when he was hardly yet well established
in his new Usurpation. These are indeed great Probabilities, but such as this
Cause needs not; seeing it has the Evidence of Holy Scripture fully confirming
it; It being certain that the Idolatry of these Calves did not take them off
from the Service of the true God. Let us examine all along the History of the
Kings of Israel; we shall find them constantly worshipping the Jehovah, the God
of Israel. Jehu was zealous for him; he destroyed the Idolatry of Baal out of
his concern for the Lord; and had the Kingdom by Gods own immediate Promise
settled upon his Posterity for his so doing. And yet it is expressly said of him,
Howbeit from 2 King. X. 29.
the Sins of Jeroboam, who made Israel to Sin, Jehu departed not from after
them, viz. the Golden Calves that were in Bethel, and that were in Dan.

89. Who was it but the true God for whom Elijah appeared so zealous? 1 King.
XVIII. when he entered into that famous trial with the Prophets of Baal; If the
Lord be God, follow him; but if Baal, than follow him. And the Fire came down
from Heaven, and burnt up the Sacrifice, and all the people confessed, saying,
The Ibid. 39.
Lord he is the God; The Lord he is the God.

90. Hence it is, that when Ahab fell into that other kind of Idolatry which
consists in worshipping of false Gods, he is represented as much more heinously
offending God, than the other Kings of Israel, who worshipped the Calves of Dan
and Bethel, 1 King. XVI. 31.
1 Kings XVI. 31. And it came to pass, as if it had been a light thing for him
to walk in the sins of Jeroboam the Son of Nebat, that he went and served Baal,
and worshipped him.

91. By all which it undoubtedly appears, that in both these cases, they
designed by those Calves to worship the true God; and then seeing it is confessed
they did commit Idolatry in that service, it must remain that men may know, and
serve the true God, and yet by worshipping him in this prohibited manner, may
in the interpretation of the Divine Law commit Idolatry.

92. I shall conclude this with that Confession which the Evidence of truth in
this matter has extorted from Cardinal Bellarmin and and some others of your
own Communion; where answering this objection, that when the Golden Calf was
set up, Aaron proclaimed a Feast not to any other strange God but (...) to the
LORD, to the Jehovah,

It is (says he) the solution of Abulensis Bellarm. lib. 2. de Imag. c. 13. p.
2130, 2131.
and others, that there were two sorts of Idols among the Hebrews. One without
the name of any certain God, as that of Micha, Judges XVII. and perhaps the
Golden Calf which Aaron made, Exodus XXXII. and Jeroboam renewed, 1 King. XII.
for the Scripture does not call the Calf the God Moloch, or the God Baal,

These are thy GODS, O Israel. The other sort of Idols had a certain name; as
Baal, Moloch, Ashtoreth, Chamos, etc. as is plain, 1 King. XI. etc. They say
therefore, and that not improbably, that it may be admitted of the former kind,
That the Jews did think that in the Idol THEY WORSHIPPED THE TRUE GOD.

93. And now tho this might suffice to show how consistent the guilt of
Idolatry is with the acknowledgment of one true God, yet will I add a
reflection or two more, for the farther confirmation of it. For,

First, Were such a Notion as this of Idolatry to be admitted, it would serve
no less to excuse the Heathens than those of the Church of Rome of the guilt of
it. For however they worshipped other inferior Deities, as these do Saints and
Angels with a lower degree of Religious Honor; yet even they too acknowledged
one supreme God, who was over all, and to whom the highest Worship and
Adoration alone was due. This has been so largely proved Defense of the Disc.
of Idolatry, par. 1
by T. G's worthy and learned Antagonist, not to mention any others who have
occasionally treated of this Argument, that I shall not need to enter on any
particular induction in order to the asserting of it.

94. Secondly, It cannot be questioned but that this new Notion of Idolatry,
set up on purpose to excuse you from that Imputation, is utterly repugnant to
the Principles of the Ancient Fathers, who certainly charged those with
Idolatry, who yet believed and worshipped the very same God with themselves.
Thus St. Athanasius charges the Arrians with Idolatry for adoring Christ, whom
they Athanas contr. Arrian. Orat. 1. p. 286.
esteemed to be a Creature. He tells them, that no supposition of any
Excellencies whatever in him, although derived from God, would excuse them. But
that if they thought him a mere man, and yet adored him, they would be found
worshippers of men for all that. Nay he doubts Ib. 387.
not to parallel them with the Gentiles, and to compare the service they paid
to our Savior upon this supposition, with that which the other gave to their
inferior Deities. And the same was the opinion of all the rest of those great
men, Gregory Nazianzen, Nyssen, Epiphanius, etc. and whose words are so well
known, that I shall not need to transcribe them.

95. But now that I have mentioned Epiphanius, I may not forget another sort of
Idolatry exploded by him, and yet more near our purpose than the foregoing. I
mean that Worship which some Superstitious Women in his time paid to the
Blessed Virgin by offering a Cake to her. Now this that Holy Father condemns as
downright Idolatry, and the device of the Devil. And to show how consistent the
charge of Idolatry is with the worship of one God, he gives us a similitude
that would almost imply a necessity of acknowledging the one true God to
complete the nature of it: Idolatry (says he) comes into the world through an
Adulterous inclination of the mind, which cannot be contented with one God
alone: Like an Adulterous Woman that is not satisfied with the chaste embraces
of one Husband, but wanders in her lust after many lovers. So possible did
those Ancient Fathers think it to be for Men in the clear light of
Christianity, and retaining the acknowledgment of the true God, nevertheless to
commit Idolatry.

96. I might add here the Exhortations of the New Testament, where both S. Paul
and S. John, among other Cautions to the Christians of their Times, place that
of fleeing from Idolatry; and this in such a manner, as evidently supposes them
very capable of continuing the Profession of Christianity, and the Knowledge and
Worship of God, and yet of falling into it. But I shall content my self,
lastly, to close up this with the Confessions of Learned Romanists themselves,
who have acknowledged Idolatry to be consistent with the Worship of the true
God.

97. S. Thomas defines Idolatry to be a Sin, whereby the singularity 22dae q.
94. Ar. 3. resp. ad 2. Cajet. page 340
of God's Dominion is taken from him: And Card Cajetane in his Notes upon this
same Question, supposes that a Christian may commit Idolatry, and yet be so far
from renouncing the true God, as not to violate any part of his Faith in him.
Gregory de Valentia, says it is Idolatry; Whenever a Man intends Lib. 1. de
Idol.
to apply to a Creature, either by Words or by Actions, any estimation which is
proper unto the Majesty of God, whether it be done directly or indirectly.
Vasquez reckons those to be Idolaters, Vasquez in 3. T. 1. p. 721.
who give to an Image the Service due to God; and defines an Idol in general to
be, Whatsoever is worshipped as God that is not truly so. Now all these either
manifestly suppose the Knowledge of the True God, or at least do not exclude it.

98. But what need I insist upon Generals, seeing if we may believe those of
your own Communion, you are not only capable, for all your Christianity, of
falling into Idolatry; but in this very Point of Image Worship, are actually
guilty of it. For,

1st, Cardinal Bellarmine disputing against that which I have Bellarm. de Imag.
Ss. l. 2. c. 24. p. 2153. C.
shown by such a number of Witnesses to be the True Doctrine of your Church,
viz. That the Image of Christ is to be worshipped with proper Divine Worship;
doubts not to say this is Idolatry; And therefore argues in this manner against
it: That this Worship is either given to the Image for it self, or for the sake
of another. If for it self, it is plainly IDOLATRY; if for another, it is not
proper Divine Worship, because the very Nature of that is to be given for it
self. Again; Either the Divine Worship (says he) which is given to the Image
relatively for another, is the same with that which is given to God, or it is
an inferior Worship. If it be the same, then the Creature is equally worshipped
with God, which CERTAINLY IS IDOLATRY. For Idolatry is not only when GOD IS
FORSAKEN, and an Idol worshipped, but when an Idol is worshipped together with
God. If it be an Inferior Worship, then it is not the proper Divine Worship.

99. So that now then the Point is reduced to a fair issue. Either we must pay
the same Adoration to the Image that we do to the Original, and then Card.
Bellarmine pronounces us Idolaters; Or we must give it only an Inferior Honor,
and then Card. Capisucchi, and the Inquisition, damn us as Heretics. Nay, but
there is Idolatry committed go which way you will. For Vasquez, another Learned
Jesuit, and whose Works have been In 3. T. 1. p. 778.
no less approved than Card. Bellarmine's, tells us; That if a Man give
inferior Worship to an Image, distinct from that which is given to the Thing
represented by it, he thereby incurs the guilt of IDOLATRY, because he
expresses his submission to a mere inanimate Thing, that has no kind of
Excellency to deserve it from him. And now seeing there is so much danger of
Idolatry, whatever the Honor be that is given to Images, I hope we may be the
easier excused, if admonished by these Confessions, and directed by God's
Commandments, we refuse to give them any Honor at all. And thus much be said
to the first Point, That a Man may be capable of falling into Idolatry, though
he continues both to know and worship the One true God. My next Business is,

2dly, To show, How this may be done by him.

100. I shall mention only two ways, and which I have already before
infinuated; ^iz.

1. By worshipping the True God after an Idolatrous manner. 2. By giving Divine
Worship to any other besides Him.
1. By worshipping the True God after an Idolatrous manner.

101. This was the Case of the Israelites, in the Examples I have before
mentioned, of the Calves of Aaron and Jeroboam. They directed their Adoration
to the JEHOVAH, the LORD their God that brought them up out of the Land of
Egypt. To him they proclaimed the Feast, and offered Burnt- Offerings and
Sacrifices upon their Altars. Yet because they set up a Symbol of him, contrary
to his Command, and worshipped him after an Idolatrous manner, they are
expressly charged as Idolaters in Holy Scripture; and the Worship that was
intended by them to God, is represented as given to a Molten Image.

102. And the same was the Case of that other Image which Card. Bellarmine
joins with these, viz. the Teraphim of Micha, Judge. XVII. that these were
designed for the Service of the True God, is plain, seeing both his Mother is
said to have consecrated the Silver of which they were made (...) to the
JEHOVA, Verse. 3. and Micha himself hired a Levite of the LORD's to be his
Priest, Verse. 10, 11. And he comforted himself upon this consideration, Verse.
13. Now know I that the LORD will do me good, seeing I have a Levite to my
Priest. And again, Chap. xviii. 5. The Priest asked Counsel of GOD; for some of
the Danites that enquired of him, and GOD, or the JEHOVA, gave them a true
Answer. It is supposed by some in favor of this Micha, that being a Religious
Man, and the public Service of God being very much obstructed by the miserable
Violence of those Times, he made himself a little Oratory, and placed in it all
the Furniture of the Tabernacle, with these Teraphim to resemble the Cherubims
of the Ark, whose Figure S. Hierome and others suppose them to have had. But
whatever becomes of this Fancy, that which I have to observe now is, that what
the Original Hebrew styles Teraphim, the old Vulgar Latin calls Idols; and in
that famous Passage, 2 Samuel xv. 23. they are both joined in the same rank of
Ilness with one another; For Rebellion is as the Sin of Witchcraft; and to
transgress an Idol and a Teraphim: (...), so Symmachus renders it; and so both
the (...) and (...) in that place must undoubtedly be understood. And indeed
Card. Cajetan Comm. Jude 17. Verse. 2.
himself confesses as to the very Point before us, that the whole Work (however
Micah intended it) was in God's estimation without question Idolatry: And to
whose Opinion we have already seen Card. Bellarmine to have agreed; not to
mention Tostatus and others whom he refers to as acknowledging the same
likewise.

103. 2dly, As for the other way by which a Man may commit Idolatry, who yet
both acknowledges and worships the True God, viz. by giving Divine Worship to
any other together with him; I have already offered Instances of that in the
Cases of the Arrians and Collyridians; the one of which for worshipping Christ,
whom they supposed to be but a Creature; the other for offering a Cake to the
Virgin Mary, are charged by the Ancient Fathers as guilty of Idolatry. Nor is
this without foundation from the Holy Scripture. For besides, that first of all
we find there all Religious Worship appropriated to God only; and therefore to
give such Worship to any other, must be practically to set up another God. To
say nothing, 2dly; that if any such Worship has at any time been offered any
Holy Men or Angels, they have not only constantly refused it as a great
Abomination, but have still given this Reason for it, that they were Creatures,
and by consequence not to be adored: Stand up (says St. Peter to Cornelius) for
I also am a Man. Sirs, Why do Acts 10. 26. Acts 14. 15. Rev. 22. 9.
ye these things? (says St. Paul to the Men of Lystra, who would have offered
Sacrifice to him) We are also Men of like Passions with you. See thou do it
not, (says the Angel to St. John) for I am thy fellow Servant: worship God. All
which sufficiently show, that to worship any other besides God, is to raise
them above the state of Creatures, and in effect to make Idols of them. We may
observe, 3dly, That to give even the least part of that Service which is due
only to God to any Creature, is expressly called Idolatry. Thus because we ought
to trust in God only: Covetous Men who (as St. Paul tells them) trust in
uncertain Colos. 3. 5. Ephesians. 5. 5.
Riches, are in the New Testament called Idolaters. And sure those do not less
deserve this Character, who trust in the Blessed Virgin and the Saints, or by
any other Act of proper religious Worship, such as Prayer, and in one word all
those other Instances of religious Adoration I have heretofore mentioned, show
that they divide the proper Service of God with them.

104. Let us add to this, 4thly, That Cardinal Bellarmine Bellarm. L. C.. 98.
supr.
himself confesses that Idolatry is committed, not only when God is forsaken
and an Idol worshipped, but when an Idol is worshipped together with him. And
this he proves from Exodus XX. 23. Ye shall not make WITH ME Gods of Silver,
etc. (...) i. e. says your Learned Vatablus, to worship them together Vatabl.
in L^c.
with Me: For I will that ye should worship ME ALONE, and not join any
Companion WITH ME.

105. I shall finish this with the Consideration of that Charge which S. Paul
brings against the Gnostick Heretics, and in which he plainly argues against
their Idolatry, Romans 1. 25. That they changed the Truth of God into a Lie, i.
e. says Theodoret, they gave the name of God to an Idol: and worshipped or
served the Creature (...) besides, but yet together with the Creator, who is
blessed for ever, Amen. For whereas (says the same Father) they ought to have
worshipped the true God, they gave Divine Worship to the-Creature; To the same
Accusation are they subject, who calling the only begotten Son of God of a
Creature, do yet worship him as God. For they ought in their Divinity either
not to rank him among the Creatures, but with God that begat Him, or if they
will have Him to be a Creature, they ought not to give Worship to Him as a
Deity.

106. Hence Athanasius calls this the folly of the Arrians and Tom. 1. p. 385.
C.
Greeks: to worship the Creature, besides or with the Creator. And again, The
Apostle (says he) accuses the Greeks that they worshipped the Creatures, seeing
that they served the Creature besides the Creator; seeing then the Arrians say
that our Lord is a Creature, and serve him as such, wherein do they differ from
the Greeks or Gentiles? And lastly, S. Jerome in answer to the charge of
Vigilantius, who accused them of Idolatry for worshipping the Relics of the
Martyrs, utterly renounces the Charge upon the same Foundation: But as for us
(says Jeronim. Epist. ad Ripar. T. 3. Erasm. fol. 54.
he) so far are we from adoring the Relics of the Martyrs, that we do not
worship the Sun or the Moon, not any Angels or Archangels, not the Cherubims
nor Seraphim, nor any Name that is named either in this World or in that to
come, lest we should serve the Creature rather than the Creator, who is blessed
for ever.

107. And thus have I endeavored in as short a compass as I could, to clear
the general Nation of Idolatry, as far as concerned the Point before me, and in
which I suppose you to have erred more for your Churches sake, than for any
great difficulty there is in understanding the nature of this Sin. It will now
be an easy task from these Principles to infer, (which is my next Point.)

II. That your Church in the Worship of Images is truly and properly guilty of
it.

And this I shall show according to what you desire;

1st, With reference to those who hold that Images are to be worshipped with
the same Worship as the Things which they represent. 2dly, As it concerns their
Opinion, who denying this, yet allow an inferior Honor to them.
First, That they are guilty of Idolatry, who worship Images with the same
Honor as the Things which they represent.

108. Where first I must observe, that this, however of late opposed by you and
the rest of our new Representers, is yet not only the most general received
Doctrine of the Roman Church, but so esteemed to be the sense of your two
Councils of Nice and Trent, that Card. Capisucchi produces a long Catalogue of
your greatest Writers who have looked upon it as savouring of Heresy to oppose
it. And not only Monsieur Imbert in France, but also Aegidius Magistralis, and
the French Gentleman, whose Case I before represented, will assure you, that in
the Inquisitions of Italy, Spain, and Portugal, it is somewhat more than a
Scholastic Nicety, or a probable Opinion, which may without danger be opposed
by you. And therefore, tho to make good my promise, I shall also dispute this
Point with you too upon your own Principles; yet I must needs declare that it is
here I esteem my self truly to oppose the Doctrine of your Church in this
particular.

109. Now that they who hold this sort of Image Worship are thereby guilty of
Idolatry, is so evident that your own Card. Bellarmine could not forbear
reproaching them with it: And whose words I will once more produce, not more
for the Authority than the Weight of them; where maintaining this Conclusion,
That Images of themselves and properly are not to be worshipped with the same
Worship with which the Exemplar is worshipped, He thus argues against the
contrary Opinion: Either that Latria or Divine Worship which is given to the
Image, for another is the same with that Worship which is paid to God, or it is
some inferior Honor: If it be the same, then the Creature is equally
worshipped with God himself, which is certainly Idolatry; For it is Idolatry,
not only to forsake God and worship an Idol, but to worship an Idol together
with God. As it is written, ye shall not make Gods of Gold or of Silver
together with Me. Thus this great Writer. And tho I ought not to expect such
free Declarations from you, whose business it is to dissemble, and soften, and
accommodate things all you can, yet have you plainly enough insinuated the very
same. For when you lay down this Position, That the Image Reply, Pref. page 18.
of our Savior Christ, or the Holy Cross, is upon no account whatsoever to be
worshipped with Divine Worship, that Worship being due only to God: All you
have to say for the other Opinion is, that it MAY, nay that is not enough, it
MAY POSSIBLY be defended, which is, I think, a tacit Confession, that, to say
the truth, you doubted it could not. It Is true, you afterward grow more
confident, and improve your POSSIBLY into EASILY; I say these Expressions of
the Schools MAY be EASILY defended; but then you add, that it must be done by
interpreting them so as not to shock this first Principle, That God alone is to
be worshipped; That is to say, by changing the Conclusion; and whereas they
say, That the Cross is to be worshipped together with Christ with Divine
Worship; you give it the new turn, That not the Cross, but Christ in presence
of the Cross is to be worshipped with Divine Worship. For otherwise you had
before told us, that the Holy Cross it self must upon no account whatsoever be
worshipped with Divine Worship; and again here, this first Principle (say you)
must not be shocked, That God alone is to be adored with Divine Adoration.

110. It appears by this how uneasy you are in this Case, and it is not a
little Confirmation to us of the Security of our Condition, to see that you
whose concern it so much is to be very well assured of what you do, yet cannot
agree among your selves what Honor is to be given to Images. But one Party
thinks that cannot be maintained without Idolatry, which the other declares may
not be denied without Heresy. As for the Images of the Blessed Virgin and the
Saints, that those commit Idolatry who worship them with the same Religious
Worship that they pay to the Exemplars, will follow from what I have before
said of your worshipping the Blessed Virgin and Saints themselves. For if it be
Idolatry to give Religious Worship to the Prototypes, it must then be much more
so, to pay it to the Images.

111. For your other Images, those of our Savior Christ and the Holy Trinity,
I shall need no other Argument than that of Card. Bellarmine beforementioned,
to show the Worship of those too to be Idolatry. It being evident that to give
Divine Adoration to any Creature, that is, to worship any Creature as God, is
to make an Idol of it, and therefore the Service that is thereby paid to it
must be Idolatry. Now that this is the Case of those who hold this Opinion, if
what I have already cited from them be not sufficient to show, and especially
where they declare (as we have seen) that not only Christ, but the Image it
self too is to terminate the Divine Worship which is paid to Christ by it; I am
sure the Reason which they bring to establish their Conclusion will be more
than enough to do it: viz. That the same Indivisible Act is at once and
indivisibly Card. Capis. de cult. Im. qu. ii. par. 9. page 650.
the Worship both of the Image, and of Christ represented by the Image. And if
the Image of Christ be adored with the same indivisible Adoration with which
Christ is adored, that Adoration must be the supreme Divine Adoration, seeing
with such only Christ is to be adored.

112. But how then does the Cardinal excuse this from being Idolatry. He
answers, That it is not Idolatry, because the Ibid. par. 18. p. 677.
Image as an Image is in that respect Christ himself. For in this respect (says
he) the Image of Christ is not considered PRECISELY as it is a CREATURE, but as
it is a Divine Thing, and Christ himself by Representation. And then he
dogmatically concludes, That it is not at all inconvenient that a CREATURE as
it is a Divine Thing, and after a certain manner one with God, should be
honored with the very Ibid. 679.
same Divine Honor, with which God himself is honored. In short, he confesses
that the Images of Christ, upon the account of their being so, may be adored
with the very same Adoration that Christ himself is; and that in such a respect
it is not at all inconvenient for the Creature to have Divine Worship paid to
it. He looks upon Idolatry to be then only committed when the Image is
worshipped exclusively to God, but that it is none to worship God by an Image,
or to worship an Image together with God. But yet since he confesses that
Images considered as Images, in their Representative Natures, are still but
Creatures, and to worship any Creature with the Worship due only to God
(whatever the pretense be for the so doing) is in effect to set up another God,
which must needs be Idolatry; It will remain that no pretense of Scholastic
Niceties will be able to excuse this great Man from Card. Bellarmine's censure
of Idolatry; Seeing (as he truly tells us) it is Idolatry not only to forsake
God and worship an Idol, but to worship an Idol together with God. But all this
will more evidently appear from the other Consideration, in which I am to show,

Secondly, That even those who deny this Supreme Divine Honor to Images, are
yet guilty of Idolatry in what they allow to them.

113. The truth is, the case of these Men is, I think, rather more inexcusable
than that of the other kind, because that (in S. Paul's words) Romans 1. 32.
Knowing the Judgment of God that they which commit such things as these are
worthy of Death, they not only do the same, but (...). They assent to those who
do them. (...), so Theophylact; they defend and patronize them: (...). As
Theodoret very well observes upon this place.

114. Now that this is indeed truly your Case appears, 1st, In that at the same
time that you assert in express terms, that you do not worship Images, God
forbid: That the Cross is upon NO ACCOUNT WHATSOEVER to be worshipped with
Divine Worship; you nevertheless comply with those others before mentioned in
all the most forbidden Instances of Divine Adoration. You incense them, you
carry them solemnly in Processions, you consecrate them for this very end that
they may be worshipped, you prostrate your selves before them in the Church of
God, and in the time of Prayer, you desire several Graces to accrue to you by
your serving of them, nay you address your very Prayers to them, which your own
Aquinas makes use of to prove that a proper Divine Adoration is due to the
Cross; for having laid down this Conclusion, that the Cross is to be adored
with the same Adoration that Christ himself is; He immediately subjoins, And
for this cause it is that we speak to the Cross, and pray to it as to Christ
himself. Where you must observe (says Aqu. 3. p. qu. 25. ar. 4. in Corp.
Card. Cajetan in his Notes on that Passage) that S. Thomas brings our speaking
to the Cross as an effect of the same Adoration with which Christ is adored.
For because we speak to the Cross as Christ, it is a sign that we recur to the
Cross as to Christ. By all which it appears that you are in this matter (...),
or self-condemned: If you believe this Worship to be lawful and yet deny it, of
Hypocrisy toward us; if you think it to be Idolatrous, and yet comply with it,
of a great Sin toward God.

115. And that which yet farther confirms me in this is, to consider what
wretched Evasions you make use of to excuse your selves in these Particulars.
Can any thing be more pitiful than the Expositions you have here offered, of
your Consecrating of Crosses, of your Good-friday-Service, and of the Hymns of
your Church, which I had alleged as Instances of that Worship you give to
Images? Do not these plainly show a desperate Cause: and that you are but too
sensible that your old Practices are not to be reconciled with your new
Pretenses.

116. If while I am endeavoring to convince you of Idolatry, I do by the way
discover your Insincerity, it is what I cannot help. But all the use I shall
make at present of these Remarks shall be to observe, that even those among you
who pretend the most to deny a Divine Worship to Images, yet must allow such
Acts of it as these I have here recounted. Now that even this will involve you
in this Guilt, is evident from the Scripture-Notion of Idolatry before
established. For I desire you to tell me, if you can, what did those Israelites
do when they worshipped the Golden Calf, that you do not at this day practice
in the very same manner? Was it, 1. that they worshipped God by an Image? But
if this be Idolatry, you cannot deny but that you do the very same. Or, was it,
2. that they did not refer their Worship finally to God, but terminated their
Adoration upon the very Image it self? Nay, but Aaron in express terms
proclaimed a Feast unto the Lord; and to whom can we suppose that they offered
their Burnt-offerings and their Peace Offerings, but to the same LORD to whom
the Feast it self was proclaimed?

117. To conclude; There is nothing in that whole History to make us doubt but
that they designed that Calf only as a Symbol of the God of Israel: And their
Idolatry by Consequence was no other than what the most moderate Men of your
Church must confess themselves to be guilty of, viz. That, contrary to God's
express Command, you set up Graven Images as Representations of our Savior
Christ and the Holy Trinity; and worship the infinite and incomprehensible God,
in a Figure made like unto a Mortal Man: Which God himself has warranted us by
his holy Word to call Idolatry.

118. It remains therefore upon the whole, that either you must show us to be
mistaken in our Notion of Idolatry; or you will never be able to acquit your
selves of the Charge of it. And when you have done this, we shall then only
tell you, that you commit a Sin in this Service, that you violate God's holy
Law which forbids it; but for the denomination of it, we shall leave it to you,
whose Sin it is, to give it what particular Name you your selves think fit.

Of RELICS.
119. IN the Point of Relics you offer only two things in Reply, p. 42, etc.
answer to all that I had said upon that Subject, viz.

Reply] First, That the whole of my Discourse proceeded upon verbal Dispute,
what we are to call that Honor which you give to them, and which you deny to
be properly Worship. Secondly, You once more egregiously cavil about the
Translation of that Part of the Council of Trent which concerns this Subject,
and deny that you seek to the sacred Monuments or Relics of the Saints for
the obtaining of THEIR Help and Assistance.

120. Answ.] For answer to which Pretenses, because I as little love to prolong
Disputes at any time, as you do when you Reply, ibid.
have no more to say in order to the carrying of them on; I will lay aside
words, and bring the Issue to the things themselves, and show how miserably you
have prevaricated in this Point too, as wellas in the foregoing, by proving,

I. That you do properly worship the Relics of your Saints. II. That you do
seek to them for Help and Assistance.
And when this is done, I shall not need say any thing to prove that you here
also commit Idolatry; seeing you allow the Cases of Images and Relics to be
the same; and the Council of Trent makes this to be the very difference between
Reply, p. 44.
the Heathens and them, and that by which they hope to escape the Censure of
Idolatry, viz. That they do not believe any Divinity or Virtue in Images for
which they ought to be worshipped, or that any thing is to be asked of them, or
any trust to be put in them. Tho how truly they declare this, the account I
have before given of your consecrating both of Crosses and Agnus Dei's will
sufficiently show.

I. That you do truly and properly worship the Relics of your Saints.

121. This is a Point that in any other Age, or Country but ours, would have
needed no Proof. And it is not the least Argument of an innovating Spirit in
you, that no Words or Expressions are of any value with you, as often as you
are minded to give us what you call the Churches Sense. Let your Writers use
never so many Phrases to assure to us their Opinion that Relics are to be
worshipped, all this signifies nothing, they meant no more by it than an Honor
or Veneration due to the sacred Remains Reply, p. 42.
of those Saints who were once the Temples of the Living God; and not a Worship
or Adoration taken in its strict Sense. There is hardly an Expression that can
signify a proper Worship which your own Authors have not made use of to
declare the Service they thought due to them. I ADORE, WORSHIP, embrace the
Relics of the Saints, said one in the second Council of Nice, and the whole
Assembly resolved, Act. IV. That their Bones, Ashes, Rags, Blood, and
Sepulchers, should be ADORED, only Men should not offer Sacrifice unto them.
Card. Baronius speaks of it as an Honor done Him by Pope Annal. ad. Ann. 821..
14.
Clement VIIIth, that tho most unworthy of so great an undertaking, he was yet
sent by him to examine and ADORE the venerable Body of S. Cecilia. And though
the cautious Synod of Trent said only that Relics should be VENERATED, yet
seeing it neither condemned the Opinions of those who taught they were to be
worshipped, but rather allowed the Acts of proper Divine Service to be paid to
them. What can we conclude, but that they made use of a loose Expression to
satisfy the more moderate Party of your Communion, at the same time that they
resolved by their practice to favor the Superstition of those who properly
adored them?

122. Now that this was truly the Case, will appear,

First, From what I have before said, concerning the Holy CROSS; which is
considered by you in a double Capacity, both as an Image and as a Relic; and
is upon both accounts declared to be worthy of the very SAME ADORATION that
Christ himself is; And I hope that is a proper Worship in the strictest sense.
For thus St. Thomas argues; If we speak of Aquin. 3. Par. Qu. 25. Art. 4.
the very Cross upon which Christ was crucified, it is to be worshipped with
Divine Worship, both as it represents Christ, and as it touched the Members of
Christ, and was sprinkled with his Blood. And for this Cause we both speak to
the Cross and pray to it, as if it were Christ Crucified upon it. Where note,
(says Cajetane) That our speaking to the Cross is here produced Cajet. in Th.
Ibid.
as an Effect of the same Adoration with which Christ is adored. This I think
is plain enough, and may serve to show both with what sincerity you deny that
properly speaking you do worship Relics; or that it is not the Cross, but
Christ Crucified upon it, to whom you speak in these Addresses; and which I
have before vindicated against your Cavils.

123. Now this is the more to be considered, in that here you cannot say, as
you do in the Case of Images, that the Figure and the Proto-type are in a
manner united together, and that therefore the Image in its representative
Nature is in some sort very Christ: The reason of this Worship being only a
former Relation to our Savior; because (says Aquinas) it heretofore Aquin.
loc. cit.
touched his Sacred Members, or was sprinkled with his Blood. Upon which single
account Cardinal Capisucchi doubts not to affirm, Paragr. Appendix. p. 690.
That the Wood of the Cross is so sanctified and consecrated by Christ, that
every the least Particle of the Cross divided from the whole, and from the
other parts does remain Consecrated and Sanctified; and therefore that every
the least piece of the Cross is to be adored with the very same supreme Divine
Adoration that Christ himself is. So truly have you told us, that you do not
allow Relics a Worship or Adoration taken in its strictest Reply, p. 42.
sense.

124. And what I have now said of the Cross, will in the next place no less
hold for the Nails, Lance, and other Instruments of his Passion. Upon which
account, as we have Vid. Card. Capisuch. l. c.
seen that you address to the Cross, so you also do to the Lance; Hail O
triumphant Iron! Happy Spear! Wound us with the Love of him that was pierced by
thee. It is possible you may find out this too in the Corpus Poctarum; and by
the same Figure that the Cross signifies at once both the Material Cross, and
our Savior that hung upon it, may make the Spear here signify at once both S.
Longinus's Spear, and the Body of Christ that was wounded with it. And that you
may see how much it will be worth the while to have such an Ecclesiastical
Trope invented. I will add one Instance more of another Relic that has an
Address made to it altogether as much wanting it as either of the foregoing.
The Relic I mean is the Veronica, or Cloth which our Savior Christ wiped his
Face, and left the Impression of his Visage upon it. And to this you thus pray;
Hail Holy Face of our Redeemer, printed upon a Cloth white as Snow; purge us
from all Spot of Vice, and join us to the Company of the Blessed. Bring us to
our Country, O happy Figure! there to see the pure Face of Christ. This is I
suppose a plain Instance enough what kind of Honor you pay to Relics. And
that this Cloth might never want Votaries to worship it, your Pope John XXII,
has vouchsafed no less than Ten thousand Days Indulgence to every repetition of
this Prayer. I might add other Instances of this kind of Superstition: But I go
on,

125. Thirdly, To another Instance of your giving religious Worship to
Relics; and that is your allowed practice of swearing by them. Now that to
swear by another, is to give that thing by which you swear the Worship due to
God only; both the nature of an Oath, which implies a calling of God to
witness, and therebly acknowledges him to be the Inspector of the Heart, and
the just Avenger of the falsehood of it, and the Authority of Holy Scripture
plainly declare; Thou shall fear the Lord thy God, says Moses, Deuteronomy. vi. 13.
and shall serve him only, and swear by his Name. How shall I be favorable unto
thee? says God by the Prophet Jeremy, Chap. v. 9. Thy Children have forsaken
me, and sworn by those that are no Gods. But now the Catechism of your late
Synod of Trent allows you to swear In 2. praec. decal. p. 267.
by the Cross, and Relics of your Saints; and there is nothing more common
among you than so to do. When the Emperor comes to Rome to take the Imperial
Diadem at his Holiness's Hands, he thus swears: I King of the Romans SWEAR --
By the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost; and by the VVood of the Cross, and by these
Relics of the Saints, etc. In which we find the Holy Trinity joined in the
same rank with the Wood of the Cross, and with the Relics of the Saints.

126. Nor am I here concerned in those Pretenses that are sometimes brought to
excuse this, viz. that you hereby intend no more than to swear by God, seeing
it is plain that you do it at once both by God and Them. And again; That you do
not believe that thereby any strength is added to the Oath which it would not
otherwise have; for allowing this, yet still you do swear by them; and if there
be neither any reason for it, nor benefit in it, you are never the less
culpable, but the more inexcusably so upon this account. But indeed you do
expect a benefit by this swearing; and suppose that the Saints do hereby become
Sureties with God to you to see the Oath fulfilled, and to punish the Perjury
if it be not. And so you not only swear by the Relics as well as by God, but
ascribe all the reason and design of an Oath to the Saints in common with God.
I will illustrate this in one of your own Instances, which will clear this
Matter to us. It happened that one of your Saintesses, S. Guria, was married to
a Goth, a Soldier in the Roman Army, that was sent to deliver the City Edessa
from the Hunns. The Siege being raised, and the Army recalled, the Soldier
required his Wife to go home with him. Her Mother could not bear this; but
being forced to comply, she brings the Soldier and her Daughter to an Altar,
under which were buried the Bodies of three Saints. And being there, she thus
spoke to him; I will not give thee my Daughter, unless laying thy hand upon
this Tomb, in which are contained the Relics of the Holy Martyrs of Christ,
thou shall swear that thou will treat my Daughter well. This he readily did:
But yet soon after, without any regard to his Oath, he used her very ill. It
were too long to recount all the Circumstances of her Misfortunes, or her
miraculous deliverance out of them, by the aid of these Holy Martyrs. I observe
only as to my present purpose, that being reduced to the utmost degree of
despair, the Saint now, as her last refuge, puts the Holy Martyrs in mind of
her Husband's swearing by their Relics, and how they were thereby become
SURETIES to her Mother for her good Entertainment, and ought not to suffer her
to be thus abused. Immediately, the Martyrs spoke to her, and told her, that as
FAITHFUL SURETIES they would deliver her: and straightway she was miraculously
brought out of a Coffin under Ground (for her Husband had buried her alive) to
the very place where their Bodies lay, and where her Husband had sworn to her.
And then they once more spoke to her to this effect: We have now satisfied our
SURETISHIP, Go to thy Mother. It was not very long after this, that the War
breaking out again, the same Soldier came back to Edessa, where he was
surprised to find his Wife alive; and being prosecuted for the Injuries he had
done her, and for the Perjury he had committed, was condemned to be hanged for
it. But,

127. Fourthly, And to conclude this Point. I will to these add those
Superstitions which are your common practice; and of which every one that has
lived any time among you, must needs have been Eyewitnesses. Such are your
running to visit the Shrines of your Saints upon their Solemn Festivals; which
with what devotion you do it, all Paris on the 3d of January every Year is
sufficiently sensible. Your carrying them in Procession is indeed very
remarkable; and of which I shall leave those who have ever known a dry time in
the City I last mentioned, to consider what they have then seen. But because I
must not expect to be credited by some Men in any thing that can possibly be
denied; I will leave these Matters of Fact to those who have been Spectators of
them: and for the satisfaction of those who have not, will give a short extract
of the form of Procession, with which you bring the Relics of your Saints
into a New Church.

128. First the Bishop with his Clergy leads the Procession to Pontific. Roman.
de Benedictione Ecclesiae, p. 119, etc.
the place where the RELICS were lodged the Night before; When they are come
to it, they sing this Anthem, Move your selves, O ye Saints of God from your
Mansions, and hasten to the place which is prepared for you. Then the Bishop
uncovering his Head before the RELICS prays thus. Grant unto us, O Lord, we
beseech thee, that we may worthily touch the Members of thy Saints that are
more especially dedicated unto thee.

Then the Incense being prepared with the Cross, and lighted Candles leading
the way, and followed by the Clergy, singing their Anthems, the Priests
appointed take up the Carriage, and one going by them all the way incenses the
Relics. The Bishop and Clergy singing, among others, this Anthem, Rise up ye
Saints of God from your Habitations; SANCTIFY the PLACES; BLESS the PEOPLE, and
KEEP us sinful Men in PEACE. -- Walk O ye Saints of God; Enter into the City of
the Lord, for a Church is built unto you, where the People may adore the
Majesty of God.

Being come to the Door of the Church, they make a stop whilst some other
Ceremonies are performed. Then the Bishop crosses the Door with Holy Chrism,
and bids it be Blessed, and Sanctified, and Consecrated, and Consigned, and
Commended, in the Name of the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost. And so they carry in
the Relics, the Bishop and Clergy singing as before.

This is the Order of that Solemnity. What Name it deserves I shall leave it to
others to say. But sure I am, that all this is somewhat more than such an
Honor and Respect which you pretend is all that you give to them. Let us see,

IIdly, Whether you do not seek to these Sacred Monuments for Help and
Assistance?

129. It is indeed a hard Case that we must be forced now to prove that which
is a known practice of daily experience amongst you. The Council of Trent it
self confesses, That by them many Benefits are bestowed by God upon Men; and
then I am confident it will not be thought at all improbable, that it should
encourage Men to recur to them for their help. But here you have a notable
evasion. You do not deny but that Full Answ. page 6.
Men go to these Sacred Monuments and Relics to receive Benefit; but this you
say will not justify my Translation unless when they come there they pray to
the Relics, instead of desiring the Saints, whose they are to pray for them.
And to make this look like a Rational Answer, you change the Terms of the
Question; which was not (as you falsely insinuate) whether the Council of Trent
directs you to Full Answ. Ibid.
IMPLORE the Aid of the Monuments or Sacred Relics; But whether it does not
condemn those who say that for the Sea Expos. p. 17. Defense, page 25.
OBTAINING of THEIR Help the Memories of the Saints are in vain frequented. And
though they do not PRAY to the Relics; yet if for the OBTAINING their Help
your People do recur to them, which you cannot deny but that they do, the
presumption offered in vindication of my rendering that Passage of your Council
is still good; and you have shown nothing but your own falseness in this new
Answer to it. If it were necessary to prove that you do pray to Relics, you
may see by what I have already offered, that even so you would not have secured
your self from having made your self a false Translation, where you charge me
with One. But you have chosen your Jury, and I accept of it; and only for their
better direction, I must desire them to look the words in the Council it self,
and not in your Transcript of them; who have purposely omitted all the
Antecedent to which the EORUM refers; that so they might be sure to see no more
than what made for your Purpose. Should I have done this, I should have found
all the variety of hard words mustered up against me, Mutilation,
Falsification, False Imposition, wilful Prevarication, wilful Mistake,
unsincere Trick, etc. that either your Margin could have contained, or your
Malice have invented; And the Truth is, I should have deserved them. But I
shall leave this also to your Jury to judge of: And for all your good assurance,
I dare venture all my little Learning, against all your Little, that the
Verdict is brought in against you; and that you are concluded in this Matter to
have been either very blind, Aut illud quod dicere nolo.

130. For what concerns the thing it self; Whether you do not seek to the
Monuments of the Saints for the obtaining the Help of their Relics; this is
what will need no proof to those who are but never so little acquainted with
your Superstition: And have seen with what Zeal you touch your Beads and
Psalters at the very Shrines in which they ae contained, to sanctify them
thereby. How upon all occasions they are brought forth by you: To cure your
Sickness; to preserve you from Tempests at Land, and in Storms at Sea; but
especially to drive away Evil Spirits, for which they are the most beneficial.
The Messieurs du Port Royal, have given us a Reponse a un Ecrit publie sur les
Miracles de la Ste Espine. p. 15. Page 18, 22.
whole Volume of the Miracles wrought by the Holy Thorn. There you may see how
Sister Margaret, one of the Nuns, being ill of the Palsy, was carried to ADORE
the Holy Thorn. How another being sick, recurr'd to it for its help, and found
it too; having no sooner ADORED the Holy Thorn, and kissed it, but she was well
of her Infirmity. Infinite Examples of the like kind might be produced, but I
shall content my self to show what Opinion you have of the Power of your
Relics, from the very Prayer that Pontific. Ro^ page 164, 165.
you make at the blessing of those little Vessels in which they are put.

We most humbly beseech thee Almighty God, Father of our Lord Jesus Christ,
that thou would vouchsafe to bless these Vessels that are prepared for the
Honor of thy Saints through the Intercession of the same Saints: That all
those who shall venerate their Merits, and humbly embrace their Relics [may
be defended] against the Devil and his Angels, against Thunder, Lightning and
Tempest; against the Corruption of the Air, and the Plagues of Men and of
Beasts; against Thieves and Robbers, and Invasions of Men, against evil Beasts,
and against all the several kinds of Serpents and creeping things, and against
the wicked Devices of evil Men.

Here I hope are benefits enough to invite a Man to seek to them, and if they
can help in all these Cases, we need not doubt but they shall have Votaries
enough to recur to them for it.

131. But that which is most admirable is, that in all these Cases, false
Relics are every jot as good as true ones; and which makes somewhat for the
Opinion of Vasquez, that provided a Man does but think it is the Relic of a
Saint, he may securely worship it, tho it may be it is no such thing. We have
before heard what mighty Cures were wrought at the Monument of the famous
Bishop and Martyr VIARUM CURANDARUM: And whether the Council of Trent
prescribed it See above (...). 3.
or no, Ressendius assures us, all the Country round about did come to the
Monument of this pretended Saint, for the obtaining Help and Assistance, and
fancied at least that they found it too. Tho it afterward appeared that 'twas
an old Heathen Inscription, and those words far enough from signifying either
the Name of a Man, or the Character of a Bishop. Many have been the Cheats of
the like kind, and which ought very much to lessen the Credit of those Miracles
that you pretend are wrought in your Church: But I shall finish all with one so
much the more to be considered, in that it was the happy occasion of
undeceiving a very great Person, and disposed him to receive that Truth he
afterward embraced: And may it please God, that the recital I shall here make
of it, may move those who are yet in Captivity to these Superstitions to
deliver themselves from the like Impositions.

132. Prince Christopher, of the Family of the Dukes of Radzecil, a Prince much
addicted to the Superstitions of your Church, having been in great Piety at
Rome to kiss his Holiness's Drelincourt Response a M. le Landgrave Ernest. p.
348.. lx.
Feet; the Pope at his departure presented him with a Box of Relics, which at
his return soon became very famous in all that Country. Some Months had hardly
passed when certain Monks came to him to acquaint him that there was a D. Man
possessed of the Devil, upon whom they had in vain tried all their
Conjurations, and therefore they humbly entreated his Highness that for his
relief, he would be pleased to lend them his Relics which he had brought from
Rome. The Prince readily complied with their desires, and the Box was with
great Solemnity carried to the Church, and being applied to the Body of him
that was possessed, the Devil presently went out with the Grimaces and Gestures
usual on such occasions. All the beholders cried out, A Miracle! and the Prince
himself lifted up his Hands and Eyes to Heaven, and blessed God who had
favored him with such a Holy and powerful Treasure.

It happened not long after that the Prince relating what he had seen, and
magnifying very much the Virtue of his Relics: One of his Gentlemen began to
smile, and show by his Actions how little Credit he gave to it. At which the
Prince being moved, his Servant (after many promises of Forgiveness)
ingenuously told him, that in their return from Rome he had unhappily lost the
Box of Relics, but for fear of being exposed to his Anger, had caused another
to be made as like as might be to the true one, which he had filled with all
the little Bones, and other Trinkets that he could meet with, and that this was
the Box that his Monks made him believe did work such Miracles.

The Prince the next Morning sent for the Fathers, and enquired of them if they
knew of any Demoniaque that had need of his Relics: They soon found one to
act his part in this Farce; and the Prince caused him to be exorcised in his
presence. But when all they could do would not prevail, the Devil kept his
Possession, he commanded the Monks to withdraw, and delivered over the Man to
another kind of Exorcists, some Tartars that belonged to his Stable, to be well
lashed till he should confess the Cheat. The Demoniaque thought to have carried
it off by horrible Gestures and Grimaces, but the Tartars understood none of
those Tricks, but by laying on their Blows in good earnest quickly moved the
Devil, without the help of either Hard Names, Holy Water, or Relics, to
confess the truth, and beg Pardon of the Prince.

As soon as Morning was come, the Prince sent again for the Monks (who
suspected nothing of what had passed) and brings their Man before them, who
threw himself at the Princes Feet, and confessed that he was not possessed with
the Devil, nor ever had been in his Life. The Monks at first made light of it,
and told the Prince it was an Artifice of the Devil who spoke through the Mouth
of that Man. But the Prince calling for his Tartars to exorcise another Devil,
the Father of LIES, out of them too, they began presently to relent, and
confessed the Cheat, but told him they did it with a good Intention to stop the
Course of Heresy in that Country.

Upon this he dismissed them, but from that time began seriously to apply
himself to read the Holy Scriptures, telling them that he would no longer trust
his Salvation to Men who defended their Religion by such pious Frauds, so they
called them, but which were indeed Diabolical Inventions. And in a short time
after, both himself and his whole House made open Profession of the Reformed
Religion. Anno 1564.

And thus much be said in Answer to your IVth Article.

FINIS.
Books lately Printed for Richard Chiswell
A Discourse concerning the Celebration of Divine Service in an Unknown Tongue.
Quarto.

A Papist not Misrepresented by Protestants. Being a Reply to the Reflections
upon the Answer to [A Papist Misrepresented and Represented]. Quarto.

An Exposition of the Doctrine of the Church of England, in the several
Articles proposed by the late BISHOP of CONDOM, [in his Exposition of the
Doctrine of the Catholic Church]. Quarto.

A Defense of the Exposition of the Doctrine of the Church of England; against
the Exceptions of Monsieur de Meaux, late Bishop of Condom, and his Vindicator.
4o.

A CATECHISM explaining the Doctrine and Practices of the Church of Rome. With
an Answer thereunto. By a Protestant of the Church of England. 8o.

A Papist Represented and not Misrepresented: being an Answer to the First,
Second, Fifth and Sixth Sheets of the Second Part of the [Papist Misrepresented
and Represented]; and for a further Vindication of the CATECHISM, Quarto.

The Lay-Christian's Obligation to read the Holy Scriptures. Quarto.

The Plain Man's Reply to the Catholic Missionaries. 24o.

An Answer to THREE PAPERS lately printed, concerning the Authority of the
Catholic Church in Matters of Faith, and the Reformation of the Church of
England. Quarto.

A Vindication of the Answer to THREE PAPERS concerning the Unity and Authority
of the Catholic Church, and the Reformation of the Church of England. 4o.

Mr. Chillingworth's Book, called [The Religion of Protestants a safe way to
Salvation] made more generally useful by omitting Personal Contests, but
inserting whatsoever concerns the common Cause of Protestants, or defends the
Church of England, with an exact Table of Contents; and an Addition of some
genuine Pieces of Mr. Chillingworth's, never before Printed, viz. against the
Infallibility of the Roman Church, Transubstantiation, Tradition, etc. And an
Account of what moved the Author to turn Papist, with his Confutation of the
said Motives.

An Historical Treatise written by an AUTHOR of the Communion of the CHURCH of
ROME, touching Transubstantiation. Wherein is made appear, That according to
the Principles of THAT CHURCH, This Doctrine cannot be an Article of Faith. 4o.

The Protestant's Companion: Or an Impartial Survey, and Comparison of the
Protestant Religion as by Law established, with the main Doctrines of Popery.
Wherein is showed, that Popery is contrary to Scripture, Primitive Fathers and
Councils; and that proved from Holy Writ, the Writings of the Ancient Fathers
for several hundred Years, and the Confession of the most Learned Papists
themselves. 4o.

A Sermon preached upon St. Peter's day: By a Divine of the Church of England.
Printed with some Enlargements.

The Pillar and Ground of Truth. A Treatise showing that the Roman Church
falsely claims to be That Church, and the Pillar of That Truth mentioned by S.
Paul in his first Epistle to Timothy, Chap. 3. Verse. 15. 4o.

The Peoples Right to read the Holy Scripture Asserted, 4o.

A Short Summary of the principal Controversies between the Church of England
and the Church of Rome; being a Vindication of several Protestant Doctrines, in
Answer to a Late Pamphlet, Entitled, [Protestancy destitute of Scripture
Proofs.] 4o.

An Answer to a Late Pamphlet, Entitled, [The Judgment and Doctrine of the
Clergy of the Church of England concerning one Special Branch of the King's
Prerogative, viz. In dispensing with the Penal Laws.] 4o. A Discourse of the
Holy Eucharist in the two great Points of the Real Presence, and the Adoration
of the Host; in Answer to the Two Discourses lately Printed at Oxford on this
Subject: To which is perfixed a Large Historical Preface relating to the same
Argument.

Two Discourses; Of Purgatory, and Prayers for the Dead.

The Fifteen Notes of the Church, as laid down by Cardinal Bellarmin, examined
and confuted. 4o. With a Table of the Contents.

Preparation for Death: Being a Letter sent to a young Gentlewoman in France,
in a dangerous Distemper of which she died. By W. W. M. A. 12o.

The Difference between the Church of England and the Church of Rome, in
opposition to a late Book, Entitled, An Agreement between the Church of
England and Church of Rome.

A PRIVATE PRAYER to be used in Difficult Times.

A True Account of a Conference held about Religion at London, Sept. 29, 1687,
between A. Pulton, Jesuit, and Tho. Tenison, D. D. as also of that which led to
it, and followed after it. 4o.

The Vindication of A. Cressener, Schoolmaster in Long-Acre, from the
Aspersions of A. Pulton, Jesuit, Schoolmaster in the Savoy; together with some
Account of his Discourse with Mr. Meredith.

A Discourse showing that Protestants are on the safer Side, notwithstanding
the uncharitable Judgment of their Adversaries; and that Their Religion is the
surest Way to Heaven. 4o.

Six Conferences concerning the Encharist, wherein is showed, that the Doctrine
of Transubstantiation overthrows the Proofs of Christian Religion.

A Discourse concerning the pretended Sacrament of Extreme Unction; with an
account of the Occasions and Beginnings of it in the Western Church. In Three
Parts. With a Letter to the Vindicator of the Bishop of Condom.

The Pamphlet entitled, Speculum Ecclesiasticum, or an Ecclesiastical
Prospective-Glass, considered, in its False Reasonings and Quotations. There
are added, by way of Preface, two further Answers, the First, to the Defender
of the Speculum; the Second to the Half-sheet against the Six Conferences.

A Second Defense of the Exposition of the Doctrine of the Church of England,
against the new Exceptions of Mons. de Meaux, late Bishop of Condom, and his
Vindicator. The FIRST PART. In which the Account that has been given of the
Bishop of Meaux's Exposition, is fully Vindicated; the Distinction of Old and
New Popery Historically asserted; and the Doctrine of the Church of Rome, in
Point of Image Worship, more particularly considered. 4o.

The Incurable Skepticism of the Church of Rome. By the Author of the [Six
Conferences concerning the Eucharist.] 4o.

Mr. Pulton Considered in his Sincerity, Reasonings, Authorities: Or a Just
Answer to what he has hitherto Published in his True Account; his True and
full Account of a Conference, etc. His Remarks; and in them his pretended
Confutation of what he calls Dr. T's Rule of Faith. By Tho. Tenison, D. D.

A Full View of the Doctrines and Practices of the Ancient Church relating to
the Eucharist, wholly different from those of the Present Roman Church, and
inconsistent with the belief of Transubstantiation. Being a sufficient
Confutation of CONSENSUS VETERUM, NUBES TESTIUM, and other Late Collections of
the Fathers pretending to the Contrary. 4o.

An Answer to the Representer's Reflections upon the State and View of the
Controversy; With a Reply to the Vindicator's Full Answer, showing that the
Vindicator has utterly ruined the New Design of Expounding and Representing
Popery.

Imprimatur.

Ex Aed. Lamb. Feb. 14. 1686. Guil. Needham RRmo in Christo P. ac D. D.
Wilhelmo Archiep. Cant. a Sacris Domest.

A COLLECTION OF SEVERAL DISCOURSES AGAINST POPERY.

By WILLIAM WAKE, Preacher to the Honorable Society of GRAY'S INN.

LONDON: Printed for Ric. Chiswell, at the Rose and Crown in St. Paul's
Churchyard. MDCLXXXVIII.

A TABLE OF The DISCOURSES contained in this COLLECTION.
I. AN Exposition of the Doctrine of the Church of England, etc. in Answer to
the Bishop of MEAUX. II. A Defense of the Exposition of the Doctrine of the
Church of England, against the Exceptions of Monsr. de MEAUX and his
VINDICATOR. III. A Second Defense of the Exposition of the Doctrine of the
Church of England, against the new Exceptions of Monsr. de MEAUX and his
VINDICATOR. PART I. PART II. PART III.
IV. A Discourse of the HOLY EUCHARIST, in the two great Points of the REAL
PRESENCE, and of the ADORATION OF THE HOST. V. An Historical Account of the
Doctrine of the REAL PRESENCE professed in the Church of England, etc. VI. Two
Discourses of PURGATORY, and PRAYERS FOR THE DEAD. VII. A Discourse of the
Nature of IDOLATRY, in Answer to the Bishop of Oxon's Reasons for Abrogating
the TEST. VIII. The Present State of the Controversy between the Church of
England, and the Church of Rome. IX. A Continuation of the Present State of the
Controversy, etc. Other Treatises written by the same Author. X. A Sermon on
the xxxth of January, Preached at PARIS, Anno 1684/5 XI. Preparation for Death:
Being a Letter sent to a Young Gentlewoman in France, in a dangerous Distemper
of which She died.
A DISCOURSE OF THE HOLY EUCHARIST, IN THE TWO GREAT POINTS OF THE Real
Presence AND THE Adoration of the Host.

IN ANSWER to the TWO DISCOURSES lately Printed at OXFORD on This SUBJECT.

To which is prefixed A Large HISTORICAL PREFACE relating to the same ARGUMENT.

LONDON, Printed for Richard Chiswell, at the Rose and Crown in S. Paul's
Churchyard. MDCLXXXVII.

THE PREFACE.
THE nature of the Holy Eucharist is a subject that has been both so
frequently insisted upon, and so fully explained in our own and other
Languages, that it may well be thought a very needless undertaking for any one
to trouble the World with any farther Reflections upon it. For not to mention
now those Eminent Men who have heretofore labored in this work, nor to run
beyond the points that are here designed to be examined; What can be said more
evidently to show the impossibility of the pretended substantial change of the
Bread and Wine into the Body and Blood of Christ in this Holy Sacrament, than
has been done in the late excellent Discourse against Transubstantiation? It is
but a very little time since the Adoration of the Host has been shown not only
to be a novel invention, contrary to the practice of all Antiquity, but the
danger of it evidently demonstrated, notwithstanding whatever pretenses can be
made of a good intention to excuse them from the charge and danger of Idolatry,
who continue the practice of it. And both these not only still remain
unanswered; but if we may be allowed to judge either by their own strength, or
by our Adversaries silence, are truly and indeed unanswerable.

It is not therefore out of any the least Opinion that any thing more need be
said to confirm our cause, much less that I esteem my self able to undertake it
with the same success that those other Champions of our Faith have done it,
that I venture these Discourses to a public view. But since our Adversaries
still continue, without taking notice of any of these things, to cry up their
Great Diana no less than if she had never at all been shown to be but an Idol,
I thought it might not be amiss to revive our Instances against it: And that we
ought not to appear less sollicitous by a frequent repetition of our Reasons,
to keep men in the Truth, than others are by a continual insisting upon their
so often baffled Sophistry, to lead them into Error.

'Twas an ingenious Apology that Seneca once made, for his often repeating the
same things; That he did but inculcate over and over the same Counsels, to
those that over and over committed the same faults: And I remember an ancient
Father has left it as his Opinion, that it was useful for the same truths to be
vindicated by many, because that one Man's Writings might possibly chance to
come where the others did not; and what was less fully or clearly explained by
one, might be supplied and enlarged by the other. And a greater than either of
these, S. Paul, has at once left us both an example and a warrant for this
solicitude; Phil. 3. 1. To write the same things to you, to me (says he) is
not grievous, but for you it is safe.

Indeed I think if there be any need of an excuse for this undertaking, it
ought to be rather to Apologize for a far greater absurdity which we all commit
in writing at all against those Men, who in these Disputes concerning the Holy
Sacrament, have most evidently shown that to be true of Christians, which was
once said of the ancient Philosophers, That there can be nothing so absurd
which some Men will not adventure to maintain.

In most of our other Controversies with those of the Church of Rome, we show
them to be Erroneous; in this they are Extravagant; And as an eminent Pen has
very justly expressed it, The business Discourse against Transubstantiation,
Page 2.
of Transubstantiation is not a Controversy of Scripture against Scripture, or
of Reason against Reason, but of downright Impudence against the plain meaning
of Scripture, and all the sense and reason of mankind.

The truth is, as the same Person goes on, It is a Ibid.
most self-evident falsehood: and there is no Doctrine or Proposition in the
World that is of it self more evidently true, than Transubstantiation is
evidently false. And if such things as these must be disputed, and this
Evidence, That what we see and handle, and taste to be Bread is Bread, and not
the Body of a Man; and what we see and taste to be Wine is Wine, and not Blood,
may not pass for sufficient without any farther Proof, I cannot discern why any
Man that has but confidence enough to do so, may not deny any thing to be what
all the World sees it is, or affirm it to be what all the World sees it is not,
and this without all possibility of being further confuted.

But yet since it has pleased God so far to give over some Men to a spirit of
delusion, as not only seriously to believe this themselves, but also vashly to
damn all those that cannot believe it with them, we ought as well for the
security of those who have not yet abandoned their own sense and reason, in
compliance only with others who in this matter profess to have laid aside
theirs; as in charity to such deluded Persons as are unhappily led away with
these Errors, to show them their unreasonableness: To convince them that
Christianity is a wise and rational Religion: that it is a mistaken Piety to
suppose that Men ought to believe Contradictions; or that their Faith is ever
the more perfect, because the Object of it is impossible: That our Senses ought
to be trusted in judging aright of their proper Object; that to deny this is to
overthrow the greatest external Evidence we have for our Religion, which is
founded upon their judgment; or if that will be more considerable, is to take
away all the grounds that even themselves can pretend to, wherefore they should
disbelieve them in favor of Transubstantiation.

And this I persuade my self I have in the following Discourse sufficiently
shown, and I shall not need to repeat it again here. For the words themselves,
which are the grounds of this great Error, I have taken that Method which
seemed to me the most proper to find out the true meaning of them; and, as far
as the nature of the Enquiry would permit, have endeavored to render it plain
and intelligible even to the meanest Capacity. And I have some cause to hope
that the most learned will not be dissatisfied with the design, what ever they
may be with the performance; it being from such that I have taken the greatest
part of my Reflections, and in which I pretend to little of my own besides the
care of putting together here, what I had observed scattered up and down in
parts elsewhere.

It was so much the more fit at this time to insist upon this manner of
arguing, in that a late disturber of the Fathers, the better to show the
Antiquity of his new Religion, has pretended to search no less than into the
secrets of the Jewish Cabala after it, and to have found out Transubstantiation
there amongst the rest of the Rabbinical Follies: Now Consensus Veterum p. 21,
etc.
however the very name of Galatinus be sufficient to Learned Men to make them
esteem his Judgment in his Jewish to be much the same as in his Christian
Antiquity which follows after, in those eminent pieces of S. Peter' s and S.
Matthew' s Liturgies, Ibid. p. 27.
S. Andrew' s work of the Passion of our Lord; Dionysius' s Ecclesiast.
Hierarch. etc. yet because such stuff as this may serve to amuse those who are
not acquainted with the emptiness of it, I was so much the rather inclined to
show what the true notions of the Jewish Rites would furnish us with to
overthrow their pretenses; and that the Rabbis Visions are of as little moment
to confirm this conceit as their own Miracles.

But whatever those of the other Communion shall please to judge of my
Arguments, yet at least the Opinions of those eminent Men of their own Church
may certainly deserve to be considered by them, who have freely declared that
there is not in Scripture any evident proof of Transubstantiation; nay some of
whom have thought so little engagement upon them either from that or any other
Authority to believe it, that they have lived and died in their Church without
ever embracing of it.

And of this the late Author of the Traitte a^un Autheur de la Communion
Roman touchant la Transubstantiation. Land. 1686.
Historical Treatise of Transubstantiation, and which is just now set forth in
our own Language, may be an eminent instance, being a Person at this day living
in the Communion of the Church of Rome, and in no little Esteem among all that
know Him. It is not fit to give any more particular character of Him at this
time. They who shall please to peruse his Book, will find enough in it to speak
in his Advantage; and if they have but any tolerable disposition to receive the
truth, will clearly see, that this point of Transubstantiation was the
production of a blind and barbarous Age; unknown in the Church for above one
thousand Years, and never owned by the greatest Men in any Ages since. The
truth is, if we enquire precisely into this business of Transubstantiation, we
shall find the first foundation of it laid in a Clayster by an unwary Monk
about the beginning of the About 636 or 640. See Blondel de l'Eucharistie. c.
14. p. 365.
7th Century: carried on by a Cabal of Men, assembled under the name of a 2.
Council. Nic.
General Council to introduce the worship of Images into the Church, Ann. 787.
Blondel. l. ^. cap. 18. page 426.
formed into a better shape by another Paschasius Radbertus.
Monk Ann. 818. and He too opposed by almost all the Learned Men of his Age;
and at last confirmed by a See the Treatise of Transubstantiation; Hist. of the
9th Age.
Pope of whom their own Authors have left us but a very indifferent Innocent.
III. Super omnes mortales ambitiosus and superbus, pecuniaeque sititor
insatiabilis, and ad omnia scelera pro praemiis datis vel promissis cereus and
proclivis. Matt. Paris.
character; and in a Council. La^^an. IV. Can. 3. de Haereticis.
Synod of which I shall observe only this, that it gave the Pope the power of
unmaking Kings, as well as the Priests that of making their God.

But indeed I think we ought not to charge the Council with either of these
Attempts; since, contrary to the manner of proceeding in such Assemblies,
received in all Ages, nothing was either judged or debated by the Synod: His
omnibus congregatis i^ suo loco presato, and juxta morem Conciliorum generalium
in suis Ordinibus singulis collocatis, facto. capitula LXX See this conprius ab
ipso Papa exhortationis sermon, recitata sunt in plen^ Concilio quae aliis
placibilia, aliis videbantur onerosa. Matt. Paris. ad Ann. 1215. firmed by
Mons^eur du Pin. Dissert. VII. Paris. 4o 1686. page 572, 573.
The Pope only himself formed the Articles, digested them into Canons, and so
read them to the Fathers; some of which, their own Historian tells us, approved
them, others did not, but however all were forced to be contented with them.

Such was the first rise of this new Doctrine; 1215 years after Christ. But
still the most learned Men of that and the following Ages doubted not to
dissent from it. See 3. q. 75. Art. 6. Utrum facta consecratione remaneat in
Hoc Sacramento forma substantialis Panis?
Aquinas who wrote about 50 years after this definition, speaks of some, who
thought the substantial form of the Bread still to remain after Consecration:
In. 4. d. 11. q. 9. Quid ergo dicendum de conversione substantiae Panis in
Corpus Christi? Salvo meliori judicio, potest aestimari, quod SI in isto
Sacramento fiat Conversio substantiae Panis in Corpus Christi, quod ipsa fit
per Hoc quod corrupta forma Panis materia ejus sit sub forma Corporis Christi
Durandus doubted not to assert the continuance of the Matter of the Elements,
whatever became of the form; and that 'twas Id. in 4. did. 11. q. 4. Art. 14.
rashness to say that Christ's Body could be there no otherwise than by
Transubstantiation: To which Scotus in 4. did. 11. q. 3.
Scotus also subscribed, that the truth of the Eucharist might be saved without
Transubstantiation, Id. 4. sent. q. 11. q. 3.
and that in plain terms ours was the easier, and to all appearance the truer
interpretation of Christ's words; in which Ockam in 4. q. 6.
Ockam and Alliaco in 4. q. 6. art. 2.
d'Alliaco concurred with him. Contr. capt. Babyl. cap. 10.
Fisher confessed that there was nothing to prove the true presence of Christ's
Body and Blood in their Mass: Ferus in Matt. 26. Cum certum sit ibi esse Corpus
Christi, quid opus est disputare number Panis substantia maneat, vel non?
Ferus would not have it inquired into, How Christ's Body is there; and Lib. 1.
de Eucharistia: See the Treatise of Transubstantiation, 1. part.
Tonstall thought it were better to leave Men to their Liberty of belief in it.
Those who in respect to their Churches definition did accept it, yet freely
declared that Vid. Bellarm. de Euch. l. 3. c. 23. p. 767, 768. Suarez in 3.
part. D. Th. vol. 3. disp. 50. p. 593, 594. Cajetan. in 3. D. Th. q. 75. art.
1. Scotus, l. c. 4. Sent. d. 11. q. 3. Uid. etiam Ockam, Alliac. locsupr. cit.
before this Council it was no matter of Faith, nor but for its decision would
have been now; That the Ancients did not believe it; that the Scripture does
not express it; in short, that the interpretation which we give is altogether
as agreeable to the words of Christ, and in truth free from infinite
inconveniences with which the other abounds. All which plainly enough shows
that not only the late private Heretical Spirit, whose imperious sentiments,
and private Glosses, and contradictory interpretations (as a late Consensus
Veterum Page 27.
Author has elegantly expressed it) like the victorious Rabble of the Fishermen
of Naples riding in triumph, and trampling under foot Ecclesiastical
Traditions, Decrees, and Constitutions, Ancient Fathers, Ancient Liturgies, the
whole Church of Christ, but especially those words of his, This is my Body, has
opposed this Doctrine; but even those who are to be supposed to have had the
greatest reverence for all these, their own Masters and Doctors, found it
difficult to embrace so Absurd and Contradictory a Belief.

And here then let me beseech those into whose hands these Papers may chance to
fall, seriously to consider this matter, and whether the sole Authority of such
a Pope as Innocent III, whose actions toward one of our own Kings, and in
favor of that very ill Man Dominick and his Inquisition, were K. John.
there nothing else remaining of his Life, might be sufficient to render him
detestable to all good Men, ought to be of so great an Authority with us, as to
engage us to give up our senses and our reason; nay and even Scripture and
Antiquity it self, in obedience to his arbitrary and unwarrantable Definition.

It is I suppose sufficiently evident from what has been before observed, how
little assurance their own Authors had, for all the definition of the Council
of Lateran, of this Doctrine. I shall not need to say what debates arose among
the Divines of the Council of Trent about it. And though since its
determination there, Men have not dared so openly to speak their Minds
concerning it as before, yet we are not to imagine that they are therefore ever
the more convinced of its Truth.

I will not deny but that very great numbers in the Roman Communion, by a
profound ignorance and a blind obedience, the two great Gospel perfections with
some men, disposed to swallow any thing that the Church shall think fit to
require of them, may sincerely profess the belief of this Doctrine; because
they have either never at all considered it, or it may be are not capable of
comprehending the impossibility of it. Nor shall I be so uncharitable as to
suppose that all, even of the learned amongst them, do wilfully profess and act
in this matter, against what they believe and know to be true. I will rather
persuade my self that some motives or prejudices which I am not able to
comprehend, do really blind their eyes, and make them stumble in the brightness
of a midday light. But yet that all those, who nevertheless continue to live
in the external Communion of the Church of Rome, are not thus sincere in the
belief of it, is what I think I may with out uncharitableness affirm; and
because it will be a matter of great importance to make this appear, especially
to those of that Persuasion; I will beg leave to offer such proofs of it as
have come to my knowledge, in some of the most eminent Persons of these last
Ages, and to which I doubt not but others, better acquainted with these secrets
than I can pretend to be, might be able to add many more Examples.

And the first that I shall mention is the famous Petri Picherelli Expositio
Verborum institutionis Coenae Domini. Lugd. Batav. 1629. 12o.
Picherellus, of whom the testimonies prefixed to his Works speak so
advantagiously, that I shall not need say any thing of the esteem which the
learned World had of him. Hoc est Corpus meum, i. e. Hic panis fractus est
Corpus meum. page 10. Hoc est Corpus meum, i. e. Panis quem frangimus est
communio cum Corpore Christi. page 14. -- and page 27. Expounding Gratian.
did. 2. Can. Non Hoc Corpus, Ipsum Corpus invisibiliter, de vero and germano
Corpore in Coelis agente intelligitur: Non ipsum visibiliter de Corpore and
sanguine Sacramentalibus, Pane and Vino; Corporis Christi and sanguinis
symbolis: Quae rei quam significant nomen per supradictam metonymiam mutuantur.
I must transcribe his whole Treatise should I insist on all he has delivered
repugnant to their Doctrine of Transubstantiation. Suffice it to observe that
in his Exposition of the words of Institution, This is my Body, He gives this
plain interpretation of them, This Bread is my Body which is both freely
allowed by the Papists themselves to be inconsistent with their belief as to
this matter; and which he largely shows not only to be his own, but to have
been the constant Doctrine of the Primitive Fathers in this point.

But in this it may be there is not so much ground for our admiration, that one
who was not very fond of any of the Errors of that Church, should openly
dissent from her in this: It will more be wondered that a person so eminent
amongst them as Cardinal du Perron, and that has written so much in defense of
Transubstantiation, should nevertheless all the while Himself believe nothing
of it. And yet this we are assured he freely confessed to some of his Friends
not long before hisdeath: That he thought the Doctrine to be Monstrous; that He
had done his endeavor to color it over the best He could in his Books; but
that in short he had undertaken an ill cause, and which was not to be
maintained. But I will set down the relation as I find it in Monsieur
Drelincourt' s Reponse a la Lettre de Monsig. le Prince Ernest aus cinq
Ministres de Paris, etc. Geneve 1664.
Answer to the Landgrave of Hesse; and who would not have presumed to have
offered a relation so considerable, and to a person of such Quality, had he at
all feared that he could have been disproved in it. Votre Altesse me croira
s'il luy plait. Mals je luy puis dire avectoute sincerite and verite, que si le
desunt Cardinal du Perron luy a persuade la Transubstantiation, il luy a
persuade ce qu'il n'a pu se persuader a soymeme, and qu'il ^'a nullement cru.
Car je scay par des Gens d' Honneur and dignes de foy, qui l'avoient apris de
temoins oculaires, que des Amiss de cet illustre and scavant Cardinal, qui
l'estoient all visiter lors qu'il estoit languissant en son lit, and malade de
la malady don't il est mort, le prierent de leur dire franchement ce qu'il
croyoit de la Transubstantiation, and qu'il repondit, qu'il la tenoit pour un
Monstre. Et comme ils luy demanderent, comment donc il en avoit ecrit si
amplement and si doctement; il repliqua, qu'il avoit deploye toutes les
Adresses de son Esprit pour colourer cet abus, and pour le render plausibile;
and qu'il avoit fait comme ceux qui font tous leurs Efforts pour defendre une
mauvaise Cause.
Your Highness (says He) may believe me if you please: But I can assure you
with all sincerity and truth that if the late Cardinal du Perron has convinced
you of the Truth of Transubstantiation, he has convinced you of that of which
he could never convince himself, nor did he ever believe it. For I have been
informed by certain Persons of Honor, and that are in all respects worthy of
belief, and who had it from those that were eye witnesses; That some friends of
that Illustrious and Learned Cardinal who went to see him as he lay languishing
upon his Bed, and ill of that distemper of which he died, desired him to tell
them freely, what he thought of Transubstantiation: To whom he answered, That
'twas a MONSTER. And when they farther asked him, How then he had written so
copiously and learnedly about it? He replied, That he had done the utmost that
his Wit and Parts hadenabled him, to COLOR OVER THIS ABUSE and RENDER IT
PLAUSIBLE; But that he had done like those who employ all their force to defend
an ILL CAUSE. And thus far Monsieur Drelincourt. I could to this add some
farther circumstances which I have learnt of this matter, but what is here said
may suffice to show what the real Opinion of this great Cardinal, after all his
Voluminous Writings, as to this Doctrine was; unless some future Obligations
shall perhaps engage me to enter on a more particular account of it.

To these two great instances of another Nation I will beg leave to subjoyn a
third of our own Country: Father Barnes the Benedictine, who in his Pacific
Discourse of most of the points in Controversy between
Catholico-Romano-Pacificus Oxon. 1680. Page 90. Assertio Transubstantiationis
se^ mutationis substantialis panis, licet sit Opinio communior, non tamen est
fides Ecclesiae. Et Scripturae and Patres docentes (...), sufficienter exponi
poss^nt de admirand^ and supernaturali mutatione Panis per Praesentiam Corporis
Christi ei accedentem, fine substantialis Panis desitione. Et. P. 95. (...)
illam in Augustissimo Sacramento factam, plerique graves and antiqui
Scriptoresita explicant, ut non fiat per desitionem substantiae panis, ^d per
receptionem supernaturalem substantiae Corporis Christi in substantiam Panis.
V. pl.
us and the Papists, expressly declares, That the Assertion of
Transubstantiation, or of the substantial change of the Bread, though it be
indeed the more common Opinion, is yet no part of the Churches Faith: And that
the Scripture and Fathers, when they speak of a (...) may be sufficiently
Expounded of that admirable and supernatural change of the Bread, by the
presence of Christ's Body added to it, without the departure of the substance
of the Bread it self.

It appears by these words how little this Monk thought Transubstantiation an
Article of Faith. But a greater than he, and who not only did not esteem it
necessary for Others, to receive it, but clearly shows that he did not believe
it himself, is the Illustrious Monsieut de Marca, late Archbishop of Paris, and
Illustriss. atque Reverend. P. de Marca Parisiens. Archiep. Dissertationes
Pos^humae. De Sanctissimo Eucharistiae Sacramento dissertatio, in fine.
well known to the World for his great Learning and Eminence. His Treatise of
the Eucharist was published with Authority, by one of his near Relations the
Abbe Faget at Paris 1668. with some other little Tracks which he had received
from the Archbishops own hands. In the close of that Treatise he thus delivers
his Opinion: Species Panis est Essentia and Natura distincta a Corpore Christi
sibi adjuncto, licet ratio Eucharistiae id exigat, ut substantia Panis interior
conversa suerit in illud Corpus modo quodam qui omnem cogitationem exsuperat.
Caeterum mutatio illa non officit quin Panis, qui videtur, [id est, Accidentia]
suam Naturam, Extantiam and Essentiam [SIVE SUBSTANTIAM] retineat, and naturae
verae Proprietates, inter quas est alendi corporis humani facultas --. Unde
consequitur recte observatum a Gelasio Sacramenta Corporis and Sanguinis
Christi divinam rem esse, quia Panis and Vinum in divinam transeunt
su^stantiam, S. spiritu perficiente, nempe in Corpus Christi spiritale: sed ex
alia part non definere substantiam and naturam Panis and Vini, sed ea
permanere, in suae proprietate Naturae. Quoniam scil. postquam Panis in divinam
substantiam transivit, [NON INTERIIT INTEGRA PANIS NATURA QUAM SUBSTANTIAM
QUOQUE VOCAT, NEC DESIVIT: SED] in suae proprietate Naturae permansit ad
alendum Corpus idonea, quod est praecipuum con^ecti panis munus. Note, That in
the Paris Edition; they have put in those words printed in the Black Letter (id
est, Accidentia) and omitted those that I have caused to be set in Capitals:
But in the Original leaf, which I have left in S. Martin's Library to be seen
by any that pleases, and which was cut out for the sake of this passage, it
stands as I have said: and as it is truly represented in the Holland Edition.
The species of the Bread is in its Essence and Nature distinct from the Body
of Christ adjoined to it, although the reason of the Eucharist requires that
the inward substance of the Bread should be converted into that Body after a
manner that exceeds all Imagination. But yet this change hinders not but that
the BREAD which is seen still RETAINS its own NATURE, BEING, and ESSENCE, or
SUBSTANCE, together with the proprieties of its true Nature, among which one is
the faculty of nourishing our Bodies, etc. Whence it follows that it was
rightly observed by Gelasius, that the Sacrament of the Body and Blood of
Christ was a Divine thing, because the Bread and Wine being perfected by the
Holy Spirit pass into the Divine substance, viz. the spiritual Body of Christ;
but on the other side, that the SUBSTANCE and NATURE of the BREAD and WINE do
not cease to be, but continue still in the propriety of their own Nature.

And here I suppose any one who reads this passage alone of this Treatise might
without the help of Baluze 2 Lettre a Monsieur le Presid. Marca. S'il est vray,
ce qu^ j'ay de la peine a croire, que seu Monsigneur ait compose les Traittez
que M. Faget a fait imprimer sous son nom, don't il se vante dans la Preface and
dans la Vie d'avoir les Originaux escrits de la main de l'Auteur, nous ne
scaurions empescher que seu Monsigneur ne pass dans l'Esprit de beaucoup de
Gens pour HERETIC, a^ sujet de l'Eucharistie.
Monsieur Baluze's Animadversion easily have concluded, That if this be indeed
the work of Monsieur de Marca, 'twill be impossible to hinder him from passing
with many Persons for a HERETIC as to the point of the Eucharist. But before I
quit this Instance, I cannot but observe with reference to this Treatise, what
care the Romanists take to hinder the sentiments of learned Men in this Point
from coming to a public knowledge: And which might give us some cause to
suspect, that their great concern is not so much whether they do indeed believe
Transubstantiation themselves, as not to let the World know that they do not.

This has been heretofore shown in another Treatise with reference to S.
Chrysostom; whose Defense of the Exposition of the Doctrine of the Church of
Engl. Appendix, p. 127. n. v.
Epistle to Caesarius some of the Sorbonne Doctors caused most shamefully to be
out out of Monsieur Bigot's Edition of Palladius, because it too plainly spoke
the Doctrine of the Protestants as to this point. And the same has almost
happened to this Treatise of Monsieur de Marca here mentioned: See the Preface
to the Reader before the Edition of the same Treatises 12o Anno 1669. and
Monsieur Baluze's Letter to the Bishop of T^^^e o^ this occasion. p. 5.
Before it came to a public sight, the passages that seemed most visibly to
oppose their Doctrine, were either changed or suppressed; The Original leaves
cut out by them having fallen into my Hands, may be seen by those that desire
it in S. Martin's Library.
(of which the passage before cited is one) as appears by the Paris Edition now
extant of them. But See Monsieur Bdluze 2. Lettre page 15.
the Providence of God that brought to light the other, has discovered this
cheat too; For before the alarm was given, and that the Chancellor, Mais enfin
le refus que Mrs. de Sorbonne luy ^nt fait de luy domer leur approbation -- *
luy ont fait ouvrir les yeux, s'estant laisse entendre, quoyqu' un peu tard,
qu'il a fait une Sottise. ibid.
the Sorbonne Doctors, but especially Monsieur Baluze by his Letters to the
President de Marca, the Archbishop's Son, upon this occasion, had awakened the
Abbe Faget to consider more nearly what he had done; Et p. 16. Je dis, un peu
tard; parce qu'il avoit de jafait des presents de son livre, and que le
libraire en avoit aussi debite quelques uns.
several Presents had been made of the entire work as it was in the Authors
MS.; and, if we may credit their own relations, the Printer who was a
Protestant and the same that printed Baluze Lettre a Monsieur l'Evesque de
Tulle, p. 5.
Monsieur Claude's Books against the Perpetuire, had obliged that learned
Person with a Copy; by which means both the genuine sentiments of Monsieur de
Marca in opposition to Transubstantiation are preserved, and their fraudulent
endeavors to suppress his opinion discovered.

To this eminent Person I will beg leave to subjoyn a fifth, and he too no less
known to the World both for his Learning and Reputation, nor less a Heretic in
this point, however not hitherto so openly discovered as the other: and that is
Father Sirmond the Jesuit. In his life of Paschasius Radbertus, he tells us,
That this Monk was the first Sirmond. Vit. Pasch. Radbert.
who explained the genuine sense of the Catholic Church in this mystery: and
indeed if what Eclaircisseme^ de l'Euch. c. 19. p. 431, etc.
Blondel and some others have observed concerning him be true, that it was for
Impanation, not Transubstantiation; the Jesuit perhaps spoke his real judgment
of him, though not in that sense that he is usually understood to have done it.

But however that be, certain it is that this learned Father so little believed
the Doctrine of the present Roman Church as to this point, that he freely
confessed he thought it had herein departed from the ancient Faith; and at the
desire of one of his Friends wrote a short Treatise to confirm his Assertion.
This though it be not yet made public, is neverthess in the hands of several
Persons of undoubted integrity: I will mention only one, whose learning and
worth are sufficiently known to the World, viz. Monsieur Bigot: who discoursing
with Father Raynauld at Lions about this matter, the Jesuit confessed to him
that it was true, that he had himself a copy of his Treatise which he would
communicate to him, and that it was Father Sirmond whom upon this account he
reflected upon in his Book, de bonis and malis Libris, where he observes, That
Men of great parts love to innovate, Ingenia praeclara in rebus difficilibus
aliquid semper de suo comminis^ntur. Nam praeclara ingenia multa novant circa
scientias. Theoph. Raynaudi S. J. Erotemata de malis ac bonis libris: Lugduni
1653. p. 251.
and invent always somewhat of their own in difficult matters.

When Monsieur Bigot returned to claim the performance of his promise, the
Jesuit excused himself to him that he could not light upon it; which when he
afterward told to Father Chiflet another Jesuit of Dijonois, he again
confirmed to him the truth of the relation, and voluntarily offered him a Copy
of the Treatise, which he told him was transcribed from Father Sirmonds
Original. This Monsieur Bigot has not only acknowledged to some of his Friends
of my acquaintance, but promised to communicate to them the very Treatise; and
I dare appeal to the candor of that worthy Person for the truth of what I have
here related, and whose name I should not have mentioned, but only to remove
all reasonable cause of suspicion in a matter of such importance.

And what I have now said of Father Sirmond, I might as truly affirm of a
fourth Person of as great a name, a Doctor of the Sorbonne, whose Treatise
against Transubstantiation has been seen by several persons, and is still read
in the MS. But because I am not at liberty to make use of their names, I shall
not any further insist upon this example.

My next instance will be more undeniable, and it is of the ingenious Monsieur
de Marolles Abbot of Ville-loyn, well known in France for his excellent
Writings and great Abilities. A little before his death, which happened about
the beginning of the Year 1681. being desirous to free his Conscience as to the
point of the Holy Eucharist, in which he supposed their Church to have many
ways departed from the right Faith, he caused a Paper to be Printed, in which
he declares his thoughts concerning it; and sent it to several of his most
learned Acquaintance, the better to undeceive them in this matter. One of these
Persons, to whom this Present was made, having been pleased to communicate to
me the very Paper which by the Abbot' s order was brought to him, it may not
perhaps be amiss to gratify the Reader' s curiosity, if I here insert it at
its full length.

The Abbot means, that now at his death he hoped he might speak freely what he
durst not in his Lifetime do.
Permission hoped for to speak freely for the Truth.
I Cannot but exceedingly wonder that a certain Preacher, who reads the Holy
Scriptures, and will maintain nothing but by their Authority, should
nevertheless undertake to defend against all Opposers by the Scriptures, the
Real Presence in the Eucharist out of the act of receiving; and think himself
so sure to overcome in this Occasion, as to talk of it as a thing certain, and
in which he knows he cannot be resisted.

It would certainly be more safe not to be too much prepossessed with anything.
I will not name the Person, because I have no mind to displease him, But in the
mean time, neither Sense, nor Reason, nor the Word of God have suggested to him
one word of it; unless the Apostle was mistaken when he said, If ye are risen
with Christ, seek those things that are above, where Christ is sat at the
right hand of God. Set your affection on things above and not on things upon
the Earth. Coloss. 3. 1, 2. For how could he speak after this manner, if Jesus
Christ be still upon Earth by his real Presence under the species in the
Eucharist?

When he ascended into Heaven, he said not to his Disciples which saw his
wonderful Ascension; I shall be with you always by my Real Presence under the
species of the Eucharist, which shall be publicly exposed to you. In his
Sermon at the Supper which he had just now celebrated, and which immediately
preceded his Passion, Jesus Christ according to S. John says expressly to his
Apostles, that he was about to leave them, that he should not be long absent,
that he would send to them the Comforter; but not one word of his Real Presence
in the Eucharist, which he had so lately instituted under the Bread and Wine,
to be a Mystery of our Faith for the nourishment of the Soul to life Eternal,
as ordinary Bread and Wine are for the nourishment of the Body to a temporal
Life, and that too for ALL the faithful, as is clearly signified by those
Words, Drink ye all of this. Whereupon I have elsewhere remarked the custom of
Libations which were in use time out of mind throughout the whole Roman Empire,
and which custom was established in honor of the gods: As may be seen in the
Version of Athenaeus in 1680; and as I had observed long before upon Virgil and
Horace, though there was but little notice taken of it. Which makes me think it
very probable, that our Savior intended to sanctify this Profane custom, as
he did some others, which I have remarked in the same place.

When Men undertake to prove too much, they very often prove nothing at all: To
maintain that Jesus Christ is entire in the Eucharist with all his Bodily
extension, and all his Dignity, so as he is in Heaven; so that under the
Roundness of the Bread there is nothing that is Round; under the Whiteness
there is nothing White; this is what the Scripture has not said one word of,
They are indeed mere Visions, and which are not so easy to maintain as Men may
think. The Priest who celebrates breaks the Host in three pieces; One of these
he puts into the Cup, of the two others he communicates, in memory as it is
plain of what we read, That Jesus the night in which he was betrayed took
Bread, and when he had given thanks he brake it, and said, Take, Eat, This is
my Body which is broken for you, Do this in Remembrance of Me. 1 Cor. 11. 23,
24. In the Mass there is here no more Bread, they are only the appearances of
Bread, that is to say, the Accidents, and which are not tied to any Substance.
And yet so long as there is but one Atom of those Accidents which they call
Eucharistical species in the Consecration that has been made, the true Flesh of
the Lord Jesus is so annexed to them, that it remains there whole and entire,
without the least confusion, and may be so in diverse places at the same time.
I doubt not but those who teach us this Doctrine have thought of it more than
once; but have they well considered it? for there is not one word of it in all
the Sacred Writings.

Is it nothing that Jesus Christ said to his Apostles but a little while before
his Passion, when he was now about to celebrate his Holy Supper with them, You
shall have the Poor always with you, but me ye shall not have always, Matthew.
26. 11. His Real Presence in the Eucharist, out of the act of communicating,
not excepted?

They say to the People, Behold your Creator that made Heaven and Earth: And
the People seeing the consecrated Bread in the Ciboire wherein it is carried
abroad, says, Behold the good God going in procession to confound the
Heretics: and according to their natural inclination, they adore with all
their Hearts they know not what, because so they have been instructed; and the
better to maintain their prejudice entire in this matter, they become mad: But
alas! they know not what they do, and we ought to pity their Excess.

On the other side, who can tell whether the Priest has consecrated, or indeed
whether he be capable of consecrating? Is it a point of Faith to believe, that
among so many Priests, not one of them is a Cheat and an Impostor? This
certainly cannot be of Faith; and if this be not, neither is that which exposed
with so much Pomp, to carry the true Body of the Lord through the Streets, of
Faith. Thus the belief is at best but Conjecture; and then whatsoever in such
cases is not of Faith is sin, according to the Apostle, Romans 14. 23.

I know not what color can be sufficient to excuse so strong an Objection,
unless Men will absolutely resist the Holy Scripture, and right Reason founded
upon it.

It Is further said, that Jesus Christ is in many places at the same time, in
the Hosts which are carried in very different manners; But neither for this is
there any Text of Scripture. You will say, this may be; I answer, the Question
here is not of the Infinite power of Jesus Christ, but of his Will, and which
we must obey when it is known to us; and of this as to the present point we
read nothing in the Holy Scripture. The shorter way then would be to say, that
the Sacrament of one Parish is not the same with that of another, although both
the one and the other concur in the same design to worship God; as the Paschal
Lamb of one Family, was not the Lamb of another, although both the one and the
other were to accomplish the same Mystery. Thus for instance, on Corpus
Christi-day, the Sacrament of S. Germain d' Auxerrois, where the perpetual
Vicar consecrates the Host, and Monsieur the Dean, the first Cure, carrys it
the Procession under a rich Canopy crowned with Flowers, this Host is not the
same with that of S. Paul's which is carried after another manner, viz. the
Image of that Apostle made of Silver gilt, falling from his Horse at his
Conversion, under the Sacrament of Jesus Christ hung up in rays of Gold, and
carried under the covering of another stately Canopy; and so of all the other
Churches.

As for the stories of several Hosts that have been stabbed with Penknives, and
have bled, they serve only to bring in some superstition contrary to the word
of God, which never pretended that there was material Blood in the consecrated
Bread, because it is the Body of Jesus Christ in a mystery of Faith.

For what is said of an Infant that was seen in the stead of the Host, and of
the figure of Christ sitting upon a Sepulcher instead of the same Host, are
mere Fables suggested by the Father of Lies.

It is further reported of certain Robbers that carrying away the Vessel in
which the Host is kept, they have thrown the Host it self upon the ground, and
trampled it under foot, sometimes have cast it into nasty places, without any
fear that it should avenge it self; This is a most horrible thought, and of
which we ought not to open our mouths, but only to detest so dreadful a
profanation.

The same must be said of those Hosts which have been cast up, as soon as
received, whether by sick persons, or sometimes by debauched Priests,
disordered with the last nights intemperance; both which have sometimes
happened, not to say any thing of those other terrible inconveniences, remarked
in the Cautions concerning the Mass. All which show that Men have carried
things too far, without any warrant from the Word of God.

It is not therefore so easy, as some imagine, to maintain the Doctrine of the
Real Presence out of the Use, against the Opinions of any Opposer.

In the mean time the Truth is terribly obscured, and few give themselves the
trouble to clear it. On the contrary it seems that among the many Writers of
the Age, there are some who make it their whole business to hide it, and to
keep themselves from finding it out, as if they desired never to be wiser than
they are. The vanity of lying flatters them but too much in all the Humane
passions which sway them.

There are nevertheless some faithful Disciples, and Apostolic Souls who are
exempted, to obey God by his Grace, and to give glory to his Name. It was not
long before his departure that David said, Every man is a liar: Psalm. 115. 2.
and S. Paul to the Romans 3. 4. to show that God only is true, adds immediately
after from Psalm Li. 4.
50. 6. Thou might be justified when thou speak, and be clear when thou
judge.

Such was the Opinion of Monsieur de Marolles as to this point: I should too
much trespass upon the Reader's patience to insist thus particularly upon
others of lesser note. The Author of the late Historical Treatise of
Transubstantiation, has fully shown not only his own Opinion, but the Tradition
of all the Ages of the Church against it: And though I dare not say the same of
whoever he was that set forth the Il nous suff^t qu^ (...). C. qui est la Verit
e meme nous ait assure que ce Sacra^ent est verit abl^nt son Corpse, and qu'il
ait ordonne de manger sa chair and boire son sang: car il faut absolument qu'il
y soit, puis q'il il nous ordonne de l'y manger, sans s'embarasser l'Esprit de
quelle maniere and comment cela se fait 2. Part, p. 102.
Moyens surs and Honnestes, etc. that he did not believe Transubstantiation
himself, yet this is clear, That he did not desire any one should be forced to
believe it; or indeed be encouraged to search too nicely into the manner how
Christ is Present and Eaten in the Holy Sacrament.

Whether Monsieur de Meaux believes this Doctrine or not, his authority is
become of so little importance, that I do not think it worth the while to
examine. Yet the first French Advertissement n. 14. p. 22. Mr. B. Speaking of
that Edition, il n'y avoit en aucun lieu de l'Article, ni le term de
Transubstantiation, ni cette Proposition, que le pain and le vin sont changez
au corpse and au sarg de J. C. dans la derniere [Edition] apres ces mots, le
propre Corpse and le propre sung de J. C. il ajoure ausquelles le pain and le
vin sont changez; cest ce qu'on appelle Transubstantiationa
Answer to his Exposition observes, that in the suppressed Edition of it he had
not at all mentioned that the Bread and Wine are turned into the Body and Blood
of Christ those words in the close of that Paragraph which we now read, viz.
that the Bread and the Wine are changed into the proper Body, and proper Blood
of Jesus Christ, and that this is that which is called Transubstantiation,
being put in Monsieur de Meaux Letter of his alterations; Vind. p. 13. and 117.
pour l'ordre, and pour une plus grande nettete du discourse and du style.
for the greater neatness of the Discourse and Style, since.

But now for his Vindicator, it is evident, if he understands his own meaning,
that he is not very well instructed about it. Vindication of the Bishop of
Condom's Expos. Page 83.
It is manifest, says he, that our dispute with Protestants is not about the
manner, How Jesus Christ is Present, but only about the Thing it self, whether
the Body and Blood of Jesus Christ be truly, really, and substantially present
after the words of Consecration, under the species or Appearance of Bread and
Wine, the substance of Bread and Wine being not so present.

In which words, if his meaning be to exclude totally the manner, How Jesus
Christ becomes present in the Eucharist, as his expression is, from being a
matter of Faith, it might well have been ranged amongst the rest of their new
Popery 1686. But if he designs not to exclude the manner of Christ's Presence,
but only the mode of the Conversion, as he seems by some other of his words to
insinuate, viz. whether it be by Adduction, etc. from being a matter of Faith,
he ought not then to have denied the manner of Christ's Presence in the
Eucharist, which their Church has absolutely defined to be by that wonderful
and singular Conversion so aptly called Transubstantiation; but more precisely
to have explained his Schoolnicety and which is altogether as unintelligible,
as the Mystery which it is brought to explain.

I might to the particulars hitherto mentioned, add the whole Sect of their new
Philosophers, who following the Hypothesis of their Master Descartes, that
Accidents are nothing else but the Modes of Matter, must here either renounce
his Doctrine or their Churches Belief. But I shall close these remarks, which
have already run to a greater length than I designed, with one instance more,
from a Prelate of our own Church, but yet whose truly Christian sincerity will
I am persuaded justify him even to those of the Roman Communion: and it is the
learned Archbishop Usher, The same is affirmed by Monsieur du Mo^lin of several
Priests in France: Disp. Sedannens. de Sacr. Euch. par. 4. p. 846. Nec abs re
de ^tentione presbyteri dubitatur, cum plurimi Sacerdotes canant Missam
re^ictante Conscient^^, quales multos vidimus qui ejurato Papismo satebantur se
diu cecinisse Missam (...) Missa alie^issimo.
who having been so happy as to convert several Roman Priests from their
errors, and inquiring diligently of them, what they who said Mass every day,
and were not obliged to confess Venial Sins, could have to trouble their
Confessors so continually withal; ingenuously acknowledged to him, that the
chiefest part of their constant Confession was their Infidelity as to the point
of Transubstantiation, and for which as was most fit, they mutually quitted and
absolved one another.

And now that is thus clear from so many instantes of the greatest Men in the
Roman Church, which this last Age has produced; and from whose discovery we may
reasonably enough infer the like of many others that have not come to our
knowledge, that several Persons who have lived and enjoyed some of the greatest
Honors and Dignities in that Communion, have nevertheless been Heretics in
this point; may I beseech those who are still misled with this great Error, to
stop a while, and seriously examine with me two or three plain considerations,
and in which I suppose they are not a little concerned.

And the first is, Of their own danger: but especially, upon their Own
Principles.

It is but a very little while since an ingenious Person now living in the
French Church, the Abbe Petit published a Book which he calls Les Veritez de la
Religion prouvees and defendnes contre les anciennes Heresies, par la virite de
l'Eucharistis. 1686.
The truths of the Christian Religion proved and defended against the ancient
Heresies by the Truth of the Eucharist: And what he means by this truth, he
thus declares in his Preface, viz. the change of Que du pain divienne le Corpse
^u fills de Dieu, and du Vin son sang. Preface p. 7.
the Bread into the Body of the Son of God, and of the Wine into his Blood. He
there pretends that this Doctrine however combatted by us now, was Quoiqu'il
n'y ait point, presentement de verites plus incontestables que les trois grands
articles de nostre foi, qui sont contenus dans le symbol, c'est a dire, la
divinite de J. C. la divinite du S. Esprit, and la Resurrection: Cependant l'
ose dire que la presence reelle de J. C. au Saint Sacrament etoit une verite
encore plus indubitable dans les premie^s siecles de l'Eglise. Pres. p. 5.
yet more undoubted in the Primitive Church than either the divinity of Christ
and the Holy Ghost, or the certainty of our future Resurrection. And this he
wrote as the Title tells us, Traitte pour confirmer les Noveaux Con^ertis dans
la soi de l'Eglise Catholic.
To confirm the new Converts in the Faith of the Catholic Church; meaning
according to their usual figure, the Roman. How far this extravagant
undertaking may serve to convince them I cannot tell; this I know, that if we
may credit those who have been that Abbot' s most intimate acquaintance, he
believes but very little of it himself, unless he also be become in this point,
a new Convert.

But now if what has before been said of so many eminent Persons of their
Church be true, as after a due and diligent examination of every particular
there set down, I must beg leave to profess I am fully persuaded that it is;
'twill need no long deduction to show how dangerous an influence their unbelief
must have had, in some of the chiefest instances of their constant Worship.

For 1. It is the Doctrine of the Council. Trid. Sess. vii. Can. 11. siquis
dixerit in ministris dum Sacramenta conficiunt, non requiri intenlionem, saltem
saciendi quod facit Ecclesia, Anathema sit.
Council of Trent that to make a Sacrament, the Priest must have, if not an
Actual, yet at least a Virtual Intention of doing that which the Church does:
And in the Vid. de defectibus circa Missam, c. de defectu Intentionis. In
Missali. R.
Rubricks of their Missal, the want of such an Intention in the Priest is one
of the defects there set down as sufficient to hinder a Consecration. Now if
this be true, as every Roman Catholic who acknowledges the Authority of that
Synod must believe it to be; it is then evident that in all those Masses which
any of the Persons I before named have said, there could have been no
Consecration: It being absurd to suppose that they who believed not
Transubstantiation, could have an intention to make any such change of the
Bread into the Body of Christ, which they thought it impossible to do.

Now if there were no Consecration, but that the Bread continued mere Bread as
it was before; then Secondly, All those who attended at their Masses, and
Adored their Hosts, paid the supreme worship of God to a bare Wafer, and no
more. How far the modern plea of their good Intention to Adore Christ in those
sacred Offices, may excuse them from having committed Idolatry, it is not
necessary I should here examine. They who desire a satisfaction in this matter,
may please to recur to a late excellent Treatise written purposely on this
Subject, and A Discourse concerning the Adoration of the Host. Land. 1685.
where they will find the weakness of this supposal sufficiently exposed. But
since Vid. Catharin. in Cajet. page 133. Ed. Paris. 1535. Where he quotes S.
Thomas and Paludanus for the same Opinion: This Book of his was seen and
approved by the Pope's order by the Divines at Paris: as himself tells us in
the review of it. Lugdun. 1542.
many of their own greatest Men confess that if any one by mistake should
worship an Unconsecrated Host, taking it to have been Consecrated, he would be
guilty of Idolatry; and that such an Error would not be sufficient to excuse
him; may they please to consider with what Faith they can pay this Divine
Adoration to that which all their Senses tell them is but a bit of Bread; to
the hinderance of whose Conversion so many things may interpose, that were
their Doctrine otherwise as infallible, as we are certain it is false, it would
yet be a hundred to one that there is no Consecration: in a word; how they can
worship that which they can never be secure is changed into Christ's Body, nay
when, as the examples I have before given show, they have all the reason in the
World to fear, whether even the Priest himself who says the Mass does indeed
believe that he has any Power, or by consequence can have any intention, to
turn it into the Flesh of Christ.

And the same consideration will show, Thirdly; How little security their other
Plea of Concomitance, which they so much insist upon, to show the sufficiency
of their Communicating only in one kind, viz. that they receive the Blood in
the Body, can give to the Laity, to satisfy their Consciences that they ever
partake of that Blessed Sacrament as they ought to do. Since whatever is
pretended of Christ's Body, it is certain there can be none of his Blood in a
mere Wafer: And if by reason of the Priest's infidelity, the Host should be
indeed nothing else, of which we have shown they can never be sure; neither can
they ever know whether what they receive be upon their own Principles, an
entire Communion.

And then Lastly, for the main thing of all, The Sacrifice of the Mass; it is
clear that if Christ's Body be not truly and properly there, it cannot be truly
and properly offered; nor any of those great benefits be derived to them from a
morsel of Bread, which themselves declare can proceed only from the Flesh and
Blood of their Blessed Lord.

It is I know an easy matter for those who can believe Transubstantiation, to
believe also that there is no hazard in all these great and apparent dangers.
But yet in matters of such moment Men ought to desire to be well assured, and
not exposed even to any possible defects. I do not now insist upon the common
remarks, De defectibus circa Missam: De defictu panis. Si panis non sit
triticeus, vel si triticeus, sit admixtus granis alterius generis in tanta
quantitate, ut non maneat panis triticeus, vel sit alioqui corruptus: non
conficitur Sacramentum. Si sit consectus de aqua rosacea vel alterius
distillationis, dabium est an conficiatur? Et de defect. vini. Si Vinum sit
factum penitus acetum, vel penitus putridum, vel de uvis acerbis seu non
maturis expressum, vel admixtum tantum aquae ut vinum sit corruptum, non
conficitur Sacramentum.
which yet are Authorized by their own Missal, and may give just grounds to
their fears; That if the Wafer be not made of Wheat but of some other Corn,
there is then no Consecration: If it be mixed not with common, but distilled
Water, it is doubtful whether it be Consecrated. If the Wine be sour to such a
certain degree, that then it becomes incapable of being changed into the Blood
of Christ; with many more of the like kind, and which render it always
uncertain to them, whether there be any change made in the blessed Elements or
no; Da Moulin, in the place above cited, mentions one that in his time was
burnt at Loudun for Consecrating a Host in the name of the Devil. These. Sedann.
Th. 97. n. 10. p. 846. Vol. 1.
the Relations I have given, are no^ of counterfeit Jews and Moors, who to
escape the danger of the Inquisition have sometimes become Priests, and
administered all the Sacraments for many years together, without ever having an
intention to Administer truly any one of them, and of which I could give an
eminent instance in a certain Jew now living; who for many Years was not only a
Priest, but a Professor of Divinity in Spain, and all the while in reality a
mere Jew as he is now. The Persons here mentioned were Men of undoubted
reputation, of great learning and singular esteem in their Church; and if these
found the impossibilities of Transubstantiation so much greater than either the
pretended Authority or Infallibility of their Church; certainly they may have
just cause to fear, whether many others of their Priests do not Live in the
same infidelity in which these have Died, and so expose them to all the hazards
now mentioned, and which are undeniably the consequences of such their Unbelief.

But these are not the only dangers I would desire those of that Communion to
reflect on upon this occasion. Another there is, and of greater consequence
than any I have hitherto mentioned, and which may perhaps extend not only to
this Holy Eucharist, but it may be to the invalidating of most of their other
Sacraments. Eugenii IV. decret. in Act. Council. Florent. Ann. 1439. Council
Labb. Tom. 13. p. 535. Council. Trident. Sess. VII. Can. 2.
It is the Doctrine of the Roman Church that to the Validity of every
Sacrament, and therefore of that of Orders as well as the rest three things
must concur, a due matter, a right form, and the Person of the Minister
conferring the Sacrament, with an intention of doing what the Church does.
Where either of these is wanting, the Sacrament is not performed. If therefore
the Bishop in conferring the Holy Order of Priesthood has not an intention of
doing what the Church does, it is plain that the Person to be ordained receives
no Priestly Character of him; nor by consequence has any power of consecrating
the Holy Eucharist, or of being hereafter advanced to a higher degree. Now the
form of conferring the Order of Priesthood they determine to be this; Ibid.
page 538. Catech. Council. Trid. de Sacr. Ord. n. xxii. p. 222. Item, n. L. p.
228.
The Bishop delivers the Cup with some Wine, and the Paten with Bread into the
Hands of the person whom he Ordains, saying, Receive the Power of offering a
Sacrifice in the Church for the living and the dead, in the name of the Father,
and of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost. By which Ceremony and words, their
Catechism tells us, He is constituted an Interpreter and Mediator between God
and Man; which is to be esteemed the chiefest Function of a Priest. So that
then the intention necessary to the conferring the Order of Priesthood is this;
to give a Power to consecrate, i. e. to Transubstantiate the Host into Christ's
Body, and so offer it as a Sacrifice for the Living and the Dead.

If therefore any of their Bishops, for instance Cardinal du Perron, or
Monsieur de Marca, did not believe that either the Church or themselves as
Bishops of it, had any Authority to confer any such Power, they could not
certainly have any Intention of doing in this case what the Church intends to
do. Having no such Intention, the Persons whom they pretended to Ordain were no
Priests. Being no Priests they had no Power to Consecrate. All the Hosts
therefore which were either offered or taken, or worshipped in any of the
Masses celebrated by those Priests whom these two Bishops Ordained, were only
mere Bread, and not the Body of Christ; And as many of them, as being
afterward advanced to a higher dignity, were consecrated Bishops, received no
Episcopal Character, because they were destitute of the Priestly before. Thus
the danger still increases: For by this means, the Priests whom they also
Ordain are no Priests; and when any of them shall be promoted to a higher
degree, are incapable of being made Bishops; And so by the Infidelity of these
two Men, there are at this day infinite numbers of Priests and Bishops, who say
Mass, and confer Orders without any manner of power to do either; and in a
little time it may be there shall not be a true Bishop or Priest in the whole
Gallicane Church. But,

II. A second Consideration which I would beg leave to offer from the
foregoing instances is this: What reliance we can make upon the Pretended
Infallibility of their Church; when it is thus plain that so many of the most
learned Men of their own Communion did not only not believe it to be
Infallible, but supposed it to have actually Erred, and that in those very
Doctrines that are at this day esteemed the most considerable Points in
difference between Us.

It is plain from what has been said in the foregoing reflection, that
disbelieving Transubstantiation, they must also have looked upon all the other
Consequences of it, viz. the Adoration of the Host, the Sacrifice of the Mass,
etc. as Erroneous too. Nom though it be not yet agreed among them, nor ever
likely to be, where the supposed Infallibility of their Church is seated, yet
since all manner of Authority has conspired to establish these things; Popes
have decreed them, Councils defined them, and both Popes and Councils
anathematized all those that shall presume to doubt of them; it is evident
either these Men did not believe the Church to be Infallible, as is pretended;
or they did not believe the Roman, to be, according to the modern phrase,
indeed the Catholic Church.

III. And upon the same grounds there will arise a third Reflection, which they
may please to make with us; and that is, with what Reason they can press us
with the Authority of their Church in these matters; when such eminent persons
of their own Communion, and who certainly were much more Obliged to it than we
can be thought to be, yet did not esteem it sufficient to enslave their belief.

It is a reproach generally cast upon us, that we set up a private Spirit in
opposition to the Wisdom and Authority of the Church of God: and think our
selves better able to judge in matters of Faith, than the most General Council
that was ever yet assembled. This is usually said, but is indeed a foul
Misrepresentation of our Opinion. All we say is, that every Man ought to act
Rationally in matters of Religion, as well as in other concerns; to employ his
Understanding with the utmost skill and diligence that he is able, to know
God's will, and what it is that he requires of us. We do not set up our own
judgments against the Authority of the Church; but having both the Holy Oracles
of God, and the Definitions of Men before us, we give to each their proper
weight. And therefore if the one at any time contradicts the other, we resolve,
as is most fitting, not that our own, but God's Authority revealed to us in his
Word, is to be preferred. And he who without this examination servilely gives
up himself to follow whatever is required of him; He may be in the right, if
his Church or Guide be so; but according to this method shall never be able to
give a reason of his Faith; nor if he chance to be born in a False Religion,
ever be in a capacity of being better instructed. For if we must be allowed
nothing but to obey only, and not presume to enquire why; He that is a Jew must
continue a Jew still; he that is a Turk, a Turk; a Protestant must always be a
Protestant: In short, in whatsoever profession any one now is, in that he must
continue, whether true or false, if reason and examination must be excluded all
place in matters of Religion.

All this is lately granted by the Catholic Representer. Cap. VI.
And indeed after all their clamours against us on this occasion, yet is this
no more than what themselves require of us when it is in order to their own
advantage. Is a Proselyte to be made, they offer to him their Arguments: They
tell him a long story of their Church; the Succession, Visibility, and other
Notes of it. To what purpose is all this, if we are not to be Judges, to
examine their pretenses whether these are sufficient marks of such a Church as
they suppose; and if they are, whether they do indeed agree to theirs, and then
upon a full conviction submit to them. Now if this be their intention, it is
then clear, let them pretend what they will, that they think us both capable of
judging in these matters, and that we ought to follow that, which all things
considered we find to be most reasonable, which is all that we desire.

And for this we have here the undoubted Examples of those Eminent Persons of
their own Communion before named; who notwithstanding the Authority of their
Church, and the decision of so many Councils esteemed by it as General, have
yet both thought themselves at liberty to examine their Decrees, and even to
pass sentence too upon them, that they were erroneous in the Points here
mentioned. And therefore certainly we may modestly desire the same liberty
which themselves take; at least till we can be convinced, (and that by such
Arguments as we shall be allowed to judge of,) that there is such an infallible
Guide whom we ought in all things to follow without further inquiry, and where
we may find him, and when this is done I will for my part promise as freely to
give up myself to his Conduct, as I am till then, I think reasonably, resolved
to follow what according to the best of my ability in proving all things, I
shall find indeed to be Good.

IV. I might from the same Principles, Fourthly, argue the Reasonableness of
our Reformation, at least in the opinion of those great Men of whom we have
hitherto been speaking: And who thinking it allowed to them to dissent
themselves from the received Doctrine of their Church, which they found to be
erroneous, could not but in their Consciences justify us, who, as a national
Church, no way subjected to their Authority, did the same; and by the right
which every such Church has within it self, reformed those Errors, which like
the Tares were sprung up with the Good Seed. This it is evident they must have
approved; and for one of them, the Abbot of Ville-loyne, I have been assured by
some of his intimate Acquaintance, that he had always a particular respect for
the Church of England, and which others of their Communion at this day esteem
to be neither Heretical nor Schismatical.

V. But I may not insist on these things, and will therefore finish this
Address with this only remonstrance to them; That since it is thus evident,
that for above 1200 years this Doctrine was never established in the Church,
nor till then, in the opinion of their own most learned Men, any matter of
Faith; since the Greatest of their Writers in the past Ages have declared
themselves so freely concerning it as we have seen above, and some of the most
eminent of their Communion in the present have ingenuously acknowledged that
they could not believe it; since it is confessed that the Scripture does not
require it; Sense and Reason undoubtedly oppose it, and the Primitive Ages of
the Church, as one of their own Authors has very lately shown, received it not;
They will at least suffer all these things to dispose them to an indifferent
Examination, wherefore at last it is that they do believe this great Error?
Upon what Authority they have given up their Senses to Delusion; their Reason
to embrace Contradictions; the Holy Scripture and Antiquity, to be submitted to
the dictates of two Assemblies, which many of themselves esteem to have been
rather Cabals than Councils: And all to support a Doctrine, the most injurious
that can be to our Saviour' s Honor; destructive in its nature not only of the
certainty of the Christian Religion, but of every thing else in the World;
which if Transubstantiation be true, must be all but Vision: for that cannot be
true unless the Senses of all Mankind are deceived in judging of their proper
Objects, and if this be so, we can then be sure of nothing.

These Considerations, if they shall incline them to an impartial view of the
following Discourses, they may possibly find somewhat in them, to show the
reasonableness of our dissent from them in this matter. However they shall at
least I hope engage those of our own Communion to stand firm in that Faith
which is thus strongly supported with all sorts of Arguments; and convince them
how dangerous it is for Men to give up themselves to such prejudices, as
neither Sense nor Reason, nor the word of God, nor the Authority of the best
and purest Ages of the Church, are able to overcome.

A TABLE OF THE Principal Matters Contained in this TREATISE.
PREFACE.
THE occasion of this Discourse. Page i The method made use of for the
explaining the nature of this Holy Eucharist. iv No Proof of Transubstantiation
in Holy Scripture. v The rise and establishment of it. vi, vii Several of their
greatest Men before the Council of Trent believed it not. vii, viii And many
have even since continued to disbelieve it. x So, Picherellus. x Cardinal du
PERRON. xi F. Barnes. xii Monsieur de MARCA. xiii F. SIRMOND. xv Monsieur L --.
xvii Mons. de Marolles. ib. Others. xxiv, etc.
Consequences drawn from these Examples:

I. Of the danger of the Papists, especially upon their own Principles. xxvii
With reference to this Sacrament: and therein to the 1. Consecration. xxvii 2.
Adoration. ib. 3. Communion in one kind. xxix 4. Mass. xxx
With reference to their entire Priesthood. xxxi II. Against the Infallibility
of the Roman Church. xxxiii III. Against its Authority. xxxiv IV. As to the
Reasonableness of our Reformation. xxxvi V. That these things ought to dispose
those of that Communion to an impartial search into the grounds of their belief
as to this matter. xxxvii
PART I.
The Introduction. Of the Nature of this Holy Sacrament in the General. Page 1
Christ's design in the Institution of it. 2 That he established it upon the
Ceremonies of the Jewish Pas^over. 3, 4, 5, 6 The method from hence taken to
explain the nature of it. 6, 7
CHAP. I. Of Transubstantiation; or the Real Presence established by the Church
of Rome. 8 What is the Doctrine of the Church of Rome in this point. ib. --
This shown upon the Principle before laid down, to be repugnant, 1. To the
design and nature of this Holy Sacrament. 12 2. To the expression it self, This
is my Body. 14
The Papists themselves sensible of it. 18 That the Sixth of S. John does not
at all favor them. 20 -- This Doctrine shown further to be repugnant, I. To
the best and purest Tradition of the Church. 24 II. To the right Reason. 32
III. To the common Sense of all Mankind. 36
Conclusion of this Point, and transition to the next. 37
CHAP. II. Of the Real Presence acknowledged by the Church of England. 41 The
notion of the Real Presence falsely imputed, by a late Author to our Church. 42
In answer to this Four things proposed to be considered, I. What is the true
notion of the Real Presence as acknowledged by the Church of England. 43. II.
That this Notion has been constantly maintained by our most Learned and
Orthodox Divines. 46 -- So those abroad; Calvin. 47 -- Beza. 49 -- Martyr, etc.
51 -- For our own Divines; consider the express words of the twenty ninth
Article, in K. Edw. VI. time. 52 -- Archbishop Cranmer. 53 -- Bishop Ridley. 55
-- That the same continned to be the Opinion of our Divines after. 56 Shown 1.
From the History of the Convocations proceeding as to this point in the
beginning of Q. Eliz. Reign. ib. 2. From the Testimonies of our Divines. -- Bp.
Jewel. 59 -- Mr. Hooker. 60 -- Bp. Andrews. 62 -- A. B. of Spalatto. 64 -- Bp.
Montague ib. -- Bp. Taylour. 66 -- Mr. Torndyke. 69
Whose Testimonies are cited at large: Of 1. Reformatio Legum Ecclesiasticarum.
2. Bp. Morton. 3. A. B. Usher. 4. Bp. Cosens. 5. Dr. Jo. White. 6. Dr. Fr.
White. 7. Dr. Jackson. 8. Dr. Hammond.
Whose Authorities are referred to; 71, 72 III. That the alterations which have
been made in our Rubric, were not upon the account of our Divines changing
their Opinions, as is vainly and falsely suggest^d. 72 IV. That the Reasons
mentioned in our Rubric, concerning the Impossibility of Christ's Natural
Body's existing in several places at the same time, is no way invalidated by
any of this Author's Exceptions against it. 77 1. Not by his First Observation.
ib. 2. Nor by his Second. 79 3. Nor by his Third. 80 4. Nor by his Fourth. 81
The Objection, of this Opinion's, being downright Zuinglianism; Answered. 82
And the whole concluded. 84

PART II.
CHAP. III Of the Adoration of the Host as prescribed and practiced in the
Church of Rome.
Two things proposed to be considered;

I. What the Doctrine of the Church of England as to this point is. 86 Our
Authors exceptions against it, Answered. 87 II. What is the Doctrine of the
Church of Rome; and whether what this Author has said in favor of it may be
sufficient to warrant their Practice as to this matter. 91 Their Doctrine
stated. ib. The Defense of it, unsufficient: shown in Answer, 1. To his
Protestant Concessions. 93 2. To his Catholic Assertions. First. 96 Second. 99
Third. ib. Fourth. 100 Fifth. 102 Sixth. 103 Seventh. 104 Eighth. ib.
3. To the Grounds he offers of their Belief. 105
The Lutherans Practice no Apology for theirs. 106 Ground First. Second. Third.
Fourth. Fifth.

Answered. 108 109 113 114 115

Some Arguments proposed, upon their own Principles, against this Adoration.
117 Conclusion. 125

ERRATA.
PAGE xvii. l. 10. fourth r. sixth. p. xviii. l. 10. in r. on. p. xxii. l. 33.
r. they are. p. xxiv. l. 5. r. That thou. p. 13. marg. Hammond. l. 6. p. 129.
p. 64. marg. Casaubon. ib. l. 19. Body is of Christ. p. 76. l. 24. dele. which.
p. 80. l. 15. then that. p. 91. l. 27. r. this Holy. p. 98. l. 16. for then r.
the. p. 112. l. 18. Catholica. l. 20. asks.

A few lesser Faults there are, which the Reader may please to correct.

A DISCOURSE OF THE Holy Eucharist, With particular Reference To the two GREAT
POINTS OF THE REAL PRESENCE, AND The Adoration of the HOST.
INTRODUCTION.
Of the Nature of this HOLY SACRAMENT in the General.

TO understand the true design of our Blessed Savior, in the Institution of
this Holy Sacrament, we cannot, I suppose, take any better course than to
consider first of all, what Account the Sacred Writers have left us of the Time
and Manner of the doing of it.

Now for this St. Paul tells us, 1 Cor. 11. 23. That the Lord Jesus the same
night in which he was betrayed (having first eaten the Passover according to
the Law, Exodus 12. Matt. xxvi. 20.) took Bread, and when he had given thanks he
brake it, Matt. xxvi.
and gave it to the Disciples, and said, Take, Eat, This is my Body which is
broken for you, This do in Remembrance of Me. After the same manner also he
took the Cup when he had supped, saying, This Cup is the New Testament in my
Blood: This do ye, as often as ye Drink it in Remembrance of me.

Such is the Account which St. Paul gives us of the Original of this Holy
Sacrament: Nor do the Evangelists dissent from it; only that St. Matthew with
reference to the Cup, adds, Drink ye ALL of it, Matt. xxvi. 27. to which St.
Mark subjoins a particular Observation, and which ought not here to be passed
by, That they ALL drank of it, Mark xiv. 23.

It is not to be doubted, but that the design of our Blessed Savior in
instituting this Holy Sacrament, was to Abolish the Jewish Passover, and to
establish the Memory of another, and a much greater Deliverance, than that of
the firstborn, now to be wrought for the whole World in his Death. The Bread
which he brake, and the Wine which he poured out, being such clear Types of his
Body to be broken, his Blood to be shed for the Redemption of Mankind, that it
is impossible for us to doubt of the Application.

And as God Almighty under the Law, designed that other Memorial of the Paschal
Lamb, now changed into a so much better and more excellent Remembrance, to
continue as long as the Law its self stood in force: So this Blessed Eucharist,
established by Christ in the room of it must no doubt have been intended by
Him, to be continued in his Church, as long as the Covenant sealed with that
Blood which it exhibits, stands: And therefore, that since that shall never be
abolished; it is evident that this also will remain our Duty, and be our
perpetual Obligation to the end of the World.

This is the import of our Saviors Addition, Do this in Remembrance of Me; and
is by St. Paul more fully expressed in those Words, which he immediately
subjoyns to the History of the Institution before recited, 1 Cor. xi. 26. For
as often as ye eat this Bread, and drink this Cup, ye do show, i. e. in the
Jewish Phrase, set forth, Commemorate the Lords Death till his coming.

And that this Holy Sacrament now established in the place of the Jewish
Passover, might be both the better understood, and the easier received by them;
it is a thing much to be remarked for the right explaining of it, how exactly
he accommodated all the Notions and Ideas of that Ancient Ceremony to this new
Institution.

I. In that Paschal Supper, the Master of the House took Bread, and presenting
it before them, instead of the usual Benediction of the Bread, He brake it, and
gave it to them, saying, See Dr. Hammond on Mat. xxvi. lit. E. Casaubon in Mat.
xxvi. 26. etc.
This is the Bread of Affliction which our Fathers ate in Egypt. In this Sacred
Feast, our Savior in like manner takes Bread, the very Loaf, which the Jews
were wont to take for the Ceremony before mentioned; breaks it, and gives it to
his Disciples, saying, This is my Body which is broken for you; alluding
thereby, not only to their Ceremony in his Action, but even to their very
manner of Speech in his Expression, to the Passover before them, which in their
Language they constantly called, (...) Vid. Buxtorf. Vindic. contr. Capel. p.
14. Hammond in Mat. xxvi. l. e. etc.
the Body of the Paschal Lamb.

II. In that Ancient Feast, the Master of the House in like manner after Supper
took the Cup, and having given thanks, gave it to them, saying, Allix preparat.
a la Saint Cene. cap. 2. page 16.
This is the Fruit of the Vine, and the Blood of the Grape. In this Holy
Sacrament our Blessed Lord in the very same manner takes the Cup, he Blesses
it, and gives it to his Disciples saying, This Cup is the New Testament in my
Blood; his Action being again the very same with theirs; and for his
Expression, it is that which Moses used, when he ratified the Ancient Covenant
between God and the Jews; [Exod. xxiv. 8. compared with Hebr. ix 20.] saying,
This is the Blood of the Testament.

III. In that Ancient Feast, after all this was finished, they were wont to
sing a Dr. Lightfoots Heb and Talmud. Observat^on Mat. xxvi. ver. 26, 27. T. 2.
p. 258, 260.
Hymn, the Psalms yet extant, from the cxiii. to the cxix. thence called by
them, the Great Hallelujah. In this Holy Supper, our Savior and his Disciples
are expressly recorded to have done the like, and very probably in the selfsame
words. [See Matt. xxvi. 30. Mark xiv. 26.] In a word, Lastly,

IV. That ancient Passover the Jews were commanded to keep in memory of their
Deliverance out of Egypt. The bitter Herbs were a (...)
remembrance of the bitter servitude they underwent there, Exodus i. 14. The red
Wine was a (...)
Memorial of the Blood of the Children of Israel slain by Pharaoh: And for this
they were expressly commanded by Moses, Exodus xiii. 8. to (...)
SHOW, i. e. to annunciate or tell forth to their Children what the Lord had
done for them. And so in this Holy Sacrament, Christ expressly institutes it for
the same end, (...).
Do this, says he, in remembrance of me; which St. Paul thus explains, 1 Cor.
xi. 26. For as often as ye eat this Bread, and drink this Cup, ye do (or
rather, do ye) (...).
SHOW (the very word before used) the Lords death till his coming.

So clear an Allusion does every part of this Sacrament bear to that ancient
Solemnity; and we must be more blind than the Jews themselves, not to see, that
as that other Sacrament of Baptism was instituted by Christ from the Practice
and Custom of the Sea Dr Hammonds Practical Catechism Lib. 6. page 115. Oper.
fol. Land. 1684.
Jewish Doctors, who received their Proselytes by the like washing; so was this
Holy Eucharist established upon the Analogy which we have seen to the Paschal
Supper, whose place it supplies, and whose Ceremonies it so exactly retains,
that it seems only to have heightened the design, and changed the Application to
a more excellent Remembrance.

I know not how far it may be allowed to confirm this Analogy, That it was one
of the most ancient Traditions among the Vid. Fagium. in Annotat. in Exodus xii.
13. where he renders their words thus, Et in eadem die viz. xv. mensis Nisan,
sc. Martii, redimendus. est Israel in disbus Messia. Vid. Vol. 1. Critic. M. p
498.
Jews of old, that the Messiah should come and work out their deliverance, The
very same night in which God had brought them out of Egypt, the night of the
Paschal Solemnity. But certainly considerable it is, that as God under the Law,
the same night in which he delivered them, instituted the Passover to be a
perpetual Memorial of it throughout their Generations; so here our Savior
instituted his Communion not only in the same Night in which he delivered us,
but immediately after having eaten His last Passover; to show us, that what
that Solemnity had hitherto been to the Jews, this Sacrament should from
henceforth be to us; and that we by this Ceremony should commemorate ours, as
they by that other had been commanded to do their Deliverance.

This the Holy Scriptures themselves direct us to, by so often calling our
Blessed Savior in express terms, The Lamb of God, Joh. i. 29. St. Peter
speaking of our Redemption wrought by Him, tells us, that it was not obtained
by corruptible things, such as silver and gold, but by the precious Blood of
Christ, as of a Lamb without blemish, and without spot, 1 Pet. i. 18. And St.
Paul so clearly directs us to this allusion, that no possible doubt can remain
of it; Christ, says he, our Passover is sacrificed for us, therefore let us
keep the Feast, 2 Cor. 1. v. 7.

And now after so many Arguments for this Application, as, being joined
together, I think I might almost call a Demonstration of it; I suppose I may
without scruple lay down this foundation both for the unfolding of the nature
of this Holy Sacrament in the General, and for the Examination of those two
great points I am here to consider in particular, viz. That our Savior in this
Institution addressing himself to Jews, and speaking in the direct form of the
Paschal Phrases; and in a Ceremony which it is thus evident he designed to
introduce in the stead of that Solemnity; The best method we can take for
explaining both the words and intent of this Communion, will be to examine what
such men to whom he spoke must necessarily have conceived to be his meaning,
but especially on an occasion wherein it neither became him to be obscure; and
the Apostles silence, not one of them demanding any explication of his words,
as at other times they were wont to do, clearly showing that he was not
difficult to be understood.

This only Postulate being granted, which I think I have so good reason to
expect; I shall now go on to examine by it, the first great Point proposed to
be considered, viz. Of the Real Presence of Christ in this Holy Sacrament, and
that

1st. As established by the Church of Rome.

2dly. As acknowledged by the Church of England.

PART I.
CHAP. I.
Of TRANSUBSTANTIATION, Or the Real Presence Established by the CHURCH of ROME.

TRansubstantiation is defined by the Council. Trid. Sess. 13. cap 4. and Can. 2.
Council of Trent, to be A WONDERFUL CONVERSION of the whole Substance of the
Bread, in this Holy Sacrament, into the whole substance of the Body of Christ,
and of the whole substance of the Wine into his Blood; the Species or Accidents
only of the Bread and Wine remaining.

For the better understanding of which Wonderful Conversion, because the Church
of Rome, which is not very liberal in any of her Instructions, has taken
Catechismus ad Parochos. Par. II. cap. de Euch. Sacr. n. 39. 41, 45.
particular care that this should not be too much explained to the People, as
well knowing it to be a Doctrine so absurd, that even their credulity could
hardly be able to digest it; it may not be amiss if, from the very words of
their own Catechism, we examine a little farther into it.

Now three things there are, which, they tell us, must be considered in it:

I. Catech. ibid. n. xxv. Sect. Primum.
That the true Body of Christ our Lord, the very same that was Born of the
Virgin, and now sits in Heaven at the right hand of the Father, is contained in
this Sacrament.

Now by the true Body, they mean not only his Human Body, and whatsoever
belongs to it, as Bones, Sinews, etc. to be contained in this Sacrament; Ibid.
n. xxxi. Sect. Totus Christus ut Deus and Homo in Eucharistia continetur.
But the entire Christ, God and Man; so that the Eucharistical Elements are
changed into our Savior, as to both his Substances, and the consequences of
both, his Blood, Soul, and Divinity its self, all which are really present in
this Sacrament; Ibid. n. xxxiii. Sect. Per Concomitantiam in Euch. quae sint.
the Body of Christ by the Consecration, the rest by Concomitance with the
Body.

Again: When it is said, Ibid. n. xxxix. Sect. Conversio quae sit in Euchar. etc.
That the whole Substance of the Bread is changed into his whole Body, and the
whole Substance of the Wine into his whole Blood; this is not to be so
understood, as if the Bread did not contain the whole Substance of his Blood,
as well as of his Body, and so the Wine, the whole Substance of his Body, as
well as of his Blood; Ibid. n. xxxv. Sect. Christus totus in qualibet
particula, and n. xlii. etc.
seeing Christ is entire in each part of the Sacrament, nay in every the least
Crumb or Drop, of either part.

II. The Ibid. n. xxv. Sect. Secundum.
second thing to be considered for the understanding of this Mystery, is, That
not any part of the Substance of the Bread and Wine remains; tho nothing may
seem more contrary to the Senses than this; in which they are certainly in the
right.

III. Ibid. n. xxv. Sect. Tertium and n. xliv. Sect. Accid. sine subjecto
constable. in Euch.
That the Accidents of the Bread and Wine, which either our Eyes see (as the
Color, Form, etc.) or our other Senses perceive (as the Taste, Touch, Smell)
all these are in no Subject, but exist by themselves, after a wonderful manner,
and which cannot be explained.

For the rest, the Conversion its self, Ibid n xxxvii. Sect. Primo ^atione.
It is very difficult to be comprehended, How Christ's Body, which before
Consecration, was not in the Sacrament, should now come to be there, since it is
certain that it changes not its place, but is still all the while in Heaven.
Nor is it made present there by Creation, Ibid. n. xxxix. Sect. Conversio quae
sit in Euch. etc.
nor by any other Change; For it is neither increased nor diminished, but
remains whole in its Substance as before. Ibid. n. xliii. Quonam modo Christus
existat in Euchar.
Christ is not in the Sacrament Locally; for he has no Quantity there, is
neither Great nor Little.) Ibid. n. xli. Sect. De Transubstant. curiosius non
inquirendum.
In a word, Men ought not to inquire too curiously, how this Change can be
made, for it is not to be comprehended, seeing neither in any natural Changes,
nor indeed in the whole Creation, is there any Example of any thing like it.

Such is the Account which themselves give of this Mystery: From all which we
may in short conclude the State of the Question before us, to be this; That we
do not dispute at all about Christ's Real Presence, which after a Spiritual and
Heavenly manner, we acknowledge in this Holy Eucharist, as we shall hereafter
show; nor by consequence of the Truth of Christ's Words which we undoubtedly
believe: But only about this Manner of his Presence, viz. Whether the Bread and
the Wine be changed into the very natural Body and Blood of Christ, so that the
Bread and Wine themselves do no longer remain; But that under the Appearance of
them is contained that same Body of Christ, which was Born of the Blessed
Virgin, with his Soul and Divinity; which same Body of Christ, tho extended in
all its parts in Heaven, is at the same time in the Sacrament without any
Extension, neither Great nor Small, comes thither neither by Generation, nor by
Creation, nor by any local Motion; forasmuch as it continues still at the right
Hand of God in Heaven, at the very same instant that it exists whole and entire
in every consecrated Host, or Chalice; nay more, is whole and entire, not only
in the whole Host, or the whole Chalice; but in every the least Crumb of the
Host, and every the least Drop of the Chalice, here upon Earth.

And here it might well be thought a very needless, indeed an extravagant
undertaking, to prove that those Elements, which so many of our Senses tell us;
continue after their Consecration the very same, as to what concerns their
natural Substance, that they were before, are in reality the very same: That
what all the World Sees, and Feels, and Smells, and Tastes, to be Bread and
Wine, is not changed into the very natural Flesh and Blood of a Body actually
before existent; had it not entered into the Minds of so great a part of the
Christian Church to join in the maintaining of a Paradox, which has nothing to
defend it, but that fond Presumption they have certainly done well to take up,
That they cannot possibly be in the wrong, and without which it would be very
difficult for them to persuade any sober man that they are here in the right.

To show that those words, which they tell us, work all this Miracle, and are
the only reason that engages them to maintain so many absurdities as are
confessedly the unavoidable Consequences of this Doctrine, have no such force
nor interpretation as they pretend; I must desire it may be remembered what I
before remarked, That this Holy Sacrament was established by our Savior in the
room of the Jewish Passover, and upon the very Words and Ceremonies of it. So
that, if in that all things were Typical; the Feast, the Customs, the
Expressions merely allusive to something that had been done before, and of
which this sacred Ceremony was the memorial; we ought in all reason to
conclude, that both our Savior must have designed, and his Apostles understood
this Holy Sacrament to have been the same too.

Now as to the Nature of the Passover; we have already seen that it was
appointed by God as a Remembrance of his delivery of the Jews out of the Land
of Egypt, when he slew all the firstborn of the Egyptians, Exodus xii. The Lamb
which they ate every year in this Feast, was an Eucharistical Sacrifice and
Type of that first Lamb which was slain in the night of their deliverance, and
whose Blood sprinkled upon the Posts of their Doors had preserved their
Forefathers from the destroying Angel, that he should not do them any
mischief. The Bread of Affliction, which they broke, and of which they said,
perhaps in the very Vid. Cameron. Annot. in Matt. xxvi. 26. in illa verba,
(...), inter critic. page 780. I. 24.
same manner that Christ did of the very same Loaf, Take, eat, this is the
Bread of affliction which our Fathers ate in Egypt; they esteemed a Type and
Figure, of that unleavened Bread which their Forefathers so many Ages before
had eaten there; and upon that account called it Allix Sermon. page 503.
The Memorial of their delivery out of Egypt. Hammond Pract. Catechism. lib.
vi. page Ed. fol.
The Cup of Blessing which they blessed, and of which they ALL drank in this
Feast, they did it at once in memory both of the Blood of the Children of
Israel slain by Pharaoh, and of the Blood of the Lamb, which being sprinkled
upon their doors, preserved their own from being shed with that of the
Egyptians.

Now all these Idea's with which the Apostles had so long been acquainted,
could not but presently suggest to them the same design of our Blessed Savior
in the Institution of this Holy Sacrament: That when He, as the Master of the
Feast, took the Loaf, Blessed, and brake it, and gave it to them, and Bid them
in like manner henceforward, Do this in Remembrance of Him; He certainly
designed that by this Ceremony, which hitherto they had used in memory of their
deliverance out of Egypt, they should now continue the memory of their Blessed
Lord, and of that deliverance which he was about to work for them. That as by
calling the Lamb in that Feast The Body of the Passover, they understood that
it was the remembrance of God's mercy in commanding the destroying Angel to
pass over their Houses when he slew their Enemies; the memorial of the Lamb
which was killed for this purpose in Egypt; so Christ calling the Bread his
Body, nay, his Body broken for them, could certainly mean nothing else but that
it was the Type, the Memorial of his Body, which as yet was not, but was now
just ready to be given for their redemption.

This is so natural a reflection, and in one Part at least of this Holy
Sacrament so necessary too, that it is impossible to explain it otherwise. This
Cup, says our Savior, is the New Testament in my Blood; That is, as See Exodus
xxiv. 8. Heb. ix ^0. And this Allusion is applied by S. Peter, 1 Ep. i. 2. Vid.
Hammond. Annot. in loc. lit. a.
Moses had before said of the Old Testament in the very same Phrase, the seal,
the ratification of it. Now if those words be taken literally, then 1st. It Is
the Cup that is Transubstantiated, not the Wine; 2ly, It is changed not into
Christ's Blood (as they pretend) but into the New Testament in his Blood; which
being confessedly absurd and impossible, it must in all reason follow, That the
Apostles understood our Savior alike in both His Expressions; and that by
consequence we ought to interpret those words, This is my Body which is broken
for you, of the Bread's being the Type, or Figure of his Body; as we must that
of the Cup, That it was the New Testament in his Blood, i. e. the sign, or seal
of the New Testament.

So naturally do all these Notions direct us to a figurative interpretation of
his Words; the whole design of this Institution, and all the Parts and
Ceremonies of it being plainly Typical, in Remembrance (as Christ himself has
told us) of Him. But now if we go on more particularly to inquire into the
Expression its self, This is my Body which is broken for you, That will yet
more clearly confirm this interpretation.

It has before been observed, That these words of our Savior in this Holy
Sacrament, were used by him instead of that other Expression of the Master in
the Paschal Feast, when in the very same manner he took the very same Bread
into his Hands, and blessed it, and brake it, and gave it to those who were at
the Table with Him, saying, This is the Bread of affliction which our Fathers
ate in Egypt. And can any thing in the world be more plain, than that as never
any Jew yet imagined, that the Bread which they thus took every year, was by
that saying of the Master of their Feast changed into the very substance of
that Bread which their forefathers had so many Ages before consumed in Egypt,
in the night of their deliverance; but being thus broken and given to them,
became a Type, a Figure, a Memorial of it: So neither could those to whom our
Savior Christ now spoke, and who as being Jews had so long been used to this
Phrase, ever imagine, that the pieces of that Loaf which He brake, and gave
them, saying, This is my Body which is broken for you, Do this in Remembrance
of me, became thereupon the very Body of that Savior from whose Hands they
received it; and who did not sure with one member of his Body, give away his
whole Body from himself to them; but only designed that by this Ceremony they
should remember Him, and his Body broken for them, as by the same they had
hitherto remembered the Bread of affliction which their Fathers ate in Egypt.

I ought not to omit it, because it very much confirms the force of this
Argument, That what I have here said of this Analogy of the Holy Eucharist, to
the Jewish Passover, was not the original remark of any Protestant, or indeed
of any other Christians differing from the Church of Rome in this point: But
was objected to them long before the Reformation, by the Vid. apud Author.
Fortalitii Fidei, Lib 4. Consid. 6. Impos. 10. Those who have not this Book,
may find the Quotation at large in the late Edition of Joan. Parisiensis, in
Praefat. page 73, 74.
Jews, themselves to show that in their literal Interpretation of these Words,
they had manifestly departed from the intention of our Blessed Savior, and
advanced a notion in which 'twas impossible for his Apostles, or any other
acquainted, as they were, with the Paschal forms, ever to have understood him.
And if Epistol. xxiii. ad Bonifac. Vol. 2. page 29. Oper. Ed. Lugd. 1664.
St. Augustine, who I suppose will not be thought a Heretic by either party,
may be allowed to speak for the Christians; he tells us, we are to look upon
the Phrase, This is my Body, Just, says He, as when in ordinary conversation we
are wont to say, This is Christmas, or Good Friday, or Easter Day; Not that
this is the very day on which Christ was born, or suffered, or rose from the
dead, but the return or remembrance of that day on which Christ was born, or
suffered, or rose again.

It is wonderful to consider with what confidence our new Missionaries produce
these words on all occasions; and thereby show us how fond they would be of the
Holy Scripture, and how willingly they would make it their Guide in
Controversy, did it but ever so little favor their Cause. Can any thing, say
they, be more express? This is my Body; Is it possible for words to be spoken
more clear and positive? And indeed were all the Expressions of Holy Scripture
to be taken in their literal meaning, I will not deny, but that those words
might as evidently prove Bread to be Christ's Body, as those other in St. John,
I am the Bread that came down from Heaven, argue a contrary Transubstantiation
of Christ's Body into Bread, John vi. 48, 51. or those more usual instances, I
am the true Vine; I am the door of the sheep; That Rock was Christ; prove a
great many Transubstantiations more, viz. of our Savior into a Vine, a Door,
and a Rock. But now, if for all this plainness and positiveness in these
expressions, they themselves tell us, That it would be ridiculous to conclude
from hence, that Christ was indeed turned into all these, and many other the
like things; they may please to give us leave to say the same of this before
us, it being neither less impossible, nor less unreasonable to suppose Bread to
be changed into Christ's Body, than for Christ's Body to be changed into Bread,
a Vine, a Door, a Rock, or whatever you please of the like kind.

But I have already shown the ground of this mistake to be their want of
considering the Customs and Phrases of the Jewish Passover, and upon which,
both the Holy Eucharist it self, and these Expressions in it were founded: And
I will only add this farther, in confirmation of it; That in the Style of the
Hebrew Language in general, there is nothing more ordinary, than for things to
be said to Expressions of this kind are very frequent in Holy Scripture. The
seed is the Word of God, Luke viii. 11. The field is the World; the good seed
are the children of the kingdom: The tares are the children of the wicked one,
Matt. xiii. 38. The seven Angels are the Angels of the seven Churches; and the
seven Candlesticks are the seven Churches, Rev. i. 20. With infinite more of
the like kind.
Be that which they Signify or Represent. Thus Joseph interpreting Pharaoh's
Dream, Genesis xli. 26. The seven good Kine, says he, are seven years; and again,
The seven good Ears of Corn are seven years, i. e. as is plain, they signify
seven years. And so in like manner in this place; Christ took Bread, and
blessed, and brake it, and gave it to his disciples, saying, Take, Eat, this is
my Body which is Broken for you: That is, this Bread thus Taken, and Blessed,
and Broken, and Given to you; This Bread, and this Action, signifies and
represents my Body which shall be Broken for you.

And indeed, after all this seeming assurance, it is nevertheless plain, That
they themselves are not very well satisfied with their own interpretation. See
the Preface.
We have shown before, how little confidence their greatest Schoolmen had of
this Doctrine; those who have stood the most stiffly for it, could never yet See
their Opinions collected by Monsieur Aubertine de Eucharistia, lib. 1. cap. 9.
11, 12, 13, 14.
agree how to explain these words, so as to prove it: And Cardinal Bellarmine
alone, who reckons up the most part of their several ways, and argues the
weakness too of every one but his own, may be sufficient to assure us, that
they are never likely to be: And might serve to show what just cause their own
great Tract 2. de Verbis quibus Conficitur.
Catharinus had so long since to cry out, upon his Enquiry only into the
meaning of the very first word, This: Consider, says he, Reader, into what
difficulties they are thrown, who go about to write upon this matter, when the
word THIS only has had so many, and such contradictory Expositions, that they
are enough to make a man lose his Wits, but barely to consider them all.

'Twas this forced so many of their See their Testimonies cited in the late
Historical Treatise of Transubstantiation; in the Defense of the Exposition of
the Church of England, p. 63, 64, 65. In the Preface above, etc.
greatest and most learned men before Luther, ingenuously to profess, That
there was not in Scripture any evident proof of this Doctrine; and even
Cardinal Cajetan since to own, That had not the Church determined for the
literal sense of those words, This is my Body, they might have passed in the
Metaphorical.

It is the general acknowledgment of their See Bellarmin's words in the Defense
of the Exposition of the Doctrine of the Church of England, page 56, 57. To
which may be added, Salmer. Tom. 9. Tr. 20. Suarez. Disp. 58. Sect. 7. Vasquez.
Disp. 201. c. 1. etc.
greatest Writers at this day, That if the Pronoun THIS in that Proposition,
This is my Body, be referred to the Bread, which our Savior Christ held in his
Hand, which he blessed, which he brake and gave to his Disciples, and of which
therefore certainly, if of any thing, he said This is my Body, the natural
repugnancy that there is between the two things affirmed of one another, Bread
and Christ's Body, will force them to be taken in a figurative Interpretation:
For as much as it is impossible that Bread should be Christ's Body otherwise
than in a figure. And however, to avoid so dangerous a Consequence, they will
rather apply it to any thing, nay to nothing at all than to the Bread; yet they
would do well to consider, whether they do not thereby fall into as great a
danger on the other side; since if the Relative THIS does not determine those
words to the Bread, it is evident that nothing in that whole Proposition does;
And then how those words shall work so great a change in a Subject to which
they have no manner of Relation, will, I believe, be as difficult to show, as
the change its self is incomprehensible to conceive.

And now after so plain an evidence of the weakness of that foundation which is
by all confessed to be the chief, and has by many of the most Learned of that
Church been thought the only Pillar of this Cause; I might well dispense with
my self from entering on any farther examination of their other pretenses to
establish it. But because they have taken great pains of late to apply the
Council. Trid. Sess. xiii.
sixth Chapter of St. John to the Holy Eucharist, though it might be sufficient
in general to say that no good Argument for a matter of such consequence, can
be built upon a place which so many of the Sea them thus ranged by Albertinus
de Euch. lib 1. cap. 30. page 209. Two Popes; Innocent III. Pius II. Four
Cardinals, Bonaventure, D' Alliaco, Cusan. Cajetane. Two Archbishops, Richardus
Armachannus, and Guererius Granatensis. Five Bishops, Stephanus Eduensis,
Durandus Mimatensis, Gulielmus Alti^iodorensis, Lindanus Ruremondensis, and
Jansenius Gandavensis. Doctors and Professors of Divinity in great abundance;
Alexander Alensis, Richardus de media villa, Jo. Gerson, Jo. de Ragusio,
Gabriel Biel, Thomas Waldensis, Author. tract. contr. perfidiam quorundam
Bohemorum, Jo. Maria Verratus, Tilmannus Segebergensis, Astesanus, Conradus,
Jo. Ferus, Conradus Sasgerus, Jo. Hesselius, Ruardus Tapperus, Palatios, and
Rigaltius. Here are 30. of the Roman Church, who reject this Application of
this Chapter. For the Fathers, see the Learned Paraphrase lately set forth of
this Chapter, in the Preface: All which shows how little strength any Argument
from this Chapter can have to establish Transubstantiation.
most Eminent and Learned of that Communion have judged not to have the least
Relation to this matter; yet I will nevertheless beg leave very briefly to show
the Weakness of this Second Attempt too; and that it is in vain that they rally
these scattered Forces, whilst their main Body continues so entirely defeated.

It is a little surprising in this matter, that they universally tell us, That
neither the beginning nor ending of our Saviors Discourse in that Chapter
belongs to this Matter; that both before and after that passage which they
refer to, it is all Metaphor; only just two or three words for their purpose,
Literal. But that which raises our wonder to the highest pitch, is, that the
very fifty first Verse its self on which they found their Argument, is two
thirds of it Figure, and only otherwise in one Clause to serve their Hypothesis.

I am, says our Savior, the living Bread which came down from Heaven; This is
Figurative: If any man eat of this Bread, he shall live for ever: That is, they
say, by a Spiritual Eating by Faith: And the Bread which I will give, is my
Flesh, which I will give for the life of the World. This only must be
understood of a proper manducation, of a real eating of his Flesh in this Holy
Sacrament.

It must be confessed, that this is an Arbitrary way of explaining indeed, and
becomes the Character of a Church whose dictates are to be received, not
examined; and may therefore pass well enough amongst those, with whom the
supposed Infallibility of their Guides, is thought a sufficient dispensation
for their own private Consideration. But for us, who can see no reason for this
sudden change of our Saviors Discourse; nay think that the connection of that
last Clause with the foregoing, is an evident sign that they all keep the same
Character; and are therefore not a little scandalized at so Capernaitical a
Comment, as indeed Who can bear it? V. 60. They will please to excuse us, if we
take our Saviors Interpretation to be at least of as good an Authority, as
it is much more reasonable than theirs, V. 62. Does this, says he, Offend you?
Does my saying that ye must eat my flesh, and drink my Blood scandalize you?
Mistake not my design, I mean not any carnal eating of me; that indeed might
justly move your Horror; It is the Spirit that quickneth, the flesh profits
nothing; the words that I speak unto you they are spirit, and they are life.

He that desires a fuller account of this Chapter, may please to recur to the
late excellent A Paraphrase with Notes, and a Preface upon the Sixth Chapter of
Saint John, Land. 1686.
Paraphrase set out on purpose to explain it, and which will be abundantly
sufficient to show the reasonableness of that Interpretation which we give of
it. I shall only add, to close all, that one Remark which De Doctrine.
Christian. Lib. 3. Cap. 16.
Saint Augustine has left us concerning it, and so much the rather in that it
is one of the rules which he lays down for the right Interpreting of Holy
Scripture, and illustrates with this particular Example: If, says he, the
saying be Preceptive, either forbidding a wicked action, or commanding to do
that which is good, it is no Figurative saying: But if it seems to command any
Villainy, or Wickedness, or forbid what is profitable and good, it is
Figurative. This saying, Except ye eat the Flesh of the Son of Man, and drink
his Blood, you have no Life in you, seems to command a Villainous or Wicked
Thing: It is therefore a FIGURE, enjoining us to communicate in the Passion of
our Lord, and to lay it up in dear and profitable Remembrance, that his Flesh
was crucified and wounded for our sakes.

And now having thus clearly, I persuade my self, shown the Weakness of those
Grounds, on which this Doctrine of the substantial Change of the Bread and Wine
into the Body and Blood of Christ in this Holy Sacrament is established; I
shall but very little insist on any other Arguments against it: Only in a Word,
to demonstrate, that all manner of Proofs fail them in this great Error, I will
in the close here subjoin two or three short Considerations more, to show this
Doctrine opposite, not only to Holy Scripture, as we have seen, but also,

1. To the best and purest Tradition of the Church. 2. To the Right Reason, and
3. To the Common Senses of all Mankind.
I. That this Doctrine is opposite to the best and purest Tradition of the
Church.
Now to show this, I shall not heap together a multitude of Quotations out of
those Fathers, through whose hands this Tradition must have past: He that
desires such an Account, may find it fully done by one of the Roman Communion,
in a little A Treatise of Transubstantiation, by one of the Church of Rome,
etc. Printed for Rich. Chiswell. 1687.
Treatise just now published in our own Language. I will rather take a method
that seems to me less liable to any just Exception, and that is to lay down
some general Remarks of undoubted Truth, and whose consequence will be as
evident, as their certainty is undeniable. And,

I. For the Expressions of the Holy Fathers; It is not denied, but that in
their popular Discourses they have spared no Such are (...), but never (...).
And Note, there is hardly any of these Words, which they have applied to the
Bread and Wine in the Eucharist, but they have attributed the same to the Water
in Baptism.
words (except that of Transubstantiation, which not one of them ever used) to
set off so great a Mystery: And I believe that were the Sermons and Devotional
Treatises of our own Divines alone, since the Reformation, searched into, one
might find Expressions among them, as much over-strain'd. See Treatise first,
of the Adoration, etc Printed lately at Oxford; Which would make the World
believe that we hold, I know not what imaginary Real Presence on this account;
just as truly, as the Fathers did Transubstantiation.
And doubtless these would be as strong an Argument to prove Transubstantiation
now the Doctrine of the Church of England, as those to argue it to have been
the Opinion of those Primitive Ages.

But now let us consult these men in their more exact composures, when they
come to teach, not to declaim, and we shall find they will then tell us, That
these Elements are for their It is not necessary to transcribe the Particulars
here that have been so often and fully alleged. Most of these Expressions may
be found in the Treatise of Transubstantiation lately published. The rest may
be seen in Blondel, Eclaircissements Familiens de la Controverse de l*
Eucharistie, Cap. iv, vii, viii. Claude Rep. au 2. Traitte de la Perpetuite, i.
Part. Cap. iv, v. Forbesius Instructiones Historico-Theolog. lib. xi. cap. ix,
x, xi, xii, xiii, xv. Larrogue Histoire de l' Eucharistie, live. 2. cap. ii.
substance what they were before, Bread and Wine: That they retain the true
properties of their nature, to nourish and feed the Body: that they are things
inanimate, and void of sense: That with reference to the Holy Sacrament they
are Images, Figures, Signs, Symbols, Memorials, Types and Antitypes of the
Body and Blood of Christ. That in their Use and Benefit, they are indeed the
very Body and Blood of Christ to every faithful Receiver, but in a Spiritual
and Heavenly manner, as we confess: That, in propriety of speech the Wicked
receive not in this Holy Sacrament the Body and Blood of Christ, although they
do outwardly press with their teeth the Holy Elements; but rather eat and drink
the Sacrament of His Body and Blood to their damnation.

II. Secondly, For our Saviors words which are supposed to work this great
Change, it is evident from the Liturgies of the Eastern Church, that the Greek
Fathers did not believe them to be words This Arcudius himself is forced to
confess of some of the latter Greeks, viz. That they take these Words only
(...), Historically. See his Book de Concord. Lib. 3. Cap. 27. And indeed all
the ancient Liturgies of that Church plainly speak it; However both He and Goar
endeavor to shift it off; in which the Prayer of Consecration is after the
words of Institution, and distinct from it. So in Liturg. S. Chrysostom.
Edition. Goar. page 76. n. 130. 132. are pronounced the Words of Institution.
Then page 77. numb. 139. the Deacon bids the Priest, (...). Who thereupon thus
consecrates it; He first signs it three times with the sign of the Cross, and
then thus prays (...). And so the Cup afterward.
of Consecration; but to be the same in this Holy Eucharist that the Haggadah,
or History of the Passover was in that ancient Feast; That is, were read only
as an account of the Occasion and design of the Institution of this Blessed
Sacrament, not to work any Miracles in the Consecration. And for the The same
seems to have been the custom of the African Church, whose Prayers now used,
see in Ludolph. Histor. l. 3. cap. 5. Where is also the Expression mentioned,
n. 56. Hic Panis est Corpus meum, etc.
African Churches, they at this day expound them in this very Sacrament after
such a manner, as themselves confess to be inconsistent with
Transubstantiation, viz. This Bread is the Body of Christ.

III. Let it be considered, Thirdly, That it was a great debate in the
Primitive Church for above a thousand Years, Whether Christ's Glorified Body had
any Blood in it or no? Now how those Men could possibly have questioned whether
Christ's See this whole matter deduced through the first Ages to St. Augustine,
whom Consentius consulted about this very matter, in a particular Treatise
written by Monsieur Allix de Sanguine Christi, 8vo. Paris 1680.
Glorified Body had any Blood at all in it, had they then believed the Cup of
Eucharist to have been truly and really changed, into the Blood of his
Glorified Body, as is now asserted, is what will hardly, I believe, be ever
told us.

IV. We will add to this, Fourthly, their manner of opposing the Heathenism of
the World. With what confidence could they have rallied them as they did, for
worshipping gods which their own Hands had made? That had So Justin Martyr.
Apol. 2. Tertul. Apolog. cap. 12. Arnobius, lib. 1. Minutius Felix. p. 26.
Octav. Julius Firmicus, page 37. Edit. Lugdunens. 4to, 1652. Hieron. lib. 12.
in Esai. St. Augustinus in Psalm. 80. and in Psalm. 113. Lactantius Instit. lib.
2. cap. 4. Chrysostom. Homil. 57. in Genes. etc.
neither Voice, nor Life, nor Motion; Exposed to Age, to Corruption, to Dust,
to Worms, to Fire, and other Accidents. That they adored gods which their
Enemies could spoil them of, Thieves and Robbers take from them; which having
no power to defend themselves, were forced to be kept under Locks and Bolts to
secure them.

For is not the Eucharistical Bread and Wine, in a higher degree than any of
their Idols were, exposed to the same raillery? Had their Wafer, if such then
was their Host, any voice, or life, or motion? Did not their own Hands form its
substance, and their Mouths speak it into a God? Could it defend its self, I do
not say from public Enemies, or private Robbers, but even from the very
Vermin, the creeping things of the Earth?

Or should we suppose the Christians to have been so impudent, as
notwithstanding all this, to expose others for the same follies of which
themselves were more notoriously guilty; yet were there no And yet that none
did, the Learned Rigaltius confesses. Not. ad Tertul. l. 2. ad Uxor. c. 5.
Heathens, that had wit enough to recriminate? The other See Tertul. Apol. c.
21. Et de carne Christi, c. 4. 5. Justin Martyr, Apol. 2. Arnob. l. 2. Orig.
contr. Cells. l. 1.
Articles of our Faith they sufficiently traduced; That we should worship a
Man, and He too a Malefactor, crucified by Pilate; How would they have
triumphed, could they have added, That they worshipped a bit of Bread too;
which Coster himself thought a more ridiculous Idolatry than any the Heathens
were guilty of? Since this Doctrine has been started, we have heard of the
Reproaches of all sorts of Men, Jews, Heathens, Mahometans, against us on this
account. See du Perron de l'Euchar. l. 3. c. 29. p. 973.
Were there no Apostates that could tell them of this secret before? Not any
Julian that had malice enough to publish their Confusion? Certainly had the
Ancients been the Men they are now endeavored to be represented, we had long
ere this seen the whole World filled with the Writings that had proclaimed
their shame, in one of the greatest instances of Impudence and Inconsideration,
to attacque their Enemies for that very Crime, of which themselves were more
notoriously guilty.

V. Nor does their manner of Disputing against the Heretical Christians any
less speak their Opinion in this Point, than their See this fully handled in a
late treatise called, The Doctrine of the Trinity and Transubstantiation
compared etc. 1687.
way of Opposing the Idolatry of the Heathens. It was a great argument amongst
them to expose the frenzy of Eutyches, who imagined some such kind of
Transubstantiation of the humane nature of Christ into the Divine, to produce
the Example of the Eucharist; That as there the Bread and the Wine, says P.
Gelasius, Being perfected by the Holy Spirit, pass into the Divine Substance,
yet so as still to remain in the property of their own Nature, or substance of
Bread and Wine; So here the This Argument is managed by St. Chrysostom Epist.
ad Caesarium Monachum. By Theodoret Dial. 2. page 85 Ed. G. L. Paris, 1642.
Tom. 4. Gelasius in Opere contra Eutychen and Nestorium. He thus states the
Eutychian Heresy, Dicunt unam esse naturam, i. e. Divinam. Against this he
thus disputes, Certe Sacramenta quae sumimus corporis and sanguinis Christ's
divina res est. -- Et tamen non desinit substantia vel Natura Panis and Vini.
-- Satis ergo nobis Evidentur Ostenditur, hoc nobis de ipso Christo Domino
sentiendum quod in ejus imagine profitemur. -- Ut sicut in hanc sc. in divinam
transeant S. Spiritu perficiente substantiam, permanentes tamen in suae
proprietate naturae, sic, etc.
Humane Nature of Christ still remains, though assumed by, and conjoined to the
Divine. Which words, as their Editor has done well to set a Caute upon in the
Margent to signify their danger, so this is clear from them, that Gelasius,
and so the other Writers that have made use of the same Argument, as St.
Chrysostom, Theodoret, etc. must have thought the Bread and the Wine in the
Eucharist no more to have been really changed into the very Body and Blood of
Christ, than they did believe his Humane Nature to have been truly turned into
the Divine; For that otherwise the parallel would have stood them in no stead,
nay would have afforded a defense of that Heresy which they undertook to
oppose by it.

VI. Yet more: Had the Primitive Christians believed this great Change; how
comes it to pass, that we find none of those Marks nor Signs of it, that the
World has since abounded with? See the contrary proved, that the Fathers did
not believe this, by Blondel, de l'Euch. c. 8. Claude Rep. an. 2. Traitte de la
Perpetuite, part. 1. c. 4.
No talk of Accidents existing without Subjects, of the Senses being liable to
be deceived in judging of their proper Objects; in short, no Philosophy
corrupted to maintain this Paradox. No Adorations, Processions; Uows paid to
it, as to Christ himself. It is but a very little time since the Under Greg.
ix. Ann. 1240. vid. Nauclerum ad Ann. cit.
Bell came in play, to give the People notice that they should fall down and
Worship this new God. The Instituted by Urban iv. Ann. 1264.
Feast in honor of it, is an Invention of Yesterday; the Adoring of it in the
Streets no Indeed, in all Probability, a hundred years later.
older: Had not those first Christians respect sufficient for our Blessed
Savior? Or, did they perhaps do all this? Let them show it us if they can; But
till then, we must beg leave to conclude, That since we find not the least
Footsteps of any of these necessary Appendages of this Doctrine among the
Primitive Christians, it is not to be imagined that we should find the Opinion
neither.

VII. But this is not all: We do not only not find any such Proofs as these of
this Doctrine, but we find other Instances directly contrary to this belief. In
some Churches they So in that of Jerusalem. See Hasych. in Levitic. l. 2. c. 8.
burnt what remained of the Consecrated Elements; So in that of Constantinople.
Evag. Hist. l. 4. c. 35.
In others, they gave it to little Children to Eat: Vid. apud. Author. Vit.
Basilii, c. 8. in Vit. Pat. l. 1. This Custom was condemned in a Council at
Carthage, Anno 419. Vid. Codic. Eccl. Afric. Justel. c. 18.
In some, they buried it with their Dead; In all, they permitted the
Communicants to carry home some Remnants of them; they sent it abroad by Sea,
by Land, from one Church and Village to another, without any Provision of Bell
or Taper, Canopy or Incense, or any other mark of Adoration; they sometimes
made Vid. St. August. Oper. imp. contr. Julian. lib. 3. c. 164.
Poultices of the Bread; they mixed the Sea an instance of this in Baronius,
Ann. 648. Sect. 15. The 8th General Council did the same. In Act. Syn.
Wine with their Ink; all which we can never imagine such holy Men would have
presumed to do, had they indeed believed them to be the very Body and Blood of
our Blessed Lord.

VIII. Lastly: Since the prevalence of this Doctrine in the Church, what
Opposition has it met with? What Schisms has it caused? What infinite Debates
have there risen about it? I shall not need to speak of the Troubles of
Berenger in the Eleventh: Of the Waldenses, Albigenses, and others in the
Twelfth Century. Of Wickliff, Hus, etc. who continued the Opposition; and
finally, of the great Reformation in the beginning of the last Age; by all
which this Heresy has been opposed ever since it came to any Knowledge in the
Church. Now is it possible to be believed, that so many Centuries should pass,
so many Heresies should arise, and a Doctrine so full of Contradictions remain
uncontested in the Church for almost a Thousand years? That Berenger should be
one of the first that should begin to Credit his Senses, to Consult his Reason,
or even to Defend his Creed?

These are Improbabilities that will need very convincing Arguments indeed to
remove them. But for the little late French trick of proving this Doctrine
necessary to have This is the Foundation of the Authors of the Treatises, De la
Perpetuite: Answered by Mons. Claude.
been received in the Primitive Church, because it is so in the Present, and if
you will believe them, it is impossible a Change should have been made; I
suppose, we need only turn the terms of the Argument to show the Weakness of
the Proof, viz. That from all these, and many other Observations, that might be
offered of the like kind, it is Evident that this Doctrine at the beginning, was
not believed in the Church, and let them from thence see, if they can conclude
that neither is it believed now.

Thus contrary is this Doctrine to the Best and Purest Tradition of the Church:
Nor is it less, Secondly,

II. To Right Reason too.
It were endless to heap together all the Contradictions that might be offered
to prove this; That there should be Length, and nothing Long; Breadth, and
nothing Broad; Thickness, and nothing Thick; See Mr. Chillingworth against
Knot, c. iv. n. 46.
Whiteness, and nothing White; Roundness, and nothing Round; Weight, and
nothing Heavy; Sweetness, and nothing Sweet; Moisture, and nothing Moist;
Fluidness, and nothing Flowing; many Actions and no Agent; many Passions, and
no Patient; i. e. That there should be a Long, Broad, Thick, White, Round,
Heavy, Sweet, Moist, Flowing, Active, Passive NOTHING. That Bread should be
turned into the Substance of Christ, and yet not any thing of the Bread become
any thing of Christ; neither the Matter, nor the Form, nor the Accidents of the
Bread, be made either the Matter, or the Form, or the Accidents of Christ; that
Bread should be turned into Nothing, and at the same Time with the same Action
turned into Christ, and yet Christ should not be Nothing; that the same Thing
at the same Time should have its just Dimensions, and just Distance of its
Parts one from another, and at the same time not have it, but all its Parts
together in one and the self-same Point; That the same Thing at the same time
should be wholly Above its self, and wholly Below its self, Within its self,
and Without its self, on the Right Hand, and on the Left Hand, and Round-about
its self: That the same thing at the same time should move to and from its
self, and yet lie still; or that it should be carried from one place to another
through the middle space, and yet not move. That there should be no Certainty
in our Senses, and yet that we should know something Certainly, and yet know
nothing but by our Senses; That that which Is and Was long ago, should now
begin to be; That that is now to be made of Nothing, which is not Nothing, but
Something; That the same thing should be Before and After its self. These and
many other of the like nature are the unavoidable, and most of them the avowed
Consequences of Transubstantiation, and I need not say all of them
Contradictions to Right Reason.

But I shall insist rather upon such Instances as the Primitive Fathers have
judged to be absurd and impossible; and which will at once show both the
Falseness and Novelty of this monstrous Doctrine; and such are these; See
Examples of every one of these collected by Blondel, Eclaircissements familiers
de la controverse de l'Eucharistie, cap. 8. p. 253.
That a thing already existing should be produced anew: That a finite thing
should be in many places at the same time; That a Body should be in a place,
and yet take up no room in it; That a Body should penetrate the dimensions of
another Body; That a Body should exist after the manner of a Spirit; That a
real body should be invisible and impassible: That the same thing should be its
self, and the figure of its self: That the same thing should be contained in,
and participate of its self; Monsieur Claude Rep. au. 2. Traitte de la
Perpetuite, part. 1. c. 4. n. 11. p. 73. Ed. 4to. Paris 1668.
That an Accident should exist by its self without a Subject, after the manner
of a Substance. All these things the primitive Fathers have declared to be in
their Opinions gross Absurdities and Contradictions, without making any
exception of the Divine Power for the sake of the Eucharist, as some do now.

And indeed it were well if the impossibilities stopped here: but alas! the
Repugnancies extend to the very Creed it self, and destroy the chiefest
Articles of our Faith, the Fundamentals of Christianity. How can that man
profess that he believes our Savior Christ to have been born xvi. Ages since,
of the Virgin Mary, whose very Body he sees the Priest about to make now before
his Eyes? That he believes him to have Ascended into Heaven, and behold he is
yet with us upon Earth? There to Sit at the right hand of God the Father
Almighty, till in the end of the World He shall come again with Glory to judge
both the Quick and the Dead? And behold he is here carried through the Streets;
locked up in a Box; Adored first, and then Eaten by his own Creatures; carried
up and down in several manners, and to several places, and sometimes Lost out
of a Priests Pocket.

These are no far-fetched Considerations; they are the obvious Consequences of
this Belief; and if these things are impossible, as doubtless, if there be any
such thing as Reason in the World, they are; I suppose it may be very much the
concern of every one that professes this Faith, to reflect a little upon them,
and think what account must one day be given of their persisting obstinately in
a point so evidently erroneous, that the least degree of an impartial judgment,
would presently have shown them the falseness of it.

But God has not left himself without farther witness in this matter; but has
given us, Thirdly,

III. The Conviction of our Senses against it.
An Argument this, which since it cannot be Answered, they seem resolved to run
it down; as the Stoic in Lucian, who began to call names, when he had nothing
else to say for himself.

But if the Senses are such ill Informers, that they may not be trusted in
matters of this moment, would these Disputers please to tell us, What Authority
they have for the truth of the Christian Religion? Was not Christianity first
founded upon the Miracles of our Blessed Savior and his Apostles? Or were not
the Senses judges of those Miracles? Are not the Incarnation, Death,
Resurrection and Ascension of our Lord, the most Fundamental Articles of our
Faith? Have we any other Argument to warrant our belief of these, but what
comes to us by the ministry of our Senses? John xx. 27, 29.
Did not Christ himself appeal to them for the proof of his own Rising?

The Romanist himself believes Transubstantiation because he reads in the
Scripture, or rather (to speak more agreeably to the method of their Church)
because he has been told there are such Words there, as, Hoc est Corpas Meum:
Now not to enquire how far those words will serve to warrant this Doctrine, is
it not evident that he cannot be sure there are any such words there, if he may
not trust his Senses: And if he may, is it not as plain, That he must seek for
some other meaning than what they give of them?

Let us suppose the change they speak of to be Supernatural; Be it as much as
Miracle as they desire: The very Character of a Miracle is to be known by the
Senses. Nor God, nor Christ, nor any Prophet or Apostle, ever pretended to any
other. And I shall leave it to any one to judge what progress Christianity
would have made in the World, if it had had no other Miracles but such as
Transubstanation to confirm it: i. e. Great Wonders confidently asserted, but
such as every ones sense and reason would tell him were both falsely asserted,
and impossible to be performed.

But now whilst we thus oppose the Errors of some by asserting the continuance
of the Natural Substance of the Elements of Bread and Wine in this Holy
Eucharist; let not any one think that we would therefore set up the mistakes of
others; as if this Holy Sacrament were nothing more than a mere Rite and
Ceremony, a bare Commemoration only of Christ's Death and Passion.

Our Church indeed teaches us to believe, That the Bread and Wine continue
still in their True and Natural Substance; but it teaches us also that it is the
Body and Blood of See the Church Catechism, and Article Twenty eighth. The
Communion-Office, etc.
Christ, which every faithful Soul receives in that Holy Supper: Spiritually
indeed, and after a Heavenly manner, but yet most truly and really too.

The Primitive Fathers, of whom we have before spoken, sufficiently assure us,
that they were strangers to that Corporeal change that is now pretended; but
for this Divine and Mystical, they have openly enough declared for it.

Nor are we therefore afraid to confess a change, and that a very great one too
made in this Holy Sacrament. The Bread and the Wine which we here Consecrate,
ought not to be given or received by any one in this Mystery, as common
ordinary food. Those Holy Elements which the Prayers of the Church have
sanctified, and the Divine Words of our Blessed Savior applied to them, though
not Transubstantiated, yet certainly separated to a Holy use and signification,
ought to be regarded with a very just Honor by us: And whilst we Worship Him
whose Death we herein Commemorate, and of whose Grace we expect to be made
partakers by it, we ought certainly to pay no little regard to the Types and
Figures, by which he has chosen to represent the one, and convey to us the
other.

Thus therefore we think we shall best divide our Piety, if we Adore our
Redeemer in Heaven, yet omit nothing that may testify our just esteem of his
Holy Sacrament on Earth: Nor suffer the most Zealous Votary for this new
Opinion, to exceed us in our Care and Reverence of Approaching to his Holy
Table.

We acknowledge him to be no less Really Present, tho after another manner than
they; nor do we less expect to Communicate of his Body and Blood with our
Souls, than they who think they take Him carnally into their Mouths.

Let our Office of Communion be examined; let the Reverence and Devotion, with
which we Celebrate this Sacred Feast, be considered; all these will show how
far the Church of England is from a light esteem of this great Mystery; indeed,
that it is impossible for any to set a higher Value and Reverence upon it.

I shall close this with the Declaration of One, who after many Years spent in
great Reputation in their Communion, was so happy as to finish his Days in our
Church; upon his first receiving the Blessed Communion among us: Andr. Sallii
Votum pro pace, c. 23. p. 90. Ed. Oxon. 1678.
Tantam magnorum Praesulum demissionem, tam eximiam Principum and Populi
Reverentiam, in Sacra Eucharistia administranda and recipienda, nusquam ego
vidi apud Romanenses, qui tamen se unos Sacramenti istius cultores jactant.
That He never saw in the Church of Rome, so great a Reverence both in
Administering and Receiving this Holy Eucharist, as he found among us; insomuch,
that he supposed it would hardly be believed among them, what from his own
Experience, he recounted concerning it.

Porro haec quae narravi and trita nimis ac vulgo nota Videbuntur fratribus
nostris Reformatae Ecclesiae: Nova omnino and forte incredibilia Apparebunt
Romanae Congregationis Vid. ibid. page 90. cap. xxiv. n. 7.
Alumnis; quorum scilicet auribus perpetuo suggeritur per suos Instructores,
nullam apud Protestants existere fidem praesentiae Christi realis in
Eucharistiae Sacramento, nullam Devotionem aut Reverentiam in eo Sumendo.

And this may suffice for the first thing proposed; Of the Doctrine of
Transubstantiation, or of the Real Presence professed and established in the
Church of Rome. Our next Business will be to inquire:

II. What that Real Presence of Christ in this Holy Eucharist is, which is
acknowledged by the Church of England.

CHAP. II.
Of the Real Presence acknowledged by the Church of England.

IT may sufficiently appear from what has been said in the foregoing Chapter,
what just reason we have to reject that kind of Presence which the Church of
Rome supposes of Christ in this Holy Eucharist. But now in Answer to our
Reflections upon them on this Two Discourses concerning the Adoration of our B.
Savior in the Eucharist. Oxford. 1687.
Occasion, a late Author has thought fit to make the World believe, that we our
selves, in our Opinion of the Real Presence, are altogether as absurd as they
are; and that the same Exceptions lie against our own Church, which we urge
against theirs: All which, if it were true, would but little mend the matter,
unless it may be thought sufficient for a man to prove, that he is not mad
himself, because most of his Neighbors are in the same condition. Indeed
herein he must be allowed to have reason on his side, that if the Case be so as
he affirms, we, of all men living, ought not to press them with such
Contradictions, as our own Opinion Tract. I. page 15, 16.
stands equally involved in.

It Is true, he confesses for what concerns the Church of England, as it stood
in the latter Tract. I.. 26.
end of King Edward the oth's time, and as it may perhaps be thought to stand
now, since the Ibid.. 4.
reviving of the Old Rubric against the Adoration of the Sacrament at the end
of our Communion-Office; it seems not to lie open to such a Recrimination: But
taking our Opinion of the Real Presence from the Expressions of our own
Divines, and of those abroad, such as Calvin, etc. whose Doctrine, amongst all
the rest, the Church of England seems rather to have embraced and agreed with,
especially since the beginning of the Reformation by Q. Elizabeth; it plainly
implies, That the very Substance of Christ's Body; That his Natural Body, that
very Body that was born of the Blessed Virgin, and crucified on the Cross, is
present as in Heaven, so here in this Holy Sacrament, either to the worthy
Receiver, or to the Symbols: which not only contradicts the present Declaration
of our Church; viz. That the Natural Body of Christ is not in this blessed
Sacrament; but will also lay a necessity upon us to quit our Reason too that we
give for it; viz. That it is against the Truth of a Natural Body to be in more
places than One at One time; and on which we seem to found our Faith in this
matter.

This is, I think, the design of the former of those Discourses lately Printed
at Oxford, as to what concerns the Real Presence; and in Answer to which, that
I may proceed as distinctly as possible, I shall reduce my Reflections to these
Four Generals:

1. What is the true Notion of the Real Presence, as acknowledged by the Church
of England. 2. That this has been the Notion constantly maintained by the
Generality of our Divines. 3. That the Alteration of the Rubric, as to this
matter, was not upon any such difference in their Opinions, as this Author
seems to surmise. 4. That the Reason alleged by it, concerning the
Impossibility of Christ's Natural Body's existing in several places at the same
time, is no way invalidated by any of his Exceptions against it.
But before I enter on these Reflections, I cannot but observe the
unreasonableness of our Adversaries, in repeating continually the same
Arguments against us without either adding of any the least new force to them,
or even taking notice of those Replies that have more than once been made
against them. The Publisher of this Treatise has not been so indiligent an
Observer of what has past under his Eyes, with reference to these kind of
Controversies, as not to know, that this very Objection, which is the
Foundation of his First Discourse, was made by his Old Friend T. G. above Nine
Years since; and fully answered by his Reverend and Learned Adversary not long
after. And therefore that he certainly ought either quietly to have let alone
this Argument already baffled, and not have put the World in Mind where that
Debate stopped; or, at least, he should have added some new strength to it. But
to send it again into the World in the same forlorn State it was before; to
take no notice either from whose Storehouse he borrowed it, or what had been
returned to it; This is in effect to confess, that they have no more to say for
themselves: And it is a sad Cause indeed that has nothing to keep it up, but
what they know very well we can answer, and that they themselves are unable to
defend.

But to return to the Points proposed to be considered: And,

First, To state the Notion of the Real Presence, as acknowledged by the Church
of England.

I must observe, 1st. That our Church utterly denies our Savior's Body to be
so Really Present in the Blessed Sacrament, as either to leave Heaven, or to
exist in several places at the same time. We confess, with this Author, that it
would be no less a Contradiction for 1. Tract. p. 19.. 27.
Christ's Natural Body, to be in several places at the same time by any other
Mode whatsoever, than by that which the Church of Rome has stated; the
repugnancy being in the thing its self, and not in the manner of it. 2dly, That
we deny that in the Sacred Elements which we receive, there is any other
Substance than that of Bread and Wine, distributed to the Communicants; which
alone they take into their Mouths, and press with their Teeth. In short, All
which the Doctrine of our Church implies by this Phrase, is Answer to T. G's
Dialogues. Land. 1679, page 66.
only a Real Presence of Christ's Invisible Power and Grace, so in and with the
Elements, as by the faithful receiving of them, to convey spiritual and real
Effects to the Souls of Men. As the Bodies assumed by Angels, might be called
their Bodies, while they assumed them; or rather, as the Church is the Body of
Christ, because of his Spirit quickening and enlivening the Souls of Believers,
so the Bread and Wine, after Consecration, are the Real, but the Spiritual and
Mystical Body of Christ.

Thus has that learned Man, to whom T. G. first made this Objection, stated the
Notion of the Real Presence professed by us; and that this is indeed the true
Doctrine of the Church of England in this matter, is evident not only from the
plain words of our xxviii. Article, and of our Church Catechism; but also from
the whole Tenor of that Office which we use in the celebration of it. In our
Exhortation to it, this Blessed Eucharist is expressly called The Communion of
the Body and Blood of our Savior Christ: We are told, that if with a true
Penitent Heart and lively Faith we receive this Holy Sacrament; then we
Spiritually eat the Flesh of Christ, and drink his Blood. When the Priest
delivers the consecrated Bread, he bids the Communicant Take and eat this in
Remembrance that Christ died for thee, and feed on him in thy Heart by Faith
with Thanksgiving. In our Prayer after the Receiving, We thank God, for that he
does vouchsafe to feed us who have duly received these Holy Mysteries, with the
Spiritual food of the most precious Body and Blood of his Son our Savior Jesus
Christ, and does assure us thereby of his favor and goodness toward us, and
that we are very Members, incorporate in the Mystical Body of his Son. All
which, and many other the like Expressions, clearly show, that the Real
Presence which we confess in this Holy Eucharist is no other than in St. Paul's
Phrase, a Real Communion of Christ's Body and Blood; or as our Church expresses
it Article xxviii. That to such as rightly and worthily, and with Faith receive
the same, the Bread which we break is a partaking of the Body of Christ, and
likewise the Cup of Blessing is a partaking of the Blood of Christ.

Hence it was that in the Prayer of Consecration in King Edward vi. time, the
Church of England after the Example of the ancient Liturgies of the Greek
Church used that Form, which our Author observes to have been since left out.
And with thy Holy Spirit vouchsafe Tract. I. 2.
to Bless and Sanctify these thy Gifts and Creatures of Bread and Wine, that
they may be unto us the Body and Blood of thy most dearly beloved Son Jesus
Christ -- i. e. as the Sense plainly implies, may Communicate to our Souls all
the Blessings and Graces which Christ's Body and Blood has purchased for us;
which is in Effect the very same we now pray for in the same Address* Hear us,
O Merciful Father we most humbly beseech thee, and grant that we receiving
these thy Creatures of Bread and Wine, according to thy Son our Savior Jesus
Christ's Holy Institution, in remembrance of his Death and Passion, may be
partakers of his most Blessed Body and Blood. Between which two Petitions there
is so near an Affinity, that had not our Author been very desirous to find out
Mysteries where there are indeed none; He would hardly have suffered his
Puritan Friend to have lead him to make so heavy a complaint, Page 3.
about so small a Variation.

I will not deny but that some Men may possibly have advanced their private
Notions beyond what is here said: But this is I am sure all that our Church
warrants, or that we are therefore concerned to defend. And if there be indeed
any, who as our Author here expresses it, do believe Christ's natural Body to be
as in Heaven, so in the Holy Sacrament; they may please to consider how this
can be reconciled with the Rubric of our Church, That the natural Body and
Blood of our Savior Christ are in Heaven and not here, it being against the
truth of Christ's natural Body, to be at one time in more places than one.

In the mean time I pass on to the next thing I proposs'd,

Secondly, To show in Opposition to the Pretenses of our Adversary, that this
has been the Notion of the Real Presence constantly maintained by our most
Learned and Orthodox Divines.

And here, because our Author has thought ^it to appeal not only to our own,
but to the foreign Divines for this new Faith which he is pleased to impose
upon us, viz. That the very Substance of Christ's Tract. I.. 7.
Body, that his Natural Body, that that very Body that was born of the Blessed
Virgin, and crucified on the Cross, etc. is present, as in Heaven, so Here in
this Holy Sacrament; i. e. in both at the same time: I must be content to
follow his Steps, and enquire into the Doctrine first of Mr. Calvin and his
followers; next of our own Countrymen in this Particular.

And first for Mr. Calvin, and his followers, I cannot but observe what
different charges are brought against them in this matter. On the one hand we
are told by Becanus the Jesuit, that, Calvinistae negant corpus and sanguinem
Christi, vere, realiter, and substantialiter praesentem esse in Eucharistia.
Becani manuale. l. 3. c. 9. p. 501. Ed. Luxembergi. 1625.
The Calvinists, says he, deny the Body and Blood of Christ to be truly really,
and substantially present in the Eucharist: On the other, Here is one will
prove, that they believe his very Body, his natural Body, now in Heaven, to be
nevertheless at the same time in the Holy Sacrament. It were to be wished that
they would let us once know what it is they will stick to, and not by such
contradictory charges show to all the World, that both their Accusations may be
false, but that it is utterly impossible they should both be true.

And indeed in this very instance they are both CALVIN.
false; The Calvinists hold neither the one or other of these Extremes. In the
Edition of his Institutions printed at Basil 1536. Mr. Calvin thus delivers his
Opinion, of the Body and Blood of Christ in the Holy Dicimus vere and
Efficaciter exhiberi non autem naturaliter. Quo scil. significamus non
substantiam ipsam corporis, seu verum and natural Christi corpus illic dari,
sed omnia quae in suo corpore nobis Beneficia Christus praestitit. EA est
corporis PRAESENTIA quam Sacramenti ratio postulat; Edit. Basil. 8o. 1536.
Eucharist. We say, that they are truly and Efficaciously exhibited to us, but
not naturally: By which we signify, not that the very Substance of his Body,
or that the true and natural Body of Christ are given there, but all the
Benefits which Christ did for us in his Body. THIS is that PRESENCE of his
Body, which the nature of the Sacrament requires.

But because I do not find these words in the Editions of that Book since,
least any one should thereupon conclude that he had also changed his Opinion;
we may observe the very same delivered by him in Dilucida explicatio etc.
Contra Westphalum. Edit. Anno 1561.
another of his Books, and which will be so much the more considerable, in that
it was written purposely for the clearing of this matter. Now in this he
affirms, Christi corpus non modo semel fuisse datum in salutem nostram, dum ad
expianda peccata immolatum in cruce fuit, sed quotidie nobis in alimentum
porrigi, ut dum ipse habitat in nobis, bonorum eriam ejus omnium s^cietate
fruamur. -- Apud Hospin. Hist. Sacram. Part 2da Ann. 1561. p. 477.
That Christ's Body was not only once given for our Salvation, but is also every
day reached out to us for our Sustenance, that so, whilst he dwells in us, we
may also enjoy the Fellowship of all his goods. -- Then he explains How Christ
is our food, viz. Rursum alimentum a nobis vocatur hoc sensu, quia
incomprehensibili spiritus Virtute nobis vitam suam inspirat ut sit nobis
communis, non secus atque a radice arboris vitalis succus in ramos se
diffundit, vel a capite in singula membra manat Vigor. Ibid. -- Imprimis
obstaculum de corporis immensitate submovere necesse est. Nisi enim constet
finitum esse caeloque comprehendi nulla erit dissidii conciliandi Ratio -- p.
478. Christus sicuti in gloriam coelestem semel est receptus, ita l^corum
intervallo quoad carnem, est a nobis dissitus; Divina autem Essentia and
virtute, gratia etiam spirituali caelum and terram implere. -- Idem ergo Corpus
quod semel filius Dei Patri in sacrificium obtulit, quotidie nobis in Coena
offert, ut sit in Spirituale Alimentum. Tantum de modo tenendum est, non opus
esse descendere carnis Essentiam e coelo ut ea pascamur, sed ad penetranda
impedimenta and superandam locorum distantiam sufficere Spiritus virtutem. --
Commenta procul facessant; qualia sunt de Corporis ubiquitate, vel de occulta
sub panis symbolo inclusione, vel de substantiali ejus in terris prasentia.
Hospin. p. 478. Haec omnia refert ex illo Calvini loco.
because by the incomprehensible Virtue of the Holy Spirit, he inspires his
Life into us, that he may communicate it to us, no less than the vital juice is
diffused from the Root into all the Branches of the Tree, or than Vigor flows
from the Head into all the members. -- He declares Christ's Body to be finite,
and enclosed in Heaven; and therefore as to his Flesh to be distant in place
from us. -- That it is not necessary that the Essence of his Flesh should
descend from Heaven, that we may be fed with it, but that to remove all such
impediments, and overcome the distance of places, the Virtue of the Spirit is
sufficient -- In short, that all inventions contrary to this are to be
rejected, such as, The Ubiquity of Christ's Body, the enclosing of it under the
Symbol of Bread, and his Substantial presence upon Earth. BEZA.


By all which it sufficiently appears, that Mr. Calvin was no friend to our
Authors Fancy; but evidently explained the Real Presence after that Spiritual
manner we have before laid down.

For Beza, and the rest as he calls them, of the same Sect; we cannot better
learn their Opinion than from the Acts of the Colloquy of Poissy, and which
chiefly lay upon this Point. At this conference the most eminent Men of the
Calvinian Party were assembled; the first of them which spoke, was Beza: In
that part of his Discourse which referred to the Holy Eucharist, his words were
much like those which our Author has quoted out of him. And by his own
Exposition of them, we shall be better able to judge of his meaning, than by his
Adversaries Gloss. See Hospin. Hist. Sacram. Part. 2. ad Ann. 1561. p. 515.
Edit. Genev. 1681. Comment. de statu Relig. and reipub. in Gallia ad Ann. 1561.
p. 112. Et postea page 138. ita se exprimit in eundem plane sensum affirmamus
J. c. adesse in usu Coenae, in qua nobis offert, dat and vere exhibet Corpus
suum and sanguinem suum operatione Spiritus Sti. nos vero recipimus, edimus and
bibimus spiritualiter and per fidem illud ipsum corpus quod pro nobis mortuum
est, eumque illum sanguinem pro nobis effusum. Edit. Ann. 1577. 8o. Beze. Hist.
Eccles. page 595* 596. For all this see Beza's own History ad Ann. 1561. p.
524. And when in the Conference D'Espense pressed them with departing from
Calvin; Beza declared, that they were not at all contrary to him: That for the
word Substance, which he sometimes used in expressing Christ's Real Presence, it
was only to signify, that they did not feign any imaginary Body of Christ, or
fantastic reception or communion of His Body in this Holy Supper; But that for
the rest, they all believed, that no one could participate of him otherwise
than Spiritually and by Faith, not in taking Him into the Mouth, or eating him
with the Teeth. See page 599. Ibid.
We do not say that in the Eucharist there is only a commemoration of the death
of our Lord Jesus Christ; nor do we say, that in it we are made partakers only
of the fruits of his death and passion; but we join the ground with the fruits,
affirming with St. Paul, that the Bread which by Gods appointment we break, is
the participation of the Body of Christ crucified for us; the Cup which we
drink, the Communion of the true Blood that was shed for us; and that in the
very same Substance which he received in the Womb of the Virgin, and which he
carried up with him into the Heavens -- Then descending to the Popish Doctrine
of Transubstantiation: It overthrows, says he, the truth of Christ's Humane
nature and of his Ascension -- So little did he suppose, that Christ's natural
Body could be at the same time both in Heaven and in the Sacrament. Hereupon he
explains himself yet farther; -- But now if any one should ask of us, whether
we make Christ absent from the Holy Supper? We answer, By no means. But yet if
we respect the distance of place (as when we speak of his Corporal presence,
and of his Humanity, we must) we affirm, says he, that Christ's Body is as far
distant from the Bread and Wine, as Heaven is from Earth -- If any one shall
from thence conclude, that we make Christ absent from the Holy Supper, he will
conclude amiss: For this Honor we allow to God, that though the Body of Jesus
Christ be now in Heaven and not elsewhere, and we on Earth and not elsewhere,
yet are we made partakers of his Body and Blood after a spiritual manner, and
by the means of Faith.

Thus does Beza in like manner expound their Doctrine of the Real Presence, by
a real communion of Christ's Body and Blood, and flatly condemns our Authors
invention, of his natural Body's being either in PETER MARTYR.
the Symbols, or any where else upon Earth. The same is the account which
Respondeo pro mea part, Corpus Christi non esse Vere et substantialiter alibi
quam in Caelo. Non tamen inficior Christi corpus verum, and sanguinem illius
Verum quae pro salute humana tradita sunt in Cruce, fide spiritualiter percipi
in Sacra Coena. Histoire Eccles. de Beze. live. 4. p. 606. Anno 1561.
Peter Martyr in the same conference gave of it; and of whom Vid. Hist. de Beze
ib. p. 599. Comment. de stat. rel. p. 140. ad Ann 1561. Hospin. page 518.
Espensius, one of the Popish delegates, confessed That no Divine of that time
had spoken so clearly and distinctly concerning this Sacrament, as he did. And
however See Hospin. of this whole matter page 520.
Genebrard fasely pretends that the other Protestants dissented from him, yet
it is certain they were so far from it, that they all Subscribed the very same
Paper out of which he read his Declaration. But I will close this with the same
words with which these Protestants did their final resolution in the Colloquy
as to this matter; We Affirmamus nullam locorum distantam impedire posse
communicationem quam ha^emus cum Christi corpore and sanguine, quoniam Coena
Domini est res coelestis; et quamvis in terra recipiamus ore panem and vinum,
vera scil Corporis and sanguinis signa; tamen fide and spiritus sancti
operatione mentes nostrae (quarum hic est praecipue cibus) in caelum elatae
perfruuntur corpore and sanguine praesente. Et he respectu dicimus, Corpus
vere se pani conjungere, and sanguinem vino; non aliter tamen quam sacramentali
ratione, neque locali neque naturali modo, sed quoniam Efficaciter significant
Deum illa dare fideliter communicantibus, illosque fide vere and certo
p^r^ipere. Hospin. l c. Comm. ibid. p. 142. Ubi subjicitur Haec est perspicua
de Corporis and sanguinis J. C. Praesentia in Sacramento Caenae Ecclesiarum
Reformatarum sententia -- Beze Hist. Eccles. page 615. where he adds, that they
reject not only Tra^substantiatim and Consubstantiation, but also toute maniere
de presence par laquelle ^e corpse de Christ ^'^st colloque maintenant
reellement ailleurs qu'au ci^l. And then adds, why they thus use the word
substance in this matter, and what they mean by it. See page 615. ad Ann 1561.
affirm that no distance of place can hinder the Communion which we have with
Christ's Body and Blood; because the Supper of the Lord is a Heavenly thing, and
though upon Earth we receive with our mouths Bread and Wine, viz. the true
Symbols of his Body and Blood; yet by Faith, and through the Operation of the
Holy Spirit, our Souls (of which this is the chief food) being carried up into
Heaven, enjoy the Body and Blood present. And in this respect we say that the
Body does truly join its self to the Bread, and the Blood to the Wine, but yet
no otherwise than Sacramentally, neither after a local or natural manner. But
because they do effectually signify, that God gives them to the Faithful
Communicants, and that they do by Faith truly and certainly receive them.

And thus far I have considered the foreign Divines produced by our Author,
and in which we find the very same Explication which our Church gives of the
Real presence. For our own Authors, I shall insist the rather upon them, both
to take off any impression which the scraps here put together by those whose
business it is to represent their own Sense, not their Authors, might otherwise
be apt to make upon some Men; and also to show the exact concord there has been
ever since the Reformation amongst us as to this matter.

Now for what concerns our Divines in King Edward viths. time, we have our
Authors own confession, that toward the latter end of the Reign of that
excellent Prince, they seem to have denied any such Real and Essential presence
as he would fasten upon those of Queen Elizabeth's after. For as the first days
of this Prince, says he, seem to have been more 1 Treatise. xxvi. page 19.
addicted to Lutheranism, so the latter days to Zwinglianism; as appears in
several expressions of Bishop Ridley and Peter Martyr. And indeed the Articles
agreed upon in the Convocation at London 1562. plainly show it; in the xxixth.
of which we find this express Clause; Since the very being of humane Nature
does require that the Body of one and the same man cannot be at one and the
same time in many places, but of necessity must be in some certain and
determinate place; Therefore the Body of Christ cannot be present in many
different places at the same time. And since, as the Holy Scriptures testify,
Christ has been taken up into Heaven, and there is to abide till the end of
the World, it becomes not any of the faithful to believe or profess, that
there is a Real or Corporal Presence, as they phrase it, of the Body and Blood
of Christ in the Holy Eucharist. I shall therefore produce only a Witness or
two of this King's Reign; and so pass on to those that follow.

And 1st, A. B. Cranmer in his Answer to Gardener, A. B. CRANMER.
Bishop of Winchester, objecting to him, That he denied the Presence of Christ
in this Holy Eucharist, replies, That it was a thing he never said nor thought.
-- My book in diverse places says clean contrary, Answer to Gardener, Bishop of
Winchester. Fol. London, 1551.
That Christ is with us spiritually present; is eaten and drunken of us, and
dwells within us, although Corporally he be departed out of this World, and
gone into Heaven, page 5. -- As he gives Bread Page 5.
to be eaten, with our Mouths, so gives he his very Body to be eaten with our
Faith. And therefore I say, that Christ gives himself truly to be eaten,
chawed and digested; but all is spiritually with Faith, not with Mouth, page 9.
-- As the washing outwardly Page 9.
in Water is not a vain Token, but teaches such a washing as God works
inwardly in them that duly receive the same; so likewise is not the Bread a
vain Token, but shows and preaches to the godly Receiver, what God works
in him by his Almighty Power secretly and invisibly. And therefore as the Bread
is outwardly eaten indeed in the Lord's Supper, so is the very Body of Christ
inwardly by Faith eaten indeed of all them that come thereto in such sort as
they ought to do; which eating nourishes them unto Everlasting Life. And in
his Treatise of the Holy Sacrament, Lib. 3. where Assertio verae and Catholicae
Doctrinae de Sacramento Corporis and Sanguinis, J. Christi Servatoris nostri.
Lich^, 8 vo. 1601.
he sets himself particularly to state this very Question, How Christ is
present in this Holy Sacrament, He declares, Cap. 2. That whereas the Papists
suppose Christ to be under the Species of Bread and Wine; we believe him to be
in those who worthily receive these Holy Elements. They think him to be
received by the Mouth, and to enter with the Bread and Wine; We assert, that he
is received only by the Soul, and enters there by Faith. That Christ is present
only sacramentally and spiritually in this sacred Mystery, p. 116. That since
his Ascension into Heaven, he is there, and not on Earth, p. 118. and that he
cannot be in both together, 128. -- In short, he gives us this Rule for
interpreting the Expressions of the Fathers, where it is said, That we eat the
flesh, and drink the blood of Christ; That we receive in the Holy Sacrament,
the very body that hung on the Cross, etc. cap. 14. p. 180. These, says he, and
other Expressions of the like kind (which speak Christ to be upon Earth, and to
be received of Christians by eating or drinking), are either to be understood
of his Divine Nature (which is every where); or else must be taken figuratively
or spiritually. For he is figuratively only in the Bread and Wine; and
spiritually in those that receive this Bread and Wine worthily. But truly, and
as to his Body and Flesh, he is in Heaven only; from whence he shall come to
judge the quick and the dead.

Thus did this Learned and Holy Martyr understand Bp. RIDLEY
our Doctrine of the Real Presence; and the same was the Idea which his
Companion both in Doctrine and Suffering, Bishop Ridley, has left us of it. In
his Discourse of the Lord's Supper, page 33. he tells us, That Ridlei de Caena
Dominica Assertio; Geneve apud Jo. Crispinum. 1556.
the Substance of the Bread continues as the Matter of this Sacrament; but so,
that by reason of its change, as to Use, Office and Dignity, it is turned
Sacramentally into the Body of Christ; as in Baptism, the Water is turned into
the Laver of Regeneration -- That the Humane Nature of Christ is in Heaven, and
cannot in any manner lie hid under the form of Bread, p. 34. -- Then he
enquires, whether therefore we take away the Presence of Christ's Body from the
Sacrament? p. 35. And utterly denies, that this is either said or thought by
him. The Substance of the true Body and Blood of Christ, says he, is always in
Heaven, nor shall it depart thence before the end of the World. Now this
Substance of his Body and Blood being conjoined to his Divine Nature, has not
only Life in it self, but can, and is wont to bestow it upon all those who
partake of it, and believe in his Name. -- Nor is it any hindrance to this,
that Christ still remains in Heaven, and that we are upon Earth. For by Grace,
that is, Life (as S. John interprets it, c. 6) and the Properties of it, as far
as may be profitable to us in this our Pilgrimage here below, he is with us to
the end of the World. As the Sun, who though he never leaves his Orb, yet by
his Life, Heat, and Influence, is present to us: page 36, 37.

Hitherto then there can be no doubt, but that both the Church and the Divines
knew no other Real Presence than what has been before acknowledged to be still
our Doctrine. We must now go on to the times of trial, the days of Q.
Elizabeth, and her Successors, when our Author supposes, that Men of different
Judgments had the Power. Now for proof of 1. Tract.. IV. page 4.
this, besides the Expressions of particular Men, which we shall presently
consider, we have Two General Presumptions offered to us; One, That Dr. Heylin,
and others, have observed, he says, of this Queen, that she was a zealous
propugner of the Real Presence; which may be very true, and yet but little to
the purpose, if she propugned it in the same sense that her Brother King Edward
the 6th, and the Church of England had done before, and not in the new Notion
imposed upon her by this Author, but without any manner of proof to warrant his
suggestion. The other, That upon the Re-view made by her Divines of the
Common Prayer and Articles, they struck out of the One 1. Treatise. page 2.. I.
and again, p. 22.. XXXI.
the Rubric against the Adoration of the Sacrament, and the Passage before
mentioned (being of the same temper as the Declaration in the Liturgy), out of
the xxixth Article; and which has accordingly been omitted ever since.

And here I cannot but again take notice of the disingenuousness of this
Author, in dissembling the true Account that has so largely been given by our
late accurate Compiler of the History of our Reformation of this whole matter,
only for the advancing so pitiful an Insinuation of what I dare appeal to his
own Conscience whether he did not know to be otherwise. I will beg leave to
transcribe the whole Passage; and shall then leave it to the indifferent Reader
to judge whether a man so well acquainted with Books, and so interested in this
matter, could have lived so long in the world without hearing of so eminent a
matter in our Church History as this.

The Author is treating about the difference between the Article established in
King Edward the six's time, Dr. Burnet's Hist. of the Refomation, Vol. 2. Page
405. Ann. 1559. Edit. 2. 1683.
and those in Q. Elizabeth's.

In the Article of the Lord's Supper there is a great deal left out; For
instead of that large Refutation of the Corporal Presence, from the
Impossibility of a Bodies being in more places at once; from whence it follows,
That since Christ's Body is in Heaven, the Faithful ought not to believe or
profess a Real or Corporal Presence of it in the Sacrament. In the new Article
it is said, [That the Body of Christ is given and received after a spiritual
manner; and the means MSS. C. Cor* Christ. Cant.
by which it is received, is Faith.] But in the Original Copy of these
Articles, which I have seen subscribed by the Hands of All that sat in either
House of Convocation, there is a further Addition made. The Articles were
subscribed with that precaution which was requisite in a matter of such
consequence: For before the Subscriptions there is set down the Number of the
Pages, and of the Lines in every Page of the Book to which they set their
Hands.

In that Article of the Eucharist these words are added; Christ when he
ascended into Heaven made his An Explanation of Christ's Presence in the
Sacrament.
Body Immortal, but took not from it the Nature of a Body: For still it
retains, according to the Scriptures, the Verity of a Humane Body; which must
be always in One definite place, and cannot be spread into many, or all places
at Once. Since then Christ being carried up to Heaven, is to remain there to
the end of the World, and is to come from thence, and from no place else (as
says S. Austin) to judge the Quick and the Dead: None of the Faithful ought to
believe or profess the Real, or (as they call it) the Corporal Presence of his
Flesh and Blood in the Eucharist.

But this in the Original is dash't over with minium; yet so that it is still
legible. The Secret of it was this; The Queen and her Council studied (as has
been already shown) to unite all into the Communion of the Church: And it was
alleged, that such an express Definition against a Real Presence, might drive
from the Church many who were still of that Persuasion; and therefore it was
thought to be enough to condemn Transubstantiation, and to say, that Christ was
present after a spiritual manner, and received by Faith. To say more, as it was
judged superflous, so it might occasion division. Upon this these words were by
common consent left out. And in the next Convocation the Articles were
subscribed without them; of which I have also seen the Original.

This shows, that the Doctrine of the Church subscribed by the whole
Convocation, was at that time contrary to the belief of a Real or Corporal
Presence in the Sacrament; only it was not thought necessary or expedient to
publish it. Though from this silence, which flowed not from their Opinion, but
the Wisdom of that time, in leaving a Liberty for different Speculations, as to
the manner of the Presence; SOME have since inferred, that the chief Pastors of
this Church did then disapprove of the definition made in King Edwards time;
and that they were for a Real Presence.

Thus that Learned Historian. And here let our Adversary consider what he
thinks of this Account; and whether after so evident a Confutation from plain
matter of Fact of his Objection before it appeared, we may not reasonably
complain both of his Weakness and In-sincerity; neither to take any notice of
such a plain History of this whole Transaction, or to imagine that so vain a
Surmise of Q. Elizabeth's being a great propugner of the Real Presence, would
be sufficient to obviate so clear and particular an Account of this matter.

But though this might suffice to show the continuance of the same Doctrine of
the Real Presence in this Queen's, that was before professed in her Brother's
Reign; yet it may not be amiss to discover a little further the truth of this
matter, and how falsely this Author has alleged those great Names he has
produced. I will therefore beg leave to continue my Proof, with an Induction of
the most Eminent of our Divines that I have at this time the Opportunity to
consult, to our own days.

And first for Bishop Jewel; though the part he had Bp. JEWEL.
in the Convocation before mentioned, may sufficiently assure us of his
Opinion; yet it may not be improper to repeat the very words of a Person of his
Learning and Eminence in our Church. In his Reply to Harding thus he expresses
the Doctrine of the Church of England, as to the Real Presence: Whereas Mr. Vth
Article of the Real Presence against Harding, page 237. Land. 1611. See also
his Defense of the Apology of the Church of England, page 219, etc.
Harding thus unjustly reports of us, that we maintain a naked Figure, and a
bare Sign or Token only, and nothing else -- He knows well, we feed not the
People of God with bare Signs and Figures, but teach them, that the Sacraments
of Christ be Holy Mysteries; and that in the Ministration thereof Christ is set
before us even as he was crucified upon the Cross. -- We teach the People, not
that a naked Sign or Token, but that Christ's Body and Blood indeed and verily
is given unto us; that we verily eat it; that we verily drink it; that we
verily be relieved and live by it: that we are Bones of his Bones, and Flesh of
his Flesh; that Christ dwells in us, and we in him: -- Yet we say not, either
that the Substance of the Bread and Wine is done away, or that Christ's Body is
let down from Heaven, or made Really or Fleshly present in the Sacrament. We
are taught according to the Doctrine of the Old Fathers, to lift up our Hearts
to Heaven, and there to feed upon the Lamb of God -- Thus spiritually and with
the Mouth of our Faith we eat the Body of Christ, and drink his Blood; even as
verily as his Body was verily broken, and his Blood verily shed upon the Cross
-- Indeed the Bread that we receive with our Bodily Mouths, is an earthly
thing; and therefore a Figure; as the Water in Baptism is likewise also a
Figure. But the Body of Christ that thereby is represented, and there is
offered unto our Faith, is the thing it self, and not Figure. To conclude,
Three things herein we must consider: 1st, That we put a difference between the
Sign and the thing it self that is signified: 2. That we seek Christ above in
Heaven, and imagine not him to be present Bodily upon the Earth: 3. That the
Body of Christ is to be eaten by Faith only, and none otherwise.

I shall not trouble the Reader with any more of our Divines who lived in the
beginning of this Queen's Mr. HOOKER.
Reign, and subscribed the Article before-recited; but pass on directly to him
whom our Author first mentions, the Venerable Mr. Hooker, and whose Judgment
having been so deservedly esteemed by all sorts of men, Tr. I. cap. 2.. 10.
Page 6.
ought not to be lightly accounted of by us.

And here I must observe, that this. Learned Person is drawn in only by a
Consequence, and that no very clear one neither, to favor his Opinion. The
truth is, he has dealt with Mr. Hooker just as himself, or one Difference
between the Protestant and Socinian Methods, in answer to the Protestants Plea
for a Socinian, page 54.
of his Friends has been observed to have done on the like occasion with the
incomparable Chillingworth; has picked up a Passage or two that seemed for his
purpose; but dissembled whole Pages in the same place that were evidently
against him. For thus Mr. Hooker in the Chapter cited by him, interprets the
words of Institution: If we doubt, says he, what those admirable words may
import, let him be our Teacher for the meaning of Christ, to whom Christ was
himself a Schoolmaster. Let our Lord's Apostle be his Interpreter; content we
our selves with his Explication; My Body, the Communion of my Body; My Blood,
the Communion of my Blood. Is there any thing more expedite, clear and easy,
than that as Christ is termed our Life, because through him we obtain Life: So
the parts of this Sacrament are his Body and Blood, because they are Causes
instrumental, upon the receipt whereof the participation of his Body and Blood
ensues? -- The Real Presence of Christ's most blessed Body and Blood is not
therefore to be sought for in the Sacrament, but in the worthy Receiver of the
Sacrament -- And again, p. 310. he thus interprets the same words; This
Hallowed Food through the concurrence of Divine Power, is in verity and truth
unto faithful Receivers instrumentally a Cause of that mystical participation,
whereby as I make my self wholly theirs, so I give them in hand an actual
possession of all such saving Grace as my sacrificed Body can yield, and as
their Souls do presently need. This is to them and in them my Body.

And this may suffice in Vindication of Mr. Hooker. Those who desire a fuller
Account, may find several Pages to the same purpose in the Chapter which I have
quoted. The next our Author mentions, is the Learned Bishop Andrews, in that
much noted passage, as he Bishop ANDREWS. 1 Tract. page 7.. xi. n. 1.
calls it, in the Answer to Bellarmine.

And indeed we need desire no other Passage to judge of his Opinion in this
matter; in which 1st. He utterly excludes all defining any thing as to the
manner of Christ's Presence in the Eucharist. 2. He professes that a Presence we
believe, and that no less a True one than the Papists. 3. He plainly insinuates
that the presence of Christ in the Eucharist, was much the same as in Baptism;
the very allusion which the Holy Habemus Christum praesentem ad Baptismatis
Sacramentum, habemus eum praesentem ad Altaris Cibum and Potum. Augustine.
Stola, quae est Ecclesia Christi, lavatur in ipsius sanguine vivo i. e. in
lava^ro regenerationis. Origin. Statim baptizatus in sanguine agni Vir meruit
appellari. Hieron. Christi sanguine lavaris, quando in ejus mortem Baptizaris.
Leo. P. etc.
Fathers were wont to make, to express his Presence by in this Holy Sacrament;
which since our Adversaries can neither deny, nor yet say is so real, as to be
Essential or Corporeal; they must of necessity allow that there may be a true
Presence (which is all the Bishop affirms*) without such a Substantial one as
this Author here contends for.

But to show that whatever this Bishop understood by the Real presence, it
could not be that Christ's glorified Body is now actually present in this Sacred
Mystery, will appear demonstratively from this, that he declares it is not this
Body which we either Represent or partake of there; insomuch that he doubts not
to say, that could there be a Transubstantiation, such as the Church of Rome
supposes, it would not serve our turn, nor answer the design of this Sacrament.
It Is in his Sermon on 1 Cor. v. 7, 8. We will mark, says he, something more:
That Epulemur does here See Sermon vii. on the Resurect. page 454. Sermon. L^nd.
1641.
refer to Immolatus: To Christ not every way considered, but As when he was
Offered. Christ's Body that now is, true; But not Christ's Body as now it is, but
as then it was, when it was offered, rent, and slain, and sacrificed for us.
Not as now he is glorified; for so he is not, he cannot be Immolatus; For as he
is, he is immortal and impassible; But as then he was when he suffered death,
that is passible and mortal. Then in his passible State, he did institute this
of ours, to be a memorial of his Passible and Passion both. And we are in this
Action not only carried up to Christ (sursum Corda) [so that Christ it seems is
not brought down to us] but we are also carried back to Christ, as he was at
the very instant, and in the very Act of his offering. So, and no otherwise,
does this Text teach; So, and no otherwise do we Represent him. By the
incomprehensible power of his Eternal Spirit, not He alone, but He as at the
very act of his offering is made present to us, and we incorporate into his
death, and invested in the Benefits of it. If an Host could be turned into him
now glorified as he is, it would not serve; Christ offered is it. Thither must
we look; to the Serpent lift up: thither we must repair; even ad Cadaver: We
must Hoc facere, do that is then done. So and no otherwise is this Epulare to
be conceived. And so I think none will say they do or can turn him.

Whatsoever Real presence then this Bishop believed, it must be of his
crucified Body, and as in the State of his death; and that I think cannot be
otherwise present than in one of those two ways mentioned above by Archbishop
Cranmer, and both of which we willingly acknowledge; either Figuratively, in
the Elements; or Spiritually, in the Souls of those who worthily receive them.

And from this Account of Bishop Andrew's Opinion, we may conclude what it was
that Casaubon and KASAVBON, ^ING JAMES, A. Bishop of Spalato.
King ^ames understood by the Real Presence, who insist upon that Bishops words
to express their own Notion and meaning of it. Nor can we make any other
judgment of the Arch Bishop of Spalato; who in the next Vol. 3. de Rep. Eccles.
lib. 7. cap. 11. page 200, 201.
to that cited by our Adversary is very See the 1. Tra.. xi. note 2. page (...).
earnest against those who receive unworthily this Holy Sacrament, and by
consequence ties not Christ's natural Body to the Bread; and declares it to be
after a Spiritual imperceptible and miraculous manner. As for the term
Corporaliter, which he there uses, and which Melancthon and some others had
used before him, that may be well enough understood in the same Sense, as vere
or realiter; and is often so used both in Scripture and in the Holy Fathers. As
when St. Coloss. ii. 9, 17.
Paul says of Christ, that in Him dwells the fullness of the Godhead Bodily;
that is really, in opposition to the Shechinah or Presence of God in the
Tabernacle. And again, The Body of Christ; that is the substance, the reality,
opposed to the types and figures See Ham^d in Coloss 1. Annot. d.
of the Law. And so in the Hebrew Exposition (...) is often used for Essence as
well as Body, and applied to Spiritual as well as Corporal things. Archbishop
LAWD.


Nor can I see any more reason to understand Archbishop Lawd in any other
Sense. He asserts the true and real Presence of Christ in this Sacred Feast;
but he does not say, that Christ's natural Body which is now 1 Tract.. xiv.
page 8.
In Heaven, is also in this Holy Sacrament, or in the worthy receiver; nor have
we any reason to believe that he understood it so to be. MONTAGVE Origenes
Eccles. Tom. prior. par. poster. p. 247. 249. 250. etc. Panis in Synaxi fit
corpus Christi; -- Sed et Corpus Christi CREDEN^ES (...). Ad eundem utrumque
modum and mensuram; sed non Naturaliter; -- ^que nec Panis ITA est Corpus
Christi; Mystice tantum, non Physice. vid. plur.
And the same must be said of Bishop HALL.
Bishop Hall, Bishop Montague, and Bishop Bilson; in whose expressions as they
are quoted by MONTAGUE BILSON.
our Author, I find nothing that proves the Sense he would impose upon them;
and whose works had I now by me, I might possibly be able to give some better
account of them. Though after all, should one of these in his violence against
his Adversaries, or the others in their pacifick design of reconciling all
Parties as to this Point, have said more than they ought to do, I do not see
but that it ought to have been imputed to the circumstances they were in and
the designs they pursued, rather than be set up for the measure either of their
own, or our Churches Opinion.

And now I am mentioning these things, I ought Bishop FORBES.
not pass over one other eminent instance of such a charitable undertaking, and
which has given occasion to our Author of a Quotation he might otherwise have
wanted, in that excellent Bishop of St. Andrews Bishop Forbes; concerning whose
Authority in this matter I shall offer only the censure of one, than whom none
could have given a more worthy Character of a person, who so well deserved it
as that good Bishop did; I do not deny, but his earnest desire of a general
Author of the Life of Bishop BEDEL; in the Preface.
Peace and Union among all Christians, has made him too favorable to many of
the Corruptions in the Church of Rome: But though a Charity that is not well
balanced, may carry one to very indiscreet things; yet the principle from
whence they flowed in him, was so truly good, that the Errors to which it
carried him, ought to be either excused, or at lest to be very gently censured.

There remain now but two of all the Divines he has produced to prove his new
fancy, which he would set up for the Doctrine of the Church of England; and
those as little for his purpose as any he has hitherto mentioned; Bishop Tailor
and Mr. Thorndyke. For Bishop TAILOR.
Bishop Tailor, I cannot acquit our Author of a wilful prevarication; since it
is evident that he has so plainly opposed his Notion, and that in the very Book
he quotes, and which he wrote on purpose to show our meaning of the Real
Presence, that he could not Polemical discourses. p. 182. London. 1674.
but have known that he mis represented him. I shall set down the state of the
Question as it is in the beginning of that Treatise. The Doctrine of the Church
of England, and generally of the Protestants in this Article is; That after the
Minister of the Holy Mysteries has rightly prayed and blessed or consecrated
the Bread and the Wine; the Symbols become changed into the Body and Blood of
Christ after a Sacramental, i. e. in a Spiritual Real manner. So that all that
worthily communicate, do by Faith receive Christ Really, Effectually, to all
the purposes of his Passion -- It is Bread and it is Christ's Body: It is Bread
in in Substance, Christ in the Sacrament; and Christ is as really given to all
that are truly disposed, as the Symbols are p. 183. -- It is here as in the
other Sacrament; for as there natural Water becomes the laver of Regeneration;
so here Bread and Wine become the Body and Blood of Christ: but there and here
too the first Substance is changed by Grace, but remains the same in nature --
We say that Christ's Body is in the Sacrament really, but Spiritually. They (the
Papists) say it is there really, but Spiritually. For so Bellarmin is bold to
say that the word may be allowed in this Question. Where now is the difference?
Here; By Spiritually they mean present after the manner of a Spirit; by
Spiritually we mean present to our Spirits only; that is, so as Christ is not
present to any other Sense but that of faith or spiritual susception -- They
say that Christ's Body is truly present there, as it was upon the Cross, but not
after the manner of all, or any Body -- But we by the real Spiritual Presence
of Christ, do understand Christ to be present, as the Spirit of God is present
in the Hearts of the faithful, by Blessing and Grace; and this is ALL we mean
besides the tropical and figurative presence.

Such is the Account which that Excellent Bishop here gives not only of his
own, but, as he expressly terms, it of the Church of England' s, and the
Generality of the Protestants Belief in this Matter. Our Author's dissimulation
of it is so much the more inexcusable, by how much the more zealous an Advocate
he Treatise 1st. p. 20th.
makes him of his Cause, when all this that I have transcribed, was in the very
same Section, and almost in the same Page with what he has cited. For his
little Remark upon the Title of the Bishops Book, where he calls it of the Real
Presence and Spiritual, whence he would infer a difference between the two
Terms, and find something Real that is not Spiritual in this Sacrament; it is
evident that the Design of that Distinction was this: There be several sorts of
Real Presences; the Papists, the Lutherans, the Church of England, all allow a
Real Presence in the Sacrament, but after dif^erent Manners; it was therefore
necessary to add somewhat more, to show what kind of Real Presence she
undertook to maintain, and he knew no word more proper to express it by than
Spiritual, which does not therefore imply a Distinction from, but Limitation of
the other Term Real. And thus he explains it, N. 6. and 7. of that Section,
where he shows that the Spiritual is also a Real Presence, and indeed Page 183.
more properly so than any other. In short, thus he concludes the State of the
Question, in the same Section, Page 186.
on, between us and the Church of Rome, so that now, says he, The Question is
not, Whether the Symbols be changed into Christ's Body and Blood or no? For it
is granted on all sides: But whether this Conversion be Sacramental and
Figurative? Or whether it be Natural and Bodily? Nor is it whether Christ be
taken Really, but whether he be taken in a Spiritual or in a Natural Manner? We
say the Conversion is Figurative, Mysterious, and Sacramental; they say, it is
Proper, Natural, and Corporal. We affirm that Christ is really taken by Faith,
by the Spirit, to all real Effects of his Passion (this is an Explication a
little different from our Authors) They say he is taken by the Mouth, and that
the Spiritual and the Virtual taking him in Virtue or Effect, is not
sufficient, though done also in the Sacrament. Hic Rhodus, hic Saltus.

If this does not yet satisfy him that he has injured this Learned Man in the
Representation of his Opinion, directly contrary to his Sense, I will offer him
yet one Passage more, taken from another part of his Works, and which, I hope,
will thoroughly convince him. It is in the 5th. Letter, to a Gentleman that was
tempted to the Communion of the Church of Rome. He had proposed to the Bishop
this Question. Whether, without all danger of Superstition or Idolatry, we may
not render Divine Worship to our Blessed Savior, as present in the Blessed
Sacrament or Host, according to his Humane Nature, in that Host? The Question
is certainly every way pertinent to our present Purpose; let us see what the
Answer is that he makes to it. We may not render Divine Worship See Pole^ic.
Disc. Append. Page 69. 70.
to him as present in the Blessed Sacrament according to his Humane Nature,
without danger of Idolatry, because he is not there according to his Humane
Nature, and therefore you give Divine Worship to a Non Ens, which must needs be
Idolatry. Well, but Treat. 1st. Page 10.
still it may be the Bishop does not intend to exclude the Corpus Domini, but
only the Corporal or Natural Manner of that Body: Let us therefore hear how he
goes on. For Idolum nihil est in mundo, Says St. Paul, and Christ as Present
by his Humane Nature in the Sacrament is a No^ens. For it is not true; there is
no suchthing. What, not as Christ there, no way as to his Humane nature? -- No,
he is says the Bishop, present there by his Divine power, and his Divine
Blessing, and the Fruits of his Body, the real effective Consequents of his
Passion; but for any other Presence, it is Idolum; it is nothing in the World.
Adore Christ in Heaven; for the Heaven must contain him till the time of
restitution of all things. This then is Bishop Taylor's Notion of the Real
Presence: and now I am confident our Author himself will remit him to the
Company of those Old Zuinglian Bishops, Cranmer, Ridley, and the rest, who
lived before that Q. Elizabeth had propugned the Real Presence of his new Model
into the Heads of the Governors of the Church of England.

And now I am afraid his Cause will be desperate unless Mr. Thorndyke can
support it. And how Mr. THORNDYKE.
unlikely he is to do it, he might have learnt from what has been answered to
T. G. on the same Occasion. T. G. Dialogue 1st. Page 21.
T. G. Had in his first Dialogue quoted the same place which our Author has
done since, to prove his belief of the Real Presence: His Answer to (...). G's.
Dial. Page 92.
Adversary confesses this, but produces an^^her that explains his meaning;
THORNDYKE Laws of the Church. Chapter 4. Page 30.
if it can any way be showed, says he, that the Church did ever pray that the
Flesh and Blood might be substituted instead of the Elements under the
Accidents of them, then I am content that this be accounted henceforth the
Sacramental presence of them in the Eucharist. But if the Church only prays
that the Spirit of God coming down upon the Elements -- may make them the Body
and Blood of Christ, so that they which receive them may be filled with the
Grace of his Spirit; then is it not the Sense of the Catholic Church that can
oblige any man to believe the abolishing of the Elements in their bodily
substance, because supposing that they remain, they may nevertheless come to be
the instruments of Gods Spirit to convey the operation thereof to them that are
disposed to receive it, no otherwise than his Flesh and Blood conveyed the
Efficacy thereof upon Earth. And that I suppose is reason enough to call it the
Body and Blood of Christ Sacramentally, that is to say, as in the Sacrament of
the Eucharist.

Thus Mr. Thorndyke expresses himself as to the Real Presence: But yet after
all, I will not deny but that this Learned Person seems to have had a
particular Notion in this matter, and which is far enough from what our Author
would fix upon him. He thought that the Elements by Consecration were united to
the Godhead of Christ, much after the same manner as his Natural Body was by
Incarnation; and that so the very Elements became after a sort his Body. The
Church See his Just Weights and Measures, 4^^. Land. 1662. -- Page 94.
from the beginning did not pretend to consecrate by these bare words, This is
my Body, this is my Blood, as operatory in changing the Elements into the Body
and Blood of Christ; but by that Word of God whereby he has declared the
Institution of this Sacrament, and commanded the use of it; and by the
Execution of this Command. Now it is executed, and has always been executed by
the Act of the Church upon God's Word of Institution, praying that the Holy
Ghost coming down upon the present Elements, may make them the Body and Blood
of Christ. Not by changing them into the Nature of Flesh and Blood; as the
Bread and Wine that nourished our Lord Christ on Earth, became the Flesh and
Blood of the Son of God, by becoming the Flesh and Blood of his Manhood,
Hypostatically united to his Godhead, says Gregory Nyssene. But immediately
and ipso facto, by being united to the Spirit of Christ; i. e. his Godhead. For
the Flesh and Blood of Christ by Incarnation, the Elements by Consecration
being united to the Spirit; i. e. the Godhead of Christ, become both one
Sacramentally, by being both one with the Spirit or Godhead of Christ, to the
conveying of God's Spirit to a Christian.

And thus have I considered the several Divines produced for this new Conceit
concerning the Real Presence; and shown the greatest part of his Authors to be
evidently against it; some not to have spoken so clearly that we can determine
any thing concerning them; but not one that favors what they were alleged
for; viz. to show that they believed, Christ's Natural Body to be both in
Heaven and in the Sacrament; only after another manner than the Papists. It
were an easy matter to show how constant our Church has been to the Doctrine
of the true, real, spiritual Presence which it still asserts, and which it
derived from its first Reformers, whose words have been before set down by a
cloud of other Witnesses; as may be seen by the short Specimen I have put
together in the Reformatio legum Eccles. ex Authorit. Henr. 8. and Edw. 6.
Land. 1641. Tit. de Sacram. cap. 4. page 29. -- Morton de Euch. part. 2. Class.
4. cap. 1.. 2. page 224. Lat. 1640. 4^^. -- Fr. White against Fisher, page 407.
Land. 1624. Fol. -- A B. U^er's Answer to a Challenge, c of the Real Presence,
p. 44, 45. Land. 1625. -- Id. Sermon before the House of Commons, page 16, 19,
etc -- Dr. Hammond Pract. Catech. part. ult. Answer to this Question; the
Importance of these words, That the Body and Blood of Christ are verily and
indeed taken and received; p. 130. Edit. Land Fol. 1684. -- Dr. Jackson's
Works, Tom. 3. page 300, 302. Land. 1673 Dr. Jo^'s Way to the True Church.
Land. 1624.. 51. N. 10 page 209. Cosens Hist. Transubst. p. 3, 4, 12, etc.
Edit. London, 1675. 8vo.
Margent. But I have insisted too long already on this matter; and shall
therefore pass on to the Third thing I proposed to consider; viz.

Thirdly, That the Alterations which have been made in our Rubric, were not
upon the account of our Divines changing their Opinions, as is vainly and fasly
suggested.

To give a rational Account of this Affair, we must carefully consider the
Circumstances of the Times, the Tempers and Dispositions of the Persons that
lived in them; and what the Designs of the Governing Parties were with
reference to them; and then we shall presently see both a great deal of Wisdom
and Piety in the making of these Alterations; allowing the Opinions of those
who did it, to have continued, as we have seen, in all of them the same.

When first this Rubric was put into King Edward's Liturgy, the Church of
England was but just rising up out of the Errors and Superstitions with which
it had been overrun by the prevalency of Popery upon it. It had the happiness
to be reformed, not as most others were, by private persons, and in many places
contrary to the desires of the Civil Power; but by a Unanimous Concurrence of
the Highest Authority both Civil and Ecclesiastical, of Church and State. Hence
it came to pass, that Convocations being assembled, Deliberations had of the
greatest and wisest Persons for the proceeding in it, nothing was done out of a
Spirit of Peevishness or Opposition; the Holy Scriptures and Antiquity were
carefully consulted; and all things examined according to the exactest measures
that could be taken from them; and a diligent distinction made of what was
Popery, and what true and Catholic Christianity, that so the One only might be
rejected, the other duly retained.

Now by this means it was that the Ancient Government of the Church became
preserved amongst us; a just and wise Liturgy collected out of the Public
Rituals: Whatever Ceremonies were requisite for Order or Decency, were
retained; and among the rest, that of receiving the Communion kneeling for One,
which has accordingly ever since been the manner established amongst us. But
that no Occasion of Scandal might hereby be given, whether to our
Neighbour-Churches abroad, or to any particular Members of our own at home:
That those who were yet weak in the Faith, might not either continue or fall
back into Error, and by our retaining the same Ceremony in the Communion that
they had been used to in the Mass, fancy that they were to adore the Bread as
they did before: For all these great Ends this Caution was inserted; that the
true Intent of this Ceremony was only for Decency and Order; not that any
Adoration was thereby intended, or ought to be done unto any Real or Essential
Presence of Christ's Natural Flesh and Blood, which were not there, but in
Heaven, it being against the Truth of Christ's Natural Body to be at One time
in more places than One.

And this is sufficiently intimated in the words of the Rubric to have been
the first Cause and Design of it. Thus it continued the remainder of King
Edward's time: But now Queen Elizabeth being come to the Crown, there were
other Circumstances to be considered. Those of the Reformed Religion abroad
were sufficiently satisfied, both by this public Declaration, which had stood
so many years in the Liturgy of our Church; and by the Conversation and
Acquaintance of our Divines, forced by the dispersion in the foregoing Reign,
to seek for refuge among their Brethren in other Countries, of our Orthodox
Faith, as to this Point. Our own Members at home had heard too much of this
matter in the public Writings and Disputations, and in the constant Sufferings
of their Martyrs, not to know that the Popish Real Presence was a mere Figment,
an Idolum, as Bishop Tailor justly styles it; and their Mass to be abhorred
rather than adored. There was then no longer need of this Rubric upon any of
those Accounts for which it was first established; and there was a very just
reason now to lay it aside. That great Queen desired, if possible, to compose
the Minds of her Subjects, and make up those Divisions which the differences of
Religion, and the late unhappy Consequences of them had occasioned. For this,
she made it her business to render the public Acts of the Church of England as
agreeable to all Parties as Truth would permit. The Clause of the Real Presence
inserted in the Articles of her first Convocation, and subscribed by all the
Members of it (to show that their belief was still the same it had ever been as
to this matter) was nevertheless, as we have seen, struck out for this end
their next Session. The Title of Head of the Church, which her Father had first
taken, her Brother continued, and was from both derived to her, so qualified
and explained, as might prevent any Occasion of quarrelling at it by the most
captious persons. That Petition in the Litany inserted by King Henry viii. From
the Tyranny of the Bishop of Rome, and all his detestable Enormities, Good
Lord, etc. struck out: And in conformity to what was done in the Articles as to
this Point, this Rubric also was omitted, lest it should give Offense to those
who were still zealous for their mistaken Principles and Worship. This was the
Wise and Christian Design of that Excellent Princess; and how happy an Effect
this Moderation might have had, if the Bishop of Rome had not by his Artifice
and Authority with some of her Subjects, prevented it, the first Years of her
Reign sufficiently show.

Thus was the Occasion and Reason of its omission in Q. Elizabeth's time, as
great as the necessity of its first Insertion in King Edward's. And in this
state it continued all the Reign of that Queen, and of her two Successors, King
James and King Charles. 1st, I shall not need to say by what means it was, that
new Occasion was given for the reviving of it. We have all of us heard, and
many of us seen too much of it. How Order became Superstitious, and Decency
termed Idolatry: The Church of England traduced as but another Name for Popery;
and this Custom of kneeling at the Communion, one of the strongest Arguments
offered for the Proof of it. And now when Panick Fears had found such
prevalence over the Minds of Men, as to destroy a King, and embroil a Kingdom
into a Civil War, of almost Twenty Years continuance; and tho by the good hand
of God our King and our Peace were again restored, yet the minds of the People
were still unsettled, and in danger of being again blown up upon the least
Occasion; what could be more advisable to justify our selves from all
suspicion of Popery in this matter, and induce them to a Conformity with us in
a Ceremony they had entertained such a dread of, than to revive that ancient
Rubric; and so quiet the Minds of the People now, by the same means by which
they had been settled and secured before?

This I am persuaded is so rational an Account, as will both justify the
proceedings of our Governors in these Changes, and show the dis-ingenuity of
those, who not only knowing, but having been told these things, will still
rather impute it to an imaginary wavering, or uncertainty of Opinion, than to a
necessary and Christian Accommodation to the Times. For the change in the
Prayer of Consecration, I have already said, that it is in the Words, not the
Sense: And if our Governors thought the present Expressions less liable to
exception than the former, they had certainly reason for the Alteration. For
the other Exceptions there is very little in them, whether the Minister lay his
Hand on the Sacred Elements, when he repeats the words of Institution, as at
this time, or only consecrates them by the Prayers of the Church, and the Words
of Christ, without any other Ceremony, as heretofore: Whether with the Church
of Rome we use only the words of Christ in the distribution; or with most of
the Reformed Churches, the other Expression, Take and eat this, etc. or (as we
choose rather) join them both together: Whether we sing the Gloria in Excelsis
Deo -- before or after the receiving; but because the chiefest Mystery he
thinks lies in this, That whereas in King Edward's days the Rubric called it
an Essential Presence, which we have now turned into Corporeal; I must confess
I will not undertake to say what the Occasion of it was; if they thought this
latter manner more free from giving Offense than the other would have been, I
think they did well to prefer it. Let every one entertain what Notion he
pleases of these things; this I have shown is the Doctrine of the Church which
we all subscribe, That the Natural Body and Blood of our Savior Christ are in
Heaven, and not here; i. e. in the Sacrament; and if there can be any other
Real Presence than such as I have shown to have been the constant belief of our
Divines consistent with this Rubric, I shall no more desire to debar any one
the belief of it, than I shall be willing to be obliged to believe it with him.

And now after so clear an Account as I have here given of the several changes
that have been made in our Rubric, were I minded to recriminate, and tell the
World what Alterations have been made in their Mass, and those in Points
infinitely more material than any thing that can be alleged against us, I much
question whether they would be able to give us so good an account of it. And
something of this I may perhaps offer as a Specimen of the wisdom of this
Author in the choice of his Accusation before we part; In the mean time I go on
to the last thing proposed to be here considered.

4thly. that the Reason mentioned in our Rubric concerning the Impossibility
of Christ's natural Body's existing in several places at the same time, is no
way invalidated by any of this Authors exceptions against it.

Now these being most of them founded upon the former mistaken Notion of the
Real presence falsely imputed to us, will admit of a very short and plain
consideration.

1st. He observes That Protestants, but especially our Treatise 1st.. xx. n. 1.
page 13.
English Divines generally confess the presence of our Savior in the Eucharist
to be an ineffable Mystery. Well, be it so; what will he hence infer? Why this
he conceives is said to be so in respect of something in it opposite and
contradictory to, and therefore incomprehensible and ineffable by Humane
Reason. But supposing they should not think it so from being Opposite and
Contradictory to, but because the manner how Christ herein communicates himself
to us is hid from, and above our Humane Reason; might not this be sufficient to
make it still be called an ineffable, and incomprehensible Mystery? Whereas the
other would make it rather plain and comprehensible Nonsense. It Is a strange
Affection that some Men have got of late for Contradictions; they are so in
love with them, that they have almost brought it to be the definition of a
Mystery, to be the Revelation of something to be believed in Opposition to
Sense and Reason. And what by their Notions and Parallels, have advanced no
very commendable Character of Christianity; as if it were a Religion full of
Absurdities; and as Fisher the Jesuit once told King James 1st. with reference
to this very Subject, the rather Bishop TAYLOURS Polem. Disco. of the Real
presence. Sect. ii. page 231.
to be believed because it is contrary to Reason. But if this be indeed our
Authors Notion of Mysteries (and the truth is Transubstantiation can be no
other Mystery) we desire he will be pleased to confine it to his own Church,
and not send it abroad into the World as ours too. We are persuaded, not only
that our Worship must be a reasonable Service, but our Faith a Reasonable
Assent. He who opposes the Authority of Holy Scriptures, says Bishop Tailor,
against manifest and certain Reason, does neither understand himself nor Ibid.
them. Reason is the voice of God as well as Revelation, and what is opposite
to the one, can no more be agreeable to the other, than God can be contrary to
himself. And though, if the Revelation be clear and evident, we submit to it,
because we are then sure it cannot be contrary to Reason, whatever it may
appear to us; yet when the contradiction is manifest, as that a natural Body
should be in more places than one at the same time, we are sure that
interpretation of Holy Scripture can never be the right which would infer this,
but especially when there is another, and much more reasonable, that does not.
And in this we are after all justified by one whose Authority I hope our Author
will not question, even his own self; If, says he, we are Treatise 1st.. 29.
page 21.
certain there is a contradiction, then we are certain there neither is nor can
be a contrary Revelation; and when any Revelation, though never so plain, is
brought; we are bound to interpret it so, as not to affirm a certainly known
impossibility. And let him that sticks to this rule, interpret Christ's words
for Transubstantiation if he can.

But do not our own Authors sometimes say, that notwithstanding all the
difficulties brought against Transubstantiation, yet if it can be shown that
God has revealed it, they are ready to believe it? Perhaps some may have said
this, because for that very Reason that there are so many contradictions in it,
they are sure it cannot be shown that God has revealed it. But if he means, as
he seems to insinuate, that notwithstanding such plain contradictions as they
charge it with, they thought it possible nevertheless, that God might have
revealed it, and upon that supposition, they were ready to believe it; I answer
from his own words, that their supposa^ then was Absurd and impossible; since
he himself assure us, that None can believe Treatise 1st. xx. n. 3. page 14.
a thing true, upon what motive soever, which he first knows to be certainly
false, or which is all one, certainly to contradict. For these we say are not
verifyable by a divine Power; and Ergo, here I may say, should a divine power
declare a truth, it would transcend its self. Which last words if they signify
any thing and do not transcend Sense, must suppose it impossible for such a
thing as implies a certain Contradiction, to be revealed.

II. Observation, But our Author goes on, I conceive that any one thing that
seems to us to include a Perfect Contradiction, can no more be effected by
divine Power than another, or than many others the like may. Seeing then we
admit that some seeming Contradictions to Reason may be verified by the Divine
power in this Sacrament, there is no reason to deny but that this may be also
as well as any other.

Now not to contend with him about words; whoever told our Author, that we
allowed that there was any thing in this Sacrament, as received by us, that
seemed to us to include a Perfect Contradiction? Perfect Contradictions we
confess are all of them equally verifyable by a divine Power, that is, are all
of them impossible. And for this we have his own word before. Now if there be
any such things as perfect contradictions to be known by us, that which seems
to us to be a perfect contradiction, must really be a perfect contradiction;
unless contradictions are to be discovered some other way than by seeming to
our Reason to be so. And such it not only seems, but undoubtedly is, for the
same One, natural, finite Body, to be in more places than one at the same time;
if to be and not to be, be still the measure of Contradictions. He that says of
such a Body, that it is in Heaven and on Earth, at London and Rome, at the same
time, says in Effect that it is one and not one; finite and not finite; in one
place and not in one place, etc. All which are such seemingly perfect
contradictions, that I fear 'twill be a hard matter to find out any Power by
which they can be verified.

III. Observation, He observes Thirdly; That those Treatise 1st.. xxii. p. 15.
who affirm a Real and Substantial presence of the very Body of Christ to the
worthy communicant, contradistinct to any such other Real presence of Christ's
Body, as implies only a presence of it in Virtue, and Spiritual Effects, etc.
must hold this particular seeming Contradiction to be True, or some other
equivalent to it.

If by the Real Presence of the very Body of Christ, he means, as he before
explains it, That Christ's Natural Body, that very Body which is now in Heaven,
should be also at the same time here upon Earth; it is, I think, necessary for
those who will affirm this, to hold some such kind of Contradiction, as he
says: And it is for that very Reason, I am persuaded, he will find but few such
Persons in the Church of England; which so expressly declares, that Christ's
Natural Body is in Heaven, and not here, upon this very account, That it is
contrary to the truth of a Natural Body to be in more places than one at the
same time. However, if any such there be, as they herein depart from the
Doctrine of their Church, so it is not our concern to answer for their
Contradictions.

IV. He observes, lastly: It seems to me that some of the more judicious
amongst them (the Tract. 1.. xxviii. p. 20.
Divines he means of the Church of England) have not laid so great a weight on
this Philosophical Position, as wholly to support and regulate their Faith in
this matter by it; as it stands in opposition not only to Nature's, but the
Divine Power: because they pretend not any such certainty thereof, but that if
any Divine Revelation of the contrary can be showed, they profess a readiness
to believe it.

I shall not now trouble my self with what some of our Divines may seem to him
to have done in this matter; it is evident our Church has laid stress enough
upon this Contradiction. Indeed where so many gross Repugnancies both to Sense
and Reason are crowded together, as we have seen before there are in this
Point, it ought not to be wondered if our Divines have not supported and
regulated their Faith wholly upon this one alone. We do not any of Us think it
either safe or pious to be too nice in determining what God can, or cannot do;
we leave that to the bold Inquisitiveness of their Schools. But this we think
we may say, that if there are any unalterable Laws of Nature, by which we are
to judge of these things; then God can no more make one Body to exist in ten
thousand places at the same time, than he can make one, continuing one, to be
ten thousand, than he can divide the same thing from its self, and yet continue
it still undivided. And if any of our Divines have said, that they cannot admit
that one Body can be in several places at once, till the Papists can
demonstrate the possibility thereof by Testimony of Holy Scripture, or the
ancient Tradition of the Primitive Church, or by apparent Reason. We need not
suppose that they said this, doubting whether it implied a Contradiction, but
because the certainty of the Contradiction secured them against the possibility
of any such Proof. This is evident in B. Tailor, who thought that God could not
do this, because it implied a Contradiction: Real Presence,. xi. n. 1. p. 230.
and Ibid. n. 27. He says it is utterly impossible. So also Dr. White professes,
that according to the Order which God has fixed by his Word and Will, this
cannot be done: Confer. page 446, 447. and before, page 181. to this Objection,
That tho in Nature it be impossible, for one and the same Body to be in many
places at once, yet because God is Omnipotent, he is able to effect it: We
answer, says he, It implies a Contradiction, that God should destroy the
nature of a thing, the nature of the same thing remaining safe: See more, p.
180, 181. White' s Works, Land. 1624.


And now I know but one Objection more that is, or can be offered against what
I have said, and which having answered, I shall close this Point: For if this
be all the Church of England understands, when it speaks of a Real Presence,
viz. A Real Sacramental Presence of Christ's Body and Blood in the Holy Signs,
and a real Spiritual Presence in the inward Communion of them to the Soul of
every worthy Receiver; will not this precipitate us into downright See 1.
Treatise, page 23.. xxxii. p. 24.. xxxii. p. 25.. xxxvi, xxxvii, etc.
Zuinglianism, and render us after all our pretenses as very Sacramentaries as
they? Indeed, I am not able directly to say whether it will or no, because I
find the Opinion of Zuinglius very variously represented as to this matter. But
yet, First, If by Zuinglianism he means that which is more properly Smalcius de
Coen. Dom. p. 347. Id Disp. 9. de Hypocr. p. 289. Volkelius lib. iv. cap. 12.
p. 304, 319, etc. Socinus in Paraenesi, c. iv. Sclichtingius disp. de Coen.
Dom. p. 701.
Socinianism, viz. a mere Commemoration of Christ's Death, and a Thaksgiving to
God for it; it is evident it does not, forasmuch as we positively confess, that
in this Holy Sacrament, there is a Real and Spiritual Grace communicated to us,
even all the benefits of that Death and Passion which we there set forth. And
this, or somewhat very like it, I find sometimes to have been maintained by
Zuingl. See de Provid. Dei, cap. 6, etc.
Zuinglius. But now, Secondly, If by Zuinglianism he understands such a Real
Presence, as denies only the Coexistence of Christ's Natural Body now in
Heaven, at the same time in this Holy Sacrament, but denies nothing of that
Real and Spiritual And this our Author seems to insinuate: See the places above
cited: And indeed others have alleged this as the true Opinion of Zuinglius:
See Calvin. Tract de Coen. Dom. Defens. Sacram. Admonit. ad Westphal. and
Passim. alibi. Vid. insuper libr. de Orthod. Consens. c. 7. And especially
Hospin. p. 42, 55, 177, etc. Hist. Sacr. part 2:
Communion, of it we have before mentioned; this is indeed our Doctrine, nor
shall we be ashamed to own it for any ill Names he is able to put upon it. But
yet I wonder why he should call this Zuinglianism; since if the common name of
Catholic, or Christian Doctrine, be not sufficient, he might have found out a
more ancient Abettor of this Real Presence, than Zuinglius, and the truth is,
one of the most dangerous Opposers both of their Head and their Faith that ever
was; I mean St. Paul, who has not only clearly, expressed himself against them,
as to this Point of the Eucharist, 1 Cor. x. 16. but in most of their other
Errors left such pernicious Savings to the World, as all their Authority and
Infallibility, let me add, nor all their Anathema's neither, will not be able
to overcome.

I shall close up this Discourse of the Real Presence acknowledged by us in
this Holy Sacrament, with a plain familiar Example, and which may serve at once
both to illustrate, and confirm the Propriety of it. A Father makes his last
Will, and by it bequeaths his Estate and all the Profits of it to his Child. He
delivers Vid. Cosens Hist. Transubstantionis, cap. (...).. 5. p. 57.
it into the Hands of his Son, and bids him take there his House and Lands,
which by this his last Will he delivers to him. The Son in this case receives
nothing but a Roll of Parchment, with a Seal tied to it from his Father; but
yet by virtue of this Parchment he is entitled to his Estate, performing the
Conditions of his Will, and to all the Benefits and Advantages of it: And in
that Deed he truly and effectually received the very House and Lands that were
thereby conveyed to him. Our Savior Christ in like manner, being now about to
leave the World, gives this Holy Sacrament, as his final Bequest to us; in it
he conveys to us a right to his Body and Blood, and to all the Spiritual
Blessings and Graces that proceed from them. So that as often as we receive
this Holy Eucharist, as we ought to do, we receive indeed nothing but a little
Bread and Wine into our Hands; but by the Blessing and Promise of Christ, we by
that Bread and Wine, as really and truly become Partakers of Christ's Body and
Blood, as the Son by the Will of his Father was made Inheritor of his Estate:
Nor is it any more necessary for this, that Christ's Body should come down from
Heaven, or the outward Elements which we receive, be substantially turned into
it, than it is necessary in that other case, that the very Houses and Lands
should be given into the Hands of the Son to make a real delivery or conveyance
of them; or the Will of the Father be truly and properly changed into the very
Nature and Substance of them.

PART II.
CHAPTER III.
Of the Adoration of the Host, as prescribed and practiced in the Church of
Rome.

WE are now arrived at the last Part of this Discourse; in which I must thus
far change the Method I pursued in the Other Subject, as to consider,

First, What the Doctrine of the Church of England as to this Point is; and
what our Adversaries Exceptions against it are.

Secondly, What is the Doctrine of the Church of Rome; and whether what this
Author has said in favor of it, may be sufficient to warrant their Practice as
to this Matter.

For the former of these, The Doctrine of the Church of England, we shall need
go no farther than the Rubric we have beforementioned; wherein it is expressly
declared, with reference to this Holy Sacrament, That no Adoration is intended,
or Rubr. at the end of the Communion.
ought to be done, either to the Sacramental Bread and Wine there bodily
received, or to any Corporal Presence of Christ's Body and Blood: For that the
Sacramental Bread and Wine remain still in their very Natural Substances, and
therefore may not be adored, (for that were Idolatry to be abhorred of all
Faithful Christians) and the natural Body and Blood of our Savior Christ, are
in Heaven and not here; it being against the truth of Christ's natural Body, to
be at One time in more places than One.

This then being sufficiently cleared, let us see what this Author has to
observe against it.

1. He supposes that we will grant, that if there Treatise 1. Chapter 4.. 39. p. 27.
were a Corporal Presence of Christ's Natural Body in this Holy Sacrament, then
Kneeling and Adoration would be here also due upon such an Account. He means,
that were Christ himself here in his Body actually present, He ought to be
adored; and this he need not doubt of our readiness to grant.

2. Tho the Corporeal Presence of Christ's Body, Ib.. x^.
i. e. of its being there ad modum Corporis, or clothed with the ordinary
Properties of a Body, be denied; as it is, not only by the English Divines, but
by the Lutheran and Roman: Yet let there be any other manner of Presence (known
from Divine Revelation) of the very same Body and Blood; and this as Real and
Essential, as if Corporeal; and then I do not see but that Adoration will be no
less due to it thus, than so, Present.

Now to this I shall at present only say, That the Supposition being absurd,
does not admit of a rational Consideration. Those who deny a bodily Presence of
Christ's Body in the Eucharist, and ask whether Adoration may not be paid to
his Body, which is confessed not to be bodily present there, supposing it to be
there some other way; ought to have no other satisfaction than this, that they
suppose an Impossibility, a thing which cannot be; and therefore concerning
which no reasonable Answer can be given. Some I know have been more free, and
allowing for the unreasonableness of the Supposal, have resolved contrary to
our Author: But I think it very needless to dispute of the Affections of a
Chimera; and wrangle about Notions that have neither Use nor Existence.

3. He observes, lastly, That the Church of England Treatise 1. p. 28.. xli.
has believed and affirmed such a Presence (he means of Christ's Body in the
Eucharist) to which they thought Adoration due. I presume it was then in the
Times of Popery; for since the Reformation, I have shown before, that she has
always held the contrary. But our Author will prove it, and that since the
Reformation; For, he says, he Ibid.
has in his time met with no less than five of our Writers, and those of no
mean Account neither, that have been of this Opinion. This indeed is a very
notable way of proving the Doctrine of our Church: But what now if I should
bring him fifteen Others that have denied it; then I hope the Doctrine of the
Church of England may be as fair for the contrary. But we will examine his
Evidence.

First; Bishop Andrews, he says, declares, that Treatise 1.. xlii. p. 28.
tho we adore not the Sacrament, yet we adore Christ in and with the Sacrament,
besides and without the Sacrament: and assures the World, that K. James looked
upon Christ to be truly present, and truly to be adored in it. How this Bishop
thought Christ truly present in the Sacrament we have seen before; and may from
thence easily conclude how he supposed he might be adored there: viz. As in all
other Holy Offices, in which we confess Him by his Divine Power to be present
with us, but especially in this Sacred Mystery. And thus we all adore him, both
in and with, and without the Sacrament; we confess him to be truly present, and
therefore truly to be adored by us. But now for Christ's Natural Body, (of
which, and not of Christ himself, our Dispute is) if that be any otherwise
truly present than as we before showed, let it be remembered, that according to
this Bishop, it must not be his Glorified Body, his Body as it now is; but his
Body Crucified, his Body as See above.
offered for us, and in the State of his Death; so He expressly affirms; and
this I believe our Author himself will confess in his sense to be impossible.

His next Witness is Bishop Tailor: We worship, Treatise 1.. xliii. p. 28.
He means, says this Author, the Body, or the Flesh of Christ [in the
Eucharist]. But is he sure the Bishop meant so? If he be, I am sure the Bishop
thought we all of us committed Idolatry in so doing. For being consulted, as we
have seen above, whether without all danger of Idolatry we may not See
Polemical Discourses 5. Letter, at the end, p.
render Divine Worship to our Blessed Savior as present in the Blessed
Sacrament or Host, according to his Humane Nature in that Host? He expressly
declares, We may not render Divine Worship to Him as present in the Blessed.
Sacrament, according to his Humane Nature, without danger of Idolatry, because
he is not there according to his Humane Nature; and therefore you give Divine
Worship to a Non Ens, which must needs be Idotry. And indeed this our Author
knew very well was his Opinion, who himself in his next Treatise, cites the
xiiith Section of his Real Presence, Treatise 2. p. 9.. vi. n. 2.
which was written on purpose to prove the unlawfulness of worshipping Christ's
Body in this Sacrament. But dissimulation of other Men's Opinions in matter of
Religion, is perhaps as lawful on some Occasions, as if it were their own: And
why may not an Author prevaricate the Doctrine of his Adversary in defense of
the Catholic Faith, since I have read of a The Story was published in the
Memoirs of Monsieur D'eageant, printed with permission at Grenoble, 1668. page
246 I will set it down in his own words. Il'y avoit deja quelque tems que
D'eageant avoit gagne l' un des Ministres de la Province de Languedoc, qui
etoit des plus employez aux Affairs and menees de ceux de la R. P. R. and en
l' Estime particuliere de Monsieur de Lesdiguiers. Il avoit meme secrettement
moyenne sa Conversion; and obtenu un Bref de Rome, portant qu' en core qu' il
eut etc receu au giron de l'Eglise, il luy etoit permis de continuer son
Ministere durant 3 Ans, pourveu qu'en ses preches il ne dit rien de contraire a
la creance de la vraye Eglise, and qu' il ne celebrat ponit la cene. Le Bref
fut obtenu, afinque le Ministre put estre continue dans les Emplois qu'il
avoit, and decouvrir les menees qui se faisoient dans le Royaume.
Protestant Minister, who in the Troubles of France being brought over to the
King's Interest, was secretly reconciled to the Church of Rome, and permitted
so far to dissemble his own Opinion, as not only to continue in the outward
profession of the Protestant Religion, but even to exercise the Functions of
his Ministry as before; and that by the express leave of his Holiness, for
three whole Years, the better to carry on the Catholic Cause in betraying the
Secrets, and managing the Debates of his Brethren.

As for Bishop Forbes, and the Archbishop of Spalatto, it is not to be wondered
if Men that had entertained the Design of reconciling all Parties, were forced
to strain sometimes a little farther than was fit for the doing of it. And for
Mr. Thorndyke, we have seen that his Notion of the Real Presence was
particular, and widely different both from theirs and ours; and therefore that
we are not to answer for the Consequences of it. But however, to quit these
just Exceptions against them: Will he himself allow every thing to be the
Doctrine or not of the Church of Rome, which I shall bring him three of their
Authors to affirm or deny? If he will, then Transubstantiation is not their
Doctrine, for I have already quoted above twice three of their most Learned Men
against it. To adore an Unconsecrated Host by mistake, is Idolatry; for so S.
Thomas, Paludanus, Catharine, and others, assure us: To worship the Host,
supposing their Doctrine of Transubstantiation false, a worser Idolatry than
any Heathens were ever guilty of; so several of their Writers confess. But now
if our Author will not allow this to be good arguing against them, with what
reason does he go about to urge it against us?

Secondly; We must in the next place consider what the Doctrine of the Church
of Rome as to this Point is; and whether what this Author has advanced in
favor of it, may be sufficient to warrant their practice of this Adoration.

For the Doctrine of the Church of Rome, I find it thus clearly set down by the
Council of Trent: Council. Trid. Sess. xiii. cap. 5. p. 57. Nullus itaque
dubitandi locus relinquitur, quin omnes Christi fideles pro more in Catholica
Ecclesia semper recepto Latriae cultum, qui Vero deo Debetur, huic Sanctissimo
Sacramento in veneratione exhibeant. Neque enim ideo minus est Adorandum quod
fuerit a Christo D. ut sumatur institutum: Nam illum eundem Deum praesentem
INEO adesse Credimus, quem Pater aeternus introducens in Orbem Terrarum, dicit;
Et adorent eum omnes Angeli Dei. Hebr. I.
There can be no doubt, but that all the Faithful of Christ, after the manner
that has ever been received in the Catholic Church, ought to give that Supreme
Worship which is due to the true God, to his Holy Sacrament. For it is
nevertheless to be adored, because it was instituted by our Lord Christ that it
might be received; For As much as we believe the same God to be present in it,
of whom the Eternal Father when he brought him into the World, said, And let
all the Angels of God worship him. That therefore, according to this Council is
to be worshipped, which Christ instituted to be received; and in which they
believe Christ to be present: But it is no other than the Holy Sacrament, as
these Trent-Fathers here expressly and properly style it; which we all confess
Christ instituted to be received, and in which they suppose Christ to be
present: And therefore it is the Sacrament which is to be adored. Which
reasoning I find Card. Pallavicini thus improving in his History of this
Council: It Card. Pallavicino Istoria del Concilio di Trento: part seconda, l.
12. c. 7. page 298. Ora e notissimo, che, accioche un Tutto s'adori con
adorazione di Latria, basta che una part di quel tutto meriti questo culto. --
Come dunque non douremo parimente adorare questo Sacramento, il quale e un
Tutto che contiene come part principale il Corpo di Christo.
is well known, says he, that to make a Whole Adorable with the Supreme
Adoration, it is sufficient that One part of that Whole merits such a Worship.
This he illustrates in the Example of Christ's Humanity; and thence concludes,
How then ought we not in like manner to adore this Sacrament which is a Whole,
that contains as its principal part the Body of Christ?

It is therefore, as I conceive, the undoubted Doctrine of the Church of Rome,
that the Holy Sacrament of the Eucharist, for the Reason here given, is to be
adored, with that Supreme Adoration that is due to the true God.

Now to warrant their Practice in this Matter, our Author thus proceeds in
proof of it:

I. He premises some Propositions, which he calls, Answer to his second
Discourse.
Protestant Concessions. II. Some others, which he styles, Catholic
Assertions. And then, III. Goes on to show what warrant they have for that
Belief on which this Adoration is founded.
I shall distinctly follow him in every one of these.

In his first Part, which he calls, Protestant Concessions, I. Part, Protestant
Concessions.
I will go on with him thus far:

1st.. I. page 1.
That Supreme and Divine Adoration is due to our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ.

2dly, Ibid.. II.
That wherever the Body of our Lord now is, there must also his whole Person
be.

And therefore, 3dly, Ibid.. III.
That wherever Christ's Body is truly and really present, there his Divine
Person is supremely adorable.

But now for his next Assertion;. V. n. 1. p. 2.
That it is affirmed by many Protestants, especially those of the Church of
England, that this Body and Blood of our Lord is really present, not only in
Virtue, but in Substance in the Eucharist. See Treatise 1. p. 5.. 7.
If he means, as in his former Treatise he explained himself, that the very
natural Body of Christ, that Body that was born of the Virgin, and crucified on
the Cross, and is now in Heaven, is also as to its Substance truly and really
present on Earth in the Holy Eucharist, or to the worthy Receiver: I have in
the foregoing Chapter fully shown this new Fancy to be neither the Doctrine of
the Church of England, nor the Opinion of those very Writers whom he produces
for proof of it. And as to the Disc. 2. p. 8.. vi. n. 1.
adoration of it upon any such account, I have just now declared his Mistake of
them in that Point too. And I shall not follow our Author's ill Example in
repeating it all over again.

For his. vii. p. 10.
fifth Remark, That the Lutherans affirm that Christ's Body and Blood are
present, not only to the worthy Communicants, but to the Consecrated Symbols,
and whilst so present, which is during the Action of the Lord's Supper (i. e.
says he, as I conceive them from the Consecration, till the end of the
Communion) are to be Adored. I answer; First, As to the former part, it is
confessed that the Lutherans do indeed suppose Christ to be present, not only
to the worthy Communicants, but also to the Consecrated Symbols. But now,
secondly, for the other part, that during the Action of the Lord's Supper, He
is to be Adored there; this is not so certain. For, 1. I do not find any thing
established amongst them as to this matter, neither in the Confession of
Auxpourg, nor in any other public Acts of their Church. 2. I find several of
their Divines utterly denying, that Christ's Body is to be Adored in the Holy
Sacrament; and our See below, Disc. 2. p. 16.
Author himself confesses it. Tho now, 3. Conrad. Schlusselburgius, Catal.
Haeret. l. 3. arg. 45. p. 205. Item Arg. 103. p. 280. It. arg. 174. p. 327.
Francof. 1605. And Hospinian quotes it of Luther himself, that it was his
Opinion, Concord. discor. p. 358. n. 16. Genev. 1678.
I will not deny but that some others of them do allow, if not that Christ's
Body, yet that Christ himself is to be Adored after a peculiar manner in the
Action of the Lord's Supper; and as far as I conceive, do by the Action mean,
as our Author here represents it, from the Consecration to the end of the
Communion. So that then, with this Limitation, his Proposition I presume may be
admitted; That the Lutherans do acknowledge, that Christ is present during the
Action of the Lord's Supper; and therefore it is by several of them supposed,
that he ought to be adored in it.

As to the sixth and last Concession, which he draws. vi. p. 10, 11.
from Monsieur Daille's Apology, That tho we do not our selves belive the Real
Presence of Christ' s Body in the Signs, yet neither do we esteem the belief of
it so criminal, as to oblige us to break off Communion with all those that hold
it; and therefore, that had the Roman Church no other Error but this, that it
would not have given us any sufficient cause of separation from it; we are
ready to admit it; always supposing that the belief of it had not been pressed
upon us neither, as a necessary Article of Communion; nor any Anathema
pronounced against us for not receiving it. And for the other part of it which
he subjoyns, That a Disciple Ibid. page 11.
giving Divine Honor, upon mistake, to another Person, much resembling our
Savior Christ, would have been no Idolater; from whence he would infer, That
therefore allowing a Consecrated Host to be truly Adorable, a Person that
should by mistake adore an unconsecrated One, would not be guilty of Idolatry.
We are content to allow it; tho what use he can make of it in this Controversy,
unless against his own Brethren, S. Thomas, Paludanus, and others, I do not
understand; since he knows we utterly deny any Host, consecrated or not, to be
fit to be worshipped. And this may serve for his first Foundation of Protestant
Concessions,; which were they every one as certain as his first is, that Christ
is to be adored, I cannot see what his Cause would gain by it; and he has not
by any Application of them in this Treatise, given us the least reason to think
that they are of any moment in it. But some Men have a peculiar faculty of
amusing the World with nothing: and I remember, I once heard a judicious and
modest Man give this Character of an Author much resembling ours, with
reference to his Guide in Controversy, that for a Book which carried a great
appearance of Reasoning, it had the least in it of any he ever met with. But I
go on,

II. To his Catholic Assertions. 2. Part. Catholic Assertions.


And first: Catholics (as he calls them) affirm in the Eucharist after the
Consecration, a Sign, or Page 13.. ix.
Symbol to remain still distinct, and having a diverse Existence from that of
the thing signified, or from Christ's Body contained in or under it. This it is
true the Papists, or if you please, the Catholics do affirm; because that
otherwise they could not call it a Sacrament. But now, if we enquire what that
which they call a Sign, or a Symbol in this Holy Sacrament is, we shall find it
to be neither such as our Blessed Savior established, nor indeed any thing
that can in propriety of Speech be so termed.

For our Savior Christ, it is evident that the Symbols instituted by him, were
Bread and Wine: They were these that he took and blessed, and gave to his
Disciples; and commanded them also in like manner to take, and bless, and give
to others in remembrance of him; and as the Symbols of his Body and Blood in
this Holy Eucharist. But now for the Papists; they destroy the Bread and the
Wine; they leave only a few aerie, empty Species, that is, appearances of
something, but which are really nothing, have no substance to support them.

The Symbols established by Christ were Festival Symbols, a matter apt for our
Corporal Nourishment; so signify to us, that as by them, viz. by Bread and
Wine, our Bodies are nourished to a Corporal Life; so by the Body and Blood of
Christ, which they both represent and communicate to us, our Souls are fed to
Life Everlasting. But for that which has no Substance, i. e. nothing which can
be converted into our Bodily Nourishment; how that can be a Symbol of this
Spiritual Food, I do not very well understand. Indeed our Author tells us, That
tho after Consecration, Page 14.. x.
the Substance of the Bread and Wine is denied to remain, yet is Substance here
taken in such a sense, as that neither the hardness, nor the softness, nor the
frangibility, nor the savor, nor the odor, nor the nutritive virtue of the
Bread, nor nothing visible or tangible, or otherwise perceptible by any Sense,
is involved in it: That is to say, that the Symbol or external Sign then in
this Eucharist, is according to them, a hard, soft, frangible, gustible,
odoriferous, nutritive, visible, tangible, perceptible nothing. Verily a fit
external Species indeed to contain, a one, manifold; visible, invisible;
extended, unextended; local, illocal; absent, present; natural, supernatural;
corporal, spiritual Body.

Secondly; Concerning the Adoration of the Sacrament, he tells us, That this
word Sacrament, is Page 14.. xi.
not to be taken always in the same sense; but sometimes to be used to signify
only the external Sign, or Symbols; sometimes only the Res Sacramenti, or the
thing contained under them, which is the more principal part thereof. This
indeed is a sort of new Divinity. I always thought hitherto, that when we
talked of a Sacrament, properly so called, we had meant an outward and visible
Sign of an inward and spiritual Grace: and that this particular Sacrament had
been a whole composed of the External Species, (whatever they are) as the Sign;
and the Body and Blood of Christ as the inward part, or thing signified. Thus I
am sure the Catechism of the Council of Trent instructs us. First, for the
name; it tells us, that The Latin Doctors have thought Catech. ad Parach. part
2. de Sacram. n. iii. and v. p. 92.
that certain Signs, subjected to the Senses, which declare, and as it were set
before the Eyes, the Grace which they effect, may fitly be called Sacraments.
And for the nature of them, thus it defines a Sacrament from S. Austin, It is
the sign of a holy thing; or more fully, as I before said; a visible sign of an
invisible Grace, instituted for our Justification. So that neither then Symbols
alone, nor the invisible part, or Grace alone, can with any manner of propriety
be called a Sacrament; but the Sign referred to the Grace; and as it is the
Symbol instituted by Christ for the conferring of it.

This therefore can with no good reason be called a Catholic Assertion; being
neither general nor true: But however, since he seems content to allow it to be
an impropriety of Speech, and that, I confess, the Catec. Conc. Tr^d^ part 2.
de Euch.. viii. nota p. 144.
Catechism of the Council of Trent does lead him into it; let us see what use
he can make of it. Page 15.. xi.
And as Protestants much press, so Catholics (Roman Catholics) willingly
acknowledge a great difference between these two, The worshipping of the
Sacrament, as this word is taken for the Symbols; and the worshipping of
Christ's Body in the Sacrament. There is, no doubt, a great difference between
these two: but then they who tell us, the Sacrament is to be Adored, if they
will speak rationally, must mean neither the one nor other of these, but the
Host; that is, as Card. Pallavicini expounds it, The whole, of which Christ's
Body is a part; in the language of the Council of Trent; the Sacrament IN WHICH
they believe Christ to be present, and for that Cause adore it; as the Cardinal
again argues; See above, page 91, 92.
that, To make a Whole Adorable, it is sufficient that one part be so; and
therefore since the Body of Christ is adorable, the Sacrament for its sake is
to be worshipped. It is therefore a mere shift to tell us that the Sacrament is
to be adored; i. e. Christ's Body in the Sacrament. Nor will the remark of our
Author help us out, that tho the Chapter indeed calls it the Sacrament IN Page
16.. xiii.
WHICH is Christ's Body, yet the Canon speaks more precisely, and calls it
Christ in the Sacrament; unless he supposes the Council to have been infallible
in the Canons only, and not in the Chapters; as some have thought, that they
may be out in their Proofs, but cannot be in their Conclusions. But however,
since he so much desires it, for my part I shall be content to allow them this
too; for I should be glad by any means to see them sensible of their Errors.
But yet so as that it be esteemed only a private Opinion this, not a Catholic
Assertion.

Thirdly; Catholics, he means the Papists still, P. 21.. xvii.
ground their Adoration, not upon Transubstantiation; as if Transubstantiation
defeated, Adoration is so too; but on a Real Presence with the Symbols, which
in general is agreed on by the Lutherans together with them. By which
Assertion, if he means only to make this Discovery, That Christ's Real
Presence, together with the Substance of the Bread and Wine, is in his Opinion
as good a ground for Adoration, as if he were there only with the Species of
the Bread, the Substance being changed into his Body; I have no more to say to
it. But if he would hereby make us believe, that it is all one whether Christ be
adored, as supposed here by the Lutherans in this Holy Eucharist, and as
imagined there by the Papists; I must then deny his Assertion; and desire him
to keep home to his own manner of Real Presence, and which I shall presently
convince him, will leave them in a much worse condition than their Neighbors,
whom he would draw into the same Snare with them. And therefore, whereas he
concludes,

Fourthly; That supposing Transubstantiation to be an Error, yet if the Tenent
of Corporal or Real P. 22.. xviii.
Presence (as held by the Lutherans, or others) be true; Catholics (he would
say Papists) plead their Adoration, is no way frustrated, but still
warrantable: I must tell him, that the Adoration of those among the Lutherans,
who worship Christ in this Sacrament upon the account of his Real Presence in,
or with the Bread, tho it be an Error, yet is infinitely more excusable than
theirs, who suppose the Bread to be turned into Christ's Body; and because it
may not be thought that I speak this out of any prejudice against them, I will
here offer my Reasons for it.

1st, They that adore Christ as really present, together with the Bread, do no
violence to their Senses: They confess, that what they see, and taste, and
feel, and smell, is really Bread and Wine. Whilst the Papist in denying the
Bread and Wine to remain; or that what he sees, and feels, and smells, and
tastes, is what all the World perceives and knows it is, contradicts his
Senses, and in them the Law of Nature, that Means which God has given us to
direct and lead us into the search of Truth; and by Consequence errs against
infinitely greater Means of Conviction, and so is more inexcusable than the
Other.

2dly; They who worship Christ, as supposing Him to be together with the Bread
in this Holy Eucharist, are erroneous indeed in this, that they take Christ's
Body to be where really it is not; but yet their Object is undoubtedly right,
and in that they are not mistaken. But now for the Papist; he adores, it is
confessed, what he thinks to be Christ's Body; and would not otherwise adore
it: But yet still it is the Host that he adores, the Substance that is under
those Species which he sees; and which if it be not Christ, but mere Substance
of Bread, the Case is vastly altered between the Lutheran and Him. The former
adores Christ, only as in a place where he is not; the latter not only does
this, but moreover adores a Substance for Christ which is not his Body and
Blood, but a mere Creature of Bread and Wine.

Monsieur Daille therefore might rightly enough say of a Lutheran, that his
Adoration is mistaken, P. 23.. xix.
not in this -- that it addresseth it self to an Object not adorable, but only
that by Error it seeks and thinks to enjoy it in a place where it is not; and
so becomes only vain and unprofitable: And yet our Author has no manner of
Reason from thence to pretend, that a Papist who terminates his Adoration upon
a Substance which really is not Christ's Body, but only mistaken by him to be
so, shall be in the same Condition: there being an apparently vast difference
between worshipping Christ in a place where he is not, and worshipping that for
Christ which really is not Christ, but only a created Substance.

And this in truth our Author seems to have been sensible of, and therefore
thinks to evade it, by saying, That they do not worship the Substance that is
in Ibid p. 23.
that place, under such Accidents whatever it be, (which if Bread should happen
to be there, he confesses would make them Bread-worshippers) but they worship
it only upon supposition that it is Christ's Body, and not Bread.

Well, be this so: But what now if they are mistaken in their Supposition: They
worship, he confesses, the Substance-that is under those Accidents, supposing
it to be Christ's Body; but still, mistaken or not, that Substance which is
under those Species, whatever it be, they do worship: And if they have, as he
thinks, a rational ground for this Supposition, which we shall see by and by,
yet this will only excuse them from being formal Idolaters; but will not hinder
but that their Worship is still directed to an undue Object, if that which is
under the Species be indeed but Bread, and not Christ's Body as they imagine.
And this then may serve to argue the falseness of what he lays down as his

Fifth, Catholic Assertion: That supposing both P. 22.. xix.
the Lutherans and Papists mistaken in their Opinion, yet there can be no
pretense why the One should not be as excusable as the others. Since as I have
said; 1st, They err more grossly in abandoning the conviction of their Senses,
which the Lutherans do not; 2dly, They worship a Substance for Christ, which
really is not: To which if this be not enough, I will add yet two other
Reasons: 3dly, That they make the Consecration, without which Christ is not
present upon their own Principles, to depend on such uncertainties (as I shall
more fully show anon) that they can never be sure that Christ is there, which
the Lutherans are free from: And lastly; They Anathematize those who dissent
from them as to this Point, and so make a Schism in dividing the Unity of the
Church, which the Lutherans are so far from doing, that they neither establish
any Doctrine of Adoration at all, nay many of them do not believe it; and upon
occasion, freely communicate with those who dissent from them in their belief,
both of their way of the Real Presence, and of the Adoration. And for the same
reason I cannot totally assent to his

Sixth Assertion: That supposing there be no P. 25.. xxi.
such Real Presence as either of them believes, yet that their adoration of
Christ, who is a true Object of Supreme Adoration, and only by them mistaken to
be in some place where He is not, cannot be termed any such Idolatry, as is the
worshipping of an Object not at all adorable.

This as to what concerns those of the Lutherans who adore Christ in the
Sacrament, is true: But for the Papist it is not. He intends, I allow it, to
worship Christ, but he mistakes an Object for Christ, which is only a piece of
Bread. He worships his Host, supposing it to be our Savior's Body, but his
Error is gross, and he not only mistakes Christ to be in a place where he is
not, but he mistakes that to be Christ which indeed is not, but only a simple
Wafer. His Worship therefore is not like the Manichees worshipping of Christ in
the Sun; but rather as if the Manichee should, from some mistaken grounds, have
fancied the Sun it self to be turned into Christ's Body; and then in defiance
of all Scripture, Sense, and Reason, should have fallen down before it; but
with a good Intention not to adore the Sun, but the Body of our Blessed Lord
under the Species or Accidents of the Sun. This is the true Parallel; only that
herein still the Manichee would have been the more excusable of the two, by how
much the Sun is a more likely Object to be mistaken for Christ's glorified Body
than a Morsel of Bread; and less capable of being discovered by our Senses and
Examination not to be so.

It remains then, that these Lutherans only adore Christ where he is not; the
Papists not only do this, but more-over they adore that for Christ which really
is not, but a mere created Substance. Both the One and the Other are Erroneous;
but the Papist's Mistake, renders him at the least guilty of material Idolatry,
whereas the Lutherans is only an undue Application of his Worship as to the
Place, but right as to the Person. Let us see,

Seventhly; How far their Mistake will excuse them, in answer to his seventh
Assertion: That however a Manichaean may be guilty of Idolatry for P. 26.. xxii.
worshipping Christ in the Sun; and an Israelite for worshipping God as
specially resident in the Calves of Dan and Bethel, because it is adoring a
Fancy of their own, without any rational Ground or Pretense thereof; and
however merely a good Intention, grounded upon a culpable Ignorance, can excuse
none from Idolatry, or any other Fault; yet if Catholics, (i. e. the pretended
Roman Catholics) can produce a rational Ground of their apprehending Christ
present in the Eucharist, tho possibly mistaken in it, they are to be exexcused
from Idolatry. Which Proposal is so just, that I am very willing to allow it;
and shall be heartily glad that the Grounds of their Mistake may in the End
prove to have been so reasonable as to excuse them. But then it must be
remembered too, that he confesses if these Grounds be not reasonable, but as he
says of the Manichees, their adoring of the Host be indeed an adoring a Fancy
of their own without any rational Ground; So that their ignorance in this
Matter is culpable, then by their own allowance they are Idolaters.

This therefore brings me to the last Thing to be enquired into.

III. What Grounds they have for this Adoration? and whether they be such as,
should they be mistaken in it, will be sufficient to excuse them?

And thus after a great deal of Preamble, but very little to the purpose, we
are at last come to the main Question. I have already so largely shown our
Reasons against Transubstantiation, or that Real Presence on which this
Adoration is built, that I shall not need to insist here. Yet because the
stress of this Controversy depends principally on ^his last Part, I will,

1st, Examine the strength of those Grounds which this Author has offered, to
warrant their Adoration. 2dly, I will propose an Argument or two upon their own
allowed Principles against it.
But before we proceed to these Points, we must vet have one touch more upon
the old String: For Page 26.. xxiii.
the Lutherans, he says, being allowed to have such a plausible Ground or
Motive for their Adoration, whereby they become Absolved by other Protestants
from Idolatry, in adoring our Lord as present there, I see not why the Grounds
of Roman Catholics should be any whit less valued than theirs.

In Answer to which, the Reader may please to remember, that I have before
said, that we do not excuse those Lutherans who do this so much upon this
Principle, that they have a more plausible Ground or Motive for their
Adoration; but for this rather, that confessing the Substance of the Bread to
remain, they do not mistake their Object, but pay their Adoration indeed to
Christ, only supposing him to be there where in Truth he is not. But, 2dly,
this Author is very much mistaken if he thinks the Lutherans have no better a
Foundation for their Real Presence than the Papists. Indeed, were the
difference See Ibid.
no greater than between a Con and a Trans, it would, I confess, be hardly
worth the while to contend about it. But when we come to the Point it self, we
may observe these four Advantages, among many others of the Lutherans side. 1.
They confess for the outward Elements, that they are really what they appear to
be, Bread and Wine; and so they do no Violence to their Senses; which, as I
have said, is a great aggravation against the Papists. 2. By this means they
are at no defiance with all those Texts of Scripture where they are so often
called Bread and Wine after Consecration: All which the Papist contradicts, but
the Lutheran does not. 3. From the words of Christ, This is my Body; we all of
us confess may be inferred, that Christ's Body is in this Holy Sacrament: But
whence does the Papist infer the destruction of the Substance of the Bread; so
that what is taken, and blessed, and given, is not Bread, but Christ's Body
under the appearance of Bread? This is an Error which I am sure the Text gives
no manner of color to; and therefore our Author cannot with any reason
pretend, as he does, whether we consult the Text of Holy Scripture, or our own
Senses, that they have as good grounds for their Real Presence, as the
Lutherans have for theirs. To all which let me add, 4thly, that by
Transubstantiation they destroy the very Nature of a Sacrament, by leaving no
true external Sign or Symbol, and which is another unanswerable Argument
against them, whilst the Lutherans acknowledging the Substance of the Bread to
remain, do not destroy at all the Nature of this Sacrament, but retain the same
Sign which our Blessed Lord established, and so have no Objection on this side
neither to convict them.

But yet notwithstanding all this, Do not some Page 26, 27.
of our Writers confess, that the Papists Interpretation is more rational than
the Lutherans? I Answer; What certain Protestants may have said in Zeal for
their own Opinions, and in particular Hospinian upon the account of his Master
Zuinglius, I cannot tell: But sure I am, we are not bound to answer for all
that any Protestant Author has said. And if these Reasons I have here given for
the contrary are valid, they ought to be more regarded, than the ungrounded
Assertions of a Sacramentary Historian.

Well, but still the Papist does not ground his Page 27.
Adoration upon Transubstantiation, but on Corporal Presence; and so they must
both be excused, or neither.

This is a fetch to very little purpose: For let me ask this Author; He
confesses he founds his Adoration upon the Corporal Presence: Does he believe
the Corporal Presence in the way of Transubstantiation exclusive to all others,
or no? If he does, then it is evident that the Corporal Presence and
Transubstantiation, must with him stand or fall together; and so if he adores
on the account of the Corporal Presence, he does it upon the account of
Transubstantiation. If he does not believe this, it is plain he is no Papist,
nor submits to the Authority of the Church of Rome, which has defined the
Corporal Presence to be after this particular manner, exclusive to all Others,
and Anathematized all that dare to deny it.

Laying aside therefore this Comparison, and which in truth will do them but
very little kindness: Let us view more particularly what rational Page 27..
xxiv.
Grounds they have to exhibit for this their belief of their Corporal Presence
of Christ in the Eucharist, and of the Adoration of him upon that account.

I. Ground: And the first is Divine Revelation: Ibid.
For which our Author offers the two usual Instances, of the words of
Institution, and the 6th Chapter of S. John; both which therefore I have at
large discoursed on above, and I believe sufficiently shown how false a
Foundation these are of this belief.

But yet since our Author reminds us; Page 27, 28.
That against these no Argument taken from our Senses or Reason is valid: I
will beg leave to remind him of his own Assertion too, See Treatise 1. p. 14.
That none can believe a thing true upon what Motive soever, that he knows
certainly to be false, or which is all one, certainly to contradict -- So that
if our Reason then P. 21. Treat. 1.
makes us certain of such a contradiction, we may be certain that there neither
is nor can be a contrary Revelation; and when any Revelation, tho NEVER SO
PLAIN, is brought, we are bound to interpret it so, as not to affirm a
certainly known impossibility.

From which Principle it seems to me to follow, that were Hoc est Corpus meum,
as evident a proof of Transubstantiation, as their own Authors confess it is
not; yet if our Sense and Reason tell us that there are certain Contradictions
against the common Principles of Nature, and the universal Sentiments of all
Mankind, no otherwise to be avoided but by taking those words in the sense in
which we do; we are then BOUND to interpret them so, as to avoid these
Impossibilities. And this I am confident I have at large shown above to be the
Case, and thither I refer the Reader.

II. Ground. Their second Ground is founded upon P. 28.. xxv.
the Authority of those Councils that have determined this Matter; The
Declaration, as he calls it, of the most Supreme and Universal Church Authority
that has been assembled in former Times for the decision of this Controversy,
long before the birth of Protestantism.

These are great Words indeed; but I wonder who ever heard before that a few
miserable These are his Synods; at Rome, Vercelles, Tours; Rome again, An.
1059. and again, An. 1078.
Synods of particular Prelates, such as are all those to which he refers us,
assembled against Berengarius, were the most supreme and universal
Church Authority. For his little Reflection, that they were assembled long
before the birth of Protestantism, I must tell him, I doubt he is mistaken. The
Religion of Protestants, like that of Papists, is composs'd of two great parts;
Catholic Christianity, common in some measure to us all; and Protestations
against Popery. Now it is true, for what concerns the latter of these, we allow
Popery to have the advantage of us, as to the Point of Antiquity, nor are we
ashamed to own it: It being necessary that they should have fallen into Errors,
before we could protest against them; but as to the present matter, our Author
in his Disc. 1. p. 55.. lvii.
Guide, to which he refers us, confesses that Berengarius, against whom these
little Synods were called, proceeded upon Protestant Grounds, i. e. in effect
was a Protestant as to this Point: And therefore it is false in him now to say,
that these Councils were assembled long before the birth of Protestantism.

But I return to his Church Authority; and answer; 1. If this Doctrine be
certainly contrary to Sense and Reason, as was before said, then he has told us
before, that no Motive whatever, no Revelation, tho never so plain, can be
sufficient to engage us to believe it. 2. For his Councils, the eldest of them
was above a thousand Years after Christ, when by our own Confession, the Error,
tho not of Transubstantiation, yet of the Corporal Presence, was creeping into
the Church. 3. These Councils were themselves a Party against Berengarius, and
therefore no wonder if they condemned him. 4. They were neither universal of
the whole Church, or even of the Western Patriachate in which they assembled;
and therefore we can have no security that they did not err, tho we should
grant this Privilege to a truly General Council that it could not. 5. It Is
evident that some of them did err; forasmuch as the very In the first Formulary
prescribed him by P. Nicholas 2. in the Siynod of Rome, 1059. He thus declares,
Panem and Vinum quae in altari ponuntur post consecrationem non solum
Sacramentum sed etiam verum Corpus and Sanguinem, D. N. J. Christi esse; and
sensualiter non solum SACRAMENTO, sed in Veritate manibus Sacerdotum, tractari,
frangi, and fidelium dentibus atteri. The former Part of which Confession is
Lutheran; the latter utterly denied by the C. of R. at this day. In the second
Formulary prescribed him by Gregory viith, 1078. Confiteor Panem and Vinum --
converti in veram ac propriam Carnem and Sanguinem J. C. D. N. Et post
consecrationem esse verum Corpus Christi -- non tantum per signum and virtutem
Sacramenti, sed in proprietate naturae, and veritate substantiae. This speaks
of a Conversion, but of what kind it says not; and Lombard and the other
Schoolmen, to the very time of the Council of Lateran, were not agreed about
it: and P. Gregory himself in his MS. Work upon St. Mat. knew not what to think
of it.
Formularies of Recantation prescribed to Berengarius, do not agree the one
with the other; and one of them was such, that their own Jo. Semeca ad Can. Ego
Berengar. not. ad Jus Canon. Nisi sane intelligas verba Berengarii in majorem
incides Haeresim quam ipse habuit; and ideo omnia referas ad species ipsas; nam
de Christi Corpore parts non facimus. So Hervaeus in 4. did. qu. 1. art. 1.
says, that to speak the more expressly against the Heretics, be declined a
little too much to the opposite side. So Ricardus de Media Villa in 4. did.
princip. 1. qu. 1. Berengarius fuerat infamatus quod non credebat Corpus
Christi realiter contineri sub pane, ideo ad sui purgationem, per verba
excessiva contrarium Asseruit.
Authors tell us it must be very favorably interpreted, or it will lead us
into a worser Error than that which it condemned. 6. Were they never so
infallible, yet they none of them defined Transubstantiation, but only a
Corporal Presence; and so whatever Authority they have, it is for the
Lutherans, not the Papists. 7. And this their own Writers seem to own;
forasmuch as none of them pretend to any definition of Transubstantiation
before the Council of Lateran; and till which time they freely confess it was
no Article of Faith.

Such is the Church Authority which this Discourser would put upon us. But now
that I have mentioned the Council of Lateran, as I have before observed, that
it was the same Council which established Page 28.
this Error, that also gave power to the Pope to depose Princes, and absolve
their Subjects from their Obedience; so I cannot but remak further in this
place, the Zeal of our Author in the defense of its Authority. It is but a very
little while since another of their Church, Land. 1616. Page 362, etc.
Father Walsh, in his Letter to the Bishop of Lincoln, did not think that the
Mr. Dodwel Consid. of present Concernment,. 31.
Learned Person of our Church, to whom he refers us, had so clearly proved
these Canons to have been the genuine Monsieur du Pin utterly denies these
Canons to have been the Decrees of the Council. Dissert. vii. c. iii.. 4.
Acts either of the Council, or even of the Papist himself, but that a Man
might still have reason to doubt of both: But indeed, tho that Father be of
another mould, yet there are still some in the World, and I believe of this
Author's acquaintance, who like this Council, never the worse for such a
decision; but think the third Canon as necessary to keep Princes in a due
Obedience to the Church, as the first, de Fide Catholia, to help out the
obscurity of the Text in favor of Transubstantiation.

But he goes on; and upon these Premises, Ask Page 28, 29.. XXV.
us, What more reasonable or secure course in matters of Religion can a private
and truly humble Christian take, than where the sense of a Divine Revelation is
disputed, to submit to that Interpretation thereof, which the Supreamest
Authority in the Church, that has heretofore been convened about such matters
has so often, and always in the same manner decided to him, and so to act
according to its Injunction?

Now, not to say any more as to his Expression of the Supremest Church
Authority, which it may be he will interpret not absolutely, but with this
Reserve, that has been convened about such matters; I answer from himself, 1.
It is a more reasonable and secure course to follow that Interpretation which
is agreeable to the common Sense and Reason of Mankind, and against which he
tells us, not only the Authority of a Synod, but even a Divine Revelation is
not sufficient to secure us. 2. These Synods, as I have showed, besides that
they were particular, were moreover Parties in the case. And then, 3. It is
false to say that they always decided the same, or, that that which they
decided is the same which the Church of Rome now holds in this matter. All
which our Particularly Blondel, to whom this Author refers us, Eclairciss. de
l'Euch. c. 20, etc. Albertinus de Euch. lib. 3. P. 947.
Authors have fully proved, and this Discourser therefore ought to have
answered.

III. Ground. But now, he says, if these Councils P. 29.. xxvi.
be declined, as not being so ancient as some may expect; i. e. not held before
some Controversy happened in the Church touching the Point they decided: They
have yet another very rational Ground of their belief, and that is, the evident
Testimony of the more Primitive Times. It would have been more to the purpose,
if he could honestly have said of the most Primitive Times. But however his
Modesty is the greater now, tho his Argument be not so strong. As to the Point
of Antiquity, I have already fully discussed it above; and we are but Treatise
of Transubstantiation, by an Author of the C. of R.
very lately assured by one of their own Authors, that Antiquity is of our side
in this Point. For the six or seven Fathers he has mentioned, S. Ambrose de
Sacramentis. Eusebius. Emyssen. de Paschate.
some of them are spurious; others have been Cyril Hierosol. in the Relat. of
the Conference at my Lady T. 1676. in the Paper sent my Lady T. p. 50, 51, 52.
And for S. Ambrose de Sacr. allowing the Book, yet see the Explication of what
is there said, given by himself, l. 5. c. 4. See a late Treatise of the Doct.
of the Trinity and Transubst. compared, Part 1. p. 46, 47.
expressly answered by us; and all of them at large by Monsieur Aubertine,
Larrogue, and others. If this does not satisfy him, he may shortly expect a
fuller account in our own Language; Transubstantiation no Doctrine of the
Primitive Fathers. Cyrill's Authority examined, p. 13, 14. Ambrose's, p. 18,
19. Chrysostom's, p. 40. Greg. Nyssen's, p. 48.
a Specimen of which has already been given to the World in Earnest of what is
suddenly to follow.

IV. Ground. His next Ground is taken from the universal Doctrine and Practice
of the later both Eastern and Western Churches till Luther's Time, and at
present also excepting his Followers. To which I answer; That this Ground is
not certainly true; and if it were, yet certainly it is nothing to the purpose.
1. It is not certainly true: Indeed, that the latter Ages of the Western
Churches before Luther, that is, from the time of the Council of Laterane, did
profess the belief of Transubstantiation is confessed: And that a great part of
the Greek Church at this day does the same, since their new College at Rome,
and their Money and Missionaries sent among them have corrupted their Faith, I
do not deny: But that this was so before Luther is not so certain; and
whosoever shall impartially read over the long debate between the late Monsieur
Claude, and Monsieur Arnaud concerning this matter, will, I believe, confess
that this can be no rational Ground for their belief. Ludolphus tells us of the
Ethiopian Hist Ethiop. l. 3. c. 5. n. 48.
Church, that at this day, it neither believes Transubstantiation, nor Adores
the Host: and Tellezius confesses it, because they consecrate with these words,
Ibid.
This Bread is my Body: For the De Eccles. Graec. Stat. Hodiern. D. Smith, p.
116. Land. 1678. Claude Reponse au 2. Traitte; live. 3. c. 8. p. 434, etc.
Charenton. 1668. Id. ult. resp. a Quevilly 1670. lib. 5. c. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6.
Histoire Critique de la creance and des Coutumes, des Nations, du Levant. --
Voyage du Mont Liban. Remarques, p. 302, 303, etc. Larrogue Hist. de
l'Eucharistie, live. 2. c. 19. page 781. Edit. Amst. 12o. Albertinus de
Eucharistia, p. 988, 989. fol. Daventriae 1654.
Greeks, the Muscovites, the Armenians, the Nestorians, Maronites, etc. those
who please to interest their Curiosity in a matter of so little moment as to
their Faith, may satisfy themselves in the Authors, to which I refer them. Tho
now, 2. To allow the matter of Fact to be true, I pray, what force is there at
last in this Argument, The Church both Eastern and Western, in these last Ages
have believed Transubstantiation; therefore the Papists have a rational Ground
to believe it. That is to say, you Protestants charge us for believing
Transubstantiation, as Men that act contrary to the design of Christ in this
Holy Eucharist, that have forsaken the Tradition of the Primitive Ages of the
Church; that destroy the nature of this Holy Sacrament, and do violence to the
common Sense and Reason of Mankind: Be it so; yet at least we have this
rational Ground for our belief, tho it should be false, viz. That we did all of
us peaceably and quietly believe it, till you came with your Scripture, and
Antiquity, and Sense, and Reason, to raise Doubts and Difficulties about it;
nay more, we all of us still do believe it, except those that you have
persuaded not to do so. Spectatum admissi risum teneatis Amici?


V. Ground. Of no greater strength is his last P. 31.. xxviii.
Ground for their belief, viz, That since Luther's Time no small number of
Protestants, even all the Genuine Sons of the Church of England, have proceeded
thus far, as to confess a Real Presence of our Lord's Body and Blood in the
Eucharist, and Adoration of it, as present there. For, 1. If we did acknowledge
this, yet it seems we are mistaken in it; and then what grounds can it be for a
Papist to believe Transubstantiation, that we Heretics by a Mistake do not
believe it, but only a real spiritual Presence, and as such are Anathematized
by them for our Error? 2. I have before shown, that were this a rational
Ground, yet it fails them too; for neither do the Genuine Sons of the Church of
England, nor any other that I know of, either believe Christ's natural Body to
be substantially present in the Holy Eucharist, or to be adored there: I am
sure if there be any such, they cannot be the Genuine Sons of the Church of
England in this Matter, who believe so expressly contrary to her formal
Declaration, as this Author has himself observed.

And then for the Lutherans, to whom he again Ibid. Page 32.
returns; it is hard to conceive what rational ground of Security they can
derive from their practice; that because they commit no Idolatry in worshipping
what they know certainly to be Christ, the Papist commits none for worshipping
what he does not know certainly is Christ; in truth what, if he pleased, he
might know certainly is not Christ.

And now after a serious and impartial Consideration of the Grounds produced in
Vindication of this Worship; tho I could have wished I might have found them as
rational as our Author pretends them to be, and shall be glad, as they are,
that they may hereafter prove sufficient to excuse them from the Guilt of
formal Idolatry in this Adoration; yet I must needs say, I do in my Conscience
think it is more an excess of Charity, than any necessity of Argument, if our
Writers do sometimes, either not P. 33.. xxx.
at all, or but faintly, charge them with Idolatry. And the Testimonies he
produces, argue rather the candor of our Affections toward them, even such as
to hope, almost against Hope for their sakes; than give any security to them in
their Errors. And because I would willingly, if possible, convince them of it,
I will very briefly subjoin a Reason or two.

2dly; Why even upon their own Principles I am not satisfied that they have
such a rational Ground for this Adoration, as may be sufficient to excuse them.

For, 1st, It is granted by this Author, That a P. 26.. xxii.
merely good Intention grounded upon a culpable Ignorance, cannot excuse them
from Idolatry. So that if their ignorance then be really culpable, their good
Intention will not be sufficient to excuse them. Now the ignorance upon which
this practice is founded, is their mistaken interpretation of those words, This
is my Body; and whether that be a rational or culpable Mistake, we shall best
be able to judge by two or three Observations.

1. It is confessed by the greatest Men of their Church, that there is no
necessity to interpret those words in that manner that they do; so that had not
the Authority of their Church interposed, they might have been equally verified
in our Interpretation. And this must be allowed, unless we shall say, that all
places of Holy Scripture must be understood in a literal sense, whatever the
Consequence be of so doing.

2. Our Author himself confesses, that if the taking of them in the literal
sense does involve a certain Contradiction, then it cannot be right; but we are
bound to seek out some other Exposition to avoid a certain Contradiction.

3. It is undeniable, that their Interpretation of these words destroys the
certainty of Sense, and in that of the Truth of the Christian Religion, which
was confirmed by Miracles, known only by the evidence of Sense; and by
Consequence of this particular Point, that Transubstantiation is revealed to us
by God, or can be relied upon as coming from him.

Now from these Principles I thus argue: If that sense of these words, This is
my Body, upon which they ground their Adoration, does necessarily imply many
plain and certain Contradictions, then by their own Confession that cannot be
the right sense of them. But that it does so, and that without gross and
culpable Ignorance they cannot doubt of but know it, I thus show. He that
believes these words in the sense of Transubstantiation, must believe the same
natural Body, at the same time, to be in tenthousand several places upon Earth,
and yet still to be but one Body, and that all the while in Heaven: He must
believe that the same natural Body is at the same time extended in all its
Parts, and yet continuing still the same Body without any change, to be
unextended, and have no distinct Parts, nor be capable of being divided into
any: He must believe the same Body at the same time, to move, and to lie still:
to be the Object of our Senses, and yet not to be perceptible by any: With
infinite others of the like kind See above, Chapter 2. of Transubstantiation. Page
32, 33.
as I have more fully shown before. But now all these are gross Contradictions,
contrary to the Nature of a Body, and to the common Principles of Reason in all
Mankind; and no Man can, without culpable Ignorance pretend not to know them to
be so: And therefore, notwithstanding any such supposed Divine Revelation as
may be pretended from those words, This is my Body, they cannot, by our
Author's own Rule, without culpable Ignorance, not know that they are mistaken
in this Matter.

Again: No Papist can have any reason to believe Transubstantiation to be true,
but because he reads those words of Holy Scripture, This is my Body. That these
words are in Scripture, he can know only by his Senses: If his Senses therefore
are not to be trusted, he is not sure there are any such words in Scripture. If
they are to be trusted, he is then sure that the Interpretation which he puts
upon them must be false.

Since then it is confessed, that there is no necessity to understand those
words in a literal sense; and that both upon the account of the Contradictions
that such an Exposition involves to the common Principles of Reason, and to the
certain Evidence of the Senses of all Mankind, it is necessary to take them in
some other meaning, it remains that without gross and culpable Ignorance they
cannot pretend not to know, that this could never have been the intention of
our Blessed Savior in those words; and that such Ignorance will not excuse
them, our Author himself has freely confessed.

But, 2dly, let us quit this Reflection, and for once suppose the possibility
of Transubstantiation. Yet still it is confessed by them: 1. That there is no
Command nor Example in holy Scripture for adoring Christ in the Eucharist. 2.
That infinite Defects may happen to hinder him from being there; and then what
they worship is only a piece of Bread. 3. That they can never be sure that some
of these Defects have not happened; and by consequence, that what they suppose
to be Christ's Body, is indeed any more than a mere Wafer.

From whence I argue;

He that without any Command or Warrant of God, pays a Divine Adoration to that
which he can never be sure is more than a mere Creature, can never be sure that
he does not commit Idolatry: But whosoever worships the Host, worships that
which he can never be sure is more than a mere Creature; and therefore he can
never be sure that in so doing he does not commit Idolatry.

Now concerning the former of these, how dangerous it is for any one to give
Divine Worship to what he can never be sure is any more than a mere Creature,
be it considered, what jealousy God has at all times expressed of his Honor as
to this Matter; how strict he has been in the peculiar vindication of his
Supreme Prerogative in such Cases. How therefore he that will come to him, must
be very well assured that it is God to whom he approaches; and therefore if he
has but the least reason to doubt of it, ought not to worship with a doubting
Mind; because he ought not to do that the omitting whereof can be no fault, but
the doing of which may, for ought he knows, be a very great Sin.

And for the second; Whether every Roman Catholic, who adores the Host, has
not even upon his own Principles, very great cause to doubt, whether he adores
Christ's Body, or only a bit of Bread, will appear from those infinite Defects
which they themselves allow as sufficient to hinder a Consecration; and which
make it great odds, were their Doctrine otherwise never so true, whether yet
one Host in twenty, it may be in five hundred, be consecrated.

1. With reference to the Holy Elements to be consecrated: If the Bread be not
all, or at least the greater part, of Wheat Flour; if it be not mixed with See
all this in the beginning of the Missal, de defectibus circa Missam.
pure Water; if the Bread be corrupted, or the Wine sour; if the Grapes of
which the Wine was made were not ripe; if any thing be mingled with the Wine
but Water; or if there be so much Water mixed with it, that that becomes the
prevailing Ingredient; in all these Cases, and many others which I omit, there
is no Consecration. And of all this, he who adores either the Bread or Wine,
can have no security. But,

2. Be the Elements right, yet if the Priest, being either ignorant, or in
haste, or unmindful of what he is about, should by mistake, or otherwise, err
in pronouncing of the words of Consecration; whether by Addition, or by
Diminution, or by any other Alteration, there is no Consecration: The Bread and
Wine continue what they were; and of this too he that worships them can never
be certain.

3. Let the words be never so rightly pronounced, yet if the Priest had no
intention to consecrate; if he be a secret Atheist, or Jew, or Moor: If he be a
careless negligent Man; it may be does not believe he has any Power to make
such a Change, (as I have shown that several of their greatest Men in this very
Age have doubted of it): If he consecrate a number of Wafers for a Communion,
and in his telling Mistakes, intending to consecrate but twenty, and there are
one and twenty before him; in all these Cases, for want of a due intention in
the Priest, there it no Consecration; but that which is adored, is only a
little Bread and Wine.

4. Let the Priest have a good Intention, yet if he See above in the Preface.
be no Priest; if he were not rightly Baptized, or Ordained; if he were a
Simoniac, or Irregular, or a Bastard, etc. Or if there were no defect in his
Ordination, yet if there was any in his who ordained him; or in the Bishops
that ordained that Bishop that ordained him; and so back to the very Time of
the Apostles, if in the whole Succession of Priests to this day, there has been
but any one Invalidity, whether by Error or Wilfulness, or for want of a due
Intention, or by Ignorance, or by any other means; then he that consecrates is
no true Priest, and by consequence has no Power to consecrate; and so all is
spoiled, and whosoever worships in any of his Masses, adores only a piece of
Bread instead of our Savior's Body.

When therefore so many Defects may interpose upon their own Principles to
hinder this Conversion, that it is exceeding probable, nay it is really great
odds, that not one Host in twenty is consecrated; it must certainly be very
hazardous to worship that for God, which upon their own Principles they can
never be sure is so; nay, which it is twenty to one is not God, but a mere
inanimate Creature of Bread and Wine.

It Is this has forced their most Learned Men to See Bellarm. de Justif. c. 8.
confess, that they can never be sure of a Consecration; and our Author himself
to declare, That they do not worship the Substance that is under the Accidents
Page 23.
of Bread and Wine, WHATEVER IT BE, but UPON SUPPOSITION that it is CHRIST'S
BODY; Which is what Pope Adrian 6th, following Adr. VI. quodlibet. Sect. 10.
Suppos. 2.
herein the Authority of the Council of Constance, prescribed; that they ought
always to adore the Host with such a reserve: The Council of Constance, See
Gerson, Tract. de Exam. doctr. consid. 6.
says he, excuses those who in their simplicity adore an unconsecrated Host,
because this condition is tacitly implied, of it be rightly consecrayed: And
therefore he advises, let them so adore the Host, I. ADORE THEE IF THOU ART
CHRIST. But now if, as the Apostle tells us in another case, Whatsoever is not
of Faith, is Sin; and, He that doubts, is damned if he eats: I shall leave it
to any sober Christian to say what security there can be in such a Worship,
which is neither advised, encouraged, or commanded in Holy Scripture; and which
they themselves confess they can never be certain is addressed to a right
Object; and therefore are forced to such Shifts and Reserves, as were they once
admitted, might make any other Creature in the World as warrantably adorable as
their Host.

How much better were it for them to adore their Blessed Savior in Heaven,
where his glorified Body most certainly is: Where there can therefore be no
danger to lift up our Hearts unto him. Were his Sacred Body indeed
substantially present in this Blessed Sacrament, yet still it would be in a
manner to us imperceptible, in the state of his Death, and by consequence of
his Humiliation; and we might therefore have some cause to doubt whether, since
we have received no Command concerning it, it were our Savior's Pleasure that
his Body should be adored by us in that State: So that there could be no Sin in
the not doing of it. But now amidst so many Doubts, not only upon Ours, but
even upon their own Principles, that they dare not themselves worship at a
venture, that which yet they do worship; tho I shall leave them to their own
Master to stand or fall at the Great Day, yet I must needs profess. I think
there is very much hazard in it. A great Sincerity, and great Ignorance, may
excuse a poor untaught, and therefore blindly obedient Multitude: but for their
Guides, who lead them into Error, for those to whom God has given Capacities
and Opportunities (as to those now among us he has done, of being better
informed) I can only say, Lord, lay not this Sin to their Charge!

And this may suffice to have been said to the third Thing proposed, of their
Rational Grounds for this Worship. For what our Author finally adds; That Page
37.. xxxiii.
to adore that which the Adorer believes not to be our Lord, but Bread, would
be unlawful to be done by any, so long as the Person continues so persuaded --
But then if we suppose the Church justly requiring such Adoration upon such a
true Presence of our Lord, neither will the same Person be free from sinning
greatly in his following such his Conscience, and in his not adoring.

I Answer: It will then be time enough to consider this, when either the Church
to which we owe an Obedience, shall require it of us, or they be able to prove
that in such a Case the Church would not sin in Commanding, and not we in
refusing to obey her. But, blessed be God, there is no great danger of either
of these: Our Church is too well persuaded of the unlawfulness of such a
Worship, ever to require it of us. And for that Church which has so
uncharitably undertaken to Anathematize all those who will not own her
Authority, and receive her Errors, tho never so gross, as Articles of Faith: We
are so fully convinced of the unreasonableness of her Pretenses, and of our own
Liberty, that we shall hardly be brought to submit our selves to the Conduct of
such a blind Guide, lest we fall into the same Ditch, into which she her self
is tumbled. And it would certainly much better become our Author, and his
Brethren, to consider how they can justify their Disobedience to their own
Mother, than to endeavor at this rate to lead us into the same Apostasy, both
to our Religion and our Church with them.

The Conclusion.
AND thus by the Blessing of God, and the Advantage of a good Cause, have I
very briefly passed through this Author's Reflections, and I am persuaded
sufficiently shown the weakness and falsity of the most of them. If any one
shall think that I ought to have insisted more largely upon some Points, he may
please to know, that since by the importunate Provocations of those of the
other Communion, we have been forced too often to interrupt those Duties of our
Ministry, in which we could rather have wished to have employed our Time, for
these kind of Controversies which serve so very little to any purposes, either
of true Piety, or true Charity among us: We have resolved thus far at least to
gratify both our selves and others, as to make our Disputes as short as is
possible; and loose no more time in them, than the necessary Defense of our
selves and the Truth do require.

I have indeed passed by much of our Author's Discourses, because they are
almost entirely made up of tedious and endless Repetitions of the same things,
and very often in the same words. But for any thing that is Argumentative, or
otherwise material to the main Cause, I do not know that I have either let the
Observation of it slip, or dissembled at all the Force of it.

It was once in my thoughts to have made some Reflections in the Close upon the
Changes of their Rituals, in requital for our Author's Observations on the
Alterations of our Liturgy; but I have insisted longer than I designed
already, and shall therefore content my my self to have given the Hint of what
might have been done, and shall still be done, if our Author, or any in his
behalf desire it of me.

In the mean time I cannot but observe the unreasonableness of that Method
which is here taken; from the Expressions of some of our Divines, and the
Concessions of others, whose professed Business it was to reconcile, if
possible, all Parties, and therefore were forced sometimes to condescend more
than was fit for the doing it; and even these too miserably mangled and
misrepresented, to pretend to prove the Doctrine of our Church contrary to the
express Declarations of the Public Acts and Records of it. This has been the
endeavor of several of our late Writers, but of this Discourser above any. Had
those worthy Persons, whose Memory they thus abuse, been yet living, they might
have had an ample Confutation from their own Pens; as, in the very Instance
before us, has been given them for the like ill use made by some among them, of
the pious Meditations of a most Excellent and Learned Father of our Church; and
who might otherwise in the next Age have been improved into a new Witness
against us. I do not think that Bp Taylour ever thought he should have been set
up as a favourer of Popery, who had written so expressly and warmly against it.
Yet I cannot but observe a kind of Prophetic Expression in his Book of the
Real Presence, which being so often quoted by these Men, I somewhat wonder it
should have slipped their Remark: Where speaking of their Shifts to make any
One they please of their side, he has these words; And -- I know no reason,
Real Presence,. xii. n. 28. page 261.
says he, but it may be possible, but a WITTY MAN may pretend, when I am dead,
that in this Discourse I have pleaded for the Doctrine of the Roman Church.

We have now lived to see some of those WITTY MEN that have done but little
less than this; tho how Honest they are in the mean time, I will not determine.
But I hope this Design too shall be from henceforth in good measure frustrated:
And therefore, since neither their New Religion, nor their New Advocates will
do their Business; since it is in vain that they either misrepresent their own
Doctrine, or our Authors in favor of it; may they once please either honestly
to avow and defend their Faith, or honestly to confess that they cannot do it.
Such shuffling as this, does but more convince us of the weakness of their
Cause; and instead of defending their Religion by these Practices, they only
increase in us our ill Opinion of that, and lessen that good'One which we
willingly would, but shall not always be able to conserve of those, who by such
indirect means as these, endeavor to support it.

FINIS.
Books lately printed for Richard Chiswell.
A Dissertation concerning the Government of the Ancient Church: more
particularly of the Encroachments of the Bishops of Rome upon other Se^s. By
WILLIAM CAVE, D. D. Octavo.

An Answer to Mr. Serjeant's [Sure Footing in Christianity] concerning the Rule
of Faith: With some other Discourses. By WILLIAM FALKNER, D. D. 40.

A Vindication of the Ordinations of the Church of England; in Answer to a
Paper written by one of the Church of Rome, to prove the Nullity of our Orders.
By GILBERT BURNET, D. D. Octavo.

An Abridgment of the History of the Reformation of the Church of England. By
GILB. BURNET, D. D. Octavo.

The APOLOGY of the Church of England; and an Epistle to one Signior Scipio, a
Venetian Gentleman, concerning the Council of Trent. Written both in Latin, by
the Right Reverend Father in God, JOHN JEWEL Lord Bishop of Salisbury: Made
English by a Person of Quality. To which is added, The Life of the said Bishop:
Collected and written by the same Hand. Octavo.

The Life of WILLIAM BEDEL, D. D. Bishop of Kilmore in Ireland. Together with
Certain Letters which passed betwixt him and James Waddesworth (a late
Pensioner of the Holy Inquisition of Sevil) in Matter of Religion, concerning
the General Motives to the Roman Obedience. Octavo.

The Decree made at ROME the Second of March, 1679. condemning some Opinions of
the Jesuits, and other Casuists. Quarto.

A Discourse concerning the Necessity of Reformation, with respect to the
Errors and Corruptions of the Church of Rome. Quarto. First and Second Parts.

A Discourse concerning the Celebration of Divine Service in an Unknown Tongue.
Quarto.

A Papist not Misrepresented by Protestants. Being a Reply to the Reflections
upon the Answer to [A Papist Misrepresented and Represented]. Quarto.

An Exposition of the Doctrine of the Church of England, in the several
Articles proposed by the late BISHOP of CONDOM, [in his Exposition of the
Doctrine of the Catholic Church]. Quarto.

A Defense of the Exposition of the Doctrine of the Church of England; against
the Exceptions of Monsieur de M^aux, late Bishop of Condom, and his Vindicator.
40.

A CATECHISM explaining the Doctrine and Practices of the Church of Rome. With
an Answer thereunto. By a Protestant of the Church of England. 80.

A Papist Represented and not Misrepresented, being an Answer to the First,
Second, Fifth and Sixth Sheets of the Second Part of the [Papist Misrepresented
and Represented]; and for a further Vindication of the CATECHISM, truly
representing the Doctrines and Practices of the Church of Rome. Quarto.

The Lay-Christian's Obligation to read the Holy Scriptures. Quarto.

The Plain Man's Reply to the Catholic Missionaries. 240.

An Answer to THREE PAPERS lately printed, concerning the Authority of the
Catholic Church in Matters of Faith, and the Reformation of the Church of
England. Quarto.

A Vindication of the Answer to THREE PAPERS concerning the Unity and Authority
of the Catholic Church, and the Reformation of the Church of England. Quarto.

Imprimatur,

May 13. 1687. GUIL. NEEDHAM.

TWO DISCOURSES: OF PURGATORY, AND PRAYERS FOR THE DEAD.

LONDON, Printed for Ric. Chiswell, at the Rose and Crown in St. Paul's
Churchyard, MDCLXXXVII.

THE CONTENTS.
INTRODUCTION. THE Occasion of these Discourses, 1 The Doctrine of Purgatory
derived from the Ancient Philosophers. 2 The Opinions of the Primitive Fathers
concerning the state of Men after Death. 3 All vastly distant from the Doctrine
of the Romish Purgatory. 5 Which had no foundation for the first 600 years. 6
How it then began to creep into the Western Church ib. In the Other Churches
not received at this day 7
SECT. I.
What it is that the Church of Rome means by Purgatory. 9 Shown -- From the
Council of Trent. ib. -- From private Writers of that Church. 10

SECT. II.
That there is no Ground for such a Purgatory in Holy Scripture. 12 Shown in a
particular Examination of the two main places alleged by them, viz. 2 Maccab.
XII. 13 Matt. XII. 32. 16


SECT. III.
That the Primitive Church for 600 years, knew nothing of the Romish Purgatory.
21 Shown in the Particular Examination of the several passages alleged from
Origin. 22 Gregory Nyssen. ib. St. Jerome. 23 St. Hilary, etc. 25 St. Cyprian.
26 Gregory Nazianzen. 27 St. Basil. 28 Theodoret. 29 Tertullian. ib. St.
Austin. 30


SECT. IV.
That the Principles of Right Reason do not engage us to the belief of
Purgatory. 31 Shown in the Examination of Cardinal Bellarmin's First Reason. 31
Second Reason. 32 Third Reason. 34


SECT. V.
That the Doctrine of Purgatory is contrary to Scripture, Antiquity, and
Reason. 38 To Scripture. 39 -- Antiquity. 40 -- Reason. 43

DISCOURSE II. OF Prayers for the Dead. 45 SECT. I.
Of the Practice of the Primitive Church in praying for the Dead. 46 That the
Primitive Christians prayed for the Dead. ib. The Grounds on which they did it.
47. That this does not at all favor the present Practice of the Church of
Rome. 48

SECT. II.
The Allegations brought by those of the Church of Rome, to justify their
Practice of Praying for the Dead, examined; and their weakness Demonstrated. 51
The Pretenses of the Nubes Testium considered, and in order thereunto, The Case
of Aerius inquired into. 52 The Authorities of the Fathers examined. Dionysius
Areopagita. 56 Tertullian. 58 Arnobius. 59 Eusebius. Theodoret. ibid.
St. Ambrose.
St. Jerome. 60 St. Austin. 61 Tertullian, Cyprian. 62 St. Ambrose. 63 St.
Chrysostom. 65 The Greek Church. ib.

CLOSE. In which a short Apology is made, That we do not now Pray for the Dead,
after the manner that we confess the Ancient Church did. 66
ERRATA.
PAge 3. line 4. Palinurus. p. 6. l. 30. Pozzuolo. p. 17. l. 1. it must be, r.
there must have been. In the Marg. p. 28. l. 6. post (...), r. (...), etc. p.
60. l. 32. for Figments r. Pigments. Some of lesser moment there are, which the
Reader will please to Excuse.

A DISCOURSE OF PURGATORY, etc.
INTRODUCTION.
THERE is so near a Connection between the two Points of Purgatory and Prayers
for the Dead, as they are now established in the Church of Rome, that it is
impossible to state the one as we ought, without entering on some Consideration
of the other. It has been so much the rather thought fit to give an account to
the World of both these, in that the Opinions of the Primitive Fathers touching
the state of the Souls departed, and the early Practice of praying for the Dead
founded thereupon, being not well understood by the Generality now a days, seem
to give our Adversaries a greater pretense to Antiquity in these Points, than
in most others that are in debate betwixt us.

For what concerns the Latter of these, I shall in the next Discourse, say what
I suppose may be sufficient to show how little Grounds the Ancient Custom of
Praying for the Dead in the Primitive Ages of Christianity, will afford to the
Practice of those who pretend to be their Followers in the same Custom now. As
to the business of Purgatory, which is our present concern, We willingly allow
it to have been of very Venerable Antiquity; and to have exceeded not only our
Reformation, but even Christianity its self for some hundreds of Years. The
Truth is, the Church of Rome is beholding for this Doctrine, as well as for
many other things in her Religion, to her worthy Ancestors the Heathen Poets
and Philosophers: And tho I cannot tell how far Cardinal Bellarmin's Argument
will Bellarm. de Purgat. lib. 1. cap. 11. p 612. Colon. 1620.
hold good to prove it from thence to have been the dictate of right Reason it
self, because this might engage us to give up the Cause to Paganism, not only
in the Points of the Worship of Images and Inferior Deities, etc. which perhaps
the Cardinal may be content to think the Voice of Nature too; but even as to
all the other parts of their Superstition, in which they were more universally
agreed than in their Notion of a Purgatory; yet for what concerns the thing its
self, we do not deny but that many of them did certainly believe it.

Eusebius recounts it of Plato, that he divided mankind into three States: Some
who having purified themselves Praeparat. Evangel. lib. 11. cap. 38. page 568.
Ed GL. Paris, 1627.
by Philosophy, and excelled in Holiness of Life, enjoy an eternal Felicity in
the Islands of the blessed, without any Labor or Trouble, which neither is it
possible for any Words to express, or any Thoughts to conceive. Others, that
having lived exceedingly Wicked, and therefore seemed incapable of Cure, he
supposed were at their Deaths thrown down headlong into Hell, there to be
tormented for ever. But now, besides these, he imagined there were a (...).
middle sort, who, tho they had sinned, yet had repented of it; and therefore
seemed to be in a curable Condition, and these he thought went down for some
time into Hell too, to be PURGED and Absolved by grievous Torments; But that
after that, they should be delivered from it, and attain to Honors according
to the Dignity of their Benefactors.

Now that they supposed those who were in this state might ^eceive help from
the Prayers and Sacrificings of the Living, the complaints of the Ghosts of In
Odyss l. 12.
Elpenor in Homer, and of In Aeneid. l. 6.
Palniurus in Virgil abundantly show. And indeed the Ceremonies used for their
deliverance, as described by those Poets, Vid. ib. Odis 30. Virg. Aeneid. l. 5.
so nearly resemble the practice of the present Roman Church, that were but
their Poems Canonical, it would be in vain for the most obstinate Heretic here
to contend with them.

It must then he confessed, that our Adversaries in this point have at least
four Hundred Years Antiquity, not only against us, but even beyond Christianity
it self. And I suppose I may without any injury to the memories of those Holy
Men, who have been our forerunners in the Faith, say, That 'twas the
impression which these Opinions of their Philosophy had made upon them, that
moved them when they became Christians to fall into Conjectures concerning the
state of the Soul in the time of separation, not very much different from what
they had believed before.

It is not necessary to recount the Errors of Origin as to this matter: who
turned even Hell it self into a Purgatory, Bellarmin l. 1. de Purgat. c. 2. p.
573.
and thought that not only wicked Men, but the very Devils too might be so
Purged in it, as to come forth Angels of Light. St. Augnstine tells us, That
the Platonicks were De Civitat Dei l. 21. c. 13. p. 793. to 5. Lugd, 1664.
of an Opinion not much different from this, who though they would not have any
Sins past unpunished, yet supposed that all Punishments, whether of this life
or the next, were designed to amend, and therefore that whatever pains awaited
men after Death, they were all Purgatory. And though this conceit of Origin has
been condemned by the Church as Heretical, yet there remained other Opinions
for some Centuries after, not much differing from it. See for all those, S.
Austin de Civit. Dei, l. 21. c. 18, 19, 20, 21, 22.
Some thought that all men whatsoever should in the end be saved; others, and
among these See below Sect.
St. Jerome himself, that all Christians should be delivered: August. Ench^. ad
Laurent. c. 67. p. 64. To. 3.
Some who restrained their Charity yet more, still allowed Salvation to all
that dyed within the pale of the Catholic Church; to which, others finally
added this further condition, That they had not only stood firm to the Faith,
but also been charitable to the Poor. Which last circumstance is the very same
that Virgil from the Platonicks again required in those who should be
translated to the Elisian Fields; in which therefore he places not only them
whose Virtue and Piety had entitled to that Happiness, but also by their Alms
had V^rgil Aeneid. l.
made others mindful of them. Quique sui memores alios fecere merendo.


But not to insist more particularly on these things, three Opinions there seem
to have been among the ancient Fathers concerning the state of men after Death,
more generally received.

Bellarmin de sanct. beat. l. (...) c. 5. p. 713. Owns it to have been the
opinion of Tertullian. Lactantius and Victorinus Martyr: But Sixtus Sinensis
more fairly confesses it of many others. Bibl. lib. 6. annot. 345. p. 714.
edit. 1626. Colon 4^^. Irenaeus, Justin Martyr, Clemens, Origin, Prudentius,
Ambrose, S. Chrysostom, S. Augustine, Theodoret, etc.
1. That the Souls departed do not straightway go to Heaven, but remain in a
quiet and pleasing state free of all troubles and pains, yet earnestly
expecting their final Consummation in Glory.

2. Another Opinion there was, which from the credulity of See Eusebius H^st.
Eccles. l. 3. c. 39. edit. Valerii.
Papias became almost the Universal Belief of the first Ages of Christianity
concerning the Justin Martyr, contr. Tryph. page 89. C Edit. Henr. Steph. Gr.
-- Irenaeus vid. apud Eusebius. Hist. Eccles. lib. 3. cap. 39 -- Tertullian
passim, etc.
Millenary Kingdom of Christ; That our Blessed Savior before the final
Judgment should come down from Heaven, and raise from the Dead those of the
faithful, whose Piety had been most eminent and approved; and with them reign a
thousand years at Jerusalem, in great plenty, and with extraordinary splendor;
and that this was that which St. John meant by the first Resurrection, and at
the end whereof the other was to follow.

3. A third Opinion, and that too embraced by many This is asserted by almost
all the Fathers of the Primitive Church.
of the most ancient Fathers, was, That all men being raised up at the last
Day, should pass through a certain (...).
Probatory Fire, in which every man should be scorched and purified; and some
be tormented more, others less, according as they had lived better or worser
lives here upon Earth.

Such were the Opinions of the Primitive Fathers as to this matter. It is
evident to any one that shall please to compare these with the account I shall
hereafter give of the present Roman Purgatory, how vastly different they were
from what is now proposed to us as an Article of Faith. But yet from these
Opinions it is, that those of that Communion, impose upon the unwary their
pretense of Antiquity for this Doctrine; whilst whatever those Holy Men have
written of a third place, meaning the place of Sequester 1st Opinion.
beforementioned; but especially of the 3d Opinion.
Purgatory Fire of the end of the World, they presently apply it all to their
own fancy, and which in those first Ages found no manner of entertainment,

It is, I know, generally pretended by those of the other Communion, that St.
Augustine at least began to favor their Opinion. And indeed I will not deny
but that he does sometimes speak of a Purgatory after this Life; But yet so as
that it refers either to the same Purgation we before spoke of, at the end of
the World; or else to that Vid. August. loc. supr. citat. Enchirid. cap. 67. ad
Dulcit. quaest. 1, etc.
Grief which he imagined those Souls who had been passionately tied to the
things of this World, might still retain in their place of Sequester: And which
he therefore thought to be the meaning of that obscure place of S. Paul, 1 Cor.
iii. 12. so confidently produced by our Adversaries on all occasions, in favor
of their Doctrine. But all this he proposes with so much doubt and uncertainty,
as plainly shows it to have been in this Fathers time so far from an Article of
Faith, that he durst not affirm any thing at all concerning it.

Thus then had the Roman Doctrine of Purgatory no manner of foundation in the
Primitive Church. About DC Years after Christ, Pope Gregory the Great first
began to give countenance to it. The public practice of Praying for the Dead
continuing still in force in the Church, and those Opinions of the Primitive
Fathers upon which that was first established, being now no longer received
with that Universal Belief they had heretofore been, it was but natural to seek
out some other grounds for a practice which they saw so generally received, and
yet could not well tell what account to give of the reason of it. Let us add
this, that about that time a sad Barbarity began every where almost to
overspread the World: The Goths and Lombards in Italy, the Franks and
Burgundians in. France, the Vandals and West-Goths in Spain, the Saxons in
Britain, destroying almost all Learning out of the World. From henceforth
Miracles and Visions governed the Church: The Flames of Aetna and Vesuvius,
were thought on purpose to have been kindled to torment departed Souls. Some
were seen Broiling upon Gridirons, others Roasting upon Spits, some Burning
before a Fire, others shivering in the Water, or Smoking in a Chimney. The
very ways to Purgatory were now discovered; one in Sicily, another in Pozzueto,
a third nearer home, in Ireland. One found out by the help of an Angel, another
of the Devil. Insomuch that Pope Gregory himself was carried away with these
illusions, and which some are not ashamed even at this day to support.

By these means came Purgatory first established in the Roman Church, in the
VI, VII and VIII. Centuries: But yet, still the Article continued rude and
unpolished. Pope Gregory discovered how certain Souls for their punishment were
confined to Baths, and such like places on Earth, but he had not as yet found
out any one common Place for them to be tormented in, in Hell. Nay for some
Ages after, it seems not to have been risen to a matter of certainty, so far
was it yet from being an Article of Faith. Insomuch, That in the XII. Century
many doubted of it, as we may gather by that Expression of Lib. 8. Chron. cap.
26. Esse apud inferos locum Purgatorum, in quo salvandi vel tenebris tantum
afficiantur vel expiationis igne decoquantur QUIDAM asserunt.
Otto Frisingensis, Ann. 1146. That there is in Hell a place of Purgatory,
wherein such as are to be saved, are either only troubled with darkness, or
decocted with the Fire of Expiation, Some (says he) do affirm; plainly enough
implying that all did not believe it.

It is not necessary to say, what Opposition this novel Invention met with in
the several Centuries in the Latin Church, from Claude Bishop of Turin, in the
IX. Century, from Peter Bruges and Henry his Successor at Tholose; From the
Waldenses in France and Piemont, among whom this Doctrine was never received,
and who are therefore condemned by Cardinal Bellarmin himself on this account.
I Bellar. de Purg. l. 1. cap. 2. p. 571, 572.
will rather observe, that the Eastern Churches have continued all along free
from this Error. For however the Pope and his Ministers so far prevailed with
the Greeks in the Session. 25ta. Conc. Labb. Tom. 13. page 492. and p. 1135.
Council of Florence, as to persuade them to yield to a kind of pretended Union
in this matter; yet both their Apology penned by Vid. apud Sixth. Senens. Bibl.
l. 6. Annot. 259. page 667.
Marcus Eugenicus Archbishop of Ephesus, and presented to Cardinal Cusan, and
the Deputies of the Council of June 14. 1438.
Basil the year before, wherein they positively declare, That they neither had
received any such Doctrine from their Ancestors, and therefore neither would
they ever accept it; plainly shows they had no such Tradition amongst them; And
the proceedings of the same Marcus, and of the Greek Church after, neither of
which would be drawn to consent to this Union, more fully confirm it. And it is
well known how the Christians of Histoire Critique, page 5. 20. Edit. Franck
fort, 1684. for the Greeks, Id. page 69. Cites Gabriel Sionita affirming the
same of the Melchites, Purgatorium nullum existere pessime crediderunt. Id.
page 72. That the Georgians believe a Purgatory, but not such as the C. R. See
concerning the Armenians, p. 141. Job Ludolph. Hist. Aethiop. Lat. shows the
same of the Ethiopians, that they deny a Purgatory, l. 3. c. 5. n 67, 68. See
Bellarm l. 1. de Purg. cap. 2. page 572.
Asia and Africa do not at this day consent with the Roman Church in this
point, as some of their own Authors confess; tho others not so ingenuous, would
endeavor to persuade the contrary.

But however this be, Purgatory is now become an Article of Faith, and of too
comfortable an Importance to be easily parted with; nor have I the Vanity to
hope I shall be able to argue those men out of it, who by this craft gain their
Acts xix. 25. etc.
Living, and will no doubt therefore be as Zealous in Defense of it, as ever
Demetrius was of the great Goddess Diana upon the same account. But for those
whose interest it rather is to be freed from these Terrors after Death, which
serve only to enrich the Priests, and keep the Laity all their lives in Fear
and Subjection; I hope to satisfy them, that these are only imaginary Flames,
invented for gain, established upon false grounds, and kept up by artifice and
Terrors to delude the People, but which themselves many of them no more
believe, than did that great Cardinal, who minded one day to pose his Chaplain,
and proposed this Question to C. Richlieu.
him; How many Masses would serve to fetch any Soul out of Purgatory? To which
when he appeared, as well he might, unable to reply; the Cardinal thus
pleasantly solved the doubt, That just so many Masses would serve to fetch a
Soul out of Purgatory, as Snow-balls would serve to heat an Oven.

But it is time now to come to a closer Examination of all these things, and in
order thereunto, let us first see;

SECT. I.
What it is that the Church of Rome means by Purgatory.

HAD the Doctrine of Purgatory been as clearly explained by the Council of
Trent, as it was peremptorily defined in it, we should have had the less need
to make the Sea it at the end of the Council of Trent, p. 225. Edit. Labbe
Paris 1667. fol.
present enquiry. In Pope Pius the IV's Creed, it is only said in general
terms, That they constantly believe that there is a Purgatory, and that the
Souls there detained, are helped by the Suffrages of the Faithful. Nor is their
Decree concerning it at all more clear; it only adds, That they are assisted by
the Suffrages of the Faithful, but especially by the acceptable Sessio. 25.
page 174.
Sacrifice of the Mass; and therefore, that the Bishops should diligently take
care that the wholesome Doctrine of Purgatory delivered by the holy Fathers and
Councils, should be believed, held, and taught by all the Faithful in Christ.

Indeed in the foregoing Sessions, we find two other things defined with
reference to this Doctrine, but such as conduce very little to the better
understanding of it. 1st. It Anathematizes Session 6. Can. 30. page 47.
those who shall say, that after the Grace of Justification, the fault and
guilt of Eternal Punishment is so remitted to the Penitent Sinner, that there
remains no guilt of a Temporal Punishment to be paid by him, either now, or
hereafter in Purgatory, before he can attain to the Kingdom of Heaven. And
2dly, In their Canons of the Mass they resolve, If any one shall say that the
Mass Session 22. Can. iii. page 135.
is not a Propitiatory Sacrifice, or that it ought not to be offered for the
Living and the Dead, for their Sins, Pains, Satisfactions, and other
Necessities, let him be Anathema.

And accordingly the Bishop of Meaux in his Exposition of the Doctrine of the
Catholic Church, contains himself within the same Bounds. Those (says he) who
depart this Life in Grace and Charity, but nevertheless indebted to the Expos.
B sh. Condom, S^ct. viii page 15.
Divine Justice some Pains which it reserved, are to suffer them in the other
Life. -- This is what the Council of Trent proposes to our belief touching the
Souls detained in Purgatory, without defining in what their Pains consists, or
many other such like things.

The Misrepresenter calls it, A Place or State where Souls departing this Life,
pardoned as to the eternal Guilt Papist Misrepr Sect. xxiii. page 30.
or Pain, yet obnoxious to some temporal Penalty, or with Guilt of some Venial
faults, are purged and purified before their Admittance into Heaven.

Alexander Natalis is yet more precise: He distinguishes what is of Faith in
this Matter, and what not, and thus resolves. That it does not at all belong to
the Faith. In dissert. Saec. iv. dissert. xli. page 352.
1st, Concerning the Place, whether it be in this World, or upon Earth, or in
the dark Air where the Devils are; or in the Hell of the damned; or in some
place underneath nearer the Earth, that the Souls are purged. 2dly, Concerning
the Quality of those sensible Pains which the Souls held in Purgatory undergo;
whether it be true and corporeal Fire, or whether Darkness and Sorrow, or any
other Torment inflicted by the Justice of God, punishing them after a
wonderful, yet true manner. 3dly, Concerning the duration of these Purgatory
pains, how long the Souls are detained there. For tho Soto thought that no Soul
continued in Purgatory above ten years, yet it is a matter altogether uncertain
how many years those Pains shall last. -- The only thing therefore, he says,
that is in Controversy between the Catholics (as he calls them) and
Protestants, is this, Whether the Faith teaches that there is a State of the
Dead, in which they shall be expiated by Temporary Punishments, and from which
they may be freed, or otherwise helped by the Prayers of the Church.

But tho this then be all which these men suppose is to come into our inquiry;
yet I must observe, that the Catechism set out by order of the Council of
Trent, determines concerning the Pains themselves, that they are caused by
Fire. There is (says that Catechism) a Purgatory-FIRE Catechism. ad Paroch.
part. 1. Artic. v. Sect. v. page 41. Colon. 1684.
in which the Souls of the Faithful being tormented for a certain time, are
expiated; That so a passage may be opened for them into their Eternal Country,
into which no defiled thing can enter. So that I do not see how they can choose
but allow the Pains of Purgatory to be determined by them to the particular
kind of Fire.

St. Thomas is yet more precise; not only that it is Fire in which the Souls
are tormented, but that it is the very In 4. Sent. did. 21. qu. 1. art. 1.
same Fire that Torments the Damned in Hell, and the just in Purgatory. And
Bellarmin himself confesses, That almost all their Divines teach, that the
Damned and the Souls in Bellarm. de Purg. lib. 2. cap. 6. page 646.
Purgatory, are tormented in the same Fire, and in the same Place.

But yet, since they suppose that nothing ought to come into this dispute, but
what is just defined in the Council of Trent; we will take the state of the
Question according to their own desire, and enquire only in the words of
Cardinal Bellarmin,

Whether there be any such place, (as they suppose) in which, as in a Prison,
the Souls are purged after this Life, which were not fully purged before: that
so being cleansed, they may be able to go into Heaven, where no unclean thing
shall enter.

SECT. II.
That there is no Ground for such a Purgatory in the Holy Scripture.

TO demonstrate this, it will not, I presume, be expected that I should show
the weakeness of all those Places, which tho some of their Controvertists have
alleged, yet the more learned among them freely confess to have nothing to the
purpose in them. Cardinal Bellarmin has put together xix several Texts out of
both Testaments; but yet was far from thinking them all to his purpose;
confessing De Purgat. l. 1. c. 3. p. 578. a.
either of all, or at least of all out of the old Testament, except the first,
that they are but probable Arguments. Of these Alexander Natalis utterly
rejects xvi; and one he mentions not, as indeed he needed not to do it, when
Bellarmin himself had set a particular mark upon it, as impertinent. Ibid. cap
8. arg. ult. Sect. Utuntur nostri, p. 601. D.


The Misrepresenter unwilling to see his Cause reduced to two only places of
Holy Scripture, restores again to its Authority 1 Cor. iii. 15.
one of those which Natalis had rejected 1 Pet. iii. 15.
, and adds another which they had all of them overlooked, but very
unfortunately: For that 1st, They have ever been esteemed Bellarm. de Purg. l.
1. c. v. p. 582. A. Natalis Alex. dissert. xli. Saec. iv. p 378.
two of the most difficult ard obscure places of all the new Testament; and
therefore, certainly must be very unfit to build an Article of Faith upon. And
then 2dly, For St. Austin, upon whose Authority he would be thought to alledg
them; it is evident that he utterly mistook the design of that Father, if he
thought that he understood them of the Roman Purgatory, as both his words
evidently show, and his own Masters Vid. in loc. 1 Cor. 3. 15. page 377, 379.
Natalis, has ingenuously confessed for the one, and Bellarm. de Christi Anima,
Lib. 4. cap. 13. page 455. per tot.
Bellarmin for the other So that then I may reasonably presume to have answered
the design of the present Section, if I can give a fair account of those two
places which they all agree to be the principal supports of this Doctrine; and
from whence some of them Natal. Alex. in loc. page 362.
doubt not to say it may be demonstratively concluded.

Now the first of these, is that noted passage in the 2 Maccab. cap. xii. Where
Misrepres. n. 23. p. 28.
(they tell us) it is said, That Money was sent to Jerusalem, that Sacrifices
might be offerr'd for the slain; and it is recommended as a holy Cogitation to
pray for the Dead. This not only Bellarmin ranks in the front Bellarm. de Purg.
l. 1. c. 3. Misr. Sect. xxiii. page 28. Natalis ub. supr. p. 364.
of his Scriptnre proofs, but the Misrepresenter has again advanced it, and
Natalis doubts not to call it a demonstrative Testimony.

But to all this our Exceptions are very just:

1st, That the Book it self is not of sufficient Authority to establish a
matter of Faith. 2dly, That if it were, yet is not the Text by any means clear
for the proof of that, to which it is applied by them.
1st, For the Authority of the Book it self.

Thus much our Adversaries themselves confess, and I See Mons. du Pin.
Biblioth. dissert. prel. p. 59, etc.
think we need desire no more; That this Book was never received by the Bellarm
de Purg. l. 1. cap. 3. p. 575. Natalis Alex. saec. iv. par. 3. dissert. 41. p.
365.
Jews as Canonical: That St. Jerome therefore rejected it our of the Canon of
the Christian Church: That it was not of a Bellar. ibid. p. 576. A. B.
long time after received into it; insomuch, that in Canus l. 2. c. 10. ad. 4.
Pope Gregory the Great's time, that is DC years after Christ, it was lawful to
doubt of its Authority; for indeed, that Pope himself did not receive it as
Canonical. And sure then it ought not to be thought unreasonable in us to doubt
of the Authority of a Book, which being a part of the old Testament, was yet
never received by the Jews as Canonical, and of whose Authenticalness
therefore, the Primitive Christian Church for the first DC years declared
themselves altogether unsatisfied. But

2dly, To allow the Book the Credit which they desire; yet still the Text is by
no means clear for the proof of that to which it is applied by them. The Story
its self is this, That when Judas the day after the Battle came to bury 2
Maccab. xii. 39, v. etc.
the Bodies of them that were slain, they found under the Coats of every one
that had been killed, things consecrated to the Idols of the Jamnites, which
was forbidden to the Jews by the Law. This discovered to them the cause of
their Death, and how they were slain by God for their Sin. Hereupon Judas and
all his men betook themselves to Prayer, and besought God that the Sin might
wholly be put out of Remembrance. And Judas upon this occasion exhorted the
People to keep themselves by their Example from the like Sin; and lastly, He
made a Collection among them of a Sum of Money, and sent it to Jerusalem, to
offer a Sin-offering unto the Lord.

This is the Story, and the Design of all is very easy; That Judas considering
the danger he had been in by the Sin of these men, prayed to God that it might
not be imputed to the People, and offered a Sin-offering for the Congregation
according to the Law; remembering what the whole People had once suffered in the
like case for Achan's Transgression. Joshua vii.


But our Adversaries will have this Sin-offering to have been for the Dead, and
the History expressly says it was so. I answer, 1st, The History says no more
than what we have set down, that Judas did this: For the rest, it is the
conjecture of the Historian, not an historical Narration of what design Judas
had in it. Now that this could not have been his design, is evident, 2dly, In
that neither the Law of Moses, nor any other part of the Holy Scripture, makes
any mention of any such Sacrifice either prescribed or allowed of, for the
Dead. And 3dly, Had the Law in some Cases approved of Sacrifices for the Dead,
yet certainly it could not have done it in this, Idolatry being one of those
Sins for which there was no Offering allowed, nor any Atonement to be made for
it.

But what then is it that this Historian designed? I reply, it was this: That
Judas by this Sacrifice made an atonement for the Dead, to the end that their
Sin being forgiven, they might have a happy Resurrection. This he expressly
declares, v. 44, 45. For considering (says the Historian) that there is an
excellent reward laid up for those that dye Godly, which was a holy and godly
thought; (...).
he therefore made an expiation for the Dead, that they might be absolved from
their Sin. For many of the Jews then, as some Christians have done since,
thought Offerings might be made for the forgiveness of those Sins after Death,
that were not forgiven before. Therefore seeing that these Soldiers died in a
grievous Sin before they had time to repent, the Historian supposed that Judas
might have designed this Offering to expiate their Offense, that so they might
obtain a Happy Resurrection. But now this was only the conjecture of the
Historian, and as before we have seen very ill grounded, to be sure far enough
distant from the Roman Purgatory. For 1st, This respected the future
Resurrection^, That the present Sufferings of the Dead. 2dly, The Prayers here
spoken of, were offered for men who dyed in a Mortal Sin; but the Papists deny
that any such go to Purgatory, or can receive any benefit from the Prayers of
the Living. 3dly, Whatever becomes of all the rest; how was it possible that
these Prayers should have been designed for the slain to deliver them out of
Purgatory, when if we will believe the Papists themselves, their Souls were not
there, but either in Hell, or in the Limbus, where they supposed the Souls of
the Ancient Fathers were detained, till our Savior Christ descending thither,
set them free.

So that which way soever then we consider this passage, it cannot give us any
manner of satisfaction. If we look upon it as a part of that History, the Book
is not Canonical; nor was ever esteemed so by the Jews, or by the Christians of
the first 600 Years. If we take it as the History of what Judas did, this
respected not the Dead at all; nor by consequence can it belong to Purgatory.
If, according to the Opinion of the Relator, it regards the Dead indeed, but
then with reference to their future Resurrection, not their present Punishment;
and so is still impertinent. If finally, according to the Hypothesis of the
Papists themselves, it is utterly impossible it should belong to Purgatory,
because there was as yet no such place, and therefore these Soldiers could not
be there, or by any Sacrifices be delivered from thence. And this I hope may be
a sufficient reply to this first passage.

The other, from whence they also tell us their Doctrine of Purgatory may be
demonstratively concluded, is in the xiith of St. Mat. v. 32. Where our Savior
speaking of the Sin against the Holy Ghost, tells us, That it shall not be
forgiven neither in this World, nor in that to come.

He would, I believe, be thought to make a very strange conclusion, that should
without more ado argue thus abruptly from this Passage, Therefore there is a
Purgatory: And indeed they themselves are sensible of it. And therefore
Bellarmin confesses, that according to the Rules of Logic, Purgatory cannot be
inferred from hence: But according to the Rules of Prudtnce he thinks it may,
because that otherwise, he says, Christ must be said to have spoken improperly,
which we ought not to suppose he did. But if there be nothing in this place to
prove Purgatory, according to the rules of Logic, I suppose it must be some
mistake then, in that which he told us before, that it may be demonstratively
inferred from thence. For as for the rule of Prudence, that will at most make
it but very probable.

But indeed this rule will fail them as well as the other, as we shall
evidently see in examining the Proofs which they make from it. Now their
Argument lies thus: Our Savior Christ says, that the Sin against the Holy
Ghost shall not be remitted neither in this World, nor in that to come: We must
therefore suppose that some Sins shall be remitted in the World to come, or
else our Savior spoke improperly, which according to the Rules of Prudence we
may not say. Now the World to come, must signify the state of the Soul between
the day of every man's Death, and the final Resurrection, because that after
that, no Sins shall be remitted: And it must be to those who are in a middle
state, because those who are blessed, are already forgiven; and those who are
damned shall never be remitted.

This is the sum of their arguing from this place: but now if it appear that we
can have no manner of assurance of any of these suppositions; much more if it
be clear that not one of them is true; Then I presume it will follow, that
neither is it prudentially credible that our Savior here intended to establish
a Purgatory, but rather altogether certain that he did not.

1st, Then: Our Savior says, that the Sin against the Holy Ghost shall not be
forgiven, neither in this World, nor in that to come; therefore, they conclude,
some Sins shall be forgiven in the World to come.

I answer: It is most certain that some Sins shall be forgiven in the World to
come, even all those that are forgiven in this, and for which therefore God
shall not call us to account at the last Day. As if one should say, To him that
repents and believes, his Sins shall not be imputed neither in this World nor
in the World to come; that is, they shall never be imputed. And so both St.
Mark and St. Luke interpret the Phrase, (...) Mark iii. 29. Luke xii. 10
He shall not be forgiven, says the one; he shall not be forgiven for ever,
says the other: What is this to Purgatory?

But our Adversaries are more acute: Christ says the Sin against the Holy Ghost
shall not be forgiven neither in this World nor in that to come; therefore some
Sins that are not forgiven in this World, shall be forgiven in the World to
come. This indeed is no consequence, according to the Rules of Logic, as
Bellarmin acknowldges; but how then does it follow? Because that otherwise our
Savior Christ would have spoken improperly, which according to the Rule of
Prudence we ought not to say. The Cardinal might have added, according to the
Rule of Civility and good Breeding too. But still how does this appear? Why
because that otherwise it would have been impertinent to say that it shall not
be forgiven neither in this world, nor in the world to come, if no sins should
be forgiven in the world to come, that are not forgiven in this.

I answer, 1st, He might have said it to exaggerate his Speech, and so the
better enforce the hainousness of the Crime; and it is a thing very ordinary on
such occasions to use many words, when one would have been sufficient: But
2dly, He might, and certainly did do it, to prevent the mistake of the Jews,
and cut off all hopes of pardon for this sin: Two things there were which they
understood by the (...), or world to come; the Kingdom of the Messiah, and the
state after death; and in both these they thought a Remission might be had for
some sins, that were not otherwise to be forgiven: Our Blessed Savior
therefore to take away all hopes of Remission for this Sin, and make the deeper
Impression upon their minds, bids them not flatter themselves with any such
fond Expectations; that this was a Sin that should never be forgiven them,
neither in this World, nor in the World to come; i. e. neither now nor in the
Kingdom of the Messiah; neither in the hour of Death, nor in the day of
Judgment. But

2dly, They suppose, That the World to come must signify the time between every
man's Death and the general Resurrection.

But now for this, there is no manner of Ground, either in the Holy Scripture,
or in the Language of the Jews; nor can it be with any propriety so esteemed.
For the World to come, cannot be supposed to begin till this World ends, i. e.
till the time be, that according to their own Bellarm. de Purg. l. 1. c. 5. p.
586. D Dico, post novissimum judicium non fore Purgatorium.
Confession, Purgatory shall be no more. Whatever then our Savior Christ means
by the World to come, or however Sins shall be remitted there; it cannot be
understood of Purgatory, which now is in this present World, and in the other
shall be destroyed.

3dly, They suppose, lastly; That the Persons whose Sins shall be forgiven, are
not the perfectly just, in whom there is no spot of Sin remaining; nor yet the
damned, whose Sins are irremissible; but such as are in a middle State, i. e.
that depart with sanctifying Grace and Charity, but yet guilty of some lesser
Sins, of which they are to be Purged.

I relpy, 1st, That there is not a word of all this so much as hinted in the
Text; and any one might from thence as reasonably conclude for either of the
other kinds, as they do for this middle sort. For as concerning the Just, it is
not certainly at all absurd to say, that their Sins are then forgiven, when
they are finally acquitted at Gods Tribunal, as they shall be in the World to
come. And for the Wicked, since we here are told that Blasphemy against the
Holy Ghost is the only Sin that shall not be forgiven; nay, our Savior
expressly says, That all other Sins shall be remitted; it may with much more
agreement to the Text follow, that all men, be their Sins what they will, shall
have Grace of Repentance whereby they may be pardoned in the World to come, the
Blasphemers of the Holy Ghost alone excepted, than that those only shall be
forgiven, who die with venial Sins. But

2dly, What have we here to do with the Remission of Sins? Purgatory is a
place, not where Sins are remitted, but where they are punished with the
greatest Severity; nay, what is still more, punished after they are remitted;
nay, what is still more extraordinary, therefore punished, because they are
remitted. For if the Guilt were not remitted, the Sinner could not go to
Purgatory, nor have the favor of being punished there. And therefore it is
utterly impertinent from the Remission of some Sins in the World to come, to
conclude there is a place where all Sins, even the least, are exacted, and that
so rigidly, that there is no escaping thence, till either by their selves or
their friends, they have paid the very uttermost Farthing. Mat. v. 26.


In short, if we will conclude any thing as concerning the Remission of Sins
from this; the Rules both of Logic and Prudence will direct us to make one
part of the Opposition answer to the other: And then it will stand thus. The
Sin against the Holy Ghost shall never be at all forgiven, whether as to Guilt
or Punishment, but shall be avenged to all Eternity. Therefore all other Sins
upon Repentance shall be forgiven, both as to the Fault and Punishment, so as
not to be required, neither now or hereafter. Any other Remission than this,
the Scripture no where speaks of, nor does this Text infer it: And to suppose
without proof that there is any other, is in good earnest to beg the Question.

The sum of all, is what I before said: That our Blessed See Dr. Lightfoot upon
the place.
Savior intended by this Phrase, to cut off all hopes of Pardon for this Sin,
by telling them that it should not be remitted, neither by any Expiation in
this Life, nor by any extraordinary Grace of God in the Age of the Messiah, or
in the Life after this; which are the only notions of the World to come, that
the Jews knew, and in both which they fancied some Sins not elsewhere
remissible, might be forgiven.

And this may suffice to have been said to show how far the Holy Scripture is
from establishing this Doctrine as an Article of Faith; for sure, if these
places which they call demonstrative, are so little to the Purpose, we can have
no great Expectation from the rest, which themselves esteem but only probable
proofs of it.

SECT. III.
That the Primitive Church for 600. years, knew nothing of the Romish Purgatory.

BUT if the Scriptures be thus silent in this matter, let us see if the Fathers
of the Church in the first Ages of the Gospel received the present Doctrine of
Purgatory as an Article of their belief. I shall need to insist so much the
less on this here, because the greatest part of the Authorities, that are
usually produced to this effect, relate not immediately to Purgatory, but to
Prayers for the Dead; and therefore will be more proper to be considered in the
next Discourse. Those that speak precisely to this point are but few; and I
shall take them in such order, as seems most natural for our Examination.

And the first I shall mention, is Origin. We ought so ORIGIN.
much the rather to complain of the Sophistry of our Adversaries in making use
of his Testimony; in that, either they themselves must deny that his Opinion
concerning Purgatory, was the same with theirs, or they must confess that those
Fathers and Councils who condemned him as an Heretic on this account, have in
him pronounced their Sentence also. I have before observed of this Father, that
he thought there were no Pains but Purgatory after this Life; insomuch, that
after a certain time not only all men, tho never so wicked, but the Devils
themselves should be purified by them, and so saved in the end. This Bellarmin
elsewhere Lib. 1. de Purg. c. ii p. 573. C.
confesses to have been his Opinion, and to this the place which he quotes out
of him clearly refers: He that is saved, is Origin. Homil. 6. in Exodus Qui
salvus fit per ignem salvus fit, ut siquid forte de Specie plumbi habuerit
admixtum, id ignis decoquat and resolvat, ut efficiantur OMNES aurum purum,
Bellar. de Purg. l. 1. c. 10. p. 608. B.
saved by Fire, that so if by chance he has any thing of Lead mixed in him, the
Fire may melt and separate it, that so ALL may be made pure Gold. And is not
this a rare Testimony for Purgatory, which neither they themselves approve of,
and which, both the Ancient Fathers Epiphanius, St. Jerome, St. Austin, nay,
and even the 5th General Council its self, has condemned as Heretical?

And what I have now said of Origin, I must in the next GR. NYSSEN.
place assirm of another Father, and he the first which Bellarmine produces on
this occasion, viz. Gregory Nyssen, who has long since been observed as to this
matter, to have favored the Heresy of Origin. Indeed we are told by Photius,
that Germanus Patriarch of Constantinople in the VII. Century, wrote an Apology
for him, in which he shows Codex 233. p. 904. Ed. G. L.
that this was not the Opinion of Gregory Nyssen himself, but that his works
had been corrupted by the followers of Origin, the better to countenance their
Error; which so ever it were, it is the same thing as to the Authority of his
Writings in this Controversy: And indeed the very places cited by Bellarmin
show, that this was the Purgatory he contends for; viz. such, in which all were
to be purified, and at last saved for ever. He distinguishes two Orders of Men,
of which one by the Discipline of Christ are purged here on Earth, Greg. Nyss.
de mortuis Orat. page 635. (...). 636. A. To. 3. Ed. GL. Paris 1638. Ibid. p.
636. (...). B. Which Bellarmine from P. Francisc. Zinus, faultily renders,
Aliis autem post hanc vitam purgatorio igne materiae labes abstergentibus. de
Purg. l. 1. c. 10. p. 607.
such are the Patriarchs, Prophets, Apostles, Disciples, Martyrs, and as many
as preferred (says he) a Virtuous life before a sensual and material enjoyment;
In the other he ranks, All other men whatsoever, who shall return, he says, to
that Grace that was once given them, after that by the future Discipline (i. e.
in the World to come, after the final judgment) they shall have cast off in the
Purgatory fire their propension to matter: For so it is in the Original; and
not as Bellarmin renders it; a Wiping away the spots of matter in a Purgatory
fire after this life.

To these two I must in the next place subjoin St. Jerome, S. HIEROME.
whom, though I will not with See Bellarm. de Purg. l. 2. c. 1. p. 631. A.
Ruffinus accuse of being involved in the Error of Origin, yet Ibid. 632. C.
Bellarmin himself cannot deny him to have been charged with an Opinion not
very much differing from it, viz. That All Catholic Christians shall in the
end be saved, after they have been tried and purified in the fire. And this the
very place which they cite in favor of their Purgatory, plainly shows to have
been his Opinion; As we Sicut Diaboli and omnium negatorum atque impiorum, qui
dixerunt in cord suo non est Deus, credimus aeterna tormenta; sic Peccatorum
and Impiorum, and tamen Christianorum, quorum opera in Igne probanda sunt atque
purganda, moderatam arbitramur, and mixtam clementiae sententiam Judicis. Comm.
in Is. in ^in. Bellarm. l. 1. c. 10. p. 608. A.
believe (says he) the torments of the Devil, and of all that deny the Faith,
and of those wicked men who have said in their heart there is no God, to be
eternal: So for those who are Sinners and wicked, but yet Christians, whose
works are to be tried and purged in the fire, we believe that the sentence of
the Judge shall be moderate, and mixed with clemency. In which words, this
Opinion which the Romanists themselves confess to be Erroneous, is plainly
contained, viz. Of the moderate punishment of wicked men and sinners, if
Christians; i. e. of their salvation after a certain time of Purgation in the
fire of the last judgment; (for so the opposition to the Eternal punishment of
the others, requires us to expound it): But for the burning of good men, whose
sins are forgiven, and who depart this Life in a state of Charity, and in the
Grace of God, such as are punished in the Popish Purgatory, of this there is no
mention.

And the same is so evidently the meaning of the other passage alleged by
Bellarmin from this Father, that there can Bellarm. ib. p. 608. D. Hieron. lib.
1. contr. Pelag. ultr. med. Si autem Origines omnes rationabiles creaturas
dicit non esse perdendas, and Diabolo tribuit Paenitentiam; Quid ad nos, qui
Diabolum and satellites ejus, omnesque impios and praevaricatores dicimus
perire perpetuo; and Christianos, si in peccato praeventi fuerint, salvandos
esse post poenas?
be no doubt of it: If, says he, Origin says that all rational creatures are
not to be destroyed, and allows repentance to the Devil; What is this to us,
who say, that the Devil and his companions, and all wicked and prevaricating
men shall perish for ever; and that Christians, if they are overtaken in their
sins, shall be saved after Punishment?

And hitherto we have considered such passages as the Error of Origin,
sufficiently different from the Doctrine of the Romish Purgatory, has given
occasion to. But there was another opinion in the Primitive Church, which I
have mentioned above, and to which many other expressions of the other Fathers
do allude, viz. That all those who at the last day shall appear before the
Judgment Seat of Christ, shall be proved by a certain terrible fire, by the
force of which the good and bad shall be separated, and if any evil of their
past life still adheres to the Good, it shall then in that Purgatory fire be
entirely done away.

Now to this belong those passages that are produced on this occasion from
Lactantius, Hilary, St. Ambrose, Eusebius Bellarm. de Purg. l. 1. c. 10. p.
607. etc.
Emissenus, and some of St. Austin himself. I shall offer one proof of this in
the last instance of Cardinal Bellarmin, St. Hilary, which he thus quotes, An
unwearied fire is to be undergone by us, in which are to be endured those
grievous punishments, of a soul Nobis est ille indefessus ignis obeundus, in
quo subeunda sunt gravia illa expiandae a peccatis animae supplicia. Bell. p.
609.
to be expiated from its sins. But the whole passage is indeed this: St. Hilary
in his Annotations on the 20 v. of the 119. Psalm. My soul breaks for the
longing that it has unto thy judgments; applies it unto the future judgment;
Hilar. in Psalm. 118. Gimel: page 865. F. 866. A. Edit. Paris, 1652. An cum ex
omni ocioso verbo rationem simus praestituri, diem judicis concupiscimus, in
quo nobis est ille indefessus ignis obeundus, in quo subeunda sunt gravia illa
expiandae a peccatis animae supplicia? B. Mariae animam Gladius pertransibit,
ut revelentur multorum cordium cogitationes; si in judicis severitatem, capax
illa Dei Virgo ventura est, desiderare quis audebit a Deo judicari?
and among other observations has this passage, Seeing we must render an
account for every idle word, do we desire the day of judgment in which that
unwearied fire is to be passed through? In which those grievous punishments are
to be undergone for the expiating of a soul from sin? A sword shall pass
through the soul of the B. Virgin Mary, that the thoughts of many Hearts may be
revealed. If that Virgin who bore God, is to come into the severity of the
judgment, will any one dare desire to be judged by God. This certainly is such
a Testimony as had Bellarmin ever examined it, he would have been ashamed to
have produced it for a proof of Purgatory.

The Authority of St. Cyprian, as it is commonly cited CYPRIAN. Bellarm. de
Purg l. 1. c. 10 p. ^08 D.
by them, seems more considerable; It Is one thing to be purged from sins by a
long time of torments, and to be mended a great while by fire; another by
suffering to have purged all sins. But the truth is, this is as little to the
purpose as any we have yet seen. St. Cyprian in that Epistle to Antonian,
defends a certain new Decree of his Church that had been made in favor of
those who fell in times of persecution, whereby they were admitted to penance,
and by which it was feared by some, lest the Christians should be rendered more
slow to suffer for the Faith. In this Epistle St. Cyprian shows Antonian, that
though the Church had granted something of favor to these Libellatick
Christians, yet still their condition was infinitely worse than that of the
Martyrs, so that there was no cause to doubt but that every one ought to prefer
Martyrdom, notwithstanding the new favor that was allowed to them. And then
entering upon the comparison, It Is one thing (says he) to stand in expectation
of Cyprian. Epist. 55. Antoniano. page 109, 110. Edit. Oxon. Aliud est ad
veniam stare, aliud ad Gloriam perveni^e; aliud missum in carcerem non exire
inde, donec solvat novissimum quadrantem, aliud statim fidei and virtutis
accipere Mercedem: aliud pro peccatis longo dolor cruciatum emundari, and
purgari diu igne, (f. diutine) aliud peccata omnia passione purgasse; Aliud
denique pendere in die judicii ad sententiam domini^; Aliud statim a Domino
Coronari.
pardon, (as the Penitents did) another to be arrived at their glory (as the
Martyrs were): It Is one thing being clapped into the prison, not to go out thence
till they have paid the uttermost farthing; (i. e. not to be admitted into the
Church till they had past through all the several parts of the penance
inflicted on them) another presently to receive the reward of their faith and
courage: One thing to be cleansed by a long grief for sin, and to be purged a
long time by fire; another to have purged away all sins by suffering. (All
which still refers to the afflictions and troubles of the Penance they were to
undergo, and concerning which all this discourse of St. Cyprian is; whereas the
Holy Martyrs by suffering, were already cleansed from all their sins. There is
nothing more ordinary than by the phrase of Fire to signify any kind of
afflictions: and if the conjecture of the Reverend Editor of the Oxford
Cyprian, be accepted, as the authority of several Manuscripts, seems to render
it exceeding probable, that instead of diu igne, it ought to be diutine: then
it will follow, that this Father spoke nothing at all of fire, but only said
this, That it is infinitely better with the Martyrs to be justified from all
their sins in Heaven, than with the Penitents be put under a long course of
severe discipline for them here in the Church on Earth.

And this Interpretation the Learned Rigaltius approves; And what S. Cypr.
himself adds, plainly shows that it cannot See his Annot. in loc. p. 109, 110.
refer to the Romish Purgatory, where going on still with the Antithesis, he
adds, It Is one thing in the day of Judgment to expect with Anxiety the Sentence
of the Lord, (as these Penitents were to do); another to be presently crowned
by the Lord, as these Martyrs were. Now this could not be said of the Souls in
Purgatory, who if you believe them, are in no Anxiety about their future
Sentence, but actually secure of their Salvation, as soon as they shall be
delivered from those severe, yet temporary Pains in which they are.

For Gregory Nazianzen, both his Tom. 2. Op. G. L. p. 1037. C. Paris 1630.
Scholiast Nicetas Interprets GREGORY. NAZIANZ.
the Fire he speaks of, to be that of Hell, and the occasion of his words, and
the Persons to whom he Addresses, show it can be understood of no other. The
Persons were the Novatians; the occasion to exhort them by the fear of this
Punishment to return to the Communion of the Greg. Naz. Homil. 39. T. 1. p. 636.
Church. Now for Schismatics, if they continue obstinate in their Separation,
I suppose the Church of Rome will allow there shall be reserved some worser
Fire than that of Purgatory.

The next Father produced by Bellarmin, is St. Basil, St. BASIL. Bell. p. 608.
C.
who upon Is. ix. 18. says, That Sin is therefore by the Prophet compared to
Grass, because Grass is the most fruitful among (...).
Herbs: -- And then he goes on in the Words produced for Purgatory; If
therefore we shall lay open (...). Basil. in 9. Is. Tom. 2. p. 216. Ed G. L.
Paris, 1637.
our Sins by Confession, we shall make this Grass dry, and worthy to be
devoured by the Purgatory Fire. Now that this Purgatory-fire cannot be that
which the Romanists mean, is evident from this, that the Sin is not devoured by
that, but being first devoured by Confession and Repentance, is here punished
in this Fire. We must therefore seek out some other meaning, and for that we
can take no better than what this same Commentary affords us; viz. That it
signifies the Holy Spirit, operating upon the Hearts of the Penitent, and with
his Celestial Fire consuming those Sins which by Confession are dried, and
made fit for that Holy Flame. So on the 6th of Isaiah, speaking of the Altar
which the Prophet there saw, he says was signified by it, A certain Celestial
(...), etc. To. 2. cap. 6. p. 172. B.
Altar, namely the place of the purifying of Souls; from whence that
Purgatory-fire is sent out to the sanctified Powers. With this Fire did the
heart of Cleophas and Simon burn, when our Lord opened to them the Scriptures.
With this Fire are they heated, who are warmed by the Holy Ghost, etc.

As for the other Passage that is alleged from the same Comment, it is so
clear, that by the purging, or rather the castigating Fire which he there
speaks of, he understands Vid. ibid. page 216. E.
those Evils and Afflictions that God was about to bring upon the Israelites
for their Amendment, that I shall not need say any thing more to it.

For Theodoret, whom Bellarmin cites out of his Comments THEODOR.
on 1 Cor. 3. He is indeed the clearest of all to their purpose: We believe,
says he, this to be the very Purgatory Bellarm. page 608. C. D.
fire, in which the Souls of the dead are tried and purged as Gold in a
Crucible. But now the misfortune is, that Theodoret has no such words; nay,
though they themselves are the Editors of his Works, yet have they never yet
dared to insert this pretended explication into them. It is indeed an instance
of the peculiar confidence of these men in their pretenses to Antiquity, not
only to go on to alledg See Bellarm. l. 1. de Purg. c. 5. p. 591. B.
Theodoret for an Abetter of their Doctrine, after they had been publicly
challenged by a Nilus de Purgatorio, p. 144.
Greek Author in his Tract against Purgatory concerning it; but especially,
when his Comments on this very place of St. Paul, which themselves have set
forth, interpret the Fire he there speaks of, to be Theodoret. in 1 Cor. 3. 12,
13. (...). To. 3. p. 134. A. and below Lit. B. (...). Et Lit. C. (...). Edit.
Paris G. L. 1642.
the Fire of Hell; and the Day which is to reveal it, the Day of Judgment.

There are yet remaining two of the Writers of the Latin Church to be
considered by us; the first Tertullian in TERTUL.
his Book de Anima, c. 17. So Bellarmin alleges him; but it should have been
the 35. But this Author is utterly foreign to his purpose: All he says is,
That the Souls of Men shall be restored to their Bodies, some sooner, others
later, in Christ's millenary Kingdom, according to what their Sins or Piety have
deserved: That if we live wickedly, the Judge shall cast us into the Infernal
Prison, from whence we shall Et judex te tradat Angelo executionis, and ille te
in carcerem mandet infernum, unde non dimittaris nisi modico quoque delicto
mora Resurrectionis expenso, Page 291. Edit. Paris 1675.
not go out, until every the least Offense has been paid for by the delay of
our rising. And this was all that Rigaltius himself understood by it.

As for St. Austin, the last Father to be considered by us, St. AUSTIN.
I have already said enough to obviate whatever Authorities can be brought from
him. He was in the Opinion of those who believed a Probatory-fire at the end of
the World; and to this, many of his Expressions refer. Again, he thought that
those who departed hence, did not go straight to Heaven; and therefore, that
those whose See his Enchiridion. cap. 67, 68, 69. Et in Quaest. ad Dulcit. qu.
1. See above, Introduction.
Affections were very much tied to the things of this World, might still retain
in their separate State some desires toward them, and be troubled for the loss
of them: And by this we must explain some others of his sayings. But in all
these he expresses himself with so much doubt and uncertainty, as plainly shows
how little he thought any of these things to be Articles of Faith; and whatever
they were, yet are they, to be sure, all of them vastly different from the
Roman-Purgatory.

And now after so particular an Examination of the several Testimonies produced
in favor of this Doctrine; I think I may venture to conclude with the same
that I began this Section, That neither the Holy Scripture nor Fathers of the
first 600. Years, do at all Authorize the Romish Purgatory. Let us see,
finally, whether the Reasons offered for the establishment of it, will have a
sufficient weight to engage us to believe it.

SECT. IV.
That the Principles of Right Reason do not engage us to the belief of
Purgatory.

AND 1st, thus they Argue. There are some Sins in their own nature Venial, and
worthy only of a Bellarm. de Purg. l. 1. (...). 11. p. 609. C.
temporal Punishment: But it is possible a man may depart out of this Life with
such only: Therefore it is necessary that he may be purged in another Life.

To this rope of Sand, rather than Argument, I reply; 1st, That the Supposition
it goes upon, is false. 2dly, That the Conclusion it infers, is inconsequent.
For the former of these; That some Sins are less than others, it is confessed;
but that any Sins are properly Venial, we deny. To be Venial, is to be worthy
of Pardon, or not to deserve Punishment; but whatsoever does not deserve
Punishment, can be no Sin, for all Sin infers an Obligation to Punishment; and
therefore to be a Sin, and yet be Venial, is in proper terms no better than a
flat Contradiction. Again, The Sins here spoken of, are supposed to be worthy
of a temporal Punishment; but Sins that are worthy of a temporal Punishment,
are not properly Venial; therefore, either the Sins here spoken of, must not
deserve even a temporal Punishment, or they cannot be said to be properly
Venial.

But 2dly, Be the Sins, as they desire, Venial; how does it from hence follow,
that it is necessary that these be punished in another Life? And why is not the
Blood of Christ which cleanses the greatest Sins, a sufficient Purgatory for
the least Infirmities? Venial Sins are by themselves confessed to be entirely
consistent with the Grace of God; nay, so consistent as not to destroy, or but
even lessen it. Now for a Christian, who has lived so well as to be still in
the Grace and Favor of God; that has received an actual Pardon of all his
other Sins, through the Merits and Satisfaction of Christ, so as to be
absolutely certain of a Crown of Glory for ever; to think that such a one, I
say, shall be punished with Torments, inferior in nothing but the Duration to
those of Hellfire its self, for such slips and infirmities as the best of men
are encompassed with, and which no man can ever hope perfectly to overcome; and
this, notwithstanding all the Promises of Mercy and Forgiveness, which God has
declared to us; this certainly is so far from being a Dictate of Right Reason,
that it is impossible for any one that has any Reason at all, and is not
exceedingly carried away with Prejudice for his Opinion, ever to believe it.

Again, 2dly, Thus they Argue: When Sinners are reconciled to God, the whole
temporal Pain is not always remitted with the Sin: Now it may happen, Bellarm:
ibid. p. 610. C.
and often does happen, that in a Man's whole Life, he does not fully satisfy
for that temporal Pain; and therefore there must be a Purgatory wherein to do
it.

I answer, That this too proceeds upon a false Supposition, That God when he
forgives our Sins, does not also forgive the entire Obligation to Punishment,
which by our Sins we stood engaged to; and which both Scripture and Reason
contradict.

1st, That God does sometimes afflict those Persons whose Sins he forgives,
whether to prove, or to amend, or to secure them for the future, this it is
confessed we read in Scripture; and that this is most reasonable, cannot be
denied upon the account of those excellent ends that are to be served thereby,
both to the benefit of the Sinner, and to warn others by his Example not to
offend. But where is there any mention of any thing of this kind either
threatened or done in another Life? What end is there to be served in this? When
Men go to Purgatory, they are already in the Grace of God, or otherwise they
could not come thither; they are already forgiven their Sins, and secure of
their Salvation. The punishments therefore of that place can serve no end,
either of improving him that suffers them, or of keeping others by his example
from offending. Add to this, That the Justice of God is already entirely
satisfied by the Merits and Sufferings of Christ: So that then these
punishments can be inflicted for no other purpose than for the delight God
takes in punishing. But to say that God delights in the punishment of any, much
more of good men, who are his Children, who love him, and whom therefore he
both loves and intends to glorify to all Eternity; this is certainly to advance
a notion unworthy of God, and contrary to all those kind and endearing Idea's
which the Holy Scriptures have given us of him; and therefore ought not without
evident proof, which is not so much as pretended to by them, to be admitted.

2dly, When we say that God forgives sin, we must understand by it one of these
two things, viz. That he remits either the Stain, or the Guilt of it. For by
sin there is only these two contracted. As for the stain or pollution of sin,
That is not properly forgiven, but is washed away by God's sanctifying Grace
upon our repentance and reconciliation to him: And for the Guilt, that is
nothing else, but that obligation to punishment, which every Man by sinning,
renders himself obnoxious to; so that to remit the Guilt, is to remit the
obligation to punishment. To say therefore that God forgives the Guilt of sin,
and yet that our Obligation to punishment remains, is in effect to say, that
God forgives the Guilt, which he does not forgive, which must be a
Contradiction.

But may not God forgive the Guilt as to the Obligation it lays upon us to
Eternal punishment, and yet retain it as to a Temporal one? No doubt he may;
and had He declared that he would do so, we must have believed it. But then
this would not have been properly to forgive the Guilt, but to commute it, to
lessen it. And since neither has He any where declared that this is all he does
when he forgives sins; nor does his Justice require that he should do no more;
But especially, seeing wherever God speaks of the remission of sins, he does it
without restriction, in the most large, comprehensive terms that can be
imagined: We see no cause either to suspect his Goodness, or to lessen his
Mercy by our own arbitrary and ungrounded limitations.

But 3dly, There is yet another Argument, and it is this: The Opinion that
takes away Purgatory, is not only Bellarm. de Purg. lib. 1. c. 11. p. 613. D.
false but pernicious; for it makes men lazy in avoiding sinning, and in the
doing of good Works. Whilst he that believes that there is no Purgatory, but
that all sins are abolished by death to those that die in Faith, says to
himself, To what purpose do I labor in Fastings and Prayer, in Continence and
Almsdeeds? Why do I defraud my heart of its delights and pleasures, since at my
death, my sins, whether few or many, shall all be done away -- Habeat jam ROMA
Pudorem;
Tertius e Coelo cecidit Cato. --


For is not this rare Cant? To hear those who have taken away the fears of
Hell, with a demure countenance exclaim against us as wicked, in throwing off
so great an engagement to Piety as, if you will believe it, they esteem
Purgatory to be? But yet since the point is brought at last to this issue, let
us see the comparison.

1st. We who deny Purgatory, thus press the practice of good works upon our
Auditors. That God, to whom we are engaged by all imaginable ties of Love,
Duty, and Gratitude, expressly requires them of us, as the only means to retain
his favor. That if we be zealous in his service now, we shall certainly
receive an Eternal weight of Bliss and Glory in his Kingdom. But that if we be
careless and negligent of our duty, nothing but everlasting torments shall
remain for us. That, let us not deceive our selves, or flatter our souls with
any new ways of Getting to Heaven; Without Holiness no man shall ever see the
Lord. Repentance is the only thing that by Faith can reconcile us to his
favor: And repentance cannot be true, except there be a true Love of God, and
an utter detestation of sin, and a hearty contrition that we have ever
committed it; and a steadfast resolution never to fall any more into it; and
this improved in an actual, sincere endeavor, what in us lies, to abound in
Good works, and fulfill that duty which he requires of us. That without this,
it is not any power or Authority of the Church, Absolving us from our sins; any
Pardons or Indulgences, either before or after our Commission of them, that can
stand us in any stead, or restore us to God's favor and the hopes of
Salvation. But that if we do this, then indeed we may assure our selves of his
acceptance; we may raise our hopes to the blessings that he has promised; and
that we may be the more encouraged to pursue them, may assure our selves that
all those joys which he has prepared for us, and which it does not now enter
into the heart of man but to conceive any thing of as he ought to do, are not
at any great distance: As soon as ever we have finished our course here, we
shall presently be translated, if not to a perfect fruition of them, yet to
such an Antepast, as shall be more than a sufficient reward for all our
endeavors in the pursuit of them.

This is the method of our Preaching: Let us now set Cardinal Bellarmin in the
Pulpit, and see how much more effectually he will press these things upon his
Congregation. And because I would not make the worst of the matter, we will not
consider him in quality of a Jesuit, instructing the people by Artifice and
Distinction, how to evacuate the whole morality of the Gospel, by stating
precisely the point, How often a man is obliged to love God? Whether upon all
Sundays and Holydays? or only once a year? or once in five years? or but any
one time in a man's whole life? or finally not at all, neither living nor dying?
This were, it may be, to carry matters too far; we will stop within the bounds
of their more common belief.

And here first of all, as is most fitting, we must be sure to put them often
in mind of the Obedience they owe to the Church: of the high opinions they
ought always to retain of her, and of that entire submission wherewith they are
to yield themselves up to her Conduct. That they be sure not to fail to go to
Mass every Sunday and Holyday; that they eat no flesh on any of the Fasts of
the Church, unless they are otherwise dispensed with to the contrary: That once
at least every year they receive the Sacrament, and before they do so, that
they fail not to go to Confession; That they make no doubt but by the Priests
Absolution they are certainly forgiven their sins whatsoever they were; That
indeed it were well that they were contrite for them; but if they are not, it is
all one, Attrition with the Sacrament of Penance does the same thing: That this
therefore sets them free of all danger of Hell, so that be their lives what
they will, there is no great fear of that; but yet that to secure their Piety,
the Church has thought fit to discover to them another very terrible place
called Purgatory, whither they must go to satisfy for their sins before they
can get to Heaven. That, indeed, let them live how they will, hither they must
come: But yet let them not be discouraged; there are several secret ways of
avoiding it, with infinitely more security than the best Life in the world can
give them. First, an Indulgence may be had, and that too beforehand, to secure
the greatest sinner from ever coming thither. If this fail, yet they may enter
themselves into some Holy fraternity, as for instance that of the Scapulary,
and then they certainly get out of Purgatory the Saturday after they dye. At
least, that let the worst that can happen, a good number of Masses when they
are dead, infallibly does the business. It Is true, none of these things can be
had without Money, and therefore the poor must take heed and have as few sins
as they can to answer for; but yet that if they watch their time, an Indulgence
will come at an easy rate, and the Church in Charity will fall her price,
rather than refuse that Money that will be so much to the benefit of her
faithful Children.

This is, I think, the difference between us: Let the world now judge, who it is
that give the greatest encouragement to Vice, the Cardinal in these easy
methods of Salvation, or We by retaining the old Scripture-way of Repentance
and a Good Life. But the truth is, the Argument ought to have lain thus; The
Opinion that takes away Purgatory, and leaves men that have lived well, in
repose at their death, cuts off all the benefit of Masses, Prayers for the
dead, and the like; not to say any thing of the dear concern of Indulgences, by
which our Church and our Clergy in great measure subsist; and therefore though we
know we have nothing to say for it, yet we are resolved we will not quit the
belief of it: And this indeed is the honest Truth; but for the rest, it is in
good earnest nothing to the purpose.

SECT. V.
That the Doctrine of Purgatory is contrary to Scripture, Antiquity, and Reason.

HItherto we have seen how little grounds the Church of Rome has to establish
this Doctrine as an Article of Faith; We will now go yet further, and show not
only, that there is no Obligation upon us either from Scripture, or Antiquity,
or Reason, to believe this Doctrine; but that according to the principles of
every one of these, we ought not to do it.

1st. For Scripture.
It is not a little to be considered in opposition to this Doctrine, that these
Sacred Writings not only every where represent to us this present life as the
time of trial and exercise, of sufferings and afflictions; but also encourage
us on this very consideration to bear them with Patience and resignation, That
as soon as we die they shall all end, and we shall receive the blessed reward
which God has prepared for them that bear them as they ought to do. I look upon
Romans viii. 18.
it, says St. Paul, Romans viii. 18. that the sufferings of this present life are
not worthy to be compared with the glory which shall be revealed. And again, 2
Cor. iv. 17. For the 2 Cor. iv. 17.
sufferings of this present life work out for us a far more exceeding and
eternal weight of glory. Many other places of this kind there are, in which our
present sufferings are compared with, and opposed to, our future reward. Now if
when all these encounters are ended, there be still another, and a more
dreadful sort of trial to be undergone elsewhere, How could the Apostle have
used those kind of Antitheses; and have encouraged us to a constancy in our
present afflictious, from the prospect of a time, when according to these Men
there are yet greater and more severe ones to be undergone by us?

And this then may be a second Observation; That the Scrpture always speaks of
the Death of good men as a Blessing, an immediate rest from their labors; and
therefore sure understood nothing of those Torments to which the Church of Rome
now condemns them. So Revel. xiv. 13. Rev. xiv. 13.
I heard a Voice from Heaven saying unto me, Write; Blessed are the dead which
die in the Lord, from HENCEFORTH, yea says the spirit, that they may rest from
their labors. 'Twas this assurance made the Holy men of old so desirous of
their dissolution, That they might find an end of all those labors and evils
which they suffered here: Phil. 1. 23. Phil. i. 23.
I am in a straight, says St. Paul, betwixt two, having a desire to depart and
to be with Christ which is better, etc. Surely St. Paul never thought of
Purgatory, when he talked thus of going to Christ; nor would he have appeared
so desirous of his Dissolution, had he known he should have been cast into such
a fire as the Romanists suppose to be in this infernal Region.

Nor can it here be reasonably said, that this was the Apostles peculiar
happiness; and therefore that though he indeed was secure of going immediately to
Christ, yet others were not therefore to expect the like favor: For 2 Cor. v.
1. we 2 Cor. v. 1.
find him promising the very same to all Christians indifferently; We know,
says he, that if our Earthly house of this tabernacle were dissolved, we have a
building with God, a house not made with hands, eternal in the heavens. And
again, Verse 8. When we are absent from the Body, says he, We are Verse. 8.
present with the Lord: By all which it appears, that when good Men dye, they
go to the Lord; to Christ; to their Heavenly House; and that sure is not
Purgatory.

To this agree those few instances we have of Just men's dying, in the
New Testament. Lazarus in the Parable, was in Abraham's besome; The Penitent
Thief on the Cross was promised that he should be that day with Christ in
Paradise: And we have good reason to believe that the same is the state of all
others, not only from the passages already mentioned, and many more of the like
kind that might have been offered; but also from this, that we have not in all
the Holy Scripture the least intimation of any such place as Purgatory: That
there is neither precept nor example of any one that either prayed for the
delivery of their friends departed, out of these pains, or any Directions left
for any one hereafter so to do: Now certainly it is not easy to be imagined,
that the Holy Penmen should have been so perfectly silent in this matter, had
there been so great a Cause for it, as the delivery of their Souls out of
Purgatory undoubtedly would have been; or had they then esteemed it so
excellent and necessary a piece of Christian Charity, as it is now pretended to
be.

And this Presumption against Purgatory the Holy Scriptures will afford us. If
we look

2dly, To the Holy Fathers,
We shall find them proceeding exactly upon the same Principles: They thought
the just when they were departed were presently in a state of happiness; That
it was injurious to Christ, to hold that such as died in his Faith were to be
pitied; That Christians therefore ought not by any means to be afraid of dying:
It Is for him, says S. Cyprian, to fear death, that is unwilling to go to
Christ. It is for See his Book de Mortalitat. p. 157.
him to be unwilling to go to Christ, who does not believe that he begins to
reign with Christ. -- Simeon said, Lord now let thou thy servant depart in
peace; proving and witnessing that the Servants of God then have peace, then
enjoy free and quiet rest, when being drawn from these Storms of the World, we
arrive at the Haven of our everlasting Habitation and Security. -- Let us
therefore embrace the day that brings every one to his own House, which
having taken us away from hence, and loosed us from the Snares of this World,
returns as to Paradise, and to the Kingdom of Heaven.

I shall leave it to any one to consider, whether this Holy Father, who
discoursed thus of our Dying, believed any thing of these tormenting
Purgatory-fires, that now keep Men in Anxiety, and make the best Christians
afraid to dye. And the same is the Language of all the rest. St. Chrysostom
Hieron. in Os. com. 3. Augustine. Epist. 28. ad Hier. To. 2. p. 31. A. Et Tract.
49. in Joan. To. 9. p. 124. A. Auctor. Quaest. sub Justini nomin. Quaest. 75.
p. 436. D. E. Paris, 1636. Chrysostom. Hom. de S S. Bernice and Prosdoce. T. 1.
Frontod. page 563. Paris, G. L. 1636.
particularly inforces the same considerations, from those Psalms that were
usually said at the Burial of the Dead. Return to thy rest, O my Soul, for the
Lord has been gracious unto thee. You see, says that Holy Father, how that
Death is a Blessing, a Rest. -- God calls it a Blessing, and do thou Lament?
What could thou have done more, if thou had been his Enemy?

But to put this matter, as to the Point of Antiquity, beyond all doubt, I will
remark distinctly two or three things.

1st, That several of the most Ancient Fathers not only believed the Souls of
the Faithful to be in Happiness, immediately upon their departure, but to be
carried immediately into Heaven. 1 So Athenagoras, 2 St. 1 Legate. pro
Christianis. 2 Cyprian libr. de mortal. p. 157. vid. supr. 3 Orig. contr. C^ls.
l. 6, 7. 4 Greg. Naz. Or. 10. To. 1. p. 173. 5 Chrysostom. vid. supr.
Cyprian, 3 Origin, 4 Gregory Nazianzen, 5 Chrysostom, 6 Cyril Alexandrinus, 7
St. Hierom and others. Now, 6 Cyril. Alex. in Joan 19. 30. ^b. 12. To 4. ^Ed G.
L. Paris, 1638. p. 1069. B C. 7 Hier. Epist. 25. fol. 7 C To. 1. Edit. Erasm.
certainly they who believed that just Men when they dye go straight to Heaven,
could not have believed that they were for a long while after their Death
tormented in Purgatory; and therefore all these at least must have been of an
Opinion different from the Church of Rome, in this matter.

2dly, Another thing remarkable in some of the Ancient Fathers, is, That they
utterly deny that the Soul is capable of being purged in another World; and
this is, to be sure, expressly contrary to the present Doctrine of the Romanists
in this Point. Thus Gregory Nazianzen speaking of the Judgment after Death;
It Is better, says he, to be now chastised and purged, than to be delivered over
to that Torment, when it shall be no longer a time of Purgation, but of
Punishment. Where we see the Father expressly Opposes the time of Purgation in
this Life, to the time not of Purgation, but of Punishment in the next. And St.
Chrysostom, If the Soul be purged here, (i. e. from Sin) that Fire shall not
hurt it, when it departs hence: But the Soul that goes hence in Sin, that Fire
(not of Purgatory, but of Hell) shall receive. This was the Doctrine of those
times; the Soul that was clear of Sin, by Gods Pardon and Forgiveness, no Fire
could hurt; that which was not, no Fire could cleanse; but it was to remain in
Torments of Hell for ever.

Nor may we omit to observe, 3dly, That the Fathers take no notice of Purgatory
in such places, as had they believed it, they could not well have omitted it.
Hence we see no mention of it in any of their Creeds or Councils, or
Catechetical Discourses, in which the other Articles of their Faith are set
down and explained. The 5th General Council, which condemned Origin for his
Errors concerning the Pains after Death, never mentioned any other Purgatory in
opposition to that which he had Heretically invented. But that which shows it
yet more plainly to have been unknown to them, is, that not only St. Austin,
but Pope Gregory himself, the great Patron of this Error, yet spoke of it with
some doubt; not as they use to do of a Point firmly believed by the Church, but
as a peculiar thing in which they were not themselves very well resolved. When
the Fathers disputed against Origin, they none of them mention any of the
Purgatorypains, which the Orthodox Faith taught, to distinguish them from those
from which he erroniously had invented. When Epiphanius disputed against
Aerius, concerning the Reason and Benefit of Praying for the Dead, is it to be
imagined he could then have forgot the great concern of delivering the Souls
departed out of Purgatory, had the Church then believed any such thing? To all
which, if we finally add, That the Greek Church neither at this day does, nor
ever did receive this Doctrine, I cannot tell what clearer Evidence we can
desire to show, that this whole Business of Purgatory, is but an Error of the
Latin Church, not an Article of the Catholic Faith.

3dly, For Reason.
I shall only offer this one Reflection: Whether there can be any Reason to
think there should be such a place, and such punishments as Purgatory, for no
end or purpose in the World. They who go thither, must be perfect in Charity,
in the Grace of God, secure of their Salvation; their Satisfaction must have
been made by Christ's Blood, and so God's Justice satisfied. Now when all this
is already done, to what end is it that they should be tormented? Had there
been any means by such a Purgatory, either to fit them for Heaven, or to
satisfy the Divine Justice, there might then have been some pretense for it.
But to think that God punishes Men only for Punishing-sake; and this too his
own Servants, Men who are in his Favor, that have lived well, and upon that
account are justified by him through the Blood of Christ; this is such an Idea
of an Infinite Love, Mercy and Goodness, as sure can never be the Dictate of
Right Reason; I think I may say, is utterly inconsistent with it.

OF PRAYERS FOR THE DEAD.
WE have now passed through the former Part of our Undertaking, and found but
little Reason to be concerned for those imaginary Flames, which so much terrify
those of the other Communion. It only remains that we descend to the great
Argument that is most usually insisted upon by them, to prove at least the
Antiquity of their Error, and that is from the undeni'd Primitive Custom of
Praying for the Dead; and concerning which, I suppose, it may be sufficient to
offer these two things.

1st, To give a general Account, What the Practice of the Primitive Church was;
from whence it will appear how little Advantage the Church of Rome can derive
to themselves by it. 2dly, To Answer those Allegations, that are from hence
brought by them in favor of that Praying for the Dead, which is now practiced
by them in their Church.
SECT. I.
Of the Practice of the Primitive Church, in Praying for the Dead.

NOW that I may give the clearer account of this, I must observe; 1st, That it
is one thing to enquire whether we may not innocently Pray for the Dead; and
another, whether we ought to do it? 2. That there is a great difference between
Praying for the Dead in general, without defining what the particular intent of
it is, and what Advantages accrue to the Dead thereby, and determining that we
are to Pray for the Dead upon such a certain Account, as for instance, To
delive their Souls out of Purgatory, and that our Prayers are effectual in
order thereunto.

1. As to the former of these, We do not deny but that the Fathers did begin
very early to Pray for the Dead; and some of them were so zealous for it too,
that Epiphanius (as we shall see below) made it no small part of his Accusation
of Aerius, that he opposed the Practice of it. But yet, we do not find that
they pretended it was any part of a Christian's Duty to do this: That the
Gospel has any where required it of us, or recommended it to us: In short, they
did it as something which seemed to them very Pious and Fitting; but they tied
up no Man's Conscience with any Decisions or Anathema's about it.

2. For the Benefit and Advantage of it, in this they were yet less agreed than
in the other: Insomuch, that when Aerius, whom I before mentioned, earnestly
demanded what good came to the Dead from our Prayers? Epiph. Here Is. 75. l. 3.
n. 3. p. 908. A. Edit. An. 1682. Ibid. n. 7. p. 911. C.
Epiphanius chose rather to fly off to the Custom of the Church, to the
necessity of these Prayers to distinguish the Condition of our Blessed Lord
from that of all other Persons, and the like; than he would say expressly, how
or wherein the Dead were profited by them?

Many were the private Opinions of those holy Men, as to this matter. Some who
believed the Millenary Doctrine Tertullian. lib 3. contr. Mare c. 24. p. 412.
Intra quam aetatem (sc. 1000, annorum) concluditur sanctorum resurrectio, pro
Meritis maturius vel tardius Resurgentium.
before mentioned, that the Dead in Christ should revive within the compass of
a thousand Years, some sooner, others later, according as they had lived better
or worser lives on Earth; flattered themselves, that by their Prayers they
might hasten the Felicity of their Friends, and accordingly prayed, Tertull. de
monogam. c. 10. p. 531. A. Ambros. de Obit. Valent. T. 3. Te quaeso, sum
Deus, ut Charissimos Juvenes matura Resurrectione suscites, etc.
propter maturam Resurrectionem, for their speedy rising in Christ's Kingdom.

2. Others supposed that in the General Conflagration of the World at the last
day, All Men should pass through the Fire; That the better Christian any one
had been, the less he should feel of the Torment of it: And these prayed for
the Dead, that God would have Mercy on them in that day, and not suffer them to
be too much singed and burnt, not in the Fire of Purgatory, but in the General
Conflagration at the end of the World.

3. Some believed that the Souls of just Persons departed, went not straight to
Heaven, but were reserved in a certain place of Sequester, where they earnestly
expected and continually wished for their Absolute Consummation with all the
Faithful in Christ's Kingdom. And these prayed that God would give them Ease,
Rest and Refreshment, in the Bosom of Abraham, that they might be comforted
with the blessed Company of the Holy Angels, and the Vision of our Savior
Christ, till the so much wished for day of Judgment should come.

4. And lastly, not to mention any more; others there were who thought that the
Sentence was not instantly pronounced as soon as men died; or if it were, yet
not so Peremptorily, but that still, till the last day, an increase of Glory
might be added to the Crown of Righteousness which God has designed for the
Just; and some diminution made of the Torments of the Wicked. Now these prayed
for the Dead out of this Hope, to render them either more Happy or less
Miserable, to augment their Glory, or to diminish their pains for ever.

And all these were the private Opinions of particular men, no definitions of
the Faith of the Church in this matter: Epiphan. ib. Sect. 7. p. 911.
Many of the Holy Fathers declaring no other cause of their praying for the
Dead than only to show their Hopes of them, that they still lived, and
therefore ought to have some Communion maintained with them: Or else to
distinguish all, even the greatest Saints, from our Blessed Savior, and show
his infinite Prerogative above them, whilst they prayed for all the rest, to
testify their infirmity, and only gave thanks for him to manifest his Glory.

Having given this particular account of the Opinions of the primitive Fathers
as to this Point, and to some or other of which I shall show, that all the
passages produced out of them, in vindication of the Doctrine of Purgatory may
be applied; it will be no difficult matter to show how little all this can
favor the present Doctrine of the Roman Church in this matter.

1. The Primitive Christians, it is true, prayed for the Dead, but they never
put it into any of their Creeds, as the Council of Trent has done now. Nay
Epiphanius himself, See Epiph. Tom. 2. l. 3. p. 1103. Vol. 1. N. 21.
in the close of his Book, making a distinct recapitulation of what was the
Catholic Faith, and what the Constitution of the Church, places Prayers for
the Dead among Ibid. N. 23. p. 1106.
the latter; and which were therefore used, because the Custom of the Church
gave Authority thereunto.

2. The Prayers that are made for the Dead by the Church of Rome, are expressly
determined to this particular end, To See Sess. 25. Conc. Trid. de Purg. Symb.
Pii IV. etc.
Help and Relieve the Souls that are detained in Purgatory. Whereas we do not
find in the primitive Church any thing at all defined as to the immediate
design and benefit of them; and are only sure of this, that it was not to
deliver the Souls out of Purgatory.

Now this in general is Evident, in that we find them to have prayed for the
best Persons, for the Holy Apostles, Martyrs, and Confessors; for the Blessed
Virgin her self; for those whom they supposed at the same time to be in
Happiness, and whom the Papists themselves do not suppose to have ever touched
at Purgatory.

Thus we find in the Liturgies, said to be of the Ancient Church, that their
Prayers were made for all these: The Author of the Ecclesiastical Hierarchy,
having first described the Party deceased De Ecclesiast. Hierarch. Cap. 7. Page:
347. 348. 350. A. B. C. 352. C.
as replenisht with Divine Joy, and now no more fearing any change for the
worse; being publicly pronounced a happy man, and verily admitted in to the
Society of the Saints that have been from the beginning of the world; then
brings in the (...), etc. Page 354. A.
Bishops praying for him, That God would forgive him all the sins he had
committed through Humane infirmity, and bring him into the Light and Land of
the Living, into the Bosom of Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob: Into the place where
there is no more any pain, or sorrow, or sighing.

In the Liturgy said to be St. Basils, we find them thus praying for the Dead;
Be mindful, O Lord, of them which are dead, and are departed out of this Life,
and of the Orthodox Bishops which from Peter and James the Apostles See all
these Collected by A. B. Usher; Answer to a Challenge; Chapter of Prayers for the
Dead; p. 185. etc. Edit. 1625. Constitut Apost. lib. 8. Cap. 12.
until this day have clearly professed the right word of Faith; and
particularly of Ignatius, Dionysius, Julius, and the rest of the Saints of
worthy Memory. Be mindful, O Lord, of them also, who have stood unto Blood for
Religion, and by Righteousness and Holiness have fed thy holy Flock.

In the Liturgy ascribed to the Apostles, thus they pray, We offer unto Thee
for all the Saints which have pleased Thee from the beginning of the World;
Patriarchs, Prophets, Just men, Apostles, Martyrs, Confessors, Bishops,
Priests, Deacons: Surely, I hope not to deliver all these out of Purgatory.

In the Liturgy of the Church of Egypt ascribed to St. Basil, Liturg.
Aegyptiac. ex Arabic. Convers. Usher. ib. p. 186.
Gregory Nazianzen, and Cyril of Alexandria, it stands thus: Be mindful, O
Lord, of thy Saints; vouchsafe to remember all thy Saints which have pleased
Thee from the beginning; our holy Fathers the Patriarchs, Prophets, Apostles,
Martyrs, Confessors, Preachers, Evangelists, and all the Souls of the Just
which have died in the Faith; especially, the holy Glorious, the evermore
Virgin MARY, Mother of God; and St. John the forerunner the Baptist and Martyr:
St. Stephen the first Deacon and Martyr; St. Mark the Apostle, Evangelist, and
Martyr, etc.

In the Liturgy of the Church of Constantinople, said to be St. Chrysostoms, we
find the very same: We offer unto Chrysostom. Liturg. Edit. Goar. in Euchol p.
78. Paris. 1647.
Thee, this reasonable service for those who are at REST in the Faith; our
Forefathers, Fathers, Patriarchs, Prophets, and Apostles, Preachers,
Evngelists, Martyrs, Confessors, Religious persons, and for every spirit
Perfected in the Faith: Especially, for our most Holy, immaculate, and most
blessed Lady, the Mother of God, the Ever-Virgin MARY.

I suppose, I need no other Evidence than these public Records of the very
prayers of the Primitive Church, to show that they did not pray for the Dead,
with any intent to the bringing them out of Purgatory; and by consequence that
there can be no manner of proof derived from what those Holy men did, to
justify what the Church of Rome now does. Were it at all needful to enforce
this from the Testimonies of private Writers, I could easily run them out into
a greater length than I am willing to do. Cypri. Epist. xxxix. page 77. Ed.
Oxon.
St. Cyprian prayed for Laurentinus and Ignatius, whom he in the same place
acknowledges to have received Palms and Crowns for their sufferings. De obitu
Valentin. Imper.
St. Ambrose prayed for the Religious Emperors Valentinian and Gratian; for Id.
De Obit. Theodos. Imper.
Theodosius; for his Brother Id. De Obit. fratris Greg. Naz. in Funer. Caesarii
Or. 10.
Satyrus; all which at the same time he declares he thought to be in Happiness.
Gregory Nazianzen did the like for his Brother Caesarius: And all these and
many other proofs might at large be produced, were it needful to insist.

But this will more properly be done in the next point; wherein I am to examine
the proofs offered by those of the Roman Church in favor of their own present
practice from the Custom of the primitive Fathers which we have hitherto been
speaking of.

SECT. II.
The Allegations brought by those of the Church of Rome, to justify their
practice of Praying for the Dead, examined; and their weakness demonstrated.

BEfore I enter on this debate, it may not be amiss to premise what the true
state of the Point in Controversy is; viz. Not whether the Primitive Fathers
did not pray for the Dead, after the manner we have now seen; for that we have
already confessed they did: But whether they prayed for the Dead upon the same
principles that the Church of Rome does now, as supposing them to be in a state
of Torment, undergoing the temporal Pains due to their Sins, and in which,
therefore they were charitably to be relieved by the Prayers and Suffrages of
the Living. This is that which our Adversaries are to prove to us; and I will
now enquire what one of the latest of them in his Collections upon this Point,
Nubes Testium: of Aerius, page 84.
has offered to this purpose.

And here, 1st, I cannot but observe his loose proposing of the Point in
debate, and the short account he gives of the Case of Aerius in this matter,
whom he sets at the Ibid
Head of his Enquiry. In the first Century, says he, about the year of Christ
50. Aerius went out of the Church, Nubes Testium, p. 84.
and teaching many erroneous Doctrines, related by St. Epiphanius, Haer. 75.
endeavored to draw Numbers after him. His principal Tenets were those wherein
he condemned Prayers for the Dead, etc. -- And a little below, Aerius condemned
praying for the Dead: The Fathers practiced it, and owned it as advantageous to
the Souls departed.

That the Fathers practiced praying for the Dead, and that many of them
believed it advantageous to them, we have before freely allowed: And that
Aerius was to be condemned for what he did in Opposition hereunto, we shall
hereafter show: In the mean time this Gentleman ought to have known, that this
is neither what they affirm, or we deny: If he will state the Question as he
ought, it must be as we have before done it. Aerius condemned Praying for the
Dead, to deliver them out of Purgatory; the Fathers practiced it, and owned it
as Advantageous in order to this End: But this neither did Aerius condemn, nor
the Fathers practice; and therefore, the state of this Question alone, had it
been sincere, would have confuted his whole Chapter.

To give then such an account of Aerius, as may let us Bell. de Purg. l. 1. c.
2. D p 571 Petavius in Epiphan. page 328. n. 3. Natal. Alex. disp. 41. Saec.
iv. page 346. part. 3.
distinctly see what his Error was, and how little chargeable we are with it,
however it has pleased the Writers of the Roman Church not without some
ignorance, as well as much uncharitableness to impute it to us: I must first
observe a small mistake in our Author, as to the point of his Chronology,
whereby he is pleased to place Page 84.
Aerius in the first Century, about the year of Christ 50. I shall not need to
say that there must be something of an Error in this, because his own friend
Natalis, out of whom he has transcribed Natalis Alex. Hist. iv. Sec. par. 1. p.
263. Paris 1679.
every Article of this Chapter, will assure him, that he was contemporary with
Epiphanius, and living at the time that that Father wrote: So that unless we
shall suppose him to have been almost 400 years old, we must conclude that this
Gentleman has placed him near 300 years before his time. But this only by the
way: As for the Error its self with which Epiphanius charges him, it is this,
That he opposed the mentioning the names of the dead: Epiphan. Her. 75. page
908. B.
asking, to what purpose they did it? He that is alive prays, or offers the
Sacrifice; what shall this advantage the dead? But if the dead are indeed
profited thereby, then let no man from henceforth trouble himself to live well;
only let him oblige his Friends, or give Money to persons to pray for him, that
none of those inexpiable sins he has committed may be required of him. This
was the case of Aerius: And had the Church indeed universally believed, as some
of the Fathers did, that the Judgment after death was suspended till the
General Resurrection, and that in the mean time the sins of the dead might be
expiated by the Prayers of the living, he had but justly enough opposed so
dangerous an Error. But this was not the common opinion of the Church, nor her
design in those Prayers: which as the Dionys. Eccles. Hierarch. cap. 7. (...).
page 347.
Author of the Ecclesiastical Hierarchy tells us, were made only for good men:
either for such as had committed no notorious faults, or had repented of them,
and so died in an assured hope of God's favor and acceptance. And therefore
Epiphanius in answer to this Objection, gives Epiphan. ibid. n. vii. p. 911.
other reasons why they prayed for the dead; viz. to declare their Faith and
Hope concerning them; to distinguish the infinite Prerogative of our Savior
Christ above all, even the chiefest of his Saints, by praying for these, but
giving thanks only for him: And then for the benefit these Prayers did the
dead, he tells him that though they were not of force to cut off all sins, which
was the foundation of his objecting, yet they were profitable to them, to
implore the Mercy of God for those who had been sinners, but repented; and to
obtain for them a recompense for all in the resurrection of the just.

The Prayers therefore of the Church, for the rejecting of which Epiphanius
here justly reproves Aerius, were not such as the Church of Rome now uses; it
being not imaginable, had the Church then known any thing of praying of Souls
out of Purgatory, that either Aerius could have asked the Question, To what
purpose are these Prayers? Or Epiphanius being asked, not presently have
replied, to deliver the Souls departed from the flames of Purgatory. The
Prayers that Aerius condemned were those which the primitive Fathers made upon
the account that from Epiphanius I have just now given: And which those of the
Church of Rome do no less condemn than he did; whilst they so often tell us,
that if there be no Purgatory, Prayers for the dead must be unprofitable: So
says Contr. Gent. lib. 4. c. 91.
Aquinas: That the manner of praying for the Apostles, Martyrs, etc. is by
disuse deservedly abolished: Controvers. Theol. qu. 6. Schol. Sect. 7.
So Mendoza: Nay, that to offer Sacrifices for those that are in bliss is
plainly absurd and impious: So says Azorius Instit. Moral. Tom. 1. l. 8. c. 20.
See these cited by A. B. Usher. Answer to a Chall. page 244, 245.
Azorius; who in this certainly outruns Aerius himself, who only pretended that
it was unprofitable; but never durst say it was impious and absurd.

It is therefore very improper in our Collector of the Primitive Fathers to
insinuate as if we were Aerians upon the account of our not praying with them
for the dead. Aerius rejected the Prayers that the Primitive Church made, upon
those principles that we have said, and which the Romanists themselves reject
and condemn with him: We reject those Prayers which the Church of Rome makes
now for delivering Souls out of Purgatory. Had we lived in those times that
Aerius did, we had readily complied with the Practice of those Holy men, upon
such grounds as they used it: Had those Holy Fathers lived now in the dregs of
the Church, and seen the abuse of the Romanists in this matter, I make no doubt
but they would have censured both the Cause and the Practice of the present
praying for the dead, as false and unfitting; I am sure Epiphanius elsewhere
gives us sufficient reason to believe that he would; where speaking concerning
the state after death, he tells us, That in the Age to come, after the death of
a Man, there is no advantage Epiphan. Her. 59. page 501. D. 502. A. B. C.
of fasting, no call to repentance, no demonstration of Charity; -- There
Lazarus does not go to the Rich man, nor the Rich man to Lazarus: Neither
Abraham sends the poor man to labor that he may grow rich, nor does the rich
man obtain, though with Prayers, entreating merciful Abraham. Then the Garners
are sealed, the time is ended, the combat finished, the Lists are empty, and
the Crowns distributed. Those that have not yet encountered have no more
opportunity, and they who have been overcome in the Lists are cast out. In
short, all is perfectly ended when once we are departed hence.

And now having thus prepared the way to the following enquiry; Let us see
whether his Fathers will prove any better Advocates for their Cause, than this
loose and imperfect state of the Question between us seems to promise. And

1st. I must take notice that the greatest part of those he has here cited, say
only in General, that they were wont to pray for the dead, that God would
forgive them their sins, and instate them in the light and land of the living;
or something of the like kind. Now it is evident from what has been before
observed, that all these argue nothing more than what we have already confessed
to have been the practice of the Primitive Church, but give not the least
Authority to those Prayers which are made in the Church of Rome to deliver the
Souls departed out of Purgatory.

So Dionys. Areopag: The venerable Prelate coming, Nubes test. p. 85. Natalis
Alex. saec. iv. To. 3. p. 392. Dionys. Hierarch. Eccl. p. 354. A.
prays over the dead body, he implores the Divine Clemency to pardon all the
sins committed by the deceased party, through humane frailty, and that he may
be received into the state of bliss, and region of the living.

This is indeed the sense of what the pretended Dionysius says, though not his
Words: But then I must observe 1st, That this Prayer is made over those, who
having lived Dionys. ib. p. 348. C.
holy lives, are now come to the end of their combats, and therefore rest in
Joy and in a certain Hope, and are already received into those most holy seats,
to which all those in time shall be promoted, who are here endued with a Divine
perfection. So that it must be an intolerable presumption Ibid 352. C.
to pretend that this Prayer was designed to deliver the deceased out of a
place of Torments, nothing inferior to those of Hell fire, such as we are told
Purgatory is.

2dly, The Author inquiring to what purpose these Prayers were made, answers,
That the holy Bishop knowing the promises of God to those who had lived well,
now prayed that Dionys. Ibid. p. 356, 357.
those sins which by human frailty had been committed by the person deceased,
being forgiven, the rewards promised to the just might be accomplished in him.
Here then is a plain account of the design of their Praying, but no way
favorable to the business of Purgatory.

3dly, Pachymeres in his Paraphrase, explaining what the meaning of those Hymns
and Lessons was, which were read at the Funeral of such a one for whom they
thus prayed, says, It Is to signify those eternal Mansions, to Dionys. Eccl.
Hierarch. p. 366. D.
which the party deceased is gone, and to exhort the living to strive after the
like holy end. Now, surely these Eternal Mansions of the blessed were not the
Roman Purgatory; and it would have been but an uncomfortable Exhortation to
have proposed to the Living, that they should use their utmost endeavors, that
they might come into this place of Torments.

4thly, In his account of the Prayers themselves, he says, That the Bishop
knows from the Holy Scriptures, that by the just Judgment of God, a blessed and
divine Life is prepared Ibid. p. 370.
for the just, the divine Goodness mercifully overlooking the spots which by
humane frailty we contract, and from which no Man is free. And therefore
knowing this, he prays, that whatever spots of this kind, he by his frailty may
have contracted, that God would mercifully overlook them, and give him his
sacred Reward. And the same was the Language of the Ancient Liturgies of the
Church, which we have before cited; in which, having named the Holy Apostles,
Martyrs and Confessors, which even the Romanists themselves will not send to
Purgatory; they pray, that they may rest in the Country of the Living; in the
delights of Paradise, in Gods Kingdom, in the Bosom of Abraham, Isaac and
Jacob; as (...). Litur. Jacob. Bibl. Patr.
St. James's Liturgy has it in the very words of Dionysius: Make them (...).
Lit. Marc.
rest in the Tabernacles of thy Saints, says St. Mark (...). Lit. Basil. and
Chrysostom.
in the light of thy Countenance, says St. Basil, and St. Chrysostom; Da illis
requiem, Cyril. Heroes. Liturg.
Give them rest, says St. Cyril: Now, if these Prayers for this Rest were to
this end, that God would deliver them out of Purgatory, and set them at ease,
as the Church of Rome pretends, then certainly the holy Apostles and the
blessed Virgin, must have been in a very ill Condition, who after 400 years
(for so late, some of these Prayers must be confessed to have been) were still
esteemed by the Church to lie in those Purgatory-flames; and it was great
uncharitableness in St. Peter and his Successors, that they would not all this
while open the Treasure of the Church, and by some powerful Indulgence set them
at Liberty. Conclude we therefore, that there is no manner of Consequence in
this Argument, The Primitive Fathers prayed for the Rest of the Souls departed;
therefore they thought them in Torment in a Purgatory-fire, suffering the
temporal Punishment due to their Sins, and by these Prayers believed they could
deliver them from thence.

And yet is this the most that the greatest Part of the Testimonies which are
offered to us, say; and by Consequence are, as we see, wholly impertinent to
the purpose of the Church of Rome: I shall need only name them, since the same
Answer I have given to this first, will by Application serve for all the Rest.

So Tertullian, whose words our Natalis Alex. diss. 41. ^ii Saec. p. 394. Nubes
Test. p. 85.
Collector thus renders, Ob ^tiones pro defunctis, pro ^natalitiis a^ die
facimus. De Corona c. 3. page 102. A.
We make Oblations for the Dead, and keep the Anniversary of their Birth. -- He
is speaking in that Chapter of several Customs of the Church, which Tradition
and long usage had established, but for which there was no Authority of Holy
Scripture; and this he gives as one instance. But were these Oblations to
deliver them out of Purgatory? I shall only desire him to consider the
Interpretation which their own Editor gives of the Natalitia, which he renders
Anniversaries, and then affirm it if he can. By the Natalitia, says he, is
meant the Solemnities used to be kept in honor of the Le Prieur. Annot. in
loc. p. 102.
Martyrs, every year, on the Day when by dying to the World they were born to
Heaven. It seems then these Solemnities Tertullian here speaks of, were for
those who were already born to Heaven, for the Holy Martyrs; and not as is
pretended, to deliver their Souls out of Purgatosy.

Nor does Natalis Alex. p. 395. Nub. Test. 86.
Arnobius add any thing more: What reason was there that our Churches should be
so outragiously thrown down, in which Prayers were offered to our Sovereign
God, Peace and Mercy was implored for all, for Magistrates, Cur immaniter
conventicula dirui (meruerunt) in quibus summus Oratur Deus, pax cunctis and
venia postulatur, Magistratibus, Exercitibus, Regibus, Familiaribus, Inimicis,
huc vitam degentibus, and resolutis corporum vinctione, lib. iv.
Armies, Kings, Friends and Enemies, whether alive or dead. Here is mention of
Praying for the Dead; but as for Purgatory, (...).

What Eusebius speaks concerning the death of Constantine, Natalis Alex. ib.
page 398 Nub. Test. 88.
is no way more pertinent. He tells us that they offered up Prayers to God for
the Soul of the Emperor; but that these Prayers were to deliver his Soul from
the Temporal pains of Purgatory, he says not one word.

I have already considered Epiphanius, and we find in his reprehension of
Aerius much against them, but nothing in their favor: As for what Natal. Alex.
page 401. Nub. Test. 92.
Theodoret relates of Theodosius the younger, that he prayed for his Father and
Mother, begging that they might obtain pardon for all their Sins of frailty. It
still confirms that they did in those Days Pray for the Dead, and for the
forgiveness of their Sins; but for the remission of any present Temporal
Punishment which they thought they were undergoing for them, this we do not
find that they Prayed for.

For St. Ambrose, had his whole words been transcribed, Natalis Alex. p. 402.
Nub. Test. 93.
we should have seen at first view that they were nothing to the purpose. He
Exhorts Faustinus, not so much to bewail his Sister, as to pray for her. What
to deliver her Soul out of Purgatory? No surely, for in the words immediately
foregoing, he tells him, That being taken for a time from us she does pass a
better life there. But this Haec ad tempus quidem erepta nobis meliorem illic
Vitam exigit. Epist. 8.
little oversight ought not in justice to be imputed to our collector; who
Transcribes Natalis, and not the Fathers themselves; and could therefore give
us no more than what he found in him.

The next from whom he supposes may be inferred the Natalis Alex. p. 402. Nub.
Test. 93.
Doctrine of praying Souls out of Purgatory, is St. Jerome: Who in the Epistle
mentioned to Pammachius some time after the death of his Wife Paulina,
particularly commends him that Vid. Arg Eras. P. 73. Tom. 1.
he had sold all his Goods, and given them to the poor, and taken up the
resolution of leading a Monastic life. Other Husbands, says he, dress their
Wives Tombs with Violets, Roses, and Purple flowers, and by these services ease
their disturbed mind: But our friend Pammachius pays no other duty to the Holy
Ashes, and Venerable Bones, but by giving Alms, cherishing them by this sweet
Odor, because he knows it is written, as Water extinguishes the Fire, so do
Alms blot out sin. This is in some measure, St. Jerome's sense, but by no means
suitable to the Elegance of his Expressions: But not to insist on that; was
this Charity, to deliver her Soul out of Purgatory? Nay, but St. Hierome in the
close of that very Epistle says, that she was with her Sister Bloe^ila Fol. 76.
Edit. Eras. Tom. 1.
already with the Lord: That they both enjoyed a sweet and pleasant sleep: And
in the very words cited, there are so many expressions of her present Quiet, as
can never be reconciled to the Purgatory Torments. But this the Translator left
out: Cherishing them (say he) by this sweet Odor: St. Hierom's words are
these: With these Figments and these Odours he cherishes her dead Ashes NOW AT
REST: Which plainly enough shows that he thought her in a state and place
vastly different from the condition of Souls in Purgatory; all that St. Hierom
then meant by this, was only thus much, that this Charity of Pammachius was
most pleasing to Paulina, that her Soul rejoiced in it, as in a fragrant and
delightful Odor; and that hereby he should engage the Mercy of God not for
himself alone, but for his Wife too, in whose name he did it, and to whose
Salvation it should therefore not a little conduce.

As to what is alleged of St. Austin's praying for his Natalis Alex. p. 402.
Nubes Test. 94.
Mother Monica, nothing certainly could have been more inauspicious to the
Consequence that is pretended to be drawn from it; for besides, that in all
which he says there is not one word of any Temporal Pains, which he desired she
might be freed from; he expressly declares, That he believed Et credo jam
feceris quod te rogo, sed Voluntaria Oris Mei approba Domine. St. August.
Confession. l. ix. c. 13. Tom. 1. p. 61. B.
God had already done all that he desired:If therefore he desired to have her
delivered out of Purgatory, He believed God had already done it, and therefore
the Prayers he now made, could not be to obtain her Freedom. But this
Circumstance our Author cautiously omitted, tho in the middle of what he set
down; and that the charge of such false dealing may not always lie upon
Natalis, I must here free him from it; this being the only passage in the whole
Chapter which our Collector has not borrowed from him; and must therefore bear
now the blame himself, unless he has some other Friend, that I do not at
present know of, upon whom to lay the imputation.

I shall not need to give any Answer more to the other passage or two from the
same Father; in none of which is there the least mention of any Purgatory
Pains, or that the Prayers were made for their deliverance from them.

And hitherto then we have considered such Testimonies as cannot with any show
of Reason be pretended to make any thing for the Custom of Praying for the
dead, now used in the Church of Rome. But now

2dly, Some others there are that may seem more immediately to their purpose;
in which they expressly desire Rest, Comfort, and Refreshment for the dead. I
have already answered in great measure this Argument, by showing that these
things they prayed for, even for the Apostles and Martyrs, and the B. Virgin
her self; and therefore that these expressions cannot be said to signify that
the persons for whom they prayed, were either in Purgatory or any other place
of Torments. But I will now more expressly remove this difficulty, and to that
end I must repeat what I have before observed, that many among the ancient
Fathers supposed that the Souls departed, do not go straight to Heaven, but are
kept in a place of Sequester, where they earnestly desire the accomplishment of
the number of Christ's Saints, that they may be consummated with them Nub. Test.
vid. supr.
in Glory. Now with reference to this Opinion it was, that they prayed to God
to give them Rest: So Tertullian, and St. Ambrose, alleged by our Collector;
to grant them repose; a quiet sleep: So St. Cyprian, i. e. as Tertullian
himself explains it, That they might have comfort in the Bosom Lib. de An. c.
35. Id. lib. IV. contr. Marc. c. 34.
of Abraham, till the time of the Resurrection shall come.

If it shall be objected against this, That to pray for their rest implies as
if they were not now in Ease, and so reduce us to a necessity of confessing
either a Purgatory or some other the like place of punishment. I answer 1st, If
this be so, then the B. Virgin, the Apostles, Martyrs, and Confessors were all
at this time in Purgatory, above 300 years after their death; for thus we see
they prayed in the Primitive Church by name for them, which yet the Church of
Rome dares not say. But 2dly, In the continuance of their Prayers for the dead,
they used the same supplications that they did at their first departure; and
therefore pray for their rest and repose, as if they were but now just Lib. 2.
de Purg. cap. v. p. 644. C.
about to enter into it; and this account Cardinal Bellarmin himself gives us
of it. To which let me add 3dly, That the Ancient Fathers thought, that in this
place of refreshment there were diverse degrees of it; and therefore they prayed
that God would give them rest, not as if they were now totally destitute of it,
but as desiring it might be increased to them in a yet higher degree: Or else
4thly, as Tertullians words seem to imply, they desired hereby their rest, i.
e. the continuance of that rest they now enjoyed to the day of judgment.

Nor is it any prejudice to this, that the dead were now out of a capacity of
having their state ever altered, and therefore that it was in vain to pray for
that happiness which they were already secure of, since as Bellarmin himself
Lib. 2. de Purg. cap. v. ib.
confesses, the Ancients thought it no way improper to pray for those things
which they knew God was resolved to give: And we see our Blessed Savior in his
own short Prayer has commanded us to pray that God's Kingdom may come, which
whether we pray or no, will in its due time most infallibly be accomplished.

Whether these Reasons may, any or all of them appear to be a sufficient
vindication of such kind of Prayers I cannot tell: But this is certain, that
the primitive Christians did pray for the rest of those whom they esteemed
already in happiness, and by consequence that these Prayers do not argue a
state of Torments from whence the dead were to be delivered by them. And
because it may be of great moment to be well assured of this, I will subjoyn an
undeniable instance of it, in one of the very particulars offered by our
Collector, but with what sincerity I shall leave the Reader to judge, in favor
of Purgatory.

St. Ambrose in his Oration on the Death of Theodosius, thus prays for him:
Give perfect rest to thy Servant Theodosius, that Rest which thou have prepared
for thy Saints. Let his Soul ascend thither from whence it had its Origin;
where it may be out of the power of Death, where it may know that Death is not
an end of Nature but of Sin. I loved him, and therefore I pursue him to the
Region of the living; nor will I leave him, till by my Tears and Prayers I
bring him whither his Merits call him, into the Holy Mount of our Lord, where
there is life without end.

Thus our Collector tells us St. Ambrose prayed for Theodosius: But did this
Holy Bishop think him as yet in Purgatory, and that by his Prayers he should
set him at Rest from the Torments of it? Let us judge by what goes before in
the same Oration: Theodosius of honorable memory, being Absolutus igitur dubio
certamine, fruitur nunc Augustae memoriae Theodosius luce perpetua,
tranquillitate diuturna, and pro iis quae in hoc gessit Corpore, munerationis
Divinae fructibus gloriatur. Ergo quia dilexit augustae memoriae Theodosius
Dominum Deum suum, meruit sanctorum consortio.
freed from doubtful fight, does now enjoy everlasting light, and continual
tranquillity; and for the things which he did in this Body, he rejoiceth in the
fruits of Gods reward; because he loved the Lord his God, he has merited the
Society of the Saints. And again in the same Oration: He has not laid down,
but changed his Kingdom, Regnum non deposuit sed mutavit; in Tabernacula
Christi jure pietatis asci^u^, in illam Jerusalem supernam.
being taken by the right of his piety into the Tabernacles of Christ, into the
Heavenly Jerusalem. Now surely the Tabernacles of Christ, the Jerusalem that is
above, are no Characters of Purgatory; and yet here St. Ambrose thought
Theodosius at the same time that he prayed for him. But St. Ambrose is yet more
express; Manet ergo in lumine Theodosius, and Sanctorum caetibus gloriatur.
Theodosius therefore (says he) remains in light, and glories in the Company
of the Saints. Let the Reader now judge, whether the Prayers of this Holy Man
for the rest of Theodosius, be any president for those Prayers that are made
for the Rest of Souls, by the Church of Rome.

3. There is yet one Witness to be considered, and upon which our Collector
insists more largely than ordinary, and that is St. Chrysostom: Who in the
places cited out of him Nub. Test. p. 88, 89, etc.
speaks indeed of certain Benefits which came to the dead by our Prayers; and
thereupon exhorts all persons to perform this Office to them. I have before
mentioned an Opinion of some Fathers, that even the damned in Hell might be
advantaged by the Prayers of the living; and if not be freed from, yet be at
least alleviated in their torments. And in this excessive Charity St.
Chrysostom was one of the forwardest; as is evident in the very Hom. 21. in
Act. Tom. 3. in N. T. p. 202, 203. Hom. 3. in Ep. Phil. To. 6. in N. T. p. 32,
33.
Homilies cited by this Collector, were I at liberty to insist on a thing so
well known. We are not therefore to wonder if we find this Father so earnestly
pressing this Charity of praying for the dead, which he thought of so great a
force as even to relieve the greatest sinners. If this be either the belief or
practice of the Roman Church, we shall not deny them a pattern in this Holy
Father; But if this be what they neither believe nor allow of, How impertinent
must it be to produce his praying for the dead, on such Principles as they
condemn, to be a witness of the Antiquity of their praying for the dead to
deliver them out of Purgatory, which he knew nothing at all of, nor did at all
intend by his Prayers.

4. As for what is finally added concerning the Greek Church, it is confessed
that they do pray for the dead upon the same grounds, and after the same manner
that the Ancient Church did; but that they pray for them as the Romanists would
now insinuate, this is false, as we have before shown; nor do the testimonies
produced at all convince us of it.

And this may suffice to have been said to the several proofs that are offered
by those of the Roman Communion in favor of this Error, concerning Prayers for
the dead; for as for Isidore Hispalensis, he is beyond the period I have fixed
to my reflections; and for St. Perpetua's Dream which the Misrepresenter, from
Natalis too, heretofore insisted upon, I may reasonably presume by our
Collector's omission of it, that he thought it sufficiently answered by the
Learned Author that first undertook the examination of his Pretenses against us.

CLOSE.
AND now after so particular Examination of all these things, there is but One
Objection more remaining that I can foresee may possibly be made against us, on
this Occasion: For be it that we have reason to throw off the Romish Error of
Purgatory, and by consequence those Prayers for the Dead which are made in that
Church to deliver the Souls from thence; yet since we cannot deny but that the
Primitive Christians did pray for the Dead for many other ends, and which we do
not presume to condemn them for, Wherefore at least do we not continue the
ancient Practice, and pray for them as those Holy Men of old did?

This perhaps may be a scruple that some may raise, and having answered it I
shall conclude: And

1st, If he be one of the Roman Communion that makes this Objection, he may
please to tell us, wherefore it is, That they of his own Church do not do this?
Or why he should require us to follow the Ancient practice of the Church in
those things which themselves do not think sufficient to oblige them to a
Conformity? They may call us Aerians or what else they please upon this
account; but if to follow the Error of Aerius, this be to become properly
Aerians, we have before seen that they do so; nay they outstrip him in it;
whilst that sort of Praying for the dead, which the Ancients used, he thought
only needless and irrational; but there are amongst them those who See above.
doubt not to call it impious and absurd.

I have before shown what the Grounds were on which those Holy Men prayed for
the dead: Now there is not one of these which is not at this day disclaimed by
the Church of Rome, no less than by us, and especially that which was the
chiefest foundation of all, viz. The Opinion of the State of the Soul out of
Heaven during its separation, they have in the Council of Florence flatly
condemned. Now if it be then no crime in them to reject the Opinions of those
Primitive Christians on which this practice was founded, nay to censure the
very practice its self upon any other account but that which they now assert,
and which the Ancient Fathers, as we have seen, never knew; how comes it to be
more unlawful in us to do this, than it is in them; or why may not we as well
give off Praying for the dead as the Ancient Church did, as they themselves not
only leave it off, but even censure it to have been impious and absurd, which
we never presumed to do? But

2dly, If the Person who makes this Objection, be of some other Communion, I
have several Reflections to offer in our Justification in this Matter.

1st, Let his Reverence for Antiquity be never be so great, yet he will not I
am sure, say either, that those holy Men were Infallible in every thing they
did, or that we ought to receive at all adventures whatever can be proved to
have descended from them. We do indeed confess, that this Custom of Praying for
the Dead, was one of the most early Practices of the Church. But then we have
seen what it was that introduced it: And their grounds are many of them such,
as are now generally disclaimed by almost all Christians; such as that of
Christ's Millenary Kingdom; of the passing of all Men, through the
Purgatory-fire at the end of the World; of the Souls of the just being in a
place of Sequester out of Heaven till the last day, and the like; the rest so
inconsiderable, as that we cannot by any means think them sufficient to warrant
so dangerous a Practice. For what is it to engage us to this, that the Ancients
thought hereby to distinguish the best of Men from our Savior Christ? To
testify their Hopes of a future Resurrection? To maintain a kind of Fellowship
and Communion with them? There are other ways enough to do all this, without
engaging in such a piety as the Holy Scripture, is not so much as pretended to
Countenance: the most that ever the Holy Fathers offered for it, being the
Custom of the Church; and Tertullian expressly places it among those things
which are no where written. How far such an Authority might then have obliged
us to compliance with the Practice of the Church had we lived in those
Primitive Times, it is not necessary to enquire; but since neither the Holy
Scripture requires it, nor does the Custom of the Church now exact it of us,
nor do we acknowledge those Opinions on which it was heretofore used, nor can we
see any Benefit that we are able to do the Dead by them; it is but reasonable
to omit that, which might justly give offense to some, but cannot possibly
bring advantage to any.

But 2dly, We have yet a more particular Reason, why it is by no means fitting
at this time, thus to pray for the Dead; and that is, to prevent that danger
which the present Practice of the Church of Rome would be apt to expose Men to,
should we do it. To pray for the Souls departed as that Church does, neither
did the Primitive Fathers ever allow, and we have sufficiently shown how
dangerously erroneous it is to do so. It is therefore by no means convenient to
continue a Practice, whereby it might be very easy to lead Men into such gross
Mistakes; and however, some might still be able to make the Distinction, and
see a great difference in the Design and Intention of the same kind of praying;
yet the ill use that is made, even of what those Holy Fathers did, sufficiently
shows us how apt men are to confound those things together, that have so nigh a
Relation as to the Practice, and the Act being the same, to lead them to
believe that the Principle is so too.

In short, 3dly, We cannot imagine, if there were indeed any such great Piety
in this Practice, as to deserve our Apology for the Omission of it, how it
comes to pass that neither Precept nor Example of any such thing, is to be
found in the Holy Scriptures: And to those, who make that the Rule of their
Religion; we do not see that any more need be said than this, That we find
nothing there to Authorize such a Devotion, and that, therefore we cannot think
it fitting to make it a part of the Churches Service.

I shall close up all with the Words of our Church in her Homily upon this
Subject: Let these and such other Considerations Third part of Sermon. concern.
Prayer, p. 212. Ed. Ox. 1683.
be sufficient to take away the gross Error of Purgatory out of our Heads;
neither let us dream any more that the Souls of the Dead are any thing at all
helped by our Prayers: But as the Scripture teaches us, let us think that the
Soul of Man passing out of the Body, goes straight ways either to Heaven, or
else to Hell; whereof the one needs no Prayer, the other is without
Redemption. The only Purgatory wherein we must trust to be saved, is the Death
and Blood of Christ, which if we apprehend with a true and steadfast Faith, it
purges and cleanses us from all our Sins, even as well as if he were now
hanging upon the Cross. The Blood of Christ, says St. John, has cleansed us
from all Sin. The Blood of 1 John i. Hebr. ix.
Christ, says St. Paul, has purged our Consciences from dead Works, to serve
the Living God. Also in another place, he says, We be sanctified and made Holy
by the Hebr. x.
offering up of the Body of Jesus Christ done once for all. Yea, he adds
more, saying, With the one Oblation of his blessed Body and precious Blood, he
has made perfect for ever and ever, all them that are sanctified. This then is
that Purgatory, wherein all Christian Men put their whole Trust and Confidence;
nothing doubting, but if they truly repent them of their Sins, and die in
perfect Faith, that then they shall forthwith pass from Death to Life. If this
kind of Purgation will not serve them, let them never hope to be released by
other men's Prayers, tho they should continue therein unto the Worlds end. He
that cannot be saved by Faith in Christ's Blood, how shall he look to be
delivered by Man's Intercessions? Has God more Respect to Man on Earth, than he
has to Christ in Heaven? If any man sin (says St. John) we have an Advocate
with the Father, even Jesus Christ the Righteous, 1 John ii.
and he is the Propitiation for our Sins. But we must take heed that we call
upon this Advocate, while we have space given us in this Life, least when we
are once Dead, there be no hope of Salvation left unto us. For as every Man
sleeps with his own Cause, so every Man shall rise again with his own Cause.
And look in what State he dies, in the same State he shall also be judged,
whether it be to Salvation or Damnation.

Let us not therefore dream either of Purgatory, or of Prayer for the Souls of
them that be Dead; but let us earnestly and diligently pray for them which are
expressly commanded in Holy Scripture, namely for Kings and Rulers, for
Ministers of Gods Holy Word and Sacraments, for the Saints of this World,
otherwise called the Faithful; to be short, for all Men living, be they never
so great Enemies to God and his People, as Jews, Turks, Pagans, Infidels,
Heretics. Then shall we truly fulfill the Commandment of God in that behalf,
and plainly declare our selves to be the true Children of our Heavenly Father,
who suffers the Sun to shine upon the Good and Bad, and the Rain to fall upon
the Just and Unjust.

For which, and all other Benefits most abundantly bestowed upon Mankind from
the beginning, let us give him hearty thanks, as we are most bound; and Praise
his Name for ever and ever.

Amen.
FINIS.
Books lately printed for Richard Chiswell.
1. A Discourse concerning the Necessity of Reformation, with respect to the
Errors and Corruptions of the Church of Rome. Quarto. First and Second Parts.

2. A Discourse concerning the Celebration of Divine Service in an Unknown
Tongue. Quarto.

3. An Exposition of the Doctrine of the Church of England, in the several
Articles proposed by the late BISHOP of CONDOM, [in his Exposition of the
Doctrine of the Catholic Church.] Quarto.

4. A Defense of the Exposition of the Doctrine of the CHURCH of ENGLAND,
against the EXCEPTIONS of Monsieur de MEAUX, late Bishop of Condom, and his
VINDICATOR. Quarto.

5. An Answer to THREE PAPERS lately printed, concerning the Authority of the
Catholic Church in Matters of Faith, and the Reformation of the Church of
England Quarto.

6. A Vindication of the Answer to SOME LATE PAPERS concerning the Unity and
Authority of the Catholic Church, and Reformation of the Church of England.
Quarto.

7. An Historical Treatise written by an AUTHOR of the Communion of the CHURCH
of ROME, touching TRANSUBSTANTIATION. Wherein is made appear, That according to
the Principles of THAT CHURCH, This Doctrine cannot be an Article of Faith.
Quarto.

8. An Answer to the First, Second, Fifth and Sixth Sheets of the Second Part
of the [Popish Representer].

9 The Lay-Christians Obligation to read the Holy Scriptures. Quarto.

10. The Plaiu Man's Reply to the Catholic Missionaries, 24o.

11. The Protestant's Companion: Or an Impartial Survey, and Comparison of the
Protestant Religion as by Law established, with the main Doctrines of Popery.
Wherein is shown, that Popery is contrary to Scripture, Primitive Fathers and
Councils; and that proved from Holy Writ, the Writings of the Ancient Fathers,
for several hundred Years, and the Confession of the most Learned Papists
themselves. Quarto.

12. A Discourse of the Holy Eucharist, in the two great Points of the Real
Presence and the Adoration of the Host. In Answer to the Two Discourses lately
printed at Oxford on this Subject. To which is pre^ed a large Historical
Preface relating to the same Argument. Quarto.

13. The Pillar and Ground of Truth. A Treatise showing that the Roman Church
falsely claims to be That Church, and the Pillar of That Truth, mentioned by St.
Paul in his First Epistle to Timothy, Chap. III. Verse. 15. Quarto.

14. A Brief Discourse concerning the Notes of the Church, with some
Reflections on Cardinal Bellarmin's Fifteen Notes, of which Eight are extant,
the Rest will be published Weekly in their Order.

15. A Defense of the Confuter of Bellarmin's Second Note of the Church
[Antiquity] against the Cavils of the Adviser. Quarto.

16. The Peoples Right to read the Holy Scriptures asserted. In Answer to the
6th, 7th, 8th, 9th and 10th Chapters of the [Popish Representer.]

17. A Short Summary of the Principal Controversies between the Church of
England, and the Church of Rome. Being a Vindication of several Protestant
Doctrines, in Answer to a late Pamphlet entitled [Protestancy destitute of
Scripture Proof].

Imprimatur Liber cui Titulus, A Discourse concerning the Nature of Idolatry,
etc.

Ex Aedib. Lambeth, Febr. 18. 1687. Guil. Needham, R. R. in Christo P. ac D. D.
Wilhelmo Archiepisc. Cant. a Sacr. Domest.

A DISCOURSE Concerning the Nature of Idolatry: In which a Late Author's True
and Only NOTION of IDOLATRY IS Considered and Confuted.

Si inter solos Pontificios versarer, etc. i. e. If I conversed with none but
Papists, and considered their Religion corrupted with Old Wives Tales, and were
altogether destitute of a Rule of Faith, by which to discern the vast
difference between the Christian Religion, and the Trifles of Popery; and
lastly, if no Histories were extant, showing how these Dotages crept in: If it
were thus, I say, then I frankly confess, that I should very much suspect the
Christian Religion, nay I should utterly reject it as foolish and mean, and
beneath the esteem of old Gossips; nor should I less hate the name of
Christianity, than I do that of Popery. Tentam. Physic. Theol. Auth. Samuele
Parkero, P. 4. LONDON: Printed for William Rogers, at the Sun over against St.
Dunstan's Church in Fleet Street. MDCLXXXVIII.

THE PREFACE.
WEre we to judge of the Merits of a Book merely by the good Opinion which the
Author seems to have of it, we might reasonably believe, that the Discourse
concerning the Nature of Idolatry, which I am about to consider, was not only
set forth in Defense of a truly Infallible Church, but that the Author of it
thought himself delivering nothing but Oracles all the while he was composing
of it.

If his Reasons had born proportion to the nature of his Attempt, we should
easily have forgiven him, or rather we should have thanked him, no less than
the Gentlemen of the Roman Communion would have done in such a case. He does
indeed Treat men with Contempt, whom all the World knows to be above his
Contempt, nor can I believe him to be so singular as not to know it himself;
but yet had he reasoned well, we had yielded to him: for an over-bearing Spirit
in an Adversary, neither makes us to submit to a bad Argument, nor to resist a
good one.

It seemed something strange, that that Author should think to Trample upon us
now, for pretending that the Church of Rome has defined Transubstantiation as
it is understood by us, and that she has established an Idolatrous Worship in
her Communion: For not only the greatest Persons of the Reformed Religion have
brought this Charge against her, but to the truth of it himself has subscribed
in his time. But it was much more amazing to find so new a Confidence supported
by Arguments so weak, that it is not without reason that some of the Roman
Communion are said to complain, That they have been Betrayed, rather than
Defended by him.

How unsuccessfully he has managed his Design of Expounding Transubstantiation,
has been shown in a late Discourse proving Transubstantiation to be the
peculiar Doctrine of the Church of Rome, and in the Preface to the Examination
of the New Articles of the Roman Creed by Catholic Tradition. If I make it
appear that he has miscarried as much in the point of Idolatry, his Theological
part will then be considered; and for the rest, we do not by any means presume
to meddle with it.

As for the Subject which I have undertaken, one would have thought, that a man
who resolved to despise all that had ever written upon it, and not according to
his Opinion, should have taken care, if not to produce something that could not
be Answered, yet at least not to offer any thing that had been already Confuted.

But on the contrary, this Author, after all this noise, has for the most part
been only an humble Transcriber of the Old Exploded Pretenses; and which I may
truly say were much more strongly, as well as more modestly urged by Dr. Godden
against his learned Adversary. And when I consider how much more roughly this
Author uses him, than that Doctor did, I am apt to think it might in some
measure proceed from the sense he had that Dr. St. in discovering the Sophistry
of his Old Antagonist, had beforehand confuted whatever this New one could
find out again to revive the Controversy.

And for this I shall leave the following Discourse to be my Evidence; and of
which I shall say no more here, than that in his own phrase: I have delivered
my Judgment, as I will answer Page 135.
for my Integrity to God and the World. But now there is another thing, which I
ought not in this place to pass by. It has been insinuated by this hot
Reasoner, as no small Crime in us, that we charge the Church of Rome with
Idolatry, Not only (says he) because of the Page 72.
falseness of the Calumny, but the barbarous consequence that may follow upon
it, to incite and warrant the Rabble, whenever Opportunity favors, to destroy
the Roman Catholics and their Images, as the Israelites were commanded to
destroy the Canaanites and their Idols. And in the next Page he tells us, That
this Charge of Idolatry has ever been set 73. 74.
up as the Standard against Monarchy.

There are many more Passages of the like kind, in which he exercises his Gift
of Eloquence: for I dare say he never learnt it, unless he has in his time
studied to imitate a Tempest; for I know not what other Original he could
propound to himself. This style is the fittest in the World to his purpose, and
will perhaps be a Copy for the future to them that intend to speak neither
according to Charity nor Truth; which are ever best heard in a Calm.

But however, if this too were for the declaration of his Judgment, we will no
more complain of the Violence of his Expressions, than we do of the Force of
his Arguments; only I would beg leave to say, that he should have been sure he
could discharge the Church of Rome of that Guilt, before he had fixed a Mark of
Calumny upon the whole Body of the Reformed, who accuse them of it; lest when
men examine his Proofs, and find them defective, they be tempted to retort the
Censure, especially considering with what Freedom and Violence he has been
pleased to lay it upon us.

But now for his great fear that this should incite the Rabble to any Violence
against those of the other Communion, I dare venture to say, there is not the
least reason to be at all apprehensive of it. He knows very well how free the
Christians of the first three Centuries were in laying the very same Charge
against the Gentile World; and yet we do not find that they ever showed
themselves either the less obedient to their Emperors, or the less charitable
to their Neighbors, upon the account of it. And though I am verily persuaded
that the Romanists, in the Invocation of Saints, and in the Worship of Images
and Relics, and of the Host, are guilty of Idolatry; yet I thank God I am not
conscious to my self of one disloyal Thought to my King, or of the least
Uncharitableness toward any of my Countrymen, who differ from me in these
Particulars.

And what I can thus truly profess in my own behalf, I doubt not but I may do
for all others the true and genuine Members of the Church of England; and who
by being such, must, I am sure by Principle, be both Obedient Subjects, and
Charitable Christians. As for this Author, he has made as broad a sign that he
intends to leave us, by insinuating, that the Charge of Idolatry ought to be
followed with Blows, as by his concern not to have Idolatry charged upon the
Church of Rome. We who do protest against certain Practices as Idolatrous, do
also protest against violating either Loyalty or Charity, upon the account of
Religion. This Author, it seems, likes us neither upon one account, nor the
other; or this at least is to be said, that he has been thus long of our
Communion, and has not all this while understood what we teach concerning a
Christian's Duty to his Neighbor.

Did we indeed profess that of Idolatry, which some others do of Heresy, that
it is a sufficient Ground for the Excommunicating of a King, and Absolving his
Subjects of their Allegiance; had we ever been caught not in Otesian
Conspiracies, but in Real Plots against our Sovereign upon this account, there
might then have been just cause for such an Insinuation. But whilst our
Principles are so Loyal, that we have even been laughed at for our asserting
them, and that too by some of those who would now be thought so zealous for
their Princes Safety; it was a very unreasonable Apprehension, to think that
the Charge of Idolatry (and that too begun in the time of a Prince of whom it
was Misprision of Treason, but to say that he was guilty of it) should in the
bottom have been the design against the Monarchy, which we have so often
declared, and in the very Person of our present King have shown, we think our
selves obliged to support, whatever his Religion be who is to sit upon the
Throne.

And for what concerns our Brethren of the Roman Communion, it is well known
that we are not of those who destroy men for Conscience sake. We have never
been infamous either for Parisian Massacres, or Military Conversions. They are
Others that have ruined at once both the Churches and the Servants of the
Living God, out of Zeal for their Religion. We have indeed taken care to remove
the Idols out of our Israel; but for the Worshippers of them, if they have
suffered any thing, it has not been for their Idolatry, but for that which
shows there is something else more dangerous to the English Monarchy than this
Charge.

The truth is, when I consider how heinous a Suggestion this is, and what
little foundation there is, either from our Principles, or our Practices, to
support it, I am under some temptation to reply to this Author, as an ancient
Father once did to a Heathen who accused them of such Cruelties and Filthiness
in their Ceremonies, as none but themselves were capable of committing. Nemo
hoc POTEST CREDERE, nisi qui POSSIT Minut. Felix. Oct. p. 34.
AUDERE.

And this I hope may serve for my Excuse, if I have at this time appeared in
defense of a Charge in which every true Member of the Church of England is so
highly concerned; and for which all Orders and Degrees among us, have been so
contemptuously exploded by this Author. Or if I must still be content to bear
the Censure of such as He, I shall at least comfort my self in this, that I can
fall under no Reproach, but what must at the same time reflect upon all the
great Names of the Primitive Christian Church, with whom I had rather suffer
the angry Reflections of a few of our own Communion, than flourish with them,
and gain their Applauses.

To say the truth, when such Learned Defenders of our Church are struck at, and
that in so impetuous a manner as that most deservedly esteemed Person he has so
often mentioned, and I think never without something to raise his Repute
amongst Honest and Judicious Men; I should be even ashamed not to be ill spoken
of by such a one at the same time, if I had had the Honor of his Acquaintance.

As for what concerns the charge its self, I shall leave it to any one to
judge, whether if the Roman Church be indeed guilty of what we say it is, we
can discharge our Duty either toward God, or our Neighbor, as we ought to do,
without endeavoring to convince them of their danger. And when others are so
zealous for the Reputation of a few Men whose breath is in their Page 80.
Nostrils; sure we may be excused if we express some Jealousy for the Honor
of that God who has made both them and us.

It is indeed a most deplorable Spectacle to consider whether blind
Superstition, and a Zeal not according to Understanding, has been able to carry
otherwise good and pious Men. Nor is it the least of my Wonders, to consider
Persons whose Learning I admire, and whose Sincerity I am unwilling to
question, yet either by the Prejudice of Education, or by some other Causes to
me unknown, so biased in their Affections to the grossest Errors, that the
most plain and convincing Arguments have not been able to prevail upon them.

It Is hardly to be believed, but that they are themselves the Publishers of
their own Doings, that in the clear Light of Christianity men should be so
blind as to contend for giving Religious Worship to their Fellow Creatures, and
set up senseless Images to be joined in the very same Act of Divine Adoration
with the great God the Creator of Heaven and Earth. And I would Vasquez in 3
part. D. Th. q. 25. disp. 110.
to God their Impiety had stopped here; but indeed it has gone much farther;
they have found out ways how not only all other things, Animate and Inanimate,
may be warrantably adored with Divine Adoration, but even the Devil himself be
Worshipped, without sin; by virtue of a good Intention to Honor God, and not
certainly knowing it to be the Devil. And if we may believe a Man in his own
Case, one of them once went much farther: He made no scruple to Worship the
Devil whom he knew to be so, and that without taking any care (for ought
appears by his Relation) to terminate his Worship finally upon God. And because
it is indeed a singular instance, to show to what Extravagance such Principles
as we oppose, are apt to carry indiscreet Votaries, I will, to avoid all
suspicion of falsehood, give you a short account of it in his own words.

Father Gauffre being sent for to Exorcise Recit Veritable de ce qui s'est fait
and pass ans Exorcismes de pi^^ieurs R^ligienses de la Ville de Louciers en
present de Monsieur le Penitencier d' Evreus and de Monsieur le Gauffre. page
30, 31. This Book was printed at Paris, Anno 1643. With Permission.
a terrible Devil called Arfaxa, which was got into the foot of Sister
Bonaventure a Nun, she earnestly prayed him that he would Confess her; for as
the Father observes, the Devil had a particular desire to speak to him. After
some Discourse had passed betwixt them, and they began to understand one
another a little better, I threw my self (says the Father) upon my knees before
him, telling him, that my design was to confound my Pride by that of the
Devils, and to learn Humility of them that had none. The Devil, enraged to see*
me in that posture, told me, that he had received a Command to prevent me. But
when I continued, for all that, to humble my self before him, he thought to
take advantage of it, and told me, Thou do this to Adore Me. I replied,
Villain, thou art too infamous, I consider thee as the Creature of my God, and
the Object of his Wrath; and therefore I will submit my self to thee, though
thou do not deserve it: and for that very reason I will immediately Kiss thy
Feet. The Devil surprised at this Action, hindered me. Upon which I conjured him
to tell me, as far as he could guess at it, what the Will of God was, whether
that I should Kiss his Feet, or He mine? He answered, Thou know what Motion
God gives thee; follow that. Immediately I threw my self upon the Ground, and
Kissed his Feet: at which he was in a Rage: And then I commanded Him by the
Relics of Father Bernard, to Kiss mine; which he did accordingly, with great
readiness. After this, I continued upon my Knees before him, for about half a
quarter of an hour.

And now when these things are publicly taught and done in the Roman Church,
is it not high time for us to speak, and to assert the Honor of God, and the
Purity of his Religion? Shall others, without scruple, maintain and propagate
their Errors, and shall it be a Crime in Us, even when attacked in the most
violent manner, to defend the Truth? Nay, but let God be Served, though all the
World be Dissatisfied.

In the mean time, whilst forced by these Considerations to assert our
Religion, we pursue these Examinations, be it your parts (for whose sake we
principally labor) to encourage our Endeavors by a firm adherence to that
Form of Sacred Doctrine which you have received. As you have hitherto
maintained an Unreprovable Zeal for your Profession, so go on more and more to
contend Earnestly for the Faith Jude, v. 3.
that was once delivered to the Saints. And above all, be careful to adorn your
Holy Religion with a suitable Practice, That 1 Pet. 3. 16.
they may be ashamed, who falsely accuse your good Conversation in Christ. For
so is the Will of God, that with well doing Joh. 2. 15.
ye should put to silence the ignorance of foolish men. Let the same mind be in
us, which was also in those Primitive Christians beforementioned. Let us
boldly assert the Truth, as those who know what Account they are one day to
give unto God for it; but let us also be Charitable Mat. 5. 44.
toward our Neighbors? and if they will rather be esteemed our Enemies, let
us remember, that even under that Name, we are yet to Love them. Let us still
be careful to maintain the Character of the Best Subjects, as we have long
asserted the most Loyal Principles: that as the Prosperity of our King makes up
a considerable part of our Daily Prayers, so by a sincere discharge of all
humble Obedience toward Him, He may be convinced of the Malice of those who
would insinuate any false Suggestions against us; and effectually see, that,
excepting only our Duty toward God, we are much more Forward and Ready to do
his Majesty Effectual Service, than any man can be, whose Loyalty is not
Supported by Religion.

CHAP. I.
In which the Charge of Idolatry which we bring against those of the Church of
Rome, is freed from those Odious Imputations that have been of late suggested
against it.

IT may possibly appear to some not a little surprising, that a Church which
makes no scruple of practicing what is Idolatrous, should yet be so very
unwilling to lie under the imputation of it: There is nothing in all our
Disputes with those of the other Communion, which they would be thought so
highly to resent as this; the very mention of it has seemed to Scandalize them;
and if heat and confidence could have born us down, they had long since
effectually delivered themselves from all suspicion of it.

It is not my business to enquire into the Reasons of this Proceeding, and
which, when duly considered, will be found to have nothing in it, but what is
exceeding natural. Men are always more forward to do ill things, than to avow
them, or to own them under their proper names: Idolatry (as our Author says) is
a scandalous Charge. By his leave, the Charge is not always scandalous, though
the Crime be ever so, and the Charge reputed scandalous by them who are charged
with it. Though a Church that does countenance the Commission of it, may by
subtle Arguments and bold Denials keep up its Reputation well enough amongst
those who are resolved at any rate to believe her, yet 'twere impossible she
should long support her Interest, should she freely avow the doing of it.

But of all the Methods that have been made use of to put a stop to this
Charge; there has been none so surprising as what this Author has here found
out; and could he but have made it good, I am persuaded there would not have
been any more effectual. He represents it as inconsistent not only with the
Principles of Charity toward our Neighbor, but even of Page 71, etc.
Loyalty toward our Prince; and makes the very mention of it to be little less
than a setting up of the Standard against Monarchy. And yet he is not so
unacquainted Page 74.
with the Principles and Dispositions of those of the Church of England, as not
to know, that next to our solicitude for the Honor of God, there are no two
things in the World, we value our selves more upon, than that Character we have
so justly obtained, of teaching the best Measures both of Duty to our King, and
of Love, and Kindness, and Charity toward One Another.

I must therefore, before I proceed to vindicate our Notion of Idolatry, first
say somewhat to remove this great prejudice that has been offered against it;
And this I shall do,

I. By considering upon what weak Grounds this Author has undertaken to
insinuate these Crimes against us. II. By showing what horrible Consequences
would follow from it, should what he pretends indeed be true.
1. Of the weak Grounds upon which he has undertaken to insinuate such things
against us.

Now all that he has to say for this odious Charge, if taken out of his
turbulent and declamatory Style, is but this: That Idolatry is a Sin very
heighnous to God, Page 71, 72, 73.
and which he therefore, under the Law, commanded to be punished with Death.
This is the sum of what he has dilated upon in three whole Pages; and against
this I have many things to except. For,

1. What if Idolatry be a damnable Sin, may we not therefore say, without
uncharitableness, that those are guilty of it, whom we effectually prove to be
so? Must we therefore become men's Enemies because we tell them the Truth? I am
sure a very little Charity would have taught him to have made a better
Conclusion; nor can I imagine what greater instance of my Affection, I could
show my best Friend, if I saw him in such a course as I thought would render
him eternally miserable, than to tell him freely of the danger of his Sin, and
press him with the best Reasons I had to persuade him to forsake it.

It may be he will say, he does not deny but that we may charge men with great
Sins, provided that they be truly guilty of them: But yet that the
heighnousness of this Crime should make us careful not to do it, but upon very
good grounds; for to this purpose I find he sometimes expresses himself: So
black a Crime as this (says he) is not Lightly to be charged Page 73.
on any Party of Christians. And again, Before so bloody an Indictment be
preferred against the greatest Party of Christendom, the nature of the thing
Page 73.
ought to be very well understood. And if this be all he means, we readily
acknowledge the reasonablness of it: but then he ought not to fly out into such
Tragical common places against us for charging the Church of Rome with
Idolatry; but to come close to the Point, and show that we have not sufficient
grounds for what we do. If those whom we accuse of this Crime, be indeed Page
70, 71.
innocent of it, whether God had commanded Idolaters to be Stoned under the Law
or not, we could not justify our charging of them with it: but if our
Arguments do prove them guilty, the heinousness of the Sin, and the danger of
it, may be a good motive to dispose them seriously to weigh our Allegations,
but I am sure it can lay no obligation upon us not to impute to it them.

2. As to the other insinuation, that God commanded Page 71.
Idolaters under the Law to be put to Death: And for proof of which, we have
two long passages transcribed out of Exodus and Deuteronomy; What would he
infer from it? would he prove to us, that therefore they ought to be put to
Death by us under the Gospel too? does he look upon these Precepts as
Obligatory to us now? If so, I dare be bold to say, he has done more in one
single Page, to stir up the People against the Romanists and their Images, than
all those popular Page 72, 73.
Divines he so complains of, in all the Books they have ever written upon this
Subject. And yet this must be his Meaning, if it has any Meaning at all. For to
examine this matter a little more closely: God (he says) commanded the
Israelites in Deuteronomy. 13. 6. If thy brother, the son of thy mother, or thy son,
or thy daughter, or the wife of thy bosom, or thy friend which is as thine own
soul, entice thee secretly, saying, Let us go and serve other gods, etc. Thou
shall not consent unto him, nor hearken unto him, neither shall thine eye pity
him; But thou shall surely kill him: thine hand shall be first upon him to
death, and afterward the hand of all the people. And thou shall stone him with
stones that he die. Now either he looks upon this Precept as still in force,
and would hereby insinuate to the People, that it is their Duty, if they think
the Romanists guilty of Idolatry, utterly to destroy them; and this is
certainly one of the most Seditious, as well as one of the most false
Suggestions in the World: or if he does not believe this Command obligatory to
us now, nor would insinuate any such thing by the repetition of it, what
impertinence must it be to say that we cannot in Charity charge the Church of
Rome with Idolatry, because God commanded heretofore under the Law that all
those that were guilty of it should be put to Death.

But though these kind of Precepts do not oblige us now, yet may not such a
Charge be apt to stir up the deluded Rabble to think so; and so upon occasion
encourage Page 72.
them to destroy the Roman Catholics and their Images, as the Israelites were
commanded to destroy the Canaanites and their Idols? Answer, Yes; provided
there were but a few such Orators as himself among them, to fill their heads
with such Notions as these, and never tell them the impertinence of them. For
instance: That these were only the Political Laws of the Jews, and therefore
can no more warrant us now to do any violence to our Neighbor, upon any such
pretense, than because the Jews were commanded to do no work upon the Sabbath
day, we may Numb. 15. 32, etc.
therefore lawfully Stone any one that we see gathering a few Sticks upon it.
But if the Question be, Whether the Charge of Idolatry, as it is managed by us
against the Church of Rome, may not be apt to cause any such mischief? I say,
it is not; and that for these Reasons: For,

1. Let him examine all our Books of Controversy, and see if he can find any of
these old Laws produced, much less insisted upon, and enforced by us, to
mislead the People into any such desperate Mistakes: On the contrary, we take
all occasions to declare to them, that no pretenses of this kind can warrant us
so much as to withdraw our Affection from those who differ from us: That the
Jews indeed esteemed themselves Mat. 5. 43, etc.
allowed to hate their Enemies; that is, those who were not of the same
Religion with themselves, but Worshipped other Gods; and more especially those
Canaanites, whom we are told it pleased God to destroy from Page 72.
off the face of the earth for their Idolatry: but that our Savior Christ has
utterly forbid us to make any such distinction: I say unto you, love your
enemies, bless them Verse 44.
that curse you, do good to them that hate you, and pray for them that
despitefully use you, and persecute you. We set before them the Examples of the
Primitive Christians; with what Charity they behaved themselves toward the
Gentiles among whom they lived; with what an humble Obedience they submitted
themselves to their Idolatrous Emperors, and underwent the most Tertul. Apol.
cruel Persecutions for their Religion's sake, even when they had power
sufficient to have asserted their Faith, and to have destroyed both the
Idolaters and their Idols together. And by these Maxims we exhort them to walk;
and according to these it is that we both now do, and I am persuaded shall
always behave ourselves with all Christian Charity toward those of the Roman
Communion, notwithstanding we both believe them to be guilty of Idolatry, and
charge them accordingly. But

2. We do not only tell them, that those kind of Laws are now no longer in
force, and that therefore we may not by virtue of them presume to run into any
violence against our Brethren: but we teach them moreover, (what yet more shows
the impertinent Malice of this Suggestion) that they never were intended, even
under the Jewish State, to be in force against such Idolaters as they of the
Church of Rome are. It is manifest to every one that has impartially considered
the Notion of Idolatry, in the Old Testament, that there were two very
different kinds of it: 1. One whereby they totally Apostatized from the Law, to
Worship other Gods than the GOD of Israel; as when it is said that they fell off
to Worship strange Gods; i. e. they renounced the Religion established by the
Law of Moses, and took in another Religion, with all the Ceremonies and
Sacrifices belonging to it, as the Egyptian, Canaanitish, or Chaldaean: And
such as these were concluded under the Sentence of the Law before mentioned. 2.
But then another sort of Idolatry there was, in which they still pretended to
adhere to the Law of Moses, and Worship the God of Israel, but yet after an
Idolatrous manner, as when Jeroboam set up the two Calves in Dan and Bethel;
parallel to which, is that Idolatry with which we charge those of the other
Communion at this day. Now in this Case; though we find the Prophets severely
exclaiming against their new Altars, yet we do not meet with any inforcement of
this Precept for putting such Idolat^rs to Death, or that they are any where
charged as guilty of it upon this Account.

In short, he that would know how innocent this Charge is, of any of those ill
Consequences that are here brought against it, need only look back to the
State of the Church in the days of Constantine: there he will find our
Primitive Fathers, freely accusing the Arrians of Idolatry, and sometimes warm
enough too in their Disputes against them; but yet I believe all the Records of
those times, will not furnish this Author with so much as one instance of any
Bishop that ever put the Emperor in mind of this Law against them; or so much
as insinuated to him, that he might warrantly destroy them out of his Dominions
for their Idolatry. And sure our behavior toward those of the Church of Rome,
has not been so different from what theirs was against the Arrians, that any
such violence should be feared from us now, as was never so much as urged by
the hottest Opposers of Idolatry in those days.

But 2dly, If there be then no good Grounds for such Insinuations as these,
which he has here offered only to render our Charge of Idolatry odious, I am
sure there is cause enough upon other accounts, to make them justly be detested
by all good Men.

For 1. Not to say any thing of the sad Consequences that may arise from hence,
should such insinuations as these ever be able to gain so much credit with his
Sacred Majesty, as to make him entertain that ill Opinion of Us and our
Religion, as we should justly deserve, were we such as we are here represented
to be: Can any thing be more desperate, than to impeach at once the whole Body
of a Great and Orthodox Church, of holding Principles so inhumane, As to out do
the very Cannibals themselves; and for which they have Page. 73.
no other Grounds than the (rude and rash Assertions of some popular Divines,
that have no other measure of Truth or Zeal, but Hatred to Popery. In short, of
maintaining Fanatic Pretenses, and such as have ever been set up as the
Standard against Monarchy. What is this but, in other words, to say, that all
the Orders and Degrees of Men amongst us, that have ever been concerned in
charging the Church of Rome with Idolatry, our Princes and our Nobles, the
Houses of Parliament and Convocation, as many as concurred either to the
Approving or Subscribing the Book of Homilies, or to the Establishing or the
obeying of the Laws made in the last Reign, not to say any thing of those
Learned Men who have from time to time written expressly on this Subject, were
all in plain terms neither better nor worse than a Pack of Unlearned, Cruel,
Barbarous, Cannibal, Fanatical, Antimonarchical Villains.

Certainly, a man had need have either a very good Cause, or a very hard
Forehead, that can have the confidence to pronounce such a Sentence as this,
and of which I will only say, in his own words, That how inconsistent soever
Idolatry may be with Salvation, Page 73.
I fear so uncharitable a Calumny can be of no less damnable consequence. But
however,

2. To allow this great Author to take any Liberty he pleases with us: What
shall we say as to the Primitive Christians, whose Examples we follow, by whose
Principles we manage this whole Controversy, and with whom therefore we must
either stand or fall. Were all they a parcel of Seditious Fellows too? It
cannot be denied, but that those Holy Men very freely charged the Gentiles
first, and then the Heretical Christians, the Arrians, and others, with
Idolatry. And the Passages of those Writers, Justin Martyr, Origin, Clemens
Alexandrinus, Tertullian, Cyprian, Athanasius, Greg. Nazianzen, Epiphanius,
Theodoret, and others, have been too often alleged, to need a Repetition here.
And which ought not to be forgot, at the time that they did this, their
Emperors were themselves of that very Religion which they so Accused. Now
then, according to this Learned Gentleman, all these Holy Bishops and Martyrs
were even as bad as we; and Antiquity has been so sottish as to celebrate the
Praises, and recommend to us the Examples of a long Series of Factious
Fanatics, who for their Rudeness to their Emperors, and Cannibal uncharitable
Censures of their Brethren, justly deserved all the Torments and Persecutions
that they underwent. But,

3. Because those that pretend the highest regard to the Authority of the
Fathers, can yet easily except against it, when they are pressed with it, what
will this Author say to that of the Apostles? It cannot reasonably be doubted
but that St. Paul very well understood the true nature of Charity, who so often
and earnestly recommended it to his Disciples; and that he was no Friend to any
Seditious, Anti-monarchical Principles, I believe his 13th Chapter to the
Romans, will sufficiently demonstrate. Yet behold this very St. Paul charging
the Emperors Religion as Idolatrous, exhorting all men to forsake it as such;
and going up and down in all parts, preaching wherever he came against it, on
this account. And I desire this Gentleman to consider with himself what he can
say in defense of this Holy Apostle, that shall not vindicate us too.

So that now then upon the whole it appears, that out of an over-eager desire
to Traduce us, this judicious Author has in his Heat exposed all the Christians
of the first three hundred years, the Catholics of the following Centuries,
nay the blessed Apostles themselves, besides the whole Body of the Reformed
Religion in this and the last Age, as the worst of Monsters, and such as
deserve to be esteemed any thing, rather than Christians.

Let those, whose Cause he has so unfortunately undertaken, consider this; and
I am persuaded they will begin to grow ashamed of their Advocate. And how
unjust soever they may esteem our Charge of Idolatry, yet they will not say, it
is such as cannot be maintained against them, without inspiring us at the same
time with all the horrible impulses of Cruelty and Barbarity against
themselves, and of Faction and Rebellion against the Government; which some men
would insinuate.

As for our selves, we earnestly beseech all those of the Church of Rome,
against whom we at any time advance this Imputation, that they will as heartily
consider our Arguments, as we can truly profess they are charitably proposed by
Us; and whether they shall remain satisfied or not, that there is Reason in our
Charge, yet to give us so much Credit with them at least, as to believe that we
think there is; and shall be heartily glad to be convinced that we were
mistaken in our Opinion.

CHAP. II.
In which this Author's True and only Notion of Idolatry is Considered, and the
Method laid down for a more particular Examination of it.

I Will now take it for granted, that under the shelter of so great an
Authority as I have shown to be equally concerned with us, in all the
scandalous imputations that can be raised against our charging those of the
Church of Rome with Idolatry, I may venture to search a little more
particularly into the nature of it, without being thought either a Cannibal or
a Fanatic, or to have any design of setting up a Standard Page 73, 74.
against the Monarchy, for my so doing; especially considering that I resolve
not to encounter any Church or Party of men in the World on this occasion, but
merely to show that this Man's Notion of Idolatry, though set off with such
assurance as few Writers have ever equalled, is yet, after all, so far from
being supported either by Scripture or Antiquity, that it is indeed utterly
repugnant to both. And therefore that the Church of Rome is only Vindicated by
him from the Charge of an Idolatry that no man ever produced against her, but
for such Idolatry as we accuse her of, she may still fall under the weight of
that, for any thing that has here been offered to the contrary.

According to this Author, Idolatry is neither more nor less than this: The
Worship of the heavenly Bodies, the Sun, the Moon, and the Stars, or any other
Visible and Corporeal Deity, as the Supreme God, so as to exclude all Sense and
Apprehension of a Spiritual and Invisible Godhead.

From whence it follows, that to make a Man an Idolater, these three things are
required.

1. That he cast off all Sense and Apprehension of a Spiritual and Invisible
Godhead. 2. That he believes there is no other Supreme God than either the Sun,
Moon, or Stars, or some other the like Visible and Corporeal parts of the
World. 3. That in pursuance of this Apprehension, he worships these Visible and
Corporeal Deities as the Supreme God.
Now to exclude all Sense and Apprehension of a Spiritual and Invisible
Godhead, and to believe no other Supreme God, but some Visible and Corporeal
part of the World, in opposition to a Spiritual and Invisible Godhead, is, I
think, to be an Atheist, though here is much ado to describe him. For to
believe none but a Visible God, in opposition to an Invisible One, and to
believe none but a Corporeal God, in opposition to a Spiritual God, is to
believe no God at all; unless a man can suppose a Supreme God, without
Understanding, or any Perfection whatsoever of a Spiritual and Invisible Nature.

By consequence, for a man with these Apprehensions to worship this God which
he has made to himself, is not well capable of any other construction, than
that he takes some pains, and goes a little way about to expose all Religion
and Worship to Contempt.

I would be very glad to understand our Author's Notion of Idolatry; and
therefore if it were possible, I should be content that his Idolater should not
be an Atheist for a while, that we might see what else we can make of him. For
a man to take nothing else for the Supreme God, but a certain Visible Being,
from which he shuts out all Apprehension of a Spiritual and Invisible Godhead,
is certainly to be a downright Atheist, though his Atheism might have been
described in fewer words. And yet on the other side, to worship something in
good earnest as the Supreme God, seems to imply that a man is not an Atheist:
For an Atheist is one that does not so much as believe that there is a Supreme
God. But he surely believes a God, who worships any thing for the Supreme God,
whatever that be which he so worships.

Now if Thomas Aquinas were here, it would strangely perplex him to clear this
matter. I do not mean to make good sense of the words, for that I take to be
impossible, but to tell us by the words, what the Author's drift should be. For
they make up a Nonsense so very stiff, that it will not bend one way or the
other. And if I must understand something by every word that he says, I can
have no more Notion of his Idolatry than I have of nothing. And if he had said,
Idolatry is neither more nor less than Nothing, I had been as much edified as I
am now. Unless he would give us to understand, that Idolatry is mere
speculative Madness, which no body that has common sense and understanding, can
possibly be guilty of.

For all that part of the World that either is or ought to be out of Bethlehem
and the like Hospitals, do by the Supreme God, understand something at least,
that is not only able to help or to hinder, but knows also when to do one and
the other, and is willing to do accordingly. And therefore to worship any thing
as the Supreme God, and at the same time to exclude all Sense and Apprehension
of a Spiritual and Invisible Godhead, is to worship a thing because I am sure
it knows something, while I take care to be as sure at the same time, that it
knows nothing at all. I can compare this to nothing, as I have already
intimated, but to some extraordinary instance of Madness. For instance: If I
should ever see a man fall down upon his Knees, and seem in good earnest to ask
Blessing of a Post, and to call it Father, I should presently think of this
Author's Idolater: for his Idolater is rather more than less mad than he that
fancies a Post to be his Father. For men in their Wits, have at least as high
an Opinion of what they take to be their Supreme God, as they have of their
Parents: And therefore to worship that as the Supreme God, which no less wants
the Perfections of a Spiritual and Invisible Nature, than a Post does, is a
Misfortune that cannot light upon any Body but a Mad man.

So that our Author's Idolater is a man whom either all the World must
acknowledge to be out of his Wits, or if you put him into his Wits, he is a
mere Atheist; though I am confident he would not have described himself so
wittily, as this Author has described him.

This Notion of Idolatry is to me so monstrous a Notion, that I am apt to look
again and again into the Book, to see if the words be there in which he has
delivered it. But when at last I find that they are undoubtedly there, I am
taken with a new fear, that the Author did not mean what he says; and therefore
that I do not understand his meaning, though I understand the meaning of his
words.

In such a Case as this, I have nothing to do, but to take another Notion of
Idolatry; which though it be not the true and only Notion of it, has yet plain
sense, and comes as near to his, as a Notion that has Sense can come to one
that has none. And it is this: That Idolatry is the Worship of the Sun, Moon,
or Stars, or any other Visible and Corporeal Deity, as the Supreme God, not so
as to exclude all Sense and Apprehension of a Spiritual and Invisible Godhead;
but so as to suppose that as they are Visible Beings, so they have Invisible
Natures too, and some Spiritual Perfections, which are indeed proper to the
true God.

Now this Notion of Idolatry is, in one part of it, quite contrary to our
Author's. For they who worship any Visible Deity as the Supreme God, with this
persuasion, that it has indeed Spiritual and Invisible Perfections, do not
thereby exclude all Sense and Apprehension of a Spiritual and Invisible
Godhead; because they have the Sense of such a Godhead in the Notion of that
very thing which they worship. But though this is not the Idolatry which his
Book speaks of, yet, as I said, it is the likest to it that I can think of. And
if he does not mean what his Book says, it is a hundred to one but he means
this.

But if I should be mistaken, it is no great matter; for if I can but show that
this is not the only Notion of Idolatry, it follows out of hand, that the
Notion of his Book cannot possibly be so neither: So that one way or other I am
sure to reach him, whether he and his Book have one meaning or two.

1. According to this Notion then, those who retain the sense and apprehension
of a Spiritual and Invisible Godhead, though they do worship the Heavenly
Bodies, the Sun, Moon, and Stars, but this only as Inferior and Subordinate
Deities, cannot be Idolaters. And therefore if the Gentiles, the Egyptians,
for instance, or the Chaldoeans, did believe One Supreme God, and worshipped
the Sun Moon, and Stars, upon the account of those Celestial Spirits they
supposed to reside in them, this worship was not Idolatrous.

In like manner, those Gentiles that worshipped any Corporeal Deity, or any
thing Visible or Invisible besides the Supreme God, if they believed all the
while that it was not the Supreme God, and did not worship it as such, they I
say could not be Idolaters. And therefore I think if the Gentiles were
Idolaters in worshipping any of their Deities, it must be because they had no
knowledge of the true God. So that either St. Paul or this Author was out in
the true and only Notion of Idolatry. For though St. Paul accused the Gentiles
of Idolatry, yet he confessed, that they knew God. For (says he) Though they
knew God yet they glorified him not as God. Romans 1.

2. If we do but interpret the Cautions of the New Testament against Idolatry,
by our Author's Notion of Idolatry, they will be Paraphrased so as I believe
they never were done before his time, and I suppose will never be after it. For
instance; When St. Paul said to the Corinthian Christians, My dearly Beloved,
flee from Idolatry; this was as much as if he had said, My dearly Beloved,
Idolatry being neither more nor less than the Worship of the Heavenly Bodies,
the Sun, the Moon, the Stars, or any Other Visible or Corporeal Deity as the
Supreme God, I entreat and earnestly require you to Flee from Idolatry. And
therefore though I do not bid you worship the Heavenly Bodies, or their Images
upon Earth, yet I strictly charge you, not to worship them as the Supreme God,
or as if there were not an Invisible God above them All; if ever you should
find it convenient to worship the Sun or Moon, or Stars, or any Representation
of them here below.

This would be an Admirable Paraphrase, and which I doubt not but our Author
would be able to make good against all those that neither do, nor can, nor
ought to understand these things. But whether our Nobility and Men of Quality
are willing to come into this Number I think I need not say.

3. But because to Created Beings he afterward adds Mortal Ones, of which more
hereafter, I suppose he means Reasonable Beings, let us see how things will go
upon these new Terms. Dearly Beloved, if ever you should worship Saturn or
Jupiter, or such like men who died long since, still remember that they were
once Visible and Mortal Men, and have a care not to worship them as the Supreme
God.

I mention here only dead Heathens, there being yet no Christian Hero's in St.
Paul's time to whom any such worship was given, nor for some Ages after. Now I
think this will pass as little as the Other with Men that ought and do
understand. For besides the barbarous Stuff which this Notion makes the Apostle
to speak, it presses a mere Monster upon us; That the Apostle supposes it
utterly impossible for a Christian that does not at once renounce his whole
Faith and Profession, to be guilty of Idolatry. St. Paul certainly was a very
deep man in hiding his purpose, if by entreating the Christians to Flee from
Idolatry, he meant no other thing than that they should not take and worship
the Sun, or the Moon, or some dead man, as the Supreme God. And our Author is
as deep a Man in finding out this hidden purpose of the Apostle, which till He
arose no man was ever so happy as to do.

But indeed with all his Rhetoric he will never make himself and the Apostle
of One mind in this matter. For thus St. Paul goes on: Ye cannot drink the Cup
of the Lord and the Cup of Devils; Ye cannot be Partakers of the Lord's Table,
and of the Table of Devils. Do we provoke the Lord to Jealousy? Are we
stronger than He? Now if they who partake in Idolatrous Sacrifices are
Idolaters, and if Idolaters have no Sense of a Supreme God, above the pretended
Deities to whom they offer, they will not I conceive care one Jot whether they
partake of the Lord's Table or not, nor be concerned about the Lord's Jealousy
at all. And yet St. Paul plainly supposes, that if Christians should be guilty
of Idolatry, they would yet probably be concerned about God's Jealousy, and
desire to partake of the Lord's Table.

Thus when the same Apostle wrote to the very same Persons not to keep Company,
no nor so much as to eat with One called a Brother, if he were a Fornicator, or
Covetous, or an IDOLATER, or a Railer, or a Drunkard. I cannot but wonder what
an Idolater has to do in this Company, if this Author's Idolater, and St.
Paul's Idolater were the same Idolater. For whatsoever the Fornicator, or
Covetous, or Railer, or Drunkard, might pretend for a Title to Brotherhood; I
am yet certain, that he is fallen even from all right to that Name, who
worships the Sun (for instance) as the Supreme God, and so renounces God the
Maker of the World, and the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ. St. Paul speaks of
his Idolater as One within the Church, and One of those wicked Persons that
were to be cast out of the Civil as well as the Religious Communion of it. But
if there be no Idolater besides this Author's Idolater, who has renounced the
Maker of Heaven and Earth, and lost all Apprehension of him, he has prevented
the Apostle's direction, and is out of the Church by his own Act.

4. These things do, I confess, give me a great Prejudice against this Author's
true and only Notion of Idolatry. And there is one thing which I believe will
make him less fond of it himself, when he comes to consider it; and that is,
that his Notion does by no means suit with the Sense of that Church, to which
he designed a good Turn in all this. It is very well known how the Fathers of
Trent, to Vindicate their Worship of Images from being Parallel to what the
Gentiles heretofore paid to theirs, did, among other Differences, lay down this
for one: That they do not believe any Divinity or Virtue to be in them, for
which they ought to be Worshipped. For to believe this, their Catechism tells
us, is to make the Images become Idols, and by consequence, the Worship of them
to be Idolatry. Now if it be Idolatry to worship Images with such an Opinion,
then it cannot be the only Notion of Idolatry to worship the Sun, Moon, or
Stars, or any Corporeal Deity, as the Supreme God, or their Images as the
Images of a pretended Supreme God: For without any thing of all this, one may
believe Divinity and Virtue to be in Images, and worship them upon that account.

For Example: The Heathens had a mighty Opinion of Aesculapius after his Death,
that in his Temples, and by his Images, he could cure Diseases. Let us suppose
now a Person to fall down and worship one of these Images, in hopes of some
Divine Virtue coming thence. Were this Worship Idolatry, or not? If it were
not, then was the Council of Trent to blame, to make this an instance of the
Gentiles' Idolatry; if it were, then in the opinion of the Roman Church, the
account of Idolatry which this Author has given, cannot be the only Notion of
it: For this was neither the Worshipping of any Corporeal Deity, as the Supreme
God, nor of any Corporeal Image of the Supreme God.

Lastly, In all the Accounts which the Missionaries of the Church of Rome have
given us of the Heathen Nations where they have come, we find them generally
acknowledging a Supreme, Spiritual, and Invisible Godhead. And that if they
worship the Sun, Moon, or Stars, it is not that they esteem them to be mere
Visible and Corporeal Deities, much less think them to be the Supreme God, so
as to exclude all sense and apprehension of a Spiritual and Invisible God above
them; but they worship them either as inferior Deities, to whom God has
committed the Government of the World under him; or they look upon God to be
the Soul of the World, and that therefore the parts of it deserve Honor upon
that account: or finally, they esteem God to be of so great Perfection and
Excellency, that He is above their service, and that therefore they ought to
pay their External Adoration to somewhat below him. Now I shall leave it to
this Author to consider upon what grounds, according to his True and Only
Notion of Idolatry, he will charge these men with this Guilt; or if out of his
great Charity he shall think fit generously to acquit them of it, I will then
send him to some of his Friends of the Roman Communion for better Instruction.

These and many other Reasons, that I might add, occur to me upon the very
first view only, to make me suspect his Hypothesis. But now when I examine it
more particularly, I find it yet more gross and unreasonable. The sum of what
he offers for it, is an Historical Deduction of the State of Idolatry in the
Old Testament, compared with the Accounts that are given of the Idolatry of the
Ancient, especially the Eastern Nations, Who acknowledged Page 99, 100.
no other Deities, but the Stars, among whom the Sun was Supreme; in opposition
to which false Principle, Rabbi Maimon says, God enacted the Law of Moses. And
according to this Law, it appears, That Idolatry is giving the Worship of the
Page 80, 81.
Supreme God to any Created, Corporeal, or Visible Deity, or any thing that can
be represented by an Image, which nothing but Corporeal Beings can; and to
suppose such a Being the Supreme Deity, is the only true and proper Idolatry.

In opposition to which positive Conclusion, I will content my self at present
to say, that there is not one word of truth in it; for that neither was the
Religion of the Eastern Nations, such as he pretends, nor the Nature of
Idolatry under the Law, what he represents it to have been. And to the end I
may plainly clear this whole matter, I will distinctly show three things.

First, That the Idolatry of those Nations whom he mentions, the Egyptians,
Chaldeans, Persians, Arabians, etc. did not consist in Worshipping the Sun,
Moon, and Stars, as the Supreme God; So as to exclude all sense and
apprehension of a Spiritual and Invisible Godhead. Nor therefore,

Secondly, Was this the only Idolatry forbidden to the Jews by the Law. But

Thirdly, That as the Jews retaining both the apprehension and worship of the
God of Israel, were yet guilty of Idolatry for worshipping him after a gentile
manner, so may Christians be now.

And therefore that the Church of Rome may justly be charged by us as
Idolatrous, though we do not pretend in any wise to say either that she
worships the Sun, Moon, and Stars, or any other Visible and Corporeal Deity as
the Supreme God; or that she has lost all Apprehension of a Spiritual and
Invisible Godhead.

And thus having established the true Notion of Idolatry, I shall last of all
consider such Objections as may be necessary to be replied to for the clearing
of it; and so leave the particular Charges to be made good by those who shall
have occasion so to do.

CHAP. III.
Of the Idolatry of the Ancient Heathens; especially, of the Chaldeans,
Egyptians, and Persians; and that it did not consist in their Worshipping the
Sun, Moon and Stars, or any other Visible and Corporeal Deity, as the Supreme
God; so as to exclude all Sense and Apprehension of a Spiritual and Invisible
Godhead.

THis is the Fundamental mistake of our Author concerning his Notion of
Idolatry; and which being overthrown, his whole Hypothesis built upon it, must
fall together with it. For thus it is that he argues: P. 80.
God designed by his Law, to preserve the Jews from falling into the Idolatry
of the Nations round about them: Against this, we find not only all its
Precepts, P. 102.
but even the Rights and Ceremonies of it, to have been directed. But the
Idolatry of those Nations was no other than the Worship of the Sun, Moon and
Stars, or of some the like Visible and Corporeal Deities, P. 97, 100.
so as to exclude all Sense and Apprehension of a Spiritual and Invisible
Godhead. And therefore this must be the true and only Notion of it in the Old
Testament.

I shall hereafter more fully show the weakness of this Proof, when I come to
demonstrate, That there were two sorts of Idolatry mentioned in those Holy
Scriptures extremely different the one from the other. And therefore that tho
this were the true Notion of Idolatry in one respect, yet it would not follow
that it was the only Notion, by reason of the other. And this I shall do in the
next Chapter. My business at present is to show, That what he has thus
Confidently laid down, is so far from being the only Notion of Idolatry, that
it is indeed no Notion of it at all; for that those very Heathens whom he
insists upon for his Warrant in this matter, were not guilty of such an
Idolatry as he pretends they were.

We have already seen his Definition of Idolatry, that P. 74.
it is neither more nor less than this: The Worship of the Heavenly Bodies, the
Sun, the Moon, and the Stars, or any other Visible and Corporeal Deity, as the
Supreme God, so as to exclude all Sense and Apprehension of a Spiritual and
Invisible Godhead. This he pretends is the only Scripture Notion of it. And
thus Ibid.
(he says) all Learned Men of all Nations, all Religions, P. 99.
ever understood the old Notion of Idolatry, till this last Age, when Folly and
Passion cast it at any thing that peevish Men were angry with. So Rabbi Mamion,
the most Learned and Judicious of the Jewish Doctors Discourses at large, That
the Ancient Idolatry was nothing but the Religion of the Eastern Nations, who
acknowledge no other Deities but the Stars, P. 100.
among whom the Sun was Supreme. And then he immediately subjoyns, That the
Ancient Heathens worshipped only the Stars, without any Notion of Heroes Ibid.
or D^mons: So Diodorus Siculus says of the Egyptians; Herodotus of the
Persians and Chaldeans; Strabo and Justin, of the Arabians, and Caesar of the
P. 101.
Germans. He confesses indeed, That there was another sort of Idolatry
introduced afterward, the Worship of Men and Women; but this he takes to have
been much more Modern, and a mere Invention of the vain and lying Greeks; but
that whenever it came in, it was grafted upon the old Stock, of giving the
Worship of the Supreme God, not only to created, but to mortal Beings. So this
Author. To which I Reply.

I. That as to this latter sort of Idolatry, seeing he has declined the
Consideration of it, as being of too young a date to found the Scripture Notion
of Idolatry upon it, I shall not insist upon it; tho I am by no means
satisfied, either in his account of its Antiquity, or that it was a mere
Invention of the vain and lying Greeks. For

1. It has been the Opinion of very Learned Men, that this kind of Idolatry was
practiced in Egypt soon after the Flood. And that the most Ancient Osiris, See
Vossius de Idol. l. 1. c. 27.
was no other than Mitzraim, the Son of Cham, whom they worshipped together
with his Father, and from whom the whole Country is in Scripture called by his
Name. In the cv. Psalm 23. it is expressly styled, the Land of Cham: And
Plutarch informs us, that in the Plutarch de Iside and Osiride.
Sacred Rites of Isis, they call it (...), very probably upon the same Account.
And that which makes this the more likely is, that in the Division of the World
among the Sons of Noah, Genesis x. Arabia fell to the Lot of Cham; and in that
Chush his eldest Son fixed himself, from whence the Country is called, the Land
of Cush, in 2 Kings xix. 9. And then it may easily be conceived that his second
Son Mitzraim, should go into the next adjoining Country, the Land of Egypt. Now
if this be so, then it follows, not only that this sort of Idolatry was much
more Ancient than is pretended; but that being practiced in Egypt before the
Children of Isreal's going down thither; it may be reasonably enough allowed a
sufficient Antiquity for us to derive something from it of the Notion of
Idolatry, with reference to the times under debate. But,

2dly, As to the very Apis its self, the chief Deity of the Egyptians, and whom
our Author contends to have been the Sun; it is not improbable, but that they
meant P. 89.
no other than the Patriarch Joseph by it; and whom they Honored with Divine
Honors, upon the Account of his wonderful Preservation of them in the seven
years Famine, Genesis xli. Thus Julius Firmicus expressly Interprets it, and what
is more, adds, that this was Jul. Firm. p. 17, 18.
according to the manner of their Country: The Egyptians (says he) after his
Death, according to the appointment of their Country, built Temples to Him. And
again, This Man is worshipped in Egypt, he is adored, etc. To him Ruffinus
agrees; and St. Augustine, or Ruffin. l. 2. Hist. Eccles. c. 23.
whoever else was the Author of that Book under his Name, De Mirabilibus
Scripturae, informs us, That the Egyptians upon this account, set up the Symbol
of an Ox over the Sepulcher of Joseph, in Memory of their Deliverance. Thus
Suidas interprets their Suidas in voce (...). Cl. Alex. (...). 1.
Serapis; who as Clemens Alexandrinus (out of Aristeas) tells us, was the same
with Apis; and both Suidas, Ruffinus, and Julius Firmicus, add, that his Statue
was set up with a Bushel upon his Head, to denote the Plenty of Corn which he
provided for them. And in the very Scripture it self, Joseph is either called,
or at least compared to an Ox, Deuteronomy. xxxiii. 17. And some of the Rabbis have
given this account of the very Calves of Jeroboam, that they were the Symbols
of Joseph, set up by him in Honor of his Ancestors, from a part of whose
Tribe, viz. that of Ephraim, he was himself descended.

Here it were an easy matter to multiply Proofs upon this occasion, to show
that the Idolatry of Consecrating Heroes into Gods, and Worshipping them as
such, is by no means of so fresh a date, as this Author would have it thought
to be. For what he adds, That whenever it came in, it was grafted upon the
Old Stock of Page 101.
giving the Worship of the Supreme God, not only to Created, but to Mortal
Beings:

I answer, 1. That this is evidently contrary to all the accounts we have of
their Worship; and according to which it appears, that the Heathens paid no
other Worship to their Divi, or deified Men, than what the Church of Rome at
this day does to her Saints; but as carefully distinguished between the
Adoration of the Supreme God, and these Heroes, as the other do between Him,
and those Blessed Men that Reign together with Him, as their Language tells us.

2. Whenever this Idolatry came in, it is evident that the very nature of it
utterly overthrows his Only Notion of Idolatry before laid down; unless he
supposes that they thought their Heroes, whom whilst they lived they knew to be
but men, born into the World after the common order of Nature, and even dying
after the same manner as all others, became after Death the Supreme God that
made Heaven and Earth; and believed all this so firmly, as not only to give the
Worship of the Supreme God to them, but to exclude all Sense and Apprehension
of any God above them. For so (he says) a man must do, before he can be guilty
of Idolatry.

Now if this be his Opinion, I would then ask this Learned Antiquary one small
Question: Seeing the Number of their Heroes was very great, whom the same
Persons at the same time worshipped; Did they believe every one of these to be
the Supreme God that made Heaven and Earth, and give the highest Divine Honor
accordingly unto every one of them as such? That they did this, no man of Sense
will either say or believe; and yet if they did not, the true and only Notion
of Idolatry is at an end; for which ever of their Heroes they believed to be
the Supreme God, and Worshipped as such, they must have Adored the rest only as
Inferior Deities, and with an Honor suitable to their Apprehensions of them.

Either therefore he must quit his true and only Notion of Idolatry, which he
tells us is neither more nor less than, The Worship of the Heavenly Bodies, the
Page 74.
Sun, the Moon, and the Stars, or any other Visible and Corporeal Deity, as the
Supreme God, so as to exclude all Sense and Apprehension of a Spiritual and
invisible Godhead; or he must give us some assurance that the Egyptians (for
instance) worshipping of Joseph under the Symbol of an Ox, did believe him to
be the Supreme Deity, so as to exclude all sense and apprehension of any
Superior Godhead, and did worship him accordingly; that is, that those men were
so sottish as to think that a man who had lived and died amongst them, was the
Great God that framed the world, and all things in it, many Ages before himself
had any Being. But

II. To come to the Other, and (as he supposes) the more Ancient Idolatry, and
in his Notion of which, I affirm him to have been utterly mistaken: And here I
must observe, that it is not at all doubted, but that these Heathens did
Worship the Sun, Moon, and Stars; that which I pretend is, that this Author is
very much out in the Account which he gives of their Worship of them.

1. He affirms, That they worshipped these Heavenly Bodies as Visible and
Corporeal Deities, so as to Page 74.
exclude all sense and apprehension of a Spiritual and Invisible Godhead:
Whereas on the contrary, they believed these very Bodies themselves to be
animated by Celestial Spirits who resided in them, and rendered them thereby
proper Objects of their Adoration.

2. That they worshipped these Visible and Corporeal Ibid.
Deities, as the Supreme God; whereas they constantly acknowledged a First and
Invisible Godhead, superior to them.

3. That they worshipped no other Gods but these, Page 97, 100.
and amongst these the Sun as supreme; when on the contrary it is certain, even
from the very Authors that himself produces, that they worshipped other
Deities, both Heroes and Doemons, of which this Man yet pretends with so much
assurance, that they had no Notion.

And all these are not only gross Errors for an Author who writes with such
Confidence as if he would be thought to have been initiated into all the
Religions of which he discourses, but such as utterly ruin all that he has to
say to support his true and only Notion of Idolatry. But I must examine these
Points more particularly. And

1. That these Nations did not worship the Heavenly Bodies as Visible and
Corporeal Deities, so as to exclude all sense and apprehension of a Spiritual
and invisible Godhead.

This is an Assertion not only so monstrously absurd in its self, but so
contrary to all the Accounts we have from Antiquity, of the Theology of those
Nations to which he refers us, that I must once more confess, that I never lay
under a greater Temptation to disbelieve my own Senses, or to suspect my
understanding of plain words than now: On the one hand, I am sure our Author
here defines Idolatry to be, The Worship of the Heavenly Bodies, the Sun, the
Moon, and the Stars, or some other visible and Corporeal Deity, not only as the
Supreme God, but so at to exclude all sense and apprehension of a Spiritual and
Invisible Godhead: That is to say, that he who is an Idolater must worship them
as mere Corporeal Parts of the Creation, void of all Understanding; for so I
think Visible and Corporeal Gods must be taken, when opposed to all sense and
apprehension of a Spiritual and Invisible Godhead. And yet on the other hand,
how to reconcile such a Paradox with either the common Reason of Mankind, as I
have observed before; or the clear Evidences of the Gentile World to the
contrary, as I observe now, I am not able to comprehend: But let our Author
take his choice; for I will here again do more than I need, rather than be
thought to omit any thing that was fit to be taken notice of. If he thinks good
to own this Notion, I will then offer what may serve to confute it; but if
being admonished of the Absurdity of it, he shall choose rather to wrest his
words to some other meaning than they naturally bear, I shall only have spent
some little time in confuting that, which if he does not, I am certain no body
else will ever affirm.

And to begin where himself does, with the Holy Scriptures, not only the most
certain, but the most Ancient History in the World.

He produces indeed a few Texts from whence it may be concluded, that the
Heathens of old, did worship the Sun, Moon, and Stars; but that they worshipped
them (according to his Notion) as Corporeal Deities, and so as to exclude all
sense and apprehension of a Spiritual and Invisible Godhead; for this he has
not so much as offered at one single Proof.

For 1. As to his first Instance, (and which indeed Page 77.
is the first account we have) of Idolatry. The Scripture, it is true, tells us
that Terah, Abraham's Father, worshipped Strange Gods; but that these Gods were
Corporeal Deities, and that they worshipped them so as to exclude all sense and
apprehension of a Spiritual and Invisible Godhead, of this there is not a word:
See Josh. xxiv. 2. and I shall presently show the contrary.

If we go on with him to the next (and as he thinks Page 78.
the first plain) intimation we find of Idolatry in Palestine, in the History
of Jacob; after his Conversation with the Shechemites, where upon his departure
Genesis 35.
from that City by God's especial Command, he builds an Altar at Bethel to God,
and commands his Family to put away their (...), or strange Gods. Neither here
shall we find our Author's notion so much as insinuated, but as I will now
prove, much to the contrary. It is not to be doubted, but that these Gods were
the same that they worshipped in Syria when they were in the house of Laban;
and that therefore the Images which Jacob buried, could be no other than the
Teraphim, so usual amongst them, i. e. such as Rachel stole from her Father
Laban, Genesis xxxi. 30. How far from hence it might be proved that their Idolatry
did not consist merely in their worshipping of the Sun, Moon, and Stars, I
shall not now dispute: Let us suppose these Teraphims to have been not only
made by Planetary Influences, but designed to represent the Sun, or some other
Heavenly Bodies; then, I say, it follows both from the History of Laban, and
from the accounts we have of these Idols, that they did not worship the Sun as
a Corporeal Deity, and by consequence that that cannot be the true Notion of
their Idolatry, which is pretended to be. For,

1. As to Laban, we read Genesis xxxi. 53. that when he ratified the Covenant with
Jacob, he called to witness not only the God of Abraham, but the (...), his own
domestic Deity too, i. e. in our Author's opinion, the Sun, The God (says he)
of Abraham, and the God of Nachor judge betwixt us: Now this plainly shows that
Laban looked upon his Father's God (and who was also the God of Tera
beforementioned, Josh. xxiv. 2.) not to be a mere Corporeal Deity, but as
having an Intellectual Being incorporated in it, that was both capable of
hearing their Oath, and of judging betwixt them, and without which he could
never have called him to witness their Contract.

2. For what concerns the Teraphim, it appears from Holy Scripture, that the
Chaldeans made use of them not only as symbols for Worship, but for Oracles
too, and as such, were wont to consult them; it was for this, that Rachel is
supposed to have stolen away her Father's Gods, Genesis 31. that so when he
should come, and miss her husband, he might not be able to enquire of them
which way to pursue after him. We read in Ezekiel. xxi. 21. That the King of
Babylon consulted with his Teraphim, which St. Jerome calls consulting with
Hierom in l. 7. in Ezekiel. p. 212.
his Oracle, after the manner of his Country: And the Prophet Zachary x. 2.
tells the People, That their Teraphim had spoken vanity: Now how could this
possibly be, had the Chaldeans worshipped only Visible and Corporeal Deities?
Is not this an undeniable Evidence, that they acknowledged in the Heavenly
Bodies, invisible Spirits to descend and influence their Teraphim, so as to
make them speak?

Many are the accounts that may be given of these Idols, and which have been
collected with much exactness Vossius de Idol. lib. 1. Seldom de diis Syris
Syntag. 1. c. 2. Dr. Pocock on Hosea xiii. 2. p. 725.
by those great men, Gerard Vossius, Mr. Seldom, etc. But I shall content my
self to subjoin the Authority of one only Person, now living, and no way
inferior to any that can be produced, It seems (says he) to have been the
Opinion of those Ancient Idolaters, that some spiritualities from superior
Intelligences, and Heavenly Powers, did influence such Images as they made in
such Figures as they thought acceptable to them, and dedicated to them; and
therefore called such their Images themselves God, and thought them so, at
least Deos Vicarios, Inferior Deities; Mediators between them and the Superior,
and did offer Sacrifice, and burnt Incense, that they might draw down and
entice (as it were) those spiritual Influences to reside on those Images, that
so they might declare to them, and do for them what they desired. And elsewhere
he says, That the modern Zabii Id. on Hosea iii. 4.
not only pretend to succeed the old Chaldees in their Religion, but that as to
their Rites about Telesms, and Figures, and Images, we cannot but easily
believe, that they were derived to them from Ancient Times.

And now that I mention the Zabii, I cannot but observe the wonderful acuteness
of our Author in his Reflections upon them; he calls it the Dream of the Zabii;
and he decretorily condemns all that is said by Learned Men on their behalf,
merely because Page 76.
He (a Person so acurately versed in all the Learning of the East) can find no
Ancient Footsteps of any such people in the world; and that Dr. Spencer has
discovered Page 110, 111.
for him, That the name is ^no older than Mahomet, who called them Zabii,
because they lay Eastward from Arabia; for so the word signifies, Easterlings.

Thus this Author, and still, as becomes himself, he pronounces, Dictator-like,
and is always in the wrong; for the Question is not about the name of Zabii
(which from henceforth must signify Easterlings, tho the Learned Dr. Spencer
had collected no less than five several significations of it, and every one
supported by probable Conjectures); but about the People, or De Legib. Heb. l.
2. c. 1. Sect. 1.
rather the Religion; and to draw this matter out of the Clouds, and show what
an Admirable Critic we have got here, it is just as if a man should undertake
to prove the Britains to be a people of no Antiquity, because they are now
called. Welsh, and that is but a Modern Name.

Now according to this true State of this Matter, it is evidently showed by
that Learned Person I before Spencer ib. l. 2. c. 1. Sect. 2.
mentioned, that the Religion of the Zabii is not only of no Modern date, but
is as Ancient, or even more Ancient than Abraham. Abulfeda calls it the most
Ancient Religion; and Saidus Batricides attributes the Dr. Spencer ib. p. 240.
Original of the Zabii, thus considered, in their Manners and Superstitions, to
the time of Nachor, Abraham's De Conve^^, Indor. l. 1. c. 4.
Grandfather. To this Subscribes the Learned and Inquisitive Hornbeck; and who
thinks them to be the same with those that were anciently called Saboei; and
Abul-Pharajius, cited by Dr. Spencer, thus confirms it, That which we certainly
know of the Sect of the Hist. Dynast. D. 9. p. 281.
Zabii, is, that their Profession is altogether the same with the Profession of
the Ancient Chaldeans.

As for the point before us; we are told that they Spencer ib. p. 237, 238.
worshipped the Host of Heaven, supposing the Stars to be animated by Divine
Understandings. Dr. Pocock adds, That they looked upon the Planets, as Mediators
Not. in spec. Hist. Arab. p. 143.
between the Supreme God, and Men; and cites Gregorius, Abulfaroeus and
Sharestanius, for his Warrant; which last expressly says, That they worship
Ibid. p. 146.
the Bodies of the Planets, as the Habitations of the living, rational, and
intellectual Substances, which they suppose to animate them.

Now these are all plain and rational Accounts, why they should worship these
Heavenly Bodies; but to talk of their worshipping the Sun, Moon and Stars, as
Visible and Corporeal Deities, and that so as to exclude all Sense and
Apprehension of a Spiritual and Invisible Godhead, is to represent their
Worship contrary not only to Truth, but to common Sense and Reason too. But
when Men are resolved to advance such Notions, as this Author does, they must
have Proofs of the same kind. And this for the Chaldeans.

As to the Egyptians, Jamblicus informs us, That Jamblic. de Myster. Sect. 37.
they worshipped indeed the Sun, Moon and Stars, as Visible Gods; but such as
were compounded of Soul and Body, and they esteemed those Planets to be Seats
only of those Celestial Spirits that were to take care of human Affairs.

It was a nice Question put by Porphyry, to an Egyptian Id. Sect. 1. c. 17.
Priest, How the Sun, Moon and Stars could be Gods, seeing the Gods are
incorporeal?

Jamblicus answers, That the incorporeal Gods assume those Bodies, by which
they become Visible.And Syrianus asserts, The Celestial Animals (as he calls
Syrian. in Metaphys. l. 12.
them) to be the Images of the Maker of the World, and to communicate Sense to
it.

But it may be said, That these were Philosophers, and endeavored to make the
best of their Idolatry. I answer, That Jamblicus declares, he delivers nothing
Jambl. de Myster. Sect. c. 1.
but according to the old Egyptian Books: And he delivers it for the true
Egyptian Theology; That there was one Supreme God above all; next him the
Demiurgus; Cap. 2.
the third Principle he calls (...), and some think the Sun is meant by it, as
the immediate Governor of the World. If so, there is great Reason why the Sun
should be worshipped under the Names of Moloch and Baal, as being King and Lord
of this inferior World. And thus neither did the Egyptians worship these
Heavenly Bodies, so as to exclude all Sense of a Spiritual and Invisible
Godhead.

If from both these Nations we pass finally to the Persians, Jac. Golius will
give us the very same Account of them, viz. That the Ancient Persians did Gol.
not. in Alferg. p. 20, 21.
worship Celestial Spirits, as having a particular presidency over the
material part of the World.

And now, after so many plain Testimonies in this matter, were it yet needful
to look into any other Countries, we should find the Case to be every where the
same. Pliny pleads much for the Divinity of the Pliny l. 2. c. 6.
Sun; but does he believe it to be a Visible and Corporeal Deity, so as to
exclude any Invisible and Spiritual Godhead? No, on the contrary, he calls it
the Spirit and Mind of the World. He attributes Sense and Understanding to it;
and affirms from Homer, That it sees and hears all. And indeed this is so often
insisted upon by that Poet, that Eustathius from thence observes, Eustath. in
Homer, Odyss. T. p. 1871. In Iliad. (...) p. 414.
that the Sun was to be considered not only as a Luminary of the Heavens, but
as a (...), a Spirit clothed with such an illustrious Body. And in another
place he takes notice of the decency of Homer, That he calls the heavenly
Powers to be Witnesses of Oaths, and particularly the Sun.

(...),
(...),
(...).
So little Truth is there in this first of our Authors Pretense, That the
Ancients did Worship the Sun, the Moon, and the Stars, as Visible and Coporeal
Deities, so as to exclude all Sense and Apprehension of a Spiritual and
Invisible Godhead. Let us see

2dly, Whether they who worshipped these Planets, P. 97.
looked upon them as the Supreme Deities, so as not to acknowledge any Divinity
above them.

And here it must be confessed, he has at least an Mor. Nevoch, l. 3. c. 29.
appearance of Truth. For, as for the Chaldeans, Maimonides tells us of the
Ancient Zabii, That they had no other Gods but the Stars; and that among them,
they looked upon the Sun as Supreme. From whence Hornbeck de Convers. Ind. l.
1. c. 4. Pocock Not. in Spec. Hist. Ar. p. 139.
our Learned Pocock seems to think it not far from the Truth, to say, that
possibly they derived their very Name of Zabii; Saba in the Hebrew, signifying
an Host, as if one should say, (...), Worshippers of the Host of Heaven.

The same is the Account which Sanchoniathon, mentioned both by Eusebius and
St. Cyril, gives of the Eusebius. Praep. Evan. l. 1. c. 9. p. 30. Cyril. contr.
Jul. l. 6. p. 205. c,
Phoenicians, That they worshipped the Sun, Moon and Stars, as the only
immortal Gods, among which the Sun was chief, called by them Beth-Samen, Lord
of Heaven. And for the Persians, Herodotus tells us, That the Sun was their
only God: (...); Herodot. l. 1.
to which Strabo and Trogus, in Justin, assent. And Hesychius, tho he rejects
this, yet acknowledges him Strabo l. 11. Trogus apud Justinum l. 1. vid. Voss.
de Joel. l. 2. c. 9.
to be the first or supreme God amongst them (...) (says he) (...). All which
seems to be confirmed by those Ancient Inscriptions collected by Gruterus and
others, Apud Voss. loc. cit. vid. Hornb. de Con. Ind. p. 19. Elmenhorst. in
Arnob. p. 27, etc.
DEO SOLI INVICTO. OMNIPOTENTI DEO. And again, SOLI INVICTO and LUNAE AETERNAE.
from all which it may be thought to follow, that (as this Author here tells us)
the Gods which those Ancient Heathens worshipped, were nothing but the P. 97.
Heavenly Bodies, or the Sun as the supreme Deity.

But yet if we enquire more exactly into these things, we shall find their
Worship to have been much otherwise than what at first sight it appears to be;
for to begin with those I last named, the Persians; and than whom none have
been more famed for Adoring the Sun: Plutarch tells us that they had a Notion
of a De Iside and Osiride.
Deity whom they called Oromasdes, superior to him, and the Account of whom
(derived to them from Zoroaster) he thus delivers to us. They believed that
there were two contrary Principles, the one Good, the other Evil. The former of
these they called Oromasdes, whom they also looked upon as the (...), or
Creator, as Agathias informs us; the other Arimanius. Between these two, they
placed their Mithras, or the Sun, who was esteemed by them, as much Inferior to
Oromasdes, as Superior to Arimanius. To this Oromasdes, they ascribed the
Creation of the Stars, and of the Good Gods, thus Plutarch: But Photius carries
Photius Cod. 81.
it yet a little further in his Account of a Book written by Theodorus, Bishop
of Movestia, concerning the Persian Rites, he says, That they believed the
first Principle of all, to be (...), and that he begat the other two, which
with some little difference, he calls Ormisdas and Satan.

But not to insist upon these Accounts: We are told by a Learned Man in his
Notes upon Alferganus, that Jac. Golius Not. in Alferg. p. 20.
the Persians gave the Names of their Gods to their Months and Days, according
to the Ancient Religion of the Persians and Magi, whereby they did believe
their Gods to preside over them; it being a Principle amongst them, as well as
among all other Nations of the East, that the things of this lower World are
administered by Angels. The Spirit over the Sun, they called Mihrgian, from
Mitro the Sun. But above all those, they believed there was one Supreme God.

Eubulus, who wrote the History of Mithras (which Porphyr. de antro Nympharum.
was extant in St. Jeromes time) has given a particular Account of the Cave
which Zoroaster made in honor of another and superior Mithras, the Father and
Maker of the World. Even Herodotus himself, whom this Author so confidently
produces for his Warrant (but cites no particular passage of him) distinguishes
their Jupiter from the Sun, and says, by it they understood the Herod. Clio n.
131. p. 56.
whole Heaven in which the Sun is fixed; and sacrificed to him distinctly from
the other. And so does Strabo, Strabo l. 15. p. 503.
another of his Authors: Xenophon often mentions a (...), as a Deity superior
to the Sun; especially, where speaking of Cyrus being admonished in a Dream See
Dr. Cudworth. l. 1. c. 4.
of his approaching Death, he tell us, that he sacrificed to his Country
Jupiter first, and then to the Sun: And Plutarch brings in Darius in like
manner addressing to him, (...). Thou our Country Jupiter, or Supreme God of
the Persians.

I might add here, That the same is the Opinion of See Dr. Still. Answ. to T.
G. p. 110.
those Persees, who stick to their Ancient Religion at this day. But these have
been already collected by a very Eminent Hand. I shall conclude, therefore,
with the form of that Proclamation, which Cyrus gave in favor of the Jews, and
by which it plainly appears that they believed the same First and Sovereign
Deity with our selves, Ezra i. 2. Thus says Cyrus King of Persia, The Lord God
of Heaven has given me all Kingdoms of the Earth, and has charged me to build
him a House at Jerusalem. And in the next Verse, he calls the same God, The
Lord God of Israel. And I hope this Author will not say that was the Sun, or
any other Visible and Corporeal Deity.

I have enlarged my self the more on this part of Antiquity, because the
Persians, if any, must have been found to worship the Sun, as the Supreme God.
I shall be very short in other Nations, and so close this Consideration.

And for what concerns the Egyptians, I have already given some Account of
their Theology; and we may learn from thence, how it came to pass, that the Sun
(whom none of the Heathens looked upon as absolutely the supreme and highest
Being) is yet so often spoken of by them as such. For as Jamblicus informs us
out of See before.
the old Egyptian Books, they believed one Supreme God above all, next him the
Demiurgus, and then (...), or the Sun; whom they esteemed the Supreme Visible
God, and as he who had the Super-intendency over the visible World. To which I
will add the Authority of Prophyry, and that the rather for that in his Epistle
to Eusebius. pr. Ev. lib. 3.
Anebo, he seems to suspect that the old Egyptians looked no farther than the
Sun, Moon and Stars. But it is plain that this was only a difficulty, which he
puts to the Egyptian Priest; since himself owns that they represented the
Creator, whom they called Cneph, with an Egg in his Mouth, to signify the
Production of the World; and of which the Sun is but a Part.

And here I may not omit another Notion of the Egyptians, and which was not
theirs only; and from whence we may again know how to understand those Porphyr.
de Abst. l. 2. Sect. 34.
who seem to represent the Sun as the Supreme Deity. It was a Principle in
their Theology, that the Supreme God of all, is not to be worshipped by any
External and Sensible thing, not so much as by Vocal Prayer, but only by pure
Silence and Contemplation: But that Sacrifices and Hymns were to be made to
Powers inferior to Him. Among these they esteemed the Sun, Moon and Stars to be
the chief; from whence it was obvious enough to mistake, that because these
were the highest Deities, to whom they paid any External Adoration, therefore
they had no other superior to them.

And now there remains only the Chaldeans and Phoenicians, to be considered;
and of these, both Gregarius Abulfarajus and Sharestanius, cited by our Not. in
Specim. Hist. Arab. p. 143.
Learned Dr. Pocock, gives us Accounts very different from that of Maimonides
before mentioned; and that Judicious and Reverend Author, justly esteems the
Credit of Abulfarajus, preferrable to R. Maimon's, for that he was better
acquainted with their Writings, and read them in their own Language, which the
other did not. And if what Sharestanius reports be true, That it was their
Principle, that between the Supreme God and Us, Ibid. p. 140.
there must be some Mediators; this again will furnish us with yet another
Reason, why the Sun may easily have been mistaken for their Supreme Deity,
because he was the principal Mediator betwixt God and them, and the Highest to
which they paid any immediate External Adoration. And tho this Author is as
positive, as if he had all the Evidence in the World for it, That God made an
extraordinary Discovery of himself P. 76.
to Abraham, as Lord of all things, in opposition to the Idolatry of his own
Country, by which he would imply that the Chaldeans in those days did not
suppose God to be the Lord of all things; yet is it (like the rest of his Book)
all Imagination, without any thing to support it. For indeed we have all the
reason in the World to believe that the Chaldeans had at this time the knowledge
of the one true God. 1. It appears by manifest Computation, that Shem, from
whom Tera and Abraham were descended, was yet living with them, and it is
altogether unaccountable, either that himself should have lost the knowledge of
the one true Supreme God; or that if he retained it, all the rest of his Family
should have been utterly ignorant of it. 2. It is indeed said in Holy
Scripture, Josh. xxiv. v. 2. that they worshipped strange Gods; but it is not
said that they either worshipped them as the Supreme God, or had utterly lost
all sense and apprehension of any such spiritual and invisible Godhead. 3. In
all the History of God's calling Abraham out of Ur of the Chaldees, we do not
find any thing to make us believe that God was pleased to make the discovery of
himself to him, as Lord of all things, in opposition to the Idolatry of his
Family. 4. It is hard to suppose, that when all the barbarous Nations, as we
have seen, preserved the Notion of the True, Supreme God, only these Chaldeans
should lose it; it was but on the other side the River, that we find the
knowledge of God preserved in the Land of Canaan. And lastly, we do certainly
know, that but two Generations after Laban, tho he did worship (as it is said
of Tera) (...), strange Gods too, yet he retained with them a very good sense
and apprehension of the Supreme God, as is plain from Genesis xxxi. where the God
of Abraham is found to appear to him, v. 29. And again v. 53. he ratifies his
Covenant with his Son Jacoh, swearing by the God of Abraham, as well as by the
strange God, the God of Nahor.

To conclude; Macrobius, than whom none could Macrob. Saturnal.
have taken more pains to show the universal Worship of the Sun, was yet so far
from thinking that it excluded all sense and apprehension of a Supreme God,
that he plainly says in the beginning, that he intended to treat only of the
Dij qui sub Coelo sunt, the lower sort of Worldly Gods; and in his Commentary
upon the Dream of Scipio, he plainly acknowledges a higher Divinity, whom he
calls the Prima Causa, and Omnipotentissimus Deus; The First Cause, and most
Almighty God.

I shall close all with a passage of Plutarch, which will at once show both
that the Heathens had a knowledge Plutarch de Iside and Osiride.
of the Supreme God amongst them, and that it was He whom they all every where
Adored as such, however differing in their Manners and Ceremonies from one
another: No inanimate thing can be a God to men; but they who bestow upon us a
continual supply of what is sufficient for us, have therefore been esteemed
Gods by us; which Gods are not different among different Nations, as if the
Barbarians and Greeks, the Southern and Northern People had not the same God;
but as the Sun, and Moon, and Heaven, and Earth, and Sea, are common to all,
but are called differently by different men; so tho there be but ONE WORD, or
REASON, ordering all those things, and but ONE PROVIDENCE dispensing all
things, and the Inferior Powers which are appointed over all, having had
several Names and Honors from several Persons, and by the Laws of several
Countries, have been every where worshipped throughout the whole World.

I pass on finally to enquire,

3. Whether these Ancient Idolaters, as is pretended, did so Worship these
Heavenly Bodies, as P. 97, 100.
to Worship nothing besides, and in particular so as to exclude all Notion of
Heroes and Doemons.

This indeed is an Assertion worthy our Author, who as he has hitherto advanced
nothing but Paradoxes, so he resolves he will not now alter his Character by
representing Antiquity truly at the last.

I have already shown in opposition to this suggestion, how the Egyptians had
their Divi, or Canonized men presently after the Flood; and that we have some
reason to believe their principal Deities, viz. Apis and Osyris, to have been
such; I will now add, that the first Dynasties of Manetho, of Gods and
Demigods upon Earth, confirms this, and to which the old Egyptian Chronicon in
Syncellus adds yet more force. St. Cyril tells us from Sanchoniathon, that not
only the most Ancient Greeks, but especially the Phoeniceans and Egyptians,
from whom this Superstition was derived to all others (tho our Author, ever in
the wrong, P. 101. Cyrillus Alex. contra Julian, l. 6. p. 205. C. D.
will have the Greeks to be the Inventors of it) esteemed those the greatest
Gods, (...), who had either found out some things useful for the life of man,
or otherwise deserved well of their Country. (...). And looking upon them as
their Benefactors and Causes of great good to them, they worshipped them as
Gods, and prepared Temples for that purpose, and consecrated Pillars and other
Ensigns of Honor to their Memory. And as the Holy Father from the same Author
goes on, These they greatly worshipped, and the Phoenicians especially,
dedicated Festivals unto them.

But it was not enough for our Author merely to advance a most false Conclusion
concerning these Gentiles, unless he also choose an Evidence for it that speaks
the direct contrary to his Assertion: For thus it became him to keep up a just
decorum between his Principles and his Proofs, that so we may be satisfied,
that he values Truth alike in both.

This (says he) is attested by all Historians, viz. Page 100.
That the old Heathen Nations worshipped only the Stars, without any Notion of
Heroes and Demons. And the very first he instances, in is Diodorus Siculus for
the Egyptians.

But this is perfectly to astonish us, and too plainly shows that some men's
assurance is without bounds, as well as without reason: For what? Does Diodorus
Siculus say that the Egyptians worshipped only the Stars, without any Notion of
Heroes and Demons? This is worse than to write History out of an Invisible
Manuscript; it is indeed to write History directly contrary to the Visible
Records out of which he pretends to have taken it: For let this Author look
into Diodorus Siculus, whom I would willingly hope he has never yet read, and
there he will find him in his First Book, Diodorus Siculus Ed. Hanov. G. L. An.
1604.
so far from what he pretends, that on the contrary, he expressly distinguishes
between two sorts of Gods among the Egyptians, and discourses of them in Order:
And first of the Celestial Gods, p. 10. two of which he says the Egyptians
first of all had, (...), the Sun and the Moon: Having discoursed of these, he
thus formally concludes his Account, And this the Egyptians say concerning
their Celestial Gods, and Page 12.
such as had an Eternal Generation.

And then goes on immediately on the other sort, which this Author pretends
Diodorus Siculus denies Ibid.
them to have had ANY NOTION OF: (...). But besides these (the Sun and Moon,
etc.) they say there are other Terrestrial Gods, Mortals indeed by Nature, but
for their Wisdom and Prudence, and the benefits they did to mankind, endued
with Immortality; of which kind (says he) were some of the Kings of Egypt. In
the next page he places amongst these, our Author's Friends, Isis and Osiris,
whose History P. 13.
he relates: And finally, to raise his ill choice to the highest Evidence,
having given a long relation of these kind of Deities, he conclud^ as directly
against P. 101.
our Author's other Assertion, That this kind of Idolatry was the Invention of
the vain and lying Greeks, as if he had been retained on our side, by showing
expressly how they derived this kind of Idolatry from Diod. Siculus p. 20, 21.
the Egyptians, by the means of Orpheus, who had been initiated in the Egyptian
Rites; and then gives us this universal Conclusion, p. 21. (...). That the
Egyptians do in general say, that the Grecians have appropriated to themselves
the most eminent of their Heroes and Gods, as well as of their Colonies.

So much would it have been for our Author's Reputation, if Diodorus Siculus
too, had been an Invisible Manuscript.

2. The next Author he produces, is Herodotus, who, he says, affirms the same
of the Persians and Chaldeans, that they worshipped only the Stars, without any
Notion of Heroes and Demons; but concerning the former part of his Assertion, I
have already shown, that they did not worship only the Stars, but acknowledged
a Supreme Deity above them; and for the latter, the very same Herodotus who
says this of the Persians, in his first Book, does directly contradict his
Conclusion, That this was the sense of all the old Page 100, 101.
Heathen Nations, but especially that the worshipping of Men and Women, was the
Invention of the vain and lying Greeks, in the very next, where he tells us
that they derived their Twelve Gods from the Egyptians, Herodotus, l. 2. c. 4.
p. 91.
who were the first Inventors of this Idolatry.

3. The same (he says) in the next place is affirmed by Strabo and Justin, of
the Arabians: Had he been pleased to produce some passages from these Authors
wherein they do say, That the Arabians worship only the Stars, without any
Notion of Heroes and Demons, we should have had less cause to suspect his
Assertion; Strabo indeed says that the Arabians Strabo l. 16. p. 539.
worship the Sun, but that either He or Justin have ever affirmed what this
Author pretends, I am yet to learn; in the mean time this I am sure, that other
Authors have given us a very contrary account of them. Lucan tells us, that
their only God was Jupiter Ammon, whom that Learned Critic, Gerard Vossius
Lucan l. 9. v. 517.
does not without reason suppose to have been Cham, whose Eldest Son Chus, as I
have before shown, first planted himself there. Arrian in his History of
Alexander's Expedition, says that they had two Gods, Arrian de Exped. Alep. l.
7. p. 486.
(...), or the Heaven, and (...), or Bacchus; and that 'twas this encouraged
that great Conqueror to invade them, that he might make himself a Third God
amongst them; and this may be well enough consistent with the other Account, if
what some Learned Men suppose, be allowed; that these were their own proper
Gods, whereas Jupiter Hammon, was rather the Deity of the Ammonites, among whom
his Oracle stood, and to whom they only sent Ambassadors to consult upon
occasion, it not appearing that the Arabians had any Temple for him in their
own Country: So that here too our Author is mistaken, for that the Arabians had
other Gods than the Stars, and were not Vossius de Idol. l. 1. c. 26.
without all Notion of Heroes and Doemons.

4. His Fourth Instance is in the Ancient Germans, Caes. Com. l. 6.
and of them I confess Caesar does say what he pretends, but then it is to be
observed, that in the very same place, he utterly overthrows all the use this
Author can be supposed to make of it, viz. to show, That all the old Heathen
Nations worshipped only the Stars, without any Notion of Heroes or Demons;
seeing in the very same place, he says of the Ancient Gauls, that they
worshipped such kind of Gods as he denies any of the Heathen did, and that with
a Superstition so like that of some of his Acquaintance, that I cannot forbear
taking notice of it: The Gauls, says he, are very superstitious, and therefore
if they fall into any dangerous distemper, or are concerned in War, or in any
other danger, they straightway sacrifice, etc. For this purpose they have their
particular Gods; Mercury to prosper them in their Journeys, or help them in
their Traffic; Apollo to cure them in their sickness; Minerva to find out any
Artificial Works; Mars for War, etc. And this our Author could not but know,
since in the very Passage to which he refers, he opposes the Germans to them;
the Germans (says he) differ much from this custom (viz.) of the Gauls, which
he had just before recounted; for they esteem them only for Gods whom they see,
and by whom they are manifestly helped, the Sun, Vulcan, and the Moon.

But I have yet more to except against this instance; for however Caesar came to
be so misinformed, the Ancient Germans had other Gods, even such as this Author
denies to all the Ancient Idolaters. Tacitus mentions Hist. l. 6. Cap. 64.
Mars as the chief God of the Tencteri, a Nation Cap. 9.
bordering upon the Bhine; and in his Book de Moribus Germanorum, he speaks of
Hercules as another of their Deities. That they also Worshipped Mercury, we
learn from the same Author, whom in their Language they called Gota, or Wota,
as Gotefridus Viterbiensis in his Chronicon observes, from whence also he
supposes, that their word Got, signifying God, is derived; Vos. de Idol. l. 1.
p. 240.
tho in this, other Learned Men dissent from him.

And lastly, the same Tacitus mentions yet another De Moribus Germ. c. 2.
God more Ancient than all these, the first Founder of their Country, Tuisto,
whom they worshipped, with his Son Manus; and these, some think, were no other
than Gomar, and his Son Thogorma or Aschenar, by whom Germany was peopled after
the Flood, tho Vossius rather supposes them yet of a greater Antiquity,
believing Tuisto to be Adam, and Manus, to whom also Tacitus assigns three
Sons, Noah, by whom the World was again established after the Flood.

4. And this may suffice for his particular Authorities. His next are
universal; for he says Eusebius in his Book de preparatione Evangelica, has
shown this to be the sense of all the Old Heathen Nations, Page 100.
as may be seen in his Collections of their several Opinions, where he proves,
That the Ancient Heathens only worshipped the Stars, without any Notion of
Heroes or Demons.

Good God! What can be done with such a Man as this? Eusebius has proved that
all the Ancient Heathens worshipped only the Stars, without any Notion of
Heroes and Demons, which was a mere Invention of the vain and lying Greeks: And
yet has this very Eusebius quoted Diodorus Siculus, for his account Eusebius.
praep. Evan. l. 2 c. 1.
of the Egyptian Theology. He distinguishes with him their Gods into Celestial
and Terrestrial: Of the first, he Treats in his first Book from that Author; of
the second in his next. The very Title of his Chapter is, Lib. 1. c. 7. Lib. 2.
c. 1. p. 45.
An Epitome of the Egyptian Theology, and how it passed from them to the
Greeks. In the beginning of it, he speaks how their Gods, who had been mortal
Men, were for their Benefits they did to Mankind, and for their Wisdom, made
immortal Deities. He exemplifies this Page 45, 46, 47, 48.
in a large account of their Mythology; and then concludes expressly with his
Author, (...). That the Greeks had appropriated to themselves, the principal
Hero' s, and Gods of the Egyptians. And yet this is the Author that has shown
at large, how all theold Heathen Nations P. 100.
worshipped only Stars, without any Notion of Hero' s and Demons.

His other Author is Macrobius, who he says, has proved it of all the Ancient
Idolaters, that they worshipped the Sun as the Supreme Deity. He should have
added to make good his Conclusion, and that so as to exclude all Notions of
Hero' s and Demons. P. 100.
But this Macrobius never undertook to do: And I have before shown, that in the
very Book of his Saturnals, here mentioned, He was so far from showing that
they worshipped the Sun as the (absolutely) Supreme Deity, that in the
beginning of his Discourse, he expressly restrains it to the Dii duntaxat qui
sub Coelo sunt, or Sub-Coelestial Deities: And in his Comment upon Scipio's
Dream, he acknowledges above the Sun and Heaven, many other Gods; viz. 1. An
Eternal Psythe, the Creator both of the Heaven, and the Sun. 2dly, A perfect
Mind or Intellect, and (as he calls him) Omnipotentissimus Deus, the most
Omnipotent of all Gods.

5. He has two Authors whom he produces; our own Learned Seldom, in his Book De
Diis Syris, and Gerard Vossius, in nothing inferior to him, who have proved all
the Idols mentioned in Scripture, to have been so many Appellations of the Sun,
whom the Ancient Idolaters believed to have been the Supreme God, and Creator
of the World, (and therefore of himself too, for he is part of it) as Baal,
Baal-Peor, Bell, Molech, Baal-Zebub, and Mythras; tho I doubt this last was
taken from some Invisible Manuscript of the Bible, for I do not remember that I
have ever met with it in any of the Editions that are extant of those sacred
Volumes.

But to let this pass too; Did Mr. Seldom then, and Gerard Vossius in good
Truth, undertake to show, that all the Ancient Idolaters worshipped the Sun as
the Supreme God, so as to exclude all Notion of Demons and Hero's?

1st, Mr. Seldom gives only a Critical Account of the Syrian Deities; and in
several of them shows, that others at least have believed them to be somewhat
else than the Sun.

2dly, Gerard Vossius is so far from favoring this Man's pretenses, that on
the contrary it is he, who has spent his whole first Book of Idolatry, to give
an Account of the Ancient Hero's, that were consecrated by the Gentiles into
Gods; It Is he that interprets the Egyptians Osyris to be Mitzraim; the Beel of
the Chaldeans to be Nimrod; the Tuisco of the Germans, Gomer, or perhaps Adam.
In short, he shows this sort of Idolatry to have been introduced among the
Heathens the very Age after the Flood, even before God called Abraham from Uz
of the Chaldees.

And thus have I considered this Author's Pretenses to Antiquity; and I think I
may say, there is nothing but Falseness and Vision, in all his Notions and
Authorities. Upon the whole, I shall beg leave very briefly, to Conclude as to
the Nature of Idolatry.

I. That seeing all these Ancient Idolaters, did acknowledge one Supreme,
Invisible and Spiritual Godhead, their Idolatry did not consist in worshipping
the Heavenly Bodies, so as to exclude all Sense and Appehension of any such
thing.

II. That seeing they believed the Sun and other Heavenly Bodies, to be the
Vehicles only of immaterial and spiritual Substances, who had the
Superintendency over the Affairs of this lower World, and were to be applied to
as Mediators between God and Them; their Idolatry did not consist in
worshipping any Visible or Corporeal Deities, as the Supreme God, so as to
exclude all Sense and Apprehension of a Spiritual and Invisible Godhead,
Superior to their Deities. By Consequence,

III. That either this, which our Author here lays down, is not (as he
pretends) the true and only Notion of Idolatry; or if it be, none of those
Ancient Nations were Idolaters.

IV. Tho I dare not presume to establish true and only Notions in this Case;
yet from what has been said, I think we may reasonably Conclude their Idolatry,
to have consisted especially in these two things; Either, 1st, That they
worshipped the true God by Corporeal and Visible Symbols; or that 2dly,
together with the true God, they worshipped other inferior Deities; whether
Intelligences, (which they supposed to reside in the Heavenly Bodies) or
Demons. And that by consequence,

To Worship the Supreme God in any Corporeal Representation or Image
whatsoever; or to pay Divine Worship to any Created Being, whether Spirit or
separate Soul; either as having the Power over this inferior World to
Administer things in it, or as Mediators between the Supreme God and Us; this
is, if not the only, yet at least a true Notion of Idolatry.

CHAP. IV.
Of the Notion of Idolatry under the Law; and that it did not Consist in the
giving the worship of the Supreme God to some Created, Corporeal or Visible
Deity as supposing it to be the Supreme God.

THis was the next point I proposed to examine, and our Author thus delivers
his Opinion of it. That according to the Law, Idolatry is giving Page 80.
the worship of the Supreme God to any created, corporeal, or visible deity, or
any thing that can be represented by an image, which nothing but corporeal
Beings can, and to suppose such a Being Page 81.
the Supreme Deity.

And though there may seem to be two sorts of it. First, either to worship a
material and created Being as the Supreme Deity, or Secondly to ascribe any
corporeal Form or Shape to the Divine Nature; yet in the result both are but
One; for to ascribe unto the Supreme God any Corporeal Form, is the same thing
as to worship a Created Being, for so is every Corporeal Substance.

This is, I say, the TRUE and ONLY Notion of Idolatry.

This indeed is Great and Magisterial, and would almost dispose a man to think,
that there should certainly be at least something of Truth, where there is so
very much confidence. But we have had already sufficient reason to suspect him,
where he seems least to suspect himself. Here I cannot but wonder that a person
of his Character should send abroad such Notions into the world for the
Dictates of Holy Scripture, as are evidently contrary to the Tenor of it;
unless he thought our Nobility and Gentry as little acquainted with that Book,
as some of their Guides are said to have thought it fit they should be.

To make a man an Idolater according to the Idea this Author has given of it,
two things are required, which I much question whether they ever yet concurred
in any considerable number of men in the world, viz.

1. That he give the worship of the Supreme God to some Created, Corporeal, and
Visible part of the Universe. 2dly, That he give this worship to it as
esteeming such a Being to be the Supreme God.
I will not be so rude as to enquire by what Rules of Discourse he infers all
this from the Second Commandment, that because God there forbids the Israelites
to make any Graven Image, the likeness of any thing that is in Heaven above, or
in the Earth beneath or in the water under the Earth; to bow down before it and
worship it; therefore, this Image must be the similitude of some visible and
Corporeal deity; and that Deity be supposed to be the Supreme God, and be
worshipped as such. He that can infer this from the Second Commandment, would
do well to tell us how he does it. But not to be importunate here. If this be
the true and only Idolatry, according to the Law, I would desire to know;

First, Seeing the Law was delivered by the Ministry of Angels, and these were
no visible and Corporeal deities; what if the Jews had paid Divine Adoration to
them? would this have been Idolatry according to the Law? If it would, I should
be glad to know what part of his definition it is that makes it to be so?

Secondly, I have before shown that the ancient Heathens, the Egyptians,
Chaldeans, etc. though they worshipped indeed the Sun, Moon and Stars; yet they
neither believed them to be the Supreme God nor the Image of the Supreme God;
nor that they were only visible, and Corporeal deities: They looked upon them
as the vehicles of Celestial Spirits, which dwelt in them; and as such they
paid their Adoration to them. Now then was this Idolatry by the Law, or was it
not? If it were not, how came the Israelites to be charged with Idolatry
(according to this Author's own principles) for joining with them in this
Service? If it were, how will this agree with his true and only Notion of
Idolatry? Seeing they worshipped these Heavenly bodies neither as the Supreme
God, nor so as to exclude all sense and apprehension of a spiritual and
invisible deity. But,

Thirdly, To come to the Holy Scripture it self we read 1 Kings 11. that
Soloman in his old age turned away his Heart, and worshipped (...) -- Verse. 4.
Collat. cum Jos. 24. 2. Page 93.
other Gods, viz. Ashtoreth, and Milcom, and Chemosh, and Moloch, i. e.
according to this Learned Man's Notion, the Sun, and Moon, and I suppose he
will not deny that herein he committed Idolatry. But now can any one believe
that Solomon who had been so well instructed in the knowledge of the Lord God
of Israel; he to whom God had twice himself 1 ^ngs 3. 5. -- 9. 2.
appeared; and whom he had endu'd with wisdom above all the men upon the
Earth; finally who had not so long since built him a magnificent Temple at
Jerusalem; where the Service of the true God was continued, even whilst he
worshipped the Gods of his Wives. Can any one, I say, be so stupid as to believe
that this Solomon gave the worship of the Supreme God to the Sun and Moon, as
supposing them to be the Supreme deities, and that he did not only not worship
but likewise not so much as believe the only supreme God? And yet this we must
say, if we will allow this Author to have given us the true and only notion of
Idolatry.

Besides it is certain that whilst he was engaged in his Idolatrous worship,
God did not utterly forsake him, but admonished him of it and threatened him
with the loss of his Kingdom for serving strange Gods, which is inducement
enough to conclude that he had still an apprehension of the True God. If
Solomon did immediately upon this admonition give over his Impious worship, it
showed evidently that he retained the knowledge of that God who had twice
appeared to him. For to suppose that he had quite lost all sense and
apprehension of him just when he fell to Idolatry, and just recovered some
sense of him upon this admonition, and that all the while between, he believed
his visible and Corporeal deities, or some one of them to be the Supreme God,
and had no sense of him who is truly so, is to make Solomon almost such a man
as I before showed our Author's Idolater to be according to the meaning of his
words: I am sure it is not to make him one of the wisest men that ever was in
the World. But supposing that Solomon went on for some time after this to
worship his strange Gods, yet he must now at least have recovered some Sense of
the true God, it being this admonition in all likelihood, that sooner or later
brought him to Repentance: And then our Author's Principles do from that time
that he was admonished, acquit Solomon of all Idolatry, though he went on to
serve the Gods of his Wives.

It is a shame to run this matter any farther, and I make no doubt but that I
have all men of Sense whether of ours, or of the Roman Church with me in this
matter against our Author. But that I may not seem only to destroy his Idea,
without fixing any other in the room of it; I now proceed to observe, That we
find two sorts of Idolatry mentioned in the Old Testament; and (such is the
misfortune of this positive man,) both of them utterly destructive of his true
and only Notion of it, viz.

I. The worshipping of the true God, by a material Symbol or Representation. II.
The worshipping of other Gods, than the God of Israel, and that whether it be so
as, 1. Utterly to forsake the true God, and serve others only, Or 2. To
worship other Gods together with Him.
1st. That according to the Holy Scripture, it was esteemed Idolatry among the
Jews, to worship the true God by any material Symbol or Representation.

And of this I shall desire no better proof, than those very instances which
this Author so much insists upon, for the establishing of his Notion, viz.
those of the Golden Calf, and of the Calves of Dan and Bethel. That the
Children of Israel did commit Idolatry in the worship of these is on all hands
agreed; And yet that both these were designed as Symbols of the true God, and
not of any visible or Corporeal deities, will I think appear evident, almost to
a demonstration, from these following reflections.

1st. That it is altogether incredible that the Israelites in either of those
Cases, could so soon have forgotten the true God, as to give divine worship to
visible and Corporeal Beings, as supposing them to be the supreme Deity.

If we consider their Circumstances when they worshipped the Golden Calf, Exodus
32. It was but a very few days since God had made a very great discovery of
Himself to them at Mount Horeb, when he gave them the Law, and asserted Himself
to be the Jehovah, their God which had brought them up out of the Land of
Egypt, Exodus 20. 1.

And in the Case of Jeroboam's Calves, the knowledge of God in which they had
been bred up; a continued public Service of Him at Jerusalem; the Feasts and
Sacrifices, and other Ceremonies which they observed in Obedience to his
Command, the very Seal of his Covenant which they carried about them in their
Flesh, not to say any thing of that Temple which Solomon had so lately built
unto him; all these must certainly have made too deep an Impression upon their
minds, to permit them so suddenly to fall away into such an utter
forgetfulness of him, as to worship visible and corporeal deities as the
supreme God, so as to exclude all sense and apprehension of him who really is
the supreme God. Such an Ignorance as this is hardly to be found, even among
those Infidels that have never had any revelalation of the true God at all made
to them: But that Men who had once been instructed in the knowledge and worship
of him, should so suddenly fall off from both, as they must here have done
according to this Author's true and only Notion of their Idolatry, this I
think is as incredible, as the notion it self, which he would prove by the
supposition of it. But,

2dly. That the people did not fall into any such Apostasy, but designed in
those Calves to worship the God of Israel, is evident from the Characters given
of that deity whom they served by them.

For as to the Golden Calf, we read Exodus 32. 4. that when it was set up they
cried out, This is thy God O Israel, which brought thee up out of the Land of
Egypt, and Aaron built an Altar before it, and made proclamation and said, to
Morrow is a Feast to the Jehovah or the Lord.

And so Jeroboam in the very same manner, having set up his Calves in Dan and
Bethel, 1 Kin. 12. 28. It is too much for you (said he to the people) to go to
Jerusalem; Behold thy God O Israel, which brought thee up out of the Land of
Egypt. Now may I desire this Learned Author to tell us. 1. Where in Holy
Scripture does he find the name JEHOVAH, or the LORD attributed to any other
but the true God? Or if we should suppose the people to be Ignorant in this
Case, yet could Aaron the High Priest be so forgetful, as not to remember that
this was that peculiar name which God assumed to himself, Exodus 6. 3. and of
which our Author himself takes notice, p. 80. 81. 2. Whom should they then, and
Jeroboam mean after by the Jehovah that had brought them up out of the Land of
Egypt, but him who at the delivery of the Law, appropriated this Character to
himself, Ex. 20. 1. and who was under that Title worshipped by the Jews at
Jerusalem where his Temple stood, and whither all the Tribes were wont to go up
to worship him. It is too much for you to go up to Jerusalem. Behold thy God, O
Israel, which brought thee up out of the Land of Egypt.

3. Had Jeroboam hereby designed to set up a new God amongst them, how came it
to pass that He used no Arguments with them at all as to that matter, but
merely remonstrated to them the trouble of going up to Jerusalem to worship?
Never sure were people easier persuaded out of their religion than the ten
Tribes, if our Author thinks, that the distance of place made him choose rather
to return to the Idolatry of Egypt, than to be at so much pains to worship the
true God.

3dly. But all this will farther appear, in that it is altogether incredible
that the Egyptian Gods should be the God that delivered the Israelites out of
the hand of Egypt; and sent all those Plagues upon their own servants. But
especially that thick darkness under which they lay for three days, seems to be
a very odd Effect for the Sun to have wrought. But to quit such Suppositions;
Two things there are by which it undoubtedly appears that the Israelites in
these Cases, could not have designed any return to the Egyptian Idolatry. For,

1. As to the Golden-Calf, it is said that they offered burnt offerings, and
brought Peace offerings unto it. And Jeroboam sacrificed unto the Calves which
he had made and Consecrated Priests with a bullock and seven rams to their
Service.

Now all this was most agreeable to what God required in his Service: but so
utterly repugnant to the Superstition of the Egyptians that our Author himself
confesses God commanded their beasts to be offered in Sacrifice to him, in
contempt of the Sacredness in which they were held by those Idolaters. He tells
us That to offer a young Ram was the greatest affront that could be put upon
the Egyptians, who held a Ram not only in religious esteem, but the most
sacred of all their Holy Animals. And particularly upon the account of the
sacredness. of these Animals, the Egyptians (says he) NEVER OFFERED any of
their Species in Sacrifice. In so much that when Pharaoh bid Moses go sacrifice
to the Lord in the Land of Egypt, Moses answers that they durst not do it,
because Exodus 8. 26.
it would be an Abomination to the Egyptians, so that they would stone them:
that is, it would be a profaneness and open affront to the Religion of the
Egyptians if they should offer in Sacrifice those very Animals that the
Egyptians had consecrated to the Honor of their Gods. And for the same reason
the Israelites were also commanded to Sacrifice young-Bullocks, as well as
Rams; for that next to a Ram the Bullock was the most Sacred of all the Holy
Animals.

Our Author is very large on this Argument; but I think what I have here
offered, is little less than a demonstration against him as to this point; that
the Jews in the Worship of their Calves did not return to the Idolatry of
Egypt, seeing they offered such Sacrifices before them as by his own confession
were an open affront to the Religion of the Egyptians.

2dly. It is evident from Holy Scripture, that the Idolatry of these Calves was
a distinct Idolatry from that of worshipping the Heavenly Bodies; and according
to the Estimate which God himself put upon it, much less heinous. And this we
find in both the instances before mentioned. For as to the Golden Calf, Stephen
says Acts 7. 41, 42. That they made a Calf in those days, and offered Sacrifice
to the Idol, and rejoiced in the work of their hands; THEN God gave them up to
worship the Host of Heaven. Now here must be a manifest difference allowed
between these two, seeing the one is represented as the punishment of the
other, and what a ridiculous paraphrase would it make of these words, to
suppose that they Adored the Sun in both; viz. That for worshipping the Sun,
under the Symbol of the Golden Calf, God gave them up to worship the Sun under
the name of Moloch.

As for Jeroboam's Calves, we find this also distinguished from that of
worshipping the Heavenly Host. For thus the Idolatry of Ahab was aggravated
against him; 1 Kings 16. 31. That as if it had been a small thing for Him to
walk in the Sins of Jeroboam the Son of Nebat; He went and served Baal, and
worshipped Him. Now if the Idolatry of the Golden Calves was the worship of the
Sun too, (as this Author would have it,) then this passage concerning Ahab must
be expounded in this manner; That as if it had been a small thing for him to
worship the Sun under the Calves, He even proceeded to such a height of
Impiety, as to worship the Sun under the name of Baal. But 4thly, and to
conclude this Point; That under the Calves they worshipped the true God, is
evident from the whole Course of the History of the ten Tribes, and of the
State of Religion under them. We find God as well revealing himself to these as
to the other two. His Prophets came amongst them, and though they often
inveighed against their Altars, yet never charged them as deserters of the God
of Israel.

Nay, in many Cases we find those who worshipped the Golden Calves, yet accepted
by God as zealous in his Service. I shall instead of many, offer only one
Example, that of Jehu. 2 Kings 10. 16. who as he was expressly designed by God
to be King over Israel, so he there bids Jehonadab, come and see his Zeal for
the LORD. Now the zeal he there meant was in destroying of Baal out of Israel.
This he most Effectually did, as may be seen at large in that Chapter; and for
the doing of it, had the Throne confirmed by God to his Posterity for four
Generations. I shall therefore make bold to conclude, that Jehu was no
worshipper of Baal or the Sun, but of the God of Israel, whose Service he
promoted, and for whom Elijah not long before had appeared in opposition to
this very Baal, 1 Kings 18. 21. How long (says he) Halt ye between two
opinions, if the Lord be God follow him; but if BAAL then follow him. And yet
Jehu still worshipped the Golden 2 Kings 1^. 29, 31.
Calves that were in Bethel, and that were in Dan; He observed not to walk in
the Law of the LORD God of Isral with ALL HIS HEART, seeing he departed not
from the Sin of Jeroboam which made Israel to Sin.

I conclude upon the whole, that that cannot be the true and ONELT Notion of
Idolatry which this Author pretends, viz. The giving the worship of the Supreme
God to some Created Corporeal or visible Deity, as supposing it to be the
Supreme deity, since (as we have now seen) to worship even the true God, under
the worship of some Corporeal Symbol or representation, as the Israelites did
in these Calves, is in the account of the Holy Scripture to commit Idolatry. I
go on,

2dly. To show: That to worship any other God, besides the God of Israel,
whether it be so as to forsake the true God, or but only to join the worship
of any other with him; This is also according to the sense of Holy Scripture,
to commit Idolatry.

Now this will appear from the Examples of this kind of Idolatry, that occur in
those Sacred Writings; I shall mention only an Instance or two in either kind.
And,

1st. That to give divine worship to any other than to the God of Israel,
though they do not worship that Being as the Supreme deity, but on the Contrary
worship the true God together with it, is according to the Censure of the Holy
Scripture Idolatry.

This was the Case of Solomon in some of the last years of his Life, For
however, at the persuasion of his Wives; he neglected very much the Service of
the true God, yet we do not find that he utterly forsook either the Worship or
the Acknowledgment of him. On the Contrary, the Holy Scripture plainly enough
insinuates, that he still served the God of Israel, and his fault was, that he
did not serve him only, but worshipped Moloch, and Chemosh and Ash^^reth, and
Milcom together with him. For thus speaking of his Idolatry it says, 1 Kings
11. 4. That his heart was not perfect, with the Lord his God: and again ver. 6.
That he went not fully after the Lord as did David his Father, i. e. He did not
wholly give up himself to serve the Lord, and him ONELT as his Father had done.

Another, and a more notable Instance of this we meet with in 2 Kings 18. Where
the Kings of Assyria having led the ten Tribes into Captivity, and planted some
of his own Subjects in their Country, we read ver. 24. that God sent Lions
amongst them to destroy them, because they neglected to worship ver. 25.
him. Upon this the King of Assyria ordered one of the Priests of Bethel to go
up and teach them, the manner of the God of the Land; then one of the ver. 27.
Priests whom they had carried away from Samaria, came and dwelt in Bethel, and
taught them how they 28.
should fear or serve the Lord. Howbeit every man made Gods of his own, and so
they feared the Lord and served their own Gods and their Graven Images.

Such was the State of these Samaritans, and their practice will furnish us
with two very useful Remarks upon this Occasion. For 1. Since these Samaritans
were punished for not worshipping the God of the Country, i. e. of the God whom
the Israelites were wont to worship; it follows that the God of the Israelites
was not the same with the God of the Samaritans: And therefore since these are
supposed to have worshipped the Sun, it follows that the Israelites did not
worship the Sun; but some other and him the true God.

2dly. That these Samaritans at the same time that they committed Idolatry in
serving their own Gods, did also both know and fear the true God, and therefore
their Idolatry could not consist in giving the worship of the Supreme God, to
their created and visible Deities, as supposing them so to be. But their Sin
was that they gave divine worship to their own false Gods, after they had been
instructed in the worship of the true, and joined both the one and the other in
their Religious Service. But,

2dly. As it was therefore thought to be Idolatry, to worship any other being
together with God, so must it much more have been esteemed so, to forsake the
true God, and worship any other Corporeal and visible Deity.

An Instance of this we seem to have in Ahab, who 1 Kings 16. 30.
seduced by Jezabel his Wife, did evil in the sight of the Lord, above all that
were before him, and what this was we find in the next verse, viz. That not
content with the Idolatry of Jeroboam, in worshipping God after an Idolatrous
manner, he utterly forsook him and served Baal, and built a Temple and an Altar
for him.

Now that Ahab had utterly laid aside the Service of the true God, seems
evident upon two accounts, 1st. Of the Great persecution that he suffered his
Wife 1 Kings 18. 4.
to make of the Prophets of the LORD, 2 Kings 18. 4. When as Obadiah tells
Elijah, he hid them in Caves from her fury. 2dly. From the miserable State of
the Kingdom, in that time as we find Elijah reporting it even to God himself, 1
Kings 19. 14. The Children of Israel, says he, have forsaken thy Covenant,
thrown down thy Altars, and slain thy Prophets with the Sword, and I even I
only am left, and they seek my Life to take it away.

Indeed it is not to be doubted, but that the Idolatry of this time was very
deplorable. But now wherein did it consist? Did Ahab worship Baal or the Sun as
a Corporeal Deity, so as to exclude all Sense and apprehension of a Superior,
Spiritual and Invisible Godhead? This is not credible, seeing throughout his
whole Reign we find him corresponding upon all occasions with the Prophets of
the LORD, and therefore sure he could not be without some Sense and
apprehension of him.

And what I have now shown in the Example of Ahab I will yet farther confirm in
another, that will perhaps be liable to less exception, and that is the
instance of Manasse King of Judah. This King not content to forsake the God of
his Fathers set up his Idolatry in the very Temple of the Lord; but yet neither
had he lost all sense and apprehension of a spiritual and Invisible Godhead. He
had been bred up by his Father in the knowledge of the true God, the Prophets
of the LORD still continued to 2 Chr. 33. 10.
put him in mind of his danger, and no sooner did he feel the punishment of his
Rebellion, but he returned to his God, ver. 12. When he was in affliction he
besought the Lord his God, and humbled himself greatly before the God of his
Fathers.

And thus have I taken a short View of the several sorts of Idolatry which
occur in the Old Testament, and from thence it appears, that this sin is
consistent not only with the acknowledgment but even with the worship of the
true Supreme Deity, and therefore that it is a very false account, which this
Author has here given us of it, viz. That Idolatry is neither more nor less
than the Worship of the Page 74.
heavenly bodies, the Sun, Moon and Stars or any other visible and Corporeal
Deity as the SUPREME God; or as he elsewhere defines it, that Idolatry is the
giving the worship of the Supreme God to Page 80, 81.
any Created, Corporeal or Visible Deity, and to suppose such a Being the
Supreme Deity is the ONLY, TRUE and PROPER IDOLATRY.

But before I quit this point it may not be amiss to observe yet one instance
more of Idolatry, (I am sure generally supposed at least to be so) and which I
cannot tell whether it may properly be reduced to any of the foregoing kinds,
and it is that of the Brazen-Serpent to which the Children of Israel burnt
Incense in Hezekiah's time, as we may see 2 Kings 18. 4. This pious King
observing their superstition caused it to be broke into pieces, and we find
this recorded among the Rest of his Enterprises, for Rooting Idolatry out of
his Country. He Removed the High places and brake the Images, and cut down the
Groves, and brake in pieces the Brazen-Serpent, that Moses had made: for unto
those days the Children of Israel did burn Incense to it, and he called it
Nehushtan.

I do not believe that even this Author himself will have the confidence to say
that this was an Image of either the Sun, Moon or Stars, or of any other
Visible and Corporeal Deity, or that the people Worshipped it as supposing it to
be the Supreme God, so as to exclude all sense and apprehension of a spiritual
and Invisible Godhead, and yet the learned men on both sides confess, that here
was Idolatry committed, though it may be the people were far from thinking that
they did so, and then it will remain that to give any appropriate Acts of
divine Worship to any Creature, whatever sense men have of the thing to which
they give them, or their Intension be in so doing, is nevertheless esteemed by
God to be Idolatry.

CHAP. V.
The objections against the Notion of Idolatry laid down in the foregoing
Chapter considered, and refuted.

SInce I first began the examination of this Book, I have been under some
temptations to doubt whether the Author of it really designed to serve the
interest of those of the Church of Rome in the writing of it, or by a seeming
defense of their Idolatry, intended only to show how little he could say in
their behalf, and to give us an occasion by Answering his Arguments to convince
the World upon what just Grounds we advance that Charge against them.

It does indeed a little startle me when I consider how base a thing it is, and
unbecoming the Character of a Christian, to put on only an appearance of Zeal
in behalf of a Party, to whom it must be confessed he has been highly Obliged,
and whom therefore if he could not serve, yet at least he ought not to have
betrayed. But then it seems to be something worse, I do not now say for a
Christian, but for a Bishop that has not yet quitted either the Revenues or the
Communion of the Church of England, nor retracted the subscription he once made
of this very charge of Idolatry against those for whom he would now be thought
to plead; to revile that Church which nourishes him, and whose Opinions we must
suppose him to hold, till we see him as formally renounce them, as ever he once
subscribed to them. And if on the one hand he seems to show a great deal of
bitterness against us in his Expressions, yet on the other, it must be
confessed his Arguments are so extremely civil as not to carry so much as the
appearance of Reason in them. And few of the Romanists have ever undertaken
this cause, that have not said a great deal more in their own defense, than
this Amphibious Advocate has offered for them.

But whether this Author designed to expose them or us or himself only, as I
am not much concerned to know, so neither will I undertake to determine. This
is plain, that had he meant to ridicule the Church of Rome never so much, he
could not have taken a more effectual way of doing it. And whether our Nobility
do, or can, or ought to understand Page 9.
Transubstantiation or no, yet I am sure men of much meaner capacities than
those Honorable Personages for the most part are, will be able to discern the
truth of this remark. And that he must indeed have thought them not only
incapable of judging Ibid.
of Abstruse propositions, but even destitute of Common sense and reason, if he
hoped to impose such discourse as this upon them for Arguing.

Now to make this appear, I shall need only desire the Reader to observe with
me these two things:

I. That the position he undertakes to defend is, that the notion of Idolatry
in holy Scripture is neither MORE nor LESS than this. The worship of the
Heavenly bodies, the Sun, the Moon, and the Stars, Page 74.
or any other visible and Corporeal Deity, as the Supreme God, so as to exclude
all sense and apprehension of a spiritual and invisible Godhead.

II. That to prove this, it is not sufficient to show, that this is Idolatry,
or that the Jews did sometimes fall into it: But it must be shown that they
never committed any other Idolatry; and particularly that this was the Idolatry
of the Golden-Calf, and of the Calves of Dan, and Bethel. For though the
worship of the Heavenly Bodies, (as the Author represents it) were one sort of
Idolatry, yet if the Scripture has charged the Jews with this Guilt for any
other worship, wherein they did not adore the Sun, Moon and Stars, or any other
visible and Corporeal Deity as the Supreme God, it will then follow that this,
which is alleged, cannot be the ONLY Notion of Page 80, 81.
Idolatry, and it must be false to assert, that Idolatry according to the word
of God is neither MORE Page 74.
nor LESS than this.

Now from these two remarks only, it will presently appear what slender
pretenses some men will take up with to run out into the most excessive
clamours against those whom they oppose. For, 1st. As to what he so largely
insists upon, as if there were something very important at the bottom of it,
viz. That the Jews were a people prone to Idolatry, Page 83.
and that the design of God throughout the whole Law, was to preserve them from
it, though it be a great truth, yet it is certainly in this place a great
impertinence. Seeing neither do we deny this, nor can he make any use of it, in
establishing his true and only notion of Idolatry. For I hope he did not
intend to argue thus, The Jews were very prone to Idolatry, and God intended
his Law to restrain them from it; Therefore Idolatry is neither more nor less,
than the worship of the Heavenly bodies, the Sun, Moon and Stars, as the
Supreme Deity.

2dly. It will from hence appear, that all those passages of Holy Scripture,
where God charges the Jews with worshipping other Gods, with serving the Host
of Heaven, etc. conclude nothing, seeing it is confessed that they did fall
into this Idolatry too; but that does not hinder but that they may have fallen
into some other besides; and we are assured that so they did; nay, that they
were suffered by God to fall into this, as a punishment for having committed
the other, so St. Stephen expressly tells us, Acts 7. 41, 42. They made a Calf
in those days, and offered Sacrifice to the Idol, and rejoiced in the work of
their hands. THEN God gave them up to worship the Host of Heaven.

Nor is it any more to the purpose, 3dly, to prove Page 99.
that the Scripture says, that to worship the Sun and Moon is Idolatry; unless
he could find out some Text where it adds, that they who worshipped the Sun and
Moon, worshipped them as visible and Corporeal Deities with the Honor due to the
Supreme God; and so as to exclude all sense and apprehension of a spiritual and
invisible Godhead, and that this is the true and only Idolatry. But now this
which was the only point in question, he has prudently forgot, and whilst he
lives will never be able to prove it.

In short if there be any thing more than noise and show in what he has said,
it must be in his Account of the two points before considered. viz. The
Golden-Calf and the Calves of Dan and of Bethel: For as for the Brazen-Serpent
and the honor paid to that, he is as silent as if there had been no such thing
in his Bible.

For the former of these, the Golden-Calf, he expatiates very much, but sure
never were Words put together with less pertinence than here. The thing to be
proved is, that the Jews intended by this Calf Page 84, 85, etc.
to worship the Egyptian Apis or Serapis or Osyris, that is, the Sun as the
Supreme Deity.

But how does he go about to prove this. First, He learnedly shows that the
Apis whom the Egyptians worshipped was not the King of the Argives, nor Son to
Jupiter. And this I think may be foreign enough to what we are seeking, which
is the design of the Jews in setting up the Golden-Calf. Secondly, He assures
us it is much more propable that the Greeks borrowed the very word Apis from the
Egyptians. Page 87.
And thereupon he takes occasion to make a Learned reflection upon our
Translation of Jer. 46. 15. which it may be was one of the passages for which
he has been wont to censure our version with as little Modesty as
Understanding. For to say no more of it than this, if we have rendered this
Verse amiss we have erred not only with all the Learned Versions the Syriack,
the Chaldee Paraphrase, and even the Vulgar Latin it self, but with the
Original Hebrew too; and in all which there is this only Difference, that what
they call Valiant in one Number, we render Valiant Men in the other. And all
this is still as impertinent to the Point in hand, as any thing can well be
imagined to be.

And yet from this, Thirdly, He boldly infers, That the Calf must have been the
Symbol of some Ibid.
Egyptian Idol, and that the people thinking themselves betrayed or deserted by
Moses after forty days absence forced Aaron to restore to them the Symbols of
their old Gods to go before them, instead of this new God that seemed to have
deserted them. And this indeed is pertinent, but it has another terrible
defect, viz. that it wants proof. In short the only reason he has to offer for
what he says, is this; That all their other worship seems to have been forced
and constrained, but this is free and voluntary: And that there could be no
other Ground of that great joy they showed on this occasion, but that they were
restored to the Exercise of their former Religion. And to this I have many
things to reply.

First, That this is at best but a plausible presumption, and such as if
compared with the reasons I have alleged to the contrary, will not be thought
to deserve the name of an Argument. For,

Secondly, Whereas this Author (always positive Page 88.
if that might pass for proof) says, that there could be no other ground of
this joy than that they were restored to the worship of their old Gods; I would
fain know how he comes to be assured of this? I am confident were it fit to
establish a Principle of this moment upon the sandy Foundation of our own
Conjectures, one might be able to find out other reasons for it. For why might
they not have had just cause of rejoicing to behold a Symbol of their own God
set up amongst them, as well as if it had been a figure of an Egyptian Idol?
what if despairing of Moses's return to them, as they designed this Symbol to
supply his place, to direct them in their journey, and to be an Oracle at which
they might continually enquire God's pleasure, so they testified some
transports of joy upon the erecting of it? Nay but,

Thirdly, What if we should say that we cannot discern any such extraordinary
joy, more than what the Solemnity of a Feast Dedicated to the JEHOV AH for the
setting up of a visible Symbol of his presence amongst them might very well
warrant? The case in short was this; Moses delayed to come down from the Mount,
the people were impatient to continue on their Journey toward the Promised
Land; but how to learn God's pleasure they knew not, and for this purpose they
cried unto Aaron, that he would make them a God to go before them; such as very
probably they had seen in Egypt, and which might serve instead of an Oracle
unto them. This Aaron makes, and for the Dedication of it appoints a Feast unto
the Lord, and offers such Sacrifices as God indeed required, but which this
Author himself confesses were an Abomination to the Egyptians: And upon the
occasion of this Feast it was that it is said, They rejoiced in the works of
their hands. Acts 7. 41. And again, The people sat down to eat and drink and
rose up to play, 1 Cor. 10. 7. And what this joy was we find particularly
expressed, Exodus 32. 19. They were singing, and dancing before the Calf. Now
all this was very natural on such an occasion; and what ever sin they committed
in it, yet I cannot see any necessity there is to conclude that there could be
no other ground for such a joy than their returning to the Idols of Egypt. And
the Arguments I have before given clearly show that whatever it^ was, it could
not be that, seeing that the whole Solemnity was consecrated to the JEHOV AH,
and performed in a manner utterly inconsistent with the Egyptian Idolatry.

As for the Calves of Dan and Bethel, our Author has (if possible) yet less to
say against their being the Symbols of the God of Israel, than he had in the
former Case. He produces only the Learned Visorius Page 93.
to prove that Monceius was mistaken in imagining that Jeroboam set up these
Calves in imitation of Solomon's Cherubim. But now this is not our question,
whether the Calves were made in imitation of the Cherubim, but whether the God
of Israel, or the Gods of Egypt were worshipped by the Ten Tribes at Dan and
Bethel? And yet without saying one pertinent word, he concludes, with as good
Assurance as if he had made a demonstration of it; So that it is plain that
these Calves were set up by him as Idols, or Symbols of a new or separate
Religion from the Tribe of Judah.

One thing indeed there is that may seem to deserve an Answer, and that is, why
the people for three whole years did not comply with him, if he kept up the old
Religion that had been established under David and Solomon? But now this is a
gross Mistake in a person that would be thought so Learned in the Scriptures.
The people did comply very readily with Jeroboam, and were far from refusing
for any such time as is pretended. And that passage to which this Author must,
I suppose, refer 2 Chronicles. 11. 17. is spoken not of the Israelites, but of the
Kingdom of Judah; namely, that for three years they walked in the way of David
and Solomon.

And now let any reasonable man consider what a pitiful Vindication is this,
to support so much Clamor and confidence? And how must all men of sense, even
in the Roman Communion despise such trifling after what they have seen their
own Dr. Godden perform upon this very subject? The truth is we ought to give
that Learned Man his due. He has said what was to be said to excuse his Church
from Idolatry; and his performance shows that he wanted nothing but a better
Cause to have acquitted himself to every one's satisfaction. But he had a hard
Mistress to serve, and he was not unsensible of it. But for this new Advocate
his Arguments are as much short of the Doctor's, as his assurance is greater.
There the D. of Paul's found something worthy his consideration, but here is
nothing but a great noise, and a great deal of Anger and Scorn, without any
just occasion, though in such a Case the Cause ought to be very plain. In
short, I cannot imagine any other effect this Discourse can possibly have than
to raise the Credit of Dr. Godden's; and after whom it is indeed a bold
undertaking for another to engage: for could this Point have been defended, he
was the Person that of any other seems to have been the most likely to have
done it. But he too has failed, and because his performance was good,
considering the matter of it, the worth of the man argues the badness of the
Cause, and the impossibility of defending it.

CHAP. VI.
That the Account which has been given of the Notion of Idolatry under the Law,
is equally applicable to the Case of the Christians now. The Objection from the
Cherubims answered: and the whole concluded.

I Am now come to the last point to be considered, and it is indeed so
necessarily consequent upon the foregoing, that if what I have before said
concerning the Notion of Idolatry under the Old Testament be allowed, this
cannot be denied: viz. That as the Jews retaining both the Apprehension and
worship of the truly Supreme God, were nevertheless guilty of Idolatry, for
worshipping him after a Gentile manner, so may Christians be now, and therefore
that the Church of Rome may justly be charged by us as Idolatrous, though we do
not pretend in any wise to say either that she worships the Sun, Moon, and
Stars, or any other visible and Corporeal Deity as the Supreme God, or that she
has lost all Apprehension of a Spiritual and invisible Godhead.

I shall not much enlarge my self upon the proof of a Consequence, both in it
self very plain, and which this Author is so far from denying, that his whole
Book is built upon the Supposal that he makes of the truth of it; It is indeed
the only thing wherein he seems to have any reason, nor can any thing be more
just than for the understanding what Idolatry is to search the Holy Scriptures,
and see what is there declared to be so.

As for the New Testament, we find the Apostles earnest indeed in their
Cautions against Idolatry, but we do not see that they any where defined the
Nature of it; They spoke as to men who understood these things, and were
acquainted with the Notion of Idolatry, and needed only to be warned against
falling into it. They give not the least intimation that it was not the same
then, it had ever been esteemed before, or that Christians were to think any
otherwise of it, than the Jews had been wont to do under their Law. All we can
conclude from their Exhortations to the Christians to avoid it is, that
Christians were capable of falling into it, and by consequence that Men who
have not lost all Sense and Apprehensions of a Supreme, Spiritual and Invisible
Godhead may for all that become Idolaters.

So that to know what the Scripture Notion of Idolatry is, we must with this
Author search into the History of the Old Testament, and from thence I have
shown two Cases wherein Men may without excluding either the Sense or Worship
of the true God, yet justly be charged with this Crime. I. By worshipping the
true God, by any Corporeal Image or representation. II. By giving divine
Worship to any other besides God, though they do not only retain the Notion,
but even the Adoration too of the true God together with it.

It were an easy matter to enlarge upon both these points here in the
Application of them, but my design now is not to accuse any particular Church
of this Guilt, but only to show in General what Idolatry it self is, and that
the Church of Rome though it both knows and worships the true God yet may do it
in such a manner, and give such worship to other beings, as justly to deserve
the censure which has been brought against her, for any thing this Author has
said to clear her of it.

Indeed as to the former of these ways whereby I pretend a Man may be guilty of
Idolatry, viz. By worshipping God by any Corporeal Image or Representation, he
has offered somewhat in prejudice of it. For did not God himself command two
Cherubims to be page 125. 127.
made, and used in his worship? and were not these Sacred Images set up in the
place of worship, and does not this show that God was so far from forbidding
the use of Images in his Service, that he would not be worshipped without them?

But, to this I answer that God did indeed command two Cherubims to be made and
placed at the two ends of the Mercy Seat; But that they were put there for any
use to be made of them in his Service, or for any other purpose than to
over-shadow the Mercy Seat, from whence God had promised to deliver his Oracles
unto them, this we utterly deny.

Hence we find that when God had directed Moses how to make this Throne of his
glory, Exodus 25. 22. he commanded him, To put the Mercy Seat above upon the Ark
of the Testimony, and there (says he) I will meet thee, and I will commune with
thee from above the Mercy Seat from between the two Cherubims which are upon
the Ark, and in the VIIth. of Numbers ver. 89. It is said, That when Moses went
into the Tabernacle of the Congregation to speak with God, he heard the Voice
of one speaking to him, from off the Mercy Seat, from between the two
Cherubims. Now here we may plainly see what the Object of Divine Worship was,
not the Cherubim but the Invisible Majesty which spoke from between them, and
communed with Moses. The Mercy Seat it self was but the place where God had
promised to meet them; The Cherubim were the Ornament, and covering of that,
But neither the one nor the other of these were the Object of Divine Worship,
or Figures or Similitudes of that God who alone was adored there.

And this the Learned Men of the Church of Rome confess no less than we,
Aquinas having objected against Aquinas 12. Q. 102. Art. 4. ad 6.
the Second Commandment, That the Cherubim were put in the Tabernacle and in
the Temple: Answers that they were neither put there as representations of God,
nor for any Worship to be paid to them. And explaining the Ark and all that
belonged to it as a Mystery, he says, That the Holy of Holies represented
Heaven; The Ark was the Foot stool of the Divine Majesty; But that because God
was Incomprehensible to any Creature, propter hoc nulla Similitudo ejus
ponebatur, therefore was there no Similitude of him placed there the better to
denote his Invisibility. As for the Cherubim he says they represented the
multitude of Angels attending upon his Throne; and there was therefore more
than One, that all worship might be excluded from them, to whom it had been
commanded that they should worship only one GOD. So far was Aquinas from
thinking -- that these Images were any Representations of God, or that any
worship was to be paid to them, and the same has been confessed by others of no
less note of that Church, Vasquez Lorinus, Azorius and even by his own
Visorius, whom he has before alleged, but is not pleased to take notice of on
this occasion.

But here our Author supposes he has something to boast of. For if we may
believe him our own great Defender of this charge has given up the Cause as to
this matter, and confessed that it was lawful to worship TOWARD an Image, but
not to give worship page 130.
to one. This is I fear a wilful perverting of that Learned man's words. The
Question was about the Jews Adoration toward the Ark, and the holy of Holies.
His Answer is this; That they only directed their worship toward the place,
where God had promised to be signally present among them, which (says he)
signifies no more to the worship of Images, than lifting up our Eyes to Heaven
does when we pray, because God is more especially present there. What is there
in all this to allow it to be lawful to give worship TOWARD an Image, but not
to it? Nay he plainly denied that there were any Images for worship there, or
any worship directed toward them. But there was a Symbol of God's immediate
presence as on his Throne between the Cherubim, and this appointed by God
himself, and thither the people directed their worship, and I desire this
Author, if he can, to tell me what there was more in this, than there is in
directing our worship toward Heaven when we pray. And whether according to his
true and only Notion of Idolatry, he may not as well say that we worship Apis
or Baal or Maloch, i. e. The Sun, Moon, and Stars, in this, as that the Jews
worshipped the Cherubim by that?

Nor is there any more Sincerity in what he calls his Second reply, and in
which he represents him as allowing that the Cherubim might be Adored once a
year by the high Priest, but not exposed to the people to worship. For in that
very place he denies the Cherubim to have been any representations of God, But
says that his Throne was between them on the Mercy Seat; and adds in plain
words, That they were never intended for objects of worship. And yet this
Author insults and triumphs upon this, in a very glorious manner, as if the
Cause had been gained by it. Had that Learned Man said that the high Priest
adored the Cherubims once a year, then indeed there might have been some Color
forthose sweet Expressions of shameless shifts and pretenses. But this he
utterly denied; and he might as well have made him confess it to be lawful to
worship Images, though he disputed against it, and have brought him in allowing
that 'twas no Idolatry so to do, as to represent him confessing that the high
Priest adored the Cherubim once every year. But what defense can there be
against such Adversaries, as will make men confess what they reject, and affirm
what they deny; and yet when they have done, dare to appeal both to God and the
World for their Sincerity?

And now from what has been said, I will venture to conclude in behalf of our
Church, and of those Learned men of our Communion, who have been concerned in
this Controversy, that the Notion of Idolatry which both the one Teaches, and
the others have Defended, is after all this Author's Clamours against it
neither new nor unlearned, nor Fanatical, nor Anticatholick, nor Antichristian,
nor any of those ill things he pretends; but the truly Ancient, Learned, and
Catholic Notion of it. The Notion which God in his Holy Word has Established;
Which the Jews received; The Apostles taught, and the Christian Church till
these latter days, that men's interest prompted them to seek out to themselves
new Inventions, constantly maintained. It was by this Notion that St. Paul
censured the Worship of the Golden Calf as Idolatrous, and condemned the
Gentile World of the same crime, Romans 1. 21, 23. That though they knew God, yet
they did not Glorify him as God, but changed the glory of the incorruptible
God, into an Image made like unto Corruptible Man, and to Birds, and fourfooted
Beasts and creeping things.

This was the Notion that made our forerunners in the Faith, choose rather to
suffer Martyrdom than to give Religious worship to any Creature whatsoever. And
whatever this Author thinks of those Primitive Saints, I am confident he will
find but very few besides, that will believe they Sacrificed their Lives to
their Folly and Passion, and died only to defend a mistaken Notion of Idolatry.

It was this Notion upon which the Ancient Fathers condemned the Arians of
Idolatry; They did not believe Christ, to be either the Sun or Moon, or any
other visible or Corporeal Deity, or the Image, of the Supreme and invisible
Godhead. They believed him to be the most Divine and excellent Being after God,
only they denied that he was Coeternal and Coequal with the Father; and yet
those Holy, Orthodox Fathers censured them as Idolaters, because supposing him
to be a Creature they worshipped him as a God.

And upon the very same Notion it is that the Reformed Churches have ever
looked upon the worship of Images and Saints in the Church of Rome, as
deserving the very same censure; And I cannot but wonder that this Author
should charge the Invention of this Notion upon a person now living, which he
must needs have known both our Church and the Writers of it have constantly
asserted, before any of this Generation ever saw the light.

I should now add somewhat in Answer to those bitter reflections he has made
upon the same Reverend Person, whom he seems to have resolved at any rate to
run down: But though the Charge be severe, yet is it so inartificially laid, as
plainly shows there was no Achitophel in the Contrivance; And I will only say
that whosoever shall consider the little Credit he had in those days, to which this
Author refers, with them whom himself looks upon as the Contrivers and Managers
of that Plot which he would be thought to lay to his Charge, will soon discover
a great deal of ill will utterly ruined, for want of a little skill in the
management of it.

But we ought not to wonder, if he who in the beginning of his Discourse flew
out into such violence against all the Abettors of this Charge as a company of
Fanatic, Anti-monarchal Villains has in the Close thought fit to fix some
particular marks of his Displeasuere, upon the last and most Learned Assertor
of it. This was the least he could do to make amends for the misfortune of a
approving and Licensing that very Book which was written in Defense of this
Charge. And it is well for us all that there are some men in the World, who as
Ulpian tells us can do no injury, Sive pulsent sive concivium dicant.

How far this Author may be reckoned in the number of these I shall leave the
final result of his Judgment in this case to satisfy the world, viz. That
Idolatry made the Plot, and the Plot made Idolatry, and the same persons made
both. For whether this can be the result of any man's Judgment that is well in
his Head, I shall leave it to those who have no Distempers there to determine.

But he has delivered himself, as he will answer for his Integrity to God and
the World. To this Judgment I now leave him: And though I fear it be too late
to provide against the sentence of the Last, yet I heartily pray he may
consider what he has done, and how he will stand in Judgment before the other.

FINIS.
Books lately Printed for Will. Rogers.
THE Doctrines and Practices of the Church of Rome, truly Represented; in
Answer to a Book entitled, A Papist Misrepresented, and Represented, etc.
Quarto.

An Answer to a Discourse entitled, Papists protesting against Protestant
Popery; being a Vindication of Papists not Misrepresented by Protestants: And
containing a particular Examination of Monsieur de Meaux, late Bishop of
Condom, his Exposition of the Doctrine of the Church of Rome, in the Articles
of Invocation of Saints, Worship of Images occasioned by that Discourse. Quarto.

An Answer to the Amicable Accommodation of the Differences, between the
Representer and Answerer. Quarto.

A View of the whole Controversy, between the Representer and the Answerer;
with an Answer to the Representer's last Reply; in which are laid open some of
the Methods, by which Protestants are Misrepresented by Papists. Quarto.

The Doctrine of the Trinity and Transubstantiation, compared as to Scripture,
Reason and Tradition; in a new Dialogue between a Protestant and a Papist, the
first Part: wherein an Answer is given to the late Proofs of the Antiquity of
Transubstantiation, in the Books called, Consensus Veterum, and Nubes Testium,
etc. Quarto.

The Doctrine of the Trinity, and Transubstantiation, compared as to Scripture,
Reason and Tradition in a new Dialogue between a Protestant and a Papist, the
Second Part: Wherein the Doctrine of the Trinity is showed to be agreeable, to
Scripture and Reason, and Transubstantiation repugnant to both. Quarto.

An Answer to the Eighth Chapter of the Representer's Second Part, in the first
Dialogue, between him and his Lay-Friend.

Of the Authority of Councils, and the Rule of Faith. By a Person of Quality:
With an Answer to the Eight Theses, laid down for the Trial of the English
Reformation; in a Book that came lately from Oxford.

Sermons and Discourses, some of which never before Printed: The third Volume.
By the Reverend Dr. Tillotson, Dean of Canterbury. Octavo.

A Manual for a Christian Soldier, Written by Erasmus, and Translated into
English. Twelves.

A new and easy Method to learn to Sing by Book, whereby one (who has a good
Voice and Ear) may without other help, learn to Sing true by Notes. Designed
chiefly for, and applied to the promoting of Psalmody; and furnished with
Variety of Psalm-Tunes in Parts, with Directions for that kind of Singing.

A Persuasive to frequent Communion in the Sacrament of the Lord's Supper. By
John Tillotson, Dean of Canterbury, in Octavo, Price Three Pence.

A Discourse against Transubstantiation. In Octavo. Price Three Pence.

The State of the Church of Rome when the Reformation began, as it appears by
the Advices given to Paul III. and Julius III. by Creatures of their Own. With
a Preface leading to the matter of the Book. Quarto.

A Letter to a Friend, Reflecting on some Passages in a Letter to the D. of P.
in Answer to the Arguing Part of his first Letter to Mr. G.

The Reflecter's Defense of his Letter to a Friend, against the Furious
Assaults of Mr. I. S. in his second Catholic Letter. In four Dialogues. Quarto.

A Sermon Preached at the Funeral of the Reverend Benj. Calamy, D. D. and late
Minister of St. Lawrance-Jury, Land. Jan. 7th. 1685/6. By W. Sherlock. D. D.
Master of the Temple.

A Vindication of some Protestant Principles of Church-Unity and
Catholick-Communion, from the Charge of Agreement with the Church of Rome. In
Answer to a late Pamphlet, Entitled, An Agreement between the Church of
England and the Church of Rome, evinced from the Concertation of some of her
Sons with their Brethren the Dissenters. By William Sherlock, D. D. Master of
the Temple.

A Preservative against Popery: being some Plain Directions to unlearned
Protestants, how to Dispute with Romish Priests. The first Part by William
Sherlock, D. D. Master of the Temple.

THE Present State OF THE CONTROVERSY BETWEEN THE Church of ENGLAND AND THE
Church of ROME; OR, An Account of the Books written on both sides. In a LETTER
to a Friend.

Imprimatur, Guil. Needham, May 7. 1686.

LONDON: Printed for Tho. Basset, James Adamson, and Tho. Newborough, 1687.

THE Present State OF THE CONTROVERSY BETWEEN THE Church of ENGLAND AND THE
Church of ROME, etc. In a LETTER to a Friend.
SIR,
IN pursuance of my promise made to you, to send you such an account as you
desire, of what has been lately published here, with reference to the Points in
Controversy between us and the Church of Rome; I now give you the trouble of
this Address.

It was you know the design of the Clergy of this City some years since, to
reduce the matters in debate with the Dissenting Party, to a certain number of
Cases, and in the plainest and most inoffensive manner that they could, to show
them how little cause they had to separate from our Communion upon any of those
pretenses, which were said to be the cause of Separation. I need not tell you
what their Performances were, for you have read their Tracts, and are therefore
able to judge, from your own knowledge, concerning them. As to the Success which
they have had, we that live here, have not only observed that our Churches have
been more charged since, but do also know, that several for whose sake those
Discourses were principally intended, have declared themselves abundantly
satisfied, both with the strength and temper that appeared in them.

When this first undertaking was finished, their next resolution was to run
through the principal Points of difference between the Papists and us after the
same manner, that those who had not the liesure or opportunity to consult
longer Books, might here in short be led to a true knowledge of the
Controversy, and stand the firmer in the truth, by being better acquainted
with the grounds of it. It was also hoped, that many who had hitherto been
detained in their Errors for want not so much of a Will to embrace the Truth,
as of Light to discern it by, might possibly take this opportunity of seeing
with their own eyes, and discover that way of Error in which their ignorance or
their prejudices had so long detained them.

But before they had finished this their second undertaking, the sudden and
unexpected Death of our late Royal Sovereign broke their measures, and from
thenceforth they thought fit to be of the Defensive side, and for some time
published no more Discourses of this kind, but waited to see whether the
Gentlemen of the Roman Communion would make any Attaques upon us, or be
contented that the Controversy should rest as it was.

But because you desire an Account of all that has been done of this nature, I
will let you know how far they advanced in their design, and give you a
Catalogue of their Tracts, tho not just in the order as they came out, yet in
that order which seems to have been designed, and is most natural for you to
peruse them. And in the first place, as a preparatory to all the rest, there is
a little Tract entitled, I. A Persuasive to an ingenuous Trial of Opinions in
Religion, etc.

and which they who know the unreasonable prejudices of those of the Roman
Communion, as to any free enquiry, cannot doubt to have been exceeding
necessary. To which I must add, II. The difference of the Case between the
separation of Protestants from the Church of Rome, and the separation of
Dissenters from the Church of England.

For both these Tracts, as you may easily discern, were designed to remove such
Mistakes and Prejudices as are common to Papists and to Dissenters, and were
therefore thought to be a proper transition from the first undertaking to the
second.

Then follow those Treatises that relate to the Questions about the Church, and
for which our Adversaries of late seem the most concerned. III. A Discourse of
the Unity of the Catholic Church maintained in the Church of England.

IV. A Discourse about the Charge of Novelty upon the Reformed Church of
England, made by the Papists, asking of us the Question, Where was our Religion
before Luther?

V. The Protestant Resolution of Faith, being an Answer to three Questions, 1.
How far we must depend on the Authority of the Church for the true sense of
Scripture? 2. Whether a Visible Succession from Christ to this day, makes a
Church which has this Visible Succession, an infallible Interpreter of
Scripture? 3. Whether the Church of England can make out such a Visible
Succession?


VI, VII. Two Discourses concerning the necessity of Reformation, with respect
to the Errors and Corruptions of the Church of Rome.



Another sort of general Questions necessary to have been premised to the
particular Disputes, do refer to the principle on which we are to proceed in
the management of them.

And to this purpose there were published the two following Tracts, VIII. A
Discourse about Tradition, showing what is meant by it, and what Tradition is
to be received, and what Tradition is to be rejected.

IX. A Discourse concerning a Guide in matters of Faith, with respect
especially to the Romish pretense of such a one as is infallible.



Thus far they proceeded upon general Points, and no farther, tho more were
designed to be debated, as one may see by the dividing and managing of the
Arguments which they finished, and as I my self have been told by some that
were best able to inform me.

But as these general Discourses were coming abroad into the World; the
particular Disputes were prepared, and those that follow were published. X. A
Discourse concerning the Object of Religious Worship; or, a Scripture Proof of
the unlawfulness of giving any Religious Worship to any other Being besides the
Supreme God.

XI. A Discourse concerning the Devotions of the Church of Rome, especially as
compared with those of the Church of England, in which it is shown, that
whatsoever the Romanists pretend, there is not so true Devotion among them, nor
such rational provision for it, nor encouragement to it, as in the Church
established by Law amongst us.

XII. A Discourse concerning the Invocation of Saints.

XIII. Of Prayer in an unknown Tongue.

XIV. Of Auricular Confession, as it is prescribed by the Council of Trent.

XV. A Discourse against Transubstantiation.

XVI. Of the Adoration of the Host.



These are the Tracts that were published in pursuance of that Design I
mentioned before, since which time, our Divines have kept themselves, as I told
you, upon the Defensive Part, their whole Work having been little else than to
answer such printed Books, or Papers scattered about in writing, as the
Romanists have from time to time sent abroad.

I need not tell you that at length we were surprised with a Book published by
some Romanist, which has made no little noise all over the Kingdom, and has
been the occasion of many more: But that which surprised us was this, that
there was not the least notice taken in it, of those Discourses now mentioned,
and not long before published in behalf of the Church of England against the
Church of Rome.

The discreet Persons of that Communion acknowledged they were above Contempt;
and it was the general persuasion of our Communion, that they would not admit
of any just and reasonable Answer; and for this very reason, some appearance of
an Answer was generally expected to save, if it might be, the reputation of the
Roman Cause, or at least of the Ability of our Adversaries to maintain it,
unless they should think fit to let the Controversy lie still, which if they
had done, I believe our Divines had thought themselves obliged by the example,
not to publish new Books upon it, but to content themselves with that diligence
in their Parochial Stations, that might be sufficient to countermine any secret
endeavors to draw People from the Communion of this Church: But it seems our
Adversaries thought fit to begin a Dispute, and that without taking the least
notice of what had been so lately done on our side: Which tho we wondered at, at
first, yet we have given over wondering at it now that we are something used to
their way of Controversy. For some of them (as the Representer knows) can
without blushing for the matter, drop the Defense of Arguments, and the
maintaining of Disputes begun by themselves; and yet they write on still, as if
the Cause went for them, and they had not made one false step in the management
of it.

But I must now give you a particular account how these Gentlemen began, and in
what manner they carried on that Assault, of which it is possible they may have
had some cause to repent them since.

The first that led the way, was one that calls himself R. L. with a Book full
of Cunning and Dissimulation, entitled A Papist Misrepresented and
Represented. In which he runs through most of the Points in Controversy
between us in a twofold Character; in one of which he pretends to show that
which Papists are commonly misunderstood to be; in the other, that which, as he
says, they really are.

The real design of this Method, you must know is this. Popery in its proper
colors is so unlike Catholic Christianity, that it is in vain ever to hope to
promote it, if it appear in its own shape. It is necessary therefore, that the
Religion, like the Prophet, should come to us in Sheeps clothing, and the
Heresy to be made look as Orthodox as is possible. Some things are denied,
others mollified, all disguised, and a double benefit thereby obtaind: Popery
is to be received as a very innocent, harmless thing; and the Protestants,
especially the Ministers and first Reformers represented to the World, as a
sort of People that have supported themselves by Calumnies and Lies, and made a
noise about Errors and Corruptions, which are no where to be found, but in
their own Brains or Books, but which the Church of Rome detests no less than We.

But this Trick was quickly discovered, and the design laid open by an
excellent hand, in a Treatise which he called

I. The Doctrines and Practices of the Church of Rome truly represented; in
answer to a Book entitled, A Papist Misrepresented and Represented, etc.

In which the Author passes through every Point of his Characters, and truly
states the Question between us, and gives a short, yet sufficient account of
our Reasons against their Tenets.

I shall not need enlarge my self to give you any account of this Controversy
which has been lately summed up, to satisfy the World, that this Author has
taken as little care to defend his Characters, as he showed Sincerity in the
first drawing of them. The Books themselves that have passed on both sides are
these,

Reflections upon the Answer to the Papist Misrepresented, etc.

II. A Papist not Misrepresented by Protestants, being a Reply to the
Reflections, etc.

Papists protesting against Protestant Popery; in Answer to a Discourse
entitled, A Papist not Misrepresented by Protestants.

III. An Answer to a Discourse entitled, Papists protesting against Protestant
Popery, containing a particular Examination of Monsieur de Meaux late Bishop of
Condom' s Exposition of the Doctrine of the Church of Rome, in the Articles of
the Invocation of Saints, and Worship of Images.

An Amicable Accommodation of the difference between the Representer and the
Answerer, in return to his last reply.

IV. An Answer to the Amicable Accommodation of the Difference between the
Representer and the Answerer.

A Reply to the Answer to the amicable Accommodation.

To which has lately been returned,

V. A View of the whole Controversy between the Representer and the Answerer,
with an Answer to the Representers last Reply.

This is in short the Sum of what has hitherto passed in this Dispute, the
Misrepresenter not having yet taken any notice of this new Antagonist, who it is
thought by some, has summed up this Controversy so effectually, as to put an
end to it. As for his second Part which he acted afterward under the Character
of the Catholic Representer, I shall have occasion to give you some farther
account of it when I come to those Pieces of our own Divines that have either
been the occasion of, or the Answers to his Sheets and half Sheets.

The next that appeared upon the Stage, was the famous Bishop of Condom, the
great Abettor, if not Founder of this new Sect of Expositors of their Religion,
and the occasion of his appearance this. Our Misrepresenter being answered the
first time, as has been said by the Learned Author of the Doctrines and
Practices of the Church of Rome truly represented. The new Method of Expounding
and Representing, i. e. Dissembling the good Old Doctrine of the Church began
to sink; and the People who were principally designed to be seduced by it,
generally discovered the Snare that had been laid for them. It was now too late
to recede into the old Popery again. The Misrepresenter had not only forsaken,
but in good measure Anathematized that, and professed that they abhorred it no
less than we; and therefore to own it now, was in effect to confess that we had
reason to reform those Errors which themselves were once ashamed to abet: So
that what remained, was to put a good face upon the matter, and see if the
Original Pattern, the pompous Exposition of this Bishop, with the long Relation
of an Advertisement, and the glorious Trains of Briefs and Approbations before
and behind, might not possibly support the undertaking, and keep up the credit
of their new Popery, which must otherwise necessarily fall.

Such was the occasion, or rather the necessity of publishing this Bishpps
Book, which you have seen under the Title of,

The Exposition of the Doctrine of the Catholic Church in matters of
Controversy.

To which there have been two Answers made, of one of which there has been no
notice taken by the other Party: It Is called

I. An Answer to the Bishop of Condom's Exposition, etc. with Refletions on his
Pastoral Letter.

The only Excuse I can think of for the other Parties not replying to this
Answer, was because another came out before it, which is yet but a lame
pretense, since the Book is not only a direct and full Answer to all that was
offered by the Bishop of Condom, either in the way of Exposition or Argument,
but has also a considerable variety of useful Reflections, which perhaps made
it more advisable to let it alone, than to go about to consult it. The other is,

II. An Exposition of the Doctrine of the Church of England, in the several
Articles proposed by the Bishop of Condom, in his Exposition of the Doctrine of
the Catholic Faith

This Answer was so exquisite in all its parts, that it could not fail of
gaining a general esteem; but the suddenness in which it was dispatched, raised
the admiration of all. And that which made it yet more taken notice of, was the
preface prefixed to it, in which the worthy Author (who had the advantage of
informing himself of these matters, by living some time in France) gives a
large account of this Bishops Exposition, and of a suppressed Edition, which it
seems had carried the Trick a little too far, and therefore was not permitted
to see the Light, together with some other matters of Fact that very much laid
open the Design.

But to those particulars wherewith you are already well acquainted, I beg
leave to add another piece of History which I have learned concerning this
matter.

You must understand then that the project of Converting the
French-Protestants, which has been more or less carried on ever since Henry the
Fourth's time, was more especially agitated at the conclusion of the Pyrenean
Treaty almost 30 years since: The Spaniards being apprehensive of the French
Power, and willing to divert it by an undertaking, which they thought might
find them work at home, and not leave them at leisure to disturb their
Neighbors. It was resolved there, at the same time that the Civil Power began
to oppress them, the Church should offer some Terms of a Reunion to them, and
all possible endeavors be used to incline them to accept it: To this end Money
was secretly given to several of the Ministers, to favor this Project; but the
Design being discovered by a Minister of Bas-Languedoc, the Synod of Nismes,
Ann. 1662. and that of Cevennes being assembled not long after, appeard so
vigorously against it, that they were forced to lay aside the Design for some
time. About Ten years after it broke out again; but the Ministers of Languedoc
and the Synod of the Isle of France opposing it, as those of Nismes and
Cevennes had done before, it came to nothnig.

Now this second attempt was dated precisely at the same time that the Bishop
of Condom's Exposition began to see the Light: And that which convinces me that
it was purposely contrived for the advancing this Design is this, that the
Marshal de Turene, who was this Bishops Convert, and the principal Defender of
this Exposition, was also at the same time the great Undertaker for this
Project. It Is well known how to this end he sent a Person through the several
Provinces of France, with private Instructions to those Ministers, which he
thought he could most influence to close with it: And in effect he did obtain
several of their Subscriptions, whom when the Protestant Synods would
afterward have censured for their so doing, the Kings Commissioners took their
parts, and would not suffer them to do it.

And here I ought not to forget one particular which may be worth your
knowledge, and that is this. Among others to whom the Marshal sent, one was the
famous Monsieur le Blanc, he was at that time Prisoner at Sedan, and the
moderation that he showed in stating the Controversies of Grace, Free Will,
Predestination, etc. gave them great hopes that he might easily be drawn in to
the favoring their Project of an Accommodation with the Church of Rome, by
meeting one another half way. The Agent brought him a Letter from Monsieur de
Turene to this purpose, but was mightily surprised, when instead of what he
expected, he found him stiff and inflexible, and absolutely resolved not to
relax any thing. Indeed the very attempt that was made upon him, so disturbed
him, that he could not be satisfied with his private resentment of it, but in
the year 1673. published a Disputation to them, that the reunion which they
had attempted with the Lutherans made nothing to one with the Papists, which he
there shows to be impossible.

This with what you have read in the Preface to the Tract, which has occasiond
this Digression, may seem to satisfy you, what the Quality of the Bishop of
Condom's Exposition is, and what intreague it was designed to serve. You have
the Politiques of the Clery of France, in which Book you may see the very
Propositions that were made for this Accommodation, and which are a pure
Original of New Popery, and so conformable to the French Expositor, and our
English Misrepresenter, that you cannot doubt but that they all designed to
carry on the same Design.

For the little value that is to be set upon the Approbations prefixed to it:
The Author of the Exposition of the Doctrine of the Church of England, has I
think said enough to satifie you: To which you may add, that in the late
Divisions between the Jansenists and their Opposers in France, the Books on
both sides have been very solemnly approved, and the Jansenists above any. And
in the present Case, either the Approbations of the Bishop of Condom's
Exposition signify nothing, or those heretofore prefixed to Cardinal
Bellarmines Works, and their other learned Controvertists are become
super-annuated; for all these cannot possibly stand together.

But I run too far from my business, and must return to our Expositor, who was
not long without an Answer, entitled

IV. A Vindication of the Bishop of Condom' s Exposition, with a Letter from
the said Bishop.

I will not tire you with giving my own sense of the Performances of any whose
Titles I send you, and whose Books I leave you to judge of when you read them. I
will only observe to you, that we are very much beholding to the Bishop, with
confessing the particulars which his Adversary had charged him with, and which
there are many that before did hardly believe. And for his Excuses which he
makes, the truth is, they are so little to the purpose, that he has gained but
little credit even among his Friends by them. And if this be as they say, the
first notice he ever took of any Adversary that appeared against him, he would
do very well to have a care of setting out Vindications of his Works, at which
he appears to be so horribly unlucky.

But for all this you may recur to the Reply that has been made by the same
Author who wrote the Exposition of our Doctrine in his second undertaking,
called

V. A Defense of the Exposition of the Doctrine of the Church of England,
against the Exceptions of the Bishop of Condom and his Vindicator.

In which besides an Answer to the Bishops Letter, and a particular review of
all the several Articles in debate, you will find in the Appendix some Pieces
that will gratify your Curiosity, relating to the Point of the Invocation of
Saints. And in the close of all, the Epistle of S. Chrysostom to Caesarius,
which had been indeed very basely suppressed by by them, but is now happily
recovered, to the everlasting reproach of those who have so often and
confidently urged the Authority of that Father for to support their new Heresy
of Transubstantiation, and which he here in as plain words speaks against, as
if Peter Martyr had not only first produced, but as some of them have said, had
written the Epistle for him.

And thus far this Controversy has proceeded, which at present stops here,
though the Reverend Father who writ the Vindication, had prepared us to expect
that it should not long do so, But we now begin to think, that both the
Vindicator and the Representer, are sensible that their design will not bear
being driven on any further.

But tho we have done with the business of the Exposition, yet we must not so
soon part with the Bishop. For since the Publication of that, these new
Poperymen, have favored the World with two other of his Pieces, the

1. A Pastoral Letter to the New-Converts of his Diocese. The 2. A Treatise of
Communion under one kind.
The latter of these which had drawn in French an admirable Answer heretofore,
from that exact Historian, Monsieur Larroque; which it is said, the Bishop
himself thought too strong to be answered with any advantage; has also not long
since produced us a Treatise very worthy your perusing in our own Language,
entitled

A Discourse of the Communion in one Kind, in Answer to a Treatise of the
Bishop of Meaux, of Communion, etc.

And in the two Discourses, I mean the Bishops and the Answer, you may expect
to find whatever Artifice and Insincerity can do on one side, or Truth and
Learning reply on the other.

For what concerns his Pastoral Letter, I have seen several Answers to it in
French, and one particularly very accurately done, called Reponse a Monsr.
L'Eveque de Meaux sur sa lettre Pastorale; which if you think fit, I will send
you: I do not know that any one has particularly undertaken it here, any
farther than what was done by the Author of the second Answer to his
Exposition, who made some Reflections upon the Pastoral Letter too.

In this Letter, there is one notable passage; and the account of which,
because you may not perhaps meet with elsewhere, I will run the hazard of
another Digression to offer it you here. In the 3d page, there is set in
Capital Letters, this notable Declaration, Not one of you has suffered
Violence, either in his Person or Goods. And page 4. So far, says he, have you
been from suffering Torments, that you have not so much as heard them
mentioned; I hear other Bishops affirm the same: You are returned peaceably to
us, you know it.

I doubt not but this Passage a little surprised you, as it did all the World
that ever read it; being so contrary to all the Accounts that have come from
thence. Indeed His Majesty's Brief alone may serve for a Confutation to so
shameful an Assertion, and show us how little we can rely upon those Gentlemen,
when they talk to us of things that were done 12. or 14. years ago, that make
no scruple of dealing thus with us in a matter of Fact, in the sight of the
World, before whose Eyes these things are acted: Nay, to tell the very
Protestants themselves, that they had suffered no Violence, that they knew it,
when the contrary was as evident to them, as that their Host is not the Body of
a Man; and no doubt the Bishop might as easily be able to prove the one, as
with all his fine Words persuade the other.

But I will open to you the Mystery of this. You must know then, That, as far
as I can learn, the Dragoons were not lodged in the Bishopric of Meaux; but
yet they came up to the very Gates of the City. Being thus in sight of their
Danger, and expecting every minute when it would fall upon them, the Bishop
thought that certainly now, if ever, they would be disposed to compliance.

With this advantage he invites them to a Conference, appears more moderate
than even his own Exposition; and desires very little more of them than what
any one might venture to subscribe. Such advances backed with so good an
Authority as the Dragoons at the Gates, could not but prevail upon them; they
subscribed as he desired, and so the Dragoons were dismissed without doing them
any farther mischief.

In this state, they continued for about three months, when the Bishop began to
Visit his Diocese, and especially, those parts in which there were the most
Protestants. His carriage upon this review was very different from what it had
been before. He was now no longer the free, relaxing, good natured Bishop of
Meaux, that held the Conference with them, but rigid as any little Emissary. He
threatened those, who refused to go to Mass, and assist at the other Offices of
the Church; and tho several told him that this was not what he had promised
them, yet he took but little notice of it. Mons. de Soguier, Lord of Charmoi,
and Cousin to the late Chancellor Soguier, and several others more obstinate
than the rest, both had the Dragoons quartered upon them in his Diocese, and
are at this day Prisoners upon this Account. This I have read in some late
French Pieces, which have taken notice of it; but the main of what I send you,
is an extract of a Letter, which was written to a Friend of mine out of France;
and who being himself not long since there, confirmed to me several of those
Particulars, as to this Bishops Diocese.

I presume you have heard how this Bishop, who in his Pastoral Letter dated
March 24. denies, as you see, that there has been any thing of violence used to
the Protestants in France, did in another Letter to a Person of Quality that
had escaped thence, and whom he desired to draw back if possible to his
Country, and his Church, both own and justify the Persecution. This Letter was
dated but Apr. 4. after the other. This Honorable person had such indignation
against him for his double dealing, that he has permitted the Bishops Letter to
him, to be printed; and which agrees as well with his Pastoral Letter, as his
Exposition does with Cardinal Bellarmine's Controversies; the Old Popery from
whence we reformed, with the New by which they would now seduce us.

A third subject there has been for a more important Controversy than either
of the foregoing, occasioned by the Papers left by His Majesty concerning the
Authority of the Catholic Church; and the Method of which lies thus:

The two Papers written by the late King Charles the Second.

1. The Answer entitled, An Answer to some Papers lately printed concerning
the Authority of the Catholic Church in matters of Faith, and the Reformation
of the Church of England.

To these there came out almost at the same time two Replies.

A Defense of the Papers written by the late King of Blessed Memory.

In which there is little remarkable besides the unhandsome levity of the
style, and the ungrateful drolls in a matter of so much seriousness.

A Reply to the Answer made upon the Three Royal Papers.

This is much more to be commended both for its strength and decency; and they
would perhaps much more have served the interest of their Cause, and shown
their respect to His late Majesty, had they suffered no other to appear.

But to both of them the same worthy Author who wrote the former Reply, has
very lately published a most Learned and Excellent Answer, and which I would
very much recommend to your careful consideration, Entitled,

2 A Vindication of the Answer to some late Papers concerning the Unity and
Authority of the Catholic Church, and the Reformation of the Church of England.

A Discourse so Learnedly and clearly written, that we ought to thank our
Adversaries for their importunity that has produced us so excellent a Treatise
in a Point of such importance.

I think I have now set down all the Disputes that have proceeded to any length
this last year: For the rest, they are either such as you may call Occasional
Treatises only, or such as are not advanced into any set and regular debates.

I. Of the former kind I understand these following:

First, concerning St. Peter's Supremacy, a Discourse Entitled,

A Sermon preached upon Saint Peter' s Day, printed at the desire of some that
heard it, with some Enlargements.

The Occasion of which was this: Dr. Godden had the last year published a
Sermon on this Subject which he preached in the Q. Dowagers Chapel; whereupon
the Reverend Author of this Discourse having likewise preached on the same day,
and upon the same Text, was prevailed with to print his too.

Another Subject that has Occasionally produced us two or three very good
Treatises, is, The Worship of Saints: Our late Misrepresenter and the Bishop of
Meaux's Exposition having been pleased very much to palliate the Doctrine and
Practice of the Church of Rome as to this matter; and pretending that what they
now do is no more than what was done even in the Fourth Age of the Church; it
was necessary some particular discovery should be made of this Artifice, and it
has accordingly been done very effectually in the following Tracts.

2 Speculum B. Virginis; A Discourse of the due Praise and Honor of the Virg.
Mary.

In which is clearly set forth what we allow, and what the bold extravagancy of
the Church of Rome has carried them to do in the Worship of the Blessed Virgin.

3 A Discourse of the Worship of the Blessed Virgin and the Saints, with an
account of the beginning and rise of it among Christians, in Answer to Monsieur
de Meaux' s Appeal to the Fourth Age in his Exposition and Pastoral Letter.

4 Wholesome Advices from the Blessed Virgin to Her indiscreet Worshippers.

This last is but a Translation: It was written originally by a Papist, one Mr.
Widenfelt, a Person of good Esteem and Reputation in his Country; who being
Scandalized at the extravagant Practices of his Church in this matter, wrote
this little Treatise to awaken their Consideration, and if possible, reduce the
People from their usual extravagance, to the Temper and Moderation of the
present Advocates for their Cause, as to this matter. But alas! He found them
too fond of their Old Popery, to leave it so easily: Instead of doing any good
upon them, his Book was censured in a very extraordinary manner, and the Honor
of the Blessed Virgin vindicated against these new Heretics, by her faithful
Champion Father Crasset the Jesuit: A short Specimen of whose Book you may see
at the end of the Defense of the Exposition of the Doctrine of the Church of
England; or if you had rather have it from their own Pens, as indeed none can
better expose their Extravagancies of this kind, than they have done
themselves, you may then consult a late Popish Book called,

Contemplations on the life and glory of Holy Mary the Mother of Jesus; With a
daily Office agreeing to each Mystery thereof. By J. C. D. D. To which he has
since added, An Apology for his Contemplations, etc.

But of all this, you will find a particular account in an excellent Preface
prefixed to these Advices by the Translator of it; who professes himself to be a
Layman of our Church, and has the character of a very worthy, as he has
sufficiently shown himself to be a very ingenious Gentleman.

It may be proper here to remark, that this Preface has been attacked by the
Catholic Representer; or the Misrepresenter transformed: in his 4th Chapter of
his Second part; and to which he has returned a smart Reply, called,

5. A Letter to the Misrepresenter of Papists.

Another occasional Treatise came forth not long since, entitled,

6. A Discourse concerning a Judge of Controversies in matters of Religion; With
an Address to wavering Protestants, showing what little Reason they have to
think of any change of their Religion.

It was written in Answer to some Papers that had been sent to the Learned
Author, by a Person of Quality, asserting the necessity of such a Judge. If I
should tell you from whose Pen this Treatise came, you would need no other
inducement carefully to read it. And to encourage you to it, I will only say
thus much, that it has been generally received with great Applause here, and
does certainly as well deserve it, as any thing that has hitherto been
published among us.

Here has been published likewise a short Tract concerning the nature of the
Catholic Church, and the Authority of it.

It is not levelled against any particular Author; but designed to answer the
little captious Arguments now much in vogue; and therefore, necessary to have
been thus prevented: The chief points handled in it, are these three. 1. What
is the Nature of the Catholic Church. 2. That the Church of Rome is not the
Catholic Church. 3. That the Holy Scriptures, and not the Church, are the Rule
of Faith. The Title of this Treatise, is this,

7. A plain and Familiar Discourse by way of Dialogue, betwixt a Minister and
his Parishioner concerning the Catholic Church.

To these I may add a Treatise, concerning the defection of the Church of Rome
from what it once was. It is an Answer to a Popish Paper, which the Author has
Printed at the beginning of his Book, given about it seems by those of that
party, and sent by way of Letter to a Gentleman: It is called,

8. An Answer to a late Paper given about by some of the Church of Rome.

Another Subject that has occasionally been handled, is, concerning Schism and
Heresy: It is an Answer to some things in a Popish Pamphlet, called, Why are
you a Catholic? The Author treats of the Nature of these two, and enquires to
which Church it is that they really do belong: In short, Whether the Papists or
we, are Schismatics and Heretics? The Title is this,

9. A Vindication of the Church of England from the foul Aspersions of Schism
and Heresy, unjustly cast upon Her by the Church of Rome. In two Parts.

The last Subject that has occasionally, but yet more copiously been handled,
and which upon that Account, I reserved to this place, is concerning the
Worship of Images, etc. It began by this means. A Reverend Divine of our
Church, took occasion from the late Pretenses of our Misrepresenting the
Opinions of the Papists, to set forth an excellent Catechism, called

10. A Catechism truly representing the Doctrines and Practices of the Church
of Rome, with an Answer unto them.

It is not to be wondered that such a Book as this should be thought proper to
be set forth; When the whole business of those of the other Communion, was to
palliate by any means the true Doctrines and Practices of their Church; it
certainly became us to represent them to the World, as indeed they are. This
has here been done from their own Authors, and with great Sincerity. But
notwithstanding this, the Misrepresenter that then was, in one of his Answers
to the first great Controversy I have mentioned, took him to task for it: In
the close of a new Edition of this Catechism, an answer was made to his
Exceptions. Not long after this, the Misrepresenter began a new undertaking, to
oblige the World with a Sheet a week, first; called the Second Part of the
Papist Represented and Misrepresented; and after, of half a Sheet, which he has
continued to the number of sixteen Chapters, under the new Character of the
Catholic Representer. In his 1st, 2d, 5th and 6th Sheets or Chapters, he falls
upon the Author of this Catechism, with reference to the Point of the Worship
of Images, and of the Cross; which has produced us three short, but yet
excellent Answers, called 11.
1. The Papists Represented and not Misrepresented, in Answer to the first
Sheet of the Second part. 2. The like to the Second. And 3. To the Fifth and
Sixth.


The business of all which is the same, viz. to show what the true Doctrine of
the Church of Rome is in the Points before mentioned, Of the Worship of Images,
and of the Cross.

For the other sort of Tracts that have been written,

II. More immediately in Answer to some of their set Discourses.

They have also been on different Subjects: Such as these.

(1.) Concerning Transubstantiation.
Upon which their late Attempts, either to set up that, or to ruin the other
Mysteries of the Gospel, but especially, that of the Trinity, have occasioned
several short, but accurate Discourses: I shall send you the Titles of them.

1. The Answer to the Popish Dialogue between a new Catholic Convert and a
Protestant, to prove the Mystery of the Trinity to be as absurd a Doctrine as
Transubstantiation: By way of short Notes upon the said Dialogue.

2. The Doctrine of the Trinity and Transubstantiation compared, as to
Scripture, Reason, and Tradition: In Answer to the same, and in two Parts.

To which I will add for the Affinity of the Subject, two other Treatises, viz.

3. A Paraphrase with Notes, and a Preface upon the 6th Chapter of St. John,
showing that there is neither good Reason, nor sufficient Authority to suppose
that the Eucharist is discoursed of in that Chapter, much less to infer the
Doctrine of Transubstantiation from it.

4. An Historical Treatise of Transubstantiation, written by an Author of the
Communion of the Church of Rome: Wherein is made appear, that according to the
Principles of that Church, this Doctrine cannot be an Article of Faith.

To these Discourses upon this subject, we cannot more fitly add any thing,
than what has lately been done on another relating to the Holy Eucharist, viz.

(2.) Concerning the Real Presence, and Adoration of the Host.
You ought to know very well what gave occasion to this Controversy; viz. the
two Discourses set out by Mr. W -- at Oxford on this Subject. As for the Answer
to them, it was sent you into the Country, and bears this Title:

5. A Discourse of the Holy Eucharist in the two great Points of the Real
Presence, and of the Adoration of the Host; in Answer to the two Discourses set
forth at Oxford on the same Subject.

It was I believe expected that this Controversy would have either exposed our
Church, had we owned the extravagant notion of the Real Presence Mr. W -- would
put upon us, and which is indeed Cousin German to Transubstantiation; or have
raised, it may be, a Civil War amongst us, if we did not. But I believe both
their expectations will fail them; for certainly whatever some particular
persons may have believed themselves, yet the Doctrine of the Church of England
is plainly as the Answerer has represented it; and as we expect it will be
farther proved in the other Reply which we are told is preparing at Oxford by
an Eminent Person there to the same Book.

There is prefixed to this extant, a very large Preface, which has properly
enough retorted Mr. W's -- Argument; and shown the World that if other Divines
(as he pretends) have believed a Substantial Presence of Christ's Natural Body
in the Holy Eucharist, it is more than many of the most Eminent of theirs have
done, who are here plainly discovered not to have believed Transubstantiation.

A third Subject that has given occasion to another Answer, is what they have
called a Protestants plea for a Socinian. The design was to prove, that in
interpreting Scripture by Reason, and not submitting to the Infallible
Interpretation of what they call the Church, we make an Apology for the
Socinians, and all other Heretics whatsoever. The falseness of this Pretense
has been at large shown in the Answer which an Eminent person of our Church has
lately put out to it, called,

6. The Difference between the Protestant and Socinian Methods, in Answer to a
Book, Entitled, A Protestants Plea for a Socinian.

In which besides a full account of this matter, you will find many other
Curiosities relating to the Method and Principles of the Socinians, which you
have never it may be elsewhere met with.

To these I may add the Answers that have been set forth by way of Notes on
some Papers called, Lucilla and Elizabeth, or the Donatist and Protestant
Schisms paralleled. And, A Request to Protestants to produce plain Scripture
directly authorizing certain Tenets, which he there subjoins. The Answers are
called,

7. A Protestant of the Church of England no Donatist.

8. An Answer to the Request to Protestants, etc.

Which last Answer has had a Reply called, Protestancy destitute of Scripture
proof, against which there is, I am told, a Defense of the Answer now in the
Press.

There are some other little things which I ought not to forget, because they
have done a great deal of good.

As, The plain man's Reply to the Catholic Missionaries.

And An Answer to the Eighth Chapter of the Representers second Part in the
first Dialogue between him and his Lay-friend.

Published by the Layman of whom I have spoken above. As for the Conference at
the D. of P. which you have heard of, one Mr: G. who maintained the Roman side,
tried to resolve the Infallibility of the Church into Oral Tradition, and
afterward boasted so unmeasurably of the Advantages he had made of the
Controversy, that he drew upon himself a just rebuke in a Printed Paper called,

A Letter to Mr. G. concerning the Conference at the D. of P.

Which having produced two Letters from the other side, there presently came
forth,

A second Letter to Mr. G. in Answer to Two Letters lately published concerning
the Conference at the D. of P.

There is also lately published a Discourse by an Ingenious and worthy
Gentleman, concerning the Authority of Councils, etc. to which is added a short
but an effectual Answer to the Eighth Theses, by which Mr. W. -- in his Part V.
of Church Government pretends to try the English Reformation. The Title is,

Of the Authority of Councils, and the Rule of Faith. By a Person of Quality.
With an Answer to the Eight Theses laid down for the Trial of the English
Reformation, in the Book that came last Week from Oxford.

After which there came forth a Discourse which is here exceedingly well
received, and the Design whereof is sufficiently explained by the Title, Viz.

An Apologetical Vindication of the Church of England, in Answer to those who
reproach her with the English Heresies and Schisms, or suspect her not to be a
Catholic Church upon their account.

I ought not to conceal the Answer to that Libel upon the Reformation which you
have seen, called Pax Vobis; though it is not a just Answer to the Book, but a
Preface rather to more that is to follow. The Title is

Some Dialogues between Mr. G. and others, with Reflections upon a Book called
Pax Vobis.

When the Answerer has finished his design, you may have what remains, as I am
told under the same Title.

I shall conclude your Trouble at present with telling you of a Set of
Discourses concerning the Notes of the Church, as they are laid down by
Bellarmine. Thus far the Design has proceeded already.

1. A Brief Discourse concerning the Notes of the Church, with some Reflections
on Cardinal Bellarmine' s Notes.

2. Bellarmine' s first Note of the Church, concerning the Name of Catholic
examined.

3. The 2d Note of the Church examined, viz. Antiquity.

4. The 3d Note of the Church examind, viz. Duration.

(...) perceive we may expect the rest in Order. I am Sir,

Yours, etc.

THE END.
POSTSCRIPT.
WHen the Author let this Paper go out of his hands, there were some Discourses
omitted, which he intended to add toward the close; but because it was
published before he was aware, there was no other way left to supply the
defects of the Letter, but by sending abroad this Postscript after it.

To those Discourses therefore that are mentioned in this Letter, these are to
be added. I. The plausible Arguments of a Romish Priest answered by an English
Protestant.

which is a Book that seems to be contrived on purpose to make the most
material Differences between both Churches, easy to be considered and
sufficiently comprehended by Persons of the plainest Education. To which I must
add, II. A Discourse between two Protestants, in answer to a Popish Catechism,
called, A short Catechism against all Sectaries.

in which Tract one shall find all that plainness which is fit to enlighten
ordinary Capacities, together with that solidity of Reasoning, which cannot but
gratify Persons of the best Education and Abilities.

To the same purpose there was another Book published not long since, called,
III. A plain Defense of the Protestant Religion, fitted to the meanest
capacity, being a full Confutation of the Net for the Fishers of Men.

Above a year since there were some Queries put to Protestants, which were
answered in a Book that has this Title. IV. Some Queries to Protestants
answered, and an Explication of the Roman Catholics Belief, in Four great
Points considered. 1. Concerning their Church. 2. Their Worship. 3.
Justification. 4. Civil Government.



Tho I omitted, how I know not, the Defense of the Dublin Letter, yet it ought
to have been remembered in the first place. It Is an Answer to the Third Chapter
of the Second Part of the Catholic Representer, and has this Title, V.
Transubstantiation no Doctrine of the Primitive Fathers.

There is another Tract which ought to have been mentioned among the Discourses
against Transubstantiation; in which, tho there is an attempt to explain the
real Presence by a singular Hypothesis, that neither serves the turn of the
Papists, nor is needed by Protestants; yet it is in many respects so very
rational and useful, that I am glad I did not forget to mention it here. The
Title is VI. A brief Discourse of the real presence of the Body and Blood of
Christ in the Eucharist, against the Bishop of Meaux and Monsieur Maimbourg.

And here I must not forget a Book that will not be forgotten in have, viz.
VII. The School of the Eucharist, with a Preface concerning the Testimony of
Miracles.

The Answer to Mr. Sclaters Reasons, and to the Nubes Testium has been
published in two Parts; the Reverend Author seeming to design to go through
with the latter. The Parts are called, VIII. The Antiquity of the Protestant
Religion, with an Answer to Mr. Sclaters Reasons, and the Collections made by
the Author of Nubes Testium. The First Part.

The Antiquity of the Protestant Religion concerning Images, with an Answer to
the Collections made by the Author of Nubes Testium. The Second Part.

In the mean time, they that would farther know what little regard is to be had
to that Collector, may look into the First Part of The Doctrine of the Trinity
and Transubstantiation compared: Of which Book I have given notice before.

There was published last Week another learned as well as smart Answer to Mr.
Sclater, whose Consensus Veterum, will now no longer be spoken of with
contempt, after it has proved the occasion of the Veteres Vindicati: A Book so
excellent in it self, that it needs not the help of comparison with the Book it
answers, to set it forth. And I heartily wish that unhappy man who has a
particular Right to the Instructions of those Papers which his own have
produced, may receive the greatest benefit by them. The Title is, IX. Veteres
Vindicati, in an Expostulatory Letter to Mr. Sclater of Putney, upon his
Consensus Veterum, etc. wherein the Absurdity of his Method, and the Weakness
of his Reasons are shown, his false Aspersions upon the Church of England are
wiped off, etc.



Upon this occasion I will take leave to say, that although many count it needless
to answer Authorities that are borrowed out of baffled Books, that have been
forty times urged, and as often replied to; yet we are obliged to those that
will undergo this Task, not only because we know what Advantages our
Adversaries desire to make, by saying, that such and such a Book that quotes
the Fathers is not answered: But because our Arguments and Answers from
Antiquity are not at a stand, tho theirs are. Ours, I do verily believe, need
no improvement, but that now and then they are capable of it, is what several
Books of the learned Men of our times are undeniable instances of.

By the Author of The plain Man's Reply to the Catholic Missionaries, there was
another little Tract published, which was not inserted in its place. The Title
is, X. The Country Parsons Admonition to his Parishioners, persuading them to
continue in the Protestant Religion.

To both these there has been lately published an Answer by the other side, to
which we expect a Reply.

The next that lies before me is, XI. The Judgment of private Discretion in
matters of Religion, defended in a Sermon at S. Paul's in Covent Garden, by Mr.
Kidder.

And another Tract there is written by a Lay-Gentleman, entitled, XII. A
modest enquiry whether S. Peter were ever at Rome, and Bishop of that Church;
wherein the Arguments of Cardinal Bellarmin and others for the Affirmative are
considered, and some Considerations taken notice of, that render the Negative
highly probable.



Since the Fifth Part concerning Church Government which Mr. W -- published, he
has sent us from Oxford another Book concerning the Spirit of Luther, and the
Celibacy of the Clergy: He seems to have a Set of Books which he intends to
publish one after another, for the Diversion of this Age, and to leave the
Defense of them to the next. For since his two Discourses concerning the Real
Presence, etc. he has thought fit to publish two other Books, without taking
any notice, or so much as offering to vindicate the First. Which Tergiversation
will not I believe save his new Books from being answered, since there is so
great a choice of Learned Men in that famous University, of which he is a
Member, that some or other without doubt will be at leisure to attend his
motions, and to do him right from time to time.

This Week was published the Examination of Bellarmin's Fourth of his Fifteen
Notes of the Church, viz. Amplitude; and because the Answer of the Examination
of the Second is just now come to my hand, I am not unwilling to do our
Adversaries that kindness to publish it here, if it be a kindness to them,
which will be better understood in a little time.

I have no more to add but that we may expect in a little time, to see two
Discourses concerning Purgatory and Prayers for the Dead; a Subject which has
not been thoroughly handled since the revival of these Controversies. It will be
no injury to the performance to raise an expectation of it, if it be done by
that hand, which I am told we are obliged to for it.

ERRATA.
Page 4. lin. 10. for charged, r. thronged. l. 19. for longer, r. larger. p.
10. l. 22. for he, r. is. p. 14. l. 19. for consult, r. confute. p. 17. l. 10.
for prisoner, r. professor. l. 24. for them, r. show. l. 30. for seem, r. serve.

FINIS.
A CONTINUATION OF THE Present State OF THE CONTROVERSY.

Imprimatur, Liber cui Titulus, [A Continuation of the Present State of the
Controversy between the Church of England, and the Church of Rome.]

Junii 7. 1688. H. Maurice RR. in Christo P. D. Wilhelmo Archiep. Cant. a Sacr.

A CONTINUATION OF THE Present State OF THE CONTROVERSY, BETWEEN THE CHURCH of
ENGLAND, AND THE CHURCH of ROME.

BEING A Full ACCOUNT of the BOOKS that have been of late Written on Both Sides.

The Second Edition.

LONDON: Printed for Ric. Chiswell, at the Rose and Crown in St. Paul's Church
yard. MDCLXXXVIII.

TO THE Very REVEREND and WORTHY THE AUTHORS OF THE DISCOURSES here Collected,
IN Defense of the Church of ENGLAND.
GENTLEMEN,
AFter so much Pains as you have taken, and so much Good as by the Blessing of
God on your Endeavors you have done to that Church of which I esteem it my
happiness that I am a Member, may it be permitted to a private and obscure hand
to return you this small Tribute, in acknowledgment of that Sense which not my
self alone, but I dare say every single person of our Communion has of what we
all owe to your Learning and your Integrity.

I present you here with a short view of your own Labors; or rather, I offer
to the World a small Collection of those Discourses you have written in Defense
of our Religion. And how unsuitable soever it may appear to usher a few Titles
of Books into the World under the protection of so many great Names, yet I am
confident the Consequence of this Undertaking cannot but be as Honorable to
you all, as I heartily wish it may, and as I am sure it ought to be: When it
shall be considered how vast a Number, and of what acurate and learned
Discourses is here comprised, and for almost all which we are in the compass of
about Three Years indebted to you.

It is indeed a matter of just wonder to all those who are acquainted with your
method of living here, how persons engaged not only in a laborious attendance
on their Parochial Cures, and a constant return of painful and acurate
Preaching; but almost utterly distracted with that multitude of other Business
which in these last Years has taken up the greatest part of your time, should
yet find leisure to discharge all these, and at the same time to adorn the
Press with so many Books as might alone have seemed more than enough to have
employed your whole Industry.

But blessed be God, who has raised you up against such a time as this, and
given us so great an Earnest of his Favor to us, that as we had never more
need of Able, and Honest, and Firm Guides, than at this day; so I may venture
to challenge any Age of the Church, to show such a Number of truly Learned, and
Pious, and constant Pastors, as the Church of England, and especially this
City, does now abound with.

May your Labors and your Examples always find such a success as they deserve,
and as they have of late met with amongst us. And since we cannot now have any
excuse for our Apostasy should we renounce our Holy Profession, after so much
as you have done to convince even the most ignorant Persons amongst us of the
Truth and Purity of it; may we ever firmly adhere both to you and it: That when
we shall appear before the Great Bishop and Pastor of our Souls, we may all of
us give up our Accounts with joy.

This, as it is my hearty Wish, so I am persuaded it is the sincere Resolution
of every one of those whom God has committed to your Care. And that in this
Firmness we may be all of us established more and more, shall be the continual
Prayer of him who in all thankful Duty will ever remain,

GENTLEMEN, Your most Humble and Obedient Servant.

TO THE READER.
AS for those who shall please to peruse this Treatise, I have but very little
to premise to them. They will here see an Exact Collection, as far as I was
able to make it, of the Controversy on both sides between our Divines, and
those of the Church of Rome. And in that, the Victory of Truth over Error.
Never certainly was any Cause more entirely baffled than the Popish is at this
time. Never was a Controversy more fully handled, and that in such a manner as
to instruct even the meanest Capacities, than This has been in these last
years. Insomuch that now there is scarce a person amongst us so ignorant, that
is not able to make a Stand against the rudest Attacques of our Adversaries.
Nay, our very Footmen esteem themselves, (and I think have satisfied the World
that they are not mistaken) an equal match for Jesuits, i. e. for those who
would at least be thought the most able Men of their Party, and dropped down from
Heaven on purpose to oppose the Growth of Protestant Heresy.

What others may judge of this, I cannot tell: But, for my part, I cannot but
from thence conclude, That certainly the Hand of God is with us for Good. And
that He who has given us this Opportunity to understand the Weaknesses and
Deceits of our Enemies; and endu'd us with so great and general a Resolution,
never upon any Account whatsoever, to depart from our most Holy Religion, will
also crown all our future Endeavors with such a Success, that the Generations
to come shall rise up and call us Blessed; When they shall see our Firmness and
our Labors in the Lord, and receive from our hands that pure and uncorrupted
Truth, which I am persuaded those excellent Treatises I here mention, shall
deliver down even to the very End of the World.

THE CONTENTS.
THE Occasion and Design of this Continuation. Page 1 The Whole Divided into
II. Generals. 2
FIRST PART.
Of the Cases against Popery, begun in the late King's Time. ib. The Catalogue
of them reduced to the following Heads. 1. Preliminary Discourses. 2, 3 2. Of
the Church. 4 3. Of the Rule of Faith. 5 4. Of Particular Points. ib.
An Account of the Disputes that have arisen, on the Occasion of the Discourse
against Transubstantiation. 8
SECOND PART.
Of the Discourses that have been published in Defense of the Church of
England, since the Time of His Present Majesty: With an Account of the Popish
Treatises that occasioned them. 9 These reduced to the several following Heads.
SECT. I.
Of the REPRESENTING Controversy. The Papist Represented and Misrepresented.
10 The Bishop of Condom's Exposition. 12 Good Advice to the Pulpits. 16 And the
Disputes occasioned by these Treatises.
SECT. II.
Of the pretended Agreement between the Church of England, and the Church of
Rome. 17
SECT. III.
Of the Disputes concerning the Holy EUCHARIST. 1. Real Presence. 19. 2.
Communion in One kind. 20 3. Transubstantiation. 22

SECT. IV.
Of the Disputes concerning the CHURCH. 25 1. Of the Notes of the Church. 26 2.
Of the Unity and Authority of the Church. 27 3. Of the Infallibility of the
Church. 29

SECT. V.
Of the Prerogatives of St. Peter, and the Popes as his Successors. 31
SECT. VI.
Of the Reformation of the Church of England, and the Imputations of Schism and
Heresy laid against us on the account of it. 34
SECT. VII.
Of the Disputes concerning the Rule of Faith: And in particular, 1. Of the
Holy Scripture. 38 2. Of Tradition. 39

SECT. VIII.
Of the Disputes concerning the Idolatry of the Church of Rome. 49 1. In
General. 50 2. In Particular. Worship of Images. 51 Invocation of Saints. 52

SECT. IX.
Of the Disputes concerning the Validity of Orders, In the Church of England.
54 In the Church of Rome. 55
That the Papists are upon their own Principles, uncertain whether they have
any true Priests in their Church. ib.
SECT. X.
Of other Particular Points in Dispute betwixt us. Popish Treatises. 56
Discourses of the Church of England. 57
A full Account of what passed on the occasion of the Conference between Dr.
Tenison, and Father Pulton the Jesuit. 60
SECT. XI.
In which the several Treatises before mentioned are reduced to their distinct
Arguments, for the direction of those who would fully satisfy themselves in
any Particular Point in Dispute betwixt Us, and those of the Church of Rome,
viz. 63 1. General Discourses. 65 2. Of Religious Worship. 3. Of Prayer in an
Unknown Tongue. -- 66 4. Of the Invocation of Saints. Particularly of the B.
Virgin. 5. Of Images and Relics. 67 6. Of Idolatry. 7. Of Merits,
Satisfactions, Purgatory and Indulgences. -- 68 8. Of the Sacraments. 9. Of
Confession and Penance. 10. Of Extreme Unction. -- 69 11. Of Orders. 12. Of the
Real Presence. 13. Of Transubstantiation. -- 70 14. Of the Sacrifice of the
Mass. 15. Of the Adoration of the Host. -- 71 16. Of Communion in Both Kinds.
17. Of the Rule etc. of Faith. 18. Of the Holy Scripture. -- 72 19. Of
Tradition. 20. Of the Church. -- 73 21. Of St. Peter and the Pope. 22. Of the
Reformation. -- 74 23. Of Schism and Heresy. 24. Of the Celibacy of the
Clergy. 75

SECT. XII.
In which the whole is closed, with an Account of the Present Undertaking, to
examine the Texts of Scripture alleged in favor of the Popish Errors. 75
A CONTINUATION OF THE PRESENT STATE OF THE Controversy.
IT is now some time since it has been very much desired, That a Full Account
might be given to the World, of the several Tracts that have these late years
been published on the Points in Controversy between the Church of England, and
the Church of Rome. The Present State of the Controversy, set forth about two
years since, being become very Imperfect; and serving rather to raise Men's
expectations of some further Account to be given of this matter, than to
satisfy their desires with what is there offered.

I will not pretend to have been so diligent an Observer of these Things, as
not to have let many Discourses slip, in such a number as have appeared on both
sides: And must, therefore, humbly entreat the Representer's favor to me, if
He find some defects in my present Undertaking; and that he will not impute
that to a spirit of Misrepresentation in me, which really proceeds only from my
Ignorance or Inadvertency. What Discourses have come to my Hands, I will
faithfully give an account of; and if He, or any other for Him, will put forth
an Appendix of what is wanting here, it will be much more to the satisfaction
of the World, than to run over once more, his Common Place against me, as a The
Cases against Popery.
New and Upstart sort of Misrepresenter, and fancy that the Eyes of all the
World are set upon him, to chastise me for my Unsincerity.

The present State of the Controversy gives an Account how the Divines of our
Church, at the time of the late King's death, were engaged in a Design of
publishing some Discourses on the several Points in Controversy between Us and
the Papists; correspondent to what they had done, not long before, with
reference to our Disputes with our Brethren the Dissenters. And how the
favorable Reception their former Attempt had met with from these, encouraged
them to hope their Labors would not be altogether unacceptable to those. But
the Catalogue of what they have done in pursuance of this design, is imperfect;
and it may not be amiss, before I proceed any farther, to give a more complete
one here.

A Full Account of the Cases that have been published on the Points disputed
between the Church of England, and the Church of Rome.

I. PRELIMINARY DISCOURSES.
1. A Preservative to an Ingenuous Trial of Opinions in Religion.

2. The difference of the Case between the Separation of Protestants from the
Church of Rome, and the Separation of Dissenters from the Church of England.

3. A Preservative against Popery: Being some plain Directions to unlearned
Protestants how to dispute with Romish Priests. In Two Parts. By the Reverend
Dr. Sherlock, Master of the Temple.

I place this Discourse here, because I do not see to what other Glass it could
more properly have been reduced, though it is but just now published, and
perhaps, was never designed by its learned Author, to add to the number of this
kind of Treatises: But that which is more pertinent for me here to observe, is,
That the former part of this Undertaking soon met with such an Answer as is now
commonly given to our Books, when any at all is given, viz. one single Sheet
from Father Sabran the Jesuit, and who is now well known by his late little
Encounters of this Nature. It was called,

4. An Answer to Dr. Sherlock' s Preservative against Popery, etc.

To this an exact and solid Answer was returned by a Protestant Footman, one W.
Giles; and who may justly be offered to the World as an Instance of what use
our late Discourses have, or might have been, for the Instruction even of the
meanest Persons in the matters in Controversy between Us, and the Church of
Rome. The knowledge which this ingenious and diligent Man obtained, being
entirely due to them; and yet how considerable it is, I shall leave it to any
one to judge, that will but have the Curiosity to examine his Performance. It
is called,

5. A Defense of Dr. Sherlock' s Preservative against Popery, in Reply to a
Jesuit' s Answer: By W. Giles, a Protestant Footman, living with Madam H. in
Mark-lane.

This Defense, and the Preface of the Publisher of it, did put the Jesuit quite
out of all Patience, and Decency; and made him forget himself so far, as once
more to provoke the Reverend Dr. Sherlock, by publishing an Answer to both
Parts of the Preservative against Popery, and to the Footman's Defense of the
first, under this Title:

6. Dr. Sherlock's Preservative considered, First Part, with its Defense, etc.
By Lewis Sabran of the Society of Jesus.

This Answer was writ in such a violence of Passion, and does charge the
Reverend Master of the Temple at such a rate with Ignorance, Calumny, and God
knows what, that he has at last condescended to chastise this ignorant Jesuit
himself; and the World will very speedily see, that never Man set Pen to Paper
with such a stock of Ignorance and Confidence together, as this Father Sabran.
After which, if he shall still continue to write in spite both of good
Learning, and of good Manners, it is to be hoped, that at least we shall be
excused by all those who have any share of either, if we do not give either our
selves or them the trouble of any farther Replies to him.

A Vindication of both Parts of the Preservative against Popery: In Answer to
the Cavils of Lewis Sabran, Jesuit. By William Sherlock, D. D. Master of the
Temple.

II. Of the CHURCH.
1. A Discourse of the Unity of the Catholic Church, maintained in the Church
of England.

2. A Discourse about the Charge of Novelty upon the Reformed Church of England
made by the Papists, asking of us the Question, Where was our Religion before
LUTHER?

3. The Protestant Resolution of Faith, being an Answer to three Questions:

1. How far we must depend on the Authority of the Church for the true Sense of
Scripture?

2. Whether a Visible Succession from Christ to this day, makes a Church which
has this Visible Succession, an Infallible Interpreter of Scripture?

3. Whether the Church of England can make out such a Visible Succession?

4. Two Discourses concerning the Necessity of Reformation, with respect to the
Errors and Corruptions of the Church of Rome.

There was a Third Part intended by the Reverend and Learned Author of these
two Discourses, which we have hopes that it will be published ere long under
the same Title.

III. Of the Rule of Faith.
1. A Discourse about Tradition; showing what is meant by it, and what
Tradition is to be received, and what is to be rejected.

2. A Discourse concerning a Guide in matters of Faith, with respect especially
to the Romish pretense of such a one as is Infallible.

IV. Of Particular Points.
1. A Discourse concerning the Object of Religious Worship; or a
Scripture Proof of the unlawfulness of giving any Religious Worship to any
other Being besides the Supreme God.

2. A Discourse concerning the Devotions of the Church of Rome, especially as
compared with those of the Church of England: In which it is shown, that
whatsoever the Romanists pretend, there is not so true Devotion among them, nor
such rational provision for it, nor Encouragement to it, as in the Church
Established by Law amongst us.

3. A Discourse concerning the Invocation of Saints.

4. Of Prayer in an Unknown Tongue.

5. Of Auricular Confession as it is prescribed by the Council of Trent.

6. A Discourse against. Transubstantiation.

7. Of the Adoration of the Host.

These are the several Discourses mentioned in the former Present State, page
5, 6, 7, 8.
Catalogue; to these I must add several others that have since been published.

8. Two Discourses of Purgatory, and Prayers for the Dead.

To which I may subjoyn a Discourse just now published, viz.

9. Purgatory proved by Miracles, etc.

10. A Discourse concerning the Sacrifice of the Mass.

11. Of Extreme Unction.

And here it may not be improper to observe, that the Author of this Accurate
Discourse, thought fit to premise to it an Address to the Vindicator of the
Bishop of Condom, upon the occasion of some things just then published by him
in his Reply to our Expositor, relating to this Argument; but especially
concerning Cardinal Cajetan's confessing that their only Text for this
pretended Sacrament, that of St. James, made nothing for it. To this the
Vindicator gave a half-sheet Reply, called,

A Letter from the Vindicator of the Bishop of Condom, to the Author of a late
Discourse concerning the Sacrament of Extreme Unction.

And this produced another Letter in Reply to it, Entitled,

A Second Letter from the Author of the Discourse concerning Extreme Unction,
to the Vindicator of the Bishop of Condom.

Which put an end to this Debate: Though the Vindicator made us hope for a
Reply to that Excellent Discourse; but I presume will not esteem himself
obliged to be as good as his word.

12. A Treatise in confutation-of the Latin Service practiced, and by the Order
of the Trent Council continued in the Church of Rome.

13. Of the Authority of Councils, and the Rule of Faith.

14. Of the Celibacy of the Clergy.

15. Of the incurable Skepticism of the Church of Rome.

16. A Discourse concerning the Merits of Good Works.

17. An Historical Discourse concerning the Necessity of the Ministers
Intentions in administering the Sacrament.

I shall perhaps be looked upon to have referred many Tracts to the number of
these Discourses against the Papists, that did not enter into the first design
that was laid for them. But I know not to what Head I could so properly refer
them, as to this; and if they help to make up the Collection of Particular
Points in Debate betwixt us, it matters not by what Occasion, or with what
Design they were first composed.

I do not know that any more of these Treatises have been particularly attacked
by those of the other Communion, except that one only against
Transubstantiation: which having, after some years being let alone, given at
last occasion to a formed Controversy, yet in agitation, I will, before I go
any farther, remark what has hitherto passed concerning it.

The first that appeared in Answer to it, was a Hot New-Convert, under the
Glorious Title of,

Reason and Authority; or the Motives of a late Protestant's Reconciliation to
the Catholic Church; together with Remarks upon some late Discourses against
Transubstantiation.

But the Performance was so mean, so disproportioned to the Strength and Merits
of the Discourse he had undertaken to attack; that it is to be presumed, the
weakness of the New Convert obliged some more able Controvertist to appear as
his Second; and to publish not long after a new, and better Answer, called,

Transubstantiation Defended; and proved from Scripture, in Answer to the First
Part of a Treatise Entitled, A Discourse against Transubstantiation.

And to make all sure; a Third about the same time undertakes the same Cause,
in a Discourse which he calls,

An Answer to a Discourse against Transubstantiation.

It is no part of my Design to give any Character of these Treatises; I will
only observe, that the Second, which seems to have been written with the most
care, continues still unfinished; the Author (whoever he be) having not yet
thought fit to publish his 2d Part. Now this I the rather remark, to satisfy
those who have long expected our Reply to these Treatises, what has been in
some measure the Cause of the deferring it: tho the multitude of other
Discourses that have since been published on this Subject, may well excuse so
small an Omission: However, since after almost a Years attendance, there is now
but little Hopes of any thing more to be expected from this Antagonist, I may
venture to promise the Reader that he shall not continue much longer without
the Answer that has been prepared to what is already published; and which might
long since have been finished, had not the Reverend Author desired to acquit
himself of all his Task at the same time.

And this may serve in short to have been remarked concerning the first Part of
this Design, of the Discourses which our Divines began to publish in the late
King's time upon the Points in Controversy between us and the Church of Rome.

We must now pass to a more troubled and perplexed Undertaking; and endeavor
to reduce to the clearest Method we can, those many Tracts that have since come
out in Answer to one another on both sides; and the number of which is now so
great, that it is no easy matter to give an exact Account of them. And for the
doing of this, I shall consider them not in the Order of their coming out, but
reduce them as near as I can to the several distinct Subjects to which they
refer.

Now the first Thing that began all our Late Disputes, was the Pretense so much
insisted upon, of our MISREPRESENTING the Doctrines and Practices of the Church
of Rome: And it shall therefore be the first kind of Discourses I will here
consider.

SECT. I.
Of the Treatises that have been Published on the Representing and Expounding
Controversy.

1. WHAT the Occasion and Design of this Uundertaking was, has already been
remarked in the First Part of Present State, p. 10.
the Present State: and therefore I shall not need to say any thing to it here.
The Treatises that have passed on both sides, may be consulted in this
following Order.

I. A Papist Misrepresented and Represented. The Representing Controversy.


R. The Doctrines and Practices of the Church of Rome truly Represented; in
Answer to a Book entitled, A Papist Misrepresented and Represented, etc.

II. Reflections upon the Answer to the Papist Misrepresented, etc.

R. A Papist not Misrepresented by Protestants; being a Reply to the
Reflections, etc.

III. Papists protesting against Protestant Popery; in Answer to a Discourse
entitled, A Papist not Misrepresented by Protestants.

R. An Answer to a Discourse entitled, Papists protesting against Protestant
Popery; containing a particular Examination of Monsieur de Meaux' s late B. of
Condom' s Exposition of the Doctrines of the Church of Rome, in the Articles of
the Invocation of Saints, and Worship of Images.

IV. An Amicable Accommodation of the difference between the Representer and
the Answerer, in return to his last Reply.

R. An Answer to the Amicable Accommodation of the difference between the
Representer and the Answerer.

V. A Reply to the Answer to the Amicable Accommodation.

R. A View of the whole Controversy between the Representer and the Answerer,
with an Answer to the Representer' s last Reply.

And here the matter rested when the first State of the Controversy was
published; and it was then generally believed would have done so. But the
Representer had by this time got too much assurance to be easily put out of
Countenance; and tho by the longer time he took in his Answer to this last
Treatise, than to either of the foregoing, and which his Performance
sufficiently shows was not for any extraordinary pains he resolved to take in
his Reply to it, he seems to have struggled a little with himself, before he
could get the better of his Conscience, in going on at so pitiful a rate of
Vindicating his pretenses, yet at last there came out something that was to be
called an Answer to our last piece, in a Preface to a further Continuation of
his unjust Pretenses against us, viz.

VI. The Papist Misrepresented and Represented; 3d part; with a Preface
containing Reflections upon two Treatises; the one, the State, the other, The
View of the Controversy between the Representer and the Answerer.

But to this too, the worthy Author of the View of the Controversy soon
returned such an Answer as I find has not a little discomposed the Representer:
and I believe no less troubles the Vindicator too of the Bishop of Condom's
Exposition, viz.

R. An Answer to the Representer's Reflections upon the State and View of the
Controversy, etc.

To this the Representer has now satisfied us, that he never intends to reply:
for having lately set out an Answer to another Discourse of which we shall
speak hereafter, viz. The Apology for the Pulpits: he adds triumphantly in the
Title, that it is not only an Answer to that Discourse, but also, A Vindication
of the Representer against the Stater of the Controversy. But such a
Vindication as this, could certainly never have come from any other Pen but the
Representer's: and is by the same figure a Reply to this Treatise, by which he
heretofore told us, that his Papist Represented and Misrepresented was enough
to answer not only all our late Discourses against Popery, but a Papist Misr.
part. 3. Pref.
great part of all the Books and Sermons that had ever been writ or preached
against them. The truth is, I can hardly forbear here to leave a while my
design of pursuing the Treatises that have been Published on this Controversy,
to expose the Confidence of this vain Man: But since the worthy Author of that
Book which he pretends to answer, has thought fit to give him up as a
Privileged Person, who is past either sense of Modesty, or hopes of being
reclaimed, I shall pay that deference to his Judgment, as not to trouble my
self with any Vindication of his Discourse against so trivial and occasional an
attempt against it. But if there be any of this Author's Communion who shall
think fit in good earnest to attack this, or any other of those Discourses
which he has published against them, I will then take the liberty to promise,
That tho to our great regret, the incomparable Author of them be now in his
Grave, and Dr. Claget.
no longer in a state to vindicate his own Works, yet neither his Labors nor
his Memory shall want a Defense, and let his Adversaries whenever they please
begin the experiment.

And here I suppose we may now take a final leave of this first Controversy;
The Papist Represented and Misrepresented. I will only add, That since this
first attempt of his began, he has carried it on in two other parts, under the
Title of the Catholic Representer. The second of which coming out weekly in
several Chapters, has received a very full, and I suppose a satisfactory
Answer; there being no care taken to reply to what our Divines have with great
care and learning returned to it. The third has been considered, as far as was
thought necessary, by the Late Worthy and Learned Author of the Defense of the
State and View of the Controversy before mentioned.

II. It was not long after the beginning of this, that the better The
Expounding Controversy.
to promote the same design, another Engagement of the like kind was set on
foot, under the Title of

An Exposition of the Doctrine of the Catholic Church in matters of
Controversy.

I need not say that this piece was Originally written in French, and published
many years since by the Bishop then of Condom, now of Meaux. The prosecution
that has been made of this matter in the Books that have been published on both
sides, have given a very large Account of this to the world; and what is
farther necessary for the understanding of the design of it, may be seen
already set down in the former part of the Page 15, 16.
Present State of the Controversy. I will therefore only perfect the Catalogue
of what has past in this Enterprise also on both sides, by adding to that
already given, those other Treatises, that have been published since the former
State was sent abroad.

1. An Answer to the Bishop of Condom's Exposition, etc. with Reflections upon
his Pastoral Letter.

And concerning which I shall observe only, what was before remarked, That to
this day no attempt has been made of returning one word in Answer to it.

2. An Exposition of the Doctrine of the Church of England, in the several
Articles proposed by the Bishop of Condom, in his Exposition of the Doctrine of
the Catholic Faith.

To this in a little time came out an Answer Entitled,

3. A Vindication of the Bishop of Condom' s Exposition, with a Letter from the
said Bishop.

And to that not long after, a Reply, called,

4. A Defense of the Exposition of the Doctrine of the Church of England
against the Exceptions of the Bishop of Condom, and his Vindicator.

And here this Controversy rested for some time, and it was by many supposed
would have ended. But at last both the Bishop and his Vindicator resolved once
more to venture into the world; and so after a long expectation, an Answer was
published to this last Treatise, viz.

5. A Reply to the Defense of the Exposition of the Doctrine of the Church of
England; With a Second Letter from the Bishop of Meaux.

To this there have been two Treatises already returned, and we may in some
time expect a Third to be added to them, as soon as the Author has discharged
himself of a new O. W's Appendix in answer to the Discourse of the Real
Presence, and Adoration of the Host.
Adversary, which has since attacked Him on another account. The Vindicator it
is hoped will not think much of a little delay in this matter; especially since
I am Commissioned to promise him, that let Him make what have he will, the last
Part shall be got ready for Him, before He has finished any reasonable Answer
to those already published.

If it be enquired here, Wherefore this last Defense was divided into so many
Parts; I presume this account may be given of it; That the Vindicator having
run his Answer into a greater length than the ordinary rate of these Discourses
usually allows of, either no just Reply must have been made to it, which our
Expositor was unwilling they should be able to object to Him; Or if there were,
He thought it would be much more acceptable to the world, as well as less
burdensome to Himself, to publish his Answer at several times, than to be
oppressed with so large a Volume, as it would have amounted to all together. What
is already finished will be found under these Titles:

6. A Second Defense of the Exposition of the Doctrine of the Church of
England, against the new Exceptions of Monsieur de Meaux and His Vindicator.

Part I. In which the Account that has been given of the Bishop of Meaux' s
Exposition, is fully Vindicated; the dictinction of Old and New Popery,
Historically Asserted; and the Doctrine of the Church of Rome in point of
Image. Worship, more particularly considered.

Part II. In which the Romish Doctrines concerning the Nature and Object of
Religious Worship: Of the Invocation of Saints, and Worship of Images and
Relics, are considered, and the Charge of Idolatry made Good against those of
the Church of Rome upon the Account of them.

And thus far our Expositor has carried his Reply: whilst the Second of these
Parts was writing, the Vindicator attacked the First according to their Modern
way of Controversy, in a sheet and half; yet called it,

A Full Answer to the Second Defense of the Exposition of the Doctrine of the
Church of England, in a Letter to the Defender.

But the Author of the View of the Controversy being at that time engaged in a
Reply to the Representer, and finding some congruity that the Answer to both of
them should come out together, for the reasons given in the Preface to His
Treatise; the Defender was left at liberty to go on with his design, and yet
the Vindicator not suffered to complain for want of Consideration: The Reply I
have in part mentioned before, but I will now give the Title of it at its full
length:

An Answer to the Representer's Reflections upon the State and View of the
Controversy. With a Reply to the Vindicator's Full Answer; showing, That the
Vindicator has utterly ruined the new design of Expounding and Representing
Popery.

III. Having now given account of those two principal Controversies that have
of late been carried on among us, of Expounding and Representing the Points in
debate betwixt us and the Church of Rome; I cannot better close this Point,
than with this remark, That in a very little time after the Bishop of Condom's
Exposition was set forth by the Vindicator, we were also obliged with the
Translation of another of that Prelate's Pieces, called,

A Pastoral Letter to the New Converts of his Diocese.

It is not necessary to say that the Bishop in this Piece pursued still the
design of his Exposition. That has been already shown in the Answer to it,
which I before remarked, at the end of the other Reply that was made to His
Exposition, and which still continues Unanswered. That which has made more
Noise is his open declaring to the New Converts of his Diocese, that they knew
there had been no such thing as a Persecution in France. And the falseness and
unsincerity of which declaration has been sufficiently exposed, both in the
former part of the Page 22. Sec. Defense, Answer to the Bishops Letter.
State of the Controversy; and in the second Defense of the Exposition of the
Doctrine of the Church of England: And thither I shall remit those that desire
to inform themselves more particularly of this matter.

IV. I should here have dismissed this Argument, had not the great
Misrepresenter that began this Point, lately pursued it in a Good Advice to the
Pulpits.
new Undertaking, and of which I cannot better give an Account, than in this
place. It is not long since, that with the old design of exposing the Ministers
of the Church of England to the Censures of the World, as Men who made it their
Business, at any rate, to run down Popery, he set forth a malicious Discourse,
called by him,

1. Good Advice tu the Pulpits, etc.

In which he takes together out of the Sermons published in the last years of
the late King's Reign, whatever he thought would serve to make them odious. The
Design was well enough laid; and the Circumstances of the Times considered, it
were not to be wondered if some things should have passed more hot against those
of the Church of Rome, than was to have been wished. But either our Ministers
were then, as they have always been, very moderate; or this Author has been a
very careless Examiner of their Excesses. However his Attempt soon met with a
solid Confutation, in an excellent Treatise, Entitled,

2. An Apology for the Pulpits.

And in which our Divines are fully justified against his Exceptions.

To this he has lately set forth an Answer, called,

3. Pulpit-sayings; or the Characters of the Pulpit-Papist examined.

To which there is an Answer called,

4. Pulpit-Popery, True Popery.

And hitherto has this first sort of Controversy been carried on: A second
thing which has given occasion to some Disputes these late years, and which,
for the Affinity it has to the foregoing. I choose next to mention, is,

SECT. II.
Of a pretended Agreement of the Church of England with the Church of Rome.

AND this too the Representer is reported to have had a principal hand in. It
is no very long time since a Book was published in order to this end, and
called in express terms,

An Agreement between the Church of England and Agreement between the C. of E.
and the C. of R.
the Church of Rome.

I think I needed not have made any change of my former Head for this Treatise;
there being perhaps not a more foul Misrepresentation in the World, than what
the great Chastiser of Misrepresenters has made here in such a pretense as
this. But tho his Title be General, yet the main design of his Book was to
expose a particular person of our Church, and whom indeed they have all the
reason in the world, if they can by any means, to run (...). Sherlock.
down; for I know no man that does them and their Cause more mischief, by those
excellent Treatises which he continues still to publish against them. However
both the general and the particular design of this new Contrivance, has been
effectually answered in the two Replies that have come forth to it, viz.

1. The Difference between the Church of England and the Church of Rome, in
Opposition to a late Book, entitled, An Agreement, etc.

2. A Vindication of some Protestant Principles of Church-Unity and
Catholick-Communion; from the charge of Agreement with the Church of Rome. By
Dr. Sherlock.

But what this Author attempted in a more general manner, the Publisher of
Discourses against us at Oxford, more particularly endeavored with reference
to the Holy Eucharist; in which, as he pretends, there is little or no
difference between the true Sons of the Church of England, and those of the
Other Communion: And which therefore shall be the next General Head of
Controversies, to which I will now pass, viz.

SECT. III. Of the Real Presence.

Of the Disputes which have passed these last years, concerning the Holy
Eucharist. And here,

I. Concerning the REAL PRESENCE.
THis is the Point in which Mr. W. would fain piece up a kind of Agreement
betwixt us, though all the World sees nothing can be more different than the
Doctrine of the Real Presence as taught in the Church of England, and that of
Transubstantiation, which is the Real Presence believed in the Church of Rome.

But however it be, Mr. W. doubts not to make it appear; That our Divines have
asserted the very same Presence of Christ, in effect, in the Eucharist, that
the Romanists maintain; in a Treatise, called,

1. Two Discourses concerning the Adoration of our Blessed Savior in the
Eucharist.

And the former of which wholly pursues the pretended Agreement I have now been
speaking of.

To this there came out first a London Answer, in which his Quotations were
fully examined, his Pretenses considered, and the whole matter largely stated:
And in return to his Allegations of some of our Church that believed their Real
Presence, an Account was given of several that have lived and died in their
Communion, that neither did nor could believe any such thing. The Title of it
is,

2. A Discourse of the Holy-Eucharist in the Two great Points of the Real
Presence, and the Adoration of the Host.

Not long after this, a Person of great Worth at Oxford published a second
Confutation of the same Piece, but with this difference, That whereas the
former Discourse examined at large his Quotations, this chiefly considered the
Principles on which he proceeded, and the Arguments he brought to justify his
Pretenses. It is called,

3. A Reply to Two Discourses lately printed at Oxford, concerning the
Adoration of our Blessed Savior in the Holy Eucharist.

And here this Controversy rested till the last Term, when Mr. W publishing
another Treatise upon the same Subject, viz.

4. A Compendious Discourse on the Eucharist:

Added to the End of it two Appendixes, in answer to the two Tracts that had
been written against them. It appears by the Heat and Bitterness of these
little Satyrs, how much those Books had troubled him, and how unable he is to
command himself, even there where he pretends the most to do it. One would have
thought after what the Representer had done, we had seen the height of what a
licentious Pen could arise to in matters of such seriousness. But indeed this
poor impotent old Man has convinced us of our Error, and shown such an indecent
Passion in the menage of his Answer, as is much more to be pitied than valued.
But I shall leave it to those who are engaged with him, to take notice of these
things: It is not to be doubted, but that in a little time their Answers will
be finished; both the One and the Other, being, as I am informed, already in
good forwardness.

II. COMMUNION in BOTH KINDS.
Having thus given an Account of what has passed as to the Point Of Communion
in Both Kinds.
of the Real Presence; the next thing that naturally offered its self, was the
Doctrine of Transubstantiation. But there has passed so much concerning this
Controversy, that I was willing before I came to that, to consider all the
lesser Debates that have risen relating to this Holy Sacrament.

The occasion of this Engagement was this: Monsieur de Meaux having some years
since composed a famous Book upon this Argument, it was thought fit by those of
the Church of Rome to translate that also, as well as the rest of his Tracts,
into our Language. Accordingly we find it to have been published some time
since, under the Title of A Treatise of Communion under One Kind.

Now however it might have been sufficient for us to have followed their
Example, in translating that most accurate Answer of the late Monsieur Larrogue
to it; yet one of our Divines was content to give it a new Consideration, in an
excellent Book, called,

A Discourse of the Communion in One Kind. In Answer to a Treatise of the
Bishop of Meaux, of Communion, etc.

And here this Flourish ended: The Translator (whoever he was) of the Bishop's
Treatise, looking upon himself to be no more obliged to defend it against his
English Adversary, than the Bishop thought himself to be to vindicate it
against the Attack of his French Antagonists. But tho this Controversy
proceeded no farther, yet the Subject has been lately again revived by a very
Learned Hand, who having searched thoroughly into Antiquity as to this Point,
has given us an accurate Collection, called,

A Demonstration that the Church of Rome and her Councils have erred; by
showing that the Councils of Constance, Basil, and Trent, have in all their
Decrees touching Communion in one Kind, contradicted the received Doctrine of
the Church of Christ.

III. Of TRANSUBSTANTIATION. Of Transubstantiation.

And now having cleared the way of all other Debates touching this Holy
Sacrament, we are at last arrived to the great Point in dispute betwixt us, the
Doctrine of Transubstantiation. But how to dispose of my self in so copious a
Subject, and upon which so many Books have been written, is hard to resolve. I
have already remarked what has passed on the occasion of the Discourse of
Transubstantiation, the first that began this Debate. The next that gave
occasion to the revival of this Controversy, was the Author of the Dublin
Letter, who being answered by the Representer in his Second Part, cap. 3. a
learned man of our Communion made good his Party in an excellent Discourse,
which he calls,

Transubstantiation no Doctrine of the Primitive Fathers; being a Defense of
the Dublin Letter, etc.

And that no pretense to Antiquity might remain unconsidered as to this matter,
the same Learned Hand has since obliged us with a full view of all that can
reasonably be desired from the Primitive Fathers as to this matter, viz.

A Full View of the Doctrines and Practices of the Ancient Church relating to
the Eucharist, wholly different from those of the present Roman Church, and
inconsistent with the belief of Transubstantiation, etc.

2. A 2d sort of Discourses there have passed on this Argument in which our
Adversaries of the Roman Communion, have made it their business to prove the
Doctrine of the Trinity to be as full of Contradictions as that of
Transubstantiatiom: But whether this be more likely to make us Papists or
Socinians, to believe the Doctrine of Transubstantiation, or to disbelieve that
of the Trinity, I shall not determine. However our Divines have resolved to
show that there is no manner of reason for them to do either; and the Tracts
that have been published on this Occasion, are especially these. On the Popish
Part.

A Dialogue between a New Catholic Convert and a Protestant, concerning the
Doctrines of the Trinity and Transubstantiation. On Our Part.

1. An Answer to a late Dialogue between a new Catholic Convert, and a
Protestant, etc.

2. A Second Dialogue between a New Catholic Convert, and a Protestant, showing
why He cannot believe the Doctrine of Transubstantiation, though he do firmly
believe the Doctrine of the Trinity.

3. The Doctrine of the Trinity and Transubstantiation compared as to
Scripture, Reason, and Tradition. In a new Dialogue between a Protestant and a
Papist. In 2. Parts.

4. Transubstantiation contrary to Scripture; or the Protestant's Answer to the
Seeker's Request.

3. Other Discourses there have been in great numbers on both sides as to this
Point, and it shall suffice only to transcribe the Names of them. Popish Tracts
concerning Transubstantiation.

1. A Seeker's Request to Catholic Priests and Protestant Ministers, for
satisfying his Conscience in the Truth of what he ought to believe of the
Lord's Supper.

2. The Catholic Answer to the Seeker's Request.

3. The Catholic Letter to the Seeker. Protestant Treatises against
Transubstantiation.

1. A Plain Representation of Transubstantiation, as it is received in the
Church of Rome.

2. The Absolute Impossibility of Transubstantiation demonstrated.

3. An Historical Treatise of Transubstantiation.

4. A Paraphrase with Notes, and a Preface upon the 6th Chapter of St. John.

5. A Brief Discourse of the Real Presence.

6. The School of the Eucharist.

7. Six Conferences concerning Transubstantiation.

8. The Protestant's Answer to the Seeker's Request.

9. The Protestant's Answer to the Catholic Letter to the Seeker: Or, A
Vindication of the Protestant's Answer to the Seeker's Request.

To which we may add two Books, written indeed long since by two eminent
Bishops of this Church, but thought fit to be Reprinted again, since Mr. W's
attempts from Oxford about the Real Presence. The First is,

10. A Brief Declarationn of the Lord's Supper, written by Dr. Nicholas Ridley
Bishop of London, during his Imprisonment. With some Determinations and
Disputations concerning the same Argument, by the same Author.

11. Diallacticon Viri Boni and Literati, etc.

I mention this Book, (tho a Latin one) because it is a very excellent Of the
Notes of the Church.
Discourse written by Dr. John Poynet, Bishop of Winchester, in Edward V^'s
days, and was very rarely to be met with till this Reprinting of it.

SECT. VI.
Another Subject which has opened a large field to Disputes between us, and has
accordingly been frequently insisted upon, is the CHURCH; with reference to the
Marks, and Nature, and Prerogatives of it.

I. Of the NOTES of the Church.
HE must be very little acquainted with the late Methods made use of by those
of the Church of Rome, in propagating their Religion among us, who knows not
this to have been all along their great Endeavor, to fly, as much as possible,
all particular Disputes, and keep themselves within the general Notions of the
Church: That so applying whatever is, or is pretended to have been said of the
Church Catholic, to their own particular Communion, they might more easily
deceive unwary and ignorant Men. But in this too, as well as in all other
Points in debate, they have not failed to meet enough to encounter their
Pretenses. And to the End it might be better seen how vain a Pretense it is in
them to call themselves Catholics, and their Church the Catholic Church, as if
(in the words of the Prophet) they were alone, and there were none besides Isa.
xlv. 6.
them: One of the first Controversies to be remarked in this Point is, that of
the NOTES of the CHURCH; and upon which they undertake to show theirs,
exclusive to all others, to be the Catholic Church of Christ Militant upon
Earth.

The former part of the State of the Controversy gave an account of the
beginning of these; how our Divines engaged themselves to a weekly
consideration of them, till they had past through the largest Catalogue we have
yet had of these Notes, viz. that of Cardinal Bellarmin. They were then
advanced to the third only, but now the whole is finished; and those little
Exceptions which our Adversaries thought fit to make to them, are fully
answered, and they altogether compose a just Volume; and plainly show, that
were the Church indeed endued with all those Prerogatives they pretend it is,
yet would it stand them in no stead, seeing, that according to their own Notes,
the Church of Rome cannot possibly be the Catholic or Universal Church.

The Notes which on this occasion have been particularly examined, are these.

1. An Examination of BELLARMIN's First Note concerning, [The Name of
Catholic.] 2. -- His Second Note, [Antiquity,] 3. -- His Third Note,
[Duration,] 4. -- His Fourth Note, [Amplitude or Multitude and Variety of
Believers.] 5. -- His Fifth Note, [The Succession of Bishops.] 6. His Sixth
Note, [Agreement in Doctrine with the Primitive Church.] 7. -- His Seventh
Note, [Union of the Members among themselves, and with the Head.] 8. -- His
Eighth Note, [Sanctity of Doctrine.] 9. -- His Ninth Note, [Efficacy of the
Doctrine.] 10. -- His Tenth Note, [Holiness of Life.] 11. -- His eleventh Note,
[The Glory of Miracles.] 12. -- His Twelfth Note, [The Light of Prophecy.] 13.
-- His thirteenth Note, [Confession of Adversaries.] 14. -- His Fourteenth
Note, [The unhappy End of the Church's Enemies.] 15. -- His Fifteenth Note,
[Temporal Felicity.]
To which is prefixed,

A Brief Discourse concerning the Notes of the Church; with some Reflections on
Cardinal Bellarmin's Notes.

And annexed,

A Vindication of the Brief Discourse concerning the Notes of the Church; in
Answer to a Late Pamphlet, Entitled [The Use and great Moment of the Notes of
the Church, as delivered by Cardinal Bellarmin (de Notis Ecclesiae) Justified.

A Defense of the Confuter of Bellarmin' s Second Note of the Church
[Antiquity] against the Cavils of the Adviser.

II. Of the UNITY and AUTHORITY of the Of the Unity and Authority of the Church.
Church.
This is another Argument that has exercised the Pen of a very great Person
amongst us: The occasion of his entering on the Debate, was given by the
publishing of some Papers of His late Majesty, and which are in every Bodies
hand, called,

1. The two Papers written by the late King Charles the Second.

To these an Answer was published, Entitled,

2. An Answer to some Papers lately Printed concerning the Authority of the
Catholic Church in matters of Faith, and the Reformation of the Church of
England.

It was not long before two of the other side appeared about the same time, in
defense of the Royal Papers: The one very light, and in some places even
ridiculous, and which shows, that the Author's Talent lies toward Controversy
no more in Prose, than it appears by the Hind and Panther, that it does in
Verse; called,

3. A Defense of the Papers written by the late King of Blessed Memory.

The other, much more solid and grave than the former, Entitled,

4. A Reply to the Answer made upon the Three Royal Papers.

To both of which the Learned Author returned a most accurate and elaborate
Discourse, viz.

5. A Vindication of the Answer to some late Papers, concerning the Unity and
Authority of the Catholic Church, and the Reformation of the Church of England.

And thus far this Controversy proceeded: But there have been some other
Discourses besides these, published on this Subject: In particular, the
excellent Discourse just published by the Reverend Dr. Sherlock, with this
Title,

A Discourse concerning the Nature, Unity, and Communion Of the Authority and
Infallibility of the Church.
of the Catholic Church: Wherein most of the Controversies relating to the
Church, are briefly and plainly stated. Part 1. by William Sherlock, D. D.
Master of the Temple.

To these, for the Affinity of the Subject, I cannot do better than adjoyn,

III. Such other Treatises as have been published, relating to the AUTHORITY
and INFALLIBILITY of the Church.
Where first I will beg leave to mention some short Pieces which have passed
betwixt a Country Parson, and a Romish Missioner. The occasion, as I am
informed was this: The Minister having observed some Endeavors to seduce his
Flock, thought it his duty to give them some seasonable directions; which he
therefore published under this Title:

1. The Country Parson's Admonition to his Parishioners, with directions how to
behave themselves, when any one designs to seduce them from the Church of
England.

In which Tract, he advises his Parishioners, as far as possible, to avoid all
Disputes about Religion: But if the Importunity of others shall force them to
it, he then directs them how to bring the matter to a short issue, viz. by
putting them to prove the pretended Infallibility of the Church of Rome. And
this he manageth under the Title of,

2. The Plain Man's Reply to the Catholic Missionaries.

I ought not to conceal how acceptable those little Pieces have been to the
World, nor what good they have done among those for whose use they were chiefly
designed. And this those of the Of the Infallibility of the Church.
other side have been so sensible of, that they have thought it worth their
while to set out a pretended Confutation of them both; called,

3. The Plain Man's Answer to his Country Parson's Admonition: Together with
the Missionaries Answer to the Plain Man's Reply.

To which the worthy Author of the Two first Treatises, has lately replied,
under these Titles,

4. A Defense of the Country Parson's Admonition.

5. A Defense of the Plain Man's Reply.

And here I think this Controversy has ended. If any Answer has been published
to these last Papers, It is more than I have yet seen or heard of; and I
believe there is none. As for those separate Discourses that have come forth,
relating to this matter, the Principal, if not all, are these that follow. On
the Part of the Church of England.

1. The Pillar and Ground of Truth; a Treatise showing that the Roman Church
falsely claims to be THAT Church, and the Pillar of THAT Truth mentioned by S.
Paul, in 1 Timothy III. 11, 15.

2. A Discourse concerning a Judge of Controversies in matters of Religion.

3. A Plain and Familiar Discourse by way of Dialogue, betwixt a Minister and
his Parishioner, concerning the Catholic Church.

4. Reasons why a Protestant should not turn Papist, in a Letter to a Romish
Priest.

5. Monsieur Claude' s Conference with the Bishop of Of the Authority of the
Church.
Meaux.

6. An Historical Examination of the Authority of General Councils.

7. Of the Authority of Councils, and the Rule of Faith.

8. A Sermon on S. Mark' s Day, by Dr. Patrick.

9. Doubts concerning the Roman Infallibility.

10. A Short Discourse concerning the Church's Authority in Matters of Faith.
On the Church of Rome' s Side.

1. A Peaceable Method for the re-uniting Protestants and Catholics in Matters
of Faith. Written in French by Monsieur Maimbourg.

2. Seek and ye shall find: or a search into the Grounds of Religion, etc.

3. Monsieur de Meaux' s Conference with Monsieur Claude concerning the
Authority of the Church.

SECT V.
To these Disputes concerning the Church, I do not know any that I can so fitly
subjoin, as those which regard the pretended Privileges and Authority of St.
PETER and of the POPES, as His Successors.

IT is now some time since an Eminent Person of the other Communion, Dr.
Godden, began the Contest as to this matter, in a Sermon Preached by him in the
Queen Dowagers Chapel, and called,

A Sermon of St. Peter, preached before her Majesty, the Of S. Peter and the
Pope
Queen Dowager, June 29. 1686.

In requital of this, a very Learned Man of our Church, set out a Sermon which
he had occasionally Preached in his own Church, the very same Day, upon the
same Text; entitled,

A Sermon Preached upon S. Peter' s Day; Printed at the desire of some that
heard it, with some Enlargements, by a Divine of the Church of England.

I will not say any thing more of these Two Discourses, than this, That whosoever
shall please to read them, will find what is to be urged from that famous Text,
Thou art Peter, etc. on either side; and when they compare them together, may
judge as they shall find the evidence of Truth to incline them.

But of this large Subject much more has been set forth; and it shall suffice
to give a very brief Account of it.

1. The Catholic Balance; or a Discourse determining the Controversies
concerning, 1. The Tradition of Catholic Doctrines. 2. The Primacy of S. Peter,
and the Bishop of Rome. 3. The Subjection and Authority of the Church in a
Christian State.


2. The Antiquity of the Protestant Religion; with an Answer to Mr. Sclater' s
Reasons, and the Collections of Nubes Testium.

3. A modest Enquiry, Whether S. Peter were ever at Rome, and Bishop of that
Church?

4. Sure and Honest Means for the Conversion of all Of St. Peter and the Popes
Supremacy.
Heretics; and wholesome Advice and Expedients for the Reformation of the
Church.

5. Dialogues between Philerene and Philalethe.

These are, I think, the chief Discourses that have been Published by our
Divines relating to the Prerogatives and Authority that some pretend to, in
behalf of St. Peter, and the Bishops of Rome, his Successors. As for those
which have been sent abroad on this Head by those of the Other Communion, these
are the Principal that have come to my Knowledge.

1. St. Peter' s Supremacy faithfully discussed according to Holy Scripture,
and Greek and Latin Fathers: By Mr. Clenche.

2. The Popes Supremacy Asserted from the Considerations of some Protestants,
and the practice of the Primitive Church, in a Dialogue between a Church-Divine
and a Seeker. In Vindication of Nubes Testium.

Concerning this last Discourse, you must observe, that it does belong to the
Controversy about the Nubes Testium betwixt the Representer and the Divine of
our Church who answered that Collection. The Representer made a very faint
defense of his Nubes against that Answer, but gave it a good Title, calling it,
The Primitive Fathers no Protestants: To which Mr. G. shortly after replied in
his Primitive Fathers no Papists; after which that Controversy rested, till
the Representer peept out again with this Tract in defense of one point only of
his Nubes Testium; but whoever will take the pains to look into it, will find
that the Representer's Stock is quite spent, and therefore he is forced to
patch up these Learned Dialogues out of his own Nubes Testium, and the
Appendix, with the addition only of a few bold strokes (which F. Sabran would
have called Calumnies) about Dr. Sherlock, etc. So that this Book deserves no
Answer at all; however a very Learned Person of our Church having undertaken to
answer Mr. Clenche's Book, and Dr. Godden's Sermon about the Pope's Supremacy,
has condescended to consider this Tract also, and the world will very speedily
be obliged with a Complete and Learned Answer to them all under this Title.

A Discourse of the Popes Supremacy, in Two Parts:

The First, In Answer to a Treatise Entitled, Saint Peter's Supremacy
faithfully discussed according to Holy Scripture and Greek and Latin Fathers.
And to a Sermon of St. Peter Preached before her Majesty, the Queen Dowager on
St. Peter and St. Paul' s day, by Tho. Godden, D. D.

The Second, In Answer to a Discourse Entitled, The Pope's Supremacy asserted
from the Considerations of some Protestants, and the Practice of the Primitive
Church, in Vindication of Nubes Testium.

SECT. VI.
Such have been the Treatises that have passed on both sides concerning the
Popes Authority. The next Point which seems to follow the nearest upon these,
and which indeed is chiefly founded on Arguments drawn from the Pretenses
before mentioned, is that of our unwarrantableness in separating from the
Church of Rome, and Chair of St. Peter: And concerning which much has been done
on both sides.

AS for our Divines, the Treatises they have published in Vindication of our
Reformation from the Charge of SCHISM and HERESY, have been these that follow.

1. A Vindication of the Church of England from the Of the Charge of Schism and
Heresy.
foul aspersions of Schism and Heresy unjustly cast upon her by the Church of
Rome. In two Parts.

2. An Answer to a late Printed Paper given about by some of the Church of
Rome: In a Letter to a Gentleman.

3. An Answer to the Considerations which obliged Dean Manby to embrace what he
calls the Catholic Religion.

4. Notes upon Lucilla and Elizabeth.

5. An Apologetical Vindication of the Church of England, in Answer to those
who reproach her with the English Heresies and Schisms, or suspect her not to
be a Catholic Church, upon their account.

6. A few plain reasons why a Protestant of the Church of England, should not
turn Roman Catholic.

7. An Answer to the Spirit of M. Luther, and the Original of the Reformation,
lately Printed at Oxford.

8. Animadversions on Mr. W's Discourse of Church Government. In two Parts.

9. Reflections on the relation of the English Reformation, lately Printed at
Oxford: and on the Oxford Theses, Two Parts.

10. An Answer to a Book Entitled, Reason and Authority, or the Motives of a
late Protestant's Reconciliation to the Catholic Church. Together with a brief
Account of Augustine the Monk, and the Conversion of the English.

11. The State of the Church of Rome when the Reformation began; as it appears
by the Advices given to Paul III. and Julius III. by Creatures of their Own.

12. The Queries offered by T. W. to the Protestants concerning the English
Reformation, Reprinted and Answered.

Nor have those of the Roman Communion been sparing in this Argument, but have
made this a Great Subject of Contention against us: As will appear by the
following Account.

1. Lucilla and Elizabeth, or the Donatist and Protestant Schism Paralleled.

2. The Sum of a Conference had between two Divines of the Church of England,
and two Catholic Lay-Gentlemen, in 1671.

3. The Church of England truly represented according to Dr. Heylin' s History
of the Reformation.

4. The Considerations which obliged Peter Manby Dean of Londonderry to
embrace the Roman Catholic Religion.

5. Schelstrate his Dissertation against Dr. Stillingfleet, concerning
Patriarchal and Metropolitical Authority.

As to this Book, since Mr. Schelstrate's Friends heve ventured to expose it in
a Translation here, the Reverend and Most Worthy Dean of Paul's will not fail,
if God continue him health and opportunity, to give an Answer; and I am sure
the world will not be angry with me for raising their Expectations of the
Dean's Answer, since they are satisfied that he will make them sufficient
amends for them.

6. A Discourse concerning the Spirit of Martin Luther, and the Original of the
Reformation.

7. Church Government Part V. A Relation of the English Reformation, and the
lawfulness thereof examined.

8. Some Queries to Protestants concerning the English Reformation: by T. W.

9. The Schism of the Church of England Demonstrated in Four Arguments,
formerly proposed to Dr. Gunning and Dr. Pearson the late Bishops of Ely and
Chester, by two Catholic Disputants, in a celebrated Conference upon that Point.

This little Paper with a large Title was the other day Reprinted at Oxford by
the Converts there. The foul dealings and egregious disingenuity concerning
that Conference, as well as the weakness and falseness of its Arguments, have
been fully shown in an Answer we have received just now from Cambridg, from a
Reverend Person who was particularly related to one of those abused Bishops.
The Title of his Answer is,

The Reformation of the Church of England justified, according to the Canons of
the Council of Nice, and other General Councils, and the Tradition of the
Catholic Church, being an Answer to a Paper Reprinted at Oxford, etc.

SECT. VII.
And these are the chief Treatises that have been published on these more
General Points. We come now to examine what has been done on the more
particular Controversies. And first we will begin with that which is the Ground
of all,

The RULE of FAITH.

MAny have been the Debates concerning this; both with relation to what we
suppose to be the only Divine Rule, viz. The HOLY SCRIPTURE, and with reference
to that other Of the Rule of Faith.
which those of the Church of Rome have added to it, viz. The TRADITION of the
Church. And,

1. As to the Point of the HOLY SCRIPTURE, these Discourses have passed of late
concerning it: On the part of the Church of Rome.

1. The Protestant's Plea for a Socinian, justifying his Doctrine from being
opposite to Scripture, etc.

2. Protestancy destitute of Scripture Proofs.

3. A Request to Protestants to produce plain Scriptures, directly Authorizing
xvi Tenets held by them.

4. The 6th, 7th, 8th, 9th, and 10th Chapters of the Second Part of the
Catholic Representer.

5. An Address to the Ministers of the Church of England.

6. A Clear Proof of the Certainty and Usefulness of the Protestant Rule of
Faith.

7. The Catholic Scripturist.

8. Pax Vobis. On the Protestant Part.

1. The difference betwixt the Protestant and Socinian Methods, in Answer to a
Book written by a Romanist, and entitled, The Protestant Plea for a Socinian.

2. An Answer to the Request to Protestants to produce plain Scriptures
directly Authorizing their Tenets.

3. A Summary of the Principal Controversies between the Church of England and
the Church of Rome, in Answer to Protestancy destitute of Scripture proofs.

4. The Lay-Christians Obligation to read the Holy Scripture.

5. The Peoples right to read the Holy Scripture, asserted; in Answer to the
6th, 7th, 8th, 9th, and 10th Chapters of the 2d part of the Popish Representer.

6. A Treatise proving Scripture to be the Rule of Faith; writ by Reginald
Peacock, Bishop of Chichester, before the Reformation, about the year 1450.

7. An Answer to the Address presented to the Ministers of the Church of
England.

8. A Vindication of the Answer to the Popish Address, presented to the
Ministers of the Church of England; In reply to a Pamphlet, abusively
Entitled, A Clear Proof of the Certainty and Usefulness of the Protestant Rule
of Faith.

9. Some Dialogues between Mr. G. and others, with Reflections on a Book called
Pax Vobis.

To which I must add another and fuller Answer preparing to that same little
Piece, not yet Published, viz.

10. The Protestant and Popish way of Interpreting Scripture impartially
compared, in Answer to Pax Vobis.

2. For what concerns the other Point, TRADITION; it has been the great
Endeavor of some of late to set up once more the Infallibility of it. But none
with more Noise, by an Accident, which I am now to recount, than Mr. G. and the
great Master of Controveesie, and Patron of this new Hypothesis, J. S.

It happened about a year and half since, that the forwardness of Mr. G. to
engage in a Dispute wherein he was sure to have the disadvantage both in the
Point, and in the Person that was to manage it against him, led him into a
Conference with the Reverend and Learned the Dean of Paul's. I need not say what
passed there, the whole having since been published: The Subject of the Debate,
was the Infallibility of Oral Tradition. The Conference being over, Mr. G.
(according to the perpetual Custom of the vain and assuming spirit of that
Party) began to make great Boasts in the Coffee-houses, what Feats he had done,
and how great a Victory he had gained; tho the Gentleman, for whose sake the
Conference was held, declared himself much more confirmed in the Communion of
our Church than he was before, and resolved to continue in it. This enforced
the Dean to publish a short Expostulatory Letter, called,

1. A Letter to Mr. G. giving a true Account of a late Conference at the D. of
P.

In return to this, Mr. M. who was with Mr. G. at the Conference, returned a
Letter or two to Dr. Stillingfleet, concerning the Conference; and these
produced a second from the Dean of St. Paul's, called,

2. A second Letter to Mr. G. in Answer to two Letters lately Published
concerning the Conference at the D. of P.

One of the Answers to the D. of P's first Letter, was called,

3. A Letter to the D. of P. in Answer to the Arguing part of his First Letter
to Mr. G.

To this a Person not yet concerned, put in a Reply, Entitled,

4. A Letter to a Friend; reflecting on some passages in a Letter to the D. of
P. in Answer to the Arguing part of his first Letter to Mr. G.

And here Mr. J. S. was thought fit to be entrusted with carrying on this
weighty Controversy; which he did in several Letters, which he calls Catholic
Letters; in Answer to the former Letter, to the second of the Dean's, and to a
Sermon, which in pursuance of this Controversy, he preached at Guildhall. To
these Dr. S. has since replied in a Treatise, which he calls,

5. A Discourse concerning the Nature and Grounds of the Certainty of Faith, in
Answer to J. S. his Catholic Letters.

It was expected that this excellent Discourse, which made such a discovery of
the Vanity and Contradictions of that busy Man, would have stopped his Mouth for
the future, especially since the Blackloist Heresy was now like to be brought
on the Stage again. But J. S. was long since past such Modesty; and since, if
the worst that can come, he can eat his words now again, as well as he did
before, when he was cited to Rome, to be censured for those dangerous Heretical
Opinions which he is now again broaching in England: He is for venturing on,
and wrote a Fifth Catholic Letter (as he ridiculously calls it) against the
Dean. But tho his Letter has, I believe, met with as few Readers as Himself has
Admirers, and there is no danger in the World of its doing any Mischief, since
I do not believe it possible to hire any Manof Sense to read three Pages in it;
yet in Compassion, I suppose, to the poor headstrong Man himself, there is a
very Learned Person has undertaken to answer not only that Fifth Letter, but
the other Discourses of the Romanists about Tradition, in

An Historical Discourse concerning Tradition.

This we may expect to have published shortly. In the mean time the Reverend
Dean himself did take another and more effectual course to disprove J. S's
Fantastical Demonstrations of Oral Tradition, by showing, that tho we should
allow Tradition to be as certain and Infallible a Rule as they desire, yet it
would do them no service, who in all those Points wherein they differ from us,
have no Catholic Tradition to warrant them; upon this, in a short time after
the publishing his Discourse, he set forth the First Part of a Work which we
suppose may put a final end to this Debate, viz.

6. The Council of Trent examined and disproved by Catholic Tradition; in the
main Points in Controversy between Us and the Church of Rome: With an account
of the Times and Occasions of Introducing them. Part I.

We are promised a Second Part, if God continue the Reverend Author Health and
Leisure; we cannot but earnestly wish for it, since the First Part was so very
acceptable, and so very satisfactory.

And thus far this Controversy has been carried on on both sides. I had almost
forgot to observe, that tho the Dean of Paul's himself undertook Mr. J. S. his
Catholic Letters; yet the Reflecter was not wanting to his own Defense as far
as he was particularly concerned in them. But in a Second Discourse defended
his Letter against Mr. J. S. his Attack in his Second Catholic Letter: The
Treatise is called,

7. The Reflecters Defense of his Letter to a Friend, against the furious
Assaults of Mr. J. S. in his Second Catholic Letter. In four Dialogues.

In this Condition was this Controversy when the Continuation first appeared
abroad. But Mr. J. S. has since carried it a little farther in a new Piece,
which he calls,

8. A Letter to the Continuator of the Present State of our Controversy.

And in which, tho one would think his main Design were what he adds in the
rest of his Title, To lay open the folly of my extravagant Boastings, and the
Malice of my wilful Forgeries: Yet, after two Leaves and a half, spent in
railing at me, he insensibly falls to his old Adversaries, and spends the rest
of his Pains upon them. And to their Correction I shall leave him, who are
chiefly concerned to take notice of his Insolence. As for my self, I heartily
pity his Vanity; and shall neither trouble my self, the World, nor him, by
taking the least notice of his Recitings.

Besides this long Encounter upon the Score of Tradition, other Discourses have
been published on both Sides upon this Point, Whether the Church of Rome has
indeed such an Antiquity as it pretends, for the Articles in dispute betwixt
us? And such was,

First, The famous Collection of one of their earliest Converts, Mr. Sclater,
Minister of Putney, in a Book which he called,

1. Consensus Veterum: or the Reasons of Edward Sclater Minister of Putney, for
his Conversion to the Catholic Faith and Communion.

And to which a Reply was published, that has put an end to this Undertaking,
viz.

2. Veteres Vindicati: In an Expostulatory Letter to Mr. Sclater Minister of
Putney, upon his Consensus Veterum.

But the next Collection was more general, and has run into a longer Debate: It
was called,

1. Nubes Testium: Or, A Collection of the Primitive Fathers, giving Testimony
to the Faith once delivered to the Saints.

To this the same Learned Man who had before Encountered Mr. Sclater's
Pretenses, gave a short but exact Answer; and showed, That tho the Representer
(for it seems his it was) called it a Collection of the Primitive Fathers, he
might much better have entitled a Collection of Natalis Alexander, out of whom
he stole the far greatest part of it. The Representer will, I hope, excuse this
Reflection, which I make only for the sake of Truth, and to show how unwilling
I am in any thing to deserve being thought a Misrepresenter; which is now
become as dangerous a Name, as ever that of Heretic or Schismatic was
heretofore. The Answer is called,

2. An Answer to the Compiler of the Nubes Testium: Wherein is shown, That
Antiquity did not for the first five hundred years Believe, Teach, or Practice,
as the Church of Rome does at present Believe, Teach, and Practice.

And here we are to meet a very strange Accident, the great Chastiser of
Misrepresenters, that honest, sincere Man that cannot endure false dealing, but
was dropped down from Heaven to be the Scourge and Censor of a licentious Age,
himself become a Misrepresenter: And by a strange kind of Metamorphosis, from
an Angel of Light transforming himself into a Spirit of Darkness. In short, He
was it seems enraged to the last Degree, to see not only his venerable
Authorities all ruined, but his Treasury discovered, and the very places marked
from whence he had stolen his Book, without so much as once acknowledging to
whom he was beholden for it. And yet what should he do? Reply to it fairly he
could not; for after all his show of Antiquity, the Fathers were a sort of
Christians that he was utterly unacquainted with; and had he been as well
versed in them as he is in Natalis Alexander, yet could he not have fairly
brought them to speak in behalf of his Church. He therefore resolved under a
new form to pickeer with the Author, and see if he could prevent him by some
cunning Stratagem from being in a capacity of showing him any such trick for
the future. And therefore now no more the Reverend Father he was before, but as
a Zealous Brother of the other Extreme, tho yet a Misrepresenter still, he lets
fly at the Principles of his Adversary; and undertakes out of his grand concern
for the Protestant Interest, to show our Divines that this Gentleman was one,
who for all his Pretenses in their behalf, really endeavored to set up Popery
in Masquerade. And to this end came out a formal Piece called,

3. A Letter from a Dissenter to the Divines of the Church of England in order
to a Union.

But to the great surprise of this Gentleman, his Adversary, who it seems was
as well acquainted with Henry Hill's Press, as Natalis Alexander's History, and
by a sort of Beauties so essential to the Representer, that do what he can he
is not able to disguise himself, presently found out what an Ass was crept into
the Lyon's Skin. And to let the whole World see what an honest fair dealer this
Representer is, he quickly gave an account of it in Print, in his Answer to the
Pamphlet, Entitled,

4. A Vindication of the Principles of the Author of the Answer to the Compiler
of the Nubes Testium, from the Charge of Popery: In Answer to a late pretended
Letter from a Dissenter, to the Divines of the Church of England.

To this I do not know that the Representer has yet replied: But in defense of
his Nubes Testium we have an Answer that every way befits the Character of its
Author: It is called,

5. The Primitive Fathers no Protestants: Or a Vindication of Nubes Testium
from the Cavils of the Answerer.

And that has produced us another Defense: viz.

6. The Primitive Fathers no Papists: In Answer to the Vindication of the Nubes
Testium. To which is added an Historical Discourse concerning Invocation of
Saints, in Answer to the Challenge of Father Lewis Sabran the Jesuit.

And here it was thought this Controversy would have ended, till the other day
the Representer peept out with his Defense of one Chapter of his Nubes Testium,
which I have already mentioned under this Title, The Popes Supremacy Asserted.

To which an Answer will be shortly in the Press.

And here this Debate might have ended, had not a short Postscript at the Close
of the first Answer to the Nubes Testium, engaged our Worthy Author in a new
Quarrel with Father Sabran a Jesuit; and who is now grown more famous in the
World from his New Antagonist the Protestant Footman, who as we have before
observed, undertook the Defense of the Reverend Master of the Temple from such
pitiful Cavils, as indeed were not worth the while of the Learned Man himself
to take notice of; and are abundantly answered by his new and more proper
Antagonist.

In his Sermon before the King at Chester, this Jesuit told his Majesty and the
Auditory, that he followed the advice of St. Austin when he recommended himself
to the Blessed Virgins Intercession, and advised them to do the same: And for
this quotes his Thirtyfifth Sermon de Sanctis. Upon this there began a hot
Debate in Letters betwixt F. Sabran, and the Answerer, concerning this
Authority of St. Austin; and at last from a particular Passage, rose up to a
General Point, of the Practice of the Primitive Church as to the Invocation of
Saints. The Pieces themselves may be consulted in this Order.

1. A Letter to a Peer of the Church of England, clearing a Point in a Sermon
Preached at Chester, in Answer to a Postscript joined unto the Answer to Nubes
Testium.

2. A Letter to Father Lewis Sabran Jesuit, in Answer to his Letter to a Peer
of the Church of England, etc.

3. A Reply of Lewis Sabrand of the Society of Jesus, to the Answer given to
his Letter written to a Peer of the Church of England, etc.

4. A Second Letter to Father Lewis Sabran, Jesuit, in Answer to his Reply.

And here the Controversy about St. Austin's Sermon was either ended or dropped,
the Jesuit being now ferretted by the Second Letter out of all his starting
holes. But Mr. G. in his Primitive Fathers no Papists, taking into
Consideration a Challenge, which the Jesuit had made him in one of his Letters
about Invocation, published an Historical Discourse to prove that Invocation of
Saints was neither the Doctrine nor the Practice of the Primitive Fathers. Upon
this the Jesuit begun again, after having taken a little breath, and in a whole
Sheet undertakes to answer that large Historical Account, with this Title,

5. The Challenge of Father Lewis Sabran made out, against the Historical
Discourse concerning Invocation of Saints.

To which Mr. G. very soon after replied in

6. A Third Letter to Father Lewis Sabran, Jesuit; Wherein the Defense of his
Challenge concerning Invocation of Saints, is Examined and Confuted.

In this Letter Mr. G. made such Discoveries of the strange Disingenuity, and
confident Ignorance of the Jesuit, that he was resolved to rid his Hands of
such an Adversary as had neither Learning nor Good-manners, and therefore told
him in the Conclusion of his Letter that he would trouble himself no more with
answering such an Adversary. Upon this the Jesuit, whose only stock is
Confidence, being turned off by his Learned Adversary, was forced to address
his next Reply to a Third Person, and pitched upon Mr. Needham, because he had
Licensed Mr. G's Third Letter to him; and directed a Letter to him with this
Title,

7. A Letter to Dr. William Needham; In Answer to the Third Letter by him
Licensed, Written to Father Lewis Sabran, of the Society of Jesus.

To which Mr. G. did finally Reply in an Address to the Jesuit's Superiors; and
this it is supposed will end this Controversy, it is called,

8. A Letter to the Superiors, (whether Bishops or Priests) which approve or
License the Popish Books in England; particularly to those of the Jesuits
Order, concerning Lewis Sabran, a Jesuit.

And all these Engagements the first Answer to the Nubes Testium produced: But
tho we now quit our Author, yet we must not therefore leave the Subject. For
about the same time that the former Answer appeared, another Learned Person of
our Church began to consider it by Parts, in several Letters to a Person of
Quality: And the Account of which I will now give, as far as the Pieces are
come to my Knowledge. The first that appeared, was called,

1. The Antiquity of the Protestant Religion: With an Answer to Mr. Sclater' s
Reasons, and the Collections made by the Author of the Pamphlet entitled,
Nubes Testium. In a Letter to a Person of Quality. The first Part.

The next he Entitled,

2. The Antiquity of the Protestant Religion, concerning Images: With an Answer
to the Collections made by the Author of the Pamphlet, Entitled, Nubes
Testium. In a Letter to a Person of Quality. The 2nd Part.

What Notice has been taken of the former of these, I am not able to say; but
the latter has produced us an Answer, Entitled,

3. A Discourse of the Use of Images, in relation to the Church of England and
the Church of Rome; in Vindication of Nubes Testium.

To which our Author has replied in

4. A Third Letter to a Person of Quality, being a Vindication of the former;
in Answer to a late Pamphlet, Entitled, A Discourse of the Use of Images.

And to that in pursuance of his First Design, has lately added a Fourth, which
he calls,

5. A Fourth Letter to a Person of Quality; being an Historical Account of the
Doctrine of the Sacrament, from the Primitive times to the Council of Trent,
showing the Novelty of Transubstantiation.

To conclude this Head, I shall only add one General Discourse on this Subject,
which I have before mentioned, and can never name too often, viz.

Of the Authority of Councils, and the RULE of FAITH.

SECT. VIII. Of the Nature of Idolatry.

Having hitherto pursued the business of the Rule of Faith, and the Treatises
that have been published on the Occasion of it; we will now go on to the more
special Examinations that have been made by both these Rules; viz. Scripture
and Tradition, of the particular Points in debate betwixt us. And because I
have just now mentioned some such Examinations of the two great Rocks of
offense to us, The Worship of Images, and the Invocation of Saints; it may not
be amiss first of all to see what has been further done upon these Arguments,
and the other instances of what we esteem,

The IDOLATRY of the Church of Rome.
THere is perhaps nothing in all our Disputes with those of the other
Communion, which they so unwillingly care to enter on, as this. They look upon
the very Name of it to be a kind of Reproach to them, and would be thought as
heartily, as we our selves can desire, to detest the Guilt of it. But yet it is
too evident to be denied, that our Charge is very justly brought against them;
and by consequence that it ought not to be doubted, but that our Separation
from them must have been most reasonable, if it can indeed be made appear, as
we are persuaded we have plainly shown, that we could not have continued in
their Communion, without joining with them in the Practice of one of the
greatest of Sins, viz. Idolatry.

But before we come to the Particulars in which this Charge is brought against
them, it is fit we should first state the general Notion of IDOLATRY; and this
has been effectually done, but very lately. The Reverend the Bishop of Oxon,
having in a Treatise which he published for the abrogating of the Test and
Penal Laws, given us just occasion to do so. This Book is so well known, and
the Answer to it was so lately published, that I shall not need say any thing
more of either, but only add their Titles, which are these, viz.

1. Reasons for Abrogating the Test.

2. A Discourse concerning the Nature of Idolatry: In which a late Author' s
true and only notion of Idolatry is considered and Confuted.

I must not forget to observe also, that the Bishop in his Tract pretending to
give a new and very strange Account of the Romish Doctrine of
Transubstantiation, that part of his Book received two particular
Considerations, the one in the Preface to the Reverend Dean of Paul's Book,
Entitled, The Council of Trent examined and disproved by Catholic Tradition:
The other in a Learned Discourse, under this Title,

3. Transubstantiation the Peculiar Doctrine of the Church of Rome.

I am told we owe this Book to a very ingenious Nonconformist; and as we cannot
but thank him for the Discourse he has given us, so he deserves to be thanked
for his design of answering the other part of the Bishop's Book about the
Nature of Idolatry; in which he was prevented, as I am told, by the other
Discourse about the Nature of Idolatry coming out while that good design was
under his hands. I cannot but wish that our Brethren had begun sooner to assist
us in such a large Controversy as we have been obliged to manage, and that
others amongst them would follow the Example, which this Learned Author has so
worthily set before them.

Another Writer has given us a very ingenious short Answer to both parts of
the Bishop's Book, and calls it,

4. A Discourse concerning Transubstantiation and Idolatry, being an Answer to
the Bishop of Oxford's Plea relating to those two Points.

As for the particular Instances wherein we make good this charge of Idolatry
against them; I have before mentioned that of the ADORATION of the HOST, and
the Discourses that have been published on that Argument. The two Points See
above, Page 6. 19.
remaining, and of which something was said under the last Head, are, the
WORSHIP of IMAGES, and the INVOCATION of Saints.

I. Of the WORSHIP of IMAGES.
Upon which Point, besides the two Letters written in Answer to the Nubes
Testium, the following Discourses have also been set forth, viz. Of the Worship
of Images.


1. The Fallibility of the Roman Church demonstrated from the manifest Error of
the second Nicene and Trent Councils; which assert, That the Veneration and
Honorary Worship of Images is a Tradition Primitive and Apostolical.

2. A Discourse concerning the second Council of Nice, which first introduced
and established Image Worship in the Christian Church; Anno Domini 787.

For the other Point,

II. The INVOCATION of SAINTS.
Many Discourses have been Published, and a full account given of this Matter;
and if we may judge by the slender Returns that have been made to them, little
is to be said in Vindication Of the Invocation of Saints.
of this Superstition. The Treatises that I have seen, are these that follow.

1. Speculum B. Virginis: A Discourse of the due Praise and Honor of the
Virgin Mary.

2. A Discourse concerning the Worship of the Blessed Virgin, and the Saints;
with an Account of the Beginning and Rise of it among Christians; in Answer to
Monsieur de Meaux' s Appeal to the ivth Age, in his Exposition and Pastoral
Letter.

3. Wholesome Advices from the B. Virgin to her indiscreet Worshippers.

This Piece was only a Translation which an Ingenious Layman of our Church put
into English, and set a large Preface before it: To this the Catholic
Representer gave an Attack in the 4th Chapter of his Second Part; and thereby
obliged our Author to make a smart Reply upon him, called, A Letter to the
Misrepresenter of Papists.

4. An Account of the Life and Death of the B. Virgin, according to the Romish
Writers, with the Grounds of the Worship paid to her.

5. The Life of S. Mary Magdalene of Pazzi, a Carmelite Nun; with a Preface of
the Nature, Causes, Concomitants, and Consequences of Ecstasy and Rapture; and
a brief Discourse added, about discerning and trying Spirits, whether they be
of God.

6. An Abridgment of the Prerogatives of S. Ann, Mother of the Mother of God.

7. The Enthusiasm of the Church of Rome demonstrated in some Observations upon
the Life of Ignatius Loyola.

8. The Virgin Mary Misrepresented by the Roman Church, etc. Part I. Wherein
Two of her Feasts, her Conception, and Nativity, are considered.

We are in hopes that the Excellent Author of this most ingenious and diverting
Discourse will e're long oblige the World with a Second Part, and teach the
Papists at length to grow ashamed of their intolerable Superstitions toward
the Virgin Mary.

As for those of the other Communion, it is but little they have published in
particular on this Subject, besides what I have already mentioned. But two
Pieces there are which I ought by no means no forget, viz.

1. Contemplations on the Life and Glory of H. Mary. 2. An Apology for the
Contemplations, by Dr. I. C.
Which Apology was fully answered in the ingenious Preface to the Book called,
An Account of the Life and Death of the Blessed Virgin.

SECT. IX. Of the Validity of Orders in the C. of E.

I shall mention but one Particular more, on which we have of late, as
heretofore, been attacked by those of the Roman Church, and effectually
Vindicated our selves, both against their Calumnies, and their Reasons; and
that is as to the Validity of ORDERS in the Church of England.

THE Occasion of reviving this Matter, was given by a little Scurrilous Libel
that went abroad, under the name of, The Church of England truly Represented.

And in Reply to whose Calumnies, Three Discourses have been Published, two of
them new, the other only reprinted, viz.

1. A Vindication of the Ordinations of the Church of England; in answer to a
Paper written by one of the Church of Rome, to prove the Nullity of our Orders.

2. A Defense of the Ordinations and Ministry of the Church of England; in
Answer to the Scandals raised or revived against them, in several late
Pamphlets, and particularly in one entitled, The Church of England truly
Represented, etc.

3. A short Defense of the Orders of the Church of England, as by Law
established; against some scattered Objections of Mr. Webster of Linne.

But this Subject has been most largely and learnedly handled by the Learned
Mr. Brown, of S. John's College in Cambridge, in his Sermon ad Clerum; and in
another Sermon Preached before the University on Commencement Sunday;
Translated into Latin; and both together Printed at Cambridge under this Title.

4. Concio ad Clerum habita coram Academia Cantabrigiensi Junii 11. An. 1687.
pro Gradu Baccal in S. Theologia; Ubi vindicatur Vera and Valida Cleri
Anglicani, Ineunte Reformatione, Ordinatio. Cui accessit Concio habita Julii 3.
1687. de Canonica Cleri Anglicani Ordinatione Latin reddita and aucta; a Th.
Brown, S. T. B. Coll. D. Joh. Evang. Soc. annexum est Instrumentum
Consecrationis Matthew. Parker, Archiep. Cant. ex MS. C. C. C. Cantabr.

I hear the worthy Author has been very earnestly requested to Translate these
Latin Sermons into English; and I am told, that he delays it only upon the
account of some Answer that the Papists have been talking they would give to
them, being desirous to make his Translation and Vindication one trouble. I
cannot therefore but in the behalf of those who are so desirous to have these
Sermons in English, request our Adversaries, That if they have any thing to say
to them, they would make a little more haste with it. And for the mighty Master
of Controversy, who I hear has resolved to answer a Paragraph in one of them,
I must needs tell him, That Nine Months is more by Eight and an half, than an
ordinary Controvertist would have taken to answer such a Piece in.

But in this Controversy we have not been merely upon the Defensive Part, but
have attacked their Orders, as well as defended our own. This a Learned Man of
our Church has done in a Book under this Title,

5. Roman Catholics uncertain whether there be any Miscellany Treatises.
true Priests or Sacraments in the Church of Rome.

SECT. X.
Having thus reduced the Principal Treatises that have been set forth, to their
Particular Heads, as far as in so great a Confusion of Matter I could well do
it; it remains only to add here such Treatises on both sides, as I have before
passed by, or could not be so readily brought to any special Consideration.

NOW those of this kind, which have been set forth by the CHURCH of ROME, are
these,

1. Question of Questions.

2. Why are you a Catholic?

3. Propery Anatomized; or the Papists cleared from the false Imputation of
Idolatry and Rebellion.

4. Veritas Evangelica; or the Gospel Truth asserted in xvi useful Questions.

5. Pope Pius Profession of Faith vindicated, etc.

6. Dr. Sherlock sifted from his Bran and Chaff.

7. The Pharisee unmasked.

8. Assertio vii Sacramentorum; by King Henry viiith, against Luther.

9. A Reformd Catechism, by P. Manby.

10. Animadversions on the Rishop of Bath's Sermon, etc.

To these they have, because not at leisure to write new Books, or for some
other better Reason, added an old Book written by one F. Huddleston, a
Benedictine; it is called,

11. A Short and Plain way to the Faith and Church, etc.

To this there is an Answer almost finished by a very Learned Person, who will
demonstrate to the World, how little that Book had in it to convince.

On Our Part have appeared of this Miscellany kind, these that follow.

1. Remarks on Popery Misrepresented, with reference to the Deposing Doctrine.

2. Pope Pius's Creed, with Comments.

3. The Additional Articles in Pope Pius's Creed, no Articles of the Christian
Faith.

4. A few plain Reasons why a Protestant of the Church of England should not
turn Roman Catholic.

5. Thirty plain, but sound Reasons why Protestants differ from Popery.

6. A Discourse showing that Protestants are on the safer side, notwithstanding
the uncharitable Judgment of their Adversaries; and that their Religion is the
surest way to Heaven.

7. A Pacifick Discourse of the Causes and Remedies of the Differences about
Religion, which distract the Peace of Christendom.

8. The Missionaries Arts discovered.

9. A Request to Roman Catholics to answer certain Queries on several of their
Tenets mentioned.

10. A Brief Account of the first rise of the Name Protestant, etc.

11. An Historical Relation of several great and learned Romanists that have
embraced the Protestant Religion.

12. A Catechism truly representing the Doctrines and Practices of the Church
of Rome; with an Answer to them.

13. The Plausible Arguments of a Romish Priest Answered by an English
Protestant.

14. A Discourse between two Protestants, in Answer to a Popish Catechism,
called, A Short Catechism against all Sectaries.

15. A Plain Defense of the Protestant Religion, fitted to the Meanest
Capacity: being a full confutation of the Net for the Fishers of Men.

16. Some Queries to Protestants Answered: and an Explication of the Roman
Catholic' s Belief in Four great Points considered; 1. Concerning their Church.
2. Their Worship. 3. Justification. 4. Civil Government.

17. The Judgment of Private Discretion in matters of Religion, defended in a
Sermon at S. Paul' s Covent Garden, By Mr. Kidder.

18. The Protestant Resolved: Or a Discourse, showing the Unreasonableness of
his turning Roman Catholic for salvation.

19. A Discourse, wherein is held forth the Opposition of the Doctrine,
Worship, and Practices of the Roman Church, to the Nature, Designs, and
Characters of the Christian Faith.

20. Two short Discourses against the Romanists, by Mr. Dodwell, Cambden
Professor in the University of Oxford.

21. An Answer to a Discourse concerning the Celibacy of the Clergy, printed at
Oxford.

22. A Letter to a Lady: furnishing Her with Scripture Testimonies, against the
principal Points and Doctrines of Popery.

In return to the last of these Discourses, Father Darrell the Jesuit has been
pleased to set out a Single Half Sheet, which he calls,

A Letter to a Lady: wherein he desires a Conference with the Gentleman who
writ Her that Letter.

This is indeed a new way of answering Books, and becoming the busy, assuming
spirit of that Society. One would wonder, after so little Success as they have
hitherto met with in these Encounters, what should move this Reverend Father to
be so forward to come into the same List with Goodwin, Pulton, and a few others
of the same Character. For tho abundance of Noise in a Conference, and of
Misrepresentation after, may help out a weak Cause, and an Illiterate Defender
of it, when they are sure beforehand of the person for whose sake it is held;
yet methinks they should be more wary than to run upon such Hazards, where, in
all probability, they are not like either to gain their Proselyte, or to have
the opportunity of these kind of Subterfuges to assist them.

However, tho I have neither the Honor to know the Lady, or the Author of that
Letter; yet for this good Father's satisfaction, I will venture for once to
promise him, That if her Ladyship does desire it, not only the Author of that
Letter will be ready to meet him, but to show how willing we are to encourage a
hopeful Design, let him choose his Gownman between Blackwall and Hide-park
Corner, and I dare say there is not one among them all that on this or any
other occasion will decline to show him how little reason he has for his
forwardness.

I am now hastening to an End of this Undertaking; and, I think I cannot better
finish it, than with a short Account of a Controversy which made no small
Noise in the World, between the Reverend Dr. Tenison, and Father Pulton the
Jesuit.

About Michaelmas last they met at a House in Long-Acre, on the acount of a Boy
whom Mr. Pulton had perverted from our Religion. Great things were presently
talked, as usual on such occasions, concerning this Conference; and the Papists
failed not to boast of a mighty Conquest made over the Doctor. This forced him
to resolve on a Publication of what passed, tho otherwise as little fit, as
designed to be communicated to the world. Each Party set forth his own Account,
and first Mr. Pulton his, in two Books, called,

1. A true Account of the Conference, etc.

2. A true and full Account of a Conference held about Religion, between Dr.
Thomas Tenison, and A. Pulton one of the Masters in the Savoy.

Dr. Tenison's was Entitled,

3. A true account of a Conference held about Religion, at London, Sept. 29.
1687. between A. Pulton Jesuit, and Thomas Tenison, D. D.

This was followed on the Jesuit's part, with a new Discourse, called,

4. Remarks of A. Pulton, upon Dr. Thomas Tenison's late Narrative, with a
Confutation of the Doctor's Rule of Faith; and Reply to A. Cressener's
pretended Vindication.

To which Dr. Tenison replied in a second Treatise, viz.

5. Mr. Pulton considered, etc.

And this produced another Discourse from another hand, viz. Mr. Meredith, who
was present at the Conference, called,

6. Some farther Remarks on the late Account given by Dr. Tenison of his
Conference with Mr. Pulton.

As for what is added in Mr. Pulton's 3d. Treatise in Answer to A. Cressener,
the meaning of it is this: Mr. Cressener a Schoolmaster, being present at the
Conference, Mr. Pulton in his account of it, gave him some occasion to complain
of his Relation, as to that part of it which concerned him; and therefore, to
justify himself, he published a short Treatise, to which Mr. Pulton there
refers, viz.

7. The Vindication of A. Cressener, Schoolmaster in Long-Acre, from the
aspersions of A. Pulton Jesuit and Schoolmaster in the Savoy.

And thus this Controversy ended; but yet I must not leave it, till I have
taken notice of another that it begat, and that no less memorable than the
foregoing. For upon the occasion of this Conference, a Paper was taken notice
of much used by the puny Controvertists of our days, called,

1. Speculum Ecclesiasticum: Or an Ecclesiastical Prospective Glass:

Written, as we are told, by a Soldier of that Party, T. Ward; and to which
Dr. Tenison procured a young Man, a Friend of his, to write an Answer; which he
did, Entitled,

2. The Speculum Ecclesiasticum considered, in its false Reasonings and
Quotations.

But before this was published, the Doctor obtained a Copy of a Defense which
the Soldier had prepared of his Quotations, but was not yet come from the
Press; and to finish all at once, an Answer was set forth to that too at the
same time ere it could appear abroad in the world. This the Soldier resented,
and expressed his sense of it in a Letter to Dr. Tenison; which, together with
a Reply to it, were published under the Title of,

3. An Answer to the Letter of the Catholic Soldier, in a Letter from C. D. to
A. B. the Examiner of his Speculum.

However, not long after, the Defense was published with a dreadful Name, viz.

4. Monomachia: Or, A Duel Between Dr. Thomas Tenison Pastor of St. Martins,
and a Roman Catholic Soldier.

And so I think this worthy Controversy ended.

SECT. XI.
Having now run through the several Heads of Controversy that have of late
exercised the Pens of our Learned Men in Defense of our Religion, it may not be
amiss to stop here awhile, and by a brief Recapitulation of the Whole, see what
more remains to a complete Vindication of our Selves against all the Tricks and
Artifices, as well as against the Arguments of our Adversaries.

IT is sufficiently evident from the foregoing Collection, what slender Returns
those of the Church of Rome have made to the many excellent Discourses, which
themselves (without any provocation of ours) have extorted from us. And what
prejudice they have hereby done to their Religion, I am confident they
themselves are not unsensible. I need not say what a Number of Disputes they
have altogether let fall; how many of our Books, to this day, remain
Un-answered, and are ever likely to be so. In a word, what Trifles many times
they have set forth under the arrogant Title of FULL ANSWERS to those they have
thought fit to take Notice of. And now at last, to complete all, they seem to
have utterly deserted the Controversy; and, too late, to see that Truth and
Learning are not to be run down by those who are utterly destitute of the One,
and, as far as we may be allowed to guess by their performances, have but very
slender pretenses to the Other.

The truth is, Popery is a Religion fit only for an Inquisition to maintain,
and Dragoons to propagate. Ignorance and Barbarity brought it into the World;
Interest and Passion maintain and keep it up: No sooner did Learning begin to
revive, but Popery began immediately to decay; and ever since, the One has
still decreased in proportion, as the Other has flourished. And to think at
this time a day seriously to dispute a Nation so resolute and knowing as Ours,
again into the Errors of it, plainly shows either that our Adversaries have a
very mean Opinion of our Understandings, or I am sure deserve that we should
have no very great one of theirs.

But whatever they once may have flattered themselves withal, I am confident
they now begin to be satisfied, That Popery is a Religion that will not thrive
in our Northern Climate. And tho they are pleased sometimes to divert
themselves with our Divisions, and, it may be, did from thence conceive some
hopes of promoting their Interest amongst us; yet I doubt not but they now see,
that we are not so much divided amongst our selves, as we are all of us
heartily united against them.

As for the Divines of the Church of England, how firmly they have adhered to
the Protestant Interest, is not unknown to any. Their Preaching, their
Conversation, but, above all, their Writings declare it to the World: And how
foully, by consequence, they were heretofore either mistaken, or misrepresented,
when they were exposed by some (who I believe wished them so) as Papists in
Masquerade, or at least as Popishly affected.

Never perhaps was there a Controversy more successfully managed than this has
been in these late Years. Till now, these Points were handled in such a manner,
that if the Learned applauded the performance, yet the Vulgar were but little
the better for it. But in these Discourses, Strength of Argument, and Plainness
of Discourse seem to vie with one another. The Arguments so sound, as to
convince all Gainsayers; and yet the Plainness so great, that the meanest
Persons may comprehend the force of them. And thus have they pursued not one or
two Points, but I may warrantably say, the whole Controversy betwixt us.
Insomuch that from henceforth we may well excuse them any farther trouble, till
either our Adversaries shall think fit to answer their Discourses, or to
advance some other Arguments than those which have already been obviated and
confuted.

But indeed there is no great likelihood of either of these; and I dare venture
to promise my Reader, that let those of the Church of Rome attacque him where
they please, let them in writing or discourse offer what they are able to him,
he shall here in this Collection, which I therefore on purpose make of several
of these Treatises under their proper Heads, find more than enough to answer
all their Allegations.

I. GENERAL DISCOURSES: Or such as consider the most part of the Points in
debate betwixt us.
1. The Doctrines and Practices of the Church of Rome truly Represented. 2.
Answer to the Bishop of Condom's Exposition. 3. Exposition of the Doctrine of
the Church of England. 4. Two Defenses of the Exposition. 5. An Answer to the
Compiler of the Nubes Testium. 6. The Primitive Fathers no Papists. 7. Pope
Pius's Creed with Comments. 8. The Additional Articles in Pope Pius's Creed, no
Articles in the Christian Faith.
II. Of RELIGIOUS WORSHIP.
1. A Discourse concerning the OBJECT of Religious Worship. 2. A Discourse
concerning the Devotions of the Church of Rome.
III. Of PRAYER in an UNKNOWN TONGUE.
1. A Discourse of Prayer in an Unknown Tongue. 2. A Treatise in Confutation of
the Latin Service, etc.
IV. Of the INVOCATION of SAINTS.
1. A Discourse concerning the INVOCATION of SAINTS. 2. Second Defense of the
Exposition, Artic. III. 3. An Answer to Papists protesting against Protestant
Popery. 4. Mr. Gee's third Letter to Father Sabran. 5. The Primitive Fathers no
Papists. 6. A Discourse in Answer to Monsieur de Meaux's Appeal to the IVth.
Age. Paticularly of the B. VIRGIN. See several Discourses collected, page 52,
53.
V. Of IMAGES and RELICS.
1. The Antiquity of the Protestant Religion concerning Images. 2. The
Vindication of it. -- See above, page 48. 3. The Fallibility of the Church of
Rome demonstrated, from the manifest Error of the Second Nicene and Trent
Councils, in the Point of Images. 4. A Discourse concerning the 2d. Council of
Nice, which first introduced and established Image Worship in the Christian
Church. 5. Second Defense of the Exposition, Part 2. Art. IV. 6. Answer to
Papists protesting against Protestant Popery.
VI. Of IDOLATRY.
A Discourse concerning the Nature of Idolatry, in Answer to the Bishop of
Oxon.
VII. Of MERITS; SATISFACTIONS; PURGATORY; and INDULGENCES.
1. Two Discourses of Purgatory, and PRAYERS FOR THE DEAD. 2. Purgatory proved
by Miracles. 3. Apology for the Pulpits. Appendix of Indulgences. 4. The
Primitive Fathers no Papists. 5. Summary of the Controversies for Purgatory. 6.
A Discourse concerning the Merits of Good Works.
VIII. Of the SACRAMENTS.
An Historical Discourse of the Ministers Intentions, in Administering the
Sacraments.
IX. Of CONFESSION and PENANCE.
A Discourse of Auricular Confession, as prescribed by the Council of Trent.
X. Of EXTREME UNCTION.
1. A Discourse of Extreme Unction.
XI. Of ORDERS.
1. A Vindication of the Ordinations of the Church of England. 2. Concio ad
Clerum, etc. See page 54, 55. 3. A Defense of the Ordinations and Ministry of
the Church of England. 4. A short Defense of the Orders of the Church of
England.


To these Learned Discourses we shall shortly have added another upon the same
good Subject from the Reverend and Learned Dr. Prideaux, Prebendary of Norwich,
entitled,

5. The Validity of the Orders of the Church of England made out against the
Objections of the Papists in several Letters to a Gentleman of Norwich that
desired satisfaction therein. 6. Roman Catholics uncertain whether there be any
true Priests or Sacraments in the Church of Rome.
XII. Of the REAL PRESENCE.
1. A Discourse of the Holy Eucharist in the two great Points, of the Real
Presence, and the Adoration of the Host. 2. A Reply to two Discourses, printed
at Oxford, etc.
XIII. Of TRANSUBSTANTIATION.
1. A Discourse against Transubstantiation. 2. Transubstantiation no Doctrine
of the Primitive Fathers. 3. Full View of the Doctrines and Practices of the
Ancient Church, relating to the Eucharist, etc. 4. Transubstantiation contrary
to Scripture. 5. A Paraphrase, with Notes and a Preface on the vith of St.
John. 6. The Absolute Impossibility of Transubstantiation demonstrated. See
many other Tracts above, from page 22. 7. Veteres Vindicati, in Answer to Mr.
Sclater. 8. A Discourse of the Holy Eucharist, in Answer to Mr. W. 9. Fourth
Letter to a Person of Quality. See above, p. 48. 10. Transubstantiation the
peculiar Doctrine of the Church of Rome, see p. 50.
XIV. Of the SACRIFICE of the MASS.
1. A Discourse concerning the Sacrifice of the Mass
XV. Of the ADORATION of the HOST.
1. A Discourse of the Adoration of the Host.
XVI. Of COMMUNION in BOTH KINDS.
1. A Discourse of Communion in One Kind, in Answer to the Bishop of Meaux. 2.
A Demonstration that the Church of Rome and her Councils have Erred, touching
Communion in One Kind.
XVII. Of the RULE etc. of FAITH.
1. A Discourse concerning a Guide in Matters of Faith. 2. The Protestant
Resolution of Faith. 3. Of the Authority of Councils, and of the Rule of Faith.
XVIII. Of the HOLY SCRIPTURE.
1. An Answer to the Request to Protestants. 2. A Summary of the Principal
Controversies betwixt the Church of England, and the Church of Rome. 3. The
Lay-Christian' s Obligation to read the Scripture. 4. The Peoples Right to read
the Scripture. 5. The Protestant and Popish way of Interpreting Scripture,
impartially compared; in Answer to Pax Vobis. See other Discourses above, p.
38, 39.
XIX. Of TRADITION.
1. Discourse about Tradition. 2. An Historical Discourse concerning Tradition.
3. The Council of Trent examined and disproved by Catholic Tradition. See more
Discourses above, p. 40, 41, 42. To which I must add an Excellent Treatise
omitted in its proper place, but which ought not by any means to be forgotten,
called,

4. A Treatise of Traditions. In 2 Parts.


XX. Of the CHURCH.
1. A Discourse of the Unity of the Catholic Church maintained in the C. of E.
2. A Discourse of the Charge of Novelty, brought against the Chapter of E. 3. The
Notes of the Church. See above, p. 26. 4. Of the Unity and Authority of the
Church: See Discourses above, p. 28. To which we must add a Book since
published, which ought by no means to be forgotten, being (as we are assured)
the Genuine Issue of the Great and Admired Bishop Sanderson; It is called,

5. A Discourse concerning the Church, in these following Particulars, 1.
Concerning the Visibility of the True Church: 2. Concerning the Church of Rome:
3. Concerning Protestant Churches: 4. An Answer to the Question, Where was your
Church before Luther?

6. Of the Authority and Infallibility of the Church. Several Discourses, p.
29, 30, 31.

7. Two short Discourses against the Romanists, by Mr. Dodwell.
XXI. Of St. PETER, and the POPE.
1. A Sermon Preached upon S. Peter' s Day. 2. The Catholic Balance. 3. A
Discourse of the Pope's Supremacy, in two Parts. To which we may add a Tract
since Printed, with this Title,

4. Pope Gregory the Great his Opinion of the Supremacy of the Bishop of Rome,
taken from his own Writings. See other Discourses above, p. 32, 33, 34.


XXII. Of the REFORMATION.
1. Two Discourses concerning the Necessity of the Reformation. 2. An Answer to
the Spirit of Martin Luther, and the Original of the Reformation. 3.
Reflections on the Relation of the English Reformation, Printed at Oxford. See
other Discourses above, p. 35, 36.
XXIII. Of SCHISM; and HERESY.
1. A Vindication of the Church of England, from the foul Aspersions of Schism
and Heresy, 2 Parts. 2. An Apologetical Vindication of the Church of England,
etc. See other Discourses above, p. 35, 36.
XXIV. Of the CELIBACY of the CLERGY.
1. A Discourse of the Celibacy of the Clergy. 2. An Answer to a Discourse
concerning the Celibacy of the Clergy; Printed at Oxford.
SECT. XII.
And now after so full an Account of these Discourses, and of the several
Controversies that have been handled in them; I have only remaining for the
Close of all, to give a short Account of that Excellent Undertaking in which
our Divines are at this time engaged; and which being finished, I do not see
what more can be desired in order to our full Satisfaction in this Matter.

I Have before recounted how by a joint Labor they run through the
Consideration of the pretended Notes of the Church, on which the Romanists
establish their usurped Authority. No sooner were those ended, but they
presently resolved upon another, and a more useful Project, which was to search
into our Adversaries Books; and collect all those Passages of Scripture which
are usually alleged by them to maintain their Errors. And by giving the true
Explication of them, at once to secure their Flock from their false Glosses,
and let them into a better understanding of those Sacred Books. In this
Undertaking they have already made a considerable Advance, as will appear by
the following Catalogue:

1. POPERY not founded on SCRIPTURE: Or, The Texts which Papists cite out of
the Bible for the Proof of the Points of THEIR RELIGION, examined, and showed
to be alleged without Ground.

After which follow the Texts themselves, which they bring for,

2. The Obscurity of the Holy Scriptures.

3. The Insufficiency of Scripture, and the Necessity of Tradition.

4. The Supremacy of St. Peter, and of the Pope, over the whole Church, in Two
Parts.

5. Their Doctrine of Infallibility.

6. The Worship of Angels and Saints departed. In Two Parts.

7. The Worship of Images and Relics.

8. The Seven Sacraments, and the Efficacy of them. In Two Parts.

9. The Sacrifice of the Mass. Two Parts.

10. Transubstantiation.

11. Auricular Confession.

12. Satisfactions. Two Parts.

May they go on with Success to finish this Good Work; whilst we (for whose
sake they take all these pains) encourage their Endeavors, by a firm adherence
both to them and to their Doctrine, and by our constant contending for the
Faith we have received from them, declare to all the World, that their Labor
has not been in Vain in the Lord.

FINIS.
A Postscript of N. N. to Mr. John Sergeant, occasioned by his Letter to the
Continuator of the Present State of the Controversy.
Mr. Sergeant,
HAving perused your Letter to the Continuator of the Present State of our
Controversy, I perceive, that you are mightily concerned at the Historical
Discourse concerning Tradition, which he mentioned to be writing, and that you
Letter to the Continuator, etc. p. 13.
would gladly find some way to save our Friends this vast labor, and excuse
them from this Impossible Task [of answering you]. I quickly apprehended your
meaning, that you had a great desire not to be answered; and therefore in pure
Complaisance to you, the first time I met with the Author of the Historical
Discourse, I desired him, in yours and my own Name, that he would excuse
himself the writing of that Book, and told him, That I understood by your
Letter, that you would take it extremely kindly at his hands, if he would not
give himself the trouble of answering you.

But this Courtship would do no good upon him; so that I was forced to alter my
strain, and began to threaten him; Sir, said I, if you dare to answer Mr.
Sergeant, he will be revenged of you, for he has a plaguey sharp Pen, and will
not spare you. All the answer I had to my Threats, was to be laughed at, he
assuring me he would venture that. Upon this, I told him, it was no jesting
matter; that if he did provoke you, you would turn the rough side of your
Tongue to him; and asked him, whether he could digest the being called Rogue,
or Liar, or Mad Dog? his answer was, that he could not very well: why then,
said I, Look you, Sir, you shall have these, and ten times worse, if you dare
to answer Mr. Sergeant; and upon this I out with your Letter, and showed him
how smartly you could handle your Pen. How will you like, Sir, quoth I, to be
called hot brained Letter to the Continuator, etc. p. 1.
Calvinist in Masquerade, par boiled by the scalding Zeal against Popery; into
a stanch Protestant? To be called P. 2.
a wilful and bold Calumniator? To be told, you are a Careless, P. 2.
Open, and Confident Liar? To be nick-nam'd, a Knight of the Post, that writes
without fear, shame, or wit? To have your Book called, P. 3.
a little ridiculously malicious Satyr, wholly made up of Vapor, Insolence,
silly Amplifications, Ironies, Invectives, and open Falsehoods? To be nick
named, a Thersites with a P. 5.
steeled Impudence? Sir, said I, if Mr. Sergeant could bestow all these
Complements in so very few Pages upon the Continuator, for no reason in the
world, what must you expect, if you should dare to provoke him by an Answer? Be
wise then, and learn so much Wit as to sleep in a whole skin, and thank me for
my good Advice. Now would you think it, Mr. Sergeant, that any man could have
dared to have withstood all this! And yet this strange man did, and bragged
withal, that neither this, nor more than this, should fright him from answering
you.

I had but one other Argument left to persuade him, and concluded, that it
would do his business for him. Well, Sir, said I, to be short with you, why
will you run your head against a Wall? Mr. Sergeant does assure me, that his
Fifth Letter is P. 5.
an Elaborate Discourse, and that it is (in one word) P. 8.
Unanswerable; why then will you be meddling with a Book that cannot be
disproved, that is unanswerable? I always took you for a prudent man, show it
now, and let Mr. Sergeant alone: for he says, the Best P. 8.
Wits of our Nation have also declared in his favor, that his Letters are
unanswerable: (k) That he is informed his P. 8.
Fifth Letter, in particular, has sold so well, that there are not an hundred
left of them. Nay more, that F. W. had said, that these same Letters (which you
will be daring to meddle with) had laid Dr. Stilling fleet so flat, that he
would never be able to rise again. And can you not be quiet, without bringing
the best Wits of the Nation, and F. Warner, a Jesuit, upon your head? They have
declared already against you, and they will in honor stand up for John
Sergeant, and then what will become of you? But all this was lost, Mr.
Sergeant, upon him, and was so far from silencing him, that he seemed to grow
proud of having the honor of baffling John Sergeant, and the Best Wits of our
Nation: And for F. Warner, he had like to have called him F -- for daring to
take Dr. Stillingfleet's Name into his mouth, who had so lately, and so
thoroughly exposed him in his Appendix to the Council of Trent's Examination.

In short, As to the selling of your Letter, he told me, that if he were not
mis-inform'd, it is no great wonder your Bookseller should not have above an
Hundred remaining, seeing there were but 300. in all Printed, and those at your
own cost, and a considerable number of which you gave in Presents to your
Friends, who therefore were obliged, in Gratitude, to commend it.

And now Mr. Sergeant, you see what pains I have taken in your behalf; and tho
the Continuator neglects you, and this other Author defies you, yet that your
Letter has not been without some effect upon me. What the issue of it will be,
we shall see in a little time, as soon as this Historical Discourse concerning
Tradition comes out: In the mean while, all I can further do, is heartily to
wish you, what I fear you will much more need than the Continuator does
Sincerity, A Better Cause, and a more Civil Pen; and remain, Sir,

Your very Humble Servant, N. N.


