His Majesty's Gracious LETTER to the Privy Council of SCOTLAND, for Adjourning
the PARLIAMENT.
WILLIAM R.
RIght Trusty and right entirely beloved Cousin and Counselor, right trusty
and entirely beloved Cousin and Counselor, right trusty and right well beloved
Cousins and Counselors, right trusty and well beloved Cousins and Counselors,
right trusty and well beloved Counselors, and trusty and well beloved
Counselors, We Greet you well.
The earnest desire We have of bringing all the Counsels and Deliberations of
Our Parliament to a happy Close, and with as general satisfaction as is
possible, moves Us upon some very serious considerations, to stop their
proceedings for a very short time, until some matters before them be so
Prepared, and some Interests so Adjusted, as their Unanimity thereafter may
encourage all good Men, and disappoint those, who being as well enemies to Our
Parliament as to Us, place much of their vain hopes upon apparent Divisions
amongst them. If Our Affairs here had allowed Our Presence with them, as We
once designed, We should have judged this worthy of Our immediate endeavors;
But in Our absence We have recommended to the Lord Melvill Our Commissioner (in
whose fidelity to Us, unstained affection to Religion, and to the National
Interest, Our Parliament, as well as We, may justly confide) to take such
methods for removing these evils, with their causes, as may best conduce to
prepare Matters for their Consideration, and bring Our good Subjects to that
Concord and Unity in Our Service, as shall make, We hope, that Meeting to be
called, The happy and healing Parliament. We therefore Require you forthwith to
Adjourn the Meeting of Our Parliament, from the Twenty seventh day of March
instant, to the Fifteenth day of April thereafter, and to issue forth a
Proclamation in Our Names, Continuing and Adjourning Our Parliament to the said
day, and Requiring all the Members thereof, to be present then in the usual
Manner, at the accustomed Place, and under the Certifications appointed by Our
Laws. For doing whereof, this shall be to Our Commissioner, and to you a
sufficient Warrant; And so We bid you heartily Farewell.

Given at Our Court at Kensingtoun, the Twentieth day of March, 1689/90. And of
Our Reign, the first year.

