His Majesty's Gracious LETTER To the Meeting of the Estates of His Ancient
KINGDOM of SCOTLAND.
WILLIAM R.
My Lords and Gentlemen,
THE Commissioners sent by you have presented your Letter to Us, with your
Petition, or Claim of Right, the Grievances, and your Address for turning you
into a Parliament, which were all Read in Our Presence; after which the Queen
and We did take and Sign the Oath tendered to Us by your said Commissioners,
which (by GOD'S assistance) We will Religiously observe.

At our first Engaging in this undertaking, We had particular Consideration and
Regard for Scotland, and therefore We Emitted a Declaration for that, as well
as this Kingdom, which We intend to make good and effectual to you, and you
shall always find Us ready to Protect you, and Assist you in making such Laws
as may secure your Religion, Liberties, and Properties, and prevent or redress
what ever may be justly grievous to you.

We shall never believe, that the true Interest of the People and the Crown can
be opposite; and shall always account that Our greatest Prerogative, to Enact
such Laws as may promote Truth, Peace, and Wealth in Our Kingdoms.

At your Desire, We have Resolved to turn you (who are the full Representatives
of the Nation) into a Parliament; But, because the Instructions to Our
Commissioner, and other things Necessary, cannot be expected before the Twenty
one Instant, to which you are Adjourned; Therefore, We do Authorize you to
Adjourn your Selves to the Fifth day of June Next, against which time you are
to Require all your Members to be Present; That then you may Proceed with
Unity, and Alacrity, to Dispatch what Affairs do most Conduce to the Right
Settlement of that Nation. And as We do assure you, on Our Part, that We will
not put the Advantages the Crown may have, in the Balance, with the True
Interest of the Kingdom: So We do expect on yours, that (all Animosities, and
Private Interests being laid aside) you will Cheerfully Concur with Us, in
settling the welfare of the Kingdom, by such Laws as may procure your own
Happiness, and establish the Public Good. And so We bid you Heartily Farewell.

Given at Our Court, at Hampton Court, the seventeenth day of May, one thousand
six hundred and eighty nine, and of Our Reign the first Year, By His Majesty's
Command, MELVILL.

EDINBVRGH, Printed by the Heir of Andrew Anderson, By Order of the Convention
of Estates, Anno DOM. 1689.


