Ne Suitor ultra Crepidam.

OR BRIEF ANIMADVERSIONS Upon the NEW ENGLAND Anabaptists LATE FALLACIOUS
NARRATIVE; Wherein the Notorious Mistakes and Falsehoods by them Published, are
Detected.

By (...) Willard Teacher of a Church in Boston in New England.

Prove. 18. 17. He that is ^^rst in his own cause seems just; but his
neighbor comes and searches him. Romans 16. 17. Now I beseech you Brethren,
mark them which cause divisions and offenses contrary to the Doctrine which ye
have learned, and avoid them

18. For they that are such, serve not our Lord Jesus Christ, but their own
belly, and by good words, and fair speeches deceive the hearts of the simple.

BOSTON IN NEW ENGLAND, Printed by S. Green, upon Assignment of S. Sewall. And
are to be Sold by Sam. Philips, at the West end of the Exchange: 1681.

To the READER.
THe Anabaptists in New England, have in their Narrative lately published,
endeavored to make Candida de nigris and de candentib^s atra, themselves the
Innocent persons, and the Lords servants here, no better than Persecutors. In
which respect, it has been judged necessary, that some one should Animadvert
upon what they have done, that so such persons as have been imposed upon by
their untrue Relations, may be disabused. Many are of the mind, that it is not
worth the while, to take notice of what is emitted, by men so obscure and
inconsiderable. And I confess I have thought so my self, so far as I am
personally concerned in any of their reflections; and therefore shall not lose
precious time in a needless defense. Ita concurrimus utrinque; illiextremo
furore, ego summo contemptu; and vincit mea audacia in Christo. It seems to me,
that the Reverend Author of the following Animadversions, has showed much
humility, in condescending to take persons in hand, between whom, and himself
there is such an Impar congressus, and let it be, that for this once, He has
contradicted that proverbial saying Aquila non capit Mus^^s. Had he not been
sensible, that by good words, and fair speeches the hearts of the simple are
deceived, this pains would have been spared. I verily believe, that the
Anabaptists by their fallacious Narrative, have grievously offended God;
inasmuch as the things by them misrepresented, were not done a far off (for
then mistakes about them would have been excusable) but at home, where right
Information was easy to have been obtained; had they been willing to have
known, and that others should have known the truth. And by this means, have
they done ill for themselves, forcing others to discover the enormities of
some, whose nakedn^ss and shame should not have been divulged to the World, and
to posterity forever; but slept in a grave of silence: had not their own
Narrative brought them forth. They have also by Letters, misrepresented worthy
and honorable persons as well as things, and their reports have been received
elsewhere, with too much readiness and credulity, as I perceive by certain
Complainants, whosay they understand that the present Honorable Governor of
this Colony, had threatened th^^ poor people, their Christian friends (as they
style them) with death: which rereport of theirs, is like too many particulars
in their vindication, an utter mistake; ne qui^ gravius dicam. The Governor
(whose integrity, wisdom, and moderation is well known) has sometimes moved,
that an old severe Law made against those that should manifest any public
contempt of that ordinance of Infant Baptism, might be lenifyed. So far is the
scandalous report which they have raised upon the Governor (and caused it to
fly three thousand miles) from being true.

As for the Brethren, that have thought good to prefix an Epistle to such a
Narrative, and therein to declare, that Molestation is given, and severity is
exercised (...) Antipaedobaptists in New England, merely for a supposed Error
about the subject of Baptism, controverted amongst learned and holy men, they
are marvelously deceived in that their supposition* possibly I do not fully
cape their meaning when they say, that for one Protestant Congregation to
persecute another; is more unreasonable than all the cruelties of the Romish
Church: Some are ready to take it for an intimation that the Churches of Christ
in New England, are more cruel and unreasonable than the Romish Synagogue; like
as the Anabaptists in Germany, look d upon such Men as Luther, Bullinger,
Calvin, Zuinglius, etc. to be worse than the Pope and his Cardinals. But I ^ope
the^ are far from any such insinuation, and that they design no other then to
suggest unto us, that for men whom God has by his holy spirit made one through
faith in Christ, to be cruel to their Brethren, is most unreasonable. Which
A^^ertion, (though true in Thesi) if applied to the Churches of the Lord Jesus,
in this Wildern^ss; it is both an erroneous conception, and un^u^t reflection.
Protestants ought not to persecute any; yet, that Protes^ants man punish
Protestants; and as the case may be circumstanced, a Congregation of such as
call themselves Protestants: cannot rationally be denied. Those of the
Congregational way (as themselves in the preface to their confession of Faith
have professed) f^lly concur with the old puritan Non-conformists, such as
Cartwright, Rainold, Whitaker, Bains, Parker, etc. in whose writings,
Congregational Principles, about Church Government, are to be seen Now the old
Nonconformists (notwithstanding their sufferings from those that took delight
to smite their fellows^rvants) did believe that disorders in whole
Congregations were liable to the (...) Magistrates censure, as is evident from
that excellent and judicious Book, called Pu^i^anismus Anglicanus, composed by
Mr. Bradshaw, and published by Dr. Ames. Affirmant si particul^ is aliqua
ecclesia erraverit, Magistratus civilis debet eandem in ordinem redigere, Cap.
2. Th. 6. Why then should we be rendered as men of bitter, persec^ting, rigid
spirits and principles; when we say nothing b^t what our Fathers, the old
Puritans, (worthy Confessors, and sufferers for the Truth) constantly affirmed.
Our famous Cotton, was another Moses, in respect of meekness, and christian
forbearance, as to Dissenters from his judgment in matters of a lesser
concernment, yet would he sometimes make a zealous Protestation, that if
Magi^^rates in New England should tolerate Transgressors against the Rules of
godliness (as well as offenses contrary to what the rules of honesty require)
he believed that God would not long tolerate them. And whereas the Brethren
that have subscrib^d the Epistle, pray the Honorable Governors in
New England, to be careful of doing that which may give occasion of trouble to
Nonconformists elsewhere: I shall heartily join with them in the same request;
and I can assure them, that consideration has caused more indulgence to be
exercised toward their Friends (as they call them) here, than ever they were
worthy of. And I hope it will be so still, so far as may consist with Scripture
Rules, and the safety of the interest of Christ's Kingdom in this Wilderness.
These Churches are Tender vines, and I cannot persuade my self, that the
Brethren when they rightly understand things, will think that the Magistrate
should see little Foxes spoiling them, and should look on all the while, as one
no way concerned. As for those of the Antip^^dobaptistical persuasion, which
differ from us only in that particular, I would speak to them as unto Brethren,
whom (their Error (for so I believe it is) notwithstanding) I love, and would
b^ar with, and exercise the same indulgence and compassion toward them, as I
would have others do to me, who feel my self compassed with infirmities.

I have been a poor labourer in the Lords Vineyard in this place upwards of
twenty years: and it is more than I know, if in all that time, any of those
that scruple Infant Baptism, have met with molestation from the Magistrate
merely on the account of their Opinion. I would therefore entreat the Brethren,
(and others of their persuasion; who may be of a Christian and moderate spirit)
that have subscribed the Epistle, seriously to consider;

1. That the place may sometimes make a great alteration, as to indulgence to
be expected. It is evident, that that Toleration is in one place, not only
lawful, but a necessary duty, which in another place would be destructive; and
the expectation of it irrational. That which is needful to ballast a great
ship, will sink a small boat. If a considerable number of Antipaedobaptists
should (as our Fathers here did) obtain Liberty from the State, to transport
themselves and families, into a wast American wilderness, that so they might be
a peculiar People by themselves; practicing all, and only the institutions of
Christ: if now Pado-Baptists should come after them, and intrude themselves
upon them, and when they cast men out of their society for moral Scandals,
entertain them: Surely they would desire such persons; either to walk orderly
with them, or to return to the place from whence they came. And if they would
do neither, they would think that such Pado-Baptists were blameworthy: let
them th^n do as they would be done by; and deal by us, as they would have us to
deal by them; were they in our case, and we in theirs.

2. Let them please to consider, that those of their persuasion in this place,
have acted with so much irregularity and profaneness, that should men of any
other persuasion whatsoever, have done the like, the same severity would have
been used toward them. I truly profess unto them, that if any men, either of
the Presbyterian, or Congregational (or never so much of my) persuasion in
matters referring to Church Discipline, should behave themselves as the
Anabaptists in Boston, in New England, have done, I think they would have
deserved far greater punishment than any thing that to this day, has been
inflicted upon them. Whether the sentence pass^d on them by the Churches,
proceeding in the Name of the Lord Jesus, were only the abuse of an holy
Ordinance; or a righteous process according to Scripture Rule: the following
Animadversions, will discover unto those that are willing to weigh matters
impartially, in the balance of the Sanctuary. How vain is it for men, after
they have received such Excommunicates into their communion, and then perceive
that the World cries shame on them for it; and some of their own persuasion
reprove them: in stead of abhorring themselves before God and the World; and
purging out the old leven, to think they shall come off with saying, It was a
defect! and who in this world are without their failings? and then by retaining
such in their communion to persist in their scandal to this very day? To
parallel the case of the Anabaptists in New England, with that of the
Nonconformisis in England, seems most unreasonable. Do the conforming
Congregations there, cast men out of their fellowship for moral, scandalous
evils? I doubt the godly Discipline which their Liturgy confesses was in the
Primitive Church, and should be in theirs, is not found amongst them: or, if
they should, I believe the Noncon^ormists would be loath to receive any such
into their Communion; which the New England Anabaptists have done, and have
persisted therein, from year to year, and that after conviction. And although
in their d^luding Narrative, they seek to palliate this offense, by a
fallacious Repres^ntation of things; their iniquity is marked before the Lord,
Nitre and much Soap will never wash them cl^an. If then Dr. Stillingfleet, or
any other shall go about to stir up Persecution against conscientious
Nonconformists in England, and endeavor to justify it by the practice of
Congregational Men in New England: we see not that any real advantage has been
given, (only taken) from proceedings here. The Author of the Book called The
Mischief of Impositions, has given a fair, and rational answer to the Doctor,
as to this particular. They say, those of the Congregational way in England,
plead for Anabaptists liberty as for their own. That they plead for liberty and
indulgence to be extended toward those that differ from them only in that
point of Paedo-Baptisme, I believe: when I was in England, I did so my self;
and if I were their now, I would do so again: but that they should plead for
liberty unto such practices, as our Anabaptists have been guilty of, is not
easy to believe; or, if they do, it is because such Narrators as these
Animadverted upon, have by untrue Relations misguided them into undue
Apprehensions. Nay, I am fully convinced, that those of their own way, if of
serious and gracious Spirits, when once they are possessed with a true Relation
of things concerning them, will see cause to condemn New England less, and
those their Friends more, than at first they were aware of: How did they bear
the World in hand, that the Churches here did Excommunicate them for nothing
but their Opinion, in scrupling Paedobaptisme! But that therein they have dealt
most untruely, and injuriously; the subsequent Answer to their Narrative has
made apparent from the Church-Recodrs concerning those matters.

Finally, let me entreat the Brethren to believe, that some of us would show as
much indulgence unto truly tender Consciences, as themselves It is not so long
since our own Necks bled under an intolerable yoke of Imposition upon
Conscience; as that we should forget what it is to be so dealt with; or
exercise that severity toward any, that we have our selves complained of, in
others. But the Brethren will readily own that some men have pretended
Conscience, when pride, and perverseness in the will* have been at the bottom:
They will also confess that a mere pretense of Conscience, is not enough to
bear men out in an evil practice. All the difficulty is, in discerning the one
of these from the other. Blessed Mr. Burrou^hs in his excel'ent Irenicum, has
laid down Rules concerning this: And if that which he says, page 32. be sound
Doctrine (as undoubtedly it is) some of our Anabaptists, have not such
characters of a tendor Consc^ence upon them, as were to be desired. If men will
call unjustifiable Practic^s by the name of their Opinion: and when their evils
are born witn^^s against make out cries, that they suffer for their Opinion,
and for their Conscience: How is it possible, for those to help them, who
desire to keep their own Consciences pure, and without offense toward God, by
being faithful according to that capacity the Lord has set them in; and giving
a due testimony against those things, which they believe provoke him to
jealousy? And if Anabaptists in this Land, have declared their agreement with
those of the like persuasion in England, as to matters of Faith and Worship: I
doubt not, but that there are many godly Antipaedobaptists there, who will
never declare their agreement with those here, as to their evil practices,
which have been so offensive to Christ, and unto his People in New England.

INCREASE MATHER.
Boston New-Engl. Nov. 4. 1681.
Brief Animadversions Upon the New England Anabaptists late Narrative wherein
the great Mistakes by them published are made Apparent.
SECTION I.
THere are two things which every one who designs to give the World an Account
of the History of things done, ought principally to endeavor; viz. 1. Truth of
expressions, with a plain and full recital of all essential passages thereto
belonging. 2. Candor, in Animadverting charitably upon them, not setting our
malicious gloss upon things deserving a better interpretation, which rules if
the Author of this Narrative had in any degree observed, this reply had been
needless: our present business is not to vindicate the Doctrine and Practice of
these Churches in point of Infant* Baptism, which if the Anabaptists judge not
to have been already sufficiently performed, we cannot help that; but it being
so that these Churches in New England are herein charged with persecution
raised against that sort of men, and both their and our management of affairs
depending between them and us in that respect are grossly misrepresented, and
convincible of manifest falsehoods, of which they cannot be (except willingly)
ignorant, and (should no answer be made) the World might judge us truly charged
as to matter of fact, and on that account draw such conclusions as best suit
their own apprehensions; yea, our best Friends might possibly be prejudiced at
us: it was thought needful to prevent a second Error by discovering the first.
In such a case the wise man's counsel seems applicable, Prove. 26. 5.

Concerning the Author of this Narrative, Divine Providence has removed him
from our endeavors of conviction, and the Laws of Humanity (as well as
Religion) forbid us now to be over severe in our censures of him; his
everlasting estate is not my business to enquire afte^* nor would I at all
reflect upon him, if an Answer could have been made without it: However it
being John R^ssel with the consent of the Whole, of whom they tell us he was an
Officer, it concerns them therefore to stand by it as far as they can whom to
render ob^oxious, and make known to the World, so far as they have made it
necessary to do it by this script of theirs, is the professed design of this
Reply, and let the R^a^er take notice, that my controversy is with an
Historian in point of Truth and Falsehood, and not with a Divine in matter of
Orthodoxy and Error: in which we hope the Anabaptists will not be angry, if we
are as tender of our reputation, as they were in printing of their Pamphlet for
the clearing of their Innocence.

SECT. II.
I shall begin with the Title, which promises fair, and looks innocently; but
yet (methinks) might have done better to have spoken plainly and told us indeed
what it intended. It is not fair to invite a man with a specious show, and then
cheat him: he calls it a Brief Narrative, and we promised our selves to find
an honest toothless Relation, but (upon reading it) it seems more fit to be
called a Satirical Invective; for certainly the principal part of it is rather
a Sarcasme than a Narrative; or what if we call it a Romance? which (according
to the use of the word) is a story built upon a real Subject, but adorned with
Fictions, or a representation of things according as we fancy they should be,
not regarding what they are indeed: But let it be a Narrative, what is the
business it has to acquaint us with? Considerable Passages. Sometime the worth
and excellency of a thing, sometimes the newness and strangeness of it render
it considerable: and sometimes it is very considerable whether the thing be so
or no. But what is it that is so consiberable? why the story of the first
gathering, and further progress of a Church of Christ in Gospel Order in Boston
in New England: It is certainly considerable (and admirable too) that Christ
should have any Church in Gospel Order in the world, since Satan and his
Instruments are so busy to wast and overturn all Order; partly by secret
conspiracies, and open persecutions partly by seducing Spirits, and disorders
of Erroneous persons, such as Quakers, Anabaptists, etc. but through Gods
goodness there are more Churches then one in Gospel order in Boston in N Engl.
whereas that is rather an Vbiquitarian Church. But what Church may this be
which is so eminently observable? Oh! it is a Church common^y (though falsely)
called by the name of Anabaptists? and it is well that it is falsely so called,
else we should hardly have believed it a Church in Gospel Order, because we
know Baptism is one of the foundations of Gospel Order, Heb* 6. 1, 2. But are
they falsely so called? Alas for our ignorance! we have mistaken the men all
this while: Men render themselves suspected when they deny their names: but
they have but one Baptism* therefore not to be called Anabaptists; but to deal
fairly by Anabaptists we mean no other but those men that deny the Baptism
received in ^nfancy to be any Baptism, and seek another pretended one of their
own, and thereby undermine the Baptism that has been practiced and owned by
all the Churches of Christ in the World ever since Christ, excepting a few of
their own sect* and if the word be not so proper, yet being generally used, and
well understood, it pleads custom, and may do better then a new one: their own
term ( Baptists) is fallacious, insinuating that there are none for Baptism
but themselves: next he tells us the mov^ng cause of that Narrative, which is
very honest and good; It is for the clearing of their innocence and that every
good man may lawfully do, and sometimes ought. The first Fathers in the Church
wrote their Apologies. But it were better to be innocent without a plea, then
to do misc^ief, and then wipe their mouth an^ say* I have done no wickedn^ss.
It was high time to purge themselves with a Narrative, when there were so many
scandalous things laid to their charge but, if either the things be not laid to
their charge, that part of their defense will be va^n and superfluous, or the
things laid to their charge be both true an^ scan alous, they will never be
able to render them other then so by writing Narratives.

SECT. III.
In the next place* we have an Epistle to the Reader, to usher in the
Narrative* Dignum patela op rculum. If strangers will needlessly be meddling,
they must thank themselves if they get a blow. They tell us, they ^eave the
ensuing Apology to plea^ ^o it self (But it had been friendly to have spoke a
word for it, it being able to speak so little for it self) yet they are willing
to give in their testimony how that one and the same spirit in Christians makes
them in passions and affections present, though locally distant, and extends a
fellow-feeling with the members of the same body) and if that were proper to
sincere Christians, or characteristical of them, they had said something: But
experience lets us know, that a spirit of Error is as diffusive, as that of
sincerity, and a common cause (though bad) can tie men up in a combination and
conspiracy: hence they do well to subjoyn that plea from their perfect
agreement in matters of Faith and worship] for if so, then self interest also
obliges them to take part with their Brethren: and they do it to purpose,
having squeezed the quintessence of the Book into their Epistle. The intendment
of it is to accuse this Government and these Churches of Persecuting the Saints
and Servants of Christ: and they begin with the Churches, where (wisely taking
the Question for granted, which might have put them to some difficulty to have
proved) they endeavor to aggravate our guilt by diverse Arguments.

1. Our practices are contrary to the Principles and practices of our Brethren
of the Congregational way in England, which do equally plead for the liberties
of the Anabaptists as their own] But let them not be angry if we are hard to
believe that those of the Congregational way i^ England do judge such
Anabaptists as these in New-Engl. to be as Orthodox as themselves, and deserve
like countenance and favor; or that Magistrates and Churches are no ways
bound to labor (according to the power given them) to suppress Errors
scandalously persisted in, or to manifest a practical dislike of them: is not
this to scandalize the congregational Churches there, that they may better
accuse them here?

2. Our practices are contrary to the design of our first Planters, who left
all for liberty of Conscience, and we are the Children of those that felt the
lash of Imposi^^^^, and yet will show to others the like severity] I perceive
they are mistaken in the design of our first Planters, whose business was not
Tolerations ^^ were pro^essed Enemies of it, and could leave the World
professing they died no Libertines. Their business was to settle, and (as much
as in them lay) secure Religion to Posterity, according to that way which they
believed was of God. If (therefore) this People parted with so much, and were
at such charges for their liberties why then do the Anabaptists trouble them,
who had neither scot nor lot in that charge? let them go and do the like, and
we shall not so molest their Churches, as they have shamefully done by ours.

3. It is against their Brethren] the sincerity of the expression is much to be
suspected, since we know that they do deny us to be, so much as visible
Christians, while they declare our Baptism, not only to be a mal
Administration, but a mere nullity. But granting it, we never could find that
Discipline rightly administered, was against Christian charity; and yet the
subject of it is Brethren; yea the neglect of that duty (in case) would argue
want of love, if not hatred, Levit. 19. 17.

4. But they are Brethren that avowedly profess and appeal to the same rule]
But what if the Churches, in their bearing witness against them, do appeal to
the same rule? and think they should violate it by neglecting this duty, how
shall we do then? why do they censure our Church censures against them that
have sometimes been our Members? we do avowedly appeal to the same rule. Is it
sufficient to satisfy men in one another proceedings (though contrary)
because they appeal to the same rule; this must certainly be some Lesbian Rule,
that may square to all men's Opinions and fancies.

5. That the present molestation given them is merely for a supposed Error
relating to the Subject of Baptisme] Here learn, how dangerous a thing it is,
to take a thing for truth, upon the credit of prejudiced persons. How untrue
this is, there will be afterward occasion in diverse examples to make appear:
only we must give them leave to call it a supposed error; but with whom? with
them it is a believed truth, and of such weight, that it were better set a fire
on the World than not stand up in it is defense: and (I can assure them) with us
it is more than a supposed error: and yet that that has been the only ground
of their being molested, shall also appear to be more than a supposed falsehood.

6. It is a matter which has been, and (if we believe them) is still sub
judice: controverted, and that between learned and judicious, holy and good
men] why then should they be so stiff for it, or we against it? it is very
weak for men to be so rigid on all hands about a nice controversy, and
indeterminable question, which learned and good men have not these 1600 years
known how to determine. But (upon search) I find it has been both professed
and defended in all ages by the Churches of Christ: though this truth (as many
others) has not escaped the opposition of men left by God to a spirit of
error: but it has fared as well, as almost any great Gospel Truth; God having
ever raised up worthy Patrons for the defense of it. If fundamental Truths must
be the more charily or dubiously asserted because men enfatuated with Error and
holding perverse, principles, yet pretending holiness (and what Heretic ever
did other) impugn it, it would be a plausible way to subvert all.

With these Arguments they fortify their conclusion, viz. that for one
Protestant Congregation (on such occasions) to persecute another (where there
is no pretense to insallibility in deciding controversies) seems much more
unreasonable then all the cruelties of the Romish Church* etc.] Before I saw
that Narrative, one told me it was a moderate piece, and showed a Christian
spirit. If they intend us not in these words they are vain m^n; if they do,
they render themselves the Persecutors, pursuing us with bitter words who have
this to say that in all our dealings with them, we have (allowing humane
infirmities) walked by the golden Rule they urge upon us (if rightly
understood) doing as we would be done by.

Now they have a word of counsel to the Governors in New England, to consider
their Brethren of the Congregational way in England lest they justify those
that trouble them there*] They owe thanks to any that will fairly put them in
mind of their duty, only in this counsel there lurks a dangerous evil, which
they (in retaliation of cour^esies) are to be admonished of, viz. they forget
that the cause evermore alters the quality of the action: nor was it ever
thought by any (of a ^ound mind) that justice should not be administered upon
offenders, lest others (by misapplication) should thence take occasion to wrong
the innocent: and the Honorable Governors in New England have learned, and
are persuaded that if they should sin, by omitting duty for man's sake* they
should both dishonor God and grieve their Brethren To scare us the more with
this, they tell us how Dr. Stillingfleet improved it to the same purpose
against us.] all I shall say to this is we cannot confess guilty, for the
censure of those, who neither knowing what we do, nor weighing the difference
of cases (which they would make parallels) rashly conclude against us: we
humbly conceive men that are not prejudiced will easily discern that
suppressing with all gentleness and tenderness, a dangerous error and of bad
tendency (such as Anabaptism especially so circumstanced as in New England it
has been) and the enforcing of Ceremonies in Religion, which are neither
directly, nor by any good consequence required, in or by the word of God do
differ to^o coelo.

For the concluding Prayer, we can heartily put it up to God, and might have
joined with them in it too, had they not added it as a cloak to the slander of
their Epistle.

SECT. IV.
Now follows the Narrative it self, in which the first thing that accosts us is
(indeed) a brief account of their congregating, or that act of theirs in
gathering a Church; where we have the moving cause, the manner, and the
materials of it.

1. The moving cause of it is brief and pithy: It pleased God to move their
hearts] and if this be indeed so, then those that opposed them in it, and
endeavored to suppress them, will be found fighters against God, and to act in
vain, for the Will of God shall be accomplished, and no weapon formed against
it shall prosper: and this Argument we shall find them making use of ( page
2.) But who knows not that all Heretics pretend to the Spirit and Direction of
God, though it is certain that in so doing they take the Name of God in vain:
and it is little less then Blasphemy to bring God in, to patronize their sinful
Actions: For,

1. God does not graciously move the hearts of any to irregular and unlawful
Actions; and though men are very prone to entitle Him to it, yet He utterly
disclaims it, Jam. 1. 13, 14.

2. And it is certain that when men grow wanton and despise the Ordinances; God
(many times) judicially gives them strong delusion to believe a lie, 2 Thessalonians.
2. 10, 11. and that is none of the least, to misjudge a seducing spirit to be
the spirit of God.

3. To follow an erring Conscience, which verily believes his error to be the
truth, is not to follow the direction of the Spirit of God. If what God
forbids, Conscience persuades, this is not of Gods approbation, for so he
should be against himself. It is a snare and a judgment to be under such a
Conscience; so that they must pardon us if we suspect the moving cause.

2. The persons thus moved are described from their former experience of his
teaching: such whom by his Word and Spirit he had instructed and taught in the
way, ande.] Thus one error begets another: what have we to do with the
Anabaptists Kuria doxa? do none but the Orthodox bring this plea? we expected
he should have given us some Rules by which we might have known it. It is a
piece of arrogance for men to beg the principle, or forcibly impose upon our
belief that which is the very Dispute and Controversy between us, i. e.
whither it be an error or no: and they tell us God taught them, therefore it is
no error, true, but if we reply, it is an error, therefore God taught them not,
where are we now? are Anabaptists only Masters of Rules and Canons? may not we
as easily deny, as they affirm without proof?

3. They entered into solemn Covenant to walk in Communion in the practice of
all the holy appointments of Christ, etc. and so became a Church of Christ]
This alone will not make them a Church of Christ, for if so, then every
combination of Enthusiasts, Ranters, Socinians, etc. may become Churches of
Christ, for they do pretend, and promise each other in words as much as these,
or any other Churches in the World can do: but there are Synagogues of Satan
too, in the World. If they who are fit to be cast out of Churches, (and are so
actually) combine and covenant, does that make them a Church?

4. They are men of holy and exact walking, viz. In the practice and
performance of the holy Ordinances of Christ according to Divine Institution)
If men were not proud and confident, they would never impose their assertions
upon us with an ipse dixit: grant but an Anabaptist, that his Opinion is true,
and he can easily prove that ours is false; but if you question that, he has
no more to say to you. It is certain they have exploded Infant Baptism, which
has been acknowledged by the body of the Church Christian in all ages: not
only for an Institution, but a principal Institution of Christ; but if these
deny it, then we are mistaken. How like holy men they have walked will appear
afterward.

5. He gives us the names of the men who laid this precious Foundation: and if
they had been such men as had done this to begin right Church Order in
New England, they ought not to be forgotten but had in honorable remembrance;
but if they were (and I am afraid the great day will discover that they were)
the Heads and Ringleaders of a Schism, and culpable cause of great troubles in
the Churches of Christ in New England, they had better been forgotten.

SECT. V.
And now we have a Church gathered of such excellent materials, and in so
regular a way; what reception is it they find in New England? one would think
that such a Church, and in such a place, should have been highly esteemed,
strenuously defended by the civil Magistrate, and imitated by all the Churches,
who came into the Wilderness on very purpose to serve God in his own way, but
unhappily missed of it, till the Anabaptists found it out, but lo! they meet
the quite contrary; they are assailed with troubles and afflictions: and from
whom? certainly a vile Generation; but it must be born, they are not the first
sufferers for the truth (nor for falsehood neither) it has always befallen
those whom God has singled out from others to bear witness to the truth] true,
the World ever persecuted the Church: But have not the People of God also had
their zeal to maintain the ways of God, and counted it their duty to use means
to suppress such as upon what pretense soever, sought to pervert them? and if
God have proved his People with Anabaptists (as he is wont to do his Church
with Seducers) who shall blame them that have shown their fidelity to God, in
endeavoring to stop their progress? and thus the just sufferings of these men
will be a poor Argument to prove them the servants of Christ, though men may be
sufferers, yet they are not presently Martyrs: Causa, non passio, facit
Martyrem.

But these precious Saints, (acted by the right Spirit of the old Confessors)
had counted the cost, and therefore cheerfully past these pikes and are now
gone to rest] and it is pity to disturb them only it might not be amiss to
remember, that the vilest Heretics and grossest Blasphemers have resolutely
and cheerfully (at least sullenly and boastingly) suffered, as well as the
people of God; (Histories are pregnant with e^amples) and therefore hitherto
they have said nothing to convince any one of their Orthodoxy and sincerity:
they may be right, they may be out of the way, for all this.

SECT. VI.
We have now done with the Narrative (handsomely contrived in one page) the
other fourteen are Apologetical which they were put upon for three Reasons.

1. To Emblazon the Names of their dead Founders, and prevent the Worlds being
mistaken in them: and truly, first Founders deserve a Record, and they should
be unworthy Successors if they did not Canonize them: though (as things are
circumstanced) some wise men think they had done them a kindness, if they had
said nothing: and to me, I am sure, for then I had been prevented this
undesired task of publishing the follies of men after they are dead. The child
does his Father the best kindness to say nothing of him, when by speaking he
does but revive his Infamy. But I take it for a just judgment of God on that
generation of men that by a fallacious Narrative, they should enforce us to
make the World acquainted with the scandalous conversation of these beginners,
which had otherwise slept in the private records of those Churches wherein they
were acted.

2. The very grievous Scandals cast upon these Beginners] Scandalous men (if
incorrigible) deserve to have scandals cast upon them, and if we shall prove
these such, they must (for ought I know) bear the Reproach of it and thank
themselves.

But yet there are two things wherein they are to be blamed that lay scandal to
them; though just, yet it is unjustly done, viz.

1. The frame of spirit they do it with, they a^e rugged Spirits) truly this
becomes not men who profess a Spirit of Meekness: and yet sometimes the Gospel
calls Christians to wit^stand Seducers to the face; to characterize some men in
their proper colors, and contend earnestly with them for the Truth: yea,
experience tells us that such a rough thing as a New England Anabaptist, is not
to be handled over tenderly: the spirit which they have at all times discovered
under the greatest disadvantages (and God grant that they may never have more
advantage over us) easily tells us what they would have been, if circumstanced
as those whom they accuse.

2. A wicked end: and a good action may be spoiled by a bad design at bottom:
We have charged them on purpose to make them odious, and make the World believe
them a people not fit to live) men wonderfully sagacious, and extremely
charitable! I dare say none of ours ever told them this was their end; why
might they not have interpreted it zeal? Paul so interpreted his persecuting
Countrymen. But, suppose it be made appear that we have not endeavored to
reader their persons odious but only their perverse Doctrine, and that we have
used all meeknes, patience, gentleness toward men in that capacity we took
them to be in? for any such passage of any of ours as judging them not fit to
live, I know not of it, nor (I believe) do they, nor do we patronize any such
expression though (since their Book has so many in it) I know not why this may
not go for one of their mistakes: and now they appeal to God) we accept it
readily.

SECT. VII.
Their great Sufferings are of two sorts.

1. In Estate and Liberties of which we must not expect a particular account,
and are charitably to th^nk it is because they are tender of our reputation:
but errorsly in generals, a particular account might have been more satisfying:
These things look directly upon our Magistracy, in vindication of them a word
will suffice. Two things take up this discourse; The persecution, and the
success.

1. The persecution is compendiously represented. Some of us were oftentimes
brought before Councils, etc.] (I suppose they allude ^o Mat. 10. 17.) To which
let this be taken as a Reply, viz. that as the Honored Magistrates here are
Christian, so have they judged it their duty to maintain the ways of Christ,
and strengthen them by civil Laws, which has not only been the practice of
Reformers of old, but the constant judgment of the Church of Christ ever since
the Apostles. If evil minded men will take this advantage to oppress the truth,
it is no more then may be done in all other cases: and as it is thought no good
plea to keep the Scriptures from the la^ty, lest they should learn to be
Heretics; so neither to deny the Magistrate his due power on supposition that
he may abuse it. On this Principle our worthy Rulers have made Laws against
many Sects and Intruders, and among the rest the Anabaptists. That in quelling
the Anabaptists they do not oppose the truth, but suppress Error they are fully
persuaded: and although they never pretended to a Lordship over men's
Consciences, yet they account the outward man is subject to them: and if we
must tarry till all men are agreed about what is truth* before we oppose Error,
we shall stay till there is no need of it. For the progress of our Magistracy
in the execution of these Laws, they have been so far from a violent, eager, or
willing taking advantage against these men, that (notwithstanding their
opprob^^ous speeches when they have been before them, their scornful carriages,
and purposed endeavors to irritate them by insolent challenges) they have
always proceeded slowly, tenderly, far on this side the Law, as those who
sought not to ruin either their Names, Liberties, or Estates. How often when
fines have been laid upon them, have they stopped the Execution? if any have been
imprisoned, it has been but when dared to it: and though once a Sentence of
Banishment did pass upon two of their Ringleaders (heady violent men) yet then
they neglected, and scorned to take notice of it (resolving to run utmost
hazards) neither was this improved as any advantage against them. Nor is it to
be wondered that our Governors have been opposite in particular to these men,
since, if they could get head among us, they would certainly undermine the
Churches (...) Order, destroy piety, and introduce profaneness.

2. For the success of these endeavors: God is pleased still to uphold them,
and they are by these means not weakened, but strengthened and increased)
Methinks I hear the Jews crying, we are delivered to do all th^se abominations.
Let them but remember that many things are done by Gods permissive providence,
when the doers have not his approbation: nor is it an unfailing ground of
sincerity that they have withstood such trials and are increased: we know (do
what we can to restrain them) Evil men and Seducers shall wax worse and worse,
and many shall follow their p^^nicious wa^es. Nor is it to be wondered at, that
persons discontent with the yoke of Christ in the Churches or taking offense at
particular Administrations, which might touch their own interest, have so
readily followed the faction of the Anabaptists, of which sort of men, the most
of their society and Founders here, have consisted.

SECT. VIII.
2. Their great sufferings in their Name; and (it should seem) there are many
terms of Reproach cast upon them: pardon them then if they are very tender of
their Reputation. Only they should have gone orderly to work, first to have got
a good name, and then to have kept it by walking worthy of it. Here we have a
file of scandalous things laid to their charge) they might have done well to
have told us where, and by whom, that we might have compared them* but (I see)
we must do what we can and consider what is charged, and how justly, and
whither they are wiped away in their desense. These are no sewer then eight:
let us examine them.

1. They are a Schismatical company who have rent themselves from the Churches
of Christ, and received into their society such as have disorderly left the
Churches.)

Ans. This charge (in terms) was never made against them by us, and so part of
their vindication is superfluous; for we never said all of them rent from these
Churches: some were strangers to us till their turbulency made them too well
known; and others were never joined to other Churches, but had l^ved without
Communion. But that they are a society of schismatics, (if Schism be an
unjust ren^ing from a Church of Christ) we assert. Three things they (in words)
grant. 1. That our Churches are Churches of Christ ( page 14.) 2. That foam of
them were once Members of them ( page 4.) 3. That some of theirs did depart
from these Churches and join in this new combination ( page 5.) now to prove
them hence, a company of Schismatics: Observe,

1. That whosoever combine with, and encourage Schismatics, have fellowship
with them in their sin.

2. That Thomas Gold, and Thomas Osborn (the persons in dispute) were
Schismatics, or did unjustly rend from the Church whereof they were before
Members will appear by a true Relation of matters of fact (for this story of
the Narrative, and Truth are Strangers) whereof there is sufficient Testimony
to be found in the Records of the Church at Charlstown (whereof they were
Members) and there are many saithful witnesses yet alive, who were present at
these transactions and can say, if these things be not so; which ought to
outweigh the story of a prejudiced person, who has all by hearsay, whose very
business is to palliate and lick over matter^ to shape them to his own turn:
Here,

1, For Goodman Gold: Let the Reader consider these things: and let the
Anabaptists dispro^e them, if they can.

1. That though he was first called to an account about withholding his child
from Baptism, yet that was not the reason of his being admonished (as the
Pamphlet asserts) nor because he could not be convinced of Error; nor yet did
the Church proceed to Admonition, till such time as he (not only spoke
contemptuously and irreligiously of the emptiness and nullity of that
Ordinance, but also) used unbecoming gestures in the time of Administration, of
which (being asked the reason) he (before the Congregation) acknowledged they
were to cast di^respect upon it: nor then neither till after much patience Now
let Anabaptists themselves judge, whither there be not a vast difference,
between doubting about an Ordinance, and professedly vilisying of it by
unhandsome words and carriages; and whither they will bear with any Member of
theirs, that will so contemn any of those things which are to them sacred, and
acknowledged as Christ's Institutions.

2, That at his first Admonition he was not sententially suspended, but only
desired, for the preventing of the offense of some, to abstain from coming to
the other Sacrament.

3. That upon this, Thomas Gold took up a trade of absenting himself from the
Meetings of the Church to worship God on the Sabbath, which made a new offense.

4. That the Church in much tenderness waited upon him, and (after many
provocations) proceeded not to Excommunication, but tried with Admonition upon
Admonition, and that by the space of seven or eight years: nor was he
Excommunicated, till (having left his own) he joined to another Society,
without the churches leave, or once asking it: and now also being twice sent
for by the Church* he disclaimed their authority over him.

5. That Thom is Gold did not leave the Church at Charlstown on the account of
the Anabaptists new Church (as is pretended) but had many years before
renounced his submission to that Church.

6. That he did (while under Admonition) neglect public worship, and gather a
private meeting on the Sabbath to his house.

7. That he did (contrary to the judgment of Anabaptists themselves) wickedly
slight the Admonition of the Church, declaring that they had by it discharged
him of all relation to them.

2. For Thomas Osb^rn^; the Churches proceedings with him were with the like
patience as to Thomas Gold: only it is to be observed, that his first offense
(which this dissembling Pamphlet, finding it disadvantagious, wilfully passes
over) was this: whereas it is one thing which Church Members engage to upon
Admission, to walk with the Church in constant attendance upon public worship,
he (without notifying any offense) did withdraw and separate, frequenting those
Schismatic Meetings at Golds on the Sabbath: this was the offense (where was
the Narrators Conscience mean while?) nor did he (when first dealt with)
pretend any dislike of Infant Baptism, but that the Church gave no liberty to
private Brethren to Prophecy* that they limited the Ministry to learned men,
and that he did not find his own spirit free to come: though afterward he
spoke both of that, and of their severity to the Quakers, though that Church
meddled not with them, but only to preach against their Errors. In this practice
he contumaciously persisted many years, denying himself to be subject to that
Church* or bound to assemble with them (though he had solemnly given himself up
to them in Covenant) slighting many Admonitions; and afterward (with Thomas
Gold) went off to, and became a worthy Pillar of an Anabaptist Church. And
whereas he insists so upon a bitter spirit in the Church against dissenters let
seven years patience, with serious endeavors (in all tenderness) to reclaim
them, speak whither it be not an audacious Slander. And now (Reader) judge, are
these a Church of Schismatics or no?

SECT. IX.
2. That we are Scandalous in three respects* 1. The Foundation was laid with
Excommunicate persons. 2. We called such to Administer holy things, who were
justly for scandal cast out of other Churches. 3. For receiving such into our
Society. Ans. This is indeed the charge, from the just imputation whereof all
their tergiversations* excuses, suppressions of the truth, and suggestions of
salshood, shall never acquit them. I find not that he denies the first
proposition, viz. that those who do such things (adding the word justly to the
first part of the charge) are to be reputed scandalous. That they have so done
remains to be proved.

1 Their Foundation was laid with persons excommunicated and that for scandal:
for this it may be considered.

1. Thomas Gold was not admonished for his Opinion (nor does it appear that
ever he should, if he had carried humbly) but for opprobrious words and
carriages against an Ordinance which he himself had before professedly
reverenced and highly esteem^d and which he knew that Church he walked with,
had still in the li^e esteem. And Thomas Osborne, by relinquishing public
Worship d^rectly violated his Covenant, not so much as pretending (at first)
any doubt about Insant Baptism.

2. They both of them despised the Church, continued to absent themselves, laid
false charges against them, separated in a priva^e meeting, went off to the
Anabaptists without asking leave, and so became (supposed) Members of one
before they were regularly discharged of their obligation to another Church:
all which things are against the Anabaptists own professed Rules if they will
stand to their confession. Whereas he says, their not hearing the Church was
nothing else but their not coming when the Church sent for them] it is a
foolish pretense: their not hearing the Church was their appearing and proving
themselves impenitent* and that after many Treaties used with them many solemn
Admonitions laid upon them. convictions s^fficiently offered* of sins against
the light of their Consciences, and which (it is certain) they would have
acknowledged, had it not been for fear of being reconciled to the Church, whose
Excommunication they feared not, but impudently desired* The truth is, they
were weary of their Church Relation* and resolved to get rid of it, and not
knowing any regular way to obtain it, they chose to sin rather then suffer; and
undergo a just Excommunication, that they might be by themselves; presuming
that they could blind the World with a vain pre^e^se that they were ejected for
no other reason but but because they questioned the right of Infant Baptism.
Hence Thomas Gold did particularly express before the Church his desire to be
excommunicated, which yet they proceeded not to (till by a first and second
refusal to appear at the Churches citing of them) they proved themselves
incorrigible: Besides, it is to be observed that these men (having privately
exercised their gifts in Meetings with applause) began to think themselves
wronged that their light was put under a bushel; and finding no remedy in our
Churches, threw on a cloak of Anabaptisme, and so gained the thing they aimed
at, in a disguise.

2. They called such to Administer, etc.] against all his winding to get clear
of this, I only say, Thomas Gola was thus employed, concerning whom too much
has been said, except we had better to say.

3. They have received such as have (justly) for moral evils been cast out of
other Churches; add, and never given Christian satisfaction. Here he
endeavors a salvo. The persons instanced are Thomas Foster, and John Farnham;
the former sometimes of the Church at Billerica the other of the second
gathered Church in Boston. He acknowledges they have received them, but on
just reasons, or (at worst) not very irregularly. Let the Records of these
Churches be compared with this Narrative, and see if the Anabaptists have not
good skill in painting, and putting a fair face on a foul matter.

1. For Thomas Foster, let it be observed.

1. That he was not only a Member of the Church of Billerica, but of the
Foundation, and at their gathering was full, free, and forward in owning Infant
Baptism to be an Ordinance of Christ's Institution: and if he judged himself
(that notwithstanding) to have been then a true Christian he ought to have
extended more charity (then his after expressions showed) to the Church still
remaining of the same persuasion.

2. That he first discovered his receding from that (formerly received)
judgment, by disorderly carriage at the time of Administration of that
Ordinance, and being reproved for it, he confessed he had carried unbecoming
any person in any Christian Assembly; which gave satisfaction to the Church.

3. Though, (when about three months after this, he began, and thence continued
to leave the meeting at the celebration of Baptism,) he was, at a private
Church meeting given to understand that it grieved the Brethren, and that he
had receded from his Covenant; and was advised solemnly and seriously to
consider of it, yet he was not (as the Narrator asserts) laid under Admonition,
or prohibited Communion: nor did the Church ever do any such thing in private
to any, (which he knew) nor did they intend for this, to have debarred him of
Communion.

4. That after this, he neglected the Church Assemblies; and frequented the
Anabaptist meetings, and was there rebaptized: and being called by the Church
at a meeting, at the Pastors house, to give an account of these proceedings;
though at first he dissembled, yet at length acknowledged, and justified his
actions, (if false charges may be accounted a justification:) For he told them;

1. That they had laid him under sin, whereas he thought he had not done amiss;
but they had not so done judicially; though they told him his carriage was a
grief to his Brethren: nor (as I have said before) had intended it; so far is
the Narration from speaking truth, when it says nothing but matter of
Conscience was (or could be) laid to his charge.

2. That they denied him Baptism: whereas they owned him for Baptized, and if
he was not it was wickedness in him (an unbaptized person) to come to the Lords
Table.

3. That they yoked him with Unbelievers: which was, because they extended
Church watch to a Child (or children) of the Church: and yet, for this, he
judged his separation lawful, and produced for it 2 Cor. 6. 14. 15, 17. therein
(implicitly at least) pronouncing the Church a company of Belialists and
Infidels.

4. That they had presented him to the Court] The truth is, one of the Brethren
of the Church, had made complaint of him to the Grand Jury, which occasioned
his presentment, judging his Freemans oath engaged him so to do, when other due
means to reclaim him from his turbulent carriages had been used; and this he
makes the Churches fault, because they did not lay that Brother under a
censure, for not daring to violate his Oath, and betray hia Fidelity to the
Civil Authority.

5. That they had dealt injuriously by one of his Brethren, in laying him under
Admonition] In justification of which act there needs no account be given here;
only, let any judge whither it be a just ground to separate from a Church,
because I am not fully of their mind in every act of Administration: and also,
it seems a thing not warrantable for a private Member of a Church (in pretense
of selfvindication) to vilify and asperse a Church of Christ: if this be
humility, what is pride? But yet,

5. The Church still continued to labor his conviction: and when they could
not obtain it, after much patience, they called him forth in public, charged
him with offensive departing, and rending away from the Church; denying himself
a subject of Discipline, and vilisying the Church by false charges: he,
observing one ready to write his Answer, refused to speak any thing, unless he
were forbidden: and not obteining it, essayed to depart; yea, though required
by the Officer to stay, and hear the Church, he wil^ully withdrew: on the
following Sabbath, he was for these carriages admonished, and debarred
Communion, and not till then: and after some patience used, being called forth
again, to see if it repented him, he remained obstinate, and was therefore
Excommunicated: and now compare notes, and see what will become of John
Russel's consectaries: As for his retaining the respect of a very Godly man
where he is known (which is so boasted of) it must be only among men void of
reason, for (though we will not say but he may have the root in him; yet) he
has blasted profession, by wicked ways impenitently persisted in, and thereby
wounded such men's charity, who judge (as they ought) of the tree by the fruit.

SECT. X.
2. Relating to John Farnum, we have him confessing guilty in some things,
acknowledging a defect, but would not have it thought wilful, nor such as any
Church in their imperfection may not easily fall into: well, they can make
great faults little, and small ones none at all. In sober earnest* we may say
of this act of theirs about Farnum, that if in nothing else they had been
guilty, yet that is enough to render them low in the hearts of any good men,
and a shame to Anabaptists themselves. A little in so dirty a matter is enough
to be said: Therefore,

1. They say when he walked in fellowship with the Church, he was in reputation
among them for a very godly man.] They should have le^t the word ( very) out:
though (in charity) they had hopes he might have the root of the matter in him;
yet he was never judged eminent for his piety: it was long ere he could obtain
Admission into the Church at Dorchester: and some discerning Christians ever
suspected him to be ( John Farnum) such an one as he after proved.

2. That he was deputed by them for a Deacon] and yet neither the present
Teacher; nor any that have been added to the Church, these twenty years, either
deputed, or thought him fit for that Office: and whereas there is but one
surviving of the Founders of that Church, he professes there is never a
syllable of truth in that report.

3. That the Churches dissatisfaction was chiefly upon account of his Opinion.

4. The rugged spirit in these men against Dissenters, was the cause of his
withdrawing.

5. Other things were gathered to this, having a face of Scandal.

A true survey of the Churches proceedings, will show the vanity of these
Assertions: For,

1. The Church did not so much as deal with him till he had wholly withdrawn
Communion from them, refusing so much as to hear the Word Preached with them
for many months, no, nor so much as declared themselves offended with him. What
now is this rugged spirit?

2. When he alleged his Opinion, the Teacher of the Church (though possibly
some may think he did more than the rule required) declared to him, that if he
were so weak as not to think it lawful to see a Child Baptized, his withdrawing
when that Ordinance was Administered, should not be imputed as an offense: how
is it then that his judgment was the principal thing in that process?

3. His offense for which he was dealt with, was many moral evils (and so a
complicate offense) breaking forth at once: viz. 1. Renouncing Communion with
the Church, contrary to Heb. 10. 24. 2. Holding familiarity with Excommunicate
Persons, contrary to Math. 18 17. 2 Thessalonians. 3. 6, 14. 3. Slanders against
several holy and worthy men (now with Christ.) 4. That having been often
reproved for these things he still persisted. When the Elders reproved him for
these slanders he replied, that they might be offenced at a thousand things, he
cared not: and that there was never an Elder in New England was willing any
should read the Scripture, but themselves: After this, he was called before the
Church, tenderly dealt with, and those Scripture Rules which he had
transgressed were applied to his Conscience: but in vain.

At the third Church Meeting on his account ( October. 16. 1665.) the Pastor (Mr.
Mayo) told him it wos expected that after so much patience he should manifest
repentance. His reply was, that he desired none of their patience, he was
humbled for his sins. The Teacher (Mr. Mather) saying to him, we must see it by
the fruits, he retorted, you see it! you shall never see it: some Brethren told
him his speeches and carriage were very sinful, they had never seen the like,
he replied. I did not come hither to be snub'd and snarl'd at by every one, and
so he turned his back to depart: the Pastor wished him to stay and hear what
further they had to say, and seeing him still proceed, charged him in the Name
of the Church and of Christ to stay: he rejoyned, do not use the Name of Christ
to me, I am not one that can how and stoop to every one; and exit. The same day
he told some of the Brethren that he wished the Church would Excommunicate him,
and then he should be of a better society. On all these accounts was he laid
under Admonition. Two months after which, being called before the Church, he,
in words, confes^ the evil of some of the particulars but was observed at the
same time to turn about and laugh: where then was his Repentance? The Church
(this notwithstanding) waited diverse months longer, till he went on to that
height of impiety and profaneness, that one of the Teaching Officers setting
before the Church the Rule concerning Excommunication Farnum makes a l^g to him
(in the Assembly) in way of ^erision, and declared, that except the Church
would yield to four things, he would have no communion with them: viz 1. They
must set up the Ordinance of Proph^sie. 2 Promise to Baptize no more Infants.
3. All be Baptized (i. e. rebaptized) themselves. 4. Put away their present
(and still continuing) Teacher from his Office. Upon these things the Church
concluded upon his censure, only allowing him another months patience: after
which (no repentance appearing) they proceeded.

Now judge: 1. Whither these things have no more than a face of scandal and
that too, only as they are taken and construed. 2. Whither their Admission of
him, were not more than a mere defect in those who so admitted him, yea, a mere
scandal* stinking in the nosthrils of moral men. 3. Whither if it were but a
defect, it were not a wilful one, since they either had, or might have had, an
account of the Churches proceedings with him; and ought to have inquired after
the true cause of his Excommunication, before they received him. Well, it was
but a little fault, and a little amendment was enough: and what was that? when
clamors were revived and renewed:] and then to speak of open and notorious
wickedness, if it be approved by a society of Anabaptists, is Clamor. But it is
well a clamor roused them; whom serious warnings and informations could not.
And now the Church (in good time) are dissatisfied, and determine to make
search:] But they knew before, that he was Excommunicated: only because he was
an Anabaptist, they concluded it was for his Opinion: We see what harm too much
credulity does men. Now they send Messengers, etc. procure a copy of
proceedings, and are convinced, (better late then never) suspend him, bring him
to give them satisfaction, advise him to satisfy the Church he had offended:]
patcht cobling work! a good Shoemaker would have scorned it. Who appointed the
Anabaptist Church to be a spiritual Court of Appeals, to judge cases for, and
receive satisfaction on the account of another Church, in respect of any of
their Members? Ex ungue Leonem, this teaches us what Lordly men they would be,
had they advantage. But he did apply himself to that Church, and all were well
satisfied but one:] How did Goodman Russ^l know this? suppose all but one
remained dissatisfied; nay what if not so much as one was well satisfied? where
are we then? except he know them better then they know themselves; both the
Elder and Brethren utterly deny the truth of this passage It is true indeed he
did once and again (in writing) acknowledge that the Church had exercised
patience toward him, and that ^e had been guilty of sin, and great evil; both
in word and action: and (orally) before the Church he confessed, he had done
very wickedly, and was ashamed of himself:] The Church then had done well. But
why is he not (then) upon this restored? alas! this he sought not; but, the
very next day declared, that if he should return into Communion with that
Church, it would be the greatest sin that ever he had been guilty of in his
life: which made the Brethren suspect his Confession to be insyncere, and yet
this satisfies the Anabaptists; they still continue to hold Communion with a
vile person justly cast out, not see^ing to be restored; and therefore (by the
will of Christ) to be counted and carried to, as an Heathen and a Publican.

SECT. XI.
3. That we are disorderly, and walk disorderly,] For all his plausible excuse,
and abuse of Scripture in it, there needs no more but to consider, whither it
be not to walk disorderly, to receive into their Communion persons that are
under Church dealing for moral evils, yea excommunicate Impenitents: and not to
withdraw from them, after they have confessed they missed it in so doing. If
this be not disorder, to set up a Church for a Sanctuary, or City of Refuge for
scandalous men who (scorning to submit to the discipline of Christ) presently
take up Anabaptisme, and know where to be made welcome; we may then enquire
whither there be any such thing as Disorder.

SECT. XII.
4. We are disturbers of the public peace:] that this has ( in terminis) been
charged upon them, I find not: but that they have made disturbance among us, is
true; what else have been the carriages of some (now theirs) when of other
Churches? with the courses they have taken to make parties? what their many
complaints into England, and misrepresentations of us, to render us as
obnoxious as might be, and what this Narrative?

SECT. XIII.
5. That we are underminers of the Churches] and is not this true neither? alas
that in all things we should so mistake! But this we mean, that such of these
men as sometimes stood in relation to other Churches, sought to draw others
away with them: witness Thomas Gola's private meeting in his own house for many
years: where (living two miles distant from the public place of Worship) their
Neighbors (I speak things known) were drawn in, and there were the Churches
vilified, and Ministers scoffed at, and means used to aliena^e men's hearts: and
not only so, but they have published to the World that Infant Baptism is a
nullity, that we are Churches of unbaptized men and women, and have unbaptized
Officers; by these pleas seeking to draw men off: and if this be their
reduction, it is in vain distinguished from destruction; and is properly
Seduction. Add to this, their readiness to receive any discontented persons,
so that if any be under offense in any of our Churches (though he be never so
vile) let him but turn Anabaptist, they will take up his case, if he can
satisfy them (and we may think a little will do) let his own seek it where
they can get it: is not this undermining? nay, have they not by there unjust
clamours, and false reports, done more hurt to the Churches of Christ in
New England, than all their Enemies in the world besides?

SECT. XIV.
6. We neglect public Worship on the Lords Day] What he brings here for
justification, is (to us) a confessing guilty; that is it we mean, and
therefore what we say, is not utterly untrue: only the reasons they give for
their separation, are misrepresented. Whereas they say, we would not admit any
of them to communion with us: they know that our Churches have received some
that were scrupulous about Infant Baptism, who were willing to carry
inoffensively: that we have refused such as were rebaptized among these
Excommunicate Anababtists, is true hypothetically, viz. except they would
acknowledge and repent of that act: because we judge it scandalous. And whereas
he tells the World, We have been shut out of our public house, and the doors
nailed up, and we forced to meet without in the open Air, on a very cold day:)
he seems to have forfeited all honesty, so to relate. It is true, the Civil
Authority here, have (by a very needful Law) prohibited any from erecting any
public Meeting House, without the consent of the Freemen of the Town where
they live first orderly had and obtained at a public Meeting assembled for
that end; and License of the County Court; etc. Without such a Law many hopeful
Plantations would have come to nothing. And it equally concerned all others,
with Anabaptists; and yet these men (neglecting this Law) undertake such a
business. Report of this is made to the Civil Magistrate, who enquired into it,
and these fallaciously pretend it might be for a Warehouse, or a Brew House;
thus they still proceed, till it become a Meeting House, and is met in on the
Lords days: Now are they again called before the Council, justly reproved for
slighting the Law, and for Dissimulation; and lovingly desired to be content to
meet in private (as before) till the General Court (near approaching) might
hear and determine this matter. They refusing to promise so to do* Order was
given to nail up their doors: whereupon the Anabaptists sullenly meet in the
open Air on a cold day (though a large house, and their usual place of meeting
stood just by) that they might make matter to frame a scandalous clamor out
of: yet were the Doors soon broken open again, and they there publicly meet
before the Court. Now I only desire to be satisfied who gave these men leave to
trample all Authority under foot, and live as men that are lawless?

SECT. XV.
7. That we are Idolaters:) For this they quote the late Synod-Book, but there
is no such word there: we have not been afraid to charge them with the breach
of the second Commandment. Every declining from the Rules of Worship, omission,
or alteration of Divine Institutions, without immediate warrant from the
Lawgiver, is against that Command.

SECT. XVI.
8. We are charged to be enemies of Civil Government.) I find no such charge:
The first Germane Anabaptists were so, we hope these (though they have shown
too much contempt of Authority) are not so far gone. But for his so gloriously
emblazoning their service in the late Wars, it is neither to the purpose, nor
of much moment. That they did join against the common Enemy is true: Swanzy (a
place chiefly consisting of Anabaptists, and where they had a Church) was the
place where the Enemy made the first onset (which Church also (being one of
two) was as much removed as our four (of above forty) they so tauntingly
upbraid us with page 15.) Besides, any man would fight, rather than have his
throat cut; it was not for Religion, nor Civil Government, but for lives and
estates. For Captain Turner, we have not abridged him ought of his due
acknowledgement, in what has been published. But for his acts at Connecticut
Falls, they are hyperbolically discribed: for 1. There was another Captain and
his Company, joined with him in that undertaking, a man of appoved valor and
conduct, which at that time he discovered in his prudent drawing off his men.
2. Captain Turner was at that time by sickness d sabled from do^ng much. 3 God
saw meet to obscure the victory by the affrighted and disorderly retreat of our
men, the slaughter of many, and death of Captain Turner. Nor did the Indians
receive the greatest blow at that time; nor is it the Anabaptists true, but
vain glory, to set such an encomium upon their own deeds.

SECT. XVII.
We have dism^ssed the charge, now comes a strong A^gument of their Orthodoxy,
a witness from Heaven, viz. their happy preservation in the time of the Small
Pox) Let it be remembered, that one of their persuasion di^d of it at Woborn
(where John Russel lived, and should have observed it) and many of their
Children. But be it so; their Society is small, and scattered from Dan to
Beersheba. And who knows; but God might spare them in judgment, to harden
them? Th^se things are too high for us: only when God comes to ch^sten his
People, those that are not chastened, may ask whither they are ^o^ Bastards.

SECT. XVIII.
And now he had done, had not a Book of Mr. Mather's come out, to which he has
a few words to say: and a few he thinks are enough to consute so weak and silly
a piece, It is Titled, The divine right of Infant Baptism: Ans. sooner said
then proved. Excellently refuted! But he has a word more in general, and one
or two in particular to say to it.

1. In general, Any sober unbyassed Christian may be satisfied, that the main
(or one main) design of it, is to render all that are nicknamed Anabaptists as
odious as he could) I am sorry for it, that so good a Book should have so bad a
design: but he is no unbyassed Christian who asserts it: and it is strange that
that worthy man, whose charity has been so large to such men (as is well
known) should be thus guilty, and if he be, truly it is very unhappy. But
diverse that have read the Book, cannot spy it; I fear it is a suspicious and
censorious slander. For his Arguments, It Is Answered, they are no new ones] And
I like them the better; verissimum est antiquissimum. Had he brought novel
pleas, I had suspected him, as I do (for that reason) the Anabaptists: nay, he
tells us, ( page 2.) he intends old Arguments, an^ no other. But what then?
they must have no new Answer, being sufficiently confuted already. I am glad of
that, he saves me some labor by it. He blames him not for disputing for what
^e believes) nor I neither, but think he deserves commendation, and God has
blessed it to the reclaiming of several that way i^clined, and set^li^g many
more in the truth. But why should Mr. Mather wickedly injure holy men, by
arguing, An Opinion must needs be bad, because the Professors of it have
miscarried.) But Mr. Mather has expressly declared against any such conclusion.
( Page 25.) This is the sum of his Argument. That Opinion which has been
attended with signal judgments on the first and chief assertors of it, and
generality of those that have (especially at first) embraced it, is to be
suspected as Erroneous. And is it any harm for men to suspect themselves, when
God seems to frown on them? do not the Anabaptists allow this Argument; and
therefore plead that God kept and increased them under persecution, ( page 2)
and wonderfully preserved them in times of sickness, ( page 12.) which they
desire may be observed; (though this is of little weight, because these are not
the first, nor the chief.) And do not the generality of the Orthodox, improve
this Argument against Heretics? does not John Russel use it against us? (page
15.) what besel Corinthus, Manicheus, Arius, etc? Dr. Beards Theater of Gods
Judgments, Mr. Clarks Examples, and others may speak for this. Nay, was it not
thus with Korah, with Ananias and Saphira? and for Gods judicially leaving them
to scanda lous evils. See Mat. 7. 15, 16. 2 Timothy 3. 13. and what befell the
first Anabaptists? see Sleidan's Commentaries, and other Authors of great note,
quoted by Mr. Mather.

SECT. XIX.
2. But there is a thing or two in particular which he cannot pass, they touch
him so near. Mr Mather charge them with the sin of Jeroboam, but they are not
concerned in, or with it.) The Text alluded to, is, 1 Kings 12. 31. the
Original is, Jeroboam made Priests of the extremities of the People; both ends
comprehend the whole (see Diensi^s in Ezekiel. 33. 1.) It was Jeroboams sin, that
any that would might (under him) be made Priest; fit, or unfit. The Belgic and
others read it, of both ends of the People. If a fit man would accept it, so;
if not, to the other end, and take one unfit. The Anabaptists would have a
learned Man, if they could get one of their mind; if not, John Russel the
Shoemaker. The learned Zepperus. De polit. Eccl. p. 186. lamenting the low and
miserable estate of Religion, gives this for one reason of it; they make
Ministros De extremitatibus populi, i. e. Sartoribus, Sutoribus, Idiotis, etc.

He does not think the Spirit is locked up in the narrow limits of College
Learning.) No^ we neither; nor yet Ministerial gi^ts to be (ordinarily)
acquired in a Shoemakers Shop. We believe men are to be instructed, and
endeavors used; and that there are Schools of the Prophets to that end, or
there may be private m^ans used. We believe a learned man may prove v^tious*
and so not fit to be improved in that work. We believe every true Christian
receives the spirit in his measure; but that he therefore is fit to teach and
instruct a Congregation, is an Enthusiastic^l notion. Truly, ^^ Goodman Russel
was a fit man for a Minister, we have but fooled our selves in building
Colleges, and instructing our Children in learning.

Frange leves calamos, and scinde Thalia libellos;
Si dare SVTORI, CALCEVS ista potest. Mart.
We have enough of his Last to people New England with Prophets.

SECT. XX.
One thing more, and he will dismiss us: Mr. Mather charge them with a
pernicious Principle in their Confession of Faith, viz. That Believers Baptized
are visible Christians, and fit matter for a visible Church.) How may the
altering of a word or two change the sense? the words of their Confession are,
Believers, being Baptized are visible Saints, and true matter of a visible
Church. Hence (if the Anabaptists would give leave to draw consequences, (but
then they would never have done with us, and that is the reason they cannot
receive our Arguments for Infant Baptism, because they are nothing but a few
consequences, and that is nothing to the purpose:) a man might argue that
Believers being unbaptized are not visible Saints; and we know they acknowledge
n^ne Baptized but themselves: and that will bring in another consequence, that
there are no visible Saints but Anabaptists, But suppose a man cannot reach
them a blow with a consequence; let them yet say, is Baptism administered to
persons within the visible Church, or without it? Besides, they say, Baptized
persons are true matter of a visible Church, and they say those that were only
sprinkled in their Infancy, were never Baptized: and will not this undermine
the foundation of all the Churches in the world, but theirs? and what more
pernicious? They had even as good cry with Edom's Sons, Raze it, Raze it to the
Foundation.

And now he cannot choose but burst out into a lamentation over such a spirit:
But thus it will be in the world, that the joy of some, will be made the grief
of others; the triumph of truth, will be the mourning of error: I pray God this
cause of the Anabaptists lamentation may be continued, by the constant supply
of men zealous against errors.

SECT. XXI
For a Conclusion the Narrator turns Prophet, and gets up to the top of Mount
Ehal, and there curses the people of God, or these Churches in New England: and
what is it so stirs his spleen? why they have born their witness faithfully
against Anabaptists Errors and Scandals and detected the sin of those men who,
after they have (for Lyes' Slanders, Covenant breaking, despising Gods
Ministers, and slighting the Admonitions of their respective Churches) been in
Christ's Name delivered up to Satan, have joined themselves in erecting and
establishing an Anti-Temple, and (like the Samaritans of old) become a
Mount-Gerizzim, a Den, and Receptacle for every mal-content and scandalous
person (that cannot submit to the Discipline of Christ in his Churches) to
repair unto. And now for this they are compared to those damnable Hypocrites
mentioned Mat. 24. 49. and threatened with no less then eternal desolation. We
see what men may come to in time, begin with falsehoods, and end with cursings.
But causeless curses shall not come, nor need these Churches regard, if they
keep faithful to their God, though Anabaptists Anath^matize them.

FINIS.

