His Majesty's gracious Message to the Convocation, sent by the Earl of
Nottingham.
WILLIAM R.

HIS Majesty has summoned this Convocation, not only because it is usual upon
holding of a Parliament, but out of a pious Zeal to do every thing that may
tend to the best Establishment of the Church of England, which is so eminent a
part of the Reformation, and is certainly the best suited to the Constitution
of this Government; and therefore does most signally deserve, and shall always
have both His Favor and Protection; and He doubts not, but that you will assist
Him in promoting the Welfare of it, so that no Prejudices, with which some Men
may have labored to possess you, shall disappoint His good Intentions, or
deprive the Church of any Benefit from your Consultations. His Majesty
therefore expects that the things that shall be proposed, shall be calmly and
impartially considered by you, and assures you, that He will offer nothing to
you but what shall be for the Honor, Peace, and Advantage both of the
Protestant Religion in general, and particularly of the Church of England.

The Humble Address of the Bishops and Clergy of the Province of Canterbury, in
Convocation assembled, in Thanks to His Majesty for His Gracious Message.
WE Your Majesty's most Loyal and most Dutiful Subjects, the Bishops and Clergy
of the Province of Canterbury, in Convocation Assembled, having received a most
Gracious Message from Your Majesty, by the Earl of Nottingham, hold our selves
bound in Duty and Gratitude to return our most humble Acknowledgments for the
same: and for the Pious Zeal and Care Your Majesty is pleased to express
therein for the Honor, Peace, Advantage, and Establishment of the Church of
England. Whereby, We doubt not, the Interest of the Protestant Religion in all
other Protestant Churches, which is dear to Us, will be the better secured
under the influence of Your Majesty's Government and Protection. And We crave
leave to assure Your Majesty, that in pursuance of that Trust and Confidence
You repose in Us, We will consider whatsoever shall be offered to Us from Your
Majesty, without Prejudice, and with all Calmness and Impartiality: And that We
will constantly pay the Fidelity, and Allegiance, which We have all sworn to
Your Majesty and the Queen; whom We pray God to continue long, and happily to
Reign over Us.

His Majesty's Most Gracious Answer to the Address of the Bishops and Clergy,
deliver^d by the Lord Bishop of London, President of the Convocation.
My LORDS.
I Take this Address very kindly from the Convocation: You may depend upon it,
that all I have promised, and all that I can do for the Service of the Church
of England, I will do: And I give you this new Assurance, that I will improve
all Occasions and Opportunities for its Service.

LONDON, Printed for Robert Clavel, 1689.


