The CASE of the EXILED VAUDOIS, AND French Protestants, STATED: And their
Relief Recommended to All GOOD Christians, Especially to Those of the Reformed
Religion: IN A SERMON Preached at St. James Westminster, April 5. 1699. Being
the Day of the Public Fast.

By William Wake, D.D. Rector of S. James Westminster, And Chaplain in Ordinary
to His Majesty.

Published at the Desire of the Honorable the Board of Vestry; and of several
Persons of Quality of the said Parish.

LONDON: Printed for R. Sare at Grayes-Inn-gate in Holborn, 1699.

MATT. x. 42. Whosoever shall give to drink unto One of these Little Ones, a
Cup of Cold Water only, in the Name of a Disciple; Verily I say unto you, He
shall in no wise lose his Reward.


OUR Blessed Savior having spent the greatest Part of this Chapter in
declaring to his Disciples what Troubles, and Persecutions, they should undergo
for his Sake; takes Occasion from thence, in the Verses before the Text, to
show, how we ought to behave Our selves toward Those who should fall into any
Sufferings upon such an Account; and how Great the Reward of our so doing
should be. He that receives you, says he, receives Me; and He that receives
Me, receives Him that sent Me. He that receives a Prophet, in the Name of a
Prophet, shall receive a Prophets Reward. And He that receives a
Righteous-man, in the Name of a Righteous-Man, shall receive a Righteous Man's
Reward. And, Whosoever shall give to drink unto One of these little Ones, a Cup
of cold water only, in the Name of a Disciple; Verily I say unto you, He shall
in no wise lose his Reward.

I shall not trouble you with any nice Enquiry into the distinction which our
Savior, in these words, makes of Those whom he therein recommends to our
Charity, and Entertainment. Three sorts of Christians he manifestly refers to
in them, and speaks of Those in the Text, as the least, and meanest, of them
All. And yet even of These He tells Us, that Whosoever should give but a Cup of
Cold water to drink, to One such Christian, in the name of a Disciple; that is,
should show the least regard to him upon this account, That He belongs to
Christ; He should in no wise lose his Reward; i. e. He should be very highly
Rewarded by God for it.

Now this being the Occasion, and Import of these Words, I shall with Relation
to both, proceed to discourse upon them, in this following Method;

I. I will show you, That those who Profess the Gospel of Christ, must expect
oftentimes to meet with Trials, and Persecutions, from Wicked Men, upon the
account of it.

II. That it is the Duty of every Good Christian, according to his Ability, to
assist and support those who suffer upon such an Account. And,

III. That whatsoever Charity we shall exercise toward such Persons, upon the
account of their Sufferings, it shall turn to our great Advantage in the other
World; where We shall be, in a singular manner, Rewarded by God for it.

I shall speak, but very briefly, to each of these Points; and so proceed to
that Application of them, which the present Occasion requires of Me. And,

I. That those who Profess the Gospel of Christ, must expect oftentimes to meet
with Trials and Persecutions, from Wicked Men, upon the account of it.

This was what our Savior expressly declared to his Disciples in this Chapter;
and their own Experience sufficiently convinced them of the Truth of his
Prediction.

If we look back to the first State of the Church, before the Conversion of the
Empire to Christianity; what are all its Histories but the Records of those
Trials which its most eminent Professors underwent for the sake of it? What
Torments they endured; what Oppositions they met with; and by what Deaths they
perfected all their other Sufferings? When, in the Language of our Apostle,
Every one who would live Godly in Christ Jesus, was sure to suffer persecution.
Their Religion was their Crime: and there was no choice left them but to
renounce it, or to resolve to suffer; it may be, to Die, for it.

Nor did the Case become much better afterward. It Is true, the Pretense of the
Persecution was altered: Men did not any longer suffer for the Name of Christ,
as they had done before. But the truth of the Gospel was still persecuted, though
under another Character: And the Sufferings which Christians have brought on
their fellow Christians, have not been at all less, than what had been
inflicted upon them by their Common Enemies heretofore.

It is indeed a most astonishing thing to consider to what a strange degeneracy
the Spirit of Christianity has fallen in this particular. That a Religion
founded upon Love and Charity, and which breaths out nothing more than
Kindness, and Gentleness, in all its Precepts; should yet have become the
Occasion of more Cruelty, and Barbarity, than ever any Religion in the World,
besides, had been. But that which is yet more Amazing, as well as more
deplorable, is; that Men should make it a matter of Conscience to the
Principles of such a Religion, to persecute One another: And think that they do
God Service, when they Dye their hands with the blood of His Servants. Yet to
this degree of Fury have some Christians, in these later Ages, arrived: And
have thereby given Us but too just a Ground, still to continue the Assertion I
have laid down; That those who will profess the Gospel of Christ, in the Truth,
and Purity of it, must expect, even in Christian Countries, to fall oftentimes
under the severest Trials, for the sake of it.

How this barbarous, and bloody Spirit, first got admission into the Church of
Christ, I shall not now enquire. Certain it is, that as there is nothing more
Unreasonable, in the nature of the thing its self, than to force Conscience,
and to persecute men into a right faith; So is there nothing more contrary to
all the Rules of the Gospel, than to propagate its interests by Violence, and
Oppression. This the Primitive Christians, constantly objected to their Heathen
Enemies. This all the Best, and Wisest Men, have generally asserted ever since:
And, even the most Perverse, see the Reasonableness of it, when it comes to be
their own Case; and they are themselves in danger of Suffering upon this
Account. And yet such is the strange partiality of Mankind, that we hardly any
of us know how to set bounds to this Temper, when we have the Power in our
Hands. We think we have all a Right to persecute Others, though none have any to
return it upon Our selves. And accordingly, we do all, in our several turns,
both Rail at Persecution in Matters of Religion, and yet continue to set up for
it.

But as this Temper has always been observed to prevail most on the Worst Side;
(which is generally found to make up with Violence, what it wants in Argument:)
So of all kinds of Christians never have any been more scandalously guilty of
this Barbarity than those of the Church of Rome; that dishonor to the Name,
and Scourge to the Disciples of Christ. Whose Religion as it has a Great Allay
of Paganism, in it; so we ought the less to wonder if we see it wholly acted by
a Pagan Spirit. And of the Corruptions whereof I shall, at present, say no more
than this; that had we no other Ground than this to reject it, even this alone
would be enough to warrant us in our disowning of it; that she has Glutted her
self with the Blood of the best-Christians, and still continues to thirst for
more: And openly avows that, Principle, which I am now speaking against, as
Cruel and Antichristian; that Religion is to be propagated, and maintained by
the Sword.

I shall not here enter on any particular Relation of those Persecutions, with
which that Church has filled the Histories of the whole World, for some Ages
past: And of which not only Europe, but Asia, and America; Infidels, as well as
Christians, have been the Spectators. Blessed be God! neither her Cruelties,
nor her Corruptions, are unknown to any of Us. It shall suffice to say, that as
our Savior Christ from the beginning knew what would happen to his Church to
the very end of the World; and foresaw as well, what the Church of Rome in
these latter Ages should do to it, as what the Jews and Heathens were at the
beginning to bring upon it; so we must conclude, that in this Chapter, he
referred indifferently to both: And designed no less to fortify, and instruct
us of these Times, how to behave our selves under the Persecutions of Popery;
than to direct his Apostles, and Primitive Disciples, how it would behove them
to manage themselves, with relation to the Heathen, and Jewish, Cruelty.

Let this then be our first Conclusion, founded on the foreknowledge of Christ,
and the Corruption of Humane Nature; which hitherto we are sure has been, and
we h^ve Reason to fear, will always continue to be but too true; viz. That
those who profess the Truth of Christianity, and will hold fast to the purity
of it; must expect to meet with many Trials, and Persecutions from wicked Men,
upon the account of it. I proceed,

II. To show; That it is the duty of Every Good Christian, according to his
Ability, to assist and support those, who suffer on such an Account.

And that whether we consider them (1 st.) Under the common Character of
Christians. Or (2 dly) under the more particular Circumstance, Of suffering for
Righteousness sake.

(1 st) If we consider Them under the Common Character of Christians; Even this
alone will oblige Us not only to minister to their Wants, but to do it with a
singular desire, and affection of Mind toward Them. God who has commanded Us
to Do Good unto All Men; Gal. vi. 10.
has also commanded us to Do it, in a more especial manner, to Those who are of
the Household of Faith. Heb. ixli. 1. 1 Pet. i. 22 1 Jo. iii. 16^
There is a Brotherly Love required of Us by Christ, toward One Another,
beyond what we are obliged to have for the rest of Mankind: and which ought to
dispose Us not only to a more tender sense of, and compassion, for their Needs;
but, with that, to a more bountiful supply of them. Mat. v. 44.
So that though a Christian must Love his very Enemy; and Do Good to those who
despitefully Use him, and persecute him; yet he must remember, that there is a
difference to be made by him between a Brother and an Enemy; and he must as
much love, and do Good to the One, above the Other, as he is more nearly
related to the One, than to the Other.

But this is the least part of our Obligation in the Case before Us: Which as
it supposes the Suffering to be for the sake of Christ's Religion, So will it,

(2 dly) Oblige us, in a more particular manner, to Relieve those, who fall
into their distresses upon such an account.

In such Circumstances as these, not to Assist our Brethren, is to deny our
Faith: And the neglect we put upon Them, will fall not so much upon Them, as
upon Him whose Disciples they are, and for whose Sake they suffer.

Hence we may observe, in all the ancient Persecutions of the Church, with what
an Officious diligence the Other Christians still attended upon their Martyrs
and Confessors. How they ministered to them in their Prisons, and Bonds: Went
with them to their Judgments; and would not leave them at their very
Sufferings. With what Zeal, and Readiness, they furnished them with such things
as they stood in need of: How they Encouraged them in their Conflicts; and
showed their earnest desire to partake with them in their Sufferings, as they
did in the Cause for which They suffered.

Thus they Confessed Christ, by Owning of those who were Persecuted for their
Confession of Him: And thus ought every Good Christian to Confess him still. In
a public War, if any One part of a Country be destroyed, it is but an Act of
Justice for the rest, to bear their share in the loss; and, to contribute
toward the Repair of the damage that was sustained by it. The Case is, in
reality, the same here. We are all Members of the same Common, Catholic, Church
of Christ. If Persecution for the Faith arises, which part soever suffers, it is
the Church that is persecuted. And we ought to account our selves concerned to
bear our Share in the Evils which our Fellow Christians Undergo, for the Common
Cause of the Gospel; as We hope to be one day made partakers with them, in the
Promises of it.

Here therefore is a duty, which not only Christian Charity, but even
Common-Justice, and Equity, oblige us unto. In this Case, to desert our
Brethren, is to betray our Faith; And we shall, in effect, Renounce the Cause
for which they suffer, if we refuse to partake with them in their Sufferings.
But to Own and to Receive them; to Cherish, and Relieve them; and that as
suffering for the Cause of Christ; this is openly to join with them in their
Confession: And, as our Savior here assures us, if we do communicate with them
in their Afflictions, we shall also be made partakers with them of their Reward.

Which brings Me to the last Point I proposed to speak to;

III. That whatsoever Charity we shall exercise toward such Persons, upon the
account of their Sufferings; it shall turn to our great Advantage in the Other
World; where we shall be, in a Singular Manner, Rewarded by God for it.

There is hardly any Virtue prescribed to Us in the Gospel, to the Practice
whereof so many Promises have been made by God, as to this of Charity. In the
Old Testament, it pleased God to encourage the Jews to a liberal Exercise of
it, by the Hope of a present Retribution that should be made to Them for it.
And though under the Gospel, such Promises as these are not to be expected; yet
has our Savior Christ assured Us, that a plentiful Reversion shall be laid up
for Us in Heaven, to reward every Act of Charity that We perform here upon
Earth.

An Eminent Argument whereof we meet with in the account which He has given Us
of the last Judgment: And in which He seems to make the whole Issue of our
Acquittal, or Condemnation, in a manner, to depend upon it. For having told us
how he will then divide the Sheep from the Goats; and set the one on his Right
Hand, and the other on his Left: Matt. xxv. 32, 33.
He thus delivers the Sentence which He will pass on both. -- 34:
He will say to those on his Right Hand; Come ye blessed of my Father, inherit
the Kingdom, prepared for you from the beginning of the World. For I was an
Hungry and ye gave me Meat; -- 35:
Naked and ye Clothed me; Sick and in Prison, and ye Ministered unto me. -- 41.
But he will say to those on his Left Hand; Depart ye Cursed into Everlasting
Fire, prepared for the Devil, -- 42.
and his Angels. For I was an Hungry, and ye Fed me not; Naked and ye Clothed
me not; Sick and in Prison, and ye Ministered not unto Me. These are the
Sentences, which our Savior Christ will pronounce, upon the Good and Bad at
the last Day. And from which if we may not generally conclude, that Our Charity
is the only Thing that shall hereafter be Enquired into, and and be either
Rewarded, or Punished for ever; yet thus much we may certainly infer, that it
is one of the main Things by which Our Piety shall be judged of: And that he
who has a true Love for his Neighbor, and is upon all Occasions ready to do
all the Good he can for him, shall hardly fail of being Accepted by God, as he
will be sure to be generally beloved of Men, for his Beneficence.

But it is not only our Charity that shall entitle Us to a Reward, in the
present Case; though even that alone would be Sufficient, to make Good the
Promise of the Text to Us. He who Relieves a Persecuted Christian, in the Name
of a Disciple; because he belongs to Christ, and suffers for his Sake; shall be
considered by God, not only for his Charity toward his Neighbor, but for his
Confession of Christ too: And have a part in the Reward, which the Other is to
Receive upon the account of such his Persecution.

And this at once both ascertains, and increases the Retribution of such a
Charity. It renders it both more Excellent in its self, and more Acceptable
unto God: Who as he will, in the first place, Reward those who Suffer for his
sake; so will he in the Next, Consider Those who Own them in their Sufferings,
and extend their pious Beneficence to them, upon the account of them.

Hence we may observe, with what Extraordinary Circumstances, our Savior
Christ delivers the Promise of the Text to this purpose. The Person of whom he
speaks, is One of the least of his Disciples; the meanest of any that should be
called to suffer for his sake. The Charity, in which he instances, is the
poorest of all Charities: A Cup of Cold Water; Such as the most indigent person
is able to Give, and hardly any can be so far Reduced, as to stand in need of
it. And yet even this little, contemptible act of Charity, if done to one of
the meanest of Christ's Disciples; in the Name of a Disciple, shall not lose
its Reward. So acceptable a thing is it to God to Confess him, in any Way,
before Men! And so certainly shall he who does it, be Gloriously Rewarded by
him to all Eternity.

And here then let us stop; and from the general Consideration of the duty
proposed, and of the Great Reward which it has pleased God to promise to the
faithful discharge of it; proceed to that Application which his Providence has
called Us, at this time, to make of it. In pursuance whereof, if the Principles
already laid down be admitted, as the true measure both of our Duty and
Interest, in this particular; then I shall need only to show, that you have
here a proper Occasion presented to you, to practice the One, and to advance
the Other. And that I shall do in this following method.

1 st. I will show, That the Persons here Recommended to your Charity, are
indeed the Disciples of Christ.

2 dly. That they do suffer for Righteousness sake. And therefore,

3 dly. Ought to be Considered, and Relieved by Us, upon the account of such
their Sufferings.

And 1 st. That the Persons here Recommended to your Charity, are indeed the
Disciples of Christ.

This is a Point that I should not have thought it needful to insist upon, had
not the Calumnies of our Common Enemies obliged me to it. But since They have
thought fit again to Revive the malicious Slanders of their Ignorant, and
Prejudiced Revilers; Monsieur de Meaux's Variations des Egl. Protestan. live. xi.
and to set them off to the World with all the advantage that their Wit, and
Language, enabled them to do; It is necessary in justice to these poor,
persecuted Christians, to place their History in its true light; and to express
our Charity toward them, as well by Vindicating their Reputation, as by
Ministering to their Needs.

To take then this matter from the beginning: The Persons of whom we are now
speaking, are a Portion of the Christians of the Evangelical Churches of
Piemont. The common Name by which they are most known, is that of Vaudois, or
Waldenses: So called not from Peter Waldo, Ledger. Hist. des Eglises Evangel.
des Vallees de Piemont. live. 1. cap. 2. Allix. Remarks, chap. xix.
as has commonly been supposed; but from the place of their Habitation; the
Valleys under the Alps; within Three of which the Churches we are now speaking
of were comprehended.

Who it was that first planted the Gospel in these Parts; or about what time it
was done, we cannot certainly tell. But as our Religion was propagated in the
very times of the Apostles, into the Other Parts of Italy; so is it most
probable that it was, not long after, settled here too; though by what Evangelist,
we are not able to determine.

Christianity being thus brought into these Parts, and that, no doubt, in the
same parity in which it was generally taught in those first Ages; continued in
these Churches, as it did in Others, for some considerable time, if not free
from All Corruption; yet at least, free from those dangerous Errors, which
afterward began to creep into the World. But about the Eigth Century, the
business of Image Worship, added to some Other more Early Superstitions; began
to disturb the Peace of the Church, and to Inflame the Zeal of the best
Christians to the Opposing of it.

Great was the Contention between the Eastern and Western Churches upon this
Occasion: The One, Vide Car. M. and Synod. Paris. Script. de Tmagin.
with the 2 d Synod of Nice, (by Them accounted a General Council) standing up
in the Defense of Images; The Other, with that of Frankford, as stiffly
declaring against the Worship of Them.

Among those who, in these Western Parts, appeared in the defense of the
Christian Truths, none was more Eminent than Claudius, the Learned, Catal.
Test. veri^ lib. ix. in Claudio. Ion. Aurel. de Cult. Imag(...) Claud. T^u^i^
Bibl PP. Tom. ^i^
and Zealous Bishop of Turin; in whose Diocese these Churches of the Valleys
lay. The Point He began with, was this of Images: But his Piety, and Learning,
soon carried him farther; and led him on both to the Discovery, and the
Reformation, of several Other Abuses, that had privily crept into those Parts.
The Invocation of Saints; The Superstitious Use, and Honor of Relics; but,
above all, the Groundless Pretense of the Popes Authority; were the Chief
Points against which he declared his Resentments: And the Issue of his
Endeavors was, that though He met with much Opposition, and raised to himself
many Enemies, yet he went on prosperously with his Undertaking; and laid the
Foundation of that Purity of Christianity in his Diocese, which has ever since
been preserved by these Churches of the Valleys, to this very Day.

Thus early began the Reformation of Religion in those Parts: But that which
most contributed to the future Security of it, was another Accident which fell
out not long after; and of which it will therefore be necessary for Me to give
you a particular Account.

Car. a S. Paul Geogr. S. lib. ii. Ital. n. iv.vii.x. Allix. Remarks. chap.
xiii.
In the first Times of Christianity, so far was the Bishop of Rome from being
thought to have a General Authority over the Whole Church of Christ, that his
Jurisdiction did not extend to the neighboring Diocese of Italy its self. His
Authority was limited to a Certain Tract of Land about the City, called the
Sub-urbicary Region; Whilst the Churches of Italy were under another
Government, and Acknowledged the Bishop of Milan for their Head.

It cannot be doubted but that this must have been no small Grievance to the
ambitious tempers, and designs, of the Bishops of Rome: Who therefore omitted
no Endeavors to gain the Bishop of Milan to their side; and to persuade him to
yield to their Authority. Yet still that Church preserved its Liberty for near
1100 d. years after Christ; Allix. Remarks Chapter xiv. Baron Annal. An. 1059
and then by Artifice, and Faction, was either forced, or persuaded to part
with it.

It happened about that time, that among other things, a Controversy was raised
between the Clergy, and People of that Diocese, concerning the Marriage of
their Priests. To compose this, Pope Nicholas the IId. became a Mediator
between them; and sent Peter Damian, as his Legate, to manage the difference
for him. And the Conclusion was, that though with much difficulty, and at the
hazard of his Life; the Cunning Legate carried his Point, and persuaded the
Bishop to submit to him.

Scarce was this Affair thus ended, and the Legate well gone, before the Bishop
began to perceive the false Step he had made; and resolved, in the best manner
he could, to recover himself out of the Snare into which he had fallen. In
order whereunto, He called a Synod of his Own Province; disannulled all that
the Legate had done; and asserted the Rights of the married Clergy.

From hence began an Open Schism in the Church of Milan. The One part adhered
to the Interests of Rome: The other, with their Archbishop, stood up for their
own Liberties; and the Rights of the Clergy. And being for this deserted by the
Rest, they communicated by themselves in a place called Pataria, and from
thence were afterward known by the Name of Patarines.

To this Party, as that which had the Greatest Right on its side, the Churches
of the Valleys joined themselves. And being thus broke off from the Communion
of the Roman Church, they kept themselves free from the Corruptions of it; and
maintained themselves in so much the greater Purity, by their Constant, and
Earnest Oppositions to it.

It was not long after this, that Peter Waldo, Ledger Hist. des Vaudoises l. 1.
c. ^
of whom I before spoke, began a Reformation of Religion at Lions: Whose party
being dispersed, many of them chose to retire for safety into the Valleys; and
thereby gave Occasion to the Vulgar Error, of his being the first Founder of
the Evangelical Churches there.

Thus were these Churches both betimes Reformed; and Settled, and Secured, in
their pure Profession of the Gospel. It would be too long to relate, what great
Good was done, by their means, to all the other Churches of Europe. What
Colonies they sent out into France, Germany, England, and even into Italy its
self; to propagate the Truth of the Gospel. From these Churches it was that our
Wicleff derived his Faith, and Knowledge. From these, the Churches of Bohemia
were established. Here, in short, was the Truth of Religion both Taught, and
Maintained; till at last it pleased God to give it a free passage, and a larger
Dominion; by the Great Reformation which was generally made in Europe, about
the beginning of the last Century. Anno. 1517.

These then are the Persons whom we now recommend to your Charity. They are a
part of the most ancient of all the Reformed Churches of Europe. Who by
breaking off betimes from the Tyranny, and Communion, of the Bishop of Rome,
were never at all involved in the most part of those Errors which that Church
abounds with; And from the Ninth Century downwards, have stood clear of those,
into which they were before fallen.

I go on, 2 ly, To show; That what they now Suffer, is for the sake of the
Gospel of Christ.

I have before observed, that it was about the middle of the xi th Century,
that the Church of Rome usurping upon the Authority of that of Milan,
occasioned a Separation of many of the Italic Churches from its Communion; and
of these of the Valleys among the rest. And if we look back into the
Ecclesiastical History of that Province, we shall find that from thenceforth
they never enjoyed any Rest from those Violences, and Oppressions, which the
Malice and Interest of that Proud, Ambitious See, found means to raise against
them.

To pass by the Bulls, the Sentences, and Excommunications which were
continually thundered out from the Vatican against Them: Vid. Council Lateran
iii. apud Labb To. x p. 1504. and Cap. xxvii. de Haereticis.
and the Effect of which many of these Poor Men sufficiently felt, in the time
of Pope Alexander the III. Anno. 1180 Ibid Col. 1737.
How terible was the Decree of Pope Lucius the III. against them? Who not
content to Excommunicate them for their Heresy, and to invite the Civil
Government to engage on his side against them; obliged all Princes to take a
Corporal Oath to make search after them, and to use their utmost Endeavors
utterly to extirpate them out of their Dominions.

Thus their Trials, and Persecutions began; Council iv. Late^an Cap. 3. de
Haeret. Add. La^b To xi p^g. 234.
but they did not stop here. For what Lucius decreed, Pope Innocent the III,
took care to put in vigorous Execution. He renewed this Order against them; and
Caused diligent Search to be every where made after them. And to strengthen the
Churches Authority, Pope Honorius the III, not only continued the same Method,
but obtained of the Emperor Frederic. ii. Constit. Sect. 5, 6, 7, and Constable.
Feud. page 27

Labb. To. xi col 334.


Frederic the II, that memorable Edict, which is still preserved in the Feudal
Law, against them.

But above all the rest, most effectual was the Course which Gregory the IX.
pitched upon, to destroy them. He settled the Inquisition into an Established
Office against Them: and so perfected that Design which his Predecssor Innocent
the III, had set on foot, for their Ruin.

How those barbarous Executioners of the Iniquity of the Romish See, proceeded
against them, it were too long to Recount. Much they suffered, both by their
secret Proceedings; and by their Open Violences. I shall rather observe, that
when this Method also proved too slow to answer the eager Desires, and
Expectations of their Enemies; Ledger. Hist l. ii. c. 2. Morland. l. ii. c. 1.
at length Pope Innocent the VIII. bethought himself of a more compendious way
of doing their Business. He raised a Holy War against Them: And sent Albert his
Legate into the Valleys, at the Head of 18000 Men, all bent with Zeal, and
Arms, to their Destruction.

But from this bloody Attempt also, it pleased God to deliver them: Who in
despite of all their Endeavors, has continued them still Monuments of his own
Mercy; and for a Reproach of the Cruelty, as well as Corruptions, of their
Roman Persecutors.

At last, Another Method was resolved upon; and that such a One, as nothing but
the miraculous Hand of God could deliver them from. A Congregation was Erected,
Ledger. Hist l. ii. chap. 6.
and fixed at Turin (the Capital City of the Dukes of Savoy, in whose
Territories the most Considerable Part of these Churches were seated) for the
Propagation of the Faith, and the destruction of Heretics; so its Style ran;
but which in truth was intended for the particular design, of Ruining the
Churches of the Valleys; as the Event has too plainly shown.

It was about the time of the last Jubilee, that this Design was unhappily
formed against Them; and it was but a very little while before they felt the
deplorable Effects of it. Ledger. l. ii. c 9. etc. Sir Sam. Morland. Hist. of
Piem. l. ii.
Their whole Country being so utterly ruined in 1655. and their Numbers so
weakened; that but for the present Interposition of almost all the Protestant
Princes, and States, of Europe on their behalf, they must have fallen under a
final desolation. But from this last disaster, that Part of these Churches
which is now Recommended to your Charity, had the good Fortune to be preserved:
Who having, some years before, Anno. 1633. Memor. Recond. di Vittorio Siri.
Vol. vii. p. 500. etc.
been united to the French Crown, as Dependents on the Garrison of Pignerol,
enjoyed thereby the Protection of that State.

What their Condition since that time has been, the Severe Proceedings of that
Court against all the Reformed Churches of its Dominions, may suffice to tell
Us. I shall only observe, that being forced by the Persecutions they suffered
from their New-Masters, to retire to their Brethren under the Duke of Savoy's
Government; they accordingly bare their share in the Great Calamities which
that Prince brought upon the Valleys See the account of that persecution
published at Oxford. 4o 1689.
in the year 1686.

How their Present Circumstances stand, His Majesty's Letters set out to you.
They are banished from their Country; forced to abandon their Houses, and
Lands; their Friends, and Relations; and to seek for Refuge in such other
Places, as the Providence of God, and the Charity of Protestants States, and
Princes, should provide for Them.

And here then let us stop, and take a Short View of the miserable Condition of
these poor, persecuted Christians; and consider what they have suffered, during
these last 600 years, upon the account of their Religion.

If 1 st. we respect the Cruelty of their Persecutors, What barbarous
Slaughters have they Committed upon them? The Histories are still extant, and
some of them in our own Language, Ledger. Hist. des Sr. Sam. V^udois. Morla^d.
Hist. of the Evangel. Churches of Piem. Book ii. c. 6 etc.
that convey the Particulars to Us: And they give us so lively an Image of the
true Spirit of Popery, that I cannot but wish they were in the hands of Every
Sober, and Charitable Christian among us.

Thus much in General, I may venture to say; That whether we regard the number
of Those who have suffered by their hands, or the nature, and quality of their
Sufferings; Scarce did the whole Church of Christ undergo more in the Ten
Heathen Persecutions, than these poor Churches alone have undergone, from the
more than Heathen Cruelty, and Inhumanity of their Romish Enemies.

Nor has 2 dly: The Injustice of their Sufferings been less Evident, than their
Sufferings themselves have been Notorious. To say nothing of the strange
Paradox, of Christians persecuting of Christians, for the Profession of the
Gospel of Christ. To omit the Inoffensiveness of their Lives and Manners; and
in which their very Enemies themselves, after all the false pretenses of some
others of their Party, have Gloriously justified Them. Ledger. Hist. l. 1. c. 30.
What can be more Unjust; than for a People dwelling as it were alone;
separated by Vast Mountains from all their Neighbors round about Them; Content
with what Nature furnishes them withal; and desiring only to Live in Peace with
their Neighbors, and in the quiet Enjoyment of a Good Conscience toward God;
should, for nothing, be harassed, and oppressed: Hunted like Wild Beasts;
Persecuted with Fire, and Sword; and treated as if they were not worthy to live
upon the Earth?

Nay but this is not all: Their Enemies have not only thus persecuted them
without a Cause; but against their Own most Solemn, and Sacred Engagements to
the Contrary. They have broken the Public Faith; Violated their Own Treaties,
and Promises; And effectually shown how little Truth they think themselves
obliged to keep with those whom they call Heretics; whenever they can get a
fair Opportunity to destroy them.

And had their Fury, and their Malice, been content to stop at their Lives, and
Goods; it might the more easily have been excused. But their Cruelty, and their
Falseness, have carried them beyond these; whilst to excuse their own
Proceedings, and bespatter their Adversaries; they have,

3 dly; Done, what in them lies, to murder the Reputation of those whom they
have Persecuted: and to render them Odious to the present Age; and Infamous,
and detestable, to all succeeding Generations.

Witness those false Accounts which they have industriously spread abroad in
the World, of these Poor Men. Ledger. Hist. l. ^. c. 19.30.

Allix. Remarks c. 26.


If we enquire into their Faith; they are Arians, and Manichees: that is to
say, Monsters of Men; and not worthy the Name, or Character of Christians. If
we consider their Manners; Their very public Meetings are full of Lust, and
Debauchery: And they commit in them such Sins, as ought not to be once named
among the Saints. And as for the Proceedings that have been made against them;
Ledger lib. l. 11. c. 10. etc.
They have been for their Sedition, and Rebellion. They have drawn the fury of
War upon themselves, by their own unquiet Behavior; and and may thank their
Own, undutyful demeanor to their Princes, for whatsoever Calamities They have
suffered from them.

These are the accounts which those of the Roman Communion have delivered to
the World of these poor Christians. I shall not need to say that in all this
they only set forth their Own Falseness and Malice; and publish to the world
not what these Christians are, but what they would have Men think Them to be.
See Ledger. before.
This their own Authors, have sufficiently already done. It is enough that we
know who they are that give us these Characters, to enable us to judge what
Credit is to be given to them: And that beyond the Alps, among those of their
own Communion, We our selves are set forth in as Black Characters, both with
respect to our Faith, and Manners; as ever these distressed Persons have been
Represented to Us, on this side the Mountains. The short of the Matter is, that
both They and We, freely declare against the Tyranny, and Corruptions of the
Church of Rome; and that is enough to warrant the Worst that can be said, to
blacken, and bespatter both Them, and Us.

But I must not insist upon these Matters; but having now more fully than I
designed, shown, both Who the Persons are who ask your Charity; and How they
come to stand in need of it; shall proceed,

3 dly: And very briefly to represent to you, What just Reason we have to
succor, and assist them; upon the account of These their Sufferings.

If (1 st.) We consider either the Cause, or Authors of their Persecution; it
will from both appear that we of the reformed Religion must Support Them; or
they must be left to sink under their Afflictions: for We may be confident,
that if we do not help them, No body else will.

Were the Case here that of Christianity in General; Did these Poor Men suffer
by the Hands of Turks, or Infidels; One might then hope that the Common Love,
and Duty, we all profess to our Blessed Savior, and his Gospel, might move
every Church, however differing in other Matters, yet to join together for
their Relief. But it is the misfortune those for whom we are now concerned,
that they are persecuted not by the Common Enemy, but by those who are called
by the same Name of Christians. They suffer, not for the defense of the Gospel,
but for the maintenance of the Truth, and Purity, of it; against those who have
either mistaken, or perverted the Faith of it. And if We, who in this are
agreed with Them, do not relieve them; with what Reason can we expect, that
those whom they Oppose, and by whom they are Persecuted, should help Them?

Here therefore is a Case, in which the Argument of the Text returns with a
double force upon Us. These Persons are not only the Disciples of Christ; but
of the same particular Faith and Communion with our selves. They are our
Brethren not only as they are Christians, but as they are Reformed too; and
which is yet more, They suffer for being so. They might have believed in
Christ, and yet have continued in the peaceable Enjoyment of their Country, and
Possessions. But they could not have continued Reformed without quitting them;
and therefore they readily forsook both. And surely the least we can do to
testify our concurrence with them in this Profession, will be to extend our
Charity toward them: And thereby to show that We do own their Cause; and
account it such, as deserves to be suffered for.

But (2 dly,) It is not only a Matter of Charity, but of Interest also to Us,
to help, and relieve them: And that is an Argument, which where it is once
received, seldom fails of prevailing with most Men.

It cannot be unknown to any among Us, what Endeavors have been used, and what
projects have been laid, for these last forty, or fifty Years, utterly to root
the Protestant Interest out of Europe. What Progress has been made by our
Enemies to this purpose in Piemont, Hungary, Bohemia, France; shall I add, and
here at Home too, both in England, and Ireland, is evident to all of Us. And
had the design succeeded, as it was verily believed and hoped it would have
done; I do not see what could have preserved the Reformed Religion from a
general destruction.

But blessed be God! Who in most of these places has disappointed their
Designs: and we hope will, in the End, turn them, (as he has already in part
done) to their own Shame, and Confusion. And has effectually convinced us, how
necessary it is for us to unite together in Interest and Affection, against our
Common Enemies; if ever we mean to support our selves, and our Cause, from
Ruin; by their unwearied Malice, and Indefatigable endeavors against Us.

It is but a little time since we were called upon to receive those of the
Reformed Church of France into our Bosoms. By doing of this we have preserved
so much of the Protestant Interest from sinking. And all that their Persecutors
have gained by their Cruelties aginst them is but this, that they have forced
them to change their Country; but have not at all lessened either their Zeal
for their Religion, or their Ability to defend it.

We are now invited to preserve the Remains of the same Church, and of some of
those of the Valleys of Piemont with Them. A Flock little in Number, About
11500. Persons.
but of Great Worth: And such as we cannot suffer to Perish, without fixing an
Eternal Infamy upon our Names, for our Incharitableness.

Whose turn it may next be to suffer in this Cause, we cannot tell. This we
know, that be it whose it will, Our Charity will have its Reward with God; and
give a Good Example, and Encouragement to the Church of Christ. We may, by what
we do for these poor, persecuted Men, prolong our Own Tranquillity; and so meet
with a Reward on Earth. But though we should not; yet this we are sure, that we
shall hereby purchase to our selves an Inheritance in Heaven. Our Unrighteous
Mamon, shall prepare for us an eternal Habitation. What we now give for the
sake of Christ, and to his Disciples, in his Name; he will one Day return, as
if we had done it unto Himself: And Verily I say unto you, ye shall in No wise
lose the Reward of it.

ERRATA.
PAge 7. Margin r. Hebr. xiii. 1. p. 14. l. 15. r. Purity. Ib. Margin l. ult.
r. Imagine. p. 22. Margin l. 10. dele Sir Sam.

FINIS.
BOOKS Printed for R. Sare at Grays-Inn-Gate in Holborne.
THe Genuine Epistles of the Apostolical Fathers St. Barnabas, St. Ignatius,
St. Clement, St. Polycarp, the Shepherd of Hermas, and the Martyrdoms of St.
Ignatius, and St. Polycarp; Written by those who were present at their
Sufferings; being together with the Holy Scniptures of the New Testament, a
complete Collection of the most Primitive Antiquity for about 150 Years after
Christ; Translated and Published with a large Preliminary Discourse, relating
to the several Discourses here put together, 8o.

The Authority of Christian Princes over their Ecclesiastical Synods asserted,
with Particular respect to the Convocations of the Clergy of the Realm, and
Church of England. Occasioned by a late Pamphlet Entitled, A Letter to a
Convocation Man, 8o.

An Appeal to all the True Members of the Church of Enggland in behalf of the
Kings Supremacy, as by Law established; by our Convocations Approved, and our
eminent Bishops and Clergymen Stated and Defended, against both the Popish and
Fanatical opposers of it, 8o.

A Practical Discourse concerning Profane Swearing, especially in the two great
Points of Perjury and Common Swearing, 8o.

The Principles of the Christian Religion Explained, in a brief Commentary upon
the Church Catechism, 8o.

A Sermon at the Dorsetshire Feast, 1690.

Before the Queen at Whitehall, May the 10th. 1691.

Before the Lord Mayor, November 26th, 1691.

At Gray's Inn upon the Death of the Queen.

At St. James's upon the Thanksgiving.

These Ten by Dr. Wake.

Fables and Stories Moralized, being a Second Part of the Fables of Aesop, and
other eminent Mythologists, etc. Folio.

By Sir Roger L'Estrange.


