THE UNLAWFULNESS OF Bonds of Resignation.

First Written in the YEAR 1684.

FOR THE Satisfaction of a Private Gentleman. And now Made Public for the Good
of Others.

Indultum a jure Beneficium non est alicui auferendum.

Quod suo nomine non licet, nec alieno licebit.

Quod ob gratiam alicujus conceditur, non est in ejus dispendium retorquendum.

Reg. Juris. LONDON: Printed, and to be Sold by E. Whitlock near Stationers*
Hall, 1696.

SAcerdotia non sunt delata ad Patronos, ut illa circumciderent, aut de illis
depraedarentur; sed ut illorum praesidio and fide tuto conquiescerent.

Reformat. Leg. Ecclesiast. sub. Henr. 8. and Edv. 6. Page 57.
The UNLAWFULNESS OF Bonds of RESIGNATION.
HAving many Years since, in a Public Discourse, cast some Reflections upon
Bonds of Resignation, I was not a little importuned to make them yet more
Public; and, amongst other Solicitations, received the following Letter from a
very worthy Gentleman, dated July 12th. 1684.

SIR,
YOur Opinion against Bonds of Resignation, sufficiently convinces me that
they are not commendable, though they do not direclty appear unlawful: But since
the contrary has been an Error so universally (I had almost said, so
advantageously) received by Patrons, I must needs beg you, not only for my own
satisfaction, but as a Justice to our Mother the Church of England, to give
those Reasons more at large; or if you think fit, to make them public. It Is
charitable to confute an Error so generally received, and Truth is a Cause
worthy a good Man; especially where it is a Debt to the Church, a Justice to
your self and Friends, and will be a particular Obligation to

SIR, Your most Humble Servant, W. S.


Upon the Receipt of which Letter I immediately drew up this short Account.

First, Of the Unlawfulness of Bonds of Resignation; and, Secondly, Of their
great Mischief and Inconveniency.

The Unlawfulness of Bonds of Resignation appears, I. From the Statute of the
31 st. of Elizabeth. II. From the Ecclesiastical Canons, confirmed by that
Statute. III. From the Absurdities that follow upon the Practice of them.


First, By the Statute of 31 st. Eliz. c. 6. That no Person shall Present for
any Sum of Money, Reward, Gift, Profit or Benefit, directly or indirectly; or
for, or by reason of any Promise, Agreement, Grant, Bond, Covenant, or other
assurance of, or for any Money, Reward, Gift, Profit, or Benefit whatsoever,
etc. In which Words, all Bonds for Money, or whereby any Profit or Benefit,
directly or indirectly, may accrue to the Patron, are expressly forbidden. And
whoever Presents for, or in Consideration of the Clerk's having given a Bond to
Resign, when his Son comes to be of the Age of a Priest, most certainly
Presents for, or in consideration of a Bond, that is to the Profit and Benefit
of the Patron, and really preferable to a considerable Sum of Money. And of
this we need no other Proof than the Bonds themselves, which are constantly for
a greater, or lesser Sum, proportionable to the Value of the Parsonage.

There are two Cases in Crook's 2 Rep. p. 248, and 274.
Crook's Reports, which are commonly urged in behalf of those Bonds: When the
Patron (to put the most favorable Case) has a Son designed to succeed. And
Sir S. D. pleads for these Bonds, That Nature teaches us to provide for our
Children. But that Gentleman should have considered, that Nature does not teach
us to provide for our Children by indirect and unlawful Methods; That Daughters
are to be provided for as well as Sons; and if this Pretense of Nature will not
justify a Patron to take 500 l. of a Clerk, as a Portion for his Daughter, it
will not justify his taking a Bond of Resignation (which may really be worth
more) to make provision for his Son. The Ecclesiastical Canons forbid a Patron
Ecclesiamnomine dotalitatis ad aliquemtransferre; and the Common Law will not
allow a Patron to covenant with a Clerk, that upon the condition of his
marrying of his Daughter, he will present him to his Church; and the pretense
of Nature's teaching of them to provide for their Children, will not excuse
them.

But before I leave these two Cases in Crook's Reports, it is very observable
that the Point in Issue was only the Validity of such Bonds against the Clerks
that gave them, for the Payment of the Money; but whether such Bonds were
within the Corruption condemned by the Statute, and so their Preferments void,
was not in Issue. And in that famous Case-betwixt Jones and Lawrence, where the
Clerk alleged in Arrest of Judgment, the illegality of the Contract, the Court
agreed that that was not material as to the Bond, because the Statute did not
make the Bond void, though it did the Presentation: And so the Judges punished
those Clerks, by making of them pay the Penalty of their Bonds for not
Resigning; but did not secure them from the Penalty of the Statute, and being
turned out for their corrupt Contracts. But had these two Cases been never so
full in behalf of such Contracts; yet we see daily that Judges do not look upon
themselves as bound up by the Opinions of their Predecessors, but vary from
them as often as they see reason for it; and in this very Matter there is a
Case reported by Noy, p. 22. betwixt Sir John Pascall and one Clerk, in the
15th. Year of King James, where such Bonds were adjudged illegal. There is also
a farther Clause in this Statute, of Queen Elizabeth, that is very observable;
viz. That if any Incumbent of any Benefice with Cure of Souls, do, or shall
comply, resign, or exchange the same, or corruptly take for, or in respect of
the resigning of the same, directly or indirectly, any Sum of Money or Benefit
whatsoever, shall lose double the Value of the Sum so given, etc. Now whoever
Resigns for, and upon the Account of his having a good Bond of 500 l. or any
other Sum, given back to him, does certainly either directly or indirectly
Resign for a Sum of Money, or Benefit, and loses double the Value of the Bond
given up, one half to the King, and the other half to the Informer, as the Act
expresses it. And this Statute will be so far from justifying such corrupt
Resignations, that it expressly forbids them and punishes them. And, to sum up
this Matter, If, after a Bond given to Resign, it be unlawful for a Clerk to
Resign upon the Account of being freed from the Penalty of the Bond; and yet
if he does not Resign at the time appointed, the Patron will recover of him the
Penalty of the Bond; then these Bonds are in effect the same, as if they had
been absolutely for so much Money at the time agreed on; and so there is no
doubt but that such Bonds are corrupt, and against the Statute.

Secondly, These Bonds are contrary to the Ecclesiastical Canons, which are now
in force, and were confirmed by that very Statute of Queen Elizabeth. For there
it follows in these Words: Provided that this Act shall not extend to take
away, or restrain any Punishment, Pain, or Penalty, limited, prescribed, or
inflicted, by the Laws Ecclesiastical, for any of the Offenses before, in this
Act mentioned; but that the same shall remain in force, and may be put in due
Execution, as it might be before the making of this Act, or any thing contained
therein to the contrary thereof, in any wise, notwithstanding. And therefore if
at any time the Bishop of the Diocese will proceed to a Sentence of Deprivation
against a Clerk for giving Bond to Resign, I take it that there can lie no
Prohibition against him, from any Common-Law-Court, because the very Act of
Parliament that appoints other Punishments to the Buying and Selling of
Ecclesiastical Preferments, reserves and confirms this Power to the
Ecclesiastical Courts. Now the ancient Ecclesiastical Law, in this Matter, is
in a Council held at Westminster by Edmond Archbishop of Canterbury, in these
Words, Nulli liceat pro Praesentatione alicujus personae, pecuniam vel aliquod
emolumentum, pacto interveniente recipere, etc. Also in Linwood, l. 2* de
Juramento and Constit. Stephani and Cant. Episc. by which every Clerk, before
he received Institution, was to take this Oath. Quod propter Praesentationem
illam, nec promiserit, nec dederit aliquid Praesentanti, nec aliquam propter
hoc inierit pactionem; i. e. That he has neither given, nor promised any thing
to his Patron, for presenting him, nor entered into any Bond or Agreement upon
that Account. And at this day, pursuant to the Canons of King James the First,
every Clerk, before he receives Institution, must swear, That he has made no
Simoniacal Payment, Contract, or Promise, directly or indirectly, by himself or
any other, to his knowledge, or with his consent, to any person or persons
whatsoever, for, or concerning the procuring and obtaining of this
Ecclesiastical Dignity, Place, Preferment, Office, or Living, nor will at any
time hereafter perform or satisfy any such kind of Payment, Contract, or
Promise made by any other, without his knowledge and consent. Now if there be
any doubt or scruple, what is, and what is not a Simoniacal Contract, this
cannot be determined by Statute or Common Law, where the Word Simony or
Simoniacal is never used, nor by those two Cases, in Crook's Reports, which
relate only to the validity of Bonds of Resignation against the Clerks, for the
payment of the Forfeiture, without determining whether such Bonds include any
corruption against the Statute or Canons, but by the Ecclesiastical Canons; and
there is no doubt but that the Canonists did always account such Bonds
Simoniacal Contracts. Father Paul, of Matters Beneficiary, p. 75. has these
Words: It Is constantly affirmed by all Canonists and Casuists, That every
Contract, in Matters of Benefices, is Simoniacal, if it be made without the
Pope's participation; but with his Intervention, it is legitimate; holding for
constant this general Proposition, That the Pope, in Beneficiary Matters cannot
commit Simony. So that except our English Patrons can get the Pope on their
sides, to legitimate every particular Bond of Resignation that they require,
they are undoubtedly Simoniacal. The Pope himself is esteemed above all Laws
and Canons, Legibus Canonibusque solutus; but for any other Patron to conferr a
Benefice, for a limited time, is held unlawful in all those Churches where
these Canons are in force. Even Resignations, if they were occasioned through
fear or compulsion, and were not purely voluntary, were accounted void: Every
valid Resignation the Canonists call Spontaneam ejurationem, and siquis ad
beneficium ejurandum metu adigatur, irrit^ est ejuratio, Duarenus, l. 8. c. 2
So that in the Canon Law these Bonds destroy themselves; and whilst they compel
a Clerk to Resign, make his Resignation* forced, and by consequence not good.

Thirdly, There are many Absurdities that follow from the practice of these
Bonds, both in the Common and Canon Law. In our Common Law, the
Parsonage-house, Church, Churchyard and Glebe, are the Parsons Freehold; but
to have a Freehold determinable upon a certain number of Years, is absurd; and
as a Lessee for Years (be they never so many) cannot grant an Estate for Life,
because he cannot turn his Lease into a Freehold; so by parity of Reason, a
Presentation of a Clerk virtually, pro tempore limitato, cannot be sufficient
for a Bishop's Institution and Mandate of Induction, which give an Estate for
Life and make a Freehold. By the Canonists, a Parsonage is defined to be, Res
Ecclesiastica quae sacerdoti vel Clerico ob sacrum Ministerium in perpetuum
conceditur -- dicitur in perpetuum, quia cum ad tempus Minister Ecclesiae
ordinari non potest, necesse est Beneficium ipsum quod ministerio conjunctum
est, perpetuum esse, Duarenus, l. 2. c. 4. i. e. Every Benefice is granted to a
Priest for ever; and therefore it is for ever, because since no one can be
ordained only for a set time, the Benefice, or Title upon which the Ordination
is founded, must be perpetual also. Antiquity knew of no difference betwixt
Ordination, and giving a Benefice; and if any one was ordained a^ Priest
without a Title, by the Canons of the Fourth General Council, his Ordination
was void. And if all lawful Ordinations fix a perpetual and indelible
Character, as our Canons declare, then Presentations and Institutions must be
unlimited also. So that Bonds for Resignation of a Benefice, at a set time,
are very contradictory to the Nature of a Benefice, and include manifest
Absurdities both in the Common Law of the Land, and the Canon Law of the Church.

Fourthly, The Unlawfulness of these Bonds appears both from the Nature of the
Obligation, and of the Condition* The Obligation is absolute for a Sum of
Money; and if it be unlawful to give a Sum of Money for the Presentation, it is
also to give a Bond; for every good Bond is virtually Money; and even our
Common Lawyers are agreed, that where the Money, and not the Resignation is
designed by the Patron, the Contract is corrupt. Now who knows what the Patron
designs? Or if any one could know it, how should he be sure that he will
continue in that Mind and no Crosses nor Losses make him alter it? When the
Bond is forfeited, its Money, if the Patron pleases; and should he wave the
requiring of it, who knows what an Executor may do? And then the demand of the
Money made by the Patron, and the payment of it by the Clerk, will be naturally
construed in a Court of Judicature, to be no more than what was originally
designed, and, by Consequence, corrupt. And if we look into the Conditions of
these Bonds, we shall find that they will not help the Matter* for the
Condition is, to resign the Benefice at a time expressed. Now if this Condition
be out of the Clerk's Power, and he cannot resign when he pleases, then the
Bond will be still the same as if it were absolute. If a Man should give Bond
to pay a Sum of Money, if before such a day he did not fly up to the Moon,
such a Bond is as to the effect of it, the very same, as if it had been a Bond
absolute for the Sum of Money mentioned. Now whoever is instituted into a
Benefice, takes upon him the care of so many Souls, and cannot resign his Trust
without the particular consent of his Ordinary that committed it to him. Father
Paul says, That it was never lawful for him that was put into any
Ecclesiastical Charge, to leave it off of his own Authoritysand it is at the
Superior's liberty to receive the Resignation or not. And we have the
concurring Opinion of the Canonists in Duarenus, l. 8. c. 2. So that for a
Clerk to engage himself under a Sum of Money to resign the Benefice, at a time
prefixed, is really to engage to do what is not in his power, and so will be
very much the same as a Bond absolute for the Sum agreed on.

Notwithstanding these Reasons for the illegality of Bonds of Resignation,
there are two popular Arguments in behalf of them, which deserve to be
considered.

First, That it seems reasonable that such Gentlemen as are possessed of the
Advowson of any rich Benefice, should have the liberty to present one of their
own Sons, if fit for it; and should the Benefice become void, whilst his Son
designed for it is only in his Education, and not qualified for Priesthood,
that the Patron have Power to dispose of it provisionally, for a time, till his
Son be fit.

In Answer to which, I grant, that if the Patron, or his Ancestors, had been
the Donors of the Temporalties, there might have been some pretense; but if on
the contrary, the Right of Patronage arose from the Building of the Church, and
neither Tith nor Glebe (generally speaking) were of the Patron's Donation; If
the Temporalties (upon the Vacancy of the Church) do not return to the Patron,
but the Bishop, and he, and not the Patron disposes of them, first by
Sequestration, and afterward by Mandate of Induction, and the Right of
Patronage is purely a spiritual Trust to recommend a worthy Person, and not
directly concerned in the Temporalties at all, there will be very little
Argument in this pretense; and if the Patron have the liberty to present his
own Son, when he is fit, there is no reason that the Laws and Constitutions of
Church and State should be strained to favor him farther, and enable him to
give those Temporalties to his own Children, which were given to the Church by
other Persons.

Secondly, It is objected, That these Bonds of Resignation are very reasonable,
when the condition of them is only the Clerk's keeping strict Residence, or not
accepting of another Benefice, or the like.

To which I Answer, That even in these Cases, since the Penalty of all these
Bonds, upon the forfeiture, is payable only to the Patron, its shrewdly to be
suspected, that whatever the pretense be, yet the Patron collaterally and
indirectly, at least, has an eye to the gaining of the Money upon the
forfeiture of the Bond.

Now that which should sway with every good Man, is the great heap of Mischiefs
and Inconveniences that attend these Bonds.

First, To such conscientious Clergymen, as refuse to give Bonds of
Resignation; who, though they be never so learned, never so pious and well
qualified for the Cure, yet are slighted and passed by, and less worthy Persons
preferred, for no other reason, but because these will enter into those Bonds,
which the other will not.

Secondly, To such Clerks as give these Bonds, who many times are troubled in
Conscience for what they have done, when it is too late to help it; and though
they be not, yet having been settled in a Parish, and, perhaps, having a Wife
and Children to provide for, they are then called upon to resign, when they
want the Profits more than ever, and forced to seek Bread for themselves and
Family; and since most Persons that have given Bond, are apt to persuade
themselves, either that the Patron will not put the Bond in suit against them,
or that the Son designed to succeed, will either not be fit, or not willing to
take Orders, or may die before that time, or that the Bishop may refuse to
receive his Resignation, or the like, they will be very apt to look upon their
present Preferments as Settlements, and run into the Inconveniences mentioned.

Thirdly, To the Parishes where such Clerks live; for it cannot be imagined,
that where the Incumbent is limited to a certain number of years, that he can
afford to relieve the Poor, and perform such Acts of Charity and Hospitality as
become his Station. How can a temporary Incumbent afford to rebuild the
Parsonage-house, be it never so ruinous? How can he afford to repair and
beautify the Chancel? And therefore what is observed to happen often to old
Incumbents, that they let their Houses decay with themselves, will be generally
true of these, who see their end more certainly approaching than the other do,
and will do as little in repairs, as possible, because they see that they have
but a short time.

Fourthly, To the Church and Kingdom. What Encroachments does this occasion
upon the Tithes, Glebes, and other Profits of the Church, when the Minister is
kept in awe by his Patron, and has neither Money nor Time that he can spare
for managing a Lawsuit in defense of them? How will such a one be able to
oppose Vice and Faction; especially if his Patron be criminal? He must be
contented to preach such Doctrine as will please him; and though embroiling the
Civil Government be the Patron's Design, yet the Clerk must blow the Coals, and
preach Doctrine suitable, as was too visible in our Civil War; and, lastly,
should the Patron be a Roman Catholic, Popery must be quite let alone in his
Sermons, or touched very gently.

These, and many more Mischiefs are such natural consequences of Bonds of
Resignation, and so easily to be observed by any one that will give himself
time to think, that I shall conclude that Man to be no Friend either to Church
or State, that does not use his best Endeavors to discourage them. And for the
more speedy and effectual suppressing of this growing Evil, I Humbly propose it
to my Lords the Bishops that they would please to take some pains to inform
their Clergy of these Matters; especially such as come for Priesthood or
Institution, that they would set before them the true and genuine sense of the
Oath against Simony, that it is not imposed by Statute or Common Law, but by
the Ecclesiastical Canons; and that the true sense and meaning of these Words
is not to be learned from the Common Law, but the Ecclesiastical. That the
Opinion of the Judges in the two Cases quoted for these Bonds, did only relate
to the Law of the Land, and not to the Laws of the Church; and that even they,
though they did declare these Bonds good against the Clerks that gave them, yet
did not determine whether they did not make the Livings void: That the Statute
of Queen Elizabeth, over and above the Penalties there inflicted, expressly
confirms and ratifieth all Ecclesiastical Punishments for such Offenses; and
that after such plain Admonition given by the Bishops, they would inflict the
Ecclesiastical Censures for Simony and Perjury upon all such as should be found
guilty, I doubt not but that such a Method would effectually suppress such
Contracts for the future, and deliver the Church from those mischievous Snares
that have of late years so mightily prevailed.

FINIS.

