Love's Pedigree. OR A Discourse showing the Grace of LOVE in a Believer to be
of A Divine Original Delivered in a SERMON Preached at the Lecture in Boston,
Febr. 29. 1699./1700

By S. Willard, Teacher of a Church there.

Jam. 1. 17. Every good gift, and every perfect gift, is from above, and comes
down from the Father of lights. BOSTON, in N. E. Printed by B. Green, and J.
Allen. Sold by Benjamin Eliot, at his Shop under the West End of the Town
House. 1700.

Love's Pedigree
1 John IV. 19. We Love him; because he first Loved us.
THE knowledge of our good and safe Estate, deriving from an interest in the
Everlasting Love of God, is a thing which every one who has right thoughts of
the Eternity he is going to, will be very sollicitous about. There is, besides
the Testimony of the Spirit of God to this in us, which is necessary for our
confirmation in the belief of it, the witness of our own spirit requisite, for
our ordinary Assurance about it, which must be given to those things in us
which are evidential of i^. These Evidences are built upon the discovery of
such fruits or effects of the love of God wrought in us, as a^e proper and
distinguishing, and these are mainly the Graces of Faith and Repentance; and
these are put into us by the operation of the Spirit of God, in our Effectual
Vocation; and because there may be something like unto these found in
Hypocrites, which may cheat them into false and presumptuous hopes of their
good estate; there is a yet farther trial to be made of them, to prove that
this Faith is unfeigned, and that this Repentance is unto life, which must be
gathered from those distinguishing fruits of them, which are not to be found in
the other. These fruits are all of them in the Word of God, reduced to that
common head of love, by which Faith is said to Operate, Gal. 5. 6. Which Love
is distributed according to the next or immediate objects of it, into the
loving of God, and of our brother; and because these two are inseparable, they
are therefore made use of mutually to evidence each the other; inasmuch as, if
we truly love our brother, it derives from our love to God as the principle, in
which it is rooted; and if we love God indeed* it will unfailingly pr^duce the
other love in us. So that the grand Case into which our Self Examination must
ultimately resolve it self, is, Whether God loves us with that love which he
bears to his Chosen; because if we are but sure of this, the inference is
infallible, viz that we shall certainly at last arrive at Eternal Life; how
happy then must we needs be? and the enquiry on which this conclusion must
determine, is, Whether we do cordially and sincerely love God? for though our
happy state was secured for us in the former, it being appointed and settled in
that love of his, yet we cannot come at the knowledge of it but by the ^at^er.

The words of our Text give us a reason of the safety of this way of
concluding, and show us why and wherein it amounts to a Demonstration, in as
much as it leads us from the Effect to the supreme cause from whence it must
derive. It is needless to enquire after the coherence of our Text with the
Context, the words themselves being an entire proposition, and having abundant
mattar of profitable instruction in them: and the design of them is, not only
to assert the close connection that there is between our loving of God, and his
loving us; but also to point us to the reason of this Connection, and show us
the closeness of it, and the safety of our inserring his love to us from ours
to him; and if it be enqui^ed to what kind of reasoning it is to be referred? I
answer, it must needs be to the Efficient Cause. It does not only intimate that
there is a Concomitancy, but also a Causality: for, though the word [ because]
does not always refer us to the cause of the thing but may refer to any other
head of arguments, and is accordingly to be judged of by the nature of that
which it refers to; yet it must do so in this place, inasmuch as we are here
given to understand the priority of Gods love to us, as that from which we come
to love him, which can be inferred from no other but the Efficient. The word is
an Adjective, and not an Adverb; and that also puts force into the argument; he
was the first in this love, and thence it was that our love followed after.
Hence,

DOCTRINE.
Our Loving of God is the genuine effect of his first Loving of us. If we love
him in time, it it because he first loved us from Eternity.

I shall not insist on this Doctrine at large, but restrain the following
Discourse to the resolution of the following Case, viz.

Quest. In what respect Gods love to us is leading to, and influential of our
loving of him?

A. That we may take up the right meaning of the Case, in order to the better
resolution of it: There are these two remarks to be made.

1. That by Gods love to us, we are to understand his Eternal purpose of good
will, by which he appointed us to Salvation by Christ. Love is improperly
attributed to God, in whom there are no Passions or Affections, properly so
called, inasmuch as they argue imperfection, and composition in the subject of
them, which is incompa^ible with the most absolute first Being. But because
these are in men the Instruments of the Will, by the Ministry whereof it
performs its Imperate Actions, or they are the various postures of it with
respect to its Object, according to the resentment that it has of it; hereupon
when we see such things done in Gods Works of Efficiency, as are wont to be
managed by such an Affection; we, after our manner of conception, ascribe it to
that Affection; because we cannot otherwise express it. Now love is an
Affection in us, which bears good will to the Object of it and expresses it
self in acts of kindness to it. As therefore it is an Humane Affection, it is
rooted in the heart or will, and is on all opportunities discovering it self in
the carriage; and from this conception of it, when God manifests his
benignity to the Creature, we conceive him, in his so doing, to act as a cause
by Counsel, and so ascribe it to his Benevolence, and call it his love. And
from this consideration, there is a diverse love that is assigned to him,
according to the different effects of his good will, discerned in the fruits of
his Beneficence to the Subject of it. There is a common love attributed to him,
wherein the good and the bad do promiscuously partake; and it appears in that
Goodness of his which he confers upon them, wherein he gives them large tastes
of his bounty; and to this love we are pointed in, Psalm. 145. 9. The Lord is
good to all, and his tender mercies are over all his works. And Acts 14. 17. He
left not himself without witness in that he did good, and gave us rain from
heaven, and fruitful seasons, filling our hearts with food and gladness. And
there is an Especial love of his that we are told of, which he bears only to
some, and in comparison with which others are said to be hated, according to
Romans 9. 13. Jacob have I loved, and Esau have I hated; and it appears in those
peculiar favors which he has laid in for, and bestows upon them; of which we
have such observations, Joh. 3. 16. God so loved the world, that he gave his
only begotten Son, etc. 1 John 4 9. In this was the love of God manifested
toward us, because God sent his only begotten Son into the world, that we
might live through him; and this is the love that we are now considering of,
and is intended in our Text: which, if we run up to the top of it, is nothing
else but that good will of his, by which he purposed to bestow all saving good
upon us. There is a natural love which we ascribe to God, by which he loves
himself eternally, being his own last end: and with this love every Sacred
Person in the undivided Trinity love each other; and there is a voluntary love
which we conceive in him, which must needs flow from his good pleasure; for we
are told, Romans 9. 18. He has mercy on whom he will have mercy. And such must
be all ^e love which he bears to the Creature, since ^ being, and all that he
does to it or for it ^rive from his holy pleasure, Who does all things ^ording
to the Counsel of his will, Ephesians. 1. 11. And ^ was this love that procured our
Salvation, Gal. ^ 20. Who loved me, and gave himself for me.

2. That by our loving of God we must understand, ^at Cordial respect which we
have for him, where ^ we have chosen him for our portion, and are en^ely
devoted to his fear. Love in us, is an Af^ction leading us in pursuit after
Union to the object ^ it, in order to our having intimate Communion ^ith it:
for love is a Closing Affection, and ^rrieth us forth after that which we love.
That which attracts our love to it, is the Goodness which we apprehend to be in
the object of it, which renders it a thing lovely; the discovery ^^ which
goodness made to the Understanding, ^oves on the Judgment, and by that on the
^eart, and draws it out after it. Now the ex^ession of this love is in a
suitable respect that ^e show to the object of it, and is accordingly
^iversifyed, as there is a different reference or re^tion that we bear to it:
the love therefore ^^ Parents to their Children, and of Children ^^ their
Parents does not show it self after the ^me manner. There are therefore these
two ^ings wherein our real love to God appears, Viz. In our renouncing of all
other things ^ him, choosing him alone for our portion, a^ accordingly depending
upon him for all; wh^ we can say as the Church, Lam. 3. 24. The L^ is my
portion says my Soul, therefore I will hop^ him: And as the Psalmist, Psalm.
62. 5. My S^ ^ait thou only upon God, for my expectation is fr^ him And in our
submitting our selves w^ greatest willingness and delight to his Servic^ Christ
therefore directs to this as the Evide^ o^ our love. Joh 14 15. If ye love me
keep ^ Commandments. Love is therefore used in ^ Scriptures to express all that
Obedience wh^ we pay to God, in studying and practicing u^versal conformity to
his revealed will. Thi^ rooted in our hearts by the delight we have his
precepts; when we can say with him, R^ 7. 22 I delight in the Law of God after
the inw^ man. And it is exerted in our life, when ^ devote our whole man to New
Obedienc^ When we love the Lord our God with all our he^ and all our soul, and
all our mind, Matthew. 22. ^

It n^w ^^llows that we proceed to the re^l^tion of the Case; and we may take
it up^ the following Propositions.

1. This love of ours with which we love God, not barely a Natural Affection,
or a Moral Pr^ciple in it, but a Grace of the Spirit. The ^tural affection
indeed is the Subject of it, in which it is rooted, but we must distinguish
be^^een the affection it self, and the love which ^ rooted in it. Love has
Good for its Object; and such as the good is, so is the love denomi^ated. We
love the things that are suited to ^ur inclinations: and hence there is in
Unre^enerate m^n, a Carnal Love which inclines them ^^ the gratification of
their carnal Lusts, and so ^e objects which are suited thereto attract ^eir
love There is a Natural Love in men to ^ch persons or things as are agreeable
to their ^atures: and there is a love to the things that ^^e Morally Good and
Honest, which some Un^onverted men have in them, and it proceeds ^om a
principle of Morality, which either re^ains in them notwithstanding the fall,
or has ^een acquired by them: but none of these a^ounts to the love which we
are now in the Consideration of: There is then a Divine Love, which carries men
out to God, and to Heavenly things, and fixes them there: and ^is flows from a
special gracious principle in^sed into the man by the Spirit of God, and can
^laim its Original from no other; it is therefor called one of the fruits of
the Spirit, and ^^ the first named, Gal. 5 22. The fruit of the Spirit is love,
etc. This love of God indeed was ^onnatural to man in his state of integrity,
being ^ne of those Graces of Sanctification which were concreated in him, and
belonged to the Image of God which was at first put upon hi^ and adorned him.
This love was active a^ vigorous in man before such time as he had ^ pra^ed
himself by Sin; and none of the Comm^^ were grievous to him.

2. The Apostasy robbed man of that holy love God which was at first planted in
him. This it ^ when it stripped him of the Image of God, in wh^ this and all the
other Graces of Sanctificati^ were contained. When man put off the Ima^ from
him, all that was Spiritual, or Theologic^ good in him went with it: So that
every U^ regenerate man, if he will say the Truth, m^ confess of himself
entirely, as Paul does of hi^ self in respect to his worser part, Romans 7. ^ In
me, that is in my flesh, there dwells no good thi^ Man, who at first loved God
as his last end a^ chief good, now cease to do so, and there is n^ one spark
of that primitive love left in him. ^ is said of every natural man, that the
love of ^ Father is not in him, 1 John 2. 15. The Affecti^ of love abides in
the man, it being essential his Humanity, and inseparable from it; but has
shifted objects, and exchanged God for ^ Creature; Unconverted men are said to
Lovers of pleasures, more than lovers of God, 2 Ti^ 3. 4. And hereupon that is
one title put up^ ungodly men, Romans 1. 30. Haters of God. that their first
love, in respect of the object on which it was placed, is turned into hatred.

3. This love must be again recovered by the man, in order to his being made to
enjoy God, and to be happy in him. It is certain that man's true happiness
consists in his enjoying of God, who is the only adequate object of felicity;
no other can make a suitable and sufficient portion for the reasonable
Creature: to be far from God, is to be miserable indeed, Psalm. 73. 27. For lo,
all that are far from thee, shall perish: In his favor there is life; his
loving kindness is better than life it self. Now God is a portion for none but
those that love him: it is by love that we come to have Communion with him,
which is our blessedness, Prove. 8. 17. I love them that love me. Hatred keeps
the Sinner at a distance from God, and there is a fearful Curse out against all
such, Psalm. 21. 8. etc. Thine hand shall find out all thine Enemies, thy right
hand shall find out those that hate thee; thou shall make them as a fiery Oven,
etc. Whereas there is a great Blessing in store for such as love him, Psalm. 5.
11, 12. Let them that love thy name, be joyful in thee; for thou Lord, wilt
bless the righteous, with favor will thou compass him as a shield. It
therefore infinitely concerns us all to see that the love of God dwells in us;
and this is it which the Apostle prays for in their behalf, 2 These. 3. 5. The
Lord direct your hearts into the Love of God.

4. It utterly exceeds the power of man to recover this Principle, and the
activity of it. Of the Natural man's inability to exert any truly Gracious
action, the Scripture abundantly informs us, Josh. 24 19. Ye cannot serve God.
Romans 8. 7, 8. The Carnal mind is Enmity against God; for it is no^ subject to
the Law of God, neither indeed can be. So then they that are in the Flesh,
cannot please God. 2 Cor. 3. 5. We are not sufficient of our selves to think
any thing, as of our selves. Now this defect arises from the loss of the Image
of God on his Heart, and his incapacity of getting it again by any Endeavor of
his own. Because he has not a root of Grace in him, therefore he cannot act
Graciously; for no^ Effect can exceed the Virtue of its Cause: And because
there is a contrary Principle in him, which reigns over every Faculty and Power
within him, he therefore is not able to withstand it. Indeed he cannot so much
as desire to Love God, much less is he able to restore this Grace to his heart
again. The Will therefore as well as the Deed, must be of his operation in us,
Phil. 2. 13. It is God who works in you to will and to do, of his own good
pleasure. The restoring of lost Grace to fallen man, is a work of Omnipotency,
and therefore none but he who is Almighty is able to do it in us: it is
therefore compared to a Creation, 2 Cor. 4. 6. God who commanded the light to
shine out of the darkness, has shined in our hearts, etc. And to a
Resurrection, Ephesians. 2. 1. You has he quickened, who were dead in trespasses and
sins. Love is a thing that is not to be purchased; all that a man would offer
for it will be despised, Cant. 87. Which may be interpreted as well of our
loving God, as of his loving us.

5. This love is a saving gift, and therefore must have God for its Author. It
is one of those things which we are told do accompany Salvation, Heb. 69. and
is therefore called a fruit of the Spirit, in the fore cited, Gal. 5. 22. This
love is an effect of the New birth, whereof God is the Author, 1 John 4. 7.
Love is of God, and every one that loves is born of God. And indeed, it being
one of the Graces of Sanctification, it must needs proceed from Gods
Efficiency, for it is he that Sanctifies us, 1 These. 5. 23. And the wonderful
change that is made in the man by it, must force us to say of it, behold the
finger of God. To see one who the other day despised God, had no desire after
him, had him to depart from him, chose carnal objects, lying vanities rather
than him; ^ay, hated his counsels, and was full of all prejudices against him;
now to love him, to choose him, to embrace him, to forsake all for him, to
submit to him, and delight in his Service is a thing of which no other account
can be given but that God has created him a new in Christ Jesus, that he has
given him another and a Ne^ heart, or otherwise it could never have been.

6 There was nothing in us that could move Go^ to produce this saving quality
in us. In all voluntary actions, which are done by a Rational Agent, we are
wont to enquire after the Impulsiv^ cause of them, or what it was that moved
an^ engaged him so to do: and by such measure as these are we necessitated to
conceive of God Works of Efficiency: It is a demonstration o^ Gods wonderful
love to us, that he will put principle of Sanctification into us, and thereb^
restores us from death to life, and whence was that he so did; or what was it
that induce^ him hereunto? Certainly it could not be from any loveliness that
he saw in us, for there wa^ none; we had nothing in us that was desir^ble, but
every thing was hateful: the Image God, which once was our beauty and orn^ment
was gone; and the Image of Sin, which is our shame and vileness was contracted,
an^ by virtue of it we were every way abomin^ble: when therefore God speaks of
doing suc^ things for backslidden Israel, he would have them to take that
humbling remark upon i^ Ezekiel. 36. 22. Thus says the Lord, I do not the for
your sakes, Oh house of Israel but for mine holy names sake, etc. Nor was he
moved hereto by our requests and prayers; it was not because we, in sense of
our folly and misery, sought relief of him, that his bowels earned toward us,
for he himself says, Isa. 65. 1. I am sought of them that asked not for me, I
am found of them that sought me not; and though he has declared, in Ezekiel. 36.
37. I will yet for this be enquired of by the house of Israel, to do it for
them. Yet his preventing grace produc^th this in us, otherwise we should never
have thus enquired after him, but abode in our distance from him.

7. Hence the spring or rise of all this must be from his love or good will to
us. When we have searched into all the causes of Regeneration, in which this
gracious principle is wrought in us, we must ultimately determine it hither: we
are made to partake in this Grace, because God has appointed us to it; and the
reason why we were so appointed, was because it so pleased God; Mat. 11. 25.
26. Thou have hid these things from the wise and prudent, and have revealed
them to babes; even so Father, for so it seemed good in thy sight. God
therefore tells Israel, that he loved them because he loved them; Deuteronomy. 7. 7,
8. The Lord did not set his love upon you, because ye were more in number, etc.
but because the Lord loved you. In timating that the motive of this love was
no^ where to be sought out of himself; and on this account God assigns our
effectual calling to a love of his own that never had any beginning, Jer. 31.
3. I have loved thee with an everlasting love, therefore with loving kindness
have I drawn thee; and needs must it be so, for he is the first cause and last
end of all things, Romans 11. ult. Of him, and through him, and to him are all
things Nor could his Grace be otherwise absolutely free, and sovereign, as the
Gospel every where assures us that it is.

8. All the engagements by which our love is excited to act upon him, are from
his first loving of us* As there is the planting of saving grace in us, in our
Renovation, by which a principle is infused into us, enabling and disposing of
us to love him, so there are the attractives by which this principle is drawn
forth into act, which are so many motives to stir up this love in us; for our
love of God is not a brui^ish passion, but it is acted with the highest reason;
and all the reasons of it are found in his love to us: he therefore thus draws
us in order to our following of him; Cant. 1. 14. Draw me, we will run after
thee, and the way in which he allures us, is by his love, Hos. 11. 4. I drew
thee with the cords of a man, with the bands of love. Now there are principally
such things as these, the consideration and belief whereof attract the love of
our Souls to God.

1. It was this love that appointed us to be the heirs of Salvation. The Word
of God does frequently express our Salvation under the consideration of an
Inheritance; and so all the claims that we can make to i^, must be in way of
Heirship: and we are not born heirs to it by a natural birth, but are
introduced into it by a voluntary Adoption: we had in our selves no more of
right to it than the Devils, nor could we make out a better claim to it than
the rest of Apostate mankind: we were common heirs with them of the same
destruction, Ephesians. 2 3. Being children of wrath by nature even as others. We
therefore come to have a right thereto according to appointment, 1 These. 5. 9.
God has not appointed us to wrath, but to obtain Salvation by Jesus Christ.
Nor can there be a greater obligation upon us to love God, than the
consideration of this eternal design: to think that God had such a thought of
good will for us, when he proposed no such favor for millions as good, and as
well deserving as we; and this is owing to his love, 1 John 3. 1. Behold what
manner of love the Father has bestowed upon us, that we should be called the
Sons of God? And sure this love must be more ancient than ours to him, who but
the other day hated him, and were his Enemies.

2. This love provided Christ to purchase Salvation for us. Such was our
unhappy condition by the Fall, that there could be no salvation for us, but by
a satisfaction made to offended Justice, which Attribute must not in the least
vail its glory in this affair, or so much as stoop to mercy in it. If God will
save us, he must provide a Jesus for us, one that can save us from our sins.
The Law must have a reparation made for the violation of it; our contracted
Guilt must be expiated; we cannot do this for our selves, thousands of rams,
and ten thousand rivers of oil will not do it; there must a Surety interpose to
undertake this, none could do it but the Son of God, he must be made Sin and a
Curse for us, he must have all our Iniquities laid upon him, and by his stripes
we must be healed: the case was reduced to this exigence, either God must
destroy us everlastingly for our sins, or do the execution upon his own Son in
our stead; nothing else would have done: Certainly then here was love
unparalled: Christ himself expresses it as that which exceeds all
comparison, Joh. 3. 16. God so loved the world, that he gave his only begotten
Son: And the Apostle thought it to be an argument which could not be over
strained, in the exercise of our faith for the obtaining of al^ the good that
is laid up in the promise, Rom 8 32. He that spared not his own Son, but
delivered him up for us all, how shall he not with him also freely give us all
things? and the consideration of it will be further amplified, by observing
that this was done for us before we had any love for him: not only was it
agreed upon in the eternal compact, that Christ should in fullness of time come,
and work out salvation for us, but the thing it self was accomplished on ou^
account during our being his enemies, Romans 5. 8, 10. God commends his love
toward us, in that while we were yet sinners, Christ died for us. When we were
enemies we were reconciled to God, by the death of his Son.

3. This love has revealed Christ to us as an Object suitable for us to trust
in for salvation. As it exceeded the reach of any created understanding to find
out the way of salvation by Christ: the thing it self being a mystery of
Infinite wisdom; so the Revelation or declaration of him to sinful men is of
God alone. It is his Gospel in which Christ is published; there it is that we
are acquainted with his Person and Offices, his undertaking and accomplishment,
his Incarnation, subjection to the Law, and making satisfaction to it for us;
how acceptable his Redemption was to his father, how sufficient it was for us,
to procure peace and life for us; there it is that we are acquainted how, and
assured that he is able to save all those to the uttermost that come unto God
by him, Heb. 7. 25. How many nations are there in the world that hear nothing
of him, and thereupon they perish unavoidably for lack of vision? Certainly
this good news, is a token of Gods good will, it is he who sends it unto us,
and treats with us in it; They that bring these glad tidings are his
Ambassadors, 2 Cor. 5. 20. We are Ambassadors for Christ, as if God did beseech
you by us. It is a treaty of peace and reconciliation which is opened hereby to
us, but for which we must have remained utter strangers unto peace for ever.

4. This love has pointed out to us the way of Salvation by Christ. As God
has laid it in Christ for us, so he has in the Gospel discovered the way of
it to us. There is a way in which Sinful men must come to partake in the
precious fruits of Christ Redemption, and there are terms on which these are
conveyed to us; now God has opened these terms, and laid out all the Articles
of the New Covenant in his Gospel. This is not a favor which all partake in:
it is said of the Gentiles, who are without the Gospel, in Romans 3. 17. The way
of peace have they not known. And we are told in, 2 Timothy 1. 10. That God has
brought life and immortality to light through the Gospel. There are the
proposals in the New Covenant which must be complied withal, by those that hope
to be Saved by Christ; they that never hear of them, can never comply with
them, Romans 10. 14. How shall they believe in him ^f whom they have not heard.
And it is Gods love to his chosen that moved him to open ^his Covenant and
propose the terms of it to them, in order to their being brought into it.

5. This love has not only provided the means, but also renders them effectual
to our Salvation. God brings about the Salvation of his Elect in the way of
means, as best accommodated to his treating of them as reasonable Creatures; he
has therefore appointed them in the Gospel; and they are the gifts of our
glorified Savior, Ephesians 4. 10. etc. It is therefore a singular favor for men to
enjoy them; there is that remark, Psalm. 147. 19, 20. He showed his word unto
Jacob, his statutes and his judgments unto Israel; he has not dealt so with
any nation, etc. And it must be so, for the want of them is a note of
perdition, 2 Cor 4. 3. If our Gospel be hid, it is hid to them that are lost.
But yet many have them, and they prove occasions of their greater ruin,
because they abuse them: Herein therefore is Gods love, antecedently to ours
eminently celebrated, in that he gives a blessing to the means, and so making
them powerful to advance the end of them, Romans 1. 16. The Gospel is the power
of God to Salvation in them that believe; and why only in such a^ do believe?
why because the Spirit of God comes in with them to such, and leaves saving
impressions by them. Now all these are the incentives of our love, and do
certainly proceed from his loving us first.

USE. I.
We may hence infer the Doctrine of personal Election. Great attempts have been
and are used in the Christian world to undermine this truth* but all are in
vain: If there were no more Scripture evidence for the confirmation and
establishment of this Article of our faith, but only the words of our Text, it
is sufficient to enervate all the cavils and objections that are brought
against it. If Gods first loving us be not only a Reason, but a Cause too of
our loving him; and consequently if any of us have the love of God produced in
him, it is an evidence of that antecedent love which he bare to us; it so
becomes a distinguishing note between them whom he loved and others; and for
that reason it must needs be an infallible evidence of Gods having such a love
for us before, which must needs be from Eternity, because his will and purpose
is like himself Immutable. And this can amount to nothing less than a Personal
^lection: for, if God be the author of this Grace ^^ us, and he produces it by
his Spirit because ^e loved us, than we were personally appointed ^ereto from
Eternity. So the Apostle lays it ^own, Ephesians. 1. 3, 4. Blessed be the God and
Father ^f our Lord Jesus Christ, who has blessed us with ^ll Spiritual
blessings in heavenly places in Christ: according as he has chosen us in him,
before the foundation of the world, that we should be holy.

USE. II.
This tells us that Gods Electing love could not ^e founded on the prevision of
any thing in the Creature. We are here acquainted with the Absolute Sovereignty
of God in this affair. If Gods love be the first cause of all Grace and Good to
us, it must needs then be it self Independent, for that is an inseparable
property of a Supreme Cause. If Gods love produces all that is good in the
Creature, it is then impossible that the goodness of the Creature should
produce that love to it. To limit Gods special love which he bears unto any,
unto something foreseen in the Subject, is to make something in us that did
precede that, and that did not derive from it as the Efficient of it; which is
to invert the order of Causes, and put the second being in the place of the
first. God could not foresee any thing lovely in us, but upon his own purpose
to confer it upon us, on which the futurity of it depended; an^ therefore this
foresight could not cause his lov^ but must needs flow from it. He bestowed the
gift on us because he loved us, Rev. 1. 5. Un^ him that loved us, and washed us
fr^^ our sins, his blood.

USE. III.
Hence we learn what little reason they have t^ think that God loved them, who
are void of the love of God. It is true, Gods love to those whom he has Chosen
in Christ, runs under groun^ for a great while; and there are those whom h^
has an endeared respect for, who are at present in arms of rebellion against
him, who have n^ regard for him, who say unto him, depart from us such indeed
are all Gods Elect before Conversi^ on, Ephesians* 2. 2, 3. Wherein in times past ye
walke^ according to the course of this world, etc and were Children of wrath,
even as others, Tit. 3* 3* We ou^* selves also were sometimes foolish, and
di^obedient etc. And though there are ^nseen ways in which this love of his is
before hand working towar^ them, yet all this while ^^ey have no groun^ of
evidence to prove their interest in his special favor* It is certain, if any
are the Subjects of this love it will sooner or later brea^ ^orth in their
Calling, and will kindle in them a ^incere love to him; Jer* 31 3* I have loved
the ^ith an everlasting love, therefore in loving Kind^ess have I drawn thee.
And this is the first ^iscovery by which they know that he loved them, 2 These.
2. 13* God has from the begin^ing chosen you to Salvation, through the
Sancti^cation of the Spirit. And therefore the order ^f Assurance is to come at
the knowledge of ^ur Election by our Vocation, 2 Pet. 1. 10. In ^ain then do
they pretend to be the beloved of God, who do not love and serve ^im cordially.

USE. IV.
Hence it follows, that they who truly love God, cannot but acknowledge and
adore his Electing love ^o them. What is the reason why the Profesing World, is
so full of prejudices against the Doctrine of Gods free Sovereign Election, and
that there are so few that can relish, or pa^iently endure the Preaching of it?
Doub^ess ^t must be because they were never experimentally acquainted with it.
That man who ^ath had the love of God shed abroad in his ^eart* and has known
what it is to be Saved by Grace, will put the greatest Emphasis upon this
Article of it; and his love will be the more ardently enflamed by it, to think
that herein God has manifested what precious and endearing thoughts he had for
him in the da^ of Eternity; how distinguishing that love w^^ when he had
neither being nor deservin^.

My Prayer then for all such prejudiced persons shall be, that God will give
unto them the experience of this love in themselves, and that will silence all
their uprisings of heart, and fill them with adoration.
FINIS.

