Impenitent SINNERS Warned of their MISERY And Summoned to Judgment.

Delivered in Two Sermons: the former on the Sabbath, Nov. 6. the other on the
Lecture following, Nov. 10. School.

Occasioned by the Amazing instance of a Miserable Creature, who stood
Condemned for Murdering her Infant begotten in Whoredom. To which are subjoyned
the Solemn Words spoken to her, on those Opportunities. Published for the
Warning of others.

By Samuel Willard, Minister of the Gospel, and Teacher of a Church in Boston,
N. E.

Deuteronomy. 17. 13. -- And all the People shall hear, and fear, and do no more
presumptuously. Boston, Printed by B. Green, and J. Allen. Sold by Michael
Perry, at his Shop over against the Town House. School.

TO THE READER.
Reader;
IF ever there was a time when God solemnly calls his Servants to Cry aloud and
not to spare, but show his People their transgressions, it is now, when
Iniquity so abounds and love waxes so cold. And as the Philosopher once said,
that Evil manners occasion the making of good Laws; So the hor^^d wickedness of
some notorious sinners, gives occasion for the Preaching of Sermons more
peculiarly serviceable for the rowsing and awakning of secure ones, and loudly
calling them to Repentance; when God touches the hearts of his Ministers, with
a feeling sense of the ^anger of, and tender compassion toward those that are
going without regard in the path of destruction. That which gave birth to the
ensuing SERMONS, was the prodigious example of a forlorn young Creature, that
had defiled her self with Whoredoms, and been the unhappy mother of two
illegitimate children successively, and became the barbarous Murderer of the
latter of them; for which Crime, she there stood under a sentence of Death,
upon due Conviction, and that before she had seen full Nineteen years in the
World: and for the which she has been since righteously executed. My Soul was
the more deeply affected with her condition, partly, because she belonged to my
Flock, and had received the Seal of the Covenant from my hands, and was under
my Charge; in which I could not but feel an heart thrilling rebuke in the Holy
Providence of God: Partly because of the most amazing, and scarce paralel'd
induration of heart, and tremendous Wickedness which she discovered in and
under her Imprisonment, to the deep consternation of all serious ones that were
acquainted therewithal. Which will, I hope, plead sufficiently for the
suitableness of the Subjects treated of, and the severity of the Words used in
the prosecution of them. But she is now gone, and has given up her account to
the Judge of all. Yet her example remains, and stands for the Warning of
others. And doubtless God expects that the living should lay it to heart, and
learn lessons of Caution thereby. I have therefore endeavored, according to
the Grace given me, to Level these Discourses for the Admonition of others,
least they also provoke a Sin hating God, to give them up to be more
astonishing Monuments of his righteous severity. And there are, I fear, more
abominations as great as these, which have not yet seen the light; and may her
example, and these warnings drawn forth by it, drive such to a timely
Repentance, and making of their peace with God. Let young Ones more especially
learn by her, To Remember their Creator early, and beware of such sins as were
leading to the bringing of her to a fearful end; in particular let all
Children, and such as are under the Command of Parents and Family Government,
beware of disobedience to their Parents, and those that have the Authority over
them; let them be warned to ^ake heed to themselves of being linked in ^ain
company, and take the wise man's counsel, Prove. 1. 10. My Son, if Sinners entice
thee consent thou not. Let them beware of profaning Gods Holy Sabbaths: of
unnecessary absenting themselves from the Worship of God in his House, or
neglecting of any opportunities of attending on his Holy Ordinances; and let
them be advised to keep their feet when they come to the House of God, and not
suffer their hearts to wander into the corners of the earth, when they should
be learning what God the Lord has to say unto them. Let them be warned against
the neglect of Secret Prayer, and Meditation, and be afraid of living content
in an Unregenerate State, trifling away a day of grace, and putting off calls,
and counsels, and the strivings of the Spirit of God with them, as things that
may be thought of soon enough, when they have taken their full of their mad
mirth, and glutted themselves with sensual pleasures; all of which Sins that
poor Creature acknowledged her self to have been eminently guilty of: lest, if
you be not admonished by her example, an Holy God should be provoked to leave
you up to your own hearts lusts. Be sure therefore to read in her a
confirmation of that truth, that for these things the Wrath of God comes on
the children of Disobedience. Let Parents be rouzed up by this to take more
care, and use more prudence in maintaining that Authority over their Children,
which God has vested them withal, and beware of an over fond indulgence, in
giving them an unrestrained liberty: let it awaken them to lay themselves out
with more industry, and constancy, in training them up in the nurture and
admonition of the Lord; in instructing them about the great things of their
Souls and Eternity; let it make them more affectionate and importunate in
praying with them, and for them; and put them upon the more watchful care over
themselves in their whole conversation, that they set no evil examples before
them, but write them a copy in their lives of all the counsels and admonitions
which they offer to them: fearing lest, if they by their neglect bring guilt on
themselves, their children should be forsaken of God, and prove an heaviness to
their Parents, as this foolish Child did. May all that Fear God, and peculiarly
his Ministers, whom the Lord Jesus Christ has given a special charge unto, to
feed his Lambs, be excited hereby to more anxious solicitude, and industrious
endeavors for the Souls of all whom they are concerned withal, and more
especially for the Rising Generation, that they may not become a stubborn and a
rebellious Generation, a Generation that set not their heart aright, and whose
spirit is not steadfast with God: And may the following ^^^^ons be made any way
serviceable to th(...) ends and purposes, God shall have the (...) to whose
gracious Blessing I Commend (...)th my most hearty Prayers, Who am,

(...) than the Least of all Saints. Samuel Willard.

THE FOLLY and MISERY OF Impenitent Sinners.
PSALM. V. 5. The foolish shall not stand in thy sight.
I shall not now spend time in inquiring after the Occasion of the penning of
this Psalm, or in Analyzing of it. Let it suffice to observe that David in
verse 4, 5, 6. represents the miserable condition of wicked men, on the account
of the Holiness of God, as it stands engaged against sinners for sin. The sum
of it is, that God takes no pleasure in them, but hates and abhors them, and
therefore will not admit them into his favor, but will bring destruction on
them: and one would think that every word should be an envenomed arrow in the
Heart or Conscience of the ungodly. Our Text is one of those shafts taken out
of Gods quiver, and shot at every unregenerate Soul; and Oh! that they might be
thoroughly wounded by it. The words before us are an assertion delivered by the
mouth of Truth it self, and may well terrisy and amaze every Christless Soul.
In them we may observe two things. 1. The Subject spoken of, the foolish: I
shall not insist on the various usages of this word in Scriptures; it is
sometimes improved in a good sense; and sometimes it is made use of in a bad
sense; and in this latter it is here: and thus it is frequently used for a
Fool, or a Madman: and therefore many translations read it, Insani; the mad or
distracted; men that are out of their wits. 2. The thing asserted concerning
these, they shall not stand in thy sight. Hebr. before thine eyes. i. e. Gods,
for of Him the Psalmist is speaking. Eyes are ascribed to God after the manner
of men, for he is a Spiritual being, and has neither senses, nor organs of
sense: and the word [Stand] signifies to be in a settled Condition: and it is
in the last conjugation, which farther intends the signification. To stand then
in Gods sight, or before his eyes, intends an enjoying of, or being settled in
his favor. It is a Metaphor taken from the favorites of Princes, who are
admitted into their presence, and stand before them at all times. And in this
negative the contrary affirmative is included, i. e. they shall fall before
him, and be thrust out of his sight; and it also intends that he cannot bear
the sight of them, and will banish them his presence. This may be referred to
the present life and time; but has a more peculiar respect to the great day of
Accounts.

Hence,

DOCTRINE.
All impenitent Sinners are foolish and mad, and therefore shall not stand in
Gods sight; which will render them extremely miserable.

There are three Propositions contained in this Doctrine.

Prop. I. That all impenitent Sinners are foolish and mad.

There are a sort of persons in the world, whom God in his word, is pleased to
put the Character of fools and madmen upon, who are neither naturals, or void
of the use of reason, considered as men; nor yet bereft of their
understandings, through occasional dotage or frenzy in that respect: and who
are they? we have a summary account of them, Jer. 4. 22. My people is foolish,
they have not known me, they are sottish Children, and they have no
understanding; they are wise to do evil, but to do good they have no knowledge.
The sum is, all sinners, remaining in their natural estate belong to this
Character; and hence Sin and Folly are, in Scripture, terms equivalent. Here we
may, in particular, briefly come at this in three steps.

1. All sin is folly. And hence so much sin as remains in the Godly, so much
foolishness there abides with them. This the Psalmist confesses of himself,
Psalm. 69. 5. O God, thou know my foolishness. Every time a person commits
any sin, he has just reason to say of himself, as he, 1. Sam. 26. 21. I have
sinned, I have played the fool, and have erred exceedingly. And it must needs
be so, for every sin is an act of disobedience to that God, on whom we have our
entire dependence, and to whom we owe our selves and our whole lives: it is an
act of rebellion against that God whom we are bound to subject our selves unto,
and is able to destroy us for that rebellion. It is a forsaking the fountain of
living waters, and digging of broken Cisterns that can hold no water. Jer. 2.
13. It is a preferring of lying vanities before everlasting Mercies. Jer. 2. 8.
It is a provoking of God to jealousy. 1 Cor. 10. 22. And we are not stronger
than he. It is an entering of the lists of contention with him, a running upon
him, even his neek, on the thick bosses of his buckler, Job. 15. 26. It is for
a worm to bid a challenge to Omnipotency it self: yea, what shall I say? there
are uncountable follies attend the commission of every sin; and no wisdom at
all.

2. That hence all they that are under the Dominion of Sin, are egregious
fools. There is folly cleaving to the best of Gods Children here, as long as
they have a body of death to carry about with them; and it shows it self in
every stirring of the corrupt part: but yet they have the principles of the
true wisdom in them; they are such as are made wise to Salvation. But as for
those in whom there are no seeds of saving Grace sown, but they yet remain in
their natural estate, folly is bound up in their hearts, and they have no other
principle in them. As to their Understandings, they are foolish and perverse,
they call evil good, and good evil. Isai. 5. 20. As to their Wills and
Affections, they are engaged. Eccl. 8. 11. The heart of the sons of men is
fully set in them to do evil. They do nothing at all with a sincere aim at the
glory of God, and the furtherance of their own salvation: yea, their whole life
is a continual progress in the way that leads to destruction; hence we have
that put into their description, Romans 3. 16, 17. Destruction and misery are in
their ways: and the way of Peace have they not known.

2. That Impenitent Sinners are the greatest fools of all. The Word of God
often uses these words. Sinners, Fools, Wicked emphatically, for such as are
peculiarly so: and then it intends either, (1.) Such as live in most notorious
and prodigious sins; thus a common Whore is called a Sinner more than once in
the Gospel: or (2.) Such as remain obstinate and impenitent in they Sins under,
and notwithstanding means used to win them to repentance. Now the means used
with them are of two sorts. (1.) Such as are afforded to the Gentiles, who have
not the Gospel, viz. the light of a natural Conscience, and the common
strivings of the Spirit of God in them; they are therefore said to be a Law to
themselves, and their Consciences to bear witness, and either to accuse or
excuse, Romans 2. 14, 15. and the Providence of God, which ought to be improved
by that light, to excite them to repentance: thus the Goodness of God is said
to lead to it, Romans 2. 4. and his common benefits are called witnesses, Acts
14. 17. his Judgments also are that the Inhabitants of the World may learn
righteousness, Isa. 26. 9. (2.) Such as those enjoy who sit under the means of
Grace, wherein God shows them the evil and danger of their sins, and not only
invites them to Repentance, but also gives them all suitable directions, and
the greatest imaginable encouragements to help them in it; and these are
afforded to such as are in the Covenant with him, Psalm. 147. 19, 20. he shows
his word to Jacob, his statutes and judgments to Israel: he has not dealt so
with any nation. Impenitence in the former of these is a note of inexcusable
folly; and so it is charged on their foolish minds, Romans 1. 21. how much more
then may it be imputed to the latter, and their folly be reputed the Paroxism
of madness? inasmuch as they have a price in their hands, and have not an heart
to make use of it; and whence is that, but because they are fools; according
to, Prove. 17. 16. Wherefore is there a price in the hands of a fool to get
wisdom, seeing he has no heart to it? they have life and death set before
them, and they choose death; they have the way to escape the Wrath of God, and
obtain Eternal Life, and regard it not; they are told whither their sinful
courses do lead, and where they will end, and yet they will take no warnings,
but run wilfully and violently on to their own destruction, like that fool,
Prove. 7. 22, 23. he goes after her straitway, as the ox goes to the
slaughter, and as a fool to the correction of the Stocks, till a dart strike
through his liver, as a bird hacteth to the snare, and knows not that it is
for his life; they are invited and entreated to be reconciled unto God, and to
put away their sins by repentance, and they mind it not, but stop their ears,
and harden their hearts, and turn their backs; they have a day of visitation,
in which the things of their peace are set before them, and do not know it;
they see others of their fellow sinners cut off by Gods awful Judgments, and it
makes no impression upon them: yea, they themselves are brought to sorrow and
shame; and still they will not be reclaimed: and were not madness in their
heart, could they do so?

Prop. II. That therefore such Sinners shall not stand in the sight of God.

Could that Philistian Prince say, 1 Samuel 21. 14, 15. the man is mad, wherefore
then have ye brought him to me? have I need of mad men? etc. and will not God
declare as much concerning these? yea, he has said it, Text. Here two things.

1. That no such as these shall stand in Gods sight. That this is so, our Text
fully asserts, and many other parallel Scriptures confirm. All that lies before
us at present, is to consider what is implied in this. The words are a
threatening, and indeed a very awful one, as will presently appear. Here then
let it be observed, that the expression may reser either to the time present,
or that which is to come.

1. With respect to the time present; and then it intends that God will cut
short their lives, and hurry them out of the World before they should have
died, according to the ordinary course of nature; hence we read, Psalm. 55. 23.
bloody and deeeitful men shall not live out hals their days; and Eccles. 7 17.
be not wicked overmuch, why should thou die before the time? It is a common
favor which God allows to men as he sees meet, to spare them, and let them
fill up their number of days; whereas such fools have reason to expect to be
debarred of this privilege, and posted away before hand. But I insist not
here, though this also affords matter of awful consideration.

2. With respect to the time to come: and then to stand in Gods sight, intends
to enjoy his special favor and love, and we have this infelicity expounded in
Isa. 27. 11, and there are two seasons wherein they shall be debarred of this
favor.

1. In the day of Judgment. In some sense all must stand before him then; i. e.
all shall be cited to make their personal appearance before God, and receive
their doom; but by standing then, we are to understand their being acquitted
and accepted, and acknowledged by him as his Redeemed; these only are said to
stand then; whereas these fools shall fall before the Judge; they shall be
utterly disclaimed by him, he will say to them, Depart, I know you not, Mat. 7.
23. they shall be condemned and have a sentence of death pronounced on them,
Mat. 25. 41. Depart ye cursed, and in this respect it is said, Psalm. 1. 5. the
uugodly shall not stand in the Judgment.

2. In the Eternal Kingdom; into which the righteous shall be received, and
partake in the Everlasting Vision of God, these shall then be excluded, Mat. 8.
12. The Children of (...) Kingdom shall be cast out into outer darkness. We
observed that the word signifies, A Settled Condition: Heaven is the Godly man's
Inheritance, and when he comes there, he shall settle to remove no more; but
there is no settlement for these, but an everlasting exclusion from the
presence of God, which is a punishment ordained for them, 2 These. 1. 9. they
shall never have one look of pity or compassion from God any more for ever.

2. That the reason of this is, because they are such fools, this will appear,
if we consider,

1. That all men are foolish in their Natural Estate, it is bred in, and born
with them; it is the Wise man's observation, in Prove. 22. 15. foolishness is
bound up in the heart of a Child, and we have it more distinctly set forth in,
Psalm. 58. 3, 4, 5. The wicked are estranged from the womb, they go astray as
soon as they be born, speaking lies. Ignorance of God, and alienation from him
is rooted in the hearts of all the posterity of sinful Adam, and the Apostle
gives us a true account how it is with every natural man, before regenerating
Grace has renewed him, Ephesians. 4. 18. having the understanding darkened, being
alienated from the life of God through the ignorance that is in them, because
of the blindness of their heart.

2. That yet there are a great many of these that shall stand in Gods sight.
God has not left this foolish and sinful race without all hope. The Doctrine
before us, is not to drive the wretched children of men to despair. There have
been such as have added to their natural folly, prodigious wickednesses,
whereby they have expressed the height of their madness, who yet
notwithstanding have been made partakers in this grace, to be heavens
favorites, and taken near unto God, and entitled to all the Glories of his
Kingdom, what says the Apostle? 1 Cor. 6. 9, 10, 11. Neither Fornicators, etc.
shall inherit the Kingdom of God, and such were some of you, but ye are washed,
etc. and he puts himself in the number, in that declaration of his, Tit. 3. 3.
for we our selves also were sometime foolish, disobedient, deceived, serving of
diverse lusts and pleasures, etc.

3. That in order to this they must be made wise. Though God saves such as have
been foolish, yet he does not save them in their folly, but from it. God hates
sin, and it is his holy and pure nature that is displayed in his so doing, as
Hab. 1. 13. thou art of purer eyes than to behold evil, and can not look on
iniquity. There must therefore be a change wrought in them, they must be cured
of this distemper, in order to their obtaining of this privilege, though God
be Gracious, yet he is Holy; and will not baulk this Holiness of his, but
display it in the application of his grace to sinful men. There must therefore
a work of Sanctification pass upon them, in which Sin must be subdued, and
grace must be implanted in them.

4. That God offers this wisdom to all that live under the Gospel, and invites
them to seek to him for it. Herein God shows his good will to such, in that he
has told them wherein the true wisdom consists, Job 28. 28. to man he says,
the fear of God, that is wisdom, and to depart from evil is understanding; and
has pointed them to know where it is treasured, viz. in Christ, Col. 2. 13. in
whom are hid all the treasures of wisdom and knowledge, bids them come to him
for it, and encourages them so to do, Jam. 1. 5. if any of you lack wisdom,
let him ask it of God, that gives to all men liberally and upbraideth not, and
it shall be given him; yea, and expostulates with sinners about their refusing
of it, as one that is grieved, Prove. 1. 22. how long ye simple ones, will ye
love simplicity? and ye scorners delight in their scorning, and fools hate
knowledge?

5. Hence it is by their impenitency that Sinners procure this to themselves.
If they would have hearkened to Gods voice, and received instruction, it had
not been so: but because they have hardened their hearts against all Counsel,
and would not receive his reproofs, though he followed them with repeated cries
and calls, and tried all courses with them unto wonderful long suffering, he
therefore puts them out of his sight, and they shall fall before his judgment;
hitherto therefore God reduces the reason, and lays the charge on which the
threatening is built; Prove. 1. 24, etc. because I have called, and ye refused,
etc. I will also laugh at your calamity; I will mock when your fear comes, etc.

Prop. III. That this will render them extremely miserable.

The Psalmist is here setting forth the miserable state of Impenitent Sinners;
and the sum of all infelicity is contained in this very thing. Observe
therefore;

1. That it is a woeful infelicity for a Sinner to be every day exposed to
destruction, to have the Wrath of God continually impending over him, to be in
the state mentioned, Psalm. 7. 11. God is angry with the wicked every day; to
have the Arm of Divine Vengeance up, with the glittering Sword of revenging
Justice, ready to give him the deadly stroke; to have nothing before him but a
fearful expectation of fiery indignation which shall devour him, when it lights
upon him; in the fullness of his strength and folly, to fall upon him, and send
him down to the pit of endless misery; such is the condition of impenitent
sinners at the best; read at leisure, Job 18. 5. to end, and you shall find it
there astonishingly described, and see 1 These. 5. 3. when they shall say, peace
and safety, then sudden destruction comes upon them, as travail upon a woman
with child, and they shall not escape.

2. Their condition must needs be fearful who shall fall before God in the
judgment: who shall not be able to stand, when they shall appear before him in
the great and terrible day. It is a dreadful thing to stand at an Humane Bar,
and to have sentence of death pronounced upon one by the Judge; it fills the by
standers with consternation, and what horror has seized such as have been
under it? What shrieks, and cries have they uttered! what will it then be when
the Judge of all the Earth shall say to the man, as Mat. 21. 41. Depart thou
cursed into everlasting fire, prepared for the Devil and his Angels. Which
Sentence will be immediately followed with as terrible an Execution? and yet
such is the portion of Impenitent Sinners.

3. That to lose the sight and favor of God for ever, is the quintessence of
everlasting miseries; what says the Psalmist, Psalm 30. 5. in thy favor is
life. 63. 3. thy loving kindness is better than life. 16. ult. in thy presence
is fullness of joys; and the Apostle thought he had backed his Exhortation with
a most potent argument in, Heb. 12. 14. follow after Holiness, without which no
man shall see God; in his light only can we see light; and there is nothing but
outer darkness out of it; he that loses God, loses all: there is nothing but
destruction that accompanies this exclusion, Hos. 9. 12. Woe to them when I
depart from them, they fall under Gods indignation; and we are told, Psalm. 11.
6. upon the wicked he shall rain snares, fire and brimstone, and an horrible
tempest; this shall be the portion of their cup; how miserable then must these
forlorn creatures needs be!

USE I.
Learn hence the grievous folly of those that embolden themselves in sin, on
presumption of Gods mercy. The truth is, the foolishness of Impenitency in
nothing appears more, than in the arguings by which men strengthen themselves
in it: and among these, I know none more amazing, than the delusion of a falsE
hope in mercy; notwithstanding men persist in iniquity, and refuse to return,
this is that which God complains of, Psalm. 50. 21. these things thou have done,
and I kept silence: thou thoughtest that I was altogether such an one as thy
self. And the Prophet urges it on them, Jer. 7. 9, 10. Will you steal, murder,
commit adultery, etc. and come and stand, etc. and say, we are delivered to do
all these abominations? As if God had no other way to show himself merciful,
but by saving sinners in their sins; whereas we are told that Christ's great
design is to save them from their sins, Matthew. 1. 21. Hence we have God using
that Sarcasm, Isa. 27. 4. Fury is not in me: who would set the briars and
thorns against me in battle? I would go through them, I would burn them
together: and drawing up that sentence, verse 11. It is a people of no
understanding: therefore he that made them will not have mercy on them, and he
that formed them, will show them no favor. But men forget that God has a
revenging Justice to glorify in the Obstinate, as well as Mercy on the
Penitent: and whiles men thus nourish a vain hope, to gratify their own lusts,
they lose the Opportunity of mercy, and lay up treasures of wrath; than which
what madness can be more pernicious?

USE II.
Let it then be a word of warning and terror to Impenitent Sinners under the
Gospel and I know none that carries more of dread in it, if well understood and
believed, let all such then consider,

1. You are all foolish in your natural estate. Whatever vain opinion you have
of your own wisdom, which is indeed but an indication of your folly, according
to, Prove. 26. 16. the sluggard is wiser in his own conceit, than feven men that
can render a reason; yet this is a great truth of all men as they come into the
world in their natural estate, Job 11. 12. vain man would be wise, though man
be born like a wild asses colt. The wise man gives in the true character of
every Child of Adam, as he is in himself, from the beginning to the end,
Eccles. 9. 3 the heart of the sons of men is full of evil, and madness is in
their heart while they live, and after that they go to the Dead.

2. If you live and die such, you shall never stand in Gods sight; your doom is
determined and pronounced: and you have the reason given in the words following
our Text, thou hate all the workers of Iniquity. And if God hates you, you
have reason to expect that he will separate you from his presence. You have a
fearful account given you, of the concition of those who add Impenitency to
Iniquity, Psalm. 7. 12, etc. if he turn not, he will whet his sword; he has
bent his bow, and made it ready, etc.

3. God affords you the means of grace as a remedy to cure you of your
foolishness: The great design of the Gospel and Ordinances is to show men the
right way, to recover of their madness, and be made wise. This is the
usefulness of the word of God, 2 Timothy 3. 15. the Holy Scriptures, which are
able to make thee wise unto Salvation; they that have them not must needs die
without knowledge, it is the main design of the means to point us to this; God
gives Pastors to feed men with knowledge and understanding, Jer. 3. 15. What he
says of his Proverbs, may be applied to the whole book of God, Prove. 2. 3, 4.
To know wisdom, and instruction, etc.

4. If you perish in your impenitency under these means, you will never be
cured. Sinners, by their handness of heart, withstand the efficacy of the Word
and Ordinances; and when once it comes to that, that sinners do practically
say, as they did expressly, Jer. 44. 16. As to the word which thou speak to
us in the name of the Lord, we will not hearken unto thee; their case is next
to desperate We have God therefore expostulating with such, Psalm. 94. 8. Ye
fools, when will you be wise? These are the only means which God has appointed
to bring sinners to their right minds; and if the operation be contrary, it
argues their case to be deplorable. Hence that complaint of our Savior, Math.
23. 37, 38. Jerusalem, etc. how often would I have gathered, etc. but ye would
not: therefore is your house left unto you desolate.

5. However you now despise instruction, yet you will mourn for it at last. It
will be a dreadful thing to lose Gods presence for ever, though now you can say
unto him depart, yet when it comes to be your lot indeed to lose all your hope
of his favor, this will be unconceivable bit^erness: and nothing will make it
more bitter than to think, I had a day of Grace, wisdom himself pleaded with
me, stretched out his hands all the day long to me; I heard the precious truths
of the Gospel, I was told of my miserable state, entreated to consider of it,
offered help out of it; was waited upon with line upon line, striven with, both
by Parents, and Godly friends, and faithful Ministers, and by the Spirit
himself together with them: I was told what it would come to; and yet I
despised, I scorned, I would have mine own ways, and grew the more resolute in
them, and now I am but filled with my own devices, and made to eat of the fruit
of my own ways: and how dreadful an echo of Conscience will this be? and yet
we are told that thus it will be in the end, Prove. 5. 11. etc. and thou mourn
at last, etc. and say, how have ^ hated instruction, and my heart despised
reproof? etc.

6. Hence think what a doom is hastening upon you, and what an execution will
follow that. You must very shortly appear before God; your day of Grace will
soon be at an end; the time is drawing near when God will say that his Spirit
shall strive no more with you; the ax which lies at the root all this while,
will cut you down, you must hear your ter^ible Judge say, depart from me, I
know thee not, thou worker of iniquity: and when that word is once past, the
sentence will take place. And whither must you go, when you depart from him,
but to everlasting burnings? to the worm that dies not, to the fire that is not
quenched, to eternal torments, to dwell with the Devils and damned, and feel
the endless impressions of the fury of a provoked God? and can your hearts
endure? let these terrors of the Lord work on your hearts and persuade them.

And to that end,

1. Be convinced of your folly and madness. As long as you are wise in your own
esteem, there is no hope that ever you should be so indeed; or so much as
comply with the means that are made use of to render you so; it is the remark
in, Prove. 26. 12. See thou a man that is wise in his own conceit? there is
more hope of a fool than of him. Conversion begins at Conviction; and men are
led to that Conviction by Consideration, as, Ezekiel 18. 28. Because he
considers, and turns away from his transgressions, etc. And think how
unreasonable a thing it is to choose Sin before Holiness, to prefer unprofitable
vanities, before the glories of the everlasting Kingdom: to gratify your lusts,
and undo your Souls; for a few moments pleasure, in the gratification of the
senses, to suffer eternal separation from God, and the fearful impressions of
his insupportable wrath.

2. Deeply resent your danger. Think it not a small and inconsiderable thing to
lose Gods gracious presence; and take heed of counting it a light matter to be
th^ust out of it, after all the offers of it that have been made to you, and
advantages that have been put into your hands to gain it, and the importunate
entreaties with which it has been urged upon you, have been neglected, and
despised by you. Yea, solemnly consider, that you can in nothing more dishonor
God, or provoke him to hasten your woe day, and speedily to put you out of his
sight at the farthest distance, than by hardening of your hearts against all his
calls and warnings.

3. Be often pondering what a God you have to do withal. He is a great and a
terrible God; if you lose his favor, and procure his anger to burn upon you,
you will certainly fall before it. What says he? Psalm. 76. 7. Thou, even thou
art to be feared; and who may stand in thy sight when once thou art angry? He
is an holy God; he hates, and is resolved signally to testify his displeasure
at sin; and woe to those that must be made the monuments of that displeasure of
his, better had it been for them, if they had never been born. He is a Just
God, and he will not suffer the righteousness of his Law to fail; and if bold
sinners will thrust themselves upon the swords point, they shall feel the smart
of it, to their confusion. He is a True God, and faithful to his threatenings as
well as to his promises, and if he has said, that the foolish shall not stand
in his sight, let all impenitent sinners look to themselves, for they shall
find that the Strength of Israel is not a man that he should ly, or a son of
man, that he should repent.

4. Let the consideration of all this make you hastly, and in earnest to fly to
God for his Spirit and Grace to make you wise. This is the right improvement
that sinners ought to make of the Terrors of the Lord: it should make them
afraid of the wrath of God, and put them into trembling at the apprehension of
their danger; and by this fear to be stimulated to an uneasiness and
restlessness in their present condition, and cause them to cry aloud to God,
for his pity and help, and by his Holy Spirit to work in them that great
Change by which they may be turned from folly to wisdom, from darkness to his
marvailous light, from sin to God. And let the dread of such a misery as this
separation will certainly produce, be a spur to quicken you to make no more
delays, lest whiles you despise the mercy offered, and trifle away a precious
day of Grace which you enjoy, you pull down vengeance on your own heads, and be
put beyond hope for ever.

5. And to make you the more earnest, look on, and take warning by every awful
monument of Gods dispeasure on this account. There are those Judgments of his
in the World, which he designs to be exemplary, for the rousing up of secure
sinners, and terrifying of them under the apprehension of his Holiness therein
displayed. When any are left by God to themselves, and by their own naughtiness
run themselves upon the sword of civil Justice, and must be cut off by it, God
would have all Israel to hear, and fear, and do no more so presumptuously. Such
an one we have now, in the Providence of God set before us; and the Lord give
us all the Grace to learn by it, and let young ones in a special manner, and
more peculiarly, such as are in their sins, and leading a course, possibly as
vile and abominable as that was which led her into this snare; take warning
from this, and let it be a solemn admonition to you: let her History be your
Caution, lest God be provoked, to make you an History too.

And now let me direct my speech to her, but let all sinners in the
Congregation take warning by it, and not look upon themselves unconcerned. Let
me then say unto you, that your own sin has found you out, and God has made
you a Spectacle to the world, of his righteous indignation. Your life is
forfeited as to man; you are made a Curse, and may not be suffered to live, but
must be Cut off, lest otherwise the Judgments of God should fall upon the land.
But still there is hope in Israel concerning this thing, with regard to your
poor immortal Soul; though you must flee to the pit, and no man may stay you;
yet Sovereign Grace can say of you, as, Job 33 24. Deliver her from going down
to the pit, I have found a ransom: only know and be assured, that if ever you
be Saved, you must be Converted; and in order to your being Converted, you must
be Humbled. And for your help, I have five things to advise you about; and do
you look up unto God, that you may be enabled solemnly to entertain them.

1. Think what an egregious fool you have been; if ever God show you mercy, he
will imprint this thought on your heart very deep. Remember then, you were born
and brought up in a Land of Uprightness, in the Valley of Vision, where Christ
and Salvation by him has been published. You were admitted in your Childhood
to partake in the privileges of the Gospel Covenant; and have been by Baptism
Sealed to the Service of God, and devoted to be for him and no other. You have
doubtless had many private warnings and counsels given you by your Parents, and
Kindred, and Godly Neighbors. You have fat under the clear Dispensations of
the Word of God, in which you have been many a time over, told of your sinful
courses, and the certain destruction that they would lead you to, if you held
on in them, and been solemnly advised to break off your sins by repentance; and
all arguments have been used with you to persuade you of the necessity and
happiness of your so doing. You have seen and heard of the falls of others, and
of the misery which they brought themselves into thereby. You have been your
self left by God to fall into scandalous sins, and warned thereby to beware and
not to go on, lest some worse thing should befall you; and yet how have you
despised instruction, and scorned reproofs, and more desperately resolved in
your own ways and courses, until the holy God was provoked to leave you up to
your self, and withhold his restraining grace from you, and so suffer you, by
your unaccountable madnels, to lay your self open to the Sword of Justice, and
you must now dye, as one that would not be instructed; and you may well reflect
on that expostulation, and think, that you hear God so saying to you, Jer. 2.
17. have thou not procured this to thy self, in that thou have forsaken the
Lord thy God, when he led thee by the way? Cry out then bitterly of this your
own foolishness.

2. Be convinced of the amazing danger which you have exposed your self to, by
your fearful hardness of heart; and tremble to think, that this hardness that
you are under the power of, may be Judicial. I am sure it is so sometimes, in
Gods lighteous judgment, with such as God has spoken to, used many endeavors
with, but they would not receive his advice: affected hardness is very often
punished in this li^e, with inflicted hardness; as Psalm. 81. 11, 12. my people
would not hearken to my voice, and Israel would none of me. So I gave them up
to their own hearts lusts, and they walked in their own counsels; and what more
fearful plague can befall any soul on this side of Hell? Had not your heart been
dreadful hardened, would you not have taken warning by the first fall which God
left you to, to have avoided evermore exposing of your self to such another;
nay, would it not have driven you to have sought unto God for grace to prevent
you, and for forgiveness and peace through the blood of Christ? Had not your
heart been desperately obdurate, would you, when by your most egregious
wickedness, you had again fallen into your former sin, have run your self over
such a precipice as this, to expose your self, by adding of Murder to
Whoredoms, to have your life taken away from you by the Hand of Justice; but
rather have sought your peace with God? Had not your heart been harder than an
Adamant, would not the horridness of that Sin of Murder, which without all
reason, and by an unaccountable desperateness you precipitated your self into,
have made you to relent? whereas instead of discovering a broken heart, and a
contrite spirit, upon a reflection on it, your whole carriage both before and
at your Trial, and at the very pronouncing of a Sentence of Death upon you,
has been such, and so stupendous, as has put a grief of heart, into all that
fear God, who have either seen it, or heard of it; and what do you think this
Impenitency will lead to at length, if God do not graciously heal you of it?

3. See what a little time you have left you, and how soon your case will be
determined for Eternity. I know, that there is never a bold and secure Sinner
in the Congregation, who can tell but that he may be Cited before Gods
Tribunal, sooner than you shall, and had therefore need to see to his own
concern: But this you know, that you are dead in the Law, and may every day
expect to have the Warrant Signed, and warning given you to go to Execution.
Well; bethink your self; no more opportunity for the securing your Souls
Eternal Welfare is before you. When once you are dead, you are fixed
unchangeably; if your peace be not made before then, you are gone for ever: And
Oh, what a great work have you to do in a little time? and the Lord knows
whether at present it be so much as begun in you; yea, there are fearful tokens
that it is not. Oh that this pungent word may, by his grace give a forcible
stroke unto it.

4. Suitably repent of all your follies in particular. Repentance and Pardon
are inseparable; and you are told who it is that has the dispensation of both,
viz. Christ: Acts 5. 31. him has God exalted with his Right Hand, to be a
Prince and a Savior, to give repentance to Israel, and forgiveness of sins;
and be sure to seek to him for it, as you hope to obtain it; let all the
obstinacy and hardness of heart which you have labored of, be exceeding bitter
to you, call all your sins to remembrance, and let every one of them be
confessed and bewailed apart; and more peculiarly those sins that have brought
you to this, your pride, your disobedience to your Parents, your impatience of
Family Government, your company keeping, your Whoredoms, and your despising of
Christ, who has offered himself to you; and let all this lead you to the
fountain of Iniquity, to the source or original of all abominations, and make
you to consess with David, Psalm. 51. 5. behold I was shapen in iniquity, and in
sin did my mother conceive me. Beware of hiding, excusing, extenuating, falsely
denying of any thing, wherein the Glory of God is concerned: what said he to
Achan, when Gods Providence had discovered him, Josh 7. 19. My son, give glory
to the Lord God of Israel, and make confession to him; and be sure to pour out
your heart besore God, with the most aggravating acknowledgments, in all the
circumstances, with deepest self loathings and hatred of your sins, utterly
renouncing of them; remember what is said, Prove. 28. 13. he that covers his
sins shall not prosper, but whosoever confesses and forsakes shall have mercy.

5. Now humbly betake your self to the blood of sprinkling; come to the
fountain opened, to be washed in; there is enough in the blood of Christ for
your pardon and healing, 1 John 1. 7. the blood of Christ cleanses from all
sin; there wants not virtue in him to save such an one as you are, for we are
assured, Heb. 7. 25. he is able to save to the uttermost. 1 Timothy 1. 15. Jesus
Christ came to save sinners, of whom I am chief. Isa 1. 18 though your sins be
as scarlet, they shall be white as snow; though they be red like crimson, they
shall be as wool. There have as great sinners as you, sought mercy, and found
it. God can be just, and yet forgive your sin; he can get himself a name, and
exalt the glory of his grace, in you; he can make those ^alls of yours to be
the occasions of his appearing in his grace the more eminently to you, in his
humbling, healing, and pardoning of you; and so making it to appear in you, how
much more that can do for the saving of a Soul, than a vile hardened sinner can
do for her own undoing. Only beware of cheating your self by any fond
presumptions of mercy, though you live in your Impenitence, or of supposing
that you can comply with the terms of peace in your own strength: but carefully
spend the residue of your little time, in lying prostrate at the footstool of
the throne of Sovereign Grace, looking up to him, who has mercy on whom he
will have mercy; and with repeated earnestness cease not to offer up that
petition to him, while you have any breath left in you, Psalm. 25. 11. For thy
name sake, Oh Lord, pardon mine Iniquity, for it is great.

A Citation TO Judgment after DEATH.
Hebr. IX. 27. -- And after this the Judgment.
THIS Verse is the protasis of a comparison which the Apostle makes use of in
his Discourse; which needs not for the present be insisted on, or laid open, in
as much as we have now to do but with the general Doctrine contained in the
words themselves. Among all those things which men are invited to the serious
contemplation of, there are none that carry more of solemnity in them, than
those of Death and Judgment: because the former of these puts an end to man's
life and time, and opportunities; and the other disposes them to an
Everlasting and Unchangeable Estate. Death it felf is styled a King of Terrors
in the Holy Scriptures; and the Philosopher could call it, [TON PHOBERON
PHOBERATATON] of fearful things, the most fearful; but that which adds to the
tremendousness of it, is that it is a passage to the great and last Judgment,
which the ignorant Gentiles had but dark notice of; but is evidently manifested
in the Word of God, which we Christians are favored withal. The verse before
us, gives us an intimation of both these, and of the certainty of them, as
things which are appointed. The word [appointed] signifies both a designation,
and a reservation of a thing: notifying that, as there is an Eternal purpose
for it in the Decree of God, so it is his fixed and unchangeable will that it
shall so be; and accordingly all men are reserved for it. It is the latter of
these statutes then that I am now to treat of, though with that respect as it
is consequent upon the former. In the words then, there are three things to be
observed:

(1.) A Statute for the Judgment is asserted; and thereby we are assured that
it shall be without fail; for the appointment mentioned in the beginning of the
verse has reference to this as well as to death; and this is the first and
most proper signification of the word.

(2.) The time when it shall be, after that men die. And although we are not
told how loon it shall be after, yet we have Scripture warrant to conclude,
that every ones personal Judgment will follow presently upon it; though the
great and general Judgment is reserved until the consummation of all things, as
will be farther observed anon.

(3.) The subjects of it, or who they are on whom this Judgment shall pass?
men, indefinitely expressed; it intends all men: this Judgment is as extensive
as Death; yea there have been, and will be some exceptions from the general
Rule about Death, who have been translated, or shall be changed; but even these
also shall come to the Judgment.

Hence,

DOCTRINE.
A certain Death shall be followed with as certain a Judgment. It is every whit
as certain that men shall come unto Judgment, as that they shall Dye.

That every one must die sooner or later, is an acknowledged truth by all, and
proved by universal experience: though, Oh how few do improve it to good
purpose? And a reason why this truth has no more proper or suitable
impressions on men's minds, may be because, either they believe not, or put from
them the thoughts of the ensuing account which they shall be called unto, and
look no further than the Grave, where they think there will be an end of them,
which must needs make them unconcerned for that which comes after. But here we
are led into the contemplation of a more awful truth, which is no less real,
though not so obvious to the senses. I shall not at present enter upon any
distinct or methodical discourse about this matter, but only make some cursory
glances on it. There are therefore three or four brief Observations which I
shall make on this truth, to make it practicable.

1. That there is a future Judgment to which all reasonable Creatures shall be
called. How far the Doctrine of a future Judgment has been entertained by the
light of nature, in the Consciences of men acted by humane reason, without the
help of Scripture revelation, I shall not now enquire. But that it is an
Article of faith, commended to us by the infallible Oracles of that God who
cannotly, or be mistaken, is written with Sun b^ams in his word. Read for this,
Eccles. 12. 14. God will bring every work into Judgment with every secret
thing, whether it be good or evil. Acts 17. 31. he has appointed a day in
which he will Judge the World in righteousness, by the man whom he has
appointed. 2 Cor. 5. 10. we must all appear before the Judgment Seat of Christ,
that ^v^ry one may receive the things done in the body; and we have a
description of it given to us by Christ himself, in Math. 25. 33, to end. And
it must needs be so, for, there is a special Government of God, to be
acknowledged, in the managment whereof he will bring all reasonable Creatures
to an everlasting state of happiness or misery, according to their Obedience or
Disobedience to the Law of that Government, in prosecution whereof he will
display the Glory of his Justice and Grace. God deals with his Creatures in his
Government, according to the nature which he saw meet to bestow on them in
their Creation. Now when God Created man, he made him a reasonable Creature,
and thereby capable of being treated in the way of a Covenant, by precepts and
promises, and threatenings; according unto which capacity, he gave him a
Command, and required his obedience to it; promised him a reward of life, in
case of his performing of perfect Obedience thereunto; denouncing Death against
him in case he should disobey. He has also, upon man's Apostasy by which he
fell under a Curse of Death, revealed to him a new and a living way for his
recovery out of that misery into which he was plunged; and has treated some of
that race with a Covenant of Grace, in which he has promised them life upon
their compliance with it, and menaced them with damnation, yea double
damnation, on their neglect of it. All these things are abundantly testified to
in the Word of God: Now men are, according to their behavior, with respect to
this discovery which God has made of himself to man, and obligation which he
has laid him under, disposed of everlastingly: In order unto which they are to
pass under a Trial. Where there is a Law given to reasonable Creatures,
established with Sanctions, there must needs be a Judgment, in which their
relation thereto is to be examined, and a retribution made to them accordingly.
Either they have complied with the Rule given to them, and are to receive a
reward of life; or they have revolted therefrom, and have not sought and made
their peace, according to the tenor of the Covenant of Grace; and then they
must receive the wages of sin, which is death, as we are told, Romans 6. 23. The
wages of sin is death. He therefore that acknowledges a Government of God over
rational beings, must needs believe that there shall be a Judgment, or a time
of Trial and Recompenses.

II. That this Judgment is after Death; this is the order that it is manifestly
put in, Text. That there are many awful and stupendous Judgments that God
brings upon men in this world, is not to be denied; in which he declares his
Holiness and just Indignation at sin; and hence we are told, Psalm. 9. 14. The
Lord is known by the Judgment that he executes. There is also a Court which
God has set up in men's Consciences, at which Bar they are sometimes solemnly
tried, and being there convicted of breaking the Holy Law of God, and laying
themselves open to the vengeance therein threatened, they are filled with
horrors. But it is another Judgment whereof we are now considering, in which
men are to appear before God, and receive from him their final doom, which,
when it is once past, shall be immediately put in Execution. Now this men come
not to in this life, but after they are dead; so that death is not, as too many
vainly dream, the last news that shall be heard of men, but there is something
more fearful and amazing that comes after it, and that is the Judgment. There
is a Judgment to come; so Paul Preached to Faelix, at the report whereof he
trembled, Acts 24. 25. and when is that, but when men are past from time, and
have done the work which they were engaged in in this life? while men are in
this world, conversant in the body, they are upon probation for Etetnity, they
are laying in, and making way for their account, and all that they do here
bears a proper respect thereunto; for they are the works which are done in the
body, which must be called to an after reckoning, 2 Cor. 5. 10. hence sinners
are said in this time to be treasuring up into themselves wrath against the day
of wrath, Romans 2 5. It is evident, that neither good men nor evil men are in
this life, openly distinguished in the observable Providence of God, except in
some special instances; love and hatred cannot be known by all that is before
them, Eccles. 9. 1. yea, the wise man has an observation, as if often times,
the outward face of things look with a contrary aspect, Eccles. 8. 14. there be
just men to whom it happens according to the work of the wicked; and there be
wicked men to whom it happens according to the work of the righteous. What
shall we say? It is for the present a day of patience and forbearance with
which God sees meet to treat men, even the worst of men withal, in which he
lets them alone for a while, and suffers them to go on, till they have filled
up their measure: and though they give him uncountable and very grievous
provocations, yet he falls not upon them. But yet he is brought in laughing at
them all the while, and we are told the reason of it, Psalm 37. 13. The Lord
shall laugh at him, for he sees that his day is coming. Since then men are not
called to their reckoning here, it remains that they be summoned to it
afterward; inasmuch as it is certain, that God will sooner or later manifest
the glory of his Holiness and Righteousness, and make it known that he is the
great Potentate and Ruler of Angels and men.

III. That there is a particular Judgment to which every man shall be called
immediately after Death. It is true, the general Judgment is reserved for the
great and last day, when, after the whole affair of time is wound up, God will
call all reasonable Creatures to an account; and, having raised up their dead
bodies to life, and re united them to their Souls, of which Resurrection also
the word of God gives us the assurance; he will cite them before his Tribunal,
and dispose of them in their whole persons eternally, which day is peculiarly
Celebrated in the Book of God; which, though it also follows after man's death,
yet it will not be till a long time after a great many have dyed, and seen
Corruption; and that because there were other Generations to be born, and live,
and die, until the whole Series of them, according to the Divine appointment, be
consummated. But there is, besides this, another more particular one, which
passes upon the Soul, on its departure from the body, which, though it be not
so frequently, or expressly spoken of in the Holy Scriptures, yet there are also
sufficient intimations of it there(...) be found, enough to confirm our faith
in the belief of it. This is an indubitable truth, that the Soul of man does
not die a proper natural Death; nor is it capable of it. The man indeed is said
to die, by reason of the dissolution of the bond of Union, and the separation
which is thereupon made between the Soul and Body, whereupon the body remains a
Carcass, and must suffer Corruption, after which there must be a powerful
Resurrection bestowed on it, in order to its being made capable of standing
forth in Judgment. But it is otherwise with the Soul; that, in its separate
state, still retains its Spiritual and Immortal nature, which it is in no other
way able to lose but by an Anni^ilation; and it is accordingly disposed of
presently to its unchangable state, whether it be of weal or woe. When Lazarus
dies, his Soul is forth with carried by a Convoy of Angels, into Abrabams
bosom, and that is no other but a place and state of actual Felicity. When the
Wicked Rich man dies, the next news that we hear of his Soul is in Hell,
whether it is carried, and where it is disposed of; and that not only as in a
Prison, but as a place of Execution, where it suffers the penalty which its sin
had procured for it: for this reason we have him pouting out his doleful
complaint, Luke 16. 24. I am tormented in this flame. And we have Abraham
brought in declaring concerning them both, Verse 25. He is comforted, and thou
art tormented. When the penitent Thief dies, he is the same day entertained
with his Savior in Paradise; for so Christ himself promised to him, Luke 23.
43. which must needs intend a state of actual blessedness enjoyed in that
place. And why was Paul in such a strait, and so desirous to depart? Phil. 1.
23. it was to be with Christ, which he says is best of all; which it could not
be, if he did not presently enter into communion with Christ in blessedness.
Now certainly, men's going actually to receive rewards and punishments,
necessarily infers a Judgment that is past upon them in order thereunto: for
those things are beyond all question, disposed of by God, in the exercise of
his Government over the Creature, as he is the Judge of all. Besides, there is
such an Indefinite assertion used by the wise man, which amounts to an
universal, and has a respect to all sorts of men, Eccl. 12. 7. Then shall the
dust return to the earth as it was, and ^he Spirit shall return to God who gave
it. These two returns are put together as contemporary; and all Souls do not
return to God as their Father, to be admitted into his Kingdom, and to dwell
with him, and enjoy his favorable presence for ever; that is a privilege
proper only to the Godly, and none shall enjoy it but those whom Christ has
Redeemed and Saved. As for the ungodly, it is said concerning them, Psalm. 9.
17. The wicked shall be turned into Hell and all the nations that forget God.
It is therefore to God as a Judge, to be doomed, and disposed of by him,
according to his righteous Judgment.

IV. That this is an awful consideration to men while they live, and
peculiarly so to such as are just ready to die. I may not tarry at these things,
to give a distinct and particular account of them, but must only give some
brief glances at them: And there are two asser^ions in this Observation.

1. It carries awe in it to men while they live, to put them on the greatest
Circumspection to themselves in their whole course. If there were no Judgment
to come, what need would there be for men to take any care how or after what
manner they lead their lives? The Epecurian Doctrine, let us drink and drab,
let us revel and swagger, and give every sensual lust its freest scope to
satisfy it self, might plead, if not reason, yet immunity and security; for,
if there be no after reckoning, there is then no danger at all. But this
thought, if it be rightly entertained, will be a strong curb to sin, and a
sharp spur to duty, inasmuch as it must needs lead men's thoughts forward to
such meditations as these: There is certainly a future Judgment, in which I am
personally concerned. I am Gods Creature, and am placed under the Rule of his
special Government, and interested in the Sanctions of his Holy Law. I am now a
probationer for that day, and all that I am doing in this world has a
reference unto that, and must come under the strict examen of it. Every thought
of mine heart, every word of my mouth, and every deed that I do, will then be
called over, and tried whether it be conformable to, or dissonant from the
Rule, by the which I must be either acquitted or condemned; and so exact will
that scrutiny be, that not so much as one idle word shall escape it, Math. 12.
36. Every idle word that men shall speak, they shall give an account thereof in
the day of Judgment. I am under the watchful eye of an all-seeing God, who
keeps an exact account of all my thoughts, words and deeds, and will certainly
in that day, bring them into open light, and set them in order before me; For
God will bring every work into Judgment with every secret thing, Eccl. 12. 14.
I must die ere long, and there is no possible avoidance of it, and then to the
Judgment I must, whether I will or no; and it will be utterly in vain for me to
tire the Rocks and Mountains, to hide me from the presence of the great God, or
secure me from making my appearance before his Judgment seat. There will need
no witness then to be produced to prove any of the matters that shall be
alleged against me; since mine own Conscience is an exact register of all
things, and will be more than a thousand witnesses. I am, all the time that I
am living in this world laying up treasures for eternity, and those either of
happiness or of misery, which shall be righteously distributed to me, according
as I have been laying in in this time. I have a righteous Judge unto whom I
must give up my accounts, with whom there is no respect of persons, and a vain
thing it is to hope to bribe him; but according as my true state, upon the most
exact enquiry, shall be found, so will he take order about me, and pass the
sentence either of absolution or condemnation upon me. Now, what a check would
such reflections as these are, thoroughly believed, and fixedly entertained,
give to the mad youngster, in the midst of all his frolicks, and mar all the
mirth of his greedy lusts, turning it into bitterness? God therefore offers
such a memento as this is to these. Eccl. 11. 9. Rejoice, O young man, in thy
youth, and let thine heart cheer thee in the days of thy youth, and walk in the
ways of thine heart, and in the sight of thine eyes: but know thou, that for
all these things, God will bring thee into Judgment. Yea, how would it put
every one of us upon greater wariness to our selves, and make a deep impression
of that advice upon our hearts, Ephesians. 5. 15. See that you walk circumspectly,
not as fools but as wise, redeeming the time. How would it put us upon
pondering our way, and living by rule, and make us afraid of rash and
precipitant rushing into any action? I am sure that Job tells us that he was
awed by such a thought a^ this, and upon it to look well to himself, lest at
any time he should expose himself to the danger of not being able to hold up
his head, when he should be called to a r^ckoning, Job 3. 1. 14. What then
shall I do when God rises up? and when he visits, what shall I answer him?

2. And what an amazing thought must it needs be to them, that are at the point
of death, except they have made their peace with God? As for those indeed, who
have through grace obtained a pardon and acceptance unto life through the
New Covenant, this thought must needs afford to them all preciousness and
desirableness; though still, the very nature of the thing will carry in it an
holy awe on their hearts. But as for all others, how can they, a^ such an hour,
look upon it without horror? Truly, the uncertainty of death, and the certainty
of the following Judgment, and Reckoning he must then be called to, is enough
constantly to fill the sinner with consternation, for that he has reason every
moment to be afraid of the arrest: though careless men, put away the thoughts
of this, on presumption that the vision is for many days to come. But when he
perceives that he has but a very few days or hours to stay; death now stares
him in the face, shows him its Warrant, and tells him he must be gone, and
there is no hope of a longer reprieve; what a tumult will it raise in him, and
what pungent thoughts must it needs fill him withal? can he but reflect and
say? my working time is now done, my day in which I have been laying up for
another world, is over, and I am now ready to pass into an amazing Eternity;
and what an unconceivable change will it make with me? what little hope have I
that this Change is like to be unto me for the better, and not for the worse? I
have indeed been hard at work in my little, time, and pursued my buisiness with
great eagerness, but what manner of work is it that I have been doing? I have
been laying up of vast treasures, but where is it they are stored? I am now
going to appear before my Judge; my naked soul, must, in a very little while be
brought before his Tribunal; and he will certainly recompense me, without all
partiality, according to what I have done in the body, whether it be good or
evil: If the life I have led in this world has been wicked, how can I expect
that my latter end should be peace? There is an Heaven and an Hell before me,
one whereof will receive me as soon as I depart; but into which of these am I
like to pass? the Judge will certainly appoint me to one or the other of them.
Oh! where shall this Immortal Soul of mine lodge, when it shall be called out
of this mortal body, and shall be required at mine hands? Have I any good
reason to think that it shall be received by the blessed Angles, and lodged in
Abraham's Bosom; or rather fall into the hands of rageful Devils, and be
hurried to endless torments? What manner of life is it that I have been leading
in the World? Which way is it that I have been going? Have I chosen that narrow
way that leads unto life, which there are but a few that find? or have I not
rejected it, and gone in the broad way that leads to destruction, in which the
multitude of mankind are traveling? what Guilt is it that I have been
contracting to my self by transgressing of Gods Law, and exposing my self to
the curse of it? how many horrid and amazing sins do there stare me in the
face? sins which I have committed against light, against conscience, against
mercy and patience, against counsels and warnings, against the strivings of the
Spirit of God? and what hope have I that these sins are forgiven, and shall not
be laid to my charge? what grounds have I to think that my person is accepted
with God? and what is the foundation on which my hopes are built? have I truly
and cordially repented of these sins of mine, or rather hardened mine heart
against all calls, and counsels, into impenitence? have I really forsaken these
sins, never to have to do with them more, or do I not hold them fast, and
refuse to let them go? Have I gotten into Christ by a true and living faith?
Have I made my Judge mine Advocate and my friend? or have I not despised all
his offers of Grace and Mercy, and resisted his Spirit who strove with me, and
thereby horribly aggravated my Guilt, provoked him to take Vengeance on me? How
shall I appear before this Great and Terrible God? must I in that condition be
haled to his Judgment Seat? is there nothing to be done yet for my safety, that
I may not fall under his terrible indignation, but may meet him with comfort?
must I die, and be judged, and condemned, and damned for ever? Happy, yea thrice
happy are they that can say as he, 2 Timothy 4. 7, 8. I have fought a good fight,
I have finished my course, I have kept the faith, henceforth there is laid up
for me a Crown of righteousness, which the Lord, the righteous Judge will give
me at that day. But as for me, what shall I do?

I had chosen this text for a most solemn occasion, which had been designed for
this day; which, in pity to an Immortal Soul, and to give Opportunity of a
farther space for repentance is deferred. God grant it to obtain the desired
end. But I hope, with his blessing, it may prove a seasonable subject, both to
the miserable object, and to the whole Congregation. I shall therefore offer at
a brief Application of it.

USE. 1.
For Information in three particulars.

1. Learn we hence the folly and madness which the generality of mankind do
labor of. Are all men riding post to their dissolution, and must they thence
pass unto Judgment? we must then certainly conclude, that the workers of
iniquity have no understanding. If we take a due observation of the Lives and
Conversations which the most of the Children of men are leading, we may plainly
read thus much in them, viz. That they either believe that they shall never die,
or at the least that they have no thoughts or expectations of ever being called
to an after reckoning. Does the Covetous worlding, who lays out all his
thoughts and industry, in laying up his treasures on earth, and making of that
his only care, that by heaping up wealth, and providing himself with abundance
of the good things of this life, he may have encouragment to sing that requiem
to his Soul; Luke 12. 19. Soul, thou have goods laid up for many years, take
thine ease, eat, drink and be merry. Does he believe that he shall ever be
parted from his possessions, and he made to go to the generation of his
fathers, never to see light? Does the Profligate Voluptuary, who seek no
farther than to immerge himself in carnal pleasures, spending of his time among
vain and lewd Companions, in drinking, and gaming, and wanton dalliances,
always making provision for the flesh to fulfill the lusts thereof, ever affect
his heart with the thought or belief of the days of darkness which shall be
many? Does the Profane Swearer, that is every day rending of Gods blessed name
with horrid Oaths and Cu^ses; the wicked Sabbath breaker, who, on design, takes
holy time, for his most grateful Opportunity of acting his greatest
debaucheries; the Licentious Young person, who despises his Parents, ^ejects
all their faithful counsels, and warnings, rebelliously and resolutely breaks
away from under the yoke of Family Government, and gives the reins to his
youthful lusts; the Fornicator and Adulterer, who with greatest greediness
drinks his stolen waters, and eats his bread in secret; the thief, who
watches for the twilight, for the black and dark night, to commit his outrages
in; do these, and a great many more that might here have been brought into the
number, believe that their sins are written with a pen of iron, and the point
of a diamond, and that for all these things God will shortly call them to a
severe account? Do careless sinners, who trifle away a day of grace, without
regard to their Souls and Eternity; who live contented in their state of
Unregeneracy, and take no heed to make their peace with God, or seek to secure
an interest in Christ, and that Salvation which is wrought out by him, by
giving all diligence to make their calling and election sure; expect shortly to
be called to a reckoning for their Talents received, and be doomed accordingly?
certainly no. And does not the truth now under consideration say, that all
these labor of madness in their hearts whiles they live?

2. Here we see one great reason why there is so much horrid wickedness
committed in the World, the root of it indeed is in that Original Sin, which
the hearts of all men are by nature full of, and is a fountain that is always
sending forth its bitter streams: and he was never rightly acquainted with his
own naughtiness, who is not led by the observation of his actual prevarication
to the source from which all do derive: However, there are those restraints
under which the Corruption that is within men is held back from breaking forth
into prodigious Enormities, which is none of the least of these favors which
God indulgeth the children of men withal, but for which all humane So^ieties
must disband, and one, and not the least of these, is the d^ead of an after
reckoning imprinted on the Consciences of men, by which they are kept in awe;
when therefore this chain, with which God ties men up, and sets bounds to their
violence, is taken off, and men are insensible of any impressions from it, what
will not their impetuous lusts make them dare to do? It is the Psalmists
observation in Psalm. 36. 1. The transgression of the wicked says in my heart,
that there is no fear of God before his eyes, and did men think of, or believe
the terrors of the Lord, they would surely make them afraid; were the
expectation of a fu^ure judgment, and a strict reckoning then to be taken of
men, of all that ever they have done, realities to them, they would not dare to
do as they do. Would the bold Sinner dare to run himself upon the point of the
sword of revenging Justice, if he knew that it is for his life: Would the
miserable children of men dare Heaven with their impious blasphemies, and all
manner of brutish abominations, if they believed that there is a great and
holy God, who will bring them before his bar, and punish them with everlasting
destruction for these things? No, there is a root of Atheism in the bottom of
all this; Psalm. 14. 1. The fool has said in his heart there is no God. And
they that entertain arguings in their minds to put them on calling in question
the being and perfections of God, will certainly, on the same Topics, conclude
that there can be no Judgment. The Prophet therefore is given to understand,
what it was that nourished the daring abominations of those Jews, Ezekiel. 9. 9.
The iniquity of the house of Israel, and Judah is exceeding great, and the city
is full of blood, and the land full of perverseness: for they say, the Lord
has forsaken the earth, and the Lord sees not. And they that are arrived to
entertaining of such sentiments as these, are no better than Atheists.

3. This truth tells us who they be that are the truly and only wise men: not
those that have the worlds verdict for such, and are cried up among men on this
account: not they who have that Character upon them, Jer. 4. 22. They are wise
to do evil, but to do good they have no knowledge. All the skill that men have
attained unto, by which they outdo others in being able to get and keep the
world; all the wit which men exercise in carrying on their courses of iniquity
with greatest secrecy and security, will be found one day to have been nothing
better than madness, whiles they have looked no farther, nor laid in any
provision for the time to come; and every such man has the doom already
declared against him, that in the end he shall be a fool. He, he is the only
wise man, who believing the reports of a future account, and looking upon
himself to be deeply concerned in it, makes it his great study and business to
be providing for it, and what ever be the changes that go over him in this
world, to secure peace in his latter end, to study how he may, and endeavor
that he may make the Judge his friend and Attorney; to get a sure claim to the
promises of the everlasting Covenant, and all the mercies that are laid up in
them; to get now a sealed pardon of all his sins, that none of them may rise up
against him in that day, and a Justification unto life. This is the man who
shall stand in the Judgment, when all others shall fall; this is the man who
may look death in the face without dread, and entertain joyful thoughts of that
great Judgment, which may make all other faces to gather paleness and hearts to
be filled with astonishment and horror: this is he who can look with an eye of
faith on his appearance before God, and upon every warning that is given him of
the approach of it, can say, Amen, even so come Lord Jesus. Who shall pass
through death to be Judged, and being there accepted before God, and his cause
found good, shall pass from thence with comfort, and be settled in the eternal
Kingdom, and live in the fullness of those joys that are in Gods prescnce. And
when the last Trumpet shall sound, he knows now that his Redeemer is coming to
give him perfect Salvation in both Soul and body: whiles they that had so
little consideration, as to neglect the things of their peace in the day of it,
having laid out and lost all their thoughts, and endeavors upon perishing
things, shall howl and lament bitterly, when the Judge shall shut them out of
his presence Chamber, and thrust them down into the bottomless pit, where shall
be nothing but wailing, and gnashing of Teeth.

USE. II.
Let this Doctrine be a watch word for sinners. I am sure that it carries just
matter of terror in it to all such as are open to the Temptations of sin, and
ready inconsiderately to entertain them. I am sure that Paul made use of this
very thing as his monitor, to keep him close to his work, and make him faithful
in the discharge of it, 2 Cor. 5. 10, 11. We must all appear, etc. knowing
therefore the terrors of the Lord, we persuade men. Let us then be always
bearing this in mind, and using of it as a potent argument on our hearts, to
excite us to be very careful and fearful, lest we should fall into the neglect
of duty by reason of the discouragements which encounter in the way of it, or
run our selves into the Commission of any sin, through the allurements which
may be offered to us, from the men or the things of the world. Whatsoever
arguments flesh and blood, wicked men, or Satan may at any time urge upon us,
to entice us in to sins of Omission or Commission, let us be sure to weigh them
in the balance of the Sanctuary against this great consideration, I must very
shortly appear before God, and be called to answer for this then, and what an
account shall I give to him? ask, will it bear the trial of that day of
revelation? will it then have the approbation of the Judge? or if it will not,
will the benefit which I shall gain by it, in the gratification of carnal
concupiscence, make reparation for the damage which I shall sustain by the
sentence of Condemnation that will then pass upon me for it, and the fearful
miseries which I shall undergo in the execution of that sentence? and if not,
think what an ineffable infatuation it will be to give place to it. When you
are urged hard, and find your selves beginning to give consent, and address
your selves to the Commission of any sin, think seriously, if the hand of Gods
anger should now ^all upon me, and cut me off, and hasten me to the Judgment,
how shall I appear before this dreadful God? what good might such thoughts as
these do, if reallized?

USE. III.
Let it be for a word of Warning to us all, to be very careful in making ready
to dye well: whiles others are only solicitous in providing that they may rub
through, and live according to their hearts desire in this wo^ld; let us be
persuaded to be peculiarly thoughtful, and practically so, that when we come to
die, we may make a good end. And I know no argument that carries more of
pungency in it, to stimulate us hereunto, than the Truth in hand, if it be
entertained with a one solemnity. Let us then gather up our thoughts, and fix
them frequently here. Think, I am going to the Judgment; think who is to be
Judge, and that no other than the all knowing, heart-fearching, holy,
righteous, and Almighty God. Think, what will be the matter of the Judgment;
even all that I have been and done, to a thought; and the most secret
abomination that ever I was guilty of. Think what is the Rule according to
which all will proceed, and that will be the exact Law of Justice, unless I am
under Grace, and so delivered from the Dominion of it. Think what shall be the
happiness of those that shall then stand, and receive the sentence of
absolution; and what will be the woeful infelicity of those that must ^all.
Think how sin has exposed us all to condemnation, and where our only hope and
help is, even in Jesus Christ, who alone can deliver us from the wrath to come.
Think, now is the time for us to seek and secure a part in him, by getting into
him by a living faith, and it will be too late for this, when death has
delivered us up to the Judgment. Think what a fearful thing it will be then to
be mistaken, to go out of this life with hope that will prove a a spiders web;
to lean on an expectation that will fail and break under us. Think if I make
not the more have, it may be too late; I stand on the very edge and brink of
eternity, the Judge is at the door. Am I ready for it? if not, shall I dare to
dally in an affair of such infinite concernment one moment? will it not expose
me to unconceivable hazard? and when we see any such as have despised Gods
Grace, and run themselves desperately into selfdestroying sins, and are now
ready to be posted away to their fearful account; let any such Object before
us, put a suitable solemnity into our hearts, and make us reflect and say, I
may go away as soon as or before such an one, and am I in a better readiness?
have I done any thing more to lay in for a comfortable trial? and let this
drive you to him who is the God of all Grace, to ask of him, with the most
intense importunity, to work you up unto a meetnaess for this Appearance.

And now give me leave to add one word of advice to the poor Condemned Creature
who is under a Sentence of Death: Who if God had not put more pity into the
hearts of her pious and compassionate Judges, than she had for her own Soul,
had now been hearing the last Sermon that ever should have been Preached in her
ears; and the Lord grant that this respite given you, may turn to the account
of your Salvation; else know it, it will add a fearful Item to your astonishing
account. Oh that I might now have had the occasion and encouragement to have
spoken a consolatory word, to a broken heart, wounded to death under the Arrows
of the Almighty, and sensible of her miserable condition, humbly asking after
the hopes of Salvation: the Lord knows how my heart would have rejoiced, might
it have been so. But since it must be otherwise, I pray God that his Terrors
may make you afraid, and drive you yet, before all hopes of mercy be past and
gone, in deepest sense of your own unworthiness, to take Sanctuary in the Blood
of Christ, where only, how much soever you have despised it, you can obtain
safety. Your Humane Judge has told you that you must Die, and that very
quickly; and you have no hope that this Sentence will be reversed. But I am now
to Cite you, in the name of God, to a more dreadful Judgment upon that; as soon
as ever you are dead, you must be called to it, and what preparation have you
made? what have you been doing in order to it? alas! a fearful deal; you are
but a young Creature, but ah! an old sinner, grown ripe, and must be cut down
before you have seen twenty years in this world. What a fearful Indictment has
the All-seeing God ready drawn up against you? what uncountable bloody Items is
it filled up withal? I have already given you the most solemn advice, in the
name of God, about these things on the last Sabbath, and all the encouragement
to seek for a pardon, which the Word of God affords; and many of Gods faithful
Servants have been in public or private, or both, solemn and serious in their
applications to you; and what do you now mean to do? are you resolved to harden
your neck, till you be remedilesly destroyed? will you add Impenitency to
Iniquity, and trample on the precious Blood of Christ, that has been and is
offered to you? do you think to plead with God, as you have done with men, that
you are guilty of Murder only according to man's Law, and not ^is! Shall the
all-knowing God so be put off? do you hope thy your lies, which men have
detected you of, not only before, but at your Trial, and since your
Condemnation, will shelter you from the Vengeance of that God who is a Witness;
and ^ath said, Rev. 21. 8. That all Liars shall have their part in the Lake
which burns with fire and brimstone? Do you think that your abominable Whoredom
committed in the Prison, and under the apprehension of being quickly to be
thrust out of the World as an Execration, will help forward your repentance, or
make your account more easy? is this the provision that you are making for
your standing before God? let all that hear me this day take notice and
tremble, and learn by this amazing instance, what sin persisted in, under
calls, and counsels, and warnings will expose them to, and how righteous a
thing it is with God, to leave them up to a feared conscience, Who would not be
instructed. Well, I know that the blood of Christ can wash away this guilt too,
and the Sovereign Grace of God can yet discover it self, and my hearts desire
and prayer to God in this behalf continually is, that it may be so: and let
every soul that is affected with the misery of this poor Creature, lift up a
prayer in this regard. But know it, that if you appear before your Judge under
the guilt of these Crimson and Scarlet Sins, a few days more will fix you in
Eternal Miseries, and because you have despised mercy in the day of it, you
shall have Judgment without mercy; and can your heart endure, to be made the
Subject of Gods Fiery Indignation, and feel the Impressions of his Fury in
Everlasting Burnings? Hasten then, the Avenger of Blood is just ready to give
you the fatal stroke, and if you do not with all speed get into the City of
Ref^uge, you are gone for ever. The Lord give you an ear to hear, and heart to
consider, lest this word also rise up in the Judgment against you, and increase
your Eternal Flames.

FINIS.

