AN EXPOSITION OF THE DOCTRINE OF THE Church of England, IN THE Several
ARTICLES proposed by Monsieur de MEAVX, Late Bishop of Condom, IN HIS
EXPOSITION of the DOCTRINE OF THE Catholic Church.

To which is prefixed a particular account of Monsieur de Meaux's Book.

LONDON, Printed for Richard Chiswell, at the Rose and Crown in St. Paul's
Churchyard. MDCLXXXVI.

THE PREFACE.
THE smalness of this Treatise would hardly justify the solemnity of a
Preface, but that it might be thought too great a rudeness to press without
some Ceremony upon a Book, which both the Merit and Character of the Author,
and the Quality of those Approbations he has prefixed to it, may justly seem to
have fenced from all vulgar attempts, as Sacred and inviolable. It may perhaps
be some satisfaction to the Reader too to know, how it is come to pass that a
Mere Exposition of the Doctrine of the Church of Rome, pretending to contain
nothing but what they have always professed, and in their Council of Trent
plainly declared to be their Doctrine; should have become so considerable, as
not only to be approved by many Persons of the greatest Eminency in that
Church, but even to be recommended by the whole body of the Clergy of France in
their Assembly 1682; Method. 10.
and wherever it has come, done so many Miracles, as not only common report
speaks, but even the Advertisement it self prefixed to it, takes care to tell
us that it has.

The first design of Monsieur de Meaux's Book was either to satisfy or to
seduce the late Marshall de Turenne. How far it contributed thereunto I am not
able to say; but am willing to believe that the change that honorable Person
made of his Religion, was upon some better grounds than the bare Exposition of
a few Articles of the Roman Faith; and that the Author supplied either in his
personal Conferences with him, or by some other Papers to us unknown, what was
wanting to the first draught which we have seen of this.

The Manuscript Copy which then appeared, and for about four Years together
passed up and down in private hands with great applause, wanted all those
Chapters of the Eucharist, Tradition, The Authority of the Church and Pope,
which now make up the most considerable part of it; and in the other points
which it handled, seemed so loosly and favorably to propose the Opinions of
the Church of Rome, that not only many undesigning Persons of that Communion
were offended at it, but the Protestants who saw it, generally believed that
Monsieur de Meaux durst not publicly own, what in his Exposition he privately
pretended to be their Doctrine.

And the Event showed that they were not altogether mistaken. For in the
beginning of the Year 1671 the Exposition being with great care, and after the
consideration of many years reduced into the form in which we now see it; and
to secure all, fortified with the Approbation of the Archbishop of Reims and
nine other Bishops, who profess that Having examined it with all the Care which
the importance of the matter required, they found it conformable to the
Doctrine of the Church, and as such recommended it to the People which God had
committed to their conduct, it was sent to the Press. The impression being
finished and just ready to come abroad; the Author, who desired to appear with
all the Advantage to himself and his Cause that was possible, sent it to some
of the Doctors of the Sorbonne for their Approbation to be joined to that of
the Bishops, that so no Authority, ordinary or extraordinary might be wanting
to assert the Doctrine contained in it, to be so far from the suspicion the
Protestants had conceived of it, that it was truly and without disguise
Catholic, Apostolic, and Roman.

But to the great surprise of Monsieur de Meaux, and those who had so much
cried up his Treatise before, the Doctors of the Sorbonne to whom it was
communicated, instead of the Approbation that was expected, confirmed what the
Protestants had said of it; and, as became their faculty, marked several of the
most considerable parts of it, wherein the Exposition by the too great desire
of palliating, had absolutely perverted the Doctrine of their Church.

To prevent the open Scandal which such a Censure might have cansed, with great
Industry, and all the Secrecy possible, the whole Edition was suppressed, and
the several places which the Doctors had marked changed; and the Copy so
speedily sent back to the Press again, that in the end of the same year another
much altered was publicly exposed, as the first Impression that had at all
been made of it.

Yet this could not be so privately carried, but that it soon came to a public
knowledge; insomuch that one of the first Answers that was made to it, charged
Monsieur de Meaux with this change. I do not hear that he has ever yet thought
fit to deny the Relation, either in the Advertisement prefixed to the later
Editions of his Book, wherein yet he replies to some other passages of the same
Treatise, or in any other Vindication; Whether it be that such an imputation
was not considerable enough to be taken notice of, or that it was too true to
be denied, let the Reader judge. But certainly it appears to us not only to
give a clear account of the Design and Genius of the whole Book; but to be a
plain demonstration, how improbable soever Monsieur de Meaux would represent
it, That it is not impossible for a Bishop of the Church of Rome, Advertisement
Page 1.
either not to be sufficiently instructed in his Religion to know what is the
Doctrine of it; or not sufficiently sincere, as without disguise to represent
it. And since a Copy of that very Book so marked, as has been said, by the
Doctors of the Sorbonne is fallen into my hands, I shall gratify the Sea the
Collection at the end of the Preface.
Readers curiosity with a particular View of some of the Changes that have been
made, that so he may judge whether of the Two were the Cause of those great
advances, which the Author in that first Edition had thought fit to make
toward us.

It might perhaps appear a very pardonable curiosity in us, after the knowledge
we have had of the first miscarriage of this Book at the Sorbonne, to enquire
how it comes to pass, that among so many other Approbations as have with great
Industry been procured to the later Editions of it, we do not yet see any
subscription of theirs to it, even now. Monsieur de Meaux could not certainly
be ignorant of what weight the Censure of that Learned Faculty is with us; and
that such an Approbation might not only have been more easily obtained, but
would also more effectually have wiped away the blot cast upon his Book by
their former refusal, than all the Letters and Complements that could come from
the other side the Mountains, and which France it self has taught us, in
matters more considerable than this, not to have too high a Value for: Nor can
we suppose any thing else, than that the fear of a further Correction kept it
from being any more submitted to their Censure; and that the Author would
rather pass without the Honor of their Approbation, than run the hazard of a
second Refusal.

But for this, because we cannot speak any thing certain, we will not pursue
our Conjectures. Certain it is that whatever the judgment of the Sorbonne would
now have been of it, many of the Church of Rome were still dissatisfied with
it. See his Advertisement.
And how improbable soever Monsieur de Meaux would have us think that one of
his Answerers affirms, that a Papist should have written against him; Yet not
only the confessed sincerity of Monsieur Conrart who often declared that he had
seen it, but the undoubted integrity of some others by whom I have been assured
that they had it, in their hands, obliges me to join in the assertion, that
Monsieur M --, one of the Roman Communion had finished an Answer to it, before
any of the Protestants were published, however upon some certain Considerations
it was thought fit to suppress it.

It will perhaps be looked upon, that this confirmation of that Manuscript
Answer deserves as little assent, as Monsieur de Meaux has thought fit to give
to Monsieur de la B -- 's first Assertion of it. And therefore to show that it
is not impossible, nor indeed very improbable, that Papists should write one
against another; and that the Method of the Exposition, how plausible soever to
deceive Protestants, has nevertheless offended the sincere and Vndesigning of
the other Communion; I will beg leave to produce two or three undeniable
Witnesses upon some of the first and chiefest Points of it; and which though
not written purposely against it, yet I am persuaded, Monsieur de Meaux himself
will be so just as to confess, that he cannot be altogether unconcerned in them.

For his first Point, The Invocation of Saints; The great moderation of the
Exposition tells us only, That it is useful to pray to them, and that we ought
to do it in the same Spirit of Charity, and in the same Order of Brotherly
Society with which we entreat our Friends on Earth to pray for us: that all the
Prayers of the Church howsoever they may be worded, yet must still be
understood to be reduced to this form, PRAY FOR US.

Now what Monsieur de Meaux here says in general concerning the Invocation of
Saints, another Tract Printed about the same time at Cologne, and entitled
Salutary Advertisements of the Blessed Virgin, [ Avis salutaires de la bien
heureuse Vierge a ses Devots indiscrets. This Tract was published first at Gand
in Latin, by Monsieur Widenfelt a German, Intendant of the Affairs of the
Prince of Suarzembergh; afterward Translated into French.]
to her indiscreet Adorers; particularly applied to that Service, which with so
much superstition is paid in the Church of Rome to the Mother of Christ.

The Book is every where full of Expressions of Honor and Respect for her; and
only speaks against that Worship which Monsieur de Meaux here declares in the
name of the Council of Trent to be none of theirs. It was sent abroad into the
World with all the Advantage imaginable: It had the Approbation of the Bishop
of Mysia, Suffragan to the Archbishop of Cologne; of the Vicar General of the
place; of the Censure of Gant; of the Canons and Divines of Malines; of the
University of Louvain; and Lastly of Monsieur the Bishop of Tournay, who
recommended it as a Treatise full of solid Piety, and very fit and necessary to
draw people out of those Errors and Abuses into which their Superstition had
led them.

Yet notwithstanding all this Applause, if we enquire what success this Book
had with others, Father Crasset the Jesuit, who wrote purposely against it, See
his Book entitled La veritable devotion envers La St. Vierge. 4o.
his Book Printed at Paris 1679, Licensed by the Provincial, approved by the
three Fathers of the Society appointed to examine it, and Lastly, authorized by
the King's Permission, tells us, La Preface p. 1, 2.
That for fear of giving Scandal to Heretics, he had given a very great one to
(those he calls) Catholics: That the Learned Men of all Nations had written
against him; that the Holy See had condemned him; Spain had banished him out of
its Dominions, and forbid to Read or Print his Book, as containing Propositions
suspected of Error and Impiety, that abused the Holy Scripture, and imposed
upon Catholics, by taking them off from the Piety and Devotion due to the
Mother of God; In a word, from the general Invocation of Saints and Worship of
Images.

I shall not need to say how far the Fathers Zeal carries him in the Answer it
self: It is evident that what Monsieur de Meaux tells us, is only Useful, Page
31. etc.
the Jesuit declares to be absolutely Necessary: That we are indispensably
obliged to pray to her: That it is the intention of God, that we should obtain
both Grace and Glory by her; That all Men should be saved by the Merits of the
Son, and the Intercession of the Mother, and that forasmuch therefore as God
has resolved not to give any Grace but what passes through the Hands of Mary;
as we cannot be saved without Grace, so it must be confessed that we cannot be
saved without her. This is I presume somewhat more than what Monsieur de Meaux
expounds to us; and I shall leave it to any one to judge whether this Father
who has showed himself so zealous against the Author of the Blessed Virgins
Salutary Advertisements, could have been very well pleased with Monsieur de
Meaux's Exposition.

The next Point which the Exposition advances, is concerning The Worship of
Images, Monsieur de Meaux in the Edition suppressed, See the Collection at the
end of the Preface.
affirmed, That the Church of Rome does not so much honor the Image of the
Apostle or Martyr, as the Apostle or Martyr in presence of the Image. And
though the Censure passed upon this new fancy, obliged him to speak a little
more plainly, yet is it only thus, even now, 'that when the Church pays an
Honor to the Image of an Apostle or Martyr, her intention is not so much to
honor the Image, as to honor the Apostle or Martyr in presence of the Image.

Concerning which the Reader may please to observe, that Cardinal Capisucchi
one of the Approvers of Monsieur de Meaux's Exposition, has lately set forth a
Volume of Controversies at Rome, with all the most solemn Permissions and
Approbations that can be desired, in which he formally contradicts the Doctrine
of the same Exposition in this Point; and concludes, Art. 8. p. 647.
That the Church in the Councils of Nice and Trent forbids only such a Divine
Honor to Images as is Idolatrous, i. e. says he, which is paid to Images in
and for themselves; and by which the Image is worshipped, as if some God or
Divinity were contained in it. But for that Divine Worship which is paid to the
Images of the Holy Trinity, of our Savior Christ and the Holy Cross, upon the
account of the things represented by them, and as they are in that respect one
and the same with the thing which they represent, and ascribes not any Divinity
to the Images, there never was, nor can be any dispute of it.

Monsieur de Meaux may please to consider whether this be not sufficiently
contrary to the Doctrine Expounded by Him; and how we are to reconcile the
Controversies of the Cardinal Capisucchi, with the Letter and Approbation of
the So he was when he wrote to Monsieur de Meaux.
Master of the Sacred Palace. In the mean time I will beg leave to add one
instance more, that is nigher home, and I think still at this time depending;
and which the particular interest Monsieur de Meaux has more ways than one had
in it, will I suppose undoubtedly satisfy him, that notwithstanding the
Assembly of the Clergy have recommended so much both his Book and his Method,
all nevertheless at this day are not very well satisfied, even in France it
self, either with the one or other.

Monsieur The whole of this is taken out of the Factum which he printed of his
Case.
Imbert Priest and Doctor of Divinity in the Province of Bourdeaux was not long
since accused, that upon Good Friday before he proceeded to the solemn service
of that day, which consists chiefly in the Adoration of the Cross; He turned to
the People, and taking occasion from the rashness of some of the Fathers of the
Mission whom he had with grief heard maintain, That the Cross was to be adored
after the very same manner as Jesus Christ in the Sacrament of the Eucharist;
professed to them that he could not enter on the service of that day without
declaring truly to them what the real Doctrine of the Church as to this point
was. That the Church designed not that we should adore the Cross which we see,
but that we should adore Jesus Christ whom we do not see. That there was a
great difference between the Cross and the Holy Sacrament; That in this our
Savior Christ was really present, whereas that was only a simple figure or
representation of him.

This was his Accusation, and he confessed that his Opinion was, That the
Church adored not the Cross, and that the contrary Opinion was not only false
but Idolatrous. That not only the Protestants made their advantage of those who
maintained such Errors, but that he himself was scandalized to converse every
day with the Missionaries and others, whom he had openly heard preach a hundred
times, 'That we ought to adore the Cross with Jesus Christ, as the Humane
nature of our Savior with the Divine.

Being accused for this, he defended himself with all the strength of Argument
that he was able; yet being still accounted a Heretic for it, he finally
alleged in his defense, 'That the Exposition of Monsieur de Meaux defended the
very same; that he went upon his principles, whose book was approved by the
Pope and several Cardinals in Italy, by the Bishops and Clergy of France and
others of the greatest note in the Church of Rome.

Nevertheless he was suspended in a manner grievous and extraordinary: He wrote
to Monsieur de Meaux himself about it, who presently sent to the Archbishop of
Bourdeaux in his behalf: He addressed himself besides to many other the most
considerable Persons of the Kingdom; to Monsieur the Chancellor; Monsieur de
Chatteau-neuf; to the Intendant of the Province, only that he might have
justice in a cause, which according to Monsieur de Meaux's principles, was
certainly very favorable; But I do not hear that he has yet had any other
Effect of all his supplications, and the interest of those Honorable persons
in his behalf, than that they still draw more and severer menaces from his
Judges, and threats either of perpetual Imprisonment, or even death it self for
his Offense.

After this clear conviction I may reasonably hope it will appear no improbable
matter to Monsieur de Meaux himself, either that one Papist should have written
against his Book, or that many others should have expressed themselves to be of
a mind very different from the principles and opinions of it. Had it pleased
him to have gratified the World with the sight of Cardinal Buillon's and
Monsieur l'Abbe de Dangeau 's letters to Cardinal Bona and Cardinal Chigi, as
well as of their answers to them, they would perhaps have shown, that not only
the Protestants pretended such oppositions of his own party to his Book, but
that Monsieur de Meaux himself was not altogether unsensible of it.

No sooner was the first Impression of the Exposition which was permitted to
pass abroad, See the Advertisement.
finished, but presently a Copy was dispatched to Rome, with Letters and
recommendations to prepare the way for its reception in that Court; [Cardinal
Bona's Letter: V. E. mi accenna che alcuni to Accusano de qual che mancamento.
And a little after, Ne mi maraviglio che gli habbino trovato a dire, perch
turte le Opere grande, e che Sormontano l'Ordinario sempre hanno Contradittori
-- Answer to Cardinal Buillon.]
and provide against those faults which some it seems accused it of, if the
Contradictors which opposed it at home, should think fit to pursue it thither.

It is not to be supposed that either the dignity of the Cardinal who sent the
Book, or of him to whom it was addressed, would have permitted them in such a
manner to take notice of the faults and the Contradictors which their Letters
speak of, had they not been both things, and Persons worthy their
consideration. But much less would Monsieur l'Abbe de Dangeau have used his
interest with Cardinal Chigi to gain the favor of the Master of the Sacred
Palace, See the Answer of Cardinal Chigi to Monsieur L'Abbe de Dangaeau;
[Parlai al Padre Maestro di S. Palazzo, and al. Secretario della congregatione
dell'Indice, e connobbi Veramente che non vi era stato chi havesse a questi
padri parlato in disfavore del medesimo.]
and of the Congregation del Indice, if any one had or should speak against it,
had there been no cause to apprehend that any one would attempt either.

What other particular persons were employed upon the like Offices, is a secret
too close for us to be able to penetrate. Only the Advertisement it self gives
us cause to believe that great interest was made even by the French Ambassador
himself to his Holiness about it; See Advertisement, etc.
and that the few Letters we see set out with so much Industry both in the
Originals and their Translation, and the long History of them in the
Advertisement, were the effects of a labor and interest, great as the long
term of eight years that were spent in the procuring of them.

The second Answer to Monsieur de Meaux has so fully examined every one of
these Approbations, and so plainly showed how small account is to be made of
them, that we do not find that in four years that it has been published, any
one has undertaken to reply to it. I will therefore only add in general a
remark or two that may serve to inform those of our own Country who are
unacquainted with such intrigues, what the Method of the Approbations of the
Church of Rome is, and how little stress is to be laid upon them.

It is a long time since it has been resolved by many of their Casuists, that
it is lawful to disguise the sentiments of their Religion, not only in private
Conferences, but in the very Pulpit it self, when there is a sufficient reason
for the doing of it. But I cannot tell whether it be yet so generally known
that it is lawful for them to set their hands to and approve those Books whose
Principles and Doctrine they dislike, by an Art peculiar to themselves, and
which Protestants, who are used to sincere dealing, will find it a little
difficult to believe.

The instance of Cardinal Capisucchi before mentioned is an undeniable proof of
this for Italy; Who about the same time that he sent his Letter and Approbation
to Monsieur de Meaux of his Exposition, wrote, as we have seen, directly
contrary to the Doctrine of it, and had his Book approved with no less
solemnity at Rome, than Monsieur de Meaux can pretend his to have been. And for
France, a Person very justly esteemed both for his great Quality and his own
worth, Monsieur the Procureur General of the Parliament of Paris, having
clearly revealed the mystery of it, I shall beg leave to represent it to the
World, under the advantage of so great and unquestionable an Authority.

Father Thomassin about twenty years since printed a Book which he called Notae
in Concilia; the design whereof was to set up the Authority of the Pope above
all Councils, which he renders in a manner useless to the decision of
Ecclesiastical matters. The Copies of this Book were all seized, and looked up
in a Chamber of the Fathers Oratorians at Paris. Ten or twelve years after,
with some changes to fill up the Leaves that had been censured, and the
Approbation of the Doctors of the Sorbonne, he again attempted to have it
published. But Monsieur the Procureur General opposed it, and told him that but
in consideration of Father Harlay, his near Relation, who interposed for him,
he would have had his Book burnt by the hand of the common Hangman.

The Father justified himself that his Book contained no other Principles than
what were found in Cardinal Bellarmine's Controversies, which had been printed
with authority, and were permitted to be every day publicly sold in France.
The Procureur General replied, That they suffered in France, that an Italian
should write according to the Principles of his Country, and that this ought
not to hinder but that a Book, otherwise good, might be publicly printed and
sold with privilege; but that for a Frenchman to do the same, was another
matter, and would have different consequences: and that inshort, The Italians
used the same method toward them.

And indeed the late change of the Jesuits in their Approbations plainly shows,
that it is permitted to those of the Church of Rome to write and approve not so
much according to their own Opinions, as to the Principles and Genius of the
Country in which they live. For which reason the Fathers of the Society do no
longer now, as formerly they were wont, take out their License from the General
of their Order, but from their respective Provincials; who accommodate
themselves to the current Doctrine of the place in which the Book is published;
without which it would be almost impossible for them to write in France, but
they should be subject to the danger of a censure at Rome.

After this general account of the Nature of the Approbations of the Church of
Rome, I shall spare both my self and Reader the trouble of examining the
several Letters before the Exposition, though otherwise they lie open to many
exceptions; only concerning his Holiness 's Brief, which Monsieur de Meaux so
much triumphs in, it may not be amiss to observe, that the last Pope, in whose
time the Exposition came first to Rome with great Recommendation, yet never
gave any Approbation to it; and that the present Pope did it upon occasion of
L' Auteur -- fit avec un tres profond respect ses tres humbles remercimens au
Pape par une Lettre du 22. Nov. 1678. don't il receut reponse par un Bref de sa
Saintete du 4 Jan. 79. Avertiss. And in the Brief it self, Devotionem interim
atque Observatiam quam erga sanctam hanc sedem nosque ipsos qui in ea
Catholicae Ecclesiae immerito praesidemus tuae ad Nos Literaeluculenter
declarant, mutuae charitatis affectu complectimur.]
a submissive Letter of the Authors to him, and after the reports that he had
heard of the great The Bishop of Strasburgh having accounted to his Holiness
his design of Translating the Exposition into the German Language, Sa Saintete
lui fit dire qu'il connoissoit ce livre, and qu'on luy raportoit de tous costez
qu'il faisoit beaucoup de Corversions. Avertissement.
Conversions that were every where made by it, to which such an Approbation
would be likely to add a new force. So plain is the intrigue and design of
this, that were the Popes Briefs otherwise of as great consideration, as the
Papists themselves show them to be of little value, yet this could not be
regarded by us, as any other than a mere Artifice to deceive us, not a sincere,
much less authoritative Approbation either of the Nature or Principles of
Monsieur de Meaux's Book.

But whatever the Opinion either of the Pope or Papists has been of this
Exposition, certain it is the Protestants have openly enough declared their
thoughts concerning it; and the Exposition according to the fate of all other
great and extraordinary things, Card. Bona's Letter.
has found enough on this side to oppose it.

It was but a very little time after the first Edition of it, that Monsieur
Noguier and another Author well known, yet whose name I spare, because he has
not thought fit himself to discover it, wrote against it; and with so much
success, that the Papists themselves confessed, 'That it was an ill Cause
defended extremely well.

Monsieur de Turenne not long before that last Campaign in which he lost his
Life, made great boasts of a Reply that was speedily to be published to them;
but after the long expectation of above eight Years, only an Advertisement was
prefixed to a new Edition of the Book, which neither touches at all the
greatest part of the Exceptions that had been made against it, nor gives any
satisfaction to those it does take notice of.

It has been the constant method of Monsieur de Meaux, having once written, to
leave his Tracts to the World, and take no care to defend them against those
assaults, that seem with success enough to have been sometimes made upon them.
We should think the great Employments, in which he has had the Honor to be
engaged, might have been the cause of this, did not he who takes no care to
defend his old Books, find still time enough to write new. Perhaps he looks
upon his pieces to be of a Spirit and Force sufficient to despise whatever
attempts can be made upon them; but sure he cannot be ignorant, that
Protestants make another and far different Conclusion, and look upon those
Opinions to be certainly indefensible, which so able and eminent an Author is
content so openly, and, if I may be permitted to add it, so shamefully to
forsake.

What other Answers besides those I have now mentioned have been made to it, I
cannot undertake to say; Two others only that I know of have been published;
the Author of the latter of which Monsieur de Brueys having in a very little
time after his writing left his Religion, might have made a new instance of
Monsieur de Meaux 's Conquests, did not his inability to answer his own
arguments against the Exposition, give us cause to believe, that some other
Motives than those of that Book induced him so lightly to forsake a Cause,
which he had so soundly and generously defended.

And now after so many Answers yet unreplied to, if any one desires to know
what the design of the present undertaking is, they may please to understand,
that having by a long Converse among the Papists of our own and other Countries
perceived that either by the ignorance or malice of their Instructors, they
have generally very false and imperfect Notions of our Opinions in the matters
in Controversy between us, I have suffered my self to be persuaded to pursue
the Method of Monsieur de Meaux 's Exposition as to the Doctrine of the Church
of England; and oppose sincerely to what he pretends is the Opinion of the
Roman Church, that form of Faith that is openly professed and taught without
any disguise or dissimulation among us.

I was not unwilling to take the Method of Monsieur de Meaux for my direction,
as well upon the account of the great Reputation both of the Book and of the
Author, as because it is now some years that it has passed in our Language
without any answer that I know of made to it. Besides, that the late new
Impression made of it, with all the advantages of the Advertisement and
Approbations, which the later French Editions have added to it, seemed
naturally to require some such Consideration.

I do not pretend by any thing of this to treat Monsieur de Meaux as an Enemy,
but rather as both his great Learning, and that Character which I have ever
learnt very highly to reverence, oblige me, to follow him as my Guide. To
render an account to him and to the World what our differences are, and point
out in passing some of those reasons that are the most usually given amongst
us, wherefore we cannot totally assent to what he proposes.

I am persuaded the whole is done with that Charity and Moderation, that there
is nothing in it that can justly offend the most zealous Enemy of our Church.
If I knew of any thing in it that without dissembling the Truth might have been
omitted, I sincerely profess I would most willingly have done it, being
desirous to please all, that so, if it be the will of God, I may by any means
gain some.

For this cause chiefly have I forborne to set my name to it, lest perhaps any
prejudice against my Person, might chance to injure the Excellence of the Cause
which I maintain.

This effect at least, if no other, I would willingly hope such a Treatise may
have upon those of our Country that have been taught to believe very
differently concerning us; That they would please no longer to form such
horrible Ideas of our Profession as they have heretofore been wont to do; at
least till it can be shown that I have either palliated or prevaricated the
Doctrine of the Church of England in this Exposition. Which I am yet so assured
I have not done, that I^ here entirely submit both my self and it to her
Censure; of whose Communion I esteem it my greatest Happiness that I am, and
for whose preservation and Enlargement I shall never cease, as I ought, to pray.

A Collection of some of those Passages that were corrected in the first
Edition of the EXPOSITION suppressed by Monsieur de Meaux: To which is added,
the Censure of the Faculty of Louvain, upon some part of the Doctrine still
remaining in it.
. I.

MOnsieur de Meaux in the very beginning of his Book speaking of the design of
it, had these Words:

1. Edit.

So that it seems then to be very proper to propose to them (the Protestants)
the Doctrine of the Catholic Church, separating those Questions which the
Church has decided, from those which do not belong to Faith. p. 1.

It is evident, the meaning of Monsieur de Meaux in that passage must have been
this; That whatsoever was either not at all contained in his Exposition, or was
otherwise maintained by any particular Authors, beyond the Exposition he gives
us of those Points which are here mentioned, was not to be looked upon by us,
as any of the Church's Decision, nor necessary to be received by us as matter
of Faith.

I shall not need to say how many Doctrines and Decisions, not only of private
Writers, but of the very Council of Trent it self, this would have at once cut
off. It would perhaps have been one of the fairest Advances toward an Union,
that ever the Church of Rome yet offered. But it seems whatever Monsieur de
Meaux supposed, this was thought too great a condescension by others: and he
was therefore obliged, without changing any thing in his Book, to give us a
quite other account of the design of it.

Later Editions.

So that it seems then we can do nothing better, than simply to propose to them
(the Protestants) the sentiments of the Catholic Church, and distinguish them
from those Opinions that have been falsely imputed to her. Which is but little
to the Purpose. II.

1 Edit. p. 7, 8. The same Church teaches, That all Religious Worship ought to
terminate upon God, as its necessary End. So that the Honor which the Church
gives to the Blessed Virgin and to the Saints is religious, only because it
gives them that Honor with relation to God, and for the love of him.

So that then, so far ought one to be from blaming the Honor which we give to
the Saints, as our Adversaries do, because it is Religious, that on the
contrary it ought to be blamed if it were not Religious.

There can be nothing more plain than that Monsieur de Meaux's Opinion, when he
wrote this, was, That the Honor which the Church of Rome pays to the Blessed
Virgin and Saints departed is a Religious Honor; nay would deserve to be
blamed if it were not Religious.

This was by others thought a little too ingenuous, and what would give too
great an advantage to our objections against it. And therefore instead of that
free, honest Confession, That the Church of Rome gives religious Honor to the
Blessed Virgin and Saints departed, he now puts a doubt that insinuates the
direct contrary, The same Church teaches us, that all religious Worship ought
to terminate in God as its necessary End; and if the Honor which she rendereth
to the Blessed Virgin and to the Saints, may in some sense be called Religious,
it is for its necessary relation to God.

So that really then the Honor they give their Saints in Monsieur de Meaux's
opinion is Religious, but it is not fit that we should know it.

III.

Monsieur Daille some years since wrote a Volume of the Tradition of the
Primitive Church, concerning the Object of Religious Worship; in which he
clearly shows that the first 300 years knew nothing of the Invocation of
Saints, the Worship of Images, Crosses, and Relics; of the Adoration of the
Host, etc. Monsieur de Meaux in his first Exposition granted the whole, in
these words since struck out, For Monsieur Daille, says he, he thinks fit to
confine himself to the first three Centuries, in which it is certain that the
Church more exercised in suffering than in writing, has left many things to be
cleared afterward both in its Doctrine and in its Practice. 1 Edit. p. 9.

Now it being evident, notwithstanding this new thought, that the sufferings of
the first 300 years have not hindered, but that we have very large accounts of
its Doctrine and Practice from the Writings of those Fathers who lived in them;
To confess that it is certain, that the Tradition of the Church of Rome fails
in many things both in Doctrine and Practice for the first 300 years, is
doubtless as fair a yielding up the Cause, as to the matter of Tradition, as we
could desire; and therefore however known by Monsieur de Meaux to be most
certainly true, was yet thought too much by others to be confessed to the
World, by a person of so great Learning and Eminence in their Church.

IV.

As to the point of the Invocation of Saints, Monsieur de Meaux still shows us
that he knows not what account to give of the grounds of it. He proposes
several ways how the Saints may possibly know our Prayers, but cannot well tell
us by which it is they do so.

But in the first Edition he showed yet more doubt: Not only which way the
Saints hear them, but whether they hear them at all or no: Not only, whether
they join with them in their Prayers, as they desire them to do, but whether it
is not rather by some other means, yet more unknown to them, and not by their
Intercession, that they receive the benefit of them.

The Church, says he, contents her self to teach with all Antiquity, these
prayers to be very profitable to such who make them; Whether it be the Saints
know them by the Ministry and Communication of Angels, who according to the
Testimony of Scripture know what passes amongst us; being established by Gods
order as administering spirits to cooperate with us in the work of our
salvation: Whether it be that God makes known to them our desires by a
particular revelation: Or whether it be that he discovers the secret to them in
his Divine Essence in which all truth is comprised. And that in the manner, and
according to the measure which he pleases; or whether lastly by some other way
yet more impenetrable and more unknown he causes us to receive the Fruit of
those Prayers which we address to those blessed Souls. 1 Ed. p. 23.

So that in effect, whether the Saints hear us or no, whether they join with us
in our requests or no, according to Monsieur de Meaux's Exposition, their
Church knows not; which is sure a sufficient prejudice against their
Invocation; and was, it seems, thought so by those who therefore caused all the
latter part of this paragraph to be struck out, for fear of the advantage we
might reasonably make of it.

V.

But if Monsieur de Meaux in his first Exposition freely confessed how
uncertain the grounds of this Invocation were, he no less freely left it to our
choice whether we would practice it or not. He assured us there was no manner
of obligation at all upon us so to do: And that the Church would not condemn us
if we did it not, provided we refused it not out of contempt, or with a Spirit
of dissension and Revolt.

Furthermore, says he, there is nothing so unjust as to accuse the Church of
placing all her piety in these devotions to the Saints; since on the contrary
she lays no obligation at all on particular persons to join in this Practice.

By which it appears clearly that the Church condemns only those who refuse it
out of contempt, and by a Spirit of dissension and revolt. 1 Ed. p. 33, 34.

This was Monsieur de Meaux's first Exposition of the Doctrine of the Catholic
Church in this point: But such as his Correctors it seems would not admit of:
Who therefore obliged him wholly to strike out that passage, That the Church
imposes no obligation at all upon particular persons to practice this
Invocation:

And instead of condemning only those that refuse it out of contempt, or a
Spirit of dissension and revolt, which had freed us wholly from their Anathema,
to expound it now more severely.

That she condemns those who refuse this practice whether out of disrespect or
Error. Which will be sure to bring us under it.

VI.

In the article of Images Monsieur de Meaux having first laid down this
foundation, That the Church of Rome does not attribute to them any other virtue
than that of exciting in us the remembrance of those whom they represent; added
in his first Exposition which was suppressed, It Is in this consists the use and
advantage of Images. 1 Edit. p. 25.

And to assure us yet further how little Honor they had for them, concluded
thus, So that to speak properly, and according to the Ecclesiastical style, we
do not so much honor the Image of an Apostle or Martyr, as we do honor the
Apostle or Martyr in presence of the Image. 1 Edit. p. 26.

Now though we do not doubt but that this is the real opinion of Monsieur de
Meaux, and all which he himself does, yet to say that the Church of Rome does
neither require, nor practice, nor intend any more, was to presume too much
upon our Ignorance; and indeed to give too great a scandal to many of her own
Communion, more zealous than himself for this service: And therefore we find it
now expounded in a manner more conformable to the truth, though still
exceedingly mollified, It Is upon this is founded the Honor which we give to
Images: and again.

When we honor the Image of an Apostle or Martyr, our Intention is not so much
to honor the Image, as the Apostle or Martyr in presence of the Image.

VII.

In the Section of Justification Monsieur de Meaux has omitted this whole
paragraph since his first Edition: The Catholic Church, says he, is no where
more invincible than in this point, and perhaps it would need no long discourse
to show, that the more one searches by the Scriptures into the design of the
redemption of Mankind, which was to make us Holy, the more one shall approach
to our Doctrine, and the more depart from the opinions of Calvin, which are not
maintainable, nay are contradictory and ruinous of all true and solid piety. 1
Ed. p. 36, 37.

Monsieur de Meaux may please some other time to expound to us, what those
Opinions of Calvin in this matter are which the Church of Rome is so invincible
in, and which all parties among them will agree to be so contradictory, and
ruinous to all true and solid piety, as he then said.

In the mean time we will only beg leave to observe on occasion of this
Correction, that perhaps there are some in the Church of Rome of Mr. Calvin's
mind in the worst of those Principles Monsieur de Meaux refers to, and to
assure him that there are several Protestants in the World that are not; tho
they dare not therefore so severely censure the Opinions of those that are.

IX.

Monsieur de Meaux having in a very few words explained the Doctrine of
Justification, upon which the Council of Trent is so long and perplexed,
assured us in his first Exposition, That that was enough for any Man to know to
make him a through Christian.

Thus have you seen what is most necessary in the Doctrine of Justification;
and our Adversaries would be extraordinarily contentious not to confess, that
there is no need to know any more to be a solid Christian. 1 Ed. p. 47. This
would have been of great advantage to us, and have freed us from the Anathema's
of many other Particulars, of which we more doubt, than of any thing Monsieur
de Meaux has expounded of it; but this others thought too great a Concession;
and the Bishop therefore, without changing any thing in his Premises, was
forced to draw a very different Conclusion from them.

Thus have you seen what is most necessary in the Doctrine of Justification,
and our Adversaries would be very unreasonable if they should not confess, that
this Doctrine suffices to teach Christians, that they ought to refer all the
Glory of their Salvation to God through Jesus Christ. X.

In the Article of Satisfaction, Monsieur de Meaux speaking of the Temporal and
Eternal Punishment of Sin, and how the one may be retained when the other is
forgiven, had this Paragraph in the first Edition, since struck out.

The Church has always acknowledged these two different manners of applying the
Remission of Sins, which we have proposed; because she faw that in the
Scriptures, besides the first Pardon, and which ought to be the only, if Men
were not ungrateful, and which is pronounced in the terms of a pure Remission,
there is another Absolution, and another Grace, that is proposed in form of a
Judgment, where the Church ought not only to loose and remit, but also to bind
and retain. 1 Edit. p. 54, 55. The Censure passed upon this, were enough to
make one suspect, that either Monsieur de Meaux, or his Correctors, were
sensible upon further Consideration, that they could not so easily find out
these two forms, so distinguished in holy Scripture, or prove that the Church
had always acknowledged them; and therefore judged it safer not to undertake it.

XI.

In the Article of Confirmation, speaking of the Imposition of Hands, Monsieur
de Meaux insinuated in his first Exposition, that it had always been
accompanied with the use of Chrism ever since the Apostles.

Thus, says he, all Christian Churches have religiously retained this Practice,
accompanying it (the Imposition of Hands) with holy Chrism. 1 Ed. p. 65. This
was too clearly false to be suffered to pass, and therefore it is now more
loose, so as to admit of an Equivocation, and yet seem to say still the same
thing.

Thus all Christian Churches since the Apostles times have religiously retained
it, making use also of holy Chrism. XII.

In the Article of the Sacrifice of the Mass, Monsieur de Meaux having
expounded it according to our Principles, in his first Edition, concluded with
us too. So that it (the Mass) may, says he, be very reasonably called a
Sacrifice: 1 Ed. p. 115. But since the Correction, the Conclusion is much
strengthened, tho the Premises remain the same: So that there is nothing wanting
to it, to make it a true Sacrifice.

XIII.

As to the point of the Pope's Authority, the first Exposition ran much higher
than it seems the Spirit of the Gallicane Church could bear. So that our
Profession of Faith obliges us as to this point, to believe the Roman Church to
be the Mother and Mistress of all Churches, and to render a true Obedience to
the Pope, the Successor of St. Peter, and Vicar of Jesus Christ. 1 Ed. p. 166.
It is now more loose, and in general thus; We acknowledge a Primacy in the
Successors of the Prince of the Apostles, to whom, for that cause we owe that
Obedience and Submission which the holy Councils and Fathers have always taught
the Faithful. 5 Ed. p. 210. But it may be what was struck out of the Exposition
to please the Correctors, Monsieur de Meaux recompensed in his Letter to
satisfy his Holiness.

XIV.

In the Conclusion, Monsieur de Meaux telling us that none of those Articles he
had expounded, according to our own Principles, destroyed the Foundation of our
Salvation, added in his first Exposition what that Foundation was, viz.

The Adoration of one only God, Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, and the Trust in
one only Savior. 1 Ed. p. 160. It is hard to say why this was not let pass,
for we are unwilling to believe that the Church of Rome has any other
Foundation for Salvation than this. But it may be to have put down this as the
Foundation of Salvation, would have been too plainly to show, that then we
certainly have this, and that without mixture of any thing destructive
thereunto.

XV.

Monsieur de Meaux go's on, in a very candid manner, since struck out; In
effect, says he, in all these Explications, which contain the very bottom of
our Belief, there is not any one word repugnant to these two Principles, either
directly, or by Consequence.

So that acknowledging then this, That the Church of Rome does believe and
profess all that is essential to preserve the substance of the Christian
Religion, so that they cannot reasonably impute to us any Doctrine contrary
thereunto, they must at the same time acknowledge, by their own Principles, that
the Church of Rome is a true part of the Church of Christ, to which every
Christian is obliged to unite himself in his Heart, and in effect as far as in
him lies. 1 Ed.



Monsieur de Meaux may please to know, that we do confess the Church of Rome to
be a part of the true Church, tho indeed we think one of the worst; and that we
do with all our Hearts desire a Union with her; and in effect do show it as far
as we are able, by retaining whatever we can of the same Doctrines and
Practices with her.

And if this were all they desired of us, as indeed it is all they ought, and
all we can do: However an absolute Union would not thereby be obtained, yet
might we live at least like Christians and Brethren, in a common Charity with
one another, and so dispose our Minds, as by God's Grace to come in a little
time to some better agreement in the rest too, than ever we are like to do
without it.

These are some of those Passages that gave occasion to the correction we have
spoken of at the Sorbon, and to the suppression of the whole first Edition,
however authorized by the Bishops of France in the same words it now is. I
might have added many more; but instead of it, will beg leave to offer the
Reader one Correction made very lately by another Faculty, that of Louvain; if
not immediately of Monsieur de Meaux's Exposition, yet at least of a Doctrine
which they were beforehand given to understand, was so explained in it.

Monsieur de W itte, Pastor and Dean of St. Mary's, in the City of Michlin,
having, in a Discourse with some Persons of that City, on the 8th of July last,
maintained the Authority of the Church and Pope, according to the manner of
Monsieur de Meaux's Exposition; complaint was made of him, first to the
Inter-noaen, then to his Holiness himself, and four Propositions drawn up
against him, as the Heads of his Heresy.

Monsieur de Wit maintained his Opinion in several Papers printed to that
end; in the Entitled, Prosecutio probationis locum Mar. 16. non recte resundi
in Apostolorum principis successores.]
4th of which, after several other Authorities of Persons of their Church
defending the same Doctrine; He tells them, That the Golden Exposition of Faith
of Monsieur the Bishop of Condom, Nihil praeterea, ad sanam Catholicam, and
Orthodoxam fidem deposcit aurea illa Expositio Catholicae fidei Jacobi Episcopi
Condomensis, praeter Illustrissima Clarissimonum Virorum Elogia, ipsius S.
Patris Innocent. xi. peramantissimis literis comprobata.
required nothing more to the Sound, Catholic, and Orthodox Faith in this
Matter; which Exposition, besides the Elogies of many other Eminent Persons,
was also approved by our Holy Father Innocent the 11th himself, in his kind
Letter to him. But all this could not prevail with them to respect his Doctrine
ever the more for Monsieur de Meaux's Exposition, or his Holinesses Brief. The
Faculty of Divinity, at the command of the Nonce, and with the knowledge, no
doubt, and assent of the Pope, to whom the whole Affair had been communicated,
censured his Propositions, Nov. 3. 1685. and especially the second, in which
Monsieur de Meaux's Exposition of the Catholic Faith was principally
concerned, as scandalous and pernicious.

Judicamus eam censurari posse uti scandalosam and perniciosam. May those who
insist so much on the Fidelity and Authority of Monsieur de Meaux's Exposition,
please calmly to consider these things; and tell us how we can rely on such an
Exposition of their Doctrine, as notwithstanding so many formal Approbations;
first, of the Bishops of France, was yet corrected in so many places by the
Sorbon; and secondly, of the Pope, Cardinals, and others in Italy, and of the
whole Body of the Clergy of France in their Assembly; has yet so lately been
censured, at the command of the Nonce, and with the consent of his Holiness, by
the Faculty of one of their most eminent Universities, to be scandalous and
pernicious.

A TABLE OF THE ARTICLES Contained in this TREATISE.
I. THe Introduction. Page. 3 II. That Religious Worship is to be paid to God
only. Page. 6 III. Of the Invocation of Saints. Page. 9 IV. Of Images and
Relics. Page. 13 V. Of Justification. Page. 19 VI. Of Merits. Page. 21 VII. Of
Satisfactions, Purgatory, and Indulgences. Page. 24
PART II.
VIII. Of the Sacraments in general. Page. 33 IX. Of Baptism. Page. 35 X. Of
Confirmation. Page. 39 XI. Of Penance and Confession. Page. 40 XII. Of Extreme
Unction. Page. 44 XIII. Of Marriage. Page 45 XIV. Of Holy Orders. Page. 46 XV.
Of the Eucharist; and first of the Explication of those words, This is my Body.
Page. 47 XVI. Do this in remembrance of Me. Page. 54 XVII. The Doctrine of the
Church of England concerning this holy Sacrament. 55 XVIII. Of
Transubstantiation, and of the Adoration of the Host. 58 XIX. Of the Sacrifice
of the Mass. 62 XX. Of the Epistle to the Hebrews. 67 XXI. Reflections upon the
foregoing Doctrine. 69 XXII. Of communicating under one kind. 72
PART III.
XXIII. Of the Word written and unwritten. 75 XXIV. Of the Authority of the
Church. 76 XXV. The Opinion of the Church of England, as to the Authority of
the Church. 80 XXVI. The Authority of the holy See and of Episcopacy. 81 XXVII.
The Close. 82
ERRATA.
PReface] Page xxix the number of the Sections mistaken to the and. P. xxxii.
l. 15. dele 5 Ed. p. 210. P. xxxiv. l. 28. r. Mechlin, ib. l. 33. r.
Inter-nonce. Book.] P. 13. l. 10. r. Practice. P. 20. l. 5. r. works it in us.
P. 22. in the Margin, l. 9. del. 16. P. 23. the same. P. 24. Marg. del. p. 66.
P. 34. l. 18. r. Virtue. P. 36. l. 13. r. Mr. de Meaux. l. 14. Charity. P. 40.
l. 13. r. Virtue. P. 69. Marg. ib. r. ver. 24.

AN EXPOSITION OF THE Doctrine of the Church of England In the several Articles
expounded by Monsieur de MEAUX.
I. The Introduction.
IT has always been esteemed more reasonable to doubt of Principles first, and
then to deny the Conclusions that are drawn from them, than having granted the
Foundation, afterward to cavil at the clear and necessary Deductions from it.

To profess that Religious Worship is due to God only; and at the same time to
say that we ought to adore Men and Women, Crosses and Images, and all that
infinite variety of Follies which these latter Ages have set forth under the
pious name of Relics. To declare, " That we are saved only by Christ's Merits;
and yet still continue to teach us that we ought to set up our own. In a word,
to say, That the Death of Christ was a perfect Sacrifice, and one drop of his
Blood more than sufficient for the Redemption of Mankind; and nevertheless go
on to require our Satisfactions as necessary too, and oblige us to believe that
other Propitiatory Sacrifices besides that of the Cross, ought to be offered up
continually to God in his Church, for the Sins both of the Dead and the Living:
This must certainly be the part of a Disputant, either too ignorant to
understand, or too obstinate to submit to any Conviction.

Monsieur de Meaux, the design of whose Exposition seems rather to be an
Apology for the Popish Religion, than a free Assertion and Vindication of its
Errors, is above all things sensible of the Justice of this Reflection: and
therefore endeavors by all means possible in the very entry of his Treatise to
prepare his Reader against it, By showing the Injustice of charging
Consequences upon Men which they do not allow; and that therefore tho their
Superstructure should chance to overthrow their Foundation, yet since they
profess not to know that it does so, they ought not to be taxed with what they
do not believe.

It is not denied but that Consequences may be sometimes either so obscure, or
so far distant, that a Person prejudicate for the Principle, may well be
excused the charge of a Collection, which his Actions show he neither believes
nor approves. But when the Conclusions, as well as Principles, are plain and
confessed, and the Dispute is only about the Name, not the Thing; we must beg
leave to profess, that we cannot choose but say that he believes not as he ought
the infinite Merits of Christ's Sacrifice, who requires any other Offering for
Sin; and that no subtilty of Argument will ever persuade us that those destroy
not their Principle of worshipping God only, whom we see, contrary to his
express Command, prostrate every day before an Image, with Prayers and Hymns to
Creatures that have been subject to like Infirmities with our selves, and that
are perhaps at this very time in a worser Estate, than the most miserable of
those that call upon them for their assistance.

Be it therefore allowed to be as great a Calumny, as Monsieur de Meaux can
suppose it, to accuse Men of Consequences obscure and disavow'd; the Opinions
we charge the Church of Rome with, are plain and confessed, the Practice and
Prescription of the chiefest Authority in it. And to refuse our Charge of them,
is in good earnest nothing else than to protest against a matter of Fact; a
Plea, which even Justice it self has told us, may without Calumny be rejected
as invalid.

However, thus much at least we have got by this Reflection, that it directs us
to the true State of the Controversy between us; and shows, That we, who have
been so often charged by the Church of Rome as Innovators in Religion, are at
last by their own confession, allowed to hold the ancient and undoubted
Foundation of the Christian Faith; and that the Question between us therefore
is not, Whether what we hold be true? which is on all hands agreed, but,
Whether those things which the Roman Church has added as Superstructures to it,
and which, as such, we reject, be not so far from being necessary Articles of
Religion, as they pretend, that they indeed overthrow that Truth which is on
both sides allowed to be Divine; and upon that account ought to be forsaken by
them?

The Declaration of this, not so much by any new proof, as by clearing rather
the true state of those Points which are the subject of our Difference, is the
design of the following Articles; in which I shall endeavor to give a clear
and free account of what we can approve, and what it is that we dislike in
their Doctrine; and as far as the shortness of this Discourse will allow, touch
also upon some of those Reasons that are the most usually given by us for both.

ARTICLE II. That Religious Worship is to be paid to God only.
THat Religious Worship is due to God only, how necessary soever those
Practices of the Roman Church, which we are hereafter to consider, may have
rendered it to Monsieur de Meaux to declare, yet is it, we suppose, but little
necessary for us to say,

We firmly believe, that the inward acknowledgment of his Divine Excellencies
as the Creator and Lord of all things, is a part of the supreme Worship that is
due to him. We believe that all the Powers of our Soul ought to be tied to him
by Faith, Hope, and Charity, as to that God who alone can establish and make us
happy. And tho we do not think that there is now any sensible, or material
Sacrifice to be offered to Him under the Gospel, as there was heretofore under
the Law; yet do we with all Antiquity suppose the Sacrifice of Prayer and
Thanksgiving to be so peculiarly his due, that it cannot, without derogation to
his Honor, be applied to any other.

What our Opinion is of that Worship which the Roman Church pays to the Blessed
Virgin, and Saints departed, we shall hereafter fully show: But certainly great
was the difference of those Holy Men whom Monsieur de Meaux mentions as their
forerunners in this practice, from the present manner of the Popish
Invocation. Gregory Nazianzen in a Rhetorical Apostrophe, called to Constantius
in one, to his Sister Gorgonia in another Oration, but he prayed to neither.
St. Basil; St. Ambrose; St. J. Chrysostom; St. Hierom; St. Augustine; they
desired sometimes that the Martyr or Saint would join with them in their
requests, but they were rather Raptures and Wishes, than direct Prayers; and
their formal Petitions, but especially those of the Church, were only to God
Almighty. They doubted whether the Saints could hear them or no; and were
rather inclined to believe that they could not. The Addresses of the Mind,
which the Church of Rome allows no less than the others to them, they looked
upon to be so peculiarly God's due, that they supposed he did not communicate
them to the very Angels that are in Heaven. They declared against all thoughts
of being assisted by the Merits of their Saints, or that God would ever the
more readily, or indeed so soon accept their Prayers coming by the Intercession
of another, as if they had gone themselves directly to the Throne of Grace. In
a word; they never imagined that this was an Honor due to them; but, on the
contrary, constantly taught that it was a Service belonging only to God
Almighty.

Well therefore might And that it is the most he does; Se de Cult. Lat. l. 3.
c. 18.
Monsieur Daille refer the beginnings of this Invocation to these Men, whose
innocent Wishes, and Rhetorical Flights, being still increased by the
Superstition of after-Ages, first gave birth to this Worship. But certainly the
Romanists cannot with any reason allege them in favor of their Error, till it
be shown either that we are mistaken in those differences we have here declared
to be between what they did, and what the Church of Rome now practices; or that
they are otherwise proved to be so inconsiderable, as not to make any notable
alteration in it. And yet that the Ages before knew nothing even of this, not
only their confessed inability to produce any Proofs from them of this
Superstition, but the contrary Testimonies of the undoubted Writings of
Ignatius, Tertullian, Clemens Alexandrinus, Origin, Novatian, and Others, so
plainly show, that it ought not to be esteemed at all rash at this distance to
assert, that in this very small Change, the Fathers of the fourth Century, did
certainly begin to depart from the Practice and Tradition of those before them.
And if that Reason of the Church of Rome be of any strength, why they prayed
not to the Holy Men under the Old Testament, viz. because they were not then
admitted to the sight of God, and therefore ought not to be prayed to. It seems
to us that not only the greater part of the Primitive Fathers, but even those
very Men Monsieur de Meaux mentions, could not certainly have allowed such an
Invocation as is now used in their Church; the most of them being notoriously
known, and even by their own Writers freely confessed, to have believed the
same, That neither do the Saints and Confessors of the Christian Church any
more enjoy the Presence of God even now.

Thus much was thought fit to be said to remove that Prejudice Monsieur de
Meaux had thrown in the way. We go on now with him to consider the Doctrine it
self, and what our Church's Opinion is of it.

ARTICLE III. Of the Invocation of Saints.
THE Invocation of Saints, as it is stated by Monsieur de Meaux, we look upon
to be one of those Practices which our Church styles, fond things, vainly
invented, and grounded upon no Warrant of Holy Scripture, but indeed repugnant
to God's Word. Artic. xxii.
Monsieur de Meaux himself dares not say that they do or can ordinarily by any
ability in themselves, hear, see, or know, the Wants, State, or Prayers of Men
upon Earth, to be mindful of them unto God in Heaven. Nor can it ever be
proved that by any of those ways which he proposes, but seems himself not to
lay any great stress upon, they are certainly and particuly communicated to
them.

We think therefore, that till this be cleared, it is ^o great a hazard to
leave a Mediator, who both certainly knows our wants, and has promised to hear
us; that has invited us, nay commanded us to come to him in all our Needs, to
go to Intercessors which God has no where appointed, and which we can never be
sure our Prayers shall come up to. It suffices not that they may know some
things, in some places, at some times, and of some Men extraordinarily, unless
we could tell what Saints, and what things, and in what places, and at what
times, they do know them. When this is cleared, it may then be more reasonable
to desire us to join with them in this Service. In the mean time, tho we should
not charge them with Idolatry merely for this, yet we must needs confess we
cannot but think these Addresses to be too full of hazard and uncertainty to
venture any Requests at all, much less so many as they do every day, upon them.

In vain therefore does Monsieur de Meaux endeavor to defend the Innocence of
this Invocation, whilst he forgets to show us the Reasonableness of it. We
should be pleased indeed to be assured of that; but we cannot be convinced that
we ought to join in the Practice till we are satisfied of the other too. And
yet we cannot but regret, that if their design be truly no more than this, to
entreat the Saints to pray for them, we should find the greatest part of their
Service addressing to them after so contrary a manner; that they would
interpose not only their Intercessions, but their Merits too for their
forgiveness: Not only that they would pray to God for them, but that they would
themselves bless them. That the Angels and Saints would give them Strength,
Grace, Health, and Power. That St. Peter would have Mercy upon them, and open
to them the Gate of Heaven. That the Blessed Virgin would protect them from
their Enemies, and receive them at their Death: In a word, that she would
command her Son to forgive them by that Right, This Passage is often denied:
See Cassander Consult. in Art. 21.
which as a Mother she had over him. All which their very public Rituals so
far allow, that the Service which is paid to God in his Church by the Mediation
of Christ, is infinitely exceeded by the Addresses of this nature, through the
Merits of the Virgin Mary, and of the Saints.

Now if these Prayers signify no more than, as Monsieur de Meaux expounds them,
to entreat the Saints to pray for them, why have we such Scandal given us in
the Practice? If they intend really what we suppose, and what their words do
certainly signify; what Ingenuity can it be to impose upon us in the
Declaration? However at least they will please to excuse us that we have fallen
at so just a stumbling Block; and charged them as derogating from the Merits of
Christ, whilst they have thus cried up the Merits of their Saints, and of a
Presumption unwarrantable, if not wholly Idolatrous, in desiring any but God
alone to help, and succor, and give them those Blessings, which God only has
power to dispense.

1. When therefore we shall be certainly assured that all that infinite number
which the Church of Rome has canonized, are truly and infallibly Saints.

2. When we shall be assured that these Saints do already enjoy the Presence of
God Almighty; a Circumstance which the Papists themselves confess necessary to
warrant their Invocation.

3. When it shall be made undoubtedly appear, that either by their own
Knowledge, or by some other Revelation, they do ordinarily and particularly
understand all the Requests that are made to them; so that we can be as secure
of their hearing us, as when we desire our Brethren upon Earth to pray for us.

4. When the Liturgies of their Church shall be reformed, and all those
dangerous Insinuations of the Merit and Personal Assistance of their Saints be
removed.

5. When those desperate Doctrines, and yet more desperate Addresses of their
Schoolmen and Controvertists, which scandalize the more moderate even of their
own Party, shall be censured.

6. And Men taught to practice this Invocation with such Sobriety, as neither
to make it so freely and publicly their Worship as they do, nor with any
Opinion of being either sooner heard, or more effectually answered by this way
of Address, than by going directly to God by our Savior and only Mediator
Jesus Christ.

7. In a word, when even an Invocation so moderated, shall be shown either to
have been commanded by God Almighty, or to have been advised by his Apostles,
or to have been practiced ordinarily and directly by the most Primitive
Christians: Or lastly, but to be no way injurious to the excellent Goodness of
that Intercessor, who has so kindly invited, and even conjured us to come to
Him in all our needs; Then will we not fail to join our Ora pro Nobis with
them: But till then we must beg leave to conclude with a Charity and
Moderation, which we suppose they themselves cannot but approve in us, That it
is a fond thing, vainly invented, and grounded upon no warrant of Holy
Scripture, but rather indeed contrary thereunto.

And what we have now said of their Prayers, we must in the next place apply to
their Sacrifices too. To mention the Names of the Holy Saints departed in the
Communion; this we look upon to be a Practice as innocent as it is ancient. So
far are we from condemning it in them, that we practice it our selves. We name
them at our Altars, we give God thanks for their Excellencies, and pray to him
for Grace to follow their Examples. But as we allow thus much to their
Memories, so we cannot but condemn that Practice which Monsieur de Meaux seems
to have omitted, tho yet the chief thing that offends us; that they recommend
the Offerings which they make to God, through the Merits of their Saints which
they commemorate, and desire that by their Merits they may become available to
the Churches needs. As if Christ himself, whom they suppose to be the
Sacrifice, needed the Assistance of St. Bathildis or Potentiana, to recommend
him to his Father: Or, that the Merits of an Offering, which they tell us is
the very same with that of the Cross, should desire the joint Deserts of a St.
Martin to obtain our Forgiveness.

They who shall consider these things as they ought, will, we doubt not,
confess that we have some reason to complain, both that they derogate herein
from Christ's Merits, and attribute to their Saints more than they ought to do.
If this Paactice be reformed, our Complaint, as to this point, cease. If it
be not, in vain does Monsieur de Meaux endeavor to persuade us, that they only
name their Saints to give God thanks for their Excellencies, whilst their
public Practice avows, that they desire both the pardon of their Sins, and
even the acceptance of their very Sacrifices themselves, by their Mediation.

ARTICLE IV. Of Images and Relics.
What the Opinion of the Church of England is concerning the Worship of Images
and Relics, will need no long Declaration to show, they being joined by her in
the same Article with that of the Invocation of Saints beforementioned, Artic.
XXII.
and by consequence, submitted by her to the same Censure.

But then, as we before complained, that both the Practice of their Church in
the public Liturgies of it, and the approved Doctrine of their most reputed
Writers, should so far contradict what Monsieur de Meaux would have us think is
their only design in that Service; so we cannot but repeat the same Complaints
in this: That if all the use their Church would have made of Images and
Relics, be only to excite the more lively in their Minds the remembrance of
the Originals, not only the People should be suffered to fall into such gross
Mistakes, as it is undeniably evident they do, in their Worship of them; but
even their Teachers be permitted without any Reproof to confirm them in their
Errors.

Has St. Thomas and his Followers, nay, and even their Pontifical it self, ever
yet been censured by them, for maintaining in plain terms, that the Image of
the Cross ought to be worshipped with the same Worship as that Savior who
suffered on it? Have the Jesuits been condemned for teaching Men to swear by
it? Does not their whole Church upon Good Friday yet address her self to it in
these very dangerous words, Behold the Wood of the Cross! Come, let us adore
it. And do not their Actions agree with their Expressions, and the whole
Solemnity of that day's Service plainly show, that they do adore it in the
utmost propriety of the Phrase? Does she not pray to it, that in this time of
the Passion, it would strengthen the Righteous, and give Pardon to the Guilty?
Is the Hymn for the day of the Invention corrected, wherein they profess that
the Cross heals their Sicknesses, ties up the Devil, and gives them Newness of
Life; and thereupon desire it to save its Assembly, gathered together in its
honor? Is the manner of consecrating them changed, in which they entreat God
to bless the Image of the Cross which they there sanctify, that it may be for
the establishment of their Faith, an increase of their good Works, the
Redemption of their Souls, and their Protection against the cruel Darts of the
Enemy? That Christ would embrace this Cross, over which they pray, as he did
that upon which he suffered: That as by that he delivered the whole World from
its Guilt; so by the Merits of this, they who dedicate it may receive remission
of their Sins. In a word, that as many as bow down before it, may find health
both of their Souls and Bodies by it.

And is all this in good earnest no more than to excite more lively in our
minds the remembrance of Him that loved us, and delivered himself to the Death
for us, and to testify by some outward marks our acknowledgment of that
favor, by humbling our selves in presence of the Cross, to declare thereby our
submission to Him that was crucified.

Is not this rather, if not absolutely to fall into, yet certainly too nearly
to approach to that which Monsieur de Meaux himself confesses to be Idolatry,
viz. to trust in the Images as if there were some divinity or virtue joined to
them, and for which they not only show all imaginable marks of outward Worship,
by Kissings, Prostrations, and the like Ceremonies; but make as formal
Addresses to them, and that in the public Service of the Church, as to God
himself?

How this allowed practice can be reconciled with the prohibition of the
Council of Trent, Not to believe any Divinity or Virtue tied to their Images
for which they ought to be adored; nor to demand any Grace of them, nor place
any Trust or Confidence in them; Monsieur de Meaux may please to expound to us.
In the mean time, as we are so far from condemning the making of all sorts of
Images, that we think it not any Crime to have the Histories of the Gospel
carved or painted in our very Churches, which the Walls and Windows of several
of them do declare: As we publicly use the sign of the Cross in one of our
very Sacraments, and censure no Man for practicing it, only without
Superstition, on any other occasion: so we cannot but avow the Scandal that is
given us by those Doctrines and Practices before mentioned; and that we think
that Worship justly to be abolished which the Primitive Church abhorred, and
which at this day scandalizes not only so great a number of Christians, but
even our common Enemy the Jew and Turk: In a word, which is so far from being
commanded by God, that it needs many nice Distinctions to render it not
directly opposite to an express Prohibition; and is therefore if not downright
Idolatry to those who know how to direct their Intention aright, yet to the
Simple and Ignorant, that is, to the much greater number, and the most zealous
practioners of this Service, so very near it, that the Generality of the wisest
Papists, no less than We, complain of it.

For the honor that is due to Relics, no Protestant will ever refuse
whatever the Primitive Church paid them; or may be fit to express the Honor we
ought to retain for those Bodies that by Martyrdom have been made Sacrifices to
God Almighty. If this be all Mr. de Meaux desires of us, we are ready to
profess our Opinion, that we judge it to be neither offensive to God, nor fit to
be scrupled by any good Man.

We believe that according to the Circumstances of the Times, the Church may
testify this Honor by more or less outward Signs and Marks of Respect. And we
do with satisfaction read that Declaration of Mr. de Meaux, That we ought not
to be servilely subjected to these outward Ceremonies, but to be invited by
them to offer up to God that reasonable service, in Spirit and in Truth, which
he requires of us. And if this be the State of the Question, we confess the
Explication of it has taken away a great part of the difficulty.

But what then means the Council of Trent, to tell us, That we are not only to
honor them, but to worship them too? That by doing so, we shall obtain many
Benefits and Graces of God. That these sacred Monuments are not unprofitably
revered, but are to be sought unto for the obtaining their help and assistance;
to cure the Sick, to give Eyes to the Blind, Feet to the Lame, and even Life to
the Dead. How comes it to pass that their Church not only honors them, which
we could allow, but carries them in Processions, makes Offerings to them, gives
Indulgences to such as shall go to visit them; prescribes Pilgrimages to them,
swears by them, touches their Beads, or Hankerchiefs, with them to sanctify
them; thinks to obtain one Blessing by virtue of this Relick, another from
that; and the like superstitious usages, which we suppose we have good reason
with our Chnrch, to conclude to be fond things, vainly invented, Art. xxii.
and grounded upon no Authority of Holy Scripture, but indeed repugnant
thereunto.

When therefore all these Abuses which we have named, and which Monsieur de
Meaux seems content to allow with us to be such, shall be corrected: When in
the matter of Images, 1. The Hymns and Addresses that teach us, so contrary to
the Spirit of Christianity, to demand Graces of them, and to put our Trust in
them, shall be reformed; St. Thomas and his Abettors censured; and all other
Marks of an unwarrantable Worship be forbidden. 2. When the Pictures of God the
Father, and of the holy Trinity, so directly contrary both to the second
Commandment, and to St. Paul's Doctrine, shall be taken away, and those of our
Savior, and the blessed Saints be by all necessary Cautions rendered truly the
Books, not Snares of the Ignorant. When in points of Relics, 3. they shall be
declared to have no sanctifying Virtue in them: 4. Nor that they ought to be
sought to for any Assistance Spiritual or Temporal to be expected from them. 5.
When it shall be resolved to be no matter of Merit to go to visit them: 6. Nor
any more extravagant Indulgences be set forth for Pilgrimages unto them: When
all these things which Monsieur de Meaux passes over, and which yet are
undeniably their Practice and our Scandal, shall be corrected; Then will we
both believe and submit to the rest which he desires of us: We will honor the
Relics of the Saints as the Primitive Church did: we will respect the Images
of our Savior, and the Blessed Virgin: And as some of us now bow toward the
Altar, and all of us are enjoined to do so at the Name of the Lord Jesus; so
will we not fail to testify all due Respect to his Representation. In the mean
time, if the Outcries of their own Church at these Abuses cannot prevail with
them to redress them, yet at least they will confirm us in the Reformation we
have made of them; and whilst we find Hezekiah commended in the holy Scripture
for destroying the Brazen Serpent, tho made by God's express Command, and in
some sort deservedly honorable for that great Deliverance it brought to the
Jews, 2 King. 18.
Because the Children of Israel offered Incense unto it. We shall conclude our
selves to be by so much the more justifiable, in that the Images we have
removed were due only to the Folly and Superstition of Men, and have been more
scandalously abused, to a worser and greater dishonor of God.

ARTIC. V. Of Justification.
THE Doctrine of Justification is one of those Points that deserves our careful
Consideration; as being not only one of the chiefest of those Points wherein we
suppose the Church of Rome to have prevaricated the Faith, but as Monsieur de
Meaux remarks, one of the first that gave occasion to that Reformation that was
made from it.

It is not necessary to say to what an Extravagance the business of Pardons,
Indulgences, and other means of satisfying the Divine Justice, was arrived; and
how much more confidence the People generally put in the Inventions of Men,
than in the Merits and Satisfaction of Christ. If they have been somewhat
better instructed since, they may thank the Reformation for it: tho we fear all
the difference is, that they are somewhat more reserved in exposing these
Follies now, but yet still retain the Foundation of that Doctrine upon which
they are built.

We willingly allow Monsieur de Meaux this honor, that he has reduced the long
Decrees of the Council of Trent to a short and easy Debate; and proposed the
things which contain our Difference with such tenderness, as might invite us to
close with a great part of it, did not the Decrees of the Council seem too
plainly to refuse Monsieur de Meaux's Exposition of them.

We believe with him, That our Sins are freely forgiven by God's Mercy through
Christ; and that none of those things which precede our Justification, whether
our Faith, or our good Works, could merit this Grace.

We are persuaded that our Sins are not only covered, but are entirely done
away by the Blood of Jesus Christ.

We confess that the Righteousness of Jesus Christ is not only imputed, but
actually communicated to the Faithful, through the operation of the holy
Spirit, in so much that they are not only reputed, but made just by his Grace

We deny not that this Righteousness is a true Righteousness, even in the sight
of God; because that it is God who by Charity works in us: only we think it
withal such as is too weak to obtain for us the pardon of our Sins, which
Monsieur de Meaux seems content to confess with us.

We willingly acknowledge that our Righteousness is not perfect in this Life.
Whilst we are in the Body, the Flesh will lust against the Spirit, and in many
things we shall offend all. The Life of a Christian is a continued state of
Repentance: and he must be too much opiniated of himself that refuses to
conclude with St. Augustine; That our Righteousness in this Life, consists
rather in the Remission of our Sins, than in the Perfection of our Virtue.

In a word; the sum of our Difference as to this Point, seems to be this. Our
Church by Justification, understands only the Remission of our Sins: We
distinguish it from Sanctification, which consists in the production of the
Habit of Righteousness in us. We believe our Sins are pardoned only through the
Merits of Christ imputed to us. And for the rest, we say, that this Remission
of Sins is given only to those that repent; that is, in whom the holy Spirit
produces the Grace of Sanctification, for a true Righteousness and Holiness of
Life.

The Church of Rome comprehends under the notion of Justification, not only the
Remission of Sins, but also the production of that inherent Righteousness,
which we call Sanctification. They suppose with us, that our Sins are forgiven
only by the Satisfaction of Jesus Christ. But then as they make that inward
Righteousness a part of Justification too; so by consequence, they say our
Justification it self is wrought also by our own good Works.

It appears by this, that were these things clearly stated, and distinguished
the one from the other, the difference between us, considered only in the Idea,
would not be very great: And that we might safely allow whatsoever Monsieur de
Meaux has advanced upon this point, provided it be but well and rightly
explained; tho in some things he has expressed himself after a manner unusual
among us; and which we suppose not so entirely conformable to the Expressions
of holy Scripture.

The sum of all is this. Christ died, and by that Death satisfied the Justice
of God for us. God therefore through the Merits of his Son, freely forgives us
all our Sins, and offers us a Covenant of Mercy and Grace. By this Covenant,
founded only upon the Death and Merits of Christ, he sends us his Holy Spirit,
and calls us powerfully to Repentance. If we awake and answer this Call, then
God by his free Goodness justifies us; that is, he pardons our Sins past, gives
us Grace more and more to fulfill his Commands for the time to come; and if we
persevere in this Covenant, crowns us finally with Eternal Life. And all this
he is pleased to do, not for any thing which we have, or can perform, but only
through the Merits and Satisfaction of his Son by Faith applied to us.

This is the Foundation wherein Monsieur de Meaux seems content to agree with
us. We go on to see how the following Doctrine will stand upon this Foundation.

ARTIC. VI. Of Merits.
FOR what concerns the Merits of Good Works, we are content to accept of
Monsieur de Meaux's Exposition; That eternal life ought to be proposed to Man
as the Grace of God mercifully bestowed upon us through Jesus Christ, and as a
recompense that is faithfully rento their good Works, and to the merits of them
by virtue of Gods Promise.

The word Merit we acknowledge to have been very ancient in the Church; and tho
to prevent those mistakes which many in these latter ages have made an occasion
of that expression, we think it safer to discourse more reservedly of the
Merit, and press more strongly the Necessity of good Works: Yet if it be
understood so as Monsieur de Meaux expounds it, That all our Merit derives its
force only from the Merits of Jesus Christ, who works in us both to will and to
do; and when we have done, renders by the same Merits our good Works acceptable
to God, and available to our Eternal Life, we shall not be difficult to allow
of it.

If this be All the Church of Rome ascribes to Good works, that our
Justification proceeds absolutely from God's Bounty and Mercy, and but
accidentally only (in as much as God has tied himself by his Word and Promise
to reward them) from our own Performances; We need no long exhortations to
receive a Doctrine which we have always defended against such of the Church of
Rome as have opposed it, and are not yet, that we know of, censured for their
so doing.

That which we reject is, That we do as truly and properly merit Rewards when
we do well, as we do merit Punishment when we do ill: so says the Jesuit
Maldonate. Ezekiel. 18.20.
That our Good Works do merit Eternal Life condignly, not only by reason of
God's Covenant and Acceptance, De Justif. l. 5. c. 17. Vasquez in D. Th. 1, 2
ae q. 114. d. 214. c. 5.
but also by reason of the Work it self; so says Cardinal Bellarmine. All which
Vasquez sums up in the three following Conclusions; 1. That the Good Works of
just Persons are of themselves, without any Covenant or Acceptance, worthy of
the reward of Eternal Life, and have an equal value of Condignity to the
obtaining of Eternal Glory. 16. c. 7.
2. That there comes no accession of Dignity to the Works of just Persons by
the Merits or Person of Christ, which the same would not otherwise have, if
they had been done by the same Grace bestowed freely by God alone without
Christ. 3. 16. c. 8.
That God's Promise is indeed annexed to the Works of just Men, but yet belongs
no way to the Merit of them, but comes rather to the Works themselves, which
are already not only worthy, but meritorious also. From all which he draws this
remarkable Corallary; Disp. 222. c. 3. n. 30, 31.
Seeing the Works of just Men do merit Eternal Life, as an Equal Recompense and
Reward, there is no need that any other condign Merit, such as that of Christ,
should interpose, to the end that Eternal Life might be rendered to them. --
Wherefore we never pray to God that by the Merits of Christ, the Reward of
Eternal Life may be given to our worthy and meritorious Works; but that
Christ's Grace may be given to us, whereby we may be enabled worthily to merit
this Reward.

This is that Doctrine of good Works which we most justly do detest: And if the
Opinion of the Church of Rome be so directly opposite to it as Monsieur de
Meaux professes, we are a little surprised that no Index Expurgatorius, no
authentic Censure, has ever taken notice of so dangerous a Prevarication. But
contrary-wise, these are the great Authors of their Party, approved, embraced,
and almost adored, by the Greatest and most Learned of that Communion.

These are the Principles which we suppose to have been an unwarrantable
derogation to the Grace of God, and directly opposite to the nature of
Justification by Faith in Christ, before established. And tho this point was
far from being the only cause of our Separation from their Communion, yet let
Mr. de Meaux himself please to say, whether such a Doctrine of Merits as this
were not sufficient, if not to engage us wholly to leave a Church that taught
such things, yet at least to dissent from her in these Particulars.

ARTIC. VII, etc. Of Satisfactions, Purgatory, and Indulgences.
THE whole of this Point we think to be the advancement of a Doctrine grounded
upon no Authority of Holy Scripture, but on the contrary, derogatory to God's
Mercy in Jesus Christ, and, as the Doctrine of Merits before considered,
inconsistent with the nature of that Justification we before established.

Monsieur de Meaux was pleased there to tell us, of God's justifying us freely
for Christ's Merits: That our Sins are not only covered, but entirely done away
by his Mercy; and the Sinner not only reputed, but made just by his Grace. We
cannot but be troubled to see our selves so soon deprived of this excellent
Hope; and required our selves to satisfy God's Justice here, which he assured
us was entirely done for us by Christ before.

When Christ, says Monsieur de Meaux, who alone was able to make a sufficient
Satisfaction for our Sins, See above p. 66.
died for us; having by his Death abundantly satisfied for them, he became
capable of applying that Satisfaction to us after two very different manners;
Either by giving us an entire Forgiveness of our Sins, without reserving any
Pains for us to undergo for them; or in changing only a greater Pain into a
lesser, the Eternal Torments of Hell into a Temporal Punishment.

The former of these being the more entire, and the more agreeable to the
Divine Goodness, he accordingly makes use of it at our Baptism: But we suppose
he gives the second only to them who after Baptism fall again into sin; being
in a manner forced to it through the Ingratitude whereby they have abused his
former Gifts, so that they are to suffer some Temporal pain, tho the eternal be
remitted to them.

This is a very great Doctrine, and ought certainly to have some better Proof
of it, than barely We suppose. However it be, our Church has declared its self
of an opinion directly contrary: That since the absolute forgiving of sin is
Confessed to be the more perfect way, and more becoming the Divine Goodness;
and that God has never, that we know of, revealed any other; but rather has
constantly encouraged us to expect his Pardon after the largest and most ample
manner that it is possible for words to set forth; We are persuaded that
accordingly whenever God does pardon, it is in that way which is the most
suitable to his Divine goodness, and which alone he has declared to us, that
he does it entirely for Christ's merits, not for any Works or Sufferings of our
own.

In vain therefore does Monsieur de Meaux labor to reconcile this Doctrine
with Christ's absolute Satisfaction. We confess that we ought not to dispute
with God the manner of his Dispensations; Nor think it at all strange if he who
shows himself so easy at our Baptism, is afterward more difficult for those
sins which we commit being Baptized. There is nothing in all this but what we
could most readily allow of, were there but any tolerable Arguments to
establish the Doctrine that requires it.

But whilst this is so destitute of all Proof, that it is acknowledged to
introduce a manner of forgiveness neither so entire, nor so befitting Gods
mercy as a total remission of the Punishment, together with the Guilt; whilst
we have the Sufferings of Christ to rely upon, which are so far from needing
any addition of our own, that they are Confessed to have been Super-abundant to
whatever the divine Justice could require of us; Tho we can and do practice the
same Discipline for the other benefits of it, viz. To show our Indignation
against our selves that we have offended, and to keep us from sinning for the
future; yet we cannot be so forgetful of our dear Master, as to pretend to any
part in that Redemption, but only to enjoy the benefits of that forgiveness,
which by his alone Merits he has entirely purchased for us; nor do we see any
reason to believe that Gods Justice will require any more, than what has been
Super-abundantly paid upon the Cross for the Iniquities of mankind.

It Is true, Monsieur de Meaux tells us, That the necessity of this Payment does
not arise from any defect in Christ's Satisfaction, but from a certain Order
which God has established for a salutary Discipline, and to keep us from
offending.

This indeed were something, would either Monsieur de Meaux have been pleased
to show us this Establistment, or had not the Council of Trent declared more,
Council. Trid. Sess. 14. c. 8.
viz. That the Justice of God requires it; and that therefore the Confessors
should be charged to Proportion the Satisfaction to the Crime. From whence
Cardinal Bellarmine concludes, L. 1. de purg. c. 14.
That it is We who properly satisfy for our own sins, and that Christ's
Satisfaction serves only to make ours Valid. This is an Exposition somewhat
different from Monsieur de Meaux's, who will have the Church of Rome believe,
That we do not our selves satisfy in the least for our sins, but only apply
the infinite Satisfaction of Christ to them.

Upon the whole it appears, 1. That these Penances are not only a Salutary
discipline, but a Satisfaction too. 2. They change the Mercy of God into a
forgiveness, that is confessed neither to be in its self Perfect, nor so
becoming the Divine goodness as an entire remission of sin, the Punishment as
well as Guilt, would be. 3. Their Establishment depends only upon a humane
Supposition of its fitness; and derogates from the very Foundation of that
Covenant God has entered into with us by Christ, Hebr. c. 8. v. 12.
That he will be merciful to our unrighteousness, and our Sins and our
Iniquites he will remember no more. Upon all which accounts, tho we Practice
this Discipline for many other benefits of it, and wish it were universally
Established, not only in a more perfect manner than either in Ours or Their
Church it is, Catech, conc. Trid.
but even in a strictness equal to what they tell us it is fallen from; yet we
cannot believe, that by any of these things we are able to make a true and
proper Satisfaction to God for sin; which he only could do, who Himself bore
our sins in his own Body upon the Cross, and by that one suffering, Hebr. 10.14.
for ever perfected them that are Sanctified.

ARTICLE VII. Of INDVLGENCES.
THE Doctrine of Indulgences the Council of Trent has asserted only, not
explained: Monsieur de Meaux has stated it after a manner so favorable to us,
that I am persuaded he will find more in his own Church than in ours to oppose
his Doctrine.

It was the discipline of the Primitive Church, when the Bishops imposed severe
Penances on the Offenders, and that they were almost quite performed, if some
great cause of pity chanced to arrive, or an excellent Repentance, or danger of
death, or that some Martyr pleaded in behalf of the Penitent, the Bishop did
sometimes Indulge him, that is, Did relax the remaining part of his Penance,
and give him Absolution.

Monsieur de Meaux having this Pattern before his Eyes, frames the Indulgences
now used in the Church of Rome exactly according to it. When the Church; says
he, imposes upon sinners hard and laborious Penances, and that with, Humility
they undergo them, this we call satisfaction; and when having regard either to
the fervor of the Penitents, or to some other good works which she prescribes,
she relaxes some part of the Punishment yet remaining; This is called
Indulgence.

But to pass by for the present those abuses that are every day made of these
Indulgences, and which both the Council and Monsieur de Meaux seem willing to
have redressed; such essential differences we conceive there are between the
Indulgences of the Primitive, and those of the Roman Church, that tho we
readily enough embrace the One, yet we cannot but renounce and condemn the
Other.

In the Primitive Church these Indulgences were matters of mere discipline, as
the Penances also were; the One to correct the sinner, and to give others
caution that they might not easily offend; the Other to encourage the Penitent
to honor the Martyr that interposed for his Forgiveness, or to prevent his
dying without Absolution. In the Church of Rome they are founded upon an Error
in Doctrine; that as their. Penance is not matter of Discipline, only to
correct the sinner, but to be undergone as a satisfaction to be made to God for
the sin; so their Indulgence is not given as Monsieur de Meaux expounds it,
upon any consideration had of the fervor of the Penitent, to admit him to
Absolution which he has already received, but by the application of the Merits
of their Saints who they suppose have undergone more temporal punishments than
their sins have deserved, to take off that pain, which notwithstanding their
Absolution, the sinner should otherwise have remained liable to.

In the Primitive Church the Bishop received the Penitent to Absolution, and
the exemplariness of his Repentance, or the intercession of the Martyr that
supplicated for him, was the only consideration they had for the Indulgence. In
the Church of Rome the Indulgence is to be had from the Pope only, in whose
hands the merits of their Saints lie, the overplus of which are, they say, the
Treasure of the Church, to be dispensed upon all occasions to such as want, and
upon such terms as his Holiness shall think fit to propose.

In the Primitive Church these Indulgences were very rare, given only upon some
special occasions, and the Bishop never relaxed the remainder of the Penance he
had imposed, till the Penitent had performed a considerable part of it, and
showed by his contrition that it had obtained the effect of bringing him to a
sense of his sin, and a hearty repentance for it, which was the end they
designed by all. In the Roman Church they are cried about the Streets, hung up
in Tables over every Church Door, prostituted for Money, offered to all
Customers, for themselves or for their Friends; for the dead as well as the
living; and to visit three Churches, say a Prayer before this Altar, at the
other Saints Monument, in a third Chapel, is without more ado, through the
extraordinary Charity that Church has for sinners, declared sufficient to take
off whatever such Punishment is due for all the sins of a whole Life.

And here then let Monsieur de Meaux in conscience tell us; Is all this no more
than to release some part of the remaining Penance, in consideration of the
fervor of the Penitent in performing the rest? Such Pardons as these we do
certainly with Reason conclude, To be fond things, See our 22d Artic.
vainly invented, and grounded upon no Authority of Holy Scripture, but indeed
repugnant to Gods Word. But for the rest, We profess our selves so far from
being enemies to the Ancient Discipline of the Church, that we heartily wish to
see it revived; And whenever the Penances shall be reduced to their former
practice, we shall be ready to give or receive such an Indulgence as Monsieur
de Meaux has described, and as the Primitive Ages of the Church allowed of.

ARTICLE VIII. Of PVRGATORY.
BUT the Temporal Pains which they suppose due to sin, has yet another Error
consequent upon it. That since every man must undergo them according to the
proportion of his sins, if any one chance to dye before he has so done, he
cannot pass directly into Heaven, but must undergo these punishments first in
the other Life, and the place where these Punishments are undergone, they call
Purgatory.

So that the Doctrine then of Purgatory, relies upon that Satisfaction which we
our selves are to make for our sins, besides what Christ has done for us: And
according to the measure that that is either true or false, certain or
uncertain, this must be so too: Since therefore Monsieur de Meaux tells us
only, that the Church of Rome supposes the former to be true, they can only
suppose the latter in like manner; and therefore till they are able certainly
to assure us of that, we shall still have reason to doubt of this.

That the Primitive Church from the very second Century, made Prayers for the
dead, we do not deny; But that these Prayers were to deliver them out of
Purgatory, this we suppose Monsieur de Meaux himself will not avow; it being
certain that they were made for the best Men, for the Holy Apostles, the
Martyrs and Confessors of the Church, nay for the Blessed Virgin her self, all
which at the same time they thought in happiness, and who the Papists
themselves tell us never touched at Purgatory.

Many were the private Opinions which the particular Christians of old had
concerning the Reason and Benefit of Praying for the dead. Some then, as we do
at this day, only gave thanks to God for their Faith and their Examples. Others
prayed for them, either for the Bodies Resurrection, or for their acquitting at
the final Judgment, as supposing it to be no way unfit to pray to God for those
very Blessings which he has absolutely promised and resolved to give. Some
thought an Increase of Glory might be obtained to the Righteous by their
Prayers. All believed this, that it testified their hope of them, and
manifested their Faith of that Future Resurrection which they waited for; and
in the mean time maintained a kind of Fellowship and Communion between the
Members of Christ yet alive, and those who were departed only, not lost by
death.

But then it is to be observed, that when they most ordinarily prayed for the
dead, yet was there nothing determined as to this Point; all was left to the
Piety and Opinion of particular men, nor durst they absolutely resolve whether
the dead received any benefit by them; as both the learned of the Church of
Rome themselves Confess, and the Writings of Primitive Antiquity, even to St.
Augustine himself, undoubtedly show.

Now as there is none of us that will condemn the Charity of any man, to pray,
or fast, or afflict himself for the Pardon and Forgiveness of his Friends, his
Country, or his Church, so it be done without any fond Opinion of Merit or
Satisfaction, and to hope too by such Prayers to obtain God's mercy for them:
So if any one will put up his particular Requests for the dead too, for any of
those ends for which the Primitive Christians did, we shall not condemn him.
Only let not that be made an Article of our Faith which we can never be assured
of, and which when it was most Practiced, was received only as a private
Opinion, and in a Sense far different from what is now asserted; And for the
rest We shall not refuse to Consent to any Liberty whereby Peace may be
obtained, and our free Justification by Faith in Christ not injured.

PART II. OF THE SACRAMENTS.
ARTICLE IX. Of the Sacraments in General.
THE Doctrine of the Sacraments has always been esteemed one of the most
considerable obstacles to our union with the Church of Rome. We cannot imagine
why Monsieur de Meaux should insinuate as if our disputes about these, except
it be in the point of the Eucharist, were not so great as about other matters,
unless it be to serve for an excuse for his own passing so lightly over them,
or to make us less careful in examining their Doctrine.

The Sacraments of the New Testament, in that proper sense in which we now take
the word, we have always looked upon to be not only Holy Signs to represent and
confirm to us the Grace of God, but also effectual Tokens of his good Will to
us, by which he does work invisibly in us, and strengthen and confirm our Faith
in him.

To obtain the benefit of the Holy Sacraments, we cannot believe it to be
enough that we have no ill disposition, but do suppose that it is a sufficient
Obstacle if we have not a good one. Artic. 25. of the Chapter of En.
We confess that the Faith of the Church, and those who present them to
Baptism, is all that is required to prepare Infants to receive the spiritual
Regeneration which that Sacrament confers. But for those who by age are capable
of it, we suppose both in Baptism and in the holy Eucharist, an actual faith of
Gods Promise annexed to the outward signs which we receive, to be indispensably
necessary for the partaking of their effects.

And tho if the rest be agreed, we shall not desire to determine any man's
belief, as to the manner how the Sacraments confer that Grace which God has
promised by them; yet we judge it more agreeable to the Analogy of our Faith to
say, That upon the performance of the outward Ceremony, God bestows the inward
Blessing; than that the Blessing is conferred by Virtue of the Words which are
pronounced, and the action which is done to us, as Monsieur de Meaux has
expounded it.

We do not by this at all take off from the necessity of the outward signs. We
confess, That besides the inward Preparation, there is required for our
Sanctification a special operation of the holy Spirit, and an application of
Christ's Merits by the means of the holy Sacraments. This we are so persuaded
of, that we profess them to be So our Chu. Catechism.
necessary to Salvation, insomuch that whosoever either carelessly neglects, or
presumptuously despises the use of them, will in vain expect it by any other
means.

For the number of the Sacraments, we acknowledge only two as generally
necessary to Salvation; and are surprised to see the Council of Trent damning
all such as will not receive a number, which neither has the Scripture any
where declared; nor was it, that we know of, till the very 12th Century ever
heard of in the Church. De Cerm. Ec. etc. l. 1. c. 12.
Hugo de St. Victor is the first that we can find it in, 1130 Years after
Christ; Lib. 4 Sent. Did. 2.
Lombard and the Schoolmen followed him. Pope Ann. 1439. in Conc. Flor.
Eugenius in his instructions to the Armenians gave yet more countenance to it;
but that all those Ceremonies which the Church of Rome now receives are truly
and properly Sacraments, and that there be neither more nor less than Seven,
never any one absolutely determined, till the Council of Trent first
Canonically decreed it, and commanded the Church under an Anathema to receive
it.

The special consideration of their five pretended Sacraments, will give us an
opportunity more particularly to establish that number we our selves propose.

This presumption of the truth we must not omit here, That not only the Ancient
Fathers of the Church when they speak of the Sacraments properly as we now do,
mention only Baptism and the Lords Supper; but even the Papists themselves who
establish more, yet confess these to be so far the Principal, that our own
Article says but little more, than what their greatest Schoolmen have
voluntarily confessed.

ARTICLE X. Of BAPTISM.
HOW strict our Church is in maintaining the necessity of Baptism, the very
Office by which we do administer it, sufficiently shows. See our Office Of Pub.
Bapt
We declare that all men are conceived and born in sin, and that none can enter
into the Kingdom of God, except he be regenerate and born anew of Water, and of
the Spirit. This is the Law of Christ which the Eternal Truth has established;
and whosoever shall presume to oppose it, let him be Anathema.

But now as all other Laws, so this of Christ, must, we think, be interpreted
according to the rules of natural Equity. The Ancient Church constantly
professed her belief, that Martyrdom excused the defect of Baptism. Many of the
Papists themselves suppose, that the desire of it, when by some unavoidable
necessity the Sacrament its self cannot be obtained, shall be reputed for it.
Monsieur de Meanx insinuates that the Acts of Faith, Hope, and Charicy, may
supply the want of it. Ep. 70. if it be indeed his.
St. Bernard plainly concludes the same, If, says he, a man desirous of Baptism
be suddenly cut off by Death, in whom there wanted neither found Faith, nor
devout Hope, nor sincere Charity; God be Merciful unto me, and pardon me if I
err, but verily of such a Ones Salvation in whom there is no other defect but
his faultless lack of Baptism, despair I cannot, nor induce my mind to think
his Faith void, his Hope confounded, and his Charity fallen to nothing, only
because he has not-that which not contempt, but impossibility withholds.

When therefore so many ways have been allowed to excuse the defect of Baptism,
tho our Church has rather taken all imaginable care that Infants shall not die
without it, than presumed rashly to determine what shall become of them if they
do; yet we cannot but condemn the uncharitableness of the Church of Rome in "
Excluding them from all Part in Jesus Christ, and denying that Mercy to a
tender and impotent Age, which they so liberally extend to those of Riper years.

If not the Want but the Contempt of this Sacrament be the only thing that is
damnable, to be sure no Contempt of Baptism can be in them. If the desire of
Baptism in those that are capable of it, is by many of the Church confessed to
be reputed for Baptism; why shall we not hope that God who is all merciful,
will accept the Desire of the Church and of their Parents in their behalf, who
by their Age are not capable to have any of their own. By Monsieur de Meaux,
see before.
If Faith, Hope and Charity, as Monsieur de Meaux himself implies, may excuse
them who actually have these Graces, tho they want this Sacrament; why may not
that Faith, that Hope, that Charity of the Church, which being imputed to them
renders them capable of Baptism, be as effectual to stand instead of it to
them, as their own proper Faith for Others, if a necessity which could not be
avoided prevents it?

In a word, Since such is the Mercy of God, that to things altogether
impossible he binds no man; but where what he Commands cannot be performed,
accepts of our Will to do it instead of the Deed. 2. Seeing God's Grace is
not so absolutely tied to the Sacraments, but that many exceptions have been,
and are still Confessed to be sufficient to obtain it, without the external
Application of them: Seeing, 1 Cor. 7.
3. St. Paul has told us that the Seed of faithful Parentage is Holy from the
very Birth, as being born within the Covenant of Grace; Tho we determine
nothing, yet we think it the part of Charity, not only to take all the Care we
can to Present our Infants to Baptism whilst they live, but if by any
unavoidable necessity they should die without it, See Cassan. Consult. Art. 9.
and de Bapt. Infant. Where he cites many others of the C. of R. of the same
Opinion.
to Hope well of them: Remembering that Judgment of God, Exodus 4. who when Moses
neglected to Circumcise his Son, spared the Child in that he was innocent, but
sought to kill Moses for his Carelessness in the Omission.

A necessity therefore of Baptism we constantly maintain; but absolutely to
determine that all those who die without it, are excluded from the Grace of
Christ, neither will Monsieur de Meaux presume to do of Men, nor dare we much
less to affirm it of Infants. The Lutherans condem the Anabaptists for refusing
Baptism altogether to Children, which we also condemn in them. But that
therefore they make no allowance for extraordinary Cases, where both the Church
and the Parents desired to have Baptized them, only that some unavoidable
Accident prevented it, neither did Cassander believe, Consult. Art. 9.
nor do the terms of their Confession at all require. For the Calvinists, so
far were they from being the Authors of this charitable opinion toward Infants
dying unbaptized, That many of the most Eminent men of the Church of Gerson.
Gabriel Biel, Cajetan, and others.
Rome have long before them maintained the same.

To conclude, If Monsieur de Meaux himself does in good earnest believe the
danger so great as he pretends; may he then please to consider, What we are to
Judge of those who in so many places have not left any Ministers at all to
confer this Sacrament. For our parts we freely declare their hazard to be
infinitely greater than either the Childrens or their Parents; who are so far
from that indifference Monsieur de Meaux most injuriously charges them with,
that in places where public Ministers reside, that they have the opportunity
to do it, they fail not with all imaginable Care to Present them in the
Ambassadors Chapels to Baptism, if they have but the least apprehension that
they are not in a Condition to be carried to their own Temples.

ARTICLE XI. Of CONFIRMATION.
TO clear our way to that particular Examination that is necessary of the
following pretended Sacraments of the Roman Chruch, it will be necessary to
observe, that by their own Confession these three things are absolutely
required to the Essence of a true Sacrament. 1. Christ's Institution. 2. An
outward and visible Sign. 3. An inward and spiritual Grace by Christ's promise
annexed to that Sign.

We cannot but admire, that neither in the Council of Trent, or in the
Catechism made by its Order, is there any Attempt to prove either of these from
the Holy Scripture as to the Point of Confirmation. It was so much the more
necessary to have done this, in that Many of the greatest Note in the Roman
Church had denied the Divine Institution of it; and some of them were approved
by the Holy See its self that did it. The outward Sign has been none of the
least Controversies that have exercised their own Pens: and indeed since they
have laid aside that of Imposition of hands which they confess the Apostles
used; it was but reasonable to have shown us some Authority for that other they
have established in its stead. What Monsieur de Meaux expounds, is a clear
Vindication of our Practice, but defends nothing of their own Doctrine.

That we think it to have been an Ancient custom in the Church, and which the
very Apostles themselves Practiced, to lay hands on those that had been
Baptized; and in imitation whereof we our selves at this day do the like, the
Practice of our Church sufficiently declares.

We Confess that the use of Chrism in Confirmation was very Ancient, yet such
as we deny to have been Apostolical. We do not our selves use it, yet were that
all the difference between us, we should be far from judging those that did.

The Discipline of our Church allows none that is not of the Episcopal Order to
Confirm. And for the benefit of it, as the Bishop prays to God for his Holy
Spirit to assist us in the way of Virtue and Religion, to Arm us against
Temptation, and to enable us to keep our Baptismal Covenant which we then (our
selves repeat, and) in the Presence of the Church-openly ratify and confirm:
So we Piously hope that the Blessing of the Holy Spirit descends upon us,
through his Prayer, for all these great Ends; both to strengthen the Grace we
already have, and to increase it in us to a more plentiful degree.

ARTICLE. XII. Of Penance and Confession.
FOR Penance and Confession, we wish our Discipline were both more strictly
required, and more duly observed than it is. The Canons of our Church do
perhaps require as much as the Primitive Christians themselves did: and it is
more the decay of Piety in the People, than any want of Care in her, that they
are not as well and regularly Practiced.

We do not believe Penance to be a Sacrament after the same manner that Baptism
and the Holy Eucharist are; because neither do we find any Divine Command for
it, nor is there any Sign in it established by Christ, to which his Grace is
annexed. We suppose that if the Ancient Church had esteemed it any thing more
than a part of Christian Discipline, they would not have presumed to make such
changes in it, as in the several Ages it is evident they did.

The Primitive Christians interpreting those places of Mat. 18.18. John 20.23.
St. Matthew and St. John which Monsieur de Meaux mentions, of public
Discipline, and to which we suppose with them they principally at least, if not
only refer, at first Practiced no other. For private faults, they exhorted
their Penitents to Confess them to God, and unless some particular
Circumstances required the Communication of them to the Priest, plainly
signified that that Confession was not only in its self sufficient, but in
effect was more agreeable to Holy Scripture, than any other.

If the Conscience indeed were too much burdened by some Great fault; or that
the Crime committed was notoriously Scandalous, then they advised a Confession
to the Priest too. But this was not to every Priest, nor for him just to hear
the Confession, and then without more ado to say I absolve thee; They
prescribed in every Church some Wise Physician of the Soul on purpose for this
great Charge, that might pray with the Penitent; might direct him what to do to
obtain Gods favor; might assist him in it; and finally, after a long
Experience, and a severe Judgment, give him Absolution.

This was the Practice of the Eastern Church; till upon occasion of a certain
scandal, Nectarius first began to weaken it in his Church at Constantinople;
and St. J. Chrysostom his Successor seconded him in it. They reduced the
Practice to what it had been in the Beginning; that open and scandalous Sins
should be openly punished by the public Discipline of the Church, and the
private be Confessed only to God Almighty.

Yet still the public Confession remained in the Practice of the Western
Church. Pope Leo I. to take away the occasions of Fear and Shame that kept many
from the exercise of it, first ordered, that it should be sufficient to Confess
to God and the Priest only; which is the first plausible Pretense offered by
them for Auricular Confession.

Thus this Practice, now set up for a Sacrament instituted by our Savior, and
absolutely necessary to obtain God's pardon, first began. But the performance
of it was yet left to every Man's liberty. About 1215 Years after Christ, the
Council of Lateran first Commanded it to be of necessary observance: But we do
not find that till the Council of Trent in the last Age, it was ever required
to be received absolutely as a Sacrament of Divine Institution, and necessary
to Salvation.

This short View of the Practice of Antiquity in this point, may be sufficient
to show, that unless it were the public power of the Church to censure open
and scandalous Offenders, which was the Key of Discipline our Blessed Savior
left to it; for the rest, several Churches and Ages had their several
Practices. They advised private Confession as upon many accounts which Monsieur
de Meaux Remarks, and which we willingly allow, very useful to the Penitent:
but it was not for above a 1000 Years ever looked upon as absolutely necessary,
nor by Consequence as Sacramental.

The Church of England refuses no sort of Confession either public or private,
which may be any way necessary to the quieting of men's Consciences; or to the
exercising of that Power of binding and loosing, which our Savior Christ has
left to his Church.

We have our Penitential Canons for public Offenders: We exhort men if they
have any the least doubt or scruple, nay sometimes tho they have none, but
especially before they receive the Holy Sacrament, to Confess their sins. We
propose to them the benefit not only of Ghostly Advice how to manage their
Repentance, but the great comfort of Absolution too, as soon as they shall have
completed it.

Our form of Absolution after the manner of the Eastern Church at this day, and
of the Universal Church for above 1200 Years, is Declarative rather than
Absolute. Whilst we are unable to search the Hearts of men, and thereby
infallibly to discern the sincerely contrite, from those that are not; we think
it Rashness to pronounce a definitive Sentence in God's Name, which we cannot
be sure that God will always confirm.

When we visit our Sick, we never fail to exhort them to make a special
Confession of their sins to him that Ministers to them: And when they have done
it, the Absolution is so full, that the Church of Rome its self could not
desire to add any thing to it.

For the rest; We think it an unnecessary Rack to men's Consciences to oblige
them where there is no scruple, to reveal to their Confessor every the most
secret fault, even of Wish or Desire, which the Church of Rome exacts: Nor dare
we pronounce this Discipline Sacramental, and necessary to Salvation; so that a
contrite Sinner, who has made his Confession to God Almighty, shall not receive
a Pardon, unless he repeat it to the Priest too.

This we must beg leave with assurance to say is directly contrary to the
Tradition of the Church, and to many plain and undoubted places of Holy
Scripture. And if this be all our Reformation be guilty of, That we advise not
that which may Torment and Distract, but is no way apt to settle men's
Consciences; nor require that as indispensably necessary to Salvation, which we
find no where commanded by God as such, we assure Monsieur de Meaux we see no
cause at all either to regret the Loss, or to be ashamed of the Change.

ARTICLE XIII. Of Extreme Unction.
OF all those pretended Sacraments of the Roman Church that have no foundation
in holy Scripture, this seems to stand the fairest for it. Here is both an
outward and visible Sign, and an inward and spiritual Grace tied to it.
Insomuch that Monsieur de Meaux himself, who never attempted to say any thing
of it in the two foregoing Instances, yet fails not to put us in mind of it in
this.

To interpret rightly that place of St. 1 James 5.6, 14.13.
James which is alleged to prove it, we must remark, that anointing with Oil
was one of those Ceremonies used by the Apostles in working their miraculous
Cures, Mark 6.13. They cast out devils, says the Evangelist, and anointed many
sick persons with Oil, and cured them. Sometimes they used only Imposition of
hands, and sometimes they did it without either.

Together with these outward signs they usually added Prayer too, some
Invocation at least in the name of Jesus Christ, as the more substantial and
more effectual Assistance.

So that St. James's Direction there, If any man be sick let him call for the
Elders of the Church, and let them pray over him, anointing him with Oil in the
name of the Lord, and the Prayer of Faith shall save the sick, and the Lord
shall raise him up; referring as is evident to those miraculous cures which the
Apostles and their Successors in the Primitive Church wrought by such
anointing: We look upon it, that the advice, in as much as it belonged to that,
could neither have been the Institution of a Sacrament at all; and that
together with the miraculous power of healing, it is now long since ceased in
the Church.

Monsieur de Meaux ought not to refuse this Interpretation: Vid. Sacram. Grge.
p. 66 Et Rursus 251. and serqq. Menard. annot. 3 MSS. and alia ejusd. opin.
The Ancient Rituals of the Roman Church for above 800 Years after Christ, show
that they esteemed this to be the meaning of it; they understand it plainly of
bodily Cures, Cajet. Annot. in loc.
and Cardinal Cajetan himself freely confesses that it can belong to no other.

Our Savior and his Apostles, when they thus miraculously healed the infirmity
of the Body, at the same time forgave the sin of the soul too; For this cause
St James adds, " And if he have committed sins, they shall be forgiven him.

Tho this extraordinary Power be now ceased both in the One and the other kind,
yet we still endeavor to perform whatever we are capable of on these
occasions; We send for the Elders of the Church when we are sick, they pray
over us; if we stand charged with any private sins, or public Censures, we
confess them to them, and they fail not by their Absolution, as far as in them
lies, to forgive us.

This is all, we think, is now remaining for us to fulfill of what this Text
requires; We anoint not our sick for the recovery of their bodily health, as
St. James here prescribed, because the miraculous power of healing, to which
that Ceremony ministered, is ceased in the Church. We pray over them if it
please God for the recovery of their present Health, but especially for their
Eternal Salvation: We exercise the power of the Keys to the forgiveness of
their sins, because the benefit of this is the same now that ever it was;
Christ's Promise remains, and whilst we piously make use of the same means, we
doubt not but it shall be to the like Effect.

ARTICLE XIV. Of MARRIAGE.
FOR the point of Marriage, Monsieur de Meaux says nothing but what we
willingly allow of: We deny that it is a Lomb. of our side. See Cassand. Con.
Sacrament after the same manner that Baptism and the holy Eucharist are,
because it both wants an outward sign to which by Christ's Promise a Blessing is
annexed; and is so far from being generally necessary to Salvation, as they
are, and as we suppose all true and proper Sacraments ought to be, that the
Church of Rome has thought fit to deny one of the most considerable parts of
their Communion altogether the use of it.

ARTICLE XV. Of Holy Orders.
THE Imposition of Hands in holy Orders, being accompanied with a Blessing of
the Holy Spirit, may perhaps upon that account be called a kind of Particular
Sacrament. Yet since that Grace which is thereby conferred, whatever it be, is
not common to all Christians, nor by consequence any part of that foederal
Blessing which our Blessed Savior has purchased for us; but only a separation
of him who receives it to a special Employ; we think it ought not to be
esteemed a common Sacrament of the whole Church, as Baptism and the Lords
Supper are.

The outward sign of it we confess to have been usually Imposition of hands,
and as such we our selves observe it; Yet as we do not read that Christ himself
instituted that sign, much less tied the promise of any certain Grace to it; so
Monsieur de Meaux may please to consider, that there are many of his own
Communion, that do not think it to be essential to holy Orders, nor by
consequence the outward sign of a Sacrament in them.

We confess that no man ought to exercise the Ministerial Office till he be
first consecrated to it. We believe that it is the Bishops part only to Ordain.
We maintain the distinction of the several Orders in the Church; and tho we
have none of those below a Deacon, because we do not read that the Apostles had
any, yet we acknowledge the rest to have been anciently received in the Church,
and shall not therefore raise any controversy about them.

ARTICLE XVI. Of the EVC HARIST. And first of the Explication of those Words,
This is my Body.
IN our entry upon this Point, we cannot but testify our just regret, That
this holy Sacrament which was designed by our Blessed Savior not only to be
the greatest assurance of his love to us, but the strongest Engagements of our
Charity to one another, should have become the chiefest subject of our
contentions, and widened that breach which it ought to have closed.

Monsieur de Meaux who grounds his opinion of the Corporeal presence of Christ
in this Holy Eucharist, upon the words of Institution, which he contends ought
to be literally understood, yet proposes two Cases wherein he seems to allow
it might have been lawful to forsake the Letter. We will join issue with him
upon his own terms, and show, 1. That there are such grounds in those words for
a figurative interpretation, as naturally lead to it. 2. That when we come to
consider the Intention of our Savior in this holy Sacrament, we are yet more
strongly confirmed in it.

It is confessed by the greatest Authors of the Church of Rome, that if the
relative This in that proposition, This is my Body, refers to that Bread which
our Savior Christ held in his hand at the time when he spoke those Words, the
natural repugnancy there is between the two things affirmed of one another,
Bread and Christ's Body, will necessarily require the figurative interpretation.
For this is impossible, says Gratian de Consecrat. d. 2. c. 55.
Gratian, That Bread should be the Body of Christ. It cannot be, says L. 3. de
Euch. c. 19. SS. Primum.
Card. Bellarmine, That that proposition should be true, the former part
whereof designeth Bread, the later the Body of Christ. Id. ib. l. 1. c. 1.
So that if the Sense be, This Bread is the Body of Christ, either it must be
taken Figuratively thus, This Bread signifies the Body of Christ, or it is
plainly absurd and Impossible. The whole difficulty therefore as to our first
point consists in this, Whether our Savior Christ when he said, This is my
Body, meant any thing else to be his Body, than that Bread which was before him.

Now for this, the Connection of his discourse seems to us an evident
Demonstration. Our Savior Christ took Bread, and gave Thanks, and brake it,
and gave it to his Disciples, Luke 22.19.
saying, Take, Eat, This is my Body which is given for you; do this in
Remembrance of me.

For what did he demonstrate here, and say was his Body, but that which he gave
to his Disciples? What did he give to his Disciples, but that which He brake?
What brake he, but that which he took? And St. Luke says expressly he took Bread.

What Jesus took in his hands, that He blessed: what He blessed, the same He
brake and gave to his Disciples: What he gave to his Disciples, of that he
said, This is my Body: But Jesus, says the Text, took Bread; of the Bread
therefore he said, This is my Body.

In a word; Forasmuch as the Papists themselves believe the Bread to be turned
into the substance of Christ's Body, because Christ said This is my Body:
Either those words refer to the Bread, and then by their own Confession they
will require our Interpretation; or if they do not, it is evident that then
from these words they can have no Grounds to conclude their own pretended
change.

So necessarily do both the words themselves and their own Confession, lead us
to the Exposition which we make of them. And what these prepare us to receive,
the same, 2dly. The Intention of our Savior in this Holy Sacrament, does yet
more strongly confirm to us.

When God delivered the Children of Israel out of Egypt, Excd. 12.
he instituted the Passover to be a continual Remembrance of that great
deliverance. In like manner our Blessed Savior being now about to work out a
much greater deliverance for us, by offering up himself upon the Cross for our
Redemption, he designed by this Sacrament to continue the memory of this
Blessing, 1 Cor. 11.26.
That as often as we eat of this Bread, and drink of this Cup, we might show
forth the Lords Death till his Coming.

That this Sacrament instituted for the like end which the Passover had been,
and now for ever to succeed in its place, might be both the better understood,
and the easier received by them, it pleased our Blessed Lord to accommodate
himself as near as was possible to the Ceremonies and Phrases they had before
been used to. He retained the Symbols, and even the Expressions they had so
long been acquainted with; only he changed the application of them to a new and
more excellent Remembrance.

In the Jewish Passover, the Master of the House took Bread, and brake it, and
gave it to them, saying, This is the Bread of Affliction, which our Fathers eat
in Egypt. In this holy Sacrament, our Savior after the very same manner, took
Bread, and brake it, and gave it to them, saying, " This is my Body which is
broken for you; Do this in remembrance of Me.

Now as it is evident, that that Bread which the Jews every Year took, and
brake, and said, This is the Bread of Affliction which our Fathers eat in
Egypt, was not that very Bread which their Ancestors so many Generations before
had eaten there; but was designed only to be the Type or Figure of it: so
neither could our Saviors Disciples to whom he spoke, and who, as being Jews,
had so long been acquainted with that Phrase, ever believe, That the Bread
which he held in his hand, which he brake and gave them, saying, This is my
Body which is broken for you, Do this in remembrance of me, was the very,
actual, real Body of Christ which they saw before them at the Table. They
understood it, no doubt, to be the Type and Figure of that Body which was now
about to be broken for them; as that Bread which the Master of the Feast, after
the very same manner, was wont to break to them, was the Type of that Bread of
Affliction which their Fathers had eaten in Egypt.

Nor does the Phrase, My Body, at all weaken, but rather confirm this Idea, as
being the ordinary expression among the Jews, whereby they called the Passover,
The body of the Passover, The body of the Paschal Lamb. It was therefore used
here by our Savior with that allusion, more expressly to signify, 1 Cor. 5.7.
that he was the true Passover now to be sacrificed for us, by whose Blood we
were to be delivered from the destroying Angel, and for the Remembrance
whereof, we were therefore to keep this Ceremony, as the Jews had done their
Passover for the other.

This we suppose to be the undoubted Interpretation of this place. Monsieur de
Meaux ought the less to except against it, in that it was the original remark,
not of any Protestant, or of any other Party of Christians differing from the
Church of Rome in this matter, but was objected to them by the very Jews
themselves long before the Reformation, upon the same account. They showed by
it, that in the Doctrine of this pretended Change, the Church of Rome had
evidently opposed the design of our Saviors Iinstituion, and advanced an
Interpretation, which no one accustomed to the Jewish Notions, as the Apostles
were, could ever have understood to be his meaning.

The design of this discourse permits me not to proceed to any more particular
vindication of this Exposition, nor to mention many other Arguments more
usually proposed; and wherein it has clearly been shown, that they have not
only the holy Scripture, and the design of our Blessed Savior in this
Sacrament, but Sense, Reason, Antiquity, whatsoever is able to furnish an
Argument, all unanimously against them: It remains only to examine whether what
Monsieur de Meaux has proposed, be any thing more reasonable, that so we may go
on to the Consequences established upon this foundation.

Where first we cannot conceive why Monsieur de Meaux designing to establish
the Exposition of the holy Eucharist upon the Analogy which it has to the
Jewish Sacrifices, should fly off to the nature of their Sacrificesin general,
where the parallel is neither so clear, nor so uncontroverted, as to produce
any necessary consequence from the allusion. It would certainly have been more
reasonable to compare it, as we have done, with that particular Sacrifice of
the Passover to which it succeeded, and from which therefore, if any, must be
showed the design of it. But we will clear the whole difficulty in a reflection
or two, and prove, that what has been offered to us as a convincing Argument,
is, upon a nearer view, a mere fallacy.

And 1. We desire it may be observed, That the Peace Offerings under the Law
were designed as an acknowledgment on the peoples part, for those temporal
blessings which it pleased God to bestow upon them. And because after the
sacrifice of Isaac, God first entered into the Covenant with Abraham, and
promised him his Blessing, and to be his God, Genesis 22.16, etc.
and the God of his Seed after him; it seems to have been further their
intention in all these Sacrifices, to call to remembrance that Offering of
Isaac as the foundation of all those blessings for which these Sacrifices were
appointed as a testimony of their Gratitude.

2. That tho the Passover, like the Sacrifice of the Cross, was first offered
as a sin-offering for the delivery of the firstborn in the land of Egypt; yet
that yearly remembrance of it, which God afterward established, was always
esteemed a Peace Offering; and indeed, the perpetual order of their Sacrifices
clearly demonstrates that it could be no other.

So that the Parallel therefore, for the explaining the nature of the holy
Eucharist, must be this:

1. That as the Jews ate of their Peace Offerings in General, to call to mind
the Sacrifice of Isaac, and give God thanks for t hose blessings which they
received by it, and of that of the Passover in particular, in memory of Gods
delivering them out of Egypt; So the Christians partake of this blessed
Sacrament, in memory of that deliverance which the Sacrifice of the Cross of
Christ, whom both Isaac and the Paschal Lamb slain in Egypt typised, has
purchased for them.

2. That as the Peace-affering which the Jews eat, was not changed into the
Substance of that first Sacrifice whereof it was the remembrance, but was eaten
as a figure or commemoration of it; so the Christians in their Sacrament are
not to think the Bread and Wine which Christ has appointed to be our
Peace Offering, should be changed into the very substance of that Body which
was offered for us upon the Cross, but to be received only as Types of it. For
thus was the Peace Offering in general, a Type of Isaac, and the Passover in
particular, the Type of that first Lamb, which was slain for their deliverance
in the Land of Egypt.

When therefore Monsieur de Meaux tells us, that the Jews ate the proper flesh
of their Peace Offering; we answer, that so do we the proper substance of ours;
we eat the Bread which Christ appointed to be the remembrance of that
deliverance which he has purchased for us, as the body of the Lamb was
commanded by God to be the remembrance of theirs.

Monsieur de Meaux adds, That the Jews were forbidden to partake of the proper
flesh of their Sin-offering, and of the Blood, because that a perfect Remission
was not then obtained, and that therefore by the rule of contraries, we ought
now to eat of Ours, because a full satisfaction is now made by Christ.

For Reply to which, it might suffice to say, that this rule of contraries,
should we follow it according to the Letter, would lead Monsieur de Meaux into
so many absurdities, that he would be forced himself to abjure his own
Principle. According to this rule, the Apostles could not have eaten the flesh
of Christ before his Resurrection; the Priests under the Law being commanded
not to eat of the Sin-offering after the third day, and therefore by the rule
of contraries they could not partake of it before.

Monsieur de Meaux may please to consider how far he will approve of this
Conclusion: In the mean time as to his Objection, we have before said, that the
remembrance we make in the holy Eucharist, like that of the Paschal Feast among
the Jews, shows it to be a Peace Offering; and for the rest, if, as Monsieur de
Meaux pretends, this Blood was mystically forbid under the Law, to show that a
perfect remission of sins was not then obtained; It will follow, that for the
contrary reason, Christ appointed the Cup to be received in this holy
Sacrament, to testify that full remission which bis blood has purchased for
us. The Church of Rome therefore in refusing the Cup to the people, not only
violates the express command of our Blessed Savior; but according to Monsieur
de Meaux's Principles, teaches them by it, that a full remission of sins is not
yet obtained, even by the precious Blood of Christ himself.

It may by this appear what little advantage Monsieur de Meaux can get to
justify their Doctrine of the corporeal Presence of Christ in the Eucharist,
from the Analogy of the ancient Sacrifices, which do clearly and necessarily
establish the contrary. For what remains of this discourse we are but little
concerned in it.

We Confess this Sacrament to be somewhat more than a mere Figure; but we deny
that therefore it must be his very Body. We acknowledge the power of God, to do
whatever he pleases: Yet Monsieur de Meaux may please to consider, that
Contradictions, such as to be and not to be at the same time, are even in their
own Schools usually excepted. Monsieur de Meaux supposes, that because Christ
did not explain his words in the figurative Sense, the Apostles must needs have
understood them in the Literal. But we have before showed, that the Jews, who
are certainly the best Judges, are of a quite contrary opinion, viz. That his
Apostles knowing his allusion, could never have understood them otherwise than
in a Figure. In a word, for his last Remark, That the Laws of discourse, which
permit, that where there is a just Proportion between the Sign and the thing
signified, the one may be put for the other; Yet suffer it not to be so, when a
Morsel of Bread, for instance, is set to represent the Body of a Man: We must
beg leave to say, that neither is the Proportion so small betwixt the Bread
broken and Christ's Body broken, as Monsieur de Meaux would suggest; Or, that if
there were, yet since our Saviors institution has set the one to represent to
us the other; we think that designation ought to be of more Authority with us,
than all their new Laws of Discourse; invented purposely only to set the fairer
Gloss upon so great and apparent an Error.

ARTICLE XVII Do this in Remembrance of Me.
THE Explication of the preceding Article, having engaged us to a length
extraordinary, we will endeavor to recompense it by our shortness in this.

We are entirely agreed, that the Intention of the Son of God was to oblige us
by these words to commemorate that death which he underwent for our Salvation.
We Confess, that that real Presence which we suppose in the Communion, does not
at all contradict the Nature of this Commemoration. We are persuaded, that as
the Jews eating of their Peace Offering, which was the remembrance of God's
Covenant, and particularly of the Passover, the Type of that Paschal Lamb that
was offered for them in Egypt, called to mind the Sacrifice of Isaac, and that
great Deliverance God had wrought for them, in bringing them up out of the Land
of Bondage: So whilst we Eat of those Holy Elements which our Savior Christ
has instituted like the Peace Offering aamong the Jews, to perpetuate the
Memory of his death, We call to mind the more lively, that great deliverance
which He has wrought for us, and render thanks for it, and by faith and
repentance apply to our selves the Merits of it.

Thus whilst we receive these Holy signs which he has instituted for our
Memorial, we need no real descent of the Son of God from Heaven; no new
Crucifying of the Lord of Glory to raise in our Souls those just resentments we
ought to have of so excellent a Blessing. But as a Child cannot but recollect
the kindness and affection of a dear Father, as often as he beholds the
Monument where his dead Body lies interred: So we much more, cannot choose but
excite our Love to our blessed Redeemer, as often as we see before our eyes
these Sacred Elements under which he is veiled. Nor is it necessary for this,
that this Mystic Tomb, as Monsieur de Meaux phrases it, should any more be
changed into the very real Body of our Savior to raise this remembrance, than
that natural One into the dead Corpse of the Father, to recall the tender
Affections of his Child at the sight of it.

In a word; As we will not now move any Argument from the nature of this
remembrance, to oppose that substantial change, which we have before combated
on more solid grounds; so we suppose muchless ought Monsieur de Meaux from the
sole opinion of that more lively remembrance, which he imagines the actual
eating of the very Flesh of Christ would raise in us, then only to do it in a
figure, to conclude him to be substantially there. It is evident, that they who
believe this change, and they who believe it not, receive him entirely alike.
They see, and taste, and feel the same thing: It is Faith alone which works in
both, and makes the one believing him spiritually present, to remember him with
the same love, to honor him with the same reverence, and embrace him with the
same hope, as the other, who thinks him corporeally, but yet after a manner
altogether unperceivable, contained under the sacred Elements that are
presented to him.

ARTICLE XVIII. The Doctrine of the Church of England, concerning this Holy
Sacrament.
THe sum of our belief as to the nature of this holy Sacrament is this:

We esteem it designed by Christ to be a perpetual memorial of his suffering
for us: That so often as we eat of this Bread, and Drink of this Cup, 1 Cor.
11.26.
we might show forth the Lords Death, till his coming.

We believe that in this Communion, we do not only remember, but effectually
partake our Blessed Savior, and all the benefits of his passion; Insomuch that
to such as rightly, See our 28. Article.
and worthily, and with Faith receive the same, the bread which we break is a
partaking of the body of Christ, and likewise the Cup of the blessing, is a
partaking of the blood of Christ.

For the manner of this Participation, We believe that the Body and Blood of
Christ, See the same Article.
are given, taken, and eaten in this Supper, only after a heavenly and
spiritual manner; and that the means whereby this is done, is Faith.

We believe that the wicked and such as are void of Faith, The same Article.
tho they may visibly and carnally press with their teeth, as St. Augustine
says, the Sacrament of the Body and Blood of Christ, yet are no way partakers
of Christ, but rather as St. Paul tells us, 1 Cor. 11.
eat and drink their own damnation, not discerning the Lords body.

In a word, The same Article.
We believe that Transubstantiation, or the change of the substance of Bread
and Wine into the substance of Christ's Body and Blood, can never be proved by
Holy Scripture, but is repugnant thereunto; contrary to the intention of our
Blessed Savior, and to the nature of this Holy Sacrament; and has given cause
to many great abuses, As in the following Article, we shall have occasion more
particularly to show.

This is our Faith of this holy Eucharist: And in this Faith we are confirmed
not only by those unanswerable proofs, which our Writers have given, and some
of which we have before touched upon; but also from those irreconcilable
differences, which this Error has thrown the Writers of the Church of Rome
into. In effect we find every party exposing the falseness and impossibility of
every ones Hypothesis but his own. Their greatest men confess the uncertainty
of their own proofs. That there is not in Scripture any formal proof of
Transubstantiation: So Lomb. 4. sent. did. 10.
Lombard, Scotus 4. did. 2. q. 11.
Scotus, and many others, That there is not any, that without the declaration
of the Church would be able to evince it: Bellarm. de Euchar. l. 3. c. 13. ss.
secundo dicit. Where be cites many others of the same Opinion.
So Cardinal Bellarmine himself confesses. That had not the Church declared her
self for the proper sense of the words, the other might with as good warrant
have been received: So says In 3. D. Th. q. 75. art. 1.
Cardinal Cajetan. That if the words of Consecration refer to the Bread, which
is changed by them, then they must be taken in our sense: So the generality of
that Communion confess. In a word, See Scotus cited by Bellar. l. 3. de Euch.
c. 23. ss Unum tamen. So also Gabriel cited by Suarez, T. 3. disp. 50. sect. 1.
So Lombard. l. 4. sent. did. 11. lit. A.
That this Doctrine was no matter of Faith till the Council of Lateran, 1200
year after Christ, and that had not that and the Council of Tent since
interposed, it would not have been so to this very day.

And here who can choose but admire the Power of Truth? That after so many
Outcries against us, for Opposing a Doctrine which they would make the World
believe it is as clear as if it were written with a Ray of the Sun; after so
many Anathema's against us for Heretics, and Schismatics, and ten thousand
repetitions of their great Scriptum est, "This is my Body: they should at last
be forced to confess, That they are not, cannot, nor are ever like to be agreed
in the Explication of them. That they contain nothing in them necessary to
prove this change. That had not the Church declared its self for the Litteral
meaning; the Figurative interpretation might with as good Reason have been
received. That for 1200 years this Doctrine was no matter of Faith, and but for
the Council of Lateran had not been then. In short, that if the words of
Institution refer to the Bread, then are we doubtless in the right; and if they
do not, how will they ever prove the change which they pretend is made of the
Bread into the Body of Christ by them?

Certainly confessions, such as these, ought to awake every Papist careful of
his own Salvation, into an unprejudiced Examination at least of these things.
To consider what Foundation there really is for this Doctrine, and what
desperate Consequences, unknown to Antiquity, contrary to the formal words of
Holy Scripture, and without Gods infinite Mercy, absolutely destructive of
their eternal Salvation, have been built upon it.

As we hope that these declarations have been permitted by God to fall from the
greatest, and most Esteemed of their Church, not only to confirm us in our
Faith, but also to prepare the way for their return to that Catholic truth,
from which they have so long erred; so we doubt not, by Gods blessing, but that
they will in time attain to it, when being sensible of that Tyrannical
usurpation that has been made over their Consciences, and resolved to use that
Knowledge God has given them, to search the Scriptures, and examine their Faith,
and not servily follow every Guide that will but pretend to lead them: They
shall seriously and indifferently weigh all these things, and find that
therefore only they have thought us in darkness, because their own Eyes were
shut that they might not discern the light.

ARTICLE XIX. Of Transubstantiation, and of the Adoration of the Host.
WHat remains of this Subject of the Holy Eucharist, being wholly consequent
upon the foregoing mistaken interpretation of the Words of our Blessed Savior
before considered; we should have passed them over as things we have in effect
already declared, that the Church of England receives not; but that we are
persuaded the particular consideration of them will yet more fully show the
falsness of that Foundation upon which they are built.

Monsieur de Meaux in proving the Corporeal presence of Christ in the Holy
Eucharist, from the Words of institution, " This is my Body: had something that
at least seemed to favor his mistake; but to produce them here for
Transubstantiation, that is, not only to argue the presence of Christ's
substance, but also the change of the substance of the Bread and Wine into it,
he has not the least appearance of the Text for him.

Indeed were there no other way for Christ to be present in the Eucharist, but
only by this change; it might then be allowed that having, as he imagines,
proved the one, he had in effect established the other. But the number of those
who interpret the Words in like manner according to the Letter, yet are as
great enemies as our selves to this change; and suppose Christ's Body to be
present by a Union of it to the Bread, rather then by a Conversion of the Bread
into it; not only shows that there is no necessary consequence at all between
the real presence, and Transubstantiation, but that there is another manner of
Christ's presence, both more agreeable to Holy Scripture, than that which they
advance; and that takes off infinite difficulties which their
Transubstantiation involves them in.

That the Substance of the Sacred Figures remains in this Sacrament after the
Consecration, those clear expressions of St. Paul, wherein he so often calls
them 1 Cor. 10.16. etc. -- 11.26.
Bread and Wine after it, seem to us plainly to show: Acts 2.46. etc.
To break Bread, the Holy Scripture tells us was the usual Phrase all the time
of the Apostles, for receiving the Holy Communion; and which the Blessed Spirit
himself dictated. These passages Monsieur de Meaux certainly ought not to put
off with a Figurative meaning, unless he can give us some good reason why he
follows the High road of the Literal interpretation in the one, to establish
the Substance of Christ's Body in the Sacrament; and forsakes it in the other,
to take away the Presence of the Bread from it.

For the Adoration of the Host, The Church of England consequently to her
Principles of the Bread and Wine's remaining in their natural substances, See
her Rubric at the end of the Communion Office.
professes that she thinks it. to be Idolatry, and to be abhorred of all
faithful Christians.

Monsieur de Meaux, in Conformity to theirs, tells us, That the presence of
Christ's Body in the Eucharist ought to carry all such as believe it without all
scruple to the Adoration of it. This therefore being taken as a Principle
acknowledged by them; it may not be amiss to observe, that since it is certain,
that neither Christ nor his Apostles appointed or practiced, nor the Church for
above 1000 Years required or taught any Adoration of this Holy Sacrament;
neither could they, according to Monsieur de Meaux's Principles, have believed
the Corporeal Presence of our Blessed Savior in it.

Is there any of the Evangelists that mentions it? They all tell us, Take, Eat;
Do this in remembrance of me. But does any one add, This is my Body, fall down
and Worship it?

When St. Paul reproved the Corinthians for violating this Holy Sacrament; 1
Cor. 11.20, etc.
is it possible he could have omitted so obvious a Remark, and so much to his
purpose; That in profaning this Holy Sacrament, they were not only guilty of
the Body and Blood of Christ, which it was instituted to represent to us; but
even directly affronted their Blessed Master corporally present there; and whom
instead of profaning, they ought, as they had been taught, to Adore in it?

With what simplicity do the Ancient Fathers speak of this Communion in all
their Writings? The Elevation of the Sacred Symbols was not heard of till the
Seventh Century; and then used only to represent the lifting up of Christ upon
the Cross not to expose it to the People to adore it. The Bell, the Feast of
the St. Sacrament, the Pomp of carrying it through the Streets, all the other
Circumstances of this Worship, are inventions of yesterday. The exposing of it
upon the Altar to make their Prayers before it; their Addresses to it in times
and cases of Necessity; their performing the chiefest acts of Religion in its
presence, never mentioned in Antiquity.

Nay, instead of this Worship, they did many things utterly inconsistent with
it. They disputed with the Heathens for worshipping Gods their own Hands had
made. Was it ever objected to them, that they themselves did the same: Worship
a Deity whose substance they first formed, and then spoke it into a God? They
burnt in some Churches what remained of the Holy Sacrament. They permitted the
People to carry it home, that had Communicated: They sent it abroad by Sea, by
Land, without any the least regard that we can find had to its Worship: They
buried it with their Dead; they made Plasters of the Bread, they mixed the
Wine with their Ink. These certainly were no instances of Adoration: Nor can we
ever suppose that they who did such things as these, ever believed that it was
the very Body and Blood of their dear Master, whom they so much loved; and whom
doubtless they would have been as ready to have worshipped, had they so
believed; as both Monsieur de Meaux supposes they ought to have been, and as we
see others for the rest no more pious than those Primitive Christians were, now
to do it.

ARTICLE XX. Of the Sacrifice of the Mass.
A Third Consequence of the Corporeal Presence of Christ in the Holy Eucharist,
is the Sacrifice of the Mass: In which we ought to proceed with all the Caution
such a Point requires, as both makes up the chiefest part of the Popish
Worship, and is justly esteemed one of the greatest and most dangerous Errors
that offends us.

Monsieur de Meaux has represented it to us with so much tenderness, that
except perhaps it be his Foundation of the Corporeal Presence, on which he
builds, and his Consequence that this Service is a true and real Propitiatory
Sacrifice, which his manner of expounding it we are persuaded will never bear;
there is little in it besides but what we could readily assent to.

We distinguish the two Acts, which he mentions, from one another. By the
Consecration we apply the Elements, before common, to a Sacred use; by the
Manducation, we fulfill our Savior's Command; We take, and eat, and Do this in
remembrance of Him.

This Consecration being separately made of his Body broken, his Blood spilt
for our Redemption, we suppose represents to us our Blessed Lord in the figure
of his Death, which these holy Symbols were instituted to continue the memory
of. And whilst thus with Faith we represent to God the Death of his Son, for
the pardon of our sins; we are persuaded, that we incline his Mercy the more
readily to forgive them.

We do not therefore doubt, but that this presenting to God Almighty the
Sacrifice of our Blessed Lord, is a most effectual manner of applying his
Merits to us. Were this all the Church of Rome meant by her Propitiatory
Sacrifice, there is not certainly any Protestant that would oppose her in it.

Where is that Christian that does not by Faith unite himself to his Savior in
this holy Communion? That does not present him to God as his only Sacrifice and
Propitiation? That does not protest that he has nothing to offer him but Jesus
Christ, and the Merits of his Death? That consecrates not all his prayers by
this Divine Offering; and whilst he thus presents to God the Sacrifice ofhis
Son, does not learn thereby to present also himself a lively Sacrifice, holy,
and acceptable in his sight?

This is, no doubt, a Sacrifice worthy a Christian, infinitely exceeding all
the Sacrifices of the Law. Where the Knife is the Word, the Blood shed not but
in a figure, nor is there any Death but in Representation. A Sacrifice so far
from taking us off from that of the Cross, that it unites us the more closely
to it; represents it to us, and derives all its Virtue and Efficacy from it.

This is, if any other, truly The Doctrine of the Catholic Church, and such as
the Church of England has never refused: and except it be our doubt of the
Corporeal Presence, Monsieur de Meaux had certainly reason to expect, that
there was nothing in this we could justly except against.

But now that all this is sufficient to prove the Mass to be a True and Proper
Sacrifice, Council. Trident. Sess. 22.
truly and properly propitiatory for the sins and punishments, the
satisfactions and necessities of the dead and the living; and that to offer
this true and proper Sacrifice, our Savior Christ instituted a true and proper
Priesthood, when he said, Do this in Remembrance of Me: This is what we cannot
yet understand, and what we think we ought not ever to allow of.

We know indeed, that the Primitive Church, called the holy Eucharist a
Sacrifice, in that large extent of the Expression, whereby the holy Scripture
styles every religious performance, our Prayers, our Thanksgivings, our
Virtues, our very Selves, Sacrifices to God: And accordingly in our own
Liturgy, we do, without all scruple, do the same. But when it comes to be set
in Opposition to a Sacrament, and to be considered in the true and proper
signification of the Word; we must, with all Antiquity, needs profess, That we
neither have, nor can we after that of Christ admit of any.

Hence it is, that our Church following the Doctrine of the Holy Apostles and
Primitive Christians, teaches, See Article 31.
That the Offering of Christ once made, is that proper Redemption,
Propitiation, and Satisfaction for all the sins of the whole World; and that
there is no other Satisfaction for sin but that alone. That the Application of
Christ's Death by Faith in the Holy Eucharist, is made to all such as with true
Repentance receive the same, we undoubtedly believe. We are persuaded, that by
our Prayers, which in this holy Solemnity we never fail to offer for the wants
and necessities, the pardon and forgiveness not of our selves only, but of all
Mankind; of those who have not yet known the Faith of Christ; or that knowing
it, have prevaricated from the right way, we incline Gods Mercy to become
propitious unto them. Only we deny, that by this holy Eucharist, as by a true
and proper Propitiatory Sacrifice, we can appease Gods Wrath for the sins of
the whole World; can fulfill the satisfactions, and supply the necessities of
other men; of the dead and the living; of them that are absent, and partake not
of it. This we attribute to the Sacrifice of the Cross only; and are persuaded
that it cannot, without derogation to the Merits of that most absolute
Redemption which was there purchased for us, be applied to any other.

When we examine the first Institution of this holy Communion, we cannot
perceive either in the words or action of our Blessed Savior, any Sacrifical
Act or Expression. He took bread, and brake it, and gave it to his Disciples,
saying, Take, Eat, This is my Body which is given for you: Do this in
Remembrance of Me.

Monsieur de Meaux seems to imply, that the Consecration made it a Sacrifice.
But this Vasquez tells us, that others think to be only a preparation to it,
In. 3. D. Th. disp. 222. c. 1.
because till after the Consecration Christ is not there, and by Consequence
cannot be offered.

The Council of Trent seems to refer it to the Oblation: This Bellarmine
opposes, L. 1. de Miss. c. 27.
because neither Christ nor his Apostles used any.

Bellarmine is positive, that either Christ sacrificed in Eating, Ibid.
or there is no other action in which he can be said to have done it. Yet even
this the greatest part of that Communion reject; because Eating is not
Offering: and in the Ordination where the Priest receives the power of
Sacrificing, not any mention is made of it. In Effect, Reason will tell us,
That this is to partake of the Offering, not to offer it; and Monsieur de Meaux
himself accordingly distinguishes the Two Acts of Consecration and Manducation
from one another, and refers the Sacrifice wholly to the former.

If we consider the Nature of a true and proper Sacrifice, they universally
agree, that these Four Things are necessarily required to it: 1. That what is
Offered be something that is Visible: 2. That of profane, which it was before,
it be now made sacred: 3. That it be offered to God: And 4. by that offering
suffer an essential destruction.

Now we suppose, that the greatest part of these Conditions are evidently
wanting to this pretended Sacrifice of Christ's Body in the Mass. 1. It is
Invisible: They confess it. 2. It was never profane, that it should be made
sacred: They will not presume to say that it was. 3. It suffers no Essential
destruction: The Blood is not spilt but in a Mystery, says Monsieur de Meaux,
nor is there any Death but in Representation.

As therefore none of these things truly and properly agree to this holy
Eucharist, so we suppose, that neither can it be truly and properly a
Sacrifice. We are persuaded, that the Offering its self, like the necessary and
essential Properties of it, must be only in Figure and Representation. This is
what we willingly allow Monsieur de Meaux, and what their own Principles do
undoubtedly prove.

For what our Savior adds, Do this in Remembrance of Me: However the Council
of Trent has Canonically resolved it to be the Institution of a true and proper
Priesthood, See Sess. 22. cap. 1.
to offer this Sacrifice; yet that it has no such Proof, the preceding
Discourse evidently shows. Our Savior Christ commanding his Apostles to Do
this, commanded them to Do no more than what himself had done: So that if he
therefore did not Sacrifice himself, neither did he give any Authority to them,
or to their Successors to Sacrifice.

ARTICLE XXI. Of the Epistle to the Hebrews.
THE Epistle to the Hebrews so clearly establishes our Doctrine, in Opposition
to the pretended Sacrifice of the Mass, that Monsieur de Meaux had certainly
reason to enter on a particular consideration of it. We will, after his
Example, follow the same Method, and show the whole Design of that Sacred Book
to be directly contrary to the Principles of the Roman Church.

Monsieur de Meaux observes, that the Author of this Epistle concludes, that
there ought not only no other Victim to be offered for sin after that of
Christ, but that even Christ himself ought not to be any more Offered. Now, the
reason which the Apostle gives, is this; Because that otherwise, says he, Heb.
9.25, 26.
Christ must often have suffered: Plainly implying, that there can be no true
Offering without Suffering. So that in the Mass then, either Christ must
Suffer, which Monsieur de Meaux denies, or he is not Offered, which we affirm.

This is so evidently the meaning of that place, and so often repeated, That
without Blood, Heb. 9.22.
there is no Remission; that Monsieur de Meaux is forced freely to declare,
that if we take the word Offer as it is used in that Epistle, they must profess
to the whole World, that Christ is no more Offered, either in the Mass, or any
other way. Now, how these things can stand together, that the Epistle to the
Hebrews contradicts not the Offering of the Mass, and yet that the same Epistle
absolutely declares, that Christ can no more be Offered, because he can no more
Suffer; nor any more become a Propitiatory Sacrifice, because without Blood
there is no Propitiation: All which Monsieur de Meaux allows, and professes to
the whole World, that in the Notion of the Epistle to the Hebrews, Christ is
not offered in the Mass, nor can be any where else, we are not very well able
to comprehend.

But that Epistle goes yet further. It tells us, that Christ ought to be but
once offered, because by that one Offering he has fully satisfied for our sins,
Heb. 10.14.
and has perfected for ever them that are Sanctified. If therefore by that
first Offering he has fully satisfied for our sins, Ibid. v. 18.
there is then no more need of any Offering for sin: If by that first Sacrifice
he has perfected for ever them that are Sanctified, the Mass certainly must be
altogether needless to make any addition to that which is already perfect.
Ibid. v. (...)
In a word, if the Sacrifices of the Law were therefore repeated, as this
Epistle tells us, because they were imperfect; and had they been otherwise,
they should have ceased to have been offered. What can we conclude, but the
Church of Rome then, in every Mass she Offers; does violence to the Cross of
Christ; and in more than one sense, Crucifies to her self the Lord of Glory.

Lastly, The Council of Trent declares, that because there is a new and proper
Sacrifice to be offered, it was necessary that our Savior Christ should
institute a new and proper Priesthood to offer it. And so they say he did,
after the Order of Melchisedeck, Hebr. 7.3.
in opposition to that after the order of Aaron under the Law. Now certainly
nothing can be more contrary to this Epistle than such an assertion: Both whose
description of this Priesthood shows it can agree only to our Blessed Lord; and
which indeed in express terms declares it to be peculiar to him. Ibid. v. 27.
It calls it an unchangeble Priesthood, that passes not to any other, as that
of Aaron did from Father to Son, but continues in him only, because that he
also himself continues for evermore.

ARTICLE XXII. Reflections on the foregoing Doctrine.
ANd here then let us conjure our Brethren of the Church of Rome seriously to
consider these things; and into what desperate consequences that great Error
of the Corporeal presence has insensibly led them.

Can any thing be more rash or more uncharitable, even the Literal
interpretation of this Holy Eucharist being allowed, than their Canon of
Trasubstantiation? To cut off from their Communion the greatest and most
Orthodox part of the Christian Church, only for a Nicety; a manner of presence,
which neither has the Scripture any where revealed, and which they themselves
never understood.

Is it possible for men to fall into a grosser or more dangerous Error, than to
set up a Wafer for their God, and pay a divine Worship to a Morsel of Bread?
Shall their good Intentions secure them? Had not the Israelites a good
Intention to " hold a feast unto the Lord, Exodus 32.5.
when they Worshipped the Molten Calf? Were they therefore not Idolaters for
it? Had this been a sufficient excuse, Nadab and Abihu had not been punished:
Their intention was certainly good to burn Incence to the Lord. Lev. 10.
The Jews had a good intention even in Crucifying the Lord of glory: St. Paul
thought it Zeal to presecute his Disciples. Our Blessed Savior has foretold,
and we live to see it accomplished, that the time should come when Men should
kill their Brethren, and think they did God good service. Joh. 16.2.
The Church of Rome may do well to consider whether their good intention will
justify them that do it; and whether both in this, and that, they do not run a
desperate hazard, if it appear that they have no other plea than a well meant
mistake to excuse them.

For our parts we must needs profess that these things give us not only a
scandal but a horror for their Religion. Monsieur de Meaux had certainly
reason to say, that this is the Chiefest and most important of all our
controvesies, and wherein we are at the farthest distance from one another. And
would to God they had only offended us by these Errors; and had not exposed
our common Name to the reproach of the very Heathen; who have been confirmed by
them in their Idolatry, and thought it more rational to adore a Stock or a
Stone, than with the Christians to Worship this moment what they Eat the very
next.

But Monsieur de Meaux thinks we have no reason to appear so obstinate against
them, who declare our selves so favorably toward the Lutherans, who yet are
involved in the same Error. It Is true we believe the Lutherans mistaken in their
Literal interpretation of this Holy Sacrament. But we are persuaded they are
infinitely less so, and less dangerously than the Papists.

They confess that there is no change made in the Substance of the Sacred
Elements. They believe that the Bread and Wine continue in their proper
Natures, and that Christ's Body is present only when he is received. They adore
not the Holy Eucharist: They found no Propitiatory Sacrifices upon it: They say
no Masses for the sins and satisfactions, for the wants and necessities of the
Dead and the Living: They deny not the Cup to the People; their Error in one
word, whatsoever it be, is only a matter of simple belief; has no ill
consequences attending it, nor do they damn us for not receiving it.

Let the Church of Rome do all this: Let them raze their Anathema's out of
their Councils, and banish their Masses and Adorations out of their Churches;
Let them no longer scandalize us with any unwarrantable practices, nor desire
to enslave our Consciences by submitting them to their own inventions; and
though we shall still think Transubstantiation to be the greater Error, yet
will we receive them with the same charity we do the Lutherans: We will pray to
God to give them a better understanding, but will not drive them from our
Communion, for matters of simple belief, and which are only to themselves, though
they be wrong.

But till then, in vain does Monsieur de Meaux exhort us to consider the ways
of providence to bring us to a Union, which God knows we could be glad to have
on any terms but the loss of truth. In the mean time if the Church of Rome in
good earnest thinks, that as we tolerate the foundation of all these Errors,
the Corporeal presence in the Lutherans, so we ought to bear the consequences
of it in them: Let them at least do what the Lutherans have done; let them
embrace our Communion; let them leave off to persecute us where they have
power, and damn us where they have not; let them receive us as Brethren, not
Lord it over us as our Masters. This will make us hope that they are sincere
when they conjure us to be at peace with them, and they may justly then accuse
us of partiality, if we continue to repute them as Enemies, when they will be
thus content to love, and receive, and deal with us as friends.

ARTICLE. XXIII. Of Communicating only under one kind.
THis is the last of those consequences that give us a just detestation for
that great Error of the Corporeal presence on which they are founded. It is so
plainly contrary to the express command of our Blessed Savior, that we are
persuaded it has pleased God to suffer them to fall into it, on purpose to
correct that vanity whereby they have so proudly aspired to an Opinion of
Infallibility: That whilst they Lord it over men's Consciences, and will not so
much as give them leave to ask them a Reason of what they do, they might here
at last be surprised in an Error which the most vulgar Eye is able to discern.

The Church of England conformably to all Antiquity declares, See our 30th
Article.
That the Cup ought not to be denied to the Lay People; forasmuch as both parts
of the Lords Sacrament by Christ's Ordinance and Commandment, ought to be
ministered to all Christian men alike.

For indeed, Did not he who said of the Bread, "Take, Eat, this is my Body, say
also of the Wine, with the same expressness, Drink ye all of this, for this is
my Blood of the New Testament which is shed for you for the remission of sins?

Did not he who commanded them, Do this in Remembrance of Me, for the Bread,
even according to their own Construction, Take and Consecrate, and give to
Others, as I have done to you; command them for the Cup in like manner, " Do
this; i. e. consecrate, and give it to Others, as I have done to you, in
remembrance of Me?

We confess, That the Grace of God is not tied to the outward signs: Yet we
think withal, that without taking the outward and visible signs, we can have no
pretense to the inward and spiritual Grace of that holy Sacrament; which
deriving all its Effect from our Savior's Promise, we can have no security
that it shall have any good one to them, who do not receive it according to his
Institution.

Had Christ esteemed it sufficient for us to receive the Blood in the body, we
suppose he would not have consecrated the Cup afterward. But if it was our
Savior's pleasure, that to commemorate the more lively his Passion, we should
take his Blood as it was spilt for our Redemption, separate from his Body; we
think it an unwarrantable presumption for us to make our selves wiser than God,
and say, that it is sufficient to participate of Both in One.

Monsieur de Meaux has received so full an Answer upon this point, from the
Reply made to his Treatise written purposely on this Subject, that he will have
no cause to complain of us for not repeating here, what has been so fully and
so successfully handled there.

Only as to that Negligence of these latter Ages, which he is pleased to
allege as the reason of this change; We must needs say, that God be thanked,
we cannot observe any such Negligence of this holy Communion in our Churches,
where yet this holy Sacrament is administered to as large Congregations, and
with as great frequency as any where among Them. Both our Priests and the
People, give and receive it with that Care and Reverence, that we find as
little grounds for any such pretense, as there is reason in it, were it never
so true, to justify so great and unwarrantable a Change.

PART III. OF THE CHURCH.
ARTICLE XXIV. Of the Word Written and Unwritten.
OUR Blessed Savior having founded his Church upon the Word which He preached,
we confess, that the unwritten Word, as to that Gospel which he preached, was
the first Rule of Christians. But God Almighty foreseeing how liable such a
Rule must have been to infinite Inconveniences, thought fit to have that Word
which was first spoken by Mouth, afterward consigned to Writing. By which
means the Word written and unwritten were not Two different Rules, but as to
all necessary matters of Faith, one and the same: And the unwritten Word so far
from losing its Authority, that it was indeed the more firmly Established, by
being thus delivered to us by the holy Apostles and Evangelists.

We receive with the same Veneration whatsoever comes from the Apostles,
whether by Scripture or Tradition, provided that we can be assured that it
comes from them. And if it can be made appear, that any Tradition which the
Written Word contains not, has been received by All Churches, and in All Ages,
we are ready to embrace it, as coming from the Apostles.

Monsieur de Meaux therefore ought not to charge us as Enemies to Tradition, or
obstinate, to receive what is so delivered. Our Church rejects not Tradition,
but only those things which they pretend to have received by it: But which we
suppose to be so far from being the Doctrine of the Apostles, or of All
Churches in All Ages, that we are persuaded they are many of them directly
contrary to the Written Word, which is by Themselves confessed to be the
Apostles Doctrine, and which the best and purest Ages of the Church adhered to.

ARTICLE XXV. Of the Churches Authority.
THE Church; i. e. The Universal Church in All Ages, having been Established by
God, the Guardian of the Holy Scriptures, and of Tradition, we receive from her
the Canonical Books of Scripture. It is upon this Authority, that we receive
principally the Song of Solomon as Canonical, and reject other Books as
Apochryphal, which we might perhaps with as much readiness otherwise receive.
By this Authority we reverence these Books, even before by our own reading of
them, we perceive the Spirit of God in them: And when by our reading them, we
find all things conformable to so Excellent a Spirit, we are yet more confirmed
in the belief and reverence we before had of them.

This Authority therefore we freely allow the Church, that by her hands in the
succession of the several Ages, we have received the Holy Scriptures. And if as
universal and uncontroverted a Tradition had descended for the Interpretation
of the Scriptures, as for the receiving of them, we should have been as ready
to accept of that too. Such a declaration of the sense of Holy Scripture as had
been received by all Churches, and in all Ages, the Church of England would
never refuse: But then as we profess not to receive the Scriptures themselves
only, or perhaps principally upon the Authority of the Roman Church, which has
in all Ages made up but a part, and that not always the greatest neither, of
this Tradition; so neither can we think it reasonable to receive the sense of
them only from her, though she profess never so much, to invent nothing of her
self, but only to declare the Divine Revelation made to her by the Holy Ghost,
which she supposes has been given to her for her direction: Whilst we are
persuaded, that neither has any Promise at all been made to any particular
Church of such an infallible direction; and have such good cause to believe
that this particular Church too often, instead of the divine Revelations,
declares only her own Inventions.

When the dispute arose about the Ceremonies of the Law, Acts 15. the Apostles
assembled at Jerusalem, for the determination of it. When any Doubts arise in
the Church now, we always esteem it the best Method to decide them after the
same manner. That the Church has Authority not only in matters of Order and
Discipline, but even of Faith too, we never denied: But that therefore any
Church so assembled, can with the same Authority say now, as the Apostles did
then, Acts 15.28.
It has seemed good to the Holy Ghost, and to Us: This we think not only an
unwarrantable presumption, for which there is not any sufficient ground in Holy
Scripture, but evidently in its self untrue, seeing that many such Councils are
by the Papists themselves confessed to have erred.

Hence it is that we cannot suppose it reasonable to forbid Men the Examination
of the Churches Decisions, which may err, when the Holy Apostles, nay our
Savior Christ himself, not only permitted, but exhorted their Disciples to
search the Truth of their Doctrine, which was certainly Infallible. Yet if the
determination be matter of Order or Government, as not to Eat of things offered
to Idols, etc. or of plain and undoubted Precept, as " to abstain from
Fornication, and the like: Here we fail not after the Example of Paul and
Silas, to declare to the faithful what her decision has been; and instead of
permitting them to judge of what has been so resolved, teach them throughout all
places "to keep the Ordinances of the Apostles. Acts 16.4.


Thus is it that we acquiesce in the judgment of the Church; and professing in
our Creed a Holy Catholic Church, we profess to believe not only that there
was a Church planted by our Savior at the beginning, that has hitherto been
preserved by him, and ever shall be to the end of the World; but do by
consequence undoubtedly believe too, that this Universal Church is so secured
by the Promises of Christ, that there shall always be retained so much Truth in
it, the want of which would argue that there could be no such Church. We do not
fear that ever the Catholic Church should fall into this entire Infidelity:
But that any particular Church, such as that of Rome, may not either by Error
lose, or by other means prevaricate the Faith, even in the necessary Points of
it; this we suppose not to be at all contrary to the Promise of God Almighty,
and we wish we had not too great cause to fear, that the Church of Rome has in
effect done both.

It is not therefore of the Catholic Church truly such, that we either fear
this infidelity, or complain that she has endeavored to render her self
Mistress of our Faith. But for that particular Communion, to which Monsieur de
Meaux is pleased to give the Name, tho she professes never so much to submit
her self to the Holy Scripture, and to follow the Tradition of the Fathers in
all Ages; yet whilst she usurps the absolute Interpretation both of Scripture
and Fathers, and forbids us to examine whether she does it rightly or no, we
must needs complain that her Protestations are invalid, whilst her Actions
speak the contrary: For that if this be not to render her self Mistress of our
Faith, we cannot conceive what is.

In a word, tho we suppose the Scriptures are so clearly written, that it can
very hardly happen, that in the necessary Articles of Faith any one man should
be found opposite to the whole Church in his Opinion: Yet if such a one were
evidently convinced that his Belief was founded upon the undoubted Authority of
Gods Holy Word, so far would it be from any Horror to support it, that it is at
this day the greatest glory of S. Athanasius, that he stood up alone against
the whole World in defense of Christ's Divinity, when the Pope, the Councils,
the whole Church fell away.

Conclude we therefore, that God, who has made us, and knows what is best and
most proper for us, as he has subjected us to the Government and Direction of
his Church for our Peace and Welfare, so to secure our Faith, he has given us
his Holy Word, to be the last resort, the final, infallible Rule, by which both
we and the Church its self must be directed: And from this therefore if any one
shall endeavor to turn us aside, or preach any other Gospel unto us than what
we have therein received, Gal. 1.8, 9.
tho he were an Apostle from the Grave, or even an Angel from Heaven, let him
be Anathema.

ARTICLE XXVI. The Opinion of the Church of England, as to the Authority of the
Church.
FOR the two last Articles of Monsieur de Meaux's Exposition, I might very well
have passed them by. The Church of England, whose Doctrine I pretend to
explain, is but very little concerned in them. Therefore only in a word, That
we allow the Church a just Authority in matters of Faith, both the declaration
of our xxth. Article, and the subscription we make to the whole 39 show: Such a
deference we allow to her decisions, that we make them our directions what
Doctrine we may, or may not, publicly maintain and teach in her Communion: In
effect, we show whatever Submission we can to her Authority, without violating
that of God, declared to us in his Holy Scriptures.

Whatsoever deference we allow to a National Church or Council, the same we
think in a much greater degree due to a General. And whenever such a one,
which we much desire, shall be freely and lawfully assembled, to determine the
Differences of the Catholic Church, none shall be more ready both to assist in
it, and submit to it.

ARTICLE XXVII. Of the Authority of the Holy See, and of Episcopacy.
FOR the Pope's Authority, though we suppose no good Consequence can be drawn
from that Primacy we are content to allow St. Peter among the Apostles, for
that exorbitant Power which has of late been pretended to: Yet when other
Differences shall be agreed, and the true Bounds set to his Pretenses, we shall
be content to yield him whatsoever Authority the Ancient Councils of the
Primitive Church have acknowledged, and the Holy Fathers have always taught the
faithful to give him.

This Monsieur de Meaux ought to be contented with; who himself absolves us
from yielding to those pretenses, that have indeed very justly rendered this
Authority, not only odious, but intolerable to the World.

Let those who are Enemies to Episcopacy, and who deny any due respect to the
Chair of St. Peter, answer for themselves. The Church of England has both
retained the one, and will be ready according to what we have before declared,
when ever it shall be requisite, to acknowledge the other.

THE CLOSE.
SUCH is the Doctrine of the Church of England in those points which Monsieur
de Meaux has thought fit to propose, as the principal matters in debate betwixt
us. May it please the unprejudiced Papist to say, what he can find in All
these, to warrant that bitter and unchristian hatred they have conceived
against us. To cut us off, as much as in them lies, from the Communion of
Christ's Church on Earth, and to deny us all part of his promises in Heaven.

We firmly believe the Holy Scriptures, and whatsoever they teach or command,
we receive and submit to, as to the Word of God. We embrace all the ancient
Creeds, and in them all that Faith which the Primitive Christians supposed, and
which the Religious Emperors, by their Advice, decreed should be sufficient to
entitle us to the common name of Catholics.

What new Donatists, Gentlemen, are you, to presume to exclude us from this
Character? And may we not justly demand of you, what S. Augustine once did of
them on the same occasion; You say that Christ is Heir of no Lands, De unitate
Eclesia, c. 6.
but where Donatus is Coheir. Read this to us out of the Law and the Prophets,
out of the Psalms, out of the Gospel, out of the Sacred Epistles: Read it to
us, and we will believe.

We accept the Tradition of Primitive Antiquity truly such, with a Veneration
we dare confidently say greater than your selves. We have showed, that the very
grounds of our difference is, that you require us to believe and practice such
things as the Holy Scripture forbids us, and the Primitive Church never knew.

You command us to worship Images: See Article 4.
Is it not evident that both the Law and the Gospel have forbid it? and is it
not confessed, that both the Apostles and their Successors abhorred the very
name?

You command us to communicate only under one kind: That is in our Opinion,
nay, it is in yours too, Article 23.
to contradict the Institution of our Blessed Savior, and the practice of the
very Roman Church for above a Thousand years, and of all other Christians to
this very day.

You command us to pray to Saints and Angels: Article 3. Col. 2. v. 18. Rev.
19.10. -- 22.9.
Does not St. Paul forbid it? Did not the holy Angel twice refuse it from St.
John? And many Centuries pass without One probable Instance of any that did it?

You command us under pain of your Anathema to believe Transubstantiation?
Article 19.
Do you your selves understand what you mean by it? Is it any where written?
Was it ever mentioned for above a Thousand years?

You bid us Adore the Holy Sacrament: Article 19.
Has Christ prescribed it? Have his holy Apostles written it? Did not here also
above a Thousand years pass before any one attempted it?

You require us to believe the blessed Eucharist to be a true and real
Propitiatory Sacrifice for the sins and satisfactions both of the Dead and of
the Living. Article 20.
Have ye any probable proof of it? Are ye yet, or ever like to be agreed among
your selves about it? Do not your own principles evidently show the contrary?

Men and Brethren: Consider, we conjure you, these things: And if you please,
consider us too, what we are, and what our Manners and Conversation among you
has been: Believe us, at least, that we have no other End but Truth in these
Enquiries: No other Interest but to save our souls, and go the surest and
directest way to Heaven.

The Proofs we offer, they are not vain Conjectures; they are clear, we think,
convincing Arguments. And though the design of this little Treatise has been
rather to show you what our Doctrine is, than to give a just account of those
Reasons that detain us in it: Yet perhaps even in this there may be somewhat to
show, that we do not altogether build in the Air; but deserve certainly to have
our Articles and our Canons, both better understood, and better answered, if it
may be, than they have ever hitherto been.

For to resume yet once more some few of our differences.

You think you ought to invocate the Blessed Virgin and the Holy Saints.
Article 3.
Now not to repeat what we have before said of the Unlawfulness of it, This we
suppose to be first needless, because we know we have a more excellent and
powerful Mediator, that has commanded us to come to him; and next Uncertain,
because you are not able to tell us how, nay, not to secure us that by whatever
way it be, our Prayers do always and certainly come up to them. If we are
mistaken, at least we run no hazard in it: We address our selves continually to
the Throne of Grace, where we are secure that we shall be both heard and
answered. But now should you err, consider we beseech you how many Prayers you
every day lose, and what a dishonor you put upon your divine Mediator. And if
you please, consider too how unjust you are to damn us for not joining with you
in a practice, that has so great danger, so little assurance, and not any
advantage.

You suppose we ought to fall down before your Images. Not to do this is to be
sure no sin, Article 4.
you dare not say it is. To do it may be, and you can never secure us it is not
abominable Idolatry, odious to God, and contrary to that holy Faith into which
we have been Baptized.

You damn us for doubting of the number of your seven Sacraments. Has God
revealed it to you? Article 10.
Have the Holy Scriptures defined it? Or even Tradition its self delivered it
to you. If it be true; Can you yet escape the charge of rashness and
uncharitableness, to damn whole Churches for so needless a matter? should it be
false, how will you escape that Anatheema your selves; you have then so falsely
as well as uncharitably denounced against us?

You require us to believe that children dying unbaptized, are excluded the
Grace of Christ for ever. Article 10.
To what purpose this? For what benefit? Were it as evident as it is indeed
uncertain, and we are persuaded false; our modesty is safe in deciding nothing;
the Error of such among us as believe it not is charitable; founded upon the
sure Mercies and Goodness of God, who never inflicts any punishment where there
is no fault; and in a word, has not any the least ill consequence upon it. We
take as great care to Baptize our Infants, as you can do who most believe it.
But now if your Opinion should be false; What answer will you ever be able to
make to God, for peremptorily defining what was so uncertain and uncharitable?
and for damning us, only because we dare not venture to cut off those from
Christ for whom he died, and whom we hope he will in mercy receive to him?

Lastly, Article 23.
You deny us the entire Communion; you pronounce an Anathema against us,
because we will not confess that one part alone is sufficient. Is it not
certain that if we err, we have yet both Christ's Institution, and the practice
and Opinion of many Ages to absolve us? But have you any thing to excuse you,
if you are mistaken? To take it as we do, you confess can have no danger, are
you sure that to deny it as you do, may not be a Sacrilege?

And what shall I say more? For the time would fail me to speak of every one of
those other points Monsieur de Meaux mentions, much more to add many others,
and of no less consequence, which he has thought fit to pass by. In all which
we have at least this undeniable advantage over you; that besides the clearest
Arguments that we are in the right, the hazard we run is not very great if we
should not be: Whereas for you, neither is there any tolerable proof of the
contrary Errors, and an infinite danger should you chance to be mistaken.

These things, as both the Character of the Book we have now examined, and the
Style of many other your latter most considerable Authors, give us cause to
hope, begin to be no longer totally hid from your Eyes; so shall we never cease
in all our Prayers to make mention of you, that you may be perfectly enlightened
to discern, and impartially disposed, to receive and to embrace the Truth.

In the mean time, whilst both you and we mutually address our selves to the
Eternal Truth for his assistance; whilst as we ought, we implore his mercy,
that he would give us a right understanding in all things; remembering this that
we are all but Men, and that it is not therefore impossible for either of us to
err: That it may be strength of Passion, or prejudice of Education, or even
vehemence of affection, more than the light of Reason, has hitherto kept us in
a too fond partiality for our own Opinions: Let us at least, we beseech you,
agree in that mutual Charity which alone can secure us amidst all our Errors;
which will both best dispose Gods mercy to show us what is right, and will best
incline our Minds to that sincerity which we all pretend to, and I hope all
really have to embrace it.

If we cannot yet agree in all the points of our Religion; let us consider,
that neither are the dearest friends entirely of the same opinion in every
thing. Let us wait Gods pleasure; if it be his will to reveal even this also
unto us: Philip. 3.15, 16.
Nevertheless whereunto we have already attained, let us walk by the same rule,
let us mind the same thing.

We believe in the same God; we rely on the same Redeemer; we embrace the same
Creeds; we attend the same hopes of an Everlasting Salvation: And in all these,
amidst all our other Differences, have at least an entire agreement in what is
most necessary, and shall we hope to the Honest and sincere among us, be
sufficient for our Eternal Security.

Let these things engage us to have the same love too: to be more sparing in
our Anathema's, and more zealous in our Prayers for one another, to seek and to
maintain the Truth, but to do it so as not to violate our Charity. In a word,
whether we write, or speak, to do both as Men who in a little time expect to be
brought before a divine Tribunal, where we must render a severe account for all
these things; and one Word spoken with this excellent spirit, to close those
Divisions that so long have separated us, shall be preferred to ten thousand
Volumes of endless and uncharitable controversies, that serve only to widen our
breaches, and heigthen our Animosities.

FINIS.
AN ADVERTISEMENT Of Books lately Printed for Richard Chiswell.
THE APOLOGY of the Church of England; And an Epistle to one Siginor Scipio, a
Venetian Gentleman, concerning the Council of Trent. Written both in Latin, by
the Right Reverend Father in God, JOHN JEWEL Lord Bishop of Sarisbury. Made
English by a Per on of Quality. To which is added, The Life of the said Bishop;
Collected and Written by the same Hand. 8o.

The LETTER writ by the last Assembly General of the Clergy of France to the
Protestants, inviting them to return to their Communion. Together with the
Methods proposed by them for their Conviction. Translated into English, and
Examined by GILBEBT BVRNET, D. D. 8o.

The Life of WILLIAM BEDEL D.D. Bishop of Kilmore in Ireland; Together with
Certain Letters which passed betwixt him and James Waddesworth (a late
Pensioner of the Holy Inquisition in Sevil,) in matter of Religion, concerning
the General Motives to the Roman Obedience. 8o.

The Decree made at Rome the second of March 1679. condemning some Opinions of
the Jesuits and other Casuists.

A Discourse concerning the necessity of Reformation, with respect to the
Errors and Corruptions of the Church of Rome. 4o.

A Discourse concerning the Celebration of Divine Service in an Unknown Tongue.
4o.

A PAPIST not Misrepresented by PROTESTANTS. Being a Reply to the Reflections
upon the Answer to [A Papist Misrepresented and Represented.] 4o.


