THE SPEECH OF THE Prince of Orange, TO SOME Principle Gentlemen of
Somersetshire and Dorsetshire, on their coming to Join his Highness at Exeter
the 15th of Nov. 1688.
Though we know not all your Persons, yet we have a Catalogue of your Names, and
remember the Character of your Worth and Interest in your Country. You see we
are come according to your Invitation and our Promise. Our Duty to God obliges
us to Protect the Protestant Religion, and our Love to Mankind, your Liberties
and Properties. We expected you that dwelt so near the place of our Landing,
would have joined us sooner, not that it is now too late, nor that we want you
Military Assistance so much as your Countenance, and Presence, to Justify our
Declared Pretentions; rather than accomplish our good and gracious Designs.
Though we have brought both a good Fleet, and a good Army, to render these
Kingdoms happy, by Rescuing all Protestants from Popery, Slavery, and Arbitrary
Power; by Restoring them to their Rights and Properties Established by Law, and
by Promoting of Peace and Trade, which is the Soul of Government, and the very
Lifeblood of a Nation; yet we rely more on the Goodness of God and the Justice
of our Cause, than on any Humane Force and Power whatever. Yet since God is
pleased we shall make use of Humane means, and not expect Miracles, for our
preservation and Happiness: Let us not neglect making use of this Gracious
Opportunity, but with Prudence and Courage, put in Execution our so honorable
purposes. Therefore Gentlemen, Friends and Fellow-Protestants, we bid you and
all your Followers most heartily Welcome to our Court and Camp. Let the whole
World now Judge, if out pretentions are not Just, Generous, Sincere, and above
Price; since we might have, even a Bridge of Gold, to Return back; But it is
our Principle and Resolution rather to dye in a Good Cause, than live in a Bad
one, well knowing that Virtue and True Honor is its own Reward, and the
Happiness of Mankind our Great and Only Design.

FINIS.
EXETER, Printed by J. B. 1688.


