By the King and Queen, A PROCLAMATION.
William R.

WHereas the French King has lately Caused Our Kingdom of Ireland in a Hostile
manner to be Invaded by a great number of Officers, Soldiers, and others, and
has Raised and Carried on a War against Us in Our said Kingdom, and Furnished
Our Rebellious Subjects there with Arms, Ammunition, and Money, to the apparent
Danger and Hazard of that Our Kingdom; We have therefore thought fit, and by
and with the Advice of Our Privy Council, We do by this Our Royal Proclamation,
strictly Prohibit and Forbid all and every Our Loving Subjects, and all other
Persons whatsoever, within these Our Dominions, to Trade or Traffic with any
Person or Persons whatsoever in Our said Kingdom of Ireland, without Our Leave
first Obtained in that behalf, or Correspond or have Communication with any
Person in any Parts or Places within the same, except such as are in Obedience
to Our Government, upon pain of Our utmost Displeasure, and of being proceeded
against as Persons holding Correspondence with Rebels and Enemies. And We do
hereby Require and Command all and singular Justices of the Peace, Mayors,
Sheriffs, Bailiffs, Constables, and other Our Officers and Subjects, to use
their Endeavors in and for the Discovery and Apprehending of all Offenders
herein, to the intent that they may be Prosecuted and Punished according to the
utmost Rigor and Severity of Law.

Given at Our Court at Hampton Court, the Sixth Day of June, 1689. In the First
Year of Our Reign. WILLIAM and Queen MARY.
LONDON, Printed by Charles Bill, and Thomas Newcomb, Printers to the King and
Queen's most Excellent Majesty's. 1689.


