Their Majesty's DECLARATION For Encouragement of Officers, Seamen and
Mariners, Employed in the present Service.
WILLIAM R.

THeir Majesty's out of Their Princely Care and Wisdom, with great Tenderness
and Regard having taken into Consideration the Condition of their Seafaring
Subjects, as well Officers as Seamen and Mariners, and with intent and purpose
that their Resolution and Forwardness, Valor and Faithfulness in the present
Service, necessarily undertaken for the Honor and Defense of Their Majesty's
Dominions, the Support of the Protestant Religion, and Security of the Commerce
and Trade of their Subjects may be duly Rewarded and Encouraged, By and With
the Advice of their Council, have thought fit to Publish and Declare,

That all Captains, Seamen and others that do or shall Serve in any of Their
Majesty's own or Merchant Ships Employed in Their Service, shall (for time to
come in lieu of all Prizes) Have and Receive from Their Majesty's for every
Ship or Prize they shall Lawfully take, whether Merchant Men, or Men of War,
Laden or Light, the Sum of Ten shillings for every Tun the said Ship shall
measure, according to the ordinary Rule of Shipwright's Hall, and Six pounds
thirteen shillings and four pence for every Piece of Ordnance, whether Iron, or
Brass, the same to be paid by the Collector for Prize Goods within Ten days
after the payment of the Ships (in case Adjudication be made of the Ship in the
Admiralty Court) to be shared and divided amongst them proportionably,
according to the respective Places and Offices in the Ship in which they
Served, and according to the Custom of the Seas in that case.

And further, That it be Lawful for all Captains, Seamen, and others, serving
as aforesaid, to take and have to themselves as Pillage, without further or
other account to be given for the same, All such Goods and Merchandises as
shall be found by them, or any of them, in any Ship (they shall take in fight
as Prize) upon or above the Gun-Deck of the said Ship, and not otherwise: And
for every Man of War sunk or destroyed by Firing or otherwise, to have Ten
pounds a Gun only, to be divided as aforesaid, to be paid by the Commissioners
for Prize Goods, within Ten days after the payment of the Ship as aforesaid,
upon Certificate of the Matter of Fact stated by the Council of War.

That in paying the Wages of all Seamen and Mariners, that now do, or hereafter
shall Serve on Board any of Their Majesty's Ships, the following Method and
Regulation shall be observed;

That all Seamen and Mariners that on the First of November next, shall have
been in Their Majesty's Service Six Months, shall by themselves or assigns
receive full Two Months pay; and in like manner those that on the First of May
next shall have been in the Service Six Months, shall receive other Two Months
pay, and so (till their Ships be paid off) shall continue to receive Two Months
pay* after having Served Six Months from the aforesaid days of Payment; For
which Pay or Pays for Two Months from time to time, as aforesaid, Tickets shall
be given gratis under the Hands of the Commander, and other Officers usually
appointed in Signing them, and Letters of Attorney shall be also Attested under
the Hands of the aforesaid Signing Officers gratis, in such manner as shall be
thought to conduce most to the Benefit, Support, and Ease hereby intended to
Seamen in general and their Families, of whom Care shall be taken that these
Payments be made accordingly.

And all Commanders are hereby strictly Charged and Required not to Discharge
any Seaman from Their Majesty's Ships, without giving the Person so Discharged
the usual Ticket for the time of his Service.

That Care shall be taken for defraying the Charges of Sick and Wounded Men,
and for the Relief of Widows, Children and Impotent Parents of such as shall be
slain in the Service at Sea; And for Medals, or other Rewards to such Officers
and Seamen of the Fleet, as shall be found to have done any Eminent or
Extraordinary Service: And that for Supplying of necessary Provisions for Sick
and Wounded men on Board, there shall be allowed by His Majesty Five pounds for
Six Months Service for every Hundred Men.

That upon the Discharge of Sick and Wounded men from the Ships in Their
Majesty's Service, Care shall be taken for the payment of their Tickets and
Conduct Money.

That Directions shall be given to all Mayors, Bailiffs, or other Magistrates
in any Port Towns to take Care for all necessary Accommodations at the charge
of Their Majesty's, for the Relief and Cure of such Sick and Wounded men as
shall be sent on shore.

That the Moiety of Our Hospitals in England, employed for the Cure of Wounded
and Sick People, be reserved during the time of War at Sea, for such as shall
be Wounded in the Service of the Navy, as they shall become void from and after
the First day of June next. 1689.

Given at Our Court at Hampton Court this 23d. Day of May, 1689. In the First
Year of Our Reign.
At the COURT at HAMPTON COURT, The Twenty third of May, 1689.
PRESENT, The King's most Excellent Majesty. His R. Highness Prince George of
Denmark, Lord Privy Seal, Duke of Norfolk, Duke of Schonberg, Earl of Oxford,
Earl of Shrewsbury, Earl of Nottingham, Earl of Maclesfeld, Earl of Portland,
Earl of Fauconberg, Viscount Newport, Viscount Sydney, Lord Bishop of London,
Mr. Vice-Chamberlain, Admiral Herbert, Mr. Russell, Mr. Boscawen.


IT was this Day Ordered by His Majesty in Council, That Their Majesty's
Gracious Declaration for Encouragement of Officers, Seamen and Mariners,
Employed in the present Service be forthwith Printed by His Majesty's Printers:
And that so many Copies thereof as shall be required by the Right Honorable
the Commissioners for Executing the Office of Lord High Admiral of England, be
disposed of as they shall think fit and direct; And so many also to the
Principal Officers and Commissioners of His Majesty's Navy Royal, by them to be
Distributed to such Persons and Places as in their Judgments shall seem
Convenient: some of them also to His Majesty's Principal Secretaries of State,
and to the Lords of His Majesty's most Honorable Privy Council.

Cha. Montague.

LONDON, Printed by Charles Bill, and Thomas Newcomb, Printers to the King and
Queen's most Excellent Majesty's, 1689.


