DIEV ET MON DROIT.


WILLIAM the Third, by the Grace of God, King of England, Scotland, France, and
Ireland, Defender of the Faith etc. TO ALL and Singular Archbishops, Bishops,
Archdeacons, Deans, and their Officials, Parsons, Vicars, Curates, and all
other Spiritual Persons: And also to all Justices of the Peace, Mayors,
Sheriffs, Bailiffs, Constables, Churchwardens Chappelwardens, Headboroughs,
Collectors for the Poor, and their Overseers: And also to all Officers of
Cities, Boroughs, and Towns Corporate: And to all other our Officers, Ministers
and Subjects whatsoever they be, as well within Liberties as without, to whom
these Presents shall come, Greeting.

WHEREAS It has been humbly Represented unto Us by the Petition of William
Ebourne, John Ebourne, William Marshall, Thomas Huggins, and Marmaduke Roberts,
and above One Hundred others Sufferers by Fire, in the Parish of Saint Mary
Magdalen Bermondsey, in the County of Surry: And also by a Certificate made at
the General Quarter Sessions of the Peace, held by Adjournment for the said
County, on Thursday the Twentieth day of July last, under the Hands of our
Trusty and Well-beloved Sir Peter Daniel, Knight, Anthony Bowyer, Samuel Lewin,
Samuel Atkinson, Thomas Lant, Charles Cox, James Isaacson, and Richard Marsh,
Esquires, Justices of the Peace for Our said County: THAT on the Fourteenth day
of June last, there happened near the River of Thames, in the said Parish of
Saint Mary Magdalen Bermondsey, where the Petitioners were Inhabitants, a most
Dreadful and Sudden Fire, which in the space of a few Hours consumed and burnt
down to the Ground the Dwelling-houses, of the said poor Petitioners, (the said
Dwelling-houses being in Number One Hundred and Sixteen) And also the
Warehouses, Sheds, Stables, Outhouses, Wharfs, and other Buildings: And also
burnt several Ships and Vessels laying on the Shore, and some in Yards:
Together with the Houshold-Goods and other Goods, Chattels, and Implements of
Trade belonging to the said poor Sufferers: The Loss sustained thereby
amounting to above Twenty three Thousand and Seventy nine Pounds, Three
Shillings, and Sixpence, as appeared to Our said Justices upon a serious and
strict Examination by them taken in open Court, upon the Oaths of the said poor
Sufferers, as also upon the Oaths of several experienced and able Workmen, and
of several other honest and substantial Householders within the said Parish, who
viewed and made an Estimate thereof. By which said Dismal Calamity, the said
poor Sufferers and their Families (who by their great Industry in Trade and
Commerce, had acquired considerable Stocks, and were always forward in
relieving others) are now become destitute of all Support and Livelihood, and
no ways able to sustain themselves, but must fall into great Want and Penury,
Unless timely relieved by the Charitable Aid of our Loving Subjects.

AND Have therefore humbly besought Us to grant unto them Our gracious License
and Protection under Our Great Seal of England, to Authorize and Enable them to
Ask and Receive the Charitable Contributions and Benevolence of all Our Loving
Subjects within Our Kingdom of England, Dominion of Wales, and Town of Berwick
upon Tweed: Unto which their humble Request, We have condescended, and do by
these Presents in a peculiar manner Recommend their deplorable Condition to the
tender Regard and Charitable Consideration of all Our Loving Subjects, not
doubting but that they will extend their Bowels of Compassion to their said
poor Suffering Brethren for their Relief and Support upon this sad Occasion.

KNOW YE THEREFORE, That of Our Royal Favor and Princely Compassion, We have
given and granted, and by these Our Letters Patents under Our Great Seal of
England, do give and grant unto the said poor Sufferers the Inhabitants of the
said Parish of Saint Mary Magdalen Bermondsey, and to their Deputy and
Deputies, the Bearer and Bearers hereof (Authorized and Deputed in that Behalf,
as in these Presents is Appointed) full Power, License, and Authority, to ask,
gather, receive, and take the Alms and Charitable Benevolence of all Our Loving
Subjects, not only Householders, Masters and Mistresses, but also Lodgers,
Servants, Strangers and others in all and every the Counties, Cities,
Cinque Ports, Towns-Corporate, Universities, Boroughs, Privileged Places,
Parishes, Chappelries, Towns, Villages, Hamlets, and all other Places
whatsoever, within Our Kingdom of England, Dominion of Wales, and Town of
Berwick upon Tweed, toward the Support and Relief of the said poor distressed
Sufferers.

WHEREFORE We Require and Command You and every of You, That at such Time and
Times as the Deputy and Deputies, the Bearer and Bearers hereof, shall come and
repair to any of Your Churches, Chapels, or Assemblies for Religious Worship,
to ask and receive the Alms and Charitable Benevolence of Our said Loving
Subjects, That Ye quietly permit and suffer them so to do, without any manner
of Your Letts or Contradictions. And You the said Parsons, Vicars, Ministers,
and Curates, upon the next Lord's Day after these our Letters Patents, or
Duplicates, or True Copies thereof shall be produced or tendered unto You, or to
the Churchwardens, or Chappelwardens respectively, shall deliberately and
affectionately publish and declare the Tenor of the same unto Our said Loving
Subjects, and by the most prevailing Arguments, Excite, Persuade, and Stir them
up to extend their liberal Contributions toward their said Great Losses.

AND to the Intent all Our Loving Subjects of Ability, of what Persuasion
soever may not exempt themselves from contributing hereunto, We do hereby
charge and command the Preachers and Ministers of all Congregations and
Assemblies for Religious Worship, That they and every of them do publish these
Presents, and effectually exhort their respective Congregations to manifest
their Charity upon this Occasion.

AND YOU the said Churchwardens, Chappelwardens, Collectors for the Poor, and
their Overseers, together with the Minister where it conveniently may be, are
hereby required to go from House to House upon the Weekdays next following the
Publication hereof, to Collect the Alms of Our said Loving Subjects. And the
Sum and Sums collected by Virtue hereof to indorse upon these Our Letters
Patents or the said Copies, in Words at length and not in Figures only;
together with the Names of the Counties, Cities, Towns, Parishes, Chappelries,
and Places where the same was collected, and the Time and Times when collected;
Which Indorsments are to be subscribed by the Ministers and Your selves, and
also to be entered into your Books of Account for the said Parishes,
Chapyelries, and Places respectively. And You are also to deliver all the said
Moneys with all the said Copies unto the said Bearer and Bearers hereof,
Authorized as herein is appointed, whenever You shall be by them or any of
them thereunto required, but to no other Person or Persons whatsoever whose
receiving thereof together with their or any of their Acquittance or
Acquittances shall be your sufficient Discharge for so doing. Which said Bearer
and Bearers are hereby willed and required upon Receipt of the said Money, to
pay the same into the Chamber of Our City of London, within Thirty Days next
after receipt thereof, From whence the same is to be issued, disposed of, and
distributed to and amongst the said poor Sufferers, for their Support and
toward rebuilding the said Houses and Buildings, and repairing such as were
spoiled by the said Fire in such manner AS Our Right Trusty and Well-beloved
Sir Richard Levett, Knight. Lord Mayor of Our City of London, and the
Lord Mayor for such the time then being, Our Trusty and Well-beloved Sir
Francis Child, Knight, Alderman of Our City of London, Sir Thomas Cuddon,
Knight, Chamberlain of Our said City of London, and the Chamberlain of Our said
City for such the Time being, Samuel Lewin Esquire, Samuel Atkinson Esquire,
Charles Cox Esquire, and John Cholmeley Esquire, or any Five or more of them,
shall from Time to Time under their respective Hands and Seals, direct and
appoint. Which said Persons, We do hereby constitute and appoint, Commissioners
and Trustees of the said Charity, with full Power to them or any Five or more
of them, to appoint Collectors, under their respective Hands and Seals, and to
see the Money applied and distributed as aforesaid amongst the said poor
Sufferers, in such proportion and with such regard to their Losses and
Conditions, as to them shall seem Just and Equal; and to no other Use, Intent,
or Purpose whatsoever, Care being already taken by Our said Justices of the
Peace in their said Session, that Bond is taken of the said Sufferers with
Sureties which remain amongst the Records of the Sessions of Peace for Our said
County of Surry; That the said Sufferers nor any of them shall at any time
convert, employ, or bestow any of the said Money to the Benefit and Advantage of
any Landlord or other Person whatsoever, but that the same shall be employed
and bestowed in re-edifying, re-building, and repairing the said Houses and
Premises, consumed by the said Fire.

AND LASTLY, Our Will and Pleasure is, That no Person or Persons whatsoever,
shall collect or receive the said Moneys of or from the said Churchwardens,
Chappelwardens, Collectors for the Poor, and their Overseers, or any other but
such only as shall be thereunto appointed and authorized by Deputation, under
the Hands and Seals of the abovenamed Commissioners and Trusties, or any Five
or more of them. IN WITNESS whereof, We have caused these Our Letters to be
made Patents, and to continue for One whole Year from Michaelmas next, and no
longer. WITNESS Our Self at Westminster, the Eight and Twentieth day of May, in
the Twelfth Year of Our Reign.

Fall per Pearson.
God save the King.
LONDON: Printed by BENJ. MOTTE, for the Patentees, 1700.


