By the King and Queen, A PROCLAMATION, By and with the Advice of Their
Majesty's Privy Council, For preventing of False Musters and Injuries which may
be done, either to the Soldiery or Subjects.
William R.

WHereas We have received Information, That notwithstanding the great Care that
has been taken by Us from time to time since Our Accession to the Crown, to
furnish Money constantly for the Subsistence of Our Forces, (and so far as the
Necessity of Our Affairs would admit) for the Clearing of their Pay; yet some
of the Officers of Our Army, respecting more their own Profit then Our Service,
or the Ease or Safety of Our Subjects, have presumed by False Musters to
Defraud Us, and by detaining part of the Moneys which should have been paid
unto the Soldiery, have given Occasion of Disorders amongst them, and to Abuses
and Injuries which have been put upon Our Subjects where the Soldiers have been
Quartered; We having Resolved to use Effectual Means to have all Our Troops and
Companies complete, and that the Soldiers who Serve Us shall be justly and duty
Paid from time to time without any Injury to be done them by their Officers,
and to prevent all Oppressions in the Counties which might be committed by the
Soldiery, by Non-payment of their Quarters, or otherwise, have thought fit, by
the Advice of Our Privy Council, to Give Commission under Our Great Seal to
several of the Nobility and Gentry, and thereby Authorizing and Empowering
them, or any three of them, to make diligent Examination and Enquiry in all
Places where any of Our Troops or Companies have been, are, or shall be
Quartered, whether the same Troops or Companies respectively, have been, or
shall be complete in their Numbers, and what Deficiencies are, or may be in
them, or any of them, and whether the Subsistence Money and Clearings have
been, or shall be duly paid as they ought, and what Injuries or Abuses have
been, or shall be Committed in the Countries in the Soldiers Quarters, or
otherwise, and to Redress the same, and from time to time to make such
Representations unto Us, as Our Service, and the Good of Our Subjects shall
Require in these Cases, or any of them; And therefore We have thought fit to
make Public these Presents, to the end any of Our Subjects or Soldiers who
shall receive any Wrong or Injury in the Premises, may know where and how to
seek Redress.

Given at Our Court at Hampton Court the Thirteenth day of May, 1689. In the
First Year of Our Reign.
God Save King WILLIAM and Queen MARY.
LONDON, Printed by Charles Bill, and Thomas Newcomb, Printers to the King and
Queen's most Excellent Majesty's. 1689.


