By the King, A PROCLAMATION.
WILLIAM R.

Whereas it has been represented unto His Majesty, That diverse Frauds and
Abuses have been and are Committed by Collectors and others concerned in
Assessing, Collecting and Paying of the Duties Granted unto His Majesty, by an
Act of Parliament made in the Sixth and Seventh Years of His Reign, Entitled,
AN Act for Granting to His Majesty certain Rates and Duties upon Marriages,
Births and Burials, and upon Batchelors and Widowers, for the term ot Five
Years, for Carrying on the War against France with Vigor; Which said Duties
were, by another Act made in the Eighth Year of His Majesty's Reign, Entitled,
An Act for Making good the Deficiencies of several Funds therein mentioned, and
for Enlarging the Capital Stock of the Bank of England, and for Raising the
Public Credit, continued payable to His Majesty until the First Day of August,
One thousand seven hundred and six: And whereas by means of the said Frauds and
Abuses, the Sums of Money intended to be Raised by the said Acts, for and
toward Satisfaction of the Principal and Interest Moneys charged thereupon,
falls greatly short: Aad whereas by an Act of Parliament made in the Ninth and
Tenth Years of His Majesty's Reign, Entitled, An Act for Preventing Frauds and
Abuses, in the Charging, Collecting and Paying the Duties upon Marriages,
Births, Burials, Batchelors and Widowers, It is amongst other things Enacted,
That the Commissioners appointed thereby for Raising and Levying the said
Duties, should on or before the First Day of August, One thousand six hundred
ninety and eight, and so from time to time once or oftener in every Three
Months, Meet together at some convenient Place or Places within their
respective Limits or Divisions for the Execution of the said Acts, who are
thereby Empowered to Warn, not only the respective Assessors and Collectors, but
also the Surveyors, Inspectors and Receivers General, and (if need be) any
Parsons, Vicars, Curates, Parish-Clerks, and others concerned, in relation to
the said Duties, or any of them, to Appear before them, and other the
Commissioners, at every such Meeting, and Requiring them, or such of them, to
whom it appertains respectivly, to bring in their Assessments, Presentiments and
Accounts for or concerning the said Duties, and also the Registers of
Marriages, Births and Burials, or Copies thereof, as shall be directed; and if
Default be made therein contrary to such Warning given, then the said
Commissioners, or the major part of them present at such Meeting, shall and may
Fine the Offenders for every such Default, not exceeding Five Pounds; And the
said Commissioners, or any Two or more of them, shall and may proceed to
Examine the said Assessments, Presentiments and Accounts, and also the said
Registers, or the Copies thereof; And if they, or any Two or more of them, do
find that any Person or Persons are Omitted, or not fully Charged, shall and
may cause such Person or Persons to be Taxed and Charged according to the true
meaning of the said Acts, and thereupon to Allow and Sign the Assessments or
Presentiments, and to cause Abstracts or Duplicates of the gross Sum or Sums,
which from time to time shall appear to them to have accrued, or which ought to
have accrued to His Majesty in every Parish or Place, for the said respective
Duties upon Marriages, Births, Burials, Batchelors and Widowers, to be made up
and Signed by them, or any Two or more of them, and to be forthwith transmitted
into the Exchequer, to wit, into the Office of the Kings Remembrancer there;
And that the respective Collectors of the said Duties, shall render their
Accounts, upon Oath to the best of their Knowledge, which Oaths shall and may
be Administered by the said Commissioners, or any Two or more of them; And in
default of rendering such Account, when thereunto required by the said
Commissioners, or any Two or more of them, every Collector making such Default
shall and may be Fined by the said Commissioners, or any Two or more of them,
not exceeding Twenty Pounds: And whereas by an Act made in the Eleventh and
Twelfth Years of His Majesty's Reign, Entitled, An Act for Granting an Aid to
His Majesty, by Sale of the Forfeited and other Estates and Interests in
Ireland, and by a Land Tax in England, for the several Purposes therein
mentioned, It is amongst other things Enacted, That all and every the Persons
Appointed to be Commissioners for putting that Act in Execution for the said
Tax or Assessments, within the Kingdom of England, Dominion of Wales, and Town
of Berwick upon Tweed, be also Commissioners for putting in Execution the
several Acts for the Duties upon Marriages, Births and Burials, Batchelors and
Widowers, and all the Powers in the said several Acts contained, within all and
every the several and respective Countries, Ridings, Cities, Boroughs,
Cinque Ports, Towns and Places for which they are Commissioners by the said
Act, during the continuance of the several Acts for the said Duties
respectively; And that the said Commissioners, or any Three or more of them,
should have full Power and Authority, and they and every of them are thereby
Required and Empowered to Act, Do, Proceed and Finish in all Matters and Things
relating to the said Duties upon Marriages, Births, Burials, Batchelors and
Widowers, and the Arrears thereof, as fully and effectually as if the said
Commissioners were particularly Named and Appointed in the said Acts for the
aforesaid Duties of Marriages, Births, Burials, Batchelors and Widowers, during
the time aforesaid: And whereas the said Frauds and Abuses have been in a great
measure occasioned by the not meeting of the said Commissioners, and calling to
Account the said Collectors, and other Persons concerned in the said Duties,
pursuant to the Directions of the said Act; His Majesty therefore (with the
Advice of His Privy Council) has thought fit to Issue this His Royal
Proclamation, hereby Commanding and Requiring all Persons whatsoever, any ways
concerned in the Assessing, Levying and Paying any of the Duties Granted by the
aforesaid Acts of Parliament, to be Careful and Diligent in Performing their
several Duties by the said Acts Required, and His Majesty does hereby strictly
Charge and Command, all and every the Commissioners Appointed by the said Acts
for managing the said Duties, That they do, pursuant to the said Acts, meet at
their usual Places of Meeting in their respective Limits or Divisions, once in
every Three Months, or oftener, if need require, and to Summon before them not
only the Assessors and Collectors of the said Duties, but also the Surveyors
and Receivers General, and (if need be) any Parsons, Vicars, Curates,
Parish-Clerks, and others concerned in relation to the said Duties, to bring in
their Assessments and Accounts, and Registers, or Copies thereof, to the end
the said Commissioners may inform themselves whether the said Assessments are
made, Accounts taken, Registers kept, and the Duties Answered, pursuant to the
Directions of the said Acts, and Punish them that shall be Negligent in their
Duty, or Act any thing contrary to the Directions of the said Acts. And His
Majesty does hereby likewise strictly Charge and Command every Ecclesiastical,
or other Person Required by the said Acts, or any of them, to keep a Register
of Persons Buried, Christened, Born or Married; That they do in the same
Registers respectively, according to the best of their Knowledge and
Information, together with the Name of every Person so Married, Buried,
Christened or Born, Set down and Express, or cause to be Set down and Expressed
in Writing, the respective Degree, Condition or Quality, according to which His
Majesty's Duty ought to be Paid for every such Burial, Birth or Marriage
respectively; And in the case of Burials, the Names of the Heirs, Executors,
Administrators, Fathers, Mothers, Guardians, Churchwardens, Overseers or
others, who by the said Acts ought to Pay for the same, and where they dwell
respectively; And in case of Births, the Names of the Fathers, Mothers, or
those that take on them the Guardianship or Care of such Children so Born, and
where they Live respectively; And in case of Marriages, the Places of Abode of
the several Husbands, on Pain of being Prosecuted for the Penalty of Twenty
Pounds Imposed by the said Act on those who shall refuse so to do, with Intent
to Defraud His Majesty of any Part of the said Duties.

Given at Our Court at Kensington, the Fifth Day of December, 1700. In the
Twelfth Year of Our Reign.
God save the King.
LONDON, Printed by Charles Bill, and the Executrix of Thomas Newcomb,
deceased, Printers to the Kings most Excellent Majesty 1700.


