A Second Letter TO A BISHOP From A MINISTER OF HIS DIOCESE.

LONDON, Printed in the Year MDCXCII.

My Lord,
SInce my last of October 26, 1691, which you were pleased to thank me for, and
to publish, I received your Lordship's Commands by Mr. H. to add what has
since occurred to my Mind, concerning the same matter; and more particularly
you require me to lay before you those common Causes of the greatest of our
Evils, and the most powerful Remedies for the removing them. Since that time I
have been hindered by a dangerous Sickness, the effects whereof I have not as
yet got clear of: Besides this, when I had recovered to some small degree of
Health, I met with other things which unavoidably hindered me from obeying your
Lordship's Commands. And having been thus long restrained, I believe I had not
entertained any farther Thoughts of this matter, had I not by your Lordship's
Letter, of Feb. 27. last past, been vehemently urged to add what I had farther
to say upon this occasion.

What I now trouble your Lordship with, is perfectly in obedience to your
Commands, and the freedom I shall use proceeds from the same cause: For tho I
have had ancient acquaintance with your Lordship in the University, yet that
would not excuse the Liberty I take, had I not been obliged by your Authority,
as well as secured by your Friendship.

It is a very unpleasant thing to find fault, and especially to me who know my
own faults so well, that I cannot tell how to make severe Reflections upon
others. I am under no Discontent, I desire no Preferment, am of no Party, and
have no ill will to any Man living: Besides, I know it is very often an argument
of a weak Mind, to cry out of the present time, and commend the past: And
therefore I find my self uneasy under this Task.

But when I consider to whom I write, and for what end, I cannot refuse to say
something. For tho I take no pleasure in seeing Wounds, and raking into Sores,
yet I should be too nice and uncharitable also, should I refuse this where I
had any prospect of working a Cure. The Eyes of good Men are upon the Lords the
Bishops at this time, and it is greatly hoped you will be Repairers of our
Breaches; and you will greatly disappoint the just expectations of the wise and
good if ye be not. In view whereof I shall offer those things which follow in
this Paper. And I shall complain of no Evils but such as the Bishops, by their
united Counsels and Endeavors, by their Interest and their Influence, may in
great measure remove. I say in great measure; for certain it is, that they
cannot be altogether removed. Some of them are such, as when they are once
admitted, they are not to be cured, but are like Errors in the first
Concoction, that are not to be amended afterward. However this may be done;
they may be for the future prevented, and the present Set of Bishops may leave
the Nation in a much better case than they found it. The Particulars which I
humbly lay before your Lordship are these that follow.

I. The care of Schools. There are a considerable Number of these in your
Lordship's Diocese, and some of them well endowed; your Lordship has the
Choice of one of the Masters, and the Approbation of several; and none of them
can Teach without a License from you. I hope many of the Masters of these
Schools discharge themselves well; it is of great moment they should all do so.
I must needs say, I fear they do not. I once took an occasion to spend some
time in Examining one of them, at the request of some Friends, whose Children
were placed there for their better Instruction, and of one of the Governors of
it. I was greatly surprised to find the Charity of the Pious Founder abused,
and the honest Design of the Parents of so many Children disappointed. I Will
tell your Lordship nothing but matter of Fact. In that great School there were
not above two that understood any thing of their Grammar, even among those who
had been there above three Years. The first Rudiments were never taught them
with care; and, for want of that, all the after-care imported nothing, and did
but make the Children weary, and render the School a Prison to them. I hoped,
at least, I should have found them instructed in Religion, but they were so far
from it, that they were not Taught any Catechism at all by their Master, who
never prayed with them, nor took any care of their Souls. You cannot imagine
what an Affliction this was to me. There must be some Remedy found out for this
great Evil.

Upon this Occasion I humbly lay before you the following Particulars:

1. That there might be from time to time some certain and fixed times
appointed for the strict Examination of all public Schools; This is practiced
with good success in many great Schools, especially about the City of London:
If this were done with great care, and openly, you would soon find the good
effects of it. I could tell your Lordship where one of the best Schools in
England had been utterly ruined, had it not been for this Care. The Governors
of it, upon this public Examination, removed the negligent Master, and placed
another; who, by his great Care and Diligence, restored it from a very low
Condition to a most flourishing one. 'Twill be no hard matter for your Lordship
to accomplish this. And you may find Men of Probity who will undertake this
trouble, and give you a faithful account. But then they must enquire not only
into the Learning, but Manners of the Scholars also; and what care has been
taken to bring them up in the nurture and admonition of the Lord. I need not
acquaint your Lordship how much the Public is concerned in this matter. The
timely Care of their Morals may save many Souls, and prevent unspeakable
Mischiefs which flow from want of an early and wise Discipline.

2. That for the future all possible Care be taken, that Men of great Probity
be chosen Masters of Schools. Where the Bishops nominate and approve, and,
indeed, generally in all great Schools, this Care may be taken. The main Care
is, that the Master of a School be a Person of great Probity, a Man of Virtue
and Integrity, Yet Learning here is not to be despised, where it may be had,
but not so much to be insisted on; For it is not necessary as Probity is. A
little Learning with great Diligence, wise Discipline, good Temper, and hearty
Love of God and Religion, is preferrable to the greatest measure of Learning. I
have known several Country Schoolmasters, that had very little Learning
themselves, that have had flourishing Schools, and some of the greatest Men
this Age has known have been bred under them. But then they have been Men of
great Wisdom, and most exact Discipline; their Piety has been great, and their
Lives exemplary; and their Youth (like Jacob's Lambs) have from what they saw
in their Master's Lives, and from that goodly Idea of Religion which they laid
before them, conceived aright, and been formed into a Conformity to the
excellent Pattern laid in their way. I have the honor to know some Persons of
Quality of singular Virtue, that do own the good which they received this way.

II. The Care of the Universities. This Care perhaps may not be thought to
belong to the Bishops, but to the Heads of Houses, and Fellows of Colleges. But
still it must be granted, that the united Endeavors of the Bishops may do much
in this matter. For some of them are Heads of Colleges themselves, others of
them are Visitors of them, and many of them have a great Influence upon those
Heads and Fellows as they are Deans or Dignitaries of their Churches, Chaplains
in their Families, and have their Dependencies or Expectances from them. And
very certain it is, that the want of good Discipline in the University is the
Source of unspeakable Mischief to the whole Kingdom. For want of due Care in
this Matter the Gentry have been corrupted, at least not improved; The Country
has been filled with ignorant and indiscreet Ministers and Curates; The People
have taken occasion to forsake our Church; Schism has been continued, and is
like to be so; There are those who durst not trust their Children there, and
therefore have chosen to send them to St. Omers, or else have commended them to
the Care of Dissenters who have taught Schools, and undertaken to Instruct them
in the University Learning; By this means they have been prejudiced against the
Church of England, and many of them become the professed Enemies of it. I am
under no temptation to speak hardly of our Universities, having had a Relation
to both of them, and also being under great Obligations to them. But yet I
cannot but say that their Discipline of late Years has been very lax; I have
been sometimes desired to recommend a Number of young Gentlemen to the Care of
Tutors, and have found it a very difficult Task to place them safely. It Is
notorious, and not to be concealed; I have in passing through one of them,
heard more Oaths sworn by the Students, and more of them in or coming out of a
Tavern, than I had observed whiles I lived there in many Years time. I make no
doubt but some in each University have used great Care. But yet this could not
avail much, when the greater Number were negligent; And some of the Governing
part gave Example of great Intemperance by frequenting Taverns, or apointing
drinking Clubs in their Colleges. I know very well both the Men, and Places
where they met, and did not only debauch themselves but reproached better Men
than themselves over their Bottles, as Men not true to the Interest of their
Church. The young Scholars were in the mean time neglected, permitted to
frequent public Houses daily, and not called to a strict account of their
Studies or Manners. The Exercises required by the Statute have been huddled
over, or bought off; Degrees given without any merit; Preferments bestowed by
Friendship, and Letters of great Persons; The Charity of Pious Benefactors
perverted; Offices both public and in particular Colleges not performed, tho
the Salary were received; Preferments kept that were inconsistent with the
Local Statutes; The Studious and Virtuous have been disheartened; Eating and
drinking to excess has been the practice for many Years; I could say much
more, and am very sure I could prove it also. I had rather proceed to offer at
some Remedy; I lay before your Lordship the following Particulars.

(I.) That the first Care should be to make the Universities Nurseries of Piety
and Virtue. The Learning which the young Student gets will do him or the World
little good if his Morals be not secured: And indeed if his Virtue be
preserved, he is in a fairer way to get Learning also. This ought to be the
first and greatest Care; I wish it were not upon the matter wholly neglected.
Your Lordship remembers the Words of Socrates before Hippias. Xenoph. Mem. l.
IV.
It Is (says he) a wonderful thing, that whereas if a man would put one out to
learn a Trade or Art, he may easily find a Place where this may be learned; Nay
more, it is said, he may easily find those who will teach an Ox or an Horse to
be tractable and useful. But if a Man were himself disposed to learn what is
Righteous, or would place out his Son or Servant to be taught it, he would not
be able to find where to place himself or them. I believe there is nothing so
hard and difficult a matter as to find a School of Virtue. We have often seen
those who went innocent to the Universities come thence depraved. And this has
many times happened through want of Care and diligent Application. That part of
our Age which we spend there requires the utmost Care, and generally is
neglected. There are very many that there have lost their Virtue and Modesty;
That have been so far from Improvement there that they have been ruined. 'Twill
stand you in hand to procure such a Discipline, and order that it shall be an
hard matter for a young Student to miscarry. This will never be whiles they
that are sent thither for Instituton have the Liberty to live as they list.
There must be great Care taken to form their Manners, to possess them with the
Fear of God, and Sense of a World to come; To convince them of the Difference
of things; to principle them in true Religion, and every Virtuous thing. They
must be kept from Wine and Wantonness; inured to Labor and Exercise;
restrained from the Conversation of the Town; not suffered to go out of their
Walls without leave; They must be strictly kept to Prayers, and taught to pray
by themselves; instructed with exact Care for the Holy Sacrament, and kept to
frequent Communion; the idle and vicious must be Carefully removed, and all ill
Examples taken out of the way. The Heads and Governors of Colleges may with
due Care turn their Colleges into Religious Houses; and it is hoped your
Lordship and the other Bishops will take this Matter into Consideration, and do
your utmost toward the effecting it.

(II.) 'Twill be highly fit that the Heads and other Governors should be
visited. Indeed there are Visitors appointed by the several Founders for some
Colleges, and for some Number of them in one of the Universities: But we have
not seen any great Fruits of this Power. My meaning is, that some Number of Men
should be Commissioned from time to time to Visit both Universities; Men that
should be Empowered to Examine strictly into Things, and make Report, that the
Negligent may be punished severely. I will not undertake to make Articles of
Enquiry, but I think I may name some that will be needful, viz. How the Estates
of the Founder and Benefactors have been dispensed? How the Statutes of the
House have been observed? Have the Heads and Governors resided as they ought?
Have they kept no Place, nor been possessed of Estates inconsistent with the
Statutes of the House? Have all Exercises been duly performed? Diligence and
Virtue duly encouraged? What Lives do they lead? And what Account can they give
of Themselves and of their Time spent there? What Lectures are read by the
Professors and other Lecturers, and whether all be done which the Statute
requires? Are those Studies pursued Diligently which tend to make Men useful to
the Public? Are there no unstatutable Fees exacted? No expensive Customs
introduced? No unnecessary Eating-Houses allowed? etc.

Were these things looked into by Men of Authority, were the Criminals severely
punished, and some of them that are most Guilty removed; were this done
frequently, and with due Care, we should soon see the good Effects of it. There
would be another Face of things quickly; Profaneness and Idleness would skulk
presently and soon be banished; and Diligence and Virtue would revive and hold
up their Heads. We have now many Men that have spent many Years there in order
to serve the Church as they profess; when they come for Orders they have not
the Learning of some Schoolboys. This I know upon my certain Knowledge, having
been employed to Examine them when they offered themselves to be Ordained. I
could give your Lordship a great many Instances of those who have not had Skill
enough to turn the Creed into true Latin, or an Article of Religion; And a
great many others that had some of this Skill, yet had not any Understanding at
all of Theological Matters; and yet were these Dunces admitted to Degrees, and
brought Testimonials under the College Seal. My Lord, you cannot imagine with
what Grief I write this: But thus it is; And there must be due Care taken of it.

(III.) These Visitors might be of farther Use if they had Orders to require
some Public Exercises whilst they visited; If they were obliged to bring with
them a List of the most Pious and Deserving, that should be kept in some
public Place; If they had Power to appoint some Discipline, and revive the
Exercises of greatest Use that are now omitted. A great many things might be
named under this Head which I forbear. One thing might easily be done, viz. The
requiring all the Students to speak the Latin Tongue within the Walls of their
House with each other. To do it at least at their Meals. I remember well when
this was done in a certain College, and with that success that many of the
House had gained that readiness, and were arrived to that Elegance that they
far exceeded all Foreigners. It Is a shame Men should be at a loss in this
Matter when every Foreigner has attained it that knows any thing of Letters.

(IV.) 'Twill be necessary that greater Care be taken in bestowing Degrees to
those only who deserve them. That Testimonials be not given promiscuously; That
the Good and Bad have not the same Testimony; That a Course and Method of
Studies be contrived; That there be greater Care taken to encourage
Mathematical Learning, and those Parts of it especially which are most for the
Use of Life; That those Theological Studies be commended which tend to make Men
more Serviceable to the Church, and better able to Defend our Common
Christianity against all Gainsayers; That particular Care be taken to Direct
young Students in their Study of the Scriptures.

III. There ought to be very great Care taken in admitting to Holy Orders. And
this is a Care peculiarly belonging to the Bishops. The want of this Care has
been attended with unspeakable Mischiefs. The Church groans under them, and is
like to do so for some time. The Bishops are the only Judges of the Fitness of
Persons that come to be Ordained, and may refuse them that they judge unfit,
without any danger of a quare impedit, or any other Legal Molestation. But when
they are admitted, a Bishop runs an hazard, that refuses to give them
Institution. If another Bishop Ordain an unfit Person, and that Person be
presented to your Lordship to a Cure, you will find your self under great
Difficulty. If you admit him, you deliver up the Cure of Souls to a Person you
do not Approve; If you refuse him, you run the hazard of being sued at Law.
Indeed where you have Ordained a Person, you cannot reasonably refuse him
Institution when he desires it. But it is very hard you should be obliged to
Institute him whom another Bishop has without due Care admitted to Holy
Orders. This careless admitting Men to Holy Orders, may, by the united
Agreement of all the Bishops, be prevented for the future. I need not tell you
what good Laws are made on this behalf, and how easy a thing 'twill be for the
future to take Care of this Matter. But every Bishop must take the utmost Care,
and the Archbishops had need require a strict and constant Account that others
do their Duty. For if one Bishop be Careless, as that Bishop will be resorted
to and Ordain the greatest Number, so the other Bishops and the Church will
suffer greatly by it. I know there have been some Bishops that have been very
remiss; And some who have had a small Diocese have had great Ordinations, and
that when they lived remote from their Diocese also. This thing must be looked
after Diligently; and 'twere well that every Bishop were obliged to give his
Metropolitan an Account from time to time of the Number and Qualifications of
all those whom he admits into Holy Orders, and of the Places of their abode,
etc.

After all, the Bishops had need be Careful that they be not imposed upon with
false Titles, (a very common practice) with slight Testimonials, and the
perfunctory Examination of a Chaplain. He had need Examine them himself, and
require them that come for Orders to apply themselves to him some considerable
time beforehand, that he may be the better satisfied concerning them. Every
wise Man will be very tender in commending a Person as a Servant to his Friend,
much more if it be to a Place of any considerable Trust. What Care then ought
the Bishops to take when they Commend Men and Admit them to the Service of God,
and of his Church, and the tremendous Care of Immortal Souls? The utmost Care
in this Matter will be little enough. And were this Care taken by all the
Bishops; we should soon see the blessed Fruits of it; young Men would ply their
Studies, and take care of their Lives, and form themselves to some show at
least of Seriousness in Religion. I know very well a certain excellent Prelate
that has in this Matter used Exemplary Care and Diligence; and I am told, by
one that knows, the good Effects of it too. There are very few but have
competently fitted themselves before they have offered themselves to him: And
for the Idle and Negligent, that have heard of many such refused, they have
endeavored with all their Skill to find means to be admitted into Holy Orders
by some other hand. A due Care of this Matter would go a great way in that
Reformation which all good Men desire, and justly hope from the present
Bishops. And this is no more than what is in your Power to do.

IV. A due Care of the Lives of the Clergy, and to see that they Reside on
their Cures and do their Duty.

This is a great part of the Bishops work. And they may do very much in it, and
the Necessities of the Church and the Souls of Men call for it at your Hands. A
wicked Clergyman does unspeakable Mischief. I know a considerable Town that
was some Years since in good order, the People came constantly to Church, and
they all did so: At the usual times they came to the Sacrament also. But a lewd
and scandalous Minister is now the Incumbent of that Place, one that is often
disordered with Drink, and swears commonly. The People are now dispersed: They
are run into separate Meetings; and, in a word, the Town is ruined. I know the
Truth of this; and can name several Places in your Lordship's Diocese where
there is something of this, tho I know no Place where it is so notorious as in
that considerable Town. 'Twill be needful that some Remedy be found out for so
great an Evil. I will not undertake to Direct your Lordship. It Is too evident
how much the Church has lost by such bad Men.

Another Care is that of Residence, which is notoriously neglected. There are a
great Number of Parishes that have no resident Minister or Curate. Instead of
that the Minister comes or sends every Sunday, and the Parishioners are
destitute the rest of the Week. There are many more Parishes which are great,
and have a considerable Revenue, which are supplied by some cheap and very
unfit Curates; By reason whereof the People are scattered, Parsonage-Houses are
dilapidated, Hospitality disused; and, which is the saddest Consideration of
all, the Souls neglected. There are a Number of Ministers in England that do
not Reside on their Livings: Some choose to live from their People in some great
Towns at a distance for the sake of Conversation, or Air, or upon some other
Pretense: Some become Curates or Lecturers in other Places, and forsake their
own Charge: Some are at the Universities on pretense of better fitting
themselves: Some lie about London, hunting after another Living, or some
Lecture there. Some are in the Families of Persons of Honor, others hang about
the Court; and some are in Cathedral-Churches in some Employment there, and
notoriously neglect their cure of Souls in the mean time. I know some that are
perfect Strangers to their People that see them not in several Years, and upon
the matter never preach with them. I know a Person that has one of the best
Livings in England, and has had for sixteen Years last past, and never
preached among them; not for want of Ability, or Leisure, or because he has
any other Cure, or Public Employment, but because he is not reconciled to the
Labor of his Calling. I could enlarge very much on this Head, and yet not
borrow Materials from others. I have seen and do very well know many of the
Neglects of this kind. I am amazed when I seriously consider it, and wonder how
these Men can look up to Heaven, or with what Brow they can look honest Men in
the Face when they are conscious of so great a Sin? It Is time for the Bishops
to look after this Matter, as they would not have the Blood of the neglected
Souls lie upon them.

But your Lordship will say, How can this be prevented? For a great Number of
these Persons have Qualifications and Dispensations, and some others are absent
for Health, or Studies, and other reasonable Causes.

To which I answer, That this will not excuse them that have no reasonable
Cause for their Absence, nor any longer than that Cause continues. I know
several Men that live at the Universities to a considerable Age, and are never
like to be more fit than they are. These Men ought to go to their Cures, and so
should those Men too, who withdrew for want of Health when their Health is
restored. The Dispensations to hold two Livings will not excuse a Man from not
residing upon either. And that has too often been the Case. Besides, it is very
fit those Dispensations should be very rarely given, and it is in the Power of
the Archbishop to restrain them. It Is no creditable thing for a Man to need a
Dispensation generally speaking; And tho where one Living is not a Maintenance,
and another small one is near it, a Dispensation to hold those two may be a
very allowable thing, yet this will not excuse the promiscuous allowance of
Dispensations. I know a great Number of Men that have Plurality of the best
Livings, and those too at a considerable distance; and the same Men that have
two great Livings apiece, have many of them besides one, some two or three
Dignities apiece. Great have been the Mischiefs of Non Obstante's and
Dispensations. They were first used in the Court of Rome. Vid. Godolphin.
Repertor. Canonic. p. 300.
'Twas an ill President and Mischievous to all the Commonwealths of
Christendom. For the Temporal Princes perceiving that the Pope dispensed with
Canons, in imitation thereof have used their Prerogative to Dispense with their
Penal Laws and Statutes, when as before they caused their Laws to be
Religiously observed, like the Laws of Medes and Persians, which cannot be
dispensed with. For this reason it was that a Canonist said, Dispensatio est
vulnus quod vulnerat jus commune. Another says, That all Abuses of this kind
would be reformed, Si duo tantum verba [non Obstante] non Impedirent. And
Matthew. Paris, having recited certain Decrees made in the Council of Lions,
which were beneficial for the Church of England, adds, Sed haec omnia and
alia per hoc repagulum [non Obstante] infirmantur.

After all it is certain, that there are very many Non-residents who have no
Dispensation, nor Excuse that is reasonable. It Is pity but these should be
obliged to reside, or proceeded against according to the Statutes in that
behalf. If they were duly punished, according to Law, we should soon find the
good Effects of it.

I have heard some wise Men affirm, who understand the present Posture of
things in the City of London, that there are a considerable Number of Men
there, who are Curates, or Lecturers, or Readers, or at least Candidates for
such Places, that have Cures in the Country which they leave, and some of those
Cures not well provided for. If this be so, I am sure it is a great Evil: But
this is an Evil easily cured. The Bishop of London may put a stop to it when he
pleases. And I believe he will do it; because I know he is a Prelate of great
Virtue, of most Exemplary Diligence and Care; and of so great Wisdom besides,
that he cannot but discern the Mischievous Effects of such a Permission. Were
he put in Mind of this Matter, certainly he would never License any Curate or
Lecturer there who had a Cure elsewhere. And did he once take up this
Resolution, he would soon discourage this sort of Men. It Is of vast Consequence
that the City of London should be well supplied: And that it may be, without
employing Men that have Cure of Souls already. And this I must needs say, That
tho I have sometimes heard that there are such Men employed in the City, I
cannot believe they are Approved or Licensed by that Eminent Bishop.

But your Lordship is not only to take Care that your Clergy Reside, but that
they do their Duty also: And that amounts to a great deal more than Preaching
every Sunday, and Reading Prayers on Wednesdays, Fridays, and Holy Days. Sick
People are to be visited, the Poor to be provided for, young Ones to be
instructed, the Good to be encouraged, the Afflicted to be comforted, the
Criminals to be admonished, the Contentious to be reconciled.

There are many Emergencies to be provided for. The Minister is the common
Father of his People. He is always wanted, and the utmost Care he can take, the
most Time he can spare will be all little enough to spend among them. The very
Catechizing the Youth of his Parish, preparing them for Confirmation first, and
then for the Sacrament of the Lord's Supper will require great Thought and
Pains. The bare saying the Catechism is not enough. They must be brought to
Understand their Religion, and made sensible how much it is their Interest and
their Duty. The least Parish will need the Presence and Labor of its Pastor.
This is not to be left to a raw Curate. We affront Almighty God by taking this
Course, and do in this greatest Concern what is never allowed in things of less
Moment. When we have retained a learned Physician, or Lawyer, we will not give
them the liberty to substitute and put upon us some unskilful Apothecary, or
young Attorney. Our Concerns are of greater Value than to be thus left. And
sure our Souls are of greater Worth than our Lives or Estates.

V. A greater Care concerning Confirmation of those who have not been confirmed
before. The Truth of it is, that this has been often huddled over, and with
little Fruit. Whereas it is not only an excellent Institution of it self, but
may be so managed also as to be of unspeakable Use. Those that are to be
Confirmed had need be prepared for it, and the Thing ought to be done with
great Solemnity. To that purpose I humbly offer the following Particulars to
your Lordship's Consideration.

First, That there should be Notice given of a Confirmation some considerable
time before, and that the Minister be required to Prepare the Youth of his
Parish for it; That he have Notice to Instruct them with great Care, not only
in the bare getting the Catechism by Heart, but in enabling them to give such
an Account of the Meaning of what they say, and so possessing them with the
Obligation lying upon them from their Baptismal Vow, that they may be fitly
disposed to receive great Benefit thereby.

Secondly, That none be offered to the Bishop but such as the Minister of the
Parish has thus prepared. And to this purpose the Minister may be obliged to
deliver to the Bishop a List or Catalogue of those who are to be Confirmed by
him, together with a Certificate under his Hand and Seal at the bottom of it;
in which he shall Testify that he has Examined and does Approve of the
Persons abovenamed in Number........ and judges them fit to be Confirmed. It
is to be supposed no Minister will give this Certificate without good Cause.
However the Bishop may upon occasion so order the matter, that he may have some
of them for trial Examined before they are Confirmed, that he may find out the
Fraud if he think it fit, and have any cause to fear due Care has not been
taken. By this course they who are to be Confirmed may be called by Name, and
the Bishop will not be crowded by those who are not Instructed, and by those
who have been Confirmed before. For it has been observed, that many will be
Confirmed often, and many others before they are Instructed, and others that
are so young that they cannot understand what they do.

Thirdly, It Is very fit there should be a Sermon preached on this Solemn
Occasion, setting forth the Grounds upon which Confirmation is Built, the
Advantages of it, with a particular Address to those who are to be Confirmed;
or else the Preacher may discourse of the Baptismal Vow, and of the
Reasonableness of taking that Obligation upon our selves, which was promised in
our Infancy by our Sureties: But your Lordship may choose a wise and good Man
for this Service, and then he will be at no loss for his Argument.

Fourthly, Your Lordship may consider also, whether it might not be fit some
little Book should be devised by common Consent of the Bishops, which might be
of after-use to them who are Confirmed; which Book may be delivered to each of
them at the time of their Confirmation, gratis, (by the Bishop's own Hand) with
an Obligation laid upon them to read it. In this Book there ought to be some
Prayers, and Instructions toward the Preparing for the Holy Sacrament.

Fifthly, The several Ministers are to be strictly charged to have a watchful
Eye over those who are thus Confirmed, and to Prepare them for the Sacrament of
the Lord's Supper as soon after as is fit and convenient.

These are my sudden Thoughts of this Matter. Your Lordship is the best Judge
of the whole. Thus much is certain, that if this Care were taken, or some
better, those who now despise it would be very glad of this blessed Opportunity
of engaging Themselves, their Children, and their Servants, to the Obedience of
Christ and his Holy Laws. This Service might be so managed that it would be of
great Use to the Souls of Men.

Sixthly, There ought to be the utmost Care taken of Market Towns that they be
well provided (if possible) with able Ministers, and Men of a good Life, and
Men that shall preach twice a day also. For if they be well provided, the
little Parishes about them will be the better for it. For as good Preaching in
London (a Place of great Resort from all Parts of the Kingdom) has a mighty
Influence upon the whole Nation, so in proportion it must be in all
Market Towns, to which the Country People come, and the Ministers of the
Villages also. A wise Man there is consulted upon Occasion by the other
Clergymen; and a great Example of Virtue in an Eminent Place goes farther than
the same in a Village, or little Hamlet. I confess the Maintenance here is
generally small, but then they ought to be encouraged by what other Helps the
Bishops can afford them; And some of the Bishops have Prebends and other small
Dignities to bestow, which cannot be better placed than upon the worthy
Ministers of such Places; who as they have the greater Charge and Work, so
ought to have the greater Encouragement. Besides, these are the Places where
the Dissenters, that preach, generally are; And indeed here are the greatest
Number generally of that sort of People. I have known several of these Places
preserved from Schism and Faction by watchful, and diligent, and prudent
Pastors; and (I speak it with grief) a great many of them miserably divided
from our Church through the Negligence, and Folly, and Wickedness of their
Ministers: Some of which have refused to Preach in an Afternoon, when it has
been much desired; others have spent their Pains in the Pulpit generally in
bitter Invectives against the Dissenters; others have gone beyond the Rubric,
and refused to please their People where they might have done it without
breaking any Law; some have sided with Parties, and instead of ending
Differences have been of a certain Party in them; and others have contended
with their Neighbors for Trifles, falling into Heats with them, and then have
refused to Visit them or do them Civil Offices. The Dissenters have taken
Occasion to set up Preaching in their Towns and drawn away their People. The
Schism has hereby grown great, and the Minister himself has had too much hand
in it, notwithstanding his warm Declamations against it. My Heart aches when I
seriously think of this. And 'twill be worth the utmost Care of all the Bishops
how to get this Evil at least lessened, if not quite removed. The Care of these
great Places concerns the whole, and 'twill become the Bishops to find some way
by themselves, or their Interest at Court, or elsewhere, to procure some
additional Maintenance for those who are Diligent and Painful in these Places.
Great Cities and Towns (and the Universities especially) most need warm and
powerful Preachers, and 'twill be great Charity to provide them with such. And
thus, my Lord, I have spoken my Mind frankly. Some perhaps will think I have
used too great Liberty: Nor shall I wonder at it: For perhaps I have not
considered you in this Letter as my Diocesan, but have used that Freedom which
I was wont to use with you when I knew you in the University. If I have done
so, it is not for want of Deference for your Person and your Character.

I make no question but when you come among us, and in your Visitation, you
will answer the expectations of your Friends, and at least silence your
Enemies. I doubt not but you will do all you can (and you may do much by your
Example and Authority) to make us better, and to work a Reformation, which all
good Men expect and desire. You will find many of your Clergy very complying in
those excellent Designs. If you mind them of their Duty (as I am sure you will)
I dare assure you of a great Number ready to assist you.

It Is high time to be doing that great Work which you intend. There are a
considerable Number that expect your Commands, and greatly hope you will
vigorously Encourage us to look after our Cures, to Instruct our Youth, to set
up Prayers in all the Families of our Parishioners, and to preach up the
Necessity of Reformation, and preach against the Vices that reign amongst us,
and to do it with great Care and Application.

I am very certain (as bad as the World is) that by this Method you will be an
Instrument of much Good to the Souls of Men. That you may be so, is the most
earnest Prayer of,

My Lord, Your Lordship's Most Obedient Servant, F. W.
March 26. 1692.

