By the King and Queen, A PROCLAMATION Commanding all Papists, and Reputed
Papists, forthwith to depart from the Cities of London and Westminster, and
from within Ten Miles of the same.
Marie R.

WHereas notwithstanding the several Acts of Parliament, whereby the Resorting
of Papists to the Cities of London and Westminster, and Places thereunto
adjacent, are declared to be dangerous to the Peace and Safety of this Kingdom,
and the Ways and Methods Provided and Enacted as well for Discovering as
Amoving them; And notwithstanding the Manifestation of Their Majesty's Princely
Disposition to extend Their Protection and Royal Grace to all and every of
Their Subjects that will live Quietly and Peaceably under Their Government,
diverse Popish Recusants, being ill affected to Their Majestites Government, and
of restless Spirits, have lately Resorted to the said Cities and Places in
great numbers, and thereby having opportunity to Meet, have taken great
Boldness to Consult and Prosecute diverse Mischievous and Treasonable Designs
and Practices, contrary to the Duty of their Allegiance: Their Majesty's have
therefore thought fit (by the Advice of Their Privy Council) to Issue out this
Their Royal Proclamation, and do hereby strictly Charge and Command all Popish
Recusants, and Persons reputed so to be, (Except Merchant Strangers, and such
other Persons as in the said Acts are Excepted) on or before the Seven and
twentieth Day of this instant June, to depart out of the said Cities, and from
all Places within the Distance of Ten Miles of the same, And Their Majesty's do
hereby further Require and Command, That if any of the said Popish Recusants,
or so reputed, shall presume to remain within either of the said Cities, or Ten
Miles adjacent, or repair or return to the same, they be Proceeded against as
Persons Conspiring against the Peace and Welfare of the Government. And Their
Majesty's do hereby straightly Charge and Command the Lord Mayor of London, and
all and every the Justices of the Peace, Constables, and other Their Majesty's
Officers and Ministers of Justice within the said Cities, and either of them,
and within Ten Miles of the same, That they do make strict Search and Enquiry
for, and with all Vigor Proceed against all and every Person or Persons who
shall be found within the said Cities of London and Westminster, and within Ten
Miles of the same, contrary to the Effect of any of the said Statutes, and the
Purport of this Their Majesty's Proclamation. And Their Majesty's do further
strictly Charge and Command, That immediately after the said Seven and
twentieth Day of June, the Constables, Churchwardens, and other Officers within
the said Cities and Places, do go from House to House in their several
Parishes, Hamlets, Constableries and Divisions respectively, and there take an
Account of the Names and Sirnames of all such Persons as are Popish Recusants,
or reputed so to be, as well Householders as Lodgers or Servants, and to carry
a List of their Names to the two next Justices of the Peace, who are hereby
Required and Enjoined to Send for, and Proceed against them (Excepting always
Merchant Foreiners, Settled Householders, and other Persons in the said Acts
Excepted) as aforesaid: And they the said Justices are likewise Required, when
they shall have received such List or Lists, to certify the same, together
with their Proceedings thereupon, to Their Majesty's most Honorable Privy
Council.

Given at Our Court at Whitehall the Seventeenth Day of June, 1690. In the
Second Year of Our Reign.
LONDON, Printed by Charles Bill and Thomas Newcomb, Printers to the King and
Queens most Excellent Majesty's. M.DC.XC.


