The Prince of Orange HIS SPEECH In Defense of the Protestant Religion.
Gentlemen, and Fellow Soldiers,
IT is not a little satisfaction to me, That having an Army composed of so many
different Nations; I do notwithstanding find them unanimously bent to maintain
and prosecute, to the utmost, the Cause I have now undertaken. And though by
several Declarations, I have (as I believe) sufficiently satisfied both you,
and all England, of the Sincerity, as well as the necessity of these my Actions
and Designs. I shall not, however, think it unnecessary, or superfluous,
briefly to repeat and Sum up some things which may serve you for satisfaction,
as to matters past, as well as Encouragement for the Future.

That England, and the United Provinces, are the Two main Pillars, whereon all
the Reformed Churches of Europe seem to depend, is to us rather the Envy than
the Doubt of our Adversaries now at the Court of Rome, and lately of England,
not only to weaken, but wholly to root out even the Name of Protestant, each
Man's private Diurnal, as well as our public Annals, do sufficiently Testify;
nor is that Breach made by the restless Malice of our Enemies (urged by a late
Opportunity) in the Laws and Liberties of these Kingdoms, so effectually made
up as to free us from the Suspicion and Fear of a more dangerous Relapse. What
therefore remains, but that we apply such Remedies, as shall not only for the
present Ease us, but for the future Secure us. Lenitives have, to our cost,
been too long thrown away on the Cankered Hearts of our Irreconcilable Enemies.
God's Providence, not our Swords, proving the only Antidote against their
Poison. The present Persecution of the poor Protestants in Ireland, is but as a
Prologue to their intended Miseries, had it not by Providence been timely
prevented: nor did the Laws and Liberties of the People of England, seem a
sufficient Sacrifice to their Hungery Zeal for the present, unless by Methods
as Sophistical as their Doctrine, they might bind and secure them to Posterity.
We have seen the Corruption of Judges (those betrayers of their Country,) the
Oppression of the Bishops (those Pillars of the Church,) the Abuses of most of
the great Offices (Civil and Military,) private Cabals, and public Grievances;
and all to promote a Faction as uneasy, as contrary to all Moral Conversation.
Let us therefore, Gentlemen and Fellow Soldiers, with Courage and Constancy,
Oppose and Disarm these common Disturbers of the Peace of Christendom. If our
Adversaries boast of French Supplies, and Irish Succors (while you are
resolved and united in your Hearts:) I value them not; I fear not the Strength
of the One; and, I thank God, can Laugh at the Malice of the Other. Let us
vigorously Tread that Path, which God Almighty seems to have peculiarly marked
out for us. If there be any of you that either distrust your own Courages, or
are dissatisfied with the Cause you have undertaken, I freely give you Liberty
and safe Conduct to your several Abodes. I will My Self, be both the Spectator
and Rewarder of all your Actions; resolving to be the Personal Example of your
Courage and Resolution I Exhort and Command you to be Dutiful and Obedient to
your several respective Commanders To forbear, on pain, of Death, all Fraud or
Pillages on the Citizens; and to be careful and vigilant in your respective
Posts; and, as I believe, you are sufficiently satisfied with the Justice of
our Cause; so, by the help of God, (which I chiefly Exhort you constantly to
Pray for) I doubt not of a happy and speedy Success, as in other places, so in
London.

LONDON, Printed for G.R. 1688.


