(...) (...) royal blazon or coat of arms
By the King and Queen, A PROCLAMATION Concerning PAPISTS, and other
Disaffected Persons.
MARIE R.

WHereas Their Majesty's, as well by the Regular and Impartial Administration
of Justice to all Their Subjects, and Their abundant Mercy and Grace to such of
them as have been liable to Penalties, as also by Prosecuting a necessary War
against France by Sea and Land (on the Success of which the Common Safety of
this Realm, and all other Their Majesty's Kingdoms and Dominions does Depend)
have manifested Their Princely Care and zeal for the Preservation, Ease and
Welfare of all Their Subjects; and might justly Expect suitable Returns of
Loyalty and Obedience from every of them: Nevertheless diverse Papists and
reputed Papists, and some other Persons Ill-affected to Their Majesty's
Government, and of Restless Spirits, abusing the Clemency which has been used,
have Resorted to, and Assembled in the Cities of London and Westminster, and
other Places, and taken great Boldness by Seditious Discourses and Libels, and
with Insolent Behavior to Defame and Affront the Government And also do
Consult and Prosecute diverse Mischievous and Treasonable Designs and Practices
tending to the Disturbance of the Public Peace, and the Destruction of Their
Native Country. Their Majesty's resolving not to suffer such Notorious
Contempts of the Laws to go unpunished, and to Prevent the Evil Consequences of
the same, Have thought fit (with the Advice of Their Privy Council) to Issue
this Their Royal Proclamation; And do hereby Require and Command all Lords
Lieutenants, Deputy Lieutenants, Justices of the Peace, Mayors, Sheriffs,
Bailiffs, and all other Officers and Magistrates whatsoever, That they be
Circumspect and Vigilant in their Respective Charges and Jurisdictions, and
Perform their Duties in Suppressing the Insolences, Designs and Practices
aforesaid; and that from time to time they cause diligent Search and Inquiry to
be made after the said Offenders, and them being Discovered, cause to be
Prosecuted, and brought to Condign Punishment according to Law.

And Their Majesty's do Hereby strictly Charge and Command all Popish
Recusants, Natives or Denizons, being above the Age of Sixteen years, That they
do (according to the Statutes in that behalf made) Repair to their respective
Places of Abode, and if they have none, then to the Places where their
respective Father or Mother is or shall be dwelling, and do not thereafter
Remove or Pass above Five miles from thence. And Their Majesty's do likewise
Charge and Command all Papists, and Persons reputed so to be, (Except Merchant
Strangers, settled Householders, and other Persons Excepted in the Statutes made
in this behalf) on or before the Twenty third Day of this instant April, to
depart out of the said Cities of London and Westminster, and from all Places
within the distance of Ten miles of the same. And Their Majesty's do hereby
Command the Lord Mayor of London, and all other Justices of the Peace, and
other Officers within the said Cities and Ten miles of the same, that they make
strict Search for, and Proceed against all such of them as shall presume to
remain, repair or return within the Limits aforesaid, according to the Statutes
in that Case provided; and particularly the Statute made in the First Year of
Their Majesty's Reign, Entitled ( An Act for the Amoving Papists and Reputed
Papists from the Cities of London and Westminster, and Ten miles distance from
the same) by Tendering to them the Declaration therein mentioned, and otherwise
according to the said Act.

And Their Majesty's do likewise Charge and Command the aforesaid, and all
other Justices of Peace whatsoever, who shall know or be Informed that any
Person is, or is suspected to be a Papist, to Tender unto such Person the
Declaration aforesaid, and proceed thereupon according to one other Act made in
the said First; Year of Their Majesty's Reign, Entitled, ( An Act for the
better Securing the Government, by Disarming Papists and Reputed Papists.) And
for the better Discovery of Persons Disaffected to the Government, and that
being discovered, their Disloyal and Wicked Purposes and Attempts may be
disappointed, Their Majesty's do strictly Charge and Command all Justices of
the Peace, and other Officers in that behalf Authorized, That where they shall
find, or be informed of any Person, who by reason of his Conversation,
Discourse, or other Demeanor, shall be suspected not to be Well-affected to
Their Majesty's Government, they do Tender unto such Person the Oaths appointed
by an Act made in the First Year of Their Majesty's Reign, Entitled, ( An Act
for the Abrogating of the Oaths of Supremacy and Allegiance, and appointing
other Oaths;) And that in case of Refusal to Take the same, due Prosecution be
made thereupon. And for the more effectual Performance thereof, the said
Justices of Peace are to make and keep Entries or Records of such their
Proceedings, in order to the Tendering the said Oaths again to the Person to
Refusing; it being Their Majesty's Pleasure, that the said Law be Executed to
the utmost against such Offenders, And Their Majesty's do hereby Charge, and
particularly Require all Deputy Lieutenants and Justices of the Peace, That
they do Meet Monthly to Enquire into and Inform themselves of the Affairs of
their respective Counties and Divisions, in relation to the Premises, and take
special care to preserve the Peace, and prevent all Unlawful Meetings and
Assemblies against Their Majesty's and Their Government, and that from time to
time they give Information of their Proceedings and Discoveries, to the Lords
of Their Majesty's most Honorable Privy Council.

Given at Our Court at Whitehall the Ninth Day of April 1691. In the Third Year
of Our Reign.
London, Printed by Charles Bill and Thomas Newcomb, Printers to the King and
Queens most Excellent Majesty's. 1691.


