monogram of 'W' (William) superimposed on 'M' (Mary)RR

DIEV ET MON DROIT

HONI SOIT QVI MAL Y PENSE

royal blazon or coat of arms
By the King and Queen, A PROCLAMATION, Requiring all Seamen and Mariners to
Render themselves to Their Majesty's Service.
WILLIAM R.

WHereas diverse Seamen and Mariners have lately left their usual and ordinary
Places of Above, and have removed themselves into some private and obscure
Places, endeavoring thereby to Avoid or Escape from Our present Service: We
therefore, by the Advice of Our Privy Council, have thought sit to Publish this
Our Royal Proclamation; And do hereby strictly Charge and Command all Seamen
and Mariners remaining in any County of England or Wales, and not Listed in Our
Service, That they forthwith Render themselves unto the Principal Officers and
Commisioners of Our Navy in London, or to the Commissioners of the Navy at
Chatham, or to the Commissioners of the Navy at Portsmouth, or to the
Store-keeper and Buster-Master for the Navy at Harwich for the time being, or
to Henry Greenhill Agent for the Navy at Plymouth, or to Robert Henley at
Bristol, or to the respective Collectors of the Customs for the several Ports
and Places followings, viz. Ipswich, Wells, Lynn, Boston, Scarborough,
Sunderland, Whitby, Southampton, Cowes, Poole, Weymouth, Lyme, Topsham,
Dartmouth, Falmouth, Looe, Fowy, Truro, Pembroke, Newcastle, Hull, Leverpoole,
and Great Yarmouth, in order to their being Received into Pay, and Sent on
Board such of Our Ships as shall be found most expedient for Our Service: And
if any of Them shall hereafter be found out or discovered to have neglected to
Obey this Our Royal Command, they shall be proceeded against with all Severity.
And We do hereby Require all Mayors, Ba^liffs, Sheriffs, Justices of the Peace,
Constables, and other Officers to whom it does or may appertain, That they
cause diligent Search to be made within all and every their Precincts, for the
said Seamen and Mariners, and to seize and Secure the Persons of such of them
as shall be there found, and also all loose and unknown Persons whatsoever, who
may justly be suspected to be Seamen or Watermen, and Cause them to be sent to
the Principal Officers and Commissioners of Our Navy in London, or to such
other of the Persons and Places aforesaid, to which they may most conveniently
be sent, in order to their being Employed in Our Service; And also send up to
Our Privy Council a List of the Names of all such Seamen and Mariners as they
shall procure for the Service aforesaid, together with the Names of the
respective Persons to whom, and Places to which they shall send them. And the
said Principal Officers and Commissioners, and other Persons aforesaid, shall
give Receipts in Writing for the several Seamen and Mariners delivered to them
in pursuance hereof, And We do hereby straightly Charge and Command, That no
Person of Persons whatsoever, do presume to Conceal, or to Further of Favor
the Escape of any Seamen or Mariners, or loose and unknown Persons aforesaid,
upon Pain that all and singular Persons offending herein, be forthwith
Committed to Prison by the next Justice of the Peace or other Magistrate, and
Prosecuted with all Severity according to Law, as Persons Conspiring against Us
and the Safety of Our Kingdom. And We are hereby pleased further to make known,
That We have given effectual Orders to the respective Officers and Persons
herein above appointed, to Receive the said Men, and for Paying forthwith to
the Conductors the Impressed and Conduct-Money Disbursed upon this Service.

Given at Our Court at Whitehall, the Twenty eighth Day of January, 1691/2. In
the Third Year of Our Reign.
London, Printed by Charles Bill, and the Executrix of Thomas Newcomb deceased;
Printers to the King and Queens most Excellent Majesty's. 1691/2.


