DECLARATION Against the FRENCH KING.
WILLIAM R.

IT having pleased Almighty God to make Us the happy Instruments of Rescuing
these Nations from Great and Imminent Dangers, and to place Us upon the Throne
of these Kingdoms, We think Our Selves obliged to endeavor to the uttermost to
Promote the Welfare of Our People, which can never be effectually secured, but
by preventing the Miseries that threaten them from Abroad.

When we consider the many unjust Methods the French King has of late Years
taken to gratify his Ambition, that he has not only Invaded the Territories of
the Emperor, and of the Empire now in Amity with Us, laying Waste whole
Countries, and destroying the Inhabitants by his Armies, but Declared War
against Our Allies without any Provocation, in manifest Violation of the
Treaties Confirmed by the Guaranty of the Crown of England; We can do no less
then Join with Our Allies in opposing the Designs of the French King, as the
Disturber of the Peace, and the Common Enemy of the Christian World.

And besides the Obligations We lie under by Treaties with Our Allies, which
are a sufficient Justification of Us for taking up Arms at this time, since
they have called upon Us so to do, the many Injuries done to Us and to Our
Subjects, without any Reparation, by the French King, are such, that (however
of late Years they were not taken Notice of, for Reasons well known to the
World, nevertheless) We will not pass them over without a Public and Just
Resentment of such Outrages.

It is not long since the French took Licenses from the English Governor of
New Foundland, to Fish in the Seas upon that Coast, and paid a Tribute for
such Licenses, as an Acknowledgment of the sole Right of the Crown of England
to that Is;land; and yet of late, the Encroachments of the French upon Our said
Island, and Our Subjects Trade and Fishery, have been more like the Invasions
of an Enemy, then becoming Friends, who enjoyed the Advantages of that Trade
only by Permission.

But that the French King should Invade Our Charibbee Islands, and possess
himself of Our Territories of the Province of New York and of Hudsons-Bay in a
Hostile manner, seizing Our Forts, burning Our Subjects Houses, and enriching
his People with the Spoil of their Goods and Merchandises, detaining some of
Our Subjects under the Hardship of Imprisonment, causing others to be
inhumanely killed, and driving the rest to Sea in a small Vessel, without Food
and Necessaries to support them, are Actions not becoming even an Enemy; and
yet he was so far from declaring himself so, that at that very time he was
Negotiating here in England by his Ministers, a Treaty of Neutrality and good
Correspondence in America.

The Proceedings of the French King against Our Subjects in Europe are so
Notorious, that We shall not need to enlarge upon them; His countenancing the
Seizure of English Ships by French Privateers, forbidding the Importation of
great part of the Product and Manufactures of Our Kingdom, and imposing
exorbitant Customs upon the rest, notwithstanding the vast Advantage he and the
French Nation reap by their Commerce with England, are sufficient Evidences of
his Designs to destroy the Trade, and consequently to ruin the Navigation,
upon which the Wealth and Safety of this Nation very much depends.

The Right of the Flag, Inherent in the Crown of England, has been Disputed by
his Orders in Violation of Our Sovereignty of the Narrow Seas, which in all
Ages has been Asserted by Our Predecessors, and We are resolved to Maintain for
the Honor of Our Crown, and of the English Nation.

But that which must nearly touch Us, is his unchristian Prosecution of many of
Our English Protestant Subjects in France, for matters of Religion, contrary to
the Law of Nations, and express Treaties, forcing them to abjure their Religion
by strange and unusual Cruelties, and Imprisoning some of the Masters and
Seamen of Our Merchant Ships, and Condemning others to the Galleys, upon
pretense of having on Board, either some of his own miserable Protestant
Subjects, or their Effects; And Lastly, as he has for some years last past,
endeavored by Insinuations and Promises of Assistance, to overthrow the
Government of England; So now by open and violent Methods, and the actual
Invasion of Our Kingdom of Ireland, in support of Our Subjects in Arms, and in
Rebellion against Us, he is promoting the utter Extirpation of Our good and
Loyal Subjects in that Our Kingdom.

Being therefore thus necessitated to take up Arms, and Relying on the help of
Almighty God in Our just undertaking, We have thought fit to Declare, and do
hereby Declare War against the French King, and that We will in Conjunction
with Our Allies, Vigorously Prosecute the same by Sea and Land (since he has
so unrighteously begun it) being assured of the hearty Concurrence and
Assistance of Our Subjects in support of so good a Cause; Hereby Willing and
Requiring Our General of Our Forces, Our Commissioners for Executing the Office
of High Admiral, Our Lieutenants of Our several Counties, Governors of Our
Forts and Garrisons, and all other Officers and Soldiers under them, by Sea and
Land, to do, and execute all acts of Hostility in the Prosecution of this War
against the French King, his Vassals and Subjects, and to oppose their
Attempts, Willing and Requiring all Our Subjects to take Notice of the same,
whom We henceforth strictly forbid to hold any Correspondence or Communication
with the said French King, or his Subjects; And because there are remaining in
Our Kingdoms many of the Subjects of the French King; We do Declare and give
Our Royal Word, that all such of the French Nation as shall demean themselves
dutifully toward Us, and not Correspond with Our Enemies, shall be safe in
their Persons and Estates, and free from all molestation and trouble of any
kind.

Given at Our Court at Hampton Court the Seventh Day of May, 1689. In the First
Year of Our Reign. WILLIAM and Queen MARY.
LONDON, Printed by Charles Bill and Thomas Newcomb, Printers to the King and
Queen's most Excellent Majesty's. 1689.


