By tne King and Queen, A PROCLAMATION, Concerning COLORS to be worn on Board
Ships.
MARIE R.

WHereas diverse of Their Majesty's Subjects have of late presumed on Board
their Ships to wear Their Majesty's Iacks, Pendants and Ensigns, which
according to Ancient Usage have been appointed as a distinction for Their
Majesty's Ships, and many times thinking to evade the punishment due for the
same, have worn Iacks, Pendants and Ensigns in shape and mixture of Colors so
little different from those of Their Majesty's, as not without difficulty to be
distinguished therefrom, which practice is found attended with manifold
Inconveniences: For prevention of the same for the future, Their Majesty's have
thought fit, with the Advice of Their Privy Council, by this Their Royal
Proclamation, strictly to Charge and Command all Their Subjects whatsoever,
That they do not presume to wear in any of their Ships or Vessels, Their
Majesty's Jack, commonly called the Union Jack, nor any Pendants, nor any such
Ensigns or Colors as are usually born by Their Majesty's Ships, without
particular Warrant for their so doing from Their Majesty's, or the Lord High
Admiral of England, or the Commissioners for executing the Office of Lord High
Admiral for the time being. And Their Majesty's do hereby also further Command
all Their Loving Subjects, that without such warrant as aforesaid, they presume
not to wear on Board their Ships or Vessels, any Iacks, Pendants, Ensigns or
Colors, made in imitation of those of Their Majesty's, or any other Flags,
Iacks, Pendants or Ensigns whatsoever, than those usually worn in Merchants
Ships, Viz. The Flag and Jack White, with a Red Cross, commonly called St.
George's Cross, passing quite thougt the same, and the Ensign Red, with the
like Cross in a Canton White at the upper Corner thereof next the Staff, nor
any kind of Pendant whatsoever, saving that for the better Distinction of such
Ships as shall have Commissions of Letters of Mart or Reprisals against the
Enemy, and any other Ships or Vessels which may be employed by the Principal
Officers and Commissioners of Their Majesty's Navy, the Principal Officers of
Their Majesty's Ordnance, the Commissioners for Victualling Their Majesty's
Navy, the Commissioners for Their Majesty's Customs, and the Commissioners for
Transportation for Their Majesty's Services, relating particularly to those
Offices. Their Majesty's do Command that all such Ships as have Commissions of
Letters of Mart or Reprisals, shall besides the Colors which may be worn by
Merchants Ships, wear a Red Jack, with the Union Iacks, described in a Canton
at the upper Corner thereof next the Staff; And that such Ships and Vessels as
shall be employed for Their Majesty's Service, by the Principal Officers and
Commissioners of Their Majesty's Navy, the Principal Officers of Their
Majesty's Ordnance, the Commissioners for Victualling Their Majesty's Navy, the
Commissioners for Their Majesty's Customs, and the Commissioners for
Transportation for Their Majesty's Services, relating particularly to those
Officers, shall wear a Red Jack with the Union Jack in a Canton at the upper
Corner thereof next the Staff, as aforesaid, and in the other part of the said
Jack shall be described the Seal used in the respective Offices aforesaid, by
which the said Ships and Vessels shall be employed. And Their Majesty's do
s;trictly Charge and Command That none of Their Loving Subjects do presume to
wear any of the said Distinction Iacks, unless they shall have Commissions of
Letters of Mart or Reprisals, or be employed in Their Majesty's Service by the
before mentioned Offices respectively. And Their Majesty's do hereby require
the principal Officers and Commissioners of Their Majesty's Navy, the
Governors of Their Forts and Castles, the Officers of Their Customs, and the
Commanders or Officers of any of Their Majesty's Ships, upon their meeting
with, or otherwise observing any Ships on Vessels of Their Majestes Subjects,
wearing any Flag, Pendant, Jack or Ensign contrary hereunto, whether at Sea or
in Port, not only to Seize, or cause such Flag, Pendant, Jack or Ensign to be
forthwith Seized, but also to Return the Names of the said Ships, and Vessels,
together with the Names of their respective Masters or Commanders, unto the
Lord High Admiral, Commissioners for executing the Office of Lord High Admiral,
or the Judge of the High Court of Admiralty for the time being, to the end that
the persons offending may be duly punished for the same. And Their Majesty's to
hereby Command and Enjoin the Judge and Judges of the High Court of Admiralty
for the time being, That they make strict Enquiry, and cause;e all such
Offenders to be duly punished. And all Vice-Admirals, and Judges of the
Vice-Admiralties are also to do the same, and attend the due Observation hereof
within the several Ports and Places belonging to their respective Precincts.
And Their Majesty's further Pleasure is, That this Proclamation shall take
place according to the times hereafter mentioned, Viz. For all Ships in the
Channel or British Seas, and in the North Sea after Twelve Days from the Date
of these Presents; And from the Month of the Channel unto Cape St. Vincent
after Six Weeks from the Date of these Presents; And beyond the Cape, and on
this side the Aequinoctial Line, as well the Ocean and Mediterranean as
elsewhere, after Ten Weeks from the Date of these presents; And beyond the Line
after the space of Eight Months from the Date of these presents.

Given at Our Court at Whitehall, the Twelfth Day of July, 1694. In the Sixth
Year of Our Reign.
LONDON, Printed by Charles Bill, and the Executrix of Thomas Newcomb deceased;
Printers to the King and Queens most Excellent Majesty's. MDCXCIV.


