By the King and Queen, A PROCLAMATION For Appointing Commissioners for putting
in Execution an Act of this present Parliament for Raising Money by a Poll and
otherwise, toward the Reducing of Ireland, and Prosecuting the War against
France.
WILLIAM R.

WHereas in and by one Act lately Passed in this present Parliament (Entitled,
An Act for Raising Money by a Poll and otherwise, toward the Reducing of
Ireland, and Prosecuting the War against France) it is Enacted, That for the
better Assessing, Ordering, and Levying of the several Sums of Money limited
and appointed to be paid by the said Act, and for the more effectual putting of
the same in Execution, the Persons named and appointed to be Commissioners by
an Act of the last Parliament (Entitled, An Act for a Grant to Their Majesty's
of an Aid of Two shillings in the Pound for One Year) together With those
Members of this Present House of Commons, which were not named Commissioners in
the said Act, shall be Commissioners for putting in Execution the said Act for
Raising Money by a Poll and otherwise, and the Powers therein contained, within
all and every the several and respective Counties, Ridings, Cities, Boroughs,
Towns and Places for which they shall be appointed Commissioners respectively,
as by the said Act, relation being thereunto had, more fully may appear. The
King and Queens most Excellent Majesty's reposing especial Trust and Confidence
in the Abilities, Care and Circumspections of all and every the Person and
Persons which were named and appointed to be Commissioners by the said Act for
granting to Their Majesty's an Aid of Two shillings in the Pound, That are now
living, do hereby Appoint and Declare them and every of them to be Their
Commissioners for putting in Execution the said Act of this (...) and all the
Powers therein and contained, within all and every the several and respective
Counties, Ridings, Cities Boroughs, Towns and Places for which by the said
former Act they are appointed Commissioners. And Their Majesty's Reposing the
like Trust and Confidence in the Care and Circumspections of those Members of
this present House of Commons which there not named Commissioners in the said
Act, do by these Presents likewise Appoint and Declare them to be also
Commissioners for putting in Execution the said Act for Raising Money by a Poll
and otherwise, and all the Powers therein contained, within the several
Counties, Cities and Boroughs for which they respectively serve in this present
Parliament; and where they or any of them do serve for any particular Cities,
Boroughs, or Ports, they shall act as Commissioners for the respective Counties
in which such Cities, Boroughs, or Ports are; And to them the said
Commissioners, or to such or so many of them as by the said Act for Raising
Money by a Poll and otherwise, are or shall be in any Case or Cases requisite
and necessary, Their Majesty's do hereby give full Power and Authority to put
Execution all the Powers contained or specified in the same Act, and generally
to Do, Perform and Execute, or cause to be Done, Performed or Executed, all
Matters or Things whatsoever, which any Commissioners appointed or to be
appointed by Their Majesty's, may or can lawfully Do, Perform or Execute, in
relation to the same, within all and every of the said several and respective
Counties, Ridings, Cities, Boroughs, Towns and Places for which they are
Commissioned and Appointed, as aforesaid: Hereby Willing and Requiring them and
every of them from time to time to Proceed and Act according to the Rules and
Directions of the said Act of Parliament, and diligently to intend the
Execution of this Their Majesty's Service as becomes. And this shall be to
them and every of them a sufficient Warrant and Discharge in this behalf.

Given at Our Court at Whitehall the Thirteenth Day of May, 1690. In the Second
Year of Our Reign.
LONDON, Printed by Charles Bill and Thomas Newcomb, Printers to the King and
Queens most Excellent Majesty's. 1690.


