By the King and Queen, A PROCLAMATION, For Apprehending of Robbers on the
Highway, etc. And for a Reward to the Discoverers, etc.
WILLIAM R.

WHereas many heinous Murders, Robberies on the highway, and Burglaries, and
other Breaking of Dwelling-Houses, have been committed, and many lewd,
disorderly and wicked Persons, who betake themselves to commit such Murders,
Robberies and Burglaries, have been, and in time to come may be emboldened to
the like Offenses, by reason of the negligence of due keeping of Watch and
Warding, and for want of that Pursuit which ought to be of Robbers on the
Highway by Hue and Cry; and sometimes they are emboldened to commit such
Rapines through the refusal of Persons to give that Aid they ought to do, in
being Assistant to the Constables and other Public Officers, in Following and
Apprehending of Felons, and many times by reason of the Concealment of them and
their Horses by Innkeepers, Hostlers and others, where such Felons do set up
and keep their Horses, to Ride out and commit such like Thefts, Burglaries and
Robberies, and by the Connivance of Persons keeping Horses to Let out to Hire,
and also by other Persons who keep Lodgings where such Felons and Robbers do
privately Harbor, and are Harbored by evil disposed Persons, and frequently
by the private, unlawful and clandestine Practic^^ of Brokers and others who
buy stolen Goods, and who have sufficient cause to suspect, but will not
Apprehend the Felons, and who often upon Enquiry refuse to produce what Goods
they Buy or take to Pawn, and by many the indirect Practices of such as Receive
and Cenceal the said Felons and Robbers, and share with them their stolen Goods:
And We being given to understand, that many of Our Loving Subjects Traveling
on the Highways and other Parts, upon their lawful Occasions, are daily Set
upon, and put in fear and peril of losing of their Lives, and others Our
Subjects are by frequent Burglaries, and Felonious Breaking of their Houses,
much disquieted in their Dwellings and Habitations, and spoiled of their Goods:
And being in particular Informed, That John Smith alias Ely Smith, Charles
Rawlinson alias Lloyd, Edward Poor, Anthony St. Ledger, Jonathan Compton, Elias
Carroll, Henry Howell, Charles Brown, Richard Awson alias Old Mobb, Thomas
Randall, Thomas Walters, Nicholas Gradin, Anthony Dunn, Henry Vaughan alias
Phillips, (...) Trelawney, and William Jennings, are Persons notoriously known
to be such as do daily commit such Offenses in despite and defiance of the Law,
and are some or most of them Indicted or Accused upon Oath, and all of them are
known to be of one Party and Knott, and commonly do keep Company the one with
the other, and all of them fly from Justice, although great Endeavor, Pains
and Cost have been used for their Apprehension: And We being minded, and
Graciously inclined to preserve Our Loving Subjects in their Lives and Estates,
against such and all other like Rapine and Violence, have thought fit, by and
with the Advice of Our Privy Council, to Issue this Our Royal Proclamation, and
do hereby Command all Our Loving Subjects and Officers of Justice, that they do
use all their best Endeavors for the Discovering and Apprehending, as well the
Persons particularly before mentioned, as all such other Persons who have
committed, or shall commit any of the Offenses aforesaid, to the end they may
be proceeded against according to Law for such their Offenses.

And in Order thereto, We do hereby Declare Our Will and Pleasure to be, and do
hereby Require and Command all and every Our Justices of the Peace throughout
this Our Realm of England, Dominion of Wales, and Town of Berwick upon Tweed,
That upon Notice of this Our Royal Proclamation they do take Order and see that
due Watch and Ward be constantly kept by Horse and Foot; And that after Notice
to them given of any Murder, Robbery on the Highway, or Burglary, and other
Thefts committed, that they take Care that Hue and Cry be made after Robbers,
and other pursuit made and raised, and Felons pursued with the utmost Diligence
that the Law requires for the Apprehending of the Offenders. And We do hereby
strictly Charge and Command, That all Vintuers, Keepers of common Ordinaries,
Gaming-Houses, Innkeepers, Housekeepers, and Persons keeping Lodgings,
Chamberlains, and Keepers of Common Hostleries, Goldsmiths, and Workers in Gold
and Silver, Brokers, and Common Buyers, and Takers to Pawn of Goods, and all
other Persons whatsoever where any such Robber on the Highway, Burglarer,
Breaker of Houses or Murderer shall resort unto, come, or be, or such Person as
they have cause to suspect to be Robbers on the Highway, Burglarers, or to
have committed any Murder, that they immediately stop them with their Goods
suspected to be stolen, and cause the said Offenders to be Apprehended, and
carry them before some of Our Justices of the Peace to be Examined upon such
Suspicions, and proceeded against according to Law. And they the said
Goldsmiths, and Workers in Gold and Silver are hereby Required upon any Melted
Silver in Ingot or otherwise to be brought unto them, to be well satisfied of
the Persons who bring the same unto them, that such Silver is honestly come by,
and who melted down the same, and why the same was so melted down, or to secure
such Person so offering the same to Sell, and to cause them to be brought
before some Justice of Peace, that the same Suspicion may be further enquired
after, as they the said Goldsmiths, and Workers in Gold and Silver will answer
their Negligence therein at their Peril. And for the Suppression of Highway
Robbers, Burglarers, Breakers of Houses, and Murderers; and for the
Encouragement of all such Persons as have Discovered and Apprehended, and hall
from henceforth Discover and Apprehend, and cause to be brought into Custody,
Prosecuted and Convicted any Person or Persons who already have, or hereafter
shall commit any Murder, Robbery, Burglary or Breaking any Dwelling House in
the day time, and commit any Murder or Rapine therein, We are graciously
pleased, and do hereby Declare, That such Person or Persons who already have or
hereafter at any time, until Our Pleasure be known to the contrary, shall
Discover, Apprehend, and cause to be brought into Custody, Prosecuted and
Convicted the Persons particularly before mentioned, or any one or more of
them, or any other Person or Persons who already have committed, or hereafter
shall commit any Murder, Robbery on or near the Highway, or Burglary, or Break
any Dwelling House or Houses in the Daytime, and commit any Murder, or
Felonious Rapine therein, for which by the Laws of this Our Kingdom they ought
to Receive Judgment of Death, shall for every of the Persons before herein
particularly mentioned, have and receive the Reward of Twenty Pounds; and for
every other Offender so Discovered, Apprehended and Convicted the Reward of Ten
Pounds of lawful Money of England within Fifteen Days after Conviction of such
Offender or Offenders. And all and every Sheriff and Sheriffs of the respective
Counties where such Conviction shall be had, are hereby Required upon the
Certificate of the Judge, or Two or more of the Justices before whom such
Person or Persons shall be Convicted, to Pay unto the Person and Persons who
Discover, Apprehend, and cause to be brought into Custody, Prosecuted, and
Convicted, or upon whose Discovery and Apprehension the Offenders herein before
particularly Named, or any other Offender or Offenders shall be Convicted, the
Reward of Twenty Pounds for each of the said Persons before particularly Named;
and the Reward of Ten Pounds for every other like Offender so Apprehended and
Convicted, out of the Public Moneys received by him in that County where such
Conviction shall be had, without any Demand or Defalcation of any part of the
said Reward, upon any pretense of charge for passing such Sheriffs Account for
the same in Our Exchequer, or otherwise, or other matter whatsoever, and for
Allowance whereof this Our Proclamation shall be a Discharge to such Sheriff
for such Money by any Sheriff paid (The said Sheriff or Sheriffs producing a
Receipt of Payment according to the Tenor of the Certificate of the Judge or
Justices certifying for Payment of the said Rewards, which shall be Allowed
unto such Sheriffs, paying the same without Fee or other Demand.) And to that
purpose We do hereby Direct, and give in Command to Our Undertreasurer and
Chancellor of Our Exchequer, and Barons of the said Court of Exchequer, and all
other Our Officers of Our said Court of Exchequer, and to every of them, to
Allow unto every Sheriff and Sheriffs so from time to time paying the said
Rewards, such Moneys as he or they shall actually pay upon such Certificate for
the Reward as aforesaid, without any Charge unto, or Fee, or Money to be
Demanded of such Sheriff for passing such part of his said Account in Discharge
from Us of so much Money by him so paid, or to be paid, or for Allowance to be
made unto such Sheriff, for Re-imbursing him or them any Money so from time to
time paid and to be paid in Obedience to this Our Proclamation for the Purposes
above mentioned.

And for the more effectual Execution of the Laws against such Offenders, and
for the Preservation of Our Peace, and the Preventing for the future of
Robberies and Violences to Our said Loving Subjects, We do hereby strictly
Charge and Command all and every of Our Justices of the Peace, that they do
forthwith meet, and in their several Districts assemble themselves together,
and cause public Notice to be given of this Our Proclamation, and Intentions
and Pleasure for the Apprehending of Offenders, and Punishment of them above
mentioned, to all Innkeepers, Hostlers, and such as Let Horses to Hire; And
to all Brokers, and such as Buy, or take to Pawn any Goods, that if any of them
do furnish any Person who shall commit any the Offenses aforesaid, with Horses,
or shall in any manner receive, comfort, harbor, maintain, countenance or
conceal any such or other Felons that they shall be proceeded against, and
punished according to the severity of Law. And for the furthering of the good
Purposes We desire to be effected by this Our Royal Proclamation, We strictly
hereby Charge and Command Our said Justices of the Peace, and they are hereby
Enjoined to meet once in every Month in their several Divisions of their
Counties and Places, and to Enquire after, and to take an Account of the
Constables, of the Defaults of Watch, Warding, and of the Defaults of Hue and
Cry and Pursuit of Felons, and to take care that all Persons and Places making
Default herein, be Presented and Prosecuted to Conviction for such their
Defaults; And also the said Justices are to Enquire after the Defaults of the
Constables, Headboroughs, and other Officers of Justice, to see that they do
their respective Duties as they are of Office to perform, in discovery of all
Persons committing any Murbers, Robberies and Burglaries, and other Felonies,
and to Present their Default at every next Quarter Sessions of the Peace, and
to see them Prosecuted for the same. And also Our said Justices are Monthly to
take an Account from the said Constables, of all Innkeepers, Hostlers, and
Keepers of Horses at Livery, and of such as keep and Let out Horses to Hire,
and of Persons either publicly or privately driving the Trade of Pawn-Brokers,
and common Buyers of Goods, and of their Demeanor in their said Employments;
And also what suspected Persons there are, and where and by whom they are
Lodged, Harbored or Resort unto in their Constableries, to the end the
Offenders and their Harbourers, Aiders and Countenancers may be proceeded
against according to Law. And to that end the said Justices of the Peace are
hereby Required to cause the Constables to make frequent Searches after all
Persons suspected to be of evil Life, and guilty of any of the said heinous
Offenses, their Abettors and Harbourers, to the end Our said Justices may
proceed against them for the Preservation of Our Peace, as there shall be
occasion: And Our said Justices of the Peace, and every of them, Committing any
Person brought before them, for any Robbery on the Highway, Burglary, or
Breaking and Robbing of any Dwelling House in the Daytime, are hereby Required
and Enjoined, that with all convenient speed they be transmit a Copy of such
Persons Commitment to some of Our Judges of Our Court of King's Bench, with such
Description as they can give of such Person Charged with, or suspected to have
committed any Robberies, Burglaries or Housebreakings, as above mentioned, and
of their Horses, and with a Particular of what Goods are taken with such
Offender, to the end Our said Judges may give further Direction for Prosecuting
and Trial, or for Charging them in Custody with any other Robberies and
Burglaries which such Offenders have committed, as shall be requisite, so as
they may in no wise escape from Justice, ^ut receive a just Punishment for
their Misdoings. And Lastly, We do hereby Charge and Command all Lieutenants,
Deputy Lieutenants, Justices of Peace, Mayors, Sheriffs, Bailiffs and other
Officers and Persons whatsoever, to take notice of this Our Royal Proclamation,
and to give due Obedience thereunto, in being Aiding, and giving Assistance in
all things tending to the Execution hereof according to the Laws and Statutes
of this Kingdom, as they tender Our Pleaure, and upon Pain of being proceeded
against as Contemners of Our Royal Authority, in a Matter of so great Concern
to the Public, according to the strict Rites of Justice.

Given at Our Court at Whitehall the Thirtieth Day of October, 1690. In the
Second Year of Our Reign.
LONDON, Printed by Charles Bill and Thomas Newcomb, Printers to the King and
Queens most Excellent Majesty's. 1690.


