monogram of 'W' (William) superimposed on 'M' (Mary) RR

DIEV ET MON DROIT

HONI SOIT QUI MAL Y PENSE

royal blazon or coat of arms
By the King and Queen, A PROCLAMATION, Declaring the PARLIAMENT shall be
Prorogued until the Fourteenth Day of June next.
Marie R.

WHereas Our Parliament is now Prorogued to the Four and twentieth Day of this
Instant May; And Whereas by Our Proclamation of the Fifth of this Month, for
the Reason therein mentioned, We thought fit to Declare Our Pleasure, That Our
Parliament should not only Meet on the said Four and twentieth Day of May, but
should Continue then to Sit for the Dispatch of diverse Weighty Affairs. We
taking it into Our Royal Consideration, That Our Navy being now at Sea, and
Joined with that of Our Allies, and in a readiness (by the Blessing of God) to
Resist and Repel the Designs and Attempts of Our Enemies: And being unwilling
to Call Our Subjects from their Habitations at this Season of the Year, unless
in case of Necessity, Have therefore thought fit (with the Advice of Our Privy
Council) to Publish and Declare, and We do hereby Publish and Declare Our Royal
Pleasure, That Our Parliament shall upon the said Four and twentieth Day of
May, be further Prorogued to the Fourteenth Day of June next, Whereof Lords
Spiritual and Temporal, and the Knights, Citizens and Burgesses of the House of
Commons, and all others whom it may concern, may hereby take Notice, and Order
their Affairs accordingly. We letting them know, That We will not at the said
Four and twentieth Day of May expect the Attendance of any, but such as being
in or about the Cities of London and Westminster, may Attend the making of the
said Prorogation, in such manner as heretofore in like Cases has been
accustomed. And We to hereby further Declare, That convenient Notice shall be
given by Proclamation, of the time when Our Parliament shall Meet and Sit for
the Dispatch of Business, to the end that the Members of both Houses may Order
their Affairs accordingly.

Given at Our Court at Whitehall the Sixteenth Day of May, 1692. In the Fourth
Year of Our Reign.
London, Printed by Charles Bill, and the Executrix of Thomas Newcomb deceased;
Printers to the King and Queens most Excellent Majesty's. 1692.


