His HIGHNESS the Prince of ORANGE HIS SPEECH TO THE Scots, LORDS and
Gentlemen. WITH Their Address, and his Highness his Answer. With a true Account
of what past at their Meeting in the Council Chamger at WHITE HALL, Jan. 1688/9.
His Highness the PRINCE of Orange having caused Advertise such of the Scots,
Lords and Gentlemen, as were in Town, met them in a Room at St. James's, upon
Monday the Seventh of January at three of the Clock in the Afternoon, and had
this Speech to them.

My Lords and Gentlemen,
THE only Reason that induced me to undergo so Great an Undertaking, was, That
I saw the Laws and Liberties of these Kingdoms overturned, and the Protestant
Religion in Eminent Danger; and seeing you are here so many Noblemen and
Gentlemen, I have called you together, that I may have your Advice, what is to
be done for Securing the Protestant Religion, and Restoring your Laws and
Liberties, according to my Declaration.

As soon as His Highness had retire^ the Lords and Gentlemen went to the
Council C^^^^^^ (...) White Hall, and having Chosen the Duke (...) their
President, they fell a Consulting, what ^^^ce was fit to be given to His
Highness in this Conjunc^^e* and after some hours reasoning, they Agreed upon
the Materials of it, and appointed the Clerks, with such as were to Assist
them, to Draw up in writing, what the Meeting thought expedient, to Advise His
Highness, and to bring it in to the Meeting, the next day in the Afternoon.

Tuesday the Eighth Instant, the Writing was presented in the Meeting, and some
time being spent in Reasoning about the fittest way of Conveening a General
Meeting of the Estates of Scotland: At last the Meeting came to Agree in their
Opinion, and appointed the Advice to be Writ clean over, according to the
Amendments. But as they were about to part, for that Diet, the Earl of Arran
proposed to them, as his Lordships Advice, that they should move the PRINCE of
Orange, to desire the KING to return, and Call a Free-Parliament, which would
be the best way to Secure the Protestant Religion and Property, and to Heal all
Breaches. This Proposal seemed to dissatisfy the whole Meeting, and the Duke of
Hamilton their President, Father to the Earl, but they presently parted.

Wednesday the Ninth of January, They met at three of the clock in the same
Room, and Sir Patrick Hume took notice of the Proposal made by the Earl of
Arran, and desired to know if there was any there that would second it: But
none appearing to do it, He said, That what the Earl had proposed, was
evidently opposite and inimicous to His Highness the Prince of Orange's
Undertaking, his Declaration, and the Good Intentions of Preserving the
Protestant Religion, and of Restoring their Laws and Liberties expressed in it.
and further, desired that the Meeting should Declare this to be their Opinion
of it. The Lord Cardross seconded Sir Patricks Motion; it was answered by the
Duke of Hamilton, President of the Meeting, That their business was to prepare
an Advice to be offered to the Prince; and the Advice being now ready to go to
the Vote, there was no need that the Meeting should give their Sense of the
Earls Proposal, which neither before nor after Sir Patricks Motion, any had
pretended to own or second; so that it was fallen, and out of doors; and that
the Vote of the Meeting, upon the Advice brought in by their Order, would
sufficiently declare their Opinion: Thus being seconded by the Earl of
Sutherland, the Lord Cardross, and Sir Patrick did acquiesse; and the Meeting
Voted unanimously the Address following.

To His Highness the PRINCE of Orange.
WE the Lords and Gentlemen of the Kingdom of Scotland, Assembled at Your
Highness's desire, in this Extraordinary Conjunction, do give Your Highness our
humble and hearty Thanks for Your Pious and Generous Undertaking, for
Preserving of the Protestant Religion, and Restoring the Laws and Liberties of
these Kingdoms.

In order to the Attaining of these Ends, our humble Advice and Desire is, That
Your Highness take upon YOU the Administration of All Affairs, both Civil and
Military; the Disposal of the public Revenues and Fortresses of the Kingdom of
Scotland, and the doing every Thing that is necessary for the Preservation of
the Peace of the Kingdom, until a General Meeting of the States of the Nation,
which we humbly desire Your Highness to Call, to be Holden at Edenburg the
Fourteenth day of March next, by Your Letters or Proclamation, to be published
at the Market Crosses of Edenburg, and other Head-Boroughs of the several
Shires and Stewartries, as sufficient Intimation to All concerned, according to
the Custom of the Kingdom: And that the Publication of these Your Letters or
Proclamation, be by the Sheriff or Stewart Clerks, for the Freeholders, who
have the value of Lands, Holden according to Law, for making Elections; and by
the Town-Clerks of the several Buroughs, for the meeting of the whole Burgeses
of the Respective Royal Buroughs, to make their Elections at least Fifteen
Days before the Meeting of the Estates at Edenburg; and the Respective Clerks
to make Intimation thereof, at least. Ten days before the Meetings for
Elections: And that the whole Electors and Members of the said Meeting at
Edenburg, qualified as above expressed, be Protestants, without any other
Exception, or Limitation whatsoever; to Deliberate and Resolve what is to be
done for Securing the Protestant Religion, and Restoring the Laws and Liberties
of the Kingdom, according to Your Highness Declaration.

Dated at the Council Chamber in White Hall the Tenth Day of January 1689.
This Address being Subscribed by Thirty Lords, and about Fourscore Gentlemen,
was presented in their presence at St. James's, by the Duke of Hamilton their
President, to His Highness the Prince of Orange, who Thanked them for the Trust
they reposed in him, and desired a Time to consider upon so Weighty an Affair.

Upon the Fourteenth of January, His Highness, the Prince of Orange met again
with the Scots Lords and Gentlemen, at St. James's; And spoke to them as
follows.

My Lords and Gentlemen,
IN persuance of Your Advice, I will, until the Meeting of the Estates in March
next, give such Orders concerning the Affairs of Scotland, as are necessary for
the Calling of the said Meeting, for the Preserving of the Peace; the Applying
of the public Revenue to the most pressing Uses, and putting the Fortresses in
the Hands of Persons, in whom the Nation can have a Just Confidence: And I do
further Assure you, That you will always find Me ready to Concur with You in
every Thing that may be found necessary for Securing the Protestant Religion,
and Restoring the Laws and Liberties of the Nation.

The Earl of Crawfourd desired of His Highness, That himself, the Earl of
Louthian, and others, come to Town since the Address was presented, might have
an opportunity to Subscribe it; which was accordingly done: His Highness
retired, and All showed great Satisfaction with His Answer.

Sold by R. Janeway, in Queens-Head-Ally in Paternoster Row. 1689.


