By the King and Queen, A PROCLAMATION For Collecting and Levying the Arrears
of HEARTH-MONEY.
William R.

WHereas His Majesty having been Informed, that the Revenue of Hearth-money was
grievous to the People, was Pleased by His Gracious Message sent to the Commons
assembled in tHis present Parliament, to signify His Pleasure, either to Agree
to a Regulation of it, or the taking it wholly away, as should be thought most
convenient by the said Commons: Whereupon the said Commons being filled with a
most humble and grateful Sense of His Majesty's unparallelled Grace and Favor
to His People, not only by restoring their Rights and Liberties which had been
Invaded contrary to Law, but in desiring to make them Happy and at Ease, by
taking away such Burdens as by Law were fixed upon them (by which His Majesty
would erect a lasting Monument of His Godness in every House in the Kingdom)
did most humbly beseech His Majesty, that the said Revenue of Hearth-money
might be wholly taken away and abolished for the future; And thereupon it was
Enacted in and by one Act made at tHis present Parliament Entituted, [ An Act
for the taking away the Revenue arising by Hearth-money] That the several Acts
of Parliament for the Establishing, Ordering and Collecting the said Revenue,
and every the Clauses and Articles in the said several Acts contained, should
be wholly Repealed and made void with a Proviso, That nothing the said Act
contained, should be taken or construed to hinder or prejudice the Collecting,
Levying, Answering or Paying the said Revenue which should grow due on the Five
and twentieth of March in the year of our Lord One thousand six hundred eighty
nine, or any ^^^^^s of the said Duty which were then due and payable by the
said former Acts; But that all the Powers and Articles in the said former Acts
relating to the Collecting and Levying of the said Duty, and the Arrears
thereof, should continue and remain in force for the Collecting, Levying, anb
Recovering of the said Duty of Hearth-money so growing due on the said Twenty
fifth day of March One thousand six hundred eighty nine, and all Arrears of the
said Duty, as if the said Act had not been made. Nevertheless, some Ill-advised
Persons do raise and revive several Questions and Disputes concerning the
Payment of the said Revenue and the Arrears thereof now due, with intent to
obstruct and hinder the Answering and Paying of the said Arrears, albeit the
said entire Revenue is for the future by Their Majesty's Grace Wholly remitted
and taken away for ever; And albeit the said Questions and Disputes are
contrary to Acts of Parliament made concerning the said Duty. Wherefore to the
intent no Persons may pretend Ignorance in the Premises, and for the more
speedy and easy Collecting and Answering the Duty and Arrears due as
aforesaid, and preventing Disputes about the same, Their Majesty's have thought
fit to Charge and Require, and by the Advice of Their Privy Council, do hereby
Charge, Require and Command all and every Their Subjects whom it may concern,
That they readily, and without Dispute, pay all and singular the Arrears of the
said Duty, in pursuance of the said Acts, and that all Justices of the Peace
proceed in the Hearing and Determining of all Matters relating to the same as
by Law they ought; And that they, and all Sheriffs, Mayors, Bailiffs,
Constables, Headboroughs, and all other Officers whatsoever, be Aiding and
Assisting in the Collecting, Receiving and Levying the same accordingly; And
hereof they, each and every of them, are not to fail in any wise, as they will
answer the same at their Peril.

Given at Our Court at Hampton Court the Sixth Day of June, 1689. In the First
Year of Our Reign.
LONDON, Printed by Charles Bill, and Thomas Newcomb, Printers to the King and
Queen's Most Excellent Majesty's. 1689.


