By the King and Queen, A PROCLAMATION For a Public THANKSGIVING.
WILLIAM R.

WHereas Their Majesty's having a deep and serious Consideration of the War in
which they (together with most of the Princes and States of Europe) were and
still are Engaged against the French King, did by Their Royal Proclamation
bearing date the Tenth day of May last; as also by another Proclamation bearing
date the Sixteenth day of August last, appoint Two General Fasts to be kept
throughout this Kingdom, for Imploring the Blessing and Protection of Almighty
God in the Preservation of Their Majesty's Sacred Persons, and Prosperity of
Their Arms both at Land and Sea, which have been Observed accordingly. And
forasmuch as it has pleased Almighty God of His infinite Goodness, in Answer
to the Prayers humble and devoutly of offered up to Him, to preserve Their
Majesty's and Their Government, against the Designs and Attempts of Their Open
and Secret Enemies, and to Protect His Majesty's Person from the Danger to
which He was Exposed in His late Expedition beyond the Seas, and to Grant such
Success to His Majesty's Arms both at Sea and Land, and to the Forces of the
Confederate Princes and States in several Parts of Europe, as to put a
considerable Stop to the Rage and Fury of the Enemy, and to bring Him back in
Safety to this Kingdom: Their Majesty's therefore Adoring the Divine Goodness,
and duly considering, That such Great and Public Blessings do call for Public
and Solemn Acknowledgments, Have thought fit, and (with the Advice of Their
Privy Council) do hereby Appoint and Command, That a General Thanksgiving to
Almighty God for these His Mercies be Observed throughout Our Cities of London
and Westminster, and elsewhere within the Weekly Bills of Mortality, on Sunday
the Second day of December next: And in all other Places throughout this
Kingdom of England, Dominion of Wales, and Town of Berwick upon Tweed, on
Sunday the Sixteenth day of December ensuing. And for the better and more
orderly Solemnizing of the same, Their Majesty's have given Directions to the
most Reverend Archbishops, and Right Reverend Bishops of this Kingdom, to
Compose a Form of Prayer suitable to this Occasion, to be Used in all Churches
and Chapels, and other Places of Public Worship, and to take Care for the
timely dispersing of the same throughout their respective Diocesses. And Their
Majesty's do strictly Charge and Command, That the said Public days of
Thanksgiving be Religiously Observed by all Their Loving Subjects, as they
tender the Favor of Almighty God, and upon Pain of Suffering such Punishment
as Their Majesty's can justly inflict for the Contempt or Neglect thereof.

Given at Our Court at Whitehall the Fifteenth Day of November, 1694. In the
Sixth Year of Our Reign.
London, Printed by Charles Bill, and the Executrix of Thomas Newcomb,
deceased; Printers to the King and Queens most Excellent Majesty's. 1694.


