By the King and Queen, A PROCLAMATION.
WILLIAM R.

WHereas in Order to the Holding a Correspondence with Their Majesty's Enemies,
and the Carrying on other Wicked and Treasonable Designs, diverse Passes, and
also diverse Warrants for Seizing of Persons have been Forged, and thereto the
Hand and Seal of Daniel Earl of Nottingham, Their Majesty's Principal Secretary
of State have been Counterfeited, by Means whereof not only the Peace of the
Kingdom may be Disturbed, but great Danger may Ensue to Their Majesty's Royal
Persons, unless some Speedy and Public Notice be given of the said Fogeries:
Their Majesty's therefore, with the Advice of Their Privy Council, have thought
fit by this their Royal Proclamation to Notify the Premises to all Their
Loving Subjects. And to the End they may not hereafter be Deceived or Imposed
upon by such Forged Warrants or Passes, the Impression of the said
Counterfeited Seal is Described, and Imprinted in the Margin of this Their
Majesty's Proclamation. And for the future and more certain Avoiding the
Mischiefs which may be Occasioned by the said Forgeries, and lest well-meaning
Persons may be Deceived by any Resemblance between the said Counterfeit Seal
and the True and Real Seal formerly made use of (Their Majesty's said Principal
Secretary of State having, by Their Erpress Command, Caused a New Seal of a
different Impression to be Prepared, which is to be Used for the Future) Their
Majesty's do by this Their Proclamation, with the Advice of Their Privy
Council, Revoke and Discharge all Passes, and all Warrants whatsoever for
Apprehending or Seizing any Person or Persons heretofore Sealed with any Seal
which shall Resemble the Impression made in the Margin of this Proclamation,
hereby Willing and Requiring all Justices of Peace, Mayors, Sheriffs and
Officers belonging to the Ports, and all other Officers and Persons whatsoever,
to take Notice hereof, and Commanding them, and every of them upon their Duty
and Allegiance, That they do not at any time hereafter Yield Obedience to any
Warrants or Passes whatsoever, which shall be Sealed with the said Counterfeit
Seal, or any Seal which shall Resemble the said Impression in the Margin
hereof. And also that they and every of them do use their utmost Endeavors to
Apprehend and Seize such Persons as shall use or produce any of the said
Counterfeit Warrants or Passes, and cause them to be Committed to the next
Goal, there to remain until they shall be delivered by due Course of Law: And
that as soon as such Person shall be Apprehended, they do give Notice thereof
immediately to Their Majesty's, or Their Privy Council, or to Their Principal
Secretary of State. And Their Majesty's are Graciously Pleased hereby to
Promise and Declare, That whosoever shall Discover any Person who has been
Guilty of making or Forging the said Counterfeit Warrants or Passes, or of
Dispersing or Using the same, so as such Person may be Convicted by due Course
of Law, shall have and receive as a Reward for such good Service, immediately
upon the Conviction of any such Offender the Sum of Five hundred Pounds.

Given at Our Court at Whitehall, the Ninth Day of March 1692/3. In the Fifth
year of Our Reign.
LONDON, Printed by Charles Bill, and the Executrix of Thomas Newcomb deceased.
Printers to the King and Queens most Excellent Majesty's. 1692/3.


