A CHARTER of Regulations to the East India Company, by Their Sacred Majesty's
King WILLIAM and Queen MARY, under the Great Seal of England, Dated the 28th.
of September, 1694.
WILLIAM and MARY, King and Queen of England, etc.
To the Governor and Company of Merchants, Trading into the East Indies, etc.
Greeting.
Whereas by our Charter, Dated the 7th. October, 1693. We did appoint Sir
Thomas Cook, Francis Tyssen Esquire; etc. to be a Body Corporate and Politic, by
the Name of the Governor and Company of Merchants of London, Trading to the
East Indies. under the Provisoes therein mentioned. and did grant them several
Liberties, Powers, etc. wherein is the Proviso following of several Directions,
etc. viz. which if the Company don't conform unto if made before the 29th.
Sept. 1694, and put under the great Seal, then We may make void these Presents,
and the Powers and things herein contained, to cease and be void.

And whereas by Our other Charter of the 11th. Nov. last, several Regulations,
etc. are prescribed pursuant to that Proviso. and also the following clause,
obliging the Company to act according to such Orders, Regulations, etc. as we
should make and put under Our Great Seal before the 29th. of Sept. 1694. Or
else to be liable to have this Charter, and that of the 7th. October
determined, and the Powers and Grants therein contained,

NOW KNOW YE, That in pursuance of the said two Provisoes, And by virtue of
what otherwise we may lawfully put in execution, We do by this Writing under
our great Seal, by Advice of our Privy Counc^^ Order and Direct, That every
Person qualified to Vote by our last Charter, or otherwise in a General or
other Court, to be hereafter holden by the Company, shall before admittance to
give in such Votes, take an Oath before the Governor, or Deputy, or any one of
the Committees. if required by any Member of the Company having 1^^^ l. Stock
in his own Right, and not in Trust.) That he or the so desiring to Vote is then
really entitled to so much Stock for his or her own Use and Right, and not in
Trust, as qualifies them to give in the Votes they desire.

Which Oath the Governor, Deputy, or any of the Committees, are required to
administer. Every Person not taking such Oath, shall not be admitted to give
any Vote, nor their Votes be of any avail. None to be Free but Subjects Natural
Born or Indenized. Every Person who by plurality of Votes shall be Elected
Governor, Deputy, or of the Committee, shall before his being, or acting as
such, take an Oath in the General Court before the Governor, etc. that at the
time of his Election and taking his Oath, he is entitled in his own right and
not in trust, to so much Stock as qualifies him for such Election.

Which Oath the said Governor, or Deputy, etc. are required to administer. And
if such Person do not take the same, his Election shall be void, and the Court
shall proceed to a new Election, according to the Directions in this and the
last Charter. No Person or Persons that is or shall be Chosen Governor, or
Deputy of the Company, shall continue in their places for more than two Years
together. And no Person that has served therein two years together, shall be
capable of being re-elected till two years after. If above sixteen of the last
years Committee Men be new Chosen at the next Annual Election, the
Supernumeraries who have the fewest Votes, their Election shall be void, and
others chose in their stead, so that at least Eight new ones shall be Elected.
And whereas by the Charter of the 11th. Nov. 1693. We did Order, That the said
Governor and Company should not License any Person to Trade, or Ship to Sail,
into or from the East Indies on private Account, on pain of making void the
last two Charters.

Now we do hereby direct, That the said Governor and Company may License the
Commanders and Mariners of their Ships, to trade in such Commodities, and to
such a value as a General Court shall allow of, and not otherwise. Due Entries
being made thereof, and the Duties paid at the Custom-House, before the
Landing, notwithstanding the said Charter.

And whereas by the said Charter we Ordered the said Governor and Company
Yearly to Export 100000 l. worth of Goods of English Manufacture, etc. To the
and the Truth thereof may appear, We do hereby Order them to give (...) unto
Us, in Our Privy Council, in the Month of August Yearly, a true Account fairly
written under the Governor or Deputies Hand of the Nature, Quantity, Value and
Cost of such Goods Exported Yearly. And from what place. And Oath made thereof
by the Proper Officers of the Company. And We do hereby Order, that none of the
Goods so Exported shall be again Landed in England, or carried elsewhere than
within the Limits of the Companies Charter.

If any Six or more of the Adventurers, having each 1000 l. or more, in his own
Right, and not in Trust, and qualified to Vote by the last Charter, shall at
any time hereafter by Writing under their Hands, delivered to, or left for the
Governor, or Deputy, at the East-India-House, Request a General Court may be
called. The Governor, or Deputy, shall within Eight Days after Summons a
General Court accordingly. Which, or any other, shall not be broken up without
Consent of the Ma^ority of the present Members capable to Vote. All private
Committees of the Company shall be Chosen by the General Court. No Governor,
Deputy, nor any of the Committees, shall Lend any of the Companies Money,
unless previously Authorized by the General Court. No Goods of the Companies
shall be delivered to any Person, till the Money be actually paid for the same,
or Security given to the Companies Satisfaction. No Court of Committees, nor
any Members of the said Company, shall by any Agreement bind the General Stock
of the Company, for Receiving or Delivering Stock, without leave of a General
Court. The Companies Cash shall be entirely kept in Effective Money within
their own House. And always be in the Custody of Three at least of the
Committees of the Treasury. And by them issued out to the Cashire, as the
Companies Occasions require. No Sum of Money shall be allowed on the Companies
Account, but where it shall appear when, to whom and for what it has been paid;
Except only where the General Court shall previously Authourize any to dispose
thereof without Account.

The Company notwithstanding the Clause afore-recited of the Late King
Charles's Charter, Dated the Third of April, 1561. Shall after two Years hence,
In Case We shall require the same in Writing, make present payment of their
Customs, due on Goods by them imported, and be allowed Discount of Four Pounds
Ten Shillings per Cent. per Annum, in Lieu of the said two Six Months, and Six
Pounds Five Shillings per Cent. on Additional Duties, in Lieu of the Four Three
Months allowed by Act of Parliament. If the said Charters of the 7th. October,
and 11th. Nov. or any other Charters of the Companies, or these presents, or
the Continuance thereof in whole or part, shall not be profitable to Us or Our
Realm. Then after Three Years warning, all the said Charters shall be
determined and Void. And the said Governor and Company shall no longer
continue a Corporation.

The Governor and Company shall, by Writing, under their Common Seal, to be
Approved of by Our Attorney or Solicitor General, declare their Acceptance of
and Submission to the two Last, and this present Charter. And in Default
thereof, not Act as a Corporation.

WILLIAM and MARY, By the Grace of God King and Queen of England, Scotland,
France, and Ireland, Defenders of the Faith, etc.
To the Governor and Company of Merchants of London, Trading into the
East Indies, and to all others to whom these Presents shall come Greeting.
Whereas in and by a certain Charter, or Letters Patents, under our Great Seal
of England, bearing date at Westminster, the Seventh day of October now last
past, We did make, constitute, ordain, declare and appoint Sir Thomas Cook
Knt. and one of the Aldermen of our City of London, Francis Tyssen Esquire; George
Earl of Berkeley, and diverse other persons therein named and described, should
be a body Corporate and Politic, in Deed and in Name, by the Name of the
Governor and Company of Merchants of London, Trading into the East Indies,
under, and subject to the Provisoes and Conditions, and upon the Terms therein
mentioned, and we did thereby give and grant unto the said Governor and
Company, and their Successors several Liberties, Powers, Privileges and
Immunities, in which said Charter or Letters Patents, there is, amongst other
things therein contained, a Clause or Proviso in the Words, or to the effect
following, that is to say, Provided always, and upon condition nevertheless,
and Our express Will and Meaning is, that if the said Governor and Company of
Merchants of London, Trading into the East Indies, and their Successors, do not
accept of, and from time to time, and at all times hereafter, Act according to,
and put in due and effectual Execution, and submit and conform in all things
unto such orders, directions, additions, alterations, restrictions and
qualifications relating to the constitution, continuance, determination,
rights, powers or privileges of the said Company, or the Government thereof,
or of the said Governor and Company, or the encouragement, management.
regulation or advancement of Trade, or of the present or future Joynt-Stock of
the said Company, or concerning any future Subscriptions to be made by way of
increase or addition to the Joynt-Stock, or for ascertaining the true values of
the said Joynt-Stock, at and during the times of any such future Subscriptions,
which, and as We, Our Heirs, or Successors, by the Advice of Our or Their Privy
Council, shall from time to time, at any time before the Nine and Twentieth day
of September, which shall be in the Year One Thousand Six Hundred Ninety and
Four, think fit to make, incert, limit, direct, appoint or express in or by any
further or other Charter, Letters Patents, or other Writing or Instrument under
Our or Their Great Seal of England, Then, and in each and every of the Cases
aforesaid, it shall and may be lawful to and for Us, Our Heirs and Successors
by Letters Patents, under Our or Their Great Seal of England, to determine,
revoke and make void these Presents, and the Grant hereby made, and from and
immediately after the passing of such Letters Patents of revocation or
determination under the Great Seal of England, These Presents, and all the
Powers, Privileges, Grants and other things herein contained shall cease,
determine, and be absolutely void to all intents and purposes, any thing to the
contrary notwithstanding. And whereas, in and by one other Charter, or Letters
Patents, under the Great Seal of England, bearing date at Westminster the
Eleventh day of November now last past, diverse orders, directions, additions,
alterations, restrictions, regulations, qualifications, and other matters and
things are contained and prescribed, pursuant to the said Proviso in the said
first Charter, and therein is also contained a Clause or Proviso in the Words,
or to the effect following, that is to say, Provided always, and upon
condition nevertheless, and our express Will and Meaning is, and we do hereby
order, direct and appoint, and the said Governor and Company do hereby agree,
That if said Governor and Company of Merchants of London Trading into the
East Indies, and their Successors, do not accept of, and from time to time, and
at all times hereafter Act according to, and put in due and effectual
Execution, and submit and conform in all things unto, as well all and every the
orders, directions, additions, alterations, restrictions, qualifications,
matters and things herein before expressed, as also all and every such further,
and other orders, directions, additions, alterations, restrictions and
qualifications relating to the Constitution, Continuance, Determination,
Rights, Powers or Privileges of the said Company, or the Government thereof,
or of the said Governor and Company, or the Encouragement, Management,
Regulation or Advancement of Trade, or of the present or future Joynt-Stock of
the said Company, or concerning any future Subscriptions to be made by way of
increase or addition to the Joynt-Stock, or for ascertaining the true values of
the said Joynt-Stock, at and during the times of any such future subscriptions,
which, and as We, Our Heirs or Successors, by the Advice of Our or their Privy
Council, shall from time to time, at any time before the Nine and twentieth day
of September, which shall be in the Year One thousand Six hundred Ninety four,
think fit to make, incert, limit, direct, appoint or express in or by any
further or other Charter, Letters Patents, or other Writing or Instrument under
Our or their Great Seal of England, then and in each and every of the Cases
aforesaid, it shall and may be lawful to and for Us, Our Heirs and Successors,
by Letters Patents under Our or their Great Seal of England, to determine,
revoke and make void, as well these Presents, and the Grant hereby made, as
also the said Charter or Letters Patents, bearing date the Seventh day of
October last past, herein before mentioned, and all and every, or any the
matters and things therein and herein contained; and from and immediately after
the passing of such Letters Patents of Revocation or Determination under the
Great Seal of England, as well these Presents, as also the said Charter or
Letters Patents, bearing Date the Seventh day of October last past and all the
Powers, Privileges, Grants, and other things therein and herein contained,
shall cease, determine, and be absolutely void to all intents and purposes, any
thing to the contrary notwithstanding, As in and by the said several Letters
Patents, relation being thereunto respectively had, may more fully and at large
appear. NOW KNOW YE, That by virtue and in pursuance of the said two Provisoes
in the said Charters and Letters Patents mentioned, and by virtue of all other
Powers, Ways and Means, which We have, or can, or lawfully may make use of, or
put in Execution, We do by this Writing or Instrument under Our Great Seal of
England, by the Advice of our Privy Council, Order and Direct, That every
Person who by having One Thousand Pounds, or more, in the Stock of the said
Company, is or shall be by virtue of our said last Charter, or otherwise
qualified or entitled to give one or more Vote or Votes in any General or
other Court to be at any time or times hereafter holden for the said Company,
shall at the time of holding of every such General or other Court, and before
such persons shall be admitted to give any Vote or Votes in any such Court,
take an Oath before the Governor of the said Company or his Deputy, or some
one or more of the Twenty four Committees of the said Company then present, if
thereunto required by any Members of the said Company then present, having One
Thousand pound or more, in the Stock of the said Company in his own Right, and
not in Trust for any other, That he or she so offering or desiring to give any
Vote or Votes in any such Court, than is really and bona fide Interested in and
Entitled unto so much of the Stock of the said Company for his or her own Use,
and in his or her own Right, and not in Trust for any other Person or Persons
as does Entitle him or her according to the Directions and Qualifications
mentioned in Our said last Charter, unto such Vote or Number of Votes in a
General, or other Court, which he or she then does or shall Give in, or Offer
or Desire to Give, (which Oath the Governor or his Deputy, or some one or more
of the Twenty Four Committees of the said Company Then present, shall, and are
hereby Authorized and Required, from time to time, to Administer accordingly).
And if any such Person or Persons so Required to take such Oath, shall Refuse
or Neglect to take the same, Then he or she so Neglecting or Refusing, shall
not be Admitted, nor have any Capacity to Give any Vote or Votes in any such
General, or other Court, Nor shall any such Vote or Votes be of any avail, Any
thing in the said recited Charters, or either of them, or other matter or thing
whatsoever to the contrary notwithstanding. And We do hereby further, in like
manner, Order and Direct, That no Person shall be admitted to the Freedom of
the said Company, that at the time of such Admission shall not be a Natural
born Subject of this Realm, or Naturalized or Indenized. And we do hereby
further, in like manner, Order and Direct, That every Person who shall by
Plurality of Votes be Elected Governor or Deputy Governor, or any of the
Twenty Four Committees of the said Company, shall before he take upon him to
be, or to Act as Governor, Deputy, or one of the Twenty Four Committees, take
an Oath in the General Court of the Company, before the Governor, or Deputy,
or one or more of the Twenty Four Committees of the said Company, (not being a
party concerned) That such Person so Elected Governor, or Deputy Governor, or
one of the Committee at the time of such Election, or Giving of Votes as
aforesaid, was, and at the time of taking such Oath is, really and bona fide
Interested in, and Entitled unto, so much of the Stock of the said Company in
his own Right, and to his own proper Use, and not in Trust for any other, As
by, and according to Our said last Charter, Does Qualify and Capacitate such
Person or Persons to be Elected Governor or Deputy Governor, or one of the
Committees of the said Company respectively, Which Oath the said Governor,
Deputy Governor, or any one of the said Twenty Four Committees (not being a
party Concerned in that present question) is, And are hereby respectively, from
time to time Authorized, and Required, to Administer accordingly; and If such
Person or Persons so Elected, into any the said Offices or Places respectively,
shall Refuse or Neglect to take the same, Then the Election, and Votes given
for the Election of every such Person so Refusing shall be void. And the said
Company shall from time to time proceed to a New Election, according to the
Direction and Qualifications in this and our said last Charter, as if the said
Refuser or Refusers had never been Chosen, And as if no Votes had been given
for such his Choice and Election. And We do hereby further, in like manner,
Order and Direct, That no Person or Persons that Now is, or hereafter shall be
Chosen Governor, or Deputy Governor of the said Company, shall continue in
the Office or Place of Governor, or Deputy Governor, or either of them for
more than Two Years together; And that no Person or Persons that shall have
served in both or either of the said Offices of Governor, or Deputy Governor
of the said Company by the space of Two Years, together, shall be Chosen, or
Capable of being Chosen, into either of the said two Offices or Places, within
the space of Two Years next after the end of the last of those Two Years
wherein he served either as Governor, or Deputy Governor. And we do also
hereby, in like manner, further Order and Direct, That the Twenty Four
Committees of the said Company shall be Yearly Chosen; and if at such Election,
more than Sixteen of those for the last Year shall be Chosen, The Election of
so many of them as are above the Number of Sixteen, and have the fewest Voices,
shall be Void, and others Chose in their stead, so that there shall be Yearly,
at least, Eight that were not of the Committee the precedeing year. And
whereas, in and by the said last mentioned Charter, bearing Date the Eleventh
day of November, in the Fifth Year of Our Reign, It is provided, And We did
thereby Order and Appoint, That the said Governor and Company of Merchants of
London Trading into the East Indies, or their Successors, should not at any
time then after, License or permit any Person or Persons whatsoever, to Trade
or Traffic, or any Ship or Ships, to Sail or pass into, or from any part of
the East Indies, on any private Account whatsoever, and that if any such
License, or Permission, should be granted contrary to Our said Order and
Appointment therein before declared, That then, and In each such Case, as well
the said Last mentioned Charter, or Letters Patents, as also the said Letters
Patents bearing Date the said Seventh day of October last past, and all and
every the Powers, Grants, Matters and Things in both the said Letters Patents
contained, should Cease, Determine, and be utterly Void to all Intents and
Purposes, Any thing to the Contrary notwithstanding. Now We do hereby Order and
Direct, That the said Governor and Company of Merchants of London, Trading
into the East Indies, and their Successors, May at any time hereafter License,
and permit, any Commanders, Officers and Seamen, which from time to time, or at
any time hereafter, shall be Employed by the said Company, in the Ships of, or
belonging to, or in the Service of, the said mompany, and set out upon the said
Companies Account only, to Trade and Traffic in, and to Import in such
Ships, from any part of the East Indies, for and upon the Account of such
Commanders, Officers or Seamen, only such Commodities and Goods, and such
proportion thereof, as shall be from time to time permitted, and allowed of, by
the Majority of Votes at a General Court of the said Company for the time
being, and not otherwise; Due Entries being made thereof, and the Duties Due
for the same, being paid, or secured, at, or in, our Custom-House of the place
where the same shall be Imported, before the Landing thereof; The said
last-mentioned Provisoe, Direction, or Appointment, contained in the said
last-mentioned Charter, to the Contrary notwithstanding. And Whereas, We did
also in, and by, the said last-mentioned Charter, or Letters Patents, Order and
Appoint. That the said Governor and Company of Merchants of London, Trading
into the East Indies, and their Successors, should Yearly, and every Year,
During the Continuance of the said Joint Stock, Export, and Carry, to the
East Indies, so many Goods of the Growth, Product, or Manufacture of this Our
Kingdom of England, as should Amount to the Value of One Hundred Thousand Pound
at the least. To the End therefore, That the Truth and Certainty thereof may be
made to appear to Us, Our Heirs and Successors, We do hereby, in like manner,
Order and Direct, That the said Governor and Company, for the time being, and
their Successors, Do and Shall give in, and deliver, unto Us, Our Heirs and
Successors, in Our, or Their Privy Council, Yearly, and every Year, in the
Month of August, A True Account, or Inventory, fairly Written and Signed by the
Governor, or Deputy Governor, of the said Company for the time being,
Containing the Nature, Quantity, Quality, Value and Prime Cost, of all such
Goods of the Growth, Product or Manufacture of this Our Kingdom of England, as
in the last precedeing Year have been Exported, and Carried to the East Indies,
on the said Companies Account, Together with the Place, Town, or Port, from
whence the said Goods were Exported to the East Indies, And, That Oath be made
of the Truth of such Account or Inventory, by the proper Officers, or Servants,
of the said Company, concerned in such Exportation. And We do hereby further,
in like manner, Order and Direct, That None of the said Goods, or Commodities,
so Exported, shall be again Landed in Our Kingdom of England, Dominion of
Wales, or Town of Berwick upon Tweed, or be carried to any other Country or
Place, but into the East Indies, or some place within the Limits, or Bounds, of
the said Companies Charter. And We do hereby, in like manner, further Order and
Direct, That in Case any Six, or more, of the Members of the said Company, who
shall then each have in the Stock of the said Company, One Thousand Pounds, or
more, for his own Use, and in his own Right, and not in Trust, or for any
other, and qualified to Vote in a General, or other Court of the said Company,
as by the said last-mentioned Charter is Directed, shall at any time or times
hereafter, by any Writing under their Hands, to be delivered unto, or Left for
the Governor, or Deputy Governor, of the said Company for the time being, at
the East-In^ia-House, or other usual place of Meeting of the said Company,
Request the said Governor, or Deputy Governor, to Call a General Court of the
said Company, That then, and so often, the said Governor, or Deputy Governor,
shall within Eight Days next after such Writing shall be Delivered, or Left as
aforesaid, Summon a General Court accordingly; And that the same being so
Assembled, as also any other General Court, which shall be at any time
hereafter Assembled, shall not be broken up, or Dissolved, without the Consent
of the Majority of the Members of the said Company then present, and Capable to
Vote in such General Court as aforesaid. And We do hereby further, in like
manner, Order and Direct, That all and every Private Committees of the said
Company, shall from time to time, and at all times hereafter, be Chosen and
appointed by the Majority of a General Court of the said Company, and not by
the Court of Committees of the said Company. And We do hereby, in like manner,
further Order and Direct, That the Governor, Deputy Governor, and Committees
of the said Company for the time being, or any of them, shall not Lend, Nor
shall it be in the Power of them, or any of them, to Lend any Money of or
belonging to the said Company, to any Person or Persons whatsoever, unless
previously Enabled or Authorized to do the same by the Majority of the General
Court. And further we do, in like manner, Order and Direct, That No Goods
whatsoever, of or belonging to the said Company, shall be delivered to any
Person or Persons whatsoever, until the Money be actually paid for the same, or
such Security given, as shall be approved of by a Majority of Votes, in a Court
of Committees of the said Company. And We do also hereby, in like manner, Order
and Direct, That no Court of Committees of the said Company, or any Member or
Members of the said Company, Do, or shall at any time or times hereafter, Make
or Enter into any Contract, Article or Agreement, with any Person or Persons
whatsoever, whereby to Oblige, or by means or reason whereof, the General Stock
of the said Company, or any part thereof, shall or may be Obliged or Bound,
either for Receiving or Delivering of Stock at a Price Agreed on, without Leave
first had or obtained in that behalf, by a Majority of Votes in a General Court
of the said Company. And We do hereby, in like manner, further Order and
Direct, That the Cash of and belonging to the said Company, shall from time to
time, and at all times hereafter, be entirely kept in Effective Money, within
the Companies House in Leaden-hall-Street, London, Or in such other House or
Place where the said Company shall meet, and sit for the Dispatch of the
Companies Business. And further, That the Money, and Cash of the said Company
for the time being, so to be kept as aforesaid, shall always be and Remain in
the Custody of Three at least of the Committees of the Treasury, of, or
belonging to, the said Company for the time being, to be by them issued out to
the Cashier of the said Company for the time being, in such Sums as the
Companies Occasions shall or may from time to time Require. And We do hereby,
in like manner, further Order and Direct, That No Sum or Sums of Money
whatsoever shall be allowed by or upon the Account of the said Company, but in
such Case, where it shall appear when, to whom, and for what, such Sum or Sums
of Money was, or were paid; Except in such Cases where, by Authority of a
General Court of the said Company, any Committee, or Member or Members of the
said Company, shall be previously Authorized, and Empowered to Dispose of the
same without account. And whereas, Our Late Royal Uncle King Charles the
Second, in and by certain Letters Patents under the Great Seal of England,
bearing Date the Third day of April, in the Thirteenth Year of His Reign, Did
for Him, His Heirs and Successors, Grant to the said Governor and Company of
Merchants of London, Trading into the East Indies, and their Successors, That
when, and as often as any Custom, Poundage, Subsidy, or other Duties should be
due and payable unto the said Late King Charles the Second, His Heirs or
Successors, for any Goods, Wares or Merchandises whatsoever, to be returned out
of, or from, any the Islands, Ports, Havens, Cities, Towns or Places therein
mentioned, unto the Port of London, or any of the Havens, Creeks, Members or
Places to the same Port belonging, That the Customers, and all other Officers
for the time being, of the said Late King, His Heirs or Successors, for or
concerning the Receipt of Custom, Poundage, Subsidy or other Duties, to whom it
should or might appertain, should upon the Request of the Governor and Company
of the said Merchants of London, Trading to the East Indies, or any their
Agents, Factors or Assigns, Give unto the said Governor and Company, their
Agents, Factors or Assigns Six Months time for the payment of the one half, and
after Those Six Months ended, Other Six Months for the Payment of the other
half of their said Customs, Poundage, or other Subsidies or Duties, Receiving
good and sufficient Bond with Surety, to the use of the said late King Charles
the Second, his Heirs and Successors, for the true payment of the same
accordingly, And upon Receipt of the said Bond with Surety, from time to time
to Give unto the said Governor and Company of Merchants of London, Trading
into the East Indies, for the time being, their Agents, Factors or Assigns,
Their Cocquets, or other Warrants, to take out and receive on Land the same
Goods, Wares and Merchandi^es, by virtue thereof, without any Disturbance. And
whereas We Think it Requisite for our Service, that some Alteration be made in
that Matter, We do therefore by these presents, in like manner, Order and
Direct, That the said Governor and Company of Merchants of London, Trading
into the East Indies and their Successors, Do and shall, from and after, the
end of Two Years commencing from the Date hereof, (In Case We, Our Heirs or
Successors, by any Writing under Our, or their Royal Sign Manual, shall require
the same) Make present payment of all the Customs, Subsidies, Additional and
other Duties, Due and payable to Us, Our Heirs or Successors, for such Goods
and Commodities as after the end of the said Two Years shall be Imported into
Our Port of London, or any the Havens, Creeks, Members or Places to the same
Port belonging, by or upon the Account, or in the Name of the said Company, And
in consideration of such present payment, the said Governor and Company, and
their Successors, shall be allowed to Deduct and Discount after the Rate of
Four Pounds Ten Shillings per Cent. for a Year, for all the said Customs and
Duties so paid, in Lieu and Recompense for the two Six Months, given them by
the said Charter for payment thereof. And shall also be further allowed for all
the Additional Impositions and Duties now payable by the said Company, (other
than the Duties of Tonnage and Poundage) after the rate of Six Pounds and Five
Shillings per Cent. by way of Discount for present payment, in Lieu and
Recompense for the Four Three Months allowed for payment thereof, by the
several Acts of Parliament by which the said Duties are granted. And We do
hereby, in like manner, Order and Direct, That if it shall appear to us Our
Heirs or Successors, That the said two Charters, or Letters Patents, bearing
Date the Seventh day of October, and the Eleventh of November now last past, or
any other Charters, or Letters Patents, heretofore made, or Granted to the said
Governor and Company of Merchants of London, Trading into the East Indies, or
these Presents, any or either of them, or the continuance of them, any or
either of them, in the whole, or in any part thereof, shall not be profitable
to Us, Our Heirs, or Successors, or to this Our Realm, That then, and from
thenceforth, upon and after Three Years warning to be given to the said Company
by Us, Our Heirs or Successors, under Our or their Privy Seal or Sign Manual,
The said several Letters Patents, bearing Date the said Seventh day of October,
and Eleventh day of November now last past, and other the said former Charters
or Letters Patents, and the Regulations in these Presents contained, and every
of them, shall Cease, be Void, and Determined, to all Intents, Constructions
and Purposes. And the said Governor and Company of Merchants of London,
Trading into the East Indies, from and after the end of the said three Years,
shall not Continue to be, nor shall Act as a Corporation, or Body Politic, but
shall be wholly Determined; Any thing therein or herein contained to the
contrary in any wise notwithstanding. And We do hereby also, in like manner,
Order and Direct, That the said Governor and Company of Merchants of London,
Trading into the East Indies, Do and shall, before the First day of December
next Ensuing, by an Instrument in Writing, under their Common Seal, to be
approved of by our Attorney, or Solicitor General, Declare their Acceptance of,
and Submission unto the said Charters of the Seventh of October, and Eleventh
of November last past, and all and every the Regulations, Matters and Things
therein and in either of them contained; And also their Acceptance of, and
Submission unto these Presents, and the several Matters and Things therein
contained. And if they shall Refuse, or Neglect, so to do, that Then the said
Governor and Company of Merchants of London, Trading to the East Indies, from
and after the said First day of December next, shall not continue to be, nor
shall Act as a Corporation, or Body Politic, but shall be wholly Determined,
any thing to the contrary Notwithstanding. In VVitness whereof, We have Caused
these Our Letters to be made Patents. VVitness Our Selves at Westminster, the
Eight and Twentieth Day of September, in the Sixth Year of Our Reign.

per ipsos ^^^^m and Reginam.
Pigott.


