VIRGINIA'S Discovery of SILKE-VVORMES, with their benefit.

AND The Implanting of MULBERRY TREES.

Also The dressing and keeping of Vines, for the rich Trade of making Wines
there.

Together with The making of the Saw-mill, very useful in Virginia, for
cutting of Timber and Clapbord, to build withal, and its conversion to other
as profitable Uses.



LONDON, Printed by T. H. for John S^ephenson, at the Sign of the Sun, below
Ludgate. 1650.

To all the VIRGINIA Merchants, Adventurers, and Planters.
Gentlemen:
THE unhappiness to be amongst the lowest of men, for parts and fortune,
cannot hinder me from the satisfaction which I receive in my self, that none
is possessed with a more eager passion of contributing toward the advancing
Virginia to that degree of felicity which the bounty of nature, richness of
soil, and temperature of Climate designed her to: and were my power but of as
strong a Wing as my inclinations and desires, that above-example Country
should be placed in such a Zenith of stability, wealth, and glory, that it
should behold all the other National happinesses of the World in a Sphere
beneath her; and her Merchants Adventurers and Planters, like so many
Load-starres to conduct Mankind into an innocent Ocean of unfathomed wealth of
unrocky prosperity.

No Country under the Sun is less ungrateful then Virginia, if she be but
justly courted, but to Complement a Virgin for her affection by breathing
smoke in her nostrils, to express our Civilities by vapor; and for all that
vast Dowry of spaciousness, wealth, bounty of air, and plenty of provisions,
to proffer her a jointure of Tobacco, is a Complement indistinguishable from
incivill rudeness.

What Riches may not the Silke-worme, Vine, Olive, and Almond afford us? By
these noble undertakings we contract China two thousand Leagues nearer to us,
and are not troubled though Spain and Italy were remooved five thousand more
distant from us: and if we could not satisfy the implacable curiosity of our
Senses without the Eastern Spices, it i^ without dispute, that what every
Orient has of Aromatic, ^ould grow without any deterioration in this
incomparable Country.

Yet if, by some occult propriety of nature, these Spices, and Gummes should
not prosper with that success in the Country ^o which they are only
adoptive, as where they are natural: The South Sea flowing upon the skirts of
this gloriously appa^relled Virgin, would not only furnish us, but (through
our means) all the Western Worl^ with whatever the Philippines and China have
in their brow, or bosom: which that it may be discovered, a Public
encouragement from the Merchan^s here, and the Colony ^here, would awaken all
spirits which have any scintillation of Honor, or industry, to undertake the
employment, effect it undertaken, and by the effect raise an unperishable
structure for their own glory, perpetuated by the public felicity.

The grea^est defect that Colony can with consent complain of, is their want
of shipping, and the greatest with which others find themselves perplexed, is
the want of industry to build them. If Virginia had not as stately Timber as
any other Region wha^soe^er: is it had no^ a Soil naturally inviting them to
improve her in Iron for Gunnes, Anchors, and other conveniences; in Hemp for
Cordage, Flax for Canvase, and Pine trees for Mast: this defect might be
allowed for real: but where all these concenter, it is as unreasonable to
complain, as for a man seated at a Table covered with excellent provision, to
accuse his fortune for suffering him to perish wi^h hunger, because his meat is
not digested in his stomach, without putting his hands and teeth to labor.

I could cordially wish that there were such quantity of cleared ground in
Virginia, that every one at his first arrival might ^ix upon the Plough, that
the so much discoursed of S^aples of Wheat and Rye, might be brought to an
absolute ripeness of per^ection: But to imagin^ so many millions of trees of a
facile removal, or that old Planters knowing the benefit thence arising,
should part with them to others, and seek new uncleared grounds for
themselves, were merely to dream of impossibilities.

But the Vine, Almond, and Olive, may be set where the tree is only barked
about to hinder it from leaving; besides if ^here were a necessity to have
absolutely cleared grounds, (which reason it self cannot imagine,) yet four
Acres of ground so cleared ^or the Vine, will re^urne (by much) more profi^,
and l^sse trouble, then twenty Acres of Wheat, at such ra^es as they are prized
in the common estimation.

But since ^his profi^ reverts to the Purse without the toil of ^radica^ing
trees, as great em^lument, as if the ground were al^oge^her treel^sse, to what
purpose should we court sweat and affl^ction? or increase our miseries without
any addition to ou^ happin^sse?

Gen^lemen, he happiness o^ this N^tion depends upon your co^stancy and
prosperi^y, i^ you seriously erect these staples, we shall be free from the
imperious usurpations of foreign Princes upon your estates, and shipping,
from the rapine of Pirates upon your lives or liberties. The decayed number of
our shipping may be resupplyed by encouragement of Carpenters of all Nations,
to make use of those materials which the inimitable liberality of this
Country gratefully presents you with: all Staples (diffusively spread in other
Regions) will meet here united, and we shall arrive to that degree of
happiness, to make our intrade by much exceed our exportations: for the
completing of which, if such an inconsiderable, and lost thing as my self,
could be any way isntrumental, I should as cheerfully hazard my life in the
employment, as I now subscribe my self,

Your ready, faithful, and most humble servant, ED. WILLIAMS.

The Discovery of Silke-wormes; with their benefit, and implanting of Mulberry
trees.
THE Mulberry tree, yielding the sole food of this exellent Worm, must first
be provided for, whereof there are Myriads dispers^ in the wide Continent of
Virginia, which may be collected by transplanting, grafting, or nursering.

For transplantation there are infinite advantages both of well-growne and
springing Mulberry trees, which may with much facility be removed, and with
great felicity thrive upon such a removal, of which experience can afford
frequent examples.

The Grafts must be chosen from excellent good Plants which express a large
fertility, and be something large of themselves, by which election there will
be a greater certainety of the goodness^, and a more speedy expectation of
g^owth in those Grafts, which thrive better when grafted one upon another, then
upon the Chestnut, Apple Tree, Elm, White ^ople^, or any other, which if they
are not mortally opposite, are however praeternaturall to the Silke^worme.

The Nu^series have so much of tediousness and difficulty, that I shall hardly
advise to put it in practic^; yet to those who have a stronger ^^^dulity then
my reason ca^ persuade me to^ I shall offer the ^ol^ ^xpedient of effecting
it, if that may be called aptly an exp^^^^^^, which has so little of
expedi^ion in it.

Let ^h^ (...) to make a Nursery, observe, and gather such (...) will suit with
his necessity^ of the ripest Fruit growing upon those Trees which bear the
fairest and roundest leaves: These thus gathered, you must wash in two or three
waters, pressing them with your hands, by which means you shall fi^de the
expressed seed in the botto^e of the water: I ^cced^ more to the sowing of the
Mulberries whole without such expression, how ever, either the Mulberry entire,
or the seed may be sowed after the manner following.

A b^d of fa^ earth being dug, husbanded, and the Mo^ld brought into a small
Powder^ must have strait Rows or Lines in Furrowes^ all ha^fe a foot equally
distant every Furrow two inches deep, and f^u^e broad, this distance may be
something larger that an in^ervall may be made to the Weeder in the weeding of
such things ^s may hinder the Mulberries growth by participating in its aliment.

A great care must be had to water it often for the first year, i^ the
weather b^ dry, the succeeding year you may pull up and transplant your
Mulberry trees into another ground more at large, viz. at two or three f^^^
distance, which must be not retransplanted till the growth arise to some six
inches in the circumference^ at which bigness you may remove them to the
ground designed for their constant fixation, leaving betwixt each Tree a
distance of sixteen or twenty foot, that the too much ^i^inity may not make
the extending branches mutually inconvenience either by exclusion of a full
Sun, or wound themselves by intertangence of one another^ In such warm
Countries as that of Virginia, the Root must be preserved cool and moy^t, by
a deeper implantation then is usual in colder Regions.

For the election of your Plants or Sciens you may take notice of two Families,
or Races, of Mulberry trees, the black, and the white, discordant in Wood,
Leaf, and Fruit; only having this in common to spring later then other trees,
as never emitti^g their leaves till all apprehension of cold is vanished, the
black Mulberry is not subdivided into any other species having the wood solid
and strong, the leaf large, and rud^ in the handling, the fruit black, great^
and acceptable to the Palate: B^t there are three app^rently di^ferent species
in the white, distinguishe^ only by the color of the fr^it, namely, white,
black, and red: Yet is this fruit by much less grateful to the palate then
that of the black Mulberry. No other distinction besides, the color of the
fruit discernes them one from the other, the Leaves of all three being of the
same mean greatness of the same smooth feeling, the wood of the same
internal yellowness, almost as firm as that of the black Mulberry.

But the silk taking his quality from the leaf make us lay a^ide the black
Mulberry tree, since the bottomes from thence are too gross and heavy, whereas
the white Mulberry makes silk fine and light, to temper which many feed the
Worms with two ^orts of meats by dictinction of times, viz^ at the beginning
with white leaves, that the silk may be fine, in the closing, with black to
fortify it, and make it weigh: Yet this though it have an appearance of reason
^t the first inspection, rarely answers the expectation, the very alteration of
the meat as from that which is more delicate, to that which is more gross,
being disagreable to the nature of the Worm, who must show that diminution in
the quality of his silks which he feels in the impairing of his n^triment.
Others make a contrary application of leaves by a more (imaginative solid
foundation^) which is to begin their dieting with black, and conclude with
white; which cannot succeed better, for the black having disposed the matter of
the silk, the white leaves after administered have no power to alter that
seminall disposition.

We shall therefore fix upon it as a Principle of Nature, not to vary the
nourishment of this industrio^s Creature. If we begin with the black Mulberry,
the continuance of it will be necessary. If the Ground you possess be
already planted with black Mulberries, it is so much loss of time and expenses
to replant white: But if we are to commence a thing de Novo, every man's reason
leading him to choose the most profitable, and common exp^rience telling us that
the white antecede the black ones so incredibly in the point of Maturation,
that six years of growth advance not so much the latter as two the first; it
were an act declaring Bethlem for Dic^ator, not to prefer the most speedy and
profitable before the tedious and improper commodity. Besides which Em^lument
the Branches which by that speedy shoot they bring forth will be useful for
propagation of that tree to infinite Numbers.

There is yet experimental election amongst the white Mulberries. Some
affirming that the Leaves of those trees which emit the white fruit are fittest
to be assigned for this nourishment, which they fortify by this reason; That
Pullen and Swine do most delight in the white, and never eat the red and
black but by constraint, a conjecture not altog^ther irrefragable; for why may
it not be controverted that Pullen and Swine being a greedy Generation, may
rather balance that which is most gross and fulsome, as b^st adapted for
their Palate, then that which is nice, and subtle, and best according to the
delicate tenderness of this Creature? Others who have their own experience to
fortify their ass^rtion, commend the white Mulberry bearing the black fruit,
the color demonstrating a better concoction in the fruit, and consequently in
the leaf then the others.

But (which we must be extremely curious in) we must expel from our yard
all Muberry trees bearing leaves too much indented, which, besides that it is
an apparent sign of small subsistence and ^ncompleated nature, is more
defective in quantity and quality of nourishment, then that which is less
interruptedly circular: Yet this may easily be remedied^ if you inoculate such
tr^es in the Bud, or Eseuch^on, having need of such freedom; the profit
thence arising being very con^iderable for this kind of nourishment: For by
this course that inconsiderable quantity of worthless and famelick leaves
receives a happy melioration into an abundant plenty of substantial and
nutritive nature. Nor is this transmutation improper, for any other Orchard
Plants which will succeed to your most advantageous expectation, and all
indomestick and wild trees may by this be made capable of a most happy
cultivation. This infranchizing may be practiced to the answer of your desires
in Mulb^rries of all Ages: In the older, on their new shoots of the antecedent
year then lopped; in the younger upon the smallest trees of the Nursery. But to
graft these trees in the first season, that their growth will permit it^ is
most opportune and profitable^ for by this means your Groves of Mulberry will
be in^irely delivered from all apprehension of jejune sterility, or
insub^tantiall deficiency^ Nor can ever you fear a want of supply, if you
constantly maintain a Nursery of such Graf^s, not from the seed, but from the
shoots and branches of your best trees thus propagated to an unperishable
infinity by couching them in the ground, and the trees increasing by their
reimplanting are constantly furnished with Leaves of an excellent sweetness
and greatness, exquisitely abundant in nourishment, and consequently exempt
from all the inconveniences which walk hand in hand with ^n ungrateful
wildness. Having described what Trees, Grafts, and Nurseries are best
conducent to our mystery; let us next dilate of their most proper soil, and
best order in planting.

The best soil and order for planting the Mulberry.
FOr the soil it must be chosen in particular much like that of the Vines,
inclining rather to dry then moist, light then heavy, sandy then ^layie; for
those which opinionate themselves that a f^t ground is inconvenient t^
Mulberries^ as supplying leaves of too gross and unsubtile aliment; The
Objection is pretty, but under pardon scarcely solid, neither am I capable of
any reason to the contrary, why a rich soil should not emit the growing Tree^
with a greater maturation and bigness, then a lean Plantation, where the
tender Plants are even starved with the sparenesse of distributive moisture and
aliment: Yet to prevent the too gross substance of the leaf after the tree by
the advantage of a rich nourishment, has arrived to a competent greatness;
the order which we shall prescribe in their planting will admit the Plough
amongst them, where cultivation will easily take off the soil from all
exuberancy of fullsome rankness. The soil which is full of Springs, Lakes,
Rivers, or (which is worst of all) Marshes, is particularly to be avoided.

The manner of implanting them would require a distance of four fathomes or
more, which in Virginia where we labor not under a penury of ground, may be
something more spaciously enlarged^ the Reasons why this extent of distance
are: First, the intermixture of spreading Branches, where by their contingency
they violate and mutually wound themselves will be avoided. Next, the Sun
has a more unimpeached immi^^ion and distrib^tion (...) his Beams, with which
this tree is most particularly delighted. Lastly, this largeness of intervalls
permits a free passage for the Plough, to take off all luxuriancy of rankness,
which t^o much inspissate^ the leafes, which must feed this admirable Creature.

But of such Grains as may with least impairement be sown under the Mulberry
trees, Oats and Pease are the most proper, which during the collection of the
leaves may with very small detriment be trodden upon (the season commonly
falling in April and May, when their blades are backward) nay the very
compressure of the Earth makes them afterward arise more strongly.

I approve much more of interplanting the Vine; but (which I conceive the most
convenient for Virginia i^) the setting of the Indian Potato has the most
inestimable benefit; the Potato having such a happy multiplica^ion of and in it
self, that whilst there is but a string of the Root left behind in the earth,
the species will be renewed. Besides the excellency of the food, whether for
man, or (where such a vast abundance may soon introduce a satiety) Cattle will
bring alone with it an inestimable advantage; whereas Corn may too strongly
impoverish a Ground, and the Vine it self when it comes to its ripest
excellency, will want the complete comfort of the Sun beams to give fruit a
well concocted maturity, the Mulberry like an Ambitio^s Grandee, e^grossing all
that favor to himself by his prevalency of height and greatness.

Nor should we be too curious to plant the trees one over against the other
exactly opposite; but still observing for beauties ^ake to set them in a right
line) rather one against the Intervall of the other, that so the Sun may have
no interposition from any Angle, to warm, comfort, and enrich this tree, which
aides the production of so many incomprehensible Miracles.

The order for collection of the Leaves.
THe order to be observed for collecting the leaves should be precisely
insisted upon, that the trees may be of longer and flourishing duration, and
the food of a more curious and unsoyled nourishment: It is a truth not to be
denied, that the disleaving of trees is extremely prejudicial, and in some
irrecoverably deadly; the reason is their extraordinary scorching, by being
left without any shade of protection: But the Mulberry being (as it were)
destined to this work which it naturally supporteth, more inprejudicially
endures this temper of disleaving then any other trees whatsoever. But for the
obviation of this inconvenience, it will be absolutely necessary for our
Master of the silkeworme, to have such a proportionable number of trees, that
the half may alternately repose unpluckt every second year. This diligently
put into practice will make your trees continue verdant and vigorous for many
Generations.

To gather them with both hands leaf after leaf, is confessedly the most
proper, but yet withal the most expencefull; for the multitude of hands which
such a circumstantiall labor would exact.

The other way of gathering them with stripping them from the branches, is
without doubt extremely n^cent to the tree, and worm: to the tree by
unbarking, wounding, and perishing its branches. Nor is it less detrimentall
to the Worm seeing this disorderly collection corrupts and sullies the leaves,
which this delicate nice Creature perceiving, either rejects them, or sickens
upon their reception by bruising the leaves, and expressing that which is the
life of its substance, the juice, and this commonly with unwasht hands, which
leave the ill odor unremoveable upon them.

The removal of these inconveniences is easily effected by following the
course they practice in some parts of Spain, which is by clipping the leaves
from the branches with a sharp instrument, like a Tailors sheares; by this way
you disleave many stalks at once, which falling into a clean sheet spread
under that tree for the purpose, seperating afterward the leaves also, such as
are sound from unsound, such as peradventure have much of the stalk, from
those which are nothing but leaf, (the stalk being hurtful to this tender
Creature) and administered to them the Sunny side of the leaf upward is the
most commendable practice of gathering and feeding that has hitherto been
delivered.

The leaves of the old Mulberry are to be much preferred before those which are
not come to an absolute perfection; the age of perfection in the Mulberry, we
reckon to be accomplished in seven or eight years, as to soundness of
nourishment; not that they grow not after, but by that time it is grown
powerful to conc^ct such succulency as might before over master it.

The trees disleaved must by a diligent hand be pruned immediately after the
last collection; what ever is broken, wounded, or made unprofitable must be
carefully cut off. The extremes of all the branches must be top'd a little
with a sharp pruning knife, which is an invitation to nature to send forth the
next year more vigorously. But whether it be in gathering the leaves, or
pruning the trees, it must be our principal care that they be entirely
beared^ the omission of which, by not taking all the leaves off, turns back
the liberallity of the repeating Spring. This observation has been grounded
upon practice, made so successful by experience, that it has been found,
that trees after such culture and disleaving, have within a month attired
themselves with such a new border of leaves, that the former imbalding them
has been imperceptible.

Which induces me to believe a former assertion, that it is possible to have a
second silk harvest by this means, and why not equal with the first, I know
not, since the seed is more youthful and vigorous then that of the year
preceding grown feeble by its continuance.

The raines if they fall about the time this noble creature draws unto her
perfection and period, is by much more strangely prejudicial, then when they
are in the greatest of their feeding, the wet leaves occasioning them many
desperate diseases: the usual way of prevention is to have a provision of
leaves before hand, when there is any jealousy of rainy weather; but this
provision must be laid in a clean dry place which is fresh aired, and that w^
may remove all dangers of contracting too much heat, to be turned often, which
course, although the Rain should not oppr^sse us, yet is it of great
convenience, not so much out of apprehension ^o be necessitated^ as for the
quality of the food, it being much better after fourteen or fifteen hours
resting in a place clean and dry, then when fresh from the tree. But if you
are surprised by an unexpected season of wet, take those Mulberries which you
intend to ^op the next year, (and the Mulberry would be lop'd every ten or
twelve year, which revives and strengthens the tree with a new youth) and ^ut
their branches which hung up in a dry corner, either of your house or barn,
or any other coverture in airy places, will soon have their leaves dry,
better conditioned, and of more efficacy then any leaves set to a fire, which
is too sudden, or to winnowing by a wind artificial and unnatural.

The Mulberries chief profit consisting in the leaf, we must be careful to
lose nothing of this revenue; which considered, we should delay the disheading
or lopping of them till the Worms have done feeding, which would be about the
latter end of May, or the beginning of Iune^ and alt^ough by the disbranching
of them in such a season, we cannot expect such l^rge returning shoots as those
which were cut in February or March, the distance of time being material in
their growth, yet the profit of the leaves being double, very well answer such
in^quality. The Mulberry being of so ^ranke and pliable a disposition^ that
notwithstanding its amp^^ation in unseasonable Moon and w^ather, no injuries
shall hinder him from Regermination.

Yet are not these advantag^s (no necessity obstructing them) to be omitted by
any which are not enemies to their own profit. The Mulberries in the increase
of the Moon pou^ed, or lopt, bring forth their young shoots long without
spread^ng Branches; in the Wane short, with many little Branches crossi^g the
principal. To reco^cile this (the election of the time being i^ our power) the
Mulberries seated in lean grounds, are ^ost properly disheaded in the new
Moon: those which are pl^nted in ^ich ground, in the last quarter; so will
those in the lean soil emit shoots as long as the barrenn^ss^ of the place
will afford them: and those of the fa^^er, through the benefit of their seat,
co^veniently ^^gaine that which they would not easi^y have done, cu^ in the
inc^^ase^ For those aspi^ing branches, we^e they not r^st^ai^^d by the counte^
shoots who participate with them in nou^^^hme^t would by reason of their
unweldy length, be fo^ced to b^nd downew^^ds to the deforming of the tree from
the shape of a Muiberry into that of a Palm Tree, which is not to be feared
in the rest, by reason of the leanenesse of the ground, forbidding all
abundance of shooting: We have provided for the feeding of this little and
great Artificer, let us now express an equal care in his lodging.

The lodging of the Silk Worms.
IT IS a vanity to expect emolument from this mysterious Creature, if we sort
him not with a lodging proper and agreeable to his nature, who c^n with no
less disprofit be ill accommodated in his habitation, then in his
nourishment; who to show a particular affinity with the noblest of Creatures,
Man, makes his affection of habitation equal to his. Spaciousness, pleasure,
healthfu^lness, distance from off^nsive vapors, damps and humidities, warmth
in the extremes ^f colds, coolness in the extremes of warmth. Wh^t ever we
naturally desire and abhor, does this Creature by the prosperity or
i^f^licity of his labou^^ show a most experimental r^s^ntment ^f

His ^tation therefor ^ust be i^ the mean twixt the top and bottom^ of a
foundation, the first being too much obnoxious to h^ats or wi^des, the second
to colds and D^mps. The Platform therefore of your building his station must
be so contrived, as to have his Basis three or four foot above the g^ound, nor
ascending within an e^^^ll distanc^ of the Til^s. A Fab^ick (says De Serres)
of seven fathom in length, three in breadth, and two in height, will
entertain with ease the Worm^s enlivened from ten ounces of seed: this
pr^portion may be raised acco^ding to your seed. In VIRGIN^A these may be of
very sudden erection; Nature has furni^h^d that excellent Country with
materials, to invite all who have the desire to attempt it.

That the air and wind (if cool and dry) may have free passage to refresh
these laborious spinners, who near upon the perfection of their work are upon
the point of stifling^ (the season, and the ^bund^^ce of (...) silk wherewith
they are filled, both coop^rating ther^u^to) W^e must h^ve windows opening to
all Angles to receive u^susp^^ted inf^igi^^tions in extreamiti^s of heat, and
wa^m^ng transpiratio^s in immod^^ate colds; Yet with this Proviso, that these
windows be fit not only to receive any favorable air, but to expel all
noxious vapou^s; and because this Creature loves any thing that is white and
luminous, it will sort excellently well with his disposition and safety, to
p^rget or plaster the inside of the house very well and smooth, both to
satisfy the eye and preserve him from the danger of Rats, which cannot clime
up such a wall, though a principal care ought to be used that the several
stations on which they are lodged, be remote from all fixures to walls, which
might give Rats and Mice advantage.

To build the S^affolds containing these Worms: Many Pillars of Carpenters
work di^ectly squared, shall be pe^pendicularly erected, from the ground to
the seeling, to support the Tables which crossing the pillars upon little
joints sixteen inches di^tant one from the other (exc^pt that from the g^ound
which must be 36 inches.) Upon these Tables do we l^y our Wormes^ but their
boards must not be equal in breadth, ev^ry table as it exceeds in height,
being to be narrower then the next below by four inches, and the highest
approaching the ^eeling to be narrowest of all. This Pyramidicall form is of
most beau^y and safety to the Worms; when wandering upon the Edges from one end
of the Scaffold to another, seeking a fit place ^o ^omi^ their ^ilke, they fall
in such a precipice from the higher scaffold to the ground, that they break
themselves in pieces: But by this means fal^ing but from one scaffold to
another, the smallness of the distance contributes to their preservation. The
breadth of the most low^st table shall be limited even to this proportion,
that easily of one side a man with his hand may reach the middle to a^tend the
Worms; as for the ascending scaffolds their continual diminution makes the
serving of them of greater easiness.

A Room of any capacity will admit several of these scaffolds (distinct from
the wall for reason before recited of Rats) and also that the attender may come
on either side of the scaffold, such space being always to be left between
their position.

These scaffo^ds must be made of an unsuspected fi^menesse, to prev^nt the
falling down of a^y ^art of it, or the whole either by the ladder which the
Keeper ascends, or the weight of the Worms themselves, when once grown great
and hea^y.

To ascend these sc^ffolds, some make boards about the^, ^s it were by
Galleries^ others have their getting up to them by little stairs appropriated
to this; others by forms. I approve of none more co^venient then a light
ladder which fits all, and poss^sses but one place.

The timber fitt^st to employ in the tablure of this scaffolding is usually
fur or such light wood: In VIRGINIA^ I apprehend none fitter then Cedar or
Cypress, because o^ their delicious odours.

We h^ve already spoken of such means as may refresh the overheated worm;
r^sts now to d^liver an experiment to wa^me the Air, this Creature b^ing no
l^s^e Enemy to cold in the beginning of his apprentissage, then to hea^e when
^ee is ready to go out ^f this W^^ld M^st^r workman.

Aft^r ^aving built your house for worm^; let there be a hole pierced through
your wall, where you must make an Oven, the mou^h whereof must be on the o^^
side of the house Then before you make it off, take pots like flower pots, but
such a^ will endure the fire^ and lay them with the mouth side of these pots
tending inwards toward the house^ and the bottom within the Oven, lay these
^^u^ sidelong at an equal distance^ and work^ up the Oven with the po^^
incorporate ther^unto. This done you may make a fire in the Oven, which by the
benefit of the pots conv^y^s a^l the heat to you without any inconvenience of
smoke. To make this heat the more agreeable to the Wo^mes, and to keep the
house in a temperate and inoffensive warmth, you may put into these (...)
branches of Rosemary, Time, Roses, Juniper, etc.

This Figure ^heweth the order for ^^nking the T^bl^s on ^^e Se^ffolds, to lay
the L^aves on, for feeding the Worms.


This Figure shows how to place the Rods, between the Tables, for the Worms
to climb up, and spin their silk.


This Figure represents the Engine, to wind off the silk from the Cods, w^^h
Furnaces and Cawlderns necessary thereto.


T^^^ F^^ure ^our^ra^^s the Cods, with the Butterflie^ come forth of them, ^o
l^y their E^g^ upon black S^^g^, Chamlet, ^ammy, or such like ^^^ffe, as in
this Treatise is showed.


The election and use of the seed of the Silke-Worme.
THere is a great deal of Reason, that we should be curious in the election of
ou^ ^eed; and it is not more Poetic then Philosophic, that of HORACE: Est in
juvencis est in equis patrum,
Virsu^ nec imbellem feroces
Progenerant aquilam columbae.


What can we expect of generosity in that which has a disposition to degenerate
before produced: of all the seeds proper for the vivifying this animal, there
is none more exc^llent, as yet a^rived to our knowledge, then that of Spain:
this De Serres ^ffirmeth, though he seem to be in a kind of haesitation,
whether that of Calabria march not in a higher degree of reputation, as
yielding more abundance, and of equal hardn^sse with the Cod of Spain; yet
this is certain in nature and reason, that seed transported in^o other colder
Regions, can no way lay claim to a parity of ^hriving with that continued in
its own Climate; and I doubt not but if the South of VIRGINIA, where the
Silke-worme is a^o^iginally native, were duly inquired after, the Seed of that
would have a particular excellency, to which all the Europaean Na^ions must
give the glory, the right hand of pre-eminence.

But leaving this to the scrutiny which shall be made by time, and experience,
we must grant the prim^ opinion to the Sp^nish, which however it thrive in
France for four yeares^ yet afterwa^ds it degenerates extremely, so that it
must every four years be renewed, for within that circle it suffe^s a
m^nif^st d^clension in goodness. Coming from Spain it is of a dark taw^y
color, after certain generations, gray.

To prove whether the seed b^ dead or not, you must expe^iment it upon your
nail, that which breaks in cr^cking, c^sting forth ^umor and moisture, you may
^ssuredly ^steem for good, the other is to be rejected. The smalln^s^^ of the
Sp^nish se^d incr^as^s the number of Worms, for which it deserves ^ p^rticular
p^ae^ation.

No seed of above a year old is any fu^ther profitable, till you put them to
Ha^ch, you may preserve them in Boxes thrust amongst wo^llen cl^athes in a
Trunk or Chest, and let the Chamber where such Trunkes or Chests are, be now
and then aired with a fire, to the intent they being rather warm then cold,
may be praedisposed for a hasty production when the season of the year shall
invite you to put into practice.

To imbibe or steep the seed of Silke-wormes in the most generous Wine you can
procure, is an experiment that has always answered with a happy success; for
this not only discriminates betwixt the good and bad, (the good always
subsiding, and the other floating) but adds legitimation and strength to the
approved ones, making them come forth free and fortified, and causes them to
hatch almost all at one time. After the good are taken out, they must be set to
dry in the Sun, or before the fire, laid upon very clean paper, covered with
white linen, or smooth paper, lest the ^eat might bring it prejudice.

The vivification of the Seed.
THE Spring being come, and the Mulberries budding, it will be seasonable to
put them to hatching, which (all other ways ^mitted, as the keeping them in a
Box, in ones pocket, between a woman's Brea^^s, etc.) sorts b^^ with Reason and
convenience, performed thus, viz. That the seed removed from its first vessel,
shall b^ committed into a Box lined with Cotton, over which you must put a
white paper, which must separate the seed from the Cotton, then cover the seeds
(being not above half an inch thick) with a little bed of sow, over which Tow
you are to lay a paper pierced very thick with small holes, much about the
bignes^e of the tag of a point; over this paper you shall lay some Mulberry
leaves. And this is the preparative to hatch them.

To bring them forth, lay your Box so prepared between two Pillowes, which
moderately warmed with a Pan every two hours, and after the first three and
four days visiting the Box at every such warming, to the end to separate such
as you shall see hatched, who will not fail to creep through the Tow, and
pierced paper to the Mulberry leaves, to which they will cleave: which to
remove, you must draw them out of the Box by taking hold of the Mulberry
leaves with a needle, and removing them and the Worms adherent into a bigger
Box or si^ve; with paper at the bottomes, distinguish those of a hasty
production from those of a more slow, that the work may arise more equal.
These thus brought forth must by gradations be accustomed to endure the
coolness of the Spring, diminishing daily something from his accidental
warmness: the first four days let them in the sieve covered with clean
linen continue upon the bed, the curtains closely drawn, then removed into a
warm chamber, close from all penetrations, laid upon ranks close together,
that they may give and receive mutual warmth, allowing them a larger
proportion of room, as they increase in bo^y.

But the most assured way to preserve the Worms until their second change in
warmth and security from Vermin, dust, or other hostilities of nature, is by a
great Press or Cubbord made with many stages, pargetted or pasted for the
agreeableness of the odout with Ox dung, made of fur, or mats, and to draw
out at will seperately, equally distant four inches, compassed round about
with Linen tackt to the doors, with paper w^ndowes on the sides and foremost
door, to admit or exclude air after the exigency of the occa^ion; and h^ere
vacant places being left at first to enlarge them, as they increase in growth
may they be distinguished according to the Dates of their first appearance
upon the Mulberry, rejecting all that seed, which is not enlivened before the
fifth day^ as unprofitable for working by confu^ion of times, and useless by
their weakness.

Four times does this excellent Artist change his skin, which is the cause
of his so many sicknesses. The first sickness arriving within eight days from
the beginning of his life, is known by these symptoms; the head grows big
and white, and he ^^des himself under the leaves: To administer any food were
needless; but that they are not all sick at one instant, so that some must be
given to nourish them which have not arrived to, or past over their sickness,
which you shall know by their change of color and creeping upon fresh leaves.

The second sickness arising within eight days, or thereabouts, from thence
is known by the same accidentalls, and must have the some appl^cations, only
now they would be removed into new, clean, and more spacious places: The
third is in all like the two other, though something more dangerous; here you
must carefully prevent the accession of all cold airs whatsoever: It may
happen that some of these Worms may grow yellow, which is almost incurable in
themselves, and deadly contagious to all the rest; th^se must be carefully
selected from the rest and ejected. Remove, enlarge and cleanse as before.
Eight or ten days after appears the 4. change or sicknes^ and now the
recovered Wor^^ being increased to their full growth, must be removed,
enlarged, and cleansed, as before.

At appointed hours morning and evening must this Worm be f^d from their
hatching to their first change or sickness^; from the second chang^ to the
third or fourth, they must be fed three times the day at the l^^st, taking
this for an assured max^me, that after the recovery from their last sickness,
The very cloying of them with leaves even to the satiety of their ^ppetite,
accelerates th^^ to the perfection of their task; for these curious V^ssells
will the sooner discharge themselves of their precious enclosed substance, by
how much they are the sooner replenished. Nor is there any p^odigall
improvidence in this; for it has been observed that Worm^s have eaten near
as much in eight days when more sparingly distributed, as in four when
liberally handed to them; so that by such wary disp^nsa^ion they save no
leaves, and lose four days in point of time.

But a particular eye of care must be had to the quality of the leav^s you
feed with. No goodn^sse of a selected tree being capable to secure it self
against ^ccidentall diseases arising from the unnaturalinesse of se^sons,
whe^ein by extremes of drought or moisture mildewes, heat drops, and other
distempers, all the leaves oftentimes becoming yellowish, spotted, or
speckled, declare the nature of that food highly unwholesome and pernicicus:
Such as grow out of the ^unne in the interior umbragious parts of thick trees
are almost as dangerous: Nor are the leaves of the second Spring which shoot
afresh on trees already disleaved of less guilt, through the inequality of
their Ages. One banquet of those gives the last repast that your Worms shall
have need of, a ^iuxe thence arising killing them, and easing you of further
trouble, if you ^^count it so to be vigilant over your own^ pro^it.

The most agreeable to all Worms is to be fed with leaves of their own age,
and by this the feeble Creatur^ shall meet with tender leaves, then grown
strong with leaves, fu^l grown correspondent to both their complexions. The
fault of the wet leaves may be corrected by patience, attending the serener
season; but of dry leaves you ought at no time (if you regard your own profi^
with a sober providence) to be unprovided, and ^he way how to prep^re has
been already delivered in this Treatise.

T^^s^ preciou^ creatures exact no great expense or laborious care during the
first three or four weeks, being satisfied with little, as most agreeeble to
the tendern^ss^ and smalln^^s^ of bodies, and are very w^ll entertained with
the leaves of the ^uccours or other branches, from whence for the profit of the
tree one should n^c^s^^rily cu^ them. At the beginning we go to gather leaves
with H^nkerchiefs, then with little baskets, la^tly with sacks and maunds, as
growing to a bigness to require it, and a p^rfection to discern it.

That the Gathere^s of these leav^s should handle them with pure and washed
hands, we have already decla^ed absolutely necessary: But the Governor of
these chaste and magnificent ^reatures must be Master of an exact purity. The
smell of Tobacco is deadly to them: Let his observance forbear it: Let him
have a watchful eye, that none of an offensive smell approach them; all ill
breathings upon them whether contracted by fu^some food or nature make this
innocently noble Creature express her resentment by her own death, or
sickness Let him pu^ifie the rankn^sse of his own breath (when fasting) with
good Wine ere he approach them, with the odor whereof the worm is highly
cherish^d. Let the Lodging be swept ev^ry day, and pr^served so by sp^inkling
the flou^e with vinegar, and afterward strawing it with Lav^nder, Spike,
Rosemary, Time, and such like of well comforting Odours. To these we may
sometimes add a perfume composed of Frankincense, Benioin, Storax, and other
quickening aromaticks burned in the lodging.

Let the Tables be often made clean and shifted, by often, I mean every ^^^rd
o^ fourth day at the furth^st, at which time the litter begins to be offensive
to this curio^s natured Creature; especially with the increase of the heat,
let his diligence increase, that no uncleanesse (at that time more then
ordinary malign) cut him from the benefit of his labors.

The litter must not be taken away by degrees to the trouble of our curious
Creature, but all at once; which may be effected, if you leave at the end of
each Scaffold an empty station to place the adjoining Worms on, whose left
station being made clean is fitted for the next neighborhood, and thus may
all be removed and shifted by degrees, and a vacant table at the other end of
the scaffold r^maines to begin again (as before) within two, three, or four
days at the longest. And thus without carrying far, the Worms shall be
removed with ease and security, not once laying the finger upon their tender
bodies; for giving them fres^ leaves at the time of their replacing, the Worm
will fasten to the leaf, and the leaf may be removed with his precious
burden, with no less safety then convenience.

It will be requisite to dispose the tables in such a fashion that they may
be seperately taken from the scaffold like tills out of drawers; for this the
easiest and less nocent way of cleansing, as preventing the falling of any
stench upon the lower tables^ and by which they are more suddenly discharged of
their filth and ordure, merely by striking them gently on the floor, which
done, let them be swept and brushed perfectly well; Let the tables on which
you put your Worms after their first sickness be sprinkled with Vinegar or
Wine, then rubbed over with sweet Herbs to delight and encourage them to
labor. Some have made trial, which has succe^ded happily of the smell of
Garlic and Onions to refresh them; I dare not absolutely assent to this
experiment; but it is clear as Sunshine, that the Worm not only rejoices
in agreeable odours, but is succored thereby in his greatest maladies: of
which we now intend to discourse.

The causes of extraordinary maladies in Worms, and their c^re.
THe extremes of colds and heates, the too sparing, or too abundant
administration of victuals in their several ages, and a malign disposition
of the leaves are the principle causes of all extraordinary maladies which
afflict this Creature. If the inclemency of Cold has benumbed or diseased this
innocent Artist, the stove or oven formerly mentioned will recover it (the
stopping of all windows, and other admi^sories of air cooperating:) To the
greater complement of the cure, let the lodging be perfumed with redolent
Gummes, with Wine, strong Vinegar, or Aqua vitae^ If on the contrary, the
torrid violence of heat have wasted the strength of this sudden and
excellent spinner: The fresh air admitted at the doors and windows some
brave artificial Fannes or Ventalls to raise this breath, if too little, or at
the last the exposing them upon their t^bles out of their lodgings to enjoy an
uncontrouled and liberal communion of the air, some half an hour before
S^nne rising are the proper means of their recovery. Those which by a wastfull
liberality of their keeper in the tenderness of their age have injured
themselves with over feeding, must be cured by a two days abstin^nce, and for
some two succeeding days di^ted with a moderation. Those who famished by the
negligence of their keeper are almost languishing to death, must be restored
by giving them meat in slender proportion, but frequently repeated, by such a
diet regaining their forfeited appetite. Those which by having fed on yellow
spotted, or too young leav^s have contracted a flux, and from thence a jaundice
and spotted color, accompanied with black bruisings, must upon the first
inspection be immediately removed into separate chambers, that the change of
air and diet may labor for their almost desperate cure, and to prevent a
contagion, which from thence would universally domineere. But such Worms which
as ^n accession to this last disease you should behold bathed on the belly by a
certain humor flowing in that part of their bodies, are as incurable, good for
nothing but to repast your Poultry.

Indeed excepting this last inexpugnable malady perfumes and change of chambers
are generally conducing to overcome all diseases and to res^ore a new health
and vigor. But this noble Creature is by nature sufficiently privileged from
these diseases, if the unskilfullnesse or negligence of the keeper did not
violate this privilege, and by that violation increase his own trouble.

Nor is this care of the keeper to be only limited to the day, the night too
must require a part of his vigilance; Mice and Rats then take advantage, and
grieved that any Creature should labor for man without their participation or
obstruction devour them by Troop^s, and the Cat her self enters in^o a league
with these her usual prey^ to prey upon these poor things, whose in^ocency
and excellency makes them the more obnoxious to their cruel avarice. To remedy
this, the house must not be without contin^all Lamps, Bells, and other vain
terr^u^s to aff^ight them: The keeper himself also, or his Depu^y must
frequently walk round about his little Army. And le^t the Oil (which
occasions diverse indispositions, if it fall ^ut in a drop upon these nice
Artists) might be p^ejudiciall, the Lamp^s should be aff^^^d on the wall, and
the portable lig^ts with which he visits his curious charge of Wax, Tallow,
fur tree, or any other of innoxious, but illuminative substance.

These things well observed, within se^ven or eight days at the most,
succeeding their four^h and last exuviall sickness^; The Worms dispose
themselves to pay the exp^nce of their Diet. T^ make prepa^ation for them,
there must be accommodations of ^ods necessary for these Worms ^o come up to
vomit their silk, and fasten their W^bs by. To ass^mble these Worms (the
term assigned to this work) the most proper matters are Rosemary, cutting of
Vines sho^ts, of Chestn^ts, O^es Osiers, Sallow^s, Elmes Ashes, and in gen^rall
of all flexible shrubs, not having a^y disagreeing od^ur. The feet of these
rods ^v^n^d for the better fixure shall be joined at 15 inches distant to the
table below, and the tops of them ^rched together at that above. Which
Epitomall Amphitheater is Maste^ of as much beauty a^ those of the CAESAR'S in
the great^^t volume of their luster and magnificence; the ^pper part of the
Arch must be plenti^ully interwoven with sprigs of Lavender, Spike, Thyme, and
shrubs delectable to the smell. By this intermixture the Worms shall have
ample satisfaction to their restless curio^ity, where firmly to fasten their
rich matter, having an election of such delectation of Perfumes, and variety of
shoots: But these twigs must by no means be green, the moisture extremely
offending the Cattle, and not suddenly withering, if the air be moist.

The Worms being removed to these Amphitheatrall Trophies, you may easily
discover their grateful inclination to spinne, by their bigness of body,
brightn^sse, and clearenesse of belly and neck, neglect of meat, and irregular
wandering through the Troop; and a little after to fulfill these promises they
ascend their branche^ to vomit, or rather spinne out their silky substance.
Here you must diminish their Ordinary, daily, for they will in short time have
united themselves to those shoots or twigs, quite forsaking the table. Those
Worms which clime not before the others union to the branches, are of a latter
hatching; and to prevent all ^nseasonable intertextures in general, to the
retarding and perishing of the whole work, must be assembled two other tables
arched as these, that they may work together at one time.

The knowledge (when these Worms have perfected their Cod^ or bottoms) may be
obtained by an ear that is but the leastwaies curious, these creatures making
both a pleasant humming in feeding and continuing it in fashioning their
bottoms, give that noise and their completed work over both together. That
which falls next is the propagation of the seed to be preserved till the next
Harvest.

The Propagation of the Silke-Worme seed.
HAppy creature, which live only to do mankind service, and dyest when
thou have accomplished it! Miracle of Nature! a Worm shut up in his own
monument, breaks through his silky grave, transformed into a Butterflye!
employes ten days to erect himself a sepulcher, and an equal proportion of
time to leave it! disimprisoning himself from his own interment, by
perforation of his bottom, he returns to the view of Mankind in the figure
of a Butterflye, with wings, as if he had already tryumph'd over his Mortality;
which done, he and his co-triumphall Females, coupling together perpetuate
their species by dissolution of their bodies; and that which compleats the
miracle, may arise from the long abstinence of this living three and twenty
days imprisoned without any sustenance or fruition of that which he takes a
particular delight in, day light.

Removing your branches from the Tables, and your silke-balls or bottomes from
the Branches 5 days after the work is perfected, the Balls are then to be
made election of, for such seed as you will preserve for the year following.
Bono^ill, and De Serres do both agree that there should be proportioned 200
Balls for one ounce of seed,he Balls Male and Female (the description of which
hereafter.) But whereas Bon^^ill is of opinion that a hundred double or trebble
Bottomes which two or three Worms have spunne and made up in common, will
produce so many Worms as Bottom^: I demand his pardon if I accede rather to
the judgment of De Serres: for from every double or triple Bottom there come^
forth but one Butterflye, though it has more within: the Reason is, it being
not probable that they should be all ripe together, that which is most mature
by perforation of the Balls, exposes the other to the assault of the air,
which giving them cold, they dye imperfect.

To distinguish the sexes.
THE Male of the worm, when grown great, is known from the Female, by a
wrinkled head, and a great appearance of eyes; the Female has the head round
without any such appearance. In the Bottomes of Balls the Male is known, as
having worked himself into a Bottom, long, slender, and by much sharper at
one end then the other: the Bottomes of the Female are bigger, softer, round at
one end, half poynted at the other.

The Sex in those Butterflyes is thus distinguished: the Male is lesser of body
then the Female, stirring the wings more often and more strongly.

Selecting then two hundred bottomes (male and female included in the number)
you must pass a thread through the first and outward Down, called the Sleave
of the Ball (using a wary hand that you pierce not into the silk, lest the
cold getting in you should quite abortive your Worms) of which you must make
several connexions composed of an equal number of both Sexes; these (to
prevent Rats and Mice) must be hanged upon some hook in a chamber of middle
temper, but something inclining to coolness, yet however not subject to
moisture, that the Butterflyes may come out with the more facility,

Having pierced through their confinement, though nature her self infuses in
them disposed applications to find out their opposite Sexes, it will be
necessary to couple such as yet are disjoined: all which, after you shall
perceive them in conjuncture, must be set either upon Say, Piropus, Tammey,
Chamlet, the Backside of old Velvet, (in general upon any stuff which has no
woolly Down, wherein the grain may be lost, or where it may get between the
threads, as is linen) hanged upon the wall close by their Balls, or in defect
of such stuff, take Walnut-tree leaves one handful, or more as you shall see
occasion, tie them by dozens backsides together, hang them at several nails
or pinnes, and set the coupled Buterflies thereon. Take the Chamlet, or other
stuffes, receiving the seed, and rub it gently between your hands, and the seed
will come out with great facility.

The principal time of the Butterflyes issuing out from the Cod, is in the
morning about eight of the Clock: the seed collected must be put into a Box
very clean pasted with paper, to exclude all air or dust, kept in a Chest in
a dry temperate place where it may be preserved till the Spring following,
avoiding to make any continual fires in such Chambers, lest the warmth
untimely hatch the Worms, which being brought forth at such a season must
perish for want of food.

The Spaniard takes commonly the double and triple Balls for seed, not that he
conceits every double Ball should produce two Butterflyes, or which is a
conceit of more fondness, Male and Female; but because the multiplicity of
creatures spinning their silk in common, make the work so confused that they
cannot well wind it off, which makes them be put in the rank of the pierced
ones for sleave, and I must ingeniously acknowledge my self to accede to his
opinion; for these double and triple balls are not unapt for this purpose,
since they commonly, as De Serres observes, come rather from a lustiness and
supplenesse of the Worm, then any natural debility: Which sure are so much
fitter to be culled out, that the best balls may be made into silk, which
will easily wind, and the seed of these which is fully as proper for seed,
but less apt for silk: neither do I know why they should not be preferred,
since the Spanish seed proceeding from these double and triple Balls carries a
particular pre-eminence above the rest; which if we shall make use of, the use
is the same with others, except that they must be clipped at the smaller end
with the point of a pair of scissors, with a regard that you cut not clean
through the bottom, which would by admission of wind destroy the Worm, and
this they do that the Butterflies, if more then one, may find an easy
passage; the best bottomes (if you will preserve them) for Grain, are great,
hard, weighty, and of carnation or flesh color.

The balls preserved for seed being made choice of, the next thing we are to
fall upon is, how to wind off the bottomes designed for silk: Which would be
of much more advantage for purity and plenty of silk, and facility of labor,
if they could immediately be wound off. The silk so freshly taken unwinding
without any loss or violence: But this delayed, the Gum, by which the Worm
fastens her threads becoming dry, does so harden the bottom, that without
difficulty and loss, the winding cannot be accomplished.

This expeditious winding prevents the enclosed Worm of her full metamorphose
into a Butterflye, and the bottom from perforation: But then where shall we
find so many workmen if the design were general, as could in seven or eight
days wind off so many millions of bottomes? Not excluding therefore such as
can have that convenience, the next best course to kill the Butterflyes in
those bottomes which we cannot wind off, is by exposing and laying them in
the Sun, the heat of which in its own work stifles this Creature: But let
this be two or three days successively (not all at one exposure, lest your
silk be burned instead of stifling its spinner) two hours before, and two
hours afternoon each day respectively. Let the bottomes, spread upon sheets,
be turned often, that the heat may destroy equally, no one excepted from this
sharp insolation; but this must not be done with a rude hand, which instead
of turning them may bruise the Worm, the slimy matter of whose body, being
thus bruised, is very prejudicial both for staining the silk, and gluing it
so together, that no Artist can ever unwinde them.

Removing them therefore oftentimes during such sunning with a gentle hand,
wrap them thus warmed in sheets, and let them lie in a fr^sh dry chamber.

But if the Sun should fail, an Oven of such moderate heat a^ is usual
after two hours drawing the bread, or heated to such a degree of wa^mth
(laying it over with boards, and the bottomes in sacks upon those boards, there
remaining each time an hour and a half, repeating it till your experience by
opening the most suspected bottom find the enclosed Worm consumed) will be
of equal operation.

But that which is the best and least practiced course is this: Take your
bottomes, and fill such a Furnace or Copper as your Brewers use, half full of
Water: Within three fingers breadth of this boiling water, lay a lid or planke
or board within the Copper, bored through as thick with holes as a Cullender,
and so fit to the side of the Furnace, that it by no means may sink into the
water: Upon this cover lay a thin Carpet of Darnix or the like, and upon the
Carpet the silk bottomes, which must be often stirred, with care not to use
too much violence. The mouth of the Copper, except when you stir the bottomes,
must be constantly covered, that the heat may smother the Wo^mes: Your Worms
being dead, lay your bottomes in some room, where there is air to dry their
moisture. This is an assured (though not vulgar) experiment, and by it your
silk becomes as easy in the winding, and as pure in color and substance, as
if it had been spunne the same moment the Worm had given it perfection.

To wind^ ^ff the Silk from the Cod, or B^ttome.
THe winding off the ^ilke from the Cod or bottom, is thus effected: fill a
Caldron full of very fair water^ and s^t it upon a Furnace, heat it to such a
degree that the wate^ becomes bubbled, as though there were small Pearls in
the middle, being ready to sees; then cast in your Cods' or bottomes, still
stirring them up and down with broom^ or other small bushes, if yo^ shall see
that the heat is not capable to make your bottomes wind, augment your fire,
otherwise abate it.

The bottomes winding the threads will take hold of the broom or brushes; draw
those threads so affixed the length of half a yard and more out with your
fingers, till all the grossness of the bottom be wound off, which cutting
off and laying aside, take all the threads of your bottomes united into one and
according to the bigness of thread you intend to make (as whether sowing or
stitching) chose the number, not letting the other threads fall into the water
again, which must be reserved to succeed) which you must run through an
Wire Ring, appointed for to rank the threads which (as you shall see in the
draught or Picture,) must be fastened upon the fore part of a piece of wood set
directly upon a form before the round or circle, which we call a Bobin, in
the top of which piece in a little space that there is, are fastened two Bobin^,
distant from one another two fingers; from this wire ^ing the thread must be
drawn and crossed upon the bobins, whose only use there is to twist the silk
through a ring which is fastened in the midst of a staff; above the Bobins
you must continue the draught of your thread; this staff which moves with the
wheel is called a Lincet set a cross beneath the wheels, from that Ring you
must fasten your thread upon the wheel it self, which must be still turned
till the skeyne of silk be wound up, the Representation see in the next
figure.

Observe, when any thread disconti^ues, his bottom being wound off, to repair
your number from another bottom, this you shall perceive when your full number
of bottomes stir not altogether.

Be sure that you artificially cut the knots which will be in your threads,
that your silk may be more pure and uniforme.

Those which cast Gum Arabic in the water under pretense to make the silk
wind more p^re and glossey, are but impostours, it being a mere cheat to
make the silk weigh the heavier.

Basins, or Caldrons, wherein you p^t your bottoms to wind, if of Lead re^tore
the silk more pure then those of Copper, this Metal being subject to a
rubiginous quality, from which Lead is wh^ly exe^pt. Let the wheels be large
for the better speeding of the work, that two skeines may be wound off
together. That the fire of the Furnace may be pure, and without smoke, let it
be made of Charcoale.

The difficulty of their winding may be mollified by soap, put in the Basin or
Caldron; the old Cods or bottoms hardened by time, will have the natural Gum
which glues their threads dissolved, and the silk come off much more easy.

Those bottomes of silk preserved for seed, and pierced by the Butterflyes,
may be made of good use, if washing them in water you throw them into a
Caldron ready to boil, with soap in it, which must be dissolved before the
bottomes are cast in: thus let them boil a quarter of an hour, or
thereabouts, which done, take them out, wash them in clean water and d^ye
them being dyed you must beat them with a round st^ffe of a good bigness upon
a stone or some block which is better, which will make them become white, and
smooth as wool. The way to spinne them after is this.

They must with the fingers be pulled one from one another, and opened as wool
uses to be in such preparations, let it then be put on a Distaffe and spunne
as small as you can, or please.

Treatise of the Vine.
THat the use of the Vine is really intended by nature for VIRGINIA, those
infinite s^ore of Grapes which crown the forehead of that happy Country are so
many speaking testimonies: But what fate has hitheto diverted our English
there inhabiting from the public undertaking a Commodity of so inestimable
benefit, I do not say for a public Staple (though it would be as rich as any
other one species of Traffic whatsoever) but even from private Vineyards,
where they might sit under their own Vine, drink of their own Grapes,
satisfy even the most irregular desire of their, voluptuous appetites, and all
this de suo, without entering into the Merchants book^s for Wines, peradventure
adulterate, without paying the sweat of their brows for the exudation of the
Grape, I dare not determinately judge, lest I might be forced to ascribe it
either to a strange nonchalency or sluggishnesse to their own prof^^, or which
is worse an inveterate contempt of all other ways of improvement (of what ever
return) in comparison of Fume of Tobacco.

But that they may not be ignorant of the profit of the Vine, they will be
pleased to know that the Vine requires (once planted) little more labor then
the Hoppe. To attend upon four Acrees of Hops is the ordinary undertaking of
one man in ENGLAND, who besides this, neglects not many other labors. If one
man in VIRGINIA be not sufficient to do as much as another in ENGLAND, ^
shall either imagine him to be lame or idle; nor let them o^j^ct to me the
heat of the Country; if the mid-dayes be hotter, the mornings are much colder,
and the Labourer in VIRGINIA has this advantage of being full of bread to
^atie^y, whereas oftentimes the Hireling in ENGLAND having a family to feed,
and sometimes no employment, comes to work with a famished body, and courage,
lives merely de die in diem, with as little hopes of ever changing the copy of
his fortune, as renewing the lease of his Cottage with his Landlord: those are
but lean encouragements. In VIRGINIA the meanest servant (if he have any
spirit) is still in expectation of improving his condition, and without any
presumption may cherish his hopes, which promise him (his time expired) a
present happiness and future possibility of a Fortune equal, if not outgoing
his Master, the encouragement being greater, the care less, and his
provisionall subsistence by much better: why the Laborer in VIRGINIA should not
^e (I do not say superior) but equal in strength of body and resolution of
mind, to the miserable day-Hireling in ENGLAND, needs an OEDIPUS to unriddle.

By this I hope it granted, that the VIRGINIAN may without any extraordinary
efforts of sweat and spirits, labor equally with those of ENGLAND, and upon
this account I shall assign a Vignard of four Acres to his tillage, an easy
task; let us compute the profit with the labor, and see what may be the
proceed of this ^^^portion well husbanded.

That an acre of Vines in VIRGINIA (when once grown to perfection) will yield
an equal increase to a common Acre of Vines in FRANCE, there being as great a
difference between the soyles as the Acres, and much greater) will I believe be
denied by none, who pretend to modes^y or reason: yet the Acre of Vines in
FRANCE, one with another, very few excepted, will yield yearly ten or twelve
Muyds of Wine, a measure containing seventy two gallons (a very famous
Frenchman LIEBAULT, is my Author:) what the common Acre, or Arpent, is in
FRANCE, the same man informs us: an Arpent (the common Arpent or Acre of
FRANCE) is 100 Pole in the square, the Pole being longer then ours by eighteen
inches; so that one French Acre yields three Tun of Wine and upwards; Our Acre
being near upon 50 Pole more, we doubt not of profit equal.

The excellent VIRGINIA will pardon me, if for dilucidation of an argument, I
make her pure and unexhausted brows descend to wear a Gyrlond of fertility
equal to that laborious and over-teeming Mother, the French Kingdom, nay to
her common Vineyards: yet let us compute the profit arising from the four
acres, being but one man's labor, we shall find the product even by that
estimate, to be twelve Tun of Wine, as the recompense of his particular
toil: let us imagine this but at ten pounds the Tun, and the profits of this
single person amounts to 120 pounds per annum.

Here they will object the dearness or difficulty of Caske; but this
objection must be made by those who know not VIRGINIA, where there is such an
excellent convenience, and abundance of peculiarly proper Timber, that the
Winter will afford the other Laborers together with our Vigneron leisure, to
cleave Pipe-staves sufficient for private use of Caske, and to sell to the
public; one man (during that little season) being easily able to make four
thousand.

But our acre being a third part bigger, the soil better, why we may not
promise to ou^ selves this profit, is an incredulity in ENGLAND, w^rth a b^and
of misunderstanding, in SPAIN would deserve the Inquisition,

What soil is most proper for the Vine.
HE which will go to p^ant the Vine without the twinne consideration of the
qualyty of the soil, and the disposition of the air, has much affinity with
him who goes to Sea without Lead or Compass: the one seldom attaines his
Port, nor the other his Harvest.

The quality of the ground whereon the Vine thrives best, is a fine small
Mo^ld, of a subsistence rather inclining to a gentle lightness, then a
churlish stubbornness: they which would not have it to be very fat, are
ignorant that while the Vine is young, the soil where you plant may be employed
to other tillage, and by such expense of its native richness, reduced to that
which they commend so highly, mediocrity. But if the fitness of the ground
transmit a rich and never-failing sap into the nascent Vine, making it grow
speedy and strongly, if the Vine participate of this fatness, which it may be
they call grossness, as desiring to have it more subtle, there is small
question to be made, but that this Wine so imbodied and Fortified by nature,
must have extraordinary spirits to preserve it, and that age will have resined
all that grossness into more pure and noble spirits; that if transported, the
Sea will contribute to its melioration: whereas this Wine which they call
subtle and delicate spirits, if either preserved long or transported far, will
with so much applauded subtilty and delicacy lose all his spirits by age and
evaporation.

Scruple therefore at the richness of your ground no more then at the
rankness of your purse; it is in your power to correct either if there were
necessity: let it have the qualities of gentle, easy, fine and light, to be
stirred, seated (if possible) on the decline of a Hill, not near to any Marish
ground, nor having any springs gliding through it; these Marish grounds you
must avoid as you would do Level in a Valley. And the reason is, that the
Vine growing in these parts has a crude and ^ndige^ted blood, quickly soures,
and has neither strength to commend or preserve it, and the Frosts in the
winter time sinking to his ro^ts, by the moist passage of his situation, kills
it; the Grapes plumpe and break, and when as an additionall judgment to your
inj^dicious election, a Rainy year comes to afflict, the Kernells break out,
the true juice of the Grape accompanying it, and though it fall out that the
Grape swell again, yet let not your expectation swell upon it, for instead of
good Wine proceeding from thence, you will receive nothing but Viny water.

The gentle, easy, fine, and light ground being the best, does not so wholly
arrogate all excellency, as to deny an accession, a neighborhood of goodness
to other soyles. The gravelly ground yields Wine of a great delicacy, but a
small quantity; besides the infant Plants are in danger of being washed away in
any extraordinary surfeit of raines, such grounds being not able to give them a
deep rooting. The like may be said of sandy ground which notwithstanding in
some places especially where it is of a nitrous substance, will not yield the
Palm to any ground o^ whatever richness; other grounds may have an enforced
richness, but because usually all such enfatning compost consists of Dung and
Urine, which spoil the purity of the Vine: If my advice were of any weight,
they should never be used for Vintage, till necessity commanded my obedience.

For the disposition of the air, as particularly whether inclining to a
Meridian, or Oblique to the South, South-East, or South-West; If we contemplate
the nature of the Vine, that it by instinct, prefers places rather hot then
cold, dry then moist; that it ^areth storms and tempests, it affects a
gentle breathing wind, or a serene calm; we may presently collect that it is
neither to be placed open to the North, North-East^ nor (in VIRGINIA
especially) to that Nursery of storms, the North-West quarters, nor upon the
tops of Hills, where it lies equally assailable to all: the dear place then
for the Vines embraces, is a Descent, toward, not in a Valley (except never
subject to inundation^) that being sheltred from the more blustering Domine^rers
in the air, it lie open to the South, South-West, South-East, or any part of
the East and West, within the South quarter, for such a grateful mansion, and
acceptable soil assigned him, doubt not, but he will return you a rent which
shall s^tisfie your most unbounded wishes.

But le^t the eye in the option of your Vineyard, may impose upon you,
considering that every gr^und has some arcane quali^y which the sight is not
able to discover: to make a most certain experiment, let me propose this way
of Examen. Make a pit in the ground (where your intentions are to plant) two
foot deep, take a clod of the earth so cast up, powder it, and infuse it in a
glass full of clear Raine-water, do your best to incorporate it with the
water by frequent agitation and mixture: let it repose till the subsided earth
have made his perfect residence and settlement in the bottom, and the water
recovered her native clearenesse; taste the water, and arrest your judgment
upon this, that such a taste as the water delivers to your palate, will that
earth transmit to your wine: if of an inoff^nsive or acceptable relish, you may
confidently promise your self a Wine pure, and consequently (if the soil be
rich very noble, nor is a salt taste an ill argument: but if it be a bitter
aluminous, or su^hury gust, this place is not fit for your planting, you lose
your Wine and your labor.

But VIRGINIA has a more certain assurance; God and nature have pointed them a
soil ou^ with their own finger; let them therefore fix their eyes upon those
places where either the Vine or Mulberry grow conjoined, or separate, and let
them assure themselves of the excellency of the soil, a diffi^ence in this
being an affront to Nature: yet this caution is to be used that though Valleys
are Marshy places^ may sometime have them by nature, yet their florescence
would be much more excellent and healthful if removed to such a ground as
formerly we have made choice of.

To make election of Plants.
CUriosity about the choice of your Vine Plants will commend your Husbandry;
let the Vine therefore from whence you take your Plant be of as little Pith as
may be, such unpithy Vines being both fruitful and fortified by nature,
bearing a remarkable abundance of substantial Grapes and strongly resists the
violence of the weather, and of this fertility and firmness will your Plant
also participate. Let not the Vine you mean to plant from, be above the middle
of his strength, or age, and observe ab^ut September th^se which are most laden
with Grapes, fullest of eyes in their branches, and have been least wounded by
the unseasonablenesse of Weather. Take not a Vine growing on a South side to
transplant him to a Northern: and set this down for a principle in Nature,
that all plants removed to a better situation and soil, answer your largest
hopes, by their fruitfulness: but transplanted to a worse, assure your self
that without an extraordinary cultivation, there cannot be the least
probability of its thriving.

Let your Plant (if you may with convenience) immediately be planted after its
separation from its original; for while it yet retains any vital vigor, it
will the sooner apply it self to the desire of life and nourishment. If your
necessity will not admit of this festination, wrap it tenderly in its own
earth; and when your leisure will permit you to plant it, let it soake some
four or five days in water, and (if possible) running water: this immerging
is a very strong preparative to its sudden taking root.

If you apprehend a necessity of keeping him long or transporting him, (imagine
it the Cyprian or Calabrian Grape thus to be transportable into Virginia,) put
him into a close Barrel filled up with earth; and that no air may mortify
him, let both ends of the Plant be put into Onions or Garlic, or (which is
better) made up with wax, and now and then watered, but not more then to keep
the earth from resolving into a dry dust; for too much moisture might (instead
of preserving him) make him fructify, and your Plant would become all root.

We have already spoken how we must choose, but not what we must make choice
of: Let your Plants therefore be of those which grow between the highest and
lowest, (the lowest having too much of earthy juice, and the high^st too
little) let them be round, smooth, and firme^ having many eyes, and about one
foot and a half of old wood cut off with the new.

The manner, and way to ^lan^ Vines.
HUman curiosity plungeth us in so many unnecessary toils, that it would almost
take a person off from necessary labor: Look into Columella, the Country
Farm, the Du^ch Husbandry and all those supercilious Writer^, and you shall
see them stand upon such impertinent Puntillos; one while the dependence upon
stars benights a man, another while the ground which should produce this or
that, must be cast after this form, or else it will be barren in spite of the
bounty of the Divine Providence.

Not enumerating therefore all their ways of Planting, I dare lay my life that
if the Vine were but set on foot in VIRGINIA, the ground prepared for it as
they do their Tobacco there, by a right line, holes made instead of their
Hillocks, but larger, deeper, and at greater distance, that there might
something grow betwixt them which might be inoffensive to it by nature, and
clear it from being choked with weeds, or something drawing a contrary
juice, (peradventure Onions and Garlic) or something requiring small
nourishment, (as Lupins) which turned into the earth again (distance of five
foot being left for a Plough, with caution not to come too near the Roots,
which must be bared with a stowe, the Plough running first the length, and then
the traverse of those rows, which therefore must be lineally straight) would
both fatten the earth, and cultivate the Vine all at one moment. Yet submitting
my self to judgments of greater experience then my modesty or nature can ever
hope for, I shall deliver the several way of planting the Vine, with as much
brevity as the matter, and my first resolution rather to contract then enlarge,
will permit me.

The first preparing of the earth to receive the Vine must be done in Spring
or Summer, where the ground you dig or cast must be cleansed from all manner
of superfluities whatsoever; n^mely, Roots, Weeds, Stones, etc. this digging
must be several times repeated, that the earth by alternate changing its
place of top and bottom may be thoroughly tempred, the dry refreshed, and the
moist qualified: Thus cleansed, cast in into many ^urrowes (the sides whereof
the French call Chevaliers or Guides, because it should guide you in the
planting) the depth of eighteen inch^s or more; let the mould cast up above,
be so disposed, that ^t may answer to the depth below.

Note that these furrows in a sandy, (...), or wet ground must not be so
hollow as in that which is rough and crabbed: In the bottom of the first you
may put stones about the bignes^e of an ordinary brick (but round) not bigger,
which in the heat of Summer refreshes, in violence of Rain opens a passage to
the water, that it dwell not at the root to rot it.

The best season for planting of Vines is in October, the Moon increasing, the
Furrows must be made in August, that the exposed earth may have time of
digestive preparation.

If your plant have Roots, you must when you plant it cut them of^ all, except
it be newly gathered, if it be a slip or cut, which though it be not so
swift of growth the first year, yet is of much longer continuance, you must
soake it in water, if it be possible in running water five or six days.

He which plants the Vine, the ground thus prepared, and having a line with
him, that he may observe a just evennesse and straightness, both in the Row,
and to the opposite Plant, that so every four may make a regular quadrangle,
must bow his plant, the bigger end forward one foot into the earth of the
Ditch, letting first some of the Mould from the sides fall into it; let him
tread upon the Mould the better to fix the plant, and with his hand (the foot
still pressing upon that part of the plant which is inearthed) gently raise or
bow the top of the plant that it may grow erect: this done, let him cast some
more Mould on it, to the thickness of six inches, and cut the top of the
Plant, so as not to leave above three knots or joints above the earth: Let him
proceed in planting of the rest, observing the prescribed order: some set two
plants together in this order, that if one should fail, the other might
recompense the default.

If you will have your Vine to grow without stakes or props, cut it so, that
you let it no: increase above two or three joints in the year, which will make
it to stand firm against all storms, i^ but naturally violent.

It will be extreme ill husbandry to plant Vines of different kinds or
qualities together, such diversity there is in their season of ripeness; some
preventing your expectation by the suddainenesse of their maturity, others
deceiving it by their late ripeness. We have spoken of the planting, let us
now handle the culture and dress of it, that his fertility may in some measure
requi^e the labor of his impl^nting.

The manner of dressing the Vine.
MId May will be a season which will best inform you, whether your Plants
have taken so good root, that it expresses a verdure and germination in his
Branches; when therefore the shoot is able to endure dressing, let it be cut
within two or three knots of the old Wood, and if any other slips spring from
the Root, cut them away (with care however that it wound not the Root, or the
maine stock, which are wonderfully offended by the too near approach of any
tool that is edged) that the whole strength of the Vine may unite into one
common stock or pillar, to support and convey the sap into the permitted
branches, of which you may not let any flourish the first year of its growth.
It is observed, that to cut the Vine in the decrease of the Moon, makes the
fleshy part of the Grape of a more substantial grossness and feeding, and is
a peculiar remedy for those Vines which are given to be over-ranke with wood:
Let it be the care of the Vigneron to remoove all obstructions of Weeds which
uninvited participate of the Vines nourishment: the surest way to kill which,
is, to turn them in toward the earth, which is not only a destruction to the
thief of its moisture, but a r^stitution of the robbery^ for the Weeds so
inverted enrich the ground to the great encouragement of the Vine, and the no
less profit of the Vine dressers. Let your knife with which you cut your Vine
be very sharp, and let your Vine be cut sloping at one cut, if possible, and
not far from the old Wood, that the growth of the Vine may the more speedily
cover the wound.

The Vines must be dressed or husbanded ^hree times the year, the first
culture of it must be in March, at which time you are to dig about the Root
three quarters of a foot deep, or thereabouts: The next season must be in
April, wherein you must dig about the Root, within a third of the former
depth, then you must also prune it by cutting all the branches, and leaving
some three knobs or joints of the new wood in your Vine of the first years
growth, and cutting off all dead or superfluous branch^s of the old, whose
permitted branches must also be pruned, lest they should spend that aliment
decreed for the Grape in elongation of the branches, all succors also must be
plucked away. In August the like course is to be used in the Wine of the
precedent Autumn leaving two or three joints or knobs of new wood: again the
old ones may be only dug, if at that time, and at all other times you
perceive any dead or wounded branches, you must cut them off something further
then the mortification or hurt extends; and in all prunings let no Vine be cut
in the knob or joint, but in the space betwixt; there following usually nothing
but absolute and irremediable decaying, where they are cut in the articula^
knitting^ If in Aprils dressing, the Vine h^ve no branched but only budded,
which is most usual (but more especially in March) you must nip the bud off
with your fingers, to the end that the juice which would ascend to hasten the
germination, may be stopped to strengthen and engrosse the store.

The third year the Vine will bear you Grapes in these Countries, but I am
confident that in VIRGINIA it wou^d bear at the second; and this my confidence
is grounded upon the hasty perfection all things receive in VIRGINIA^ by much
prec^ding all our neighbor Countries. The P^ac^tree arrives not to that
viri^ity of growth in eight years, in th^s^ r^gions, which it obtaines at
four there. The like is verified in Apples and Cherries: and if it be
que^tioned how such men which peradventure b^ing in a necessity, are not able
to attend two yea^es for a retu^ne, shall in the mean while subsist: it is
easi^y answered^ that the intervalls betwixt the dressings of the Vines will
^fford space enough for a reasonable Crop of Tobacco; and ther^ is much mo^e
labor in looking to 5000. Plants of Tobacco then the like number of Vines,
especially if the intersp^ces be pl^ughed, and ^ow^d with Turnips or Lupines,
which both add^ to the fatness and unwilding of the ground, and choke up all
weeds and grass which might afflict it. Contrariwise, Tobacco will admit
nothing in the Vacant s^aces, and must be perpetually weeded. Further, though
other Vine-Masters prescribe the digging about the roots of their Plant in
August^ which is the busy s^^son of inning the Tobacco, yet I am driven by
diverse reasons to wish such culture om^tted at that time of the year, since it
lays the root by so much the nearer to a violently torrid Su^ which is so far
from cherishing of it, that it burns it; by which means his C^op of Tobacco
need not at all to be neglected: but these Vines steal into such perfection by
that time ^hey are arrived at fou^e years growth, that twenty thousand Plants
of Tobacco, though sold at 6 pence per pound, (a great rate in VIRGINIA) will
not return you a like profit, which though it may be something sp^ringly
believed, yet may be made apparent. For admitting our Vines by that time of 4
foot high, by their so often cutting of the shoots, nourished unto a stock
strong enough to support it self; of B^anch^s, by the like tillage, equal in
vigor, yield but a gallon of Wine per pi^ce, yet here is 20 Tun of Wine
yearly, for 30 years together, (so long will the Vine thus husband^d, last
fruitful, and vigorous, if Planted with the slip rather then the Root) without
any interruption but that which sets bounds and limit to all things, the divine
providence in his dispensation of seasons.

Of the D^seases of Vines, and their Remedy.
BEfore we can justify our expectations of a good Harvest, we must providently
foresee and prevent (as much as in us lies) such casualties as may make our
hope abortive; let us therefore cast our eye upon such Diseases which may make
the Vine unfruitful, or after the fruit produced, destroy its desired
fertility.

To prevent the Frost from benumming, or absolutely destroying your Vines, let
there be laid up in diverse places heaps of dry du^g, with an i^term^xture of
ch^ff^ and straw, and when you conjecture the appro^ch of the Fro^t, set this
combustible stuff on fire, and the smoke arising from thence will so temper
and qu^lifie the air that your Vine for that season will be secured from
D^m^n^ge: yet if (before you have applied th^s preventive remedy) the fruit of
your Vine be destroyed, cut it off very short, and the strength continuing in
the rem^inder will so fortify it, that the next year it will recompense you
double in the quantity of your fruit; for what it has been robbed of by the
present.

To provide against the blasting of your Vine: When you perceive it upon the
point of budding, cut it as late as may be; for this late cutting it will make
your Vine something later^ and by consequence, bloss^me or flower at such time
as the Sun is ascended to his greatest degree of heat and fervor.

To break off such Mists and Fogs as are already gathered in the air, and
give probable menaces to fall upon your Vines, you must apply your self to
this remedy: let a smoke round about your Vineyard be made with Go^ts du^g,
kindled and set on fire. Such Fogges as have outstripped your care and already
fallen upon, and endammaged your V^nes, must have the malignity of their vapors
taken off, or at least assuaged by irrigation of Vines, with the water in which
the leaves or roots of wild Cucumbers, or Coloquintida have been laid some
time to infuse: this must be applied immediately after the mists. Some are of an
opinion that Bay-trees (which by the way are dangerously sociable to the Vine)
planted round, but not too near the Vineyard, will privilege the Vine from this
di^taster, by attracting all the ill disposed malice of those Fogs unto it
self. This till experimented will hardly be worthy belief.

It is an opinion no way contradicted, that fertility is restored to a Vine
become barren, if humane Urine kept a long while stale, to make it the more
salt and rank, be dropped by degrees upon the Vine stock, which must immediately
after be laid about with dung and earth mixed together: the season for the
application of this Cure must be in Autumn. Another way I should conceive to
be altogether as effectual, namely, to leave it nothing but the stock, bare
the roots, and lay there either Acornes, Chestnuts, or rotted straw; and if the
bigness of the root will permit it, to cleave it a little way, and to thrust
into the ^issure a piece of Vine wood, cut small for the purpose; it being
certain that trees themselves sometimes groan under the sickness of being
hide-bound: Vines are perceived to want moisture, when their leaves turn of a
deep red color: this Disease is cured by watring them with Seawater, or stale
Urine.

The Bleeding of the Vine.
THE Vine sometimes is troubled with an extraordinary Efflux, or emanation of
its juice; some call it the weeping, others the ble^ding of the Vine, and this
Disease is commonly so violent, that if not stopped it leaves the Vine without
blood and life. The remedy is to break the bark of the Vine upon the body
thereof, and to anoint the wound with oil boiled to the half, or else with the
Lees of Wine not salted; this done, let it be watered with Vinegar, which by
how much the stronger it may be, is so much more effect^all.

The scattering Vine.
THE Vine sometimes is oppressed with an unretentive scattering dis^ase, as
unable to maintain the fruit sh^e has produced, which she therefore
discharges, and let^ fall from her; the symptoms by which you are to judge of
this disease, are an unnatural palenes^e and dryness of the leaves, the
branch it self l^nguid, broad, and of a more pithy softn^sse then usual. The
cure to this, is to rub Ashes beaten and mixed with strong Vinegar about the
foot of the Vine, and to water all tha^ is round about the stock: Quaer^,
whether fissures in the Bark made with a sharp knife some fix inches long
may not be an additionall Receipt to the former prescription. The tree
peradventure having contracted this malady by too close imprisonment in the
bark, being in a manner hide bound^; how ever the foregoing Medicine cannot in
this case but sort to better effect, if the tree and bark jointly be rubbed
over then the bark only, unless this Medicine could give a relaxation to the
bark, which I have no faith in.

The Vine too full of branches, or luxur^ant.
THE V^ne expending it self too wastfully in overmany branches, must be cut
very short. If this overcome not that luxury, the usual remedy is, let it be
bared at the Roots, and River gravel laid round about the stock, together with
a few Ashes or else some stones. The reason I apprehend not, except it be to
check its fertility^ which I conceive may more prosperously be effected, if
only the branches being cut, and the stock low, you suffer that exubrancy to
waste it self in adding more corpulency to the stock, which will of it self
be a sufficient spender to restrain and confine the former liberality of
juice.

The withering Vine.
IF the Grapes languish and dry away as they hang upon the Vine, before you
apply a remedy you must cast away all that are already affected with this
contagion; then water the rest with Vinegar, in which Ashes of Vine branches
have been infused^ The most assured remedy is to water the Root of the Vine,
from whence the disease comes with the stalest Urine; the former Remedy being
something irregular, as if it were easily feisible to remove a malady by
application to the effects, without considering the efficient.

The rotting of Grapes upon the Vine.
THere are of Vines whose fruit putrify upon the Branches before they come to
maturity: this disease is remedied by laying old Ashes to their Root, or
Gravel, or Barley meal mixed with the seed of Purcellane about the body;
Quaere, whether this disease proceed from a Plethorick rankn^sse or em^ciate
debility: if from rankenesse all application of ashes hurt it: the symptoms of
rankenesse are, when a tree lavishes his moisture into too many branches, which
may make him neglect to feed the fruit, as unable to maintain two spenders;
and I am confident the natural remedy for this is to bare him (as much as
possible) of wood, that it may divert the nourishment to the Grape; if from
debility, which you shall perceive by a flaccid palenes in the leaves, the same
remedy which we prescribed to the withering Vine, vi^. to water the Root with
Urine of a long stalenesse, will be the most proper.

The biting of the Cow or Ox.
Indeed the best way to prevent this disease, is to have your ground either
well paled or quicksetted, or both: But that the biting or breathing of Kine
may not endamage the Vine (which ^^rdly recovers after such wound or infection)
water the f^^t stock of your Vine with such water as the Tanners have used in
dressing and mollifying their raw Hides, and you may promise your self to be
secured from them, they as mortally hating such sents, as the Vine abhors their
bite or breathing.

Against Caterpillars.
THe opinion is^ that Caterpillars and other noisome, though little Vermin,
will not molest the bud or leaf of the Vine, if the hook or hedgebill
wherewith you prune and cut off the superfluous branches of the Vine be
anointed over with the blood of a Male Goat, or the fat of an Ass, or of a
Bear; or with the Oil wherein Catterpillars or brayed Garlic have been
boiled, or if you anoint and rub them with the purse or sheath of a Badgers
stones, after your hook has been ground: These are curious rather then
apparently approved Medicines, and for their reason I must demurre to give it,
Quaere, whether the Oil wherein Catterpillars or brayed Garlic have been
boiled well, rubbed about the stock of the Tree, may not make those Reptilia
ab^or the a^cending, or whether the ^uce of Rue so applied, have not the like
virtue.

The driving Locu^ts from the Vine is done by fumigation, as either fi^ing of
old Ox dung, Galbanum, old shoe soles, Harts-^orne, women's hair; but that
which they propose las^, I conceive to be the best, namely, to plant Pionie
near them.

To prevent Pismires.
PIsmires, who diverse times fret in sunder the wood of the Vine, even to the
very marrow, will not at all approach it, if you anoint and rub the slock with
the dung of Kine, or grease of Asses.

The Bay Tree, Hasell-tree, and Col^worts bear a particular enmity to the
Vine, and express it by effects when pl^nted near; this I cannot believe to
be out of any Magical Antipathy, but rather that these (as the Plum-tree) are
great and strong succors of juice, and happily drawing of the same, by which
the Vine is more particularly nourished, of which being cheated, it is no
wonder if she express a decadency.

The manner of the Vintage.
AND now we are come to that which is most acceptable to mankind, the
successful fruit of his labors reaped in his Vintage, which we must not of
a natural g^eedinesse precipitate, till the Grapes be of such a kindly
ripeness^ of age, that to let them continue on the Vine longer were to lose
them; this ripeness is visibly understood by a mutation in the Branch and
Grape; in the Branch you shall perceive a manifest mutation by an incline to
redness in the Grape; if it be white it alters toward a yellow, if red
toward a black color; nor are the ta^te and touch les^e discerners of such
full maturity; for if they be sweet in taste, and the liquor of a glutinous
substance, cleaving to the finger; we may conclude that both they, and the
time to gather them are of full ripeness. There are also other signs, if the
kernel expressed out of the grape between your fi^gers, come out clean, and
altogether separate from the flesh or pulpe of the Vine, if after such
expression (gently performed) the Grape diminish nothing from his bigness,
etc. These all, or the most of them concurring, prepare for your Harvest.

Yet in VIRGINIA, where the Harvest is more abundant then the Laborers, to
prevent a glut of work flowing upon few hands, and consequently not possible
to be thoroughly equalled: It will no^ be amiss to use both anticipation by
accelerating nature with artificial means in some, and retardation by
arresting the speed of growth in others, to accelerate Ashes laid to the foot
of Vines, and those Vines planted to something more advantage of an am^rous
Sun, will make them antecede the others, at the least by their advance of
foureteen^ d^yes; the other in their natural course following that spice
after, and the others more particularly retarded (which may be easily effected
by the pruning of them later then the rest just upon their prep^rative to b^d;
which arresting the sap m^kes it afterward (though later) return with a
greater abundance) staying fourteen days later, there will be^ compleately
six weeks time (...) gathering in of your Vintage. And by this means you
(...) Vineyard tilled or manured every third year all over, which (...) no
ungrateful accession to its duration in fertility and (...): Those of the most
forward ripeness this year, being retarded the next, and those of the natural
maturation husbanded in that manner, the next Winter.

The fittest season to gather them must be in a serene unclouded sky (the
Grapes having any Rain or Dew upon them when gathered, losing much of their
perfect strength and goodn^sse;) for the Wine made of Grapes thoroughly dried in
their collection, has a greater privilege of force and continuance: But
before this collection be attempted, all things fitting to receive y^u^
Vintage must be prepared in cleanliness and order, viz. Baskets, Caske, and
Fatts strongly hooped, Tubs great and small, Stands, Pre^^es, etc. and all
scoured, washed, and furnished with their necessary instruments and
conveniences.

The Grape gatherer must distinguish and separate the lean, green, sower,
withered, or rotten Grapes, from those which are of absolute ripeness and
soundness. That the Wine by such an uncomely confusion or mixture may not be
less pure, sprightly, and healthful, then it was intended by nature, such
inconfiderate Gatherers are said to be of the Devils sending, to spoil Gods
provisions. Nor should they con^usedly mix good with good, if of different
quality, as to mingle that which is strong and rich, with which is small, but
delicate. They prescribe that the Grapes so gathered should be left in the
ground at least a day or two, and that ^ncovered, provided it rain not, by
which means, say they, they will become much better, since the Sun, dew, and
earth, by this exposure taking from them what ever they have of bad
unprofitable moisture, refine and purify them. A course as far as my span of
reason can extend, so far from this promise of refining and purifying, that it
absolutely tends to their corruption. Have they wanted the Sun and Dew when
upon the stalk? Could not the same Sun and Dew which enripened them, refine
and purify them there? As for the earths meliorating them, if melioration be
understood by putr^faction, it is easily granted; Apples that lie on the ground
are so meliorated, that is to say rotted, and shall the Grape a more delicate
and tender fruit avoid it? This is by way of digression, but it is necessary^
for without this caution a modest man which re^des with an obedient judgment
any booke^ of these men, taking the Author for an (...), subscribes to it,
observes the prescription, and gains a doctrine of future providence, by the
loss of his present Vintage.

But after the Grapes have rema^ned a day or two in the house, it will be time
to put them into the F^tt to be trodden out equally. Those which tread the
Grapes should before they go into the Fatt have their feet and legs washed
extremely, and themselves covered with a shirt as well ^s drawers, that their
sweat may not mix with the Wine, and that nothing in the act of eating fall
from their mouths into it, they must be punctual in abstaining from eating of
the Grapes, while they are at this their labor.

Surely this way of treading the Grape is derived from some abstenious man, who
devised this stratagem under a pretense of expediting the work; but indeed to
deter men from drinking that which is so uncomely prepared. I know they will
allege that by tre^ding it flows more naturally, and withal more pure forth,
then that which is pressed; but withal give me leave, say that the very
Press it self if it be not too violently and greedily labored, makes it
glide forth altogether as naturally and purely, and which is more with greater
equality; for in the Press, all the Grapes feel the impultion at once, and if
the Owner be not too covetous to bring the dross and gros^e parts of the
Grape to a second squeezing^ and mixing with the fi^st^ without dispute the
Wine so expressed is altogether as good and strong as that which is trodden,
but I am certain much more clea^ly.

The Wine (however^ being expressed must be poured, dross, Husks, and all,
into a Fat to work or boil in, which it must do for the space of four and
twenty hours at the least, if you will h^ve it fine, delicate, and subtle;
but if you desire to have it strong and noble, let it work in the Fat four or
five days, with a Covering over it, that so the vapor thereof may not exhale,
or his force waste it self.

The Fat, or Tub prepared, must have immediately before his reception of the
Wine, a little bunch of Vine branches laid before the Tap-hole, which (that it
may not heave up with the Wine) must be kept down with a clean stone or
Brick, or which is better and l^s^e off^nsive, a ring of Lead wound about it:
this when you draw the Wine will hinder the Husks or Grapes from coming out
with the liquor. Your Fat must not be full by half a foot or more, that the
Wine may have the more space to boil or work in.

Your Wine in vessel'd must not be filled up to the Bung, nor the Bung closed,
that the Wine may have the greater liberty of despumation, and rejecting
whatever it finds reluctant to its own nature.

Every day you must fill up what is expurged, and something more, till you
^inde the Wine thoroughly appea^ed, and discharged of whatever might be
obstructive to its generosity: nor must this Caske be in the Cellar, but either
in the open air, or in some B^rne where it has a liberal respiration; besides
the defects in Caske cannot be so easily discovered when the Wine is in the
Cell^r, ^s in open places. When it is so thoroughly settled, that it has given
over all appetite or sign of boiling, you may have it committed to your
Cellar, which should stand upon the North here, (in VIRGINIA upon the
North-west as the coolest and driest Angle) paved wit^ gravel or dry earth,
which is less subject to moisture or ex^dations then Brick, or especially
stone, absolutely remote and unmo^ested by any ill odours of Stables, Sinkes,
Bathes, Marshy places, etc. neither should it have any thing shut up or kept in
it, which have any sent of acrimony or harshnesse, as Cheese, Garlic, Onions,
Oils, (Trane, Neatsfoot, Linseed, and others, not the Salade-Oyle) it being
observed, that nothing is more open or obnoxious to contagion then Wine,
especially when new.

Your Vessels must be so ranked in order that they touch not one another, by
this means to leave a liberty of sight to foresee a misfortune, or prevent it
when happened. They must be so close stopped in the Bung with Clay, that not
the least irreption of air may be capable to taint it, to which it is very
subject.

To cause new wine to be quickly purged, put (after this proportion in the
rest:) to 15 quarts of new Wine, half a pint of strong Vinegar, and within the
space of three days it will be fined.

To preserve Must or new Wine all the year, take that Vine which voluntary
distilleth from the Grape; before is suffer the press, and put it into a
Vessel pitched within and without the same day: let the Vessel be half full,
and very well stopped with plaster above; and thus the new Wine will continue a
long while in his sweetness. But to add to this experiment and the
continuance of the Wine, you must hinder it from working, which you may well
do, if you put the Vessel into some Well or River, there to remain thirty
days; for not having boiled it will continue always sweet, and is preserved
by the heat of the Pitch. Others prefer the burying of this Vessel in moist
gravel: and (which in my opinion is the best) others cover the Vessel first
with the dross of the Wine press, then heap upon it moist gravel; by which
means, something interposing betwixt the extraordinary moisture and cold of
the gravel, which might have some influxe upon the Wine, your Must preserved
in an excellent mean of temper.

To know if there be any water in the Wine.
THE Malice of servants sometimes swallowing down their Masters Wine, and
fearing to be discovered if the quantity be diminished, or the baseness of the
Dealer to impose upon the Merchant, makes both of them adulterate it with
water, which not being discernable to the eye, may be made familiar to your
knowledge by this experiment: Take a withered Rush, immerge it in the Wine;
after a small space draw it out again: if the Wine have been thus bastarded,
you shall perceive the water cleaving to it. Otherwise, take raw and wild
Pears, cutting, and cleansing them in the midst, or in lieu of them,
Mulberries, cast them into the Wine, if they float, the Wine is neat and clear
from such sophistication; if they subside there is water in it. Some do anoint
a Reed, a piece of wood, or paper, hay, or some other little bundle of herbs,
or strawes with Oil, which if they dry, put into the Wine^ and after draw
them out, if the Wine have been embased with water, drops thereof will gather
unto the Oyl^. Another sure trial is to cast un^laked Lime into the Wine; if
there be any adulteration, the Lime dissolves, if the Wine be undevirginated,
the Lime collects thereby a harder cementation. Others take of the Wine, and
inject it into a Drying Pan wherein there is boiling Oil, and the Wine (if
depured) declares it with a loud noise, and frequent Bubbles. To make another
trial, lay an Egg into the Wine, the Egg descending, manifests the abuse,
not descending, the Wine is as the Grape bled it.

To separate Wine from Water.
BUT as the miserable man in the pit desir^d his friend not to question how he
fell in, but to advise how he should get out: We will not be satisfied that
there is water in the Wine, but how it may be sepe^ated from it; which if we
may believe the deliverers of it, who have published it to the World in their
names, you must put into the Vessel of Wine melted Alum, then stop the mouth
of the Vessel with a sponge drenched in Oil, which done, turn the mouth of
the Vessel so stopped, downwards, and the water only will come forth,
leaving the Wine pure: the reason of this I cannot give, and have only read
(not seen) the expeririment.

The way to correct ^ver much waterishnesse in Wine.
IF gluts of rain have made the year so unseasonable, that the Grape has
contracted a watery quality to the diminution of his Winy goodness: or if it
fall ou^ that after the time of gathering them, there fall such store of rain,
that the Grapes instead of Dewes are too much wetted; (such is the profit of
exposing the gathered clusters into the open air for 48 hours) the remedy is
to tread them quickly, and finding the Wine weak, by tasting it after it has
been put into the Vessel, and begun to boil there, it must presently be
changed, and drawn out into another Vessel, for so the watr^ parts that are
in it will stay behind in the bottom, yet the Wine standing still charged,
will be totally corrected, if you put to every fifteen quarts of Wine, a pint
and a half of Salt.

To make Wine of an acceptable odor.
IF you will perfume your Wine with a grateful odor, by which the brain may
be strengthened, as well as the heart exalted: take a few Myrtle-berries dry,
bray them, and put them into a little Barrel of Wine; let it so rest, close
stopped, ten days afterward use it at pleasure. The like effect will follow,
if you take the blossoms of the Grapes (those especially which grow upon the
shrubby Vines) when the Vine is in flower, and cast them into the Wine, the
brimmes of the Wine-vessell being rubbed over with the leaves of the Pine and
Cypress tree, and this will give it a fragrancy delightfully odorate: Or which
is of equal facility, you may hang an Orange, or Pomecitron, (being of a
convenient greatness) and prick it full of Cloaves, and that in such sort as
it may not touch the Wine, shut up in all these Applications, the Vessel very
close. If this like you not, take the simples of such matter as you would have
your Wine to smell of, infuse them in Aqua vitae, the infusion may be repeated
by percolation of the old herbs, and addition of new, till it have gotten a
full and absolute perfection of th^se odours you desire, then pour the Aqua
vitae (the herbs ^trained from it) into the Vessel of Wine.

To make Cute.
YOU may make the boiled Wine called Cute, if you boil new Wine that is good,
lovely, and very sweet until the third part thereof be consumed; when it is
grown cold put it into a Vessel and use it. But to make this Cute, that it
may continue all the year, gather your Grapes whole, and let them lie spread
three days in the Sun, on the fourth about noone tread them. The liquour or
sweet Wine which shall run out into the Fatt before the dro^^ey substance come
under the press, must be boiled one third as before; then to every nineteen
quarts of Wine add an ounce of Irees or Corn flag well brayed, strain this
Wine without the Lees, which being done, it will continue sweet, firm, and
wholesome.

To cause troubled Wines to settle.
TO cause troubled Wines, and such as are full of Lees to settle, pour into
thirty quarts of Wine, half a pint of the Lees of Oil boiled, till the third
part be wasted, and the Wines will immedi^tely return to their former
settlement. Otherwise, which is better and more easy, cast into the
Wine-Vessell the whites of six or seven Eggs, and stir them together very
well with a stick.

To know whether the Wine will keep long.
THE knowledge whether the Wine will continue long or not in a good condition,
is thus made apparent: When your Wine is tunned up, you must within some time
after change it into another Vessel, leaving the Lees behind in the first;
which you must diligently stop from taking any vent whatsoever; after some time
you may look into the Lees with careful animad version, whether they change
or contract any ill sent or not, or whether they breed any Gnats, or other such
Creatures; if you espy none of these mutations or corrupt generation, repose
your self with all confidence that your Wine will continue pure to the
longest: But t^^se symptoms discovered, will be so many admonitions to
dispose of that Wine with the soonest, which is already by nature inclined to
^urne bad and corrupt; others take a pipe of Elder, or such other wood as may
be hollowed through, with which they receive the sent of the Lees, and by them
inform themselves how the Wine is conditioned.

A good palate will divine of Wines by the taste, namely that if the new Wine
be sharp and quick, they repose confidence in its goodness and continuance;
but if flat and heavy, then they expect nothing but the contrary to good
qualities: again, if the new Wine (when put into the Vessels) be fat and
gl^wy, the sign is prosperous; but if contrariwise, it be thin and weak, it
is ^n argument that it will easily be turned,

To keep Wine at all times.
TO effect this, you may cast Roch-Allum (very finely powdered) into the,
Vessel which you mean to put your new Wine in, or bay Salt very finely
powdered: or pibble stones, and little flints taken out of some Brook, or which
will retain the spirits of the Wine from evaporating; more certainly Salade
Oil, so much as will cover the superficies of the Wine.

To make that Wine sh^l not Flower.
Wine will have no Flower, if you put into it the Flowers of the Vine,
gathered, and dried, or the meal of Fetches, changing the Wine into another
Vess^ll, when the meal or Flowers are settled down to the bottom.

To prepare Physical Wines.
NEither is this digression impertinent; Physicians are not so frequent in
VIRGINIA, as in PADUA, or LONDON, and were there more, yet the vast space of
ground, those people take up in their scattred dwellings, makes the addresses
to them very difficult: that therefore they may (in absence of the Physician)
have some common remedies for common diseases; I have thought fit to give them
this account of Medicinal Wines out of LIE^AULT, all of them of excellent
Virtues, and easy preparations: the first shall be

To make Wines of Wormwood.
TO which effect, take of Sea-Wormewood, or in default of that, common
Wormwood, especially that which has the small stalk, and short leaves, eight
Drammes; stamp them, and bind them in a cloth which is not woven too thick,
cast it into the Vessel, pouring new Wine upon it, making this account, that
to every three pints of Wine there must be eight drams of Wormwood; continue
this proportion in the filling of your Vessel, which you must leave with the
vent open, that the Wine fall not a new to boiling. The use of this Wine is
good for the pain of the stomach and liver, and to kill Worms.

To make Wine of Horehound.
THis Wine being very sovereign for the Cough, must be made in the time of
Vintage, to which purpose you must gather of the Crops and tender stalks of
Horehound, of that ^specially which grows in lean untilled places; afterward
cause them to be dried in the Sun, make them up into bundles, tying them
with a Ru^h, sink them in the vessel to 65 quarts of new Wine; you must put
eight pound of Horehound to boil therewith, after the Wine is settled the
Horehound must be taken out, and the Wine stopped very diligently.

The Wine of Anise and Dill very good against the difficulty of the Urine: The
Wine of Pears against the flux of the belly; the Wine of Bays against the ach
and wringings of the belly; the Wine of Asarum Bace^^r against the J^undise,
Dropsies, and Tertian Agues; the Wine of Sage against p^ines and weakness of
the sinews, are all made as the Wine of Wormwood.

To make Wine of Betony.
TAke Betony, the Leaves and Seeds about one pound, put it into twenty quarts
of Wine, and at the expi^atio^ of the seven month, change the Wine into new
Vessels. This most excellent Wine aswageth the pain of the Reins, breaks
the stone, and heals the Jaundise.

To make the Wine of Hysop.
TAke the leaves of Hysop well stamped, tie them fast in a very fine cloth, and
cast about one pound of them into twenty quarts of new Wine; this Wine is
peculiarly excellent against the diseases of the lungs, an old Cough, and
shortness of breath.

Wine of Pomgranates, made of Pomgranates that are scarce ripe, being thoroughly
bruized, and put into a vessel of thick red Wine, serves of singular use
against the flux of the belly: to which end also serve the Wines made of
Services, Mulberries, and Quinces.

The Ancients had a very high opinion of Treacle Wine, from consideration of
its extraordinary virtue in asswaging and healing the bitings of Serpents, and
other venomous Beasts. Nor had the Vine solely this virtue in its Grape, but in
the leaves also stamped and applied unto the grieved part. This Vine is thus
prepared: cleave three or four fingers breadth of the Plant you intend to set,
take out the pith, and replenish the vacant part with Treacle, afterward set
the cloven part covered and wrapped in paper. Thus Vines may be made
soporiferous, if you prepare them in the same manner with Opium, as before with
Treacle, laxative by preparing it with some soluble purge. By this means you
may have Wine to taste like the Greek Calabrian Frontignac, or any other noble
for its excellency; if the Lees purified and preserved be inserted into the
pith of the branch, Aromatic, if to these Lees you add compounds of Cynamon
Cassia, Cloves, o^ what ever shall be most agreeable to the nostrill and
palate.

To remedy Wines inclining to corrupt; and first of Wine beginning to sour:
IF you perceive Wine beginning to wax sour, put into the bottom of your
Vessel a pot of water well stopped, close the Vessel, yet so as at a vent hole
to receive and transmit a little air: the third day draw out the pot, and you
shall s^e a noble experiment of attraction, for the water will be stinking^ and
the Wine sound and neat.

At what time, and by what accidents Wine is most apt to corrupt, with its
remedy.
THE season when Wines are subject to turn or be troubled, is about the
Summer sol^tice, viz. the 11. of June, at the same time that the Vine emits her
blossom; nor then alone, but sometimes about the Dog-dayes^ by reason of the
variety of heates: generally the Wine is in some sort of commotion, when a
constant S^uth wind disturbes the air, whether it be in Winter or Summer, in
great and continued raines also, and winds in Earthquakes or mighty Thunders.
To keep them from turning is by the injection of pan salt, when they boil or
work, or else o^ the seed of smallage, Barley-bran, the leaves of Bay-trees,
or of Fennel seed brayed with the Ashes of the Vine brayed. The like effect
have Almonds cast into the wine^ or the Ashes of the Oake^ the Meal of the
^hite Fetch both defends the wine from turning, and keeps it in his
soundness. Alum broken in pieces the same, the worst application is of
Brimstone, Lime, Plaster, etc. To r^cover the wine when turned, must be
effected either by changing the Vessel, by beaten pepper; or take whites of
Eggs, beat them very well, and take the froth from thence arising of them,
pour them into the Vessel, which you must immediately roll after its
infusion: Or else take twelve Kernells of old Walnuts (the Virginian Walnut I
conceive exceeding proper) roast them under the Ashes, and while they ^re yet
hot, draw a thread through them, hang them in t^^ wine, where they must be
till the wine (which will not fail) recover its former color.

If the wine become troubled, either the Kernels of Pine Apples, or Peaches, or
the whites of Eggs, and a little salt will not fail to clear and refine it:
Others take half a pound of Alum, as much Sugar, make a very small powder
thereof, and cast it into the Vessel.

To help Wine that begins to wast and die.
IF you by manifest Symptoms apprehend your wine suddenly inclining to
degenerate and corrupt, this course is prescribed: If it be Clarre^, take the
Yelke of an Egg, if white, the white add to it three ounces of clear bright
stones taken out of a running River, make them into a small powder, together
with two ounces of Salt, mingle all together, and (the wine shifted into
another Vessel neat and clean, not tainted with any smell beforehand) cast in
this Compound; mingle it with the wine five or six times the day, until three
or four days be past. This remedy is not prescribed when wine is absolutely
spoy^ed, for then it would be applied to no purpose; but that the careful
Master should by his observation of it to such a disposition, prevent it by
this experiment.

To restore Wine grown musty, unto his former purity.
CAst into the Vessel Cowes milk salted^ Some (but to the infinite
unhealthfullnesse of him that drinks it) attempt this restoration with Alum,
Lime, and Brimstone, a more undangerous way is to infuse in it Juniper Berries,
and Irees Roots: Yet if the wine should continue this ill senting qu^lity, by
having taken wind: Let it be rouled too and again to awaken the spirits
thereof, that they may the better disperse the strength of its infu^ion:
afterward set it again upon his cantling, replenish the Vessel and shut it
close to prevent wind for the future.

To preserve Wines from sowring, may be performed by your disposing of your
Vessel in a place that is very cool and dry (the Vessels being very well
filled and well stopped) to prevent as well the emission of the spirits, by
which the Wine continues vigorous, as the admission of air. But in regard all
men are not the masters of such opportune conveniences, being fo^ced sometimes
to make uses of places obnoxious to heat, and drawing one Vessel a long time,
cannot hinder the secret invasions of air; yet if you perceive in time that
your Vine begines to harbor an acid or sour quality, you shall preserve it
from falling into a full degree of soreness; if you take a good piece of
Lord, wrap it well in a Linen cloth, tie it to a small cord, and let it down
by the Bunghole into the middle of the Wine, still letting it lower as the Wine
decreaseth. Some advise, and not without a great appearance of reason, to put
into the Vessel, Oil Olive, or Salade, in such quantity, that it may only
cover the sup^rficies of the Wine: Which Oil when the Wine is drawn off from
the Lees, may be separated from them, and preserved.

To take away the waterishnesse and crude moisture of the wine, put into the
Vessel the leaves of the Pomgranate-tree, though in my opinion such Wine being
easily known in the Fatt, when first trodden, should be corrected by boiling,
as before.

The remedy against venomous Beasts falling into the Wine, as Adders^ Rats,
etc. is, so soon as the dead body is found, to burn it and cast the Ashes
into the same Vessel, s^irring it about with a wooden stick: Others give
advice to put hot bread into the Vessel which will attract all the venomous
qualities to it self, and clear the Wine.

Of the Olive.
THE Vine and Olive being such delightful associates as to express a mutual
emulation for the Glory of fertility when planted together. This Treatise shall
not divide them, they are both exhilaratives, the Vine rejoices the heart, the
Olive glads the countenance; and that VIRGINIA may express the delight she
affords to mankind by being reinforced with this second Sister of laughter,
the Olive; this discourse particularly designed to her improvement, shows its
planting and culture when planted.

The Olive tree, though it delight in a rich fat ground; yet if he have a warm
air, and a South, or South-East wind to refresh him, will in all places
testify a bounteous gratitude for its situation in an almost unlaboured for
fertility: Yet to prepare a place for this rich plant to prosper on, his
prosperity being no small part of your own, you must dig the pits where you
intend to plant them, a year before such implanting; in this pit burn some
straw, or which is better castings of Vine or Brambles (but no part of Oak,
there being such a particular enmity betwixt this tree, and the Oak, that the
Olive not only refuses its neighborhood, but dies if planted in the place
where the Oak has been rooted up) or you may leave it to the Sun and Rain,
which will without such adustion exhale and purify all infectious vapors: The
place being provided to plant upon, we must next select our Plant.

Select your Plants from the Shoots or Branches of those Olive trees which are
young, fair, and fertile: Let them be in thickness the circumference of an
ordinary wr^st, in length eighteen inches; plant it the bigger end downwards
into the earth, prepared as before, and ram the Mould, mingled with Dung and
Ashes close about it: Let it be dug every year in Autumn. The time to
plant it is in April or May, it must not be transplanted for the first five
years, nor the Boughs cut or pruned till it have attained eight. Graft it not
but upon it self, so will it bear fruit better in the species and number; in
its transplantation you must take up as much of the soil with its roots, as
you can possible, and when you reset it, give it the like scitu^tion for Coast
and Quarter that it had before.

Olives are intended for two uses when gathered; either to be^ served up at the
table in collation, or to make Oil of the largest sort of Olive, is most
proper for the table, the lesser more particularly convenient for Oil: They
must be gathered with the least offense to the tree that may be, the bruising
of the branches with Poles as some use it in striking down the fruit, makes
the tree barren: The best way therefore is to ascend the tree by a Ladder, in
fair weather (not so much for convenience of the Gatherer; as for the profit
coming from the Olive, which is not to be taken from the tree, but when it is
exceeding dry) and pulling them with your hand put them into a Wicker Basket,
which you shall have carried up with you to that purpose. Those Olives you
inten^ to preserve or pickle, must not have that full ripeness which is
requisite for those you purpose to make Oil of. The Olive^ which you keep for
Banquets must be full of flesh, firm, fast, large, and ovall; if you will
pickle them, put them into an earthen pot, and cover them with salt brine or
verjuice, or else with Honey, Vinegar, Oil and Salt smally beaten. If you
intend to keep them long, by changing your salt brine constantly every two or
three Months, you may effect it.

For the Olives whereof you are to express your Oil, you must gather no more
at one time then what may be made into Oil that day, and the day following:
before you bring them to the Press let them be spread upon hurdles, well
picked, and cul'd; let the hurdles not be too thick set with twigs, that the
Lees and watery humor of the Olive (which if ^xpressed with Oil would make it
extreme full of faeculency, and corrupts it both in the nostrill and Palate)
may expend, waste it self, and drop through; some therefore that this
malignant humor may have a full defluxion before they bring the fruit to the
Press, make a high and well-raised floor, with provision of partitions to
keep every days gathering separate; (which is, if your abundance be such that
your Press is not able to discharge you of them daily) the bottom of these
partitions must be paved with a decline descent, that the moistness of the
Olives may flow away, and be received into gutters or little channels there
provided for their transfluxe.

The Olives being thus prepared for the Press, and the Press readily provided
of all things necessary, viz. of Fats, V^ssels to receive your several Oils,
scoopes to draw, and empty out the Oil, Covers great and small, spunges, pots
to carry out the Oil, tied about by bands or Cords of Hemp, or Broome-barke;
the Millstones, Oyle-mills, Pressers, and all other instruments serving
thereunto being very well cleansed, and the air having been before as well
heated by a plentiful fire; (if it be not warm enough by its natural
situation) for the assistance of heat makes all Oily Liquors resolve and run
more gently and freely, whereas cold astringes, and detaines it. This
Presse-house therefore should be so seated, that it may enjoy a full admission
and benefit of the South Sun, that we may stand in need of very little fire,
if any at all, such heat being no more assistant to the expression, then
accessory to the corruption of the Oil.

Carry your Olives thus cleansed to the Press, under which put the^ whole in
new willow baskets (the willow adding a beauteous and innocent color to the
Oil;) the Willow also something staving off the rude strokes of the Press,
that the Olives may be bruised with as little violence, and as much leisure as
possible: Nor would it be inconvenient if their skin and flesh were a little
broken at the first with a Millstone, so set, that it should not break the
Kernels, which would utterly spoil the Olive, taking them from the Mill thus
prepared: let them be stronglier bruised in the Press, and put four pound of
Salt to every Bushel of Olives. The Oil which comes first is by much the
best, and therefore called Virgin Oil: the second which comes with more
violent expression is fitter for Liniments then the Table: but the last, which
is extorted from the dross, and stones, is of no use but for Lamps; or such
sordid employment.

The Tuns and Vessels wherein the Oil is to be put, must be well dressed with
pitch and gum, made very clean with warm Lees, and carefully dried with a
sponge, into which you may power your Oil within thirty days after the
expression of it, so much time being necessarily allowed for the settling the
Lees, which by that will have grounded upon the bottom. The Cellars where the
Vess^ls of Oil are to be conse^ved, must be in a place of constant dryness
and coldness, heat and moisture being corrupters of the Oil; provide
therefore a Cellar on the North coast of your house: and for the better and
more neat preservation of your liquor, pour it ^ather into glass Vessels or
earthen pots, which (if they be made capacio^s) are far more convenient then
the pitched retainers we formerly spoke of.

Accidents befalling Oyle^ with their Remedies: and first to rec^ver frozen
Oil.
IF (in the time of Winter) Oil does freeze together with his Lees, you must
put into it twice boiled salt, which dissolves and clears your Oil from all
further apprehension of danger; nor need you entertain a jealousy that it
will be salt, since unctuous matters (and especially Oil) have seldom any
relish of it.

To keep Oil from becommimg rank.
When the Oil begins to change from his first purity of taste to a disposed
rankenesse; the r^medy is to melt an equal proportion of wax and Oil
together, to which you are to mingle salt fried in Oil before; this you must
pour into the Vessel, which composition above the prevention of it, when
beginning to grow rank, effects an entire restitution to its simple pureness,
when already affected. Anniseeds cast into the Vessel by a particular
attraction, perform the same operation.

To purify troubled Oil.
SOme are of advice, that the applying it to the fire or Sun recleares it.
Others, if the Vessel be strong, ca^t into it boiling water: how these
remedies agree with their former assertions, (wherein they declare heat so
unnatural to Oil) is beyond my reconciling: I for my part, should rather make
an experiment of Vinegar, which being cast into the Oil by degrees, has such
a penetrating and inquirent faculty over all the parts, that it would without
doubt recompose it.

To recover Oil corrupted in the Sent.
TO perform this, take green Olives, pound them, free them from their stones,
and cast them into the Oil: or else cast the crumbs of Barley bread mixed with
corn salt: otherwise, infuse in your Oil the flowers of Melilot: or else hang
in the Vessel a handful of the herb Coriander, and if you find the
putrefying quality yet unexpelled, cast in diverse times of the same herb, and
which is better, change his Vessel; this ill odor others drive away thus:
They take Grapes, pick out their Kernells, stamp them, and with Salt make them
into a lump or lumpes, which you must cast into the Vessel, and after ten
days fail not to change it: Which must necessarily be done after the
application of any remedy to Oil grown rank and putrified, the Vessel still
impairing what the remedy recovers.

We have done with the Oil Olive, after the manner of whose expression may
be extorted any unctuous matter of fruits, plants, or seeds^ namely, Wal^uts,
Filberds, Almonds (both sweet and bitter) Nutmegs, the Kernells of Peaches,
Pine-Apples, Abricots, Cherries, Plums, Pistach^s, the seed of Line, Rape,
Cole, Mustard, Hemp, Poppy, Henbane, the seeds or Pipins of Apples, Pears,
Cucumbers, Gourds, Melons, and other such like: But that we may give the
Reader a more clear dilucidation of the manner of preparation, We shall
briefly discover the method used in the expression of Oil from Almond and
Nutmegs, which will easily make him apprehend all the rest; the particu^ar
reason which persuades me to introduce the example of Almonds, is b^caus^ I
have purposed b^fo^e I finish this concluding Treatise, to discou^se
particularly of the pla^^^ng the Almond. Whose Oil i^ ^o be taken inwa^ds, is
to be thus expressed.

Pill the Almonds after they have steeped some time in warm water, pound them
in a Mortar of Stone or Marble with a wooden pestle, make them up in little
Lumpes or Loaves, which you may kne^d with your hands against the vapor of
warm water, or put them in a glass ves^ell of a large content^ for some four
or five hours: (let the seat and Glass be so contrived, that it may rather
be above the water to receive the vapor on its sides and bottom, then in it)
the Almond being thus mollified by the disposition of the moisture, must be
put into a hair cloth or hempen bag, and laid in a press, whose bottom must
be well heated, hollow, and bending downwards to give the better delabency for
the Oil thus expressed, you may bake the drossy part of the Almonds under the
Ashes, which in time of necessity will serve for bread, of plenty for a dainty
and fatning food to your Poultry. This Oil is of sovereign, excellency to
mitigate and remove the throws and gripes of women newly delivered, and to
aswage the pains of the Colli^k or Reins, taking it in two ounces of white
Wine, or one of Aqua vit^; the Line, Cole, Rape^ Wallnut, and other need not
these curiou^ preparations, and their Cakes are of unmatchable nourishment to
fatten Kine and other Cattle.

Oil of Nutmegs.
Oil of Nutmeg (which in the South part of VIRGINIA not subject to any
inconveniences of cold would undoubtedly flourish) is thus made: bray them with
a wooden stamper, afterward press them out, the plankes being very well
heated; to extract it more rich, divide them into little heaps, and steep
them three da^es in very good Wine, after dry them in the shadow of the Sun
two whole days, then heat them reasonably in a frying pan upon the fire,
sprinkling them with Rose-wa^er, and presently press them. This I judge
conveniently sufficient for Oils: Let us descend to the planting of the
Almond-tree, which as it has a peculiar excellency, so without dispute
returns as ample profit.

Of the Almond tree.
THough the Almond tree delight particularly in gravelly places, of which
VIRGINIA is too rich to afford a convenience; yet there is no dispute, but if
the Mould wherein you plant them be mingled with Oyster-shels, or ^^ch like,
of which there is to be found inexhaustible Quantities, they will have a
greater virtue then gravel to the quickening and ingerminating of this tree;
having the perplexed hardne^^e of gravel and unctuousnesse of marle united.
The soil thus prescribed; let the seat of your Almond be in a hot place fully
exposed to the South or South-West, and it will not only flourish to your
expectation, but its fruit will be excellently qualified, and in vast
abundance: it grows very well of the stone, which because it cannot be
procured new should be kept close in a Vessel of earth; to be transported, set
i^ as you would your Peach; it thrives very well too of the branch o^ scien,
which must be cut from the top of the tree, and planted as the Olive, the
earth rammed very hard about it, and prepared as before, both the stone and the
scien should be steeped for the space of twelve or four and twenty hours in
homed w^ter; the best season to set or plant it in VIRGINIA, is in October and
November. This tree will be of admirable use there, in regard that both that
and the Olive will hinder no undergrowing Corn; let neither this tree nor your
Olive grow above ten foot in the stock, and in this as in Olives, if you see
any branch aspiring higher then his neighbors, repress such ambition by
cutting him off, o^herwise he will divert all the sap of the tree into his
own body^ an^ leave his fellows in a starving and perishing condition;
amongst which if you maintain equality, they will altogether consent in
gratitude to return you a plentiful Harvest.

The barren Almond tree will become fruitful if you lay o^en his Roots in
Winter, or else if you pierce some part of the stock close to the earth, and
put through the hole a wedge of Oak, watering it about with stale Urine.

The bitter Almond will be capable of bul^oration, if you lay round about his
bared Root Swines dung tempered with Urine, casting afterward much mould upon
it, this must be practiced yearly, till he be perfectly reclaimed, you will
find the same effect if you bore a hole in the stock of the tree, and put
therein a wedge wrapped about with cloth dipped in Honey. Beasts by brousing and
cropping of the first and tender branches, change the nature of sweet Almonds
into bitter Almonds, are gathered when their Husks through the heat of the
Sun begin to divide; (I should therefore advise that those made choice of to
set, may be taken before such exact ripeness, that the heat of the Sun may
not exhale their generating vigor) if when you have beaten them down you
shell them altogether, and wash them in brine, they will become white, and be
preserved a long time; cautionarily that you dry them in the Sun; their
repository or granaries must have good open admissories for an unmoist air,
and lie upon that Coast that is most open to the North-West, being the driest
wind in that Country.

The Medicinal excellency of Almonds, is, that they are good for those which
are troubled with a clammy fleame in their throat, with weak lungs, and such
as are subject to the gravel in the Reins or difficulty of Urine, they are
great restorers to nature, and fortify the parts tending to generation; nor is
it only beneficial in its fruit, for the Gum also of the Almond tree
arrests the spitting of blood.

Of the Fig tree.
THE Fig tree grows with an unusual celerity, as beginning to bear the
second year from his planting, and is of that nature, that during a month or
five weeks when Grapes are ripe and good to eat, the Fig also is at that
season daily mature, and fit for the palate, it may be planted as the Vine,
and effects the same soil; such as have roots grow sooner, but without doubt
the branches continue longer; the order you observe in planting the Vine
adheare too in this, and it will prosper. The fittest season to plant it is in
October, and the succeeding Month to the 15. or twentieth: You shall cause
them in planting the better to take root, if you loosen the barque, or which is
better bruise it gently at the nether end of the stem about half a foot. To
cause them to be fertile, and bring forth fruits remarkable for fulness and
verdure, put to his root rich Mould beaten and tempered with the setlings of
Oil Olive, and man's dung, or which I like better then this stercoration if it
have already a benine soil, crop the tops and ends of the branches when they
first spring.

To reclaim a wild Fig Tree, water him at the roots with Wine and Oil mixed
together.

If you make a composition of an equal quantity of salt brine and water bestow
this irrigation in a small trench round about the body of the tree, your Figs
are prevented from unripe fallings.

To have ea^ly Figs, water the tree with Oil and Pigions dung, if your
ambition be not only to have the earliest, but the latest, take away the first
Buds, when they are about the bigne^se of a Bean.

To keep or preserve them, lay them in a pot of Honey full and well stopped,
but so that they neither touch the sides of the pot, nor one another. Or take
an ^arthen pot (the Figs being put in) stop it close, and immerge this Vess^ll
to another full of Wine, no taint or corruption will possess your Figs so
enclosed, while the Wine retains his goodn^sse.

The plant steeped in brine, or the end thrust into a Sea Onion, becomes much
more fruitful when planted.

This fruit is of great virtue in making the belly soluble in abundance of
nourishment and provocation of sweat, dried and mingled with the flower of
Linseed or Fenugreeke, it resolves and kills all Impostumes, and hard
tumors, in decoctions it assists much in driving away of the Co^gh, and
difficulty of breath, which last virtue the fruit also expresses very happily,
if steeped in Aqua vitae, the night precedent, and taken every morning during
the dominion of this disease after you, the Milk of the Fig Tree dropped into
the ear kills the Worms in it, the Leaves of the Fig Tree rubbed do
provoke the Hemorrhoides: the juice of Figs is of equal felicity in opening
them, which to increase his excellency amends all roughness, ill conditioned
scabs small pocks, purples, freckles, ringwormes, and other ^ye^sad blemishes
of the face or body therewith anointed, being first tempered with the flower of
parched Barley, a little Cotton wool dipped in this juice, and laid upon the
aching tooth asswageth the pain.

Of the Pomeganate tree.
THE Pomegranate tree, which may be planted either from the Branch or succor,
is one of the most absolute encouragers of an idle person in the world;
provided, it be exempt from the intemperate operation of the cold, neither the
torrid heat of the Sun, nor the barrenness of the Soil, shall make him forgo
his glorious Rubies; no culture or dressing is required by it: yet if it be set
in a rich soil, it will be sure to make an advantage of it to his own
flourishing, and your profit: the wine thereof (for it affords Wine as well as
excellency of fruit) may be made after this manner^

Take the ripe kernels, freed and cleansed from their skins, put them into the
Press, and exact the Wine, keep it in Vess^ls till it is fully fined from all
working, which finished, distribute such a quantity of Oil as may float over
all the top of the Vessel, and this preserves it from sowring or corruption.

The Pomegranate apple put in a pot of new earth, well covered, and Luted with
clay, and set into an Oven so long, till the Fruit may be resolved into powder,
is of very Princely virtue; for (taking the weight of half a crown thereof in
red Wine) it miraculously stops the Bloody flux. It is also good in diverse
diseases of women, which (because they are more arcanely peculiar to that Sex)
I shall forbear to speak of.

Of the Quince tree.
THE Quince tree grows much sooner from the Root then Branches: it delights
in a soil of a moist and cold nature, and would therefore be planted toward
the more umbragious and cool corners of your Garden. The Garden, or reclaimed
Quince, bears two sorts of fruits, to which curiosity has assigned Sexes,
and they are called the Quince and Quincesse; the Male, which is the Quince, is
of a more wrinkled, dry, redolent F^uit, and golden color then the Quincesse.
If you graft the Male upon the Female, or E convers^, the Quinces thence
proceeding will be tender, and may be eaten raw, which without such an
Hermaphroditisme must of necessity have been prepared, to which nature, rather
then to eat it, crude has de^igned it. The use of Marmalade, and its
preparation is so publicly known, that it is unnecessary to repeat it.

It is not enough to enjoy the delight of these fruits for the Summer only:
The Winter too in reason should claim a part of our Summer contentments, which
cannot be better expedited then by ^^ying such f^uits as are capable of a
refaction, and agreeable when dried, the principal whereof are the Vine or
G^ape, the Fig, the Peach, and Abricot.

How to dry Grapes, that they may be kept.
YOur Grapes being at their just ripeness, select the fairest out of your
Vineyard, for such quantity as you shall use, let them lie thin spread while
you prepare a Lie for them, made of fair water and Ashes, proceeding only
from the cuttings of the Vine without any other mixture of wood whatsoever:
sees this lie till you have made a strong and clea^e liquor, then taking or
straining away the Ashes, put the liquor into a clean Caldron, set it again
over the fire till it be ready to sees; then tying the stalks of your Grapes
with thread, and fastening the thread to such sticks and in such order bunch by
bunch, as Chandlers use to dip their Candles, which dip them into this lie
four or five several times: Which done, let them dry in the Sun, either so
hanging on their sticks, o^ which is better upon Lattices or Hurdles of Rods,
or the like, until they be conveniently dry; then barrel them, pressing them
very hard and flat in the Vessel, others dry them upon such Lattices or
Hurdles without steeping them even as they come from the Vine, and peradventure
more successefully.

How to dry ^igges.
LET them (as the Grape) be gathered very ripe; then lay and spread them upon
Hurdles or Lattices of Reeds or Osier joined together, with rifts or vacancies
betwixt the covering of those Osiers, that the air transpiring through those
void spaces may assist the Sun in the drying them; but you must be cautious
that during their exposure to the open air no Rain or Dew incommodate them:
When they are dry barrel with the same poise of pressure used to the Grapes.
Others take a big Reed or Cane of two or three foot in length, boring little
holes all the length of it, through which they put little sticks of two foot
extent, being the small and ^harpe upon which they thread the Figs, till they
are very full of them, and so hang the Cane in the Sun, which dried they
barrel up using the same course as before.

How to dry Peaches and Abricots of all sorts.
When they are very ripe, pare off the upper skin, cleave them into four
quarters, dry them as you did your Figs, barrel them and keep them for the
Winter.

The manner how you shall prepare them to eat is this; provide an earthen pot,
and after you have washed your Peaches in fair water, put them into the pot
with as much Wine as will cover the Peaches, then sees them half a quarter of
an hour. They may be^ made ready without boiling thus; let them infuse three
or fo^re days in Wine, (which way they are much better) put to them beaten
Cynamon, and thus they will last a Month in the Wine, eaten every morning they
are very wholesome, and provoke a good appetite.

The fittest seasons for sowing of seeds.
TO prescribe Rules according to our Climate, to tha^ of VIRGINIA, may have
much of affection, but without all peradventures, little of Wisdom. We must
therefore seek for a nearer correspondence in parallells. Having therefore
seen some letters of an ancient date written by Frenchmen, then employed in
VIRGINIA^ to their Intrusters, wherein they conf^ss^ that of all the Provinces
of FRANCE: None came so near to that noble Country, as LANG^EDOCK and
PROVENC^, two of the Eyes of that Kin^dome, abounding withal the d^lights and
delicacy that ITALY can pretend to, or SPAIN boast of; I could not but
apprehend that their times of sation and insition, of planting and replanting,
might in some measure correspond with that place where the English are now
seated, and having seen a regular di^tribution of the months and seasons in
the year for sowing, grafting^ and other offices belonging to the industrious
Lovers of Agriculture; I should both unsatisfie my own conscience^ and
disoblige that Country, and its Christian Inhabitants^ if I did not publish it
with the same resentment of affection I received it; not that any should be so
pinioned to these Precepts, that neither weather, inconveniency, or want of
opportunity should make him recede from the punctual observation of them: But
I speak it out of a very strong confidence that the observations of the
seasons according to these prescriptions will sort well with VIRGINIA in
general, and the Planters in particular, to whom it is intended, and indeed it
is as exact a Directory as any yet published.

I am not ignorant that Critics will laugh at this; much good do it them, and
why so many Months for the same seed? Why so many Repetitions? My Exceptionist
forgets that we not only covet to have things early, but their continuance:
Will it offend him that we have Artichokes in May? and July both? Because we
may have Cabbage, Lettuse in April, shall we be forbidden to have any in May:
the principal scope of this directer was to show how long such and such seeds
might be continued to be sown, and in what Month and Moon, if he
apprehend it not; I can send him to no Month, but that of June, nor Moon, but
that of Midsommer.

He that will sow seed, must know that, Some may be sown at all times of the
Month and Moon, as, Asparagus, Colewort of all sorts, Spinach, Lettuse,
Parsnips, Reddis^.
Other^ would be sowed in a certain Month and Moon, as there must be sown
in February, the Moon being -- New Spike Garlike Borage Buglo^se Cheruse
Coriander Gourd^ Water cre^ses M^jorane Palma Chri^^i^ Flower gentl^ White
Poppy Pu^stane Radish Rocket Rosemary Sorrel Double Marigold Thyme.
Full Anise Violet^ Blites Skirworts White Succory Fennel Parsley.
Old Holy Thistle Cole Cabbage White Cole Green Col^ Cucumber^ Harts-horn^
Sampier Diers grain Spinach Cabbage-Lettu^^ Melon^ Onion^ Larkes-heel^ Burnet
Le^kes^




So^ in March the Moon being, New Garlic Borage Chervile Coriander Gourds
M^jorane White Poppy Pursl^ine Radish Sorr^ll Double Marigold Th^me Violets.
Full Anise Bleets Skirworts Succory ^^nn^ll Apples of Love Mavelous Apples.
Old Artichoke^ Ba^il Thi^^le^ Bl^ss^d This^le Cole Cab^age White Cole Green
Cole Ci^rons Cu^u^bers Hart^ horn Sa^pire Dier^ grain Spinach Gilly flower^
^y^sop Ca^^age Let^use Melon^ Onyon^ Fl^wer (...) Burnet Leeke^ Savory.



So^ in April the Moon being New Majoran^ Flower ge^^^e Thyme Violet^.
Full Apples of Love Mavelous Appl^s.
Old Artichokes Cabbage Cole Citrons Harts-horn^ Sampire Gilly flowers.



In May in the old of the Moon Blessed Thi^^le^

In June the Moon New Go^rds Radishes.
Old Melons Cucumbers.



In July the Moon ^^ll White ^^cc^ry Old Cabbage Let^u^e.


In August the Moon being Full White S^^^ory^

Herbs growing of seeds that are sown may be transplanted ^t all times,
except Chervils, Arrage, Spinach, and Persely, which are nothing worth when
they are transplanted; ever observed that such transplantation be in a moist,
rainy weather, otherwise they must be very diligently watered.

You may take notice that the choice and age of seeds is double, in choosing
them you are to regard that they be ripe, full, heavy, firm, gross, and of a
good color, not falling to powder through rottenness or bruises.

Some grow bettter of new seeds, as Leeks, Cucumbers.

Others grow better of old seeds, as Coriander, Persley, Savory, Beets,
Origanum, Cre^ses, Spinach, Poppey.

Further observe, that you must preserve from cold, Lettuses, Artichokes,
Basil, Cabbage Cole, Diers grain, Melons, fifteen days after they put forth
from the earth.

Make account that seeds thrive and prosper much better, when they are sown
upon such days as are between the extremes of cold and heat, then in hot,
cold or dry days.

Be pleased to remember, that seeds must be gathered in fair weather, in
the Wane of the Moon.

They must be kept some in Boxes of wood, Dry, and not laid upon the ground,
but kept very clean. Bags of Leather, Dry, and not laid upon the ground, but
kept very clean. Ve^^els of Earth, Dry, and not laid upon the ground, but kept
very clean.
others, as Onions, In their Husk. Chibols, In their Husk. Leek^^ In their
Husk.



To do regularly, w^ should Plant in the last of the Moone^ Gather Grafts in
the last but one of the Moone^ Graft two days after the change of the Moone^




An Explication of the Saw-mill, an Engine, wherewith force of a wheel in the
water, to cut Timber with great speed.
THIS Engine is very common in Norway and Mountains of Sweden, wherewith they
cut great quantity of Deal-bords; which Engine is very necessary to be in a
great Town or Forest, to cut Timber, whether into planks or otherwise. This
here is not altogether like those of Norway: for they make the piece of Timber
approach the Sawes on certain wheels with teeth; but because of reparations
which those toothd wheels are often subject unto, I will omit that use: and in
stead thereof, put two weights, about 2. or 300. pound weight a piece, whereof
one is marked A. the other B. The Cords wherewith the said weights do hang, to
be fastened at the end of the 2. pieces of moving wood, which slide on two other
pieces of fixed wood, by the means of certain small pulleys, which should be
within the house, and so the said weights should always draw the said pieces
of moving wood, which advancing always toward the Sawes rising and falling,
shall quickly be cut into 4. 5. or 6. pieces, as you shall please to put on
Saws, and placed at what distance you will have for the thickness of the
planks or bords ye will cut: and when a piece is cut, then let one with a Lever
turn a Rowler, whereto shall be fastened a strong Co^d which shall bring back
the said piece of wood, and lift again the weights: and after put aside the
piece already cut, to take again the Sawes against another piece of wood.
Which once done, the ingenious Artist may easily convert the same to an
Instrument of threshing wheat, breaking of hemp or flax, and other as
profitable uses.

FINIS.

