monogram of 'W' (William) superimposed on 'M' (Mary) RR

DIEV ET MON DROIT

HONI SOIT QVI MAL Y PENSE

royal blazon or coat of arms
By the King and Queen, A PROCLAMATION, To Explain a Clause in a late
Proclamation [for Encouraging Seamen and Mariners to Enter themselves on Their
Majesty's Service] Dated the One and twentieth Day of December, 1691.
MARIE R.

WHereas in Our said Royal Proclamation there is this following Clause [And We
do hereby further Declare, That no such able Seamen that shall so voluntarily
Enter themselves within the time before mentioned on Board any of Our Ships of
the First and Second Rates, shall be turned over to other Ships] which Clause
as it may be understood, may prove prejudicial to Our Service, and not
according to Our Royal Intentions, for by the purport thereof, such able Seamen
as did Enter themselves on Board of any of Our First and Second Rate Ships as
abovesaid, may claim of right to be Cleared and Paid off, in case by Accident
or Stress of Weather such Ship at her first going out should happen to be
disabled from the Summers Service, or else such Seamen so Entering themselves
will have Pay for no Service, if they may not be turned over to other Ships,
during the time the Ship on which they are Entered is Refitting. Wherefore to
avoid such Inconveniences, and that such able Seamen who Entered themselves, as
aforesaid, may have the benefit of Our Royal Intentions and Encouragement to
them; We do hereby, by the Advice of Our Privy Council, Explain the said
Clause, and Declare by this Our Royal Proclamation, That when any of Our Ships
of the First or Second Rates shall be sent in to be Refitted or Repaired, and
not laid up, the Men belonging to such Ship or Ships, though Volunteers, and
Entered as aforesaid, may be turned over to any other Ship or Ships in Our Royal
Navy, by Directions from the Commissioners for Executing the Office of Lord
High Admiral of England, according as our Service shall require, during such
time only as such Ship or Ships so sent in, as aforesaid, shall be Repairing or
kept in Pay: And We do further Declare, That when such Ship or Ships shall be
Repaired, and sent out to Service again, the same Men, being Volunteers, and
turned over as aforesaid, shall be again returned to their Ship or Ships on
which they Entered themselves Volunteers, unless they desire to continue in the
Ships to which they shall be turned over, that when such Ship or Ships shall be
laid up, and put out of Pay, such Volunteers may be Paid off, and Cleared; In
Order to which, We do hereby strictly Charge and Command Our Commissioners for
Executing the Office of Lord High Admiral of England, not to turn over such
Volunteers into any Ship or Ships, that shall be Employed in any Foreign
Voyages, but into such Ship or Ships that shall be Employed in Our Main Fleet,
or Chanel-Service only.

Given at Our Court at Whitehall the Twenty eighth Day of July, 1692. In the
Fourth Year of Our Reign. God save King William and Queen Mary.
London, Printed by Charles Bill, and the Executrix of Thomas Newcomb deceased;
Printers to the King and Queens most Excellent Majesty's. 1692.


