By the King and Queen, A PROCLAMATION, Requiring the Discovery and Bringing in
of Arms lately Imbezled.
WILLIAM R.

WHereas by the late Disbanding of the Army, and the Disorders that have lately
happened amongst Soldiers deserting their Colors, great quantities of Arms,
Ammunition, Stores and Vtensils of War belonging to Us, have been by the
Soldiers cast away, Panned, Sold, or otherwise Imbezled; And notwithstanding
Our late Proclamation to that Purpose, are not as yet Discovered or brought in
for Our Use, as they ought: We do hereby Require and Command all and every
Person and Persons having any such Arms, Ammunition, Stores, or Vtensils of War
in their Custody, to bring in the same unto the Mayor, Chief Officer of the
Town, or to the next Justice of the Peace of the County where they shall be
found: And for the Encouraging and Rewarding such as shall do their Duty
herein, We do hereby Order and Appoint the Sum of Five shillings for every
Snaphance Musket, for every Match-lock Musket, Two shillings six pence, for
every Carbine Five shillings, for every pair of Pistols five shillings, and for
all other Ammunition, Stores, or Vtensils, the fourth part of the real Value.
And in case any Person or Persons in whose Custody any such Arms are, or shall
be, shall neglect the bringing them in, then the said Reward to be given and
paid to such Person as shall Discover, and cause the same to be Seized to Our
Use; The said Values to be paid by the Mayor, Officer, or Justice of the Peace
respectively to whom the same shall be so brought; And that the Mayor, Officer,
or Justice of the Peace receiving the same, upon the Receipt thereof do give
notice to the Principal Officers of Our Ordnance at Our Lower of London, of
such their Receipt and Payment, who upon such Notice are hereby Required to Pay
the Moneys Disbursed, and Receive the same for Our Use. And We do hereby
further Require Our respective Lords Lieutenants, Deputy Lieutenants, and their
Under Officers of Our Militia, Sheriffs, Justices of the Peace, Mayors and
Chief Officers of, and in the respective Counties, Cities and Towns where any
such Arms shall be, diligently to Enquire, and by all Lawful Ways and Means to
Discover and Seize the same for Our Use, and Arrest and secure, or otherwise
according to Law Proceed against the Persons in whose hands any such Arms shall
be found, as against Persons Imbezling Our Stores or Arms, so that they may be
Tried and Punished for the said Offense, at the next Sessions or Assizes to be
Holden for the County, or Place where such Offense shall be Committed.

Given at Our Court at Hampton Court the First day of April, 1689. In the First
Year of Our Reign. God save the King and Queen.
LONDON, Printed by Charles Bill and Thomas Newcomb, Printers to the King and
Queen's most Excellent Majesty's. 1689.


