monogram of 'W' (William) superimposed on 'M' (Mary) RR

DIEV ET MON DROIT

HONI SOIT QVI MAL Y PENSE

royal blazon or coat of arms
By the King and Queen, A PROCLAMATION, For Recalling and Prohibiting Seamen
from Serving of Foreign Princes and States.
MARIE R.

WHereas We have been Advertised, That great number of Mariners and other
Seafaring Men (being Our Natural-born Subjects) have betaken themselves to the
Service of Foreign Princes and States, in this time of War, when there is
occasion to use Men of their Sort and Calling; We for Redress thereof at
present, and for Preventing the like for the future, by this Our Royal
Proclamation (with the Advice of Our Privy Council) do strictly Charge and
Command all Masters of Ships, Pilots, Mariners, Seamen, and other Seafaring Men
whatsoever, and wheresoever (bring Our Natural born Subjects) who are in
Service of any Foreign Prince or State, or do Serve in any Foreign Ships or
Vessel, That forthwith they and every of them do withdraw themselves, and
depart from such Foreign Services, and return home to their Native Countries.
And further, We do hereby strictly Prohibit and Forbid all Masters of Ships,
Mariners, Seamen, and other Seafaring Men whatsoever (being Our Natural born
Subjects) from Entering themselves, and do hereby strictly Charge and Command
them and every of them front henceforth to forbear to Enter themselves into
Pay, or otherwise betake themselves to the Service of any Foreign Princes or
States, or to Serve in any Foreign Ship or Vessel, without Our Special License
first Had and Obtained in that behalf; to all which We expect due Obedience,
and exact Conformity. And We do hereby Publish and Declare, That the Offenders
to the contrary shall not only incur Our just Displeasure, but be proceeded
against for their Contempt according to the utmost Severities of Law. And
further, We do hereby Authorize and Command all Our Officers and Ministers in
Our respective Ports, and all Captains, Masters, and other Officers Serving or
Employed in any of Our Ships or Vessels at Sea, to Stop and make Stay of all
such Person and Persons as shall endeavor to Transport or Enter themselves
into the Service any Foreign Prince or State, contrary to the true intent and
meaning of this Our Royal Proclamation; and also to seize upon, take, and bring
away all such Mariners, Seamen, and other Persons aforesaid, as shall at any
time after the First day of February next be found to be Employed, or Serving
in any Ships or Vessels belonging to any Foreign Prince or State, or to any
Merchant, or other Person or Persons, being Subjects of any Foreign Prince or
State. And We do hereby further Declare, That in case any Mariner, Seamen, or
other Persons aforesaid, Serving in any Ships or Vessels belonging to any
Foreign Prince or State, or to any Merchants, or other Persons, being Subjects
of any other Prince or State, shall at any time after the said First day of
February next be taken in such Service by any Ships of War belonging to the
Governments of Algiers, Tunis or Tripoli, they shall be left to remain in
Slavery according to the Treaties and Capitulations between Us and the said
Governments in that behalf, and are not to expect to be demanded by Us.

Given at Our Court at Whitehall, the Tenth Day of October, 1692. In the Fourth
Year of Our Reign. God save King William and Queen Mary.
London, Printed by Charles Bill, and the Executrix of Thomas Newcomb deceased;
Printers to the King and Queens most Excellent Majesty's. 1692.


