Dr WILLIAMS's FIFTH SERMON AT Mr. BOYLE'S Lecture, 1695.

IMPRIMATUR,

Guil. Lancaster.
May 1. 1695.
The Divine Authority of the Scriptures. A SERMON Preached at St. Martin's in
the Fields, May 4. 1695. BEING THE Fifth of the LECTURE For this present YEAR,
Founded by the Honorable ROBERT BOIL, Esquire.

By JOHN WILLIAMS, D. D. Chaplain in Ordinary to His Majesty.

LONDON: Printed for Ri. Chiswell, and Tho. Cockerill, Senr and Junr: At the
Rose and Crown in St. Paul's Churchyard; and at the Three Legs in the
Poultrey. MDCXCV.

HEB. I. 1, 2. God who at sundry times, and in diverse manners spoke in time
past unto the Fathers by the Prophets, has in these last days spoken unto us
by his Son, etc.
IN these words, there is contained (as I have before showed)

1. A description of Revelation, it is God's speaking.

2. The Certainty of it, it is by way of declaration, God who at sundry times,
etc. It Is taken for granted.

3. The Order observed in delivering this Revelation, it was at sundry times,
and in diverse manners, etc.

4. The Perfection and Conclusion of all, it is in these last days by his Son.

Under the Second I have showed,

1. That God has actually revealed his Will at sundry times, and in diverse
manners.

2. What are the Characters of true Revelation.

3. I am now in order to prove that the Scriptures of the Old and New Testament
do contain the Matter of Divine Revelation, and have upon them the Characters
belonging to it.

In which there are two things to be considered.

1. The Matter contained in Scripture.

2. The Books containing that Matter.

Which two will admit of a distinct Consideration. For,

(1.) These two, the Matter and the Books, were originally distinct; for the
Matter was revealed before it was written, and would have been of the same
Authority, if unwritten, as written. The writing not being essential to the
Authority, but only made use of as a fit means for the conveyance and
preservation of the Matter.

(2.) These two are capable of a different proof: For the matter of Scripture
was confirmed by Miracles, and had a Divine Attestation given to it: But we
don't find the like Testimony given to the Books. There were Miracles upon
Miracles, to confirm the truth, suppose, contained in the Four Evangelists; but
none to prove those Four Gospels to be wrote by Persons inspired, or that these
were the Books wrote by them. For that has another sort of Evidence, to be
hereafter inquired into.

2. It Is fit these two should be considered apart. For,

(1.) If we were to discourse with a professed Infidel, we must begin with the
Truth of the Matter, and then proceed to the Authority of the Books: And we may
make Converts (as the Apostles and others in those primitive times did) from
the proof we are able to make of the Truth and Authority of our Religion,
though at the present we have not the Books.

(2.) It Is of no little advantage. For by handling the Matter apart from the
Books, we need not for the present concern our selves in the Doubts and
Objections about the Books; such as the supposed Inconsistencies in Scripture;
the various Readings; the uncertainty of the Authors; the Subject of
Inspiration, whether words as well as matter, etc.

These being laid aside for the present, by this distinct consideration of the
Matter and the Books, will shorten our Work; and if we prove the matter to be
of Divine original, we also gain a great point toward the proof of the Books
themselves.

I am to begin with the Matter contained in Scripture.

Now that is of a diverse nature, and therefore according to the nature of it,
so is its Authority. For there is matter of Fact, and Historical Relations of
things; and when we say these are of Divine Authority, we thereby mean they
were recorded and committed to writing by the Appointment, Direction or Command
of God. Again, there are Matters of a moral nature, which might be found out
by, and are the Dictates of pure Reason; and when we say these are of Divine
Authority, we thereby understand that they are authorized by the Divine
Command, as well as in their own nature obligatory. In which cases holy men of
God spoke, and wrote, as they were moved, incited, by the Holy Ghost, 2 Pet. 1.
21.

But the more especial way was when the Matter was purely of Divine Revelation,
and wholly proceeding from it; and though this were not to be learned, and
found out by Reason (as has been before showed) yet it is agreeable to it; as I
shall now proceed to prove; and that I shall do in this order.

1. I shall consider, The Claim which the Matter of Scripture has to
Revelation and Inspiration.

2. The Characters upon which that Claim is grounded.

3. The Proof by which that Claim to Revelation is made good.

1. I shall consider the Claim, etc. And that is, if the Matter contained in
the Scripture be not a Revelation from God, and the True Revelation, then there
neither is, nor ever was, nor can be such a Revelation.

1. If That be not a Divine Revelation, there is no Revelation; for as That
denies and rejects all Revelation besides it self, so there is none other that
can produce such Evidence for it: And consequently, if notwithstanding the
Evidence producible for Scripture, That is not to be admitted for Divine, then
there is no Revelation existent in the World, since no other has the Evidence
which That appears to have. This we may leave to any indifferent person to
judge of, by comparing the Alcoran with the Bible; and the Chinese Divinity of
a Confutius, with that of Christianity.

2. If this be not a Revelation from God* then there never has been such a
Revelation; and that for the Reason before given, viz. That there is no other
Revelation extant save this. But if there ever had been a Revelation, and a
Revelation designed for all Mankind (as that of the Gospel apparently is), what
was once, would always and for ever afterward have been existent; since the
same reason there was once for a Revelation to Mankind, the same would have
been for the Continuance of it; and the same Divine Goodness that took care
there should be a Revelation, would certainly have taken the like care for the
preserving of it. But if there be no Revelation, (as there is not, if the
Scripture be not that Revelation) then there never was a Revelation; and so all
that has been before said upon this Argument, about the Existence, Usefulness,
and Necessity of a Revelation, must go for nothing.

3. If the Scripture be not of Divine Revelation, then there never can be a
Revelation, or at least, such a Revelation as shall oblige us to receive and
believe it: Since there can be no stronger Evidence produced for the Proof of
it, than there is for that of Scripture. And therefore he that will* pretend
not to believe the Scripture-Revelation for want of sufficient Evidence, can
never be convinced of the Truth of any Revelation. For what better Evidence can
be given, as to the Matter, the Persons Inspired, the Supernatural Proofs of
Miracles and Prophecy, etc. than what we have for the Scripture?

Admit then that there is, or ever was, or may be a Divine Revelation, we may
be certain that the Matter contained in Scripture is of that nature.

But though this must be allowed to be a good step toward the Proof of the
Divine Authority of Scripture; yet it remains to consider what that Evidence is
which is thus peculiar to Scripture-Revelation, and that none besides ever have
or can have: And this is the Subject of the Second General:

Which is to consider,

2. The Characters belonging to Revelation, upon which that Claim is grounded.

That Revelation may be distinguished from Imposture and mere Pretense, there
must be proper Characters that are essential to Revelation; without which Marks
of distinction, we must do by it as few have done, and totally reject it; or
else as the Romans did by the Deities of other Countries, that admitted all
into their Calendar, we must refuse none. But since there has been a Revelation
(as all Mankind have been inclined to believe), and several Pretenses to it (as
the experience of all Ages has showed), we must follow the direction of
Scripture, 2 Pet. 2. 21.
which not only warns us of false Prophets, 1 John 4. 1, etc.
and exhorts us to try the Spirits; but does also furnish us with such
Characters, as will enable us to distinguish the true from the false.

And this direction, methinks, may pass for one Character, according to that of
our Savior, Joh. 3. 20, 21. Every one that does evil, or speaks falsely,
hates the light, lest his deeds should be reproved, and his Pretenses
discovered. But he that does and speaks truth, comes to the light, that his
deeds may be made manifest, that they are wrought in God; or that what he
says, may appear to be a Revelation from him.

Now when the Revelation so called does thus offer it self to an impartial
trial, and exhorts and requires all persons to examine and make enquiry, and
lays down such Rules, Principles, and Characters, as in the opinion of all men
are sufficient to distinguish the true from the false, it is an undoubted sign
that it is able to justify it self, and to make out its Claim to a Divine
Authority, by a correspondence to those Characters.

By this the Scripture is distinguished from all others; for though there were
several among the Heathen Lawgivers that pretended to derive their Laws from
the direction of their gods, yet it was rather to prevent Enquiry, than
encourage it; and to oblige the people to an absolute submission: For who might
dispute that which the gods commanded? Or who durst so much as enquire, Justin.
Hist. l. 3.
where the Fear of Religion restrained them?

But to expose it self to a trial, and to require that men examine before they
receive and believe, and to give them such signs as shall serve to describe the
Truth, and detect Imposture, is peculiar to the Scripture. From thence
therefore it is that I shall produce such Characters as will give that a Title
to Divine Authority, and oblige us to a belief of it. And what are such, if
these are not? viz. That it could come only from God, is worthy of him, and has
a Divine and Supernatural Evidence to attest it. Where these are, there is a
Divine Authority, there is a Revelation. And these I shall show do belong to
what the Scripture proposes as such.

1. It is a Character belonging to Revelation, and a sign of the Truth of it,
when it apparently has God for the Author, and can proceed from none but him.
This is a Character, I presume, will upon examination be found to belong to
Scripture.

As I shall now attempt to prove, by considering that which is the chief
subject of it; and that is the Revelation of God's Will to Mankind.

Here I shall premise and take for granted,

1. That God having created Man, created him in a state of Innocence and
Purity; for being infinitely Good, it is not to be conceived that he made any
thing evil in it self.

2. That Man fell from this happy state; of innocent he became guilty; of a
pure, he became a depraved creature, as the experience of all Ages shows him
now to be.

3. That Almighty God was disposed to pardon and admit him again to favor.

Upon this state of things the Scripture proceeds: And because it was
impossible for Man to find out of himself the way and means by which he might
be restored, there needed a Revelation to inform him in it.

I grant there is a Natural Means, and what the reason of the thing supposes to
be necessary to our Reconciliation, and that is Repentance.

But that this is of it self a Means sufficient, and upon which alone God will
be reconciled to the Offenders, has been always doubted of; as is evident from
the several ways of Atonement, and especially of Sacrifices, practiced in all
parts of the world. For since God is the Governor of the world, it seems no
more reconcilable with his Justice, and consistent with that Authority he is to
maintain, to pardon all Offenders upon Repentance, than it is consistent with
the ends of Government among men, to accept of the Offenders Penitence as a
full Satisfaction to the Law, and to remit the Penalty threatened.

We have an Instance to the contrary, in this very case; when notwithstanding a
supposed Repentance in Mankind, God inflicted the Penalty threatened, In the day
thou eatest thereof, thou shall dye. Now therefore, since the natural Means of
propitiating Almighty God was not sufficient, there is somewhat further in
reserve; and what that is, none could tell, but he who had it in his own power
what to accept, and what to refuse; it was for him to reveal, that was to
institute.

And if we take a view of the Scheme of what the Scripture sets before us as to
this matter, it will abundantly confirm what I have proposed as a Character of
Revelation, and that is, That it is from God, and only from him.

The Sum of which is, That since Mankind had thus lapsed into a Preternatural
State, in which through the Infirmity and Corruption of their Nature, they
themselves neither were, nor could do what was acceptable to God in order to a
Restitution and Reconciliation, it was designed that the Son of God himself
should become a Mediator by a present Stipulation, and in a prefixed time, by
an actual Undertaking to dye for us. That accordingly, in testimony of God's
acceptance of the Atonement, and of his Reconciliation, the Son rose from the
dead, and ascended into Heaven, is there our Intercessor, and the Dispenser of
all those Gifts, and that supervenient Grace which is necessary to the
reforming Mankind, and the fitting them for that state he is now invested in,
and has promised to bestow upon such as are qualified for it.

Now who is there, that upon a Review of these several Particulars that do
constitute the Christian Religion, and make up the chief Subject of Scriptural
Revelation, can pretend that this was to be found out by Human Consideration
and Enquiry; or rather, that must not grant it proceeded from God? Especially
if it be observed what a wonderful Intermixture there is in this Scheme, of the
Divine Mercy and Justice; of his Mercy in pardoning the Sinner, and of his
Justice in requiring an Atonement. What a representation of his Hatred to Sin
on one hand, when God established so valuable an Atonement as the Blood of his
own Son; and of his Favor and Love to Mankind, when he spared not his own Son,
but delivered him up for us all? What a foundation for our Hope on one hand,
when he accepted of the Propitiation; and what a dread of offending is there on
the other, when he that knew no sin, was made a sin offering for us?

All which laid together, do confirm the Truth of this Character, and the Title
that the Scripture-Revelation has to it.

But there is somewhat further to be added in Proof of this Point. That it was
a Revelation from God; and that is, The many Prophecies that are interwoven
with it in Scripture; which could proceed from none but Him who alone has all
Causes and Events in his Power, and so alone could foretell how those Causes
would operate, and what should be the Events of such Operation. These being the
chief part of the Revelation concerning the whole Scheme of Man's Salvation,
confirm what I have before said, That it was from God, and from Him alone. But
this must be reserved to its proper place, under the Third General Head.

To go on,

II. A Character necessarily belonging to Divine Revelation, is, That it be
worthy of God, and what becomes the Majesty of Heaven to make known to Mankind.

When we say it is to be worthy of him, thereby is meant, that it is suitable
to the Perfections of his Nature, to his Holiness and Justice, his Goodness and
Mercy, his Wisdom and Power, etc. To which, and all of which, a Revelation
truly so, can no more be repugnant, than God himself can be other than he is,
and destitute of those Perfections which are essential to him.

In discoursing upon which, we may observe,

1. That it cannot be denied, but the Revelation of himself to Mankind is
worthy of God, though it be an Infinite Condescension.

It was an Infinite Condescension in the Deity, that had all in himself, to
make such a Creature as Man; and it is no more unworthy of God to reveal
himself to him, than it was to make him. For what other reason* was there for
the making such a Creature, and the enduing him with the Light of Reason, but
that he might own, honor, and serve the Author of his Being? And since to know
and acknowledge God, is the chief end for which Man was made, it is as much
becoming Almighty God to reveal himself to him, as it was to make him for the
knowledge of himself.

2. That is a thing worthy of God to reveal, which is a thing worthy of God to
do: And such is the Recovery and Restoration of Man to the like condition he
was created in, and unhappily fell from; for that is a kind of Re-making him,
and giving him a New Being: And since a New Being is to a Depraved Being, what
Being was to No Being, it is as much becoming Almighty God from a depraved
state to raise him to a state of Purity and Holiness, as it was at the first to
give Him a Being that before had none.

And this is the great Subject of what we call Divine Revelation; which as it
respects Man, may come under a Twofold Consideration; and that is, the
Perfection of Human Nature, and the Happiness of Mankind.

It will be a needless undertaking, to prove that these Ends are worthy of God;
but that which rather becomes us is to show, That as it is the great design of
the Scriptural Revelation to represent this, and to acquaint us with the Method
that the Almighty Wisdom and Goodness thought fit to observe; so the Method as
there laid down, is worthy of such Wisdom and Goodness, as I shall now proceed
to show in the two Instances given.

1st. The Method Almighty God is in Scripture said to take for the purifying
and the perfecting Human Nature, is highly worthy of so glorious a Being; and
that is Threefold, Cautionary, Moral, and Supernatural.

(1.) That which I call Cautionary, is the way Almighty God was pleased to take
for the representing his Displeasure against Sin, and to make Mankind cautious
of offending. The Means made use of before the Fall was a Penalty threatened, In
the day thou eatest thereof thou shall dye. But because that had proved of so
little force to restrain mankind, and for fear lest when God had received them
into Favor after such a Threatening, his Mercy and Indulgence might be abused,
and become an Encouragement to Sin, God added thereunto an Expiation (as has
been before said), and that to be made by his own Son; who from the Dignity of
his Person, and the voluntary Oblation of himself, should be reputed as a
Representative of the whole, and the whole be esteemed to suffer with him. By
which means, as God's Mercy would be abundantly testified in a design for
redeeming them; so his Justice would be exemplified, when he that had no sin of
his own, should yet be made a Sin-offering, and suffer for them. For how could
they presume after this to offend the Almighty Father, when rather than suffer
his Laws to be violated, his Authority slighted, his Holiness and Justice
disparaged, or leave Mankind under a temptation so to do, he would express his
hatred against sin, and his resolution to punish it, by requiring and
substituting such a Sacrifice as that of his Son in their stead? This is the
apparent Reason of such an Institution; and both the Institution and Reason of
it are worthy of the Divine Counsel; since there is no way in which these
things can be represented to greater advantage, than by the Scripture-Scheme of
Man's Redemption.

(2.) There is the Moral Means, that serves the same end, viz. the purifying
and perfecting Human Nature, to which Revelation gave the last and finishing
hand. It is true, these Moral Principles are no other than Natural Maxims, and
which were Nature, unassisted, sufficient for, might have been extracted out of
it. But Mankind were no more able to attain to that skill of themselves, than
an unexperienced person, and unacquainted with the Art of Chemistry, can
extract such Exalted and Generous Spirits out of the Bodies of Plants and
Animals, as upon trial we find they are endued with. It is another Light we
view Nature by since the communicating of the Evangelical Revelation to the
world. Nature and Reason now, are not the Nature and the Reason they were
before, or are still where that Revelation has not been known: And therefore if
we would know what the force of those Principles are, and how far they operated
by their own power, and of themselves, the way is not to judge of it as it
appears to us, where the Gospel-Revelation is, but as it was in the state of
pure Heathenism, not excepting the finer part of it (as it flourished in Greece
it self) and as it is now in some of the remote parts of the world, as in the
West Indies, etc. For Gentilism it self apparently mended upon the Publication
of the Gospel; and then their Moralists wrote with another strein, than those
of their own Sect did before that time.

For in the Scripture there is such an entire and complete System of all things
requisite to the perfection of Human Nature (as far as in this state it is
capable of it) that nothing is wanting for direction and obligation.

There we find the most Natural Characters of Good and Evil traced along from
the first rise in all their tendencies, and the just bounds of both described.
There we have on one hand the most enforcing Encouragements to Virtue and
Goodness, and on the other the most necessary Cautions and Admonitions against
Sin; and both fortified with proper Instances and Examples.

There we find the noblest Principles, and exactest Rules; and the great Lines
of our Duty plainly set forth in their utmost extent; and that as well for the
Regulation of the Thoughts and Desires, as the Government of our Actions.

There we find that Duty enforced by the highest Obligation, by no less
Authority than that of God himself, whose Precepts and Injunctions they are
declared to be, and not the mere results of our own Nature and Reason.

And whereas Nature falls as short in its Sanctions (having only Conscience to
enforce them) as its Authority; when these Moral Principles become God's Laws,
they have Rewards and Punishments of another kind annexed to them, and as
everlasting as our Souls, to bind them upon us.

So that as far as Nature thus directed and excited can go, we have the most
effectual means in our power for the amendment and purification of it.

But because it is only so far in our own power, and that in the issue we prove
too remiss in the exerting of it; and that after all, Nature flags and recoils,
and is too much Nature still. Therefore,

(3.) There is a Supernatural Means to render the other effectual, and to give
encouragement and success to our endeavors; and that is a Power as Divine as
the Authority, which is the assistance of the Holy Spirit of God. Look we upon
the Morality of the greatest Philosophers, how poor is that to the Doctrine of
our Savior and the Apostles? Look we upon the fruits of it, and there we shall
find them short of their Principles; and that the case was much with them as
with the Stoical Posidonius, that would not allow Passions in Human Nature;
that when invaded by the Gout, might chide both that and himself for his
sensation of it; but the Disease and Nature, kept on their course, and would
own no such Authority. So it was with them that had only Nature to correct
Nature; that while they pretended to be the Physicians of it, could not cure
themselves, nor alter so much as Custom, which had altered that.

The Instances they give of a Philosophical Cure, are as rare as the Miracles
they pretend to have been wrought in the Temple of Aesculapius, or by a
Vespasian, few and questionable; a Phoedon, or a Polemon, to credit the Schools
of a Socrates or a Xenocrates. But the Instances of such as were converted by
our Savior and Apostolical Persons, were like his Miracles, numberless, and
not to be disputed. When the Gospel flew like Lightning through the earth, and
became as successful in reforming, as teaching the world; Nature by it was
changed, and the Temper became subject to the Divine Power. So that the
Doctrine of Christ did turn those that were immersed in wickedness, Contr.
Cells. l. 1, and 2.
to a life agreeable to Reason, and the practice of all Virtue; as Origin
shows, and appeals to his Adversary in.

And what was then done, would always be done, if there were not some
obstruction on our part, either as to asking that Assistance, or in the not
improving it; according to that of our Savior, Matthew. 13. 12* Whosoever has
and uses it, to him shall be given, and he shall have more abundance.

2dly. It is worthy of God, and becoming the most Benevolent as well as the
most powerful of Beings, to consult what may be for the happiness of the
reasonable Nature, and to propound this as an encouragement to them in the
Performance of that Service he expects and requires of them.

And what can make them happy, if the Order and Method of Salvation revealed in
Scripture be not sufficient for it? Whereby they are not only assured of the
Protection and Blessing of Divine Providence in this Life, but also of a State
of Immortality in the Life to come: Where they shall be taken into the
Enjoyment of their Ever-blessed Creator; and be fitted both in Body and Soul,
by the Divine Power, for such a Participation.

To which I may add, That it is as worthy of God to reveal the Way by which
that Happiness is to be attained. I grant that by the use and power of Reason,
and the sense we have of the difference between Good and Evil, we may learn,
though obscurely and very imperfectly, what is acceptable to God: But yet
without Revelation we are much in the dark, and can as little know what is on
our part necessary toward the attainment of that Happiness, as we do what the
Condition of the Future State is, and wherein the Happiness of it consists.

There is as much difference between what is only supposed, and what is
necessary, as there is between what we hope for, and what is certain. And
therefore, as there needs a Revelation to assure us of that which without
Revelation we only hoped for; so there is as much need of Revelation to inform
us of what is necessary to our Acceptance with God, and to our Happiness in
another world; and without which we are left to Conjecture only. So that as far
as Certainty is to be preferred beyond Hope and Imagination; and the Knowledge
of what is necessary, is beyond Conjecture; so much is the Comfort of
Revelation beyond that of Nature; and so much is it becoming Almighty God, who
gave us our Nature and Being, to acquaint us with what may both make us happy,
and lead us to it. Especially was this necessary, considering how far the World
had wandered out of the right way; and what superstitious and infamous Rites had
been taken up; and what Practices dishonorable to the Deity and Human Nature,
had been used. And this way to Happiness the Scripture has plainly revealed.

3dly. It is a Design worthy of God, to reveal Himself to the World, and to
give Mankind a right Notion and Representation of his Nature. The Being of God,
is what the whole Creation proclaims; and there are some Attributes of his lie
open to all, and are conspicuous in their effects, such are his Wisdom and
Power. But there are others that we rather know by Inference, and need a
farther and brighter Light to inform us in; and such are his Goodness and his
Mercy. And since these are as essential Perfections of the Deity as the other,
and exceed them in the influence they have upon mankind, as to our Love and
Adoration of him; and yet are not so legible in the Frame of Nature, nor so
observable in the Course of his Providence as the other; we cannot conceive but
that it is as becoming our Creator to represent himself to be a God Gracious
and Merciful in a Revelation to Mankind, as to be a God Great, Powerful, and
Wise in the Creation. We see how confused the Gentile World was in their Notion
of the Supreme Power; how inconsistently they thought, and how low their
Representations were of the Deity: And at best they had a very imperfect Notion
of those Divine Attributes of Love and Goodness, of Pity and Compassion, of
Indulgence and Condescension, of Patience and Forbearance, of Mercy and
Forgiveness, which the Scripture represents with Life and Perspicuity

There it is that we find the Almighty Creator stooping to the Creature,
condescending to their Condition, bearing with their Infirmities, pitying their
Miseries, forgiving their Sins. There we find him reproving, arguing, following
Sinners with importunity, and leaving nothing undone, that was consistent with
his Nature and Honor to do, toward the Salvation of Mankind. And above all, In
this was manifested the love of God toward us, because that God sent his only
begotten Son into the world, that we might live through him, 1 John 4. 9.

So that if to reveal what was not otherwise to be known, concerning God's
Reconciliation to Mankind, and the Terms upon which he is reconciled; if to
restore Man to the state he is fallen from, and to promote him to a state of
Purity, Perfection, and Happiness; if for God to reveal and to render himself
acceptable to mankind by the most obliging Characters of Love and Favor, be
worthy of him; lastly, If to reveal what is most worthy of God, be a Character
of Revelation, Then the Scripture is such, and what is therein contained must
be from God.

III. A Character necessarily belonging to Revelation, and by which the True is
to be distinguished from the False and Pretended, is a Divine and Supernatural
Evidence; which is the same with the Third General Head, viz. The Proof by
which the Scripture's Claim to Divine Revelation is to be made good; and that
is next to be considered.

Now there are Three Instances of this kind, viz. Prophecy, Miracles, and the
wonderful Success of the Christian Religion, and the Preservation of it under
the most Potent Opposition, and greatest Discouragements.

(1.) Prophecy. That is of it self a Revelation; Cic. de Divin. l. 1.
and as it is what all Nations, as well Learned as Barbarous, have
acknowledged; so being an Instance of Revelation, it is a good Proof of that
Revelation which it does accompany, and is interwoven with. And this is the
case before us; for the Scripture being composed of matters of a different
kind, cannot have the same sort of Evidence: But Prophecy being self-evident
(when the Event has apparently answered the Prediction) and a Supernatural
Evidence, is a good Proof to what has no such Evidence; and which for the sake
of that Proof is as much a Matter of Faith, and as credible, as the Prophecy it
self; because such a Testimony being a Testimony from God, cannot be applied to
the support of a Falsehood. So that where there is Prophecy truly so, we may
conclude that to be true, and to come from God, to which that Testimony is
given; for if the Testimony be Divine, the Doctrine confirmed by it must be
Divine also.

In discoursing upon which, I premise,

1. That there is such a thing as Prophecy; that things future have been
predicted: Tully says, This all Nations have agreed in; as has been aforesaid.

2. That Prophecy is a good Testimony to what it is given (as I have proved
already).

So that there is nothing remains, but to show that the Revelation in Scripture
has had this Testimony.

And of this there are two sorts, Near, or Remote. Of both which we have an
Instance in the Prophet sent to Jeroboam, 1 Kings 13. 2.

The Remote was, That a Child should be born, Josiah by name, about 330 years
after, who should burn men's bones upon that Altar. The Proximate (which we may
otherwise call a Sign) was, That at that time the altar should be rent, and the
ashes poured out. If the Remote had been alone, it would have had little
influence upon them who were most nearly concerned; and therefore there needed
some present Sign to verify it. But otherwise, the Remote is the stronger,
especially when at such a vast distance of time, as shall render it impossible
for Men or Angels to foresee, or by any practices of theirs to accomplish; when
it depends upon Voluntary as Natural Agents, and is in the conclusion answered
by a Parallel Event, it is to After-Ages a certain and indisputable Evidence.

To which if we add the Concurrence of both, when there is a Chain and Series
of Prophecies near and remote, in a certain and continued order following each
other, the first looking forward to others that are to succeed, and the latter
having a retrospect to the former; there is no reasonable nor possible
exception to be made against the matter thus testified, without excepting
against the Testimony of Prophecy, contrary to the sense of all mankind.

As for Instance; if there be a Prophecy or Prophecies in several Ages, from
which it plainly appears, that at such a precise time, in such an Age of the
world, some Hundreds or Thousands of Years after, there should arise a certain
Person, born at such a place, and in an extraordinary way, and descended from
such and such Progenitors, who should come to reform Mankind; and in
confirmation of his Doctrine, should perform many astonishing Acts, and do many
supernatural Works; that at a certain time, and in a certain determined year,
he should be put to death by his own Nation, and upon it that Nation should be
captivated and destroyed, and the Country desolate; it is a Testimony not to
be disproved.

And yet setting aside the many Prophecies in Scripture relating to particular
Persons and Families, to the Jews and other Nations, I shall only instance in
some of those concerning our Savior; and others of our Savior's himself: The
former of which will appear to be exactly parallel to the Case proposed.

The first of these is the Prediction immediately after the Fall of Adam, and
4000 years before the actual Completion of it; That there should be one born of
the seed of the woman, Genesis 2. 14.
and supernaturally made of her alone (as Adam was out of the Earth without a
Woman) that should bruise the serpent's head, Gal. 4. 4.
who had beguiled Eve through his subtilty.

About 2000 years after which Prophecy, and so 2000 years before our Savior,
it was revealed to Abraham, Gal. 3. 16.
That in his Seed, and by one who should descend from him, Genesis 12, 3, etc.
all the families of the earth should be blessed; and which was afterward
renewed to Isaac and Jacob.

Again; about 1700 years before Christ, it was prophesied by Jacob, That
Shiloh, or the Messiah, Gen 49. 8.
should descend from his Son Judah.

About 1000 years before our Savior's Birth, David was exalted to the Throne,
of whose Family the Messiah was to be a Branch; whence it was that he was
commonly known among the Jews, Matthew. 22. 42.
by the Character of David's Son.

In the same Royal Prophet have we the Prediction of our Savior's Death,
Resurrection, and Glorification; and in very minute Circumstances, as to the
first of these, Vid. Psalm. 16. 10. 22. 1, 7, 8, 14, 16, 18. 110, etc.

This is also the great Theme of Isaiah's Prophecy, 700 years before the
Accomplishment, That there should be a root out of Jesse, the Messiah, who
should dye for the Sins of the People, be rejected by his own Nation, but be
believed in by the Gentiles. Isa. 11. 10. 42. 10, etc. 53.

In the same Age lived Micah, who foretells the very Place he should be born
in, Mic. 5. 2.
viz. Bethlehem-Ephrata.

Lastly; About 500 years before our Lord's Incarnation, Daniel directly points
to the Time and the Year the Messiah should suffer in, Dan. 9. 24, etc.
which was to be in the midst of the Seventieth Prophetical Week, Lev. 25. 8.
(each of which consists of Seven Years) that is, the 490th. Year, from the
Decree of Artaxerxes for the Rebuilding of Jerusalem. As may easily be computed
by Ptolomy's Canon, and reckoning the Years backward from the Death of our
Savior, (which was in the Reign of Tiberius) to some fixed year of Artaxerxes.

In consequence of which, the City and Sanctuary were to be destroyed, and the
whole Country laid desolate, as with a Flood.

This Conclusion leads us on to the Second Branch of Prophetical Observations,
viz. our Savior's own Predictions, which are very many; but a most remarkable
one is his Prophecy of the Destruction of that People, City, and Country,
foretold by Daniel as to the very time; and which our Savior describes so
particularly, as if he had it at that instant before his eyes, when he
discoursed of it to his Disciples.

There he foretells, * The preceding Signs, as Famines, and fearful Sights,
etc. * that many False Prophets should arise. * That there should be barbarous
Slaughters one of another. * That Jerusalem should be closely besieged; but
withal, that at that time there should be an opportunity for escaping; which he
advises them to take, and to fly to the Mountains for present security. * That
the Enemy should at last cast a Trench about it, and keep them that remained in
on every side. * That he should finally take the City, and lay it even with the
ground; and that not one stone of the stately Structure, the Temple, (which
they then were admiring) should be left upon another. * That the surviving Jews
should be led Captive into all Nations, and never return again to that Land as
Proprietors. * And that all this was because they knew not the time of their
visitation. * And that this should happen in that very Age.

Never was any Prophecy more express, never any Sentence more terrible, nor
more punctually fulfilled, as to all the Particulars before-recited; and for
which we may appeal to Josephus the Jew, who was an Eyewitness of all, and as
exactly describes it as to those Instances, as if he was writing a Comment upon
our Savior's Prophecy* Joseph. de Bell. l. 4, 5, 6, 7.

And accordingly, as the Temple, though attempted by Julian the Apostate's
Order, never could be built, (as the Heathen Historian Ammianus Marcellinus
relates, Hist. l. 23.) so that People to this day remain Vagabonds, without any
certain place, dispersed over the world.

Having traced this Subject thus far, we may proceed.

2. Another way by which we prove the Claim that the Matter of Scripture has
to a Divine Authority, is Miracles; of which kind there is nothing wanting that
can reasonably be desired; and that either as to the Judaical, or Christian
Dispensation.

As for Instance: If a Person should pretend that he comes from God with a
Revelation, and which he requires us to hearken to, on peril of Damnation: What
Satisfaction should we desire?

Surely if the Doctrine he teaches be in it self credible, and worthy of God,
and what in the nature and tendency of it proves to be useful and beneficial to
Mankind, we have as much Evidence as the nature of the thing will bear. And
farther, if the Person upon whom we are to rely, does openly and in the sight
of all, even of Enemies that watch him, as well as Friends, and in the most
Public Assemblies, cure all manner of Diseases, though naturally incurable, by
a Word, or a Touch, and even at a distance. If he commands the Winds and the
Seas, the Good and the Evil Angels, feeds Thousands in a Desert with no more
than what would satisfy a few, and raises the Dead. If he tells the most secret
Thoughts, Inclinations, and Practices of his Enemies as well as Followers.
Lastly, If when himself is put to a violent Death, he in a few days, according
to his own Prediction, rises again, appears to, and converses with those that
knew him when alive, and saw him dead: And afterward in the view of many
ascends bodily into Heaven; and within a few days, as a farther Testimony of
his former Mission and present Glorification, confers the same or like Power
upon his Disciples: Who can reasonably doubt of the Truth of what he has taught?

I need not here draw the Parallel.

And if the Question should be put, as it was by those whom John the Baptist
sent, Art thou he that should come? Our Savior's Answer will serve for one
here, Tell John what things ye have heard and seen, how that the blind see,
etc. Luke 7. 19.

There needs no greater Evidence to convince Mankind.

3. Another Proof of the Divine Authority of the Matter of Scripture, is the
Event and Success, correspondent to former Predictions. Such was that of the
Israelites in Canaan* And much more, the wonderful and astonishing Progress of
the Gospel, without any of that Assistance and Force which that People had, and
when it had the Force of Emperors and Kings to oppose it.

Could it be thought possible, that a few simple and timorous Persons, who had
been bred up to a mean Employment, and had never been out of their own
Country, should each by himself undertake perilous and remote Journeys, among
People they had no knowledge of, and to whose Tempers, Customs, and Language,
they were altogether strangers; and should prevail with them to change their
gods and their Religion, their Customs and their Lives?

Could it be thought that Men of no Authority nor Interest, of no Learning,
Depth of Judgment, nor Subtilty in Arguing, should be able to maintain and
propagate a Doctrine that seemed to be foolish and absurd, a Doctrine of a
Crucified Savior, a Doctrine opposite to the sensual Inclinations and
Interests of Mankind, (as the state of the world then was) a Doctrine that
obliged them that believed it, to profess it with the Hazard of all that was
dear to them in this world, and upon no other Encouragement than a Reward in
another?

And yet even this Doctrine, so meanly attended, became so successful, that
according to our Savior's Prediction, Matthew. 24. 14. before the Destruction of
Jerusalem, and within Forty years after his Death, the sound of it went out
into all the earth, Romans 10. 18. Not to proceed further in this Argument than
Scripture; in those early times we find Converts, if not Churches, in the most
frequented Cities for Trade, Learning, and Dominion; in Corinth and Ephesus,
Athens and Rome; in the Courts of Princes, even of a Herod and a Nero: Acts 13.
3. Phil. 4. 22. And where not?

Now if there had not been Truth in the Doctrine; If it had not been a Doctrine
worthy of God, suitable to the Desires and Expectations of Mankind; If it had
not had a Supernatural Evidence and Testimony, and an Assistance as great as
its Evidence, it could not in those Circumstances have made its own way, nor
have proved in the Event so powerful and successful. No, it was God that chose
the foolish things of the world to confound the wise, and the weak things of
the world to confound the things which were mighty: And it must be a Revelation
from him alone, that had all these Testimonies on its side to confirm it. So
that we may conclude as we began, That if ever there was a Revelation, the
Revelation contained in Scripture is a Revelation, and the only True Revelation
now in the World.

And if so it be, then what an Obligation is there upon us to observe it? When
it is God speaking to us, we ought to give the more earnest heed to the things
we have heard from him, lest at any time we should let them slip, Heb. 2. 1.

FINIS.
ERRATA.
In the License to this Sermon, for May 1. read May 4. P. 10. l. 5. r.
Good Will. P. 12. l. 3. after God put a (;)


