By the King and Queen, A PROCLAMATION For Prohibiting Seamen from Deserting
Their Majesty's Service.
WILLIAM R.

WHereas the King and Queen's most Excellent Majesty's have occasion to Employ
Their Royal Navy for the Honor and Safety of Their Majesty's Realms and
Dominions, in carrying on a War against the French King; And whereas by the
Laws of this Realm, every Mariner, Seaman and Soldier receiving Press-Money to
Serve the King in any of His Ships, and after refusing to Serve, or absenting
himself at the Time and Place appointed unto him for His Service, does incur
Danger and Penalty of Felony, and is to be Punished and Forfeit as a Felon;
Nevertheless His Majesty is Informed, that several Mariners, Seamen and
Soldiers, Pressed for His Service, and having received Press-Money, do neglect
to Repair to, and Desert the said Service, whereby Their Majesty's Ships may be
unfurnished, and Their Service disappointed, to the Dishonor of Their
Majesty's, and Danger of Their People, especially in this Time, when the French
have already Invaded Their Majesty's Dominions, and are Preparing to Deprive
Their Subjects of their Privilege of Trade and other Interests.

Their Majesty's therefore in Their Princely Wisdom, foreseeing the
Inconveniences which may ensue, have thought fit, with the Advice of Their
Privy Council, to Publish Their Majesty's Royal Proclamation, and do hereby
straightly Charge and Command all Mariners, Seamen and Soldiers, who are or shall
hereafter be Pressed for Their Service in any Ships or Vessels belonging to the
said Navy, and have received, or shall receive Press-Money for that purpose,
that they duly repair and come to the Places, and at the Times appointed unto
them, and there continue in the Service unto which they are or shall be
respectively Commanded, upon Pain of Death, and all such other Pains, Penalties
and Forfeitures, as by the Law can be Inflicted or Imposed upon them. And for
the speedy and effectual Prosecution of such Offenders, Their Majesty's have
thought fit, and do intend forthwith to Issue Commissions of Oyer and Terminer,
for their Legal Trial and Punishment according to Justice: And for the better
Execution of this Their Royal Intention, do hereby Charge and Command all and
singular Lieutenants, Deputy Lieutenants, Mayors, Sheriffs, Justices of the
Peace, Bailiffs, Constables, Headboroughs, and other Their Majesty's Officers,
Ministers and Subjects whatsoever within this Realm, with all Care and
Diligence to make Search for, Discover, and Apprehend all and every Person and
Persons offending as aforesaid, and such as shall be Apprehended, forthwith to
Commit, or cause to be Committed to the next Goal of the County, City or Place
where they shall be so Apprehended, there to remain until they shall be duly
Proceeded against, and Delivered by Course of Law. And that the Names of the
Persons so Apprehended and Committed, be forthwith sent to Their Majesty's, or
the Privy Council, that Care may be taken for their speedy Prosecution
accordingly.

Given at Our Palace of Hampton Court the Twenty Ninth day of April, 1689. In
the First Year of Our Reign.
God Save King WILLIAM and Queen MARY.
LONDON, Printed by Charles Bill, and Thomas Newcomb, Printers to the King and
Queen's Most Excellent Majesty's. MDCLXXXIX.


