Imprimatur,

Liber cui Titulus, [ An Answer to the Address presented to the Ministers of
the Church of England.]

Febr. 11. 1687. Guil. Needam, Rmo. in Christo P.ac. D. D. Wilhelmo Archiep.
Cantuar. a Sacr. Domest.

AN ANSWER TO THE ADDRESS Presented to the MINISTERS OF THE CHURCH of ENGLAND.

LONDON: Printed for Ric. Chiswell, at the Rose and Crown in St. Paul's
Churchyard. MDCLXXXVIII.

AN ANSWER TO THE ADDRESS Presented to the Ministers of the Church of ENGLAND.
Address.
An Address Presented to the Reverend and Learned Ministers of the Church of
England, by one sincerely desirous of finding out the Truth, in behalf of
himself and others equally concerned, as well for their own as the general
Satisfaction.

Answer.
It Is a hard Shift the present Writers of the Church of Rome among us, are
brought to, that when other helps fail them, they take up with such a sort of
Arguments, which how useful soever they may prove to make some men of Their
Religion, have a plainer tendency to make others of None.

Certainly were these persons as much concerned for the Truth of Christianity,
as they are for their own Corruptions of it; or could defend those Corruptions
in a better way, they would not put the case upon this extremity; and had they
the Scripture as much for the Church of Rome's Supremacy and Infallibility,
etc. as it is for its own sufficiency, the Trinity and Incarnation of our
Blessed Savior, we should have heard more of their Proofs from Scripture, than
of Requests and Addresses to the Church of England (the great Patron it seems
of these Points) to prove from Scripture the Trinity and Incarnation.

These Articles of the Christian Faith are an Argument worthy of a serious
Consideration, if proposed by one that really needs, as well as he pretends to
desire, Satisfaction. But to have a Member of the Church of Rome (as our Author
apparently is) personating an Arrian and other Heretics, and in the face of
the World requiring Scripture Proof for those abovesaid Points of Catholic
Doctrine: To have this thrust upon us afresh after the unrefuted Answers given
to the First Request, the Catholic Dialogue, and the Plea for a Socinian, is
no good sign, whatever he pretends, of one sincerely desirous of finding out
the Truth; nor would it be worth the while to take up the Cause anew for his
sake, who I am sensible is not to be satisfied in this way, were it not for
some better End it may be useful to.

The Address consists of several Proposals; which thus begin:

Address.
There can be no doubt, but that the main Concern of Man in this Vale of Tears,
is the Salvation of his Soul. If this be lost, he loses all; if this be gained,
he gains all, and both for an Eternity. No body then can blame me, if being
solicitous to save my Soul, I have recourse to those, whose Learning must needs
enable them, and whose Charity cannot but incline them to instruct me in this
weighty Affair. I therefore humbly beseech you, most Reverend and Learned
Doctors of the Church of England, to afford me a clear and satisfactory
Solution of these following Doubts.

First, I desire to know, Whether all things necessary to Salvation are
contained in Scripture? If not, where must I seek them? If they be, then they
are either clearly contained in it, so that there is no need of an Interpreter
for the meaning of the words; or not. If there be no need of any such
Interpreter, then I humbly ask what these Necessaries to Salvation are, and in
what Chapter and Verse of Scripture each of them may be found. For example; Is
the belief of a Trinity, etc.

Answer.
For the clearer understanding of the whole, I shall divide it into several
Questions.

Q. 1. Whether all things necessary to Salvation are contained in Scripture?

A. If there are things necessary to Salvation that are not contained in
Scripture, the World is, for ought I see, at a great loss where to seek them:
For nothing can be necessary to Salvation, which was not necessary in the
Primitive, and will be so to all succeeding Ages. But where to find those
things thus necessary, out of Scripture, that have been of a date and Authority
equal to it, I know none that have attempted the discovery: Nor could we ever
yet be favored with an account of what these Necessaries are, and where each
of them may be found. So that Scripture must contain these Necessary things, or
else we are left without any means of knowing them. And the Scripture must fail
of its end, and we of the Salvation therein revealed, if that be not as
sufficient in its kind to beget Faith in us, as Faith is to save us. For faith
St. John 20.31. These things are written that ye might believe, that Jesus is
the Christ, the Son of God, and that believing ye might have life through his
name. Nay, we are as much assured of this, as we are of its Divine Authority;
for the same Apostle that says, All Scripture is given by Inspiration of God,
does immediately before as positively affirm, that the Scriptures are able to
make us wise unto Salvation, 2 Timothy 3.15, 16.

From which Consideration it was, that all doubts relating to Salvation were
hereby to be resolved; which could not be, were not all things necessary to
Salvation contained in it. So when that Question was put to our Savior,
Master, what shall I do to inherit eternal life? He answered, What is written
in the Law? How read thou? Thou know the Commandments, Luke 10.25, 26.
Mark 10.17, 19. And that they had Moses and the Prophets, was in his estimation
sufficient to dispose them to Repent, without any other Revelation than was
therein contained, Luke 16.29, 30, 31.

Till it can therefore be shown, that the Scripture was not written to make men
wise unto salvation; or that men might be wise to Salvation without knowing the
things necessary to it: Till it can be proved that the Old Testament was not a
Rule of Faith and Manners to the Jews in all points necessary to their
Salvation; Or that both Old and New Testament have not the same end, or not the
same sufficiency to that End now to the Christian, as the Old Testament alone
had to the Jewish Church; we have no reason to think the Scripture defective in
any thing necessary to Salvation, or that there is any other means provided by
God to supply its deficiency therein.

And in this Doctrine we are not alone, but have the concurrence of the most
Authentic Writers of the Christian Church; of which sort in particular is that
memorable saying of St. Austin, De Doctr. Christ. l. 2. c. 9.
All things which concern Faith and Manners of Life, are found in those things
which are plainly contained in Scripture. A Truth that the Writers of the
Church of Rome in their soberer thoughts do often acknowledge. So Antoninus A.
B. of Florence, God, says he, has spoken but once, Sum. Part 3. Tit. 18. c.
3. ff. 3.
and that in the Holy Scripture, and that so fully as to meet with all
temptations, and all cases that may fall out, and all good works; that, as
Gregory expounds it, he needs speak no more to us concerning any Necessary
matter, seeing all things are found in Scripture.

Q. 2. Whether all things necessary to Salvation are clearly contained in
Scripture?

It was, we have seen, the Opinion of St. Austin, that not only all things thus
necessary are contained in Scripture, but also that they are plainly therein
contained. And yet neither that Father nor any of the same mind with him (as
who was not then, and who is not now, except the Church of Rome?) did ever
thereby understand that all these Necessaries are expressly contained in
Scripture, since an evident Consequence is equivalent to a plain and express
Proposition; as it was Matt. 22.31, 32. Nor 2. do they understand by being
clearly contained in Scripture, that all persons may immediately learn all
Necessaries, by the mere reading of it (as our Author puts the Case) without
the use of those means for the understanding of it, that God has appointed, and
the nature of the thing requires; such as attention, consideration, and the
assistance of Teaching Guides. For the plainness or clearness of the things to
be learned and understood, and an Instructor to lead us to or help us in the
understanding them, are not only consistent, but generally to be supposed. It Is
a good saying of one upon this Argument; That is not obscure, White's Way to
the true Church. Sect. 8. N. 2.
which by ordinary means may be apprehended; but that is so which either has
no means at all to open it, or has such as are not ordinary.

Neither 3. can it be supposed that the Scriptures do so clearly contain all
things necessary, as that nothing of that kind ever was, or can be excepted
against; For they may be plain, and yet for some prevalent reasons it may not
be confessed. They may again be plain, and yet not be understood to be so from
several Impediments.

Sometimes this proceeds from a natural Impediment, as it is in Children, and
such as are of a very weak capacity. And yet even to such St. Austin supposes
them to be intelligible, Enarrat. in ps. 8.
God having bowed down the Scripture to the capacity of Babes and Sucklings,
that when proud men will not speak to their capacity, he himself might.

Sometimes from moral Impediments, such as prejudices and prepossessions, as it
was with the Apostles who understood not our Savior when he told them openly
and plainly, again and again, that he must be killed, Mark 8.31, 32. 9.31, 32.
Such again are vile affections, as Pride and the Love of the World, Interest
and Obstinacy, into which our Savior resolved the Jews Infidelity, John 5.40,
44. Such are Partiality, Negligence, Sloth and Inconsideration.

There are also Judicial Impediments, when for their contempt and obstinacy,
etc. God sends men strong delusions, that they should believe a lie, 2 These.
2.10, 11.

But now where those and the like Impediments are not, but that men lay aside
all malice, and all guile and hypocrisy, and as new born babes, in the Apostles
Phrase, desire the sincere milk of the word that they may grow thereby, 1 Pet.
2.1, 2. that they come with an honest heart, and use a competent diligence,
with a Dependence upon God's assistance for the Wisdom he has promised, I know
nothing necessary to Salvation (unless what the Church of Rome has made so)
but what is plainly taught in Scripture, and may be learned from it. But
without this temper the plainest and most express words, and the necessary
meaning of those words will not convince some men.

As for Example, what more plain, than that in Exodus 20. there is a 2 d
Commandment distinct from the First? What more plain, than thou shall not make
to thee any graven Image, nor the likeness of any thing, to bow down before it,
or worship it? What more plain, than drink ye all of it, Matthew. 26.27. What
more plain, than that Prayer is not to be in an Unknown Tongue? 1 Cor. 14.
Lastly, what more clear, than that the Scriptures are able to make us wise unto
Salvation? And yet we know where these things will not be confessed. The Truth
is, that as long as there are Prejudices and Interest, and depraved Affections
in mankind, Truth will be obscure: And the things that are easy, In John 1.1.
c. 4.
are yet to Heretics hard to understand, says St. Cyril. But the defect in
them, makes none in the Scripture, which is as entire, complete, and clear,
when men do disagree about it, as when it is by all unanimously consented to.

I shall sum up what I have said in the words of St. Chrysostom, who thus
delivers himself upon this Argument, The Scriptures are easy to understand,
Homil. 1. in Math and Hom. 3 de Laz.
and exposed to the capacity of every Servant and Plough-man, and Widow, and
Boy, and him that is most unwise. And again, Therefore God penned the
Scriptures by the hands of Publicans, Fishermen, Tent-makers, Shepherds,
Neatherds, and unlearned Men, that none of the simple People might have any
excuse from reading, and that so they might be easy to be understood of all
men, the Artificer, the Householder, and Widow-woman, and him that is most
unlearned: Tea the Apostles and Prophets, as Schoolmasters to all the world,
made their Writings plain and evident to all men; so that every man of himself
only, by reading them, might learn the things spoken therein.

If the Reader desires further satisfaction, he may find it in a Learned Book
newly published, called, A Discourse concerning the Nature and Grounds of the
certainty of Faith, p. 40, 80, 81, etc.

Q. 3. What are these Necessaries to Salvation?

Our Author offers Three Instances of such Necessaries as are not clearly
revealed in Scripture, viz. The Trinity, the Incarnation of our Savior, and
the observation of the Lord's Day.

Of the first of these he thus discourses.

Address.
For Example; Is the Belief of a Trinity, One God and Three Persons, necessary
to Salvation? If it be, as the Creed of S. Athanasius* assures us it is, in
what Chapter and Verse of Scripture is it clearly expressed? If you send me to
the 1 Epist. of S. John, Chap. 5. Ver. 7. where we read, There are Three who
give Testimony in Heaven, the Father, the Word, and Holy Ghost, and these Three
are One; or to the Gospel of S. John, Chap. 10. Ver. 50. I and my Father are
One; I desire you to show clearly out of Scripture, that the word One here
signifies a strict Identity or Unity of Substance, as the Church of England
holds; not a mere Moral Union, as many Learned Arrians and others will have it,
and as we all confess the same word signifies in S. John, Chap. 17. Ver. 21.
where our Lord Prays that all Believers may be One, as he and his Father are
One; where certainly he cannot be supposed to mean One in Substance. In what
Verse then and Chapter in Scripture have we these or the like words, The word
One in the 1 Epist. of S. John, Item in S. John' s Gospel, signifies a strict
Identity; which notwithstanding I conceive ought to be, if all Necessaries to
Salvation be clearly contained in Scripture. Now if the Belief of a Trinity be
not necessary to Salvation, I desire it may be clearly owned in these or the
like words: It Is not necessary for Salvation to believe Three Persons and one
God, notwithstanding the Creed of S. Athanasius, and Definition of the first
Council of Nice, when the Church was in her Purity, not the least corrupted.

Answer.
The sum of our Author's Argument is this, That the Doctrine of the Trinity is
not clearly contained in Scripture, because Unity in some places signifies not
a Unity of Essence, but of Will; which way of arguing supposes that if a word
be taken in two or more different senses, then the Scripture does not clearly
contain the things contained in those words.

As for Example; the word, Door, is sometimes taken in Scripture in a proper
sense, sometimes in a Metaphorical; and being thus differently taken, we cannot
according to him, certainly know when it is to be understood Properly, and when
Metaphorically; and must be at a perfect loss to understand, whether when our
Savior is called a Door, John 10.7. it is not meant properly; and when St.
Peter is said to stand at the Door, John 18.16. it is not meant Metaphorically.
Or to come nearer to our Author, the Body of Christ is sometimes taken for a
Natural, sometimes for a Mystical Body; and therefore we cannot be certainly
assured, whether when Joseph begged the Body of Jesus, it is not to be
understood of the Mystical Body; and that when the Apostles and Prophets, etc.
were given for the edifying the Body of Christ, Ephesians. 4.11, 12. it is not to be
understood of Christ's Natural Body.

In this so difficult a case, which is absolutely necessary to be answered for
the salvation of his Soul, p. 4. (if you will believe the Addresser) What is to
be done? What in reason will content him? It Is nothing less than this, That it
be shown, that in some Verse and Chapter in Scripture, we have these or the
like words, -- The Word One in St. John' s Epistle, signifies a strict
Identity: And he might have gone on without end in the same way; and one as
obstinate as himself, may say, Show me some other Chapter and Verse, wherein it
is said, that the word Door, John 10. is to be understood Metaphorically, and
the word Body, Ephesians. 4. is to be understood Mystically; or else it is apparent
that we cannot know what Door, Proper or Metaphorical; or what Body, whether
Natural or Mystical, is meant in those places; for, This ought to be, if these
things are clearly contained in Scripture.

This is a Thought, for ought I know, peculiar to our Author, (for I don't find
this Address comes out with other Allowance, than Printed for R. Tailor); and
as I do not envy him the Glory of the Invention, so I shall leave him the
satisfaction of self-enjoyment.

Indeed his Friends the Learned Arrians went not his way in opposing the
Trinity, nor the Orthodox in defending it; and therefore if this Point was now
to be argued, the Ministers of the Church of England, that hold with the
Orthodox, and amongst other places produce this of 1 John 5.7. for it, would
say, that it is as plainly said, The Father, Word, and Holy Ghost are One, as
that they are Three; and that tho Unity is sometimes taken in a Moral sense, as
John 17.21. yet the arguing of St. John in the former place, shows it not to be
understood in the same sense as the latter; he making a plain difference
betwixt the Unity that is betwixt the Three that bear record in Heaven, and the
Three that bear witness in Earth; for of the Three that bear Record in Heaven,
it is said, They are one; but of the Three that bear witness on Earth, it is
said, They agree in One. Now if it had been a mere Moral Union that was betwixt
the Father, Word, and Holy Ghost (who are the Three in Heaven) it would have
been as well said of them, as of the Spirit, the Water and the Blood (which are
the Three in Earth) that they Agree in One. In like manner would the Ministers
of the Church of England support the proof of this Article from John 10.30. I
and my Father are One, and show that it is to be understood of the Unity of
Essence, and not of mere Will and Consent; because the Jews took up stones to
stone him for blasphemy, and because that thou being a man, make thy self
God. But since there is a Union that may be betwixt God and Man without making
man to be God, as it is John 17.21. it follows that neither did our Savior
speak, nor the Jews understand him to have spoken of a Moral, but a Natural
Union; but for this let me recommend the Addresser to the Second Part of the
Dialogue concerning the Doctrine of the Trinity and Transubstantiation
compared, p. 10, 11. and Published the last Year.

His second Instance is of the Incarnation; of which he says,

Address.
Again, Is the Belief of the Incarnation necessary for Salvation? Where is it
clearly expressed in Scripture? You refer me to S. John, chap. 1. The Word is
made Flesh. But you know that many Learned Men, Nestorius and others, denied
that word to signify a strict Incarnation, but either a Moral Union, or a mere
external appearance of a Man, as those who held Christ not to have a real but a
fantastic Body. Now be pleased to show me in what Verse or Chapter it is
clearly expressed, that the said words signify a strict Incarnation? But if
you deny the belief of this Mystery to be necessary to Salvation, own it, for
our satisfaction, in these or the like words: It is not necessary for Salvation
to believe, that the Second Person of the Blessed Trinity was made true Man.
And if the Belief of neither Trinity nor Incarnation are necessary, show me
what it is, and where expressed in Scripture.

Answer.
Setting aside what the Opinion of Nestorius was (which our Author for ought I
perceive understands not) the sum of what is said, amounts to this, That the
Scripture is not clear in this Point; because, as he says, Many learned Men,
Nestorius and others, deny that word [he means that phrase] to signify strict
Incarnation. So that if a learned Man, or learned Men dispute the Point, that
Point so disputed, or the words expressing it, cannot be clear, or the Sense
certain. But I have before showed that this is no reason against the
perspicuity of Scripture in such a case, because nothing can be clearer
expressed than many of those things which are sometimes made matter of
Disputation.

As what can be clearer, than that Christ had a Body of Flesh and Bones? Yet
there were some of our Authors Learned men, that held Christ was a mere
external appearance of a man; and not to have a real, but a phantastic Body.
And the Ministers of the Church of England, notwithstanding the denial of his
learned Men, do yet maintain the Incarnation of our blessed Savior to be
evidently delivered in the words, The word was (not is, as he mistakes) made
Flesh. For who was the Word, but he that is called God, ver. 1. that made all
things? ver. 3. And what was his being made Flesh, but his being made of the
Seed of David? Romans 1.3. And how was he made Flesh, but by being united to it,
and becoming Man? Now if the Word, that was God, was the Word and not Man,
before he was made Flesh; and when he was made Flesh, did not cease to be the
Word, then there must be in him two Natures united, which is the Incarnation.

His 3 d Instance is, as he says, in order to Practice, and the Query upon it,
is,

Address.
Then in order to Practice, I desire to know, whether it be necessary to
Salvation, to keep holy the Lord's Day, that is, Sunday and not Saturday. If it
be, I desire to know in what Chapter and Verse it is clearly contained in
Scripture; as also where the Abrogation of the Saturday is clearly expressed?
If it be not necessary for Salvation to keep holy the Lord's Day, I desire your
warrant for it in these or the like terms: It is not necessary to keep holy the
Lord's Day, that is, Sunday.

Answer.
To this I answer, That the obligation to observe the Lord's Day is more or less
necessary or unnecessary, according to the Institution of it; for such as the
Institution is, such is the Obligation. If it be of mere Humane and
Ecclesiastical institution, it may by the same Authority be altered as it was
established: If of Divine Institution, it is not subject to humane arbitration.
And if it be of Divine Institution, we must have it by the Revelation in
Scripture, or else it cannot be Divine. And that it is established upon such
Authority, I shall offer these considerations:

1. There is as much in the Reason of the thing for this peculiar Day to be
observed in the Christian Church, as there was for the Sabbath in the
Patriarchal and Jewish Church; for what the Moral Sabbath was to Man upon his
Creation, and the Ceremonial Sabbath was to the Jews upon their Deliverance out
of Egypt, Deuteronomy. 5.15. that is the First Day of t^^ Week, or the Lord's Day to
Christians, upon our Redemption by Christ, which was accomplished and testified
in his Resurrection on that Day.

2. There is the Mark of Divine Institution set upon it, when that which was
otherwise called the first Day of the week, was afterward called the Lord's
Day, Rev. 1.10. It being usual in Scripture after that Times, Places, Things,
and Persons were set apart for the Service of God by Divine Institution, to
have his Name as a Mark of Propriety given to them: Thus we read of the Lord's
Passover, Exodus 12.11. The Sabbath of the Lord, Exodus 20.10. The Temple of the
Lord. The Lord's S^pper, 1 Cor. 11.20.

Now I know not what Reason can be assigned, that when the Things thus
dignified by this Title, are elsewhere of Divine Institution, and so named
because of that Institution; that this Day should be called the Lord's Day, and
not be of Divine, but Humane Institution.

3. We may observe further, That as the New World of Redemption began upon that
Day, so upon the same Day did Christ solemnly consecrate the Christian Church
by the Descent of the Holy Ghost upon the Apostles, Acts 2.1, 2. (as of old,
the Jewish Church was by a Cloud or Divine Appearance, Exodus 40.34. 1 Kings
8.10, 11.) which they had the Promise of, and until which, they were not to
depart from Jerusalem, and to enter upon the work of gathering a Church, Acts
1.4.

4. It was the Day which the Primitive Christians in the Apostolical times held
their stated Assemblies upon for Divine Worship; as appears Acts 20.7. 1 Cor.
16.2.

This may suffice for the first branch of his Query, I desire to know in what
Chapter and Verse it is clearly contained in Scripture.

His next is, Where the Abrogation of the Saturday [he means the Sabbath] is
clearly expressed? I may answer him, it is in the same Chapter and Verse where
the Abrogation of Circumcision is clearly expressed. And when he can find out
Chapter and Verse for the one, I will undertake to show him Chapter and Verse
for the other. Indeed there was no need of an express Abrogation of either; For
Baptism being instituted by Christ as a means of Initiation into his Church;
Circumcision that was the old way of admission, must fall in course, because
the one was inconsistent with the other. So the Lord's Day being set apart for
the public and solemn Worship of God in the Christian Church, the Sabbath that
was before appointed for it, must in reason surrender to it. So the Apostle,
Col. 2.16, 17. Let no man judge you in meat, or drink, or in respect of an
holy day, or of new mons, or of the sabbath [days] which are a shadow of
things to come, but the body is of Christ. Where the word, (...), tho in the
plural, signifies the Seventh day, or Jewish Sabbath, as it does Matt. 25.10,
12. and for the most part in the New Testament: And which being a shadow, as
well as Meats and Drinks, Holy Days and New Mons, was with those, and for the
same reasons, to cease by the coming of Christ.

Now, as the Institution of Baptism abrogated Circumcision, and the Lord's Day
abrogated the Sabbath; so we may certainly infer, that if the Sabbath was a
shadow, and abrogated as such (which the Apostle here asserts) that there was
some other day instituted in the place of it; (these things mutually inferring
each other) and what that day is, I may leave to our Author's guess, without
again going to Chapter and Verse.

Q. 4. Address.
If you say that everyone is only bound to believe what is clear to him in
Scripture, reading it with Sincerity and Humility; then I must desire to know,
What if I, reading Scripture Sincerely and with Humility, cannot find clearly
expressed either the Trinity or Incarnation? will it not be necessary for the
Salvation of my Soul to believe these two Mysteries?

Answer.
I Answer,

1. Sincerity and Humility, do imply the due use of all the means a person has
in possession, for the finding out the Truth; such as diligent reading the Word
of God, Prayers, and Consultation with such as are most able and fit to assist
him: And where this temper is, and this course is taken, there will never be
wanting what is necessary. John 7.17. If any man will do his will, he shall
know of the doctrine, whether it be of God, or whether I speak of my self.

2. No man can believe but according to the motives of credibility, and the
reasons he has for his Faith. An obligation lies upon all to believe all
things necessary to Salvation; but that is when they are proposed: and
according to the Evidence, so we are to believe, and so only we can. And yet we
do not say as this Writer words it, That Every one is only Bound to believe
what is clear to him in Scripture. For the Obligation to believe, does not
depend upon his Understanding, but the Authority of the Revelation; his want of
understanding may be taken as an excuse for his want of Faith, but does not
diminish his obligation to believe.

3. No man shall answer for what he had not a power to do; and if he wants the
Means, or fails of the End in a due use of those Means, it shall not be imputed
to him, John 15.22. If I had not come and spoken unto them, they had not had
sin. I do not question, but as he that is truly sincere would believe if he was
able, and could see into the strength of evidence for it, so that this
ingenuous disposition of mind will be a reason for Almighty God to give him
that Faith which is necessary, or to pardon the want of it; and if I was to
choose, I had rather be sincere and err in a Matter of Faith, than believe upon
the full Conviction of the Truth, and yet not be sincere in the p^ofession of
it; being sensible that what is involuntary is a less sin than what is
voluntary; and that I shall suffer less for a fault in my Understanding, which
I could not help, than for a fault in my Will, which I might. Therefore let a
person first learn Sincerity and Humility, and read the Scripture sincerely and
with Humility, and then he will be sure to find all Truths necessary to
Salvation, so clearly and sufficiently expressed therein, that he will be
thereby convinced of it; or if he fail in it, he may be sure his Sincerity and
Humility will do more through the Grace and Mercy of God in Christ to save him,
than the want of a Belief of some things otherwise necessary, can do to damn
him.

Address.
Put the Case I have recourse (as by these I have) to Church Guides, and they
tell me I must believe those Mysteries: Is it necessary I believe these Guides?
If it be, then Scripture alone is not clear in Necessaries to Salvation; for
here I am obliged to believe what is not clear to me in Scripture. Again, am I
bound to keep holy Sunday, tho I find no Precept for it in Scripture, and not
Saturday, tho I find an express Command for it, nowhere Abregated in
Scripture, because my Guides tell me I must do so? If I must, then Guides are
necessary to Salvation, and Scripture alone without them is not sufficient. Be
pleased to own this Proposition -- Scripture alone is not sufficient, without
Guides to Interpret it. If notwithstanding my Guides, I am not bound to believe
either Trinity or Incarnation, or observe Sunday, then I must beg of you to
warrant with your Authority these words: I am not bound to keep holy the
Lord's Day or Sunday, tho the Guides of the Church tell me I must, if I cannnot
find it clearly in Scripture.

But you tell me, That Necessaries to Salvation are either clear in Scripture,
or evidently deduced out of Scripture. Very well. Assign then these
Necessaries, and deduce them out of Scripture; show the Verse and Chapter from
whence is evidently deduced an Obligation to keep holy Sunday and not Saturday.
Again, the Evidence of that Deduction is either had immediately from the mere
reading of Scripture, without help of Guides, and then I desire to see the
Places from whence these Necessaries are evidently inferred; or it cannot be
had but by the help of Guides, and then the Scripture alone is not sufficient.

Answer.
What he here says concerning Church-Guides, and Deductions from Scripture, has
been before in good part prevented, and shall have a farther Reply. But I
cannot but observe, before I proceed, how our Author does all along rather
design to amuse his Reader, than to come to the Point; of which there is not a
Paragraph, but is an Evidence. As for Instance,

1. He thus argues, If all things necessary to Salvation are contained in
Scripture, then they are either clearly contained in it, so that there is no
need of an Interpreter for the meaning of the words, or not, p. 1. Now he
cannot but know, that an Interpreter for the meaning of the words, is no more
denied by us, than it is sufficient for them; without he understands more by
Meaning of the Words, than he cared his Reader should at first perceive.

2. He argues again, Put the case I have recourse to Church-Guides, and they
tell me I must believe those Mysteries; is it Necessary I believe those Guides?
-- Am I bound because my Guides tell me I must do so? Now he knows that such
Guides as it is necessary to believe, are the Guides they indeed would have, but
we deny.

3. He proceeds, The evidence of the Deduction is either had immediately from
the mere reading of Scripture, without help of Guides; or etc. Now who ever
said, that all Necessaries are to be learned by all persons by the mere reading
of Scripture without the use of Means, such as Attention, Consideration,
Prayer, Interpreters, and Guides?

4. He then infers fallaciously, Or it cannot be had but by the help of Guides,
and then the Scripture alone is not sufficient: For when the Scripture alone is
said to be sufficient, it is meant so as to contain all things necessary to
Salvation; it is sufficient as a Rule for all things belonging to Faith and
Manners, so as to exclude the Necessity of any other Rule of that kind: But
it is not so alone sufficient as to exclude all Means by which it is to be
understood.

5. He farther conceals himself, when after he had applied the case to
Church-Guides, as if he would be understood of private and ordinary Teachers in
the Church, he at last lodges it in the bosom of some stated and universal
Infallible and unerring Guide, as in the next Question.

Address.
Secondly, But if all Necssaries to Salvation be not clear enough in Scripture
to be understood without an Interpreter, then it will be necessary to know who
and where the Interpreter is. If you remit me to the Decision of the true
Church, it will be necessary to know which is that Church. If you tell me all
Christian Churches joined together, then it follows that I am bound to believe
nothing but what all Christians agree in; for what they disagree in, cannot be
the Sentiment or Decision of the whole Church, but only of a part of it. I am
not then obliged to believe the Trinity; for the Arians, tho Christians, deny
it. I am not obliged to believe the Incarnation, for many Christians deny that
Christ was God made Man by a strict Incarnation, but only by a Moral Union;
that is, he was a Man who had the Authority of God, as his Plenipotentiary, and
the like. Now then let me know on what all Christians agree, and let me have
your Warrant that I am bound to believe neither the Trinity nor Incarnation,
nor any thing wherein all Christians do not agree. Now if you tell me I am
obliged to stand to the Determination of one particular Church, or some and not
all, tell me which, and why that or those more than others? What Church, for
Example, were particular Persons bound to follow Two hundred years ago before
the Reformation?

Answer.
Our Author at first put the Question, Whether all things necessary to Salvation
are contained in Scripture? And upon this he argues, If they be, then they are
either clearly contained in it, so that there is no need of an Interpreter for
the meaning of them, or not. If the Addresser could have gained the first
Point, That all necessaries are not contained in Scripture, then the Case lay
fair before him, and it would follow (as he supposes) that there must be some
external and speaking Authority from whence those Necessaries not contained in
Scripture, are to be received, and where they are to be fought: This is a Case
he puts to the Question, If not, where must I seek them? But there he leaves
it: Indeed it was a tender Point, because of late they would have us believe
that they have Scripture for what they differ from us in; and then to talk of
Necessaries not to be found in Scripture, and to instance in those Necessaries,
would be to give up that Cause which they have so much labored to support in
that way; and to tell the World that the Church of Rome is the Treasurer of all
those Necessaries, is a Doctrine not so suitable to the Genius of the present
Age, as it was to others heretofore.

But if that would not be yielded, That all Necessaries are not contained in
Scripture, he then puts in with a Second, That they are not so Clearly
contained in it, as not to need an Interpreter; and if this be yielded, he
would in his own opinion, save his Cause; for then he concludes there must be
some Guide and Interpreter, and it will be necessary to know who and where the
Interpreter is. Now if we may guess what kind of Interpreter or Guide it is
that he would have, it is one that is necessary for all to believe, and whose
Interpretation all are obliged to receive; a Guide that is a Judge, and whose
Judgment is absolute, final, and conclusive, into which all is to be resolved,
and from which there is no appeal; that is to teach all Necessaries to
Salvation not contained in Scripture; and to interpret the meaning of those
that are; without which we cannot know whether there be a Trinity, or our
Savior was Incarnate; and upon whose determination all the Articles of our
Faith do depend for their declaration. Here the Case is immutably fixed, says
our Author, I must believe; it is necessary to believe; I am obliged to believe,
and am bound to follow; as he puts the Case.

But now we that are for Ministerial Guides and Interpreters that are appointed
by God for the teaching his Church, and whose Office it is to teach them so as
they may understand and judge for themselves, know nothing of such a Guide as he
would introduce upon us; and we have reason to be cautious, when we find both
the Apostle declaring against it, 2 Cor. 1.24. Not for that we have dominion
over your Faith, but are helpers; and our Savior warning us against such an
Imposition, Matthew. 23.8, 9, 10. Call no man master on earth, for one is your
master. It Is his Prerogative alone to challenge such an absolute submission
from us; and it is a gross Usurpation in any other to claim and assume it: So
that we may leave our Author to find out, Who, and where the Interpreter is;
for we own no such Guide or Interpreter as he would impose upon us, whether he
means by it any particular Church, or any part or Society of that Church, or
indeed any humane Authority whatsoever. And when he or his Partisans think it
worth the while to undertake the proof of it, and shall as clearly prove it as
the Trinity and Incarnation are from Scripture; we that profess the latter, and
are as sincerely desirous of finding out the Truth as he can be, do promise him
to own the former; and for this Reason, and that they may have a fair occasion
offered to try their skill upon it, I shall put the Case a little forward.

I am sensible our Author would take it in good part to have it granted that
all things necessary to Salvation are not contained in Scripture, and to have
it brought to his first Question, If so, where must I seek them? Or that, They
are not clear enough in Scripture without an Interpreter; that at least the
next Question may be brought on, Who, and where the Interpreter is? And
therefore to gratify him as much as I can, I shall for the present suppose
that all things necessary are not in Scripture; and then in his order and
words, I ask, What those necessaries to Salvation are, that are not contained
in Scripture, and where each of them may be found? Now he that supposes this,
must proceed upon the Principles of the Church of Rome (since no Church
besides, that I know of, is of this mind.) And whither may we expect to be
directed so soon as to the Creed of Pope Pius IV. which contains the chief of
those Doctrines they differ from other Churches in, and which are made as
necessary to be received and believed, as the Articles of the Nicene Creed,
being by that Pope's Authority, in consequence of the Order of the Council of
Trent, incorporated into one and the same Profession of Faith. By which means
they are forced upon one of these two Difficulties, either to prove their
new-coined Articles by Scripture as well as those of the Nicene Creed; or to
show that the Articles of the Nicene Creed are no more to be proved from
Scripture, without Tradition and the Churches Explication, than those of Pope
Pius: The former they are never able to do, and all their attempts that way
have proved vain and unsuccessful; and therefore they have taken several ways
for the latter, sometimes detracting from the Sufficiency or Perspicuity of
Scripture, at other times exalting Tradition, and Church Authority to an
equality with it. For since all these Points are made by this means equally
necessary to Salvation; and since it is as necessary to believe on pain of
Damnation, That the Church of Rome is the Mother and Mistress of all Churches;
and that the Body and Blood of Christ are truly, really, and substantially,
together with his Soul and Divinity, in the Sacrament, and the whole Substance
of the Bread is turned into the Body, and the whole Substance of the Wine into
his Blood, etc. Since it is as necessary to believe this, as the Being of a God,
the Trinity, and Incarnation of our Blessed Savior, and that they are sensible
they are not to be proved in the same way, they find themselves obliged to give
the same Authority to one as the other, and to bring down the Scripture to the
Church, or exalt the Church to the Authority of Scripture. So that if we will
look for things necessary, not contained in Scripture, we must have recourse to
the Church, which can, as they say, ordain new Articles of Faith, and which
whenever so ordained are as much to be believed and received as those which
have their Authority immediately from Scripture. And after our Author has beat
about, and done his endeavor to loosen the Articles of our Faith from the
written Revelation, and the Foundation of the Prophets and Apostles; hither he
would bring the Case, that we are obliged to stand to the Determination of one
particular Church, as he insinuates, page 4.

But now to return his own words upon him, If you remit me to the Decision of
the true Church, it will be necessary to know which is that Church. For since
there are several pretenders, and there are Christian Arrians, as he says, and
many other Dissenters, how shall I find out this True Church, and why that more
than others?

Is it because she herself says she is the True Church? All the rest claim the
like Character of being a True Church; and besides; this is to demand the thing
that is to be proved. Is it that she is like a City upon an Hill, or the Sun in
the Firmament, to be known by a self-evident Light? Why is it not then as well
known, and indisputably owned to be the true Church, and the only True Church,
as a City to be a City, or the Sun to be the Sun? Is it to be found out by the
Notes and Marks of the True Church? Then we must find out the Marks before we
find out the Church that is to be known by them. And then the pinching Question
comes on, Where must I seek these Notes? It Is to be feared that will lead us to
the Scripture; and then we know what follows. Lastly, Are we to find out the
Church by an Infallible Guide? Then we are to find such a Guide out of the
Church; and that we have no direction where to seek, or by what Notes we may
know it. Here indeed we are left in a Maze to beat out the way, and they that
have made the Church a Guide, have appointed no Guide to lead us to the Church.
That is a Track we must find of our selves, there we must use our own simple
Reason, Consideration, and Enquiry. So that how certain soever we may be when
in the Church, we can never be infallibly certain which is the Church that we
are bound to follow; because this kind of certainty is peculiar to the Church,
and not to be had out of it.

But since we have gone thus far upon Supposition, let us take it for granted
once more, that the Church is upon the Hill visible and demonstrable, yet
because the Church is a Collective Body, where is the Seat of that Infallible
Authority, that I am to attend to, and finally to be determined by? Is it in
every particular person? Then because Infallibility knows no degrees, I my self
should in that Church be as Infallible as the Supreme Pastor of it. Is it in
one particular person, or in a General Council? Who, and where is it? Must I
suspend till I know, or till all the parts of the Church agree in it? If you
tell me all joined together (as our Author has taught me to Reason) then it
follows I am bound to believe nothing of this kind, but what all agree in; for
what they disagree in, cannot be the Sentiment or Decision of the whole Church,
but only of a part of it. I am not then obliged to believe the Pope's
Infallibility; for the Councils of Basil and Constance, and the French Church,
tho Papists deny it. Nor am I obliged to believe a Council Infallible without
the Pope, because those at Rome deny it. And because what is a good Argument in
one case, is good in another; let me have our Author's Warrant, that I am bound
to believe neither Infallible, since neither of these agree with the other. For
certainly I am no more obliged to believe the Infallibility of their Church,
which they do thus disagree in, than our Author would persuade us that we are
not obliged to believe the Trinity, because the Arrians, tho Christians, deny
it. But supposing that the Seat of Infallibility be clear and evident; Yet how
can I, that am at a vast distance of years or place from that Oracle, whatever
it is, be infallibly assured that these that are put into my hands are the very
Results and Decrees of that Authority? Or that this that I think, or am told,
is the true and undoubted sense of them? Or (to speak modestly) How can I be as
much assured of the Truth of these matters, as I am of the Authority and Sense
of Scripture? Or that Christ has not spoken as plainly and intelligibly in the
Scriptures, as his Vicar or Substitutes have in any of their Canons and
Decrees? So that tho the Church be Infallible, and I a Member of that
Infallible Church; yet what will that Infallibility avail me, when I am without
the doors of that Infallible Council, or out of the reach of the immediate
Dictates of the Infallible Chair? And unless the spirit of Infallibility
descends from the Chair to the meanest Priest who is to instruct and direct me;
or is indorsed upon every Decree, and inspires every Article with its own
unerring sense; I am not infallibly certain. And I may be no more certain of
the true Doctrine of the Infallible Church, than I am of the sense of Scripture
under the Conduct of a Fallible Church; since the immediate Authority I depend
upon for the Doctrine, and the Sense of it, is all this while Fallible. As for
example, I am told that there is such a Creed as that before mentioned of Pope
Pius IV. that contains in it such Articles that every one is so bound to
believe, as without the belief of which no Man can be saved: And I find in that
Creed, that the Church of Rome is the Mother and Mistress of all Churches. And
yet how shall I be Infallibly assured, first, that there ever was such a person
as Pope Pius the 4th? or that he ever composed such a Creed? or that the
foresaid Supremacy of the Church of Rome is one of those Articles? The Pope I
never saw, nor am like to see. A Council is a rare thing, and what they care
not to hear of at Rome, and are able to do as well without as with it. And
therefore where shall I be infallibly instructed in these matters? How shall I
then be sure that the Article aforesaid is not to be understood, that the
Church of Rome is the Mistress of all Churches within the particular Diocese of
Rome only? For here is a different use of the same Word; and if, in our
Author's way of Arguing, a different use of the same word will render us
incapable of attaining the sense contained in these words, it would be to
little purpose to read the word without an Infallible Assistant always at hand
to explain it clearly and certainly to us. So that if there be no better way to
end the many Controversies of this Age, than what he calls the only and surest
way, they are likely to continue for his time. And if their Church has no surer
way to bring the Case to an issue, than this of exposing Christianity to save
themselves, they will as soon make men to quit all Religion, as that which they
have, to be of theirs, of which they cannot be, but by subverting those
Principles upon which the best Religion in the World, the Christian, is
supported.

Here I might have concluded; but our Author may take it ill, if after I have
traced him from Paragraph to Paragraph, I should leave out his pathetical
Conclusion, which is as follows:

I conceive, Address.
an Answer to these Doubts absolutely necessary for the Salvation of my Soul.
For how can I be saved, if I know not what is necessary thereunto? I need not
say a satisfactory one, for no other can flow from your Learned and virtuous
Pens; I only fear that some Pin-feather'd Divine, out of an itch to appear in
Print, may prevent yours, and put me off with a Flim-flam, or an uncharitable
Jeer, or Railing against some particular Church he may fancy me to be of, which
is nothing to my purpose, who seek where I may find securely Necessaries to
Salvation, not where I cannot find them. This would be also prejudicial to the
Church of England; for when Men see Doubts so sincerely and submissively
Proposed, Answered only with Jeers, Railing and Invectives, or omitted and let
pass, as not deserving an Answer, they must needs doubt of the Learning ae well
as of the Virtue and Charity of their Leaders.

Now were the Satisfaction I here desire, intended for myself alone, it might
have seemed more proper to have made my Address in particular to some one of
your Reverend and Learned Body; but forasmuch as it concerns so many others,
and as I persuade my self, will prove extremely beneficial to Religion, it
being the surest, nay only way to end the many Controversies of this Age, I am
forced to desire of you, whose high Character obliges you to a Zeal of Souls, a
public, and withal a speedy Answer, by which you will highly oblige,

SIRS, Yours ever.

LONDON: Printed for Randall Tailor, 1688.

Our Author has too plainly discovered himself, and had reason to suppose his
Reader might well fancy him to be of some particular Church; and he may as well
expect to receive a due Correction for this his Dissimulation, that pretends to
be in doubt, and yet to be in a Church (as he supposes) Infallible; that
pretends the Answer to these Doubts absolutely necessary for the Salvation of
his Soul, and yet is of a Church in which he is judged to hazard his Soul if he
does but doubt; that Presents An Address to the Ministers of the Church of
England, to resolve his Doubts, and yet has a Guide of his own whom it is
necessary to believe, and whom he is bound to follow; that pretends to be
sincerely desirous of finding out the Truth, and does all he can to involve it:
Lastly, that brings these very Doubts to the Ministers of the Church of
England, that have been of late so frequently answered by them, to the
Confutation, tho, it seems, not altogether to the Silencing of their
Adversaries. I will direct him to the Books, and I hope by way of Courtesy he
will in his next direct us to the Answers that have been since returned to them.

The Peoples Right to Read the Holy Scripture, in Answer to the Representer.

A Discourse concerning a Guide.

A Vindication of the Answer to some late Papers. Page 40, etc.

An Answer to a late Dialogue, between a New Catholic Convert, and a
Protestant, to prove the Mystery of the Trinity, etc.

The Doctrine of the Trinity and Transubstantiation compared, etc. in 2 parts.

An Answer to the Request to Protestants to produce plain Scriptures, etc.

With the Vindication of it, called, A Short Summary of the principal
Controversies.

An Answer to a Book Entitled, Reason and Authority. Page 1, 2, etc.

The Difference betwixt the Protestant and Socinian Methods, in Answer to the
Potestant's Plea for a Socinian.

All these Books, with several others to the same purpurpose, were Printed the
last year; and if our Author had consulted them, as he ought, and had as
sincerely read them, as he pretends to propose his doubts; whatever his
Confidence might, I am apt to think his Conscience would not have found any
just occasion to have made this Address, nor needed Another to Answer it.

But it seems nothing less will satisfy our Author, than an Answer from the
Ministers of the Church of England. It Is not a particular person that he
conceives sufficiently qualified to undertake his Case, and to rescue his Soul,
which he is so solicitous to save out of this danger; and to instruct him in
this weighty Affair. But it is their Reverend and Learned Body (as he
fleeringly styles them) that he presents his Address to; from whom he expects a
Public, and withal a Speedy Answer. He writes as if they were now in
Convocation, or that they were all obliged through the Two Provinces forthwith
to assemble about this important Case; and by one Solemn Act of theirs, to
return an Answer to these Doubts, which is absolutely necessary for the
Salvation of his Soul. But because it is now not a season for this purpose, and
'twill be too long to stay till the days grow longer, and the ways better, I
thought I might as well presume to try what might be done by a private hand,
and he might as well accept of it, as he might Present an Address to the
Ministers of the Church of England, in behalf of himself and others, and at
last subscribe in his own name with a, Sirs, Yours ever.

FINIS.
Books lately Printed for Richard Chiswell.
A Discourse of the Holy Eucharist in the two great Points of the Real
Presence, and the Adoration of the Host; in Answer to the Two Discourses lately
Printed at Oxford on this Subject: To which is prefixed a large Historical
Preface relating to the same Argument.

Two Discourses; Of Purgatory, and Prayers for the Dead.

The Fifteen Notes of the Church, as laid down by Cardinal Bellarmin examined
and confuted. 40. With a Table to the Whole.

Preparation for Death: Being a Letter sent to a young Gentlewoman in France,
in a dangerous Distemper of which she died. By W. Wake, M. A 120.

The Difference between the Church of England and the Church of Rome, in
opposition to a late Book, Entitled, An Agreement between the Church of
England and Church of Rome.

A Private Prayer to be used in difficult Times.

A True Account of a Conference held about Religion at London, Sept. 29. 1687.
between A. Pulton, Jesuit, and Th. Tenison, D. D. as also of that which led to
it, and followed after it. 40.

The Vindication of A Cressener, Schoolmaster in Long-Acre, from the Aspersions
of A. Pulton, Jesuit, Schoolmaster in the Savoy, together with some Account of
his Discourse with Mr. Meredith.

A Discourse showing that Protestants are on the safer Side, notwithstanding
the uncharitable Judgment of their Adversaries; and that Their Religion is the
surest Way to Heaven. 40.

Six Conferences concerning the Eucharist, wherein is showed, that the Doctrine
of Transubstantiation overthrows the Proofs of Christian Religion.

A Discourse concerning the pretended Sacrament of Extreme Unction; with an
Account of the Occasions and Beginnings of it in the Western Church. In Three
Parts. With a Letter to the Vindicator of the Bishop of Condom.

The Pamphlet entitled, Speculum Ecclesiasticum, or an Ecclesiastical
Prospective-Glass, considered, in its False Reasonings and Quotations. There
are added, by way of Preface, two further Answers, the First, to the Defender
of the Speculum; the Second to the Half-sheet against the Six Conferences.

A Second Defense of the Exposition of the Doctrine of the Church of England,
against the new Exceptions of Mons. de Meaux, late Bishop of Condom, and his
Vindicator. The FIRST PART. In which the Account that has been given of the
Bishop of Meaux's Exposition, is fully Vindicated; the Distinction of Old and
New Popery Historically asserted, and the Doctrine of the Church of Rome, in
Point of Image Worship, more particularly considered. 40.

A Second Defense of the Exposition of the Doctrine of the Church of England,
against the New Exceptions of Mons. de Meaux, late Bishop of Condom, and his
Vindicator. The SECOND PART.

The Incurable Skepticism of the Church of Rome. By the Author of the [ Six
Conferences concerning the Eucharist] 40.

Mr. Pulton Considered in his Sincerity, Reasonings, Authorities: Or a Just
Answer to what he has hitherto published in his True Account; his True and
Full Account of a Conference, etc. His Remarks; and in them his pretended
Confutation of what he calls Dr. T's Rule of Faith. By Th. Tenison, D. D.

A Full View of the Doctrines and Practices of the Ancient Church relating to
the Eucharist, wholly different from those of the Present Roman Church, and
inconsistent with the belief of Transubstantiation. Being a sufficient
Confutation of Consensus Veterum, Nubes Testium, and other late Collections of
the Fathers pretend^ng to the Contrary. 40

An Answer to the Representer's Reflections upon the State and View of the (...)


