DIEV ET MON DROIT

HONI SOIT QVI MAL Y PENSE

royal blazon or coat of arms
By the King and Queen, A PROCLAMATION For the better Discovery of Seditious
Libellers.
MARIE R.

WE being sensible that diverse Evil Disposed Persons being not Reformed or
Wrought upon by Our Grace and Favor, notwithstanding We have extended Our
Royal Mercy and Clemency to Our Subjects, as well by Our General as Particular
Pardons, since Our Accession to the Crown, do make it their business as well to
Write as Print sundry False, Infamous, and Scandalous Libels, endeavoring
thereby not only to Traduce and Reproach the Ecclesiastical and Temporal
Government of this Kingdom, and the public Ministers of the same, but also to
stir up and dispose the minds of Our Subjects to Sedition and Rebellion: For
the discovery of which wicked Offenders, and to the intent they may receive
such Punishments as the Laws of this Our Realm in such Cases direct, We (with
the Advice of Our Privy Council) do by this Our Royal Proclamation Publish and
Declare, That if any Person or Persons shall discover or make known to either
of Our Principal Secretaries of State, or to any Justice of the Peace, the
Person or Persons to whom any such Libel at any time since Our last General
Pardon, has been, or shall hereafter be brought, and by him or them received,
in order to Print or Transcribe the same, or the place where such Libel shall
be Printing, or Transcribing, whereby the same shall happen to be Seized, or
the Person or Persons by whom any such Libel at any time since Our said General
Pardon has been or shall hereafter be Printed, Transcribed, or otherwise
Published, or shall discover and make known to either of Our said Principal
Secretaries of State, or to any Justice of Peace, any Press kept contrary to
Law by any Person or Persons wheresoever, he or they making every such
Discovery shall have and receive as a Reward from Us the Sum of Twenty Pounds.
And We do further hereby Publish and Declare, That if any Person or Persons
shall Discover and make known to either of Our said Principal Secretaries of
State, or to a Justice of the Peace, the Author of any such Libel, which at any
time since Our said General Pardon has been or shall hereafter be devised and
made, or the Person or Persons who at any time since Our said General Pardon
have, or has handed, or brought, or shall hereafter hand or bring any such
Libel to the Press, or to any Person or Persons in order to Print the same, so
that they may be brought to Punishment, he or they making such Discovery shall
receive and have from Us the Sum of Fifty Pounds. And to the end that the
Person or Persons making such Discovery may Without any Charge or Attendance
immediately after the same made, receive the respective Rewards hereby
proposed, We do by this Our Royal Proclamation Require the Commissioners of Our
Treasury, or Our High Treasurer of England for the time being, that upon a
Certificate from either of Our Principal Secretaries of State, or any Justice
of the Peace of any such Discovery made, he or they do satisfy and pay the
said respective Sums to the Persons or Persons making such Discovery Without
any Delay or Abatement whatsoever. And We do hereby strictly Charge and Command
all and every Our Justices of the Peace, to whom such Discovery shall be made,
that he or they with all possible speed do give Notice thereof to Us, or to one
of Our Principal Secretaries of State, to the end that the said Libels may be
Suppressed, and the Parties offending effectually prosecuted.

Given at Our Court at Whitehall the Thirteenth Day of September, 1692. In the
Fourth Year of Our Reign. God save King William and Queen Mary.
London, Printed by Charles Bill, and the Executrix of Thomas Newcomb deceased;
Printers to the King and Queens most Excellent Majesty's. 1692.


