A SERMON Preached at SALTERS-HALL, TO THE SOCIETIES FOR Reformation of
Manners, May 16. School. And now Printed at their Request.

By DANIEL WILLIAMS.

LONDON, Printed for John Lawrence, at the Angel in the Poultry, over against
the Compter, M DC X^ VIII.

TO THE SOCIETIES FOR THE Reformation of Manners, In the CITIES of London and
Westminster.
WHEN First desired by You to Preach the Ensuing Sermon, my Compliance would
have been more difficultly obtained, had I taken time to consider, That it came
within the Number of the Discourses that were to be Printed at your Request;
yea, to be the last of them.

A Subject, exhausted by Eleven Divines of so great Name and Worth, can receive
little Advantage by the succeeding Attempts of a Head so barren, and a Heart so
cold as mine.

HOWEVER, My Promise being given, I entreated His Assistance whose Cause I
plead; and the Event I commit to Him.

IF I have (...) on any thing said by Others ((...) its scarce possible to
avoid) its not borrowed from them; for I consulted none of the former Sermons
in preparing this.

THE Medium which runs through this Discourse is very fit, I Am sure, to enforce
what is said before, and notwithstanding the Defects of my Management, I can
say, I believe what I deliver, and approve heartily of your Good Design, and
what is better urged by others to promote it.

ITS Matter of deepest Sorrow, When Villainies of all Sorts abound, When Men
declare their Sins with Sodoms Insolency, When our Settlement is thereby so
exposed, and a probable Safety from the awfullest Woes, is held by a Thread so
tender as the Life of His Majesty King WILLIAM. That yet some Persons of Note
require other Motives to espouse this Work of Reformation: And many Magistrates
shift off the execution of the Laws, tho the Oath of God be upon them.

HOW rare is a Zealous Nehemiah? Nay, Symptoms of our Condition were less
dangerous, if all who served at God's Altar admitted Phineas for a Pattern of
Concernedness in resisting Sin as (...) are capable, tho he is not to be
imitated in the manner of his Execution.

BUT amidst great Causes of Fears and Lamentation, let us not ungratefully
neglect to adore God's undeserved Goodness, that our Constitution retains so
many good Laws against gross Enormities: The Parliament has made an Address,
and the King pursuant thereto, published a Proclamation, so excellently
acknowledging the dueness, necessity, and value of Reformation, with Resolves
of promoting it to the utmost. It were very afflictive, as well as
uncharitable, to think a stop could be made here, and the execution of the Laws
suspended as formerly, for this would turn to the Nations Reproach, and be an
Aggravation of its Guilt, by rendering the forecited Instances, a mere Testimony
against future Neglects, and a cause of severer Judgments.

NOR is it an inconsiderable Presage of Good, as well as a probable Means of
England's Amendment, that you have formed your selves into Societies for the
Reformation of Manners, a Title becoming a Christian Name, an Enterprise alike
owing to flagrant Zeal, and amazing Courage, an ordinary Spirit under common
Assistances, had been overwhelmed with the very view of the strength of that
Tide of uncontrouled Wickedness, which was at first to be stem'd by so very few.

HOW soon did Divinely inspired Minds coalesce in this Undertaking? -- And
easily made it evident, That there is no such difference between Members of the
Established Church, and the Dissenters, that will not be overlooked by all
Serious Persons, when the undoubted Concernments of Christ and Practical
Godliness are in danger.

BY an Union founded on a Bottom, and designed to Ends so truly Christian, your
Numbers were soon increased; Very many Magistrates and Persons of Eminent
Figure gave up themselves to this Undertaking, fit Rules were adjusted, and the
strange Successes which encouraged your early Attempts, do still grow more and
more amazing, being as much beyond the hopes of your timorous friends, as the
expectations of surprised Offenders, (who as Such only, can be ill-willers to
this Design) nay, Men strong in Faith, are as in a Dream, to see the Work of
Reformation advanced thus far in so short a time; and induced to hope this to
be the dawning of that Season, wherein Reforming Attempts shall succeed to
those higher degrees of Purity which are prophesied of; although awful
Dispensations may shake the frame of things to introduce it.

BESIDES, it is no mean effect of your successful Example, That Men of the same
Temper in other Places in this Nation, are awakened to exert their United
Strength in pleading the Cause of Christ against Profaness.

YEA Ireland, as if blushing at engaging so late, when their Distress and
Deliverance had been so astonishing -- Do even exceed your Fervor, and
Protestants of every Communion in Dublin, account Reformation their greatest
Business.

MAY not we hope that your influencing President may in time extend to all
other Protestant Countries; that none called Reformed, as to their Faith, may
wear the Reproach of neglecting a Reformation in their Manners: They owe the
same Love to their Neighbor as you do, their Municipal Laws against Vice, are
a Talent for which they are as accountable as you be for yours: Gross Sins will
be as dangerous to every Nation which has equal Light, as they be to England,
and the Heart wherein a Divine Principle reigns, will naturally prompt to the
same Zeal against Sin, as they shall hear to be now at Work in your Societies.

BUT let the happy issue of your Undertaking be more or less extensive; Bless
you the Merciful God for inclining your Hearts to this Work, and giving you the
present Opportunity to express your good Intentions, and not denying you such
encouraging Success.

BE Conscientious in observing the Directions given you in the Sermons of all
those Ministers invited to your assistance, and neglect not to apply their
Encouragements, that you may be strong and faithful in what respects your own
Duty in this glorious Attempt, so you will die in Peace in a Review of upright
Vigorous Endeavors to serve your Generation.

THAT this Discourse may among the rest, contribute somewhat to your good
Designs, is the Prayer of,

Your Servant in the Gospel, Daniel Williams.

ERRATA.
PAge 10. l. read is not, p. 24 l. ult. read (...). p. 30. in sheet C. Lult.
read disingenuous. p. 18. l. 19. in the 3d sheet, read their for the. The 3d
Sheet is Folo'd as the 2d.

MATTHEW. xii. 30. He that is not with me, is against me; and he that gathers
not with me, scatters abroad.
TO understand this Text in its aptness to excite your promoting a Reformation
of Manners; we must consider the occasion of these Words, which you will find in
the foregoing Verses, v. 22. Christ healed a Man possessed with a Devil, who
had deprived him of both Sight and Speech. The Hand of that Enemy is sometimes
great in Bodily Diseases, and when they come by his immediate Agency upon any
Person delivered up by God to endure statedly such Effects of his Power; so
far, and so long, that Person is said to be possessed with the Devil, who is
Commissioned thus to vex and hurt him. In this Condition the Man was brought to
Christ, who not only removed the Diseases, by restoring his Sight and Speech,
which was a Cure; but therein he overcame the resisting Power of the Devil, and
expelled him; so that he could no longer have access to the Person as his own
privileged Place, to make him Blind and Dumb: which connotes the Devil's
Agency in this Disease, and Christ's Conquest over him in his healing the
Diseased Person. V. 23. And all the People were amazed, and said, Is not this
the Son of David? This Miracle filling them with amazement, induces them to
receive Christ as the promised Messiah: q. d. Who should he be, but that Rod
out of the Stem of Jesse? Prophesied of Isa. 11. 1. 10. Matthew. 21. 6. Could any
below him perform what we have seen and heard? What more Miraculous can the
Messiah do? The Power of God would never work such a Miracle to favor an
Impostor; and no Power below what is Divine, could possibly effect it: And
seeing his Doctrine agrees with the Old Testament; and these his Works are so
plain a Testimony of the Spirit to his being sent of God, he must be what he
declares himself, viz. The promised Christ.

THE Pharisees not able to deny the Fact, attempt to enervate the Inference the
People made therefrom. V. 24. But when the Pharisees heard it, they said, this
Fellow does not cast out Devils, but by Beelzebub the Prince of Devils: q. d.
We grant there is a power more than Humane, in what this Man has performed
before you, but it is a Diabolical Power this Work is owing to; and it is to
serve the Purposes of the Devils, and under the Conduct of their Prince, that
this Contemptible Man, unworthy of any Name, is employed even in what you are
so amazed at. Therefore instead of thinking him to be the Messiah, you ought to
conclude him a grand Impostor, and reject him as such, and the more for these
Infernal Assistances you see afforded to him.

THIS was a Conclusion too malicious for an Apology from mere Ignorance, which
with what our Lord applies to these Men, V. 31. 32. gives a probable Reason to
conclude, That the Sin against the Holy Ghost is a wilful ascribing to the
power of the Devil, those evident Miracles wrought by the Holy Ghost in
Testimony to Jesus being the Messiah, that so it might be concluded, Jesus was
not the Christ, but an Impostor.

IT IS no wonder, that it is impossible to bring such as commit this Sin to
Repentance, and consequently to obtain Pardon, because they hereby deprive
themselves of the advantage of Miracles to subdue their Unbelief; yea, they
employ them to harden themselves in Infidelity against him, who is exalted to
give Repentance, and deliver the Will of God to Mankind.

OUR Lord Jesus answers this wretched Assertion, by detecting its Weakness,
Falsehood, and Impossibility* and thereby justisies the Peoples Conclusion from
v. 25. to 29. Not to mention his Reasoning, v. 27. from their Childrens
Practice, the principal Argument is thus drawn ab impossibili.

SATAN must be a designingly wilful Destroyer of his own Kingdom, if Christ did
cast out Devils under his Conduct, and by his Virtue, which was a thing of
which Satan who was such a Self-lover, and had so great a Reach, could not
possibly be guilty. No, the Devil is too wise not to understand his Interest
better than thus, especially in a Case so obvious, and so nearly concerning
himself.

OUR Savior to clear the force of this Argument, declares,

1. THAT God and the Devil have two very distinct Kingdoms, which are
Constituted, Ruled, Supported, and Propagated by Ways, and in a manner
extremely different, V. 26. If Satan cast out Satan, he is divided against
himself; how then can his Kingdom stand? Here is one Kingdom, viz. the Devils,
v. 28. But if I cast out Devils by the Spirit of God, then the Kingdom of God
is come among you: This is the other Kingdom, viz. God's Kingdom.

2. THERE is in this World so fixed a War between these two Kingdoms, that the
one grows upon the others Ruins.

3. THE way of Christ, and the Fendency of his Doctrine, and scope of all his
Attempts, were utterly to overthrow Satan's Kingdom, and advance the Kingdom of
God.

4. SATAN's Kingdom was effectually weakened, and the Kingdom of God advanced,
and enlarged by all that power which Christ had put forth in this and all other
Miracles.

5. WHATEVER Christ did contribute by his exerted Power to the Destruction of
Satan's Kingdom, was in a way of force and violence upon Satan, and not with
his Consent.

ALL these things are implied in v. 26. 28. and most expressly v. 29. Or else
how can one enter into a strong Man's House, and spoil his Goods, except he
first bind the strong Man, and then he will spoil his House. The Sum of
Christ's Plea is this, it is impossible the Devil who is a Being so sagacious
and experienced, should wittingly help me to offer violence to himself, and
thereby enable me to force him out of his Throne, rescue the Prey out of his
Jaws, pluck down what he has so studiously erected, defeat his chief design,
and advance God's Throne and Interest, upon the obstructing whereof Satan is
constantly and maliciously intent. These are things so inconsistent, that
without inveterate Malice they cannot be surmized. Nay, I am so far from
working Miracles by the power of Beelzebub, that it must be evident to every
unprejudiced Person, they are wrought by the Power of God, in whose interest I
am so entirely engaged, and which I hereby subserve.

HAVING given you this account of the Matter our Blessed Savior is treating
of, I shall consider the Text; He that is not with me, is against me, and he
that gathers not with me, scatters abroad. Herein several things seem
designed.

1. AN inforcement of the forecited Argument. q. d. Satan is so far from
concurring with me in my design, or yielding me assistance by his Power, that
he would employ his Skill to support what I am casting down, he would neglect
no Method to pull down what I am building up: And instead of favoring my
Attempt, his Power would be engaged against it; the utmost Strength possessed
by him, he would be sure to exert, to obstruct Men's Faith in me, and not to
induce them to believe; he would prove me an Impostor, instead of attesting my
Commission. Who then can surmize that my Miracles are wrought by any virtue
derived from him? Seeing he must be against me, if he be not for me.

2. ANOTHER thing designed is to assert, That the Lord Jesus is the Head of
God's Kingdom in its present Economy.

THIS is evidenced by the alteration of the Terms; for in a strict connection
with the foregoing Passages, the Words would run thus; He that is not with
God's Kingdom, is against God's Kingdom. But instead thereof, they are, He that
is not with me, (the Christ) is against me; to denote, that the Administration
of God's Kingdom is committed to Christ God-Man the Mediator. q. d.
Legislation, Dominion, Judgment, the Care and Disposal of all Persons and
Things which appertain to the Divine Kingdom in this World, I am entrusted
with; to me they belong: The Government is upon my Shoulders, Isa. 9. 6. I am
the King, Zech. 9. 9. and the Interest of the Deity among Mankind, is lodged in
my Hands; and therefore Men's adherence to God's Kingdom, is determined by their
adherence to me, to whom the Authority therein is delegated.

CHRIST considered abstractedly as God, is of the same Essence with the Father,
and so originally possessed the Kingdom of God as Creator, in the same very
respects as the Father did; he had the same absolute Royal Dominion, and
Rectoral Authority was essential to him without a Delegation.

BUT to Christ as Mediator, this Kingdom which refers especially to the
Recovery of Fallen Men, and the Government of them as redeemed, is given as a
Reward: Joh. 13. 3. Jesus knowing that the Father had put all things into his
Hands. Joh. 5. 22. 27. For the Father judges no Man, but has committed all
Judgment to the Son: And has given him Authority also to execute Judgment,
because he is the Son of Man. Matthew. 28. 18. All power is given me in Heaven
and Earth.

THIS is that Kingdom which was erected to reduce Apostates to a subjection to
God, against whom they had rebelled; this as Wisely, Justly, Faithfully, and
Perfectly administered by Christ, shall be delivered up after all Men have been
Tried at this Redeemer's Bar, and the Equity of his Procedure is solemnly
vindicated, 1 Cor. 15. 24. 2 Thessalonians. 1. 7, 8, 9, 10.

A due Consideration of this Kingdom, as in Christ's Hands, and as it is his
Kingdom, would evince his Divinity, as well as his Mediatorial Administration:
For were not he truly God, he could not know, and influence so many Minds;
Direct, Inspire, Uphold, Defend, Restrain, Succeed and Accommodate such a
Multitude of Persons, in such variety of Exigencies, at the same time, in
different Places, and judge the Secrets of all Men at last.

IT would also force Men's acknowledgment of a Gospel Law, without which the
Notion of a Gospel Kingdom would be in many respects incongruous; and a
judicial proceeding upon Sinners, as Believers, or Unbelievers, Penitent, or
Impenitent, were impossible: For by the Law of Innocence, the Penitent
believing Sinner would be as infallibly condemned, as he who is a believing
Penitent.

NEITHER would it be such a difficulty to comprehend how an Obedience short of
legal Perfection, is acceptable at a Redeemer's Bar, as a Condition of a
Sinner's possessing the Effects of that Redeemer's Righteousness; for his
Righteousness being the sole meriting cause of those beneficial Effects, the
Impetration of them is confined to his Obedience, which was more than adaequate
to the Law of Innocence; and so there is no room left for our meriting by our
Obedience to the Gospel, which is the Rule by which Christ only applies the
Blessings purchased by himself: But yet if that Gospel do not entitle us to
those Blessings upon our compliance with the Conditions whereupon it offered
them to all Sinners, and exclude not them who refuse to comply; then Christ's
Gospel Kingdom is a mere Physical Kingdom, wherein Benefits are no Motives to
Duty, nor Danger a Disuasive from Sin. Gospel Pleadings, Persuasions, and
Authority, have no more place with, and are as improper to them, as to the
raging Sea, or hardest Stones; the influence of Consideration is totally
excluded, and some are haled to Heaven by mere external Power, without any
regard to their voluntary subjection to the Gospel; and others thrust into
Hell, without any respect to their wilful refusing of the Remedy, and
self-hardening against repeated Calls, and the Grace offered by the Redeemer.
Such thoughts could scarce be conceived possible to one who ever read the Holy
Scriptures, unless an occasional obscure Passage must govern against the whole
and plain scope of the Bible; where a Rectoral Administration toward fallen
Man in order to his Recovery, is so constantly expressed, and our Savior is
found designedly to call this so very often by the Name Kingdom.

SHOULD any Sinner object, If I should be cast into Hell from under the Gospel,
I shall be so dealt with because the Curse of the Law of Innocence lies against
me only as a Fallen Sinner. I answer, That Sentence took hold of you as Fallen
Sinners; but with that, there shall be a sorer Destruction for refusing Christ,
and rejecting the Mercy of God, which offered you a Freedom from that first
Condemnation: And that very offer of Deliverance upon Gospel Terms, the earnest
Pleadings of Christ with you to accept it, his Complaints of your refusal, his
Threatenings of sorer Punishments to excite your Minds, his laying your
continued and aggravated Ruin upon your wilful Disobedience, and for that as
Judge Condemning you at last as unrelieved, do fully demonstrate, that Christ's
Gospel Kingdom is a Rectoral Constitution adapted to Subjects capable of Moral
Government, notwithstanding your Apostasy; and that by these Methods joined
with his assisting Grace, he was treating with you as such, in order to your
Salvation.

3. A third thing designed by the Text, is a distribution of all Persons into
Abettors of, and Contenders for Christ's Kingdom on the one side, or the
Devil's Kingdom on the other. q. d. All are with me, or against me, as the Head
of the Gospel Kingdom; and he that is not for me, is against me, and for my
Competitors: They who gather not with me, i. e. they who do not under my
Conduct assist and propagate the Divine Interest, which I am managing, such
scatter abroad, i. e. they oppose the Interest of God, and in conjunction with
Satan they exalt his Dominion and Purpose. None are Neutrals, each is engaged
and suitably employed.

FROM the Text in connection with the foregoing Verses; we have ground for these
following Observations.

1 Observe. THERE are two Kingdoms, with their several Interests, in opposition
and contest against each other in this lower World.

THE one is a Kingdom of Light, the other of Darkness; the one of Truth, the
other of Error; the one administered by Holy Laws, the other by Diabolical and
Carnal Maxims: -- The one a Kingdom of Love and Peace, the other of Enmity,
Cruelty, and Discord. The Encouragements in the one are Rational, Spiritual,
and Heavenly; in the other, they are Vain, Sensual, and Earthly. As the one
prevails, Men become Just, Kind, Temperate, Humble, Pious, Heavenly-minded,
and adorned with every Grace; as the other obtains, Men become Unjust,
Malignant, Intemperate, Proud, Impious, Earthly-minded, void of every Grace,
and Universally vicious. The voluntary Subjects of the one Kingdom, are Men
Sober, Regular, Useful, Good, and truly Religious; the Subjects of the other
are all either Wild, Irregular, Mischievous, as well as Unuseful, Bad,
Idolatrous, Profane, or Irreligious: These Kingdoms, so extremely opposite, are
in perpetual War, one growing upon the others decay, as the one prevails, the
other loses ground; Peace is impossible between them, yea, a Truce or
Cessation cannot be admitted for a moment, tho the Struggles sometimes, and in
some Places, are more visible than in other.

2 Observe. THE Rulers of these Contending Kingdoms and Interests, are Christ
God-Man our Mediator on the one part, and the Devil considered Collectively as
the Head of the Apostasy on the other part. The Lord Jesus in the Humane Nature
opposes Satan, and Invades the Territories he long possessed, and erects his
Throne where his Seat had been.

THE Devils severally under whatever Conduct the Superiority in Order, Power,
or Office among them does adjust, do oppose Christ's Attempts, secure their own
Conquests, defend the Degeneracy introduced by them, promote Man's Hostility
against Heaven, closely guard their Prisoners, and recover whatever of their
Image or Dominion Christ at any time impaireth. Satan is the Ruler, with whom
Christ stands Competitor in every Age.

3 Observe. ALL Men are divided into two Parties by their adherence to these two
opposite Rulers, in their respective Interests and Designs.

THE one Party is for Christ, and the Purposes he pursues; in this are included
all Good Men, and whatever good they do, especially of a Public Nature: These
under the Conduct of Christ, advance what he is building up, and extirpate what
he came to destroy; they Imbark with him, and fight under his Banner, from an
Approbation of his Design as very agreeable to their own renewed Temper.

THE other Party includes all such who yield up themselves to Satan's Conduct,
these have an Aversion to Christ and his Interest, from their own corrupt
Nature, and no less a Fondness for those things he attempteth to destroy. By
this their vile Disposition the Devil easily actuates their Faculties, and
employs their Powers, and so they become his ready Instruments, tho they see
not that its he employeth them.

4 Observe. ANY Man's Neutrality between these engaged Parties, and opposite
Rulers and Designs, is altogether impossible.

EVERY Person is in the one Kingdom, or the other. By Nature all Men are in
Satan's Interests, and under his Power, Ephesians. 2. 2, He rules in the Children of
Disobedience: By Grace we are delivered from Satan's Power, and translated into
the Kingdom of our Lord Jesus, Col. 1. 13. Christ by the Gospel inviteth and
presses all to side with him; but until they obey his Call, they remain in
Satan's Kingdom, they continue on his side in this War, and hinder what they
can the success of Christ's Attempts, against the Devil's Usurpation.

SOME please themselves with a Conceit, that they are not of a Party with the
Devil against Christ, tho they are conscious they are not engaged on Christ's
side. -- But the Vanity of it is apparent from this, that their very surmized
Neutrality is really their being a Party with Satan; for they were originally
bound to be God's Subjects, because they were his Rational Creatures, and tho
by their Rebellion they forfeited the Immunities of his Kingdom, yet an
obligation to continue his Subjects, ceased not thereby.

NAY further, Christ by his Merits having procured a Restoral of their
forfeited Privileges, if they will return; and offering his Assistance to
enable them to return, he now claims their Allegiance, both as God's
Creatures, and as his own Redeemed.

IF therefore after this Claim, Men shall refuse to join actually with Christ,
and to give up themselves to him, must not every Man confess they continue in
actual Rebellion? Keep they not still in the Enemies Camp, whilst they List not
themselves in Christ's Army? -- Are they not there? However they lag or hide,
'till they come over to our Lord, whom God has sent to bring them back to him?

ALL of you therefore have reason to assure your selves, if you are not
actually and explicitly for the Lord Jesus, you are against him; yea, the Devil
is your Leader, you and he have the same common Interest, and drive on the same
Design. These words, He that is not with me, is against me, prove what I say,
and should awaken us to deep thoughts when we neglect an explicit Dedication
of our selves to Christ; and also whenever he has any Momentous Concern in
agitation in our Day.

5 Observe. IT IS in vain for any Man to profess to be on Christ's side, or
harmless to his Concernments, if he do not in his place contribute his utmost
to serve Christ in promoting his Interest, and pursuing the Designs he is
carrying on against Satan's Kingdom in this World.

HE that gathers not with Christ, scatters abroad, and is not with him, but
against him: By these words he determines that they who are indeed with him,
must be active in his Cause, for he will use their Service, tho he do not need
it: They must gather with him, or he deems them to be his Enemies, and
adjudgeth them Obstructors of his Work, if they statedly neglect to contribute
to it, according to their Power.

NAY, in his account, if his Interest grows not by their Labor, they are
Accessory to its Detriment; and they subserve the Devil's Purposes, tho they
own it not.

SOMEWHAT all Men are doing and pursuing as the scope of their Lives, which
fails not to be pernicious, if it be not profitable.

IT is our Redeemer's Demand, that Men be entirely and heartily devoted to his
Cause, which will not fail to command their Time, and employ their Talents in
his Service. Idle Intentions and unactive Wishes, are not sufficient
Testimonies against Hypocrisy in their professed Regards for him, nor fit
Evidences that they are Sincere.

AND as vainly do Men hope to escape the Odium of being of a Party with the
Devil, because they do not professedly abet his Cause, or to be unhurtful to
Christ's Designs, if they make no direct and deliberate opposition thereto.

ALAS, you will find your State will be determined by more close and substantial
Indications. Our Lord who required Peter to evidence the Truth of his Love to
him by feeding his Sheep, Joh. 21. 16. expects our Discipleship shall be
instanced in a vigorous advancement of his Conquests.

WE must not only cease to provoke him by our own Enormities, but we must help
on the Reformation of others, we must increase his Kingdom, by lessening the
number of Rebels; and vindicate it, by restraining Men's profligate
Disobedience, as far as we are able.

THIS is gathering with Christ, which if we omit, we do one way or other
promote Men's Rebellious Disobedience, which is scattering abroad; whereby we
make Christ's Building more difficult, and less probable, we make havoc in his
Heritage, pull down what he is so studious to erect; and disperse into the open
Wastes (where Satan presides) those whom Christ is bringing into his own
Enclosures.

THE Subject would require my Enlargement on each of these Observations -- But
one Discourse will not admit a prosecution even of this last to its full
extent. Therefore I shall satisfy my self to have laid a Foundation for what
may be most properly directed to your assistance; as Societies attempting the
Reformation of Manners, by putting the Laws in Execution against sundry open
Immoralities.

WHAT can engage you to, or encourage you in this Undertaking; yea, or oblige
you to Diligence and accurate Circumspection in the prosecution thereof, like
this? In this your Attempt you have Christ for your Head, and his Kingdom and
designs to promote, and this in opposition to Satan and his Kingdom: Also, that
to neglect it, would state you on Satan's side, and for his Interests, in
opposition to Christ, and his Kingdom.

HOW forcible is any one of these Considerations? How much more all of them
conjoined? As indeed they be in favor of your Blessed Enterprise: And this I
hope to evidence in the following Propositions, which are founded on what I
have already spoken to, and will lead me to reassume, and improve those
Observations I more hastily passed over.

1 Prop. THE Reformation of the Manners of Mankind, is a considerable part of
the design of Christ, as Head of the Divine Kingdom in this World.

BY Reformation of Manners, considered as the adaequate design of Christ; I
mean the turning of Men from Sin to Holiness. This, I confess, is beyond a
Restraint to such flagitious open Enormities which limiteth your Undertaking.

AND therefore I shall say little of Reformation, but under a respect to such
open Evils. Our Lord finds the World grossly depraved -- Serving diverse Lusts
and Pleasures, Tit. 3. 3. The gratification and fulfilling of Carnal and
Spiritual Lusts, make up the Sordid Employment of Apostate Sinners, and this
often in open defiance of God's Authority. Some are Mad upon their Idols, Jer.
50. 38. Some are Blaspheming the Sacred Name of God, from their Contempt of,
and Enmity against him. Some profaning his Sabbath and Worship: Others
destroying the Harmony of this Lower State, by violating the Laws of those
several Relations Men stand in to each other; some guilty of Blood, others of
Filthy Fornication, and Adulteries, or defrauding their Neighbors, or Lying,
Slandering, and the like.

The prevalency of such Crimes argues the Devil's Empire, and as far as they
obtain he Reigns in any place, Rev. 2. 13. But when these be Reformed, his
Seat so far is overthrown, and the Kingdom of Christ gets ground.

To reform a World so corrupt, was very becoming a Holy Jesus, but possible
only to an Almighty Savior, when all that was in it is Lust, 1 John 2. 16. and
the whole of it is so easily, agreeably, and deeply fixed in Wickedness; yea,
in that wicked one, who introduced, excites, and maintains this Corruption,
(...), 1 John 5. 19.

AMONG other designs for the Glory of God, and the Benefit of the Creation,
Jesus Christ resolves the Reforming of Menkind; He came to bless us, in
turning every one of us from his Iniquity, Act. 3. 26. For, well knowing
Impunity would make no Man happy, whilst his Temper and Course of Life is
wicked, he will Bless us by Reforming us; and to effect this, was a
considerable part of his Errand; the same is attested 1 John 3. 8. For this
Purpose the Son of God was manifested, that he might destroy the Works of the
Devil, i. e. Unrighteous Wicked Works; these Devilish Bands wherein Satan held
Men, Christ came to unloose.

The Methods Christ took to reform the World, are greatly adapted to this end,
as well as expressive of his concernedness to accomplish it; consider his
GOSPEL, That teaches us to deny Ungodliness and Worldly Lusts, and to live
Soberly, Righteously and Godly in this present World, Tit. 2. 11, 12. And if
you will examine this as the Standard, it will be found, that the highest
profession of Religion with a bad Life, and the greatest Pretenses to Grace,
where Vices are indulged; make up no more than a dead Image, and will prove no
other than Damning Hypocrisy.

THE same Gospel Light will convince you, that the Doctrinal Opinions which
tend not at all to promote Practical Godliness, are but vain Notions; the most
plausible Speculations which obstruct it, are destructive Errors; yea, the most
Orthodox Conceptions which influence not to a Sober Behavior, will eventually
increase Men's Condemnation. Nor can any Man wisely examine whether his
Knowledge, Faith, or Love, be saving, or not saving, unless he try them by the
Efficacy they have upon the scope of his Practice; for they will never prove
Saving in that Man whom they fail to Reform.

OUR Blessed Lord did not only adapt his Doctrine to our Reformation, but he
also suffered Death to remove the Obstacles to it, and to procure the Spirits
Operations for restoring the Divine Image, and turning Men from their wicked
Course.

HE spoiled the Devil of his Power to that Degree, that he cannot compel Men to
Transgress, as otherwise he had been able.

WICKEDNESS he put to the Blush by his own Holy Example; and provided a Barier
against it, by the Authority enstamped on both Magistracy and Ministry.

NEED I add, his continuing (if not a new implanting) such Notices and
Instincts in Fallen Men, as render them Shy, Ashamed, and Afraid of gross
wickedness, till they be hardened by Custom; and even by this scarce ever
brought so far, as not secretly to disallow their own Vicious Courses, and
approve the contrary.

NOT to mention his Providential Restraints, and sensible Rebukes to flagitious
Evils, nor his clear Explication of God's Laws; let us note how full and plain
an Account he has given us of Heaven and Hell, whereby Sin and Holiness must
be far enough from being Indifferent Matters to Immortal Souls; for as either
of them do Govern, we shall be Eternally lodged in the one or other of those
two places, Romans 2. v. 7, 8, 9, 10.

AND for what is this, and the rest which our Lord has done? But that
Profaneness and Immorality may be Expelled, and true Religion, Justice, Truth,
Love, Purity, and Temperance might again prevail, with an Acknowledgement of
himself as the great Means of all. How happy will this Earth-be, when his
Kingdom overcomes? That is, when this designed Reformation Universally
prevails -- The Natural, as well as the Moral Effect of it will be a stop to
the Miseries, and the Improvement of the truest Welfare of Mankind.

2 Prop. ALL they who promote the Reformation of the Manners of Mankind; are so
far with Christ and his Kingdom, and against the Devil and his Kingdom.

THIS determines whom they follow as their Leader, and what End they live to.
Whenever you put a stop to Sin by Advice, Reproof, or Restraints, you are
opposing what Christ came to destroy; and when you contribute to the
Advancement of Piety and Virtue, you concur with Christ in what his Heart is
set on. You may say, We are Workers together with Christ, 2 Cor. 6. 1. and this
in what he will own at last. Nor need you fear opposition therein from any
besides the Devil, and such as he can influence: You fight under Christ's
Conduct, and this is the truest Indication that you are his Subjects and
Followers; yea, if you do it heartily, and for right Ends, it is an Infallible
Evidence you are his Disciples in Sincerity. To Proselyte Men to a Party among
Christians, will be found no such Testimony of your being for Christ, as this
Faithful Endeavor to Reform Men's Ways.

3 Prop. Every Man in his proper Station ought to be for Christ, in promoting
the Reformation of others. To take the Sense of this, you may observe the
extent of the Obligation; it is all Men, each should do somewhat; the Measure
and Limitation of Men's Attempts, that is to be according to their proper
Station; the kind and degrees of Service in this Work, must be accommodated to
your Abilities and Opportunities. Any Neglect is culpable, utmost Endeavors
will be accepted, and Order must be maintained.

THIS is part of the Charge that accompanies every Office of Divine
Appointment. Magistrates have their Power and Honor, with this affixed
thereto, That they be a Terror to Evil Doers, and a Praise to them that do
well, Romans 13. 3, 4. The Supreme Magistrates should enact Laws against
Immoralities and Profaness; and all in Power must execute the established
Penalties impartially, and conscientiously.

MINISTERS are appointed by Reproof, Threatenings, Instructions, and Censures to
dissuade from all Iniquities, and prevent them what they can; and a Woe is
denounced expressly against such as omit this, Ezekiel. 33. 6. It were easy to
prove that Masters are to restrain Impiety and Vice in their Servants, and that
it is incumbent on Parents to use all diligence to subdue Transgressions, and
encourage Virtue in their Children.

THIS Charge is so evident, that one would think a claim to Honor and Duty as
by Divine Appointment, were disingenious in any in these Superior Relations,
who disregard that Reforming Work, for which God appointed the said Honor and
Authority -- Nor is it any Wonder that Providence often permits the Inferior
Correlates to despise and disobey them who are over them, when Superiors suffer
Vice in them to go unrestrained.

BUT the Obligation of such Superiors to Reforming Work, is too obvious to
insist on; the Scruple may appear greater among Equals, and such may be ready
to excuse themselves by saying, I am a Private Man, without Power over my
Neighbor, and therefore free from all Obligations to endeavor their
Reformation. To such I answer, Either Reforming others is not Christ's
Interest, or thou according to thy Station, art obliged to do it; and thou
may innocently obstruct the Amendment of others, or it is thy Duty to promote
their Amendment: For the Text is thus extended, Whoever is not for me, is
against me, and who gathers not with me, scatters abroad.

TRUE, The Magistrate's Sword is not thine to do execution thy self, but Christ
by the Magistrate calls to thee, as Exodus 32. 20. Who is on the Lord's side,
let him come unto me. It is the recorded Fault of the Common People, as well as
of others, None calls for Justice against Atrocious Criminals, Isa. 59. 4.
and you may as well say, None except the Magistrate, should help to apprehend
the flying Murderer; as that no other should assist to Convict the Drunkard,
Fornicator, Sabbath-profaner, and Blasphemer. If there were no Laws to punish
these Offenders; thy private seasonable Reproof, and forbearing their Company,
would be thy last Relief.

BUT when there be Laws against such; nay, when the Laws expressly encourage
Private Men's Prosecution of such, what can be pretended to exempt you from
doing so small a thing as informing against Transgressors, that they may be
reclaimed, and the Land acquitted by their Punishment?

THE same Providence that led thee to behold that Offense, (if private Reproof
recover not the Delinquent) dictates to thee, thou art that Person designed to
embitter his Sin to him by Public Punishment, and so prevent the Contagion by
his indulged Example.

The Ends of good Laws are frustrated, if private Men must not Convict
Offenders; for what great use are our Laws against Vicious Practices and
Profaneness, if Multitudes may offend, and none be Punished, unless that they
perpetrate their Villainies in the sight of some Zealous Magistrates, which are
not many? Moreover, the Obligation of Private Persons to restrain Sin as they
are able, does result from that Duty of Love you all owe to your Neighbors,
Lev. 19. 17. Thou shall not hate thy Brother in thy Heart; thou shall in any
wise rebuke thy Neighbor, and not suffer Sin upon him. Thy Neighbors
Amendment is the End, rebuking him is the Means: -- But what is meant by this
Rebuking? No less than that just Severity which is sufficient to reclaim him be
used, when gentle Reproof has been tried in vain: -- For you may as well say,
to reprove him by Word is no Duty, if you may stop at that, when you can
lawfully bring him under Methods more severe. For to rebuke him includes the
last as well as the former: -- Nor is it less hatred to deny him the help of
Legal Punishments, to affright him from 'em, than to grudge him the assistance
of a few words of thine own.

BUT to issue this Point. I put it to your Consciences, is not every Private
Person obliged to do all which he has both Right and Ability to do, for the
dethroning of Satan, advancing of Christ, serving his Country, and saving his
Neighbor? Will any Man deny this? -- Now Reforming others by judicially
prosecuting the Flagitious, tend to these good Ends, and that the meanest among
you have a Right and Ability to Convict such Criminals, which is a fit means to
the Reformation, you cannot pretend: What Pretense than will the obscurity of
your Condition yield against the convicting them, being your Duty, as well as
others, especially when any Man's giving Testimony for Conviction, is but as a
Private Man, and the Law authorizes you therein, as much as if you were a
Magistrate; therefore you are as much obliged to Witness, as any Magistrate:
And you have no Plea against engaging herein, but what might command a Blush;
for he that pondereth the Heart sees, and will force your selves to own, that
you omit it, because you secretly favor Satan's Empire against Christ, you
make a light account of the evil and danger of these Sins, you are under a
Cursed Indifferency for Christ's Interest, and prefer your Gain, Ease, and
Safety above them: Nay, you hate your Brother, and are well content, that
Satan's depraving and destructive ways should abide and prevail.

THEREFORE lay by your Excuses, and say no more, Am I my Brother's Keeper? Why
should I intermeddle?

4 Prop. EVERY Faithful Christian, and Follower of Christ, must and will
subserve Christ in the Work of Reformation.

MY Text will bear this Connection, He that is for me, will gather with me: If
any Man be truly devoted to me as his Head and Leader, he will concur with me
in promoting Religion, Truth, Righteousness, Temperance, and Purity, upon the
Ruins of Irreligion, Profaneness, Falsehood, Injustice, Drunkenness, and
Debaucheries. And, my Friends, this is so far from Contingency, that there is a
necessity, and a certain futurity of it from the very Constitution and
Essentials of a true Christian, even such, that he cannot be a Christian
indeed, who statedly, and altogether omits it.

For, 1. IT is implied in our Dedication to Christ. We become Christians by our
Dedication to the Lord Jesus, and that Dedication can amount to no less than
that we do renounce the World, Flesh and Devil, and will fight under Christ's
Banner, and stand by his Cause and Interests against Satan and his Usurpations,
which interpretatively is not only, that the Devil and the Flesh shall not
govern me in particular, but that as far as I am able, they shall govern no
other Person; they shall have no place whence I can expel them, I Will adhere to
Christ, and vigorously follow him in all just Attempts for their Restraint and
Extirpation.

YOU wear a Christian Name, and you own that you yielded up your selves unto
the Lord Christ by Covenant-engagement: How then is it possible, if your Hearts
were right, to hear his Name Blasphemed, see his Day Unhallowed, his Laws
trampled on, and what he came to destroy, maintained with defiance, and you
connive at Men's doing it without control, when you have the happy advantage of
good Laws to put a stop thereto.

TO reconcile this to Christianity, you must reckon that Profaness and
Sacrilege are part of your Christian Vow; or that Hypocrisy in vowing is
allowable, or else that in giving up your selves to Christ, you truly intended
no more than what may be thus expressed. Oh thou my Savior! To thee I yield up
my self, that by thee I may get Safety, and Life Eternal; but I am not so much
as to offend a wicked Neighbor, or at all to expose my self in resisting thy
Enemies, avouching thy Interests, or pleading thy Cause: I must be exempted
from all Labor, Expense, and Hazard, in following thee as my Leader; I will be
Neutral in thy Undertaking to reform the World, and excepted from pursuing that
Design. With these Limitations, I Am content to give up my self to thee, this is
all I mean by my Christian Dedication, and if therein thou insistest upon more
Service on my part, I disavow and renounce that Dedication, and shall show that
I do so by my indifferency and neglect, whenever thou put me on helping
forwards the Work of Reformation.

WHATEVER you may farcy, thus must your Foederal Transactings with Christ be
interpreted, if you esteem your selves unobliged to restrain other Men's Oaths
and Enormities.

BUT how are you imposed on by Satan and your own Carnal Minds, if you can
imagine that this is to be Baptized in (or into) the Name of the Father, Son,
and Holy Ghost, Matthew. 28. 19. or that a good Conscience answers to no other
Demands in that Baptism which saves, 1 Pet. 3. 21. Read the Gospel again, and
you will soon find it Condemns such a heartless and deceitful sense of
devotedness to Christ, a sense which every Gracious Soul must abhor; yea,
common Ingenuity will detest, as Ungrateful and Base, and too mean for a
Christian to offer, or a Blessed Redeemer to accept. Every real Saint will
reckon himself separated to Christ, and that Christ has thereupon an absolute
Propriety in him, and that it is by the utmost Services this Propriety is to be
acknowledged; his Language is the God whose I am, and whom I serve, Act. 27.
23. To me to live is Christ, Phil. 1. 21.

2. A Regenerate Nature impels a Christian to further the Work of Reformation.

EVERY true Christian is partaker of the Divine Nature, 2 Pet. 1. 4. by this he
is denominated the Regenerate Seed of Christ, because he is in a degree truly
conformed to Christ in his Temper and Inclinations, and thence he loves and
abhors things correspondently to what Christ does: Upon which very account
the reforming designs of Christ are lovely to the Genuine Christian, and all
daring wickedness is detested by him; yea, a Zeal for the restraint of Sin, and
for promoting Holiness, is become his Natural Instinct; and therefore he
suffers in the Criminal Exorbitancies he beholds, and must offer a violence to
himself when he testifies not his dislike against open Wickedness, as well as
his approbation of what is virtuous and becoming.

HOW impossible then must it be to such a Man to have a prospect of Reforming
the flagitious and a certainty of restraining their open and daring Villainies,
and yet neglect the means which are in his Hand to effect these things?

YOU must suppose the Judgment, Conscience, Will and Affections of this Man
altogether unactive; nay, himself to move statedly against his strongest biass,
and Divine Influences to yield, nor excite any Holy Propensions, if Sloth, or
Carnality can reconcile him to indulge what he so abominates, and to neglect
what his Heart is so intensly bent for.

MOREOVER, you must conclude this Man to pray in a deceitful manner, and to
counter-act his own Petitions, for he daily prays, Thy Name be Sanctified,
and yet suffers it to be Blasphemed; Thy Kingdom come, and yet countenanceth
Rebellion: Thy Will be done on Earth, as it is in Heaven, and yet conniveth at
the daring violation of God's plain Commandments, and is content the Earth
shall be an Emblem of Hell for Villainy, Matthew. 6. 10.

A good Man from the instinct of a Holy Nature says, Rivers of Water run down
mine Eyes, because they keep not thy Laws, Ps. 119. 136. And is it possible he
should refuse Labor and Expense to ease himself of what he thus heartily
complains. What costs him Floods of Tears when he cannot prevent it, must force
his utmost endeavors to subdue it.

WHENEVER you determine that a Regenerate Person may neglect to help forwards
the Work of Reformation, you must account him to frustrate his greatest hopes,
which are, That there shall be a new Heaven, and a new Earth, wherein dwells
Righteousness, 2 Pet. 3. 13. He must be reckoned free from the impress that
every Nature is under the power of, viz. an abhorrence against what is
destructive to it, and an aptness to propagate it self.

3. THE Reforming of the World is one great design of Christ's Discipling and
gathering Men into his Kingdom.

THIS is the Charge they receive, this is a great part of their Trust, and they
must be treacherous to him, and unfaithful to that Trust, if they omit to
enlighten, cleanse, and reform the World to the utmost of their Capacity.
Christ as the Head of the Humane Nature, is engaged in a War against the Devil,
to rescue Sinners out of his Power, to divide the Spoil, Isa. 53. 12.

HE might have employed Angels alone in this Contest; but he will put an Honor
upon sinful Men also in the Affair. He could have furnished all the Men he
employed, with the Dignity, Force, and Authority of Princes; but for the
generality he makes use of a few mean ordinary Persons, that Satan's Defeat,
tho assisted with the Scepters of most Kings, might be more tormenting to the
Devil, and more Honorable to Christ. Of this number assisting Christ in this
War is every real Christian reckoned, and upon his efficacious Call, he enrolls
them his Subjects, and by making them Christians, he lists them Soldiers; not
only to fight their own way to Heaven, but to assist Christ's Cause, and extend
his Conquests as far as they are able, 2 Timothy 2. 4.

VERY often they bear their Testimony for Christ, by enduring only a Fight of
Afflictions, Heb. 10. 32. and thus overcome by Dying, Rev. 12. 11. The more
qualified among them defend the Faith by Arguments as well as by Sufferings, 1 Timothy 6. 12. 2 Timothy 4. 7. But the summary Trust of each Christian, and at all
times, and by all due ways, is no less than this, viz. That in defense of the
Laws of Christ, they strive against Sin, Heb. 12. 4. (which must often be other
Men's Sins, or their Blood had not been in apparent danger to be shed for
striving against them.) And that with the Doctrine of Christ, they promote
Piety, and Virtue, which that Doctrine fails not to produce, wherever it is
sincerely received.

AT some Seasons Christ gives an advantage to his Followers, by wholesome Laws,
and Godly Magistrates -- And when it is so, can you think their own safety
suspends their Trust? Or that he who was to die a Martyr, for testifying
against Sin, must not oppose Sin by endeavoring to put those Laws in execution
which are enacted against it, such a supposition argues their Quiet is
dangerous to the Church in a worse sense than it has been as yet accounted,
viz. that it relaxeth all Obligations on private Christians to endeavor
faithfully the Worlds Amendment.

THEY that govern themselves by this Notion, would scarce have been Martyrs for
any concern of Christ in a Day of Suffering; for if Idleness, or a Scoff be
enough to deter from resisting Sin, surely a Flame, a Gibbet, or loss of Estate
would prove sufficient to make them commit those Sins, and Condemn all Holiness.

HAD former Martyrs lived in our Days, that Zeal which governed them to die for
Christ's Truths, and Laws, must have compelled them now to act vigorously for
his Laws, and never cease to adore that Grace which afforded them the
Protection and Assistance of Magistrates in so acting for Christ against Sin
and Satan.

PUT these three Heads together, and judge whether he deserves a Christian
Name, who will not engage on Christ's side to reform the Nation, and whether
there be any danger that a true Israelite can refuse it, unless his Dedication
prove a nullity, his Regenerate Principle loose its power, and the design of
his Christian Calling be disappointed?

APPLICATION.
Infer. 1. REAL Christians are united in the greatest things.

THEY are for Christ and his Interests, against Satan and Sin, in the bent of
their Hearts and scope of their Lives, To me to live is Christ, has their
joint consent, Phil. 1. 21.

HIS Kingdom they endeavor to advance, his Royalties they would maintain, and
what oppugnes him they would overthrow, they would make the World wiser and
better, and set all Men free from Satan's Empire, which is upheld by, and
expressed in the Dominion of Men's Lusts.

UNION in these great things may well consist with difference in less
considerable Matters, and is more Christian and of higher consequence than
Agreement in many disputed Notions, or accord in a Ceremony.

HOW mean a thing and unprofitable is it to be of one Faction, or Party; yea,
or Communion among Protestants, compared herewith? Let Men agree in these never
so much, they are departed from Christ, and Carnally joined together, if they
are divided in a resolvedness to reform the Nation.

AND what a pity is it, that they who are joined in Christ this Head, and in
this his Interest and Design, should be disunited in lesser things, especially
to mutual Hatred and Detractations?

AND more is it to be bewailed that any Persons who honestly aim at the
promoting of Christ's Interests, and opposing of Sin, should by mistakes and
temptation at any times be employed by the Devil in serving his Purposes, and
disserving Christ, which too too often happens, and ought to caution the most
confident to try their own Spirits, and examine their Proceedings, especially
when vehement: Ye know not what manner of Spirit ye are of, was a Charge
against better Men than us, Luke 9. 55.

Infer. 2. ENCOURAGEMENTS in promoting Reformation Work, are very great,
notwithstanding the greatness of the Difficulties.

DIFFICULTIES I know are apt to deter from beginning, and to discourage you
from proceeding in this Work, tho Honorable; and he is unthoughtful who
acknowledges not the Difficulties to be great. Great are the struggles of
Corrupt Nature; violent, unwearied, and various is the opposition of Satan,
that we may say as St. Paul, We fight not against Flesh and Blood, but against
Principalities and Powers, Ephesians. 6. 12.

IN our Land Custom has heightened the Torrent of Profaness and Irreligion,
and makes feeble means incapable to put a stop thereto.

GREATNESS and Multitude still too much support these, as former Authority for
unworthy Designs, had a great hand in introducing and making them fashionable.

BUT after all, if your Eyes were open, you would perceive that more are for
you, than can be against you; and the ground for Courage much exceeds that of
Despondency. For this end review a little.

1. WHO he is that you are for, and with you.

2. WHAT you are striving for, and against.

3. WHOM you have to oppose and sight against you.

4. WHAT present Advantages in this Work you have at this time.

I. WHOM you are for, and is with you.

MY Text tells you it is for Christ; he is your Head, to whom the Kingdom is
given, and who is far above Principalities and Powers, Ephesians. 1. 21, 22. You have
him for your Leader, who has the security of Heaven, that he shall Reign and
Overcome, Rev. 17. 14. and of whose Kingdom there shall be no end, Dan. 7. 14.
In the Fight you are sure to prosper in the proper Season, which if delayed, he
will alike own and reward your Faithful Endeavors, as if your Success were
greatest.

CAUSE of fear in this Enterprise you have none, when he can protect you in the
utmost danger, and has a Right to admit you into his Heavenly Kingdom when
your Work is over, both which he will infallibly do, for he has the Keys of
David, Rev. 3. 7.

GO on then, for no Faithful Followers can ever be ashamed of this General; nor
will he be ashamed of such. His Eye is still upon you, and his Presence ever
with you, to renew your strength and afford Supports. Angels think this
Employment for him to be their Honor, Rev. 22. 9. And can you disdain it?
Millions of Martyrs have esteemed his Service safe, even when they Suffered,
and how can you be afraid?

YOU are for him who is the God of the Spirits of all Flesh, able to alter
Tempers, and change Men's Minds. Yea, can command unexpected Success to the
poorest Instruments.

II. CONSIDER what you are striving for, and against what.

IT IS for what God, and Angels, and all Good Men approve; yea, it is for the
Interest of CHRIST on Earth: Things, that when they prevail, will make Mankind
happy? And they are what shall most certainly prevail against the utmost
opposition of Earth and Hell; what you attempt to advance, will justify the
greatest Expense, Labor and Hazards.

BUT against what do you contend? It Is against Profaness and Debauchery; not
things good, nay, not disputable, or indifferent; but so plainly evil, that the
most brutish would blush to plead for; it is against the Reproach and Leprosy
of Humane Nature, the Causes of our past Calamities, and what can alone
endanger the Nation for the future: These Sins, themselves are the sorest
Plagues. It Is Vice you would extirpate, which makes its Abettors Cowardly: It Is
what Reason, as well as Revelation, testifies against, it is what few Sinners
like in their own Children: Who would not be encouraged to reduce and remove
such?

2. WHOM you have to oppose and fight against you in this Enterprise of
Reformation.

ITS the Devil, and such as he does actuate, who will resist you; he is the
grand Leader, and they his Instruments -- And even himself is cast into Chains
by the Great God, 2 Pet. 2. 4. your Leader has trampled on him in the Upper
Regions, Col. 2. 15. he has in a great measure prevailed against him in the
Earth already, and will shortly chain him up from his wonted Influences here
below, Rev. 20. 3. yea, at last he will entirely baffle, break him, and put him
beyond any further Attempts, Rev. 20. 10.

TAKE Courage, it is against one who is an Usurper, and whom his most Obsequious
Followers are ashamed to own, and afraid to see.

IN a word, greater, stronger, wiser, and better is he that leads you in this
Work, than he whom the World follows in opposing Reformation.

AND as for the Men who engage against the attempt of suppressing Vice, they
can be none but the Inconsiderate part even of Brutal Persons; and as they are
at this Day restrained by Laws from doing you much open Injury, so their own
Consciences will soon approve your Attempts to better them, they will judge them
very kind if they shall reform, and as highly just when they have sinned away
the Season of Amendment.

IV. YOU have very encouraging Advantages at this juncture.

THE Parliaments Address, and the King's Proclamation thereupon, with a
prospect of more Laws pursuant thereto, are great things, and good signs; the
most hopeful Indications England for many Years affords: You engage against
Evils which the Supreme Authority in all its Constituent parts, have testified
against; Magistracy is engaged and enjoined to assist you; nay, it is no other
than the Execution of many Excellent Laws which you subserve.

THE Number of your Societies are multiplying in the Country, yea, your Example
is imitated in Ireland with greater success than here; the main o^ your
Difficulty is over, and signal Successes have attended you; many Prayer^ are on
your side, and Invisible Power concerned with you. By many such things Heaven
smileth on this Work, and can you faint without the greatest Reproach?

Exhort. LET me therefore Excite and Enjoin you to proceed vigorously in this
Glorious Attempt.

I have proved it your Duty past all Dispute, that ought to remove your
Backwardness and Sloth. I have shown you somewhat of your Encouragements, let
that allay all fear. Need I tell you? You are hereby endeavoring but due
Returns from England for its Eminent Deliverance from extremest Miseries, and
those unavoidable to Humane View.

YOU are preventing those Calamities which will return with Aggravations, if
these Evils be not Reformed, Ezra 9. 13, 14.

YOU are providing the surest way to revive our Trade, prolong our Peace, and
recover England's Glory. If you succeed, Bodies and Minds will be freed from
the sad Effects of the Debaucheries, which are as fatal as apparent.

YOU lay the best Foundation for Peace among the Divided Parties in this
Nation, who will when Virtuous, easily coalesce, and be free to take away all
unnecessary Causes of Division.

YOUR very Meeting together, and joint Concurrence in this laudable Employment,
will Conciliate yourMinds, and melt them down into Moderation, which is a
Temper so necessary, and upon which our Happiness so much depends, that I dare
deliver this Prognostic: England can never be fixedly happy in its Religious,
or Civil Concernments, but by an UNION between the Moderate Churchmen, and the
Moderate Dissenters.

YOU befriend your own Children and Posterity, by preventing the Infection that
may ruin them.

MANY other Arguments might be urged -- Oh that these and all others made use
of by the several Reverend Ministers in both Places of your Meetings, may by
the Blessing of God envigorate your Minds in this Attempt, and dispose
Transgressors to submit thereto.

AND surely whatever is a Motive to the Physician to endeavor the Cure, is
much more forcible with the Diseased to admit it: Is endeavoring the Reforming
of you Oh Sinners! So plainly the Duty of this Society, and worth their utmost
Pains and Charge: And can it be a light thing, whether you will be Reformed, or
no? Oh the Testimony against you that shall arise from hence, if you be still
uncleansed!

Some CAUTIONS.
I shall give a few Cautions.

1. WITH respect to the Preliminaries to, and the first Words of my Text.

STATE not Christ's Designs which you propose to serve by your hasty Fancy, but
his own plain adjustment of them; you are not for Christ by espousing an Error;
you act not with, or for him in opposing what he forbids not, or violently
contending for what is indifferent, trivial, or doubtful; his Kingdoms
Concernment lies in what is commanded, plain, and momentous.

AND therefore let your Endeavors be laid out in proportion to the evidence
his Word gives concerning things, and tho it be too unusual, yet be you as
earnest for what is important, and plainly commanded, and against what is
flagitious and plainly Prohibited, as others are apt to be for trifles of their
own inventing, or against Sins of their own making.

AND withal, be afraid, without highest Scripture Evidence well applied, to
judge any Men, or Party of Protestants, to be for or against Christ, in
contradistinction from others: It would make a Tender Heart to bleed to hear
two Extremes apply that one Text against Men of a duer Temper, How long halt ye
between two Opinions? If God be God follow him, but if Baal, follow him, 1
King. 18. 22. when more Charity would better evidence either side to be the
Followers of Christ.

2. TO you the Members of the Societies, with respect to your Undertaking.

THINK not lightly as to your selves of such Sins as fall not under the edge of
the Magistrate's Sword: For tho they are not so hurtful to Humane Societies,
and therefore not so provided against by the Law of Man, yet they are as
contrary to Christianity, and inconsistent with it, as others be. Brutal Sins
are chiefly those you have the Law on your side to punish: But be you alike
watchful against Devilish Sins, such as Malice, Envy, Pride, Rancour, Lying,
etc. Guard also against Infidelity, Hypocrisy, Carnal-Selfishness, and all
Impurity of Heart; which with the like Sins God reserves for Punishment in
endless Flames.

WATCH strictly that no Scandalous Practices of your own, blemish, or obstruct
your Undertaking; for you will be more observed than others, and your Faults
will induce a Charge of Hypocrisy upon all active Instruments, tho never so
sincere.

LET not your Endeavors be blasted by any appearance of Pragmaticalness,
Ostentation, Folly, Rage, Vanity, making a Sport of Sin, Revenge, or
Partiality: -- But contrive things so, that the Punished may be forced to
confess, It Is Zeal for God, and Love to them which entirely govern you in this
Attempt.

TAKE care that your Ends, and the Principle you act from, be approved by the
Heart-searching God; that so you may not loose your Reward, nor forfeit his
Defense: And know, it is possible for Carnal-Selfishness to be the Spring of
Actions advanced to the height of these, tho so very excellent.

Go not out of your own Station, neither use any unjustifiable means, least you
prove Snares to others, or your selves, instead of Reformers.

BE tender of your Neighbor's Reputation, and therefore publish no Man's
Faults, unless it be before the Magistrate in order to Civil Punishments; or
before Persons authorized to inflict Church Censures: Reproachful Railing was
never ordained by God, or Man, to be a Reforming Means: And he who charge you
to speak not evil of one another, Jam. 4. 11. Yea, of no Man, Tit. 3. 2. will
require at your Hands all that obstructed Service, and all afflictive Damage
occasioned by your Reproachful Language.

ATTEMPT to Convict no Man of Punishable Crimes, where your Proof is not full
and evident; for thereby you will discover your own Folly, and Uncharitableness,
baffle your great Design, expose your Neighbor to Suspicion, and your selves
to Danger.

BEGIN not with Severest Methods, where you hope milder will prevail; for it is
not Cruelty, but Reformation is your Honest Aim; and the last is best attained,
when the least of the first is needful.

ADMIT nothing to excuse your Vigorous Care to restrain Sin, which will not
bear your Dying Thought, in a view of God's Tribunal.

LET nothing below or besides Reformation, be your Design, and yet be not
satisfied with the mere Honesty of your Intention, but use the best and justest
ways which a well informed Mind directs, as likeliest to reach that End.

TRUST not in your own Heart, nor reckon Success to be at your own Beck, but
depend on, and Pray much to God for his Conduct, Defense, and Blessing.

LIMIT not your Resolution to persist in this Blessed Attempt by the continued
Assistance of others; for many now Vigorous, may cool in time, but your
Obligation will not cease by their Backslidings.

REPENT not of beginning this Attempt, if you should meet with less Success,
and more Trouble than you at first expected: For it was not well considered, if
you did not count your Costs; and your Undertaking may be well managed on your
part, tho great Success be wanting. But however, unexpected Trouble will not
lessen Duty, nor Disappointment as to expected Success, hinder your Reward; nor
will other Men's Faultiness be charged on you.

ALLOW not your Spirits to grow Lukewarm and remiss in this Work; when you
have for some time applied your selves to it, and attained some degree of
Reformation thereby. There is need of this Caution, on these several Accounts.
Your Endeavors will be faint, proportionably to the Remissness of your Spirit:
Time is apt to allay that Fervor, which in the beginning of an Enterprise is
more common and Natural; the need of Reforming Methods will continue, tho you
should find some Reformation as to open Impieties, for many Defilements will
abide uncleansed; Corrupt Nature will soon discover it self, when Restraint
diminishes, and the more violently, because a while kept in.

SET no bounds to the Reformation you propose, short of what the Laws of the
Land do countenance.

WHATEVER Evils they remark, do not you connive at, tho they appear not so
gross as those you at first encounter. It Is Wisdom in a very Degenerate Nation,
to begin with the greatest Crimes: -- But it will be Unfaithfulness, when these
are somewhat amended, to overlook the Lesser; for they are Evils, and will, if
indulged, dispose Men to return to such as are more Atrccious.

WISELY prevent all Divisions, Quarrels, and Sinister Dealings in your own
Societies. Should you be uneasy to each other, your Strength is broken, and
the least injustice will sully your Reputation, which is so absolutely
necessary to your Usefulness. The Reason why I caution you against Divisions,
is this: It too often happens, that forwardness in such Attempts proceeds from
a Natural Fervor, as well as a pure Heavenly Zeal; and as far as this Natural
Fire is active, Provoking Insolence, and Indiscretion, are hardly with the
greatest Care prevented, and what tendency the discovery of these have to
Quarrels and Disgusts, is too obvious to insist on.

HAPPILY would this Work be carried on, if a Divine Zeal in Sedate Tempers
directs it, and every one shall bear as much with each other's Weakness, as he
would in a Profitable Concern of his own. As to that part of the Caution which
relates to Sinister Dealings, I have no ground to suggest it, but that the
Holiest Society here, may have a Judas, and whilst our Nature is not wholly
healed, we should be warned against Satan's Devices.

Lastly, TAKE heed that your Societies Degenerate not, nor be made to serve
lower, or other Purposes, than this of the Reformation of Manners. Earthly
Minds may debase their use, and Designing Men endeavor to pervert them. They
now are duly managed to Ends for which they deserve this Glorious Name: Oh let
that Name ever govern all your Discourses, Designs, and Methods. He too little
knows Mankind, and the History of former Times, that thinks this very Caution
needless.

THE Lord impress these Warnings which Faithfulness to Christ, and a great
Esteem of your Undertaking, compelled me to deliver.

I shall conclude the whole by calling you to Lament with me; that the City and
Nation so hate to be Reformed, that they who seriously attempt it, must bear
the Scoffs of most; and to be an Informer against the obstinately Vicious, is
with them a reproachful Title, tho God records it for a Commendation to Men of
highest rank, v. 9 12.

Let Us Bewail; That after all God's long use of all Reforming Methods, we
should still have so much need to be Reformed. That Text, Ezekiel. 22. 24. is
applicable to us; Say unto her, Thou art the Land that is not cleansed. And
when we consider that the Pestilence, the Burning this City, the Sword, loss of
Trade, growing Poverty, and above all, the Gospel Means of Grace have been all
so notoriously uneffectual to Reclaim us, have we not great cause to pray that
God pass not that Sentence against us, which you find uttered by this same
Prophet? Cap. 24. 13. In thy Filthiness is Lewdness, because I have purged
thee, and thou wast not purged; thou shall not be purged from thy Filthiness
any more, till I have caused my Fury to rest upon thee.

FINIS.
Books Printed for John Laurence at the Angel in the Poultry.
A Sermon Preached to the Societies for the Reformation of Manners, in the
Cities of London and Westminster, November. 15. 1697. By John Shower, Octavo.

The Saints Convoy to Heaven, an Occasional Discourse. By Thomas Doolittle, M.
A. Octavo.

The Saints Mansions in Heaven: A Discourse occasioned by, and Preached upon
the Death and Funeral of Mrs. Elizabeth Brooks (late Wife to Mr. Samuel
Brooks, Minister in Darking in Surrey) who Deceased, March 13th, 1697. By Mr.
Tho. Doolittle, Octavo.

Mr. Woodhouse's Reformation Sermon, May 31th. 1697, Octavo.


