IMPRIMATUR,

Feb. 4. 1694/5. Guil. Lancaster.

The Certainty of Divine Revelation. A SERMON Preached at St. Martins in the
Fields, Feb. 4. 1694/5. BEING THE Second of the LECTURE For the Ensuing YEAR,
Founded by the Honorable ROBERT BOIL, Esquire. By JOHN WILLIAMS, D. D.
Chaplain in Ordinary to His Majesty.

The Second Edition Corrected.

LONDON: Printed for Ri. Chiswell, and Tho. Cockerill: At the Rose and Crown in
St. Paul's Churchyard; and at the Three Legs in the Poultrey. MDCXCVI.

HEB. I. 1, 2. God who at sundry times, and in diverse manners spoke in time
past unto the Fathers by the Prophets, has in these last days spoken unto us
by his Son.
IN which Words I have observed there is,

I. A Description given of Revelation, it is God's speaking, and declaring his
Will to Persons chosen for that purpose.

II. The Certainty of it; it is by way of Declaration, and taken for granted,
God who at sundry times, and in diverse manners spoke, etc.

III. The Order observed in delivering this Revelation; it was at sundry times,
and in diverse manners: In time past by the Prophets, and in the last days by
his Son. It was (...), in parts, and in several Periods and Manifestations; and
(...), by Illapses, Visions, etc.

IV. The Perfection and Conclusion of all, it is in the last days by his Son;
the Heir of all things, etc.

Under the first I have showed,

1. What we mean by Revelation, in contradistinction to Natural Light.

2. The Possibility of it.

3. The Expedience, Usefulness, and Necessity of it.

It is the Second I am to proceed to, viz. The Certainty.

Under which I shall show,

I. That God has revealed himself; or that there has been such Revelation.

II. The Difference between Pretended and Real Revelation.

III. That the Scriptures of the Old and New Testament contain such a
Revelation, and have upon them all the Characters necessary and belonging to
such Revelation.

I. That there has been a Divine Revelation.

What I have principally in my eye, is the Proof of the Divine Authority of the
Holy Scriptures; but for the present I shall lay that aside, and take my rise
toward it from such general Principles and Observations as are founded upon
Reason; or such particular Instances and Matters of Fact as manifestly
proceeded from Revelation.

And accordingly I shall dispose of what I have to say in Proof of it, under
these Four Heads; as we have for it, 1. A Rational or Moral Evidence. 2. A
Natural. 3. A Traditionary, or Testimony. 4. A Supernatural.


First, Moral: Where in the first place I take for granted what I have before
proved, viz. That a Divine Revelation is Expedient, Useful, and Necessary; and
upon that Supposition shall attempt to prove the Certainty of it.

I acknowledge, where the Necessity is created by our own fault, there lies no
obligation upon the Creator to provide a Remedy; and since the Necessity
Mankind is now in, proceeded from their Apostasy, that Necessity can in reason
be no just Plea for it, nor a sufficient Excuse in the want of it. When Man was
created in such a state as made Revelation a necessary Help to his Reason, God
immediately afforded him such an extraordinary Manifestation of himself: But
when he forfeited that Divine Gift, he could have no allowable Right or Claim
to it; For to him that has, and improves what he has, shall be given; but to
him that has not, and takes no care to preserve and improve it, may justly be
denied what was otherwise fit and necessary for him to have.

This indeed is the Case, if rigorously stated; but considering the miserable
Circumstances Mankind were in after the Fall, more especially through want of a
Revelation, we may reasonably conclude, That the Goodness of God would no less
incline him to give it, than if he had been obliged to it by a special Grant,
Promise, or Covenant. Decrees are Secrets locked up in the Breast of Almighty
God; and whatever Good is therein intended, how beneficial soever they may be
in the Event, yet afford no Satisfaction to us, till they are opened and
revealed: And though the Redemption of Mankind were decreed, and were according
to Circumstances to operate, and in due season to be fully executed, yet what
would They have been the better, if for 4000 Years together that Decree had lay
hid in the Bosom of the Father, and the Decree had never been a Promise, and
that Promise had never before that time been revealed unto them? So that had we
no such Promise upon record, as, The seed of the woman shall bruise the
serpent's head; yet however, we might be as sure that there was some such kind
of Revelation made to Adam, some Promise of Forgiveness, when God did intend to
Redeem him and all Mankind, as there was a Design to Redeem them: It being as
necessary toward their present Comfort to have a Revelation of that Mercy in
their Redemption, as Redemption it self was necessary toward their Happiness.

And this will farther be confirmed, if we consider what has been before proved
in the former Discourse, That all men have had a Sense of the Want of a
Revelation; and have been possessed with an earnest and impatient desire of
obtaining it; which being a desire becoming Human Nature, useful and fit to be
cherished, it is not to be conceived, that where there is provision made to
answer all sensible and natural Appetites throughout the Creation, that this no
less importunate, though supervenient Desire, should have no regard paid to it,
but be suffered, like Aetna, to be always burning within, tormenting, as it
were, the Bowels of Mankind with an unquenchable Fire, or an unsatiable Desire
of knowing what was not to be known, and of obtaining what was not to be
obtained. This is a State that the Consideration of God's Goodness will not
admit us to suppose; and we must therefore necessarily conclude, That the same
Divine Power and Wisdom that made Man a Reasonable and Inquisitive Being, and
has allowed him a World of Wonders to employ that Faculty in the Contemplation
of, has also provided for that Noble Desire of knowing what the Will of his
Maker is, and what relates to his own Eternal Welfare; and that is, by a
Revelation. Indeed without this, it is with him as with one that is born Blind,
that whatever other Evidence he may have of the Being of a God, wants one of
the most convincing of all, which is, The Wonders of an Almighty Power and
Incomprehensible Wisdom, conspicuous in the Frame of Nature, and the visible
parts of the Creation: So whatever sense men, that have only Reason for their
Guide, may have of the Mercy and Goodness of God; whatever they may observe in
the Course of his Providence to confirm them in the Belief of it; whatever
Hopes they may have of it, from the general Notion of the Divine Nature;
whatever Desire they may have of it, from a sense of their own Misery, yet they
want that Evidence of it, which, as we find by constant experience, alone can
satisfy and compose their doubtful and distracted Minds, and that is Certainty,
or, which is the same, Revelation; by which and nothing less, That Certainty is
to be attained. And therefore we have just reason to believe that was not
wanting to the First Ages of the World: For the same reason we have to believe
God to be good, the like reason we have to believe that he did after that
manner make himself known in those early times from the first to Mankind.

But it may be said, What is all this Reasoning to Matter of Fact? For if after
all, there has been no such Revelation, or no Proof can be made of it, That is
more than a Thousand Speculative Arguments for it. And besides, supposing there
was once a Revelation, what was that to those Ages and Nations that afterward
wanted it, and were condemned, as it were, to sit in darkness, and the shadow
of death?

The last of these is not to be denied, and so I shall first of all consider
it. And in answer to it it shall suffice to say for the present, That if there
has been such a Revelation made known to the World, and all due care taken by
the Almighty and Beneficent Creator for the Preservation of it, and it
afterward be damnified, or corrupted, or in fine, utterly lost, through the
Negligence or Perverseness of men themselves, the Fault of the Miscarriage
wholly rests upon them. The making known the Revelation, was an extraordinary
Case, and is a voluntary Act of Grace and Favor in Almighty God; the
Preservation of it is the ordinary Case, and belongs to Men: and when once the
Extraordinary Case becomes Ordinary, God leaves it to its proper and natural
Course, to Second Causes, to Human Prudence, Care, and Inspection.

Thus it is with Reason, the Noblest Principle of Human Nature, which if not
attended and nurtured, may degenerate into Stupidity, and a kind of Brutality.
As it happened to some Nations in the Southern Parts of Africa, West-Tartary,
and West Indies, that notwithstanding the Characters of an Almighty Being
legibly stamped upon the Face of the whole and every part of the Creation, have
so far degenerated, that it has been questioned, Whether they have had any
Notion or Sense of a God, or any sort of Worship for him. And so it is in the
case before us: For as God had made a special Revelation of himself to Adam
after as well as before the Fall, so he took a very effectual way for the
Conveyance and Preservation of it, by the Longaevity of those Patriarchs with
whom it was deposited, and who were to take care that it might be preserved
inviolable: Three of which alone filled up the first Period of 1656 Years, from
the Creation to the Flood; viz. Adam, Methuselah, and Noah: So that Methuselah
lived 243 Years with Adam, (for so old was he when Adam died;) and Noah lived
600 Years with Methuselah (for so old was Noah when Methuselah died, and the
Flood came.) And four again of the Fathers after the Flood (tho the Extent of
their Lives was shortened) fell in with the 856 Years from the Flood to the
giving of the Law by Moses at Sinai: So that Abraham is well supposed to have
lived 150 Years with Shem, Jacob about 20 with Abraham, Levi 60 Years with
Jacob, and Amram the Father of Moses lived in the Time of his Grandfather Levi.

Now what course, in the Circumstances and the State the World was at that time
in, could be more fit, if duly observed, for conveying the matter of a
Revelation through the several Periods and Ages of the World, so far as
Personal Teaching was sufficient?

And especially, when the Things revealed, and after this manner to be
delivered from Age to Age, were of Importance sufficient to oblige both Teacher
and Scholar; and withal so Few, as might without any Difficulty be retained.
And therefore, if notwithstanding the Method taken by Almighty God for the
registring what he had revealed, in the memories of men, and for delivering it
down to future Ages, there was afterward no care taken on their part, and no
reasonable provision made for conserving such a Revelation, but that in process
of time, it was either totally obliterated, or vilely corrupted, the
Miscarriage was (as I have said) wholly chargeable upon such as by their
Negligence or Wickedness made Mankind to sin, in not delivering, or not
faithfully delivering down to Posterity what they themselves had received in
its Original Purity from their Ancestors. The Case is indeed very lamentable,
but what is not to be helped, without Almighty God alters the Nature of things,
turns them out of their proper and ordinary Course, and acts solely by his own
Power and Prerogative, either without or above the Agency of Second Causes.
Which is no more with reason to be expected, than that when God has made the
Earth in its own nature fertile, and capable of yielding all things necessary
for man's subsistence, with Cultivation; that He should also be obliged to
continue it in the same state it was created in; and when by the Sloth and
Stupidity of men it brought forth nothing but Thorns and Thistles, should
miraculously make every Tree that is pleasant to the sight, and good for food,
and whatever was beneficial and necessary, to grow out of the Ground, as at
first, and before there was a Man to till the ground. Now if this be
unreasonable for Man to expect, it is so then in the case of Revelation, which
God had committed to the Custody of Men themselves, and made them whose
Interest it was, to be the Conservators of it.

Having thus far considered the Case of those that had not, or have no
Revelation, I shall return to the Main Point, which is, To show that there has
been such a Revelation. And that brings me to the

IId. Sort of Proof, which I call Natural, as it belongs to things Natural, and
is opposed to what is of mere Institution, (which I conceive to be equivalent
to Revelation): And they are Speech, and common Notions.

1. Speech: For which there is in Man a Natural Capacity, and Organs admirably
contrived and disposed (as we see by experience.) But now there is a vast
difference in that case betwixt Us and other Creatures; for other Creatures
have not only Organs as we have, fitted for their proper Notes, but at once
have all those Organs in Tune and in Operation; so that whatever they would
signify in their way, and according to their kind, they immediately thereby
express: But though the Organs of Speech in us are as exquisitely framed, yet
we gradually grow up to the use of them; and again, can never apply them, or
know how to use them, without some precedent Instruction. And therefore it has
been the Opinion of many, That without hearing others speak, we should be
eternally dumb V. Postellus, lib. de Orig. c. 4.
; as the Experiment of Psammeticus King of Egypt shows Herodotus, Enterpe. c. 2.
, (if true) of shutting up Two Children in separate Caves, where they never
heard one Articulate Word, and so could use none.

So that now Man must be taught, and as he is taught, so he speaks. But we will
put the case in which there was no Human Instructor, and yet the Person spoke
as articulately, and had the free use of Words, and knew as well how to express
his mind by them from the very first, as if he had had the best Helps for it in
the world, and had been never so long a time versed and practiced in it; and
that Person was Adam, who was created in a full Age, and had none before him;
and yet must as soon have Words for use, and Skill how to use them, as he had
to give Names to the Creatures, according to their several kinds. For without
this, what Conversation could he have with Eve, or what Comfort could he take
in her presence, (for it was not to be called Society); and what a Dejection
must there be in each of them, when all other Creatures had their Notes for
understanding each other, according to the Species they were of, but they
themselves alone were mute. So that though it is not expressly said, That Adam
and Eve had any Discourse; yet it is as certain from the reason of the thing, as
it is that God spoke to them, or the Serpent and Eve spoke together. But it is
certain Adam must then be self-instructed, or be instructed by God: He must
then invent a Language of himself, or he must be taught by him that made him.
If he was to teach himself, how could he know that he was able to speak; or how
can we think he would begin his Conversation by an attempt that way? For it is
highly probable, that they would first have began with dumb signs, or some
external motions (as we see those ordinarily do, that have no Words which
others can understand); or if they should at length have found out such an
Expedient, and formed some Articulate Sounds, yet what a tedious course would
this have been, and how long before it could be wrought into a Language, that
they could first Think of Words, and then Remember them, and then Use them, and
then fall into Discourse? Don't we find how difficult it is to learn to speak a
Foreign Language, when we have all Advantages for it, by Instruction and
Discourse with those that speak it? But suppose Two Persons wholly strangers to
one another, and of a Language as different as Chinese and English, should meet
together, and be constrained by Circumstances, being without other Society, to
converse with each other; though each had a Language of their own, and knew how
to speak and form Words for Pronunciation, yet how long would it be before they
could fix the Words for it, and to have a Term for every thing they were to
discourse about; to invent and agree upon it, and then to remember them, and
then to use them? And then much more will the difficulties increase, were these
Two in the case of Adam and Eve, and to beat out the Track which never any
walked in before; to invent Speech it self, and Words to be spoken, and
sufficient to express the Thoughts of each other, so as to make Company, and
that Company agreeable, acceptable, and useful. This must have been the work of
Time, if it had been practicable; and the Difficulty of it would have made each
others Company a Burden rather than a Pleasure, till such time as they could
come to a mutual understanding of one another minds and inclinations. And
therefore to make them meet helps for each other, it was of Necessity that they
should have an extraordinary Power communicated from Heaven, and be enabled by
that Instinct as soon to speak, as the other Creatures are in a course of
Nature to utter such Voices as are suitable to their kind, or as Mankind are to
express their Passions of Joy or Sorrow, by Laughter or Tears.

So that it is not without reason, I rank the Gift of Speech among those things
that are of a Divine Infusion, and so equivalent to Revelation.

2. Another Instance of this kind, is what is usually called Common Notions, or
Natural Impressions: Common Notions, because they are common to all Mankind;
and Natural Impressions, because they are conceived not to be acquired by any
Human Means, such as Education and Instruction, Observation and Experience; but
are imprinted on our Nature by an Immediate and Supernatural Power.

That there are such Notions as all Mankind do agree in, is undeniable; such as
the Belief of a God, an Adoration to be given to him; and that there is an
essential difference between Good and Evil, so that Good cannot by any art or
endeavor be made or esteemed to be Evil, nor Evil Good: For as the Natures of
the things themselves cannot be altered, so neither can our Conceptions of them.

It is as undeniable, That these Notions or Impressions are so early to be
discovered, and do so grow up with our Reason, that they seem not to be the
Effects of our Reason, but rather to be antecedent to it; and that it is rather
what we Find, than what we Choose; what belongs to our Nature, than what we add
to it. And accordingly as we have a Notion, so a Sense of those things,
antecedent to all Reasoning and Instruction, which we call Conscience, excusing
or else accusing, according to the nature of the things, whether good or evil.
Now as the Nature of the things must be before our Conception of them, so both
must be before we pass this practical Judgment upon them: And if we do exercise
this Faculty antecedent to all Instruction, then so must the Sense of the
things be, about which it is exercised. So the Apostle, Romans 2. 14. When the
Gentiles which have not the law, do by nature the things contained in the law,
these having not the law, are a law unto themselves: Which show the work of the
law written in their hearts, their conscience also bearing witness, Ad Nicom.
l. 4. c. 5. l. 5. c. 9. l. 8. c. 1.
etc. Which is exactly agreeable to the Phrase of the Wisest among them; So
Aristotle calls it, the Natural, Common, and Unwritten Law. Rhet. l. 1. c. 10,
13, 15.


But above all, Cicero (who best knew the sense of the Philosophers, and how to
express it) does speak fully to this point, both as to the Universality of
these First Notions, and the agreement in them by all Mankind; both as to the
nature and rise of them. Pro Milone.
There is, says he, a certain Law, not written, but native to us, which we
have not learned, received, nor read: But we have taken and derived it from
Nature it self; to which we were not Taught to be conformed, but Made; it was
not by Institution, L. 1. de Not. Deor. and L 2. de Legib.
but Infusion. This, in another place, he says all men have by a certain
Anticipation, and calls them innate Cogitations; and will allow it to come from
no less a Power than what is Divine. We have, Pro Cluentio.
says he, received a Conscience from the Immortal Gods, which cannot be
plucked away from us.

So that whatever Improvement these Notions and Impressions may receive from an
after Instruction, yet they seem to be implanted in us by the same Power that
made us reasonable Creatures, who no more could leave himself without Witness
in our Minds, than in the Works of Nature. And being thus antecedent to our own
Reasoning, or other information, can proceed from no other a Principle than
Revelation does, and is therefore equivalent to it.

III. There is a Traditionary Proof of Revelation, which is by Testimony, or by
such Instances as are a part of the Revelation; and of which, as I conceive, no
tolerable account can be given, if they are not allowed to be of Divine
Institution. In order to which,

1. I observe, That the Want of a Revelation in any particular Nation or Age,
is not an Argument sufficient to prove that there never was any Revelation. For
Revelation being more especially of things not knowable by the mere Light of
Nature, may be lost, while the Light of Nature remains. It being in this case
much as it is in Matters of History, which may be derived from one Generation
to another, and especially by Registers and Memorials: But if a former
Generation be careless and slothful, or the Records not faithfully wrote or
kept, the Matters of Fact in one Age are irrecoverably lost in the next, or
turned into Fables. Of which the Earliest Times are too manifest an Instance;
and for which reason Varro did not divide them amiss, into (...) and (...),
obscure or unknown, and fabulous. Which lasted till the First Olympiad, and
that was, at soonest, Anno Mundi 3173; when the Historical Age, according to
him, begins. Now as the want of such Histories will not prove that there never
were any such, and much less that there were no Matters of Fact for the
furnishing such Histories: So though there be no Revelation, or no Memorials of
such a Revelation, in some particular Nations or Ages, it will not necessarily
follow that there never was any such Revelation made to the World.

2. When I propose the Proof of a Revelation, I would not be understood so much
as to suppose, That there was from the beginning, or before the Time of Moses,
a Pandect or Collection of Divine Revelations; but only that there were
Inspired Persons to whom God did (as occasion served) reveal himself in sundry
times and diverse manners, such as Adam, Enoch, Noah, etc.

3. Where there has been or is no Revelation, or pretense to it (if any such
Age or People ever were) yet there are or have been in those Ages or Nations,
certain Footsteps of such a Revelation; and which wherever they are found, are
as evident Marks of such a Revelation, as Pillars or Crosses found in a
Country at present uninhabited, are, that there have been some persons that
have been there before, and have erected those Monuments.

4. I account such Usages, Rites, and Principles, to proceed from Revelation,
that have no foundation in Reason, and the nature of the thing, but are
correspondent to what we call Revelation; and which can well have no reason at
all assigned for them, if not the Reason given in that Revelation: Such are
Expiatory Sacrifices, and other things relating to Divine Worship.

5. This is the more confirmed, if such Usages, Rites and Principles have been
observed, practiced, and believed, in Nations that have had no relation one to
another, no Commerce or Communication, nor sometimes knowledge of one another;
for then they must arise from some common Head, from whence they were
ab-originally dispersed among the several Branches of the same Stock.

When one People has been mixed with another, as the Jews and Egyptians; or
derived from another, as the Colchi from the Egyptians; or there have been
Commerces and Confederacies, Wars and Conquests, it is no wonder they
intermingle in several Rites and Observances. Of this we have a notorious
Instance in Circumcision, which by the abovesaid means came to be received by
several Nations, as the Ethiopians, Egyptians, and Colchi, the Phoenicians, and
some of the Syrians, as Herodotus shows Clio. cap. 36, 37. Enterp. cap. 104. V
Bochart Geogr. Saci. Phaleg. l. 4. c. 31.
. But when the Usages, Rites, and Principles have been as well found where
there has been no Communication, as where there has; it is no less a sign they
descend from one and the same Original, than when the Waters of the Seven
Branches of the River Nilus have one and the same Taste and Color, without any
Communication, that they do all descend from the Main Stream.

In like manner, if we find, suppose, among the Seventy Nations (into which
it is said Mankind was divided, upon the Confusion at Babel) several of the same
Rites and Usages, generally speaking, concurring with those of what we call
Revelation, we must conclude, That they were observed before that Dispersion,
and were wholly owing to as early an Institution.

Among the Instances that I shall make use of for the Proof of a Revelation, I
shall begin with those that relate to Divine Worship, such as Time, Sacrifices,
etc.

1. Time. That there is some particular Portion of Time to be set apart for the
Public Worship of God, either by Divine Appointment, or Humane Consent, is
absolutely necessary, when it is to be the Act of a Society; for Worship,
without some time for such Society to convene and assemble in, must inevitably
end in Confusion and Dissolution.

And therefore as God created the World as a Temple to exhibit and manifest
himself in, and created such Beings as should in their several Stations
celebrate his Praise; so when he had finished all his Work, he established that
Day which he rested upon, to be from thenceforward devoted to that Service; as
we may see the Institution, Genesis 2. 2. I call this an Institution; for when
could that be more seasonably instituted by Divine Authority, than at the Close
of the Creation, when the Sanctification and the Reason of it were so
immediately connected; God blessed and sanctified it, because in it he had
rested from all his work? It being not probable that there should be at that
time no Institution, when the Reason for it is expressly given; or that there
should be no present Obligation to observe it, when there was an Institution.
If God had no sooner finished his Work, but he sanctified the Day following,
it is evident that the Obligation to observe it must begin with the Institution:
And if he sanctified it, because on that Day he rested, it is as evident the
Institution did begin with the Reason of it. And then how improbable is it that
God should bless and sanctify a Particular Day, and yet for the space of Two
thousand Years together should leave that Day in common with the other Days of
the Week, without any distinction? How improbable again, that it should be
first instituted and made a Duty to the Jews only for a Reason that equally
concerned all Mankind as well as them, because he rested; and for a reason
existent from the first, as well as in the time when it was instituted at
Sinai? It Is highly unreasonable to add one Prolepsis to another, and to heap
Figure upon Figure, when there is no necessity for it, contrary to all the
Rules of a Just Interpretation.

Now if this be an Original and Primaeval Institution, we have one Instance of
a Divine Revelation, so far as the Scripture is of Authority; and surely we may
demand in its behalf, to have as much regard paid to it as we give to Profane
Histories.

But however, we are not without a concurrent Testimony from them also in this
particular. For it is manifest that there has been of great Antiquity such a
Distribution of Time as we call a Week of Seven Days; and which is more to our
purpose, That the Seventh Day was a Festival and Religious Day. This Lucian
does more than intimate; and long before him, Solon, who calls it Most Holy
Day, in his Elegies, quoted by Eusebius Praepar. l. 13. c. 12, p. 667
; and one earlier than he, Homer, who calls it, (...), The Holy Day. But
Calimachus, Homer, and Linus, are still more particular, for they say it was
because all the Works of Creation were then finished. So Homer, (...); and it is
therefore called by Linus, The Birthday of the World.

Now there is nothing in Nature to point to this; for there is no more to be
observed from the Motion of the Heavens for such a Septenary distribution of
Time, or Division into Weeks, than there is for the dividing of a Day into
Hours: And consequently it must proceed from some Institution, and from a very
early Institution, because of what I have observed from the forecited Authors,
who are of great Antiquity, especially Homer and Linus: For Homer is supposed
to have lived in or about the time of Saul, in the Year of the World 2940, and
Linus in the time of the Judges, about the Year 2570. The consideration of
which does make it probable, that these Ancient Poets owed their Information to
the general Tradition of the World, rather than to the Jews. Indeed Aristobulus
the Jew, from whom Eusebius drew the abovesaid Testimonies, says, these Poets
had borrowed them from the Jewish Books. But if it be considered how little the
Jewish Books, the Scriptures, were known to the World before the Translation of
them by the Seventy into Greek, which was about 300 Years before the Birth of
our Savior; or how little the Opinions of the Jews themselves before the
Captivity were known abroad, it will hardly be conceived, that these things
should be known so early, and spoke of so positively by the Greek Poets, Homer
and Linus, within so short a time after the Institution of the Sabbath at
Sinai, as these two lived; for Linus must have lived within less than half an
hundred Years after the time of Moses; and Homer in less than 400. Where if we
take the lowest term, that of Homer, the Jews were hardly in a settled State,
and no more in a Condition, than they were disposed in their Temper, or
permitted by their Religion, to inform other Nations in the Articles or
Mysteries of their Religion. So that it seems very evident, that the
Observation of the Seventh day for the Service of God, was an ancient and
general Opinion, and especially of those who may be best presumed to understand
what had been the sense of Mankind in the Ages before, or those in which they
lived. And if this was the Opinion of those early Times, conformable to the
History of Scripture, we have sufficient reason to offer this as an Instance of
a Revelation.

2. Another instance of Revelation is Sacrifices, and especially those of
Expiation. Amongst all the Rites and Usages relating to Divine Worship, there
are none that exceed these in their Antiquity (except the Sabbath) or Extent.

For we no sooner read of God's Reconciliation to Mankind, but that they
offered Sacrifice; no sooner of Noah's Deliverance and Escape out of the
Deluge, but he offered Sacrifice: And without doubt, as it begun, so it
continued, and was as much dispersed and observed among Mankind before the
Flood, as after it. But how probable soever it is, that this Rite was thus
universally observed before, yet That we are not so certain of, as we are of
the Observation of it after the Flood, when there was no Age nor Nation where
it was not to be found, how dispersed soever they were; of which no tolerable
Account is to be given, unless it be allowed to have been in use before the
Dispersion at Babel, and that it was of Divine Institution. It must have been,
I say, in use before that Dispersion; for how could all Nations fall into one
and the same Practice, and have the same Opinion of Sacrifices, when there is
nothing in the Nature of the thing to lead them to it, if it had not been, that
they had all descended from one Blood, from one Family, from one Body; by which
means it was conveyed into all the several Branches issuing from it, and went
along with them where ever they went.

Now the question is, Whence this should arise, and what gave it this universal
Acceptance and Authority? whether the Invention of some Eminent Persons,
suppose, in those early Times? or whether it was by Revelation from God, and of
his special Institution?

There seems no great reason to think this Service should proceed merely from
the Invention of Men, even of those pious and welldisposed Persons, since (as I
have said) there is nothing in the nature of the thing to lead to it. For how
could it be supposed that this should be acceptable to Almighty God, which in
it self holds no Conformity, nor is at all suitable to his Nature? Psalm 50* 13.
Will I eat the flesh of bulls, and drink the blood of goats? is a true
representation of it.

It might become a sanguinary sort of Demons, or false Gods, and wicked
Spirits, to be pleased with the Fumes and Reakings of the Bleeding Sacrifice,
as the Heathens generally thought: But men of any understanding would rather
choose a reasonable Service for the God that made them reasonable Creatures, and
might presume another sort of Sacrifice would be more acceptable to him than
this, and acceptable without it, viz. a Sacrifice of Praise and Prayer, of a
pure Mind, and a good Life, which the wiser Heathens did in their Opinion
exceedingly prefer. But as for the Sacrifices and Blood of Beasts, such
Philosophers as Pythagoras and Plato spoke of them often with regret and
displeasure; and others wondered how they first came into the World, Eusebius.
Praepar.
as Porphyry, that wrote expressly against them.

What Expression could thereby be given, suppose, of men's gratitude to God for
their Being, and their Preservation? Who of all Mankind is fo stupidly
credulous, so foolish, that can think the Gods delighted with such a present of
Bows, (...). lib. 2. Sect. 58.
Gall, and Blood, which a hungry Dog would scarcely touch; and that they should
repay the favor to those that offer it? said an ancient Heathen Poet, cited by
Porphyry.

But if we descend to Expiatory Sacrifices, who could think that the Blood of
Bulls and of Goats could take away sin, and that God would accept of that as a
fit Compensation for their Crimes; the Blood of a Brute for that of a Man, the
Life of one that is not in its own power, instead of him that was?

And if men were so weak as of their own accord to offer it; can we think the
Almighty Creator would accept of what was for it self only unbecoming his
Majesty, and be so highly delighted with it, as to testify his Acceptance of
Abel's by the descent of a Miraculous Fire to consume it; (...). So Theodotion.
and to smell a sweet savor upon Noah's Oblation; to appoint it as a sign of
his Covenant with Abraham; and lastly, to embody it into the Mosaical
Institution?

It was enough, one would think, that the Majesty of Heaven and Earth has
accepted of the good will of the first Inventors, how poor and low soever the
Invention was; but it was too great a Condescension to do by these as the
Heathens by their Heroes, to translate them into the number of their Deities;
too much to have such a Mark of the Favor of Heaven, as none of the Divine
Institutions could have more.

But why should we think so meanly of those Antediluvian Patriarchs, of Adam
and Abel, Enoch and Noah, etc. the first Inventors or Encouragers of this way
of Worship? At this rate happier far were the Inventions of Adah, Jubal, and
Tubal-Cain, that taught others how to order Cattle, to handle the Harp and the
Organ, to work in Brass and Iron; Genesis 4. 20.
for these did serve either the Necessities or Pleasures of Mankind, and were
suitable to their nature and condition: But to offer Bestial Sacrifices to an
Infinite Spirit, was as if we should present Mankind with the Entertainments
and Pleasures of the Brutes; and so it cannot be thought that Men (how low
soever their Understandings were) would think the Blood of Beasts a decent
Present to their Creator, which indeed would not be so to their Superiors here.

But we have another sort of Character of those Holy Men, who were Persons of
great Knowledge and vast Experience; who both received their Religion from the
Almighty, were the great Props and Stays of it in their Generation, and to whom
the care of transmitting it to Posterity was committed; and for which reason,
as well as others, God seemed to have protracted their Lives to so vast an
Extent. They were such as were eminent for their Piety; as Abel's Faith is one
of the renowned Instances, Heb. 11. and Enoch is said to walk with God, and was
in an extraordinary way rewarded for it. Such again were they as were endued
with the Spirit of Prophecy, Genesis 4. 25.
as Adam, Abel, Enoch, Noah. Genesis 9. 26.


And therefore it cannot in reason be supposed that ever they should think the
offering the Blood, Jude 14.
and burning the Flesh of a Beast, 2 Pet. 2. 5.
to be a fit expression of their Gratitude to Almighty God, or a means to
obtain his Favor by way of Expiation for their Sins, without his Institution.

It is then (as far as I conceive) evident, that Sacrifices, of what kind
soever, were not invented by men. But if they were not invented by men, How
came they to be admitted, and at last so much to obtain in the world?

I answer, They were of God's own Institution; and therefore were received by
the Patriarchs, and accepted by himself.

But then it may reasonably be demanded, Why they should be thus honored by a
Divine Legislation and Authority, when it is allowed that they are in
themselves not suitable to his Nature?

I answer, They were instituted as those Sacrifices were Typical, and had
respect to a greater Sacrifice, that of Christ. And therefore it is observable,
That as Almighty God for the Comfort of Adam, and preventing his Despair, (as
has been before showed) did immediately after his Expostulation with him, and
Sentence passed upon him, reveal his intention to pardon him, and the Means by
which it was to be procured and ratified, Genesis 3. and 4.
The Seed of the Woman: so in consequence of this, and to show their Faith in
that Promise, we read in the next Chapter, of their Sacrifices and Offerings
which they brought unto the Lord, as a Representation of what they for their
Apostasy had deserved, and should have suffered, had not the Divine Mercy
interposed.

Now if we have represented this aright, we have a fair account of an Expiatory
Sacrifice, and how it came to take such place among men, and to be so
universally received.

We have a reason again how and why it came to be framed into the Law of Moses;
and why those Sacrifices and the Rites belonging to them, were made a principal
part of it, and have thereby a Key to unlock many Mysteries in that Law, and to
answer many Difficulties about it, when it is a shadow of good things to come.

By this means again we come to understand the special Providence of God, that
this was so much preserved and so universally dispersed and received among
mankind.

By this means again we have a fair account how the Doctrine of the Cross, and
the Notion of our Savior's Death as an Expiatory Sacrifice, came to be soon
entertained among the Gentiles; for being of God's Institution, as he preserved
it, so being thus preserved, it became an excellent introduction, and prepared
Mankind for the belief and reception of our Redemption by Christ.

To the same Original may the First Fruits, Priesthood, Genesis 14. 18. 20.
and Tenths be referred; the first of which was observed from the time of Abel,
Genesis 4. and the two last long before the time of the Mosaical Law; and
therefore are to be derived from an ancient Institution.

But because it may be thought these Instances may be liable to exception,
forasmuch as they are sometimes disputed among those themselves that do contend
for a Revelation, I shall proceed to

IV. Sort of evidence, which is Supernatural, and that is either it self a
Revelation, or the Proof of it; of the former is Prophecy; of the latter,
Miracles.

1. Prophecy, or the foretelling of things to come; whatever time they are to
exist in, near or remote. I add this latter Clause to it, to prevent all
Exception, and to distinguish Prophecy truly so called, from Sagacity, or Human
Providence; which from Precedent Observations and proximate Causes, may be
often fortunate in its Conjectures or Predictions. But now as to Infinite Power
all things are alike possible and easy, and there is nothing great or little,
more or less, with respect to it; so to Infinite Knowledge, to which one day is
as a thousand years, and a thousand years as one day, all things, the remotest
as well as nearest, are alike present; and there is nothing distant or near
with respect to it. And therefore wherever the true Spirit of Prophecy is, the
same Power that can foretell what shall happen to morrow, could, if he so
pleased, as easily foretell what shall happen a Thousand Years hence; since all
things are alike naked and opened unto him with whom we have to do. Now this
sort of Knowledge can proceed from nothing less than him, who as he knows all
things, so has all Causes in his own Power, and can foresee how they will
operate, and what shall be the Event of such Operations, or can dispose them to
it as he pleases, whatever the Causes be, whether (as we usually say) they are
Voluntary, Necessary, or Contingent; and being thus peculiar to him, and his
sole Prerogative, it is no less than a Species of Divine Revelation. And
therefore as none can know the Certainty of such Futurities and Events but God;
so none can foretell them but such as he is pleased to reveal them to* From
whence it was that Plato somewhere calls Prophecy, (...), a Communication or
Fellowship with God. For suppose now we should set before us any Epoch or
Character of Time, which the Prophecy respects; the 160. Years from Isaiah's
naming of Cyrus, to his Decree for building Jerusalem, Isa. 44. 28. Or the 350.
Years from the Prophet's naming Josiah, to the time he defiled those Idolatrous
Places, 1 Kings 13. 2. 2 Kings 23. 16. Or the 490. Years in Daniel's Weeks,
from his time to the Death of Messiah Dan. 9. 2. 4. What an infinite number of
intercurrent Passages must there be before it be brought in its proper season
to its accomplishment? And how amazing a sight would it be, if we could lay our
hand upon the Clue of the Prophecy at its first setting out, and follow it,
making its way through all Oppositions and Interferings, to the last Period and
Completion! But then if we turn our Thoughts to the chief Subject of
Revelation, the Prophecy of the Incarnation of our Savior, as it began
immediately upon the Fall, and passed along through the 61 Generations, for
4000 Years together, it would be like the dispersed Parts of a Human Body, to
the Time and State of the Resurrection, that are carried safe and entire
through all Transformations; and at last when the Sea and the Grave are called
upon to give up their dead, all the Atoms and Particles are recalled from their
several Vehicles or Tribes they were joined to, and fall into the same
Composition as before in this present state. Much such a Subject have we before
us, which after various Windings and Turnings, and an Infinite Succession of
Causes and Events; we read, That it might be fulfilled -- and as it was spoken
by the mouth of the holy Prophets, which have been since the world began, Luke
1. 70.

So that as many Prophecies as we have, or the world ever had, so many
Evidences have we of a Supernatural and Divine Revelation.

And this all Mankind have had a belief of, as is manifest from the Oracles
they consulted upon all emergent occasions; many of which were very ancient, as
Herodotus tells us that of Jupiter Hammon in Lybia was. I acknowledge that
these were full of Imposture, and were despised for it by the Wiser part of the
Heathens, such as Tully, (Lib. 1, 2. de Divinat.) and detected, as Eusebius
shows, (Praepar. Evang. l. 4. Init. and l. 9. c. 5.)

And I mention these, not that I esteem them of any Authority; rather the
contrary; but to show what the World thought of Prophecy, and that even those
Philosophers who diverted themselves with the Mistakes and Impostures of their
own Oracles, never questioned whether ever there were any true Prophecy; but
always allowed it, and took it for granted.

So that the Impostures of their own Pretenders never engaged them so far, as
to call in question the Veracity of all Prophecy, or to deny it where it was
able to justify it self.

2. Sort of Supernatural Evidence, is Miracles. But of that, God willing, I
shall Discourse afterward.

Thus far I have endeavored to show, That there has been a Revelation,
antecedent to, or where there was no Written Revelation: And the Arguments and
Instances have been such as were proper to those Circumstances; such as we are
led to by the Light of Nature, and Human Observation: And therefore though they
receive Light and Confirmation from a Written Revelation, are not supposed to
depend upon it for their Evidence. And if this Point has been hereby made out
and proved, we then find that God has at sundry times and in diverse manners,
revealed himself to mankind by the Prophets and inspired Persons, from the
beginning through the Ante-diluvian and Post-diluvian Times, till the
Promulgation of a Written Law by Moses.

If it be said, That these are far from amounting to a Certainty, and from
giving us an Infallible Assurance of a Revelation, since some of them are
disputed even among those that own a Revelation; as the Original of the
Sabbath, and Sacrifices; and at the most are but Probable Arguments.

1. I answer, Probability is a fair Step to Certainty; and I may after all
affirm, That the Account here offered is the best that can be given o those
Instances:

2. There are such Arguments as are taken from the Consideration of God's
Nature; and there cannot be a stronger, than what is fetched from the nature of
things.

3. There are other Instances that are equivalent to a Revelation, and can
proceed from no lower a Principle; such are Speech and Common Notions; the
former of which in the Circumstances before recited, must be from Divine
Inspiration, and the latter from a Divine Impression.

4. There are those things which when they accompany what we call a Revelation,
prove the Truth and Certainty of it; and being recorded in a Written
Revelation, become of the Body of it, and they are Miracles.

5. There are others that are the Matter of Revelation, and they are
Prophecies, especially such as are carried along in a continued Train, and
mutually confirm each other.

6. There are others that are not only consonant to what we own to be a
Revelation, but to Human Testimonies; and being confirmed by both, are of great
Authority.

All which laid together, give us, I may say, unquestionable Evidence, That
there has been a Revelation, or that God has made himself and his Will known to
the World by Persons chosen out, and inspired, and commissioned by him.

And this is a good Preparative and Introduction for what is to follow, viz.
That there is a special Revelation, and that Revelation recorded and
transmitted by Writing to the World; which is a Point in Reserve, and that will
in order be discoursed of.

FINIS.
BOOKS Printed for Richard Chiswell, and Thomas Cockerill.
RVshworth's Historical Collections: The Third Part, in Two Volumes; containing
the Principal Matters which happened from the Meeting of the Parliament,
November 3. 1640. to the End of the Year 1644. Wherein is a particular Account
of the Rise and Progress of the Civil War, to that Period. Fol. 1692.

Dr. John Conant's Sermons, Octavo. Published by Dr. Williams.

The Possibility, Expediency, and Necessity of Divine Revelation. A Sermon
preached at St. Martins in the Fields, Jan. 7. 169 4/5. at the Beginning of the
Lecture for the Ensuing Year. Founded by the Honorable Robert Boil, Esquire.
By John Williams, D. D. Chaplain in Ordinary to His Majesty. 4to.

Dr WILLIAMS's THIRD SERMON AT Mr. BOYLE'S Lecture, 1695.


