A SERMON Preached before the QUEEN AT WHITEHALL: May Xth. M. DC. XC. I.

By WILLIAM WAKE, D. D. Chaplain in Ordinary to Their MAJESTY'S, and Preacher
to the Honorable Society of GRAY'S INN.

Published by Her Majesty's Special Command.

LONDON, Printed for Richard. Sare, at Grays-Inn-Gate, next Holbourn, 1691.

Hebr. iv. 1. Let us therefore fear, lest a Promise being left us of Entering
into his rest, any of you should seem to come short of it.
THese Words are the Application of the Apostle's Discourse in the foregoing
Chapter. He had there entered on a Parallel betwixt Moses and Christ; between
the Promises which the One made of a Temporal Inheritance to the Jews
heretofore, and the Assurance which the Other has given of an Eternal Reward
to Us now. But as they notwithstanding those Promises, yet by their Sins and
their Infidelity came short of them and perished in the Wilderness, so may this
be our Case too. God has indeed called us to a Glorious Hope of Everlasting
Happiness. He has given us all the Security we can desire that we shall. One
day be made partakers of it. But yet there are Conditions required on our parts
too, both to Qualify us for this Happiness, and to Entitle us unto it: And if
we neglect to fulfill them, we shall as certainly fail of Ours, as ever they did
of Their Expectations.

Let us therefore fear, lest a promise being left us of entering into his rest,
any of you should seem to come short of it.

For the enforcing of which Exhortation, I shall observe this Method.

I st. I will show, that God has left us a Promise of Entering into his Rest; a
Promise enough to satisfy all our Desires, and to engage our heartiest
Endeavors after it.

II dly. That nevertheless we may by our own fault come short of this Promise.

III dly. That therefore we ought to be very fearful and sollicitous lest we
should do so.

IV thly. That the best way to secure this Promise to our selves, is to take
the Advice of the Text, and live in a continual fear of coming short of it.

And I st, That God has left us a Promise of Entering into his rest; a Promise
enough to satisfy all our Desires, and to engage our heartiest Endeavors
after it.

This is that great fundamental Principle upon which not only the present
Exhortation, but in effect the whole Gospel of Christ is built. Whatsoever our
Blessed Savior either did or suffered whilst he was on Earth himself, or
commanded us to do or suffer after his Example; All the Precepts, all the
Revelations of the Gospel, are but one continued Argument to convince us of
this Truth. Insomuch that what St. Paul once said to the Corinthians concerning
that other great 1 Cor. xv. 14.
Article of our Creed, the beginning of our Hope, and preparatory to our Glory,
The Resurrection of the Body; I may no less apply here to this other of the
Life Everlasting consequent upon it: If there be no such thing as Another Life
after this, wherein we shall either receive the Everlasting Reward of our
Piety, or suffer the Eternal Punishment of our Sins; Then is our Preaching
Vain, and your Faith also is Vain. The whole Business of Religion is a mere
Cheat and Illusion; Let us Eat and Drink, for to morrow we -- 32.
Die.

But Blessed be God who has not left us the least room to doubt, in a matter of
such importance as this is to us: But has given us such noble Descriptions,
such repeated Assurances of our Future Happiness, as may abundantly suffice
both to satisfy all our Scruples concerning it, and to ravish our Souls into
the most earnest Longings and Desires after it. And though neither the weakness
of our Capacities, nor the Method of the present Discourse will permit me to
speak either very much, or very clearly concerning it: yet I shall endeavor at
lest to give such an Account of the Rest here spoken of as may serve to answer
the Design of the Argument. I have undertaken; And show with what Good reason
the Apostle here exhorts us to fear lest such a Promise as this being set
before us, we should any of us be so unhappy as to come short of it.

Now two things there are that will be necessary to be considered by Us in
Order to this End: (1st.) The Greatness, and (2dly.) the Certainty of our
Future Reward. That the promise which God has left us of entering into his Rest
is as excellent in it self, as it shall be most surely made good to us, if we
live so as to render our selves Worthy of it: And therefore ought, upon both
these Accounts, to engage us to use our utmost diligence not to come short of
it.

(1st.) For the former of these, The Greatness of that Reward which God has
promised to us in the Gospel: It is a Subject worthy indeed of all our
Consideration, but impossible ever to be fully comprehended by Us, till we our
selves shall come to the Enjoyment of it. Even St. Paul himself, though
admitted to the nearest Contemplation of it that ever any Man was, yet could
not find out any Expressions that would serve him to communicate his Idea's of
it to us. He tells us that being caught up into Paradise, He heard Words
unspeakable, and which it is not possible for a Man to utter 2 Cor. xii. 4. And
all he could do was but to declare with Isaiah on the like Occasion, 1 Cor. ii.
9. That neither Eye has seen, nor Ear heard, neither have entered into the Heart
of Man the things which God has prepared for Them that love him.

And indeed it is, I think, none of the least Commendations of the Glories of
the Other World, that they are not possibly to be comprehended by Us in this.
That their Excellency so far transcends all the Notions of Happiness we have
ever been acquainted with here, that we cannot from thence take any Measure
whereby to judge of our Eternal Reward. But that after all our most enlarged
Thoughts, when we shall have given the utmost scope to our Imaginations; have
ranged through all the highest Instances of innocent and un-mix'd Felicity that
we have ever heard of in this life: nay, when we shall have done yet more,
shall have indulged our very Fancies and Desires to invent some new Happiness
beyond whatever any One could possibly have enjoyed in this imperfect state of
Mortality; We may even then venture to say, that what God has prepared for them
that fear him is somewhat exceedingly beyond all this: Though what it is we are
no more able particularly to declare, than we are to measure Omnipotence; or to
define what an Infinitely Good and Great God is able to do for them that Love
Him, and whom therefore he both Loves, and will Bless and Glorify together
with Himself to all Eternity.

But then as in speaking of God Himself, tho we cannot comprehend his Nature,
yet by putting together the highest Idea's that we have of Infinite Perfection,
we do endeavor to raise up our Souls into some suitable Apprehensions of it:
So here, it has pleased God to give such General Descriptions to us of the
Glories of the Other World, as may suffice to let us into some imperfect
Knowledge of it; and be more than enough both to raise our Desires, and to
quicken our Endeavors after it.

For 1st. We are told that Heaven is a place free from all Trouble and Misery;
from all those Hopes and Fears, those Dangers and Disappointments, in a word,
from all those Evils and Calamities that continually disturb us here, and
render our highest Enjoyments very flat and insipid to us.

This is what our Apostle insinuates, when he calls it by the name of a Rest:
Let us fear, says he, lest a Promise being left us of entering into his Rest,
any of you should seem to come short of it. And again, Verse 19. There
remains therefore a Rest for the people of God. But St. John more expressly,
Revel. xxi. 4. where speaking of the New Jerusalem, our City which is above, He
tells us that There God shall wipe away all Tears from our Eyes, and there
shall be no more any Death, neither sorrow nor crying, neither shall there be
any more pain, for the former things are passed away.

Here we live in a Vale of Misery, exposed to Trials, and encompassed with
Troubles on every side. He who is the most fortunate among us, is yet forced to
measure his Happiness rather by the frequent Intervals he enjoys of Comfort and
Satisfaction, than by any absolute Freedom from all Evil and Misery. We come
into the World with a Cry, and go out of it with a Groan, and the Time we pass
from the one of these Periods to the other, is for the most part filled up with
little else than a melancholy Series of Sighs and Tears, of Doubts and
Uncertainties; of Uneasiness at what is present, and Fearful Apprehensions of
what is to come. So that were we to look no farther than the present Condition
of mankind, one might almost be tempted to ask with Job, Chapter iii. 20. Wherefore
is light given to him that is in masery, and life to the Bitter in Soul? Which
look for Death and it comes not, and dig for it more than for hid treasures?
Who rejoice exceedingly, and long when they can see the Grave? There the wicked
cease from troubling, and there the weary be at rest. There the Prisoners rest
together, they hear not the Voice of the Oppressor.

But when we come to Heaven, there we shall find a perfect Deliverance out of
all our Troubles. No pains or Diseases, no Weakness or Infirmity shall disturb
our Bodies; No Lusts or Passions, no irregular Appetites or Desires shall
discompose our Souls, there shall be nothing to interrupt or lessen our
Enjoyments. Heaviness may endure for the Night of this World, but when the
Blessed Morning of Eternity shall spring forth, then pure Joy, and an un-mix'd
Felicity shall spring up with it; and nothing remain but the memory of our
former Troubles, the more to increase our Comfort and Satisfaction in that
Absolute deliverance we shall then have obtained from them.

This is the first part of that Character which the Holy Scriptures have given
us of our Future State, It is a State free from all Evil and Misery: And how
considerable a Blessing this is, if the sense of our present Evils be not
sufficient to inform us, I shall leave it to the Authority of St. John to tell
you, Revel. xiv. 13. where He makes use of this as an Argument to strengthen
the Christians of those times in the enduring of any Trials that could fall
upon them for their Religion, that they should in a little time be perfectly
delivered from all their Miseries; I heard a Voice from Heaven, saying unto me,
Write, from Henceforth Blessed are the dead which die in the Lord; yea, says
the Spirit, for they Rest from their Labors, and their Works do follow them.

But this is not yet all, for 2dly; When we come to Heaven we shall not only be
set free from all other Evils, but from that which is the great Source and
Foundation of all our Miseries, from Sin too: And from all those Consequences
of it which now fill our Souls with so many sad Reflections, and make all our
present Enjoyments a mere Dream and a Vision, the appearances of Happiness,
rather than any real and solid Satisfaction, viz. the Fear of Death, and the
Apprehension of Damnation.

Here we live in a continual State of War and Danger: Difficulties and
Temptations encompass us on every side; and when we think we stand the most
securely, yet even then we cannot tell how soon, or how dangerously we may
fall. The Flesh and the Spirit, those contrary Principles of which we are
composed, still dividing us between our Desires and our Duty; and forcing us
often times when we the most steadfastly resolve, and the most earnestly
endeavor to live well, yet to encounter no small difficulties in the doing of
it: And in the sense thereof to cry out with St. Paul, Romans vii. 24. O Wretched
Men that we are, who shall deliver us from the Body of this Death!

But Heaven is a place Innocent as it is Glorious: There all these Conflicts
shall have an End. No Lusts or Passions, no Dangers or Temptations, shall
either draw us from our Piety, or put us to the least pain for the fulfilling
of it. But it shall be our Meat and Drink, the Desire and Bent of our
Affections to live Innocently: And what David once said of Himself, be much
more perfectly accomplished in all of us, Psalm. xl. 8. Our delight is to do thy
will O God! yea, thy law is within our Hearts.

It is one great part of that account which St. John every where gives us of
the Blessed in Heaven, that they spend their whole Time in little else than a
continued Exercise of Piety and Devotion. In praising God, and admiring his
Perfections, and celebrating his Goodness. But especially, in the most Elevated
Returns of Love and Gratitude, of Joy and Thanksgiving to Him for the great
Work of our Redemption; and for all those Miracles of Mercy by which they have
been delivered from Sin and Hell, and translated to such a blessed State of
Happiness and Glory.

And indeed what wonder if this shall be the Great Business of our Lives there,
when as the same St. John tells us we our selves shall be made like unto him.
Pure and Holy, Enemies 1 Jo. iii. 2.
to Sin, and to all those Temptations that have heretofore been wont to lead us
into Sin. And being thus made like unto God in Holiness, we shall become like
him in Happiness too. For then Death and Hell shall be destroyed; They shall be
cast into the Lake of Fire, Revel. xx. 14. And we shall sing for ever that
triumphant Song of St. Paul, 1 Cor. xv. 55. O Death, where is thy Sting? O
Grave, where is thy Victory? -- Thanks be to God who has given Us the Victory
through our Lord Jesus Christ.

But 3dly, and to go yet farther; We shall not only then be set free from all
our Troubles and Miseries, from whatsoever is any way Grievous or Afflicting to
us in this World: But we shall in stead thereof be blessed in a full Enjoyment
of the most perfect Happiness that our Condition shall then be Capable of, and
that is a Great deal more than we are now able to conceive.

For, 1st. Our Bodies, which here are the Weight and Burden of our Souls,
neither to be supported without Care, nor kept under without Trouble, and which
when we have done all that we can, will yet many times afflict us with Pains
and Diseases, Weaknesses and Infirmities: Sometimes expose us to grievous
Temptations, and too often betray us into the Greatest Sins; to be fure always
so clog and depress us, that we shall at best be able to rise up but to very
imperfect Discharges of our Duty, shall then be Glorified, and rendered a
Habitation fit for so Divine a Spirit to dwell in. So our Apostle tells us, 1
Cor. xv. 43. This Corruptible, says he, shall put on Incorruption, this Mortal,
Immortality. We shall not only receive our Bodies again out of the Dust, but we
shall receive them in Greater Beauty and Perfection, than ever they were
before. They shall rise out of their Graves, as the Sun arises from beyond the
Mountains of the East; Bright and Shining: Or rather as the Body of our Blessed
Savior when he appeared to St. Paul on his way to Damascus, Acts ix. and in
comparison See Acts xxvi. 13.
whereof the very Sun it self seemed to be but Dim and Obscure.

And as, our Bodies shall be thus Glorified, so our Souls, and all the powers
and faculties of them, shall be no less enlarged. Now we know 1 Cor. xiii. 12.
in part, and see as through a Glass darkly: He that is the Wisest amongst us,
and has made the Best Progress in Learning, is yet ignorant of a Great deal
more than he knows, and in what he thinks he understands the best, is often
times mistaken. But then we shall see face to face, and know even as also we
are known. All the Mysteries of our Faith, and the Secrets of our Redemption
shall be laid open to Us: And those Disputes which now so unhappily divide the
Church, and disquiet the Minds of the Best Christians, be for ever Determined;
not by Force, but Conviction, not by Canons and Definitions, but by an Evident
Light, and a clear and distinct Perception.

This shall be the state of our Understandings in the Other World, nor shall
our Wills be any less perfected. There shall be no Repugnancy to the Service of
God; No Passions or Appetites to Cross or Encounter in the fulfilling of it. We
shall be all Flame, and Love, and Devotion: Shall flee to our Duty with the
Ardors of Seraphim, and shall feel such new and unspeakable Joys arising in our
Souls from the performance of it, as now we are not able to conceive. Only
perhaps some pious Votary may now and then have felt some Antepasts of them;
when having either overcome some great and violent Temptation, or else
fulfilled some noble instance of Duty, he finds in Himself such a Serenity of
Mind, such sweetness and satisfaction of Spirit proceeding from the
Consideration of it, as exceeds all the Sensual Pleasures of the most Exquisite
Voluptuary: But which alas! are as far short of that perpetual Joy and Comfort
we shall then live in, as the best of our Performances here, are exceedingly
inferior to what the constant discharges of our Piety shall be there.

And being thus prepared for a full Draught of Happiness, we shall not fail to
enjoy the largest Portion that we can even wish for of it.

What the particular Ingredients of our future Felicity shall be, I am not able
to say. But this we know, that We shall live in the Presence Psalm. xvi. 11.
of God, in whose Presence there is fullness of joy, and at whose right hand
there are pleasures for Evermore. We shall Converse with Angels, and be
translated to the General Assembly and Church of Heb xii. 23.
the First Born, and to the Spirits of just Men made perfect.

There we shall meet with all those Great and Wise, those Holy and Excellent
Persons who in their several Ages have made up the Glory and Ornament of the
Church Militant on Earth, and now shine as Stars in the Church Triumphant in
Heaven. Whose Virtuous Lives and Patient Sufferings, we have either read or
heard of with so much Wonder and Satisfaction. By whose Learning we have
profited; whose Disciples we have professed our selves; and whose Examples we
have looked up unto, both for our Imitation and our Encouragement.

There we shall again be restored to our Friends and our Relations, whom we
have here left with so much sorrow and bitterness. There we shall behold the
Blessed Apostles of our Lord and Savior, and all the rest of that Noble Army
of Martyrs and Confessors by whose constant Labors, and patient Sufferings,
the Gospel first became published to the World; and to whom therefore as
fellow-workers with Christ, we our selves have in part been indebted for our
own Salvation. And lastly, to complete all; There we shall meet with the
Blessed Jesus Himself, the Great Shepherd of the Sheep, the Author and Finisher
of our Faith, by whose Blood we were Redeemed, by whose Grace we have been
Sanctified, and by whose Merits and Intercession we shall have then attained to
all this Glory.

This is that Company to which we shall be translated, when we come to die. And
then, think if you can what an unspeakable Happiness it must needs be to us to
pass from the vain Conversation of a peevish, and wicked World, to such an
admirable Society as this: From the Follies and Disorders of sinful and frail
Men, to the wise and innocent and endearing Conversation of Saints and Angels.

I shall not for the farther improving of these reflections trouble you with
any Uncertain Conjectures, of the rare Discourses, the Glorious Entertainments,
the sincere Friendships, we may there expect to meet with. What new transports
of Joy shall fill our Souls, when we shall begin to consider the Temptations we
have overcome, the Dangers we have escaped, and the various Troubles we have
passed through in our Pilgrimage here on Earth; and compare all these with that
Peace and Glory we shall then Enjoy in the Kingdom of Heaven.

But one thing there is that must not be passed by, and that is, that being now
instated in all this Great Felicity, we shall at the same time become secure of
an Everlasting Enjoyment of it: That Our Glory shall be Eternal, and our Reward
no man shall take from Us. For though this be but a Circumstance, and so does not
enter into the Nature of our Happiness, yet it is such a Circumstance, that
Heaven it self would hardly be complete without it. But the Greater our
Enjoyments were, the more it would trouble us to think that the Time was coming
when all this mighty Treasure should be exhausted; and We should either
altogether cease to be, or which is worse, should be divested of our present
Happiness, and become again as poor, and sinful, and destitute, and miserable,
as once we were, or rather to speak more sensibly, as we now are. Whereas now,
we may without all Anxiety freely rejoice in the Blessings we shall enjoy, and
take no thought for the future: Being assured that our Felicity is founded upon
the Rock of Ages; Permanent as Eternity; Firm and Stable as that God from whom
it flows; in whom there is no variableness, neither shadow James I. 17.
of turning, and with whom we also shall continue 1 Thessalonians. iv. 17.
for Ever and Ever.

This is that Rest of which our Text speaks: and of this

(2dly.) We shall most certainly be made Partakers, if we live so as we ought
to do.

For God being not only most True and Faithful in all his Promises, and
therefore incapable of deceiving us, but most Powerful too, and therefore able
to Do whatever he pleases for us; It cannot be doubted but that what He has
promised, shall most assuredly be made good to us: And therefore that if such a
Rest as this be indeed set before Us by Him, we may and ought to depend upon it
as a faithful Saying, and worthy of all Men to be received. 1 Timothy I. 15.


Now that the Holy Scriptures have encouraged us to expect such a Rest is so
very plain, that I do not see how any one can have the Confidence to doubt of
it. They have not only assured us that there shall be a final Judgment, and an
Irrevocable Sentence of Happiness or Misery passed upon all Mankind, according
to what they shall have done, whether Good or Evil: But they have moreover
declared to us, that it was for this very Purpose that our Blessed Savior came
into the World, that He Died and was Buried, and Rose again from the Dead, that
He might both Purchase this Great Reward for us, and receive full Power and
Authority to confer it upon us. Either therefore we must say that all this is
mere Fable and Romance; that the whole Business of Christianity is but an Idle
Story, that has nothing of Truth or Reality in it: Or if we think the Gospel to
deserve any Credit, we must conclude that this Promise shall stand Firm and
Immutable as that God who made it, That if we live according to the Rules of
our Religion, we shall receive the Reward of it; that Eternal Rest of which our
Text here speaks, and which I have now been endeavoring to describe to you.

It remains then that there is without all Doubt a Blessed Expectation reserved
for us in another. Life: but then,

II dly. It is as certain, that we may by our own fault Come short of it.

For the Promise of this Rest is not Absolute, but Conditional. It depends upon
a Covenant in which there are Duties to be fulfilled on Our Part, as well as a
Reward to be made Good, on God's: And if we fail in the One, there is no reason
to expect that He should perform the Other.

When our Savior sent forth his Disciples to preach these Glad Tidings of
Salvation to the World, we read in St. Mark that their Commission ran in these
Terms, Mark xvi. 15. Go ye into all the World, and preach the Gospel to Every
Creature: He that Believes and is Baptized shall be Saved, but He that
Believes not, shall be Damned. And what it is we are there to understand by
Believing, we may see in the Parallel place of St. Matthew, Chapter xxviii. 20. Go
ye and Teach all Nations, Baptizing them in the Name of the Father, and of the
Son, and of the Holy Ghost; teaching them to Observe all things whatsoever I
have commanded you. And from both which the conclusion is very plain, that if
we mean to be Saved, we must not only enter our selves into the Church of
Christ by Baptism; but being so admitted, must Believe and Do whatsoever he
has required of Us: And without which we shall be so far from having any right
to these Promises, that we shall incur the Greater Damnation for our Sins.

But this is not yet all; For if the Case be so as I have now shown it to be,
If the Promise of this Rest be Conditional, and we are no Otherwise entitled
to the Blessings than as we are careful to fulfill the Duties of the Gospel:
Then I must add, that We may not only by our own fault come short of it, but
that without a Great deal of Care we most certainly shall do so; And therefore
ought the more to Fear lest we should fall from such Divine and Glorious
Expectations.

The Righteousness of the Gospel, and that Universal Obedience which it
requires of us in order to our Salvation, is not a Work of Common and Ordinary
Attainment. It calls us to a Great deal more than many of us, I fear, are aware
of, I am sure than most of us practice. To a Piety that has startled the
Consciences of the most perfect Votaries; and once made even the Apostles
themselves cry out, Who then can be Mat. xix. 25.
saved? Those Severe Duties of Mortification and Self-denial, of Taking up the
Cross, and Following Christ, were never designed for mere Pomp and Show; only
to exalt the Credit of the Gospel, and make it the more admired in the World:
But as Helps and Assistances, to conquer our Passions, to confirm us against
all the Temptations of a Wicked World, and to raise us up to the utmost degree
of Piety, that our Condition would admit of in it; For the Trials of our Faith,
and the Exercise of our Patience, and in short, to Fit us for Heaven, before
they carried us to it.

Men may live as they please, and content themselves with a formal and
superficial Piety; and think it very well that they stand in the same Rank with
the Generality of the World, and have as Good Pretenses to Heaven as their
Neighbors. But the Commands of God are not to be Evacuated by the Wickedness
of Men. God has plainly set before us the Terms of our Salvation; What we are
to Believe, and what to Do, if Ever we mean to attain unto it. And if
notwithstanding this, Men will be careless and negligent in their Duty;
Scepticks in their Faith, and Atheists in their Practice: If they will scoff at
the Revelations, and despise the Morals of Christianity; laugh at the Divinity
of our Savior Christ and the Holy Ghost, and Live so as if they did not
believe there was any God at all: Let them applaud themselves, if they please,
in their profane Drollery, and strengthen One Another in Wickedness; but let
them know assuredly that there is a Time coming when neither their Number shall
Defend, nor their Sophistry excuse them; But for All these things Eccles. xi. 9.
God will bring them to Judgment.

Seeing then we not only may, but without great care we most certainly shall
come short of that Rest which God has prepared for Us, it will I think very
much behove us all

III dly. To take the Advice of the Text, and Fear lest we should chance so to
do.

This is the Apostle's own Inference in the Words before us, and such as I
think naturally arises from the foregoing Considerations. For since it has
pleased God to call us to such a Great and Precious Promise, as I have before
showed the Rest here spoken of to imply; to a Perfection of Glory and Happiness
which neither any Tongue can utter, nor any Thought conceive: What can be more
reasonable than that we should make it our utmost Endeavor, the Great Business
and Concern of our Lives Earnestly to aspire after it, and by all means to
Qualify our selves for the obtaining of it?

The truth is, were we to discourse of this Matter only upon the Principles of
right Reason, and according to the Common Bent and Inclination of our Natures,
without any regard to the Practice of Mankind; One might justly think that
instead of arguing with Men upon this Subject, we ought rather to Apologize for
the Absurdity of making that an Exhortation, which every Man must do whether He
will or no. Happiness is that which all Men Desire, and therefore must needs
Endeavor to attain unto. And to exhort Men to be Happy, to pursue that which
is to raise them to the highest pitch of Felicity that their Condition is
capable of: What is this, but as if one should go about to argue with a
Covetous Wretch not to neglect a fair Opportunity of growing Rich, or with a
loose Voluptuary, to Eat and Drink, and fill his Soul with sensual
Satisfactions; that is, to endeavor by Reason to incline them to that, which
their own Appetites, beyond all the Reason in the World, hurry them on to.

And yet though all this be most certainly True, that we do all of us Naturally
desire that which will make us Happy; and it cannot be doubted but that it is
this Rest, this Eternal Reward, in which above any thing the Felicity of Man
does consist: I know not how, there is scarce any thing which Men Generally so
much neglect, or so little seem to trouble themselves about as This. As if the
whole Business of Religion were indeed no more, than what some profane Men have
called it, a piece of State-Contrivance, a Device to keep Fearful and
Superstitious People in Awe: And the Gospel-Promise of a Future-State, a
Refinement only upon the Old Poetic Hypotheses of Elysian Fields, and I know
not what other Dreams of Happiness, no where to be found but in their Numbers.

Tell a Man how to establish his Present Fortunes, show him the way how he may
accomplish his Ends in what he aims at in this World; and though perhaps the
utmost of His Ambition be but to gain some little Estate, or Honor, or
Advancement, which can neither reward his Pains, nor satisfy his Desires; yet
you shall not fail to meet with a very ready Attention from Him. He will
receive your Instructions with Greediness, and if they carry but never so
little a Probability with them, you shall need no Perswasives to put him upon
the practice of them.

But now speak to the same person of the Vast Concerns of Heaven and Eternity;
Exhort him to consider how short and uncertain his Life here is, how fast it
runs away, and in how little a Time the whole Stock of it will be exhausted;
and that then He must appear before the 2 Cor. v. 10.
Judgment Seat of Christ, to receive the things done in the Body according to
what He shall have done whether Good or Evil: And though by an Affectionate
Application you may chance to warm Him for the present, or even force him, with
Felix, to tremble at the thoughts of a Judgment to come; though your Arguments be
strong, and his own Conscience concurs with you to satisfy Him that these
things are so as you represent them to Him; yet all the Effect shall be but
this, that He will grow weary of the Admonition, and be uneasy till he can
get away from you; and no sooner is he at liberty, but he begins presently to
think how he may shake off those dull and melancholy Apprehensions your
Discourse has raised in his Mind; and then He becomes the very same Man that He
was before, goes on again in his Sins and Debauches, and never considers that
the End will be that He shall perish for ever.

Now this being the General Neglect and Security in which Men live, it cannot
certainly but be very proper, not only to Exhort them sometimes to a greater
Care; but if it be possible, to convince them too of the Grounds they have to
fear, whither such an Incogitancy as this will carry them?

And I st. If their Indifference in this Matter proceeds from a real Belief
that there is no such thing as Another Life after this, nor any Account to be
given to God of all our Actions; that there is neither any such Eternal Portion
of Happiness to be enjoyed, or of Punishment to be undergone, as we have been
told there is: This I confess will make their Neglect the more Rational; and we
ought not to wonder, if they are not afraid of coming short of a Reward, which
they do not believe was ever to be attained by them.

But then at least they ought to be very sure that their Belief, or rather
Infidelity, as to this Point is well-grounded, before they venture the
Everlasting welfare of their Souls upon it. For not to say any thing of those
Assurances which the Gospel has given us of our Future State, and the Authority
whereof is founded upon such strong and convincing Arguments, that we see the
greatest part of the Wisest Men in all Ages have thought there was no
reasonable Exception to be made against it.

Do they believe that there is a God? That this World was not made without some
Cause to produce it, nor is now Governed and Preserved without some Superior
Power to overlook and order the Affairs of it? This I am sure the Gentiles
themselves have generally acknowledged, and I much question whether there was
ever any Man so void of all Reason, as to be able seriously to make a Doubt of
it.

But if there be a God, and if His Providence does overlook the Affairs of Men,
there must needs be a Future Judgment, some Day of account in which He will
render to every Man Romans ii. 6.
according to his Works; and those Virtues shall be rewarded, and those Vices
punished in some other Life, which we see oftentimes but little regarded in
this.

Do they believe that they are themselves endued with Rational Souls; that they
are not mere Machines, a little Mass of Clay, stamped with the figure of a Man,
but by some purer Principle, raised above the Condition of the other Creatures
that are below them? But then let them consider what these Souls are, and
whether they may not possibly be of a spiritual substance, capable of Existing
by themselves, when the Body falls into the Dust: And if they may, then let
them think a little farther, whither they are to go, and what is to be done
with them?

In short; Do they believe their own Sense and Experience? Let them then tell
us why it is their Consciences so often check them for the Sins they commit,
and force them many times to start and tremble at the thoughts of them: And
especially then when they are nearest their End, and past all danger of
Punishment in this World, unless it be, that their own Hearts then begin to
misgive them, and force them at least to fear the Judgment of the Other.

But 2dly; It may be, though they are not absolutely certain, that there is no
such thing as a Future State, yet neither are they sufficiently satisfied that
there is, and this makes them the less sollicitous about it.

Now if this be the Case, then I must confess that here again there may be some
Reason why they should not be so vigorously concerned for the business of
Religion, as those who without all doubt expect a Glorious Reward of their
Labors. But yet still, seeing they are not sure, but that there may be another
Life after this, and an Eternal State of Happiness or Misery, as we say there
is; it must certainly be the wisest way not to be too secure, nor expose
themselves to so great a Hazard, as either to come shert of this Rest, if there
should be such a thing, or to be lost and damned for ever, as they must be,
should God chance to call them to an Account for their Sins.

And if such Persons as these, notwithstanding all their Skepticism as to this
matter, ought nevertheless to Consider and Fear, and do no more Wickedly; much
more, 3dly, Should we who have no doubt at all of this Reward, be very careful
not to come short of it, nor suffer any present Interests or Temptations, to
deprive us of our Eternal Glory.

It is the Great Disadvantage of the Point before us, that in discoursing of
the Happiness or Misery of the Other World, we talk to Men of somewhat at a
great distance from them; of Blessings not to be enjoyed till after they are
Dead, and that they Hope shall not be yet a while. Now this makes them for the
most part so very Careless in their Provisions for it, and so little apt to be
troubled with any fears about it. But yet, since we are sure we must Die, and
we cannot tell either How soon, or in What manner we may be cut off, and that
should we chance to be surprised, and taken away out of our present State,
before we have made any Due Provision for the future, it will be impossible for
us ever to retrieve our Neglect: Certainly all these Considerations ought to
engage Us not to let any time pass in securing of so Great a Stake; nor give
any Rest to our Souls, whilst we have any just Doubts remaining what shall be
our final Portion for ever.

Such Reason therefore have we all to be very fearful and sollicitous about
our future Happiness: And the more to excite us thereunto, let us consider,

IV: That the best way to secure to our selves the Promise of this Rest, is to
take Advice of the Text, and live in a continual fear of Coming short of it.

And that upon these two Accounts: Because (1st) This will be the most likely
to engage our own Care: And (2dly) To entitle us to God's Favor.

(1st) This will be the most likely to Engage our own Care.

For Fear where it is not a Slavish Terror arising in the Mind from an
Apprehension of Punishment for Sin committed, but a concern for the Discharge
of our Duty, lest otherwise we should offend God, and deprive our selves of
that Reward he has called us to; naturally puts Men upon the strictest Guard
over themselves, and Care of their Duty. And therefore Solomon who very well
understood the Advantage of it, sets it forth to us as the first step to a
Religious Life, Prove. ix. 10. The Fear of the Lord, says he, is the Beginning
of Wisdom: As on the other side, David, when he would describe to us a Sinner
of whom there was no Hopes, could not find out any better Character for him
than this, that He had no fear of God before his Eyes, Psalm. xxxvi. 1. And the
reason of this is plain; Because wherever there is such a Fear, it shows the
Person who has it, to be endued with a just Sense both of his Duty and of his
Danger, of the Necessity there lies upon him to Live well, and of the great
Hazard he shall run if he neglects to do so. Nay it shows yet more, that such
an one is not only sensible of all this, but does moreover in the consequence
of it resolve to be very careful and diligent in the Offices of Religion; to
serve God, and discharge his Duty toward him, that so he may obtain the Reward
of it. And where there is such a Disposition as this, it is hardly possible
that a Man should fail of accomplishing his Desires.

For if we look more narrowly into this matter, and consider what it is that
keeps so many Christians in such a strange Security with Relation to their
future State; we shall find it to proceed from one of these two Causes: Either
they are not sufficiently sensible of their Obligations to Piety, and of the
Necessity there lies upon them to Live Well; Or else they flatter themselves in
their own Righteousness, they think they are in a very safe way already, and
need not aim at any higher Seize. But now he who has this Fear
continually upon his Mind, will not easily be deluded with either of these: But
as he will be truly concerned for his Salvation, so he will be always afraid
that he is not so secure as he ought to be of it. And this will naturally put
him upon yet farther Endeavors to get some New and Greater Victories over
himself; to Grow in Grace, and come up nearer to Perfection, that so he may
increase in Hope too, and have still more full and more comfortable Assurances
of God's Mercy to Him through Christ Jesus.

(2dly) As such a Fear will be sure to engage our own Care, so will it be the
best means to entitle us to God's favor.

For 1st: This will above any thing qualify us for the Gracious Assistance of
his Holy Spirit, to strengthen us in our Endeavors, and to enable us to
discharge that Duty which is required of Us. For God resists the proud, but
gives Grace to the 1 Pet. v. 5.
Humble. To the Humble, that is, to Those who are fearful and jealous of
themselves; Conscious of their own Weakness and Infirmity, and supported only
with the Hope of God's Grace, to help them in time of need. And therefore St.
Paul upon this very Ground exhorts the Philippians to work out Phil. ii. 12.
their own Salvation with fear and trembling; because if they did so, then God
would not fail to Bless them in it, and to work in them both to -- 13.
Will and to Do of his good pleasure.

2dly: Such a Fear, as it will the best dispose us for the Grace of the Holy
Spirit to help us in our Duty, and to fortify us against those Temptations
that may chance to arise to draw us away from it; so will it the best dispose
us for the Pardon of those Sins, which when we have done all that we can, we
shall still continue more or less to commit. Because he who thus fears, will
either never Willingly fall into any Sins, and then there can be no doubt but
that he shall find a very ready Pardon of his Involuntary Offenses: Or if he
should be at any time so unhappy as to be led away by the Deceitfulness of Sin,
yet this Fear will soon awaken him, and bring him both to a true Sense, and a
deep Abhorrence of it.

Here therefore, if ever, will be an Object fit for God's Mercy. An Humble,
Contrite, Penitent Christian: A Man who in his Heart truly loves God, and above
all things both the most desires, and the most endeavors to please Him: And is
never so sensibly concerned, as when he does any thing that he thinks was
contrary to his Duty to Him.

And having thus put a Man into a State of Grace, this Fear, 3dly, to complete
all, will be the surest means to enable Him to persevere in it unto the End.
Whilst keeping him still under the same concern for his Salvation, and in the
same Apprehensions of coming short of it; It will by consequence keep him also
in the same pious Care to live so that he may not miscarry at the last, and
lose all the Benefit of his former Piety, for want of going on and continuing
in it.

And now when so many Considerations engage us to the practice of this Duty;
When the Reward proposed to us is so Great, and the Danger of missing it so
Fatal, and one of the best ways in the World to secure it to us, is to live
always in a warm concern for it, and under a due apprehension of Coming short
of it: Methinks I could almost flatter my self that all this shall be
sufficient to prevail with you thus to fear, lest any of you should be so
unhappy as to fail of it.

Nor let any one think this an improper Exhortation for this place. Fear is, I
confess, in General but a Slavish Passion, and such as I can easily believe the
Greatest part of this Assembly to be but little acquainted with. But yet there
are some things which the Philosophers themselves Aristot. Eth. Nicom. lib.
iii. c. 6.
could tell us the Bravest Men both might and ought to be afraid of: And sure,
if any thing, the Wrath of God, and Eternal Damnation, may well be allowed to
fall under such a Character.

Never was there a Prince endued with a truer personal Courage than King David
I need not tell you through how many Dangers he passed, with how many
Difficulties he encountered, and how Great and Intrepid he appeared in all his
Trials. And yet notwithstanding all his Bravery, this Great King thought it no
reproach to Him to own such a Fear as this which I am now recommending to you,
Psalm. cxix. 120. My flesh, says he, O God, trembles for fear of thee, and I am
afraid of thy Judgments.

Where was there ever a Race of Men that despised, I do not say Death, but what
is worse than Death, Disgrace, Reproaches, Torments, more than the Primitive
Martyrs and Confessors of the Christian Church did? So terrible were their
Conflicts, that it almost chills our Blood to read the Accounts of those
Cruelties which they with an admirable Patience and Constancy underwent. The
Relations of their Sufferings look more like Romance than History: They seem to
describe not so much what any Men ever really underwent, as what the Writers of
their Lives thought sit to invent, to magnify their Courage, and Honor their
Religion. And yet now these are the Men who in their very Sufferings showed
what a Fear they had of Offending God, and losing their own Souls. It was their
Apprehension of this that inspired them with that Bravery we now so much
admire; and made them dare to suffer any Evils in this World, rather than run
the hazard of Perishing for Ever in the Other.

In short, our Religion which exhorts so much to fear in this one Case, yet by
this very Fear inspires us with the highest Gallantry and Resolution in all
others: Whilst setting before us the Hopes of a Better State, it teaches us not
to value any Dangers or Difficulties in This. It shows us how to be Valiant
upon a Wise and Rational Foundation: And whosoever follows the Dictates of it,
He may indeed be more Temperate in the Use of his Courage, and place it upon
better Objects, and reserve it for more worthy and more justifiable Occasions
than Men are now a days wont to do; but he need never fear he should ever
become the less a Brave Man, for being a fearful and obedient Christian.

I shall conclude all with that Great Precept of Christian Magnanimity, Luke
xii. 4. And which as it is a short Summary of all I have now been speaking, so
may it, I think, be enough not only to direct, but to try the Courage of the
Stoutest among us:

Fear not them that kill the Body, and after that have no more that they can
do. But I will forewarn you whom you shall fear; Fear him which after he has
killed, has power to cast into Hell: Yea, I say unto you, Fear Him.

FINIS.

