A SERMON Preached in the Parish Church of St. JAMES Westminster, April xvith.
1696. Being the DAY of the Public THANKSGIVING, For the Preservation of His
MAJESTY'S Person From the late Horrid and Barbarous CONSPIRACY; AND FOR
Delivering this KINGDOM from the Danger and Miseries of a FRENCH INVASION.

By William Wake, D. D. Chaplain in Ordinary to His Majesty, and Rector of St.
JAMES Westminster.

Published at the Desire of the Honorable the Board of VESTRY; and of several
other Persons of Quality of the said Parish.

LONDON: Printed for Richard Sare at Grayes-Inn-gate in Holbourn. 1696.

PSALM XXViii. 7. The LORD is my Strength and my Shield; my Heart Trusted in
Him, and I am helped: therefore my Heart greatly Rejoiceth, and with my Song
will I Praise Him.
THOUGH it be difficult to say what the particular Occasion was which moved the
Royal Psalmist to Compose this Psalm; yet there is more than enough, in the
very Subject of it, to show, how suitable it is to that Great Deliverance which
we are now Assembled to Offer up our Thanksgivings unto God for.

If First, We consider the Author of it; the Inscription will tell us that it
is a Psalm of David. And if we look to the Character which he attributes to
Himself in the Words following the Text; We shall find, that when He Composed
it, he was King of Israel: And designed it as an Acknowledgment to God for some
signal Favor which he had received from Him, after his Advancement to that
High Dignity.

If Secondly, We enquire into the Subject of it; It is evident from the whole
Series of the Psalm, that it was intended for a Thanksgiving to God, for some
Eminent Deliverance which He had Vouchsafed to him. For this he Praises God in
the Verse before the Text: Blessed be the LORD, because he has heard the Voice
of my supplications. And in the Words of it, declares the Joyful Sense he had
of his Own Preservation: The LORD is my Strength and my Shield; my Heart
trusted in Him and I am helped; therefore my heart greatly rejoiceth, and with
my Song will I praise Him.

But this is not yet all: For, Thirdly; If we look to the Circumstances of that
Deliverance, we shall find it to be still more Agreeable, to the Occasion of
our Own Thanksgiving.

For (1st.) The danger to which the Psalmist was exposed, was not only a Design
against his Person, but such as extended to his very Life. He had Cruel and
Merciless Men to deal with; and had not God seasonably interposed his hand, he
had fallen a Sacrifice to their Rage and Malice.

So the first Verse of this Psalm tells us; Unto Thee will I cry O LORD my
Rock, be not Silent to Me; lest if Thou be silent, I become like Them that Go
down into the Pit. And in the Psalm immediately foregoing; and composed, not
only about the same time; but, as is reasonably conjectured, upon the same
Occasion too, with this before Us; He represents his Adversaries as so many
Savage Beasts, that had designed to Tear him in Pieces, and to Glut themselves
with his Blood: Verse 2. When mine Enemies, and my Foes, came upon Me to Eat up
my Flesh, they Stumbled, and Fell.

( 2dly.) The Persons who had Conspired against Him, were not only a sort of
Merciless, and Bloody Men; but they were as false, and treacherous, as they
were Barbarous and Cruel. They spoke him fair, at the same time that they had
resolved to Stab him to the Heart. They had long endeavored by Calumny and
Mis-representation, to Alienate the Affections of his People from him: And when
they saw that this would not Do; then they resolved, at Once, to make an End of
Him.

And for this we have, again, the Psalmist 's own Words, in both these Psalms;
who therefore upon this very account Prays to God against them: Psalm xxviii. 3.
Draw me not away with the Wicked, and with the Workers of Iniquity, who speak
Peace to their Neighbors, but Mischief is in their Hearts. Psalm xxvii. 12.
Deliver me not over unto the Will of mine Enemies; for False Witnesses are
risen up against Me, and such as Breath out Cruelty.

But ( 3dly.) Though the Design of these Barbarous Men, was chiefly against the
Person of King David; yet it did not stop there. No; They resolved to extend
their Malice to All that Adhered to Him: And not to leave, till they had
completed their Vengeance, in the utter Ruin both of the One, and of the
Other.

It was this gave Occasion to that Conjunction we meet with both of His and
Their Deliverance, ver. 8. The LORD is Their Strength; and he is the saving
Strength of his Anointed. And drew from him that Prayer with which he concludes
this Psalm; ver. 9. Save thy People, and Bless thine Inheritance; Feed them
also, and Lift them up for ever.

And as such was their Design against David, and his Followers; so if we
enquire ( 4thly.) What may have been the Cause of so inveterate a Malice
against Both, we shall be Able to give no other Account of it than this; That
God had wonderfully Raised up the One, to the Throne of Judah, and the Other
thought themselves Obliged in Conscience to Submit to him, and to Support his
Authority.

This is what the Psalmist again declares to us, in the 4th. and 5th. Verses of
this Psalm: Where he (for this very Reason) either Fore tells, or Prays for,
their Disappointment: Give Them according to their Deeds, and according to the
Wickedness of their Endeavors; Give Them after the Work of their Hands; Render
to Them their desert: -- Because they regard not the Works of the LORD, nor the
Operation of his Hands: That is to say, Those Evident Marks of God's singular
Providence, which were so plainly to be seen, in his raising Him up to be King
of Israel.

In the Words before Us, there are these four things to be Considered:

I. The Deliverance it self for which David, in this place, Blesses God; I am
Helped.

II. The Author of his Deliverance; It was the LORD.

III. The Motive which induced God to Deliver Him: The LORD was his Strengh,
and his Shield; His Heart Trusted in Him, and therefore, He was Helped.

IV. And Lastly. The Return which the Royal Psalmist made to God for his
Deliverance: Therefore, says he, my Heart greatly Rejoiceth, and with my Song
will I praise Him.

These are the several Parts which my Subject leads me to Consider: And I shall
do it, all along, first (but very briefly) as they relate to King David, and
his People; and then, more fully, as they may be applied to our Own Royal
Sovereign, and to that Wonderful Deliverance, God has been pleased to afford
us, out of the Hands of our Enemies.

And, First: Let us Consider the Deliverance it self, which is to be the
Subject of our present Thanksgiving; I am Helped.

What the particular Blessing was to which David here refers, we cannot tell:
But as the whole Tenor of this Psalm assures us, that it was some very signal
Danger from which God had Rescued Him; So, I have before Observed, that the
Occasion of it was Owing to that Implacable Malice which some few Wicked Men
had Conceived against him, for his being Made King of Israel; notwithstanding
the visible Marks of God's Hand, which appeared in the whole Progress of that
Affair.

It is, indeed, an Astonishing thing to Consider, that after so many, and such
plain Assurances as God had given of his Pleasure, in this particular; yet
still such numbers should continue not only, not to Regard his Work, but even
to bid Defiance to his Providence; And to set themselves up against One, whom
they could not but see, He was resolved to Exalt.

That Samuel was a true Prophet, and appointed by God to deliver his Will to
that People; none among them ever doubted. 1 Samuel viii, etc.
He was the Person whom God employed to introduce the Kingly Government among
them: 1 Samuel x. 12.
And it was upon his Credit, that Saul himself was received by them for their
King. And yet it was this same Samuel that published God's Decree for taking
the Crown from Saul; 1 Samuel xv. 10. etc.
and that so Openly, and in such a Solemn manner, that it was not possible for
any among them to have been ignorant of it.

Nay, but this was not All: Samuel not only made known to them the Decree of
God concerning Saul; but showed them the very Person whom God had chosen for
them in his stead. 1 Samuel xvi. 13.
He Anointed him, for this very End, in Bethlehem; and commanded the Jews to
look upon him, and receive him as their King.

This was so Notorious, 1 Samuel xx 31. xxiv. 20. lb. xxiii. 17.
that even Saul himself knew of it: And Jonathan, Readiness Son, and Heir Apparent
to the Crown, not only knew the same thing, but Consented to it; and used his
utmost endeavor to promote the Will of God in it.

And now, when all this was so plain, as I have here represented it to you, and
as you all know that it was; Who could have imagined, that there should ever
have Risen any doubt, whether the Jews were to stick to the House of Saul; Or
to lay that aside, and without any more ado, submit to David, as their King?
Yet so we see it proved: For Abner, Readiness General, 2 Samuel ii. 8, etc.
no sooner saw that his Master was slain, but he took Ish-bosheth his Son, and
made him King in his stead; and eleven of the twelve Tribes of Israel,
Acknowledged his Authority.

It would be too long a Story to recount to you, what unhappy Divisions this
threw that People into; and through what a Multitude of Dangers, God, at last,
brought his Anointed to the full Possession of that Power which he had allotted
to Him. I shall only Observe, that so Generous, as well as Innocent, was the
Conduct of the Holy David, in the whole Course of this Affair; as showed him to
have deserved the Crown, though God had not bestowed it, in so singular a Manner,
upon Him. Though Saul several times endeavored, 1 Samuel xviii. 10, 25. xix. 11,
etc.
by the foulest means, to destroy him; and God, (as if it had been on purpose
that he might make him a Retaliation) twice put Saul himself into his hands; 1 Samuel xxiv. xxvi.
yet this brave Prince not only scorned to take the Advantage of him, but would
not Consent that Any of his Party should touch him. And when, (tired out with
the Confusions they had lain under, and convinced of the Will of God, to set
David upon the Throne) 2 Samuel iv. 6.
Two of the Chief Officers of his Army treacherously slew Ish-bosheth their
Master, and brought his Head to King David; that Excellent Man, did not only
not show any favor to them; but as he had before done to the Amalekite, who
slew Saul, 2. Sam. i. 15.
(though at his Own desire, and merely to keep his Enemies from doing of it,) He
punished them according to their desert: He cut off their hands and their feet,
2 Samuel iv. 12.
and hanged them up in Hebron; and gave an Honorable Burial to the Head of
that unfortunate Prince, whom they had so basely and barbarously murdered.

But though God had therefore in so Eminent a manner set David upon the Throne,
and David himself had appeared, in all respects, so Worthy of that Dignity:
though never any Prince more generously exposed himself for the Public Safety,
or came off with Greater Honor, or put things into a better posture, than He
did that Country; yet was not all this sufficient to quiet the Minds, and to
reconcile the Affections of some Perverse Tempers to Him: But they were still
ready, upon every Occasion, to Assault his Person; and to do, what in them lay,
to subvert his Authority. And which may be a sufficient demonstration to us,
that some Men's Resentments, are not only without Bounds, but beyond Conviction
too: And that we ought not to wonder if no Rational Considerations can take
place with those, whose Passions and Prejudices are so violent and infatuating
that we see a Prophet could not; And it may al, most be questioned, whether an
Angel from Heaven would have been able to Persuade them.

Such was the Case of the Jews heretofore; and I would to God, I had no cause
to say, that the same is our Case at this very Day. But what then means our
Solemn Assembling at this time? Why are we here met together to Bless God for
the Preservation of our Royal Sovereign, if neither his Person was in danger,
nor his Authority invaded?

To recount the several Steps by which it pleased God to bring our David to his
Throne; and show you what just Reason an injured People had to look to
themselves, and not suffer their Liberties to be subverted, and their Religion
destroyed, without taking any due Care to preserve either; would divert me too
far from the Subject before me, and to which I desire now particularly to Apply
my self. I shall therefore only say thus much as to this Matter; that if ever
it may be lawful for any People to provide for their Own Safety: If the
Constitution of a Limited Monarchy, be not a Mere Notion, that has neither
Meaning, nor Privilege in it: If a Nation Governed by Laws of its Own
Approving; and that never engaged to Obey any Sovereign, but what mutually
Obliged Himself to Rule according to Those Laws; has as just a right to the
Legal Government of the Prince, as the Prince has to the Legal Obedience of
such a People: In short, If it be Absurd to say, that a whole Kingdom may have
a right to its Laws and Liberties, and yet have no right to defend them, though
they should never so Apparently, or in such considerable Instances, be Broken
in upon; though such things should be enterprized, as all Men must see were
designed, and if not prevented, must End in a total Dissolution of the
Constitution: Then had This Kingdom also Reason to stand up in Defense of its
Laws, and its Religion, established by Those Laws: And to lay hold on the Happy
Opportunity of the Desertion of a King, who was resolved rather not to Rule at
all, than not to Rule in his Own way.

Whether this were our Case, as to Matter of Fact, whether our Constitution was
really in danger of being subverted, and our Religion, Laws, and Liberties were
invaded; this must be left to every Ones own Conscience to judge of. But if
they were, and if our Monarchy be in the very Frame and Constitution of it a
limited Monarchy; and established not upon the Imperial Laws of a few Visionary
Politicians, but upon the Fundamental Laws of its Own Making, or Allowing: Then
I must Solemnly profess that either I am incapable of judging what Sense and
Reason is; or it must follow, that an absolute Monarch, a Prince not bounded by
Law, but Governing only by the Arbitrary Motions of his Own Will, is no King of
Our Acknowledging: Our Constitution knows no such Monarch, nor did we ever
Oblige our selves to Obey such a One.

And now having thus truly shown you how our Case stood when it pleased God to
send our Royal Deliverer to Us, I shall need say very little to convince you,
that he did not come without a Particular Providence attending him in the whole
Course of our Deliverance. And though Success when it stands without any other
Support, much more if it be contrary to Justice and Equity, is but a very bad
Argument of the Divine Approbation; because God may Permit what He does not
Allow of: Yet where a whole Kingdom is manifestly injured, Oaths are broken,
Laws despised: Where the Religion of a Nation is endeavored to be subverted;
and a free People to be subjected to the intolerable Yoke of an Arbitrary
Power, and an Idolatrous Worship; and God visibly appears on their behalf, in
such extraordinary instances of his Providence, as scarce any Age can parallel:
It must be Obstinacy and Perverseness not to see that his Arm has brought
Salvation unto them; or seeing it, not to be persuaded, with all Thankfulness,
to Accept of it.

For not to say any thing of those many Deliverances we have heretofore
assembled to bless God for: How great was the Mercy that Saved us from our
present danger? How evident was the hand of God, in every Circumstance of it?

That Men, neither the most Religious, nor Compassionate of Any in the World;
Enemies to our Religion, and (if it were possible) somewhat worse than Enemies
to our present Government; should yet be so struck with the Regret of an
Enterprise, which alone could give them any just Hopes of succeeding in their
designs against us, as to become Themselves the Discoverers of their Own Wicked
Undertakings; is certainly very Strange: And what can hardly be accounted for,
without Acknowledging some Extraordinary Impulse of Conscience in it.

That having discovered it; those who suffered for it; and whose Concern for
their Own Reputation, if not for the Common Cause, one would think, should have
prompted them to leave the Credit of such an Attempt as much in doubt, as was
possible; should yet join their own Testimony, to the Witness that had before
been given of the Truth of it; this is yet more Wonderful: And what neither the
Principles, nor Politics of the Church of Rome, usually Allow their Proselytes
to do.

That to Strengthen both the Witness of Some, and the Confessions of Others, as
to this matter; So many foreign Proofs should be sent us from all Parts abroad,
and show that to have been published beforehand almost to all Europe, which
ought, if possible, to have been concealed even from those who were to be
Actors in it; this must be the Effect of a more than Ordinary Infatuation: And
cannot be Reconciled to the Usual Caution, and Closeness of Those, who were the
Great Contrivers, and Abettors of it.

In Short; That when such a Time was taken to invade us from Abroad, as (had
our Own Measures succeeded) we must have been left utterly destitute of any
possibility either of preventing, or Opposing it at Home; He who Governs the
Wind and the Sea, should so Order Matters, that it was not possible for us to
send away those Ships, on which our Safety was to depend: This is, above all
the Rest, an evident instance of God's favor to us; and ought to be as
Wonderful in our Eyes, as it has been Astonishing in those of our Enemies.

So plainly was God pleased to show Himself on our side, in Every Circumstance
of this deliverance. And that we may the better know what Returns we ought to
make for it, give me leave to offer you, a very few Observations, with
Reference thereunto.

And, 1st. If we consider it only in that part of the Design which was the
first to have been put in Execution; God has prevented the Murder of Our King:
Of that King whom He had chosen to be the Instrument of Our Preservation; and
in whose Safety our very Enemies themselves account our Welfare to Consist. And
God forbid! We should have a less Esteem of our Royal Sovereign, than those who
the most Hate him, show us that they Have.

2dly: This Murder was to have been followed with a Foreign Invasion: An
Invasion from that Prince who has already filled most of the Other parts of
Europe with Ruin and Desolation. And, particularly, has shown Himself so
Irreconcilable an Enemy to the Protestant Religion, as to be resolved (if it
were possible) to root out the very memory of it from off the Earth.

And here then let us consider, what a Confusion and Desolation this must have
put our unfortunate Country into? When we should have seen, Our Houses in
Flames about our Ears; Our Land destroyed; Our Friends and Relations
slaughtered before our Eyes: The Best and Greatest of our Nation, those from
whose Courage or Conduct, from whose Counsel or Interest, we might have
Especially hoped for Help, secretly cut off, in the very beginning of Our
disorders. In short, when our Land being become a Seat of War; we should have
beheld, and suffered All those Miseries, and Calamities, which we tremble to
hear of, though at the Greatest distance from Us.

Oh! How happy would Those have been, who should have had the Privilege of
being first destroyed? Rather than to have outlived the fortunes of their
Country, their Own Peace, and their Churches Establishment. But, Blessed be
God! Who has graciously delivered us out of their Hands! And thereby given us a
new earnest of his favor to us: And manifested to the World, that in Vain are
all the Counsels of men to destroy Those, whom He has resolved to Help and
Support.

And thus have I shown you, not only What Our Deliverance is; but withal, which
was my

IId. Point; To Whom we are to Ascribe the Glory of it.

For though God be, indeed, the Sovereign dispenser of all Our Fortunes; and, as
such, must be recurr'd to as the final Author of whatsoever Good we enjoy: Yet
in some Cases He is Pleased in a more particular manner to discover his hand in
the Blessings which we receive from Him; and therefore ought in a singular
manner to be looked unto, as the Donor of them.

So He did in David's deliverance; and so he did in Our late Preservation. It
was neither our Hand, nor our Counsel that saved us: Neither the Strength of
our Armies, nor the Cunning of our Contrivance, that disappointed the designs
of our Enemies against Us. But it was the Arm of the LORD that defended us: He
was our Strength and our Shield; and therefore we were Helped.

Which being so let us go on,

IIIdly, To consider, What it was that induced God to deliver David heretofore;
and for which we may justly presume He was pleased, in so wonderful a manner,
to Preserve Us now: My heart Trusted in Him, says he, and I am Helped.

There is nothing more frequently taken notice of by the Royal Psalmist,
throughout this whole Book, than this One thing; that He was therefore so
Often, and in so signal a manner, protected by God, because he put his trust in
Him.

It is upon this ground that He sometimes prays to God for Help: Psalm. vii. 1.
O Lord my God! in Thee do I put my trust; Save me from all Them that Persecute
Me, and Deliver Me. And again, Psalm. xv. 2. O my God! I trust in Thee, let me
not be ashamed, neither let mine Enemies triumph over Me.

And when God heard his Prayer, and preserved him from his Enemies; it is to
this that He ascribes his doing of it: I have trusted in the LORD, therefore I
shall not slide, Psalm. xxvi. 1. And again, Psalm. xxi. 7. The King trusts in
the LORD; and through the mercy of the most High, He shall not be moved.

It is this that He recommends to all Others, as the best means they could use
to secure to themselves the favor of God, and the Protection of his Good
Providence. Trust in the LORD, says he, and do Good; So shall Thou dwell in the
Land. Ps. xxxvij. v. 3.
They that trust in the LORD shall be even as Mount Zion, Psalm. cxxv. 1.
which may not be removed, but stands fast for Ever.

And, lastly, not to mention any more particulars; It is this that makes him
speak so often of God, as the particular Defender of such Persons: The LORD,
says he, Redeemeth the Souls of His servants; and none of them that trust in
Him shall be destitute. Psalm. xxxiv. 22. And again, Psalm. xviii. 30. He is a
Buckler to all Those that Trust in Him.

Now this being the benefit of such a trust, even with respect to our present
Welfare; it cannot but be a Matter of great consequence to us to know, wherein
the Nature of this Trust does consist; and how we may intitule Our selves to
the Benefits of it?

And here, 1st. I must observe, that we ought not so far to mistake either our
duty, or our Interest, as to imagine that because we are commanded to Trust in
God, therefore we must take no farther Care of, nor make any suitable Provision
for the success of our Affairs.

This would be not so much to Trust in God, as to Presume upon Him: To expect
that He should work Miracles for Our Sakes; And do All to Save those, who will
do Nothing to Save themselves. On the contrary we see how even David Himself,
amidst all his trust in God's Help, yet still took care to make the best
Provision He could for his Own Safety. And when the Israelites before, were
sent by his Own peculiar Commission, to kill and take possession; and were
assured of Victory, before they went into the Field: Yet still they were
required to act with as much Art and Cunning; to contrive as wisely, and to
fight as resolutely, as if the whole Success of their Enterprises were to have
depended upon their Own Courage and Conduct.

And so must We do Now: God has, it is true, in a wonderful manner, delivered
our King, and discovered the designs of our Enemies against Us. He has shown us
what kind of Men we have to do with; and from whence our danger is likely to
Arise. And it must be, in great measure, our Own fault, if we do not prevent
it. But yet, if because God has done thus much for Us, we shall from henceforth
grow Careless and Secure: If while our Enemies threaten us from abroad, and we
are beset with a discontented, designing party at Home; we shall neither be
careful to discover what their Strength is, nor to consider How to fortify our
selves against Them: We must blame no body, but our selves, if we shall at last
fall into their Snares, and sink under those Attempts, we have now so narrowly
escaped.

But 2dly. Though we may, and ought to Use our best endeavors to provide for our
Own Security; yet we must not place our dependence upon them: but when we have
done all that we can, must still look up to God, for Deliverance and Success.
And this is truly to Trust in him; and will furnish us with a clear Notion of
the Nature of that great duty which is required of Us on all these Occasions.

To provide for our Own safety, and to take those Measures that seem the most
likely to promote the public Welfare; this is not only very Lawful, but is
Reasonable and Necessary. Nor shall we ever be secure, without doing of it. But
yet, when all is done, it is neither our Arms, nor our Counsels; neither our
Strength, nor our Policy, that we must depend upon: But we must still Recur to
God for Help; And put our whole Trust and Confidence in his Mercy.

So David did; and it was this that Crowned his Enterprises with Honor and
Victory. I will not trust in my Bow, says he; neither shall my Sword Save Me.
Through thee will we push down our Enemies; through thy name will we tread them
under, that rise up against us. Psalm. xliv. 5, 6. And in Another Psalm, He
makes this Wise, and Pious Remark, upon the different Conduct of his Enemies,
as to this matter; and How it succeeded with Them accordingly: Psalm. xx. 7, 8.
Some trust in Chariots, and some in Horses; but we will Remember the Name of
the LORD our God. They are brought down and fallen; but we are Risen and stand
upright.

For men to look only to the number of their forces; the Exactness of their
discipline; and the Cunning of their Management; and then boast of their
Enterprises as Certain and Infallible; and exalt Themselves in their own
Imaginations, as if no Disappointment could happen to them: This is not only to
show too great a Contempt of God's Providence, but too little a reflection upon
the State of the World; and those numerous Accidents to which the Greatest and
Wisest Undertakings are exposed. And I am pretty Confident, our Enemies
themselves begin, by this time, to be sensible of their Own Folly in this
Particular: And to Perceive how vain a thing it is to lay great designs, and
build up mighty expectations upon them; and not consider all the while, that
there is a God who Rules in the Kingdoms of Men, and whose Counsel, when we
have done All we can, Dan. iv. 32 Prove. xix. 21.
shall Stand.

But above all, 3dly: As we must not trust in our Own Strength or Policy for
Success, and Security: So must we take heed not to engage in any Wicked
Courses, either to promote our Interests, or to prevent our Danger. For this
will be plainly to Forsake God; and to trust in our Own devices, even in
Defiance of his Ability to Control, and Disappoint Us.

There is a certain justice to be observed even against an Enemy: and War its
self has its Laws, from which the more upright Heathens thought it, not only
Evil, but Scandalous to depart. And much more ought we Christians to do
likewise. And though to a Weak mind, and a Brutish policy; it may appear a very
Wise method of proceeding, to endeavor, by secret treachery, to cut off a
dangerous Enemy; and do that by a sudden Stab, or a deadly draught, which
cannot without much hazard be accomplished in a fair Engagement: Yet there is a
God above, who as He abhors himself, and has taught us to detest such barbarous
undertakings; So does He for the most part bring them to naught: And leave the
projectors only to the Regret of having been disappointed in their designs; and
to the Hatred and Contempt of Mankind, for having ever engaged in Them.

Thus God did Do in the Case of David, whom Saul so often endeavored, and
hoped to have destroyed: And thus has he done for Our Royal Sovereign. He has
delivered Him from the Secret practices, as well as from the Open Violence of
his Enemies. And continued him to be, as he is this day, a living Monument of
his Own Mercy; And of the Un-Christian, Un-manly designs of those, who are
Great only in Treachery and Deceit: In endeavoring basely to destroy Those,
whom they never yet durst meet in the Field of Honor; nay, to whom they would
Rather tamely yield up, if they had it, the Empire of the World, than let the
Sword decide it between them, to Whom it should belong.

And let them rejoice, if they please, in their Inglorious proceedings. Let
them raise Armies, and train up forces, not to fight, but to countenance the
treachery of their Proceedings. Let them buy Victory; and Corrupt those, whom
they would be thought to Engage: And fancy, after all, that they are Great and
Honorable; because they are able to Command Panegyric's, and to Reward the
mercenary Authors of them. But Posterity will know the baseness of their
proceedings; and God, in a little time, will judge them for Them. In the mean
While it will be our parts to provide, the best we can, against their
Wickedness: And having so done let us not doubt, but that God will turn their
devices to their Own Confusion; and not suffer us to fall by them, whilst we
continue to put our Trust in Him.

And now, it remains only that I conclude all with the IVth and last Point,
which I proposed to speak to, Viz. The Return which the Royal Psalmist made to
God for his deliverance: Therefore my heart greatly Rejoiceth, and in my Song
will I praise him.

In which Words we have these (2) Things represented to Us:

1st. The Inward Sense which David had of God's Mercy to him: His Heart greatly
Rejoiced. And, 2dly. His Outward Expression of it; In my Song will I praise Him.

These Two together made up the Return of that Holy Man; and Both of them must
concur in Our Thanksgiving; if ever we mean to Render it Pleasing and
Acceptable to God Almighty.

1st. We must entertain a Worthy, and Grateful Sense of our Deliverance.

And this, one would think, Every One should do, who is Capable of
Understanding what it was; and from what a deluge of Miseries, we have reason
to believe, we are Freed by it.

Were the mischief, designed against us, to have reached no farther than to the
death of the King; yet sure we cannot have so soon forgot, How much we Owe to
Him, as not to account our selves, in an Eminent manner, concerned for his
Preservation. He who in the time of our Greatest Danger ventured His Own Life
and Fortunes, to secure Ours; and when our Enemies seemed to be in their full
Career, trampling both our Laws, and Religion under their feet; Stepped forth
into the Gap, and bravely withstood the Torrent, which would otherwise have
born down all before it: As he must needs deserve our most Grateful
Acknowledgment for so seasonable an Interposition; So shall He, I hope, be
always considered by Us, as the Repairer of our Breaches; the Supporter of our
State; the Defender of our Liberties; and the Preserver of the true Religion
among us: And in whose Safety, we therefore ought, as we do, most heartily to
Rejoice.

But this is not all: The very danger he was exposed to, was merely for our
sakes; and upon the Account of that Protection which he continues to afford us,
against the fury of Our Enemies. Nor would they ever have thought of Destroying
him, had He not been so Zealous to Save Us.

The truth is, if we will consider the design of our Enemies aright; we must
look upon our solemn Rejoicing at this time, to be not so much upon the account
of Our Royal Sovereigns Preservation, as of Our Common Deliverance. Our
Country; Our Families; Our Estates; nay our very Lives Themselves: The
Constitution of our Monarchy; the Laws by which we are Governed; the Religion
in which we serve God now, and through which we expect to be Saved hereafter; All
these were Struck at: And, had their Attempt succeeded, must All have fallen
together with the great Defender of them. Nor can any One excuse himself from a
grateful Resentment of this Happy Deliverance, without declaring himself
thereby a public Enemy: An Enemy, not only to his Prince's Safety; but to the
Peace, the Welfare, nay to the very Establishment of the Church and Government
under which we live.

We were appointed as Sheep for the Slaughter; Our Land to have been made an
Akeldama, a Field of Blood: The Fury of War, always very dismal, and no where
more, than where the French Tyranny has the Fortune to prevail; was to have
been doubled upon Us. Whilst we should have been exposed not only to the Rage
of those Abroad, (and who by the Treatment they have given their own
Countrymen, have sufficiently shown, what all others, of a different Religion,
must expect from them;) but to the particular Resentments of our own Domestic
Enemies. Or to speak all in one Word; we should have been laid open to all the
Cruelty that a false Zeal, and a persecuting Church could inspire into the
Minds of Men; who would have set no Bounds to their Rage; as they know no
Measure of their Hatred, and Malice, against us.

Oh! the Horror and Confusion, the Shreiks and the Lamentations, that would
have been seen, and heard in all our Streets! How often should we in vain have
wished to die, rather than live to behold and suffer such Evils, as would,
before this Time, have come upon us? As the Horror of a Shipwreck at Sea, or
of an Earthquake at Land; As a City taken by Storm; As if the Day of Judgment
were coming upon the Earth; such would the Case of this Miserable Country have
been.

But, Blessed be God! who has not given us over for a Prey unto their Teeth.
Psalm. cxxiv 6, 7.
Our Soul is escaped, even as a Bird out of the Snare of the Fouler; the Snare
is broken, and we are delivered. Nay, we are not only saved from our present
Danger, but are, I hope, in some Measure awakened to provide for our future
Safety: And effectually convinced what Canaanites we have among Us; and how
much it will concern us to Beware of them.

And, I would to God; they did not give Us, every Day, more and more Reason so
to do. For even since the Discovery of this Horrid, Barbarous, Base Design;
Where is almost the Man, that has given us any good Assurance of his Abhorrence
of it? That he is ashamed of the Undertaking; that he detests those who were
engaged in it: Or is indeed concerned for any thing of it, unless it be for
this one thing, that they succeeded no better in the Execution of it.

But such is the Power of Passion and Prejudice; and so Unaccountable are the
Working of some Men's Consciences! For sure, Otherwise, one would think it
should be somewhat more than Infatuation, to imagine, that to call in a French
Power is a likely Method to secure English Liberties: Or that those who have
been so Zealous to roct out the Protestant Interest at Home, will yet be so
good natured, as to establish it Abroad.

I hope there is no one will so far mistake my Design in insisting upon these
Matters; as to think that I desire hereby to raise up any Storm, against the
quiet and conscientious Part of those who differ from Us, in Point either of
Religion or Government. On the contrary, I freely profess, that I love, and
value, a sincere and upright Christian, let his Opinion be never so contrary to
what I take to be the right: And for the whole World I would not, willingly, be
the Occasion of the least Evil, to such a one. Persecution for Matters of
Opinion, is what, I thank God, I have ever Abhorred: And I hope I shall never
be so far transported in my Zeal for any Cause or Party, as to give the least
Encouragement to it.

But then I must beg Leave to observe withal, Jam. iij. 17. Colos. iij. 12. 1
Cor. xiij. 5, 6.
that true Religion, is first pure, then peaceable; it is humble and
charitable; it thinks no evil, nor wishes any; it rejoices not in Iniquity;
but desires the Welfare and Happiness of those, who are at the greatest
Distance from its own Persuasion. And if instead of maintaining such a
Character, Men will be peevish and morose; turbulent and unquiet: If they will
not only show an implacable Hatred toward all such as differ from them, but
will, upon every Occasion, publicly censure and revile them too: If they will
rejoice in their Harm, and be concerned at their Welfare; and resolve at any
Rate to procure their Ruin, though they were sure to perish together with them:
In short, if such be their Conscience, that they can without Remorse consent to
have a King murdered; their Country invaded; their Religion and Liberties given
up into the Hands of those who are the professed Enemies of both: I cannot but
think, that then it is high time for us to look to our selves, and to have a
Care of such Zealots; and to consider, the rather, how to prevent our Ruin, for
that it is become a Matter of Conscience, with some Men, to do all they can to
destroy us.

And now if, from what has been said, it appears, that our Hearts ought greatly
to rejoice at this Deliverance; then I am sure I shall need Add very little to
persuade you, 2dly. To let your Tongues declare the Sense of them. For the
Expressions of the Mouth, naturally follow the Disposition of the Mind: And
when the one is full of a grateful Resentment of God's Mercies; the other will
break out, into Songs of Praise and Thanksgiving for them.

Now this we have, in some Measure already done; and shall again go on, with
the Church, to do. But we must not let our Thanksgiving stop here; nor think
that the Acknowledment of one such solemn Meeting, is a sufficient Return for
so great a Preservation. Rather, we should teach our very Children to speak of
this Mercy; and deliver the Memory of it down to succeeding Generations. That
the Ages yet to come may know what a Deliverance we have received; as well as
enjoy the Benefits of it. And by more and more Instances be convinced, how
impossible it is to reconcile a Popish Power, to the Interest of a Protestant
Church and Kingdom: And that they ought rather, to expose themselves to any
Hazards, and to undergo any Burdens; than be brought again under the Yoke of it.

Thus then let us rejoice in the Blessing we have received, and thus let us
speak of it in all our Gates. And may that God who regards the Heart, and
knows the secret Thoughts of every one of us; approve our Sincerity, and
accept of our Thanksgivings! And ever more preserve us, from the Treachery, and
Violence of All our Enemies; but, especially from the Tyranny of the GREAT
OPPRESSOR.

May he incline those to consider and praise him, who are yet to be convinced
of the Justice of our Cause, and the Happiness of our Deliverance: Nay, who
perhaps break in upon the Solemnity of this Day, with Murmurings and Repinings
against God for preserving us.

And as for those who are true and steady to the public Interest of their
Country and Religion; may he every Day render them more useful, and serviceable
to both! May they be active and vigorous; firm and resolute! Neither afraid to
own a good Cause, though reviled by those who wish ill to it; nor unwilling to
venture themselves, and all they have, for the Support of it.

May they to the Sacrifices of their Lips, add the Piety of their Lives: And by
a general Reformation of Manners, and Union of Hearts and Affections among Us,
remove the only Obstacles that seem any Way likely to prevent our Common
Happiness!

And having thus disposed our selves for his Blessing; May that God who has
sent this great Salvation to us, multiply more and more his Favors upon us!
May he direct our Counsels; animate our Resolutions; and give Success to our
Undertakings! But especially; may he preserve our Royal Sovereign from all the
treacherous Designs of his Enemies against him; and from the Hands of those who
delight in Blood! May his Arms be prosperous; and his Reign happy! May he
finish all his Enterprises with Honor, And Victory: And may we consider more
and more, how much our Safety depends upon his Welfare; and with what Zeal we
ought to Unite together against all such, as by seeking his Destruction, shall
give us the highest, and most fatal Demonstration that can be given, of their
Desire to promote our common Ruin.

I shall conclude all, with the Words of our Royal Psalmist, when God had given
him Rest from all his Enemies, and had delivered him from the Hand of Saul,
Psalm. xviii. 46. The LORD lives, and blessed be our Rock; and let the God of
our Salvation be exalted. He has delivered us from our Enemies; he has lifted
us up above those that rose up against Us; he has delivered us from the VIOLENT
MAN: Therefore, will we give thanks unto thee O LORD among the Heathen, and
sing Praise unto thy Name:

Salvation and Glory, and Honor and Praise, and Thanksgiving; be unto the LORD
our God, for Ever and Ever, Amen.

FINIS.
Books Printed for R. Sare at Grays-Inn-gate in Holborn.
THe Genuine Epistles of St. Barnabas, St. Ignatius, St. Clement, St. Polycarp,
The Sphepherd of Hermas, and the Martyrdoms of St. Ignatius and St. Polycarp.
Translated and Published with a large Preliminary Discourse, by W. Wake, D. D.
8o.

A Practical Discourse concerning Swearing, especially in the two great Points
of Perjury and Common Sw earing: By W. Wake, D D. 8o.

Fables of Aesop and other Eminent Mythologists, with Morals and Reflections.
Folio.

The Visions of Don Francisco de Quevedo. 8o. Seneca's Morals, 8o.

Tully's Offices, 12o. Erasmus's Colloquies. 8o.

Bona's Guide to Eternity. 12o. All six by Sir Roger L'Estrange.

Complete Sets, consisting of Eight Volumes of Letters, writ by a Turkish Spy,
who lived forty five Years undiscovered at Paris, giving an Impartial Account
to the Divan at Constantinople, of the most remarkable Transactions of Europe
during the said time. 12o.

Humane Prudence, or, the Art by which a Man may raise himself and Fortune to
Grandeur. The sixth Edition. 12o.

Moral Maxims and Reflections in four Parts. Written in French by the Duke of
Rochfoucault. Now made English. 12o.

Epictetus's Morals, with Simplicius's Comment, made English from the Greek. By
George Stanhop, late Fellow of King's College Cambridge. 8o.

The Parson's Council or; or, the Law of Tithes. By Sir Simon Degge. 8o.

Of the Art both of Writing and Judging of History, with Reflections upon
Ancient as well as Modern Historians. By the Learned and Ingenious, Father Le
Moyne, 12o.

An Essay on Reason. By Sir George Mackenzie. 12o.

The Unlawfulness of Bonds of Resignation. 8o.

The Doctrine of a God and Providence; vindicated and asserted by Tho. Gregory
late of Wadham-College, Oxford; and now Lecturer near Fulham. 8o.

Some Discourses on several Divine Subjects. By the same Author.

Death made Comfortable, or the Way to Die well. By John Kettlewell, a
Presbyter of the Church of England. 12o.

Dr. Gregory's Divine Antidote against John Smith, a Socinian Writer. 8o.

Dr. Gregory's Sermon upon the Thanksgiving Day, for his Majesty's Preservation
from the intended Assassination.


