THE ANSWER TO THE Report, etc. Which the United Ministers Appointed their
Committee to draw up, as in the Preface. ALSO LETTERS of the Right Reverend the
Bishop of Worcester, and the Reverend Dr. Edwards, to Mr. Williams; against
whom their Testimony was produced by Mr. Lob. And Animadversions on Mr. LOB's
Defense of The Report.

By Daniel Williams.

London, Printed by Sam. Darker, for John Lawrence at the Angel in the
Poultrey. School.

The Preface.
I Shall give a true Narrative of the Composing and Publishing of the following
Sheets. The United Ministers, after their usual recess, met at St. Hellens,
Sept. 6. 1697. After previous Debates [it was Unanimously voted that the
Committee should take notice of the Papers called, The Report and the Remarks.
And if any Brother had any thing to offer about the same, that he should
communicate it to them, in order to their drawing up an Answer.] The Committee
consists of Dr. Bates, Mr. Hammond, Mr. How, Mr. Alsop, Mr. Williams, Mr.
Stretton, Mr. Woodhouse, Mr. Spademan, Mr. Nath. Tailor.

Sept. 20. 1697. [The Answer of the Committee to the Report, etc. was read, and
ordered to be read a second time next Monday.] Note, 1. They of the Committee,
who applied themselves to this Work, were Mr. Hammond, Mr. Alsop, Mr. Williams,
Mr. Stretton, Mr, Woodhouse, Mr. Spademan, and Mr. Nath. Tailor. Six of them
severally perused this Answer to the Report; and after several Meetings, all
the Seven Unanimously agreed thereto, and brought it to the Meeting as the
Answer they had prepared. The most material parts were read to Dr. Bates
(particularly the Proposal, p. 27, 28. The Accouut of the Subscription to the
first Paper, and concerning my Book, p. 41, 42, etc.) and approved of by him.
Our rule is, that no matter of moment shall be determined, unless it have been
openly and freely debated, and agreed in one Meeting, and then reassumed and
concluded in a Second Meeting. 3. This Answer was debated, and agreed to in the
Meeting; tho a Brother had objected against its being in the Name of the Body.
Sep. 27. 1697. [Resolved that the Reading of the Answer to the Report, be
deferred to this day Fortnight, that the Committee may have time to consider.]
Note, 1. The occasion of this delay, was not any thing objected against any
part of this Answer; But three of the Brethren insisted that it was too great a
Condescension in the Body, to Answer so insignificant a Person as the Author of
the Report; And that this Present Answer should be Published by a particular
Brother, and that some inconveniency might attend putting forth any Answer in
the Name of the Body. 2. The thing to be considered by the Committee was, what
expedient could be offered, or Reason given, why this Answer should not be
Published in the Name of the United Ministers as such. 3. The Committee met,
and debated. But one of the foresaid three Brethren remained unsatisfied, that
any Answer should be Printed in the Name of the Body of the United Ministers.
The debate was put off to another time.

October 11. 1697. [Mr. Hammond acquainted the Brethren that the Committee was
not ready to give in their Report.] Upon some of the Brethren beginning to
express their resentments at these delays; I spoke to this effect: [Mr.
Moderator, Tho I have met with no Reason that is cogent with me, or with many of
the Brethren, why any be unwilling the Answer should be Published in the Name
of the Body of the United Ministers, yet the dissatisfaction of any worthy
Brother, etc. Is so inconvenient at this juncture, that I shall not insist on
the present reading of our Answer here. -- But I shall acquaint you, that some
or other of the Brethren will cause this Answer to be Printed, with an Account
how far it has proceeded among us.] This proved a satisfying expedient, of
which no Man expressed any dislike. Hereupon a Vote which past nemine
contradicente, Sep. 27. 1697. (When all were present, who desired further time
to consider whether the Answer should be in the Name of all the United
Ministers) was now repeated and unanimously approved; the Vote was, [We Judge
it needful that there be an Answer to two Papers, called the Report and the
Remarks, in Vindication of the United Ministers from the Charge therein made
against them.] Thus far and no further did this Answer to the Report, proceed
in our Meeting of Ministers; nor did I keep it a secret when in the Press. But
most of the Brethren were informed thereof, whereat none expressed (that I know
of) any dissatisfaction. As for the Epistle and the Reflections on the Remarks,
they went no further than the Committee, and were not to be brought to the
Meeting till after the Answer had past.

Tho this Narrative informs you, that this Answer is not Published in the Name
of the Body of the United Ministers, because the Confirmation of it by a second
Reading is suspended, and only so. Yet the Original Papers and the Matters of
Fact declared, are as unquestionable, and the Doctrines herein acknowledged are
as much their common sentiments as if the Answer had been Published in the Name
of the Body. For I appeal to the Book of St. Hellens, for the Truth of this
Narrative, and to the Copy perused and marked by the Committee, that there is
no Change in the Answer to the Report, except one amendment in the date of
time. Nor in the Epistle, or Reflections on the Remarks, besides one expression
softened by the Committees direction.

Could the Answer of a particular Brother, as well express the Doctrines
assented to by the United Ministers, and obtain the same Credit in a recital of
Matters of Fact (in both which lies their Vindication) as this Answer [which
their Committee was appointed to draw, and which they brought in to the Meeting
as their prepared Answer, and which was once agreed to by the Body, and
unexcepted against in any one Passage, when it was suspended to gratify three
of the Brethren,] I should have preferred the Liberty of Answering alone, if I
had not Judged it needless after so great an Answer as the Faithful Rebuke,
which was so acceptable that only the modesty of the Author preveuted the
thanks of the United Ministers, for his putting a stop to the evil effects of
the Report, whilst their Meetings were discontinued.

I have subjoyned that Second Paper, mentioned in the Report, etc. As also one
of the Letters of the Right Reverend the Lord Bishop of Worcester, and one of
the Reverend Dr. Edwards, both whose Books Mr. Lob cites against me: and
therefore I thought none fitter to vindicate me against his Charge, and their
own Books from the ill use he wrested them to serve. Lastly, Mr. Lob's Defense
of the Report, with a Challenge to me coming forth, when these were in the
Press; Friendship and Justice to the Rebuker prompted my bestowing a few hours
to stop the ill effects of this grand piece of Art and Misrepresentation, (it is
nothing else) until he shall better fifth, and more expose it. And one thing I
hint, which I thought proper for him to overlook. If after all this Evidence
Mr. Lob can find a people so credulous and bewitched by prejudice, as to say,
The United Ministers, or my self, are Socinians; that the difference on our
part (tho it is so on theirs) have been about mere Words or Trifles; that we
have opposed any thing but Gross Crispianism, that we brake the Union, or
refused Reunion from a Zeal for Errors against the satisfaction of Christ, or
Justification by his Righteousness; They deserve Pity rather than Argument.
That at last Truth and Peace may prevail, is the Prayer of,

Daniel Williams.
Nov. 17. 1697.
To the Reader.
NOne are more afflicted than our selves under those unseasonable dissentions,
which we would have Concealed, when our utmost Endeavors and Compliances could
neither prevent, nor yet put a Period to. But the Authors of the Printed Papers
which we confute, have contrived so to Proclaim our differences, by sending
those sheets in Letters to most of our Ministers in the Kingdom, yea, to
foreign parts, and to Multitudes of Private Persons: That our Defense, instead
of making our Divisions more known, will scarce reach those already
misinformed. Had the Charge contained only small mistakes, or lesser Errors;
Christian Prudence might forbid an Answer. But when they publish us guilty of
such destructive Opinions, as they say subvert the Doctrine of Christ's
satisfaction, yea, and make it impossible; and this not as rash Censures, but
pretending to cite our own Paper for their Charge; A Vindication is necessary,
unless we ought to Prostitute our Ministry, betray the Truth, lie under the
brand of Heretical Opinions, induce others by our Example to entertain such
Errors, and Confirm those who are already infected. Had the Accusation been
still confined to some particular Brethren, our Practice hitherto may convince
the World, we had not as a body set forth this Vindication: But when the
Authors of the Report, etc. Accuse all who sent the Third Paper, i. e. the Body
of the United Brethren in and about London: Nothing short of our own Public
Testimony can be sufficient to declare what our Principles be, or acquit us
from holding those horrid Errors, they so confidently as well as falsely
ascribe unto us. A particular Brothers Defense of us would be incompetent to
these Ends, had any one been willing thereby to expose himself.

And yet tho the Reporters write for, and pretend to give the Sense of all the
Dissenting Brethren, as well as to Arraign and Condemn all us the United
Ministers: Nevertheless, we direct our Confutation only to the Authors of the
Report, and of that called Remarks, with such as consented to and approved
thereof. We are so far from intending any other Persons, that we hope, none
besides them will esteem themselves reflected on in this our Defense: Nor had
we given any Narrative of the rise and progress of our differences (least more
might appear intended;) But that the Report and Remarks do so frequently
declare, that our Divisions hitherto have been caused only by our contending
for Socinian Errors against Christ's satisfaction. We also desire the Reader to
observe that what we call the First Paper, Is that which several Congregational
Brethren contend for. That which we call the Third Paper, is, that which the
United Brethren sent as a mean of Reunion to those wh^ have left the Union.
And when we Term such as left the Union, and approve of the Report, Dissenters,
it is not from any dis-respect, but because the Report chooses to call them by
the Name of Dissenting Brethren, p. 4. And whereas once or twice we have
occasion to give a Narrative only of some things declared by some of our
Brethren, we do not therein determine concerning such things, further than to
report that those Brethren have declared such things as we there mention.

With this necessitated Vindication of our selves and Ministry, we think it
incumbent on us to warn all Persons, especially such of you as stand more
peculiarly related to us; that you be not shaken in mind, but that you remain
steadfast in the Faith in this time, when seducers not only abound, but under
various disguises are so unusually active, and successful to the Reproach of
Christianity, and the apparent danger of the Souls seduced by them. Lament with
us to see all revealed Religion exposed by some, the Godhead and Satisfaction
of Christ our Blessed Redeemer denied by others, and Doctrines which have a
direct tendency to libertinism espoused too many. All which, with the residue
of the great Errors at this time Propagated; do (however inconsistent they
seem) jointly contribute to the subverting of the true Religion, and threaten
misery to these Kingdoms.

And as we would excite your Godly Zeal for the Truths and Laws of Christ,
against Opinions, subverting the Foundations of Faith, and militating against
Practical Godliness: So with equal concern we must exhort you, to have fervent
Charity toward all Christians, and to walk in Peace with all who call upon the
Name of the Lord out of a pure Heart. Notwithstanding differences in lesser
matters. Whereunto we have attained, let us all walk by the same Rule; waiting
with mutual forbearance, till God shall reveal those things to such, Who at
present are otherwise minded than our selves.

PEace is so desirable, that we have suffered our selves to be long
misrepresented in hopes that time at least would so abate the Prejudices of our
Dissenting Brethren (as the Report calls them) as not to necessitate us to a
Public Vindication of our selves. But to our grief we find that the more we
submitted, the more some were encouraged to serve their own purposes, by
exposing us and our Ministry. Yet we continued Passive until a Printed Paper,
entitled, A Report of our Differences: written by some of them as if in the
name, if not with the consent, or countenance of the rest, compels us at last,
to state Matters of Fact, as they stand, with respect to Doctrinals, between us
the United Ministers in and about London, and such as have Deserted our Union:
which we can freely submit to the Judgment of the unbiased Reader, although we
forbear to mention several things, which would irritate more than those we are
forced to Recite for our Defense against the Paper we are now taking into
Consideration.

The Title it bears is, A Report of the present State of the Differences in
Doctrinals, etc. But upon Perusal, we find it neither an impartial, clear, nor
true Report of those Differences; nor can the design it is to serve be
concealed, especially when it is so industriously sent throughout the Kingdom,
to impose on such as are unacquainted with our Case. Before we examine the
particulars of this Report, it is needful to give an Account of the rise, and
progress of our differences, wherein it will appear whether we did any thing to
break the Union, or ommitted any thing within our power to induce those
Brethren to reunite, who had separated from us, or were not inclined to live
i^ Peace, when their unperswadeableness made us so un^happy, as to be deprived
of their des^red Society.

About the beginning of the Year, 1691. were Pub^lished the ^eads of an
Agreement between the Presbyterian and Congregational Ministers (as then
distinguished in and about London, which were drawn up by a numbe^ deputed by
those of both Denominations: of the fir^ were, Mr. Hamond, Mr. How, Mr.
Williams, Mr Stretton with Dr. Annesly and Mr. Mayo, who both of the^ are now
at rest in the Lord. Of the other were, M^^ Griffith, Mr. Mead, Mr. Chauncey,
Mr. Lobb, with Mr^ James and Mr. Mather, which two also are now fal^len asleep
in the Lord. These Heads of Agreemen^ were Assented to (as far as we know,) by
all the Pres^byterian and Congregational Ministers then in and about London,
except Mr. Cole, Mr. Mather, and Mr. Rich. Tay^lor. Among other things, we
therein declared, First We would meet and Consult, without the least shadow of
separate, or distinct Parties. Secondly, That as to what appertains to
soundness of Judgment in matters of Faith, we esteem it sufficient that a
Church acknowledge the Scriptures to be the Word of God* the perfect and only
Rule of Faith and Practice; and own either the Doctrinal part of the Articles
of the Church of England, or the Confession, or Catechisms shorter or larger,
Compiled by the Assembly at Westminster; or the Confession agreed on at the
Savoy to be agreeable to the said Rule.

By the first, we thought our meetings of Ministers were secured, and opposite
Meetings prevented. By the latter, we provided, that our Union should not be
dis^olved by every different Opinion; especially such as were known to be
espoused by Persons when admitted Members of the Union, as the Reverend Mr.
Baxter, Mr. Cockain, etc. This Union was tollerably maintained for a while,
notwithstanding the attempts of some to break it, as we have reason to fear,
and of others to make it serviceable to purposes not fit to be mentioned.

About October, 1692. Mr. Chauncey in a meeting of the united Ministers after
many warm Expressions declared, he would leave their meetings, and break off
from their Union. The Cause he alleged, was our taking no Cognizance of a
^aper of Objections, subscribed by Mr. Griffith, Mr. Cole, Mr. Mather, Mr.
Chauncey, Mr. Trayl, and Mr. Richard Tailor, against Mr. Williams's Book
called, Gospel Truth Stated, etc. written in Confutation of Dr. Crisps's unsound
Opinions which had been revived, and divulged by his Works reprinted; to which
Book of Mr. Williams's, an Approbation is prefixed with several of our Names.
There were many Reasons we should take small notice of those Objections in our
Meetings, seeing that three of the six Objectors were not of the Union: The
material Objections were not only ungrounded, but they recited as Mr.
Williams's Words in his Book, what we found quite contrary to the Letter of his
Expressions* We might add many more.

But notwithstanding, we were convinced, That particular Brethrens subscribing
Mr. Williams's Confutation of Dr. Crisp's Errors (which were openly propagated
to our common Danger and Reproach,) did not affect the Union, nor the united
Ministers as such; and therefore could be no just cause of any Brother,s
deserting us; yet we appointed a number of the Brethren to consider those
Objections against Mr. Williams's Book, who together with the Objectors
accommodated that Affair, by a Subscription to certain Doctrinal Propositions,
of which you have an account, Printed 1693. called, An Agreement in Doctrinals;
out of which we shall only collect these Passages. P. 1. Whereas some
differences have of late arisen, occasioned by a Book written by Mr. Williams,
Entitled, Gospel Truth Stated (wherein Dr. Crisps Works reprinted are
considered,) and by certain Books written by Mr. Chauncey in opposition
thereto, and by an Approbation of diverse of us prefixed to Mr. Williams's Book,
and by a Paper Snbscribed by Mr. Griffith, Mr. Cole, Mr. Mather, Mr. Trayl, and
Mr. R. Tailor, in conjunction with Mr. Chauncey: It is hereby declared, that
neither they who Subscribed that Approbation prefixed to Mr. Williams's Book,
did therein more than signify (as their own Words express,) that they judged he
had, in all that was material, fully and rightly stated the Truths and Errors
therein mentioned as such, without delivering their Sense about the Preface,
Explications, or Proofs thereto belonging; which Declaration is not to be
esteemed as a disapproval of the said Preface, Explications, or Proofs.

Here it is plain, that whatever ground of difference was pretended from that
Book, or the Approbation to it, was then considered and adjusted; that being
the very express and sole matter, which that Agreement refers to: And
therefore, how unaccountable is it to maintain Divisions so long after, upon
that same pretense?

P. 2. We and they say, in order to the composing of matters of Controversy,
etc. We do Subscribe these following Propositions, as what do most fully
provide against the Arminian, Antinomian, Socinian, and Popish Errors. etc.
Here was declared a full provision against those respective Errors. And is it
not strange, that now such Phrases and Words must be the Standard of Orthodoxy,
which neither this Agreement, the Church of England, the Assemblies, nor the
confession of any Church require.

P. 15. We shall always through God's gracious assistance in our future
Ministry, to our utmost avoid all appearance of opposition to one another, so
as not to hinder or prejudice, but as far as in us lies to promote the success
thereof, and the common benefit thereby.

When the following behavior of some of our dissenting Brethren, is observed
in many signal instances, ^t might be well suspected, whether ever they
subscribed an engagement so solemn, or if they did, what ^an be contrived to
oblige them? But that they subscribed; See p. 16.

December 16. 1692. This Day the Brethren, who endeavored to Accommodate this
controversy, did with Mr. Williams, and Mr. Chauncy, and these other five, who
with him objected against Mr. W^lliams's Book, subscribe to this agreement, and
these Doctrinal Propositions.

Daniel Williams. Samuel Annesley. Math. Barker. Edw. Veal. John James. Stephen
Lob. John How. George Hamond. Vincent Alsop. Rich. Mayo. Sam. Slater. Isaac
Chauncy. Geo. Griffith. Tho. Cole. Nath. Mather. Rob. Trayl. Rich. Tailor.
On December 19. This expedient was brought to a Meeting of the united
Ministers, who unanimously expressed their approbation in the following words,
Viz. That those Brethren, who, at the desire of the United Ministers,
considered some Objections against Mr. Williams's Book, having brought in the
abovementioned expedient, for the Accommodation of the matters in controversy;
the United Ministers have weighed it, and approve of the same. Besides, it was
further declared by them, that whereas the United Ministers Collectively
considered, and as such, have not been desired to approve of Mr. Williams's
Book; in like manner, they do not by any thing in this agreement, imply an
approbation of Mr. Chauncy's Writings in this controversy; Nevertheless they do
rejoice, that both Mr. Williams, and Mr. Chauncy, have accepted this offered
expedient.

We hoped after this agreement, Union and Peace were well secured: But (alas!)
in a little time (without any occasion given on our parts) we found, besides
the endeavors of those, who came not into the Union, to prejudice People
against us and our Doctrine, as well as against the Union; Several of those
called Congregational, who were Members of the Union, frequented not our
Meeting, but often joined with the former in a Meeting at Pinners-Hall, the very
day and hour of the Week, in which our Meetings of Ministers are statedly kept.
Yea, and some of them in Print reflected on our Meetings in very unbeseeming
Terms, as will be made appear if occasion require. Nevertheless, our Zeal for
Peace, did not only prevail with us to be silent under these Public affronts,
but set us on making a new Essay for a reunion, about the latter end of the
Year 1694. To which end, we appointed a Number to meet, both with the
dissenting Brethren, who had left us; and with such* who had always refused to
be of us. These dissenting Brethren pretended nothing for their separation, but
that there were Erroneous Persons in the Union. To gratify them as to this, the
Persons deputed by us, admitted such Provision as pleased those Brethren,
against whatever Errors they suspected any of our Number guilty of. This you
will find in the former Part of the following Paper, which was brought to our
Meeting, as what would satisfy the Dissenters, if assented to by us. Some of
us, were sensible of this New ^mposition of theirs (against whose Opinions we
had so much to object) and the dangerous Consequences of thus Multiplying
confessions, as also of favoring such unjust suspicions of our Principles,
which we knew they had no Reason for, as (...) any of our Number. Nevertheless,
we submitted (...) Prospect of a Coalition; only we finding their Pa^^r to want
due Provision against Crispian and Antino^^an Errors, which many did Publicly
Espouse and ^^bet, we desired Mr. How, Mr. Stretton, Mr. Williams, ^^d Mr. Lob,
to supply the said defect. The result ^hereof you have in the ensuing Paper,
which was un^^imously agreed to in our Meeting, and sent from us (...) Mr. Lob,
to our Dissenting Brethren; In Ian. 7. 1694.

After a Preface it thus follows,

'We the United Ministers in and about London, considering of a way whereby to
preserve the Union, and prevent any mistakes, and remove any prejudices that
may arise amongst us, to interrupt the foresaid Union, do declare, that we
still adhere to the Terms thereof, and do still submit to the Holy Scriptures
as the Rule of Faith and Practice, and do own the Doctrinal part of those
commonly called the Articles of the Church of England, or the Confession,
shorter or larger Catechisms, compiled by the Assembly at Westminster, or the
Savoy Confession; and do renounce, and testify against all Opinions and
Doctrines dissonant therefrom; as for instance, among many others.

First, That there is no definite Number of Persons elected from all Eternity,
whom God will by his appointed means certainly save, and bring to Eternal Life,
leaving the rest who fall under a just Condemnation for their Original and
Actual Sins, especially for their neglect and contempt of the means of
salvation. 2. That Christ died equally for all Men, not intending the final
salvation of some more than others. Thirdly, That Men have in their own Power
by the use of the Natural Faculties of their reason and will, unassisted by the
special Light and Grace of the Holy Ghost, to perform all that is necessary to
salvation; or that his special efficacious Light and Grace is not necessary to
their conversion, perseve^rance, and final salvation. Fourthly, That any o^
them whom God has foreknown, predestined and called effectually according to
the purpose of hi^ Grace, shall fall away either totally, or so as not t^ be
finally gloryfied Fifthly, That Faith, Repen^tance, a Holy Conversation, or any
Act of Wor^ whatever done by us, or wrought by the Spirit o^ God in us, are any
part of that Righteousness for the sake of which, or on the Account whereof,
Go^ does justify any Man, or Entitle him to Eternal Life.

On the other side.

First, That Men are under no obligation to mak^ use of their Natural
Faculties, with such Externa^ means of salvation as God affords them, praying
i^ hope, for his Gracious assistance in order to tha^ blessed end. Secondly,
That God has not made of^fers of Grace by Christ, to all within the sound o^
the Gospel, testifying that whoever believes shall b^ saved, without excluding
any, and commandin^ them to believe accordingly. Thirdly, That any ar^ in the
sight of God justified, or Entitled to Eternal Life, before they are
effectually called, or while the remain unregenerate, or in unbelief. Fourthly,
Tha^ any may expect Pardon without Repentance. Fifthly* That continued
Repentance toward God, and Fait^ in our Lord Jesus, and Holiness of Heart and
Life are not in the Nature of the thing, and by the con^stitution of the Gospel
necessary to salvation. Sixthly* That the Moral Law is not of use to
unregenerate Men, to awaken their Consciences to fly from the wrath to come,
and drive them to Christ, or that it is not a rule of Life to them that live
under the Gospel, as well as others. Seventhly, That believers falling into
grievous Sins, do not incur Gods displeasure; or that they may expect assurance
otherwise, than by the evidence of those Graces to which the promises of
salvation are made, and by the Testimony of the Spirit of Adoption witnessing
with our Spirits, that we are the Children of God. We have thought it our Duty
to bear our Testimony against all these Erroneous Opinions, or any other
contrary to the plain Tenor of the Gospel of God: And we do further protest
against any design of undermining one another in any matter of Church
Government, but do heartily desire to maintain Communion with each other,
according to the Heads of Agreement we have assented to. And if any thing has
been done or spoken by any of us, through mistake or inadvertency, that may
cause any just offense to the prejudice of the said Union, we are ready upon
better information to rectify the same, still desiring and continually
resolving a Brotherly forbearance toward one another, in any lesser points
wherein we may differ.

Our concern for Union will appear, if it be considered that (to the best of
our Knowledge) we retained all the very words sent by them to us, as a guard
against each of the Errors, of which they suspected any of us: the Provisions
we added, is generally in the words of the Assembly, to which we hoped they
would be more easily induced to assent, than if we had expressed our selves in
other words; and we limited our additions to such Errors as are the other
extreme, as to the Articles they had chosen to insist upon, whereas we might
have provided against each of Dr. Crisp's Errors.

A good issue of this Paper was expected by many of us. But to our grief it was
rejected, and no Answer sent us concerning it to this very day: Yea, a
Coalition hereupon was cheerfully hoped for by us, even after their Friends
had, Nov. 7. 1694. Necessitated four of our Number to leave the Lecture at
Pinners-Hall, and all such of the dissenting Brethren, who were managers of ^he
reiief for Poor Ministers, had deserted their Assoiates with other things, not
so directly belonging to the Body of United Ministers, as such. But alas! (as
they had generally absented from us long before) all the Bre^hren called
Congregational (except the Reverend and Upright Mr. Barker, and a very few
more) joined as a separate Party from us, in the Monday's Meeting at
Pinners-Hall, with the Ministers who had opposed the Union ever since it was
concluded.

The temper of our Brethrens Spirits, the methods taken to expose us, their
disappointing us so often, when we thought they had been obliged; And the
unsuccessfulness of so many probable attempts for Reunion, might well
discourage any further endeavors; yet when we heard that any of these Brethren
had the least disposition toward Peace, we applied our selves to an
Accommodation. In order thereunto, the Reverend Dr. Bates, Mr. Hammond, Mr.
Hill, and Mr. Slater, in concurrence with Mr. How, and Mr. Williams, were
desired to draw up a proposal, which they brought to our Meeting, as that
wherein they were all agreed; and after we had several days considered the
same, it was unanimously assented to, and sent by us in a Letter to our
Brethren.

The Paper, by the Report called the third Paper, which was sent by the United
Brethren to such as had left the Union.
WHereas some unhappy Differences have arisen among us, principally about the
Doctrine of Justification, as set forth in Mr. Williams's Book, entitled,
Gospel Truth Stated, to which several of our Names are pre^ixt; we being
willing to give all reasonable satisfaction therein, for the removing the
present, and preventing all future Differences, which will otherwise tend to
the dishonor of God, disquiet of his Churches, and danger of Souls; do here by
declare our Judgment concerning the same.

That we adhere to our former Approbation of the Doctrinal Articles of the
Church of England, or Confession of Faith compiled by the Assembly at
Westminster, or that at the Savoy, as agreeable to the word of God, and
particularly, to the Articles collected by us out of the Confession with the
Catechisms compiled by the same Assembly, printed 1693. And further declare,
That if any shall express himself disagreeably thereto, in any momentous Points
of Doctrine, we will with Brotherly candor and kindness endeavor to give, and
receive just satisfaction therein, bearing with one another Infirmities, and
different Sentiments in matters of lesser weight, not contending about Logical,
or Philosophical Terms, or mere Human Forms of Speech, not judging it
reasonable or just, to charge upon any such consequences of any expression or
opinion of his, which he himself shall disown.

And we further declare, as to the special matters in difference.

I. Concerning Justification. That although the express word of God do assert the
necessity of Regeneration, to our entering into the Kingdom of God; and requires
Repentance, that our Sins may be blotted out; and Faith in Christ, that we may
be justified; and Holiness of Heart and Life, without which we cannot see God.
Yet that none of these, or any work done by Men, or wrought by the Spirit of
God in them, is, under any Denomination whatsoever, any part of the
Righteousness for the sake, or on the account whereof, God does pardon,
justify, or accept Sinners, or entitle them to Eternal Life, that being only
the Righteousness of Christ without them, imputed to them, and received by
Faith alone.

II. Of a Commutation of Persons between Christ and us. As we are to consider
our Lord Jesus Christ in his Obedience, and Sufferings, as God and Man*
invested with the Office of Mediator; So it is apparent, this Commutation of
Persons with us was not natural, in respect of either nature, by which his
Individual Substance should become ours, and ours his; nor Moral, in respect of
Qualities, or Actions, whereby he should become inherently Sinful, and we
immediately Sinless. Nor was it any change whereby his office of Mediator
should be transfered on us. But it is to be understood in a Legal, or Judicial
Sense (as we may call it) viz. He by agreement between the Father and Him, came
into our room and stead, not to repent and believe for us, which the Gospel
requires of us as our Duty (tho he has undertaken the Ele^t shall in due time
be enabled thereto) But to answer for our violation of the Law of Works: He
being made sin for us, that knew no sin, that we might be made the
righteousness of God in him. 2 Cor. 5 21.

III. Of God's being pleased or displeased with Christ, as standing, and
suffering in our stead. We judge that God was always pleased with Christ, both
in his Person, and execution of all his Offices, which is expressed most
particularly in that of his Priestly, 1^ John 17, 18 Therefore does my father
love me, because I lay down my life, etc. And no otherwise displeased than as
having a dispassionate Will to inflict upon him the punishment of our Sins,
which he had undertaken to bear, that God might, without injury to his Justice
or Honor, pardon and save penitent Believers, for his satisfaction, and
Intercession founded thereon.

Mr. Williams freely declares his Concurrence with us in these three
particulars, and that his Judgment was never contrary to the sense of this
Paper, for which he appeals to the said Book: So it is manifest, that when he
uses the prhase of no change of Person between Christ and the Elect, it could
not be intended as a denial o^ a change of Persons between Christ and us in the
General Sense, but only in opposition to the Opinion of his adversary he wrote
against, for in that very place he expressly affirms, That Christ suffered and
dyed in our Room, and stead. And we do declare, that whosoever shall be found,
to express themselves in their Preaching or Writing agreeably to this Paper,
and to the mentioned Articles or Confessions, we shall esteem them to deliver
the sincere Gospel of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ; and it shall be remote
from us to oppose or reflect upon, but we shall to our utmost Encourage, and
give Countenance to one another Ministry therein.

Such of us, whose Names are prefixed to the said Book, do declare they were
given to the State of Truth and Errors, as formerly expressed in the Paper,
entitled, The agreement in Doctrine, Subscribed and Published, Anno Dom. 1692.

They who framed this Proposal had before them two Papers, one which the report
calls the first Paper, which one of our Brethren had with great Condescension
and Inclination to Peace, concerted with some of the Dissenters: Which Paper,
although it was never proposed to, nor read in any of our Public Meetings of
Ministers, and was unanimously agreed to be laid aside with a Second Paper,
that had been brought unto us by another Brother; Yet it is manifest, the
Brethren in the framing of this Third (which is our only Paper) greatly
Accommodated themselves to the Model of the first: For they admit a new Debate
concerning Mr. Williams's Book, after a Solemn Accommodation of that whole
matter, when the Dissenters had unjustly made it an occasion of difference so
many Years before; they also recite two Passages of Mr. Williams, as excepted
against by the Dissenters, and limit the Declaration of our Judgment to the
Three Heads, the Objectors did choose to insist upon, whereas you will
presently read a Vote of us united Ministers, wherein we require a disowning of
very many Antinomian Errors, Published by several of these Dissenters, whenever
they shall make the disowning of any Passages out of Books Written against
Antinomianism, a Term of Union. Yea further, we retain the whole Provision of
the First Paper, against any of our surmized Errors in the Doctrine of
Justification, and what we add is in Scripture Words. And in the other two
Heads, we come as near as we can with Truth, and Freedom from Ambiguity, in
Points of so great Concernment, and in a time when so many are at work to
Propagate Crispianism, and Antinomianism. A Coalition could be no indifferent
thing to such, who to obtain it do thus condescend, and deny themselves. But to
give our attempt a yet greater advantage, we omitted not to address our selves
to our Brethren, with the most affectionate, fervent, and humble entreaties,
and supplications, as well as persuasive Arguments; as you will see in this
Letter which we sent to them, with the forementioned Paper.

Note, It was declared, that by the words [under any Denomination whatsoever]
we exclude all Righteousness from being Meritorious, or Attoning, yea, or a
procuring Cause of these benefits; none is at all so, but the Righteousness of
Christ. But we intended not to exclude what the Gospel requires in order to
our interst, in those benefits given for the sake of Christ's Righteousness.

To our Reverend, and duly Respected, and Beloved Brethren in our common Lord
and Savior Jesus Christ, Mr. Griffith, Mr. Mead, Mr. Chauncey, Mr. James, Mr.
Lobb, and the rest of the Brethren of the Union, (who for some time.) have
forborne to meet with the United Ministers at Dr. Annesley's Meeting Place.
Reverend Brethren,
YOUR forbearing to meet with us at our ordinary times and places for so many
months* has made a deep, and smarting impression on our Spirits, and filled
our Hearts with Grief and Wonder. With Grief, because we have been so long
deprived of much of that Satisfaction and Assistance, which your presence with
us was wont to afford us. With Wonder, because we could neither apprehend nor
receive any certain Information of those Reasons, which prevailed with you, to
keep off so long from our Conventions. For to this day you never acquainted us,
directly, and clearly, of any Offense that was ever offered to you, by the
united Ministers, as standing in that Capacity, had you been pleased to
signify your Resentments to them* they take themselves to have been obliged to
have sought out proper ways and means for the removal of all Prejudices, and of
rendering to you, reasonable and due satisfaction. All the light that we have
received about matters in difference between us, has been from a reverend
Brother, who told us, that by Conference with some who forbear to come to our
Meetings, he under stood, that they apprehended, there are those in our Union,
who have Sentiments about the Doctrine of Justification, different from the
common Faith of all Orthodox Protestants, and so dissonant from the Holy
Scriptures, and the Confessions, which have been owned and approved by us. The
same Brother added that if there were sufficient Evidence and Assurance given
them, that the Body of the United Ministsrs would approve themselves, sound,
clear, and steadfast in that most weighty and important Doctrine (which we all
acknowledge to be Articulus stantis vel cadentis Eclesiae,) they would then
maintain all Brotherly communion with us. When this was notified to us, we
presently conceived great and good Hopes, that all Jealousies might be easily
removed, and that a Redintegration of Affections would immediately follow. And
what should hinder? For if you do attentively, and deliberately weigh what is
Asserted in the Article of Justification, in the enclosed Paper, (which was
unanimously agreed unto, after open Reading, and that upon several Days) we are
confident, that it will evidently and undeniably appear, that we perfectly
agree with our Brethren in the Evangelical Doctrine of Justification, even in
the very Phrases and Modes of Expression.

Our Agreement in the Doctrine of Justification, which was as the Test and
Cement of our Union, being so happily Established and fixed; we shall need to
say but little, touching the other two points mentioned in the enclosed Paper:
which (as we think) are so clearly and heartily stated, that we believe, (as we
suppose, upon sure and certain grounds) there will be nothing remaining (upon
that account) to obstruct our entire and hearty Union

It would be superfluous to lay before you any considerations to set forth the
desirableness, usefulness, we may add the necessity of Ministerial Concord: Or
to represent the sin, and mischief that will inseparably cleave to our
unbrotherly breaches. We all find (by sad experience) what advantage is given
thereby, to some who seek occasion to reproach us, and to hinder the success,
or acceptableness of our Ministry. They do certainly wish, and will endeavor
to make our wound incurable. But we trust, the Lord will blast their Designs,
and Frustrate their Expectations, by enlightening our Minds, to receive and hold
fast all Truths, and specially those which are Fundamental: And by his Grace,
most sweetly and effectually draw our Hearts to Love as Brethren: That we may
closely, strongly, and intimately knit-together in inviolable Bonds: And so
Guide us, that we may all follow after the things that make for Peace, and the
things wherewith one may edify another.

And now (Dear Brethren) we do, with all sincerity and ardor, beseech you to
meet us with the like Frame of Spirit; that our only Emulation and Contention
may be, who shall be most Industrious to promote the interest of our Lord
Redeemer: Be most useful to the Souls we are set to watch over: And be most
forward to embrace each other in the Arms of Love.

That these Blessed Ends may be the more effectually pursued, we do (with all
importunity and fervor) beseech you to return to and frequent our Meetings, as
ye have formerly done: That we may join with you there, in your Holy Prayers:
Be assisted with your wholesome Counsels, and be refreshed with your much
desired Society: That we may with one Mind, and one Mouth Glorify God, even the
Father of our Lord Jesus Christ. Amen.

If, after the perusal of the enclosed Paper, ye meet with any thing therein
that may seem to need further Explanation: And ye be willing to entertain a
Conference about it: Be pleased to appoint the time and place, when and where,
a determinate Number of the United Ministers, may meet with a like Number of
the Brethren Nominated by you, and we shall most readily and cheerfully comply
with your Proposal. Howbeit, we must add, That we hope, we have already set
down our sentiments, as Nakedly and Perspicuously as we could express, in
pursuance of our End, which was to give you all possible satisfaction -- We
conclude this Paper with two earnest requests to you. (1.) Upon the hopes which
you have conceived, that (through the Grace and Blessing of our God) the
differences which have risen among us, will be brought to an happy composure:
We importunately beseech you, to use your uttermost Endeavors, to persuade
these Brethren who have not as yet entered into our Union, that they will join
with us in it. (2.) That you would (as soon as conveniently you can) vouchsafe
us an Answer to this our Letter.

Finally, Brethren Farewell, Be Perfect, be of Good Comfort, Be of one Mind,
Live in Peace: And the God of Love and Peace shall be with you. Signed at Dr.
Annesle^'s. October 27. 1696. By Mr. Hammond Moderator.


To our Letter so Submissive, Peaceable, and Impo^tunate, we received this and
no other Answer.
Reverend Brethren,
HAving received from you a Letter with a Paper enclosed, in Answer thereunto
suffer us to acquaint you, that a Paper Subscribed by a considerable Number of
you, and approved of by us some Months since, which we have Reason to believe
some of you have had the perusal of; we therefore to whom your Letter is
directed, do not reckon it Brotherly in us to forsake them who have Subscribed
the foresaid Paper, but do rather Judge our selves bound in Conscience to
entreat ^our hearty Concurrence with them, and us, in that ^^st Paper; which,
as we have already said, has been ^^bscribed by very Principal and Reverend
Ministers, ^^ghly esteemed both by you and us: and this we hope, may, through
the Blessing of God, be the speediest way (...) obtain the desirable End.

^ubscribed in the Name of several of the Brethren, to whom your Letter was
Communicated.


THis is the Letter our reporter Complains we gave no reply to, wherein we
think we paid a great ^egard to them who sent it, and we shall still overlook
(...) otherwise than to Note, First, It is more than ^robable some of us
perused, what a considerable Num^er of us Subscribed. Secondly, Our Brethren
who ^ubscribed, could not Judge it unbrotherly, to be for^aken for laying aside
the first Paper, when every one ^f them had laid it aside before, and joined in
the ^hird Paper, and in the Letter whereto this Answer is ^^^en (which it is
strange any of the Dissenters could (...) ignorant of.) Thirdly, What is the
desirable End? ^ad they said Union, it would have been more accep^able to us,
than it seemed to be to such of themselves, (...) declared in one o^ the
Meetings about this expe^ient, that it was not intended by this attempted
a^reement, that they would join with us in our Meet^^gs as United Ministers,
but that an agreement in Doctrine might be a step to further Union: Yea, we
(...) scarce hope they would have reunited, could we (...) submitted to their
Papers, because, as we are infor^ed, Mr. Cole and Mr. Mather refused their
assent to (...) And this their Letter was subscribed in the Name, (...) of
several (not of all) to whom it was Communica^^^^; nor (as we find) was any
Union, or Agreement ^^gaged, or expressed, except in Doctrine, had this
expedient obtained. This is the true State of the ca^^ between our Brethren and
us: Could we have obtai^^ed a reunion upon mutual forbearance wherein we
di^^fer: Had any of these Accounts of our Principles ^^^tisfied them; (Though we
therein admit so rigid and (...) a Trial wherein they suspected us, and propose
so v^^ry short and easy a Test when we affirm the Trut^ denied by them) Had our
impo^tunity for Peace, atte^^ded with much Patience and Condescension, been
a^^cepted; the mischievous effects of our differences h^^ been prevented. Nor
can we guess what would p^^^vail with the Authors of t^ese Divisions, unless
tha^ Book should be disowned, which, the Subscribers (...) convinced, is of
great use for the Defense of the Go^^pel in a time abounding with Errors: And
such Trut^ betrayed, as the usefulness of our Ministry and Prac^^^cal Religion
depend upon: things we are sure Chr^^^ would not app^ove, nor could we expect a
Peace bought to prove a Blessing.

We were well assured, that a faithful Account of (...) State of things among
us, must acquit us of the bla^^ of those unhappy differences, and prevent the
adva^tages some made by mis-representing us: Neverth^^less, we had still
remained silent, if this so unjust a (...) pors (with a Paper of remarks
following it) had (...) been obtruded on the World, and with Art scatter^^
throughout the Kingdom, yea, sent to Foreign Na^^ions as can be proved; after
this, indeed our sile^^ would proclaim us stupidly insensible and unconcern^^
for the common Good, as well as for our own repu^^^tion and usefulness.

We shall proceed to consider what is material in (...) Report.

First, The Report says, Our differences may be re^^^ced to Christ's
satisfaction and the Penal Sanction of (...) Law; though hitherto, the greatest
struggle has been about (...) first.

Answ. 1. The first was no part of the difference till ^f late, that Mr. Lobb
contrived to make it so, though without any Reason; for Mr. Williams rightly and
fully ^sserted the first in his Books. And the utmost that ^an be made of the
latter is, that Mr. Williams asserts that if the Precepts of the Law of Works
be consi^ered, as taken into the Gospel, they fall under the Gospel Sanction;
and though in this respect there is a ^hange of the Sanction, yet the Precepts
considered ^ill as a part of the Law of Works, they are under ^he same Legal
Sanction as at first, which is to say, The Covenant of Works and the Gospel
Covenant dif^er. And yet this seems to be reserved for a New Controversy, if we
had agreed to their very mode of expressing the point he insisteth on.

Answ. 2. It Is a very great mistake, that our differ^nce with them is reduced
to these two points, alas! ^t extends to many other things (Viz.) Most of Dr.
Crisp's Opinions, as to which they refuse to give us sa^isfaction, though he
grants these two are all they quarrel with us about, and how unjustly will
presently be seen. We shall detect his mistake by a brief Narrative.

1. The difference Originally appears to be about most of those Positions,
called Truths and Errors in the State of them in Mr. Williams's Book; for Six
of the Dissenters did not only object some particular Passages; but they deny
those to be Truths which are called Truths, and such to be Errors which are
called Errors, In the 2.5.7.8.12.16.18. and 19. Chapters of that Book: Yea,
they say, They find not Truth and Error rightly Stated in other places besides
these; Thus they say, Mr. Chauncyes Neonomianism unmasked, Par. 3. p. 96.
Whereas many of our Brethren Subscribed, that each of these were rightly
Stated. He that will Read the Truths and Errors in those several Chapters, may
judge of the difference, and whether any of Dr. Crisp's Errors will be
disowned. 2. In the forcited Articles 1694. You Will find that when we had owned
such to be Errors, which they required of us, yet they refused to disown those
Errors which we added; and therefore the difference at that time, respected
whatever they refused to agree with us in, and was not ever since Accommodated.
3. The Reporter cannot be Ignorant, that September 15. 1695. This Vote
unanimously passed among the United Brethren, upon reading a Paper relating to
several dangerous Expressions in favor of Antinomianism, if that any thing
objected out of Books written against Antinomianism be required to be disowned
as a Term of Union, that those things read this Day, and further to be
Collected of that kind out of the Books on the other side, shall be required to
be disowned.

Some things Collected out of the Books of Mr. Chauncy, Mr. Cole, Mr. Mather,
and Mr. Trail.
TO talk of a Gospel threat, is a Catechresis at best, and nothing else can
save it from being a Bull. Pardon is rather the Condition of Faith, and much
more having a causal influence thereunto, than Faith and Repentance are of
Pardon. It was sin, as the (...) that Christ bore, the fault of sin was laid
upon Christ, the sin it self as opposed to guilt. Christ was reputed a
Criminal, not only by Man, but by God. As to the Elect, there was never any
Guilt upon them, in respect of the Righteous Judgment of God, in foro Dei, but
that which Accompanied the Letter of the Law, setting in with the Conscience.
Justification is before effectual Vocation -- The Doctrine of Justification
before Faith is not an Error, but a Great and Glorious Truth. Justification in
regard of Application must be before believing -- The first Application, ordine
naturae saltem, is to an ungodly Man, eo nomine that he may believe; we believe
that we may be justified declaratively. It is denied, that God requires Faith
as an Indispensible Qualification in them, whom he will justify for Christ's
merits -- He denies that unbelief is the Cause why Men are barred from
Justification, and Obnoxious to Misery. He says, you talk of an offer to the
Non elect, and that offer you say must be serious, etc. But I Pray, where is
any offer of Grace to the Non-elect at all, as such. And show me any Grace
given, or Gospel Duties required of the Non-elect, or Benefits promised to the
Non-elect, upon their performance of Grace and Duties, etc. And what if the
Non-elect be in as bad a Case as the Devils, Is God bound to be any better to
them than to the Devils? God has not said, I will save a Non-elect Person if
he believe, more than he has said, a Horse shall be a Man, if he can use
Reason, or speak, or a Man shall be a Horse if he has four Feet. God was
reconciled to the elect at Christ's Death, but we are reconciled to God by the
Gospel Ministry. Union with Christ is before Faith, at least Natura, and we
partake of the Spirit by Virtue of that Union: there is a Complete Union with
Christ before the Act of Faith. All that a believer can pray for, is the
further manifestation of Pardon, for he knows that all his sins are Pardoned. A
believer is to work from Life and not for Life. It Is a great Truth that God
sees no sin in a believer, sin can do no real hurt to a believer. God is not
displeased with his People, and is not angry with the Persons of believers, for
their sins. Legal Convictions before saving Faith are no more than sin, it is
but the Filthy Conscience polluting guilt of sin. There is no Preparatory work
distinct from Gods Act in effectual Calling. The Gospel is no Rule of Judgment,
that is the Law only. The Gospel is not any part of the Rule of Judgment at the
last day, that is only the Law of Creation. Denies that, at the Judgment Day
there will be a Trial, upon which some will be justified, others Condemned.
Christ's Precepts are not Laws with a Sanction. Approves of these words,
sanctification is not the way of a justified Person to Heaven -- If you look
upon Graces and Duties, and Salvation, as two distinct things, I deny that they
are necessary to give a right to Salvation. All imperfect Holiness is sin. Turn
ye, turn ye, why will you dye? Is but the Triumph of the Law over a Dead
sinner. An unsaved Person can do nothing in order to salvation. God was
displeased with Christ as our surety: We in Christ satisfied the Justice of
God. We through Christ's Righteousness have a right to Glory, by Adams Covenant.
Adam for one good work, should have entered into full possession and a
confirmation therein. To teach that a Christian upon the Actings of Graces, and
Performance of Duties, may in the Virtue of the promise made to the exercise of
those Graces or Duties, expect any of those promised Blessings, is to teach a
low and servile Spirit.

The Eternal Life in which the Angels were Created and Confirmed by Christ,
differs from that Eternal Life which believers have in Christ; the one is a
Creature Life, or a Created Life, the other is the Eternal Life of God
Communicated in time. Believers are as Righteous as Christ, I mean not in a way
of Similitude, but in a way of Equality. Christ's Incarnation was no part of his
Humiliation; we Coalesoe upon believing into one mystical Person with Christ,
which is distinguished from Legal Union, which is before Faith. The Gospel has
no Law-Sanction, it is plainly denied that the Gospel is a Law of Grace. Faith
is neither a Condition nor Qualification in the Office of Justification; with
several things of the same sort as above recited.

Most of these were then included in the Paper, the Vote refers to; which with
the other things further Collected, shall be proved to be in the Printed Books
of the foresaid Authors, and Book and Page cited for each, when it shall be
required. Yea, at great deal more, if not worse, of the same sort.

By these things it is manifest what the difference is about, though a noise has
been raised about things remote from the true occasion, that while we seemed to
be only on the defensive part, their Errors might receive Countenance as if
unopposed, and the abettors thereof might less appear the cause of our
Divisions.

Answ. 3. Although Brethren from a Zeal for Peace condescended to mention but
three particulars in the third Paper, yet it is too evident, that the Dissenters
adhere to their own Paper (called the first) and refuse ours, because this does
provide some Defense against some of the Errors, which our difference is about,
(the same cause for which they rejected the Articles in 1694.) And it is plain
by what their Paper says of Justification, they had this our Paper of Ninety
four before them, and therefore must know, that we insisted under that Head to
have it clearly expressed, That none are justified in the sight of God, or
Entitled to Eternal Life, before they are effectually called, or whilst they
are unregenerate, or in unbelief; And that Men must repent in order to
forgiveness; as also that continued Repentance, Faith and Holiness of Heart,
and Life, are by the constitution of the Gospel, as well as in the Nature of
the things themselves, necessary to salvation, etc. Our Dissenting Brethren
knew this, and yet insert nothing in that first Paper sufficient to this
purpose. By the Reporters arguing against us, their not mentioning those things
is their disowning of them, and owning the contrary, yea, we have more reason
to infer thus, because what they omit was sent by the body of United Ministers
to them as a mean of Union, whereas, what is omitted by us, was not sent to us,
much less to that end, nor adjusted by our appointment. But we need not to
insist on this, when by comparing the first and third Papers, it is evident,
that the foresaid Errors are inconsistent with the few variations in our Paper,
bnt very consistent with theirs, though not in the sense designed by our
Subscribing Brethren.

In the first part of the Head of Justification, their Paper says, Repentance,
Faith, and a Holy Conversation, are by Gods express word manifestly necessary
to Salvation. They do not say, Repentance is necessary to Pardon, nor Faith to
Justification, though that be the Head treated of: No, these are necessary to no
more than a Holy Conversation is necessary to, i. e. to Eternal Salvation: nor
do they say, that the necessity of these to salvation it self is by the Gospel
Constitution, or any enacted Connection between Duty and Benefit. Things being
thus worded, it may pass with such who tell us, the Gospel has neither
Precept, Threatening, nor Conditional promise: Repentance is not antecedently
necessary to Pardon, nor Faith to the Justification of our Persons, but only to
manifest to our Consciences for our inward Peace, that our Persons were
justified before God whilst in our unbelief. But such things are prevented by
our Paper, which says, That the Word of God requires Repentance, that our Sins
may be blotted out, and Faith that we may be justified; And afterward, the
Gospel requires of us as our Duty; that we repent and believe, and God Pardons
penitent Believers. In like manner, their Paper in the other Heads expresses
things so, as that such may subscribe it, who think the filth and fault of sin
were Transacted on Christ, he was the Criminal, the Murderer, etc. in Gods
Account; that God was really displeased with Christ, and abhorred him as our
surety; though not considered in himself: and sundry the like (that our Paper
gives no Countenance to) which our subscribing Brethren do abhor.

It Is not then without Reason, that the Dissenters insist on the first Paper;
whether they be such who hold those Errors, or resolve to indulge such as do
so. And yet there wants not Art in placing the differences upon our omitting a
Phrase in the third Paper, wherein the true sense of it is expressed; for the
Reporter well saw, a quarrel with us for the omission of a Phrase of so
uncertain a sense, is as yet more plausible, than their struggle for Errors of
so ill a sound would be.

Answ. 4. But if the Doctrines about which we differ are not yet sufficiently
evident, we shall with a desire of Union make this proposal; If our Dissenting
Brethren will declare their agreement with us. First, That Repentance toward
God, is Commanded in order to Remission of Sin. Secondly, That Faith in Christ
is Commanded by the Gospel, in order to the Justification of our Persons before
God, for the sake of the alone Righteousness of Christ. Thirdly, That the Word
of God requires perseverance in true Faith and Holiness, that we may be
Partakers of the Heavenly Glory. Fourthly, That the Gospel promises Pardon
through the Blood of Christ to the penitent, Justificaion before God to the
Believer, and the Heavenly Glory to such as persevere in Faith and Holiness;
and also declares that God will not Pardon the Impenitent, justify the
Unbeliever, nor glorify the Apostate or Unholy. Fifthly, That justifying Faith
is not only a persuasion of the understanding, but also a receiving and resting
upon Christ alone for Salvation. Sixthly, That by change of Person is meant,
that whereas we were Condemned for our sins, the Lord Jesus was substituted in
our Room, to bear the Punishment of our sins, for the satisfaction of Divine
Justice, That whoever believes on him may be acquitted and saved; But it is not
intended, that the Filth of sin was upon Christ, nor that he was a Criminal in
Gods Account. Seventhly, That by Christ's being our surety is meant, that Jesus
Christ our Mediator obliged himself to expiate our sins by his Blood, and to
purchase Eternal Life for all that believe, and Faith and every saving Grace
for the Elect; but it is not intended, that we were legally reputed to make
satisfaction, or purchase Eternal Life. Eighthly, That by Christ's Answering for
us, the Obligations of the violated Law of Works is intended, that whereas the
Law obliged us to dye for our sins, Christ became obliged to dye in our stead,
and whereas we were, after we had sinned, still obliged to yield perfect
obedience; Christ perfectly obeyed the Law, that upon the Account of his Active
and Passive obedience believers might be forgiven, and entitled to Eternal
Life: but it is not intended that the Sense of the Law of Works should be, that
if we, or Christ obeyed we should live, and if Christ suffered we should not
dye, though we sinned: Nor that Believers are justified, or to be judged by the
Law of Works, but by the Gospel; although the Righteousness for the sake of which
they are justified, be as perfect as that Law of Works required, and far more
valuable.

If our Dissenting Brethren will Subscribe to these Propositions and
Explications, we will subscribe with them even to the Words, Change of Persons,
surety, and Answering for us the Obligations of the violated Law of Works, as
well as we have already subscribed that no work done by Men, nor wrought by the
Spirit of God in them, Is any part of that Righteousness for the sake, or on
the Account whereof we are justified, that being only the Righteousness of
Christ without ut, imputed to us, and received by Faith alone, which is the
procuring cause of all saving Good. How gladly would we Reunite with them,
might this but remove the difference!

And since we are content, to use their very Words and Phrases explained in the
Orthodox Sense (the omission whereof is, what is excepted against us) we hope,
that such of the Dissenters as shall refuse to agree with us, will not
hereafter say, that a difference in the Doctrines pretended by the Report* is
the Reason why they unite not with us: But Acknowledge, that they keep up the
differences from their Zeal for the foresaid Opinions of Dr. Crisp and the
Antinomians, which we think to be very Erroneous.

Secondly, The Report says, that the third Paper was taken and sent from some
who meet at Little St. Hellens.

Answ. These some had with them all of our Brethren, who subscribed the first
Paper, yea, several of them were the Framers of it, as well as the whole Body
of the United Ministers (as far as we know) consented to it.

Thirdly, The Reporter gives the Reasons why the Dissenters did not approve of
the third Paper, which are these.

1. He says the third Paper omitted to mention, that a Change of Persons is
the common Doctrine of Protestants, and that neither Justification nor Christ's
satisfaction can be duly explained, or defended without it, and that Grotius
and the Reverend Bishop of Worcester have proved a Change of Persons, p. 4.

Answ. 1. The third Paper asserts a Commutation of Persons, therefore we wonder
he, p. 5. affirms, that we have not mentioned it, but having therein fully
asserted it in opposition to Socinianism, is it not strange our Paper should be
scrupled, because we duly explained Justification and Christ's satisfaction
thereby, but did not say, They could not be explained without it, etc. Which
though we may think, yet the mere saying so is not the hinge of the Controversy,
nor would it add any strength to the hedge which we have made without it; or
else surely, some of our Protestant Confessions would at least have made
mention thereof, and therefore these Brethren must reject every one of those,
as well as ours.

Answ. 2. We have affirmed and explained a Change of Persons in the same Sense,
as Grotius and the Reverend Dr. Stillingfleet Bishop of Worcester, have done
(as will appear to any who consult those Authors) but they are far from
approving the Crispian Explication of that Phrase, as we shall evidence by a
Letter of the said Reverend Bishop to Mr. Williams.

Answ. 3. As we durst not imitate the Reporters liberty, persuading the World,
we denied and rejected a Commutation or Change of Persons, when we asserted it
in express Terms, so we assure him, we designed not to offend our Brethren,
who, he says, p. 6. are grieved because our Letter says, That on our so happy
establishing the Doctrine of Justification, we need say but little in the Point
of Commutation of Persons. By which words it is plain we meant not, that we said
little of it in our Paper* where in the second and third Heads we said enough
to clear it, even twice more than what we said of Justification: But we say
little of it in our Letter, where we have enlarged on Justification; because
for several Years the Dissenters pretended all their great Quarrel was about
that Doctrine; and may not we justly grieve that for our Industry, in clearing
our selves beyond all their Challenges as to this, we should be Hereticated by
this Report in the New Controversy, started by Mr. Lobb?

The Second Reason occurs so often, that we cannot avoid Answering it again and
again.

3. Reason, There is such a wrong Description given of a Change of Person in
the Third Paper, as perverts the Doctrine of satisfaction, p. 6. yea, p. 7. It
tells us, Christ did not, yea, could not make satisfaction upon what you affirm.

Answ. 1. We shall first enquire what description the Reporter gives of a
Change of Persons, which is such ^s must with wise Men justify our careful
expressing our Sense of this Phrase, p. 7. He says, a Commutation is the same
with a proper Surrogation, where the surety puts on the Quality* State, and
Condition of the Debtor, p. 5. He tells us, we are all by Nature under the
Curse of the Law* And destitute of a Righteousness Entituling to Eternal Life*
and adds, this is our State and Condition, this is the place we are in; a few
Lines after he says, that Christ put himself into our Place, State and
Condition, so that whereas We were sin and under a Curse, by this blessed
change Christ was made sin and a Curse. Here he plainly expresses his sense of
the Change of Persons: As to what he speaks of Christ's being a Curse, we object
not further than that Christ was not so by Nature; but the things we
observe-are, that he says, Our State Place and Condition was, that we were
destitute of a Righteousness, Entituling to Eternal Life; this was it: He
says, that Christ put himself into this our State, Place and Condition; if so,
then with him Christ was destitute of a Righteousness, Entituling to Eternal
Life. To make this more evident, he says, we were Sin, this was our Place,
State and Condition, into which Christ put himself; and by this change was made
sin: Now, how were we sin? We were not a sin-offering but sinful vile
offenders; we were sinful and destitute of all Righteousness, that was our
Condition; yet he says, Christ came into our condition as we were sin; which
must be, that he was changed to be a sinful vile offender, not an offering for
sin, for that was not our Condition: By which it is evident, our Reporters
Commutation of Persons is not, that Christ became a sin offering, and in our
stead subject to the punishments, which by the Law Sinners deserved, that they
might be delivered. No, that will not content him; But that Christ was changed
to be a sinful Person, destitute of a Righteousness Entituling to Eternal Life;
this is his change, this is his Christ's taking on him the Person of Sinners;
which is a position not only unworthy of the Praises he bestows on it, p. 5.
But so horrid, that we hope, some of our Dissenting Brethren will be provoked
to clear themselves from the Imputation, this Reporter seems fond to lay them
under.

Answ. 2. The Arguments must be strong by which he says, Our Account of a
change of Person is attaqued, if they will prove that we have thereby perverted
the Doctrine of satisfaction, yea, and rendered it impossible. Whether the
Arguer and Reporter be the same Person, we enquire not, but of the same Spirit
none can doubt: In return whereto, we wish them more Charity and Modesty for
the future: However, some might expect they would have consulted their own
Credit so far, as not to Proclaim the very same Men, the most Learned and most
Orthodox, and yet very Ignorant and Grossly Heretical: And that as to the very
same Point: The first Character the Reporter bestows on them, for subscribing
the first Paper; yet it abates nothing to them of the last, seeing they will
frame and approve of the Third Paper. But it greatly concerns all of us, to
peruse the Arguments which follow.

Arg. 1. When we Discourse of a Commutation, we should consider Christ (who is
invested with the Office of Mediator) as our surety in the Execution of his
Priestly Office, etc. But wording it as they do, is Calculated for their
Meridian, who hold Christ suffered only in the Person of a Mediator not in the
Person of Sinners: For which Reason we may perceive, why there must not be the
least mention of Christ's suretyship in the Third Paper.

Answ. 1. Christ's surethyship did not divest him of the Office of his
Mediatorship, but Connotes, that as Mediator he engaged himself to suffer for
Condemned Sinners, yea, and to do much more for them, than what is included in
the Execution of his Priestly Office, ( Viz.) To teach them, overcome their
Enemies, etc. Nay more, all Christ's sufferings, as a Priest, were his
sufferings* as one mediating for Sinners, and not one become himself a Sinner;
as he is represented to be, by making such a vast difference between him as our
Mediator, and as surety.

Answ. 2. Though we mention not the word Surety (which we Scruple not) yet we did
plainly express the thing designed by that Word, as far as belongs to a
subsequent surety in Criminal Causes (tho not pecuniary) and as is cousistent
with Christ's being a Mediator, in all his Engagements and Performances for us.
A disregard to both which occasioneth such confused and mistaken Notions
concerning these Doctrines.

Arg. 2. Their Account of a Commutation is: It Is to be understood in a Legal or
Judicial Sense, as we may call it; not that it is really so* only we may so
call it.

Answ. 1. As we may call it, Is not opposed to really, but we use it as an
Apology for the Term Judicial added to Legal, and as unscriptural; we mean that
wherein Christ suffered, he was judicially dealt with, as if he had been the
Condemned Sinners, in whose Room he suffered* But knowing that many give a
dangerous sense of the Word Legal, when without Explication or Limitation, we
added judicial thereto.

Answ. 2. The Reporter might have spared saying, They Will not Quarrel about the
Term, may the thing they contend for be granted them. Instead of complaining of
a disrespect to Fifty or Sixty Ministers, we'll desire all our Brethren were as
temperate, which would End all Quarrels about Humane Words, when the Sense is
granted; nor would this disparage the Reporter, who seems so fond of a set of
Words, as if he highly valued himself, for his discover^ of them to his
Associates; and therefore he will contend for them so stiffly, that neither
Union, Orthodox Explications, nor his reverence for some of us (when useful to
him) shall signify or amount to any thing, if all his Phrases be not still made
use of.

Arg. 3. We apprehend this to be their meaning, because in their Explication,
there is not a word proper and peculiar to a Commutation in a Legal Sense, etc.
What though Christ dyed in the Person of a Mediator, to Answer for our violation
of the Law of Works, yet if he dyed not in the Person of Sinners, to Answer for
them the violated Law of Works, he did not, he could not, make satisfaction to
Vindictive, or Remunerative Justice.

Answ. 1. We shall not insist how proper satisfaction is to Remunerative
Justice, nor how unfair it is to argue, as if we had said, Christ dyed only in
the Person of a Mediator (when our Paper has no such thing) only because
himself had said, our words are Calculated for the Meridian of such who hold so.

Answ. 2. Our own words will convince the unbiassed, whether there be strength
or truth in this Argument; take what we say in the second and third Heads in
our Paper, which must be Connected to express our Sense.

Christ our Mediator by agreement with the Father, came into our room and stead
to Answer for our Violation of the Law of Works, he being made sin for us, that
knew no sin, that we might be made the Righteousness of God in him; and with
Christ as standing in our stead, God was no otherwise displeased, than as
having a will to inflict on him the punishment of our sins which he had
undertaken to bear, that God might, without Injury to his Justice or Honor,
Pardon and Save penitent be^^^^^rs through his satisfaction, and intercession
(...)ed thereon.

Can any read these words, and honestly infer, That we have not a word proper
to a Commutation in a Legal Sense, or that we denied Christ's satisfaction, or
that Christ's satisfaction was impossible by the Account we give thereof? And
yet we are charged in the report with each of these: But for the better
information of the Reader, we shall show what our Account contains.

First, The Father as the offended Rector proposes, and agrees upon, Terms
with Christ our Mediator, upon which Condemned Sinners shall be Pardoned and
Saved. Secondly, The Terms proposed and agreed are such, as sufficiently secure
Gods Honor, and make amends to Justice, so that neither are to suffer any
injury by Pardoning the Sinner; and they are such as Answered for all our
Violations of the Law of Works, and they are such as render Christ's sufferings
a punishment for our Sins. Thirdly, The Father and Son agree not only that
these Terms are sufficient, but that also they shall be Accounted to us, and
performed in our room and stead, we mean, vice nostra, and loco nostro; that
therein he was to Answer for our Violations of the Law, and that we should be
Pardoned and Saved thereupon. Fourthly, Upon this agreement the Father as a
just Ruler, provoked by us Sinners, does justly inflict the punishment of our
sins on Christ, for satisfaction to his Justice (which is the same, as that his
Justice might not be injured.) Fifthly, Christ suffers those punishments in our
stead, and is therein a sin-offering for us (though not deputed by us) That we
might be made the Righteousness of God in him. Sixthly, What he suffered is a
satisfaction; his intercession is founded upon that satisfaction, for, and by,
which the penitent believer is Pardoned and Saved:
If we have not herein affirmed and explained a Legal Commutation, and Christ's
suretyship in a sound sense (though not the Reporter's) and affirmed Christ's
satisfaction, yea, enumerated the essentials of it; we despair that we ever
can. And if Men will not Acknowledge, the Reporter does mis-represent us, and
intend his Phrases to be a cover for several Errors, when this Orthodox Sense
of them could not satisfy him; we can but bewail their prejudice and partiality.

Answ. 3. We do not see why our words ( Viz.) Christ dyed in our room and stead
(which he leaves out) to Answer for our Violations of the Law of Works, etc.
Should not make Christ's satisfaction possible; yea, and affirm it, as well as
their words ( Viz.) Christ put on the Person of Sinners and came into their
room and stead, to Answer for them the Obligations of the violated Law of
Works. Putting on the Person of Sinners, can have no good sense beyond Christ's
coming into our room and stead, which we have asserted; the words, for them,
have but the same import: And seeing the violated Law obliged us to dye, for
our Violations of that Law; if Christ in our stead Answered for our Violations
of that Law, for which it put us under those Obligations to Dye; then Christ
Dyed to Answer for us the obligations of that violated Law, i. e. its
obligations on us to dye for our sins; to which Christ's satisfaction (which is
the point in hand) refers.

Answ. 4. From what we observe so often repeated by the Reporter, had he justly
represented the Third Paper, and dealt sincerely, he must have reduced all his
Reasons and Arguments to prove his heavy charge against us, and to justify the
Dissenters refusal of that Paper, to this one Argument, ( Viz.)

They, who in a Paper expressly affirm and explain the satisfaction of Christ,
omitting to mention these words, Christ took upon him the Person of Sinners, do
pervert, deny and make the satisfaction of Christ imposible. But the
Presbyterians (in the Third Paper) expressly affirm and explain the satisfaction
of Christ, omitting to mention these words, Christ took upon him the Person of
Sinners; Therefore the Presbyterians do in the Third Paper, pervert, deny, and
make the satisfaction of Christ impossible.

Upon this Argument, the true weight of the Reporters cause and charge does
hang; and if the Major be true, the Conseqence will be, that all the Churches
of Christ in their Confessions pervert and deny, and make impossible the
satisfaction of Christ. For to our Remembrance these words, Christ took on him
the Person of Sinners, are omitted in the Confessions of all the Churches; and
we had much more Reason to omit them, when we knew for what End they are
insisted on, by such as the Reporter.

Arg* 4. They impose a Sense in express Contradiction to the Letter, and
General Scope of Mr. Williams's Book, that when he says, There is no Change of
Persons between Christ and the Elect, It could not be intended as a denial of a
Change of Persons, between Christ and us in the General Sense, but only in
opposition to his adversary he wrote against; for in that very place he
expressly affirms, Christ suffered and dyed in our room and stead; for his
words are as exclusive of a Change of Persons in every Sense, as words can be,
etc. p 37. to 41. Gospel Truth: first Edition.

Answ. 1. Mr. Williams no where says, there is not a Change of Persons in the
Plural Number, but of Person Singular; yet the Paper as Subscribed made him to
say the first; however, the Report does change it now, nor is this a small
mistake with him, when he takes a Change of Persons, to refer thus to
intelligent beings, ( Viz.) Christ dying in the Room of Condemned Sinners,
which he affirms: But a Change of Person to denote a Change, as to Office,
Acts, Qualities, Adjuncts, etc. Really inseparable, and peculiar to either
Christ on the one part, or Men on the other; as is plain by all his Arguments
against a Change of Person, p. 41. There is no Change of Person between Christ
and the Elect, for Christ was the Savior; and never ceased to be so; we are
the Saved and not the Saviors, Christ was the Redeemer, we the Redeemed and
not the Redeemers: Christ was he who by his own merits forgives us, but never
was forgiven; we are forgiven, and never had merits of our own to forgive our
selves, or others. It Is profane Arrogance for us to pretend to his
Prerogatives, and it is Blasphemy to debase him among them who were Enemies
without strength and sinners, for whom he was the dying Sacrifice; it is enough
that he reserving the peculiars of a Redeemer, should agree to dye for our
sins; it is enough that we are pardoned for his sake, when we deserved endless
woe, and are never capable of making the least Atonement.

Here you have all which Mr. Williams has written against a Change of Person,
wherein is not a word against Change of Persons, and it is evident, he took
Change of Person in the afore-recited Sense.

Answ. 2. When he confutes the Sense wherein Dr. Crisp explains a Change of
Person, he must in denying his Sense, deny it under that Phrase (Change of
Person) of which the Dr. gave that Sense: Take then the Doctors words, Christ
himself is not so Completely Righteous, but we are as Righteous as he; nor we
so completely sinful, but Christ became as completely sinful as we; that very
sinfulness that we were Christ is made, that very sinfulness before God; so
that here is a direct change, Christ takes our Person and Condition, we take
Christ's Person and Condition; with much of this sort, p. 38. Here Is the Change
of Person which Dr. Crisp affirms, this is the change Mr. Williams denies.

Answ. 3. Mr. W. is so far from denying a change of Persons in the general
Sense, that in that Book he often asserts and proves what the Orthodox intend by
that Phrase, yea, in the very places where he denies a change of Person. See p.
37.39. Christ's sufferings and obedience were so in our stead, that God cannot
exact from us any other Atonement for Sin, p. 42. He thus explains the
Imputation of Christ's sufferings; to impute to one, what is suffered by
another, is to esteem the one undertaken for in the sufferings of the other,
and to deal with him as if himself had suffered the same things, p. 43. Had not
Christ suffered for us, we could not have been absolved for the sake of his
sufferings, p. 47. God has provided for his Justice and Honor (in saving true
Christians) by the satisfaction of Christ, p. 247. The Punishment of our Sins,
yea, the Guilt of them as an obligation to punishment was laid upon Christ our
Sponsor. See p. 79.13. What words can more distinctly and properly express the
Orthodox Sense of a change of Persons?

Answ. 4. His Cavils, p. 9. against Mr. Williams, as not affirming the Sense of
a change of Persons, tho he say, Christ suffered and dyed in our room and
stead; are weak and individious for,

First, Mr. Williams when he had a fit occasion (as the Reporter knows) duly
asserts Christ's suretyship, and proves; That Christ suffered not only for our
good but in our stead, and that he was a proper (...), See this at large, Man
made Righteous, p. 91 etc.

Secondly, The Racovian Catechism in the Amsterdam Edition (and not only Modern
Socinians) affirm, Christ dyed in our stead; and Socinus, Crelliu^ and others,
asserted a change of Persons between Christ and us, and the Sense in which the
first take dying in our stead is as Metaphorical, and Improper, as the last do
take a change of Persons in. But if our Reporter finds a Socinian, to use a
Phrase explained in an ill Sense by themselves, and others make use of that
Phrase in a contrary. Sense never so expressly, his way is presently to charge
upon them the use of that Phrase in the Socinian Sense; the same dealings
toward him were equally just, when he uses the Phrases the Antinomians are
wont to do.

Thirdly, After all he has said, to make the stress of our cause against the
Socinians, to depend upon the Terms, change of Persons, etc. An insight into
that Controversy would convince him, that there are other things which do fa^
more certainly define that Controversy about the satisfaction, ( Viz.) Was
Christ in his Death, an Expiatory Sacrifice? Did he make Atonement to the
Justice of God? Did Christ endure the Punishment of our Sins? etc. All these
Mr. Williams in Gospel Truth asserts. To what is repeated before out of that
Book, we will add, p. 7. Our sins were imputed to Christ with respect to the
Guilt thereof, so that he by the Fathers appointment and his own consent became
obliged as Mediator, to bear the Punishment of our Sins, and he did bear those
Punishments to the full satisfaction of Justice, and to our Actual Remission,
when we believe. If he that writes thus must Socinianize, none are free besides
the Antinomian^. But what can be safely said in the Opinion of the Reporter,
who tells us, p. 10. It was a Ridiculing Dr. Crisp, when Mr. Williams showing
the ground of his mistakes says, p. 52. Because Christ suffered in our stead,
that the Fruit of his sufferings might be our deliverance from suffering and
our being saved at last, therefore he thinks there is a change of Person: Which
very words do evidence plainly, that Mr. Williams by, in our stead, allows the
sound Sense of a change of Persons, while he opposes Dr. Crisps Erroneous
Sense of his change of Person; and that Mr. W. took a change of Person and a
change of Persons in a very different Sense; tho the Disputer or Reporter, seem
not to distinguish between a Surrogation, upon which an Innocent expiates
another Crime, and his becoming the very sinning Criminal; or, to use his own
Metaphor with him, He that is a surety to pay the Drunkards Debt, must in
Quality, Nature and Condition be the Drunkard too.

Fourthly, Whatever the Reporter says of the Scope, or offensiveness of that
Book of Mr. William's, called, Gospel Truth Stated; Those Brethren whom he
calls of biggest Name, who Subscribed the first Paper, have declared they
intended not by that Paper to censure the passages against which the Dissenters
objected; but were so far from Condemning any Passage therein, that they
Subscribed the first Paper, because they were sure, that upon enquiry it would
appear, there was nothing in that Book of Mr. Williams's contrary to the Sense
of that first Paper; and they still as well as formerly declare, it is an
useful Book, and that it is the ca^se of truth it pleads, and have given it
under their hands that the State of Truth and Error is not at all enlarged or
changed, since they first Subscribed, nor did they mean so in the first Paper;
but only that there were in the Book, besides the State of Truth and Error,
several Explications and Arguments added thereunto; nor indeed could the State
of Truth and Error be enlarged or changed, because (as it is attested by
several, even of those sixteen that were the first, who Subscribed to the first
Edition) the Book as far as it contained the State of Truth and Error was
Printed before they Subscribed the Attestation; nor do we know of any of the
Subscribers of that Attestation, who do dis-allow the said Book, nor any whose
Names are affixed thereto without their consent -- We shall conclude with these
further remarks.

1. Besides the mis-representation of the points in difference, and of the
Account given by us (in the Third Paper) of these Doctrines, etc. We could
detect great mistakes as to Matters of Fact* Some refused to Subscribe the
first Paper, as Mr. Slater; some who say they never Subscribed it, as Mr.
Barker, are yet set down as Subscribers; others are said to express their
approbation of it, who vehemently declared their disallowance of it, as Dr.
Annesley, etc. The Reporter says, he cannot Learn, there are five Pastors of
Churches Dissenting from it, when it is Notorious to Persons, more retired, that
from the first about Twenty Pastors of Churches Assented not; yea, we know not
one of our Meeting who did Subscribe it, but were soon convinced that an
Explication of it was needful, and therefore agreed to the Third Paper. Other
mistakes might be added.

2. It was unjust and disingenuous, for the Reporter to Publish this first
Paper with the Names of our Brethren affixed thereto. They, from a Zeal for
Union, condescended to prepare a way for it by Subscribing, but then they
declared they Subscribed not as their conclusive Act, but agreed thereto upon
condition the Meeting of the United Ministers would approve of it, and to whom
they did wholly refer it. Yet he publishes it as a consummate Instrument (tho
the Copy was neve delivered as such, and the Original not at all) and this
without their consent, and after he knew they had laid it aside, and agreed to
another Paper as the Instrument of Union. Such a course must Minister
Jealousy, that the Reporter when Active in carrying on that Paper; did more
design a breach among the United, than Union with the Dissenters, and that his
disappointment produces this report; when he saw our Union among our selves
Consolidated of late, and that one of our Articles is to this effect, that
we'll suffer none commonly called Laymen, to Preach in our Pulpits.

3. The Reporter has no reason* to glory in any of our Brethrens agreement
with him in Doctrine, in any point wherein the first Paper differs from the
third: by which third Paper they supply what was wanting, and explain what was
doubtful in the first Paper, and determine their sense of those Doctrines: nor
did they ever intend the weight of their Assertions should be laid upon any
unscriptnrall words, but upon the orthodox sense of them, which our Paper
stateth.

4. It Is matter of grief to us, that in opposiition to the preface of both
Papers, Law-terms and humane forms of speech, in Doctrines so fully expressed
in the Gospel and capable of being expressed in the words used and appointed by
the Holy Ghost, should be made Engines of Division among persons who agree in
the sense of such phrases, and yet dare not say, that God designed to limit or
extend his Revelations by what such terms may signify in humane Laws or Usages,
especially when they need Explications and Limitations to prevent what is grossly
erroneous; to instance, Christ took on him the person of Sinners; if it be
taken in its extent, it will not only be true, that it was of all Sinners, but
that he took upon him all that belonged to sinners as such, and he was to be
reputed as sinful as they, yea, as all of them: But the Churches of Christ
have been wiser than to insert such phrases into their Confessions, knowing it
would confound the Minds and perplex the Consciences of Christians in points of
greatest concernment to their Salvation.

5. This report gives a pregnant instance what Zeal for a party will tempt Men
to; even to misrepresent Persons and Things, to invent and applaud slight
pretenses against Union with their Brethren, break all rules of Decency in
praising or dispraising men, as their turn is served; raise endless noise and
clamours, let the juncture be never so unseasonable; nay, cover and plead for
the errors of their associates, which at other times they themselves have
condemned.

There is occasion enough to invite our enlargement: but we design to irritate
no man; the vindication of our selves from a printed charge so severe (as the
perverting, denying and making the satisfaction of Christ impossible) is so
necessary, that all Men must justify our publishing this defense: Without a
Narrative of matters of fact as to doctrines (for other things we omit)
transacted with the Brethren who left the Union, our Apology had been dark and
imperfect; otherwise we had mentioned nothing of that kind. It Is this Reporter
must bear the blame, that we are compelled to say so much to convince the
World, that if the Brethren had such a disposition to Peace, as we have all
along expressed, the union had never been broken; after they had made a breach
we had soon re united; and when a reunion was refused by them, we yet had
lived in quietness, and prevented their heats, which have stumbled the
well-meaning, and advantaged our enemies, by producing such clamorous debates,
and unjust reflections and misrepresentations. We have not to our knowledge
omitted any thing consistent with integrity to prevent our breaches, or to heal
them. Another supplicatory Letter to the Brethren for Union was written in
Reply to the discouraging Answer they had given to our former; being contented
to repeat those self-denying Methods, which many would judge hardly meet or
prudent. But this Report has prevented the sending of this Letter, which was
delayed by the time taken up in confirming the Union among our selves. In this
our Answer to the Report, we have for a reunion proposed to subscribe the very
Phrases they insist on, provided their sense may be duly adjusted, and those
plain Truths secured, upon which practical Godliness and a true
Gospel Ministry so much depend. By which proposal we hope many of our
dissenting Brethren, who have been imposed on, will be so undeceived, as to
reunite with us, and leave such to themselves who will still divide for the
sake of such errors as these Brethren cannot approve, and therefore will not
for the strengthening of their hands be longer contented to bear the imputation
of those Opinions, and contribute to the propagation of them; neither of which
can be avoided, if they continue to be of a party with those who so publicly
plead for those errors, and divide from us only for defending the opposite
Truths. Their own observation will furnish them with many more Arguments at
last to change their course, especially if they will consider where it is like to
end; it is already come to this pass, that with a stock of these errors, their
ignorant Laymen set up for the only Gospel-preachers, and are crowded after.
Many of their own people are so infected as to decry themselves for Legalists,
when they dare preach of any thing besides Believers priveledges, and the
Priesthood of Christ; such things cannot but affect all them who mind the
interest of Christ above their own; of which number we are persuaded many of
the Dissenters be, and will approve themselves. We conclude unfeignedly
praying, that the God of Peace will increase all our Light and Love, that with
a truly Christian Spirit we may jointly serve the interest of our common Lord.

We shall add some Reflections on a Paper called, Remarks, etc. Which soon
followed the Report; and too much resemble each other. But having already
Answered what is most material, few further reflections will suffice: And we
shall speak of the Authors as if but one Man.

First, It was needful to applaud the publishing his reported Paper, as
refreshing to himself, p. 1. Because it is so offensive to all serious Persons;
nor see we, how even he could be refreshed thereby, further than as he Glories
in deceiving the simple, loves divisions, and has a Prospect of attaining some
mischievous purpose by our Breaches.

Secondly, These his Papers, instead of removing, do Proclaim and fix that
reproach upon him and his adherents, Viz. That they divide for dividing sake,
and know not about what they differ, p. 6. for he assigns their Divisions to
one or two mere words or Law Terms, as to the Sillables and Letters, and not to
the Sense, upon which they will not openly fix their disagreement. But if he
would remove this reproach, let him plainly and honestly contend for their
Errors which we oppose, and no longer deceive the world by impertinently
nibbling at a few expressions, and from thence charging us with Opinions which,
he is convinced, all of us abhor. Only he thinks it will be a greater reproach
to Acknowledge, they divide for such horrid Errors, than that they divide for
dividing sake, and differ about they know not what; Custom and Nature being
some excuse for both these.

Thirdly, The confidence of this remarker is more than ordinary, that p. 7.15.
can tell the World, That the Points in Controversy are by his Paper made
manifest. Which, he says, is about a Change of Persons. Whereas this change of
Persons never was the whole, nor any part of the Controversy between us. Nota
Part, For it is asserted expressly by all of us in the Third Paper, as soon as
it was objected to us, and the sound Sense of it affirmed in Mr. Williams's
Book long before. Far less was this the whole of the Controversy; for though he
Accounts the bottom in the first Paper to be generous, because our Bre^hren
therein made so little Provision against the Crispian Errors, yet we must mind
him these Errors gave rise to our differences, and the abettors thereof still
refuse to give us satisfaction; yea, even as to the most pernicious of their
Opinions.

Fourthly, Sure he is conscious, what we must think of him, when p. 7, 8, 9. He
heaps so many words to show that the Difference among us, concerning a
Commutation of Persons, is not about trifles, or matters of lesser weight, but
what is essential to salvation. He cannot blame us to ask. Is it the mere
phrase, change of Persons, or the sound ^ense of that phrase, which he says is
the Cornerstone of Christ's satisfaction, and what is so applauded by Justin
Martyr and Dr. E. etc. If it be the mere phrase, all the Churches of Christ are
Condemned, because their Confessions omit it. If it be the Sense of the
Reporter and Crispians, then the Reverend Bishop Stillingfleet, Grotius, Dr. E.
and our Celebrated Antisocinian Authors are in as bad a Case as we, for they
reject that Sense. But if it be the sound Sense expressed by Dr. Edwards, as
cited in the remarks, which deserves these Praises, they cannot be denied to
us, no not to Mr. Williams; for his Book asserts,* Not only that Christ's Blood
was shed instead of ours, his life went in exchange for ours, and that to
satisfy Justice and Answer the Law; but also, that Christ's sufferings were
^unishments. You Will presently see the Judgment of the Learned Dr. Edwards, whom
he recites as a favourer of his cause against Mr. Williams.

Fifthly, If the Congregational Brethren have no more than their Signing the
First Paper, to clear them from the Charge of Antinomianism, they must still
abide under that charge. Notwithstanding all that is said, p. 9* 10, 11. the
invalidity of his Reasons will appear by our Answer to each. 1. How can their
present Declaration of their adhering to their approbation of the Articles of
the Church of England, or to the Confessions of Faith, etc. Prove, They are far
from being tainted with Antinomianism? When several of them have Published
their Antinomian Opinions, both before and since the like Declaration. 2. They
do still affirm, that neither Repentance nor Faith are necessary to a Sinners
Pardon, or Justification before God; but only follow that; whatever they be to
final salvation. Nor does this Paper say any thing against it. 3. It Is palpably
false, that the first Paper affirms, that God does not Pardon, Justify, or
accept a Sinner, nor Entitle him to Eternal Life before the Righteousness of
Christ be applied and received by Faith (it is strange he said not before
repentance too) but it is not true as to Faith it self. The Paper says, The
only Righteousness for the sake of which God Pardons, Iustifies, or Accepts
Sinners, or Intitles them to Eternal Life* is the a lone Righteousness of
Christ without them, imputed to them, and received by Faith alone. Note, he
puts applied for imputed (which he would not say is by Faith) and here is not
so much, as that it is only the believing Sinner who is justified: But above
all, he knows of his Party who explains such words, by publishing, that Christ's
Righteousness when applied and received by Faith, is only for a manifestation
to their Consciences for their quiet, that Christ's Righteousness had been
applied to the Justification of their Persons before God, long before they
believed. This is all the Justification by Christ's Righteousness as received by
Faith; but they were Pardoned and Entitled to Life as much before, though they
knew it not. And this Opinion the Paper denies not. 4. The Paper says, Christ
came into the Room of Sinners not to repent, or believe for them, which the
Gospel requires. The remarker knew, if the Gospel requires these by its
Precepts, it was a slip overlooked by such of them who deny the Gospel to be a
Law, therefore he wordeth it, The elect are not exempt from an obligation of
doing it themselves. But he as well knows they hold, there is no obligation on
them to repent or believe as a condition or Term of obtaining any benefit
purchased by Christ; as to that, they have nothing to do. Also that it was the
Law of Works, and that only, which commands Faith and Repentence with any
Sanction; And the Paper contradicts them not. 5. Tho the Paper says, there
is not such a Moral change whereby Christ became Inherently sinful, and we
immediately sinless, yet they do and may still hold, that the filth, fault and
fact of sin are so Transacted on Christ, that he was in Gods Account a very
Criminal, the Blasphemer, etc. And that we are as Righteous as Christ in
equality. And the Legal Sense of the ^^ange is such, that we are legally
reputed to have made satisfaction our selves by obeying and dying* because
Christ did it in our Persons, and we did it in his Person. 6. The Paper says,
the Father was not offended, much less abhorred Christ, considered as he was in
himself, But as in Relation to us as our surety; and the Father was displeased
with Christ, as the guilt of our Iniquities was laid upon him. And he knows his
Friends do hold, that God was displeased with and abhorred Christ, because of
the fault and filth of sin upon him as our surety; which the Paper at least
forbids not. It Is worth observing, that this Article was framed in opposition
to one of the two only Errors objected here against Mr. Williams's Book: Whose
words are these: That God testified his threatened indignation against sin, in
the awful sufferings of Christ in his Soul and Body, etc. (And that Christ
endured the effects of Gods wrath) yet the Father was not displeased with
Christ, much less abhorred him because of the ^ilthiness of sin upon him, p.
31, 32. Here Is the Error (and but once mentioned) that required one of the
three Articles to oppose it. Our Third Paper has given them far more ground to
make this the point in Controversy, than that of Change of Persons (which it
asserts both as to Name and Sense.) But they insist not on this, because of the
odious sound of what they must assert in opposition to it. As to the Remarkers
hint from the Assemblies words, that Christ endured the weight of Gods wrath;
Let us mind him, that displicency is opposed to Complacential Love, and
therefore none can be the object of Gods displeasure, but one who is evil and
wicked in the sight of the Lord, and therefore hateful to him as such. But the
effects of Gods Rectoral wrath may fall on Christ, tho beloved as our surety,
yea, who was not hated but loved for dying, according to his own Voluntary
Engagements. Review these things, and judge what a poor Vindication from
Antinomianism the first Paper affords. Unless they ^hi^k, he must be far
enough from this Error, that ^^^eth the Law of Works to be in full force, and
the only Law, although they also hold, that the elect have fulfilled this Law
perfectly in Christ, and therefore are themselves to yield no sort of obedience
in order to any benefit, or preventing of any punishment. Here Is all the Zeal
for the Law which they think enough to acquit them from Antinomians, and all
who think that we under the Gospel are any further obliged, are to be
Neonomians. But. 7. Yet as great a Liberty as this Paper gives Antinomians to
subscribe it; observe in what a faint and dark manner they do subscribe even
this poor defense; their words are; We are glad to find so good an agreement
among us as this Paper does express. This is all. But wherein? or how far? Or
under what Limitations* Or in hopes of what future advances this agreement is
to be construed? They have reserved sufficient liberty to explain as occasion
offers; and cannot deny the reader a leave to guess, especially when he sees
the Reporter already to differ so very much from our Brethren, in his
explication of a Change of Persons, and other things contained in that Paper.
8. But yet further, as poor a defense against Antinomianism as the Paper is, if
plainly assented to; And as mere a nullity as the Subscription is, there were
several of the Congregational who refused to do even thus much; and refused to
set their hands to this. Which the Reporter well knows, whatever Art he has
used to hear what they all have done.

May not we hope upon so plain evidence. That such of our Congregational
Brethren as are not Antinomians, will be convinced, it is necessary to do yet
more for their Vindication than thus signing this Paper; seeing that, not only
they, who are far from being tainted with this Poison, but they who are most
infected may safely Subscribe as it requires, and they have done, who in the
adjusting of this Paper could not be brought to grant, that Regeneration is
necessary to bring us into a good State.

6. Notwithstanding his Complement to a few Subscribers, p. 12, 13, 15. The
Presbyterians need not subscribe the first Paper to acquit them from the
Socinian slander, that they are Arminians: No, nor yet from the Reporters
slander, that they are Socinians.

They have done it more effectually in the published agreement in Doctrine,
1692. They have done it yet more in the Articles 1694. Which had been also
published, if these Dissenters could have cleared themselves of Antinomianism,
as the Presbyterians did of Arminianism. Yea, they have done it as fully by the
Third Paper as can be by the First: That retains the same words in the Head of
Justification, and in all the rest, as far as they oppose Arminianism. Nay, do
not we and Mr. Williams Book, assert Christ's sufferings to be a punishment in
satisfaction to punitive Justice? which the remarker, p. 14.15. declares to be
the distinguishing point; are not our words, Christ came into our room and
stead to dye, to answer for our violations of the Law of Works, and that the
punishment of our sins were inflicted on Christ, that God might without injury
to his Justice or Honor, Pardon Sinn^rs for his satisfaction? What a
slanderous Spirit Acts this Man, that makes Christ's satisfaction to punitive
Justice, to be that which distinguishes the Arminians and Socinians from the
Orthodox? And yet ranketh us among the former, tho he knows all of us assented
to the Third Paper, which affirms Christ's sufferings were a satisfaction to
punitive Justice.

7. But how long will this Man acquit any of the Presbyterians, from the
slander of being Arminians and Socinians too? He is sure, the World will soon
know that even they of our Brethren, who Subscribed the first Paper, have
several of them framed, and the others assented to the Third Paper, as an
Explication of their Sense of the ^^rs^. The Reporter says, the Third Paper
perverts and denies the ^a^isfaction of Christ, in the Ac^ount given of a
Change of Persons; If so, he must Account these Brethren hereafter no other
than Arminians and Socinians in common with the rest of us; perhaps he will
Pro^laim them Apostates too, for not adhering to the First ^aper, in opposition
to the ^hird. And he is too well known for us to doubt that when it serves his
turn, no Presbyterian shall be sound in the Faith, because he is not a Crispian
in Doctrine.

8. All his artifice, p. 15, 16. has not, nor ever can reduce the controversy
among us into a narrower Room than this. Is Repentance required by the Gospel,
in order to the Forgiveness of Sin? and Faith in Christ in order to the
Justification of our Persons before God. Unless he will reduce it to this, Is any
Duty on Man's part required by the Gospel in order to his obtaining any saving
benefit, or any kind of sin, a bar to his Title to any such benefits by the
Gospel constitution? here is the Controversy, and the Third Paper is refused
because it is express, for the affirmative beyond the first.

9. We are sorry we have so much Reason to fear, that if this pretended point
of a Change of Persons, were Accommodated to the Crispians liking, Mr. Lob
would find some occasion to continue our heats and divisions, wherein he had
the greatest Hand under the Name of a Pacificator, as soon as other Agents
became a little quiet. What de^ign he proposes, or some others by him, if
detrimental to the Common Good, we hope, God will disappoint it, and at last
favor such who may be repairers of our breach, and restorers of Paths to dwell
in.

Reader, Note that our Answer comes out so late, because the Reporter Published
his Paper, when he knew our Meetings were laid down, and that we were not to
come together till September.

The Report and Answer make mention of a second Paper, which to render the
whole matter more plain, is here annexed, with the Occasion of it.

September. 7. 1696. At a meeting of the United Ministers, Mr. Williams spoke to
this effect: Mr. Moderator, I hear by some persons, that since our recess,
there is a disposition in some of the Congregational Brethren to Peace, if not
to Reunion: And that the only pretended obstacle is the want of satisfaction
concerning the Orthodoxness of all of us in the Points of Justification,
Commutation of Persons, and the Fathers displeasure with Christ. For their
dissatisfaction, they instance somewhat out of my Book as a denial of a
Commutation of Persons, and insinuate as if the other two were not duly
asserted. All proposals for Reunion should begin with this Board, nor ought
particular Members conclude themselves in a matter of this kind till you are
consulted. But though, I confess, I know not what can be justly offered, which
we have not done already, and all that concerns my Book is long since adjusted;
yet that nothing may seem wanting on our part to promote Peace, I would not
lose the advantage of their present inclination to it. And being that only my
Book is objected against, I have drawn up in this Paper the Heads of a
Proposal, to be sent to P. Hall, which I submit to the Judgment of this Board.

That called the Second Paper.

The Preface is made up of what is Cited p. 4. out of the Agreement 1692; and
what is in the Preface of the first and third Papers. The Three Doctrinals are
in these words. We declare,

1. Of Justification, As the Gospel plainly requires Repentance toward God in
order to a Sinner's partaking of the Remission of sins, and Faith in our Lord
Jesus in order to Justification, and a godly Conversation in order to eternal
Glory, promising Justification and Forgiveness of Sin to all penitent
Believers, and eternal Li^e to such as persevere in Faith and true Holine^;
Also declaring all impenitent Unbelievers (wh^le such) to be in a state of
Condemnation. So by the same Gospel it is evident, that none of these, nor any
w^^k done by Men, or wrought by the Spirit of God in them, are under any
denomination any part of the Righ^eo^sness, for the sake, or on the account
whereof any Blessing is merited or procured, much less Justification or Eternal
life. But God justifies, pardons, accepts and entitles Sinners to Eternal life
only for the sake of the Righteousness of Christ without them, imputed to them,
and received by Faith alone.

2. O Co^mutation o^ ^ersons. Whereas sinners were obnoxio^s to suffer the
Punishments threatened by the Law for their Transgressions; The Lord Jesus by
his Compact with the Father, became our mediating Surety* and as such, he
obeyed the Law, and our Punishments were judicially transferred on him; which
for our Redemption he endured in our room and stead, to the satisfaction of
Justice, that we might be justified when we believe, and be dealt with
accordingly. Nevertheless we deny that by a Commutation of Persons there is
such a reciprocal change of condition betwixt Christ and Sinners, or such an
imputation, or translation of qualities, as implies that Christ was as Sinful
as we, and we as Righteous as Christ. And though we assert that Christ has
undertaken the Elect shall in due time repent and believe, yet we deny that
Christ came into the room of the Elect to repent or believe for them, or that
Believers are accounted to have done and suffered what Christ did, or that they
are justified by the Law of Works -- See more in the next Head.

3. Of the ^athers being dis^leas^d with Christ; (Thoug^ the Phrase be not
proper, yet we declare) The Lord Jesus having engaged in the Covenant of
Redemption, as our mediation Surety, to suffer the punishment of our Sins for
the expiating thereof: He did bear the guilt of our Iniquities, to suffer as
Sinners suffer, and to be dealt with as God threatened to deal with them whom he
is displeased with, as far as was consistent with Christ's being innocent, and
one who became subject to those Punishments by his own consent in Obedience to
the Father, and for the Redemption of Sinners. And therefore Christ was under
the wrath of God, as that was his will to punish him; yea he endured the weight
of that wrath in the punishment of our Sins; which sins, as to the obligation
to endure those punishments, were laid on Christ; It pleased the Lord to bruise
him, having laid on him the iniquities of us all.

But we deny that our Sins, as to their fil^h or fault, were transferred on
Christ, or that he was inherently, or in legal esteem, or looked on by the
Father as one contrary to his holy Nature and Will, either as he was our
Surety, or in any other respect. And therefore if by displeased with C^ri^t, is
meant, that the Father hated or abhorred Christ (which is proper only to one
evil in the sight of the Lord) because of our sins imputed to him; So the
Father was not displeased with Christ. But on the contrary, the Father was
always well-pleased with him, at all times accounting him (even as our High
Priest) holy, harmless, undefiled and separate from Sinners; and therefore
such, when he offered himself an expiating Sacrifice; yea, for that he loved
him.

Then follows Mr. William's Concurrence in these three Points, with Citations
at large out of his Book that he had often affirmed the very same, and that the
places objected did not at all contradict any of these things.

And then further declares, that as he had often proposed it, so now he is
willing to an Union with the dissenting Brethren, either by mutual forbearance,
wherein we differ in judgment; or if satisfaction be insisted on as to any
other expressions that have been or shall be objected out of any of his Books
(where he knows nothing but what is orthodox) he is willing to give it in the
same time and manner as Mr. Cole, Mr. Mather, Mr. Chauncy, Mr. Trayl, etc shall
be obliged to give satisfaction as to many material exceptions he has made,
and shall yet make, to what they have published in their Books. But otherwise
he will no farther concern himself, but keep to the Vo^e past, Sept. 16. 1695.
notwithstanding that now for Peace-sake, he has waved the demand thereof in
Answering the above mentioned Exceptions, when they are not required to do the
like.

Lastly, There is the form of Words for the Subscribers of Mr. Williams's Book
which you have before, p. 4 cited out of the Agreement 1692: only with this
Addition, That Mr. W. did not write his Book, nor they subscribe the
Approbation with any design to oppose our Congregational Brethren as such, or
to divide from them.

This Paper was read and received; but Mr. W. desired it might be waved, when a
proposal was made by a Subscriber of the first Paper, that we should draw up
the third Paper out of this and another Paper, called the first; which were
both voted to be laid aside, although that called the first ^aper was never read
in the Meeting, nor once proposed to be received there.

A LETTER from the Right Reverend Dr. Stillingfleet, Bishop of Worcester, in
Answer to one from Mr. Williams, who desired his Judgment as to the following
Questions; because his Lordship's Book is in the first Paper, and the Report
pleaded against Mr. Williams.
SIR,
I Return you Thanks for the Papers you were pleased to send me; by which I am
able to Understand something more than formerly, of the Present state of the
Difference about the Change of Persons between Christ and us: But I shall
meddle no farther in it than I am Obliged to do it in Answer to the Questions
you propose to me. And I wish I may be able to do any service therein.

The first is about my sense of Commutation of Persons. It is said in the first
Paper, that I do with G^otius expressly affirm and irre^ragably prove it with
the common sentiment of Protestants, and that the Doctrines of Justification
and Christ's satisfaction, cannot be duly Explained and Defended consistently
with the Denial of any Commutation of Persons between Christ and Believers.

This had been fairly Represented, in Case there could be no other sense of
Commutation of Persons than what is asserted by Dr. Crisp, but there is a 3
fold sense of it, very different from each other.

1. Such a Change of Persons as implies that One is Appointed and allowed to
Act on behalf of others, and for their Advantage; and this sort of Commutation
of Persons the Socinians never denied; as I have showed in the Discourse of
S^tisfastion. p. 62. 190* 191. It is not therefore the Use of the Words, but
the sense of them is to been enquired into For some may Affirm a Change of
Persons, and yet be Socinians; and others may deny a Change, and be far enough
from Socinianism, according to the sense in which they are understood.

2. Such a Change of Persons as supposes One to be substituted in the Place of
others to become an Atonement for the^ in order to their Redemption and
Deliverance. And when such a substitution is by the Will of God and Consent of
the Person who suffers; here is a Real Change of Persons as to that Particular
End with is designed by it. And in this sense I did Assert a Change of Persons
between Christ and us, because by the will of the Father and his own Consent,
he became a Sacrifice of Propitiation for our Sins in order to their Remission,
and our Recontiliation with God on such Terms as are declared in the Gospel; as
may be seen at large in the Discourse already mentioned, particularly chapter 4.. 4

3. Such a Change of Persons as implies an Actual Tra^^lation of the Personal
guilt of all the Sins of Believers on Christ, and his Personal Righteousness on
them, without Regard to any Conditions on their Part, but merely by the free
Grace and favor of God. And this I take to be Dr. Crisp's sense of the Change
of Persons; of which I shall discourse when I come to the last Question.

But the Authors of the first Paper and of the Report, p. 4. seem to take it
for granted that there can be but One Sense of Commutation of Persons; wherein
they do not discover their profound Knowledge in these Matters, if they thought
so; or their Ingenuity, if they knew otherwise, and designed to impose upon
those who did not. For it appears that there is a Sense i^ which it may and
ought to be denied, without the least Prejudice to the Doctrine of Christ's
satisfaction. Although that cannot be Explained or Defended without some kind
of Commutation of Persons; yet it very well may and ought to be Defended
without and against Dr. Crisps sense of it, as will be made appear afterward.

The Author of the Report, p. 5. says, this is the very Hinge on which the
Controversy between the Orthodox and Socinian does turn; which shows him to be
not very deeply skilled in it; for the Hinge of the Controversy is not about
the Words, but the sense of Commutation of Persons: and even the sense is not
the Original Controversy, but Consequential, upon our Asserting Christ's
Sacrifice to be a Propitiation for our Sins; for upon this they ask how the Act
of one Person can be so Benificial to others? and to that we Answer, that although
One Man's Act cannot become another, yet if by Consent both of the Father and
Son, he becomes our Mediator, and suffers in our stead, in order to our
Reconciliation, then as to that End and Purpose, here is a Change of Persons:
for whereas in strictness we ought to have suffered the Desert of our own Sins,
God was pleased to Accept of his suffering instead of ours, and so by virtue of
that Propitiation we hope for the Remission of Sins and the Favor of God,
according to the Terms of the Gospel. And therein consists the true Controversy
between the Socinians and us: viz. whether the sufferings of Christ were to be
Considered as a Punishment for our Sins, and as a Propitiatory Sacrifice to God
for them; o^ only as an Act of Dominion over an Innocent Person in order to his
Advancement to glory.

But it is said in the ^eport* p 5. that if there be no Change of Persons
between Christ and us, there can be no Translation o^ the Guilt, nor a just
infliction of the Punishment of our Sins on Christ; that is, there can be no
prope^ Satisfaction.

To this I answer, that there is a twofold Translation of Guilt to be
Considered.

1. Of the Personal Guilt, which Results from the Acts of sin committed by such
Persons. If this guilt be translated, Christ must become the very Person who
committed the sins; and so he must be looked on not only as an Actual Sinner,
but as the Person that Committed all the Sins of those for whom he died: which
comes so near to horrid Blasphemy, that I wonder Persons that bear any
Reverence to our Blessed Savior do not abhor ^he very thoughts of it.

2. Of Legal Guilt, which lies in the Obligation to Punishment, by virtue of
the Sanction of the Divine Law. Now this Guilt implies two things; 1. The
Desert of Punishment which follows Personnal guilt, and cannot be transferred
by a Change of Persons; For no man can cease to deserve Punishment for his own
faults; nor deserve that another should be punished for them. 2. The Obligation
to undergo the deserved Punishment, but because the Execution of Punishment
depends both on the Wisdom and Justice of the Legislatour; therefore here a
Change of Persons may intervene, and by the wisdom and Justice of God a
Mediator may be Accepted in such a Manner as himself determines, and upon the
Acceptante of his Sacrifice the Offenders may be Pardoned and Received into the
Grace and Favor of God, on such Terms as he has declared in the Gospel. And
in this sense the guilt of our Sins was charged upon Christ as our Mediator,
who was to bear the Punishment of our sins; so as by virtue of his sufferings,
we may not only hope to escape the Just Punishment of our Offenses, but to be
Admitted into the Privileges of the Children of God.


But the Reporter out of a certain Manuscript gives another Account of
Commutation of Persons, viz. that Commutation in a legal sense is the same with
a proper surrogation, where the surety puts on the Person, and stands in the
Quality, state and condition of the Debtor, and lies under the same Obligation
to answer for him.

But this I have showed long since to be a very wrong Notion of Christ's
Satisfaction; and which in Effect gives up the Cause to the Socinians: For if
sins be considered as Debts, God may freely forgive them (without disparagement
to his Wisdom and Justice) without any Satisfaction: and the Right of
Punishment then depends on God^ Absolute Dominion; and Satisfaction must be by
way of Compensation; of whiah I have treated at large, Chapter 1.. 2. ul^. But I
cannot but wonder at the learned Author of the M. S. that he does at the same
time assert our sins to be considered as Debts, and the Necessity of Vindictive
Justice: For, what vindictive justice belongs to a Creditor? May not a Creditor
part with his own Right, and forgive what and whom he pleases, without any
violation of Justice? I can hardly think, that those who write so rudely and
inconsistently, ever penetrated into these Matters in their own thoughts; but
only take up with a set of Phrases and Common Expressions among those they
Converse with, which they look on as the standard and Measure of Truth about
these Matters.

But he finds fault with some men who hold that Christ only suffered in the
Person of a Mediator, and not in the Person of Sinners. What is the Meaning of
this? I had thought, that a Mediator interposing for that end, that by his
sufferings there might be a Propitiation for sins, did so far sustain the
Person of Sinners, as to take upon himself the Punishment of their sins, and
Procure Grace and Favor for them. But if he means any thing beyond this, he
must Explain himself. Christ suffered in the Person of Sinners. Is it that he
suffered that others might not suffer? That is not denied by those who say that
Christ suffered in the Person of a Mediator. For a Mediator is a Public
Person, and Acts in the stead and on the behalf of others; and if this be
called sustaining the Person of Sinners, I suppose they will not quarrel with
the Expression. But if more be meant by it, viz. that the Personal Guilt of
sinners, in Dr. Cris^s sense, is transferred upon Christ, that they have to
deny; as I hope to make it appear in Answer to the third Question.

The 2d Question is, whether the Author of Gospel Truth stated, viz. Mr.
Williams be chargeable with Socinianism, in what he said, p. 37.40?

The charge stands thus in the Report, p. 4. that he says, there is no Change
of Persons between Christ and Sinners: which is there said to be inconsistent
with the Doctrine of Christ's Satisfaction; which must suppose a Commutation of
Persons. and therefore he that denies any Change, cannot assert the Doctrine of
Satisfaction.

This is the force of the Objection. And being desired to give my Opinion of
it, I examined and compared several passages in that Book, that I might judge
truly and impartially concerning it. And I found the Author, p. 3. saying
concerning the Difference with Dr. Crisp, that it was not whether Christ had
made full Atonement for sin; which he thereby owned to be his sense. And p. 7.
more fully he owns that our sins were imputed to Christ with Respect to the
Guilt thereof, so that he by the Fathers appointment, and his own Consent,
became obliged as Mediator to bear the Punishments to the full satisfaction of
Justice and to our actual Remission when we believe. Can any thing be more
clear and express against Socinianism than this? There are other passages, p.
10.19.28. etc. to the same purpose, but these are sufficient to show, that he
could not absolutely deny any Commutation of Persous

But in what Words does he deny it? For it is possible there may be such Words
used as may Restrain and limit the sense; and then it is very hard to force
such a sense upon them, as is inconsistent with what he had said before, for no
man Loves to Contradict himself; especially, when he knows what advantage will
be taken by it. The words are these, p. 40 The difference lies in these points.
1. Whether there be a change of Person between Christ and the Elect? Yea, or
betwi^t Christ and Believers. This the Doctor affirms, and I deny. How can any
Persons, in common Ingennity, understand this otherwise, than that he deni^d
such Change of Persons as Dr. Crisp affirmed? But against this it is urged by
the Author of the MS. in the Report, p. 81. that his Denial of a Change of
Persons, is so Express and ^ull* as leaves no room for any distinction,
limitation or Restriction, or for an owning it in any sense. What! not in the
sense that himself had owned it in before? This is very hard; especially when
he mentions what the Doctor affirmed and he denied* There is a very good
passage to this purpose in the first Paper, mentioned in the Report, p. 12. Not
thinking it Reasonable or just to charge upon any Brother such Consequences of
any Expression or Opinion of his, which he himself shall disown. Why then
should such a sense be charged upon him, which he disowns at the same time?
There must be something farther in this Matter, than appears to an Indifferent
and Impartial Reader; what it is, is no Part of my business to enquire.

But that which must give the best Light into it, will be the Resolution of the
last Question.

The 3 d Question is, concerning Dr. Crisp's Sense of the Change of Persons,
whether it be true or false? Which, I s^ppose, is truly set down by the Author
of the Gospel Truth stated; in these words, p. 38. Mark it well, Christ himself
is not so completely righteous, but we are as righteous as he; nor we so
completely sinful, but Christ became, being made sin, as sinful as we; Nay,
more, we are the same righteousness; for we are made the righteousness of God;
that very sinfulness that we were, Christ is made that very sinfulness before
God. So that here is a direct Change, Christ takes our Person and Condition,
and stands in our stead, and we take Christ's Person, and stand in his stead.

Here is indeed a Change of Persons supposed, but I do not find it proved; and
therefore is only to be looked on as an Imaginary Change, which it is possible
for Men to fancy; but that is no Ground to build a Matter of Faith upon; and
such as the Salvation of their Souls is so nearly concerned in. But to deliver
my Opinion freely and distinctly about it, I shall show, 1. That it has no
Foundation in Scripture. 2. That it is contrary to the Tenor of it, and the
Terms of Salvation contained in the Gospel. 3. That it is attended with very
bad Consequences, which naturally follow from it.


1. That it has no Foundation in Scripture For which I desire it may be
considered, that our blessed Savior himself in all his Preaching, who came to
Reveal the Will of God to Mankind, says nothing at all of it: and can any
possibly think that he would omit such a Point, wherein, I perceive, some do
think the Substance of the Gospel is conta^ned? All that our Savior says to
this purpose, is, That he came to give his Life a Ransom for many, Mat. 20.28.
and that his Blood was shed for many for the Remission of sins, Mat. 26.28.
What other Change of Persons is herein implied, but that of a Ransom, and a
Sacrifice of Propitiation? He that knew best for what End he suffered, says
not one word of his taking upon himself the Person of sinners, in any other
sense than as he suffered in their stead, and for their advantage. Here is
nothing like his being as completely sinful as we; and our being made as
righteous as he. And yet certainly he communicated to his Disciples those
Points on which their Justification and Salvation depended. But how could they
apprehend any such Change of Persons in this sense, from any words used by
himself to them? And all necessary Points of Faith were delivered by our
Savior to his Disciples: And therefore to make such a Change of Persons
necessary, and yet not mentioned by him, is to charge him with failing in his
Prophetical Office, which all those ought to consider, who lay such stress upon
this Matter.

But does not St. Paul say, that God has made him to be sin for us, who knew
no sin, that we might be made the righteousness of God in him? 2 Cor. 5.21. I
grant he does so. But do not these words imply such a Change of Persons as Dr.
Crisp asserts? By no means, Which I thus prove: Dr. Crisp's Notion of the
Change of Persons, supposes the Benefits of this Change to be antecedent to any
Conditions on our side, viz. that it was by a Transaction between the Father
and the Son, without Regard to any Act of ours: But when the Apostle speaks of
Christ's being made sin for us, and our being made the righteousness of God in
him; he supposes, that before we can have the Benefit of it, we must be first
Reconciled to God, which is an Act on our Part. For to this purpose he says,
v. 18, 19. that after the Reconciliation made by Christ at his Death, he had
given to the Apostles the Ministry of Reconciliation. To what purpose? Was it
only to let them know what Christ had already done for Mankind? That were to
set up a Ministry of Consolation for Believers; but not of Reconciliation. But
the Apostle lays great force upon it, that God had committed to them the Word
of Reconciliation. Now then, says he, we are Ambassadors for Christ, as though
God did beseech you by us, we pray you in Christ's stead, be ye reconciled to
God, v. 20. They were by this Ministry of Reconciliation, after what Christ had
done and suffered, prayed; and with great earnestness, to be Recon^iled to God?
To what End? If according to this Change of Persons, they were more than
Reconciled to God already, if they were true Believers; for they were as
righteous as Christ himself, and therefore must be in the Grace and Favor of
God. If they were not Believers, then, according to this Scheme of the Change
of Persons, they could have no Benefit by it; and consequently, this Ministry
of Reconciliation, is wholly subverted, as to the great Purpose and Design of
it. For either they were Reconciled already, or they never could be. And yet
the Apostle, after those words, v. 21. immediately subjoyns Chapter 6.1. We then as
Workers together with him, beseech you also, that ye receive not the Grace of
God in vain. What can the meaning of these Words be, if Dr. Crisp's Sense of
the Change of Persons hold good? Can they who are completely righteous, ever
receive the Grace of God in vain? And to what purpose does he speak of their
working together with God, and beseeching them not to do a thing utterly
impossible? For it would be to undo what had long since been done between the
Father and the Son in the Change of Persons. So that this Notion of the Change
of Persons is as different from St. Paul's, as may be; for that supposes no
conditions on our side; and the Ministry of Reconciliation in St. Paul, is
wholly founded upon it, and really signifies nothing, as to the Ends he
proposes without it. For to what purpose is that appointed to persuade Men to
be Reconciled to God, if all that ever shall be admitted to Heaven were long
since Reconciled at the Death of Christ, and they were made as completely
Righteous as Christ himself?

It may be said, That the Ministry of Reconciliation is not useless, because it
is the means whereby God does ^ffectually convey his Grace into the Hearts of
Believers. But this cannot satisfy any one that considers St. Paul's
Expressions: For his Words are, We pray you in Christ's stead, be ye Reconciled
to God. If he had said, That God had made Christ to be sin for you already, and
you as Righteous as Christ was; How would it have looked to have said after
this, We pray you to be Reconciled to God? For, what need they any
Reconciliation, who were already so much in his favor?

But is there no Change of Persons then implied in those Words of St. Paul; Who
made him to be sin for us, who knew no sin, that we might be made the
Righteousness of God in him? Yes certainly. Such a Change, whereby Christ did
undergo the Punishments of our sins; and so Erasmus observes, that Christ is
not called a sinner here, as Dr. Crisp would have it, but sin; i. e. a
Sacrifice for sin, according to the Scripture sense: And we are made the
Righteousness of God in him, i. e. That God upon the Account of his Sacrifice,
and our Reconciliation to him, would treat us as Righteous Persons; or receive
us into his Grace and Favor; which is all that I can find that St. Paul
understood by this Expression.

2. I am now to show, that this Notion of the Change of Persons, which Dr.
Crisp asserts, is contrary to the whole Tenor of the Scripture, and the Terms
of Salvation contained in the Gospel. I am sensible how large a Field I am
entered upon: And if I should pursue this matter as it deserves, it would take
up much more room than I can allow to this Answer. I could easily prove that in
all the Transactions between God and Mankind, some Conditions on our side were
required in order to his Favor. So it was in the State of Innocence; So it
continued after Man's Fall, as appears by those Remarkable Words of God to Cain;
If thou do well, shall thou not be accepted? If thou do not well, sin
lies at the Door, Genesis 4.7. So it was in Gods dealing with the Patriarchs, and
the most excellent Persons in the Old Testament, Abraham, Moses, David, Job,
etc. But I pass over these, (although I suppose they will not be denied to have
been of the Elect, and to have had the Benefit of Christ's Righteousness as well
as Christians) and come to the Terms of Salvation, as declared by Christ
himself. Let any one seriously peruse the Doctrine which he Preached from the
time, when he began to Preach and to say, Repent, for the Kingdom of Heaven is
at Hand, Mat. 4.17. And he shall find the main business of his Preaching was to
put Men upon performing such Conditions, as were necessary to their Salvation:
And for that Reason. As may be seen in his Sermon on the Mount, in which he
begins with promising Blessedness to the Humble, Merciful, Pure in Heart, Mat.
5.3, 4. etc. What do these things mean, if they be not Conditions on our Parts
necessary in order to Happiness? And that they are considered by God as such?
Why does he say, Except your Righteousness exceed the Righteousness of the
Scribes and Pharisees, ye shall in no Case enter into the Kingdom of Heaven,
Mat. 5. if such a Righteousness, be not a Condition required in order to such
Entrance? And if it be, no Change of Persons without inward and real
Righteousness can be sufficient. Our Savior does not speak of what will be
Eventually in some Persons, but of what is required to be done in order to an
End. And therefore he concludes his Sermon with saying, Whosoever hears these
sayings of mine and does them, I will liken him to a wise Man, who built his
House upon a ^ock, etc. Mat. 7.24. Not he that believes that he is one of those
who is made Completely Righteous by a Change of Persons, without any Change of
Temper or Disposition of Mind: He never promises the least Degree of Happiness
to such; but still insists on our own Endeavors, By striving to enter in at
the straight Gate, which St. Paul Calls, working out our own Salvation with
Fear and Trembling, and St. Peter, giving all Diligence to make our Calling and
Election sure. For, says he, If ye do these things ye shall never Fall.

Do not these Expressions Note the necessity of the Performance of Conditions
on our side? And therefore all Imaginary Notions of such a Change of Persons,
as has no Regard to any Acts of ours, is wholly Repugnant to the main Scope
and Design of the Gospel. I meddle not with the dispute about the Mortal Law,
which must continue to oblige us as long as the Reason of it continues; but the
main Argument to me is from the Gospel, as it is delivered by Christ and his
Apostles, who certainly understood the Substance and Design of it far better
than Dr. Crisp, or the Reporter does. What was Transacted between the Father
and the Son, we know no more than they have Revealed to us; and we know they
had no Design to Impose upon Mankind, by laying so much weight upon such
Conditions as God had no Regard to; and by Concealing from them such a Change
of Persons as made them Completely Righteous without any Act of theirs. Men
could never be Reconciled to the just Veneration and Esteem we have of the
Sacred Penmen of the Scriptures, nor to their Knowledge of the Mysteries of the
Gospel, nor to their Fidelity in declaring them for the Good of Mankind. So
that if we find nothing of this Change of Persons in their Writings, and so
much as is utterly inconsistent with it, we have all the Reason in the World to
Reject it.

This Notion of the Change of Persons is attended with very bad Consequences.
Which I do not charge on those who do not see them, or are carrried by some
higher Principles above them; but we are not to Judge of Persons but of Things,
and the Natural Tendency of Principles.

And so the Change of Persons in this Sense has these very had Consequences:
That it is apt to Lessen our Reverence of the Divine Perfections; our just
Sense of the Differences of Good and Evil; Our Obligations to all sorts of
Duties; It tends to the Disparagement of that Free Grace they pretend to Exalt;
and Exposes the Gospel to the Reproach and Contempt of Infidels, and leaves the
Minds of those who embrace it, under Great Temptations to Presumption.

These things I can only mention, because you des^red a short Answer to your
Questions, and I have brought it into as narrow a Compass as I could.

I am Sir, Your Faithful Friend and Servant, ED. WIGORN.
Nov. 10. 97.

The Learued Doctor Edwards's Answer to the same Three Questions; in a Letter
to Mr. Williams; occasioned by Mr. Lob's Remarks. Wherein he pretends the
Doctor's Preservative against Socinianism, condemns Mr. Williams's Judgment
concerning a change of Persons.
SIR,
I Have perused the Passages which you refer to, (viz. Gospel Truth stated, p.
37, 40. the places objected among the rest) besides severel other parts of your
Books, though I have not as yet had Leisure sufficient to read them over;
However I have read enough to know your Opinion, and to understand how you
state the Matter in debate between you and your Antinomian Adversaries; and
thereby am sufficiently instructed to answer your Queries To the First
therefore I say, That when speaking of the Sufferings of our Savior, I assert,
as other Divines usually do, a Permutation of Persons: I mean no more than what
you affirm; viz. That Christ not only died for the good, but likewise vice, or
loco peccatorum, in the room and place of Sinners. But when we assert an
Exchange, or Permutation of Persons, this must always be understood under such
Restrictions and Limitations as may help us to avoid those two Dangerous Errors
which the Antinomians have Fallen into. And therefore, First, We must affirm,
we mean no more thereby then an obligation to Punishment, which he no otherwise
Contracted then by his own Free and Voluntary consent and undertaking, to
undergo that Punishment which the Law threatened, and our Sins deserved, Viz.
Death. But this must by no means be so far misconstrued, as to imagine that
thereby the Filth and Turpitude of our sins were Transferred upon him: For tho
in the former Sense, he is said to be made sin for us; yet in the latter he
still continued Holy, Harmless, Undefiled, separate from Sinners, and at an
Eternal distance from them. Neither, Secondly, Must this Permutation be
extended so far as to imply a Reciprocal Exchange of Persons, Viz. Of us
Sinners, into the Room and Place of Christ; As if God did look upon us as doing
all that Christ did, and consequently, that we do Merit Pardon, atone Justice,
completely satisfy and fulfill the Law, so that we are actually discharged from
Punishment without more ado. No, we continue still under the sentence of the
Law, Notwithstanding all that Christ did to free us from it, till we perform
those Conditions upon which the application of Pardon is suspended. The
immediate therefore Effect and Consequence of the Permutation which we are
speaking of, is only this, that Christ by dying in our room, had so far
reconciled us to his Father, as that he is willing to Pardon and admit us to
his favor, provided that we on our Parts perform the Conditions of the New
Covenant, Viz. Repentance and Faith. For tho Christ by dying for us has
merited our Pardon, yet it still continues so far in his own Power, as that he
will not dispose of it, but upon such Terms as have been agreed upon between
him and his Father; which indeed are no other then such, as without which we
are neither capable of Pardon, nor can God in Honor bestow it upon us. To
apply Pardon to a Sinner while he continues in his obstinacy and impenitence,
is not only contrary to the Holiness of God, but inconsistent with his wisdom,
and destructive of his Authority and Government. And therefore the Graces
before mentioned must be looked upon by us, to be both the necessary Parts of
every Christians Duty, and the indispensible conditions of his Happyness. (In
another Letter) I intend no more by an Exchange of Persons, than what you have
affirmed in your Writings. As to your Second Query, I Judge those Assertions
and Acknowledgments frequently made by you in your Books concerning the
sufferings of Christ, and the satisfaction thereby made to the Justice of God
for the Sins of Men, do fully acquit you from giving any Countenance to the
Errors of Socinus in that point. (In another Letter) you have very rightly, and
in an Orthodox manner Stated the Doctrine of Christ's satisfaction: And it is in
perfect agreement with the Doctrine of our own and all the reformed Churches,
and therefore fully acquits you from the Imputation of Socinianism. Thirdly, As
to the Doctrine of Dr. Crisp and others of that Sect, who affirm such a
Permutation of Persons between Christ and Sinners; as if to all intents and
purposes, they were to be looked upon in the Room and Place of each other; So
that Christ is to be Accounted the Swearer, Drunkard, Blasphemer on one Hand,
and the Sinner to be perfectly Righteous on the other; I cannot but look upon
it to be not only false, absurd, impossible, but likewise an Impious and
Blasphemous Opinion; as being highly Dishonorable to our Savior, repugnant to
the Wisdom and Justice of God, and tends plainly to subvert the whole design of
Christianity; which is hereby exposed to the just and unanswerable Reproaches
of its Adversaries, which can never be wiped off, if the Opinion be true. I
would say a great deal more upon this occasion, if it were necessary, but what
I have thus briefly suggested, may I suppose be sufficient for your present
purpose. And if you think that what I have wrote may be any way Serviceable to
the common cause of our Holy Religion, I give you leave to make what use you
think fit of it; and in the mean time remain

Sir, Your assured Servant, Jonathan Edwards*
Jesus Coll. Oxon. Oct. 28. 97.

I had not given this trouble to these Great Men; But that Mr. Lob makes
frequent use of their Testimony against my Judgment, in favor of them whom I
oppose. And being no Authors better understand, and more effectually oppose
Socinianism, I was sure their Vindication of me would be past exception, and
therefore made bold to propose to them, whether they intended more by a
Commutation of Persons than I did affirm in my Books (which I sent them.)
Secondly, Whether I was by the Passages excepted against in my Book (by the
First Paper and Mr. Lob) chargeable with Socinianism. Thirdly, What their
Judgment was concerning that Change of Persons which I oppose, and Dr. Crisp
and others of that Sect affirm. To these Questions they were pleased to send
these Answers, with a Permission to Print them. I think, every Man will
conclude from what they say, that they Account our Holy Religion is struck at
by what Errors I oppose; and that Mr. Lob does wrest their Books when he cites
them in Confutation of what I affirm. I might have added another Letter of this
R. R. Bishop to the same effect, and wherein he proves that God was not
displeased with Christ: And also of the said Reverend Doctor Edwards. But these
published abundantly suffice.

Some Animadversions on Mr. Lob's DEFENSE of the REPORT. By D. W. Note, I call
the Author of the Rebuke, Mr. R.
THough I have the Testimony of the Ministers and Elders of all the Dissenting
Congregations in Dublin (except One) for my Peaceableness and Diligence in the
promoting of Union there; yet being industriously branded as the great Divider
in this place, it is necessary to represent the Cause of Men's Mistakes. To me is
ascribed the Rise of our Divisions, because at the Request of several
Ministers, after other means were unsuccessful, I wrote Gospel Truth stated;
when Dr. Crisp's Reprinted Book so obtained as to threaten^ our Ministry. The
Continuance of our Breaches I am charged with, on no better pretense than this,
A beaten Man makes all that Noise which proceeds from the furious blows that
fall upon his Person. I consented to that Expedient 1692. wherein all objected
against my Book was adjusted, and gave no Cause for the Objectors to violate
that Agreement. Mr. Chauncy, Mr. T. Mr. K. Mr. E. etc. wrote Volumes against
that Book; to all which I replied in a Defense of Six Sheets; thinking that
sufficient, and in hopes some Rest might be obtained by silence. Mr. M. revives
the Assault with a Charge of Blasphemy and Damning Errors; This extorted one
small book more. Then by Contrivances I was voted out of the Lecture at
Pinners-Hall. Whereupon Dr. Bates, Mr. How, Mr. Alsop and my self, remove to
Salters-Hall. About two Months after this my Morals (upon a search back to my
Childhood) are Impeached, the united Ministers unanimously adjudged and
declared me clear and innocent of all that was laid to my Charge. I forbear
Recriminations against many, for which I am furnished. The same Book comes
again upon the Stage with Mr. Lobs Objections, which I answered in one sheet.
Mr. Lob rejoineth, but at the Reverend Doctor Bates request, I laid aside a
Book ready for the Press. The Doctor and I fully agree in Sense,
Notwithstanding he had used some Phrases which Mr. Lob hoped to divide us by.
They stop not here, as the result of many private Meetings with my Adversaries;
A Paper is gotten Subscribed (when I was at Bath) by some at least of my
Friends, who fully agreed with me in Doctrine. Herein there were several
mistakes in matters of Fact refering to the Subscription to my Book, many
insinuated reflections (not designed by all) against the Doctrine of that Book,
with such Ambiguities and Omissions, as endangered the Truths by me defended,
and those Terms proposed to me, which might startle a Man they had no Power
over, and justly expected better treatment at least from such whose cause I
pleaded. Yet when this Paper was laid aside, and the Third Paper agreed to, I
sat still, tho I knew that First Paper (unprinted) was sent through the Nation
to my great Detriment. Might not one expect some quiet after such various
attempts against this Book and its Author? (Which I do not ascribe to the
Congregational, as a body, nor had I mentioned most of these things, if I were
not charged with all our divisions.) My hopes are disappointed; Mr. Lob
Printeth his Report, wherein the United Ministers for my sake are branded for
Socinians, and therein inserts that unhappy Paper. Nay, he soon follows this
with his Remarks, to fasten his charge the deeper upon me. Stops he here? No,
in this his Defense I am still pelted, my Doctrine grossly Arraigned, the
Learned Mr. R. Censured as a Socinian for defending me. My Book sustains the
Clamor, because it denies the Crispian Change of Person, Nay, he hops it
has some invisible evil thing within its Bowels, which if I do not bring forth
(for no bodv else can) I must be one offensive and halting, p. 88. Nay, as if
first in intention, the last Words in his Book are, whether Mr. Williams be
sincere or no, he must now show it; FINIS. The English of this is, if I be
sincere I must show my self Erroneous, that they may have somewhat to justify
their past Clamours; for as yet they can prove nothing, and yet (will you not
wonder) he gives me, p. 9. more hopes of their Charity and Communion, if I will
but write Errors plainly, than they can now allow me when I assert the opposite
Truths. Am not I in a straight? He and others call and provoke me to write,
(and they might do it long enough, if the interest of the Gospel, and such
injuries to my Friend assisted not their Calls.) Yet if I write, I shall be
deemed, the cause of all our Divisions: But so 'twill be if I write not; Nay,
if I be not felo de se. I shall therefore adventure, so pressed by Mr. Lob, to
give him some hasty thoughts. I may well Call it an adventure, for I foresee,
unless he is much changed since he wrote this Defense, He will mis-represent
what is written with the greatest Caution, and if his Readers shall think him a
fair adversary, he is sure to have the better of any Man, as will soon appear.
Mr. Lob, p. 35. The Phrase of a Change of Christ's Person was never invented,
till the Gentleman who engaged my Brother to enter upon this sorrowful
undertaking, started it. And to speak the Truth, it is a Phrase only adjusted,
to express no more than what the Socinians do constantly grant, for they say
that Christ, tho he suffered not the Punishment due to us for sin, yet he
endured grievous and dolorous Pains, which is aptly enough expressed, when it
is said, there was a Change of Christ's Person for us, for he was, say these
Heretics, Changed from Ease to Pain for our good.

Note, 1. The Phrase, Change of Person, was used by Dr. Crisp, and therefore
not invented by me, (whom he means) it is from him I cited it. 2. Is it so ill
a Phrase, and serves only a Socinian purpose? Then Mr. Lob should not make me a
Socinian, only for denying this Phrase. He says, (and that when he will speak
the Truth) it is adjusted only to express what the Socinians constantly grant,
and yet Quarrels me for denying this dangerous expression. 3. If this bad
Phrase, Change of Person, and that good Phrase Change of Persons differ so far
as Heterodox and Orthodox; did not Mr. Lob deal unfairly all this while, in
telling the World I denied that Good Phrase Change of Persons, only because I
had denied this bad Phrase Change of Person? for I assure you, I no where deny
a Change of Persons in the Plural Number (tho according to his Liberty he says
I did, p. 42.) and I fully assert the sound Sense of it, as the R. R. the
Bishop of Worcester and the Reverend Dr. Edwards do Witness, and they are Men
he makes great use of in his Book, as very sound in this point: But being more
concerned for my Friend, Mr. Rebuker, I shall with this place, begin an Account
of some of the Stabbing injuries he receives from Mr. Lob, with an Art thou in
Health my Brother?

1. Mr. Lob makes Mr. R -- here to say (with the Socinians) that there was a
Change only in the Person of Christ, without an Exchange at all with Sinners*
because Mr. R. says, there was a Change of the Person of Christ, in exchange
for the Persons of Sinners (tho not reciprocally in all respects) this is
plain; for a mere Change from Ease to Pain, is only a Change in Christ's Person,
p. 31. he says, My Brother is in good earnest only for a Change of Christ's
Person, without a Change between Christ and us: When Reb. p. 44. this Phrase
the Change of the Person of Christ, has truly an honest sound Sense, Viz. The
substitution of one Person in the Room of another; And a proper redemption may
be obtained by the Punishment of one in the Room of another -- If therefore
Christ's dying by way of Change, or Exchange, be all they would have, its
granted, etc.] Yet from this very place Mr. Lob infers, as above.

2. Mr. Lob represents Mr. R. to hold with the Socinians, that Christ suffered
only so for our Good, as not to suffer truly in our stead. Because Mr. R.
affirmed, that Christ's suffering properly in our stead was for our good. Mr.
Lob says, p. 47. Whatever my Brother intends, it is manifest, that while he
Calls the Socinian Sense of Christ's dying in our stead, Knavish -- He gives the
very Sense of this Phrase, which the Socinians who use it do give, and by it
means (if we may Judge his meaning by his words) no more than what Socinus
Crellius, and that fraternity do consistently with a denial of Christ's
satisfaction constantly grant. He says worse the lines before. See also, p.
36. and 10 times repeats, etc. The Place he grounds this upon is, Reb. p. 35.
[The Caviller proceeds, in our place and stead, with some signify no more, than
for our good; Why, it is impossible they should: That which Christ suffered in
our stead is for our Good, to bear the Punishment of our sins, to satisfy
Divine Justice, was certainly for our good, etc. Therefore for our good because
in our stead.] Reader, is not Christ's bearing the Punishment of our sins to
satisfy Divine Justice, suffering properly in our stead? And is suffering
properly in our stead, and suffering in our stead in the Socinian Sense, ( Viz.
Improperly and not at all) the same thing? But Mr. R. said, it is impossible in
our stead, should signify any more than for our good. I Answer, That it is
considered with respect to our concernment therein, as it is a benefit designed
for us; but not to exclude its being in our place and stead, which he fully
asserts, and without which we had been ruined for ever. Is not Man's chief end
to be happy in the Enjoyment of God? And does not Christ's dying properly in our
stead subserve that end? Mr. Lob might better say, Mr. R. denied that Christ's
dying in our stead was for Gods Glory, to which our good is Subordinate, than
that he denied that Christ dyed properly in our stead, because as to our own
felicity it did no more than subserve it, or was it for our hurt, or could it
be more beneficial to us than for our good, for it is only as to our benefit he
applies the Words.

3. Mr. Lob Represents Mr. R. to deny (with the Socinians) that Christ's
sufferings are a Proper Punishment for our Sins: When Mr. R. does most
expressly assert, that Christ's sufferings were the Punishments of our Sins, for
satisfaction to the Vindicative Justice of God. Mr. Lob, p. 48. agreeably
hereto (the Socinians trifling in a wretched Sense, and rejecting of Phrases to
make Christ's sufferings not penal) my Brother, as he rejects the Phrases of
sustaining the Person of Sinners, and puts an unsound Sense on Christ's
suffering in our place and stead; so that word (answering the obligation of the
Violated Law) which was in the first Paper, to make it evident that we esteemed
Christ's sufferings to be proper Punishments, is rejected; as what cannot in my
Brothers Opinion bear a sound Sense. This charge that Mr. R. denies Christ's
sufferings to be Punishments, he imposes in very many Pages. Whereas Mr. R.
says, p. 35. Christ did bear the Punishment of our sins to the satisfaction of
Justice, p. 48. And it is freely granted that Christ suffered and dyed for the
Persons of Sinners, and for the sins of their Persons, and in the room and
stead of their Persons; And that he suffered and dyed to make satisfaction to
the Justice, to the Vindicative Justice of God, etc.

What pretends Mr. Lob against so full conviction? No other than that we by the
Third Paper rejected this Phrase, obligations of the violated Law: But this is
not true, we only waved it, and Mr. R. says no more. But Mr. Lob says, the
Phrase which we put in its stead, Viz. Christ came to Answer for sinners
violation of the Law of Works, differs as much from their Phrase, answering for
us the obligations of the violated Law of Works, as a Gospel Truth and a
Socinian Error, p. 50. One would think it is still a true Phrase after his
mangling it. But pray take it as in our Paper. Christ came into our room and
stead to Answer for our Violations of the Law (add what follows) and the
Punishment of our sins was inflicted on Christ, that God might without injury
to his Justice Pardon and Save penitent Believers. Is this a Socinian Error?
Or, is a word wanting to make Christ's sufferings proper Punishments? Nay, what
is it for Christ in our stead to Answer for our Violations? But go yet lower:
Is not to Answer for our sins, another thing than Socinians hold? even this is
no less than suffering the Punishment of our sins, if we were for Violating the
Law under its obligations, to suffer those Punishments: But I come to Mr. Lob's
charge against Mr. R. from the words, cannot bear a sound Sense.

4. Because Mr. R. used certain warm words once, and that only against the
unsound Sense of that single Phrase, Commutation of Persons (which yet he there
says, may be capable of receiving a sound meaning) Mr. Lob makes Mr. R. to
intend those warm words against the sound Sense of that Phrase, against that
Phrase it self, and a great many other good Phrases which himself makes use of
as very safe, yea, against the sound Sense of many other Phrases which Mr. R.
pleads for. I shall fully recite the only place upon which Mr. Lob grounds his
charge, Reb. p. 30. [A change of Persons, which may possibly be capable of
receiving a good meaning (elsewhere explained) and yet is more sounding toward
a dangerous Sense, the Brethren did unanimously agree to grant as much as the
sound Sense could bear, and modestly to wave and pass by the other, which was
liable to be interpreted to a Sense, and sound of malignity to the whole of the
Gospel.] You see the other which could not bear a sound Sense, but was liable
to a sound of malignity, is but one thing, for other is not nomen multitudinis,
and agrees with the Verb WAS, which is in the singular Number. This other, to
which these words are appropriated, cannot be the Phrase, Commutation of
Persons, for that is not waved, but retained by us in the Third Paper; nor can
it be the sound Sense of that Phrase, for that is provided for by Mr. R. much
less can it be all the Phrases and Passages in the first Paper omitted in the
Third. It must then be confined to some one thing expressive of the unsound
Sense, which the Crispians put upon the Phase Change of Persons; Mr. R's.
following words point at, [And the Brethren are now more fully persuaded they
are in the right by the Reporters Notions.] What Is that? Such a change as makes
Christ to be destitute of a Righteousness Entitling to Enternal Life, and to
become sin as we are sin: Rep. p. 5.7, i. e. filthy sinners.

Yet upon this foresaid Passage of Mr. R. Mr. Lob says, p. 14. [This Passage of
my Reverend Brothren does make it manifest, that the Paragraphs, Terms and
Phrases, which were in the First Paper, and were waved and passed by in the
Composure of the Third, are looked upon by my Brother, as what could not bear a
sound Sense, but a sound of malignity to the whole of the Gospel; that is to
say, the Phrase of Christ's taking on him the Person of Sinners, of Answering
for us the obligations of the Violated Law of Works, the Term surety, and the
Assertion of the necessity of a Commutation of Persons -- This is the Sense of
my Reverend Brother.] And so these words cannot bear a sound, etc. Are trumped
up I believe forty times with these by tail, p. 48. to 65. nay, in this last,
p. 65. [According to what my Brother declares, it must be supposed; this
Passage, ( Viz. Regeneration, Repentance toward God, Faith in our Lord Jesus
Christ, and a Holy Conversation, are by Gods word manifestly necessary to the
salvation of a Sinner) Cannot bear a sound Sense, but is liable to be
interpreted to a Sense and Sound of malignity.] Must not Mr. R. tho thus loudly
warned, find it impossible to guard himself against this Man?

5. Mr. R. p. 17. says, [These Phrases, Terms, or Expressions, Viz. Change of
Persons between Christ and us, and his taking on him the Person of Sinners, are
unknown to our Confessions and not to be found in the Body of Confessions.] Mr.
Lob exposes him by Citing a Confession that uses some Phrases, Mr. R. makes
use of, and others which he never denied, but mentions no Confession that has
the Phrases Mr. R. said, could not be found. Upon this poor work he toiles
from, p. 71. to 80. I must stay a little on what occurs, p. 73. and ask, 1.
When Mr. R. denied only that these Phrases (not the sound Sense) were in the
Confessions? why should Mr. Lob make him deny that the Confessions gave any
Countenance to the sound Sense of those Phrases? 2. When Mr. Lob declares he
had silent, if he had not found these Phrases in some Confessions, and
Ridicules Mr. R. for denying they were in them; Why did not he show these
Phrases, or one of them in some or other Confession? 3. If these Phrases, as to
the Letters and Syllables (which Mr. R. called for) are wherever the sound
Sense of them is to be found, (Which is, what Mr. Lob pretends, or fondly
argues) why does he deny that the very Phrases Christ taking on him the Person
of Sinners, etc. Are in the Third Paper, and say they are rejected by us,
seeing the sound Sense of those very Phrases is there? 4. Mr. Lob says, [The
Phrases of Change of Persons, of Christ's sustaining our Person, of his being
substituted into our Room, and his suffering in our place and stead, are so
nearly allied that they live and dye together, grant one and all necessarily
come in with it, etc] They must then be of the same adequate Sense with each
other, or the Confession could not assert Christ's sustaining in our Person, by
its saying, Christ dyed in our stead: But if the Sense be adequate, then Mr. R.
denies the right Sense of none of these Phrases, for he asserts, Christ dyed
properly in our place and stead, and that he was substituted in our Room.
Whence it will be no better by Mr. Lobs own Confession, than that he makes all
this Noise to show his Copia Verborum: He will have the mentioning of each of
the various words of the same signification, to be Terms of Communion, and the
omission of any one as great a bar to it, as if the very sense of all those
words were denied; Ay, and that when the full just sense of any of those words
is granted. For my part, after all his big words, from p. 58. to 65. about
Logical Terms, or mere humane forms of Speech, (Tho I believe, they who drew up
the Third Paper never dreamt of such designs, as he wtih somewhat too like,
malice fastens on them) I would think him a Turbulent, uncharitable Scismatick,
who would divide from others merely because they scrupled this or that humane
form of words, so they held and plainly expressed the Scriptural Truth designed
by those words, yea, tho they expressed it by Terms less proper. How much more
culpable is it then, to raise such storms only for our omitting a Phrase,
because less intelligible to the People, more capable of being abused by the
Etimology and Acceptance thereof among the Vulgar, and known to be grossly
abused by the Crispians from that occasion. May not Mr. Lob Commence as just a
War, of People should omit his fine Phrase, Zeal for Populacy, and yet be
willing to use their plain Phrase, Zeal for Popularity. But to conclude this
head: I deny that his Change of Persons, or Christ's suffering in our Person, or
in the Crispian Sense, or his own, as Stated, Rep. p. 5. are included in or to
be proved from the Confession: to pretend the litereal Phrases from such words
as Christ dyed in our stead, was substituted in our Room, is sordid, and the
Confessors meaning in those words, is contrary to the Crispian and Reporters
Sense; And therefore Mr: Lobs Phrases are not at all proved from the
Confessions; unless a thing be proved where the Phrase is unmentioned and the
Sense opposed.

6. Mr. Lob, that he might bring his English Reader to Judge Mr. R. a baffled
Man, leaves out a considerable word in his Translating a part of the Scotch
Confession, p. 81. [It became the Redeemer to be true God, and true Man,
because he was to suffer the Punishments due for our sins, and to appear [
Quasi in persona, nostra coram judicio patris, pro nostra transgressione and in
obedientia pati, in our Person before the Judgment Seat of the Father, to
suffer for our Transgressions and Disobedience.] Thus Mr. Lob Englisheth the
Latin words, and boasts -- Here you see the Church of Sco^land uses this
very Phrase, etc. But least his admirers should applaud his conquest to an
indecency, it is fit they know there is a word QVASI, which Mr. Lob did not think
for his purpose to English. He ought to have said thus; And to appear [ AS IT
WERE] in our Person, that is, Christ appeared nor properly in our Person; that
Phrase is too hard, tho there be somewhat toward it in some certain respect;
As Calvin in this case uses Quodamodo. But Mr. Lob, by leaving out Quasi,
performs what he undertook, p. 73. Perhaps it may appear (i. e. to the
Englishman) that the Phrase most exposed by him will be found literally in one
or other Confession. These words Cited are all, by which he makes it to appear,
and Quasi Answers to perhaps. Nay, had the diminutive Quasi been out, he is not
sure it had served his turn.

But considering the wonted Freedom of the Man, I wonder he left not out this
Quasi. For I could give many instances, where the very next words omitted by
him, would have defeated his purpose by what he Cites. But, To prevent a
snare, I Will prefer that in His Letter to Dr. Bates, p. 17. he says, many held
Christ and us to be one Person in Law; (And) that it may be said, that we
suffered in Christ, is the import of that assertion which says, that Christ
suffered as our surety; and is allowed by Mr. Baxter; (just against this, Mr.
Lob Cites in the Margin) It is not so aptly said he satisfied, as that he
suffered in the Person of sinners, Mr. Baxter, Cath. Theol. Part 2. p. 79. (It
should be, p. 76, 77.) Amazed, I took Mr. Baxters Book, and found the very next
words were; Note, That it is not any other Man's Person that Christ suffered in,
but his own, and we mean, that he took upon him the Person of a Sinner himself,
in as much as he consented to suffer for sin, and so Personating here, is not
becoming any other Man's Person in Law-Sense, so as that other legally suffered
what he did; but it is only his own Person's becoming a sufferer in the stead
of sinners for their sins -- (And two or three lines before Mr. Baxter tells
us) To say that Christ satisfied in our Person, and we by him; is false, and
subverts the Gospel.

Or why did not Mr. Lob split the word Quasi, and leave out the last syllable
si, then qua being often redulplicative, had better fitted, thus he served me,
Man made Righteous, p. 108. I had said, Therefore Christ HEREIN is what the
Civilians Call, An ex promissor, he suffered alone, tho he Acts for another.
Mr. Lob in his Letter to Dr. Bates, p. 12.13. to expose me as unlearned, and
himself skilful, Recites several properties of an Expromissor, and will have me
to mean that all these did belong to Christ, and then infers what pleased
himself; whereas I had by the entire word Herein, limited it to one property of
an Ex promissor, Viz. He is obliged alone tho he Acts for another, (in
Redemption-work.) Mr. Lob seeing the word Herein would mar his project, He
fairly splits the word, leaves out In, and makes it (a local) HERE and so found
Scope for his purpose. These few Instances of many, may convince how unsit Mr.
Lob is to report other Men's words, tho his Talent seems confined to the
Collecting and Publishing what Authors write; 'twere well for his Readers, he
did it with more of true Judgment, and less of Trick; for thereby his
Quotations would more edify, and require less care and pains to become sure the
Authors are not misrepresented.

7. Men will scarce Judge it decent or prudent in Mr. Lob, (if in his Friend)
to publish by that Letter to himself, a reflection on the Rebuker for his
Loyalty to the present Government, as inconsistent with a few Rhetorical
expressions, in address to the Late King James, (to whom his obligations were
somewhat peculiar:) But whereby does his meaning appear so insincere at that
time? Or what is done by him since, so contradictious to what he said, as to
render him an exemplar of insincerity now? No other than swearing allegiance to
King William, Signing the Association and Carrying it, becoming a Loyal Subject
in his Prayers, Sermons, and Peaceable behavior and advices? What Fetters are
some in, If once addressing the Late King by a few big words, must Eternally
Proclaim a Man an Hypocrite, unless he be now a Non-juror, Nonassociator,
Plotter, and director of other Ministers (in imitation of himself) to pray so
for the King, as either of the two Kings may be intended, if they must at all
seem to Pray for King William* I hope, few will be gulled into such a
Character, from the fancied obligations of former addresses (tho some of them
were highly inconsiderate), nor any discouraged from persevering Loyalty by the
forecited Aspersion. This would admit enlargement, which provocations might
improve. But I retain a respect sufficient to forbid it, nor had I inserted the
least hint at such things, except as a warning against the like instances, when
His First-Rate Man is to Execute his Fiery threats, and his very Learned Person
already Roused (alike obnoxious) stretches forth his Claws. Let Men take their
way, but the common interest will not long be Sacrificed, ere some (now imposed
on) will find out the Instruments and Designs of our Breaches. I hope, the
Reverend Rebuker will Pardon my Interposal, and that I acquainted him not
therewith. His abilities for a reply, I acknowledge such, that if these short
hints serve for a foil to that he is preparing, and in the interim abate the
ill Impressions of Mr. Lobs attempt, I shall Account these few hours well
employed, which otherwise had been more feelingly spent in resenting those base
reflections, that I am his Leader, Master, Principal, and what else became,
scarce any Man besides Mr. Lob, their Author.

Mr. Lob, p. 8. owneth, I asserted, besides the effects made ours, the
Righteousness of Christ is imputed to Believers, but adds, I mean nothing by
this grant: Because I use a simile to illustrate the manner, in Man made
Righteous, p. 77. If one give me my Liberty, which he Voluntarily purchased for
me at a dear rate. He mediately gives me what he paid for my Ransom, tho
immediately he gives me my Liberty and a right thereto.

A. Had he Cited the Apodosis, which is in the next words, He had spoiled his
suggestion, I shall Contract what I there enlarge on. I make Pardon and
Adoption to be benefits, or effects following upon the Imputation of Christ's
Righteousness. And the Righteousness of Christ I distinguish into, 1. His
performance of the conditions of redemption. 2. His right (or jus adjudicatum)
by the Covenant of redemption, to our Pardon and Adoption; for his performance
of the conditions adjusted in that Covenant. The former I said, is mediately
imputed. The latter I said, is immediately imputed; it is reckoned to us when
believers, because it was acquired expressly for believers, John 3.16. Isa.
53.10, 11. The judicial imputation of this right of Christ intervening; the
Righteousness of Christ (as a performance of the conditions) is imputed as our
Plea for that Pardon, it being the procuring cause of that right of Christ's,
which is immediately imputed to us. And this right I also distinguish from that
which the Gospel-promise made to believers does invest them in, for the former
right results immediately to Christ, from the Covenant of Redemption, and is
subjectively in him, tho imputed to us: Whereas the promise, he that believes
shall be forgiven, or saved, not only supposes the former Transactions, and is
the Instrument by which God imputes Christ's Righteousness to the believer; But
it also, as a conditional promise, gives believers a right to Forgiveness,
whereof they are the immediate Subjects. Here Mr. Lob may see the Vanity of his
Objection; it is not Pardon, or such possessed effects that intermediate
between Christ's Righteousness and us, nor only the right given by the Gospels
conditional grant. No, it is Christ's own right, and that imputed to us by God
himself, and that immediately to us. And Pray, Is Gods imputing to us Christ's
performance of the conditions, so far as to be our Plea and Foundation of
Claim, no imputation of his Righteousness at all, because the imputation of
Christ's acquired right Intervenes? Nothing is left out but Gods Legal
accounting us to have performed all that, by which Christ merited and made
Atonement. Yet without this Proud assumption, nothing will please Mr. Lob.

Being so often pressed to it by Mr. Humfreys and Mr. Lob, I will endeavor
their satisfaction. If Christ had acquired by his Death a Power indefinitely to
forgive sins, without a Compact determining (either by Name or Qualification)
the Persons that should be Pardoned in the Virtue of his Death, or only
purchased the Gospel Covenant, as conditionally offering Pardon; I should agree
with Mr. H. but it being otherwise, I differ from him. And add, as the
possessed effects are not properly imputed, so I will not confine the support
of my Faith ultimately, and only to the Gospel conditional promise (tho that is
infallible) when God has made the Compact between the Father and our Mediator,
to be my security, and Christ's performance of the conditions of that Compact to
be my Plea with God, among which conditions was what Answers the Law of Works,
which I have Transgressed. Although I own I must try my interest by Christ's Gospel
Law, as what describes the Person who is Entitled to Pardon, and injoyneth us
to be such, with a promise of that interest. In short, a believer having for
his Security and Plea, the Gospel promise, the Covenant of Redemption and the
Value of Christ's Death, I Will retain each; and therefore still say, Besides the
effects possessed by me, the Righteousness of Christ is imputed to me, as above
Accounted for.

On the other hand, could I think it was by the Covenant of Works, that Christ
was constituted our surety, so that his obligations to suffer the Punishment of
our sins, did immediately result from that Law; And that we Sinners were
Principals in Redemption Work, and Christ such a surety as to be Joint Party
with us in that Work of Redemption. And that the Law of Works required the
Divine Nature, to give a value to what it Accounted to be Righteousness. And
lastly, that this Law promises Pardon to sinners for the sake of a Mediators
sufferings; I should then agree with Mr. Lob, that we satisfied for our sin,
dyed, and obeyed in Christ's Person, and he and we paid the Idem. Nay, be a full
Crispian and say, I was justified at the time of Christ's Death; I had nothing
to do to become partaker of the effects of that Death, I was as Righteous as
Christ, deny any proper forgiveness, Nay, own that Christ was really a sinner;
for I am sure the Law could immediately oblige no other to dye.

But I must disagree with Mr. Lob and them, Because I am well persuaded, God
never proposed the Work of Redemption to Condemned Sinners, but to Christ our
Mediator. Also that to the Redemption of Sinners, God in Justice requiring for
the Honor of his Violated Law, that a perfect obedience, and the suffering of
what was equivalent to its threatened Punishments, should in the Humane Nature
be summitted to by the Redeemer. Our Blessed Mediator obliged himself to yield
that obedience, and bear those Punishments, upon condition that such sinners
should be forgiven in his right, who should comply with the Gospel Terms agreed
upon between the Father and him. And pursuant hereto, our Mediator did in our
Nature perfectly obey and suffer the Punishments of our sins, whereby he had a
right to a believers Pardon, and believers do obtain it in the way above
described. And Lastly, I am sure the Law of Works never promises Pardon to
sinners for the sake of Christ's sufferings, the Payment of the full Idem was
impossible, (tho there was a supra-equivalent) and the Law accounts that
Righteousness perfect, which an Innocent Holy Creature renders, tho he have
not, the Divine Nature to give that value to his obedience; without which (very
thing) we had been entirely lost.

Here Mr. Lob may find a surety, Viz. An obliged Mediator. And under the Law,
Viz. As an Article taken into the Covenant of Redemption, whereby Christ was
obliged: And in our stead, Viz. We were Condemned to suffer, we are by and for
his sufferings to be saved. Nay, he may find the ^ound meaning of his other
Phrases, as Change of Persons, yea, Christ's suffering in the Person of sinners.
That is, Christ our obliged Mediator suffers in our stead what we were to
suffer; yet it was that we might be delivered for it, but not legally reputed
our selves to suffer. And yet here is place le^t for Pardon, a Gospel Law, Terms
of Application. etc.

That none may mistake, Note, 1. I instance Pardon, etc. for brevity sake, but
exclude no saving benefits, and distinguish saving benefits, which are used as
Motives to Duty in the Gospel, from the Duties which are Conditions of those
benefits. 2. And therefore I speak not of Christ's peculiar purchasing Grace
for the Elect effectually to perform those Conditions whereby, together with
the Decree, their eventual salvation is secured. This is my Judgment; but I
ought not to confound this with that adjustment of things, whereby the
Gospel-Offer of salvation to all men, and the Gospel-Rule of conferring its
benefits, and of our final Judgment, are provided for.

Mr. Lob often objects a Contradiction, if I affirm a Change of Persons, and yet
say, I deny there is a Change of Person.

Answ. Besides Answers already given, I say, without any designed Affront, it is
no greater than Answer not a Fool according to his Folly, yet Answer a Fool
according to his Folly.

By thus gratifying Mr. Lob's Imperious Humor, I am the freer to tell him,

1. I am sorry that he so boldly averreth many gross mistakes in mattter of
Fact, p. 35. I invented the Phrase Change of Person; whereas I cite and use it
as Dr. Crisp's Phrase. P. 26.43. I deny a Change of Persons. Whereas I never
denied it; what I denied was Dr. Crisp's Change of Person, and fully asserted
the Sense of the other. P. 22. I appealed to the Learned Witsius. But this I
never did. P. 7. That only Mr. Toland wrote much in praise of my Book. Whereas
he being then in Holland (and not the Man he since appears) desired them who
gave an account of Published Books, to give their Judgment of my Book, and the
great Praises are theirs; and others have since commended it above its worth.
P. 63. That I was the Contriver of the Third Paper. Whereas others had drawn it
up before I saw it. His vile Reflections on Mr. R. with respect to this, and
his Nine Subscribers of the First Paper, p. 70. makes an account of that Matter
necessary. The United Ministers appointed Dr. Bates, Mr. Hamond, Mr. Slater,
Mr. Hill, with Mr. How and my self, to compose an Expedient, etc. Two of the
Brethren drew it up (which is this Third Paper) and brought it to the rest of
us met together: After some Alterations we did all agree to it, and brought it
as our agreed Act to the Meeting at Saint Hellen. There, among the rest, Mr.
Stretton, Mr. Quick and Mr. Evans agreed to it. Mr. Alsop, Mr. Burgess, and Mr.
Showers not being present any of the times when it was read in the Meeting; it
was brought to the View of Mr. Alsop, who approved of it. I am very sure also
it was shown to Mr. Burgess (his Informer) who appeared to agree to it; and Mr.
Showers did to more than one express his Approbation of it. So that Mr. Lob
has all the Nine Subscribers to my book enumerated. Mr. Lob somewhere says,
all the Phrases of the first Paper, not into the Third, were rejected by my
means; And yet several of them are in my own Paper, called the Sccond. Which I
am glad was Printed ere I read his Defense. He says the Third Paper denies a
Commutation of Persons, p. 14. when both Phrase and Sense are in it. Other
instances are not wanting. It Is false that the generality of the Pastors do not
approve my Book, though they were asked only to subscribe the state of Truth
and Errors.

2. The cause he undertakes is miserably defended against the Rebuke: He
appears to give, p. 13. a Scheme of his project, Viz. The points left out of
the Third Paper which offended the Brethren, but where is his Proof that the
United Ministers were obliged to retain so many Phrases of the first Paper as
they did? If they had used none but what the Church of England and the Assembly
of Divines Confessions included, the Heads of Union were observed by them, and
violated by such as exacted more. Where makes he it good, that the United
Ministers rejected all the Phrases of the First Paper which they omitted;
especially when it was never read nor proposed to them: Or that the omission of
those Phrases warrants the breach of Union? Such matters ought not to pass
unargued, without which none can tell what honest cause the Report pretends to,
unless the traducing Men sound in the Faith to cover the Turbulency of the
Erroneous, should be so Accounted. As these are waved, so he trifles in what he
pretends to insist on. Mr. R. demands the difference between a Commutation of
Persons between Christ and Sinners, and Christ's dying properly in the sinners
stead. Mr. Lob grants they are the same, and yet pours out a Flood of
impertinent words against the R. as if they widely differed. Mr. Lob makes
Christ's suffering the Punishment of our sins to the satisfaction of Justice,
the thing which distinguishes the Orthodox from the Socinians, and yet he
represents Mr. R. as a Socinian, who often asserteth, Christ suffered the
Punishment of our sins to the satisfaction of Justice, even Vindicative
Justice, Mr. R. charge his Account of Change of Persons, Rep. p. 5. with
little less than Blasphemy, he bears that with profoundest silence. Mr. R.
blames him, that he gave not a full Report of our difference, and from its
Rise. To this he says, he pretended not to give a Narrative of the whole. And
yet, Rep. p. 4. The difference hitherto has been about the satisfaction of
Christ. And in his Remarks, often leads his Reader to Judge we never had any
other Controversy. Indeed his Present State of difference was such a Piece of
Art, as he thought it so much pity to spoil it by a fuller Account, that their
violation of the Agreement in Doctrines, 1692. He Answers only with a groan.
Their refusal of the Paper, 1694. Because a disowning of sundry Antinomian
Errors was added, he excuses no better than by an abrupt Dismiss, after a
Suggestion, that nothing had been added but that about Repentance, which is not
true; and yet this being in the Assemblies Words, he impeacheth the Refusers as
insincere in subscribing this in the Assemblies Confession, and yet refusing it
in that Paper. To the horrid Passages out of his Brethren's Books, collected to
justify a Demand of Satisfaction, and a fit Antidote when he formed their
Creeds: with him it is enough they were not sent to P. H. as if it mattered not
that he knew they were in their Books, and before the united Ministers. What
says he to Mr. R.'s Citations out of my Book, fully asserting Christ's
Satisfaction? ne (...) quidem, but caluminates still; where states he a fair
Question with the R? Instead of that he pursues a Logomachy, cites Authors to
prove what Mr. R. pleads for, and to confute what his Party reckons he defends;
yea, what himself oft-times asserts. Phrases he tires, when the Sense is so
disregarded, that I would thank him to show one Error of Mr. R. (unless by
gross wresting of his Words) he once remarketh; or one Doctrinal Truth he
pretends to prove, which Mr. R. has not expressly owned. Upon the whole, the
Cause of the Rebuke is still unhurt, otherwise than as its Author is pelted
with his smoothest Brothers rotten Eggs; such as not having a Grain of Sense,
heretical, false, delirous, Changeling, and what not? But as for the Cause of
the Report, the Defendant has wisely got that into a Wood, in Hopes his Party
shall not find it is dead by the Rebukers Wounds.

3. I Will foretell from what I already hear and see, how several sorts are
likely to judge, and stand affected to his Performance. His Disciples may say,
All we have learned is even this. A Change of Persons and Christ's suffering in
our Person, if explained to a sound Sense, are no more than Christ's suffering
properly in our stead: And yet Christ's suffering properly in our stead, is not
so much a Change of Persons, or Suffering in our Person, But that we mnst call
them Socinians, who hold Christ suffered in our stead, if they will omit any of
our Masters other Phrases, although they own the Sense of all. The Sagacious
Crispians (if any such) will say he has betrayed our Cause; yea, himself
condemns it, and anon espouseth it. But one good turn is done, he has toiled
hard to spoil what is a real Confutation of it. The factious Biggots may glory,
whatever becomes of Truth, yet it is worth our Contribution, that he has spoiled
all Hopes of that ill thing, Union and Peace too, and put the United Ministers
to groan we are abused, and as far as this Pacificator can influence, our
Breaches shall still be wider. They whom he remarked, saying, The Dissenters
differ about they know not what, will loudly boast, we now see with a witness,
even the only Man of close study, that no Man can guess what it is about. They
who used to trust to Quotations from Authors, must grow suspicious, and resolve
always to examine. Hard Students (some such there are besides Mr. L.) will
dread a Common place Book of Phrases, least they should divert them from their
more important Sense, and confound themselves to the distracting of the Church,
and torment of all Mankind. It Is well if some of his reproached Preachers say
not, we study Things more than Words, and yet Words more than to speak false
English, that we may strut in Bombastick Phrases; and both to better purpose
than our assuming Dictator, who brands us with Ignorance, and a Zeal for
Populacy, whilst his Gain by our more common Acceptance, qualifies him for a
sort of closer Study; but in time we may become more Politic. But which more
affects me, plain serious Christians with Grief will cry, we know not what to
think, if the way to Heaven be thus perplexed, and the Articles of our Faith so
intricate as these heaps of Obscure Phrases represent them. The Profane are
tempted to scoff at Religion as a wordy Noise, and our Enemies well pleased to
see us destroy each other by dividing, and this for what exposes us as much to
Contempt as Ruin. How much should we pray for Godly sincerity in our appeals
to God, and Serviceableness to a common good in our pretended pleadings for
Truth! And not still amuse Men, as Mr. Lob has done, by ^ Book, the Substance
whereof is no more than a Misrepresentation of the R's words, that the Reader
may believe him an Heretic in grain, when the plain sense of his Expression
seems often contended for by Mr. Lob. Nor can people propose a benefit by
multiplied Quotations of a Phrase, when the Authors, who use it, design by that
Phrase no more than Mr. R. grants. And his Exception is nor against their sense
of that Phrase, but against impo^^^^ it is a Term of Union, after the Crispians
and Mr. Lob so perverted it.

FINIS.

