A DEFENSE OF Gospel Truth. Being a REPLY to Mr. CHANCY's First Part. AND As an
Explication of the Points in Debate, may serve for a Reply to all other Answers.

Wherein the Mistaken may at least see that,

I. I affirm that we are Justified for or by Christ's Righteousness alone, and
not by Works. II. That we are Justified as soon as we truly Believe. III. That
the Righteousness of Christ is imputed to the Believer, and not only the
Effects of it. IV. That Gospel-Conditions are not our Justifying Righteousness,
which Legal Works were to be. V. How the Gospel is a Law, explained and proved,
and c. VI. That I am not for the Popish or Arminian Doctrine of Justification,
and c. as stated by our Divines. VII. That all I contend for is the way which
God has appointed for the application of Christ's Merits, and dispensing the
Effects of Free Grace, and for a Gospel Ministry suited to this purpose.
By DANIEL WILLIAMS.

LONDON:

Printed for John Dunton at the Raven in the Poultry, 1693.

TO THE READER.
HAving, by the Good Hand of GOD, contributed so much to the restoration of
Peace in the dissenting Congregations in Dublin, and somewhat to the Union
here, a Reason may be expected how I become engaged in the present Debates;
with grief of Heart I shall nakedly render it. Soon The Reasons of my Sermon at
P. H. above a year since.
after the reprinting of Dr. Crisp's Works, his Errors that lay hid for many
Years appeared with open Face: Many pleading, that there are no Humblings or
preparatory Works in order to Conversion, Saving Faith is nothing but a
Persuasion that our Sins are pardoned; yea, we are justified before we are
born; Christ was accounted the very Blasphemer at God's Bar; Sin cannot hurt
the Believer; Men have nothing to do in order to Salvation; no assurance by
Signs from Sanctification, etc.

Eleven Counties the Flame broke soon into, under the conduct of Mr. Davies,
and several others; the faithful Ministers were deserted as Legalists, Churches
divided, and Town and Country filled with Debates and Noise. These Errors and
Disorders were imputed to the Body of Nonconformists, and Attempts against our
Liberty thereupon threatened. Dr. Crisp's Son puts out a Book of his own to
abett some of his Father's Opinions, and therein reflects on me by Name, and
other Books to this purpose were set forth; hereupon once, and but once, I
delivered at Pinners-Hall that which is the Appendix to my Book, hoping that a
plain state of the Differences might convince some well-meaning People, or at
least vindicate us, that we were not Papists, Arminians, etc. as these
represented us, nor Antinomians, as by others we were all accused. In that
Sermon I charged no person; yea, to prevent a Jealousy that I might intend Mr.
Cole, etc. I inserted this; It Is true, there are some small Differences among
the Orthodox, in wording some of these things, but shall we hereby give
advantage to such Errors, etc? A great Clamor is thereupon contrived, and in
his next turn, Mr. Cole, with great severity, exposed us to vulgar notice,
affirming many Notions that some worthy Divines were startled at: Some Friends
of Mr. Coals proposed to me a Meeting with him, in the presence of Dr. B. Mr.
M. and Mr. H. In this Meeting it was agreed, that I should read my Sermon,
after which Mr. Cole declared he had no Exception, and so we were agreed (which
was now the second time.) Mr. Cole, in his turn at P. H. publicly declared
there was no real Difference, as Mr. H. also did, and I repeated it with great
satisfaction, hoping that the Err^neous would be less confident, when they lost
that Cover which they made of his Name. This Calm did not long endure, for Mr.
Cole, (I fear Why I printed my Book, about six months since.
by Instigation) revived at P. H. the same Reflections, and Dr. Bat^s
practically preaching the Necessity of Repentance to the Forgiveness of Sin,
Mr. Cole soon after brake out into the wonted Exclamations, and charged us as
Opposers of Christ's Righteousness in Justification, etc. and I was accounted
by most as the chief Mark levelled at. Friends entreated me to take no notice of
these Reflections in my Sermons there; and though thus often provoked, I never
expressed any Resentments in any Discourse there since that first: Nevertheless
many assured me of the necessity of printing somewhat to clear our selves, and
if possible to stem this Tide; Peoples Mouths were filled with the grossest
Misrepresentations of our Doctrines; Ministers were accused as Legalists, when
they only preached that men had somewhat to do if they would be saved; if a man
did but plead with Sinners from Gospel-Threats, or argue Obedience and Duties,
he was no Gospel-Preacher: Yea, some arrived to that daringness, as publicly
to assert there were but three or four Ministers of Christ in London; the
Reverend Mr. Mead himself escaped not the Title of a Legalist. These things
caused in me many sad Thoughts, and at last I was convinced, unless we should
prostitute our Ministry, suffer the infecting of our People, which would end in
Divisions, (as I found attempted on some of my own) and be all guilty, and
branded abroad as Complyers, by our silence; something must be published. I was
sensible of the Trouble, Reproach, and Hazards attending it, especially since I
was informed that some, out of the Union, were the Spring in this Affair, who
having failed in their Unchristian Methods to oppose that Agreement, it seems
judged by the Notions of some few (of whom I was ignorant) that either these
Opinions must prevail, by our silence, or that the Union would be endangered if
we appeared against them. At last I found the effects of Mr. Davies's and
others Practices, abroad, and in the City; that the hazard to our Peace would
grow, by further delay, especially seeing as yet so very few, if any of the
United Brethren, were suspected to abett these Errors, and Mr. Cole, with all
the rest that appeared their Advocates, in City and Country, were not of the
Union. Nay, I believed if some others did not act Mr. Cole, he could not be
offended with what I should write, he having at three meetings expressed
himself so reconciled to my Principles, and then disowned what I should oppose.
The reason why I desired any Testimony to my Book, was because the People do
often value Names more than Arguments, the Opposites (so unscrupulous in their
Clamours) might prejudice men against the Truths, as if I was singular. And
considering the delay of (...) Testimony against Mr. Davies, this might be some
Antidote, till we arrived at more. Yea, I heard also Mr. Cole was printing when
I was about mine. These are the Considerations which induced me to print my
Book at the desire of several Brethren, and I have Peace in this, that it
appeared an absolute Duty. Some object* Why I did not get some of the Brethrens
Hands, Vulgar Objections against my Book answered.
formerly called Congregational, and it looks like forming a Party, etc. A. I
did ask some of them that I thought would not scruple it, particularly Mr.
Mead, who did object nothing against it, but a prudential Consideration; and
the same answer he made to Dr. Bates, when he first asked him; and before the
second Edition came out, I telling him what use his Hand might have been of, he
made the like answer, and made then to me no Objection against the Book, but
that he wished I had left out that of the third to the Phil. All which I
mentioned to some, with real respect to him and those Brethren. But since Mr.
C's Book was published, Mr. M. tells me and others, he is not of my judgment;
but I know not wherein, except in my sense of that Text. Yet there are others
that forbear subscribing, who declare no disagreement; and he must quite alter
his useful way of Preaching, if he much differ from me. Others ask why I raked
into Dr. Crisp's Ashes. A. It was needful I should instance some Author, for
they said nobody affirmed those things I mentioned in my Sermon. I chose Dr. C.
before another, not from Prejudice, but because he was reprinted with an
unhappy Front, his Works seemed the Standard of the propagators of these
Errors. This Book was taking with many, recommended to People by Mr. Trayl and
others, as I can prove, and he must never be answered, if not after his Death;
and though I treat him with all respect, yet I wonder his Works should be so
applauded now, when most of our great Divines opposed them heretofore: Yea, as
Mr. Nesbit from cre^lible Hands informs me, the Assembly of Divines desired to
have them burnt. Obj. You are said to misquote him. A. I cannot find I mistook
one word, except that once I set Justify instead of Pardon, which is altered
in the second Edition Obj. You misrepresent his Sense. A. Not that I know; and
what Mr. C. instanceth, I have fully proved it must be his sense, though I inform
you in my Book he often speaks Contradictions, but the most I mention he labors
to prove, and his Scheme enforces it. Obj. You take Bits of Sentences. A. I
still give one full period, and it is only to avoid swelling my Book that I
mentioned no more in other Clauses; yea, in what is material I often set his
words at large, and if it be needful, I shall put him in a fuller light. Many
Obj. My Book was written against Mr. Cole. A. I had no Eye to him at all,
except in the Digression about Repentance, which was much the same as I
delivered at a third meeting to compose the Debate between Dr. Bates and him,
(though since then he broke out against us twice) this I preface in my Book with
these words: Herein I have to do with men of more orthodox Principles than Dr.
Crisp. And Mr. Cole must know, these words did refer to him; yea,
notwithstanding many strange Passages, I hope he does not hold most of those
Opinions; nor can he agree with Mr. Chancy, unless he disagree with what he
has often said, yea, and printed. Obj. It Is more than hinted, that I intend in
that Book to reflect on all them called Congregational. A. I am sure I abhor
such an Intention; nay, did not I pitch on Testimonies from among them, to
oppose these Errors? I know many of their Ministers, whom I think free from the
least disposition toward them; the New England Synod effectually opposed them;
The History thereof is worth the buying, Mr. Parkhurst lately reprinted it.
Mr. Flavel and Mr. Lob have written well against them; I cite Bulkley, Dr.
Owens, etc. who are fully for the opposite Truths; and though I sent Mr. M. word,
that in the mind I was in, I would forbear Testimonies from his Writings, but
that I would not bind my self for any time, yet I have since met with great
reason to cite him, as one fully for the Truth: Yea, Mr. N. (though I never
requested it) in my House declared, That if Mr. M. and three more such had
subscribed, he would not have been unwilling to do it; and he desired me to add
( Congregational) to the Divines in and about this City who forbear to
subscribe only from prudential Considerations which I refused. He remembers
the latter part, and owneth it; and he told Mr. Hume, that if one Passage or
two were rectified, he would subscribe my Book. It Is true, some clamorous
People, that cry up these Opinions, happen to be of that Persuasion, but I hope
far the greater part are better principl'd; and many seem on the wrong side
only from Misrepresentations. Obj. Why do you use the word Rector? A. It Is a
proper word, used by Dr. Owens, Mr. Charnock, and most. This Book has met with
various entertainment, with many it has pleased God to grant it acceptance,
and many Ministers out of the Country offered their Subscriptions; but of the
four seeming Answers to it, I Will give these hints. To Mr. B. I am obliged, for
his Christian usage, and while he allows, that I speak the Language of Time,
and of the Dispensation I am under, I will comply with his Proposal, not to
enter the Lists, unless I have occasion to prove my Sense of Phil. 3. which I
find patronized by Augustine. Of Mr. Keach I would but ask, 1. Does not he
believe that persons are bound to agree to the Covenant of Grace, and thereby
engaged to love God, and sincerely obey him; and is not refusing to agree to
this Covenant the damning Sin? yea, is not this Refusal the Heart of Unbelief?
And that is all I there affirm. 2. Is his Spirit in a right frame, when he shall
bring these words in my Catechism, to prove that we are not justified upon
believing, till we do Good Works, when in that short Catechism there is this;
Q. Is not a Believer pardoned, before he can put forth any other Act of
Obedience? A. Tho true Faith is a certain Principle of Obedience, yet so soon
as we believe, we are pardoned, even before there can be time to put forth any
other Acts of Obedience. Yea, how often do I say in my Book, that no Act of ours
is a jot of the Righteousness for or by which we are justified, but that is
Christ's alone; and yet this person fixes the quite contrary on me, and so
batters in the dark, and warns all from hearing me: The Lord humble and
forgive such. The Letter from the City, etc. seems rather to design a Turn,
than argue a Truth; for as it weakly says some things true; and others
erroneous, so throughout he belies their Principles whom he exposes; if it be
wilfully, let his own serious Reviews give him his Character; if ignorantly,
why should he intermeddle? There are few Books written that pretend so much,
which may be so easily and much exposed. Mr. C. is the Author I here deal with:
I have long read Books, and from five years old have had no Employment besides
my Studies; yea, before nineteen I was regularly admitted a Preacher, yet I
never met with a Tract parallel to his, for abusive Language, violent Rage, and
uncharitable Censures. Many great Divines dissuade me from a Reply, assuring me
it was at best needless* with their Advice I had complied, but that I find the
Ignorant believe his Misrepresentation of my Principle: It Is amazing what Eye
they read with, if they read at all. What Is become of Truth or Ingenuity, that
Professors dare affix these Doctrines to me, which I a thousand times disown,
and never can ascribe any Passages to ground them on, but are still forced to
cry, This is your meaning, against my plain words and entire Scheme; as thou will see in this Reply. Mr. C. says I juggle and equivocate; when I declare I
still speak my mind, and must be the most inconsistent Fool, if it were not so.
But what should induce me to juggle or equivocate? I value not the Purses of
any, and in God's Cause I fear not the Abilities of the whole Party; yea, by
more of God's presence I shall be reconciled to their fiery and clamorous
Tongues, which is their only formidable strength, though the liberty they take
does not evidence a good Cause or a Christian Spirit. They give out, that I often
meet with Noblemen about a great Affair, when I never spoke with one of these
Noblemen, nor ever was once in any Meeting about that matter. They assert Mr.
How said, he had not put his Hand to my Book, but that I assured him Mr. M.
would do the same; when Mr. H affirms he never said any such thing, but that
after he had signed, he desired me to ask Mr. M's Hand. Others say, that Hands
were affixt without their leave, which is too gross to reply to. Nay, they turn
the effects of my sinking Distempers to my reproach; the worst I wish them is
Forgiveness, and more Charity and Wisdom. Obj. They say some of the first
Subscribers did not read the whole Book. A. The whole substance of the Book is
in the Truths and Errors which they did peruse. Obj. Do not some of the
Subscribers recant? A. Though they have been abused, yet the only one that to me
seemed willing that his Name had been left out, and that only because of the
noise. I offered to publish, that he desired it, but he has forborne any such
desire. Two of these Authors pretend to great Piety in their Party above
others, the Lord increase it in all; but I am persuaded they call many Serious
ones of their Party, who live under the power of the contrary Truth, and
understand not the Errors of those for whose persons they may have regard.
There be a far greater number of humble, meek, heavenly Christians, that abhor
these Errors, which they observe to alter much the Christian Calm and tender
Frame of such, that I hope are upright in the Substance. And I heartily desire
all of us would lay these Texts to Heart, 1 Cor. 13. Though I have all Faith,
and have not Charity, I am nothing. Iam. 1. 26. If any man among you seem to be
religious, and bridleth not his Tongue, but deceives his own Heart, that man's
Religion is vain. Iam. 3. 13, to 18. But the Wisdom that is from above is first
pure, then peaceable, gentle, and easy to be entreated. And it is evident,
notwithstanding what Mr. C. says of Passions, p. 12. that a holy Fear, with a
siducial Consent to Christ, t^ds more to make a man's state safe, and his walk
exact, than sudden Confidence or easy Persuasions. It Is true, Assurance should
be endeavored in our working out our Salvation with trembling and with fear;
yet Mr. Sedgwick was a man I Will believe before Mr. C. or the Letter, and he
says, In my Conscience this is the general Opinion of ungodly men; they hear
Christ died to take away Sin, and to make Peace for Sinners, and therefore they
will take no thought after Christ, but will live basely and boldly in their
sinful ways, etc. but Christ never yet made such a Reconciliation, that all
Sinners whatsoever, though they live in Unbelief and Impenitency, shall share
in it, but only penitent Sinners, and believing Sinners. S. of Cov. p. 258.

I shall represent the true state of the points in debate, that if any men will
engage me to Edification, and with Truth, they may be directed. The
Controversy with Dr. C. my Book does it so plainly, that I hope all may see it
there; but the present Specimen more especially shall refer to Mr. C. who
differs from many that help the noise, though they will not see it.

1. It is not whether a certain number of Sinners are of Free Grace elected to
Faith Part of the Controversy between Mr. C. and me stated, which appears
fully in his Principles, as in the following Book.
and Justification, which I affirm but whether the Elect are required by the
Gospel to believe, that they may be justified; which Mr. C. denies, and I
affirm. 2. It is not whether the Gospel be such a Law, as that Acts of
Obedience to it stand in the place of legal Works. so as that for them we are
saved, which I deny, but whether the Gospel does assure Salvation for Christ's
Merits to such as obey it, and threaten an exclusion from this Salvation
against all such as disobey it. This Mr. C. denies, and I affirm. 3. It is not
whether we are justified by our Faith, or any Act of ours, as if they, as Works
or Qualifications, were a jot of that Righteousness for which, or by which we
are justified; this I deny; but whether God has fixed this as the Revealed
Gospel-Rule, that a man must be a penitent Believer, whom God will justify for
Christ's Righteousness. This Mr. C. denies, and I affirm. 4. It is not whether
the Faith and Forgiveness of the Elect be the Fruits of Election and
Distinguishing Mercy, which I affirm; but whether God has a revealed Rule, by
which as Paternal Ruler he gives Pardon and Glory to Believers for Christ's
sake, and judicially withholds them from others, whom he condemns not for their
being unelected, but for their final Impenitency and Unbelief. This Mr. C.
denies, and I affirm. To other of his Citations under his Third Principle add
this, p. 32. If you understand Judicial in respect of any Duty, Grace, or
Qualification found in us, though wrought by the Spirit, I abhor it. 5. It is not
whether we are immediately justified upon believing, before any Works, which
follow the first Act of Saving Faith; this I affirm; but whether if Faith
should be ineffectual to Acts of sincere Holiness, and to prevent Apostasy and
utter Ungodliness, would we be subject to Condemnation by the Gospel-Rule. This
Mr. C. denies, and I affirm. 6. It is not whether Holiness or Good Works are
necessary to Salvation* this they and I affirm, but whether God does require
them as indispensible means of obtaining the possession of Salvation through
Christ; and declares, that the total want of them, and much more their
Contraries, shall expose to Misery. This Mr. C. must deny, and the Necessity
they speak of is only a Physical Necessity, not a moral. Note, (...) two last
Questions refer to the Adult that have time. 7. It is not whether
Justification, Adoption, and Glorification be Acts of God's Free Grace, which I
affirm, but whether i^ ^eased God to leave himself at liberty to justify the
Unbeliever, while such, and glorify the Unbelieving and Wicked, and also to
damn the penitent godly Believer. This Mr. C. affirms* and I deny. This is
these men's Free Grace, while they deny the Gospel-Rule and Law. 8. It is not
whether God has, as to us, absolutely promised and cove^nted with Christ, that
the Elect shall believe, and all men believing be pardoned, and so persevere in
Faith and Holiness to Eternal Life, which I affirm, but whether there is a
Covenant which require our true believing Consent to the Terms of it, as ^
Con^tion of Pardon and Glory, and supposes this true Consent in the actual
(...) (...) ^f th^se Benefits. This Mr. C. denies and I affirm. 9. It is not
whether ^uth (...) (...) only Grace by which we receive and rest on Christ and
his Righteousness for Justification, and that it is Christ received by Faith
does justify, which is the Sense of Protestants, when they say we are
justified by Faith alone; this I affirm; but whether he that can truly believe
to Justification, must be in part a convinced, humbled, penitent Sinner. This I
affirm, and Mr. C. denies: yea, he says, that Pardon is rather the Condition
of Faith; nay, Pardon is the Cause of Faith. 10. It is not whether
Sanctification taken strictly do follow Justification; this I affirm; but
whether Effectual Vocation make a real habitual change in the Soul, and that
this Vocation is in order of Nature, before Justification. This Mr. C. and the
Letter, etc. deny, and I affirm with the Assembly. 11. It is not whether our
sincere Faith, Love, etc. are imperfect, and so can be no meriting
Righteousness, which I affirm, but whether they are disobedien^ even in Gospel
Account, and so incapable of being the Conditions of any of its promised saving
Benefits. This Mr. C. affirms, and I deny.

These are some of the Points wherein Mr. C. and I differ: I fear I shall find
him in all things of Dr. Crisp's opinion, as I have assurance he is in his
Definition of Faith. May not I now expect, that People that rail at me will
impute to me only what I thus plainly state? The Body of well-esteemed Authors
are on my side; there is an end to our Ministry if these be not true; most of
the practical Books we have, as Allen, etc. are all Lies, and tending to ruin
Souls, if Mr. C. judge aright. Thou will find in this Book Testimonies cogent
to my purpose, and if it will serve Mr. C. to say I wrest them and men there
upon believe him, I cannot help it. Such as I quoted in my first Book' are
truly quoted, and serve fully to what I produce them for, but to reconcile all
men to themselves is not my Work; and yet I think it no hard matter to
evidence, that none of my Authors speak against my Assertions. Mr. C. says I
am against the Articles of the Church of England, and the Assembly; I am sure
he will never prove it, and I profess the contrary, and am certain he is against
all Confessions of Faith that we own as Orthodox. How far other Ministers are
concerned for the Kingdom of Christ, the Safety of Souls, the Rule of Judgment,
the plain Gospel way of Salvation to Sinners, the truth and scope of their
Ministry, Time will evidence.

But in the strength of Christ I Will sustain the utmost Persecution at the Hands
of these angry men, and while God enableth me, they shall not overturn the
Gospel by their unscriptural Abuse of the blessed Names of the Righteousness of
Christ and Free Grace, the Gospel way of the application whereof, and a
subservient Ministry, being the whole I contend for. I have often attempted to
adjust these things before I engaged, nay, since the severe Treatment I have
met with, I sent to Mr. Chapter that I would meet him, and show how much he mistook
my Principles; or if he refused a meeting, I would send him an account in
Writing, that he might not abuse himself and the World, but he would accept of
neither; as if he could not write without the Question were mistated. Yea, at
the request of the united Brethren, I agreed to suspend this Book, if he would
do so with his, but this he refused. Now, whatever be the Consequences of these
Debates, I am innocent, and commit all to God, in whose Cause I, though sickly,
weak and unworthy, am engaged. There is a Mystery in it, that the Explication
of one Text should be pretended by some for a Reason against my whole Book, and
so countenance all Dr. Crisp's Errors, which yet they profess to dislike; and
the Impartial see I oppose nothing but those Errors. The Doctrine of Imputation
being still by Mr. C. etc. objected against me, though I have not yet had
opportunity to insist thereon, I will state that case, 1. It is not whether
Christ was a public person as a Mediator in his Undertakings, and so
transacted all for Sinners, that they might be pardoned and saved by his
undertaken Satisfaction and Merits; this I affirm; but whether we were so
represented in Christ, ^s that we were in Law sense they that undertook to
atone and merit. This I deny. 2. Nor whether Christ was a Surety for us in a
Bond of his own, to pay our Debt to the full, (and much more) that we might in
a due time and way be released; this I affirm; but whether we were
joynt-parties in one and the same Bond with him, and so we were actually
acquitted when he made Satisfaction, and therefore God could enjoin no Terms of
the application thereof to us for Justification and Glory, nor suspend the same
upon those Terms. This I deny. 3. Nor whether Christ was made under the Law,
and that this was one Article of his part in the Covenant of Redemption, viz.
That he should in a way of proper Satisfaction bear the substance of the
Penalty of the Law, and yield perfect Obedience to all such of its Precepts, as
were competent to his Person, and this to save the Elect; this I affirm; but
whether Christ was joynt-Covenant-Party with all the Elect in Adam's Covenant,
so that they were legally esteemed to make satisfaction and yield perfect
Obedience in his doing thereof. This I deny. 4. Nor whether Christ's
Righteousness is imputed to Believers, and so made theirs, that it is applied
to them, and pleadable by them, as what was always designed and undertaken for
their Salvation, and is the sole meritorious Cause of their Pardon, Acceptance,
and Glory, and this as effectually, as if they themselves had satisfied and
merited; and this Righteousness is reputed by God as that which now pleads for
their Impunity, Acceptance, and Happiness, as Members of Christ: All this I
affirm; but whether it be imputed as our formal Righteousness, and so we may
truly plead, that we our selves, as Elect, did legally, by Christ as our Proxy,
satisfy and merit all, and without the interposal of the Gospel-Rule, we have
a legal Title to Glory by Adam's Covenant. This I deny, as what excludes
Forgiveness, makes Christ's Sufferings needless, denies any proper
Satisfaction, and destroys Christianity. 5. Nor whether we all sinned and died
in Adam, and in Christ are all made alive; which I affirm, owning Christ's
Influence as both real, yea, and public, as before explained; but whether we
were in Christ before Faith, as we were seminally in Adam before we were born,
which his foederal Headship did suppose. The being thus in Christ before Faith
I deny. These express my Thoughts, which I doubt not (by Christ's help) to
maintain against all these Opposers, while I expect nothing but a gross exposal
of themselves, when their Conceits are forced out of their cloudy Expressions.
Reader, I had reason to instance some minute things, though with men of Wisdom
and Fairness a Cause dep^nds on Arguments, and not personal Respects. Ioyn with
me in earnest Prayer, that Truth and Love may flourish, and that Christ's Cause
may be managed with a Christian Spirit, which I have endeavored, and not
exposed nor reviled my Adversary. I am thy Servant in the Kingdom and Gospel of
our Blessed Lord,

DANIEL WILLIAMS.

ERRATA.
P. 1. l. 8. (...) (...) (...) (...). P. 14. l. 18. dele for.

A DEFENSE OF Gospel Truth,
THE Reverend Opposer of my Book having as yet offered so little of Argument
against my Assertions, my Reply must be short to what he has said; and shall
therefore choose another method than what his Book prescribes. His unusual
Reflections I dare not return, being awed by Him who charge me not to render
railing for railing, 1 Pet. iii. 9. and has declared, that the Wrath of Man
works not the Righteousness of God: Happy they, and likely to arrive at
Truth, that are (...), Ephesians. iv. 15. truthing it in love. The weight of the
Points in debate will not allow me to be Pedantick; nor can I bid at childish
Jests, without suspecting my Mind in a Case unfit for Serious Thoughts, or the
Aids of the Spirit in search for Truth; neither is it allowed Tit. ii. 7. in
Doctrine showing Gravity, etc. I The Method.
shall therefore proceed in this method: 1. Show how he mistakes and
misrepresents my Principles against the plain Words of my Book, even where I
mention them as my positive Judgment. 2. I shall endeavor to make the most
material things more evident to the ordinary Reader. 3. I shall instance some
of Mr. Chancy's Principles, which he asserts, and labor to let thee see where
we differ, and what is the Judgment of others in these things. 4. I shall
briefly reply to what else is material in his Book, that falls not under the
former Heads.

Some Instances wherein Mr. C. misrepresents my Principles against my plainest
words in my Book.
I. Mr. C. says of the Athenian Society, I doubt not but they are of your
Opinion in Doctrinals; and then charge them, as being against an election of
a determinate number of men to Eternal Life; and adds, I doubt not you will be
found to do so.

Repl. These Gentlemen were pleased, in answer to a kind Letter of Election
asserted.
Mr. Crisp's, to give their Thoughts of my Book, and your Reply to what they
have said of Election, affects not their Assertion. But, by what words can I
express my own Judgment more fully then? P. 66. I affirm, There is a ^romise of
the first Grace made to Christ for the Elect, and by virtue of that Promise
they consent, P. 3. chapter 1. I affirm, That certain Persons freely-elected by him
shall certainly be justified and adopted; and that these persons are the
Objects of God's Love of Good Will, even while they are Si^hers; (...) that God
continues his Purpose of doing them good, notwithstanding their Provocations;
and Christ has made full a^onement for Sin, and merited Eternal Life for the
Elect, which shall be in God's time and way applied. There is a great
difference between an Elect Sinner, and others. As to what they shall be in
time, chap. 20. p. 210. God has elected a certain number, etc. and so the
Gospel shall not be in vain to all. See the same often repeated, p. 66, 16, 210,
105.

II. Mr. C. represents ^e, (...) p. 3. The (...) of (...) (...) (...) is
abrogated, transiit in (...) (...) etc. (...) aside ^he (...) (...) (...)
(...), and of no use to us at all. So p. 21. We have nothing to do with it,
it is out of doors.

Repl. He would insinuate that I say, That the preceptive part of the The Law
not abrogated.
Law is not a Rule of Manners, nor that the transgression of it makes us
guilty, nor that men, whilst they reject the Gospel, are not at all under the
Curse of the Law. All which I abhor. And though this Point fell not in my way
to handle, yet there wants not Passages to this purpose: P. 198. The holiest
Action of the holiest Saint needs Forgiveness. Chap. 21. p. 225. It Is legal
Preaching to be always pressing the Duties of the Law of Nature, but neglect
preaching Christ, etc. where I allow it sometimes. Again, in the same Page I
condemn saying, That our best Obedience does not deserve Wrath by the Law, as a
Rule of Misery and Happiness; or that it does not need forgiveness. P. 125. I
affirm the Law to be a Rule of Duty. Cap. 12. p. 107. the Gospel declares all
condemned till they do believe; it declares they are so, and denounces they
shall be so, etc. And again, They that believe, their Condemnation is reversed:
See p. 57. Reader, thou may read me still affirming the Misery even of the
Elect, by the Law, till they are justified by Christ.

It Is true, I do think that 1. The Sentence of the Law cannot hinder the relief
of any Soul by Christ, who complieth with the Gospel. 2. Nor that it is
possible for any man to be saved by the Law of Innocence. By Forgiveness is our
Blessedness, and not by our sinless Obedience: And so far I Will own it, but not
in the three former senses.

III. Mr. C. tells me, p. 20. That when I said Christ's Sufferings were the
Foundation of our Pardon; that our Sins are forgiven for Christ's Sufferings,
and without them Sin cannot be forgiven. Your Fundamentally is only a remote
Causality, etc. all that we have of your meaning, is a poor causa sine qua non.
And within a few lines you mean, By something else besides them, not by the
immediate application of them, but mediate and remote, a causa sine qua non.

Repl. The plain meaning of what he thus exposes is, that the Elect were not
discharged and actually justified at the time when Christ suffered: Which is
proved p. 17. etc. But it is strange, that any one that read this or the
following Passages, should infer either, 1. That Christ is only a causa sine
qua non, which is no Cause; 2. Or that his Righteousness is not the sole
meritorious or material Cause of our Pardon, which in judicial acts are the
same; 3. Or that Christ's Sufferings are not immediately applied to our Pardon;
4. Or that Pardon is by any act of ours as a joint meritorious Cause with
Christ; each of which, I hope, the following Passages will clear me in. P. 16.
I affirm, When we are pardoned, the whole meritorious Christ's Righteousness
the sole meritorious Cause or material Righteousness in Justification; and it
is applied to Believers.
Cause of Pardon is the Atonement of Christ, and what is required of Sinners,
is only a meetness to receive the Effects of it. P. 39. I affirm, That
Justification, and all other Benefits, be the Fruits of Christ's Righteousness,
as the only meritorious Cause of them. P. 40. We are, for the sake of Christ's
Righteousness delivered from the guilt of Sin, and entitled to Life, and
accepted with God against all excluding Bars. P. 41. Christ was he by whose
Merits he forgives us, but he never was forgiven; we are forgiven, and never
had Merits of our own to forgive our selves: And it is enough that we were
pardoned and adopted for his sake, when we deserved endless Woe, and are never
capable of making the least atonement. P. 43. Faith owns the Foundation of our
Plea to be in Christ, from whom are derived to us that Pardon and Right to Life
which are the effects of his Righteousness; for this we are justified, for that
Righteousness which is in Christ we are acquitted and adopted; the efficient
Merit is in him, the Effect of the judicial Absolution for that Merit, is in
us: The Righteousness is still in Christ, for the sake whereof we are absolved
or justified: God has for Christ's sake forgiven us, but not for the sake of
what is in ourselves, etc. and now being absolved or made righteous in a Law
sense, we have as much matter of glorying as absolved acquitted Sinners can
have. We are justified by his Righteousness; that is, for that we are forgiven,
and also entitled to Life, which we had forfeited our selves, but we are not
made innocent, nor so esteemed; we are not accounted them who made the
atonement; we still take hold of Christ's Righteousness, that by it we may be
forgiven; and this is our Blessedness, and our Gospel-Righteousness, which all
such refuse who reject Redeeming Love from a Conceit of their own Merits, or
refuse the Terms of the Gospel, which by the Promise do make us capable of
being justified and saved for the Merits of Christ; yet these still remain his
Merits, though thus beneficial to us in their Application, as the procuring
cause of all our Good. P. 44. We still need Pardon, and continue justified by
the efficacy of the Righteousness of another, and must look to Christ as* the
only Subject of it all our days. Our justified state is a continuance of the
blessed Effects of the Righteousness of Christ, from first to last; that Cause
is still productive of Supplies, as our Guilt returns, or Necessities and
Capacities renew or grow, but our Redemption is ever in Christ. P. 249. Pardon
is not the Effect of those Graces, but of the Promise in the Virtue of Christ's
Blood, or of his Blood applied for Forgiveness by the Promise. Reader, if thou
regardest Truth, do not thou find Christ's Sufferings to be a real Cause of
Pardon, a sole meritorious or material Cause, all other Causes of that kind
excluded, and these Sufferings and Christ's Righteousness immediately applied?
See p. 247. We are justified only by Christ's Merits, as the sole procuring
Cause or Righteousness, for which we are justified.

V. Mr. C. p. 21. The use of Christ's Sufferings is to compound with God for
Sinners, upon the account of the Old Law, and put a Bar upon his Proceedings,
according to that, and procure another Law, by the Righteousness whereof we are
justified, which Righteousness is our own inherent Righteousness, and not
Christ's. And p. 30. Faith does not justify us by applying Christ's
Righteousness, etc. but by its own Virtue, as being a Righteousness it self,
etc. but Christ's Righteousness has nothing to do here, it is our own Faith and
Repentance is the Righteousness, in conformity to the Rule of Promise, and
that is Latin for the New Law. So p. 15. We are not at all entitled to this
Blessing by Christ, but by our own Obedience you mean, etc.

Repl. I am represented as if I thought, 1. That Christ served only to excuse
us from perfect Obedience, but that our Pardon and Glory, given
Gospel-Conditions not the Righteousness for which we are justified, nor of the
same nature as legal Works.
by the Promise, were not the immediate Effects of his Merits. 2. That he
merited only that we might merit by our Faith. 3. That our Faith and Repentance
are the meritorious Cause of our Pardon and Glory by the New Law, and so, that
Gospel-Conditions are of the same use to our Justification, as Works were under
the Law; that is, to be the Righteousness for which we are justified and saved.
All which I disown, and expressly declare, 1. That Christ has satisfied
Justice, and merited Pardon and Glory; these have their Being only on his
account, and he has a Right to give them. 2. When the Sinner partakes of these
Mercies, he partakes of them as the fruits of his Death, and for his sake. 3.
God in Christ, as our Ruler, has declared a Way and Order how he will dispense
these Benefits to us, and enjoins our compliance with that Order. If we believe
(though Faith be his Gift) he will forgive for Christ's sake, otherwise he
declares he will not. 4. Gospel-Conditions have no other use to our Interest in
these Benefits, than a compliance with this stated Rule of the Distribution of
Pardon and Glory, which are merited by Christ, and given only for his sake.
This is my plain meaning in all he has objected against, consult my words in
the Epistle, and what I have repeated in the last Head, and these following in
my Book. Cap. 7. p. 39. I affirm, That Christ by his Righteousness merited for
all the Elect, that they should in his time and way be certainly partakers of
its Saving Effects, and did not only purchase a conditional Grant of those
Effects, viz. that Proposition, He that believes shall be saved. P. 1. I
affirm, The whole meritorious Cause and Price of Justification, Adoption, and
Eternal Life were perfect, when Christ finished the Work of Satisfaction. Cap.
3 p. 16. I affirm, That when we are pardoned, the whole meritorious Cause of
that Pardon is that atonement, and what is required of Sinners, is only a
Meetness to receive the Effects of it. Cap. 10. p. 84. I deny, that preparatory
Qualifications do merit True Grace; and that Faith or Repentance do merit an
Interest in Christ. I say, their whole use depends on Christ's Ordination. P.
45. we are reputed righteous, for the sake of what Christ did, and not for the
merit of what we have done. P. 61. I deny the performance of the Conditions of
the Covenant to be a purchasing Price, or meritorious of the Benefits promised
on such Conditions: This I deny, for Christ alone paid the Price, and it is the
Covenant-Promise gives an Interest in the Benefits, to such as perform the
Conditions. Cap. 8. p. 53, 54. When I had shown how all Satisfaction, etc. were
provided and adjusted in the Covenant of Redemption, I declare, that by the
Covenant of Grace I mean the way that God has ordained, to apply to Sinners
that Salvation which is prepared by Christ, and which he will enable the Elect
to comply with. Same Page I affirm the Conditions do not merit the Blessings
promised. P. 55. I affirm, it is from God's Will in the Promise that they are
made to be Conditions; he connected the Benefit and the Duty; though he chose
Conditions that were fit, yet their fitness would not have availed to our
Interest in the Benefits, unless he had promised they should so avail, etc. And
the Covenant, though conditional, is a disposition of Grace: There Is Grace in
giving Ability to perform the Conditions, as well as in bestowing the Benefits:
God's enjoining one in order to the other, makes not the Benefit to be less of
Grace; but it is a Display of God's Wisdom, in conferring the Benefit suitably
to the nature and state of Man in this Life, etc. P. 45. Our Pardon and
Acceptance is firm and lasting, and will no more fail us than the Righteousness
of Christ will fail, it being the meritorious Cause and Security thereof, and
the Benefits can abate to none, who answers the Gospel-rule of its Application.
P. 57. These Conditions make us capable of no Happiness, but what Christ has
bought and prepared for us, etc. P. 58. The Use and Interest of
Gospel-Conditions is not from the conformity of them to the preceptive part of
the Law, (though in a degree there be that) but from their conformity, to the
Rule of the Grace of the Promise, the promise of Pardon through Christ being to
the penitent Believers, and no other. Repentance and Faith become necessary and
useful Conditions of this Pardon, by the order of God in that gracious Promise;
but by the Covenant of Works, the mere Work gave an Interest in the Reward, as
it was obedience to the Precept, by a Sanction that had Goodness, but no such
Grace in it. See p. 61, and 225. I deny that Faith, etc. are in the same place
as Works were under the Law, How many more places could I cite? but I shall
refer thee to what follows, as to the point of Merit. See p. 225, 247.

VI. Mr. C. p. 30, 31. He looks whether or no we have fully performed the
Conditions, and upon finding them, he judicially gives the Promise, i. e. in
away of Reward to the Works performed. Whether they be perfect or imperfect
it is no matter; the Reward is of Debt, and not of Grace, etc. And what can this
be, but a declared Judgment, that he is de congruo, deserving Pardon, and I
think ex condigno too, before he is pardoned, etc.

Repl. The scope of these and the like Passages, is to render me one that
thinks that Faith or other Graces did merit the pardon of our Sins; which is
contrary to my declared Judgment; as may be seen in what I have above cited,
and in these following Passages, Cap. 12. p, 102, 103. Tho Faith be no way a
meritorious Cause of a Sinner's Justification, etc. Note, Gospel-Conditions no
way meritorious of Justification or Salvation, nor other workingconditions, but
a mere conformity to the Gospel way of receiving the Gifts of Christ.
1. There is a Righteousness for which a man is justified, that is only
Christ's Righteousness; this is the Foundation of the Promise, and the Merit of
the Blessing promised: Nothing can add to it or mingle with it; it is
sufficient, and alone sufficient to satisfy Justice, atone for Guilt, and
merit Acceptance and Eternal Life. 2. There is to be considered, what the
condition of the person is, whom this Mercy is promised to; he is one that has
this True Grace of Faith, etc. Christ's Righteousness shall not be imputed to
this use, unless we believe, etc. and this Faith being a conformity to the Rule
of the Promise, some call it a subordinate Righteousness, not meaning any
Righteousness for which a man is forgiven, for it is Christ's Righteousness
alone for which God justifies us: But it is our answering the Rule by which
Christ applies his Righteousness for our remission, and a Right to Life, and
his Promise is the ground of our Title. P. 104. I deny that Faith or any Grace
be a jot of the meriting Righteousness for which we are justified. I deny that
Faith, or any other Grace add anything to the value of Christ's Merits: Yea, I
add, That if Christ's Righteousness could be applied for Pardon, to the vilest
Sinner, before he believes, it would justify him; but God has declared, it
shall not be applied to Unbelievers. P. 120. Neither Holiness, sincere
Obedience, or good Works, are in the least the meritorious Righteousness
whereby Salvation is caused, or for which this, or any Blessing, becomes due to
us, as of Debt, etc. but He appoints these as the Way and Means of a Believer's
obtaining Salvation, etc. P. 125. I deny that any Holiness, internal or
external, any Obedience, work, or Duty, do at all merit the Promise, or is the
meritorious Cause or Righteousness for which any promised Mercy is bestowed:
And I own, that all is of Gift, though given in an order suitable to our
condition, as Subjects in a state of Trial. P. 137. Nothing of these merit
Heaven, but he that merited Heaven, has peremptorily appointed these to bring
us thither. P. 155. We ought to renounce every Thought of purchasing from God
any Benefit for what we do. P. 210. We must teach the best man to renounce all
the Grace he has, and Good he performs, as if being the least atonement for
Sin, or least purchase of Life, or any addition of Merit to a Christ, or
sharing in what is peculiar to him. P. 225. I condemn it as Legal to preach,
that our Faith, Holiness, or Good Works stand in the same place now, as perfect
Obedience did under the Law, viz. to render the Reward to be of Debt, or be the
meritorious Righteousness for which we are justified. P. 244. I do renounce all
that Saints have or do, as any atonement for Sin, or purchasing Price of the
least Benefit, much less Salvation.

Judge, Reader, if I can say more to exclude all Opinion of Merit.

VII. Mr. C. p. 31. you, do here not a little insinuate what I know lies in
your Breast; That there is no specific difference between Grace and mere moral
Endowments. And it appears so upon all your Hypotheses, for you declare, there
ought to be such and such Qualifications, to entitle a man to the Promise of
Grace, or Grace in the Promise, before he has the Promise. The same p. 32.

Repl. Here I am charged, 1. as if I thought there were no specific difference
between Saving Grace and mere Moral Endowments. I suppose by Moral Endowments
he (...) such as the unconverted have; to which I answer, There is a moral
specific difference, the one is Saving, the other is not; the one is from the
effectual Work of the Spirit, whereby the Soul is truly regenerated, the other
is not. And this difference thou will see me own, as far as I had occasion. 2.
I am charged, as that I hold there must be Qualifications in a Sinner, to
entitle him to the first Grace, or to the Promise of it. But as there is not a
tittle leading to either in the words he cites, so I pray weigh the places
under each Head.

1. There is a specific difference between Grace and mere moral Endowments. P.
224. I condemn it as legal to press men to Faith and Repentance, A moral
specific difference between true Grace and mere moral Endowments.
and other Duties, as if to be performed in our strength, without the Grace of
Christ, and influences of the Spirit. P. 57. The Conditions of the Covenant of
Grace are performed by the Grace of Christ, freely given to Sinners. Cap. 11.
p. 90. Every man is without Christ, till he be effectually called; but when by
this Call the Spirit of God enclineth and enableth him willingly to accept of
Christ, as a Head and Savior, a man becomes partaker of those Influences and
Privileges which are peculiar to the Members of the Lord Jesus. Cap. 11. p.
92. I affirm, that Christ's giving us the Spirit of Grace does begin this
Union, and the Spirit given, in order to Saving Operations, produces this
Faith, whereby the Union is consummated. P. 83. I affirm, There may be
Knowledge, Assent, Humblings, etc. and yet a Soul fail of an interest in
Christ, for want of true Conversion.

2. See how positive I am, that there are no Qualifications to entitle a man
The First Grace absolutely given.
to the First Grace, or the Promise of it. Though I wonder that he makes no
difference between the Promise of Grace, which is absolute, and Promises to
Grace, which are conditional. Cap. 10. p. 83. I affirm, The worst Sinners are
often the Objects of God's effectual Calling, in order to an Interest in
Christ. Cap. 8. p. 61. I affirm, the First Grace is absolutely given, though
dispensed ordinarily in the due use of Means. P. 66, The Gospel or Covenant
tells us, that there is a Promise of the First Grace made to Christ, for the
Elect, and by virtue of that Promise the Elect do consent to the Covenant; and
this Gospel or Covenant is the Means whereby that Faith is wrought.

VIII. Mr. C. It is this Doctrine, viz. of Imputation, that you are still
bantering; it is that you have the greatest pick at.

Repl. Reader, weigh my plain words; Cap. 7. p. 37. The Mediatorial
Righteousness of Christ is so imputed to true Believers, as that for the sake
thereof they are pardoned, and accepted unto Life-eternal, it being reckoned to
them, and pleadable by them for these uses, as if they had personally done and
suffered what Christ did, as Mediator for them, whereby they are delivered from
the Curse, and no other atonement, nor meriting price of Saving Benefits, can
be demanded from them. P. 39. I affirm, That besides these Effects ( viz. all
the saving Effects of Christ's Death) being made Christ's Righteousness is
imputed.
ours, the very Righteousness of Christ is imputed to true Believers, as what
was always undertaken, and designed for their Salvation, and is now effectual
to their actual Pardon and acceptance to Life* yea, is pleadable by them* as
their Security, and is as useful to their Happiness, as if themselves had done
and suffered what Christ did. (And a few lines before) I affirm, That Christ's
Sufferings and Obedience were so in our stead, that God cannot exact from us
any other atonement for Sin, or price of any Gospel-Blessings. P. 43. Had not
Christ suffered for us, we could not be absolved for the sake of his Obedience
and Sufferings. The like may be seen p. ^47.

Reader, I would inform thee, that I can agree to any Expressions, to note
Christ a Representative, Surety, Head, etc. that are consistent with Pardon of
Sin, and our not being the persons in God's Account, who suffered and obeyed:
But, I think, Forgiveness for the sake of what Christ did and suffered for us,
is what we must take comfort in, and Christ suffered in the person of a
Mediator.

IX. Mr. C. p. 1. For the Doctrine of Justification especially, we are in a
manner returned to Egypt, that of Justification by Works being brought into
the room of Justification by Faith.

Repl. Here, and in many places, I am arraigned, as being for Justification by
Works, and not by Faith; which must be to import, 1. That I am for Works being
joined with Faith, to our admission into a state of Justification. 2. That
Faith and other things do justify us, as the Righteousness for or by which we
are justified. As to the last, review what is cited under the 3, 4, 5, 6
misrepresented Principles, and sure thou will see that it is Christ's
Righteousness, and not ours, which is that for and by which alone we are
justified, as the sole Merit. The former then remains as a Charge; as to
which, see if I do not positively assert, that we are justified as soon as we
truly believe. Cap. 12. p. 104. I affirm, that we are justified Justified by
Faith before Works.
the same moment as we truly believe in Christ, and the Blessing is not
suspended for any time longer. This I affirm, because God justifies us by the
Promise, as his Instrument; and this Promise declares, that He will justify
him that believes. It Is Christ, truly believed on, does justify us, and a
Christ so believed on cannot but justify us. P. 247. We say we are upon
repenting and believing put into a justified State, before any other Work^*
Reader, I did, to prevent this mistake, preface that Chap. 13 of the Necessity
of Holiness and Good Works, with these words. P. 120. Note, that whatever is
spoken in this Chapter of any Act of Grace, except penitent Believing, refers
not to the forgiveness of Sin, or the Sinner's admission into a justified
state; the Benefits I here treat of* are the not forfeiture of Pardon, the
possession of Heaven, and particular Blessings, as increase of Peace, Joy.
Returns of Prayer, etc. So* p. 113.

Obj. The only Pretense for this Charge, must be, That I make Repentance
necessary to Forgiveness.

Ans. But, 1. I expressly deny Repentance to be any part of the Righteousness
for which we are forgiven. It Is no Merit, etc. this thou may see Gospel ^ons
no (...) of Justification.
in a hundred places in my Book, some are cited in the 4, 5, 6 Heads. 2. I deny
it to be any cause of Forgiveness. I say in p. 119. I own my self to be among
them who deny Repentance, of any Grace in M^n, to be a Cause of Forgiveness. ^.
I deny that Justification is equally ascribed to Repentance, as to Faith, etc.
See p. 113. I deny Justification to be equally Justification by Faith alone, as
the (...) Receiving* Condition
ascribed to Faith and Repentance, for we are said to be justified by Faith;
which imports, that Repentance is but a Disposing Condition, and Faith the
Receiving Condition: Repentance without Faith is unavailable, as Faith without
Repentance is impossible. Faith seems to complete all, and in a manner
comprehend all. Now Reader, thou see that all I say, is, That Faith alone
receives Forgiveness by Christ, or Christ for Forgiveness: But that Repentance
of Heart must be in that Soul, who shall obtain Forgiveness, see my Reasons
Cap. 12. from p. 115, to 119. By the way note. If it can be true, as he says
p. 16. That I mean Works are necessary to Salvation, as working Conditions;
when I exclude all Graces and Works, as any Cause at all.

X. Mr. Chapter p. 29. What a sad case is a poor Sinner in, if he make shift to
scramble, by his imperfect Conditions, into Covenant! He is like every day to
be turned out again; and when he has done the best he can, he must never
believe that he shall go to Heaven, till he lie a dying.

Repl. Here my Principles are represented as against the perseverance of the
Elect Believer: But I shall cite a few places, and leave it to thy Judgment.
Cap. 7. p. 40. I affirm, That Christ by his Righteousness merited, All Elect
Believers shall persevere.
and by his Spirit does renew the Hearts of his Members, and will, in time, so
communicate of his Grace to them, that they shall be perfectly holy, even
without Spot and Blemish: And the Spots and Blemishes remaining in a godly man,
do consist with his justified state, and shall not cast him out of God's
Favor. P. 138. Do not say, the Elect Believer will not fall away, I think the
same; yet is it the less true, that even he shall perish if he fall away: Nay,
does not God by these Threats contribute to keep him from Apostasy? And p. 173.
I deny that a Principle of Life, given at first conversion, will finally fail
to exert it self in due Humblings for repeated Enormities, and in holy
Resolves. And p. 248. God sees no Sin in Believers, so as to cast them out of a
Justified state. P. 66. The Gospel secures the Perseverance of Believers in
that true Faith, and the necessary effects and operations of it, and thereby
secures those Benefits as unforfeited. Many more places might be produced; as
p. 37, etc.

XI. Mr. C. p. 16. The great Quarrel you have with him, is, That he (viz. Dr.
Crisp) makes it so much his business to vindicate the Honor of Free Grace, and
of the Lord Jesus, in our whole Salvation. P. 35. According to your own
Principles, it is a question whether you have not put a Bar upon the Grace of
God, by making so daring and audacious an opposition to it, as you have done in
this Book.

Repl. This severe Charge is, that I 1. oppose the Honor of Christ; 2. I make
an audacious opposition, to the Grace of God, even to a doubt, whether I am
guilty of the Sin against the Holy Ghost: But I hope the places following will
convince thee of his Mistake.

1. I do not oppose the Honor of Christ, though I would keep the Crown upon
his Head. See p. 55. Christ as a Priest has merited all, but as a King Christ
not opposed, but ex^ted.
or Priest upon his Throne, he dispenses all. And p. 209. We must teach, that
Christ has purchased all Saving Benefits, and that men must look to him as the
Author of Salvation, and Giver of that Grace whereby we obey the Terms of Life.
Cap. 22. p. 236. I am willing to own any thing that lays Man low; and exalts
Christ, as the only Atonement, the only Purchaser of all our Blessings, the
only Procurer of our Acceptance, the Author and Finisher of all Grace. Nothing
can add to his satisfaction or fullness; Pardon* Peace, Life, all are the
effects of his sole Merits; we must do all in his Name* act in his Strength,
daily live on him for all Supplies, and look to him for Acceptance, without
whose Incense the best man and the best action were an Abomination* What I
contend for is his Government, so wisely contrived to apply his Blessings to
Men, in a state of Trial. Reader, look back to what is cited before, 4, 5, 6
Heads, and I am sure my Book is full of such Passages.

2. I do not oppose the Free Grace of God: See Cap. 23. p. 240, etc. I have
affirmed* and would admit the fullest Expressions to testify, that in Free
Grace honored, and not opposed.
these is the Free Grace of God in Truth Of mere Grace he elected some certain
Sinners to Life, upon no moving foreseen Condition, but yet to obtain it
through Sanctification of the Spirit to Obedience, and sprinkling of the Blood
of Jesus. Of mere love to Sinners no way deserving it, he gave his Son to dye
for them, who also undertook to bring all the Elect to Salvation, in the way
appointed between the Father and him. He without any thing in Man to deserve
it, gave his Gospel, and thereby offers in the virtue of his Son's Blood
Pardon, and Eternal Life to every one that will repent, and truly believe, and
no penitent persevering Believer shall miss of Life by a failure of this
Promise. He freely, and of mere Grace, bestows Faith and Repentance; yea, gives
his Spirit to create these, and any other good Work in worthless vile Sinners;
and though he will not forgive any that finally refuse to believe and repent,
nor save any ungodly apostate man* yet Pardon and Life are his Free Gift, and
no Grace nor Duty merits them, they being no more than the required Conditions
or Means of our partaking of them, as the Gifts of God through Christ; and so
he hereby honors his own Government, and no way indulgeth the Boastings of
Men. P. 244. This Grace I adore, and own the best to merit nothing, to forfeit
all, yea, to deserve Hell by the Law of Works. And I do renounce all that
Saints have or do, as any a^onement for Sin, or Purchasing-price of the least
Salvation, etc. Very many other places I might add, and have said nothing
inconsistent herewith, unless that I mu^t be arraigned, because I think, that
since God has published his Will, that he will forgive all such, and none but
such as believe and repent, and will damn all that remain unbelieving and
impenitent; that therefore He is not alike free to forgive the Unbeliever and
Impenitent, whilst they remain such, and to condemn the penitent Believer, when
he is by Grace made such: Though I declare, He will make all the Elect to become
penitent Believers, and then forgive them.

XII. Mr. C. Truly for your comparing Christ and Holiness in the matter of
Justification, it is perfect stuff. P. 16. You mean, as a working Condition,
whereby you put Works in the place of Christ; and mean as your Oracle speaks,
etc. p. 30.

Repl. Here, as well as in other places; I am represented to compare Christ and
Holiness in Justification, yea, to put Works, as working Conditions, in the
place of Christ. I have already instanced, that I denied any Holiness not
compared with Christ, nor Works s^t in (...) place.
Grace or Work to be any Cause at all, 9th Head; also, that Christ's
Righteousness is the sole meritorious Cause or Matter of our Justification,
which is imputed to us 4, 5, 6 Heads; and that our Works follow Faith and
Pardon, and neither Faith nor Works are any Price, Atonement, or moving or
procuring Cause, 6, 11 Heads, and elsewhere; yea, and that we are to renounce a
Thought of this. Do I then oppose Christ, or compare any Holiness with him? I
shall add, Cap. 19. p. 198. I own we should esteem the sincere Holiness of a
Believer's Heart and Actions to be Dung, if compared with Christ, as
meritorious of Justification. And, p. 202. Who must not own, that compared with
Christ, the best thing in us is vile, yea, compared with his Righteousness? And
p. 210. We must teach the best man to renounce all the Grace he has, and Good
he does, as it being the least atonement for Sin, or least purchase of Life, or
any addition of Merit to Christ, or sharing in what is peculiar to him. And
Cap. 21. p. 225. I condemn any that preach, that our best Obedience does not
deserve Wrath by the Law, or that it does not need Forgiveness, or is any
Supplement of Christ's Righteousness; yea, or to neglect to call men to
renounce all in themselves, as any atonement for Sin, or cause of Pardon; and
that we must look to Christ as the only Propitiation, Purchaser of all our
Blessings, and Cause of the acceptance of our Persons and Performances.

Reader, I have given thee a few of those many places. Having finished this
first point proposed, I will appeal to thy Conscience, whether I can with any
shadow of Justice be charged with those Principles which this Brother fixes
upon me. I hope he did not wilfully expose me in the face of such Evidence. The
words in my Preface lead not to the least suspicion, yea, are positive to the
contrary; and therefore how he says this is my sense, when I must not only
equivocate, but grossly contradict my self, and that in places where I state the
Question, must increase the Wonder: Neither is there the least pretense, except
that I assert, that though Pardon and Salvation are all Free Gifts, and the
Merits of Christ are imputed as the sole meritorious Cause of all, yet God, as
our Ruler, has appointed a Method in the Gospel for the dispensing of them,
and does confer them in that Method* and ordains a Gospel Ministry in a
consistency therewith, and in a subserviency thereto. This Scheme any man may
see in my very Preface and morethrough the whole Book. 2. I shall attempt, if
possible, to make my sense intelligible to the most vulgar Apprehension, to
this end I premise.

1. God may be considered in his Dispensations toward fallen men, as a The
(...) of the Ele^, ^f God be considered as mere Proprietor.
mere Proprietor and Benefactor, and not as Rector or Ruler; and so men must be
considered merely as Creature-Objects of his Benefits, and not at all as
rational Subjects to be now governed, and hereafter judged. If you look at God
thus absolutely conferring Benefits, then the way is this: He eternally elects
to Glory a certain number of men, whom he sore saw undone by Adam's Fall; he
appoints his Son to undertake their recovery, as the sole covenanting Party
with him, in the Covenant of Redemption he was to satisfy Justice, merit
Glory, and make them physically meet for it.

This is all true, and sometimes prophetically declared thus, and the event as
to the Elect is, as certain as if God dealt no otherwise with Man on this side
Death. But if this be the whole Method of GOD with Men, as some account it, how
much of the Bible is unintelligible and vain, how much is contradicted, and a
great part of God's manifold Wisdom obscured and denied, which shines forth in
his present Paternal Dominion as Redeemer?

2. God may be considered as a Ruler, Proprietor, and Benefactor conjunctly: We
may look at him as communicating his Benefits in a way of Government, and that
in many things not exclusive of his absolute Propriety. That this is his
Method, I have proved in my Book. Cap. 8, 13, 20. The state of fallen Men, as
GOD is considered a paternal Ruler.
and other Chapters, and may hereafter more confirm it. Herein God connects
Benefits with Duties, offers Pardon and Glory upon Terms, deals with Men as
Subjects whom he now governs, and will hereafter judge without respect of
Persons, and to that end has set down his Rules, by which he now sentence^h by
the Word, and will at the great day do it by the Person of Christ; all which
suppose Christ's Merits, and the Ability to obey, and Benefits given for his
sake alone.

It Is true, he discovers his absolute Propriety, in not giving the same Means
or the same internal Grace to all; which will, no doubt, fully appear to be
equal. He does also discover himself peculiarly beneficent to his Elect, (for
whom Christ merited all) and infallibly brings about his purpose concerning
them, by making them obedient to the Conditions of whatever saving Benefits his
Gospel promises upon Conditions: But yet he dispenses the promised Benefits
as a just Rector or Ruler, according to the Offers made to all. Pursuant
hereto, our Ministry is appointed to propose Blessings to all in the same way,
and upon the same Terms, and to assure all, that upon those Terms, and no
other, they shall obtain those Benefits for the sake of Christ. Can any think
we dare make the same Offers to the Devils, as to every man; or to the Damned,
as we can to all men alive? Dare we say to them after Death, If you will now
believe, you shall yet be saved; turn now, and you shall yet live?

On the other hand, dare we say to an Elect Unbeliever, if we knew him, Elect,
thou shall be forgiven, though thou do not believe, thy Unbelief is no Bar to
thy Salvation, by any Threatening of God declared against thee? Is Sentence past
on all men in Adam, or on the Elect in Christ's Person, that God deals with
neither in a way of Government, as in any state of Trial for Eternity? There Is
an end of that Preaching which God has fitted and most blessed to the
conversion of Souls, if this be true: Mr. Chancy's Father, in Doct. of
Iustific. p. 117. Mind you your Duty, God has ordained the End with the Means;
and therefore, though it were revealed to thee from Heaven, that thou shall
certainly be saved; yet I might truly say to thee, except thou believe, and
repent, thou shall perish, etc. The Offer of Christ in the Gospel, this shows
what he would have us to do, even to repent and believe. Mr. Norton, Orth.
Evang. shows, They (might) say to a Judas, If thou believe, thou shall be
saved; and to a John, If thou believe not, thou shall be damned, p. 89, 90.

Having premised these things, I shall familiarly deliver my real Thoughts as
to what men ignorantly accuse me of, and pitch upon Forgiveness of Sin, A plain
account of my Judgment by Questions and Answers.
as a word most intelligible to ordinary Readers. Q. Who forgiveth Sin? A. It Is
God in Christ forgives Sin. Q. What is it for God to forgive our Sins? A. To
absolve us from obligation to endure those undoing Punishments, due for the
Sins which he forgives. Q. For what does God forgive our Sins? A. Only for the
Merits and Righteousness of Christ imputed to us. Q. Whose Sins does God
forgive? A. The Believer's Sins, though he be a Sinner. Q. Is our Faith the
Righteousness for or by which we are forgiven? A. No, this would put up Faith
in the room of Christ. Q. Does God accept of Faith, or any imperfect Obedience,
instead of perfect legal Obedience, as the Righteousness for or by which he
counts us worthy of Pardon and Eternal Life, as if He for Christ's sake had
abrogated the Law for this end? A. No, for this were to exclude Christ's Merits
from being the immediate procuring Cause of our Pardon and Eternal Life; which
with all Saving Blessings are the Fruits of his Merits and Satisfaction. Q. Is
not Faith, or any thing in Man, the Cause of Forgiveness? A. No, because
Forgiveness is a Mercy, which no Grace or Act of ours has any causal Influence
into. Q. Is Faith, or any Act of ours, any Price of Forgiveness? A. No,
Forgiveness is a Free Gift, and of Free Grace and Mercy. Q. Is Faith, or any
Act of ours, a foreseen Motive to incline God to purpose, offer, or give us
Forgiveness for it? A. No, it is of mere Grace that God resolved, and for
Christ's sake actually forgives us when we believe. Q. Will God certainly
forgive a Sinner when he believes? A. Yes, because he has promised to do so.
Q. Will God forgive all the Elect? A. Yes, when they do believe. Q. Did God
decree, and did Christ merit that the Elect might be only capable of being
forgiven if they do believe? A. No, for God decreed, and Christ merited, that
the Elect should certainly believe, and so be infallibly forgiven. Q. Will not
God forgive the Elect before they do believe? A. No, because he has not
promised to forgive any, while they are Unbelievers; yea, He has declared he
will forgive no Unbeliever. Q. What is that Faith in Christ which you persuade
to? A. Such a Trust in Christ my crucified Savior, as brings me to receive a
whole Christ, in opposition to all Rivals, for Justification, Sanctification,
and Glory; relying on his Merits, Fullness, Power, and Care to perform in his
own way, what he has promised, and I stand in need of. Q. Must not we receive
Forgiveness before we receive Christ himself? A. No, we must receive Christ
himself, and with him his Benefits, though I must first believe, that there is
Forgiveness in him for me, as well as for other Sinners, if I will accept of
him. Q. How come we to believe? A. By the Work of the Spirit in our effectual
Calling. Q. Have we not an Interest in Christ, as Members of him, before we do
believe? A. No, we have no claim to the Privileges of Christ's Members, until
we believe: But yet, when the Spirit effectually calls us, Christ thereby takes
hold of us, to make us Members, and by Faith we receive him for our Head, and
so have the Privileges and Benefits of his Members, as in Marriage both
Parties consent, before the Wife has claim to the Privileges of a Wife. Q.
Does not Faith entitle us to Forgiveness? A. No; yet by Faith I have a certain
Interest in Forgiveness. Q. What does entitle us to Forgiveness? A. The
Promises of God entitle us to Forgiveness for Christ's sake, when we do
believe. Q. Has God declared any Rule by which he gives Forgiveness to one
rather than another? A. Yes, his Gospel, wherein he declares, he will forgive
them that believe. Q. What use is Faith of to Forgiveness? A. Not to merit, not
to buy, not to cause Forgiveness; but it answers that Gospel-Rule by which God
applies Christ's Righteousness for our participation of this, as one of the
effects of his Death. Q. Have we a Right to Forgiveness for Christ's sake upon
our believing? A. The Promise gives us a Right to Forgiveness by Christ's
Merits, when we believe. Q. When God forgives us, does he judge us to be
Believers? A. Yes, for he has declared he will forgive none but Believers. Q.
Will God hereafter more publicly declare us to be Believers? A. Yes, (...) in
the day of Judgment, where he will publicly pass that Sentence, which he by
the Gospel now passes upon every Soul. Q. Is it any thing in the nature of
Faith, as a Work whereby a Believer comes to be forgiven, rather than an
Unbeliever? A. No, though God did think fit to choose this Grace, as fittest to
honor Christ, make use of his Promise, etc. yet its availableness is from
God's Ordination and Promise, wherein he has made Faith a Condition of
Forgiveness. Q. Why do not you use the word Instrument? A. Besides the
improperness of that word as the Act of a Sinner, who is the Object of God's
justifying Act, which is a forensick or judicial Act, I think it ascribes too
much to Faith as a Work and like not to hear it made a Cause, and to have a
causal influence on Forgiveness; yet I believe the Learned mean no more by it
than a moral Instrument, which is the same with a Condition, and therefore they
use these words promiscuously. Q. But do not they say we are forgiven by Faith
only as it is related to Christ's Righteousness, etc? A. So do I say, and add,
that the use of any other Gospel-Condition of any other Benefit, is only as
that Condition relates to Christ: But how comes Faith related to Christ's
Righteousness, but as the Promise declares, if thou believe thou shall be
forgiven for Christ's Righteousness imputed. Q. But are not we justified by
Faith? A. No otherwise than as God has declared Christ's Righteousness shall
justify them that believe. Q. Does not Faith take hold of, or look to, approve
of, rely on, and accept of Christ and his Righteousness for Pardon? A. Yes,
and therein is its fitness above any other Grace: But that would not forgive
us, if it were not ordained by the Will of God, that they who thus take hold of
Christ and his Righteousness, should be justified by the Righteousness of
Christ, when they take hold of it. Q. But do not you affirm, that Repentance is
necessary to our being forgiven? A. Yes; not to Pardon in it self, but to our
obtaining it; and have proved this Cap. 12. but I do not put it in the same
place with Faith, no^ do I insist upon the whole of Repentance, but I affirm,
that no man will look to Christ, that sees not his own Misery; and no man does
accept of Christ, that does not purpose to leave his Sin and Idols; neither do
in a manner any solid Writers deny the presence and necessity of so much of it
with Faith, which Faith is the great Term of the Covenant, and includes so much
of Repentance as I insist on. Q. Shall the Elect fall from a state of
Forgiveness? A. No, the Decree, the Intercession of Christ, the Promise of
Perseverance, yea, and Forgiveness it self, do all assure a perseverance in
Grace, and so a continuance in a pardoned estate. Q. What do you trust in, as
that for which God will accept of you, and save you? A. Only in the
Righteousness of the Lord Jesus. Q. Do not you trust in your own inherent
Righteousness, as that for which God will save you? A. I abhor such a Thought.
Q What stress do you lay on Good Works? A. Not as necessary to my justified
state, into which I am admitted upon my first believing: 2. Nor as any
Righteousness for which God will save me. Q. What stress then do you lay? A. No
more than as they evidence my Faith to be true, execute my first believing
Consent, prevent their Contraries, which the Gospel threatens with Misery, and
answer the Rule of any Gospel-promise, that God has made, and will execute for
Christ's sake, to the upright person. Q. Do you think that we are justified by
our Good Works at the last day, as if they were the Righteousness by which we
shall be saved at the last day? A. No, I would tremble at such a Thought, and
declare it is Christ's Righteousness alone, and unmixed, that I hope to be saved
for and by. Q. What are your Thoughts then as to our inherent Righteousness and
Good Works, as they fall under Christ's Judgment at the last day? A. My whole
Heart is, 1. That if a man truly believe, and dye before he has opportunity to
do more, he shall be sentenced Happy as a Believer, notwithstanding he was
prevented by Death from professing the Truth, and proceeding in Holiness,
performing Acts of Worship, etc. 2. God has declared, that none shall at last
be saved by Christ's Righteousness, that are Infidels, Ungodly, utterly
unprofitable, or Apostates: And therefore all that God will then save for
Christ's Merits, must truly be, and will be declared to be no Infidels,
Ungodly, utterly unprofitable, nor total Apostates, but the contrary; and they
shall be judged free from the guilt of final Infidelity. 3. The most eminent in
Faith, Holiness, Sufferings, and Labors, shall be adjudged to greater degrees
of Glory, which added degrees will be as truly the effects of Christ's sole
Merits, as the lesser degrees. All this is exactly consonant to my Book, and my
full Persuasion.

Because I see that well-meaning People are imposed on, by a noise of Popery
and Arminianism, I shall let thee see how our Protestant and Orthodox Divines
do represent and oppose the Popish and Arminian Points in this matter; and so
thou may judge how the Antinomians secure their destructive Errors by this
clamor. The sum of the Popish Principles our Divines Popish (...) (...).
oppose may be thus reduced: They think that, 1. by Attrition, (or a (...)
legal fea^ of Punishments) Men do ex congruo (or meetness) merit Charity and
Faith, which be the beginning of Sanctification, and that this begun
Sanctification is all our first Justification. 2. That whatever be the
efficiency of the Spirit in working Faith, it is determinable by Man's free
Will, whether any believe or no. 3. That upon our improvement and exercise of
this first Charity and Faith, we truly and properly merit the increase of
Holiness, and Eternal Glory, and that ex condigno. This they call the second
Justification. 4. That by the Absolution of the Priest on Confession, in the
Sacrament of Penance, our Sins of Age are forgiven; as original Sin was by
Baptism, and venial Sins, and temporal Punishments of mortal Sins by
Satisfaction, and Indulgences; and all in a way of merit.

The Points that can be at all pretended as my Concern, I Will give you, as
stated by Dr. Ames, in his Bellarminus Enervatus, with r^y own Answers to his
Questions, Tom. 3. lib. 5. Q Whether Prayer, Fasting, or Alms are satisfactory
Works? A. I plainly deny it often p. 240. Q. Do our Works truly and properly make
satisfaction to God, for that Obligation to Punishment which remains to be
expiated? A. I say, No; for we make no satisfaction by any thing. Tom. 4. p.
109. Q Whether Faith alone justifies? A. I say, Yes; that is, we are justified
by Faith alone, as that which alone receives Christ, and before Works of
Obedience: But yet I think Ames well explains this, p. 112. Something may be
before Pardon, as a pre-requisite Disposition, so that it be not the cause of
Pardon. And this is all I say of Repentance, and agree with him in p. 112.
Repentance taken for legal Humiliation goes before Justification, as a
Disposition in Order pre-requisite, but not as a Cause. 2. Evangelical
Repentance is taken for Conversion, of which Faith is a principal part. Yea,
add, That a great part of Repentance is the effect of Justification. 3. I agree
with him in the next words: Quocunque modo, etc. Whichever way Repentance is
taken, neither Grief nor detestation of Sin is the cause of Justification. Nay
more, I agree with Ames in his Account of Faith, cap. 2. p. 101. Fides
specialis misericordiae duplici ratione vocatur, etc. Faith of special Mercy
(which is Trust or Relyance) is taken in two respects, 1. whereby it apprehends
Christ, or cleaves to him, for apprehending special Mercy by him: 2. As it
apprehends special Mercy as already bestowed. In the first sense it goes before
Justification; in the latter sense it follows Justification,

Lib. 6. Cap. 1. He treats of imputed Righteousness; and p. 139. says, that
this is the Protestant Judgment; Christi justitiam catenus imputari, etc.
Christ's Righteousness is so far imputed to us, that by the virtue thereof we
are as much esteemed just before God, as if we had somewhat in our selves,
wherewith we might be esteemed just before him. P. 205. Q. An opera bona, etc.
Are the Good Works of Men truly and properly the Merits of Eternal Life? A. I
positively and often deny it, and dare not assert, that Condecency which Ames and
others do.

Reader, if thou art a man of any Skill in these things, thou will find that
they oppose the Papists concerning our Graces and Works, only as merirorious,
and causal of Saving Benefits; and I deny them to be either. See even Chemnit.
Exam. par. 1. p. 172. Davenant. de Iustit. actuali, cap. 30. q. 1. arg. 1. Ames
Bellarm. Enerv. tom. 4. lib. 6. Downam of Iustif. p. 15.

I shall now show thee what our Calvinists and Orthodox Divines oppose the
Arminians in, as to this Doctrine of Justification.
The Synod of Dort. in their Canons, Part 1. p. 289. of the Errors under the
Arminian Justification, as our Divines state it.
Head De Morte Christi, thus condemn the Arminians; Qui docent foedus illud
novum gratiae, etc. That teach, that the Covenant of Grace which the Father,
upon the intervention of Christ's Death, made with Men, does not consist in
that, viz. That we are justified before God, and saved by Faith, as it
apprehends the Merit of Christ, but in this, that the Demand of perfect legal
Righteousness being abrogated, God accounts* Faith it self, and the imperfect
Obedience of Faith, for (or instead of) the perfect Obedience of the Law, and
graciously judges this worthy of the Reward of Eternal Life. Which they justly
brand as the Socinian Notion.

Reader, I declare against this Error, and have affirmed, that Faith alone
receives Christ and his Merits. 2. That it is the Righteousness of Christ alone
which is the Meritorious or Material Cause of Justification. 3. That our Faith,
Repentance, or Works are not a jot of the material or meritorious Righteousness
by or for which we are Justified.

They say, Christ died that we might be saved if we believe. I say, Christ died
that the Elect should believe, and believing, have Life through his Name.

To any one that knows the five Points wherein the Arminian Controversy
consists, I have said enough fully to acquit me. I am positive, for absolute
certain Election, for Christ's not dying alike for all: For the Elect he died
to secure their actual Reconciliation; for others his Death is sufficient, and
real Offers of Salvation are made to them, on the Terms of the Gospel,
notwithstanding their being condemned by the Law. Again I say, Man is corrupt,
and without the Grace of God he cannot believe: All the Elect shall be (though
without violence) brought by efficacious Grace to believe, and finally
persevere. All which I often assert in my Book.

An Account of some of Mr. C's Principles, which he has set up in opposition
to mine. I shall begin with Three of them, and consider them together.
Mr. C. p. 24. The Essence of the Gospel is altogether Promise and Free Gift.
P. 28. The Gospel has no Law-Sanction of its own, but it only establishes the
Sanction of the Law by way of Promise to all that are saved. P. 33. The Gospel,
as such is no Law, has no Sanction, etc. Which, and many more places, I may
contract into this as his

First Principle. That the Gospel is in no sense a Law, nor includes in it as
Mr. C's first Principle.
any part thereof, either any Precept, nor any Promise upon any Condition on
our part, nor any Threatening. If thou doubt the word Precept should not be
added, know, the words above fully assert it. And p. 23. he tells us, The
Precept of Faith is a Precept of the Law of Nature.

Mr. C. affirms, p. 34. Whatsoever befalls Sinners retaining their sinful
state, and rejecting Grace, is from the Law, and not from the Gospel: To talk
of a Gospel-Threat is a Cata^hresis at best, and nothing else can save it from
being a Bull.

His Second Principles is, The Gospel has no Threatenings. Mr. C's 2d Principle.


When my Question answered by him p. 32. was this: Does God promiscuously
dispense these, viz. Forgiveness, Adoption, Glory, or any other promised
Benefit given upon God's Terms? (I say) Does God dispense these, without any
regard to our being Believers, or no? Or, whether our Faith be true or no? Mr.
C. answers, I would know, whether if God distribute his Free Grace to poor
wretched worthless Creatures, according to his Election and distinguishing
Mercy, does he do it blindly because he finds no Reason in them? Whence I may
call this

His Third Principle. That God forgives, adopts, and glorifies Sinners, without
Mr. C's 3d Principle.
any respect to their being true Believers, or no; and Election and
distinguishing Mercy be the only Rule by which he forgives, adopts, and
glorifies Sinners, as well as gives the First Grace.

To put the better gloss upon his Principle, he says, p. 13. Does God dispense
Faith blindly, etc? A. The Question was not, whether God gave Faith absolutely,
but whether he gave Forgiveness and Glory promiscuously. Nay, he knows I
oft-times affirm the former. And in p. 21. he reviles me for saying, That there
must be a Work of the Spirit for conformity to the Rule of the Promise, in the
person to be pardoned. Yea, this third Principle must follow, and is but the
same as That the Gospel is no Law or stated Rule of Forgiveness, Adoption, and
Glory. And he affirms, that Faith is a Precept of the Law, and denies that any
Precept of the Law is a Rule of Happiness with a Sanction, p. 22, 23.

Repl. (Not to insist how in the first Point, in what he says of the Sanction,
he excludes Forgiveness of Sin altogether; yea, and as he words it, may bind
the penal Curse on us.) He opposes in these three Principles what he calls my
2, 3, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 11, 12, 13, 15th Paradoxes; but had he considered the 4th
and 13th, he had answered his few seeming Arguments, and prevented his gross
misrepresentation of my Principles. There he might have seen, that I assert, 1.
There is a Certainty that the Elect shall obey the Terms of the Gospel, and be
infallibly saved. 2. That it is Christ's Righteousness which is the alone
meritorious Cause of a Believer's Justification and Salvation; and that our
compliance with the Terms of the Gospel by the Grace of God, is no more than
our answering that Rule by which God bestows on us Justification and Salvation,
for the Satisfaction and Merits of Christ. He that cannot distinguish between
the Righteousness for which we are saved, and a compliance with that Rectoral
Method, wherein God does save us for that Righteousness, and the Interest
arising from that method complied with, had better sit still, than meddle with
these Disputes.

Reader, though I did not once call the Gospel a Law in all my Book, and only
said in my Preface, that the Apostle called it a Law of Faith, with respect to
what I had discoursed, yet because the whole of Mr. C's Book runs on this, I
shall insist most on this Head, 1. by explaining the word Law; then 2. in what
sense it is not a Law; 3. show in what sense it is a Law, which I shall prove,
and c. 4. answer his Objections; 5. produce some Testimonies.

1. As to the name or word Law. It has pleased God to call the way of his The
word Law of Grace same as the Covenant.
application of Grace to fallen Sinners, by various names, and by that variety,
to help our Apprehensions, which one name would not so well contribute to. It Is
called a Law, a Covenant, a Testament, a Promise, a Word, etc. none of them
exclude the others, and are easily reduced to each other. A Promise of God,
that sets down an Order in conferring Benefits, wherein he enjoins any Duty on
Man's part, in that Order, has the nature of a Law; yea, though he engage to
enable the Person to do that Duty. We must also consider, that God in some
respects varies these Terms from their common use among men, both his Dominion
and his Grace abating their rigid Sense. He calls it a Law, but yet his Mercy
resolves thereby to confer such Benefits, as brings the Law down to a Promise.
He calls it a Promise, but his Dominion renders the Term enjoined a Duty, and
so be raises up the Promise to a Law. The word Covenant implies the certain
performance on his part, in the way he sets down, and our restipulation to that
way. In the very word Testament, as he notes the ratification of the Covenant
by Christ's Death, so it excludes not the appointed Condition of the Legatees,
to whom he makes a disposition of the Benefits: So that the Word, the Law of
Grace, or the Law of Faith, is no other than the Covenant of Grace, the
Gospel-Promise of Salvation, the Testament of Christ, or the Word of the
Gospel, or the Gospel it self. Whereas Mr. C. exposes it as a New Gospel and
New Law; it is the first How for a new Law, and yet no new Gospel.
Gospel GOD delivered to Men, for he never promised to give Glory by Christ to
any unbelieving impenitent person. A new Law indeed it is, as being a little
younger than the Law of Innocence, which condemns for the least Sin, and gives
Life to none but the Perfect; by which Law no man but Christ was ever
justified, and by whose answering it for us we shall be justified in a
Gospel-way. Heb. 11. 4, 6.
But yet it is a Law older than Cain or Abel, otherwise Abel's Sacrifice had
been no more acceptable than Cain's, which by Faith it was; and which Faith in
Christ must have been commanded, as well as the Sacrifice; though the brief
account which Moses gives, of above two thousand years, does not express it,
nor was it Genesis 4. 7, 11.
needful. Yea, God's Words to Cain imply it as Mr. Ball on Covenant, p. 43.
says, These are a Promise of the Covenant, that took place after the Fall.

2. I do not say, the Gospel is a Law in the following sense. 1. I do not say
that the How the Gospel is not a Law.
Gospel includes nothing besides this Law; it gives us an account of the
Covenant of Redemption, and the absolute Promises: There be many Prophecies the
History of our Blessed Lord, and c. Doctrinal Truths, Prophecies, and c. yet
these may be called Adjuncts. 2. Nor do I judge it a Law in that sense our
Divines fix on the Socinians and Arminians, viz. as if Acts of Obedience to
this Law are the Righteousness for which we are justified or saved; as Perfect
Obedience was under the Law of Adam. This I deny, for we have no Righteousness
for which we are justified or saved, but Christ's, and the Fruits of that are
we blessed with, upon complying with the Gospel. Our Faith or inherent
Righteousness, and c. are not the paying a Farthing of Debt to the Creditor,
but our submitting to that way by which we have Forgiveness of all the Debt,
and are Partakers of Glory; both which God had in his Eye, as to be purchased
by Christ, before he fixed on this way for our obtaining them. 3. Nor do I take
it in the Popish sense, which the Socinians and Arminians espouse, but true
Protestants oppose, viz. as if the moral Law were not perfect in its kind, but
that the spiritual extensive sense of the Precepts were new Precepts of our
Lord; and that the Old Testament did not include the Gospel-Precepts of Faith
in Christ, and Repentance for Pardon, as well as the New, though it did not
discover the Objects and Motives, and c. so clearly. 4. It is not a Law that
supposes a moral ability in Sinners to perform its Precepts; that was
necessary in God's Dealings with Men as his Creatures, just come out of his
Hand; but not so, when he deals with Man about his recovery, when he had
virtually sinned in Adam, forfeited all, yea, had undone himself. Whatever Mr.
C. says p. 23. I affirm, if the Subject be rational, or have natural Power: If
such Ability comes so with this Law, that the Elect are made effectually able,
and others are wilfully faulty if they finally rebel, it is enough to justify
the Divine Order. Will not and cannot are distinct things with Mr. Fenner, in
his Book of Wilful Impenitency. Yea, with D. Owens on Ps. 130. p. 248. 5. It is
not a Law that extinguisheth the Law of Nature which has its special Precepts,
and which in genere upon Gospel Revelation, requires what the Gospel requires,
and condemns for Faults against the special Precepts of the Gospel, though it
condemns not so, as to bar the Relief which the Gospel affords, nor promises
Life upon those Terms, which the Gospel does. The Gospel in a large sense takes
the Law as subservient to its gracious designs; though Mr. C. weakly infers p.
24, 25. that therefore the whole Precept is hereby made the Condition. 6.
Neither does this Law require any thing of us as a Condition of Christ's coming
into the World as a Redeemer, it supposes that, nor yet any Condition of the
first Grace to the Elect. This the Covenant of Redemption secures; and it is
assured to the Catholic Church by Promise. 8. Nor is it a Law, Obedience
whereto renders any promised Blessing a Debt. All is free though sure: It Is free,
as to Man's Procurement or Price, yet it is as sure by Promise, as if it were a
Debt; but the Price was Christ's Obedience and Sufferings, and all comes to us
of Gift, yet in that way which God appoints to give it.

2. I mean by the Gospel being a Law, that God in Christ our Redeemer does How
the Gospel is a Law.
by the Gospel expressly command Sinners to receive Christ with a true operative
Faith, and promises, that though they are condemned by Adam's Law, yet upon
their so believing, they shall be united to Christ, and justified by his
Righteousness; and that persevering in Faith by sincere Holiness, they shall be
saved for his sake. He also threatens, that if any shall dye unbelieving,
impenitent, ungodly Rejecters of his Grace, they shall be barred from these
Benefits, and they shall perish without relief, and have sorer Punishments,
than if these gracious Offers had not been made to them: This is the Law of
Faith. I Will add one Caution to this Account, which is too needful. Give me but
the Assemblies Description of Faith, Conf. cap. 14. and I desire to use no word
as expressive of the Terms of the Gospel, besides Faith, but men now define
Faith by such a small part of it, as requires Caution for the sake of Souls.

1. Here we have all the Essentials of a Law. God is our Ruler, and we his
Subjects; Iam. 4. 12.
his Will is revealed in a way of Government; here is his 1 Ioh. 3. 23
Precept which binds us to Duty; here is a Mark 16. ^5, 16.
Promise made to such as do comply; and here is a Threatening denounced against
such as finally rebel; Preach the Gospel to every Creature, he that believes
and is baptized, shall be saved, he that believes not shall be damned. 2. Yet
this is a Law of Grace; it is made by our Redeemer for fallen Man, all the
Benefits of it are founded on Christ's Righteousness, as the immediate cause of
them: Effectual Ability to perform the Duty, is provided for all the Elect, and
declared in the Gospel, and God does not fix on these terms for any Worth in
them, or profit to him. 3. The Gospel is the Instrument or Sign by which this
Will of God is expressed: This is not the Language of God in Adam's Law; if
this were not superadded to that, we had been utterly miserable. 4. This fixes
that Rule of the Promise which Mr. C. p. 33. is at a loss to know. God
promises he will justify him that truly believes, and save the upright in
Heart: Hereby he that in Truth believes, and is upright, answers that Rule
which the Unbelievers and Hypocrites do not, and so God does not hereby promise
to save them; yea, he declares they shall not have an Interest in these
Mercies, because they continue such, and condemns them as such at last: It Is
Faith, not Infidelity; it is Faith in Truth, not Faith in Perfection, nor
Hypocrisy.

I shall offer thee some few Reasons why I say this is some part of the Essence
of the Gospel, and that God has fixed this Rule therein.

R. 1. The Gospel is often called a Law by the Spirit of God, Isa. 42. 4. He
Proved that the Gospel is a Law.
shall not fall, nor be discouraged, till he have set Judgment in the Earth,
and the Isles shall wait for my Law, Mic. 4. 2. Many Nations shall come, etc.
for the Law shall go forth of Zion, etc. Romans 3. 27. The Law of Faith, Romans 10.
31. The Law of Righteousness, the Law of Liberty, Iam. 1. 25. and 2. 12. A
converting Law, Psalm. 19. 7. The Law of Christ, Gal. 6. 2. The best
Commentators expound these to be the Gospel; yea, many say, this is that Law of
the Spirit of Life in Christ, Romans 8 2. Many more places might be added.

R. 2. Men's Behavior toward the Gospel is expressed by words that denote it
to be a Law, Romans 10. 16. They have not obeyed the Gospel, 2 Cor. 9. 13. Your
professed Subjection to the Gospel. 2 Thessalonians. 1. 8. To take vengeance on them
that obey not the Gospel. 1 Pet. 4. 17. What will the end of them be that obey
not the Gospel?

R. 3. Justification is a judicial Act, and therefore it must be by a Law, if
we allow God to be a Ruler when He does it. We dispute this against the
Papists, who deny it to be a forensick Term. It Is true, the Righteousness for
which we are justified, is Christ's, which answered the Law of Innocence, but
the application of it to one man rather than another, and to the same man at
one time, and not before, is by the Gospel. It Is not the voice of the Law of
Works, that the believing Sinner shall be justified for Christ's Righteousness,
Romans 3. 26. So Gal. 3. 22. And I might show, that in Justification is a Right
to Impunity; And can any thing but a Law give this? for Condemnation by Law
cannot be reversed without a Law.

R. 4. The Gospel gives a Right to its Benefits upon believing, Ioh. 1. 12. to
as many as received him, to them gave he power to become the Sons of God, even
to them that believe in his Name. What did God by his Gospel give to these
(...) a Right, a Title to be the Sons of God. Very many places of this kind
might be urged: And little do men see what follows from denying this
Gospel-Rule, when we read such Places as they were worthy, Rev. 3. 4. 1 Thessalonians.
1. 5. 11.
the Reward, Col. 2. 18. Heb. 11. 26. Mat. 6. 4.
a Right to the Tree of Life. Rev. 22. 14.
Are these Terms proper from the mere nature of Men's Actions? That Is Popish
Merit. Or from the Law of Works? That Is false, and anti-Evangelical. But it is
safe to say it is a Gospel Worthiness, Reward, Right, etc. God having for
Christ's sake promised to give Blessings in such a way. The Gospel-Law is so
entirely founded on Christ, and refers to him so fully, that there is no more
than an inviolable Connection between Terms and Benefits; there is no boasting
when the Claim is strongest; yea, not boasting, but ascribing all to Christ, is
one of the great Terms.

R. 5. If God has no Gospel-Rule beside Election and Distinguishing Mercy to
confer Glory by, then God will not, nay, cannot forgive or save the Non-Elect,
though they should believe in Christ. Say not they will not believe, that makes
no alteration, as to the Point in hand: Has not God declared he will save them
if they believe? That is his Law; and their rejecting his Salvation John (...).
(...). John (...). (...). Heb. 2. 3.
God arraigneth them for: He is condemned because he has not believed, etc.
What an allay to their Misery would it be to think! Though I had believed, I had
not escaped this Woe: I have lost neither Christ nor Heaven by my Unbelief.
Read God's Pleas with all Sinners; remember Christ's Tears over lost Jerusalem.
^.
What do Men speak of a Day of Grace, that Men may sin away? Nay, what are the
serious Pleas of Ministers with every Soul, to believe and repent? All are
delusive Mockery; whilst God is as free to pardon the Elect, whether he
believes or no, He is at liberty to damn others, though they should believe;
nay, He is sure to do it, should they believe, because they are not Elect. If
this leads not to Hobbism, I see nothing. I own that Forgiveness is an Act of
Sovereignty; that is, he is free to give Faith and Forgiveness upon it to whom
he will: But they that think God has left himself absolutely free to forgive
the Adult, whether they believe or no, and to condemn the Believer, seem to
forget their Bible. Would men of this Principle but preach according to their
Scheme, I think their Influence would abate, with all that seriously mind
Heaven, not withstanding Mr. C. says, that Pardon will not leave them
impenitent.

R. 6. The Apostles, with all the Saints, may be arraigned as fallen from
Grace, and turned from the Gospel, if it be no Rule according to which God
applies See my Book Cap. 20.
Christ's Righteousness for Justification. How could Peter say, Repent, and be
baptized for the remission of Sin, etc. when the People cried, What shall we
do? How could Paul answer the Goaler's Question, What shall I do to be saved?
Believe Acts 2. 37, 38.
on the Lord Jesus Christ, and thou shall be saved? This is not an Advice to
Signs, but to appointed Terms; q. d. God has commanded you to repent and Acts
16. 30, 31.
believe, and has enacted, that if you do so, the Blood of Christ shall wash
and save you. So Gal. 2. 16. We have believed that we might be justified by the
Faith of Christ. They believed for this very end. If any say it was Christ
justified, it is true, but it was upon believing. Faith is not the justifying
Righteousness, but it is the Condition of our being justified by this
Righteousness, and the Saints did ill to believe to this end, if God had not
enacted it to this end: Nor could they do it in this assurance, that they
should be justified when they believed, if God had not promised it upon
believing. Had Pardon come by an absolute Promise, they acted very legally in
believing that they might be pardoned. Mr. C. may as justly say of them as of
me, They set up a new Gospel.

R. 7. The Gospel is at least part of the Rule by which Christ will judge the
World at the last day. That it must be a Law, if it be a Rule of Judgment, I
suppose none will deny, unless they will deny that Christ is a Judge: The Work of
that day is not to try Christ, whether he fulfilled all (...) Righteousness,
nor yet whether his Righteousness was impured to all that did believe, but by
solemn Sentence to decide the Cause of all men, to silence all false Apologies,
and publicly Of the judgmentday.
adjudge all to their eternal place, unto the Glory of Justice and Mercy. That
day supposes all justified or not by the Gospel, Christ then changes no man's
state; the Godly stand there pardoned and entitled to Life by Christ's
Righteousness imputed; the Wicked are there without any Interest in Christ;
these wicked ones, if they pretend to sinless Innocence, they are cast upon the
least Sin, by the Law of Adam: But if they plead God's general Mercy, it will
be evident that Mercy adjusted its Rule in the Gospel. If they plead Hopes from
Christ as a Redeemer, and the Offers he made, they are convinced by that Book,
that Christ saved none but such as repent and believe. If they plead they did
believe and profess his Name, Christ will convince them, that his Gospel
required a true Faith, operative in sincere and persevering Obedience, the want
whereof he will charge upon them; as you see in Mat. cap. 7. cap. 22. and 25,
etc. and so leaves them subject to the Law of Adam, without Relief by the
Gospel; yea, heightens their Condemnation for disobeying the Gospel: But if
they yet plead, But Lord, thou savest some that were Unbelievers as well as we,
at least, they were not such Believers as did yield sincere Obedience: This
Plea Christ will confound by solemn Declaration of the true Faith and Sincerity
of all them whom he now saves, and so will evidence, that his Judgment is
without respect of persons, and that his Righteousness is no Plea for any
finally unbelieving, ungodly Hypocrite, whom his Gospel condemned. If the
Damned or Satan should plead, But they were Sinners, though not unbelieving
Hypocrites; the Answer of Christ will be, I have satisfied the Law for them,
and so Justice cannot suffer by my washing them in my Blood, nor hinder their
being glorious for my sake.

I humbly think this is being judged according to our Works, Rev. 20. 12, 13.
This is being justified by our Words, Mat. 12. 37. And what James most intends
Iam. 2. 24. I hope none can doubt, but this proves the Gospel is part of the
Rule of Judgment, and it is plain, God will judge the Secrets of all Hearts by
my Gospel, Romans 2. 16. And the word that I have spoken to you, that shall judge
you. This is one of the Ioh. 12. 48. Of Just. p. 10. Rev. 20. 12.
Books that shall then be opened, says Mr. Chapter Father. And how awful is that
day, when the closest Hypocrite will be discovered, and yet the doubtful
Christian adjudged sincere! But blessed be God, the Saints Plea will be managed
by Christ himself.

Reader, it is hard reconciling the account we have of the Day of Judgment, by
any thing below what I have delivered, and were not the Gospel to be a Rule of
Judgment, I cannot see how that could be a Iudgment-day, it must be only an
Execution-day, for by the Law of Adam no Believer could be acquitted; that Law
must be altered by the Lawgiver, to admit a Satisfaction, and it is by the
Gospel only he has enacted the way how this Satisfaction shall be applied. By
that first Law these Unbelievers (yea, all men) were condemned virtually in
Adam when he was judged upon his Fall, and that Sentence seized them as soon as
they had a Being, there needed no other. It would help thy Thoughts, if thou will accomodate some of the Circumstances of the last Judgment to them that
shall be alive at that time. I might multiply Arguments to prove the Gospel to
be a Law. Whatever proves the Covenant to be conditional, proves the Gospel to
be a Law. Nothing keeps the most sincere Godliness, or Act of a Saint here from
being downright a Sin, if the Gospel be no Law, for they are not legally
perfect, and so are Sins, I see not how any man can have grounded Hopes of
Glory, if the Gospel be no Law; and they that deny it, and say Faith is but a
Sign, must set up Works above Faith, for they are more evidencing Signs than an
internal Act of Faith: Yea, how can Christ be our King, if his Gospel be no
Law? Many more might be added, were there room, but I shall omit the rest,
except what will occur in my Answer to Mr. C's Objections which follow.

I. Mr. C. objects, p. 5. Whoever is justified by a Law, is fallen from Grace,
Mr. C's Obj. the Article is wanting.
Gal. 3. 11. It should be read a Law, not the Law; it is (...), the emphatical
Particle is not put in, and so it is every Law is excluded.

Repl. Upon such Cobwebs, in the face of the plain scope of the Bible, does
this Cause stand. Where Is the Argument? Because in a few places the Article
(...) is not put in, therefore the Apostle excludes even every Law, when he
does plainly exclude only one sort, as appears by the whole Context. Nay, when
he at the same time affirms another Species, under that general, Romans 3. 27.
But farther note, 1. Where the Article is elsewhere omitted, the word it refers
to does not exclude every sort of Law, Romans 2. 14. (...). Will you render this?
For the Gentiles, which have not a Law, or not any Law, the Article is wanting,
but sure they had some Law, even the Law of Nature. 2. Where the Article is
wanting, it does not infer, that every kind under the general word are alike
intended; Romans 2. 12. (...). Is not there the written Mosaic Law set in
opposition to the Law of Nature unwritten? Yet the Article is wanting, Romans 5.
20. (...), The Law was added; Was it no special Law? Sure there was some Law
before. So Gal. 4. 4. Gal. 3. 11. (...), The Just shall live by Faith. Is this
any sort of Faith? Will a temporary or historical Faith serve? Yes, by Mr. C's
Rule. 3. The Article is often added to the word Law, in the very Subject before
us, Gal. 3. 12. (...), etc. But the Law is not of Faith. V. 21. (...), Is the
Law against the Promises? and v. 24. Romans 10. 5. (...), Moses describes the
Righteousness which is of the Law. 4. The Socinians evade the force of Ioh. 1.
1. and so deny the Deity of Christ, even by Mr. C's Argument: (...). The
Article is wanting to (...), therefore it is to be thus rendered: The word was a
God, not the God, a God by Office, for that is a God, but not by Essence, which
would be the God. 5. The Context does manifestly specify this Law, and not
exclude every Law. It Is true, the Gospel argues a fortiori against
Justification by the Law of Innocence, yet he directly speaks of Moses's Law;
as any may see in reading the places, Mr. C's Proof is taken from Gal. 3. 11.
And does not the Apostle, v. 17. say, The Law, which was four hundred and
thirty years after, cannot disannul the Covenant, etc. Was it every Law that
was given 430 years after Abram? So from Romans 3. 28. and cap. 4. And is not the
Apostle in the three Chapters express, That that Law was the Jewish Law, or at
most the Law of Nature together with it: But more of this last hereafter.
Reader, Mr. C. seems fond of this Argument from the Article, and thence often
repeats it; but do thou but read one Book in the Greek Testament, by his Rule,
viz. that where the Article is omitted from a word in negative Propositions,
there every Species is excluded; yea, bring it down to Names, and where the
Article is omitted, then it is any Peter, any John who is there spoken of.

Obj. II. Mr. C. often objects, as p. 5. Works performed under a Law-Sanction,
are legal Works, and do make the Covenant enjoining them a Covenant of Works.
And a few lines before says he, The performance of Duty as Terms enforced by a
Law-Sanction, A Sanction makes it a Covenant of Works.
is a Covenant of Works; so that such men are Preachers of a Law, no matter
what Law. P. 21. The preceptive Will of God with the Sanction of Rewards,
promised upon the things required, and Threats of Punishment upon the
nonperformance, is always a Law or Covenant of Works. This runs through his
Book, and he often says, The Gospel has no Sanction, and if we say so, we make
i^ a Covenant of Works. P. 10. Christ is of no effect to him that is justified
by a Law.

Repl. 1 He often seems not to understand what a Sanction is; for p. 24. he takes
it to be mere Life and Death, considered abstractedly, but not as determining A
Law Sanction.
the way of giving of the one, or inflicting of the other: Whereas a Sanction
consummates a Law, and determines what the Benefit or Penalty shall be, and
the certain Connection between the Benefit and the Condition, and between the
Penalty and the want of that Condition, etc. Now will any, except Mr. C. say,
That God has not by the Gospel given Assurance, that upon believing we shall
be saved? Have not we God's Word, Oath, and Seals for this? 2. A Law-Sanction
does not exclude the greatest Mercy and Grace, in conferring the Benefit. It Is
true, Every Sanction excludes not Grace.
that if the Condition be in it self meritorious, then in that respect the
Benefit is of Debt, and was made a Condition in the Covenant, because of its
condignity, if exactly proportionable, or congruity if less valuable: But God
chooses a Condition, that has ^o merit either of Congruity or Condignity; nay,
the Benefits are purchased by Christ, qua good things in themselves, and they
be freely given, though in this way. Is it not a gracious Law, though a Law, that
If fallen wretches will duly accept of my Son, they shall have Life by him; and
this I command them to do? 3. His Mistake seems to be in his Notion of Reward,
and in his upon and not upon performance of the Condition. Gospel-Benefits are
no Reward of Debt, and yet The Gospel Sanction infers not merit.
they are given in a way of reward. The Benefits are given not for our Faith,
yet upon believing; not upon it as a meriting consideration, yet upon it as
that the presence whereof is made necessary by the Gospel, this having required
Faith, and confined the Benefit to him that believes. If a man says, I Will give
you a thousand pounds if you will come to my House and fetch it; is it not a
free Gift, though the poor man must come if he will have it? And the Giver is
yet bound by his Promise to give it if he come, and not bound to give it if he
refuse to come. Do not say receiving Pardon is only naturally necessary, and
not as a Condition enjoined, for God might have applied Christ's Merits for
Pardon, though the Sinner consented not. A Lunatic may be pardoned by a King;
and the Rich man might have sent the thousand pound to the Poor man's House,
whether he came for it or no; but Christ resolved to show his governing
Authority in the displays of Grace, and excite to Duty by Motives from
Benefits, though the Benefits shall be so given, as that what we do shall be no
cause or Merit of them. 4. Has The new Covenant has a Sanction.
the Gospel Covenant no Sanction? What think you of Heb. 8. 6? He is the
Mediator of a better Covenant, which was established upon better Promises. I
hope he will grant this Covenant is the Covenant of Grace, in a greater opposition
to the first Covenant with Adam, though more immediately opposed to the Jewish
Covenant; yet this second Covenant has a Law-Sanction, (...), Sancitum est,
says Beza. It Is a greatest part of the new Name Mr. C. has reproached the
Gospel with; here is a Law, a Law-Sanction which the new Covenant is consummated
by. Men skilled in the Socinian Controversies lay the stress of the Cause of
Truth upon Arguments from Condemnation and Justification, being God's Rectoral
Acts, but what a loss will they be at, if God do not (...) by a or any Law? as
Mr. C. Of Iustif. 166, 167.
says p. 18. Where Is Dr. Owen's Law of Justification? Yea, We must part with
the Force of Romans 5. 19. 5. But why must it needs become a Law or Covenant A
Sanction does not make the Gospel a Law of Works.
of Works merely by a Sanction? The great difference between the Covenant of
Works and the Covenant of Grace, lies in this: What is the Righteousness for
which we are saved? Is it the Righteousness of Works, or the Righteousness of
Christ? But it is not how we come to obtain Salvation by Christ's
Righteousness. Does God make our Faith or Sincerity to be our Justifying
Righteousness? If he says, If thou truly believe, I will justify thee by
Christ's Righteousness, but if thou believe not, thou shall remain condemned;
something might be said (though not enough) if we were to believe by our own
Strength, but that is not so More might be said, yea, enough, if our Faith and
Sincerity were to be the Righteousness for which we are pardoned, or entitled
to Life; but neither is it any thing like that, nor does the Gospel design it,
nor its Law-Sanction at all infer it. It Is ^
one thing to be justified for Faith, as a Work or inherent Qualification,
(though it be such a Qualification) it is another thing to be justified by it,
as a mere Condition: I abhor the former, and will (through God's Grace) dye by
the latter. In the first sense, it is only that for which I am justified; in the
last sense, it is only that upon which, by God's Ordination, the Righteousness
of Christ justifies me: As a Work, it would make me just as an immediate Cause
of Title, but as a Condition, it removes the Obstacle which God's
Gospel-Threatning has laid in the way of my obtaining his Gift of
Righteousness upon Christ's account. Has God appointed Faith by his Command to
be a Gal. of coming to Christ, p. 170.
federal Instrument to receive Christ's Righteousness? I say no more, so that
Men will own Men shall be denied it without that Instrument: But then, must the
Gospel be a Law of Works? By no means; though Mr. C. p. 30, 31, 33. thinks, that
whatever Law requires an Act of ours in order to Benefits for the sake of
Christ, is a Law of Works, because (I suppose) the Action is a Work. Is not
receiving Christ an Action? Ay, but it Ball, son Covenant, p. 114. The Action
of Faith is not excluded, in To. 3. 27, 28. How Faith justifies as a Condition,
though it be an Act.
justifies not as receiving, but it is Christ received justifies. I say the
same, but yet I ask, Will Christ justify me if I do not receive him? A Christ
he is, and a full Righteousness he has before I receive him, yet I was
unjustified, notwithstanding that. Why was I unjustified by his Righteousness
so long? Was it not because I received it not, till I received it? Well then,
sure though that Action of Receiving does not justify me, yet that Action is
by God's fixed Law necessary to my being justified by Christ's Righteousness;
not as it is an Action, but as it answers to the Rule of the Promise, whereby
God enacts, he will for Christ's sake justify him that believes. 6. The
Apostle does expressly tell us, that the Gospel-Law is not a Law of Works, Romans
3. 27. Where is Boasting then? Is it excluded? Paul affirms the Gospel to be a
Law yet not a Law of Works.
By what Law? Nay, but by the Law of Faith. Here Is two Laws opposed, and yet
both are Laws, and one no Law of Works neither. We are threatened with an
Answer, P. 33. though I know as much as he is like to tell me, yet I am sure I
have the best Expositors for this sense, and doubt not the defense of it: Yea,
though he should argue, it is but the Doctrine of Faith, yet if God be a Ruler
that commands that Faith, in order to my obtaining saving Benefits, I despise
all that can be said against its being a Law. But it may be he will admit a
Solution of his Objection from Mr. Bulkley of New England, The Bulkley, of
Gospel Covenant, p. 325.
putting of a Condition does not hinder or lessen the Free Grace of the
Covenant, so long as the Condition is Evangelical, and not Legal. And p. 328,
329, 330. he answers the Objection against the Gospel being a new Law, and
says, Though Christ be not a Lawgiver, to give a Law of Works to justify our
selves by it, yet He is a Lawgiver, to give us a Law of Faith, commanding us
to believe, etc. p. 333, 334. when it is said, Do this and live: Here the
Promise of Life is legal, because the Commandment of Doing is legal. On the
other side, when it is said Believe and live, here the Promise of Life is
Evangelical, because the Commandment of Believing is Evangelical; but if we
make the Commandment of Believing to be legal, then the promise of Life upon
Condition of believing must be legal also, and then there is no difference left
between these two, Do and live, and Believe and live, which confounds Law and
Gospel, Heaven and Earth, and makes the two Covenants all one. See Mr. Ball,
The Covenant which was Ball, of the Covenant, p. 17.
made of Free Love, and calls for nothing at our hands, but what comes from,
and shall be rewarded of mere Grace, is a Covenant of Grace, though it be
conditional: So the pardon of Sin is given of Grace, and not for Works, though
the Pardon be granted to the Penitent, and Faith on our part, a lively,
unfeigned, and working Faith be required to receive the Promise.

Obj. III. Mr. C. p. 2^. Moreover, all the preceptive Will of God, then or
afterward Mr. C. obj. No Law but the Law of Innocence.
to be revealed, was enjoined to Man as his Duty to observe in the Law of
Nature, imprinted on his Heart: As for Faith, it was an eminent part of his
Perfection, and that which the Serpent first wounded him in by Temptation, etc.
P. 22. I tell you, the Gospel has no Law-Sanction at all of its own, but it
only establishes the Sanction of the Law by way of promise to all saved ones.
Christ is the end of the Law to them, and as to those that are not saved, the
Law takes its course of them, they came not under the efficacy of the Gospel at
all.

Repl. The Argument of these words is, that all the Precepts and Threats in the
Gospel are part of the Law of Nature, given to Adam; and that Law of Adam is
the only Law, and therefore Faith in Christ, which Sinners are called to is
only the Voice of the Law of Works or Innocence; and the whole Sanction of the
Gospel is the Sanction of that Law, and hence the Gospel must be no Law. I
might show what a gross sense he gives of Christ being the end of the Law, and
that his words lead us to think, that all Obligation (except from Gratitude) to
Obedience, lies on Christ only, and not on the Elect; that the Gospel has no
influence at all upon them that are not actually saved; that the Gospel is only
an absolute Promise, or rather a Declaration of Election, to the Elect, and
requires nothing at all from them as a term of any Benefit whatever, and yet
they are saved, as Elect by the Law, as immediately entituling them to Life,
without the interposal of the Gospel-Sanction; that is, the Gospel does not
only invest them in Pardon, and a Right to Salvation by God's imputing Christ's
Righteousness to them (when Believers) which was a perfect Obedience of his to
the Law, and a full Satisfaction to the Lawgiver for them, as their voluntary
Surety: Which I hold; but that the Law immediately judges them to have obeyed
it perfectly, and also to have endured the Penalty in Christ, he being their
Proxy and Attorney.

This is the Method these men espouse, whereby they destroy Christ's Sufferings
as a proper Satisfaction, exclude all Forgiveness, as needless: They debase
Christ to an Attorney, and exalt the Creatures, as if they stood on the
strictest Terms of Merit with God, having legal Innocence of their own, as
having obeyed and atoned too: Yea, they had a Grant of all the Saving Effects
of Christ's Death, before they fell in Adam, who was their Head even when
Christ was their Head too, for they were one legal Person wlth Christ always
as Elect, and not when they become Believers. And hence the Gospel does require
nothing of any elect persons, to interest them in Christ or his Benefits.

But I pass by these, and in opposition to the Argument, I shall (in the
strength The Gospel is not the law of Adam.
of Christ) evidence, that the Law of Nature or Works is not a hindrance to the
Gospels being a Law, but that the Gospel is another Law, distinct in its
Precept and Sanction, and other respects.

1. The Gospel is distinct in its preceptive part, from the Law of Innocence.
The Gospel differs in its Precepts from Adam's Law.
Faith in Christ was never commanded by that Law. To say Faith in God was a
Duty, is a vain Objection, for Faith in Christ as a Savior is specified from
its Object, and is distinguished into temporary, historical, saving, etc. The
Faith that Mr. C. says Adam was wounded in, was merely a Faith of Assent,
which the Devils have, or a natural Trust in God as Creator: But what is that to
a receiving of Christ, or consent to him as Redeemer, and relyance on him? Of
which more by and by.

Is it not strange that Mr. C. says, The Law never brings us to God, then
Faith does not, for it is part of the Law, etc. But let us hear what others
speak. Mr. Hooker of New E. p. 337. says, I flatly deny that Adam, if the Lord
Jesus Mr. Hooker Souls Effect. Calling.
had been revealed to him, was able to believe in him, and so to rest upon him,
etc. the Reason to confirm this Point, that Adam had not this Grace of Faith,
is this; this believing in the Lord Jesus is that which does directly cross the
Estate of Adam in his Innocence, etc. He to p. 343. proves it, and answers
Objections. P. 338. to one he thus says: I answer, that not believing in the
Lord Christ is not a Sin against the Moral Law, but it is a Sin against the Law
of the Gospel, 1 Ioh. 3. 23. Romans 3. 28. Mr. Bulkley, p. 327. lays down this;
That Faith in Bulkley of Gospel Covenant.
Christ unto Justification and Salvation, the Commandment enjoining this Faith
is no Commandment of the Law, but of the Gospel, which I prove by these ensuing
Arguments. This he does by no less than nine Arguments, and answers many
Objections from p. 327. to 335. and thus concludes: Thus far we are come, that
the putting of Faith as a Condition of Life in the Covenant of Grace, does no
whit derogate from the freeness of Grace.

D. Goodwin affirms, That Faith now is of another kind than the Faith of Adam:
D. Goodwin in 2 vol. of the Creatures, etc. lib. 2. cap. 7. p. 5^. to 63.
As to the Principle, Objects, Light, etc. ours is supernatural, his natural,
and as you may see at large, proves by several Reasons, that his was but
natural; as, 1. All other things belonging to him were natural, etc. and
therefore it would be strange, that if the Principle of Faith in him, which
then was not of general use, should be supernatural, etc. 2. For him to have a
supernatural Principle of Faith, as we have, was in him superfluous and vain.
This he shows, because Adam's Covenant would not have brought him to Heaven. 3.
It would not only have been of no use, but it would have made him miserable. 4.
And therefore our way of Faith must needs be supernatural, and altioris ordinis
from his, etc. which he proves 1. in the respect of the Objects revealed to our
Faith, which his Mind should never have arrived at: 2. in regard to the Light
by which our Minds are acted and elevated: 3. in respect of the way or manner
of Knowledge or Assent raised up thereby.

I might add the Testimony of one whom Mr. C. honored, who gives this reason
in the present Debate, saying, viz. If Consent to the Covenant was a Duty by
the Law, then the Law did bind to its own dissolution. But I suppose this may
serve to show, that Faith in Christ was no Duty by the Law of Nature, and
therefore either it is a Command of the Gospel-Law, or it is no Duty at all.
The like I might show of Repentance, which Melancthon's Followers prove against
Flaccius Illyricus.

Obj. If any one should object, Did not the Law of Nature bind us to do
whatever God should at any time require?

A. You must consider, 1. the Law of Nature less properly, as the Rule of The
Law as in Innocence not the Gospel-law.
Happiness in the Covenant of Innocence; and so it was appropriated to that
state, and was a particular Law of Works: If so considered, the several
Precepts of it were written on Man's Heart, and God and the Creatures ministered
Instruction to the innate Light, which was inherent in our Minds, and that in a
natural way. Some Ruins of both are still preserved to fallen Man, Romans 1. 19,
20. Cap. 2. 14. In this sense Faith and Repentance could have no place at all
in the Law, for it was a Law to govern and save Innocent Man, but not to
recover Sinful Man. To suppose our own Perfection to be the Condition of Life,
and yet to be obliged at the same time to repent of Sin, or believe in an
a^oning Savior; to have our Abilities immediately from God as Creator, and a
Stock in our own Hands, and yet be obliged to depend on Christ as Mediator for
all Strength, are utterly The Law as natural in f^lnmen, not the Gospel-law.
inconsistent. 2. If you take the Law of Nature for the remaining Instincts and
Notices of it in Man (which ought to be perfect) and assisted and directed by
the Works of God, sure the Gospel must be another Law, or else Heathens are
able to find out Christ by the Book of Nature, and engaged to receive him, and
rely on him, though he were never revealed to them. The reason is this; the Law
of Nature in this sense binds all the Heathens, and its Precepts are engraven
naturally upon their Hearts, and God and his Works considered naturally, direct
their Minds. 3. The Law of Nature may be considered most generally, viz. as it
is an Obligation upon Man to believe and obey, whatever God shall any way or
time reveal and require, and to suffer for Disobedience what God shall
threaten. In this sense indeed the Law commands all Duty in general, but it
does not deny The general Law of Nature ^inders not the Gospel to be a Law.
the Gospel to be a special Law, for this indeed does oblige us to obey all
God's Laws, when he makes them Laws; but it does not determine any one Law, nor
give a Being to one particular Precept. It Is the Foundation of our Obligation,
to submit to God's Authority as Creatures, but appoints not wherein we must
instance that subjection. It Is the same as an Obligation among men to
Allegiance to the supreme Power, which I hope prevents not the Ruler's Acts to
be Laws. This Law of Nature subjects us to God's Threatenings, which he shall
pronounce at any time for Sin, but determines neither the sort nor degree of
the threatened Evils. This Law is common to good Angels, Devils, innocent Man,
fallen Man, yea, damned and glorified Man, for they are all engaged as
Creatures to obey the Laws of God, when he enacts them, and suffer what he
threatens if they obey not. But is the Gospel therefore no Law, or only this
Law of Nature? Then Angels, Devils, and the Damned are obliged to believe in
Christ for Salvation. Do not say, God does not require this of them, for they
are under this Law of Nature, and so he does require it of them; or else it is
some distinct special Law, whereby he requires it of others, and not of them.
By this Notion God never made any Law beside this one Law of Nature; no
positive Law, no ceremonial Law, for this Law of Nature did bind Man to observe
them when God was pleased to command them; and yet they were special Laws for
all that. And why then must the Command of Faith in Christ, and Repentance for
Remission, be no Law, when God commands them, because the Law of Nature
requires us to obey them when God does command them? What a Government do these
men assign to God, who allow him but one and the same Law to govern the whole
Creation by, when their state and circumstances be so different, though all are
his Creatures? 4. As for such as confound the Law of Nature with the Law to The
Moral Law now the Gospel.
Israel, as taken into the Covenant of Grace, I shall not think fit to say more
to than this; Though the carnal Jews did turn it into a Covenant of Works, as
if their imperfect Obedience and chargeable Sacrifices were the very
Righteousness for which they were justified, and so neglected Repentance and
Faith in the Promise of Forgiveness for the sake of Christ, who was typified in
their Sacrifices; nevertheless it was a Law of Faith and Repentance, as
Wittichius calls it, p. 106. Wittichius Epist. ad Romans
in cap. 2. v. 25. and therefore such great Titles are given it in the Old
Testament; and not as such is it opposed by the Apostle Paul in the New
Testament, it was the base perverting of it, as exclusive of Faith in Christ,
and as opposing Gospel Institutions by Jewish Ordinances, that he reprehends:
See Calvin. on Calvin on Psalm. 19. 10. That the Law was the Gospel in David's
since. Ball, Cov. ^15.
Ps. 19 9. he states the difference between the Law commended by David, and as
represented by Paul, and says, that Paul had to do with the perverse
Interpreters of the Law, which separated it from the Grace and Spirit of
Christ* etc. and sums up all in these words, Haec diversa legis acceptatio,
etc. This different acceptance of the Law easily reconciles the seeming
difference in the words of David and Paul, because Paul's purpose is to show
what the Law of it self ( viz. as it sincerely requires the Duty we owe to God,
without the Promise of Grace) can do in us or for us; but David commends the
whole Doctrine of the Law, which is the same with the Gospel, and therefore
includes Christ therein. See Mr. Ball's Arguments for the Covenant with Israel
being the Gospel Covenant, Ball on Cov. from 102, to 120.
and how the Precepts were Gospel-Precepts. Indeed it is true, the matter of the
Ten Commandments were much of the matter of the Law of Innocence, but God did
not deliver it to his Church as a Law to innocent Man, but to fallen Man, for
his direction and recovery. Therefore when any Authors take the Law as given on
Sinai, to be the Covenant of Grace, they deny Faith to be commanded Adam in
Innocence, though they grant it required in the Law at Sinai.

2. The Sanction of the Gospel is not the same with the Law of Innocence; The
sanction of the Gospel differs from Adams law.
which I shall evidence in the promissory and minatory parts. I Will begin with
the promissory part.

I. The promissory part of the Gospel differs from that of the Law of
Innocence. 1. There are many things promised in the Gospel, which that Law
never The Promises differ.
promised. Did that Law ever promise Union with Christ, or the indwelling
Spirit, or Forgiveness of Sin, or Perseverance? Surely no: But the Gospel does
all this. Nay, Dr. Goodwin urges many Arguments to prove, that the Reward of
D. Goodw. vol. 2. lib. 2. p. 46, etc.
Adam was to be only a continuance in the same Life he had in Paradise, and not
a translation to Heaven. 2. The Rewards of the Law of Works were not promised
on the same account, as the Benefits promised by the Law of Grace be; those
were on the account of Works as a meriting Righteousness, ours are by Free
Grace, on the account of Christ's sole meriting Righteousness. Dr. Goodwin
says, D. Goodw. p. 45. ubi supra.
The Reward of the Law was in a just sense due (of Debt) unto the Creature, and
that from God: Not that God can owe any thing to his Creature, or be obliged
for any thing to him, but because in a way of natural Justice, or rather
Comeliness and Dueness, such as is by the Law of Creation to be between a just
Creator and a holy Creature; there is an approbation due to him from God,
whilst that Creature obeys him, and that as a Debt of Nature. But I say, all
the claim we have, is for Christ, and ex pacto, as the Free Promise assures
us. 3. The Benefits are promised on different terms. By the Law all was for
perfect Sinless Obedience, but the Gospel promises Pardon upon our true
repenting and believing; and we forfeit not our Interest in its Blessings, if
our Faith be effectual and persevering in sincere Holiness and Obedience. 4.
The Law of Adam did not justify till the whole time of the trial of Obedience
was finished. It Is true, it did continue the Blessings he had, while he sinned
not, but it did not fix his state of Happiness till his trial was over; but the
Gospel puts us in a justified state upon our first believing.

II. The threatening part of the Gospel differs from that in Adam's Law. 1. The
The Threatenings differ.
Evils threatened are not wholly the same: Here Is not only Death, but that in
sorer degrees, Heb. 10. 29. and 12. 25. God's Wrath will be more poured out,
and Conscience will find matter of sorer Reflections. Here Is a privation of
Christ, and his Spirit and Pardon: We are not only without them, but we are
barred from them, because of our wicked refusal, when they were sincerely
offered us after our Apostasy. If the Gospel were no Law, we could not be
obliged to more Misery than Adam brought us under; yea, and Adam could not be
our full Representative in his Covenant, if we are capable of increasing our
Misery by that Law, without disobedience to a new one. 2. The Gospel does not
denounce Death for the same Sins, as Adam's Law did; that Law threatened Death
for the least Sin, yea, for one Sin, but the Gospel threatens Death not for
every Sin; it does not bar every Sinner from actual Relief, but the impenitent,
unbelieving, and utterly ungodly Hypocrite. 3. The Gospel binds not Damnation
on us, unless we are finally impenitent Unbelievers. If at any time of life we
truly repent and believe, we shall find Mercy, but Adam's Law denounced him
miserable on his first Sin.

III. There be a great many other Differences, viz. in Adam's Law God acted
Other Differences.
as mere Creator, in the Law of Grace he acts as Redeemer as well as Creator;
in Adam's Law Men were considered as innocent and sinless, in the Gospel we are
considered as Sinners; by that Law God governed us as happy, in order to a
fixing us in our happy estate, in the Gospel he deals with us in order to our
recovery from a lost estate; in that there was no Mediator, in this there is a
Mediator, who also is our King-Redeemer. Many more might be added.

Reader, weigh all these things, and if the Gospel must be a special Law, so
that it be not the Law of Innocence, what can be more plain, than that it is
not the same with the Law of Innocence or Nature either. I could farther
demonstrate, that the very appropriation of Faith (though it were a legal
Precept) to be the grand Condition of Salvation, does argue the Gospels being a
distinct Law* for otherwise any Duty would be of equal use: But because Mr. C.
charges me as a New Gospeller, I Will give thee a few of the hundreds that oppose
his three former Errors, and consent to my Paradoxes as orthodox.

TESTIMONIES that 1st the GOSPEL is a LAW.
Our Divines in the Synod of Dort. say, par. 2. p. 104. Ex sacris literis, etc.
It Is Calvin and Wittichius see before, Syned of Dort. acta Synodi.
evident from the Scriptures, that some are judged and condemned for Sins
committed only against the Light of Nature, who yet are excused for not
performing the Law of Faith, through invincible Ignorance, which Excuse can
have no place where God publishes this Law, and men are required to obey it.
Many other places from this Synod might be added.

Willet says, p. 888. We exclude not every Law, but the Law of Works; but
Willet Synopsis papismi
the Law of Faith is not the Law of Works. And p. 635. The Publican finding
Mercy, and departing justified, no doubt had also an express purpose in himself
for ever to forsake his Sin, for otherwise he could not have been justified,
nor found remission of Sin; for this is the Law and perpetual Rule of
Forgiveness, Ezekiel. 18. 21. Steph. de Br^is, in Romans 3. 27. Hooker of N. England.


Lex evangelica clamans, the Gospel-law cries, Believe, and thou shall be saved.

Hooker of Effect. Calling, p. 338. says, I answer, not believing in the Lord
Christ is not a Sin against the Moral Law, but it is a Sin against the Law of
the Gospel, as he proves fully.

Says p. 328. Hereto agree the words of the Apostle, Romans 3. 27. where the
B^lkley of^ Covenant,
Apostle distinguishes between the Law of Works and the Law of Faith; by the
Law of Works understanding the Moral Law, by the Law of Faith understanding the
Gospel, etc. he adds, Here are two distinct Laws, having two distinct
Commandments, as two distinct Conditions of the two Covenants. This he proves
at large.

P. 102, to 122. proves the Law as given to Israel was the Gospel Covenant Mr.
Ball of the Covenset forth by Mr. Ash.
for Substance: P. 113. says, Faith in Christ is not commanded in the Moral
Law, as it was engraven in the Heart of Adam in the state of Innocence, but as
it was given to Israel, to be a Rule of Life to a People in Covenant, it was
presupposed and commanded.

Lib. 2. Cap. 1. proves at large, that God published a new Law as Redeemer to
Lawson Theopolitic.
Man upon his Fall.

P. 17. Christ will proceed at the Day of Judgment according to a double Law,
Dr. Wallis of God's Sov^raignty.
the Moral Law, and the Law of Faith; the Moral Law says, Cursed is every one
that continues not in all the Law to do it. Now by this Law we are all cast;
but the Law of Faith affords to Mankind a mitigation of the Moral Law, and
begins where the other ends, God having sent his only begotten Son to this end,
that whosoever believes on him should not perish (notwithstanding the
Condemnation of the Moral Law) but have everlasting Life. Much like the
favorable Law amongst us, which affords the Benefit of Clergy, etc. P. 19.
Those therefore whom Christ shall then acquit, are acquitted by the Gospel, or
Law of Faith; those whom he condem^s, he condemns by both Laws.

P. 230. They that really believe Forgiveness in God, do thereby obtain
Forgiveness. Dr. Owens on Ps. 130.
Believing gives an interest in it, it brings it home to the Soul concerned.
This is the inviolable Law of the Gospel; Believing and Forgiveness are
inseparably conjoined. P. 139. he says, Repentance was no Duty to Adam in
Eden, it is none for the Angels in Heaven, nor for the Damned in Hell, what
then may be the Language of this Appointment? O Sinners! come and deal with God
by Repentance, etc. It Is true, many do deceive themselves, they raise
themselves unto an expectation of Immunity, not on Gospel-grounds: But God
deceives none, whoever comes to him on his Proposal of Repentance, shall find
Forgiveness. It Is said of some, He will laugh at their Calamity, etc. But who
are they? Only such as refuse his Call to Repentance, with the Promises of
Acceptance annexed. See p. 254.

P. 375. Faith is the only Condition of the Covenant of Grace, which is
therefore Downam on Iustif.
called the Law of Faith.

P. 7. The Covenant of Grace, the Apostle calls it the Law of Faith, and it is
Sedgwick of the Covenant.
especially expressed thus, He that believes shall be saved.

P. 308. The Precept of Believing is a Gospel-Precept only, and the Punishment
for Unbelief is threatened and inflicted in relation to the Gospel; as he often
shows at large, and in p. 10. instanceth in five things a great difference
between Faith in Adam and Gospel-Faith, one of which is, that though there was a
kind of Faith in Adam, yet it was not to be the Condition of that Covenant,
etc. But the Faith required in the Covenant of Grace comes in purposely as the
Condition of Life, and Justification for the Sinner.

P. 18. Oh says the Law, such Duties have been omitted, such Sins have been
Dr. Jacomb on Romans 8.
committed, such Sabbaths have been profaned, etc. such Tenders of Grace have
been slighted, ( Here (says he) the Gospel* Law comes in as an Accuser too.)
And p. 55, and 553. You must so confide and rely on Christ's one most perfect
and all-sufficient Sacrifice, as yet withal to be careful that you, on your
part, do perform those Gospel-Conditions, which God enjoins and requires of
you, in order to Remission, Justification, and Glorification, etc. The whole
Business of Merit and Satisfaction lies upon Christ, but as to Believing and
Repenting, the two grand Gospel-Conditions, they lie upon your selves, (with
respect to the Act, though not the Power) and must be done by your selves; yea,
and the doing of these is as necessary on your parts, under the notion of
Conditions, as suffering and dying was on Christ's part under the notion of
Merit: And it is most certain, that the latter without the former will not
profit you, because Christ never designed to impute, or make over his Merit to
any, further than as they should make good these Conditions of Faith and
Repentance. P. 553. he shows the Rock of Popery is to trust in these as Merits,
and the Rock of Antinomianism is to deny that respect to Holiness, Obedience,
Faith, and Repentance which is due to them, as Means and Conditions. P. 157.
you read Romans 3. 27. the Law of Faith, and the Law of Works, very opposite and
contrary Laws.

P. 610. Unbelief is disobedience to the Law of Faith, when discovered to Men;
Mr Charnock, 2 ^ol.
therefore it is our Sin (not the Sin of Heathens, as that is disobedience to
any Law) which is against that Law when revealed and known. See p. 314. The Law
of Christ requires Belief in the Satisfaction he has wrought, for the Law of
Christ is not as the Law at the Creation was, etc. p. 683.

P. 190. Vocatur lex, etc. The Covenant of Grace is called the Law of Faith,
Turretin Instit. Theol. par. 2. Mr. M. Mead Early Obedience.
because Faith is therein prescribed to us as the Condition of the Covenant.

P. 146. There is a legal necessity that he that continues in his Lusts and
Unregeneracy must perish, and that because of the Will and Law of God. As God
wills the Salvation of all that will turn to God and obey him, so he wills the
Damnation of all that will not, but hold fast their Lusts and refuse to return.
As He has made a Law, that whosoever will come to Christ, and take up his
yoke, shall find rest to his Soul, and shall livefor ever; so He has declared
it as peremptorily, that he that slights Christ, and will not hearken to him,
nor obey him, shall be utterly cast off. P. 148, 102, 103. It is He that with
the Father has established this, as the great Condition of Salvation, bearing
the Yoke. So that it is the standing Law of Heaven, whoever will be saved, must
take up Christ's Yoke: This is the way to Blessedness, and there is no other.
Bear the Yoke of Christ and be blessed, cast that off, and he will cast you
off; submit and be saved, reject it and Christ will reject you: This is the
unalterable Condition of Salvation, and there is no other. Things are so
settled in the eternal Compact between the Father and the Son, about the Case
of Man, that the Blood of Christ it self cannot stead us, nor the Mercy of God
(infinite as it is) benefit us, without this Condition be performed by us. P.
202. In the day of Judgment God will not proceed with Men upon Election and
Reprobation, but upon Obedience or Disobedience to his Law, Romans 2. 7, 8, 9,
etc. God will vindicate the justice of his Proceedings in that day, by making
the Word the Rule of his Judgment to all that are under it, Ioh. 12.48. P. 165.
God has not absolutely promised Salvation and Eternal Life to any, but he has
annexed it to certain Dispositions and Qualifications, without which we shall
never share in the Blessing promised. P. 119. Mat, 5. 8, etc. P. 72. None can
be saved by all which Christ has done and suffered, but upon these Conditions,
and they are Self-denial, Faith, Repentance, taking up the Cross, Obedience;
these are the unalterable Conditions of Salvation, and these Conditions of
Salvation are the Yoke of Christ. These Passages of this worthy Divine amount
to no more than what Dr. Ames says.

P. 189. Bellarmin objecting Mat. 11. 29. My yoke is easy; Ames answers, Pro
Ames Bellarm. Ever. Tom. 4. lib. 6. cap. 7.
lege, etc. There Is nothing said in these words concerning the Law, simply
taken, and the perfect observation of it; but they speak of the Gospel, that
is, of Faith and new Obedience, that is the easy Yoke of Christ. I could bring
an hundred places out of Dr. Manton, wherein he calls the Gospel a Law, and
proves it. Mant. most frequently. See 2 Sermon* o^ Romans 8.


Altingius proves, that the Repentance required of us is a Gospel* Command, and
not required by the Law. Peraeus, Peter Martyr, yea, Chamier himself, affirm
the Gospel to be a Law of Faith. Indeed who deny it, except a few Lutherans,
who also deny the Doctrine of Perseverance, and three or four ^ranaker Divines,
who are followed by several of the Cocceians, but not by all of them? See more
Proof of this under the next two Heads. I shall subjoyn the Assembly of
Divines. Q. What does God require of us, etc? A. To escape the Wrath and Curse
of God, due to us for Sin: God requires of us Faith in Jesus Christ,
Repentance unto life, Assembly of Divin^s (...) (...).
with the diligent use of all the outward means, whereby God communicates to us
the Benefits of Redemption. Reader* 1. Is not that Sign or Instrument whereby
God requires these things, to this end, a Law of God? What Is a Law if that be
not? Is it the Counsel of a Fellow-Subject? No, it is God's commanding Act, he
requires these. 2. Does God require these of us to this end in the Law of Adam,
or in the Gospel? Was innocent Man to escape the Curse due to him? No, it was
not upon him; that Law did not suppose him undone; it must then be the Voice of
God by the Gospel to fallen Man. The Gospel enjoins these Duties to this end,
with a Promise that we shall not fail of this end, if we omit none of these
Duties. Here Is the Gospel-Law.

II. TESTIMONIES that the GOSPEL has its proper Threatenings.
P. 90. The best Persuasion we can arrive at, concerning the Spiritual
Condition D. Owens, on Heb. c. 6. v. 9.
of any, leaves room for Gospel-Threatnings, etc. And p. 91. Whatever we
(Ministers) may conceive of the state of any such, they are not to baulk or
wave the delivery and pressing of any Evangelical Warnings, or the severest
Threatenings contained in the Gospel. P. 91. Others should not think they are
hardly dealt with, when they are pressed and urged with the severest* Threatenings
of the Gospel* See him on Cap. 4. Heb. v. 1, 2. P. 217, 180, 181, 182, on Ps.
130. p. 266. he On Ps. 130.
that believes not shall be damned: That Is a hard word, many men cannot endure
to hear of it; they would not have it named by their good-wills, etc. But let
not men deceive themselves; this is the softest word that Mercy and Love it
self, that Christ, that the Gospel speaks to despisers of Forgiveness, etc. Mr*
Mead: It Is Epist. before the Almost-Christian.
sad, but certain, that the Gospel inflicts a Death of its own, as well as the
Law.

P. 121. There be many Threatenings annexed to the Covenant of Reconciliation,
Gilaspie, Ark of the Covenant.
Threatenings of Gospel-Vengeance to the Transgressors of the Covenant, but
there are no Threatenings in the Covenant of Suretiship, nothing denounced
against the man Christ, etc. How many places might I collect from Mr. C's
Father? Mr. Chancy of (...).
P. 124. Ye Unbelievers! your Curse is doubled, and your Condemnation is the
Condemnation. John 3. 19. the Law pronounces a Curse for breaking of it, but
the Gospel a far greater for not receiving Christ, and your Life and Salvation
which is offered to you through him. P. 303, This Gospel-Iustice, which is the
most terrible.

P. 309. The Gospel is so far from promising Life, by the Death of Christ, to
(...) on the Cov.
impenitent and unbelieving persons, that it threatens and seals Death, and
Wrath, and Condemnation to them, John 3. 36, 18, etc. If you read the Canons of
the Synod of Dort. you will find Evangelii minas, the Threatenings of the Gospel.
This Acta (...). par. 1. p. 313.
point is so obvious in all orthodox Writers, that I forbear more Testimonies.
But why are Gospel-Threatnings a Bull? No doubt, because the Gospel is (...),
glad tidings. And indeed, is it bad news that Sinners shall be saved, if they
repent and believe, and many shall believe? Will nothing be glad tidings, but
that they shall be saved, though they neither repent nor believe? This indeed was
a Message unfit for God to send; and though Mr. C. calls it a Bull, Christ has
solemnly declared, as the Lord of the N. Testament, that they who believe not,
the Wrath of God abides in them. This cannot be a Threatening of Adam's Law,
for those Threatenings respected every Sin. It is true; the Unbeliever is damned
for other Sins, by rejecting Christ, but what makes those Sins damning to him
in the event, notwithstanding the Offers of Life? Is it every Sin will do this?
Will a vain Thought exclude a man from Pardon, as much and as surely as final
Unbelief? Surely no: But yet the Threatening of Adam's Law denounced Death
against any Sin, as much and as certainly as against final Infidelity, and so
did not appropriate Death to Infidelity, as the Gospel-Threatning does.
Besides, is it an abiding of Wrath on us, which Adam's Law threatened? No, it
was the first bringing of Wrath on them that were free before.

III. TESTIMONIES that God has declared a fixed Rule, by which He pardons,
adopts, and glorifies Sinners, which Rule is his Gospel, and not his Secret
Decree.
To prevent mistake, know, that I speak not of the first Grace, which He gives
to all the Elect, but I speak of Pardon and Glory, which he has promised upon
Terms, and judicially denies to them that refuse Christ.

They put this Q. How is the Grace of God, etc? A. The Grace of God is
manifested Assembly of Divines larger Catech.
in the second Covenant, in that He freely provideth and offers to Sinners a
Mediator, and Life and Salvation by him, and requiring Faith as the Condition,
to interest them in him, etc. Here thou feast Faith is a Condition, and a
Condition required, and this required to interest us in Christ: No Interest,
but in conforming to this Rule, that requires Faith to this end.

He, De Christo gr^tis justificante, p. 244. Conditio vero, etc. The Condition
Mr. Fox, that wrote the Book of Martyrs.
whereby we are properly justified, is this; That we believe in Christ, and
cleave to him by a constant profession, etc. P. 251, 252. I ask, When Salvation
is promised freely for Christ's sake, will the absolute Promise save all men
promis^uously for the sake of Christ, without the limit of any Condition? I
think no such thing: Go on then. When this Promise belongs but to some, and
that only upon a certain Condition who then are those on whom this Promise
properly falls? Thou must say, the Believer, etc. P. 297. Q. What Sinners are
justified by Christ? A. Those who* inclined by a serious remorse, bewail their
Sins, and displeased at themselves, do recollect themselves with their whole
Soul, and are converted to Christ with an entire Faith, these are the only
Sinners whom Faith without Works does justify. And p* 311. Repentance prepares
the Matter to receive Justification, but the cause of Justification is Faith.

Consult these Canons of the Synod of Dort. p. 289. The Promise of the Gospel
(...) Synod. par. 1.
is, that whoever believes on Christ crucified, shall not perish, but have
everlasting Life; which Promise, with the Command of Faith and Repentance,
ought to be declared, and proposed promiscuously, and without distinction to
all men, to whom God in his good pleasure sends the Gospel. But the reason why
many that are called by the Gospel do not repent nor believe on Christ, but
perish in their Unbelief, is not truly any want or insufficiency of Christ's
Sacrifice offered on the Cro^s but through their own fault. And the Synod adds,
p. 302. Quotquot autem, etc. But as many as are called by the Gospel are
seriously called, for God does seriously and most truly declare in his Word
what is pleasing to him, viz. That they that are called should come to him, and
unfeignedly promises Rest for their Souls, and eternal Life to all that come
and believe.

I have cited these, to show, that God sets down this general common Rule to
all in his Gospel: It Is not one Rule to the Elect, and another to the
Non-elect, it is the same to all. Would the Reprobate obey the Call of the
Gospel, he should have Eternal Life: And the Elect do obey this Call, and
thereupon obtain Eternal Life. I could give very many instances out of this
Book, where Faith is called Act a Synod. par. 2.
the Condition. P. 105, Salvation is the thing promised in the new Covenant;
neither is it promised, but upon the Condition of Faith. Seeing therefore that
all men have not Faith in Christ, under which alone Condition is Salvation
promised, it is certain that Christ's Death has not purchased the Restoration
to a state of Grace and Salvation for all men, but only for Believers. See p.
12. God wills that the obtaining of Life should be suspended, on condition of
foregoing Faith. Dr. Owens on Heb. cap. 6.


P. 76, 77. When the Gospel is preached to Men, an Experiment is made, how they
will prove as to Faith and Obedience; if they acquit themselves in these, they
receive the Blessing of Eternal Life from God. And p. 14. There is no Interest
in Christ or Christian Religion to be obtained, without Repentance from dead
Works. See p. 12, 13, 14. The removal hereof ( viz. Enmity of our Minds by
wicked Works) consists in this, Repentance; for that is our turning unto God
upon the Terms of Peace tendered to us, etc. All Doctrines, Notions, and
Persuasions, that tend to alleviate the necessity of Personal Repentance, etc.
are pernicious to the Souls of Men, etc. P. 15. It has an absolute
inconsistency with the especial Righteousness of His Nature ( Christ) and which
he exercises as supreme Rector, and Judge of all, that any such should stand
in his sight, etc. and for the Lord Jesus, it would plainly make him the
Minister of Sin, etc. and the Gospel does openly propose Pardon of all sorts of
Sin, to all sorts of persons, that shall believe and obey it. If the Gospel did
this without annexing to its Promise the Condition of Repentance, never was
there, nor can there be so great an Encouragement to all sorts of Sin and
Wickedness. He on Ps. 130. p. 141. And this Connection Dr. Owens on Ps. 130.
of Repentance and Forgiveness, is that Principle from whence God convinces a
stubborn unbelieving People, that all his ways and dealings with Sinners are
just, Ezekiel. 18. 25. and should there be any failure in it, they could not be
so, if out of love to Sin, or the power of Unbelief, he refuse to close with
him on these Terms, his Condemnation is just. P. 136. After the Angels had
sinned, God never once called them to Repentance, he would not deceive them,
but let them know what they were to look for at his Hands: He has no
Forgiveness for them, and therefore would require no Repentance of them. It is
not, nor ever was, a Duty encumbent on them to repent, nor is it so unto the
Damned in Hell; God requires it not of them, nor is it their Duty, there being
no Forgiveness for them. What should move them to repent? Why should it be
their Duty so to do? Assignation then of Repentance is a revelation of
Forgiveness: God would not call upon a sinful Creature to humble it self, and
bewail its Sin, if there were no way of recovery or relief. Pray see him p.
151, etc. P. 184. he says, Whence is it that men perish in and for their Sins?
Is it for want of Mercy, Goodness, Grace, or Patience in God? Is it through any
defect in the Mediation of the Lord Christ? Is it for want of the mightiest
Encouragements, and most infallible Assurances, that with God there is
Forgiveness? Not at all, but merely on the account of their own obstinacy,
stubbornness, and perverseness; they will not, they hate the Light, they will
not come to Christ, that they may have Life. See his awful denunciation of the
Curse against all that resolve to continue in the neglect of this Salvation,
Dr. Owens of the satisfaction of Christ.
p. 272. I Will add one Passage of his, p. 144. the satisfaction made for Sin
being not made by the Sinner himself, there must of necessity be a Rule, and
Law-Constitution, how the Sinner may come to be interessed in it, and made
partaker of it, for the consequent of the Freedom of one by the Suffering of
another, is not natural or necessary, but must proceed from a Law-Constitution,
Compact, and Agreement. Now the way constituted and appointed, is that of
Faith, or Believing, as explained in the Scripture. If Men believe not, they
are no less liable to the Punishment due to their Sins, than if no satisfaction
at all were made for Sinners. Dr. Manton on the Hebrews.


P. 624. he asks, whether there be any Terms or no Terms in the Covenant; he
answers, Surely there are. How shall poor Creatures make out their Interest
therein, unless God has declared upon what Conditions we shall be possessed of
the Privileges, etc? If God has once declared the Conditions, if we would
have the benefit, we must consent to them. In the last part, p. 127. he tells
us, the Conditions of the Covenant are Faith, Repentance, and new Obedience.

P. 374. Nothing can be objected against the Conditions He requires, viz.
Charnock vol. 2.
Repentance and Faith. Can any Malefactor expect Peace with his Sword in his
Hand? And is it not fit there should be such Conditions to justify God? since
we were the guilty Offenders, can there be less, than to cast away our Weapons,
bewail our Sins, receive the Mediator, and serve him with newness of life? They
are such reasonable Conditions, that the Honor of God would not be provided
for, nor have a salvo without them. See p. 692, 349, etc.

P. 36. Make sure of true saving justifying Faith, etc. it secures from this
(Condemnation) Dr. Jacomb on Romans 8.
both as it is the Grace which unites to Christ, and also as it is the great
Condition of the Gospel, upon which it promises Life and Salvation, etc. He
may set down what Condition he pleases, in order to the giving out of his
Grace, which when they are performed, he is engaged to make good what he
promises upon them.

How often does he tell us, that God requires of every man Faith to be the
Condition, Dr. Preston of new Cov.
to be Partaker of the Covenant. P. 114. and p. 143. he says, The Condition
required of us is the doing this, viz. to repent, to serve the Lord in newness
of Life.

Bulkley by very many Arguments, from p. 278, to 298. does prove the
Gospel Covenant Bulkley on the Coven.
to be conditional, P. 280. The Lord does not say to any Soul, I will save you,
and bring you to Life, though you continue impenitent and unbelieving; but
commands and works us to repent, and believe, and then promises, that in the
way of Faith and Repentance he will save us. Had I room, I would give thee full
proof, that Davenant, Pemble, Perkins, Twiss, Scharpius, Zanchius, Rollock,
Wendelin, Altingius, Burgess, Blake, New England Synod, Turretin, Synod of
Dort. with hundreds more, do positively affirm the Gospel Covenant to require a
Condition on our part, and so fix this Gospel-Rule. Mr. Chancy's Father urges
it, p. 79, Mr. C. on Iustif.
132, 123, and 116. where he shows what we must do to obtain the Propitiation.
So 117.

Mr. Rutherford affirms, That to deny there be Conditions, is to belly the
Gospel; Rutherford Survey of Antinomianism, par. 2.
and adds, That Good Works are Conditions without which we cannot be saved, p.
38. and p. 36. It is a new Heresy of Antinomians, to deny a conditional
Gospel; it is all one as to belly the Holy Ghost, who says, He that believes
shall be saved, he that believes not is condemned already. Or they may say,
whether Men believe or no, they may be saved, as Dr. Crisp says.

P. 445. If not, then be wise, and (...) from the Wrath to come; and there is
Mr. Mead, Early Obedience.
but one way, and that is by closing with Jesus Christ, and giving your selves
up to an entire subjection to his Yoke: There is no way to escape Wrath, and
secure Eternal Life but this. P. 276. Consider where you will lay the blame of
your Destruction; you cannot lay it upon God, for he gave Christ to redeem and
save you; you cannot lay it upon Christ, for he would have gathered you, and
you would not, he never cast you off till you cast him off; you cannot lay it
upon the Spirit, for he would have convinced, and converted, and sanctified
you, and you have resisted and quenched him; you cannot lay it upon your
Ministers, for they have set before you Life and Death, and declared to you the
danger of Sin, and necessity of Holiness, but you would not believe their
Report, etc. So that you can lay the blame no where, but upon a cursed corrupt
Heart; thy Destruction is of thy self. See what he says of Conditions, and
decree, under the Head the Gospel is a Law.

P. 182, 183, 184, etc. proves the Covenant to be conditional, that without
Faith Mr. Obad. Sedgwick of the Cov.
there is no relation in a way of Covenant 'twixt God and us; and that upon
Faith God becomes our God in Covenant, and answers Objections. P. 188, 189. he
speaks to Sinners presuming of the many Promises of Salvation, etc. Oh but
Sirs, there is a Condition in the Bond, which he often repeats. P. 430. when he
had proved Repentance was necessary to the remission of Sin, he adds, Whereas
they say this is Popish and Legal, they speak ignorantly, if not maliciously,
etc. it is as Popish to say Repentance is required for Assurance, as for
Remission, for both are Acts of Grace. Beza, Epist. 20.


Conjunctas autem, etc. But Repentance and Remission of Sin are joined
together, and truly so, that Repentance goes before Forgiveness: This partly
the Word of God teaches, yea, Reason it self, and common Sense, however
corrupt, does Calvin, Harm. in Mar. 4. 12. Vid. Instit. lib. 3. cap. 17. 5. Mr.
Clerkson of Saving-Grace. Calvin is positive that the Gospel Covenant is
conditional, but that condition is not the hard one of the Law, lib. 2. cap. 5.
12. Yea, he only excludes meritorious conditions; when he says it is absolute
lib. 3. cap. 3. 21, 22.
manifest it; he proves this fully. So Calvin, God forgives no Sins but such as
Men are displeased with themselves for, etc.

The excellent Mr. Clerkson will help thee to resolve some seeming difference
thou find among Authors, who in one place seem to deny the Covenant to be
conditional, and in other places affirm it. See p. 132, 133, 134. After he had
asserted the first Grace to be absolute, viz. in Effectual Calling, etc. he
adds, The subsequent Blessings of the Covenant, those that follow the first,
are in some sense conditional, and so offered and promised in a conditional
form, and yet are nevertheless gracious. There are Terms and Conditions, taking
the word Conditions in a Latitude, as comprizing Qualifications, Adjuncts, and
necessary Antecedents, which do no way derogate from Grace, neither detract
from its freeness, nor obscure, but rather illustrate it, Romans 10. 8, 9, 10.
Rev. 3. upon such Terms are Justification, Adoption, and Salvation offered, and
not offered but upon Terms, and yet most freely* and graciously, etc. and not
only Faith, but holiness of Heart and Life, and perseverance therein, are the
Terms upon which Salvation is promised, etc. P. 134. And has constituted an
Order amongst them, so that one must go before another; we must believe before
we are justified, and be holy before we can see God, and has appointed one of
them to be the means or way to obtain the other: We are justified by Faith, we
are created unto good Works, that we should walk in them; Acts of holy
Obedience are the way wherein we must walk to Salvation. So that here is an
antecedence of some Duty, and that necessary by divine Appointment and Command,
and this tending to obtain the Favor freely offered. And by this we may
understand what a Condition is, in a sense very innocent, and no way injurious
to Grace: It is an Antecedent necessarily required, as the way to attain or
arrive at what is promised. And in this sense it must not be denied there are
Conditions in the Gospel, and its Promises, unless we will deny that there are
Duties necessary to Salvation, and made necessary by Divine Command, for such a
Condition is nothing but something of a Command joined with a Promise in a
conditional form, etc. He commands all to Repent, and He promises Pardon; put
this Promise and that Command together, and it becomes a conditional Promise,
If you repent you shall have Pardon, 1 John 1. 9. But p. 137, 138, 140. he
justly excludes meritorious, natural, and legal Conditions. By which Legal he
means not whatever is commanded with an annexed Promise, for that were to
contradict all here cited; but such Conditions as do entitle us to the Benefit,
as the very Righteousness for which we merit or obtain them; which I have often
denied Gospel-Conditions to be. And so he explains himself.

Reader, it is evident what a number of Men fall under Mr. C's Curse, as well as
I, and judge thou what reason he has to pretend to the old Gospel, and arraign
us for a new one. My Paradoxes appear the common Sentiment of the notedly
Orthodox, while his Principles must be content with the Patronage of new
sangled Antinomians. The Testimonies under the 1, and 2. Principles prove this
Rule. Because the Paradoxes may be entire, I Will add the 10th, viz. the Wedding
Garment, Of the Wedding Garment.
Mat. 22. 11. is true Uniting Faith; of which Mr. C. p. 32. your saying the
Wedding Garment was Faith, and not the Righteousness of Christ apprehended by
Faith, ^is a wretched wresting and abuse of Scripture, etc. Repl. 1. Does a
true Uniting Faith exclude Christ's Righteousness, or include it? Keep to this
Rule when you speak of being justified by Faith, and what will become of the
Object justifying? 2. Is it Christ's way to condemn Men, merely because they
have not a Privilege, or else because they neglected the Terms on which that
Privilege was promised? The former was mere Misery, and no Fault; the latter
is a Fault by which he is obnoxious to that Misery, and therefore fittest to
ground a Sentence on. 3. I Will join two, to help to bear this Calumny; Fox, p.
343. Sed per Mr. Fox de Christo justificant^.
solam fidem, etc. But by Faith alone; therefore Faith is that Garment made
white in the Blood of the Lamb, which properly clothes us for the Wedding. And
Mr. Gale, p. 197. Should you this night hear the Cry, Behold, the Bridegroom
comes, Mr. Gale of Christ's Coming.
are you ready to enter into the Wedding-Chamber? Have you the Wedding Garment
of Faith and Holiness?

As to Phil. 3. 8. I have tried stronger Arguments than Mr. C. is like to
offer, Augustine expounds Phil. 3. 8. as I (...).
and yet my sense of that Text is not altered, and fear not to defend it in due
time.

Mr. C. p. 27 As for the Notion, that the Covenant of Redemption is a distinct
Covenant Mr. C's Fourth Principle, No Covenant ^fi Redemption distinct from the
Covenant of Grace with Men. Rutherford Covenant opened. Ark of the Coven.
Sedgwick of Coven. Bulkley of Covenant.
from the Covenant of Grace; I deny it.

Repl. By the Covenant of Grace is meant the Gospel Covenant made with Men. Mr.
R. proves, that the Covenant of Redemption and the Covenant of Grace are two
distinct Covenants, p. 308, to 313. So does Mr. Gilaspie, Cap. 1. 2. and shows
the Difference between these two Covenants, cap. 5. The same is proved by Mr.
Sedgwick, p. 3, 4, 5. and by Bulkley, p. 29, to 32. It Is affirmed by Mr.
Norton, Orth. Evan. p. 113. It Is often asserted by Dr. Owens, by Mr. Mead, in Mr.
Mead. The Author of the City (...).
his Book of Early Obedience, p. 72. etc. and Sermon for Mr. Rosewell. Nay, the
Author of the Letter grants it, p. 24.

Reader, I shall not now descend to argue this Point, only hint to thee, that
the Parties are distinct, the Terms are distinct, the Promises are distinct's
moreover, one has no Mediator, the other has, etc. It Is true, some worthy
Divines formerly speak of these two Covenants as if one, which rendered their
Notions less plain; but yet they did not deny, but affirm, that there was part
of that Covenant to be actually engaged and performed by Man, though giving
Ability was undertaken by Christ in the other part of it; and also, that as it
was promised to him, that upon Man's compliance with the Conditions, they
should be Partakers of the Benefits; so (...) it was a Promise made to them
upon compliance with the Terms. Whereas Mr. C. asks me, Do not we plead
Redemption, or the Promise made in Christ? Repl. I had said, that the Promises
of the First Grace were pleadable only by Christ, as the stipulating Party: And
what is that to Redemption? But can he think that unregenerate men can plead a
personal Right to the First Grace? And it is Right that is included in the word
pleadable.

Mr. C. p. 29. Pardon is not promised to Faith and Repentance, as things
distinct Fifth Principle. Pardon is the cause of Faith, and not Faith the
Condition of Pardon, etc.
from the Promise, but Pardon is promised, together with Faith and Repentance,
to the Sinner, etc. Pardon is rather the Condition of Faith and Repentance, and
much more, having a causal Influence thereunto, than Faith and Repentance of
Pardon, etc. p. 21.

Repl. 1. Here, and p. 28. he confounds a Promise of Grace, and Promises made
to Grace. 2. He affirms, that the whole of the Gospel Covenant is but one
Promise; and this, I suppose, is the first Promise in the Sentence against the
Serpent: Hereby he blasts all the fuller Discoveries of it by the Prophets,
yea, and Christ The first Promise considered.
himself, as if all the Conditional Proposals of Covenant-Benefits on Terms of
Duty were Additions injuriously added to the first Promise. 3. He wretchedly
mistakes the nature of that first Promise, as if it excluded all Terms of our
Saving Interest in the Blessings of it: Whereas it did imply them. If you take
the words as a Promise of Christ, that he should in our nature overcome Satan,
then it belonged to all Mankind, to whom it is promulgated, even the rejecters
of it, Acts 13. 32, 46. and as such, gives no Interest in the Effects of it to
any man. If you take them as importing the Saving Benefits to the Seed of the
Woman, then there must be some change in them, who are by Nature the Seed of
the Serpent, as well as the most wicked, otherwise all the natural Seed of Eve
have the same Saving Benefits; which is thus evidenced: When God renewed the
Promise to Abraham and his Seed, that Seed the Apostle tells you were
Believers, Romans 4. 11, 16, 27. and as I have said before, Faith must be then
enjoined, for by Faith Abel's Sacrifice was more acceptable than Cain's, and
God's Words to Cain were the Redeemer's Language; and the use of Sacrifices
imports, that God revealed more of his Will to them, by way of Precept, than is
there recorded. 4. And what can he mean by things distinct from the Promise? If
that Faith and Repentance are promised, I had often affirmed it: If that as Acts
in Man they are not distinct from the Promise, it is unfit to reflect on: If
that they may not be Terms of Pardon conjoined therewith, in one promissory
Series, it is against the scope of the Bible; and sure, if that hinder not
Pardon to be the cause of them, it will not exclude them to be Terms of Pardon.
5. But what strange Divinity is this! 1. that Pardon is the Condition of Faith.
2. Pardon is the cause of Faith. How is Pardon and these at once, as he affirms
( i. e. in order of Nature) and yet Faith is the consequent, Pardon not the
caus^ of conditional Faith.
yea, effect of Pardon. But to come to the point, Is not this to burlesque the
Scripture, We believe that we may be justified, Gal. 2. 16? That is, we be
justified that we may believe. We are justified by Faith, Romans 5. 1. that is,
we are made Believers by Justification. We repent for the remission of sins,
Luke 33. that is, we have remission of Sins, that we may repent. One Reason at
least should have been offered for these contradictions; I suppose all that
would be offered is, that Christ cannot work Faith in us till we are pardoned,
which the whole Scripture is against, and God has provided for it, by Divine
ordination, in that Christ's Merits are admitted effectual to the working and
and accepting of this Grace, before these Merits are applied for Forgiveness;
which is fully expressed in his own revealed Method, whereby he commands and
works Faith in order to Forgiveness: Yea, he will not, I hope, deny (lest he
spoil his Argument p. 28.) that Union with Christ is before Pardon in order of
Nature; And is not that an Effect of Christ's Merits? Yea, the Gospel-offers,
Spirits operation of Faith, etc. are so. 6. How long must I stay for an Answer,
if I ask what kind of Cause is Pardon? It Is well if it be not hisprocatartick.
7. Is not this a new and singular Gospel? Consult the former Testimonies. Need
I mind thee, that Dr. Owens says p. 306. We require Dr. Owens Treatise of
Iustif. Clerkson, Norton, Acta Synod. ^ par. p. 279, etc. Bulkley on the Coven.
Sheppard's Sound Believer. Mr. C's Father of Just. The Assemb.
Evangelical Faith, in order of Nature, antecedently to our Justification, etc?
R. Mr. Cl. p. 134. Norton, etc. say the same; the Synod of Dort. is often
positive. Mr. Bulkley p. 321. gives nine Reasons to prove that Faith is an
antecedent Condition of Justification, and says, the denial of it is some of
the new Light, which the old Age of the Church has brought forth. Mr. Sheppard
proves the same, p. 221, to 240. Mr. C's Father says, Faithunites the Soul to
Christ, p. 144. It accepts of a whole Christ, with a whole Heart, p. 154. It Is
a receiving Christ in all his Offices, p. 132. Faith has an influence into a
Sinner's Justification, p. 122. Faith is constituted and ordained of God in the
Covenant of Grace, as a necessary and indispensible means for attaining this
end in adult persons, p. 123. And he answers his Son's Objections, as to
Infants. The Assembly affirm, That Justification is a Benefit flowing from
Vocation wherein Faith is wrought; but of this hereafter. It Is well if he call
not all these Enemies to the Grace of God, as p. 8.

Mr. C. near a kin to this is his Banter on me, p. 21. because I had said that
Mr. C's 6th Principle, no Conversion or effecteal Vocation before Pardon. This
the (...) Letter affi^ms, which I (...) regard here, in opposition to his
denying an habitual change b^f. Pardon.
Election was not formally our Pardon, nor a legal grant of it, but that by
Divine Appointment there was to interpose between the decree of Pardon, and the
actual Pardon of the Elect, a Gospel-Promise of this Pardon, and a work of the
Spirit on Men, for a conformity to the Rule of that Promise. He tells me, I
would have Christ to stand as a Medicin in the Apothecary's shop, for some body
or other when the Physician prescribes it: Nay, it is not an absolute sick
Patient neither, it is one the Apothecary has in a manner cured before, etc.
And before the person be pardoned, he must be in a very sound and safe
condition, etc. and there must be inherent Righteousness in the person to be
pardoned, etc. Add this (and much of this kind up and down in his Book) to his
fifth Principle, viz. That Pardon is the cause of Faith, etc. and then we have
his sixth Principle, That we are pardoned before the Spirit do at all work any
change upon the Soul in effectual Vocation, or we are not called or converted
in order of Nature before we are justified. This is fully the sense of the
Letter from the City, p. 25, 30, etc.

Repl. 1. A Legal Grant is a term out of Mr. C's Element, or he would not
confound it with a Decree; and what he speaks of the Promise Tit. 1. will
appear not to be eternal, but before many Ages, and not to exclude
Gospel-Conditions in their use, for our personal Interest in Pardon. 2. Is
there not a fullness in Christ for Sinners before they make use of it? 3. All
Sinners are ungodly in a Gospel The Object of Pardon is a Believer, though
ungodly, by Adam's Law.
sense, when God comes to call them effectually in order to Pardon; and they
are ungodly in a legal sense when God does pardon them, or they would not need
Pardon. 4. Yet they are not unconvinced Unbelievers that are the Objects of
God's pardoning Act; they are such ungodly ones as believing Abram was. 5.
Their Faith does not merit Pardon, nor is it the Righteousness by which they
are pardoned; that is Christ's alone. 6. Faith, or the first Grace, is far from
making a The first Grace does not make us sound, if abstracted from Christ and
the Promise.
Sinner sound or whole before Pardon; it makes him sound, but as being the
Condition upon which Christ's Righteousness will be applied to him for healing;
but without this applied to the Believer for Pardon, he would be miserable
notwithstanding Faith. 7. Faith is necessary to our Interest in Pardon; see
cap. 12. 8. This Faith is an effect of the Work of the Spirit, on the Heart of
a Sinner, in effectual Vocation, and by Vocation there is a change of the Soul,
and its prior to Pardon: Whom he called, them he justified, Romans 8. 30. Lest
they should be converted, Effectual Vocation before Pardon in order of Nature.
and I should heal them, Mat. 13. 15. Act. 26. 18. The Sanctification which
follows Justification, does not import, that there is no Calling before, nor
that begun habitual Holiness is not infused in Vocation. But I would ask, 1. Q.
What kind of Faith is that by which we are justified, if there be no Work of
the Spirit on the Heart? Ephesians. 2. 5, 6. 2 Cor. 4. 3, ^.
Is it a vital Act before Life? Is it the Faith of God's Elect, when it
proceeds from an unregenerate Heart? Is it an Act of an enlightened Mind,
before the Mind be enlightened? or, Can they see Christ before their Eye be
opened? Is it an Act of John 1. 12.
the Will, before the Will be at all determined by Grace? Is it a receiving of
Christ, while the Heart is yet under an utter aversion to him? Is it a
renouncing of all for Christ, whilst the bias of the Heart is against Christ,
and for other things above him and against him? Do we believe before we are
made a willing People? Can it be an Effect of Infinite Power, and make no
change in the principle of our Ps. 110. 3. Ephesians. 1. 19.
Actings? Or can that Principle be, and yet have place neither in Understanding
or Will? It Is true, as they describe Faith, a man may be Evangelically ungodly
and yet believe, because it is a Faith common to the most profane, who persuade
themselves all is safe, though Destruction is near, and this while they hate
and reject Christ with their whole Heart. How can it be a Faith unfe^gned,
while Villainy 2 Timothy 15.
and Hypocrisy reign in the Soul? Or be adapted to such great Operations
whilst in its whole Essence there is nothing which argues the least alteration
on the Soul, or operation of the Holy Spirit? Here Is the Faith of a dead Soul,
of an unregenerate Soul, of an unconverted Soul; and by such a Faith we are
justified they say. But, 2. Q. How dare these men pretend to agree with our
Orthodox Divines, when they Testimonies that Vocation is before Justification.
The Assembly.
are so plain against them? Read the Assemblies lesser Catechism; Q. What is
Effectual Calling? A. Effectual Calling is the Work of God's Spirit, whereby
convincing us of our Sin and Misery, enlightening our Minds in the knowledge of
Christ, and renewing our Wills, he does persuade and enable us to embrace Jesus
Christ freely offered to us in the Gospel. Q. What Benefits do they that are
effectually called partake of in this Life? A. They that are effectually
called, do in this Life partake of Justification, Adoption, Sanctification, and
the several Benefits which in this Life do either accompany or flow from them.
Reader, is not the Assembly plain, that a man is called before he is justified?
When Justification is a Benefit that the Called and none but they partake of,
and this Benefit supposes them effectually called who partake of it, let us
next see who are called; Is there no change made upon them by effectual
Vocation? Sure there is, and this in order to their embracing Christ, which is
Believing. They are convinced of Sin and Misery, their Minds are enlightened
with the Saving Knowledge of Christ. Their Wills are renewed; they are
persuaded and enabled to put forth that Act of Faith, whereby they embrace
Christ. Is here no change? Sure it is a great one in the Understanding and Will
too; and all this to make a man an Object of Justification. And shall these men
To deny it, is to join with the Arminians.
face us down, as if we differed from the Assembly? Nay, do not all our
Orthodox plead against the Arminians, that there is the infused Habit of Faith
before the Act; yea, and that most Habits are infused at once, and included in
the vital Principle? What heaps of Testimonies could I produce for this! Yea,
is it not our common Principle, that Vocation is before Justification? Herewith
agree the Synod of Dort. Hooker. Mr. C's Father of Just. Norton Orth. Evan.
Rutherfords Survey of Antin. par. 2
Canons of the Synod of Dort. par. 1. p. 303. Hooker's Effect. Calling, p. 344,
345. Mr. C. says, p. 123. Hence Justification is set after Vocation, and
therefore after Faith, because Faith is wrought in Vocation. Norton, p. 260,
261, 263. Union in order of Nature follows Vocation, p. 291. So also Ball of
Cov. p. 334, 339. See how Mr. Rutherford exposes this Error, p. 131. and p.
111, 112. he sets down this as the Gospel Order: 1. The Sinner dead in Sin, a
Son of Wrath; 2. a Walker after the Errors of this World; 3. The Gospel of
Free Grace is preached to the Dead, the elect Heirs of Wrath, etc. 4. The Law
and Curses of it preached (with the Gospel, lest they despair) to humble them;
5. The Sinner legally humbled, Romans 7. 11. with a half hope of Mercy, prepared
for Christ, etc. 6. The stony Heart of mere Grace removed, in the same moment a
new Heart put in him, or the Habit of Sanctification put in him. 7. In the same
moment the Soul believes in him that justifies the Ungodly. 8. In the same
moment God for Christ's sake, of mere Grace, justifies the believing Sinner.
Is not here a new Heart in order of Nature before Faith, and that Faith before
Justification, though not in time.

Mr. C. p. 22. When I had affirmed, that in Adam's Law Life was promised to
sinless Obedience, etc. and that Salvation is now impossible by that Law; but
that God in the Gospel promises Blessings on lower Terms, viz. unfeigned
Faith, etc. Mr. C. answers, To talk of any obedience to that Law besides
sinless, in respect of that Mr. C's 7th Principle; all sincere Graces and
Actions are Sins, if they be not perfect.
Law in its preceptive part, is nonsense, for sinful Obedience, which you are
going to plead for, is Disobedience. And p. 26. I roundly assert, that no Law
of God, with a Sanction of Life and Death, upon performance or nonperformance
of Obedience, does admit of the least imperfection in the said Obedience. He
often speaks in this manner; whence I think this is his Principle: That God has
not promised any Benefit for Christ's sake upon any terms short of perfect
Obedience; and sincere Faith, Love, and Holiness, because imperfect, are
formally downright Disobedience; or Sin, which is the same.

Rep. 1. I grant sincere Faith and Holiness be imperfect, as to the preceptive
part of Adam's Law. 2. I grant, that nothing imperfect can be a meritorious
Righteousness for which we are justified, etc. But yet I wonder, 1. that any
man dare say that God has promised no beneficial Effects of Christ's Merits
upon any Terms The Gospel promises Benefits upon (...) Grace, tho imperfect.
short of Perfection, though not for them as the meriting Cause. Ioh. 13. 17. If
ye know these things, happy are ye if ye do them. Mat. 8. 13, 15. If ye
forgive, etc. Mar. 11. 25. If we confess our sins. 1 Ioh. 1. 9. He is just to
forgive. Romans 10. 9. If confess with thy mouth, and believe with thy heart,
thou shall be saved. What Is Repentance unto Life, etc? It seems the meaning of
these words is, If thou confess, and art sinlesly perfect, God will forgive. Or
else, though I promise thus, yet I mean, that it is all as one, whether thou
confess or not, believe or not, repent or not, it shall make no difference in
thy Interest in the promised Forgiveness. 2. It Is as strange, that the most
sincere Action or Grace is Disobedience or Sin, because it is imperfect;
Iniquity Sincere Graces not sins, tho imperfect. Vid my Book, cap. 19
cleaves to them, but are they therefore Iniquity? Is there no Gospel
mitigation, so as to admit sincere Grace to be true Grace, though it be not
perfect Grace? It seems the Saints have weaker Vices, but no Graces; their
Duties are something less Sins, but no obediential Acts; their Love is an
abated Hatred, but not truly Love; they are mere Dung, only they do not smell
so strong. Is not this to spit in the Face of the most of the Bible? It speaks
often of an inherent Righteousness, true Graces, real Godliness, and good Fruits;
it praises Saints for these; but, it seems, we persuade People only to
Disobedience, when we call them to believe; and they try themselves by their
Sins, when they try themselves by marks of Sanctification, and there is no
specific difference between the best and worst action they do; all is
Disobedience, and but Disobedience. 3. And where is the strength of what is so
roundly affirmed? viz. No Law of God with a Sanction admits of the least
Imperfection in the said Obedience. Then if the Gospel, as including Adam's
Precepts, commands Perfection, it cannot forgive any Imperfection; if it do not
abate the Rule Every degree of Duty is not always the Condition of Benefits.
of Duty, it cannot confer any degree of its promised Mercy. But, Sir, you
confound the extent of the Precept with that degree of Obedience to it, which
is made the Condition of its promised Benefit: May not a humane Law command
many things, and yet confine its Sanction to one part, yea, and vary its
Threa^s or Promises by many different circumstances in the Offenders, or
Obeyers? Does he indeed think that wherever God enjoins Duties, he denounces
his Threatening to all degrees of neglect of what he makes a Duty; or that it
cease to be a Duty at all, if the Sanction reach not every degree of
omission? Mar. 16. 16. He that believes and is baptized, shall be saved. Is
not it a Duty here to be baptized? Yes sure. But shall none be saved if they
are not baptized, tho they do believe? The Sanction then falls not on all the
Precept, or none of the Unbaptized can be saved. The unsoundness of this
Principle will appear to thee in most practical Books thou read, and the
Orthodox are positive in the contrary. What more common than the difference
between legal and evangelical Obedience? It Is stated by Sedgwick on the Cov. p.
652. Sedgwick. Jacomb. Rutherford. Ames. Mr. C. of Iustificat.
Dr. Iacomb, Romans 8. p. 23. Rutherford Ant. p. 8. Davenant on Colos. p. 17.
Ames spends a Chapter to prove against Bellarmin, that our Good Works are not
Sins quoad essentiam. Mr. C's Father, p. 130. Neither is that Obedience which
is required of Believers, a strict and exact conformity to the Law, as it does
in it self require and demand a legal Obedience, but evangelical Obedience,
which stands in the desire, resolution, and endeavor to obey God's revealed
Will. And p. 222. says, The imperfect Good Works that are done by the
Faithful, are accounted Righteousness, or (as Mr. Calvin says) are accounted
for Righteousness, they being dipped in the Blood of Christ, i. e. they are
accounted righteous actions, and so the Faithful shall be judged according to
their Good Works, tho not saved for them. Dr. Owens, p. 72. God has abolished
the Covenant of Works, by substituting a Dr. O. on Heb. 6.
new one in the room of it, because it could not expiate Sin, nor could approve
of such an Obedience, as poor sanctified Sinners were able to yield unto God;
for it requires Perfection, when the best they can attain to in this Life, is
only Sincerity, etc. and in this Covenant God has provided for the acceptance
of sincere though imperfect Obedience, which the Law had no respect to.

Mr. C. p. 23. Christ our Redeemer gives Commands, and exerts a Ki^gly Power in
Government of his Church, and has Judgment committed to him, but these are not
the Gospel-Conditions Mr. C's 8th Principle.
of Life unto Sinners, propounded in the Gospel, God does not require Obedience
to the Laws of Christ in his Church, as foederal Conditions of Eternal Life.
Such Obedience is part of the Life promised, etc.

Repl. Not to expose the Passages before this, as if because the Gospel in a
large sense includes all the moral Precepts, therefore taken in a strict sense,
it makes all those Precepts and perfect Obedience to them the Condition of its
peculiar Benefits; and as if Christ's Law did not bind a person morally
impotent; and that Men must be first pardoned before they are obliged to submit
to Christ; and that Christ is King, and his Laws bind under a Gospelsanction.
there is no difference between such a taste of Pardoning Mercy, as assures us
we shall have Pardon on Gospel-Terms, and our actually having that Pardon
before those Terms be yielded to. At this rate he reasons throughout his Book,
but I mind greater things than the discovery of his Weakness; therefore to his
Principle I answer: He gives Christ, as Redeemer, a poor Kingdom; it is a Kingly
Power, but it is of a low sort. 1. Its extent is small, it is bounded within his
Church; it seems then he has no Authority over them that are without, no, not
to command them to be Church Members. I thought, though he be acknowledged King
by his Church, yet his Laws bind much farther. I am sure he damns others for
disobeying him. But, 2. by these words He is not such a King as can make Laws
in his Luke 19. 14, 27.
very Church; He exerts a Kingly Power in governing of his Church: This is
distinguished by Mr. C. from giving Commands. The sound of this Passage is, He
gives Commands as an Officer acting not in a proper Legislation. 3. Allow what
he prescribes to be His Laws in any sense, yet there is no Salvation depends
upon obeying them: Nothing He requires, yea, by his Revealed Gospel, are any
Conditions of Life. He came to purchase Salvation, but he has no Authority to
enjoin the Terms of it. Whereas I read, Romans 14. 9.
that for this end he died, that he might be Lord of the dead, and of the
living: Heb. 5. 9.
He is the Author of eternal Salvation to all them that obey him: Joh. 8. 51.
If a man keep my Sayings, he shall never see death: Joh. 14. 21.
He that does my Commandments, and keeps them, he loves me; and he that
loves me shall be loved of my Father: Joh. 5. 24, 25, 26, 27.
The dead shall hear the voice of the Son of God, and they that hear shall
live. For as the Father has life in himself, so has he given the Son to have
life in himself, and has given him Authority to execute Judgment also, because
he is the Son of Man. He that hears my word, and believes him that sent me,
has everlasting life, and shall not come into condemnation. It seems too that
Church Censures bind nothing of eternal danger, even when rightly administered.
Dr. Owens, in his Treatise of the Sabbath, says near these words, That our
worshipping Christ in his Ordinances on Earth, is the Condition of our being
with him in Heaven. 4. The Reason for all this is strange, such Obedience is
part of the Life promised; then he rendered the Elect Libertines, when he made
such Promises: He promised to make the Elect obedient, therefore he cannot
command them to be so. Pursuant to his Promise, he will make them obedient,
therefore the Terms to be obeyed are no foederal Conditions of other Blessings
promised on those Terms; because he will see they shall believe, therefore he must
not thus enact, Believe, and thou shall be saved. 5. But is there no
distinction admittable in the word Life? It Is sometimes put for Grace in us,
sometimes for Glory consummated, sometimes it is put strictly for the saving
privilege part of the Covenant, as consequent to the Terms of it, and that
believing ye might have Life. In this sense he saw I took it: And does God in
Joh. 20. 31.
every Promise of Life in this sense, promise Obedience to the Terms of it? 6.
A few lines after these he determines, the Judgment committed to Christ; It Is
not Legislation at all, nay, all of it is not Gospel-Iudgment (he might have
said none Mr. C. p. 24.
of it, for with him the Gospel is no Law, and so no Rule of Judgment): Nay,
worst of all, his Judgment is only to destroy, not to save; i. e. his Reward as
Redeemer is to be Executioner of Adam's Law, without conditional Offers of
Pardon to any, that are not saved; for if there be no foederal Sanction in the
Gospel, there can be no conditional Offer to any that are not saved, nay, to
none that are saved. Now Reader, see how Christ as Redeemer is honored by Mr.
C. He shall be of use to excuse us from loyal subjection, while himself is
dethroned, as to the rectoral way of the application of his Merits. This very
point of Christ's regal Authority as Redeemer, has been defended by our Icanes
against Hammond; vide Charnock, vol. 2. p. 687. 2. These. 1. 8.
Divines hitherto, and I am sure he will take vengeance on them who obey not his
Gospel.

I might instance others of his Principles, which I suppose agree with Dr.
Crisp, as in his Description of Faith, which he hints p. 36. and I have heard
him more fully define it, by assurance of our Pardon: In that place he makes
Faith of no use, but to claim Possession, to which it seems we had as full a
Title before we believed. And p. 17. Mr. C. After the manner of imputation, in
foro justitiae, our Sins shall never be laid on us, (viz. the Elect,
qua-Elect.) Which I will prove against you when you will. Rep. Let Us understand
the Question, for it is too confused: What is this After the manner of
imputation in foro, etc? Do you mean, the Elect shall Mr. C's Challenge
accepted.
never come to God's Bar of Judgment before they believe, and are forgiven? If
so I grant it: But if you mean, that the past Sentence of God binds not the
Sins of the Elect upon them, while they are Unbelievers* and that this Act of
his, by his Word, is not an Imputation in foro divinae justitiae. I freely
accept your Challenge, so that you will engage to avoid unruly Passions. And
it is well if those Effects of Electing Love, which Paul had applied to him in
the Womb, are not semen quoddam electionis, which Calvin so condemns. Calv.
Inst. lib. 3. cap. 24. sect. 10, 11.


Of the same sort is what Mr. C. says p. 34. of 2 Cor. 5. 18. Rep. 1, God is
so reconciled, that no want of atonement shall prevent Peace. 2. That upon this
atonement God offers Peace on the lowest Terms. 3. That the Elect shall in time
be enabled to obey those Terms, and be actually reconciled. 4. But the whole
Canon of the Word, and unopposed in this place, assures me, that the Elect are
in a state of Wrath till they believe; yea, were God actually reconciled to
them, he could not suffer them to remain Enemies in their Minds by wicked
Works, and a total absence of his Spirit. But I have not room for these and the
like.

Mr. C. p. 10. After a certain zealous Neonomian had taken his Leave of us: And
p. 22. you play the Iugler more; He says Quoniam and Christus Mediator, etc.
being that both Christ the Mediator, and Faith in Christ, are only means of the
restoration of Man to God, by Holiness and Love. Therefore it must doubtlesly
be said, that from the nature of the thing Faith, Holiness, and the Love of
God, are more necessary to Salvation than either Faith in Christ, or the
Sacrifice of Christ himself. There Is a ^one for you to pick.

Rep. These are Mr. Baxter's words, and had I been in his stead, I should not
have given so much occasion to simple Readers to startle; but being the only
seeming Difficulty Mr. C. has put me to, (except the exercise of Patience)
I Will see if the Offense may be prevented. 1. Mr. B. does not here compare the
causal Influence Mr. Baxter explained.
of Christ's Satisfaction with our Holiness, nor the use of Faith in Christ
with Faith in God, as the way of Life is now appointed by the Divine Will. If
any man had asked Mr. B. Is Holiness as meritorious of Salvation as Christ's
Satisfaction is? he would have answered, No; for Christ's Satisfaction is the
sole meritorious cause of Salvation, and Holiness is none at all. If you had
asked Mr. B. Is Faith-Love to God of that use, to receive Christ for our
Justification, as Faith in Christ is? he would have answered, No; Faith in
Christ is in it self most ap^ and by the Lord appointed to this use to receive
Christ. Both these he of^ affirms. 2. Mr. B. here speaks only of the
comparative necessity of these to Salvation, with respect* to the nature of the
thing it self; that is, as he explains himself, it cannot be a Salvation
without Holiness at least habitual; it is a Contradiction, as it would be to say
Salvation without Salvation: It is not whether is more necessary now to my
obtaining Salvation; as if I should ask, whether is more necessary to the
Essence of Man, his Humanity, or Christ's Satisfaction? you would say, from the
nature of the thing, a man's Humanity is. 3. Nay, had Mr. B. spoken of the
essential necessity of these to the obtaining Salvation, yet Mr. C. has made
him speak very orthodoxly; for p. 22. Mr. C. says, When once a Transgressor is
sentenced by the Law, he falls into the hands of Prerogative, and the Prince
may do with him what he pleases. God also might have put Repentance into the
Conditions of the Law of Works at first, and said, if thou do not eat, or
repent of thy eating, thou shall have thy Reward. Now if, as he says,
Prerogative could save fallen Man, if God pleased, and what way He pleased;
nay, that it was not inconsistent with Gods Nature, to have made Repentance a
Condition of Reward to sinning Man, in the first Law, without the interposal of
Christ's Satisfaction, then Mr. B's words are plain; so that we can prove, that
it is inconsistent with God's Perfections* to save a man that finally hates
him, and is utterly void of all Holiness. And sure if, as Mr. C. says,
Christ's Satisfaction was not absolutely necessary to Salvation, Faith in
Christ would have been less necessary.

I am in Duty bound to resent that treatment the memory of this great Blessing
of the Nation meets with: What could be more slightly mentioned of any Fellow,
than he took his leave of us? or more falsely than he was a Iugler; though I more
so? Were his Enemies as free from crafty Tricks, Falsehood, and Selfishness as
he was, a public Good would be more intended, and the power of Religion
receive a greater Testimony. There be of them that say publicly Mr. B. is in
Hell: I confess, I am not in all things of the same Judgment with this great
Divine, nevertheless I must say, no man I ever knew expressed so much of God's
Image, as consisting in Light, Holiness, and Love: many Thousands bless God for
his Labors, which are so adapted to promote Christ indeed, and not an empty*
Name of him; and I fear not to declare my assurance that his Name will flourish
when the Antinomian E^siasts shall fail to impose on the World by their
Calumnies, Nonsense, and abusive Pretexts of Free Grace.

Mr. C. p. 24. I never thought God gave a Rule to fin by. P. 28. To determine
Rules of Sin A Rule of Sin and Misery is a proper expression.
and Misery, is to make the Gospel to approve of Sin and Misery, and its great
design is to send men to Hell. Take your way of expression in what sense you
please, it is so unscholar-like, that a Schoolboy should be whipped for it.

Rep. Yet God has given a ^ule to abstain from Sin by. Does not the Precept
determine the nature and measure of Omissions, and the prohibition fix what are
Sins of Commission? We say even rectum is norma sui and obliqui. I fear he
knows not what a Rule is, or he would see it is as applicable to Sin as to Duty,
for it alike adjusteth what both are. But let Turretin share in my Correction
for saying ^ex justi and ^njusti regula; The Law is Turret. Inst. Theol. par.
2. p. 2.
a Rule of what is just and unjust. Alti^gius shall have a ^ash, Regula recti
and obliqui index, It Is well if Paul escape, I bad not known Sin, but by the
Law, Romans 7. 7. I had not known Altingius Expl. Catec. par. 2. p. 12.
Lust, except the Law had said, Thou shall not covet. Yea* and a Rule of Misery
is not less proper* Is not a Rule, as to the d^bitum poenae, an authoritative
constitution of what is due to us in a way of Punishment. Does not the Rule
determine what the kind, duration, and degrees of Misery shall be, and on whom
it shall fall? Is not norma judicii, a Rule of Judgment, as well related to
Condemnation as Absolution?

I shall next vindicate my self from Mr. C's Charge* as if I did misrepresent
Dr. Crisp. Mr. C. p. 14; 15. A Vindication from the charge of abusing Dr.
Crisp. He means, sin can do no hurt.
Mr. C. you say, Dr. C. affirms Sin can do no hurt. A. He says it very often,
and frequently attempts to prove it. C. You would have men understand that no
person in Christ need fear to commit Sin. A* That Is upon the account of any
harm they shall receive by it, and that will go a great way with m^st. C. But
you would have them think that we mean Sin in its abstract nature is good. A. I
never designed that in any words cited cut of him, for he says Sin is a Lion;
there is its nature, etc. he says it is a dead Lion, there is its calmness, and
because it is dead* it is not to be feared; it had a Terror and Fearfulness,
that is its Nature; Christ has drank it all up, there is its h^rmlesness: It Is a
Traitor* that is its Nature; it is bound hand and foot, there is its inability to
Ha^m* C. Dr. Crisp renders Sin innocent, that is your Expression p. 198. A. My
Expression is, he had said much to render Sin innocent to the Elect; that is not
to make it good, (...) then it would be so to all as well as the Elect, but he
has said too much to ma^e it harmless to the Elect. C. He declares plainly,
the hurt he means is only the penal Effects of sin. A He says not so, and yet
those are the most of the Hurt that comes for Sin. C. He declares he speaks
this not to encourage to sin. A. But does it not more strongly encourage to
Sin, to assure men there will come no hurt by Sin. C. He speaks of the sins of
Believers, A. He might say it of all the Elect, for their Sins are no more
theirs any time, than when they are Believers: It seems then you grant, that
Believers Sins can do them no hurt. C. He speaks not of sins to be committed,
these ought to be looked on as most odious. A. But not dangerous: But they are
not Sins before committed, and pray whose Sins hurt them before they are
committed? C. No real hurt. A. Imaginary hurt* is innocent, if the Fancy be
sound. C. He speaks it only upon the account of some poor distressed
Consciences, whose sins* lay much upon them. A. And must these be eased with
lying Pillows? But pray consult his own words. He begins, p. 509. Well, what
are the things we should not be afraid of? Perhaps I shall pitch upon things
People are much afraid of. I must tell you, the People of God, they need not be
afraid of their Sins; I do not say we must not be afraid to sin, but they need
not be afraid of their Sins; there is no Sin they commit can possibly do them
any hurt; therefore as they cannot hurt them, so there is no cause of fear in
their Sins they have committed. Obj. Some will say this is strange, all the
Evils in the World that come, they grow from the sinfulness of men; if a man
may be afraid of any thing, he should be afraid of Sin. I answer, It Is true,
Sin naturally is a root bringing all manner of evil Fruit, but yet I say,
whatever Sin in its own nature' brings forth, yet the Sins of Gods People they
that have God for their own God, (which with him the vilest, if Elect, have)
their Sins can do them no hurt at all, and in that regard there is no cause of
fear from any of their Sins that ever they have committed. Beloved, I conceive
this may seem harsh to some Spirits, especially to such as misconceive the
drift at which I aim, which is not to encourage any one unto Sin, but to ease
the Consciences of the distressed. I desire you to resolve with your selves
this one thing, and I beseech you kick not against the Truth, There is not one
sin nor all the sins together of any one Believer, that can possibly do that
Believer any hurt, real hurt I mean, and therefore he ought not to be afraid of
them; I will make it appear: And goes on for five Pages to prove it. Now
Reader, can this one line make all the rest safe? There is no more said by him,
it is in a Doctrinal way stated, and not in a use to wounded Consciences. (He
often says it elsewhere without so much as this) and he says this to avoid the
Odium, not to guide his Discourse; and it is no other, than if a man were
proving a quarter of an hour ^o a whole company very apt to drink poisoned
Wine; if this Poison be drank, it will do no harm to them that drink it; but
yet should once say, I prove this all this while, but it is for the sake of them
that have drank the Poison, but not to encourage you to drink the Poison; yet
be you all assured, that when it is drank, it cannot harm you more than them. C.
It Is to evince the damning nature of sin is taken away. A. But that is a gross
Error, tho Pardon will prevent its effects. Yet hear D. C's own words p. 511.
No you will say, no condemnation in Hell, but yet, as there is remainders of
Sin in Gods own People, so there will some Evil or other fall upon the
commission of Sin: Mark, etc. and in many words answers it, Now sin is
condemned to the Believer, it can do no hurt at all to him, for what hurt can
that do, which is carried into the Land of Forgetfulness? (and this he often
affirms was when Christ died. Reader, I Will tell thee on what Principles Dr.
Crisp affirms that Sin can do no hurt. Take his words: 1. God has no more to
lay to the charge of such a person (Elect, tho a Murderer) than he has to lay
to the charge of a Saint in Glory, p. 364. and the Lord has not one Sin to
charge on an elect person, from the first moment of conception to the last
moment of Life. 2. A man does sin against God; God reckons not his Sin to be
his, he reckons it to be Christ's, therefore he cannot reckon it his; see p.
270. Except God will be offended where there is no Cause to be offended; he
will not be offended with a Believer, because he does not find the Sin of the
Believer to be the Believer's own Sin, but he finds it to be the Sin of Christ,
p. 15. Now Reader, judge how vain Mr. C's Excuses be, and how injurious his
Censures.

What Mr. C. p. 15. pleads for Dr. Crisp's saying, that Graces and Holiness
cannot do us the least Dr. C. intends no Graces or Works can do us any good.
good, is as vain and false, viz. that he is only against setting them in the
place of Christ, for he reckons they are put in Christ's place, tho they be
affirmed but as Means or Conditions antecedently necessary by divine
appointment to obtain any Blessings for the sake of Christ's Merits. His
Principles are, 1. That Faith is not so much as the Instrument by which we are
united to Christ, or justified, p. 616. 2. That Christ brings us all good
things when we are ungodly, and so it is in vain to do any thing to obtain
these* p. 41, 42. yea, that we had a full Title before we are born. 3. He
says, p. 45, 46. It Is a received Conceit among many, that our Obedience is the
way to Heaven, and tho it be not, say they, the cause of reigning, yet it is
via ad regnum, the way to the Kingdom: But all this Sanctification is not a jot
the way of that justified person unto Heaven. 4. Salvation is not the End of
any good work we do. 5. No Believer should have the least thought in his Heart
of promoting or advancing himself, or any end of his own by doing what he does.
Consider these, with many such, and what good can Faith or Holiness do us? See
my Book, c. 13, 14. Read the Preface to Mr. Flavel's Blow at the Root, which
Mr. Mather subscribed: Reader, distinguish 1. between the Righteousness for
which we are justified, and the way of applying it to us. 2. between a Law by
which Christ's Merits are applied, and that Obedience whereto is our meriting
Righteousness; 3. between the Precepts included in the Gospel, taken in a large
sense, and what are its proper Conditions; 4. Free Grace, as it gives Faith and
Pardon, and as it is a Liberty to condemn the Believer, and justify the
Unbeliever; 5. between the Promises of Grace, and Promises to Grace; 6. The
Gospel as a means to quicken us, and as a Charter of Benefits; and thou will
Answer Mr. C's Arguments.

FINIS.

