Man made Righteous BY Christ's Obedience. Being two SERMONS AT Pinners-Hall.
With Enlargements, etc. Also some REMARKS ON Mr. Mather's Postscript, etc.

By DANIEL WILLIAMS.

LONDON, Printed for I. Dunton at the Raven in the Poultry, 1694.

IN a Paper signed by G. Griffith, T. Cole, N. Mather, I. Chancy, R. Trail, Ri.
Tailor; and since Printed by Mr. Chancy. Neonom. Unmasked, pa.3.p.96. they
Charge me: He teaches, That the Righteousness of Christ is imputed only as to
effects, with a purchase of a Conditional Grant, viz. this Proposition, He that
believes shall be saved. Gospel Truth, p. 39.

My words there are these: The difference is not 4. Whether Christ by his
Righteousness merited for all the Elect that they should in his time and way,
be certainly partakers of its saving Effects; and did not only purchase a
Conditional Grant of those Effects, viz. that Proposition, He that believes
shall be saved. 5. Nor whether besides those Effects being made ours, the very
Righteousness of Christ is imputed to True Believers, as what was always
undertaken and designed for their Salvation, and is now as effectual to their
actual Pardon and Acceptance to Life; yea, is pleadable by them as their
Security; and is as useful to their Happiness, as if themselves did and
suffered what Christ did. All these I affirm, p. 39, 40.

Can any thing be more contrary: They say I affirm what I do expressly deny; and
that I deny what I expressly affirm.

Mr. M. says, my damning Error is: He is one that makes Union to Christ; our
having this Righteousness upon us, and our being justified by it, to be given
us in way of Reward, of something done by us.

My only words to which he twice refers are these, Gospel-benefits are no
reward of Debt; and yet they are given in a way of Reward; the Benefits are
given not for our Faith, yet upon Believing; not upon it as a meriting
Consideration, yet upon it, as that the presence whereof is made necessary by
the Gospel, this having required Faith, and confined the Benefit to him that
Believes, Defense of Gospel Truth, p. 25. These and other Imputations I have
spoke to.

You see, I say only Benefits indefinitely; the thing done by us here, is only
Believing: In way of Reward, is only a performance of a Gospel-promise, made to
encourage and move Sinners to Believe.

To the READER.
It is fit that God (whose we are) should use us to his own Purposes, however
unagreeable to our Inclinations the Work is, or Mysterious the Design of
Providence be at present. I am sure Peace is my delightful pursuit, though
unreasonable Men force me to Debates, as part of my Employ. The several Books
written, and Sermons studiously preached for Antinomianism, had not engaged my
Pen at first, if the Leaven had not spread to the open Censure of the usefulest
Ministry as legal, the Hazard of the Souls, and Peace of our Congregations, and
the common Reproach of the Dissenters. When a Testimony by Gospel Truth stated
was published, I resolved to cease any further Progress in this Affair, being
assured it was sufficient to inform such as were not given up to those
Delusions, against which only it was designed. But Mr. Chancy's Notorious
Misrepresentation of my Principles, necessitated my Defense of Gospel Truth,
when his Billingsgate Language would have been wholly slighted. Since then he
has published three Books unworthy of my regard, being he was resolved to
persist in mistaking the Matters in Debate, and must argue in a way I was sure
the Judicious would Contemn; and only such Simple ones be confirmed thereby,
who had no List or Patience to read an Answer. He was followed by one Mr.
Edwards, a Man even of far less Judgment and equal Violence, two Pages of whose
Book assured me, that reading furth^, was only to view an Emblem of Hell, viz.
Hot Fire and thick Darkness. His Namesake, the Learned Author of Crispianism
Unmasked, treated his Answer thereto, with the same due Pity as I have done.
The War among the Angels also was written with an Air of such Falsehood and
Profaneness, as cautioned any from answering it, who had not the like Freedom
to form an Antinomian Prayer. That Unchristian Spirit all these Men discover,
is convictive that Christ employs them not. The Fury and Arts of the Promoters
and Abetters of their new Gospel (without Precepts or Threatenings) appearing a
public Damage, as they unseasonably divided the Nonconformists, rendered me
Industrious to allay the Heats; but I soon found that such as opposed the Union
at first, would not quit the occasion they had framed, to keep up a Faction
opposite thereto. Hence, though we got them to Subscribe with us an Agreement
in Doctrines, and therein we mutually engaged to be at Peace, and not expose
each other; it was not three Weeks ever new Books were published, and their
Pulpits (without any Provocation on our parts) filled with the former Railings,
reckoning, it seems, themselves at Liberty, because they judged we thought our
selves obliged by our Subscriptions to be silent. I, for the Public Good,
connived at this, and at Mr. Cole's violent Censures and Misrepresentations of
our Judgment at Pinners-Hall near twelve Months, without the least return; till
at last, in a Sermon there, he proclaimed, That Gospel Truth stated, was just
the Case of the Parable of the Pharisee. I thought it my Duty, to show in my
next Turn, in the calmest words, that Gospel Truth stated, agreed in nothing
with the Pharisee; and was quarrelled with only because it urged the Imitation
of the Publican in his Penitent Humiliation as necessary to Forgiveness (which
that Brother constantly exclaims against) and I urged the Necessity of an end
to Contentions. I meddled not again, and forbore exposing his Mysterious
Nonsense, which his Books as well as Sermons ministered sufficient Advantage
for; though, alas, he and his Party (I know not why) judge once Vindicating our
selves from false Aspersions, is an intolerable Crime in me, when his frequent,
and weak as well as passionate Outcries, are very Justifiable, even though he
still Imputes to us what we Abhor. For some time we were quiet, and it was my
hope we should continue so; but Mr. Mather, the great Enemy to the Union,
finding he could no longer instigate others to blow the Flames, finds an
occasion to get into Pinners-Hall, upon the Sickness of one of the six
Lecturers; and there, as he owneth in his Preface, studiously and of purpose
renews the Debate. Mr. B. and I were often as good as named by him, and the very
Body of our Ministers arraigned as Socinians, and by him charged as holding
Soul-destroying Errors, if there be, or^ ever were, any in the World: Enemies
to Christ's Righteousness at Heart, worse than Papists; with the like envenomed
Reproaches. And with the rest of his Stuff, he under the Pain of Damnation,
required the People to believe, that Christ's Incarnation was no part of his
Humiliation, and every Believer was as Righteous as Christ in Equality; and not
in Similitude only with other things, which the following Tract insists on.
These he had often in his own place preached, and long endeavored to make our
Ministry hateful to his Hearers; yet that I was silent under: But serious
Thoughts of the Design, and Tendency of his open Attempt at Pinners-Hall,
forced me in my next Turns in that Lecture, to preach the Principal Heads of
the following Sermons, which I enlarged in four Discourses at my own place. Yet
I had that regard to Peace, that as I forbear all Indecent Reflections, so I
took no notice that any one asserted what I determine against; and had never
published them, except that he had Printed his, and that with the Scandalous
Name he intends us to be called hereafter by, viz. Semi-Socinian. Sober Men
justly cry out against these Debates, but I appeal to their Consciences, where
the Blame must be laid? Can we be Faithful to Christ, to our Ministry, to Souls
that need our help, or to our own Name, as Ministers, if we lie down with these
Calumnies and Misrepresentations? Though did they only plead for their own
Whimsies, I should for Peace disregard them; but to make it their daily work to
Prejudice the People against the Faithfulest Ministry, and run them into
Confusion of Mind for a Factions sake, calls I think for an Industrious
Opposition. If you ask what in us is it they so exclaim against, I answer, It Is
1. That though we own Christ's Righteousness is truly imputed to us, yet we
deny that God esteems us to have done and suffered what Christ did. 2. Though
we own that God requires nothing of us to be a meriting legal Righteousness, or
Atonement for Sin; yet we say, that God in a way of governing Grace, requires
some Duty to be performed on Man's part (to which he enableth us) whereupon he
applies to us the Beneficial Effects and Fruits of Christ's Righteousness,
according to the respective Gospel Promises; and thereby incourageth us to
those Duties; governs our Fears and Hopes: And that is the Heart of the
Controversy, for they think no Duty, as a Duty is ordained, a means to any
Benefit: They own no Law but the Law of Works, which admitted nothing short of
perfect sinless Obedience: And because we cannot perform that, as the Meriting
Condition of Life in the Adjustment of Justice; therefore Men must do nothing,
as a Condition of enjoying any Benefits in Christ's Right, by the Adjustment of
Grace in a way of Authority: Since we cannot be wholly Sinless, it is all as one
whether we are Sincere or no. 3. We own that it is Faith alone is the receiving
Condition of Justification; yea I add, That it is the only expressed Condition
of the Imputation of Christ's Righteousness in order to Pardon; but all is in
vain, because we say that Repentance is necessary to our actual Pardon. Mr. M.
falsely pretends, that their Notions are the Truth in the Churches Possession
since the Reformation. But I have proved the contrary by many Quotations in my
Defense of Gospel Truth; and the very I^dicious and Learned Apology of the
Subscribers of my Book has added a greater Number. I will of Hundreds I could
produce, give two Testimonies, Mr. Perkins 's Order and Causes of Salvation,
etc. Cap. 36. Quest. Whether is Justifying Faith commanded in the Law? Ans. It
is commanded in the Law of Faith, namely the Gospel, but not in the Law of
Works, that is, in the Moral Law, Romans 3.27. The Reasons are these. 1. That
which the Law reveals not, that it commands not; but the Law is so far from
revealing Justifying Faith, that it never knew it. 2. Adam had fully before his
Fall written in his Heart the Moral Law, yet had he not Justifying Faith which
apprehended Christ. He then proceeds to answer the Objections against the
Gospel being a Law. Mr. Anth. Burgess in his Doctrine of Justification, Part 1.
P. 161. denies that Repentance is in a Man, as a Sign only that God has
Pardoned. But says, We must go further, and say, it is the Means and Way which
God has appointed antecedently to Pardon, so that where this goes before, the
other follows after. This he proves by six Arguments, and the Book was
Printed at the Desire of the London Synod. Calvin often owneth the Gospel to be a
Law, and in his Commentaries on Jonas, Cap. 3.10. P. 359. says, Forgiveness is
Free, and yet as often as God proposes Forgiveness to Sinners, this Condition is
still added therewith, viz. That they Repent. He gives the Reasons of it, and
calls it a Law, by which God so commands Repentance in order to Pardon, though
not as a Cause of Pardon. I have in this Book endeavored to put the Doctrine
of Justification in a plain Light; though I wonder why our Brethren still say,
I mean what is quite contrary to what I say. I suppose it is because they have
so long thought and represented some of our Principles contrary to what they
be, that they cannot think it possible that they should be what indeed they
are; or at least they will suspect us Fools and Liars, rather than seem to own
that they could be so long mistaken. I request therefore, that if Mr. M. will
reply to me, he would cite my words fully, and give the Page as I have done,
for hitherto my own words would have put their Calumnies to Shame; Him, while
God spares me, I will attend to. He says, That he is not far from the place,
where the Weary are at Rest, and the Wicked cease from Troubling. I wish him
Repentance of the Wound he has injustly given so many, fitter to serve their
Generation than him or me; and whilst he is spared (which I desire for Service
may be long) that he may be less unwearied in hindering and breaking that
Blessed Union which promised so much Good; though I am sorry he boasts of his
own Quietness, whilst he creates Broils, and Disquiet to so many; some known
to us both, he will meet in Glory, who were comforted by the above Consideration,
whilst less able to bear up under his Assaults, than by Grace I have been long
strengthened to do. Nevertheless, whilst Conscience binds me to some Sharpness
against his Attempt to destroy so many Ministers, as to what is more valuable
than their Lives: I do from my Heart forgive him, and would rejoice to find him
convinced of his Mistake and Misrepresentation of our Principles, that we might
peaceably concur in promoting the Kingdom of Christ and our common Good, and
not be the Scorn of such as Glory in our Weakness.

Reader, It Is worth thy notice, that there is more Safety in our way, than in
the contrary, for we trust in Christ's only Righteousness for all those Things
and Uses it is appointed to, even for Satisfaction to Justice, the Pardon of
all our Sins and Defects, the Acceptance of our Persons and all Performances,
the Merit of all Good, yea, and our Legal and Prolegal Righteousness,
renouncing every Grace and Work of ours to any of these Purposes; and this is
all they pretend. But if it prove, that Christ never intended his Righteousness
to be instead of true Faith and Repentance, Sincere Love to God and Men, and
Perseverance in True Holiness and Fruitfulness. And that Christ will judge us
according to these, as things he required to our actual enjoying of promised
Benefits in his Righteousness. They who pursue and by Grace have these, will be
safer than such as neglect them; yea, Mr. M. owneth, P. 67. Such are thy
bounden Duties, and God will Damn thee for neglecting them. It were easy to
show how these Men contradict each other as well as themselves, but I forbear
exposing them. That the Father of Light and Love would guide all of us into the
way of Truth and Peace, is the unfeigned Prayer of

Thy Servant in the Kingdom, and Patience of Christ, Daniel Williams.

THE Errata's are such as may easily be Corrected. Any who consider what Men I
have to deal with, will excuse my frequent Repetitions, and sometimes less
accurate words, as object for subject, when I would most plainly distinguish
between Justifying Righteousness, with its Causes, and the Person partaker of
it.

SERMON I. Of Christ's Obedience.
Romans 5. the last part of the 19th Verse. So by the Obedience of One shall many
be made Righteous.


THE Text represents to us, First, A saving Privilege and Dignity, Made
Righteous. It supposes us Unrighteous, ere we are made Righteous; and so
subject to the Curse, till we are Absolved, as well as Disobedient to the
Gospel while Unconverted. The Word (...), often, though not always, denotes an
act of Authority, as Mat. 25.21. Luke 12.14, 42. Act. 6.3, etc. thus its
properly enough applicable to the Matter before us. We are constituted
Righteous Juridically, and all other Benefits included here in the term
Righteous, are Authoritatively Conferred; and this according to a Divine
enacted Constitution: of which hereafter.

Secondly, The sole procuring Cause of our being made Righteous; Its by the
Obedience of One: This One is the Lord Jesus. He alone was capable to make
fallen Men Righteous by his Obedience, and its by his Obedience that Sinners
are constituted Righteous. Mercy prompted the recovery of miserable Man; Wisdom
contrived this, as a way sufficient, effectual, and congruous, to that End:
God, as our Judge and Ruler, admitted and accepted this, and in his adjusted
way applies it for our Pardon and Adoption. Faith is the Moral Instrument or
Condition of that Application, the Gospel Promise is the express Sign of the
Divine Will, or the Instrument whereby God does apply it: But the different
Interest of each of these prevents not the appropriation of all the Causal
Merit to this Obedience. God justifies, regenerates, and saves, but its with an
Eye to this, as the only procuring Cause.

Thirdly, The Subject actually partaker of this Blessing, Many; they are Men
and not Devils; Fallen Men and not Innocent; Many and not simply few; nor yet
all; though its for final Impenitency and Unbelief that any of the Sons of Men
remain Condemned: These many are equal to the number of Godly Believers in all
Ages.

Fourthly, The futurity and certainty of many being made Righteous; both which
the Future Tense imports. Shall be made Righteous; it notes Futurity. With
respect to the effect of Adam's Sin it is said (...), they were made Sinners.
That Guilt is entailed on all his Seed, and Filth derived to them as soon as
they subsist; yea its true, they were all Offenders, and Corrupted in Adam as
being Seminally in him: But by Christ's Obedience its affirmed many shall be
made Righteous; i. e. when it is applied and not before.

The Elect since Christ's time remain Unrighteous whilst Unbelievers,
notwithstanding that Christ's Obedience is long since finished; as well as all
Believers before Christ's coming were made Righteous by this Obedience, though it
was not then actually performed, Heb. 11.14, 15.

The Reason of both is the same, viz. That we are made Righteous, not
immediately in the moment of Christ's Obeying, nor merely on the Acts done; but
upon Gods applying this to us by the Word of his Gospel, and Work of his
Spirit: Therefore believing Abraham was made Righteous many Ages before Christ
Obeyed, Romans 4.22. And the Elect Corinthians were unjustified all the time of
their Infidelity, though Christ had finished his Work before, 1 Cor. 6.11. The
Gospel Promise confers Righteousness for Justification on all Believers, and
none but Believers; though Christ's Obedience be that, for which alone, when they
believe, any are justified. This Righteousness is offered to all Hearers on the
terms of the Gospel* Its designed Infallibly for all the Elect; but neither
offer nor design constitutes any Man Righteous. There must be another act,
(even imputation) and that terminates on no other object but the Believer.

2. The Words denote certainty, q. d. many shall eventually be made Righteous
by it. A may be made Righteous, if they will believe, is a Mercy to Mankind
above Devils: But a mere may be is too low a reward for Christ, and incongruous
to an Obedience so Astonishing. Strange were it that the Lord of Life should
Die for Sinners, and it remain contingent, whether any of them should Eternally
speak his Praises, or be happy by his Merits. But my Text is an unerring
Prediction, which will be still accomplishing till Christ's shall Judge the
World: His Seed he shall see, whom by his knowledge he will justify, Is.
53.11. He will not violate the Gospel Constitution by justifying the
Unbelievers, because he is Elected; but the Elect shall believe that they may
be justified by his Obedience. The Eternal Counsel shall be executed in the way
enacted by Governing Grace.

5. The Redditive Note, which refers to the first clause in the Text; (...),
So: The Apostle had said, As by the Disobedience of one, many were made
Unrighteous; So, etc. He principally intends hereby to affirm, That by Christ's
Obedience all his Regenerate Seed shall as certainly be made Righteous, as
Adam's Natural Seed were made Sinners by his Disobedience: Christ's Obedience is
as effectual to the one, as Adam's Disobedience was to the other. Adam is said
to be the Figure of Christ, v. 14. They were two public Persons in this
respect. All Men were made Sinners by Adams fall, all Men that ever are made
Righteous are made so by Christ's Obedience. This is the main scope of the
Apostles reasoning, in the Parellel between the First and Second Adam; but he
intends not to infer a Similitude in all things between Christ and Adam, who in
so many things differ: Nay, in this Chapter you have sundry instances of that
difference given.

Doct. By the Obedience of Jesus Christ, GodMan our Redeemer, many shall be
made Righteous. Good News to a lost World; that tho we are undone as Adam's
Posterity, yet help is laid on Christ, who is mighty to save, Psa. 89.19.
There Is a way to rescue us out of the Pit wherein is no Water, Zech. 9.11. and
to release us from that Slavery, which as to any thing in our power or purchase
must have Eternally continued. But what comfort does it Minister to Sinners?
That the Gospel Proclaims, a way to be made Righteous on its terms, a way to be
made Obedient to those terms; and a certainty that many of us Apostates,
Forlorn Wretches, shall infallibly be made Righteous in that way. Nor does it a
little contribute to our Joy, that it is by Christ's Obedience all this is
effected, this gives the strongest security, and must infer the benefits to be
exceeding glorious, when the Price is so invaluable, which was paid by him who
is Wisdom it self. Yea, we, since Christ's Resurrection, have the advantage
above the Old Testament Saints, that we know more o^ the Obedience and the
Person rendering it than they did, yea, and that is finished: Even all is
actually done by him, which the offended Lawgiver exacted, as Satisfactory for
the Injury done to governing Justice by Sin, or meritorious of our Blessedness,
and of our right to all saving Benefits. Well might the Angel be the Herald of
such News as Luke 2.10, 11. I bring you good tidings of great Joy, which shall
be to all People, for unto you is born this Day a Savior, which is Christ the
Lord.

Should I insist on every part of the Doctrine, the Discourses would exceed the
number I intend. I shall therefore confine my self to what naturally fall under
these Enquiries.

1 Q. What is the Obedience of Christ, by which many shall be made Righteous?

2 Q. What is it to be made Righteous by the Obedience of Christ?

1 Q. What is the Obedience of Christ, by which many shall be made Righteous?

A. All that Christ did or suffered in Obedience to the Will of God for the
Salvation of Sinners, either in a way of Satisfaction or Merit. It Is sum'd up
in the Solemn Prayer for Believers, John 17.4. I have glorified thee on Earth;
I have finished the Work thou gave me to do. The Words indeed have the same
anticipation as is in the Lord's Supper, this is my Body broken for you, tho he
was not actually Crucified. So here I have finished the Work, i.e. I am just
upon it; and all was performed in a way of Obediential Subjection, q.d. It Is
what thou gave me to do for the Display of thy Glory obscured by Sin and the
maintaining that Glory in all the Blessings thy goodness inclined thee to
bestow on Sinners. The Word in my Text expressing Obedience is (...), and
exactly answers to those Words of Christ's, Isa. 50.56. He has opened mine Ear
and I wa^ not Rebellious, neither turned a^ay my Back. I gave my Back to the
Smiters,

I shall reduce to a few Propositions, what I think Explicative of this point.

1 Pro. God is essentially just. Ps. 5.4, 5. He has no pleasure in Wickedness,
Jer. 51.56. Nah. 2.3. From the Essential Justice of God it is, that there are
Laws of Nature, as well as Positive Laws. Here the first necessity of
Satisfaction for Sin, or the certain punishment of Sinners have their rise, tho
its ratified by the Veracity of God, when threatenings are promulgated by him.
God admits no Violation hereof in any of his Ordinations, but accommodates them
thereto; and provides for the Glory thereof in all the Revelations of his Will,
and Dispensations of his Providence.

2 Pro. God was pleased eminently to reveal the Glory of his Governing Justice
in the Covenant of Works with Innocent Man.

It Is true, his Holiness appeared in the precept, as a rule of ma^ners; and it
was of goodness that God would expressly Covenant with Man by promising any
reward for Obedience, and increase his Defense against Sin, by pronouncing the
threatening.

He might have left Man to that mere Light which Nature afforded, and proceeded
only according to that absolute Dominion which he had over Man, as his Creator
and Owner. But it pleased God to take on him the relation of a Governor, to
which he had a right from his Dominion. As a Governor he Enacts the Law of
Works, and displays his Justice in Constituting the rule, whereby he would
Reward and Punish. Justice held the Balance in adjusting the Threatening and
Reward, or this Constitution were not a Law of Works, but a Law of Grace; yea,
Obedient Man had not been rewarded for his Obedience, but for somewhat else;
which is contrary to Romans 10.^. Moses describes the Righteousness which is of
the Law, that the Man that does these things shall live by them, where he
infers that a Man's Obedience had been his right to Life, to which add Romans
4.4. Now to him that works is the reward not reckoned of Grace but of Debt.
The Reward would not only have been sure from the truth of God, (which Gospel
Blessings are) but due from the Covenant as formally Legal; it was to be a
Reward strictly Legal; as being proportioned and connected by governing
Justice; which adjudged the Duty to be done would honor Justice, and answer
the ends of Government, to the proportion of the Reward, which was promised for
that duty. Were it not thus, Governing Justice had no concern in the Law of
Works, as to the premiant part of the Sanction, but must be confined to the
punitive part alone. It must adjust the Threatened Evil in case of Sin, but not
the Reward in case of Obedience. Had Justice been so unconcerned in the
rewards, Divine goodness might even in that Law of Works, have promised the
Reward, without requiring any duty as the Condition; and consequently* there
were no absolute necessity of Christs's meriting glory for us: his mere
atonement for Sin being as much as would answer Governing Justice, which did
not adjust the reward, but the threatening against Sin only; whereas the reward
was inserted and proportioned of mere free goodness. This would also weaken the
main argument for the necessity of the imputation of Christ's Active Obedience,
for our title to Glory; for if Governing Justice made not Man's Obedience a
meriting condition of Glory* but that the Reward was of mere Grace in that
Constitution, It Is no Violation of Justice, that we have Glory as pardoned
Sinners; tho Obedience be not imputed to us.

Let us then entertain thoughts of the Law becoming that account. The Law is
holy, just, and good. Holy in its precepts and prohibitions, Just in its
Sanction, and good in its use and tendency.

3 Pro. Man by Sin injured the Relative or Reputative glory of Governing
Justice, and cas^ contempt on God's Government, and thereby became Subject to
the C^^se, forfeited all right to the Reward, yea became utterly incapable of
recovering that right by the Covenant^ of Works, Romans 25 ^ 8. Judgment came on
all Men to Condem^^on, and Romans 3.20.23. All (...) sinned and ^^me sho^ of the
glory of God^ Yea, Romans 5, 12^ D^at^. passed (...) all Men (...) t^^^ all h^ve
(...)

4 Pro. That the Glory of Governing Justice might not suffer by the saving of
Sinners, there must be a Satisfaction for the Offense they committed, and a
Meritorious Price for the good to be dispensed to them. Gods Government must
not be Arraigned before Angels or Men, as weak; Nor would the Justice of God
seem an approver of Rebellion, by admitting Sin to pass unpunished; nor admit
such an occasion of Disobedience to his Government. By Satisfaction, I mean
that which fully vindicates the Reputative Glory of Justice so injured by Sin,
and secures the ends of Government. By Merit, I intend, that which Governing
Justice adjudged proportionable to the Benefit to be conferred on the Sinners.

5 Pro. Sinners being utterly incapable for this, God, our Lawgiver, did Ordain
and Admit Christ, with his Consent, to be the Redeemer and Savior of lost
Sinners, by making Satisfaction for Sin, and Meriting the forfeited Blessings,
and much greater for them, H^b. 3.2. he was appointed. This was an act of the
Lawgiver as above the Law, but it was not by the Law of Works: Yea, God
dispensed with the Law of Works in admitti^g Christ's Sufferings and Obedience
to be Satisfactory and Meritorious for Offenders. That Law knew no vicarious
Obedience or Punishment; The Soul that Sins must Di^, ^^d n^^ another for it,
was the Language of the Law. Divine Grace and Sovereignty ^er^ exert themselves
to answer the E^ds of the Law, by substituting a Savior of lost Souls.

6 Pro. It was in the Covenant of Redemption, wherein it was adjusted and
agreed what should be thus Satisfactory and Meritorious; and so effectual to
save Sinners, Is. 53.10, 11, 12. Ps. 40.6, 7, 8. Ze^h. 6.13. Ioh. 17.4. The
Parties in this Covenant are the Father and Spirit, on the one part; and the
Son on the other. Whatever Christ suffered in time, and all the Obedience he
yielded, were terms proposed to him, and accepted by him. In that Volume were
Recorded what his Work and Rewards were to be; and of the later the Salvation
of his Members is a part. What he herein submitted to, he became obliged as an
act of Faithfulness to perform. Whatever was herein promised him, he had a
right to receive, and did accordingly Claim. By this Compact, he agreed to be a
Subject and Servant; and hence the Law of Mediation did Commence as Binding. By
this Compact his Obedience and Sufferings became a Satisfaction that otherwise
had been Uneffectual. Satisfaction imports a Refuseableness antecedently to an
Agreement; And hence we may perceive, that though what Christ paid was a ^ull
equivalent, yet it was not in all things the same in kind, as Man was obliged
to. True, Justice took care that all was inserted into this Covenant, as
Christ's Work, which was necessary to the Reparation of its Glory; And hence the
great Essentials of the Law of Works were inserted, as Articles to be performed
by Christ, viz. Sinless Obedience a^ a Man, which is the Sum of the Precept,
and Death the substance of the Threatening; and these to be done and suffered in
the Human Nature. Nevertheless some things in the Threat were incompetent to
him; as Spiritual Death, the Hatred of God, etc. Many Precepts were not
agreeable to his Circumstances, all which were omitted: Nay, many things, which
the Law of Works never enjoined on Men, were necessary to be done by the
Redeemer, and therefore were superadded. From this Covenant arises the
immediate Obligation of Christ to all his Obedience, as well as the Rule and
Measure of it; And from this his Title to all the Reward, much of which the
premiant Sanction of the Law of Works never contained, and could never give a
right to. No doubt, that in this Covenant were adjusted the terms of the
application of Redemption to Men, which the Gospel Covenant does enjoin; which,
I suppose, the Assembly mean, when they join the Covenant of Redemption, and
the Gospel Covenant together; and say, it was made with Christ as the second
Adam: But they cannot intend, that Christ obliged himself to perform Personally
all the Terms of the application of his purchased Benefits to us, as he did the
Terms of the Impetration of those Benefits: He bound not himself to Repent and
Believe for us, though he did to Die for us; yea, and as Surety of the Gospel
Covenant he engaged, that the Elect should Repent, Believe, and Persevere* But
yet the Benefits should be applied to Men upon their Personal Believing; and
they are required by the Gospel so to Believe, and become themselves federating
parties in the Gospel Covenant. This runs throughout the Assemblies Confession
and Catechisms. As when they say, Faith is required by the Covenant, as a
Condition to Interest us in Christ large Catechism, Q. 32. And they say, Q.
153. That we may escape the Wrath and Curse of God due to us, by reason of the
Transgression of the Law, God requires of us, Repentance toward God, and
Faith toward our Lord Jesus, and the diligent use of outward means, whereby
Christ communicates to us the Benefits of his Mediation. You have the same in
the lesser Catechism; And they often tell us of Promises made to Graces, etc. by
which, and much more, its plain that Conditions are required of Men.

7 Pro. Satisfaction being to be made for innumerable Sins committed, and not
only forfeited ^^essings, but even greater to be Merited, and that for many;
the Obedience of Christ must exceed what the Law of Works enjoined on Mankind,
as the condition of its Reward.

What was necessary from every single Man for himself, could not by Legal
Justice be sufficient from one Man for all others that omitted it: Now the Law
required Obedience to its Precepts from every single Man.

That could not Merit the Reward for Sinners which was but necessary to an
Innocent Man's Title to the Reward: But what the Law required was necessary to
Innocent Man's obtaining the Reward, though he had not Sinned before: That which
was by Governing Justice adjudged but proportionable to a less Reward, could
not Merry a greater Reward: But whatever the Law of Works required, was but
proportioned to its lesser Rewards. Lesser I call them, though I allow them to
be an Eternal Felicity in another World, yet these were not Union with Christ,
nor such a degree of Conformity to his Glory, etc. much less did they include
the Rewards promised to Christ for his Obedience, as a Name above every Name,
all Judgment and Authority, with many more, all which are the Reward of Christ's
Obedience. As to Expiation of Sin by Punishment for Reconciliation with the
offended God, the Law enjoins no such Duty, nor hinted such a thing. Its
Threatening was Eternal Death As Eternal, Eternity was an ingredient into the
Misery of every Sinner, and can be removed by nothing but the Lawgivers
dispensing therewith, upon Considerations equally Vindicating the Glory of
Justice, as this Eternity of Sinners Torments would do: And it must be
equivalent not only to the Eternal Woe of one Offender, but at least of all
those Sinners who escape it.

Consider these and the like Things, and see if the Law of Works (which all Men
were perfectly to Obey) did enjoin all that Obedience which Christ was to
yield, as the condition of his Reward, of which Man^ Salvation is but part;
especially when its a Reward adjusted by strict Governing Justice, abating
nothing of the Meriting Price thereof. I mention these Things to let you see
the danger of confining Christ's Obedience to the idem of what the Law enjoined
on Man, or promised to him. Alas we should be infinite Loosers thereby, we
could expect at best no mo^e Happiness than what the Law of Works promised.
Nay, I think a P^^demption of Sinners in a way of Justice, would be more
exceptionable than some Persons think, who dare much, because they see too
little. A Suretiship of Christ's confined to what the Covenant of Works
includes, would be an uncomfortable Doctrine.

But the Obedience of Christ was not only super-equivalent to all that Man was
to do by the Law, but equal to all the Reward promised in the Covenant of
Redemption. The Dignity of his Person, the Things he did and suffered, and the
Inten^ness of his Obedience: His Unobligedness to do or suffer these, but on
the acco^^t of Glorifying God by satisfying for Sin, and opening a way for
exerting Grace to Sinners, with many more, concur to Aggrandize his Obedience:
Of this more elsewhere. Obj. Will not the Dignity of his Person let in all
Happiness to us by a Suretiship in the mere Covenant of Works? Ans. No, but ye^
I ask, Where does the Law of Works require this Dignity in the Person Obeying?
Or, How can it put such a value on what it required not? And how can it impure
that Dignity to us which it never exacted? And if it could, Where are many of
those forementioned Rewards promised in its Sanction, and if they be not so
included, How can that Covenant convey^^ Right to them? God has better
contrived for his own Glory, and for our Good, for which we should for ever
Praise and Adore him. He has taken the Essentials of the Law into the Covenant
of Redemption, and added these to other superadded Articles; Promising Christ a
Seed, and their utmost Felicity, as also Rewards to himself in the Humane
Nature, if he performed these Articles. These Christ undertook, and performed
to a title. And what Christ hereby acquired, he is dispencing in a Gospel way
of Grace, and yet of Government; and Blessed be his Name, he is our Surety,
that we shall not violate the Terms of the Gospel Covenant; and a Witness for
God, that we shall obtain the good promised in the said Covenant.

8 Pro. Our Redeemer did fully vindicate the Glory of Governing Justice from
the injury offered by Sin, and caused his Government by his Obedience to appear
venerable, notwithstanding all the Forgiveness and Blessings which Grace should
bestow in Christ's Right upon any Sinners.

Forgiveness is a Mercy which the Devil foresaw not; and besides, according to
Gods Methods with himself, he could hardly suspect it possible, because he knew
God would n^^ reflect on his own Justice or Purity, nor prostitute his Glory as
a Governor, nor hazard the ends of Government by Pardoning Delinquents: He
therefore tempted Man with confidence of his final Ruin, if persuaded to
Trangress; A Satisfaction by an equivalent he understood not: But infinite
Wisdom Triumphed over Satan's Wiles* and spoiled his Glorying over his Captive
Prey. God ^^^ds a way of Forgiveness without Tempting any to offend the more;
and appears exactly just whilst yet he shows as much Pardoning Mercy as the
Offenders needed; yea, makes Sin appear more Awful, and his Government more
Sacred, by the Satisfaction on which he Pardoned, than in the Punishment of all
that had Transgressed. Romans 3.26. To declare at this time his Righteousness,
that he might be Just, and the Iustifier of him which believes in Jesus. In v.
25. The Apostle had affirmed, That the Pardon of Sins committed before Christ's
coming was on the account of Christ's Propitiation, as well as of those since.
He adds, That in the Propitiation whereby any Sins were remitted, God appeared
Righteous whilst he Pardoned; though he justifies the Believer, yet he appears
Gloriously just in that Propitiation whereupon he justifies.

9 Pro. The Lord Jesus thus Glorified God as he satis^ied and Merited, by
perfectly Obeying the Will of God; and by the whole of his Humiliation,
especially in offering up himself an Atoning Sacrifice by Death upon the Cross.
His Active and Passive Obedience concurred in the whole of Redemption.

1. He perfectly Obeyed the Will of God. Whatever was adjusted as his Duty he
performed; He made the Authority of the Lawgiver manifest, and exemplified the
perfect Purity of the Law; He was habitually Holy without defect and blemish;
and actively Obedient to the extent and spirituality of the Precept. Heb. 7.26.
He was Holy, harmless, and undefiled, separate from Sinners: He fulfilled all
Righteousness, Mat. 3.15. not refusing Obedience to the Institution Ministered
by John the Baptist: He fulfilled the Moral Law; yea observed the Ceremonial
Law, and filled up every Relation wherein he stood: He not only did what we are
to do; but whatever act of Obedience was consistent with his Circumstances: He
pleaded no Exemption because of his Dignity; nor waved any thing as too mean or
difficult. An accurate observance of the Divine Will ran, as a constant Line,
through his whole Life, according to the various opportunities presented to
him; And every Act of his Obedience was filled with that Love, Zeal, and
Alacrity, as might prescribe Instruction to the highest Angels; and convince
them, how just, meet, good, and excellent a thing the profoundest Obedience is,
when God in Flesh was thus Observant. Thus he made the Law honorable, and
thereby the Lawgiver, Is. 42.21.

2. He was Humbled, and suffered the utmost punishment, which Justice required,
and God proposed for the expiation of Sin. He was Incarnate, and therein
emptied himself, Phil. 2.7. He was a Man of Sorrows, as if they made up his
Constitution, and was acquainted with Grief, even with the inwards of it, as
his Familiar, Is. 53.3. He endured reproach, so as to cry out, they have broken
my Heart, Ps. 65.20. So low was he brought, as to express his Estate by those
Words, I am a Worm, and no Man, Ps. 22.6. He was beholding to others for
Necessaries, Luc. 8.3. which seems felt by him in the commoness of that passage
with him, its more Blessed to give than to receive, Acts 20.35. He received
Comfort by the Ministry of Angels, Matt. 4.11. Luc. 22.43. How often was he
Blasphemed, Mocked by Men, grieved by his Followers, and deserted by his
Friends? His Blood was often shed, at Circumcision, when Stoned, Whipped,
Crowned with Thorns, Crucified, and at last his Heart Blood let out, John
19.34. Oh! the direful Agony which so amazed him; Forced Clots of Blood, and
rendered him Sorrowful even to Death. God hid his Face from him: A Death in the
manner of it, accursed, as well as shameful, he tasted and endured. He lay in
the Grave for a time, after he had thus wade^ through a Sea of Blood, Shame and
Terror. Alas! Who can tell what he underwent, whose Resentments of all must
give them a weight beyond our conjecture? One so Glorious to be thus Debased,
one so near to God to be thus Deserted, etc.

How astonishing a sight was it to see Christ hang upon a Cross? The purposes
designed by it must be answerable to the wonder, and so we shall acknowledge,
when we understand the Justice and Purity of God, the Evil of Sin, the Harmony
of Divine Government, the value of Pardon, and Eternal Life, the Honor of the
Mediator, and the influence of his Obedience on Myriads of Angels.

At present we see the Pardon of Sin made consistent with Justice. Our Lord
endured that Punishment of Sin, that God might be Glorious, whilst the
Believing Sinner escapes. By this, God declared the Righteousness of his
Government, whilst he Glorified his Grace in saving Transgressors: Christ's
being Obedient even unto Death, Honored the Law above all that Men could
perform in their best Condition: yea, sets it above Contempt, when the Penitent
is forgiven his greatest Enormities: So that God as our Governor, receives such
Glory by Christ's Subjection, as it suffers nothing by the Impunity and
Happiness of all who are saved. Yea, A Dying Christ is more fit to Awe every
one against Rebellion, and dispose to the exactest Obedience than any other
Consideration.

For the further clearing of this Point, I shall propose three Enquiries.

1 Enq. Were Christ's Sufferings a part of the Obedience of Christ whereby we
are made Righteous?

Ans. The Sufferings of Christ were a part of the Obedience of Christ, whereby
we are made Righteous. No Precept could try his Obedience more, than that he
should make his Soul an Offering for Sin. Herein he outdid the Loyalty of all
Beings; for the proof of this Point, I shall give you some further Evidence,
that Christ's Sufferings were a part of his Obedience.

1. Whatever was endured by Christ was enjoined on him in a way of Authority,
upon supposition he would be Redeemer.

He agreed to be a Subject and Servant: He learned what Obedience was, even by
what he endured; Heb. 5.8. and still acknowledged an Authority over him as
Mediator, This Commandment I have received of the Father's John 10.18. Not as
I will but as thou will; were his Words; when the Human Nature hinted so much
Reluctance, as expressed the Cup to be truly bitter, Mat. 26.29.

2. Christ's Sufferings were endured by him in a way of Obedience, he obeyed in
whatever he endured. Isa. 50.5, 6. The Lord God has opened my Ear, and I was
not Rebellious, I gave my Back to the Smiters. etc. Mat. 26.42. He shows the
most Obediential regard, Thy Will be done. Phil. 2.8. He was Obedient unto
Death. The Law of Mediation enjoined it, his Will exerted its true consent,
even giving up the Ghost.

3. The efficacy of Christ's Sufferings much depended on their being acts of
Obedience, had they been against his Will, or had he Repented after he had
first agreed, Men had failed of Salvation. Heb. 10.9.10. Lo I come to do thy
Will, O God. By the which Will we are Sanctified, through the Offering of the
Body of Jesus Christ, one for all. The Will of God appointing and accepting
this Atonement, and the Will of Christ obeying and freely performing what was
appointed, are that we are Saved by. The Obedient Heart of Christ, in all gives
a Power thereto. Hence there is a Stress laid on his Voluntariness in his Work;
He gave Himself. Gal. 14. Tit. 2 14. And he offered Himself. Heb. 7, 27. He
testified this in being the Priest, that offered himself, as well as the
Sacrifice that was offered.

These being such amazing instances of Obedience, tended much to glorify Gods
Government, how sacred is that Authority, and how binding are its mandates ^
When the Son of God in Flesh will observe them, even when they require such
Sufferings to be endured and submitted to. These are harder precepts than
Angels or Men were ever called to obey, and therefore how cheerful should they
be in observing such Commands, as be less humbling and difficult; especially
when the Authority of Gods precepts are founded in his absolute Dominion over
them? But Christ could be under no Law, till by his own consent, he was willing
to be a Subject. I infer then, that if Christ's Sufferings were a part of his
Obedience, then we are made Righteous thereby, or we are made Righteous by only
some part of his Obedience, which I suppose you will not affirm.

2. Christ's Sufferings are a part of Christ's meriting Righteousness, this
will both prove that they are part of Christ's Obedience, and that we are made
Righteous thereby. Unless any should surmize, we are made Righteous by some
what of Christ's, besides his Obedience; or, that his meriting Righteousness
does not conduce to make us Righteous. That Christ's Suffering are apart of his
Righteousness, might be demonstrated many ways, as First, They were part of the
condition whereupon Christ had a right to Men's Pardon and Salvation. Isaiah
53.11 12. Second, Christ pleads and interceeds in the virtue of his Sufferings.
1 John 2.1, 2. Third, We are justified by his Blood. Romans 5 9. Four, They are
meritorious of what blessings we receive, but these things will be insisted on
in the third Enquiry.

2. Enquiry. Was Christ's Incarnation a part of his Humiliation?

Ans. Christ's Incarnation was a part of his Humiliation.

To argue this point with evidence, I must mind you, that the subject of this
proposition must be taken as it naturally lies, I would think it of no use to
you, and in it self a vain question to ask; had Christ assumed our Nature in
another State than it is since the Fall, or had Christ become incarnate in
another manner, than by being Conceived in the Womb of the Virgin; Whether then
his Incarnation had been a part of his Humiliation? tho I know some Popish
Schoolmen ungroundedly affirm, that Christ would have taken our nature into
union with him, if Adam had not fallen, and so there would not have been that
place for his Humiliation, yet I think not hard to prove, that for the Eternal
word to become Incarnate in any manner, would have been a great Humiliation;
and there must have been somewhat that would have rendered it so, or he would
not have assumed our Nature. But we have nothing to do with such Chimaeras,
Christ was Incarnate, he has assumed our Nature, the Word of God tells us, in
what manner he assumed it, and to what ends, and in what State. Therefore we
must in our Question speak of Christ's Incarnation as it was, and not as it was
not, and which ever way it be decided, every one must confine his Conceptions
according as the Subject in the Question is Stated, unless they will deceive
others and themselves. I shall offer these Reasons to prove, that Christ's
incarnation was a partt of his Humiliation.

1 R. The Word of God in express Terms affirms this, Phil. 2.7. But made
himself of no Reputation, and took upon him the form of a Servant, and was made
in the likeness of Men. Let us for the better apprehending the force of this
Text, consider, 1. The Context. 2. The Words in the Verse. 3. The Objection
that can be offered to enervate it from V. 8. For if the Context tend to prove
that Christ's Incarnation was a part of his Humiliation, and the text in plain
Words affirm it, and there be nothing in the whole against it, the Proof must
be express; only let me give you the 7 verse as it is in the Original, which by
our translation is Darkened. Christ emptied Himself, taking on him the force of
a Servant, being made in the likeness of Men.

1. Lets consider the Context, The Apostle had commanded Self-denial, Charity,
and Humility, ver. 3, 4. This charge he inforceth by Christ's example ver. 5.
Let this mind be in you which was in Christ Jesus; lhat he might give this
instance, the greater Advantage. 1. He shows the glorious dignity of Christ as
God. ver. 6. Who being in the form of God, thought it no Robbery to be equal
with God. He was equally glorious, he that assumed our Nature, and suffered in
it, was as excellent and the Beams of his Glory as Illustrious, as God himself;
being of one Essence and Nature with God, and having no other Nature besides
his Divine. 2. He then proceeds to tell them, how this Glorious One humbled and
debased himself, v. 7. of which presently; and thereby lets them see, how meet
it was, that they should not grudge at denying themselves, or being the most
lowly and humble when Christ, so infinitely more Glorious, was content to
become so low and mean, as to take our Nature, and suffer in it. You see the
Context requires, that whatever is affirmed in this seventh Verse must refer to
Christ's Debasement, or it cannot answer the plain scope of the Apostles
Reasoning; which is, to persuade Men to be Self-denying, from this Example of
Christ's humbling himself.

2. The words of the seventh Verse are next to be considered, He made himself
of no reputation, (...). This is the first Expression, if you regard the
derivation of the word, it amounts to this; He rendered himself such, as if his
Perfections and Glory were vain or useless. The word is consonantly translated,
1 Cor. 9.15. Make [my glorying] void. It Is rendered by Tertullian, Se Exhausit.
etc. Of all, made himself nothing: By Beza, Quasi ex omni seipsum ad nihil
redegit. Zanthius raises it higher, Se Evacuavit omni g^oria and aequalitate
cum patri: He emptied himself of all Glory, and Equality with the Father.
Indeed who can comprehend the utmost of this Examinition. Now these words must
refer to his Incarnation, as what let in, and made him ^^pable of all the
subsequent Sufferings. The next words are, He took on him the form of a
servant; or taking on him the form of a Servant: (...). Wherein was this? I
answer, In taking our Nature. For by assuming this Nature, he became God's
Servant, and subject to his Authority, as if not his own Master, tho a Servant
to Man he never was. He that was in the form of God, that is truly so, was in
the form of a Servant, that is truly so; that is the sense the next words
confirm, and was made (or being made) in the likeness of Man. Not likeness, in
opposition to the reality of the Humane Nature; but a conformity in Nature, and
the natural Operations thereof: He assumed our very Humane Nature. I hope then
the plain order and import of the words appear to be this: The Lord Jesus did
greatly empty and humble himself in taking our Nature, by the very assumption
of which Nature, he was a Servant. And lest you should think, that by being a
Servant is meant some Servile Debasement after he assumed this Nature, and not
his mere Incarnation, the Apostle explains it yet more; Being made in the
likeness of a Man, is added after the form of a Servant. Nay, lest any one
should deny his Incarnation to be part of his Humiliation, by inverting the
order of the words: He proceeds, v. 8. And being found in habit or fashion as a
man, he humbled himself: q. d. Being thus emptied and debased in taking our
Nature, and being to observance in a State common with other mere Men, he went
on to undergo those sensible Sufferings, which his Humane Nature rendered him
capable of enduring. Which leads me,

3. To the Objection from v. 8. Being found in fashion as a man, he humbled
himself, becoming obedient unto death, even the death of the cross. Whence may
be objected, That his Humiliation is confined to his dying in the Humane
Nature, after he had assumed it.

A. Christ's Dying was a great part of his Humiliation, but that does not argue
that it was all his Humiliation. Christ's Death, and lying in the Grave,
finished his Humiliaiton; but it does not follow, that was the beginning of it.
His Incarnation did begin it, tho he proceeded to Consummate it by obeying unto
Death. And (...), or Emptying himself, which is ascribed to his Incarnation,
does as truly express an Humiliation, as (...), which we render Humbled: Yea,
the former denotes a far greater Humiliation, as to the significancy of the
word. To conclude this; I cannot conceive, how the Apostle could more expressly
assert, that Christ's Incarnation was a part of his Humiliation; nay, he seems
to lay a very great stress upon it; and variously expresses Christ's assuming
our Nature, as that wherein the Wonder consisted most. Oh that he, who had a
Glory shining equally with the Father, should so submit to the withholding of
it, as to be made a Man. Let me mind you, that the Socinians will thank any Man
that denies the sense I give of this Text.

2. R. Christ did in his very Incarnation, in obedience to God's Command,
voluntarily submit to the concealing and suspending of his manifestative Glory,
that he might be capable to suffer the utmost Punishments he had engaged to
endure.

This Argument will appear in greater strength, if we consider it in its
several Parts. 1. By showing what a concealing and suspending of Christ's
Manifestative Glory there was in his very Incarnation. 2. That submiting and
enduring this in obedience to God, and for the Ends he thus assumed our Nature,
was truly a Degree of Humiliation. 3. I shall answer an Objection that may be
offered against the Son of God being capable of being humbled.

1. There was a great suspending and concealing of Christ's Manifestative Glory
in his very Incarnation. Our Nature was taken as an obscuring Vail, and in the
manner of Assuming it, that Vail was exceeding thick; which will appear in
these Things: 1. Christ was conceived in a Woman's Womb, there was he confined
the usual time; he was born, he s^ent part of his time in the unactive state of
Infancy and Childhood. He was capable of growing in knowledge, Luke 2.52. This
points to the manner of his Incarnation; and is there no conc^alment of his
Glory herein, no laying it aside? Oh for God-Man to be at any time unactive as
an Embrio, or Child in the Womb! for him to be born of a Woman, for him to pass
through the Incapacities of Infancy, and the like necessary Consequences of the
manner of his Incarnation! Sure here is a Suspension of Glory. Eve was formed in
a way more Glorious. Whereas the Apostle notes it of Christ, that he was made
of a woman made under the law, Gal. 4.4.

2. Christ in his very Incarnation assumed the Humane Nature when in a low
State, yea after the Fall, and subject to many Effects of that Fall. It was not
a Glorious Body, a Spiritual Body, a Body clothed with Immortality; but a Body
subject to Hunger, Thirst, Weariness, yea Death it self. The Apostle leaves a
Remark on this, 2 Cor. 5.16. Tho we have known Christ after the Flesh, yet know
we him so no more. Further, what a Vail was it, that he assumed our Nature
after Man had sinned, after he was condemned, and part of the Sentence
executed: Yea, there was need of an extraordinary way of Generation to prevent
the propagation of Guilt, and Defilement to him; our Lord was subject to Grief,
Fear, Trouble, Temptations from without, etc. and the same Infirmities as we
fallen Men are, Sin only excepted, Heb. 4.15. And was all this no Humiliation;
his mere Incarnation was his assuming a Body, in the frame and habit whereof
these Infirmities had actual place, and not a Body exempted from these: He was
in the likeness of sinful flesh, Romans 8.3.

3. The Apostle includes Christ's Incarnation in his Inferiority below Angels:
Heb. 2.9. We see Jesus, who was made a little lower than the Angels for the
suffering of death, etc. Tho his Exaninition in assuming our Nature be not all,
yet it is a great part of his Minoration* as taking a Nature below the
Angelical: Tho he could soon raise it above Angels when he had assumed it, and
finished his Work therein; and hence some render (...), for a little while. But
it is plain, that the Humane Nature in it self is below the Angelical; and
therefore in taking this lower Nature, he was so far Humbled, and went so far
further from his Glory.

2. Christ's receding from his Glory, in taking our Nature in this state, and
after this manner in obedience to God, and for the ends for which he assumed
such a Body, was truly a degree of Humiliation. That Christ should become Man,
was one Article submitted to by him, Heb. 10.5. It was a Debt, Heb. 2.16, 17.
(...); He was Incarnate; and that in the very described manner, that he might
be capable of enduring those full effects of Sin; that he might taste Death for
every Man, be Tempted, and the like. Had not he assumed our Flesh, he was not
capable of enduring these; yea, had he not assumed our Nature in an humbled
State, and submitted to a Vail on his Glory, the World would have been dazzled
with his Brightness above the Sun's; and none durst have blasphemed or
assaulted him. But our Lord was thus Incarnate, his Humane Nature was in this
humbled Condition, and not in an exalted State when he assumed it, and begun
not to be humbled afterward; he laid by his Glory when he put on our Flesh in
his Conception; and therefore, John 17.5. he prays, Glorify me with that glory
which I had with thee before the world began. And the Apostle reckons it as a
degree of his Humiliation; Gal. 4.1. Made of a woman made under the law. Yea, I
think it might be demonstrated, that the Lord's quitting the Display of his
Divine Glory in his Conception, Birth, and the whole time of his Life, was the
greatest degree of his Humiliation. And what can exclude his Incarnation,
especially in such a manner, from being a part of Humiliation, unless this
following Objection; for it was in a way of Obedience, his Glory obscured, and
this to abasing Purposes.

Obj. How could the Divine Nature be humbled?

A. It was the Eternal Word, or the Second Person that was humbled, as far as
his Incarnation obscured his Glory in the way above described. 1. The Divine
Nature essentially considered, could neither be humbled, nor exalted; nothing
can add to, or take from it. 2. Neither could the Divine Nature feel or resent
Sufferings in the same manner as the Humane Nature; it was not capable of
Passion. 3. Yet the Eternal Word was capable of laying aside his Manifestative
Glory, of subjecting himself to do so in obedience to the Father, and persuant
to his Covenant Undertaking, and to make himself capable of drinking the whole
of the Cup, by being clothed with such Flesh, and that in a manner so
obscuring of his Glory. It Is more strange, that this should be questioned by
such who ascribe to Christ Acts properly Mediatorial before his Incarnation.

3. R. Christ, for his very Incarnation among other things received Authority
as a Reward; Job. 5.27. He has given him authority to execute judgment,
because he is the son of man. If you say, he was not capable of such a Gift but
as the Son of Man, even that argues a degree of Humiliation; that the Person to
whom all was due by virtue of his Divine Essence, should assume another nature
to be capable of this as a Gift. But the words express his being the Son of Man
to have a Causality, "(...) Authority is a Reward for his Incarnation, among
other things: And if this be rewarded, it must come within the compass of his
Humiliation; for all Christ's Meritorious Acts come under the consideration of
his being humbled, and the Acts of his exalted State are not properly
Meritorious. I might add other Reasons, as from the dependant State to which
Christ became subject, by assuming our Nature; and from the way how the Glory
of Christ's Person added to value the Sufferings of the Humane Nature, etc. But
I think what is already offered is sufficient.

Obj. If Christ's Incarnation was a part of his Humiliation, then he is in a
state of Humiliation in Heaven.

A. 1. Christ's continuing in the Nature assumed when he has exalted it, may
not be a part of his Humiliation, and yet his assuming that Nature was a part
of his Humiliation. The Act of Assumption is one thing, remaining United is
another: The Nature in a humble State, as it was when he was Incarnate, is one
thing; that Nature in a perfected glorious State, as it is now in Heaven, is
another. Christ does not in Heaven assume our Nature Denovo; but remains United
to that Nature which he assumed in the Womb: And the state of this Nature is
now Glorious, whereas he took our Flesh when it was Inglorious. A Prince may
humble himself in marrying an ignoble, deformed, sickly Beggar; and yet it will
not follow he humbles himself still, because he lives with her as a Wife,
especially if he has ennobled, beautified, healed, and enriched her.

2. Saying; That Christ's Humane Nature is exalted in Heaven, is an
acknowledgment, that Christ was humbled in taking our Nature in the manner and
condition he assumed it in. Would Christ's Body be in an exalted State, if it
were in the form it had in its first Conception? Yet so it was in the moment of
Incarnation. Were it exalted if still to be Born? Yet so it was. Would he be in
an exalted State, if still an Infant or Child? Yet this was necessary from the
manner of Christ's Incarnation. Would this Nature be exalted, if still subject
to Weariness, Pain, Grief, Hunger, Shame, Temptation, and Death? Yet such was
the frame and habit of it when he assumed it. This vast difference in the state
of Christ's Body in Heaven, and when he became Incarnate, may convince us that
Christ humbled himself in assuming it; unless you will suppose it was first a
Glorious Body, i. e. when he took it, and after he assumed it, it was deprived
of that Glory, and humbled, and then again exalted: But such Conceits I pass by.

3. I might add, Tho the exalted Body of Christ be now a more fitted Medium,
whereby the Divine Glory is exerted and manifest, and also the Glorious
Purposes attained by the Hypostatical Union continued, do compensate it;
Nevertheless the Human Nature is in a sense at present some Vail upon the Glory
of Christ, as the Eternal Word, notwithstanding the Exaltation of the Humane
Nature; 1 Cor. 15.28. But these things are so beyond our comprehension, that an
humble Reverence does best set Limits to our Thoughts. But what has been
insisted on, without enlarging on this, may suffice to give us juster Thoughts
of our selves as Men, at least so as not to furmise, it was no Act of
Humiliation in the Lord of Glory to become Man, by being Conceived and Born;
for him to be a Child, to assume Flesh subject to Weariness, Pain, Sorrow,
Faintness, Temptation, Death, etc. for the Creator of the World to assume to a
Personal Union with himself, the lowest sort of intelligent Creatures; and for
the Lord of Glory to become a Subject and Servant. I shall conclude this Point,
by giving you the Westminster Assemblies Judgment; Less Catech. Q 27. Wherein
did Christ's Humiliation consist? A. Christ's Humiliation consisted in his
being born, and that in a low condition made under the Law, and c. You see that
they thought Christ's being bo^^ was a part of his Humiliation. And not only
the Miseries that followed his being born, nor the Low Condition wherein he was
born. (...) tech. Q. 46. The Estate of Christ's Humiliation, was that low
condition wherein he for our sakes emptying himself of his Glory, took upon him
the form of a Servant in his Conception, and Birth, Life, Death, and after his
Death till his Resurrection. Q. 47. Christ humbled himself in his Conception,
in that being from all Eternity the Son of God in the Bosom of the Father; he
was pleased in the fullness of Time to become the Son of Man, made of a Woman of
a low Estate, and to be born of her with diverse Circumstances of more than
ordinary Abasement. You see his very becoming the Son of Man; and his
Conception whereby he was Incarnate, were Parts of Christ's Humiliation.

3. Enq. Did Christ by his Death and Sufferings merit any thing, and that for
us?

A. Christ by his Death and Sufferings merited, yea even saving Blessings for
us. I shall, 1. Premise somewhat that may tend to clear this. 2. I shall prove
the Thing I affirm.

1. Let this be premised: Christ's Death and Sufferings may be conceived of,
first as Satisfactory, and then Meritorious. On the other hand, Christ's active
Obedience is to be conceived, as first, fit to be Meritorious, and then
Satisfactory. The reason of the former is this: Had not Christ's Death and
Sufferings been for to make satisfaction, God had not admitted them, or
delighted therein, as the merit of any Benefits; nay, God would have looked at
them with dislike, in stead of accounting them a meet Price of Blessings. The
reason for the later is; That had not Christ's Active Obedience been perfect,
and so fit to merit, it could not satisfy, or be a recompense for Man's
Disobedience, by vindicating the injured Glory of God's righteous Government.
Imperfect Obedience had tempted Creatures to offend, instead of atoning God for
the Offense.

2. I shall prove, that Christ's Death and Sufferings did merit greatly, and
that for us. Short Hints will suffice to confirm a Position to plain.

1. R. That for which Christ was rewarded, both as to himself, and as to us,
did truly merit, and that for us. But Christ was rewarded, both as to himself
and us, for his Death and Sufferings.

That Christ was rewarded for his Death and Sufferings as to himself, is past
Question, Phil. 2.9. Wherefore God has highly exalted him, and given him a
name above every name. The Covenant of Redemption adjusteth this; Christ
claims this often as of Right, and the Father is often said to perform it as of
Justice. That Christ was for his Death and Sufferings rewarded as to us, is as
evident. All the saving Benefits we receive are part of Christ's Reward, and
dispensed as such: Isa. 53.11, 12. He shall see of the travel of his soul, and
shall be satisfied, by his knowledge shall my righteous servant justify many,
for he shall bear their iniquities. Therefore will I divide him a portion with
the great, and he shall divide the spoil with the strong, because he has
poured out his soul unt^ death, etc. I shall presently instance the Saving
Blessings, which we receive for the Sufferings of Christ, as the procuring
Ca^se thereof.

2. That which is the Price of our Redemption, did merit for us; but Christ's
Death and Sufferings were the Price of our Redemption, etc. 1 Cor. 6.20. For ye
are bought with a price. 1 Pet. 1.18, 19. Ye were not redeemed with corruptible
things, but with the precious blood of Christ, etc. Acts 20.28. To feed the
Church of God, which he has purchased with his own blood. You cannot doubt but
that by which we are redeemed and bought did merit; the just God was a detainer
of us as guilty Offenders, until Christ by Death made reparation to his Glory.

3. That which is part of the Righteousness of Christ, for which we are
justified, did merit for us. But Christ's Death and Sufferings are part (at
least) of the Righteousness of Christ for which we are justified, etc. Romans
5.9. We are justified by his blood. It Is by this Blood as the procuring Cause,
this was the Propitiation: Hence his Blood is said to cleanse us, 1 John 1.7. I
hope you will not doubt, that that of Christ, for which we are justified, is at
least a part of Christ's Righteousness.

4. If Christ's Poverty merited Riches for us, then his Sufferings merited for
us; but Christ's Poverty merited Riches for us: 2 Cor. 8.9. For ye know the
grace of our Lord Jesus Christ, that tho he was rich, yet for your sakes he
became poor, that ye through his poverty might be rich. He was Owner of all
Things, but for a time he quitted as it were his Claim, to acquire Treasures
for us, who has forfeited all: He had not a Cottage of his own to lay his Head
in, that he might purchase Mansions for us.

5. That in the Virtue whereof Christ intercedes for, and gives out the saving
Blessings we receive, did merit for us; but it is in the Virtue of his Death and
Sufferings that Christ intercedes for, and gives out the saving Blessings we
receive.

He is entered into the holy place, Heb. 9.12. Into heaven it self, v. 24. There
he presents the Offering he had finished on Earth; that is, in the Virtue
thereof he claims, and expects the Blessings promised thereto, and merited
thereby: The dispensing thereof is committed to him; and each of them is given
to us, and received by us, in the express Virtue of that Offering. I shall
enumerate some, and show that each is assigned to Christ's Death and
Sufferings: Col. 1.14. In whom we have redemption through his blood, even the
forgiveness of sins. Which Blood was shed for the remission of sins, Matthew.
26.28. Ephesians. 1.7. We have redemption through his blood. Heb. 13. 12. Wherefore
Jesus, that he might sanctify the people with his own blood, suffered without
the gate. Reconciliation is owing to the same cause: Col. 1.21, 22. Now has he
reconciled in the body of his flesh through death to present you holy, etc.
Yea, eternal Life the sum of all promised good is granted on the same account:
Heb. 9.15. That by means of death for the redemption of their transgressions
that were under the first Testament, they which are called might receive the
promise of eternal inheritance. Can you suppose that we have Remission,
Sanctification, Peace, and an eternal Inheritance for Christ's Death and
Sufferings, and that his Intercession for these and other Blessings is in the
Virtue of his Blood, and yet his Death merited not these.

6. I might add, Heb. 10.14. He has by one offering perfected for ever them
that are sanctified: Which must not only prove, that Christ's Death and
Sufferings merited for us, but that all saving Blessings are under their
Influence, as the meritorious Cause thereof.

Object. Christ's Death and Sufferings were but the paying of a Debt, and
therefore merited nothing.

1. A. Was not our Obedience a Debt? Yea it was so more properly than our Sins
or Punishment. Sins are metaphorically called Debts, but they are not Things we
owe to God, but are the neglect of that Obedience which we do owe to God, and
so oblige us to Punishment. Punishments are called a Debt, not as what God owes
to us as a Debt, or we to him, but as what we are obnoxious to ^or
Disob^dience, if God is pleased to inflict them: But yet he is not so obliged
to Punish us; as to exempt him from a Pardoning. Right in the way his infinite
Perfections will adjust. If the Objection then will prove, that Christ's Death
merited nothing, because it was the payment of a Debt; the^ it will more
follow, that Christ's Active Obedience merited nothing; for that is as much at
least the paying of a Debt, yea more properly. The Confusion which this word
Debt has induced weak Men into, especially as a Pecuniary Debt, in the
Doctrine o^ Satisfaction, I shall afterward be necessitated to speak to. 2. A.
Christ's Death and Sufferings were Acts of Obedience in Christ, and so they
merited. Our undergoing of Punishment would have been no Act of Obedience in
us, but an involuntary enduring of Vengeance: It was not by a Divine Precept
made our Duty, but by the Sanction rendered due to us. There was a Threatening
whence it must be endured, but no Commandment that made our being Punished an
Obediential Act in us. Is it an Act of our Obedience to die a Spiritual Death,
or to be hated and abhorred by the Lord? Yea, Is being eternally Damned a Duty
performed to God by the Tormented? But whatever our Lord Jesus suffered, was
obedientially and voluntarily endured: It was God's Commandment to him, and in
him an Act of the highest Obedience to God; he pleased God therein. Ioh. 10.17.
Therefore does the father love me, because I lay down my life. He was obedient
unto death, Phil. 2.8. His willing subjection to God's Authority and Design
herein, was that which gave Life and En^rgy to his Sufferings. Truly Christ's
Dying was the highest Act of Obedience, and what we call his Active Obedience,
yields no Instance that equalleth this. It follows then, that if Christ's
Obedience could mer^^, then his Death and Sufferings merited, because they were
strictly Acts of Obedience: His very ensuring them was Obediential.

3. A. Tho Death was due to us as Sinners, yet Death was not due to Christ, but
as it was to be Satisfactory and Meritorious. It was thus proposed to him by
the Father, and thus consented to by Himself. He was to bear it as a Punishment
for the satisfaction of Governing Justice, and to merit the Pardon of Sinners;
his Sufferings were a Pardoning Price. He had committed no Crime, and therefore
deserved no Punishment, nor needed any Pardon. But he was willing to bear the
Punishment of our Crimes, that thereby he might merit our Forgiveness, in a way
consistent with the Perfections of God, and conducive to the Glory of Divine
Government. Hence, Is. 53.5. The chastisement of our peace was upon him. It on
him was a Chastisement for our Peace, as its designed End. True it was for Sin,
or it had not been necessary, nor yet a Punishment, but yet it was to purchase
our Salvation, or he had not submitted to it.

4. A. The immediate Efficacy and Operation of Christ's Sufferings upon us, are
as they be Meritorious.

Christ's Death must be satisfactory to God, or he would not have accounted it
Meritorious of Peace to us; nor granted us Benefits on the account thereof.
Provoked Justice, and the Injury to Divine Government by Sin, stood in the
Sinner's way, yea stood in the way of all Merit for good to us. There must be a
Propitiation for Sin to God; and this being made to God, it is accepted as a
Ransom and Price by him, and so it operates on the Sinner in a way of Merit
consequential of that satisfaction we are redeemed by Christ's Blood as a
Redeeming Price; we are saved by it as Meritorious of Salvation: Tho it was
also offered as an Atonement, and supposed to be so, ere Life could be granted
to Men for the sake thereof.

5. A. It were a great Reflection on the Father, and upon Christ, as well as
destructive to Sinners, to suppose, that Christ by his Death and Sufferings
merited nothing for us.

God is strangely represented, if he will have his innocent Son die for
Sinners, and yet his Death not be allowed Meritorious of the Release of
Sinners. We conceive not of Christ according to his Wisdom, that he would make
his Soul an Offering for Sin, and not thereby purchase the Release of Sinners
in his way. And as to the concern of Sinners, What avails it them, that Christ
died to honor Justice, if their Pardon, Adoption, and Glory, be not merited
thereby? If we should conceive that Christ died for us, and yet thereby merited
not that we should not die, but live; it would infer, that Christ's
Satisfaction did no more than make it consistent with God's Glory to save
Believers, but not certain that God would save those that believe. I say,
Believers, because Christ died to purchase Salvation absolutely for none but
them that would believe: Tho he purchased Faith for the Elect, (whereby their
Happiness is as sure, as if absolutely purchased,) and the serious Offers of
Salvation on the Terms of the Gospel for all Men that hear the Gospel.

I hope these Considerations will induce you to conclude, that the Death and
Sufferings of Christ are Meritorious of saving Blessings for us. Tho I grant,
Christ's Active Obedience was Meritorious, yea and in a very proper sense
Satisfactory too; yet if it were necessasary, (which it is not,) that we must
confine the Merit of Salvation to either his Active or Passive Obedience, I
should esteem it abundantly safer to confine it to his Passive Obedience; as
Olevian, Piscator, Windelin, Gataker, Pitcairn, and many of our greatest
Divines, have done.

I shall contract the Application of what you have heard, and leave the
Improvement of such Inferences as these to your Minds.

1. How great and awful an Evil is Sin! Besides the Defilement which it brings,
the Debasement of our Rational Nature by it, and that Obnoxiousness to
Punishment which attends it, we have seen how contrary it is to the Holy Nature
of God, and what an Injury to the Glory of his Government. This is that
Provocation which Essential Justice required, an Atonement for, and the Wisdom
of God, saw necessary to punish in the most awful manner in his very Son. What
an Offense was that, which when his boundless Grace made him willing to
forgive, yet his other Perfections would not admit to pass unpunished* that the
Government of God might receive no damage by Man's Impunity? The Agony and
Death of our Redeemer as convincingly testify the Evil of Sin, as the Howlings
of the Damned, yea in many respects far more. This is that of which without
blood there is no remission, Heb. 9.22. Yea for which the Blood of Christ alone
was a fit Propitiation, 1 Ioh. 2.2. The Blood of him alone that was God could
wash it out of God's Books, and fetch its Stain out of our Consciences.
Whatever Wonder is displayed in the method of Redemption, proclaims the
Odiousness and Disorder of Sin. Let us then humbly bewail our past Offenses,
wonder that we can make a Mock of Sin, be in Distress till our Pardon be sealed
to us, watch and be afraid of all Sin for the future, and be restless whiles
this worst of Evils has any room in our Hearts, or advantage to break out in
our Lives.

2. The Governing Justice of God is strictly exact, and his Authority sacred;
God is infinite in Mercy, but not to the least Detriment of Justice; he bare a
good Will to the Elect, but will not eclipse his Throne in forgiving them. He
will be just even when he Pardons, Romans 3.25. His Son must obey in our Nature,
if we neglect or fail to obey; his Son must die in our Flesh, if we offend, and
yet obtain Remission. Angels irremediably perish for their Rebellion, having no
God in their Nature to atone for them. If sinful Man escape, it is by a
Satisfaction made by Christ in their Nature as their Sponsor, Heb. 2.14, 16.
More of this afterward. Let us reverence his Laws, tremble at his Threats,
submit to all he Prescribes, and serve him with Reverence and godly Fear, for
our God is a consuming fire, Heb. 12.28, 29.

3. How amazing is the Love of the Father, in giving his Son for us, and as
astonishing is the Love of Christ in giving himself for us! The Indignation of
God against Sin, and the Love of God to Sinners, contend in this Instance. God
takes occasion to display his Love, while he vindicates the Honor of his
Justice: Romans 5.8. But God commends his love toward us, that whiles we were
yet sinners, Christ died for us. He does herein not only assure us of his Love,
but gives to Angels and Men an instance of the Infiniteness of that Love of
his. By this, beyond any other, he proclaims how much he can love. Can you
question it, when you consider him so provoked by Sin, when you weigh the
Dignity and Dearness of his Son to him, the humble State he was to enter into,
and the astonishing Miseries he was to endure in that State; and this for vile
Worms, and careless resolved Enemies. Well might the Apostle say, Herein is
love, not that we loved God, but that God loved us, and sent his son to be the
propitiation for our sins, 1 John 4.10. Alas! all Creatures love to God is not
worth the name of Love, in comparison with his Love to us. How should this
aggravate our Unkindness, raise our admiring Thoughts, heighten our Esteem,
unite our Hearts to him, render him the Object of our supreme Delight, and
render our Obedience to his Commands exact and pleasing, yea joined with the
greatest Zeal for his Glory, and Serviceableness to his Interests. The Father's
Love must not be overlooked, which too many are guilty of, by representing him
to their M^^ds as only exacting Satisfaction from Christ, not minding that he
provided and gave Christ to make that Satisfaction.

Our blessed Redeemer's Love is alike unaccountable; he was not ignorant of
what attended his Undertaking when he subscribed it, he knew all the Abasement
of his humble State; he understood all the bitter Ingredients of the Cup, how
deep every Nail in the Cross was to pierce, what Impressions Divine Wrath would
make, and what an Eclipse his own veiled Glory would occasion. But yet his Love
was sufficient to take on him all this weight, and carry him through the utmost
of his Undertaking. His Kindness was not quenched by floods of Sorrow, nor his
Heart changed when he felt the most; with the bitter Cup in his hand he
embraced them, for whose sake he was to drink it. Ioh. 13.1. When Jesus knew
that his hour was come, having loved his own, he loved them to the end. What
care took he of them? What allowance did he make for the weakness of their
Flesh? How kindly does he assure them of Eternal Mansions with that Pathetick
Accent, If it were not so, I would have told you? Joh. 14.1. How earnestly did
he pray for them? Ioh. 17. How soon does he visit them without upbraiding their
sad Desertion? etc. Yea our blessed Jesus retains the same affectionate Heart
toward us in Heaven, after all he endured on Earth: He ever lives to make
intercession for us, Heb. 7.25. as if that were the very business and end of
his Living. How precious should Christ be to us, to us to live should be
Christ, his Dominion we should acknowledge, and obey his Law; who so dearly
bought his Government, Romans 14.9. Let us be entirely resigned to him, and with
joy endure the utmost for his Name; for we are redeemed by his Blood. Be
careful and studious to imitate him, as what expresses our Esteem of him, and
most answers the great Ends of his Undertaking: Romans 8.29. Tit. 2.14.

4. That sorer Punishment denounced in the Gospel against such as neglect
Salvation by Christ, is exceeding just. Heb. 10.29. Of how much sorer
punishment suppose ye shall he be thought worthy, who has trodden under foot
the son of God, and has counted the blood of the covenant wherewith he was
sanctified an unholy thing? etc. It Is equal they die in their Sins,
notwithstanding the Remedy, since they refuse it; and that the Wrath of God
abide on them, who despise his Reconciling Love. But that is not all, the Gospel
proportions its Threatenings to the aggravated Sins of Unbelief and Impenitency;
that we will not come to Christ, for the Life he purchased by his Death, is
worse than our first forfeiture of Life. By this we trample on Christ as
odious, and esteem his Blood profane and vile. We spurn at the tenderest
Bowels, and contemn the riehest Grace. We approve of our Apostasy, and hug our
Chains. We downright tell God to his face, I choose to be Damned, rather than be
saved by Christ. Can any think it strange, that their Fall should be the lower,
their Flames the hotter, and the Reflections of a tormenting Conscienee more
penetrating. It Is in flaming fire Christ will take vengeance on such as obey
not the Gospel, who shall be punished with everlasting destruction from the
presence of the Lord, and from the glory of his power. The Blow intended for
such, is too great for a created Instrument to give, therefore it will be
immediate by the Presence of the Lord; yea it will be so awful, as shall make
the Power of God's Arm glorious in inflicting it.

Marvelous is the Instance by which God intends to glorify any Attribute; sore
will be that Misery by which God will get Eternal Glory to the strength of his
Power, in making Wretches miserable. Oh! tremble at Gospel Vengeance, and
credit Gospel Threatenings, lest you feel them, and thereby Christ not only
become useless, but also terrible to you? What will your case be, when he shall
avenge his despised Blood, and execute that which is the condemnation! Joh.
3.19. And know, O! obstinate Sinner, thy Ruin is as sure, as it is dreadful.
Heb. 2.3. How shall we escape, if we neglect so great a salvation? There Is no
possibility of escaping, thy own awakened Mind being Judge. Has God a dearer
Son to give for thee? Will God be a Liar, and Perjured for thy sake? Can
thou hope for this, as thou must, since he has so often declared, yea sworn,
that the impenitent Unbeliever shall never enter into his Rest. Undo not thy
self by Hopes, without any Word of God for them, yea so expressly against his
Word, which so many thousands already feel the certainty of. Obey the Gospel
for Salvation thou must, or its sorer Vengeance thou shall Eternally undergo.

5. The Faith and Joy of a sincere Christian are well grounded, notwithstanding
his many Offenses, and great Forfeitures. Our Sins are many and great, can God
forgive them? I am exceeding unworthy, how shall God deal with me as his Child,
or admit my wearing a Crown of Glory? Can I expect this, or have any joyful
hopes concerning it? Truly these are necessary Challenges, if the Price of
Salvation be unknown. But consider, O Soul! that thy Pardon and Eternal Glory
are purchased by the Obedience of the Son of God in our Nature, and secured to
thee by the Covenant made and ratified in the Virtue of Christ's Blood. Thy
Sins have not dishonored God above the Glory which redounds to him by the
Sufferings and Merits of thy Redeemer. That was done and suffered by Christ,
which in the Balance of Justice more than compensates whatever is to be
forgiven thee, or is promised to thee. No Perfection of God is aggrieved by any
thing the Gospel grants to the Persons it designeth: Art thou a godly Believer,
tho a weak one? Even thou may rejoice in God through our Lord Jesus Christ,
having now received the atonement, Romans 5.11.

Having answered the first Ques^^on, What is the Obedience of Christ, by which
we are made Righteous? I come to the second Question.

SERMON II.
2 Q What is it to be made Righteous by Christ's Obedience? A. There Is hardly a
word in Scripture of so various acceptations as the word Righteousness. But I
shall confine my self to what the Spirit of God designeth principally in the
Text. To be made Righteous by Christ's Obedience is;

1. To be made free from Condemnation, as if we had not sinned, and to be
entitled to Acceptance with God and Eternal Glory, as if we had kept the whole
Law: and both for the sake of Christ's Righteousness imputed to Penitent
Belie^ers for Pardon and Adoption. It is not to be made Men that never sinned,
for that is impossible; nor to be esteemed Men that personally kept the whole
Law, for that were false; both which blessedness by Pardon does demonstrate;
our forgiveness shows our disobedience.

2. By the Merits and Spirit of Christ to be made obedient to the Gospel, at
least in those things which Christ has graciously appointed to be the
Conditions of our actual Enjoyment of saving Benefits, as the effects of
Christ's sole Righteousness. In the first sense we are made Righteous in our
Justification, which is a forensick act; and infers a relative change of our
State from Guilty to Pardoned, from Non-Accepted to Accepted, and from being
void of Right to have a Right to the Eternal Inheritance. In the sense of the
second particular, we are made Righteous partly in our Effectual Vocation, and
partly in our Progressive Sanctification and Perseverance. This is by the
efficiency of the Spirit of Christ enclining and enabling us to the performance
of the respective Gospel Conditions; he enableth us to Believe for
Justification, to Repent for Pardon, to Persevere in Faith and True Holiness
for the possession of Eternal Glory. Both these are by the Obedience of Christ.
His Satisfaction and Merits have a causual influence on both, though these
effects be produced in a different manner. We must not limit our being made
Righteous by Christ's Obedience, below our being made Sinners by Adam's
Disobedience; as far as Adam made us Sinners, so far Christ makes us Righteous,
or the reddition is improper: We are as truly absolved by Christ's Obedience,
as we were made guilty by Adam's Disobedience; And we are as truly Regenerated
by Christ's Obedience, as we were Depraved by Adam's Disobedience. In the first
we are made free from the Curse of the Law due to us as Sinners; in the later
we are preserved from being impenitent ungodly Infidels, to whom the Gospel
does not give a freedom from the Curse; but leaves such under the Law's
Sentence, yea denounces greater punishments against them. By the first we have
a full Righteousness to stand before God in, notwithstanding the exactness of
the Law of Innocence, and all our Faults and Defects. By the second we are
rendered the Objects or Subjects of that full Righteousness according ^o the
Gospel promise, which is the Instrument whereby God bestows it. But hereof more
fully in due place. I shall insist most on the first point.

1. To be made Righteous by Christ's Obedience, is to be made Free from
Condemnation as if we had not Sinned, and to be Entitled to Acceptance with God
and Eternal Glory, as if we had kept the whole Law; and both for the sake of
Christ's Righteousness, imputed to Penitent Believ^^s for Pardon and Adoption.

I can in the shortest way Comprehend the Nature and Parts of this Particular
by the following Propositions.

1 Pro. All Men are unrighteous by nature, Romans 3.10. There is none righteous,
no not one. We are all Transgressors, and therefore each is liable to
Vengeance, Romans 3.19. All the world is become guilty before God, (...), he
might have arrested, and Executed Judgment upon all of us. When Innocence
ceased, the Sentence of the Law took place; and obnoxiousness to Misery
inevitably followed. This includes a forfeiture of Right to Happiness by the
Law of Works; Be sure, if it condemns us by its Threats, it cannot reward us by
its Promise; Disobedience putting us past a possibility of perfectly obeying,
which was the Condition of its Reward. Therefore by the deeds of the law shall
no flesh living be justified, for by the law is the knowledge of sin, Romans
3.20. God can never speak peace by it to the Sinner, nor acquit the Offender,
because by it he condemns for the least Sin, and promises Life to none but the
perfectly Obedient. By this Law Sin is not only known to be Sin, but Sin is
known to bring Damnation, and to bar us from Happiness. Hence, though Christ's
Obedience was perfect according to the Law, yet it is not by the Law that God
pronounces the Believer just, but by the Gospel. Righteousness comes not by
the Law, Gal. 2.21. No Man is justified by the Law, Gal. 3.11.

Exh. Be affected with that Unrighteous State, wherein you all once have been,
and the Impenitent still remain. Is it a small thing to have been Rebels
against the holy Law of your Maker? Can you make a light account of being under
the Curse, which comprehends the utmost Misery? Gal. 3.10. This as a flaming
Sword keeps thee from the Tree of Life, and with irresistible power binds
Vengeance on thee, whilst thou art Christless. Divine Wrath points to thee, as
the Obnoxious Person, and in the mean time thou have no Claim to God's Favor,
no Title to God or any Saving Blessing. In this State the best of you once
were, Ephesians. 2.12. And what Grace was it, that ref^ued you out of this extremity?
Who can enough adore it? But what is the stupidness of such among you, that can
quietly sleep in an Unrighteous State; yea, so long despise and refuse
Deliverance from it? Hell is your due every moment, and should you die in this
condition, as you may without farther warning; neither the Mercy of God, nor
the Merits of Christ, will prevent Eternal Torments.

2 Pro. God is so Righteous and Jealous of the Glory of his Government, that
his richest Mercy admits the Pardon of no Offender, nor Saving Benefits to such
as in the least fail in their Obedience, but on the account of a Righteousness
at least exactly adequate to what strict governing Justice did enjoin and
prescribe. It must be a Righteousness of Obedience as perfect as the Law
Precept required of Men; it must be a Righteousness of Satisfaction, by bearing
a Punishment equivalent to what the Law Threatening denounced against Sinners.
And because this Law in its Precepts and Threats was a Law to Men, and they
were Men that transgressed, therefore Justice required that the Obedience
should be yielded, and the Punishment suffered by and in the Humane Nature.
Hence even the Son of God must take our Flesh, if he would be a Redeemer: The
Satisfaction must yield as much glory to Justice, as the Sin forgiven did
injure it. The Merit must be proportioned in the Scale of Justice to the
Benefit to be conferred, and that upon Offenders, which rendered what was
appointed to Christ, to be above what the Law required of Men. Of which I have
spoken somewhat already, and shall have reason again to enlarge. Romans 3.26. His
Righteousness is declared, and he appears just, when the Justifier of him that
believes in Jesus. Sin must be condemned in the flesh of Christ by his dying a
Sacrifice for it, that the righteousness of the law might be fulfilled in us,
who walk not after the flesh, but after the spirit, Romans 8.34.

Exh. Adore the Authority and Justice of God, notwithstanding Pardoning Mercy.
The Atonement speaks it, neither is it debased by all the Displays of Grace. We
are as subject to God, as if he had never spared us, and he is still as just,
as if all Mankind were to be damned. If you despise his Dominion, you shall
find the edge of his Sword, if you reject the Atonement, the Severity of his
Justice will instance it self upon you. See then that you provoke not the Lord
to jealousy. Deuteronomy. 29.20.

3 Pro. No Grace, nor Act of the best Saint can be a Satisfaction for the least
Fault, or a Righteousness Meritorious of the least Benefit. All Saints have
sinned, yea Sins and Defects adhere to their best Duties. Our exactest actions
cannot atone for a past Crime, because they are no more than what is at present
due from us. Imperfect Duties cannot merit, because they are not in the
estimate of governing Justice proportioned to the lowest Benefit. A Reward of
Debt can be to none below him, that never sinned and perfectly obeys, Romans
4.4. though a Reward of Grace is promised to the Upright, Ps. 50.11. When we
have done all we now can do, we are unprofitable Servants, and by the Law of
Works, the iniquity of our holy things were enough to bring us under
condemnation.

Exh. See your need of a greater Righteousness than your own, and submit to the
way of its application. Romans 10.3.4. For they being ignorant of Gods
righteousness, and going about to establish their own righteousness, have not
submitted themselves to the righteousness of God. They not knowing the
Righteousness which God had contrived, and appointed for the Salvation of
fallen Man, proudly thought they could by a tale of Works, made up with operous
costly Sacrifices, merit Life at the hands of God; and by this conceit they
despised a Crucified Christ as needless, refused to believe in Christ for
Justification by his Merits, and went on in Impenitency, as above the necessity
of Pardon by his Blood. Which Impenitent persisting in rejecting of Christ was
their non-submission to the Righteousness of God. Oh the danger of a Heart too
proud, and a Will too stubborn to stoop to Christ and his Gospel! Alas our own
Garments are too scant for a covering and unless we accept of a whole Christ,
we shall be naked, notwithstanding the largeness of his Robe. His Stripes will
not heal us, if we return not unto this Shepherd and Bishop of our Souls, 1
Pet. 2.24, 25. A Righteousness to procure Acceptance, or Merit Life, we cannot
work out, but blessed be God, Christ is the end of the Law for Righteousness to
every one that believes, Romans 10.4. The end of the Ceremonial Law, is what the
Tipes signified: The end of the Law of Works, as being the scope and issue of
it; for if it had been perfectly obeyed by Man, right to Impunity, and its
Reward, was the utmost which that Law could confer on Innocent Man. And blessed
be God, Christ has by his Obedience merited both these; and all that will
truly believe, shall in Christ's Right be Entitled to both; though for any thing
wrought by them, they could never attain either Impunity or Glory. If you
peruse v. 5. to the 11. you will find, that God has put us past all
solicitousness concerning the sufficiency and certainty of a Christ, who has a
fullness of Righteousness for the Salvation of Sinners: But the thing incumbent
on us to be sollicitous about, is, that we comply with the Gospel, that we may
be saved by his Righteousness. V. 10, 11. If thou shall confess with thy mouth
the Lord Jesus, and believe with thy heart, thou shall be saved; for with the
heart man believes unto righteousness, and with the mouth confession is made
to salvation. Without these, neither his coming to Dye, nor his Resurrection
from Death, will avail us to Salvation Oh! then accept of Christ, and yield up
your selves to him, and to a due and faithful Confession of him, as your Lord
and Jesus.

4. Prop. Jesus Christ, by the gracious Dispensation of God, as our Lawgiver,
was admitted, and in our Nature did so fully answer the demands of Governing
Justice, as that to its own very Glory, it admits the Grace of God to exert it
self in forgiving Believing Sinners, and in conferring on them Saving Benefits
in the Righteousness of Christ. It was not so small a matter, as most account
it, to bring Justice and Pardoning Mercy to consist; to honor the Government
of God, and save Believing Sinners, who before were Sentenced to Dye. But
having spoken to some part of this Proposition in my former Discourse, I shall
reduce it to these Particulars, which I shall briefly hint at. 1. It was in our
Offending Nature that Christ answered the Demands of Justice, though it was not
in our Person. Romans 8.3. God sent his Son in the likeness of sinful flesh. If
without this it had been possible to vindicate the Government of God in
general, yet without assuming our Nature, it would not have been a Vindication
of the Government of God over Men in particular; the Sufferings had not been a
satisfaction for Human Offenses, as Human. 2. Nothing was abated to Christ that
Governing Justice exacted; the Substantials of the Law were inserted into the
Rule of his Active and Passive Obedience, and Justice adjusted his Work to his
Wages. There Is no Common nor Special Benefit promised, or given, on the account
of his Obedience to any, but the value of his Obedience is proportionable
thereto, though yet the Benefits much exceed what Adam forfeited; and therefore
his Obedience must transcend what was injoined Man by the Law of Works. 3. Gods
Government and Justice were not only Vindicated by Christ's Obedience, but
greatly Honored. Oh! the luster cast on Gods Laws hereby! Never did the
Authority of Gods Precepts appear so Royal, as when God in Flesh so accurately
obeyed them; even to that of Dying for Sinners. Never was the awfulness of Gods
Penal Sanctions discovered, as in the Tears, Sweats, Agony, and Blood of his
Glorious and Beloved Son. There Is no instance of the Riches of Gods Praemiant
Sanction, as in the Rewards which our Savior received. How Exalted is his
Human Nature above Angels! And how great are his Rewards in his Members! Yea,
no Blessing given to lost Man, but it is on his account. What an attesting Echo
have you, Ioh. 12.28.27. Father, glorify thy Name. Then came there a voice from
heaven, saying, I have both glorified it, and will glorify it again. Christ
spoke his part when he had inspected the united force of Terrors just besetting
him: Now is my soul troubled: Father, save me from this hour; but for this
cause came I unto this hour. q. d. As heavy as it presses, as awful as it is,
yet Father glorify thy Name; abate nothing that will make for thy Honor,
however my Flesh trembles, and my Soul is distressed: Be thou great, however
low I must be brought: Spare not for my crying, so as to abate whatever tends
to make thy Authority Sacred, and Justice Exact. The Father Answers, I have
persued the Interest of my Glory hitherto in thy Debasement, Poverty; Contempt,
Sorrows, Shame, Temptations and Torments, which are now just a finishing; my
Sword is giving its utmost blow; and then I will be Glorious in Exalting and
Rewarding thee: I Will get my Remunerative Justice as great a Name in thy
Triumphs, as my Punitive Justice has acquired in thy Debasements. So Christ
explains it, v. 31, 32. Now shall the prince of this world be judged, and when
I am lifted up, I Will draw all men to me. 4. Though all was fulfilled by Christ
when appointed to it, yet it was by a gracious Dispensation of God, as
Lawgiver, that Christ was allowed to work this Righteousness for the Salvation
of Sinners. The Lawgiver is above the Law; and though the Law knew no Sponsor,
whose Obedience should procure Pardon, and save the Guilty; alius was aliud in
its accounts: Noxa Caput sequitur is its Language: The Punishment must fall on
the Sinner, it could appoint no other to bear it, and imputing to the Sinner
what another endures, is above its Dialect. Yet God, the Lawgiver, had not
signified his whole Will by the Law of Works, he had reserved a Prerogative
whereby he could secure the Glory of his Government, and spare the Rebel;
satisfy Justice, and not destroy the Sinner; and be as glorious in forgiving as
in punishing. To him the satisfaction was made, and by him accepted, Heb. 10.7.
And hence the Sinner is not free, as soon as the satisfaction was made, but
it is when, and on what terms the Lawgiver and Sponsor would adjust; yea, and
the release comes to the Sinner as a forgiving Act.

Exh. Adore the Wisdom and Grace of God. Oh! what Grace that would transfer the
punishment! What Wisdom that contrived a way to place it so, that God should be
satisfied, and yet his Grace be free! The Sinner saved, and yet not tempted to
Rebel! The Sufferer repaid in Glory, suited to what he did and endured! The
Redeemed kept Humble as Pardoned, though the Pardon was granted on a valuable
Price! The Gift so bestowed, as to exert Authority, and necessitate Diligence!
And yet nothing done on the Receivers part to purchase the Gift, or to Rob
Grace of its Glory: its comprehensively expressed, Ephesians. 1.7, 8. In whom we have
redemption through his blood, the forgiveness of sin according to the riches of
his grace; wherein he has abounded toward us in all wisdom and prudence.

5 Prop. The righteousness of Christ in all respects is perfect and complete,
yet Christ's Righteousness is variously denominated from those different
respects.

However variously we conceive thereof, its every way perfect, it is chargeable
with no defect, nor subject to any challenge.

1. It Is perfect, if you consider it as a mere conformity to the preceptive
part of the Moral Law, in which respect it is the same as Holiness.

He was holy, harmless, and undefiled, separate from sinners, Heb. 7.26. He was
habitually Holy above Adam; yea, above Angels; none so full of grace and truth
as he, Joh. 1.14. No Mind so* filled with light, in actu primo, even from the
very ^^nning; no Heart so inlaid with the Divine Image, and enflamed with Love
as his; he had the Spirit without measure, Ioh. 3.34. He had no taint of evil
in his Constitution, in the Womb he was that Holy thing, Luke 2.35. And when
the Tempter assaulted him with the most Skilful violence, he had nothing in
him, Ioh. 14.30. He super-eminently obeyed to an Iota all that was required of
him, or competent to his Person, and this without any defect in the manner, and
to the utmost extent of the Precept. Thus completely Holy was Christ, which
Holiness went into the matter of his Righteousness, and is often called so; he
gave God his utmost due, as a Holy Lawgiver.

2. It was a perfect Righteousness, as the performed condition of the Reward
promised him in the Covenant of Redemption. Whatever was promised to Christ,
either for himself or Members, was promised upon certain conditions; some of
which were a due undergoing of the bitterest Sufferings threatened in the Law of
Works, others were included in that of his Active Obedience. A Penal Sanction
in case of his failure, had no room in the Law of Mediation, because of the
impossibility of his Nonperformance, and therefore a right to Impunity is of
as little concern; but Christ's Active and Passive Obedience, became formally a
complete Righteousness, as what he did and suffered, was an exact fulfilling of
the condition of the Reward in the Sanction. He took our Nature, he made his
Soul an Offering for Sin, he Honor the Law, he Glorified God, he did all the
^^rk, which was given him to do, and drunk the Dregs of the Cup, which was
appointed him to Drink: He fulfilled all Righteousness, Mat. 3.15. Even all
that for which he was to be Exalted, or his Seed made Happy; nothing was
omitted by him, or abated to him.

3. This Righteousness of Christ, as the performed condition of the Reward, was
a Federal Righteousness, above what was to be Man's Righteousness by the Law of
Works; which could not be, but that the conditions consented to by Christ in
the Covenant of Redemption, were other, and greater than what were required of
Adam by the Covenant of Works.

I shall give you a few of many instances of Conditions, appointed to Christ in
the Covenant of Redemption, above what the Law of Works required. The Law of
Works did not require the Person Obeying or Suffering, to be the Eternal Son of
God in our Nature, but the Covenant of Redemption required this; should I Name
no more, this would fully prove the point. But I add, The Law of Works did not
exact an Obedience above what Innocent Adam was able to perform, but the
Covenant of Redemption did this: And Christ so obeyed in our Nature, (not
needlessly) as must fill the Angels with admiration to see themselves outdone.
The Covenant of Works did not exact Punishment even to Death, from the same
Person as still yielded perfect Obedience, but the Covenant of Redemption did
this. The Law of Works did not require, or appoint a vicarious Punishment or
Obedience from a Sponsor for others, but limited both to the Persons originally
subject to the Law, whereas the Covenant of Redemption appointed this. The Law
of Works did not command the Sufferings of any, as a Reconciling Propitiation,
but the Law of Mediation did this. My reason for that is, The Law of Works did,
by its Threats, denounce Vengeance against Sin; But this was not by a Precept
upon Obedience whereto, the Sufferer could Merit Peace and Reconciliation,
whereas the Law of Mediation appointed Christ's Death for a Propitiatory
Offering, and in Dying he yielded the highest Act of Obedience to a Precept,
Ioh. 14.31. And this to make Reconciliation, Heb. 2.17. Col. 1.20. The Covenant
of Works did, as a condition of Impunity and Reward, injoin Obedience to no
Law, but - that which Adam was under, viz. the Law of Works, and the Positive
one, Prohibiting the Eating of the Tree of Knowledge of Good and Evil: But the
Covenant of Redemption required Obedience to the Ceremonial Law, etc. The Law
of Works appointed no more Obedience than Governing Justice, as such, had
suited to the Rewards of that Covenant: But as the Covenant of Redemption had
far higher Rewards, so it ordained suitable conditions. The Law of Works
appointed no Obedience after Sin, as a Meritorious condition of obtaining
forfeited Benefits, but the Covenant of Redemption did this. We may easily
perceive, that the conditions prescribed to our Redeemer, much differed from
those the Law of Works required; and since Christ fulfilled all these, his
federal Righteousness exceeds that which the Law of Works prescribed. If you
ask, why Christ's Righteousness must thus exceed what the Law of Works
ordained? I Answer: It Is because it is a greater thing to Redeem an Offender,
than to continue an Innocent Persons Right to Impunity: And it is more to
Purchase greater Blessings for one that has forfeited all good, than it is to
continue lesser Blessings, though with some addition to one that has not
forfeited. Yea, and Reconciliation is more difficult than maintaining Peace
before any Enmity.

4. Christ's Righteousness was perfect, as it was his adjudged just right to the
Rewards promised him, for performing the foresaid Conditions. The dueness of
the Reward to Christ in a way of strict Justice is his Righteousness. Ius ad
premium, it was to him a Reward of Justice and not of Grace, because Justice
proportioned the Conditions to the Reward, and the Reward to the Conditions; if
it were not so, governing Justice never glorified or discovered it self in the
dispensing of Rewards.

To finish this Point, consider 1. The Reward to which Christ has a Right
includes all that was promised to Christ or to others, on the account of his
Satisfaction and Merits. Not only that he should be exalted, and have a name
above every name, P^^^. 2.8. with whatever Glory or Homage which was to be
rendered to him as a Savior. But it comprehends all by the Father promised,
and by himself bequeathed to his Members; as Justification, Adoption, the
Sanctifying Spirit, Perseverance, and Eternal Glory to his Regenerate Seed. As
also Regeneration and Faith to all the Elect, that they may be raised to be a
Seed to him, and united with him. 2. The Lord Jesus was solemnly adjudged to
have performed all the Conditions, and to have a Legal Right to all this
Reward. His Righteousness was adjudged he was justified as foretold, Is. 50.8.
God by Voice declared this, but it was more manifest in his Resurrection, and
yet more in his Solemn Enthroning in the Heavens, where he sits at Gods right
hand, Heb. 8.1. Yea, he had Authority given him to execute his own Right, Ioh.
5.27.

Exh. Rejoice and Glory in the Perfection of Christ's Righteousness. You see
that in all respects it is complete. The Law of Redemption prescribed, as became
Gods Essential Justice to propose: To these Governing Justice annexed a due
Reward, upon performing the Conditions; the perfectly Holy Jesus had a right to
all the Reward, and was solemnly adjudged to have performed the Conditions, and
to have that Right to the Reward. His Right is founded in a full performance of
the Conditions, which includes a full Conformity to the Law of Works, yea, and
what far exceeds it.

In this then we may glory, there is no blot in his performance, there is no flaw
in his right. Can Sinners need anymore than this applied? for it will serve to
all the purposes it is designed to. Oh! Christian honor it, by laying the
stress of thy Hopes and Comfort on it, and clearing thy Interest in it above
all good; it answers guilt, weakness, yea, thy want of all things except that,
without which it cannot be applied to thee; nor its effects attained, viz. a
Penitential Faith. When thy Body rotteth in the Grave because of Sin, thy
Spirit will be safe, and Eternally live on the account of this Righteousness,
Romans 8.10. thou may cheerfully venture thy Soul upon it.

6 Pro. The Lord Jesus is, and always will be, possessed of this Righteousness
in his own Person. In the Lord have I Righteousness and Strength, Is. 45.14.
with respect to this it is said, our Redemption is in Christ, by which we are
justified, Romans 3.24. The Meriting Acts are over, as Acts, but the Merit never
cease. His Sufferings are past, but the Righteousness acquired thereby
remains; it is not only their Virtue simply that continues, but the
Righteousness or Right founded thereon abides. He has a Right to Faith for
all the Elect who are yet uncalled; he has a Title to Pardon for all True
Believers; he has a Right to Eternal Glory for all Persevering Saints. There
is our Right best secured. It is for the Righteousness that is in Christ that
we are acquitted and adopted, and on it, as in him, we must still depend.

Exh. Sinners and Saints, look to Christ as having in him a full Righteousness.
Let this Commend him to thy Acceptance and Trust. Sinners, you need him on this
very account to answer for your Unrighteousness; all his Offers and Calls
should have power with you from this very motive, he has a perfect
Righteousness; it were else in vain to believe in him, it were to no purpose to
repent and turn to him; were not he by this Righteousness mighty to save thee,
an answer to his Call might not be expected. But know with assurance, that he
is a Fountain deep enough for thy Uncleanness, Zech. 13.1. The Son of
Righteousness has healing under his Wings, Mal. 4.1. and peace and glory in
his power. You may trust the Promises, by which the Gospel allureth you to
Christ, for as amazing as the Good is which they contain, they are by his
Righteousness, Yea and Amen, 2 Cor. 1.20. but take care of separating his
Person from his Righteousness, you must accept of him, as a whole Christ, if
you hope for good by his Righteousness; and your Faith must be directed to him
in a firm dependence, and entire subjection, or he will be to you as unuseful, as
if he had not this fullness of Righteousness.

7 Pro. All Graces and Saving Benefits are dispensed to Men in the
Righteousness of Christ. By his Satisfaction he rendered it consistent with the
Perfections of God to visit blind Souls with his light, and surprise the dead
with spiritual life; on Christ's account the Spirit descends to strive with the
rebellious, and awake the sleepy. His Regenerating Influences are the effects
of Christ's Merits, he acts as the Spirit of Christ. I do not mean, that
Christ's Righteousness is imputed to Men in order to the working of Faith in
them, as it is in order to Pardon; you may as well say it is imputed to Men in
order to the preaching of the Gospel to them, for that is an effect of Christ's
Righteousness; but these are the result of a Divine Constitution, wherein
Christ is acknowledged, but no right in Men supposed. The first Grace is
absolute, and an arbitrary act, as to any claim the Sinners has. Though Christ
has a right to the Elects being brought to believe, yet he transfers not his
right to the Elect, who till they believe are not united to him, and so are
Aliens to his Righteousness. But God has an Eye to the Merits of Jesus in all
his Grants and Gifts from first to last, from the least to the greatest. When
he forgives Sin, it is a rendering to us what is purchased by Christ's Blood,
Ephesians. 4.32. It is a giving forth of what he has bought: We are made Kings and
Priests as a proper Reward to Christ, and a Testimony to his Righteousness.

Exh. Say of every Saving Benefit, and of all Graces, This I receive, because
the Lord Jesus has a full Righteousness. The Heavens had been Brass as to
Vital Influences, but for this; The Word had been a dead condemning Letter, but
for this; My Sins had been eternally sealed up among his Treasures, Pledges of
his Love to my Soul I had never found, my Prayers would have been excluded
audience, Christian Hopes and Comforts I had not intermeddled with, but that
Christ is Righteous, yea, perfectly so. But because his Righteousness is great,
I have found Healings when Wounded, Strength when Weak, my Prayers have had
frequent Audience; God has not refused me Communion with himself, mine
Iniquities are removed as a Cloud, I joy in Gods Favor, I glory in his
Fullness, and have lively Hopes to be ever with him. Should not that be owned
by us in all, which is the Consideration upon which all is given.

8 Pro. The Righteousness of Christ is differently applied, and operative, as
the Gospel distinguishes the promised Benefits with respect to the various
Conditions of such, who are the Persons described in the Promises.

For Explication of this note, 1. The Gospel Promises distinguish the Benefits
that come by Christ, and describe the Objects of each. The Promises are
various, and those are all Gospel Promises that are made to fallen Man, for
Christ's sake. To be a Promise to fallen Man, and not Gospel, to be for
Christ's sake, and not a Gospel Promise, are in the nature of the thing
impossible. The variety of the Promises is obvious, and the Persons to whom
they are made not alike described. Some are made to one Grace, some to another
Grace; some on one Condition, some on another. Justification is promised to the
Believers, Pardon to the Penitent, Mar. 1.4. Returns of Prayer to him that
prays frequently, and in Faith, Iam. 5.16. Glory to the Persevering Saint, Gal.
6.9. Abundant Glory, or Reaping liberally to him that sows liberally, that is,
who is abundant in fruitfulness, 2 Cor. 9.6. He that hungers after
Righteousness shall be filled, and the like, Mat. 5.2. Each of the Promises are
made in Christ's Right; They are but an Inventory of Christ's Claim; Nay, they
were made with respect to his Merits; If God could make a Promise of Saving
Benefits to Sinners without an Eye to Christ's Satisfaction, as the
Consideration of making that Promise, I doubt it will go too far to prove, that
he may perform that Promise without an Eye to his Satisfaction. The same
Objection will not lie against a mere. Decree or Purpose to give such Benefits
in and by Christ, for this Purpose gives no Man right to the Benefit, but the
Promise does give a right; and to suppose a Sinners Right without respect to
Christ's Righteousness, seems to weaken the necessity of his Satisfaction and
Merits, who is given to be a Covenant, Is. 42.6. i. e. for his sake this
Covenant is made, and by him confirmed and executed. But how ever various the
Promises are, they grant in his right, they be Christ's Legacies, they are
bequeathed by his Testament, and therefore argue that the respective Blessings
contained therein, are his proper Goods, given out by the Promises as his
Donative Instrument, and upon terms which the Fathers and he thought fittest to
prescribe, as rendering the State of the Receivers such as they judged most
subservient, to infinitely wise, and holy purposes.

3. It Is Christ's Righteousness that exerts it self, and operates, in conferring
the Benefits included in these various Promises; this empties it self in all
those Channels, and influenceth by each of those means; the Blessing conferred
is a display of his Merits as the procuring Cause, whatever power the thing is
effected by, or way it is effected in: Christ's Righteousness is applied in
Pardon, in Adoption, in the Perseverance of Penitent Believers, Gal. 3.16. This
is applied in the Answer of every Prayer; this is as truly in all additional
degrees of Grace in some Saints, as in any measure in every Saint; yea, in the
augmented degrees of Glory, as in a State of Glory. Hence it is past doubt, that
unless we say some Spiritual and Heavenly Benefits are given not by, or for
Christ's Righteousness, or that his Righteousness may be equally applied, and
yet not produce equal effects, then we must conclude, the Righteousness of
Christ is not in the same degree applied unto all, to whom it yet may be
applied to saving purposes. It is applied to no true Believer, but that it
secures to him a Deliverance from Hell, an acceptance of his Person and Duties,
Perseverance in Faith, and the Kingdom of Heaven at last; But are all as
greatly beloved as Daniel, as mighty with God as Moses, or Jacob? Had he that
was Ruler of five Cities as great Glory, as he that was made Ruler of ten
Cities, Luke 19, 17, 19, 24. Comp. Mat. 25.28. and surely the very pre-eminence
in these respects is owing to the Righteousness of Christ applied, Rev. 1.5.

Exh. Be careful and industrious to be the described objects of the several
benefits you desire, according as the Promises describe the Persons and to whom
they are made, yet expect each benefit by Christ's Righteousness, when you are
the described objects of those benefits according to the Gospel Ordination. In
vain do you expect the benefit promised, if you are not the Persons to whom the
Promise grants it, for the Promise does as truly exclude the wrong Person from
its Blessing, as it assures it to the right Person. But by what does the
Promise describe you to be the Person it speak of? It Is not by your Name, but
by your Character, even your being such a one as Christ declares by the
Promise, he will give the Benefit to. Would you be filled? be then one that
hungers after Righteousness: Would you be pardoned for Christ's sake? see that
you be Penitent Believers; for it is to such only Christ's Righteousness is
promised to be applied for Pardon. Would you reap plentifully? then sow
plentifully; for if you be of them that sow sparingly, God does not say it to
you, that you shall reap plentifully 2 Cor. 9.6. The like I may say of every
other Promise that is Conditional, for therein God moves us to duty by
Benefits; he induces us to what we are more backward, by what we more esteem
and desire; Election knows our Names, the Promises appoints our Qualifications:
And do not think thou can plead Christ's Righteousness to obtain the Good
promised, if thou art not such a one as the Promise describes; for in making
these Promises, Christ has fixed the way how the Effects of his Righteousness
shall be dispensed; and by these he requires us to guide our Expectations, or
they do not answer the end of his Publication of them.

But when thou art, by the Grace and Spirit of Christ, the characterized Man to
whom the Promise belongs, expect the Blessing as the Effect of Christ's
Righteousness, and not of thine own; the Promise had not been made to thee but
for that; it is in his right the Blessing is conferred, whenever any partake
thereof, which adds Sweetness as well as Certainty thereto: The Spirit frames
the Vessel, but Christ affords the Oil. By the Operation of the Holy Ghost thou
art rendered the designed Object of the Promise, but look to Christ as Procurer
of the Good which the Promise is to convey: But more of this hereafter.

9 Pro. In and by the Righteousness of Christ, they that sincerely believe,
are, upon Gods pardoning of them, as free from Condemnation, as if they had
never sinned; and accepted and entitled to eternal Glory, as if they had kept
the whole Law, Romans 8.1. There is no Condemnation to them that are in Christ
Jesus, who walk not after the Flesh but after the Spirit. These are in that
State wherein the Curse is restrained from arresting them: Yea, they are Heirs,
joint heirs with Christ, Romans 8.17. the Gospel Covenant is their Charter of
right, which is secured by the Death of Christ, the Oath of God, and
Sacramental Seals. The Death of Christ is to be considered, not only as what
purchased the Covenant-Blessings, of which I have spoken before, but also as
what ratifies the Covenant to our Faith; by Death its irrevocable as a
Testament; and it must be sure, or the Lord of Glory had never died to secure
the ends of it; his Death is too great a thing to admit a doubt of the
certainty of that Charter, by which the Effects of that Death are granted;
Christians being thus free, and thus accepted and entitled, proclaims them
Righteous.

Exh. Be comforted notwithstanding your Faults and Weaknesses, whilst your
Hearts are upright in God's Covenant. What is not a just Challenge to the
Sincerity of thy Faith, ought not to make thee conclude thy self Accursed, or
quit thy hopes of Glory: Failings may cause Mournings that we are so Imperfect,
when they ought not to perplex us as if we were in a lost Condition. The same
Mouth that delivered the Curse against Sinners in the Law, has published
Forgiveness, and applied Redemption to Believers (though Sinners) by the
Gospel, Gal. 3.13, 14. If your Faults be objected, Christ has answered them:
If the Weakness of Graces be objected, Christ has made up that: If the
Greatness of Gospel-Benefits be objected, it is Christ has purchased them; and
they are bestowed not for thy Graces, but for Christ's Obedience, though it be
to such as even thou art, if a sincere Penitent, that they are given; for the
Gospel-Rule does only appoint the Persons who receive the Benefits, but not
ordain us to make the Satisfaction for the Sin to be pardoned, or to purchase
the Glory to be received. Will thou not let Christ appoint his own Legatees to
his own Bequeathments? and rejoice in the Gifts, whilst thou art the Person to
whom he declares they belong? If he had promised Heaven to a mere Sinner as
such, thou ought as a Sinner to expect it with Joy. But he has promised it
to all believing Saints, however imperfect; and must not thou with Comfort look
for it, and not quit thy hopes, till thou cease to be a believing Saint? Yea,
he has ministered further to thy Joy, That he will influence thy Soul by his
Warnings against Apostasy, by Sacraments, and by constant Supplies; so that
thou shall Persevere.

10 Pro. Christians become thus Righteous upon believing, by the Righteousness
of Christ imputed to them in their Justification, and by the continuance of
this Imputation they remain Righteous.

Upon our first believing we are justified, Romans 3.29. and there is a constant
Imputation of Christ's Righteousness to the Believers for his continued
Justification. Did Men cease to be Believers, God would cease to impute the
Righteousness of Christ to them. Did God cease to impute Christ's
Righteousness, Men would cease to be justified; and did we cease to be
justified, we should be subject to Condemnation. But blessed be God he will
cause the true Believer to persevere in Faith, and so he shall remain in a
justified State. God will preserve the Habit of Faith, enable him to frequent
Acts of Faith, and still prevent damning Infidelity; he will keep thee from a
prevailing distrust and rejection of Christ as a Savior, Luke 22.32. and from
reigning Disobedience to him as thy Lord.

I shall explain this great Truth of Justification by the imputed Righteousness
of Christ, which may be conceived of according to the following Heads.

1. There is a making us Righteous, as it is a giving a Believer a right to
Pardon, Absolution from the Curse, Adoption and Acceptance, which is by
imputing the Righteousness of Christ to the Believer.

We must be made Righteous before a just God can pronounce us so, or deal with
us as such; there must be a right to Pardon e're God will Pardon; this right to
Pardon is given by God's imputing to us the Righteousness of Christ; and the
effect of that imputing Act seems to be the first Consideration in the Change
made in our State as justified. For the better apprehending of this, you may
remember I have before informed you, that Christ's Righteousness may be
considered: (1) As the full Performance of the Conditions of the Covenant of
Redemption, which included a full Conformity to the Law of Works; yea, and
more. (2) An adjudged Right to the promised Reward, for his performance of
those Conditions. Now both these are imputed to the Believer in this first
Consideration, Of giving a Believer a right to Pardon, etc.

1. The Righteousness of Christ, as it was the Performance of the Conditions of
our Salvation, is mediately imputed to the Believer. God adjudgeth, that what
Christ did and suffered for the actual Remission of Sinners, was really done
and suffered for us, it belongs to us, we are the designed Objects of that
actual Remission, to procure which for us, that Obedience was rendered, John
3.16. God so loved the World, that he gave his only begotten Son, that whoever
believes on him should not perish, but have everlasting Life. Here we see that
God gave his Son to do and suffer what he did, that Believers thereby might not
Perish but eternally Live. Now by Grace being Believers, that we may have a
right not u^ Perish, but Live, we have what the Son ^ given, did and suffered,
reckoned and accounte^ to us: God looks on what Christ did as done for us, and
esteems us Believers, them whom his Son did that for; and therefore by his
gracious Ordination we are the very Persons tha^ have a right to Pardon of
those Sins, for which we were liable to Perish, and excluded from Life. I say,
Christ's very Performance of the Conditions, is imputed mediately in this
manner; If one give me my Liberty, which he voluntarily purchased for me at a
dear Rate, he mediately gives me what he paid for my Ransom, though immediately
I receive my Liberty, and a right thereto; whereas the redeeming Price was paid
to my Detainer, in whose hands I was Captive. So it was to God that Christ made
Satisfaction, and yielded the Meriting Price; yet it is applied and reckoned so
to the Believer, that he receives the same Blessings thereby, as if himself had
rendered it; because it was for his Title to those Benefits that it was rendered
by Christ. Yea, by this Imputation it becomes his Security for all saving
Benefits, and pleadable with God by him, with respect to what is purchased for
Believers thereby, as if he had endured and performed the things Christ did.
Since God adjudgeth he is the Person in whose stead Christ died, and obeyed,
that even he might be entitled to Life and not die, 1 Thessalonians. 5.10. Who died for
us, that we should live by him. We have hereby the Benefits of his Death, and
his Death to secure those Benefits, yea, and as the Foundation of our right to
those Benefits. Hence we are said to have Redemption and Forgiveness by his
Blood, Ephesians. 1.7. By Christ we have now received the Atonement, Romans 5.11.
(...), the Reconciliation: And herein the Blood which did reconcile is applied,
it being shed and accepted to be a Propitiation through Faith therein, Romans
3.25. The Virtue of this Blood still remains, though the Act of shedding is
long since past; and that very Act of shedding, is still so referred to in the
Communication of the Benefits to such for whom it was shed, that it is still
called a Blood of sprinkling, Heb. 12.24. not now sprinkled as material Blood
on us^ but as it speaks those better things for us in Christ's Intercession,
and to us in the Promises, and as we come to it by believing therein as our
Security in all we receive; it being shed for us, that we might have a right to
Pardon thereby, as the procuring cause. It was given to God as a Satisfaction;
it is given to us as Christ's Blood triumphing in our Peace. Though God does not
adjudge that Believers made Satisfaction by it as their Blood, yet he
accounts it that which is actually satisfactory for them, being designed and
accepted to be so; and therefore they are therein adjudged to be entitled to
Pardon. In the same manner I might speak of Adoption, etc. but one Instance
suffices. By this you see that Christ's Righteousness, as it is his Active and
Passive Obedience, the (...), or the Performance of the Legal Conditions o^
Life and Pardon, is applied in the manner it is truly capable of being applied:
Here the Virtue and Merit of it is displayed and operative; the designed end of
it is obtained; God expressly acknowledges and rewards it, in what he
bestows; it is owned and relied on by the Believer as the Price of Peace, and
Merit of all Good; it is made the Souls Security and Plea, as to all its Hopes
and Enjoyments, Romans 5.18.

2. The Righteousness of Christ, as it is his adjudged right to his Seeds
Pardon, Absolution from the Law Curse, Acceptance and Adoption is immediately
imputed to Believers as his Regenerate Seed, and Members of his Mystical Body.
This right is esteemed, yea, made theirs, they have not merely the Benefits
given them but they are invested in Christ's right to those Benefits; Christ's
Righteousness is Ius adjudicatum ad praemium, he acquired a right to the
Reward, and it was adjudged that he had that right, upon his perfect Obedience
he was justified. Now part of the Reward was, That all the Elect should become
his Actual Seed, and made Believers: Also, That all his Actual Seed, even
Believers, should be Forgiven, Absolved, Adopted, etc. Christ has as great a
right to this, as to be exalted; yea, it is part of his Glory. This right he
carried into Heaven with him, this right he pleads in his Intercession, not as
what is to be tried and argued anew, but what is already adjudged; yet it is
still to be executed, and the Blessings he has that right to, are to be
dispensed. Believers therefore are not only pardoned, yea, not only have ^^ey a
right to Pardon, by the Promise of Pardon to Believers, but they have Christ's
right to that Pardon, even his adjudged right that Believers shall be pardoned*
This Righteousness is communicable more immediately, than the very Acts are
whereby that right was acquired; it is transferred to them, but without an
Alienation from Christ. This is included in that Gift of Righteousness, Romans
5.17. and is that (...) in Romans 5.18. His Obedience must be supposed to lose
its Efficacy; and his Title be reversed, if his living Members fail of Pardon,
Isa. 53.11. one Article in his Covenant, as his reward, being, that, By his
knowledge shall my righteous Servant justify many, for he shall bear their
Iniquities. It may be you will better apprehend the whole by this familiar
Instance. A Person purchases a Thousand Pounds a Year for a valuable Price,
and has by Covenants a legal sure Title thereto; he that purchased gives me by
a Deed of Gift, Twenty Shillings a Year of that Estate, to hold in dependence
on him and his Title; mediately he gives me the Purchase-Money of this Gift,
immediately he gives me this part of the Estate, and his Title for my Security,
without which I should possess precariously. It Is a Title by Purchase, as to
him that gave it me; it comes to me by Gift, for I paid him nothing for it; nor
can I be said to pay the Seller, though I have by Gift the Title for my
Security, which he that gave it me acquired by his Payment; yet still in
dependence on him who paid all, has the main of the Estate, and is possessed
of the original Covenants as in himself. This answers our case, excepting that
God is as truly said to give us all, as Christ himself can be said to give us
all; God having given his own Son to redeem us, and purchase all for us. I need
not apply this Parallel more than to tell you, that as Christ acquired our
Pardon and Acceptance, so we have his very right thereto to secure us; the
whole is exemplified in 2 Cor. 5.21. Christ was made Sin for us, who knew no
Sin, that we might be made the Righteousness of God in him. Christ was made
Sin, not esteemed the Committer of the Fact, or as filthy by it, but he stood
liable and obliged to the Punishment of it, and became the Sacrifice for it,
which is often in Scripture called Sin. This Obligation to bear the Punishment
is Reatus poenae, or if you call it Reatus culpae quoad poenam, it is much the
same, though not so safe: Yet in this Christ is not charged as if he committed
the Sin; so we are made the Righteousness of God in him, that is, We have given
us that right of Christ to what was promised him for Believers; and which was
contrived and appointed by God to be the way of our Salvation; the Debitum
poenae for our Sins became his, the Debitum praemii for his Obedience becomes
ours. But we no more paid the Purchase of that Right or Title, than Christ did
commit the Sins, the Punishment whereof he obliged himself to undergo; he was
made Sin, i. e. obliged to die a Sacrifice for Sin; to which answers, that we
are made Righteous in him, i. e. invested in his Right, for obtaining the
Blessings promised to him for us in the Covenant of Redemption; and promised to
us for his sake in the Gospel Covenant, when we believe.

Herein I have stated the first thing included in Justification, and upon this
the rest depend: Hereby we are made Righteous in Christ's Righteousness: Though
we be not personally Innocent, yet Christ's Righteousness, which fully answered
the Law, is judicially applied, so as to give us a sure right to be dealt with,
as to Eternity, as if we had been Innocent and Perfect, which is what we
principally need; and as much as we are capable of, considering we are Sinners,
and that we did not provide the Ransom, nor substitute him that became so.

2. God hereupon actually forgives, adopts, and gives the Earnest of Glory to
Believers thus invested in the Righteousness of Christ, and on the account of
that Righteousness. This is Executive Justification in part, and indeed all
Benefits peculiar to the Members of Christ, are conferred in a way of Execution
hereof; unless as we may consider, such Benefits as follow Pardon and Adoption,
to refer to Justification, as including an additional Right resulting from Gods
pardoning and adopting Acts. The reason why I add this, is, that Pardon gives a
Right to impunity, and Adoption gives a Right to the Privileges of Children;
and so with respect to Forgiveness and Adoption, a Believer may be called
Righteous, and frequently in Scripture is called so, though inclusively of
Christ's Righteousness, because it is for that we are so forgiven and adopted.
Forgiveness is of so great importance in Justification, that upon the account
hereof we are said to be Blessed: Yea, it is put frequently for the whole of
Justification, Romans 4.6, 7, 8. it is so in the Lord's Prayer, Luke 11.4. yea,
it is so put in our Creed.

3. God judicially sentenceth the Believers thus made partakers of Christ's
Righteousness, and thereupon pardoned and adopted, to be them who have a Right
to Impunity, Favor, and Glory; and accepts them as such, notwithstanding all
challenges and accusation, Romans 8.33, 34. Who shall lay any thing to the Charge
of Gods Elect? It is God that justifies, who is he that condemns? It is
Christ that died, yea rather that is risen again; who is even at the Right Hand
of God, who also makes intercession for us. This does not only obviate the
Accusation of Persecutors, against such as are chosen to suffer; but it answers
all Challenges against every Believer, gathered out of the World by the Spirit,
pursuant to God's Eternal Election; for against the unconverted Elect, God
himself has much to Charge; and he lays it to their Charge by his
Law-condemning Sentence. But as to the Converted, here is a general defiance,
and a large enumeration of what tend to their defense. God justifies them, and
this for the sake of Christ's Death; and that the Death of him who is risen,
and being risen is enthroned, and being enthroned intends their Security by his
Intercession. It Is true, if they be charged to have been sinners, they must own
it as a true Charge: But what then, must they Dye for their Sin? No: God
declares they are pardoned, and this upon a Righteousness more then adequate to
the Law of Works; and they have no lower a safety from their Guilt, than
Christ's Title; who died, that Believing Sinners might not Dye, but Live.
Indeed, if the Charge be, That these are not Believers, then God Acquits them
another way, of which hereafter. This is Sentential Justification, which is
Virtual now, and will be solemnized at the great Day.

4. It is the Gospel whereby God justifies us as his Instrument; God in his
his Word, having declared that he will Justify him that Believes, Romans 3.30.
and that we are justified by Faith, Romans 5.1. and Commanding us to Believe with
a Promise, That we shall be Justified if we Believe. He does by this very
Declaration of his Will, Justify the Believer. This promise effects what it
includes, as soon as the Object is answerable to the Tenure of the Promise. By
this he Imputes Christ's Righteousness to the Convert, and so makes him
Righteous; declares him Righteous, and treats him as Righteous, in, for, and by
Christ's Righteousness; and this as soon as he Believes. There needs no more to
express it now, than this Word of his Mouth; unless as we may add the
Sacramental Seals, and also such influences and acts of Power, whereby such
Benefits are conferred as are Executive of the Justifying Sentence; and so far
are a Divine Declaration of our State as Justified.

5. The Object of God's Justifying Act, is the living humbled, converted
Believer; who by Faith comes to, accepts of, and rusteth in Christ as an
entire Savior. The promise of this Mercy being to such, yea, confined to such;
and Unbelievers declared to have God's Wrath abiding on them, especially when
this Gospel is that Word of the Lord whereby we are Justified, Gal. 3.22. Ioh.
3.36. and 8.24. Romans 10.4. We must then Believe; but it is not Faith, unless it
be a coming to, accepting of, and trusting in a Christ; it is not a Christ, if
he be not a whole Savior. When will we Believe, if we be not convinced and
humbled? How can we Believe, if we be not quickened by the Spirit? Yea, of what
sort of Faith is it, if we are not purposed in our Heart to turn from all Sins,
Self and Idols to Christ, and to God by him? Which turning is often the Word, by
which the Spirit often expresses Faith it self, Ezekiel. 18.21, 30.1 Pet. 2.25.
Acts 26, 18.

By what is said, you may Answer the main Enquiries that occur to your Mind
concerning Justification: Qu. Who Justifies us? Ans. God as our Ruler. Qu. What
does God do for us, or on us, when he Justifies?

Ans. 1. He Imputes Christ's Righteousness to us, whereby we have his Right to
our Pardon, Absolution, etc. 2. He actually forgives, absolves, and adopts us
in Christ's Right, and for the sake of his Obedience. And by this forgiveness,
absolution and adoption, he further gives us a Right to Impunity, the
in-dwelling Spirit, Perseverance, and Eternal Glory. 3. He pronounces us free
from all Accusation and Challenges that would import a present liableness to
Eternal Death, or bar to Eternal Glory; we having Christ's Righteousness, and
thereby our Pardon, Absolution from the Curse, and our Adoption for our Plea
and Defense.

Qu. What is our State by being thus Justified? Ans. We are accepted with God,
free from Eternal Condemnation, and entitled to Life, as if we had not sinned,
but kept the whole Law to this time. Yea, we have some greater Benefits than we
forfeited, as Union with Christ, the in-dwelling Spirit, and Perseverance,
whereby we are secured from forfeiting Eternal Life for the future. Qu. By what
Instrument or Sign of his Will, does God Justify us? Ans. By the
Gospel-promise. Quest. Whom does God Justify? Ans. The true Believer, (whether
he know himself to be so or no) and no others. Yea, God in Justifying a Man,
does as far declare him to be a Believer, as he declares him to be Justified.
Qu. When does God Justify a Sinner? Ans. As Soon as he is a Believer, and not
before; such being the Object on whom the Justifying Act does terminate,
according to the Promise.

1 Exh. See that your Faith be True, and then may you rejoice in a Justified
State. A f^lse Faith will leave you condemned as certainly, as if you had no
Faith: And a false Faith too many have been satisfied with; Simon believed, but
yet had neither Part nor Lot in this matter; because his Heart was not right
with God, and he was in the Gall of Bitterness, and Bonds of Iniquity, Acts
8.13, 21, 23. Be then solicitous that your Faith be right; see that it be
unfeigned and true: True for its principle, even from Regeneration; True for
its Nature, a fiducial Consent; or such a Trust in Christ, and in God by him,
as receive a whole Christ: True for its Concomitants, that no saving Grace be
wanting; True for its Operativeness and Effects, that it works by Love,
purifies the Heart, and makes you persevere in sincere Obedience, and holy
Fruits. All this is necessary to the Faith the Gospel calls Saving; since God
will Judge your Faith, and you by it.

2 Exh. Be not satisfied merely with Believing, or talking, that there is a
full Righteousness in Christ; but submit to God's way of Imputing it; else
you will be no better nor safer by it. Thousands are damned as Unrighteous,
though Christ has a full Righteousness. It is not from a defect in Christ's
Righteousness; no, nor because God fails to impute it to such whom he has
promised it to: Whence then? It Is because they do not savingly Believe, and
turn to Christ.

The Gospel is God's Will, as to the way of the Application of Christ's
Righteousness; and if that be not obeyed we are lost, 2 These. 1.8. Gal. 3.1.
Heb. 5.9. Unbelief, is Disobedience to the Gospel, and will destroy: (...),
which is Disobedience, is often rendered Unbelief, Romans 11.30, 32. Heb. 4.11. and
(...) Unbelieving, Acts 14.2. and 17.5. and (...), not to Believe, Heb. 3.18.
The work of the Ministry is to call and persuade sinners to comply with the
Gospel, with an Assurance, that such as refuse not, shall be Justified by
Christ; and they who persist to refuse, shall perish notwithstanding the Grace
of God, and Righteousness of Christ, Mat. 23.37. Acts 13.38, 46. Having thus
insisted on this Proposition, I am led thereby to this Question:

Quest. Are Believers as Righteous as Christ in equality; Or, Are they equally
Righteous as Christ?

Answ. Believers are not equally Righteous as Christ. Sincere Christians are in
some respect as truly Righteous as Christ; but yet that is not to be equally
Righteous as Christ. Hence many choose to say, we are as Righteous as Christ
aeque, but not aequaliter. Yea, though one assert an Identity in the
Righteousness, yet that will not argue an Equality. Its one thing to have the
same Righteousness, its another thing to have it in the same measure. The Light
in the Air is the same as in the Sun; but yet it is in a greater degree in the
Sun than in the Air.

Obj. 1. We are equally Righteous as Christ with respect to his Suretiship
Righteousness.

Answ. I shall 1. give you my Thoughts concerning Christ's Suretiship. 2. Prove
that we cannot on this account, nor any other, be truly said to be as Righteous
as Christ in equality.

This Term Suretiship Righteousness, is no Scripture expression, no more, nor
so much as the word Condition. I say not so much; for if you consider Luke
14.26, 27, 32, 34. You Will find Condition used exactly in the sense objected
against by some, ver. 32, 33. Or else, whiles the other is yet a great way off,
he sends an Embassage, and desires Conditions of Peace. So likewise,
Whosoever he be of you, that forsakes not all that he has, cannot be my
Disciple; and ver. 26, 27. Whosoever does not bear his Cross and come after me,
cannot be my Disciple, ver. 26. If any Man come after me, and hate not Father
and Mother, etc. Our blessed Lord does in these Verses propose what is
necessary to Christian Discipleship, without which we cannot be saved. He
pitcheth on such things as were hardest to Flesh, as what his very Followers
must be judged by: To enforce and improve which, he pitcheth on two Parables.
By the first Parable he advises Men to consider well the Terms or Conditions
of Christianity, before they engage in the Profession of it, lest they be
ashamed, ver. 28, 29, 30. By the second he confirms the first, and adds, how
necessary it is to consent to these Conditions, as hard as they be; for we are
in a State of Enmity, and foolishly persist therein, since we are unable to
defend our selves against God, when his Vengeance approaches; and therefore
it is our Wisdom in the time of his long-suffering, to submit to the Conditions
of Peace, Luke 19.42. This is more applied in the next words: So likewise
whosoever he be of you, etc. How is this redditive so properly used, or the
Parables applied, if taking up our Cross, following Christ, hating Father and
Mother, and persevering, are not Conditions of our true Discipleship, and
consequently of Salvation by Christ? Unless we may be at Peace, and be saved
without being Christ's Disciples. But what need I Digress, when the Assembly,
and all valuable Divines, use the word in our sense. Yea, the Gospel so often
speaks Conditionally; if thou Confess, Romans 10. I return to what I affirmed,
viz. That Suretiship Righteousness is no Scripture Expression. Surety I know is
once used, and but once as to Christ; the word Righteousness is often used; but
Suretiship Righteousness is a new Word, of Humane Original, and I am sure, not
consonant to Scripture sense, as it is used to infer an Equality of
Righteousness between Christ and us.

Having premised this, I will show you First, What I grant concerning Christ's
Suretiship: Secondly, Tell you what I deny according to plain Scripture. 1. The
things that I grant are these:

1. Christ is the Surety of the Gospel Covenant for all his actual Seed; yea
for the Elect, as far as it includes the promise of the first Grace, Heb. 7.22.
He is engaged that they shall grow in Grace, persevere, and keep Covenant with
God, and not turn away finally or totally from him: He does not bind himself to
improve for us, or persevere in performing the Conditions of this Covenant for
us; but that we shall do it: Yea, he is Surety to see the ends of the Covenant
pursued, as to God's part; that he will forgive us, be our God, etc. Not that
God's Truth or Ability need a Surety: But the weakness of our Faith is answered
by such a Support; for which end God Swears, and appoints Covenant Seals,
so does he condenscend to our infirmity.

2. Christ has undertaken in the Covenant of Redemption, that he would make
Satisfaction to Justice for us, and Obey the whole Will of God, bring actually
into the Gospel Covenant all the Elect, by causing them to Believe; and that he
would bring each of the Elect to Eternal Glory in a way of Faith and Holiness;
of which before. But you must not hence infer, that Christ engaged to repent
for us, or Believe in himself for us; which to do, would suppose him a sinner,
and to need a Mediator. He was a real Sponsor, engaging to do all that
belonged to him.

3. Christ accordingly died in our Nature, and that not only for our good, but
in our stead; nostro loco; We were liable to Die, he stepped in and Died, that we
might not Die; who otherwise might have Died, but now Live by his Dying for us.
He was a proper (...), he gave his Life for ours; yea, and this to vindicate
the Glory of God in exempting us from Death. He also Obeyed for us, not indeed
to exempt us from Obeying, (for by it we are brought to Obey instead of
Rebelling) not only to be a holy Offering and Example. But that the want of our
perfect Obedience might not exclude us from Acceptance and Heaven; and that by
his Obedience and Sufferings, he might acquire for all his Members a Title to
Happiness in his Right, and not to be merited by any Work or Obedience of their
own. That the Lord Jesus did suffer properly in our stead, is plain in
Scripture, Mark 10.45. (...). a Ransom for, or instead of many. Compare Matt.
2.22. it is said 1 Timothy 2.6. he gave himself, (...), a Ransom in the room of
all: He was typified in the Sacrifices, whose Lives were given up instead of
theirs, for whom they were offered; and he is often called a Sacrifice: Neither
is it to be doubted, but he actively obeyed in our stead in the sense above
given; yea, and has excluded also the Necessity and Place of our Obedience for
the Impetration of any Saving Benefits. Thus far the Word of God directs us to
call Christ either Surety, Sponsor, Representative, etc.

2. The thing that I deny is, That Christ by his Obedience, made Atonement or
merited for us, as a proper Pecuniary Surety in the Law of Works. The thing is
far otherwise, for Christ suffered and obeyed as a Principal and Sole
Undertaker, and not as a Surety, that supposed us Principals in that
Undertaking. He bound himself to God, to give his Life by dying in our stead to
save ours; but he never was bound in one Bond with us, that he should do so. I
shall give you a few Reasons of many.

1 R. God never proposed it to fallen Sinners to make Atonement for their Sins,
and by Merit recover eternal Life, which they had forfeited. Where is the Law
or Covenant whereby God proposed this to Sinners as their Duty, and a way for
their recovery? By the Law of Works it was impossible, and a Contradiction: The
Gospel condemns a Thought of it, as contrary to the whole Scope of it: The
Compact between the Father and Son was not a Law or Covenant proposed to
Sinners for their Performance of the Conditions thereof. Now a Money-Surety is
bound to no more than the Principal is bound to do. If I am not obliged to pay
a Hundred Pounds, neither is my Surety bound to pay a Hundred Pounds. Obj.
You Will say by the Law we were bound to obey the Law perfectly, or to die for
it. Ans. Yes, To obey was your Duty, to die was the Penalty if you disobeyed.
But 1. You were not bound to die though you obeyed perfectly; but Christ was
bound to obey, and Suffer though he obeyed. 2. Were you bound when you did Sin,
and suffer the Penalty to obey afresh in a way of Merit of forfeited Blessings?
But Christ suffered, and yet obeyed to Merit forfeited Blessings, and more. 3.
Were you bound to suffer as your Duty, and that in a way of Propitiation to
reconcile the offended God by it, as an Act of Obedience? Yet Christ engaged in
this manner. 4. Were you bound by the Law, that the Son of God should assume
your Flesh, and therein obey and suffer? Yet thereupon depends the Satisfaction
and Merit of the Obedience yielded; thence is the Value of the Acts done and
Sufferings endured ^ it were not a Payment without that, for Dying and Obeying
too, would not serve to Save Sinners, if it were not the Son of God in our
Nature did both; This goes into the Price and Payment: Could Men have done it,
it had been no Payment, supposing but one Sin before. So that in this very
respect Christ was bound to redeem you by paying a Million in the value of his
Person; and the same Actions and Passion as done and suffered by you, would not
have been one Penny in value; and is he but your pecuniary proper Surety when
he is bound for a Million, and you not for a Penny, as in Redemption Work? 5.
You are supposed fallen, and the Covenant of Works broken, e're Christ
undertakes to pay any thing; And can the Bond be the same, when the Parties are
changed, the Conditions so changed on both parts, even the Creditors and
Debtors too, the former granting other things, the latter paying greater
things; the first in the Rewards, the latter in the Duties? Is it the same
Bond, and you Principals, when transacted without your Privity, your Consent
not given, the Terms not exacted from you, and unless to reproach you, not
possible to be proposed to you; God knew you and himself too well, to propose
to you, that if you will make your Souls an Offering for Sin, and perfectly
keep my Law, I will then receive you again into Favor: Yet this would change
the Bond: Or if you would be thought Principals in the Covenant of Redemption,
it must thus be proposed to you: If you will procure and send the Son of God to
take your Flesh and die, and obey the Law for you, then I will be reconciled to
you: Had he been thus in your disposal, and he had done it at your disposal,
you might claim at the rate as some do. But though God gave his Son, and his
Son gave himself to redeem you, yet you never gave him; no, nor were engaged to
give him, as the Condition of your Recovery.

These and many other Considerations should lead us to conclude, that
Redemption Work was proposed only to Christ in the Covenant of Redemption, and
that he was Principal and Sole Undertaker, as well as the Sole Performer, and
of the People there was none with him, Isa. 63.3. He alone undertook to
satisfy Justice, that we might be redeemed; he alone engaged the whole
Impetration Work, and to find the Merit of our Happiness. Though part of his
Obedience was that we were obliged to do (yet not for Redemption at all)
nevertheless his Obligation to do it was not as our Money-Surety, but by a
voluntary Sponsion he entered into a Bond that depended not upon our Consent or
Performance, and by which we have no Claim, but at his and the Fathers
Pleasure; it was us he was to Buy, but it was he alone stood obliged to Pay: He
engaged to die for us, but that is not engaging for us as Principals, that he
would die; a thing which we never were obliged to. He did not engage we should
not Sin, nor if we sinned, that we should make satisfaction; but he engaged
that he would satisfy God, that we might not die for our Sins; even one Christ
for all of us, once to die instead of our eternal Death.

2 R. Were Christ a proper pecuniary Surety in his Death and Obedience, there
would be no room for God's Forgiving us any Sin, or giving us any Mercy as of
Free Gift, unless he forgave us more than Christ satisfied for, or bestowed
what he did not merit. This is evident, for if my Surety be bound with me to a
Creditor for a Thousand Pounds; if my Surety pay, as my Surety, this Thousand
Pounds, the Creditor forgives me nothing, I pay him all. So as to Merit: If I
buy a Jewel for an Hundred Pounds, and give Bond for it, with a Surety bound
with me for that Sum; if my Surety shall pay that ^undred Pounds, can the
Seller be said to give me that Jewel? No. I in a Law-sense paid him, because my
Surety did it. Whereas the Gospel lays the Stress of our Felicity upon
Forgiveness, Romans 4.8. Acts 13.38. And though Justice do not suffer, as having
received Glory by Christ, yet that is not to exclude Forgiveness, but to make
way for Forgiveness, in a Consistency with his Perfections. And further, God no
more sells us any Blessing, notwithstanding Christ's Merits, than Christ sells
them to us: Whereas he must sell all Benefits, and forgive no Faults, if he be
considered as a Creditor, and Christ our Money Surety. Obj. God may be said to
forgive us, being he admitted Christ to be a Pecuniary Surety, though we pay by
him. Ans. That goes a very little way toward Forgiveness; yea, and to refuse
it in Money-Matters, is hardly admittable by the Rules of Equity: It sounds
low, to hear a Creditor say, You were bound to me for a Thousand Pounds, which
I was paid by one that I allowed to be your Surety; and because I would take it
from you by him, I forgave it you, though I got from you legally by your
Surety, every Farthing of your Debt. This is not Forgiving; and such a Change,
whilst the very Debt in kind is paid, is not an Abatement. Obj. God procured
Christ to be our Surety, and therefore he forgave us. Ans. In Solution of Money
this will not amount to Forgiveness: If one owes me Ten Pounds, for which I
cast him in Prison; and finding him Insolvent, do I forgive him; if I get one
that wishes him well to pay it for him, I befriend him, but am paid all my
self, even by him in his Surety, without forgiving. I know nothing more
Suspicious to be an Error, than what tends to overturn the Doctrine of the
Forgiveness of Sins, which is the great Support of a poor Sinner; and of this
the Notion of strict Money-Suretiship, whereby we paid all to God, is guilty;
whereas if you consider God as Ruler, and Christ as Mediator, making
Satisfaction for Criminals, by enduring Punishment in their stead, we avoid all
the Difficulties which that of Money-Debts perplex the Work of Redemption with.
The Socinians main strength lies in Objections from Sin, being as a Money-Debt,
and Christ's Death being the Payment of a Debt, even the Idem. This is
perceived, and therefore denied by our best Authors against the Socinians, as
Lubbertus, Essenius, Turretin, Owen, Stillingfleet, etc,

3 R. Were Christ a proper Pecuniary Surety in the same Law of Works with them,
then every Believer would be entitled to the same Reward as Christ is entitled
to; yea, and as much or more than Christ. This is evident, for if I Covenant
with another, that in Consideration of my paying a Thousand Pounds, I shall
enjoy such an Estate of Fifty Pounds a Year: I have a Surety engaged with me
for the Payment of that Money; I by my Surety pay the Thousand Pounds; upon
which I have the Legal Right to that Estate rather than my Surety; but at most
my Surety can have a Right to no more than that Fifty Pounds a Year in common
with me by those Covenants: (...) here be other Covenants between me and (...),
wherein I engage to repay him that or m^^e, in those Covenants he is not my
Surety, but a distinct Party. Hence it follows, that we are entitled to be
exalted over all, and have a name above every name to see our Seed, to be
regarded as Saviors, at least to be Satisfiers to God for our selves, and our
own Redeemers in Law-sense. Obj. Christ paid all Personally, and not we, and
therefore he has peculiar Rewards and Honor. Ans. The Principal and Surety is
one Legal Person, and therefore if the Law reckon we satisfied in Christ, the
Reward promised on that Satisfaction is common to us with Christ: The Law gives
the Honor as it receives the Tribute, and distributes the Recompense as it
estimates the Obedience: One Person in Law, made up of us and Christ, alike
obeyed in Law-sense; and then one Person in Law, made up of him and us, must be
alike rewarded; as we are reckoned to do all, so we are adjudged to have a
Right to have all due upon that doing. I shall say more of this presently.

4 R. If Christ be a strict Pecuniary Surety, I think it will be impossible to
confute many very erroneous Opinions, which naturally are deduced therefrom.
What can be said against our being Justified actually before we believe? For if
we satisfied the Law in Christ, How can our Justification be suspended till we
believe, unless there be some other Law? The Law acquits us as soon as the
Condition is performed by us. Obj. We do not apply Christ to our selves before
Faith. Ans.1. But God, by the Law, applies him to us, if we have satisfied it;
and he has applied him already, in making him our Money-Surety, the Law will
execute it self whether we apply or no. 2. When the Conditions are performed by
us, it is against the Law to deny us the Reward; or at least to continue us
under its Curse a Moment; yea, or to enjoin any Terms on us, for possessing the
Reward, besides its own Conditions, which are fulfilled by us: The laying of
Guilt on our Persons any time is unjust. Obj. We are not Christ's Seed till we
Believe. Ans. All will not own that; but if we ever satisfy in Christ, it must
be when he satisfied; it is not to be done now, when the Act of Performing the
Atonement, and Paying the Debt, is over: Can we, by becoming his Seed now, be
esteemed to pay what he paid so many Years since, if we did not pay it then? Or
can he be our Money-Surety, by whom we pay now when he has done paying, and
not then when he was paying. Obj. He being given by God to be our Surety, and
not appointed by us to die, God may suspend giving us the Benefits of his
Death, until we Believe. Ans. If God made him a strict Money-Surety with us in
the Law of Innocence, he either did change the Law, or precluded himself from a
Right of suspending the Benefits, at least the Restoration of his Image, and
Freedom from the Reign of Sin, the Curse and Wrath of God, till we Believe; for
the Law is changed, if it say thou shall be Free from the Dominion of Sin, and
the Guilt thereof, but not till thou Believe in Christ, though thou have
already legally performed all the legal Conditions: If it be not changed, it
immediately entitles to the Reward, and must be violated, if at least any
Punishment lie upon the perfect Performer of the Conditions; for it is a
punishing us after the Debt is legally paid by us. Now though there is hardly a
Truth more plain in the Word of God, than that The Wrath of God abides still
upon all Unbelievers, notwithstanding Christ's Death; yet you see how this
Notion of Money-Suretiship shakes it. I might instance others, as we ought not
to confess our Sins, nor pray for Forgiveness; God afflicts only from Sin, but
not for Sin at all; God will Judge and Justify us only by the Law of Works,
and we are Saved by that Law: If God charge us with Sin, we may charge him with
Unrighteousness. David was as acceptable to God, whilst he murdered Vriah, as
when he obeyed God most: God requires nothing from us, to escape his Wrath and
Curse for Sin; we must not propose any Benefit to our selves by any Duty, or
acting of Grace; nor are we the better a Jot by them. These and the like,
spring from this very Opinion, That we satisfied the Law fully, and perfectly
obeyed it in Christ, as a pecuniary Surety with us in that Law, To say nothing
of the advantage the Socinians have thereby. These things may Caution us in our
Conceptions, especially when the considering of Christ as a Pecuniary Surety of
the Law of Works, paying Debts to a Creditor, is not necessary to any one
Gospel End; neither the Glory of Christ, the Government of God, the Salvation
of the Elect, the Spiritual Comfort of Believers, or promoting of Holiness: All
which are more clearly subserved by this word as Surety of the New Covenant,
joined with other words frequently used by the Holy Ghost, as Mediator,
Redeemer, Savior, Ransomer; and the whole Economy of Redemption plainly
stated thereby.

5 R. Christ's being a strict Money-Surety, would be a very great loss to us:
If he be our Surety in the Covenant of Works, then we can have no Claim to any
Benefit but what the Covenant of works promises; whereby we shall lose Union
with Christ, the in-dwelling Spirit, and whatever degree of Glory is to be
expected by Christ, above what Adam was to enjoy in case he had not fallen; of
which I have spoken before. The reason is, if I have a Surety in a Bond,
wherein I have certain Immunities upon paying a Sum of Money, if my Surety pay
that Money, I can thereby have a Right to no more Immunities than that Bond
contains.

6 R. Christ where he is called a Surety, was a Surety of the better Testament;
and therefore not of the Law of Works; which enjoined Obedience, and inflicted
Death on sinners, Heb. 7.22. The word (...) is sometimes rendered Testament,
sometimes Covenant; and well it might be rendered a Legal Disposition: But call
it which you will, this Testament or Covenant of which Christ is Surety here,
cannot be the Covenant of Works. It was not the Covenant that obliged us to die
for Sin, or perfectly Obey in a way of Merit that here he is called Surety of.
Is the Law of Works that better Covenant or Testament? Or must Christ be a
Surety for us in the Covenant of Works, because he is Surety of the better
Covenant, which is not the Covenant of Works? If you doubt whether this better
Covenant be not the Covenant of Works, consider the whole Context. This better
Covenant is opposed to the Jewish Covenant, as the Priesthood of Christ is
opposed to the Levitical Priesthood; which Priesthood of Christ the Apostle
proved to be higher and better than the Levitical, by many Arguments: As Christ
was a Priest after the Order of Melchisedeck, who was greater than Abram or
Levi; He succeeded the Levitical Priesthood, as it was unable to attain the
great Ends of Priesthood. His Priesthood is unchangeable, because he ever
lives; and those Priests were Mortal. Christ was made Priest by an Oath, they
without an Oath. And to add no more, Christ was Surety of a better Testament,
which is again expressed Heb. 8.6. He is the Mediator of a better Covenant, or
Testament; and ver. 7. If the first Covenant had been faultless, there had been
no place for a second. The better Covenant or Testament in Chap. 8.6. must be
the same as this better Testament or Covenant in this Chap. 7.22. the word
there and here is the same. And there you have a full Account what this better
Covenant is: It Is the New Covenant, wherein forgiveness of sin, among other
Blessings, is promised, Heb. 8.9, to 13. At most it is the Covenant of Grace as
in the last Edition. Of which Covenant, but on different Accounts, Christ is
called the Mediator, the Surety, the Testator; And the betterness of this
Edition of the Covenant, is founded on the betterness of Christ's Priesthood;
who by his Blood purchased it with all its Benefits, confirmed it by his Death;
and by his intercession secures the great ends of it. q. d. By how much he had
a better Priesthood, By so much he was made a Surety of a better Testament,
Heb. 7.22. and repeats it Heb. 8.6. He has obtained a more excellent Ministry,
By how much also he is the Mediator of a better Covenant; which was established
upon better Promises. Was this the Covenant of Works? Surely no; for the Law of
Works pronounced the Curse, this the Blessing. The Law of Works binds guilt;
this Assures us that God will be merciful to our unrighteousness, and our sins
and iniquities he will remember no more. The Law of Works is a killing Letter: By
this Covenant, of which Christ is Surety, God writes his Law in our Hearts; and
is to us a God, and we to him a People. Yea, ^^rseverance is secured. Our Lord
Jesus is a Surety of this blessed and better Covenant; he will see it kept by
all the parties; he undertakes to have its Ends accomplished, and it fulfilled.
Believers shall persevere; New Testament Saints shall generally have freer
Access to God, Fear and Know God more, and be Holier than Old Testament Saints.
Yea, I grant all the Elect shall be brought into this Covenant, and be saved by
it. As Mediator of this Covenant, he died for the Redemption of Transgressions,
even those under the first Testament, viz. Before his Incarnation, which were
pardoned on the prospect of it. And by his Death he purchased, that his Called
might receive the Promise of the Eternal Inheritance, Heb. 9.15. As Testator he
bequeaths, and disposes by and according to this Gospel Testament what he
acquired by his Obedience, even to a Bloody Death; and by that Death this
Testamentary Disposition is irrevocable. As Surety he undertakes that his
Testament, (which is also God's Covenant with us) shall be fulfilled, even on
our parts, and also unto us. And this the Apostle directly applies to Christ's
ever-living and interceding, as what fitted him for it, and whereby he
executes this Suretiship. Wherefore he is able also to save them to the
uttermost who come unto God by him, seeing he ever lives to make intercession
for them, Heb. 7.24, 25. Many Testaments are unfulfilled, because the Testastor
being Dead, cannot see to the Execution of them, and so the Legatees are
wronged; but Christ ever lives and attends to the fulfilling his Testament,
which is the same with God's Covenant, with respect to wh^^^ as God's Covenant,
he still intercedes, as well as ever lives: You Will find this Apostle Lodge the
height of the Security of Christians against, and from Condemnation, upon this
Intercession of Christ, Romans 8.34. Who is he that Condemns, it is Christ that
Died, yea, rather is risen again, who is even at the Right Hand of God; who
also makes Intercession for us. He ascribes our Safety to his Living and
Interceding rather, and more than to his mere Dying; for though by his Death he
acquired and bequeathed Absolution, etc. for his Seed; yet it is by his Living
again and Interceding, he secures, and sees his Seed possessed of that
Absolution, and all other Blessings. And if we consider that this Covenant
mentions here, rather Benefits promised to his Seed, than Conditions of any
Benefits as required either of him or his Seed: He seems to be pointed at here
more directly a Surety, to see God's Promises made good to his Seed, than that
their New Covenant Engagements shall be made good by his Seed; though it is a
great Truth, he is a Surety on our part, that we shall keep Covenant, or we
should soon undo our selves.

I think then it is past Contradiction, That the Covenant Christ is Surety of in
this place, (which is the only place he is called Surety) is the Gospel
Covenant; and if so he can, even as a Money Surety, hereby be bound with us to
no more than what we are engaged to do and suffer by this Gospel Covenant. It Is
true, by the Covenant of Redemption, he was engaged to suffer Death in the
Humane Nature for Satisfaction; and this in our place, and also to Obey the
whole Law, and both for the Salvation of his Seed. But in that Covenant he was
Principal; for God never obliged us to Redemption-Work, either by our selves,
or by any other; and therefore Christ herein is what the Civilians call ex
promissor: He is obliged alone, though he acts for another. But how strange is
it, that from Christ's being a Surety of the New Covenant or Testament, Men
should conclude, that Christ is a Money-Surety of the Covenant of Works; and as
such, paid all our Old Covenant Debts, as Debts; and that altogether in Kind,
and so as we are accounted to pay that Debt, and merit Life by that very
Covenant, yea and damn all that will not say as they say, though to say so,
makes either Christ's Obedience or his Suffering needless, all Forgiveness
impossible, all Gospel-terms of Application of Christ's Merits Unjust; a
suspension of a Right to those ^enefits for any time Injurious, a Right in Men
to Equal Rewards with Christ Inviolable; all remains of Displeasure on, and the
Reign of Sin in the unconverted Elect, matter of just Complaint against God;
and a Claim to any greater Blessings than the Law of Works promised, Impossible.

I might further argue this Point by other Considerations, as its Inconsistency
with Christ's being a Mediator, he being a Party; also with Christ's being a
proper Redeemer of Sinners any more than of himself; yea, it excludes the True
Gospel Imputation of Christ's Righteousness in our Justification upon
Believing; as having no Righteousness of Christ's given us; for it was Legally
in us as much as in him, we having Legally performed the Conditions as much as
him; and so we need not look out of our selves for Righteousness, though our
Surety did the Acts from whence that Righteousness resulted; yet the Law-Right
was in us as well as in him; with many other. All that I aim at by insisting on
this Point, is to guide your thoughts to true apprehensions of the Doctrine of
Satisfaction, and secure you against the Vulgar Mistakes and Dangerous Notions
that are gathered from the abusive straining of the word Surety. Whereas if you
consider God as Rector, Sinners as Criminals, Sin as a Crime, making Sinners
liable to the Curse according to the Law; which Law must be Honored in the
Satisfaction of Justice, and Vindication of Divine Government. And the Lord
Jesus on the Lawgivers proposing it, freely undertaking, and promising in the
Covenant of Redemption to submit to ^^e Obligation of bearing the punishment
due to; and in the Stead of those Sinners; this Punishment being to be endured
in the Humane Nature, and of equal Weight; yea, in many things, of the same
Kind with what they were to endure: And the Lawgivers promising to Christ for
his enduring this Punishment, and perfectly Obeying his Will, a great and
certain Number that should certainly Believe in him; and that all Believing on
him, should in his Righteousness be Pardoned, Adopted, Sanctified, and
Eternally Saved in a way of Faith and persevering Holiness, to his Glory: And
that Sinners should have an Offer of these Benefits on the Terms of the Gospel
Covenant; and the Benefits to be dispensed assuredly in that Gospel Way, etc. I
say, in this manner every thing is Consistent; and with these Limitations, the
Terms Sponsor, Mediator, Surety, and Redeemer, are Proper and Consistent.

I proceed to the Second Point, viz. To prove that we are not Equally Righteous
as Christ; and shall have occasion to show, we are not so as to his Suretiship
Righteousness.

1. We are not Equally Holy as Christ; this is a Conformity to the Divine Image
and Will, and is called Righteousness. Have we an Habitual Holiness in a
measure comparable to his? Or can we pretend to that Purity of Heart and Life,
or that exalted Obedience to the Will of God which he rendered? Our Hearts must
condemn such a Thought; nay, Angels dare not be Rivals with him therein; much
less can we, whose Defects are so manifest, and Defilements are so many, Job
40.4. He is our Example proposed, but in what can we imitate him in Equality?
Mal. 11.29.

2. It is not true that we performed the Conditions of Redemption and Life
Equally with Christ. I suppose, they mean this by Suretiship Righteousness, who
choose that word. They think, that because a Principal may be said in Law to pay
to the Creditor the very same Money as the Surety pays, and in Law equally with
the Surety; therefore all Sinners for whom Christ Died and Obeyed, did then
Equally Die and Obey as Christ himself; or as others, when they believe God
does account that they Died and Obeyed Equally with Christ, and in Law Sense
they fully answered the Law of Works; and they are Justified by that very Law,
being truly and legally Innocent by the Satisfaction they have made, and
Obedience they as one Legal Person with Christ yielded: And so they are
Righteous as Christ, not in Similitude, but in Equality.

But though I grant that the Righteousness of Christ's, for which we are
Justified, be a Righteousness adequate to the Law, yea; supra-legal, as well as
in substance truly Legal; yet I deny that to be a Suretiship Righteousness, in
a sense that can infer us Equally Righteous as Christ.

1 R. I have fully proved that Christ was not a Money-Surety with Sinners or
Believers in the Law of Works, though he Died in their stead, and his Death
secured their Release and Happiness, because the Lawgiver in the Covenant of
Redemption admitted and promised this, and the Gospel does proclaim this, and
assure Christians that they shall be treated as Believers; yea, and as if
themselves had Obeyed and Satisfied, viz. As to all the Blessings promised to
Believers. But all this does not infer, that we paid the Price of Heaven, that
we Legally endured the Wrath of God; there is no Suretiship that amounts to
this, and therefore no Suretiship Righteousness that connotes it. Christ was
not our Money-Surety in the Law of Works, in performing the Law of Redemption,
and therefore we cannot be said to do and suffer what Christ did, Equally with
him; nor consequently, to be as Righteous as he in Equality. Obj. Christ was
made under the Law, to Redeem them that were under the Law; that we might
receive the Adoption of Sons, Gal. 4.4, 5. Ans. 1. I might show how the Context
does confine to the following sense, viz. Christ was made under the Jewish Law,
as delivered Four Hundred Years after the Promise, which could not give Life,
nor the Spirit; under which Law the Jewish Believers were shut up, and it their
Schoolmaster, and they as Servants in Bondage under the Elements of this World,
i. e. The Ceremonies; and far from the designed Liberty of adopted Sons. But
Christ was made under this Law to Redeem and Rescue those Jewish Believers from
this Bondage, and to bring the Gentiles as well as they, and at one instant
with them, to the Gospel Freedom and Liberty; called the adoption of Sons; even
a Liberty from the Jewish Yoke and Bondage, which many were still fond of.
Consult Chap. 3. and 4. In this sense it is not the Law of Innocence, as a
proper Covenant of Works that is meant by the Law under which Christ was made.
The Law of Innocence or Works, had not in it these Ceremonies Ordinances; and
the like.

2. I grant, that Christ in taking our Nature, became a Servant, and subject to
the Law of Innocence, to its Precepts, and its Punishments, as a Mediator,
according to the Terms adjusted in the Covenant of Redemption.

3. But how follows it, that because he obliged himself in the Covenant of
Redemption, that he would be in our Nature subject to the Law for our
Redemption; that therefore he was such a Surety in what he did, as that we
Legally did what he did; and that in the Estimate and Sentence of that Law as a
Law of Works. It Is so far from concluding this, that it concludes the contrary;
we did it not because he did it; he did it to Redeem us, we were to do it to
prevent the need of Redemption; and had we done it, there had been no room for
his doing of it: And Obeying alone would have served our turn before Sin, and
neither our obeying nor suffering have served the turn after Sin. Further,

4. Christ did not then become a Surety or Undertaker to Die for us, by being
made under the Law; but he was made under the Law, because he had undertaken to
Die for us: His very being made under the Law of Works, was but a performance
of a previous Engagement to to the Lawgiver; this being one Article in the
Covenant of Redemption, That he should take our Nature, be a Servant under the
Law, and make his Soul an Offering for Sin, Heb. 10.9. Isa. 53. Can any infer
then, that because Christ was made under the Law, in performance of his Prior
Engagement to Redeem lost Sinners, to which Engagement these Sinners were never
obliged, that therefore these Sinners did truly do and suffer whatever Christ
did and suffered to Redeem and Save them? It Is true, but for Sinners, and the
Law, and Divine Justice, Christ needed not to enter into any Obligation that he
would be under the Law, and Die for Sinners, and Obey to make the Law
Honorable. But what is this to make us Principals in that Bond, whereby h^
became obliged to come under the Law, and Die for us? The Law is Honored, and
Justice Satisfied, but not by us, though for us; because he stood alone obliged
by his Bond to Honor the Law, and Satisfy Justice. It was not from any
Obligation the Law of Works had upon him, that he become obliged to be a
Subject; or if he became a Subject, that he must Die whilst he was an Innocent
Person: Nor was it the Law of Works that gave him a right to his Reward, if he
should Obey and Die; this Law never promised his Death would be a Ransom for
all, and he be Glorious as a Redeemer; the Law of Works has nothing of this;
Christ had to do with a higher Law before he submitted to this: A Law wherein
he was Principal, transacting without us, though for our Recovery. I Will give
you an instance, There is a Law made, that he that Commits High Treason shall
Die, a Thousand Persons Commit High Treason in various degrees, and are
Condemned: But the Lawgiver, or absolute Supreme Ruler, makes a Law, that if
such a great Monarch will become his Subject, and Die to Expiate this Treason,
those Condemned Traitors shall be forgiven, and released in such a time and way
as is agreed between the Lawgiver and this Monarch: This Monarch becomes a
Subject, and Dies to Expiate the Treason, and deliver the Traitors. Now here
the Lawgiver is satisfied, the End of the Law is answered; the Monarch Dies in
the stead and place of the Traitors; and they in a fit time and way are
released. But yet they cannot be said to Die, nor pay a Ransom for their Lives;
much less to say, that they paid as much as the Monarch.

2 R. We did not equally with Christ, perform the Legal Conditions of
Redemption, otherwise, we equally vindicated the Honor of Divine Justice as
Christ did; we purchased the Spirits Operation and Faith equally with Christ;
we redeemed our selves, and bought the Church with Christ's Blood equally, as
Christ did; all which are notoriously false. The ground of the Consequence is
this, He that equally performs that by which a thing is effected or procured,
does equally effect or procure that thing: Therefore if we performed that
equally with Christ, by which the Honor of Divine Justice is vindicated, we
did equally honor Divine Justice: If we paid the Price of our Redemption, and
that whereby Faith and the Church is bought, in equality with Christ, we did
redeem our selves, and buy Faith and the Church equally with Christ; the
performed Conditions being the Ransom and Price.

3 R. If we performed the legal Conditions equally with Christ, we then are
entitled equally with Christ, to all his Rewards proposed to Christ upon those
Conditions. The ground of the Consequence is this, Whatever is proposed and
promised upon any Conditions, is equally due to all who equally perform those
Conditions. Therefore if Christ is to have a Name above every Name, and all
Judgment and Authority committed to him, for Obeying the Law and Dying; then if
we have equally with Christ so Obeyed and Died, we are to have a Name above
every Name, etc.

4 R. If we performed the legal Conditions in equality with Christ, then we
have an equal Share in whatever contributed to make Christ's Sufferings and
Obedience Satisfactory and Meritorious; and so the Influence of the Divine
Nature, into the value of all the performed Conditions, was equally ours, as it
was Christ's. The reason of the Consequence is this, Whatever is essential to
the performed Conditions, must be equally ascribed to all that equally
performed those Conditions; and none of you will doubt, that it was not
sufficient to Redeem Sinners, that the mere Acts were done, and the Sufferings
endured; but that they were to be done and suffered by him that was habitually
Holy to Perfection; yea, by him that was the Son of God, in our Nature, the
value resulted from the Dignity of his Person: Had he not been the Son of God,
he could not make Satisfaction for Sin by his Obedience. It then unavoidably
follows, That if we equally obeyed and satisfied with Christ, then we are
accounted legally to have the Dignity of the Divine Nature in what we
performed, and that in equality with Christ; a thing the Law never obliged
Innocent Man to, and a thing too great to be assumed by Sinful Wretches.

What need I more Arguments to prove, that we did not equally with Christ
perform the legal Conditions? Though we have the same Right to a Freedom from
Condemnation and to Eternal Glory as if we had, only we are excluded from that
Carnal Pride, in saying we did it legally our selves, and engaged against
Idleness and Security in our Obedience to the Terms of the Application of what
Christ has performed: If we dare not pretend that we satisfied Justice,
vindicated the Honor of God's Government, purchased the Spirit of Grace and
Faith, and redeem^^ our selves, yea, and the whole Church in equality with
Christ: If we abhor pretending to the same Glory and Authority, which belongs
to Christ as Redeemer, in equality with him: If we tremble at pretending to
have an equal Share with Christ, in the Dignity and Value of his Obedience,
from the Glory of his Divine Person as the Son of God; we must renounce this
Conceit, that we equally performed the Conditions, the Reward whereof is our
Redemption and Salvation; and therefore should renounce, that we are equally
Righteous as Christ. The Performance of these Conditions being the legal
Righteousness of Christ, and that for which we are Justified and Saved; but not
to be equally ascribed to us and Christ; and for any Pretense to it from its
being a Suretiship-Righteousness, you have seen there is no Suretiship of that
kind, as will infer that we performed whatever Christ performed, or suffered
what Christ suffered for our Redemption, much less equally with him.

Though I might stop here, for it is the Righteousness of Christ, as it was the
Performance of the legal Conditions, which is intended by
Suretiship-Righteousness, in respect of which we are said to be equally
Righteous with Christ; yet I will proceed further.

3. It is not true, that we are equally Righteous as Christ, as he is
Righteous, with respect to his Right to the Reward, upon his performing the
Conditions thereof. If any thing would afford a Shadow for the Assertion, this
is likeliest to do it, though alas the thing intended is of a higher Nature,
even the Performance of the Condition it self; but yet even in this lower Sense
it is ungrounded. By the Reward, I mean what was promised Christ for himself or
others, in Consideration of what he was to do and suffer. I shall briefly give
you some considerable Differences between Christ's Right to the Reward, and our
Right, even though it is in Christ's Right we obtain all Saving Blessings.

1. Christ's Right was by his own Purchase, but we have a Right by Gift, and do
receive every Benefit as the Effect of his Purchase: He bought a Pardon for
Penitent Believers by his own Blood; He graciously gives Believers this Pardon
secured by his Title. Is there nothing peculiarly honorable to Christ distinct
from us? Sure, he has the Glory of the Purchase and of his Beneficence, whilst
we have reason of humble Gratitude, as needing, and of Gift receiving this,
though he makes it safe to us, Rev. 1.5, 6.

2. Christ is Righteous, as the Subject in whom Righteousness inheres and
formally is; but Believers have it by Imputation, and hold all in dependence on
it as in Christ. The Purchase is peculiar to him, and the Right resulting
therefrom, never alienable from his Person; though it be so transferred, as to
be the Plea and Security of Believers, for what is promised to them: Though it
be upon them, it is in Christ, Romans 3.22. Sure, here is somewhat of a distinct
Ground, as to the Degree, Reason and Manner of Denomination; Subjectively
Righteous, and Imputatively Righteous: Also Originally and Independantly
Righteous, and Dependantly Righteous, have not a Sound of equality. The Moon
that borrows its Light from the Sun, and depends on the Sun for Light, is not
equally Light as the Sun, though it have the same Light. Believers use and
apply themselves daily to this Righteousness as it is in Christ, that they may
be dealt with according to it.

3. Christ had nothing Forgiven him, and needs no Forgiveness; but Believers
are Forgiven much, and often need Forgiveness, and are taught by Christ daily to
pray for it; yea, much of their Happiness and Hope lies in God's Forgiving
them, Luke 11.4. Romans 4.7, 8. Is there a full Equality between him that is
Happy by Pardon, yea, is often pardoned actually after he is Justified and most
Righteous? And him that never needed a Pardon for himself, yea, in whose Right
that Pardon is granted when so often needed. Alas! Believers have their Right
to Blessedness maintained by God's frequently Forgiving their Sinful
Forfeitures: Without this Forgiveness they would soon be liable to Misery, and
to be dealt with as Unrighteous: And are such equally Righteous as Christ?

4. It were intollerably Arrogant, for Believers to Plead with God, as they
might justly do, if they were equally righteous as Christ: Dare they say, Lord
we need no Pardon from thee, thou forgivest us nothing; I legally paid the
utmost Farthing by perfectly Obeying and Suffering too. I will that this and
that be done for me, John 17.24. thou art unjust to me, as well as to my
Surety, and not only Unfaithful if I am denied. Would this sound
Conscientiously any more than Decently, Have Believers a Right pleadable on
this Head of Justice? And yet Christ is so Righteous that he can plead so of
Right: Can they be in equality Righteous, whose Claim is so Different?

5. We are not dealt with as if we were equally Righteous with Christ, and yet
God is not Unjust nor Unfaithful therein. Believers have much Sin in their
Hearts, frequent Offenses they commit, they want much of God's Image, their
Graces are very Weak and Imperfect, the Spirit of God often grieved by them, and
for it abates his Influences; God is provoked frequently, and therefore hides
his Face, and rebukes them in Displeasure; yea, leaves them under Temptations.
To say nothing of other Penal Corrections, as Poverty, Cursed Relations, Death
and the Fears of it; yet in all God is Righteous, even when these are inflicted
for Sin; nay, a great part of them is Sin in them, though the withholding of
more Grace is Righteous in God, and often repeated as Penal; yea, indeed, all
remains of Sin in our Hearts, are the Penal Effects of our first Apostasy, not
yet removed by Divine Grace. Can any Man consider this and say, Believers in
this case are equally righteous as Christ? Has he no more a right to his
present exalted State, than we have to our present Freedom, from the Effects of
our Apostasy? Or are we equally righteous, when all these things are justly
left upon us? Had we a right to be at present Free from all Sin and Trouble, to
be immediately made fully conformable to Christ, sure we should arrive thereto
even now? And if we have not a right to a present Freedom from these Evils, and
Enjoyment of the opposite Good, we cannot be now righteous equally with Christ:
A present right to Freedom from Sin hereafter, is even in that an Inequality to
Christ's right, who is entitled to a present Freedom from all that is Humbling
or Afflictive, and never was subject to Sin it self.

6. Christ has a right to much more Good than we shall ever enjoy, or have a
right to: Believers have not now, no nor ever shall have, a right to a Reward
equal to the Redeemer's Crown; He will receive a Homage as Redeemer; His Humane
Nature possesses a Glory beyond all created Beings: Now can they be equally
righteous with Christ in matter of right, who have a right to no more than what
is abundantly short of his? It is unaccountable to denominate one righteous
from the Greatness or Largeness of right, and conclude them equally righteous
who have so unequal a Right, as to the Greatness of the Things they are
entitled to, of which this Head speaks; and in what so differenceth the Nature
of their right, as applied to them, of which before. Christ has given us in
his right many Blessings which begin the Felicity he intends to complete
hereafter, according to our various Capacities to receive; but he has not
transferred to us his right to the Salvation of Millions, to Dominion of
Angels, to give out the Fruits of his own Righteousness as he pleases; and
many such Prerogatives that never belong to Believers.

I might add, We are not so Solemnly adjudged righteous as Christ is, and that
makes an Inequality: And our righteous State is sustained by a constant
Intercession of Christ in his own right; but I think enough is said, to
conclude this Point; for if we are not equally Holy as Christ, nor have equally
performed the legal Conditions with Christ, nor have an equal right to the
Rewards promised on those Conditions as Christ, nor are equally adjudged
righteous by God's solemn Sentence as Christ was; Where is the least Shadow of
doubting, that Believers are not as righteous as Christ in equality? No, not as
to Suretiship-righteousness, or in any other proper Sense. Obj. If my Surety
paid my Debt, I am as Free from my Creditor's Arrest as if I never owed him any
thing; I can tell him I legally paid him all, and he cannot charge me, etc. and
therefore I am as Righteous as Christ. Ans. The Improperness of calling God
Creditor, and Sin Debts, otherwise than Metaphorically, I have spoken to: The
Socinians have such an Advantage by it, that all Men who understand the true
way of opposing them, quit these Terms: But,

1. Such as make this Objection, and urge it to prove that Believers are as
righteous as Christ, must confine our Righteousness as a right only to
Impunity, and not extend it to positive Good as eternal Glory is: And is it not
strange, to affirm Christ by his Death only paid a Debt, but merited nothing;
and yet argue we are as righteous as Christ, merely because our Debt is paid,
which is by his Death: What is not Christ's Active Obedience a part of his
Righteousness? If it be, then notwithstanding our Impunity by the Payment of
our Debt, Christ is more righteous than us, as having the Merit of his Active
Obedience.

2. But it is so far from true, that the Believer paid God all his Debt, that
it is true he paid God not one Penny of his Debt, neither by himself, nor by
Christ as a Money-Surety. Christ made Satisfaction to God the injured
Lawgiver, as a Pri^cipal Undertaker to save us in his way; but the Believer
never made any Satisfaction to God for the least Sin, as I have fully proved:
And therefore it is gross arguing, that I am as righteous as Christ, because I
paid all my Debt, when I paid nothing, but was forgiven all.

3. The Believer is contracting new Debts every day, and were it not for a
renewed Washing or Pardon by Christ's Blood still applied, he would be subject
to new Arrests, Ier. 36.3. Psalm 51.9. Matt. 6.12. Is it well argued then, I am
as righteous as Christ, because I would daily run my self into Prison; but that
I have a Pardon often repeated in the Virtue of his Righteousness.

4. Though Pardon in Christ's right will keep a Believer out of Hell, yet he is
unacquainted with the Word and the Dealings of God with Believers, that think
they feel none of the bitter Fruits of Sin, and several Arrests of Displeasure
for Sin, Rev. 3.19. Ames 3.2. Eternal Condemnation is the soarest but not the
only Effect of Sin: Is it a part our Freedom that our Lusts are so strong? That
the Image of God is so little restored, God so much dishonored and offended
still by us, etc. will this reasoning persuade you? Because I shall be kept by
Christ's Righteousness out of Hell, therefore I am as righteous as Christ,
though still subject to many Penal Effects of Sin; and know not how much
greater I may yet be subject to.

5. Does the Plea formed in this Objection, fit the Mouth of any true Believer?
Lord I do not now need thy Forgiving me any thing; nor ever was indebted to
thee for abating me ought; I bore the Punishment legally before I offended, and
paid the Debt before I contracted it: Be but just toward me, and I fear no
Advantage thou can have against me: Let me be and do what I will or can, I am
out of thy reach; I have in the eye of thy Law suffered what can be inflicted;
nay, I am as righteous as Christ himself, and that in equality, therefore thou
may as well and as much be offended with him as with me; yea, may as
justly deny him the Reward of his Obedience, as deny me any part of that
Reward; for I performed the Conditions in the Eye of the Law as much as he, and
have a right equal to his; I am equally righteous with him. Are these the
Apprehensions of an humble broken Heart? These things are as unreasonable, as
if Millions of Persons were liable to die for Robbery, and the King and his
only Son should agree, that the Son should die in the room of these Millions of
Criminals, that they, owning humbly his Kindness, might be released and
honored, and the Son to have the Glory of being their Redeemer, and have
Homage done him as such. Would it not appear strange, if one of these should,
after his escape by the Prince's Death, say to the King, I owe you nothing for
my Life, I paid you in your Son's dying for me: And to say to the Son, I have
done and ^uffered as much in the Eye of the Law, to ^ave my Life, as you did,
and deserved it as much as you; and have as much Honor due ^o me for dying in
you, as you have for dying for us Millions, the King and the Law look on me,
and all should judge me as Just a Man as your self. I doubt such a Man might
for^eit his Claim to Freedom for want of humble Thankfulness, and for denying
the King's Son ^he Glory of being his Redeemer.

Exh. With Sobriety of Mind keep an hum^le Sense of your distance from Christ,
under ^he highest Privileges he advances you to: ^dore his Grace, that through
his Blood you ^re Righteous as pardoned Believers, but ^read comparing with
him: He will, and it is (...) he should, In all things have the Pre-eminence,
Col. 1.18. and sure to be more righteous than us in all respects, is one of
those things: What can be a tenderer part of his ^rerogative?

11 Pro. Neither Faith, nor any Work of Believers are any Righteousness, that
have any Share or Place with Christ's Righteousness in Justification, as this
is before described: Our Graces do neither make Atonement, nor merit Pardon of
the least Sin, or the conferring of the lowest Benefit: No Acts of ours are a
jot of our Righteousness, or right to Pardon, or Glory in a way of Justice:
Justice could not allow them that place, they being Imperfect, and the Actions
of Sinners: God has no Eye to our Works, as any procuring cause of his
imputing Christ's Righteousness, or of his Pardoning, Absolving or Accepting us.

Reader, Because my Enlargement on this Head is long, that it may be better
comprehended, I shall divide it into several Heads.

1. I have already told you, that Justification is that Act of God, whereby he
imputes Christ's Righteousness to a Believer, and thereupon Pardons, Absolves
from Condemnation, Accepts and Adopts him, whereby he has a right to Glory,
and sentenceth him one free from Condemnation, as if he had not sinned; and an
Heir of Glory, as if he had obeyed the whole Law: This is to make us Righteous
as in Justification.

2. In Justification thus considered, the Righteousness of Christ is that which
is regarded by God, and influential into all, as the only Merit, and procuring
cause; his Obedience Active and Passive, is the only legal Consideration on
which God Pardons, Absolves, Adopts, or gives a right to Glory; yea; it is
Christ's very Right, wherein God does Pardon, Absolve, etc.

3. Justification, as including these Benefits, stands entire, as to its
causes, antecedently to a Believer's Interest therein; it is a Blessing
purchased by Christ; it is offered to Sinners, and included in the Promise; a
Justifying Righteousness, wherein or whereby a Sinner is to be pardoned and
entitled to Glory, is not to be wrought out by Men, it is already fulfilled by
Christ; and these Effects of it are lodged in the Gospel, as Christ's Deed of
Gift, with his Title, To be applied to all that are made Partakers thereof.

4. To be Justified Actually, is to be made Actual Partakers of a Gospel-right
to these Immunities and Privileges in Christ's Righteousness, as it is imputed
to us by God, in the Applicatory Sentence of the Gospel-Promise. We have for
Christ's Obedience a right to Pardon, etc. given us, and thereupon are
pardoned, and to be dealt with and defended as such.

5. God in and by the Gospel has described and determined who shall be thus
actually Justified, and this by descriptive Qualifications; they are Sinners
condemnable by the Law (hence called Ungodly, Romans 4.5.) but not Unbelieving
Impenitent Sinners; for God Justifies none but whom by the Gospel he promises
to Justify. Now if the Gospel promised Justification to all Sinners as such,
or to all Impenitent Unbelieving Sinners, then all Sinners, all Impenitent
Unbelieving Sinners, would be Justified as soon as they are such, and cease to
be Justified when they cease to be Unbelieving Impenitent Sinners. But God, by
his Word, has positively declared, that such he will not Justify whilst they
are such, but leaves them under Condemnation, and the Wrath of God abides on
them, John 3.38. God's purpose of a better State for any, does not prevent
their being at present in this worser State; it is his Justifying Act that
changes their Condition from a liableness to Condemnation, to a Right to
Impunity from destructive Evils: As it was his condemning Act which altered
their State from a Right to Impunity, to an Obnoxiousness to ruin; this
Condemning Act was by the Law, that Absolving Act is by the Gospel.

6. Therefore whatever God by his Gospel makes necessary in a Person whom he
promises to Justify, all that, and nothing but that, is absolutely necessary
in the Person who shall be Justified. I do not speak of what is necessary in a
Person after he is Justified, but what is necessary in him on whom God's
Justifying Act does terminate: We may judge what is made necessary in the
Person to be Justified; Thus: Whoever God promises to Justify, as described
by any Personal Character, such as a Believer, etc. whatever God promises
Pardon to, as Repentance, whatever is contrary to that, for which he declares
that he will, notwithstanding Gospel Grace, continue the Sentence of
Condemnation on Sinners, and deny them Mercy. As when he says, If the Wicked
turn not he shall die; thereby Conversion is necessary. By these Rules we may
know what kind of Person he must be, whom God by his Gospel does Justify; God
will not deny it to whom the Gospel promises it; he cannot by the Gospel grant
it to him whom he declares he will deny it to; yea, on whom he still more binds
Condemnation.

7. Faith in Christ has a peculiar Aptness, and is more especially honored in
the first Application of God's Justifying Act upon a Christian, though nothing
can be wanting which God has made necessary in him whom he will Justify. This
acknowledges Christ and his Righteousness, and by it we return to him, as the
way to the Father, Heb. 7.25. and own his Authority, which is the Reward of his
Mediation, John 5.23. This is our conjugal Consent, and Band of Union, on our
part, with Christ as our Husband, Head and entire Savior, 2 Cor. 11.2. it
includes all of that regard, which is appropriated to Christ as Redeemer; and
therefore we are said to be Justified by Faith, and not by any other Grace, as
I remember Romans 5.1. But yet Forgiveness, and pardoning Mercy, is promised to
other things, especially to Repentance, and we are called to repent, with this
Promise, That our Sins shall be forgiven upon it; and we turn to God, that we
may receive Remission, of Sin, Acts 26.18. Luke 13.3.

When I have considered that we are said still to be Justified by Faith, and
yet Repentance is so absolutely required to the Pardon of Sin; I have been apt
to think, that the Spirit of God seems to instruct us, that Justification in
the first part of it, viz. The Imput^^^ Christ's Righteousness, and investing
us in his right to Pardon, and other Blessings, is especially applied to Faith;
and yet our enjoying actual Pardon upon our Investiture in Christ's right, is
promised to Repentance: As if God would ascribe the first Application of
Christ's Righteousness to that Grace, which more especially acknowledges the
Redeemer, whose Righteousness it is, by which we are Justified; and yet, that
Sin which is Treason against God, should not be forgiven, even for Christ's
sake, without Repentance; wherein God is more especially acknowledged as our
God and rightful Lawgiver; whence the Sum of our Ministry is made Repentance
toward God, and Faith toward the Lord Jesus, Acts 20.21. If there be any
weight in this (which I only offer to Consideration) then Faith is more
especially made the Condition of the first part of Justification, viz. The
Application of Christ's Righteousness. And yet Repentance also made the express
Condition of the second part of Justification, viz. Actual Pardon (that great
Privilege possessed by us) with a right to what this Pardon entitleth to:
Hereby the Dignity of the Lawgiver, and the Honor of the Redeemer are
distinctly provided for in the Justification of a Sinner; yea, the Gospel Order
is preserved, for by Christ we come and return unto God, whom we had by Sin
forsaken. Yet remember, that Repentance is still a Concomitant of Faith,
whatever Priority, as an expressed Condition, I assign to it; for no utterly
Impenitent Person can put forth an Act. of Saving (...) Justifying Faith.

8. Our Blessed Lord exerts a Governing Authority in a way of Grace, or Grace
in a way of Governing Authority, in the appointing and requiring what he makes
necessary in the Person to be Justified. He commands Men to believe, with a
Promise that they shall be Justified if they do believe, which is the Scope of
the Gospel: He plainly threatens all that will not believe, that they shall not
be Justified if they continue in Unbelief, John 3.18, 36. He has appointed
Ministers to use the Blessing of a Justified Estate, as a Motive to Men's
Believing, or coming to Christ. Thus it is as to Repentance in order to Pardon,
etc. here is the Authority of a Lawgiver, yet the Grace of a Redeemer; here is a
Law in the obliging Power of the Command, and the certain Connection between the
Duty and the promised Benefit; and yet here is Grace, mere Grace in the
Adjustment of the Sanction, as to the Matter it contains, and Merit it refers
to. This, as to us, is Governing Grace, and not Governing Justice; it is not
Justice that adjusts the Benefit, with respect to the Duty, as Meritorious
thereof; here is nothing as of Debt to us for Believing, yet a certainty of
being Justified upon Believing; here is no Pardon as a Debt for repenting, yet a
Pardon sure upon repenting. Divine Justice was honored in Christ's fulfilling
the Law of Works, where God displayed Justice in Government; yea, it is honored
with respect to Christ, in God's giving all Benefits in Christ's right, and as
Christ's proper Reward. But as to us it is of Grace, that a Believer should be
thus sure to be Justified: But though Grace be thus advanced in the Matter
given, yet here is Authority expressed in the manner of giving; and Divine
Government maintained according to the present State of redeemed Sinners: Some
Obedience shall be yielded, though perfect Obedience is become impossible;
there shall be the Reins of a Sanction on our Necks, though the Sanction of the
Law of Works has and must condemn us, if Christ relieves not from it: Fear and
Hope in us shall not be useless to us, though we were by the Fall, in a Case,
as to our selves, utterly desperate; and as to Election, and Christ's
Undertaking, eventually Safe: There shall be a Law of Faith to Judge and Save
us by, though we daily Transgress the Law of Works, and by every Transgression
are liable to the Curse, Romans 3.27. Gal. 3.10. I might, had I time, easily
prove what I have asserted, and give you the great Usefulness of this Point,
that the Gospel, by which the Blessings of Christ are dispensed, is a Law, or a
Display of Grace, in a way of Authority and Government; but I Will only glance:
1. Hereby the Gospel is said to be obeyed and disobeyed, Romans 10.16. 2 Thessalonians.
1.8. 2 Cor. 9.13. 2. Men become culpable as Rejecters of its Benefits, Acts
13.38, 41, 48. 3. All Gospel-Benefits become fit and strong Motives in
Gospel-Duty, Acts 2.38. 4. The Benefits are Suspended Infallibly till the
Conditions be performed, Luke 13.3. 5. They that obey the Gospel, may be sure
of the promised Benefits, and know how to try their Interest and conclude it,
Heb. 5.9. 6. The Gospel-Blessings may be truly offered to all, and all charged
to accept of them, by complying with the Conditions, Acts 13.38. 7. The
Conditions hereby are described, stated, urged, and not left uncertain, 1 Cor.
13.2. 8. A Rule of Judgment is hereby fixed, whereby God is justified in Saving
some and Damning others, who yet had the very same Offers, Invitations, and
Calls, Romans 2.16. 9. They that disobeyed the Gospel, are justly liable to sorer
Punishments and Vengeance, than would have fallen on them for their first
Apostasy, Matt. 11.24. 10. Here is an apt means to excite Diligence,
Watchfulness, Faith, Repentance, and Holiness; and to prevent Sloth, Despair,
Presumption and Disobedience. I appeal to the Consciences of Men, whether
fallen Men are liker to be governed by telling them, You are under no Law but
the Law of Works, which requires all Graces and Duties alike, and all to be
done perfectly without Sin, or you must eternally Perish; though, it is true, if
God please to justify you by Christ's Righteousness, then you have legally
fulfilled this Law, and you are justified by it, and you shall go to Heaven.
But God requires no Duty or Care on your part, in order to be Justified by
Christ's Righteousness; nor does he command you to act any Grace, with a
Promise of any Benefit upon that Act; nor threaten you with any Damage,
whatever Sin you commit; so that you have Faith as a Sign, but not a Condition
of your Pardon; nor ought you to obey any Command, as a means of Good to you,
but only in Gratitude, that Christ has done all for you.

Or else this way: God has set down this Authoritative Rule, to give Sinners
the Beneficial Fruits of Christ's Death, and commands you to obey it; that
though you are Lost, yet if you believe and repent you shall be pardoned; if
not, the Wrath of God will abide on you: Turn to God and you shall Live, i^ not
you shall Die: Fight the good Fight, if you overcome you shall be Crowned, and
reap if you faint not; but if you draw back, God will have no Pleasure in you:
Be Fruitful, for if you be Barren you are nigh to Cursing, and your end is to
be Burned: Use your Talents, for if you improve them God will reward you with
greater Blessedness; but if you hide them in a Napkin, you shall for your
Unprofitableness be cast into the Lake that burns with Fire and Brimstone:
Subdue your Lusts, for if Sin reign in you, you shall Die; but if you Mortify
the Deeds of the Flesh, you shall Live, etc. O then attend the means of Grace,
look to Christ, be earnest with God, watch and strive as for your Lives:
Whether, I say, is liker to Influence Men to the Design of Redemption and
Obedience to God, the first or this last? And I am sure this last is the way
God chooses, for it is his Words; though we are not by this way excluded from
adding Arguments that may also excite Gratitude: But are not these words of
Authority, the Dictates of a Ruler, and yet not the Law of Works, which
promises nothing of Good to the Imperfect, and binds Death for the lease Sin?

9. The Gospel enjoineth nothing on Men for the impetration or purchasing of
Justification, or any other Benefit; but that they may receive Justification,
and every Benefit, as the Effect of Christ's Merits. Christ has Bought all by
his Obedience, and by the Gospel prescribes the way how he in his own right
will give what he has acquired. As the Gospel is his Testament, he describes
his Legatees; as it is God's Covenant, our Consent to it is necessary to it is
Blessings.

10. The use of Faith in order to Justification is, that it renders the Sinners
the ordained Objects of God's Justifying Act and Gift; according to his own
Gospel Rule, Justification brings the Righteousness by which we are pardoned;
but God promises to Justify him that has Faith, and says he will not
Justify him that has not Faith: Does not Faith distinguish him that has
Faith from another that has not Faith? And does not God declare he will deal
very differently with him that has Faith, and him that has no Faith; he will
justify the one, and still condemns the other: And it is the same as to any
other Condition of any other promised Benefit: The Condition is not that for
which the Benefit is given, but it renders the Man the Person to whom God has
promised to give that Benefit in Christ's right.

11. All endeavors after Faith, are endeavors after Justification; and all
neglects of Faith are neglects of Justification. This is plain, for if the
Object of God's Justifying Act be the Believer, then whatever tends to make him
a Believer, tends to bring him into a Justified State; and whatever tends to
hinder him to Believe, tends to keep him out of a Justified State. It Is the
same as to all other Promises made to any Grace or Duty; though all the
Promises are made and performed in Christ's right. Yet when he describes the
person by any Grace ^ Duty who shall receive the good promised, we pursue that
good promised, by following after that Grace or Duty to which the Promise
refers. Therein we look to Christ's Righteousness with just Hope, when we look
to him in his Promise, and follow that which he has assured the Fruits of his
Righteousness upon.

12. God now does, and will hereafter more solemnly Judge Men's Faith, and Men
by their Faith, as far as he has made that Faith necessary to any Blessing.

1. God says in his Gospel, I will in and for Christ's Righteousness forgive
him that Believes, and no other; yea, all unbelievers shall be still condemned,
because they believe not, Ioh. 3.16, 19. Christ's Righteousness shall not be
applied to them for Pardon. And,

2. If the Gospel has described what this Faith in Truth is, and warned us of
all false Faith as vain and insufficient to our pardon, Iam. 2.14, 17. Gal.
5.6. if those two things be true. Can you imagine 1. That God does make no
Judgment of that Faith, whether it be true or false? Are all sorts of Faith
alike in his Account (...) Dead Faith and a Living, a feigned Faith, ^^d an
unfeigned Faith? Does he give and execute the Pardon without any regard to
their being such Believers as his Gospel appoints? Surely he that says be
watchful, and strengthen the things that are ready to Die, for I have not found
thy Works perfect before God, Rev. 3.2. does distinguish between the Faith the
Promise is made to, and the Faith which the Promise is not made to; nay, which
he threatens as Hypocritical. 2. Or can you think that God makes no Judgment
concerning a Man's Interest, or no Interest in the promised Pardon, with any
regard to his having true Faith, or his not having it? The Question is not,
What Righteousness that Pardon is founded on; for that is Christ's, and the
Pardon connotes it; but the Question is, Is this or that Man the Person to whom
God has promised to give that Pardon? Does it by that Promise belong to this
Believer, or that Unbeliever? I ask then, Will not God Judge this Man by having
true Faith, to be the very Man the Pardon by that Promise belongs to, and that
the Pardon does not belong to the other Man for want of true Faith; nay, that
because he has not Faith, he is subject to the threatenings denounced against
Unbelievers? God's present dealings with Souls according to his Gospel is a
kind of virtual Sentence, but at the great day he will solemnly judge according
to the Gospel, Romans 2.16. Mat. 25. The Work of that day will be, to Sentence
Men's Faith true or false, upon full evidence of its truth or falsehood, and to
convince the World that God has pardoned all Believers, and none but
Believers; and to condemn publicly all Unbelievers, and solemnize before all,
the happy State of those pardoned Believers. The Case is the same as to every
other Grace or Duty to which God has promised any Benefit in the Gospel. As
far as God makes any Duty a necessary Condition of any Benefit by the Gospel,
he will Judge us according to that Duty; and if we totally want it, that
Benefit will be withheld: He that did not repent, shall be denied the blotting
out of Sins at that day, Acts 3.19.

13. Hence Men can be said to be Justified by Faith as a sort of Work, no
otherwise than thus: That Christ adjudgeth a Man to be a Believer who is so,
and his Faith a true Faith; and that he is to be dealt with as a true Believer
according to the Gospel Promise.

Justification in this sense, is quite another thing than Justification by
Christ's Righteousness, or by Faith as it connotes that Object. This is not
Pardoning, Absolving, and Accepting a guilty undone Sinner, which must be upon
a Righteousness adequate to the Law, and satisfying to Justice; no, no: It is
but a determination of a particular Cause, viz. He is a true Believer, and not
an unbelieving Hypocrite; and yet it is of great importance to our main Cause,
being that God has said, Christ's Righteousness shall be imputed to none but
the true Believer: And if we must be judged whether we be Believers or no, we
must be sentenced to be Believers or Unbelievers; and if we be sentenced to be
Believers, we are so far justified by Faith as a sort of Work; and if our Faith
be tried by our Words, or other Works, our Faith is justified by those Words
and Works, and we are Justified as to this Cause in trial by those Words and
Works, i. e. We are adjudged not to be Unbelievers; nor to be merely such
Believers whose Faith was not evidenced by such Words and Works, Mat. 12.37.
Iam. 2-17, 21, 25. The matter is the same as to any thing the Gospel
indispensibly requires, and concerning which we must be judged.

14. In the like manner Faith can be called our subordinate Righteousness, no
otherwise than as it is the performed Condition which the Gospel requires in
the person, whom God promises to Impute the Righteousness of Christ to for
Justification, or actual Forgiveness and Absolution.

It is not the legal Righteousness; the Law would Condemn any Man,
notwithstanding his Faith, if he had not Christ's Righteousness Imputed to him:
It is not the Righteousness that is Imputed for Justification, as that in the
right whereof Pardon and Acceptance is promised, or stands. It is not the Merit
that God regards, either in making or applying the Promise: It is not a
Righteousness by Acceptilation, (which the Socinians call it) that is, it is
not reckoned instead of a Legal or Perfect Righteousness, which were to exclude
Christ's Satisfaction, and set it instead of his Righteousness: It is not a
Righteousness that makes up Christ's Righteousness, or at all serves to the
same End. It Is not a Righteousness by or for which God justifies us, i. e. God
does not Pardon or Accept us for this.

But Christ having a full Righteousness, and promising to Impute it for
Justification to all that will Believe sincerely and requiring and commanding
Sinners to Believe in him, with this Promise, That if they will Believe, they
shall be justified by his Righteousness; and if they Believe not, they shall
not be justified by his Righteousness, but Die in their Sins, notwithstanding
the full Righteousness that is i^ him, and the Offers made to them. I say, a
far as this Promise gives a Believer a right to the promised Benefit; his Faith
is that upon which he receives that right, and so far the Gospel makes him
Righteous by his Faith, i. e. He is the Man whom the Gospel assures that
Benefit to; which it gives the Unbeliever no right to, but directly excludes
him. So that this Faith is no Righteousness that is any part of Justification,
which is the Benefit promised; and subsists entirely in its own Causes: But
what Righteousness it is depends wholly on the Authority, Tenure and Truth of
the Gospel, as the instrument whereby God applies Christ's Righteousness to us
for our Justification. If the Gospel does not promise to Justify one that has
true Faith, though it be imperfect, then indeed Faith is no Condition, nor at
all a Conformity to the Gospel, as defining the Condition; and if the Gospel
does not by its Pormise or Sanction, give any Right to the Benefit promised
upon performing the Condition, then indeed Faith must not be called a
subordinate Righteousness. But if the Gospel assures to every true Believer,
Justification by Christ's Righteousness, then true Faith is the performed
Condition; and thereupon the Gospel gives him an infallible Title; yea, this
Gospel is his Title by God's gracious will to his partaking of Justification by
Christ's Righteousness; yea, to the Imputation of Christ's Righteousness for
Justification; but still it is Christ's Righteousness that justifies, and only
that; though it be thus assuredly applied to him that believes.

15. Faith it self, much less any other Grace or Work, is not the
Righteousness, or any Part of the Righteousness wherein a Believer is accepted,
pardoned, or glorified, or stands in before the Justice of God; or is it
pleadable against the Law of Works, or Charge of Sin.

It Is Christ's Righteousness alone that pleads for Believers in all these
respects; this answers the Law, and for this we are released from the Curse. By
this Righteousness our Pardon and Heaven were purchased, and for it they are
given: That there is a Pardon, that there is a Glory for fallen Man, is owing
to Christ, and that Believers have those given to them, is also in Christ's
Right, though his Gospel assures them to Believers. Yea, it is for Christ's
Righteousness that the Spirit works Faith in any Person. Faith puts in no Claim
of Merit, nor can it stand before governing Justice, nor admit a Trial before
God as Creator, as what entitles any to his Rewards. But to the Praise of
divine Grace and Wisdom, our blessed Redeemer will own true Faith as that which
he has ordained to be a Means of investing us in his blessed Righteousness,
and what renders a Sinner certain of the Fruits of his Merits. The Believer
has a Right by the Gospel to plead all Christ's Obedience as the Security of
his Pardon and Glory; and he has the Gospel to plead as what gives him, upon
his believing, a Right to use that Plea. What Christ has done answers all the
Benefits, Christ's Gospel applies what Christ has so done, and gives the
Benefits for it. Faith is the Condition of the Person to whom the Gospel
applies Christ's Righteousness, and gives the Benefits. But is not that, for
which any thing is given, or by which it is purchased: It determines the
Legatees in Christ's Testamentary Absolution and Gifts, which he bequeaths to
Believers, and confines to them therein?

Exh. 1. Be watchful that you set no Grace, Duty or Work of yours into the
Place of Christ's Righteousness. Do not think any thing you do answers the LAw
of Works, or any way proportioned to governing Justice. Dread a Thought that
any thing is due to thy best Duty, as of Debt, Romans 4.4, 5. Whatever seem to be
good Works are wholly vain, highly provoking to God, affronting to Christ, and
Snares to your selves, if you think they are a Christ, or instead of a Christ
to you: And this you are guilty of, if you think you hereby atone for your
Sins, or merit Glory at the Hand of governing Justice; will you rob Christ of
his Glory, who satisfied for all your Sins, and purchased all Blessings alone;
and who freely gives you but the Fruits of his own Purchase, whatever Terms he
insists on for the dispensing of his Gifts in a Way most honorable to himself,
and profitable to you?

Exh. 2. Yet do not thrust your Graces or Duties out of the Place, where Christ
by the Gospel Promises has set them. He knew what was consistent with his
Honor, and that it would not be injurious thereto, to insist upon Terms of the
Application of his Righteousness, and the Communication of the Fruits thereof
in a way of governing Grace; though as Sovereign Proprietor, he gave the Power
to perform those Terms: He thinks not himself debased by giving out his
Acquests as a Priest upon his Throne, or erecting a Gospel Kingdom as a
Redeemer of lost Man, which the Gospel Dispensation is generally called as if
of purpose to secure the Gospel Law, Mat. 4.23. 1 Cor. 15.24. Search carefully
whether the Spirit of God has wrought in you the Conditions of the Benefits of
the Gospel Covenant.

These are necessary to your actual obtaining of any Benefit promised to them
respectively; and you expect those Benefits without God's Promise, yea, against
God's Word, if you neglect to act the Grace the Promise is made to. On the
other hand you distrust God's Promise in not assuredly expecting the Benefit
for Christ's Sake, when you have the Graces to which the Promise is made. The
Gospel does not deceive us when it encourages to Duty by Benefits, as Rev.
22.14. Blessed are they that do his Commandments, that they may have Right to
the Tree of Life, Romans 10.9. If thou confess with thy Mouth, and believe with
thy Heart thou shall be saved. Be thou faithful unto Death, and I will give
thee a Crown of Life. Will Christ fail to do what his Mouth has uttered,
though he display his Grace in giving us that Assurance upon such Duties?
Christ's Righteousness will be applied in making good every Gospel Promise: How
unsavory then is it for any one to say, that all your Obedience avails no more
to justify you than your worst Sins? It Is true, no Duty is our Righteousness
for which we are justified; but it is as true, that the Obedience and great Duty
of Faith signifies more to our Justification than that worst Sin of Unbelief;
for Christ's Righteousness will never be applied to us for our Justification,
unless we believe; and if we believe, we shall certainly be justified by
Christ's Righteousness. Oh Sirs! Woe to us at the last Day, if we are found to
have nothing but the vilest Sins, and no Graces or Duties, for then will God
judge us by the Gospel, whether we are believers or unbelievers, Obedient or
Disobedient to the Gospel, Godly or Wicked, Precious or Vile, see Romans 2.6. to
13. And Be not deceived, God is not mocked, whatsoever a Man sows that shall
he reap, Gal. 6.7. We may have Boldness in the Day of Judgment, because as he
is, so are we in this World, 1 John 4.17. Little Children let no Man deceive
you, He that does Righteousness is Righteous, 1 John 3.7. whatever Christ, by
his Gospel, promises upon any Duty, we follow after that in being earnest with
God in Christ for Ability to do that Duty; and if by Grace we are enabled
thereto, we may rejoice in God's Truth, and be sure that in the Righteousness
of Christ, he will perform that Promise to us; whereas if we neglect the Duty,
we wickedly presume to expect that Blessing, and abuse and profane the Name of
Christ and his Righteousness, in thinking that we may have that Blessing by his
Righteousness, though we impenitently persist in our Neglects. The Reason is
this, Christ in his Gospel-promises has declared how the Effects of his
Righteousness shall be dispensed to Men, and designeth thereby to govern our
Hopes and Fears now, and to judge us at the last Day.

2. The second Sense, wherein we are made Righteous by Christ's Obedience, I
should now insist on, but I have already declared what may inform you somewhat
thereof, nor have I room to pursue it; only let me hint, 1. That Faith,
Repentance, Holiness, etc. are a Real Righteousness; they are often called so by
the Holy Ghost, and Men are denominated Righteous thereby: Nay, these are
called Righteousness, and Men said to be Righteous, with respect to those
abundantly oftener, than on the account of the imputed Righteousness of Christ,
1 John 3.7. 1 Timothy 1.9. 1 Pet. 4.18. Romans 6.13, 16, etc.

2. All our Inherent Righteousness is owing to Christ's Obedience, and to
effect it, was one of the Principal Designs of Redemption: The Impunity of
Sinners is a lower Design than the Restoration of the Divine Image to depraved
Man, Tit. 2.14. Ephesians. 4.20.24.13. He purchased our Graces, and mainly attends to
the Mortifying of Sin, and perfecting the Holiness of his Members; and will at
last present them to the Father, fit for his delight, Ephesians. 5.27.

3. The Economy of Redemption is such, that the Holy Ghost is to have a great
hand in Saving Sinners; especially in applying Christ's Righteousness to Men,
and communicating the Effects thereof. Hence 1 Cor. 6.11. We are justified in
the Name of the Lord Jesus, and by the Spirit of our God. The Father gives the
Redeemer, the Redeemer pays the Price of Redemption, the Holy Spirit applies
the Price. The Father gives his Son to obey for Righteousness, the Son by
Obeying acquireth the Righteousness, the Spirit quickens and works Faith in the
Sinner, whereby he becomes the Person Justified by his Righteousness, according
to the Gospel-rule of its Application, which Rule was jointly enacted by
Father, Son, and Spirit. It Is as dangerous to exclude the Holy Ghost from an
Efficiency in framing Sinners for the participating of Blessings in Christ's
Right, as it is to exclude Christ from the sole Impetration. Many little think,
what a Dishonor and Offense they are to the Holy Ghost, in denying an
Authoritative Connection between Duties and Benefits, and allowing him no hand
in making them the Objects to whom Gospel Benefits are appropriated by its
Sanction: The Language of such to the Spirit is, We are without any Operation
of thine on us, the Persons entitled to all Benefits: Christ has not only a
Right to all these Blessings, but we also are fully and constantly invested in
that Right, without any dependence on thee, or Obligation to thee; though we
own thou workest some of those things after we have a full Right to them; and
because we have that full Right, yet we are at no time indebted to thee, for
any ways rendering us the Persons to whom that Right is applied or belongs; the
vilest Wretch in Hell owes thee as much Thanks on that account. I would
tremble to hold a Principle, whereof this is the Native Language; when I see
that though the Promises are made in Christ's Right, and the Benefits contained
in them are his Purchase; yet as they require Conditions in such as shall be
Partakers of Christ's Right to those Benefits, to the Glory of the Son, and of
the Father who gave his Son; so there is a wise Contrivance for the Honor of
the Holy Ghost also, as it is he who enableth Men to perform those Conditions,
for a Gospel-Interest in those Benefits.

A REPLY TO Mr. Mather's Postscript.
I Shall first consider the Errors Mr. M. charge me with, and then his
Defense of his own. The Errors he loads with no lighter Epithets than Damning
and Blasphemou^. Terms agreeable to his long known Temper and Charity: He
introduces his Charge with an Ecee, This is he, he is the Man: Would he infer
that I am the only Man? No, the body of Divines, except Antinomians, affirm as
I do: And in his Preface it is his Moan, the Number is so great. Is it that I am
the Man that eminently defend these? Alas, I can show him Volumes of the Dead,
and many are yet Alive, whose Defense of my Positions is so Nervous, as renders
mine truly Inconsiderable, as his Opposition thereto Contemptible. Sure then
it is either to leave a Mark, that his Factious Design may more succeed; or to
point me the Person designed by him in his Sermons, Page 22.64. in words indeed
too blunt for a Man of his own Sagacity to need another Comment. Yet after all
his labor to make the Man sure, he has assigned the Charge so falsely, that an
Ingenuous Reader will sooner charge him for a base Trick in his Insinuations,
than me the Patron of the Opinions he would ascribe.

1 Charge. He is one that makes Union to Christ, our having this Righteousness
upon us, and our being Justified by it, to be given us in way of Reward of
something done by us.

Reply. My words which he refers to here and Page 46. are these,
Gospel-Benefits are no Reward of Debt, and yet they are given in a way of
Reward: The Benefits are given not for our Faith, yet upon Believing; not upon
it as a Meriting Consideration, yet upon it, as that the Presence whereof is
made necessary by the Gospel, this having required Faith, and confined the
Benefit to him that believes. If a Man says, I Will give you a Thousand Pounds
if you will come to my House and fetch it. It is not a Free Gift, though the
Poor Man must come if he will have it, and the Giver is yet bound by his
Promise to give it if he come, and not bound to give it if he refuse to come?
Defense of Gospel Truth, P. 25.

These are my very words he pretends to mention, and no where in my Books can
he find the least shadow for more. You see, 1. I mention only Gospel-Benefits,
and not Union with Christ or Justification. 2. It Is Faith only which I mention,
and not something done by us, by which he would insinuate, that other good
Works are meant. 3. I say it is upon Believing, and not for Faith; upon it not
as a Meriting Consideration; but upon it as that the Presence whereof is made
necessary by the Gospel. Does not this sound lower than his Reward of something
done by us? Upon it as a thing present, and of it as a thing Meriting, are very
different. 4. The occasion of my using these words was this, to prove that God
by the Gospel, injoyns Faith as a Condition of our having those good things
which yet he freely gives; and that Christ shows his governing Authority in his
displays of Grace; and excites to Duties by Motives from Benefits freely given;
and that Gospel-Conditions have no Merit of Condignity or Congruity. And 5. I
laid the Vmbrage of the way of Reward wholly on the Gospel-Promise, and not
upon the least Dignity of the Act done. God who is our Ruler, commands Faith,
and promises, as a Motive to Faith, the Benefits purchased by Christ as good
things. Here Is the whole of this Damning Error, as far as he could justly call
it mine. And by this time you will discern as little Danger to me by my Opinion,
as to him by his False and Malicious Attempt to expose my Ministry, and Person,
not to say truth it self; yea, and the generality of Ministers and Christians,
who will not stoop to him as Dictator.

2. I shall descend into the Merit of the Cause truly stated, which is resolved
into two Questions.

1 Q. When may a Benefit be said to be given in a way of Reward, when yet it is
not in a way of Debt, or Merit, or a Reward for the thing done?

Ans. A thing is thus given in a way of Reward, when a Benefit is given in a
way of Encouragement of something required, yea, or desired to be done, however
small or unvaluable the thing done is, or however great the Benefit is. If you
say to your Child, If you will make a Bow and Thank me, I Will give you such an
Estate: When you give him such an Estate upon his so Bowing and Thanking, you
do give it him in a way of Reward: It Is a Gift, because that Bow and Thanks
deserve not that Estate; it is yet given in a way of Reward, since you promised
it in a way of Encouragement to his Bow and Thanks. Indeed all
Gospel-Conditions are but a meet receiving of the Benefits.

2 Quest. Whether God does give Gospel-Benefits in a way of Encouragement to
our performing of any Gospel-Duties?

Ans. Can any one read the Bible and not cease to doubt, that the Scope of it
were vain in its Proposals and Promises, if the thing be otherwise. For 1. Are
not the Promises of the Gospel Motives to Duty, Acts 13.19. Repent and be
converted, that your Iniquities may be blotted out. Matt. 11.28. Come unto me
and I will give you rest. Is the blotting out Iniquities no Encouragement to
Repentance? Nor Rest an exciting Motive to a weary Souls coming to Christ? 2.
Is it a Dishonor to Christ, to perform his Promise in the way and to the full
ends that he makes that Promise? Does be use the Benefit as a Motive, but not
dispense it in a way showing his Approbation of the Duty whereto the Motive was
Influential? Especially when his Actual Performance of his Promise to some, is
an Encouragement to all others; as it is a Ratification of his word, so it is
urged, Heb. 6.12. That y^ be not Sloathful, but Followers of them, who through
Faith and Patience inherit the Promises. He would have us to this day be
Diligent, Believing, and Patient: What is his Motive? Even this: Others that
were so, yea, upon being so, do now in Heaven inherit the promised Good:
Through Faith and Patience they inherit. 3. Does not God frequently express his
regard to the Duty performed, as what he encourages and shows his Approbation
of, in applying the Benefit he promised hereupon. Ezekiel 18.27, 28. If the
wicked Man turns, etc. Because he considers and turns away from all his
Transgressions that he has committed, he shall surely live, he shall not die.
Matt. 25.34, 35. Come ye Blessed, etc. For I was an hungered and ye gave me
Meat, etc. Verse 23. Well done Good and Faithful Servant, thou have been
Faithful over few things, I will make thee Ruler over many things. 4. How often
are Gospel-Benefits called a Reward in Scripture? Col. 3, 23, 24. Whatsoever ye
do, do it ^eartily, as to the Lord. Knowing that of the Lord ye shall receive
the Reward of the Inheritance: for (or because (...)) you serve the Lord
Christ. Col. 2.18. Let no Man beguile you of your Reward; as falling from the
Truth would have done. 1 Cor. 3.14, 15. If any Man's work abide, he shall
receive the Reward, etc. Verse 8. Every Man shall receive his own Reward,
according to his own Labor. Nay we are downright Infidels, and next to
Atheists, who deny God is, if we do not believe that he is a Rewarder of them
that diligently seek him, Heb. 11.6. 5. The humblest Saints that abhorred Merit
most, have been encouraged to their Duty by the promised Benefit, and expected
to receive it in this way of Reward that I contend for: Gal. 6.9. Let us not be
weary in well doing, for we shall reap if we faint not. 1 Cor. 9.17, 23, 24,
25, 26, 27. If I do this thing willingly I have a Reward. This I do for the
Gospels sake, that I may be partaker thereof. So run that you may obtain: We
strive to obtain an incorruptible Crown. I therefore so run not as uncertainly,
etc. 6. How often are Christians called worthy of the Benefits (in a
Gospel-sense) and that with respect to their Graces and Perseverance? Matt.
22.18. They which were bidden were not worthy, because they rejected Christ.
Matt. 10.11, 13. If the House be worthy, let your Peace come upon it: That is,
as v. 11. who would accept the Message: In which respect the Refusers of Christ
are called unworthy of Everlasting Life, though Forgiveness had been tendered
to them, Acts 13.38, 46. so Rev. 3.4, 5. Thou have a few Names, which have not
defiled their Garments, and they shall walk with me in white, for they are
worthy. He that overcomes, the same shall be clothed in white Raiment, and I
will not blot out his Name, but I will confess his Name before my Father, and
before his Angels. A Persevering Freedom from Pollution in Doctrine and
Practice, is the very thing that the Promise refers to, in the Persons thus
encouraged; for the fifth Verse prevents Mr. M's perverting of the fourth:
Though Christ's Righteousness is supposed to this, and all other Promises, and
the Reward is in his Right, yet it is to all that overcome, and not to others;
and it is on Christ's account, that such that are Faithful can be esteemed
Worthy; but it is the Faithful, and not the Unfaithful, that in him are so
esteemed Worthy. 7. I have often thought what these Men think of Christ, that he
alone can give nothing to his Followers in a way of Reward, nor propose any
thing to his Enemies, as an encouraging Inducement to become his Disciples: It
seems he cannot outbid Satan, the World, and Flesh, least he make his Followers
Merit-mongers. 8. As strange is it, how they that credit these Confused Men,
can ever come to any grounded Hopes or Assurance of an Interest in any
Gospel-Benefit. Can they hope without a Promise? That Is vain. But what is the
Promise to them without an Interest? No more than to such as never shall enjoy
it, which are very many. Then how is it theirs? Whereby have they an Interest
rather than others, since God offers the promised Benefits to those others as
well as them? If they say, I am a Believer, and those others are not so; I a
Believer shall have these Benefits for Christ's sake, but those others shall
not, because they are still Unbelievers; and so Christ's Righteousness shall
not be applied to them for an Interest in these Benefits, according to these
Promises. Alas, hereby they fall into the Error which Mr. M. calls Damnable;
they expect the Benefit in a way of Reward upon being Believers rather than
Unbelievers, 9. The Ministry is by these Wild Notions reduced to a Dead unapt
thing; take away Encouragement to Conversion and Godly Perseverance, from the
Benefit promised thereto, and the Dangers they escape thereby; And who will
mind their telling their Story as they call it? 10. Nay they Confound all Men
in their Serious Endeavors; they call Men to believe in Christ; and tell them,
as Mr. M. in case they do so, his Righteousness will be upon them; that seems
an Encouragement, so far well. Ay, but take heed, for if you expect that upon
your believing God, will apply Christ's Righteousness to you, that is Damnable,
and not Consistent with Faith. So you must Pray, Mourn, and Reform: But you
must not rejoice in it, or look for any thing upon it, says Mr. M. that is
Destructive. Poor Paul, Our rejoicing is this, the Testimony of our Conscience,
that in Simplicity and Godly Sincerity, we have had our Conversation in this
World, 2 Cor. 1.12. And Paul brings many under Mr. M's Damning Sentence, it is
our rejoicing. Yet' I would choose to be in their case above any Men^, who talk
of Faith and Christ if they neglect this. What shall People do in this Wood?
It Is Impossible to Serious Men, it is Injurious to Christ and his Promises, not
to look for that promised Good, upon doing what he moves us to by his Promises.
But yet Mr. M. and Party assure you are Damned if you do it. The Spirit says,
In keeping God's Commands there is a great Reward, Psalm 19. 11. Mr. M. tells
you there is none. Rev. 22.14. Blessed are they that do his Commands, that they
may have right to the Tree of Life. Mr. M. says, you are gone if you expect
it. Christ says, Luke 21.36. Watch and Pray always, that ye may be accounted
worthy to escape all these things that shall come to pass, and to stand before
the Son of Man. Mr. M. tells you, he thinks it Inconsistent with Faith to do
so. 11. They effectually strike at Christ's Government in one of the Principal
Means he has pitched on to administer it by in our present State; for with
them it is Damnable to be excited to Duty, by hope of any good upon Obedience;
or by fear of missing that Good if we obey not: And so in Truth Promises and
Threats are Nullities, as to God's Government. Hence Mr. M. resolves all the
Reasons of Obedience, into Motives of what God has done for us, Page 70.
Indeed they are Motives, but they are not the only Motives, nor the chief
Motives that God makes use of; nor what are fittest to impress Mankind, yea, or
Christians, whilst they be so Imperfect and encompassed with S^ares. We see
they restrain not Wrath, Malice, Faction, etc. in too many. How dare Men say,
Is it Damning to submit to such Arguments, which God so often uses, from
future Rewards and Punishments; because he sometimes moves us from past
Privileges or present Decencies? Yea, though you should add the Authority of
the Precepts, whilst you divest them of all Promises and Threatenings, to
invigorate Men's Compliances therewith: We say, Frustra est praecipere quod
impune potest negligi. Christ says John 13.17. If you know these things, happy
are you if you do them. John 12, 48, He that rejects me, and receives not my
words, has one that judges him; the word that I have spoken, that shall judge
him. Gal. 6.7, 8. Be not deceived; God is not mocked: what a Man sows, that
shall he reap. For he that sows to the Flesh, shall of the Flesh reap
Corruption: but he that sows to the Spirit, shall of the Spirit reap Life
Everlasting. I might transcribe the greatest part of the Bible to prove this.
12. They dreadfully Contradict themselves in all the profitable Sermons they
preach. Mr. M. says it is a Damnable Error in me, to say that God gives any
Benefit in a way of Reward or Encouragement upon Believing, though not as a
Debt, or as if Faith merited ought; yea, and it is in and for Christ's
Righteousness that it is given. Yet hear himself Page 68. Oh get Faith, see
that you Believe, for in this way it will come to pass, that the Righteousness
of Christ shall be upon you. If a Man should ask him, Does God command me to
believe? Ans. Yes. But does God by you persuade me to believe by this Argument,
That Christ's Righteousness shall be upon me? Ans. Yes sure, or it is a mere
Delusion. Q. Well, but shall I have it upon my Believing? A. Yes, it is in this
way. But will it be upon me if I believe not? Ans. No, I have told you Page 66.
Your Souls shall go down into Hell. Qu. Do you intend that I may tell my own
backward Heart, If thou will believe, thou shall have an Interest in this
Blessed Righteousness; and so urge the Worth of this, and the Necessity of
Believing, upon my Soul? I suppose Mr. M. must here suspend: But if I ask, may
I expect assuredly, when I am through Grace enabled to believe, that upon this
God will put the Righteousness of Christ upon me; and make good the word
wherein he caused me to hope, viz. That if I did Believe, the Righteousness of
Christ should be upon me? Here Mr. M. by his Principle must cry out, O No, this
is to follow a Souldestroying Error, if there be any in the World. Page 46.
But, Sir, I will not plead my Faith as any Merit, but only plead the Promise
God is pleased to make to my Faith, and rely on that word now that I have Faith
Mr. M. yet that is Damnable, for then it comes in a way of Reward. Then I ask
again, If that be Damnable, Pray why did you use this Motive in the name of
Christ to persuade me to believe? How could it be a Motive to Faith, if I was
not to expect it upon believing? And if I was to expect it before I believed,
in case that I would believe, Why may not I expect it now that I do believe? I
know not what Answer Mr. M. will make, unless 1. It Is something done by Man: Or
2. God will be still at liberty to perform, or not perform, the Benefit, though
he did promise it: Or 3. He will not perform it in the way he promised it; that
is, He promised it as an Encouragement to you if you would believe, but he will
not accomplish it as an Encouragement now tha^ you do believe; nor seem so much
to approve of your Faith. The first were Silly, because it was, a Man was
persuaded to do this, eve^ to believe (for I hope it is a Humane Act, though by
the Spirits Power.) The second is, to impeach the Truth of God's Word. The
third is, a weak Foppery; as if it were a Dishonor to God to give the Benefit
in the way he chose to use it, as a Motive to the Duty; especially when, as Mr.
M. owneth, it is by the Gospel-word that God puts this Righteousness on us;
which is the very same Word whereby he urges this Benefit, as a Motive to
Man's Believing. If I again ask, Why Mr. M. would by this Motive, thus persuade
Sinners to Believe? He would, I hope, say, This is the way God has ordained to
convert them to the Faith. But why dare he Preach thus, when it implies what he
calls a Damning Error, or else it is a mere Mockery? I Will answer for him, He had
a mind to venture a Contradiction, rather than be wholly useless to those
People, whom he designed to frighten from the Ministry of others as Damnable,
that he and his Party might be more considerable.

Reader, Would thou know whence comes this Confusion? I Will tell thee it is,
Because they consider not 1. That though the Gospel be not a Law, wherein
Governing Justice displays it self in the Adjustment of Benefits to the Duty;
yet therein there is a Governing Authority in a way of Grace, suitable to the
State of Men, in the dispensing of the Fruits of Christ's Death. 2. That a
Reward of Grace is quite another thing than a Reward of Debt. 3. That all
Gospel-Benefits are given in Christ's Right, and are the Effects of his
Righteousness applied to all that partake of them. 4. That all Gospel-Precepts
and Promises do Authoritatively appoint and describe the Persons that are
Par^^kers of Benefits for the sake of Christ's Righteousness but not their own;
and not put Men on purchasing these Benefits. 5. Yet these do fully distinguish
them that shall partake of the Benefits, from others that shall not partake of
them: The Gospel does hereby fix a certain Rule of Judgment, and does
infallibly direct Men's Hopes, Fears and Expectations: Also it governs Men's
Endeavors after Graces and Duties, as the certain Means, on our part, of
coming at the respective Benefits, graciously promised in and by Christ, to or
upon those Graces or Duties. But these things I have before largely insisted
on. This Damning Error comes to no more at last than this, The Gospel Covenant
is Conditional, not as to the first Grace, but as to the subsequent, Benefits;
and so that God requires us to believe and repent, that we may escape the Wrath
of God; and that there are Promises made to Graces: All which the Assembly of
Divines in plain words assert; therefore how many are und^^ Mr. M's
Condemnation. Nay, it is well if (...) was Innocent, when he Prefaced Mr. (...)
Book called, The Blow at the Root; for there all that I assert in this Point is
affirmed.

2 Charge. He is the Man that makes the State of Believers to be undecided, and
in Suspense during this Life. This is my Second Damning Error.

Reply. He is very unfair in wording this, who would not infer either 1. That I
affirm, that all true Believers are not in a State of Salvation. Or 2. That an
Elect Person that is brought to believe Savingly will Apostarize, and Eternally
Perish. 3. Or that a Believer, during this Life, may not be assured of his
Eternal Happiness. But he knows in his Conscience, that I do often, in the
plainest words, assert the contrary to each of these: Take a few Instances out
of my Book; I affirm that we are Justified the same Moment as we truly believe
in Christ, and the Blessing is not Suspended for any time longer: And an Elect
Person once Justified, shall, by Christ's Care, be kept in a Justified Stated.
Gospel Truth stated, p. 104, 105. Again I affirm, That Assurance is attainable
in this Life, as the Effect of Faith, Page 74. I affirm that a Penitent
Believer shall be Saved, if he die before he has time for further Obedience.
Again, The Essential Blessings of the Gospel, become the Inheritance of a
Believer as soon as he is united to Christ, Page 125, 126. Do not say the Elect
Believer will not fall away, I think the same; yet is it the less true, that
even he should Perish, if he fall away? Nay, Does not God by these Threats,
contribute to keep hi^ (...) Apostasy? P. 138. See Defense, P. 9.

2. I Will give thee the Ground upon which he wordeth this Charge. P. 55. I said
the Reason why I use the word Condition, is, because it best Suits with Man's
Relation to God, in his present Dealings with us, as Subjects in trial for
Eternity. And P. 136. How unsuitable is it, to the present State of Mankind,
that Christ should govern us without Promises and Threatenings. He is a King and
we are his Subjects; and we are 1. his Subjects in a State of trial for another
World. 2. We have great Remains of Sin within us, and Temptations without us.
These are the places that give him the greatest Umbrage: Now where is here that
a Believer's Case is undecided?

3. Let us briefly examine where the very true Difference between him and me
consists; for certainly ther^ is one, though he thinks it the best Defense of
his own Opinion, to misrepresent mine, or else he had gained little by calling
it Damning. The Difference is not 1. Whether all true Believers are in a State
of Salvation. 2. Whether they shall Persevere. 3. Whether it be by the
Influences of Christ, through the Spirit, that they do Persevere. 4. Nor
whether the Influences of the Spirit and Perseverance, and the Certainty of
their Salvation thereupon, be the Effects of Christ's Righteousness, and
purchased by his Obedience. All these I affirm: But the real Difference is, 1.
Whether God require Believers to Persevere in Faith and Holiness, as the means
of their continuing in a State of Salvation? 2. Whether it be a blameably legal
Fear, to be Solilicitously Cautious in resisting Temptations, and striving in
Christ's Strength to Persevere, least we Eternally Perish? 3. Whether if a Man
have once believed, yet if he should fall under the reigning Dominion of Sin
and Corruption, he ought to suspect that he is not in a State of Salvation?
These three I affirm, and Mr. M. denies, or I can make nothing of his words,
which thou must join together. P. 50. If thou have indeed believed with the
Faith of the Operation of God, and they Conscience knows it, thou may then
conclude assuredly, That whatever thy Sins have been, or whatever thy Defects
and Corruptions now be, yet this Righteousness of God is upon thee; thou have
it and do stand in it.

Reply. The Faith is an Act past; the Conclusion is at present whatever a Man's
Corruptions be; the only Evidence of the past Faith is ^he Knowledge of
Conscience which is not Infallible. And by the way I can prove, That by his
Opinion, as that first Act is before Regeneration, so no other, or after-Act of
Faith, is necessary to continue our Justified State. Again, He exposes such,
P. 63. as hold that we stand in it (this Righteousness) by our own Faith. And
P. 64. their Continuance in Obedience, and the not failing of their Faith, is
one of the Privileges of their State, and the Effect and Fruit of their having
this Righteousness of Christ upon them, and not the Means or Cause thereof. You
see the not failing of Faith, is not so much as the Means of our continuing to
have this Righteousness on us; for of its first being on us, he makes Faith a
Cause, P. 51, 52. I need not show how often he calls all Fears about this
Perseverance in our State Legal.

I have not time to argue these, therefore shall only touch on each. 1. God
does require Believers to Persevere in Faith and Holiness, as a Means of their
Continuance in a State of Salvation, Romans 11.20, 22. Because of Unbelief they
were broken off, and thou stand by Faith. Be not high-minded, but fear.
Toward thee, goodness, if thou continue in his goodness: otherwise thou shall
be cut off. 2 Cor. 1.24. By Faith ye stand, How Conditionally is it proposed,
Col. 1.22, 23. Now to present you Unblameable in his sight: If ye continue in
the Faith, and be not moved away from the Hope of the Gospel. Here our
Unreprovableness and Reconciliation in the Body of Christ's Flesh, through
Death, as to Continuance, is stated on this, If you continue in the Faith, Heb.
10.35 to 39. Now the Just shall live by Faith: but if any Man draw back, my
Soul shall have no Pleasure in him. But we are not of them that draw back to
Perdition; but of them that believe to the Saving of the Soul. It Is by Faith we
live; this Believing is to Salvation, as drawing back is to Perdition. How many
are the Promises of Salvation to Perseverance, and Threatenings of Death against
Apostasy: And these uttered to Believers? Yea, are a great Means of their
Perseverance which Divine Wisdom has appointed.

Obj. Christ's Righteousness upon us keeps our Faith. Ans. And yet keeping our
Faith through God's Power, keeps that Righteousness upon us to Salvation, 1
Pet. 1.5. And know that Christ's Righteousness is applied in Correspondence
with the Gospel-Rule: It is not upon the Apostate to give him a Right to
Salvation, but upon the Persevering Believer: It is on the Believer for his
present Right, but it is in Christ for to be still applied to the Persevering
Believer for his continued Right. Obj. The Believer will not fall away. Ans. It
is not naturally Impossible, but it is by Grace that he shall not fall away. But
then God's Helps and Means must be used by him, of which these Cautions are not
the least; and the Connection between Apostasy, and the loss of Salvation, is
never the less true, and so Mr. M's Principal never the less false, for if ever
he draw back, my Soul shall have no Pleasure in him, and truly you may as well
infer that Faith is not necessary to our justification at first, as that
Perseverance is not necessary to our continuing so. For it was as sure of the
Elect. even before they believed that they should be justified: It Is sure of
the Believer, before he persevere, that he shall be saved. But yet, if Faith be
necessary to the first, so Perseverance is by as express Testimony, necessary
to the last.

2. It is not blamably legal Fear, for Believers to be sollicitously cautious
in resisting Temptations, and s^riving in Christ's Strength to persevere, and
this lest they eternally perish. hold fast that which thou have that no Man
take thy Crown, Rev. 3.10. was a fit Means to beget Care in holding fast. Heb.
4.1. is a Caution the Apostle comprehends himself in. Let us fear, left a
Promise being left us, any of us should seem to come short of it, any appearing
challenge from within themselves was matter of Fear, for on Christ's Part
there is no Suspicion. It Is a divine Charge, Phil. 2.13. Workout your own
Salvation with Trembling and Fear; not only begin it so, but so work it out.
Nay, in no span of Time on this side the Grave is the best Saint exempted. Pass
the Time of your sojourning here in Fear, and the Reason is, If you call upon
the Father, who, without respect of Persons, judges according to every Man's
Work, 1 Pet. 1. 17. These Men now tell us, There is no judicial Process of
Believers, no Judgment by a Gospel-rule: It will not be asked you what Sin you
have committed or forsaken, or Duty you have omitted, or Good you have done;
but are you in Christ? As if these were of no Use to determine whether we are
in Christ truly or no, and as if a Privilege were the proper matter of a
Judicial Trial. Mr. M. may know whose these are. Oh Christians! Is our Race as
yet run, our Fight already fought, or our Dangers past? Are we still in Via, or
in Termino.

3. A Man that has once believed if he should fall under the reigning Power of
Sin and Corruption, ought to suspect that he is not in a State of Salvation.
Romans 8. 13. If ye live after the Flesh ye shall die, but if ye mortify the
Deed of of the Flesh by the Spirit ye shall live, was a Truth directed to all
the Saints at Rome; and let me tell you, the Dominion of Sin is a more sure
Evidence that Men are now out of a State of Salvation, than the Knowledge of
their Consciences that they formerly believed, is of their ever being in a
State of Salvation: For this may be a mistaken Knowledge, but the other is the
divine Word. These Conceits are obviated, Ezekiel. 33. 13. when I say to the
righteous, he shall surely live, if he trust to his own Righteousness, and
commit Iniquity, all his Righteousness shall not be remembered, but for his
Iniquity that he has committed he shall surely die for it. i. e. If because he
began to do well, and because he has done so for a Time, he ventures to give
up himself to a Course of Sin, he shall certainly perish for it. This is the
plain Sense of the Place, notwithstanding Mr. M. forced Perversion of it
against our expecting any Benefit upon performing any Duty. The Apostle Paul
thought not himself above this Rule, 1 Cor. 9.11, 24. I keep my Body under lest
when I have preached to others: I my self should be a Castaway. What a damning
Sentence would Mr. M. pass on Turretin, Perkins, Mr. Anthony Burgess, and most
of our old Divines, who jointly assert, That if David had died before he had
repented of the Murder of Vria, he had been damned? Nay, that comfortable
Text, Romans 8.1. brands his Position, there is no Condemnation to them that are
in Christ, Who walk not after the Flesh but after the Spirit; whence it is
evident, That if they now walk after the Flesh they shall be condemned, at
least from its being inconsistent with their present being in Christ, whatever
they think of their former believing. I will not retort damning on Mr. M's
Opinion; yet to such Souls who credit his Notion, That whatever thy Corruptions
now be, if thy Conscience know that thou have believed formerly, they Salvation
is safe. I must in pity say thou may eternally perish by it. For thou can
not judge now it was a true saving Act, but according to the Sentence of
Conscience; and they Conscience may be mistaken, yea, if thy Corruptions now
have Dominion over thee, and continue so, God warns thee, Let no Man eeceive
you with vain Words, for these things the Wrath of God comes upon the Children
of Disobedience, Ephesians. 5.6.

3 Charge. And whether he do not in Truth disown the Imputation of our Sins
unto Christ, and of his Righteousness unto us: It is like, if he live, the
World will see more fully, for he has given such pregnant Indications thereof,
as do amount to at least, just Cause of Jealousy. Repl. 1. Is it come so low
as a Jealousy now? When he was one that under his Hand affirmed thus of me. He
teaches that the Righteousness of Christ is imputed only as to Effects, with a
Purchase of a Conditional grant, viz. This Proposition, He that believes shall
be saved, and they cite for it, though in contrary Words. Gospel Truth, p. 39.
where my Words are these. I affirm, That Christ, by his Righteousness, merited
for all the Elect, that they should, in his Time and Way, be certainly
Partakers of its saving Effects, and did not only purchase a conditional Grant
of those Effects, viz. That Proposition, He that believes shall be saved. And
besides, these Effects being made ours, the very Righteousness of Christ is
imputed to true Believers, as what was always undertaken and designed for their
Salvation, and is now effectual to their actual Pardon, and Acceptance to Life,
yea, is pleadable by them as their Security, and is as useful to their
Happiness, as if themselves had done and suffered what Christ did. Reader, were
these Men duly tender or honest when they pervert Words ^o plain, and ascribe
to me what is as directly contrary to my Words as yea and no. They say I
affirmed what I do deny, and that I denied the very thing I affirmed: But the
Turn could not be served without these Methods.

3. The Ground of Jealousy I Will give, and judge you how just it is. 1. I did
affirm that Christ did bear the Punishment of our Sins, yea, and he bare the
Guilt of our Sins, which is that respect of Sin to the threatening of the Law,
whereby there is an Obligation to bear the Punishment of Sin. But I denied that
Sin it self, as to its Filth and Fault, was transacted on Christ, and that
Christ was made and accounted by the Father the very Transgressor, the
Adulterer and Blasphemer. Gospel Truth p. 10, 11. Here Is my Crime, for Mr. M.
has often preached up the later. 2. I affirm as thou see of the Imputation of
Christ's Righteousness; but my Fault is, that I deny that God accounts that we
legally died and obeyed, that we made Satisfaction to God, though I grant that
Christ died for us, yea, in our Place and stead. 3. I have, through the
Goodness of God, lived to declare, in this Book, enough to confute his
Prophecy, and his Opinion too; though I think he should pray for a more calm
and charitable Spirit before he pr^tend to Predictions concerning his Brethren.
4. Will he repent of his rigid censorious Slander? For I Will here declare that I
assent to his own Words, p. 18. By imputed I mean, that it (Christ's
Righteousness) is looked on by God as belonging to us, in order to our being
judicially dealt with according to the Merit thereof. This I have often affirmed,
but it is far short of what elsewhere he strains it too. 4 Charge. The Son of
God was united to an Embrio, which is a Piece of ignorant Blasphemy. Repl. My
Words were; Oh! For God-Man to be at any time unactive as an Embrio, or Child
in the Womb, for him to be born of a Woman. I said not that the Son of God was
united to an Embrio, unactive as an Embrio is another thing: And I Will ^^ing him
twice Ten to oppose his two Witnesses. But had I said it, where is the
Blasphemy, when the divine Nature I hope was united to Christ's dead Body in
the Grave as all grant. And very many say, that the divine Nature was united to
the Flesh before it was organized or animated, of whom Turretin's Instit.
Theol. p. 372. Etsi anima infundi non potuit in Corpus. nisi jam organizatum,
etc. Non sequiter (...), non potuisse carnem statim sibi unire cum Opus ejus
non possit aut praesente aut absente, anima sibi coarctari. Pierson and
Multitudes are Blasphemers with this bold Man. But, (supposing that though the
Virgin conceived by the Power of the Holy Ghost, and went her usual Time, and
that Christ was like other Children, and the Faetus had Matter and Nourishment
ministered thereto by the Virgin, who conceived by the Power of the Spirit.)
Yet, that the Divine Person was not united to the Flesh before it was animated:
But are not many Phisicians so ignorant as to judge the Soul is united to the
Body unorganized; and if so, either the humane Nature of Christ had a separate
Subsistence from the Divine Person, which is false, or the Divine Person
assumed it when the Body was unorganized. But it is a Theme not fit for me to
pursue, who must confess my Ignorance therein in Comparison of Mr. M. who can
tell us how the humane Nature of Christ leans on the Godhead in the Son, and
has the eternal Power of the Deity clasping about it, and holding it in that
Union, p. 63. May not this seraphical, yet very dull Author, call what he
please in this Point a Piece of ignorant Blasphemy, whatever greater Divines,
or skilful Phisicans say to the contrary. 5 Charge. Because I would wash off
all his Dirt at once, I Will give you one Charge out of his Book that he forgets
in his Postscript, though it has been their best Tool. viz. That I lick up
Bellarmin's Vomit in my Exposition of Phil. 3.8, 9. Repl. This is as true as
the rest, for when I expounded that Text, I plainly affirmed, tha^ 1. We are
justified by Christ's imputed Righteousness only. 2. That all Holiness compared
with winning Christ, is to be esteemed as Dung. 3. The best thing in us is
vile, compared with Christ's Righteousness. And indeed if that Text speaks only
of Justification, and that the Apostle designs to oppose his own Righteousness
to Christ's, then his own and ours are as unfit as Dung to be found in. 4. But
I then judged (and still do) that the Apostle there designed to proclaim the
Preferrableness of Christianity to Judaism, and what was Pharasaical, yea, or
self-invented: And therefore, as he enumerates all the Dignities of Judaism, so
he ascribes to Christ the whole Glory of his entire redeemed State, showing
that not only his Justification, but his Sanctification too came from and by
Christ; both which were of a diviner Nature, as well as appointment, than what
he arrived to whiles he was a Stranger to Christ, and therefore expected and
pressed after a Perfection therein, whiles he despised all Things, Privileges
and Seize which stood in Competition with Christ: Yea, was glad he had
lost them all for Union with him; a Perseverance in whom with higher
Communications from him was the very main Aim of his Life and Endeavors. I am
sure this Sense best agrees with the Context, and is far enough from
Bellarmin's Sense, neither want I Reasons sufficient to prove it had I room,
yea, my Exposition of that Text is so far from militating against Justification
by Christ's Righteousness, that it proves it strongly.

2. I come now to consider Mr. M's Defense of his own Errors. He confines them
to two. Saying, I kept Silence as to more. When others read this Book they will
see a greater Number, though it seems he could not perceive them when he read
my Notes; and has left out of his printed Sermons many obnoxious Passages; yet
he will meet with his Suretiship Righteousness, the Debtor being as clear as the
Surety, P. 24. With his limiting so far Christ's Merit to his active Obedience,
p. 13. With his Position, that all Graces of the Spirit are Effects of our
being justified, and not at all the Means thereof, p. 32. That all our
Obedience avails no more to our Justification than our worst Sins, p. 71.
Though he ascribes a Causality to Faith, that the Crown of Glory is due to us
in Justice, p. 12. Even a remunerative Justice is exerted to us, p. 15. etc.

But let us take what he thinks most concerns him, the first whereof is, that
Christ's Incarnation was no Part of his Humiliation. 1. He grants the Point
which ought to be the real Question. 2. He sets up for his Chimera with a false
State of the Question and its Terms.

1. He tells us if you take Incarnation largely, as Christ's taking our Nature
and the common sinless Frailties of it, together with his being in the Form of
a Servant, and made under the Law: I know not why it should be denied to be a
Part of his Humiliation. p. 73. Reply. Well Christ's taking our Nature is
granted by him to be Part of this large Sense: And who can fairly exclude the
rest out of the Subject of this Question? Was Christ's Incarnation Part of his
Humiliation? Did not Christ assume our Nature with these Frailties, and in the
Form of a Servant? Is our Question concerning an Ens Rationis, i.e. supposing
Christ had taken our Nature without taking the Form of a Servant, which was
next to impossible; or without its sinless Frailties which were then natural to
it; and not under the Law which was the next End of taking it? What would it
have been then, i. e. if it had been what it never was, nor never would have
been, whatever some Popish Schoolmen talk, is that to be the Subject of this
Question? Is this meant by Incarnation? Whereas, as it indeed was, or as Christ
was incarnate, and the only way he was incarnate, Mr. M. grants it was
Humiliation, and so he fairly yields the Cause. But where will you hold him? In
a few Lines, he drops the Form of a Servant, as not so proper a Part of
Christ's Humiliation, because Christ in his Exaltation has still the Form of a
Servant: Well recalled because so soon; but it is to get creditable Company in
his oversight, for he charge the Apostle with the same Slip, Humiliation,
etc. Which the Apostle calls taking on him the Form of a Servant, or rather
being made under the Law: Between which there may be conceived some Difference,
for Christ is still God's Servant, etc. p. 73. It Is well the Apostle added this
in another Place. But what gains our Author by this Halt. 1. Either he engages
against him, Phil. 2.7. where the Form of a Servant is Part of Christ's
Exaninition (and note that the best Authors esteem Christ's taking the Form of
a Servant for his very Incarnation, and not any humbling Circumstances
consequential of it) or else Mr. M. answers himself, and his poor Argument too,
and sure that is convictive: For if Christ was humbled in taking on him the Form
of a Servant, though he keeps the Form of a Servant in his exalted State, then
Christ might be humbled in assuming our Nature, though he keeps that Nature in
his exalted State. 2. Yea, I think one may follow him to Gal. 4. 4. For if
there the Apostle more properly mentions Christ's Humiliation, and instanceth
Christ's being made under the Law, yet he fails not to join therewith Christ's
being made of a Woman, to share in the Humiliation with his being made under
the Law: It would seem Mr. M. thinks the Apostle had better served his Purpose,
if not written more accurately, had he set made under the Law in the room of
taking the Form of a Servant in Phil. 2. 7. But it will be no otherwise, yet he
sits not down with it; for after all his mending and winding in vain, to
confine all Christ's Humiliation to his being made under the Law; he hesitates
and will be halving that too. And therefore tells us, He is not new under the
law as he was in the Days of his Flesh. Then the Whole of Christ's being under
the Law is not a Part of his Humiliation; it must be confined to an As he was
in the Days of his Flesh: And what is all this Toil for? You Will presently see,
it is to keep all Humiliation within the Compass of the Curse; as he had before,
P. 7. All the while Christ was in a State of Humiliation, he was under the
Curse. A Point which that difficult Text Gal. 3.13. will never prove, as to the
whole time. Let us now review what he has brought his first State of the
Question to, which promised so well primo intuitu, we have lost Christ's taking
our Nature, which was never intended; we have lost the Form of a Servant, as
what is still retained in Heaven; we have lost all that is included in being
under the Law, except as it was in the days of his Flesh.

2. It Is time to see what use he will make of all this, and how he supports his
Chimaera by a further false Explaining of the Terms of the Question; and this
he does by confining Humiliation to what is far less than it truly is; and
making Incarnation to be such an abstracted thing as it never was nor possibly
could be.

1. Humiliation is fulfilling the Law, either in the Precept or the Curse of
it, P. 75 as before, P. 7. he confined it to being under the Curse.

Reply. The Disjunctive may help, otherwise he has given so hard a Definition
of Humiliation, by making it convertible with the Curse, that it would sound
ill to ascribe it to the Eternal Word, unless on the account of our Flesh
already Assumed; yea, or so as our Author intends by the Curse: But the best of
it is, this is Gratis dictum; but where is the Proof, that is a thing he seldom
minds; that he says it, is enough to bring you under his Damning Sentence if
you deny Assent. But 1. There is a very great part of Christ's Humiliation as
the Son of God, which is no part of the Humbling Curse as upon the Son of Man:
His Exaninition, or laying aside of his Glory, is Humiliation in the account of
the Holy Ghost; and this was true of the Son of God, as to his very Assuming
our Flesh, abstructed from its Humbling Circumstances, as I have fully proved.
Is it strong Reasoning then, because the Humiliation of Christ has more parts
than one; therefore that which is not that one part of it, is no part at all of
it? 2. Christ did assume our Nature in Obedience to a Law, even that of
Mediation; to which he had subjected himself as our Sponsor; this also I have
proved. And sure if Obedience to the Law of Works, as he grants, would render
the Incarnation a part of Humiliation, Why will not Obedience to another Law,
especially from him who owed no Obedience but for our Redemption, and by his
own Consent. 3. Mr. M. will hazard his ill-jumbled Hypothesis of Suretiship,
unless he will grant, that supposing the Son of God would be a Redeemer of Man,
the very Law of Works required his Incarnation: If so, then Mr. M. has
allowed, that it must be a part of Humiliation in his own proper Sense. 4. Yea,
I know a Notion of his that must fall; that supposing the Compact between the
Father and Son, antecedent to the Incarnation, the Son stood obliged to Assume
our Nature with its Frailties; and that because it was our Nature whom he was
to Redeem, and because it was in that State by our Sins, which he had obliged
himself to expiate. Yea, 5. Upon his being thus obliged, Millions of Sinners
were Pardoned and Saved before his Incarnation; and therefore he stood charged
with their Concerns, so as to be obliged to Satisfy for their Sins, and that
in their Nature (for out of their Nature would not serve.) Put these two last
together, and we shall come, even with Mr. M's own good liking, to our Point,
viz. That Humiliation does properly predicate of the Incarnation strictly
taken: Yet I suspect it will hardly go down: Why? Because Mr. M. is so very
fond of the (...) and Filth of Sin being on Christ, that he cannot think Christ
humbled sooner, or longer, than he can with some tolerable Decency call Christ
the very Murderer, Adulterer, Blasphemer, etc. which has too frequently
Preached; and in his Book P. 14. he a little washes, by saying, He put on the
Sinners Garments; and our Guilt, our Sins, were upon him. ( Crispian Phrases,
which for some end or other he still likes to Consecrate.) With him the true
Model is, Christ must be as Unrighteous as Sinners, that Sinners may be as
Righteous as Christ; and our Savior cannot be humbled till he be a Sinner, nor
Sinners happy till they be Saviors. Here is the Arcanum, whatever be the
Pretense.

2. The next Term he dissecteth and strictly garbleth, is Incarnation: It is
strictly his dwelling in Flesh, comprehending under it both the Act of
Assumption, and the Relation or Union effected thereby, between the Humane
Nature so Assumed, and the Person of the Son of God.

Reply. If one should ask him, How the dwelling in Flesh comprehends under it
the Act of Assumption, which is supposed to it as much as entering into an
House, is to a Man's abode in it, I know not what Answer he will make, unless
that the Son of God repeats the Act of Assumption as long as he dwells therein,
by that which he calls The Divinity clasping the Humanity, P. 63. If one should
again demand, Why he leaves out all that is proper to real Dwelling? Since
there might be Assumption, and Relation, though it had ceased the next Moment.
I judge he must answer, Pardon my improper Speaking, in making that the
Principal Thing, which nothing of what I speak says any thing to. But if he
should answer, by dwelling in Flesh: I do intend, Christ's still remaining in
our Nature, and only suppose to it the Act of Assumption, and the Relation
effected thereby. I reply, That this is the Grossest Fallacy; for Christ's
continuing in our Nature, is remaining Incarnate, and not formally Incarnation;
which is the Term in the Question. And the Design of this Fallacy, is to change
the Question for the sake of an Argument that he greatly wants; since the
Question thereby would be, Is the Son of God's continuing in our Nature, a part
of his Humiliation? And is any so Foolish as to say, That this is the same
Question, as was the Son of God's Incarnation a part of his Humiliation? Where
the Term Incarnation is the very Assuming our Flesh into Relation and Union;
and is so far from being comprehended in the Son of God's still dwelling in
Flesh, that it is supposed thereto, yea, as its Cause; yea, and does not so
much as connote it, but as he assumed it to dwell in it for ever: Such Juggling
it seems is necessary. But the main Enquiry I now come to, viz. Whereby was the
Act of Assumption? How did the Son of God take our Flesh into Union to his
Divine Person? Was this in and by his Conception? To this Mr. M. answers.

Mr. M. P. 74. Christ's Incarnation is one thing, his Conception another; by
the one he became Man, by the other he became the Son of Man: The former
implies only his Participation of the Nature; the other, together with the
Nature, the Manner and Way of his partaking it, though in Christ they did
Concur and Coexist.

Reply. It seems then being Man, and being the Son of Man, differ; and that so
far, as humbled and unhumbled: But did not the Son of God become Man by
becoming the Son of Man? If so, then he was humbled by becoming the Son of Man,
but again unhumbled by becoming Man. He says, They Coexisted. What as two
Separate things? No: He tells you it is as a Thing, and the Way and Manner of
that Thing therewith. But to the loss of his Fancy, he will find that the Thing
has its being, by what he calls the Way and Manner of that Thing; for the Son
of God's Incarnation was by his Conception, as the Means and Cause of it; and
therefore if he was humbled by his Conception, he was humbled by his
Incarnation too; for he became Incarnate by being Conceived. He tells us, They
did Concur as well as Coexist in Christ: What means he? Did Christ's being
Man, as by Incarnation, concur to make him the Son of Man by Conception; as his
being the Son of Man by his Conception, did concur to make him a Man, or
Incarnate. i. e. He took Flesh as a Man, that he might be Conceived, as much as
he took Flesh by being Conceived. At last finding, upon a long rolling in his
Mind, that if to be Conceived was to be Humbled, the Son of God then must be
Humbled by becoming Incarnate. He leaves this Profane Cant, and tries what he
can make of granting, There was an Abasement in the Manner of his Conception,
but not in his being Conceived. But as I think he can never part them, so I
have elsewhere proved, That his being Conceived is ^he greater Debasement; and
there was nothing in the Manner of it Debasing, but as supposing the Thing it
self was so. Alas, What is this or that Humane Circumstance compared with God's
taking our Flesh? And what are the Circumstances? Mary, though no Rich Woman,
was of David's Line, a Free Woman, and a Virgin. Yet let us hear his Reason
since he seldom offers any. The Humane Nature was really related to Mary, as to
its Cause, for she Conceived him, yet she was not a Cause either of his
Incarnation or of his Humiliation. Does he intend that Mary was not the Cause
of the Son of God's Will to be Incarnate, and so Humbled? But that is not the
Point, and none doubt it. But I ask, Was not Mary the Cause of the Humane
Nature, as it was Christ's Humane Nature? And did not it become his Humane
Nature, as he was Conceived of her, by the Efficiency of the Spirit? Well
therein, and so far, she was the Cause of his Incarnation: And if she was not
the Cause of his Humiliation, Pray whence was the Abasement in the Manner of
his Conception, which Mr. M. just now affirmed? I dare not pretend to seek out
any, least in naming the word Embrio, he should call it a piece of Ignorant
Blasphemy.

Mr. M. after all his Superfine Distinctions, of Christ's Assuming our Nature
being another Thing than his Conception; the Thing, and the Manner of the
Thing, (though that Manner was a Cause of it) the Conception, and the being
Conceived; being Self-conscious that he had offered no Arguments fit to
Proselite any, his Admirers not being able to understand them; and such as
could guess at what they did signify, being sure to despise, if not abhor
them; he comes down to offer a Proposal from his own Choice. For my own part, I
would choose to refer Christ's Conception to the Things that made him allied in
Blood to us, and so fit to act as our Surety, rather than to his actual
performing the Work of Suretiship, as antecedently standing in that Relation to
us, P. 75.

Reply. Designeth he by this, to leave others to choose for themselves, without
a Damning Sentence? That Is unlike the Height and Heat of the Man: But what can
we make of this Jargon, as connected with what past before? Was not Eve allied
in Blood to Adam, though she was not Conceived a Daughter of Man or Woman? And
therefore Christ might have been allied without Conception. Again, was not
Christ allied in Blood to us by his Incarnation, which he says is another
thing than Christ's Conception? It seems by our Author's words, That his
abstracted Incarnation was Christ's taking the Humane Nature or Flesh, but not
Specifically our Humane Nature or Flesh: Or was his Assuming the Humane Nature,
as distinct from Conception, an Assuming a Humane Soul not allied to our Souls,
as he is allied to us in Blood by Conception, and he does here confine it
thereto? Here we meet with another Distinction, sufficient to argue him still a
Designing Man, but not a very Distinct or Discerning one: Here Is a Humane
Nature, and yet not a Humane Nature allied to us; a Humane Flesh and Blood, and
not a Flesh and Blood allied to ours. By Christ's Incarnation he took a Humane
Nature, a Flesh and Blood, not allied to us: By Conception he became allied to
us in Flesh and Blood, and in Nature too, unless he has it in his Mind, that
Christ has not a Humane Soul allied to ours. Those words also are very
uncertain, Antecedently standing in that Relation to us. Does he mean that
Christ was not related to Men as their Surety before his Incarnation? How then
were all the Saints Saved before his Coming? Or is it that the Son of God did
not perform any Suretiship-Act in Assuming our Nature, or being Conceived? If
so, then he had not undertaken to Assume our Nature before he took it; though
all that he did or suffered (had it been possible) would not have availed us,
unless so done and suffered in our very Nature: And can you suppose he engaged
not that as a Surety or Sponsor, without which nothing had been Payment? Or
does he intend that Christ wa^ not allied to us in Blood before his Conception?
It Is true, and yet as true, That he was allied to us in Blood by his very
Incarnation, as well and as soon as by his Conception: Christ did not Assume a
Humane Nature before nor otherwise, than as he was by his Conception allied to
us in Blood, and Soul too: At last we are gotten out of this Labyrinth, made up
of nothing but ripe blown Thistles. His Authorities, when examined, avail him
little, I have but room to examine one, yet he is at the Front of them. Ames,
Medulla, Cap. 20. P. 94. Humiliatio est qua subditus est justitiae Dei, ad illa
omnia perficienda, etc. The Humiliation (of Christ as Mediator) is that whereby
he was subject to the Justice of God for finishing all those things which were
required for Man's Redemption, Phil. 2.8. Here he confineth Humiliation to one
part, viz. a subjection to Justice, (not Authority) and this to finishing (not
beginning) what was necessary to the Redemption of Man; which by the Text he
quotes, refers to his Death or Passion on the Cross, of which besure he was not
capable as God. But that he confined not all Christ's Humiliation to this which
excludes his Incarnation, is not evident; for the next words are, Humiliatio
ista non fuit, etc. that Humiliation was not properly of the Divine Nature or
Person, considered in themselves, but of the Mediator God-Man: Therefore the
Assumption of the Humane Nature simply and in it self considered ( non est
Humiliationis hujus pace) is not a part of this Humiliation. That Humiliation,
and of this Humiliation do indicate, that he had an Eye to somewhat else that
might be called by this Name Humiliation; at least it does not prove that
Christ's Incarnation was not a part of any Humiliation of the Son of God,
because it was not a part of this Humiliation Dr. Ames limits it to this part,
Mr. M. concludes against any other. Our Author at last, having bungled so at
Demonstration, he falls to suspicion-work, which I confess his Talent renders
him much more expert in; as if thinking no Evil, were no part of Charity; or at
least, want of Charity were no Challenge to Faith. But what has his Jealous
Head brought forth, after so often tumbling the word Conception? Even this his
own Doctrine of Imputation is lost, if Christ's Incarnation be a part of his
Humiliation: Well, it is a point I never thought of before; and it is a comfort
to me, the Gospel Doctrine of Imputation will suffer nothing, but be availed
thereby; I hope to find much more of Christ imputed to me as done for me, than
what I was personally obliged to do by the Law, or was esteemed legally to
perform; though I own as well as Mr. M. that Christ died in my stead; yea, and
so obeyed too, as you will see in this Book. But with him, farewell all Christ's
Obedience or Humiliation, if we did not legally do and endure all the very
same; and if so, he must take his leave of the greatest part of the price of
Redemption, viz. the value given to all Christ's Obedience by the Divine
Nature; for I hope the Law never required that in Man's Obedience.

And since he lays such stress on his point of the Incarnation being no part of
Humiliation, let us Appeal to Competent Judges, Phil. 2.6, 7, 8. Christ Jesus,
who being in the form of God, thought it no robbery to be equal with God: but*
be emptied himself of his Glory, taking on him the Form of a Servant, being
made in the Likness of Man: And being found in Fashion as a Man, he humbled
himself, and became obedient unto Death, even the Death of the Cross. I have
rendered (...), emptied himself of his Glory, and left out the two Copulatives
which are not in the Original. The main Matter is reducible to these. 1. Is
emptying himself of his Glory any Humiliation? I answer, it signifies more
Humiliation, than (...), which is rendered humbled, Verse. 8. The Word is as much
as rendering all Glory and Honor vain or void, so used 1 Cor. 9.15. 2. Is the
Son of God's Incarnation intended by the Apostle when he says he made his
glorying void? It is certainly and eminently so. For 1. The Nominative Case to
this Verb, is confined to the second Person not incarnate, he being in the Form
of God, etc. He, even he so considered, before he was God-Man emptyed himself,
or made his glorying void as to Manifestation, wherein could this properly be
so but in becoming incarnate, for whatever Debasement followed after his
Incarnation referred to him as the Effect of thus emptying himself. 2. The
whole 7. Verse. is confined to his Incarnation as I have fully proved, he
emptied himself being made in the Likeness of Man. P. 24, 25. etc. Verse. 8.
being found in Fashion as a Man, is that which lets in what followed his
Incarnation, though but one eminent Instance be given. The Assembly of Divines,
Larg. Cat. Q. 47. Christ humbled himself in his Conception, in that being from
all Eternity the Son of God, he was pleased in the Fullness of Time to become
the Son of Man, made of a Woman of a low Estate, and to be born of her, with
diverse Circumstances of more than ordinary Abasement. To wrigle himself out of
this which he subscribed, he does, I suppose, use ^he former Shifts. But to add
no more, Doctor Owen's Expos. on the Hebrews, Chap. 3. Verse. 2, 3. P. 21. This
glorious one humbled himself into the Form of a Man, of a Servant, unto Death,
the Death of the Cross, Phil. 25.6, 7, 8. You see his Comment on this Text.
Reader, judge now of the Confidence and small Tenderness of this Man that
should have a very peculiar Eye to this Opinion of his when he told his
Hearers, P. 38. So shall it go with your Souls, so will God deal with every one
of you as you receive or reject those Truths of his: A thing he calls a damning
Error in me when I say so but of Men's being penitent godly Believers.

The second Point to be marked is, That Believers are as righteous as Christ in
Equality, as to Suretyship-Righteousness. For that is the Point. He says little
here for it; and I have said enough in this Book against it; therefore a few
words will serve. His Authors Rhetorical Sayings are more reconcilable to Truth
than his Position. Mr. Bradshaw affirms, That Pardon without the rigid
Imputation of the Active Obedience, serves to all saving Purposes. But I Will
dismiss this with these Remarks.

1. He builds his whole Notion upon a Suretiship-Righteousness, and never
proves Christ to be any such Surety as will at all infer, that we are as
Righteous as he on that account. I have carefully weighed what he has written;
and find what he says for it, page 10, is, that he is called a Surety, Heb. 7.
22. I grant it, and he will find, I have proved that Christ is there called only
a Surety of the Gospel Covenant; and therefore can, as mentioned in that place,
be engaged to no more thereby, than what that Covenant includes. Though yet I
grant, that other Scriptures prove, that Christ undertook to be the end of the
Law for Righteousness, and died in our place or stead, etc. of which I have
insisted at large. And if this will not serve, he adds his All: He who is
obliged to pay another Debt, or any part of it, is properly, and in strictness
his Surety. Repl. But not always so, as that the Principal can be said to pay
that Debt as m^^h as he, nor be as just as he, nor be said to be immediately
released upon his payment, etc. For if a Friendgoes to a Creditor, and
promises to pay part of a Prodigals Debt, agreeing together, that upon sundry
terms, and in a fit time, and by degrees the Prodigal shall be acquitted and
released; yea, and that his Debt shall be remitted to him in a way of
forgiveness by the very Creditor, and he still be bound to certain Services
thereby; I hope all the former daring assumptions are prevented, and yet the
subsequent Surety engaged to pay part of the Prodigal's Debt. Should not Mr. M.
p. 10. forbear saying, that holy Mr. Baxter wrangles and rejects this Counsel
of God against himself, and cites the place where Mr. B. argues this point, and
offer no better proof. But that is their way, he shall Reason, and they will do
their work by mere Reproaches, and cursed Censures.

2. He p. 75. says, That Christ's Resurrection, Ascension and Intercession,
are not imputed to Believers: Yet all the proof he brings for an Eternal Legal
Union between the Elect and Christ, and their being one Person in Law, is, That
they are said to be in him in his reviving, rising from the Dead* and sitting
in heavenly places with him, p. 59. ^^hat what in one place is the instance and
ground of Legal-Surety-Imputation, in the other is excluded from being imputed:
I hope those phrases will by his followers, not again be pleaded for
Suretiship-Imputation.

3. How dogmatically spoken is it, p. 76. That if it be the same Righteousness
in which Christ and we stand, he and we are so far as that Righteousness makes
Righteous, equally Righteous? Repl. But Sir, he and we come not alike by it;
and we depend on it as in him for all; he stands not in it so as to need
forgiveness, which we do; yea, that forgiveness is often repeated to us after we
are made Righteous: He is by it entitled to much more than we are, etc. of
which elsewhere. And since he infers an Equality from a Sameness, let me ask,
are we as spiritual as Christ? And yet it is the same Spirit that is in Christ
and in us. Are we as much beloved by God as Christ our Mediator is? And yet
Ioh. 17. 26. Thou have loved them as thou have loved me, that the Love
wherewith thou have loved me may be in them: Here Is As and the Same Love, yet
it were Impudence to pretend to be loved equally. Yea, Verse. 22. The Glory
which thou gave me I have given them: Here Is the same Glory, but must we be
as glorious as Christ in Equality? Alas! Do not we see that the same Guilt of a
Fact may lie upon many, and yet all not be guilty in the same Degree? Judge
then, what an Air of Assurance does this short-sighted Man breathe forth in the
next Words. I can hardly think any Man is so forsaken of common Understanding
as to deny it: Because he cannot give convincing Light, he will threaten us into
it by calling us mad, and had he thought th^^ would have sent more open Mouths
after us, he would have given us that Term instead of Semisaciniane, Men that
hold damning blasphemous Errors, and what not. But any Man that intimately knew
Mr. Baxter (whom he loads with these Titles as well as others) and Mr. M. would
not be long concluding which had more Understanding, Truth, Love to God and
Man, Publick-spiritedness, Godliness, Integrity, and whatever makes a
Gospel Spirit and the Image of Christ upon a Man; to say nothing of Humility,
good Nature. Freedom from Envy and Malice, etc. Yea, God blessed him, more to
the real Conversion of Souls than a hundred Mr. Mather's; notwithstanding his
charging him with rejecting the Counsel of God against himself. P. 10. And to
hold pernicious, Soul-destroying Errors; for it is him, whose Words he puts in a
broken Light. P. 46.

4. He very oddly evades the Charge of the Assembly. Confess. Chap. 26. A. 3.
viz. This Communion which the Saints have with Christ, does not make them in
any wise Partakers of the Substance of his Godhead, or to be equal with Christ
in any respect; either of which to affirm is impious and blasphemous: This
Place I cited, but would not repeat the Words at Pinners Hall. To this he tells
us, P. 76. This must be taken in a limited Sense, etc. for taken absolutely it
will not hold, Believers are Menequally with Christ, etc. Rep. True, for he
has almost told us, we are hail Fellows with Christ, he was not humbled in
being a Man, nor is he dishonored in our being as righteous as he. He says,
P. 7. Christ's Incarnation may as justly be said to be a Part of his Exaltation
as of his Humiliation: But though they intend not the being of a Man in what
they so severely brand, yet they mean nothing if they exclude what is so great
a Perfetion of Christ as his Righteousness is, when they fix Blasphemy on
saying we are equal with Christ in any respect, they must think his
Righteousness such a Prerogative, that who will equal Christ in this, may next
ask of him his Kingdom also, and Mr. M. has given us a Handle for that upon
our very being as Righteous as Christ. For, P. 25. He at large shows that
Christ has two Titles to Glory, a natural one, and an accumulated one, viz. An
acquired Title as our Surety; and if you ask what Glory that is you will find, P.
56. It Is that special Revenue of Glory and Praise which the Father, who began
his Son from Eternity, and loving him with an infinite Love designed him. Now
then, if Christ's Title to all his acquired Glory be his Suretiship
Righteousness, and as to that we are as Righteous as he in Equality, what can
hinder us not only to have that very same Title to Heaven and Glory as Christ
has as he is our Sponsor! But I say what can hinder Believers Claim and Title
to the very same high Throne in Heaven, and the very same Degree of Glory, as
Christ, as their Surety has a Title to, since Christ has it? For that very
Righteousness which they have as much of as he himself, and that God gives, or
rather pay^ them all of remunerative Justice; and that they are one mystical
Person with Christ all which this modest Author affirms, P. 55. Reader ^^^ge,
is this no other Equality than in being Men as well as Christ?

5. Though he talks so much of Suretiship Righteousness, he gives an uncertain
Sound of that Bond wherein Christ and Believers come into that legal Oneness.
1. One while he was constituted a Surety in that Covenant between God and him.
P. 10. Thereby there was a legal Union, and this Union was from everlasting,
and it was of supercreation Grace, and perfected in the Transaction between God
and Christ. P. 50, 60. Reader know; That I grant there was a Covenant of
Redemption beforetime, and that therein Christ undertook to redeem and save
elect Sinners, etc. But yet I deny, that by that Covenant Christ and the Elect
were eternally one legal Person, or that he is their Surety in such a Sense, as
will render them legally esteemed to do and suffer all that Christ did pursuant
to that Covenant; or that thereby they are as Righteous as he: Thou will find
my Arguments in this Book, at present it is enough to say, we were never
Principals in that Covenant, and therefore Christ could not be such a Surety.
The thing insisted on in that Covenant was Redemption Work, and the Salvation
of Sinners, as fallen; but the redeeming and saving of Sinners, or our selves
as Sinners, was never proposed to us as our Duty; it was inconsistent and
impossible to our State as fallen; and with his Leave, as it looks strange the
Elect should have two legal Heads at once, viz. Christ and Adam, so if Christ
and Men were eternally one legal Person, I doubt it may as well be proved that
Christ legally broke the Law in the Elect's breaking it, as the Elect kept the
Law in Christ's keeping it: Well, thus far, here is a Surety without a
Principal, and a Work or Debt which none was ever bound to, but him that is
called a Surety in a Sense that many must be said to do and pay as much as he.
2. Another while Christ's Name was put into the original Bond in which we by
the Law and Covenant of our Creation were bound, P. 10. He told us before he
was constituted a Surety in another Bond, viz. The Eternal Compact; if so, then
his Name is put into this Bond, in performance of his antecedent Suretiship,
and not made a Surety by putting his Name in this Bond; then it follows, that
what he does pay of this Bond can be said to be paid by us no otherwise than
according to the Nature of his Suretiship in the former Bond, wherein we have
seen he was principal and sole Undertaker, I am glad by this that I need not
argue with him, that if Christ was a pecuniary proper Surety with us in the
Covenant of Works, then it was either absolutely or disjunctively: if
absolutely, that he would keep it, then we were not Parties at all engaged. If
disjunctively, viz. That either we or he would keep it, then it was never
broken, for he has kept it, and his Obedience, without any Suffering sufficed
to fulfill it, etc. But Mr. M. granting, and that truly, that Christ was
constituted Surety in the Covenant of Redemption prevents my insisting on such
things, Only still note, as I have elsew^ere proved, that Christ being made
under the Law (which he means by putting his Name in the Bond) was the Effect
of Christ's Suretiship. 3. Yet inconsistently enough, P. 14. Christ was made
our Surety, his Name was not only put into the Covenant of Works, but into it
as a broken Covenant. Here all is ruffled again, and how shall we unriddle it?
He was but now constituted a Surety in the eternal Bond, but he is here made a
Surety in the broken Bond: He that distinguished between assuming our Nature
and being conceived, no doubt, will find some Difference between constituted a
Surety, and made a Surety; for that he must do or he contradicts himself. Well,
I grant that Christ came in our Nature to obey the Law we had broken, and bear
the Punishment we had deserved, and answer the End of the Law which we had
frustrated. But this will not make him such a Surety in this broken Bond, as
shall make us legally accounted to do all, and suffer and answer all, and be as
righteous as he that did it, though it be in his very Righteousness that we are
saved, notwithstanding we have failed in all this. For I ask when he put his
Name in this broken Bond? Sure not before it was broken, then he was Surety
before: Again, when he did put his Name, did, he do it to the same very purpose
as we were originally bound, viz. that we might live by our Innocence and
Obedience as our Righteousness? No, it was to redeem us from the Effects of our
own Disobedience. Did he engage that we should do and suffer what would be a
Price of our Redemption and Salvation? No, he was to do it himself in his own
legal Person, I say legal, because the divine Dignity of his Person gave the
legal, yea, supralegal Value in God's Account to what he did and suffered; for
one mere Man's doing and suffering what the mere Law injoined, would not have
satisfied for Millions, and the broken Bond it self did not require a divine
Person's obeying any more than the whole Bond did, though the Attainment of its
Ends did so. Again, if Christ's Suretiship was so limited within this broken
Bond, than as he was bound to do and suffer no more than it required, so
neither he nor we are entitled by that Obedience to any more than this broken
Bond at first covenanted to give: Yea further, Mr. M. faith, P. 57. The elect
were constituted (at first) under another Head, and under another Covenant,
which had nothing in it of Christ and his Righteousness, either to be brought
in for them, or to be applied to them.

Reply. But if Christ's Righteousness be no higher than that Covenant did
require before it was broken, the Righteousness of perfect Adam had been as
great as Christ's: And if the unbroken Covenant was the same as the broken
Bond, How should the unbroken Covenant neither have nor require any
Righteousness of Christ's, and yet the broken Bond measure and limit Christ's
Righteousness, and Sentence us legally Righteous for it. But if, as Mr. M.
says, the Covenant with Adam and the Elect was another Covenant from the
broken-Bond; then we are not under the Covenant requiring what at first it
enjoined, and being federating Parties only in the first, and subjected to
Penalty only by it as it is broken: Here Is no Obedience-work for a Surety, nor
place for a proper Surety in bearing the Penalties. But I have elsewhere
enlarged, and therefore conclude, That such Confusion about the Suretiship
should abate Men's regard to his Censures, against such as will not own he
himself knows not what, and proves none sees how.

6. I find after all, that this Equality of Righteousness between Christ and
us, is not so much from Legal Union, or Judicial Imputation, but from a
Coalescence of Believers into one mystical Person with Christ by Vital Union.
Thus p. 55. Between our believing and our being justified, there comes in our
Coalescing into one mystical Person with Christ by this Vital Union, and our
having his Righteousness upon us unto the Justification of Life; and so our
being justified is not the next or immediate effect of our Believing, etc. Here
indeed; if I understand what one person is, he may well argue we are as
Righteous as Christ; for we are Christified with Christ, not in Name, or on
Account of his undertaking, or his being the Head of the Church as his mystical
Body: But as being one mystical Person, opposed to a Legal Person, than by
pointing at any Believer, you may avoid the danger of Ioh. 8.24. If you believe
not that I am he, you shall die in your sins. Mr. M. may rise higher than that
we are as Right^^us as Christ, and say we are as Holy as Christ, as Honorable
as Christ, as Wise as Christ; and so interpret his proof, 1 Cor. 1.30. Nay, are
we not assumed into a Personal Union with the Eternal Word, as the Humane
Nature of Christ is; which I think is unavoidable, unless Christ has more
Persons than one? Besides, his being a legal Person, which he opposes this
mystical Person to. And that he means something like this, hear him p. 60. It Is
called a Vital Union, because in effecting it; there is a Vital Touch, as I may
say, between Christ and us, and a clasping each on other. Compare this with P.
63. The Humane Nature of Christ leans on the Godhead in the Son, and has the
Eternal Power of the Deity clasping about it, and holding it in that Union,
etc. The Eternal Power of the Godhead in Christ (and not so much the strength
of any created Principle of Grace in us) holding our Hearts unto him, and
causing them for ever to live upon him. Can you find much difference, though he
pretend a Disproportion? The Awfulness of the Subject restrains me from
exposing this affected Cant, which is the only Gospel with these Men, because
its Mystery, i. e. unintelligible Nonsense fitted to a Rosocrucian or Behemist:
It is not enough that Christ is the Author of all in us, and the Securer of all
promised Good to us; and that he condescended to confirm this, and comfort our
Souls by such gracious Instances of a Mystical Union, as that between Vine and
Branches, Head and Members, Husband and Wife; yea, that the same Spirit dwells
in Christ and us, each of which inform and assure to us, the Blessing designed
to be signified thereby, but not whatever our Profane Fancies may wrest a
Metaphor, or force an Expression to. Must Men strain it to one Person, whereby
Christ's Prerogatives and our Vile Defects are in common to Christ and us? Is
this to let Christ in all things have the Pre-eminence? Col. 1. 18. The
Scriptures needed not so many Metaphors to represent to us the several Benefits
we have by Union with Christ: This one would have served for all, yea, far
exceeded all; only that one Person would consist but with few of them, nay with
none; Head and Members do not make one Person, but one Body; yea, one Spirit in
Christ and us does not make one Person, unless you will make the Holy Ghost to be
an animating Soul to the Body, and so be the chief constitive part of the whole
Person: What will a deluded vain Fancy expose Men to at last?

Exceptions against some more Passages in Mr. M's Book.
I Have been already engaged to hint at some, yet among many obnoxious enough,
let us consider some more of his Stamina.

1. That God has ordained Christ to do all with God for the Elect, and that he
shall be a^^ from God to them, etc. All, I say, that in this ruined Condition
they need to bring them to that height of Happiness, etc. P. 56, 58.

Reply. If he had meant only that Christ was to do all with God in a way of
Satisfaction, Impetration, Merit, or Intercession, it were true; but as he
words it, it may be very Erroneous; and it is to Scrue an Error he does thus
express it. Hence, because he finds Repentance and Faith are so necessary to
our Salvation, he has in his Pulpit endeavored to inform Men how Christ
repented, and that he repented for us; and though he does not-publish it in
this Sermon as he did elsewhere, That Christ believed for us; yet you will see
presently, how much he endeavors to convince us that he did so; for if he
believed whilst humbled, it was for us, and it is imputed to us, as he often in
this Book affirms. Had I Mr. M's liberty, what would I call this Error; for
though it is in Christ's Strength and Grace that we Repent, Believe, turn to
God, and do good Works; yet if we do not these as our Personal Acts, Misery
will be our Portion. If you (not I) believe not, you shall die in you Sins,
John 8. 24. Except you (not I) repent, you shall all perish, says Christ, Luke
13. 3. I say, Except your Righteousness (not mine) exceed the Righteousness of
the Scribes and Pharisees, you shall in no case enter into the Kingdom of
Heaven, Matt. 5.20. Had Mr. M. been an Auditor, he had not said, Lord thou
understandest not the Gospel; it is thou art to do these things, this is the
deep Counsel of God, however legally thou speak: He might as well say, it is
thou Christ shall perish, as thou Christ art to repent.

2. Faith is a prime and principal part of our Being, conformable to the Image
of Christ, etc. He is the first Pattern and original Copy of Believing, P. 62,
63.

Reply. Is Christ's Faith the Pattern of Faith in Christ? I remember somewhere
Dr. Goodwin speaks of God's trusting Christ till he was Incarnate; and of
Christ's trusting the Father since the time of his Sufferings: Yea, we may
easily grant that Christ believed God's Promise; and, as a Man, depended and
relied on God's Power and Truth. But this is no other Faith than Adam in
Innocence acted, than the Law of Works directed to. By this account we may
think better of the State of Pagans than most do; for without Gospel-Revelation
they may believe in God, trust him, and depend on him. But what is this to the
account the Scripture gives of Faith in Christ? Did Christ come to himself as a
Savior? Did he receive himself as a Crucified Redeemer? Did he eat his own
Flesh, and drink his own Blood for Eternal Life? Did he plead his own Merits,
and rely on his own Righteousness for Pardon, and restored Peace? Did he
consent to be married to himself? Did he look to himself for Healing? Or to use
Mr. M's account of Faith in this very Page, Did he go out of himself unto
himself for all? Yea, take part of his Description of Faith in Christ, p. 39,
40.1. The Subject of Faith is the Heart of a convinced brokenhearted Sinner,
etc. The very Nature of Faith, and the acting of the Soul in it, is such as
does imply and include a Sight and Sense of Sin and Misery, and a lively
heart-influencing Conviction of utter Helplesness in a Man's self, and
unworthiness to be helped by God, etc. Reader, Does Christ's Faith in the
Nature of it, imply a Sense of utter Helplesness and Unworthiness in himself,
or of his Sin and Misery? The Reason he gives for Justling out such as Abram,
and setting up Christ for the original Copy of believing in himself is this,
The Humane Nature of Christ lives and subsists in the second Person, leaning on
the Eternal Deity of the Son of God, it has its Subsistence in the Bosom of
the Godhead, etc. and has the Eternal Power of the Deity clasping about it, P.
63. The Apostle did not know this Faith, when he said that Charity was greater
than Faith: Well, as Sublime as this Reason seems to be, I will venture to say,
This is not that Faith in Christ which the Gospel requires of Sinners. 1. I
will give you a Reason of Mr. M's, which besure is none of the best, P. 7.
Christ's dwelling in our Nature is no part of the Punishment of Sin, for then
the Divine Nature only is punished, and not the Humane at all, nor the Person.
It Is a bad one for what he brings it, since that Assuming the Nature and
dwelling in it differ, and I have answered it before, and it needs a great
Allowance to keep it from. But if the Sufferings or Acts of only one Nature be
not the Sufferings or the Acts of the Person of Christ; then the acting of
Faith of the one Nature on the other Nature, is not acting of Faith upon the
Person of Christ; and consequently not Gospel-Faith, which is to be acted on
the Person of Christ; here the Humane Nature believes; but that is not with
him; Christ that believes, it believes on the Divine Nature, and that with him
is not Christ who is believed on: What now is become of Christ's Believing even
by his own Reasoning? 2. The Object of Faith in Christ, is God-Man Mediator, a
Crucified Christ, etc. but the Deity of the Son of God abstractedly considered,
is not God-Man Mediator, etc. Truly if our Gospel-Faith is specified by this, I
see not the need of Christ's Incarnation or Death, yea, or regard thereto. 3.
This leaning, and especially to the purposes assigned to this Act of Christ's
Humane Nature, is not all that which is Essential to the Faith in Christ which
the Gospel requires. But why should I Scribble the little Paper left? It Is like
the Reasons he gave for Christ's Repenting, viz. The reproaches of them that
reproached thee, are fallen upon me; and he was a Man of Sorrows, and
acquainted with Grief.

3. He plainly discovers his Mind to be, that Faith is an Act of the Soul
whilst spiritually dead and unregenerate, P. 61. He joins with such as say,
Faith is the means and way of our being made spiritually alive, rather than our
acting Life, as being already brought into a state of Life, as the Bodies
Clasping hold on the Soul by the animal Spirits, which are Corporeal things, is
rather the means of Life, than an act of Life, etc. P. 62. Suppose that the
principle of Grace begotten and created in us in Regeneration contain in it the
Habit of Faith, which I will not now call in question: Yet etc. P. 32. All our
new Obedience, and all the Graces of the Spirit comprised under that one word
Love, are the Effects and Fruits of our being justified. P. 60. In Union (by
Faith which is the cause of this Union) we are brought immediately into a state
of Spiritual Life, first Relative, then Qualitative, etc. Repl. Here, with the
Arminians, he denies the habit of Faith necessary to the actings of Faith: He
is contrary to the Assembly of Divines, who tell us, That God in effectual
Vocation, takes away the Heart of Stone, and gives a heart of Flesh, renewing
their Wills, and by his power determining them to that which is good, and
effectually drawing them to Jesus Christ, Conf. Cap. 10. A. 1. and Q. 2. Man is
altogether Passive therein, until being quickened by the holy Spirit, he is
thereby enabled to answer this Call, and to embrace the Grace offered, and
conveyed in it. Large Cat. A. 73. Faith justifies a sinner in the sight of God,
not because of those other Graces which do always accompany it, or of good
Works that are the fruit of it. Here we see, that there is a quickening
regenerating Work and Change on the Heart and Will, in order to the Act of
Faith; and that there is no Faith unaccompanied at any time by other Graces,
and that by good works they intend not such Graces, etc. Did not Mr. M. tell
us, p. 60. that in effecting our Vital Union, there is a Vital touch as I may
say between Christ and us, and a Clasping on each other. Is there a Vital Touch
before Life, or a Clasping while we are Dead? Does the Mind see Christ whilst
it is Blind, or the Will embrace him whilst it is morally dead, impotent,
unperswaded, and averse? Do we consent to Christ, and Covenant with him, whilst
Satan, Sin and Enmity Reign in our Faculties; or open the Door to Christ whilst
these keep the Keys? God, says the natural Man, receives not the things of
God, because they are spiritually discerned, 1 Cor. 2.14. but Mr. M. says,
yea, it is while they are natural that they see Christ and close with him:
Here Is a knowledge of an ignorant Mind; here is a coming and receiving without
Life. Here Is a Faith the Gospel Covenant never promises; for it is not included
in God's Writing his Laws in the Heart. The whole stress of Salvation is laid
by him on an Act of a dead unregenerate sinner, and Men are justified while the
Soul is not turned from darkness to life, nor from the power of Satan unto God,
Acts 26. 18. it were worth asking him, whose Act this Act of Faith is? It Is not
a Humane Act, unless you can suppose the Mind and Will can Act without any
Vital Principle, yea against it is own prevailing Principle: Here then must be a
force, and unactiveness too in our very acting; and it is a strange Clasping of
what we hate and abhor. I doubt here may come in again Christ's believing for
us. However, he must think 1. That our Faith after we are alive, is either a
Faith specifically distinct from that which justified us, or it is still an Act
not effected by a regenerate Principle, but is somewhat either below Life, or
above Man, even when he is spiritualized, he seems to bid at both: His Simile
is for the first; the Spirits, which he says are Corporeal, Clasp about the
Soul for Life; so it seems our Faith is a dead thing always, never made Life or
Living; any more than those Spirits are made Soul; otherwise it loses its
Clasping meetness, as they would do in ceasing to be Corporeal. Yet other times
he makes it look like a Divinity Clasp about us. 2. I do now see a little why
the Man is so against God's giving us any saving Benefit in any way of Reward,
though not of Debt: It Is because Faith is the only thing ordained (not
required) as a Physical means on our part; and this is so low a thing, that a
dead sinner may act; or so sublime, as not to be a Humane Act. 3. Again, I see
why he does still confine our Justification to the end, to the first Act of
Faith; yea, and deny the immediate influence of Faith on our Justification; for
if you should bring it among Duties, or to be under the Notion of a Duty, all
is spoiled: No, it must be a mere Physical Band of Union, not enjoined by God
as our Ruler, but appointed as the Corporeal Spirits for Ligaments. I dare not
touch the Philosophy part of that, lest if I name Embrio, he should Curse me
anew. 4. I know now at last, why he thought me a Pelegian, (the selfish reason
why he writ it to London I knew long since) because I in a Printed Sermon put
the Act of Faith after spiritual Life; it seems I should have said with him,
That in Union with Christ as one mystical Person (which is by the efficient
causality of Faith) we are brought into a state of Spiritual Life, Relative in
our Justification and Adoption, and then and thereupon Qualitative, etc. p. 60.
His Proofs for Faith before Life, because Christ promises Life upon believing,
are contemptible; as if further spiritual Life, and Pardon, and Eternal Glory,
be not Life as well as Hell is Death, 'and some sinners twice dead.

4. The Faith he so much insists on, has not all the Essentials of a saving
Faith. I know many Worthy Men distinguish between Faith quae justificat, and
qua justificat; and no doubt the Soul has an especial respect to Christ as
Priest, and his Righteousness in order to Justification. But our Discourse is
of the Faith quae justificat. What that Faith is, he tells us p. 62. Faith is a
going out of our selves unto Christ for all. And p. 40. The Hearts acting
toward this Object in its believing, is most properly in a way of trust, and
dependence, and affiance.

Rep. 1. We have just seen, it wants a Vital Principle as it is the Act of an
unregenerate dead Soul. Now this brings it, in the Judgment of most Divines, to
be no saving act at all, no saving Faith, because the Act of a Natural and Dead
Sinner. 2. I need not mention that it is no obediential Act: And note, That
when our Divines deny that Faith is not Imputed as an Act of Believing, or as
an Evangelical Act of Obedience; they say, it is not as such imputed as our
justifying Righteousness, which I grant. But they positively affirm, that the
Faith by which Christ's Righteousness becomes imputed, is an Act of evangelical
Obedience, Confess. Chap. 11.A. 1. Again, 3. I will not insist how far the
Assent of this Faith is limited, as to its Object as well as its Nature. 4. I
do grant, That by Gospel-faith we trust in, and depend on Christ as our only
Savior; and that by it we go out of our selves to Christ for all Atonement,
Merit, Causality of Acceptance of all we do, and Strength and Grace to enable
us to all. 5. Yet, see how much more the Assembly includes in saving Faith,
Confess. Chap. 14. A. 2: By this Grace (Faith) a Christian believes to be
true, whaever is revealed in the Word for the Authority of God himself speaking
therein, and acts differently upon that which each particular Passage thereof
contains, yielding Obedience to the Commands Trembling at the Threatenings,
and embracing the Promises of God for this Life, and that which is to come; but
the principal Acts of saving Faith are accepting, receiving, and restin upon
Christ alone for Justification, Sanctification, and eternal Life. 6. His Faith
w^nts the receiving of Christ, if not wholly, yet as a Prophet and Lord:
Whereas true Faith receives Christ Jesus the Lord, Col. 2.6, 7. Here Is no
yielding up our selves to our Redemer's Conduct, no Dedication of our selves to
him as our Owner. Guide and Ruler, nor Consent or Engagement or Purpose of
Heart to do so: Whereas Gospel-Faith is such a Trust of and on Christ, as
includes a yielding up our selves to him, to be saved by him in his way; as he
sets down the Terms, viz. To deny our selves, take up his Cross, be his
Followers and Disciples, Isa. 44.5. Luke 19.14, 27. Romans 6.13.16. Luke 14.26,
27, 33. Ier. 30.21. 8. Here Is no purpose of Heart to renounce the World, Flesh
and Devil, who are Christ's Rivals and Competitors; to whom we before, did
yield up our selves, 1 Pet. 3.21. Io. 5.44. Faith is a strange Conjugal
Consent, wherein the Wife promises no Duty or Loyalty; only expects all to be
done for her.

Obj. If we trust and lean on Christ we shall do these. Ans. 1. It Is as true if
we do these, we shall and do lean on Christ; and by that rule may as well call
these Faith, and leave out that. 2. It is not a saving Trust in Christ that
does exclude these, or is without them. This is plain, because the Act of
Gospel-Faith is often expressed by these as well as by Trust; and a Sentence of
Condemnation lies still upon a Soul that wants these, and is under the power of
their contraries, We will not have this Man to Reign over us, was the Language
of Unbelief; and for this they were subject to Death, Luke 19.14, 27. 3. The
Scriptures tell us of instances of a Trust and Leaning, that proved destructive
for want of these other things; and certainly will prove so to all others, Mic.
3.11. The Priests teach for hire, and the Prophets divine for money, yet they
will lean upon the Lord and say, is not the Lord among us, none evil can come
upon us? No doubt, the Foolish Virgins had a degree of Trust in Christ; but
were lost for want of Oil, though they looked for so much from him. 4. As he
wordeth it, and joineth it in other places; it looks to be a mere Contemplative
Act, which as a Man unregenerate does with him perform, so a Carnal Man may do
it for indulging his Sloth and Carelessness, q. d. I will now and then apply to
this Meditation, Christ shall do all for me, I trust him to do so, and
therefore I am safe, though I do no more; yea* I shall be damned if I strive to
do any thing else as a means of obtaining saving Benefits, though it be in
Christ's Righteousness that I expect all. We are warned Mat. 7.21. Not every
one that cries Lord Lord, shall enter into the Kingdom of Heaven. but he that
does the Will of my Father; and this was to enforce that Charge, Enter in at
the strait Gate.

5. He ascribes too much to Faith, as imperfect, dead, and unholy a thing as he
makes it; even more than I dare for a World ascribe to that which is the true
Gospel-Condition. P. 51. There is between our Believing and this Righteousness
being upon us, a reference of Causality.

Repl. We must be destroyers, and be destroyed, for saying God requires Faith,
suspending Pardon till we believe; and by his Promise, securing it to us when
we believe, though we expressly deny all Causal Influence, and confine the
Condition to the mere Frame of the Object; and do leave Justification in all
its Causes entire, as the Benefit to be given in Christ's Right to him that is
a Believer. Yet our Accuser, Witness and Judge, can innocently cry up a
Causality, a real and proper Causality; a mediate Causality of Justification,
an immediate Causality of Union with Christ, which is the greater benefit. P.
52. My short Legs can follow these small strides. It Is a Cause of
Justification; but how? By more than that Rule, causa causae est causa causati.
Faith is a Cause of Union, that Union is a Cause of Christ's Righteousness
being upon us, and that Righteousness being upon us is the Cause of
Justification; and so Faith is an influential Cause of Justification. If you go
forward with what Justification is the Cause of, and what that is also a Cause
of, Faith is a Cause of even as much, and in the same sort as it is of
Justification; and if you go backward to the next Cause of Faith, and to the
Cause of that, and even all that is the Cause of Justification, as much, and in
the same sort as Faith is. And what kind of Cause is Faith in all? It Is always
with him a Phisical Cause, a natural touch and clasping. Yet P. 52. he says,
it is by God's Constitution and Ordination; hopeful words; but he soon throws it
o^^ of ^ moral Causality again and brings i^to the Corporeal Spicies Clasping
about the Soul. Here Is a Covenant-Consent, without an Act considered as any way
Moral; a strange thing to any Man of Sense, who must know, that Acts are
considered only as Moral Acts in every Covenant.

6. He accounts all Performance of any Duty with an Expectation of any Saving
Benefits as Morally connected therewith, to be in a legal Manner and Spirit,
from legal or old Covenant Principles, and unto old Covenant Ends, etc. P.28.
Compare p. 71.

Reply. I have fully proved, that though nothing done by us is the
Righteousness wherein we stand before a Just God, or the Merit of any Good, or
Atonement for Sin, or instead of a legal Righteousness: Yet there is in the
Gospel a Display of Authority, though in a way of Grace, and a Rectoral way
fixed for giving out the Effects of Christ's Obedience in his Righteousness, as
Benefits encouraging to Duty: And in that way we must expect them to the Glory
of God's Truth and Promises, and we wickedly Presume in expecting them
otherwise; and hereby Obedience to Christ and the Righteousness of Christ are
not opposed, nor old Covenant ends pursued. Mr. M. says P. 49. Faith has no
Influence, no not so much as in a way of Instrumentality to confer upon us a
Right and Title to Christ's Righteousness; all the Influence that Faith has,
is to our actual Possession of it. I grant 1. That Faith is not our Justifying
Righteousness. 2. That Christ has merited the Elect shall have it. 3. That it
is the Gospel-Promise is our Title and Charter; yea, 4. I deny all Causal
Influence to our Possession. But as to him who ascribes to Faith a Causality, I
would ask 1. Does not the Gospel adjust by its Promise, that it is the Believer
it will invest in this Possession of Righteousness. 2. Does not this Promise
entitle a Believer to this Possession, and bar the Unbeliever. 3. Does Faith
then no way affect our Right or Title to the Possession thereof? Does it not
render us the Persons whom it so entitleth thereto? And is this nothing, though
it be not the Righteousness for which we are Justified as legal Obedience was
to be?

7. He ventures too far in making the Crown of Glory and Justification to be
Effects of Remunerative strict Justice as to us, which is untrue,
notwithstanding Christ's Righteousness is imputed to us. P. 12, 13, 15. Among
many other Expressions of this kind, he says, It is the Constitution of God,
that all the Saving. Good and Blessing which shall be given us, shall be given
not only by Free Grace, but by the Hand of Justice. Reply. If he mean only that
the Consideration upon which all Saving Good was granted, is a Righteousness
that answered strict Justice: I grant it. But to say (which he seems fully to
intend) that the Righteousness of Christ is so impured to us, as that Benefits
are actually conferred on us in a way of Remunerative Justice as to us, I deny,
and say it is a Thousand Fold worse than they whom he Condemns durst ever have
a thought of. I own also it is a Reward of Justice to Christ, that Believers
should be Justified and Glorified: But Justification and Glory are given of
mere Grace to those Believers, though in a Gospel way of Government: They
cannot plead, Now Lord I have Christ's Righteousness on me, I have a Claim to
these, as a Debt or Reward due to me from Remunerative Justice: For though
Christ give the Crown in his own Right, and his Right to secure that Crown; yet
he reserves the Claim of Justice to his own Person, and we must accept of all
even at God's Hand of Gift. Sinners shall not have the Savior's Plea in
themselves, though he will plead it for their Good. There is more Spiritual
Pride in this kind of Talk than many imagine; ^he Gift of God is Eternal Life,
even when he gives it; and not only as to antecedent Causes, we look for the
Mercy of Christ to Eternal Life, Jude 21. and it is still for Christ's sake we
must entreat and expect, and not for our own, nor for any thing as it is ours,
whatever be the Effect of the Imputation of Christ's Righteousness on us.

8. That which he calls telling a Story to us of the deep Counsels of the
Wisdom and Grace of God, how this Righteousness is upon us, from its first and
highest Original, is in several things an unsafe Account; and greatly to the
Dishonor of Father, Son and Spirit. Some parts of it I have already
considered, I now shall briefly observe these things, 1. He strikes at the
Essential Glory of the Son of God. 2. He describes the Fall of Man very
Dishonorable to God. 3. He much mistakes - what is most properly the Glory of
God. 4. He leaves out Man's Acknowledgment of the Holy Spirit in the Work of
Salvation.

1. Mr. M. strikes at the Essential Glory of the Son of God: Before I prove
this, I would premise, 1. The Son of God as second Person in the Trinity, is
equal to the Father in Essence and Glory, though he be of the Father, as to the
Mode and Manner of Subsistence. Hence he has the same Divine Perfections and
Glory. 2. Whatever is ascribed to Christ, before he assumed the Humane Nature,
must be such as is consistent with his Divine Nature as the Son of God, and
proper thereto. 3. Nothing is added to the Divine Nature, as in Christ by its
Union to the Humane Nature, besides relation to that Humane Nature. 4. The
Person of the Son of God was complete, before he assumed the Humane Nature; and
therefore the Humane Nature is no Constitutive part of the Second Person; but,
as Dr. Ameswell says, is only as an Adjunct. If Mr. M. mean more, it is
horridly Dangerous, when he says P. 8. The Humane Nature belongs to the
Constitution of Christ's Person as he now is. And looks the worse for his words
P. 7. Christ's dwelling in our Nature, is no part of the Punishment of Sin, for
then the Divine Nature only is punished, and not the Humane at all, nor the
Person. As if what terminated on one Nature only, did not terminate on Christ's
Person; and by the same Rule, the Acts confined to one Nature, as their
Principle, are not the Acts of his Person, unless they be the Acts of both
Natures. 5. Since the Incarnation we frequently meet with a Personal
Communication of Properties; what is proper to either of the two Natures; is
ascribed to Christ as God-Man, as Christ died, etc. 6. Yet there is neither a
Transfusion or Communication of the Properties of one Nature to the other; nor
must we ascribe to his Person any thing in any manner that would tend to the
Confusion of the two Natures. 7. All the Glory or Humiliation that can be
justly ascribed to the Son of God as such, cannot infer any Change in or
Addition to him, and must be confined to what is Manifestative and Relative:
His Glory may appear more, but cannot be added to; it may be obscured, but it
cannot be really diminished. 8. Hence whatever Addition of real Glory or
Afflictive Suffering belongs to Christ, it is with respect to his Humane
Nature. This was only capable of Rewards, of being Exalted, of being Deferred,
of God's hiding his Face and Dying. I shall now evidence, that Mr. M. strikes
at the Essential Glory of Christ as the Eternal Son of God.

1. He makes Christ, as the Eternal Son of God, capable of an Addition to his
real Glory as God, P. 56. God the Father from Eternity, begat his Son, the
Second Person in the Trinity, and loving him with an infinite Love, designed a
special Revenue of Glory, and Honor, and Praise unto him, as from all his
Creatures in their Kind and Way, so more eminently from and in a certain Number
of Mankind, etc. The End and Vpshot, and last Issue that all his Counsels about
them comes to, is this, That they may be brought to the Acknowledgment of the
Son of God, etc. P. 61. You see how the grand Original Design of God, to bring
in a Revenue of singular Honor, and Praise, and Glory to his Son Christ, is
brought about, etc. I shall presently repeat more: Let Us consider, 1. It Is
plain he intends the Son of God as such; It Is he as begotten from Eternity; he
as the Second Person in the Trinity; it is he as loved with an infinite Love;
yea, from being so infinitely beloved as God's Eternal Son, the Contrivance had
its Rise. The Design in the Vpshot is, That he might be acknowledged to be that
Son of God. It cannot be meant, that this Additional Glory might be designed
for him as foreseen Mediator, or as in Flesh; for this Design is the first
step; and this Glory of the Son, is the Original of all the Contrivance: He
was, pursuant to this purpose, made a Mediator and legal Head; and he tells us,
to confirm this, That for this end of bringing a Revenue of Glory unto his Son,
in the Salvation of the Elect, God ordained that he shall do all with God for
them, and he shall be all from God unto them; which is his second step; and
therefore what is subsequent to this in Intention, cannot be before the other;
his Office and Incarnation are but means to this end: So that no Doubt can
remain, that Christ is in this Design considered as the Eternal Son of God. 2.
Let Us weigh how he describes the Glory intended: It Is an especial Revenue of
Glory and Honor: It Is a Revenue of singular Honor and Glory, somewhat that
made him more Glorious than he was as the Son of God; nay, it was his being
acknowledged to be the Son of God; which is the Vpshot of the Design about him;
as if though he were Son before, yet he would not have been acknowledged to be
the Son of God, without this added Revenue of Glory.

2. He makes the eternal Son of God, considered as to his Divine Nature, to be
for a while under the Frowns and Displeasure of God.

3. He makes the eternal Son of God as God, to be capable of an acquired Right,
superadded to his natural Right, even to his essential Glory as God; and also
of an acquired Right to that Love, which he enjoyed as the Son of God in the
Divine Nature before he was the Son of Man. Take his Words, p. 25, 26. It Is
true, Christ has another Title and Right to the Love of God and unto Heavenly
Glory, viz. by the Prerogative of his Birth I mean his Eternal Generation as he
is the only begotten Son of God: But though he was rich, yet such is his Grace,
that for our Sakes he became poor, he consented (not to forego his Title) but
for a Time to forego the actual Enjoyment of the full Fruit and Benefit of it.
He was contented to lay aside his Glory for a Time, and to dwell here below on
Earth, under the Frowns and Displeasure of God his Father, until he should
fully, to the utmost Farthing, have paid our Debt, but then he was to be
restored and raised up to the Enjoyment of his Father's Love, and Heavenly
Glory, in the Virtue of that forementioned double Right or Title, viz. both as
the Son of God by Nature, and as also having discharged all the Debt of the
Elect as their Surety. This latter being accumulated and superinduced upon the
former, and therefore being not a Natural but Acquired Title. 1. You see that
it is the eternal Son of God, considered as to his Divine Nature which was
under God's Frowns and Displeasure; for it was only as to that Nature his
Person was the Subject of God's Love before his Incarnation, and it was that
Love he alone could be restored and raised to, which he had before his
Incarnation, and there could not be a restoring and raising to the Enjoyment of
this Love as to this Nature, unless that he was under the Frowns and
Displeasure of his Father as to his Divine Nature. For, whatever Nature he
enjoyed the Love of God in, before he did forego the Enjoyment of it, and to
the Enjoyment of which he was raised and restored, must be the Nature he
endured those Frowns and Displeasure in, which are opposed to the actual
Enjoyment of that former Love. He tells us that he did forego the actual
Enjoyment of this Love, and so dwelt under his Father's Frowns here below on
Earth; therefore it must be as to his Divine Nature he did forego the Enjoyment
of that Love and Glory: And consequently, as to that Nature he endured the
opposite Frowns; since that he had not enjoyed that Love in his Humane Nature
before he dwelt on Earth. 2. It Is as plain that he makes the eternal Son of
God, as to his Divine Nature, to have a superadded Right to that essential
Glory from God which he had a former natural Right to: For the Glory he enjoyed
before his Incarnation, was his essential Glory as the Son of God; and it was
his essential Glory he had a Natural Right to. Again, he had no Glory in his
Humane Nature before he was Man, to be restored to; therefore the Glory he had
an acquired Right to, being a Glory to which he was restored and raised, must
be his essential Glory enjoyed only by the Divine Nature: He could be restored
to the actual Enjoyment of no Glory, but what he actually had before he
affirmed our Flesh, and could not be restored to any Glory which he had not
till he assumed our Flesh. The Matter is the same as to the Love that his
Father bare to him as his Eternal Son; for it is the Love he was restored to the
Enjoyment of, which Christ is said by Mr. M. to have an acquired superadded
Right to; which must be no other than he was the Object of before his
Incarnation; yea, he tells them it is that very love and glory which was due to
him by Privilege of Birth, that he had this superadded Title to; yea, even that
which he did not forego his Title to, though he did forego the actual Enjoyment
of for a while; and to this he was restored in the Virtue of this double Right;
so he tells us Christ was rich, yet he became poor: How poor? By foregoing the
actual Enjoyment of the full Fruit and Benefit of it, which he enjoyed before:
The Meaning of the Place he refers to is, that though the Son of God was Maker
and Heir of all things; yet, as to his Humane Nature, he was in a necessitous
suffering Case. But hence Mr. M. infers, that Christ, as the Son of God, did
forego the actual Enjoyment of the full Fruit of his Inheritance, which he
fully possessed before, and in that respect was poor: This is plainly his
Sense, for he speaks of his being rich as he was antecedently to his
Incarnation, as to Enjoyment as well as Title; and as to Riches he did not
forego his Title to, as he was the Son of God; and yet the full Benefit of
those very Riches he was so entitled to as Son of God, he did forego the actual
Enjoyment of; whereas he might as well say he did forego the Enjoyment of all
the Benefits as any, and of his Title as of the Enjoyment, all being alike
possible to the Son of God; who still enjoyed that whole Inheritance to the
full (as Son of God) as he enjoyed it by his Title before he was the Son of
Man, to forego the Manifestation and the actual Enjoyment differ as to his
Glory. And as to Riches, it is one thing for the Human Nature to want, for the
Divine-Nature to abate any Enjoyment of what it was entitled to, is quite
another thing. A poor God is a wild Phrase. Obj. Had Christ, as our Redeemer, a
Right to no Glory as a Reward? Ans. 1. Yes, to a Glory and Riches as to his
Humane Nature. But, 2. that was not a Restoration of what the Son as God
enjoyed before his Incarnation; but a Glory and Riches granted as to his Humane
Nature which fully commenced upon his Exaltation, though eternally decreed. And
to both indeed there was a Title from the Union of the Human Nature to the
Divine Person; and also as a Reward of what was suffered and done in the Human
Nature. 3. The utmost Glory belonging to or received by Christ as acquired, was
of another kind than what belonged to him as God, and which he enjoyed before
the Incarnation. The ^ne is dependant, the other independent; the one is
Creature Glory, though above Angels, the other is increated, essential, and
divine, even the same with the Father's. Obj. Did not Christ lay by his Divine
Glory? A. 1. He could no more part with it, no, nor with the Enjoyment of it
than he could part with his Divine Essence. 2. He voluntarily agreed to have
it veiled as to Manifestation for a time; but in the least quitted not the
Enjoyment of it as the Son of God. 3. The sensible Communications of it, and of
the Divine Favor were a while much suspended from the Humane Nature: But
considered as the Son of God, he always alike possessed and perceived the
Divine Glory and Favor. The Father could as well be displeased with himself as
with his Son, as he was God. 4. Hence, though what Christ did and suffered, did
entitle him to the restoring of the sensible Enjoyments of the Divine Favor to
the Humane Nature, yet there was no Place or room for acquiring a Right to any
sencible Communications of Love, Riches or Glory to him, as Son of God: For
they were never suspended, they were essential to him; and to suppose an
acquired Right were to make that Love and Glory dependant, and bring them
within a Creatures State; whereas you may see Christ in his humbled State,
still when he speaks as the Son of God, asserting his Title and Possession in
Equality with the Father, yea, to be the fame, Ioh. 16.15. Ioh. 5.18, 19, 26.
Ioh. 1.18.

Reader, judge how he honors Christ; I could tell him what Names the Ancient
Church gave to such a Heresy, but I better like that he gives to my Opinion
causlesly, the name of Blasphemy, than that I should give so just a Cause,
though I met with a Man so ^ld, as should hope it was only ignorant. The Son of
God as God, capable of an addition of real Glory; and be the Object of God's
Frowns and Displeasure, and capable of parting with the enjoyment of God's
Favor, and the Glory and Riches he had before he was Incarnate; and that he
could have an acquired Right to that Essential Glory and Love, and Riches,
superadded to his natural Right thereto, are such Positions as should make a
Man to tremble how he ventures afterward to meddle beyond his depth. My
concern for these things prevents my using the advantage Mr. M. gives me.

2. He describes the Fall of Man in a manner very dishonorable to God: 1. He
makes it a designed necessary means resolved on, to bring to the Son of God
that Revenue of Honor and Praise which the Father had before designed for him:
This is fully expressed by him in his Model of the eternal Decrees. The 1. Step
is the Design of that Revenue of Glory to the Son. 2. Step is Christ's being to
do all for the Elect with God for them, etc. 3. Is making a Man innocent. 4. Is
the Fall of Man. 5. The double Union issuing in legal and mystical Persons. 6.
Faith is the Means of mystical Union. 7. This Faith in its Nature, is to rest
on Christ for all, P. 58, 59, 60. The thing I infer is, that the Fall being the
Fourth Step, must needs be not a thing supposed to the Fathers Design of the
Revenue of Glory to Christ; by some men's acknowledging him to be the Son; for
that is first in order resolved, and then the Fall appointed (not overruled) as
a necessary means thereto; as that by which he was to obtain this Glory, and
without which he must have gone without it, and been limited to the privilege
of his Birth. Therefore he tells us, P. 58. The Fall of the Elect into a state
of Sin and Death, and Wrath may seem somewhat remote from the point in hand.
But it is not; for hereby a Door is opened to the Son of God to step in, and do
all with God for them that in this ruined condition they need, etc. So that as
Christ speaks of the blindness of him, Ioh. 9.3. that it was that the works of
God might be made manifest in him; we may say this of the Fall of the Elect, it
was in the Counsel of God designed to this end, that the depths of the riches,
the knowledge of God might be manifest in them; and as Christ speaks of Lazarus
his sickness and dying, it was not to death, etc. So must we say of this
falling of the Elect into a state of spiritual death in sin and trespasses; it
is not unto Death for ever. but for the Glory of God, that the Son of God might
be Glorified in recovering them.

Repl. I am sure the Son of God did not need any such Glory; he had been as
happy, and perfectly Glorious as now he is, though Man had stood. 2. It seems
very unagreeable to the purity and goodness of God to design the breaking of
his own Laws, the destroying of the greatest part of mankind, the defacing of
his own Image, the gratifying of the Devil in the sin and misery of Men, such
dishonor to his own Name, etc. and this as a necessary means to Glorify his
Son; to Decree the permission of the Fall, and so to overruled it to good ends,
is another thing. 4. By this Model it was as impossible for Man to have stood,
or for the mo^^ of Mankind to have avoided Sin and Eternal Ruin, as it was for
Man to have hindered God to give to his Son that special Revenue of Glory as he
designed for him; which I think would be a greater ease to the damned than
their Consciences will feel, or the Pleadings of God with Men will import. 5.
It greatly abates that admiring and thankful regard to God and our Savior,
which the Scriptures always direct us to: For if Mr. M's Model be right, it was
Love to the Son of God that brought Men to need a Savior, and not Love to
Sinners that inclined God to give his Son, and the Son to give him-self, to be
a Savior, Ioh. 3.16. The utmost which this Model can rise to is, that since
God resolved for the Glory of his Son, that all should fall into a state of Sin
and Death, and Wrath, that thereby some of them might be to his Glory, they
were ordained to be some of those; which indeed is a mercy, but not so greatly
displaying of Divine Pity, Love and Grace, as the word represents it. Therefore
6. to suppose Man foreseen as fallen and self-ruined, and thereupon a Savior
ordained to recover, and actually save a certain number of these: And for this
to be in his suffering Nature to be rewarded, and eternally exalted, receiving
the Praises of his saved ones, fully answers the Account the Scripture gives of
the Economy of Redemption, Rev. 1.5, 6. Man is supposed thus fallen in all
the. Texts which Mr. M. cites for God's Design of a Revenue of Glory to his Son
from the Elect, Ephesians. 1.3, 4, 5, 6. We are chosen in Christ; in what State?
You Will see that by the Nature of the Blessings we are to obtain by him, to be
holy, who were by the Fall unholy: To be without Blame before him in Love, who
were so reproveable and hateful to the Adoption of Children; who had by Sin
lost our natural Birthright, and become Aliens; accepted in the Beloved, to the
Praise of the Glory of his Grace, who had made our selves unacceptable and
Condemnable in the Eye of Justice, Redemption in him, and Forgiveness of Sin
according to the Riches of his Grace, who had enslaved our selves, committed
Sin and were incapable to redeem our selves, make Atonement, or merit our
Recovery: And then he adds, Verse. 8. That in all this he abounded toward us
in all Wisdom and Prudence. Amazing Wisdom! To find a Way to sanctify the
depraved, justify the blamable, love the hateful, adopt the alien, accept the
vile and unworthy whom Justice condemned, redeem the captive, and forgive the
guilty Sinner: Here Is Work for all Wisdom, and Prudence to abound, much more
than it was to resolve first to glorify the Son of God, and then find out a
Way for it by designing to make Men fall into Misery and Death, that he might
come to this Glory by it. Look into Verse. 9. and you will see that according to
what I have shown to be the Apostle's Model, he concludes this is the Counsel
of God's Will and his Purpose in himself, even to recover by Christ Sinners,
thus in his Eye fallen and miserable. The same Sense is plain in Rev. 5.11,
12.2 These. 1.10. Ephesians. 4.13. I confess, when I consider some Men's Temper I am
at a Loss whether they are led, by what themselves are, to think of God as so
cruel and far from Goodness; or that the strange Representations of God, which
they believe, do form them to what they think is his Resemblance, Would any
Divine else dare to preach that God took the Sin of Adam and squeezed out the
Quintessence of it, into the Humane Nature, to propagate to the World. And God
took delight to see the Wicked Sin; as one that sets Rats-bane to kill Rats,
looked through the Keyhole with delight to see the Rats eating the Rats-bane,
knowing it would kill them; so God looked at the Wicked through his Fingers
with Pleasure, to see them Sinning, knowing it would destroy them. And the
Spirit of God striving with Sinners, did Enlighten them, Reform them, etc. But
why did he thus strive with many whom he did resolve he would never Save? It
was that they might be brought to those higher Degrees of Torments in Hell,
which he had foreordained them to. As Judas went to his own place, that is, to
the higher Torments in Hell, which God had decreed him to, he could not come to
this but by falling from his Apostleship, he could not fall from his
Apostleship if he had not been an Apostle, and he could not have been an
Apostle if the Spirit of God had not striven with him. Mr. M. I suppose, has
not forgotten these unsavory Passages, which I do not think I have varied a
word of; at least I am sure this is the Substance, and not aggravated at all,
as I have abundant Witnesses to prove.

3. He mistakes what is the Glory of God, as to its principal Sense; this
consists in his Essential Perfections as in himself; yea, the Manifestative
Glory of God, Father and Son, is not so much in the Creatures Acknowledgments,
as in the display of his own Perfections, in a way commanding their Admiration
and Love: Men's Hosanna's are a poor-thing comparatively even therewith: He made
all things for his Glory, i. e. To express thereby his Wisdom, Goodness, Power,
Justice, etc. His Glory shines forth more in the Impresses of his Excellencies
on any Being, than in their Thankful Returns of Gratitude to him, or Oral
mention of his Praises: Men by these do their Duty, and contribute to their own
Good, but add not to his Glory; yea, his manifestative Glory is not hereby so
promoted by those Men, as by his Image on them, and his Authority acknowledged
by their Obedience and Good Works, Matt. 5.16. God is glorified by Christ, as
Redeemer in our Nature, as his Government was honored, Justice satisfied, his
Hatred to Sin expressed, his Image restored, his Authority among men
acknowledged, his Blessed Nature exemplified in the Humane Nature and Behavior
of Christ, his Love and Mercy to Sinners made manifest by his Death: By these I
say, much more than that some few Men do own him to be the Son of God, yea, our
Redeemer, even as in our Nature is more glorified by honoring God, vindicating
his Government from Contempt, opening a way for Mercy, to exert it self without
Injury to God's Holiness or Justice, accomplishing God's Purposes and Promises,
having all Fullness of Grace in him, Authority and Judgment committed to him;
defeating Satan's Projects, and breaking his Strength and Power even by the
Humane Nature; his giving his Spirit, restoring the Image of God to a
degenerate World, rendering Men subject to the Divine Laws, Imitaters of his
Example, subject to his Authority, 2 Thessalonians. 1.10. raising the Dead, judging the
World, his wise, equal and effectual Managing his Kingdom, etc. he is by them
honored, I say, far more than in a few Persons acknowledging his Sonship; and
being that his Sonship became obscured by his dwelling in Flesh, I admire that
Mr. M. would place the Vpshot of Christ's acquired Glory in the Elects
Acknowledgment of his Sonship; as if he took a Vail to do and suffer so much,
chiefly if not only to buy off its being a Vail.

4. He leaves out the Holy Spirit, as to the mention of any G^^^y designed to
him in the Economy of the Salvation of Sinners. Yet sure the Eternal Spirit
has a Glory Superior to Christ's Humane Nature, and a Right thereto Superior
to Christ's acquired Right. Yea, we are Baptized as Redeemed ones, into, or in
the Name of the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, Matt. 28. But with these Men his
Honor is little regarded, he shall not have a Hand so much as to render some
Sinners to be the Persons that shall rather than others be invested in Christ's
Right to any Saving Benefits according to a Gospel-Rule. Though God has so
wisely contrived the Acknowledgment of Father, Son and Spirit, in the Saving of
Sinners; the Father gives and sends his Son to Redeem, the Son pays the Price
of Redemption, the Holy Spirit applies it, by rendering Sinners the Objects of
the respective Effects thereof, as the Gospel determines the Distribution of
them.

His Notion of legal Union, between Christ and the Elect from Eternity, as
being one legal Person, is an unscriptural Notion which I have confuted, though
I acknowledge Christ from Eternity undertook to Redeem and Save the Elect; but
that is far from one legal Person; being that we are not reputed to Redeem or
Save our selves, alike ungrounded, is one Mystical Person. It Is time to put an
end to my Remarks on his Story made up of Steps, which I wonder he has
acquired no better Skill in relating, than to represent the Counsels of God, in
a manner so inconsistent with, nay, reproachful to the Glory of the Blessed God.

9. I shall not take notice of such things as these, all your Obedience to the
Law avails no more to justify you than your worst Sins; the not failing of
Faith is not a means of our continuing justified; Repentance is the effect of
Pardon, and not necessary thereto. These and the like being already insisted on
in this Book and elsewhere, neither shall I demonstrate as I might; it must be
his Judgment, that all our Sins are pardoned at once, even past, present, and
to come; and that God cannot be displeased with, or afflict Believers for their
Sins, etc.

10. He vainly supposes many things possible to be in Unbelievers, which are
certain Evidences of true Faith, Effects of Faith; yea, they are the Execution
of the Consenting Act of Faith, and without them (if Men have time) all his
Faith is but a Dead Faith, that will never Save. I will admit that no Act of
Grace or Godliness can Save us without Faith: But I as positively affirm, That
there is no one Act of real Grace or Godliness without true Faith; nor yet any
true Faith without Acts of other Graces. Why then should he put the Graces of
the Spirit into a War, and tell us of mending our Ways and reforming our Lives
and our Hearts too, so as never more to Sin, and live as a Saint dropped down
from Heaven, etc. yet they are not Faith, and the Righteousness of Christ would
not be upon thee, P. 67, 68, etc. Can Men's Hearts be changed, and their Lives
thus reformed in Obedience to the Call of Christ's Gospel, and not accept of
Christ, and trust in him? No. And I ask, If any Man go out of himself to Christ
for all, and yet never repent, nor have his Heart and Life changed, nor love
God: Would that Man have the Righteousness of Christ upon him for Salvation?
Yet this is as possible as the other, yea, and more easily mistaken: 1 Thessalonians.
1. from 5. to 10. you will see the Spirit of God makes the things concur, which
Mr. M. would set at so great an Opposition. To me it is evident that Christ's
Righteousness extends it self through all the Benefits and Privileges of a
Saint, as the Sole Meriting Cause, whatever be the Condition: And all the
after-gracious Acts and Godliness of a Believer are the Operations of Faith;
they are his first Conjugal Consent executed, as well as the Effects of his
Dependence on Christ for new Supplies. 1. Faith, as it acts upward toward
Christ, still Craves, Prays, Hopes, Trusts, Expects, with Affection Adheres,
and renews Self-dedication and Consent. 2. As it looks into the word, it finds
Motives, Excitements, Directions, etc. to urge and apply to it self from
invisible things realized. 3. As it acts under the Power of both the former,
with respect to External and Internal Effects, it Purifieth, Melts, Loves,
Quickens, Strengthens to Duty, and against Temptations, Comforts, Reclaimeth,
Recovereth, Guardeth, Watches, etc. So that our renewed Act of Repentance,
Love and Fear, etc. our Godliness, Reformation, Zeal, and all sincere
Obedience, is the Operation of Faith, and the Obedience of Faith: Faith is in
them, and they are in Faith not formally, but in the way above expressed:
Whence I conclude it is a false Faith that omits Obedience to Christ in all
these, as it is a false Obedience which excludes a Dependence on Christ in or
by any of those.

11. Mr. M's Criminations of his Brethren are intolerable, becoming neither an
honest Man, nor a true Believer, and much less a Gospel-Minister; more wicked-
Malice and Falsehood hardly any Man can be guilty of, than his Accusations and
Insinuations are justly chargeable with; unless they proceed from real
Ignorance, which Charity prompts me to hope. I have instanced already how he
has perverted my words; but had he confined his Reproaches to me, I should not
think my Resentments so fit to be expressed, but he spares not the Dead, he
strikes at the Body of our Usefulest Ministers alive, and at their Ministry
too: Who or what could excite any Man to render the Labors of so many
Ministers useless, when so adapted to promote the Kingdom of Christ in the
World? Who will dare to attend their Labors, or avoid being filled with
Jealousies, Prejudices, and Abhorrence, that believe this fiery Man when he
says, They hold Soul-damning Errors, if there be any in the World, P. 46. That
they have a Dislike and Hearthatred of standing in the Righteousness of Christ
imputed, and it only, that lies at the bottom in these Oppositions (to our
being as Righteous as Christ) P. 76. and the Devil (by them) labors to
Forestall and shut up Men's Hearts against (what he calls) the Blessed Truths;
nay, his Malignant Spirit rises so high, as to call them often Semi-socinians,
and studiously brands them with that name (as what he would have them called
by) in his Preface, as well as Socinians in his Sermons; and that the Gospel of
our Salvation is Craftily and Insolently assaulted by them in the very Vitals
and Fundamentals of it. And this and much more, as an Apostasy from the Truth,
he fixes on Old and Young, even many of the rising Generation, not only among
Conformists but Dissenters also.

Reply. The Angel said, The Lord rebuke thee; when he durst not bring railing
Accusation, sure he knows not what Spirit he is of, nor who does instigate
him to these things, any more than Holy Peter did, whose Design was better.
After long working at this Trade under Ground, he proclaims it when he comes
into open Air, and hides not his Spirit or his Purpose. I hope others injured
so deeply, will join with me in forgiving him, and Praying for his Repentance,
that the Blood of Prejudiced Souls may not be required at his hands, nor these
Injurious Reproaches be imputed to him. I shall make a few Remarks on the Names
he give us:

1. He of all Men seems least allowed to give us any Name, for we are not the
Children of his Church Members, and others he will not Baptize; he pleads that
the Ancient Church, called the Offspring of Pelagius his Heresy
Semi-Pelagians: May therefore one that utterly denies a Catholic visible
Church pretend to it; yea, who thinks he cease to be a Minister, when his
Relation to his particular Flock is at an end. Nay, he is of so Rash a Spirit,
small Skill in the Reason of Names; and lavishly disregardful of Truth in this
Matter, that a Nickname must be the Effect of his giving any to such as are
not of his own Faction.

2. He quits all Truth and Modesty, in giving us the Name of Socinians or
Semi-socinians. He says, our Opinions are the Offspring of Socinianism: What
means he by Offspring? Is it 1. only that Socinianism was the occasion
thereof: Or 2. That they are of the same Genuine Nature with Socinianism. The
last is an abominable Slander, hatched by no good Spirit; 1. The former may be
pretended, but then an immediate Descent must be denied: Socinianism tempted
weak Men to the opposite Extreme of Profane Antinomianism: This Extreme was
perceived equally ^atal to the Vitals of Practical Christianity, as
Socinianism; and also to give Advantage to the Socinians by its wild Positions,
and weak Arguments consonant thereto. Therefore our best Learned Divines, at
once to prevent the Triumph of the Socinians, and the growth of Antinomianism,
waved many of those Terms which had obtained among the Orthodox in speaking of
Christ's Satisfaction, without any due regard to either of these fatal Errors.
Hence Dr. Owen of the Trinity and Satisfaction, P. 153. It appears from what
has been spoken, that in this matter of Satisfaction, God is not considered as
a Creditor, and Sin as a Debt, and the Law as an Obligation of that Debt, and
the Lord Christ as paying it. He then shows the difference, and tells us, God
must be considered as a Rector, etc. p. 113. and p. 141. There is an allusion
to them (the Socinian Argument) to a Debt and Payment, which is the most
improper expression used in this matter. The same you will find, Essenius
Triumphus Crucis p. 391, 399. Turretin. Instit. Theol. par. 2. p. 264. 462. In
like manner they place Satisfaction in an equivalent in many things, and not
the same for kind in all, Essenius p. 340. Dr. Stillingfleet of Sufferings of
Christ, p. 244, 245. Many more instances might be given.

2. But our Principles are far from being the Offspring of Socinianism, as
being of the same Nature with it, which he means. They are nothing which is
properly Socinian, or condemned as such by either Synod or Men of Learning: So
far are we from being half Socinians. The Socinian Principles are summarily
reduced to that of the Trinity, and that of Christ's Satisfaction. They deny
the Deity of Christ as the Son of God by eternal Generation: We affirm it, they
deny the Personality of the Holy Ghost, we affirm it. The Malice of our Author
cannot pretend to touch us there. The Socinians deny that Christ died a proper
Sacrifice for Sin; we affirm it. They deny that Christ's Sufferings were the
Punishment of our Sins, we affirm it. They deny that Christ satisfied Divine
Justice, or died in our Place: We affirm he satisfied Justice, and that Christ
died in our Place and in our stead: He died that we might not die, who were
liable to die: He gave his Life for ours. They say Christ died for our Good,
not by way of Merit at all strictly: We affirm that Christ properly merited all
the saving Good we enjoy. The Good they say Christ died for is, the giving us
an Example of Patience, confirming his Doctrine, and at highest, the ratifying
the Covenant wherein our own Faith and Obedience is by Acceptilation accepted
instead of a perfect legal Righteousness, and this exclusive of Christ's
Satisfaction and Righteousness; and that he attends to this is what they mean
when they say Christ in some sort may be said to give us Life. But we affirm,
that the good Christ merited is Reconciliation with God, Pardon of Sins, and
eternal Glory, etc. as well as that he gave us an Example of Patience, etc. And
we truly affirm that we have no Righteousness that answers the Law but
Christ's, and that Christ's Righteousness is imputed to us, as that wherein we
stand before a just God, and is as available to us for Salvation, as if we had
done and suffered what Christ did; and we renounce all our own Obedience and
Works legal and evangelical as any Part of that Righteousness in, or for which
we are pardoned, accepted, or glorified. Our very Faith, and much less our
Repentance or other good Works, is not any merit or procuring cause of our
Justification. The whole use and place we assign to Faith in our Justification,
and to Repentance in the pardon of sin, is, that they are the things which the
Gospel requires in those whom God will impute the Righteousness of Christ to
for actual Pardon, and a Title to Eternal Glory; as promising to impute
Christ's Righteousness to Believers, and actual Pardon to the believing
Penitent; as also, the possession of Glory to such as persevere in Faith and
Holiness; and all in, by, and for the only Righteousness of Christ, as the sole
meriting, enclining, and procuring Cause.

Reader, judge between us, yea, let the searcher of Hearts judge, whether we
are not wronged by this Brother. I have in this Book as well as formerly,
showed, that by Reward is meant no more than an encouragement to a Duty
established by the Gospel, as a Law, not whereby governing Justice enjoineth us
to work out a Righteousness as our Title to Eternal Life; but a Law, wherein
Grace in a way of Government, appoints Conditions that render us the subjects
of saving Benefits, as the Effects of Christ's Righteousness, and to be
received and enjoyed in his Right. Again, whereas some call Faith our
subordinate Righteousness, I have evidenced that they intend no more than a
performed Condition of the Gospel, and no way a Righteousness of the same kind,
or to the same End or Purpose with Christ's Righteousness. Also when any of us
say that we are justified by Faith as an Act, Justification is then taken in
quite another sense from Justification by Christ's Righteousness; the last
being universal as to our Persons and State; the former being only of a
particular Cause, viz. Are we Believers? and but consequently, are we the
Persons the Gospel promises to deal with as Believers? Also I have shown, that
Justification is entire in all its Causes; and that Faith does no more than
connote us the Objects or Subjects on whom this Justification is conferred by
God as a Benefit, or the Object on whom the Justifying Act terminates by the
Gospel. If these be Semisocinian Principles, I undertake to show, that all or
most of the noted Protestant Confessions of Faith, and the Body of our
Protestant Divines of Name, yea, especially such as have written against
Socinianism, are Semisocinian. Sure then our Author either reads our Principles
in a false Glass, or he knows no more of Socinianism, than that it is a
scandalous word, and so fit to brand those with, whose worth, acceptance and
usefulness, he beholds with an envious Eye; wherein I except my self.

Mr. M. has done more to favor Socinianism than all those whom he accuses.
1. By calling such Semisocinians, whose doctrine and Principles will approve
themselves to most Men to be Orthodox. Many will abate their prejudice against
the real Socinian, as not being so bad as the word imported. 2. He falls in
wholly with the Socinians, in denying Christ's Incarnation to be a part of his
Humiliation, and deprives us of the force of one of the greatest Texts for the
Deity of Christ, Phil. 2.6, 7. 3. He supports the Socinian Cause, and one of
their strongest Topics against the Satisfaction of Christ; by speaking still
of God as a Creditor, Sin as a Debt, the Law as a Money Bond, Christ as a Money
Surety; whereas all our Divines find it impossible to defend that Doctrine,
without denying this Metaphor, and therefore plead, that God is to be
considered as a Rector, Sin a Crime, Sinners Criminals, Christ a Sponsor, in
consistency with his being Redeemer, Mediator, Savior, Sacrifice and Priest,
etc. For if Sin were a Money Debt, why could not God forgive it without
Satisfaction, as well as other Creditors do, etc. 4. He grants the absurdity in
the sense objected by the Socinians, and still opposed by our Divines, viz.
That we are as Righteous as Christ in equality; Turretin. Instit. Theol. p.
714, 715. proves that licet, etc. though we are justified by Christ's
Righteousness imputed, non sequitur nos non minus justos esse quam Christum; it
does not follow that we are no less Righteous than Christ: So does Dr. Owen of
Iustif. p. 509, 510. All our celebrated Opposers of Socinianism do the same.
Mr. M. may say as well of these as he does of us, for denying it as they do;
They have a heart-hatred of standing in the Righteousness of Christ. 5. The
Socinians have their whole Cause favored against the Deity of Christ (or at
least the Arrians) by what he asserts concerning the Person of the Son of God.
He makes him such a God as was capable of a real Glory to be added to him, that
as God he might be under God's frowns and displeasure; might quit and forgo the
actual enjoyment of that Love, Glory and Inheritance, which as Son of God he
was entitled to, and possessed of before his Incarnation, (not in a way of
manifestation, nor as to his Humane Nature, but in reality, and as to his
Divine Nature, in which alone he acted before his Incarnation) a God capable of
an acquired Right, superadded to his natural Right to those very Riches, Love,
and Glory, which he enjoyed before he was Son of Man. And also, that the Humane
Nature belongs to the Constitution of the Person of the Son of God as it is
now, p. 8. etc. Are not these bold Strokes, which I have before fully proved to
be his Assertions? Though Charity binds me to acknowledge, that I think he
designeth not to oppose the Eternal Deity of the Son of God, by Assertions so
unsuitable to the Divine Essence; and so mistaketh what God is, rather than who
he is. 6. I might add, he blasts all the opposition made by our best Authors
against Socinianism, by branding even them as Semisocinians. To say nothing of
his representing the Doctrine of imputed Righteousness in a manner not
defensible, and tempting to most Men's being Socinians, unless they have a
better Notion of it. Few will believe, that we did legally do and suffer what
Christ did; that we are as Righteous as Christ; and that the Gospel enjoineth
no Duty as a Condition on us for obtaining the blessed Effects of Christ's
Merits, which be the only ground of his quarreling thus hotly with us. Men of
his suspicious temper will judge, he designeth to favor Socinianism, by
calling us Semisocinians.

12. Mr. M. Attempts to instruct us how to Preach, but with an evil
insinuation, and in some things very contrary to Apostolical Preaching. Thus
your Teachers should instruct and lead you. This is the Apostles direction to
Titus, that he should teach them that have believed, to be careful to maintain
good works; not to teach and press sinners in their Unbelief, to fall to doing
of good works first, and overlook believing wholly, or to postpone it after
them, p. 69. Repl. 1. Which teacher of his Hearers does teach any to postpone
Faith, or overlook it wholly, or delay it at all? If by Believing he means a
due accepting of a whole Christ, yea, do not they direct them to expect all
from God through Christ, and look to Christ as he in whom all fullness is? But
our Author is one of them who think, Christ is never Preached, unless his Name
be mentioned, and that as a Priest too. His revealed Truths, and enjoined Laws,
etc. are not Preaching Christ. 2. But may one call Sinners to no Duty till they
are Believers? Must they not be pressed to examine themselves, pray, read the
Word, hear it Preached, fear God, teach their Families, love their Wives,
meditate, consider, strive with their Hearts, resist Temptations, believe the
Scriptures, nor relieve the Poor, till they be Believers? Peter was to learn of
our Author to Preach; for though he knew Simon Magus to be in the gall of
bitterness, yet he bids him then repent of this thy wickedness, and pray God if
perhaps the thoughts of thy heart may be forgiven thee, Acts 9.22. perhaps
he will say he believed; true, in such a manner as I fear some that pretend high
to Faith exceed not. Paul gives such an account of much of his Ministry at
first to Jews and Gentiles, Acts 26.20. That they should repent and turn unto
God, and do works meet for Repentance; the Baptist was an ill Teacher, and
Christ's Sermon on the Mount, Mat. 5. and Paul's at Lystra, Acts 14.15, 16.
needed Mr. M's direction. Paul says to unbelievers, We are Men of like
Passions with you, (thus far he will agree) and Preach unto you, that you should
turn from these vanities unto the living God that made Heaven and Earth, etc. a
good Work is pressed before they believed. Here Mr. M. would have told him, you
Paul should not teach thus. But what are his Reasons? 1. They that believed in
God should be charged to excel in good works; therefore they that believe not
in Christ, should not be pressed to endeavor to set upon doing any good Work,
Hos. 5. 4. They must not so much as frame their doings to turn unto the Lord.
2. A few words after; through Faith that Righteousness will be upon you; and
being upon you, it will produce good Works. Here it seems (as I have often heard
it urged) Ministers should not urge you, nor you strive and labor after good
Works, this Righteousness will produce them; but are all that I hope have
Faith, so abundant therein, as not to need Spurs? Do all that pretend to it,
show that they have it by it is Fruits? and how can we know them? And is its
being upon us the next principle of good Works; for though it be the Meriting
Cause of all as it is in Christ, yet holy habits are the next Principle with
the Spirits influence: And above all, must we cease to declare the whole Will
of God to all that hear us, till we know is Christ's Righteousness upon them?
Yea, is it because they are dead in Sin before Faith, that we must not press
them to repent, fear and love God, etc. The same reason will hold against
pressing them to saving Faith, which of themselves they can as little perform:
And if it be by the Word that God regenerates our Hearers. Why may not the
Spirit infuse Life, by calling Men to Repent, etc. as well as to Believe; and a
true Principle of Life will act duly, though I think not in the same order of
discernable Actings in every Convert. But however it is certain, that if by
preaching Repentance the Spirit quickens a Soul, that Soul is as sure to
believe when quickened, as it is to repent when it believes. And so our Author
makes but a spiteful Flourish, when he would induce our Hearers to think we
teach them amiss, because we learn not of him.

SInce the Printing of my Answer, to what Mr. M. calls my Second Damning Error,
viz. That I make the State of Believers to be Undecided, and in Suspense during
this Life. I have found the word Undecided in my Gospel Truth Stated, P. 55.
which I then was Ignorant of, though I cast my Eye on the bottom of that very
Page. My words are, The Covenant, though Conditional, is a Disposition of
Grace; there is Grace in giving Ability to perform the Conditions, as well as in
bestowing the Benefits: God's enjoining one in order to the other, makes not
the Benefit to be less of Grace, but it is a Display of God's Wisdom, in
conferring the Benefit suitably to the Nature and State of Men in this Life,
whose Eternal Condition is not Eternally decided, but are in a State of Trial;
yea, the Conditions are but a Meetness to receive the Blessing. But as I have
in my Answer showed, that I often in Gospel Truth stated, affirm, That the Elect
shall Persevere in Faith, and that every true Saint is now in a State of
Salvation. So I shall only add, 1. I do not here mention Believers, but Men in
general, yea, rather Unbelievers. 2. By Eternally decided any Man may see, that
I had an Eye only to God's Judicial Decision at Death, and the more Solemn
Sentence at the last Judgment; when we Die, our Warfare is finished, and our
State, as Viatores, is at an end. 3. What means all the Scripture Cautions
(even to Believers) such as Watch, etc. Pass the time of your Sojourning here
in Fear, etc. If all our State be decided so, while we have many Years,
Temptations, and Persevering Work before us; as it will be beyond the Grave:
Alas how many are long deceived by the mere Form of Godliness, and they that
are Godly, are called to Caution and Care, on this very Consideration, that
they are to be judged, 1 Pet. 1.17. which were useless to such as are in
termino, 2 Timothy 4.7, 8. Rev. 2.10. See more in my Answer.

The Point of the Embrio was not fit for my large insisting on, or I could have
proved, that an Embrio is not an unformed, unorganized Mass or Lump, etc.

FINIS.
The Five following Books have been lately published by the Author of this
Discourse: Printed for John Dunton at the Raven in the Poultry.
1. GOspel Truth Stated and Vindicated; wherein some of Dr. Crisp's Opinions
are considered, and the opposite Truths are plainly Stated and Confirmed. The
Second Edition.

2. A Defense of Gospel Truth: Being a Reply to Mr. Chancy.

3. The Vanity of Childhood and Youth; wherein the depraved Nature of Young
People is Represented, and Means for their Reformation proposed: Being some
Sermons Preached at the Request of several Young Men.

4. A Discourse, showing that Repentance of National Sins God requires, if ever
we expect National Mercies.

5. Man made Righteous by Christ's Obedience: Being two Sermons Preached at
Pinners-hall, with Enlargements, etc. Also some Remarks on Mr. Mather's
Postscript, etc.

AN Essay upon Reason, and the Nature of Spirits. By Dr. Burthogg. Heads of
Agreement assented to by the United Ministers in and about London.

The Fourth Volume of the Morning Exercise.

There will also be Extant in a few days, The Second Volume of the French Book
of Martyrs. Published by her Majesty's Royal Privilege.

There is in the Press, Remarks upon Bishop King's late Book, concerning the
Inventions of Men in the Worship of God. By the Reverend Mr. John Boyse.

Malbranch's Search after Truth, will also be published in a few Weeks.


