W R

HONI SOIT QVI MAL Y PENSE

DIEV ET MON DROIT


MARIE R.

WE being Willing and Desirous to give all due Encouragement to such Seamen as
have already Voluntarily Entered, or shall Voluntary Enter themselves in Our
Service, on Board Our Ships of War in Our Royal Navy, Have thought fit, by and
with the Advice of Our Privy Council, to Publish this Our Royal Proclamation;
And We do hereby Promise and Declare, That all such able Seamen as have already
Entered themselves Voluntarily on Board any of Our Ships of War of the First,
Second, or Third Rates, since the First day of December last, shall Receive Six
Weeks Pay as Our Free Gift and Royal Bounty, which shall be paid them before
the respective Ships to which they belong shall Sail from the Buoy of the Nore.
Provided that the said Seamen do within Twelve days after the Date of this Our
Proclamation, Repair on Board the respective Ships on which they have so Entered
themselves, and give their constant Attendance for Fitting out to Sea such Ship
as each of them shall belong unto, notwithstanding any Leave which may have
been given from their Commanders for being absent (otherwise they are not to
expect to receive Wages Arrear from the time of their First Entry;)
Nevertheless, if they shall so Repair on Board within Twenty days after the
Date hereof, they shall receive as of Our Gift and Bounty, Six Weeks Pay; And
if they shall so Repair on Board before the Twentieth of February next, they
shall receive as of Our Gift and Bounty, One Months Pay. And We do further
Promise and Declare, That all such able Seamen as shall Voluntarily Enter
themselves on Board any of Our Ships of the First, Second and Third Rates
within Twenty days after the Date hereof, shall likewise receive, as of Our
Free Gift, and Royal Bounty, Six Weeks Pay; And such as shall so Enter
themselves before the Twentieth day of February next, shall receive One Months
Pay, to be paid as aforesaid, before the Ships to which they belong shall Sail
from the Buoy of the Nore. And We are also Graciously pleased to Declare, That
Conduct Money, according to the Practice of the Navy, shall likewise be Allowed
to such able Seamen as shall Voluntarily Enter themselves on Board any of Our
said Ships, according to the true meaning of this Our Proclamation. And for the
Prevention of any Deceits and Abuses that may happen by any Person or Persons
leaving the Ships to which they belong, and Entering him or themselves on Board
any other of Our said Ships, as aforesaid, in order to the obtaining of the
Bounty Money herein before Granted, We do hereby likewise Direct, Declare and
Command, That such Seamen belonging to any of Our Ships or Vessels whatsoever,
as shall leave any the Ships or Vessels to which they belong, and Enter
themselves on Board any other of Our Ships in order to the obtaining of the
said Bounty Money, shall not only lose the Wages due to them in the Ship which
they shall so leave, but shall also be severely punished according to their
Demerits.

Given at Our Court at Kensington the Fifteenth Day of January, 1690. In the
Second Year of Our Reign.
God save King William and Queen Mary.
London, Printed by Charles Bill and Thomas Newcomb, Printers to the King and
Queens most Excellent Majesty's, 1690.


