monogram of 'W' (William) superimposed on 'M' (Mary) RR
DIEV ET MON DROIT HONI SOIT QUI MAL Y PENSE royal blazon or coat of arms
By the King and Queen, A PROCLAMATION For the careful Custody and well
Ordering of the New River brought from Chadwell and Amwell to the North Parts
of the City of London.
William R.

WHereas by Authority of two several Acts of Parliament Made and Ordained in
the Third and Fourth Years of the Reign of King James the First, Our Royal
Ancestor of Blessed Memory, the River now running from Chadwell and Amwell in
Our County of Hertford, to the North Parts of Our City of London, was at the
great Charge of the said King, and other the Undertakers, happily made and
finished; Since which time the Water thereof is dispersed by Pipes and Branches
through the several Streets and Places of Our said City, and the Liberties and
Suburbs of the same, and elsewhere, to the Benefit and Ease of Our Subjects
there Inhabiting, as well for the cleaning and sweet keeping of them in the
times of Infection, as the preservation and safety of the Houses and Buildings,
Goods and Riches therein, from the fearful danger of Fire casually happening;
And such was the Care and Providence of His said Majesty King James the First,
that the Water in any place in the course thereof, should not at any time be
troubled or corrupted (whereby the Health or Lives of the People might suffer
or be endangered) that by His Letters Patents of Incorporation, dated the One
and twentieth day of June, in the Seventeenth Year of His Reign over this Our
Realm of England, he Created and Erected a Governor and Company, successively
to Regulate, and carefully to Oversee all things appertaining to the said
River; And several strict Orders and Commands were Made and Given by the said
late King, for preservation of the said River, and preventing of such things as
might be prejudicial thereunto; Notwithstanding which, the present Governor
and Company have Represented unto Us, That great Abuses are daily committed: We
therefore taking into Our Princely Consideration, That the preservation of the
said River is of great and especial Consequence, are Graciously pleased by this
Our Royal Proclamation (with the Advice of Our Privy Council) straightly to
Charge and Command, That all and every the Grants, Clauses and Restrictions in
the said Acts of Parliament, Letters Patents, and in all other Letters Patents,
Orders and Proclamations concerning the said River, Enacted, Made, Established,
Granted or Confirmed, be from time to time carefully obeyed, observed and
performed; And We do hereby strictly prohibit and forbid all and singular the
Inhabitants of Our City of London, the Suburbs and Liberties thereof, Our City
of Westminster, and also the Inhabitants of Our several Counties of Middlesex
and Hertford, and likewise all the Plummers, Paviers, and other Artificers
whomsoever, and every of them, That they nor any of them, do or shall presume
at any time or times hereafter, without the privity, permission and allowance
of the Governor and Company aforesaid for the time being, to intermeddle with
the said Works, or any of the Pipes or Branches thereof, or to convey or derive
any Pipe or Branch, Pipes or Branches of the said Water, into their, or any of
their Houses, or other Places, nor shall fetch or carry the Water out of the
said River, the Pipes or Branches thereof, or otherwise hinder, waste or
consume, disturb, infect, abuse or corrupt the same River, by setting up of
Grates, overflowing of Grounds, making of Trenches or Drains, filling of Ponds,
Fishing, Watering of Cattle, keeping of Geese or Ducks thereupon, casting of
Carrion thereinto, Washing themselves therein, or by doing or permitting any
Misusance, Annoyance, Let, Stoppage or Prejudice whatsoever, to the Stream of
Our said River in any part of the Current thereof, nor shall cut, spoil, take a
way or destroy any of the Branches, Bridges, Wharfs, Posts, Rails, Banks,
Mounds or Fences to the said River in any wise belonging or appertaining, or
therewith enjoyed, or lying near or behooveful to the same; And that the said
Governor and Company, their Officers and Servants shall have free liberty in
the daytime, in the presence of a Constable, to Search any House, Yard or
Backside, where they shall suspect any Branch or Branches are laid contrary to
their knowledge, upon Pain of Our High Displeasure, and of such Pains,
Penalties and Punishments, as by the Law and Statutes of this Kingdom, or Our
Prerogative Royal, can and may be inflicted upon the Offenders for Contempt of
Our Royal Will and Pleasure herein Declared. And We do hereby strictly Charge
and Command all Mayors, Justices of the Peace, Commissioners of Sewers,
Sheriffs, Bailiffs, Constables, Headboroughs, and all other Our Officers,
Ministers and Subjects within Our said Cities of London and Westminster, the
Suburbs and Liberties thereof, Our Counties of Middlesex and Hertford, whom the
same shall or may concern, That they and every of them hereafter be vigilant
and circumspect, that Our Royal Will and Pleasure herein Declared, be from time
to time effectually observed; And that they and every of them in their several
Offices and Places respectively, without Excuse or Delay, be upon all Occasions
Aiding and Assisting to the said Governor and Company, their Officers and
Ministers, in the strict Observance and Execution of all and singular the
Powers and Authorities, Limitations and Restraints herein before mentioned, and
in the Grants and Prohibitions aforesaid contained, according to the true
intent and meaning of these Presents, when they shall be thereunto required by
them or any of them, as they and every of them tender Our Pleasure, and will
answer the contrary at their Perils.

Given at Our Court at Hampton Court the Six and twentieth Day of September,
1689. In the First Year of Our Reign.
LONDON, Printed by Charles Bill and Thomas Newcomb, Printers to the King and
Queens most Excellent Majesty's. 1689.


