WR

HONI SOIT QVI MAL Y PENSE

DIEV ET MON DROIT


William R.

WILLIAM and MARY, by the Grace of God King and Queen of England, Scotland,
France and Ireland, Defenders of the Faith, etc. To all to whom these Presents
shall come Greeting. Whereas in and by one Act lately made in Parliament,
Entitled, An Act for a Grant to Their Majesty's of an Aid of Twelve pence in
the Pound for One Year, for the Necessary Defense of Their Realms, and by an
Additional Act also lately made in Parliament, for appointing Commissioners for
Executing the other Act aforesaid, it has been Provided, That it should and
might be lawful for Us to Issue, or cause to be Issued out under the Great Seal
of England, such and so many Commissions as We should think fit, and therein
and thereby to Nominate, Constitute and Appoint such and so many Persons, being
Qualified as in the said Acts, or either of them, is Prescribed or Directed, as
We should think convenient, to be Commissioners for putting in Execution the
said Act of Parliament for Granting unto Us the said Sum of Twelve pence in the
Pound; Which said Commissioners so as aforesaid to be Nominated and Appointed,
were, and are by the said Acts, or one of them, Directed and Enjoined in the
respective Counties, Cities, Boroughs, Divisions, Towns and Places for which
they should be appointed Commissioners respectively, to meet together at the
most usual or common Place of Meeting, within each of the said Counties,
Cities, Boroughs, Divisions, Towns or Places respectively, at or before the
Third Day of this Instant September, or such other Day as We should Appoint,
and further to Do, Perform and Execute as in and by the said Acts, or one of
them, is Required and Commanded, and as by the same, relation being thereunto
respectively had, may more fully appear.

And whereas We have Issued, or are now Issuing under the Great Seal of England
several Commissions for Executing the Act of Parliament for the Aid aforesaid;
But it being necessary that (pursuant to the Power given Us in the same Act) a
further time be Appointed for the First General Meeting of the said
Commissioners, We have thought fit by and with the Advice of Our Privy Council
to Appoint, and We do by these presents Appoint the respective Commissioners by
Us Nominated and Constituted, or to be Nominated and Constituted for the
Execution of the said Acts, and either of them in the respective Counties,
Cities, Boroughs, Divisions, Towns and Places for which they are or shall be
Appointed Commissioners respectively, to Meet together at the most usual or
common Places of Meeting, within each of the said Counties, Cities, Boroughs,
Divisions, Towns and Places respectively, at or before the Thirtieth Day of
this Instant September: And We do hereby Direct, Authorize and Command the said
Commissioners, or so many of them as by the said Acts or either of them are
requisite, not only at the First General Meetings to be at or before the said
Thirtieth Day of this Instant September, as aforesaid, but at all other Times,
and in all Cases and Respects whatsoever, to Proceed and to Act, Do, Perform
and Execute, and to cause to be Done, Performed and Executed, all Matters and
Things whatsoever by the said Acts, or either of them, Authorized, Entrusted or
Empowered to be Acted, Done, Performed or Executed, according to the true
intent and meaning of the same; And these Presents shall be to them, and every
of them a sufficient Warrant and Discharge in this behalf.

Given at Our Palace of Hampton Court the Second Day of September, 1689. In the
First Year of Our Reign.
God save the King and Queen.
LONDON, Printed by Charles Bill and Thomas Newcomb, Printers to the King and
Queens most Excellent Majesty's. 1689.


