By the King and Queen, A PROCLAMATION, For the Discovery and Apprehending of
Highway Men and Robbers, and for a Reward to the Discoverers.
Marie R.

WHereas in Contempt of the Laws and well Established Government of this
Kingdom, many Robberies upon the Highways have been of late frequently
committed, to the great Terror and Damage of Our Loving Subjects; and We being
desirous to secure all Our People in Tavelling and Going about their lawful
Occasions by Suppressing and Preventing the said Mischiefs, and Bringing the
Offenders to condign Punishment, do therefore (by and with the Advice of Our
Privy Council) hereby straightly Charge and Command all Sheriffs, Justices of
the Peace, Mayors, Baylifs, Constables, Headboroughs, Tythingmen and other Our
Officers, Ministers and Subjects to whom it does or may appertain, That they
and every of them in their respective Places and Stations do use their utmost
Endeavors for the Discovery and Apprehending all Highway Men and Robbers. And
in order thereunto, We do hereby Declare Our Will and Pleasure to be, and do
hereby Require and Command all and every Our Justices of the Peace throughout
this Our Realm of England, Dominion of Wales and Town of Berwick upon Tweed,
That upon Notice of this Our Royal Proclamation they do Take Order and See that
due Watch and Ward be constantly kept by Horse and Foot, and that after Notice
to them given of any Robbery on the Highway or other Theft committed they take
care that Hue and Cry be made after Robbers, and other pursuit be made and
raised, and Felons pursued with the utmost Diligence that the Law requires for
the Apprehending of the Offenders. And for the Encouragement of all Persons to
put in Execution this Our Proclamation, We are Graciously Pleased, and do
hereby Declare, That all and every Person and Persons who shall at any time
within One Year now next Ensuing, discover to any Justice of Peace, or any
other Officer of Justice, any Person that has committed, or shall commit any
Robbery on the Highway, and shall Apprehend or cause to be Apprehended such
Offender, shall within Fifteen Days after Conviction of such Offender so
Apprehended upon such Discovery, have a Reward of Forty pounds for every such
Offender so Apprehended and Convicted, and all and every Sheriff and Sheriffs
of the respective Counties where such Conviction shall be had, are hereby
required upon the Certificate of the Judge, or under the Hand of Two or more
Ius;tices before whom such Conviction shall be had, to pay unto such Person or
Persons who shall Discover and Apprehend such Offender, or upon whose Discovery
such Offender shall be Apprehended, the said Reward of Forty pounds within the
time aforesaid, for every Offender so Apprehended and Convicted, out of the
Public Money received by him in that County, which shall be allowed to him
upon his Account in Our Exchequer. And to that purpose We do hereby Direct and
Command Our Undertreasurer, and Chancellor of Our Exchequer, Barons, and all
other Our Officers of Our said Court and every of them, to allow unto every
Sheriff and Sheriffs, so from time to time paying the said Rewards, such Moneys
as he or they shall actually pay upon such Certificate for the Rewards as
aforesaid, without any Charge unto, or Fees or Money to be demanded of such
Sheriff for Passing such part of his said Account, in Discharge from Us of so
much Money by him so paid or to be paid, or for Allowance to be made unto such
Sheriff for Reimbursing him or them any Money so from time to time paid or to
be paid in Obedience to this Our Proclamation for the Purposes abovementioned,
for Allowance whereof this Our Proclamation shall be a sufficient Warrant.

Given at Our Court at Whitehall the Thirteenth Day of September, 1692. In the
Fourth Year of Our Reign. God save King William and Queen Mary.
LONDON, Printed by Charles Bill, and the Executrix of Thomas Newcomb deceased;
Printers to the King and Queens most Excellent Majesty's. 1692.


