THE PERSECUTION AND OPPRESSION (Which, as Solomon says, is able to make a
wise man mad,) OF JOHN BALE, That was called to be Bishop of Ossory, by the
sole Election, without any other man's Motion, of that pious King, Edw. 6. AND
OF GRUFFITH WILLIAMS, That was called after the same manner to the same
Bishopric by the sole Election, without any other man's Motion, of that most
excellent, pious King, and glorious Martyr, Charles I. Two Learned men, and
Right Reverend Bishops of Ossory.

LONDON, Printed for the Author, 1664.

I. THis John Bale was a great Scholar, and a Doctor of Divinity in the
University of Oxford, in the time of King Edward the sixth, and he himself
wrote a Book, (which the Right Worshipful, and my much honored Friend, Sir
James Ware lent me) wherein he sets down, the vocation, persecution, and
deliverance of himself: and out of that Book I have drawn this Abstract of his
life and persecution, and expulsion from that very house from whence I was also
expulsed, and for which I am still oppressed and troubled.

1. His Vocation was by the mere good will, without any solicitation of any
other, of that good King Edwards, when he saw him in South-hampton, he sent
unto him by diverse of his Nobility, to bid him prepare himself to go to be the
Bishop of Ossory, which he obediently did, and transported himself and his
Family into Ireland, and being consecrated at Dublin, though with some
opposition, by reason of the Popish inclination of the Catholic Clergy, he
presently went to Kilkenny; where

2. His Persecution did begin, for he no sooner began to preach the Gospel of
Jesus Christ, which he incessantly did, but the most part of his Prebends and
the Popish party opposed and contradicted him; and within a very little while,
after the death of King Edw. 6. he was exceedingly persecuted by Barnaby
Bolger, and the Popish Priests, and others, that sought his death in his house,
this Bishops Court, alias Holms Court, Rich. Foster a Deacon, Rich. Headly,
John Cage, and the Maid.
where he saw five of his household Servants, four men and a maid, of sixteen
years of age, killed, before his face, and so had he been slain also, had he
not shut the Iron Grate of his Castle, and kept the Kearnes out, until the good
suffereige of Kilkenny, with a hundred horsemen, and three hundred footmen,
brought him away in the night time, and so delivered him out of their hands,
and forthwith sent him to Dublin, from whence, his life being there likewise
hunted after, he was conveyed away in a Mariners apparel, and in his passage
to Zealand was cruelly tossed by tempests, and was taken at sea, and carried to
St. Ives in Cornwall, where a wicked fellow named Walter accused our Bishop
Bale of High Treason before the Justices there, yet being not able to prove any
thing against him, the good God delivered him out of their hands.

And yet not long after one Martin an English Pirate did most falsely accuse him
of many heinous crimes, as the putting down of the Mass in England, caused
Doctor Gardener Bishop of Winchester to be imprisoned, and poisoned the King,
and many other heinous things, which brought him abundance of troubles and
vexations with the Captain of the ship wherein he passed toward Holland, as
himself relates at large, from fol. 38. of his Book of his persecution unto
fol. 42.

And because they are so fully exemplified and expressed by himself there,
together with the rest of his troubles and persecutions which he had in Ossory,
in Dublin, and in his passage by Sea toward Germany, in the Book that himself
printed, of his Vocation to the Bishopric of Ossory, and his persecution in
the same, I will set no more down here, but refer my Reader to that Book.

II. GRiffith Williams, born at Carnarvon, at fourteen years old was sent to
Oxford, from whence by reason of the hard usage of him Junonis ob iram; by an
angry Juno, that was his Unckles virago, he was fain to betake himself, within
two years after, alienas visere terras, and failing to pass into France, where
he intended, he was forced to retire into Cambridge, where having no friends,
nor money, a Country Gentleman of Harleton, named Mr. Line, having but one
little Son, about eight years old, took affection unto me, and entertained me
into his house, and table, to tutor and teach that young Child, and being
there, I got my self admitted into Jesus College; where, as it came to my
course, I kept my Exercise, and within two years after, (having gotten a
Certificate from Christ-Church in Oxford, of my study and good carriage there,
for two years before, I had my degree Bachelour of Arts, and within three years
after, I took my degree Master of Arts, at 21 years of age, and, being admitted
into the holy Orders of a Deacon by the Reverend Bishop of Rochester, and of
Priesthood by the Bishop of Ely, after I had been a while Rector of Foscot in
Buckingham-shire, I became a Preacher and Lectorer in St. Peter's the Proud in
Cheapside, and in the Cathedral Church of S. Paul, For I found it so. And then
printed my first Book, entitled, The resolution of Pilate; and my second Book
entitled, The delights of the Saints.
for the full space of five years; I Lectored upon St. Paul's Epistle to the
Romans, and then began my persecution by the Puritans, as they were then
called, and Fanatics of those days, (saving a little opposition that I
formerly had by the same generation, while I was Curate of Hanwel in Middlesex)
for now, the more pains I took to study, and to preach the truth boldly unto
them, as I ever did without fear, the more mad they were against me, and so
mad, that not only forty, as they were against St. Paul, but I believe above
twice forty conspired together to work my death, and most falsely accused me, of
such things as I never knew, never did, and never said, yet they prosecuted the
same so maliciously that I was bound over (and they did their very best to
hinder me to get any bayl) to answer for my life, at the Sessions house upon
the Goal delivery of Newgate, where, I might demand, tantenae animis
terrestribus irae? But he that dwells in the Heavens, and knew mine
Innocence, and the cause of their malice, laughed them to scorn, and became to
me, as he is always to them that fear him, Deus in opportunitatibus, a present
help in trouble, Who seeing that they would prefer no Bill against me, quitted
me, and said they had forfeited, and should pay their Recognizance, as they
well deserved, to the King. See the Epistle to the Reader before the seven
Golden Candlesticks.
and delivered me with credit and honor out of the mouth of those Lions, that
were exceedingly blamed and checked by that worthy Judge, that afterward came
to be Lord Chancellor Coventrie: Sic me servavit Apollo; So that Jehova saved
me to whom I have committed my self ever since, and vowed, I would praise him,
and thank him, and do him the best service that I could, while I lived, as I
showed in an Epistle before the seven golden Candlesticks. Then immediately
after this, being then about twenty seven years old, I went to Cambridge, and,
though my former troubles wasted my means, (being, by reason of the former
accusations of mine enemies, suspended by the Bishop of London, and driven to
be released by an appeal to the Prerogative Court) yet I took my degree
Bachelour of Divinity, and returning to London, I presently petitioned to my
Lord of Canterbury, Abbats, (whom ever after I found, my very gracious Lord)
and to my Lord Chancellor Egerton, (whom I found so likewise) and showed them
the great wrongs and abuses, to my utter ruin, that I had suffered from the
Bishop of London, and those bloody persecutors, without any shadow or color of
truth in any of all their Accusations; and they presently pitying my case gave
me the Parsonage of Llan-Llechyd, worth to me a 100 li. per annum, a better
Rectory, than that which mine enemies caused the Bishop of London to take from
me, that was rightly presented to it by the Earl of South-hampton. But sicut
unda sequitur undam, so one affliction comes in the neck of another; for I was
no sooner arrived in Llan-Llechyd, but the Bishop of Bangor, because I refused
to take another living for this that he saw was so commodious for him, began to
persecute me afresh, and devised certain Articles, which ex officio he
prosecuted against me, and I was fain again to appeal unto the Arches, and my
Lord of Bangor being in London, my Lord of Canterbury sent for him and me, and
checked him exceedingly for his prosecution, and gave me a License to preach
throughout diverse Diocesses of his Province, and a Protection from being
molested by my Lord of Bangor; yet still I found that busy Bishop would not be
quiet, but as the Poet says, Manet alta mente repostum, judicium paridis, so
my complaint against him to my Lord of Canterbury stuck in his mind, as I had
but a little respect or joy in his Diocese, especially from his Lordship;
therefore, after I had continued there four years, about 32 years old I went to
Cambridge again, and took my degree Doctor of Divinity; and then, returning to
London, I became a domestical Chaplain to the Earl of Montgomery, afterward
Earl of Pembroke, and Lord Chamberlain to his Majesty, to whom I had been
Chaplain at large for many years before. And then blessed be God, I had a
little rest from my persecution, and began to study hard, to Print Books, of no
small Volumes, nor of mean Subjects, as the seven Golden Candlesticks, and many
other Sermons, now termed, The best Religion, and The true Church: divided in
six several Books. And to be promoted, to some eminent places, to be his
Majesty's Chaplain, a Prebend of Westminster, and Dean of Bangor, and before I
was full forty years old, in Election and very like to have been made Bishop of
St. Asaph.

But, when the Sun shines brightest it continues not long without Clouds, and
often times follow storms and tempest; so after I had spent these halsion
days, and lived many years in the Kings Court, I found some rubs and obstacles
of my desires by reason of some discontent and difference betwixt me and the
then Archbish. of Canterbury About my seeking to be Bishop of S. Asaph.
, that clouded the brightness of my hopes for some while; yet at last, when the
Long Parliament began to struggle, and not only to chop off the head of the
wise and stout Earl of Strafford, but also to clap up the Bishop of Canterbury
in Prison, and to clip the wings of all the rest of the Bishops, his Majesty,
of his own gracious mind and accord, without any motion of any man made unto
him, when the Lord Primate of Ireland delivered him a Petition from the Bishops
of Ireland, to desire his Majesty to nominate a very worthy man, Doctor
Sybthorp, that was Bishop of the poor Bishopric of Kilfanora, unto the
Bishopric of Ossory, answered the Primate, that he had reserved the same for
Doctor Williams, Dean of Bangor: To whom the Primate replied, Your Majesty bids
him to his loss, (to use the Primates own words, as he told me,) and his
Majesty answered, He could make him a saver, and therefore let him have the
refusal of it; and when I heard of this passage from my Lord Primate, I thought
I were a very unworthy man if I refused so gracious an offer of so gracious a
Master; and considering that, as my Predecessor, and a man of my spirit, Bishop
Bale, was called by the sole free motion of that pious King, Edw. 6. so I was
called by the sole free motion of the most religious King Charles I. I thought
my self rightly called by God unto it, and I accepted the same, and yielded
unto the divine calling, with all thankefulness unto his gracious Majesty. And
now the storms and tempest begin to darken the Sunshine of my prosperity; for I
was no sooner arrived in Ireland, seen Kilkenny, and preached once in that
Cathedral, and consecrated in Dublin about Michaelmas, but the Rebellion there
brake out the October following, after I had spent well-nigh 300 li. and had
received not one penny; then was I forced to fly toward his Majesty, and the
next Summer after having occasion to go to Dublin, after I had settled my Wife
and Family in a house that I had by Tocester, and the first night that I came
to my house, after my return from Ireland, the Rebels in North-hampton, having
heard how zealously I had preached for his Majesty, and that now I was returned
to my house by Tocester again, sent a Troop of horse under the command of
Captain Flaxon, and so he carried me a prisoner to North-hampton, where at my
first entrance into the Town, I saw a whole troop of Boys and Girls, and other
Apprentices, that expected my coming, and as the boys cried to Elizeus, come up
thou bald pate, come up, so they cried along the street, a Bishop, a Bishop,
and with this Io paean was I carried to the Commissioners Lodging, where I was
clapped up close in a Chamber, and one of the Commissioners, Sir John North, I
believe the civillest of them all, came to me with a Satchel of Writings, that
Captain Flaxon found in my house, and opening the same, the first writings that
came into his hand was the Treatise that I had written, and had entitled it,
The Grand Rebellion, and had written those words on the outward leaf thereof;
and as soon as ever he took it out of the bag, I made bold, And if I had not
done so, I had been undone.
before he had cast his eye upon the Title, to take it out of his hands, and
said, this is a Sermon that I carried with me to preach where I should rest on
the Lords day, but that the Letters, that were to the King, and to the Bishop
of York, and others, were in the Satchel, and he for haste to see the Letters,
suffered me to put my Sermon and the Grand Rebellion into my Pocket, which I
feared would have been my death or utter ruin, if the Commissioners had seen
it. Then Sir John, having taken out the Letters, asked me, how I durst at those
times carry Letters unto the King? I answered, they were Letters from those
poor Bishops, that therein showed to his Majesty how they were pillaged and
persecuted by the Popish Irish Rebels, and I knew, and had a Copy of what was
in them before I would carry them; then Sir John said, I did wisely to do so:
and so he went in unto the rest of the Commissioners, and left me, locked in the
room, yet very joyful for having gotten my Grand Rebellion out of his hands:
but behold still the malice of Satan and the subtilty of his Instruments, while
I was walking up and down the room, and had torn the worst case that I had writ
against the Parliament, and chewed it in my mouth and threw it away, an arrand
knave was peeping at the key hole, and went unto the Commissioners and told
them that I had some desperate or treacherous Papers, which he saw me tear;
then Sir John North comes to me again and aked, what Papers those were that I
was seen tearing? I smilingly answered, Alas Sir, ever since I came from Sea, I
was troubled with a looseness, and having by chance a loose leaf in my Pocket,
I plucked it out, and said, this is the Paper, that I had in my hand, to go to
the house of office, and he looking upon it, and finding it of no effect, said,
Is this all? And went his ways: and then I remembered what our Savior said,
When you are brought before Rulers, Mark 13.11.
take no thought what you shall speak, for it shall be given you, in illa hora,
in that very hour, what to answer; and God also wrought in the Commissioners
such thoughts of me, and my sufferings by the Irish, that they gave me a Pass
to go home, and delivered me my horses, which Captain Flaxon hoped to have had
for his reward, and the forty pounds, which he found in my house, and which I
told the Commissioners was all that I had to keep me and my Family: So
graciously did God help me, that I went home with joy, contrary to the
expectation of my Neighbors, that informed the Rebels of my return to those
parts.

And within a few days after was the Battle at Edgehill, at which time, I
went to his Majesty, and waited on him until he came to Oxford, And here in
Oxford I printed first my Grand Rebellion, and afterward, my discovery of
mysteries, and last of all, The rights of Kings.
where immediately I printed my Grand Rebellion; and finding how well and how
graciously his Majesty accepted of my endeavors therein, I went to Wales and
studied my discovery of mysteries, or the plots of the Parliament, to overthrow
both Church and State, and by the next Winter I came to Oxford to Print it, and
being printed, Secretary Faukeland misliking a passage, that I had set down of
the Episcopal power in causa sanguinis, would have had it called in, but his
Majesty would not suffer it to be suppressed; therefore I resolved, by the next
Winter, to publish (as I did) my Book of the Rights of Kings both in Church and
Commonwealth, and the wickedness of the pretended Parliament; and in the
interim I was persuaded to go to London, to see what I could work upon my Lord
of Pembroke, whom I had served so many years, and tutored all his Children,
whereof two were now with his Majesty; and when I came to London I took the
opportunity to go unto him, For I conceived that time to be the safest time.
while he was in bed, and after much conference with him, about the differences
betwixt the King and his Parliament, and their disloyalty to his Majesty, and
that I saw he began to be offended and very angry, for fear he should deliver
me to the Parliament, that formerly had caused all that they found of my Grand
Rebellion to be burnt, I took my leave of him, and presently highed me to go
out of Town; but was denied to pass, until I used my wit to the Mayor of
London, to get a Pass, by telling him, that I was a poor pillaged Preacher of
Ireland, that came to London to see my friends, and now having some other
friends in North-hampton and thereabout, And I have his Pass by me to this very
day.
I humbly desired his Pass to go to see them, and he pitying my case, called
for a cup of Wine, and commanded his Clerk to write me a Pass without a Fee.

And then, after I had passed a good way toward North-hampton, I turned to
Oxford: and from thence within a while to Wales, and from thence to Ireland;
and after Nasby fight, being bound with my L. Taafe in a thousand Marks a piece
unto his Majesty, for the appearance of Colonel Vangary, (that returned at
Edgehill fight from the Parliament unto the King with Sir Faithful Fortescue)
at Beaumares Sizes, for taking away a Drove of Cattle from the Drovers of
Anglesey, and he not appearing, our Recognizans were forfeited, and I was fain
to return to his Majesty, with Letters from my Lord of Ormond, that Van-garie
could not come out of Ireland, and therefore his Majesty was humbly desired to
remit the forfeiture of our Recognizance, which his Majesty, by his Letters to
the Justices of Peace of Anglesey, very graciously did, and sent another Letter
by me again to my Lord of Ormond: but in my passage to his Majesty, I was like
to be carried to the Parliament, by a knave, that about ten miles from
Aberystwith began to examine me, and said that I was a Spy for the King, and
therefore I must be carried before some of the Parliament Officers, to be
examined; and I had no other shift but to commend him for his care, and to tell
him, that there were too many Spies abroad, and I was but a poor pillaged man
in Ireland, that would very willingly go before any man, and I still called for
drink, until he was persuaded that I was a very honest man, and so he let me go
in peace. And before I could pass into Dublin, General Mitton with his Army,
had entered into our Country, and I, preaching that Sunday, that he came, at
Rhudhland, had an Alarm about midnight, and was fain to flee to Carnarvon
shire, and when he came to Carnarvon shire, to flee too Anglesey. And because
Anglesey was an Island, and could not be won if the Inhabitants would be true
among themselves, we that were true Royalists, summoned the chiefest Gentry of
the Country, Clergy and Laity, to meet on a certain day in Llan-geuenie, to
consider what we should best do for the defense of our Country; and though that
Doctor White, and my self, Mr. Jo. Gruff. and Mr. Morgan, and Mr. Michael
Evans, drew an Oath of our faithfulness and Allegiance to his Majesty, and the
defense of our Country to the uttermost hazard of our lives and fortunes,
against the rebellious Parliament so full and so well as our Wits and Learning
could devise, and all that were there, excepting Mr. O. Wood of Llan Gwyven,
took it without any scruple, yet, before any one drop of blood was spilt, or
many days were past, the Gentry Articled with General Mitton, to yield up that
Island into his hands, and he did set Garrisons where he pleased: then I,
conscious of what I had done, always and every where against the Rebels, durst
not trust to the mercy and truth of the Parliament, but gave ten pounds to
Captain Roberts, that Mr. O. Wood had appointed over the Garrison in Holy Head,
to suffer me to pass in a Parliament Ship, (for the King had none in those
parts) into Dublin, and the Master of the Ship, that carried me, said, he durst
not set me on shore any where, but bring me to Captain Wood, that was then
Vice Admiral to the Parliament in the Bay before Dublin; yet I thought it was
better for me to trust, that God would deliver me from that wood, than to stay
among the briars of the Long Parliament; so when we came to the Bay, and near
the Vice-Admirals Frigot, it being late in the Evening, I told the Master that
I was very ill, as I was indeed, and I gave him a 20 s. piece of Gold for
carrying me over, and desired that I might stay in my Cabin there, till next
morning, which he readily yielded.

And early the next morning, when I thought all the Seamen in Captain Woods
Ship, excepting the Sentinel that kept the Watch, were asleep, lest any of them
should know me, I desired to be sent to the Vice Admiral; and so I was. And
when I came there, I gave 2 s. 6 d. in silver to the Sentinel, to tell Captain
Wood, that here was a Kinsman of my Lord of York, (whom I knew was respected
by all the Parliamenteers, because he had besieged the Castle of Conway for the
Parliament, and was the chief man that called Mitten into the Country, and the
only instrument to bring Anglesey to submit unto him) and he had a Pass from
Holy Head to go, to do a little business in Dublin, and when he had finished
his business, to return with as much speed as he could unto my Lord of York
again, and I thought this was a fair tale; and indeed, I thank God, it took
effect; for Captain Wood came to me, and after he had examined me about diverse
things, and I had answered him as warily as I could, he searched me, and,
though I had in my Pocket a Letter from his Majesty in my behalf to my Lord of
Ormond, yet, because I had so artificially set it on the backside of a
Pocket-glass and Comb-case, betwixt the leather and the glass, he suspected no
such thing, though he beheld his own face in the glass, and so conceiving no
ill thought of me, but that I was a very good friend of the Parliament, being a
Kinsman of my Lord of York, and of his name too, he called for a good Glass of
Clarret-wine and drank to me and to my Lord of York, and I drunk it off every
drop; and put on a bold face, as I was wont to do every where, knowing that
degeneros animos timor arguit.

And then he sent me to shore toward Hoeth, and before we came to Land we
should see three or four Soldiers, runnagadoes, that were desirous to go to
the Parliament ship, but I gave five shillings to the Rowers to put me to land
a pretty way from them, and when I was set on land, the boat-men turned away
presently and would not receive the Soldiers into their boat, which the
Soldiers seeing, called unto me to come to them, or to stay for them, but I
would not tarry, How I escaped the runnagado Soldiers.
but went away as fast as I could; and they seeing that presented their Guns,
as if they would shoot at me; yet I still ventured to go on, knowing, that
being no standing mark, it was but a chance to hit me, if their pieces were
charged, and they shot at me, and when they saw their vain threatening did not
frighten me, they began to run after me, as fast as ever they could, and I
began to run from them, as fast as ever I could, and being a pretty way before
them, and seeing some Irish men reaping, not far off, I made toward them, and
thought I could get to them before they could overtake me, and so I did: yet
running so fast, and so far, I was all of a sweat before I came unto the
Reapers, who kept off the Soldiers that they durst not come near me. Thus was
I saved from those, that I assured my self would have robbed me, if not kill me.

Then I went to Dublin, and stayed there, and preached often, until Ireland
was surrendered upon Articles unto the Parliament; and I being by name to have
the benefit of those Articles, and having received a very fair and considerable
sum of money, by the hands of Sir George Lane, from my Lord of Ormond, that had
always showed himself a most honorable friend, and a bountiful helper and
benefactor to me; I resolved to live upon that small temporal means which I
had, about twenty pounds a year, in Wales: But, after I put my Books, and
Clothes, and household stuff, How I was taken prisoner and robbed by Captain
Beech. And nothing troubled me so much as the loss of a paper Book which I had
written, full of Sermons, which vexes me to this very day.
and all the Money I had, and my self into the Packet-boat, to pass to Holy
Head, our ship was taken, about the middle way, by Captain Beeche, and I was
robbed of all that I had in it, Clothes, Books, Money, and Household stuff, and,
with a great deal of entreaty and favor, I prevailed with Captain Beeche, to
cast us all, his Prisoners, upon a little Island, called, Irelands eye, and
making there a fire that we brought with us from the Ship, we had a boat that
carried us into Hoath, and from thence we went all to Dublin, where Doctor
Loftus very friendly gave me as much money as carrried me to London; and there
I petitioned to the Committee for Sequestered men, to be restored according to
the Articles of Anglesey and of Ireland, to my means; and one of them, named
Scot, that since has been hanged, demanded, if I had not written the Grand
Rebellion? and I answered, I did: then said he, and do you come for performance
of Articles, that deserve rather to have your head cut off; No, no, said Corbet
and the Chairman, let us go to another matter; and I, lest I should be clapped
by the heels, And after the Committee read the Letters I got them from them to
show them to other Committee men, and I keep them with me to this very day.
stunk away from those Wolves, as fast as I could.

Yet I was loath, so, desistere caeptis, but I would try movere omnem lapidem,
and seeing hac non successit alia aggrediar via, and, having procured a little
money, I went to Sir Thomas, now Lord Fairfax, and giving his Secretary some
pieces of Gold, he got me my Lord Fairfax his Letters to the Committee of
North-hampton and of Anglesey to restore me to my temporal means, and they not
sitting together, I was fain, in a very cold and snowy weather to walk on foot
(for I had no horse, nor money to buy one) from one to one of the Committee, to
get their hands to restore me, and so I had them, and I thank God I was
restored; then after I had been in London, and had the favor to go with my
Lord of Ormond in his Coach from Kingston to Hampton Court, to wait upon his
Majesty, a little before he went to the Isle of Wight, I went, as soon as ever
I heard the King was gone, to live privately and poorly in mine own house in
Wales, and there fell hard to my study to finish my Great Antichrist, and to
preach as occasion offered it self; and so I continued for a long time in a
very poor condition, so poor, that when three or four of the Parliament
Soldiers were sent to quarter at my house, and there, finding neither Servants
to attend them, nor Beer to drink, nor other provision, but some barley bread,
and a little glas-doore, I got a good dinner with them, of that provision which
they brought, and they presently went to their Captain, and told him, my house
had nothing for them, and they must have a better quarter, and so before night
they were removed to a far better accommodation, and my mean condition
preserved me ever after from the quartering of any Soldiers, while I lived
there. So poverty was to me an advantage; and so I always thought and
believed, that God would work together all things for the best for them that
love him, as the Apostle says, and therefore this made me, when my Lord of
Pembroke (whom I had for so many Lustras of years served) offered in this my
poor estate, to procure me a living, then void in Lancashire, from the
Parliament, worth four hundred pound per annum, so I would be ruled and submit
my self to the Parliament, to thank his Lordship for his Honorable favor,
When all the rest of the Bishops accepted of 100 li. a piece from Hen. Crumwel,
I refused the same.
but to refuse the Living, for which he several times called me fool for my
pains; and so likewise when Mr. Henry Crumwel heard of my often preaching in
Dublin, and was desirous to hear me in his own house, and when I had ended my
Sermon bad me dine with him, and as he allowed the rest of the Bishops 100 li.
a piece per annum to maintain them, so a friend of mine told me from his
Lordship, he was favorably pleased to do the like to me; to whom I answered,
that I was infinitely obliged to him for his favor, but that I was resolved to
live contented with that small means that I had of mine own. I was so fully
persuaded to retain mine integrity and faithfulness to my King, and assured my
self of that change and revolution, which I so speedily expected to come to
pass.

And so I continued there in Llanlechyd in that poor condition until his
Majesty, that now is, was upon his march toward Worcester; at which time Sir
Gruffith Williams, my very good friend and Landlord, being Sheriff, desired me
to preach at the Assizes in Conwey before the Judges; and the whole Country
knows how boldly and freely I showed them their duty, now to manifest their
Loyalty and love to his Majesty, whom God had thus graciously brought unto
their doors; so that Courtney the then Governor of Beaumaresh, coming to Town
after Sermon, and hearing what I had preached, did exceedingly fret, and chafe,
and chide with the Judges, because that they would hear such a man, as was so
well known to be such a grand enemy unto the Parliament, and concluded with the
now Sir John Carter, the then Governor of Conwey, (that told me as soon as I
had done my Sermon, but that he would not seem uncivil, he would have plucked me
by the ears out of the Pulpit, a fine sight) that they should clap me up in
Prison; but I hearing of it, did immediately, as fast as ever I could get my
horse, and posted away, as it were upon Pegasus, to hide my self from those
then tyrannous whelps of Cerberus; the same Carter, being the man, that (when I
was preaching at Llan Sannam, and another whelp of the same litter, rose up,
and contradicted all that I had said, and caused me to be plucked out of the
Pulpit, and such a tumult to arise, that I feared much slaughter would be
committed, and that I should be torn all to pieces; and when some of the
Gentlemen of the Parish, at the Quarter Sessions in Ruthen, would have indicted
the fellow that disturbed me in my Sermon) said, they should rather indict me
for preaching contrary to the order now set forth, than him that had so justly
hindered me; so I was only blamed, and he acquitted by the justice of Sir John
Carter.

After this I continued in my poor house until I had finished my Great
Antichrist, and then I showed it to very many of my friends, whom I durst
trust, both in Ireland and Wales, and told them when (according to the
Prophesies of the Scripture, that I had collected and was fully persuaded of
the truth thereof) his now Majesty should be restored, and I carried it to
London to be printed, and left it with my old friend, that had printed my Best
Religion, Mr Stevens, and he showing it to some of his friends, Presbyterians I
conceive, to have their opinion of it, and some of them answered it somewhat
large, and Mr. Stevens delivered the same to me, and the conclusion was, The
answer and the answerers opinion of the printing of it, I have by me to this
day.
the printing of it is like to be much to the damage of the Printer, and the
ruin of the Author, (if he be found out) and little credit, in my opinion, is
so like to gain thereby. So Mr. Stevens durst not venture to print it by any
means; yet, if I could have had any other to print it, I would have done it,
and resolved to have fled into the Low Countries when it had been done; but it
could not be, that any Stationer would venture to do it; so I went to Wales.

But when I heard that Sir George Booth was risen in Cheshire; and was so near
the time that I expected and foreshewed his Majesty's restoration, I took a
young Philly that I had of three years old, and in a very cold snow and frost
in January, I went soft and fair toward London, hoping that now, so many men
looking after the coming in of our King, and Colonel Monk expected to assist
him, I should have my Great Antichrist published; yet still the Rump was so
strong, that it could not be: therefore I was fain to retire toward Wales
again; and going from my house by Tocester, where I had left my Mare, some ten
miles, in a frosty morning, a foot, I afterward went a horseback, but had not
rid one quarter of a mile, but my Mare, whom all my Neighbors there said she
was great with foal, lay down under me; and I, fearing she would cast her
Foale, and so perhaps lose my Mare, or forced to leave her behind me, was
resolved to lead her in my hand; and so I did from that place, which was
Daintry, to my house in Wales, about seven score miles, the way being somewhat
fair in the latter end of March.

Then, having some occasions to go to Ireland, being at Holy Head, I had notice
with the Post, from London, that the Parliament, according as I found in
Scripture, had voted the coming in of the King, and I, landing in Dublin about
seven of the Clock the next morning, being Sunday, preached at St. Brides, and
publicly prayed for the King, I am sure the first man in the Kingdom of
Ireland, and the next morning went toward Kilkenny, and going to Donmore, to
present my service to my Lady of Ormond, I found her, as she was ever, the most
honorable of all the Ladies that ever I knew, and taking me aside, informed me
of the state of Kilkenny, and of all things thereabouts; so I went to Kilkenny
and preached there, and publicly prayed for his Majesty, the next Sunday after
I had done the like at Dublin, and then hasted back to Dublin, and from thence,
without stay, to Holy Head, and resting but one night in mine own house, I rode
as fast as I could to London, and having left all the Lands that I had in
Ireland, in pawn for 100 li. which mine own self carried to London, I agreed
for the Printing of my Great Antichrist, and immediately after his Majesty's
happy arrival in London, having the same printed in three Printing-houses, and
my self paying for the printing of it with ready money, I got it presently
done, and presented it to his Majesty, who very graciously accepted thereof.

But one of my Countrymen had begged of his Majesty the Deanery of Bangor; yet,
when I informed his Majesty, that my good King and gracious Master, his Father,
had conferred it upon me, to hold it in commendum, so firm as Law could make
it; his Majesty was most graciously pleased presently to send to Sir Edward
Nicholas to recall the Grant that he had made to Mr. Lloyd, but the same being
past to the Great Seal, my Lord Chancellor, to whom I ever was very much
obliged, knowing my Faithfulness to my late King and best Master, and my
sufferings for him, did most honorably stop it, before I could come unto his
Lordship; and so by his Majesty and my Lord Chancellours goodness, I still
enjoyed my Masters favor.

Then, things being somewhat settled, I went to live upon my Bishopric, in
Kilkenny, where I found the Cathedral Church and the Bishops house all ruined,
and nothing standing but the bare walls, without Roofs, without Windows, but
the holes, and without doors; yet I resolved presently to mend and repair one
Room, and to live in the Bishops house, and as I had vowed, that if I should
ever come to my Bishopric, I should wholly and fully bestow the first years
profit for the reparation of the Church, so my witness is in heaven, that I
have done it; and have since bestowed more, as forty pound the last Summer for
repairing the Steeple of the Cathedral, And this Summer six score pounds for to
make a Bell, worth they say 200 l.
and yet a thousand pounds more will not sufficiently repair that Church, which
I vowed to bestow, If I recover the Bishops house, and live to it; and a great
deal of cost more I laid out upon the Bishops house. Yet now began my
Oppression, which grieves me much more than my Persecution, because my
persecution was personal, and concerned my self alone: but mine Oppression does
now reach to the dishonor of God, and the robbing of Jesus Christ of his
service, and the destruction of his Servants; when as the Church of Christ
cannot be ruled without Governors, nor instructed without Teachers, and
neither of them can subsist without maintenance.

And yet now Noblemen and Gentlemen, Soldiers and Citizens and all, think no
Bread so sweet, no Wine so pleasant as that which they snatch from the Altar,
and no Land so fertile as that which they hold from the Church, and keep it by
force from the Churchmen; and to give you a taste of this truth, I have
printed a Narrative and a true Relation of a Law proceeding, betwixt my self
and Sir George Ayskue, a civil Gentleman, I confess, and one that has been
Vice Admiral to the Long Parliament, but now is very faithful to our present
King, and sorry for what he has been, as I verily believe, and is a man of a
very fair carriage, and of very good parts; yet bewitched with the disguised
spirit of Sacrilege, to hold fast in his hands the Lands of the Church, and
not only he, but many others are sick of the same disease, as appears by the
subsequent of this relation.

A true Relation of a Law-proceeding, betwixt the Right Reverend Father in God,
Griffith L. Bishop of Ossory, and Sir George Ayskue, Knight, etc.
Shows,
THat the Lordship of Bishops Court, alias upper Court, belongs to the Bishop
of Ossory: And as I am informed, Jo. Bale Bishop of Ossory dwelt in the Manor
house thereof, and was from thence driven by the Tories in Queen Mary's days,
to flee to Geneva to save his life; when he, looking out at his Window, saw his
Steward, that was, with his Hay-makers, killed before his face; and he being
fled to Geneva, Jo. Tonery was made Bishop of Ossory, and he made away diverse
Lordships, and among the rest, this Bishops Court in Fee-farm, as they pre end,
to one Rich. Shea, Bishop Bale being yet alive, and lived in Queen Elizabeth's
days; after, Tonery came Bishop Gafney, and Bishop Bale still alive; and after
Gafney, came Bishop Walsh, and he finding the invalidity of the Fee-farmes made
by the Popish Bishops, while the right Bishop was alive, petitioneth to Queen
Elizabeth, and had her Letters to the Lord Lieutenant and Council, to hear the
Cause, and to relieve the Bishop according as they found the equity of his
Cause, but before he could have any redress, he was killed by some Irish man
(to prevent the recovery of the said Lordship, as it is conceived) in his own
house; After that, came Bishop Deane, and he vigorously prosecutes the recovery
of the said Lordship, and he had not done much more then begun, but he dies:
Then came Bishop Wheeler, and he petitioneth to my Lord of Strafford for the
said Lordship of Bishops Court, and by the great care and desire of the now
most Reverend Primate of all Ireland, to benefit the Church of Christ, Bishop
Wheeler had the Lordship of Frenis-Town, (that was one of the pretended
Fee-farms made by Tonery, and formerly yielded the Bishop but 4 li. yearly, and
does now yield 50 li. every year) yielded up unto him; so that Shea might still
continue in the Bishops Court; and when Wheeler died, my gracious King, and
good Master, Charles the First, commended me to the Bishopric of Ossory, then
came the Rebellion, and I was driven to flee before I had received one Penny
from my Bishopric, or had continued two Months therein; but blessed be God
for it, I was restored by our now most gracious King; and having an Order from
the most Honorable House of Lords, to be put into the possession of all the
Houses and Lands of the Bishop of Ossory, that the last Bishop died seized of,
the Sheriff of the County of Kilkenny did put me, among diverse other places,
into the possession of the said Bishops Court, and the Tenants attourned
Tenants unto me, and continued from the (...) day of April until the 8th. day
of October following, 1662. at which time, one Captain Burges, and diverse
others, Anabaptists and Sectaries, the Tenants of Sir George Ayskue, that never
come into the Church, yet came into the Bishops House, and thence expelled the
Bishop and his Tenants, from his possession. And I, the Bishop hearing of it,
went thither my self, with two men and my Chaplain Mr. Thomas Bulkley; and
finding the door open, I and my Chaplain went in, and one of them, that kept
the possession, affronted and justled me at the door of the Loft, to hinder my
entrance in, and yet I got in; and then more and more came into the Room, to
the number of 9 or 10 persons: And some of them, especially Captain Burges,
vilified and threatened me to the fear of my Life, and some did shut the Iron
Grate, and locked it, as I conceived, to keep me there for their Prisoner, and
to hinder my two servants, that I had sent with my horses to Freshfoord, to
come in; and when they demanded if they meant to murder their Lord, and desired
to come in, one of them, that had a Cudgel in his hand, said, that if he
offered to come in there, he would knock him in the head; and my man answered
him with the like menaces, and I, hearing of their high threats, and fearing
what mischief might fall out there, sent a peremptory command to my men, to go
home, and let what death soever pleased God, come to me; but, after that I got
liberty to go unto mine own house, I called a private Sessions, and Indicted
Will. Portis, Tho. Collins, Jo. Rayman, Josias Scot, Will. Burges, for their
forcible entry; but the Indictment, being removed by a Certiorari to the Kings
Bench, though I had retained two Counselors, and gave them twenty shillings
for their Fee, to do things right, and according to Law, yet through the error
of the Clerk, there were some faults found in the Indictment, and so the same
was quasht by the Judges of the Kings Bench: Then I got the best Attorney that
I thought was in Dublin, and is so reputed by all my friends, to draw me
another Indictment against the foresaid forcible enterers; and being drawn, I
carried it to Sir William Donvil, the Kings Attorney, and gave him his Fee to
review it, and mend it, if any thing was amiss in it, and make it so, as it
might stand good in Law, the which thing, he very carefully did, and amended
some things with his own hands: And I knew not what I could or should do more,
to draw a good Indictment.

Then I desired the Justices of the Peace, to send a precipe, to the Sheriff
to summon a Jury to examine the force, which they did, upon the said place,
where the force was committed.

And, though Sir George Ayskue had for his Attorney, Mr. Smith, the now High
Sheriff of the County of the City of Kilkenny, and Mr. Johnson, the Recorder
of the City of Kilkenny for his Counselor, to plead against the finding of
the Indictment true, as much as ever they could, and another Counselor stood
against it, as much, or more than either of them both; and I had neither
Attorney nor Counselor to say any thing for it, but what the Witnesses
proved; yet the Jury did presently find it Billa Vera.

Then I desired the Justices of the Peace to restore me to my Possession, but
to prevent the same, Mr. Smith, Sir George Ayskues Attorney, having a
Certiorari ready in his Pocket, did immediately, as soon as ever the Jury had
brought in their Verdict, deliver the same into the hands of the Justices of
the Peace, and they delivered it to the Clerk of the Peace, and the Justices
said, that now they could not restore me to my Possession, because that their
hands were stopped, and all the proceedings must be transmitted to the Kings
Bench, by Octab. Hillarii.

And when I came to Kilkenny, I went to the Clerk of the Peace, and examined
the same Indictment, which the Jury found (and which I had done before) ad
amussim, very diligently, with that Copy, which the Kings Attorney had amended,
and averred to be sufficient; and I prayed the Clerk of the Peace, to give me
a Copy of that Indictment, which the Jury found, the which he did under his
hand, and I examined all again, and found them in all things to be verbatim,
word for word agreeable one to another.

Then by Octab. Hillarii, the time set, to return the proceedings to the Kings
Bench, I went to Dublin: But there was no Indictment returned; still I
expected, but still in vain; At last I complained to the Lords Justices; but
they answered, that they could not help it, for they knew not, whether the
Certiorari was delivered or not: At last, seeing it was neither returned, nor
like to be returned, I was advised to make Affidavit, that I had seen it
delivered into the hands of the Justices of the Peace, and that I heard it
read, and then saw it delivered to the Clerk of the Peace; and then upon the
reading of my Affidavit, and a motion made by my Counsel thereupon; there was
an Order set down, that there should be 20 li. fine set upon the Clerk of the
Peace, if the proceedings and the Indictment came not in by such a day; So, at
last, it came in, but it was the last day of the Term that it came into the
Court; and then the Kings Sergeant moved for my possession; but the Counsel, on
the other side, pleaded, that there was an error in the said Indictment; and
being somewhat long in alleging the Cases of A. and B. and of John an Oaks
and John a Style, the Lord Chief Justice told him, it was the last day of the
Term, and Motions were to be heard: Therefore seeing they could not hear out
the Matter now, they should show cause by the second day of the next Term why
possession should not be restored.

Then I thought this was to keep me long enough out of my Possession, and to
let Sir George Ayskue have one half years rent more, to the two half years Rent
that he had already, since I was driven out of my Possession, and to let his
Counsel have time e ough added, to what they had already, to pick as many holes
as they could find, or could make in mine Indictment, but, considering that, as
the Poet says, Levius fit patientia quicquid corrigere est nefas, I went away,
and said nothing.

But upon the second day of the next Term, which was appointed for the hearing
of it, the Kings Attorney moved for possession, and the Counsel of the other
side began to plead the errors of the Indictment, but the pleading was
presently put off, and it was prosecuted the next day: The Kings Attorney being
not there; and the main error, that was of any moment, and which was neither
seen nor touched the Term before by Sir George his Counsel; (for all other
things alleged, as my Counsel said, were but trifles, and could easily be
answered) was, that in the Indictment it was said, Per Sacramentum quindecem
virorum, whereas it should be Per Sacramentum proborum and legalium hominum
comitatus Kilken-predict. extitit. presentat. which words were all left out of
the Indictment, and the other words put in the room of them; Then I stood up
and said, I was certain, the words quindecim virorum were not in the Indictment
that was found by the Jury, and that all the other words were in it; because
that my self had examined it, and read it, and had likewise a Copy of it, under
the hand of the Clerk of the Peace, which was examined with the Original by my
self: And I offered in open Court to make Oath of all this; but the Lords
Justices answered, that they could not proceed but according to the Record,
that was returned to the Court, which they must conceive to be the true Record;
And I answered, That I hoped they would not judge according to that Record,
which I would swear was false and corrupted, and not the true Record, nor
according to the Record that was found by the Jury; yet I could not prevail to
have the Clerk of the Peace sent for, and to bring the original Record to be
showed in the Court, therefore by the next day I brought this Affidavit in
writing: THe Right Reverend Father in God, Griffith, Lord Bishop of Ossory,
this day made oath before me, that he had sundry times perused the original
Indictment and Record of Forcible Entry found by a Jury of the County of
Kilkenny, upon the 18th day of December last past, against the said Defendants
in the Custody of one Nicholas Halpenny, who as is alleged is either Clerk, or
Deputy Clerk of the Peace for the said County, and that the said Indictment and
Record being removed into this Court Pursuant to his Majesty's Writ of
Certiorari, this Deponent did peruse the said Record so transmitted by the said
Halpenny, and does find upon view and examination thereof, that there are
sundry Circumstantial and substantial words, which are in the said original
Indictment found by the Grand Jury omitted to be returned; and as this Deponent
believes and remembers other words are inserted therein by the Clerk that
returned or drew up the same. He further deposed, That before the Record was
returned into this Court, he had a Copy of the said Original attested under the
hand of the said Halpenny, which he does find upon examination to be different
from the Record now lodged in this Court, by virtue of the said Certiorari, and
that as this Deponent is credibly informed, and verily believes, the said
Certiorari and Record now returned was for the space of one month, or
thereabouts, in Dublin detained in the hands of Mr. Patrick Lambert, who is
said to be Attorney for Sir George Ayscue Knight, the pretended Proprietor of
the premises in the Indictment contained, before such time as he returned the
same, and that this Deponent could not have the said Record returned ere that
he had by the Court a conditional fine imposed upon the Clerk of the Peace, or
his Deputy for his neglect in not returning thereof.



And then my Counsel moved, that it might be read, and so it was: And I showed
to their Lordships what great wrong and abuse this was to me, and an injury to
his Majesty, to have the Record falsified and corrupted, and protested in the
open Court, that, so long as I could either speak or go, I would not suffer
this abuse to pass unexamined, and at last, with much ado, I got the Lords
Justices, to grant their Writ, to enjoin the Clerk of the Peace, to appear
upon the Saturday following, to answer such things as should be objected
against him sub poena c. librarum, at which time he came; and I went with him
to my Lord Chief Justice his house, to show him the original Record, and how it
was falsely transcribed, and not according to that, which was brought into the
Court; but my Lord Chief Justice seeming, as I conceived, somewhat angry, said,
he would hear nothing, nor, see any thing, but what should be showed in Court;
and then the Clerk of the Peace came with me to the Court, and when he was
called, he confessed the truth, that the Record transmitted to the Court, was
not according to the original Record, but w s falsely written by his Clerk,
that he trusted to write it, altogether unknown to him; then my Counsel moved,
that the Record might be amended according to the original Record; but the
Lords Justices answered, that they could not alter the Record brought into the
Court: And the Kings Solicitor, Mr. Temple, very honestly replied, they might,
if they pleased, have it amended, for that, in such a case, some error or
mistake was found in an Indictment in the time of one Clerk of the Peace, and
it was ordered to be amended pro rege in the time of another Clerk of the
Peace; the Lord Chief Justice answered, this Indictment was brought into the
Court the last Term, and therefore it could not be amended this Term. Then I
replied, It should have been brought in in the beginning of the last Term, but
it was concealed till the last day of the last Term, and this error then was
neither seen nor spoken of; and how could we move then, to have it amended,
before we knew the falsehood and corrupting of it, which was no ways perceived
till this time? Yet, for all that I could say or do, I could not prevail to
have the Record amended, according to the original Record. And when I saw that,
I desired my Counsel, to desire their Lordships, either to grant that it might
be amended, or to quash it out of hand, that I should not spend my self in
Dublin, but go to begin a fresh, and to indict them again; and then my Lord
Chief Justice answered, seeing we desired to quash it, let it be quasht; which,
in respect of the Kings fine, I conceived, should not be done, if the original
Indictment, found by the Jury, was good. Then I got the Kings Solicitor, Mr.
Temple, and the Kings Sergeant, Sergeant Griffith, and Mr. Darcy, to draw me an
Indictment, that would stand good in Law; and presently I went to Kilkenny, and
required the Justices of the peace to send their precipe, to the Sheriff, to
summon 24 men to appear at Freshfoord the 23 of the instant, which they did
accordingly; and the Deputy Sheriff appointed these Gentlemen to be summoned,
Nom. Jur. ad inquirend.
John Grace of Courtstowne, Esquire; John Wheeler, Gent. Rich Donvil, Gent. William
Davies, Gent. Walter Bushop, Gent. Walter Nosse, Gent. John Pursel, Gent.
William Pay, Gent. William White, Gent. Ralph Hale. Gent. Lewis Mathews, Gent.
Robert Grace, Gent. George Lodge, Gent. Edmund Butler, Gent. Matthew White,
Gent. William Hunter, Gent. Thomas Green, Gent. Vincent Knatchbul, Gent. Ric.
Comerford of Degenmore, G. Tho. Bowers of Knoctopher, G. Emanuel Palmer, Gent.
Mathias Reilegh, Gent. Chri. Auetstone of Thomastone. Tho. Hussie of Gowrom,
Gent. Toby Boil of Condonstown, Gent. Tho. Tomlins of Lyniate Abbey. Joseph
Wheeler of Killrush. George Barton of Gostingstown, G.


But before the Bailiffs were gone to summon them, the High Sheriff was come to
the Town, and seeing the List of the Subscribed, and having conferred with Sir
George Ayscue, that lay in the next Room where the Sheriff lay, he said those
men should not serve in the Jury, but he would choose a Jury for this business,
and he nominated such men: Anabaptists, Presbyterians, and others of the most
rigid Sectaries, that were in all the whole County: Yet because I knew two or
three of them to be very honest men, I was very well contented with them. But
as soon as ever I was gone from the Sheriff, those men were put by, and other
Sectaries put into the List in their stead A Jury as my friends, that knew
them, said would hang all the Bishops in Ireland, if they were their Jury to
try them.
. And the Bailiff coming to me for more money then I had given him, for
summoning those that the Deputy Sheriff had appointed, because now, the High
Sheriff had appointed men, that he had picked out over all the County of
Kilkenny: Then I suspected some evil determined against me, and I desired the
Bailiff, to show me the List of those, that he was to summon, and when I saw
those honest men that I knew, put out, and others put in their room, I put the
Warrant in my Pocket, and bad the Bailiff tell the Sheriff, that my Witnesses
for the King were not ready; and after he told this to the Sheriff, he came to
me again weeping and crying, and desired me for Gods sake to give him his
Warrant: For the Sheriff was very angry with him, and he was utterly undone,
for showing me the Warrant, but I kept it still in my Pocket.

And thus was I served, with a great deal of travel and charge above 60 li. in
seeking to recover the Church Lands, which I resolved and vowed if I could
recover it, to bestow it wholly for the repairing and re-edifying of the
flat-fallen Church of Kilkenny: And now, let the Judge of all the World, and
let all just and honest men judge, whether this be a fair and just proceeding.

But quorsum haec? To what purpose is all this pains of this Relation? Is it to
tax and charge the Reverend Judges either of injustice or partiality? No, By
no means: I tax no man; but I set down rem gestam the whole matter a capite ad
calcem; and they, the Judges and Counselors, being great Lawyers may find all
this to be just; and especially, to make it seem so to be; and though for all
cheating Pettifoggers and covetous Counselors, that against the dictate of
their own consciences, and against their King and against the Church of God,
will, for a Fee, sell their souls unto the devil; I hate their doings that are
Sicut atri janua ditis: Yet I do from my heart honor and reverence all the
grave and just Judges, and Learned Lawyers, without whose help and Counsel and
Judgment, we could not live in this Commonwealth. And though I failed at the
Kings Bench, to prevail to procure those Fines unto the King, which I conceived
should be imposed upon those five that I indicted, (whereof the chief of them,
that is, Captain Burges is now sent Prisoner to Dublin, by my Lord of Ossory,
which may be a just Judgment, that he should be committed by my Lord of Ossory
for his abuse done to the Bishop of Ossory,) yet I have had very fair Justice
done me, by the Judges of the Court of Claim, and I am confident, to find the
like from them again, and to be righted by the Judges of the Court of Exchequer
And so likewise from the Kings Bench and Common Pleas.
for the wrongs and damages that I sustained by those that forcibly entered
upon my Possessions, and do still detain it from me, when I shall bring the
cause before them. Therefore I have no reason for the biting of a mad Dog, to
hang all the good Dogs in the Country, or for the abuse or injustice done me
by some one man or few Lawyers, to exclaim against all others, when as the Poet
advises us, Parcere paucorum diffundere crimen in omnes. But I do exceedingly
tax my self, and mine own understanding, that understanding both Greek and
Latin, and having read what Lambert, Bolton and Dalton have written of
Forcible Entries, I should be such a Dolt, as not to understand this Proceeding
of mine, about the Indictment of those Forcible Enterers to be a just and a
fair Proceeding.

Therefore mine apprehension conceiving such proceedings to be foul, and very
much amiss, and that the justice which I had, upon the whole matter, had not
what Pindarus says Justice uses to have, that is, (...), I thought good, to
set down the same, not to accuse, and complain against any one for being
unjust, or to seek any redress unto my self; for I have born, and can be
contented still to bear, more wrongs than this: But I do it for these ends.

1. To let poor men see, how they may be wronged and oppressed, and have their
Land and Possessions taken from them by great and powerful men, and what they
are best to do in such a case; and my counsel is, to be patient, because as I
said before, Levius fit patientia quicquid corrigere est nefas, and as our
Savior says, If any man sue thee for thy Coat, let him have thy Cloak also;
So I say, if any great man, that has a great Place, or great Friends, take
away thy Lands, let him take away thy House also, rather then spend thy Money,
and lose that with thy Lands; for as Christ says, If these things be done to
the green tree, what shall be done to the dry? So if these Proceedings pass
against me, that can both speak and follow my business to the uttermost, and,
I thank God have ability to go through with it, what shall become of thee, and
thy Cause, that art a poor man, when thou swimmest against the stream, and
kickest against the pricks?

Therefore I advise thee, rather in such a case, to cry to God, than complain
to any Judge, lest that as the Poet says, Excessit medicina modum, thy remedy
will prove worse than thy disease. For thou see how I am served, put out of
my House, and spend above 60 li. and have no redress.

2. If this proceeding and dealing with me, be, as I conceive it, not so fair
and so just as it should be, both for the King and my self, that am ejected out
of my House and Lands; then I conceive, His Majesty and the Parliament should,
to prevent the like Oppression and wrongs to poor men, provide an easier and
plainer way to relieve the oppressed, and to set down an usual Form of
Indictment, or to cause that the Indictments should not be so easily and so
frequently, upon every Lawyers motion, quasht, as they are reported to be:
Especially when the matter of Force is plain and evidently proved. And this
redress of Injuries I petition and move for, for these four special reasons.

1. Because the difficulty of framing the Indictments so, that a cunning Lawyer
cannot easily find a fault, and a flaw in it, and then the frequent quashing of
such Indictments, as are found faulty, is a great wrong to his Majesty, in
depriving him of those Fines that otherwise are due, and should be rendered
unto him.

2. It is a great Abuse and injury unto the poor Subject, that shall be driven
out of his Possession, and, for want of a sufficient Clerk or Counselor to
draw the right form of his Indictment, (which as I see few can do) he shall
both spend his Money, and lose his labor; and perhaps, he is not able to do as
I did, three or four times to draw Indictments, till he finds one that may
stand good.

3. This frequent quashing of Indictments is a great encouragement for
Oppressors, and wicked men to wrong their neighbors more and more; for say
they, I will enter upon him and thrust him out, and if he does indite me, I
will remove it to the Kings Bench, and I shall find a Lawyer that will quash
his Indictment by and by.

4. This very practice and proceeding may be feared to prove the very bane and
destruction of whole Nations and Kingdoms: For if Righteousness exalts a
Nation, and a Kingdom is translated from one Nation to another People, because
of unrighteousness, as Solomon says, and as we may read it in all Histories.
Then you may see how requisite it is, for Kings and Princes, to look to those
things, and not to suffer unrighteous Judges, either for favor to one, or
hatred to another, to do what they list, and to make their Laws like a Nose of
Wax, to bend which way they please, or like a Spiders Web, that catches the
small Flies, but is broken, by the great humble Bees, all to pieces; but to be
like the Chancellor Steel, that although he hated my person, yet, he said,
though I deserved it not, I should have Justice, and so he did me Justice
presently, and I love to do right to my Adversary, and to say the truth of mine
enemy.

But for my self, I thank God for it, as I lived many years very quietly and
contentedly with far less means then 20 li. a year, and with far less pains and
troubles then I have now, so I doubt not, but I could live so still; and I
resolved and vowed, as I have attested in my Epistle to his Majesty, that, if I
should recover this Bishops Court unto the Church, I would wholly and fully
bestow the same for the repairing of the Cathedral Church of Kilkenny: So that
recovering it, I should not be one Penny the richer, or not recovering it, not
a Penny the poorer; and so the wrong done by this Proceeding, whosoever did it,
is, as I conceive, more against the King and the Church than against my self.
And if the Proviso for Sir George Ayskue carries this Bishops Court to him
from the Church, which in my understanding is clean contrary to the very words
of the Act, page 72. Let him pray that he has it not with that Sauce which God
prescribes in Psalm. 83. And so I end, and so be it, as God pleases, Amen.

And after I had delivered this same Relation unto his Majesty, and showed the
Effect and sum thereof, by the next day I gave him this Petition.

To the Kings Most Excellent Majesty. The Humble Petition of Gruffith, Lord
Bishop of Ossory,
Shows,
THat your Petitioner has caused five of the Tenants of Sir George Ayskew to
be twice Indicted for a forcible Entry upon the House and Lands of the Bishop of
Ossory, and yet your Petitioner with the Expense of above 60 l. could not
prevail to have them punished as the Law requires, whereby your Majesty is
wronged in not receiving the Fines that should be imposed upon them for that
offense, and your Petitioner is abused, in being still kept out of his
Possession, to about 300 l. Damages.

May it therefore please your Majesty to write to the Duke of Ormond, or to the
Parliament, to see that the former Proceedings may be reviewed, and that your
Petitioner may be relieved according to Justice.

And your Petitioner shall ever pray, etc.

And my Lords Grace of Canterbury very graciously, and like a most Religious
Father and Countenancer of the Fathers of the Church, going with me to deliver
it to his Majesty, and to let him understand the substance of it, said, here is
the good Bishop of Ossory (so his Grace was pleased beyond my Deserts, to style
me) that has a very reasonable Petition to your Majesty, and telling him the
sum of it, his Majesty, like a most Pious King, most graciously answered, I
will do it with all my heart: and my Lords Grace sent for Secretary Benet, and
he drew me this his Majesty's Answer the next day.

Whitehal, July 16th. 1663.
HIs Majesty is graciously pleased effectually to recommend the Consideration
of this Petition to his Grace the Duke of Ormond, Lord Lieutenant of Ireland,
to the end his Grace may forthwith take care, to settle and establish the
Petitioner in his Right, and that such who disturb him may be punished
according to Law.

I know not what more I could have desired; his Majesty herein doing more then
I desired: And when I was very willing to have given 5 l. in Gold for Sir Henry
Bennets Fee, that most Courteous Gentleman, Mr. Quod-dolphin, said, I should
not pay one penny, but Sir Henry would lay that upon the Church, and my Lord of
Canterburies score: So fairly, and so friendly was I used at his Majesty's
Court: The Lord bless them, and reward them for it; and grant them always the
like Favor as I found with them.

And when I came with his Majesty's Reference to my Lord Duke of Ormond, I
found his Grace, as honorable, and very gracious in his Answer and Direction
to me; but, when his Grace referred the Petition (that I drew to his Grace, to
do as his Majesty directed) and his Majesty's Reference, to the Council Table,
I must acknowledge, that I feared the success, and so it happened according to
my fear; for when I was called before the Council, his Grace said, he was no
Lawyer, but he left the Matter to them, to inform me, what was to be done
according to Law; and my Lord Chancellor said, that both my self, in my
Relation, and my Lawyers and Counsel confessed, that the Judges did act, and
their Proceedings were according to Law; and therefore I must even begin again,
and it was my best course to proceed according to Law; and I answered, if all
this in my Proceedings were Law, I pray God send us a better Law; for I showed
the whole Proceedings to his Majesty, and to diverse of the Judges of England,
and they said, this was a fair proceeding indeed, to set up a man of straw, and
then shoot at him, to bring a false Indictment to the Court, and then quash it;
for I proved it in the open Court (by the Confession of the Clerk of the
Peace, that brought the true Indictment with him to the Court, and acknowledged
that the other was falsified, either by the Clerk that he trusted to write it,
or by some other, he knew not who:) that the Indictment brought to the Court,
was not the true Indictment, that was found by the Jury; and so without any
more words, my Lords Grace seemed to me very graciously to smile, and so I was
dismissed.

But I fear that the favor which Sir Geo. Ayskue finds in every place against
me, may produce no good effect.
And then I called to mind the cause that moved me to fear the success I should
have at the Council Table, not Injustice, that I mean not. I know that they are
just, but that the Justice I should have, would not be to my advantage, and the
favor that I desired: For when I still indicted the forcible Enterers, and
still proceeded against Sir George Ayskues Tenants, he preferred a Petition to
the Council Table, about this Lordship of Bishops Court; and I hearing of it,
conceived that before any thing should be done thereupon, I should have the
favor to be made acquainted with the same Petition, that I might answer it,
but I could hear nothing of it, until a little while after, some of the
Bishops, by reason of the power to my L. Lieutenant and Counsel given by the
last Proviso in the Act of settlement, fearing that they would alter and
retrench some of his Majesty's Favors and Additionals granted unto them, by
the said Act, petitioned that they would not do so, but leave all things that
concerned the Bishops, statu quo, as they are expressed in the Act, without
Alteration or retrenchment; and my Lord Lieutenant and Counsel granted their
Petition; but with this only Proviso, that Sir George Ayskues right might be
preserved, that is, as I conceive, against all the Bishops, for that none is
named; and this Proviso, of all the men in Ireland, is but only for Sir George
Ayskue, and of all the Bishops in Ireland, it seems by all likelihood, only
prejudicial to the Bishop of Ossory: Which notwithstanding, if the last Proviso
in the Act of Settlement, be well understood and rightly followed, can be no
prejudice to him at all, as I conceive it; for that the Power given to my Lord
Lieutenant and Counsel by that Proviso, is as I understand it, a power to alter
and retrench any thing, in part or in whole, which they shall find either
contrary to his Majesty's Declaration, or inconsistent with, Which are the very
words in the Proviso.
or to the general settlement of the Kingdom; and I conceive, that the
suffering of the Bishop of Ossory, to enjoy his own House and Lands, where the
Bishops used to live and reside, cannot be contrary to his Majesty's
Declaration, not inconsistent with the general settlement of the Kingdom. And
therefore I humbly conceive, that my Lord Lieutenant and Counsel have no power
by that Proviso granted unto them, to take away his Majesty's Grant and Favor
to the Bishop of Ossory, and to settle the same upon Sir George Ayskue;
especially if his Majesty was deceived in his Grant to Sir George Ayskue, as I
verily believe he was; for his Majesty grants him the Lands settled upon him for
his Service in Ireland; and I have searched and examined the Matter as much as
ever I could, and yet could never find nor understand what Service he had done
in Ireland, that deserved to carry away the House and Lands of the Bishop of
Ossory, or indeed of any Service, that he did in Ireland at all, either for
King or Parliament.

And if for all this, he carries the Bishops House away, I will sing, Mopso
Nisa datur: and seeing how many of the Bishops Houses and Lands, that were by
an Order of the House of Lords, delivered to my possession by the Sheriff of
the County, and were peaceably in my Tenants possession, and paid me Rent ever
since his Majesty's happy coming in, were given away, while I was in London,
Petitioning about this Cause, and could not be at Dublin, to answer them that
sued for them, nor dreamed of any Suites against me, and being not able in mine
old Age (especially seeing what Pains, Charge, and Success I have hitherto had
with Sir Geo. Ayskue) to follow so many Suits, against so many men, so powerful
as they are, in the Courts of Justice, at the Council Table, and in all places,
I will like Balaams Ass, so unjustly beaten, lie down under my burden, too
heavy for me to bear, and call and cry to God to arise and maintain his own
Cause, and the Cause of his own Son Jesus Christ.

Yet in this Suit, betwixt me and Sir Geo. Ayskue, because I have taken so much
pains, and spent so much Money, (and specially because I do hate and abhor,
that any man I mean not Sir G. Ayskue, but whosoever he be.
, which has fought under the Standard of the Beast and Long Parliament,
against that Most Pious King, and my Most Gracious Master, Charles the First,
should carry away the Houses and Lands, that Religious Princes have dedicated
for the Honor and Service of Jesus Christ, for the Reward of that wickedness)
I resolved once more to enter into the List, to follow my always very
honorable Friend, my Lord Chancellours Advice, and try the Success with him,
by the Verdict of an honest Jury, and I indicted 6 of the Tenants and Servants
of Sir Geo. Ayskue, for a forcible Entry, and 5 of them now, the third time;
and I had six Counselors help, to draw and compose the Indictment, and so to
review it, and correct it, if any thing was amiss therein, that, being found
Billa Vera by the Jury, it might so stand good, and not be quashed, as my two
former Indictments were, by the Judges of the Kings Bench.

And the 6 forcible Enterers being indicted, for fear lest the Record should be
falsified, and corrupted, as the former indictment of them had been, I got the
Clerk of the Peace, to send it enclosed in a Letter sealed up, by my man, to
his Agent in Dublin, to be delivered into the Office, which mine Adversaries
presently told to my Lord of Santree, and was objected as a Piaculum; Meaning,
as I conceived, by the Relation that I had printed of the former Proceedings.
and when the Record came to the Court, my Lord Chief Justice said upon the
Bench, that my Lord Bishop had abused the Court, to whom I replied, that I had
not abused the Court, for that I had set down nothing but the Truth, and was as
loath as any man, to offer the least Abuse to any of his Majesty's Courts, or
Judges of his Courts; And after my Lord Chief Justice and my self had conferred
together, I found him my very honorable Friend, and I retained three of the
Kings Counsel to follow the said Cause for his Majesty, and the Counselors of
the Fanatics failing to quash the Indictment, my Lord Chief Justice told them,
they must either submit, or be bound to prosecute their Traverse; and they
became bound in 200 l, to prosecute the same upon the 10th. day of Easter Term,
which was the sixth day of May. And when, upon that day the Jury were sworn,
That their children and their childrens children may understand from what (I
will not say Canaanites, but Catharists) they are sprung. Who and what my
Witnesses proved,
viz. William Baker of Ballytobin, John Pursel of Lismore, William Baxter of
Earlstown, Isaac Jackson of Kilamery, John Jones of Ri (...) Robert Howford of
Ballyneboly, Nicholas Pharoe, Thomas Tomlins of Lismoteag, Chrystopher Render
of Fadenarah, John Nixon of Brawnebarn, William Cheshire of (...) and Thomas
Huswife of Gowran; good men and true, or neither good men nor true.

1. I brought in evidence, Mr. Sheriff Reigly (who was the Sheriff that gave me
possession) and Mr. Connel (and Hugh Linon, that was thought needless) to prove
my possession given by the Sheriff of the County of Kilkenny, by virtue of an
Order of the House of Lords, of this Lordship of Bish. Court and the Lands
thereto belonging, and of the Tenements in Freshfoord, as it was expressed in a
Shedule annexed to the Order of the Lords, upon the 29th day of April, 1662.
and that the Tenants did atturne Tenants, and gave pieces of money in earnest
of their rents, and promised to keep the possession, and to continue Tenants
unto me during my pleasure.

2. Mr. Thomas Bulkley, Mr. William Williams, Thomas Davies, and my self proved
the multitude of persons, to the number of ten or twelve, that upon the 8th day
of October, 1662. were entered into the said Bishops Court, and there forcibly
kept the possession against the Bishop, and some (one with a sword by his side,
and a staff or Cane in his hand, and another with a long staff in his hand)
threatened that they would make him repent his doings and coming there, and that
Sir George Ayskue would spend 500 li. before he would leese this Bishops Court,
and that Captain Burges said, he would keep and uphold the possession for Sir
George Ayskue with his life and fortune; and others, having shut the Iron
Grate, to hinder the Bishop to go out or his Servants to come in, when his
Servants demanded, what they meant, to murder their Lord? And desired to come
in, to wait upon their Master, they threatened them, and said, that if they
offered to come in there, they would beat them down, and knock out their Brains.

3. Mr. Richard Marshal, Mr. George Far, Mr. John Murphey, and Ed. Dalton,
(that proved how he was thrust out of the house by head and shoulders) proved
the forcible entry, with arms and weapons, a Gun, and a Pike, and Staves, into
some of the Tenements in Freshford; and that for nine days, they kept the same
with such a company of Fanatics, Anabaptists, and other Sectaries, that they
seemed rather to be a Garrison, than the keeping of the possession of any house.

And after nine days they bound George Far and others in a bond of a
thousand pounds that they should continue true Tenants to Sir George Ayskue,
and keep the possession for him against the Bishop of Ossory.

And because the said George Far proved this point so fully and so plain,
that nothing could be said against it; one of the Fanatics Counselors said,
what I conceive was very unfit to be spoken, in so public a place, and before
such honorable Judges of any of the Kings Witnesses, that this man, the
principal of the Witnesses, was a parricide, which I dare justify to be most
untrue.

4. For impounding the Cattle, and beating and wounding them that sought to
hinder it, the said George Far proved the same so fully, and that one of the
women, that was beaten, lay long sick after her beating, that Sir Audley Mervin
and Sergeant Gruffith would not suffer three other Witnesses, that I had there
at the Bar, that is, John Duran, Barbara Marshal, and another Wench, to be
sworn and examined, and so to trouble the Court any further; because said they,
you see the Lords Justices, and the whole Court, are sufficiently satisfied,
that I had more than abundantly proved the forcible entry, and detaining of
this Bishops Court, but they gave way, to six of the Intruders Counsel, to say
what they could for their Clients.

And when each one of them had made his Oration, and spent much time, and my
Lord Chief Justice heard them, with a great deal of patience, to prove what I
never denied, but was ready to confess all that they said, touching the large
Writings and Evidences, that they produced, to prove the Title and Interest of
Mr. Robert Shea to this Bishops Court, which at this time, when the question
was only of the forcible entry, I had no reason to contradict, and which
perhaps might be good (and perhaps not) before he forfeited the same unto his
Majesty.

But for Sir George Ayskue, that for his Service, How S. George Ayskue came to
have this Bishops Court.
you know to whom, (which makes me believe it will never prosper with him) had
a Commission from the Usurper Crumwel, that for 200 li. which was due unto him
for some Service that he had done, as I am informed, the Commissioners should
allot him so much Lands, as they thought worth 200 li. and they out of favor
to him, and getting Lands so cheap as they did, gave him this Bishops Court,
and so much more other Lands, as are now far better worth than 200 li. per
annum; his Counsel said never a word touching his Title and Interest; for he
enjoyed it not peaceably and quietly, but only during the time of the
Rebellion, and Usurpation, (which I conceive to be no true Possession,) for as
soon as ever his Majesty was so happily restored before one year had gone
about, I sent to enter upon it, and to distrain for my Rent, and Captain
Burges, Sir George Ayskues prime Tenant, gave me a Writing, which I have to
show, under his hand, to become answerable unto me for the whole Rent of this
Bishops Court and Freshfoord, when I should be peaceably settled in it.

So when these six Counselors had spent their spirits in tyring the worthy
Judges, and beating the soft air, to no purpose, but only (like those Fanatic
Preachers, that read their Text, and never touch it after) to amaze the simple
and -- Jury which I may justly term -- for that I am confident, the most of
them were resolved what to do before ever they heard the Evidence: My Counsel,
that were Sir William Dunvil, the Kings Attorney, Sir Audley Mervin The Speaker
of the House of Commons.
, Sir John Temple, the Kings Solicitor, Sergeant Gruffith, and Mr. Rian, all
very worthy men, and worthy to be named, thinking it no wisdom in them, as one
of themselves told me, nor any ways beneficial, either to the King for his
Fine, or to me for the Possession, to follow those extravagant Counselors in
their devious ways, and to answer their needless discourses, so far from the
point in question, as being only about Sheas Title, and no ways touching nor
contradicting the forcible entry, were very silent, and said never a word to
all that the adverse Counselors had said, but left the Evidence to be
explained to the Jury by the Judges, who had so exactly examined them, and so
patiently heard what both sides could say: for which, some of the adverse
Counselors, and some of my friends blamed them very much, for making no
manner of replication at all to Sir George Ayskues Counsel. But truly I do
conceive, that digitus dei erat hic, that as he opens the mouth of babes and
sucklings to show forth his praise, so he shuts the mouths of the Wise and
Learned, when it pleases him, as here he did, for the trial of this Jury,
whether they would be true and honest, that, being found Like Belshazzar,
weighed in the balance and found too light.
as I conceive they are, they might be made an example (which he knew I would
do, to the uttermost of my power) for all other Juries, to terrify them from
falsehood and wrong, to the great benefit of the whole Kingdom, which, without
some severe censures upon such high Offenders, would rather prove to be a Den
of thieves than a seat of safety for honest men, that were best (if -- Juries
may still do what they list) to obey the voice, which cried in the air, at the
Siege of Jerusalem, Migremus hinc.

Then my Lord of Santry, that is, my Lord Chief Justice, seeing my Counsel
silent, began most nobly, rightly, and truly, as a most upright Judge, and like
himself in all his judgments, told the Jury, that for the title and matter of
Law, and the Interest of either in this Bishops Court, it was not in their
charge to inquire of it, but they, that were the Judges of the Law, and of the
right interest were to do it, and would do the same, when my Counsel should
move for the possession, but they were, for the King, to enquire only of the
matter of fact and force; whether after possession was given to the Bishop by
the Sheriff, by virtue of an Order of the house of Lords, and the Bishop
continued his possession from April to the eighth of October, The which said
he, a Disseisor should not forcibly be put out.
though he should be a Disseisor, yet was he not forcibly put out, and kept out
of the same? This was their only charge, to inquire after: and for this, said
my Lord Chief Justice, you see what is proved; a multitude of persons, ten or
twelve at the least, when as one may make a forcible entry; you heard also,
said he, what weapons they had, Gun, Pike, Sword, and Staves; and you heard
what threatening words they used, that they would make the Bishop to repent his
coming there; that they would knock down his Servants and beat out their brains
if they attempted to come in; and you heard likewise how they had beaten and
wounded those Servants, that sought to hinder them to impound their Cattle; and
all this, said my Lord Chief Justice, makes the forcible entry plain, so that
you need not stand upon it. So justly and so fairly did my Lord of Santry deal
herein, without either fearing or favoring the one or the other.

So the Jury was dismissed; and all that heard the evidence, Sure, if I had not
been a Bishop they would never have given such a Verdict.
and what my Lord Chief Justice said, would have laid, some twenty to one, some
forty to one, and some a hundred to one, that the Jury would not stand upon it,
but presently find the Verdict for the King. Yet they brought their Verdict for
the Defendants.

And as I am informed, all the Grave and Reverend Judges wondered, and were
discontented at their Verdict; And who will prosecute for the King if Juries be
suffered to do thus?
and whereas some would have the Jury fined, and imprisoned for the wrong they
had done to the King; my Lord Chief Justice answered, there was a fitter place
to punish them: meaning, as I conceive, the Star Chamber.

And if such men, that formerly most of them were against their King, be thus
permitted, to drive men out of house and home, and forcibly to enter into their
possession, though they should be Peers of the Realm, which is a violence
offered unto the Law, and a petty Rebellion, the next degree, and forerunner
of rebellion against their King himself; and when any oppressed and expulsed
man shall with a great deal of pains and labor, and with a vast expense of
money, and an indictment upon indictment, thrice over, bring the same to a
travers, and they, the Jury, without any Conscience, contrary to all justice,
and contrary to all their evidence, and the plain Declaration and Judgment of
the Lords the Judges of the Court, and of the whole Court, shall do what they
please, and say, Quod volumus, id sanctum est, what we do is Law, without any
speedy remedy against them, to the utter undoing of many poor oppressed men,
who had better suffer any, the greatest wrong, than seek to be relieved, And as
the Poet says, Excessit medicina modum.
by such a way, whereby usura superat sortem, and the seeking of a Remedy shall
so far exceed the Disease, I know not with what safety, either of Life, State,
or Fortune, (which are all in the power of the Juries, to determine of them)
any man can live in this Kingdom.

For here, (especially in the County of Kilkenny,) where that perfidious Rebel
and Traitor Axtell planted his Colony, such a multitude of Anabaptists,
Quakers, and other worser Sectaries, What I say against these, I say not
against the worthy Gentlemen and good Protestants, that are also very many, and
my very good Friends in these parts: Neither do I say it against those wel-bred
Gentlemen that were Officers, and Commanders in the Army, but of the generality
of the Common Soldiers, and some of the meaner Officers, that for their small
Arrears got large Territories, and are now great Freeholders, and the chiefest
Jurymen and Judges of our Lives, Lands, and Fortunes.
that in the beginning of the English Rebellion, were broken Citizens and
Tradesmen, Taylers and Tinkers, Shoomakers and Cobblers, Plow-men, and others,
the like, men of no fortune, thought to raise themselves by the Irish Wars, and
having some Arrears of Pay due unto them, got Orders to set out Lands unto them
for the same, and the Kingdom being depopulated and wasted, and made a
Wilderness without Inhabitants, the Lands were of nothing worth, and they had
what Lands they pleased, and as much as they pleased, for their Arrears; for
ten pounds as much as is now worth a hundred pounds a year; and for a hundred
pounds as much as I will give a hundred pounds per annum.

These men, that followed Axtells Religion, and were of his Plantation, being
mounted up on Cock-horse, to be such great Freeholders, (the Irish Proprietors
being, for the most part, driven away, and the Church Lands also taken into
these Soldiers hands,) they must now be, for the most part, the principal Jury
men and so the Judges of our Lives, Lands, and Fortunes.

And they, considering their own interest to be alike, in the Lands, both of
the Church, of the Irish, and of all, from whomsoever they hold it, do stick
and cling together, like sworn brethren, or rather like forsworn wretches, to
defend and maintain each others Title and Interest in the Lands, that each one
holds, both against Clergy and Laity, God or the King, be the same right or
wrong, they will not lose their lands.

And they do encourage each other thus to continue in their wickedness, saying,
that they got their Lands with the loss of their blood, and the hazard of their
lives; and therefore, to get the King some small fine, whereof he shall have
but the least part of it, and be but very little the better for it, and to
dispossess their own fanatic Party, and give the Lands unto their Enemies,
especially unto the Bishops, whom of all others they hate most of all, and
Bishop Williams above all the rest, as he that hates their former Rebellions,
and their now practices, more than any man else, they will never do it: though
they hazard the loss, both of body and soul.

Indeed, for the Bishop of Ossory he understands their malice toward him, well
enough, (I pray God forgive them) so great, that, were it not for some honest,
and truly religious Irish Gentlemen, and some of the Catholic Religion, I
profess that I durst not live amongst these, that formerly warred against their
King, and if the truth were known, do as I believe, as little love their
present King, as they do much hate our Church, and the Bishops of our Church:
when as they that hate their Bishops, cannot be said to honor their King, as I
have most fully showed in my Grand Rebellion.

And therefore I went unto his grace, my Lord Lieutenant, and related to his
Grace the Verdict of the Jury, plain contrary to their evidence and the
Declaration of my Lord Chief Justice, and the Judgment of the whole Court; and
therefore did most humbly desire his Grace, to give me leave to go for England,
to dispatch some necessary occasions, and to signify unto his Majesty, that,
if there were no Court of Star Chamber here, nor any other provision made, to
punish all perjured Juries, and all high Transgressors of the Laws and heinous
offenders, that deprive his Majesty of the fines, justly due unto him, and his
Subjects of their right, we, the true Protestants, and his Majesty's loyal
Subjects, were not in safety, nor able to live among such Confederates of
wickedness; but must, as King Boco said to the Senate of Rome, depart thence,
lest the ire of the Gods, or the rage and injustice of such men do utterly
destroy us. And his Grace very mildly and graciously answered, my Lord, the
Bill for a Star Chamber is already drawn, and sent to his Majesty to be signed,
and will speedily come down, to pass the Houses, and then such Malefactors may
be fully punished according to their offense.

And I protested, and do protest, that I would be with the first, that would do
my uttermost endeavor, to punish this Jury, and all false and forsworn
perjured Juries, and the like high Transgressors, that concern me whatsoever.
For,

It is most certain, that Impunitas peccati invitat homines ad malignandum; And
therefore I do believe, that I am as equally bound in conscience, to punish
this Jury, as I am to recover the Lands of the Church.
and as Solomon says, because the punishment is deferred, the hearts of the
children of men are altogether set, to do evil; and my Divinity assures me,
that to punish a perjured person, and a transcendent Transgressour of the Law,
is as acceptable unto God, as the relieving of the Oppressed; because that
hereby we do our best that those, which will not be persuaded by good Counsel
to be honest, and virtuous, may be forced with stripes, to do their duties, or
at least terrified from being so vicious, for that as St. Bernard says, Qui
non vult duci debet trahi.

And therefore, with what means that God has given me, I will with his
assistance, do my best, to repair Gods House, to relieve the Distressed, and to
punish the Perjured, and the Oppressors of Gods People; and the rather, because
that here, in the parts, where I live, I have seen, in three or four years,
more forcible Entries, Riots and Oppressions than I have seen in England, or
Wales, that might be thought a little more wild than England in all my life, so
that a Stranger, might rather think it a Country of Robbers, Tyrants, and
Oppressors, much like unto Albion, when Brutus entered it, than a Country where
with safety he might dwell amongst them; for I do profess, were it not for some
honest Irish, that are not all of my Religion, nor I of theirs, that do further
me, encourage me, and protect me, in Gods service, and the advancement of Gods
Church, I had rather live a poor Curate in my own Country, than a Bishop among
such a company of Crumwellian Anabaptists, Quakers, and other worser Sectaries,
that do live in these parts, and the wind of his Majesty's happy Government,
and the prudent care of my Lord Lieutenant, has driven them, like the Church
Papists in Queen Elizabeth's days, As by their actions and hatred I do
perfectly discern them.
to come within the Pales of our Church; and yet are as false-hearted, if the
same might be seen, both to the King and the Church of Christ, as ever they
were in Crumwells days; as I conceive it to appear, by the oath of one of my
Witnesses, that swore he heard the Captain of these forcible Enterers, that I
indicted, encouraging his followers, to keep the possession for Sir George
Ayskue, and to assure themselves, things should never be quiet until they
returned and come again as they were before; which was a strange saying, as I
understood it.

Yet I would not have my Reader here to think, but that as the Scripture
distinguishes betwixt the seed of the woman and the seed of the Serpent, the
Children of God and the Sons of Belial, so I do here in no ways prejudice, nor
think the least evil of the true-hearted English and true Protestants, the
worthy Gentlemen, the Officers, Captains and Commanders of the Army, that are
likewise many in these parts; but I make a great deal of difference betwixt
them, so much, as that I do as much love and honor the one, as I do hate and
abhor the doings and wickedness of the other.

So you may see, what it is to live in Ireland, For here now the Poet may well
say, that Terras Astraea reliquit.
among Anabaptists and other Sectaries, worse than Pagans; and how it is my
Fortune to feel the brunt, and taste the poison of their Malice, to publish the
same to all posterities: God deliver his Servants from them. Amen.

ANd now, until I shall see whether the Star Chamber will think it Justice, as
I do, that this -- Jury should bear all the damage that I sustain by their
Verdict, and which I should have recovered upon the forcible Enterers, if they
had gone according to their Evidence, I thought good to prefer this Petition to
His Majesty.

To the Kings Most Excellent Majesty. The Humble Petition of Gruffith, Lord
Bishop of Ossory,
Shows,
THat Justice is a virtue and grace most acceptable with God; yet your
Petitioner has been infinitely injured, and your Majesty likewise wronged:

1. By forcible Enterers that drove your Petitioner out of his house of Bishops
Court and Freshfoord.

2. By a wicked forgerer of the Indictment of those persons, that were indicted
for that entry.

3. By a packt Jury, that, when the forcible Enterers were three times
indicted, by three several Juries, quitted them, contrary to their evidence,
and the mind of all the Judges.

May it therefore please your Majesty to cause that Justice may be done to your
Petitioner, and that you would write to the Sheriff of the County of Kilkenny,
that, as formerly he has settled your Petitioner in this Bishops Court and
Freshfoord, by virtue of an Order of the House of Lords, so he would now settle
him in his right and possession of the same by virtue of an Order from your
Majesty.

And your Petitioner does here promise, and engage himself to God and to your
Majesty, that, as he bestowed about four hundred pounds already, so having the
four hundred pounds per annum, that your Majesty granted, settled upon him,
according to the Act of settlement, page 71, and 73. he will lay out a thousand
pounds more to repair the flat fallen, formerly fair Cathedral Church of St.
Keny.

And shall ever pray for your Majesty, etc.

The sad condition of the Church and Clergy in the Diocese of Ossory; and I
fear not much better in all Ireland.
THE Church of Ireland in former times was very famous and glorious for many
things especially for Piety, and neighbourly Charity, and bounty of the people
one toward another, as it appears by the rare and many many Edifices of
Churches and Monasteries, endowed with ample means and revenues, dedicated for
the honor of God, and the service of Jesus Christ; all to be seen at this very
day: for which cause it was wont to be admired and applauded, and by the
bordering Nations, that observed their sedulity in pious works, and neglect of
worldly pomp, when, as the holy Patriarchs lived in Tents, so most of them were
contented to lie in Booths, and poor earthly Cabins, or houses made of Earth,
that they might build to God houses of Marble, most sumptuous and glorious; and
that they might be the better able, to bestow the more, to adorn and beautify
the houses and Temples of God; it was called, and not amiss, Ecclesia
Sanctorum, the glorious Church of holy Saints; that aimed only to go to heaven.

But now since the unhappy time of that potent K. H. 8. when Sacrilege,
through his discontent with the Pope, about his divorce with Queen Katherine,
Ut fama vagatur, began to get the upper hand, and to throw away Piety from the
Church, and trample it under foot, and cover it over with the Cloak of
hypocrisy, and the vain shadow of no Religion, instead of the true service of
God, you may see reliquias danaum, the ruins of Troy, and in all places the
carcass of Religion, lodged in the thrown- down walls of all the Abbeys and
Monasteries, and most of the Cathedrals, and the other Churches of Ireland,
that are now, as the Prophet says, defiled and made heaps of stones, Psalm.
79.1.

For if you walk through Ireland, as I rode from Carlingford to Dublin, and
from Dublin to Kilkenny, and in my Visitation thrice over the Diocese of
Ossory; I believe that throughout all your travel, you shall find it as I found
it, in all the ways that I went, scarce one Church standing, and sufficiently
repaired, for seven, I speak within compass, that are ruined, and have only
walls, without ornaments, and most of them without roofs, without doors,
without windows, but the holes to receive the winds to entertain the
Congregation.

And what a lamentable thing, and a miserable sight is this? If you say, that
in the time of blindness the people were over zealous in building too many
Churches, and thinking to merit much thereby: I say, that now, in the fullness
of knowledge, and the Sunshine of the Gospel, they are too riotous to pull
them down, and too negligent of Gods honor, and of the Peoples good, to waste
and ruinate so many Churches, and to let the people want them to meet together,
to serve God; which will merit a worse reward for them, than they shall have
that built them.

You may remember, that when Moses was to erect the Tabernacle, in the
wilderness, within a desert place, of no trade or traffic, and therefore not
easy to get any wealth in it: Yet Moses requiring their aid and free will
offering to do the same; they were ready, and so willing, every man, beyond his
power, to bring in their oblation in such abundance, that Moses was fain to
tell them, they had brought enough, and too much: and therefore forbade them to
bring in any more; he like a good man and just, being not desirous to make any
gain of their bounty.

And you may read in 1 Chronicles. 29.3. 1 Chronicles. 29.3.
when King David resolved to have the Temple built, what great provision he
left for the erecting of it; and how Solomon his Son did most gloriously finish
the same in seven years, 1 Reg. 6.37.
and furnished the same with all things necessary for the service of God; and
after that Nebuchadnezzar had destroyed it, the Jews under Zorobabel did most
readily, beyond the ability of captived men, newly released, contribute, and
offered their free will offerings toward the re-edifying of the same, which
they finished in the ninth year of Darius Histaspes, Joseph. lib. 11. c. 4.
that made it to be forty six years in building, from the second year of Cyrus,
who began it, according as the Jews say, to our Savior Christ. And because
these newly released Jews, that had scarce taken root in the Land of Jury, and
were but scarce seated, and unsettled in Jerusalem, were not able to make this
their Temple answerable in glory and sumptuousness, to that most rare and
admirable Temple, which those two mighty Kings, and Kings of all Israel, David
and Solomon, had joined their wealth and strength together to make it a most
glorious house, for the most glorious and Almighty God; therefore Herod, that
was but an alien, an Idumean, knowing that great and glorious things are to be
offered, ascribed, and dedicated to the great and glorious God, re-edified and
finished the same most sumptuously in eight years, Joseph. l. 15. c. ult.
as Josephus writes; and he built the same so exceeding excellent, and more
admirable than the Egyptian Pyramides, that Cheops builded of rare Theban
Marble, so that for the rareness thereof, the Disciples show it our Savior
Christ, saying, Master, see what manner of stones, Mar. 13.1.
and what buildings are here.

And the Jews generally were so zealous of Gods service, and so ready to build
and erect houses for his service, that, besides this glorious, great, and
magnificent Temple, they had many Synagogues, that is, other lesser houses,
like unto our Parish Churches, dedicated and consecrated for the worship of
God; and he was counted a very good man, and worthy of all love and respect,
that had built one of these, as they tell Christ, that the Centurion was worthy
to have that favor showed him by Christ, as to heal his Daughter, Luke 7.5.
because he had loved their nation, and had built them a Synagogue, that is, a
house for the people to meet in it, to pray, and to serve their God in it.

And it is most likely, they began to build these Synagogues when the Tribes
were settled in the Land of Canaan; because the Ark, that remained in Shilo, and
afterward the Temple, that was erected in Jerusalem, Why the Synagogues of the
Jews were built.
were so far distant from them that dwell in the remotest parts of the Land,
that they could not come so often, as they would, unto it, therefore they built
to themselves Synagogues, to pray to God, and to serve him in them, instead of
the Temple: for so we read that Moses of old time, probable, I say, from their
very first beginning of their settlement, Acts 15.21.
had in every City them that preached him, being read in their Synagogues every
Sabbath day: where, by the way, you may observe, that of old time, contrary to
the conceit of our new Fanatics, the reading of the holy Scriptures was
accounted the preaching of Gods word; though I deny not, but after it be read
and so preached, Luke 4.18.
it may be further explained, as Christ did that place of Isa. 61.1.

And you see they had these Synagogues in every City, so they must have as many
Synagogues as there were Cities in all their Land; The number of their
Synagogues.
and Sigonius writes, that there were four hundred and eighty of these
Synagogues in Jerusalem; and the Scripture shows that in other Cities and
Provinces there were many other Synagogues, as in Galile, in Damascus, in
Salamis, and in Antiochia: and Maymonides, one of their prime Doctors, says,
the tradition of their Elders was, that wheresoever ten Families of Israel
were, they ought to build them a Synagogue.

And shall the Jews, that were under the Law, and burdened with such infinite
Taxes and Ceremonies of their Religion, as were more than they were able to
bear, Acts 15.10.
as the Apostle testifies, be so zealous, so religious, and so ready to part
with their wealth and the best things they had to build so sumptuous, and so
glorious a Temple, and so many Synagogues, to perform those services that God
required of them, which notwithstanding were but the types and shadows of that
true Religion which we have, and do profess to embrace it; and shall we, that
have the substance of those shadows, which they had, and the truth of the
Gospel of Jesus Christ, which they never had, but in aenigmate, preached so
clearly and so amply among us, and are freed from all the legal Ceremonies and
Ordinances of the Law, be so cold and so careless as we are to repair the
houses of Jesusr Christ? I fear then that these Jews shall rise in judgment
against us.

Nay, more than this, if you look into the stories of the Gentiles, Grecians,
or Barbarians, that knew not God, but knew that there is a God which all men
ought to worship; you shall find how zealous they were to build Temples and
Oracles to their unknown Gods, that were no other than the devils, as the
Oracle of Delphos, Amphiaraus, Hamonium, Dodonaeum, the Temple of Diana, at
Ephesus, of Vesta, Ceres, Minerva, and other Goddesses of the Gentiles, and the
many many Temples, that the Romans and other Nations built, to Jupiter, Apollo,
Mars, and the rest of their false and feigned Gods and Goddesses, that were
indeed but very devils; Quia dii gentiim daemonia.
and how sumptuously they erected and gloriously adorned and beautified those
houses of these deceitful Oracles, and were so exceeding bountiful, almost
beyond belief, in their oblations and donations, to these holy places, as they
deemed them, as it appears in Herodotus, Herodotus l. 1.
by the large gifts of inestimable value that Cresus sent to the Temple of
Delphos, and other Temples of those Gentile gods.

And because they knew no otherwise, but that these infernal devils were
Celestial Gods, and so worshipped them as gods, with Temples, Altars,
Sacrifices, Prayers, and Oblations, dedicated unto them, which do only and
properly belong to the true and eternal God: therefore Horace says to them
that neglected the erecting and beautifying of these Temples, that belonged to
these no Gods.

Delicta majoram immeritus lues
Roman, donec templa refeceris, Horat l. 3. Ode 6.

Aedesque labentes deorum, and faedanigro,
Simulachra fumo.
The which Ode, that worthy and learned Imitator of this best Lyrick Poet thus
excellently translateth, in this elegant Lyrick Verse.

Roman resolve thou shall desertless taste
Sins scourge, for vice of Predecessors past;
Until thou do again repair
Decayed Temples, and make fair
The falling houses of the gods, disgraced,
And cleanse their Images, with smoke defaced;
To think thee less than gods, thy power commends,
Hence take beginnings, hither aim thy ends;
The gods neglected did impose
On sad Hesperia many woes;
Twice Pacorus, and twice Manaeses hand
Our inauspicious forces did disband;
Who with a plentious prey made glad,
To little chains new links did add.
And if by the judgment of this learned man they shall suffer for all the sins
and offenses of their Fathers and Forefathers, until they re-edifie the
Temples, and raise the flat-fallen houses of these gods, and beautify the
defiled Monuments and Sepulchers of their Heroes, and other noble persons that
were dead: What shame and what punishment do we deserve, for suffering the
Tombs and Sepulchers of our heroic Fathers, and the Temples, Houses, and
Altars of our good God and our Redeemer Jesus Christ to lie so waste, so
ruined, and so defiled as they are here in this Kingdom of Ireland; for I do
believe that of about 100 Churches that our forefathers built and sufficiently
endowed in the Diocese of Ossory, there are not 20 standing, nor 10 well
repaired at this day.

Truly, I have done my best, beyond my ability, let Demas and the detractors
say what they please, to repair the Quire of St. Kenny, and I have privately
vowed, and publicly protested often, and engaged my self to God, to His
Majesty, and to the People, and I am contented to be bound in a bond of one
thousand pounds, that if the Bishops Court and Freshford, (that were given to
the Church, and dedicated to God, for the service of Jesus Christ,) shall be
restored to the Church, there shall not one penny, or penniworth, of all the
rents, and profits thereof, be retained or transferred to me, or any of mine;
but it shall wholly and fully be employed and laid out for the raising and
reparation of that Cathedral Church which the Lord has now committed to my
charge.

But if I shall still see, as I have seen hitherto, that Rebels and Traitors
that have been, (if such as have fought under the Standard of the beast and
Great Antichrist, against their own King, to bring him to be murdered, may be
so styled,) shall be countenanced, furthered, and upheld, to carry away, and
enjoy the Lands and Houses of the Church, and so little regard had of that
justice we owe to render unto God, what belongs to God, and less respect to the
servants of Jesus Christ than to the followers of the Antichrist; then seeing,
as the Prophet says, in vacuum laboravi, I have labored in vain; I have spent
my strength, my time, my means, and my money for naught, in seeking to bring to
God what is Gods, and to the Church what of right belongs unto the Church,
Liberavi animam meam, and I hope I may freely turn the leaf, and as God said of
the house of Eli, I said indeed that the house of Eli, 1 Samuel 2.30.
and the house of his Fathers should walk before me for ever: but now, says
the Lord, be it far from me. And seeing they had so far dishonored him, and so
much profaned his service, it was just with God so to do.

And so I said indeed, I would do my best, and I would bestow as much as I was
able, and perhaps more than many would imagine, to repair the Cathedral Church
of St. Kenny; yet now being disappointed of my hope, and finding men preferring
flesh and blood before the dictate of the Spirit of God, favoring those, that
have been rebels, before such as are religious. Seeing I cannot build the
Church of Christ, I have resolved, to the uttermost of my power, to overthrow
the Synagogue of Satan; that is, to punish perjurers, and such others, high
transgressors of Gods Laws, and to leave the houses of God (as finding my self
unable to prevail to do therein any good,) wasted and ruined as they are. And
if this I cannot do, but that Scelera sceleribus tuebuntur, one false and
perjured Jury shall be defended, and protected, and justified by another false
Jury; and one wicked oppressor excused by another the like oppressor; or that
the fear of great men will not suffer poor spirited Lawyers to afford us Law
for any money: then ad te domine clamabo, that we can have neither truth nor
justice in the earth.

But to proceed to show the miseries of the Church of Ireland, though it be a
very lamentable thing, and an unanswerable argument of the decay of Piety, and
of small Religion in the noblest persons, to suffer the houses of God to lie as
they do, for hogs and other beasts to dig up the bones of holy Saints, it may
be, the Fathers or Mothers of the now great Lords and Ladies of the Kingdom.
Yet as the Lord said unto his Prophet Ezekiel, Turn thee yet again, and thou
shall see greater abominations, Ezekiel. 8.6. so I say to my Reader: For,

2. The great want of able Ministers in this Kingdom, and why they are so scant.
2. As God is without Churches for his people to meet in to serve him, so he is
without servants, enabled to do him service, to praise his name, and to teach
his people; and to have Churches and no Churchmen is to no purpose.

But why have we not such Churchmen as are able to instruct Gods people?

I say, it is easily answered; that it is not so easy to get able, worthy, and
sufficient Churchmen, unless there were sufficient means and livings to
maintain them: for as Seneca truly says, Sublatis studiorum premiis ipsa
studia pereunt, where there is no reward for learning, there will be want of
learned men, as one demanding why there were no Physicians in Lacedemon, answer
was made, because there was no stipend nor allowance set forth for the
Professors of that faculty; but as Martial says to Flaccus, Sint Maecenates
non deerunt Flacce marones,
Virgiliumque tibi vel tua rura dabunt.
But here in Ireland since Hen. 8. Why we want learned and painful Preachers
here in Ireland.
overthrew the Abbeys and Monasteries that were as Universities to breed
Scholars, and to send them forth to feed the flock of Christ, and gave the
Revenues thereof, which were the Ecclesiastical Livings of the Church, unto his
Nobility and lay Gentry, that spend the same, in many places, in hawking and
hunting, and perhaps in some other worser employments, the Church of Christ
wants Scholars, and which is worse, wants means to maintain those
Scholars, that otherwise would supply the defects of this Kingdom from other
Universities, if they should have maintenance to support them, and to supply
their necessities.

If you say, Queen Elizabeth to make up the breach which her Father made,
caused the College to be built by Dublin, to breed up Scholars, to instruct
the Natives.

I wish the Natives were bred therein, according to the Statutes and
Institutions thereof; but the Natives say, I know not how true, that the
English by friends do carry away the places, and the Irish, as they lost their
Friends, and their Lands, and their strength, so they lose their right. But the
truth is, that the whole Society of this College cannot adequate, that number
that the Priories and Monasteries formerly bred; or if they could, yet the
means and maintenance being alienated the Laborers cannot make up the full
tale of bricks, when the straw is taken from them, and they must run over all
the Land, like the Israelites, to gather stubble, and to use other labor to
maintain themselves and their Families.

And to make this apparent unto my Readers, I have here set down all the
Rectories and Vicaredges in my Diocese, and what Procurations, (besides their
Subsidies and twentieth part, which they are, and ought, to pay unto his
Majesty, It may be at some dear year they may be of more worth or that the
cunning Farmar may make more of them then the Minister does.
and besides many other Taxes, that must lie upon them,) they are to pay every
year, to the Archdeacon, to the Bishop, and to the Archbishop, every third
year, and to the Primate, when he comes to visit them: and I have in my last
Visitation, with the help of my Archdeacon, Mr. Teat, and my Register Mr.
Conell, and two or three more of my gravest Clergy men, searched, and inquired,
as diligently as we could, what was the value, that every Living might be worth
communibus annis: and accordingly I have here set them down; that my Readers
may themselves judge, whether these many Livings, that each Clergy man holds,
are more, or enough, Deductis deducendis, to make one competent Living for a
worthy and able man, that will constantly reside, and conscionably preach unto
Gods people.

And these be the names of the Livings, their Procurations, their yearly value,
and the persons that do hold them. viz.
Procurat. Value. l. s. d. Com. Orm. R. Offerulam 0 12 0 Segrave V. Ibid. 0 6 0
Episc, R. Bordwel 0 3 4 Episcop. V. Ibid. 0 1 8 Neyland R. Aghavo Cul. Jun. V.
Ibid. 1 2 8 Episcop. R. Rath-Sarau. 0 4 8 C. Orm. R. Rath-Downy 0 10 8 Episcop.
V. Ibid. 0 5 4 Bar. de Ossor. R. Cowlkerry 0 4 8 Cul. Jun. R. Delgnie 0 1 6
Teate R. Donnogh-more 0 5 4 Teate V. Ibid. 0 1 8 Civit. Kilk. R. Skirke Cul.
Sen. V. Ibid. 0 14 Cul. Sen. R. Kildermoy 0 4 8 R. St. Nicolai. 0 4 8

2. Decanatus de Aghor.
Eccles. Cath. R. De Skaffin 0 3 4 Com. Desm. R. Donnogh More 0 14 8 Williams
V. Tubbrid Britt. 0 4 0 Eccles. Cath. R. Clontabrit. 0 4 0 Sir To. Foord R.
Killahie 0 4 8 Partridge V. Ibid. 0 2 4 Baro de Oss. V. Killenie and Cahire 0 7
4 Willams R. Cloghmant. and Kilrush 0 7 6 Eccles. Cath. R. Rath-Logan 0 5 10
Eccles. Cath. R. Cowlkashin 0 5 8 R. Deane R. De Eirke Kerney V. Ibid. 0 14 8
Decan. R. Irlingford C. Orm. R. Glashard 0 4 8 Eccles. Cath. R. Ballilorcan 0 4
8

3. Decanatus de Odogh.
Archd. Bulk. R. Castrie de Odogh 0 8 4 Drisdale V. Ibid. 0 4 4 Barry R.
Glash-crowe 0 2 4 Spencer R. Rath-behath 0 4 0 Eccles. Cath. R. Durho 0 14 8
Teat R. Rosconnel 0 8 8 C. Orm. R. 0 4 4 Goburne R. Attanagh 0 5 0 Moore V.
Ibid. 0 2 6 Co. Orm. R. Kilmenan 0 5 0 Kilkormicke 0 2 8 Com. Orm. R.
Donnogh-more 0 6 8 Drisd. V. Ibid. 0 3 4 Com. Orm. R. Kilcolman 0 6 8 Spenser
R. Cowlcrahin 0 7 6 Driscall R. Kilmocar 0 4 8 Spenser V. Ibid. 0 2 4 Driscall
R. Comer 0 13 4 Cull. Sen. V. Ibid. 0 6 8 Collegium V. Disart 0 11 0 Cull. Jun.
V. Mothell 0 9 0 Civit. Kilk. R. Macully 0 18 6 Cull. Sen. V. Ibid. 0 0 9 Com.
Desm. R. Don-mors 0 5 8 Spenser V. Ibid. 0 2 4 Moore Jun. V. Agharnie 0 7 0

4. Decanatus de Syller.
Archd. Bulk. R. Kilferegh 0 4 8 Moore Sen. V. Donfert 0 6 8 Idem. V. Kiltranie
0 4 8 Wilson R. Inshiolaghan 0 10 8 Idem. R. Tulloghanbroge 0 9 8 Idem. V.
Ibid. 0 4 10 Kerney V. Kilmanagh 0 6 8 Collegium R. Dromdelgnie 0 8 8 Collegium
R. Bally-bur 0 3 4

5. Decanatus de Claregh.
Civit. Kilk. R. Dromerthe 0 2 4 Cull. Jun. R. Kilmadimocke 0 3 4 Idem. R.
Kilderie 0 5 0 Civit. Kilk. R. Fennel 0 0 0 Collegium R. S. Martini 0 2 0
Miler. R. Gowran Drisdall V. Ibid. 1 12 0 Vic. Dubl. R. Blanchfield 0 6 8 Mr.
Moore R. Dongarvan 0 12 8 Miler V. Ibid. 0 6 4 Cull. Sen. R. Claregh 0 5 0

6. Decanatus de Obercon.
R. Thomastowne Teat V. Ibid. 0 4 8 Co. Orm. R. Disart 0 2 8 Kerney V.
Rosbercon and Shambogh 0 2 10 Cap. Holsey R. Kilkolbin 0 5 4 Kerney. V. Ibid. 0
2 8 Spenser. R. Listerling 0 5 6 V. Ibid. 0 3 2 Civit. Watf. R. Kilmahevog
Blake V. Ib. and Bally Margur. 0 2 2 Kerney V. Kilkoan and Kilbrit 0 4 0 Idem.
V. Tristle Maure 0 2 0 Com. Orm. R. Rower 0 8 8 R. Deane V. Ibid. 0 4 4 R.
Tannerveghan 0 6 8

7. Decanatus de Kells.
Teate V. Jerpoint 0 6 8 Co. Orm. R. Knoctopher Bulkley V. Ibid. 0 3 10 Barry
R. Aghaviller 0 5 0 V. Kilknedie 0 4 0 Collegium R. Kilkeis 0 4 0 R. Innethart
0 4 0 Moore V. Mallardstowne 0 3 0 V. Ballegh 0 4 8 Moore V. Earlestowne 0 4 0
Dr Chamberl. R. Callan 2 15 0 and pro Synodalibus 0 7 0 R. Deane V. Callan 1 8
1 and pro Synodalibus 0 4 2 Capella villae de carti 0 3 4

8. Decanatus de Over^e.
(...) (...) ^ath Pat^^ck 0 1 4 (...) (...) ^^ll^k^^^han 0 3 4 (...) (...)
Dunk^^ 0 3 4 (...) (...). Illud 0 0 1^ (...) (...). ^^lmaboy 0 3 4 ^ll (...).
^allymartin 0 1 4 D^ll^l^^ V. Po^^^^s^^lly 0 1 4 ^^ll^^^um V. ^^^h ^^^an 0 1 8
^ull^l^^y V. (...) 0 2 4 Wil^on R (...) 0 1 4 D^l^ley R. (...) 0 2 8 W^l^^n V
(...) 0 14 8 ^u^^l^^ R. (...) 0 1 8 (...) V (...) 0 1 2 (...) R. (...) 0 3 4
(...) (...) 0 3 0 (...) 0 0 8 (...) (...) 0 ^ 0 (...) 0 0 ^^ R (...) ^ 1 8

(...) ^ ^^ ^ (...) 0 ^^ ^ (...) (...) ^ ^ ^ (...) (...) ^ ^ ^ (...) (...) ^ ^
^ (...) (...) ^ ^ ^ (...) (...) ^ ^ ^ (...) (...) ^ ^^ ^ (...) (...) ^ ^ ^
(...) (...) ^ ^ ^ (...) (...) ^ ^ ^ Col. Welsh R. Kilbecocke and Killahie 0 6 8
R. Rossenan 0 2 0 Clarke R. Thomastowne 0 15 0 Inisteog 0 15 0 Cap. Holsey R.
Kilcoan 0 5 0 Clarke Collankill 0 3 4 Civit. Wat. R. Cashlane 0 10 0 Mr. Welsh
R. Donkitte 0 13 4 Co. Sup. Oss. R. Killenie and Cahire 0 4 4 Preb. Whiting. R.
Attire and Attan. 0 5 0 Total 69 4 11 procurat.

These be all the Rectories and Vicaridges in the Diocese of Ossory; and of
these
1. The Dean and Chapter have six: that is, 1. Skaffin 3 s 4 d 2. Clontabrit 4
s 8 d 3. Rath-Logan 5 s 10 d 4. Bally Lorcan 4 s 8 d 5. Durho 13 s 8 d 6.
Coulcashin 5 s 8 d


2. The College of the Vicars have six: that is, 1. Disart 11 s 2. Dromdelgney
8 s 8 d 3. Bally-bur 3 s 4 d 4. St. Martin 2 s 5 Kilkeyse 4 s 6. Rath-Keran 1 s
8 d The Cathedral 1 l 11 s And the College 19 s



3. My L. Duke of Ormond, for himself and my Lady Duches have 1. R. Offerulam
12 s 2. R. Rath-downy 10 s 8 d 3. R. Glashard. q. 4. R. Lawkil. q. 5. R.
Donnaghmoore 14 s 8 d 6. R. Kilmenan 5 s 7. R. Kilcolman 6 s 8 d 8. R.
Donnoghmoore 6 s 8 d 9. R. Kilmocar 4 s 8 d 10. R. Donmore 5 s 8 d 11. R.
Disart 2 s 8 d 12. R. Rower 8 s 8 d 13. Knoctofer q 14. Prior Jerpoint 15 s 4 d
15. Prior Kells 6 l 13 s 4 d 11 l 6 s Irish. 8 l 9 s 6 d sterling. procurations.


But I do understand that this pious and most honorable Duke does most
religiously (as it is said of Arauna, All these things as a King did Arauna
give unto the King, 2 Samuel 24.23.) intend to yield up, and to bestow them all
for the building of a College in Kilkenny, to bring up Scholars for the
service of God, and the perpetual honor and glory of himself and the
succeeding Race of his Family for ever; and I beseech God continue his grace in
that most godly resolution: And let the God of heaven multiply his blessings
upon him, to ride on with his honor more and more.

4. My Lord of Upper Ossory has 1. Koolekerry 4 s 8 d 2. Aghamacartie 2 (...)
3. Calline and Cashire 4 s 4 d 2 l 3 s Irish. 1 l 3 s 9 d sterling.


5. My Lord of Ga^moy has Far^inageratgh 2 (...)


6. My Lord of Cavan has 1. Thomastowne ^^ (...) ^. ^^^^steog 4 (...) and ^^
(...)


7. Sir Robert Foord has R. Killahie, and Kilbecocke, 6 s 8 d


8. Captain Holsey has R. Kilcolbin 5 s 4 d R. Kilcoan and Kilbrit 5 s


q. 9. Sir Jo. Ponsonby has R. Fidown 6 s 8 d


10. Colonel Dillan has R. S. Keiran. R. Capel: S. Nicolai.


11. Mr. Welsh has R. Dunkitt 13 s 4 d R. Rosenan 2 s


12. Archdeacon Bulkley has 1. R. Bananagh 2. R. Kilferagh 3. R. Odogh. 4. R.
Disort. c. or. q. 5. R. Tulloherin


And I did always conceive, that no Churchman, that understood what Sacrilege
is, and the hainousness of that sin, would ever accept of any impropriate
Livings, and hold the same as a lay fee from the Church of God; for, if a
Clergy man holds it lawful to take five, I do not wonder that a lay man should
hold twenty.

13. The City of Kilkenny has 1. R. Skirke. 2. R. Tubbrid britain 4 s 3. R.
Maculli 18 s 6 d 4. R. Dromerthin 2 s 4 d 5. R. Fennel 6 s 6. Prior S. John 4
l.


14. The City of Waterford has 1. Prior S. Katharin 6 l 8 s. 2. Prior.
Kilkellihine 6 l 6 s 8 d 3. R. Portnescolly.


The best Livings in all the Diocese are held by the Nobility, Gentry and
Cities.
And all these Rectories are the best and the chiefest Livings, that are of any
worth, or of any note within the Diocese of Ossory: and as I showed you, the
Nobility, Gentry, and Cities do hold them from the Church, and do yield little
or nothing for the service of God in those Churches, neither dare the poor
Vicars and Curates, according to the Bishops appointment, ask them any thing
for the serving of these Churches; nor is it to any purpose for any Incumbent
to sue for any Tithes or rights that belongs unto his Church, for when he
sueth, and has proved the truth of his Allegation, and to his great expenses
expects judgment, then presently, upon a false suggestion, comes a
prohibition, to stop all just proceedings in the Court Christian; which is the
usual and common practice against all the Christian Ministers in Ireland, when
they sue for any right; and which is the cause that the Christians wanting
Vicars and Curates, that will not undertake to strive against the stream, or to
labor in Gods Vineyard, and to want bread, our good God is thereby
dishonored, the People uninstructed, and ignorance, superstition, and Popery,
very like to continue still unrooted out amongst them.

A memorable Instance. Mr. Partridge.
And to make this more plain unto you, I will here set down a thing recenti
memoria factae; A poor Minister, and very honest man, expelled by the Irish
Rebels from his Livings, and plundered of all that ever he had, and kept out of
all, (as we all were, by far more wicked rebels,) was lately restored and
placed by my self in the small Vicaredge of Killahie; but Sir Robert Foord,
having the impropriate Rectory, bestowed the same with his Daughter to a very
great rich man, powerful, Colonel Stopford.
in former times, with the Long Parliament, and he forbids his Tenants to
suffer the poor Vicar to have his Vicarial Tithes; that were not all worth five
pounds per annum, because they paid none for all the time of the Rebellion:
therefore the poor Vicar sueth for his Tithes, and by sufficient Witnesses
proved the payment thereof, before the Wars, unto the Vicar: whereupon the
great Gentleman came unto me, and said that such a Minister of my Diocese sued
the Tenants and Servants of Sir Robert Foord, that was a Privy Counselor, and
a great Parliament man, and therefore desired me to stop the Suite: I answered,
that I could not do so; for what if all the men in the Parish were the Tenants
and Servants of Parliament men, and denied to pay their Tithes to the Vicar,
shall the poor man be without his means, during all the continuance of the
Parliament? So he may starve for want of food, and the people perish for want
of instruction: Then he showed me a writing under the hand and Seal of another
Bishop, that stopped the proceeding of a Minister in his Diocese against the
Defendants, upon the Allegation and proof, that they were Tenants and Servants
of Sir Robert Foord: And I answered, that I was not to guide my actions by the
doings of other men, though reputed never so wise, but to do what I conceived
to be just and honest without the fear of the greatest man; and I answered him,
there should be nothing done in his cause but what was just; so we parted; and
his Agents gave it out, that he would spend a hundred pounds before the Vicar
should have any Tithes there: and the next news that I heard was a Prohibition
from the Chancery to stop the proceeding in the Court Christian, which I
conceive to be no furtherance of the Christian Religion. And so M. R. Deane,
Vicar of Callan, having sued one for his right, in mine Ecclesiastical Court,
when the matter was ready to be sentenced, there comes a Prohibition to stop
it; and so in many other the like causes. And how can a poor Minister, not
worth five pounds in all the world, nor scarce clothes to his back, when he was
put into this Vicaredge, wage Law with such a man, of a vaste estate, so that
he could offer fourteen hundred pounds (some say more) for a Purchase? Cuncta
trahit secum, vertitque aerarius omnis, Nec patitur certa currere quemque via.
Let the world judge, what would become of Religion, if all Impropriators
should thus deal with their Vicars, and all great men and powerful Parishioners
with their poor Parsons? Even as I am dealt withal; to spend above four hundred
pounds to gain the rights of the Church: and to be not one jot the nearer to
prevail, than I was the first day.

But to proceed; having seen how the best Livings are held and disposed of, and
how the poor Parsons, Vicars and Curates are commonly dealt withal, What
Livings the Clergymen do hold in their possessions.
you shall understand what Livings the poor Clergy men hold in their
possession, and of what value they are unto them (deductis deducendis,)
communibus annis, as by the inquisition of three or four of the ablest
Clergymen in my Diocese, with my self, I have understood the same in my
Visitation; and thereby my Reader may understand the meanness of our Irish
Livings.

Their Procurations. Worth. M. Barry has 2 s 4 d 1. Glashcrowe 5 l. 5 s 2.
Aghaviller 8 l. 3 s 4 d 3. Bewley 10 l 4. V. S. John 10 l 10 s 8 d 33 l Mr.
Blake has 2 s 2 d 1. Kilmahevog and Bullymagarney 10 l 1 s 4 d 2. Rath-Patrick
5 l 1 s 2 d 3. Cashlane 5 l. 4 s 8 d 20 l Mr. Bulkley has 11 d 1. Illud 8 l 2.
Kilmaboy 16 l 1 s 4 d 3. Portnescolly 6 l 10 s 2 s 4 d 4. Polroan 7 l 2 s 8 d
5. Clonmore 3 l 10 s 3 s 10 d 6. Knoctofer 6 l 1 s 8 d 7. Tibbrit 1 l 3 s 8.
Tibrahaine 1 l 10 s And he has the Prebend of Clonamry 6 l 15 s 9 d Mr. Cull
Senior has 14 s 8 d 1. V. Skirke 16 l 4 s 8 d 2. R. Kildermoy 30 l 6 s 8 d 3.
V. Comer 2 l 10 s 1 s 9 d 4. V. Macully 3 l 5 s 5. V. Clarech. 1 l 12 s 9 d Mr.
Cull Junior has 1 l 2 s 8 d 1. V. Aghavo 15 l 9 s 2. R. and V. Mothell 5 l 3 s
4 d 3. Kilmadimoy 4 l 5 s 4. Kilderie 4 l And he has the Prebend of Tiscoffin
10 l 2 l Dr. Chamberlain has 2 l 15 s 1. R. Callan 10 and pro Synod. 7 s Mr.
R. Dean has 4 s 4 d 1. Rower 11 l 1 l 8 s 1 d 2. V. Cullan 40 l 3. R Eirke 50
l 1 l 12 s 5 d And he has the Prebend of Kilamerie 20 l and pro Synod. 5 s 2 d
The Dean of S. Keney has 1. Irlingford 2 l 2. R. S Patrick 30 l The Church
down, and the people have neither Sermon nor Service. Mr. Drisdall has 4 s 4 d
1. Castrie de Odogh 5 l 3 s 4 d 2. Donnoghmore 8 l 13 s 4 d 3. R. Comer 25 l 1
l 12 s 4. V. Gowran 14 l 1 s 4 d 5. Bally-martin 4 l Rosenan 2 l 10 s 2 l 14 s
5 d Dr. Edwards has 1. The Prebend of black Ruth 16 l Mr. Goburne has 5 s 1.
R. Attanagh 30 l Mr. Kerney has 6 s 8 d 1. V. Kilmanagh 30 l 2 s 10 d 2. V.
Rosbercon and Shambogh 10 l 2 s 8 d 3. V. Kilcolbin 8 l 4 s 4. V. Kilkoan and
Kilbrit 3 l 2 s 5. V. Tristle-maur 5 l 3 s 4 d 6. R. Kiltokeghan 5 l 7. V.
Dun-kitt 5 l 14 s 8 d 8. V. Eirke 35 l And he has the R. of Kilmanagh for his
Prebend 24 l ^ l 16 s 2 d Mr. Miler has 1. R. Gowran 40 l 6 s 4 d 2. V.
Dungarvan 10 l Dr. Neyland has 1. R. Aghavo 50 l Mr. Moore Senior has 6 s 8 d
1. V. Dunfert 4 s 8 d 2. R. Kiltranie 3. V. Bailytobin 6 l 3 s 4. V.
Mallardstowne 6 l 4 s 5. V. Earlestowne 10 l 6. V. Ketts 15 l 18 s 4 d Mr.
Moore Junior. 2 s 6 d 1. V. Attanagh 10 l ^ s 2. V. Agharney 7 l Mr. Segrave
has 6 s 1. V. Offerulam 15 l M. Spenser has 4 s 1. R. Rathbehath 8 l 7 s 6 d
2. R. Cowlchrahin 5 l 2 s 4 d 3. V. Kilmocar 2 s 4 d 4. V. Donmore 8 s 8 d 5.
R. and V. Listerling 10 l 5 s 6 d 6. V. Main 10 l 1 l 10 s 4 d And he has N.
Main for his Prebend 10 l. Mr. Teate has 1 s 8 d 1. R. Donnaghmore 15 l 8 s 8
d 2. R. Roseconnel 16 l 4 s 8 d 3. V. Thomastowne 10 l 6 s 8 d 4. V. Jerpoint
13 l 1 l 1 s 8 d And he has the R. of Kilfane for his Prebend 15 l Mr.
Whitingham has 1. V. Killanie and Cahire 2. Killinkar And he has Aghore for
his Prebend 12 l Mr. Williams has q. 1. V. Tibbrid-brittain 4 l 7 s 6 d 2. R.
Gloghmantagh and Kilrush 16 l Mr. Wilson has 10 s 8 d 1. R. Inshiologhan 8 l 4
s 10 d 2. V. Tullaghanbroge 3 l 1 s 4 d 3. R. Ballytarsney 12 l 14 s 8 d 4. V.
Fidowne 12 l 1 l 11 s 6 d.

These be the rest of the Livings within the Diocese of Ossory; Whether the
foresaid means and rates be able to maintain a sufficient Ministry
and the just value (so far as I could learn) of each of them; and do you think
that this value is sufficient to maintain an able Ministry to supply all these
Churches and Parishes as they ought to be, or that Popery shall be suppressed,
and the true Protestant Religion planted amongst the people, by the unition of
Parishes, and the diminution of Churches without any augmentation of their
means? Credat Judaeus Apella, non ego.

But you will say, his Majesty has most graciously provided, Object.
and it is confirmed by the Act of Settlement, that a very ample augmentation
is added to all the meanest Bishoprics of Ireland, and he has most royally
and religiously bestowed all the Impropriations forfeited to his Crown upon the
several Incumbents, unto whose Churches they did belong.

I answer, That when God placed man in Paradise, Answ.
the devil was ready to cast him out: and when God makes our paths straight
and easy, Satan will straight put rubbs and blocks in our way to stumble us:
so, though I gave above fifty pounds for Agents money to follow the Churches
cause, and spent above thirty pounds to procure a Commission, to gain that
augmentation, which his Majesty was so graciously pleased to add unto the
Bishop of Ossory; yet presently there comes a Supersedeas, to stop the
proceeding of my Commission, How the devil hinders all intended good
and I am not the better, either by Augmentation or Agents, so much as one
penny to this very day: and some devil has put some great rub for a stumbling
block in my way: until God removes the same, and throws it where blocks
deserve to be. And though his Majesty has been pleased to bestow his
Impropriations upon the Incumbents, yet my Lord Lieutenant and the Council
thought it fit, to take forty pounds per annum out of those Impropriations for
the better provision of the Quire in Dublin; and so by that means, the Clergy
of Ossory are not the better by one penny: that the Clergy might be like unto
their Bishop: for I find but four impropriations forfeited to his Majesty, and
bestowed upon the Church in all the Diocese, and these being set by Mr.
Archdeacon Teate, to the uttermost pitch that he could, they did not reach to
forty pounds the last year.

And to say the truth, without fear of any man, we are not only deprived of the
Vicarial Tithes and offerings by the Farmers of the great Lords Impropriate
Rectories, but our Lands and Globes are clipped and pared to become as thin as
Banbury Cheese, by the Commissioners and Counsel of those illustrious Lords:
for though his Grace, our most excellent Lieutenant, the Duke of Ormond, is (I
say it without flattery) a man of such worth, so noble, so honorable, and so
religious, as is beyond compare, and for his fidelity, and Piety, and other
incomparable parts, scarce to be equalized by any Subject of any King, and so
many other great Lords are in themselves very noble and religious; yet as
Rehoboam, in himself considered, was not so very a bad King, but had very bad
Counselors that did him a great deal of dishonor and damage: so this most
honorable Duke, And thus, as Christ was crucified betwixt the good thief and
the bad, so are we, betwixt the good Lords, and their bad Agents.

But let them fear, least by making their Lords great here on earth, they do
make themselves little in heaven,


and other great Lords, may have, as I fear some of them have, such
Commissioners and Counsel, that, as well to make themselves a fortune, as to
enlarge their Lords revenues, will pinch the Parsons side, and part the
Garments of Christ, betwixt themselves and their Lords, as my Lord Dukes Agents
have distrained and driven away my Tenants Cattle for diverse great sums of
Chieferies, and challenged some Lands, that as I am informed, were never paid
nor challenged within the memory of man.

And who dares oppose these men, or say unto them, Why did you so? Not I,
though they should take away my whole estate; for as Naboth had better have
yielded up his Vineyard, than to have lost his life, so I conceive it better to
yield to their desires quietly, than to lose both my Lands and my labor by
such a Jury, as will give it away though never so Unjustly: whereof I have had
experience, and a sad proof non sine meo magno malo. Yet,

The Civility and Piety of the 49 men.
I confess the 49 men have been very civil, and showed themselves very fairly
conditioned, and religious both to my self, and as I understand, to all other
Clergymen; and I wish that all Noblemens Commissioners and Agents would be so
likewise, that their doings may bring a blessing and not a curse upon them, and
perhaps upon their Lords and Masters, Lords and Masters shall answer to God for
the oppressions that their servants do under their power.
that must give an account to God for the ill carriages, and the oppressions of
the poor by their servants, who dishonor their Lords, and make them liable to
Gods wrath for the wrongs that they do, to make them the greater, and so
receive the greater condemnation: for great men must not only do no wrong
themselves, but they ought also to see, that none under their wings, and
through the color of their power and authority, do any wrong unto the poor.

But to deal plainly, and to show what respect, favor, and justice we the poor
Bishops and Clergymen have from the great Lords and Courts of justice in this
Kingdom, I will instance but in the example of my self; who, after I had
exposed my self to the daily and continual hazard of my life, by my preaching
and publishing so many Books against the Rebels and Long Parliament, which I
have unanswerably proved to be the Great Antichrist, and had, for all their
Reign, served, duram servitutem, and suffered more hardship than any Bishop,
and upon my restitution to my Bishopprick, by the happy restoration of our
most gracious King, having spent above four hundred pounds to gain the Bishops
Mansion house, where Bishop Bale saw five of his Servants killed before his
face, and himself driven to flee to save his life, and which was given to Sir
George Askue by Cromwell for his service to the Long Parliament, I have fully
showed the favor and the justice that I had at the Kings Bench, though I must
ingeniously confess my Lord Chief Justice dealt as fairly and as justly as any
Judge in the world could do. And I do pray to God that both Judges and Jury and
all the pleaders may have better at the Bar of the King of Kings.

Then letting pass the proceeding of the Court of Claim, that gave away the
Lands and Houses that were in my possession, while I was in London, though a
chief Member of that Court promised that nothing should be done against the
Church until I returned home, and acknowledging the civility and fair respect
that was showed me by my Lord Chief Baron, and the other Barons of the
Exchequer, in doing right both to the King and to my self, by putting the
Bishops Lands out of charge. His M jesty having most graciously conferred four
hundred pounds per annum o me and my Successors, out of the fee Farms
forfeited to his Majesty, and the Parliament confirming the same by the Act of
settlement; I took a Commission of enquiry, and when all my Witnesses came
together, and were ready to proceed, there comes a Supersedeas to stop our way:
but his Majesty's Attorney Sir William Dunvil, and Sir Audley Mervin, and the
rest of the Kings Sergeants and Sollicitors did so faithfully, so learnedly,
and so religiously plead on his Majesty's behalf and the Church, (for which the
God of heaven will reward them,) that they had the Supersedeas superseded and
vacated by our most honorable and most religious Lord Chancellor; and then I
proceeded, and the Jury found this Bishops house and Freshford forfeited to the
King, and worth a hundred pounds per annum; then coming to Dublin, to have my
Commission put upon the file, and to get a Pattent according to the Act and the
Kings Grant to enjoy the same, after I had spent above a hundred pounds to
bring the matter to this pass, I received this answer, that my Lord Deputy and
Council were resolved to do nothing unless they received the Kings Letter and
Command to do it; and though I was sorry for the vaste expense of money that I
laid out to no benefit, yet I am glad to see men so observant of the Kings Word
and Command: I would to God they and all others the Kings Subjects would have
obeyed Solomon's Counsel to observe the words and commands of our late most
gracious King Charles the First. I should not have needed to suffer so much as
I have done, and so often to have troubled our now most gracious King; and to
have spent near sixty pounds for Agents money for the good of the Church; and
above four hundred pounds to repair the Chancel of S. Keney, and in all above
five hundred pounds to recover the Bishops Mansion house, and Freshford, from
Captain Burges and Sir George Ayskue, and to be not one jot the nearer, nor one
penny the richer for all this money that I have spent; nor have any more by one
pennyworth than what my most gracious King, and late loving Master gave me to
this very day, and I conceive this to be nothing else, but --

But then after I received this answer, I presently went to London, and
presented this Petition to his Majesty.

To the Kings most Excellent Majesty. The humble Petition of Gruffith Lord
Bishop of Ossory.
Shows,
THat your Petitioner has suffered the loss of all that he had, and the
continual hazard of his life, during all the time of Cromwell and the Long
Parliament, for his service and faithfulness to your Majesty, and your Royal
Father, of most blessed memory.

That your Majesty has been most graciously pleased, to grant four hundred
pounds per annum out of the forfeited Fee-farmes for an augmentation to his
poor Bishopprick of Ossory; and that your Petitioner, being by the Sheriff put
into the possession of the former Bishops Mansion house, called Bishops Court,
by virtue of an Order from the House of Lords, and being forcibly driven out by
the Tenants of Sir George Askue, whom your Petitioner has therefore indicted
three several times by three several Juries, yet after the expense of above
four hundred pounds could not be righted. And your Petitioner having got a
Commission of inquiry, what Fee-farmes were forfeited to your Majesty, and when
the same Commission was superseded, having, with a great expense, superseded
that supersedeas, and had, by the fourth Jury, found the said Bishops Court to
be a Fee-farme held from the Bishop of Ossory, worth by improvement a hundred
pounds per annum, and forfeited to your Majesty; yet, after the expense of
above a hundred pounds to bring the Commission to this pass, your Petitioner
received this answer from the Lord Deputy and Counsel, that they were resolved
to pass no Pattent of any Lands, granted by your Majesty, and the Act of
Settlement unto the Bishops, but to such as had your Majesty's special Letters
to do the same.

And forasmuch as it had been better for your Petitioner to have had nothing
granted unto him, than after such a vaste expense (above five hundred pounds)
to miss of gaining one hundred pounds per annum; Your Petitioner humbly
prays, that your Majesty would be graciously pleased to write your Letters to
the Lord Deputy to pass a Pattent according to what the Jury found, and
according to your Majesty's former Grant, and the Act of Settlement.

And your Petitioner does oblige himself to lay it out all for the repair of
the now ruinous Cathedral Church of S. Keney, and he shall ever pray, etc.

And his Majesty did most graciously read it every word himself; and then said,
I will speak to my Lord of Ormond to do it.

So whether I recover it, or not, Non hujus facio, I weigh it not a rush, for I
hope my Savior Jesus Christ (whose Solicitor I am only in this suit) will not
impute the loss of this to me, seeing I have done my very best to regain it for
his service; yet could not do it, by reason of the great Friends of Sir George
Askue, who made me, like Ixion, (that embraced a Cloud for Juno,) to spend five
hundred pounds to hunt after a shadow, and to lose the substance, and to have
his Majesty's gracious (...), to become (...); but, let him take heed of Moses
Emphatical Prayer for Levi, and of David's Prophetical Prediction, what shall
become of them that keep the Revenues of the Church, and the Houses of God in
their possessions; and let his great Friends, and his Jury pray to God, that
they may have more favor from Jesus Christ, than they have showed for his
honor; and if this be the reward that Sir George Askue and the Bishop of
Ossory shall receive for their service to King Charles the first, I will say no
more, but pray to God, as I do, both day and night, to be a just Judge betwixt
me and them, that have opposed me, in this the Churches right, Amen.

So you have seen some part of the miseries of the Church of Ireland, and all
the Livings in my Diocese of Ossory, and who holds them, and what they are
deemed to be worth, communibus annis, unto the Incumbents: and this, together
with the state and condition of the Bishoppricks in Ireland, which are now like
Anthropophagites, eating up and devouring one another, (excepting the poor
Bishopprick of Ossory, that stands yet alone like the trunk of a goodly
Oak, without boughs, without leaves, without beauty;) when as many Bishops
here in Ireland have two or three Bishoppricks apiece: As the Bishop of Cork
has also Rosse and Cloyne; the Bishop of Limricke has also the Bishopprick of
Kerry; the Bishop of Waterford has Lysmore; the Bishop of Laghlin has the
Bishopprick of Fermes; the Bishop of Dublin has also the Bishopprick of
Glandelo; the Bishop of Downs has likewise Conner and Kilmore, whose Lands
and Lordships the great Lords and Gentry hold, and they the names of those
Bishoppricks, whereof, formerly, each Bishopprick was sufficient to maintain an
able Bishop. If you say, the Bishops themselves made away their Lands in
Fee-farme: I dare boldly and truly say, as Christ does of the like case, that
they who did it were thieves and robbers, Joh. 10.8. and they that received
them were no better, but they that retain them worse. When as now two or three
Bishoppricks must be soddered and conglutinated together, to make an honest
competent means for one learned Bishop. This I say shows he miseries of our
Churches, and the difference betwixt the fruits that the purity of the Gospel
produces in our times, and the Piety of our forefathers that lived in the
Primitive times, and afterward under the manifold mysts and several
Superstitions of the Romish Church, when the Lands and revenues that they gave
to God to maintain the Bishop of Ossory to do him service, is now As I believe:
worth fifteen hundred pounds per annum, and our zealour Gospellers have
brought it, in the last Bishops time, to be scarce worth two hundred pounds per
annum; and I believe the other Bishoppricks are not now and then much unlike
it, and so we and our forefathers are not much unlike those two Sons, whereof
our Savior speaks, whose Father said unto the first, Go work to day in my
Vineyard, and he said, I will not, but afterward he repented and went; and he
came to the second, and said likewise, and he answered and said, I go Sir, and
went not: So our forefathers lived in the times of blindness, and knew not well
what was acceptable unto God; yet they did to the uttermost of their endeavors
and knowledge, what they were able, to please God, and to serve him; and we
have his Truth, and his Will, his Gospel, and his Mercies plentifully
published, and poured forth amongst us, and we do all that we can, to obstruct
his service, and to evacuate the Religion of Jesus Christ.

And therefore I do much fear that these blind Christians, as our Gnostics
contemptuously call them, The Papists shall rise in judgment to condemn our
fruitless and sacrilegious Protestants.
shall rise in judgment to condemn the great and quick-sighted worldlings, and
fruitless Christians of our time: who, by their profaneness and Sacrilege
have so much hindered Gods Service, and caused our most holy Profession to be
so much blasphemed, and slighted among Infidels and Pagans, and the rest of the
enemies of Jesus Christ.

Object.
But you will say, how can that be Sacrilege, or those men blamed, that, for
the reformation of the Church, took away those things that were usurped by the
Pope, and abused by the Monks and Friars to uphold Masses and Dyrges, and to
continue their Superstition, to the great dishonor of God, and the hazard of
many thousand souls?

Answ.
I answer, if a thief steals my horse, will thou take it away from the thief,
and keep it still from me? Art thou any better than the thief to me, or any
juster in the sight of God? So the Pope and his Popelings took away the Tithes
and Oblations, the Lands and the Livings of the Church, and thou tookest them
from the Pope and his Friars: And why do thou not restore them to the
Churches, to the which they do belong? For, thou may remember that when
Nebuchadnezzar had, like the Pope, robbed the Temple of God at Jerusalem, and
abused the Vessels thereof in the service of his false God; and Belshazar his
Son had in like manner profaned the same, by his lascivious quaffing therein
with his Queens and Concubines, for which he was justly punished by the
revenging hand of God, Dan. 5.3, 25. yet Cyrus, when he had taken Babylon, and
so robbed the thief that had robbed God, and understood, that these holy
Vessels did belong to the Service of God in the Temple of Solomon, he durst not
meddle with them, to retain them for himself, but, lest he should be punished
for his Sacrilege, as Belshazar was, he commanded them to be carried to
Jerusalem, and to be restored to their former proprietors, and for their former
use in the divine Worship of Almighty God.

And so should Hen. 8. and those Lords and Ladies, that have taken away the
Revenues of the Church from the Pope, have restored them to the Protestant
Bishops, and the reformed Ministers of our Church. Cod. Theod. l. 4. C. 16.
tit. 44. contra Donat. And so S. Aug. shows all the godly Emp did Ep 50 ad
bonifac. militem.
For so you may find a Decree of the godly Emperors Honorius and Theodosius
against the Montanists in these words, If there be now any of the Edifices of
the Montanists standing, which are rather to be termed Dens of wild beasts,
than Churches of Christ, let them with their revenues, be appropriated to the
Sacred Churches of the Orthodox Faith; and in the said Code it is said, let the
Bishops, Priests, and Prelates (that is of the Donatists) be stripped of all
their Revenues, and be banished to several Islands; and let those possessions
where Superstition has reigned, be annexed to the holy Catholic Church.

And good reason for it; for as the Ark of God, when it was taken and abused by
the Philistines, yet did it not then cease to be the holy Ark of God, and
therefore when it was afterward sent home by the Philistines, it was received,
respected, and as much reverenced, and to the same ends used by the Israelites
as it was before; as were also the Vessels of Solomon's Temple, after their
return from Babylon: So the Revenues of the Church, though taken from the
Church, and abused by the Pope, yet, being restored again to the Church, as
they ought to be, they have the same effect, notwithstanding their former
abuse, to promote the service of God, as they had before: For being once
dedicated for Gods service, they ought never be to alienated from it, as I have
most fully showed in my Declaration against Sacrilege; but, as those Censers
(wherewith the two hundred and fifty Rebels, impiously usurping the Priests
Office, would needs offer Incense to God,) were hallowed; and therefore God
would not suffer them afterward, to be at any time employed for any common
uses, but commanded, that they should be made into broad plates for a covering
of the Altar, Number. 16. and so the Brass which those Rebels had so wickedly
abused, should be religiously used by the true Priests for Gods service: So the
Lands and Revenues of the Church that were once hallowed, and consecrated for
Gods Divine Worship, though the Idolaters did abuse them, and the Lay Lords
usurp them, yet God cannot endure, that being once in his possession, and given
for his service, they should be snatched out of his hands, and transferred to
Lay and profane uses, but that, like those Censers, they should ever continue
for the service of his Altar; and so St. Augustine shows as much in his 154
Epistle to Publicola.

And thus you see, how God is robbed, his Service neglected, and his Servants
deprived of their means and maintenance, so that they can neither discharge
their duties to God, nor feed the flock of Christ, and instruct the people
committed to their charge; as they ought to do, and would no doubt do the same,
if they were enabled to do it, which is a lamentable thing: and yet I can show
you a greater abomination, Ezekiel. 8.6. even in the Visitations of these poor and
pillaged Clergymen: I remember God has a twofold visitation, the one in
mercy, to relieve the oppressed, to deliver the Captives out of their
Captivity, as he visited the Israelites in Egypt, and the like; the other in
justice; to punish the malefactors, and the transgressors of his Laws, as he
visits the sins of the Fathers upon the Children unto the third and fourth
generation of them that hate him; but whether the Visitations of our Clergymen
be in mercy, or in justice, or whether it be pro correctione morum, or
collectione pecuniarum, and refectione corporum, or both, I will not determine;
I believe their first institution aimed at our good, for the praise of them
that do well, and the punishment of the refractory and evil doers; but time and
craft corrupts the best things, and as the wicked turn the graces of God into
wantonness, so covetous men and corrupt minds, do abuse all the good
institutions of our Ancestors; so the service of the true God was, in time,
translated to become the service of the Idols of the Gentiles; and so, I fear
me, these Visitations of the Clergy, that at first aimed at their good, and for
their relief, are now become, in many places, an oppression, and a heavy yoke
upon their necks, and a burden scarce portable upon their shoulders. As

1. In the multiplicity of them, 1. The multiplicity of Visitations.
three or four that may be in one year; as first the Archdeacon, he visits, and
gathers up his Procurations, perhaps all the money that the poor Clergy can
procure; then comes the Bishop, and he visits, and the Clergy must now double
their file, his Procurations being twice as much as the Archdeacons; then,
every third year, the Archbishop comes about in his triennial visitation; and
if in either the Bishop, or the Archbishops visitation, the Clergy fail, either
in the payment of their Procurations, or making such refections as shall be to
the satisfaction of their Visitors, their Livings may be sequestered, and let
them live as they list; and after all this, the Lord Primate, if he please, may
come in the same year, to make a regal Visitation; and he being so good a man,
and coming from so good and so gracious a King, deserves no less than the best;
and the best entertainment, that can be made for his Grace is fit to be made
for him; And can these many visits, think you, be for the profit of the poor
Clergy? But,

2. 2. The Refections.
The refections seem to be more burdensome than the Procurations; especially
because the Procurations are certain, what every man must pay, but the
Refections (contrary to the mind of our Savior, that says unto his Disciples,
Into what house soever ye enter, eat what shall be set before you, Luke 10.7.)
must be to the satisfaction of the delicate and delicious company of the
visitors, and not according to the power of the poor Clergy; when they remember
not the old Proverb, That the full dog knows not how, or what the empty dog
does bark; and if they be discontented with their entertainment, their Censures
must be as they please, and none dares say, that it is unjust, or how can it be
so from the men of God? Yet, as all powerful great men can easily find a staff
to beat a dog: so the superior Bishop or Archbishop can (if they please) soon
find a fault in a poor inferior Clergy man.

Now I will set down (for I fear no man living,) what information I have by
Letters from the last Visitation of the Archbishop of Dublin, that was held in
my Diocese of Ossory, by his Surrogate Mr. Archdeacon Bulkley: and these be the
very words of the Letters, that the World may thereby see, and the Judge of all
the World may judge in what case the poor Clergy do stand.

My Lord,
IT pleased God a little after your journey to Dublin to take out of this life
your Grandchild Mrs. Cull, who discovered much Religion on her death bed; and
as she wanted not attendance in her sickness, so neither decency, nor solemnity
at her Funeral; Since your Lordships departure your Maid did, unknown to me,
marry Mr. Barry the Smiths man, whom she brought to lie in your Lordships
house, whereupon there arose some quarrels between Thomas and her, insomuch
that Thomas sat up a whole night with Candlelight for fear of the men, as he
complained unto me, whereupon I charged the man not to lie at night time in
your Lordships house till your Lordship did return; which has prevented the
like inconvenience since: As to the triennial Visitation I shall give your
Lordship this brief account, The Lord Archbishop did not come in person, but
sent Mr. Bulkley, whom we waited on three miles to bring him into Town, he told
us what noble refections he met with in the Diocese of Kildare, Leighlin, but
that here he was resolved to lodge at his Daughters house, he asked what
Provision we had made for his Register, we told him Mr. Connels house; when his
Register came to Town, though his men some of them and his Portmantle were in
Mr. Connels house, he did not like his lodging, and complained to the Vicar
General; On Monday, after the Commission was read, he told us, that in regard
the refection for the Archbishop was neglected, he suspended the Jurisdiction
for six months, and whereas he thought to behave himself as a loving brother,
he would prove a severe Judge, and that we should expect nothing but utmost
justice; we invited him that day to dine at Whitles, where we bespoke a Dinner
for his refection, which cost six or seven pounds; but he refused, and every
day we invited him, but could not prevail,; on Tuesday, and Wednesday he seemed
very mild and respective, and earnestly desired to be an happy Instrument in
the reconciliation of Mr. Dean and my self, Mr. Cull, and Mr. Drisdale, upon
which importunity that we might not discover our selves to be litigious, I was
willing to be reconciled to him, whom I had no visible quarrel with, so was
Mr. Drisdale, but Mr. Bulkleys awe upon Mr. Cull made him condescend to a great
submission, and ask him forgiveness flexis genibus; the next day the
Archdeacon told me, that if we would discharge his Servants quarters, he would
take off the Inhibition upon the Jurisdiction, whereupon Mr. Connel and my self
engaged to discharge the Reckoning; and so we thought that all things had been
ended in a fair correspondence, but upon his departure, he did privately
sequester all the Livings of Mr. Cull Junior, the Vicaredge of Aghaboe into the
hands of one Manby the Archbishops Chaplain, he sequestered out of my own poor
means Donnoghmore and Rosconnel, and two Livings more of Mr. Cull Senior, and
there were many other Sequestrations that I could not get an account of, which
they carried to Dublin; Thus praying for your Lordships speedy return to
countenance and support the Clergy; I rest,

Kilkenny, July 23. 1664. Your Lordships most obliged Servant, Joseph Teate.

And now having set down this Letter, I would have my Reader to understand that
whatsoever I set down here, touching my Lords Grace his Visitation, I say it
not to accuse any of his Officers of the least fault, or to lay the least blame
on them for any unjust proceeding therein.

The things acted by Mr. Archdeacon Bulkley in my Lords Grace his Visitation,
which the Bishop of Ossory understands not, as 1. The suspension of the Bishops
jurisdiction. Canon 24.
But I only set down rem gestam, to show how heavy the Censure was, and how
burdensome (which a just judgment may be) unto the poor Clergy, whose neglect
or fault, I excuse not, if they committed any, but only pity their case under
their Censure; and likewise to show how far, beyond my understanding, (which
notwithstanding might be most just) many things were acted therein; As,

1. The Suspension or inhibition of the Jurisdiction, I know not for how many
months together, nor for what cause, if as Mr. Teates Letter says, for the
neglect of the Archbishops Refection, I find the Canons say, that neither the
Archbishops in their Visitation shall charge their Suffragans, nor the Bishops
their Clergy, with any noctials or refections, over and above their ordinary
Procurations, (reserving notwithstanding unto the Archbishops the refections
heretofore usually received in those Diocese, where the same Procurations are
not received by them, which are yearly paid by the Clergy unto their Bishops.)

But the Archbishops do receive from the Clergy of the Diocese of Ossory all
the Procurations that they do yearly pay unto their Bishops.

And yet notwithstanding this exemption of Refections by the Canon, I am sure I
paid seventeen pound for the Archdeacons refection in the Archbishops last
Visitation, which is a great deal more than the Subsidy and twentieth part that
I pay unto his Majesty any year, and it may be more than ever was bestowed upon
a Dinner for the blessed Apostle S. Paul.

But you see in the Letter, how highly they do extol the Bishop of Kildare,
which is the prime Bishop in the Kingdom, for the noble entertainment that he
made at this Visitation, spending, as some say, forty pounds at least for their
Refection; and the Bishop of Lachlin and Fernes in like manner, that was not
much behind the former, to show his love and respect to his Metrapolitan, my
Lords Grace of Dublin.

Truly, I do honor, respect, and reverence, and do heartily love my Lords
Grace of Dublin, as a most noble Gentleman, and a most reverend and a worthy
Father of the Church, and as much, and it may be more than any of them, and
have suffered somewhat for the love I bare him; though my large expense for the
rights of the Church darkened the expression thereof in the Archdeacons
Refection, as the Archdeacon represented it to his Grace.

Or it may be, as some say, my Jurisdiction (for the Jurisdiction is mine, and
not my Archdeacons, nor Register,) was suspended because I appeared not, at the
Visitation, but went to England without my Lords Grace his leave; especially
after I had notice of his Visitation.

Indeed, I must confess, I went after I had notice of the Visitation: but my
only business was the business of the Church, and I had my Lord Lieutenants
leave, under his hand and seal, to go without any prejudice unto me; neither
was I so forgetful of my duty, or of civil respect, as to neglect my Lords
Grace, but I went unto his Grace to excuse my absence from his Visitation, and
to desire his leave, to go on my journey; and he very graciously yielded unto
me.

And why, after such leaves obtained, my Jurisdiction, which is half my
Episcopal Function, should be inhibited, I understand not; If Mr. Bulkley
says, quomodo constat, that you had my Lords Grace leave to be absent: I
answer quomodo constabat, how did I know, that Mr. Archdeacon Bulkley should
visit me, and would think me so uncivil, and so ill bred, as to forget my
respect and duty to my Lords Grace, as to go away without his leave?

I, but why did not you, says the Archdeacon, send a Certificate under the
Archbishops hand, that you had his Grace his leave?

1. Because I did not understand, that, if I were at Cork, or Kerry, or some
other such remote place from Dublin, it is absolutely necessary by any Canon or
Law, that I must either go or send to Dublin to get my Lords Grace his leave to
go about my most unavoidable occasions, of what consequence soever they be, or
else, to be sequestered from my means, or to be suspended from my jurisdiction.

2. Because that, having his leave ore tenus, by word of mouth, I did not
believe that Mr. Archdeacon would imagine, that a man should not trust the
Archbishops words except he had it under his hand and seal, when as I never
doubted of any honest man's word, and much less of the words of my Lords Grace
of Dublin.

Yet the Jurisdiction was suspended, as they say, for six months, till all the
harvest and the profit of the year should be past over; and what a grievance
this is, to all those parties, that have suits depending in the Bishops Court,
to have justice retarded all this while, and to those also, that would sue for
their Tithes, or for any other right within the cognizance of the
Ecclesiastical Court, I do not understand it, but am sorry for it: and let
others judge of it.

2. The taking of the Articles exhibited against the Dean out of the Bishops
Court.
2. When as Articles were exhibited unto me of high nature, against the Dean of
S. Kenny, and I calling him into my Court, to answer them, and giving him his
own time, that he desired to have, to make his answer, that he might not be
surprised, and this long before any inhibition of my Jurisdiction came into my
hands, I do not understand how the same suit, depending in my Court, could be
taken off, but by an appeal, and transmitted by a due Course of Law: or
otherwise, all the suits and causes depending in my Court might be cancelled
and taken off, as well as this: and what a grievance is this, to the
prosecutors of any suit, and of how much damage I cannot imagine.

3. 3. The giving of Relaxations of the Bishops Sequestrations without hearing
what the Bishop could say for sequestring them.
When the Deane of Kilkenny came to be instituted into his Deanery that was
Sequestered into the hands of Alderman Butler, and would neither pay the Fees
for his Institution, nor take a Relaxation of that Sequestration to this very
day; and I letting him alone for this, and for many other prejudices, that
concerned my self, yet when diverse of his Parish came unto me, and complained
how duly they paid their Tithes and all duties unto him, and yet how roughly
he used them, and how negligent he was of them, when as they had neither
Service, nor Sermon, nor Minister, to Christen their Children, Marry their
Youths, and Bury their Dead, but they must go, and entreat this man or that man
to do it, and that I could not persuade him to have a better care of his Flock,
nor to pay any Dues to his Majesty, to my Lord Duke of Ormond, and the Bishop,
I Sequestered his Living for the better Service to be done unto his people, and
the sooner to get those Duties due both to the King and Bishop; and he
understanding thereof, instead of coming to me for to desire a Relaxation,
(which I expected,) he went and desired to see the Sequestration, and the man
that had the Sequestration, gave it him to read, and he put it in his Pocket,
and keeps it to this day, and gathered his Tithes, giving many opprobrious
terms, and using great threatenings against the honest man to whose hands I had
sequestered his Living.

And when Mr. Archdeacon Bulkley came to the Archbishops Visitation, he,
without my privity, and without any appeal, or demanding what I had to say
against him, gives a Relaxation of that Sequestration.

And all this I cannot well understand; but it puts me in mind of a Play Book
that I saw on a Booksellers Stall, entitled, A King and no King; and of what
the Jews said to Christ, Hayl King of the Jews, that is in their mind, Rex sine
Regno: For thus, taking the Articles out of my Court, and relaxing the
Sequestration, and undoing whatsoever I had done, I conceived I should be a
Bishop and no Bishop: or a Bishop without the authority and power of a Bishop.

And truly, I do think, I were better to use no Jurisdiction, than in vacuum
laborare, and to do things to no purpose, but only to be undone again; which
is not so much a prejudice unto me, as it is to all those Parties that had, or
should have any Suits depending in the Bishops Court, and must every third year
go fifty or sixty miles to follow their Suits, and with a vast expense in
Dublin; and I wish his Majesty would consider this agrievance of his People.

But now, as Abraham said to God, Genesis 18.30. I have taken upon me to speak
unto the Lord, let him not be angry, and I will speak; so I say to my Lords
Grace of Dublin, The things that the Bishop of Ossory observes to be
considered out of the Letters. 1. Touching the Refection.
seeing I have taken upon me to speak of these things, let not his Grace be
angry, and I will yet speak a little of what I have observed in the afore-cited
Letters; And

1. For the Refections, I will say no more but what you see in the Letters; and
what I said before touching this Point, but desire (if we must still continue
to give Refections to the Bishops and Archbishops,) that the uncertainty of the
expense might be remedied, and either commuted for a certain Sum of money, or
limited not to exceed a Sum as shall be agreed upon, to be convenient, that the
poor Clergy might be certain what they are to do, and understand in what case
they stand, and not be punished for their ill-doing and neglect of their duty,
when they think they have been very bountiful and have done very well; And,

2. 2. For the reconciliation of the disagreeing persons.
For the Reconciliation of the persons disagreeing it was a very good, and a
very charitable work; but for the submission of the Senior Cull unto the Deane,
it puts me in mind of Aesops Fable, Lupus ad caput fontis, bibens videt agnum
procul infra bibentem; for to say the truth, Ea fama vagatur, the Dean is
reported, and I will not justify the report, to be very litigious, and
covetous, and to have much wronged the poor Vicars; and to have been, as
Chaplain to one Delboire a Cousin of his, at the Siege of Basing House, against
his late Majesty; which, if true, makes me believe him to be a very unworthy
man, and not worthy to be countenanced against any honest man; and I know Mr.
Cull is reputed to be a very honest man, presented so to me by the Mayor and
Aldermen of Kilkenny, and I am sure a very constant and painful Preacher; and
yet the Deane charged him with such heinous crimes, that, if proved, were
sufficient utterly to undo him; Whereupon Mr. Cull, to quit himself of the
Accusations, preferred these Articles following against the Deane, and
delivered the same to me, and I finding, that, if Fame be true, they might be
all very easily proved, did put the same into my Court, to be answered by the
Deane: And not to prejudice the Reputation of the Deane, (the things alleged
being not proved,) but that my Reader might the better understand the truth in
this place.

And the Articles, being exhibited unto me, by the Junior Cull from his Father,
as I showed before, I required his Proctor to draw up the same in forma juris,
and my Register to deliver them to the Dean; and in open Court, I gave the Dean
his own desired time to answer them; and all this being done, the Articles
exhibited, the Dean having his own time to answer them, and lying long in the
Court before any tidings of the Archbishops inhibition came unto us, I conceive
it strange, and cannot understand, quo jure, how these Articles should be taken
out of my Court, as they were, without my privity, without an appeal, or any
other due course of Law, and the offender quitted, and set free without any
answer to any Articles, (which I conceived to be rather a covering of faults,
and cherishing offenses, than a reformation of manners,) but especially to
consider that the party wronged, and so highly injured, The strange injunction
laid upon Jo. Cull.
should be enjoined to make such a submission, as flexis genibus upon his
knees, to ask forgiveness to him that did the wrong: hoc mihi magnum est, hoc
miram, I pray you forgive me, that I did not thank you for abusing me: to
justify herein the foresaid Fable true; for, I know no wrong that Cull did to
the Dean, but I can make it good, that the Dean did many ways exceedingly
wrong poor Cull; And yet Cull must be enjoined to ask the Dean forgiveness upon
his knees; and truly, to this day, I could not learn for what, unless it were
for complaining that the Dean dealt with him, as the Wolf did with the Lamb.

And not only so, but the report goes, that the poor man (who spends what he
has, to maintain his two Sons in Oxford,) was awed, (as the word of my Letter
is,) that is, threatened and terrified, that if he did not do as Archdeacon
Bulkley enjoined him, he should be deprived of all the means he had, and should
not be suffered to serve in all Ireland: which if true, (as I easily believe
it,) is the readiest way to increase the oppressions and wickedness of men, to
the great dishonor of God, and not to further the reformation of those
offenses, that ought most severely to be reproved; especially in those men,
that by the dignity of their places, should be the light and good example unto
others, yet will be indeed the very scandal, shame, and reproach of their
Calling: I say no more, but that such proceedings do seem very strange to me,
that never saw the like in the Kingdom of Ingland, nor ever read the like done
in any Ecclesiastical Court.

3. For the Sequestration.
And for the Sequestrations, I can say little or nothing to them; because I know
not well the causes, for which they were sequestered; but I pity the poverty,
and the loss and want that must thereby follow to the sequestered parties, to
disinable them for a while to do that good, which otherwise they might do to
themselves and their Families.

Yet, as the old Axiom is, that Corruption unius est generatio alterius, so
their loss is a gain to the Officers and friends of the Sequestor, (though
perhaps they have not so much need of it, as those that are sequestered,)
because Mr. Archdeacon Bulkley (as I am informed) wrote his Letters to the
Dean, and to his Cousin Mr. Lloyd (who, notwithstanding his Letters, dealt like
a Gentleman with the sequestered parties) to make the best agreement they could
with the Sequestered Clergy for their own profit and advantage, before they
should have their relaxation; which I believe was never so intended when
Sequestrations were first ordered to be extended.

But for Jonathan Cull, that is said to be sequestered for not going to his
Grace, to ask leave to go to Oxford, before he went, (which was indeed a fault
in Cull,) and no man will excuse him, unless he can yield a very good reason
for his neglect.

But for his Non-residency from his Livings, I think, that the Statute does
allow him to be absent from his Living, and to live in the University studendi
gratia until he be forty years old, and I having sent him word, from the
Rector of Lincoln College, where he is a student, that he must make haste to
come before the Act; and his new-married Wife being lately dead, he might be
thereby so troubled, and in such an ecstasy, as to forget his duty and
obedience to my Lords Grace, not so much out of contempt or neglect of his
Grace, as out of ignorance, bashfulness, or forgetfulness, that might well
excuse him before any mild, and no severe Judges a tanto licet non a toto; and
therefore consideratis considerandis, the fault, which might be accounted
venial, might be conceived not to deserve so heavy a Censure, as to be deprived
of all his means, whereby he is disinabled to continue his study in the
University; which makes me believe, the Sequestrator conceived some greater
cause to sequester him, either against him, or against some other of his
relation, which is probable, as I conceive it, to be against my self, whom some
thought to wound through the side of Jonathan Cull, because I know the man to
be so civil, and of so fair a carriage, as to give no just offense to any one,
or in any place; I would the accuser of his brethren were so blameless: but
many times Aristides is punished for being just, and Clodius applauded for his
wickedness.

Or if he, or any other of my Clergy has justly deserved punishment, I will
not be their Advocate to justify or to excuse any heinous crime.

And for the Visitations themselves; The Visitations of this Kingdom.
the Bishops Visitation seems to be clipped here in this Kingdom of Ireland
more than seems convenient; for the chief parts and duties of this Office of
Episcopacy, different from Presbytery, do consist in these two special things:

1. Ordination of the Priests and Deacons to be the Teachers and Pastors of the
Church, to feed the flock of Christ.

2. Jurisdiction, to rule and govern all the members of the Church, Clergy, and
Layty, according to the Laws, Canons, and Constitutions of the Church.

And if in this Triennial Visitation of the Archbishop, he inhibits the Bishops
Jurisdiction for two or three months, before he visits, and then when he
visits, suspends the Jurisdiction for six months more, as here you see he does,
or for more than that if he please, and this every third year: and in any part
of the year, when he will; has not the Archbishop swallowed up almost all the
Jurisdiction of the Bishop? And then as the Pope sends his Legatos a latere, to
do only what the Pope directs him; so the Bishop shall stand by the Archbishops
side, and shall be set aside, as often as he pleases, which seems to me to be a
Jurisdiction ad placitum, and so little better than a Cipher, that standing by
himself, signifies nothing, and so is worthy of a Presbyterial correction.

But, as Monarchy is the best kind of Government in the World, when the same is
well ordered, and rightly used, as I have most amply showed in my Book, of the
Right of Kings, so the multiplication of powers into one hand, being abused,
has produced Tyranny among the Tyrants of the Gentiles; and, as Presbyterians
say, in the Popes of Rome: Therefore our Savior Christ, seeing how ambitious,
and how greedy his Disciples were to usurp authority, forbids them, (not, to
use their authority, and the jurisdiction that he gives them,) but he
forbids them to abuse it, (...),
i. e. not (...), to domineer one over another, as the heathen Tyrants did, 1
Pet. 5.3. and to that end, the most Divines say, and I think all, except the
Popes Parasites, I am sure all the Presbyterians affirm it, that Christ equally
distributed the power and authority, that he gave, to the Governors of his
Church, which were the twelve Apostles, amongst them all: See Bishop Howsons
Sermons that proves this Point at large.
and therefore they had all equal jurisdiction; though S. Peter had the
priority of nomination, in respect of order, which must be observed in all the
actions and the works of God, which is the God of order.

Yet I, that am and will be as observant, respective, and obedient to my
Archbishop as any Bishop in Ireland shall be to his Metrapolitan, say not this,
as finding any fault, or laying the least blame, upon the Canons and
Constitutions of the Church, and the Laws of these Kingdoms (for all must
confess, that the Office and Calling of an Archbishop was not so from the
beginning, nor is, jure divino, of Christ's institution,) that ordered and
appointed the same to be governed and guided by the Bishops subordinate to
their Archbishops, that are to have the oversight of them; which is a most
excellent way, that all things may be done right in the rule and government of
Gods Church: So it be done with that temper and moderation that it ought to be
done.

But I say this, to the same end as our Savior said it to his Disciples, that
all things might be done, Leni spiritu, non dura manu, rather by an inward
sweet influence, than an outward extreme violence, and that all the Bishops,
and the Archbishops in their Visitations, and in all their actions should study
and strive to be like Moses, that in the Government of Gods people was the
gentlest, and the meekest man upon earth, and endeavored, as he says himself,
to carry them in his bosom, which is the greatest commendation, and the best
quality that can be in any Bishop, of whom, it is a shame to say, Non pater est
Aeacus, thou art not the son of Moses, sed te genuere ferae, but thou art more
like the savage beasts: when thou art so cruel, so unmerciful, and so severe in
the censure of thy brethren of thine own Coat.

For as I said long ago, so I say now, and will say it still, One of the
chiefest causes of the late distractions in our Church.
that the rigid carriage of some severe Bishops, and their undiscreet
Surrogates, on the one side: and the high stomachs and proud behavior of the
Presbyters, on the other side, when the Governors ruled, and domineered like
Tyrants, and the Presbyters, like stubborn Children, refused to be obedient,
has been one of the chiefest causes of the late distraction and miseries, that
we have felt in this our Church,

But I will demand of the Lay men, whether that Censure, be commendable, when
for a fault that deserves a penny fine, the offender shall be punished with a
pound? And that delinquency, which springs through ignorance, or forgetfulness,
and not of obstinacy, shall be equally punished with the highest
transgressors; which is, in my judgment, like Draco, that wrote his Laws in
blood: Yet may you see the like Draco's sometimes in the Sequestrations and
Censures of some Clergymen: Poor souls, I can but pity them. And I will not be
the Judge, but let the Reader consider it; A young man is newly instituted into
a little Living, and becomes bound to his Majesty for his first fruits, then
goes to his study to the University, that he may be the better enabled to do
God service, in the Church of Christ; yet, because that either through
bashfulness to go to so great a Prelate, that he never was acquainted with, or
through ignorance of his duty, or forgetfulness, or perhaps for haste to save
his passage by Sea, when as time and tide stay for no man; or some other
excusable cause, he goes to Oxford without his Archbishops being acquainted
therewith, though his own Bishop sent for him in all haste to come up before the
Act: yet for this heinous crime and great piccadillo fault, he is sequestered
from all the means he has, before he receives the first harvest fruits, or
perhaps one penny from the same, whereby he is disinabled to pay the Kings
first fruits, and to maintain himself in the University, and so undone: and if
this Censure be equivalent, and not exceeding the fault, judge you.

And as dislike and disaffection produce sometimes heavy Sentences upon the
poor Clergy for light faults; so I have often seen great oppressions, and much
baseness used by some great dignified Clergymen, that I could name, and yet
they were so far from Censure, that others were upheld and applauded in their
wickedness and so, Juven. 1. Satyr. 13.
as the Poet says, -- Multi
Eadem committunt diverso crimina fato
Ille crucem pretium sceleris tulit, hic diadema:


One man is applauded and crowned for the same fact for which another man is
condemned and hanged.

The last Visitation of the Archbishop in this Diocese of Ossory.
But for the last Visitation of the Archbishop in this Diocese of Ossory, I
shall, besides what I have said already of the Inhibition and Suspension of the
Jurisdiction, say somewhat more than I said of the Sequestrations of the
Clergy; And, 1. Of the Number of those persons that were sequestered. 2. Of the
Causes for which they were sequestered. 3. Of the Consequents of their
Sequestrations.


1. You must understand, that in all my Diocese of Ossory, I have but twenty
two beneficed Clergymen, and of them twelve are non-resident, and eight of the
twenty two were sequestered; viz.

1. Mr. Barry. 2. Mr. Cull Senior. 3. Mr. Cull Junior. 4. Mr. Drisdall. 5. Mr.
Moor. 6. Mr. Spencer. 7. Mr. Teate. 8. Mr. Kerny.
Whereof six were continually resident, and in my judgment, the most learned,
and most frequent constant Preachers, that have any Ecclesiastical preferment
in my Diocese.

2. For the Causes, why their Livings were sequestered, I cannot, and I do not
say but that they may be very just, either for not rendering to Caesar what
belongs unto Caesar, as the twentieth part, Subsidies, and the like payments,
due unto his Majesty; or for not rendering to God what is Gods, as the due and
diligent serving of their Churches, and the payment of their Procurations, and
the discharging of all other dues and accustomed duties unto his Grace, or to
them whom he sent to visit them; or for holding their Livings contrary, either
to the Civil or the Ecclesiastical Laws of the Land; or for the unworthiness of
the persons incapable of them, or some other just and lawful cause.

My Registers Letter informs me, that Mr. Cull Juniors Livings were sequestered
for going to the University without his Grace his leave, whereof I have spoken
before; and others for distance of miles, if they were above six miles one from
another, though they say, that for the tenuity of their Livings they had the
Kings Pattent under the Broad Seal, to hold them some thirty, and others twenty
miles distant; in which case, I say no more, but, if they shall not keep them
above six miles distant, they might live better and grow richer here in Ireland
by keeping Sheep, than by feeding of Christ his flock; or if the Law prohibits
them, to keep them, beyond that distance, I wonder, why they are admitted, by
the Relaxations of the Sequestrations, to keep them still if they were
sequestered, to get Fees for the Relaxation, to Mr. Proby, my Lords Grace his
Register, and not to deprive them of either Living; my Lords Grace dealt more
graciously, and like himself, in granting the Relaxation of them, than his
Surrogate did in the Sequestration of them.

But if they were Sequestered, for not paying the Archbishops Procurations, or
other duties due unto his Grace, I blame them very much, that they paid them
not; for though by reason of the smalness of their means, and the worthiness of
the men, in their pains taking, I forgave all my Procurations and other dues
also, to most of the poorer sort of them, ever since his Majesty came in, and,
to my remembrance, have not received so much as ten shillings in Procurations
from all my Clergy to this very day; yet that should not make them careless or
forgetful to pay all duties, that are due to other men; and therefore I told
Mr. Barry, that says, for not paying eighteen pence Procurations to the
Archbishop, he paid thirty two shillings to his Register, for his Relaxation,
that he did very unwisely therein; though, to excuse himself to me, that was
angry with them all that were negligent to pay all dues to his Grace, he had
says, that eighteen pence is not in my List, nor in the Archdeacons List of
Procurations, neither was it ever paid, or demanded to be paid, either by me,
or by my Archdeacon, or by any other Bishop or Archbishop before; or otherwise,
if he known how it came into Mr. Archdeacon Bulkleys Roll, he would rather
have paid his eighteen pence than thirty two shillings; and so I told every one
of the rest of them that were sequestered, and paid thirty two shillings for
each of their Relaxations, that it was their own fault, and their folly, that
they had not paid what was so justly due unto his Grace.

3. The consequents of their Sequestrations,
3. For the Consequents of these Sequestrations, as they were very beneficial
and profitable to the Archdeacons Friends, and to my Lords Grace his Officers,
as I could show you in what particulars, so they were very fatal and grievous
to the poor Priests, that were sequestered; for I, charging them, upon their
Canonical obedience, to show me the truth of the proceedings and sufferings
which they sustained, I received a Petition from the Senior Cull, and a Letter
of Mr. Manby, my Lords Grace his Chaplain, to a friend of his; (which I once
thought to insert in this place,) but I did not, yet I perceived thereby, how
heavily this burden lay upon the poor man's back, that protested unto me, he
spent near thirty pounds before he was quitted from all his troubles in this
business, and he was brought so low, that I was fain to lend him twenty pounds
to be sent to Oxford to relieve his two Sons, lest otherwise they should be
expelled out of their College for want of money to pay their arrears; and how
great a prejudice and hinderance it was to the Junior Cull in his proceedings
in the University, himself best knows, and can best inform you: the which
things I conceived were very much to be pitied by any compassionate Father in
the Church of God, that has a fellow-feeling of another misery.

And I understand likewise, from the rest of the Clergy, and the poor Clarks of
the Parish Churches, what an infinite charge the rest of the sequestered parties
had been at, in paying about thirty two shillings Fees for every Relaxation,
and Sequestration granted against them; besides their own proper expenses, and,
if I am not misinformed, besides two pence a mile from Dublin to Ossory, (which
in some places is betwixt fifty and sixty miles,) to the Apparator that served
the Sequestration; and besides a far greater trouble and loss which these
sequestered persons had from the Tenants, to whom they had set their Tithes
before they were sequestered, and (by reason of the great charge, and small
means of some of them) were fain to take some part of their money beforehand;
for when the Farmers of their Tithes, saw that their Livings were sequestered,
and put into other men's hands, yet, (though they had a Relaxation of them
afterward,) they pretended a far greater loss than it may be they had, and so
made the loss very great unto the Incumbent, that must bear all the damage, and
save the Tenant harmless; as to instance in one example for all.

The Dean and Chapter having paid me no Procurations, An instance of the loss
of the sequestered parties.
for all the Livings that they held, since his Majesty's happy restoration, I
sequestered the same into the hands of two of the ablest and best experienced
Prebends, Mr. Teate, and Mr. Kerney, who, I knew, would give a just account to
me, and to the rest of their fellow Prebends; and they did set the Tithes unto
those Tenants that were most able, and gave most for them; but when Archdeacon
Bulkley came to visit the Chapter, his great friend, and old acquaintance, the
Dean, that had all the former years Revenues in his hand, and had given none
account of any part thereof unto the Chapter, and was much grieved at my
Sequestration of it, out of his hands, would not pay the Procurations due to my
Lord Archbishop of Dublin, no more than he would pay to me any of my
Procurations; whereupon Archdeacon Bulkley, whether to please the Deane, or to
pleasure his Cousin Bulkley, I know not, sequestered the same again into the
hands of his Cousin Mr. Thomas Bulkley, and the rest of the Prebends had lost no
less than five pounds by reason of that Sequestration, if the Law had not
forced Mr. Tho. Bulkley to yield it up into the former Tenants hands. And so
did the rest of the Clergy lose very much by reason of their Sequestrations,
which they had never been acquainted with since my restoration; though I
received not forty shillings from all my Clergy since I came to be Bishop to
this very day, nor so much as one penny from the Dean in all my life.

Then about two months after the Archbishops Visitation was past, I received a
Letter from Mr. Proby, the Archbishops Register.

And therein a List of them that had not paid their Procurations unto his Grace.

At the reading of which, I did greatly wonder at the partiality of Archdeacon
Bulkley, that could spare to sequester Mr. Richard Seagar, Mr. Whittington, Mr.
Williams, Mr. Richard Deane, Mr. Goburne, Mr. Wilson, and Dr. Chamberlain, that
were the Deans friends, and for whom he interceded, though five of them were
non-resident, and yet would presently sequester those eight (whereof seven were
always resident, and took most pains in all the Diocese,) whom he knew the
Bishop therefore had a very good opinion of them, as well as of those whom he
spared; and the Dean had so eagerly, I will not say maliciously, but I dare say
causelessly, complained of them; and these also to have their Relaxations
granted before they had paid their Procurations; I hope it is not to sequester
them again, which they well deserve, if their former warning has not taught
them to pay them. And therefore, I that have always persuaded and taught
obedience to be observed by all inferiors to their superintendents, would not
be negligent of my duty, to do according to my Lords Grace his Order, but I
sent my Apparitor to all the particulars of my Clergy mentioned in the
Schedule, to come and make satisfaction for their Procurations, or to expect
what might succeed, which they were better, like wise men, to prevent.

And they, when they came unto me, showed me their Acquittances, under Mr. Juxe
his hand, that they had already paid them.

So I thought this storm was over: Yet within a while I heard that about some
ten poor Parish Clerks, and five of the Clergy were cited to appear at Dublin,
(a journey to some fifty or sixty miles, in the short Winter days, and over
ways as foul as any is in Ingland,) to answer Articles that should be objected
against them.

Then diverse of the Clerks came crying to me, that they had rather leave their
Clerkeship than to take such a journey to Dublin; and one of the Clerks the
Archdeacon Bulkley had given a License to, and yet cited him to Dublin to show
his License, the which, when he showed, the Officers of the Court said, they
mistook it, and dismissed the cause, and yet afterward sent a Citation for the
Fees. And my Clergy entreated me to intercede for them that did not know
wherein they had offended, nor what could be objected against them: and I
answered them all, that I would neither meddle nor make in their business; but,
if they have done well, then all would be well, if otherwise, let them suffer
for it, I would never excuse their negligence, nor Patronize their offense;
then some of them appearing at Dublin, expecting their Charge, and desiring
earnestly to be dispatched, Archdeacon Bulkley answered, Your Bishop is writing
of Books, (for he had some inkling of mine intent,) and will not apply himself
to my Lords Grace to intercede for you.

Yet my Lord Archbishop very nobly and graciously willed the Archdeacon to take
their answer, and to dispatch them that they might go home; and the Archdeacon
Bulkley willed them, to confess their faults, and to submit unto the Court, and
they should be discharged; and I hearing of this advice, willed them to confess
the truth, but not of any guilt, wherein they were innocent.

And therefore when they had their Articles, ten or twelve, read unto them,
(for they had no Copy of them,) they saw, they were but mere suggestions, and
not any thing in any of them, that could any ways touch them, or prejudice
them in any thing, and they presently made their answers unto them.

And when they had answered and confessed no fault that they committed; upon the
payment of their Fees, for the charges of the Court, they were dismissed.

Whereby, it seems to me, that, if they were guiltless, and nothing could be
proved against them, they might as well cite all the Clergy, and all the men in
Kilkenny, and suggest Articles against them, to bring them unto Dublin, to pay
Fees to enrich the Officers of the Court; and that being done, to send them
home glad that they are dismissed.

Then after this the Churchwardens of S. Mary's in Kilkenny, having very
justly, as I understand, presented diverse persons at the Archbishops
Visitation, Canon 65. and 67.
they were, contrary to the Canons, cited to appear at Dublin, forty seven
miles, to make good their Presentation, as the Churchwardens informed me; which
was so ill resented, that we could hardly get any that would take the
Churchwardenship upon them, for fear of the like troubles if they presented any
man. But, when I demanded of the Archdeacon why the Churchwardens were cited to
make good their Presentment: He answered, it was not so; but they retained a
Proctor to prosecute against those that refused to pay the Church taxes, and
they not following their suit, they were sent unto, either to come and
prosecute, or the Defendants should be dismissed: which if so, I blame not the
proceeding, but let the Churchwardens suffer for their own error, when they
sue out of my Court without a dismission, or an appeal.

Yet out of all my former discourse, it appears what an heavy burden and an
infinite charge this last triennial Visitation of the Archbishop has been to
the indigent Clergy of Ossory, both in their threefold Procurations, their
manifold Sequestrations, and long Winter journeys to procure their Relaxations,
and the manifold losses that they sustained by their Tenants, that, by reason
of the Sequestrations were disappointed of those tithes that they had taken
from the Incumbents, which makes me think, that we do not follow our Saviors
Counsel and Precept to S. Peter, To feed his flock; nor what we learnt in the
old Adage, that says, Boni pastoris est pecus tondere non deglubere; for
certainly these foresaid things do seem deglubere pecus non tondere; and to
cause his shepwards to starve, and not to enable them to feed his Lambs.

And therefore, as the sin of Solomon moved God to raise up Hadad the Edomite,
and Rezon the Son of Eliadah, and Jeroboam the Son of Nebat, to vex Solomon for
the sins of Solomon, 1 Kings 11.14, 23, 26. So I do not wonder, that God
suffers the devil to stir up Presbyterians, and Quakers, Why God suffers
Sectaries to vex the Bishops.
and other Anabaptistical Sectaries to vex the Bishops for these and the like
sins of the Bishops against God and his poor people, when they suffer and
countenance their Commissaries, Registers, and other Officers, to be like a
talent of lead upon the necks of Christ his Sheep.

But I do therefore demand, if these things, Whether the foresaid abuses ought
not to be redressed.
and all the things I showed to be amiss in this Treatise, ought not to be
reformed and amended?

I know some will say, they ought not thus to be published to the World, to
discover the weakness and imperfections of our Brethren, to make them more
contemptible in the eyes of the scoffers of our Calling, than they are; and
therefore will much blame me for this my publication of these things.

But as Caligula was so wicked, and his life so beastly, Reynolds in the life
of Caligula fol. 31.
that some Historiographers have been in doubt, whether it were best to bury
them in oblivion, or commit them unto memory: and it is answered by mine
Author, That, seeing it is profitable to the Readers, and to Posterity, to know
the evil doings of others, and the disgrace they have thereby, to m ke them
afraid to do the like evils, lest in like manner they should be published to
their shame: therefore it is far better to discover the faults of Governors
and great men, than to conceal them; because it is done, Why great men's faults
ought to be discovered.
not with any desire of any evil to the doers of those evil deeds, but out of
an earnest endeavor to amend them, and to prevent the like carriages in all
others; not to disgrace any, but to prevent the disgrace of all.

But though it be not amiss to make known the injustice and the faults of Great
men, that there may be a redress of them; yet who dares complain and speak of
the Vices of their Superiors? An tutum est scribere in eos qui possunt
proscribere: I have read how the Mice held a Consultation, The Fable of the
Mice.
how they might escape the fury of the Cat; and one wiser than the rest, said,
it might easily be done, if there were but a Bell tied about the Cats neck; for
so they might hear her coming, and they might get away; and all liked well,
and applauded the device; but to this day they could never agree, which of them
should tie the Bell about the Cats neck: So all the poor and inferior Clergy,
all sigh, and groan, and complain of their Taxes, and Pressures, and
Oppressions, by the Bishops, and Archbishops, and Archdeacons, and their
Suffragans, and all that come to Censure them; but not one of them all dares
tie the Bell about the Cats neck, and complain of these Great Powers unto the
Higher Powers, to have their abuses redressed, for fear of a worser
consequence; no less than to be crushed and torn all to pieces.

Yet I remember, what Seneca says, that he which is careless of his own life,
may when he will, be Master of another man's life; so he that is careless of his
own state or promotion, and regards not the confluence of wealth and worldly
things, may without fear do things that other timorous men dare not venture to
do.

The manifold deliverances of the Author.
And truly I must confess, that since the great Jehovah, my continual deliverer,
has delivered me from that multitude, of those malicious Enemies, that sought
after my life, when I was scarce budded in the world, and ever since has
preserved me so many times from such great, and so unimaginable dangers, as
from Captain Flaxen, when I was carried Prisoner to North-hampton; from Captain
Beech, when I was taken prisoner at Sea, from the drunken Captain that would
have delivered me to the Power of the Par iament, hard by Aber-ystwith; from
Sir John Carter and Courtney, that would have clapped me in prison when I
preached for his now Majesty at Conway; from the wicked Committee of plundered
Ministers, that said I deserved rather to have my head cut off, than to have
any Articles performed with me; from so many desperate Sea-voyages and Land
journeys that I p ssed through; and from Captain Wood, when I was under his
hands in the Parliament Ship; from the Great Antichrist, the Long Parliament;
and especially from the devil himself, when he threw me down at West-Wickham,
and God said unto him, as he did of Job, He is in thy hand, but save his life;
I never feared what man could do unto me: but as the Prophet David said, the
Lord delivered me from the mouth of the bear, and of the Lion, and he will
deliver me from this uncircumcised Philistine: So I say, the Lord that
preserved me so many times, from so many dangers, will still preserve me, while
with a sincere heart I endeavor to discharge my duty: especially seeing the
Lord says, I, even I am he that comfort you; and who art thou that art
afraid of a man, and of the son of man that shall be made as grass, and
forgettest the Lord thy Maker, that has stretched forth the heavens, and laid
the Foundations of the Earth, and have feared every day because of the fury of
the oppressor, as if he were ready to destroy.

Therefore, as I have been always resolute, and in a manner, desperate, in the
judgment of the timorous, as it appears, by the three Books, that, in the
behalf of our late King, I printed in Oxford, and the three Books that I writ
of the Great Antichrist, while the Long Parliament and the false Prophet were
in their greatest prevalency; and by the Sermons that I preached at St.
Nicholas, and other Churches in Dublin, at Conwey before the Judges, at Llan
Sannan, and in all places: So now in mine old age, when I am so near my grave,
I have less reason to fear, and more cause to be resolute, to say the truth, to
discharge my duty, and to implore my most honorable Friends, my Lords Grace of
Canterbury, my Lord of London, and my old familiar Acquaintance my Lord of
Winchester, whom God has placed so near his Majesty, and has raised to that
eminency of dignity pre consortibus above their brethren, not so much for their
own sakes, as for his honor and service, and the good of his Church, and like
so many religious Joseph's, to relieve their distressed Brethren, to join in
mine assistance, most earnestly to beseech, and most humbly to petition to his
Sacred Majesty, that he would be graciously pleased to relieve and help the
Church of Ireland in those threefold grievances that I have foreshewed: as, that

1. Seeing the Lands and Revenues of the Church, were I am sure, in many places
of my Diocese, given for their reward that fought against his late Majesty; and
that by reason of their wealth and great friends to uphold them therein they do
possess them; and we that would erect our Churches therewith, are disinabled to
do it without our means, that are so forcibly with strong hands, and by such
friends detained from us; his Majesty would be pleased to cause them, or some
others, some ways, and by some means, to have the Churches of God, for the
service of Jesus Christ, to be erected and repaired Especially the Bishops
Cathedral Church in Kilkenny.
, and not, to the scandal of our Religion, (which the Jews, Turks, and Gentiles
would not do,) to suffer our very Cathedrals, and so many other Parish Churches
to lie so ruinous, and so rooted up as they are.

2. That seeing so many great and goodly Impropriations are taken away from the
Church of Christ, and from the service of God, and are held in the hands of
such great persons and powerful men, that will not part with them, (as I showed
to you before,) and the poor Vicars of such Rectories impropriate, have scarce
so much means belonging to the Vicaredges, as will put bread into their mouths,
whereby they are constrained, for the relief of their Families, to take Farms,
and other Lands to occupy, like Lay men, and to neglect their duties, and the
service of Gods Church, and to suffer the poor people either to be instructed,
and to have their children baptized, married, and buried by the Popish Priests,
or to have no Priests at all; and we that are the Diocessans, by reason of the
small values of those Vicaredges, can find no men that are worthy and able
Ministers, that will come and accept of those slender maintenances; and those
that do accept them, we cannot make them, by reason of their smalness, to
discharge them; And seeing, as I said, the Churches are down, and the Lands,
Livings, and Revenues of the Church, are thus, as I showed, in the hands of the
great and powerful men, and rich Cities, and we can as easily pluck the club
out of Hercules hands, as get any of them out of their fingers, when the poor
men dare not, scarce, ask their dues of them, or if they sue for them, the
remedy will prove far worse than the disease, to go to Law with Corporations,
or with mighty men, to spend their money, and commonly to go without their
right, as they have a plain-example in my proceedings with Sir George Ayskue,
and the detention of all my Procurations, (which, as Bishop Bale says, in the
Page of his Book, was almost half the Revenue of the Bishopprick of Ossory,) by
the foresaid great men and Cities ever since his Majesty's restoration; and I
know not how to get them; it is no wonder to me, that Popery should, not only
continue, but increase more and more, and the Service of God decay more and
more, and injustice, Idolatry, and wickedness abound in this Kingdom more and
more, and I tell you herein the plain truth; let who will be angry, and let
others think what they please.

And further, seeing, that beside the payments and taxes that they are bound to
pay to his Majesty by the hand of their Bishop, and to their Bishop, and
Archbishop, and all other payments for their Churches, they are frequently,
contrary to the Acts of Parliament, exceedingly molested, taxed, and
distrained, for the same taxes, which they have formerly paid, by the Lay
Collectors: and the trouble to be discharged from those unjust Taxations is
worse, then the repayment of them again, when as excessit medicina modum, the
remedy is worse than the disease.

Therefore that it would please his Majesty, for the honor of God, and the
good of the poor people, and the poor Clergy likewise, to cause the Churches to
be built Especially the Bishops Cathedral Church at Kilkenny.
, and some competent means and sum to be deducted out of those Impropriations,
and to be added for the augmentation and better support of the poor Vicars, and
some fairer and easier way to be devised for the poor Clergy to recover their
right; and a prohibition of the Layty under a Subpaena to recharge them for
those payments which they are charged with, and enjoined by the Act of
Parliament to pay to their Diocessans.

3. That seeing three or four Visitations, that may be, of the Archdeacon,
Bishop, Archbishop, and Primate, in one year cannot choose but be a grievance
and a great burden unto the poor Clergy, that are poor enough without the
charge of so many Visitations, added unto the rest of their taxes: That it
would please his Majesty to cause the Government of the Church of Ireland, to
be brought to the same form, manner, and fashion, that is used in the Church of
Ingland, that is, for the Archdeacon to Visit for two years, and the Bishop to
visit every third year, and then the Archdeacons Visitation to cease for that
year the Bishop visits, and the Archbishop to visit once in his time, and both
the Archdeacons and the Bishops Visitations to cease when the Archbishop shall
visit.

And thus the Clergy and the Church Officers shall have but one Visitation,
quot annis, in every one year; which I think is very sufficient for the
rectifying of all abuses, and for the far greater ease both of the Clergy and
Layty: and which, I believe, none should be against the same, unless it be
such, as are too miserably covetous; for a small matter unto themselves, to
bring a heavy grievance to very many; which for my part, the Lord knows, that
I never liked it; and I suppose, it should be for the honor and praise of the
Chief Governors and Fathers of the Church, as we are styled, to deal with our
Clergy as with our Children, to ease them what we can, and not to make them
fast for our feasting.

And I find great reason, that we should in all things here in Ireland conform
our selves to the Church of Ingland; for as Polydor Virgil writes, that Pope
Adrian, Polyd. Virg. l. 13. Hist. Angl.
and after him Alexander, moved S. Christian the famous Bishop of Lismore,
their Legate, to call a Synod at Cashel, wherein they defined eight Articles,
whereof the last was, That forasmuch as God has Universally delivered the
Irish into the government of the English, they should in all Points, Rights,
and Ceremonies accord with the Church of Ingland: and Gelasius, Campians hist.
of Ireland, l. 2. c. 1.
Primate of Ardmagh, in the presence of King Hen. 2. gave his consent to those
Articles.

And therefore I wonder what has altered or hindered this our conformity with
the Church of Ingland, unless it be pride, covetousness, or ambition, and
aviditas dominandi; which are weeds fitter to be rooted out of Churchmens
hearts than to be cherished in the Primates of Gods Church, and which I verily
believe are now far enough from the thoughts of our most grave and most
religious Archbishops, who, as I hope, will most easily yield to this
conformity, that neither the Bishops be so abridged in their Jurisdictions, nor
their Clergy so much oppressed in their Visitations, as they have been.

Yet here I would not have my Reader to imagine that I speak for the ease or
remittance of the Procurations, Taxes, or other Impositions, of them that hold
the Abbeys, Priories, and Impropriate Rectories, which they have for nothing,
and as it appears to me, contrary to all divine right; and therefore should pay
the same continually every year to them that do the Service of God: but I speak
it only for the ease and benefit of the poor incumbent Rectors and Vicars that
labor and take pains for the good of Gods people, and for the saving of their
souls that hold their means from them.

And, if this may not be done, to reduce the Government of the Church of
Ireland to the same form, and after the same manner as the Church of Ingland is
governed, yet that the Archbishops and Bishops should take special care to see
that their Surrogates, Chancellours, and Deputies should not any ways to
enrich their Friends, Officers, and Servants, and to feast themselves, oppress
the poor Clergy, and others the poor Servants and Officers of the Church of
Christ. I doubt not, but the Bishops and the Archbishops are all just, and
merciful, and tenderhearted toward all their inferior Clergy; and can no
ways be justly blamed for the faults of their subordinate Officers or
Deputies, which they are ignorant of; And I do profess without flattery, and in
the word of a Christian, that my Lords Grace of Dublin, in all that he did, or
said, was so noble, just, and gracious toward those honest Clergy men, whom
his Archdeacon so severely trounced, that the least shadow of the least blame
cannot be laid upon him. And I believe Archdeacon Bulkley would never have done
what he did, but to satisfy the mind and desire of a most unworthy person, and
malicious slanderer and false accuser of his Brethren, which can be neither
true wisdom, nor honest policy, to please men, and to offend Almighty God.

And now to conclude our sad condition, when, after all my many years
sufferings, and had spent above four hundred pounds to repair the Quire and
Chancel of S. Kenny, and about six hundred pounds in Law against Sir George
Ayskue for the right of the Church, and did perceive the success like to be
fruitless, I once thought to present this Petition to his Majesty.

To the Kings most Excellent Majesty. The humble Petition of Gruffith, Lord
Bishop of Ossory.
THat whereas your Petitioner has seen how highly your Majesty has been
abused, and how slowly and scantly righted by one Jury, and how much both your
Majesty and your Petitioner have been wronged by another Jury, and how mightily
he is obstructed to gain your Majesty's gracious Grant, and the right of the
Church, where your Petitioner is but the Solicitor, and aymeth at no benefit,
not so much as one penny for himself.

Your Petitioner, that desires nothing, but that Justice (which establishes
the Thrones of Kings) may be done to God, to your Majesty, and to himself, he
humbly prays that the whole matter betwixt him and Sir George Ayskue may be
heard at the Council Table, or tried by an honest Jury here in Ingland.

And your Petitioner shall pray, etc.

But, considering my years, full 78, and mine infirmities, and especially how
heavy the Seas are always to me, and perceiving the impossibilities of
prevailing contra stimulum calcitrare, when such greatness does so visibly
oppose me: I conceived, that, till God should otherwise dispose of things, Sat
mihi posse pati, and pray to God that he would arise and maintain his own
cause: Et det mihi velle mori: and let them that detain the Right of the
Church, and them that maintain and uphold them in it, remain under the prayer
of Moses, Deuteronomy. 38.8, 9, 10, 11. Psalm 84 10, 11, 12, etc.
and the Prophecy of David, and the judgment of God betwixt me and them.

Jamque opus exegi; and with the two-edged sword of truth I smote at the
impieties and corruptions both of the Clergy and Layty, of Church and
Commonwealth, and of the great men and rich men without fear. In me convertite
ferrum; and I doubt not but I shall attract unto my self the malevolency,
detraction, and persecution from many men; but I have always armed my self
with the resolution to endeavor to do my duty, and discharge a good
conscience; and as Queen Hester said, so say I; if I perish, I perish, having
published my own funeral Sermon in the Sermons I made for others, and commiting
my self, as I have done ever:

Jehovae Liberatori.
In Impios Sacrilegos.
HEu mala progenies, fatis servata nefandis,
Gensque inimica deo: dominans voraxque sacrarum
Quid fuer as quid sisque vide: tua prima propago
Sancta fuit, sobolemque petet lues atra secundam,
Cum leo terribilis virgineis editus oris
Flammiferam ex orco pellagique plangentibus undis
Educens aciem, magnos urbesque virosque
Sternet, and antiquis solemn lunamque movebit
Sedibus: ille etiam patrio jure infima summo
Reddet, and oppressos in coelum mittet inermes.
A Prayer of the Author.
O Sweet Jesus Christ, as thou art God in Heaven, and have a care of thy Church
here on Earth, I beseech thee, suffer not thy Servants, that stand for thee, to
be cast down and trampled under feet, and those that have fought against their
King, to bring thine anointed Vicegerent to be murdered, to carry away the
Inheritance of thy Church, and the Lands that were dedicated for thy Service,
to be enjoyed for the Reward of that transcendent wickedness; lest thy Servants
should be too much dejected and disheartened to stand for thine honor, and
thine Enemies encouraged to proceed on in the like malicious wickedness: but
rather let them feel the power of Moses Prayer for Levi: and David's Prophecy
against them that will rob thee and thy Servants of their Houses and
Possessions: and be thou a just Judge betwixt us and them. Amen.

FINIS.

