monogram of 'W' (William) superimposed on 'M' (Mary) RR

DIEV ET MON DROIT

HONI SOIT QUI MAL Y PENSE

royal blazon or coat of arms
By the King and Queen, A PROCLAMATION, For Encouraging Seamen and Mariners to
Enter themselves on Their Majesty's Ships of War.
WILLIAM R.

WE being desirous to give all due Encouragement to such Seamen as shall
Voluntarily Enter themselves in Our Service on Board Our Ships of War in Our
Royal Navy, have thought sit by and with the Advice of Our Privy Council, to
publish this Our Royal Proclamation: And We do hereby Promise and Declare, That
all such Seamen as shall Voluntarily Enter themselves on Board any of Our Ships
of War, of the First, Second, and Third Rates, before the Twentieth Day of
January next, shall receive Six Weeks Pay, as Our Free Gift and Royal Bounty,
which shall be paid them before the respective Ships to which they belong shall
Sail from the Buoy of the Nore. And We do hereby further Declare, That no such
able Seamen that shall so Voluntarily Enter themselves within the time before
mentioned on Board any of Our Ships of the First, and Second Rates, shall be
Turned Over to other Ships. And We do hereby Command and Require the said
Seamen to Repair on Board the respective Ships on which they shall so Enter
themselves, and give their Constant Attendance, for sitting out to Sea such
Ships as each of them do belong unto. And We are also Graciously pleased to
Declare, That Conduct-Money, according to the Practice of the Navy, shall
likewise be Allowed to such able Seamen as shall Voluntarily enter themselves
on Board any of Our said Ships, according to the true meaning of this Our
Proclamation. And for the prevention of any Deceits and Abuses that may happen
by any Person or Persons leaving the Ships to which they belong, and Entering
him or themselves on Board any other of Our said Ships, as aforesaid, in Order
to the Obtaining of the Bounty-Money herein before Granted, We do hereby
likewise Direct, Declare, and Command, That such Seamen, belonging to any of
Our Ships or Vessels whatsoever, as shall leave any the Ships or Vessels to
which they belong, and Enter themselves on Board any other of Our Ships, in
Order to the Obtaining of the said Bounty-Money, shall not only lose the Wages
due to them in the Ship, which they shall so leave, but shall also be severely
Punished according to their Demerits.

Given at Our Court at Whitehall, the One and twentieth Day of December, 1691.
In the Third Year of Our Reign.
London, Printed by Charles Bill, and the Executrix of Thomas Newcomb deceased;
Printers to the King and Queens most Excellent Majesty's, 1691.


