AN End to Discord; Wherein is demonstrated That no Doctrinal Controversy
remains between the PRESBYTERIAN AND CONGREGATIONAL Ministers, fit to justify
longer Divisions.

With a true Account of SOCINIANISM as to the Satisfaction of Christ.

By DANIEL WILLIAMS.

London, Printed for John Lawrence at the Angel, and Tho. Cockeril at the Three
Legs in the Poultry. 1699.

EPISTLE TO THE READER.
Reader;
IF Arguments might induce Christians to Peace, 'twere enough to say, nothing
is more expressly required than Christian Concord by our Lord Jesus, or more
commended from its heavenly Original and happy Fruits; nor scarce any thing
more warned against as obstructing the Kingdom of Christ, advantageous to
Satan's Interest, destructive to Religion, yea Civil Society, repugnant to the
very Design and Spirit of the Gospel, with the mutual usefulness of Men, than
uncharitable and dividing Contentions be. The only reason that can be suggested
to acquit such Contenders from notorious Guilt must be, that it is for the Faith
of the Gospel that they contend. But it is worth our serious thoughts, that as
even this cannot excuse a rigid, censorious, envenomed Spirit, or unhallowed
Methods in our Struggles for Truth; so no other than a direct Opposition to the
Essentials of some Fundamental Article can warrant Divisions, or refusals of
Communion on the account of mere difference in the Faith, provided Assent to no
real Error is imposed on us as a Term of Union.

It Is too obvious to require Proof, that if a direct Opposition to what is not
fundamental, or to whatever remotely belongs to all which is so; nay further,
if opposing by denied Consequences what is of the Essence of any fundamental
Article of Faith, be a warrant for Separation of Ministers and Churches from
each other, then the instituted Rules of Christian Fellowship do not oblige us:
the approved Instances of Communion in the New Testament Churches ought to be
condemned, and all the Churches of Christ must daily be more and more rended by
Non-communion and dividing Animosities, until the Catholic Church lose all
show of Unity, or be reduced to a single Congregation (and that but for an
uncertain moment) even when vast numbers of Christian Societies proclaim the
Advancement of our Savior's Conquest.

Nor is their Folly less apparent, who for excuse of this surmise that every
Error which they ought to rectify in themselves, and by just methods to reform
in others, is a bar to Communion; or yet, that Separation is one of those just
Methods in the case forementioned, especially toward such over whom they
pretend to no Authority. O when will Men see that Christ's Royal Prerogative is
assumed, when ever other Terms of, or Bars to Communion are invented than what
he has expressly made such, and that in a matter wherein his own Honor and his
People's Interest are concerned next to that of Union with himself!

But alas! in contempt of Rules so necessary to the Churches Peace, many Ages
are filled with Instances of assuming a right to account him for a Heathen who
differs but in Trifles, and cannot pronounce their very Phrases, tho scrupled
because abused to support an Error, and the Truth designed by them is most
expressly owned: a thing so thwarting a Christian Temper, that Athanasius and
Bazil profess they would break with none who refused the word (...), so they
would by any words declare their soundness in the Doctrine of the Trinity; and
yet that word had been adjusted by not a few particular Authors, but the great
Council of Nice, in opposition to the Heresy of Arius. I scruple not to say, an
Antichristian Spirit most effectually extinguisheth the like Moderation; and
such Imposers entrusted with the Secular Sword, would use it as they do their
Ecclesiastical, however they condemn Severity while themselves are not the
Persecutors.

That there have been of late years great Divisions among the Dissenters is too
publicly know; I had rather share in the Imputation of an Accessory, than
perpetuate them by the fullest Vindication, hoping that a calm Season will
better fit all of us to reflect, and repent of our Faultiness, especially the
Unchristian management of our Debates, and for which we have great reason to
pray God would not signally contend hereafter.

But blessed be the Name of our God, that ever we be quite devoured by each
other, a fit occasion is ministered for our healing; and tho self-preservation
has been my work ever since my temperate Confutation of Dr. Crisp, (and then
too) none will wonder I take hold of this Opportunity to evidence that further
Contests will be inexcusable: nor is it a hard Province when the united
Ministers and Congregational Brethren have so far acquitted themselves: The
first by sundry former Accounts (and now more enlarged from any word in which I
cannot suspect two will differ) of their Vindication from Errors concerning the
Satisfaction of Christ, and Justification, which are the only Points objected.
The last by their Declaration against Antinomian Erros, for which I am too
thankful to remark its Stings; and had it come out before my Postscript, I
durst not have represented their Judgment by the Consequences of their
Objections (however natural) as in some few things is done. That the God of
Peace would give us Peace, is the unfeigned Prayer of

Thy Servant in the Gospel, and Brother in the Kingdom and Patience of our Lord
Jesus, Daniel Williams.

Note, The Edition of the Works of Socinus, etc. to which I refer, is that
printed in Folio at Irenopoli, 1656.

INTRODVCTION.
AS the too visible Progress of Antinomianism grieved us, and obliged our
Defense of the Truth, and a Gospel Ministry: so we must rejoice in the
Congregational Ministers Declaration against Antinomian Errors, well knowing
the infected will more regard the Judgment of these Brethren, because of their
Agreement with them in matters of Church Discipline.

We are sorry they were not a little sooner prevailed with to give this
Testimony; for then we had not been forced in the Answer to the Report, to hint
some of the Reasons inducing us to think many of them espoused, and the
generality of them in this City too much countenanced Antinomianism, with its
open Abettors. Nor dare we indulge a Temper so devilish, as for Party-sake to
repine at these Brethren acquitting themselves from those imputed Errors: But
on the contrary, we gladly endeavor to procure Peace by this Declaration of
theirs; for which desirable end, we shall overlook all the Reflections
contained therein against us; and not refuse to acquit our selves once more
from all hurtful Errors concerning Christ's Satisfaction, and our Justification
(although so fully and often done heretofore, that our Brethrens Insinuation to
the contrary does not a little surprise us) and, which is principally aimed at,
we hope it will appear, that in all that is material, both our Brethren agree
with us in our Testimony against Antinomianism; and we agree with them in a
disapproval of the other Extremes. To evidence which we shall repeat, 1. Our
Testimony against Dr. Crisp's Errors, when so many were endangered by his
reprinted Books. 2. Some part of our former Declarations against Popish,
Socinian and Arminian Errors, when our Brethren accused us thereof for
subscribing the foresaid Testimony against Crispianism. 3. We shall give an
account of our Congregational Brethrens Declaration against Antinomian Errors.
4. We shall evidence that this taken together and examined with Candor, ought
to be acknowledged a sufficient Vindication of the Approvers thereof from all
hurtful Antinomian Errors. 5. We shall add our further Testimony against Errors
about Christ's Satisfaction and Justification. If Peace at least must not be
allowed us after this, we must bewail a judicial stroke, and expect to be
despised by such who perceive our common hurt from these Debates, but have not
Judgment to distinguish between the injured Seekers of Peace, and the injurious
Fomenters of Trouble.

CHAP. I.
The State of Truth and Errors (subscribed by near fifty of us) drawn up and
published by Mr. Williams, in a Book called, Gospel Truth stated and
vindicated, first Edition; Anno 16. 1692.
Truth 1. IT is certain from God's Decree of Election, that the Elect shall in
time be justified, adopted, and saved in the way God has appointed; and the
whole meritorious Cause and Price of Justification, Adoption, and Eternal Life,
were perfect, when Christ finished the Work of Satisfaction. Nevertheless, the
Elect remain Children of Wrath, and subject to Condemnation, till they are
effectually called by the Operation of the Spirit.

Error. The Elect are at no time of their Lives under the Wrath of God, nor are
they subject to Condemnation if they should die before they believe; yea, when
they are under the Dominion of Sin, and in the Practice of the grossest
Villainies, they are as much the Sons of God, and justified, as the very Saints
in Glory.

Truth 2. Tho our Sins were imputed to Christ with respect to the Guilt
thereof, so that he, by the Father's Appointment, and his own Consent, became
obliged, as Mediator, to bear the Punishments of our Iniquities; and he did
bear those Punishments to the full Satisfaction of Justice, and to our actual
Remission when we believe; nevertheless, the Filth of our Sins was not laid
upon Christ; nor can he be called the Transgressor, or was he in God's account
the Blasphemer, Murderer, etc.

Error. God did not only impute the Guilt, and lay the Punishment of the Sins
of the Elect upon Christ; but he laid all the very Sins of the Elect upon
Christ, and that, as to their real Filthiness and Loathsomness; yea, so, that
Christ was really the Blasphemer, Murderer, and Sinner, and so accounted by the
Father.

Truth 3. The Atonement made by Christ, by the Appointment of God, is that for
which alone the Elect are pardoned, when it is applied to them. But the Elect
are not immediately pardoned upon Christ's being appointed to suffer for them,
nor as soon as the Atonement was made; nor is that Act of laying Sins on
Christ, God's forgiving Act, by which we are personally discharged.

Error. The very Act of God's laying Sins on Christ upon the Cross, is the very
actual discharge of all the Elect from all their Sins.

Truth 4. An Elect Person cease not to be a Sinner upon the laying of our
Sins upon Christ; that is, he remains a Sinner, as to the Guilt, till he
believes, if Adult. He is a Sinner, as to the Filth of Sin, till he be
sanctified. He is a Sinner, as to the charge of the sinful Fact he commits, and
that even after Pardon and Sanctification: Nevertheless, he is free from the
Curse when he is pardoned, and shall be purged from all the Filth of Sin when
he is perfect in Holiness. And tho Christ did bear the Punishment of our
Iniquity, yet it never was Christ's Iniquity, but ours.

Error. The Elect upon the Death of Christ ceased to be Sinners, and ever since
their Sins are none of their Sins, but they are the Sins of Christ.

Truth 5. The Obligation of suffering for our Sins was upon Christ, from his
undertaking the Office of a Mediator, to the moment wherein he finished his
satisfactory Atonement. The Punishment of our Sins lay upon Christ from the
first moment, to the last of his state of Humiliation.

Error. The time when our Sins were laid actually on Christ, was when he was
nailed to the Cross, and God actually forsook him; and they continued on him
till his Resurrection.

Truth 6. The God testified his threatened Indignation against Sin, in the awful
Sufferings of Christ's Soul and Body in his Agony, and suspended those
delightful Communications of the Divine Nature to the Human Nature of Christ,
as to their wonted Degrees; yet God was never separated from Christ, much less
during his Body's lying in the Grave; neither was the Father ever displeased
with Christ, and far less did he abhor him, because of the Filthiness of Sin
upon him.

Error. Christ was on the account of the Filthiness of Sins, while they lay
upon him, separated from God, odious to him, and even the Object of God's
Abhorrence, and this to the time of his Resurrection.

Truth 7. The Mediatorial Righteousness of Christ is so imputed to true
Believers, as that for the sake thereof they are pardoned and accepted unto
Life eternal; it being reckoned to them, and pleadable by them for these Uses,
as if they had personally done and suffered what Christ did as Mediator for
them, whereby they are delivered from the Curse, and no other Atonement nor
meriting Price of saving Benefits can be demanded from them. Nevertheless, this
Mediatorial Righteousness is not subjectively in them; nor is there a Change of
Person betwixt them and Christ, neither are they as righteous as he; but there
remain Spots and Blemishes in them, until Christ by his Spirit perfect that
Holiness begun in all true Believers, which he will effect before he bring them
to Heaven. See the 2d Truth, and note, it is only Dr. Crisp' s Change of Person
is denied, viz. a perfect Change which makes us as righteous as he, etc. but
not Christ's dying in our stead, which in this Book is often asserted.

Error. Every Believer, or elect Person, is as righteous as Christ, and there
is a perfect Change of Person and Condition betwixt Christ and the Elect; he
was what we are, viz. as sinful as we; and we are what he was, viz. perfectly
holy, and without Spot or Blemish.

Truth 8. I shall express it in the words of the Assembly. The Grace of God is
manifested in the second Covenant, in that he freely provideth, and offers to
Sinners a Mediator, and Life and Salvation by him, requiring Faith as the
Condition to interest them in him; promises and gives his holy Spirit to all
his Elect to work in them that Faith, with all other saving Graces; and to
enable them unto all Obedience, as the Evidence of the Truth of their Faith and
Thankfulness to God, and as the way which he has appointed them to Salvation.

Note, Reader, that these Divines do here join together the Covenant of
Redemption with Christ, and the Gospel Covenant whereby are dispensed to us the
Benefits impetrated by Christ; which two distinguished would lead to clearer
thoughts.

Error. The Covenant of Grace has no Condition to be performed on Man's part,
tho in the strentgh of Christ: Neither is Faith it self the Condition of this
Covenant; but all the saving Benefits of this Covenant, are actually ours
before we are born: Neither are we required so much as to believe, that we may
come to have an Interest in the Covenant- Benefits.

Truth 9. I shall express this in the words of the Assembly, and Congregational
Elders at the Savoy (Confess. of Faith, chapter 14. 2. and Declarat. chapter 14. a. 2.
of saving Faith:) By this Grace, a Christian believes to be true whatever is
revealed in the Word, for the Authority of God speaking therein; and acts
differently upon that which each particular Passage thereof contains;
yielding Obedience to the Commands, trembling at the Threatenings, and embracing
the Promises of God for this Life, and that which is to come. But the principal
Acts of saving Faith, are accepting, receiving, and resting upon Christ alone
for Justification, Sanctification, and Eternal Life, by virtue of the Covenant
of Grace.

Error. Saving Faith is nothing but our Persuasion, or absolute concluding
within our selves, that our Sins are pardoned, and that Christ is ours.

Truth 10. Christ is freely offered to be a Head and Savior to the vilest
Sinners, who will knowingly assent to the Truth of the Gospel, and from a
Conviction of their Sin and Misery out of Christ, are humbled, and truly
willing to renounce all their Idols and Sins; denying their own carnal Self and
Merits, and accept of Christ as offered in the Gospel; relying on him alone for
Justification, Sanctification, and Eternal Life.

Error. Christ is offered to Blasphemers, Murderers, and the worst of Sinners,
that they remaining ignorant, unconvinced, unhumbled, and resolved in their
purpose to continue such, they may be assured they have a full Interest in
Christ, and this by only concluding in their own Minds upon this Offer, that
Christ is theirs.

Truth 11. Every Man is without Christ, or not united to Christ, until he be
effectually called; but when by this Call the Spirit of God enclineth and
enableth him willingly to accept of Christ as a Head and Savior, a Man becomes
united to him, and Partaker of those Influences and Privileges which are
peculiar to the Members of the Lord Jesus.

Error. All the Elect are actually united to Christ, before they have the
Spirit of Christ, or at all believe in him, even before they are born; yea, and
against their Will.

Truth 12. Tho Faith be no way a meritorious Cause of a Sinner's Justification,
yet God has promised to justify all such as truly believe, and requires Faith
as an indispensible Qualification in all whom he will justify for Christ's
Merits; declaring, that Unbelief shall not only hinder Men's knowing that they
are justified, but that it is a bar to any Person's being justified while he
continues an Unbeliever.

Error. The whole use of Faith in Justification, is only to manifest that we
were justified before; and Faith is no way necessary to bring a Sinner into a
justified State, nor at all useful to that end.

In a Digression there about Repentance is added.
Truth. Although neither Faith nor Repentance be any part of the meriting
Righteousness for which we are justified, and the Habits of both are wrought at
the same time, and included in the Regenerating Principle; and there must be an
assenting Act of Faith before there be any exercise of true Repentance: And
Repentance as consisting in the fruits meet for it, viz. an external
Reformation and a fruitful Life, must follow Pardon, as does also an ingenuous
Sorrow for Sin in the sense of Pardon: Nevertheless, Repentance, as it consists
in some degree of Humblings and Sorrow from Convictions of our lost State, and
the Evil of Sin, with a sincere purpose of Heart to turn from our Sin and Idols
to God, is absolutely necessary in order to the forgiveness of Sin.

Error. Our Sins are forgiven before any Repentance; and Believers ought not to
complain, or mourn, or sorrow for the Sins they have committed.

Truth 13. Tho neither Holiness, sincere Obedience, or good Works, do make any
Atonement for Sin; or are in the least the meritorious Righteousness whereby
Salvation is caused, or for which this, or any Blessing becomes due to us as of
Debt; yet as the Spirit of Christ freely works all Holiness in the Soul, and
enableth us to sincere Obedience and good Works; so the Lord Jesus has of
Grace, and for his own Merits promised to bring to Heaven such as are Partakers
of true Holiness, perform this sincere Obedience, and do these good Works
perseveringly, and appoints these as the Way and Means of a Believer's
obtaining Salvation, and several other Blessings; requiring these as
indispensible Duties and Qualifications of all such whom he will so save and
bless, and excluding all that want or neglect them, or live under the Power of
what is contrary thereto, viz. Profaneness, Rebellion, and utter Unfruitfulness.

Error. Men have nothing to do in order to Salvation, nor is Sanctification a
jot the way of any Person to Heaven; nor can the Graces or Duties of Believers,
no, nor Faith it self do them the least Good, or prevent the least Evil; nor
are they of any use to their Peace or Comfort; yea, tho Christ be explicitly
owned, and they be done in the strength of the Spirit of God. And a Believer
ought not to think he is more pleasing to God by any Grace he acts, or Good
he does; nor may Men expect any Good to a Nation by the Humiliation, earnest
Prayer, or Reformation of a People.

Truth 14. Tho we ought to intend God's Glory as our supreme End in all our
Duties, and design therein the expressing our Love and Gratitude to God for his
Benefits, with a great regard to public Good: Yet we also lawfully may, and
ought to strive after Grace, grow in it, and perform holy Duties and Services,
with an Eye to, and Concern for our own spiritual and eternal Advantage.

Error. No Man ought to propose to himself any Advantage by any Religious Duty
he performs, nor ought he in the least to intend the Profit of his own Soul
by any Christian Endeavors; it being vain and unlawful to do any thing with an
Eye to our spiritual or eternal Good, tho in Subordination to God's Glory in
Christ.

Truth 15. The ordinary way whereby a Man attaineth a well-grounded Assurance,
is not by immediate objective Revelation, or an inward Voice saying, Thy Sins
are forgiven thee: But when the Believer is examining his Heart and Life by the
Word, the holy Spirit enlightens the Mind there to discern Faith, and Love, and
such other Qualifications which the Gospel declares to be infallible signs of
Regeneration: And he adds such Power to the Testimony of Conscience for the
Truth and In-being of these Graces, as begets in the Soul a joyful sense of its
reconciled State; and some comfortable freedom from those Fears which accompany
a doubting Christian; and according to the Evidence of these Graces, Assurance
is ordinarily strong or weak.

Error. Assurance is not attained by the Evidence of Scripture-Marks of Signs
of Grace, or by the Spirit's discovering to us that he has wrought in our
Hearts any holy Qualifications: But Assurance comes only by an inward Voice of
the Spirit saying, Thy Sins are forgiven thee, and our believing thereupon that
our Sins are forgiven.

Truth 16. The Sins of Believers have the loathsomness of Sin adhering to them,
which God sees, and accounts the Committers guilty thereby: and they ought
to charge themselves therewith, so as to stir up themselves to Repentance, and
renew their Actings of Faith on Christ for Forgiveness. Nevertheless, they
ought not thereby to fear their being out of a justified State, further than
their Falls give them just cause of suspecting that Sin has Dominion over
them; and that their first believing on Christ was not sincere.

Error. God sees no Sin in Believers, tho he see the Fact; neither does He
charge them with any Sin; nor ought they to charge themselves with any Sin, nor
be at all sad for them; nor confess, repent, or do any thing as a Means of
their Pardon; no, nor in order to assuring themselves of Pardon, even when they
commit Murder, Adultery, or the grossest Wickedness.

Truth 17. It Is true of Believers, that if Sin should have Dominion over them,
they would thereby be subject to Condemnation: And tho the Grace of God will
prevent the Dominion of Sin in every elect Believer, and so keep them from
eternal Death; yet true Believers may by Sin bring great hurt upon themselves
in Soul and Body, which they ought to fear; and they may expect a share in
National Judgments, according as they have contributed to common Guilt.

Error. The grossest Sins that Believers can commit, cannot do them the least
harm; neither ought they to fear the least hurt by their own Sins, nor by
National Sins; yea, tho themselves have had a hand therein.

Truth 18. Tho God is not so angry with his People for their Sins, as to cast
them out of his Covenant-favour; yet by their Sins he is so displeased, as for
them to correct his Children, tho he speaks Instructions by his Rebukes.

Error. None of the Afflictions of Believers have in them the least of God's
Displeasure against their Persons for their Sins.

Truth 19. Tho the present sincere Holiness of Believers be not perfect,
according to the Precepts of the Word; nor valuable by the Sanction of the Law
of Innocence; nor any Atonement for our Defects; and we still need Forgiveness
and the Merits of Christ, for Acceptance thereof; yet as far as it prevails
it is lovely in it self, and pleasing to God, and is not Dung or Filth.

Error. The greatest Holiness in Believers, tho wrought in them by the Holy
Ghost, is mere Dung, Rottenness and Filthiness as in them.

Truth 20. Gospel-preaching is when the Messengers of Christ do publish to
fallen Sinners the good News of Salvation by Christ, to be obtained in the way
which he has appointed in his Word, freely offering Salvation on his Terms,
earnestly persuading and commanding Men in the Name of Christ, to comply with
those Terms, as ever they would escape the Misery they are under, and possess
the Benefits he has purchased; directing all to look to him for Strength, and
acknowledge him as the only Mediator, and his Obedience and Sufferings as the
sole Atonement for Sin, and meriting Cause of all Blessings; instructing them
in all revealed Truth, and by Gospel-Motives, urging them to obey the whole
Will of God, as a Rule of Duty, but especially to be sincere and upright,
pressing after Perfection.

Error. Gospel-Preaching is to teach Men they were as much pardoned, and as
acceptable to God always, as when they are regenerate; and while they were
ungodly, they had the same Interest in God and Christ as when they believe;
neither can Sin any way hinder their Salvation, or their Peace; nor have they
any thing to do to further either of them, Christ having done all for them, and
given himself to them, before any holy Qualification or Endeavor.

Truth 21. Legal Preaching is to preach the Law as a Covenant of Innocence, or
Works; or to preach the Mosaic or Jewish Covenant of Peculiarity: But it is
not Legal Preaching, to require and persuade to Faith, Holiness or Duties, by
Promises and Threatenings, according to the Grace of the Gospel, and direct Men
to fear and hope accordingly.

Error. Legal Preaching is to call People to act any Grace, or do any Duty, as
a required Means of Salvation, or inward Peace; or to threaten them with Death,
or any Affliction, to cause Fear if they commit the grossest Sins, and
backslide, and fall away; or to promise them any Blessing upon their Obedience
to the Commandments of Christ, or urge the Threatenings, to persuade Sinners to
believe and repent.

CHAP. II.
A Renunciation of sundry Errors, Anno 1696. A Paper called, The second Paper,
1696. A Proposal made by us, 1697.
Although we hoped the Caution used in the foresaid State of Truth and Error,
would prevent the Imputation of Socinianism, and other hurtful Errors; yet
finding our Brethren dissatisfied, we subscribed with them, Anno 1692. (about
seven Months after the State of Truth was published) certain Doctrinal
Propositions collected out of the Assembly's Confession, which we printed Anno
1693. with this Title, An Agreement in Doctrinals, etc. but that being too long
to be here inserted, we shall confine our selves to the more material Parts of
what further Account we have given of our Judgment concerning the Doctrines of
Satisfaction and Justification, which may be seen at large in our Answer to the
Report, p. 3, 11, 27, 33, etc.

Anno 1694. In a Paper sent to our Congregational Brethren it is thus declared:

We the united Ministers in and about London, do renounce and testify against
these following Opinions.

1. That there is no definite number of Persons elected from all Eternity, whom
God will by his appointed Means certainly save, and bring to Eternal Life;
leaving the rest who fall under a just Condemnation for their Original and
Actual Sins, especially for their Neglect and Contempt of the Means of
Salvation.

2. That Christ died equally for all Men, not intending the final Salvation of
some more than others.

3. That Men have in their own Power, by the use of the natural Faculties of
their Reason and Will, unassisted by the special Light and Grace of the Holy
Ghost, to perform all that is necessary to Salvation; or that his special
efficacious Light and Grace is not necessary to their Conversion, Perseverance,
and final Salvation.

4. That any of them whom God has foreknown, predestined, and called
effectually according to the purpose of his Grace, shall fall away either
totally, or so as not to be finally glorified.

5. That Faith, Repentance, a holy Conversation, or any Act or Work whatever
done by us, or wrought by the Spirit of God in us, are any part of that
Righteousness, for the sake of which, or on the account whereof, God does
justify any Man, or entitle him to Eternal Life.

Then follows a Testimony against the other Extremes, viz. Antinomian Errors.

Again, Anno 1696. in a Paper (called The second Paper) sent to our Brethren,
we thus give our sense.

1. Concerning Justification: That although the express Word of God does assert
the necessity of Regeneration to our entering into the Kingdom of God, and
require Repentance that our Sins may be blotted out, and Faith in Christ, that
we may be justified, and Holiness of Heart and Life, without which we cannot
see God; yet that none of these, or any Work done by Men, or wrought by the
Spirit of God in them, is, under any Denomination whatsoever, any part of the
Righteousness, for the sake, or on the account whereof God does pardon,
justify, or accept Sinners, or entitle them to Eternal Life, that being only
the Righteousness of Christ without them imputed to them, and received by Faith
alone.

2. Of a Commutation of Persons between Christ and us: As we are to consider
our Lord Jesus Christ in his Obedience and Sufferings, as God and Man, invested
with the Office of Mediator; so it is apparent this Commutation of Persons with
us was not natural in respect of either Nature, by which his individual
Substance should become ours, and ours his; nor moral, in respect of Qualities
or Actions, whereby he should become inherently sinful, and we immediately
sinless; nor was it any change whereby his Office of Mediator should be
transferred on us, but it is to be understood in a legal or judicial sense, as
we may call it, viz. He by Agreement between the Father and him, came into our
room and stead, not to repent and believe for us, which the Gospel requires of
us as our Duty, tho he has undertaken the Elect shall in due time be enabled
thereto, but to answer for our Violation of the Law of Works, he being made Sin
for us, that knew no Sin; that we might be made the Righteousness of God in
him: 2 Cor. 5. 21.

3. Of God's being pleased or displeased with Christ as standing and suffering
in our stead. We judge that God was always pleased with Christ both in his
Person, and Execution of all his Offices, which is expressed most particularly in
that of his Priestly, John 10. 17, 18. Therefore does my Father love me,
because I lay down my Life; and no otherwise displeased than as having a
dispassionate Will to inflict upon him the Punishment of our Sins, which he had
undertaken to bear, that God might, without Injury to his Justice or Honor,
pardon and save penitent Believers for his Satisfaction and Intercession
founded thereon.

Note, It was declared, that by the words [under any Denomination] we exclude
all Righteousness from being meritorious, or atoning, yea, or a procuring Cause
of these Benefits; none is at all so but the Righteousness of Christ: But we
intended not to exclude what the Gospel requires in order to our Interest in
those Benefits given for the sake of Christ's Righteousness.

We also in 1697, delivered our Judgment in this Proposal to our Brethren.
1. That Repentance toward God is commanded in order to the Remission of Sins.
2. That Faith in Christ is commanded by the Gospel, in order to the
Justification of our Persons before God, for the sake of the alone
Righteousness of Christ. 3. That the Word of God requires Perseverance in true
Faith and Holiness, that we may be Partakers of the Heavenly Glory. 4. That the
Gospel promises Pardon through the Blood of Christ to the Penitent,
Justification before God to the Believer, and the Heavenly Glory to such as
persevere in Faith and Holiness; and also declares that God will not pardon
the Impenitent, justify the Unbeliever, nor glorify the Apostate or Unholy. 5.
That justifying Faith is not only a Persuasion of the Understanding, but also a
receiving and resting upon Christ alone for Salvation. 6. That by Change of
Person, is meant, that whereas we were condemned for our Sins, the Lord Jesus
was substituted in our room to bear the Punishment of our Sins for the
Satisfaction of Divine Justice, that whoever believes on him may be acquitted
and saved; but it is not intended that the Filth of Sin was upon Christ, nor
that he was a Criminal in God's account. 7. That by Christ being our Surety, is
meant, that Jesus Christ our Mediator obliged himself to expiate our Sins by
his Blood, and to purchase eternal Life for all that believe, and Faith and
every saving Grace for the Elect; but it is not intended that we were legally
reputed to make Satisfaction, or purchase eternal Life. 8. That by Christ's
answering for us the Obligations of the violated Law of Works, is intended,
that whereas the Law obliged us to die for our Sins, Christ became obliged to
die in our stead; and whereas we were after we had sinned still obliged to
yield perfect Obedience, Christ perfectly obeyed the Law, that upon the account
of his Active and Passive Obedience Believers might be forgiven, and entitled
to eternal Life; but it is not intended that the sense of the Law of Works
should be, that if we, or Christ obeyed, we should live, and if Christ suffered
we should not die, tho we sinned; nor that Believers are justified, or to be
judged by the Law of Works, but by the Gospel; although the Righteousness for the
sake of which they are justified, be as perfect as that Law of Works required,
and far more valuable.

CHAP. III.
The State of Truth and Error published in the Congregational Ministers
Declaration against Antinomian Errors, about December School.
Error 1. THat the eternal Decree gives such an Existence to the Justification
of the Elect, as makes their Estate whilst in Unbelief, to be the same as when
they do believe, in all respects save only as to the Manifestation; and that
there is no other Justification by Faith, but what is in their Consciences.

Error 2. That the Elect considered as in their natural Estate, or as in the
first Adam, are not under the denunciation of Wrath by the Law, as well as
other Unbelievers and impenitent Sinners.

Truth 1. That there is a difference between the state of the Elect whilst in
Unbelief and when Believers, besides what is manifestative to their
Consciences, p. 13.

Truth 2. That before they believe they are not personally and actually
justified in the Court of Heaven, p. 13. and none may expect to be pardoned in
a state of Unbelief and Impenitence, p. 47.

Error. 3. That pardoned Sin is no Sin, and therefore God cannot see Sin in his
People to be displeased with them for their Sins; nor does God express his
Fatherly Displeasure against them by any Afflictions laid upon them.

Truth. That pardoned, yea mortified Sins are truly and properly Sins; and God
sees the Sins of his own People, and is displeased with them for their Sins.

Error 4. That Believers are not bound to confess or mourn over Sin, as
committed by them, or pray for pardon of Sin, in making a daily acknowledgment
of a need of it, because it was pardoned before committed; and pardoned Sin is
no Sin.

Truth. That when Believers do sin, it is their Duty to humble themselves,
confess their Sins, and pray for Pardon, p. 19.

Error 5. That Believers ought not to be afraid of committing Sin, because
their Sins can do them no hurt.

Truth. The Sins of Believers do hurt them, and they should be afraid to commit
them, seeing they impair their Graces and Comforts, harden their Hearts, wound
their Consciences, hurt and scandalize others, grieve God's holy Spirit, expose
to his Fatherly Displeasure, and bring temporal Judgments upon them, p. 22.

Error 6. That they must do no good Work or Duty for their own Benefit, or with
an Eye to their own Salvation.

Truth. That Believers must do good Works, expecting Blessings in the
performance thereof, p. 24.

Error 7. Believers not having in themselves an Ability to do good Works, are
not bound to perform any good Duty, unless excited thereunto by a special
motion of the Spirit.

Truth. Tho Believers Ability to do good Works is not at all in themselves, but
wholly from the Spirit of Christ, yet are they not hereupon to grow negligent,
as if they were not bound to perform any Duty unless upon a special motion of
the Spirit, but they ought to be diligent in stirring up the Grace of God that
is in them, p. 27.

Error 8. That Sanctification evidenced by the Spirit of God to their
Consciences, is not a Sign, Mark, or Evidence of their Justification; and that
Marks and Signs for the trial of a Believer's Faith are of no use: for Faith
lying in a full persuasion and assurance that their Persons were actually
justified and pardoned in Christ, it is a Sin to question, Whether they do
savingly believe or no?

Truth. Saving Faith lies not in a full persuasion and assurance that our Sins
are actually pardoned; but Marks and Signs for the trial of our spiritual
Estate are useful, and to be sought after; and Sanctification evidenced by the
Spirit of God to our Consciences is a certain sign and mark of Sanctification,
p. 28, 29.

Error 9. That Gospel Ministers are not to preach the Law in its Commands and
Curses to convince Men of their need of Christ, nor are Believers obliged to
regard the Law as delivered by Moses, nor as externally propounded; nor are
they bound when they commit Sin to look to the Law for further Discoveries and
Convictions of the remaining Corruptions that are in them, because by the
Gospel its Obligations are dissolved.

Truth. That the Law delivered by Moses continues in its Commands and Curses
undissolved; and it is still of use to convince of Sin, that we may see a need
of Christ, and therefore is to be preached and externally propounded, and we
are to look unto it, p. 36. And tho there is no Sin so small but it deserves
Damnation, yet there is no Sin so great that it shall bring Damnation to them
that truly repent, which makes the constant preaching of Repentance necessary.

Error 10. That Ministers of the Gospel ought not to propound the Offers of
Salvation unto all those to whom God calls them to preach, seriously inviting
them to improve the Means of Grace that they may be saved, and assuring them in
the way of their Ministerial Duty, of the Salvation of all such as believe in
Christ, because they want Ability to close with the Offer, and all shall not be
saved.

Truth. That tho Men want Ability to believe savingly, yet it is the Duty of
Gospel Ministers to make the Offer, and testify unto them that whoever believes
and repents shall be saved; and that it is the Peoples Duty to make use of their
natural Faculties with such external Means and workings of the Spirit as God
affords them, that they may believe, repent and be saved, p. 41, 42.

Error 11. That by God's laying our Sins upon Christ, he became every way as
sinful as we, and we every way as righteous as he; and that therefore Persons
may expect to be pardoned whilst they continue in a state of Unbelief and
Impenitence; and that continued Repentance and Holiness are not in the nature
of the thing, nor, by the Constitution of the Gospel, necessary to our being
possessed of eternal Life.

Truth. Our Sins were not laid upon Christ so as to make him every way as
sinful as we, and we are not every way as righteous as Christ; and none may
expect to be pardoned in a state of Unbelief and Impenitence; and continued
Repentance and Holiness are necessary to our possession of eternal Life, p. 46,
47, 48.

CHAP. IV.
It Is made evident, that this Declaration of our Brethren taken altogether, and
examined with due Charity and Candor, ought to be acknowledged a sufficient
Vindication of the Approvers thereof from all hurtful Antinomian Errors.
TO this end, 1. We think that Christian Charity and Candor oblige us to judge
of what they have declared by these following Rules, and we expect the same for
our selves from them. 1. That the omission of any Points unmentioned is not to
be attributed to a mistaken Judgment concerning them, and far less when the
things expressed are granted to be Truths or Errors upon a reason that alike
infers what is omitted. 2. That the Approvers do truly intend for substance
what is declared. 3. That in a Body of Subscribers some few may be more narrow
in their Conceptions, and therefore to avoid a Breach, must be accommodated in
the phrasing of some Points beyond what the others, if at full liberty, would
either need or choose. 4. If any thing be a little darkly or suspiciously worded
in one part, and more expressly and fully in another, the latter must be the
Index of their Judgment; upon which account we cite not only their State of
Error and Truth, but refer to the Pages containing their Explications, and
approved Authorities, some of which will be mentioned afterward. 5. That they
ought not to be charged with the Consequences of any occasional Passages which
they disown.

2. These just Rules being admitted, we shall enumerate the hurtful Antinomian
Errors, as Antinomianism is described in the last Age (which in many things
differs from what was so called at first) and under each refer you to the
places (besides the abovementioned State of Error and Truth) wherein the
Brethren have so laudably vindicated themselves by their Declaration.

The dangerous Parts of Antinomianism are reducible to these general Heads. 1.
As it renders the Ministry unapt to its proper Ends. 2. As it tends to
Libertinism in Practice. 3. As it hinders a well-grounded Assurance, and
encourages Presumption. 4. As it reproacheth Christ our blessed Redeemer.
Against each of which our Brethren bear their Testimony.

1. The hurtful Antinomian Errors which render the Ministry unapt to its proper
Ends, are, 1. Unduly limiting the Offers of Salvation, and decrying Arguments
to excite Sinners to use their Endeavors under the Assistance of Gospel Means
and common Grace. Against this see Error 10. and from p. 41 to 47. 2.
Forbidding and branding as legal the preaching of Duties and Threatenings, and
the applying of promised Benefits as Motives to Faith and other Duties, whereto
those Benefits are promised. Against which see Error 9. and p. 36, 39. Error 6.
and p. 25, 26, 45. 3. Denying that the Elect whilst unconverted, are under the
Curse of the Law, and affirming they are united to Christ, and justified before
God, and pardoned whilst impenitent Infidels. Against which see Errors 1, 2,
11. and p. 12 to 18. and 47, 58.

2. The hurtful Antinomian Errors tending to Libertinism in Practice, besides
the Impediments to a Sinner's Conviction and Conversion under the
forementioned Head of the Ministry, are such as these: 1. That God sees no
Sin in his People, accounts them not their Sins but Christ's, and is not
displeased with his People, nor afflicts them for their Sins. Against which see
Error 3. and p. 19. 2. That Repentance is not necessary to Forgiveness, nor are
Believers to mourn for Sin, or to beg Pardon, nor to confess it, unless it be
to show, for Christ's Glory, how many the Sins are which are become his.
Against which see Error 4. and p. 19, 20, 21, 47, 58. 3. That their Sins can do
Believers no hurt. Against this see Error 5. p. 22, 23. 4. That we ought not to
intend our own Benefits by our Duties, neither are bound to perform Duties
unless excited thereto by the Spirit, nor are any Acts of our Obedience
rewardable; and that continued Repentance and Holiness are not by the
Constitution of the Gospel necessary to our being possessed of Eternal Life.
Against this see Errors 6, 10, 11. and p. 25, 26, 27, 47, 58, 59. 5. That
justifying Faith is a Persuasion that Christ is mine, and that my Sins are
pardoned in Christ. Against this see Error 8. and p. 30, 31.

3. The hurtful Antinomian Error which hinders a well-grounded Assurance and
Peace, and also encourages Presumption, is, that besides the last description
of Faith, we are not to try our State by marks and signs of Sanctification.
Against this see Error 8. and p. 32, 33, 34.

4. The hurtful Antinomian Errors reproachful to Christ our Redeemer are such
as these, that Christ is as sinful as we, and we are as righteous as Christ.
Against which see Error 11. p. 48, 57.

If the Reader consult these places, and compare them with our State of Truth
and Error in the first Chapter, he cannot but rejoice in our Brethrens
Agreement with us in a Testimony against Antinomianism.

CHAP. V.
SOCINIAN Errors concerning Christ's Satisfaction. Also LIMBORG's, with some
other ARMINIANS concerning Christ's Satisfaction. SOCINIAN Errors as to
Justification. LIMBORG's, with some other Arminian Errors about Justification.
With a state of Truths opposite to each of these, as also to Popish Errors.
FInding our Brethren suggest in the Preface to this Declaration, that after
all we have said in Cap. 1 and 2. yet still we ought to do more to discharge
our selves from hurtful Errors about Christ's Satisfaction and our
Justification; we shall to promote Peace renounce several more Errors about
those two Doctrines wherein we are suspected, and tell them what we think to be
Truths.

Error 1. Punitive Justice against Sin is no Property of God, but only an
Effect of his Will, and therefore there was no need of any Satisfaction to be
made by Christ for Sin; nor is it less than ridiculous to say God was at once
just as well as merciful in bringing about our Salvation by Christ: Socin.
opera Theol. Tom. 1. Praelect. cap. 16. and Tom. 2. de Servator. par. 1. cap.
1. Prael. cap. 16. Wolzog. in Mat. 19. 28. Crel. Resp. ad Grot. cap. 1.

Truth. God is essentially just, and so zealous for the Honor of his Law when
enacted and his Government, that Sin must not go unpunished; and therefore if
Sinners be saved from the Punishments threatened by the violated Law for Christ
their Mediator's sake, it was necessary that he made Satisfaction to Punitive
Justice by enduring the Penal Effects of God's Wrath.

Error 2. Jesus Christ is not the true eternal most High God, of the same
Substance, Authority and Power with the Father. Socin. Tom. 2. Respons. ad Iac.
Vujeki, cap. 1, etc.

Truth. Jesus Christ is the true eternal most High God, of the same Substance,
Authority and Power with the Father, and in time assumed the Human Nature, and
remains God-Man for ever more.

Note, This Article is inserted, because the Value of Christ's Obedience and
Death, for Satisfaction and Merit, was deprived from the Dignity of Christ's
Person as God: And therefore tho the Socinians faintly argue, that if Christ
were the eternal God, it would not render his Death a Satisfaction; yet it is
evident their great Concern in denying Christ's Satisfaction is to prevent the
unanswerable Argument this would be for his Deity. The like is also to be seen
by their Notion of the Lord's Supper.

Error 3. Christ did not by his Blood acquire or purchase the Gospel Covenant,
nor was his Death an impulsive Cause of God's promising to Men the Blessings of
that Covenant; nor did it move him to make such Promises: But Christ was only
the Mediator, that is, Sponsor of it, who assured Men that God would accomplish
it, and who in God's Name, and by his Command, performed such things as
belonged to the confirming and executing of the said Covenant. Socin. Tom. 2.
168, 199. Crell. Vol. 1. p. 612. and Vol. 3. Resp. ad Grot. p. 19, 128, 171.
and Vol. 1. 612.

Truth. Christ did not only confirm the Gospel Covenant to Men, and do such
things as belonged to the execution of the Gospel Promises, but God as Governor
made those Promises in consideration of the Death of Christ, as what vindicated
the Glory of his Government in offering and promising such Blessings to
condemned Sinners, although as our absolute Lord and Proprietor he freely purposed
within himself, that those Blessings should be granted in what method he judged
fit.

Error 4. Christ was for no other cause a Mediator, nor so called, but that he
was appointed by God a middle Person between himself and Men, not that he
should appease God toward Men, but that he should declare God already pacified
to them, and most evidently confirm the same by himself: And as for Men who
were Haters of and Enemies to God, them he was to reconcile to God (i. e.
convert) and be our eternal Lawgiver, and faithful Interpreter of the Divine
Will to them, by whom they might always have access to God, and obtain eternal
Life. Socin. Tom. 1. 788.

Truth. Jesus Christ was by Divine Adjustment a middle Person between God and
Sinners, and as such laid his hand on both; undertaking to appease God's Wrath,
and procure Salvation for us at his hand; and also to make God and the way of
Salvation known to us for our Reconciliation and Obedience to God: and by him
God still imparts his Blessings to us, and admits us free access to himself.

Error 5. Christ is called a Surety as a Sponsor or Messenger on God's part to
us, but he promised nothing to God for us. Crell. vol. 1. p. 612.

Truth. Tho Christ was not a joint federating Party with us in the Covenant of
Works, yet he was not only a Surety on God's part to us, but he was a mediating
Surety on both parts; and as such he engaged in the Covenant of Redemption to
make Atonement for us, and in the Gospel Covenant, that all true Believers
shall persevere to the obtaining of eternal Life.

Error 6. Christ was not an High Priest while on Earth, nor was his Blood
offered by him to God, but it was himself was offered, and that not on the
Cross, but when he entered into Heaven; yet the Death of Christ so far belongs
to his Priesthood, that he was prepared by his Death to become a High Priest,
and to offer himself a perfect Sacrifice for Sin in Heaven, neither of which
could be according to the Decree of God, if his Death had not intervened.
Crell. vol. 2. Resp. ad Grot. cap. 10. vol. 1. 613. vol. 2. par. 1. 162. Socin.
Tom. 1. Praelect. Theol. cap. 23.

Truth. Christ was an High Priest while he was on Earth, and as such upon the
Cross offered up himself by his bloody Death a perfect Sacrifice, whereby his
Blood was a propitiatory offering at the very time it was shed; and tho in the
virtue thereof the Saints were saved before his Incarnation, and Christ for
ever intercedeth in the Heavens, yet the presenting of himself or it there,
makes no addition to the Perfection of it as a Sacrifice.

Error 7. There is no use nor place in the Priesthood of Christ for appeasing
God's Wrath, or offering any Sacrifice, no not in Heaven, as a Condition of
obtaining Remission properly as from God, or impetrating the same; but Christ's
Death is a means of our enjoying that Remission from God, and it was indirectly
a Condition thereof as to be given to us, i. e. it was a Condition imposed: on
Christ, without which, by the Divine Decree, he was not to obtain Authority
from God to forgive us our Sins; and it may be called a Sacrifice to God's
Mercy, as of his own free Grace reconciled, but not as offended with Sinners.
Socin. Tom. 2. 665, 666. Crell. vol. 1. 612. Wolzog. in Ioh. 3. 16.

Truth. The first and principal use of Christ's Priesthood, was to offer on the
Cross a Sacrifice to appease God's Wrath against Sinners, and to impetrate
Remission and eternal Life, that so God the offended Governor might,
consistently with the Honor of his Law, and of all his Divine Perfections, be
at liberty, and inclined as well to give the said Blessings, as that we might
become actual Partakers of them from Christ, as authorized to apply them to us:
And all the other Sacerdotal Acts of Christ do refer to this.

Error 8. Redemption mentioned in the New Testament, signifies no more nor
other than a freeing us from the Punishment of Sin without any proper Price
intervening. And when it is said, Redemption is obtained by the Blood of Christ,
it is not meant that the Blood of Christ could move God, or that God was thereby
obliged to grant us Deliverance from the Punishment of our Sins, but that the
shedding of his Blood ought to intervene, that we might be moved thereby to
accept that Deliverance when offered to us. Neither did Christ buy us, but God
by Christ asserted his Right to us; and tho our Deliverance from Punishment is
gotten as if by a Price, yet this is not as if the Blood of Christ were paid to
any. Socin. Tom. (...). Prael. Theol. cap. 19. Tom. 2. 145, 147. Slicht. in
Romans cap. 5. v. 10.

Truth. Redemption by the Blood of Christ, is that we are bought by his Blood
as a proper Price, and delivered from the Curse of the Law, and Captivity under
Sin and Satan, as by a proper Ransom paid to the just Governor of the World.

Error 9. Christ by his Death did not reconcile God to us, but he reconcileth
us to God by his Death, i. e. we come thereby to be converted to God, and cease
to offend him; yea, God's Anger was so far from being appeased by the Death of
Christ, that thereby it was declared, that God was before pacified to us.
Socin. Tom. 1. 144, 145, 665, 666. Crell. vol. 3. Resp. ad Grot. 154, 155, 107.
Slicht. Tom. 2. 214, 401. and in Romans 5. 10. and 2 Cor. 5.

Truth. We being Children of Wrath because of our Sin, the Lord Jesus did by
his Death atone our offended God, who became thereby so reconciled, that he
offers Peace to Sinners, and requires and urges us by believing aright to
accept thereof; and upon our penitent believing he becomes actually reconciled
to us, delighting in us, and dealing with us as Objects of his restored Favor.

Note 1. Crellius Resp. ad Grot. cap. 8. part. 3. disputes against this as the
Error of Grotius and the rest of the Orthodox, stating it in these words, God
was before angry, but being appeased by the Death of Christ he determined to
lay aside his Anger, and upon our believing and repenting he does actually lay
aside his Anger.

2. Grotius de Satisf. cap. 7. distinguishes the Actings of the Divine Will;
1. As before Christ's Death is decreed, etc. then God is angry with the Sinner,
yet so as not to be averse to all methods of Reconciliation. 2. Upon Christ's
Death (as well when fixed as when undergone) then God not only appoints the
way, but promises to be reconciled. 3. When a Man believes in Christ with a
right Faith, and Christ according to the Tenor of the Covenant presents the
Believer to God; then God lays aside his Anger, and receives the Person into
Favor (or is actually reconciled.)

3. How little do well-meaning Antinomians consider, that not only in the third
Error, etc. but in this last Error, they agree with the Socinians, and that in
a Point whence most of their false Notions about Christ's Satisfaction proceed.
For, see you not? they hold that after God's absolute Decree to justify us,
there is no Wrath in God to appease, the change is only on our part: And no
Reconciliation but on our side, whom God begs to be reconciled to him, he being
already at Peace with us.

Error 10. By Christ's dying for our Sins as being laid on him, is not meant,
that Christ according to his Sponsion satisfied Divine Justice for our Sins, or
that he paid to God any thing which we owed for our Sins; but when he is said
to have died for our Sins as they were laid on him, nothing else is meant, but
that he died by occasion of our Sins, to take them away, i. e. he died to
reclaim us from our Sins, and to assure us, that if we did leave our Sins we
should be forgiven; and besides this, that we might perceive and obtain the
fruit of that Forgiveness, etc. Socin. Tom. 2. 153. Tom. 1. Prael. Theol. cap.
18, 20. Crell. Vol. 3. Resp. ad Grot. cap. 9.

Truth. When it is said, Christ died for our Sins as being laid on him, it is not
only to bring about the forementioned Ends, and such other Purposes as are
assigned by the Socinians, but they were imputed to him as what he had for our
Salvation engaged to make Satisfaction for: And he did by his Death make a
real, full and proper Satisfaction to God's Justice, vindicating the Honor of
his Justice and Government, and of the violated Law as fully, as if the
pardoned Sinner had endured the utmost Punishment threatened by the said Law.

Error 11. God did not inflict Death on Christ our Mediator to express his
hatred of Sin, and deter us from it by his Death as any instance of Divine
Displeasure against our Offenses, and therefore our Sins were not punished in
Christ. Socin. Tom. 1. 577, 578, 581. Tom. 2. 194. Crell. vol. 1. de Morte
Christi p. 611.

Truth. God did punish our Sins in the Death of Christ, by showing his real
Hatred against Sin in all the Extremities Christ did endure; which Extremities
and Death thus inflicted were not only fit, but truly designed to deter us from
all Disobedience, against which God thus testified his high Displeasure.

Error 12. Christ did not by his Death properly merit Salvation or any other
thing for us, nor did he by the Merit of his great Obedience appease God's
Anger. Socin. Tom. 2. de Servat. Part. 3. cap. 6. p. 205. Ruari Epist. 164.
Small. Disp. 2. contr. Frantz.

Truth. Christ by his Death and Obedience did properly merit our Salvation, and
the Reconciliation of God to us; his Death being to be considered first as
satisfactory, and hen meritorious; and his Obedience first as meritorious, and
then satisfactory.

Error 13. By Christ's dying for us, or in our stead (as some of them sometimes
word it, tho they expressly dispute against it) is not meant, that Christ was
substituted to die in the room of us who were condemned to die, that God might
be pacified, nor that his Death was instead of our Death, that we for the Merit
of it might be delivered; but the meaning is, that Christ for our good did by
his Death come to be crowned with Glory and Power, whereby he is able to make
us meet for Pardon, and authorized to give that Pardon to us. Socin. Praelect.
cap. 20, 21. and de Scrvat. cap. 8. Crell. Resp. ad Grot. cap. 9. Par. 1, etc.

Truth. By Christ's dying for us, and in our stead, is meant, that whereas we
Sinners were condemned to die for our Sins, our Lord Jesus, tho he became not a
Sinner in our stead, yet as Mediator, he was substituted to die in our stead,
that by his Death God might be inclined to forgive us who otherwise must have
died (and by virtue of his Death, as a Satisfaction to Divine Justice, we are
delivered from Death.) This Parenthesis I add to the Description Grotius gives
of Christ's dying in our stead. De Satisf. cap. 9.

LIMBORG's Opinion of Christ's Satisfaction consonant to EPISCOPIVS and some
few other Arminians.
Error 14. Vindictive Justice required not Satisfaction to be made in order to
the remission of Sin. Limbor. Theol. Christian. lib. 3. cap. 18.. 4.

Truth. Vindictive Justice for the Honor of the Divine Law required
Satisfaction in order to the remission of Sin, at least after the enacting of
Adam's Covenant.

Error 15. Christ's Sufferings were not a full Satisfaction to Justice, nor was
the Price of our Redemption fully equivalent to the Misery we deserved: But God
might accept as a redeeming Price much or little as himself judged fit, and
might be satisfied with any sort of Affliction laid on Christ. Nor did Christ
satisfy the Rigor of Divine Justice, but the Will of God considered at once
merciful as well as just (i. e. Mercy abated to Christ in the terms of
Satisfaction, what Justice demanded) Lib. 3. cap. 2.. 8, 9. cap. 22.. 2. cap.
23.. 6.

Truth. Tho the great Mercy of God appeared in his being willing to admit,
accept and provide Christ our Mediator to make Satisfaction for our Sins, yet
God our just Governor would have it that the terms of Satisfaction proposed to
our Mediator should be such as strict Justice demanded for the Honor of his
violated Law, and securing the Ends of his Government; which terms were no
lower than that he should suffer what was fully equivalent to the Punishments
they whom he was to redeem deserved to endure. And as our Lord Jesus did suffer
in kind much of what we deserved to suffer; so he suffered (considering the
Dignity and Innocence of his Person) what was in the intrinsic Value fully
equivalent to such of our deserved Punishments, as he was not capable of
suffering in kind. Nay the Price of our Redemption paid by him, was not only
equivalent to what the Law of Works required of us, but it was supralegal, that
is, it far exceeded what any Sinners were thereby obliged to; nor see we how a
full Satisfaction for all our Sins could be otherwise made.

Error 16. Our Faith and Regeneration were not merited by Christ. Lib. 3. cap.
22.. 3.

Truth. Considering that our New Birth and Faith are the Fruits of the holy
Spirit, whom by Sin we had expelled, his return to regenerate and make us
Believers must be for the sake and with respect to the Merits of Christ, as
what vindicated the Honor of God who restored him to us.

Truth. No Penance, Pilgrimage, Fastings or good Works of our own, or other
Men, can make proper Satisfaction to Divine Justice for the least of our Sins
as to any part of their Fault or Guilt.

This last we add in opposition to what POPISH Opinions seem to militate
against the Doctrine of Christ's Satisfaction.

Socinian Notions of Justification.
Error 1. In our Justification by Christ our Sins are blotted out, not by
Christ's Death and Obedience as any Compensation or Satisfaction to God for
them, but only by God's simple Forgiveness and Pardon absolutely free in all
respects, without any Merit of Christ's or our own. Socin. Tom. 1. Praelect.
Theol. cap. 15, 16. Crell. vol. 1. in Phil. 3. 9. and in Romans 3. 24.

Truth. In Justification upon our penitent believing our Sins are pardoned, and
our Persons accepted for the sake of Christ's Death and Obedience, as what
compensated and made Satisfaction for our Sins: And tho neither our Graces nor
Works do merit our Pardon, Acceptance or eternal Life, yet these with all other
saving Benefits were merited by Christ.

Note, The Socinians are as much for absolutely unlimited free Grace as even
our Antinomians would pretend to be, if not more.

Error 2. Faith in Christ is accepted under the Gospel as a perfect
Righteousness for a perfect sinless Obedience: And as this Faith expresses it
self in our Works, our Justification is in it self firmer and surer. Crell.
vol. 1. p. 110, 612, 613. 474.

Truth 1. Tho true Faith be a Gospel Righteousness, yet it is not accepted for
sinless Obedience; nor does the Gospel entitle us to Salvation upon our
believing, as the Law did upon a perfect sinless Obedience: for the Law
entitled us to Life as of Debt for our Obedience, as the immediate Merit of
that Reward by the adjustment of governing Justice. Whereas the Gospel of mere
Grace (tho in a way of Government) entitles the Believer to Life, as what was
merited by the Lord Jesus, and not by our Faith or Works.

Truth. 2. Tho a dead Faith cannot justify us, and our believing Consent must
be executed if we survive it; yet are we as truly and firmly justified, and in
Christ's Right entitled to Glory when we first believe, as when those genuine
Fruits of it are produced, which are contrary to that Barrenness, Ungodliness
and Apostasy that would subject us to Condemnation.

We shall provide against Limborg's and some other Arminians Notion of
Justification (tho it be none of the five Points which constitute Arminianism)
and that we in the former Papers opposed each of the said Points in concurrence
with our British Divines in the Synod of Dort.

Error 3. By Faith being imputed for Righteousness, is meant, that God
graciously for Christ's sake will account our Obedience which we yield him by
Faith as if it were perfect, tho it be imperfect. As if a Creditor having a
Debtor who ows him 1000 Gilders, should upon this Debtor's paying him 100,
forgive him the rest, and graciously impute to him this part of Payment for the
Payment of the whole. Lib. 6. cap. 4.. 39. -- 17.

Truth. Tho we are justified by Christ believed on, and Faith in him be
accounted a Gospel-Righteousness, as it is the performed Condition upon which
we are by the Gospel-Promise adjudged to have the Righteousness of Christ
imputed to us as our pleadable Security against the Curse of the Law; by which
Righteousness of Christ alone our Right to Pardon and eternal Life (wherein we
are personally invested by the Gospel) is merited as well as the Blessings
themselves. Nevertheless our Faith in Christ is no part of the Debt we owed to
God by the Law of Innocence, nor is it, or our sincere Obedience proceeding
from it, either in themselves, or Divine Acceptance, a full Conformity to the
Gospel Precepts, much less does God impute to us this Faith, or that Obedience
for the payment of the whole Debt owing by the Law or Gospel, tho he grant us
thereupon that Pardon, Favor and Acceptance Christ has procured, so as to
deal with us as righteous Persons; and these he does not suspend until Faith
produces the said Fruit of Obedience, but grants them upon our first true
purpose to turn from Sin to God, and our acceptance of and trust in Christ for
doing this, and for obtaining all Salvation by him.

The common POPISH Notion of Justification as stated by Andradius in his
authorized Explication of the Decree of the 6th Session of the Council of
Trent, whereto Bellarmine, and the generality of the Papists agree.

Error 4. The first Justification is the Renovation of an ungodly Man by the
infused habit of Love, the infusion of which is merited by Christ. The second
Justification is this habit of Love producing goods Works, by the Merit whereof
we are further justified, and ex condigno deserve eternal Life; but neither the
first nor second Justification consists in the forgiveness of Sin.

Note. By preparatory Work, the Council intend with the Schoolmen, that our
Wills moved by the Spirit do by their natural Power prepare themselves to
obtain the habit of Grace, and ex congruo, merit the Infusion of it, which
Habit is that justifying Righteousness, for the Merit whereof the Sinner is at
first absolved from Guilt, and accepted to eternal Life.

Truth 1. Neither this first nor second Justification is the Justification
described usually in the Gospel, which is not the Conversion of a Sinner, or
the progressive Holiness of a Convert, but a forensick Act, viz. God's judicial
absolving us from the Curse due for Sin, and adjudging us entitled to Glory for
the Merits of Christ, according to the Gospel.

Truth 2. It is not true, that preparatory Works do any way deserve from God
the Habit of Grace at first infused, tho ordinarily the Divine Spirit does by
Knowledge and humbling Convictions abate the Obstacles to Grace in our Hearts,
and put us upon seeking help from Christ; all which are as truly owing to his
more common Operations, as saving Grace is to his special.

Truth 3. Neither the first infused Habit of Grace, nor its Acts, do merit
further Grace or Holiness; nor yet any degree of that Pardon or Acceptance
which by Divine Ordination ensue thereupon.

Error. 5. Christ has merited that the Habit of Love should by its virtue
extinguish Sin in us by good Works, and we by these Works merit Reconciliation
with God, Forgiveness of Sin, and eternal Glory, as what do appease his Anger,
satisfy for our Guilt, and are part of the Price of eternal Glory.

Note. The Popish Error concerning Satisfaction leads them to this Error about
Justification; and when Justification is considered in a Protestant sense, viz.
as a forensick Act, the true Controversy between the Papists and us is about
the Doctrine of the Merit of good Works.

Truth. Neither Repentance, Faith, Love, nor any good Work proceeding
therefrom, do in the least merit Reconciliation, Pardon, or eternal Life;
neither did Christ merit that we might merit: But Reconciliation, Pardon, and
eternal Life were merited only by Christ's atoning, satifying, and meriting
Sufferings and Obedience: And therefore the Righteousness of Christ is accepted
and reputed the only meriting Righteousness in God's justifying Act, although this
Act terminates on none (Adult) besides the penitent Believer, and on all such
by the Ordination of the Gospel.

Note 1. It Is one thing for Christ to merit, that we might by our Works merit
Salvation, it is another thing for Christ to merit that Salvation it self, which
he gives and applies to Men on Gospel-terms; the first is Popish, the last is
Protestant Doctrine.

2. It Is one thing what our Judge in his justifying Act accounts to be the thing
which appeaseth his Anger (for Reconciliation) makes Compensation to Justice
(for Pardon) and to be the meriting Price (of eternal Life) to which
Reconciliation, Pardon, and eternal Life he now adjudgeth the penitent Believer
to be entitled. Now the thing which our Judge accounts to be that which
appeaseth his Anger, etc. is the Righteousenss of Christ, and only that.

It Is another matter whom our Judge in his justifying Act accounts and adjudgeth
in conformity to the Gospel-Offer, to be the Persons who he therein promised
should be actually reconciled, pardoned, and entitled to Glory in the alone
meriting virtue of what appeased his Anger, made amends for Sin, and was the
Price of Glory. Now this Person is the penitent Believer, and he is accounted
to be such from his having Gospel-Faith in Christ, with true Repentance, and as
such is adjudged to be under the Favor of the foresaid Gospel Promise of
Reconciliation, Pardon and Glory, yet procured and merited not by his Faith,
but by Christ's alone Righteousness, as before accounted for, and obtained in
his Right, who as well had these promised to him for Believers in the Covenant
of Redemption, as they are promised by God in Christ in the Gospel to Believers
themselves for a personal Title to possess them, and to plead the Merits of
Christ for the enjoyment of them.

Having testified our Concord with our Brethren, and and added this further
account of what we esteem Truth and Error in the Doctrines of Satisfaction and
Justification, we must express our Thankfulness to God, that our Brethren in
the foresaid Declaration have testified against ignorant and scandalous Persons
intruding themselves into the Ministry. And tho the Vindication of our selves
in this matter be needless, when our Principles and Practice are so well known;
and it is so notorious, that of the great number of unqualified Men who are of
late turned Preachers, those very few who broke out of any of our Congregations
in this City, received no Approbation or Countenance from us; and to avoid
Restraint and Discouragement they renounced the Name of Presbyterians, yea,
preached against us; yet to support what we can this present Testimony of our
Congregational Brethren, we'll publish one of the Articles agreed to by all of
us for strengthening our Union after our said Brethrens Recess, which is as
follows,

6. That no Ministers of the Union shall admit, or consent that any Person
shall preach in their Congregations, unless they have been solemnly admitted to
the Ministry by Ordination, or approved by some of the United Brethren, or
produce a Testimony that they have been under proper and preparatory Studies to
qualify them for that sacred Function.

CHAP. VI.
Some further Examination what is Socinianism, as to the Doctrine of Christ's
Satisfaction, and what is not so; with a brief account of several Phrases used
by Socinians and by the Orthodox in a very contrary sense.
A Strict Observation in how uncertain a sense Terms and Phrases are made use
of, must convince one that Errors may be easily concealed from the Ignorant,
and the Orthodox as easily impeached without ground by sagacious Persons who
design imposing on the Vulgar. I shall give an instance in the Controversy
before me, which makes it evident, that Men's Explications and main Hypothesis
must be regarded above words, otherwise their sense will be mistaken.

1. I find the Socinians admit and make use of the words which some Orthodox
Divines esteemed most distinguishingly expressive of their own sense, as
Commutation of Persons as well as things for Persons, Crell. vol. 2. in 2 Cor.
5. 14. Resp. ad Grot. cap. 9. par. 2.
Substitution and Surrogation of Christ's Person in our room. Crell. vol. 3.
Resp. ad Grot. cap. 9, 10.
Dying in our stead. Crell. Resp. ad Grot. cap. 9.
Christ was an Expiatory Sacrifice. Crell. Resp. ad Grot. cap. 10. Socin. de
Servat. lib. 2. c. 13.
His Sufferings were Punishments. Tom. 1. Prael. cap. 21, p. 580.
Our Sins were an impulsive Cause of Christ's Death. Crell. Resp. ad Grot. cap.
1. par. 11.
God was moved by Christ's Death to give us Forgiveness. Crell. Resp. ad Grot.
cap. 7, 8.
; Yea it was a Satisfaction. Crell. vol. 2. in 2. Cor. 5. 14. Slicht. Tom. 2.
in 2 Cor. 5. 31.
Christ was made a Sinner, yea the chief Sinner. And many more such I could
mention: But this evidenceth that these very Phrases are capable of a very ill
sense as well as a good one. Ruarus admits Christ did in a sense impetrate our
Pardon by his Death. Epist. 64. So does Crellius Resp. ad Got. cap. 9. part. 3.

2. The last Chapter gave us such a Summary of their Assertions as demonstrates
they use these Expressions in no good sense, but if you consult the places last
cited, and in Chap. 5. you will find them wrested to consist with the
forementioned Errors; but because it will be tedious to particularize, I shall
enumerate the Causes and Ends they plainly and truly ascribe the Death of
Christ to. Slicht. in Romans 3. 24. and Phil. 2. 9. Crell. Resp. ad Grot. cap. 2.
par. 1. and cap. 4. par. 7.
1. They assign Christ's Death to God's mere Dominion over him as his entire
Creature, whom he would reward for it, tho not as merited. Idem ubi sup. ad
cap. 5.
2. It was an Example of Patience. Crell. Resp. ad Grot. 215: 198, 199.
3. It was a Preparation of his Sacrifice to be offered to God in Heaven for our
Sins. Ubi supra cap. 7. and cap. 1.
4. It showed how much he desired our Salvation, tho such great Sinners, and
how faithful he would be in expiating our Sins in Heaven, when he endured such
dreadful things for our sakes, which God would have chiefly considered in our
High Priest. Crell. vol. 1. 612, 613.
5. His Death impressed a tender Affection and Pity toward us, that so he would
succor us who were to be so extremely afflicted, God would not have put
Mankind in his hands unless he first suffered Death for Sinners: And that God
might render us more assured, that if we obeyed we should have eternal Life;
Christ should be so fashioned that in a sense it should appear Christ had more
Tenderness for us than God himself, or otherwise it had been as to us alike,
that God had saved us immediately, as to have saved us by Christ. Or, Socin.
Tom. 1. 596. Crell. vol. 620, 621.
6. To establish the new Covenant and Promises. Crell. vol. 1. 612, 614, 616.
7. To confirm his Doctrine. Socin. Tom. 1. 578, 579. cap. 21. p. 580, 599.
8. To come pursuant to God's Decree to be crowned with Glory and Honor, and
invested with Authority and Power to convert, protect, forgive, and give us
eternal Life. Crell. Tom. 1. 619. Wolz. vol. 1. Pralect. cap. 2.
9. That there might be greater Rewards promised to induce us to repent than
there were before Socin. 1. Tom. 590, 594. Slicht. Tom. 2. 37. Crell. vol. 2.
in Heb. 9. 13, 14, 15.
10. To take away those greater Sins which the legal Sacrifices were not
appointed for. Socin. Tom. 1. p. 667. Crell. Tom. 1. 618.
11. Beget in us a firm hope of Life, tho we should die as terrible a Death.
Socin. Tom. 1. 575, 596.
12. That we might not fear Death, or the Curse, which we see conquered by him.
Socin. Tom. 1. 577, 588.
13. That we might be induced to leave our Sin, when he died that we might be
reclaimed from it by such hope of Pardon upon leaving of it. Socin. Tom. 1.
586. Crell. vol. 2. par. 2. p. 285.
14. To, make known how highly kind and pacified God was to us. I pass by a
compliance with Pagan Customs.

3. As they limit Christ's Death in this manner, exclusively of and in
opposition to other Causes and Ends, which the proper Satisfaction of Christ
more directly supposes, as you see in the fifth Chapter. So I could easily
show how they dilute their own seeming Concessions, as well as reduce plain
Scripture-Expressions to that Insignificancy, that no Man can hope by their
method to apprehend any kind of words with certainty as to their meaning; one
while an as if (a quasi) is all they intend by their large Grants, as if a
redeeming Price, etc. God is as it were moved, and as it were obliged by Christ
to pardon us: another while all is figurative, as a metaphorical Redemption.
Christ's Death was an Expiatory Sacrifice, i.e. metonymically and
synechdocically called so, and it chiefly signifies what by God's Decree
followed upon it, viz. his Entrance into Heaven. Many more might be heaped of
this kind. Socin. de Servat. par. 2. cap. 2. Crell. vol. 1. in Romans 3. 24. vol.
3. Resp. ad Grot. cap. 8. par. 3. p. 198, 189. Socin. Tom. 1. Praelect. cap. 20.

4. They sometimes state the Difference between themselves and others, and
there are some things they still adhere to and secure, however they perplex
this Controversy with their seeming Grants and equivocal Expressions.

(1.) Socinus states this Question and denies it: Are our Sins blotted out by
any Compensation or Satisfaction, or else by Forgiveness? Most think they are
blotted out, a Satisfaction intervening: but we think they are blotted out by
simple Forgiveness, or a Pardon absolutely free. Prael. cap. 15. p. 565. He
also states the Difference with Covet, and puts this for the Position held by
his own Party. I judge and think this to be the Orthodox Determination, That
Jesus Christ is therefore our Savior, because he has made known to us the way
of eternal Life; and in his own Person, both by the Example of his Life, and
rising from the dead, has given assurance of it, and made it evident, as also
that he will give eternal Life to us who believe him. But I affirm, that he
neither satisfied Divine Justice, by which we Sinners did deserve to be damned;
nor was there any need that he should satisfy it. Socin. Tom. 2. de Servat.
cap. 1. 121. Crellius states this Question; Did the Redemption wrought by
Christ include his Payment of a true Price to God for our Sins, which he calls
Satisfaction? Resp. ad Grot. cap. 8. This he denies; and he and others of them
take great advantage of Covet's making use of Creditor, Debtor, and Debt, to
express their Judgment in this Controversy. Other Instances might be given.

(2) The principal things they adhere to are, 1. That Christ did not appease
God's Anger toward Sinners. 2. That what Christ did and suffered had no
meriting Virtue; and so did not merit from God our Pardon, Acceptance and
eternal Life, or properly move God to give or promise them. These are the Heart
of Socinianism as to the Satisfaction of Christ; and they do exclude what
Christ performs in Heaven, as well as his Death on Earth, from any proper
influence Godward as to these things, tho to effect what they call Expiation,
they ascribe more to Christ's abiding on God's Right Hand taking care of the
Church, than to his Resurrection, and more to his Resurrection than to his
Death; these two last being but the decreed intervening way of coming to the
other, which they call the Expiation it self. Hence they always deny any proper
redeeming Price, and say God quitted his right to punish us without any respect
to Christ; and distinguish of Expiation on God's part (which they call his own
Act;) and on our part, which is, say they, Christ's giving us eternal Life;
wherein as contained a full deliverance from the Punishment of Sin. As to
Expiation on God's part, that is in no wise by Christ's inclining God to forgive
our Sins by his Sacrifice; yea Socinus tells us God alone expiates Sin. And
when CRELLIVS blames Grotius for making Socinus to confine the Efficacy of
Christ's Sacrifice to Sins future for Prevention or Pardon, and excluding the
Forgiveness of Sins past, otherwise than as it begets Faith, and so turns us
from Sin. What greater expiating Virtue does he ascribe to it under the Notion
of an expiating Sacrifice? it is this, it takes away the Guilt and Punishments
of all Sins tho past before Conversion, and however great: But how and wherein?
He answers, it is partly by declaring and granting us a right to that thing, and
partly by actually taking away Divine Punishments. But is that Right or Pardon
at all properly procured by this Sacrifice? No, by no means; that he had
denied, and abides by the Denial here, and in the following Sections. The sum
is; a crucified Savior his being exalted, and in Heaven taking care of our
Salvation, assures us, that we shall be partakers of the Pardon appointed and
promised before by the mere Mercy of God without respect to Christ; and Christ
as the authorized Sponsor on God's part conveys it, and assisted with the
Divine Power fully removes the Punishments, or rather God himself does it: Nay,
by their Scheme you cannot well see them allow less expiating Virtue to Men's
Prayers than the legal Sacrifices, yea the yearly: for, fay they, we expiate
our own Sins by those Prayers; and scarce more to Christ's Sacrifice than the
Legal, except as to more sorts of Sin, and its greater aptness to dissuade us
from Sin by the Love of God, and strong grounds of hopes of higher Rewards,
being more evidenced and assured by this Sacrifice of Christ, than by those of
the Law: For this Sacrifice of Christ is no other than an intervening Means,
which being performed, that Discharge follows by the Divine Decree, which the
self-inclined God, unmoved by any thing Christ was to do or suffer, resolved
freely to bestow of his mere Mercy.

To add no more, they carefully distinguish between the Impetration of Pardon;
etc. with respect to the Divine Will, and the means of the application of that
Pardon to the Sinner. From the former they exclude Christ's Satisfaction and
Merits, and confine their Virtue truly altogether to the latter. The thing it
self is unprocured as from God, the Sinner's obtaining it is subserved by
Christ by what he perfoms to make us meet for it, and possessing us in the
Effects of it according to the way decreed, and that only because decreed.
Socin. Tom. 1. Praelect. cap. 27. 21, 22, 23, 24. Tom. 2. de Serve. cap. 4.
Crell. Resp. ad Grot. cap. 8, 9, 10.

5. It Is very obvious that the Socinian Controversy lies not in those things
wherein some are induced to place them, because of certain Phrases sometimes
occurring in Debates concerning the Doctrine of Christ's Satisfaction. To
Instance a few.

(1.) It Is not whether the Sufferings of a Sponsor in the stead of the Sinner
be in so strict a sense a proper Punishment, as the Sufferings of the Delinquem
himself would be? this is nothing with them; for their Question is, Were
Christ's Sufferings such an Instance of God's rectoral Hatred against our Sins,
and Anger against Sinners, as that thereby the Honor of his Justice and
injured Government and Law was provided for, and vindicated, and Sinners to be
deterred from Sin by God's insisting upon such a penal Compensation before he
would be reconciled to us. Punishment under this Notion they expressly dispute
against.

(2.) Nor is it about the Phrase Commutation of Persons between Christ and
Sinners, they grant it; admit a Surrogation of the typical Sacrifice instead of
the Sinner, and a Substitution of Christ in our place. Their Point depends not
on any such mere words. But was Christ appointed, and did he consent to endure
what the Sinner was to suffer, that in virtue thereof the offended God might be
appeased, and the Sinner delivered? This is the thing they oppose. Crell. Resp.
ad Grot. cap. 9. par. 14. explaining this very Phrase.

(3.) Nor is with them the Question, Whether Christ's Sufferings were in part
the Idem, and in other respects a full Equivalent to the Punishments the Sinner
deserved: No, their Arguments run against the Equivalency, and on that account
deny that his Sufferings could be a full Price of Redemption, or a
Satisfaction; and well they may, when they call him a mere Creature. Crell.
Resp. ad Grot. c. 4. par. 2. etc. 6. par. 18. It Is the Proportion in the Value
they most directly militate against.

(4.) Nor, whether Christ was a Sinner in judicial Esteem, or was he reputed
the innocent Mediator making amends to Justice for our Sins, that we the
Offenders might be redeemed by his merits, who, to make Satisfaction, submitted
to be dealt with as if he had been a Sinner. The last is enough for their
Abhorrence; and tho Socinus took all Advantages to expose the Orthodox, in
representing their Opinion as to the Imputation of Sin to Christ, yet grants
they hold that Christ was truly innocent, and reputed so by God even when he
was punished as if an Offender. De Servat. cap. 6. It Is true, sometimes they
would force some such Consequence on the words of the Orthodox, as if Christ
must be legally reputed a Sinner, but that is to furnish themselves with an
Argument to ridicule the true Doctrine of Satisfaction. And note, they deny
that 2 Cor. 5. 21. Christ was made Sin, to be Christ was made a Sacrifice for
Sin; yea some render it, he was made a Sinner, as Slicht. etc. God dealt with
him as a Sinner. Socin in loc.

(5.) It Is far enough from the Socinian Controversy, whether Christ was
immediately obliged by the Law of Works to die, i. e. Did God thus sentence
him, Thou Christ have sinned, and therefore thou shall die? Or, was he
immediately obliged to die by the Govenant of Redemption, and mediately by the
Law of Works, i. e. the Sentence is to be thus apprehended? Whereas thou my Son
the Mediator, have with my Consent, declared thy willingness to expiate Sin,
and ransom Sinners, justly condemned by the Curse of my Law to die: And whereas
my Vindictive Justice, the Honor of my Law and Government, required that I the
Rector should exact Satisfaction and Reparation for the Crimes of these Sinners
by thy Death, if I agreed to thy redeeming and saving them, and thou have
obliged thy self to die in their stead to redeem them, therefore thou shall die
this accursed, shameful Death.

This, I say, is no part of the Dispute with the Socinians, for the last
account does as directly oppose their Notions as the former, nay much more; for
it asserts the Compact before his Incarnation, and consequently the Divinity,
at least Preexistence of Christ.

(6.) Nor yet is it of any moment with them, whether Men say Sin would be in a
more proper sense the immediate meritorious Cause of the Sinner's dying who
committed the Sin, than of Christ's dying who did not commit the Sin, tho he
obliged himself to make Satisfaction for it in the Sinner's stead, that the
provoked God might be reconciled to him. The Point with them being this, Did
our Sins, notwithstanding God's merciful Disposition, retain that Demerit in
his account, as rendered Satisfaction for it by Death necessary to reconcile
him to Sinners; and consequently did Christ suffer Death to make that
Satisfaction which was become thus necessary by Sin, and yet impossible for the
Sinner to make.

(7.) It Is true, the Socinians usually say our Sins were the occasion of
Christ's Death (yet often they call them the antecedent Cause) but occasion being
more common and agreeable to their Hypothesis, I wish others had waved that
word to prevent Abuse. Nevertheless the mere using of that word is far from
arguing any Man to Socinianize, so that he apply it to a sense opposite to what
Socinians do. This will appear, if we consider in what sense the Socinians use
it; they say our Sin was an occasion of Christ's Death, as Sin was that which
we were to be reclaimed from, and our hope supported against. And the Death of
Christ was that way in which God, who was not unreconciled before, did appoint
Christ to reclaim us from our Sins; as his Death assures us of the Truth of
his Doctrine and Promises, manifests God's prior Reconciliation, and so his
Death became an Argument to incline us to believe and repent, and also a causa
sine qua non; both of a strong Motive to Holiness, viz. the endless Glory
designed in Heaven for us (which was before shut up) and of that Power,
Authority and Care of Christ at God's Right Hand to bring us into the
Possession of it.

But when others shall call our Sins an occasion of Christ's Death, and explain
it thus; That it was an occasion of Christ's Death as a penal Satisfaction to
the Justice of God, and that he endured it to pacify God to Sinners; that God's
hatred of Sin, and his Justice (yea punitive Justice) might be no less
demonstrated in Christ's Satisfaction, than if the Sinners had been damned. And
his Obedience, and his Punishments wherein Vindictive Justice was thus
glorified, did merit the Pardon of our Sins, and eternal Life, such an
Explication does as much oppose Socinianism, as if they had used the word
meritorious Cause instead of occasion.

That no Person may pretend the Reverend Mr. Baxter's Authority in favor of
Socinianism, because he sometimes calls our Sins an occasion of Christ's Death,
I do assure the Reader that he explains the word occasion in the last sense,
and in the most direct opposition to Socinianism: nor can any pretend but the
reason he uses this word, as also pro causa meritoria, or instead of a
meritorious Cause, is only to distinguish Christ the Sponsor making
Satisfaction to Justice for our Sins, from the Sinner himself when suffering
for his own Sins. To evidence which, I have repeated his own Assertions under
this seventh Head, and could easily cite his own words, which agree exactly to
what is Antisocinian in the six foregoing Heads. See Method. Theol. par. 3. cap.
1. determ. 11, 12, 15.

Need I add that he says, God declared to the feeling of Christ his Displeasure
against Sin, which was the Cause of all the Miseries which he endured, i. e.
says he, Christ bare those Punishments which the Anger and Displeasure of God
against Sin and Sinners caused to be inflicted on him our Sponsor. Vbi sup.
Disp. 4. and all this in our stead. Det. 10. He made Satisfaction for our Sins
to God as Rector, and as the injured Party: Determ. 14. Christ's Death answered
all the Ends of the most proper Punishments, and of the Threatening of the Law:
Determ. 12. When he calls Sin an occasion of Christ's Death, he there calls it
also a remote meritorious Cause: Determ. 5. And as for a proper meritorious
Cause as when Children are punished for their Parents Sins: Determ. 5. His
Safaction yielded to our most just Rector a sufficient ground on which to
forgive penitent Believers spiritual and eternal Punishments: Dis^ 2. Nay, he
sees not, supposing the Law of Works, how God could forgive our Sins without
the Penal Satisfaction of Christ: Disp. 2. and Determ. 15. It were endless to
produce the Instances demonstrating the Orthodoxness of this great Man as to
the Satisfaction of Christ against Socinianism. And by the way, such as say*
Christ's penal Satisfaction was not necessary to the forgiveness of our Sins,
do a thousand times more favor Socinianism than Mr. Baxter's Notions or Words
can be wrested to.

Perhaps others who follow Episcopius and some other Arminians (when all must
acquit him of Socinianism) may surmise he favors their Notion of Christ's
Death, as if it were a Satisfaction only to the Will of God, and not a full
Satisfaction to the Justice of God. To this I answer, Mr. B. distinguishes
Satisfaction into that which is the fulfilling the Will of a Person, and that
which is the Payment of what was owing by an Equivalent otherwise not due. And
he affirms, that Christ's Satisfaction was not a mere fulfilling the Will of
God (tho it supposes his Consent;) but it was a full Equivalent to what
Punishments we deserved, in that it better answered the Ends of Divine
Government, than the Sinner's Punishment would have done; it more fully
demonstrated the vindictive Justice of God, than if the Sinner had been damned,
and it was a full Satisfaction to governing Justice, and the End of the Law.
Vbi supra Determ. 10, 11, 12, 15.

I thought this account necessary not only for the forementioned End, but also
that our Agreement in opposition to Socinianism might not exclude Mr. B. and
such as approve of his Scheme, which would add strength to that Heresy, and be
injurious to many worthy Persons; nor ought a few words so fully explained be
pressed to brand them with that odious Title, who could more plausibly fix the
same Character on Persons from things plainly asserted in the Socinian sense,
and subserving their Hypothesis: As Christ's Death was not necessary to the
remission of Sin, the Promise of Forgiveness is no Effect of Christ's Death.
Repentance under the Gospel is an Effect of justifying Faith in Christ. The
preaching of Reconciliation to Sinners, is only to publish to them that God is
already reconciled to them, and to call them to be reconciled to God. Many
others might be instanced; but I think it were unjust, even upon such grounds,
to call any of these Socinians.

CHAP. VII.
An Enquiry into what Difference seems to remain concerning the Satisfaction of
Christ, and Justification of a Sinner. And this Difference reduced below any
Cause of Discord.
I Think both sides are acquitted from all dangerous Errors concerning the
Satisfaction of Christ, and Justification of a Sinner; nor can I doubt but the
impartial Reader must apprehend the remaining Difference does not lie in
Opinions about these Doctrines themselves, but in accommodating some words in
opposition to other Errors which either Side have more especially applied their
Minds to confute, unless he should also ascribe it to a Zeal for sundry
received Phrases on the one part, and an apprehension in the other part, that
more accuracy is become needful since those Phrases were received.

1. In both these Doctrines the visible Spring of what Difference remains is a
different Notion of Christ's Suretiship. For by this the word Imputation, as
used in both these Doctrines, is governed, viz. how our Sins were imputed to
Christ when he satisfied, and how Christ's Righteousness is imputed to us when
we are justified; both which depend upon the various Conceptions of the
Suretiship of Christ, and the manner of his representing us, which I will begin
with. One Side thinks him a mediating Surety, and distinguishing both as to the
matter engaged, and Instrument wherein he voluntarily engaged himself, as also
the respect he had to us therein.

1. In the Covenant of Redemption they consider Christ agreeing with his Father
the Terms of Satisfaction to Justice, and Impetration of Life for Sinners, and
obliging himself to assume our Nature, and therein perfectly to obey the Law,
die an accursed Death, with whatever was equivalent to what by the Covenant of
Works our Sins deserved. Here they think Christ did not covenant strictly in
our stead, or as our Proxy, tho he covenanted to die in our stead, even
strictly so: He transacted as a free Interposer tho for our Salvation; we were
no federating Party, tho we were the Persons whose Salvation was his promised
Reward: And therefore we have more reason, since we are become his Members, to
say we intercede in Christ now, than to say that we covenanted in Christ then.
Finally, they account his Act of engaging so peculiar to himself, that his
nonperformance of what he engaged (which was impossible) had not made us more
guilty, tho it would have left us miserable for our own Sins, there being no
other way to redeem us.

2. They find Christ called a Surety in the Gospel Covenant made with fallen
Man, Heb. 7. 22. and no where else. This Covenant supposes the former, yea
supposes Christ's having executed his Engagements by the Covenant of
Redemption to make Satisfaction to Justice (i. e. it was at first accepted as
if executed) for this Covenant with Man does not adjust the terms of
Redemption, but the way of conveying the Effects of that Redemption, and is
called the Testament of our Lord Jesus, whereby he bequeaths the Blessings he
acquired by his atoning Death. In this Covenant Christ is such a Surety, as not
only assures us all will be performed which is promised to us on God's part,
but that undertakes to bring in the Elect, and for the Perseverance of
Believers unto eternal Life, by his exerting that Power and Authority he has
received. But here also they apprehend Christ a distinct federating Party: A
Mediator treating and obliging himself to make the Covenant stand sure, and
effect the Ends it was designed for: but he binds not himself to believe,
repent, or persevere for us; but that we shall repent, believe and persevere;
nor does his Engagement that we should do so, prevent our personal Engagement
by Covenant to do it our selves, tho in his Strength. Now our Act of engaging
is not his engaging Act, but an Effect of it; nor is our repenting his
repenting Act, but the Effect of his engaged Assistance; nor is that Assistance
of his reckoned to be legally our assisting our selves; nor can we say that we
covenanted in Christ to bring in the Elect, or that Believers shall persevere:
By which, with other Reasons, we are induced to think, that in covenanting he
transacts still as Mediator; but he obliging himself to these great
Performances, in order to our doing what we are personally obliged to do, and
our receiving what we are necessitated to receive, if ever we be saved even in
a Gospel-way (tho it supposes him already crucified) he is properly called a
Surety of the New Covenant, yet still connoting him a Mediator.

I need not suggest, that if in this new Covenant Christ's Suretyship will not
infer our being one foederating Party with Christ, and hence that we covenanted
in him; it will far less follow we did so in the Covenant of Redemption, which
treated of things so improper to be once proposed to us as undertaking Parties,
much less as Principals, which to strictly legal Sureties always are supposed.
But of this I have treated in Man made righteous, and in Answer to the Report,
and P. S. to Gospel Truth.

THE OTHER SIDE think Christ, with the Father's consent, came into the Covenant
of Works considered as a Bond, (as unviolated say some, as violated say others)
and therein became one foederating Party with us, (as Elect some say, as
Believers say others) even such a Surety as made the Covenant of Works run
thus: If thou Christ my Son, or you the Elect (or Believers) do obey all the
Law, you shall live: But if they sin, thou or they shall die, or they having
sinned, thou shall die. And they conceiving Christ to be as a strict pecuniary
Surety in this one Bond with us, they esteem him one legal Person and
Representative in such a sense as that we did covenant in him, and are legally
esteemed to do and suffer what he did, and not only secured of Salvation in his
right, and for his sake.

This may be accounted by some a dangerous Difference, and so it were on our
part, if we did not own that Christ's fulfilling of the Law was an Article in
the Covenant of Redemption; and that we are as fully assured of Salvation, if
we accept of Christ, as if we had covenanted in him; and that he has engaged
the Elect should accept of him, tho they did not covenant in him: and that
Believers have as inviolable an Interest in the Benefits of Christ's Death,
both in his right and by the Gospel-promise, as if they were legally esteemed
to suffer what he did suffer. But all this we acknowledge. It would be as
dangerous on our Brethrens part to say we covenanted in Christ, and obeyed in
him, if they did not renounce all proud assuming Boasts, as if they were as
righteous as Christ, or stood on terms with God needing no more Acts of Mercy
than that one of appointing Christ to be Mediator; but after that they are on
terms of strict Justice, and above Forgiveness, etc. The like Danger would
ensue their Position, if they did not acknowledge the necessity of Faith to
Justification, and this Faith to be always accompanied with Repentance and
persevering Holiness. But our Brethren renounce the former, and own the latter.

Matters standing thus, will afford no ground to hereticate each other: We
think a mediating Surety obliged in a distinct Bond to perform the utmost which
our Brethren affirm Christ to have done, does as well secure our State, and
support our Faith as if in the same Bond, and better account for the sapiential
Methods of Divine Government toward Man since the Fall, with God's judicial
Procedures toward Man as under Gospel-offers, and his suspending Christ's
merited Benefits till Men believe, as also his recorded Pleadings with Sinners.
The Brethren think not that Christ did more for our Salvation than we allow,
but that we did more in Christ; and thence judge our Faith more supported, and
the Law of Works more honored in their way. But did each side perceive all the
aforesaid respective Ends alike provided for, and evil Consequences equally
avoided, the Notion in debate could for its own sake admit no Dispute on either
side. And is it not pity to hate each other for mistaking the best Scheme, to
avoid the same Evils which both would prevent, and secure that same Good which
both honestly aim at by their respective Hypotheses?

Forbearance is the juster in this point, because it turns upon a Solution of
this Question, When Adam is called a Figure of Christ, Romans 5. 18. is there not
some disparity in their Representation of Men, as well as in those other things
there instanced? Our Brethren think Christ so fully prefigured by Adam as a
Representative, that we as truly obeyed and suffered in Christ, as we sinned in
Adam. We think the Figure, as to Representation, is to be explained thus: As no
man becomes a Sinner, or dies, whose Depravedness and Death were not procured
and merited by Adam's first Sin; and tho the Pagan Sinners who died, did not
actually sin against a revealed positive Law, as Adam did, yet he was the Root
of Death to them as well as to the Jews under Moses's Law: So no men are
quickened, justified, sanctified, or saved, but Christ is a Root of Life, Grace,
Justification, Holiness, and Glory to them (in all these by his Merits, in some
also by his Spirit and Power.)

But yet we conceive Christ may as well answer Adam's Figure here intended, by
our being quickened, justified, and saved by Christ's Obedience imputed to us,
without our being esteemed to have obeyed and suffered in him, as Christ was
condemned and died for Adam's Sins imputed to him, tho he was not esteemed to
have sinned in Adam. As he was condemned by our Disobedience, so we are
justified by his Obedience, viz. the first by his own Compact with the Father,
the last by that and the Gospel too: He was not condemned by any imputation
that made him by the Law a Sinner, unless he sinned in Adam; neither are we
justified by being legally judged Sufferers or Obeyers in him. It avails not to
say Christ was legally a Sinner, and yet not reputed to sin in Adam, because
Christ was our Root; for tho he was our Root as to Grace, Acceptance, Pardon
and Glory, and whatever else did proceed from him to us, as our Savior;
nevertheless, if he was a Sinner, he could not as to this be our Root, unless
we derive Sin from him; but surely that Denomination must have its Root, not in
him, but in those that were Sinners before him, and whose Sins were imputed to
him: they must denominate that one legal Person into which he came, a sinful
guilty Person; as he does that one obeying, satisfying Person, into which we
are admitted: (which Terms our Brethren espousing, I argue from.)

Finally, we are inclined to set the foresaid Limit to Christ's Representation
by this among many other Reasons: for in that Romans 5. 18. where Adam is called
a Figure, the Death of those Heathens was merited by their own personal
Transgressions as well as by Adam's Disobedience. But the Elect, even when
Believers do not, merit Life by their own personal Obedience; and therefore we
are not represented altogether in the same manner in Christ as in Adam.

2. From the former another point arises referring expressly to the
Satisfaction, viz. in what sense our Sins were imputed to Christ.

One says our Sins were imputed to Christ only as to Guilt or Obligation, to
bear the Punishment which we deserved for them; which Punishments tho he
obliged himself to endure in our stead to reconcile God to us, yet that did not
render him a Sinner in God's account, because that Title results from the
violation of the Precept abstractedly from a respect to the threatening; and
conceiving he was not a Sinner in our stead, tho he suffered in our stead the
punishments due to our sins, they think he was esteemed by God what in truth he
was, viz. the holy, innocent Mediator, punishable by his own consent for the
Sins he came to expiate, and were not expiable without his dying in our stead.

But our Brethren think our Sins were so imputed to Christ, as to give him the
Denomination and judicial acceptance of a Sinner in the esteem of God and the
Law.

Yet lest the difference should appear greater than it is, it is fit I inform
you that our Brethren deny that Christ had any Sin or Defilement in him, or had
any Sin of his own: they were our Sins, only imputed to him, and he was a legal
Sinner by being one political Person with those Sinners whom the Law esteemed
real Sinners, and condemned as such.

On the other hand, we own that (supposing the Covenant of Redemption) he was
as truly obliged, and God the just Rector at as full liberty to punish him for
our Sins, as if he had been reputed a Sinner: Nay Divine Justice required the
inflicting those Punishments on him, if the Sinner was to be redeemed from them
for his sake.

Now, Reader, can this difference justify mutual Censures or Alienation? What,
is a Sinner without Filth, yea or any Fault of his own, above a Sponsor obliged
to bear the Punishments of other men's Sins in the stead of the Offenders? And
they who acknowledge him to be this, what less say they of him than the others
mean, tho scrupulous of that harsher Denomination? At least it would appear
strange to revile each other for a different explication of that Text, 2 Cor.
5. 21. he was made Sin for us. One thinks he was made a Sacrifice for Sin after
the Hebrew Custom: for we find very often the words (...) and (...) to signify a
Sin-Offering as well as Sin, Lev. 7. 1, 2. and cap. 4. 28, 29, 33. And this
very Apostle follows the same Usage, calling an Offering or Sacrifice for Sin
(...), Romans 8. Heb. 10. 5. The other side will have it meant that Christ was
made a Sinner, but a Sinner that is holy, undefiled, and never offended: which
Notion of being made Sin is too diminutive to admit harsh thoughts of such as
entertain it.

An unconcerned Observer will be apt to say, These who call Christ a Sinner are
intent to renounce Socinianism; and they who call him a Sacrifice for Sin, are
as sollicitous to confute Socinianism and Antinomianism too, by withholding an
advantage which both these Errors receive by the use of that Word. But where is
the Christian Charity or Prudence of the condemning Side, when both contend for
what seems the best Defense of the Doctrine of Satisfaction? The other Phrases
accounted for in the 6th Chapter, admit the same Mitigation as this, and upon
the same Grounds.

3. The third point wherein there appears some difference, refers to the
Doctrine of Justification. But before I insist on this, permit me to offer a
few hints.

1. Any Difference in this matter seems to proceed from want of an equal
Consideration of the Covenant of Redemption, which fixed the terms of
Satisfaction, and Impetration of saving Benefits, which Christ alone was
thereby obliged to perform; and the Gospel Covenant, wherein the Method of
giving us a personal Interest in the Blessings impetrated by Christ is
ordained. By the former, all that belongs to Satisfaction and Merit are
confined to Christ, and Pardon, Adoption, and eternal Life put in the hand of
our Savior as his Reward. By the latter, a way becoming our fallen State and
rational Nature, is appointed to apply to us a Right to the purchased
Blessings; nor can the Scripture-Account of God's Calls, Pleadings and judicial
Proceedings be explained without it. I think the not distinguishing these two
Covenants, or fixing the Mind upon either of them, with too little regard to
the other, contribute much to our Debates.

2. With Humility I propose to Consideration, whether such can dangerously err
as to the way of Salvation, and particularly in the Doctrine of Justification,
who do honestly adhere to our foregoing account of Christ's Satisfaction; and
in subordination thereto, assert a Gospel-Law or Covenant, wherein is enacted a
Rule by which the saving Effects of that Satisfaction are given forth: it seems
to me highly improbable. For in the account given of Satisfaction, we ascribe
the whole Impetration of Pardon, Acceptance, and all saving Benefits only to
the Atonement and Merits of Christ, expressly excluding all our own Graces and
good Works from the least place therein: And by our Judgment of the Gospel-Law,
we secure the Method and Rule of the personal Application of these merited
Benefits, and that conformably to the scope of the Bible in its most explained
Parts, as well as in full consistency with an apt Ministry, and a judicial
Sentence against impenitent Infidels, to whom those Benefits are not applied,
notwithstanding Gospel-Offers.

Whereas if we conceived never so fitly and with greatest Soundness concerning
the Satisfaction of Christ, and denied a Gospel-Law (or what is equivalent to
it) we apprehend no small Danger inevitably to ensue; and that in no less a
matter than Men's Salvation: for if this Gospel prove a Rule of Judgment, and
that Christ gives forth Pardon and such merited Benefits thereby, will not our
Ministry be useless and ensnaring to Souls, which does not explain and press
the Gospel- Conditions in order to an Interest in those Benefits? And must not
those secure Sinners be destroyed who submit not to those Conditions, however
confident they be upon Orthodox Apprehensions of what Christ has done to
satisfy Justice, and merit eternal Life? The Boundaries therefore I would
propose to my self are, that Christ be not rivalled in his atoning or meriting
Performances on the one hand, nor rejected in his enacted Rules of dispensing
his purchased and offered Benefits on the other: for he is truly dishonored,
and Souls undone by both. But I would not be mistaken, as if this were
suggested to reflect on the Brethren who are seriously intent upon the first;
for it already appears, and will be more evident that they neglect not the
last, but affirm what to this purpose is equivalent to a Gospel-Law.

3. It is very evident that when Protestants express great Zeal for Christ's
alone Righteousness imputed to us in Justification, against the Popish
Doctrine, the generality of the Learned among them do only exclude every thing
besides that Righteousness of Christ, from being meritorious of Acceptance,
Pardon, Life, and any other Blessing; and from being any Satisfaction or
Compensation for any Sin; affirming that this alone can atone the Anger of God,
for the sake of this alone will he absolve us, and nothing below this is
perfect enough for us to stand in before the Bar of his Justice. And therefore
the Work of Faith it self can be no justifying Righteousness in that sense they
took justifying Righteousness (all which we heartily own;) and hence they often
appropriate the justifying Aptitude and Office of Faith mostly to a Reliance on
that sole meriting Righteousness of Christ, and its receiving Forgiveness,
Acceptance, and a Right to Life, of mere Mercy, for the sake of Christ's alone
Merits: All which is justly and truly spoken, as they accommodate it to the
defense of Christ's Righteousness, as the only thing appointed or fit for the
fore-described Purposes, and in opposition to the Popish Doctrine of Merit.

The Dispute they had with the Popish Church was about this meriting, atoning,
satisfying Righteousness; and you I find them often propose that if the Papists
would grant that this Righteousness was that of Christ alone, the great
Controversy about Justification was at an end: But at the same time most
Protestants, and our Homilies do fully grant, that Repentance was necessary,
and required to Forgiveness, and Faith to Justification, and these Blessings
promised to those Graces, tho they were not led to dispute whether these were
to be called a Righteousness as qualifying the Subject on whom God's justifying
Act terminated: But whether in that Act God regarded any thing as a meriting,
absolving, satisfying Righteousness, any thing as a Satisfaction to Justice,
any thing as an impelling Motive, or valuable Consideration, besides the
Righteousness of Christ. To this their Debates were confined in their day, and
this they were intent to maintain, as all Christians ought to be: Whereas the
reason of debating the Name of that by which the Subject of Justification was
determined in opposition to such whom God did not justify, was not so much
before them as before others, of later years assaulted by such as went into
another Extreme from the Doctrine of Popish Merit.

Nor was this matter otherwise stated by our able Divines who contend against
such Arminians, as affirmed the To credere, to be our justifying Righteousness;
for by Righteousness such Arminians mean the Righteousness which is part of
Payment, and stands in the place of, and answers the same Ends in our
Justification, as perfect Obedience served for to sinless Man; which we have
before stated and renounced. Were there need, abundant Testimonies offer by
which this Head is easily proved, tho I grant some Men may be found to vent
some Inconsistent Expressions. Having premised these things, I reassume the
Difference about Justification that seems to continue, which lies,

1. In the manner of the Imputation of Christ's Righteousness. Both agree it is
imputed, but how, is not so universally assented to: One side thinks the sense
of imputing Christ's Righteousness to be, that God reckons us to have legally
done and suffered what Christ did, and this to the full Satisfaction of Justice
and the Law of Works, and therefore are reputed to have perfectly obeyed the
Precepts of this Law, and fully endured its Curse; and for our legally doing
so, God judges and pronounces us righteous in full Conformity to the Law, and
therefore entitled to Pardon, Adoption, and eternal Life. If you ask, Is this
justifying Sentence the Sentence of the Law of Works, viz. its premiant
Sanction applied to us by God as the righteous Judge judging us by the Law of
Works? They answer, It is the Sentence of the Law of Works, but it is of
Gospel Grace that God allowed Christ to be one Person with us in the Covenant
of Works, whereby we are thus accounted to obey and suffer in him. But others
think that the Righteousness of Christ is imputed in the following manner, viz.
1. They consider that the Father promised to Christ in Reward of his Obedience
and Suffering, that they who believed on him should be pardoned, adopted, dealt
with as righteous Persons who had not sinned, and be eternally saved: Hence the
Lord Jesus has a right to Believers obtaining these things. And as Faith
describes the Persons in this Covenant who shall obtain them, so when we become
Believers, we are accounted and adjudged to be such Believers, and such as are
to obtain those Blessings in Christ's Right.

2. They consider God in Christ for sapiential Ends, making in the Gospel an
Offer of Pardon, Adoption, and eternal Life to poor Sinners if they believe,
and promising these Blessings when they believe, and still as Blessings bought
by Christ's Obedience and Sufferings, and promised to him for Believers; tho
withal used in his Gospel as Motives to enforce his Command of Faith and Calls
to it. These things thus considered, we apprehend that when God in Christ
justifies us, he does not only give us Pardon, Adoption, and Life; but he
adjudgeth and sentenceth us to be the Persons that by the Covenant of
Redemption were to be pardoned, adopted and saved in the right of Christ; and
to whom the Gospel by its Promise gives a personal Right to that Pardon,
Adoption and Life as purchased by Christ: And he esteems and adjudgeth that the
Obedience and Sufferings of Christ in their full virtue, is our pleadable
Security for the enjoyment of them, whereby we have a right to plead his Death
and Merits with God as what procured these for us, as well as God's Fidelity,
who promised them to us in his Gospel.

You see by this account that we rise not so high as to say, we are accounted
to do and suffer what Christ did, and to be absolved immediately by the
Sentence of the Law of Works; nor fall we so low as a mere Participation of the
Effects of Christ's Righteousness, but assert an Imputation of Christ's
Righteousness it self relatively to those Effects. Christ's Right is applied,
and his very Obedience reckoned to us, as what pleads with God for those
Effects, and secures us against all condemning Obstacles and Challenges. The
justifying Sentence is not the Sentence of the Law; God says not, You have
perfectly obeyed, therefore you shall live; you have satisfied the Curse,
therefore you shall not die: Yet the Righteousness which procured our
Salvation, and is our adjudged pleadable Security of enjoying this promised
Salvation, includes an Obedience as perfect as that to which the Law promised
Life if we had not sinned, and Sufferings equivalent to what the Curse
pronounced against us when we sinned. But because we apprehend not where this
Law includes such a Sentence as this, viz. because Christ obeyed, you shall
live tho you obeyed not; and because Christ who sinned not, did suffer for your
Sins, you shall be absolved tho you have sinned; therefore we rather conceive
the justifying Sentence to be the Sentence of the Gospel-Law, yet connoting the
Law of Mediation, and presupposing a Satisfaction made to the Law of Works,
which we conceive to be to this purpose. Thou believing Sinner, I judicially
esteem and pronounce thee to be one that I promised to my Son in the Covenant
of Redemption, to pardon, adopt and glorify in Reward of his perfect Obedience
to my Law, and Satisfaction to my Justice, which I acknowledge he has
performed: As also to be one of those Persons to whom I made a Promise of
Pardon, Adoption and eternal Glory, when I offered these Blessings to all
Sinners who would believe on him. Thou art therefore in the virtue of the
Promise made to Christ, and the Promise made thee, adjudged to receive
Forgiveness, Adoption and Glory, and to have a right to plead the Righteousness
of Christ for thy safe and comfortable Enjoyment of them in the prevailing
Efficacy of his Merits, who alone procured both these Blessings, and that Faith
upon which thy Estate is so much altered. Charity obliges me to think that
some well-meaning Persons who talk of eternal Justification in Christ, intend
no more than this Promise made to Christ in the Covenant of Redemption: and by
not distinguishing between this Promise, that all who should believe on him
should be justified; and that other Article, all the Elect shall believe on him
(which is a distinct thing) they consider not that by the first no Man can be
justified till he be a Believer; and the last Article only assures that the
Elect will be Believers, and by the Consequence of the first that they shall
all be justified, but yet not before they are Believers. Isa. 53. 10, 11. He
shall see his Seed, and by his Knowledge (or Faith in him) he shall justify
many, are not the same thing: The former ascertains the Elect shall believe,
the latter that they shall be justified when they believe; nor could it be
otherwise even when Christ upon the Cross paid that for the sake of which these
Promises were made to him; he must then pursuant to the Compact die, that
Believers might be justified, and the Elect become Believers, otherwise the
Articles of the Covenant of Redemption must be altered, and not direct his
engaged Performances and Rewards; nor can I choose but wonder to see our Divines
in their Dispute against the Papists proving that Justification is a forensic
or judicial Act, and yet find many using terms so improper to such an Act, and
omitting, yea condemning those which are proper.

But to digress no further; you see what is this part of the difference about
Justification; yet remember our Brethren do not say we our selves did
personally obey or suffer, or are reputed so to do, but are reputed to have
done it in Christ, who was one legal Person with us in the account of the Law;
nor do they deny the Pardon of Sin, but own it, whatever others think of the
difficulty of reconciling such things; they do deny also that we can be said to
satisfy in Christ, tho we died in him, or that we merited in him, tho he
merited. Further, there is no difference about the Effects of the imputed
Righteousness of Christ, nor yet about the Righteousness it self as including
both his active and passive Obedience, nor the time of its Imputation, viz.
when we believe.

And shall we condemn each other notwithstanding this Agreement in almost every
thing besides the manner of Imputation, and this is about what God accounts us
to have done in Christ, and not what Christ has done for us? Shall Men rend
each other, because one thinks there can be no Imputation beyond what he
grants; the other suspects it is not an Imputation unless it be in his words;
and yet both grant an Imputation effectually available to all the same real
Purposes, viz. the Honor of Christ and Grace, the Accomplishment of God's
Decree, and the Acceptance and Salvation of Believers, as if they had never
been unrighteous, with ground of believing hopes about it equally strong and
quieting?

2. The other Point undecided is, what Title or Name we should give to that
Faith which is required in the Person on whom God's justifying Act does
terminate: our Brethren scruple our calling it a Qualification, a Condition or
a Righteousness. Others of us think each of these properly ascribed to it, a
Qualification as it distinguishes one Man described by the Word, which
declares who shall be justified, from another who, according to the Rule of the
Word, and the Incongruity of the thing, is not to be justified, unless the
Divine Perfections and the Methods of Grace should be reflected on; for by the
Gospel-Rule he that has not Faith is to abide under Wrath. And how unbecoming
and of ill Consequence would it be to entitle a Man to Glory, and receive him
to favor for Christ's sake while he rejects Christ, and is resolved to tread
under foot his Blood, tho it is from God's Promise and not any Merit of
Congruity that the Accepter of Christ should be justified? They call it a
Condition, not to signify any Merit or Compensation, which they abhor, but to
connote God's Offers of these Blessings to more than do accept of them, as also
a Divine Authority injoyning a Compliance with the Terms on which the Blessing
is offered, tho that be no more than a meet Acceptance. And to show the manner
of God's conferring them upon that Acceptance, they think it may be called a
Gospel-Righteousness, not as meritorious of the Blessing, no, nor a full
Conformity to the Gospel-Precept, but as it is the performed Condition of the
offered Benefit according to the Tenor of the Gospel- Promise, which always
supposes Christ's Satisfaction, and his paying the impetrating Price of all
such offered Blessings.

And they are more induced to account the performed Condition a
Gospel-Righteousness, because the Gospel so very often speaks of a subjective
Righteousness in us, and denominates imperfect Men righteous so expressly with
respect to that Righteousness: they also think that this cannot be from
Obedience to the Law of Works unless it were perfect, which it is not, nor yet
from full Obedience to the Precepts of the Gospel, which enjoin no less as a
Duty than does the Law it self; therefore they can find no ground of that
Denomination, besides a Conformity to what the Gospel-Promise appoints as a
Condition of the Good it entitles a Person to; yet still as a means of giving
us in a way of governing Grace what was promised to Christ for us, as a Reward
of his full Satisfaction to Legal Justice.

But our Brethren think these Terms too high, and prefer calling Faith an
Instrument, as many Protestants do, who also call it a Condition: Some choose to
call it a means, I suppose to note a physical Influence in opposition to what is
moral, and expressive of any Law; both which by the way we apprehend an
ascribing much more to Faith than we dare, because it makes Faith efficacious
from its natural Aptitude and Activity, without a Divine Ordination of it to
that end by any Promise.

The Reason of any Debate concerning these Expressions lies in this: Our
Brethren consider all the Gospel-Duties and Benefits as a mere physical Order
of Blessings decreed by God to the Elect; and so one is given before the other,
according as the Gospel describes that Order: We grant the said Order, and
should insist on no more were not the Benefits offered to more besides the
Elect, and still used as Motives to induce Men to submit to those Duties, and
this by Promises of the Benefits if the Duty be performed, and Threatenings of
withholding the Benefits with additional Misery to be inflicted if they be not
performed, with an account of judicial Proceedings toward Men with respect to
their performance or nonperformance of the said official Terms. But things
being thus, and so very apparently the Indications of governing Methods, and
the Aptitude of our Ministry for Conversion and Perseverance so much depending
upon the affecting of Men's hopes and fears; we are forced to own that the
Gospel is not only a description of the foresaid Order, but that it is a Law of
Grace subordinate to the Covenant of Redemption.

Yet that none may suspect the difference above what it is, I shall recite what
our Brethren grant in their Declaration. They say, p. 13. We are true Owners of
Justification at the instant when we believe. P. 15. It must be said that even
in foro Dei, in God's Court, and according to the Judgment in that open Court
which God has set up in his Word; and according to the Proceedings of his Word
(which is the Rule he professes to judge Men by, and therein he keeps to the
Rule of his Word; as Christ says, I judge no Man, but the Word that I speak
shall judge you, Ioh. 12. 47, 48.) God does judge* and pronounce his Elect
ungodly and unjustified till they believe. All these are the words of Dr.
Goodwin, which they approve of, and note that he in vol. 2. of the Creatures,
lib. 2. cap. 7. p. 51, to 63. proves at large, that Faith in Christ is of
another kind than the Faith required by the Law of Works. They also say, p. 46.
God in the Covenant of Grace freely offers unto Sinners Life and Salvation by
Jesus Christ, requiring of them* Faith in him that they may be saved. Note the
Assembly of Divines in Westminsier, larger Catech. Q. 32. add requiring Faith
as the Condition to interest them in Christ. And less. Cat. to escape the Wrath
and Curse of God due to us for Sin, God requires Faith in Jesus Christ,
Repentance unto Life, etc. And in the Savoy Confession as well as theirs, Cap.
18. S. 2. The true Believer's Certainty of Salvation is not a bare conjectural
and probable Persuasion grounded upon a fallible hope, but an infallible
assurance of Faith founded upon the Divine Truth of the Promises of Salvation,
the inward Evidences of those Graces unto which these Promises are made, etc.
Of all which our Brethren have approved. To add no more, they declare p. 47.
it is an Error, That continued Repentance and Holiness are not in the nature of
the thing, nor by the Constitution of the Gospel, necessary to our being
possessed of eternal Life: And may it not be supposed that nor is put for and?
Also that necessary by Constitution of the Gospel, as distinguished from
necessary in the nature of the thing: Some of them may mean an authoritative or
rectoral Constitution, i. e. this Order is appointed by Christ as our Ruler,
wherein he has enacted this Connection, and requires our Compliance.

These things being put together, must acquit our Brethren from the imputation
of rendering Faith, Repentance, or Holiness, needless or useless to Salvation,
tho they scruple to call it a Gospel-Righteousness; and we hope it may incline
them to a forbearance toward us, who think these Concessions contain for
substance all that we intend by the Terms, Condition, and Gospel-Righteousness,
which we make use of as (...) do more exactly, comprehensively, and to some
purposes more safely express what we conceive to be the true import of these
Passages when connected, and which we approve of.

Yet to put things in a fuller Light, I shall represent the matter as it stands
by the forecited Passages, to all which they declare their Assent p. 63. The
Brethren affirm God in his Covenant offering Life and Salvation to Sinners, and
requiring Faith in him that they may be saved; and this Faith in a Mediator
commanded by the Gospel (and not by the Law of Works, as Dr. Goodwin says)
with Gospel-Promises of an Interest in Christ and his Benefits, and these are
made to this Faith, (as a Condition, says the Assembly of Divines) and this in
such a manner, that the Believer may have an infallible assurance of the
Benefits upon an inward evidence of his having this Faith, as that Grace to
which the Promise was made, wherein the said Benefits were included. And also
that this Gospel includes that Word, which is the Rule of Judgment, by which
Rule God judges that Man (tho Elect) who has not this Faith, to be a
Christless, unpardoned Child of Wrath; and him who has this Faith, to be a
true Owner of Christ and Pardon: Also that Repentance is of such necessity to
all Sinners, that it as well as Faith, is required that they may escape, and
none may expect to be pardoned in a state of Unbelief and Impenitence; yea
continued Repentance and Holiness are necessary to our possession of eternal
Life. And all this to be necessary, not only from the nature of the thing, but
also by the Constitution of the Gospel.

I apprehend this Account is so equivalent to a Gospel-Law of Grace for all its
great purposes, that I shall not be offended at what name they please to give
it; and did not a fear of offending them prevent me, I would prove it to be all
the Law of Grace which we assert; especially if they would allow that when they
say God requires Faith, that Sinners under Offers of Life may be saved, it is
upon his Throne (tho a Throne of Grace) that God in Christ requires it, and
from thence directs his Offers of Salvation to Sinners; and thence sentenceth
them who live under Gospel-Offers by their asserted Rule of Judgment.

However, we have no reason to contend, especially when both agree the Debate
is about the Instrument of Donation, and the Qualification of the Subject to
receive a Gift, and not about any thing that meriteth the Gift freely bestowed
on God's part, and thankfully and humbly received on our part. A low degree of
Charity would make allowances on both hands, when the Difference is so minute.
They seem jealous of the Honor of Free Grace (yet owning Christ's Merits:) we
are for Free Grace in opposition to all Merits besides Christ's, but not
exclusively of all governing Methods in applying the effects of Free Grace.
They grant Faith in Christ is required, that we may be saved; we more expressly
say, it is by a rectoral Authority: they grant it so by the Law of Works; we say
it is by a Gospel positive Law, tho we grant when this positive Law requires
it, we are obliged also by the general Law of Nature to yield Obedience; yet
not by the Law of Works, as specified by Adam's Covenant, which Faith in Christ
was inconsistent with from the essential Nature of that Covenant* Our Brethren
are watchful against any inherent Righteousness of man mingling with Christ's
Righteousness: We, besides avoiding of that, are solicitous lest men come short
of Salvation by the Righteousness of Christ, through a neglect of what he
requires in all those who shall be saved by it; and yet we declare against all
things besides Christ's Righteousness to be any impetrating, satisfying,
atoning, meriting or compensating Righteousness; and as Faith has no share or
place in this Office, so Christ's Righteousness, tho the sole meritorious
Cause, is not that which God by the Gospel requires of Sinners that they may be
saved by the Righteousness of Christ. Faith is that commanded Requisite, and no
more than that; its place is thereto confined: and therefore here is no mingling
of our Righteousness with Christ's, because their Use, Place, and Offices be so
very distinct.

They seem most afraid of Popery and Arminianism; and therefore keep to this
sense of being justified by Faith alone, viz. we are justified only by Christ
believed on, or the Object of Faith only is imputed to us for Righteousness. We
are truly afraid of Popery and Arminianism, but not only of these, but of
Antinomianism too; and therefore are intent to maintain two great Truths
included in that one Sentence, We are justified by Faith, viz.

1. That the Believer is absolved from Guilt, accepted into God's Favor, and
entitled to eternal Life in and for Christ's Righteousness, and neither Faith,
nor any Grace or Act of ours make the least recompense to God, or is the least
Price or Merit of Pardon or Life, or any motive inclining divine Justice to
promise or accept us into his favor, or to treat us as righteous Persons: This
from our heart we own, and know that this is what sound Protestants intended by
it against the Papists.

2. Yet as God promised to Christ in the Covenant of Redemption, all Belivers
should be absolved, etc. so in the the Gospel- Offer of his Grace to Sinners,
he promised to Men, that he would in and for the Righteousness of Christ,
absolve, accept, treat as righteous Persons, and give eternal Life (already
purchased by Christ) to every true Believer; commanding Sinners to believe, and
threatening that if they believed not, they should remain condemned, yea become
subject to sorer Punishments: And that he would judge them by this Gospel- Rule
of Judgment. Whence we are attentive to a second Truth, viz. That God accepts
and accounts Faith a performed Condition of this Gospel Covenant, and upon it
acquits the Sinner from the Charge of damning Infidelity, and adjudgeth the
Believer, qua such, in opposition to Infidels, to be, in Christ's Right, and by
his Gospel- Promise, entitled to a present personal Interest in the foresaid
Absolution, Acceptance, and Gift of eternal Life; yet as procured by Christ's
Righteousness alone, and applied for his sake.

To add no more, our Brethren in the Doctrine of Justification almost confine
their Regards to the Satisfaction of Christ, wherein Christ transacted with the
provoked Justice of God: We, besides that, consider a propitiated God in Christ
applying the effects of his Redemption to Men in a Method of governing Grace,
but without any real difference in the Doctrine of Satisfaction; and withal
sincerely granting the Condition is performed in the Strength of Christ freely
dispensed. Yet upon the whole they provide against carnal Security, and we
against carnal Boasting: They are far from designing to eclipse the Glory of
Christ, as King, Lawgiver, and Judge; and we as far from intending the
diminution of his Glory as a Priest. How unreasonable and unhappy would
perpetuated Contests by where the Grounds pretended are of so little weight?

Thus I have insisted on what seems most like a Difference in the Doctrine of
Satisfaction and Justification. Some weak persons may think there is a great
Controversy, where I see nothing worth our notice, they will say. Some think we
are justified by one Act of Faith, viz. Reliance. Well, but they say justifying
Faith is receiving Christ, etc. as well as a Reliance. Ay, but a Man sees only
with his Eye, tho more is of the Essence of a Man: But I say no Man sees
without that which is of the Essence of his Eye. Another thinks justifying
Faith as such receives Christ only as a Priest; others say, it receives him
also as a King and Prophet: yet the last say the convinced Sinner has an
especial respect to Christ's Priesthood as most agreeable to his present case;
and the former will say its but an hypocritical Faith that receives not Christ
as Prophet and King as well as Priest. Nay, its not the true Christ, the
anointed Messiah, who is received, unless it be as Prophet, King, and Priest,
even Christ Jesus the Lord. Ay, but some say Repentance is an effect of
Justification; but there be very few of our Congregational Brethren of that
mind, and I suppose they mean Works meet for Repentance, and not a change of
the purpose of the heart.

Nay, but several say, Faith alone is the instrument of Justification; others
make Repentance the Condition of Forgiveness. What then? seeing the first grant
there is no justifying Faith without Repentance, and the last grant the
aptitude of Faith to receive and acknowledge Christ (which I suppose they mean
by instrument) is far greater than Repentance. But when both sides consider
Faith as an ordained Condition as well as an Instrument, they will scarce dispute
but that Repentance is a Condition of Pardon as well as Faith, unless they
would agree to join them together by calling Faith a penitent Faith, or
Repentance a believing Repentance; connoting at once a Sinner's purpose to
return to God by Christ the Mediator, and his closing with Christ the Mediator,
that he may return to God by him: tho I think the end is first agreed to,
before the way or means to that end is resolved on or made use of.

Obj. But sure there is a vast difference between those who think we are
justified by Faith only, and those who think we are justified by Works as well
as by Faith.

Answ. 1. Not so very great; when both mean that we are justified neither by
Faith nor Works, as the word justified is commonly taken: for both agree that
we are absolved, accepted as righteous, and entitled to eternal Life only for
Christ's Death and Obedience, as the only meriting, satisfactory and atoning
Righteousness.

2. They who say it is by Faith alone that we apply this Righteousness, do also
grant that Faith is not alone in the person to whom God applies the
Righteousness of Christ; and when they apply it to themselves, Repentance,
Love, etc. are Concomitants with Faith: And they who think we are justified by
Works, as they think its God's applying Christ's Righteousness to us, and not
our applying it to our selves, that is the great justifying Act; so they grant
God justifies us as soon as we repent and believe with the heart, and suspends
not a justified State, till Works meet for Repentance or the Effects of Faith
are produced; yea, should a man die then, he would be certainly saved.

3. They who say its by Faith alone, acknowledge that justifying Faith will
certainly produce good Works; and if good Works and persevering Holiness do not
follow, it was a dead Faith; and because dead, it never was a justifying Faith,
however men flattered themselves: Also that Men's Faith, tho not their Persons,
is justified by their Works: yea the most Judicious own, that if Sin should
reign in Believers, and they apostatize, they would be condemned, (tho the
Promise of Perseverance make that impossible;) and therefore persevering
Holiness and good Works so far continue their justification, as they prevent
what would bring them into Condemnation; and Faith is the Condition of the
Continuation of Justification. See Dr. Owen of Justification, p. 207, 208, 306.

On the other hand, they who say we are justified by Works, do account Works to
be no more but the executing the foederal consenting Act of Faith; and so its
Faith exerting it self by various occasions: and considering that the
Believer's not only forgiving his Enemies, but his persevering in Faith and
Holiness, are plain Conditions in many Promises made thereto; and God
pronounces to Believers, that he will have no pleasure in any Man who drawerh
back, and he shall die if Sin reigns in him; Heb. 10. 38. Romans 8. 13. Mat. 6.
14, 15. They conceive that by Perseverance in Faith and true Holiness, they are
kept from being chargeable with final and total Apostasy, and from
Obnoxiousness to the Evils denounced by the Gospel against Apostates as such,
and are adjudged to be under the Influence and Safeguard of the Promises made
to Believers as persevering: nevertheless they abhor a thought that
Perseverance in Faith and Holiness, or any good Work, is any meriting
Righteousness, or the least Compensation for Sin, or entitling Price of the
least Benefit; nor exclude they the need of multiplied and continued Pardon, or
make they any Blessing due of Debt; but they rely wholly on Christ's Merits for
these things, as the only procuring Cause; tho they are affected and governed
by these places of God's Word, which are directed to Believers as part of his
Rule of Judgment; well knowing that whatever Sentence the said Words pass in
this Life, God executes in part now, and more at Death; but at the great Day it
will be solemnly pronounced, and perfectly executed.

These respective Concessions duly weighed, secure those who say we are
justified by Faith alone from the danger of Licentiousness; and those who say
we are justified by Works also, from detracting from the Honor of Christ's
Righteousness, as having the sole meriting, atoning Virtue and Efficacy in
Justification; and do not only grant Perseverance, but think these conditional
Promises and Comminations are apt and designed means of it, in Subjects capable
of moral Government, and whose Warfare is unaccomplished.

However such different Sentiments may appear to others, I lay so little stress
upon them, that I had not thought it worth my labor to have printed a Sheet
against any man who confessed the necessity of saving Faith (as described in
the Gospel) to Justification, (Repentance and Love still accompanying that
Faith in the Object on whom God's justifying Act does terminate) and the
Uneffectualness of Faith to save any who neglected to perform good Works, and
to persevere in Faith and Holiness. Such as granted but these things I had
never wrote against for scrupling the conditional respect of them to the
Gospel-Law. But Dr. Crisp's Notions I apprehended dangerous; and they so
greatly prevailing, my Brethren thought my confuting them necessary at that
time: whereas I had no purpose when I wrote against Dr. Crisp, to intermeddle
with these other points; but some Congregational Brethren in their Attempts
against my Book, did from a very few occasional Expressions therein, accuse us
of Socinianism, Arminianism, and Popery: and that they might have some pretense
to fix that Charge, they turned the Controversy into these lesser Matters,
whereby I was necessitated either to insist on them (however against my Will)
or else abide under the foresaid severe Imputation, to the prejudice not only
of my own Ministry, but also of most of my Brethren.

CHAP. VIII.
An Attempt to accommodate the difference between such as say Christ's
Righteousness is imputed only as to Effects, and not in se; and those of us who
think it is imputed in se.
FOreseeing an Objection that will be improved against a peaceable Forbearance
toward a number, however small, and that Rigidness may include in that number
whomever the Objectors shall disaffect, it is of use to state it.

Object. Granting the forementioned Points to be reduced below a Cause of
Dissension, yet the Difference cannot be compromised between such as say the
Righteousness of Christ is imputed [in se] for Justification, and them who say
it is not imputed in se, but quoad effectus.

Answ. I think it may be accommodated; at least so far as to cut off just
Pretenses for hereticating and dividing from each other: To which end I will
consider these several Opinions, and then reduce the difference.

First, Among them who say Christ's Righteousness is imputed [in se] there be
two Opinions most noted, and whereto all others are reducible: Of both these I
have already treated so much, that little more is needful.

1. Some think the Elect are judicially, according to the Law of Works,
accounted to have done and suffered in Christ all the Law demanded, both as the
Punishment of Sin, and the Merit of eternal Life.

Such must hold that Christ's Death and Obedience are the formal Righteousness
of the Elect, and the formal Cause of Justification, and that from the first
moment of their personal Subsistence; yea, and (except making Christ to be
their Representative) without any Gift of that Righteousness, it being imputed
not of Grace but of Legal Justice, as Adam's Obedience had been if he had
finally obeyed, and his Offense now is upon his sinning.

There are others who are for this judicial reckoning Sinners to obey and
suffer in Christ; but they hold they are not adjudged to have done this, till
they are Believers; and then they are legally just before God, and as such
entitled to eternal Life. These speak more safely, but less consistently; they
limit the time, from a Conviction that the whole scope of the Gospel must be
contradicted, if Unbelievers do not remain condemned, and Believers only are
justified. But yet it seems hard to apprehend, that God by the Law of Works
accounts the Person of a Believer to have suffered in Christ, and therefore to
be absolved, whom yet he did not account to suffer in Christ while he was an
Unbeliever, and therefore condemned him, and this by that very same Law which
now acquits him. I know, to make this consist, it is offered that the Elect are
not Christ's Seed till they become Believers. But this comes short, for it will
thence follow that Christ in his Death was a strict Representative, who
personated Believers, [qua] Believers, which will induce ill Consequences: And
yet further, it is not true, that the Persons of Believers were seminally in
Christ when he died, as we were in Adam when he sinned; and so no Argument can
be brought from that Instance. I grant that both the Merit and the powerful
Virtue whereby our Persons in time obtain Faith, were in Christ before we were
born; but that makes not Christ the Root of our Persons at that time, but of
that regenerating Virtue whereby we become Believers; and therefore tho as to
this change of our Qualification we may be called Christ's Seed when we
believe, yet it is not such a Seed as it may be said of, we suffered in him, as
we sinned in Adam who was the natural Root of our Persons, and thereupon such a
Representative as his Descendents sinned in. What may be said of Christ's
adopting Merit will have no place here, for these Authors make Adoption to be
an Effect of Justification, and so the Imputation is prior.

2. There be others who are for imputed Righteousness in se, but cannot approve
of the former manner of Imputation, among whom there is some variety in wording
their Conceptions, but they come to one and the same thing, viz. that God
adjudgeth the Believer to be one whose Absolution, Adoption and Glory were
promised to Christ in Reward of his Death and Obedience by the Covenant of
Redemption, (which are promised also to the Believer himself in the
Gospel Covenant) and for his actual Interest and Enjoyment thereof, as also
Acceptance and Treatment as a righteous Person, against all Challenges, God
judicially accounts what Christ has done and suffered to be his pleadable
Security: This we take to be Imputation.

Secondly, By the Opinion of those who say Christ's Righteousness is not
imputed [in se] but only as to Effects; they in Expressions oppose all the
forementioned account, denying that the first Head is true, and that the second
is any Imputation of Christ's Righteousness in se. Nevertheless they grant that
Christ's Righteousness is the meritorious Cause of our Justification by Faith,
and seem to insist mostly upon its Efficacy to that end, as Christ's
Satisfaction was the ground upon which God enacted the Gospel Covenant, wherein
our Faith, tho imperfect, is accounted for Righteousness. Concerning this
Opinion I shall offer a few things.

1. None ought to narrow it, as if the Authors meant that Pardon and eternal
Life are not merited by the Righteousness of Christ; for they affirm, that
these and other Gospel-Blessings are merited by Christ as well as the
Gospel Covenant. Pray say not this; it is not only the Covenant it self, but
those very Blessings which that Covenant conveys, that are the merited Effects
of Christ's Death and Obedience; they were his deserved Rewards which are
dispensed to us upon believing. This I insert, to obviate a Conceit too much
improved by some, so stupid, or worse, that they will not own this Distinction,
and still cry out as if their Opinion confined the Influence of Christ's
Righteousness to the procuring of a Law whereby Men were to purchase Pardon and
Life by their own Faith: Whereas they are so far from this, that they affirm
these Blessings were already accounted purchased, and Authority in Christ to
dispense them before he could enact such a Law.

2. They intend not to exclude Christ's Righteousness from being imputed in any
sense; for they say it is imputed quoad effectus, and therefore should not be
charged to deny all Imputation, or represented to say, we are pardoned and
saved for our own Works, without any Imputation of Christ's Death and Obedience
at all.

3. In all which they affirm concerning Justification, they still suppose
Christ's complete Satisfaction, and are sound therein: None can accuse them to
differ from the Orthodox as to Christ's expiating Sacrifice, or impetration of
eternal Life.

4. I could wish a very worthy Person of this Opinion would review his own
account of Justification, wherein he says, it is that Act whereby God imputes
to every sound Believer his Faith for Righteousness upon the account of
Christ's Satisfaction and Merits, and gives Pardon and Life as the Benefits of
it, i. e. of Justification, which he further explicates, -- Through Christ's
Sacrifice the Defects of this Faith, which is our Righteousness, are pardoned,
and by his Merits that imperfect Duty is accounted or imputed to us for
Righteousness, which it is not in it self. Had I thus stated this Point, I
should ask my self, Do not I set Pardon too remote from Christ's Sacrifice as
the meritorious Cause? And how can Pardon be the Effect of imputing Faith for
Righteousness, (which is Justification,) and yet God cannot impute Faith for
Righteousness unless he first pardon its Defects for the sake of Christ's
Sacrifice? But the cause of my mentioning this Account follows.

5. They do affirm what amounts to a real Imputation of Christ's Righteousness
in se, at least what supposes this Imputation, and infers it to be necessary:
For how by Christ's Merits can a Righteousness in it self imperfect be reckoned
before a just God for our perfect Righteousness, and yet those Merits, for
which it is so reckoned, not be imputed at all for Righteousness to us who have
that Faith? Would Faith be no Righteousness, except the Divine Mind did apply
the Merits of Christ to Faith to make it a Righteousness, upon which I am
accounted righteous by this Faith, and yet the Divine Mind not apply to me that
Righteousness of Christ, without which my Faith had left me still unrighteous?
whereas it seems undeniable, as far as Christ's Righteousness is necessary to
make my personal Faith my Righteousness in God's account, that same very
Righteousness is necessary to make my Person righteous in God's account.
Moreover, they own that God promised to Christ in reward of his meriting
Sufferings and Obedience, that all Believers should be absolved and glorified,
and can they be adjudged to this Absolution and Glory without a judicial
acknowledgment that they are to be absolved and glorified in that Right of
Christ which resulted from that Promise made to him? And can that be without an
Imputation of those Sufferings and Obedience of Christ which are rewarded in
that Right of Christ, and thereby in those Blessings wherein Believers have
this judicially acknowledged interest? They also abhor a thought that our Faith
can be presented to God as any Righteousness in Satisfaction to Justice,
Atonement for our Sin, or the meriting Price of our Salvation: withal they
grant there must be such a Righteousness, and that this was Christ's
Righteousness, and that our Sins are satisfied for, we receive the Atonement,
are reconciled, and obtain the Salvation so purchased. Now is it possible that
things should stand thus, and Christ's Righteousness not be imputed to us? Can
our righteous Judge declare himself satisfied, atoned, and reconciled to us
Sinners for the Righteousness of Christ, and not impute to us that
Righteousness in se, as what he accounts a Plea for us in his account? Can we
enjoy the merited Effects of Christ's Death, and that Death not be reckoned
what secures to us those Effects against the Challenges which the Merits of it
were designed to answer? Finally, Do not these Divines often rest on and plead
with God the Merits of Christ more immediately and directly than a denial of
Imputation will admit? when they rest on Christ's Righteousness, and plead it
with God for Pardon, (tho it is true we could not expect Pardon for it, were not
Pardon promised for the sake thereof.) I think their Minds often act more
directly and fully toward the Righteousness of Christ, than to intend it thus,
viz. I trust in Christ's Merits for Pardon, as that Pardon is the Effect of
that Justification wherein our Faith is accounted through Christ's Satisfaction
a Righteousness according to the Gospel Covenant, which Covenant was procured
by the Merits of Christ's Death.

I. grant there may be use of this progressive manner of arriving at Christ's
Death for support of our Faith as we confine its regards to the
Gospel Covenant, and examine our Interest thereby as a Rule of Judgment. But I
humbly think that when we plead with God for Pardon for the sake of Christ's
Merits, we have a more direct Eye to the Covenant of Redemption, wherein a
Pardon was promised to Christ for Believers in reward of his Death, and which
the Gospel distinctly expresses in this, viz. That Pardon is granted for the
sake of Christ's Death, as what procured it in se, as well as what merited the
Gospel Covenant, which is the Instrument of the Donation of it. And so by
keeping our Eye on the Covenant of Redemption, we plead Christ's Right as more
immediately imputable; and by keeping our Thoughts on the Gospel-Connexion
between Pardon and Christ's Death as the procuring Merit of it, we plead
Christ's very Performances mediately imputed, viz. as our pleadable Security
for our certain obtaining and safe enjoying the said Forgiveness.

6. The Reasons why these venerable Persons are so intent to deny an Imputation
of Christ's Righteousness in se, are, 1. An apprehension that there is no such
Imputation, unless we are accounted by God to have done and suffered what
Christ did, which would unavoidably induce the Antinomian Scheme as most
consistent. But that I deny to be the only import of that Phrase; for when that
Righteousness it self is imputed relatively to the special Effects of it, it is
truly an Imputation of it in se; and whereas they of the other Extreme say,
that its being a pleadable Security for our Pardon, is but an Effect; I answer,
This Righteousness it self being that Security is an Effect of the Compact
between the Father and the Son, and it is not this Effect is imputed, but the
Righteousness it self, as such; and by the same Rule, as they can deny it to be
imputed in se, because it is imputed as a pleadable Security, they may better
say it is being imputed for Justification and for Atonement, etc. would make it
to be no Imputation of it in se, for those are but Effects, and that by virtue
of the same Compact. 2. A Zeal for the Gospel-Righteousness of Faith: But that
is very consistent with the imputed Righteousness of Christ; and tho both meet
in our Justification, yet it is under very distinct Considerations, of which
afterward.

Nor can I forbear again to inform the World that both Extremes arise from too
much disregard of the one or the other Covenants, wherein the Salvation of a
Sinner is adjusted. These Brethren, forgetting the Covenant of Redemption to
which the Gospel Covenant is subordinate, too little mention the Righteousness
of Christ; the other Brethren overlook the Gospel Covenant, and darken a
Gospel-Righteousness of Faith: Whereas a distinct respect to the Rule of
Satisfaction and Impetration on the one hand, and to the Rule of the
Application of impetrated Benefits on the other hand, would put a Period to
their principal Disputes.

From this Representation of the several Sentiments of the Brethren concerned
in the Point before us, a mutual Forbearance seems no unjustifiable thing
between them who differ most; and no considerable Disagreement remains between
the others. 1. They who think the Imputation of Christ's Righteousness in se,
is God's reckoning we did and suffered what Christ did, claim a tender regard
from them who say it is imputed only as to Effects, for they disown the
Antinomian Consequences of it, and abhor all Abuses of it to carnal Boasts and
profane Libertinism, of which before: How unreasonable then were it to
perpetuate Contests about this Point from the ill Consequences of it, when
those Consequences are denied? On the other hand, it appears too like
uncharitable Rigidness for them to condemn as intolerable, such who say
Christ's Righteousness is imputed only as to Effects: For whatever is the sound
of their words, they ascribe nothing to Faith or Works which belongs to
Christ's Righteousness; nor do they detract from the Honor of Christ's
Righteousness any thing which these Brethren ascribe thereto, and are Orthodox
in the Doctrine of Satisfaction against Socinianism and Popery. When they say
Faith is an accepted Righteousness, mean they that it is a Satisfaction either
to atone for Sin, or merit Life? No, they abhor it, and confine both to
Christ's Righteousness entirely: But they do not say Christ's Righteousness is
imputed, that is not true, for they say it is imputed; Ay, but not in se. But
should that be so, would not it be far from a Christian Spirit, to be
implacable for not using a Phrase which the Spirit of God makes no use of, who
surely knew how to express Truth as properly as fallible Men should pretend to?
Yea, but the Scriptures speak what amounts to this Phrase. And so do they in
granting Christ's Righteousness to be the only Atonement and meriting Cause of
Pardon and Life, and Acceptance with God as righteous Persons. But do not they
think we stand before God only in this Righteousness of Faith, and not of
Christ? No; they assure us, that what Righteousness Faith is, it is so by
Christ's Sacrifice and Merits, and it is only a Righteousness as a performed
Condition of the Gospel, describing the Persons who obtain that Salvation which
is the Effect of the Righteousness of Christ; and whose Satisfaction still
interposeth between the Justice of God and a believing Sinner: Neither are they
backward to ascribe to efficacious Grace that Virtue whereby we are inclined
and enabled to believe. Men may expose each other by fiery Debates after such
Concessions, but he who expresses most Heat, discovers the more ungospel
Spirit, if not the weaker Cause, and weaker Judgment.

2. As for such who own Christ's Righteousness in se to be imputed in the
second sense, and those who say it is not imputed in it self but as to Effects;
if they contend, the first must quarrel the other for denying in words what he
grants for substance; and the latter must be warm against the former, because
he will not join with him in offending the weak, and hazarding Truth by
rejecting a Phrase, which, well explained, does properly express what both
intend.

CHAP. IX.
An Abstract of what helped me to avoid some Perplexity concerning
Justification, with some account of our being justified at the Creator and
Redeemer's Bar.
THO I avoid arguing any Controversy in these Sheets, which are designed for
Peace, yet I think it may promote this healing Design, to give a short Abstract
of some Thoughts whereby I arrived to Satisfaction in the Doctrine of
Justification.

. 1. Justification being a forensick Act, our Thoughts ought not to wander
beyond what is necessary to it as a judicial Sentence, nor disregard whatever
belongs to that. Here the principal Considerations are the Judge, the Rule of
Judgment, the Cause and Person to be tried by that Rule, and the Sentence to be
past by the Judge on the Person whose Cause is so tried, which must be no other
than what that Rule of Judgment, duly applied, contains. Hereby what some
call Constitutive Justification, is strictly no other than the Conformity of
the Person to the Rule of Judgment, by which he is acquittable or rewardable,
or both. Passive Justification is no other than the Effect of the judicial
Sentence, or the Person's State considered as absolved, or to be rewarded, or
both, by the Sentence now judicially past upon him, and supposes a Sentence,
and is measured by it.

. 2. A justifying Sentence is past upon every justified Person, and continues
to pass upon him by the Gospel-Promises applied by an Omnipresent, All-seeing,
Infallible, Faithful, Almighty God, Romans 5. 1, 2. The Gospel-offer is the Rule
of Judgment, the Gospel in its respective Promises complied with, is God's
justifying Sentence, and that, conclusive and effectual, tho not so discernable
by us, as if it were solemnly pronounced. 1. Here the transcendent Perfections
of God must raise our Minds above Human Judicatories: he needs no Evidence,
because he knows all things; there needs no Summons to appear, for he is ever
with us; he cannot err in Judgment, for he is inflexibly righteous, and knows
the Rule of Judgment in its extent and allowances. 2. We know not what
Solemnity this Sentence may be pronounced with concerning us, tho out of our
hearing, what in Heaven, where there is Joy for the Conversion of Sinners; what
at the Throne, where Christ is our interceding Advocate, etc. And sometimes God
condescends to make it audible to our own Consciences by the received Testimony
of his Spirit. 3. This Sentence is in part executed upon every Believer as to
what is promised for the present, as well as his Title is adjudged to what is
reserved for the future. The in-dwelling Spirit, Assistances peculiar to
Christ's Members, Answers of Prayer, the Comforts of the Holy Ghost, and
whatever special Actings of Providence belong only to God's adopted Ones, are
the Execution of the justifying Sentence, and suppose such a Sentence past, as
well as that it is a gracious one. 4. God still pronounces a justifying
Sentence according to the variety of his Gospel-Promises, tho that great one
which alters our State passes upon our first believing. As he adjudgeth us to
Pardon and Adoption upon our first acceptance of his Grace, so he adjudgeth us
non-forfeiters upon our abiding in Christ, or persevering acceptance, instanced
as the various Promises describe the Heirs thereof.

. 3. The same justifying Sentence that God past by his Promises applied by
himself in this Life, will be more solemnly and convincingly pronounced at the
Judgment-day, when the full and perfect Execution of the Sentence is to take
place.

1. We shall be as truly judged at that day as if we had not been sentenced, or
the Sentence executed at all in this Life, or at Death. The wise God who knows
the Subserviency hereof to Practical Religion, does often and most expressly
deliver it, and in words as if we were all to be among those found alive when
the Trumpet sounds. 2 Cor. 5. 10. We must all appear before the Iudgment-seat
of Christ, that we may all receive, etc. Romans 14. 10, 12. Every one of us shall
give an account of himself to God, 1 Pet. 4. 5. And what must we give an
account of? Our Words, Mat. 12. 36. Secrets of Hearts, Romans 2. 16. use of
Talents, Mat. 25. Heb. 13. 17. our Works, etc. that is, every thing as gives
Evidence concerning Men's Condition, as it is determinable by the Rule of
Judgment, and principally centers in this, Have they sincerely accepted of the
Salvation offered by the Redeemer?

2. The Rule of Judgment and Sentence at that day will be the same as that by
which every Believer is justified on this side Death; it is no new or other
Sentence, but the same more solemnly declared, unless you will say it includes
the entire extent of the Rule for the time of trial, as well as that which
changed our State.

3. The great design of that solemn Process and open Sentence, is to vindicate
God in Christ as no Respecter of Persons, in the extremely different State of
the Damned and the Saved, both in this Life and Eternity, especially such as
lived under the offers of Salvation; and withal to vindicate his own mysterious
Methods toward the Justified in their past Life, as also them from unjust
Aspersions, 2 Thessalonians. 1. Dan. 12. Mat. 22. and 25. But to instance no more than
the first, he will convince Angels and Men by manifested Instances, that they
whom he justified, and now saves, were Persons justifiable by that Rule of
Judgment whereby the others are condemned; and that the Sentence he pronounces
and executes on each, is the very Sentence which that Rule impartially applied
to their real Cases denounced.

. 4. The Rule of Judgment in its nature and scope is to be principally regarded
in order to right Apprehensions concerning the justifying Sentence: This
determines what is a justifying Righteousness, and what is not; this declares
the nature of the adjudged Title, whether it be of Grace or Debt, dependent or
independent; thereby is evident what we are adjudged to, and whether the
Sentence passes upon several complex Conditions, or one particular one; for we
must be free from whatever the Rule of Judgment denounces condemnable, and not
be without what it confineth its promised Absolution or Benefits to; seeing the
Lord our Judge does sentence us as this revealed Rule takes hold of us.

. 5. I find nothing plainer, than that on the one hand we are made righteous by
Christ's Obedience, Romans 5. 19. 2 Cor. 5. 21. and accepted in the Beloved, Ephesians.
1. 6, 7. and washed from our Sins in his Blood, Rev. 1. 5. and we receive the
Atonement, Romans 5. 11. And on the other hand, that Faith is imputed for
Righteousness, Romans 4. 9, 11, 22, 24. and we are justified by Faith, Romans 5. 1.
chap. 3. 30. and by our words, Mat. 11. 37. and by our Works, Iam. 2. 24. and
Men are called righteous with respect to their Graces and Actings short of
Perfection; and that Christ's judicial Proceedings are upon Men's Temper and
Behavior, Mat. 22. 25. chap. 10. 32. and Promises of Pardon and Life are made
still to Repentance, Faith, and Perseverance; and the Gospel denounces Death
against impenitent Ones, Luke 13. 3. Infidels, Job. 3. 36. Disobedient, Romans 2.
8. Barren, Heb. 6. 8. Apostates, Heb. 10. 38. and Workers of Iniquity, Luke 13.
27. Nor can it be overlooked that Perfection is not intended in what the
Gospel-Promise is made to, nor is the Gospel threatening of Damnation levelled
against any Offenses consistent with Sincerity. Hence I conclude, that when God
justifies a Sinner, the Rule by which he judges requires a judicial regard to
inherent Faith, etc.

. 6. By one Rule of Judgment the same justifying Sentence, in all respects,
could not be pronounced upon Christ's Righteousness, and upon that of a
believing Sinner, unless that one Rule did either,

1. Originally promise Life to perfect Legal Obedience, and also to that which
was not a perfect Obedience to the Law: But if I suppose this, I must admit
that the Law did not denounce Death for the least Sin; for to condemn to Death
for the least Sin, and to promise Life to imperfect Obedience, consist not:
yea, I must then consider God to enact that Rule of Judgment as in his first
relation to innocent Man, viz. as Creator, governing by virtue of his absolute
Propriety in Man as his Creature. But if God be considered only in that
relation, it was inconsistent with his Perfections to enact a Rule of Judgment
which promised Life to any thing short of perfect Obedience to the Law he
delivered, and which Man was originally capable to obey. And moreover, we find
in the Rule of Judgment, by which he now justifies Men, a direct respect to
many things which that first Law was inconsistent with, as the Death of a
Redeemer for our Sin. Faith in this Redeemer, Pardon of Sin, and Absolution
from the Curse which condemned us as Sinners, etc.

2. Or unless that one Rule of Judgment were the Gospel-Promise of the
Redeemer, viz. He that believes shall be saved. Hereby indeed the justifying
Sentence would directly pass upon Man as a Believer, and adjudg him to a right
in whatever the Gospel promised to Believers, qua such. And considering the
chief design of the Gospel is to induce fallen Sinners to believe upon a
supposition and assurance given that Satisfaction is already made by our
Redeemer, and not now to be made or adjusted: Many are apt to confine their
thoughts of Justification to this as the alone Rule of Judgment, and the
account of the final Judgment generally states it in this manner; nor can I
deny but this is in some respects a safe as well as easy method.

But I cannot agree that the justifying Sentence is by this Rule so
abstractedly taken: For, 1. This would too much confine the Influence of
Christ's Merits to the mere procuring of the Gospel-Promise; whereas we find it
more immediately and fully connected with Pardon, and all other saving
Benefits. 2. We must be made righteous by Christ's Obedience in some way less
remote than this. 3. The Satisfaction of Christ is not hereby sufficiently
acknowledged nor applied in our Justification. Many other Reasons might be
given why I am convinced, that when God ustifies a believing Sinner, the
Sentence respects him under some further judicial Consideration than merely a
Believer; and consequently the Rule of Judgment extensively taken, required
somewhat more to constitute him a justifiable Person.

. 7. I therefore take the Rule of Judgment to be the Gospel-Law in a
subordinated Connection with the Law of Mediation, wherein the Honor of our
Creator governing us by the Law of Works is provided for, and the Ends of that
Law fulfilled; and so the Sentence will respect the imputed Righteousness of
Christ, and the Righteousness of Faith too; the first as satisfactory and
meritorious with our injured creating Lawgiver, the latter as the performed
Condition of the Redeemer's Grant of the blessed Effects of Christ's
Satisfaction and Merits; and whereby this Man who believes is discriminated
from such who rejected the Offer of Salvation. In the first, Justice is
satisfied that a Rebel should be absolved and glorified; in the last, the Rule
enacted by governing Grace is answered by the Believer; so that the Judge is no
more a Respecter of Persons in applying these Benefits as Redeemer, than he was
regardless of governing Justice in the Condition upon which they were procured
by our Savior.

. 8. The Rule of Judgment then must be this: That the Believer (tho a Sinner)
whose Absolution, Pardon, Acceptance as righteous, and Salvation were promised
to Christ by the governing Creator in reward of his Obedience and Sufferings,
and promised to himself for the sake of Christ in the Gospel upon his believing
with that Faith which it appoints, is to be absolved, pardoned, accepted as
righteous, and saved.

From this Rule of Judgment is easily inferred that justifying Sentence on
which our State is changed, viz. Thou art that true Believer whose Absolution,
Pardon, Acceptance as righteous, and Salvation were promised to Christ in the
Covenant of Redemption, and to thy self personally in my Gospel; and therefore
thou art adjudged absolved, pardoned, accepted, and an Heir of Glory by virtue
of that Promise made to Christ, and the Gospel-Promise made to thy self, and
have a Title to plead Christ's perfect Obedience and Sufferings for thy certain
enjoyment thereof, which will also be continually pleaded by Christ thy
Advocate.

In like manner we see Constitutive Justification is our being made such
Believers, through the Influence of the Spirit of Christ, as fall under the
foresaid Promise made to Christ in the Covenant of Redemption, and the
Gospel-Promise made to our selves, and so are conformed to the Rule of
Judgment, but yet considered as not judicially sentenced according to it.
Again, Passive Justification is no other than our Persons and State considered
as affected by that Sentence as already past upon us, viz. absolved, pardoned,
accepted as righteous, and entitled to Glory. Finally, Executive Justification
is no other than God's dealing with us as Persons so absolved, pardoned,
accepted and entitled to Glory, and his performing whatever is included in the
justifying Sentence, yet in the way, time, manner, and limits which the Gospel
declares.

. 9. The Consideration of the Rule of Judgment as before explained, led me to
affirm that the Justification of a believing Sinner is equivalent to a twofold
Justification, the one at our Creator's Bar, the other at the Redeemer's; the
first by the imputed Righteousness of Christ, the other by that of Faith, which
I have insisted on in PS. to Gospel Truth, p. 276, 279, etc. 3d Edit. And being
desirous to prevent Mistakes in this Point, which I think is probable to
prevent furious Debates concerning the Doctrine of Justification, I Will give a
few hints of fuller Thoughts about it, premising only that I hoped none would
think that I said there is a twofold Justification, for I make the Sentence to
be but one, tho that includes what is equivalent to a twofold Justification: Nor
yet that I denied Christ as of one Essence with the Father to be Creator, or
said there be two actually existing Bars. But these are things too low for many
words.

1. I consider God at our first Formation as our Creator, governing Men by a
Law suited to their rational, innocent and perfect Natures, by which Law he
promised Life to sinless Obedience, and threatened Death for all Disobedience;
God considered in this relation cannot be apprehended to enact a Gospel-Law,
with a Promise of Pardon and Life to the imperfect, tho sincere, Faith of
Sinners.

2. I consider this Creator offended by Man's Violation of his holy Law: Under
this Notion, 1. He condemns the Sinner unless Satisfaction be made, and
excludes him from Life unless purchased by one capable of meriting it. 2. He
would reject Faith and every Work of a Sinner as satisfactory or meritorious,
this Offender being incapable to satisfy for the least Fault, or merit the
least Blessing.

3. I consider our Mediator transacting with our offended creating Lawgiver in
the Covenant of Redemption; wherein, 1. Our governing Creator demands of
Christ, if he would save Sinners, that in their Nature he must obey the
violated Law, and endure Death, and what was equivalent to its threatened
Punishment in their stead. 2. He declares that this Obedience, and those
Sufferings of this Mediator, considering the Dignity of his Person, should be
accepted for Satisfaction for Sin and the Merit of eternal Life, and of
whatever subserved Sinners obtaining thereof. 3. He promises Christ as a
Reward of his Obedience and Sufferings, that whoever of fallen Men should
believe on him, should be absolved, pardoned, accepted as righteous, and
eternally glorified for the sake of what he was to do and suffer; and that a
certain number should believe on him, and so be absolved, etc. to his Glory,
and he have all Power, Authority and Judgment committed to him. 4. Christ our
Mediator covenanteth to do and suffer what was proposed, and accepts of the
said Rewards. 5. In due time Christ porforms his Undertaking, and becomes
entitled to the said Rewards, and invested in a right thereto, with respect to
which he is said to be justified. 6. His Undertaking is allowed to operate as
if performed, at least from Adam's Fall; and thereby his Kingdom, and the
saving Effects of his Obedience and Death antecede his obeying and dying. 7.
Whatever concerned the Sinner's Salvation, was to be founded upon the
satisfactory and meritorious Death and Obedience of Christ our Mediator. 8. Man
is to be considered under the first Head as an innocent Subject in a state of
Trial, according to the Law of Works; and under the second Head as a Sinner
obnoxious to the Curse of the Law, past Relief by his own Merit, and yet upon
Christ's Satisfaction (pursuant to the Covenant of Redemption in this third
Head) as savable notwithstanding the Curse of the Law.

4. As an Effect of this Transaction, I do not consider only Christ our
Mediator under the Notion of a Redeemer, as all will grant him to be in an
especial manner, because he alone paid the redeeming Price: But I consider also
the Creator to be Redeemer as he gave his Son to be a Savior, accepted the
Satisfaction made by him, promised to him the foresaid Rewards; and so far
executed them as to invest him in his Office of an accepted authorized
Mediator, admitting his Kingdom to commence (as well as his Death to operate to
saving Effects) before he actually died, etc. Upon these and the like accounts
I apprehend the blessed God (considered essentially, tho the Father eminently
bears the Title of Creator, and sustains the Dignity of the Divine Essence and
Government in proposing the Terms, and receiving Satisfaction) to stand toward
us in the relation of a Redeemer, who has received Satisfaction, and
transacting with us in and by our Mediator, in whom he is well pleased.

Our Creator being considered thus as God in Christ, who is satisfied as to the
Violations of his Law, the Honor of his Government vindicated, and the Ends of
it secured, tho Pardon and Life be granted to Sinners, it will follow, that in
a consistency with rectoral Justice, he can so far suspend the Curse of the Law
toward sinful Man, and exert his Mercy, as, 1. To be willing to admit to Peace
and Favor all whom Christ shall present to him. 2. To be ready to forgive our
Offenses. 3. To make Offers of Peace, Pardon and Salvation to lost Sinners,
begging them to be reconciled, etc. 4. To return his expelled forfeited Spirit
to strive with and work on dead Sinners in order to their acceptance of this
offered Salvation. 5. To be long-suffering, and waiting to be gracious in the
use of fit Methods and Means to conquer their Resistance. These and the like
immediately ensue upon Christ's Satisfaction; and if Men intend but Instances
of this kind when they say God was reconciled to us by the Death of Christ
before Conversion, we should allow it: yet entreating them to note, that the
Curse suspended thus far, and the Curse removed by an actual Interest in saving
Blessings, are very distinct, as be Forgiveness with God, and Forgiveness
bestowed on us; and yet I fear many do detract from this Benefit, viz. that
there is Forgiveness with God for guilty Sinners, and Salvation for undone
Apostates: this is in it self a higher thing than that this or that Man is
Partaker of it, tho our personal Advantage consists in the latter.

5. I consider God in Christ Redeemer, making his offers of Salvation to
Sinners, and stating the Conditions upon which he will give the merited Pardon
and eternal Life personally to them, commanding their acceptance, with a
Promise of applying Christ's Satisfaction in those Effects upon their
Compliance, and denouncing their abiding under Guilt and Misery, with sorer
Punishments if they finally refuse. This is by the Gospel: To explicate which,
Note, 1. Compliance is injoined by a governing Authority, tho with a display of
Grace; it supposes Christ's Sacerdotal Offering over, and is an Instrument of
Government resulting from a Dominion acquired as Redeemer; and therefore may
well be called a Law, yea, and that by which he will judge us. 2. The Historical
Account of Christ's Offices, Fullness, Love, Death, and of Man's Misery; the
Displays of Covenant- Benefits present and eternal, Revelations of Divine
Truths and Mysteries, Gospel-Institutions, and Directions whence to derive
Grace, etc. are all to subserve our due acceptance of this Offer. 3. If Christ
had not proclaimed Pardon and Life to Sinners, we had not known that these were
to be obtained by any of us. If he had not declared that he gave Pardon and
Life to such as have Faith, and none else, we had not been certain whether it
were the Believer or Unbeliever were pardoned: If he had not told us he gave
Faith and then Pardon, there had been no known Order of these Gifts: If by his
Gospel God had not offered Pardon to all if they would accept it, commanding
their acceptance in order to it, promising it upon their acceptance, and
determining to judge Men as they accepted or refused, then there had been only
an order in giving Faith and then Pardon, but Acceptance had been no Condition
nor Righteousness, nor had Man been justifiable by it, or condemnable to the
want of Pardon for rejecting it. 4. Acceptance of offered Salvation, tho a
Righteousness supposes a meritng Righteousness of Christ, and can be no higher
a Righteousness than a performed Condition of a Law of Grace, by which Benefits
already impetrated are given: Which Law differs not from a Deed of Gift, but
that the Donor expresses a governing Authority in the method of applying these
Blessings, and resolves to judge them to whom that Offer is made, by their
acceptance or nonacceptance. 5. Our Right adjudged upon our acceptance is a
Right of Grace and Mercy, and tho infallible, it can infer no Claim of Debt. 6.
This Acceptance is described by the Gospel, and nothing is an Acceptance upon
which we shall receive the offered Blessings, if it be not in its Principle,
Nature, Extent, Operativeness and Duration, such an Acceptance as the Gospel
does promise its saving Benefits to. 6. Tho this Acceptance merit nothing, yet
Christ's Righteousness being ordained to merit Salvation for such as shall
accept of it, and this Acceptance being the Gospel-ordained Condition of our
personal Interest in that merited Salvation, we can be saved without neither of
them. 7. To prevent Mistakes I add, the Elect shall infallibly be brought
savingly to accept of this Salvation.

6. I consider God applying Pardon, Peace, Adoption, etc. to Men that have
accepted of this Salvation according to the Gospel-offer. 1. He acts herein as
a Judge. 2. The Relations he stands in are as Creator and Redeemer; the first
cease not, tho the other is superadded. 3. The Cause is adjusted by the Rule
of Judgment described in. 8. and this Cause partly refers to what satisfied the
offended Creator for this Sinner's Fault, and merited Salvation for this
forfeiting Rebel. Here Christ's Righteousness is the only justifying
Righteousness, Faith has no place in God's regard, who as Creator judges in
this matter. The Cause is partly also: Is this a true Accepter of Salvation,
for whom Pardon, Peace and Glory were promised in the Covenant of Redemption to
Christ in reward of his satisfying, meriting Death and Obedience, and to whom
these were promised in the Gospel? Here Acceptance is a Righteousness, the
want whereof Christ's Righteousness is not appointed to supply; and the
adjudging a Man a Believer, entitled to Pardon, Peace and Glory, upon the
Satisfaction of Christ, I call Justification active, or the Judg's justifying
Sentence.

7. I call it a Justification at the Creator's and Redeemer'S Bar; at the
Creator's Bar, as far as the Sentence refers to what vindicated the Honor of
God's violated Law, secured his governing Authority as our Maker, and merited
the Blessings, before which there was no Pardon, Peace, or Glory for the
Sinner, tho a Believer, none to be offered, none to be had by accepting. Nor is
it a needless thing that the justifying Sentence have an express regard to what
that refers to, viz. Christ's Righteousness: for as it was the alone Condition
of Christ's Impetration of Pardon, Peace and Life for Sinners, so when these
are to be adjudged to the Sinner, the Honor of the Creator, of the violated
Law, and of Christ's Satisfaction, is wisely provided for by an express
acknowledgment of, and reference to that Righteousness. I call it a
Justification at the Redeemer's Bar, as far as the Sentence refers to our
Acceptance, or Faith as a Righteousness; for the unsatisfied Creator, who
governs and judges by the Law of Works, could make no Offers of Pardon and
Glory to Sinners, if they would accept, nor admit Faith to be a Righteousness;
and yet considered as a Redeemer (as God was, when he had received
Satisfaction) he could not again demand a satisfying, meriting Righteousness to
acquit the Believer now upon; no nor, unless under the Notion of a Redeemer,
require Faith as a proper Condition of Pardon, etc. because in the Covenant of
Redemption it was promised to Christ for Sinners as merely described by Faith.
But God in Christ as Redeemer could make the Gospel-offer of Pardon upon
condition of Acceptance, injoyning that acceptance, and promising thereto the
Pardon impetrated by Christ; and so that Acceptance is referred to in the
justifying Sentence of God in Christ as Redeemer, as what discriminates one Man
who obtains the Pardon, according to the Gospel-Promise, from him who is
judicially debarred of it.

8. I think they who are altogether for Faith as the only imputed Righteousness
in Justification, do too much contract the justifying Sentence by excluding
that distinct Respect which ought to be to the Satisfaction and meriting
Obedience of Christ, whereby God as our governing Creator can admit the
Absolution of a Sinner. And they who are altogether for the Righteousness of
Christ as only imputed in Justification, do also too much limit the justifying
Sentence, by excluding the Gospel-Righteousness of Faith which the Redeemer
regards, and by which he judicially discriminates who among them, to whom
Salvation was offered, shall obtain it, and who of them shall not obtain it.
May these Hints contribute to an Agreement between these worthy Persons, at
least incline all to Christian Forbearance, I shall reckon it worth all my
Labor and Sufferings. O that the God of Peace would give us Peace by any just
means!

FINIS.

