monogram of 'W' (William) superimposed on 'M' (Mary) RR
DIEV ET MON DROIT HONI SOIT QUI MAL Y PENSE royal blazon or coat of arms
By the King and Queen, A PROCLAMATION For the Preventing of the Stealth and
Imbezilment of Their Majesty's Stores of War.
MARIE R.

WHereas not withstanding diverse good Laws Made and Enacted for the Preventing
of the Stealth and Imbezilment of Their Majesty's Stores of War, and for the
Punishing the same, Their Majesty's do find by Experience, that whether by the
Negligence or Unfaithfulness of Their Officers, or through the Difficulty of
the Work, those Frauds, Stealths and Imbezilments are not prevented (as they
ought) but are daily practiced, particularly in Stores relating to the Navy,
not only to the great Prejudice of Their Majesty's Service, but likewise to the
Hindrance and Discouragement of such Tradesmen, whose Profession and Livelihood
it is to make and sell such Stores and Commodities to Merchants Ships, who
finding a cheaper way for Furnishing their Ships, by Buying the Stores
Purloyned and Imbeziled, as aforesaid, decline the lawful Sellers of such like
Provisions: For the Preventing these and the like Abuses for the future, Their
Majesty's are pleased hereby strictly to Charge and Command all their Officers
(and particularly those of the Customs lately Authorized thereunto) not only to
endeavor the Discovery of the said Abuses, as aforesaid, but also strictly to
Prosecute the Persons offending, according to the Rigor of the Laws in such
Cases provided. And for the more easy discovery of the same, and to the end
the Receiver of such Stolen Goods may not pretend Ignorance, Their Majesty's
have thought fit hereby to Publish and Declare the Marks of the Stores
belonging to Their Navy; Namely, That all the Cordage of Three Inches and
upwards is wrought with a White Thread laid the contrary way; and the smaller
Cordage ( viz. from Three Inches downwards) with a Twyne in lieu of a White
Thread laid the contrary way, as aforesaid; That all the Canvas wrought and
unwrought is marked with a Blue Streak in the middle; And all other Stores with
the Broad Arrow, by Stamp, Brand or otherwise. And Their Majesty's do hereby
forbid all Artificers to make any Stores or Provisions so marked (except for
the Use of Their Majesty's Navy or Ordnance) and do likewise hereby Command all
Their Majesty's Loving Subjects, That they forbear to buy or receive from any
Person whatsoever any Stores marked, as aforesaid, (without particular Order
and Leave from the Principal Officers and Commissioners of Their Majesty's
Navy) upon Pain of being proceeded against as Receivers of Stolen Goods, and as
Imbezilers of Their Majesty's Stores. And for the better Discovery of such as
shall (notwithstanding this Their Majesty's Proclamation) Imbezil any of Their
Stores, as aforesaid, Their Majesty's are pleased to Declare, That any Person
who shall discover to the Principal Officers and Commissioners of Their
Majesty's Navy, or any of them, any Anchors, Cables, Cordage, Sails, Canvas,
Iron-work, or other Stores, Imbeziled or Purloyned out of Their Majesty's
Yards, Ships or Stores, shall receive as a Reward and Encouragement for such
his Discovery, upon the Delivery thereof into any of Their Majesty's Stores,
one full Third Part of the Value of such Stores so discoverd. Provided that he
likewise discover either the Imbeziler or Purloyner of them, or at least the
Receiver of the same.

Given at Our Court at Whitehall, this Tenth Day of August, 1693. In the Fifth
Year of Our Reign.
London, Printed by Charles Bill, and the Executrix of Thomas Newcomb deceased,
Printers to the King and Queens most Excellent Majesty's. 1693.


