WM RR
HONI SOIT QVI MAL Y PENSE DIEV ET MON DROIT royal blazon or coat of arms of
England By the King and Queen, A PROCLAMATION For Publishing the several Marks
or Stamps to be used for Velum, Parchment and Paper, pursuant to a late Act of
Parliament for Charging certain Duties thereupon.
MARIER.
WHereas in and by an Act made in the last Session of this present Parliament
(Entitled, An Act for Granting to Their Majesty's several Duties upon Velum,
Parchment and Paper for Four years, toward Carrying on the War against France)
it is Enacted, That from and after the Eight and twentieth day of June in the
Year of our Lord, One thousand six hundred ninety four, there shall be,
throughout the Kingdom of England, Dominion of Wales, and Town of Berwick upon
Tweed, Raised, Collected and Paid unto Their Majesty's, during the Term of Four
years, for the several and respective things therein mentioned, which shall be
Written or Engrossed during the Term aforesaid, the several and respective
Rates, Impositions, or Duties therein expressed; And that Commissioners, to be
appointed by Their Majesty's, should, within the time by the said Act limited,
provide six several Marks or Stamps differing from each other, for the several
and respective Duties thereby Granted; And that the said several Marks and
Stamps should be published by Proclamation, in such manner as by the said Act
(amongst other things therein contained, relation being thereunto had) may more
fully appear: Their Majesty's are graciously pleased by this Their Royal
Proclamation under the Great Seal of England, to Publish and give Notice, and
do hereby Publish and give Notice to all persons who are or may be concerned,
That Their Majesty's Commissioners, namely, Christopher Montague, John Stanley,
Edward Lloyd, Henry Cornish, Henry Harris, Jacob Vander Esch, and James
Isaacson, Esquires, who are appointed under the Great Seal of England, for
Marking and Stamping of Velum, Parchment and Paper, and for the Execution of
several other Matters and Things in the said Act contained, and who keep their
Head Office in Lincoln's Inn, Have, pursuant to the Direction of the said Act of
Parliament, provided Six several Marks or Stamps, to Stamp, or Impress all
Velum, Parchment and Paper, upon which any the Records, Deeds, Instruments,
Writings, Copies, or other things by the said Act charged, may be Engrossed or
Written, That is to say,

One Mark or Stamp (the Impression whereof is here made in the Margin) for all
Velum, Parchment and Paper by the said Act charged with the Payment of Forty
Shillings, Namely, For every Skin or piece of Velum or Parchment, on which any
Grants or Letters Patents under the Great Seal of England, or the Seal of the
Duchy or County Palatine of Lancaster, or of any Honor, Dignity, Promotion,
Franchise, Liberty or Privilege to any Person or Persons, Bodies Politic or
Corporate, or Exemplifications of the same, shall be Engrossed or Written. For
every Skin or piece of Velum, Parchment or Sheet of Paper, on which any Pardon
of or for any Crime, or Offense, or of any Sum of Money or Forfeiture
whatsoever, or on which any Warrant of Reprieve or Relaxation from any Fines,
Corporal Punishments, or other Forfeiture shall be Engrossed or Written. For
every Skin of Velum or Parchment or Sheet of Paper upon which any Grant from
Their Majesty's of any Sum of Money exceeding One hundred pounds, which shall
pass the Great Seal, or Privy Seal (not directed to the Great Seal) shall be
Engrossed or Written. For every Skin of Velum or Parchment or for every Sheet
of Paper upon which any Grant of any Office or Employment, which shall be above
the value of Fifty pounds per Annum shall be Written or Engrossed. For every
Skin of Velum or Parchment on which any Grant of Lands in Fee, Lease for Years,
or other Grant of Profit not therein particularly charged, that shall pass the
Great Seal of England, the Seal of the Exchequer, the Seal of the Duchy or
County Palatine of Lancaster, or the Privy Seal (not directed to the Great
Seal) shall be Engrossed or Written. For every Skin or piece of Velum or
Parchment or Sheet of Paper upon which any Presentation or Donation which shall
pass the great Seal of England, or upon which any Collation to be made by any
Archbishop or other Bishop, or any Presentation or Donation to be made by any
Patron whatsoever, of or to any Benefice, Dignity or Spiritual or
Ecclesiastical Promotion whatsoever shall be Engrossed or Written, (provided
such Benefice, Dignity or Promotion be of the yearly value of Ten pounds or
above in the Kings Books.) For ^^^^y Skin or piece of Velum or Parchment or
Sheet or piece of Paper upon which any Register, Entry, Testimonial or
Certificate of any Degree taken in either of the Two Vni^^^ities, or Four Inns
of Court shall be Engrossed or Written. For every Skin or piece of Velum or
Parchment or Sheet of Paper on which any Dispensation to hold Two
Ecclesiastical Dignities or Benefices, or both a Dignity and a Benefice, or any
other Dispensation or Faculty from the Lord Archbishop of Canterbury, or the
Master of the Faculties for the time being, shall be Engrossed or Written. For
every Skin or piece of Velum or Parchment, Sheet or piece of Paper, upon which
any Admittance of any Fellow of the College of Physicians, or of any Attorney,
Clerk, Advocate, Proctor, Notary, or other Officer or Officers in any Court
whatsoever shall be Engrossed or Written. And for every Skin or piece of Velum
or Parchment or Sheet of Paper, upon which any Appeal from the Court of
Admiralty, Arches, or the Prerogative Courts of Canterbury or York shall be
Engrossed or Written.

One other Mark or Stamp (the Impression whereof is here made in the Margin)
for all Velum, Parchment and Paper by the said Act charged with the Payment of
Five shillings, Namely, For every Skin or piece of Velum or Parchment, or sheet
of Paper upon which any Conveyance, Surrender of Grants or Offices, Release or
other Deed whatsoever which shall be Enrolled of Record in any of the Courts at
Westminster, or in any other Court of Record whatsoever, or by any Custos
Rotulorum, or Clerk of the Peace, shall be Engrossed or Written. For every
piece of Velum or Parchment upon which any Writ of Covenant for Levying of
Fines shall be Engrossed or Written. For every piece of Velum or Parchment upon
which any Writ of Entry for suffering a Common Recovery shall be Engrossed or
Written. For every Skin of Velum or Parchment upon which any Exemplification of
what nature soever that shall pass the Seal of any Court whatsoever shall be
Engrossed or Written. For every Skin or piece of Velum or Parchment or sheet of
Paper upon which any Institution or License that shall pass the Seal of any
Arch Bishop or Bishop, Chancellor or other Ordinary or any Ecclesiastical Court
whatsoever shall be Engrossed or Written. For every Skin or piece of Velum or
Parchment or sheet of Paper upon which any Writ of Error, Certiorari, Habeas
Corpus or Appeal (except to the Delegates) shall be Engrossed or Written. For
every Skin or piece of Velum or Parchment or sheet of Paper upon which any
Significavit pro Corporis deliberatione shall be Engrossed or Written. For
every Skin or piece of Velum or Parchment or sheet of Paper upon which any
Sentence that shall be Given in the Court of the Lord high Admiral of England
or the Cinque Ports, Exercising Admiralty Jurisdiction, or upon any Attachment
that shall be made out of any of the said Courts of Admiralty, or any
Relaxation of any such Attachment shall be Engrossed or Written. For every Skin
or piece of Velum or Parchment or sheet or piece of Paper upon which any
License for, or Certificate of Marriage or any Letters of Mart shall be
Engrossed or Written. For every Skin or piece of Velum or Parchment, sheet or
piece of Paper upon which any Probate of a Will or Letters of Administration
for any Estate above the value of Twenty pounds shall be Engrossed or Written.
And for every Skin or piece of Velum or Parchment, sheet or piece of Paper upon
which any Recognisance, Statute-Staple or Statute-Merchant, shall be Engrossed
or Written or Entered of Record in any Court or Office.

One other Mark or Stamp (the Impression whereof is here made in the Margin)
for all Velum, Parchment and Paper by the said Act charged with the Payment of
Two shillings and six pence, Namely, For every Skin or piece of Velum or
Parchment upon which any Record of Nisi prius or Postea shall be Engrossed or
Written. For every Skin or piece of Velum or Parchment or Paper upon which
shall be Engrossed or Written any Judgment whatsoever which shall be Signed by
the Master of any Office or his Deputy or Secondary or by any Prothonotary or
his Secondary, Deputy or Clerk, or any other Officer belonging to any of the
Courts at Westminster, who have Power or usually does or shall sign Judgments.
For every Skin or piece of Velum or Parchment or sheet of Paper upon which any
Commission Issuing out of any Ecclesiastical Court not herein otherwise
particularly charged shall be Engrossed or Written. And for every Skin or piece
of Velum or Parchment or sheet of Paper upon which any Warrant, Monition or
Personal Decree in any Court of Admiralty or the Cinque Ports shall be
engrossed or Written, or upon which any Beneficial Warrant or Order under Their
Majesty's Sign Manual (except Warrants or Orders for the Service of Their
Majesty's Navy, Army and Ordnance) shall be Engrossed or Written.

One other Mark or Stamp (the Impression whereof is here made in the Margin)
for all Velum, Parchment and Paper by the said Act charged with the payment of
One shilling, Namely, For every piece of Velum, Parchment or Paper, upon which
any Special Bail to be taken in any of the Courts at Westminster, or before any
of the Judges of the said Courts, or in any other Court whatsoever that shall
be Filed in any of the said Courts, shall be Engrossed or Written; and for
every piece of Velum, Parchment or Paper, upon which shall be Engrossed or
Written any Appearance upon such Special Bail. For every Skin or piece of Velum
or Parchment upon which shall be Engrossed or Written any Bill, Answer,
Replication, Rejoinder, Interrogatories, Depositions taken by Commission, or
any other Pleadings whatsoever in the Courts of Chancery, Exchequer, Duchy
Court, and County Palatine Courts, or other Courts of Equity. And for every
Skin or piece of Velum or Parchment, and for every Sheet or piece of Paper,
upon which any Admission into any Corporation or Company, or any Matriculation
in either of the Two Universities, or any Admission into any of the Inns of
Court or Inns of Chancery shall be Engrossed or Written.

One other Mark or Stamp (the Impression whereof is here made in the Margin)
for all Velum, Parchment and Paper by the said Act charged with the payment of
Six pence; Namely, For every piece of Parchment or Paper upon which any
Affidavits shall be Engrossed or Written (except Affidavits taken pursuant to
the several Acts made in the Thirtieth and Two and thirtieth Years of the Reign
of King Charles the Second for the Burying in Woollen, and except such
Affidavits as shall be taken before the Officers of Their Majesty's Customs, or
any Justice or Justices of the Peace, or before the Commissioners appointed or
to be appointed by any Act of Parliament for the Assessing or Levying any Aids
or Duties Granted or to be Granted to Their Majesty's, and which Affidavits
shall be taken by the said Officers of the Customs, Justices or Commissioners
by virtue of their Authority as Justices of the Peace or Commissioners
respectively and not otherwise;) For every piece of Parchment or Paper upon
which any Copy of such Affidavit as is therein before charged, that shall be
Filed or Read in any Court whatsoever shall be Engrossed or Written. For every
Skin or piece of Velum or Parchment or Sheet of Paper upon which shall be
Engrossed or Written any Indenture, Lease or Deed-Poll, not hereby otherwise
charged. For every piece of Velum or Parchment, or piece of Paper upon which
any Original Writ (except such Original on which a Writ of Capias Issues) Sub
poena, Bill of Middlesex, Latitat, Writ of Capias quo minus, Writ of Dedimus
potestatem, to take Answers, examine Witnesses or appoint Guardians, and any
other Writ whatsoever, or any other Process or Mandate that shall issue out or
pass the Seals of any of the Courts at Westminster, Courts of the Great
Sessions in Wales, Courts in Counties Palatine, or any other Court whatsoever
holding Plea, where the Debt or Damage does amount to Forty shillings or above,
or the Thing in Demand is of that Value, shall be Engrossed or Written. For
every piece of Velum, Parchment or Paper upon which any Entry of any Action in
the Mayors and Sheriffs Courts of London, and in Courts in all Corporations and
other Courts whatsoever, out of which no Writs, Process or Mandates, Issue,
holding Plea, where the Debt or Damage does amount to Forty shillings or above,
shall be Engrossed or Written. For every piece of Velum, Parchment or Paper
upon which any Common Bail to be Filed in any Court whatsoever, and upon which
any Appearance that shall be made upon such Bail, shall be Engrossed or
Written, which Appearance or Common Bail the Defendant shall cause to be Entered
or Filed within Eight days after the Return of the Process on which the
Defendant was Arrested, upon Penalty of Five pounds to be paid to the
Plaintiff, for which the Court shall immediately award Judgment, whereupon the
Plaintiff may take out Execution. For every piece of Velum, Parchment or Paper
upon which any Rule or Order, made or given in any of the Courts at
Westminster, either Courts of Law or Equity shall be Engrossed or Written. For
every piece of Velum, Parchment or Paper upon which any Copy of such Rules or
Orders Entered, or the Copies of any other Records or Proceedings in any of the
said Courts at Westminster not hereby otherwise Charged, shall be Engrossed or
Written. For every Skin or piece of Velum or Parchment or sheet of Paper upon
which shall be Engrossed or Written any Citation or Monition made in any
Ecclesiastical Court, or any Libel or Allegation, Deposition, Answer, Sentence
or Final Decree or any Inventory exhibited in any Ecclesiastical Court, the
Courts of Admiralty or Cinque Ports, or whereupon any Copies of them
respectively shall be Engrossed or Written. For every Skin of Velum or
Parchment, or sheet of Paper upon which any Decree or Dismission made by or in
the Court of Chancery, Exchequer, Court of the County Palatine or Duchy of
Lancaster, Courts of the Counties Palatine of Chester, Durham or other Courts
of Equity whatsoever, shall be Engrossed or Written, and for every Skin or
piece of Velum, Parchment or sheet of Paper upon which any Charter-Party,
Policy of Assurance, Passport, Bond, Release, Contract, or other obligatory
Instrument, or any Protest, Procuration, Letter of Attorney or any other
Notarial Act whatsoever, shall be Engrossed or Written.

And one other Mark or Stamp (the Impression whereof is here made in the
Margin) for all Velum, Parchment and Paper by the said Act charged with the
payment of One Penny, Namely, For every Skin or piece of Velum or Parchment, or
Sheet of Paper, upon which any Declaration, Plea, Replication, Rejoinder,
Demurrer or other Pleadings whatsoever, in any Court of Law shall be Engrossed
or Written, and for every Skin or piece of Velum or Parchment upon which any
Copy thereof shall be Written or Engrossed. For every Skin or piece of Velum or
Parchment or Sheet of Paper upon which any Depositions taken in the Court of
Chancery or other Court of Equity (except the Paper Draughts of Depositions
taken by virtue of any Commission before they are Engrossed) which are not
therein before Charged, or upon which any Copy of any Bill, Answer, Plea,
Demurrer, Replication, Rejoinder, Interrogatories, Depositions, or other
Proceedings whatsoever in any Court of Equity shall be Engrossed or Written.
For every Skin or piece of Velum or Parchment or Sheet of Paper upon which a
Copy of any Will shall be Engrossed or Written.

But the said Act does not extend to Charge any Bills of Exchange, Accounts,
Bills of Parcels, Bills of Fees, or any Bills or Notes (not Sealed) for Payment
of Money at Sight, or upon Demand, or at the end of certain days of Payment. Or
the Probate of any Will or Letters of Administration of any Common Seaman or
Soldier, who shall be slain or die in Their Majesty's Service, a Certificate
being produced from the Captain of the Ship or Vessel, or Captain of the Troop
or Company under whom such Seaman or Soldier served at the time of his Death,
and Oath being made of the truth thereof before the proper Judge or Officer by
whom such Probate or Administration ought to be granted, which Oath is to be
Administered without Fee or Reward.

And none of the said Rates are to be paid by any person or persons that shall
be admitted to Sue or Defend in Forma Pauperis.

Given at Our Court at Whitehall the One and thirtieth day of May, 1694. In the
Sixth Year of Our Reign.
God save King William and Queen Mary.
London, Printed by Charles Bill, and the Executrix of Thomas Newcomb,
deceased; Printers to the King and Queens most Excellent Majesty's. M DC XC IV.


