A BRIEF DISCOURSE Concerning the Lawfulness of Worshipping GOD BY THE
COMMON PRAYER. Being in ANSWER To a Book, Entitled, A Brief Discourse
concerning the Unlawfulness of the Common Prayer Worship. Lately Printed in
New England, and Reprinted in London. In which, the Chief Things Objected
against the Liturgy, are considered.

The Second Edition Corrected.

Let all things be done decently, and in order, 1 Cor. 14. 40.

LONDON: Printed for Ri. Chiswell, at the Rose and Crown in St. Paul's
Churchyard, M DC XCIV.

IMPRIMATUR,

August 9. 1693. GEO. ROYSE.

THE PREFACE.
HOW Pious or Learned the Author of the Book I undertake to answer may be, I am
no more concerned to know, than I am who the Author is, whom the Publisher bath
thought fit to commend as such; and having so done, to conceal. But he is not
(as far as I conceive) the more Learned or Pious for Writing this Book: Not the
more Learned; for by all the helps he professes to have had from Didoclavius,
etc. he is guilty of many gross and palpable Mistakes: And not the more Pious,
because of the uncharitable Reflections and Inferences he every where makes.
For would any man of a truly Christian Temper allege these things now against
the Common Prayer, which were altered or expunged above thirty years before he
published his Brief Discourse? Or charge us with violating the Word of God,
because we change the word Sabbath for the Seventh Day; or say that we
sacrilegiously steal from it, because Hallelujah, or Praise the Lord, is
sometimes left out in the Reading-Psalms; or that we equal the Apocrypha to,
and set it up above the Canonical Scriptures, because it s read on the Highest
Holy Days (as he says, but not very truly) tho the Articles of our Church
expressly declare them to be only of humane composition. Suppose now I should
treat this Author after the same manner; and whereas he professes to have
compared our Liturgy with the Missal, etc. I should take all advantages given
in his Book, to show, that notwithstanding this, he had never read them. I am
certain, I could much more easily, and as Charitably do it, as he make good his
abovesaid Charge. For would any one conversant in the Missal, Breviary and
Ritual of the Church of Rome, have said (as he does, p. 5.) That Beza notes,
that in the Roman Liturgy, men are taught to cry, Jesu Miserere mei, no less
than ten times one after another? For what need he quote Beza for that which he
has (as he says) read himself; and which after all, Beza mistook, and he with
Beza; or rather he mistakes Beza in; since the Jesu Miserere thus repeated, is
not in the Missal, etc. but in private Offices of that Church. Who again, that
had been conversant in our Liturgy, would have said, as the Author, Some have
observed, that of 172 Apocryphal Chapters, but 38 are omitted? For what need he
to be beholden to another's Observation, for what he that had thus read the
Liturgy must have under his own eye? So easy is it to repay him in his own
Coin, if we will reflect and infer after his way.

It Is a shrewd sign this Author was hard put to it to make good his Charge
against the Liturgy, and to prove his Point, That it is unlawful to be present
at the Common Prayer Worship.

And after all, it is of little Service to our Author, and those of his
Communion, to make such Exceptions as he has done; for if all things were
altered and removed that he objects against, they of his way would be no nearer
to us than they are, as the things stand at present; as long as we are a
National Church, and have a Liturgy; and whilst they continue Independent and
Congregational, are against the use of any Forms, even such as are Scriptural
(as the Lord's Prayer and Decalogue;) nay, against reading the Scripture in
their Public Congregations.

Indeed he had dealt more sincerely, if he had acquainted his Reader, That they
hold it unlawful to communicate with us, because we are a National Church; and
that they don't join in the Common Prayer Worship, because it is a Form, and all
Forms are in his Opinion unlawful. This indeed had struck at the Root of all;
but this he knew was not so easily proved, nor would look so popularly, as to
cry out Heathenism, Judaism, and Popery, which he charges our Service Book
with. This indeed will rouse the Multitude; and it is no wonder when possessed
with this Representation of our Worship, that the deluded People broke into the
Church (Erected at Boston for the Worship of God, according to the Church of
England) to search for the Images they supposed we worshipped. The time was when
the Antinomians from among themselves, History of Antinomians* in the Preface.
treated them in the like way, and called them Legal Preachers, Popish Factors,
Scribes, and Opposers of Christ. And they may remember what had like to have
been the Effect of it, if they had not taken up what their Adversaries called a
Bloody Tenet. And truly we had reason to fear it, if there had not been a
Superior Authority to overruled it.

But I shall forbear to recriminate, and shall leave the rest to the Book,
where I have let nothing escape that requires an Answer; and I hope have given
a sufficient Answer to it, and in the issue have proved, that (as far as his
Exceptions go) they have no reason to forbear being present at, or joining in
the Common Prayer Book Worship; which is the Matter of the First Question: Nor
that it is unlawful to take an Oath by laying the Hand upon the Bible; which is
the Matter of the Second.

A BRIEF DISCOURSE Concerning the Lawfulness of Worshipping GOD BY THE
COMMON PRAYER.
THE First Question proposed by the Author, is, Q. What are the Reasons why you
judge it unlawful to be present at, or to partake in the Common Prayer Worship?

The Reasons he gives are four, taken,

1. From the Original of the Common Prayer Book, which, says he, with the
Ceremonies and Worship prescribed therein, I find to be in a great measure
Popish and Heathenish.

2. From the Matter of the Common Prayer Book.

3. Because Public Liturgies of humane Composure, are an Innovation and
Deviation from Primitive Purity.

4. In this Age of Light, it would be a great Apostasy in the least to
countenance or comply with the Common-Prayer-Worship.

These are the Reasons he advances, and by which he endeavors to justify their
continuance in a Separation from the Church of England, and the Worship therein
Administered.

And these I shall take the liberty to examine.

For the clearer discoursing upon which, I shall divide what I have to say,
into so many Chapters, viz.

1. Of the Original of the Common Prayer, or English Liturgy.

2. Of the Matter of it.

3. Of the Original of Liturgies.

4. Of Worship by a Liturgy.

CHAP. I.
Of the Original of the English Liturgy.
OUR Author says, That the Common Prayer Book, with the Ceremonies and Worship
prescribed therein, are in a great measure Popish and Heathenish; and therefore
it is unlawful to join with it.

This will be resolved into two Questions.

Q. 1. Whether the Common Prayer be taken out of the Mass Book; and be
Heathenish, as well as Popish?

Q. 2. Whether the being taken out of the Mass Book, makes it unlawful to be
used or joined with, tho it be good and lawful in it self?

Q. 1. Whether the Common Prayer is taken out of the Mass Book? As our Author
takes care to represent it, one would think there is little of the Roman
Service left out in ours. The Common Prayer, says he, is in a great measure
Popish -- is taken out of the Popes Mass Book -- it cannot be denied it is
derived from thence, p. 1. There is very little in the English, which is not to
be found in the other, p. 2. This is matter of Fact, and so is not to be
determined by Authority. He himself makes a fair proposal, which I shall accept
of, viz. Let such as have any hesitancy about this matter compare the Popish
Missal, etc. with the English Liturgy, and they will be convinced, Of what?
That he had never read and compared them; or is guilty of a notorious Abuse
that he puts upon his ignorant Reader, that after he pretends to have read and
compared, shall assert so gross a falsehood, and say, There is very little in
the English, that is not to be found in the other, etc.

1. For there is little comparatively in the English, which is to be found in
the Roman Liturgy, and far more is left out, than ever was taken thence. This
is indeed directly contrary to what he affirms, and yet let any one compare
them, and he will be convinced of the truth of it. Take that which is called
the Cannon of the Mass, or Form of Administering the Eucharist, and there is no
Agreement, not one Collect or Prayer the same. Go we to Baptism, there is not
one Prayer belonging to that Office that is in ours. And as for the Litany,
there is not a third part of theirs in ours, and much in ours which is not in
theirs.

2. There is nothing in the Service of the Church of Rome, which makes it the
Popes Missal, and is peculiar to that Church, that is in ours; that is, there
is no Popery in our Liturgy. This he is in part forced to acknowledge. There
are, says he, things (as Prayers for the Dead, etc.) in the Roman Liturgy,
which are not translated into English. His Et cetera, if branched into
particulars, would be very large, as he could not but know, if he had read and
compared them. As for Example, Where are their Crossings, Elevation, and
Adoration of the Elements? Where their Solitary Communion, and Communion in one
kind? Where their frequent Crossings of themselves, and of the Book? Where
their material Crosses, and the Adoration of them? Where their Prayers for the
Dead? Where their Intercessors, the Virgin Mary and Saints, that are to be
found in the Cannon of the Mass? Where are the many Exorcisms in Baptism, the
Puffs they blow in the Infant's face, their Conjuration of Salt, for a
wholesome Sacrament to the driving away of Devils, that is put into the Mouth of
the Infant, as a propitiation unto Eternal Life? Where the Spittle with which
the Ears and Nostrils of the Infants are touched with an Ephphatha, be opened?
Where the Oil of Salvation, (as it is called) wherewith the Priest anoints the
Child's Breast and Shoulders in form of a Cross? Where the Chrism or Ointment
wherewith he anoints the Crown of the Head in figure of a Cross? Where the
change of Garments, their Purple and White Robe, that the Child is to carry
unspotted before the Tribunal of our Lord? Where the lighted Candle put into
the Child's hand, that when our Lord shall come to the Wedding, he may meet
him? Where the many Crossings of the Head before Baptism, and of the Eyes,
Ears, Nostrils, Breast, Shoulders, Mouth, etc. to be found in their Ritual and
Pastoral? Lastly, To go no farther, Where are the O Holy Mary, Mother of God,
etc. pray for us? Where are the Angels and Archangels, the Patriarchs and
Prophets, the Apostles and Evangelists; the Martyrs, Popes, and Confessors, the
Priests and Levites, the Monks and Hermits, the Virgins and Widows, the Forty
seven Saints in particular, and all Saints in general, that are called upon in
their Litany, Pray for us? And if nothing that is truly Popish be to be found
in our Liturgy, we have so far reason to deny that it is taken out of the
Mass Book.

3. I add, That our Service is so far from being taken out of he Missal, that
whatsoever in it is the same with the Office in the Church of Rome, is mostly
taken out of the Ancient Offices of the Christian Church. And because every one
cannot compare it, I will produce Impartial Authority for it. Thus says Mr.
Ball, a Nonconformist of great Note in the last Age, The English Liturgy Trial
of the Grounds of Separ. ^. 8. p. 152.
is not a Collection out of the Mass Book, but a refining of the Liturgy, which
heretofore had been stained with the Mass -- and is not a Translation of the
Mass, but a Restitution of the Ancient Liturgies. So the Ministers of Old
England, in a Letter to the Ministers of New England, wrote Anno 1637. It Is no
hard task to show, that our Service Book was reformed in most things according
to the purest Liturgies, which were in use long before the Mass was heard of in
the World, p 2.

To these I will add one more, for the Character our Author gives of him, viz.
Bishop Jewel (whom he calls that great Light in the English Church, p. 9.) Who
says, We are come as near as possibly we could to the Church of the Apostles,
and of the old Catholic Bishops and Fathers -- And besides, we have aimed not
only our Doctrine, but Sacraments also, and Forms of our Public Prayers, after
the pattern of their Rites and Ordinances.

To say the truth, it is a very odd thing to represent our Liturgy as Popish,
when those that composed and used the Liturgy, were burnt by the Papists for
it, and when to this day they will not communicate in it, nor with the Church
that uses it. Our Author says, There have been Jusuits and Popish
Intelligencers that approved of our Service, and Pope Pius 5 th would have
ratified it? And is it therefore Popish? The Independent allows the
Presbyterian Confession of Faith; And this Author says, p. 4. It must be
acknowledged that such of the Church-of-England- men, as keep to the 39
Articles in matters of Doctrine, are as Orthodox as any Protestants in the
world. And is therefore the Independent a Presbyterian, or this Author a
Church-of- England-man? I trow not. All is, that they agree in the Common
Principles the other receives, and yet one is no more the other, than if they
had no agreement in such Principles. And so is it here, the English Liturgy has
nothing but what is agreeable to the Doctrine of the Gospel, and allowable by
the Christian Church; and therefore what the Papists will, or ought to allow;
but for all* that, we are no more Papists, nor that any more Popish, than the
Independent is a Presbyterian, or our Author a Church-of- England-man. It was
not then, because it was Popish, that they approved of our Service, but that it
was Christian, and pure in its Order and Composure; neither was it because it
was Popish, that the Pope would have ratified it, but because upon any terms he
would have prevailed upon Queen Elizabeth to own his Authority, and regained
her to their Church.

4. However I deny not, but that the Compilers of the Liturgy did peruse the
Popish Offices, and take as much from thence, as was conformable to the Ancient
Offices, and was fit to be used; and that the rather, that they might the more
easily satisfy doubting or discontented Minds under the Alterations then made,
and induce them to comply with them. And this was the meaning of King Edward's
Proclamation. A practice very Christian and commendable, and agreeable to the
Apostolical prudence, which we read of, Acts 15. 16. 3. 1 Cor. 9. 19, etc.

And which the Nation soon felt the happy effects of, when by this excellent
Conduct it became, generally speaking, Reformed. But yet after all, so little
was taken out of the Mass Book, etc. that they differed more than they agreed
in, and more was left than taken out.

But our Author stays not here, That the English Liturgy, says he, is
originally Heathenish as well as Popish, is manifest, 1. In that the Pope's
Liturgy from whence ours is derived, is so. The Principal Parts of the
Mass Book were borrowed from Idolatrous Pagans. They came from Numa Pompilius,
p. 4. Ans. It has been sufficiently made out by Protestants, that there is a
great Affinity and Agreement between the Heathenish and Popish Rites; but our
Author does an injury to the Argument, when affirming, that the Principal Parts
of the Mass Book, were borrowed from Idolatrous Pagans, he goes no further than
Vestments, Holy Water, and Incense, as if these were the principal Parts of the
Mass Book, and the chief things that that agreed in with the Idolatry of the
Heathens.

But this indeed is not to our purpose. Well! suppose there be this Conformity
between the Papist and the Pagan; what is that to us, if we agree with neither?
but that he attempts to prove.

For tho he cannot find Incense and Holy Water, and his Et caetera among us,
yet he says, What Vain Repetitions does the Common Prayer Book abound with? In
one Service the Worshippers must repeat these words. Good Lord deliver us,
Eight times over. And, We beseech thee to hear us, Twenty times over. The
Gloria Patri is to be repeated Ten times in the same Morning or Evening
Service. That the Heathens were wont to Worship their Idols just after the same
manner, is clear from Matthew. 7. etc. And Beza notes, that the Roman Liturgy
does abound with them, wherein Men are taught to cry Jesu, Jesu, miserere mei,
no less then Ten times one after another.

For the better Resolution of which, I shall proceed in this order.

1. We grant, that there may be such things as vain Repetitions in Prayers, and
other Divine Offices, for that is a fault our Savior charges on the Heathens;
and what we, as well as our Author, charge on the Church of Rome, and is also
frequently charged by those that use and plead for Forms, on those that use
extemporary Prayers.

2. We yet do maintain, That there are such Repetitions in Divine Worship, as
are not vain, that are neither Heathenish or Popish. Such do we read of in the
Old Testament, as, Psalm, 57. 1. 75. 1, 4, 5. 94. 1. 103. 1, 2, 22. 107. 8, 15,
21, 31. 136. throughout. And thus our Savior repeated the same words thrice in
his Agony in the Garden, Matt. 26. 44. and twice on the Cross, Matt. 27. 46.
And consequently all Repetitions are no more condemned by our Savior in Matt.
6. 7. than all long Prayers are, Matt. 23. 14. So that the vanity of
Repetitions does not consist in using the same words eight times or twenty
times in Prayer. For do we repeat in our Service, Good Lord deliver us, eight
times: And Glory be to the Father, etc. ten times? And, We beseech thee to hear
us, good Lord, twenty times? So we find, that they not only had their thrice,
and their four times, but their twenty seven times in every Verse of Psalm 136.
His mercy endures for ever; which Psalm was most used on solemn Occasions, as
we may find it, 2 Chronicles. 5. 13. 7. 3, 6. 20. 21. Ezra 3. 11. Jer. 33. 11. So
that we may more truly say of the Church of God amongst the Jews, than he does
of the Heathens, and their Idols, that they were wont to Worship God just after
the same manner, with Repetitions in their Service, as we.

3. We are to consider wherein the vanity of Repetitions consists, so as to be
after the manner of the Heathens. This admits great variety, and just bounds
cannot be set; so that it is not to be exactly said, Here the vain Repetitions
begin. But they are such;

1. When they that use them, think that they shall be heard for their much
speaking, as our Savior says, the Hethens did: Thus the Priests of Baal did,
crying out, O Baal hear us, from Morning till Noon; and accordingly Elijah
upbraids them, 1 Kings 18. 26, 27.

2. When it is nothing but Tautology, viz. a Repetition of the same words
without new Matter; or of the same matter, but in different words. Such were
the Verses of Battus the babbling Poet. Such were the Hymns used often by the
Heathens, in the worship of their Gods. Such are the Jesu, Jesu, etc. without
Intermission, sometimes used in the Roman Church.

But when there are distinct Petitions, as when we say, We beseech thee to hear
us good Lord, it is as lawful to close each after that manner, as it is to say
Amen, which we find to follow every particular Petition, and was distinctly
repeated for twelve times together after that manner, Deuteronomy. 27. 15.

3. Vain Repetitions, are when the words are thought sufficient, tho the Heart
be not with them; but this may be common to any. So that tho there are
Repetitions in our Service, as there were among the Heathen, and are in the
Church of Rome, yet ours are not vain, nor such Repetitions as theirs, by
reason of the matter only, if accompanied with the heart.

3. He says, Some of the most Learned Patrons of Liturgies produce it as an
Argument for them, that the Heathens made use of Forms in their Idolatrous
Worship, p. 5. And so he makes this the difference between the Heathens and
Christians, that the first used Forms, but the last prayed without them. As for
the practice of the Christians, we shall have occasion to speak of it under
another Head; neither shall I trouble my self with the Opinion of those Learned
Patrons of Liturgies, he speaks of: But I shall take his Argument as it lies
before us, which is, That our Liturgy is Heathenish, because we use Forms as
they did. He might as well have said, our Liturgy is Heathenish, because we use
words as they did; since it is no more Heathenish to use Forms than Words. If
they had the use of Forms, it rather shows the sense that Mankind generally
have of this matter; and that there cannot be too great a care taken of our
demeanor in Divine Worship, according to the Direction of the Wise man, Eccl.
5. 2. Be not rash with thy mouth, etc. for God is in Heaven, etc. therefore let
thy words be few, and well considered. But if the Heathens had Forms, so had
the Jews, so had Christians, as I shall show; and so Forms no more make our
Worship Heathenish than Jewish. But of this afterward. But supposing, that our
Liturgy was (as he would have it) taken out of the Mass Book; yet,

Q. 2. Will the being taken out of the Mass Book, make that Worship, which is
otherwise good and lawful, to become unlawful to be used, or joined with?

This he affirms, and offers to prove after this manner,

It Is a known maxim (says he) Omnis honor Idoli est Idolatria. He that shall
put any respect upon an Idol, cannot be clear of the Sin of Idolatry; but the
Mass Book is an Idol. And he that uses a Prayer, or joins with a Prayer taken
out of that Book, thereby puts an Honor upon an Idol -- How then can we join
in Prayers taken out of the Idolatrous Mass Book, and offer them to the Holy
God?

In which there are Three things contained.

1. That the Mass Book is an Idol.

2. That to take a Prayer out of the Mass Book is a respect to an Idol, and is
Idolatry.

3. That it is unlawful to join in Prayers taken out of the Mass Book.

1. The Mass Book is an Idol. This we may justly question, because an Idol is
the Representation of some Divine or Beatified Object, and that is as such
propounded and set up for Adoration; such are the Images of God and our
Savior, of Angels and Saints in the Church of Rome. But in this sense the
Mass Book is no Idol; there is no Prototype or Object it represents, nor is any
such Adoration paid to it, as is paid to an Image, or a Crucifix. We grant as
well as he, that the Mass Book is Idolatrous, as it contains some things that
are so, and is used in Idolatrous Worship: But it no more follows from thence,
that it is an Idol, than that the Incense, Holy Water, or Vestments, are Idols,
which are used when they say Mass. But supposing the Mass Book for once to be
an Idol, that we may proceed to the next question, viz.

2. Whether the taking a Prayer out of the Mass Book, be such a respect to it,
as makes the Prayer to be Idolatrous? To this I answer, That the Prayers taken
out of the Mass Book, and inserted in our Liturgy, are so far from being a
respect, that it is a disrespect to it. For at the same time that some Prayers
were taken out, those were rejected that were left behind, for the gross
Corruptions that were in them; and by so doing, the Reformers as much testified
to all the World their abhorrence of it, as the emptying of the House of the
Goods and Utensils not infected by the Leprosy, and their forsaking it, was a
plain declaration of its Pollution. So that if Prayers taken from thence are
good, the using them when taken thence, is no Idolatry, and Communion in them
no Sin, and no more unlawful than it was to use the Vessels that were carried
out of the infected House.

But this is the main Question, viz. Q. Whether that which has been used in
Idolatrous Worship, may, if otherwise good and lawful, be used where the
Worship is not idolatrous?

This he denies, and for it offers these Reasons.

1 We ought not to name an Idol, but with detestation; much less may we offer
it as Worship to God. Psalm. 16. 4. Exodus 23. 13. Hos. 2. 16, 17. P. 4.

2. It was Paul's Judgment, that Meat once offered to Idols, should not be made
use of, 1 Cor. 10. 28. Therefore a Service Book offered to Idols ought not to
used. For there is a parity of Reason.

3. God has strictly prohibited his people all symbolizing with the Heathen in
civil usages, because he would not have them imitate the Heathen Levit. 19. 19,
27. -- especially in matters referring to the Worship of God. Hence they were
prohibited going up by steps to the Altar. Exodus 20. 24, 26. to plant a Grove
near the Altar, Deuteronomy. 16. 31. And to worship to the East, Ezekiel. 8. 16.

Before I proceed to consider these Arguments in particular, I shall state the
Case it self; for resolving of which, we may observe.

1. That there are things Idolatrous in their own nature, or by a standing
positive Law, and so are always the same. Such is the Picture of God, and
Worshipping by Images.

2. There are things that have been customarily appropriated to Idolatrous
Worship, and the use of which in common estimation, has been accounted
Idolatrous. Such was the offering Incense among the Heathens; and therefore the
primitive Christians refused it, as an acknowledgment of their Worship; and the
Thurificati were reputed Idolaters.

3. There are other things that are used as well in true as Idolatrous Worship,
and are lawful in themselves; such as Time, Place, Habit, Posture.

The first is always, unlawful, and makes the worship Idolatrous.

The second is not to be used where it has been thus appropriated, and thus
accounted, during such an opinion of them.

So that it is the last of these that the whole turns upon; for after all the
clamor he makes about Idolatry, and the charge he would fain fasten upon us,
he can produce nothing that is Idolatrous amongst us, no Images, no Prayers to
Saints, nor so much as any thing appropriated, or in common estimation so
accounted; no incensings of Books or Images, no sprinklings of Holy Water; but
it all amounts to this, that Forms and Repetitions have been used by Idolaters;
that they had White Garments, and observed Holy Days; So p. 4, 5, 8. Which are
things lawful in themselves (as I shall show) and cannot be made unlawful by
being used in Idolatrous Worship. For when Idolatry is not in the nature of the
thing, but in the use, take away the use, and Idolatry cease; and
consequently it may be lawfully used where there is no Idolatry in the Worship,
and no Idolatry in the use of it. And if it be not to be used, it is not because
it is unlawful in it self to use it, but because it is forbidden by God, as was
the case among the Jews; or because of some circumstances that make it
inconvenient and dangerous. Thus it was lawful to eat that Meat, which had been
offered to Idols, when it was afterward exposed to sale in the Shambles, 1 Cor.
10. 25, 26.
or set upon the Table at an Entertainment; because it was thereby restored to a
common use; when yet it was not lawful to sit at Meat in an Idols Temple, for
that was to have fellowship in the Idolatry, Chap. 8. 10, 20. It is then no
more Idolatry to use a White Garment, or a Temple, or observe a Day, or to use
a Prayer that has been used or observed in Idolatrous Worship, or by an
Idolatrous Church, than it was to eat Meat that had been offered to Idols.
Purify the Gold, and separate the Dross from it, and the Gold is not the worse
for the Dross that was before mingled with it. Scrape the Walls, and cast out
the infected materials of it, so that the House be freed from the Leprosy, and
it might have been as well inhabited, as if it had never been infected, Number.
14. 41. (to make use of former Comparisons, p. 2 d. and 3 d.) and take the
things lawful from the things unlawful, and they become lawful again, and may
be lawfully used.

But says he, The Rubbish of the Leprous house was to be cast into an unclean
place: And the Leprosy breaks out still; therefore we may have no communion
with it. p. 3.

But surely it is the same thing if we leave the House that is infected, as it
is to carry away the Rubbish into an unclean place; else why does he talk of
leaving the Communion for the sake of the Leprosy of Idolatry? We grant the
Church we left to be Idolatrous, there the Leprosy is; and therefore we left
it; but we left the Idolatry with the Church, and let him prove there is any of
the Leprosy of Idolatry in what we have taken out of it, and then he would say
somewhat to the purpose; but that he is far from.

Let us however consider his Arguments relating to the general part. 1. We
ought, says he, not to name an Idol, but with detestation, much less offer it
as worship to God.

I answer, 1 st. The naming there forbidden, is the naming an Idol with
respect; and indeed the addressing any Worship to it. So Psalm. 16. 4. Their
sorrows shall be multiplied that hasten after another God; their drink offering
of Blood will I not offer, nor take up their name into my Lips: That is, they
might not name them by way of worship, nor offer Sacrifice to them.

2 d. Where is there such a naming of an Idol amongst us? what respect do we
give to his Idol the Mass Book? what Saint do we adore? But, says he, The
Prayers are taken out of the Idolatrous Mass Book. But what then, if there be
nothing of their Idolatry in the Prayers that are taken thence; when such are
taken thence they are no more Idolatrous than before they were taken into the
Mass Book.

2d. He says, It was Paul's*Judgment, that meat once offered to Idols should
not be made use of, 1 Cor. 10. 28. Therefore a Service Book offered to Idols
ought not be used. For there is a parity of Reason.

I conceive he is much mistaken in the account he gives of the Apostle's
Judgment, who is so far from maintaining meat offered to Idols to be unlawful,
that he makes it a thing indifferent (as before); and what a person may with a
safe conscience eat of without scruple, unless it be with respect to another's
conscience that is thereby offended, as the Apostle determines it, v. 28, 29.
Now if Meat offered to Idols might be eaten of, then a Service Book that has
been used in Idolatrous Worship may be lawfully used (when the things contained
in it are otherwise lawful and good.) For there is a parity of Reason, as he
argues.

3. He says, God has prohibited his People all Symbolizing with Heathen, etc.

We grant that God did prohibit the Jews all symbolizing and agreement with the
Heathens in their Idolatry. That is not the Question. But,

1. Whether an agreement with Idolaters in what was once used by them in
Idolatry, becomes Idolatry, or be unlawful because it has been so used?

2. Or whether what was forbidden to the Jews is forbidden to all People, And
to Christians as well as they?

These we deny.

The first we deny as to the Jews, that every thing used in Idolatrous Service
was unlawful to them; for he says, The Priests of Isis used to wear Linen
Surplices, p. 9. and yet such Linen Garments were the Priests and Levites to
officiate in. So Circumcision was used among the Egyptians, etc. and yet
continued to be used among the Jews.

Again, we deny that what was in that kind forbidden to the Jews, was forbidden
and unlawful to all. For,

1 st. A great part of what they were forbidden, was with respect to the people
that before inhabited the Land; with whom they were to make no Covenant, but
were utterly to destroy them, their Altars and Groves, etc. Exodus 23. 32, 33.
34. 12. Deuteronomy. 7. 2, 3, 5.

2. They were a People very prone to Idolatry, and so were tied up by strict
Restraints and Penalties.

3. They both came from Egypt, where they had long conversed with Idolatrous
Service, and afterward bordered upon Nations violently addicted to Idolatry and
Sorcery; and in such circumstances there were these Checks laid upon them; and
an assimilation to the Customs of such forbidden.

And all this was not from the nature of the thing, and because all usages of
Idolators were unlawful, but because of the circumstances of people, time, and
place: And if so, then we must leave the case of symbolizing, and no longer
make it a Case of Conscience, but of prudence and expediency; and so we are
left to judge what is fit to be retained, and what not; what practiced, and
what not.

And here our Reformers showed their Prudence and Moderation, by what they
chose; when the Ceremonies were few; and what were the Ceremonies of the
Ancient Church, rather than the Romish. When they chose some, that they might
not give offense to the Churches of Christ in other parts of the World; and yet
retained no more, that they might not burden their own Communion. When the
Offices they selected were agreeable to the Ancientest Offices of the Church.

So that there was no Reformation in any place, where so much temper was
preserved, and where the purity of Religion, and the Simplicity and solemnity
of Divine Service were more regarded: that what was good was retained; what was
noxious was purged out, and even what was superfluous was exscinded.

But this he will not allow.

For, says he, the use of such a Liturgy does harden the Papists in their
Idolatry, p. 4. So the Liturgy came from Rome, and will perhaps lead thither
again. p. 18.

But, 1. How can such a Liturgy harden them in their Idolatry, or lead thither,
which has none of their Idolatry in it; and in which the Papists are expressly
charged with Idolatry? Vid. Rubric at the Communion.

2. How can this harden them, or lead thither, which has been the means of
banishing and keeping their Idolatry out of the Kingdom?

3. How can this harden them, or lead thither, when the Papists agree with our
Author, That it is unlawful to be present at, or partake in the Common Prayer
Worship, and are excommunicated if they do?

4. How can this harden them, or lead thither, when there is nothing that the
Papists more labor to possess the people with prejudices against?

But he adds, p. 4. The Jews themselves are scandalized by the Liturgy. It Is a
celebrated Saying among them, That the Christians have their Jephilleth from
Armillus; that is, their Prayer-Books from Antichrist.

At what are the Jews scandalized? is it that we have a Liturgy? So have they
themselves had of latter Ages at least. And so the Author says, p. 13. That he
had seen Liturgies written in the Hebrew Tongue.

Is it that we receive our Prayer Book from Antichrist? Yes, says he, and for
this quotes a Celebrated saying of theirs. But is this the truer for their
saying so? they say, it seems, that Christians have received their Prayers from
Antichrist: but I hope that there are many Christians in the World, that have
Prayer-Books which they never received from the Antichrist he speaks of; So the
Greeks and Abyssins, etc. The whole is at least a sorry Mistake, and which, for
ought I see, he understands no more than we do his Jephilleth. The case is
plainly thus; That the Rabbis say, that Armillus was to be a person of
prodigious form, begot of a Marble Statue in Rome, and was to be the last Enemy
of the Jews, and the Leader of the Christian Forces against them; that he
should kill Messiah Ben Ephraim, and at last be killed by Messiah Ben David.
That he should give Tephilleth (...), and a Law to the Christians, which he and
they set up in opposition to the Law of Moses. So that we see that his
Tephilleth is the Law as well as the Prayers of Christians; and they make
Armillus to be toward the end of the World, the last Enemy of the Jews; and how
could our Liturgy, or the Liturgies now used by Christians, be the Prayers
received from Armillus, when Armillus is yet to come, according to the
Rabinical Notion? if the Reader pleases he may have a fuller account of this
Jewish Garagantua in Buxtorf's Lexicon, Chald. Talmud. Rabbin; for I am weary
of this trifling, and unintelligible Jargon.

CHAP. II.
Of the Matter of the Common Prayer Book.
BEfore I proceed to the particular consideration of his Objections Relating to
this Head; let me observe, that if we should grant what he finds fault with to
be blameworthy; yet it is not to the purpose, and the point he proposed; which
is to give Reasons why he judges it unlawful to be present at, or partake in
the Common Prayer Worship.

And that for these Reasons. For,

1. There may be many things that are a reason against Ministerial Conformity,
which will not be a reason against communion with the Church; since there are
those things required to the one, that are not required to the other. Such is
the Surplice, the Office for Burying the Dead, Marrying, p. 8. etc. which
belong to the Minister, and not to the People: And therefore tho it should be
unlawful to wear a Surplice, or use these Offices, yet since Lay-Communion is
not concerned in them, they are no reason for separation.

2. Many of his Objections are only directed against the occasional Offices,
and so can be no reason against constant communion in the Daily office, or in
those Offices in which they do not occur. As supposing what he alleges out of
the Office of Burial, Marriage, Baptism, etc. to be true and sufficient, yet
tho they may be a reason against being present at the Offices of Burial,
Baptism, and Marriage, they are no reason against Communion, where those
Offices are not concerned.

3. Things inconvenient, if not unlawful, are no reason for a separation,
because then there could be no Communion with any Church, since no Church is
without them: And if we should grant the reading a worse Translation of
Scripture, and the Apocrypha, in the Church, to be things of that nature; yet
it will be hard to show them to be unlawful in themselves, and so to make it
necessary to withdraw from the Church where they are used.

If these things be considered, most of what he has said will be prevented; but
that I may not seem to avoid any thing, I shall take notice of the Particulars
as they lie in order. And his Arguments taken from the Matter of the
Service Book, are

(1.) Some things appointed therein are, in the judgment of sober and judicious
persons, extremely ridiculous. As how?

First, says he, How many odd and senseless Translations of the Holy Scripture
have been found therein? It Is well, he said have been found; for he is fain to
draw all his inferences of that kind, but one, from the Service Book, as it
stood before the last revisal, and that is Psalm. 58. 9. Or ever their pots be
made hot with thorns, so let indignation vex them, as a thing that is raw. At
which he Triumphs, What nonsense is this! Now I do not think that to be
Nonsense which is not soon understood; for then what will he make of the Hebrew
in this Verse, which has several difficulties in it? But I think there is a
good account to be given of the sense of this Version; and that is, E're that
the Pots are made hot with the Thorns, they shall be severely punished: The
being made hot with the Thorns, sets forth the suddenness; and the phrase,
vexing a thing that is raw, denotes the severity of it.

(2.) His next Instance of things extremely ridiculous, is, that in the
Liturgy, the Writings of the Prophets, Acts and Revelations, are called
Epistles. If these were formerly, they are not now so called; but of these when
read in the place of Epistles, it is said, The portion of Scripture for the
Epistle. That is, the Sections of Scripture read in that order, are generally
Epistles; and so, as it is usual in other cases, gives the name to all: And as
it is not now, so never was it called the Epistle of the Prophets, Acts, or
Revelations; but the Epistle taken out of Isaiah, etc.

(3.) He objects against the Responses, Those broken Responds, says he, and
shreds of Prayer (as Mr. Cartwright calls them) which the Priests and People
toss between them like Tennis-Balls, seem extremely ridiculous to standers-by.
Without doubt this is a venture of Wit; but I suppose there are standers-by
that will call it by another Name; and instead of Wit, term this scurrility in
Conversation, and profaneness in Religion; Especially if we consider how many
Psalms there are in Holy Writ, that are penned (or supposed at least to be so,
by Learned men) after this way. And whatever his Standers-by may think, there
are Persons of Piety ancient and modern, that have thought this way very
becoming, and of excellent use to quicken Devotion, and excite attention. What
may not be said in any case by such persons as these, that call this way of
Devotion (as he does) a taking God's Name in vain? And what occasion may others
take after the same manner, to treat their long Prayers, that are often
nauseous to standers-by, for their affected length, and tedious enlargements,
and forced Repetitions.

2. He objects, The Common Prayer Book is guilty of violating the sacred Word
of God: And here he charges it with no less than obliterating, contradicting,
adding to it, and detracting from it; and then concludes, Amongst men, clipping
and corrupting if Coin is Treason; and certainly it is a dreadful thing to add
to, or take from the Word of God. Dent. 4. 2. Rev. 22. 19.

And it is certainly a dreadful thing; and woe to them that are guilty.

Here I should have expected a rounder Charge by one that had so exactly read
the Liturgy, and that he would have told the World that we take whole Chapters
from the Word of God, and which have no place in our Calendar, nor are read
publicly in the Church, as I do acknowledge. And surely if the omission of one
Verse in a Psalm, and of Hallelujah in others, be a taking from the Word of
God; then much more is the omission of whole Chapters; nay, of three whole
Books. But he durst not press that too far; for if he had, it would have fallen
hard upon such as never have the Scriptures read in their Congregations, tho
that was a solemn part of Divine Worship in the Churches of God, as the
Scripture informs us, Acts 15. 21, etc. And if the Church of Rome is so
deservedly blamed for reading the Scriptures in an unknown tongue, what do they
not deserve that never read them at all in their Congregations? Surely if they
had, according to our Savior's advice, considered the Beam in their own eye,
they would not have thus magnified the Mote in their Brother's eye. I remember
a Question in a Book of the same kind with our Author's, A Survey of the Book
of Common Prayer; An. 1610. p. 26.
Whether Protestants do not sin in defrauding the people of some Books and
Chapters of Scripture, as well as Papists in defrauding them of all? And then
what sort of Protestants are they, that with the Church of Rome defraud the
people of all, so far as the Public Service of God is concerned?

But to return: Before I shall consider his few Instances, that he would make
good this Bloody Charge by, I shall premise a few things.

1. That the Instances he offers are, at the worst, Mistranslations, Slips, and
Errors, and not chargeable with Perverseness, according to what we charge upon
the Church of Rome. For here is no interest to be served: For what is our
Church concerned, whether it be read as the Liturgical Translation has it, the
7 th Day; or as the Common Translation, The Sabbath? whether as that, they were
not obedient to his word; or as this, they rebelled not against his word?
whether as that, The rod of the wicked comes not into the lot of the
righteous; or as this, rests not? Whether, as in that, the Titles of some
Psalms and Hallelujahs are omitted; or as in this, they are inserted? Surely
here is no interest visible in this, that should incline our Translators of the
Psalter to pick out these Texts above all others to make bold with.

2. Mistranslations and Errors of this kind, are no sufficient reason for not
using such a Translation, and much less for separating from a Church where they
are used; for then no Translation could be used, or no Church communicated
with, because no Church is without such Translations, and no Translation
without such Errors. Thus it was in the Church of the Jews, when the Septuagint
was used in public; Which does often alter and add to the original Hebrew; and
yet was not only used, but is quoted by the Divine Writers, even in many places
where those Alterations and Additions are. So it alters, Heb 10. 5. 11. 21.
Romans 10. 18. Act. 7. 8. It adds, as Luke 3. 36, 37. Act. 7. 14

Then also must not our common Translation be used, which besides the mistakes
allowed to be in it, does add in many places, and particularly half a Verse, 1
John 2. 23. So it adds the Dates and Subscriptions to the Epistles, Chapters,
Verses, and Arguments, throughout the whole, as if Canonical. And of this kind
are all his Instances.

As (1.) He says, The Common Prayer Book violates the word of God, as
sometimes the words of Scripture are obliterated, and others put in their room.
Thus in the Catechism they have changed those words in the Fourth Commandment,
the Lord blessed the sabbath day, into the Seventh day.

A. We grant it is so; but it is to be remembered, that it is not so in the 20th
of Exodus, but in the Liturgy; and if the Liturgy differs from Exodus, it is a
difference without a distinction, since the Seventh day and Sabbath are all
one; and if it differs from Exodus, it agrees with the first Institution, Genesis
2. 3. where it is said, God rested on the seventh day, and God blessed the
seventh day, and sanctified it.

(2.) He says, Sometimes the Liturgy makes bold directly and in terms to
contradict the Scripture; so Psalm 105. 28. it is said they were not rebellious,
but the Common Prayer Book says, they were not obedient; and so Psalm. 125. 3.

We grant, That there is a seeming contradiction in words, but not in the
meaning of it; for the relative they being undetermined, and indifferently to
be applied to Moses and Aaron, or to the Egyptians, accordingly is this place
to be interpreted; if understood of the former, it is to be read in the common
Translation, they were not rebellious; if of the latter, it is to be read in the
Translation of the Liturgy, they were not obedient. And this last reading is
according to the present reading of the Septuagint, and some other Translations
that follow that. And yet that Translation was generally used by the Primitive
Christians, and was worse than any ever used by us. As for Psalm. 125. 3. The
rod of the wicked shall not come, etc. that is, so as to rest there, and so as
to tempt them beyond what they are able.

(3.) He says, Sometimes the Common Prayer Book adds to the Scripture; there
are three whole Verses added to the 14th Psalm. And the Gloria Patri is
frequently added to Scripture, as if it were Canonical.

Ans. When he says, That it is a dreadful thing to add to the word of God, and
charges our Church with it, we might expect some very criminal instances to
make it good; and when he says three whole Verses are added, one would think
that this was somewhat invented, and herein inserted by the Church upon some
wicked selfish design. But, 1. tho we allow that such Verses are added, yet
it is not an addition to Scripture; for tho not found in this place, yet they
are in another, viz. Romans 3. 13. and quoted by the Apostle from other Psalms,
etc. 2. It Is not the Common Prayer Book that adds, but the Translations which
the Common Prayer followed, viz. the Septuagint and Vulgar; and tho it was a
mistake, yet it is far from being such as incurs the penalty of Deuteronomy. 4. 2, etc.

As for the Gloria Patri, I deny that it is added to the Scriptures as
Canonical, any more than the Contents of the Chapters, the Chapters and Verses
of the Bible, or the Dates of the Epistles are; nay, I deny that it is added at
all; for any one that can read, will see that it is not inserted in the Psalter,
but only rehearsed as the Rubric directs. And it was for a good end that this
was anciently used in the Orthodox Churches of old, and is continued in ours,
viz. in opposition to the Arians, and Anti-Trinitarians. Sozom. l. 26.

(4). He says, Sometimes words are sacrilegiously stolen out of the Bible. As
the last Verse is omitted, Psalm. 72. So are the Scriptural Titles of many
Psalms. And I know not how often those words, Praise ye the Lord, are left out.

He durst not trust his Reader with the things left out, for they would have
appeared of so little Consequence, as would have betrayed the weakness of his
Cause, as well as his own partiality: That verse omitted, Psalm. 72. is this,
the Prayers of David, the Son of Jesse, are ended. The Titles of the Psalms are
for the most part such as are no key to the matter of them, and without which
the Psalms are as entire as the Chapters without the Contents: The Clause,
praise ye the Lord, as in the Hebrew, Hallelujah, and is only left out when
it is independent, and has no immediate Relation to the preceding or following
Verse. And the reason of these Omissions seems to be, Because the Psalms being
to be read in Parts, according to the ancient Custom in Chrysostom's time and
before, or chanted, and so read on without naming the Psalm, the Titles, etc.
would have made a break in that order. And this was done after the manner of
Singing the Psalms in the Temple-Service, in which the Titles, and the passage,
the Prayers of David the Son of Jesse, are ended, were to be sure no part. And
so it is in the Singing-Psalms, used by the Dissenters as well as us: And who
may as well be charged with such Omissions as we, who there, for the reason
abovesaid, use neither the Verse nor Titles. Surely these Persons are hard put
to it, that after such a bloody charge of violating, adding to, and taking from
the Word of God, can produce no better proofs and evidences for it, but only
that we leave out the Titles and Hallelujah, and that only in the ordinary
Service in the public, where they themselves read it not at all; and when upon
the like way of arguing, we may charge them with laying aside the whole
Scripture, out of which they read not one Chapter for the information of the
People. He goes on,

3. In the Liturgy the Apocrypha Books are made equal with, nay advanced above
the Holy Scripture. Strange! that a Church should be guilty of this, that in
their Articles exclude them out of the Canon; and says, That they are not read
to confirm any Doctrine, but only for informing the Manners. But let us see how
he proves this, not by any Assertion of the Church, but some stretches of
Arguing. As,

(1.) They are made equal. For in the Preface to the Common Prayer, it is said,
nothing ordained is to be read but the pure word of God, or that which is
evidently grounded on the same. But is the Apocrypha so?

Here for improving his Argument, he alters the words of the Preface; and for
that which is in that, agreeable to the same, he reads evidently grounded on
the same, and then triumphs, Is the Apocrypha so? But take it how he will, its
evident from hence, that the Apocrypha is so far from being made equal with
Scripture, that there is a plain difference between them; for that to which a
thing is agreeable, and on which it is grounded, is above that which is
agreeable to it, and grounded upon it. A Plea grounded on the law, is surely of
less Authority than the Law on which it is grounded. The Apocrypha being read,
not for establishing any Doctrine, but for informing the Mannners; there is
nothing in what is appointed of that kind to be read, but what is agreeable to
the word of God, and not contrary to it; and so may be read, as well as their
Sermons be heard, which can pretend to no more.

(2.) He says, The Liturgy appoints the Apocrypha to be read as Lessons, just
as I find it in the Pope's Service Book, and in a greater proportion than
Scripture; for (as some have observed) of 172 Apocryphal Chapters, but 38 are
omitted. So that these Books are equalized with the pure word of God.

But surely he does not find it in our Service Book, that the Apocrypha Lessons
are read for Canonical Scripture, and declared to be so, as they are in the
Pope's Service Book; but only as Apocrypha. He that will look for the
Apocrypha-Books in the Pope's Bible, as well as Service Book, will find them
mixed with the Canonical, as Hester and Esdras, etc. but he that will find them
in our Bibles, will find them by themselves, and Apocrypha in the head of them.

If, as he affirms, the Apocrypha is read in a greater proportion than
Scripture, it does more than equalize, and does rather advance it above the
Scripture, and so belongs to his next Assertion, which he would have done well
to have reserved it to, to make up the proof he is there wanting in.

As for what he affirms, that the Apocrypha is read in greater proportion than
the Scripture; nothing more false. For,

1. All the Second Lessons throughout the Year, are out of the New Testament.

2. All Epistles and Gospels read on Sundays and Holy Days, are wholly out of
Canonical Scripture.

3. All First Lessons, on Sundays are out of the Old Testament, and none out of
the Apocrypha.

4. On the 33 Holy Days, on the Weekdays, there are but 26 Apocrypha First
Lessons, whereas there are 40 out of the Canonical Scripture.

5. When the Apocrypha is appointed to be read in Course, it is not clear two
Months for First Lessons, but the Holy Scripture is read all the other Ten
Months, and more.

6. Of the 39 Books of the Old Testament, but 3 are entirely omitted, viz.
Chronicles, and Canticles; but of the 13 of the Apocrypha, 6 are not read at
all.

7. Of the 929 Chapters of the Old Testament, 753 are read in course, and 176
only omitted (the reasons for which generally will appear to the Reader), but
out of the 172 Chapters of the Apocrypha, there are (not as he says 38) 66
omitted, and among them that of Tobit, that he objects against. Where methinks
he that pretends to have read and compared, should have had more value for his
own understanding, than to be beholding to others, and to say some have
observed; for there is nothing like a man's own observation in matter of Fact.

3. He says, The Liturgy advances the Apocrypha above the Scripture, by
intimating that they are more edifying, and can be less spared than many
portions of the Holy Canon; and by ordering them to be read on the highest
Holy Days, and many of them twice, some thrice in one year.

Methinks in such a round Charge as this, that the Liturgy advances the
Apocrypha above Scripture, he should have had more than an intimation for his
evidence. He calls it before, High Treason; and surely it is very hard to be
condemned for it by a bare Innuendo; and yet even he fails in his intimation.
For, 1. if it were true, that the Liturgy ordered the Apocrypha to be read on
the highest Holy Days, and many of them twice or thrice in the Year; it would
not follow, that they accounted them more edifying, and less to be spared than
Scripture; especially when Scripture is read on the highest Holy Days, and some
portions of it twice or thrice in the year too.

2. It Is not true, that it is ordered to he read on the highest Holy Days: For
on the highest Holy Days, there is nothing but Scripture to be read; such are
all the days dedicated to our Savior, as the Nativity, Circumcision, Epiphany,
Good Friday, Resurrection, Ascension; and all the Lords-days.

3. He says, Many of them are read twice, some thrice in the year. For the
twice, it is only 25 Chapters, viz. 7 in Wisdom, and 18 in Ecclesiasticus: And
as for his thrice, there is none but the 5th. Chapter of Wisdom, which after it
had been read on the Conversion of St. Paul, has 17 Verses of it read on
All Saints. But now, as to the Scripture, the whole New Testament, except the
Revelation, is read over thrice in the year in course, besides Epistles,
Gospels, and Lessons out of it on Holy Days. And the Old Testament is read over
once, except as before excepted, in course. And many Portions are read again in
the Service of Sundays and Holy Days, which amount to above 140 Lessons; and
some few have a third Course.

Would any one that observes this, think such a Writer, a Person of any care, I
had almost said Conscience; that utters as black Slanders as Pen can Write, or
Mouth can utter, and charges a whole Church with violating the Word of God, and
adding to it, and detracting from it, and of advancing human Writings above it,
and yet shall come off with changing a Seventh day for Sabbath, with leaving
out Hallelujah, with Intimations, and Falsities, with others Observations, that
pretends to have read and compared, and what not; and after all, charges us
with this, for Lessons appointed to be read in the Public Congregation, when
they themselves read none at all; and have no other Translation of Scripture,
than what was translated by us, and which they use in Common with us? This is
hard usage indeed; and if we should retort upon them in the like way, we should
think, if we may judge of their value for Scripture by their Public Service,
there are none have a less esteem for it than they, that read not one Chapter
of it by way of Lesson throughout the year, as has been before said.

4. He says, Such things are enjoined in the Common Prayer Book, as (to my
Conscience) cannot be practiced without Sin.

But what is this to those that are not obliged to practice them? What is it to
Laymen, that the Priests are required to give the Holy Communion to all
new-married Persons; or to use the Prayers over the Dead; or to put the Ring on
in Marriage; or use the Surplice, etc?

But what is this which cannot be practiced without Sin?

1. Ministers are required to give the Holy Communion to all new-married
Persons, whereas Marriage-Festivals used to be accompanied with such
Divertisements as unfit them. By this Doctrine, all that may Marry, may come to
the Lord's Supper, whereas Marriage is An Ordinance which Men as Men (and not
as Christians only) have a right unto. So that by this Prescription many will
eat and drink Damnation to themselves.

Ans. (1.) If this was required, yet it is not inconsistent with that state,
which is rightly called, The Holy Estate of Matrimony; and besides, those
Divertisements do not precede but follow.

(2.) Surely those Persons that are married amongst us, are supposed to be
Christians, and not to be married merely as Men.

(3.) If any eat and drink their own Damnation, it is their own fault; and the
danger of it does not release any of their Duty, or justify their neglect of it.

(4.) But the Common Prayer Book does not compel them; it says only, That it is
convenient at their Marriage, or at the first opportunity after it.

2. When any man is buried, the Priest must say, Almighty God has taken to
himself the Soul of our dear Brother, perhaps the most wicked Wretch on earth.
And that his Body is committed to the Ground, in sure and certain hope of a
Resurrection to Eternal Life; tho he did never truly, nor so much as visibly,
to the judgment of Charity, repent of his Sins.

A. (1.) The Office of Burial, supposes that of Visitation of the Sick to go
before, where the Minister is appointed to examine, Whether he repent him truly
of his Sins? etc.

(2.) It supposes the Exercise of Discipline, and that such as he speaks of,
have the Censures of the Church exercised on them, which if they be not
exercised, we know whom we are to thank for the relaxation of it.

(3.) However, the Church provides not for extraordinary, but ordinary Cases;
and if an extraordinary Case happens, and be notorious, no Rule of this nature
then binds.

(4.) If it be not notorious, it is safer to err on the charitable side.

(5.) It Is not now said, That it is certain hope of a Resurrection to Eternal
Life.

3. The putting on the Ring in Marriage, especially the making that Ceremony to
be an essential Matter, is Superstition.

A. (1.) What Superstition can there be in this, more than in joining of Hands,
both of which are Civil Rites, and fit Declarations of pledging their Troth to
each other?

(2.) How can that be Essential, which is one of the alterable things meant in
the Preface?

(3.) It Is necessary there should be some Rite used, and some actions by which
the espousal should be solemnized, and why not a Ring as well as joining hands?
And why not these as well as others? Therefore Bucer calls it, a very fit
Ceremony. Script. Angl. cens. c. 20.

4. Churching Women, and their Offerings, is Jewish Superstition.

A. (1.) Why Jewish? Is there any other Sacrifice than that of Thanksgiving
offered? as there was, Levit 12. 6.

(2.) What Superstition is there more in kneeling down at offering up Thanks to
God, than in putting up a Bill. However Bucer says, This is agreeable to
Scripture, c. 24.

5. The Observation of Popish Holy Days, especially such as are dedicated to
Saints, I look upon as highly Superstitious.

A. (1.) He looks upon them as such, but how far soever his Opinion may pass
with his own Disciples, yet others expect somewhat more.

(2.) Why does he add Popish? Surely he that has read and compared the Popish
Liturgy with ours, must needs know that we have no Holy Days for Popish Saints
in our Liturgy. As to which, I shall refer our Author to Mr. Perkins on Gal. 4.
10.

6. Of the Surplice, he says, It Is highly Superstitious. When Holy Vestments
were in use among the Jews, they had an express Command for them. Should they
have made a Mitre or Ephod, or other Ecclesiastical Garment of their own heads,
they would have sinned greatly? Witness Judge. 8. 27. If then the Church of God
had no power to appoint Sacred Vestments, no more has the Church in these days.
-- Moreover the Surplice is immediately borrowed from Idolatrous Mass-mongers.
-- Dr. Abbot (who was no Fanatic) says, That all Priestly Garments, whereby
Ministers are distinguished from the rest of the Church, are a special part of
the Character of the Beast. The Papists take the Surplice from Jews and
Heathens. There were Vestments for the Worshippers of Baal, 2 Kings 10. 12.
Bishop Jewel says, The Priests of Isis used to wear Linen Surplices. Moreover
the greatest part of our Protestant Divines have disliked this Superstitious
Garment. So Martyr, etc.

1. His Argument is, the Jews had express Command for their Garments, etc.

A. (1.) Had the Jews no Power to appoint or observe any thing relating to
Worship without express Command? How then came the Feasts of Purim and
Dedication, the Places and Houses of Prayer? Nay, whence came the alteration of
the posture at the Passover (which our Savior complied with) contrary to the
first institution? And surely Vestments are much of the same nature with Times
and Places, etc.

(2.) Supposing the Jews might not, what is that to us? Yes, says he, no more
can we. Why so? The Apostle shows we have a Liberty they had not, and we may as
well do what they could not, as forbear what they might not. They had not a
liberty as we, because under a Schoolmaster, and of a Temper that needed it,
and whose Service was Typical. And yet notwithstanding this, they had a liberty
which they might use, and much more then have we.

2. The Surplice, he says, is immediately borrowed from Idolatrous
Mass-mongers.

A. (1.) What is that, if there be no Idolatry borrowed with it? Do we use it
to sanctify Holy Water, Bells, etc?

(2.) As for his Quotation from Dr. Abbot, it is a gross mistake, at least; all
he says is, That the Buyers and Sellers, Rev. 13. 16. are the Bishops,
Priests, and Monks, that expose to sale Masses and Indulgences, etc. that bind
themselves by Oath to the Bishop of Rome, and in testimony of it, are divided
from the rest of the Church by Rites, Vows, Unctions, Tonsures, Garments. Where
he speaks of Garments in general, and no more of Surplices than Gowns; and of
Garments they ordinarily wear, such as belong to Monastic Orders, etc. But if
he had spoke of all Garments that distinguish the Clergy from the Laity, Dr.
Abbot had been in that a Fanatic, and not Dr. Abbot, who himself wore such
Garments, and surely did not think by that, he had a special Character of the
Beast upon him.

What he quotes from Bishop Jewel, is not in that place (if any where) he
refers to; neither in the English or Latin Volume.

3. The Papists take the Surplice from Jews and Heathens; and for this latter,
quotes the Priests of Baal.

A. But the Text does not say, they were any more White, than Blue or Black;
and he might as well have proved our Gowns we ordinarily wear, or others prove
their Cloaks to be such, as well as he prove our Surplices Heathenish from that
Text.

4. He says, The greatest part of our Protestant Divines have disliked it.

A. (1.) What says he to the Lutherans, who all use the like? Are not they
Protestants?

(2.) Do any he names dislike it so, as to think it unlawful?

(3.) Do they dislike it so, as to make a Schism in the Church; or for it
Separate from a Church?

I am certain these he produces, do declare just contrary. Thus Pet. Mart.
Epist. Amico and Hoopero, etc. Beza Epist. Grindallo. Zanchy Confess. c 25.. 30.
Hemingius in 4 Leg. Decal.. 29. etc. Enchir. tit. Adiaph. c. 16. Polanus in
Ezekiel. 44. And Zanchy chooses the Linen before the Woollen Garment for Divine
Offices, as a Sign of Innocence and Holiness, de Redempt. c. 16. I could much
enlarge the Catalogue of such Testimonies, if it were necessary.

So little did these Learned Men think Mr. Nichol's Argument of any force,
which our Author proposes viz. That all Vestments appropriated to the Worship
of God, and appointed for the Signification of Spiritual Duties, by the will of
Man, are unlawful. But the Surplice is so. This our Author says is, Not easy
to be answered* But if it be to be answered, no matter whether it is not easy in
his Opinion. From hence arise two Questions*

Q. 1. Whether it is unlawful to use any thing appropriated to the Worship of
God by the Will of Man?

Q. 2. Whether it is unlawful to use any thing in the Worship of God that is
appointed for the signification of Spiritual Duties by the Will of man?

By the first it is unlawful for men to appropriate places, or times, or
postures to the Worship of God. And so it is necessary, to avoid this
Superstition, to make all the Meeting-places to be houses of Merchandise, and
to be equally divided between Religious and Common Uses. By the 2d, any thing
that has such a Signification applied to it, is made unlawful, by Virtue of
such Signification, and which without such Signification would have been
lawful. So a Surplice would have been a lawful Garment, if not appropriated,
and without Signification; and might have been in its self worn as well as a
Cloak, since Custom and Use only makes the difference; but appropriate it, and
clap a signification upon it, it is unlawful: And so a Cloak may be turned out
of Service by the same way. So it is in posture, kneeling and standing are
indifferent; but once appropriate kneeling to Prayer, and make it
significative, and to be a posture of reverence, and it becomes unlawful. And
so without end. So much for Mr. Nichol's Argument, and it is difficulty.

7. Come we now to the Cross, the greatest Devil amongst all the Idols of Rome;
as he tells us Mr. Parker shows.

He says, 1. The first users of it were the Heretics, Valentinus and Montanus.

A. That seems hard, when those that wrote against them used it, as Origin,
Irenaeus, Tertullian, and Epiphanius did against the former; and several others
against the latter. We find it as ancient as Tertullian, Cyprian, etc.

2. He says, Mr. Parker proves it a sin against all the Commandments, and a
breach of the Letter of the second: for men to appoint a Religious Ceremony, is
a direct violation of the 2d Commandment, which forbids all human Inventions in
Divine Worship, as any part thereof.

A. There is a way of proving too much, and that any one that reads Mr. Parker
will soon perceive he does: And of this I take this Instance of the 2d
Commandment to be one, of the letter of which the Author says, the Cross is a
breach. Now the Letter of the Command respects two things; 1. Not to make any
Graven Image for Religious Worship. 2. Not to bow down to any such Object. Now
the Cross used in Baptism is an Aerial Cross, as he calls it; and where is the
Object or the Worship? But our Author goes on to prove it after this manner;
for men to appoint, etc. Here we grant the Proposition to be true, because God
only is to appoint his own Worship; and so it is not in the power of man to
appoint any part of it: But now if Religious Ceremonies may be, and yet not be
part of Divine Worship, then they are no such human Inventions as are
forbidden; and no direct or indirect violation of the 2d Commandment. Therefore
it remains upon him to prove the Cross a part of Divine Worship: For we say
it is only an adjunct, and is no more a part of Worship, than the striking the
Blood upon the Door-posts was (to make use of Zepperus his Similitude) or
sitting or kneeling at the Sacrament.

3. He says. The Arguments which are brought against the use of Oil, Cream,
Salt, Spittle in Baptism (practiced by the Papists) hold as well against the
Cross.

Ans. This I deny; for the Scripture speaks honorably of the Cross of Christ,
which this refers to, but not at all of the rest. Again, the Cross was traduced
and reproached by the Heathens, which gave occasion to the use of it, and so
were not the rest. So that this was used with reason; those without it.

His instance of the Gallows looks so profanely, that I shall rather pass it
by, than correct it.

4. He says, The Papists adore the Cross, and it is an Idol, etc.

Ans. But do they adore the Aerial Cross? But what is their Adoration (if it
were) to us, that do not adore it?

5. This has been testified against by Zegedinus, Lepperus (it should be
Zepperus) Goulartius, etc.

Ans. The Lutheran Churches use it. See Hemingius, etc. Bucer accounts it
neither indecent, nor unprofitable, but a Ceremony of much simplicity, and of
present admonition of the Cross of Christ; Script. Angl. censur. c. 12. And
generally they account it lawful, and not a sufficient reason for separation;
but to be used, so it be without Superstition. So Goulartius in Cypr. lib. ad
Demetr. c. 9.

8. His last Instance of Superstition is kneeling at the Sacrament. Let us
consider what he has to say against it.

1. He says, Men pretend in it reverence to Christ; but Christ himself was
personally present, when his Disciples partook of the Lord's Supper; yet they
did not kneel, but used the Table Gesture then customary among the Jews.

Ans. (1.) How is he certain the Disciples did not kneel, but used the
customary Posture in receiving? For the Jews in the Passover changed Postures,
and did not throughout keep to that of discumbency. See D. Lightfoot.

(2.) The Question is not what they did, but what may lawfully be done? and
then the Question is, whether kneeling be unlawful?

(3.) They themselves no more observe our Savior's Posture, than the Jews did
that required at the first institution. Our Author words it cautiously, when he
says the Disciples used the Table Gesture then customary; for he well knew it
was not sitting, but leaning, or lying along, and that they used this by way of
signification.

(4.) If the Table be the Rule to guide us, then to put on our Hats is
suitable, as he knows who reasons.

2. He says, Good and Wise men have chosen great sufferings, rather than
comply with this Invention.

Ans. And there were good and wise men that compiled the Liturgy, and used and
enjoined this posture; which is an argument he seeks to overthrow, p. 16. And
as Good and wise men have allowed and approved it; and thought it by no means
allowable to separate and break Communion for it. Such as P. Martyr, Zanchy,
Beza, Zepperus, etc. Bains, Noyes, Ames, Cartwright, etc.

3. In Primitive times Christians did not kneel in the participation of the
Eucharist.

Ans. (1.) It Is certain they did not sit, for they had no Notion at all of a
Table Gesture, as appears by the use of the Word Altar, and that they counted
that a posture of irreverence.

(2.) If they stood (as he says) on the Lord's-days, their standing was a
posture of adoration, to be sure, when they received: So St. Cyril expressly,
Catech. 5.

(3.) It Is probable that on other days, when not obliged to stand, that they
kneeled; and since they received every day, on six Days they kneeled; So Just.
Mart. Respons. ad quest. 115. and that more especially, because they had a
Prayer at receiving, as we have.

4. He says, It was enjoined by Pope Honorius, being fitted to the Idolatry of
Transubstantiation, etc.

Ans. This is a mistake; for Honorius did first indeed decree Adoration to the
Host, but not kneeling at it. For that is a posture no where enjoined in the
Church of Rome; and some of them say, it ought to be received standing; but
which way, whether ^^^ing standing* or lying, or kneeling, is not material say
others, as the Pope Espenceus de adorat. Eucha. l. 2. c. 16.
himself ordinarily receives sitting, unless he celebrates; and then, as all
Priests then do, he receives standing. And all adore not at the receiving, but
at the elevation of the Host.

5. He says, That Religious Worship, which is before a Creature, and with
respect to it, having no allowance from God, is against the Commandment; but so
is kneeling before the Bread and Wine.

Ans. (1.) I question whether God ever allowed any Religious Worship before a
Creature, and with respect to a Creature; for that is Idolatry, and no
allowance from God can be supposed to Justify or require Idolatry.

(2.) I deny that there is any Religious Worship with respect to the Bread and
Wine; For that, says our Rubric, were Idolatry to be abhorred of all faithful
Christians. But it is only, as it is there said, for a signification of our
humble and grateful acknowledgment of the Benefits of Christ therein given to
all worthy receivers.

6. He draws a Conclusion from the whole, The English Liturgy is very Corrupt;
now to offer to the Lord a Corrupt thing, is evil, Mal. 1. 13.

Ans. A corrupt thing there, is what is plainly prohibited: Now let him prove
the things before disputed to be such: As for example, that kneeling is
forbidden. As for that place in Malachi, I leave to his perusal the Letter of
the Ministers of Old-England to those in New England, p. 14. where that is
explained.

CHAP. III.
Public Liturgies of humane Composure are an innovation, and deviation from
primitive Antiquity: And again, Set Forms of Prayer devised by men are an
Innovation.
FOR this he offers several Arguments.

1. Says he, Had a Liturgy been needful for the edification of the Church,
undoubtedly Christ, or the Apostles by his direction, would have composed one,
which none of them ever did. And therefore these men, who take upon them to
compose and impose a Liturgy on the Churches, assume to themselves more than
Apostolical Power.

Ans. I deny his consequence: For tho our Savior and his Apostles did,
declared and left all things essential to a Church, yet there were many things
needful to the edification of the Church in future Ages that were not expressly
provided for. Our Savior told the Apostles, that it should be given to them in
that hour what they should speak; and they spoke all Languages by present
infusion; and so were not obliged to think before, or study or learn a
Language; and this was with relation to the present condition of the Church in
those times. And there are no directions for after Ages to learn Languages,
etc. So there was a miraculous gift of Prayer in the Apostolical times (as St.
Chrysostom observes, Hom. 14. in Romans 8.) and no express directions given about
it, when that Gift should cease (as he says it did) and when by the cessation
of it, Forms would be necessary. Thus faith Capellus (These. Salmur. Part. 3.)
As soon as miraculous Gifts ceased, and Heretics began to trouble the Church,
there was a necessity for Liturgies. And therefore Mr. Ball says, The
Christian Churches for the space of this 1400 years at least, if not from the
Apostles times, have had their stinted Liturgies. Trial. p. 96, etc. So Letter
of Min. of Old-England, l. 66* etc.

But this our Author denies, and calls it an Innovation.

And says, 2. The Liturgies fathered on the Apostles, and the ancient Writers
(called Fathers) Learned men have evinced to be spurious.

Ans. (1.) It Is granted, that those fathered on the Apostles were so; but tho
not the Apostles, yet many of the Prayers in them were ancient, and the main of
that called St. James's, was used in the Church at Jerusalem, as Dr. Comber
[Original and Use of Liturgies, p. 97.] in Answer to Clarkson, has showed from
Cyril.

(2.) It Is certain there was a Liturgy composed by St. Chrysostom and Basil,
and a great part of what is so called was certainly theirs; as the abovesaid
Author has showed, p. 167. 172, 209. and of this mind were Of the Mass, l. 1.
c. 6.
Mornay and Censur. 9. 10.
Rivet.

(3.) The leaft that can be observed from these Books, is, that when those
Books were writ, then Liturgies were in use; so Daille; We deny not but many of
these Liturgies are ancient, and written about the beginning of the Fourth
Century, tho they were corrupted by Additions De cultu. Lat. l. 3. c. 13.
and Alterations at several times after their first original.

3. He would prove from an obscure Passage in Justin Martyr and Tertullian,
that there was no Book of Prayer used by Christians 200 years after Christ.

Ans. The Passage in Justin Martyr is, (...), Which our Author is forced to
corrupt, and add to, before he can work it to his purpose; for thus he
translates it, according as strength and utterance was afforded to him from
Heaven: whereas word for word it is, in like manner he [the President] offers
up Prayers to him [God] as he has Power, that is, as fervently as he could: and
so the same Phrase a little before. Of this see Dr. Comber, p. 33, etc. And as
little does the Passage in Tertullian make for his purpose, which is, That the
Christians prayed, Sine Monitore quia de pectore; which surely relates not to
the praying extempore; for what testimony was that of their Loyalty, more than
if they prayed by a Form; but his plain meaning is, they needed no Prompter (as
the Heathens) but prayed heartily for the Emperors, etc. as their Offices
showed.

4. He says, That there was no Liturgy in some Churches, or in general use in
the Church, for above 400 years, is manifest from Socrates; who says, There
were scarcely two Christians found who used the same words in Prayer, l. 5. c.
21.

Ans. (1.) Here he perverts again: For (1.) Socrates does not say two
Christians, but two Churches. (2.) He does not say, they used the same words,
but the same manner.

(2.) The Words of Socrates do not infer what he would have; for he says, In
Sum among all Sects you shall scarcely find two Churches agreeing in the
manner of Prayer: Which refers not to the Words, but the Ways, as before
described, viz. lighting up Candles, etc.

(3.) Supposing it was to be understood of the Words, what is that to Extempore
Prayer? for they may not have the same words, when yet they may have Forms. The
Historian's meaning is, That the Churches had different Forms of Prayer, as
well as different Rites: Mass. l. 1. c. 6.
So Mornay speaking of the Liturgies of the Greek and Latin Churches; Tho in
substance the Service of these Churches do agree, yet we must not think there
was one and the same Prescript Form observed, and kept in them all.

5. He says, Some plead, that in the Jewish Church of old there were Forms of
Prayer, besides those of Divine Inspiration; but what was not, are all late
composures.

Ans. 1. If there were Forms of old in the Jewish Church, of Divine
Inspiration, and those Forms to be used (as the Scripture shows) then it shows
that Forms may lawfully be used.

So Mornay Mass. l. 1. p. 19.
2. That the Jews had set-forms of human composure, of ancient times, Learned
men agree: So Mornay shows; and that the First Christians framed themselves
after this manner of Service.

3. Nay, Learned men observe, that Forms were used in our Savior's time; and
yet he is so far from condemning them, that Vol. 1. 157, 158, 161.
he attended their Service, and composed a form like to theirs. So Dr. Lightfoot.

So that we see he has failed throughout in his attempt of proving Liturgies
and set-forms an Innovation. But I can tell what is an Innovation; and that is,
To hold Liturgies unlawful.

CHAP. IV.
It Is an Apostasy in this Age of Light, to countenance or comply with the
Common Prayer Book Worship.
UPON this his chief Topic is:

That Good and Learned men have born witness against the Corruptions of the
English Liturgy, and chose to suffer rather than comply with it.

Ans. 1. There have been as Good and Learned men that have showed those not to
be Corruptions.

2. There have been several of his Learned and Good men, who he says, chose
rather to suffer, than sin, by complying with the Liturgy, that have showed
those Corruptions not to be a sufficient reason for Separation: So Mr.
Bradshaw, Mr. Nicols, etc.

3. They were so far from refusing Communion for them, that the Old
Nonconformists ordinarily and constantly used the Common Prayer Book in their
public Ministrations; as Mr. Ball, one of them, declares, Trial, p. 121, 155.

4. All of them testified against the Brownists, and against a separation from
the Church. It was (says Mr. Baxter) the Parish-Churches that had the Liturgy,
which Mr. Jacob the Father of the Congregational Party wrote for communion
with. The same I may say of Mr. Bradshaw, Dr. Ames, and other Nonconformists,
whom the Congregational Brethren think more favorable to their way.

In the close, our Author offers some farther Objections from the false and
corrupt Doctrine he pretends to find in the Liturgy.

(1.) As, that it is certain by God's word, that Children Baptized dying before
they commit actual sin, are undoubtedly saved: This, says he, savours of
Pelagianism.

Ans. I don't understand the falseness, or Pelagianism of it. It Is certain by
God's Word, that of such is the Kingdom of God, and so they must be capable of
it. If capable of it, it must be upon Gospel terms; but what terms they are
capable of but Baptism, I understand not.

(2.) That there are two Sacraments necessary to Salvation; which implies a
double Error, viz. that the Sacraments are necessary to Salvation; and that
there are more Sacraments of the New Testament than two.

Ans. I don't see wherein is the first Error, if he had truly represented it;
for it is said in the Catechism, two Sacraments generally necessary; that is,
that they are a Duty belonging to all persons that are capable of it; where
there are persons to baptize, and a Congregation to communicate with; and
therefore it is not said absolutely, but generally necessary.

As for the latter* a Sacrament is not a Scripture-word, but a Term of Art, and
so has been variously used and applied; and therefore to set out what it
means, the Church has defined what a Sacrament is, and then showed there are
but two: and so this Phrase is used to distinguish it from any other so called;
and that then none but these two are generally necessary to all Christians.

(3.) The Book says, Some Sins are deadly, as if the Popish distinction of
sins into Mortal and Venial, were a sound distinction.

Ans. How can that be, when Fornication, which is called deadly in the Liturgy,
in the Church of Rome is ordinarily accounted a Venial Sin; and when the
distinction between Mortal and Venial (as used in the Church of Rome) is so
contrary to the Doctrine of the Church of England? It Is plain that our Church
means thereby no other than heinous.

(4.) It Is said, Christ has redeemed all mankind.

Ans. The Scripture says, God will have all men to be saved; and that Christ
died for all, etc.

2. He argues farther, That A stinted Liturgy, is opposite to the Spirit of
Prayer, Ephesians. 6. 18.

Ans. (1.) If so, then the Spirit will not communicate it self in a Discourse
of prayer, p. 31.
Liturgy, or stinted Form of Prayer, contrary to the sense of all sober
Divines. So Dr. Owen: Supposing, says he, those who make use of, and plead for
Forms of Prayer, especially in public, do in a due manner prepare themselves
for it by holy meditation, etc. I do not judge that there is any such evil in
them, as that God will not communicate his Spirit to any in the use of them.

(2.) If so, then almost all Churches in the world for these 1300 Sacrileg.
desert. p. 102, etc.
years, at least, to this day (as Mr. Baxter allows) have been without the
Spirit of Prayer.

(3.) If so, then we cannot lawfully communicate in, or with a stinted Liturgy,
which has yet been approved by all Reformed Churches, as Apol. ^. 13.
Mr. Ball says; and Mr. Norton says it is lawful to embrace Communion with
Churches, where such Forms in Public worship are in use.

(4.) As for Ephesians. 6. 18. that we are to pray with all Prayer; why is that not
possible by a Liturgy, when there are in it Supplications, Prayers, and giving
of thanks?

3. He lets pass the Argument, from the mischief of a prescript Liturgy, and so
will I pass what follows from the trivial, unintelligible, and dirty
Reflections of it. For he knows we can match his Fiddler with Stories of some of
those that have been Eminent the other way, and could argue upon the sinfulness
of unpremeditated and conceived Prayer.

3. He says, Mr. Cotton speaks weightily, in saying, It Is unlawful to bring
ordinarily any other Book into the Public Worship of God, besides the Book of
God.

A. I know no difference between Reading and Reciting in this case; and I have
heard Mr. Cotton used a Form of Prayer in the Pulpit. See Clerk^ Collect. of
Lives, p. 38.
If he did not, yet all the Nonconformists in former times did, as far as ever I
could learn.

To close all; he undertakes to Answer an Objection, That Good men were the
first Collectors and Publishers of the Liturgy, and died Martyrs.

This he endeavors to answer; and yet when it is to serve his own Cause, it is a
considerable Argument. Thus says he before, The Corruptions of the Liturgy
have been born witness against by good Men; and his Father, a Holy Man,
suffered much for his Nonconformity, and what not. Now surely, if this sort of
arguing is good for them, it is good for us.

But he Replies further,

1. All Persons employed in it, were not good Men, as Day Bishop of Chichester.
He was a dissembling Hypocrite, pretending to be a Protestant, but afterward
showed himself to be a Papist.

A. Here he betrays gross ignorance, or somewhat worse. For tho Day was one of
the 18 Bishops employed for compiling the Service Book at first, Anno 1548. yet
at that time he was for Transubstantiation, and Solitary Masses, and against
having the Service in the Burnet's Reformat. Part 2. p. 62. and Number. 25.
Vulgar Tongue.

And when the next Review was, which was 1550. when Cranmer wrote to Bucer
about it, it does not appear that Day was concerned; nay, rather that he was
against it, for he refused to set his hand to the Book, before it was enacted
by a Law; and was afterward turned out of his Bishopric, and deprived. But to
say all in a word, What Ibid. p. 163* p. 203.
was this dissembling Hypocrite to those who were truly Pious Men, and acted
faithfully according to the Light they had? as our Author acknowledges.

2. He says, Good men changed their minds, so did Ridley and Cranmer.

Fox's Acts and Monuments, Fol. 1465.
A. Both gross mistakes. For Archbishop Cranmer took upon him to defend the
Common Prayer, Ministration of the Sacraments, and other Rites and Ceremonies,
when in Prison.

And Bishop Ridley, a little before his Martyrdom, in a Letter to Fox's Acts
and Monuments, Vol. 2. p. 1940.
his Friend, says, This Church had of late the whole Divine Service, all
Common and Public Prayers, framed to the true vein of Holy Scripture.

And again, after his condemnation, writing an Answer to Grindal, concerning
Knox's peremptory Exceptions against the Service Book; I grant, says he, a Man
(as he is) of Wit and Learning, may Vide Dr. Tailor.

Fox Martyr. p. 1521.


find apparent reasons; yet I suppose he cannot soundly by the Word of God so
disprove any thing in it.

3. He says, Others were much troubled at the Service Book; as Bishop Hooper,
and Mr. Rogers at home; and Calvin, Bucer, Martyr, Bullinger, etc. abroad. So
Alasco, and Knox, and the first Reformers in Scotland.

A. As for Hooper's dissatisfaction, it was not at the Liturgy, but the Vide
Burnet, p. 125 etc. 166.
Episcopal Vestments; in which also he at last complied.

And as for Bucer's mind, and Pet. Martyr's, the English Reader will find it in
the History of the Reformation, p. 154, 155. And Calvin Epist. 200 and 206. and
228. That of Alasco, printed Anno 1550. And that of Knox at Middelb. 1594.
to the English Exiles at Frankford, declares against a rigorous Opposition, and
was pleased that he retained Moderation in this Case.

As for Alasco and Knox, whatever they objected against the Liturgy, yet both
had their Public Offices, and Forms of Prayer.

4. He says, In Queen Elizabeth's time the Bishops made the Common Prayer Book
in several things worse, and more intolerable, than it was in the days of King
Edward 6.

A. 1. And I hope he will confess in many things better.

2. Why those Prayers, etc. were left out, he may see in the History of the
Reformation, p. 77, 170, 392.

The reason of which has been before justified.

3. There could be no great alteration to the worse, if that was all that he
mentions; and however is nothing to us, when the Rubric of the Communion is
restored.

And now, that he may end as he begun, as he would have our Service Book come
from Popery; so he will have it, That time will discover that some, who pretend
Zeal for the Common Prayer Book, are carrying on a design for Rome.

And time has discovered, that some of those who pretended Zeal against the
Common Prayer, carried on a design for Rome, and helped them forward in it, or
stood as it were Neuters; and that the Liturgy has not so much a tendency that
way, as Separation.

The World saw it in the late Reign, and found that the Church that uses the
Liturgy, was a Bulwark against Popery; and when those that were against the
Liturgy, either basely complied, fawned upon it, or cowardly were silent.

THe Second Question.

Q. 2. What reason have you to scruple the lawfulness of laying the Hand on the
Book, and Kissing the Book in Swearing?

To this he Answers,

1. We do not find in the Scripture the Lord's Servants were wont to swear
after this manner; we read of lifting up the hand, etc. which is a natural sign
of Worship.

A. 1. We find in Scripture, that they were wont to put the hand under the
Thigh in swearing: And thus the same Abraham that lift up his hand, required
his Servant to swear, by putting his hand under his Thigh, Genesis 24. 2. and so
Jacob made his Son Joseph to use the same Ceremony when he swore, Genesis 47. 29.
Now what natural Sign of Worship was in this Rite?

2. Since we find different Rites used, it is a sign that practice of the Lord's
Servants is to be no Rule to us in this matter; but that we are to govern our
selves by the Custom of the place where, and the People among whom we live, if
there be nothing in it self unlawful.

3. He says, and seems to allow it, That the Romans of old, and Italians, and
Spaniards, use to lift up the Finger when they swear solemnly. Now I conceive
lifting up the Finger is no natural Sign of Worship. And if it had any
signification, I know no reason why the Germans may not lift up three Fingers;
to intimate, they invoke the Sacred Trinity, which he says, he cannot justify.
Nor why we may not lay the Hand upon, and Kiss the Book, in token of belief of
it, and of our acting according to it, and of our being judged according to it.

For the Word of God does not prescribe in such cases.

2. He answers, Laying the Hand on the Book is a symbolizing with Popish
Idolaters, and Superstitious Jews.

A. 1. It Is not a symbolizing with Papists as such; since there are Papists
that use other Ceremonies in swearing, as he says, The Italians, Spaniards,
and Germans do. And therefore, if this be a reason, as we must not lift up the
Fingers, because they do so; so we must not lift up the Hand, because that is
not to be done, but we must lift up the Fingers too.

2. If it was customary among the Jews to produce the Law in giving an Oath, I
see no reason to condemn it; and so know no hurt to observe it. They used also
to adjure Persons, and our Savior readily answers to it, when thus called upon.

3. He replies, Kissing in a Religious way, is a gesture of Adoration. And he
closes it, This is clearly to Worship a Book; and so to give unto a Creature
that Honor which is due to God alone. And before he says, So help you and the
Contents of this Book; is not much better than when the Papists say, So help me
God, and these Holy Evangelists, which is gross Idolatry.

A. That Kissing may be a Token of Adoration, when the thing kissed is an
Object of Adoration, is acknowledged. But it is not a token of Adoration, when
the thing kissed is not an Object of Adoration. Thus kissing the Calves, and an
Image, is an act of Adoration, because the Object is an Object of Adoration;
but kissing the Book is not, because a Book is no Object of Adoration.

If it be asked, Why then is the Book kissed? I say, it is in token of
Reverence, as it is the Book of God; and which, if I so kiss every time I read
it, it is surely far from being Idolatry. And that it is so, appears from what
follows, So help me God, and the Contents of this Book: which is in different
ways, God by his Grace, and the Contents of this Book by their Instruction; the
one as the efficient, the other the Instrumental cause. And thus without doubt
it is meant in the old Form, So help me God, and these Holy Evangelists, that
is, the Gospel wrote by them; as the name of Moses is given in Scripture to his
Writings. So that in this sense it is neither Idolatry in them, nor any thing
like it in us. And we may as lawfully kiss the Book, as lift up the Hand, since
neither of them are prohibited by God's Law; and so being indifferent in
themselves, we may act as the case requires.

FINIS.

