THE EXCELLENCY OF A Public Spirit: Set forth in a SERMON Preached ( since
much enlarged) at the FUNERAL Of that late Reverend Divine Dr. SAMVEL ANNESLEY:
Who departed this Life Dec 31. 1696. In the 77th Year of his Age.

With a Brief Account of His LIFE and DEATH.

By Daniel Williams, Minister of the Gospel.

LONDON, Printed for John Dunton, at the Raven in Iewen street, 1697.

To that Flock of Christ, over which the Reverend Dr. Annesley was lately
Pastor.
Much honored and esteemed,
THis presents you with a Discourse (for substance) preached and printed at
your desire. I faintly hope its acceptance with many, when Justice is become a
stranger, and a mere honest Man a glorius Title. Public Usefulness must scarce
escape with the Brand of Folly with those, whole Trade is turned into tricking,
or account public Employs no more than a decent opportunity to cheat the
People. But Truth may profit them, unless a Zeal for their Disease will not
allow their reading what is directed for their recovery. To you, and some
others, this Subject must appear too plainly instamp'd with God's Image and
Authority, and a tendency to Common Weal, to admit the Censure of a Narrow
Spirit (however disguised) to be it is Standard. Especially, when this is what
commended your late Pastor to such unusual Affection, as you expressed to him
living, dying, yea, when dead. Yet this might be expected, seeing his very
Spirit is transfused into his People; by whose Bounty (in good part) he
performed such great Things for a common Good. Few Ministers, had such cause of
glorying in so many Public Spirited Hearers, as yours, Mr. Denham, Mr.
Hartley, Mr. Cockerill, with many now at rest, might be named; the living I
scarce forbear. The Sermon is much enlarged, and the Method somewhat changed,
that it may more contribute to common Serviceableness. What Is more desirable
than to Useful in making others so? Hence the eminent Services of Mr. Brand, so
revived the Dr. And hereby we most extend and pertuate public Benefits; yea,
often above our own Ability, and beyond our Life. Promote you that Design in this
barren Age, by putting this Tract into Hands who need it, and by your own
vigorous Example and Prayer's; that it may be seen the Spring of your Charity
and Christian Activeness, is more lasting than the Exemplary Life or Labors of
your deceased Guide. May you find, in Spirituals and Externals, there is that
scatters and yet increases: The liberal Soul shall be made fat; and he that
waters, shall be watered also himself And all of us be excited to more holy
Fervor, by the Death of two such as Dr. Annesley and fervent Mr. Oldfield in
one Day, and worthy Mr. James soon after. I am,

Your Servant in the Gospel, Daniel Williams.

THE EXCELLENCY OF A Public Spirit.
ACTS XIII. Ver. 36. For David, after he had served his own Generation, by the
Will of God, fell on sleep.


YOUR Request bringing me hither upon this sad Occasion, (your Venerable
Pastor's Death) I have made choice of this Text as proper to enforce an
Important Duty, which, though so little regarded by most in our Age, yet the
deceased was faithful in the practice of; yea, so Eminent, that I hope he will
be a moving Example to others in this, wherein the signal Excellency of his own
Life consisted.

The words read are part of St. Paul's Sermon to the Jews at Antioch, in which,
after a fit Introduction.

1. He proves Jesus to be the Christ from ver. 23. to 38. an Article which
(supposing the knowledge of God) has the greatest influence into all our
Religious Hopes and Duties; and therefore a firm assent thereto ought to be
more endeavored than I fear is usual with many, who boast of a Christian Name.
This point he argues from these Topics: Jesus was of David's Seed which the
Christ was to be, 23, 24. Jesus was he whom John (in such esteem with them) did
bear Testimony to, that he was the Christ, 24, 25. In the unjust condemnation
and barbarous killing of this Jesus, the Jews had unwittingly fulfilled, in
every circumstance, all the Prophecies, which foretold the unjust and cruel
usuages the Christ should meet with, 27, 28, 29. This Jesus God had certainly
raised from the Dead, according as it was in several places Prophesied of the
Christ, and promised to him; which Resurrection, was God's Testimony concerning
him, that he was his Eternal Son Incarnate. But lest any might object that that
Text, Ps. 16. 10. was fulfilled in David, the Apostle obviates this, by showing
that David lay in his Grave so long as to putrify, which the Christ was not to
do, neither did our Jesus; and by this occasion the words of my Text are
introduced, as David's Praise, which the Apostle would not omit, though his
Argument lies in that part of the Verse which I have not read, viz. He saw
Corruption. And the following v. 38, 39. are both Arguments for Jesus being the
Christ, in that forgiveness of sin (to which the Mosaic Ceremonies and
Sacrifices were altogether unavailable but as Types and Shadows respecting what
Jesus did and suffered) was preached through this Jesus.

2. And also a serious offer of forgiveness to all of them, made in the Name
and Authority of our Savior Christ.

3. He inforceth this with an awakening caution, viz. That they prevent not
their own Salvation, yea, aggravate not their Misery by rejecting this Jesus,
the Christ, the Lord; q. d. the Lord Jesus, fulfilling all that is foretold of
his Death and Resurrection; his being the Crucified and Risen Savior; yea, the
offer of that blessed forgiveness he purchased, will not suffice to your
Salvation, unless you also trust and receive him. Nay, if you receive him not,
and accept not Salvation in the way he proposes, your punishment will be sorer
than if forgiveness had been never offered; yea, than if there were no Savior,
v. 40, 41. for the profitable matter, not the mere connection, having thus far
diverted, I assume the Text, which gives us account,

1. Of David's Public Usefulness while living; he served his own Generation by
the Will of God. (...) and (...), being alike governed by the Verb (...),
causes another reading to be as Grammatical, viz. After he had served the Will
of God in his own Generation; (that of Erasmus being too remote to deserve much
regard, viz. That he fell asleep by the Will of God) yet the sense of both
readings alike secures the great Duty of Public Usefulness to be David's
Praise; for if you prefer the latter, his Service is determined to the Public
Weal in his own Generation, though it may more expressly include also his care for
his own Soul by his obedience to God's Will, as prescribing the Rule by which
we must be saved; (which was the Gospel Law then as truly as it is now) of
which, a faithful improvement of our Talents is no small part. But the order of
the words most favors our own Translation, which it is a fault needlessly to
recede from. The former part, viz. Serving his Generation, will be so enlarged
on as the scope of my discourse, that at present I need say no more than to
note, that the word Serve (...) is metaphorical, and denotes both the public
influence of David's Labors, and his great Subjection; it alludes to a Man's
Rowing in a Vessel under the conduct of a superior Pilot. The Royal Prophet was
but an Under Rower, i. e. as much under Divine Authority, and as dependant, as
if the meanest Man: He served in the Vessel, viz. the Church and State, the
safe Passage whereof he consulted, and subserved, as his principal business.

By the Will of God. God did not only serve his purposes by him, which the most
regardless and obstinate cannot prevent, but this Blessed Man did designedly
and faithfully serve those purposes God intended in his Age and Place; he
obeyed God's Will as he had notice of it, and what ever labor, expense or
danger attended it. This Will of God he still consulted, as to the matter and
manner of his performances. If you read the History of David's Life, and the
Book of Psalms, you will find the laudable Character in my Text evidenced in
almost an uninterrupted Series of public and profitable Actions, from his very
Youth to his Death: By him God saved Israel from greatest Dangers, he secured
their Peace, enlarged their Borders; he fought their Battles, united the
Tribes, brought the Ark to Zion, established the Public Worship, encouraged
and propagated real Piety, exemplified the Divine Law in the course of his
Practice; few are the instances wherein he came short of the Common Good as the
scope: yea, his Heart was so enlarged, as to resolve greater things than God
thought fit to permit his Execution of, as building the Temple, (for which,
nevertheless, he prepared the Materials) How solicitous was he that his
indisposed Age it self might not fail to be useful to God's Honor in his own,
yea, future Generations? Ps. 71. 17, 18. O God, thou have taught me from my
youth, and hitherto have I declared thy wondrous works. Now also, when I am old
and gray headed, O God forsake me not until I have showed thy strength to this
generation, and thy power to every one that is to come. A Life so eminently
useful might well warrant his saying, I bear up the pillars of the Earth, Ps.
73.5. deserve the peoples acknowledgment, 2 Samuel 18.3. Thou art worth ten
thousands of us, and answer the Testimony the Omniscient God gave beforehand
concerning him. Act. 13.22. I have found David a man after my own heart, who
will fulfill all my will.

2. David's Death: He fell asleep, after, not before he had faithfully served a
common good, nor later than he was capable to do so. Every Man is Immortal, be
his danger never so great, till he has accomplished the service God designeth
by him; and there is scarce a good Man (that knows himself such) but would live
till his course in service be finished, or would choose to live longer than he
can be serviceable: but when we are unfit to be Instruments of good to others,
and are wrought to a meetness for Glory, it is fit time others have our place
whom Providence has suited to God's further Designs, by somewhat peculiarly
fitted to the rising Generation.

The word by which David's Death is expressed (...), he lay him down to sleep,
which notes Death to be no terror to him, and that Resurrection would certainly
ensue.

The former part of the Text is what I shall principally insist on; therein
David is commended, and they who imitate his life partake of the like Honor.
Two Observations the words easily afford.

I Obs. It Is an excellent Character of a deceased Person, that by Faithfulness
and Diligence in his place, he has been eminently useful in his Generation.

To render this intelligible and useful, I shall, 1. Explain this Character. 2.
Give an account of some things requisite to render a Man eminently useful in
his Generation, who is capable to be so by his Gifts, Estate, Office, etc. 3.
Evidence the Excellency of this described Character.


For the Explication of this Character, I shall propose the following Heads,
which I think will render that Duty plain, which I would this Day call you to
the performance of.

1. God so disposes of Men in their respective Generations, that they are
capable of being benefited by each other.

The parts of a Political Body can no more say to each other, I have no need of
thee, than those of the Natural, 1 Cor. 12.21. which disposition of things is
the foundation of all Societies; Men need each other, and are receptive of
mutual Advantages: Conversation, Friendship, Families, Trades, Common Safety,
(and what not) are provided for hereby, and without it would be defeated and
cease, but the All-wise God has placed Men in that posture toward each other,
that no one is Self-sufficient. Some need Health, others Knowledge, others
Defense, others Food and Raiment, others Counsel, others Reproof and Spiritual
Instruction, others Comfort, and the like; in each of these respects, those
words of our Savior may be applied, Ioh. 12.8. The poor you have always with
you: some that need your help, many in a great degree, most in one sort or
other, so that none can pretend want of Objects, or Occasions, as a Plea why
they are not useful, they are daily at hand, and adapted to the Nature and
Proportion of your Talents; infinite Wisdom has contrived the several wants of
Mankind to give opportunity for employing that common Stock he has
distributed; and as wonderful is it, that those very wants be the great Means
that the several Possessors of that Common Stock receive benefit by the shares
thereof which they respectively do enjoy; for it is visible, that whatever any
one Man enjoys would leave him distressed, unless by exchanging that with
another, he were relieved by what that other Man possesses and himself wants.
Nay, that no Man may reflect on God as unkind to the World, because the Poor
are so many, it is worthy our admiration that Poverty it self is very conducive
to the Public Good; not only as it prevents much sin, but as it is the greatest
Spur to Diligence, Callings, Inventions and Services, which the Common Benefit
depends upon; yea, were none poor, every Man would be next to miserable, by
wanting all those conveniences which they now obtain by any other persons
Want, or desire of Wealth. Who would be Servants, private Soldiers, Seamen,
Handicrafts-men, etc. if none were poor? If some would study Law, Physic, etc.
it is from few of them that their Neighbors could expect the advantage of their
Arts. They who would sail to other Countries, and bring back any thing of their
peculiar growth, how few, if any besides themselves, should be the better for
them? I wish I might not say we should have fewer Preachers, and not many so
eager of Places in the Government. But I digress too far in justifying
Providence in such necessities among Men, as render them capable of being
benefited, and consequently in giving scope to others usefulness.

2. Every Man may be more or less useful to others; and every good Man is so.

Each may influence for benefit, though in different Kinds, and unequal Spheres.
He that has not Pounds, has his Mites; and, though he cannot profit Multitudes,
may benefit some few. If you cannot instruct the Ignorant, you can relieve the
Poor, and encourage the Ministry: Are you so indigent that you have nothing to
give, yet you may pray for many, and be Examples of Meekness and Patience. Some
are unfit to serve the Public, in an Office, who yet are capable to Vote for a
Man that is fit to serve. Divine Bounty has provided a supply among Men for
those Necessities to which Mankind is subject. But a great part of the Misery
of the World is owing to some Men's inordinate craving more than they need, and
to others not duly laying out what they are entrusted with for others: Whereas,
what God has distributed among Men, is a Common Stock to benefit the Body; and
of the several parts and sorts thereof I may say as of those Spiritual Gifts, 1
Cor. 12.7. They are all given to profit others with our selves.(...). God
allows not a Man in the Lord's Prayer so much as to ask daily Bread for himself
alone.

Totally to neglect the benefit of others, argues such Unfaithfulness to God,
and Injustice, yea Cruelty, to Men; that I repent not of saying, every good Man
is useful to others. To be good and not to do good, is a contradiction; as it
is to do good, and not to do that which is beneficial, Psalm 112.5. A good Man
shows favor, and lends. A be thou warmed, is equally an argument of a bad
Heart, and of a dead Faith, Iam. 2.16. That Religion which lies in mere Words,
though noisie; and in mere Hopes, though confident, will be found vain in its self,
and useless to its Owners; it will not be saving to our selves, if it be not
profitable to others.

3. God has rendered some Men capable of greater and more public service than
others.

It Is true of the public Store of Talents, as of our common Mother the Earth,
Eccles. 5.9. The profit of it is for all; nevertheless, some Parts are a richer
Soil than others. So some Men are far more capable of common Usefulness than
their Neighbors be: And this by God's disposal, what ever be the just means of
acquirement; yea, his permissive ordering has place, though the means be unjust.

Capacities for service are various, according to Men's Offices, Gifts, Estates,
Interest, Opportunities, and what ever else would render a Man publicly
Useful, were the Possessor thereof but faithful and diligent. The Degrees of
each of them determine to what measure a Man is capable to be a common
Blessing; whether he be actually so or not. Vain it were for any Man to pretend
himself less capable to do good than in truth he is, for God keeps a just
account of the Place every Man stands in, and the Talents each Man possesses;
and he has affixed a Charge of Service to the extent of every Man's Ability. A
Magistrate or Minister may do more good than a private Person, a rich Man than
a poor, one of great Parts than one of lesser: A Magistrate in higher Place
than another in a lower, a Minister eminently qualified, than one less so. It Is
sad that no Man fails to expect regard according to his utmost pre-eminence,
and yet few reckon themselves hereby under any greater Capacy for service: They
have no respect to that, though it be what God did most intend in the inequality
of his Gifts.

4. Men are obliged to usefulness in proportion to their respective Capacities
for it, and Call unto it.

Were it not so, God would not appear to intend any Glory to himself, or Good
to Men, by any thing wherein the greatest excels the vulgar. The instinct in
all Men (yea Brutes) which sets the good of the Community above ones private,
would be a vain impression, though the basest secretly commend it in another. But
this is written with so bright a Beam, that none can doubt it, without a great
reproach to God, the Governor of this World. What must you conceive him to be,
that appoints Magistracy, and yet leave the Magistrate at liberty to suffer the
innocent Subject to be exposed and injured, the People unreformed and
unpreserved? That he should institute the Office of the Ministry, and yet
allows the Minister to neglect teaching the Ignorant, awakening the Secure,
reproving the Scandalous, opposing the Heretic; comforting the Humble, and
edifying the Weak; especially when it is so evident, that performing those
several Acts, as the End of these Offices, are so necessary to the benefit of
Mankind, (which sufficiently proves the Offices themselves to be so). And it is
no less evident that God has appointed these Offices to those very ends, and
annexed his Injunctions that they be so applied and executed, Romans 13.3. Ephesians.
4.11, 12. can then the Officers be unobliged to exert that Authority which the
Office conveighs, for the good of that people over whom they thereby have
power, yea, and claim an honor from?

Men fond of such Trusts, will find they were not conferred as Feathers for
their Caps, or gratifications to their Lusts; Heaven's Stamp was not designed
to be set on poor Clay, to indulge our Pride, Covetousness, love of Dominion,
or undue Liberty, but for a Common Good.

As in Offices, so in other vouchsafements God has a regard to Service; and
therefore with a Charge of suitable usefulness it is, that he dispenses Riches
and Gifts, each degree whereof is committed to the Possessors as Stewards, to
lay them out to the Uses he assigned, nor is it long before you will all be
summoned to give an Account of your Stewardship, Luke 16.2. then you shall be
convinced you were not absolute Proprietors, to reserve, or use at pleasure,
one pound of your Estates, nor any degree of your Interest or Gifts, but that a
demand of Service increased proportionably to what you did possess.

You may remember I mentioned a Call to Service as well as a Capacity for it,
wherein I had respect to what is more peculiar to the Offices of Magistrates and
Ministers; and hereby I would prevent a mistake, as if mere Gifts, which fit us
for an Office, if we were called to it, did oblige us to do those things which
are peculiar to that Office whereto we are not called, which is an Usurpation,
whatever usefulness Men pretend. That there be Magistrates God has injoined;
how they should be Qualified, and their power Executed, he does also appoint.
But which particular Persons shall be Magistrates, and the extent of their
Power he has left to Rules adjusted by the Community whereto they belong; in
which respect, the Magistrate is called a Humane Creature, 1 Pet. 2.13. (...).

In like manner, Christ has Enacted that there be Ministers of the Gospel;
their Qualifications, Authority and Work, he has also described, which he
permits not Men to alter or limit. But he has made other Ministers Judges,
whether this or that proposed Man be so Qualified, and being found so to Ordain
him; and among them so approved, he has made Members of the Church the
ordinary Electors who shall be their more particular Minister, 1 Timothy c. 3. and
4.14, etc.

Nothing but confusion proceeds from Men's running before they are sent; and
ordinarily, as a proud conceit of their own Gifts, puts them out of their own
place, where alone God accepts their Service, and they might have been truly
useful to the utmost of their Gifts: so a mischief to the Public, and
prejudice to their own Spiritual State, proves at long-run the effect of their
Usurpation.

Is it needful to add, that a fit opportunity for real Service is a Call both
to accept of an Office tendered, and to every one Invested in an Office, to do
those Acts which belong thereto? As also, that a fit opportunity is a Call to
every Man, to employ for public benefit, his Riches, Gifts and Interest,
according to the place he is in; yea, and very common Danger and Benefit binds
us to more Expense and Activity than would be allowable in an ordinary
juncture, as Act. 4.34. They sold all, when saving any thing would expose the
Christian Cause in its tender beginnings; and this the Civil Weal of a Nation
may render as necessary.

5. The tendency of each Man's Actings to usefulness, in his Generation, lies
in doing the Work of his Day, for the benefit of others, suitably to the place
God has set him in.

The last Heads stated the degree of Men's Capacities for Service, and
Obligation to improve them according to their Call thereto; this head is
designed to regulate all Men's Endeavors, so as that a common Good may be
subserved thereby. We have an Example, which, if imitated by every Man, would
result in the general benefit, Nehem. c. 3. Each Man built and repaired the
Walls of Jerusalem, to his proportion, in his place and order, whereby the
whole Work was done for the common Defense, and every Man's particular Labor
contributed to that Public Good, and was found therein. Comformably whereto, a
National Good must be promoted, if the Magistrate would attend to the Civil
Government, Ministers of the Gospel to Doctrine and the Administration of
Worship, and Discipline without corporal Punishments. The Rich, to distribute
to public and private Necessities; the Prudent, to give Advice; Men of Power,
to execute well-advised Things; and high and low employed according to their
Station, that the common Good suffer not by any of their Neglects or
Usurpations. Then indeed the sad Chasmes in the Public would be made up; new
Heavens and a new Earth in a great degree commence. Ambition on the one hand,
and Envy on the other, would be much allayed; For who would exorbitantly seek
that which he fore knows he must use for others rather than enjoy himself? What
place for Envy, when I see my self and others better served by every thing
wherein another is advanced above me? Alas, how easy is it to commend this,
and own its conduciveness to universal Benefit! But the World groaneth under
the contrary; every Man throws off the Care, Labor and Charge the Public is
to be served by, and intends little besides Honor and Profit upon the public
Spoil. Every Man seeks his own things, Phil. 2.21. And this to such a degree,
that the blindest cannot doubt a Providence, in that the common Good is served
even so far as it is; when it is so little designed by most of Men in any
station; and that this must be by God's overruling the general selfishness to
that Good, which in its own Nature (were it not for a Superior Hand) tends to
the ruin of the Public, as such; especially when we find the generality of
Men of greatest influence most culpable in that respect, and the residue so
unconcerned. O that God would awaken a more Public Spirit in this Age, when
love to God, to his Church, yea to our Country, is so extinguished by carnal
selfishness; then every thing whereby each Man is fitted for eminent Service,
would be as signally laid out, as the public Welfare did require. And few Men's
Capacities for general Benefit are contracted to one Particular, but multiplied
according to the variety of their Talents, Relations, and Opportunities: It
follows therefore, that a Man's place for service is commensurate to that
variety, and not confined to one, however Eminent it be. To conclude, a
tendency to public service is then greatest when there is a regular
Application of every Man's several Office, Relation, and Talent, to the common
Good: Yet all this must be done with a special Regard to that which is the
peculiar work of our Day; even that which is principally designed by Providence
to be contributed to by our various Abilities. This must not be omitted on the
account of any thing more ordinary or easy; for the peculiar work of every Age
and Place, has the highest Consequences to that Age and Place depending on it;
by that every Man's Fidelity is most tried; and a mistake in that renders Men
most publicly hurtful, as the promoting thereof makes a Man the most
beneficial in his Generation. Of this hereafter.

6. He is faithful in his Age, who, uprightly designing to serve God, and his
Generation, diligently employs his Talents to promote a common Good, in the
greatest Instances of which he is capable.

This is a provision against the Discouragements to which persons, of a low
Figure, with honest Minds, are subject: However, let such know, they may be
Faithful, though not eminently Useful. If what little they can do be uprightly
designed, and with a willing Heart performed, it finds more acceptance with
God, than greater things done, from carnal Designs, though, perhaps, over ruled
by God to further use than they intended. If want of Ability be the only
restraint, God will Judge us by our large Minds, and not our narrow Power, 2
Cor. 8.12. A gift of two Mites, when our All, is esteemed to be more than
greater gifts, when disproportionable to a larger Stock reserved. But then you
must be sure, not to look at your own things, but also at the things of others,
Phil. 2.4. and cordially employ your little, being you have no more; for he is
unfaithful, who, by sloth, or other carnal respects, omits to be useful to his
utmost; because he cannot equal the more Eminent; greater Abilities would but
more discover the falseness of such a Man. Under the Law, one Lamb was admitted
instead of two, but it was when the Leper was poor, and could not get so much,
Lev. 14. v. 21. but this one Lamb must be brought; so something, yea, the best
we can must be performed for God's glory, and a common benefit, or we vainly
pretend to Faithfulness; and as vainly, if Idleness or Waste, be the things we
indulge to make us capable of doing but so very little. Unusefulness, by
incapacity of our own causing, is as culpable as unusefulness when we are
capable; nor, deserves he the Name of a good Man, whose Laziness prevents, or
Lusts devour, what would qualify him for eminent service, although he do give
and act according to what remisser Labors have gotten, or his Excesses have
left still in his hand. Painfulness, and decent Thrift, to enable us to do
great things, are most laudable, notwithstanding the silly World's reflections;
and he has the greatest Soul, who despises these from a Mind intent on
greatest service.

7. The eminently useful Man, in his Generation, is he whose great capacity,
for service, is vigorously, constantly and wisely employed, to do that good
which is signally profitable, in the importance, difficulty, and extensiveness
thereof, in his Day.

With the Light afforded in the former Heads, this gives you the whole of the
Character I proposed to explain.

Here I suppose a Man greatly capable of Service, by Power or Parts, or Estate,
with any such other Advantages for usefulness; there remain two things
constitutive of this Character, as principally respecting the Eminency of this
Man's usefulness.

1. The Nature of the Work to which he applies his Abilities.

2. The manner how he employs his Abilities, in prosecuting what is signally
profitable.

1. The Nature of the Work to which an eminently useful Person employs his
Abilities, which this head gives you under various Epithites.

It Is that which is a good Work, and not sinful; it is a profitable Work, not
hurtful, or merely innocent, which is the highest that even the Civiler part of
Men do aim at, no, it is what benefits Men. It Is signally profitable; not in
mean, low, and remiss degrees. 1. The signal profitableness thereof is in the
importance of the good subserved, not what is trivial or inconsiderable, but
such as the salvation of Souls, preserving Men's Lives, securing public
Liberties and Peace, supporting the Esteem of useful Persons, vindicating the
Oppressed, defending the Truth, and opposing destructive Errors; putting a stop
to the attempts of Church Dividers, propagating a Gospel Ministry, breeding and
qualifying Men for eminent Service in Church or State, as young Scholars; and
voting for, and procuring the fittest Persons for Offices in Church and State,
Employing and Relieving the Poor, etc. And as it is signal in the importance of
the Work,

So, 2. in the difficulty of it; when it is not easy, but hard, not cheap, but
expensive, not safe, but dangerous; when, as often it falls out, a Man, in the
doing of it, is exposed to great Expenses, deep Studies, hard Labor,
displeasure of Friends, vilest Reproaches, loss of Estate, Persecution to
Imprisonment. Bodily Torments, yea. Death it self. When such things attend our
Service, and a good Work cannot be prosecuted with an exemption from such
Calamities, it proclaims Endeavors great, and the Man eminently useful; and
the rather, because the good end, prosecuted at so dear a rate, will be
undertaken by very few, and yet these difficulties manifest it is of greatest
concernment that it be pursued, for otherwise Satan, and the corrupt part of
Men, would not so oppose. The Apostle's Work was signally useful in this
respect, see 1 Cor. 9.11. Such with all the other Martyrs were eminently
useful, in that they endured so much for Witnessing to the Truths, and
Instructing and Reforming the World in their Day: Of whom it is justly said, The
World was not worthy, Heb. 11.38.

3. But with the difficulty, the extensiveness of this good is greatly to be
regarded, as what denotes it important.

This extensiveness regards variety of Benefits, and reaches to the greater
number of Objects. It Is not in a few things, nor to a few persons, that eminent
usefulness extends; most useful is he who can do most good to most persons
(especially influencing ones). He who benefiteth the greatest number of People
in whatever may be truly profitable to them, as a means of their Happiness in
their Soul, Peace, Health, Plenty, Freedom, Credit, Comfort, and the like,
principally in what makes them Happy for ever, next in what contributes to make
them safe, easy, and useful in time. And, if besides being profitable to
multitudes while we live, we can also serve succeeding Ages, it heightens the
Character, Psalm. 79.13. We will show forth thy praise to all Generations.

2. The manner how the Eminently Useful employ their capacities in prosecuting
what is signally profitable.

It Is not lazily, or remisly, but with vigor; with all his might. Diligence
must be great, and the Heart intently engaged in it; as our (...) not (...),
our Business, not Diversion; to spend and to be spent therein, 2 Cor. 12.15.
the Rule is great, Romans 12.7, 8, 11. neither must it be seldom, or by fits and
starts; not late attempted, or soon deserted, but constantly: Happy is he who
begins early, lasts long, and never cease to serve his Generation till God
calls him off the Stage. Blessed is he, whom his Master, when he comes, finds
so doing, Mat. 24 46. nor is it to be forgotten that it must be managed wisely,
otherwise the useful tendency of great endeavors, well designed, may be
lessened, if not defeated. Prudent application of fit and just means, is
needful to accomplish so highly a valuable end; of which hereafter.

8. The mere want, of proportionable success abates not a Man's eminent
usefulness, as to his own Excellency or Benefit, though success be greatly
desirable, and gratefully to be acknowledged. Is. 49.45. I have labored in
vain, and spent my strength for naught, yet is my work with the Lord; and though
Israel be not gathered, yet shall I be glorious in the eyes of the Lord. This
may be applied by every useful Minister.

Events are not in our hands, and therefore it is not: by them we shall be
Judged or Rewarded; the faithful Labourer is as well pleasing to God, in the
pains he took with them that perish, as them who are saved, 2 Cor. 2.15, 16. If
you have done great things to recover Men, you will be no loser, though Sinners be
hardened, or Errors prevail. What though Men abuse the Money you bestow, and
prove hurtful by the encouragement you have given; what though contrary events
have followed your just Endeavors; Confusion for Order, Disquiet for Peace,
etc. this will lie at the Door of such who were the culpable Causes of such
preposterous Effects, and you will no more be blamed than the Heavens that
dropped Dew on that Earth which brought forth Briars and Thorns, Heb. 6.8.

2. I shall now give an Account of some things requisite to render a Man
eminently useful in his Generation, who is capable by his Office, Gifts, or
Estate, to be so; wherein I shall have especial regard to Ministers, though not
only them.

I shall distribute them under three Heads.

1. Such things as are needful to incline them to become intently willing to
employ themselves in serving a Common Good. Ability, without a readiness of
mind to, and solicitousness for the Honor of God and good of Men, will never
make us serviceable. To engage your Hearts herein, it is necessary. 1. That you
have a believing view of invisible things. Of God, as he who has a full
Authority over you, to command you to this Work; as he who has an absolute
Propriety in you and yours, and therefore may dispose of you, and all you have,
to what Service he pleases; to refuse which is Sacrilege in you, who have
dedicated your selves to him. Believe a Judgment-Day, when you must Account for
all; keep sight of Christ, who bought Souls with his Blood, and whom it cost so
much to Redeem you for his Service; be at a certainty about the worth of Souls,
your own and others.

And of the dreadful Misery of such who die unconverted, or unfruitful; realize
sinners woeful state, when they cry, Come and help us, Acts 16.9. and thy own if
thou refusest. Beg Faith of Christ, who is the Author and the Finisher of it:
This is that by which unseen things are evident, Heb. 11.1. without which
Evidence we lose what must affect and move us in our service to Souls. Knowing
the terror of the Lord, we persuade Men, 2 Cor. 5.11. Every Man's unbelief is
equal to his unserviceableness; and as our Faith is, will our usefulness be.

2. Love to God and Man is needful to excite us to Usefulness. This constrains
us to express our gratitude to God, who has done so much for us when
miserable; and to be beneficial to Men, whose Misery we believe and pity.
Strong Love will answer all those Excuses which have their rise in Enmity to
God and Men; the remains whereof govern the best Man as far as he is
unprofitable. By this Divine Passion poor Endeavors will be disdained, and the
most expensive be no cause of regret; yea, a pleasure rises with the height of
the performance; and God's inclining us to do so much, becomes the very Matter
of our Praises to him; as 1 Chronicles. 29.14, 15. Keep then this holy Fire blazing,
it will always point you work, and find you strength to do it. Nay, it will put
you to pain, whiles unemployed, and make you solicitous that it be to purpose.
This, this was it put Paul in travel, till Christ was formed in those, Gal.
4.19.

3. A Public Spirit is also needful to the same End.

This is the immediate effect of Love; it is the Heart dilated by it. This is
the next Spring that sets all the Wheels in motion, which otherwise stand still
within the Precincts of narrow self. How became David such a public Blessing
he tells you, Psalm 137.6. If I prefer not Jerusalem above my chief Joy, let my
right hand forget her cunning. The vastest Stock is productive of little in
that Man's Hand who is all for himself; whether self in his own Person, or self
in his Family, yea, or self in his own Party and Faction.

But a Public Spirit will be contriving and aiming at a common Benefit above
his own, in this will such a one delight, and this he must pursue, because it
moves as a common Soul related to, and concerned in all Men, well knowing God
has an interest in each, and ones self to be but a small part of the whole,
and therefore to be less regarded than that wherein God's glory is infinitely
more displayed, and from which a so far greater Tribute of Honor and Service
will redound. Therefore be earnest with God to enlarge thy Heart, and bring it
more under the power of that Relation wherein thou stand to the Catholic
Church, yea, to all Men, otherwise thou will be apt, with Cain, to say of thy
very Brother, Am I his Keeper? Genesis 4.9. Own thy self, with St. Paul, a Debtor
both to the Greeks and to the Jews, to the Wise, and to the Unwise, Romans 1.14.
A narrow Spirit is a common Plague, abhor and deprecate it as Unchristian and
Inhumane; while it prevails, I can hardly hope thou can get to Heaven, but
all may freely say, it is no matter how soon it be that thou were there. Look at
Christ, who made himself Poor that he might make many Rich, 2 Cor. 8. 9. and
blush that thou wearest his Name, whiles thy Money Rusts, and so many Poor do
starve. But happy is that Public Spirit, that can scarce relish his own
Felicity, when he sees so many Miserable, but is bound with them that are in
bonds, Heb. 13.3. by this Spirit a Man is bent for God, and a Public Good, and
without it all beyond self, (in that cursed self) is as nothing to him, a mere
Galio, caring for neither God, nor Souls, Church nor State. You see, that to
incline you to Eminent Usefulness, you must get, improve, and exercise Faith
and Love with a Public Spirit; these will employ your Abilities for service.

2. If you would be eminently Useful, you must get such things as will fix and
relieve you against those Difficulties which attend eminent Usefulness. Good
Inclinations and Resolves will be tried in a course of public Service; and as
the Trials will be different, our Preservatives and Supports should be as
various. Indeed, Faith, Love, and a public Spirit, which excite a Man to great
Attempts for a public Good, do also yield Relief against discouragement in the
prosecution of them. Yea, Faith derives supporting Strength from Christ, as he
is our Head of Influence as well as Conduct. But, besides these.

1. Be truly humble. The proud Heart will scorn to stoop to many things which
Public Service requires; nor endure the Debasements which it will expose to,
and so the Work will be half done at first, and forsaken at last, as too
grating on a proud Spirit, which forms Projects more agreeable to an aspiring
Mind. But, if you are clothed with Humility, you will be fitted to stoop
cheerfully to what ever your Work calls you to condescend, and with easiness of
Mind to endure the Contempt which you will meet with from such you design to be
useful to. Can you, without great Humility, use such plain Words as the
Ignorant understand, inculcate the same thing often, admit a familiar Freedom
to the Poor and Mean, go into nasty Cottages, hear much Weakness and Nonsense,
without discouraging the Silly from saying any more? Can you, and not be
humble, become all things to all Men, that you may win some, and be a Servant
to all that you may gain the more? 1 Cor. 9.19, 21. Yea, you may meet with
Affronts and Scorns, with Slanders and Reproach, from the very poor whom you
endeavor to benefit in Soul and Body too; Pride will soon disdain all such
Work, but so must not you, unless you cease to be a Public Blessing. Be
humble, i. e. look at your selves, vile Dust and Ashes, as bad by Nature as the
most wicked you would Reform, and worthy to be as poor as the most Indigent you
(...) and not too good to be employed (...) in the meanest Services,
(...)really honored to be used in such as this (...)irs, and this seems
har(...)s too debasing, ask, may not that (...) better fit me, which was in
Christ Jesus my Lord, who made himself of no reputation, Phil. 2.5.

2. Be weaned from the World, mortified to all in it, and well content with
what God has reserved in Heaven for you; what you make your Portion, that will
prescribe your Work. If your Happiness is confined to Flesh and Time, you will
soon quit what seldom contributes to it, and is daily exposing it to hazard,
yea, often to ruin. Even Public Spirited Men, for their Country, venture all in
common Danger, yet, after Success, they get the least; it is often more than so
with Men who are engaged for the Testimony of Christ, and good of Souls:
Worldly Affections can never drive this Trade; Covetousness, Effeminateness,
fondness of Relations, excessive love of Life, Ease and Pleasure, will obstruct
you, when the Expenses, Losses, Pains and Dangers of Eminent Undertakings,
present themselves.

Therefore be Crucified to the World, if ever you would be Useful in it; and
let it be a dead Carcass in your Account, if you would not be hindered by it in
your best Designs. Cherish Heavenly Affections, and with pleasure often view your
chosen Portion, otherwise an irregular Appetite will press too hard, to let you
be much of long engaged in a Work that is so far from gratifying it. This way
Moses became so profitable to his People, Heb. 11.25, 26. and Paul to Jews and
Gentiles, 2 Cor. 5.12, 15, 18.

3. Get true Christian Fortitude: And this will unite, fix and steel the Heart
against all Onsets which try your Patience, Courage and Resolutions, Rev. 2. 3.
A pusillanimous Man will refuse what is difficult, and forsake what is dangerous;
or, so demean himself under it, as to frustrate a good Effect. The truest
Courage will be put to a stand, for Satan singleth out the eminently Useful, to
level all his Darts against; his own Votaries he will employ to persecute them;
whatever in civil Men is to be made use of shall conspire to make your Work
difficult, and you unhappy and uneasy; nothing shall be wanting to terrify or
bribe you, to tire or distress you, Rev. 2.102.3

2. Envy also still accompanies signal usefulness, which often renders your
Friends more grievous to you than your professed Enemies. In every Age it is
found, the spirit within us lusts to envy, Jam. 4.5. I wish all good Men,
yea, we Ministers, could also find with the Apostle; but God gives more grace:
Yet as unreasonable and devilish as Envy is, you must expect it, and be
prepared to endure the Effects thereof, but still with a Mind no more averse
from your Work, or indifferent to it; other than avoid all Oftentation, to
conceal what of your Work you can, and to but omit none, unless you can get it
done by another hand.

3. If you are called to serve your Generation, by opposing the Errors, or
Church-dividing Practices, of any considerable Sects, pretending to Zeal for
Truth, (though never so falsely) and to a purer Form of Administration, (though in
all that highly Superstitious) you will find those violent and base Methods to
asperse and sink you, which very Pagans would abhor to use; yet this must not
abate your Testimony, nor incline you in the least to betray the Truth, or to
seem to approve of their Unchristian Attempts against the Common Good; neither
suffer your Spirit to be infected and debased, to a resemblance of theirs, in
Malice, Rancour, Wrath, Rage, or Revengefulness, which is so contrary to the
Spirit of Christ, as to make you justly suspect you were no appointed Advocate
for his Truth and Interest. And alike careful must you be, that the highest
provocations prevail not with you, to vindicate your self by ways that (all
things duly considered) appear a greater damage to the Public Good, than the
single Interest of your Person can countervail.

I have given you some hints of the Exercise which you ought to provide
against, lest a surprise cause you to quit, or disserve the Blessed Work you
are called to.

4. Yet, it is true, it may prove more creditable, safe and easy, if it be only
beneficial to Men's Bodies or Estates, for against that sort, Satan and the
World make less resistance, unless it affect the Public in somewhat wherein
Factions are concerned. Yea, it may be less hazardous and grievous, if it
profit Men's Souls, if it be only in points which Christ has gained a
reputation to, and that you have many to assist you in the Defense of,
especially if your motion be but equal with those many, because such things are
familiarized, or have obtained a greater interest in the Consciences of Men,
and the remaining Stream of Opposition is divided.

5. But the most eminent Usefulness is much determined to those points which
are difficult as still deciding, and wherein the Interest of Christ, in your
Day and Place, is the subject of a present Contest between Christ with his
Instruments on the one side, and Satan with his on the other. In such cases
there will be great opposition, as far as Satan can influence any, either by
their Ignorance, Malignity worldly Considerations, Pride, or Custom, etc. And
generally the Contenders on Christ's part are at first but few, especially the
more eminent ones; and therefore it necessarily follows that such must be
exposed. It were easy to instance all this in the case of introducing the
Gospel where it was not before, in the reformation of Worship or Discipline,
where they have been corrupted, in opposing and detecting false Doctrines which
many have imbibed, and long entertained; in reclaiming a degenerate People from
evil practices much indulged; in resisting incroaching Errors and Disorders,
abetted by a considerable Number of great Zealots, especially if they have some
plausible Pretensions, suited to the disposition of sober ignorant People; and
that some more than common Spirit and Fervor do attend the Seducers, which is
very usual. But this is less needful, having cautioned you as to the Snares,
and forewarned you of the Danger.

6. Therefore may not I with reason ask you? Can a feeble Mind, or unfortified
Heart, persist in great Endeavors, and in the face of such Dufficulties
steadily pursue his glorious End? No; he must succumb, and will quit the
plainest and most important Truth or Duty. The Interest of Christ will say of
these as in Paul's case; No Man stood with me, all (these) Men forsook me, 2 Timothy 4.16. Therefore watch against all declinings in holy Christian Courage
(merely natural will not serve, though it is a good preparative,) pray with hope
for renewed Vigor, that you may find, as Psalm 69.32. your Heart shall live
that seek God; and that he is the strength of your Heart, when all else fails
you, Psalm 73.26. When the Onset is vigorous, and begins to impress, be then
strong in the Lord, and in the power of his might, Ephesians. 6.10. To that End,
remember whose Cause you plead, and who employs you: Read often your Commission,
where you will find a promise fit to revive your very fainting Spirit, Matthew.
28.20. Lo, I am with you to the end of the World. One less faithful and
compassionate than our Savior is (if possessed of Power) would not suffer any
Servant he employed to sink, in a Business wherein himself has the greatest
concernment. If your Hearts be upright, and you have God's Work in hand the
more eminently you are employed the greater Supports you will find; and in the
most difficult Enterprise he is careful to give the greatest assurance, Ier. 1.
7, 8, 18. Ezekiel. 3. 8, 9. One promise he can so spirit and fill with Power, that
it shall set thy Soul above all Fears; and cause Strength to advance to thy own
feeling in very extremity, above what it appeared in the easiest of thy ways:
Trust then in him with thy whole Heart. And because what repels our Fears tends
to encourage us, it is not improper often seriously to think what far greater
mischiefs we escape, by not drawing back, or doing the work of the Lord
deceitfully, than what can attend a faithful discharge of our work, which has
so great a reward when finished, Heb. 10.38. Rev. 3.5.

Herewith I have finished an Account of what is necessary to support us under
the Difficulties attending public Usefulness, viz. Humility, mortifiedness to
the World, and Christian Fortitude.

3. Several things are needful as tending to secure, or at least facilitate the
success of your Work persisted in.

Herein we should be solicitous that, as much as in us lies, the End we propose
may not be defeated, but that those receive that profit, which we sincerely
conduce to, by our Endeavors; whereby we may eventually prove Blessings to
them. To this End,

1. You must duly address your selves to God, to engage his Help. Be much in
Prayer to, and dependence on God through Christ our Mediator. Look to him for
Direction, that you may not mistake your Work, nor the best way to perform it:
Seek to him for abundant Anointings, that you may not be unqualified in
proportion to your Undertaking. His constant Assistance and Blessing must be
fervently implored, Neh. 1.11. without which your most probable Attempts will
be vain, yea turn to your reproach and shame. And that you may be in the
likelier posture for a gracious Return, keep all clear between God and your own
Consciences; regard to iniquity in your heart, Psalm. 66.18. Rely on Christ's
Merits and Intercession; and be always ready to ascribe to God the entire Glory
of all your serviceableness and success; for he is a jealous God, and generally
blasteth that wherein he is not acknowledged; we must make God all in all, if
we would signify any thing.

2. Be careful of your own Behavior before those to whom you endeavor to be
profitable; that it conduce to, and do not hinder your Usefulness. Prevent all
Prejudices, gain their Affection and Esteem; possess them with a sense of your
Kindness to them, good Designs toward them, and your own Belief of, and
earnestness of Soul for the matters you call them to entertain and submit to;
exercise great Patience, Meekness and Tenderness; and see that your whole
Behavior be circumspect, and your Life exemplary, 1 Pet. 5.3. that they may
find no just Exception against your Doctrine or Endeavors. If they take
occasion unjustly, or that by wicked persons you are falsely slandered, you may
better hope, God will prevent the unprofitableness of your Labors, or at least
accept them: Neither is it unfit to be cautious how you dispute with them
concerning Secular Interests; avoid also fondness of External Respect; and yet
be as jealous that you forfeit not an Internal Reverence, nor prostitute your
Authority, as you are Christ's Ambassadors, Romans 11. 13, 14.

3. Labor to attain and use true Wisdom in the ordering of your Endeavors,
that they may be apt to real Public Usefulness.

1. I call it true Wisdom, not only to oppose it to Folly and Indiscretion, but
also to all Knavish Craftiness. God's Cause needs no base Tricks; upright Men
abhor the use of them: Christ seldom prospers such to serve his Interest, but
if he overruled them to any common Good, as sometimes he does other pieces of
Wickedness, yet he will never justify or accept such Methods, but condemn
those ways, and them who use them. But indeed, as base Tricks consist not with
sincere Designs of a Public Good, so they are never used with that intention.
No, no, let Men's pretenses be never so sacred, it is to serve a carnal selfish
turn, to propagate or uphold some private Faction, in opposition to the true
Extensive Interests of Christ in the World. The eminently Useful could not die
in peace, if they must not say with the Apostle; Our rejoicing is this, the
Testimony of our Conscience, that in simplicity and godly sincerity, not with
fleshly Wisdom, but by the Grace of God, we have had our Conversation in the
World, 2 Cor. 1.12. They were wiser than to think, that will be accounted a
service to Christ in life, for which, without Repentance, he will cast them
into Hell at their death. This Text may assure us, that Paul's Guile with which
he caught these very People, 2 Cor. 12.16. was not any thing contrary to godly
Sincerity which in this Epistle the forecited place he had with more than
usual care instanced toward them; it was therefore no other than honest
Wisdom, or godly Prudence; even that which I have said is so needful to
advantage the Success of your well designed Labor; it was an instance of his
Self-denial, not his Self seeking: He used his sparing their Purses as a help
to save their Souls, upon finding their Temper such, that the Gospel was like
to be less profitable to them, if he subsisted by it. This was far enough from
any misrepresenting, and undermining, cheating, dividing, imposing, ensnaring,
and intangling Arts or Methods; ways so abominable in the most ordinary Affairs
between Man and Man, that you should tremble at a thought of using them in
matters enstamped with the Name of God; yea, though it were but in defending a
Public Good, and your self from the dangerous attempts of such as practice
them.

2. Yet true Wisdom and Prudence be very needful, to direct your just
Endeavors in the greatest aptness to succeed with all those whom you design to
benefit. A true Judgment of Persons and Seasons, with a direct regard to the
End, and an exquisite understanding of the nature of the various lawful Means,
will qualify you to choose the fittest Means to that End with those Persons.
God's Word, Prayer, Consideration and Experience must be your helps to arrive
to Wisdom, and be sure to exercise and apply to all your Endeavors the utmost
Wisdom God vouchsafes you, a neglect whereof will aggravate your
disappointment, as well as conduce thereto.

But my chief design under this Head is, to convince you of the necessity of
Wisdom in the whole course of Public Usefulness, that so you may become more
earnest with God for this, and careful to excie your Souls to the constant
exercise of it. Without Wisdom you cannot rightly judge of the work of your
Generation; a mistake wherein is dangerous to your great End; it is so, though it
should be no other mistake than to overlook one of the more principal parts of
it, and take up with what is next to it, as plainer, easier or safer; yea, if
it lies in several things, and you neglect but the least. How needful is Wisdom
to discern which is our present Duty, and what the greatest Good, when several
appear in competition? yea often there is need of exquisite Skill in an Affair
of Public consequence to determine but what will do more good than hurt. He
has not well observed, that thinks it always easy to judge what is the most
proper Duty in each Company, and wherein they need most to be benefited,
especially the fittest Seasons, Opportunities and Methods to apply suitable
Means to effect that Good which they severally stand in greatest need of, and
are most capable of receiving. It Is hard to accommodate your selves to the
various tempers and circumstances of your very Acquaintance, and know whom,
when, and how to Reprove, Encourage, Examine, Exhort or Relieve, so as to be
most beneficial to each within the limits of your power, and according to your
different obligations, though to the extent of it.

Great discretion is necessary to judge of Obstacles, and to demean your selves
under them, as may most conduce to your Public Usefulness; to know when, and
how to strive to remove or oppose them, when it is best to connive and be
silent. How to avoid the Imputation of Rashness and foolish Zeal in the former,
and of Lukewarmness and Cowardice in the latter; for Public Usefulness will be
affected by both.

In like manner there is use of Wisdom toward such as drive on the same good
design with you, as well as toward them who oppose; if you are younger, that
the elder may not by Envy or Suspicion, be tempted to divert you from your
work, or give you disquiet in it: To avoid which serve with them in humility,
as Sons with a Father, Phil. 2. 22. If you be elder, that the younger's
rashness, unfixedness, and less experience give not Satan an advantage; to
prevent which, do not discourage or despise, but assist and countenance them.
But be they inferiors, equals or superiors, who do contribute to a common good:
He that will be eminently useful, and give up himself to it, had need of
greatest Wisdom to govern himself toward each; for, a little acquaintance with
the World, will discover in most men so much of either humor, pride, envy,
selfishness, covetousness, suspicion, cowardliness, unconcernedness for the
Public, unfixedness, sloth, ignorance, credulousness, or aptness to be imposed
on by designing men; as will force the observing to fix this Conclusion, and
govern themselves by it.

They that will be most useful in their Generation, must spend, do, adventure
and suffer most, and yet must resolve to allow, entreat, connive, yield, thank,
forbear, forgive, deny themselves, and endure most, whatever persons they have
to deal with; and thus make the best use of all for a common good.

Who is sufficient for these things? but with thee, O Lord (who employest whom
thou will) nothing is impossible. A stammering Moses, a suspicious Gideon, a
childish Jeremiah, did succeed in that whereto thou did appoint them. Surely
by all this you are induced to seek earnestly for Wisdom. Ask it daily of God
through Christ, who gives liberally (for direction to do as well as suffer)
and upbraideth not, James 1. 5. dependingly hope; He will guide me by his
Counsel, and afterward bring me to Glory, Psalm. 73. 24.

I have finished the second general Head, viz. an account of what is needful to
bring a man to eminent Usefulness, who is capable of it; under which you have
heard, that his Soul must be excited to undertake it by Faith, Love, and a
Public Spirit. 2. Be relieved against the Difficulties attending it, which is
by Humility, Mortifiedness to the World, and Christian Fortitude. 3. He must
facilitate his Success by Prayer to God, a due behavior before Men, and true
Wisdom in the management of all his Endeavors.

3. I shall evidence the Excellency of this Character. To be an eminently
Useful Man, is no empty Title without real worth. God approves of it, Angels
and good Men highly esteem it; yea, there is that in every man, which now
secretly, and in time will publicly allow this man to be the best, the wisest,
and the greatest.

Eminent Usefulness greatly differs from its Counterfeits. This is no
pragmatical business in other men's matters; but a faithful discharge of our
Obligations to God and our fellow Creatures.

Neither is it a Pharisaical Proseliting to a Sect, which does narrow and
weaken Christ's Interest (proving often as fatal to the Church, yea to Men's
selves, as their walking at large in the World would be) no, it is an intentness
to promote mere Christianity, and unaffected Godliness, which reforms the
World, edifies the Church, and saves the Souls of Sinners in proportion to its
success. It Is what advances Men above the Rank of ordinary Christians, who are
Babes to these grown Men, Shrubs to these Cedars, very ciphers (if not
blemishes and burdens) compared with these Men of Name, these common
Blessings, these Witnesses to a Divine Life, and Ornaments of Religion, who
bear up the Pillars of the Church, yea of the Earth; to each of whom we
Weaklings may say as they to David, Thou art worth 10000 of us. This will
appear, if you consider,

1. It Is an extraordinary honor to be singled out by God eminently to serve
our Generation. What can be more glorious than to be singled out, as David,
from among his Brethren, to effect God's benign purposes to multitudes, when
most Men are useless, yea hurtful; their Names are registered among the Worthies
of Israel, and famous in Bethlehem, Ruth 4. 11. This is that Moses, Acts 7. 37.
Being public Blessings, they with Iabez, are more honorable than their
Brethren, I Chron. 4. 9. No Office reflects honor but with respect to that
usefulness to which it obliges, and or which it capacitates.

2. It argues a most God-like and Excellent Spirit; He is good, and does good,
Psalm. 119 68. He is (...), which was visibly instanced in our Lord Jesus; He
went about doing good, Acts 10. 38. to Souls and Bodies; in whom is this so
exemplified as in the signally useful? whose activity, fixedness, labors,
designs and beneficence correspond to Christ's, allowing for our contracted
Capacities. In such a Man many Graces and Virtues are associated, nay which can
be wanting, yea or weak in the Constitution of this Person? he also must be
greatly cleansed from those dregs, which debase, divert and deaden the less
useful. He seems to breath in another Air, to be of another make, and governed
by contrary Inclinations and Rules than most of Mankind be (I had like to have
said Christians) hence he is too often branded as less prudent, because he
walks by Rules so much above what poor and narrow Souls embrace; and postponeth
those things beyond which a vulgar spirit cannot derive a Motive. Let us remark
a few Scripture Instances, lest all appears a mere speculation; behold Queen
Esther taking her Life in her hand to save her People; did not she then love
her People above her Life? Esth. 4. 16. Moses neglected God's Offer to advance
his Family, and intercedeth for the Nations safety, as if he had hated his own
house, Numb. 14. 12, 17. What Dominion over Covetousness, Selfishness and
Cowardice did Nehemiah manifest, whiles by acting their contraries he repaired
Jerusalem, established God's Worship among the Captives restored by his means:
Without ostentation he might say, Should such a one as I fly? Neh. 6. 11.
Mordecais mind was well ballasted, that under such Advancement retained such
Goodness, and Meekness, as still to seek the Weal of his People, and speak
Peace to all his Seed, Esth. 10. 3. How could Caleb and Joshua refuse to frame
their Account to the Humor of the Multitudes, but that that they had a more
Excellent Spirit than the other Spies? Numb. 14. 24. Oh the magnanimity, zeal
for God, love to Souls, contempt of the World, and unwearied vigor and
largeness of heart which governed Paul to his extensive Usefulness! which might
be instanced in the other Apostles and Martyrs; yea those illustriously shine
in every eminently useful Christian: It Is the excellency of their Spirit which
forms such vast Designs, and enables to the unwearied pursuits thereof: Divine
Influence inspires them, and keeps their Minds above what is mean and selfish,
beyond what is narrow and sordid, yea so widens and enflames them, that their
Spheres prescribe the only Limit to their Attempts; how far would they relieve,
reform and improve the Church, the Nation, yea the World, were it but in their
power? Judge the Spirit by the use others make of the same Abilities, how
useless, how hurtful?

3. The eminently Useful have more manifest grounds for a comfortable Death
than others can expect. Death makes a great discovery of the true Value of
things; whatever renders this safe and easy, we ought highly to esteem, as Men
assured it is our Passage into Eternity, and puts a period to our Preparations
for it. In the grave there is no work nor device to change our State, or improve
our Meetness for an unseen World, Eccles. 9. 10. Therefore whatever is the best
Evidence of our Title to Eternal Life, and the greatest Meetness for it, that
must afford ground of highest Comfort, when Self-love, and the nearness of
Eternity gives Death an awakening power.

1. I shall prefix a Caution. 2. Prove what I assert.
1. For Caution. The Mistakes of weakly designing Men, necessitate me to
acquaint you, it is Christ only who procured a safe and comfortable Death, by
meriting our Pardon, and a Right to Eternal Glory, with a happy Resurrection.
It Is by Faith only, that a Regenerate Penitent looks to rely on, and receives
Christ as our Atoning Savior for Pardon and Life, according to his Promises in
the Gospel, which Promises, with the included Benefits, are purchased only by
Christ's Obedience, and applied as an Effect thereof, whenever they are
applied. The Qualifications which the Gospel appoints in him whom the Promises
invest in its Benefits, are no causes of those Benefits, nor any part of the
Righteousness which procured them. But Christ using his Gospel as an Instrument
in the Governing and Saving of Sinners, and pleading with them his purchased
Benefits for Motives to their Obedience to the Gospel, as a Rule of Judgment.
It Is not sufficient to our comfortable Death, that we believe that Christ
obeyed and died to procure Pardon, and a Right to Salvation for Penitent
Believers; but it must appear to us, that we are partakers of that Pardon and
Right to Life, which must be by the Evidence of our Regeneration, Repentance
and Faith; not one without the other; nor either (when we come to die) without
their genuine necessary Effects, and each persevered in. Vain hopes if we
totally want whatever the Gospel Promises make indispensably needful to our
obtaining Eternal Glory; and the contrary whereto the Gospel threatens with an
Exclusion from Heaven, John 3. 3, 36. Luke 13. 3. Heb. 12. 14. cap. 10. 38. He
is fool hardy, that dares die, not knowing but that his Faith was the Faith of
an unregenerate impenitent heart; yea, or satisfies himself with having thought
he once at first had such a true Faith; but is not sure that he persevereth
therein, that regards not any conformity to Christ. Universal Obedience,
sincere Holiness, and Fidelity to God, and Improvements of his Talents, all
which the Gospel so insists on, as being fitter to give evidence, than things
more obscure or remote can be Mat. 10 33. and 25. 30. 2 Cor. 13. 5. Ephesians. 5. 6.

2. I shall prove that the eminently Useful, have more manifest grounds for a
comfortable Death than others can expect; for which end, it will be sufficient
that I evidence. This eminent faithful usefulness is a most plain and infalible
Evidence of our Title to Eternal Life, and it also argues a very great
meetness for Heaven; whence it will follow, that the eminently faithful useful
Man, has more manifest grounds for a comfortable Death than others can expect,
and consequently, his Character is Excellent. It tends to a comfortable Death;
as,

1. It is a most plain and infallible Evidence of our Title to Eternal Life.
Faithful eminent usefulness, is not only an evidence considered abstractedly,
but it gives evidence to the sincerity of all, or most other Graces; yea, and
receives it from them, for by the in-being and activity of such Graces it
subsisted, and in it each of them expressed their vital power and sincerity,
and that not darkly, but clearly, not doubtfully, but to full conviction; so
that the eminently useful Man, has the concurrent Testimony of every Grace, in
a light to which each contributes. And it answers any just challenge that can
be made to his having those several Graces, and that in reality; so that if
Faith, Repentance, love to God, a new Birth, or Perseverance, have Life
promised to them, and the sincerity thereof being evident to a Man, must yield
strong consolation: then the eminently useful Man has very abundant reasons of
Comfort, as to his interest in Eternal Life. I shall evidence this by three
things

1. Can he doubt the Truth of his several Graces? Not of his Faith, because he
has been thus signally excited by his assent, to what Christ, as Prophet, has
revealed: and encouraged, by trusting in his Saviors Merits, Strength, and
Testament: and governed by the commands of Christ his received Lord, and that
in so faithful an Execution of his own Covenant Consent and Vows? yea, his
Union to Christ, is attested as well as his Faith by which he is united, for
his truly devoted fruitful life, could proceed from, and subsist by nothing
lower, than those Vital influences and supplies which came from Christ his Head
and Root, Gal. 2. 20. Phil. 1. 19, 20, 21.

His Repentance also is unsuspected, when he beholds his Lusts so subdued as
not to hinder his living to God entirely as his end; his Heart so altered in
its purposes, resolves and relishes, that he could not live to carnal self, but
a common good, wherein he delighted and spent himself. He knows his former evil
course is duly bewailed when so directly changed, and that sin was truly
hateful, being he has not only endeavored the utter Mortification of it in
himself, but greatly labored to rescue all others from the dominion and
effects thereof.

He is sure of his new Birth, when he reflects that nothing less could make my
aims, my temper, and course, to be so far conformed to Christ's, as my
devotedness to God's glory, and to the benefit of Saints and Sinners does
attest, 1 Ioh. 4. 17. Yea, more a lower Principle than what was formed in
Regeneration, would never have lasted thus long, and carried me thus far, Ioh.
4. 14.

2. This eminently useful Man's stated course and contrivances, repel a
Jealousy, that his love to God or Man or appearing Zeal, was a painted Fire;
his Faith, Hope, or other Graces, a dead Image, because all these have vitally
concurred, to direct fix, and strengthen his Labors, to lay out his Talents,
drive a constant Trade, and spend his life for Christ, Ioh. 14. 21. 1 Ioh. 3.
v. 16, 17. Romans 12. 11, 12, 13. And there is as little ground to question his
Perseverance, when he knows he was not taken off from public serviceableness,
by his sloth, fear, weariness, selfishness, or change of purpose or designs;
yea, that now he feels his Soul solicitous for, and prepared unto a public
good, were he but capable to contribute to it.

3. Besides this Testimony, from the evidence, of such Graces as Life is
promised to the useful Man, is in a way likelier for comfort than others,
because the spirit of God does not usually forbear to cast a light upon the
Graces of such when they come to die, but (and that not rarely) he makes them
to behold his face, and experience some foretasts of the approaching Glory; so
that with Moses they die at the Mouth of God, with Stephen, Act. 7. 57. as
David, 2 Samuel 23. 5. Yea, besides this, the useful Man is encouraged by the
great things that passed between God and his Soul, in bending him for, and
carrying him through those Attempts and Employments wherein he has served the
Will of God in his Generation; many Answers of Prayer, eminent Deliverances
from Evil, Supports when Fainting, Revivings and Enlargements when tempted to
Remissness, frequent views of Christ and Heaven for renewal of Strength, (and
the like) which he has often experienced, have so familiarized God and Christ to
him, and so fixed his Trust in his Goodness, Truth and Word, that he can
quietly commit his Spirit to him. And so, from all put together, having now
fought a good fight, finished his course, and kept the faith, he beholds that
Crown of Righteousness hanging over his head, which he knows his God will give
him, 2 Timothy 4. 8. and he has an abundant entrance into God's Kingdom, 2 Pet.
1. 11.

2. This eminent Usefulness argues a meetness for Heaven. He can easily quit
all worldly Enjoyments, who valued Life it self but as a means for service, and
consecrated all he had as subservient to it. This Man is not called off before
his Work be done, for his course is finished, and the end of his being on Earth
so fully answered, Acts 13. 25. Heaven must be a real Rest to him after so much
Labor, and very suitable in the nature of it, to one of so agreeable a
disposition. What welcome Company are perfected happy Souls, when the contrary
made the saving and healing of miserable Sinners to engage his Thoughts, and
command his Strength whiles he lived on Earth. His Soul that was so enlarged by
Grace for public Use, will be very receptive of those fuller Streams of
heavenly Joys.

How will he be satisfied with more of God's likeness there, when it will be
but the perfection of what he judged so lovely as to strive so much to
propagate it here? Psalm 17. 14, 15. This Public Spirit will be ravished in
contemplating and adoring a blessed God, when he beholds how universal a Good
he is; yea, and ever has been, by the Records of his Beneficence there
published and explained; whatever Employment Heaven allots (for it is no place
of idleness) he is greatly prepared for it; who did heartily perform so much
under the great disadvantages of this present state, which did arise both from
his Works and himself, yea, and such as he had to deal with. So that this man
is gathered when ripe; he his even here a Vessel of Glory, being so meet for
his Masters use, 2 Timothy 2. 21.

Now how comfortable will Death be to a Man thus well assured of eternal
Happiness, and prepared for that wherein it will consist? It cannot endanger
nor hurt him; he must rather desire than abhor or fear it, when only a sense of
present serviceableness (where it is more needful) has reconciled useful
Saints to a longer Life, Phil. 1. 23, 24.

To such useful ones as Paul it belonged to triumph over Death, rather than be
afraid, and welcome its approaches, to enjoy that a regard whereto had made him
so laborious, 1 Cor. 15. 57, 58.

Thus I have represented the Grounds on which a very useful Man may die
comfomfortably. But, can there be the like for an unuseful Person? I am sure,
where a Life unprofitably spent (through sloth, negligence, self-seeking, and
unfaithfulness to God,) does stare a Man in the Face, it is a just challenge to
his Hopes, it justifies his Fears, and he vainly expects Advantage by Death, or
Safety in dying.

Yea, a Man who has been Useful in lesser degrees, through remissness and
narrowness of Heart, cannot but feel greater jealousy of his Condition than
the eminently Useful; yea, he must make bitter reflections upon his past Life,
wherein he finds so many neglects and baulks. So little Work done in so long a
time, and with so great a Stock; and being selfconscious of the much greater
Things he might have performed for a common Good; sure he cannot, without
grief, behold his season over, whiles the Blood of Souls, the Groans of a dying
Church, or a sinking Nation, testify against his departing Soul, that omitted
relieving them to his Power. What work for Shame, and Sorrow, ay, and Fears
too, will this make, compared with a vigorously useful Life?

4. The future Rewards of an eminently useful Man will be greater than others:
His Crown will weigh in proportion to his service: They that turn many, shall
shine as the Stars in the Firmament, for ever and ever Dan. 12.3. He that
gained the ten Talents was made a Ruler over ten Cities; he that gained two,
was made Ruler but over five* Luke 19.17.

These wider Vessels shall be filled as well as the lesser; but, being larger,
they contain the more. O, then happy he who was most abundant in Labors; no
degree whereof shall be in vain, 1 Cor. 15.58. Gal. 6.9, 10. Their Works shall
follow them as a Retinue, adding to their Grandeur; and Rivers shall be more
acknowledged by our blessed God, when he will come to reward the very Drops.

These Men's Place in the Body will be more Noble, their Thrones higher, perhaps
their Services more Eminent in a heavenly Estate, as much in proportion as they
had been on Earth. And though all faithful Ones shall be as Angels, Luke 20. v.
3. Yet among these there are Degrees, wherein there will be a correspondence as
to those.

Every generous Design, Tear, Labor, Hardship, Expense, Loss, and Hazard, will
be found in a proportioned Glory: He that sows bountifully, shall reap
bountifully 2 Cor. 9.6.

Whence it is easily inferred how excellent a Character of a Believer it is,
that, he was an eminently useful Person in his Age; it is a Title will found in
the very Heavens, and be honorably acknowledged by Christ upon his Throne, he
will say, Well done, thou good and faithful Servant, enter thou into the Joy of
thy Lord, Mat. 25.21. Which yet is no reflection on his own Merits; for in the
Virtue thereof the most useful Saints inherit those further additions,
according to his Promise, as well as the less Useful possess the lesser
degrees. True, it is all his own, and he may do what he will with his own; but,
if he is pleased to foretell us how he will dispense this his own to Men,
thereupon his Veracity commands our assured expectations; and if he also use
those higher Measures of Glory, as Motives to greater Labors, we, in being
very Laborious, cannot be disappointed of those higher Measures any more than
of the least; yea, we frustrate his End in publishing such Promises; if we are
not excited to more abundant Labors by the Benefits promised, and upon such
Labors expect those Benefits.

I have offered what I hope will convince you of the Truth of the Third general
Head, viz. That to be eminently Useful in ones Generation, is an excellent
Character; for to be so employed, is an Honor put upon that Man by the
infinite God. The Spirit of such a Man is Excelcellent and God-like, he has
the greatest Grounds for a comfortable Death, both from the evidence of his
Title to eternal Life, and his meetness for it. And last, his future Glory will
be greater than that of others.

I shall proceed to the Application of this Doctrine by some Inferences.

1. Inference. To be a public Plague, is a great reproach; what can be said
worse of a Man when dead? That one did no Good in an eminent Station; that he
hid his Talent, which should have been employed in view, are infamous Scars;
but that any Man should influence to public Mischief, this leaves his Memorial
accursed; better never have been born; his Gifts, his Estate, Powers and
Offices, are become a Snare to himself, and a Mischief to the Public. The more
active, the greater detriment; the longer he lived, the more lasting Curse has
this Man been; and the further has he contributed to the Woe of others, as
well as to his own Damnation. He will be signally marked in another World, for
the harm he did in this; receiving his Torments with remarkable notice, when
they do groan to themselves, who sinned only against themselves. Will the
Powers or Riches he had on Earth guard him against the sorest Vengeance for the
hurt he did? No, no: Of this abhorred sort are the Wasters of Countries,
Tirannical Princes, Propagaters of Heresies, Perverters of Justice, great
Oppressors of the Poor, Wasters of God's Vineyards; Betrayers of their
Countries, Silencers of useful Preachers, Enemies to the Ministry, and
Calumniators of Ministers, and the like. Happy Multitudes, if such had never
been; and next, happy that they soon are taken away; see Ier. 22.17, 18. Such
will wish they had been Idiots and Beggars, of any thing else, which could have
more incapacitated them from doing Mischief.

2 Inf. This may convince us of the mischief of a narrow Sectarian Spirit, and
consonant Principles, wherever they prevail.

By such a narrow Spirit, I mean a Spirit that confineth Charity to a Sect
distinguished from other Christians, by Customs or Opinions that are not
Essential to true Godliness, and is embittered and enraged against all who
differ from such Usages and Opinions. This is the Spirit of Popery; (which is a
Sect, though a great one) yea, it is the worst of Popery; and wherever it Rules,
the most Diabolical part of Anti christianism is undestroy'd. All the
Persecutions and Impositions of that Beast proceed from this very Spirit, and
from Principles both Ministering to it, and formed by it (for their influence is
mutual.) There Is scarce any thing more opposite to Public Usefulness, or less
consistent with the Precepts, Design, and true Spirit of Christianity; the
former is that which my Subject so calls me to demonstrate, and testify
against, that without doing so I cannot faithfully handle this Doctrine. But
who can doubt the Destructiveness of this Spirit, to Public Benefit and
Service, if you observe the way and behavior of all sorts of Persons who are
acted by it? For under its impulse it is, that

1. Men confine their Usefulness to their own Faction, as if they were indebted
to seek the good of none beyond it; nay, as if Conscience obliged them against
all Attempts for Benefits more common and extensive. They judge all Men, out of
their Herd, unworthy of their love, concern, or labor; what is the Public to
them, further than as things affect their own? Let the Ship sink, so their
Cabin can be saved; they will obstruct all Settlement in Church or State, if it
be any other than a Provision for their Sect, or managed by any besides
themselves, yea, scruple not to advance their Party upon the Ruins of the
Public, as Men see from Age to Age.

2. What is it to such Bigots, if true Christianity prevail with Men, or
Converts be multiplied, unless they become their Proselites? Alas! they judge
no Man Religious, or Good, out of their own Garb; they surmize him Carnal, who
cannot pronounce their Shibboleth, and do as good as say, they are all in a
Damnable State who at all oppose them. Hence such people are far more
industrious to bring Men to a compliance with their fond Peculiarities, than to
a subjection to the great and most undoubted Precepts of the Gospel, Mat.
23.15. which is a public Mischief, as in other respects, so also in this: Men
hereby waste that Time, Strength and Labor, upon an unprofitable, (if not
hurtful) Trifle, which, by a public Spirit, would be employed in Subserviency
to what is really advantageous, viz. To make Men Holier and Safer for Eternity.
Yet,

3. As if this Effect of such a Spirit were not harmful enough to the Public,
it further prompts Men to malign the most Useful, to obstruct the most
prosperous Successes of the Gospel, to blast the most profitable Ministers, and
overturn flourishing Churches, by dividing and defaming Methods, with Lies,
Violence, and basest Artifice, as if they thought Justice, Kindness and Truth,
were due only to Men of their own Opinion, and Cruelty, Tricking, and Falsehood,
were warranted, if not required, toward all who differ, Gal. 5.10. and 6.10,
12, 15, 16. Yea, it stops not here; what Poverty, Silencings, Imprisonments,
Tortures, and Bloodshed, both by Persecution and Wars, do Men, so spirited,
greedily inflict, and bring upon Mankind? Neighbor Nations, yea, our own
proclaim. Such Actings indicate this narrow spirit to prevail; such a spirit
prevailing; will produce all those Fruits if there be but power. It may obtain
under very different forms, but is not the more innocent for any of them, though
it reigns in some of most. The best Cause will not hallow such a frame; the
worst Cause generally has most of it, and very often it is a sign thereof. But
wherever it is Christ will not own it, his Interest, in a common Good, is
sure to lose by it; it springs from carnal selfishness, it is acted and excited
by the Devil, whatever is pretended for its Justification, and it tends to
public hurt of the highest kind. Surely it is no part of, nor joined with that
Wisdom which is from above, which is first pure, then peaceable, gentle, easy
to be entreated, full of mercy and good fruits, without injuring, and without
hypocrisy, Jam. 3. 15, 17. no, it is from what is Earthy, Sensual and Devilish.

Let us all watch then against the Infection of such a temper, for it is too
natural to our unrenewed part to allow Security, yea, though our Opinions be most
Orthodox: Satan will delude you to it under the Name of Zeal, for he knows that
Zeal must degenerate into Hellish Fire when it blazeth, in the former
instances; yea, when it moves thereto. The quenching of such a Spirit, in
others, is our Duty, or, at least, resisting it, that it prevail not to a
public Mischief; nor is he worthy of the Name of a Man, publicly Useful, that
dare not venture all to oppose it; and the rather, because it is as much worse
than Brutish, as the Devil is worse than a Brute, and in many respects gives
that wound to Religion, and a public Good, which open Profaneness is not
capable of giving. Nothing but a true public Christian Spirit can expel it,
and without that there will be no aptness to contribute to that progress of the
Gospel in the World, which we daily pray for; nor a possibility to maintain, or
improve such a Mercy, by walking in Unity, Love and Peace, to common
Edification. To all which, this narrow Spirit of a Party is so irreconcilable
and destructive, that giving way thereto, will no more allay it than pouring
Oil into a Fire. Happy Times, when Divine Light and Love will so abound, that
Self-seekers can serve no turn by such a spirit, and the Honest-minded shall
neither be endangered, nor infected by it; then, and not till then, will a
Public Good be generally pursued.

3 Inf. We see one great reason why Self-denial is so proposed by Christ to all
his Disciples.

This is the first Article to which all his Followers are to submit, Mat. 16.
24. If any Man will be my Disciple, let him deny himself, take up his Cross,
and follow me. The two last are impossible to such, as agree not to the first.
But besides the necessity thereof to these, Self denial is absolutely requisite
to those Services, which Christ designeth by his Disciples, to each other, and
to the World; as Salt they are to season a corrupt World, as Lights to
enlighten a blind World, Mat. 5. 13, 14. Wisdom is to be justified by them,
Luke 7. v. 35. The virtues of God to be published, 1 Pet. 2. 9. They are to
propagate the Interests of our blessed Redeemer, etc. But which of these can we
subserve, if Self be not denied? All impediments to attempt such a Work, and
most of our unfitness to accomplish it, do arise from carnal Selfishness; where
this is subdued, Men are ready and prepared to be common Blessings, as
opportunity is afforded. Then Sloth will not delay, Fear shall not discourage,
Ambitious or Covetous aims must not divert from any Labors that others may be
benefited by; whereas carnal Self must have our Ease indulged, our Humor
gratified, and Safety, Credit, and Worldly Advantages, provided for, whatever
becomes of Christ's Interests, or a Public Weal. He that denies himself most,
will be most beneficial; he that cannot do this at all, will rarely attempt,
infallibly spoil, and easily quit any public Service. A Self-seeking Man will
not propose, or prosecute a common Good, farther than his own present Interests
do invite. A Self-indulging Man will manage his Endeavors so, as that the
Obstacles to his success, by his own Behavior, will exceed the utmost he
contributes to it. A Self-confident Man will overlook the good he might do,
attempt what he is unfit for, and, as a just rebuke from God, discover his own
weakness, instead of being prospered in what he does foolishly Enterprise in
his own Strength.

Did you strictly examine your Hearts and Ways, it would appear most Men's
unusefulness proceeds from their selfishness; this locks your Coffers that you
cannot give, this benums your Powers that you will not act; this spieth the
Lion in the way that you dare not go, this feels the Burden, counts the Charge,
and resents the Inconveniences of Service, as too great to be endured for it;
whereas, in all eminent Usefulness, we do neglect the Counsel, Counter-act the
Projects, and offer violence to the Inclinations of Self, Gal. 1. 16. and
therein we must act not only as such who are not their own, but as them who
have no Will of their own to Obey, no selfish turn to Serve, nor humor to
Gratify. When therefore selfishness is so certain an obstructer of the Uses
Christ designed his Members to, how fit was it to make our denial of it a prime
part of true Christianity, and try his genuine Followers by their consent
thereto, especially when all public Mischiefs do as truly spring from Self
indulged, as public Benefits do from this denied? Miserable Man, since his
Lusts are become himself, and rational Self-love become a stranger. Happy
Christian, who best consults his own true Interests, by trampling on his Lusts,
restraining his irregular Desires, and rejecting an undue concern for Body, and
Earthly Affairs, that he may live to Christ, and a common Good: This Man knows
he shall find his truest self most gratified, secured, and provided for, in
renouncing and opposing this his greatest Enemy. though called Self.

I shall, in the next place, Exhort you and my self, according to the nature of
this Truth which I have explained.

1. Let us be ashamed, and duly humbled, for our unusefulness in our Generation

Who of us falls not under the charge of this fault? And surely, blushings and
grief, are very proper where the charge is true; but knowing how loath we are to
acknowledge our fault, and as backward to be affected with the sense of it,
when it is too plain to be denied. I shall endeavor,

1. To convince you of your unusefulness in your Generation, that so we may not
plead we are ignorant, if we are guilty. 2. To excite you to shame and sorrow
for your Unusefulness when under conviction of the Guilt.

1. For conviction of the Guilty. To this end review your Talents, and the
improvements of them, for public Good; admit, yea, excite your Consciences, to
compare your Distributions with your Stock, your Labor with your Strength, and
your public Services with your Time, Gifts, and Opportunities; deal herein as
in the sight of Christ, whose Eyes are as a flame of Fire, Rev. 1. 14 and be
not unconcerned whether you find out your sin or not, for your Ignorance
prevents not your Guilt, if the Charge be true, though it will hinder your
Repentance, whereby your punishment becomes unavoidable. O then, let each of us
ask our selves such Questions as these: Have I ever proposed to live to God's
Honor, in the good of others, as the great end of Life? Or have not I utterly
disregarded it? Have I done good to as many persons as I had a Call to, and
opportunity for? Or have not I wilfully exempted very many, to whom I stood
obliged? Has the good that I have done in the World, been in proportion to my
utmost Ability? Or has it been very little, and inconsiderable, compared with
what I could have done? Did I begin to be Useful as soon as I was capable, and
do I continue so to this time, or was I not far in years before I began? Or
have I not deserted it, after I made some hopeful beginnings? Am I seriously
concerned to see so many Sinners posting to Hell? Does my Heart bleed at the
miserable condition of the poor and distressed? Am I very solicitous for the
Churches welfare and the Nations happiness, so as to set my self to redress
Evil and help the Good of each in my place? And this to the extent of my Power?
Or, am not I one that slight the wickedness the World lies in, want Bowels to
the distressed? If I abound, seldom think or care what becomes of the Church or
Nation, so that I and my Friends be but safe and thrive; and accordingly I
employ and spare my Estate, Labor, Gifts, and Power.

What Answer does an awakened Conscience give to these Questions? Does it not
accuse you? Must it not present to you a sad account of great Omissions and
many Neglects? Have you no such secret misgivings as these? I fear I have been
a dry Tree, and barren Soil; few have cause to bless God for my Life. Oh, the
little Good I have ever as yet attempted to do to others! What Fruit I have
born has been to my self, with unfruitful Ephraim, Hos. 10. 1. If any have
been benefited by any thing I have given or done, it has been by God's
overruling it, and seldom with any design or good will of mine; or, at best, I
have less intended the Good of others thereby than my own private Advantage;
for my Heart tells me, I coldly attempted the most promising Enterprise from
which I expected not Applause or Profit. And soon gave it over when I had a
prospect of reproach, or loss thereby. Oh that you would be faithful to your
own Souls, and acknowledge your Guilt; especially, if it be notorious! great
Instances cannot be overlooked, unless you wilfully shut your Eyes. What Trade
you have driven in the World must be known to you, though some Diversions may be
forgotten. Has public Service for God been your business in any measure? Or,
have you made the very Worship of God and your most seeming Obedience to
subserve Carnal Ends? Have you spent your Estate on your Lusts, or on the
Public Interests, and poor Members of Christ, next to the supply of your own
and Families true Necessities? What Projects have had the chief Room in your
Heads? What Matters have sat closest to your Hearts? Were they serving your
Generation, and saving your own Soul? Or, were they the perishing Affairs of
Life? Rest not till you make a true Answer; nor till that, as past all doubt,
be assented to; that so if unusefulness is imputed to you by the Allseeing God,
you may cry, I am guilty; being convinced of all, and judged of all, 1 Cor.
14.24.

2. If you are guilty, be ashamed and grieved.

His Heart is Obdurate, if not Atheistical, that owneth his unprofitableness
without shame, seeing it is a thing so indecent and unbecoming; or without
afflicting Sorrow, it being a thing so sinful in its self, so unjust toward
God, so injurious to others, and hurtful to your own Souls: Give way to some
thoughts that ought to strike your secure unconcerned Minds.

1. God keeps a Register of his Gifts committed to you, and of your Neglects
and Abuses in the employing of them: He knows what thou have done, and what
thou might have done; what you have laid out by his Rules, and what under
the Conduct of your own Lusts; nothing of either did escape his view, or slip
his memory; the Account of both are as full and exact as if Entered in a Book,
Rev. 20 12. and shortly the whole will be read by thy self, in a light which
cannot be refused, yea, transcribed on thy very Conscience, so as not to be
blotted out. Anticipate this by serious reflections, and sure it must fill you
with shame and sorrow, to see so much received, and so little restored, by
applying it to the appointed Uses, yea, so much employed to very contrary
purposes; so great an Estate, with little or nothing to promote the Gospel, or
relieve the Poor, but a very great Sum wasted on thy Lusts, or hoarded to look
upon. Will it not affect to find your Names among Magistrates or Ministers,
capable for, and called to the respective Duties of such Offices, for a common
Good? And over against your Names thus written, This Magistrate was no terror
to Evil doers, no praise to such as did well? Nay, instead of reforming others,
he corrupted them by his countenance and example; instead of relieving the
injured, he oppressed the Poor, perverted Justice, and persecuted my Servants.

This Minister did not reprove Sin impartially and boldly, especially if the
offenders were such as he expected benefit by; he declared not my whole
Counsel, but minced and chose what was safest to himself, and most pleasing to
others; he accommodated not his labors to the real benefit of all, but to the
humors of some; disdaining plain Speech, affecting levity, frothy or amusing
discourses: He was more solicitous to know how he was praised, than how others
did profit. He let Truth sink, and Errors gain ground, when he found his Name
or Incomes should suffer by opposing the last, or abetting the first; such a
time he dealt treacherously with such and such Souls, he obstructed a public
good, for his private advantage; he excused himself from preaching, pleading,
or speaking, though he saw my Insterest and the real benefit of others required
it. How formal and cold in his performances, prayerless and slothful in his
preparations! Partial and careless in Discipline, and unexemplary in walking.
Notions he took up for Truths, without search or other enquiry, then, is this
the Opinion of a Man eminent with the Party I hope to live by? and will it suit
with the Fancies of these Men? I might proceed herein, and annex the particular
Cases of others. But this may suffice to mind you what a blush should it raise,
what an anguish should it cause to see your Names thus underwritten in the
Records of Heaven; and know, the Devil keeps also an account, as full as he
can, that he may become your Accuser.

2. You can make no Apology for your unusefulness, but what is fit to aggravate
your shame and sorrow. A vain Mind, and a feared Conscience, will suggest
Excuses, and take up with them; however false and frivolous they be: But
Enquiries there will be, which will pierce into the Nature and Truth of things,
and minister such an awakening Light, as shall render the most careless and
confident person speechless, Matthew. 22.12. It were our mercy that we allowed
nothing as a sufficient Plea now, but what will be approved of at the Judgment
Bar. Examine therefore the true Reasons why you have not served your Generation
as well as others.

Obj. You Will pretend your utter incapacity for service.


Ans. 1. That is a good Apology if true, for God expects not to reap where he
has not sown, he is no such hard Master, Matthew. 25.26. None shall have ground
to affix that Character to him. But is this Excuse true? can your Consciences,
as drowsy as they are, offer this Plea, and abide by it? viz. The only Reason
why we were not Public Blessings, was, because we had no gift, no opportunity,
estate or power to be so. If Conscience upon a serious pause dare not stick to
this Excuse, but condemns thee, how much more will God condemn thee, who is
greater, and knows all things? 2 John 3.30. But if still you verily believe
that the Objection states your Case;


Ans. 2. Let me ask you, Have you really pitied the Distressed whom you could
not relieve? Have you avoided being hurtful to others, though you could not
profit them? Have you earnestly prayed for the Church of God, and the good of
the Miserable World, bewailing the sorrows of the first, and the misery of the
last? Do you rejoice in, and bless God for those who are useful, without
envying the most eminent? When you desire an Estate or Gift, and bewail the
want of them, is the later mostly because you cannot be useful, and the former
that you may be so? Do you take all due pains, and use all good thrift that you
may have somewhat to enable you to be profitable? And if you are poor, and have
the help of others, do you make conscience not to ask it till you need; nor ask
or take more than you need, that the Relief of the more necessitous may not be
hindered? If your hearts cannot honestly say, these things answer my case, it is
thus with me; then you have not a temper of mind to be useful if you had
Abilities; and it is most probable you are more able to do good, than you have
been faithful to do it.

But if indeed your Consciences do justly witness, that you can so answer to
the above Questions, as that incapacity is the very Reason your Generation is
not more served by you than by your prayers and good example; then you are not
the persons to whom my Reproof is directed, so that you do that little you can.


Ans. 3. But such of you as are able to serve their Generation, and neglect it,
should be more ashamed and grieved when you consider the true Causes of your
unprofitableness.

Your Hindrances to service are from your selves; your Lusts have the great
hand in assigning the governing Reason: Look at the baulks you have made, and
the opportunities you have past unusefully over; and ask thy Conscience, whence
was it that I neglected this? can you be unaffected when you receive this
Answer? my Covetousness, my Pride, my Sloth, my Fear, my Unbelief, or my
Unconcernedness for God's Honor, and the Public Good did hinder me, these
made me unwilling and averse, these diverted my Abilities to another Chanel,
and would not suffer me to be useful and faithful in my Trust; were not you
governed by one or other of these whenever you shut you Ears to the Cry of an
afflicted Church, of starved Ministers, of a sinking Nation, of diseased Souls,
and the distressed Poor.

If it be so, as indeed it will be found, you have cause to be ashamed and
mourn. Does it become Men to be under the Conduct of such base Guides? In this
respect God has called you to show your selves Men, Isa. 46.8. But much more
unbecoming is this, to you that wear the Name of Christians; you are called and
Redeemed to be zealous of good works, Titus 2.14. Is this to be so? Is this to
imitate or obey Christ whom you own for your Lord, and whose Livery you have
put on? Follow the Chanel to the Fountain head; be led by your actings to the
posture and frame of your hearts; and judge what vile spirits act you, what a
dominion have these Lusts in your Soul, that thus command your Talents, and
determine the scope of your Lives in opposition to the loudest Calls. Oh blush
and weep, that with all thy Light and Helps, under all thy Christian Profession
and Hopes, thy heart is so earthly and carnal, so sensual and devilish; so full
of hatred to God and Man, as the Authority of these Lusts import; and thy
unusefulness does testify in the clearest Light, the Holy Spirit has made no
saving change if you are altogether useless; the change at most is very
imperfect, whiles your usefulness is so much hindered by these unsubdued Lusts:
The very unprofitable must be made other Men, Matt. 12.33. and the less
profitable are not very good Men. You have those dry leaves and those dead
branches which may well put you to the blush, and fill you with fear, John
15.2, the unfruitful branch will be cast out.


3. Your unusefulness expresses that treachery, ingratitude and injustice
toward God, which must cause shame and sorrow in every thinking person.

The least acquaintance with the Infinite God, as our Owner, Ruler and
Benefactor, would strike an amazement and terror in our minds, that this sort
of demeanor toward him, should be justly ascribed to any of us; yet as far as
public unusefulness is our Crime, all this base Treatment of God is chargeable
upon us.

1. It Is Treachery toward God, as it is contrary to out Profession, a breach of
our Vows, and betraying our Trust. Let Us consider this in three parts.

1. When you profess your selves the Servants of God, the followers of Christ,
inspired by his Spirit, satisfied with his Covenant Blessings as your Portion,
Expectants of his heavenly Rewards, and acknowledgers of him as your Ultimate
End. Do not you hereby profess that you are employed about his work, and
serving his purposes in the World, that this is your Trade, and the business of
your Life. You who profess your selves Christians, profess no less than what I
have above described; but pray see how empty a profession it is; how far
otherwise you do than you pretend, and what other sort of People you are than
you would seem to be; when all this while you neglect God's work, and follow
your own; you overlook his designs, and serve your own turn: May not God say,
They profess to serve me, but in works they deny me, Titus 1.16. With their
meuth they show much kindness, but their heart goes after their Covetousness,
Ezekiel. 33.31. and after their Pride, and after their selfish Designs.

Do you think God will be mocked, or that you can impose on him? it cannot be;
blush then at your own falsehood; whiles your heads are so seldom projecting how
shall we best honor our God, and form his Interests, if you are satisfied with
an empty noise, or theatrical show; fear lest Christ apply himself to you as to
Judas, Betrayest thou me with a kiss? Luke 23.48. Do you profess all this, that
you may be exempted from promoting my concerns in the World; yea, that you may
dis-serve me the more in betraying my Cause by your connivance and neglects? Oh
let us mourn that our very profession testifies against us!

2. Unusefulness is a breach of your Vows, made to the Living God.

Your Baptismal Vow includes a solemn dedication of your selves and all you
have to Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, with an engagement of living to God, and
not to his Rivals, be they the World, Flesh or Devil. Consider your
unusefulness, and see, is that a performance of this Engagement, or consistent
with it? Sure by your behavior you think it was an error that you made this
Vow, Eccles. 5.6. but know, they are no Christians who consent not to it; and
having engaged, you cannot think that mere making this Vow was principally
designed in Christ's Institution; no, it was ordained to be made, that you
might be more sensibly obliged to execute it, especially in so principal a part
of it. How ever light you make of your great and wilful unserviceableness in
your day, you are therein no less than perfidious and perjured in breaking your
Oaths, and those often renewed before the Lord at his Table, often it may be in
Sickness; besides the Oaths you have taken as Magistrates or Ministers.

To your Perfidiousness you have added Sacrilege against your Self-dedication,
of which hereafter. Ought not our Souls bleed to think, I gave up my self and
my all to God, to serve and honor him, to plead Christ's Cause, and advance
his Interests, to live for him, and not for my self; Yea, I have signed his
Covenant to do this, and vowed it upon the Memorials of his Death, and in
several Extremities when Conscience represented my dangerous neglects; and yet
notwithstanding all, I employ my Estate, my Time, my Gifts, my Power, as if at
full liberty to use them as I please; as if Christ had no Interest to be served
by me, or I were under no obligation to spend or adventure any thing for his
service.

3. You have betrayed that Trust which God committed to you.

Whoever is a Minister of Christ, is a Steward to whom the Truths and
Institutions of Christ are entrusted, to maintain, dispense and defend, 1 Cor.
4.1, 2. He is a Pastor, to whose care the Flock of Christ is committed, 1 Pet.
5.2. In becoming Ministers, we undertake this Trust. The Life of Souls is very
much committed to us as Watchmen, Ezekiel. 33.8. It cannot be denied then that a
careless selfish unfaithful Minister betrays his Trust; he discharges not what
he has undertaken, but deals falsely and treacherously with our faithful Lord.

Magistrates are entrusted with God's Sword, and Subjects committed to their
care to the degree of power which they have over them; does not that Magistrate
then deal treacherously with God in betraying this Trust, when he preserves
not the Innocent, but defends the Guilty, etc. Yea, all the Talents any Man
has, is put into his hands to lay out as God directs for a common Good; and
every one whom we ought to benefit by that Talent, is committed to our Trust as
far as his Welfare depends upon that supply.

Yea, Christ has entrusted every Christian with his Honor, with his
Interests, and with the advancement of his Kindom in this World. We are
entrusted as his Witnesses, his Soldiers, etc. But, let us blush and mourn,
that as far as we neglected to serve our Generation, we have betrayed all his
public Concerns in this World; all that he has put into our hands. Ah! had
none been more faithful than we, his Gospel, his Ministry, his Members had been
in a condition more deplorable than they be. O that my Eyes were Waters!
Treachery is a vile blot; Treachery toward God is the worst sort: And yet this
have you been guilty of; yea, in saddest Instances, viz. belying your
Profession, breaking your Vows, and betraying your Trust. May it not well fill
you with confusion?

2. By your Unusefulness you have dealt ungratefully with God.

Ingratitude is a monstrous Crime, and becomes more so, as he deserves well at
our hands against whom we are ungrateful. Where there is any Ingenuity there
will be relentings, to think how God has deserved our utmost Service, and what
a base requital we have made by our great neglects. He has not spared his own
Son, but gave him to be a Sacrifice for us when Enemies; and we have grudged a
few pounds, murmured at a little labor, or hazard, in serving him, who is our
best Friend, and daily Benefactor. It is more blessed to give than to receive,
Act. 20. 35. God has made us able to give, and others in need to receive, when
he might have put them in our case and us in theirs; yet we basely refuse to
obey him, in giving out of our abundance to such as want it. How unthankful are
we to the giver of all our Gifts? That we refuse to Honor him, by instructing
the Ignorant, and reclaiming Transgressors, when he could as easily have
qualified them to Instruct us, and left us in a greater need of their
assistance than they are of ours. Whatever we are, have, or hope for, are the
Fruits of his mere Bounty, and distinguishing Favor to us; that we are capable
to do him any service, or others any good, are Endowments he dispensed to us by
Name, and that these shall not be used at all for him, is high Ingratitude. In
Mercy he has long tried us, he has spared us again and again, after that our
Barrenness has provoked him to cut us off, as well as others whom he has cast
out, Luke 13.8. and still we abuse his patience, and persist to cumber the
ground, and be little profitable to any. By great Rewards he invites us, by
great Assistances he encourages us to that which he might bind us to, at our
peril, by his mere Command, yet, as base Wretches, we loyter, yea, refuse his
Work; we wave what is hard, and think too much of what is easiest; we cast off
all that we can tolerably rid our selves of.

Ought not it to be for a Lamentation, and the more so, if you can but discern
the malignity and contempt you have expressed toward God in your unthankful
returns? What Is the Language of your refusing to serve your Generation
hitherto? No kinder, no more expressive of Gratitude, for all his favors, than
this; God deserves not my Pains, my Estate would be foolishly laid out for him;
what is he to me, that I should disturb my Ease, hazard my Name, displease my
Friends, or suffer any thing for a common Good? For my part, so that all will
be of my Mind, let Christ the Redeemer have none to Honor him, let Satan carry
away the whole Spoil, let the Gospel of Christ have no place, let his Ministers
and Members perish as well as need, let Heaven have no Tribute from this World
but Blasphemies, let God be reproached, by entrusting such a one as I am, with
what might benefit the Community, let this Earth of the Lords be a Hell for
Misery and Sin; so let all be, rather than I Will run any danger, sustain any
labor, or be at any expense or trouble. Yet this has been the Language of
your unprofitable Behavior, as far as you have allowed it, and God does so
interpret it, however partial you are toward your selves.

Is not this horrid Ingratitude to our Blessed Lord? And do dry Eyes, or a Face
lifted up, agree hereto? We may deservedly take up those words, we are ashamed
and confounded, because we bear the reproach of our past times, Ier. 31.19.
it is time to blush, when all his special favors do thus reproach us, and our
returns have breathed such gross Ingratitude.

3. Your Unusefulness has been the highest Injustice against God.

Whiles you have refused to be profitable according to your Ability, you have
denied to render to God that which is his own; you have defrauded, and
sacrilegiously withheld and mis-applied that which was his and not yours.
Whose are you your selves? Whose are all your Gifts and Estates which you have
thus grudged? They are the Lords; of every Talent he may justly say, its my
own, Mat. 25.27. The Cattle upon a thousand Hills are mine, Psalm. 50.1. The
Earth is the Lords, and the fullness thereof, Psalm. 24.1. Hence he fastens
injury on Idolatrous Israel, Ezekiel. 16.17, 18, 19. Thou did take thy Jewels of
my Gold and my Silver, and thou have set my Oil and my Incense before thy
Idols, and my Meat, etc. But especially, bethink your selves how many ways you,
even you, unuseful ones, are his. You are the Work of his Hands, he gave you a
Being, or you had never existed; he gave you to be what you are, even rational
Creatures, which he was no more necessitated to make you than crawling Toads,
Job 33.6.

He sustains you in Being and in your Ca^^^^ for service: In him we live, and
(...) have our being, Acts 17.28. By his (...) are you provided for; and by his
watchful Eye preserved every Moment, Genesis 48.15, 16.

You were Redeemed by the Blood of Christ, he bought you into a capacity for
service, when you were fettered in Prison in order to eternal Vengeance, Zech.
9.11. Luke 1.74.

You have solemnly owned the claim of God in Christ to you, by offering up your
selves, and all you possess, to this Glorious One; answerably to Romans 12.1.
whereby thou art his also by self-dedication. Seeing then his claims to you are
thus various and universal, how much have you wronged him, in denying him the
use of his own, and done your utmost to defeat him in the End for which he
created and redeemed you? Did not he create all things for himself? To bring
him Glory, and do him Service, to the degree whereof they were capable, Prove.
16.4. Col. 1.16. Christ died and rose, that he might be Lord both of the dead
and living; Romans 14.9. Was not this that he might rule all, dispose of all, and
be served by all? How unrighteous then have you been, as far as unusefulness is
your Fault, you have carried it as if he could not do with his own as he
pleased. You his Creatures have refused to go on his Errand; or, work in his
Vineyard, Matthew. 21.29, 30. You his purchased Ones have not agreed to serve him
with your Bodies and Spirits, which are his, 1 Cor. 6.20. His Money you have
refused to give as he directs. His Office, and Power you have neglected to
apply to the Ends and by the Rules which he prescribes. His Gifts have been
sacrilegiously taken away from the service to which he allotted them.

Have not your Ways been in all this unequal? And can you own it without
Blushings, and renting your very Hearts? Our unusefulness ought not to be
lightly esteemed by us, when it is so full of Treachery, Ingratitude, and
Injustice, toward the Lord our God. Paul knew Service went with God's Title,
That God whose I am, and whom I serve, Act. 27.23.

4. You should be ashamed and grieved for your Unusefulness, because it has
been very injurious to all Persons whom you have neglected to be profitable to.

They have a joint charge of Wrong against you, in that you have defrauded them
of what was theirs in Right, though you detained it. We are Debtors to as many as
God has appointed us to be useful, Romans 1.14.

God directed to them, by you, whatever help or benefit he requires you to
confer on them, and therefore you have acted the part of a fraudulent Messenger
in disowning their claim, and withholding what is their due.

The Church of God may complain, This was he who owed me great Service, but he
never rendered it to me in my Ministers, or my Members; he did nothing for my
Defense, Enlargement, or Improvement.

Your Country may exclaim, This Man enjoyed my Defense, Plenty, and
Conveniences, and was capable, by his Prayers, Votes, Purse and Gifts, to have
contributed to my Welfare, but he has wickedly sought himself, and served
himself of me, but I am no way benefited by him in my Reformation, Safety, or
Liberty, etc.

Your Families have a Right to Godly Education, as well as other Benefits; but
they do testify against you as injurious, in not instructing, persuading, and
striving with them, to rescue them from the power of the Devil, and to become
devoted to the Lord.

The Poors cries go up to Heaven against you, for keeping back their Portion of
your Substance, and denying that Advice and Help whereby you might have made
them useful and comfortable.

Such just Complaints may well touch their Hearts against whom they are
directed; perhaps you would hate to defraud any Man in what the Laws of the
Land declare unjust, but is not the Law of Nature, and the positive Laws of
God, as sufficient to determine what is Just or Unjust, as Humane Laws can be?
And these do accuse you to be injurious to Men in your wilful unprofitableness.

But besides all this, it may be many are exclaiming against you among the
Damned already, as accessory to their Miseries, by your neglects as well as
otherwise. They are dead in their sin for want of thy reproof, and thy
slackness in pulling them out as Brands out of the burnings. If our Hearts have
any tenderness under a sense of so many and manifest injuries, we must feel
this Wickedness much embittered to us.

5. You should blush at, and bewail your Unusefulness as it is a great hurt to
your selves.

Unprofitable persons govern themselves by a great mistake, in that they fall
into mischief the way they think to escape it; to avoid Self-hurt, they refrain
being useful to others, but you will find that thereby you incur a far greater
damage. For fear of loss, you kept from others what you ought to have laid out
for their Relief, and you think it is so much saved for your own benefit, but
God will so order matters, that all such riches were kept to your own hurt,
Eccl. 5.13. Whenever power is mis-applied, or not exerted for common Benefit,
that is the time wherein a Man rules over another to his own hurt, Eccl. 8.9.

Folly, when detected, is cause of shame: Mischief, when perceived, forces
sorrow in him on whom it falls; it is your Blindness and Infidelity, that you
now find not, in your great Unusefulness, the plainest evidence of both, but
what Unbelief will not now discern, Experience shortly will force the securest
of you to acknowledge, and that to the filling of you with shame and grief. Oh
that you would consider your latter end, Deuteronomy. 32.29. i. e. that you would
consider what this (selfish barren) course will come to, what it will end in. I
can by good warrant assure you, it will not be either so comfortable, nor
gainful, as to justify your Neglects. You, perhaps, will say, With what I save
by not relieving the Poor, or promoting any good Design, I shall get an
Inheritance the more hastily by so much. Is it so? Take God's Word for an
Answer, But the end thereof shall not be Blessed, Prove. 20.21. Write that as a
Prophecy upon whatever of your Estates God has forbidden you to lay up, by his
Call to lay it out. The same is applicable to all that Strength, Safety,
Credit, or Interest, you think you secure, by neglecting to serve your
Generation; the end thereof shall not be blessed.

To Evidence this, and thereby further Convince you that Unusefulness yields
reason of shame and sorrow; of shame, by your folly in it, of sorrow by the
mischief of it. Consider,

1. You can keep nothing with a Blessing which you have gotten or saved by
Unusefulness; very often God even disappoints Men of getting what they propose to
get, by their unfaithfulness to him, and unusefulness to others; with Balaam
they miss of what they so greedily desire, and some way or other God signally
defeats them in the danger they thought to prevent, and the benefit they
expected; so that they are forced to say, even at present, I have neither
saved, nor gotten any thing, by refusing to serve my Generation; I am as poor
as if I had laid out for God what I covetously with held, Prove. 11.24. I am as
much reproached, and as little esteemed, by these Men, for fear of whose
Tongues, or Dislike. I betrayed the Truth, as if I had faithfully adhered to it.

But upon supposition you have made some present Advantage, yet you may not
long keep it, God may soon blast it to the terror of others. Judas soon parted
with the Silver he got by betraying Christ, Matthew. 27.34. some have been burnt
in their House, by God's Hand, who refused to burn for the Truths sake.

Ananias soon lost the use of what he reserved from public Service, and his
Life to the Bargain, Act. 5. cap. Oh! how many remarkable Instances are upon
Record, of the ruined Families of such as acquired Estates by unfaithfulness to
God, and uncharitableness to Men? Their Children could not keep what their
Parents perfidiously heaped. Nay, Examples are very many, that did not keep,
for their own time, the Wealth or Reputation which they secured at the price of
a common Harm, but became Beggarly and Infamous.

God has made many Men's Parts to wither, and their Health to decay, whose
Sloth made their Gifts and Strength unuseful to the Public; such a Method God
took with Israel, when they disregarded God's House, and over-regarded their
own, Hag. 1.4, 9, 11. Ye looked for much, and it came to little; and when ye
brought it home I did blow upon it. Why, says the Lord of Hosts; Because of
mine House that lies waste, and ye run every Man into his own House. What
advantage they got was small, and that soon turned to no Account, because of
God's Blast; it was presently reduced to nothing.

But supposing God, for wise Ends, suffer you to keep what you have gotten or
saved, yet I am sure you cannot keep it with a Blessing. If you are Ungodly
it is your Snare, which is the worst of Curses: If you have serious Spirits, you
must uneasily enjoy it, and use it with bitter reflections, as what you hold
not with God's Good Will; a desecrated accursed thing, that hazardeth and
curses the rest, which, without this, might have been possessed comfortably
and safely; yea, and have been employed to blessed Uses, whereas now God
disdains to accept, or succeed the residue to his Service, but he embittereth
it to your disquiet, as well as emptieth it to your dissatisfaction.

2. You shall be great losers by your unusefulness, notwithstanding all you can
get or save thereby.

No profit, by deceitfulness toward God, will countervail the loss you will
sustain: Bethink you whether you have not lost already more than that amounts
to: Do you enjoy that peace you once had? Have you that free access into his
presence as sometimes you found? Does he afford you that communion with
himself, and tokens of his favor, in which you were accustomed to relish the
highest delight? Have you not less composure, and fixedness of Heart, when
dangers threaten you? Do you expect the same returns of Prayer, or use you to
meet with them as formerly? Are not you more left to your selves in Duties and
Temptations too? Have you not less Supports when Afflictions befall you? Have
not your Graces abated in their Strength and Exercise? Have not you less of God
in every Ordinance, and less success in your Performances? In such things thou
do more than vomit up the Morsel thou have eaten, and lose thy sweet words,
as Prove. 23. v. 8.

But if thy gross Neglects be impenitently persisted in, thy Losses will be far
greater, not only in further degrees of what is abovementioned, but thou shall
lose all the good thou have seemed to do. John 2. 8. All shall be taken from
thee which thou appearest to have, yea, or really have, Matthew. 25. 28, 29. Thou
shall lose all thy Hopes, however great or confident; thou shall lose that Life
which thou did so over-fondly love, John 12. 25. Thou shall lose thy own
Soul, which the gain of the whole World cannot not recompense, Luke 9. 24. You
shall not find the Good promised to the Merciful and Righteous, which is no
less than Life, Righteousness, and Honor, Prove. 21. 21. You shall forfeit all
the higher Degrees of Glory promised to the eminently Useful; yea, and the
lesser Degrees promised to the faithfully Useful, though not so Eminent. You
shall neither be Ruler of ten Cities nor of five; no entrance into the Joy of
your Lord shall be admitted you, Luke 19. Matthew. 25. 21. The Rivers of God's
Pleasure you shall never taste; that beatifick Vision you shall never
experience; the Crown of Glory you shall not wear; for these God has confined
to the faithful Labourer. Can you that never attempted, or soon fainted in
serving God in your Generation, hope to reap as they who fainted not in
well-doing? Gal. 6. 9. Shall you who laid up nothing in store, no Treasure in
Heaven, expect to be Rich there as they who did? Luke 12. 33. 1 Timothy 6. 19.
It Is in vain, and sorest disappointment will attend it. For the utterly
Unfruitful will have no Interest in any of that Glory; the less Useful will
miss of the higher Degrees of it. O compute your Gain and Loss! And what Idiot
could have made a weaker Choice, or taken a more foolish Course than you have
done? Folly will put you to the Blush, to see how vainly you refused to be rich
toward God by public Service, that you might get a Treasure for your self by
your layings up, in a neglect of common Usefulness, Luke 12.18, 19, 21. He was
branded as a Fool in bestowing all his Goods in his Barns, and laying out
nothing that he might be rich toward God. And so will all be marked, who
imitate him.

3. You shall endure great Punishments for your Unusefulness.

Besides a privation of Good, God will sensibly imbitter this Sin: He often does
testify against it in the Posterity of the Unprofitable, who, by being so,
trouble their own House, Prove. 11.29. There are many Curves lying on the Head
of such as withhold Relief from the Poor, assist not in a common Danger, and
contribute not to public Good when capacitated for it, Prove. 11.26. Judge.
5.23. all which you stand exposed to by your Unusefulness. Have not you already
met with some remembrances, that God dislikes your selfish Ways and narrow
Spirits? Has not he emptied your Mercies, embittered your Comforts, filled
your Souls with Terrors, and encountered you with a frowning Countenance? Has
not he let Satan loose upon you or yours?

But these are but the beginnings of Sorrows, and presages of greater Woes,
unless you repent; he will cut thee down as a barren Fig Tree for thy great
Leaves without Fruit, for thy cumbring the ground where thou might be
useful, Luke 13.5, 6. how full of terrors will Death present it self, when God
will force thy Conscience to reflect on thy many Neglects, with a clear view of
the hateful Causes of them, and the miserable Effects thereof? With anguish
thou will then bemoan thy self, and vainly with for the past opportunities of
Service, and that thou had a Heart to have improved them better.

Death, thus full of Stings, will lodge thee in the unseen State; but, alas!
how unprovided and ill prepared? The Face of thy Judge will be terrible, when
he shall demand an Account of thy Stewardship, Luke 16.2. and reckon with thee
about his Talents, and thy occupation of them, Mat. 25.19. it will be in vain
to deny or diminish your Trust, and what Answer can you find that can satisfy
him, or please your selves? If you hope his Merits may be pleadable by you,
he will answer, they are not applied but according to my Promises. You may as
well expect they shall be imputed without Faith, as to a dead Faith, a Faith
that did not invigorate to holy fruitfulness and fidelity in my Service, was a
dead Faith, and so no Faith in Gospel estimate, and therefore cannot save, Iam.
2. v. 14, 20.

To plead your Idleness, Fear or Covetousness, will be to proclaim the
provoking causes of your approaching Ruin. What a heart-cutting charge will
you find drawn against you, with a Sentence pursuant thereto: Thou were ashamed
of me before Men, now I am ashamed of thee before my Father, Mark 8.38. Thou
did deny me in the other World, now I deny thee in this World, Mat. 10.33.
When I was an hungry thou did not feed me, when I was in Prison thou did
not visit me; Depart therefore from me thou cursed into everlasting fire,
prepared for the Devil and his Angels, chap 25, 41. Thou did hide my Talent,
(yea Talents) therefore cast this unprofitable Servant into outer darkness;
there shall be weeping and gnashing of teeth. Mat. 25.30. What mind can
conceive the misery included in a condition made up of all the Woes these
several expressions import? Were they believed thoroughly, what we may now
conceive of them would overwhelm a Man that but seems in danger of enduring
this misery; and being that these several places describe the Sentence
pronounced against the unprofitable, who have neglected a common good (as well
as their own Souls) and betrayed the Public Interests of Christ in their day,
it follows that whatever in each place aggravates their misery, must be put
together to give us a just account thereof. Can your heart endure but the
supposing your self the person whom Christ singleth out in the View of Angels
and Men; and thus speaks to from his Tribunal, Thou selfish, false and useless
Wretch, so vile, that without reproach to my Perfections, to my Holy Word and
Glory, I can show no favor to thee (which is Christ's being ashamed of him) I
do here reject all thy pretensions to my Image, Merits, Covenant and Service;
and do declare thou art no living Member, Follower, Servant or Witness of mine,
nor is my Honor, Truth or Fullness concerned at all in thy being happy (which
is Christ's denying him.) Thou art now fallen into my hands, and the time of my
Vengeance is come, I pronounce thee guilty of persidiousness to my Name and
Interests, and unprofitable to others and thy self, in not rightly employing my
Talents for common benefit, as well as thine own; for this I now effectually
and irrevocably adjudge thee to the Loss of all Felicity, Glory, Grace and Joy,
which my presence does afford, and this without any future Hopes from any
further strivings with thee, or offers to thee, and be thou now sealed and
separated to the height of Misery ( that is, Depart from me you cursed) a
Misery in its nature and degree so great, as what is fitted to torment those
capital Enemies of mine, the Devil and his Angels, who shall be thy Companions
because they were thy Rulers; so painful to thy Body as the hottest fire, and
not less to thy Soul, else it were not fitted to torment the Devils, who are
Spirits; so full of horror as Darkness is, yea a Darkness as remote and free
from Light as can be, (that is outer Darkness) and all so resented, felt and
afflictive, as to cause the extremest sorrow, anguish and fretting against God,
thy Companions, and thy self ( there shall be weeping and gnashing of teeth.)
And as for Duration; it is everlasting fire, it is for ever that this Sentence
shall take hold of, and be executed upon thee; which is confirmed by another
place that declares the continuance of the Misery of unuseful Men, under the
Emblem of Chaff, as opposed to useful Wheat; the Chaff he will burn with
unquenchable fire, Luke 3. 17. which is the same with those words, their Worm
dies not, and their Fire is not quenched, Mark 9. v. 46. There Is no hopes of
an alteration of their Estate, unless words cannot express the Eternity of Hell
Torments; yea, unless Sinners may be reclaimed when expelled from all the
gracious Influences of the Divine Presence (implied in depart from me) Yea,
unless there be a more Valuable Sacrifice for Sinners than the Son of God was;
for this will not relieve them, Heb. 9. 26. Yea, if there be not an
Administration for reducing Sinners after, and fitter than the Kingdom of
Christ; for this will be delivered up upon that time that this Sentence passes
the first time on Sinners found then alive, solemnly upon the departed and
living, and executed upon Devils, who till then are Prisoners, 1 Cor. 15. 23,
24, 26, 28. 2 Pet. 2. 4. compared with Matthew. 8. 29. Ought not you to tremble
at this prospect of Eternal Misery? Yet if you are these unfaithful and
unprofitable Sinners during Life, you will be thus found guilty and sentenced
when you Die. Consider again and again what thou must hear, feel and endure,
for thy unprofitableness; add this to the great things thou losest by it, and
also that what now thou seem to get or save through unusefulness, cannot at
present be kept with a Blessing; when thou have done thus in a serious manner,
I will appeal to thy self, whether thy folly is not gross enough to make thee
ashamed, and thy Misery great enough to fill thee with terror, that
unusefulness in thy Age has been allowed by thee? Yea, I dare give you leave
to put all the loss, charge, labor and danger of Public Service, with all the
ease, safety and benefit of unserviceableness; and set them all against the
forementioned Mischiefs which attend the unprofitable; and if thou believe
the certainty of these, be then affected at thy barrenness, as the cause
appears to thy self; nay, were there but a probability, nay, but a possibility
that these fruits of unprofitableness were true, it were sufficient to make
thee ashamed and grieved for it.

Obj. Though I must agree that it is folly to become liable to these Mischiefs,
yet are all who are unuseful subject to endure them? for if so, who shall
escape? Supposing a capacity to service; I shall briefly answer.


Ans. There is, 1. A degree of unusefulness, which through weakness and
temptation may often befall a godly Man, which indeed shall not bring Eternal
Misery upon him; though God usually testifies his displeasure against it in this
Life.


2. There is an unusefulness which will infallibly bring Eternal Misery upon
whoever is guilty of it. If it be not so, you must question the plainest
discoveries of the Gospel of Truth.

Obj. 2. How shall I know the kind and degree of that unusefulness that will
certainly bring Eternal Misery, from that which a godly Man may be guilty of
through weakness and temptation?


Ans. A full Answer to this and the other Objections may be gathered from what
is largely insisted on in the former heads. But because some may not so easily
apply that to such particular cases; I shall therefore give you these short
hints.


1. The Unusefulness of any good Man is such as does consist with an unfeigned
dedication and habitual devotedness of himself and all he has to God in
Christ, and this is persevered in.

He is no Believer or good Christian that is not thus devoted to God; and such
unusefulness as is consistent with this, is not a Mark of Hell.

But that unusefulness which is not consistent with unfeigned dedication, and
habitual devotedness to God in Christ, is an infallible Mark of Eternal Misery
if persisted in.

2. He that shall escape Eternal Misery, is not unuseful in the prevailing
scope of his life; but every Son of Perdition is so; the course of his life is
unprofitable, and thence he is denominated unfruitful in his best State; the
stated bent of his Soul is to do more hurt than good.

3. What good he does who shall escape Hell, he usually does it in uprightness,
from love and obedience to God, with a believing respect to God in Christ; but
the Child of Wrath, in whatever seeming good he does, has a greater regard to
carnal considerations, and acts not from Faith, Love, and obediential regard
to God.

4. The good Man repents of, and bewails his unusefulness, when convinced of
it, and heartily desires to know wherein he is culpably unuseful, that he may
reform, as well as by Faith in Christ sue out his Pardon upon repenting of it.
But the ungodly is hardened in his unusefulness, unwilling to know it, set
against reforming, if not insensible of his need of Pardon, yea often justifies
himself in his selfish unprofitable course.

5. The true Christian is truly glad and thankful when God does most incline
and enlarge his heart to overcome his selfishness, and to act in the most
useful serviceable manner, though no carnal respects of his own be served
thereby; yea, though loss, reproach and suffering attend it, so God be but
honored, and a common good subserved. But the carnal Man, if he has been
overruled to any thing which proves useful, yet if his own Credit or wordly
Benefit be not advantaged, and much more if he comes to suffer by it; he is
grieved, and repents of what he has done, whatever honor God receives, or
benefit others get thereby. By these things you may know whether you are such
unuseful persons as shall be pardoned and saved, or such unuseful persons as
shall endure Eternal Misery, if you persistin this state.

Obj. 3. But though I continue unuseful in that manner as the Word of God
declares Eternal Misery will follow upon it; yet I shall be safe if I believe
in Christ for the pardon of it, and that I Will do, and yet not reform my course.


Ans. Deceive not thy self with vain words, what thou sowest, that thou shall
reap, Mat. 6. v. 19. And be it known to thee, that no Faith in Christ will be
available to thy pardon, which is not effectual to turn thee from that
unusefulness, and which does not include in it a dedication and prevailing
habitual devotedness of thy self to Christ and his service in a common good. A
living Faith works by love, Gal. 5. 6. and a dead Faith will never justify;
yea, it self is condemned as a false Faith if it want good works, when
opportunity for them is afforded. And that Man must impose upon himself, who
can imagine that the Faith which is necessary to pardon must work by Love, and
yet not work in Love toward our Neighbors at all; but if you grant it must
work in Love toward our Neighbor, I ask, must it not work toward all that
are designed by the word Neighbor, whom we are to love? if so, it includes all
Men whatever within the reach of my ability to do good to; and if it be by Love
to All them that it will work, it must express it self in those works that
instance the sincerity of our Love to them for their benefit; and so true Faith
will work toward all as far as Love is due to them, and do all that sincere
Love to them will prompt to, which is no less than serving our Generation, or
that public Usefulness which you neglect. Can the Tempter still delude you to
think, that you will have a pardon of your Unusefulness by such a Faith as does
not make you resolve to be Useful? Yea, or does not effectually produce this
Usefulness as you are called thereto? Alas! you contradict, yea, nullify a
Justifying Faith, when you say, I will not reform my useless Life, and yet I
will believe in Christ for a pardon of it; the English of which is, I will
believe in Christ for Pardon with such a Faith as Christ never promised pardon
to, and upon which he will never pardon me. This, instead of mitigating thy
Folly in being unuseful, does greatly augment and proclaim it; it sets thee no
safer from endless Misery, but by encouraging thee in the course that certainly
leads to it; it makes thy enduring that Misery the surer.


2 Exh. Resolve henceforward to be Useful in your Generation; yea, eminently
Useful, if capable thereof.

All I have hitherto insisted on tends to this, That you may resolve at last to
engage in this Work. For this end I have explained this Duty, and commended the
Performance thereof; for this I have said so much, to discover the Neglects of
it, and to convince of the Folly and Danger of those Neglects: All which will
be lost, if you go hence unresolved to be Public Blessings in your Day.

What avail all Arguments, if they incline not our backward Hearts to
Usefulness? They will no more than discover our Obstinateness, and aggravate
our Condemnation; but in hope of a better Effect, I shall Address my self to
each of you.

The more remiss you have been hitherto, the more incumbent on you it is, now
to engage your Souls in this Work; from this time, do what you can to serve the
Will of God in your Generation; devise great and liberal things, Isa. 32.8. Let
nothing set bounds to your Usefulness, but a Natural or Moral incapacity; i. e.
somewhat impossible, or something unlawful. What Is impossible God requires not;
and to do, or speak wickedly, or deceitfully for God, he will not accept, Job
13.7. But what is Lawful, and within your Power, omit not; the greater it is,
the more will God be Honored, others Benefited, and thy own Divine temper
expressed.

Be pleased with the largest opportunities of Service, and faithfully answer
each; trifle not, but be in earnest; move not slowly, but run the ways of God's
Commandments, as one whose Heart is enlarged by him, Psalm. 119. Beat not the
Air, as if uncertain of the nature or tendency of thy Work, it is for God, it
will end in Glory, 1 Cor. 9 26. Let us each, in our places, say with Nehemiah,
cap. 2.20. The Lord will prosper us, therefore we, his Servants, will arise and
build.

That I may more usefully urge this General Exhortation, I shall direct it
according to some different circumstances, which you may be in, and answerably
direct and plead with you.

1. To such as are still unwilling to serve their Generation.

Either you are convinced that this is your Duty, or you are not; if you are
persuaded it is your Duty, what peace or hope can you possess whiles you live in
the neglect of it? If you think it is not your Duty, what sense can you put
upon so many plain Scriptures that command it? That promise such Rewards to,
and Assistances in it? That threaten such sore Miseries to the Neglecters of
it? That so approve of, and praise the Practice and Practisers of it, and brand
the Name of such as Accursed who refused to do so? If these things suffice not
to prove a Duty, nothing can; and I am sure God has not excepted your Names,
from the Obligation to obey it any more than others. But whether convinced that
this is your Duty, or unconvinced, pray consider, as you are M^n, you are not
Born for your selves, but for your Country too: Nature dictates this, Heathens
assert it, your own Hearts commend it in others, and disapprove the contrary;
yea, many Brutes reproach you, when they will hazard themselves to defend their
Young, and secure each other against a Common Enemy or Mischief.

As you are Men created by the living God, you are accountable to him; you
ought to answer the ends for which he made you, which were to serve his
Purposes, and bring him Glory.

He was too Wise and Holy to make you Lawless as to himself, or to the
Community of which you are Members; nor is he so remiss a Governor, as not
severely to animadvert Offenses so publicly mischievous.

As you are called Christians, bethink your selves the Lord Jesus redeemed you,
that you might return to a state of Subjection and Service, and under that Law
you are to him, Romans 14.9. It Is no small Mercy that he calls you to this,
considering you were condemned Rebels, and that he is ready to accept it, and
assist you in it. What Ingratitude is it to live to your selves, and not to him
who paid so dear for your Ransom? 1 Cor. 6.20.

Further, consider the before-described Miseries which you wilfully choose, and
the glorious Blessings you certainly forfeit by your unprofitableness; herein
you are cruel to your selves, when you fondly think it is self-indulgence; you
destroy your selves, and yet weakly pretend to selfadvantage. Reflections upon
your madness herein, will be a great part of your torment.

Perhaps you have not thought what you expect from others, though they must be
unobliged to you, upon the same Reasons as you can give for your being free
from the Duty of Usefulness to them; to say nothing of what you expect from the
blessed God, and what every Moment you receive, though you so ill requite him.
Did not you expect your Parents Care, the Magistrates Defense, your Ministers
Labors, your Neighbors Favor and Help? How would you be dealt by, if you
were in the case of the Poor or Distressed, and they in yours? Would you think
it well done in all, or any of these, to be as unconcerned, selfish,
oppressive, cruel, or useless, as you resolve to be to them, in whatever
Capacity or Relation you stand. Our Lord's Rule was approved by Pagans, though
condemned by you, Matthew. 7.12. What would become of the Interest of Christ, the
Welfare of the Nation, the Good of Societies, Religious or Civil, if every Man
were as selfish and unconcerned for a common Good as you resolve to be? All
Safety, Harmony, Liberties, Order and Comfort, would be expelled, and their
contraries alone take place: But, if this state of Things be thy abhorrence,
ask thy self, Why should not all others be as selfish as I am, if it be
justifiable in me? Or, why should not I be as public Spirited as they, if it
be praiseworthy and useful in them? Are you an ill Magistrate, why should any
others be better? Are you an unfaithful Minister, why should any others be more
faithful? Are you careless of the common Liberties of your Country or City, why
should any other, in your station, be more concerned? Are you straithanded to
the Poor, wherefore should others of your Estate be more liberal? Are you
indifferent about the Truth, Interest, and Gospel of Christ, why should any
other in your circumstances more expose themselves? You must consent that all
these may as justly excuse themselves from benefiting others as you can; or
else you are most basely spirited, to think others should serve a Common Good
that you may share therein, but that you must be excepted from contributing to
that Service, that so you may pursue your own private Interest the more.

Directions. Weigh these things often, and deliberately judge of thy Resolves
not to serve thy Generation. Go and humble thy self before God, and earnestly
pray to him, in Christ's Name, to change thy Heart, subdue thy Lusts, and give
thee another Spirit: Enter into Covenant with Christ, to deny thy self, to take
up thy Cross and follow him. From this time* firmly engage in Christ's
strength, that thou will not consult thy flesh in thy undertakings, but keep
thy self from under the influence of a narrow Spirit, and base Lusts, as being
very ill Advisers in thy course of Life, and as unfit Disposers of thy Estate,
Gifts or Power. Set upon doing public Good presently, though it be with great
reluctance at first; the less good thou have hitherto done, now attempt to do
the more: And the later you begin, redeem the remainder of your days by the
greater Projects, and more vigorous Endeavors. Pray earnestly, and attend
Gospel Means for sincere love to God and Man, and for a believing sight of
invisible Things; and keep your Consciences under a tender, lively sense of
God's Authority, and the Day of Judgment.

2. To such as are unfeignedly willing to serve their Generation, account it a
greater Mercy than the greatest Estates or Abilities with a narrow Soul, which
thereby would be a Snare. Abhor a suggestion as if God dealt hardly by you, in
making service your Duty, or inclining you to it; for, in the first, God's
Wisdom and Goodness in the Government of this World appears. In the last, he
has honored and benefited you, in anointing you his Instruments. Our Lord
Jesus was wont to say, It is more blessed to give, than to receive, Acts 20.35.
Which the Apostle uses as a Motive to Men's laboring, that they might support
the weak, relieve the needy, etc. We imitate God as far as we are beneficent,
for he is the Fountain whence all Wants are supplied, though he is benefited by
none; and yet, for our Encouragement in doing Good, he is pleased to account
himself a Borrower, Prove. 19. v. 17. He that has pity on the Poor, lends to
the Lord. Not that you can give what is not his already, but that he is as sure
to re-pay, as if you lent it to him.

But this Head being too general to admit so distinct an Application, as the
several Sorts and Conditions of such be who are truly willing to serve their
Generation requires; I shall address my self to them in these several
Instances, which distinguish their Cases, and give suitable Directions.

1. To such as are capable of no very great service to their Generation; as
being of small Estates, low Parts, and the like.

Serve you your Generation as you can in your lower Place: To which end, beg
God's Direction, that you may not mistake your Place or Work; nor be left to
your self in the meanest Service. Go not out of your own Calling, for God will
neither accept nor bless Encroachments on other Men's Work nor your usurpation
of Power of your own Heads; no, nor at their pleasure who are not authorized to
give it, 1 Cor. 7.20. Levit. 10. 1. Do not presumptuously attempt what is above
your ability, for that is not your Duty, and it may turn to public detriment.
Take care that you pretend not public Usefulness as a Cover to an idle neglect
of your Callings, or pragmatical Business in what belongs not to you: For this
discovers your corruption, and will end in hurt and scandal. Be sure that what
you give to Good Uses be your own, and not what is another Man's: For this is
Fraud, and not Charity; and instead of being liberal you will be unjust. And
yet be conscientiously ready and vigorous to do all the good you can; your
lesser Ability must be as faithfully used as if it were greater; nor will your
having no more, excuse your unprofitableness with what you have. Instruct your
Family, though you are not Preachers; pray for and be affected with the state of
the Church of God and the Nation, if you can do no more. Vote for good Men into
Office, encourage faithful Ministers as you are able, give to what Poor you
can, and acquaint others with the case of such you cannot relieve your selves.
What little Good you can do, let it be done cheerfully, and from love. See that
you use Diligence, and avoid all Waste in your Persons and Families, that you
may be capable of doing the greater good. Be favoury in Discourse, exemplary in
Life, and ready to help those who know less than your selves. And lastly, Do
not envy others, nor murmur that you are in no higher station than you are, for
God knew what place of service you were fittest for; if you be faithful in
that, he will accept and reward it, and if fit he will capacitate you for
higher Work. Nay, you may prove of far greater use in this station than you can
now perceive; who knows what success God may give to thy Advice, or other
Endeavors? To thy Children, Servants, etc. and how Eminent they may prove?

2. To such as are capable of eminent Service to their Generation, and willing
to it, keep a humble sense of your unworthiness, that God should make you able
and willing to do him greater service than others, and answerably praise him
for it as the Sovereign Bestower both of ability and willingness; also be
watchful over your hearts, that your Ends be upright in whatever service you
perform, and abhor an Opinion of meriting from God by the most you do; in all
which you have David for a lively Example, 1 Chronicles. 29. 10. to the 17. We thank
thee, and bless thy glorious Name: But who am I, and what is my People, that we
should be able to offer so willingly after this sort? for all things come of
thee; all this store comes of thine hand, and is all thine own. I know also,
my God, that thou triest the heart, and have pleasure in uprightness, etc. Do
not judge it enough that you perform as great Services as others, when you are
capable of, and called to more; nor let the less useful (however many) of your
station prescribe to you, for they will not justify your neglects. Let not
mere difficulty, danger, nor expense, cause you to conclude, yea or to suspect
you are not called to this or that eminent Service, for your call must be
adjusted by other Rules (of which bebefore) where opportunity for great things
offer, delay not, lest that being lost, it may not be recalled, or more
hindrances intervene. Judge of Unusefulness and incumbent Service by what your
Consciences suggest in great dangers (as on a SickBed) and in the liveliest
frame by fullest communion with God (as after the Lord's Supper, etc.) for
these are Seasons to make the truest Judgment in what concerns eminent
Usefulness. Never make your abilities or activeness serve a Faction as
distinguished from, much less as opposed to a public Interest; for hereby you
act selfishly, and not as Christians, and will be more hurtful to the public
concernments of Christ, than if you did nothing at all; and be the more guarded
against this, because the Heads of Factions will solicit such as you, and
Satan will set in with your misguided Zeal, as knowing he can make no other use
of you; now that you are honestly willing to be serviceable. If you are persons
eminently useful, do not hastily govern your Activity by the Opinion of others;
if weak Men misinterpret your well-adjusted Attempts, be you resolved; should
many good Men blame you never so much for your performance, adhere to, and
still pursue it whiles you have good ground to believe it is the fittest means
to prevent a public Mischief, or produce a general Benefit. The Reasons of
this Direction are these; the Opinion and Censures of most Men are very weak
and misguided; Satan has access to the Imagination of good Men, and often
employs such to obstruct great Designs, Mat. 16. 23. And Men entirely devoted
to God in the Service of their Generation, after some ti^e of faithful
acquitting themselves th^rein, they stand more in God's secret, and by
experience are fitter to judge of public good and hurt than other good Men be.

Whatever offers as your present work do, not thinking lesser things needless,
when you have not greater things at present to undertake; for you know not what
great good a seemingly small endeavor may do (as Advice to a Child) this is
your present work, the most of your time is not filled with opportunities of
very great Services, these lesser Attemps being very frequent, as taking up so
much of our time, will amount together to great Service, a very great part of
our lives will be unprofitably spent, if we neglect these lower endeavors, and
most Men's unusefulness is greatly owing to a disregard to these. But yet see
the greatest Services be still preferred to lesser when in compitition. Keep a
jealous watch over your selves, that no Lusts prescribe your work, be admitted
into it, or nourished by it; to which end see that you do nothing through
strife or vainglory, Phil. 2. 3. or for covetous ends. Despise not others who
cannot equal your Service, or do need it; think not your great Services give
you an allowance in any way of sin, or that they are a compensation for it, or
will be accepted in commutation for the opposite duties, etc. I give this
direction, because Satan's Wiles are deep, and his Attempts on the eminently
useful are many, various and unwearied; the remains of corruption are great in
the best, Lusts are deceitful, and signal Service is an apt occasion to be
improved.

Look to Christ for strength and fervor, for fresh Anointings, and continual
Conduct that you may omit nothing which God assigns you to do in your
Generation; nor take up with any excuse which he will not approve of when he
comes to judge the secrets of all hearts; because of our selves we can do
nothing; by his strength we can do all, Phil. 4. 13. We need new supplies in
every new business, and the more as its importance is; and by dependence we
shall and must receive it.

3. To Useful persons under discouragements in their Service.

Still persist in your work; for the greater opposition you meet with in it,
the more likely it is to be subservient to Christ's present Designs, and to
produce the greater Effects in a common good, since Satan is so active to
obstruct thee. Gird up the loins of your mind, and hope to the end, 1 Pet. 1.
13. Whatever is a plain duty, will bring with it sufficient fitness, and not
want success in due time; no, rightly directed labor in the work Christ has
upon the Wheel will be lost, though success may be delayed, and the work seem
dead for a season, that so the World may be prepared to submit to it, and
Christ's Victory may appear the greater as it baffleth the Confidence of Satan
and his Instruments. When ready to faint, tell thy Soul, I must not be weary in
well doing, for I shall reap if I faint not. You have God as eminently
concerned for you, and in you, as you can be engaged for him; his Perfections
will uphold you in all that which his Authority sets you upon; and he allows
you to place to his Account the losses, reproaches and hardships you sustain in
his Cause, neither shall you lose thereby, Mark 10. 29. 30. Search lest there
be any sin unrepented of which interrupt his supporting Comforts, or that you
have too much confided in your own Abilities, or ascribed the honor of past
successes or performances to your selves. Pour out your complaints, and your
apprehensions of your own weakness before the Lord, who is full of pity and
faithful, and whose strength is manifest in our weakness, 2 Cor. 12. 8, 9. Be
much in the contemplations of Heaven; review your own experiences of seasonable
sufficient supports when your fears were as great as at present, and
attentively think it is but a little while and my work is over; He that shall
come, will come, and will not tarry, and all the promises of perseverance were
made to Souls in Eminent Service by doing and suffering, which you may safely
apply to your selves, expecting those greater Consolations and Supplies which
God will not disappoint you in.

4. To useful Persons inclining to Remisness in the Service of their Generation.

The greatest part of this Discourse being so much directed to your Case, I
shall only advise you to renew your Covenant with God in Christ. Reflect on
your selves, what you found when vigorously useful, and what you feel now in
this declining Frame: Enquire what forfeitures you have made of the Spirits
quickening influences, or what lust begins to invade your Souls, or what Carnal
thing is setting up for an Idol. Pray earnestly for exciting Grace, and be much
in such Soliloquies as these, Am not I a Redeemed Sinner? and shall I neglect
the interests of my Redeemer? Shall I disregard the end of my Being, break my
Vows, be false to my trust? Is it not in well-doing that I grow weary? Are my
Talents less accountable for, than they were, or have I now more reason to
think that my Abilities were not given for Public use? Where shall I stop if I
recover not? What shall I be doing the residue of my time, if I cease to be
useful? What may I meet with to awaken me out of this slothful Sleep? Do others
less need my help, or have I the leave of God to be remisser? Can I think
Christ a worse Master than before; or Heaven less worthy of my pains? Dare I
commend the unprofitable part of Mankind that I am thus about to justify; or
condemn the eminently useful, whom now I seem resolved to censure? Must not I
shortly on a Deathbed reflect on what a barren life I am going to live, and
the blessed Courses I put a stop too? Have I done more already than Christ
deserves at my hands, who died for me? or would I be content he should now more
remissly intercede in my behalf? Plead such things closely and frequently with
your Hearts, and force a deliberate answer, that all may issue in fresh
resolves, to be more vigorous than ever, and in shame and grief that you could
be inclinable to remisness in Public Service.

I shall conclude the whole with three cautions, to all who are willing to
serve their Generation.

1. Equal nothing with the Public which is short thereof, especially your
selves. Let every thing have its due regard, and no more. Our esteem of things
should be according to their value, and our concern is irregular if dissonant
from our just Esteem. Moses words, Exodus 32.32. If not, blot me out of thy Book
and St. Paul, Rom 9.3. For I could wish that my self were accursed from Christ,
for my Brethren were not Absolute Desires, but the regular indications of a
Public Spirit adjusting things as compared together: A Common good is above a
Particular, and the more common, still the more Estimable. The very Reason why
Divine Worship is proper to God is, because he is Author of all, above all, and
infinitely more than the whole Creation; yea, and we cannot but most intend his
Glory in our undertakings, as our regards are most extensive; and make every
thing a selfish Idol, as we Postpone what is more Public to it. Nevertheless,
the true Order is generally inverted: Most Men do not account a Mischief or
Benefit to be greater or less, as they affect the Public, but as they affect
themselves; we begin and end at the wrong Point, and Erect a false Standard
when our main concern is, how will such Public Affairs Profit or Damage First,
My own Person, then my own Family, then my own Party, then my own Nation (if at
all it will reach so far) be warned against this preposterous course; look at
your selves but as small parts of the whole, and to signify no more than as
the Public is advantaged by you. Acknowledge the interest all have in you
according to their True Order and your Capacity, and obligation to be
serviceable to each. Be uniform in your Course, and let God in a Common good
(as such) be your Governing end: Fill up each Place and relation you stand in;
let each have a due regard, and no more: Your own Families, the particular
Church you belong to and the Catholic Church above that; also your own City
and Nation, and the World; let all these have their due, and this in just order
and proportion, not exclusively of each other. Your Prayers must reach the
World, your Mental Communion the Catholic Church, Occasional Communion to
others then that wherein you are stated Members (though in many things they
differ from you). In short, confine not your Care, Estate, or Advice, below, or
otherwise than that Mind will dictate, which accounts the Body more valuable
than a Member, and a common Good than a particular. If you are Ministers, abhor
a thought that your Office obliges you to mind no more Souls than your own
Flocks.

2. Neglect not your selves whiles you mind the Public.

Do not disregard your own Soul, no nor Body neither; keep the last in a
fitness for Service, and be ever watchful that the first be in a meetness for
Glory, and improving for it: Work out your own Salvation with fear and
trembling, Phil. 2.13. Receive your selves the Christ, and Mercy you offer to
others; look not so Abroad as to forget you have a Home; yea, labor to affect
and profit your own Souls, by all your endeavors to profit others; to walk in
the light you give, and to grow in Grace by doing all the good you can. If you
are Ministers, often think of 1 Cor. 9.27. I keep under my Body, and bring it
into subjection, lest that by any means, when I have preached to others, I my
self should be a cast away.

3. Disregard not the first or least declinings, in those Graces that are the
springs of public Service, but be intent to get their vigorous Exercise
restored as soon as you perceive abatement.

Very imperfect Actings will follow decaying Graces, and strengthening the last
is the way to perfect the first, Rev. 3.2. As Ephesus decayed in her first
love, she abated her first works, Rev. 2.4, 5. which were Labors and
Sufferings for public use, v. 3. Unbelief, enmity to God and Man, and a narrow
Spirit, grow as Faith, Love, and a public Spirit weaken; and those will as
much obstruct your Usefulness, as these contribute to it: they will pervert
your Judgment, abate your Delight, aggravate your Difficulties, frame Excuses,
find Diversions, enervate Motives, and many other ways lessen your Service; and
as they grow, they tend to still further Abatements in the opposite Graces. Oh!
where will these declensions stop, if you allow them? And every Day you will be
less able and disposed to recover your former strength; and consequently, be
less sure and fit to serve your Generation.

2 Obs. The usefullest persons die.

David fell asleep. Shall I represent this as a Warning, or as an Encouragement
to Service? It has something of both, and in each respect it is a strong Motive
to serve our Generation.

1. It Is a Warning to be useful whiles you live; for Work, or Loyter you, Death
is daily making its Approaches, and when it seizes, it will be in vain to wish
to be spared for greater use, or resolve to do what you hitherto neglected:
Death sets a period to our Endeavors to benefit the Church or Nation, our
Friends or Relations; they can expect no further advantage by us. Therefore in
a sense of your own frailty, and the certainty of dying within a short while,
resolve with our blessed Savior, Ioh. 9.4. I must work the works of him that
sent me while it is day, the night comes when no Man can work. It Is a Mercy to
have nothing undone which God gave us Life for, and to be finishing it when the
Arrest of Death is felt.

2. It Is an Encouragement to such as faithfully serve their Generation. The
usefullest fall asleep; not, indeed, if it were such a sleep as rendered the
separated Soul unactive, for continued Service here would be more pleasing and
profitable to them than such a sleep as that; but it is a rest from Labor, though
not from Work; from Pain, but not from Pleasure to the departed Soul, which
will be with Christ; and though separated for a while, is sure to be reunited to
the Body at the Resurrection. It Is a Woe to the unprofited World, that
eminently useful Men are Dead, for you can hope for no further help, nor expect
any benefit by them; they left you barren and miserable after all their
Labors, and must be terrible Witnesses against you. It Is a loss to the Church
and Nation, that such eminently useful Men must die; the Defense, Glory, and
Blessing of a People are removed; what an open breach is made? The Earth's
endangered by removal of such Pillars. These are the Chariots of Israel, and
the Horsemen thereof, 2 King. 13. 14. There be but few such among the
multitude of Christians, and their loss is not easily made up; but to the
faithful eminently useful Saint, it is a privilege he shall die, (being all such
are not to be translated) he would not live always, Job 7.16. for by Death he
goes into better company; he will be freed from a weight that clogged him though he
moved so fast; the Sin and Sorrow he felt he is to feel no more; he shall enjoy
Christ in another manner, relish Pleasures in a higher way, and possess what he
hoped and waited for. Death must be his great Advantage, to whom faithful and
public Service is his very Business and Trade whiles he lives: To me to live
is Christ, and to die is Gain, Phil. 1.21, 22.

Instead of the Application of this Doctrine, I shall turn my Discourse to the
Occasion of our present Meeting, the Death of your Pastor Dr. Samuel Annesley,
in whom we have the whole Text exemplified; he served his Generation, and he is
fallen asleep.

In the last part, a just cause of Mourning is presented, with respect to many
more than our selves; in the former, a lively Example is proposed for our
imitation; as to both, here is a convincing instance. We see it is possible for
Men in our Age to serve their Generation, and yet the greatest Usefulness
prevents not Death; for he, who was so eminently Useful, lies now Dead. He
began early, he continued long, and never ceased to serve his Generation, until
by Death he was allowed to rest from his Labors.

He was born of very godly Parents, at Kellingworth near Warwick, Anno 1620.
and their only Child. The Name Samuel was appointed for him by his eminently
Pious Grandmother, who died before his Birth, and gave this reason for her
desire that he should be so called, I can say I have asked him of God. His
Infancy was as strangely impressed with the thoughts of being a Minister, (to
which his Parents dedicated him from the Womb) which so transported him from 5
or 6 years old, as to engage him to unusual Industry in what improved him in
order to it; then it was he took up a custom which he always observed, viz.
Reading 20 Chapters in the Bible every Day. Our God, to whom the end is known
from the beginning, was as provident in forming him for great Service, as he
was forward in those indications that he should be employed therein; this
appeared in the hale and hardy constitution of his Body, which was such, as to
endure the coldest Weather, without Hat, Gloves or Fire. For many years, he
seldom drank any thing besides Water; his Sight so strong, that to his Death he
read the smallest Print without Spectacles, and in a Life lengthened to his
77th Year. He was rarely sick; his Natural capacity was good, and his temper
vigorous and warm, which his Grace overruled (mostly) to undertake those
excessive Labors, and sustain the Difficulties, which, without a Body and Mind
so fashioned, had been impossible, in so long a course of Service. And this
vigor he so retained to his very Death, as if God would give an instance, That
the servour of some Men's Souls in his Work, were either independent on the
Body, or their Bodies (with Moses) were still repaired even to Old Age, when he
designeth extraordinary Services by them.

But which was more, he was (not only thus separated) but also sanctified from
the Womb; often since declaring, He never knew the time he was not Converted.

About 15 Years of Age he went to Oxford, where he gave such Instances of his
Piety and Diligence, as would engage a Recital, if I resolved not to omit
these, with all other things, (though very laudable) except his Usefulness; his
ripe Fruits, which fed so many, my regard is to.

A Heart so naturally bent for God's Glory, and the good of Souls, could admit
no longer delays from Work, than what a due fitness for it, and a regular call
unto it, made necessary; yet so long Conscience obliged him to desist, he well
knowing that the strongest desires of Ministerial Work, in the unqualified and
uncalled, will not justify their usurpation of the Office, nor prevent
Disorders and Damage to the Church and themselves, by their public
performances.

He began to cast his Net as Chaplain to the Earl of Warwick, (then Admiral)
and thence removed to Cliff in Kent, where he met with a Storm more tempestuous
than at Sea; for the people of that Place being fond of their ejected Minister,
as greatly pleasing them by his Company at their Dancing, Drinking, and
Merriments on the Lord's Day, they were so prejudiced against this his
Successor, as to rise against him with Spits, Forks and Stones, threatening his
Death at his first coming; a hard Province for a Divine not much above 22 Years
of Age! But here God gave him room for his intense Zeal, fit Objects to direct
and engage his Ministry to Conversion Work and an early Specimen of his own
resolvedness in God's Work, as well as Experience of the good God designed by
him, and care he had of him. For having some prospect of doing good among that
People, (who, though Ignorant and Profane, yet not hardened by resisting Gospel
Light) he told them, Let them use him how they would, he was resolved to
continue with them, till God had fitted them by his Ministry to entertain a
better, who should succeed him; but yet solemnly declared, that when they
became so prepared, he would leave that place. Here his Labors were unwearied,
and such efficacy accompanied the Word preached, and his winning behavior,
that in a few years the people were greatly Reformed, their Enmity changed into
a passionate kindness, which appeared, as in many other instances, so in their
loud cries and many tears, when he let them know he judged himself obliged to
remove, according to his former Declaration. (not to decide whether such a
promise was Obligatory or no) his tender concern lest any seeming lightness of
his might prove a scandal to his young Converts, so governed him, that left
this place with 400 l. per Annum; but Divine Providence had great purposes to
serve hereby.

Cliff was not a Stage large enough for the Uses God designed by this active
Soul, nor a Hill high enough for the notice of one so Exemplary. Having
procured a Successor fit to build on the Foundation, so prosperously laid by
him, he resigns himself to Divine disposal, to be employed wherever his Call
should point with the clearest Evidence. A very signal Providence directed him
to a settlement in London, Anno 1652. by the unanimous Choice of the
Inhabitants of John the Apostle; soon after he is made Lecturer at Paul's. And
in 58 Cripplegate was made happy by his settlement there: In this Place he
continued a most labourious faithful Preacher (though removed from his Lecture in
the Year 60.) till that twice unhappy Barthomew-Day, 1662. the first by the
Parisian Massacre, this last by the silencing of about 2000 faithful Ministers
in this Kingdom, where their Labors were far more necessary than the Ends
pretended for their Ejection were valuable. His abode has been ever since in
this City, where he finished his course, December 31. Anno 1696.

Having briefly represented the Sphere wherein he moved with respect to his
Office and Places of abode, etc. it remains that I give some hints of the
nature and manner of his motion therein. Where shall I begin, when so many
Things present themselves? It Is hard reducing them into order, when such a
variety of great Things meet; it is not easy to judge which most contributed to
his just Character, viz. An eminently useful Man in his Generation. In most
Things he was a Pattern worthy to be imitated. In many Things it will be
difficult for most I know to resemble him. And in what few Things he came short
of some, yet his Integrity Zeal, and public Spirit, rendered him in extensive
Usefulness more than equal. In Ministerial Labors he was abundant; where was a
more constant Preacher? Very often, before his silencing, thr'ce a day; in the
late Troubles almost every day; since this Liberty twice every Lord's Day, (too
long) even to his last Sickness; being dissuaded from the last Sermon, because
of his Illness after the Mornings, he was unpersuadable, saying, I must work
whiles it is Day. Who ever knew him, from his very Youth, refuse to preach in
any Place when asked? Few, if any, so ready to assist in Fasts and Lectures.
The sick were sure of assistance if they sent to him; doubting Souls never were
denied access, or found discouragement, harshness, or treachery, when they made
their Cases known. Did his many Labors abate their substance and tendency to
common Good? No, he so redeemed Time, that his Sermons were not raw, but well
studied and substantial; his Utterance not remiss, but earnest, as one
concerned to profit others; being himself affected, and having something that
very peculiarly expressed his heartiness in all he said. By his very often
reading over the Scriptures from his Childhood, he became a great Textuary; and
by aptly produced Texts, he often surprised eminent Ministers; as his solution of
Cases of Conscience (which his Sermons much consisted of) did instruct and
satisfy them.

His Care and Toil extended to every Place where he might be profitable: Of
whom in an equal station can it be so truly said? On him was the care of all
the Churches. When any Place wanted a Minister, he set himself to get them one.
When any Minister was oppressed by Poverty, he soon employed himself for his
Relief. O, how many Places had sat in darkness, how many Ministers had been
starved, if Dr. Annesley had died 34 Years since! The Gospel he even forced
into several ignorant Places; and was the chief (often the sole) Instrument in
the Education, as well as Subsistence, of several Ministers.

The Morning Lecture (so profitable to many) he alone supported; I wish it die
not with him: For what one Man has Zeal and Interest enough (with leisure) to
keep it up? It was by him the Meetings of Ministers, before this Liberty, were
kept up; and since the Union, in his Place and to his Expense, they have been
continued. What a multitude of all sorts were supplied by his Care! Bibles,
Catechisms, and all profitable Books, dispersed far and near. The Sick, the
Widows, the Orphans were innumerable, whom he relieved and settled. By the Poor
he was crowded as a Common Father. You may well ask how could all this be done
by him. I Answer: Of all Gifts, Salary, and Incomes, he always laid aside the
Tenths for Charity, even before any were spent by him, which is the greater
instance of his bountiful Mind, considering his numerous Family, many Losses,
and great Straights: Thus his Light directed; and then he would be faithful to
it, whatever Expense or Hardship followed. And being satisfied it was just to
do so, his servent Love to God and Man prevented all repinings, and made him a
most cheerful Giver. But this, since he was silenced, bearing no proportion to
the great Things he constantly undertook; to supply it he was the faithful
Almoner of many; and so importunate a Petitioner for Charitable uses, that few
could escape or deny him; and most of his own People he had instilled his own
Charitable Disposition into (who are apt to be of the same Spirit with their
admired Pastors.)

These assiduous Labors, and extensive Beneficence, were accompanied with
several Excellencies which sustained them, and tended to make him a successful
Blessing, or his Heart and Hands had failed.

He was a Man of great uprightness, he squared not his Profession by his
Secular Interest, though he had a large Family; yet he quitted a full
Maintenance, rather than sin against God by Conformity. Before then he was
turned out of his Lecture, and kept out a while, because he could not comply
with some Extravagancies of the late Times; and since has he suffered, because
he must witness for the Old Truth against Antinomianism. His Integrity made him
a Stranger to all Tricks, and sometimes his Charity betrayed him to be imposed
on by such as use them.

His Humility was signal, he seemed to have the meanest Opinion of his own
Gifts and Labors, highly esteeming others, and envying none; no, not the
acceptance of our promising young Ministers. He might say, with David, I
prayer; as if made up of that. Every Day he prayed twice in his Family, to the
last moment that he was capable. His usual way was to pray 3 or 4 times a day
in his Study. Upon every extraordinary Occurrence in his House he kept a Fast.
Under every Affliction, before he would speak of it, or pitch on means to
redress it, he spread it still before God in Prayer; which brought him, though a
most affectionate Husband, to bear the News of his Wives death with that
composure, as calmly to say, The Lord gave, the Lord has taken away, blessed
be the Name of the Lord. And after the greatest Losses, he was used to speak of
them with an unconcernedness, as if another, not his own. In Prayer he was
mighty, and the returns remarkable and frequent. He could trust God with all,
and was still resigned to his Will. His solicitous concern was, that God might
not be dishonored. When he lay Sick, this was often repeated Oh! that I may not
dishonor God in my last moments, whom, in my poor manner, I made it the
business of my Life to honor. Oh! that I may not dishonor my God by my
impatience. Being one Night under exceeding torture, he called his Daughter,
then present, and charged her not to entertain one hard thought of God, by any
thing he felt, but be assured he is infinitely Merciful, and none are happy but
those that serve him; he gives peace of Conscience, that is beyond all the World
can give, none can die cheerfully but a Christian; he shines on my Soul through
Christ. God and Heaven were so habituated to him, that in some disorder in his
Head, by his Distemper fixing there, he still kept the same Savor, breathed
the same Spirit, and spoke of Divine Matters most consistently. His Head was
not free of those Projects for God, which in Health it was ever full of. I Will
end this with Mr. Baxter's (who knew not how to flatter or fear any Man)
Account of him; Dr. Annesley is a most Sincere, Godly, Humble Man, totally
devoted to God. (Mr. B's. Life.)

Having hinted some things that respect the Excellency of this Person, some may
whisper, but what Tokens of God's Favor had this useful Man more than others,
he had many Troubles and Exercises? God testified his Favor to him in
Instances which he most esteemed, and pursued above all things; yea, despised
and renounced all compared therewith; which is enough to testify him a happy
Man, what ever he endured or wanted; God kept him faithful in his Work to the
last; for which he thus thanked God on his Deathbed; Blessed be God, I can
say, I have been faithful in the Work of the Ministry above 55 Years. He had
great success in his Work; many called him Father, as the Instrument of their
Conversion; the worthy Mr. Brand was one; many called him Comforter.

In all his sufferings he found supports which kept him as cheerful as his
Office and Age allowed under all; yea, 17 weeks pain without a discontended
Word or Thought. Signal returns of Prayer he frequently had; and very close
Communion with God in Christ. His Charity and Care wanted not comfortable
Effects. How many whom he contributed to the Education of are useful Ministers?
In how many Places does Religion flourish by his means? God gave him a great
Interest in the Hearts of most Ministers and serious People. How often and long
did they pray for his Life, as a public Blessing? And how generally is his
Death lamented? He thankfully owned God in all. He signally witnessed for him
in his Judgments on several of his Persecutors. One died signing a Warrant to
apprehend him. Many might be instanced, but it is fit we cover such in
acknowledgment of present Quiet.

He had uninterrupted peace and assurance of God's Covenant-Love for above 30
years last past. It Is true, he walked in Darkness for several years before
that, which is common to those who are converted in Childhood, their change not
being remarkable, and so apter to be questioned; and they often make up, in a
long time, by frequent returns, the sad hours that others have pressing in at
once. But God had a further design, viz. The fitting and enclining him to
relieve wounded Consciences by his Ministry and Discourse, wherein he was so
Eminent, that most troubled Souls resorted to him: He used to say, that this
made him unable to preach a Sermon without some Word to them.

This Assurance had not one Cloud in all his Disease: He often said, I Have no
doubt, nor shadow of doubt, all is clear between God and my Soul; he Chains up
Satan, he cannot trouble me.

To conclude all, He had an abundant entrance into God's Kingdom. He was
reconciled to Death; yea, so desirous of it, as hardly induced him to have his
Life prayed for. But hearing some Ministers had been servently praying for his
Life, he replied, I Am then more reconciled to Life than ever, for I Am confident
God will not give a Life so eminently, in answer of Prayer, as mine must be, if
he would not use it to greater purposes than ever before.

Yet some little time before his change, his desires of Death appeared strong,
and his Soul filled with the foretasts of Glory; often saying, Come my dearest
Jesus, the nearer the more precious, the more welcome. Another time his joy was
so great, that in an ecstasy he cried out, I cannot contain it, what manner of
Love is this to a poor Worm? I cannot express the thousandth part of what praise
is due to thee; we know not what we do when we offer at praising God for his
Mercies; it is but little I can give, but Lord help me to give thee my All. I Will
die praising thee, and rejoice that there is others can praise thee better. I
shall be satisfied with thy likeness; satisfied, satisfied! Oh my dearest Jesus
I come.

Now do not you think Christ is worth the faithfullest Service which ends in
this manner? To you of this Congregation, (for whose Salvation he was so
concerned) shall I say, bewail the loss of him, when you are so sensible? Yet
that is but Just. Bless God for your enjoying his faithful Labors so long; see
that none of you perish, after such pains to save you; be established in the
Truths you have heard, which you see governed his Life to such great purposes,
and helped him to die with sure Triumph: Show your regard to his Memory by
kindness to his Family, and by not breaking off from this Church, that he may
not be reflected on by your giddiness, as if he Taught you no better, or
Established you no more, than to be deluded to serve a Carnal Turn, in pretense
of greater Purity. You, his Children, live your Fathers Advice and Example, or
what a Witness will he be against you? Let us all go hence with a due sense of
it: The World has lost a Blessing, the Church has lost a Pillar; the Nation
has lost a Wrestler with God; the Poor have lost a Benefactor. You, his
People, have lost a Faithful Pastor; his Children, a Tender Father; we, in the
Ministry, an Exemplary Fellow Labourer.

FINIS.
There is now in the Press,

A COMPLETE HISTORY of the most Remarkable Providence both of Judgment and
Mercy, which have happened in this present Age; Extracted from the best
Writers, the Authors own Observations, and the numerous Relations sent him from
diverse Parts of the Three Kingdoms. To which is added, whatever is Curious in
the Works of Nature and Art. The whole digested into one Volume under proper
Heads, being a Work set on foot 30 Years ago, by the Reverend Mr. Pool, Author
of the Synopsis Criticorum, and since undertaken and finished by William
Turner, M. A. Vicar of Walberton in Sussex Recommended as Useful to Ministers
in furnishing Topics of Reproof and Exhortation, and to private Christians,
for their Closets and Families.

Proposals and Specimens giving a fuller Account of it, are to be had of I.
Dunton at the Raven in Iewenstreet, and of Edward Richardson near the Poultry
Church.

There is newly Published,

The Character of Dr. Sam. Annesley, by way of Elegy, with a Preface written by
one of his Hearers. Price 6 d. Sold by E. Whitlock near Stationers' Hall.

The whole Parable of Dives and Lazarus, Explained and Applied, in several
Sermons preached in Cripplegate and Lothbury Churches, by Joseph Stevens,
Lecturer at both. Published at the Request of the Hearers, and recommended as
proper to be given at Funerals. Price bound 2 s. Printed for I. Dunton.

The Secret History of White Hall, from the Restoration of Charles II. down to
the Abdication of the late King James. Writ at the Request of a Noble Lord, and
conveyed to him in Letters, by -- late Secretary-Interpreter to the Marquis of
Louvois, who by that means had the perusal of all the private Minutes between
England and France for many years. The whole consisting of Secret Memoirs, etc.
Published from the Original Papers, by D. Jones, Gent. Sold by R. Baldwin in
Warwick Lane.

The Dying Pastor's last Farewell. By Mr. Allyn. Printed for I. Dunton. Price 1
s.


