By the King and Queen, A PROCLAMATION, For Preventing the Exportation of Corn
to France, and Enhaunsing of Prices thereof at Home, and for Setting the Poor
on Work.
MARIE R.

WHereas a good and profitable Law was made in the Fifth and Sixty Years of the
Reign of King Edward the Sixth, against Regrators Forestallers, and Ingrossers
of Corn, and other dead Victuals, and the Execution of that Law was enforced,
and other useful Directions relating thereto were given by another Act of
Parliament made in the Fifth Year of the Reign of Queen Elizabeth, touching
Badgers of Corn, and Drovers of Cattle to be Licensed; Notwithstanding which
good Laws (still in Force) yet for want of the due and careful Execution
thereof, diverse evil disposed Persons have, and do presume to Engross, and get
into their Hands great Quantities of Corn and Grain, with intent to Sell the
same again, some without any License at all, and others, though Licensed, yet
contrary to the said Acts, and their Licenses, and Securities thereupon, do
keep the Corn in their hands, and do not Sell the same again, in such manner,
and within the time appointed for so doing, nor observe other the Matters which
those Acts and their Licenses and Securities require; by means whereof not only
the Prices of Corn and Grain in and about Our Cities of London and Westminster,
and Places Adjacent, are greatly Enhaunsed, far exceeding the Prices in Our
Midland and more Remote Counties, but the Exportation of Corn to France, or the
French Kings Dominions (where the great Scarcity and excessive Prices invite
the Importation) is rendered the more easy, and evil affected Persons,
notwithstanding the Penalty of a Praemunire Inflicted upon Offenders in such
unlawful Exportation, by Act of Parliament made in the Third and Fourth Year of
Our Reign, against Corresponding with Our Enemies, are not deterred from so
evil an Action. And forasmuch as it will much conduce to the Good and Benefit
of Our Subjects, that all the Laws in Force for Setting the Poor on Work
throughout Our Kingdom, should be duly Observed and put in Execution; We
therefore out of Our Princely Care and Tenderness for the Good and Welfare of
Our Subjects, and for their Ease and Relief in the Premises, have thought fit
(by and with the Advice of Our Privy Council) to Publish this Our Royal
Proclamation, hereby Charging and Commanding all and every of Our Judges,
Justices of the Peace, Mayors, Sheriffs, Bailiffs, and all other Our
Magistrates Officers and Ministers whatsoever and wheresoever (...)
Jurisdictions, do cause the said Acts made in the Fifth and Sixth Years of King
Edward the Sixth, against Regrators, Forestallers and Ingrossers, and the said
other Act made in the Fifth Year of Queen Elizabeth, and all other Acts
relating to the same Matters, and all Laws in Force for the Setting the Poor on
Work, to be in all and every the Parts and Branches thereof put in speedy and
effectual Execution; And that they do take Care, and give effectual Directions,
That no Licenses be granted to any Badger, Lader, Kidder, Carrier, or Buyer of
Corn or Grain, but only according to the Directions of those Acts, and to such
Persons only as are or shall be duly qualified for the same, and under such
Surety by Recognizance or otherwise, as those Acts require; And also to take
care that all Persons who shall presume to Buy and Engross any Corn, Grain, or
other dead Victuals, without License, and all such as having Licenses for that
purpose, shall not duly and strictly comply with and observe the Conditions and
Terms of their Licenses and Securities, be effectually Prosecuted and Proceeded
against, according to the Purport and Effect of the said Statutes; And that all
Fines, Forfeitures and Penalties arising thereby, be duly Levied, Answered and
Paid as those Acts direct. And in regard it is most probable that the Exporters
of Corn to France, or the French Kings Dominions, are such as Buy and Engross
the same, contrary to the said Statutes of King Edward the Sixth, and Queen
Elizabeth, For the further Prevention therefore of such Exportation, We do
hereby strictly Charge and Command, as well all Our Judges, Justice of the
Peace, Mayors, Sheriffs, Magistrates, and the Commissioners of Our Customs, and
all other Our Officers and Ministers, for the time being, of and belonging to
Our Custom-houses and Ports, within this Our Realm of England, Dominion of
Wales, and Town of Berwick upon Tweed, and all other Our Officers, Ministers,
and Loving Subjects whatsoever, that they and every of them in their respective
Places, Stations and Employments, do use all Lawful Ways and Means for the
Discovering and Preventing of all Exportation of Corn to France, or other the
French Kings Dominions: We being Resolved, and do hereby strictly Command, That
the said Act against Corresponding with Our Enemies, be in all Parts thereof
strictly Executed, and all Offenses and Offenders against the same Punished
according to the utmost Rigor of the Law. And if it shall or may be
Discovered, or upon reasonable Grounds Suspected, that any Corn or Grain is
Intended or Bought to be Exported to France, or any the French Kings Dominions,
or to be Exported by any Persons that got the same into their Hands, by Buying
or Engrossing contrary to Law, that due, strict and speedy Prosecution be made
of such Offenders and Offenses, according to the utmost Rigor of Law. And for
the better Encouragement of all such as shall make Discovery of any Persons,
who, since the making the said Act against Corresponding with Our Enemies,
have, or hereafter shall Carry or Transport any Corn or Grain to France, or any
of the French King's Dominions, We do hereby Declare, That the Person or
Persons (other then the Master of the Ship or Vessel, wherein such
Transportation has been, or shall be made, and the Parties Interested in the
Corn) making such Discovery, and giving Evidence in order to Conviction, shall,
upon Certificate from the Judges or Magistrates before whom such Offender shall
be Convicted, not only have and receive a Reward of Two hundred Pounds for
every Ship and Vessel, so Transporting, or having Transported Corn as
aforesaid, to be Paid by the Lords Commissioners of Our Treasury, or Lord
Treasurer for the time being, but also shall have and receive Our Gracious
Pardon for such Offenses, so as Discovery be made of Offenses past, within the
Space of Three Months next ensuing the Date hereof, and of future Offenses
within the like Space of Three Months next after the Time of such
Transportation. And We do hereby Require and Charge all Our Officers, Ministers
and Loving Subjects whatsoever, to be Aiding and Assisting in the due Execution
of Our Royal Will and Pleasure herein Expressed, under the Pain of Our High
Displeasure, and of such Pains and Punishments as may by Law be Inflicted upon
the Contemners of Our Royal Authority.

Given at Our Court at Whitehall, the Nineteenth Day of October, 1693. In the
Fifth Year of Our Reign.
God save King William and Queen Mary.
London, Printed by Charles Bill, and the Executrix of Thomas Newcomb,
deceased; Printers to the King and Queens Excellent Majesty's. 1693.


