The Perfection of the Evangelical Revelation.

A SERMON Preached at St. Martins in the Fields, Jan. 6. 1695/6.

BEING THE First of the LECTURE For this Present YEAR, Founded by the
Honorable ROBERT BOIL, Esquire.

By JOHN WILLIAMS, D. D. Chaplain in Ordinary to His Majesty.

LONDON: Printed for Ri. Chiswell, and Tho. Cockerill, Senr and Junr: At the
Rose and Crown in St. Paul's Churchyard; and at the Three Legs in the
Poultrey. MDCXCVI.

GAL. I. 8, 9. Though we, or an Angel from heaven, preach any other Gospel unto
you, than that which we have preached unto you, let him be accursed.

As we said before, so say I now again, If any man preach any other Gospel unto
you than that ye have received, let him be accursed.


THE People of the Jews having been all along trained up under the Law of
Moses, and by virtue of it possessed of peculiar Advantages beyond any other
Nation, were apt to think it as lasting in its Obligation, as Divine in its
Original; and that it was no more in the intention of Almighty God to have it
abolished, than it could be disproved to have come immediately from him. This
made them slow and backward to receive the Gospel, by which their ancient
Constitution would be disannulled; and after they had believed, it made them
inclinable to hearken to such Sophisters, as pretended to compound the
Controversy, and to join Moses and Christ, the Law and the Gospel together, so
as to be both alike necessary to Salvation: Which is in effect to set up
another Gospel than what the Apostle had taught, and they had received from
him; and therefore he expresses his resentment and indignation against it with
the highest aggravations, Verses 6, 7, 8. I marvel that ye are so soon removed
from him that called you into the grace of Christ, unto another Gospel; Which
is not another; but there be some that trouble you, and would pervert the
Gospel of Christ: But though we, or an Angel from heaven, preach any other
Gospel unto you, than that which we have preached unto you, let him be
accursed, etc.

In discoursing upon which words: I shall consider,

1. What is understood by the Gospel, which the Apostle had preached, and they
had received.

2. What by another Gospel, against which and the Preachers of it, the Apostle
so sharply inveighs, and pronounces an Anathema.

3. I shall show that the Gospel is the only Revelation from God; and that
there is not another, nor is any other to be expected.

1. The Gospel is here opposed to the Law of Moses, which there were some in
the Churches of Galatia, as well as in other places, that would Acts 15.
maintain to be necessary to Salvation, if not alone, yet in conjunction with
the Gospel (as aforesaid). These two indeed were so far consistent, that the
Law was a prefiguration, a Shadow and Type of the Gospel: But being thus a
Shadow and a Type of it, That in reason and from the nature of the thing, was
to give way, when the Substance came on, and the Types were fulfilled. And
therefore though the Law was established at the first by Divine Authority, yet
in course was it to cease in its obligation, when the reason of it ceased. And
consequently, to plead for its Authority and Obligation, whether in conjunction
with, or opposition to the Gospel, was to say that the substance of those
Shadows, the completion of those Types, was not accomplished, that Jesus was
not the Messiah, nor the Gospel true. In this sense these two that in a state
of subordination were consistent, by this means were made to be opposites to
each other.

So the Apostle, Chap. 5. 2. If ye be circumcised, Christ shall profit you
nothing. V. 4. -- Ye are fallen from grace; ye at the same time deny what you
seem to confess; it is a perverting the Gospel of Christ, and establishing
another Gospel.

But this is only a kind of a negative account of the Gospel; therefore we are
to proceed further in the consideration of it; and then we are to understand by
the Gospel, the Christian Religion, and more especially that part of it which
is called Christian, and for which the Professors of it are called Christians,
as distinguished from Acts 11. 26.
all Religons besides. All mankind are not more of the same common Nature, than
they generally agree in the common Principles of Nature: And that which is
natural to all, cannot be a Character by which one man is distinguished from
another. But when a Man or Institution is called Christian, it is for somewhat
peculiar, and distinct from that which is common to all. And therefore though
the Law of Nature be a branch of the Christian Religion, as it was of the
Mosaical, and is also in it self of a never failing obligation; yet there is a
supervenient Institution, and somewhat besides that which denominates us to be
Christians, without the belief and practice of which, we can no more be
entitled to to that Character, than that can be called a Natural Religion which
excludes, or is contradictory to the Laws of Nature, and the just Reason of
Mankind.

And of the number of such Principles, which are necessary to the Constitution
of Christianity, and consequently to the Character of a Christian, and are the
Articles of his Faith, are the Incarnation and Nativity, the Death and
Resurrection and Glorification of our Savior.

1. His Nativity and Incarnation. So 1 John 4. 2, 3. He that denies that Jesus
Christ is come in the flesh, is not of God.

2. His Death, as he died for Mankind, and was a Sacrifice for Sin. So St.
Paul, 1 Cor. 15. 1, 2, 3. I declare unto you the Gospel, which also ye have
heard, and wherein ye stand, by which also ye are saved. For I delivered unto
you first of all that which I also received, how that Christ died for our sins
according to the Scriptures. So that to believe in Jesus as the Messiah, and as
a Suffering Messiah, was according to the Scriptures, and by the belief of
which we are to be saved.

3. His Resurrection, and what was consequent upon it, his Glorification, the
reward of his Humiliation. In which state he is constituted Phil. 2. 8, 9.
our Mediator. From the connection betwixt 1 Timothy 2. 5, 6. Hebr. 9. 14, 15, 23. 1
John 2. 1, 2.
which two, his Death and Intercession, it is, that we seldom read in Scripture
of the one without the other.

These are constituent and essential Articles of Christianity; and if these, or
any of these are omitted, as it is not Christianity which is left, and it would
be another Gospel; so it is what the Apostle's Anathema will be applicable to.

From whence we may be able to answer the next Question.

2. What is to be understood by another Gospel?

When the Apostle speaks here of another Gospel, he thereby means somewhat that
is added to it, and with it made necessary to Salvation, as it was when the
observation of the Law of Moses was maintained to be as obligatory to the
Christians, as ever it had been to the Jews.

From which Case, by a parity of Reason we may argue, That whatever alters the
Terms and Conditions of the Gospel, and makes that necessary to Salvation which
the Gospel has not made necessary; or that unnecessary which the Gospel has
made necessary, is such a perverting it as makes it another Gospel: For that is
to set up that as a Divine Revelation, which has not the Divine Authority to
confirm it.

For it is God alone that can appoint the Terms of Salvation; and so, what no
man, or Society of men, has any Authority in, to frame, alter or revoke. The
necessary Articles of Faith, and Instances of our Duty, must have a Divine
Establishment; and so what we must learn either from the invariable Principles
and Dictates of Human Nature, or pure Revelation.

2. That is another Gospel which pretends to a Revelation from God for its
Authority, when it is of Human invention or imagination: And that whether for
the matter of it, it be true, or false. It may for the matter of it be true,
and yet not be a Revelation, but proceed only from men; and then to place that
to the account of Revelation, though it be for the matter of it true, is a
notorious falsehood and Imposture. But if for the matter of it, it be false,
it is a double Falsehood; as it pretends to a Revelation, which is not
Revelation, and also calls in the Veracity of God to give testimony to a
falsehood.

Supposing then that the Immaculate Conception of the Virgin Mary,
Transubstantiation and Purgatory are true, yet to plead a Revelation for them,
as it is pleaded in the Church of Rome Breviar. Romans October 8. Bellarm. de Purg.
l. 1. c. 11. de Eucha. l. 3. c. 8.
, if there were no such Revelation, does fix such an indelible blot upon the
pretended Infallible Church, as all the Water of Tiber cannot cleanse. But if
it should prove false (as those things certainly are) then it is to add a sort
of Blasphemy to the Imposture, as it makes the God of Truth to justify a
Falsehood.

3. That is another Gospel, which does establish another Rule, or adds to, or
detracts from that which is established, Rev. 22. 18.

Now the Scripture is the Rule of Faith and Practice; and then to alter the
Rule, by adding to it, or taking from it, is to alter the Gospel (which that
contains the Revelation of) as they do in the Church of Rome, who not only add
the Apocrypha to the Canon; but, as the Pharisees* of old, give the same
Authority to Unwritten Tradition, as to the Scripture; and require it to be
received with the like pious regard, according to the Council of Trent.

Lastly, To alter, to add to, or diminish from the Fundamental Articles or
Principles of it, is to make it another Gospel; as it is to deny Christ to be a
Mediator, or to appoint other Mediators than him, such as Angels and Saints.

By so doing, the Gospel is rendered as imperfect, and the Scripture as an
imperfect Revelation of it. But this there is no occasion for, as I shall now
show by proving, That

3. The Gospel, or Revelation, made known to the World by Jesus Christ, is
always to continue th e same; and no new, or other Revelation is to be expected.

This was the Sum of the last Lecture, and is to be the remaining Subject of
this.

There have been such, in several Ages of the Church, both anciently, and of
late, that have pretended to new Revelations; and that there was a more perfect
Dispensation to ensue, than what was contained in the Gospel. Of this Opinion
were the Montanists of old; and of this mind seems to have been Abbas Joachim,
who flourished about the Year 1200. And what was also expressly maintained in
the Evangelium Aeternum, or Everlasting Gospel, chiefly taken out of the Works
of Joachim, and published by the Mendicant Friars about 1254. Wherein it was
affirmed, Matthew. Par. Hist. An. Dom. 1255.
That the Doctrine of that Abbot excelled that of Christ: * That the Gospel of
Christ was to give way to another Gospel, called the Everlasting Gospel; or
Gospel of the Holy Ghost.

And this was a Doctrine spread far and near, Eymericus, Direct. Inquisit. Gul.
de S. Amore de peric. noviss. temp. Prateolus de Haer. l. 4. V. D.r Stilling
fleet, Fanaticism of the Roman Church.
among the Beguardi in Germany, the Alumbrados in Spain, and the Fratricelli in
Italy, etc. The Spawn of which continued for a long season in several parts,
and in some till Ann. Dom. 1560* who all agreed, that their Doctrine came from
God by as immediate Inspiration as ever the Gospel of Christ did.

I deny not, but that there may be some particular Revelation or Inspiration,
with respect to some especial Case: But as it may arise, for ought we know,
from imagination, so if it be not attended with great caution and
circumspection, may end in the Whims and Frenzies of a Brigit, a Catharina, or
a Mother Juliana, and what not? Nay, it may proceed to the disannulling the
Gospel it self, and to the preferring their own Inspirations (as they will have
it) above it.

But supposing it to be true, that there may be now some particular
Inspirations from God in such special cases; yet it is to be supposed that they
are agreeable to the Gospel Revelation; but if once they contradict it, it can
be no more a true Revelation, than the Gospel can be false; and yet such must
be a Revelation that will make the Gospel to cease in its obligation, and to be
of no more Authority to Mankind, than the Law of Moses.

When the obligation arises not from the nature of the thing, but from positive
Institution, it is in the power of the Lawgiver to bind or loose, to establish
or evacuate a Law as he thinks fit. And thus it was in the Law of Moses, which
consisted of things typical, that had a special reference to that people, and
the place of their Habitation, etc. Such were the distribution of the Tribes,
the preservation of their Genealogies, their three great Festivals, their
Sabbatical Year, and Year of Jubilee, etc. Of this temporary nature also were
the Ceremonies of the Law, which either had a relation to the Customs of the
Nations conterminous to them; or to a more perfect State that was in process of
time to succeed it. The Laws relating to which could not be supposed to be of
any force, when They were excluded that Land, and the Tribes were lost and
confounded; no more than the Laws relating to the Wilderness and the
Tabernable, could oblige them when they were settled in Canaan, and that they
had a Temple erected there.

And therefore the phrase for*ever, when annexed Deuteronomy. 29. 29.
to the Constitution, must have a laxer interpretation accordingly allowed,
which was, That it should continue to oblige (as it follows often where that
Phrase is used) throughout their generations; that is, whilst they were that
People, Ex. 12. 17. Lev. 23. 14.
so embodied, and so situated.

And had the Gospel consisted of such things that were thus mutable in
themselves, or thus peculiar to any People, Time, or Place; there might be
reason to admit it to be temporary; and to be evacuated when time should serve,
as the Law was; But there is nothing either in the nature of the thing, nor is
there any notification of the Divine Will concerning any time set for its
expiration; but rather the contrary; and so there is not the same reason for a
new Dispensation after the Evangelical, as there was for the Evangelical after
the Mosaical.

I grant that it is as possible in it self for God to reveal himself at some
time hereafter, as it was for him to have revealed himself heretofore: And he
that revealed himself under the Law, and at the first Institution of the
Gospel, may, if he so please, after the same manner reveal himself at any time,
or times. But he that will assert the futurity of this, must have more to prove
it than a possibility. It is certain God has revealed himself, and that the
Gospel was by Revelation from him: But there is not the like certainty for a
Revelation after the Gospel, or in aftertimes of the Gospel, as there is, that
the Gospel it self was of Divine Revelation.

It is certain that the Gospel has been the only Revelation for above 1600
years past, and that we have had no other Revelation than that contained in the
Scripture: And therefore whatever Pretenses any Persons or Age made to it, were
V. Spondani Annal. Eccles. Ann. Dom. 1204. de Almarico
apparently Mistakes and Impostures; for that Dispensation of the Holy Ghost,
which each Sect fancied to be in their Age, or near to it, is yet to come, if
ever it is to be.

But to give some further light and force to this Argument, I shall show,

1. That there is no proof of any other Revelation, than the Gospel of our
Savior, and now recorded and preserved in the Holy Scripture.

2. That there is no need of any further Revelation.

3. That the Scripture shuts up all Revelation with it self, so that no other
Revelation is to be expected beyond it.

1. There is no proof of any other Revelation, than what is contained in the
Scripture.

If any one will contend, that there either is, or shall be such a Revelation,
he must have some Revelation to prove it: And that must either be an antecedent
Revelation, such as Scripture is taken to be; or it must be some personal
Revelation, made to himself, or to some other credible Person or Persons.

But where is the Revelation of this Revelation?

If it be to be found in Scripture, where is the Prediction of such a State,
That the Gospel shall be superannuated, and another of greater perfection shall
grow out of it?

Under the Law there was a plain signification of another Revelation to be in
the time of the Messiah; and of a more perfect state of things to ensue. But
where are the Proofs as plain under the Gospel for a New Revelation, as there
were for that of the Gospel under the Law? Or where is it said of that, as it
is of the Law, that it decays, or is antiquated, and waxes old, and so is
Heb. 8. 13.
ready to, or shall at last, vanish away? Our Apostle here says on the
contrary, If we, or an Angel from heaven, preach any other Gospel unto you,
than that which we have preached unto you, let him be accursed.

If it be a personal Revelation, then we may reasonably demand, Where is the
Evidence for such a Revelation?

All Revelation must have a sufficient Evidence; and if it be a true
Revelation, and what obliges us to receive it as such, it will be able to
produce its Evidence.

And a New Revelation must suppose a better sort of Evidence than the former,
or at least equal to it. There must be the like wonderful Works; the Blind must
as miraculously be made to see, and the Lame to walk, and the Diseased to be
whole, and the Dead to rise. Nay, Christ himself must again descend from
Heaven, and dye, and rise, and ascend; or else the Miracles will fall short of
what it is in competition with.

Nay, it must proceed farther, and its Evidence must not only be equal, but
superior also to that which it is to supplant. It was not only fit that Moses's
Rod should be turned into a Serpent, but when the Magicians pretended to do the
same, to show his Power to be greater than theirs, his Serpentine Rod swallowed
up theirs.

It was not enough that he brought forth Ex. 7. 12. 2 Timothy 3. 8.
Frogs, when Jannes and Jambres produced the like; but that he should do what
they could not, and so what would oblige them to acknowledge it to be the
Finger of God. Ex. 8. 18, 19.


And thus our Savior being to advance a new Scheme of things, did not only
show he was the Person described, and prophesied of; but also by his numerous
Miracles, and many of them such as never any, neither Moses, nor any
Prophetical Person, ever did work. John 15. 24.


If then there be no such Evidence for such a new Revelation, (where there is a
pretense to it) we may conclude it to be another Gospel, a supposititious
Revelation, and what is to have no credence given to it, no regard paid to it.
It Is Anathema.

2. There is no need of any further Revelation. Revelation has somewhat in it
of a Miracle; it is a way extraordinary; and as we cannot suppose God will work
Miracles, and break through the standing Laws of Nature, when there is no
occasion for it, nor necessity to require it; so we cannot suppose he will
communicate himself by a way of Revelation, and immediate Inspiration, and much
less break down an Established Order of his own appointment, when there is as
much reason for the Continuance of it, as for the Institution; and that it
answers all the Ends for which a new Constitution can be framed, or a new
Revelation made.

The Apostle argues, If the first Covenant had Hebr. 8. 7.
been faultless, there should no place have been sought for the second: And if
there be a place for a Third, there must be some fault or imperfection
chargeable upon the Second. But that I shall show it to be freed from; and that
the Second Covenant or Gospel-Revelation is so perfect, that there is no need
of another. For,

(1.) There can be no more noble and useful Subject for a Revelation, than that
of the Gospel, which is concerning God's Reconciliation to Mankind, and their
Redemption by the Death of his Son.

And where this is plainly revealed, there is no place for a Second, nor any
need of a new Revelation.

(2.) If we consider the Gospel-Revelation as a Covenant, consisting of
Promises and Conditions; there cannot be more excellent and beneficial than
those, nor more necessary than these.

For what can be proposed of greater advantage unto Mankind, than what the
Gospel offers to those that believe and obey it? It is no less than the favor
of God, the blessing and protection of his Providence, the assistance of his
Spirit, and in the close of all, Everlasting Life, a translation out of this
mortal, uncomfortable, and uncertain State, to a State of unchangeable
Happiness; where Body and Soul shall again be united, When this corruptible
shall put on incorruption, and this mortal shall put on immortality. An
Encouragement that is the highest Cordial that can work upon Humane Nature, and
will (if any Consideration can) qualify the Troubles of this present Life, and
set a man above the fears of an exclusion out of it.

And when this is promised, there can nothing be offered beyond it; nor is
there any need to find out others after this is proposed.

And such as the Promises are, such are the Conditions required of us, which
are as unchangeable as the Reward: those indeed are unchangeable from the
Divine Declaration, and God's faithfulness; but these are unchangeable from the
nature of the things, as well as the Divine Command. So that there is no room
for another Revelation, unless we can change the nature of things, and make
evil good, and good evil; and put darkness for light, and light for darkness;
unless we will dissolve all Order, and confound all Relations, and set the
Creature loose from all obligations of Love, and Gratitude, and Service to the
Creator. Terms surely incapable of abatement or alteration. For who can suppose
Mankind should be left at liberty, whether they would love God, or neglect him;
whether obey, or violate his Laws; whether they would be virtuous or vicious;
and whether they would believe in Jesus, and own him to be their Savior; or,
with the Jews, reject him, and not have him to reign over them? Alter the
Promises and Conditions, and there is another Gospel, and another Revelation;
but till they are altered, or alterable, there needs no New Revelation.

All the abatements or relaxations that can be allowed, are inserted into the
body of this Revelation; where there is a two fold allowance; an allowance of
remission for whatever sins are past, and truly repented of; and an allowance
for Humane Infirmities under the strictest obligations to our duty. And lower
than these the Gospel does not, nor for the reason before given, can descend;
since then it would countenance Impenitence, and establish Iniquity by a Law;
and then indeed it had been an imperfect, a defective, a faulty Covenant, and
there would have been a place for a New.

(3.) The extent of this Law, or New Covenant, is such as none can exceed it;
for it is as much fitted for the whole Race of Mankind, as any could be for any
particular Nation. The Law of Moses was a Law to the Jews, suited to their
Temper and Circumstances in its original Frame and Constitution* and so what
other Nations, as Nations, could not come within the benefit of; nor could
particular Persons, otherwise than as they became Proselytes, and made
themselves subject to it by the same way of initiation in Circumcision. And it
is of the nature of all Humane Laws (though the general Lines running through
them are one and the same) that they are fitted for the immediate use and
service of that People, whose Laws they are; and which therefore vary
infinitely, and alter as Circumstances alter, and as Reasons of State require.

But now the Gospel Dispensation comprehends in it all Nations, and they are
all to that as if they were but one People. It was our Savior's Commission to
his Apostles after his Resurrection, Go ye into all the world, and preach the
Matthew. 28. 19. Mark 16. 15.
Gospel to every creature. And such as the Commission was, such were the Rules
and Precepts they were to give and publish, which were of universal concernment
and obligation; and neither confined by Persons nor Places, by Times nor
Circumstances, but what all Persons, in all Places, Times and Circumstances,
are equally obliged to observe; and which are of that nature, and have such a
tendency to the good welfare and happiness of Mankind, whether alone, or in
Society, whether as particular Persons, or Families, or Nations; that if
exactly observed, purity, and peace, and love would every where abound, and the
Earth be a kind of Paradise again.

And therefore, if there be any Narrowness of mind, and feuds among Mankind, if
Vice and Wickedness overflow the World, it is not for want of a Law every way
perfect to bind and restrain them; or that there need another Gospel to mend
them; but for the reason given by St. James, -- from their lusts that war in
their members. Jam. 4. 1.


(4.) If we consider the Evidence given to the Gospel-Revelation, we shall find
there needs no other evidence to be given to that Revelation; nor that there
needs any other Revelation for want for want of Evidence in this. Our Savior's
Life was a Life of Miracles as well as Innocence; and where ever he went, the
Divine Power went along with him; for in him dwelt the fullness of the Godhead
bodily. And which he exerted where* ever he came, and as occasion served, to
the confusion, if not the convicton or conversion of his Adversaries; and all
which at last concluded in his own Resurrection from the dead, his Ascension
into Heaven, and the effusion of the Holy Ghost, which began on Pentecost, but
like a torrent ran on through the Apostolical Age, and bore down all manner of
competition. And what then can any Revelation pretend to beyond it? or where
can there be any that can be supposed to produce the like Evidence for its
veracity? (as I have just before observed.)

Lastly, How can we have a Gospel that can pretend to vye with that which the
Son of God came into the World to reveal, who was the last that was to come
from Heaven; and when our Faith is that which was once delivered to the Jude 3.
Saints. Once for all; and so there is no more another Faith or Revelation to
be expected after that, than another Mediator after Him, who was once offered
to bear the sins of many. Hebr. 9. 28.


This leads to the Third Branch.

3. The Scripture shuts up all with this Revelation; and because we have now no
Revelation but that Written Revelation, we cannot suppose any Revelation beyond
it, and much less derogatory to it; or that shall direct us to any other way by
which we are to be saved, than that we have already received, and is therein
recorded.

I have before observed, that the time from Sermon. 8. of the last Year.
our Blessed Savior's appearance, and the publication of the Gospel by him (to
his second coming) is called the last days in Scripture, and consequently has
none to succeed it. So the Apostle, As it is appointed unto men once to die,
but after Hebr. 9. 27, 28.
this the judgment: So Christ was once offered to bear the sins of many; and
unto them that look for him, shall he appear the second time; without a
sin-offering, unto salvation. That is, as there is no alteration in the state
from Death unto Judgment, but as men dye, so they will appear to be at
Judgment: So there is no alteration to be between Christ's first appearing,
when he offered himself; and his second, when he shall so come in like manner
as he was seen to go into heaven.

If therefore there is to be any alteration as to this Revelation, it is not to
be before, but must be after our Savior's second appearance. But of that we
have nothing to say.

Thus far as I have considered the Argument, there may be very few supposed to
be concerned; that is, such as set up another Revelation in opposition to the
Gospel-Revelation; or that maintain the Revelation of the Gospel to be only
temporary, and that it shall have its season in which it is to expire, and be
succeeded by another. And it may seem to be scarcely worth the while to have
spent so much time upon it with respect to such wild Enthusiasts as have been,
and still are in the World.

But however, what has been hitherto said, may be of further use with reference
to another Case, just mentioned before, and that is the Case of personal and
occasional Revelation; P. 10.
which may be conceived only to serve to a more spiritual manifestation of the
Revelation already received, and so be no more derogatory to that Revelation,
than occasional or personal Revelation heretofore in the Mosaical State was to
the Body of that Law which was of immediate and Divine Revelation, and of
universal obligation to that People.

I would not altogether deny this; because I know not how far some Persons may
in some cases be enlightened by a Spirit of Prophecy; nor what particular
directions they may receive in an extraordinary way in some special Cases with
^espect to themselves, to others, and the Church of God; which may be like a
special Providence to some particular persons. But now as a man must govern
himself by the general Rules of Divine Providence, and not by particular; and
because he has sometimes met with Deliverances, and Supplies, and Directions
beyond all his own foresight and reasoning, must not forsake his own reasoning
and care, and wholly rely upon the Extraordinary: So it is to be here; a person
may perhaps have some occasional Revelation, some Divine Inspiration, at some
special Season, or in some special Case; but if he forsakes the Ordinary to
depend upon the Extraordinary, and expects Revelation in every case, because he
has had it in some particulars, he will as much be subject to error, and err no
less dangerously, than if he wholly relied upon Divine Providence, and forsook
all other means whatsoever.

And truly this is a way much liable to be abused, and to mislead persons, and
is very suspicious and dangerous.

1. It is a Case liable to imposture and abuse, forasmuch as those that are
under the influence of such a conception, are not always, if at all, capable of
making a certain judgment of it. For it is all transacted within, and the
Imagination may be so much influenced by the Body, and by an agitation of the
Humors and Animal Spirits, from an Enthusiastal and even a devout Temper, by
prepossessions and foreconceived Principles, and even by the Circumstances of
Life, that it may be wholly natural; as natural as Dreams, or the Deliriums of
a Fever, which proceed from the ebullition of the Blood, and such like ordinary
Causes.

2. Persons have been imposed upon, and taken the effect of Imagination for
Inspiration and Divine Illumination. I am far from condemning all the Instances
of this kind, of Hypocrisy, and of a design to deceive, like Maria Visitationis
in Portugal. I will rather think more charitably, That very often they have
thought themselves thus moved and acted by the Spirit of God: And yet
notwithstanding all their Pretenses, and the opinion others have had of them,
it has been afterward evident, that it has been far from being a Divine
Infusion and Illumination. What Jesus Maria. Joseph. Teresia. composed by Paul
of St. Ubald. 1654.
shall we think of Teresa, whose Life is full of her Visions and Revelations;
and of whom we are told by one of that Way, That besides many other extatical
Sights in the Kingdom of Heaven, she often had the sight and company of the
Holy Trinity, of each person in particular, that they spoke to her, and she to
them; and used to ask, and did obtain particular favors of each. -- that God
showed her how all Creatures Part. 3. P. 65, 71, 86.
are contained in his Divine Essence, as in a Crystal glass, and that she saw
therein the thoughts words, and deeds of all men. This (and truly she had
reason to P. 72.
think so) she said was one of the greatest favors to her.

Now if we would but alter the place, and for the Nunnery conceive her to be in
a Hospital, we should take it to be, what that Author in a transport sometimes
calls it, a Phrenzy.

And what a Legend of Dreams would the World be furnished with, if the Visions
and Revelations Legenda aurea. Bolandus, etc.
of this kind were bundl'd up together, as the Miracles of reputed Saints have
sometimes been?

3. They are very much to be suspected of Imposture.

(1.) And that because we read so little of this way in Scripture, even in the
Apostolical Times, and nothing to encourage us in the expectation of it
afterward: We read nothing there of the Union of the Soul to the Divine
Essence, of its being absorpt and drowned over head and ears, and ingulphed in
the depth of Divinity, so that it became one and the same Ubald. p. 14, 16, 41.
with God, by a true Deification. We read there sparingly of some Ecstasies; as
one of St. Peter, and one or two of St. Paul; but with how much reserve and
modesty does the Holy Apostle speak, when he comes to Visions and Revelations
of the Lord, when he heard unspeakable 2 Cor. 12. 1, etc.
words, which it is not lawful for a man to utter?

But what can be greater, if these of Teresia be true? And where might we more
expect to be entertained with the Relations of such Rapts, as in the Gospel? So
that when they are there so unusual, and here so frequent, that even Societies
are embodied and formed from it, we have reason to suspect.

(2.) It Is much to be suspected, when that which is the proper means of
judging, and of distinguishing Imagination from Revelation, is laid aside,
which is Reason; and when all is resolved into the Person's own testimony.

We are required in all Cases to search, and to try, which does suppose the
free exercise of our Reason; and when this is rejected, it is a sign there is no
truth in the thing pretended.

(3.) It is suspicious, when they exalt their own private Revelations to the
same Authority with the Revelations of Holy Writ; and seek to justify the one
by the other.

(4.) When they esteem the way of Religion, as described in Scripture, to be
mean, in comparison of this that they are in, and prefer this way of
Contemplation and Inspiration above the plain Precepts of Christianity: When it
is a condescension in them to join in External Worship. Thus it is given by
Father Ubald as an instance of the attainment of one to some degree of this
rapturous state, that when the hour of Prayer was spent, he could hardly be
persuaded that it was so, not knowing P. 57. n. 4.
what Prayer he was in.

And the famous Quietist, Molinos, reports of Gregory Lopez, That having for
the space of Spiritual Guide, lib. 1. c. 17. n. 135.
three Years continued that Ejaculation, Thy will be done in Time, and in
Eternity; repeating it as often as he breathed; God discovered to him that
infinite Treasure of the pure and continued Act of Faith and Love; and that
during the 36 years he lived after, he always continued that pure Act of Love,
without ever uttering the least Petition, Ejaculation, or any thing that was
sensible.

So that all is by this means resolved into a spiritual and senseless frame and
course, a certain stilness and quietness, as Molinos expresses it, when Ibid.
lib. 3. c. 7. n. 63.
the Soul does not know whether it be alive or dead, lost or gained, agrees or
resists; this, says he, is the true resigned life. Where there is no External
Service for the Mind to be concerned in, no External Object to be attended to.

A state of Perfection that is above what the Gospel does describe; and is
another Gospel than what we have in Scripture received; and which there needs
an uncontrollable Evidence for; the want of which increases the suspicion. For,

(5.) There is no Evidence for all this beyond their own simple affirmation.
And who is there without good Evidence that can believe that those Rapturous
Ladies, (such as Santa Teresa, and Donna Marina d' Escobar) did in Molinos's
Phrase, hear and talk with God hand to hand; when he reads the interlocutory
matters that are said Ibid. Preface, n. 17.
to have passed between them; as for Example, Whenever (says Teresa) the Lord
commanded me any thing, if my Confessor told me another; I turned to the Lord,
and told him that I must obey my Confessor. This, says that grave man upon it*
is sound and true Doctrine which secures Souls; or rather confounds L. 2. c. 2.
etc. 9. n. 71.
and destroys them. This puts me in mind of what the same Author elsewhere
observes, The desire of Revelations uses to be a great hindrance to the Ibid.
l. 2. c. 6. n. 46.
interior Soul, especially to women; and there is not an ordinary Dream, but
they will christen it with the name of a Vision.

The World, especially one part of it, has been much imposed upon, when
credulous this way. The Pretense abovesaid, of Maria Visitationis, is an
Instance beyond all exception, who imposed upon her Confessor (no less a man
than Lewis Granada) the Inquisition, and even V. Lud. a Paramo de Orig.
Inquisit. and Bp. Worcester. Fanat. of the Church of Rome.
on the Pope himself: And yet notwithstanding she pretended to somewhat more
than internal for her Converse with our Savior, etc. was detected at last of
notorious Imposture.

But most of the Visionaries (we are speaking of) pretended not to so much. And
therefore where there is no external Evidence attempted by them, nor that we
have the gift of Intuition to see into their inward and Self-evidence, we have
no reason to think otherwise of such Illuminations, and Introversions, and
Interlocutions, than at best the effects of an heated Imagination. But of this
before.

And so much the rather are we to be careful in these P. 15.
matters, and not to be too easy of belief,

4. Because it may be very dangerous in the consequence of it. For if instead
of a Star, it should prove an Ignis fatuus, whither may not Persons be led
under the delusion of it? For what will not be concluded to be lawful, nay, a
duty, which Revelation shall warrant? And where will this end, if it once be
credited, and that we commit our selves implicitly and blindly to such an
uncertain Guide? So that in the issue, such a Spirit of Revelation, as it is
not promised by God, and therefore not reasonable to be expected; so it is not
to be desired.

I shall conclude this with a Saying of one conversant Ubald. ibid. part. 3. c*
6. n. 11.
in that way, You must not think them holiest, that have Consolations, Visions,
and Revelations; for many are great Saints that never had any of them; and
others that had Visions and Gusts are not therefore Saints; for true Sanctity
does consist in solid virtue, and true conformity of our will to the will of
God in all things, etc.

I freely acknowledge that there will be a great alteration in the present
state of the Church, before the close of the whole, and before an end shall be
put to Christ's Mediatory Kingdom upon Earth; When the Isa. 2. 2, etc.
mountain of the Lord's house shall be established in the top of the mountains;
and all nations shall flow unto it. When the wolf shall dwell with the lamb,
etc. and that the chapter 11. 6, etc.
earth shall be full of the knowledge of the Lord, as the waters cover the sea;
that there shall be but one Church over all the World, by the conversion of the
Jews, and the coming in of the fullness of the Gentiles; and that by the coming
down of the New Jerusalem from Heaven, it shall be in a state of perfect peace;
and there Rev. 21. 1, etc.
shall be in that sense a new heaven and a new earth. But that is a state in
reserve; and there will need no evidence for that which will be self-evident.

In the mean time, if we according to his promise look for a new heaven, and a
new earth, wherein dwells righteousness, 2 Pet. 2. 13, 14.
let us, according to the Apostle's Advice, be diligent that we be found of him
in peace, without spot and blameless. Amen.

FINIS.

