THE Necessity and Extent Of the OBLIGATION, With the Manner and Measures OF
Restitution, IN A SERMON, Preached the 9th. of October, 1681. Before the
Corporation of Haverford-West, at Saint Mary's in Haverford. By William
Williams, A. M. Minister of St. Mary's in Haverford.

LONDON, Printed by T. M. for Thomas Dring, over against the Middle-Temple-Gate
in Fleet Street. 1682.

PREFACE.
THe Design of the Publication of the ensuing Discourse, is merely showing to
the World, it is not quite so monstrous a Thing upon all Accounts, as some
People (who I suppose, thought it their Interest; and therefore) made it their
Business to have it believed. Whatever there be in the Composure, that may
stand in need of an Apology; if the Reader's Candor, with such Topics as the
Corporation wherein it was Delivered, the Necessity of being as Plain, and
Particular as might be, where there is an especial Faculty of Translating of
Crimes, where the Matter is otherwise Ordered (as by good Experience, I dare
assure the Reader there was, where this was Delivered) do not help him to me; I
hold it not Prudence out of a design of forestalling all the Objections that
might be made against it, either to furnish the Ignorant, and prejudiced Reader
with such as he would never else himself start; and will be sure never to have
Kindness enough (however it may fare with his Understanding) to take along the
Answers to, or give the Candid and Ingenious One the trouble of Reading Answers
to Objections I am sure he will never make.

To me it will be Satisfaction, that this Discourse will Manifest it self not
to be really as bad as it is Represented. It Contends not for Eminency of
Strength or Beauty, but against the Imputation of strange Weakness and
Deformity: the Confutation of the Charge, whereof I have been Resolved to make,
is of the Nature of the Philosopher's to the Disputant against Motion, by
making the Thing walk before it; and so let it pass with this one Addition, by
way of Advertisement, That

An honest Gentleman, one Mr. Richard Jones, of the Town it was Delivered in,
was so far (as has been Alleged) from putting me upon a Discourse of this
Nanure, that he, nor more, nor sooner, knew of the Purpose of it, than those
that Conceived themselves most Concerned in it.

THE Necessity and Measures OF RESTITUTION.
Luke 19.8. If I have taken any Thing from any Man by false Accusation, I
Restore him Fourfold.


THE Words, I do from this Place (which, I hope, may add Weight and Solemnity,
and gain Credit to my Protest) declare, for the Occasion they Naturally afford
to urge a Matter of Conscience, I conceive Necessary to be Urged here, I have
long since (since I could not longer shut up my Eyes against what so Manifestly
offered it self) entertained Thoughts, next a Resolution, some time or other,
to insist upon: That I did not do it sooner, some plausible Reasons to the
world I could offer; upon the Acceptance whereof, yet in God's Sight I dare not
much presume; yet Hope, and beg His merciful Pardon for it. But now being
something in the state of a Dying Man, taking my leave of concernments of
course of this Nature, in this Place; I am Resolved, by God's Grace, with that
Impartiality and Sincerity, which the Consideration of my Great God, before
whom, I must one day give Account of my Charge, and that Uprightness that must
give Ease to my Conscience, may require to Discharge my self, That, if I Live
to see the Curses, such Sins are Obnoxious to, poured out upon this place, or
any particular Person here, or his Posterity, or that I consider the State of
final Impenitency any Person may Miscarry by, I may have no Remorse from
Conscience, for being Accessory to it by my Silence; no occasion to Charge my
self for not Representing the true Estate of the Matter, and not doing what I
could to prevent their Temporal and Eternal Ruin: Wherein, though my Commission
seems to run something in the Strain of Ezekiels, c. 2. v. 3. etc. Son of Man,
I send thee to a Rebellious Nation, to an Impudent Children, and stiff Hearted,
etc. and my Doom may be for my Message, if it lie in the Power of some, that of
Jeremiah's, the Dungeon; yet I hope, by God's Grace, I may have some Portion of
the same Courage God required in Ezekiel, not to be afraid of Men's Words;
Though Briers and Thorns be with me, though I dwell among Scorpions, I will not
be afraid of their Words, nor dismayed at their Looks; but when I have given my
Proposition from the Text, deduced it to an Application to the Guilty
Conscience of any Person here,

Then you may perceive, the Words are the Speech of one, newly and fully
Converted in the Judgment of our Savior; who in the next Verse declares upon
it, that Salvation is come into his House; which the Learned Hammond
Parapraises, This day Repentance, and so the Mercies of the Gospel are come to
Zaccheus. They are the Words of a Publican, one employed in the Gathering of a
Tax, imposed by the Roman Power, which Ministered him occasion for diminishing,
or violating the Right of poor People, that either for the greatness of his
Strength and Interest, or the meanness of their own, were not able to Right
themselves; for (...), the Word rendered here, I have taken by False
Accusation, in the Judgment of the best Grammarians, may import the Act of
Fraud, by what Means soever contrived, or in what matter soever Exercised; and
that False Accusation put in here, to clear the Sense of it, does not render it
inextensible to the Concernments of some Men in this place, will appear, if
(which you ought) you consider, That every wrong Defense in such a Case, is in
effect, a False Accusation.

The Proposition from the Text, is this,

That Restitution, in cases of Fraud and Injury, is so necessarily a
Concomitant of true Repentance, that in Cases of Fraud and Injuries, where
there is not Restitution made to the very utmost of the Defrauding or Injurious
Person's Power, in all Circumstances that may signify the seriousness of his
Repentance, for his Fraud and Injuries, the Fraudulent and Injurious Person
cannot be Saved, i. e. must be inevitably Damned.

In order to the clearing of this Proposition, I hope it is so known a Truth
(that a Sinner, as long as he continues Unrepenting, cannot be Saved; and if he
Dies in any unrepented Sin, is inevitably Damned) that I need not give my self
the trouble to Prove it. Repentance was that St. John called for, before his
Baptism: It was that our Savior himself indispensibly required; it is that
which His Apostles after him did; it is (and for the greatest Reasons in the
World, as were it absolutely Necessary here, could be showed) That, without
which, to any person of Maturity, the Gospel does no where Promise any of its
Benefits, or any of its Mercies; nay, tells us Positively, That unless we
Repent we shall All likewise Perish; and that no Man without Holiness (which
supposes Repentance) shall see the Face of the Lord. And therefore being so
clear to, and undeniable a Truth by, any Christian, I shall immediately fall to
make good the Proposition supposed in the Text; That Restitution is so much a
Note of true Repentance, that without making it, no Man concerned to make it,
can be Saved; that is, as before, That Restitution in cases of Fraud and
Injuries, is so necessarily a Concomitant of true Repentance, that in cases of
Fraud and Injuries, where there is not Restitution made to the very Utmost of
the Defrauding or Injurious Person's Power, in all Circumstances that may
signify the Seriousness of his Repentance for his Fraud and Injuries: the
Fraudulent and Injurious person cannot be Saved, i. e. must be inevitably
Damned. Which I shall, First, clear in general, from the Nature of Repentance.
Secondly, Show in what manner, and how far (in several Cases) Restitution is to
be made; and Proceed according to my Purpose.

Repentance has (by All) been judged of so great Moment, indeed of so absolute
a Necessity, that Divines of all Persuasions, Ancient, and Modern, have been
Curious, and laid out a great deal of Time and Pains in discovering and stating
of the Nature of it. The Moment Mr. Calvin apprehended; the Understanding of
it, he expresses in these Words, Si quid autem in tota Religione scire nostra
refert, id certe maxim refert, nempe intelligere ac probe tenere qua ratione,
qua lege, qua condition, qua facilitate aut difficultate obtineatur peccatorum
Remissio. If there be any thing in the whole Course of Religion worth our
Understanding; that is certainly most so, viz. to understand, and rightly
comprehend, which way, upon what terms and condition remission or forgiveness
of Sins may be obtained, Call. instit. l. 3. c. 4. which is as much as if he had
said, The nature of Repentance; He Sub-joyns there his reason from the
Restlesness the Conscience must be subject to, under a dissatisfaction touching
the Nature of it: But after all the large Discourses laid out upon it, as often
as it comes in the ways of Controvertists; or Men that insist upon it directly,
and immediately to move Men to the Practice of it, and Observation of the
Words; whereby it is expressed in Holy Scripture, and Practices of Men noted in
it, for an accepted repentance: the just Collection is, That repentance implies
a thorough change of the Heart of the Sinner, fully detesting his former Sins,
and resolving, for the future, to lead a new Life, answerable to the good
Pleasure of his GOD. This Detestation of former Sins, by the Schoolmen is
supposed to be attended with, nay, practiced in these Three Instances,
Contrition or Compunction of Heart, Pet. Lombardus li. 4. Did. 16.
Confession with the Mouth, and Satisfaction in Act or Deed. All (or either
whereof) the Reformists are so far from taking away, or denying, That they seem
only to rid them from the corrupt Glosses, the Propugnators of the Roman
persuasion blinded, and led by Interest, put upon them.

The forementioned Mr. Calvin, when he takes notice of the Romanists sense of
Contrition, or sorrow of Heart, finds Fault with their requiring such a just
Proportion of it, as may be answerable, and commensurate to the nature and
degrees of the Crime, which must create a great deal of trouble to the Sinner,
seeing a proportionable measure of Contrition or Sorrow enjoined, but not
determined; but notwithstanding, says, Equidem sedulo and acriter instandum
esse fateor, ut quisque amare destendo sua peccata, se ad eorum displicentiam
and odium magis acuat; Haec enim est non paenitenda tristitia, quae
paenitentiam gignit in Salutem, ib. I confess truly that it is to be carefully
and earnestly Urged, That every one by bitterly lamenting his Sins, may more
egg himself to a displeasure with, and hatred of his Sin; for this is Sorrow
not to Repented of, which works Repentance to Salvation: And a little
further, Diximus and nos quodam loco nunquam sine paenitentia obvenire
peccatorum Remissionem, quod nulli nisi afflicti and peccatorum Conscientia
vulnerati Dei misericordiam implorare sincere possunt: And I my self, have one
where said, That without Repentance, there is never any remission of Sins;
because that none but such as are afflicted, and wounded with the Consciousness
of their Sins, can sincerely implore God's Mercy. In both which Clauses, he not
only allows of, but requires Sorrow for Sin; only in the former he complains of
the unreasonableness of enjoining, and not determining the certain Proportion
due for every Sin; and after the latter of those two cited places, says, He
taught the Sinner, Non in suam compunctionem, neque in suas lachrymas intueri,
sed utrumque oculum in solam Domini Misericordiam defigere. Not to look back
upon his Compunction and Tears, but fasten his Eyes upon the alone Mercy of the
Lord: In short (as in all reason he should) Sorrow, and an hearty Sorrow for
Sin, he not only allows, but judges necessary, only would not have Men rely
upon it, as meriting Pardon; but be naturally necessary in order to it: the
Sinner, without it being not qualified for Mercy, for as much as a sense of the
misery of his Condition, must be an Incentive to his applying of himself to God
for Pardon.

Then for Confession, Call. instit. li. 3. c. 4. part de Confess.
he does not absolutely deny the usefulness and necessity of it, but ties the
necessity of an acknowledgement of our Sins to God; which when it is sincere,
he says, Sequitur voluntaria apud homines confessio, quoties id vel divinae
Gloriae, vel Humiliationis nostrae interest.
will be followed by a voluntary one to Men, as often as the Glory of God, and
a Man's own Humiliation may be promoted by it: And the Usefulness of it to some
certain Persons, for some certain Purposes he Ibid.
determines differently from the Church of Rome: All which having been not long
since, by our Right Reverend Diocesan, accounted for from this place, I shall
say no more to it now; But proceed to that which the Text, and my present
Purpose more directly lead me to, the Consideration of the Third Concomitant
of, or instance whereby our Detestation of Sin is to be Discovered,
Satisfaction; which indeed, all Reformists in the notion the Master of the
Sentences, and the Schoolmen use it, for forcing of Penances upon persons, as
to the necessity of it, with relation to God, do generally, and for good
reasons disclaim; I mean, as by it, the Romists do mean unravelling of the
Vice, and making God Satisfaction for every degree of Sin, by proportionable
Degrees, and answerableness of the contrary Virtue; because that supposition
evacuates the necessity of Christ's Suffering for Men: But as it relates to the
Church, and may be a Mean to satisfy the Members of it, of the sincerity of the
sinners Repentance; they do not only allow, but judge it very convenient. But
as by Satisfaction may be meant Restitution, Amends made by the offending or
injuring Person, to the Offended or Injured, as far as it may possibly lie in
the power of the offending Person, they do all join in the Necessity of it; and
particularly the Church of England in its Exhortation upon the bidding of the
Sacrament, moves Men in order to their showing themselves true Penitents (which
they should be before they presume to partake of That) to it. And St. Augustine
is very clear and positive, Peccatum non remittitur nisi restituatur ablatum.
The Sin continues Unpardoned, till such time as what is taken away, or (which
is the same thing) injuriously detained, be Restored. And common reason tells
us, That if the taking what is another's, upon terms the right Owner consents
not to, must be a Sin, the keeping must be so too.

But since the foresight of Beggary, or the shame of acknowledging such a
Guilt, which the injurious Person may apprehend must follow a due Restitution
of what is taken or detained: Since Covetousness, and Pride, and Ambition, may
be of so much more Authority with such a Sinner, than the Voice of all the
Schoolmen, and Fathers in the World, the Church he lives in, and his own
Reason; since those Sins will, in all likelihood, soon prevail with him: To
conclude, from the possibility that all those may err, that they really, and
actually do so; since, I say, the foresight of Beggary, that may ensue a
Restitution; since the shame of such an acknowledgement, as it must imply;
since Covetousness, Pride, and Ambition seconded with the Arts and Industry of
a wicked Spirit, will likely soon frame in the Mind of the injuring Person,
such a Discourse as this, Grant that all these, this Preacher mentions, the
Fathers, the Schoolmen, and generally all Writers, Ancient and Modern, (which
yet we have but his word for) the Church of England, and my own Reason for the
present, agree in the Necessity of Restitution, as being that, without which,
Repentance cannot be sincere and entire; and consequently, without which, a Man
that has taken away or detained from one or more Persons, or a Community their
Right, cannot be saved; yet it being acknowledged, that all of them may err in
any point; so they may in this; and therefore I am not sure they do not; and
this shall have no Force upon me. Since an Argument of this nature may be so
Eluded, let us try the Force of such as may be drawn from Holy Scripture, of
which, there can be Color for offering any such Evasion.

Now, that the sense of Holy Scripture touching this matter, is the same, That
there can be no true and perfect Repentance, without Restitution of what is
Injuriously taken or detained, will, I hope, be granted, sufficiently proved,
if I can from it prove, That he that does not make Restitution of what he has
wrongfully taken away or detained, is Guilty of transgressing the whole Law.
Certainly, he that, in God's Judgment, is guilty of Transgressing the whole
Law, cannot be thought to be a true Penitent; and consequently, as long as he
is not so, cannot be Saved. And either non-Restitution must be no Sin at all,
or in the judgment of St. James, c. 2. v. 10. it is a Transgression of the
whole Law; for there he says plainly, Whosoever shall keep the whole Law, and
yet Offend in one point, he is Guilty of all; and in the following Verse gives
the reason of it. Now there is no sort of possibility of avoiding this Charge,
but by the effrontery of denying it to be a Sin: To such a one as should be so
shameless as to suspect, much more deny, That the not Restoring of what is
wrongfully detained from others is a Sin; I Would ask him, What he thinks makes
Theft a Sin? Is it the taking away, by one, what he has no right to? It is so
here, when a person takes that which is not his Right, and keeps it longer than
he should; or, Is it only the Violence used to the person in the Act; Not so,
for some Stealths are without violence offered the persons, from whom it is
made: Nay, the detaining of others Rights against their declared Wills, or
because they dare declare nothing to the contrary, increases the numbers of the
Thefts, with the numbers of the Minutes, whereby the Detainer's time is told:
Three Hours not restoring what ought to be Restored, is so many Hours Stealing
in the sense of the Law of God, and Reason: But that I do not only say it is,
but show God's Sentence of it, as a Sin. See in the 33d. of Ezekiel, how he
particularizes Restoration, as the means of loosening of a Sin, and sign of
Conversion of a Sinner, which he had not, if in his Judgment, keeping
another's Right, had been no Sin; for after he had said in the 14th. verse,
Again, when I say unto the Wicked, Thou shall surely Dye: if he turn from his
Sin, and do that which is Lawful and Right, he Exemplifies doing Lawful and
Right, in the 15th. ver. by, If the Wicked restore the Pledge, give again that
he had Robbed, etc. he shall surely Live, and shall not Dye. If the Wicked
restore the Pledge, give again that he had Robbed: Wicked then, it seems he was
in God's Judgment while he kept it.

If after all this it should be said, That Penitence is an inward Act of the
Mind, Restitution an outward Expression; and that God regards the Inwards,
and lays not so much Stress upon outward Actions. I Would ask the person, Whether
he would be so Cheated? Such a Fool as to believe, that an Highway Robber that
takes his Purse, would by ever so much solemn Declarations of his Sorrow, for
the Injury he had done, make him believe he were truly Sorry, while he saw his
Purse in his hand? What God's estimate of Penitency is, we may judge by St.
John's calling upon those that came to his Baptism, to Bring forth Fruit meet
for Repentance; by our Savior's declaration, That we might know Men by their
Fruit; by the Apostle's challenging of the sincere Believer, which also must be
a true Penitent, to Show his Faith by his Works.

Having so showed, and I hope Convincingly, the indispensableness of
Restitution, from injurious Offenders in general; I come now to represent the
extent of the Concernment of it; And that as to Persons, and Things, with the
measures or degrees of Restitution, that ought to be made.

First, as to Persons, Where the Question is, How far this Guilt of not
Restitution, or not Restoring what is Injuriously taken or detained, may extend
it is self? Whether the Guilt dies with the Person that did at first do the
Injury, and never made Amends for it, or touches his Posterity, that they
become Guilty of it? And if it do, How far, and what obligation of Restitution
it lays upon them?

To which, I thus Answer, That, that Declaration Almighty God made in the
Second Commandment, That He would Visit the Iniquity of the Fathers upon the
Children, is very general; because it is to the Children of all them that hate
Him, that is, not only to the Children of them that Worship the Host of Heaven,
as some of the Gentiles did; or any thing upon Earth, or the Water under the
Earth, or the Images of any of them; but such as preferred any thing before
Him; that Preference of a Thing, being counted an hatred of Him; because it
supposes an incompetency of Love to Him. And if so, sure to them that gratify
their Lust or Covetousness, their Pride and Ambition; or any Sin proceeding
from them; or any thing else whatsoever contrary to God's clear Commands: I
say, This Declaration which God there made so general, was never absolutely
repealed. In Ezekiel, indeed, we find, That to the Children of Israel, that had
taken (upon the Execution likely of this part of the Law) up a Proverb, that
The Fathers had Eaten sour Grapes; and that the Childrens Teeth were set on
Edge, God promises something that looks like the Contrary: The Reason and
Import whereof, yet may probably be this, That the Sins of that Age, of the
Jews were so great and provoking, that when God Avenged them to the full, upon
Recollection, and just Examination of themselves, they might find no reason to
think, that there was any need from the heap of their Father's Trespasses, to
take in any, to aggravate their Sins, and so bring down a greater proportion of
Judgment; but that their own, every Man's singly, or the present Communities
might be sufficient to provoke more Judgments, than they saw Executed upon
them; or else, That their Provocations had been, and were so great, that
whereas God formerly had, in some cases, suspended the Execution of a Vengeance
due upon the Father's Trespasses, to the time of his Posterity, as he did in
the case of Ahab, That he would not then show so much Mercy, but Punish as fast
as they Offended; but whether for such, or some other Reason, He did to the
Children of Israel, for some season, determine it should be otherwise; yet that
he did finally and universally, that is, That he did for ever resolve, and to
all People, that it should be otherwise, does no ways, and no where appear; but
the contrary by the Observation of all Ages.

So that you see, That whatever the Sin of the Father be, his Children have no
warrant from Holy Scripture, other than the first Sinner had, that they will
escape the Punishment, that is, have no other Warrant, no Condition than
Repentance; and that a true sincere One, attended with all the genuine Fruit
and Effects of it; but on the other side, God's Truth that can never fail, to
assure them they may be Avenged upon for the Sins of the Father; and for the
manner to inquire, since God has made no Discovery, would be a sinful, and
useless Curiosity. When he says, He will do a thing, we may assure our selves,
He will find a way to do it: But whatever mitigation the Children of other
Sinners may have of this Menace, surely he that comes into the unjust
Possession of his Father, as such, will have none; for look whatsoever he has
in his Substance derived from his Father, more than he would have had in case
his Father had done all Right, paid all their own; so much has he that was not
his Fathers, and consequently more than his Father could justly Derive to him:
And his continuing a Possession of them, does not only entail upon him the
Vengeance denounced in the Second Commandment, which, if he had had none of
those unlawful Possessions from his Father, he had been obnoxious to, but
doubles it by practicing and continuing in the Sin. His Father's Sin was
detaining unjustly another's, and he Succeeds him, as his Son naturally without
that liable to the Punishment, and as continuing the Sin, in his own person.
And be sure the Guilt (tho the sense of it may) does not lessen, the longer the
Sin is practiced, but increases with time, and the Advantage made of it; For
see how much the first wrong quick stock has advanced any Man's Estate, above
what it would have been without it; so much it might have advanced the right
Owner's, if he had not been Injured, and consequently, so much ought to be
Restored to the last Mite of a Man's Possession; which if it do not rise to a
full Restitution, it ought to be Weighed out as much as possibly he can in
Sorrow before God, for the Injuries (which, if he had been able, he ought to
have testified by a full Restitution) by his hearty Prayers to God to make the
injured person Amends; and his Recommendation of him to such Men as he can
influence, that are of Ability to make him: nor indeed, in order to
Restitution, ought a Man to take his measures from the Advantage himself has
made of things wrongfully Detained; but account upon the best Husbandry could
be used about them. This I presume a clear and full Solution of the Question
proposed, with this notice, That what I said of the Son of the first Offender,
must be applied to all continuing the unjust Possession, and making Advantages
of it, proportionably to the Advantages they have, and the right Owner might
have made of it, in such a time.

Now I come more particularly to the things a person may injure, and be injured
in:

They are Goods, or Body, or Name, or All.

First, Goods we know comprehend all the Possessions, or things a Man may have
Right to, a Propriety, whereunto, for the support and comfort of Men, God has
approved, and himself given general Rules for the determination of. The keeping
of Money, or Land, or any Thing else, whatsoever of Right belonging to another,
is a violation of Right, which must, (if a Man would be saved) be restored or
amended, as I showed before in the general.

Secondly, A Man may Injure, and be injured in his Body, several ways, by
several persons. In his Infancy, for want of due Care in the Nurture of it,
(and so may the Mind also be Injured) or in his Maturity and perfect Strength,
either in part of his Body by being Maimed, or so, or in the whole by
industrious Ministering of pernicious Diet or Physic, or vexation of Spirit; in
all which, and the like cases, are required all the Amends that may be from the
offending Person, proportionable to the unhappinesses sustained by any Person,
by his Means; and that extended to his Relations, to whom he might have been
more useful, if he had not sustained those Wrongs in his Body.

Thirdly, The third thing wherein an Injury may be done a Person, is his good
Name: A thing that Solomon pronounces generally Precious, but of mighty
Consequence to some above others; as being that whereupon their own, and their
Families livelihood do depend; nay, of so ill consequence may the defamation of
some persons be, that it may in great Measures obstruct the Salvation of many
Souls, which (not to mince the Matter) may be in the case of a defamed
Minister, whose Ministry is like to be more or less Succesful, the more or less
blemished Men render his Reputation. And if it be so, let a pretended
Misdemeanour, before a Deputed Civil Magistrate, be compared with a real
Scandal of a Minister, before, and to his Flock in numbers, and as far as may
be singly be put into the Balance, and see where the weight of Mischief will
lie; on that side where the Scandal indisposes Men to receive Benefit from a
person to the Salvation of their Souls; or that, where the presumed
Misdeameanour to the person, can but occasion a less Esteem of one person: Or,
(if it must be transferred to the Place and Office, as, where an intention to
the contrary is declared, I do not see how it should) but be of some ill
example in point of Civil Observance, which yet Men in those Stations are
furnished with Authority sufficient to restrain the ill consequence of: As the
World goes, where ill Fame spreads widest, and goes furthest, it is an hard
matter to Prescribe a way of full Compensation in this Case: If we are sure of
the Desert, and mean the Reformation of the person, the Guilt may abide at
home, where the Occasion dwells; but I say, where a good Name is traduced
Groundlesly, and Unwarrantably, Maliciously, and Spleenishly, it may be morally
impossible to make proportionable Amends; especially, where the detraction is
attended with the hazard of Souls: However, all the courses that can be
presumed effectual to the purpose, are to be used toward the Restitution of a
Man's good Name: And this, as in the other cases, upon the greatest penalty,
Eternal Damnation.

Now that all this is said, and made good, it will, it may be, be judged
Impertinent, and Unnecessary, and Uncharitable, and as much more than all that
comes to, as provoked Fancies may qualify some People for Imagining and
Expressing; If I do not give some reasons for my Presumption, that there are
some persons in my Congregation that are guilty of this Sin; the nature and
danger whereof, I have endeavored to Explicate: For indeed, it had been an
absurdity not to be accounted for, to have been large, and particular in
representing the nature and danger of intemperance, or impatience before
Socrates, who, nor was, nor ever was like to be Guilty of either: And
therefore, to rid my self from the charge of such another absurdity in the
choice of my Subject, and way of management of it; I Will give the reasons that
induce me to believe, there are some that hear me, notoriously Guilty of the
gross Sin I would amend, that is, wrongfully detaining the Rights of others; in
Compassion to whose Souls (since I designed not to use many more) I thought fit
to take hold of this Opportunity; in pity, I say, to their Souls, and to Acquit
mine own from the Guilt, my finally silently passing by it, would Involve me in.

The First Reason I have to presume, or rather conclude, some of my Hearers
Guilty of this unrepented, and if it continue so, unavoidably damnable Crime,
is not of the least Moment, of less Weight, than those whereby God himself has
determined, and Men have unanimously used, as the means of deciding all
Controversies, all matters of Doubt or Question; The Oaths, I am told, of a
competent number of Witnesses, which to suspect, before they be overruled by
the Oaths of a more considerable number of more credible Persons, and that
determined so by a formal Sentence of Law, were not only Unreasonable, but
extremely Uncharitable; and much more so, when the Charge has, as in the
concernments of some, I am satisfied it has been, by the prosecuted Parties
own Acknowledgement, with a memorable Expression, confessed. Nor was this
Charge, which thus was made good, as I am convinced, a Charge of mere
misimployment, (as some have much labored to persuade Strangers to their
tempers and practices, to believe) or a Sum of Money promised to be, but not
returned, which I am told, was the single Case of one, I am persuaded too
Honest, too much a Christian to be ranked with the Rest; But of considerable
gross Sums not employed at all. Now to make good the Truth of all this, there
needs but the producing of the Depositions, which, if I listed, I think, I
might a Copy of; but that is more properly the concernment of a Court of
Judicature: That such Depositions upon Oath, were, seems too notorious a Truth:
And if so, What remains, but that either there was such a Guilt, or so many
persons as Swore it, are Perjured? Beloved, here is a clear Case, If one be
free from the Charge of detaining another's Right, the other comes within the
guilt of Perjury; and so on the other side, If the charge of Detaining be False
against one, the charge of Perjury against the other must be true; And are
either of these Sins to be soothed; to be past by in silence? These sure call
for Repentance of the most significant sort. Is it not a sad thing, that the
Preacher must either not do what he ought; or bid the one go home, and Repent
him of his Irrestitution, and make have to signify the seriousness, and reality
of his Repentance by a speedy Restitution; or bid the other go, and Repent his
Perjury?

Now to the former weighty Reason, which induces me to believe some persons
here guilty of such Injuries, as without the utmost Restitution they can make,
must become damnable; I have such as these:

Any Person that tells me my self, in a matter that I know due to me, that his
own Conscience having its full Liberty given it, cannot but tell him that it is
so, that many others know, and none can with Truth deny; I say, any person that
in such a matter, by way of defiance, in Confidence of the strength of his
Interest, or ought else, bids me come by all my Right as I can, unless I take
what he pleases in full Satisfaction from a Company directly obliged to me for
all; as for good Example, Ten Pounds for Thirty, or at least Twenty in one
Year, without any provision for Amends for former, gives me great Reason to
believe, that so many Men's Oaths in cases of Injuries charged upon him against
others, may not be False; That Person that so convinces me, in a fresh
injurious Act, gives me no Reason to believe, he could not possibly be Guilty
of any of that Nature before.

A Third Thing that induces me to believe, all things are not as Right as they
should be with some persons, is the Art and Diligence, I have observed, used in
the forming and maintaining of a strong Interest, and for some Years, securing
the Exercise of Government, in this place, in effect, in one hand: This indeed
ministered some matter of Suspicion, that the Affairs of some persons might
Suggest it necessary for them, by such means to wave off the execution of a
Judicial Sentence; it being commonly the Mark of Innocence, where it dwells,
notwithstanding the many Attempts made against it, to be plain and simple, and
easy in the recommendation of it self to the protection of him, who has given
Men the greatest assurance, he will not finally leave it, but vigorously plead
its Cause.

Thus having given the Reasons that induce me to believe there is such a Sin,
as I have mentioned, some of those committed to my Charge, may be Guilty of: I
come in the next place to Consider what plausible Defense they may make for
themselves, and what fallacies they may probably put upon their own
Consciencies, to lay the Clamours of them.

First then, It may probably be said, That sure if People had been Guilty of
such a Sin as this, and continued Unrepenting of it, as I say, all persons that
are Guilty of it, and do not make Restitution, do, That their own Consciences
must, ere this, have flown in their Faces, and made them visibly uneasy to
themselves; that ere this God would have showed His Judgments upon them,
rendered successless all their Counsels, and brought them at the feet of their
Adversaries: Whereas the quite contrary Appears; great cheerfulness of Life,
and a prosperity, so far from a subjection to their Adversaries, that it seems
rather mounted over them.

To all which, I thus Answer, That all these, Silence of Conscience (which yet,
they know best who are the Owners of them, how silent they be; they may be
vocal, and loud enough to them, though nor vocal, nor visible to others;) I
say, that Silence of Conscience, and a prosperous outward Estate, are but very
fallacious Grounds to determine the good Estate of the Soul by; so far from
being competent Arguments to that purpose, that they may attend the quite
contrary Estate of the Soul, that of Dereliction; for besides that, there may
be many ways used, whereby Men may be diverted from attending to the Clamours
of Conscience, and consequently made to think it cannot speak, because they do
not hearken unto it. We read in holy Writ of a Seared Conscience, from whose
not speaking, because it has lost feeling, we ought not to conclude all is
well with it.

And for success of Counsels, and prosperity of an outward Estate, which also
may be sometime more Arguments of God's displeasure, leaving Men to all the
Temptations of that Fortune, than his approbation of their practices; That they
are not the peculiar Lot of the Righteous, I leave David and Solomon, Father
and Son, to satisfy all the Fathers and Sons upon the Earth; the First in the
37th. Psalm, ver. 7, 8, 9, 10. Fret not thy self because of him, who prospers
in his way, because of the Man, who brings wicked Devices to pass. Cease from
Anger, and forsake Wrath; Fret not thy self in any wise to do Evil; For
evildoers shall be cut off, etc. But yet a little while, and the Wicked shall
not be, etc. For sometime then, in David's judgment, the Wicked may bring
their Counsels to pass, and prosper in their way. Solomon says, Prove. 29.20.
to the same purpose his Father spoke before, The Candle of the Wicked shall be
put out, that is, The Splendour of his Estate shall not continue for ever; which
supposes he may some time have it. What may happen to the Unrighteous and the
Wicked, as well as the Just and the Godly, ought not to be taken up as
Arguments of the Welfare of the Soul, and the person's acceptance with God. But
in case a person's Conscience be suffered to speak, and that, at leastwise,
inwardly, one may be convinced of such a Guilt; yet it is not impossible, but
he may delude himself with an opinion, that he is not obliged to make
Restitution, because that of that he has wrongfully detained, he has made no
benefit, but that it proved an occasion of real disadvantage to him; as for
illustration, Suppose the Chief Magistrate of any Town in Christendom, had, by
virtue of his place, received so much Money for the Public, but laid them out
on, or reserved them for his proper use: suppose another person, out of his
aversness to such a practice, (from what principles or motives soever, in the
present Case is not material) should use a legal course to recover those out of
his hands, in fencing of the Man's self, against which, it might cost him as
much as the first Sum in question came to, and, it may be, more; What? Are the
Cases of Conscience so severe and strict, as to require a Restitution, when the
Man is satisfied he has expended the Sum, and it may be, qy occasion of it, as
much again of his own? This, it may be, will be answered with something the
same supposition, that is in the slothful Servant's Answer to his Master in the
Gospel, of a natural austerity in the Exactor. This I do the rather take notice
of, because I have heard what to me seemed to glance that way. But the
Resolution of this will be easy, if you put it to the rule of plain and common
Debt, where you know, the Debt is never reckoned the more paid, for any charges
the obstinate refusal of paying, may occasion; there is an increase of
obstinacy and unhandsomeness, none of satisfaction made by that means. Shall
any Man lay out my Right in the defense of his own Obstinacy or Covetousness,
and shall he reckon it paid, because at long running he got nothing by it? He
that can spy a substantial difference, whereby it may be more a Plea in one,
than the other, has another faculty of seeing, than either Reason or Religion
furnish him with.

Having so given the Reasons, that induced me to believe some Men guilty, and
answered what they may probably offer for themselves to stave off their
concernment, in the matter of detaining the Right of others; I should come next
to do the same, touching injuries done to the Bodies and good Names of Persons.
As to the First whereof, I shall only say, there have been here some Injuries
done to some in that, by whom I know not, and it may be a great deal more, than
ever I heard of: Let every Man examine his own Conscience, and remember, and
use a while the Rule given, touching Restitution in that case.

And as to the Guilt of the Abuse of the good Names of People, I shall say
little more, then read you the Character Archbishop Whitgift gave an odd
Generation of Men in his time, and trust any Body in the Congregation, that
knows them, to find out the Guilty by it: Arch-Bish- Whitgift's Defense, etc.
p. 423.
It is their manner (Abuse he meant) except you please their humor in all
things, deserve never so well, all is nothing with them, but they will deprive
you, rail on you, back-bite you, invent Lies of you, and spread false Rumors,
as though you were the vilest Person upon the Earth. I must confess, had I met
with this, any time these Twelve Months hereabouts, in any new Writing, and
been left to guess whence it came, I had concluded it had been some Bodies
observation of Persons I knew well enough; But I heartily pray God to forgive
them, and in order to His forgiveness, to give them the Grace of hearty
Repentance, such as may signify its seriousness, by such Restitution of the
good Name of every abused Person, as they may be able to make, and God may
please to accept of.

Thus far have I discharged the Office of a faithful Surgeon, showed and
searched an Old Wound, and prescribed the Means of its Cure; and I am afraid,
not without extremely angering my Patients. I have showed you, in case of the
Guilt of Injury, the indispensable Necessity of Restitution; the extent of its
Concernment, as to Persons and Things, with the measure of Restitution required
in all matters of Wrong: I have brought it home to your doors, and showed you
the Reasons I had to lay it there. The absolute Necessity of Restitution, I
intimated from the Danger of Eternal Damnation. And because that may not so
nearly affect Men, though it infinitely most deserves their consideration, I
could give you both instances, and especial Threats of God's signal appearances
in this World, in the Vindication of the Oppressed Stranger, the Fatherless,
the Widow, and the Poor, when the best-spun Policies of Men will be unravelled
and defeated; and read you dreadful Things out of the 20th. chap. of Job,
beginning at the 4th. verse. of it: But instead of all that, I shall recommend
to your consideration an expression of the Psalmist, resolved into a Sentence,
When God arises, His Enemies will be scattered; which will be, when He arises
in Judgment, either here, or hereafter, or both, for sometime he will; for he
says, He hears the Complaint of the Poor, and that the Poor shall not be
forsaken for ever.

Well, before I have done, I judge it necessary to Answer two or three
Objections, which, I foresee, will, in all probability, be levelled against
this Discourse.

One, That it is a very unseasonable Discourse, and but a course Entertainment
of a Person newly entered upon his Office.

To that I say, That that never seems to me unseasonable, that is necessary,
and that I apprehend not the incivility of catching hold of the Skirt of a
Man's best Weed, tho a Robe of Scarlet, if I suspect he runs into the Fire with
it.

The next I can think of, is, That it is ill becoming a Minister of Peace, to
disturb a new-made Peace, with the Representation of old matters of Dissension,
which no doubt will, with all the aggravations, spleen and malice can suggest,
be represented.

But to this, I beg leave to distinguish between true Peace, and the varnish
and imagery of it. It is not every Combination of Men, that has just
pretensions to the glorious title of Peace. We read of a Peace between Herod
and Pontius Pilate, upon the sorry occasion of Condemning the innocentest
Person in the World; but no where any reasons to Applaud it. There are some
Unions look more like Conspiracies, than Peace. Is this Peace to hush up all
former Injuries to the public, and to capacitate Men's selves without damage,
to Act, as many more, as they have a mind to? The Answer Jehu made the Son of
Ahab, enquiring for Peace, was, What Peace, as long as thy Mother Jezabel 's
Whoredoms, and Witchcrafts are so many? And may not there, think you, a
question something like it be asked here? What Peace, as long as Wrongs and
Injuries continue unsatisfied for? The Prophet Isaiah tells us, that God says,
There is no Peace to the Wicked; and do you now judge, whether such Crimes as
Irrestitution or Perjury, may not rank Men, of what advance soever, amongst
them?

A well-founded Peace, there is no Man, I hope, I may truly say it, wishes more
than my self; but in order to it, must advise you, to be at Peace with God and
your own Consciences; and that you may so, to remove from amongst you The
Accursed Thing, which will prove a more solid Foundation for a lasting Peace,
than any thing that I know has hitherto been proposed, or happened toward the
Re-establishment of it; without which, all this Pageantry will look more like a
triumph over Justice and Honesty, than true Peace.

One Objection more against what I have delivered, I suppose, will be, That I
spoke out of Envy and Malice, and upon Provocation.

If what I have already said to that upon my entrance into this Discourse, do
not acquit me, I shall not trouble my self much more; only say, be my Motive
to, or occasion of it what it will, if I have said a truth, that will justify
no Man's non-observance of it. St. Paul, in the First Chapter to the
Philipians, says, that Some Preached Christ, even of Envy and Strife, verse
the Fifteenth; however, verse the Eighteenth, He Rejoiced; and the Nineteenth,
Was persuaded it would turn to his Salvation. Holy David was more afraid of the
Precious Balms of Flatterers, than the Wounds of his Friends, whom if they had
not been in their intentions, such he would doubtless in effect have made, by
useing their Counsels for his good. The Enmity I have to you, dispenses with my
wishing you may make as wise use of what I delivered, as St. Paul, or holy
David did, or would have done, of Truths delivered by an Enemy. If For telling
you the Truth, I am become more your Enemy, and increased your unkindness
toward me; try whether you can spite me, or show it in avoiding what is in
mine, and the judgment of the whole world, the greatest of Evils, Eternal
Damnation, by a timely, and significant Repentance; which God, I heartily pray
it, Grant you, and that what has been delivered, may not be the Savor of
Death unto Death, unto any, but the Savor of Life unto Life, to all that hear
me; wherewith I conclude.

FINIS.

