THE JUDGMENT OF THE Foreign Reformed Churches CONCERNING THE RITES and OFFICES
OF THE Church of England: SHOWING There is no necessity of Alterations. In a
Letter to a Member of the House of Commons.

Archbishop Bramhill's Works, p. 494. All Protestants both Lutherans and
Calvinists did give unto the English Church the Right Hand of Fellowship.

Casaubon's Prayer, A. D. 1610. Thou, O Lord Jesus, preserve the Church of
England, and give a sound mind to the Nonconformists, who deride its Rites and
Ceremonies.

LONDON; Printed for Robert Jenkinson, A. D. 1690.

To the Honored A. A. A MEMBER Of the Honorable HOUSE of COMMONS.
SIR,
WHEN we parted at the Election, you desired me to give you the Judgment of the
Foreign Protestants about the Church of England, and particularly as to the
Rites and Offices, of which the Author of the Letter to the Convocation tells
us, p. 23. That if the Convocation do not alter them, most certainly the
Parliament will. The very talk of Change, you know, breeds a Ferment in the
Nation, and be sure the discontented will make their advantage of it; but if
the Nation finds the Parliament as steady as the Convocation, the Heats will
soon be over, and the Kingdom return to her Settlement and Peace. Nolumus leges
Angliae mutare, was an Answer first in Parliament, and that in opposition to
some Ecclesiastics, who would have introduced several Foreign Rites and
Customs, into the room of received and approved Constitutions, quae huc usque
usitatae sunt ac approbatae.

Optatus Milev. l. 3. p. 75. tells us of his time, That there had been a Report
spread by some that came from the Emperor, that Alterations should be made in
the Liturgy, which startled the People; but when they saw their Solemn Customs
and wonted Rites observed, and that nothing was changed, added, or diminished
in their Divine Service, they were quieted again.

Those Governments have been observed to continue longest that have been most
steady in their Laws; and the Jews who were immediately governed by God, had
their very Rites and Ceremonies unaltered for almost 2000 Years, their great
Lawgiver foreseeing, that every considerable Alteration in an established
Religion, or even its Rites and Modes, would put the State into Convulsions,
and endanger a Revolution.

As to our present Conjuncture, it was a great oversight in those that carried
on the Design of a Comprehension, to begin with a Toleration; and its
unreasonable to think that the Dissenters will unite with Us, so long as their
Separation is allowed. Nothing that you can do, will promote their Union with
Us, but that which makes it their Interest, and that can be only done by
Rewards and Punishments; and therefore the taking off the Sanctions of the
Laws, and making the Separation easy, was beginning at the wrong end, and a
certain way to make a Comprehension ineffectual.

But since the Union proposed is not confined to our Nation, but extended to
all the Protestants in the World, that are now united in their Interests; I
have here, according to your Desires, given you a true account of the great
esteem and veneration they all have for the Church of England, and particularly
for those very Rites and Customs that are now disputed, and what Offense and
Scandal our Dissenters give them; so that by an impartial Consideration of
their Opinions, you, and all the Nation may be satisfied that making of
Alterations in the Instances proposed, will be so far from promoting a closer
Union with the Foreign Protestants, (who have always esteemed Us, as the very
Center of Union,) that its the most certain way to hinder it.

For what concerns the late Convocation, I shall refer you to an excellent
Paper, Entitled, Remarks from the Country upon the Two Letters relating to the
Convocation and Alterations in the Liturgy,

SIR, I am Your most Humble Servant, N. S.

THE CONTENTS.
1. THE Dissenters from the Church of England constantly appeal to the Foreign
Protestant Churches, as Persons of their Opinions. p. 2. 2. Some Inconsiderate
or Designing Persons of the Church of England have joined with them in this
Appeal and Complaint. p. 3, 4, 5. 3. This Opinion Confuted in general. p. 6, 7.
4. The Opinions of Beza, Spanheim, Diodate, Casaubon, Bochart, Dumoulin, etc.
concerning the Church of England Established. p. 8, 9, 10, 11, 12. 5. The
Opinion that the Foreign Reformed Divines have of our Dissenters, particularly
the Opinion of Calvin, Beza, Gualter, Casaubon, Bochart, Capellus, etc. p. 12,
13, 14. 6. These General Opinions applied to the Matters proposed to be Altered
by the Authors of the Letters to the Convocation, and in behalf of the Bill of
Union, and the Opinion of the Foreign Protestants, is showed as to Reading the
Apocryphal Books in the Church. p. 14, 15, 16, 17, 19, 20, 21. 7. As to the
Rules for finding Easter. p 22, 23, 24, 25. 8. As to the Names of some old
Saints and Bishops in the Calendar. p. 25, 26. 9. As to the Reading the old
Version of the Psalms. p. 26. 27, 28, 29, 30, 31. 10. As to the retaining the
Athanasian Creed. p. 32, 33. 11. As to the Cross in Baptism. p. 34. 12. As to
Godfathers in Baptism. p. 35, 36. 13. As to Kneeling at the Sacrament. p. 37,
38. 14. As to Excommunication for Contempt. p. 41. 15. As to Ordination by
Bishops only. p. 42, 43, 44, 45, 46, 47, 48, 49, 50, 51, 52. 16. As to Set
Forms of Prayers. p. 53, 54. 17. As to Established Rites and Ceremonies, etc.
p. 55, 56, 57. 18. One Word to the Dissenters. p. 58. 59.
ERRATA.
PAge 6. l. 24. Humphred read Humphrys, p. 17. l. 27. Populare read Populari,
p. 20. l. 2. Polyglot Latin, read Polyglot Bible, p. 22. l. 35. Venral read
Vernal, p. 26. l. 18. Evispine read Crispine, p. 31. l. 24. perpagato read
propagato, p. 43. l. 34. pretented read pretensed.

THE JUDGMENT OF THE Foreign Reformed Churches CONCERNING THE RITES and OFFICES
OF THE Church of England.
THERE have been Three Reasons much urged of late for making Alterations in the
Rites and Offices of the Church of England at this Juncture; the 1st relates to
our selves, the 2d to Dissenters, and the 3d to Foreign Churches. To the 1st it
has been answered, that we do not need Alterations; to the 2d that they do not
desire them; and the 3d is the Subject of this Discourse. And though the
Learned Books of Durel, Comber, Falkner and others, might have rendered such a
design needless, yet so long as the Adversaries of our Peace and Establishment
go on to amuse the Nation with old Fictions and Stories, we must not cease to
repeat old truths and plain matter of fact to confute them, not doubting but
that as truth is great, so it will prevail.

It has been the constant practice of the Preshyterian Party to boast of their
Harmony and Agreement with the Foreign Reformed Churches, in those things
wherein they differ from us, and frequently insinuate to their Followers, that
the Protestants abroad were much offended with the Rites and Offices of the
Church of England. Thus their great Founder T. C. in his Preface to the
Admonition. Out of the Realm they have all the best Reformed Churches in
Christendom against them; i. e. The Presbyterians against the Church of
England. In his Admonition, he frequently appeals to the best Reformed
Churches, and particularly p. 286. Our Ordination by Bishops is strange from
the use of all well reformed Churches in the World. In the Solemn League and
Covenant, they all Swore, To endeavor the Reformation of Religion, according
to the Example of the best Reformed Churches. Ordinance of Parliament, for
taking away the Common Prayer, Jan. 3d, 1644. -- Resolving to Reform Religion
according to the Example of the best Reformed Churches. Preface to the
Directory; The Liturgy of the Church of England has proved an Offense to the
Reformed Churches abroad. -- That we may answer the expectation of other
reformed Churches.

The Presbyterians assembled at the Savoy in the Year 1660, declare, That in
the Liturgy are things that have given offense to Learned and Judicious Drvines
of other Reformed Churches. In their Petition for Peace, p. 9. And if you
should reject (which God forbid) the moderate Proposals which now and formerly
we have made, we offer to your consideration, what judgment all the Protestant
Churches are likely to pass on your Proceedings. And again, p. 10; How strange
must it needs seem to the Reformed Churhes, to the whole Christian World, etc.
-- p. 13. The Pastors of the most Reformed Churches take this Conformity to be
Sin. And after this manner they declare all the World on their side, and that
the Foreign Churches admire at the stiffness of the Church of England, by which
contrivance though never so false, they raise the heats and clamours of the
ignorant and unthinking part of the Nation against the Church of England. And
still they go on to clamor against us without any proof, though they have been
so often urged to it; and I here challenge them all to produce any one
Authentic Act of any National Reformed Church in the World, which has at the
least Reflected upon, or Censured the Established Church of England.

And yet all this, however vile and base, is no more than we might justly have
expected from the Professed Enemies of our Peace and Establishment; but that
which raised the admiration and astonishment of all Sober Men, was to see the
Professed Sons of the Church of England, Men of Rank and Dignity, embarked in
the same bottom of mistake and error, and pursuing the same hideous outcries
against us; a mistake they could not run into, but for want of good Books or
good Company, which would have informed them better, and too much consining
their Studies and their Conversations to that ill sort of Men. So that now our
Church may justly take up the complaint of David, Psalm 55. 12, 14, 15. It is
not an open Enemy that has done me this dishonor, for then I could have born
it; -- but it was even thou my Companion, my Guide, and mine own Familiar
Friend: We took sweet Counsel together, and walked in the House of God as
Friends.

Of this sort is the Discourse concerning the Ecclesiastical Commission, p. 24.
The Eyes of all the World be open upon us, all the Reformed Churches are in
expectation of something to be done which makes for Union and Peace. And a
Letter to a Member of Parliament in favor of the Bill for a Protestant Union,
p. 5; For them that have not Episcopal Orders, there will be such a provision
made, as will satisfy all the Ministers of the Foreign Protestant Churches.
Again p. 6. And for French and German, and other Foreign Christians of the
Reformed Religion, I am well assured by Letters sent from Holland, Geneva,
Switzerland, and other Places (not to speak of the Churches of the Lutheran
Communion which write the same) that they esteem the Conditions proposed in
this Bill, (which has been communicated to them) as Terms fit for uniting of
Protestants. Where by the way, I cannot but admire at the speed and diligence
of this Persons Correspondence; the King had not accepted of the Government
till February, after this the Convention is declared a Parliament; and then
after some more necessary things for settling the Government, a project is set
on work for a Bill of Union, and yet he had sent a Copy of the Contents of it
to Germany, Holland, Geneva, Switzerland, etc. and received their several
Approbations of it in March, for that Paper is Licensed April 1st. And yet it is
more strange, that even the Churches of the Lutheran Communion should approve
the conditions of that Bill of Union: It was not long before, that an excellent
Author of undoubted credit; gave us an authentic account of a Letter from
several Ministers in Germany, That the greatest part of the Protestants of
Europe have been extremely scandalized at our Dissenters, -- That the
Dissenters ought by no means to have separated themselves for the form of
Ecclesiastical Government, nor for Ceremonies; -- That the Bishops have
justified themselves from the reproach of being Popishly affected, and of
Persecuting the Dissenters; they have made it appear that they were only
Calumnies invented by their Enemies to render them odious to Protestants; --
How much better would it be for the Dissenters to reunite themselves to the
Bishops, with whom they differ only in some Points of Discipline? And now quite
contrary, all the Reformed Churches expect that we should comply, and unite
with the Dissenters.

But without crossing the Seas, we may make a fair guess at the incredibility
of all this Foreign Account, by the very next Pretense, which gives as strange
an Account of our selves at Home. I am not singular in this, for amongst all
those who have appeared in the Churches cause, as well against Dissenters as
Papists; I do not know one single Person that is not a well-wisher to this
Bill, and I believe they will all tell you so. The direct contrary being
manifestly true, not only in several of the Ecclesiastical Commissioners who
were called together to consult of that matter, but also in the far greater
part of the whole Convocation. And if that Author be mistaken in the Age he
lives in, we have great hopes to think he is as much mistaken in the Ages past,
for so it follows, Archbishop Usher, Bishop Sanderson, Dr. Hammond, and a long
Order of other most Worthy Men of the last Age, whose Memory is most precious
in our Church, had they been now alive, would with all Zeal have promoted this
Bill of Union. Which very Paragraph is the reverse of one of Mr. Baxters, in
his Answer to Dr. Stillingfleet -- I am past doubt that Richard Hooker, Bishop
Bilson, Bishop Usher, and such others, were they now alive, would be
Nonconformists, yea, I can prove it, etc. and if so, they would not be for the
Bill of Union, which has been generally opposed by the Nonconformists. The
Preface to the Directory runs in the same Style. We have no intention to
disparage our first Reformers, of whom we are persuaded, that were they now
alive, they would join with us in this Work.

And thus its evident that these Sons of Comprehension join with the
Dissenters, to cry it up, that all the World is on their side, and clamor
against all that oppose them, as the Thessalonians did against the Apostles,
Act. 17. 6. These Men would turn the World up-side down; whenas their despising
of us, and magnifying of the Foreign Churches, is like that which OEcolampadius
tells us in his Epistles, p. 177. Aliis OEcolampadius, aliis Zuinglius
sordebat, atqui nos amici sumus and fuimus semper, and nemo gratificatur nobis
qui propter nos dissidium seminat, i. e. Some despise OEcolampadius, and some
Zuinglius, but we are, and always were Friends, nor does any one please us that
sowes Discord upon our Accounts.

Let us therefore take a short view of the judgment of the Foreign Divines, and
see what Opinion they have of this stiff, vile, sinful Church of England.

As the Reformation in general consists of Lutherans and Calvinists, so I find
that agreement betwixt them in the most material Things; as that Calvin himself
subscribed the Lutheran Confession of Ausburgh, and a whole Synod of his
Disciples at Charenton in France, in the Year 1631. declared, That there was no
Idolatry nor Superstition in the Lutheran Churches, and therefore the Members
of their Churches might be received into Communion with them, without
renouncing their Opinions or their Practices; so that, tho Papists and
indiscreet Fanatics have endeavored to set these two great parts of the
Reformation as far asunder as possible; yet the more sober Protestants have
thought them very reconcilable, and always endeavored it. Now the Church of
England has been Established in a middle way, betwixt both extremes, and laid
aside those things which on either hand gave the greatest Offense; by which
means our Established Church has been looked upon by moderate Men, as the very
Center of Union and Harmony of all the Protestant Churches in the World. For
this very reason when Calvin offered his Assistance to Archbishop Cranmer, he
was refused by him. The Famous Dr. Humfrede, who was one of those Learned Men
that fled abroad in Queen Mary's Reign, in his Prax. Cur. Romans p. 70. tells us,
Nos non sumus Calviniani, nec Reformationem nostram Calvinismum dicimus, We are
not Calvinists in England, nor do we call our Reformation Calvinism; and yet
this was the Religion established by Queen Elizabeth, when that great Man
wrote; and Sir Edwin Sandys who had made a diligent survey of all the Religions
in Europe, says expressly, p. 214. That no Luther, no Calvin was the Square of
our Faith. Now for our Church thus happily established, to alter to either
extreme, is so far from promoting the Union of the Reformed Churches, that its
the most likely way to hinder it.

If we look upon the Lutheran Churches, they have either Bishops; as Denmark,
Norway and Swedland, or else Superintendants, (which is another Name for
Bishops) who have power of Ordination and Jurisdiction, as our Bishops in
England. They have all set Liturgies and Forms of Prayer, they observe
Holy Days and set-Fasts, have Organs, Hymns and Anthems; they wear Surplices;
use the Cross in Baptism; receive the Communion kneeling, and make use of all
those Rites which have been objected against the Church of England; so that to
alter these, must needs give Offense to all those Churches, and set us at a
greater distance from them. And as these Alterations proposed, can never tend
to an Union among Protestants, so they must needs look ill at this time, when
not only all these Churches are united to us in one common Alliance for the
defense of our Religion, but also the very next Branch of our Royal Family is
so nearly related to them.

As for such as propose our Union with the reformed Churches of France, Geneva
and Holland, let them consider that the first of these is not, and so we have
now less reason than formerly; the second is only a particular City, (for the
Swiss are generally Lutherans,) and its a very unreasonable Project of Union,
to have three Kingdoms alter their Religion for conformity with one City; when
at the same time they set themselves at a greater Variance with so many
Kingdoms of the Reformed Religion. As for Holland, its well known that they
allow of all sorts of Religions, and its impossible that any settled Uniformity
amongst our selves can ever bring us to an Union to such a mixture and variety.
The Christian Religion was first planted among them by an English Bishop, and
our Reformation was fixed and settled here before theirs began.

But because the Dissenters boast that the Reformed Churches of France, and
Holland, and Geneva, were always on their side, and joined with them in their
abhorrence of the Church of England: I will next consider what Opinion the
Learned Men, even of those Churches, have had of ours. First, for Geneva. And
for his Learning and Eminency, I will begin with the Famous

1. Beza, Who in his Letter to Archbishop Whitgift has these Words, The
English Church is the Harbor of all the Godly, and the Preserver of all other
Reformed Churches.

2. Spanheim, Professor there, in his Epistle to Archbishop Usher and others.
I often call to mind those Fortunate Isles of yours -- That Beauteous Face of
your Church -- That Reverence in the Public Worship of God -- The Church of
Geneva has a great affection to the British Churches, whose Bishops we admire;
for whose Prosperity we daily Pray, that your Church may continue to praise God
as it does; that the Bishops may continue in their Authority, and your Church
in Peace, etc. and this was Written A. D. 1638. Then for his Successor

3. John Diodate, Professor at Geneva, in his Answer to the Assembly of Divines
at Westminster, when they had desired his Opinion about their Proceedings.
England (in the time of its Episcopacy) was the very Eye and Excellency of all
Churches, Christ's own choice and peculiar -- What a sad Spectacle is it to see
that Church trodden under Feet -- An horrid thing (that you have done) and
never before heard of amongst the Reformed Churches -- We are struck with
Horror at the change of the glorious Face of that Church; may God restore your
Churches to that high Estate, and pitch of Holiness and Glory in which they
have hitherto excelled and out-shin'd all the Churches upon the Earth. And this
is the esteem Geneva had for the Episcopal Church of England, and certainly we
ought not to alter the best Church in the World, to comply with that, which by
their Confession is not so good.

In the next place let us see the French Divines, I will begin 1. with
Casaubon, in his Epistle to King James the I. The Church of England comes
nearer the form of the flourishing Christian Church of old, than any other; it
has taken a middle way betwixt those Churches which are amiss, either through
excess or defect -- If my Judgment does not deceive me, the most sound part of
the whole Reformation is in England.

2. The learned Bochart, in his Epistle to Bishop Morley. There are none, of
the reformed of France, if they happen to be in England, but willingly join
with the Church of England as by Law established; and as soon as they can get a
competent knowledge of the English Tongue, are present at her Offices, and
receive the Holy Communion there, which I have often my self done at London and
at Oxford: This is not only my. Opinion, but of all the Pastors of the Reformed
Religion in France.

3. Peter du Moulin in the Preface to his Fathers Answer to Perron, The Church
of England has more of the Primitive and Apostolic Church Government than any
other Church in the rest of the world. -- The French Protestants have the same
good Opinion of it, and desire to enjoy the same Government, if they might be
so happy.

4. Monsieur Claude in his Letter published by Dr. Stillingfleet. The Church of
France has always looked upon and considered the Church of England not only as
a Sister, but an elder Sister, for which we have a respect and veneration, and
daily pray.

5. Monsiur Le Moyne in a Letter published by Dr. Stillingfleet, All the
Protestants of France, Geneva, Switzerland, Germany and Holland, look upon the
Church of England as a very Orthodox Church; -- All the Protestant Churches
have always had a very great respect for the Purity of the Church of England.
And in another Letter to Dr. Brevint, published by Dr. Durell, I praise God for
our Reformation in France, but I fear not to say, that if we had kept Bishops,
and as many Ceremonies as would serve to fix the Attention of the People
without Superstition, we should have seen for certain far greater progress of
the Reformation. To which I cannot but add what Monsieur Ronee a French
Ambassador in England, when he saw our Solemn Services and Rites, told King
James the First, That if the Reformed Church of France had kept the same Order
among them which we have, he was assured that there would have been many
thousands of Protestants more than now there are. And this Observation is so
undoubtedly true, that it long since forced this Expression from one of our
bitter Enemies, Sanders de Schism. Angl. p. 283. Queen Elizabeth in her
Reformation kept many of the Rites and Manners of the ancient Church, which
very much conduced to the Firmness and Establishment of her Heresio; for had
things been left to the capriciousness of some of the new Clergy that talked
much of the Gospel-Liberty, it had all long since vanished into Smoke, but by
her Polity was strengthened and supported.

6. Monsieur De L' Angle in his Letter published by Dr. Stillingfleet, p. 421.
I am sure with what an exceeding Joy the Protestant Churches of France would
enter into Communion with you (i. e. the Church of England) And in his Letter
to Durel, published by him, p. 70, 71. I rejoiced very much at the
establishment of the Anglico-Gallicane Church, (i. e. the French Church, with
the English Common Prayer and Rites) that this may make known to the World the
Communion that is betwixt us, and that the Reformed Churches of France have not
that aversion against the Discipline of the Church of England, which some Men
report they have; I am certain my Colleagues are of the same mind with me. And
again, p. 143. My Heart did leap for joy when I heard that your Liturgy and
ancient Discipline was restored, i. e. in the year 1660.

To these Testimonies I will add the Observation of Dur^^ a Frenchman also, p.
92. When the French Church in London was established with the English Liturgy
and Rites, tho Providence brought over many Ministers from beyond the Seas,
some from Geneva, some from France, some from Germany, some from Poland, some
from Lithuania, some from Piemont, and almost from all the Reformed Churches,
we have seen none of them, that made any difficulty to assist at Divine
Service, and conform; all of them received the Sacrament kneeling, etc.

And I cannot but wonder with what Face the Men of this Age press us to make
Alterations for the sake of other Reformed Churches, when we see those of the
Reformed Religion of France, who are all Calvinists, and who out of Zeal to
God's Glory, readily sacrificed all their Secular Interest to their Religion,
and come over to this Kingdom, have universally joined with the Church of
England, in her Liturgy and Rites, received the Lords Supper on their Knees,
had their Children Baptized with Godfathers, and signed with the Sign of the
Cross, etc. and all this at a time when the Laws of this Kingdom gave them
Liberty to join with what Communion they pleased. Which was such an
unanswerable Argument to our Dissenters, God having as it were brought a Nation
from another Kingdom to convince them, that it was generally observed
throughout all the Kingdom, that the Dissenters were very cold in their Charity
toward them.

If we look into the Churches of Holland, it is true all sorts of Religions are
allowed; but it is evident that the great and Leading Men there have ever had a
great Esteem for the Church of England; witness the great Respect and Honor
they had for the English Bishops in the Synod of Dort, when they neither had
nor desired any Representatives from our Presbyterians: Witness the two Famous
Vossius's, Father and Son, who always spoke with all Respect and Honor of the
Church of England, and so far approved of our Cathedral Service, as that the
Father was Prebendary of Canterbury, the Son Prebendary of Windsor. Witness the
Famous Grotius, who always admired the Church of England above all the Churches
in the World, and upon his Deathbed recommended it to his Wife, and such others
of his Family that were then about him, obliging them to adhere firmly to it,
which was readily obeyed by them. Bishop Bramhall' s Vind. of Grotius, cap. 2.
Witness the two Junius's and many others; but I shall only add the present
Famous, Living Instance, his present Majesty King William, who was born and
always bred in that Church, and yet from his first coming into England, has
readily and constantly joined with the Church of England, used her Liturgy with
great Devotion and Honor, and observed all its Rites and Ceremonies, as
Kneeling, Standing, etc. in their proper places, and upon all occasions, has
declared himself zealously and heartily in her Praise and Commendations, and
promised his Protection of it, and all this at such times, when the contrary
Interest wasmost prevalent, and he was daily beset with those that were no
Friends to the present Establishment. All which is an undeniable Argument how
readily those of Holland would join with us.

As to the Northern Churches, we have a great Example before us in the Prince
of Denmark. And lastly, For the Church of Scotland, not to mention the several
Synods and Acts of Parliament by which Bishops, set forms of Prayer, etc. have
been established amongst them, and the same Rites as are in the Church of
England. Not to mention the great number amongst them that at this time are
vigorous Asserters of Episcopacy; Let King James the First speak for all, in
his Speech delivered in the Star Chamber, An. Dom. 1616. -- I say in my
Conscience, that the Church of England, of any Church that ever I read or knew
of, present or past, is most pure and nearest the Primitive and Apostolic
Church, in Doctrine and Discipline, and is sureliest founded upon the Word of
God, of any Church in Christendom.

And having thus far seen the great Esteem the Reformed Churches abroad have
for the Church of England as by Law established, let us next fee what Opinion
they have of the Presbyterians, and other Dissenters amongst us.

I will begin with Calvin, who in his Book De Necess. Ref. Eccl. says, If any
be found that do not reverence such an Hierarchy, (i. e. such as we have in
England) and subject themselves to the same with the lowest Obedience, I
confess there is no Anathema whereof he is not worthy. And again, In a
well-setled Church, diversities of Customs is not to be suffered. Next for Beza
in his Epistle to the English Puritans from Geneva, A. D. 1567. (of his
Epistles, p. 97.) I tremble to think that any should perform their Ministerial
Duty against the Will of her Majesty and the Bishops. And in another Epistle to
Archbishop Grindon, A. D. 1566. speaking of the same Persons, Its in vain for
them to pretend weakness in a Kingdom, where the Gospel has been preached so
many years, and been confirmed with the Blood of so many Martyrs.

Gualterus in his Epistle Dedicatory of his Homilies upon the 1st Epistle to
the Corinthians, calls those morose and ignorant, who for things indifferent
trouble the peace of the Church of England, and separate from her Communion, --
Who whilst they endeavor to reduce the Church of England to that model and
form which they have fancied, disturb her peace, which we heartily rejoice to
see restored among you. To which I will add his Words in his Letter to the
Bishop of Ely, A. D. 1572. I would never have sent my Son into England, the
only Son by my Wife Zuinglia, (whose memory is dear to me) except I had
thoroughly persuaded my self of our consent and agreement.

Casaubon in his Ephemeris, A. D. 1610, Nov. 1st, in Moulin's Def. p. 7. has
this Prayer, Thou, O Lord Jesus, preserve the Church of England, and give a
sound mind to the Nonconformists, who deride the Rites and Ceremonies of it.

The Learned Bochart in his Epistle to Durel. Those who refuse to communicate
with the Church of England, because of her Ceremonies are Schismatics; find
your Liturgy very good, and well ordered.

Capellus in These. Salm. de Liturgia. Of late there arose in England, a
froward, scrupulous, and overnice, (not to say Superstitious) Generation of
Men, who not only blame, but Cashire and Abolish the Liturgy used hitherto in
their Church, -- for causes very trivial and almost of no moment at all, -- the
Lord grant that they may come to a better mind.

Mr. Claude in his Letter published by Dr. Stilling fleet. The Dissenters
holding their Assemblies apart, separating from the public Assemblies, etc. is
real Schism, odious to God and Man, of which the Authors and Patrons cannot
avoid rendering an account before the Tribunal of God.

Mr. Le Moyne, in his Letter A. D. 1660, published by Durell. If ever any made
their ungratefulness notorious, they are the English opposers of Episcopacy. --
What good have these troublers of Israel, that are so contrary to Bishops done,
for well nigh Twenty Years, that they have ruled? Have not all things grown
worse? Heresy grown bold? -- Did ever Satan work more mischief than since the
time that these Men became Masters, -- for a reunion of all the foreign
Reformed Churches the King of England must preserve the Bishops. And in his
Letter published by Dr. Stillingfleet. -- Whence is it that some English Men
have so ill an opinion of the Church of England, and divide rashly from her, as
they do? Is not this to divide from all the Ancient Churches, from all the
Protestant Churches, which have always had a very great respect for the purity
of that of England? -- I look upon these Men as Disturbers of the State and
Church, and who are doubtlesly animated by a Spirit of Sedition; -- Societies
composed of such Persons, would be extremely dangerous, and could not be
suffered without opening the Gate to disorder, and advancing toward ones own
ruin, -- to cantonize themselves and make a Schism, to have the liberty to
vent such vanities, is very ill conduct.

Mr. Goyon in his Letter published by Durell. Those are in a Dream and dote,
who have an Opinion that the Conscience is wounded by living under the English
Liturgy; and they wrong us very much, when they quote us to foment a Schism
extremely scandalous.

And thus I have given the judgments of the most eminent Men of the Reformed
Religion, of France, Holland and Geneva, and showed what opinion they have of
the Church of England as by Law established, and what opinion they have of the
Dissenters from it; and whoever seriously considers these things, will find no
reason for us to alter our establishment, in order to an union and compliance
with the foreign Reformed Churches. Its hard to meet with any one considerable
Protestant Writer that speaks ill of the Church of England, besides the
Dissenters that live amongst us, and some few that have been prejudiced by
them. And should we compare the Eulogies and Praises that these Foreign Divines
give the Church of England, with the opprobrious Language it generally receives
from our own own Dissenters, we must conclude that they and the Foreign Divines
are not of the same judgment. I will mention only the Divines of the Savoy
Conference, p. 3. where we have their Synodical Judgment in these words; We
take the Common Prayer to be a Defective, Disorderly and inconvenient mode of
Worship, it would be a Sin to use it, etc. How different is their Language from
that of the Foreign Divines?

But lest it be objected that these are only general Expressions I have
mentioned, and that notwithstanding all this, the Foreign Churches would be
glad to have these Alterations made which have been proposed; I will next
consider most of the things that have been insisted on to be changed, and see
whether the Foreign Reformed Churches will be better pleased with them as they
now are, or as those that delight in change would have them. And because the
Calendar is the first thing insisted on to be altered, we will begin with that;
and first the Reading of Apocryphal Chapters in the Church, and especially the
Book of Tobit, by which (says one of them,) we give too much countenance to
the Church of Rome, and supplant Canonical Scripture, etc. Now to see how very
little reason is for this Objection, let it be observed,

1. That our Church always calls these Books Apocryphal, and thereby
sufficiently distinguishes them from the Canonical, and her self from Popery.

2. In the Thirty Nine Articles of Religion, she declares, That she reads them
for example of Life and instruction of Manners, but yet does not apply them to
establish any Doctrine.

3. All our Divines that have written upon this Subject, especially Reynolds
and Cosins, have so Learnedly and unanswerably baffled the Papists, that they
have never thought good to reply to them.

4. Our Church has taken so great care in this matter to avoid giving offense,
that several of these Books are never Read in the Church at all, as the
Maccabees, Books of Esdras, Prayer of Manasseh, and the famous Fifth Chapter of
Tobit, about him and his Dog, which has been left out of our Church from the
beginning of King James the 1st, almost an 100 Years; the other Books that are
ordered to be Read in the Church, are never read on Sundays, but only Weekdays.

Now our Church in allowing of them sometimes to be Read, does much better
agree with the Primitive Church, than she would if they were shut quite out;
for it is certain that they publicly Read them. Athanasius, or the Author of
the Synopsis calls them (...), etc. not received into the Canon, but read in
the Church, Ruffinus in Symb. Alii libri sunt qui non Canonici sed
Ecclesiastici a majoribus appellati sunt, Tobit, Judeth, etc. quae omnia legi
quidem in Ecclesia voluerunt, non tamen Professi ad Authoritatem fidei
confirmandam. i. e. There are Books which are not Canonical but Ecclesiastical,
as Tobit, Judeth, etc. all which are read in the Church, but not produced to
confirm any Article of Faith. Which is exactly agreeable to the words of St.
Hierom in his Preface to his Commentary upon Proverbs, and which are quoted and
approved of by our Church in the Thirty Nine Articles. Gregorius Magnus in
Moral. l. 19. c. 13. Art. 6, may speak for the succeeding Ages, where he calls
these Books, though not Canonical, yet published for the Edification of the
Church. That they were Read in the African Churches, appears from one of the
Carthaginian Councils, at which St. Austine was present, 3 Carthag. Can. 47.
That they have been all along read in the Western Churches, appears from
Isidore de Eccles. Off. Rabanus de instit. Cler. etc. And lastly, the
Lectionarius published by Pamelius, and which goes under the name of St.
Hierom, and has been of great Use and Authority in the Western Churches, gives
an account of particular days, when particular places of the Apocryphal Books
were appointed to be read in the Church. As to the Greek Church, besides the
author of the Synopsis already mentioned, Origene in his Epistle to Affricanus
says, that the history of Susannah was read (...), in every Church of Christ.
And again, (...), the Churches make use of the book of Tobit. And as to their
present practice, besides their (...) printed at Venice, A. D. 1596. which
contains their several lessons for the whole year, and has several taken out
of the Apocrypha, we have the express authority of one that lived amongst them,
Mr. Rycaut in his History of the Greek Church, p. 372. In the Greek Church they
receive the Apocryphal Books as we do in England. In the Ethiopick Churches
they read the Athcpocryphal Books, as appears from Ludolfus's History of those
Churches; and lastly, by the works of Hippolytus, Origin, St. Chrysostom, St.
Hierome, Theodore^, Asterius, Leo Magnus, and others, it appears that the
Fathers not only wrote Comments upon these books, but frequently preached upon
them, and took their Texts thence; not to mention that Conradus Pelican,
Drusius, and some other Reformed Divines, have without any offense wrote
comments upon them as upon other parts of the Bible.

If from this general agreement of all the Christian Churches in the World, we
consider in the last place the judgment of the Reformed Churches, we shall find
them also agree with us. 1. For the Lutheran Churches they gerally use them as
we do, and Alsted in Theol. Pol. p. 287. gives this account of them, that they
are sacri secundum quid, and populare quadam ratione, and merito proxime a vere
divinis locum obtinere possunt, i. e. that they are in a sense sacred, and
deserve the next place to the Canonical Scriptures. And Chemnitius in examen.
post. 1. de. ser. can. speaking of the Apocryphal Books, says, A fidelibus in
Ecclesiis leguntur, i. e. they are read by the Orthodox in the Churches. And
then for the Churches of the Calvinists, first hear Calvin himself in
Psychopannichia, Melius nos decent sacrae literae, corpus quod corrumpitur
aggravat animam, i. e. the holy Writings teach us better, that the corruptible
body oppresses the Soul. And yet those Sacred Writings are the book called the
Wisdom of Solomon, from whence that sentence is taken. Conradus Pelicanus, in
his preface to his Comments upon the Apocryphal Books, says of them that they
are Ecclesiastici ac Biblici and in Ecclesia Catholica ab Apostolorum
temporibus fuerint cum reverentia lecti, i. e. these books are read in the
Church, and bound up with our Bibles, and have with reverence been read in all
Christian Churches from the very time of the Apostles, and he was a famous
Professor at Zurich. Lud. Capellus in These. Salm. expressly approves of the
Declaration of our Church in her 39 Articles, and says that profit may come to
the Church by their being read publicly; and so they were read in the
Primitive times for the instruction of manners. Episcopius Professor at Leyden,
in Tom. 2. Part. 2. p. 75. though the Apocryphal Books cannot serve to confirm
an Article of Faith, yet may profitably be read in 'the Church. And indeed, of
the Dutch Churches, we have their solemn judgment declared in the Synod of
Dort. Art. 6. We make a difference betwixt the Canonical and Apocryphal Books,
which last are the 3d and 4th of Esdras, Tobit, Judeth, etc. which the Church
may read, and take instructions in them agreeable to Canonical Scripture: The
Bibles of Holland, Geneva, and other reformed Churches, have these books
printed Quere in Deodats, and Ju(...) Bibles.
and bound up with the Canonical as we have; and in the Preface to the
Apocryphal Books, they commend the very sentences of Ruffinus and St. Hierom,
which declare for the public reading of them in the Churches. And the like is
done by the Publishers of the Harmony of the Confessions of all the Reformed
Churches Printed at Geneva; and lastly, the Reformed Churches of France, in
their Book of Discipline, p. 391. have this rule, Les livres de la Bible soit
Canonique ou autres ne seront transformez en Comedies ou Tragedies, i. e. the
books of the Bible, whether Canonical or others, shall not be used in Plays; in
which Words, they first call these Apocryphal books part of the Bible, and then
take care that they be not profaned. And thus it is evident, that all the
Primitive and Purer Ages of the Church, all the Eastern, Western, and African
Churches, all the Lutheran and Calvinistical Churches beyond Sea, do either
read these books publicly in their Churches, or very expressly approve of it;
nor is there any one instance of any Reformed Church that since the
Reformation, read them publicly as we have done, but still continues to do so;
and our English Dissenters are condemned by all the Churches in the World, in
leaving them out of their Bibles, who were the first body of Christians, as far
as I can find, that ever did so.

To make this the more evident, I shall here give a Catalogue of the public
large Bibles, of all the Countries I could meet with; in all which, upon
examination, I find the Apocryphal added, for the same intent as in ours, viz.
For the Example of Life, and the Instruction of Manners.

A Catalogue of Bibles Printed with the Apocrypha.
English, with Archbishop Cranmer's Preface, Land. 1541. By Coverdale, Land.
1550. By Command of Q. Eliz. Land. 1578. Welsh, Land. 1588 Scotch, Edinburgh.
1596. English translated by Wicliff a M. S. with a Prologue, in which are these
words, Holy Church reads, Judeth, and Toby, and the Books of Maccabees, but
receives not them among Holy Scriptures; so the Church reads the two Books
Ecclesiastici and Sapience, to edify the People, not to confirm the Authority
of Teaching. Bohemian, 1613. Danish at Copenhagen, 1550. French at Geneva, 1588
At Amsterdam, 1669 German, 1604 Of Luther's Translation. Heidelberg, 1617 Dutch
at Frankfurt, 1580 Armenian at Amsterdam, 1666 Spanish by Protestants,
Amsterdam, 1602. Hungarian, by the Protestant Bishops of Hungary, at Hannover
and Oppenheim, 1608 Muscovitish at Ostrogoth, 1581 Italian by Deodate, 1607
Latin, by Castalion, dedicated to King Edward the 6th. Bas. 1573 By Junius,
dedicated to William Prince of Orange, 1592 By Robert Stephens, Paris, 1540
Critici Sacri 9 Tomis Land. 1666 Hebrew. Polyglott. (...) Land. 1567
Septuagint. Syrtach. Vulgar Latin.
And indeed, amongst all the Bibles which I have seen, I find them only left
out in the Spanish Bible, examined by the Inquisitors, printed at Ferara 1553,
and that of New England, in the Virginian Tongue, printed at Cambridge in
New England 1663. So that if to comply with our English Dissenters, we must
strike out these Apocryphal books, I know no Bibles we shall follow, but that
of the Inquisitors of Spain, and the Commissioners of New England.

And to conclude this head, I shall put down these five observations:

First, That no Papist ever made use of this as an Argument that our Church
owned these Books as Canonical, so that there could be no feal ground for this
objection.

Secondly, That there neither is, nor ever was any one Christian Church in the
whole World that had set Lessons appointed for every day in the year, as we
have, but some of them were taken out of the Apocrypha.

Thirdly, That no one foreign Church whatsoever did ever declare themselves
offended with the Church of England in this matter, but as I have showed,
generally approve it.

Fourthly, That these very persons who complain of our reading Apocryphal
Chapters for Lessons, make no complaint of having Hymns printed in their Bibles
before and after David's Psalms in meeter, and being frequently used in the
Church instead of them. Which is agreeable to the practice of Holland, where
that Church before Sermon sings a Hymn, composed by one John Wittenhaven, as we
do any one of our Psalms.

Fifthly, That the great Promoters of this objection do not stop here, but urge
it to the laying aside Sermons and Homilies, as not being within the Canon;
yea, and the Scripture and Lessons themselves, and as we have reason to fear
laying aside all public service whatsoever. T. C. in his admonition, p. 221.
would have no Homilies read in the Church, because nothing but the voice of
God, and holy Scriptures, should sound in his Church; and this will destroy
Sermons and Preaching also. The Author answered by Bishop Nicolson in his
Apology, p. 184. is angry with our Church for reading two Lessons, and would
have but one: And that Lesson also is in danger by the Author of the Letter to
the Convocation, p. 21. where he proposes the leaving out the first Lesson in
the Afternoon upon short days, and in Country Parishes to read Prayers without
Lessons.

So that upon the whole, however it seems to some a small, to others a
reasonable matter, I do not say to leave out, for then that should have been
done at first, but to reject the Apocryphal Lessons, yet in this we shall
separate from the Primitive, the Eastern, Western and African Churches, from
most of the Reformed Churches; we must alter the 39 Articles of Religion, which
have been so generally received and applauded, for they declare that the Church
does read them. We must alter our Apologies and Canons, for there (Canon. 30.
Juells Apol. p. 170.) it is declared, that it was so far from the purpose of the
Church of England to forsake and reject the Churches of Italy, France, Spain,
Germany, and other Churches, in all things which they hold and practiced, that,
as the Apology of the Church of England confesses, it only departed from them
in those particular points, wherein they were fallen both from themselves in
their ancient integrity, and from the Apostolical Churches. To this agrees the
Apology for Protestants, by a French Divine, and translated A. D. 1681. p. 23.
As to the reproach cast upon our first Reformers, it is one of the greatest
injustices in the world, for nothing can be clearer from their own writings,
than that it was never their intent to subvert the ancient Government of the
Church, nor to abolish those Religious Rites and Holy Ceremonies, which the
piety of the primitive Christians had introduced, but only to take away the
abuses of them. So that in making unnecessary changes in these things, we shall
destroy the very foundation and principle of the Reformation. And that this
rule is properly applied to the matter in hand, is evident from the declaration
of our Church at the beginning of the Liturgy, where the reading of the Lessons
as is appointed, is called a godly and decent order of the ancient Fathers --
agreeable to the mind and purpose of the old Fathers. Upon all which accouuts
it is evident, that we ought not to consent to the taking away the Apocryphal
Lessons, and that the Reformed Churches do not desire it of us.

Secondly, As to the Rules and Tables for finding Easter, great objections have
been raised against our Church, and some Eminent Dissenters have declared that
they could not give their assent and consent to our Liturgy, because these were
false. Now by false they do not mean that they are contrary to Scripture, for
there are no Rules in the New Testament for this purpose, and that in the Old,
for finding their first Months in the Year, by the approaching Harvest, and
Offering their First Fruits on the sixteenth of the first Month, cannot
possibly agree to us whose Harvest is not ripe till the latter part of the
year. But by false, they generally mean that they are not agreeable to
themselves, and whereas our rule to find Easter is to keep it on the first
Sunday, after the first full Moon, after the twenty first of March, by our very
Tables as they say it appears that we frequently keep it otherwise. Now this is
a great mistake, and shows the Ignorance of those that object it. The Fathers
met at the first Council of Nice, and those before that time also did generally
agree, that Easter Day should always be kept on the Sunday, the day of Christ's
Resurection, and therein the Christians differed from the Jews, who kept the
Passover any day of the Week. They also agreed to keep it after the Vernal
Equinox, and in this they agreed with the Elder Jews, Aristobulus, the Author
of the Book of Enoch, Philo, etc, as it is observed by Anatolius in Eusebius.
And lastly, at or after the full Moon, according as God ordered the observation
of the Passover in the Book of Exodus. Now because these were great disputes
about the precise day of the Venral Equinox, and Astronomers have not yet
learned to Calculate a New Mood exactly, and one quarter of an hour near the
division of a Day, may make the New Mood a day sooner or later, therefore the
Fathers in the Nicene Council, and other Learned Men since, have esteemed it
the best way to appoint a fixed Equinox, and a perpetual rule for the discovery
of the New Mons, which if in long Tract of time should vary from the true
Equinox, and the true New Mons; yet such error would not create that
difference and disorder in the Church, which continually arose by their several
Calculations, and this was called the Ecclesiastical New Mood. All Wise men
constantly observing that it was not a matter of so great moment, whether we
kept Easter a little sooner or later, so that all Churches would agree in the
same time, and there might be no Schism in the body. Now the Equinox was fixed
by the Nicene Council on the twenty first of March, and that has been
constantly observed by all Christian Churches of the World, as the Vernal
Equinox, till A. D. 1582. when it was altered by Pope Gregory the 13th, which
was since the beginning of our Reformation, and our rejecting the Papal
Supremacy. Then for the discovery of the New Mons for ever, they having
observed that the New Mons after 19 years returned to the same days of the
Month, in a Julian year, and very near the same time of the day, they made a
Cycle of New Mons for 19 years according to the skill of the best Calculators
of that Age, and ordered that Cycle to be of perpe^ual use in the Church for
the discovery of the Paschal New Mons. Which for its great use, and
establishing peace and union in the Christian Churches, was put down in all
their Kalendars in Golden Letters, and thence called the Golden number. Ambrose
Epist. 83. Majores nostri convenientes ad Synodum Nicaenam congregatis
peritissimis calculandi, novemdecem annorum collegere rationem, and quasi
quendam constituere circulum, quem Enneadecaterida vocant, etc. Dionys. Exig.
Ep. 1. Venerabiles 318 Pontifices qui Nicaeae convenerent 14mas lunas paschalis
observantiae per 19 annorum circulum stabiles, immotesque fixerunt, quae
cunctis saeculis eodem quo reponuntur Exordio sine varietatis labuntur excursu,
etc.

Our Church likewise has taken care to print this very Cycle of New Mons in
the first Column of her Calendar, see Isidor. Orig. p. 967. by which the
Ecclesiastical Full-Moon is discovered. And to make all plain, in our great
Church Bibles, this is explained in these words; The Golden number is so
called, because it was written in the Calendar with letters of Gold, right at
the day whereon the Moon changed, and it is the space of 19 years, etc. And
though in this space of almost 1300 years since that Council, this Cycle of New
Moons is too late for the true New Mons in the Heavens by 4 days and some
hours, yet no Christian Church in the world did go about to disturb the peace
and quiet of the Church in such a trivial matter, till it was about 100 years
since very Schismatically altered by Pope Gregory. To bring this matter to a
Conclusion, let it be observed,

First, That our Calendar is agreeable to it self, and if we find the New Mons
according to this ancient and authentic Cycle, we always keep Easter the first
Sunday after the first Full-Moon, after the Vernal Equinox fixed upon the 21st
of March.

Secondly, That in following this method we agree with all the Christian
Churches in the World, from the Council of Nice, to A. D. 1582. i. e. for the
space of near 1200 years.

Thirdly, That we now agree with the Greek Church and all the Eastern
Christians who keep Easter at the same time as we do. (For the Greek and
Armenian Churches, see Mr. Rycaut, p. 416: for Ethiopick Churches see Ludolfus,
etc.) And withal those Protestants whose Reformation was established by the
consent and agreement of the Regal authority before the alteration made by Pope
Gregory.

Fourthly, It Is an opinion very agreeable to the peace and union of Christian
Churches that that which has been once established by an Universal Council,
ought not to be altered by a Provincial Synod, and this matter having been
famously settled by the first general Council, and that also as to this
particular confirmed by several others, and by the first Council of Antioch all
ordered to be excommunicated that disobeyed it, we ought not to make
alterations. And I pray let it be observed that our Church did by her
representatives give consent to some of those very Councils. At the Council of
Arles in France, A. D. 314. were present three English Bishops, and the very
first Canon agreed on there was this, Ut uno die and tempore Pascha celebretur,
i. e. That Easter should be every where kept the same day. Which seems to have
been the very first resolution about this matter in the Council of Nice. Eusebius.
vit. Constable. l. 3. c. 18. And Constantines Letter giving an account of the first
Council at Nice, expressly gives us the agreement also of the British Churches,
to the keeping Easter after that method. Eusebius. vit. constable. l. 3. c. 19.
Socrates Hist. p. 285.

Lastly, let it be considered, before we change, how we shall alter, for either
we must follow the new method of the Church of Rome, and the Decree of Pope
Gregory, and therein we shall not only take away our agreement with the Greek
and Eastern Churches, but shall more than ever be cried out against by the
Dissenters, for complying with the Church of Rome. Or else we must establish a
particular method of our own, and that would look very ill, and far from
promoting the peace and union of Christian Churches, that in a thing so very
indifferent in its own nature, we should fall from and contradict all the
Christian Churches in the World. How much such an alteration would tend to
promote Faction and Schism, I leave all the World to judge.

I pass by the silly objection of our keeping two Easters in one year. For if
by year we mean the exact revolution of 365 days, according to all rules now
used in the Christian World, we must keep two Easters in one year, every third
year, or thereabouts. Or if we mean that we keep two Easters betwixt one 25th
of March, and the next, this may be easier mended by beginning our year only at
Jan. first, as is the more usual way, and so there is never two Easters in one
Almanac. And if we kept Easter according to the true New Mons, and the true
Equinox, the same objection would continue, and always must so long as our
beginning of the year is betwixt the Paschal Terms, whereof the first was
always fixed at the Equinox, which now happens before the 25th of March, this
being the nature of movable Feasts.

I may very well pass by also the objecting of the Saints and Bishops Names
continued in our Calendar, which as it is generally used in the Lutheran
Churches, so is evidently done for a Civil, and not any Religious use, as has
been long since declared in the Preface to Pieces Privatae published by
authority, A. D. 1573. The words are, Not that we repute them all for Saints or
holy men, but that they may be as notes of some certain things, and fixed
seasons, the knowledge of which is very beneficial; of which sort are Hilary,
Valentine, David, St. George, Martin, Swithin, Lammas, Giles, Holyrood,
Evispine, All Souls, Leonard. Cicilia, O Sapientia, etc.

And so as far as I can see, the only way to continue peace and union amongst
our selves, and with other Protestant Churches, is to continue the Calendar as
it is.

Pass we next to the grand objection against the old version of the Psalms,
used in the Common Prayer Book, and the way proposed for the amending it, not
by taking that of our Bibles, which is not liked, but a more correct one in
their hands. So the Author of a Letter from the Country, p. 6. The Psalter
added to our Liturgy, is not now so defensible, when there is a more correct in
our hands -- then complains of its manifold variations from the Hebrew, and
frequently mistaking the sense -- this must needs create no little scruple in
Men's minds, by having inconsistent and differing Translations. Again, p. 13. in
comparing the two Translations of the Psalms, we find them in some things
inconsistent, and one time the one to deny what the other affirms, viz. Psalm.
105. 28. And again, the Letter to the Convocation, p. 15. must we be forced to
read the old Translation of the Psalms, and impose that on the people for true
Scripture, which in so great a number of places quite differs from it? Here is
in all this complaint not one word of the singing Psalms, which are not only
different in Words, and Phrases, from both of them, but in the sense also, as
being composed from a more ancient English Version than either of them. And so
the Protestant Churches of France continue to Sing the Psalms according to
Marrot's composition, full of uncouth words and expressions, Apol. for Prot. p.
76. and read their Bible according to a Version made at the beginning of the
Reformation. p. 82. which looks as if the Authors of these Objections were of a
Presbyterian Original, i. e. have a great Veneration for Hopkins and Sternhold,
and a natural antipathy to the Common Prayer. However weighty this Argument be
to us at home, yet Foreigners are not concerned in it: And tho (however we do
not do it, most certainly the Parliament will) as says the Author of the
Letter to the Convocation, p. 23. It was far otherwise in Queen Elizabeth's
time, when the Convocation was very earnest upon this very design of altering
the Translation of the Psalms in the Liturgy, and were by the Parliament
seriously dissuaded from it. Hammond L'Estrange's Alliance of Divine Offices,
p. 75. But the best is, this confident guesser is here mistaken also, and our
old Translation has outlived that Parliament. Not to mention that if we lay
aside this Version, and take a new correct one, never yet Printed, into our
Liturgy, the objection remains as at first, and here may be as much difference
betwixt the Psalms in the Common Prayer, of a new more correct Edition, and
that in our Bibles, as is now. Nor was it ever proposed, or so much as hinted
in the Commission to the Convocation, to have a new Translation of the Bible.
As to the Translation used in the Liturgy, it is not made from the Version of
the Septuagint, nor from the Vulgar Latin, as is evident to any one that will
compare them. And King James's Translators of the Bible, declare of the meanest
of our English Translations of the Bible, that they were the Word of God. And
tho in some places, it seems rather to agree with the Septuagint, yet it seems
done chiefly in such places, where we have great reason to believe, that the
Septuagint is more correct, and more agreeable, to the Original Hebrew. So
Psalm 14. 5, 6, 7. are not in our present Hebrew Bibles, but yet are quoted
thence by St. Paul, Romans 3. 10, 11, 12, 13, etc. and Psalm. 51. 4. our
Common Prayer reads it -- and clear when thou art judged; agreeable to St.
Paul, Romans 3. 4. but the Version used in our Bibles is different from both:
Clear when thou judge.

And if we would but take the pains to compare both Translations of the Psalms,
with the common Version of the New Testament, it will be easy to find many
places where our old Translation is more agreeable to the New Testament; of
which take these few instances:

Mat. 1. 43. He trusted in God, let him deliver him now if he will have him.

Psalm. 22. 8. in the Liturgy. He trusted in God, that he would deliver him, let
him deliver him if he will have him.

Psalm. 22. 8. in the Bible. He trusted on the Lord that he would deliver him,
let him deliver him, seeing he delighted in him.

Romans 10. 18. Their sound went into all the earth, and their words unto the
ends of the world.

Psalm. 19. 4. in the Liturgy. Their sound is gone out into all lands, and their
words into the ends of the world.

Psalm. 19. 4. in the Bible. Their line is gone out through all the earth, and
their words to the end of the world.

Romans 11. 10. And bow down their back always.

Psalm. 69. 24. in the Liturgy. And ever bow down their backs.

Psalm. 69. 23. in the Bible. And make their loins continually to shake.

1 Pet. 3. 11. Let him eschew evil.

Psalm. 34. 14. in the Liturgy. Eschew evil.

Psalm. 34. 14. in the Bible. Depart from Evil.

So that it was no doubt, the wisdom of those that compiled this Version in our
Liturgy, to consider the Authentic Translation made by the Holy Ghost in the
New Testament; and if we should admit the same Version of the Psalms into the
Liturgy, which is in the Bible, these men of scruples might be at as great a
loss to reconcile the Psalms, and the second Lesson, read presently after them,
as they now are to reconcile the two Versions of the Psalms, and at as great a
loss to reconcile both with the Singing Psalms, which were certainly composed
by as old, or older Version, than that in the Common Prayer Book.

As to that one place, Psalm. 105. 28. which has been often urged by the
Presbyterians, from the very days of Queen Eliz. and as often answered, so that
I cannot but admire at the ignorance of the diligent Will. Prynne in this
matter, who in his Pacifick Examination of the Common Prayer, p. 6. where
having proposed this objection against the Translation of Psalm 105. 28. tells
us, that it was occasioned by the Printers omission of one syllable, to wit,
Obedient for Disobedient, not the Translators. But to pass this by, Hooker and
Fuller, in Miscel. show that the Translation in the Liturgy best agrees with
the Hebrew, and their judgment is comfirm'd by the Septuagint, Syriack,
Arabic, and Ethiopick Versions. In the old Latin Versions it was read both
ways, as St. Austin observes, Tom. 8. enarrat. in Psalm. and yet it made no
disturbance in the Church, in that or the following ages. Not to mention that
both Versions are very good sense, and not at all contradictory, in the
Liturgy, they were not obedient, refers to the Egyptians, mentioned v. 27. In
the Bible, they rebelled not, refers to Moses and Aaron, v. 26. and even so our
old Version is to be preferred, it being more natural for a Verb to refer to
the last verse, than the last but one; but both are very good sense, and as
properly retained in our Church, as the different readings were by the Jews
preserved in their Bibles. And whoever shall give himself the trouble to
compare the Versions of the Bible, shall have far greater objections than this,
Deuteronomy. 21 12. She shall pare her nails; in the Margent of our Bibles, She shall
let them grow. Gal. 2. 3. in the Greek, Titus was not circumcised. In many
Latin copies, Titus was circumcised. And again, v. 5. in the Greek, To whom we
have not yielded, in the Latin, To whom we have yielded; and this latter was
used by Ireneus, l. 3. c. 13. a Greek Father. By Tertullian, l. 5. in Marcion.
p. 463. St. Ambrose in locum, etc. and many of the Fathers, as St. Hierom,
Primasius, Sedulius, Haymo, etc. freely take notice of both readings.

I might instance also in 1 Cor. 15. 51. where some read, We shall all sleep;
of which St. Hierom has a large discourse. Also in Mat. 2. 6. compared with
Micab 5. 2. and many other places; not to mention what those very Translators
of the Bible, whose Version is contended for, declared, That they in many
places set diversity of senses in the Margin, for that to determine of such
things as the Spirit of God has left (in the judgment of Judicious)
questionable, can be no less than presumption: As St. Austin says, That
variety of Translations is profitable for finding out the sense of the
Scriptures, so diversity of sense in the Margin, where the Text is not so
clear, must needs do good; yea, is necessary as we are persuaded.

But if any Learned Person has taken pains to make a more correct Version than
either of these the English Church now uses, I hope he will not envy the
Church the benefit of his labors, but will make it public, as Rob. Gell.
Printed an Essay toward the amendment of the English Translation of the Bible,
Land. 1659. But I can by no means think it proper to have it proposed to the
Convocation, who upon some short examination of it, should Authorize it. When
the Clergy are called to the Convocation, they are most of them remote from
their Boods, and in London want leisure to examine the many difficulties that
will arise. St. Hierom made a more exact Translation of the Psalms than that
the Latin Church before used; he made it public, and proposed it to the care
and study of Learned Men to examine it, and when an Universal Approbation had
for some Ages given it Authority, it was at last received into the Church,
instead of the other, but not till some hundreds of years after the time of St.
Hierom. And when Gregory the Great, about the year 600, composed Hymns for the
use of the Church, it was out of the old Version of the Psalms. Nor can it seem
strange that the same Church should use two different Versions of the Psalms,
for this was done in all the Western Churches, in the time of Gregory the
Great, who in his Epistle Dedicatory, in the beginning of his Comments upon
Job, says, Seeds Apostolica utraque utitur; the Roman Church uses both
Editions. Leander, in Spain, about the same age, wrote a comment upon both
Versions; and Card. Bona tells us, that the old Version was in frequent use
till the time of Pius V. is still used in the Church of the Vatiean, and
continued in their Breviaries. When only a Catechism was composed, not by a
single person, but a whole Assembly of Divines, at Westminster, it was Printed
and sent about, and public intimation made to the Assembly in Scotland, that
whoever had any objections, might put them in. And when a great many Learned
Men were called together, by King James l. to correct and review the
Translation of the Bible, they were no less than three years about it, as they
themselves tell us in their Preface: So that I heartily desire that Reverend
person would publish his new Version, and when time and an universal
approbation has given it authority, it may be received into the use of the
Church, not in the Common Prayer Book only, but Bible also. And this has been
done by several who have made excellent composures of the Singing Psalms, and
far better than those we now use, and yet the prudence of our Church has not
yet thought fit to give any one of them the stamp and seal of authority; for
this reason chiefly, because the Church has been long used to these, she has
and can sing many of them by heart. which as it is the best reason for the
continuance of the old Singing Psalms, so is much more a reason for the
continuance of that Version in our Liturgy, which is also sung in our
Cathedrals and Colleges, and is much better than the other. Psalterio Hieronymi
ex Hebraicis p^propagato Ecclesia Romana locum non concessit, quia veteri
certis constricto numeris modulando assuetae Christianorum aures, universeque
adeo Ecclesiae alterius novitatem far nunquam potuerunt. Huetius de
interpret. p. 109. Not to mention that in the year 1660, there was far greater
reason to take the new Translation, which only had been in use for 12 years
together, into the Liturgy, than to do it now; the old Edition has been in
constant use for thirty years together, and yet that wise Convocation refused
to do it then.

The Translation of the Bible, made in the time of King James I. was upon the
importunate complaints of the Puritans, that they could not subscribe to the
Common Prayer Book, since it maintained the Bible as it was there Translaed,
which was, as they said, a most corrupted Translation; and yet they were some
of the first that quarrelled at it, as soon as it was made, and few or none
conformed upon that account; and the Papists presently clamoured against us for
altering our Translation so ost. And the very Translators, after they had
examined all the old, and made a new Translation, declared, That there was no
need of a new Translation, nor of a bad one, to make a good one, but only to
make a good one better.

Next let us consider the project of leaving out the Athanasian Creed,
occasioned by 4 four questions proposed against it, whereof the last is from
the Council of Ephesus, against all additions being made to the Creed, and so
strikes at the whole Creed, as well as the condemning Sentences. Letter from
the Country, p. 14, 15. Must we always pronounce all damned, that do not
believe every tittle of Athanasius' s Creed, Letter to the Convecation, p. 15.
And both these give ample encouragement to that Heretical and virulent Book,
which at that very time was published against that Creed, and no less against
the Trinity it self; the Book sold openly, many of them were given about, and
magnified by the party, without any control of that sort of men of
Latitudinarian principles, till at length it received a just censure from the
honest Clergy of the lower House of Convocation; tho at that very time, to the
admiration and scandal of all sober men, that very censure was there also by
great and leading men opposed. It Is objected by the Author of the Letter from
the Country, p. 14. he finds a great dispute between the Greek and Latin
Church, about the procession of the Holy Ghost from the Son, now the first
question is, whither of these two Churches be in the right? Now the prosession
of the Holy Ghost from the Son is in the Nice Creed also, received in our
Liturgy, and confirmed by the 39 Articles of our Religion, and Art. 5. expressly
declares, that the Holy Ghost proceeds from the Father and the Son, and so
here is an Article of Faith called into question. Not to mention the exact
Harmony and Union of all the Protestant Churches of the World in this point. I
except only Arrians, Socinians, and such other Heretics who ought not to be
called Protestants. And therefore the leaving out of the Athanasian Creed upon
such a reason must needs give great offense to all the Protestant Churches in
the World. More particularly the Athanasian Creed is at this day approved of
and Authorized, by the Confession of the Reformed Churches of France, first
Published A. D. 1561. We receive the three Creeds, Apostles, Nicene and
Athanasian Creed, because they are agreeable to the word of God. By the Belgic
Confession of the Synod of Dort. Art. 9. we willingly receive the three Creeds,
the Apostles, Nicene, and Athanasian Creeds. By the Confession of the of the
Churches of Saxony, Art. 1. we have always constantly embraced the three
Creeds, and their natural sense, and by Gods help we will always embrace them.
By the Confession of Wirtenberg, Art 1. we believe one God and three Persons,
as they are explained in the three Creeds, the Apostles, Nicene and Athanasius'
s. By the Confession of the Palatine Churches, Art. 1. we believe all things
contained in the Holy Scriptures, as they are explained in the Apostles Creed,
Nicene and Athanasius' s. By the Confession of the Bohemian Churches, Art. 3.
particularly we receive the Nicene and Athanasian Creeds. By the Confession of
the Churches of Poland and Lithuania, who A. D. 1645. expressly received the
Nicene and Athanasian Creeds. The Russian Churches receive and use these three
Creeds, after the Psalms for the day, the Priest reads the Ten Commandments,
and Athanasius' s Creed out of the Service Book. Pagi^t Christianogr. p. 81.
The very Directory drawn up by the Presbyterians at the Savoy A. D. 1661. p.
26. orders the Athanasian Creed to be read in the Church, and lastly when some
Arrians would have had Beza left it out at Geneva, he returned this answer.
Epist. 56. certe in tuam gratiam non mutabitur in Ecclesia Symbolum Athanasij,
nec Nicenum cum nemo adhuc inventus est qui se opponeret quem Deus borrendo
judicio non per diderit. i. e. certainly for your sake the Church will not
change the Athanasian Creed or the Nicene, since no one ever yet opposed them,
whom God did not destroy.

Now let all the World consider what a strange way here is proposed for the
Union of all Protestant Churches to the Church of England, viz. by laying
aside, or leaving indifferent the use of this Creed, which all the Protestant
Churches in the World, even those of Geneva, Holland, and English
Presbyterians, do in their very Confessions of Faith and Devotions so heartily
retain and magnify.

Proceed we next to Baptism, and against this Office two things are objected,
1. The use of the Cross, 2. Godfathers.

1. Against the Cross, it is proposed by the Letter from the Country, p. 8. to
leave the case wholly indifferent, to use or not use the Cross. p 9 If the
Minister scruples the use of it, let another perform that Service; if any of
the Layety let the Minister baptize without it. And the Letter to the
Convocation, p. 9. the Cross in Baptism is become not only useless, but also
mischievous, -- occasions dissentions and schisms, is an ensign of War to make
us fight against each other, a Cross of torment whereon to crucify the Lord of
Life in his body the Church and rent its bowels asunder by those lamentable
divisions which it causes amongst us, -- the Church of England cannot be
guiltless if she do not something herein, etc. It Is a sad thing that the Cross
of Christ should produce all this difference amongst Christians. Well then, let
us take away the use of the Cross in Baptism, and see whether there is likely
to be a greater Union amongst the Christians. Ask all Churches of the World
from Christ's time to the beginning of the Reformation, and they generally all
of them used the Cross in Baptism for 1500 years, and its strange that all the
Christian Churches, for so many years should be guilty of so dangerous an evil,
as the sign of the Cross in Baptism, nor do I know of any one Church in the
World that condemned, or so much as showed their dislike of it for 1500 years.
And for the present age, it is still retained in all the Churches of the Roman
Communion, in all the Greek Churches, (Rycant. p. 168.) in the Churches of the
Jacobites, Brerewoods Enq. p. 153.) in the Churches of Egypt. Pagitt's
Chistianogr. p. 104. in the Abissine, or Ethiopian Churches, Ludolfi Hist.
AEthiop. l. 3. c. 6. in the Churches of the Muscovites (Joh. Faber. de relig.
Muscov.) in the Protestant Churches, of the Ausburg confession, the Sign of the
Cross is generally used in Baptism; and for the other Reformed Churches, not
one has declared themselves offended with us for using it, but several eminent
amongst them have declared for it. Bucer declared it an ancient and innocent
Rite, and that it might be decently and profitably used. The Learned Casaubon,
in his answer to Baronius, Exerc. 13. Sect. 33. commends our holy and prudent
Bishops, who have retained this use of the Cross amongst us. Peter Martyr
declared it lawful to profess our selves Christians by the Sign of the Cross.
Beza himself speaks favorably of it, in his book adversus Baldvinum. And
Goulartius of Geneva, declares it to be a ceremony indifferent. Apology for
Protestants by a French Divine, p. 87. Touching the Sign of the Cross, which
the Church of England retains, to understand it as they do, as a visible mark
that the Infant Baptized is enrolled as Christ's Soldier, should not be ashamed
to confess the Faith of Christ Crucified, and fight under his Banner -- I see
no ground at all of exception against this Ceremony.

And William Durel, in his Sermon on 1 Cor. 11. 16. had amongst other things,
given the Reformed of France an account of our using the Sign of the Cross; he
by several Letters from De L' Angle Bochart, Daille, and other eminent Divines
of the French Church, received its due praise and approbation. And now Gods
Providence has settled so many thousands of them amongst us, they readily and
willingly make use of it, and approve it.

Secondly, For Godfathers: I find them not only required in all the Eastern and
Western Churches, but more particularly, Zuinglus in his Book de Bapt. is much
for the use of them, and says, that the clamours raised against them, were
only by the Anabaptists.

Calvin, in the form of Baptism, composed for Geneva, and which is still used
there, requires Godfathers at Baptism, and they promise for the Child's
Christian Education, as in the Church of England. And in an Epistle to Farell,
he has these words, We require of the Godfathers, that they promise to see the
Children when grown up, instructed in the Faith they are Baptized in. If there
be no Godfathers, it is certain the Baptism is profaned.

Beza, in his Epistles, frequently declares for the use and necessity of them,
and particularly in Ep. 24. reckons them among the Constitutions of the Church
that bind the Conscience. And Epist. 8. to the Bishop of London, That Infants
be Baptized in the public Congregation, with a set form of Prayer, that there
be Godfathers to engage fortheir Christian Education, etc. these are plain and
honest Rites, such as give no occasion to Superstition, and who is there that
dare condemn them?

In the Laws of the Church of Geneva Sect. 38. The name of the Infant and
Godfather must be Registered by the Minister. (This was heretofore enjojned by
the Archbishop of Canterbury, in his Diocese; and I have seen some Registers in
that Diocese, whereby it appears that injunction was observed for some time,)
Sect. 39. None are to be Godfathers but the faithful, and those of our
Confession, Sect. 40. they that are suspended from the Lords Supper must not be
Godfathers.

In the Discipline of the Reformed Churches of France, chap. 11. Sect. 7. Tho
we have no express commandment of the Lord for Godfathers and Godmothers in
Baptism, yet because the custom is ancient, and introduced for a good end,
those that will not follow so good an example, but present their Infants
themseves, should be earnestly exhorted not to be contentious, but to behave
themselves according to this ancient custom, which is good and profitable.
Sect. 12th. The Minister shall diligently admonish the Godfathers and
Godmothers, to consider the promises they have made at the celebration of
Baptism, etc. and to this agrees the Synod of St. Foy, A. D. 1578. at Samues
1596. at Montpellier 1598. which last says that Godfathers are obliged not
only to instruct the Children in Piety, but also in case of necessity to
provide for their maintenance. Sect. 18th, the names of the Godfathers and
Godmothers of the Infant shall be registered. Which last thing of Registring
them as it is generally practiced by the reformed Churches abroad, so is very
agreeable to the practice of the Primitive Church, and particularly taken
notice of by Pseudo Dionysius the Areopagite. To all which I beg leave to add
the observation of Monsieur Larroque an eminent Minister of the French reformed
Church in his Book entitled, Conformite de la Discipline Ecclesiastique des
Protestants de France avec celle des anciens Chietiens. A. D. 1678 and p. 208.
he thus writes. L'usage des parriens, etc. i. e. the use of Godfathers and
Godmothers to present Children in Baptism is very ancient, Tertullian makes
mention of them in his book of Baptism. chap. 18. St. Austin in his 23d
Epistle, the pretended Denies, the Areopagite who tells us that they are of
Apostolic Institution. Gregory the 1st. in his book of the Sacraments.
Caesarius of Arles, in his 12th Homily, the SixthCanon of the Council of Mets.
A. D. 888. and indeed the subject of that whole Book is to justify their
Discipline from the antiquity of it, and agreement with the primitive Church. I
therefore mention this because Arguments of this nature are so very much
slighted by our own Dissenters. This author in the Title page of his book
prefixeth this sentence from the Laws of Theodosius, Statuimus observari quod
prisca Apostolica Disciplina and Canones veteres eloquuntur i. e. we command
that those things be observed which the Apostolic Church and old Canons
declare for and appoint. Which I think is more fully explained by St. Austin,
Epist. 118. ad Casulan. In iis rebus de quibus nihil statuit scriptura, mos
populi Dei, and instituta majorum pro lege Dei tenenda sunt; i. e. in such
things as the Scripture has not determined, the custom of the Christian
Church, and the constitutions of our Ancestors should be observed as the Law of
God. To return. Godfathers are also used in the Dutch, Rohemian, and all the
Lutheran Churches; the professors of L^yden in their Synopsis pur. Theol. p.
616. declare that though there is not an absolute necessity of witnesses in
Baptism yet the very nature of the thing, and the custom of all the Primitive
Church show it to be profit able, and is probably deduced from the practice of
the Jews, Is. 8. 2. Upon which place Junius in his Comment is very express,
hinc ritus noster adhibendi testes in Baptismo, i. e. hence came our custom of
using Godfathers in Baptism. For the use of Godfathers in the Church of the
Muscovites, see Joh: Faber de relig. Muscov. For the use of them in the
Ethiopian Churches, see Ludolfus. And now let even our adversaries be judges
whether the laying aside the use of Godfathers, or which amounts to the same
thing, leaving it as a matter indifferent to the Parents discretion and choice
whether he will have any or not, be not a very unlikely method for us to make
use of in this Kingdom in order to procure the peace and union of all the
Reformed Churches, who no doubt would be highly displeased and offended with us
should we do it.

Kneeling at the Sacrament has been often objected against by the Dissenters,
and the Letter to the Convocation, p. 12. would have us be so indulgent as to
give them the Sacrameut in their own way, and not debar them of it for the sake
of a posture, to do otherwise will be a Sin. The other Letter, p. 8. would have
it wholly indifferent to kneel, stand, or sit in the Lords Supper. p. 9. The
Person that scruples kneeling may have it delivered him in another posture in
his Pew, etc. And yet if all this was done we should not satisfy the
Presbyterians who declared at the Savoy, p. 61. That Kneeling at the Lords
Table is disorderly. And in the Directory. p. 34. The Communion Table is
ordered to be so placed that the Communicants may orderly sit about it. Now let
us go to the Foreign Protestant Churches and advise with them in this matter,
let us go into Denmark, Norway, Sweden, Germany, and advise with them and all
others strictly called Protestants, and they all receive the Sacrament
Kneeling. The confession of the Faith of the Bohemian Churches. Art. 13. Le the
ministers distribute the Sacrameut to the Communicants upon their Knees. And as
to their practice, it is to be seen in Comenius ratio Disciplinae, etc. Let
Hospinian speak for Zurick and the Swisse. Hist Sacr l. 5. c. 8. The Sacrament
ought to be received devoutly with bending Knees. At Geneva, and in the French
Churches, they refuse to administer the Sacrament to any one that sits, and now
they are so many of them in England, they all receive kneeling, which is
agreeable to the Apology for the Reformed Churches written by Monsseur Dallee,
chap. 12. p. 56. Thanks be to God we are not so ill taught as to scruple the
receiving the Sacrament on our Knees: Our Brethren of England never receive it
otherwise, and when we communicate with them we readily conform to their order.
Also Apology for Protestants written by a French Protestant. p. 88. We must
undoubtedly conclude it of great necessity, that the Communion should be
received Kneeling, as in the Church of England, and in Germany. -- And our
Reformers have still been of this opinion, and he quotes Beza, Calvin, Bucer,
and Peter Martyr for it. And the Genevians in their Annotations upon the
Harmony of Confessions are well contented that every Church should use their
Liberty in these points following, viz. Kneeling at the Communion, Organs, and
Ember-days, etc. See Bancrofts Survey. p. 358. 359.

The first Person that introduced sitting at the Sacrament in England was John
a Lasco an Arrian, and he was the chief Person that disturbed the Churches of
Poland with this slovenly, not to say Impious opinion, as appears from
Wengersicus's History of the Sclavonick Churches, p. 129. till at last in a
great Synod at Petricovia^i* A. D. 1578. It was agreed, That because sitting at
the Lord's Table is a Rite different from all the Reformed Churches in Europe,
and they amongst us were the first Authors of it, who rafhly changing every
thing in the Church fell away from us to Arrianism, therefore let us leave this
custom to them, who irreverently treat Christ and his Mysteries, I say let us
leave this custom as neither agreeing to Decency nor Religion, and to many
honest Persons extremely Scandalous. And again in another Synod at Wlodislavia,
Anno Dom. 1583. Sitting at the Lord's Table is forbidden in all the Churches of
Poland, Lithuania, etc. As not being used by those of the Reformed Religion,
and being peculiar to the Arrians. And that we have reason to have the same
fear in England, appears from the many Arrians and Socinians amongst us, and
more fully by the open Declarations of the Scotch Presbyterians against
Kneeling at the Sacrament, They would not at the Communion signify their
inferiority to Christ, nor abase themselves, but think themselves equals.
Assembly at Perth, p. 38.

It Is true, that the custom of Kneeling has been abused, in the Church of
Rome, to an Idolatrous Adoration of the Sacrament, and so has sitting and
standing also. The Priest that says Mass, receives the Sacrament standing,
and yet adores it. At Rome the Popes Deacon receives standing, and the Pope
himself receives it sitting. Card. Bona de rebus Liturg. p. 490. And Espencaeus
de^ Adorat. Euch. l. 2. c. 16. declares that the Sacrament may be adored,
sitting, standing, lying or kneeling. The care that was taken in the Churches
of Poland, was, that there should be an Authentic Declaration, that no
adoration of the Elements was intended by those that received kneeling, Harm.
confess. p. 237. So the Church of England, took care in the second Edition of
the Liturgy, in the Reign of Edward the Sixth, to insert a Rubric, declaring,
That no Adoration of the Elements, or Sacrament, was intended by kneeling, and
though when the Doctrine of our Church against Transubstantiation and
Adoraration was sufficiently known, it was left out in the Reigns of Queen
Elizabeth, King James the First, and King Charles the First, yet upon the
particular Request of the Presbyterians at the Savoy, p. 94. it was again
inserted, with a design to give them satisfaction, and yet they are after all,
as forward to object adoration to us, as if there had been no such Declaration
made.

From all which it is evident, that sitting is a posture very ossensive and
scandalous to many other Protestant Churches, as well as ours; that kneeling is
most generally used, and therefore leaving all postures indifferent, as is now
proposed, by some of our own Divines, and was formerly desired by the
Presbyterians at the Savoy, p. 56. is a likely way to increase the Disciples of
T. F. and the opposers of the Athanasian Creed, but is never likely to work an
union amongst the Protestant Churches. Letter relating to the Convocation, p.
12. This must be undeniably allowed, that antiquity never used Kneeling at the
Sacrament, it having been the constant practice of all the Churches in the
World to communicate standing. If you ask how this appears, they have nothing
to say but that the Primitive Christians, in memory of Christ's Resurrection,
for some Ages after it, stood at their Prayers on Sunday, and betwixt Easter
and Pentecost; by which they suppose that the Sacrament was received in the
same posture as they said their Prayers: Their Prayers at other times, were
upon their Knees, as indeed this very Order supposes, Tertull. ad Scap. Quando
non geniculationibus nostris siccitates depulsae? i. e. When did not our solemn
Prayers, upon our Knees, bring down Rain? Origin. in Number. c. 4. Hom. 5. Nam
quod flectimus orantes, etc. where he relates the custom of the Church to pray
Kneeling. And in his Book de Orat. p. 157. he says that they generally kneeled
at Prayers, except in case of Sickness. Now the Primitive Christians received
the Sacrament on other days than Sunday, or that space betwixt Easter and
Pentecost, and that they received it daily, is evident from St. Cyprian,
Tertullian, St. Austin, St. Hierom, and many other Fathers; and by consequence,
if they received the Sacrament in a posture of Prayer, they received it
Kneeling.

And that there might be a through Reformation, and no part of the Liturgy left
entire, some have had the confidence to except against the Collects themselves,
as too short, and not so pertinent: I shall only remind such, of what the
Devout and Judicious Dr. Sanderson said of them, viz. That the Collects were
the most passionate, proper, and most elegant expressions that any language
ever afforded; and that there was in them such Piety, and that so interwoven
with Instructions, that they taught us to know the Power, the Wisdom, the
Majesty and Mercy of God, and much of our duty both to him and our Neighbor.
And if some late Collects are intended as a Specimen, by which the old are to
be mended, I believe few will rejoice in the change.

Excommunication for contempt is complained of in both the Letters to the
Convocation as a matter highly scandalous, and that we thrust out of the Church
the best of our People for some penny or two penny Cause in our Ecclesiastical
Courts. Now this Objection is proposed more peevishly than ever it was done by
the Dissenters. After T. C. in his Admonition, p. 175. the Puritans Petition to
Kings James I. A. D. 1603. That Men be Excommunicated for Trifles, and
Twelve-penny Matters. So that from their Objection of Twelve-penny Matters;
this Author has stretched it to Penny and Twopeny Matters. But let us apply our
Selves to the Protestant Divines of the Foreign Churches, and see what they say
to it. The Dutch Divines in Sunops. Pur. Theol. p. 710. say, That the Penalty
of Excommunication is chiefly incurred for neglecting and despising the
Censures and public Admonitions of the Church. In the Ecclesiastical Laws of
Geneva p. 44, 45. They that do not obey the Orders of the Church after due
Admonition, are ordered to be Excommunicated. If we look into Scotland, and see
Constit. Eccles. Scot. cap. de Offensis. A small Offense or Calumny may justly
deserve Excommunication, if the Offender be stubborn and contumacious. 1 Book
of Discipl. 9. Head. All Families must appear once a Year before the Presbyter
to be examined; and if Children or Servants be suffered to continue in wilful
Ignorance they must be Excommunicated, etc. And how severe their
Excommunication is, appears from the 7th Head. No Person may have any converse
with him that is Excommunicated, not Eat nor Drink with him, nor Buy nor Sell
with him, nor Salute nor Speak to him; his Children born after the Sentence,
may not be admitted to Baptism, etc. And I must say the contempt is the
greater, when the occasion of it is so small. Lay aside severe Penalties for
Contempt, and Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction is lost; and to what purpose should
any Court have a Power to determine, if there be no power given it to force the
Execution of it? If we look upon Foreign Churches, we shall find that they are
more strict in having their Canons and Constitutions observed, than we are in
England. I will not mention the Severities of the Scotch-Kirk, and New-Englands
Discipline, as not being reasonable, nor suited to the Nature of the Thing; but
in so plain a Case, let Calvin and Beza, the two great Apostles of Geneva speak
for all. Calvin's Instit. l. 4. c. 5. sect. 10. Let no one that despises the
Authority of the Church go unpunished, much less let any Body be permitted to
break the Unity of the Church; Christ looks upon such as Deserters and
Runnagado's; a separation from a Church of God, is a renouncing of Christ; nor
can there be any greater Crime. Again in his Comment on 1 Cor. 14. Its easy to
prove that Ecclesiastical Canons ought not to be accounted for Humane
Traditions, since they are founded in the Word of God, and have a manifest
approbation from the Mouth of Christ. Beza in Epist. 1. Shall we say that Men
ought to have Liberty of Conscience! In no wife, as this Liberty is understood,
that every one should Worship God as he pleases, for this is a mere Diabolical
Opinion to let every one perish that will; its a Diabolical Liberty which has
filled Poland and Transylvania with so many Heresies. And again, the same Beza
in his Epistle 24. to some Dissenters in England. Things in their own Nature
indifferent change their Nature when they are commanded, or forbidden by any
lawful Authority -- Laws about Things indifferent bind the Conscience, so that
no one can wilfully break them without Sin. To him agree the Dutch Divines in
Synops. Pur. Theol. p. 453. No Body can wilfully disobey the Ecclesiastical
Constitutions about indifferent Things without Sin. But because this is a
Matter so very evident, I shall only add that in the Directory made by the
Assembly of Divines at Westminster, p. 9. its expressly declared, That no
Persons should absent themselves from the Public Ordinances upon pretense of
Private Meetings. And the Words of Mr. Baxter in his Reasons of the Christian
Religion, p. 485. No Christian must pretend Holiness against Unity and Peace --
And every tender Conscience should be as tender of Church-Divisions and Real
Schism, as of Drunkenness, Whoredom, or such other enormous Sins.

We come next to consider the great Point of Orders, and which seems to have
been principally aimed at, viz. The allowing of Presbyterian Orders as valid,
the Author of the Letter from the Country, p. 10, 11. proposes three
Expedients, The first is Bishop Bramballs; The second is Hypothetical; The
third is that of the Bill of Union. To the first, I answer that Bishop Bramhall
did never allow of Presbyterian Ordination, but did actually, and with all the
Rites and Methods of our Church, re-ordain such as had been only ordained by
Presbyters, as is evident from that very Place in the Life of Bishop Bramhall,
from whence this Author quotes a Passage, and what he did for Peace Sake was
only this; That in some of their Certificates of their being ordained by him,
he declared That this New Ordination did not destroy their former Orders, if
they had any, etc. And its abundantly evidently, that that Bishop did re-ordain
many of them. To the last of these three ways I return no Answer, because he
himself does not tell us what it was that was proposed in the Bill of Union.
The second was the principal Method insisted on, and that is Hypothetical
Reordination, in which the Office of Ordination was to be omitted, and the
Person kneeling before a Bishop, the Bishop was to say, If thou art not already
Ordained, I Ordain thee; or else in these Words, I pray God that thou be
ordained, etc. And this is justified by the Instance of Hypothetical Baptism.
To all which I reply,

1. That the Presbyterians (the Persons we are to satisfy) have already
declared against Hypothetical Ordination; so the Presbyterians at the Savoy, in
their Petition for Peace, p. 2. We earnestly beseech you that Reordination
whether Absolute or Hypothetical, be not made necessary for the future Exercise
of our Ministry: now to grant them what they have already declared against, is
no probable way to the Union pretented.

2. Hypothetical Baptism is of Two sorts, 1 st. When it is not known that the
Child has had any pretended Baptism with Water in the name of the Trinity, and
then the case is not the same as this: Of such hypothetical Rebaptization the
5th Council of Carthage, c. 3. is to be understood, where they commend the
Words of Leo, Iteratum dici non potest quod nescitur ess factum, i. e. That
cannot be said to be repeated, which was never known to be done. The 2d is,
when all that has been done is exactly known, but the authority of the Persons
Baptizing or Authenticalness of what is done, is called in question; and in
this case the Presbyterians do not allow of Hypothetical Baptism; witness the
Synops. pur. Theol. p. 617, Neque Baptismus conditionalis probandus est, qui a
Pontificiis observari solet, i. e. neither do we approve of Hypothetical
Baptism which is used by the Papists; for they to gain respect to their own
Church, endeavor to persuade such other Christians as are admitted into their
Church, to be hypothetically Rebaptized; of which we have one famous instance
in the Church of the Abyssines, reported by Ludolfus in Hist. Aethiop. l. 3. c.
6. Patres Societatis Habessinos omnes promiscue rebaptizaverunt, sub condition
tamen, si videlicet prior Baptismus non rite fuisset peractus, quae res magnam
illis invidiam conflavit; i. e. The Jesuits rebaptized all the Habessines,
with this condition, namely, if their former Baptism was not rightly performed,
which thing occasioned great troubles against them: Which troubles he reports,
cap. 13. The Habessines hated them for nothing more than their repeating of
their Baptism, as if before that they had been Heathens and Publicans. And is
it not evident that Hypothetical Reordination will produce the same troubles
here, when by this very Act our Church plainly supposes that they were not
ordained before?

But to make all this matter plain, I will first set down the opinion of the
English Presbyterians; then the opinion of the Foreign Reformed Churches.

1. For our English Presbyterians. T. C. the Ringleader of that Party having
been ordained by a Bishop, is said to have renounced his orders, and taken new
orders from Presbyters in Scotland. The Presbyterians reordained Mr. John
Cuningham, formerly ordained Priest by the Bishop of Galloway. Ravil. rediv. p.
29. A whole Synod of the Puritans at Coventry, A. D. 1588, June 10, condemned
Ordination by Bishops as unlawful; and farther declared the very calling of
Bishops unlawful. Bancroft's Engl. Scotizing. p. 86. T. C. in his Admonition,
p. 127, desires the Bishops to be laid aside from ordaining Ministers, and to
bring in the true Election by the Congregation. And in his Prayer before his
Sermon at Banbury, printed in the Life of Archbishop Whitgift, p. 47. O Lord
give us grace and power all as one Man, to set our selves against the Bishops:
Apologetical Narrative. Its a sin to take Episcopal Orders, or to own the
Authority of Bishops. And to mention no more; in the Solemn League and
Covenant, the Presbyterians of both Nations swore to the Extirpation of
Prelacy, i. e. the government of the Church by Bishops. And accordingly in
Scotland, the Presbyterians have generally persecuted all those that had
Episcopal Ordination.

2. For the Foreign Reformed Churches, observe, 1sit, That the Churches of
Denmark and Norway, are governed by Two Archbishops, and Fourteen Bishops. The
Churches of Swedeland are governed by One Archbishop and Six Bishops; the
Churches of Hungary and Transylvania are governed by Bishops, the Reformed
Churches of Bohemia have a succession of Bishops as we in England:

Pass we next to the Reformed Churches of Germany, which are in effect governed
by Bishops, whom they call Superintendants. Their Office is described in the
Harmony of Confess. p. 227. to visit Parochial Ministers, to preside in Synods,
to examine and ordain Persons fit for the Ministry, etc. To which agrees
Carpzovins Jurisp. Eccl. l. 1. Comenius in Annot. ad rat. disc. fratr. Bohem.
where he observes that St. Hierom calls a Bishop Superintendant; in Armenia the
Bishop is called Martabet, which signifies Superintendant, says Rycaut Hist.
of Arm. Churches, p. 392. And Zanchy says, that the Protestants have Bishops
and Archbishops, but that instead of good Greek Names, they call them by bad
Latin ones Superintendants, and general Superintendants. And when in the Book
of Policy (A. D. 1581.) for the Kingdom of Scotland, the Office of
Superintendants is described; it is in these Words. Imprimis, The
Superintendant of Orkney, his Diocese shall be the Isles of Orkney, etc.

The Superintendant of Rosse, his Diocese shall be Rosse, etc.

The Superintendant of Edenbrough, his Diocese shall be, etc.

The Superintendant of Glascow, his Diocese, etc.

In all Ten Superintendants for that Kingdom.

Then follows the Function and Power of the Superintendant, -- He shall plant
and erect Churches, order and appoint Ministers, Visit, etc. See the
Proceedings at Perth, p. 14, 15. And in all such Churches, where they have
Superintendants, there is no Ordination allowed but by them.

An Account of the Persecuted in Scotland, p. 58. There is not a falser
Proposition in the World, than that the Inclinations of the generality of the
People in Scotland are against Episcopacy, -- and let us have a Poll for it
when they will, and you shall quickly see the Demonstration. -- Of the Vulgus,
the Commonalty not a Third Man throughout the whole Kingdom is a Presbyterian.
-- And of Persons of better Quality and Education, not a Thirteenth. -- In all
the Country on the North of Tay, three never was above Three or Four
Meeting Houses, and these too very little frequented. At Perth, where a
Presbyterian Minister has got the Church, not One in Ten go to hear him, not
one of the Magistrates. The like at Cowpar in Fife, at st. Andrews, Sterling,
Burnt-Island, etc. Even in Edenbrough, the Presbyterian Ministers are not so
much frequented as the Regular Clergy; -- Whatever Friends the Presbyterians
there had a Year or Two ago, they arethis day diminished by a Third; the
People have enough of their Cant, and are weary of their Sermons.

2. Those Reformed Churches that are not governed by Bishops, earnestly desire
them. To this purpose, the Scottish Forbs in his Irenicum, Printed A. D. 1629,
p. 202, has these Words. Such was the condition of Protestants in many Foreign
Parts, that being forced by utmost necessity, they allowed Presbyters to
ordain; they heartily wished that they might be ordained by Bishops, but when
they could not obtain that of the Bishops without wicked conditions, etc. nor
could the prohibition of Popish Bishops hinder their Ordination from being
valid, since in those Countries the Presbyters and Pastors had the chief power
over the Christian i. e. Reformed Churches. This they did, not out of any
contempt of the ancient Canons, but out of absolute necessity, as appears from
the Apology of the Protestants for the Consession at Ausburg, Art. 14. We have
often testified that we earnestly desire to retain the ancient Ecclesiastical
Polity, and degrees in the Church, but the Bishops, (i. e. Popish,) compel our
Priests to renounce their Doctrine, etc. Wherefore in some Places this Polity
is destroyed, which we heartity desired to keep, -- this we declare before God
and the World, that it should not be imputed to us, that we have no Bishops.
When at the Synod of Dort, an English Bishop had set forth the usefulness of
being governed by Bishops, for repressing Heresy and Schism, etc. the President
of the Synod made answer, Nos non samus adeo felices, i. e. We are not so happy.

Peter Moulin in his Preface to his Fathers Answer to Perron, tells us, that
the want of Bishops in the French Church was the necessity of their condition,
that they desire the same Government we have in England, if they might be so
happy. -- When they moved Cardinal Richlieu to allow them Bishops, he flatly
denied it them; -- They could never get of the Civil Power a toleration of
Bishops, -- their Politic Statesmen would never give way to it; -- nothing
has been more eagerly opposed by the Pope and his Creatures, than that the
Protestants should have Bishops. The Apology for Protestants, written by a
French Divine, p. 60. This may suffice to satisfy the Scruples of those that
take offense at Episcopal Government, we have cleared the Point of Episcopacy,
-- p. 62. The Ordination of Priests ought to be without all dispute the Bishops
work, p. 63. The Superiority of Bishops to Pastors has continued from the very
time of the Apostles or their Disciples, as is already made appear. And
therefore in England the Papists have always labored the Destruction of our
Bishops as zealously and heartily as the Presbyterians themselves.

That virulent Papist Sanders, in his Book de Schism. Angl. p. 167, confesses,
that nothing would more gratify the Church of Rome, than the pulling down of
Bishops, Deans and Prebendaries in England. And Parsons in his Book of the
Reformation of England (see Moral Pract. of the Jes. p. 313,) proposes this as
the necessary Method to bring England to the Romish Religion. And Cardinal
Barbarini was so sensible of this, that he said, he could be contented that
there were none of their Priests in England, so there were no Bishops. Dr.
Stillingfleet Pref. to the Unreason. of Separation, p. 9. The Papists returned
their Thanks to the Rump Parliament for having delivered them from the Tyranny
of the Bishops. (Christian Moderator, p. 32.) And that the Papists had a chief
Hand in pulling down our Bishops in England, is confessed by Albius in his
Exegesis, p. 145. If Papists may not be believed in this matter, I hope Mr.
Baxter may; and he declares in his Grotian Religion, p. 95. That the Papists
had a Hand in casting out our Bishops. I shall end this undoubted Truth with
the words of Two Eminent Persons of the Church of England; Sir Henry Yelverton
in his Preface, p. 9. It Is now sufficiently known, -- what wonder the casting
out of Bishops was to the Reformed Churches abroad, and what public Triumph to
the Roman Conclave. Bishop Sanderson in his first Preface to his Sermons, It Is
well known what rejoicing the Vote against Bishops brought to the Romish Party,
how in Rome itself they sang their Io Paeans upon the Tidings of it, and said
Triumphantly, now is the day ours, now is the fatal blow given to the
Protestant Religion in England. Upon which account, we have great reason to
believe that the Romanists have used their utmost endeavors to hinder the
Reformed of France from having Bishops as they heartily desired.

3. Let us see what opinion the Eminent Divines of the Foreign Reformed
Churches have of our English Bishops.

1st. Calvin in his Book de neces. ref. If they will give us such an Hierarchy
in which the Bishops do not refuse to be subject to Christ, have him for their
only head, (i. e.) in opposition to the Pope) and be united to the truth of the
Gospel; then if there be any that do not reverence such Bishops, and submit to
them, I confess there is no Anathema which they do not deserve; and in his
Epistle to the Duke of Somerset, etc. he commends our English Bishops as such.

2d. Bucer de Regno Christi. We see by the perpetual Observation of the Church
from the Apostles time, that it pleased the Holy Ghost to have one Person set
over the Presbyters, to have the care of the Church and govern it, and
therefore he is called a Bishop. And again in his Works, p. 565. These Orders
of Bishops, Priests and Deacons have ever been in the Church by the appointment
of the Holy Ghost. And again in resp. protest. apud Goldast. Tom. 2. which
Bucer was the Author of. How much mischief the Reformed Churches have suffered
for want of Bishops, no one can easily find Words to express. (Forbs p. 132.)

3d. Beza in Ep. p. 18. Speaking of Bishops, Priests and Deacons, adds, the
Holy Ghost appointed those Orders. Contra Sarav. ad 518. Art. 3. If England
continue to keep her Bishops and Archbishops, let her enjoy that singular
Blessing of God, which I wish they may always have. And again, (If there be any
that reject all sort of Episcopacy, God forbid that any but Mad Men should join
with them.

4th. Spanheim in Epist. ad dub. Evang. Vol. 3. At Geneva they have a great
esteem for the English Bishops, and daily pray for their Prosperity.

5th. Le Moyne from Leyden, published by Dr. Stillingfleet, p. 405. As for the
Episcopal Government of England, what is there in it that is dangerous, or may
alarm Men's Consciences? and if this be capable to deprive us of Heaven, who is
there that entered there for the space of 1500 Years? for all that time, all the
Churches in the World had no other Government, etc.

6th. When the Presbyterians had in their Solemn League and Covenant condemned
Episcopacy, the Ministers at Charenton, and of the other Reformed Churches in
France, the Professors, Ministers and Consistory of Geneva, and other Reformed
Churches in those Part, were so scandalized, as that they feared it would bring
an indelible Scandal upon the Reformed Churches, etc. King Charles's Large
Declaration, p. 75.

4. When any of the Eminent Men of other Reformed Churches censured the Church
of England, it was upon our being falsely represented to them. What Calvin wrote
against our Liturgy, was only upon the sight of the first Edition of Edward the
6th's Common Prayer Book; and a Malicious Account he had received from some at
Franck fort. Beza in his Letter to Archbishop Whitgift, March 8. 1921.
Declared, that in his Writings touching Church Government, he ever opposed the
Romish Hierarchy, but never intended to impugn the Eccesiastical Polity of the
Church of England, nor to exact of them to frame themselves after the pattern
of our Presbyterial Disciplene, -- he wishes that the holy College of our
Bishops, may for ever continue and maintain their Right and Title in the
Churches Government, etc. And if Beza at any time wrote otherwise, he was
abused by slanderous reports, which caused him to do it; says Bishop Bancroft
in his Survey, p. 141. And his Guess we have confirmed by a Letter from Gualter
to the Bishop of Ely, A. D. 1572. and Printed by Archbishop Whitgift. -- We
admonished your Adversaries not to move any Contention in the Church for
matters of so small importance, and we thought the matter had been Buried; when
contrary to all Men's expectations, there came Two English Men from Geneva, and
bring from Master Beza (whose Ears they had before filled with forged
Accusations, Letters full of Complaints, and desire that we would help the
afflicted State of England, and advised me to make a Journey to you; to which
was joined the Report of these two, who reported the same things to us, that
they had done at Geneva, and set down in Writing many Superstitions which they
said were now defended in England; -- but afterward Letters from D. A. a
singular honest Man delivered you all from blame. -- Since that time we have
had nothing to do with those lying busy-bodies, for not long after, it plainly
appeared, that they went about, and were the chief Authors of Disturbances in
the Palatinate Churches, and brought much trouble and disquiet to them.
Wherefore I beseech you, that you would not have any ill opinion of Gualter,
who bears a singular affection to the English, and is persuaded of our exact
consent and agreement, etc.

In our late Civil Wars, Milton, and Georgius Hornius (under the Counterfeit
Name of Honorius Reggius,) a Professor at Leyden, and some others were hired
to give a false and abusive account of the Church of England to the Foreign
Churches, and the very Assembly of Divines at Westminster, wrote a Letter,
which was sent to the Belgic, French, Helvetian and other Reformed Churches,
to assure them, that the King made it his business to root out the Protestant
Religion, and used. all means possible to reduce the whole Nation to Popery.
Bibl. Regia. p. 64. And of this we have as much reason to complain now as ever,
it being notoriously known, that not long since, a Gentleman of considerable
quality made a Journey on purpose into France, to represent the Bishops and
Clergy of the Church of England as Popishly affected, it being the lot of this
Church to be misrepresented by Men of Designs and Malice, for both Papists and
Fanatics, as may best serve the turns of its Enemies in different Seasons.

5. Let us see what opinion the Universal Church has of such as in opposition
to Bishops, are ordained by Presbyters; the 31st of those that are called
Apostles Canons. If any Presbyter despise his Bishop, and set up separate
Meetings, let him be Deposed, and the People Excommunicated. The 5th Canon of
the Council at Antioch decreed, that if any Presbyter despising his Bishop,
separate himself from the Church, and make Meetings of his own; after the First
and Second Admonition, he ought to be condemned, and not allowed to Preach, and
if he still go on to disturb the Church, he ought to be punished by the Secular
Power, as a Seditious Person. This Canon is received into the Code of the
Canons of the Universal Church, and was confirmed in the 4th general Council at
Chalcedon, Act 4.

Athanasius in his 2d Apology tells us, that Coluthus a Presbyter passing by
the Bishop of Alexandria, ordained several Persons, all his Ordinations were
declared void, and all that he had ordained, were reduced to the order of
Laics. And I want an instance of any one Reformed Church in the World, where
Bishops are established, that Ordination by Presbyters in opposition to them,
is allowed as valid; and I think the Church of Rome is the only Church in the
World that being governed by Bishops, allows of Presbyterian Ordination, not
regularly and of course, but by an extraordinary faculty from the Popes
inexhaustible Power. Of which, see Willet in Synopsi Papis. controv. 16. q 2.
Theol. Rhem. in 1 Timothy 4. 14. Forbesii Iren. p. 176, 177, 178, 179. where he
largely proves it from the Canonists, Schoolmen, etc. I am sure the Papists
have often objected it to us, that we have no Priests, because we have no
Bishops, (Bancroft's Survey, p. 166,) and have taken a great deal of Pains to
set about the Nags-Head Fiction, and destroy the order of our Bishops; which
shows how glad they would be to have them all destroyed.

Lastly, such Eminent Divines of the Foreign Churches that have come into
England, and had only Ordination by Presbyters, and received Preferment here,
have readily and willingly received Episcopal Ordination; and now it has
pleased God to send over so many French Ministers into our Kingdom, I do not
find but that they readily and cheerfully comply with our present Establishment
in this particular also: From all which it is evident, that the Presbyterians
will not comply with Hypothetical Reordination; that in most of the Protestant
Churches, they are not ordained but by Bishops, or Superintendants; that where
they have neither, they heartily wish for them and desire them, and account
Ordination by Presbyters in opposition to Bishops to be Schismatical, and not
allowed in any Protestant Church in the World; and by consequence our doing it
in England, cannot be a likely way to promote the Peace and Union of the
Protestant Churches.

A set Form of Prayer was seriously opposed by the Presbyterians at the Savoy,
who p. 23. tells us, that serious Godliness is like to be extinguished, if only
Forms be allowed in the Church; and p. 55. The Abatement of Ceremonies, with
the Exclusion of all Prayers, but what are Read will not satisfy us. The
Author of a Letter to the Convocation, would have many of our Prayers and
Services left to the discretion and choice of the Minister, p. 21, 22. And the
Lords and Commons, A. D. 1644, and 1648, ordained, That if any Person used the
Common Prayer Book, he shall forfeit for the 1st Offense 5 l. for the 2d 10 l.
and for the 3d Offense a Years Imprisonment; -- and every Minister that shall
not strictly use the Directory, shall forfeit the Sum of Forty Shillings; and
whoever shall Preach, Write or Print against it, shall forfeit betwixt 5 l. and
50 l.

The Churches of Denmark, Swedeland, Saxony and all other of the Ausburg
Confession, have their set Liturgies, and forms of public Worship; yea the
Churches of France, Geneva and Holland have their set Prayers composed by
Calvin himself; as Luther composed Prayers for the German Churches, and
Zuinglius for those of Zurick. The Divines of Holland in Synops. pur. Theol.
Disp. 36. Sect. 33. declare set Forms not only lawful, but very profitable. --
The attention of Auditors is much helped by having a constant form. Some of
the Churches of Zealand thus declared themselves to our English Presbyterians,
We account it grievous to condemn all those Churches which from the Apostolical
times, and the Primitive Church to this day have celebrated the public worship
of God, by prescribed Forms; -- wherefore we blame the precise singularity of
those, who cast out all Forms out of Divine Worship. -- In almost all the
Reformed Churches, Church-Liturgies, and Forms of Prayers are approved as
profitable, and conducing to Edification. Capellus Professor of Samurs in
France, -- in Theses Salm. A set Form of Liturgy is highly useful and
necessary, -- has been always used in all the Christian Churches in the World
for above 1300 Years, and now is used every where, except only by some Vpstarts
in England, etc. The Greek Church, Armenian, Coptick, Ethiopick, and all the
Eastern Churches have set Forms of Prayer. Calvin. Epist. 87. I do very much
approve of a set Form of Prayer and Ecclesiastical Rites, that it be so
certain, as that the Ministers shall not recede from it, -- that hereby the
levity of some Innovators may be hindered, there ought to be a set Form of
Prayer, etc. Baxter himself in his Def. of the Cure of Divisions, p. 55. He
that separateth from all Churches amongst us on the account of the unlawfulness
of our Liturgy, does separate from them on a reason common to all, or almost
all Christian Churches upon Earth.

As to the Prayer before Sermon, Calvin constantly used the same Form faith
Beza in his Life, it is Printed at beginning of his Sermons on Job, so had St.
Austine after Sermon. The Ministers of France, Geneva and Holland use a set
Form before Sermon. Lavater of the Rites of the Church of Zurich says, It Is
not the custom of that Church for the Preacher to contrive new Forms of Prayer,
and repeat them in the Public Assemblies, but to keep the usual one. And
Durell tell us, that there is not one Minister in France but has made to
himself a set Form of Prayer, which he constantly uses before Sermon, and no
other. So that in this also, our Presbyterians are singular, that they affect
Novelties and extempore Expressions and Variations in their Prayers before
Sermons; I say that are singular, and different from the Pastors of most of
the Reformed Churches in the World.

I know it is objected against our Liturgy, that it is taken out of the Mass
Book, as if the Lord's Prayer, the Creed, or other parts of our Service, were
the worse for being found there also; but yet those that have strictly examined
this, find the Objection false. L'Estrange in his Alliance, etc. p. 30. The
beginning of our Morning-Prayer, Sentences, Exhortations, Confession,
Absolution, rehearsing the Decalogue, etc. are not to be found in the Mass
Book, nor any Popish Service. And Dr. Stillingfleet in Antiq. Br. chapter p. 232.
All these parts are retained in the excellent Office of our Church; not from
the Church of Rome (as our Dissenters weakly imagine,) but from the consent of
all the ancient Churches in the use of them, etc. And p. 237. From which
discovery it will appear, that our Church of England has omitted none of those
Offices, wherein all the ancient Churches agreed, and that wherein the British
and Gallicane Churches differed from the Roman; our Church has not followed
the Roman, but the other, and therefore our Dissenters do unreasonably charge
us with taking our Offices from the Church of Rome. And therefore the Romanists
have ever been as zealous in opposing our Common Prayer, as the Presbyterians
themselves; Mr. Harding, John Old, and other Papists wrote Books against it.
Several of our Martyrs were put to Death in Queen Mary's Dayss, for using the
Book of Common Prayer, says Fox in Acts and Mon. And the Author of Calvino
Turcismus, p. 360, has these words. The English Liturgy, as to the substance
of it, is more corrupt than the Turkish Alcoran; as to the Form, it in great
measure agrees with it. And it is not probable that the Papists would thus
abuse a Book that was so like to their own Mass, as the Presbyterians would
have it. Our Common Prayer Book is now printed in Ten several Languages, which
cannot be said of any other Liturgy in the World; and so great was the esteem
our Forefathers had of it, that I find in the Reign of Queen Elizabeth, Coppin
and Thacker were both punished for publishing Brown's Book against the
Common Prayer. And now if all the Protestant Churches in the World have their
set Liturgies, it must needs be a very improbable way to promote the Peace and
Union of the Reformed Churches, by destroying the Liturgy we have always used.

And to pass by other things, most of the Reformed Churches have declared in
their Confessions of Faith, that no Separation ought to be made for different
Rites and Ceremonies, where there is an agreement in Doctrine. See Praef. ad
Confess. Helv. and Art. 17. 27. Conf. Gallican. Art. 32. Bhoem. c. 15. Argent.
c. 14. Augustana, Art. 7. Polon. p. 220. Calvin, Instit. l. 4. c. 10. s. 27. Is
so far from condemning Rites and Ceremonies, that he would have them in every
Church be fixed and certain, without which the Nerves and Sinews of a Church
will quickly be dissolved, etc. O Ecolampadius in his Epistles, p. 169, 177,
182, 184. Is vehement in pressing every particular Church to an Uniformity in
Ceremonies, that tho they are different in several Countries, yet all that are
subject to the same Government should be bound to the same Rites, etc. And how
little these eminent Reformers agree with our new Modellers, will appear from
the Letter to the Convocation, p. 9. If any of the Laity scruple the Cross in
Baptism, the Minister may be permitted to Baptize without it; or if kneeling at
the Sacrament, the Person scrupling may have it delivered him in another
Posture, and so for Godfathers, p. 15. Let a Rubric be inserted before the
Athanasian Creed, signifying that the Creed may be read, (or may be let alone)
or with an alias, this or the Nicene, p. 21. Let the Litany be left to the
discretion of the Minister to read or omit; let it be left to his discretion
one day to read one part, and another day another; that it be permitted in the
Afternoon to leave out the first Lesson, or the like, p. 22. That it be left to
liberty and discretion to use the Prayers without the Lessons, and the Litany
alone on Wednesdays and Fridays; so Preface to the Directory complained, that
they were urged to read all the Prayers. And after this manner we must have
nothing six'd and settled, but all our Rites and Prayers left indifferent,
which is so far from promoting Union and Peace, that its the most likely way in
the World to divide us, perpetuate and establish Schism, and make us an casie
Prey to our Enemies: Even the Author of naked Truth, p. 23. says, That a
Liberty left to add or detract Ceremonies or Prayers according to the various
Opinions and Humors of Men, will certainly cause great Faction and Division.
Again, the length of our Liturgy is complained of -- Letter to the Convoc. p.
18. It Is proposed, that the Sunday Service be shortened, p. 19. Its a tedious
and prolix Service; which, tho it agreed with the complaints of the
Presbyterians, A. D. 1603. Who then desired the longsomness of the Service to
be abridged; yet does so little suit with our later long-winded Presbyterians,
that at the Savoy, 1660. p. 9. They complain of the Brevity of the
Common Prayer Book, and therefore desire to have leave to pray more copiously
-- and p. 55. They complained of too many Prayers, not too much; so that should
we in compliance with this Projector, have shortened our Prayers; we should have
displeased, not sweetened the Presbyterians to a Compliance. If we look upon the
most eminent Protestant Princes that we have had, they were all for strict
Conformity. Queen Elizabeth would have the Discipline of the Church of England,
of all Men duly observed, without alteration of the least Ceremony: Life of
Archbishop Whitgift, p. 29. And King James the First in his Proclamation, the
first Year of his Reign, We admonish all Men that they shall not ex^ect, nor
attempt any further alteration in the Common Prayer -- We are not ignorant of
the Inconveniences that arise in Government, by admitting Innovations in things
once settled by mature Delibaration, and how necessary it is to use Constancy
-- Such is the unquietness of some Dispositions, affecting every Year new
Forms. Our frequent alterations of our Religious Rites, has been justly
laughed at by Foreigners. Erasmus for this very Thing derided the English in
his time, and Cardan in Tetrab. c. 3. Tex. 12. says, That the English are
still changing their Rites and Manners of Religious Worship, sometimes to the
better, and very often to the worse. Not to mention what St. Austin, Epist.
118. adjan. observed, Ipsa mutatio consuetudines etiam quae adjuvat utilitate,
novitate perturbat, i. e. The very change of a Custom, tho to the better,
breeds a disturbance by its novelty: Malum [politicum] been positum non est
movendum.

In sine, give me leave to repeat what the Ingenious Lord Faulkland long since
told us, viz. That all Mutations are dangerous, even where what is introduced
by that Mutation, is such as would have been very profitable upon a primary
Foundation; and it is none of the least Dangers of Change, that all the Perils
and Inconveniences that it brings, cannot be foreseen; and therefore such as
make Title to Wisdom, will not undergo great Dangers, but for great
Necessities, such as cannot, I presume, be here pretended.

Upon all which Accounts its evident that the Convocations complying to make
the Alterations proposed, is the most probable way to displease most of the
Foreign Protestants that are now in League with us, and make us no longer
esteemed, as we hitherto have been, the very Center of Union.

I will add but one Reason why we should not make these Alterations for the
sake of our own Dissenters, and that is, because they are resolved they w^^
have no Union with us; but whenever we are making Proposals to unite with
them, they run farther off, and be sure make fresh Complaints of these very
Changes, and steps toward them. For the Alterations made in 1660. Mr. Baxter
likes things worse than before, and has declared frequently in Print, That
many of our old Episcoparian Divines, had they been now alive, would have been
Nonconformists, and that the new Impositions make the Ministerial Conformity
harder than formerly. Def. of Cure of Divis. p. 55. The Presbyterians at the
Savoy (after p. 35.) complain of the paucity of Concessions, (tho lately said
to be 600) And again, In one of your Concessions, in which we suppose you
intend to accommodate with us; you rather widen than heal the Breach. When
about ten Years since, some of our Church had a project of Comprehension, the
Presbyterians were farther off than before; and under the Name of a Plea for
Peace, put out bitter Reflections upon the Church of England. Dr. Stillingfleet
unreas. of Separat. Pref. p. 36. In Scotland the Presbyterians administered the
Solemn League and Covenant to the People, and made them Swear never to hear the
Orthodox Ministry more, and gave them the Sacrament thereupon. Ravil. Rediv. p.
29. The like is said to have been lately done at Northampton, and some other
Places.

And how have they behaved themselves in this juncture, we may take it from one
of the great Promoters of Alterations, in his Letter for the Bill of Union, p.
4. I do own, that in some of the Dissenters there is more then an appearance of
Aversion to this Bill of Union, or else Books levelled against Liturgy and
Episcopacy would not come out as they do, in this p juncture, fresh from the
Press.

In a Word, There are two Things that have formerly made the Government very
averse from favoring Dissenters, 1. Their Disloyalty. 2. Their readiness upon
all Occasions to join with the Popish Interest against the Church of England,
as they famously did in the Year 1588. at the time of the Spanish Invasion; and
again 1688. in the late Reign of King James II. as appears from their numerous
Addresses; their Complyances with the Dispensing Power; their Promises to take
off the Test and Penal Laws; their new Ordinations; and their great neglect
both in Pulpit and Press, to defend the Articles of the Protestant Religion,
against the many Writings of the Papists; two Tracts only amongst the numerous
Dissenters, having upon the severest computation, been found published by them,
during the whole Reign of that King; we had great reason to hope that these
Failings had been both mended, especially at a time that Popery was
discouraged, and the Government had been so kind to the Protestant Dissenters;
and yet behold quite contrary to all sober Men's Expectations, tho there are but
two Things required of all that are Hearers in Conventicles, in order to a full
Toleration, 1. An Oath of Allegiance and Fidelity to the King and Queen. 2.
Making and subscribing a Declaration against Popery, and so giving satisfaction
to the Government in these two particulars, yet they are still either so steady
to their old Principles of Disloyalty, or so far managed by Popish Agents; and
withal, so peevishly perverse, and froward in opposing every thing that is
commanded them by the Laws; that to this day, so far as I can learn, there is
not one in an Hundred of them that has done either.

FINIS.

