THE LONDON PRACTICE OF PHYSIC: Or the whole Practical Part of Physic
Contained in the Works of Dr. WILLIS.

Faithfully made English, and Printed together for the Public Good.

LONDON, Printed for Thomas Basset, at the George in Fleet Street, and William
Crook, at the Green-Dragon without Temple Bar. 1685.

THE PREFACE.
THere are many Persons to whom the Voluminous Theory of Dr. Willis, might
prove tedious, who would be desirous of having the Practical part in his Works
entire by it self; and all (...) will find themselves here gratified; and
doubtless there are many Perusers of his Theory, who will not be without his
whole Works; and (...) will be equally desirous to have this Practical part by
it self, as a Portative Manual to direct them in Practice on all occasions. The
parts (...) Dr. Willis's Works which contain Practice in them are these, 1. His
First and Second Parts of his Pharmaceutice Rationalis. 2. His Tract of
Convulsive Diseases. 3. His Tract of the Scurvy. 4. His Tract of the Diseases
of the Brain and Genus Nervosum. 5. His Tract of Fevers.


As for his Tracts, 1. of Fermentation, 2. Of the Anatomy of the Brain, 3. Of
the Accension of the Blood, 4. Of Muscular Motion, 5. Of the Soul of Brutes,
etc. they are all Theory, and contain nothing of Practice in them. That which
you have in this Volume, is, all the Practice of Physic contained in those
first five Tracts; I say all the Practice of Physic there contained, because
there is not a great deal of Theory even in those which is not here inserted:
For instance, Dr. Willis, in the First Part of his Pharmaceutice, is very large
in giving the Anatomy of the Stomach or Ventricle, and of the Guts, being the
parts which he calls the first passages, and he gives many Figures for the
Illustrating what he there says concerning them. In the second Part of his
Pharmaceutice, he (...) large in like manner in giving the Anatomy of the
Lungs, etc.

Now these things are here omitted as being besides the design of this Work:
Again, Dr. Willis, in many parts of his Practical Works, is very large in the
Pathology of Diseases, and in the Aetiology of Symptoms; as to these also, I
have been wholly arbitrary in them, often omitting what was conceived too
Prolix, and setting down barely what was judged necessary for Illustrating the
Nature of Diseases.

To obviate therefore all Cavillations, which any Man shall pretend to make
against this Work, as imperfect; on the account that all that Dr. Willis has
written in his Books of Practice, (...) not here contained, I shall give you
(...) short what you may here expect.

First, You will here find all the Definitions or Descriptions which Dr. Willis
gives of Diseases and Symptoms, together with as much of the Aetiology and
Pathology as was conceived necessary or would be desired in a work of this
Nature.

Secondly, You have always here (...) Method of Curing in any Disease,
containing all his Physical Indications and Intents of Curing, none being
omitted throughout his whole Works.

Thirdly, There is not a Recipe (...) order to the Cure of any Disease in a^^
of his Tracts, but it is here inserted I have been induced to believe on
several Grounds that the Practical pa^^ of Dr. Willis's Works, set forth after
this manner, would be acceptable (...) many. For, in truth, besides the
cheapness and portableness of the Volum, (...) any Persons unacquainted with
the (...) Tongue buy Dr. Willis, it cannot be thought that they will have the
patience to peruse a deal of Theory, consisting of large Anatomical and
Physiological Discourses, and the like, which though never so clearly delivered
in English, cannot be comprehended by them under some years study: And again,
those who understand the Latin Tongue, will certainly be better pleased to
read the Theory at large in the Original, than in the English, and having this
^^anual of Practice by them, they will and Dr. Willis's Theory of Diseases so
^^irly hinted in the Indications of them here given, that if at any time they
have forgotten it, they will easily call it to mind again, having once read it
before. The order observed here in placing the Books of Practice of Dr. Willis
in this Volume, is not according as he writ them one after the other, neither
is it conceived that if he were now to publish his Works together himself, he
work (...) so place them. Wherefore though his Pharmaceutice was the last Book he
(...) yet it is placed here in the first place, in regard that the first part
of it contains the ^^nerals of Physic; it treating of Vomit (...) Purging,
Sweating, etc. Which Generally ought to precede what he writes on particular
Diseases. After the two parts of (...) Pharmaceutice, we set his Tracts of
Convulsive Diseases, and of the Scurvy, which (...) designed as Praevious and
Introductory (...) his Tract of the Diseases of the Brain (...) Genus Nervosum;
which follows next; (...) in the last place we put his Tract of Fev^^^^. As for
the Head Title prefixed to this Volume (...) where it is called the London
Practice (...) Physic; no man happily may wonder at (...) if he considers, that
whatever Medicine (...) Dr. Willis, with his great Diligence (...) most
accurate Judgment, both in Consumptions, Practice, and on other occasions,
(...) served to be most in use here, and most rationally prescribed, he always
carefully recorded them, and everywhere throughout his Books, here Printed, set
down the most select forms of them, as he often declares himself: Some parts of
his Works indeed were written at Oxford, as his Tracts of Fevers, of the
Scurvy, and of Convulsive Diseases; but in regard the chiefest parts were
written here, I mean his two parts of his Pharmaceutice, whereof the first
contains the Generals of Physic; and his Tract of the Diseases of the Brain
and Genus Nervosum; I think the Title may bear for the reason before given. I
well know that Dr. Willis's Works are set forth together in Folio in the
English Tongue. But as this Book is of a different Nature, it containing only a
Synopsis of his Practical part, the large Theory being omitted, so it has its
peculiar use: As for the way of Translation used in this Work, any Man who
pleases to compare a Leaf of what is here done with a Leaf of the former
Translation, will easily find that this is no Transcript; the way of expression
being very differing; and we often disagreeing as to the sense of Dr. Willis;
in which others will judge who has done him most right: and as I do not doubt
but now and then there may be found a more apt expression than what I have
used, so I conceive there is no very material error in what I have written;
and without Animadversion, or Insisting on particulars, I shall take freedom to
say that I believe what I have here Translated will be judged by all Men to be
more easy, correct and clear, than what has been done before.

Eugenius (...).

THE LONDON PRACTICE OF PHYSIC, Contained in the First Part of the
Pharmaceutice Rationalis of Dr. WILLIS.
CHAP. I. Instructions concerning Vomiting, with Precepts of Vomits.
THat a Vomitory Medicine may be duly Administered; We ought to consider what
are the Indications or Signs which foreshew the want of it, what things permit
it, and which prohibit it.

It is a sign that a Vomit is needed, when a bilous and bitterish humor floats
in the Ventricle, so that from thence a nauseousness, an ungrateful savor, or
a Headache is caused: Also if the Stomach be burdened with a viscous Phlegm,
as in the longing disease of Maids, and in Men after Surfeiting, and disorderly
eating or drinking.

In most cases when with a difficulty of breathing, the loaded Ventricle is
affected with a lothing of meat or nauseousness, upward Purging is a common
Remedy.

Moreover, when the Stomach is beset with some Exotic ferment, so that it
presently casts up whatsoever is taken into it, even though the cause of it
proceeds from some remote parts; Vomiting is often advised with good success:
for by this means, the Vessels that contain the Gall being very much drained,
the Choler is emptied from the Blood in a more plentiful manner, and its
Feverish distempers are taken away.

Again, forasmuch as the Superfluities or Stagnations of the Nervous humor are
most easily Cured by this means of Evacuation; the use of Emeticks contributes
not a little toward a Cure in the Gout, Asthma, Epilepsy, Madness, and very
many other Diseases which are accounted great, and most difficult to be
conquered.

Secondly, As to things that permit this Remedy, it may be given where there is
a strength of the Viscera, and a firm constitution of Body, and especially to
those whose Neck and Breast are but short, so that there is a nearer passage
from the Stomach to the Mouth: We are encouraged also to give a Vomit to such
as Vomit easily, and bear it well, and when the matter to be expelled is lax,
and comes away readily; also when we find Nature in a calm, and as it were at
leisure for such an undertaking.

Thirdly, The use of Emeticks seems to be prohibited, where there is a
difficulty of Vomiting, or an unaptness to it found by former experience, where
there is a tender and weakly Constitution, a tall and slender Stature, infirm
Inwards, and especially if there be a Consumptive Disposition, with an Ulcer of
the Lungs, or Spitting Blood; also where there is a too great Cachexia, in
which there is danger, lest the humors should be forced from the whole Body
all on a sudden into the Ventricle: Moreover an unusual effervescence of the
Blood, the fits of Fevers, and an expectation of a Crisis, do wholly exclude
this sort of Medicine.

Prescripts of Vomits.
TAke Oxymel of Squils an Ounce and a half, Wine of Squils two Ounces; mingle
them and make a Vomitory.

Take from Six to Nine fresh Leaves of Asarabacca; bruise them, and put them
into three Ounces of Whitewine; squeeze them forth, and let it be taken cum
Regimine.

Take Powder of the Roots of Asarabacca, from a Dram to four Scruples; Oxymel
of Squills an Ounce and a half; mingle them, and let it be taken in a draught
of Posset Drink.

Take Salt of Vitriol, from a Scruple to two Scruples, or a Dram; let it be
taken in a draught of Posset Drink.

Take the Infusion of Crocus Metallorum, from half an Ounce to an Ounce, or an
Ounce and a half; let it be taken in a draught of Posset Drink cum Regimine.

Take the Infusion of Crocus Metallorum six Drams, Wine of Squils an Ounce and
a half, Syrup of Vinegar simple half an ounce, mingle them and make a Vomitory.

Take Sulphur of Antimony from six Grains to eight, Cream of Tartar a Scruple,
mix them and let it be given in the Pap of an Apple, or in a Stewed Prune, or
in a spoonful of Panada.

Take Mercurius Vitae from three Grains to six, let it be taken after the same
manner; after the like manner may be taken the Flowers of Antimony, Aurum
Vitae, or the Solar Praecipitate, and Turbith Mineral.

CHAP. II. A Cure for over-working of Vomits; and Anti-Emetick Medicines, or
such as stop Vomiting, with Instructions.
IF a Vomit over-works, let the Patient presently be put to Bed, and let him
make use of both External and Internal Remedies; and first of all to appease
the disorders in the Stomach, let there be outwardly administered to it, either
a warm-Fomentation of the decoction of Sea-Wormwood, Mints and Spices in
Red-Wine, or let a slice of the Pith of Bread be Toasted, and dipped in
Claret Wine warmed and applied thereto: Let there be a Glister given of Milk,
with Treacle dissolved in it. Let also warm frictions of the Members be used,
and strong Ligatures above the Knees to keep Convulsions from those parts; let
the Stomach in the mean time be kept empty, unless an inclination to faint, or
swouning otherwise requires, but as soon as it is able to receive any thing of
Food, or Medicine, give some Cordial Water or m^^^^ Burnt-Wine: In case the
Affect be very violent, and the Pulse admit it, Venice Treacle or Diascordium,
sometimes also a Solution of Laudanum or an Opiatick Tincture do well.

Praeternatural Vomiting stirred up from other causes, is either Critical or
Symptomatical: In the former nothing must be done too much in haste or
unadvisedly; that excretion so there be a sufficiency of strength ought not to
be stayed, but the discharge of the matter to be expelled, is either to be
facilitated or hastn'd, or it is to be converted some other way; hence when a
person is urged by a nauseousness, or striving to Vomit, you may properly give
either plain Posset Drink, or with the Leaves of Carduus boiled in it; also
sometimes Oxymel or Wine of Squills, or Antimonial Wine; sometimes it may be
good to use Glisters, sometimes also a gentle Purge carries away the matter
offending the Stomach, by a more easy way of Evacuation through the Intestines.

Symptomatick Vomiting proceeds from a conjunct cause, either subsisting in the
Ventricle, which produces that Idiopathick Affect, or fixed in other parts,
which stirs up their Convulsions, and consequently Vomitive Convulsions of the
Ventricle, by a communication of the Nerves; the Cure of which Sympathick
Vomiting depends on the Cure of the Primary Disease.

When the Stomach is Primarily Affected, it is because its Fibers are irritated
to an Excretion by some matter which it cannot duly digest or overcome, or
press forwards into the the Intestines, which matter becomes so disagreeing or
refractory, either by its own offensive quality or quantity, or through the
fault of the Stomach it self, its Tome being become lax, and its Fibers so
weak, that they are not able to brook or endure the Chyle it self, much less
the Excrementitious humors, but cast all forth by Vomiting: There being
various cases and manners of affecting of both these, we shall here briefly set
down some of the chief of them together with the Remedies.

The Emetick matter subsisting in the Ventricle, is either brought into it from
elsewhere, or what for want of digestion, or because it is vitiated, is
engendered there; in either respect, the present offensive load is first of all
to be carried off, and then care must be taken to prevent any farther supply of
it.

To cleanse the filthy Mass of viscous matter forth of the Stomach, prescribe a
gentle Vomit of Carduus Posset Drink; or of Oxymel, or Wine of Squills, or of a
Decoction of the Flowers of Chamomil, or of the Roots of Eupatorium, or give a
Solution of the Salt of Vitriol, or such like; then let the remainder be gently
carried off by Glisters, or by a Purge of Pilulae Mastichin: or Pil. Stomach.
cum Gummis, Tinctura Sacra, or an Infusion of Rhubarb.

Moreover, when an impure or rank Blood, conveying ever and anon new Stores of
offensive matter to the Stomach, either by the Arteries, or by the Gall-Vessels
which often overflow, causes a disposition to Vomit, Bleeding frequently
affords relief, and therefore Women with Child troubled with Vomiting, are
often Cured by this means; those things also do good which so temper the Blood,
that they keep it free from breeding adust Excrements: Hence Whey, Mineral
Waters, Juices of Herbs, Sal Prunella, and such like, for as much as they fuse
the Blood, and convey its dreggy Particles some other way, often remove
Vomiting dispositions. These sorts of Remedies may also be used in case a
frequent and daily Vomiting proceeds (as some think it may) from the meetings
and contest of the Bilous and Pancreatick humors, and from their regurgitation
into the Ventricle.

The more frequent Vomiting, and harder to be Cured, is that which proceeds
from a disagreeing matter, and consequently Emetick engendered within the
Ventricle, to wit, by reason of the vitiated ferment of the Stomach, whatsoever
is taken into it degenerates into an irritating Mass of Corruption; wherefore
in this case, after that the filth of the Stomach is cleans'd forth by gentle
Evacuatives, Remedies commonly called Digestives are generally used; which
according as the fermenting Juice of the Stomach (being for the most part of a
Saline Nature, and sometimes of a Sulphurous) is in a various state of
fixtness, flowing, or adustion, are variously prescribed, and sometimes these,
sometimes the others do most good.

In Belching and Acid Vomiting, these following Medicines may be tried, and you
may fix upon your method of Cure according to what you find agrees best.

Take Powder of Aron Compound an Ounce and a half, Salt of Wormwood two Drams,
Sugar of Roses three Drams, make a Powder: give a Dram of it in the Morning,
and at five a Clock in the Afternoon, in a little draught of Beer boiled with
Mace and a Crust of Bread, or give it in the distilled Water, or Tincture of
Roman Wormwood.

Take the Powders of Ivory, Crabs Eyes, and red Coral, of each two Drams,
Calcind Coral one Dram, red Saunders, Cinnamon of each half a Dram, make a
Powder: the Dose is half a Dram after the same manner.

Take the Powders of Lignum Aloes, yellow Saunders, Winters Bark, of each two
Drams, of white Chalk six Drams, Sugar Candy half an Ounce, with the Solution
of Tragacanth in Mint Water as much as suffices, make a Past, and let it be
formed into Troches, weighing half a Dram; let the Patient take three or four
of these thrice, or oftener in a day.

Take Tincture of Salt of Tartar an Ounce, the Dose is from a Scruple to half a
Dram twice a day in some proper distilled Water.

In hot and sharp or tartish Vomiting, Medicines endowed with a sharp or
tartish and vitriolate Salt are more proper. The famous Medicine of Riverius in
this case does well.

Take Salt of Wormwood a Scruple, give it in a spoonful of Juice of Limmons.

Take prepared Coral two Drams, Salt of Wormwood a Dram and a half, Juice of
Limmons four Ounces, let all stand in a large Glass; add to it of strong
Cinnamon Water two Ounces, give a spoonful or two twice a day, first shaking
the Glass.

Take Powders of Ivory and Coral of each two Drams, Vitriol of Steel a Dram,
Sugar Candy a Dram, mix them, then divide the whole into six or eight parts, of
which take one part twice a day in some convenient Vehicle.

In this case, Purging Mineral Waters which have much Nitre in them, also
Waters that come from an Iron Mineral, and likewise our Artificial Chalybeate
Waters prove of notable effect.

When at any time the Stomach perverts the most part of what comes into it,
into a bilous and bitterish Mass of filthy corruption (as it often uses to do)
and for that reason is prone to frequent Vomitings, then both acid and bitter
things are proper.

Take Elixir Proprietatis an Ounce, the Dose is a Scruple twice a day in some
fit Vehicle.

Take Rhubarb Powdered twenty five Grains, Salt of Wormwood a Scruple,
Cinnamon Water half an Ounce, Juice of Limmons an Ounce, let it be taken alone,
or with some other Liquor.

Take Powder of Aron Compound an Ounce and a half, white Christals of Tartar
three Drams, Vitriol of Steel a Dram, Sugar half an Ounce, make a Powder: the
Dose is half a Dram, or two Scruples every Morning, drinking after it a draught
of the Tincture of Roman Wormwood, or some Coffee.

Take Powder of Crabs Eyes half an Ounce, Chalybeat Tartar two Drams,
Sugar Candy a Dram, make a Powder: the Dose is half a Dram, with a fit Vehicle
twice a day.

Oftentimes the cause of a frequent and habitual Vomiting, is not so much the
matter irritating the Ventricle, as the extreme debility of its Nervous Fibers,
which are neither able to Concoct what is taken into the Stomach, nor to endure
the weight or burden of it, but are presently irritated by any thing lying
upon them, and stir up the Carnous Fibers to Excretory Convulsions.

There are two principal causes of this sort of Affect, viz. either the
debility of the Stomach arising from the Fibers themselves, is gotten by
disorder in eating and drinking, so that those Fibers, for as much as they are
beyond measure extended or overheated, and as it were scorched, are not
capable of admitting or containing a sufficient plenty of Animal Spirits: Or
Secondly, These Fibers though they may be well enough disposed of themselves,
yet for that the Nerves are in some other place obstructed, they are destitute
of a due Afflux of Spirits, whence becoming languid and flaxid, they cannot
bear what is taken in, but presently finding themselves overcharged, throw all
forth by Vomiting.

In the former Affect, those Remedies are indicated, which by their Styptick
force cause the too much distended and tenuated Fibers to corrugate and
contract themselves into a shorter space; also such as by their most grateful
refreshment enliven their languishing Spirits, and allure others more
plenteously to them.

Take Mynsicht 's Elixir of Vitriol an Ounce, give from ten Grains to fifteen
twice or thrice a day in a spoonful of the following distilled Water, drinking
seven or eight spoonfuls of the same after it.

Take Cypress Tops six handfuls, Clary Leaves four handfuls, the outward Coats
of twelve Oranges, Cinnamon, Mace, of each an Ounce, the Roots of Cyperus and
the lesser Galingal of each half an Ounce, being sliced and bruised, let them
be put into eight pounds of Brunswich Beer, and distilled in an ordinary Still.

Take Tincture of the Balsam of Tolu, extracted with the Tincture of Salt of
Tartar an Ounce: the Dose is twenty Grains with the same Vehicle: the Tincture
of Wormwood prepared with the same Menstruum may also be tried.

Take Powder of the Leaves of Wormwood and Myrtle dried in the Sun in the
Summer time, of each two Drams, Cinnamon, Flowers of red Roses of each a Dram,
Cubebs, Roots of the lesser Galingal of each half a Dram, red Coral prepared a
Dram; make of all a subtle Powder, then with six Ounces of double refined Sugar
dissolved in Cinnamon Water, and boiled up to a consistency, make it up in
little Cakes, weighing half a Dram, let one or two of these be eaten often in a
day, as the person pleases.

Take Conserve of red Roses vitriolated four Ounces, Myrobalans condited six
Drams, Ginger condited in the Indies half an Ounce, Species of Hyacinth two
Drams, the reddest Crocus Martis one Dram, Syrup of Corals what will suffice,
make of all an Electuary, the Dose is a Dram twice a day, drinking after it a
little draught of the distilled water.

In the debility or resolution of the Ventricle, by reason of the Nerves being
somewhere else abstructed, Paralytick Remedies joined with Stomachicks must
chiefly be insisted on.

Take Elixir Proprietatis Tartariz'd an Ounce, the Dose is a Scruple twice a
day, with the water above prescribed. The Tinctures of Salt of Tartar, of
Coral, of Antimony may be used after the same manner. In this case also the
sweet spirit of Salt, tht spirit of Sal Armoniack, or its Flowers are of great
effect: Moreover Vomits, Purges, and even Diaphoreticks are often successively
administered, I have known this Distemter sometimes happily Cured by Bathing in
our hot Baths at Bathe.

CHAP. III. Instructions concerning Purging, with prescripts of Purges.
AS Nature often Purges it self according to three Degrees, so there are three
Degrees of Purging by Medicine.

The first is soft and easy, gently expelling any loose matter contained in
the Ventricle and the Intestines.

The second reaches not only that, but Purges likewise other humors from the
Bilous and Pancreatick Passages, and from the Mouths of the Vessels.

The third performs all this, and that in a more full manner, and going yet
farther, strongly Purges from the Blood, and consequently from the Nervous
Juice and other parts, an Excrementitious matter which is brought by the
Arteries into the Intestines.

As for what concerns the choice to be used in Purging Medicines, though we do
not approve of those cried up Classes of Medicines appropriated to this or that
Juice or Humor; yet we do not think that all Purges are indifferently to be
used in all cases, but that there is need of a strong Judgment, and a wary
circumspection in a Physician, that according to the strength of his Patients,
their temperament, the state and ability of the Viscera, their bearing,
custom, and fancy, and so according to the nature, of the Disease, its time
and quality, he prescribe a Purge more gentle or strong; and that of hot
things, or temperate, gentle or more smart, and in a solid substance or a
liquid, or something of some other certain kind and form, as he shall see good.

A Purge therefore being not convenient at all times, nor in every state of
Body; to proceed as we ought, we must take a fit season, and use a certain
preparation, and both these have regard to the first passages, and to the Mass
of Blood.

As to the first, if at any time the Stomach be loaded with a Mass of viscous
Phlegm, or troubled with the boiling of Turgid Choler, a Purge most commonly
either becomes of no effect or does hurt, unless those contents are first of
all cleans'd forth by a Vomit, or unless their oppression and effervescency be
corrected by digestives.

As to what regards the Blood, a Purge is often unseasonable, sometimes also
inconvenient, and in neither of these cases Preparatives commonly so called,
but only Alteratives are proper, for the business is not to dispose those
imaginary humors for evacution, but the Blood it self ought to be reduced from
its troubled and confused state to a calm condition, or from its debility and
fallen Crasis to its vigor and even temperament. Whilst the Blood Feaverishly
boiling is disturbed in its mixture, Purging is always found hurtful; and so
whilst its Mass being become languid and weak, does not arise to its due
fermentation, that sort of Evacuation is no less forbidden. Moreover, when the
Blood is too bilous or watery, or too much inclined to Coagulations or Fusions,
Purges for the most part do not take away those its defaults or depravations,
but most commonly increase them: Wherefore in those cases altering Remedies are
rather Indicated which may destroy the undue Separations and Combinations of
the Salts, Sulphur and Serum, and take away other their enormities. Of these
Digestives and Alteratives which supply the place of common Preparatives, we
shall speak particularly hereafter.

The chiefest Compositions of Purging Medicines being Potions, Powders,
Bolus's, Electuaries, Morsels or Tablets, and Physick-Ales or Wines, we shall
here set down certain of the more Select Forms of each of them, and those of a
threefold kind, according as the operation of the Medicine ought to be gentle,
mean, or strong; to which in the fourth place we shall add Prescripts of easily
prepared Purges for poor People.

1. Gentle Potions. Take Rhubarb sliced three Drams, yellow Saunders half a
Dram, Salt of Tartar a Scruple, make a cold Infusion all Night in Cichory water
and White Wind, of each two Ounces and a half, to three Ounces of Clear
straining, add Syrup of Cichory with Rhubarb half an Ounce, Cinnamon water two
Drams, make a Potion.

2. Mean Potions. Take of the best Senna three Drams, Rhubarb, Troches of
Agarick of each a Dram and a half, yellow Saunders two Scruples, Salt of Tartar
half a Dram, Coriander-seeds a Dram; let them have a close Infusion all Night
in Spring Water and White Wind made warm, of each three Ounces; to four Ounces
of it strained, add of the Purging Syrup of Apples an Ounce, Aqua Mirabilis two
Drams, make a Potion: Or, Take the decoction of Senna Gerionis four Ounces,
Syrrup of Roses Solutive an Ounce, Cream of Tartar half a Dram, Cinnamon water
two Drams, make a Potion.

Take the best Senna, Cassia Fistula, Tamarinds, of each half an Ounce,
Coriander-seeds two Drams, boil all in ten Ounces of Spring Water, till a third
part be consumed, strain it, and Clarify it with the White of an Egg, add to
it the Syrup of Apples an Ounce, make a Potion.

3. Strong Potions. Take of the decoction of Sena Gerionis (with the addition
of the strings of black Hellebore and Agarick, of each a Dram and a half) six
Ounces, Syrup of Roses Solutive, or of the flowers of Peaches an Ounce, Aqua
Mirabilis two Drams: Or,

Take of the best Sena half an Ounce, strings of black Hellebore, Turbith, of
each two Drams, yellow Saunders a Dram, Coriander-seeds a Dram and a half, Salt
of Tartar half a Dram; let it infuse close all Night in eight Ounces of
White Wind made warm, to five Ounces of the Clear straining, add of the
Electuary of the Juice of Roses three Drams, Syrup of Buck-thorn six Drams,
Cinnamon water two Drams, make a Potion.

Potions of easy preparation for the Poor. Take of Flaxweed a handful, sweet
Fennel-seeds two Drams, boil them in a sufficient quantity of Spring Water till
it comes to six Ounces, add to it of White Wind two Ounces, make a Potion.
After the same manner you may make a Purging Potion of the Flowers of Damask
Roses; also of Peach Leaves, and so of the Roots of Eupatorium Avicennae.

PILLS. First of a gentle Operation. Take of Stomach Pills with Gums, from a
Scruple to half a Dram, Tartar vitriolated two Grains, Balsam of Peru what will
suffice, make thereof three or four Pills. After the same manner may be made
Pills of the mass of Pilul. Ruffi, of Pilul. Mastichin: of Pilul. de Succino,
and of our extract Solutive, the description of which you may find in our Tract
of the Scurvy.

2. Mean Pills. Take of Stomach Pills with Gumms half a Dram, Rosin of Julap
from four Grains to ten, Tartar vitriolated six Grains, Ammoniacum dissolved,
as much as will suffice, make four Pills. After the same manner may be made
Pills of the mass of Pilulae de Succino, Tartari Quercitani: Also instead of
Rosin of Jluap, you may put Scammony Sulphurated, from six Grains to twelve, or
Rosin of Scammony from eight Grains to fourteen. Or, Take Stomach Pills with
Gumms a Scruple, Rosin of Julap from six Grains to twelve, Balsam of Peru as
much as will suffice, make four Pills.

3. Strong Pills. Take Pilulae Rudii half a Dram, Rosin of Julap from eight
Grains to twelve, Balsam of Peru what will suffice, make four Pills to be taken
cum Regimine. After the like manner Pills may be made of the mass of Pilulae
Cochiae, de Sagapeno. Take of Pilulae ex duobus from a Scruple to half a Dram,
Calamelanos a Scruple, make four Pills to be taken Cum Regimine.

4. Pills easily prepared, and cheaper. Take Powder of the best Jalap two
Drams, Diagridium a Dram, Cloves, Ginger, of each a Scruple, Ammoniacum
dissolved, as much as will suffice, make a mass, the Dose is half a Dram.

Take of Pilulae Cochiae, from half a Dram to two Scruples, let four Pills be
made.

POWDERS. First, such as are gentle. Take of Rhubarb Powdered half a Dram, Salt
of Wormwood half a Scruple, Cloves two Grains, make a Powder, give it in a
spoonful of small Cinnamon Water, or in a little Broth.

Take of the greater Compound Powder of Sena, from half a Dram to a Dram, in a
little draught of Posset Drink.

Take Powder of the Leaves of Sena a Scruple, Calamelanos seventeen Grains,
yellow Saunders half a Scruple, make a Powder, give it in a spoonful of Panada.

2. Mean Powders. Take Powder of Diasena a Dram, Cream of Tartar a Scruple,
make a Powder, give it in a little draught of Broth.

Take Rosin of Jalap ten Grains, Calamelanos a Scruple, Cloves six Grains, make
a Powder, and take it after the same manner.

Take Species of Diaturbith with Rhubarb, from half a Dram to a Dram, Cream of
Tartar from a Scruple to half a Dram.

3. Strong Powders. Take Turbith, Hermodacts of each three Drams, Diagridium a
Dram, Ginger a Scruple, make a Powder, the Dose is from half a Dram to a Dram.

Take Pulvis Cornachini a Dram; after the same manner may be given the Compound
Powder of Hermodacts; also the Hydrotick Powder of Riverius.

4. Cheap Powders and easy to be got. Take Powder of the Roots of the best
Jalap a Dram, Ginger a Scruple, give it in a little draught of White Wind; so
you may give Powder of the Roots of Mechoachan, also of the Leaves of Sena in
any Liquor.

BOLUS's and ELECTUARIES. First, such as work gently. Take of the Lenitive
Electuary half an Ounce, Cream of Tartar half a Dram, Syrup of Roses what
suffices, make a Bolus. Take fresh Cassia half an Ounce, Powder of Rhubarb half
a Dram, Cream of Tartar a Scruple, Syrup of Roses as much as suffices, make a
Bolus.

2. Mean. Take of the Lenitive Electuary half an Ounce, Cream of Tartar half a
Dram, Rosin of Julap six Grains, Syrup of Roses what suffices, make a Bolus.

Take of the Electuary Diaphaenicon half an Ounce, of the Compound Powder of
Hermodacts half a Dram, Syrup of Elder what suffices, make a Bolus.

3. Strong Workers. Take of the Electuary of the Juice of Roses half an Ounce,
Rosin of Julap ten Grains, Cream of Tartar half a Dram, Syrup of Elder what
suffices, make a Bolus.

Electuaries are Compounded of the same things made up in a greater quantity,
by adding Conserves of Damask Roses, or of the Flowers of Peaches; the Dose is
the quantity of a Chestnut to be taken betimes every Morning, or twice or thrice
a Week.

4. Bolus's and Electuaries easily prepared. Take Powder of the Roots of Julap
an Ounce, of Mechoachan half an Ounce, of Ginger two Drams, of Cloves a Dram,
Cream of Tartar three Drams, Salt of Wormwood a Dram, Sugar two Ounces, Syrup
of Roses Solutive what suffices, make an Electuary, the Dose is the quantity of
a Wallnut.

Confectio Solutiva, and Passulae Laxantes, the Diapranum of Sylvius in the 30.
Page of his Practice of Physic.

5. Morsells or Tablets of a mean operation. Take Powder of Mechoacan, Gummous
Turbith of each half an Ounce, Scammony sulphurated two Drams, Rosin of Jalap a
Dram, yellow Saunders a Dram, Cream of Tartar two Drams, Conserve of Violets an
Ounce, Sugar dissolved in Rose Water, and boiled up to a fit consistency a
Pound. Make Tablets according to Art, each weighing a Dram, the Dose is one or
two. The Purging Tablets of Sylvius, Page the 28. of his Practice of Physic.

6. Physical or Purging Wines and Ales of a mean operation. Take Leaves of Sena
an Ounce and a half, Turbith, Mechoacan of each six Drams, strings of black
Hellebore three Drams, Cubebs, Galingal Roots, choice Cinnamon of each two
Drams: Put all in a large Glass, with four Pounds of Rhenish-wine, adding to it
Salt of Tartar a Dram and a half, let it stand cold and close covered for six
days, add to it Sugar Candy three Ounces, strain it through Hippocrates Sleeve,
the Dose is three or four Ounces.

Take Leaves of Sena three Ounces, Roots of Polypody of the Oak, and of sharp
Pointed Dock prepared, of each two Ounces, Turbith, Mechoacan, of each an Ounce
and a half, Epithymum, yellow Saunders of each an Ounce, Coriander-seeds an
Ounce and a half; let them be sliced and bruised, and put in a Bag according to
Art, for four Gallons of Ale. the Dose is from twelve Ounces to a Pound, either
every Morning, or twice or thrice a Week.

CHAP. IV. A Cure for Over-purging, or of Medicines that stay too much Purging,
or a Looseness: Also the Cure of the London-Flux; with Instructions in each
Case.
TO prevent over-purging upon giving any Purging Medicine, we must proceed
thus: Before we give a Purge, we must first consider well the Constitution,
Strength and Custom of the Body to be Purged; as also the Nature, Dose, manner
of Working, and ordinary effects of the Medicine to be given, and then by
comparing the one with the other, we must proportionate the virtue of the Agent
according to the bearing of the Patient. Secondly, whilst the Medicine is
working, let the Viscera where digestion is performed, the Blood, and the
Animal Spirits be kept free from any other perturbation: Wherefore during that
time, let not the Patient eat gross or viscous food, or too great a plenty of
any food, which may offend the Stomach, let him carefully avoid the admittance
of any outward cold, by which the Pores of the Body are shut up, also let the
mind be kept calm and undisturbed, free from all Cares and toilsome Studies.
Thirdly, The Operation of the Medicine being ended, we must appease the angry
rage of the Animal Spirits, and allay the effervescence of the Blood and
Humors; for which ends let an Anodine Medicine, or a gentle Hypnotick be given
according to the following forms.

Take Water of Cowslip Flowers two Ounces, Cinnamon Water hordeated, Syrup of
Maeconium, of each half an Ounce, Pearls half a Scruple, make a draught to be
taken going to rest: Or,

Take Conserve of red Roses vitriolated two Scruples, Diascordium half a Dram,
Pearls half a Scruple, Diacodium what suffices, make a Bolus to be taken going
to sleep.

In case this Provision be either omitted, or does not hinder a Purging
Medicine from working to excess, let the Patient presently be put into a warm
Bed, and be ordered as follows. First, Let either a Plaster of Mithridate be
applied to his Stomach, and to the whole upper Region of the Belly; or let
those parts be fomented with warm Linen Clothes, dipped in a decoction of
Wormwood, Mints, and Spices in red Wine, and so wiung forth; presently upon it
let him take inwardly either a Bolus of Venice Treacle, or a Solution of it in
Cinnamon Water. Moreover, let him drink every now and then a spoonful or two of
Burnt-wine, diluted with a little Mint-water; if he be troubled with Gripes,
give him a Glister of warm Milk with Treacle dissolved in it, and warm
frictions must be used to the remote parts, and sometimes Ligatures to draw the
Blood outward, and so keep it from too great a Colliquation, and from
discharging it self into the Cavities of the Viscera; then in the Evening if
there be strength, and a pretty good Pulse, let him take a Dose either of
Diacodium, or of Liquid Laudanum with some fit Vehicle.

As to other kinds of excessive Purging, which are wont to happen without the
Administration of a Purging Medicine, for the most part they are merely
Symptomatical, depending on other Diseases, and their method of Cure is wholly
the same as of those Diseases, whose offspring they are: Nevertheless
sometimes a Looseness, or Flux seems to be a Disease of it self, and because
this kind of Distemper Raging almost yearly in the City of London, is commonly
accounted Endemious, or a Disease peculiarly attending Inhabitants, I shall
here set down its method of Cure.

I have often and long observed that there are two, and that very different
kinds of that Flux (usually called the Griping of the Guts) which happens here
almost yearly about Autumn: In one of them the Stools are watery, and in a
manner clear, with a sudden failing of the strength; in the other they are
bloody, but tolerable withal.

In the Year 1670. about the Autumnal Equinox, a World of People here were
seized with a most dangerous Flux (though without Blood) and joined with a
cruel Vomiting, which presently caused great faintings, and a total decay of
strength.

For the Cure of this Disease no Evacuation did good, nay Bleeding, Vomiting,
and Purging always did hurt; only Cordials, and those of the hottest nature, to
wit, such as abounded with Spirit and Sulphur, or a Volatile Salt proved
commonly of good effect; insomuch that Brandy burnt a little with Sugar was a
Popular, and as it were Epidemick Remedy, and in that sort of Flux was seldom
given without success, though in the other sort of Flux which carried Blood
with it, having been used without due regard, it has often been found to be
hurtful: The method of Cure which I then took successfully enough with many,
and am wont still to take in the like case, is after the following manner.

Take Venice Treacle from a Dram to a Dram and a half; let the Patient take it
in Bed, and drink after it seven or eight spoonfuls of the following Julap, and
let him repeat this Dose every third, fourth, or fifth hour.

Take Mint-water, Cinnamon Water hordeated, of each three Ounces, strong
Cinnamon Water, Plague-water, Treacle-water, of each two Ounces, Powder of
Pearls a Dram, Sacchari Crystalin half an Ounce, mingle them and make a Julap:
At the same time take a piece of Bread, spread some Treacle on it, and dip it
in Sack or Red-wine warmed, and let it be applied to the Stomach as hot as it
may be suffered, and change it every now and then.

In the Evening, if the Pulse and Breathing seem strong enough to bear it, let
the Patient take of Liquid Laudanum Cydoniated twenty Grains in a draught of
Plague-water.

Take Diascordium a Dram, Liquid Laudanum half a Scruple, Compound Powder of
Crabs Claws a Scruple, Cinnamon Water what suffices, make a Bolus to be taken
going to sleep.

To those to whom Treacle or Mithridate prove nauseous or disagreeing, give a
Dose of the following Powder, or Spirit of Treacle every third hour, with the
Julap.

Take Compound Powder of Crabs Claws, Roots of Contrayerva, or Serpentaria
Virgin, of each a Dram, Cinnamon, Roots of Tormentil, of each half a Dram,
Saffron, Cochinele of each a Scruple, make a Powder, the Dose is from half a
Dram to two Scruples.

Take Spiritus Theriacalis Armoniacus three Drams, the Dose is a Scruple, with
the Julap every fourth hour, or give that, and the Doses of the Powder
interchangeably, one, one time, and the other, the other: After the same manner
the Spirits of Harts-horne. or of Soot may be given; let the persons Drink be
Ale or Beer with a Crust of Bread, Mace, add Cinnamon boiled in it and
sweetened; or let it be Burnt-wine diluted with Mint-water; let his Food be
Chicken-broth, Gruel or Panada, with the shavings of Ivory, Hartshorn, and the
Roots of Scorzonera, etc. boiled in it.

About the Autumnal Equinox, in the Year 1671. a desperate Bloody Flux seized
on many persons in this City; from the first seizing they voided Blood by seige
in abundance, and that frequently, and for the most part it was attended with a
Belly-ach, and Gripes, continual watchings also with a Fever, and a mighty
thirst usually troubled them; nevertheless their strength held commonly pretty
well for some considerable time, and if the Flux were stopped sooner than it
ought, it rendered the Patients conditions worse.

The method of Cure, with the Remedies which I found to give Relief in many
persons, was according to the following manner.

Take Venice-Treacle a Dram, Liquid Laudanum Cydoniated twenty Grains, make a
Bolus to be taken going to rest.

Take Conserve of red Roses vitriolated two Ounces, Venice-Treacle an Ounce,
Powders of the Roots of Tormentil, Contrayerva, Pearl, Coral prepared, of each
a Dram, Syrup of dried Roses what suffices, make an Electuary to be taken every
fourth or fifth hour, and let the person drink after it of the following Julap
three Ounces.

Take the Waters of Mint, Baum, Cinnamon hordeated, of each four Ounces,
Treacle-water, Plague-water, of each two Ounces, Pearl a Dram, Sugar an Ounce,
mingle them and make a Julap.

After a day or two give a Purging Potion, which leaves an Astringency.

Take Rhubarb sliced two Drams, yellow Mirobalans sliced a Dram and a half, red
Saunders, Cinnamon of each a Scruple; let them infuse all Night in the Waters
of Plantain and Cinnamon hordeated, of each two Ounces and a half, wring it
forth hard, then add of strong Cinnamon Water a Dram and a half, make a
Draught.

Every Evening, and also in certain cases in the Daytime, I was wont to give a
pretty large Dose of Laudanum; nor have I ever known this Medicine to have done
any prejudice to a person troubled with the Flux, which happen's either because
the Narcotick force of the Medicine is subdued, or made more gentle by the Acid
Juice of the Stomach, or rather that its Particles which are transmitted to the
Blood, are thence presently cast forth again with the Bloody Stools, so that
they do not affect the Brain.

If the abovementioned Electuary be found nauseous to any person, or disagrees
with him, the following Powder may be given in its stead.

Take Pulvis Pannonici Rubri a Dram, Roots of Contrayerva half a Dram, make a
Powder, divide it into three parts, and give one part in any Liquor.

Take Bole Armenick alexiteriated (that is, impregnated with the Juices of the
Leaves of Tormentil, Bistort, red Roses, etc. and dried in the Sun) Roots of
Contrayerva, of each a Dram, Pearl, red Coral, white amber, of each half a
Dram, make a Powder: the Dose is from two Scruples to a Dram.

Take the Roots of Avens and Scorzonera, of each an Ounce, of Tormentil,
Bistort and Contrayerva, of each two Drams and a half, burnt Hartshorn three
Drams, shavings of Ivory and Hartshorn, of each two Drams, Cochinele half a
Dram, red Rose-leaves two Drams, boil all in a sufficient quantity of Spring
Water, till it comes to two Pounds, toward the end of the boiling add conserve
of red Roses three Ounces, to the Clear straining add Plague-water four Ounces:
the Dose is three Ounces.

To appease the Gripes and fretting of the Bowels, Glysters are commonly
prescribed.

Take the decoction of the Tops of St. John's-wort, in which Sheeps Trotters or
their Mesentery has boiled eight or twelve Ounces, Venice-Treacle two Drams,
Oil of St. John's-wort an Ounce and a half, make a Glister.

The Therapeutick Indications into which the method before expressed of curing
the Bloody Flux may be resolved, are chiefly four, etc. two regard the Blood,
and as many the Viscera. First, as to the Blood, its recrementitious and
depraved dreggs which tend inwards, must be driven forth into the habit of the
body, that they may exhale by perspiration, and its coagulations must be
dissolved, and its Crasis restored, as soon as may be. Secondly, as to what
regards the Viscera, the irksome sensation of the Nervous Fibers, and the
irritation of the Carnous Fibers to excretory Convulsions must be appeased, and
the Mouths of the Vessels must be shut, to keep them from discharging the blood
and humors into the Intestines. The first of these is usually performed with
Opiats, and the other with Stiptick or Astringent Remedies: Besides these we
must have regard to urging Symptoms, and ill affects usually attending this
Disease, the chief of which are a Fever, with a Thirst and Wakings, Gripings
of the Guts, and sometimes their fretting, Inflammation, and Ulcers.

We must not proceed upon those four chief Indications severally and
successively, but we must take them altogether, and set upon them at once;
wherefore the Prescripts ought to comprehend Remedies of diverse kinds, to wit,
Alexipharmicks, Stypticks, Diaphoreticks and Opiats: And because it is not an
easy thing to put these into a set method, and under set Rules, which may be
generally applied; I have rather chosen to give you here some Examples of Cures
performed by me in the Bloody Flux in the year 1671.

To a Gentleman 25 years of Age, to whom I was called the third day after he
was seized. I prescribed the following Bolus.

Take Venice Treacle a Dram, Liquid Laudanum Cydoniated a Scruple, mix them,
let him drink after it a little draught of the following Julap. Take waters of
Tormentil, Mints, and Cinnamon hordeated, of each four Ounces, Treacle water
and Plague water of each two Ounces, Pearl a Dram, Sugar an Ounce, make a
Julap. He took besides of the following Electuary about a Dram and a half every
third hour, with the said Julap.

Take Conserve of Red Roses two Ounces, Venice Treacle an Ounce, Powder of the
Roots of Tormentil, Contrayerva, Pearl, Coral prepared of each half a Dram,
Syrup of Red Poppies what suffices.

By the use of these Remedies the rigor of the Disease soon abated, so that he
had not above six or seven stools in the space of twenty four hours, and those
also were not very Bloody as before, but appeared full of little flakes of
Flesh, and of fragments, as it were of Membranes: Every Evening he took an
Opiate with Laudanum.

The Fifth day of his illness he took the following Potion.

Take Rhubarb sliced two Drams, yellow Mirobalanes a Dram and a half, yellow
Saunders half a Dram, Powder of Cinnamon a Scruple; Salt of Wormwood half a
Scruple; let them infuse all night in the waters of Plantain and Cinnamon
hordeated, of each two Ounces and a half, to the straining add strong Cinnamon
water two Drams

It purged him three or four times, and gave him ease, and the next day the
Fever being abated, he was better; so that seeming to grow well, he eat flesh.
But shortly upon it fell into a Relapse, so that the Flux returning with the
Fever, it presently became more violent than it was at first: Then because the
former Medicines began to nauseate him, I prescribed after the following manner.

Take Powders of Tormentil Roots, of Contrayerva, Bole Armenick Alexiteriated,
of each a Dram, Pearl, Red Coral prepared, White Amber, of each half a Dram,
make a Powder, the Dose is half a Dram in the following distilled water.

Take Tops of Cypress and Myrtle, of each four handfuls, Leaves of
Meadow-sweet, Burnet, St. John's Wort, Avens, of each four handfuls, Roots of
Tormentil, Bistort, of each six Drams, Red Rose-flowers four handfuls, Kermes
Berries four Ounces, Cinnamon, Mace, of each one Ounce. Being all sliced and
bruised together, pour to them Red Florence Wine, and Red Rose water of each
four pounds; distill all in a common Still; let the whole Liquor be mingled and
sweetened with Syrup of Coral. He took also three or four times a day of the
following decoction three or four Ounces.

Take Roots of Avens and Scorzonera, of each an Ounce, of Tormentil two Drams,
Hartshorn burnt and powdered six Drams, shavings of Ivory and Hartshorn, of each
two Drams, Tops of St. John's Wort a handful, Flowers of Red Roses and
Balaustiae, of each a pugil. Boil all in three pounds of fountain water, till
it comes to two, adding toward the end of the boiling, of Red Lisbon wine four
Ounces; let it boil close covered for an hour, then let it be strained through
Hippocrates Sleeve.

Every night he took a Scruple of Liquid Laudanum in three Ounces of the Bloody
Flux water even now described, with three Drams of Syrup of Clove Gilly-flowers
in it.

His common drink was a decoction of burnt Hartshorn with Barley, a Crust of
Bread, Mace and Cinnamon; to a Pint and a half of which, a Pint of new Milk was
added.

He took the Purging Infusion a second time, by the use of which, and the
things before mentioned, within ten days the Fever left him, and the Flux
became much more gentle, which though without Gripes or much Blood, yet still
continued with the little pieces of Flesh, the fragments of Membranes, and a
bloody Phlegm or Gelly, which daily came from him.

Therefore to strengthen and heat the intestines, the following things were
given.

Take Tops of St. John's wort, Leaves of Perwincle and Mousear, of each a
handful, Red Rose Flowers two pugils: Boil them in the Broth of a Sheeps Guts:
To a pound of the Liquor strained, add Oil of St. John's Wort two Ounces, Honey
of Roses an Ounce and a half: mingle them for two Glysters, whereof one was
given him in the Morning, the other at five a Clock in the Afternoon. He wore
Emplast. de minio and Paracelsi upon him Belly. He took moreover twice a day
three Ounces of Juice of Plantain wrung forth with water of Scordium and Plague
water. He eat also every day a Quince made hollow, and filled with the Powders
of Olibanum, Mastick, and Balsam of Tolu, and so roasted in the Embers.

By the constant use of these Remedies, he grew perfectly well within a Month.

About the same time another robust young man, fell into a dreadful Bloody
Flux; from the first day he was seized, frequent stools and very bloody,
presently brake forth with violence, being accompanied with a Pain and Gripes:
Moreover a strong Fever, with a cruel Vomiting, Thirst and Wakings molested
him. These Symptoms being a little mitigated with Opiats, a Delirium and a
Vertigo, with an intermittent Pulse, and horrible extensions and contractions
of his Limbs presently seized him; this happening because the malignant matter
which was inwardly restrained, presently flowed into the Brain and Nerves:
Nevertheless as often as the Looseness and Vomiting returned, these affects
were presently appeased. On the fifth day Vomiting up a bloody matter, he
complained of a great torture in his Stomach, and of a Pain, as though it were
Ulcerated, and in truth I suspected that there might be a beginning of some
Inflamed Blisters, or Ulcers in it, as it usually happens in the Intestines;
but by giving him Emollient Broths with Milk in them, his Vomiting and the
tortures of his Stomach soon ceased, his Flux in the mean time increasing. He
took that night of Diacodium an Ounce, Cowslip water and small Cinnamon water,
of each an Ounce and a half; by which Medicine he was so much relieved, that in
twenty four hours space his Vomiting and Pains left him, and he was only
troubled with a few Stools, and having a good indifferent Pulse, and frequent
Sleeps, he was pretty well; yet the following night, though he took again the
same Opiate, his Flux returned, and that with very frequent Stools, and bloody
as before. The next day after, he took an Infusion of Rhubarb with Mirobalans,
Red Saunders and Cinnamon: He often voided Bilous and very sharp Excrements,
but without the least of Blood; then in the Evening he took Liquid Laudanum
Cydoniated twenty five Grains in a good spoonful of Cinnamon water hordeated;
he had moderate and quiet Sleeps. Afterward loathing any more Medicines, he
took only an Opiate every Evening, sometimes of one sort, and sometimes of
another, and in a short time grew very well.

CHAP. V. Instructions concerning Diuretic Medicines, or such as work by
Urine, with Diuretic Prescripts.
THe chief Scopes, or ends of Diuretic Medicines, are as follows.

First, If at any time the Blood becomes so compact and tenacious from a fixed
Salt, Sulphur, and Earth fermented together, and mutually combined in it, that
the Watery Particles do not easily separate from the rest, Diuretics fit to
loosen its Texture, and to fuse the Serum, must be such as excel in a volatile
or acid Salt; for such Particles chiefly dissolve any coalitions caused by a
fixed Salt. But in regard this disposition is common both to a Fever and the
Scurvy, in the former affect, the most proper Diuretics are the temperate
Acids of Vegetables; also Sal Nitre, the Spirits of Sea Salt, of Vitriol, etc.
And likewise such as have a Volatile Salt, as the Spirits of Hartshorn, of Sal
Armoniack, Salt of Amber, of Vipers, and others of this kind which we have also
ranged amongst Diaphoreticks. In a Scorbutic disposition when the Urine is but
in a small quantity and thick, the Juices of Herbs, and preparations both of a
sharp, or tart and acid nature are of excellent use; also Salt and Spirit of
Urine, of Sal Armoniack, of Tartar, etc.

Secondly, Sometimes the Blood does not retain the Serum long enough within its
Body, but either being obnoxious to Fluxions, or rather Coagulations, it
deposes it here and there in a great abundance, even more than enough; whence
it breeds Catarrhs, or Tumors in many places: Or, the Blood being become of a
weak habit, and withal of a depraved constitution, to wit, inclining to a
sourness its apt to coagulate, as to its more gross Particles, so that the more
subtle Particles being every where thrown off in circulating, and falling on
the weaker parts, cause sometimes distempers of the Head or Breast, sometimes
an Ascites, or Anasarca: And we shall hereafter show how a Diabetes happens
from the like cause: And in truth many difficult Diseases which are falsely
imputed to the ill constitution of the Viscera, arise from hence, viz. that the
Blood being distempered and obnoxious to coagulations, when it cannot continue
its full course of circulation, deposes the Serum in many places, this being
too apt of it self to recede from it. The Diuretics to be given in these
cases, are such as do not fuse the Blood, but make void its coagulations; of
this kind are those things that are endowed with a fixed Volatile, and likewise
Alkalisate Salt; and they must be such as restore and strengthen the Ferment of
the Reins, which is done by certain Sulphurous and Spirituous things. For
these ends are given Sulphurous and mixed Diuretics, Lixivial Salts of Herbs,
Powders of shells, Salt and Spirit of Urine, etc. Millepedes, Horse-Raddish,
Parsly-seed, Nutmegs, Turpentine, and preparations made of it, Spirit of Wine:
The virtues of all which are not to fuse the Blood, and to precipitate
serosities from its Mass (these things are chiefly done by Acids, and in those
cases do commonly hinder any Purging by Urine) but to dissolve the coagulations
of the Blood; so that its Body recovering a perfect mixture, and being more
readily circulated through the Vessels, drinks up the Serum every where
extravasated or deposed, and finally delivers it to the Reins to send it forth.
Now we shall show after what manner according to both these, as it were
opposite, ends of Curing, Diuretics of all kinds operate, and in what forms
they are chiefly prescribed.

The Kinds and Prescripts of Diuretic Medicines.
FIrst then, as to Saline Diuretics, we say that any Salts whatsoever of a
differing nature being put together, lay hold of each other, and are presently
joined in one, and that whilst they are so combined, other Particles freed from
the mixture, separate from each other, or fly away. This is plainly seen when a
fluid or Acid Salt is put to a fixed, or Alkalisate Salt; and so when a fluid or
fixed Salt is put to a Volatile, or a sharp Salt; and indeed on this only
disposition of Salts, depends the whole business of Solutions and
precipitations of what kind soever: Wherefore since the Blood and humors of
our Body very much abound with Salt, which Salt is also wont to be variously
changed from one state to another, and so to cause a Morbid disposition; and
likewise since Saline Diuretics are of diverse kinds, to wit, consisting of
fixed, fluid, nitrous, volatile, or Alkalisate Salts, it will always require a
great discretion and judgment in a Physician to see that the Saline Particles
in the Medicine differ from those in our Body: We shall show after what manner
this ought to be done, by running through each Species of Diuretic Salts.

Amongst Diuretics containing an Acid Salt, Spirit of Salt, or of Nitre; also
Juice of Limmons, of Sorrel, Whitewine, Rhenish and Cider, are of chiefest note
amongst the vulgar, and pretty often perform that intent, for these things
without the help of others fuse the Blood, and precipitate it into serosities,
as when an Acid is dropped into boiling Milk; but this does not happen equally to
all persons, nor to every one alike. In a sound constitution, or not very far
from it, the Salt of the Blood is partly fixed, partly nitrous, and partly
volatile; also in some Scorbutical and Hydropical persons, it becomes for the
most part fixed: In every of these cases Diuretics containing an Acid Salt are
given with success; but in Catarrhous affects, and in some Hydropical and
Scorbutical distempers, when the Salino-fixt Particles of the Blood are exalted
to a state of flowing, and the volatile are deprest, (as it often happens)
Medicines of an Acid nature commonly rather do hurt than good; insomuch as they
more pervert the Blood already degenerated from its Crasis, and Medicines
containing a fixed or volatile Salt, are more proper to be used by such persons.

Prescripts of Diuretics that have an Acid Salt for their Basis.
TAke choice white Tartar powdered, Crystal Mineral of each a Dram and a half,
Powder of Crabs Eyes a Dram: Make a Powder, the Dose is from half a Dram to two
Scruples in a fit Vehicle, repeating it every sixth or eighth hour.

Take Tartar vitriolated or nitrated two Drams, Powder of Eggshells a Dram and
a half, Seeds of Parsley, or of wild Carrots half a Dram: Make a Powder, the
Dose is half a Dram, after the same manner.

Take of the best Spirit of Salt two Drams, Hartshorn burnt and powdered, what
will suffice to imbibe it: Make a Powder, the Dose is from a Scruple to half a
Dram.

Take Juice of Limmons two Ounces, Radish water Compound, an Ounce and a half,
Syrup of the five Roots three Drams: Make a Potion.

Take Juice of Sorrel two Ounces, Whitewine six Ounces: Mingle them for a
Potion.

Take Radish water Compound two Ounces, Water of Pellitory of the Wall four
Ounces, Spirit of Salt a Scruple, twenty five drops, Salt of Tartar fifteen
Grains, Syrup of Violets half an Ounce: Make a Potion.

That Medicines containing a fixed or Lixivial Salt move Urine, it plainly
enough appears from the Vulgar and Empyrical Practice of Physic, which
commonly gives them for Curing Hydropical persons: For its a usual thing in an
Anasarca, and sometimes in an Ascites, when the Viscera, or Fleshy parts are
very much swollen by a loading of Waters: To give a Lixivium made of the Ashes
of Wormwood, or of Broom, or of Bean-stalks with Whitewine, whence it
frequently happens that a very plentiful evacuation by Urine follows, and that
the Disease is taken away. Nevertheless I have observed that this Medicine has
not proved Diuretic to some persons, and rather to have encreast the
Hydropical disposition, than to have cured it. The reason of which if we
enquire into, we shall find by what is said before, that Lixivial Salts neither
fuse Milk, nor Blood, or precipitate them, and therefore that they are not
Diuretic in their own nature, though that effect sometimes follows; because
that a fixed Salt taken in a good plenty, destroys the Energy of the Acid, and
coagulative Salt predominating in the Blood; so that the said Blood, which
before being too apt to fusion, and unable to contain its Serum, did cast it
off from it self in diverse places, now by the intercession of the fixed Salt,
recovers its due Crasis, and therefore drinking up again its extravasated
Serum, and constantly carrying it to the Reins, causes a large Evacuation by
Urine.

Prescripts of Diuretics, which have a fixed Salt for their Basis.
TAke Salt of Tartar, or of Wormwood two Drams, Coral calcined to a whiteness,
a Dram and a half, Nutmegs half a Dram: Make a Powder, the Dose is from half a
Dram to two Scruples.

Take Tincture of Salt of Tartar, from a Dram, to a Dram and a half, Radish
water Compound, an Ounce and a half: Mingle them, give it in a draught of
Posset drink which has had the Roots and Seeds of the great Bur-dock boild in
it.

Take the Deliquium of Salt of Tartar which (whilst the Tincture is extracted)
floats under, and is impregnated with the Sulphur of the Wine, from two
Scruples to a Dram and a half, Whitewine from four Ounces to six, Syrup of the
five Roots half an Ounce: Mingle them, and make a draught to be repeated twice
or thrice a day.

Take Ashes made of the Prunings of the white Vine half a pound, Nutmegs two
Drams, pour to them of White or Rhenish wine two pounds and a half; let it
stand a day in a moderate heat, and close covered, then keep the straining for
use: The Dose is four Ounces twice or thrice a day.

Let Flints be made red hot in the Fire, and be quenched in White wine, or stale
March Beer: Give of the Liquor from six Ounces to eight twice a day.

Take Water of quick Lime, from four Ounces to six, Tincture of Salt of Tartar,
from a Dram to a Dram and a half: Make a draught to be taken twice or thrice a
day.

For the same reason as fixed Salts, sometimes also volatile Salts are given
with good success to move Urine in a sourish distemper of the Blood, to wit,
forasmuch as its Particles when admitted into the Blood destroy the
predominancy of the fluid Salt in it; so that the Blood recovering its due
mixture, and being freed from coagulations and fluxions, drinks up again what
Serum is extravasated, and conveys what is superfluous, to the Reins to be sent
forth by the Ureters. But we may note withal, that Medicines prepared of a
volatile Salt, having particles somewhat fierce in operation and instigating,
when they correct the Crasis of the Blood, dispose what there is superfluous of
Serum to be discharged, sometimes by Sweat as much as by Urine. In this order
of Diuretics, not only the bare volatile Salt drawn forth of Animals and
Minerals ought to be numbered; but likewise the integral parts of Animals and
Vegetables, such as are the Powders and Extracts of Insects and Vegetables of a
smart nature.

Prescripts of Medicines that have a volatile Salt for their Basis.
TAke Salt of Amber, Pure Sal Nitre, of each two Drams: make a Powder, the Dose
is from a Scruple to half a Dram, in a fit Vehicle.

Take Flowers of Sal Armoniack, Crystal Mineral, of each two Drams: Make a
Powder, the Dose is from a Scruple to half a Dram, in a good spoonful of Radish
water compound. Salt of Urine may be given after the same manner.

Take Powder of Bees a Scruple, Lovage-seed a Scruple: Make a Powder, give it
in a spoonful of distilled water.

Take Spirit of Urine, from a Scruple to half a Dram, Radish water compound,
from an Ounce to an Ounce and a half, Juniper water three Ounces, mingle them,
make a draught. Spirit of Tartar may be given after the same manner in a double
quantity.

Take Millepedes prepared two Drams, Flowers of Sal Armoniack half a Dram,
Nutmegs powdered half a Dram, Venice Turpentine what suffices: Make Pills, let
four be taken twice a day.

Take Powder of Burdock-seeds two Drams, Wild Carrot-seed a Dram, Salt of Amber
a Dram, Oil of Nutmegs half a Scruple, Balsamum Capivii what suffices: Make a
Mass, form it into little Pills; of which let four be taken in the Evening, and
as many the next Morning.

Take Roots of Chervil, Stone Parsley, Fennel, Eringo, Cammock or Rest-harrow,
of each an Ounce, Leaves of Saxifrage, Clivers or Goosegrass, of each a
handful, Seeds of Gromwel, Hartwort, of each half a handful, Juniper Berrys six
Drams, boil all in four pounds of fountain water till half be consumed; then
add Rhenish Wine a pound, fine Honey two Ounces: Make an Apozem, the Dose is
six Ounces twice a day.

Take fresh Millepedes two pounds, Leaves of Clivers, Chervil, Saxifrage and
Golden Rod, of each two handfulls, Roots of Horse Radish six Ounces, Nutmegs an
Ounce, Juniper Berrys, Wild Carrot-seeds, of each two Ounces; being sliced and
bruised, pour to them of Whitewine Posset Drink eight pounds, distill it in a
common Still: Let the whole Liquor be mixed, the Dose is four Ounces twice or
thrice a day.

Take fresh Millepedes washed, from forty to sixty, Nutmegs half a Scruple;
being bruised together, put to them distilled Water of Saxifrage three Ounces,
wring it forth hard and drink it.

Take Leaves of Chervil, Macedonian Stone Parsley, of each three handfulls,
being bruised together, pour to them of Whitewine a pound and a half, wring it
forth hard and keep it in a Glass; the Dose is three Ounces twice a day.

Prepare a Tincture of Millepides, Bees, Grasshoppers or of Cantharides dried
with the Tincture of Salt of Tartar; give it from fifteen to twenty or thirty
drops in a fit vehicle.

Nitre is a sort of Salt, but differing from any other Salt, or from the nature
of Saline Particles, being neither Acid, fixed or volatile, but holds the mean
state as it were betwixt those three. And in truth Nitre is the thing by which
all Plants have their vegetation, all Animals live and breath, and every
Sublunary Flame or Fire is kindled and maintained.

But as to our present purpose, it is well enough known that Sal Nitre cools the
Blood, and powerfully provokes Urine, though it seems somewhat strange how
this, which is of so fiery a nature should so quallify the Blood, and run it
into Aquosities to move Urine.

I conceive that Nitre works those effects in a twofold respect, to wit, as it
is a Salt, allied both to a fixed Salt and a volatile, and as it carries a
living Root of Fire in it. As to the first, we observe that Nitre (even as fixed
and volatile Salts) being put into Milk, hinders or takes away its coagulation;
so likewise Blood whilst warm, being poured to this, is preserved from
coagulation, and from being discolored no less than if put to those. Wherefore
since Particles of Nitre inwardly taken preserve the mixture of the Blood
entire, or restore it, it follows that they prevent or take away the fusions or
coagulations of the same, from which heats, and a suppression of Urine, very
often arise. So again, Nitre in regard it carries in it a living Root of Fire,
when inwardly taken, cools the inflamed Blood, and moves Urine, because
(according to what is hinted before) it adds a vigor to the flame of the
Blood, which before was troubled and full of fumes, and so renders it more
clear and pure, and consequently more mild; since therefore the Blood burning
clearer by the access of Nitre becomes of a more loose consistency, the serous
Particles easily get clear of the more gross, and pass away in a more plentiful
manner.

Prescripts of Diuretics that have Sal Nitre for their Basis.
TAke Nitre prepared, two Drams, Barley water with Grass Roots, and Candied
Eringo Roots boiled in it two pounds, Syrup of Violets two Ounces: Mix them,
the Dose is four Ounces twice a day.

Take Sal Prunella two Drams, Sugar Candy a Dram, make a Powder to be divided
into six parts: Let one be taken in a convenient Liquor thrice a day.

Take Sal Prunella two Drams, Salt of Amber a Dram: Make a Powder, the Dose is
half a Dram thrice a day.

Take Sal Prunella, Crabs Eyes, Salt of Wormwood, of each two Drams: Mix them,
the Dose is half a Dram thrice a day.

Its also well known that Powders of Shells, and of certain Stones, containing
an Alchalisate, or Petrifying Salt sometimes promote an evacuation by Urine.
For Powders of Egg-shells, of the Claws and Eyes of Crabs have been to some a
present Remedy in great suppressions of Urine; and if we enquire into their
manner and way of working, we shall soon find that these Medicines do not fuse
the Blood, nor sensibly precipitate it; wherefore it must be said that these
things in a fourish Dicrasie of the Blood and Humors, sometimes prove
Diuretic, inasmuch as closing with the Acid Salts, they bind them and keep
them under; so that the Blood being free from fluxions and coagulations, drinks
up again the extravasated Serum, and conveys it to the Reins.

Prescripts of Diuretics that have an Alchalisate Salt for their Basis.
TAke Powder of Egg-shells, from half a Dram to a Dram: Give it in a draught of
Whitewine, or of Posset drink, or of a Diuretic decoction twice a day.

Take Powder of Crabs Claws, or of Crabs Eyes two Drams, Salt of Amber, Sal
Nitre, of each a Dram, Nutmegs half a Dram: Make a Powder, the Dose is from
half a Dram to two Scruples in a fit Vehicle. Or let the said Powder be mixed
with as much Venice Turpentine as will suffice, and make it into small Pills.
The Dose is three or four Evening and Morning.

Not only Saline, but likewise some Sulphurous and Spirituous substances
justly take place amongst Diuretics, these often producing the like effect.
Many substances of the Larix Tree, as chiefly Turpentine, and things prepared
from them; the Oils drawn by distillation from Juniper, Nutmegs, Wax, and other
Pinguous substances, taken inwardly, move in many persons a large Evacuation by
Urine, and this carrying a smell like Violets. I have known that in some
Hydropical and Scorbutical Persons, Brandy and Strong waters; nay, and strong
Wine freely drank have caused a Purging by Urine. The reason of all which is,
that when the Blood being weak, or turning sour, or what for want of
fermentation, or through the predominancy of an Acid and Coagulative Salt in
it, has not so sprightly and continued a Circulation, that it can contain the
superfluous Serum within it self, till it delivers it to the Reins: The
afovesaid Remedies forasmuch as they preserve the mixture of the Blood entire,
or restore it when faultering, conduce to the promoting of that evacuation by
Urine.

Take Ivy Berrys, Juniper Berrys, Laurel Berrys fresh gathered, of each half a
pound, wild Carrot-seeds four Ounces, Nutmegs two Ounces, all of them being
bruised together, put to them in a Glass Retort of Venice Turpentine one pound,
Rectified spirit of Wine four pounds, distill all in a sand Furnace, with a
moderate heat till it grows dry, carefully avoiding an Epyreuma, and you will
have a spirit, and a yellow Oil, both of them egregiously Diuretic. The Dose
of the Spirit is from a Dram to two or three Drams, of the Oil from half a
Scruple to a Scruple in a fit Vehicle.

To the remaining faeces in the Retort, pour Tincture of Salt of Tartar one
pound; let them digest for many days close luted in the sand Furnace, that a
red Tincture may be drawn from it: The Dose of which is from a Scruple to two
Scruples or a Dram in a fit Vehicle.

Take Millepedes prepared three Drams, Nutmegs one Dram: being bruised, pour to
them the purest Spirit of Turpentine, and Tincture of Salt of Tartar, of each
six Ounces, distill it with a gentle Bath heat, and you will have a Spirit,
Oil, and deliquium of Salt of Tartar, each of them notably endowed with a
Diuretic force.

CHAP. VI. Instructions and Prescripts for Curing too much Purging by Urine,
and particularly the Diabetes or Pissing Evil.
IN a Diabetes, as in most other affects there are three Primary Therapeutick
Indications, viz. Curatory, Preservatory and Vital. The first of these
regarding the Disease, and attempting to stay the too great Effusion of Urine
cannot be accomplished without the second, which aiming at the cause of the
Disease, endeavors to preserve and restore the mixture and due Crasis of the
Blood: Wherefore as to the Cure of this Disease, the chief intentions of
healing must be to keep the Blood from fusion, and in case that happens to take
it away.

First the fusion of the Blood is prevented, so its gross and aqueous parts
reciprocally contain each other, and do not readily and abruptly sever
themselves, which thing is effected by Incrassatives (commonly so called) whose
viscous and glutinous Corpuscles being admitted into the Mass of Blood,
strongly adhere to its Active Particles, and so part them from each other, and
hinder them from mutually combining betwixt themselves, or with Saline
Particles coming from elsewhere, as might otherwise happen through fluxions. In
this respect, Rice, Amylum, Mucilaginous Vegetables, also Gumms and some Rosins
are wont to give relief in this Disease.

Secondly, To restore the Blood after fusion, those sorts of Remedies are
indicated which dissolve the concretions of Salts, so that all the Elementary
Particles in it coming again to be at liberty, recover their former places, and
so restore the Crasis of the Blood to its first vigor. Now its well known that
this effect is produced in coagulated Milk by the addition of a fixed, volatile,
or a nitrous Salt to it; also by the infusion of Spirit of Hartshorn, of Sal
Armoniack and the like. The reason of which doubtless is, that whilst the
Salino-fixt, volatile or nitrous Particles, being in a sufficient quantity put
into the Milk, meet with the Acid or Precipitatory Particles, and are combined
with them; the other Saline Particles which before were bound, being now freed,
and diffused through the Mass of the Liquor, loosen the Sulphurous and Earthy
Parts combined betwixt themselves, and disperse them every way, so that all the
Particles being again equally mixed, mutually contain themselves, and are
contained; yet because Saline Medicaments are accounted by many to be always
Diuretic: We do not give them lightly, or without consideration for the Cure
of a Diabetes, though in this Disease I have prescribed the Tincture of
Antimony with good success. And a water of the Solution of quick Lime with the
Raspings of Sassafras, Aniseeds, Raisins and Liquorish, according to the vulgar
Receipt, is highly commended by some.

The Vital Indication is made good in this Distemper by a thickning and gently
cooling Diet, and by temperate Cordials, and chiefly by apposite and seasonable
Hypnoticks.

A Nobleman in the vigor of his Age, became very prone to an excess of
Pissing, and when for many Months he had been used at times to undergo this
great Flux of Urine, he fell at length into a confirmed Diabetes as it seemed,
and almost past hope of recovery: For besides that, in the space of twenty four
hours, he voided near a Gallon and a half of clear water, and wonderfully
sweet, as though Honey were mixed in it: He was moreover affected with a cruel
Thirst and a Fever, seemingly a Hectic, with a mighty Languor of the Spirits,
a fall of strength, and a Consumption of the whole Body. I then prescribed him
the following Remedies, by the use of which he seemed in a short time to
recover.

Take Cypress Tops, eight handfuls, Whites of Eggs beaten two pounds, Cinnamon
half an Ounce, being cut small, pour to them of new Milk eight pounds, distill
it in an ordinary Still, taking care of an Empyreuma. Let him take six Ounces
thrice a day.

Take Gum Arabic, and Gum Tragacanth, of each six Drams, Penids an Ounce: Make
a Powder, let him take about a Dram, or a Dram and a half twice a day, with
three or four Ounces of the distilled water.

Take Rhuba-b powdered fifteen Grains, Cinnamon six Grains: Make a Powder, let
him take it in the Morning, and renow the Dose within six or seven days.

Take Cowslip water three Ounces, Cinnamon water hordeated two Drams, Syrup of
Meconium half an Ounce: Make a draught to be taken every Evening.

His Diet was only Milk, which he took pretty often in a day, sometimes crude
or diluted with the distilled water, or with Barley water; sowetimes boiled with
White-bread, or with Barley: Growing daily better by the use of these things,
within a Month he seemed to be almost Cured: As he began to grow a little well,
his Urine which was Insipid, did not much exceed the quantity of Liquids he
took, and afterward turning a little Salt, it became less in quantity than
what he drank, and so by degrees recovering the wonted tone of his Spirits and
a good strength, he took to his former Diet.

Nevertheless the disposition to this Disease did not so thoroughly cease, but
afterward being apt frequently to Relapses upon disorders in Living, and happily
upon changes according to the seasons of the year; he first made Water in a
greater measure than ordinary, which by degrees grew clear and sweetish, a
Thirst and Fever, with a Languor of the Spirits accompanying it: But by the use
of the same Medicines he used in a short time to recover again: Not long since
after a large interval of health, a little before he fell into a Flux of Urine,
he found great irregularities and failings in the Genus Nervosum; viz. He was
seized with a dull numbness of his Brain, and a Vertigo, and was taken with
sudden Cramps in his Limbs, and felt little Leapings of the Tendons, and
various runnings about him, as though it were of a wind creeping here and
there. And when by the use of fit Remedies, the aforesaid Symptoms seemed to be
Cured; the Diabetes after its wounted manner burst forth afresh; viz. the
matter flowing forth in abundance from the Fibers and solid parts into the
Blood, and thence to the Reins and the Urinary Passages.

In this Juncture the same Remedies were prescribed again, by the use of which,
when within a few days he began to grow bettr, he was ordered to take thrice a
day Water of quick Lime to five or six Ounces: Having continued this Remedy
four days, he made water in a moderate quantity well tinged, and somewhat salt,
and as to other things he seemed well as he was before.

By the same method, and chiefly with the Water of quick Lime, I Cured another
of a Diabetes, who was looked upon as past recovery.

The Kinds and Prescripts of Medicines that stop Urine flowing in excess.
A Stringent Medicines properly so called, to wit, such as are austere, acerb,
and stiptick, do little or nothing in stopping a Diuresis; for the virtue of
those things has no effect on the Mass of Blood, nor does it reach to the Reins
and Bladder: But the Remedies that chiefly do good in the Diabetes are of two
kinds, as we have hinted before: viz. First, those that hinder the combinations
of the Salts, and consequently the fusion of the Blood, such as the
Incrassatives before mentioned.

Secondly, Those that dissolve the Concretions of the Salts, and consequently
restore the mixture of the Blood, of which kind are Saline Remedies of a
contrary nature, which are apt to cleave to the Acid Salt, and so withdraw it
from the combinations it has entered into within the Blood, as chiefly Medicines
endowed with a fixed, volatile or alchalisate Salt. Besides these two Primary
kinds of Medicines that restrain Urine, there rests a Secondary kind, to wit,
Hypnoticks, which putting some stop to the Animal Aeconomy, cause the vital
function to be performed with more calmness, and consequently with less fusion
of the Blood, or precipitation of the serous and nutricious humors. It remains
now to set down some Select Forms of each kind of these Medicines.

I. The first Scope of Curing, to wit, by which we endeavor by thickning the
Blood to prevent its fusion, or to take it away, is effected by the Medicines
following.

Take Gumm Arabic, and Tragacanth powdered, of each an Ounce, Sugar Penids
half an Ounce: Make a Powder, divide it into sixteen parts. Take one part
thrice a day, dissolving it in the distilled water, or in the docoction of the
Roots of Comphry in fountain water or Milk.

Take of the Resumptive Electuary three Ounces, Species Diatragacanthi frigidi
an Ounce, Red Coral prepared two Drams, Confection of Hyacinth a Dram and a
half, Gelly of the cast Skins of Vipers what will suffice: Make an Electuary,
of which let the Patient take twice a day the quantity of a Wallnut.

Take white Amber, Mastick, Olibanum powdered, of each an Ounce, Pulvis Haly two
Ounces, Balsam of Tolu half an Ounce: Make a Subtle Powder, the Dose is half a
Dram twice or thrice a day.

Take Roots of great Comphry, and Water Lillies, of each three Ounces, Dates
sliced two Ounces, Seeds of Maliows, Cotton-plant, Plantain, Fleawort, of each
half an Ounce, Boil them in four pounds of fountain water till half be
consumed, to the straining add Syrup of Water Lillies two Ounces: The Dose is
four Ounces thrice a day.

Take of the decoction of Barley with Water Lilly-roots a pound and a half,
Sweet Almonds prepared an Ounce and a half, Seeds of white Poppies, Purslain,
Lettice, of each half an Ounce: Make an Emulsion according to art, the Dose is
four Ounces thrice a day.

Take Cypress Tops six handfuls, Clary Leaves four handfuls, Flowers of blind
Nettles, Comphry, Water Lillies, of each four handfuls, Roots of Water Lillies
and Comphry, of each half a pound, Mace an Ounce, all being small sliced
together, pour to them of new Milk eight pounds, distill them in an ordinary
Still: The Dose is four Ounces thrice a day, with the Powder of Electuary above
written.

II. In the second place, though Saline Medicines of every kind and condition
are accounted Diuretic, and every of them in certain cases, inasmuch as they
fuse the Blood, and cause a copious separation of its Serosities, are in some
sort Diuretic. Nevertheless for the reason abovementioned, to wit, for that
meeting with the Acid Salt, when it is predominant in the Blood, they prevent
and take away its fusion and dissolution. I do not doubt but sometimes they may
be given with good success to stop Fluxes of Urine. And I have heard for
certain, that one was Cured of a Diabetes by an Infusion of quick Lime. Now in
regard the Saline Medicaments (which we suppose to take away the predominancy
of the Acid Salt, and to fetter it, as it were) contain either a fixed, volatile
or Alchalisate Salt: I shall give you some Forms of Diuretics, which have each
of these for their foundation.

1. First then when a fixed Salt by it self, or joined with Sulphur is required
for a Basis.

Take Tincture of Salt of Tartar, or its Deliquium what suffices: Give it
thrice a day in a draught of the decoction or distilld water before described.

Take Tincture of Antimony, let it be taken after the same manner thrice a day:
I have found by frequent experience the use of this to be very profitable in
this Disease.

Take Tincture of Salt of Coral a Scruple, let it be taken after the same
manner.

Take of the Infusion of quick Lime a pound: The Dose is three or four Ounces
thrice a day, giving before a Dose of the Electuary, or Powder above
prescribed.

Take Conserves of the Flowers of blind Nettles, and of the great Comphry, of
each four Ounces, of the reddest Crocus of steel half an Ounce, Coral calcined
to a whiteness two Drams, Syrup of Comphry what suffices. Make an Electuary,
the Dose is two Drams thrice a day.

Take Lapis Specularis calcined an Ounce: The Dose is from half a Dram to a
Dram twice or thrice a day. Country People with this Medicine successfully Cure
their Cattle that piss bloody water.

Take Coral calcined to a whiteness and powdered three Drams, Powder of Gumm
Arabic and Tragacanth, of each a Dram: Make Powder, divide it into ten parts,
let one part be taken thrice a day with a fit Vehicle, to wit, with the
decoction or the distilled water.

Take the reddest Crocus Martis six Drams, Gumm Lac powdered half an Ounce, red
Saunders a Dram: Make a Powder, divide it into twenty parts, whereof let one be
taken thrice a day.

Take Hartshorn burnt and powdered half an Ounce, boil it in four pounds of the
water of a Smiths forge till half be consumed, adding toward the end a Crust
of Bread, Roots of great Comphry, and water Lillies dried, of each an Ounce and
a half, Sacchari Perlati two Ounces, let him take four Ounces thrice a day.

2. Medicines containing an Alchalisate Salt, such as Coral, Pearl,
Cuttle-bone, Hartshorn, Ivory, Powders of Shells and the like, as they are
commonly used against Rheumatick affects, so likewise for a Diabetes: And
inasmuch as they imbibe the Acid Salt abounding in the Blood, and so free the
Mass of Blood from fusion, we may justly expect a benefit from them.

Take red Coral ground to a great subtlety, Cuttle-bone, of each half an Ounce,
Hartshorn Philosophically calcined three Drams, Pearl, Ivory, Crabs Eyes, of
each a Dram: Mix them, make a Powder, the Dose is half a Dram thrice a day,
with a fit Vehicle.

Take of the said Powder three Ounces, Species Diatragacanth frigid two Ounces,
Sugar Candy two Ounces: Make a Powder, and with a sufficient quantity of the
Solution of Gumm Arabic make a Paste; and let it be formed into Troches
weighing half a Dram, let three or four be taken thrice or oftener in a day.

Take of the said Powder two Ounces, of the Resumptive Electuary four Ounces,
Conserve of the Flowers of water Lillies three Ounces, Syrup of the same what
suffices: Make an Electuary, let him take the quantity of a Chestnut thrice a
day, drinking after it a draught of the Apozeme, or of the distilled water
above prescribed.

3. For the same reason as Medicines endued with a fixed and Alchalisate Salt
seem proper in Curing the Diabetes; for the same reason do such as have a
volatile Salt. For these as well as those lay hold on, and draw of the Acid
Salt, (by which the Blood is fus'd and dissolved into Serosities) so that its
Liquor recovers its due Crasis.

Take the Solar Tincture prepared (as I readily do it) with Sal Armoniack an
Ounce, The Dose is twenty Drops thrice a day. The Spirits of Blood, Soot and
Hartshorn, may also be tried in this Disease.

Take Salt of Amber a Dram, the reddest Crocus Martis two Drams: Mix them,
divide it into twelve parts, the Dose is one part thrice a day.

III. As to the third kind of Remedies in the Diabetes, to wit, Hypnoticks,
which by putting a stay to the Animal Spirits, retard the course of the Blood,
and so hinder in some measure its effervescency and fusion. I use to prescribe
to some persons Diascordium to be taken every Evening, and when that does not
do, I give sometimes every Night, and sometimes every other Night Liquid
Laudanum Cydoniated or Tartariz'd, and that with good success.

Take the decoction of Barley, with the dried Roots of Comphry six Ounces, white
Poppy-seeds two Drams, sweet Almonds prepared in number six: Make an Emulsion
according to art, let it be taken every Night going to sleep.

Take of the Magistral distilled water above prescribed four Ounces, Solution
of Tragacanth two Drams, Diascordium from half an Ounce to six Drams. Give it
going to sleep.

Take Conserve of the flowers of water Lillies two Drams, Laudanum Tartariz'd
or Cydoniated a Scruple, Tincture of Saffron six Grains: Make a Bolus to be
taken going to sleep.

CHAP. VII. Instructions concerning Sweating and Diaphoreticks, or Medicines
causing Sweat, with Prescripts of them.
FOr a ready and plentiful eruption of Sweat, these three things are required.
First that the Blood boiling more than its wont, circulates with a more rapid
motion. Secondly, That its Latex abounds with many watery Particles, and those
loose, that is, apt to be separated from the rest of the Liquor, and to be
resolved into Vapors; for if there be a deficiency of Serum, or if it be not
easily separable from the Blood through its too great compactness, or
incrassation by reason of Faeculencies strongly mixed in it; scarce any sweat at
all will follow, though the intense heat of a burning Fever presses for it, and
most powerful Diaphoreticks are given at the same time. Thirdly, The Pores of
the whole Body must be set wide open for a free passage of the Sweat.

Therefore Sweating Medicines to be taken inwardly must be such as make the
Blood boil more than ordinarily, and consequently cause it to evaporate: Also
such as somewhat loosen and fuse its often too compact and incrassated Mass,
that its Serosities may more readily depart from it and be separated, and they
must be such as at the same time dispose them so separated, rather to pass
forth by Sweat, than by Urine or Seige. As to the third thing required, to wit,
the opening of the Pores, this is done in a manner wholly by outward
Administrations.

Now because the same Saline preparations which are given to procure Sweat, are
often given to move Urine, and sometimes also for Cordials; we must show by
what preparation, and other requisites, Sweating is to be promoted alone
without the other intents.

And we observe that Sudorificks inwardly taken, seldom or never work of their
own accord, as Emeticks, Catharticks, or Diuretics; but always need some
Governance to actuate the Medicine, and to determine it to that Energy:
Wherefore a Diaphoretick being given, the Patient must presently be so ordered
that the Pores of his Body may be opened, and the beat of his Heart very much
heightened. For these ends, either let him be kept in a Bed, Bath, or
Hot-house, or let him exercise his Body with some quick or laborious motion;
and that these things may succeed the better in promoting Sweat; when it is in
our power, let us make choice of a fit time and subject for it, viz. when the
Blood enjoying a laudable, or not very evil Crasis, both sufficiently abounds
with a Serous humor, and has not its Particles in too great a confusion or
perturbation, but is in a disposition readily to be loosened, and to separate
it self, and run into parts. For in a Bilous temperament, in a thin and dry
constitution, and in the mindst of a burning Fever, when all things are in a
trouble and undigested: Diaphoreticks commonly prove of no effect or do hurt.
Moreover when Diaphoreticks are judged proper, we must not give all sorts of
them indifferently, but peculiar Medicines must be chosen according to the
various disposition of the Blood, and the different predominancies of the
Element in it, sometimes of this, sometimes of that, and according to the
states of the Salts.

The Kinds and Prescripts of Diaphoretick Medicines.
SUdorifick Medicines being manifold, and of diverse kinds, and being wont in a
various respect to be ranged in order, and reduced to Classes. In the first
place I have thought fit here to distinguish them, and set them down, both as
to their form and manner of Composition, and as to the matter out of which they
are made. Their most usual forms are 1. a Powder. 2. Chemical Liquors. 3. A
Potion. 4. A Bolus. 5. A Diet.

The matter of each of these are either the integral parts of the whole mixed
Body, or certain Elementary parts of some mixed, resolved by Chemistry, and
those are either simple, viz. either Spirituous or Saline: The latter of which
also are either volatile or fixed, Acid or nitrous. Or lastly the Sudorifick
Particles so divided and separated by Chemistry, are Elementary parts
compounded betwixt themselves, viz. Spirituo-Saline, and Salino-Sulphureous. As
we run through each of these Species in order, we shall adapt to each matter
the more Select forms of Prescripts.

Diaphoreticks which have the integral parts of a mixed for their foundation, in
which also a smart or volatile Salt is predominant, in this respect often
conduce to provoke Sweat, that their Particles being admitted into the Blood,
and being immiscible with it, and not to be subdued, exagitate its Mass,
greatly divide it, and draw it asunder as it were into most Minute parts; so
that at length the texture of the Blood being very much loosened, and set a
boiling, the superfluous Serosites, Recrements, and taints of the Blood are
cast forth together with the Particles of the Medicine, which are expelled by
reason of their Heterogeneity. Those that are of this rank are usually given in
the form of a Powder, Bolus, Potion and Diet, according to the following forms
of Prescripts.

Take Roots of Contrayerva, Serpentaria Virginiana, Butter-burr, of each a
Dram, Cochinele, Saffron, of each half a Dram: Make a Powder, the Dose is half
a Dram, with a fit Vehicle.

Take Powder of Vipers a Dram, give it in some convenient Liquor.

Take Powder of Toads prepared, from half a Dram to a Dram.

When Diaphoreticks ought to predominate in Sal Alchali alone, or mixed with the
former.

Take Oriental Bezoar, from a Scruple to half a Dram, give it in a spoonful of
distilled water, or some other Vehicle.

Take Powder of Crabs Claws Compound, from a Scruple to half a Dram, give it
after the same manner.

The Bezoartick Powder is made after this manner.

Take Powder of the Roots of Contrayerva, of Crabs Claws simple, of each two
Ounces, Pearl, both sorts of Coral, white Amber, Crabs Eyes, Hartshorn, Crystal
prepared. of each an Ounce, Occidental Bezoar, Lemnian Earth, of each half an
Ounce, Ceruse of Antimony two Ounces, Cochenele half an Ounce, Ambergreece a
Dram and a half, Musk half a Dram: Make a subtle Powder, and let it be formed
into little round Balls with the Gelly of the Skins of Vipers, the Dose it from
a Scruple to a Dram.

Take of this Bezoartick Powder a Scruple, Powder of Toads prepared six Grains:
Make a Powder, give it in a spoonful of Treacle water.

2. Bolus's which have for their Basis the integral parts of some mixed, made in
the form of an Electuary, Extract, or Conserve.

Take of Mithridate, from half a Dram to a Dram, of the Bezoartick Powder, from
a Scruple to half a Dram, Syrup of the Juice of Citrons what will suffice; make
a Bolus. Instead of Mithridate you may put Treacle, or Diascordium, or
Confectio Liberantis, de Hyacintho: So likewise Bezoar powdered, or the Roots of
Contrayerva, and the Powders of the like things may supply the place of the
Bezoartick Powder.

Take of the Extract of Treacle, from half a Dram to a Dram, of the Bezoartick
Powder a Scruple: Make a Bolus.

Take of the Extract of Carduus half a Dram, Bezoartick Powder a Scruple. Salt
of Wormwood fifteen Grains, with a sufficient quantity of the Syrup of the
Juice of Citrons: Make a Bolus.

3. Potious which have for their Basis common decoctions of Vegetables, or
Infusions and Tinctures.

Take Roots of Butter-burr an Ounce, Seeds of the same two Drams, Eringo Roots
Condited six Drams, Carduus Seeds two Drams, boil all in a pound of fountain
water, till half be consumed: In the clear straining dissolve of Mithridate
half a Dram or two Scruples: Let it be taken warm in Bed.

After the like manner the Leaves of Carduus, the Flowers of Marigolds or
Cammomile may be boild in a sufficient quantity of Posset Drink, of which six
or eight Ounces may be given warm either alone, or with some Powder, Electuary,
or other Diaphoretick added to it.

4. Diaphoretick Infusions and Tinctures of diverse kinds may be prepared by
extracting the virtues of simple Vegetables, and Confections with Wine,
Vinegar, or distilled water, which afterward being strained and clarified by
settling are often given with success: To this place ought to be referred the
Bezoartick waters, Wines and Vinegars prepared by Infusion, the forms of which
are every where to be found amongst Authors. Moreover Tinctures of Vegetables
which are of very great effect in a small Dose, are made after this manner.

Take Roots of Contrayerva a pound, being bruised and put into a Mattress, pour
to them Spirit of Wine three Pounds: Let them digest to draw forth a Tincture;
then strain it, and draw it off in Balneo to the consistency of Honey: Keep the
Spirit first drawn off apart from the rest, pour it again to what stays behind,
and draw the Tincture again: The Dose of which is from half a Dram to a Dram,
in a fit Vehicle.

5. Diets, whose foundations are decoctions of Woods designed for the Cure of
the French Pox, and other Cronick Affects deeply rooted in the Blood and
humors.

For indeed a very intense and frequent Sweating, viz. continued for a long
time, day by day is required for the Cure of some Diseases, to wit, that not
only the Impurities and Corruptions of the Viscera and humors, may be purged
forth, but even the Morbifick Taints, deeply Imprinted in them may be wholly
abolished, or as it were eradicated: To effect this it will not be enough to
give a Sudorifick Powder or Bolus now and then at times; but an entire Diet
must be ordered for this purpose. Wherefore let all the drink the Person takes
be a Diaphoretick Decoction, after a Dose of which taken each Morning, let a
copious Sweat be promoted, by adding to it the heat of a Bath, or of a
Hot-house; and after that by this means the Pores of the Skin are opened, and
Nature is inclined to Seeat, let the Recrements of the Blood and Nervous Juice
for that whole day evaporate by perspiration, which must be still maintained by
the use of the said Drink: By this method not only the French Pox is most
safely, and for the most part, most certainly Cured, but also some other most
difficult Diseases are sometimes easily overcome.

Take the Raspings of Guaiacum four Ounces, Sarsaparilla six Ounces, Chinna two
Ounces, all the Saunders, of each an Ounce, Shavings of Ivory and Hartshorn, of
each half an Ounnce, Antimony powdered and tied in a rag six Ounces: Let them
Infuse and Boil according to Art in sixteen pounds of founntain water, till
half be consumed, and strain it; to the remaining Magma, add the like quantity
of water, let them infuse and boil till a third part be consumed, adding to it
Raisins a pound, Licorice an Ounce: Let the straining be kept for a common
drink.

In case of a Bilous Temperament, and a sharp and hot Blood, leave out the
Guaiacum, and augment the quanntities of the China and Sarsa.

Diaphoreticks which consist of the Integral parts of the whole mixed, and are
easy to be gotten for poor people, may be prescribed according to the
following forms.

In Malignant Fevers. Take Conserve of Wood Sorrel a Dram, Mithridate two
Scruples and a half, mix them: Let it be taken, drinking after it a draught of
Posset Drink, that has the Leaves of Carduus, Scordium, or of Camomil Flowers,
or Marigolds boiled in it.

Take Powder of the Roots of Virginia Serpentary, from half a Dram to a Dram:
Give it with a fit Vehicle, or give Powder of the Root of Butter-burr a Dram
after the same manner.

In ordinary cases give the Decoction of Gromwel, of the Roots of Butter-burr,
or Virginia Serpentary, or of the Roots and Seeds of the great Burr-dock: In
the French Pox a Decoction of Soap-wort, or of the Raspings of Box, and the
like may supply the place of the Decoction of Woods, which are of greater price.

2. Sweating Medicines prepared from the Elementary parts of a mixed, have for
their Basis either a Spirit, or a Salt, sometimes simple, sometimes combined
with another Salt, or with Sulphur. Let Spirituous things be prescribed
according to the following forms.

1. Let the Spirit of Treacle Camphorated be given, from half a Dram to a Dram,
or a Dram and a half in a fit Vehicle. After the same manner many other Spirits
distilled from the Juices of Vegetables, maturated by fermentation, and
appropriated to certain Distempers, may be given to provoke Sweat, when it is
Indicated: Of which kind are the Spirits of Black-cherries, of the Berries of
Elder, Ivy and Juniper, with many others; the Spirits of Hartshorn, Soot, Blood
and the like, ought rather to be numbered in the rank of Salts.

2. Diaphoreticks, whose Basis are Spirits, with other Elementary Particles
combined, may be prescribed after this manner. Take of the simple mixture a
Dram, give it in a convenient Vehicle. To this place also may be referred those
things that consist of a Spirit, fixed Salt, or a Sulphur combined: Of which
kind are the Tincture of Salt of Tartar and Antimony: The Dose of which are
from a Scruple to two Scruples in some other Liquor. Moreover distilled waters
in which the Spirituous Particles are diluted with watery ones, are often given
to provoke Sweat with good success.

Take Roots of Butter-burr and Valerian, of each two Ounces, of Zedoary,
Contrayerva, Virginia Serpentary, of each an Ounce and a half, Flowers of
Butter-burr four handfuls, Saffron two Drams, being sliced and bruised, pour to
them four pounds of Sherry Sack, distill it according to Art: Let the whole
Liquor be mixed, the Dose is from two Ounces and a half to three Ounces. Or take
Roots of Angelica, and Master-wort, of each four Ounces, of Zedoary,
Ele-Campane, Swallow-wort, low-wort, Gentian, the lesser Galingal, of each an
Ounce, Tops of Carduus, Rue, Angelica, of each three handfuls, the middle Bark
of the Ash six Ounces; being sliced and bruised, add Mithridate, Venice
Treacle, of each two Ounces: Mix them, and pour to them of Canary six pounds,
distilled Vinegar two pounds, distill it according to Art: The Dose is three
Ounces.

The Doses of the aforesaid Waters may be actuated by the addition of Chemical
Liquors or Salts. These sorts of Medicines endowed with a Vinous Spirit are
proper chiefly, and in a manner only for old people, and such as are of a cold
temperament, and are subject to the Plasy and Dropsy: But in a hot
constitution, and when there is a fervent heat of the Bowels, and a Feverish
boiling of the Blood, by scorching those, and enflaming this too much, they
usually rather do hurt than good.

Diaphoreticks, whose Basis is Saline, as they are of a various nature, viz.
according as the Salt is volatile, fixed, Acid or Nitrous, so they are of a
different use and operation, and hence in certain cases these, and in others
those and those are most propper to be given, as we have before observed in
Diuretics.

1. Fixed and volatile Salt is most propper for those whose Blood very much
abounds with a serous humor. Moreover, when at any time the Juice which
Irrigates the Viscera, and the Genus Nervosum begins to turn sharp, as it
usually happens in Hydropical and Cacochymical persons, and in such as are
subject to Convulsive Distempers, those Medicines are most effectually give to
cause a Sweat; because that whilst they meet the Acido-Saline Particles of the
humors, and are combined with them, they loosen the Texture of the Blood, and
at the same strongly agitate its Mass by reason of their Heterogenous mixture:
Hence for a ready separation and driving forth of the Serosities through the
Pores of the Skin, those things are prescribed in the form of a Powder, Bolus
and Liquor.

Take Flowers of Sal Armoniack half a Scruple, Cristal Mineral fifteen Grains,
Bezoartick Powder a Scruple, mix them: Let it be given in a spoonful of
Sudorifick water.

Take Salt of Tartar a Scruple, Ceruse of Antimony twenty five Grains: Make a
Powder, let it be given after the same manner.

Take Powder of Bezoartick Mineral, from a Scruple to half a Dram, Gascoins
Powder a Scruple: Make a Powder, let it he given in like manner.

Take Ceruse of Antimony, from a Scruple to half a Dram, Flowers of Sal
Armoniack half a Scruple: Make a Powder.

2. Those things may be given in the form of a Bolus, by mixing the aforesaid
Doses with Treacle, Mithridate or Diascordium, or with the extract of Carduus,
Gentian, or the like.

Take Bezoartick Mineral a Scruple, Flowers of Sal Armonicak six Grains,
Mithridate half a Dram: Make a Bolus.

Take Salt of Hartshorn eight Grains, Bezoartick Powder fifteen Grains,
Extractum Theriacale a Scruple: Make a Bolus, or three Pills.

If a Liquid Form be more proper, Take Spirit of Hartshorn, or of Soot, or of
Sal Armoniack, from fifteen Grains to twently, Sudorifick water, from an Ounce
to three Ounces: Make a draught, let it be taken with governance.

Take Flowers of Sal Armoniack half a Scruple, Salt of Tartar fifteen Grains,
Sudorifick water three Ounces: Mix them, make a draught.

3. Diaphoreticks, which have a Nitrous Salt for their Basis, are wont to give
relief generally in the same cases, as those above, made of a fixed and a
volatile Salt; because they destroy the predominancy of the Acid Salt, and
dispose the mixture of the Blood after such a manner, that as it boils, its
Serum and Recrements are readily separated and discharged from it.

Take Cristal Mineral three Drams, Salt of Hartshorn, or of Soot, or of Vipers
a Dram: Mix them; the Dose is from a Scruple to half a Dram in a fit Vehicle.

Take Sal Prunella two Drams, Bezoartick Mineral; or Ceruse of Antimony a Dram:
Make a Powder, the Dose is from two Scruples to a Dram.

4. Diaphoreticks, whose ground is an Acid Salt, have a peculiar efficacy
against the predominancy of a fixed Salt, and Sulphur, viz. if at any time the
Mass of Blood by reason of Salino-fixt Particles combined with Sulphurous or
Terrene Particles in it, comes to be too much locked up and close bound, that
it does not easily let go its Serosities to be expelled by Sweat (as it
sometimes happens in continual Fevers, and in Scorbutic affects) the Acid
Salt, after the Medicine is given, meeting the fixed Salt in the Body, and
laying fast hold on it, makes void its undue combinations, and so opens the
boiling Blood, and disposes it for a Sweat.

Take Spirit of Tartar, from half a Dram to a Dram, Sudorifick water three
Ounces, Flowers of Sal Armoniack half a Scruple: Mix them.

Take of the simple mixture, from half a Dram to two Scruples, Give it in a
spoonful of Treacle water, or Bezoartick water.

Take Bezoartick Vinegar, from half an Ounce to an Ounce, Carduus water two
Ounces, Plague water six Drams: Mix them, make a draught.

Take Spirit of Guaiacum a Dram, Sudorifick water three Ounces: Mix them, make
a draught.

Some things merely, or for the greatest part Sulphurous are commonly placed
in the rank of Diaphoreticks: As for instance some Natural, and other
Artificial Balsams, also Chemical Oils, as chiefly of Guaiacum, Box, Camphire,
Hartshorn and Soot: So likewise the Resinous Extracts of Ponderous Woods, with
many others, which though by themselves they do little for raising Sweat; yet
being joined with the other Saline Medicines, I do not think them altogether
unprofitable, because in a cold and Over-phlegmatick Constitution,
Sulphureo-Saline Medicines Rarify the Blood which is then become too watery, and
dispose it to a free evaporation, no less than such as are Spirituous.

Take of Opobalsamum, from Six Drops to twelve, Water of Baum, or of Ground Ivy
three Ounces, Sudorifick water half an Ounce: Let it be taken every Morning to
provoke Sweat for many days together. It is proper for Phthisical Persons, and
such as have Ulcers in the Reins.

And so, but in a greater Dose, may be given the Balsam of Peru; also the
Tincture of the Balsam of Tolu, and likewise compounded Balsams gotten by
distillation.

Take Rosin of Guaiacum powdered two Drams, Chemical Oil of the same a Scruple,
Bezoartick Mineral, Gumm Guaiacum, of each a Dram and a half, Balsam of Peru
what suffices: Make a Mass for Pills, the Dose is from half a Dram to two
Scruples, drinking after it a Dose of the Sudorifick water, or of the Decoction
of Woods.

CHAP. VIII. Instructions and Prescripts for Curing an Excessive, or Depraved
Sweating.
FRequent and immoderate Sweating, is sometimes the Symptom of some other
Disease then affecting the Person; for in the Phthisick and Scurvy this is a
common thing: The reason of it is, that the Blood tainted with some filthy
infection, or become of an ill habit, is not able duly to concoct and
assimilate the nutritive Juice still passing into its Mass, and therefore
always degenerating, and coming now and then to be full charged by the addition
of other Excrements, it separates them, and expells them by Sweat.

The Cure of this Sweating depends wholly on the Cure of the Diseass whose
Symptom it is: In the mean time those copious Night-sweats happening in those
Diseases, plainly show that the Persons Diet ought to be altogether of light
food; viz. Milk, Grnel, Cream of Barley and the like, whose gentle and mild
Particles the Blood can bear, and not of Flesh, or strong substances.

Sometimes an excessive Sweating is the effect of some foregoing Disease which
is brought to an end, and this is so common a thing after long Agues, that
scarce any recover of them; but this Indisposition still sticks upon them more
or less. I knew a young man, who as he grew well of a Quartan Ague, which had
held him ten Months, and began to lose its fits, daily melted into such profuse
Sweats, that he was fain to change his Shift and Sheets thrice a Night, being
as wet as though they had been dipped in water: This Evacuation continuing so for
many Weeks, his Flesh so fell away, and his strength was so exhausted, that he
looked like a Skeleton. This Person when he had used many Medicines a long time
without much benefit; at length by drinking Asses Milk Mornings and Evenings,
and his other Diet being ordered of Cows Milk, he grew very well in a short
time.

The chief cause of frequent and copious Sweats seems to consist in the ill
habit and weakness of the Blood, in that it is apt continually to be fus'd and
precipitated into Serosities: The Pores of the Body in the mean time being open
and free for an Evacuation by Sweat. Now the Blood is so apt to fusions and
flowings for the most part from a predominancy of a Fluid or Acid Salt in it,
and sometimes the Nervous Juice growing sharp, empties its Acid superfluities
into the Blood, and so precipitates its Mass into Serosities.

This excessive Sweating does not only arise from the vitiated Crasis and
Fermentation of the Blood, but sometimes from its depraved Accension, and
through an excess of Sulphur in it, as sometimes through a deficiency of it.

In order to the Cure of this Over-Sweating, the Therapeutick intentions must
be chiefly these three. First, To take away or correct the ill habit or
weakness of the humors. Secondly, gently to close the Pores of the Skin which
are too open. Thirdly, To derive the Serum of the Blood, and the watery
superfluities to the Reins.

1. The first of these is performed by those Remedies which destroy the
predominancy of the Acid Salt in the Blood, or Nervous Juice; and which promote
the Exaltation of the Sulphur (if happily it grows weak) for which ends
Anti-scorbuticks, Chalybeats: Also medicines endowed with a Volatile, Nitrous
or Alchalisate Salt most commonly prove effectual. I shall set down certain
forms of each of these.

Take Conserve of the Flowers of Cichory and Fumitory, of each two Ounces,
Powder of Ivory, Hartshorn, Coral prepared, of each a Dram, Pearl half a Dram,
Species of Diarrhodon Abbatis a Dram, Lignum Aloes, Saunders both red and
yellow, of each half a Dram, Sal Prunella four Scruples, with a sufficient
quantity of Syrup of Fumitory, make an Electuary: Give the quantity of a
Wallnut in the Evening, and the next Morning, drinking after it either of the
following Julap or distilled water, three Ounces.

Take the Waters of Fumitory and Wallnuts simple, of each six Ounces, the
Waters of Snails and Earthworms, of each an Ounce, Sugar six Drams: Mix them,
make a Julap.

Take tops of Firr, Tamarisk, Cypres, of each four handfuls, of Myrtle two
handfuls, Leaves of Watercresses, Brooklimes, Agrimony, St. Johnswort,
Hart's-tongue Fluellen or Speedwel, of each three handfuls, the outward Coats of
twelve Oranges: Being sliced and bruised, pour to them of Brumswick Beer eight
pounds, distill it in common Organs: Let the whole Liquor be mixed, and sweeten
it at pleasure, the Dose three Ounces twice a day.

Take Leaves of Dandelion, Watercresses, Plantain, Brooklimes, of each three
handfuls, being bruised, pour to them of the distilled water above written a
pound, wring it forth hard: The Dose is from three to four Ounces in the
Morning at Nine of the Clock, and at Five in the Afternoon.

According to this method, I use to prescribe in a failing of strength and
Night-sweats after long Agues, and if these remedies do no good, we must come
to Chalybeates.

Take Syrup of Steel six Ounces; let a spoonful be taken in the Morning, and at
five in the Afternoon, with three Ounces of the Water above prescribed.

Take Powder of Ivory, of Coral prepared, of each two Drams, Crocus Martis,
Salt of Steel, of each a Dram and a half: Make a Powder, the Dose is half a
Dram twice a day, with three Ounces of the same distilled water.

Take Tincture of Salt of Tartar an Ounce: The Dose is from twenty to thirty
Drops twice a day with the distilled water. After the same manner may be given
the Tincture of Coral, and Tinctures prepared out of Gums and Balsams. Moreover
in these cases the Spirits of Hartshorn, Urine and Seet are given given with
success.

The second intention for the Cure of excessive Sweating, consisting in a due
state of the Pores, is performed in a manner only by outward Administrations:
For which end let the whole Body be anointed with Oil of Date-kernels, with an
Ointment of Orange Flowers and the like, and let Linen done over a little with
the same be worn; sometimes Bathing in cold Water, or in a River, sometimes
change of Air may do well.

It seems here proper to speak a little of a certain troublesome Distemper,
relating to Sweating, or at least to an excessive perspiration. I often observe
that some Persons have their Bodies so disposed, that if upon any occasion the
least Breath of Wind or Air comes upon them, their Spirits are presently in a
mighty trouble, all their Powers are in a Consternation, and their whole Body
is discomposed.

This extreme tenderness in some Persons more than in others to take cold, or
to be offended with it, happens either through the fault of the Animal Spirits,
or of the Blood, or of the Pores of the Body, to wit, of one of them, or of
more of them together.

1. First, The Animal Spirits are sometimes in fault, because being very weak,
they are not able to endure any thing harsh, or rough outwardly pressing upon
them; but presently upon the appulse of the bare Air, are put to flights and
distractions. And sometimes this Indisposition happens through their fault, for
that being degenerated, and become of an eager, restless and uneasy
disposition, they are put into disorder upon every such pressure of Air.
Wherefore those who by reason of the Spirits so disposed become
Hypochondriacal, being also subject to the Affect before mentioned, on every
little occasion are troubled with Cold.

2. The Blood disposes to a habit of depraved Perspiration in a twofold
manner, viz. both in respect of its temperament, and of its mixture: As to this
latter oftentimes the Texture of the Blood is so loose and open, that upon
every light accident, and espccially upon the appulse of a cold moist Air, it is
presently stirred to fluxions and precipitations of Serosities; insomuch that
Persons who have such Blood, dare not step forth of doors, nay scarce look
forth. Again, the Mass of Blood being often hot in its temper, and very full of
vapors, Breaths forth Effluvia's very sharp and penetrative, by which the
Pores of the Skin being too much loosned and laid wide open, the Spirits and
the Vital Flame are exposed to the injuries of the naked Air, and the Winds
more than they ought.

3. The ill constitution of the Pores, gotten either by sickness, or other
ways, or being natural from our Birth, very much inclines to that habit of
depraved Sweating. For in regard those passages being too wide, do always in a
manner gape, the Blood and Spirits in the whole Body, or in certain parts of it
are not sufficiently guarded against the encounter of the outward Air.

The Intentions for Curing this Distemper are chiefly these three' viz. first
to help the weaknesses, or dejections, or depauperations of the Blood and
Spirits. Secondly, To take away their Dyscrasies if they have any. Thirdly, To
procure a due Confirmation of the Pores.

The chief stress of this business consists in the first intention, which
regards the strengthening of the Animal Spirits, and the enlargement of the
whole sensitive Soul; for unless the Patients resolve to take courage, so as to
attempt to go abroad, to set forth their strength to their utmost, and
accustom nature daily to inure it self to hardship, all medicines prove
useless: Wherefore a plentiful and cheerful way of living are no less necessary
than Physic, that thereby the stock of Animal Spirits may be daily renewed and
increased, and so confirmed in strength by greater practices now and then
insisted on; for which ends strong Wines with good Dishes of meat are very
proper. Moreover all Studies and Cares, (with which the Soul is deprest) being
laid aside, let the time be past in idleness and recreatious, or in moderare
exercises. As by such a kind of living duly ordered, the Animal Spirits are
greatly refreshed, so it repairs the decay and depauperations of the Blood.

For the same ends also the following Medicines may be given with good effect.

Take Spirit of Amber Armonicacated what suffices; fifteen or twenty drops be
taken in the Evening, and the next Morning in aspoonful of the following
distill a water, drinking after it nine spoonfuls of the same.

Take Leaves of Sage, Rosemary, Time, Savory, Marjoram, Costmary, of each four
handfuls, Roots of Angelica and Master-wort, of each six Ounces, of Zedoary,
the lesser Galingal, Calamus Aromaticus, Florence Orris, of each an Ounce and a
half, Cubebs anOunce and a half, Nutmegs, Cloves, Cinnamon, of each an Ounce,
the outward Coats of twelve Oranges, and of six Limmons; being sliced and
bruised, pour to them of Whitewine and Canary of each four pounds: Distill it in
common Organs, let the whole liquor be mixed and sweetn'd with Sugar perlated.
In the distilling hang in the head of the Alembick a Nodulus, with a Scruple of
Ambergris in it, and half a Scruple of Musk.

Take Tincture of Antimony, or of the Balsam of Tolu an Ounce; let fifteen or
twenty drops be taken in the Morning at Nine a Clock, and at Five in the
Afternoon, in a spoonful of the water before prescribed, drinking after it
three Ounces of the same; or rather in the Morning drink after it a Dish of
Tea, or Cofee, or Chocholate prepared of a Decoction of Sage.

A little before Dinner drink a Glass of Sherry, Sack.

When these things have been used some time, and you think good to intermit
them, take the following things in their place.

Instead of the Spirit, take a Dose of the following Electuary in the Evening,
and early in the Morning with the distilled water, or Viper Wine.

Take of wet preserved Citron Pills, an Ounce and a half, Mirobalans Condited
an Ounce, Nutmegs, Ginger Candied, of each half an Ounce, Confection of
Hyacinth, Alchermes, of each three Drams, Pearl prepared, red Coral prepared,
of each a Dram and a half, with the Syrup of the Juice of Kermes make an
Electuary.

Let the ordinary drink be a Physic Ale made after the following manner, viz.
into a vessel of four Gallons put the following bag.

Take an Old Cock half boiled and mash'd, Leaves of Sage and Hart's-tongue
dried, of each two handfuls, six Dates sliced, Raspings of Sassafras two
Ounces; being sliced and bruised, mix them, put them in a little bag, and hang
it in a Vessel after it had done working.

The second intention which undertakes to correct the Dyscrasies, or depraved
dispositions of the Blood and Spirits, is performed by the same Remedies, as in
the Hypochondriacal distemper and Melancholy: Wherefore the prescripts which I
formerly gave for the Cure of those affects may serve here.

As to the third intention, which for keeping the Pores in a due State, ordains
a meet way of Government as to clothing, the Air, the Fire, etc. there is
little left for a Physician to do; for commonly every Patient will be his own
Counselor as to these things: There is only one kind of advice which they are
apt to receive, and is wont to do them good, viz. that they change their
habitation, by which often the Mind is also changed; for those that are never
so much addicted to keep themselves penned up in a Chamber, or in Bed, when they
travel into foreign Countries, where they breath a warmer and more serene Air:
It Is almost incredible in how short a time they recover.

So much concerning this depraved Perspiration which has not been touched by
others.

There remains yet a third kind of this immoderate Sweating which is not as the
first, the Symptom or effect of another present or past Disease; but it self
first beginning, is either a Disease of it self, or the parent of some Morbid
affect: To the first sort chiefly belongs the Pestilential Sweat, which was
heretofore called Sudor Anglicus: But I shall not now, go about to prescribe
Medicines for a Disease which I hope will never return.

CHAP. IX. Instructions concerning Cordial Medicines, and Alexipharmicks, or
Preservatives against Venom, with Prescripts of them.
IF the thing be duly considered, the notion of Cordial Medicines was not well
introduced, but is a mere vulgar error; for since it is not the Heart which is
the Subject of Life, but chiefly, and in a manner only the Blood, and in regard
the Soul it self (on whose existence and act in the Body Life depends) is
founded partly in the Blood, and partly in the united stock of Animal Spirits,
it plainly sollows that Medicines which preserve Life entire, or restore it
when in danger, do rather and more immediately regard these parts of the Soul,
to wit, the Blood, and Animal Spirits than the Heart, which is a mere Muscle,
serving for the Circulation of the Blood, and as often as it slackens in
performing this duty, or gives it off: This does not happen through its own
fault, but through that of the Blood and Animal Spirits, by which it is
actuated.

Therefore to know the ways and manners of working of those Medicines which are
called Cordials, we must consider these two things, viz. First, how many, and
particularly what ways the Blood being ill disposed, and often endangered,
either as to its accension, or mixture, requires Physical helps, which may
preserve or correct it. Secondly after what manner by reason of a defect or
delinquency in the Animal Economy the Heart is hindered, or perverted from its
due motion, so that Medicines are Indicated, which increase the stores of the
Spirits, and better compose them. [To be well instructed concerning these
things, read Dr. Willis at large.]

The Kinds and Prescripts of Cordials.
A Ccording to what is said before, we distinguish Cordial Medicines (commonly
so called) into two kinds; some of them chiefly and more immediately affect the
Blood, others the Animal Spirits. In the first rank of those that are designed
for regulating the accension of the Blood, we place those which by increasing,
or exalting its Sulphurous Particles cause its over-cold and slow moving
Liquor to boil more, to be more freely kindled, and to burn with more life; of
which kind are good Wines, Compound Strong Water distilled, the Spirit and
Tincture of Saffron, Quercitans Elixir of Life: the Tincture of Salt of Tartar,
of Steel, and other things that chiefly abound with Spirit, and havd a plenty
of Sulphur; of which sometimes these, sometimes those may be taken as every
patient lists. When by reason of the Bloods being not kindled, and consequently
of its too greatcorwding and stagnation, as it were, within the Praecordia, a
languishing and failing of the Spirits, with a great oppression of the Heart
happens, then Aqua Mirabilis, the waters of Cinnamon, Cloves, Wormwood
Compound, also of the Rines of Oranges distilled with Wine are proper; to which
sometimes a Dose of some Spirit, Elixir or Tincture may be added.

But here great caution is needful, that a person do no indulge himself too
much to these kind of Cordials, for many by often sipping of them, get an ill
habit, continuing their daily use, and increasing the Dose, which at length
proves fatal to them; for the Liver chiefly, and other entrails are so dried
and scorched thereby, that the stock of Blood being diminished, and its Crasis
perverted, an unhealthy Cacochymia follows, or an abbreviation of Life.

In the second Rank of Cordials, we put those Medicines which somewhat appease
the too great boiling of the Blood, and put a little stop to, and allay its
immoderate deflagration, of this kind are distilled Waters, Acids, and Nitrous
things.

Take the waters of Wood Sorrel, of whole Citrons, of Straw-berrys, of each
four Ounces, Syrup of the Juice of Citrons an Ounce, Pearl Powdered a Dram: Make
a Julape; the Dose is two Ounces three or four times a day.

Take the waters of Pippins, or Garden Apples, of Rasberrys, of each four
Ounces, Syrup of Violets an Ounce, Spirit of Vitriol twelve Drops: Make a
Julape.

Take fountain water a Pound and a half, Juice of Limmons two Ounces, Sugar an
Ounce and a half: Make a drink, of which let three Ounces be taken at pleasure.

Take Grass Roots three Ounces, Candied Eringos six Ounces, two Apples sliced
(or Corinths two Ounces) Shavings of Ivory, and of Hartshorn, of each two
Drams, Leaves of Wood Sorrel a handful, boil them in three pounds of fountain
water to two pounds; to the clear straining, add of Sal Prunella a Dram and a
half, Syrup of Violets an Ounce and a half, Make an Apozem, the Dose is three
or four Ounces thrice a day.

Take Conserve of red Roses vitriolated four Ounces, fountain water two pounds,
dissolve it close covered and warm, then strain it; the Dose is three Ounces at
pleasure.

Take Conserve of Barberrys, Rob of Rasberrys, of each an Ounce and a half,
Pearl prepared half a Dram, Confection of Hyacinth a Dram, Syrup of the Juice
of Citrons what suffices: Make a Confection; the Dose is half a Dram thrice a
day.

The third rank of Cordials furnishes those sorts of Medicines, which being
destinated against the exorbitancies of the boiling Blood, loosen and open its
close texture, for the separation and discharge of its drossy superfluities.
These being chiefly, and in a manner only of a saline nature, are also of
diverse kinds according to the manifold state of the saline Particles of which
they consist; but for the most part their Basis is either a Volatile,
Alchalisate, Acid, Fixed, or Nitrous Salt, we shall set down certain forms of
each of these.

In the First place Cordials endowed with a volatile Salt, are wont to be given
with good effect according to the following prescripts, both in Fevers, in
respect of the Blood, and also in swoonings, and sudden faintings in respect of
the Animal Spirits.

Take Spirit of Hartshorn, from fifteen Grains to twenty, Treacle water two
Drams, give it with a spoon, drinking after it a draught of some appropriated
Liquor. After the same manner may be given the Spirits of Blood, of Man's Scull,
of Soot, of Sal Armoniack Compound.

Take Salt of Vipers a Dram, Sal Prunella two Drams, Powder of Crabs Claws
Compound a Dram and a half: Mix them, make a Powder; the Dose is from half a
Dram to two Scruples, in a spoonful of Cordial Julape, drinking after it a
little draught of the same.

Take Flowers of Sal Armoniack half a Scruple, Bezoartick Mineral a Scruple:
Make a Powder, give it in a spoonful of some proper Liquor.

Secondly, Those are chiefly called by the name of Cordials by the Vulgar,
whose Basis is an Alchalisate, or Petrifying Salt, as particularly Oriental
Bezoar, Pearl, Coral, and other Powders of Shells and Stones.

Take Gascoins Powder, or Powder of Crabs Claws Compound, from a Scruple to
half a Dram; give it in a spoonful of Cordial Julape, drinking after it two
Ounces of the same.

Take Oriental Bezoar, from six Grains to twenty; give it after the same
manner.

Take Powders of Crabs Claws, and Crabs Eyes of each a Dram, Pearl, both sorts
of Coral prepared, of each four Scruples, both sorts of Bezoar half a Dram, the
best Bole-Armoniack, Aurum Diaphoreticum, of each two Scruples, Bezoartick
Mineral a Dram: Mix them, make a Cordial Powder; the Dose is from a Scruple to
two Scruples, or a Dram, with a fit Vehicle.

In Persons seized with a Plurisie, the following things are accounted the most
proper Cordials, for as much as by destroying the predominancy of the acid
Salt, they take away, or prevent the Coagulations and Extravasatings of the
Blood.

Take the Powder of a Wild Bores Tusk, from half a Dram to a Dram, Cristal
Mineral a Scruple, Powder, of red Poppy Flowers half a Scruple: Make a Powder
to be taken in any Liquor. After the same manner may be given the Powders of
Crabs Eyes, and of the Jaw Bone of the Pike-fish.

To this place belong also preparations of Nitre, which are often given with
good effect in Fevers, according to the following Forms.

Take Cristal Mineral a Scruple, Volatile Salt of Hartshorn, from three Grains
to six, mix them: Make a Powder, give it in a spoonful of Cordial Julape.

Take Cristal Mineral, Antimony Diaphoretick, of each a Scruple, Bezoartick
Powder half a Scruple: Make a Powder, give it after the same manner.

Medicines whose Basis is a fluid, or acid Salt, are prescribed in Fevers after
the following Forms, to loosen the Texture of the Blood.

Take Spirit of Vitriol, from four Drops to six, Carduus water three Ounces,
Treacle water two Drams, Syrup of the Juice of Citrons three Drams, Pearl half
a Scruple: Make a draught to be taken twice or thrice a day. Spirit of Salt, or
of Nitre may be taken after the same manner: For the same the drink Cherbet,
called also the Divine drink of Palmarius are proper.

Take Powder of Hartshorn Calcined, or of Antimony Diaphoretick three Drams,
Spirit of Vitriol, or of Salt a Dram; bray them together in a Glass Mortar, and
let them dry: The Dose is from a Scruple to half a Dram, in a spoonful of
Cordial Julape.

Fixed or lixivial Salts of Herbs often enter the Compositions of
Alexipharmicks: Moreover, Medicines which have these for their Basis, as they
are accounted very famous Febrifuges, so they ought to be numbered amongst
Cordials; for instance we propose that known Medicine.

Take Salt of Wormwood a Scruple, Carduus water three Ounces, Spirit of
Vitriol, or Oil of Sulphur a Scruple, Syrup of Violets three Drams: Make a
draught to be taken three or four hours before the Fit.

Take the waters of whole Citrons, and of Wood Sorrel, of each half a pound,
Salt of Tartar a Dram and a half, Juice of Limmons two Drams, Sugar half an
Ounce, mix them, make a Julape; the use of it is in Anomalous Fevers, which
though always burning, have daily returns of sharp fits: The Dose is three
Ounces twice a day.

The last rank of Cordials, and truly in some respect the chiefest, is of
Alexipharmicks, because these are more vital than the rest. But Alexipharmicks
being either for preservation, or for Curing: In the first place, we shall set
down Select Medicines to be given to persons, whilst yet in a state of health,
against the Infection of the Plague, or any Malignity whatsoever; omitting in
the mean time what is usually ordered concerning the alteration and rectifying
of the Ambient Air: And then in the second place we shall give you Select Forms
of Prescripts to be used after the Contagion is taken.

1. Antidotes for Preservation.
TAke Conserve of the Leaves of Rue four Ounces, Mithridate, and Confectio
liberantis, of each an Ounce, Confection of Hyacinth two Drams, Salt of
Wormwood two Drams and a half, Pulvis pannonici rubri half an Ounce, Bezoartick
Vinegar what suffices: Make an Electuary; the Dose is the quantity of a Chestnut
thrice a day.

Take Powder of the Roots of Virginia Serpentary, Contrayerva, Zedoary, Species
liberantis, of each two Drams, Camphire two Scruples, Sugar dissolved in
Bezoartick Vinegar, and boiled to a consistency for Tablets six Ounces: Make
Tablets according to art, each weighing half a Dram; let one or two be eaten
often in a day.

Take Roots of Virginia Serpentary three Ounces, boil them in three pounds of
fountain water till half be consumed, to the straining add of the best Honey
two Ounces, Venice Treacle an Ounce, dissolve it warm and close covered, and
strain it: The Dose is two or three spoonfuls three or four times a day.

Take Flowers of Sulphur four Ounces, melt them in a Crucible, then put into it
by spoonfuls one after another, Salt of Wormwood four Ounces, stirring them
together 'till the whole Mass grows red: then add the Powders of Aloes, Myrrh,
Olibanum, of each a Dram, Saffron half a Dram; stir them again for a quarter of
an hour, till they are incorporated; the Mass being cooled, and put on a glass
plate; let it stand till it dissolves into an Oil, like a most beautiful Ruby:
The Dose is from ten drops to twenty in an Ounce and a half, or two Ounces of
the Bezoartick water twice a day.

Or pour to the said Powder some spirit of Wine rectified on the Roots of
Contrayerva and Virginia Serpentary, till it cover them three fingers over;
draw forth a Tincture: The Dose is from twenty drops to thirty in a fit Vehicle.

Or, Take of the same Powder half an Ounce, pour to it of the best Canary two
pounds, let it dissolve close covered and warm: The Dose is a spoonful twice or
thrice a day.

After the Contagion is received, and the Crasis of the Blood is vitiated, and
begins to corrupt, the same Medicines are still proper to be taken, but in a
greater Dose, and oftener. Moreover the Vinegars, and fixed Salts of Herbs, are
very often added with good success to Alexipharmicks, because by them the
Coagulations of the Blood are resolved, and then all Heterogeneous Particles
evaporating, and the other being brought into a due mixture, its liquor at
length recovers its former state, and keeps it. There being innumerable
Medicines in the Books of Physicians for this end; I shall here only set down a
few.

Antidotes for Curing.
TAke of the Bezoartick water two Ounces and a half, Bezoartick Vinegar half an
Ounce, Venice Treacle a Dram, mix them, by shaking them in a Glass: Make a
draught, let the person take it, and sweat upon it.

Take Gascoins Powder, Roots of Contrayerva, and Virginia Serpentary, of each
from a Scruple to twenty five Grains: Make a Powder, give it in a spoonful of
Treacle water, drink after it a little draught of the same, or of a Cordial
Julape.

Take Powder of Teads prepared, Powder of Crabs Claws Compound, of each half a
Dram: Make a Powder, give it after the same manner.

Take Bezoartick Mineral half a Dram, Venice Treacle a Dram, Camphire six
Grains, Bezoartick Vinegar what suffices: Make a Bolus to be taken after the
same manner.

Take the waters of Wood Sorrel and Dragon-wort, of each four Ounces, Water of
Scordium Compound two Ounces, Treacle water and Bezoartick water of each an
Ounce, Powder of Pearl a Dram, Syrup of Clove-Gillyflowers (or of the Juice of
Citrons) two Ounces, spirit of Vitriol twelve drops: Make a Julape; the Dose is
three Ounces often in a day, sometimes by it self, sometimes with other
Medicines.

CHAP. X. Of the Passions of the Heart, and their Remedies.
AFter Cordial Medicines, vulgarly, though improperly, so called, it now
follows for us to treat of the Passion of the Heart, in which the Heart is
really ill affected, and therefore requires true Cordial Medicines: Under that
name two affects, somewhat differing betwixt themselves are commonly denoted,
to wit, The trembling of the Heart, and its panting: In both affects the motion
or beat of the Heart seems to be disorderly, and in a manner Convulsive; but
the irregularity of the first consists in the frequency of its Vibrations, and
of the other in their vehemence.

As to the Cure of the panting of the Heart, since its Causes are various and
manifold, its Cure also must be various; for what some affirm, that those sorts
of Remedies vulgarly called Cordials, which are reputed to revive the Heart,
and to relieve it when ill affected, are proper in any of all these Cases, it
is contrary both to reason and common experience.

We say then that the palpitation, or panting of the Heart, proceeds either
from the fault of the Blood, or of the Arteries belonging to the Heart: If it
happens through the fault of the Blood, the chief intent of Curing must be to
raise the Blood to a better Crasis, it being then become too watery and unmeet
for accension and fermenting, and to exalt or increase its active principles
which are then depressed or diminished; for which end spirituous Medicines,
also saline Medicines of all kinds, Sulphurous and especially Chalybeates
conduce: And to this place may be referred those things which are wont to be
prescribed in the Pica or longing Disease, in the Leucophlegmatia, and in the
cold Scurvy.

Take Conserve of Sea Wormwood, the outward yellow Coats of Oranges and
Limmons, of each two Ounces, Powder of Winters Bark two Drams, Species of
Diacurcuma a Dram, Steel prepared with Sulphur three Drams, Salt of Wormwood a
Dram and a half, with a sufficient quantity of Syrup of Citron Pills: Make an
Electuary, the Dose is the quantity of a Nutmeg in the Morning, and at five in
the Afternoon, drinking after it of the following Julape three Ounces, and
walking upon it.

Take water of the Leaves of Wake Robin a pound, of Pennyroyal and Hyssop, of
each four Ounces, Sugar an Ounce: Mix them, make a Julape.

Take of the Tincture of Antimony an Ounce; the Dose is from twenty to five and
twenty drops twice a day, with the said Julape. Moreover, amongst these we may
place the Tincture of Steel, and its Syrup, also Elixir proprietatis, with many
others.

Secondly, The panting of the Heart, which is more frequent, and much more
violent, happens through some fault in the Arteries belonging to the Heart,
which fault is either an Obstruction, or a Convulsive affect.

The first default for the most part is continual, and often incurable, but
especially if it arises from Consumptive Lungs, or because the Roots of the
Arteries are half stopped, or compressed, by reason of some Tuberculum, or bony
Excrescency in them: And in this case all that can be done, is to give some
ease now and then by Hypnoticks.

Moreover, it is not improbable that the Arteries sometimes are almost filled
up with Polypous Concretions engendered in them, and sometimes within the
Cavities of the Heart it self, and that thereby the free passage of the whole
current of Blood is hindered; but as it is diffcult to be satisfied when this is
so, so it is as rare to find a Cure for it. When there is a suspicion of it,
Saline Medicines seem to be most proper, and of those we must give such as have
a Volatile, or Acid Salt; but we must not give them together, but for a time
those (which failing of success) try the others.

Take Spirit of Sal Armoniack Compound, viz. distilled with Millepedes, or with
other Anti-Asthmaticks three Drams, the Dose is from fifteen drops to twenty
thrice a day, with the Julape, or some proper distilled water: After the same
manner you may try the Spirits of Hartshorn, Soot, Blood, and of an old Scull.

Take Spirit of Sea Salt, or of Vitriol distilled, and often Cohobated with the
Spirit of Wine, impregnated with Pneumonick Herbs three Drams; the Dose is from
fifteen drops to twenty after the same manner; for these purposes the Spirits
of Tartar, Guaiacum, and of Box are often used.

The panting of the Heart is very often a Convulsive affect, and wont to be
produced from the like Cause, and manner of affecting, as other Hypochondriack
and Asthmatick affects; and its Cure also ought to be attempted by
Antispasmodick Remedies; but a cholce of them must be made with some
difference, according as the Disease happens in a hot or cold temperament.

In respect of the former, the following Medicines may be prescribed.

Take Spiritus succini Armoniaci three Ounces; the Dose is from fifteen Drops
to twenty twice a day, with the Julape, or some proper distilled water. After
the same manner may be given interchangeably the Tincture of Tartar, of Steel,
or of Antimony.

Of the trembling of the Heart, and its Cure.
THe trembling of the Heart is an effect distinct from its panting or
Palpitation, and of a different nature from it, for in that its carneous and
moving Fibers seem affected by themselves, nor does the Morbifick Cause, as in
the other affect seem to lie in the Blood; or in the Arteries of the Heart.

The trembling of the Heart may be well described to be a Spasmodick
Convulsion, or rather a trepidation of its flesh, by which the moving Fibers
hastily, and only half contracted cause most swift turns of the Systoles and
Diastoles, but broken, and as it were at halfs; so that the Blood is brought
into, and carried forth of the Sinus 's of the Heart, only in very small
Portions.

As to the method of Cure to be used in the trembling of the Heart, since this
affect is merely Convulsive; therefore they are not Cordial Remedies, but
rather Cephalicks, and Nervous Medicines that are Indicated; which nevertheless
according to the temperament and constitution of the Patient, must be either
more hot or moderate, or, now of this, now of that nature. To comprehend all in
a few words, since there are three sorts of Mecines, that are wont to be mighty
successful in this Distemper, viz. testaceous Medicines, Chalybeates, and such
as are endowed with a volatile Salt: I shall here briefly set down certain
forms of each of these and their use. Therefore in the first place a provision
being made for the whole by evacuatives, and a choice being made of that sort
of Medicine which promises best, you may prescribe as follows.

Take Coral prepared, Pearl, of each two Drams, both Bezoars, of each half a
Dram, white Amber two Scruples, Ambergris a Scruple: Make a Powder, the Dose
is half a Dram twice or thrice a day, with a distilled water, or some proper
Julape.

Take Powder of Crabs Claws Compound two Drams, Powder of Male Peony Roots, and
of Man's Scull prepared, of each a Dram, Flowers of Male Peony, of Lillies of
the Valley, of each half a Dram: Make a Powder to be taken after the same
manner.

Take Ivory, red Coral powdered, of each three Drams, Species Diambrae a Dram,
double refined Sugar, dissolved in a sufficient quantity of water of Navews,
and boiled to a consistency for Tablets seven Ounces: Make Tablets according to
Art, weighing half a Dram; let one or two be eaten often in a day, as the
person pleases.

Take Conserve of the Flowers of Lillies of the Valley six Ounces, Powders of
Coral prepared, Pearl, Ivory, Crabs Eyes, of each a Dram and a half, Vitriol of
Mars a Dram, Syrup of Coral what suffices: Make an Electuary; the Dose is from
a Dram to two Drams twice a day, drinking after it a draught of the following
Julape.

Take the water of Navews, and of whole Citrons, of each six Ounces, of Orange,
Rines distilled with Wine two Ounces, Sugar half an Ounce: Make a Julape.

Take of our Syrup of Steel six Ounces, the Dose is a spoonful in the Morning,
and at five in the Afternoon, with two Ounces of the Julape before written,
leaving out the Sugar, or with distilled water.

Take Powder of Ivory, and of Coral, of each two Drams and a half, Species
Diambrae a Dram, Salt of Steel two Drams, Sugar eight Ounces, Ambergris
dissolved half a Scruple: Make Tablets weithing half a Dram, the Dose is three
or four Drams twice a day.

Take fresh Strawberies eight pounds, the outward Coats of twelve Oranges,
fresh Filings of Iron half a pound, being bruised together, pour to them eight
pounds of Wine; let them ferment in a Pot close covered for twenty four hours,
then distill it in common Organs.

Take Spirit of Hartshorn, or of Blood, or the like, three Drams: The Dose is
twenty drops twice a day, with a fit Vehicle.

Take Flowers of Sal Armoniack, Coral prepared, of each two Drams: The Dose is
a Scruple twice a day.

Take Crystal Mineral two Drams, Salt of Amber a Dram, Salt of Hartshorn a
Scruple: Mix them, the Dose is from fifteen Grains to twenty twice a day, with
the distilled water.

Of the intermitting Pulse, and its Cure.
AMong the Passions of the Heart, the intermitting Pulse may justly be numbered,
because in this affect, or at least in some kind of it the Heart it self
labors, though in somewhat a different manner than in its panting, or
trembling; for in these it is ill disposed, and irregular as to its motion, but
in that, as to its rest, this being sometimes twice longer than it uses to be
in its ordinary course.

This intermitting Pulse, or overlong Cessation of Motion in the Heart does
not proceed from the mixture or Crasis of the Blood, but only from the
irregular dispensation of the Animal Spirits, from the Cerebellum into the
Nerves that pass to the Heart, and thence into its Tendons, which irregularity
happens, because those Nerves are somewhat obstructed.

Although this Affect being very often without present hurt or danger, does not
require an overhasty Cure; yet for preservation sake, lest some great Diseases
follow it, Remedies and a method of Cure ought to be used; at least for the
whole remainder of the Persons Life, let him keep to a Diet well ordered in all
respects.

Moreover, let some gentle Course of Physic be prescribed him to be constantly
observed Spring and Fall; viz. That all the Seminal Roots of Diseases founded
in the Brain, or apt to be there engendered, may be taken away, as much as may
be; for this end we here direct you to the Prophylactick method, with the
Medicines prescribed by us elsewhere, against the Fits of the Apoplexy.

CHAP. XI. Instructions concerning Opiats, or Medicines that cause Sleep, with
their good and ill Effects; together with Prescripts of them.
OPiats exert their Force not by raising vapors to the Head, nor by opening
the Pores of the Brain, for any vapors or other Soporiferous matter to be
admitted into it, but only by destroying some of the Animal Spirits, so that
the residue being in a consternation, or forced inward, or at least called back
from their wonted Emanation into the nervous parts, quit their office, or in
some measure remit of it.

The Narcotick force of Opiats consists in this, that as the Animal Spirits are
most subtle Corpuscles, composed of Spirit and a volatile Salt united
together, and exalted to a very high pitch; so Opiats on the contrary consist
of a fetid Sulphur, that is, of a Sulphur, together combined with a fixed Salt,
and an Earthy matter, and carried up to a most high degree in like manner:
Which sort of Concrets are well known to be so contrary to the subtle Texture
of the Animal Spirits, that sometimes they put them to flights, or subvert them
at a distance by mere Effluvia's, which are very hardly, or indeed not at all
perceivable by the smell.

Opiats given in a small quantity chiefly and in a manner only regard those
Spirits to which the particular charge of natural and ordinary sleep is
committed, the rest being either untouched, or little let by them: Wherefore
after a Dose of Laudanum is taken, both the inward and outward senses are
bound, but the Pulse, Respiration, also the functions of Concoction and
Separation are continued after their usual manner, and after some time the
Spirits of the first employ return to their wonted Post.

But if an Opiat be stronger than it ought, it extends its Force father into
the Province of the Animal government, so that an overgreat Dose of it being
taken, the Appetite for the most part is dulled, Respiration is much
streightn'd, and rendered not only difficult, but likewise uneven or
interrupted, and sometimes also the motion of the Heart is so far debilitated,
that the Pulse presently grows weaker, with a cold Sweat, a deadness, and an
Eclipse as it were, of all the faculties, so that a perpetual sleep sometimes
follows this Medicine.

The good Effects of Opiats.
FIrst then, Opiats are most properly and necessarily Indicated, in case of
want of sleep, for then being seasonably and duly Administered, they give a
refreshing repose.

Secondly, In Delirous affects Opiats are given with good effect, (though
sometimes they rather do hurt than good, as we shall show hereafter) because
the Spirits being then moved with too much eagerness within the Brain, and as
it were struck with a rage, and passing their wonted bounds, the Opiats repress
them, and make them quietly retreat into their former stations.

Thirdly, Opium is accounted of most excellent use for appeasing all sorts of
Pains: For since Pain cannot be caused or continued, but a great plenty of
Spirits must always abound in the part affected, in case the Nerves are so
closed, that the passing of the Spirits to the place grieved be hindered, or
much diminished, (which Opium effects) it follows of necessity that the Pain
must cease: For the Particles of this Medicine besetting the extreme parts of
the Brain, do not only quell the forlorn Spirits in its outmost part, but
likewise strongly suppress them in their Original source within the Brain, and
in the midst of the Cerebellum, and consequently hinder their Emanations from
thence into the Genus Nervosum; so that during the Energy of the Opium, they
are sent more sparingly and thinly into the Precordia and Viscera, nay, and
into all other parts. Hence the Pulse and Breathing remit of their vehemence
and frequency; many times also all the Members and Limbs are seized with a
Languor and Lassitude. Moreover, hence the Viscera before irritated into
Convulsions, either tending to Excretions, as by Vomit, or seige, or causing
Pain, as in the Colic or Stone, depose their disorders.

Again, the good effect of Narcoticks is notoriously known in the Cure of the
Scorbutic Colic: In Pains of the Gout they also do excellently well, and so
in the Pain of the Stone in the Bladder, which Disease, when it cruelly
torments Old Men, and cannot be Cured by Cutting, admits no ease from any other
Remedy, but from Narcoticks: Wherefore in this case I have advised some to the
constant and daily use of Laudanum and Diacodium, which they have put in
practice, to the great comfort of their life, receiving no hurt thereby, though
sometimes augmenting its Dose, they have taken to a great quantity.

Fourthly, Opiats are seasonably given, if at any time the Pulse or Breathing
are more quick or vehement than they ought; for when in Fevers the Motion of
the Heart and Lungs being made more intense, give a most rapid Circulation to
the Blood, so that it is greatly perverted, both as to its Accension, and as to
its Crasis, and is not able to separate its drossy Excrements, which are so
thoroughly mixed with it: After a Narcotick is given, presently the Impetus of
those parts is somewhat broken, so that the Blood coming then to a gentle and
moderate Circulation, diffuses a less intense heat, and being loosened in its
Texture, it purges its Serum and impurities by Sweat and Urine.

Respiration not only as it is urgent, but moreover as the same is interrupted,
Convulsive, or otherwise variously irregular, often requires a Narcotick
Medicine: In a violent or very frequent Coughing always troubling us, this uses
to give relief before all other Remedies. Again, in fits of the Asthma, when
the Organs of Respiration are so laboriously exercised, that the Person
affected seems to be brought to the Agony of Death, a Dose of some proper
Opiat, makes all things presently serene and calm. Moreover in horrible
Vomiting, in excessive or violent Purging, this usually gives great ease.
Fluxes can scarce be Cured without Opium, not that this Medicine fixes the
boiling and raging Juices and Humors, but stops the Excretory Convulsions of
the Fibers, and that partly within the Cavities of the Viscera themselves, it
stupifying by its mere contact the Spirits there Implanted, and partly by
suppressing the Spirits within the Cerebellum, which continually flow to those
parts, whereby the others being destitute of supplys from them readily remit of
their Convulsive rage.

Fifthly, In Catarrhs and Defluxions of all kinds, we often fly to Opiats, as
to our last refuge, they powerfully stay excretions of Blood, and moderate and
restrain serous Evacuations, when at any time they are excessive, and tend to a
Colliquation. They repress the Immoderate Ebullition of the Blood in a burning
Fever, and lessen its excessive Accension. Briefly they most readily appease
all turbulent commotions in our Body from what cause soever they arise, and let
the Blood be never so much disturbed, they most commonly reduce it to a calm
and quiet state.

Opiats, where they agree, most commonly fuse the Blood, and after the manner
of Alexipharmicks powerfully provoke Sweat, and move Urine, as Dr. Willis gives
us here an Instance of a Person troubled with the Dropsy, and severely
tormented with Night-pains caused by the Pox, who by the constant use of
Laudanum, fell at length into great Sweats and Evacuations of Urine every
Night, and so was Cured.

A Lady, who for many years was subject at times to cruel pains of the Colic,
as often as she fell ill of that Disease, and found the pains grow intolerable,
could get no ease from any Remedy but from Opium: Wherefore she took a Dose of
this each Night, till the Morbifick matter being consumed by degrees, she
became at length free from all grief and pain.

Of the evil Effects of Opium, with cautions concerning its Use.
WE have found, by sad experience in many, the Use of Opium to be sometime
hurtful and destructive; for that some presently after taking it, have fallen
into a perpetual sleep, and others by taking a Dose of it too great, or
unseasonably, have either shortn'd their Lives, or by injuring their principal
faculties, have rendered it afterward uneasy and burdensome. I have known
some, who upon taking a Pill of Laudanum, have fallen presently into so
profound a sleep, that they could never be raised from it, they lived indeed
for three or four days, and as to their Pulse, Respiration, and Heat were
pretty well, but could never be brought again to sense, and waking, by any
Remedies or tortures. I have observed others, who after taking Opium, have
slept but moderately, nay sometimes little or scarce at all; but as to their
Pulse, Respiration, and Heat presently grew worse; so that incontinently after
the Medicine, they began to have a failing of strength, and then, growing short
and thick Breathed, to decay more and more, nor could their vigor be renewed
by any Cordials, but fainting by degrees they died. I have elsewhere related a
story of a robust man killed by Opium, who had no sleep at all after it, till
his last and mortal sleep, viz. Death it self following it; this Man presently
after he had taken the Medicine, complained of a great heaviness upon his
Stomach, and of Cold, then he was taken with a great Languor, and a
Consternation of all his Spirits, with a coldness of his extreme parts, and
within some hours complaining that his Eyes grew dim, and at length that he was
quite blind, he died.

I shall now relate what evils from the improper, or unseasonable use of Opium,
sometimes happen in the Head, what in the Breast, and what in the Belly.

As to the first, it is well known that the principal functions of the Soul,
viz. the Memory, the Reason, and the Acuteness of the understanding are very
often extremely injured by Narcoticks. A frequent use of them weakens the
Memory in many persons; I knew a person, who by taking a great Dose of it in a
Fever, wholly lost the use of that faculty, and after some weeks, when the use
of it began to return, he remembered only things done within a peculiar tract of
time, and nothing of those that were done before or after. I have known some
that have grown dull and stupid by this Medicine, and others that have grown
mad. And it is observed, that those Turks that eat much Opium, though they seem
to be well, and not injured by it, yet they are rendered more cold, and their
functions become worse; they appear always as though they were drunk and
besotted, and are affected with a Coma, or a continual inclination to sleep,
being stupid and unconstant, sometimes affirming a thing, and sometimes denying
it, so that they are unfit to deal or converse with men.

Secondly, We find that Opiats are sometimes hurtful to the Precordia and
Breast, because they depress and lessen the Pulse and Breathing, sometimes also
(as we have said before) they make them faulter, and by degrees wholly to
cease: Wherefore in Fevers, when the Blood being mightily depraved, seems to
admit of no Crisis, or not a good one, and that at the same time it furnishes
but very few and weak Spirits to the Animal Economy. Narcoticks are in a
manner always destructive, and as it were poisons: For though in the Plague and
Malign Fevers, whilst the Pulse and Respiration are strong, Treacle,
Mithridate, and Diascordium, nay and Laudanum are often given with good effect,
yet if at any time in those Diseases, and in other Fevers that do not carry so
much malignity, the vital faculty languishes, those famous Antidotes must be
used but very sparingly, and the stronger Opiats not at all. Moreover in a
violent Cough, the Phthisick, Plurisy, Empyema, and other Diseases of the
Breast, viz. in what ills soever nature is stirred up to discharge it self on a
sudden of that which is offensive, and oppresses the Breast, and lifts at it
with its greatest effort, and at the same time the Organs of Respiration being
destitute of a sufficient plenty of Spirits, faulter and perform their work
with great pain and difficulty; we must in such a case forbear Opium no less
than poison, for then Narcoticks increase and fix the weight to be removed, and
lessen the strength of the parts that labor to throw it off.

Thirdly, As to the parts within the Belly, we find that Narcoticks often
taken, proved sometimes very injurious to the principal faculty, viz. the
appetite of food (on which all nutrition, and the Root of Life depends) because
they very much blunt it, and often wholly destroy it: For when the Spirits
residing in the interior Coat of the Ventricle are stupefied, or destroyed by
the Particles of the Opiat; so that those Nervous Fibers though emptied, no
longer are corrugated, then all hunger ceases, and there is no appetite to
food, nay the same being then offered to the Stomach, proving rather
troublesome than delightful to it, is presently thrown up again. Moreover, for
the same reason the concoctive force of the Ventricle is weakn'd, and the
excretory motions as well of this, as of the Intestines grow tardy; for it is a
common observation, that a slowness of concoction, and a tardiness of going to
stool, are the familiar effects of an Opiatick Medicine.

From what is said, it will not be difficult to draw Physical Precepts and
cautions concerning the right use of Opiats, which we may do by observing the
four following things, viz. before a Narcotick Medicine be given, we must
consider, First, What kind of constitution the Patient is of. Secondly, What
kind of Disease it is he labors under. Thirdly, In what state the Animal
Spirits are, in respect both of the Animal and Vital functions. Fourthly, In
what condition the Blood and other humors are.

1. As to the first, when a Hypnotick is indicated, see that the temperament,
habit of Body, or Indisposition, Custom, or manner of Life of the Patient do
not indicate the contrary. For example, those that are of a mean stature, have
a strong, well-set, and square Body, with a hot Blood, and a lively or quick
aspect are wont to bear this Medicine best, and most commonly receive benefit
thereby; which also they may much more securely adventure upon, if they have
been used to it before; on the contrary it does not agree with, nay sometimes
it proves very prejudicial to those who are too corpulent or very thin; also to
those who being of a subtle texture of Body, have their Spirits easily
dissipable, or being of a cold temperament, have their Flesh soft and flaggy,
and being of a sluggish and intractable Nature, are of themselves dull and
sleepy; to which this thing may be added, and it augments the weight of the
rest, if they never made a Trial of that Medicine before.

The nature of the Disease is sometimes of great moment for, or against the use
of Opiats. None but flattering Physicians will make use of them in slight
affects. Moreover in some great Distempers they are either forbidden, or their
use is much suspected: In the Palsy, Vertigo, Incubus, Apoplexy, Orthopnaea,
the Dropsy of the Breast, or of the Abdomen in the numbness and trembling of the
Limbs, in very malign Fevers, and in the fits of intermitting Fevers, or in
the Crisis of others, Narcoticks are most commonly forbidden. Again, in a Cough
with much and thick Spittle, the Asthma, and in any other affects of the Breast,
with an oppression of the Lungs, and in Hysteric and other Convulsive
Passions, they are to be given but rarely, and not without caution, and the
advice of some prudent Physician: But in a violent Headache, Catarrhs, the
Colic, Plurisy, ordinary Fevers, in Vomiting, the Bloody Flux, in Nephritick
Fits, or fits of the Gout, and in any pains whatsoever, Opiats are not only
allowed, but we have recourse to them as to a Divine Panacaea.

3. But as often as an Opiat is proposed, or comes to be deliberated on, we
must farther consider in what state the Animal Spirits presiding in each
faculty are, for if they are but few, or being oppressed, flag already, and do
not sufficiently display themselves, certainly they must by no means be farther
lessened, or put in a consternation by a Medicine: Wherefore whilst the Animal
faculties do not appear quick, nor with sufficient vigor exert themselves as
to sense or reason; or when the Pulse and Respiration have the courses of their
Reciprocations but weak, also more quick or slow than usually, or disturbed,
and inequal: And lastly, if a stupor and enervation with an unwonted Languor
has seized the Members and Parts for Motion, we must wholly forbear Hypnotick
Medicines; but we may be free to use the same, if at any time they are
Indicated by reason of some great affects, and that the Animal Spirits at the
same time are strong enough, according to these and the other respects, or also
if they are too much expanded, or grown too raging and unruly.

4. In the mean time the state of the Blood and humors is not to be neglected,
for sometimes the uneven, or ill condition of these wholly forbids Opiats, or
permits them to be taken but sparingly, and with some restriction. The Blood
Indicates against their use when it is amiss either in its quantity, or in its
quality, or Crasis: As to the former, the bloody Latex either abounds, or is
deficient, and in both respects it excludes Narcotick Medicines. For first, if
at any time the Blood grown turgid through its plenty, and withal boiling in a
Fever, so exceedingly extends the Vessels as to make them strout forth; and
therefore the precordia mightily labor to circulate it as quick as possible,
by most swiftly repeated turns of the Systoles, lest it somewhere stagnates or
overflows; then certainly to give a Narcotick, whereby that labor and last
effort of the Heart, so necessary for preserving Life, would be hindered, were
rather the Office of a Poysoner, than of a Physician. Wherefore in an over
fullness of Blood, Phlebotomy ought always to precede the use of Opiats.
Secondly, No less damage is threatened from Narcoticks, if given when there is a
want or scarcity of Blood, as after great Haemorrhagies, long Fastings, or long
sicknesses: For when the current of the Blood is very slender, and by reason of
its smallness scarcely continued, the Heart being moved with as quick a beat as
may be, endeavors (as it were with redoubled efforts) to give it a most quick
Circulation, lest its course be interrupted, and consequently ceases: Hence it
is obvious to conceive how greatly prejudicial Opiats are, which put a stay, or
let to this endeavor of the Heart, so very necessary in such a juncture. And
indeed it seems to be for this reason, that we forbid sleep to Women presently
after Childbirth, when the Lochia flow in abundance, and to all others when a
considerable quantity of Blood has been taken from them, and in great
Hemorrhagies, to wit, lest the Heart be deserted by the Spirits during sleep,
with which it swiftly circulates the lessened current of the Blood. Moreover
sometimes the Blood being faulty in its quality, or (to speak more properly) in
its Crasis, Indicates against the use of Opiats; for when in a Cacochymia, or
Fever, the Blood being mightily filled with drossy Excrements, ought to be
agitated with a greater effort of the Heart, and be more swiftly circulated, to
wit, that the Heterogeneous Particles may be subdued, and soon evaporate; the
Operation of a Narcotick intervening, puts a stop to these endeavors of the
Praecordia, and consequently retards the Purification of the Blood, and
sometimes disappoints it.

As to other Excrementitious humors usually heaped together in the Ventricle,
or the Intestines, these also must be purged forth by Vomit or Seige before an
Opiat be given: For otherwise being there fixed, they will stick more
pertinaciously: For the Fibers of those parts being stupefied by the Medicine,
are not irritated as before; nor do they readily set upon excretory Convulsions
for expelling those drossy superfluities, or perform it with any vigor.
Wherefore according to the ancient Precept; If any thing be to be Evacuated,
let it be done before a Narcotick be given.

The Kinds and Prescripts of Opiats.
THe safest Narcotick, and which is generally approved of by long experience is
the Poppy and preparations of it: Wherefore as often as we endeavor
effectually and safely to provoke sleep, the whole stress of the Medicine is
Placed in Opium or Diacodium.

As to the Heads of white Poppies, with the Seeds out of which Diacodium, also
Decoctions, Emulsions, and other Hypnotick Confections are made; it plainly
appears that these have much less of a Narcotick Sulphur in them, than the
concreted Juice of Opium; and what they have of it, is much more pure and
innocent: Wherefore we give oftener, and with more safety Medicines made of
these, nor ought we to use Laudanum, but when through the violence of Symptoms,
Diacodiats will not serve: Again since these have in them less of virulency,
they do not want much preparation, but either a simple Decoction, or Infusion,
or Expression being made of them, they may be applied to Physical use. Now
Opium is seldom prescribed simply, and by it self, but is wont to be corrected
and compounded after a various and diversifyed manner of preparation, that it
may become a safe Anodine.

The wild Poppy has a certain Hypnotick virtue, but much more mild and gentle
than that other; wherefore in certain cases it agrees excellently well, and we
may be more secure as to its use. Of this a Syrup and a distilled water is
always ready prepared in Apothecaries Shops, which in many continual Fevers
are often given with good success, and they are judged to have a certain
specifical virtue in Curing the Pelurisy, because they take away pains, and by
putting some stay to the Pulse, abate the Feverish boiling of the Blood.
Moreover a Tincture is made of its Flowers Infused in Brandy, which is a famous
Medicine amongst Empiricks and good Women, and is averred to be good against
Surfeits. The reason of which effect seems to be, that the Spirit of Wine frees
the Contents of the Stomach from putrefaction, and the Narcotick force of the
Flowers prevents the Invasion of the Fever.

I shall now set down certain Select Forms of Narcoticks; which I shall also
digest into certain Classes, according as the Opiats have for their Basis,
either the Syrup or distilled water of the wild Poppy, or Diacodium, or
Laudanum Extractum, or Liquidum, or Pilul. de Styrace, or de Cynoglosso, or
lastly, Philonium.

Take the water of wild Poppies, and Cowslip water, of each six Ounces, Syrup
of red Poppies two Ounces, Sal Prunella half a Dram, mix them: Make a Julape,
the Dose is three or four Ounces thrice a day in the Pleurisy, Pains, watching
without a Fever, or any manifest Cause.

Take of Poppy water, from four Ounces to six: Let it be taken now and then by
it self twice or thrice a day for the same intent.

Take Diacodium, from half an Ounce to an Ounce, Cowslip water three Ounces,
Treacle water three Ounces: Make a Potion.

Take Carduus water three Ounces, Diacodium half an Ounce, Spirit of Hartshorn,
from half a Scruple, to a Scruple: Make a draught for procuring sleep and
sweat.

Take Diascordium half a Dram, Gascoins Powder a Scruple, Diacodium two Drams,
mix them: Let it be taken in a spoon.

Take Diacodium three Ounces, Snail water an Ounce, mix them: Its proper in the
Cough and Phthisick: The Dose is a spoonful going to Rest, and if need be, take
it again after Midnight.

Take London Laudanum a Grain, Powder of Claws Compound from half a Scruple, to
a Scruple, with a sufficient quantity of Syrup of Clove-Gillyflowers: Make
three Pills to be taken going to Rest.

Take Laudanum a Grain, Stomach Pills with Gumms half a Dram: Make four Pills
to be taken going to rest, in the Colic.

Take Laudanum, from a Grain, to a Grain and a half, Diascordium a Scruple:
Make a Bolus, instead of Diascordium, you may put the Confection of Alkermes,
or of Hyacinth.

Take Laudanum a Grain, dissolve it in a spoonful of Treacle water, add of
Cowslip water two Ounces: Make a draught.

Take of our Liquid Laudanum tartariz'd twenty Drops, give it in a spoonful of
Aqua Mirabilis, or of Cinnamon water, or of any other fit Vehicle: Its proper
in Colic, Nephritick, or Gouty pains.

Take Species of Hiera half a Dram, of the foresaid Laudanum twenty drops: Make
four Pills, let them be taken going to rest, for Purging, and easing pains of
the Colic at the same time.

Take Liquid Laudanum Cydoniated, from fifteen Drops to twenty: Give it in a
spoonful of small Cinnamon water for the Flux.

Take Conserve of red Roses an Ounce, Venice Treacle, Confection of Hyacinth,
of each two Drams, Pulvis Pannonici Rubri a Dram, Laudanum Cydoniated two
Drams, Syrup of Coral what suffices: Make an Electuary, the Dose is a Dram
every fourth or fifth hour, in a violent Bloody Flux with Gripes.

Take Pilul. de Styrace, from five Grains to six, Lac Sulphuris half a Scruple,
Oil of Anniseeds a Drop, Balsam of Peru what suffices: Make three Pills to be
taken in the Cough, Asthma, etc.

Take Pilul. de Cynoglosso, from six Grains to eight: Make two Pills to be
taken going to rest for the same intents.

Take Philonium Romanum, from one Scruple to two, Conserve of
Clove-Gillyflowers half a Dram, mix them: Make a Bolus to be taken going to
rest. Its proper for the Colic in a cold temperament.

I shall now say something concerning the Effects of the great Anti-Hypnotick
Coffee.

Coffee, though in some cases it be very profitable and Physical, in others it
is hurtful and unwholesome; for we see that great Coffee-drinkers become lean,
and are very often subject to be Paralytick, and grow impotent for generation.

Yet as to Affects of the Brain, and the Genus Nervosum, I very often prescribe
this Drink for them.

For indeed in very many Cephalic Diseases and Infirmities, viz. in
Headaches, Giddiness, the Lethargy, Catarrhs, and the like, where with a full
habit of Body, and a cold temperament, or one that is not hot, and a watery
Blood, there is a moist Brain with a sluggishness and dullness of the Animal
Spirits, Coffee has often a very good effect, for being daily drank, it
wonderfully clears and enlightens each part of the Soul, and disperses all the
Clouds of every function. But on the contrary, those who being thin, and of a
Bilious, or Melancholic temperament, have a sharp, or burnt Blood, a hot
Brain, and the Animal Spirits too much stirred and restless, ought to forbear
this Drink altogether, as being apt to pervert both the Spirits and humors in
a greater measure, and to render them wholly unfit, and unable to perform any
functions: For I have observed many, not having a sufficient plenty of Spirits,
and being also subject to the Headache, Vertigo, Palpitation of the Heart, and
a trembling or numbness of the Limbs, who presently after drinking Coffee
became worse as to those Affects, and suddenly found an unusual Languor in
their whole Body.

THE LONDON PRACTICE, OF PHYSIC, Contained in the Second Part of the
Pharmaceutice Rationalis of Dr. WILLIS.
THis Second Part of the Pharmaceutice Rationalis, is divided into three
Sections, whereof the First treats of Medicines that regard the Thorax, the
Second of Medicines that regard the Viscera of the Belly; the third of outward
Medicines, viz. Phlebotomy, Vesicatories, Issues, Cutaneous Affects, etc.

SECT. I. Of Medicines that regard the Thorax.
CHAP. I. Instructions and Prescripts for the Cure of the Phthisick, and
Consumption of the Lungs.
WE must observe the diverse states of this Disease, or the distinctive Marks
which belong to it: As First, when it is merely a Cough: Secondly, when it
begins to degenerate into a Phthisick or Consumption: Thirdly, when the
Phthisick is consummated, or past recovery.

1. And First, as to a new Cough from what Cause soever it arises, it is never
free from suspicion of danger, if it happens in a Body predispos'd to a
Phthisick; though in other robust Persons it be not presently to be feared: For
if at any time it be raised from some great evident cause, and being without a
Fever, and an indisposition of the whole Body, it proves not very troublesome,
then it is said to be only a cold taken, and is either wholly neglected, or
soon Cured without much ado. Again, if it be accompanied with a small Fever,
Thirst, and loss of Appetite, there is hope that the Blood being restored to
its due temper, the Cough will also cease of its own accord; but if drawing in
length, and not easily submitting to vulgar Remedies, it produces much
Spitting, and that discolored, it ought no longer to be neglected, but must be
dealt withal with a method of Cure, and fit Remedies, and an exact Form of
Diet: For then it may be suspected that the Lungs having received some
prejudice in their Conformation do not transmit the Blood entirely, but with a
deposition of the Serum, or Lympha, and often the nutritive Juice; and likewise
that those humors there deposed do putrify, and consequently that by a
reciprocal injury they taint the Blood, whereby it still offends the Lungs the
more.

2. But if to a Cough daily growing worse and worse, with much and thick
Spitting there be added a Languor, and falling away of the whole Body, a loss
of Appetite, difficult breathing, thirst, and a boiling of the Blood; there is
great cause to suspect that a Phthisick is at least begun, if not well
advanced: Wherefore we must then use all our endeavors both to free the Lungs
from the offensive load of matter already gathered together in them, and to
fortify them against the continual Incursion of the same; and at the same time
to cleanse the Mass of Blood of its dregs, and to restore it to a good Crasis,
whereby it may duly contain its Serosities, and other humors within its own
texture, or convey them to some other place than the Lungs.

3. But if beyond the state even now described of this Disease, the Spittle
daily increases, and becomes more discolored, and all other things still
growing worse and worse, there be joined to it a total decay of strength, and a
Hectic Fever, with a continual thirst, Night Sweats, a dying Countenance,
with a falling away of flesh even to the drought of a Skeleton; then there is
no room left for Physic, but only for a sad Prognostic, or at least all hope
of Cure being laid aside, we have nothing left to insist on but Anodines, which
may help toward an easy death.

Wherefore according to the said three states of this Disease, its method of
Cure must be in a threefold manner: viz. First we must prescribe what is to be
done for Curing a Cough, whilst being not entered the limits of a Phthisick, it
has only the name of a Cold taken. Secondly, what is proper in a beginning
Phthisick. Thirdly, what is to be done when it is consummated and desperate.

1. Men of a tender constitution, or such as are inclined to a Consumption from
their birth, or have sometimes formerly been used to be endangered by a Cough,
ought immediately as soon as they find it coming to stand on their guard, and
betake themselves to the Rules of Physic, according to which, to proceed
methodically in a way of Cure, the Therapeutick Indications must chiefly be
these three. 1. To appease or take away the disorder of the Blood, whence the
Fluxions of the Serum proceed. 2. To derive from the Lungs to the Pores of the
Skin, or Urinary passages, and other Emunctories, the dreggy Excrements of the
Blood, and all superfluities apt to depart from it. 3. To corroborate the Lungs
themselves against the reception of the Serum, and other humors; and likewise
to fortify them against the invasion of outward Cold, from which they are wont
to receive a farther prejudice. We shall speak of each of these a little more
at large.

1. The first Indication regards both the Effervescency of the Blood, in that
it grows over hot, and boils in its Vessels, by reason of the Effluvia's being
restrained within it; as also its dissolution, in that being loosened in its
Texture, it lets fall too much the Serum and other Humors from its embraces,
to remove both a thin form of Diet must be ordered, and the person being
careful to avoid all injury from outward Cold, a pretty free transpiration must
be procured, or at least the wonted transpiration must be restored: For these
ends let the Patient presently be thicker clothed, and let him keep himself in
Bed, or within his Chamber; at least let him not go forth of Doors: Evenings
and Mornings let a gentle Sweat be raised by giving him Posset Drink with
Rosemary, or Sage boiled in it: If notwithstanding the Cough grows worse,
Bleeding proves often of good effect, so his strength and constitution bear it;
after which Hypnoticks generally do well, inasmuch as they retard the motion of
the Heart, and consequently the overhasty Course of the Blood. Moreover, they
cause it to pass the Vessels of the Lungs gently, and with moderation, without
casting off any great quantity of Serosities; and to send forth what is
superfluous either by Sweat, or by Urine: For this purpose also Pectoral
Decoctions must be given, because they destroy the Acidities of the humors,
and hinder, and put a stop to the dissolution of the Blood, and its fusion into
Serosities. For the like reason and manner of Operating, Medicines prepared of
Sulphur are of such egregious use against the Cough.

2. The Second Indication, viz. the derivation of the Serum, and other dreggy
Excrements of the Blood from the Lungs, and their Evacuation by other ways, is
performed by Diaphoretick Medicines, Diuretics, and gentle Purgers; which must
go along with other Medicines, or be now and then interchangeably used with
them. Therefore after Bleeding, we usually give a gentle Purge, and sometimes
repeat it. In the Pectoral Decoctions, let the Roots of Chervil,
Butchers-broom, Elecampane, and other things moving Sweat and Urine be of the
Ingredients: Millepedes, Volatile Salt of Amber, and other fixed Salts, and
Powders of Shells, made into Pills with Turpentine, are often given with good
effect.

3. The Third Indication, viz. the fortifying of the Lungs, and its Ductus's
against the Fluxions of the humors and the assaults of the Cold, and the
suppression of the Catarrh, vulgarly so called, is performed by Linctus's,
Eclegma's, and other particular Remedies, and has chiefly a regard to two
things, viz. gently to close the Mouths of the Vessels and Glands that gape
into the Trachea with Astringents, lest they cast forth the Serosities too much
into it: And Secondly, To make smooth and glib the sides of the Ductus's of the
Trachea, that they be not offended, and thence continually stirred up to a
troublesome Cough, either by the sharp Serum coming upon them, or by the
assault of any outward Cold; and moreover, that those Ductus's being made
slippery enough, the Spittle sticking sometimes very fast to the sides of them,
may be more easily gotten off and Cough'd up: For the First intent it is, that
Conserve of red Roses, Olibanum, Mastick, Lohoch de Pino, Syrup of Jujubes, of
dried Roses, of Cup-moss, and other Astringents are so often ingredients in
pectoral prescriptions. On the account of the second intent Licorice, with its
various preparations is accounted so famous a remedy against any Cough
whatsoever. For this end Syrups, Eclegma's, and all other sweet Pectorals seem
to be ordered; to which is added Oil of sweet Almonds, either given by it self,
or reduced into the Form of some Milky pap by long stirring it with some
Pectoral Syrup. These are the chief Therapeutick Indications, together with the
apt intentions of Curing, which seem to be of most considerable use for a new
Cough, whilst it is yet free from the suspicion of a Phthisick, or at least not
yet entered its manifest limits: It now remains after this general method
briefly given unto you, to set down some Select Forms of Medicines appropriated
to each Intention: These, though they are manifold, and diversely prepared, yet
those that are of chiefest note, and most in use are Mixtures, Linctus's,
Eclegma's, Tinctures, Balsams, Troches, Tablets, Powders, Pills, Decoctions and
distilled Waters: We shall give you some of the most Elegant Receipts of each.

1. Mixtures.
TAke Syrup of Meconium, and of Jujubes, of each an Ounce and a half, Olibanum
powdered a Dram, Water of Earthworms, or Hysteric Water, or Water of Peony
Compound a Dram: Mix them, the Dose is one spoonful going to Bed, and after
Midnight.

Take Water of Snails, and of Earthworms, of each an Ounce and a half, Liquid
Laudanum Tartariz'd two Drams, Syrup of Violets an Ounce: The Dose is one
spoonful going to Bed.

Take Water of Snails six Ounces, Syrup of the Juice of ground Ivy three
Ounces, Flowers of Sulphur half a Dram: Mix them, the Dose is a spoonful going
to Bed, and early in the Morning.

Take of our Syrup of Diasulphur four Ounces, Water of Earthworms an Ounce:
The Dose is one spoonful after the same manner.

2. Linctus's.
TAke Syrup of Jujubes, and Maidenhair, of each an Ounce and a half, Syrup of
red Poppies an Ounce: Mix them, let it be taken with a stick of Licorice.

Take Oil of sweet Almonds fresh drawn, Syrup of Maidenhair, of each an Ounce
and a half, Sugar Candy two Drams: Mix them by bruising them in a Glass Mortar,
or shaking them in a Glass Vial till they grow white.

3. Eclegma's.
TAke Conserve of red Roses, two Ounces and a half, Lohoch Sanum an Ounce and a
half, Species Diatragacanthi frigidi a Dram and a half, Flowers of Sulphur half
a Dram, Syrup of Violets, or of red Poppies what suffices: Make a soft Lohoch;
the Dose is a Dram and a half in the Evening, and early in the Morning; at
other times let it be taken with a stick of Licorice.

Take Powder of the Leaves of Hedge-mustard, or of Rockets an Ounce and a half,
Clarified Honey four Ounces: Mix them, make a Lohoch, give it after the same
manner; it is proper in a cold Constitution.

4. Tinctures.
TAke Tincture of Sulphur free from any Empyreuma three Drams: The Dose is from
six drops to ten at Night, and early in the Morning in a spoonful of Syrup of
Violets, or of the Juice of ground Ivy. I know not a more excellent Remedy in
any Cough, so there be no Fever.

Take Tincture of Sulphur of Antimony two Drams: The Dose is twenty drops
Evenings and Mornings in a spoonful of Pectoral Syrup.

Take Tincture of Gumm Ammoniacum prepared with the Tincture of Salt of Tartar
an Ounce: The Dose is from fifteen drops to twenty. Tinctures of Galbanum, of
Assa-faetida, of the Gum of Ivy, prepared after the same manner, are likewise
proper in a cold Constitution.

5. Balsams.
TAke Opobalsamum two Drams: The Dose is from six Drops to ten, in a spoonful
of the Water of Hyssop, or Pennyroyal, or of any other Pectoral Water.

Take Artificial distilled Balsam, commonly called Mother of Balsam two Drams:
The Dose is from six Drops to ten, in a spoonful of Syrup of Violets, or of
Canary Wine at Night, and in the Morning.

Take Balsam of Sulphur two Drams: The Dose is from five drops to ten after the
same manner.

Take Balsam of Peru a Dram: The Dose is from two drops to four, or six, in
Conserve of Violets.

6. Troches.
TAke Species Diatragacanthi frigidi, half an Ounce, Licorice a Dram, Flowers
of Sulphur two Scruples, Flowers of Benzoin a Scruple, Sugar Penids three
Ounces, Solution of Tragacanth made in Hyssop water what suffices: Make a
Paste, form it into Troches, weighing half a Dram; let one of them be taken
pretty often in the Day or Night.

Take Seeds of white Poppies six Drams, Powder of red Poppy Flowers a Dram,
Extract of Licorice two Drams, Lac Sulphuris half a Dram, Sugar Penids two
Ounces, Mucilage of the Seeds of Quinces what suffices: Make a Paste, and form
it into Troches.

Take Species Diaireos, and of Fox Lungs, of each half an Ounce, Sugar Penids
two Ounces, Solution of Tragacanth, what suffices: Make a Mass to be formed
into Troches.

Take Powders of Elecampane Roots, Anniseeds and Licorice, of each two Drams,
Flowers of Sulphur a Dram, Tablet Sugar an Ounce and a half, Juice of Licorice
diluted and strained, what suffices: Make a Mass for Troches.

7. Tablets.
TAke Species Diatragacanthi frigidi three Drams, Powder of red Poppy Flowers,
Lac Sulphuris, of each half a Dram, Sugar dissolved in Poppy water, and boiled
to a consistency for Tablets four Ounces: Make Tablets weighing half a Dram.

Take Species Diaireos, and of Fox Lungs, of each three Drams, Flowers of
Sulphur, Elecampane Roots, of each half a Dram, White Benzoin a Dram: Make a
fine Powder, and Oil of Anniseeds a Scruple, Sugar dissolved, and boiled to a
consistency for Tablets eight Ounces: Make Tablets weighing half a Dram.

8. Powders.
THese, though seldom, yet sometimes are given in a Cough and affects of the
Lungs with good success.

Take of the Reddish tops of ground Ivy what suffices, being bruised let them
be made into a Cake, and presently dried in the Sun, then reduce it into a fine
Powder, and keep it in a Glass; this Plant retains its virtue, with its smell
and color excellently well for a long time, beyond all Conserves and Syrups,
and is of wonderful efficacy in a great and obstinate Cough: Give from half a
Dram, to a Dram twice a day, with a distilled water, or Pectoral Decoction.

After the same manner, Powders are prepared of other Pectoral Plants, and are
given with good success.

Take Cup-moss three Drams, Lac Sulphuris a Dram, Sugar Candy half a Dram: Make
a Powder, the Dose is from a Scruple to half a Dram twice a day. This Powder is
proper for those that are troubled with a Convulsive or Chin-Cough.

Take Flowers of Sulphur, Olibanum, Ceruse of Antimony, of each two Drams,
divide it into twelve parts: Give one Mornings and Evenings in a spoonful of
some fit Vehicle.

9. Pills.
TAke Aloes Rosat. or rather Pilul. Ruffi, Flowers of Sulphur, of each a Dram
and a half, Flowers of Benzoin a Scruple, Juice of Licorice diluted with water
of Snails what suffices: Make a Mass, form it into little Pills; let four of
them be taken at Night, repeating the Dose every Night, or every other Night.

Take Powder of Elecampane Roots, Licorice, and Flowers of Sulphur, of each a
Dram, Flowers of Benzoin half a Dram, Tar what suffices: Make a Mass, and form
it into small Pills; the Dose is three or four at Night, and early in the
Morning.

Take Millipedes prepared two Drams, Powder of the Seeds of Nettles and
Burdock-seeds, of each half a Dram, Oil of Nutmegs drawn by distillation a
Scruple, Salt of Amber half a Dram, Juice of Licorice what suffices: Make small
Pills, let three of them be taken at Night, and in the Morning.

10. Decoctions.
THese are taken either by themselves, or with Milk added to them: Among those
of the first kind, the Pectoral Decoction according to the London Dispensatory,
first presents it self; which is to be taken twice a day, from four Ounces to
six or eight.

Take Leaves of ground Ivy, Maidenhair, Hart's-tongue, Coltsfoot, Agrimony, of
each a handful, Roots of Chervil, Butchers-broom, of each an Ounce, Seeds of
Carthamus and sweet Fennel, of each half an Ounce, boil them in six Pounds of
fountain water, till half be consumed, adding toward the end either of
Licorice three Drams, Raisins stoned two Ounces, and six Jujubes, or of the
best Honey three Ounces: Make an Apozeme, Scumming off the Froth, and
Clarifying it with the white of an Egg. The Dose is six Ounces warm twice or
thrice a day.

Decoctions to be taken with Milk are used Mornings and Evenings instead of a
Breakfast and a Supper, according to the manner following.

Take great Daisie Flowers a handful, Snails cleans'd, in number three, Candied
Eringo Roots half an Ounce, Barley three Drams, boil them in a Pound and a half
of fountain water to a Pound: Take from six Ounces to eight warm, adding as
much of Milk, and afterward let the quantity of this be increased by degrees.

After the same manner, let Cup-moss, also the Leaves of ground Ivy, St.
John's-wort, and of other Pectorals be boild, and taken with Milk.

Decoctions of Woods frequently conduce very much to the Cure of an obstinate
Cough, especially being taken constantly for some time instead of Beer, as an
ordinary Drink.

Take Roots of Sarzaparilla four Ounces, of China two Ounces, red and white
Saunders of each half an Ounce, shavings of Ivory and Hartshorn, of each three
Drams: Let them infuse according to Art, and boil in eight Pounds of fountain
water to four Pounds, adding to it of Licorice six Drams, Raisins stoned an
Ounce and a half: In a Phlegmatic or cold Constitution, add Raspings of
Guaiacum.

11. Distilled Waters.
EVery Man may make many and different Forms of these, as occasion requires,
and according to the Constitution of the Patient they may choose sometimes Milk
alone, sometimes Milk with some part of Wine, sometimes Ale, or Brunswick Beer:
I shall give you a Specimen of these as follows.

Take Leaves of ground Ivy, Hyssop, Pennyroyal, of each four handfulls, Snails
half boiled in their shells two Pounds, Nutmegs sliced, in number six. All of
them being small shred together, pour to them of new Milk eight Pounds: Distill
them in common Organs, the Dose is three Ounces twice or thrice a day by it
self, or with some other Medicine: When its taken, let each Dose be sweetened
with Sugar Candy, or with Syrup of the Juice of ground Ivy.

In a Constitution that is not hot, especially if there be no fervent heat of
the Blood or Praecordia, to six or seven Pounds of Milk add of Canary Wine a
Pound or two, and in a Phlegmatic or Aged Body, instead of Milk, let the
Menstruum be Ale or Brunswick Beer.

Moreover, in the Winter when Snails are not easily, or scarce at all to be
gotten, the Lungs of a Lamb, or of a Weather may properly enough supply their
place, and sometimes also those of a Calf half boiled and sliced very small;
and let them be distilled with the foresaid Ingredients, and added to a fit
Menstruum in common Organs, or a Rose-still.

In this Classis, where its treated of a Cough not yet arrived to a Phthisick;
we may aptly range the Convulsive, or suffocating Cough of Children, commonly
called the Chin-Cough. This Disease chiefly assaults Children and Infants, and
at certain times, viz. in the Spring especially and Fall, its usually
Epidemical. The Diseased have frequent and very cruel fits of Coughing, in
which the Organs of Respiration do not only greatly labor, but likewise being
affected with Convulsions, variously interrupt, suspend, or pervert their
Actions: But for the most part the Diaphragm being seized with Convulsions by
it self, or by the impuise of other parts, obstinately so continues for a very
long space sometimes its Contraction, and sometimes its Dilatation, that
Inspiration or Expiration being hindered for a time, the Vital Breath can scarce
be drawn at all; so that the Coughers cry out as though they were strangled,
and their Countenance turns black through the Stagnation of the Blood: If happily
those Organs being not so much seized with Convulsions, they can Cough out
freely, nevertheless they are still fore'd to Cough with violence, and so long
till theia strength fails them.

Though this Cough seldom kills, or proves very dangerous, yet it is very
difficult to be Cured, and oftener ceases of it self as the year changes, then
it is conquered by Medicines. The reason is, that we must not only in this, as
in an ordinary Cough, alter the Blood, and derive its drossy Excrements from
the Lungs to the habit of the Body, to be sent forth by transpiration, but we
must likewise take care to correct the Nervous Juice, which in this case is
vitiated with a Heterogeneous and Elastick matter which causes the Convulsive
motions.

As to the Cure of this Disease, the method of Curing used in other Coughs
seldom proves successful in this; whererore only Empirical Remedies are
commonly Administered.

Amongst many Remedies of this kind, the two following are usually preferred
before all others whatsoever, and are chiefly in use, viz. to give inwardly
Cup-moss, and various preparations and compositions of it, and if there be need
of and further Cure, the Child is to be put into some sudden fright. And if
these things work not the desired effect, Ptisans, Syrups, Julapes, or
Decoctions and other Pectorals are laid aside, and commonly all other Medicines
are thrown by, expecting till the Disease either ends of it self in process of
time, or be Cured by the succeeding change of the year.

Cup-moss, so commonly used amongst us against Coughs of Children, has an
Astringent virtue, (as we find by its taste) and contains Particles of a smart
nature, which denote a plenty of Volatile Spirits, whence we guess its use to
be to fix the Blood, and to moderate the Fluxions of the Serum, and likewise by
Volatilising the Nervous Juice, to take away its Convulsive disposition: Its
usually given in the form of a Powder, Decoction, and Syrup according to the
following Forms.

Take Cup-moss Powdered a Dram, Sugar Candy a Scruple: Mix them, divide it into
three or four parts, take a Dose Evenings and Mornings, with a fit Vehicle.

Take of the said Moss two Drams, Lae Sulphuris two Scruples, Powder of
Anniseeds a Scruple: Divide it into six parts, give them after the same manner.

Take of the said Moss Dram, boil it in a quantity of Milk sufficient for one
Dose; let the straining be taken Evening and Morning: For those with whom Milk
does not agree, or to whom it does no good; let a decoction of it be prepared
in fountain water, or Hyssop water, or any other Pectoral water, and let it be
given to two or three Ounces twice a day, sweetning it with Sugar, or some
proper Syrup.

Take of this Moss an Ounce, boil it in two Pounds of some Pectoral Water, till
half be consumed: To the straining, add of Sugar Candy a Pound, and let it
evaporate in a gentle Bath heat, to the consistency of a Syrup.

The other remedy commonly in use for the Cough of Children, is to put them
into some sudden fright, as by setting them in a Binn when a Mill goes, etc.
which sometimes Cures the Disense on a sudden; the reason of which doubtless
consists in this, that the Animal Spirits being put to flights, and driven into
new distractions, quit their former disorders, and likewise that the Convulsive
matter is either dissipated by that perturbation, or driven into other Nerves,
where it proves less offensive.

The Empirical Cure of this Disease being thus set forth, together with the
Remedies vulgarly used, and their Aetiologies at least probably explicated: I
shall now set down a certain rational method of Curing, and happily more
efficacious against these sorts of Coughs of Children: Therefore in such a
case, I usually prescribe according to the Forms following, and sometimes
successively enough: And First, since we must begin with a Purge;

Take Syrup of Peach Flowers a spoonful, Hysteric water a Scruple: Mix them,
let it be taken Cum Regimine.

Or, Take Calamelanos six Grains, Scammony sulphurated, Rosin of Jalup, of each
three Grains: Make a Powder, give it in a little pulp of preserved Cherries to
a Boy of six Years Old; and let the Dose be increased, or lessened according to
the Age: Let the Purge be repeated in six or seven days.

If the Patient (as it often happens) be prone to Vomit, take Oxymel of Squills
six Drams, Salt of Vitriol four Grains: Mix them, give it to a Child six Years
Old, and according to this proportion, let a Dose be accommodated to others: I
have known this kind of Vomit given every Morning for four or five days
successively to have done well.

Blistering Plasters are much used, and let them be applied sometimes to the
Nape of the Neck, sometimes behind the Ears, sometimes to the Insides of the
Arms near the Armpits, and as soon as the Sores in those places begin to heal,
let others be raised elsewhere.

Instead of Beer, let the following Decoction be his ordinary drink.

Take China Roots and Ounce and a half, all the Saunders of each half an Ounce;
shavings of Ivory and Hartshorn, of each three Drams: Let them infuse according
to Art, and boil them in six Pounds of fountain water till half be consumed,
adding of Raisins stoned an Ounce and a half, Licorice three Drams.

Take Spirit of Gum Guaiacum with Sal Armoniack a Dram, Syrup of Cup-moss three
Ounces, Hysteric water an Ounce: The Dose is a little spoonful at Night, and
Early in the Morning.

Or, Take Tincture of Sulphur two Drams: The Dose is three drops at Night, and
early in the Morning in a spoonful of Syrup of Cupmoss.

To some persons of a hot Constitution, and turning of a deep red, or rather
black color with Coughing, I have sometimes successfully ordered a Vein to be
opened, or that two or three Ounces of Blood should be drawn from them by
Leeches.

Take live Millepedes cleans'd two Ounces, Powder of Anniseeds a Dram, Nutmegs
haif a Dram, double refined Sugar an Ounce: Being bruised together, pour to
them of Hyssop water six Ounces, Magistral Snail water two Ounces: Stir them
together a little with a Pestle, and express it storngly; the Dose is two or
three spoonfuls twice a day.

Thus far of the Cough and its Cure, whilst it is only an entrance to a
Consumption; now we must treat of this affect, having passed the frontiers of
this dangerous Disease, and set down a method of Cure, and forms of Medicines
proper for Curing an Inveterate Cough, viz. when either neglected, or not
easily yielding to Medicines, it begins to degenerate into a Phthisick, that is
to say, when it is come to that pass; that the Blood being loosn'd in its
Texture, does not only pour the superfluous Serum, but even the Nutritive, and
happily the Nervous Juice, the Lympha, and other its dreggy Excrements on the
Lungs, and deposes them within its Ductus's; and withal, that the depravation
of the Lungs is by so much augmented, that its Vesiculae being distended, or
many of them broken into one, and so a Solution of Continuity, or an Ulcer
being caused, a greater Mass of Matter for the Consumption is daily heaped
together: Moreover, and that the matter, in regard it is permitted to continue
long there, Putrisies, and so still corrupts the Lungs more, and taints the
Blood passing through them. In this case the Therapeutick Indieations are
chiefly these three, viz. First of all to stop the dissolution or the Blood,
which is the Root of all the mischief, and to prevent it from pouring always
matter in so great a plenty on the Lungs. Secondly, To evacuate by
Expectoration the corruption gather d together within the Lungs, and that
sufficiently in some short time. Thirdly, To corroborate and dry the Lungs
being dissolved as to their unity, or become too lax and moist, or otherwise
weak, lest they are daily more corrupted, and receive the Morbifick matter
always more and more. Each of these Indications prompts us various intentions
of Curing, and requires diverse sorts of Remedies, and many ways of
Administration; of which I shall here briefly touch the chief.

Therefore what the first Indication suggests, to wit, to stop the dissolution
of the Blood, these three things (as much as may be) must be procured, viz.
First, that the Mass of Blood may contain within it, and assimilate whatever
Nutritive Juice it is supplied with, and be so proportioned with it, that it be
not faulty either in quantity or quality. Secondly, That the Acidities
engendered either in the Blood, or conveyed to it from elsewhere be so
destroyed, that the Blood retaining always its Mixture or Crasis, be not so
subject to Fluxions or Fusions. Thirdly, That all dreggy Excrements in the
Blood be derived from the Lungs to other Emunctories, and places of Evacuation.

As to the first of these intentions of Curing, that the Nutritive Juice be
proportioned to the Blood, before all things it must be ordered that Persons
troubled with a Cough and Phthisick, abstain as much as may be from Drink, and
take liquid things but in a very small quantity, so that the Blood being weak
in its Crasis, may be able more easily to subdue the minute Portions of fresh
Juice, as long as it is not too much cloyed with it, and to retain it within
its Texture. Again, let that fresh Juice consist of such Particles as are
subtle and gentle, that they may be mastered by the Blood, and be assimilated
without any eager heat of contest: Wherefore Asses milk, sometimes also Cows
Mild, or Goats Milk; also Water Gruel, Cream of Barley, Ptisan, Almond Milks,
and other simple sorts of food agree better, and nourish more than Flesh, Eggs,
or Gelly-broaths, strong Ale, Wine, or any other kind of richer Fare. Secondly,
That the Blood retaining its temperament, be not easily dissolved into
Serosities offending the Lungs; as well its own Acidities, as those of the
other humors that are mixed with it, and especially of the Nervous and Lymphick
humors must be destroyed: Which intention is excellently performed by
Medicines prepared of Sulphur, which therefore in this case (so there be not a
Hectic Fever) are frequently given, and in a large Proportion. Wherefore let
the Tincture, Balsam, Syrup, Flowers, and Milk of Sulphur be given twice or
thrice a day in a good large Dose; for the same purpose Traumatick or Vulnerary
Decoctions, also Decoctions of Pectoral Herbs (commonly so called) and Roots
are to be taken instead of ordinary drink: Moreover, Powder of Crabs Eyes, of
Millepedes, and of other things containing an Alkalisate or Volatile Salt, are
often given with good success. The Third intention of Curing, referring to the
First Indication, viz. That the dreggy Excrements of the depraved Blood, (in
case they much abound) be withdrawn from the Lungs, and Voided by other
Emunctories, suggests to us many ways to be put in practice for withdrawing
them; For besides Bleeding, Evacuation by Urine, and now and then a gentle
Purge (which have place in all Coughs, even in a beginning Phthisick) we ought
also to range here Baths, Breathing in a warm Air to promote perspiration, also
frictions of the extreme parts, Dropax's, Issues, Vesicatories, shaving the
Head, Errhin's, Apophlegmatisms, and all other general or particular ways of
Evacuating humors or vapors.

The Seeond Indication in a beginning Phthisick, viz. that the corrupted matter
deposed within the Lungs, be every day readily and clearly discharged, is
performed with expectorating Medicines: These are said to operate in a twofold
manner, according as their virtue is conveyed to the Lungs two ways. For some
of them taken by the mouth, immediately send their active Particles into the
Trachea, which partly by making the passages slippery, and by loosening at the
same time the matter there sticking, and partly by irritating the Excretory
Fibers into Convulsions, cause an Expectoration: In which number Linctus's and
Fumigations are esteemed the chief. Expectorating Remedies of the other kind,
which are justly esteemed the best, exert their Energy by the conveyance of the
Blood, for consistion of such Particles which cannot be subdued and assimilated
by the Mass of Blood, when they enter it, being immiscible with it, they are
presently cast forth again, and penetrate from the Arteries of the Lungs into
the Ductus's of the Trachea, where cleaving to the matter, they divide,
attenuate, and so exagitate it, that the Fibers being thereby irritated, and
successively contracted in Coughing, the Contents of the Trachea, and of its
Vesiculae are thrown up into the mouth. Medicines proper for this use besides
Sulphur and preparations of it, are Artificial Balsams distilled with Oil of
Turpentine, Tinctures and Syrups of Gumm Ammoniacum, Galbanum, Assa-faetida,
Garlic, Leeks, and the like strong smelling things; of which also Lohoch's and
Eclegma's are prepared, and these indeed work both ways, so that partly by
slipping down into the Trachea, and partly by entering the Lungs by the Circuit
of the Blood, they set upon the Morbifick matter both before and behind, and so
throw it forth with the greater force.

As to the Third Indication, viz. That the injured Conformation, or vitiated
constitution of the Lungs may be restored or amended; such things must be used
which resisting putrefaction, mundify, consolidate, dry and corroborate; for
which ends also Medicines prepared of Sulphur, Balsamicks, and Traumaticks are
proper: Hence some Empiricks successfully preseribe not only the fume of
Sulphur, but likewise of Arsenick to be drawn through a Pipe or Funnel into the
Lungs, Moreover for this reason it is, that the change of Habitation, as from
Cities to a Country or Sulphurous Air, or traveling from one Country into
another hotter, proves so notably beneficial.

So far of the method of Cure which seems to be proper for a deeper Cough, or a
beginning Phthisick: Now we must set down some Select Forms of Medicines
according to each of those Therapeutick Indications, which also according to
the way used in a gentle Cough, free from a Phthisick, we shall distribute into
certain Classes, and those are Mixtures, Linctus's, Lohoch's, Tinctures,
Balsams, Troches, Lozenges, Powders, Pills, Decoctions, and distilled Waters:
We shall set before you some Examples of each of these, to which also may be
added some of the forms of the Medicines prescribed before for a beginning
Cough, and not yet arrived to a Phthisick.

1. Magistral Mixtures and Syrups.
TAke of our Syrup of Diasulphur three Ounces, Water of Earthworms an Ounce,
Tincture of Saffron two Drams: Mix them, take a spoonful going to Bed, and
early in the Mornign.

Take Syrup of the Juice of Ivy three Ounces, Snail water an Ounce, Flowers of
Suslphur a Dram: Mix them by shaking them together, the Dose is a spoonful
Evenings and Mornings.

Take Tincture of Sulphur two Drams, Laudanum Tartariz'd a Dram, Syrup of the
Juice of Ivy two Ounces, Cinnamon water two Drams: The Dose is a spoonful at
Bed time, and if the Person does not sleep, toward Morning.

The Syrup of Diasulphur. TAke Sulphur prepared after our manner, half an
Ounce, the best Canary Wine two pounds: Make a close digestion in B. M. or in
Sand for twenty eight hours: Which being done, take double refined Sugar two
pounds, dissolve it and boil it to a consistency for Tablets in a little Water
of Elder Flowers; then pour to this by little and little the Wine tinged with
the Sulphur whilst warm; let it boil a little on the fire, scumming it, and
strain it through Woollen. You will have a mest delicate Syrup of a Gold
color, and of great efficacy against the Cough and other affects of the Lungs
(so there be no bayling heat of the Praecordia, nor Hectic Fever) the Dose is
a spoonful Evenings and Mornings by it self, or with other Pectorals.

Syrup of Garlic. TAke Cloves of Garlic Pill'd, and out in slices, in number
ten or twelve, Anniseeds bruised, half an Ounce, Elecampane Roots sliced three
Drams, Licorice two Drams; let them have a close and warm digestion, for two or
three days in a pound and a half of spirit of Wine, put the clear and warm
straining into a silver-dish; add of double refined Sugar a Pound and a half;
the Dish being put on hot Coals, let the liquor be set on fire, and whilst it
burns stir it; sirain it through Woollen, and keep it for use.

Syrup of Turnips. TAke Turnips sliced, and double refined Sugar, of each half
a pound; put them in a glaz d Pot, a lay of Turnips, and a lay of Sugar till it
be full: Let the Pot, being covered with Paper, be put into an Oven to Bake
with Bread; when it is taken out, press forth the Liquor, and keep it for use:
The Dose is a spoonful Mornings and Evenings.

Syrup of Snails. TAke fresh Snails with their shells, in number Forty; cleanse
them with a Linen Cloth, then each of them being run through with a Bodkin;
let the Apertures of the shells be fill d with Powder of Sugar Candy, and being
put in a Linen Bag, let them be hung up in a Cellar, and let a Glass Vessel be
set under them to receive the Syrup which will drop from them: The Dose of this
is a spoonful twice or thrice a day in a fit Vehicle, viz. Aqua lactis, or some
Pectoral Decoction.

2.3. Linctus's and Eclegma's. TAke Conserve of red Roses three Ounces,
Tincture of our Sulphur two Drams: Mix them by stirring them in a Glass Mortar;
the Dose is the quanticy of a Nutmeg at Night, and early in the Morning:
Sometimes to allay a troublesome Cough, you may add to this of Olibanum half a
Dram, or a Dram.

Take Conserve of red Roses four Ounces, Flowers of Sulphur four Scruples, fine
Oil of Turpentine a Dram, Species of Fox Lungs three Drans, Syrup of the Juice
of ground Ivy what suffices: Make a soft Lohoch to be taken after the same
manner, viz. Mornings and Evenings; also to be sucked at other times with a
stick of Licorice.

Take Powder of Sugar Candy four Drams, Tincture of Sulphur two Drams: Mix them
by stirring them in a Glass Mortar; let it be taken after the same manner.

Instead of the Tincture of Sulphur, you may put other Balsamic Tinctures, as
of Balsam of Peru, of Opobalsamum, of the Gum of Ivy, Guaiacum, Amber, with
many others, which may be mixed either in Conserve of red Roses, or with
Conserve of the Flowers of Coltsfoot, or with Sugar Candy.

4.5. Tinctures and Balsams of the same nature and composition as we have
preserib'd before in a beginning Cough, are proper in a Phthisick, only the
Dose must be a little larger.

Take of Tar an Ounce, Water of quick Lime thrice Cohobated, two pounds, distill
them in Balneo to half: Then let the filtrated Liquor be drawn off in Balneo to
the consistency of honey; to which pour Tincture of Salt of Tartar half a
pound: Let it digest in a close Glass to extract the Tincture: The Dose is from
twenty drops to thirty, with a proper Vehicle. After the like manner a Tincture
in gotten out of the black Oil of Soot, Liquid Amber, Liquid Storax, and many
other things.

Take of our Sulphur prepared with the addition of Myrrh, Aloes, and Olibanum
in a subtriple quantity an Ounce: Let a Tincture be drawn off with Oil of
Turpentine, also with Rectified Spirit of Wine: The Dose of this is from
fifteen drops to twenty.

6.7.8. Troches, Tablets, and Powders, because chiefly directed for the Cough,
are in a manner of the same Nature and Composition with those before prescribed
for that affect, when new taken; only that for drying and consolidating the
Lungs Sulphurous and Traumatick ingredients are required in a greater
proportion.

Take Powder of the Leaves of ground Ivy a Dram, Flowers of Sulphur two Drams,
Sugar Penids a Dram and a half, Juice of Licorice diluted with Hyssop-water,
what suffices: Make Troches weighing half a Dram.

Take Powder of Yarrow bruised, and dried in the hot Sun, half a Dram, Flowers
of Sulphur, Olibanum powdered, of each a Dram, Powder of red Roses dried, half a
Dram, Sugar dissolved, and boiled to a consistency for Tablets six Drams, Oil
of Anniseeds a Scruple: Make Tablets weighing half a Dram. Take one thrice, or
oftener in a day, and especially at night, and early in the morning.

9. Pills. TAke Juice of ground Ivy Clarified in the Sun a pound, Flowers of
Coltsfoot dried, tops of Hyssop, Sage, Pennyroyal, of each a handful,
Anniseeds, Carraway-seeds, sweet Fennel-seeds bruised, of each half an Ounce;
distill them in Balneo Mariae to half, then strain it, and distill the
straining to the consistency of Pills, adding Juice of Licorice half a Dram,
Powder of Elecampane Roots, Flowers of Sulphur, of each three Drams, Flowers of
Benzoin a Dram, Balsam of Peru, half a Dram, Tincture of Sulphur three Drams,
Laudanum Tartariz'd two Drams: Make a Mass, form it into small Pills, and take
three or four at night, and early in the Morning.

10. Decoctions, such as we have before prescribed for an obstinate Cough, may
be also properly taken in a beginning Phthisick. In desperate Cases I have
sometimes very successfully prescribed the following Decoction to be taken
twice or thrice a day, and also instead of ordinary drink.

Take Guaiacum four Ounces, China, Sassafras, of each two Ounces, all the
Saunders, of each an Ounce, shavings of Ivory and Hartshorn, of each three
Drams: Let them infuse, and boil them in twelve pounds of fountain water to
half, adding Licorice an Ounce, Raisins stoned four Ounces; strain it.

11. Distilled Waters such as before prescribed, are also proper here, to which
may be added the Water of Solenander drawn from Hogs Blood with Turpentine;
also Balsamic Waters distilled from Turpentine with Pectoral Ingredients.

Take Leaves of ground Ivy, white Horehound, Hyssop and Pennyroyal, of each
three handfuls, Roots of Elecampane and Florentine Orice, of each two Ounces,
Turpentine dissolved with Oil of Tartar four Ounces, Hyssop-water four pounds,
Malaga-wine two pounds, distill them in Sand; let all the Liquor be mixed, the
Oil being separated: The Dose is two or three spoonfuls twice a day, with a
spoonful of the Syrup of the Juice of Ivy.

12. In the last place, We must here prescribe Forms of Vapors and Fumes, the
use of which sometimes does more good in a Phthisick, not past recovery than
any other Remedies; and this because they go to the Lungs it self, and so by an
immediate operation, Purge it, dry it, free it from Putrefaction, strengthen
it, and open its Ductus's.

First, Therefore let a moist steam be made after this manner.

Take Leaves of Hyssop, ground Ivy, whit Hore-hound, of each two handfuls,
Elecampane Roots two Ounces, Calamus Aromaticus, half an Ounce, Anniseeds,
Caraway-seeds, of each an Ounce, being sliced and bruis d, boil them in a
sufficient quantity of fountain water: Let the Vapor of the hot strained
Liquor be drawn into the Lungs through the hole of a Paper roul'd up Conically,
or in the Jhape of a Funnel, use it Mornings and Evenings for a quarter of an
hour.

2. A fumigation or dry Vapor is usually made one while more gentle of mere
Balsamicks, another while more strong of Sulphurous, and sometimes Arsenical
substances.

Take Olibanum, white Amber, Benzoin of each two Drams, Gum Guaiacum, Balsam of
Tolu, of each a Dram and a half, Powder of red Roses, red Saunders, of each a
Dram: Make a Powder to be strewn on burning Coals.

Take Gum of Ivy, Frankincense, of each two Drams, Flowers of Sulphur a Dram
and a half, Mastick a Dram; with a Solution of Gum Tragacanth, make Trothes.

Take white Amber, Olibanum, of each two Drams, Auripigment prepared, half an
Ounce, Storax Calamita, Laudanum of each a Dram and a half, with a sufficient
quantity of the Solution of Gum Tragacanth: Make Troches for fumigation.

Empiricks ordinarily prescribe the smoke of Auripigment to be taken in a Pipe
lighted, like Tobacco, and that sometimes with good success. Moreover its a
practice with the vulgar to take bits of Cloth Painted with Auripigment (such
as serves for Hangings in Taverns) and shredding them very small to kindle them
in a Pipe like Tobacco, and so to draw the smoke into the Consumptive Lungs for
a Cure.

Now in the last place it remains for us to speak of the great confirmed
Phthisick which is commonly past Cure, and to advise what is to be done when
the Lungs being very much vitiated and affected with one or more filthy Ulcers
do not convey the Air and Blood according to their due Course, but defile, or
corrupt the Mass of the latter, by Ministering to it continually a stook of
Putrified matter, so that a Hectic Fever, and an Atrophia through want of
nourishment seize the Diseased with a great decay of all their faculties, and
daily impairing their strength, precipitate them to the Grave: The most certain
sign generally acknowledged of this Disease growing so desperate, is a very
troublesome pain, with an Inflammation in the Throat, for this affect argues a
great Putrefaction of the Lungs, whence the corrupted Effluvia's exhaling,
stick against the narrow passage of the Throat and there pierce, and vehemently
irritate the tender Fibers in that part: In this case its in vain to attempt to
Mundify the Lungs, and to cleanse the Ulcer, and dry it; for all hot Medicines
designed for those ends, and proper enough in a beginning Phthisick, are not to
be endured when its confirmed; because augmenting the Inflammation of the Lungs
they increase the Hectic Fever, the Thirst, Watchings, and other very
troublesome Symptoms, or stir them up a fresh: And indeed in such a state of
this Disease, when we only propose to our selves to protract Life by helping
toward a well-bearing of the Distemper, and to an easy death, those Remedies
are of chiefest use that moderate the fervor of the Blood, allay the heat of
the Praecordia, restore the Spirits, and gently cherish them: Hence for Food,
Asses Milk, also Water Gruel, Barly-Broaths, Cream of Barley; and for Drink,
Ptisans, Emulsions, Milk, Water distilled with Snails and temperate Pectorals
are usually of greatest success. Let Syrups and Linctus's which lenify the
Inflammation of the Throat and Lungs, and facilitate expectoration, be often or
daily given, but especially gentle Hypnoticks to procure a moderate rest: I
shall now give you some of the more Select Forms of each kind.

Take Barley half an Ounce, Candied Eringo Roots six Drams, parings of Apples a
handful, Raisins stoned two Ounces, Licorice three Drams, boil them in three
Pounds of fountain water or two: Make a Ptisan to quench thirst; let it be
taken three or four times a day, and if it agrees, let it be used instead of
ordinary drink.

Take twenty Caudae Gammorum, Candied Eringo Roots an Ounce, a Crust of
White-bread, Raisins stoned two Ounces, Licorice three Drams; boil them in
three pounds of running Water, to two pounds: Strain it, take three or four
Ounces thrice a day; after the same manner you may make a Decoction of Snails.

Take Snails half boiled and sliced three pounds, Leaves of ground Ivy six
handfuls, Nutmegs sliced, in number six, Pith of White-bread two pounds, Milk
from the Cow eight pounds, distill it in an ordinary still. After the same
manner you may distill a Water e Caudis Gammorum: The Dose is three or four
Ounces thrice a day, sweetning it with Saccharum Perlatum, or Sugar of Roses.

Take Ears of green Wheat what suffices, distill them in a Rose Still: Let the
Person drink three or four Ounces thrice a day, sweetning it, with Saccharum
Perlatum.

Take Syrup of Meconium three Ounces, Water of green Wheat six Ounces: Mix
them, let two or three spoonfuls be taken going to Bed every Night, or every
other Night.

Take Conserve of the Flowers of Wild or Garden Mallows three Ounces, Lohoch de
Pino two Ounces, Syrup of Jujubes two Ounces: Make a Lohoch, of which let a
Dram and a half, or two Drams be often taken.

I shall now give Instances of some Patients which I have had in Cure in the
foregoing Distempers: And First, of one troubled with a simple Cough, which
begins of it self, and is free from the suspicion of a Phthisick.

Some years since I took care of the Health of a Student, who from his
Childhood had been subject to a Cough, and was wont often to undergo severe
fits of it, and of long continuance; he seemed to be of a pretty strong
Constitution, only that his lungs, being originally weak, suffered much
whenever his blood began to run into serosities; in summer, as long as a free
perspiration lasted he was sound enough, but spring and fall, when the blood
changing its temper, either of its own accord or upon some slight occasion
offered falls into serous fluxions, he fell lightly into a Cough accompanied
with abundance of thick spittle; yet this affect very often vanished by degrees
within six or seven days, without any great ado with Medicines, as soon as the
mass of blood was purged by the lungs: But if to the said slight occasion of
this Disease other greater Causes were added, as chiefly the stoppage of the
Pores, and errors in Diet, sometimes a most violent and obstinate Cough came
upon him, not soon, nor easily yielding to Remedies, and threatening nothing
less than a Phthisick: Then growing ill indeed, for the first days he had light
shiverings in his whole Body, and perceived a Catarrh in his Larynx: Afterward
he was troubled with a frequent Coughing, accompanied with a thin spittle,
together with a giddiness, deadness of the senses, and a dropping at the Nose.

In this state his best Remedy, and often tried with good success was to drink
Sack somewhat freely, and as little of any other Liquor as might be; for by
this means the Acidity and flowing of his Blood being suppressed, and a more free
perspiration raised, he sound himself very much eased, and sometimes in a very
short space grew well: Moreover going to Bed, and first in the Morning he used
to take seven or eight drops of Tincture of Sulphur in a spoonful of Syrup of
Violets, or of the Juice of ground Ivy, Or,

Take Conserve of red Roses four Ounces, Spirit of Turpentine two Drams: Mix
them, the Dose is the quantity of a Chestnut Evenings and Mornings.

But if these Remedies, together with the Canary Antidote, and a thin Diet do
not do, the Disease not being Cured by such means, runs then to a great length,
and following him sharply for some Weeks, and sometimes Months, brings the
Diseased to a mighty leanness, and even to the brink of the Grave: For the
Cough growing daily worse and very troublesome, hinders sleep mightily, and
interrupts it, his strength languishes, his appetite is dejected, heat and
drought press hard upon him: In the mean time the Spittle is daily increased,
and cast forth in a vast quantity; so that afterward not only the Serum and
dreggy Excrements of the Blood, but even the nutritive Juice, and the wastings
of the solid parts being continually poured on the Lungs, turn into corruption,
which is Cough'd forth in abundance; but respiration grows difficult, the Limbs
very weak, and the Flesh consumes very much.

When our Patient was lately ill in this manner, we prescribed the following
Method and Remedies, by the continued use of which he at length recovered: In
the first place a thin Diet being ordered him, and Ale or Beer wholly
forbidden, he took of the following Apozeme about four Ounces twice a day warm,
and a little of it at other times cold, to quench his thirst.

Take China Roots two Ounces, Sarzaparilla three Ounces, white and yellow
Saunders, of each an Ounce, shavings of Ivory and Hartshorn, of each three
Drams: Infuse them according to Art, and let them boil in eight pounds of
fountain water to half, adding Raisins of the Sun three Ounces, Licorice three
Drams: Strain it, and let it be used for ordinary drink.

Take Tincture of Sulphur three Drams: Let him take from seven drops to ten
going to rest, and early in the Morning in a spoonful of Syrup of Violets, or
of Syrup of the Juice of ground Ivy.

When by a long use of this Medicine he began to loath it, the following
Eclegma was ordered in its stead.

Take Conserve of red Roses four Ounces, Spirit of Turpentine two Ounces: Mix
them by bruising them together, the Dose is about a Dram at the same hours.

Afterward instead of this, the following Powder was sometimes taken.

Take Powder of the Leaves of ground Ivy prepared in the Summer Sun three
Ounces, Sugar Candy half an Ounce: Mix them, the Dose is half a spoonful twice
a day, with three Ounces of the following distilled water.

Take Leaves of ground Ivy six handfuls, Hyssop, white Hore-hound, of each four
handfuls, the Lungs of a Lamb half boiled and sliced small; pour to them of
Posset Drink made with small Ale eight pounds, distill it in common Organs: Let
the whole Liquor be mingled, and when it is used, sweeten it at pleasure with
Sugar Candy, or Syrup of Violets.

To appease the almost continual toil of Coughing, he swallowed now and then
the following Troches, or a little extract of Licorice.

Take Species Diatragacanthi frigidi three Drams, Powder of the Seeds of
Annise, Caraway, and sweet Fennel, of each half a Dram, Flowers of Sulphur two
Scruples, Flowers of Benzoin a Scruple, extract of Licorice diluted with Hyssop
water what suffices: Make a Paste, and form it into Troches. Or,

Take Species Diaireos, e Pulmone Vulpis, of each two Drams, Flowers of
Sulphur, Roots of Elecampane, of each half a Dram, Oil of Anniseeds half a
Scruple, Sugar dissolved in a sufficient quantity of Pennyroyal water, and
boiled to a consistency for Tablets six Ounces: Make Tablets according to art,
weighing half a Dram; let him take one as often as he pleases, swallowing it by
little and little.

In the midst of this Course, though he had a weak Pulse, and was of a cold
temperament, he was let Blood in the Arm: Besides these Remedies, a great
benefit accrued to him from the fresh Air, which he took daily either on
Horseback, or in a Chariot. For by this, he first began to recover his
Appetite, Digestion, and Sleep, which afterward were followed by degrees with
an abatement of the other Symptoms, so that at length he perfectly recovered:
He has used a method like to this, and with the like success, as often as till
this time he has been troubled with a tedious and stubborn Cough; and now
though he be wholly free from that distemper, yet he is forced carefully to
avoid all occasions by which the Pores are stopped; or, by which a Fusion or
Precipitation of the Blood into Serosities is raised, such are chiefly his
going by Water on the Thames, and his drinking Acid Liquors, as Cider, French,
or Rhenish Wines.

The foregoing Relation gives you a Type, and way of Curing a Cough, caused
through the fault of the Blood, and not reaching the limits of a Phthisick: Now
follows another which Illustrates the nature of the same affect, when it
proceeds chiefly from the Nervous Liquor.

A Boy about ten years of Age, subject from his Infancy to be often troubled
with a Cough, has undergone of late years some great and tedious fits of that
Distemper, that is to say, he is wont at times to fall ill of a hollow and
shrill sounding Cough without Spitting, which almost continually toyls him Day
and Night, and so tormenting him for many Days, nay and Weeks, it brings him to
a very great weakness: Afterward the Course of the Disease being passed over,
(which happens not till the store of Morbid matter be consumed) in a short time
he becomes well enough again, and as free as may be from any Distemper of the
Thorax, till the Morbifick matter (as it seems) being heaped together again to
a fullness, without any evident cause the same affect returns, and acts over
its Tragedy again with its wonted severity: About the time it first seizes, the
Cough usually troubles him only Mornings and Evenings; afterward the Distemper
growing worse by degrees, he often Coughs whole Days and Nights almost without
ceasing, and if at any time Sleep either happening of it self, or being
procured by Anodines, gives some truce, presently upon his waking, a more
violent fit of Coughing comes upon him: After this manner Coughing very
frequently and most vehemently without Spitting he continues ill for three
Weeks or a Month, till he be brought to a mighty leanness, and an extreme
weakness; and then the Distemper remits by degrees, so that he Coughs somewhat
more seldom, and Sleeps indifferently, shortly afterward growing very hungry,
he soon becomes full of Flesh, and vigorous, and recovers in a short time his
former Health. These fits seldom trouble him in the Summer, but in the rest of
the year they return sometimes three or four times, and put the Patient in
great danger of his Life. The cause of this Distemper is not the same as of a
vulgar Cough, in which a Serous humor distilling either slowly, or in a
plentiful manner from the Vessels of the Trachaea, or of the Lungs into the
Vesiculae or little Pipes of the Trachea induce the Symptoms that attend that
affect; for it plainly appears that in this the Ductus's of the Aspera Arteria
are wholly free from any Serum or thick humor, because the Cough which is
always deep and sonorous, throws forth nothing: Nor does this Cough arise from
the Blood forced into the Membranes of the Lungs, because in this there is no
Fever, Thirst, nor Pain, as in a Peripneumonia; neither does its Morbifick
matter seem to stick to the Nerves or Muscles ordained for breathing, because
then besides the Cough, Asthmatick or Convulsive fits, with a sense of choking
would sometimes follow, which do not happen to our Patient.

I guess therefore that a certain Serous and sharp matter, full of a Scorbutic
taint, falling from the Head by the conveyance of the Nerves, enters the
Nervous Fibers and Membranes of the Lungs, or of the Trachaea, and thoroughly
cleaving to them, increases by degrees to a fullness, and at length growing
angry and turgid, through its perpetual irritation creates so troublesome a
Cough.

When this affect once seizes, it is wont to hold on its Course for a very long
time, in despite of all Remedies: Pectoral Medicines commonly so called, as
Syrups, Linctus's, Eclegma's did little or nothing toward the Cure of this
Disease, though sometimes I have thought good to use them for making the Lungs
slippery, and to moisten them, lest hap'ly they should be endangered to be torn
asunder, by the violence of the Cough, and their Vessels to be broken; for
sometimes in a violent fit, our Patient used to Cough forth a little Blood,
though no thick Spittle.

A gentle Purge in the beginning of this Disease has often done good, as also
in its declination. Opening and Diuretic Medicines always work a good effect,
of both which he uses what suffices throughout the whole Course of his
Distemper, for his ordinary drink. Evenings and Mornings he takes some drops of
the Tincture of Sulphur, with the Water of Snails lacteated: I was forced
sometimes to give late at Night a Dose of the mixture of Diacodium, or of
Liquid Laudanum: In two of his fits he was Blooded, from which he received no
good.

In the last fit, which beginning about the Autumnal Equinox, passed over
somewhat more lightly and gently, the following method of Cure was observed.

First of all, this Cathartick was given him, and repeated after four days.

Take Calamelanos half a Scruple, Rosin of Jalup four Grains: Mix them, make a
Powder, let it be taken in a spoonful of Syrup of Violets.

Take China Roots sliced a Dram, Grass Roots three Ounces, Chervil Roots an
Ounce, Candied Eringo's six Drams, shavings of Ivory and Hartshorn, of each
three Drams, Raisins of the Sun stoned, three Ounces: Boil it in three pounds
of fountain water, to two pounds, strain it, and let it be used for ordinary
drink.

Take Syrup of Jujubes two Ounces, Diacodium an Ounce, Spirit of Sal Armoniack
with Gum Ammoniacum a Dram: Mix them, the Dose is a spoonful going to Bed, and
early in the Morning: He was much relieved by this Remedy, though he took it
only every other, or every third day; and sometimes in its stead, a Dose of the
Tincture of Sulphur, with Syrup of Violets was given him.

The Disease declining, he was purged twice, and afterward recovering by
degrees, he grew well enough within a fortnight: But finding him subject not
only to frequent relapses of Coughing, but that each fit when it came upon him
was irresistible, and that its stay notwithstanding any use of Remedies was of
long continuance, and threatened nothing less than a Consumption: I advised him
that as well for preservation, and in case the affect returned, as for Curing
it, he should Travel to a Region hotter than ours. He took my advice, and about
the beginning of November went to Montpellier, where passing half a year, he
had only two slight touches of illness: Since being returned to England, he
enjoys, thanks be to God, a perfect Health, quite free from his Cough.

CHAP. II. Instructions and Prescripts for the Cure of Spitting Blood.
THe Indications for Curing a Spitting Blood, are chiefly these two, viz.
First, presently to moderate and stay the Flux of Blood: And then in the Second
place to heal the dissolution of Unity, without leaving a Consumptive
Putrefaction in the Lungs.

In reference to the First, These two things are chiefly to be procured: First,
That the Blood do not flow to the part affected: Secondly, That withal the
Aperture of the Vessel be some way closed.

1. To keep the Blood from flowing to the part affected, many intentions of
Curing must be set upon together, viz. We must lessen the quantity of Blood,
moderate its fervent boiling, alter its ill temper, retard its motion, or
divert it another way: For which ends Blooding, Ligatures and Frictions most
commonly do well. Moreover, Julapes, Decoctions, Emulsions, and Juicy
expressions of Herbs ought to be given, and likewise moderate Hypnoticks;
especially Diacodiats are taken with good success: For these by putting a stay
to the motion of the Heart, allay the fervor of the Blood.

2. To close the Aperture of the Vessel, Astringent Remedies, and
Agglutinatives are most proper: The chief of these are usually given in the
Form of a Linctus, so that some of its Particles in swallowing, falling on the
Aspera Arteria may more immediately communicate their virtue to the part
affected. But the way of this Operation seems to be of no great moment, because
the Efficacy of the Medicines reaches chiefly, and in a manner only by the way
of the Blood to the Root of the Disease: Wherefore not only Lohoch's, but
likewise Decoctions, Powders and Pills of Traumatick, and Balsamic Ingredients
are successfully prescribed.

The Second Indication, which is for preservation, having regard to the Cure of
the dissolution of Unity, without leaving any blemish in the Lungs, ought to
provide against two sorts of evils, viz. That the Spitting Blood (to which the
Persons affected will be always subject) does not return at times; and that the
Consumption, which threatens all those that Spit Blood, does not follow it: For
which ends in order to the prevention of this Disease, we must take an
assiduous care of, or use a constant method of Cure to the Blood and Lungs.

1. As to the Blood, its Mass ought always to be kept in a due quantity, a just
temper, and a gentle and continued motion: Hence lest it abound too much, or
being affected with an evil temperament, grows turgid, or deposes impure dregs
in the Breast, we must sometimes use Bleeding, and a gentle Purge; an exact Form
of Diet is always necessary. Moreover, drinking of Asses Milk, or of Mineral
Waters contribute sometimes egregiously to the purifying and sweetning of the
Blood.

Again, Decoctions, Distilled Waters, Juices of Herbs, which take away the
Dyscrasies of the Blood, and derive the Serum and other Impurities from the
Lungs, and carry them forth by Sweat or Urine, must be diligently taken: Issues
also mightily conduce for this end.

2. Nor must less care be taken of the Lungs themselves, that their whole
frame, and especially the place affected, be preserved in a due Conformation,
and right Tone: Hence all violent motion, by which Unity is farther dissolved,
or its restoration hindered, is carefully to be avoided. Let the Person live in
a clear and brisk Air, though it must not be too sharp and piercing. Let him
abstain from gross Food, long Sleeps, large Suppers, and other errors in Diet,
which cause a Repletion, or Obstruction in the Praecordia: Besides this, let
Remedies be used, which are said to Cure the Lungs, by a peculiar or certain
Specific Virtue.

Having given you the method of Curing Blood Spitting, I shall now set down
some Select Forms of Medicines, answering to each of the Therapeutick
Indications, and to the various intentions of Curing that belong to them: And
we justly give the precedence to those which encountering the most urgent
Symptom, presently stop the flowing forth of Blood, cast out of the Lungs by a
Cough, or otherwise: In the First rank of these Medicines, we place those which
hinder the Blood from flowing to the part affected, and have a certain
Astringency, together with an Agglutinative Virtue, by which the Aperture of
the Vessel is closed; and after a Glyster and Blooding (unless the weakness of
the Pulse, and a deficiency of heat forbid it) they are presently given in the
form of a Julape, Decoction, Emulsion, Juicy Expression, Powder, Pills and
Lohochs: I shall give you some of the choicest and most efficacious prescripts
of each of these, as also of Hypnoticks, which nevertheless must not be used at
random, and indifferently, but every of them methodically and seasonably,
according to the various Constitution of the Patient, and Nature of the
Disease, as a prudent Physician shall direct.

1. Julapes and distilled Waters.
TAke the Waters of Purslain and red Poppies, of each six Ounces, Dragons Blood
finely Powdered half a Dram, Syrup of red Poppies two Ounces, Spirit of Vitriol
of Mars, half a Scruple: Mix them, the Dose is three Ounces, repeating it
within five or six hours.

Take Plantain water a pound, the Gums Tragacanth and Arabic Powdered, of each
half a Dram; mingle them and dissolve them, then add Syrup of dried Roses, an
Ounce and a half: Make a Julape, the Dose is three or four Ounces every third
or fourth hour.

Take the Waters of Oak-buds, red Roses, and Nymphaea, of each four Ounces,
Boodstone very finely Powdered, Bole Armeniack Powdered, of each half a Dram,
Syrup of Nymphaea two Ounces: Mingle them, the Dose is three or four Ounces,
three or four times a day.

Take of the Dew or insipid Phlegm of Vitriol a pound, Syrup of Myrtles two
Ounces: Mix them, the Dose is two or three Ounces, often in the day, or in the
night.

Take Cypress tops eight handfuls, Willow Leaves or Flowers six handfuls, Roots
of the greater Comphrey and Nymphaea, of each half a pound, Balaustia two
handfuls, all being sliced small together, pour to them of fresh Milk eight
pounds, distill them in Common Organs: The Dose is three or four Ounces, thrice
or oftener in a day.

Take of this distilled water, and of Plantain water, of each half a pound, the
Gums Tragacanth and Arabic, of each two Drams: Dissolve them, the Dose is
three Ounces every third hour.

The following Mixture is prescribed by Frederick Deckers, to be taken a
Spoonful at a time, and seems to be a good Medicine.

Take Plantain water two Ounces, Cinnamon two Drams, Confection of Hyacinth a
Dram and a half, distilled Vinegar half an Ounce, red Coral prepared half a
Dram, Balaustia, Dragons Blood, of each half a Scruple, Laudanum Opiatum three
Grains, Syrup of Myrtles an Ounce: Mingle them.

Take the Waters of Plantain, red Roses and Purslain, of each four Ounces,
Boodstone and Dragons Blood reduced into a fine Powder, of each half a Dram,
Sugar Candy six Drams: Make a Julape.

A Solution of common Vitriol, or of Vitriol of Mars made in fountain water,
and applied to a Wound with a rag, excellently stops all Fluxes of Blood, but
it is not proper to be given inwardly.

2. Decoctions, Tinctures, and Emulsions.
TAke Leaves of Blood-wort, Perwincle, Mous-ear, Plantain, Woodsorrel, both
sorts of Daisies of each a handful: Flowers of red Roses half a handful, Barley
half an Ounce, Raisins two Ounces, boil them in three pounds of Water, in which
red hot Iron has been quenched, till it comes to two pounds; add to the
straining Syrup of St. John's wort two Ounces, or of Mous-ear: Make an Apozeme,
the Dose is four or six Ounces thrice a day.

Take Leaves of St. John's wort, Roots and Leaves of Tormentil, great Burnet,
Meadow-sweet, of each a handful, Seeds of Purslane, Plantain, and Sorrel, of
each a Dram, Conserve of red Roses half a pound, fountain water four pounds:
Let them boil close in B. M. for twelve hours; to the straining, add Spirit of
Vitriol of Mars, half a Scruple, take it after the same manner.

Take Barley water with madder Roots boiled in it, a pound and a half: Put into
it, when grown pretty cold, of red Rose Leaves a handful: Add Spirit of Vitriol
a Scruple, let there be a close and warm infusion for three hours: Make a
Tincture, to the straining add Syrup of the Juice of St. John's wort, an Ounce
and a half: Take three or four Ounces, thrice or four times in a day.

Take of the Decoction of the Roots of fresh Nettles, a pound and a half, Seeds
of white Poppies, and of Henbane, of each two Drams, Melon seeds pill'd six
Drams: Make an Emulsion according to Art, sweetened with Sugar Penids: The Dose
is three Ounces, three or four times a day.

3. Juices of Herbs, and Juicy Expressions.
TAke Juice of Plantain Leaves half a pound: Let two or three Drams be taken
thrice a day, with three Ounces of the distilled Water above written, and
sweeten it at pleasure.

Take Leaves of fresh Nettles, Plantain, the lesser Daisy, of each three
handfuls; being bruised together, pour to them of Purslain water six Drams:
Wring it forth hard, take it as the former.

4. Powders and Pills.
TAke Powder of Boodstone, of Dragons Blood ground on a Marble with
Rose Water, and of Pearl, of each a Dram, Bole Armeniack, Terra Lemnia, of each
half a Dram, Troches of Winter Cherries two Drams: Make a Powder, divide it
into twelve parts; let one part be taken thrice a day with the distilled water
above written.

Take of the Seeds of Henbane, and white Poppies, of each ten Drams, Terra
Sigillata, red Coral, of each five Drams, Sugar of Roses three Ounces: Make a
Powder, the Dose is a Dram Morning and Evening. This Composition brought into a
soft Consistency with some proper Syrup, is called Helidaeus's Electuary, so
Famous heretofore in Germany.

The foresaid Powders may also be made into convenient Pills and Tablets, by
adding the Solution of Tragacanth, or some fit Syrup.

The spungy Excrescency usually growing to the fruit of the Dog-Rose Tree, made
into Powders, and given twice a day to the quantity of half a Dram, is a very
good remedy in spitting Blood.

Take Yarrow bruised and dried in the Summer Sun, what you think good: Make it
into a fine Powder, and keep it in a Glass for Use: The Dose is from half a
Dram to a Dram, twice a day in a fit Vehicle.

The Powder of Julius Caesar Scaliger, or rather of Serapion is mightily
commended: The Dose is four Drams, twice or thrice a day.

5. Lohoch's and Electuaries.
TAke Conserve of red Roses, and of the Dog-Rose, of each two Ounces, Powder of
the Seeds of the white Poppy, and of Henbane, of each two Drams, Species
Diatragacanthi frigidi, a Dram and a half, Boodstone, Sanguis Draconis
prepared, of each half a Dram, Syrup of red Poppies what suffices: Make an
Electuary, let the quantity of a Chestnut be taken Evenings and Mornings, and at
other times suck it with a stick of Licorice.

Take Conserve of the Flowers of great Comphrey, and of Water Lillies, of each
an Ounce and a half, Troches of Winter Cherries, and Diatragacanthum frigidum,
of each a Dram and a half, Syrup of Jujubes what suffices; Make a soft Lohoch,
of which take often with a stick of Licorice.

Take of the White of an Egg well beaten two Drams, Lucatellus's Balsam half an
Ounce, Troches of Winter Cherries two Drams, Syrup of red Poppies what
suffices: Make a soft Lohoch, take the quantity of a Chestnut Morning and
Evening.

The Second Indication being for preservation, suggests to us those Remedies
which keeping the Blood in a just temper, and the Lungs in a due Conformation,
provide against a relapse of Spitting Blood, and an ensuing Consumption; such
as regard the Blood are either gentle Evacuatives by Seige, Urine, and Sweat,
or mere Alteratives. Every one of these are wont to be prescribed either in the
Form of a Drink, Powder, Electuary or Pills: We shall set down some Select
Forms of some of the chief of them.

1. As to Evacuatives, a gentle Purge may sometiems be ordered after this
manner.

Take of the best Sena three Drams, Cassia bruised with the Fistula an Ounce,
Tamarinds three Drams, Coriander-seeds a Dram and a half: Boil them in a
sufficient quantity of fountain water to fix Ounces, to the straining add Syrup
of Cichory with Rhubarb an Ounce, Clarify it with the White of an Egg. Or,

Take Gereons Decoction of Senna four Ounces, Purging Syrup of Apples an Ounce:
Mix them, and make a Potion.

For preserving the Blood in a good temper, and that its dreggy Excrements
derived from the Lungs, may be continually discharged by Sweat and Urine, the
following Alteratives, or some of them must be constantly taken; which being
also of a healing Nature, relieve Lungs that are infirm, or dissolved in their
Unity.

For ordinary Drink, let it be pure Water, especially in a hot Constitution, or
water a little tinged with Claret Wine: Those with whom this Drink does not
agree, may use with as good success a Bochet of China and Sarsa, with the
shavings of Ivory, Hartshorn, and white Saunders in it, or sinall Beer, or Ale,
with the Leaves of Hearts Tongue, Oak of Jerusalem, and the like infused in it.

Let Pectoral Decoctions, or Hydromels with temperate Traumatick Herbs be taken
twice or thrice a day, to six or seven Ounces.

Take Roots of fresh Nettles, and Chervil, of each an Ounce, Leaves of Hearts
Tongue, Speedwel, Mous-ear, Ground Ivy, St. John's-wort, of each a handful:
Boil them in three pounds of fountain water to two pounds, adding Raisms
stone'd an Ounce and a half, Licorice two Drams; to the straining add Syrupus
Byzantinus two Ounces, Clarify it with the White of an Egg: Make an Apozem to
be taken to four or six Ounces twice or thrice a day for a Month.

In a cold or Phlegmatic Constitution, the Licorice and Raisins being omitted
with the Syrup, add toward the end two Ounces of the best Clarified Honey;
strain it, and keep it for use: The Dose is the same as the former.

Let these things sometimes be taken betwixt whiles with a distilled water
appropriated to the same end; which also may be more frequently taken by some
Persons, to whom Apozems are nauseous and loathsome.

Take Cypress Tops, Leaves of ground Ivy, of each six handfuls, Snails half
boiled a pound and a half, All the Saunders bruised, of each an Ounce: Being
sliced and bruised, pour to them of new Milk eight pounds, distill it with
common Organs: The Dose is three or four Ounces with a spoonful of Syrup of the
Juice of ground Ivy twice a day.

2. In respect of the Lungs, viz. that the Union of its parts, and the due
Conformation of the whole may be preserved without any obstruction, or opening
of its Vessels, temperate Balsamicks are of chiefest use: For this end
Lucatellus Balsam is perscrib'd even by the vulgar to be taken constantly, and
for a long time by such as Spit Blood. Chemists and some famous Women cry up
above all things a Balsamic Oil drawn by distillation, which they call Mother
of Balsam.

I shall now illustrate this Method of Cure by a Story.

A famed young man falling from a Scorbutic Cachexia into a Palsy, and for
the Cure of this Disease, having tried Remedies not only great, but likewise
disproportionate to his Blood and Spirits, viz. Salivation, and the use of hot
Baths, happened to be seized with a Spitting of Blood, and its fits (of all I
ever knew that were not presently mortal) seemed the most dreadful.

The First appearance of this Blood Spitting was after the operation of Hews's
Powder, by which having for some time undergone a Salivation, though without
Curing his Palsy, he was brought to a great weakness: Then being afflicted
with a Catarrh, and a very troublesome Cough, he began to cast forth a
discolored Spittle, and sometimes tinged with Blood, sometimes sprinkled with
it. But this Disease being mild at First, soon vanished by the use of
Medicines, and afterward the Person going into the Country, and breathing a
purer Air, grew better, and in a while seeming to be sound enough in his Breast,
he went to Bath to Cure his Palsy: Where Bathing every day for six Weeks in
the hot waters, he got his Cough again, and soon after fell into a terrible
Spitting of Blood, so that in twenty four hours space Counghing up Blood almost
continually, and in a large measure, he threw forth a vast qantity.

Going to see him the First time in this Condition, provision being made for
the whole, I presently ordered Bleeding for Revulsion, though after its
Administration (both then and ever after) his Blood Spitting either returned a
fresh, or was provoked more by it. Moreover I gave Julapes, Lohoch's,
Decoctions, and even Hypnoticks, which doing little or no good: I ordered
Ligatures about his Arms and Thighs, which first of all gave a check to the
Tyranny of this Disease: And as now and then the Evil burst forth again, I
persuaded him at length that forbearing the use of Beer, he should drink
constantly a Decoction of Sarsa and China with Pectorals: By the almost
continued use of this, observing likewise an exact Form of Diet, and abstaining
wholly from Wine, hot Aliments, and Salt and Sugar, he had his health well
enough for above two years.

But afterward being very much heated in a Crowd, he fell again into a
terrible Spitting of Blood: A Physician being called, he was presently Blooded
in his Arm, after which his Blood Spitting became more violent; and when on the
Second and Third days after he was Blooded again, the Evil increased upon him
each time: At length Ligatures being used (as before) and a Pectoral Decoction,
and a Lohoch carefully taken, the Disease presently abated, and in a short time
wholly ceased: Nevertheless he continued the use of his Pectoral Decoction, and
thin Diet, viz. without any Flesh above six Weeks, and thereby obtained truce
from his Enemy for three years: And when afterward sometimes after drinking
Wine, or too plentiful a Diet, the Blood growing turgid, began to burst forth
of the Lungs, presently by the Ligatures, together with the use of the
Decoction and Linctus, and the thin Diet, the force of it was always allayed.

Nevertheless he became not so secure, but was forced to keep in a manner
always watch and ward against that lurking Enemy: For not long since through
the Distemper of the Season, he was seized with a very troublesome Catarrh,
accompanied with a Cough, and much Spittle which was now and then Bloody, and
then the former Medicines did not do: Whereupon of his own head he betook
himself to new things; and First of all he took Evenings and Mornings a
spoonful of the Syrup of the Juice of ground Ivy, and found thereby great good:
but that Syrup, by reason of the Sugar, growing in a short time loathsome to
him, he took twice a day in a spoonful of some Liquor to half a Dram, or a Dram
of the Powder of that Herb well prepared; which Remedy being used a long time,
he became much better as to his Catarrh and Cough, but his Blood Spitting
breaking forth now and then, though it were in a small quantity, he changed his
Medicine again; and took twice a day a Powder of the Tops, and especially of
the hairy Excrescencies of the sweet Bryar Tree: Which Medicine alone, a
certain Physician formerly renowned for the Cure of Spitting Blood, had used
with great success: Nor did our Patient receive a less prosperous effect from
that Remedy: For by it he presently got wholly free from his Cough, Catarrh,
and Blood Spitting, and so continued for a very long time, till at length
thinking this Disease of his Breast wholly conquered, and therefore to be
slighted, he took up arms against the other more ancient, viz. the Palsy.
Wherefore whilst neglecting his Spitting Blood, he took daily to overcome that
Distemper, a large Dose of hot Medicines, viz. Magistral waters distilled with
Wine, Spirit of Hartshorn, of Sal Armociack, Aromatic Powders and Confections,
and indulged himself likewise to a more plentiful Diet, drinking Ale and Wine
moderately, the roaring Lion which seemed before a sleep, roused himself again,
viz. he had not long continued that Antiparalitick Method, but the Blood
Spitting returned with a very great violence, so that in the space of twenty
four hours, he Cough'd forth above three pounds of forthy Blood; and afterward
when a Physician being called, he was presently Ordered to be Let Blood, after
bleeding the Blood Spitting beginning to be abated (as it was always wont
before) was provoked a fresh: Which nevertheless after the Application of the
Ligatures, and the diligent taking of the Linctus and Pectoral Decoction, was
presently mitigated, and in a short time wholly ceased. And when afterward he
had used above Three Months the Pectoral Decoction, and an entirely thin Diet,
viz. without Flesh, and of mere Herbs, Corn, and Milk Meats, he revocered in a
short time his former health, and now lives in that state, triumphing over that
cruel Disease.

This Person always found the use of the Pectoral Decoction to do him good:
Wherefore though he changed now and then his other Medicines, he always
retained the same Composition of that; and recommended it to many other Persons
seized with a Blood Spitting with success.

The Form of the Prescript is thus.

Take all the Saunders, of each six Drams, Infuse them for twelve hours in
seven pounds of fountain water, then let it boil till a third part be wasted,
after add of the Leaves of Coltsfoot, Maiden hair, Mous-ear, Speedwel, Flowers
of St. John's-wort, of each two handfuls, sweet Fennel-seeds six Drams,
Licorice slit half an Ounce, Raisins stoned half a pound, boil them to four
pounds; then strain it, and use it for your ordinary drink.

Moreover, when the Blood Spitting was upon him, or was coming, he took thrice,
or oftener in a day the quantity of a Nutmeg of the following Electuary,
drinking after it seven spoonfuls of the Julape.

Take Conserve of red Roses three Ounces, Conserve of Hipps and Comphrey, of
each an Ounce and a half, Dragons Blood a Dram, Species of Hyacinth two
Scruples, red Coral a Dram, with a sufficient quantity of Syrup of red Poppies,
Mix them, and make a soft Electuary, take at Night, and early in the Morning a
Dram and a half, drinking after it a draught of the following Julape; at other
times let him take it with a stick of Licorice.

Take of the Waters of Plantain, and of the Spawn of Forgs, of each six Drams,
Syrup of Coral, and of dried Roses, of each an Ounce, Dragons Blood two
Scruples: Mix them, made a Julape.

CHAP. III. Instructions and Prescripts for Curing a Peripneumonia.
THe Peripneumonia is an Inflammation of the Lungs with an Acute Fever, a
Cough, and a difficulty of Breathing; it is caused by a rushing of the Blood
into the Ductus's of the Lungs, and its being there inflamed and obstructed.

The Primary Indication in order to the Cure of a Peripneumonia is, that the
Blood forced into the Vessels of the Lungs, and causing there an Obstruction
with an Inflammation, be thence discust, and restored to its former
Circulation, which if it may not be done, the Second Indication will be, that
that matter be duly Concocted or Suppurated, and with all expedition voided by
Spittle.

1. Whilst the former Indication holds good, the Intentions of Curing will be
these following: In the First place, That the excessive current of the Blood to
the part affected be cut off, or some way hindered. Secondly, We must endeavor
that the matter stagnating in the Lungs, or extravasated, be sucked up again by
the Veins into the rest of the Mass, and restored to its Circulation: Which the
better to effect. Thirdly, The Blood must be freed of its clamminess, or
viscous nature, whereby its fluidity is hindered. And Fourthly, We must obviate
by fit Remedies those Symptoms that are very pressing: viz. the Fever, Cough,
Watchings, and difficulty of Breathing: But if notwithstanding all this, the
other Indication must be pursued, we must add to the Remedies before mentioned,
such as they commonly call Maturating and Expectorating Medicines.

1. To satisfy the First and Second Intentions together, Blooding is requisite
almost in every Peripneumonia, nay sometimes it ought to be often repeated: For
the Vessels being emptied of Blood, they do not only withdraw the matter which
maintains the Disease, but likewise drink up again what was forced into the
part affected: Wherefore if the strength holds, and the Pulse be of a
sufficient vigor, its good to bleed freely at the very beginning, but
otherwise you must do it in a moderate quantity, and repeat it now and then as
occasion requires: In this Distemper the Vein should always be opened with a
large Orifice, and the Blood should not only Issue forth in a full stream, but
its running should be continued; for otherwise if in the midst of bleeding,
whilst the vitiated Blood flows forth, the Orifice be stopped with the Finger,
(as some are wont to do to prevent fainting) when its opened again, a pretty
good Blood will Issue forth next, the vitiated Blood, if any such be remaining,
being fallen back, and not presently returning to the Orifice. Besides
Bleeding, many other Remedies are here to be used, viz. such as repress the
turgid motion of the Blood, and empty its Ductus's, whereby the Morbifick
matter may be drank up again: Wherefore a very thin Diet is prescribed,
consisting almost merely of Barley and Oat-meats. And though Catharticks are
wholly forbidden, because they strongly exagitate the Blood, and force it more
violently into the part affected: Nevertheless Glysters ought to be daily
Administered which gently ease the Belly, and draw the dreggy Excrements of the
Blood downwards. Moreover qualifying Julapes and Apozemes, which allay the
fervor of the Blood, and pleasantly lead off its superfluous Serosities, and
likewise gently open the passages of the Breast, are taken with good effect.

The Third Intention of Curing which has regard to the taking away of the
obstructing clamminess, or viscous nature of the Blood, it performed wholly by
those Remedies which loosen its over-close Texture, and dissolve the
Combinations of its Salts. And truly those Remedies which Reason and Analogy
might dictate in this respect, are used even at this time after a long
expeperience: For Powders of Shells, the Tusk of a Boar, the Jawbone or a Pike,
and other things endowed with an Alkalisate Salt; also Sal Prunella are
prescribed by all Practitioners, both Ancient and modern. I have known Spirit
of Sal Armoniack, and of Hartshorn, to have done great good in this Disease:
And for the same Reason it is ( viz. Because of the good effect of the Volatile
Salt) that an Infusion of Horse-dung, though a vulgar Remedy, has often given
great relief.

Fourthly, As to the Symptoms and their Cures, a great many Remedies
appropriated to these, are Coincident with the former: For the same Julapes and
Apozemes which appease the fervor of the Blood, and also restore the Animal
Spirits, are in most common use against the Fever: To which also in respect of
the Cough, and the diffculty of Breathing, temperate Pectorals are joined: The
greatest difficulty is, what must be given against want of sleep, it at any
time the Person be very much molested by it: For Opiats adding to the prejudice
of Respiration, which is under some stress from the beginning of this Disease,
may scarce be taken with safety, nay sometimes they become pernicious:
Wherefore Laudanum's, and the stronger preparatious of Opium must be utterly
avoided in a Peripneumonia; though in the mean time Anodines, and the more
gentle Hypnoticks, as especially the Water and Syrup of red Poppies are not
only allowed, but accounted Specificks in this Disease, and in the Pleurisy:
Moreover we may sometimes use Diacodiats so the strength holds, and the Pulse
be strong, and in a good temper: For the pain of the Breast, if at any time it
proves troublesome, its proper to use sometimes Ointments, Fomentations, and
Cataplasms.

The Secondary Therapeutick Indication, whereof the Intentions are to Concoct,
and to discharge by Spittle, the matter sticking in the Lungs, (since it cannot
be discust, or drank up again) requires Medicines commonly called Maturatives
and Expectoratives; but they must both be temperate, to wit, such as rather
appease than exasperate the Thirst and Feverish heat. We have given you before
in the Chapter of the Cough, the kinds of these Medicines, which are properly
called Pectorals. We shall now set down the choicest Prescripts, and most
proper for this affect.

Prescripts of Medicines.
1.2. Medicines Conducing to the First and Second Intention, are prescribed
according to the Forms following.

TAke Water of Ladies Thistle ten Ounces, of red Poppies three Ounces, Syrup of
the same an Ounce, Pearl prepared a Dram: Make a Julape, the Dose is six
spoonfuls every fourth hour.

Take the Waters of Black-Cherries, Carduus Benedictus, and Baum, of each four
Ounces, Powder of a Boars Tusk a Dram, Syrup of Violets ten Drams: Make a
Julape, and take it after the same manner.

Take Grass Roots three Ounces, shavings of Ivory and Hartshorn, of each three
Drams, Raisins stoned an Ounce and a half, Licorice two Drams; boil them in
three pounds of fountain water to two pounds, to the straining add Syrup of
Violets an Ounce, Sal Prunella a Dram: Make an Apozeme, take to three or four
Ounces thrice a day.

For the same Intention, viz. that the emptied Vessels may withdraw the matter
maintaining the Disease, or may drink up again the Morbifick matter it self, a
Purge also is prescribed by some: In the Practice of the Ancients, it was a
thing in constant use after bleeding, to Order Preparatives and Purgers against
this Disease, as well as against most others: And Chemists of late with a
greater confidence give Vomits, and cry them up before all other Remedies in a
Peripneumonia. Nay further, neglecting bleeding, or forbidding it, they lay the
chief stress of their Cure in Antimonial Emeticks, though I know not whether
any thing can be imagined more pernicious than that their rash proceeding. In
rustic and robust Bodies sometimes this Medicine is given without harm, but in
tender Constitutions it may be reckoned little Inferior to poison: And as to
purging, though it be not proper in the very beginning, but in a manner always
does harm, yet the Morbifick matter ceasing to flow to the part, and the
effervescence of the Blood being appeased, you may empty the Body gently with a
Purging Medicine.

Take Gereons Decoction of Sena four Ounces, Syrup of Roses Solulutive and
Ounce: Mix them, make a Potion.

Take the best Sena three Drams, whole Cassia, Tamarinds, of each half an
Ounce, Coriander-seeds two Drams: Boil them in a sufficient quantity of
fountain water, to six Ounces; to the straining add Syrup of Violets an Ounce,
Clarify it with the White of an Egg, and give it.

Let not Purges be given always, nor ever in this Disease without
consideration, but Glysters must be given frequently, nay for the most part
every day; but let them be only Lenitive and Emollient, so that they gently
loosen the Belly without much stirring the Blood and Humors: For this end
Milk, or Whey with brown Sugar, or Syrup of Violets often do well. Or,

Take the Leaves of both Mallows, Melilot, and Mercury, of each a handful,
Linseed, and sweet Fennel-seeds, of each half an Ounce, sweet Prunes, in number
six: Boil them in a sufficient quantity of fountain water to a pound, to which
add Syrup of Violets an Ounce, Sugar ten Drams, Sal Prunella a Dram: Make a
Glyster.

3. Medicines for the Third Intention, viz. For dissolving the clamminess of
the Blood, are usually given in the Form of a Powder, Spirit, Draught, or Bolus
according to the Forms following.

1. Powders.
TAke Crabs Eyes powdered two Drams, Sal Prunella a Dram and a half, Sugar of
Pearl a Dram: Make a Powder, divide it into six parts, take one every sixth
hour, with some proper Julape or Apozeme.

Take Powder of a Boars Tusk (or of the Jaw Bone of a Pike) Crabs Eyes, of each
a Dram and a half, Flowers of Sal Armoniack, Powder of red Poppy Flowers, of
each half a Dram: Mix them for four Doses.

2. Chemical Spirits and Liquors.
TAke Spirit of Sal Armoniack distilled with Olibanum three Drams: The Dose is
from twelve to fifteen, or twenty Drops thrice a Day.

Take Spirit of Urine, or of Soot three Drams, give it after the same manner.

Take Spirit of sweet Nitre, viz. often Cohobated with Spirit of Wine three
Drams: The Dose is from six drops to ten, after the same manner.

Take Spirit of Tartar half an Ounce: The Dose is from fifteen drops to twenty,
or twenty five, with a fit Vehicle.

Take of the simple Mixture an Ounce: The Dose is from a Scruple to half a Dram
after the same manner.

3. Draughts.
TAke Carduus water a pound, fresh Horse-dung three Ounces, dissolve it warm,
and filter it: The Dose is three or four Ounces twice or thrice a day, adding
Syrup of Violets, or of red Poppies half an Ounce.

Take Leaves of Dandelion two handfuls, being bruised, pour to them Water of
Ladies Thistle half a pound, Treacle water half an Ounce: Wring it forth hard,
to which add Powder of Crabs Eyes a Dram, take four or six spoonfuls thrice a
day.

The Fourth Intention of Curing, having regard to the most urgent Symptoms,
suggests to us various preparations of Medicines. 1. In respect of the Fever,
the Julapes and Apozems before set down are proper. Moreover you must
frequently use Sal Prunella. 2. For the Cough and difficulty of Breathing,
Linctus's, Lohochs, and Decoctions, or Pectoral Julapes are given with success.

Take Syrup of Jujubes, of Maidenhair, of each an Ounce and a half, Syrup of
Violets an Ounce, Flowers of Nitre a Scruple: Make a Linctus to be taken now
and then with a stick of Licorice.

Take Syrup of Dialthea an Ounce, Diacodium, Syrup of red Poppies, of each half
an Ounce, Crabs Eyes finely powdered two Scruples: Make a Linctus to be taken as
the other.

Take Syrup of Hyssop, of Licorice, of each an Ounce and a half, Powder of red
Poppy Flowers a Scruple, Crabs Eyes a Dram, Lohoch de Pino six Drams: Mix them,
make a Lohoch, of which take the quantity of a Nutmeg four times, or oftener in
a day.

Take Roots of Grass, Chervil, Marshmallows, of each an Ounce, Figgs in number
four, Jujubes, Sebestens, of each in number six, Raisins of the Sun an Ounce,
Licorice three Drams, Barley half an Ounce, boil them in three pounds of
fountain water to two pounds: Strain it, the Dose is three or four Ounces.

Take Raisins stoned an Ounce and a half, Filberts sliced in number four,
Licorice sliced three Drams, Hyssop-water a pound and a half: Make a close and
warm Infusion according to art for six hours, to the straining add Syrup of
Althea an Ounce and a half: Make a Julape, the Dose is three or four spoonfuls
often in a day, swallowing it down by little and little.

3. Against want of Sleep, Take of red Poppy water three Ounces, Syrup of the
same six Drams, Plague water two Drams: Make a draught to be taken going to Bed.

It the Pulse be strong, and the strength holds, Take Cowslip water three
Ounces, Syrup of Meconium half an Ounce: Mix it, and drink it going to Bed.

4. If the pain be pressing about the part affected, Take of the Ointment of
Marshmallows two Ounces, Oil of sweet Almonds an Ounce and a half: Mix them
for a Liniment to be applied with thin Lawn Paper.

Take Ointment of Marshmallows, and the Pectoral Ointment, of each an Ounce
and a half, Oil of Linseed fresh drawn a Dram, to which add of the Emplaister
of Mucilages what suffices: Make a Plaster for the Region of the Breast, to be
applied on the part affected.

Fifthly, For the last Intention of Curing, which answering the Secondary
Indication prescribes ripening and expectorating Medicines, the Forms following
are proper.

Take Linseed Oil fresh drawn three Ounces, Syrup of Violets two Ounces, Hyssop
water half a pound: Mix them in a Glass, take two or three Ounces thrice a day,
shaking the Glass first.

Take Olibanum powdered a Dram, put it in an Apple made hollow, and let it Roast
in hot Embers: Let it be eaten going to Bed, and let the person do this three
or four times.

Take Oil of sweet Almonds fresh drawn, Syrup of Maidenhair, of each an Ounce
and a half, Sugar Candy two Drams: Bruise them in a Glass Mortar, till they are
thoroughly mixed: Make a Linctus, and take of it often with a stick of Licorice.
Take also a spoonful of it thrice a day, in a draught of Posset Drink.

As to the rest, the Remedies prescribed in a beginning Phthisick are good also
here.

I shall now give you an example or two of Persons affected with a
Peripneumonia: Whilst I was writing these things, I was called to one very ill
of a Peripneumonia: This Person being about Fifty Years of Age, of a lean Body,
and a Bilious temperament; upon taking Cold fell into a Fever with a Cough, a
pain in his Breast, and a difficulty of Breathing: Having so lain ill four days
without any Remedy or Physical Administration; I found him in a high Fever
with a Thirst, and mighty Inflammation of his Praecordia, and fetching Breath
with great Pain and difficulty, his Thorax much laboring, and being troubled
with a wheezing in the Windpipe, so that he seemed manifestly in the very
Agony of Death: His Pulse, though quick and troubled, yet being strong enough,
I presently ordered eight or ten Ounces of Blood to be taken from him: By which
finding some ease, after three hours intermission, a Glyster being first
Administered, I ordered him to Bleed again to twelve Ounces. Moreover, I
directed him to take twelve drops of Spirit of Hartshorn every sixth Hour with
a proper Julape, and betwixt whiles, a Dose of the following Powder.

Take Powder of Crabs Eyes, and Sal Prunella, of each a Dram and a half, Pearl
a Dram, Sugar Candy two Scruples: Make a Powder, divide it into eight parts.

He took also a Draught of a Pectoral Apozeme often at pleasure; by the use of
these things, all the Symptoms began to abate within three days, and the night
following he sweated and slept a little: The Day after he was Blooded again,
and afterward the same Medicines being continued, he perfectly recovered
within four or five days: The Blood taken from him was always in its surface
viscous and ill colored.

A Gentleman of a Sanguine Complexion, and a strong habit of Body after
immoderate drinking of Wine, fell into a Fever with a dangerous Peripneumonia;
so that thirst and heat very much pressing him, and sitting upright always in
his Bed, or in his Chair, and almost continually panting, he had very much ado
to draw in Air enough to support Life: He being not able to lose much Blood at
a time, I drew Blood twice or thrice from him one day after another, frequent
Glysters were Administered. Moreover Apozemes, Julapes, also Spirit of Sal
Armoniack, and Powders of Shells were given him by turns: Within four or five
days the Fever abated somewhat, and he began to breath better, and to take now
and then short sleeps, though he complained still of a mighty heaviness upon
his Breast, and an intolerable oppression of his Lungs. Wherefore bleeding
being no longer safe, I applied large Vesicatories to his Arms and Legs: The
Blisters in his Arms dried up in a short time; but those on his Legs did not
only continue open, but ran mightily after five or six days, and so for near a
Month daily discharged a vast quantity of a most sharp humor: In the mean time
his Lungs grew better by little and little, and at length were wholly freed of
their incumberance. Lastly, The Blisters raised by the Vesicatories, could very
hardly be thoroughly Cured, and not without frequent Purging.

CHAP. IV. Instructions and Prescripts for the Cure of the Pleurisy.
THe Pleurisy is an Inflammation of the Pleura caused by a boiling Blood
flowing into it through the Vertebral Arteries, and there growing clammy, with
a continual and acute Fever, a pricking pain of the side, a Cough, and a
difficulty of breathing.

When a Pleurisy commencing passes into a Peripneumonia; or an Empyema, or
inclines to a Phthisick, there is a proper method of Cure particularly set down
in each of those Diseases for it: But as to what concerns our present purpose,
Three Indications present themselves for a primary and simple Pleurisy, viz. a
Curatory, Preservatory and Vital one.

The First Indication takes care that the Inflammation or Obstruction of the
Blood in the Lungs be removed by all possible means as soon as may be:
Wherefore in a Pleurisy let a Vein be opened, and so the strength holds, and
the Pulse be strong, let the Person bleed freely; and truly it is much better
to take a large quantity of Blood at first, and every time after (as often as
there is need to repeat it) than to Bleed often, and to draw a a little at a
time; because a great many portions of the Blood grown clammy and degenerated
into a viscous nature, are gathered together about the part affected; which
unless withdrawn from thence, upon a great emptying of the Vessels by a large
emission of Blood, so that the greatest part of them flow forth, the bleeding
will be frustrated of its desired affect: Its all one in which Arm the Vein be
opened, though its now commonly done on the side affected.

But if by reason of the weakness of the Pulse, and the failing of the Animal
faculty, you ought neither to Bleed at First, nor to repeat it though the pain
be very urgent; then Cupping-Glasses with a Scarification being applied to the
place grieved, may very well supply its place. Moreover to take away the
Inflammation of the Pleura, besides an Evacuation of Blood by breathing a Vein
freely, or by Scarification, its Serous and other Excrementitious humors must
also be set upon, and be gently purged forth of its Mass, and from the Bowels
by Siege, Urine, and Sweat Strong Purges are justly forbidden, because they
trouble the Blood, and force it farther into the Places affected; and
Antimonial Vomits (though approved by some) are neither safe, nor grounded upon
reason. Let Glysters be frequently, or rather daily Administered; nay and
sometimes gentle Purges may be allowed so the Fever be not very great,
qualifying Julapes and Decoctions, and things gently moving Sweat or Urine,
such as before prescribed for the Peripneumonia, are also proper here. Let all
hot things of a sharp or smart nature, whether they are Spices, or things
containing a Vinous Spirit, be carefully avoided.

The Second Indication being for preservation, and directed against the
clamminess and effervescency of the Blood, prescribes those Medicines, which
consisting of a Volatile, or Alkalisate Salt, destroy the Combinations entered
into by the Acid, sixth, and otherwise Morbifick Salts, with other more gross
Particles: In which respect the Eyes and Claws of Crabs, the Tusk of a Boar,
the Stone of Carps, the Jaw Bone of a Pike, the Bone in the Heart of a Stag,
the Pisle of a Deer, Sal Prunella, Salt of Coral, the Volatile Salt of Urine,
or of Hartshorn, Powder of Goats Blood, Infusion of Horsedung, Spirit of
Hartshorn, of Sal Armoniack, Spirit of Tartar, Mixtura Simplex, Bezoartick
Mineral, Antimony Diaphoretick, Flowers of Sal Armoniack, are very famous
Remedies in the Pleurisy.

The Third and Vital Indication, which takes care that the strength and Vital
heat be preserved in their due Tone and State, during the Course of the
Disease, prescribes principally a fit Diet, and likewise Cordial Remedies and
Anodines, and things which seasonably afford Relief to other Symptoms, if happily
they present: First, in a true Pleurisy you must order a most thin Diet, viz.
consisting of mere Oat, and Barley-meats, and for ordinary drink, Ptisan or
Posset Drink is more proper than Beer alone, though in a mignty thirst, this
also may be allowed in a moderate quantity. Moreover to quench thirst, Julapes,
Apozemes and Emulsions may be taken at set times, to all which let Sal Prunella
be added. Secondly, let only temperate Cordials be given, which may gently
refresh the Animal Spirits, and not add to the Accension of the Blood which
burns before too fiercely: For these intents the Waters of Ladies Thistle,
Carduus Benedictus, Bawm, Borage, Cowslips, and Black-Cherries, are usually
given with good success, to which the Powders of Pearl and Coral may be added.
Thirdly, Anodines must be used both inwardly to procure sleep, if at any time
it be very much wanted; as also outwardly to ease the pain of the side: The
most usual things of the former kind are the distilled water, Syrup, and Powder
of the red Poppy, which are accounted Specificks in the Pleurisy, as well as
in the Peripneumonia. Moreover, when a very acute pain and watchings press very
much, we may give also Diacodiats: Against Pains, Ointments, Fomentations,
Cataplasms, and sometimes the warm Inwards of Animals newly killed, are proper
to be applied.

I shall now give you Select Forms of Medicines adapted to each of these
Indications.

First, Therefore about the beginning of the Disease, to take away the
Inflammation, Julapes, Apozemes, Powders, Glysters, and gentle Purges are wont
to be prescribed.

Take Water of Ladies Thistle eight Ounces, Water of red Poppies four Ounces,
Syrup of the same an Ounce, Sal Prunella a Dram: Make a Julape, the Dose is two
or three Ounces every third hour.

Take Grass Roots four Ounces, Barley half an Ounce, parings of Apples a
handful, Raisins of the Sun an Ounce, Licorice two Ounces; boil them in three
pounds of fountain water to two pounds: To the clear straining add Syrup of
Violets an Ounce and a half, Sal Prunella a Dram and a half: Make an Apozeme,
the Dose is two or three Ounces often in a day.

Take Sal Prunella two Drams, Flowers of Nitre a Dram, Powder of the Flowers of
red Poppies two Scruples, Sugar Candy four Scruples: Make a Powder, the Dose is
half a Dram, three or four times a day.

Take of the Decoction of Mallows Roots and all, together with sweet Prunes a
pound, Syrup of Violets three Ounces, Sal Prunella a Dram: Make a Glyster.

Take of whole Cassia bruised two Ounces, Tamarinds an Ounce, white Rose
Flowers a handful, Coriander-seeds two Drams; boil them in a sufficient
quantity of fountain water to a pound: To the straining add Syrup of Cichory
with Rhubarb two Drams: Clarify it with the White of an Egg, the Dose is five
or six Ounces in the Morning, for two or three days one after the other.

Secondly, To dissolve the clamminess or coagulating Viscousness of the Blood,
the following things are of use, viz. in the Form of a Drink, Powder, and
Spirit.

Take fresh Horsedung four Ounces, Carduus water a pound and a half; make a
close and warm Infusion for two hours, then filter the Liquor, to which add
Syrup of the Juice of Dandelion, or of Cichory two Ounces, Spirit of Sal
Armoniack a Dram, give five or six spoonfuls three or four times a day

For this end Water of Horsedung does admirably well.

Take Horsedung four pounds, Leaves of Carduus Benedictus, Ladies Thistle,
Scabious, Pimpernel, of each three handfuls; being sliced and mixed together,
pour to them of fresh Milk six pounds, distill them with common Organs: The Dose
is two or three Ounces, either alone, or with other distilled Waters in the
Form of a Julape.

For the same use the Tinctures or Solutions of other Dungs are given by some
Physicians, and are highly magnifyed by them. Helmont deservedly commends in
the Pleurisy the Dung of an Ox, Panarolus Pigeons Dung, others the White of
Hens Dung: Epiphanius Ferdinandus usually gave with good success in the
Pleurisy, the Decoction of Tobacco macerated in new Wine. Valeriola used the
Decoction of the Flowers of red Poppies, as a tried and familiar Remedy.
Sylvius prescribes the following mixture to be taken one spoonful after
another, by little Intervals of time.

Take the waters of Stone-Parsly and Hyssop, of each two Ounces, Fennel-water
an Ounce, simple Treacle water half an Ounce, Laudanum Opiatum four Grains, Sal
Armoniack half a Dram Syrup of red Poppies an Ounce: Mix them.

To this composition, Frederick Deckers adds Powder of Crabs Eyes, and
Bezoartick Mineral of each a Scruple.

Medicines very efficacious for this use, are wont to be given in the Form of a
Powder; for Example,

Take Powder of Crabs Eyes two Drams, Sal Prunella a Dram and a half, red Poppy
Flowers half a Dram: Mix them, make a Powder, the Dose is half a Dram, three or
four times in a day, with a fit Vehicle.

Instead of Crabs Eyes, you may use the Powder of the Jaw Bone of a Pike, or of
a Boars Tusk, or of a Stags or Bulls Pisle, and if these do not succeed, you
may try what follows.

Take Antimony Diaphoretick, or its Ceruse, or Bezoartick Mineral two Drams,
Volatile Salt of Hartshorn half a Dram, Powder of red Poppy Flowers two
Scruples: Make a Powder, the Dose is a Scruple or half a Dram, thrice or oftener
in a day.

It is for the same Intention of Curing, that Riverius gives Powder of Chimney
Soot, from half a Dram to a Dram, and that others give the Powder of Pigeons or
Hens Dung. Nay farther, according to this Analogy by which the Dungs of Animals
stored with a Volatile Salt give relief in this Disease; its probable that the
Dung of a Dog may prove no less successful in Curing the Pleurisy than in the
Squinancy; and so much the more likely, because these Diseases often
interchange their Types, and the one assumes the likeness of the other:
Chemical Liquors endowed with a Volatile Salt, sometimes also work great
effects in the Pleurifie.

Take Spirit of Blood two Drams, Red Poppy water three Ounces, Syrup of the
same an Ounce: Mix them; give a spoonful of it every other while.

Take Spirit of Sal Armoniack distilled with Olibanum three Drams, the Dose is
from twelve drops to fifteen or twenty, three or four times a day in a fit
Vehicle. After the same manner you may give Spirit of Urine, of Soot, or of
Hartshorn.

Take Spirit of Tartar three Drams: The Dose is a Scruple in a fit Vehicle.

Take Mixtura Simplex three Drams: The Dose is from a Scruple to half a Dram.

3. As to the Third Indication, besides a thin Diet, Cordial Remedies, and
Anodines are prescribed: Forms of the former kind may be supplied by the
Julapes and Apozemes prescribed for the first Indication, and by the Spirits
and Powders for the Second: Inward Anodines to be given in Watchings, and in a
very Intense pain are prescribed according to the Forms following.

Take red Poppy water two Ounces, Syrup of the same six Drams, Spirit of
Hartshorn twelve drops: Make a draught to be taken going to Bed.

If we must go higher, Take Carduus water two Ounces, Diacodium from three
Drams to half an Ounce, or six Drams, Spirit of Sal Armoniack with Frankincense
half a Scruple: Make a draught. Sometimes, though rarely, its necessary to rise
to Laudanum's, which being seasonably given, have a mighty good effect,
inasmuch as they procure Sleep, and move Sweat and Urine.

Take water of Cowslip Flowers two Ounces, Laudanum Tartariz'd, from sixteen
drops to twenty, Spirit of Blood half a Scruple, Syrup of Violets two Drams:
Mingle them, make a draught.

Outward Anodines are usually prescribed in the Form of an Ointment,
Fomentation, and Cataplasm.

Take Ointment of Marshmallows two Ounces, Oil of sweet Almonds an Ounce,
Album Graecum two Drams: Mix them by braying them together.

Take of the Emplaister of Mucilages two Ounces and a half; Malax it with Oil
of Linseed, and let it be applied upon Lawn Paper.

Take the tops of Both Malbows, Leaves of Mercury and Beets, of each three
handfuls: Boil them in a sufficient quantity of fountain water; let the
straining be used for a Fomentation.

Take the remaining faeces of the Herbs, after the Liquor is wrung forth, and
being bruised, add to it of Oat-meal six Drams, Linseed, Fenugreek-seeds, of
each two Ounces, Ointment of Marshmallows two Ounces: Make a Cataplasm.

I need not go far for Stories and Instances of persons troubled with the
Pleurisy; for I have a notable Example of this Disease now under Cure, viz. a
very fine young Woman, subject most frequently, and as it were habitually to
that affect, is committed to our care. This Virgin, who is very fair, of a
Sanguine Complexion, but of a weakly Constitution, has been wont for many years
past upon every slight occasion, viz. upon taking Cold, or by errors in any of
the six nonnatural things, nay sometimes upon the mere change of the Season, or
of the Air, to fall into a Fever, presently accompanied with pains of the
Pleura, a Cough, and a difficulty of Breathing, and for the most part horrible
Convulsions following them. She has been taken so very ill formerly of this
Distemper, that she has been often forced to keep her Chamber six Months or
more every year; but of late, though she be not freed from this affliction, yet
she is seldomer tormented with it: The last year she was pretty well all the
Summer, and well near all the Autumn; about the beginning of Winter she fell
sick of that Disease, and now toward the end of it, is fallen ill again. The
Pleuritick pain constantly possesses the right side, where the Blood sticking,
and being extravasated in its passage about the Intercostal Muscles, the
Irritated Fibers commence a most tormenting pain, together with a Convulsive
motion of Coughing which they reiterate almost perpetually: In the mean time
the Lungs being found enough, and open in their passages, readily convey the
Blood, as clammy as it is, without any let or stay, which often is the cause
of a Peripneumonia. No Remedies are wont to do good to this person without
Bleeding, which is always so particularly necessary, that every time she is
ill, we are forced even whether we will or no, to repeat it two or three times,
nay sometimes oftener: The Blood emitted has constantly a Viscous and whitish
Film on its surface. This Disease was always a simple Pleurisy without any
Peripneumonia, and for its Cure she constantly used the following method with
success.

Take Spirit of Sal Armoniack with Gum Ammoniacum three Drams, give from
fifteen drops to twenty thrice a day, with the following Julape.

Take Carduus water, Black-Cherry water, of each six Ounces, Hysteric water a
Dram, Sugar six Drams: Betwixt whiles she took a Dose of Powder with three
Ounces of an Apozeme.

Take the Powders of Crabs Eyes, of a Bores Tusk, of Sal Prunella, of each a
Dram: Make a Powder, divide it into six parts.

Take Grass Roots three Ounces, Candied Eringo's an Ounce, shavings of Ivory
and Hartshorn, of each two Drams, parings of Apples a handful, Raisins of the
Sun an Ounce: Boil them in three pounds of fountain water to two pounds; add to
the straining, Syrup of Violets an Ounce, Sal Prunella a Dram: Mix them, make
an Apozeme.

Glisters of Milk with Syrup of Violets were administered sometimes every day,
and sometimes every other day; if at any time Opiats, though never so gentle,
were given her to allay pain, commonly afterward an aching and heaviness of the
Head, and Convulsive Affects most sorely tormented her.

CHAP. V. Instructions and Prescripts for the Cure of an Empyema.
BY the word Empyema, according to its usual acceptance, is denoted a
Collection of Pus, or corrupted matter within the Cavity of the Thorax, by
which the Organs of Respiration are oppressed: That Pus commonly flowing thither,
either from a Pleurisy, or a Peripneumonia (and sometimes happily from a
Squinancy) suppurated and broken.

As to the Cure of an Empyema, we must in the First place consider whether the
signs of this Disease, as to the reality of its present Being, be certain or
doubtful; if certain, there will not be much need of Physic, but only the Body
being prepared, you may presently proceed to open the side. Therefore if after
a Pleurisy or Peripneumonia not rightly Cured, or after an inward effusion of
Blood occasioned by a stroke, fall, or wound, there be perceived a floating of
Pus, or of corrupted or bloody matter within the Cavity of the Thorax, and this
with little or no Spitting, we need no longer think of Maturating or
Expectorating Medicines; but the Belly being loosened, and the Blood and
humors duly qualified by Julapes, Apozemes, and Anodines, either order a bare
Incision; or in tender and timorous persons, First, let a Cautery be applied
betwixt the sixth and seventh Vertebrae, and after the Eschar being raised, let
the Incision Knife be entered obliquely toward the hinder and upper parts, and
that leisurely, and by little and little, till it penetrate into the Cavity of
the Thorax, and then a little silver Pipe being put in, let the matter within
contained, be let forth some at one time, and some at another, but so that as
far as the strength will bear, the evacuation of the whole humor be as quick
as may be; for a portion of it being left within, upon frequent admission of
air to it, will stinch most horridly within a few days; to prevent which evil,
or suddenly to remove it, let a vulnerary and adstersive Liquor be injected
with a Syringe twice or thrice a day. After the Incision is duly performed with
what else belongs to it, well known to skilful Chirurgions, there will not be
much more left for a Physician to do: He must prescribe a proper Diet, frequent
Glisters to loosen the Belly (as often as occasion requires) and likewise
vulnerary Medicines commonly so called, which hinder the dissolution of the
Blood, and its running into Serosities prejudicial to the Breast.

But if the Signs of this Disease are not certain, and (as it usually happens
when a Peripneumonia, or an Impostume of the Lungs precede it) are wholly
doubtful, you must not proceed to an Incision too hastily or inconsiderately:
For I have known some Spitting forth a purulent matter, nay a faetid Pus, to
whom an Incision of the Thorax has proved of no good effect, and not without
some prejudice. Therefore till it shall appear by infallible Signs that it is
an absolute Empyema you may use for a while expectorating Medicines (such as
before prescribed for Curing a Peripneumonia) and also things gently moving an
Evacuation by Urine and Sweat: But these at length availing nothing and the
Empyema still continuing or increased (since it is better, so there be
strength, to try a doubtful Remedy than none) you may proceed to the Incision.

As to Forms of Medicines requisite for Curing an Empyema; before the Incision
the same Remedies are proper, which are prescribed for a Peripneumonia, but the
incision being over, the following will be of particular use.

Against Faintings and Swoonings, which happen during that Operation, or after
it: Let the following Julape be always in a readiness to be taken now and then
to four or five spoonfuls.

Take the Waters of Bawm, and of Black Cherries, of each six Ounces, Aqua
Mirabilis an Ounce, Pearl powdered a Dram, Syrup of Clove Gilly-flowers an
Ounce: Mingle them, make a Julape.

Let the following Decoction be taken three or four times a day.

TAke Leaves of Hearts Tongue, Speedwel, Agrimony, Coltsfoot, Mous-ear,
Sanicle, of each a handful, Roots of Madder and Chervil, of each an Ounce,
Barley half an Ounce, red Ciches half an Ounce, Raisins of the Sun an Ounce and
a half: Boil them in four pounds of fountain water till half be consumed; when
it is taken, let it be sweetened at pleasure with Clarified Honey, or with
Syrup of Mous-ear. If there be no Fever, let the following Pills be taken at
Night, and early in the Morning, to a Scruple or half a Dram.

Take Powder of Crabs Eyes two Drams, Flowers of Sulphur a Dram, Sal Prunella
half a Dram, Species of Diarrhodon Abbatis a Scruple, Venice Turpentine washed,
what suffices: Make a Mass, and form it into Pills: or the Turpentine being
omitted let the same Medicine be taken in the Form of a Powder, from half a
Dram to two Scruples twice a day.

CHAP. VI. Instructions and Prescripts for Curing the Impostume of the Lungs.
THe Morbifick matter of this Vomica, or Impostume of the Lungs is always a
mere Pus, which nevertheless is there engendered tacitly, and as it were
unawares, without a Fever or Inflammation, and lies so private, that it scarce
presents any signs of it self, but a little Cough, which at first is dry, then
turns moist, which continuing some time, the Breath is drawn with some
difficulty, the Spirits faint, and the Body wears away by little and little,
though in the mean time the Spittle has no Pus or Blood mixed with it: But if
the Impostume unexpectedly breaks, it commonly kills the Patient.

If after the Impostume is broken, and the Purulent Spittle beginning to come
away with ease, and the strength holding firm, there be room for any method of
Cure: The Primary Indications according to the common custom in most Diseases
must be these three, viz. Curatory, Preservatory, and Vital. The First, directs
that the matter of the Impostume be with speed evacuated by Spitting, and that
the sides of it be cleans'd and made sound again as much as possible, The
Second provides against a confluence of new matter to the Receptacle, and other
neithbouring parts of the Lungs, whence a Consumption would be engendered. The
Third relieves the faintings of the Spirits, and restores lost strength, and
the Nutrition which was frustrated.

In respect of the First Indication, expectorating Medicines (commonly so
called) and of the hottest and smartest nature, which cleanse and dry most, and
especially (since for the most part here is no Fever) Sulphurous things are
proper; which also are prescribed according to the Forms following.

Take Tincture of Sulphur three Drams, give from seven drops to twenty going to
Bed, and early in the Morning in a spoonful of Syrup of the Juice of ground
Ivy: Or,

Take Syrup of our Diasulphur six Ounces, give a spoonful at the same hours.

Take dried Leaves of ground Ivy, Germander, Maidenhair, Coltsfoot, Hyssop,
white Hore-hound, Savory, of each a handful, the Roots of Elecampane,
Florentine Orris, Chervil, of each an Ounce, Anniseeds half an Ounce: Boil them
in six pounds of fountain water to three pounds and a half, add toward the end
White Wind six Ounces, the best Clarified Honey three Ounces: Let the straining
be Clarified and kept for use: The Dose is six Ounces thrice a day warm. Or,

Take Water of quick Lime six pounds: Put it in a large mouthed Glass with the
following Bag.

Take dried Leaves of Germander, ground Ivy, white, Hore-hound, of each a
handful, Roots of Elecampane and Florentine Orris sliced, of each an Ounce and
a half, Annisecds bruised two Ounces, Licorice an Ounce and a half, Raisins
stoned three Ounces: Let them stand cold and close covered, pour it out as you
use it, still leaving the Bag behind.

Take Lohoch Sanum three Ounces, Species Diaireos two Drams and a half, Flowers
of Sulphur a Dram and a half, Oxymel simple two Ounces: Make a Linctus to be
taken with a stick of Licorice.

Take Powder of the Leaves of Hedg-musiard, and of ground Ivy, of each half an
Ounce, Flowers of Sulphur a Dram and a half Syrup of Diasulphur, or of the
Juice of Ivy what suffices: Make a soft L^hech. Take fine Myrrh, and white,
Amber, of each half an Ounce, Sulphur vivum, Auripigment, of each two Drams,
shells of Fistick Nuts a Dram and a half: Make a Powder for Fumigation; let it
be used with a Paper Funnel Morning and Evening.

The Second Indication which is for preservation, cutting off the Mortinck
matter, and providing against the Consumption which is apt to ensue, undertakes
the purifying of the Blood, and the strengthening of the Lungs; for which eads
Purges, Vulnerary Decoctions, distilled Waters, and Physic Drinks are proper.

Take Gereon's Decoction of Sena (with Agarick a Dram and a half) three Ounces
and a half, Purging Syrup of Apples an Ounce, Aqua Mirabilis two Drams: Make a
Potion to be taken once a week with governance.

Let the Form of the vulnerary Decoction be the same, which is prescribed for
the Empyema after the Incision; or because there is no Fever, you may give
that Decoction of the shops, to four or six Ounces thrice a day.

Take Fir tops six handfuls, fresh Leaves of ground Ivy, Hyssop, Savory,
Rocket, Hedge-mustard, Winter Cress, of each four handfuls, Sun-flower Seeds
six Ounces, sweet Fennel-seeds two Ounces, Roots of Elecampane, and Florentine
Orris, of each three Ounces, being sliced and bruised, pour to them of
Brunswick or Spruce Beer eight pounds, distill it with common Organs: Let the
Liquor be all mixed, and when its used, let it be sweetened at pleasure with
Syrup of the Juice of ground Ivy: The Dose is three or four Ounces thrice a
day.

Take Roots of Sarzaparilla six Ounces, China Roots two Ounces, all the
Saunders, of each six Drams, shavings of Ivory and Hartshorn, of each half an
Ounce, Mastick-wood an Ounce, being sliced and bruised, let them Infuse
according to art, and boil in twelve pounds of fountain water, till half be
consumed, adding of Licorice an Ounce, Raisins of the Sun four Ounces; let the
straining be used for ordinary drink.

The Third and Vital Indication prescribes Cordial and Anodine Remedies, and a
fit Diet: The same Forms of Medicines in a manner that are prescribed for an
Empyema after Incision, are proper here. Also the same Diet which is ordered in
a beginning Consumption, and Asses Milk often does good in this case:
Concerning the Cure of this Disease, I have obferv'd that an Issue made in the
side has often a very good effect.

A Gentleman of a middle Age, having been always strong and healthy, found
himself ill without any manifest cause, and in a short time fell into a
languishing condition, losing his appetite, sleeping with difficulty, was
thirsty, and had a heat about his Praecordia: He was a long time under the
hands of some Physicians for the Scurvy, and of others as Hectical, and after
various methods of Cure had been tried in vain, the Disease at length openly
discovered it self: For whilst one Night being more restless than usual, he
tossed himself very much in his Bed; the Impostume within his Lungs breaking on
a sudden, he threw up by Coughing a vast quantity of Pus, which stunk most
horribly, so that within four or five hours he had thrown up about two pounds.
Moreover the Cough continuing for above two Months afterward, he daily voided
by Spittle of that Purulent, thick, and mighty stinking matter, till his Flesh
being consumed, and his strength wholly spent, he was decayed, and fallen away
to nothing.

After the Impostume was thus broken, we carefully gave him Medicines to
cleanse and heal the place where it gathered, and to mundify the Blood and the
Lungs, and free them from the imminent Consumption. Our Tincture and Syrup of
Diasulphur, together with Pectoral and Vulnerary Decoctions and Distillations,
also Linctus's and Balsamic Pills were taken day after day in a constant
method: With these Glisters, also gentle Catharticks and Diuretics were
interchangeably given; Vaporations first, then Suffumigations both Sulphurous
and Arsenical were also used Mornings and Evenings. After these things had been
carefully followed a long time without any good; we concluded to open his
Thorax, and were soon directed to a place proper for it, for on the left side
of his Sternum, betwixt the fifth and sixth Vertebrae a tumor appeared:
Instead of a Cautery, I applied thereto a Suppurating Plaster, and within
three days the top of that Swelling became red and soft, out of which being
opened the next day after, first issued a thin Ichor, and a little after a
yellow and well concocted Pus, and afterward it continued daily to run in a
more plentiful manner, and then the stinking Spittle began to abate, and within
a Fortnight wholly ceased; the Morbisick matter finding both an easy and more
apt passage through that Orifice, which at length was changed into an Issue,
and a Pea, or a Pill of Wood being daily put into it, there came forth
continually for a year and a half a plentiful Ichor, and in the mean time the
Gentleman having wholly got rid of any corruption in his Breast, and recovering
his strong and fleshy habit of Body, became sound in all respects, Lastly, That
Issue being remoy'd to the Arm, he has nothing of that Distemper about his
Breast, nor minds longer any fence against it.

Shortly after this Cure, I was called to a Lady of Quality, who having been
troubled with a Cough, and a heat of the Praecordia for many years, on a
certain day sensibly perceived somewhat broken in her Lungs whilst she was
Coughing, and presently voided by Spittle a great quantity of mere and stinking
Pus; after that that Spittle with the Cough, notwithstanding any use of
Remedies continuing for a Week, seemed rather increased than diminished, I
advised that she would permit an Issue to be cut in her side near the place,
whence she perceived the Pus to arise, which she readily giving way to, within
three days mere Pus, such as she Spit forth by her Cough, began to run from the
open Orifice; and afterward the Morbifick matter finding a sufficient vent by
that passage, both the Cough and the Spitting of Pus entirely ceased, and
within six Weeks the Patient grew perfectly well.

After this I was called to a robust man, a great Drinker, who being also
affected with an Impostume of the Lungs, did Spit forth a great quantity of
mighty stinking Pus: He would not permit any Issue to be made in his side; yet
being very free to take all sorts of Medicines, he got free at length of that
Disease by a long use of them: The Medicines which chiefly did him good were
preparations of Sulphur; wherefore our Syrup and Tincture were given him often
every day: To these we gave for Vehicles, sometimes a Pectoral Decoction,
sometimes a Pectoral Hydromel, sometimes Lime water, with the Infusion of
Pectoral and Vulnerary Ingredients. Moreover Fumigations, especially of
Sulphurous and Arsenical things, gave great Relief.

CHAP. VII. Instructions and Prescripts for the Cure of the Asthma.
AN Asthma is a difficult, short, thick, and pursy Breathing, with a great
Agitation of the Breast, and for the most part without a Fever: And its either
merely Pneumonick, proceeding from some stoppage in the Vessels that convey the
Air, or merely Convulsive, arising from some fault in the Organs of motion, or
mixed when both parts are jointly faulty.

As to its Cure there are two Primary Indications, or rather so many distinct
methods of proceeding, viz. the one Curatory, the other Preservatory: The First
teaches what is to be done in the Fit, to free the Patient from present danger;
the other what out of the Fit, to take away the Cause of the Disease.

1. In the Fit there are two chief Intentions of Curing, viz. First, That care
being taken as well of the Air, as of the Lungs, a more free Breathing be
procured, at least as much as may suffice to support Life: And Secondly, That
the Organs of Respiration be reclaimed and made to cease from the Convulsions
they are fallen into, and which are wont to be continued with obstinacy.

As to the former, in the First place let the Patient be set in an upright
Posture of Body, in a pretty open place somewhat Airy, and free from Smoke, and
the Breath of Bystanders; then endeavor that the Lungs being freed of all
inward stuffing and oppression, as well as outward compression, may be able to
draw and return the Breath deeper: For these ends, lest the weight of the
inferior Viscera press down, and straiten the Praecordia, let the Belly be
loosened by a Glister, and let the Garments and all other things covering or
binding the Thorax be slackened. Moreover since in this case the Lungs are
usually oppressed, either from the Blood growing too turgid within the Pneumonick
Vessels, or from the Serum distilling forth of the Arteries and Glands into the
Ductus's of the Trachea, the Sallies and Impetuosities of both humors ought to
be restrained and appeased: Hence if the strength will bear it, and the Pulse
be strong enough, Bleeding is often proper. Again let those things be carefully
given, which discharge the Serum, and the superfluities of the inflamed Blood
by Urine and Sweat: For which end Julapes, Apozems, and Pectorals, commonly so
called, are of excellent use. Moreover Powders of shells, preparations of
Millepedes, Volatile Spirits and Salts are taken with good effect. In the mean
time let there be likewise given things that open the Ductus's of the Trachea,
and make them slippery, and provoke expectoration; and such also if need be, as
stop the Catarrh distilling on them; for which ends Linctus's, Lohoch's,
Pectoral Decoctions, and Suffumigations are proper.

As to the other intent of Curing in Fits of the Asthma, viz. That the Organs
of Respiration being reclaimed from the Convulsions they are fallen into,
return calmly to their ordinary Functions (unless this follows of its own
accord, after that the turbulent boiling of the Blood and Serum within the
Lungs is appeased:) We must use Anti-Convulsive and Anodine Remedies; for
Medicines wont to be given in Hysteric passions, are also proper in a
Convulsive Asthma.

The Spirit of Hartshorn, of Soot, and especially Spirit of Sal Armoniack
distilled with Gum Ammoniacum; also the Tincture of Gum Ammoniacum, of Sulphur,
Castoreum, Assa-foetida, the Syrup of Ammoniacum, of Sulphur, Oxymel of
Squills, and the like; which being of an ungrateful taste or smell, dissipate
the Spirits as it were, and withdraw them from tumultuary Efforts, prove
sometimes of notable use: But if the raging Spirits cannot be appeased by this
means, we must come to Narcoticks, that some of them being destroyed, the rest
may return into order. For Opiats sometimes are mighty beneficial, unless a
stopping of the Lungs, and a great oppression of the Praecordia forbid their
use: In horrible sits of this Disease, when other Medicines have availed
nothing, I have often given Diacodium, nay Laudanum Tartariz'd with good
success: Nevertheless these may not be taken without great caution; for
Respiration which is difficult and clogged before, being hindered more, and that
very much by them, they often put the Patient in danger of Life. Moreover to
reclaim the Pnenmonick Spirits from their Convulsions; its good sometimes to
put the Spirits to torture in some other part, for when some of them are any
where tormented, all the rest for the most part, being in a concern at it, quit
their disorderly motions. Wherefore Vesicatories, Cupping-glasses, Ligatures,
and Painful Frictions give relief: Nay for this reason Vomits taken in the
midst of the fit do good. I shall now set down certain Select Forms of Remedies
appropriated to each of those ends.

First therefore to restrain the Fluxions of the Blood and Serum, and to
discharge their superfluities, derived from the Lungs, by Sweat and Urine; let
the following things be prescribed.

Take Leaves of ground Ivy eight Ounces, Rue, Pennyroyal, and Dragons, of each
two Ounces, Sal Prunella a Dram and a half, Srrupus Byzantinus, Syrup of red
Poppies, of each an Ounce: Mix them, make a Julape; let three or four Ounces be
taken thrice or oftener in a day.

Take Grass Roots three Ounces, Roots of Butchers-Broom two Ounces, Candied
Elecampane an Ounce and a half, Barley half an Ounce, Raisins of the Sun an
Ounce: Boil them in three pounds of fountain water to two pounds, to the
straining add of Sal Prunella a Dram and a half, sweeten it if it be needful,
with a sufficient quantity of Syrupus Byzantinus, or of Syrup of Violets.

Take Tincture of Sulphur three Drams: The Dose is from six drops to ten at
Night, and early in the Morning in a spoonful of the Syrup of the Juice of Ivy,
or of Violets.

Take Feculae of Aron and Briony, of each a Dram and a half, Flowers of Sulphur
a Dram, Flowers of Benzoin half a Dram, Sugar Candy half an Ounce, Licorice two
Drams: Make a Powder to be taken to half a Dram, or two Scruples twice a day,
with the foregoing Julape or Apozeme. Or,

Take of the foresaid Powder two Ounces, Honey or Oxymel what suffices: Make a
Linctus, take at Night and early in the Morning, about half a spoonful, at
other times take it with a stick of Licorice.

Take Syrup of Hore-hound, and of Garlic, of each an Ounce and a half,
Tincture of Saffron, and of Castoreum, of each two Drams: Mix them, take about
a small spoonful in the fits.

Take Spirit of Sal Armoniack with Gum Ammoniacum three Drams, the Waters of
Snails, and of Earthworms, of each three Ounces, Syrup of Horehound two
Ounces: Mix them, take a spoonful once in four or five hours.

Take Powder of Hedg-mustard, or of ground Ivy gathered in the Summer Sun an
Ounce, Oxymel simple what suffices: Make a Linctus.

So much concerning the Medicines and method requisite in a fit of the Asthma.
The other Indication which is for preservation, undertaking to remove the
Morbifick cause, and the whole Morbid Root has two parts, or distinct Intents
of Curing, which for the most part are both set upon together; one of these
endeavors to amend the Conformation of the Lungs, if it be any way prejudiced
or faulty, and the other to take away the Irregularities of the parts for
motion, and of the Spirits appointed for them: Both these Intents will very
well be answered, if Pectoral Remedies commonly so called are joined with
Anti-Convulsives, and are used interchangeably with other Medicines which have
regard to the preparation of the whole Body, and to Emergent Symptoms; for
which ends the following Method and Forms of Medicines may be used.

Take Aloe Rosata a Dram and a half, Flowers of Sulphur a Dram; Salt of Amber
half a Dram, Tar what suffices: Make Pills, in number twenty four; take four in
the Evening every Night, or every other, or third Night. Or,

Take Gum Ammoniacum, and Bdellium dissolved in Vinegar of Squills, of each
half an Ounce, Flowers of Sulphur three Drams, Powder of the Leaves of
Hedg-mustard, and of Savory, of each half a Dram, with a sufficient quantity of
Syrup of Diasidphur, or of Oxymel of Squills: Make a Mass, form it into little
Pills, and take three every Evening. Or,

Take Millepedes prepared two Drams, Flowers of Benzoin half a Dram, Salt of
Amber two Scruples, Extract of Elecampane half a Dram, Castoreum half a Dram,
Saffron a Scruple, Venice Turpentine what suffices: Make a Mass, and form it
into small Pills; take four every Evening and Morning, unless when you Purge.

If Pills are not grateful, or the foresaid Medicines will not do; then let the
following be tried to free the Lungs from obstruction.

Take Spirit of Gum Ammoniacum, distilled with Sal Armoniack three Drams, Syrup
of the Juice of Ivy three Ounces, Magisterial water of Snails, and of
Earthworms, of each an Ounce, Tincture of Saffron two Drams: Mix them, take a
spoonful going to Bed, and early in the Morning. Or,

Take Tincture of Gum Ammoniacum three Drams: The Dose is from fifteen Drops to
twenty in a spoonful of Oxymel, or Syrup of ground Ivy. Or,

Take Tincture of Sulphur three Drams: The Dose is from seven Drops to twelve
or twenty at the same hours, with a fit Vehicle.

After the like manner also other Spirits endowed with a Volatile Salt, and
mixed with Pectoral Syrups, and Cephalic waters may be usefully prescribed
Morning and Evening.

Instead of a Mixture or Asthmatical Julape of distilled waters of the shops,
the following Magisterial may be prepared to be used frequently, and upon
several occasions.

Take Roots of Elecampane, Florentine Orris, Angelica, Masterwort, of each four
Ounces, of Briony a pound, Leaves of white Horehound, Hyssop, Savory,
Pennyroyal, ground Ivy, of each four handfuls, fresh Juniper and Ivy Berries,
of each a pound, Laurel Berries half a pound, Seeds of sweet Fennel, Caraway,
Annise, Lovage, Dill, of each an Ounce, Cubebs two Ounces, long Pepper, Cloves,
Mace, of each an Ounce; all of them being sliced and bruised, pour to them of
Brunswick Beer eight pounds; distill them with common Organs: Let the whole
Liquor be mixed, and when its used, let it be sweetened at pleasure with Sugar,
or the Syrup of the Juice of ground Ivy, or with Oxymel.

Moreover, instead of Oxymel, or of any common Pectoral Syrup, let the
following Forms of Medicines be prescribed which are more appropriated to an
Asthma: And in the First place the Syrup of Elecampane, invented by Horatius
Augenius, and afterward recommended by Platerus, Sennertus, Riverius, and
other famous Practitioners shall be set down here, and ought to be frequently
made use of.

Take Roots of Elecampane, and of Polypody of the Oak prepared, of each two
Ounces, Currants two Ounces, Sebestens in number fifteen; Coltsfoot, Lungwort,
Calaminth, Savory, of each a handful, one large Tobacco Leaf, Licorice two
Drams, Seeds of Nettles, and of Cottonplant, of each a Dram and a half; boil
them in Wine and Honey diluted, to a pound and a half, and with the like
quantity of Sugar make a Syrup: Let it be taken either by it self in the Form
of a Linctus, or a spoonful at a time Mornings and Evenings, or put a spoonful
of it to a Dose of the distilled water or Apozeme.

Take Roots of Florentine Orris, and of Elecampane, of each half an Ounce,
Garlic pill'd four Drams, Cloves two Drams, white Benzoin a Dram and a half,
Saffron a Scruple, being sliced and bruised, let them digest warm in a pound of
rectified spirit of Wine for twenty eight hours: To the straining add of the
finest Sugar a pound, put it in a silver Basin on hot Coals, then the liquor
being fired, keep stirring it as long as it will burn, and then the flame going
out, it will become a Syrup; let it be given after the same manner as the
former.

Moreover, in this place we may aptly insert the Decoctions of an old Cock so
much commended by famous Physicians, both ancient and modern, for the Cure of
the Asthma. These Broaths are of two kinds, viz. with or without Purgers, and
we find various and differing sorts of both amongst Practical Authors, though I
shall only give you a form or two.

Without Purgers this is a common Form:

Take Roots of Elecampane, and of Florentine Orris, of each half an Ounce,
Leaves of Hyssop, and of Horehound dried, of each six Drams, Carthamus-seeds an
Ounce, Anniseeds and Dillseeds, of each two Drams, Licorice sliced, and Raisins
cleans'd, of each three Drams; let them be prepared and sewed up in the Belly
of an old Cock, which must be boiled in fifteen pounds of fountain water till
the flesh falls from the Bones, strain it and let it settle: The Dose of the
clear Liquor is six Ounces, with an Ounce of Oxymel simple; or if you would
have it purge, in each draught dissolve fresh Cassia and Manna, of each half an
Ounce: Let it be taken for many days together, sometimes for a whole Month.

Riverius prescribes a good Form of this sort of Purging Broth.

Take Roots of Elecampane, and of Florentine Orris, of each a Dram and a half,
Leaves of Hyssop and Coltsfoot, of each a handful, Licorice sliced, Raisins
cleaned, of each two Drams, Figs in number four, Senna cleans'd three Drams,
Roots of Polypody of the Oak, Carthamusseeds of each half an Ounce, Anniseeds a
Dram and a half: Boil them with a third or fourth part of an old Cock according
to art, and make a Broth for one Dose to be taken in a Morning; let it be
continued for twelve or fifteen days.

I shall now give you a Relation of a Person, who was subject to fits of this
Disease, which were merely Convulsive, and of another, who was subject to fits
of the same, which were partly Convulsive, and partly Pneumonick.

A Noble Man of a tall Stature, and full and strong grown, having bruised is
left Side by a fall, found himself injured upon it, and afterward fell into an
Asthmatick Distemper, so that now and then, though at no set times, First a
pain would seize him about that place, and presently after a great straitness
of Breath followed, with a vehement and long continued straining of all the
parts of Respiration, so that during the Fit, the Patient seemed to be in the
very Agony of Death: I was first called to him after he had lain ill of such an
Asthmatick Fit for two days, and was looked upon as almost past Cure.
Nevertheless finding his Lungs to be without hurt, our Prognostic bid us still
hope well, and presently other Physicians being joined with me in Consultation,
it was prescribed as follows.

Take Spirit of Gum Ammoniacum distilled with Sal Armoniack three Drams: Let
him take from fifteen drops to twenty, in a spoonful of the following Julape,
drinking after it five spoonfuls; let it be repeated every sixth hour.

Take the waters of Elder Flowers, Cammomil and Pennyroyal, of each four
Ounces, Snail water two Ounces, Sugar an Ounce, mix them: Between whiles he
took a Dose of the following Powder with the same Julape, or Pectoral
Decoction.

Take Powder of Crabs Eyes two Drams, Sal Prunella a Dram and a half, Salt of
Amber half a Dram, max them: Divide it into eight parts for as many Doses.

Large Vesicatories were applied in the inside of his Arms near his Armpits;
Glisters were daily administered, and frequent Frictions: By the use of these
things he received a sudden and unexpected ease, and within a few days got
wholly free of that Fit, and afterward as often as he perceived a little touch
of the said Distemper coming, he presently took a large Dose of that Spirit,
with the same Julape thrice or four times a day: By which Remedy, being
frequently taken sometimes for preservation, and sometimes for Cure, he has now
past above two years without any great and terrible fit of his Asthma, which
before was habitual, though he has now and then undergone some light touches of
it, but easily blown off.

An Honorable old Gentleman (upon taking cold as it is judged) found himself
ill; for he complained of a pain in the middle of his Breast by his Sternum,
which at Night as soon as he was warm in his Bed, growing worse, disturbed his
sleep, and was very troublesome to him for the most part of the Night:
Nevertheless without any straintness of Breath, or evident sign of an Asthma:
To take away this pain he was both Purged and Blooded, Pectorals and
Antiscorbuticks were daily given him, Ointments and Fomentations were applied
to the place pained, yet without any great good or ease: For the change that
happened after, was rather for the worse; for the pain being a little abated,
he was seized with a laborious and troubled Respiration, so that after his
first sleep, or as he began to slumber, he was taken with a fit of the Asthma,
and being out of Breath, and oppressed about the Praecordia, was forced to sit
upright in his Bed: Moreover this painful Breathing, and Convulsive agitation
of the parts for Respiration did not only return every Night, but daily grew
more violent, and continued longer upon him: Insomuch that one Night awaking
from his first sleep, he was seized with a most violent fit of the Asthma which
lasted for many hours, and brought him as near death as a Man might be and
live. No Physician being present, a Barber then let him Blood, which gave him
some relief; in the Morning upon a consultation of Physicians, he was ordered
for that day a thin Diet, and a loosning Glister: At Night and the Morning
following, he took twelve drops of Spirit of Gum Ammoniacum distilled with Sal
Armoniack in a Vehicle proper in that case, and continued its use afterward
for many days: Vesicatories were applied to the insides of his Arms near his
Armpits: Moreover Julapes and Pectoral Decoctions, Lohoch's, Glisters, nay and
sometimes gentle Purges had their truns; Bleeding also was repeated after two
days. Whereas before he was wont to drink for his Mornings draught about a pint
of Beer with Wormwood and Scruvygrass, Instead of this, he took about eight of
the Clock, fifteen drops of Elixir Proprietatis tartariz'd in a draught of
Coffee prepared with a Decoction of Sage: By these Remedies the Asthmatick Fits
presently abated of their wonted fierceness; insomuch that the beginning and
end of every Night were quiet enough, though about the middle of it some
uneasiness about the Praecordia kept him waking, and made him sit upright in
his Bed for an hour or two; at length growing weary of Physic, he took only
now and then some of the Medicines above mentioned: But in the mean time,
though his Asthmatick Fits troubled him little or not at all by Night as
before, yet by reason of his Lungs being very much stuffed, and a Serous humor
falling into his Feet he could not walk fast, or go up any steep Ascent without
a great difficulty of Breathing, and danger of being choked; and at present an
Asthma or Phthisick is not so much feared as a Dropsy.

CHAP. VIII. Instructions and Prescripts for Curing the Dropsy of the Breast.
IF at any time the affect of the Dropsy or Anasarca, being general, has taken
possession every where, or in most places of the Flesh, and Cavities of the
Viscera: Its no wonder if that filthy Mass of Waters gets possession also of
the Breast; but besides this, it sometimes happens that the Region of the
Thorax is either originally or alone overwhelmed with waters, the other parts
in the mean time being every where sound enough, or injured only Secondarily.

That Serous humor causing the Dropsy of the Breast, arises there either in
the Form of a Vapor, which exhaling from the Praecordia and Sides of the
Thorax is readily condensed into Water, or Secondly, the Serum is there deposed
in its proper Form as it distills into that Cavity from the Mouths of the
Vessels, viz. of the Arteries there opened: Or Thirdly, the Lymphaeducts, or
sometimes, though rarely, the Chyle Vessels, somewhere opening themselves, or
being broken may produce that affect.

A young Man of a healthy and strong constitution, who had long used himself to
violent exercises, both by riding and other ways, perceived at length a
fullness, or as it were a certain windy rising in his Thorax, insomuch that the
left side of his Lungs seemed to swell, and his Heart to be thrust forth of its
place toward the right side; for in that part it was perceived to beat most:
After he had continued in this condition some time, he perciv'd on a certain
day a Rupture as it were of some Vessel within the Cavity of his Thorax, and
after it for half an hours space, he could not only perceive in that Region a
dropping of humor as it were from the top to the bottom of his Breast, but it
could also be head by the standers by. Notwithstanding this, finding himself
otherwise well disposed, he slighted Physic; but afterward upon motion,
stooping, or any stirring of his Body, he perceived in his left side a floating
of waters inwardly gathered together: Nay, and the motion and sound of it was
most manifestly perceived of others, both by handling, and by the ear: Hence as
it was plain that this Person had a Dropsy of the Breast, so it seemed most
probable that this Disease took its rise from this, that the Lymphaeducts
appertaining to the left side of the Lungs being first obstructed near their
Insertions into the Ductus Chyliferus, had swollen up to a vast bigness, and
afterward being broken, distilled forth their humor into the Cavity of the
Thorax.

This Gentleman not perceiving himself in danger, and having tried some
Medicines without any good effect, was advised upon a consultation of
Physicians, to have his Side opened: Wherefore provision for the whole being
made, a Chyrurgion applied a Cautery betwixt the sixth and seventh Vertebrae,
and the day following he put a Pipe into the Orifice, cut into the Cavity of
his Breast, upon which presently a thick Liquor, whitish like Chyle, and as it
were Milky issued forth: There were only about six Ounces taken from him the
first time, and the day following as much: On the third day somewhat a larger
quantity being let forth, he was presently seized with a great fainting, and
afterward being Feverish, he was ill for a day or two: Wherefore till he
recovered his due temper and strength, it was thought fit to stop the egress of
that matter, and afterward a small evacuation only of the same being daily
made, the Cavity of his Breast was in a manner wholly emptied, though he still
carries the Pipe in the Orifice with a Tap, which being drawn forth once in
twenty four hours, a little gleeting of humor still issues out: In the mean
time being well disposed as to his Stomach, Countenance and Strength, he Walks
and Rides abroad, and performs other exercises which he had been formerly used
to with vigor enough: He used not much Physic, nor did he need it: After the
Incision we prescribed him temperate Cordials, viz. Powder of Pearl, Julapes,
and sometimes Hypnoticks, and afterward a vulnerary Decoction to be taken
twice every day.

By this Method and Form of Medicines continued for some time the Person seemed
to recover his due temper, strength, and habit of Body, nay and to be sound in
his Breast; yet he still carried the Silver Pipe in the Orifice of his Side,
out of which an Ichor continually issued: And when after some Months this being
taken forth, that Issue was closed up, there was a gathering again of the same
humor within the hollow of the Breast, as was perceivable by the sound and
floating of it: But afterward as upon the return of the Disease the same
Remedy presented it self, and consequently the opening of the Side was ordered
(Nature as it fell out performing the Office of a Chyrurgion) it happened of
its own accord, and gave way for the matter which was ready to break forth; and
now he is fain to keep that Orifice constantly open as a sink to prevent that
gathering of nastiness in his Breast.

As to the Cure of the Dropsy of the Breast, the Primary Indications, as
usually in Curing most other Diseases, are three, viz. Curatory, Preservatory,
and Vital.

The First endeavors that the Waters gathered in the Cavity of the Breast be
some way or other evacuated. The Second prevents the gathering of new matter.
The Third takes care to restore strength, and speedily to remove the Symptoms
that injure it.

To satisfy the First Indication, there are only two ways or manners of
evacuation, by which that filthy Mass of Waters may be cleared forth, viz.
either that the Vessels of the Breast, and Ductus's of the humors being
emptied, drink up again that Lympha when Rarifyed, and then convy it forth,
either by the way of the Blood, or of the Breath: or Secondly that the water be
all let forth in its proper Species by an Incision of the Side.

The former way, though seldom, yet sometimes to my knowledge succeeds: For the
Texture of the Lungs being spongy within, and outwardly very Porous, whilst
upon every Diastole it is dipped in the waters lying under it, it sometimes
imbibes them being converted into vapor, and so either returns them to the
Blood, or exhales them with the Air continually breathed forth at the Mough;
that this effect may more readily happen for Curing this Disease, Physical Aids
are here used: Therefore for that intent the passates of the Blood, Air, and
humors, ought to be emptied as much as may be, and to be kept open and free:
For this end let gentle Purges, Diuretics and Diaphoreticks be methodically
given by turns, also Thoracical and Expectorating Remedies must be used: Let
the Diet be thin and heating, and let such a method be ordered in all things
which may promote the exhalation of the Blood, and cause all the superfluous
humors to evaporate. I shall set down some Forms of Medicines proper for these
purposes.

Take Roots of Chervil, Butchers-broom, Polypody of the Oak, of each an Ounce,
Leaves of Agrimony, Maidenhair, Oak of Jerusalem, ground Ivy, of each a
handful, Carthamus-seeds an Ounce, Roots of Florentine Orris half an Ounce:
Boil them in four pounds of fountain water till a third part be consumed, then
add to the straining Sena Leaves an Ounce and a half, Agarick two Drams,
Mechoacan, Turbith, of each half an Ounce, yellow Saunders a Dram and a half,
Roots of the lesser Galingal a Dram: Boil them close covered for two hours,
then strain it, add of the best Honey two Ounces, and Clarify it with the white
of an Egg: Make a Purging Hydromel, the Dose is from six Ounces to eight in the
Morning, twice or thrice a Week. Or,

Take Calamelanos a Scruple, Rosin of Jalap half a Scruple, Balsam of Peru what
suffices: Make four Pills, let them be taken in the Morning, repeating the Dose
within five or six days.

Take Tincture of Sulphur three Drams, give from seven drops to ten going to
Bed, and early in the Morning in a spoonful of the following Mixture, drinking
after it three spoonfuls.

Take the waters of Snails, Earthworms, and Compound Radish water, of each
four Ounces, water of the Juice of Elder-berries fermented a pound, Syrup of
the Juice of ground Ivy two Ounces,: Mix them, make a Julape. Or,

Take Tincture of Gum Ammoniacum, or of Galbanum: Give to twenty drops at
Night, and early in the Morning with the same Mixture. Or,

Take Millepedes prepared two Drams, Flowers of Sulphur two Scruples, Flowers
of Benzoin a Scruple, Powder of wild Carrot, and Burdock-seeds, of each half a
Dram, Venice Turpentine what suffices: Make a Mass, form it into little Pills,
take four at Night and early in the Morning, drinking after it a little draught
of the same Julape.

At nine a Clock in the Morning, and five in the Afternon drink a draught of
the water of Quicklime Compound, to four Ounces, by it self, or with some
other appropriate Medicine.

For ordinary drink take the following Bochete.

Take Roots of Sarsaparilla six Ounces, China two Ounces, the Woods of white
and yellow Saunders, of each six Drams, shavings of Ivory and Hartshorn, of
each three Drams, Roots of Calamus Aromaticus half an Ounce, Raisins stoned
half a pound, Licorice three Drams: Let it infuse according to Art, and boil it
in twelve pounds of fountain water to six pounds, strain it.

I was called to a young Scholar at Oxford, who had been ill for three Weeks of
a pain of his Thorax, and of a great difficulty of Breathing that constantly
followed him in the Evening, which also upon a quick motion of his Body, or his
going up a steep Ascent tormented him above measure; he could not rest long on
either side, but was forced to lie always on his Back, and with his Head
raised: And if he tried to lie on either side, presently a pain followed the
Position of his Body; and if happily he rolled himself from one side to the
other, the pain also being presently removed, he felt as it were waters
floating from one place to another: So if he let his Body hang downwards over
the Bedside, he presently felt waters falling toward his Clavicular Bones.
Moreover, if at any time his Body was heated more than ordinary by motion, the
heat of a Bed, or of a Fire, presently he felt in his Breast a boiling as it
were of waters on the Fire, and at the same time complained of a Giddiness, and
of a little fainting of his Spirits. Being well satisfied by a due
consideration of these things that he had a Dropsy of the Breast, I prescribed
the Method and Medicines following with success.

Take Calamelanos fifteen Grains, Rosin of Jalap half a Scruple, Syrup of Roses
solutive what suffices, make three Pills. He took them early in the Morning,
and had twelve Stools, which gave him great ease. Then again on the third day
he had only four Stools by the same Medicine, though with greater relief to him
than before. He took afterward for many days of a Diuretic and Pectoral
Apozeme six Ounces: And Lastly, the same Purge being repeated, he grew
perfectly ivell.

SECT. 2. Of Medicines regarding the Region of the Belly.
CHAP. I. Instructions and Prescripts for the Cure of the Jaundise.
AS to the method of Curing this Disease, there are three Primary Indications,
all which (since we are in a manner always at a loss which of them is the
chiefest, and first to be put in Practice) must be prosecuted together:
Therefore the Intentions of Curing must be. First, That the obstructions of the
Ductus's must be opened, if happily there are any either in the Porus Biliarius,
or Meatus Cysticus, or elsewhere about the Liver, or Vessels that convey the
Choler. Secondly, That the Blood be reduced to its due temper and Crasis, lest
it engender Choler in too great a plenty, or render it unapt for separation.
Thirdly, That the strength be upheld, and that the Symptoms chiefly prejucicing
it be provided against.

1. To satisfy the First Incication, Cathartick evacuations both by Vomit and
Seige are greatly conducing, with which the descent of the Choler toward the
Intestines is Irritated, and the obstructed Vessels being by this means
mightily agitated, are freed from their stoppages. Secondly, We must give
Medicines that are smart, bitter, and salt, and others endowed with a certain
instigating virtue, which may sharply stir up the motion of the Gall gathered
together in the Liver, and there stagnating. In this place also we must range
such Medicines as are thought to be good against the Jaundise by a similitude
of substance, and as it were by a Signature; viz. as being endowed with a
yellow Juice, though many of these because they move Urine or Sweat, may aptly
enough be placed in the same rank with the former, viz. amongst evacuative
Medicines.

The Second Indication requires altering Medicines altogether, viz. such as may
depress the exaltations or wild efforts of the Sulphur and fixed Salt, and help
to the restitution of the Volatile Salt which was depressed before: For these
purposes Medicines containing an Acid or Volatile Salt, and likewise Chalybeats
will do excellently well: Hence Spirit of Salt, of Vitriol, Juice of Limons;
also Spirit of Hartshorn, and Sheeps dung, Goose dung, Crocus Martis, and other
preparations of it of diverse kinds, are often prescribed in the Jaundise with
good success.

The Third Incication being for the support of the strength, and for removing
Symptoms that prejudice it, suggests to us many and diversifyed manners of
Curing; but to avoid tediousness, I shall only set down certain general Rules
concerning Diet, and some Cordial and Anodine Remedies peculiarly proper in
this case.

The Therapeutick Indications being thus laid before you, it remains for us now
to adjust Select Medicines, viz. both simple and compound to each of those
Intentions before proposed, and to explicate the manners and ways of operating
of those Remedies which are accounted of most note in this Disesse: First
therefore we shall set before you the Forms of Evacuating Medicines
appropriated to the Jaundise.

1. Vomits.
EMetick Medicines most commonly are of good effect in a new Jaundise, whilst
the tone and strength of the Viscera hold good; forasmuch as they both ease the
Ventricle of its offensive load of viscous Phlegm, with which its in a manner
always oppressed in this Disease, and likewise by irritating the Vessels which
convey the Choler, and strongly shaking the Ductus's of the Liver, they clear
them of their stoppages, and bring the Choler to pass by the ways it formerly
was wont.

Take of the Infusion of Crocus Metallorum, from half an Ounce to six Drams,
Vinegar of Squills an Ounce, Oxymel simple half an Ounce: Make a Vomit to be
taken with governance.

Sometimes it is proper to give the Evening before the following Mixtrue, as a
preparation to facilitate the Vomiting.

Take Powder of the Roots of Asarabacca, Faecula of Aron Roots, of each a
Scruple, Tartar vitriolated half a Scruple, Oxymel simple an Ounce: Mix them.

Take Sulphur of Antimony seven Grains, Scammony sulphurated eight Grains,
Cream of Tartar half a Scruple: Make a Powder, give it in a spoonful of Panada.

Take Nine Leaves of Asarabacca; being sliced and bruised, pour to them of
Whitewine three Ounces, press forth the Juice, give it in the Morning with
governance.

Take Cambogia prepared eight Grains, Tartar vitriolated seven Grains: Make a
Powder.

Catharticks.
PUrging Medicines have place in this Disease, whether it be new or inveterate,
viz. both that the plentiful supply of Excrements, be now and then cleared from
the first passages, and that the Vessels that convey the Choler be stirred up
to excretion.

Take Electuary of the Juice of Roses three Drams, Rhubarb a Dram, Salt of
Wormwood, Cream of Tartar, of each half a Scruple, Syrup of Rhubarb what
suffices: Make a Bolus.

Take Roots of sharp pointed Dock prepared an Ounce, tops of Sea Wormwood, and
of the lesser Centory, of each two pugils, Roots of Gentian and Turmerick, of
each two Drams, yellow Saunders a Dram; boil them in a pound and a half of
fountain water to a pound; toward the end, add of the best Sena six Drams, of
the best Rhubarb three Drams, Agarick a Dram and a half, Coriander-seeds two
Drams, Whitewine two Ounces, let them boil close covered for two hours, then
strain it, and let it settle till it be clear: The Dose is from four Ounces to
six, with Syrup of Rhubarb an Ounce, water of Earthworms three Drams: Make a
Potion to be taken for three or four days together, or every other day.

In a weaker Constitution.
TAke Choice Rhubarb two Drams, Agarick Trochiscated half a Dram, Cinnamon half
a Scruple, Ginger half a Scruple: Make an Infusion in Whitewine and Succory
water, of each three Ounces, being close covered and kept warm for three hours:
In the straining dissolve Syrup of Rhubarb an Ounce, water of Earthworms two
Drams.

Take Rhubarb powdered, from half a Dram to a Dram, Salt of Wormwood a Scruple:
Make a Powder,

Take Pilulae Ruffi a Scruple, Extractum Rudii half a Scruple: Make four Pills,
let them be taken in the Morning with governance, repeating them within four or
five days.

In the Third place follow Deopilatives, and these are Diuretics, or
Diaphoreticks, of which also some are accounted Specificks for their Similitude
of substance; these sorts of Medicines both promote the separation of the
Choler from the Blood, and being separated, force its way through the straitest
passages and Pores in the Liver: Moreover at the same time by fusing the Blood,
they cause its Serosities and Bilous Excrements to be sent forth in some
measure by Sweat and Urine.

Take Elixir Proprietatis an Ounce, give twenty drops in the Morning, and at
five in the Afternoon with a fit Vehicle: After the same manner, the Tincture
of Antimony, or of Salt of Tartar are often given with success; also Mixtura
Simplex in a greater Dose. For Vehicles also for the same Intention of Curing,
Apozemes, distilled waters and Julapes are proper.

Take Roots of the greater Celandine, stinging Nettles, Madder, of each an
Ounce, tops of Sea Wormwood, white Horehound dried, Agrimony, Germander, of
each a handful, Worm-seeds two Drams, shavings of Ivory and Hartshorn, of each
two Drams, yellow Saunders a Dram and a half, Coriander-seeds two Drams; boil
them in three pounds of fountain water to two pounds, add of Whitewine four
Ounces, and strain it, add Syrup of Cichory with Rhubarb two Ounces, Water of
Earthworms an Ounce and a half: Make an Apozeme, the Dose is from four Ounces
to six twice a day.

Take Leaves of white Horehound dried, of the lesser Centory, of each a
handful, Roots of Gentian and Turmerick, of each three Drams, Cinnamon a Dram,
Saffron half a Dram, being sliced, let them be put into a Glass with White or
Rhenish Wine two pounds: Make a close Infusion, the Dose is three Ounces.

To this place belongs the famous Anti-Icterick of Gesner.

Take Roots of the greater Nettle a pound, Saffron a Scruple: Bruise them well,
and extract a Tincture with Whitewine, the Dose is three Ounces in the Morning
for four or five days.

Like to the former is that of Fr. Joel. Take Roots of the greater Celandine
sliced two handfuls, Juniper Berries a handful, being bruised, pour to them of
Rhenish Wine a pound, and extract the Juice: The Dose is four Ounces twice a
day.

The Juice of white Horehound is mightily commended by Dioscorides for the Cure
of the Jaundise, and its Syrup by Forestus.

Instead of the Elixir and other Chemical Liquors which are ordered to be taken
in a very small quantity to avoid nauseousness: You may give more successfully
Electuaries, Powders, and Pills to others of a strong Constitution.

Take Conserve of Sea Wormwood, the outward yellow Coats of Oranges and Limons,
of each two Ounces, Species Diacurcumae an Ounce and a half, Powder of Ivory,
yellow Saunders, the Lignum Aloes, of each half a Dram, Troches of Capers a
Dram, Troches of Rhubarb half a Dram, Salt of Wormwood two Drams, with a
sufficient quantity of Syrup of Cichory with Rhubarb, make an Electuary; the
Dose is the quantity of a Chestnut twice a day, drinking after it of the
following Julape three Ounces.

Take Waters of the greater Celandine, Fumitory, Wormwood simple, and of Elder
Flowers, of each five Ounces, Magisterial water of Snails, Water of Earthworms
Compound, of each two Ounces, Sugar half an Ounce: Mix them, make a Julape. Or,

Take Roots of the greater Nettle, Angelica, Gentian, of each four Ounces, the
greater Celandine entire six handfuls, Wormwood, Tansie, both Southernwoods, of
each four handfuls, the outward Coats of twelve Oranges, and of four Limons,
Earthworms prepared, Snails, of each a pound, Cloves bruised two Ounces, being
sliced and bruised, pour to them of Whitewine eight pounds, distill it with
common Organs: Let the whole Liquor be mixed. Or,

Take Filings of Steel a pound, fresh Strawberries six pounds, put them in a
glazed Pot and stir them together, and let them stand for a day, then add of
the Roots of English Rhubarb sliced a pound, the Rinds of four Oranges, being
sliced, pour to them of Whitewine six pounds, and distill them according to art:
Let the whole Liquor be mixed: The Dose of this and the former is three Ounces
twice a day after the Electuary, or other Medicine.

Take Powder of the Roots of Turmerick and Rhubarb, of each a Dram and a half,
Rinds of Caper Roots, Asarum Roots, of each half a Dram, Extract of Gentian and
Centory, of each a Dram and a half, Salt of Wormwood four Scruples, Seeds of
Watercresses half a Dram, of Rocket half a Scruple, Elixir Proprietatis a
Dram, Gum Ammoniacum dissolved in a sufficient quantity of Water of
Earthworms: Make a Mass, Form it into little Pills, the Dose is half a Dram
Evenings and Mornings, drinking after it of the distilled Water three Ounces.

Sylvius highly commends for the Cure of the Jaundise a Decoction of Hemp-seeds
in Milk, and a Solution of Soap.

The Second Indication having regard to the altering, or due tempering of the
Blood, that it engender Choler only in a moderate quantity, and duly separate
it, requires those kinds of Medicines which depress the Sulphur and fixed Salt
when too much exalted: For these ends, I know not by what chance or guidance
Medicines endowed with a Volatile Salt, as Earthworms, Snails, Millepedes, nay
Lice, the Dungs of Fourfooted Beasts, and of Fowl, being introduced into
Practice for Curing the Jaundise, are usually given not only by Empyricks, but
likewise prescribed by Physicians of the best account: These sometimes by
themselves, but oftener joined with Evacuatives and Deopilatives enter the chief
compositions of Anti-ictericks.

Fonseca prescribes Goslings Dung gathered in the Spring time and dried, and
also the white Dung of Chickens; the Powder of both which is given from half a
Dram to a Dram, in a fit Vehicle.

Take Powder of Earthworms prepared, Goose dung, of each three Drams, Ivory,
yellow Saunders powdered, of each half a Dram, Saffron a Scruple: Make a Powder,
divide it into six parts for so many Morning Doses, with some Liquor fit for
the purpose.

To the Anti-icterick Apozem and Tincture above prescribed, Earthworms; also
Goose-dung, and Sheeps-dung, are usefully added.

Take of fresh and live Millepedes, in number from fifty to a hundred, Saffron
half a Scruple, Nutmegs a Scruple, being bruised together, pour to them of
Celandine water four Ounces, water of Earthworms two Ounces, wring it forth
hard, and drink it: After this manner let it be taken first once, afterward
twice a day for a Week.

Its a vulgar and Empirical Remedy with our Country men to take Nine Lice alive
in the Morning for five or six days, by which Remedy I have heard that many
have been Cured when other things did no good; which certainly can give relief
no other way but by restoring the Volatile Salt, which was depressed in the
Blood.

On the account of the same way of Curing, the Flowers of Sal Armoniack, the
Volatile Salts of Amber, Hartshorn, and Soot, and likewise their Spirits are
often given with great success in this Disease.

Take Powder of Earthworms prepared two Drams, Species Diacurcumae a Dram,
Flowers of Sal Armoniack half a Dram, Salt of Amber a Scruple, Extract of
Gentian a Dram, Saffron a Scruple, Gum Ammoniacum dissolved in water of
Earthworms what suffices: Make a Mass, Form it into small Pills; the Dose is
three or four Morning and Evening, drinking after it of the Julape before
written three Ounces.

Take Spirit of Hartshorn tinged with Saffron three Drams: The Dose is from
fifteen drops to twenty, with the distilled water above mentioned.

In this rank of Medicines with which the Blood distempered with the Jaundise
is intended to be corrected, Chalybeats also justly claim a place; for these
give a considerable relief in the Jaundise, as well as in other Cachectical
Distempers, not so much by opening the obstructions of the Viscera, as by
depressing the exaltations of the Sulphur and fixed Salt, and by volatilizing
the Blood.

Therefore to the Decoction, Tincture, or Infusion above written, the Filings
of Iron, or its Powder prepared (its Mineral Texture being some way loosened)
or its Vitriolick Salt extracted, may be properly added; for hence it is that
our Mineral waters sometimes cure even to a Miracle such as are quite given
over in the Jaundise: Though these waters when drank in a very large quantity,
passing through all the Vessels, open also all the Ductus's of the Liver, be
they never so much shut up.

Therefore also to the Electuaries, Pills and Powders before expressed,
preparations of Steel, sometimes of one sort, and sometimes of another, may
likewise be added in a fit proportion: Moreover, you may give to the quantity
of a spoonful of its Syrup twice a day in three Ounces of the Anti-icterick
Apozeme or distilled water; also the Tincture of Steel to twelve or fifteen
drops may be given after the same manner with good effect.

Lastly, in this rank of altering Medicines, we ought to place those which are
said to Cure this Disease, not as inwardly taken, but outwardly applied either
by the touch, or being put into the Urine of persons troubled with the Jaundise.

As to the First, its a common Remedy with the vulgar to take a Tench, and
apply it to the right Hypochondre, or to the Ventricle as some will have it, or
according to others, to the Soles of the Feet of the Person that has the
Jaundise, whence they expect the Disease to vanish in a short time; though many
promise a certain Cure by this means, yet it did not succeed with me, having
sometimes tried it.

The other Cure of the Jaundise at a distance, is said to be done by I know not
what Sympathy, or secret manner of working.

Take the fresh Urine of the Patient made at one time, ashes of the Ash-tree
searced what suffices: Mix them, and make it into a Paste, and form it into
three Balls of an equal bigness, and put them in a close place near the Fire,
or a Stove; when these Balls grow dry and hard, the Jaundise vanishes: After
this manner I have known this Disease successfully Cured when it was grown
inveterate, and would not yield to other Remedies; this is a familiar practice
with the vulgar.

The reason of this Operation is, that when the Lixivial Salt in the ashes is
mixed in the Urine, it presently sets free the Volatile Salt, which before was
kept under in it, or entangled with other Particles, and at the same time that
this is done in the Icterical Urine, it happens by Sympathy that the Volatile
Salt also in the Blood of the Patient gets free from the Dominion of the fixed
Salt and Sulphur, and consequently the Icterical Dyscrasy of the Blood
vanishes: And thus Phil. Grulingius and Felix Platerus tell us that Making
Water on warm Horsedung has Cured many Persons troubled with the Jaundise, viz.
inasmuch as the fixed Salt of the Urine, and consequently of the Blood of the
Patient is altered by the Volatile Salt of the fresh Horsedung, and is reduced
to its due temperature.

The Third and Vital Indication orders a fit Diet, and likewise prescribes
Cordials and Anodines, both which are often wanted.

As to what concerns the First, the Diet in this Disease is wont to be more
Physical than in any other whatsoever: For Vegetables, and their parts,
vulgarly called Hepatick Remedies, are boiled in the Broaths of persons
troubled with the Jaundise; their Broaths also are usually made of Worms and
Snails (being accounted the Antidotes of the Jaundise) instead of other Flesh:
Moreover their Ale and other ordinary Drinks are Impregnated with an Infusion
of Physical things.

Take Roots of the greater Nettle, and of Strawberries, of each an Ounce and a
half, Candied Eringo Roots an Ounce, shavings of Ivory and Hartshorn, of each
two Drams, Earthworms cleans'd, in number twenty, a Crust of White-bread, Mace
two Drams; boil all in two pounds of fountain water to a pound: Strain it
through Hippocrates Sleeve, add to it Species of Diatrion Santalon half a Dram:
Make a Broth, of which take from four Ounces to six twice a Day. For ordinary
drink fill a little Vessel of four Gallons with Ale, into which after it has
wrought, put the following bag.

Take Tops of Sea Wormwood, and white Horehound dried, of each two handfuls,
Roots of sharp pointed Dock dried six Ounces, Bark of the Ashtree, and of the
Barbery-tree, of each three Ounces, the outward Rinds of eight Oranges, and of
four Limons, being sliced and bruised, let them be prepared according to art.

Many Persons in the Jaundise being troubled with a great weakness and frequent
faintings, stand in need also of Cordial Remedies.

Take small Aqua Mirabilis eight Ounces, Earthworms four Ounces, Syrup of
Orange Pills two Ounces: Mix them, the Dose is two or three Ounces.

Moreover there are some who in this Disease are found subject now and then to
very troublesome pains, chiefly tormenting them by Night, and who are often
molested with want of sleep; wherefore Anodines also must here come in use.

Take Aqua Mirabilis, water of Earthworms, of each an Ounce, Diacodium six
Ounces, Tincture of Saffron half an Ounce: Mix them, the Dose is a spoonful or
two late at Night when there is want of sleep.

Take Laudanum tartariz'd two Drams, Aqua Mirabilis two Ounces, Syrup of Clove
Gilly-flowers an Ounce: Mix them, the Dose is a spoonful after the same manner.

CHAP. II. Instructions and Prescripts for other Distempers of the Liver.
THe Liver often uses to be faulty, especially in one of these two things, viz.
either intercepting the Nutritive Juice appointed for other parts, it applies
it to its proper use, as its generally seen in Children troubled with the
Rickets, and in many others leading a sloathful and idle Life: Or Secondly, it
too easily receives into its most inward Recesses, the filthiness of the
depraved Blood, and all dreggy Excrements coming in its way, and retaining them
does not only grow large, but is obstructed in its Ductus's, whence oftentimes
proceeds a Jaundise, or Dropsy, and tumors, and preternatural Concretions of
diverse kinds.

Therefore we must take care of these two things, viz. lest the Liver by taking
to it self too much of the Nutritive Juice, grow to too great a Bulk, and lest
by retaining the filthy dregs of the Blood, it be troubled with obstructions,
and preternatural tumors.

Both these faults are much more easily prevented than Cured: For the former is
effected only by taking care that the Blood being well constituted in its
Crasis, and enjoying a free Circulation, both distributes the Nutritive Juice
to the parts, and especially the outmost, and driving all its Excrements to all
their respective Emunctories deposes them there: And indeed the Hepatick
Medicines (vulgarly so called, though they regard the other Viscera as well as
the Liver) do first and more immediately exert their virtue by purifying the
Blood, rather than by correcting the Liver, or other entrals; for entering the
Blood, and being immiscible with it, they so thoroughly exagitate it, that they
make it discharge all its superfluities by their proper Emissaries; and if any
Medicines are found by some specific virtue, to have respect to one part more
than to another, its because their Particles being more allied, and
consequently associated to the Recrements to be separated within that entral,
are carried thither together with them: For this reason Rhubarb, Turmerick, the
greater Celandine, and many other things allied to the Gall, readily pass to
its Ductus's, and are wont to do good in the Jaundise: We have before set forth
the Energies and ways of operating of these Medicines: As to other Hepaticks
commonly so called, we shall briefly set down certain Forms, First of those
which are said to prevent or remove the Non-natural accretion of the Liver, and
then of those which do the like, in respect of its obstructions, and
preternatural tumors.

1. Against the too great accretion, or disproportionate nourishment of the
Liver: First, a spare and thin Diet, short Sleep, and frequent and moderate
Exercises are proper. Wherefore if at any time Infants and Children are found
obnoxious to this affect, as likewise to the Rickets, we order that they suck
thin and serous Milk, that they are daily tossed in their Nurses Arms, and
carried from one place to another with a swift motion, or that they are put in
a Chariot, or in a Chair, and swiftly driven to and fro, and that they learn to
use their feet as soon as may be, and go about.

Take the Waters of Snails and Earthworms, of each three Ounces, Syrup of
Cichory with Rhubarb two Ounces, Spirit of Sal Armoniack with Gum Ammoniacum a
Scruple: Mix them, take a spoonful at Night, and early in the Morning.

Take Roots of Male Fern, Chervil, Candied Eringo's, of each an Ounce, Leaves
of Agrimony, Hearts Tongue, Male Speedwel, of each a handful, shavings of Ivory
and Hartshorn, of each two Drams, white and yellow Saunders, of each a Dram,
Raisms stoned an Ounce and a half, Barley three Drams: Boil them in three pounds
of fountain water to two pounds; to the straining add the waters of Snails and
Earthworms, of each an Ounce and a half, Syrup of Cichory two Ounces: Make an
Apozeme, take to two or three Ounces in a day.

Take Powder of white and yellow Saunders, Crabs Eyes, Lignum Aloes, of each
half a Dram, Salt of Wormwood a Scruple: Make a Powder, the Dose is from half a
Scruple, to a Scruple twice a day.

Take Emplastrum Diasaponis, Ceratum Santalinum, of each what suffices: Make a
Plaster to be applied to the right Hypochondre.

Take Vnguentum Splanchnicum two Ounces, Oil of Wormwood an Ounce: Mix them,
make a Liniment for the Region of the Liver.

The Remedies for most other Diseases of the Liver, are either Simple or
Compound: Amongst those of the former kind, are usually reckoned all Cichories,
Sorrels, sharp-pointed Docks, and in a manner all Vegetables which have a sort
of bitterness joined with somewhat of a smartness (in which the Deopilative
virtue is said to consist) as Wormwood, Germander, Ground Pine, Fumitory,
Tansie, Agrimony, Liver-wort, Lignum Aloes, all the Saunders, Tamarisk-bark,
Ash-bark, and the Roots of Capers, with many others which make up the greatest
part of Botanicks.

The fixed Salts of Herbs, and the Acid Spirits of Minerals claim a chief place
amongst these, because they mightily agitate the Mass of Blood, dissolve its
Concretions, clear its stoppages, and make it every where permeable in all its
parts.

Its also manifest both by reason and experience, that preparations of Steel
are often proper in Distempers of the Liver, as especially in the Jaundise, and
the Dropsy.

In the Antidotaries of the Ancients, we find a great many Physical
Compositions which seem to be wholly designed for the Liver, as the Electuary e
scoria ferri Rhasis, etc. But passing over these, I shall now give you some
Forms and Examples of Medicines which are accounted Deopilatives, according to
the practice of our times.

Therefore for an Opening Decoction.
TAke Roots of Fern, Chervil, the greater Nettle, Dandelion, of each an Ounce,
Leaves of Agrimony, Hearts Tongue, Speedwel, Oak of Jerusalem, Liver-wort, of
each a handful, white and yellow Saunders, of each three Drams, shavings of
Ivory half an Ounce, Red Cicehs an Ounce, Coriander Seeds three Drams, Raisins
two Ounces: Boil them in four pounds of fountain water, to two pounds, adding
about the end Whitewine four Ounces, strain it through Hippocrates sleeve; to
which put Species Diarrhodon Abbatis a Dram, our prepared Steel two Drams: To
the straining add Syrup of Cichory with Rhubarb two Ounces, waters of Snails
and Earthworms, of each an Ounce: The Dose is six Ounces twice a day, after a
Dose of the following Electuary.

Take Conserve of the yellow Coats of Oranges and Limons, of each two Ounces,
of Wormwood and Fumitory, of each an Ounce, Simple Powder of Aron Roots, Lignum
Aloes, yellow Saunders, and Caper Roots, of each a Dram and a half, Crabs Eyes
a Dram, Salt of Wormwood two Drams, Syrup of Fumitory what suffices: Make an
Electuary, the Dose is the quantity of a Wallnut twice a day, drinking after it
a draught of the Apozeme before written, or of the following distilled water.

Take Leaves of Wormwood, Centory, Tansie, both Southernwoods, Branches of
Tamerisk, of each four handfuls, green Wallnuts four pounds, green Ashen-keys
two pounds, the outward Kinds of ten Oranges, and of four Limons, Snails,
Earthworms prepared, of each a pound; being all sliced, pour to them of
Whitewine eight pounds, distill it with common Organs: Let all the Liquor be
mixed, the Dose is three Ounces, sweeten it with Sugar, or some proper Syrup.

If a Form of Pills be more grateful; the following Ecphractick Extract (as the
Shops call it) seems good.

Take white and clear Tartar, and fresh Filings of Iron, of each four Ounces,
let them be bruised together into a Powder, then boil it in four pounds of
fountain wa^^^ to two pounds, (some use Whitewine) to the straining add tops of
Centory, Sea Wormwood, and Carduus, of each a handful, Gentian Roots half an
Ounce, Species Diacurcumae a Dram and a half; let them boil close covered for
three or four hours, then strain it, and let the straining evaporate by a
gentle Bath heat, to a consistency for Pills, adding if you please, Troches of
Rhubarb, or Species of Hiera Picra two Drams: The Dose is from a Scruple to
half a Dram made into Pills, in the Evening with a fit Vehicle.

For the same intent, viz. to prevent or remove obstructions of the Liver, a
Purging Physic Ale to be taken Spring and Fall for many days, is highly
extolled by some, and diligently used by certain Persons every year during
their Lives.

Take Roots of sharp pointed Dock prepared, and of Polypody of the Oak, of each
three Ounces, Madder two Ounces, English Rhubarb two Ounces, Leaves of Sena
four Ounces, Epithymum two Ounces, yellow Saunders an Ounce, Seeds of Carthamus
and Coriander, of each an Ounce and a half, being sliced and bruised, Make a
Bag according to art for four Gallons of Ale, after six days take to twelve
Ounces more or less in the Morning, by which you may expect four or five
Stools, Sine Regimine.

CHAP. III. Instructions and Prescripts for Curing the Dropsy called Ascites.
THe Dropsy called Ascites, is a tumor of the Belly, caused by a Watery
Humor contained within its Cavity; which Humor probably is the Serum of the
dissolved Blood, distilling forth of the Caeliack and Mesenterick Arteries into
the Cavity of the Abdomen, and especially if it happens, that Scirrhous
Tumors, Glands, little Swellings, or other praeternatural Concretions are
raised about the Mesentery, Liver, Spleen, Womb, or other Viscera of the Belly;
for the Circulation of the Blood being stopped in those places, the Serous part
of it is forced from the rest, and falls into that Cavity, and commonly the
Nutritive Juice goes with it, wherefore when this Region swells, the Members
are usually extenuated.

Nevertheless the Blood is not always dissolved in an Ascites, as it is in an
Anasarca, but is sometimes too compact in its Crasis, yet so that its forced by
reason of the Obstructions of the Viscera, to depose within the Abdomen its
Salt Serum, which it could not evacuate by the Pores of the Skin, and the
Urinary passages.

Its also likely that the Lacteous or Lymphatick Vessels being sometimes broken
or opened, fill the Abdomen with a Mass of Water or Chyle.

I conceive also that this Inundation of the Belly, may sometimes arise from
the Nervous Liquor, distilling gently and insensibly from the Fibers and
Membranes: And likewise from vapors condensed within the Cavity of the Body.

Concerning the Cure of Ascites, we must consider by how many possible ways and
manners, waters gathered together within the Abdomen may be evacuated: And we
find that the Remedies, which according to the ordinary practice of Physic,
are accounted Hydroticks, work that end by Purging, by Evacuation by Urine, by
Sweating, and by insensible transpiration, and with some Persons you must
proceed this way, and with others that, or the other; and if neither of these
seem possible, or succeed well, you must timely think of an Incision. I shall
now consider each of these ways.

First therefore Catharticks seasonably given, often abate the Tumor of an
Ascites, and sometimes wholly take it away; for as much as their Particles
irritating the Ventricle and Intestines, discuss the Contents and Flatus's of
those Viscera, and likewise the humors sticking in their Tunicles and Glands,
and heaped together in the Vessels and Ductus's of their neighboring parts,
and force them partly into to Ductus's of the Intestines, and partly send them
into the Mass of Blood: But it does not succeed thus, if at any time this
Disease proceeds from a Lympha, floating within the Cavity of the Abdomen, or
from an Inflation or Tympanitical extention of the Membranes; because
Hydragogues carry forth little or nothing of those waters, and if they are
strong, exasperate and increase the Flatulent Distemper. Catharticks accounted
Hydragogues, are either Emeticks or Purgers.

1. The Hydragogue Emeticks of chiefest note, are Gum Gutta, Esula or
Cataputia, and diversified preparations of them: Also Hercules Bovii, and
Pilulae Lunares.

2. The Purgers are Elder, and Dwarf Elder, Sea Bindweed, Hedge Hyssop, Juice
of Orris, Elaterium: I shall briefly set down certain Forms and manners of
prescribing, compounding, and giving each of these.

1. Gum Gutta is highly extolled for Purging Serous humors; but in regard
being given by it self, it mightily disturbs the Stomach, and often weakens it,
therefore to repress a little its excessive and violently Emetick force,
various ways are contrived for preparing it; but its best of all corrected with
an Acid Spirit, or with an Alchalisate Salt, or by thoroughly tempering and
compounding it with Aromaticks.

Adrian Mynsicht commends its Magistery, which is made by dissolving it with
Spirit of Wine, and then by drawing it off, and preciptiating it with fountain
water; also by dissolving it with Spirit of Wine Vitriolated, and Tinged with
Roses and red Saunders, and then by evaporating it, others prepare it with the
fume of Sulphur after the manner of Scammony Sulphurated: Others grind it on a
Marble, moistning it with Oil of Cinnamon, or of Cloves, or other Chemical
Aromaticks: I use most its Solution, made with the Tincture of Salt of Tartar:
The Dos of which is from fifteen Drops to twenty or thirty.

Take Gummi Gutta six Grains, Mercurius Dulcis fifteen Grains, Conserve of
Violets a Dram and a half: Mix them, make a Bolus.

Take Gummi Gutta twelve Grains, Salt of Wormwood six Grains, Oil of Mace a
Drop, Conserve of Damask Roses a Dram: Make a Bolus. And its wont to be given
with Tartar Vitriolated, or Cream of Tartar, and powdre of Rhubarb.

Take Gum Gutta sulphurated or vitriolated fifteen Grains, Croam of Tartar half
a Scruple, Extract of Rhubarb a Scruple, Oil of Cinnamon two Drops: Make four
Pills.

A Woman of late being ill of a dangerous Ascites, and as it seemed to me in a
desperated condition; by taking the following Medicines for six days
successively, grew much better, and in a short time after perfectly recovered.

Take Gum Gutta powdered twelve Grains, Oil of Cinnamon a Drop, Syrup of
Buckthorn what suffices: Make a Bolus, let the Dose be increased every day, by
rising from twelve Grains to twenty.

Take of our Tincture of Gum Gutta a Scruple, water of Earthworms an Ounce,
Syrup of Rhubarb half an Ounce: Mix them, give it Cum Regimine.

Though there are various kinds of the Spurges, and all of them work violently
by Vomit or Siege, by reason of their mighty Irritation of the Viscera, and
consequently evacuate Serous humors in a plentiful manner; yet because of the
excessive strength of most of them: The lesser or wild Spurge, is now in a
manner only in use: And its most approved preparations are the Powder of the
Rinds of its Roots, and its Extract; We also add its Tincture, which is not
Inferior to the rest.

Take the lesser Spurge, with the Roots cleans'd four handfuls, Lignum Aloes,
Cloves, of each a Dram; being bruised, boil them in four pounds of fountain
water till half be consum'd' let the straining Clarify by settling in an
oblong Glass, then let the clear Liquor Evaporate by a Bath-heat to the
consistency of an Extract; The Dose is a Scruple.

Take of this Extract half an Ounce, pour to it in a Matras six Ounces of the
Tincture of Salt of Tartar, digest them in a Sand Bath till the Tincture be
Extracted: The Dose is from twenty to thirty Drops, with a fit Vehicle.

Take Powder of the Roots of the lesser Spurge, from seven Grains to ten,
Cinnamon half a Scruple, Salt of Tartar eight Grains; bruise them together in a
Glass Mortar, give it by it self, or with the Addition of some fit Conserve or
Syrup: Make a Bolus or Pills.

3. Praecipitatum Mercurii cum Sole, or Hercules Bovii; For as much as by its
Acrimony, it mightily irritates the Fibers of the Stomach, and fuses the Blood
by reason of its Mercurial and Saline Particles, it raises a violent Vomiting,
and so forces a discharge of the Serous humors, which are violently drawn into
the Cavities of the Viscera.

Pilulae Lunares, in like manner by reason of the Vitriolick Particles of the
Silver, being sharpened with other Saline Menstruums produce the like effect,
viz. by much corrugating the Fibers of the Viscera, they strongly force the
Serous humors into their Ductus's, and causes them to be evacuated.

A Solution of Silver being made in Aqua Stygia, and well purified, is redud'd
by a gentle evaporation into clear Crystals; which by themselves (or with the
addition of Sal Nitre to repress the force of the Lunar Vitriol) are made into
Pills with the Crum of Bread: The Dose is sometimes a single Pill, sometimes
two or three according as they work, and as the strength will bear, these sorts
of Medicines are sometimes given with success in a strong Constitution, and
where the Viscera are sound, and of a good habit; but scarce ever have a good
effect in tender and Cachectical Bodies, and are seldom taken by such persons
without doing them hurt.

Hydragogue Medicines which work merely or chiefly by Seige, are either mild,
as Elder, Dwarf Elder, Sea Bindweed, and the Juice of English Orris, which are
rarely given by themselves, but want to be quickened by such as are smarter,
and for return they qualify the vehemence of the other; or they are strong, as
Hedg-Hyssop, Jalap, and Elaterium.

The Seeds of Elder and Dwarf Elder, being dried and powdered, and taken to a
Dram, gently evacuate Serous humors by Seige; a Water and Spirit are distilled
from the Juice of both their Berries fermented, and Robs and Syrups are made of
it; which with many other preparations of those Vegetables are highly extolled
for all Hydropical Distemper.

Sea Bindweed, and Hedg-Hyssop, are now rarely used by themselves, but often
enter the Compositions of other Hydragogues, and chiefly in Apozemes.

The Juice of English Orris is a good Medicine, and the more to be esteemed
because easy to be had for poor people: Its given from six Drams to an Ounce
and a half, or two Ounces, either by it self in a fit Vehicle, or with other
proper ingredients. Jalap is a well known and vulgar Medicine against all sorts
of Dropsies. Every ordinary Man that has that Disease, presently takes a
Pennyworth of the Powder of Jalap, with a little Ginger in Whitewine; and this
Medicine taken a pretty many times seldom fails of success.

Elaterium is justly accounted a most powerful Hydragogue, in regard that most
powerfully irritating the Fibers of the Viscera, and at the same time fusing
the Blood and humors by a sort of corrosive virtue as it were, it forces
whatsoever Serosities the Tunicles of the Viscera, Membranes, and Vessels; also
those that the Glands and Fleth contain within them, to discharge themselves
into the Cavities of the Stomach and Intestines: Which Medicine working well,
sometimes the swelling of the Belly fall. This indeed is the chief Instrument
of the Empyricks Arsenal against an Ascites, though using it in all cases, they
oftener give if to the prejudice of the Patient, than to his advantage: The Dose
is from three Grains to ten or fifteen. Its taken either by it self, only with
the Addition of Aromatical Correctives, or its given with other Hydragogues in
the Form of a Powder, Pills, or of an Electuary: Its Tincture and Essence are
Extracted with Spirit of Wine, or with Tiacture of Salt of Tartar.

These are the chief simple Hydragogues, of which being duly prepared with the
Addition of other things, diverse sorts of Compounds are made, some common in
Shops, others Magisterially prescribed, and are every where in use, and a great
many more may be ordered ex tempore on occasion. We shall here set down some
few Select Forms of them, and especially such as are taken in the Form of a
Potion, Powder, Electuary and pills.

Take Roots of Dwarf Elder, and English Orris, of each an Ounced and a half,
Leaves of Sea Bindweed, and Hedge Hyssop, of each a handful, Roots of
Asarabacca and wild Cucumbers, of each two Ounces, Roots of the lesser Galingal
six Drams, choice Jalap half an Ounce, Elaterium three Drams, Cubebs two Drams,
being slie'd and bruis;d, pour to them of small Spirit of Wine Tartariz'd three
pounds; let them digest close luted in a sand Furnace for two days, strain off
the clear, which being purified by settling; give from two spoonfuls to three
with a fit Vehicle.

Take Elaterium, Sea Bindweed, Ginger, of each a Scruple, Galingal, Cloves,
Cinnamon, of each half a Scruple, Salt of Tartar fifteen Grains: Make a Powder
for two Doses.

Take Powder of the Roots of the best Jalap a Dram, Giner a Scruple, Cream of
Tartar fifteen Granins: Make a Powder, give it in a draught of Whitewine.

Take Rhubarb powdered a Scruple, Elaterium five Grains, Tartar vitriolated half
a Scruple, Spike three Grains, with Syrup of Buckthorn: Make four Pills.

Take Pilulae Aloephanginae half a Dram, Elaterium half a Scruple, Oil of
Cloves three drops: Make four Pills.

Let the Hydropick Pills of Bontius be given from half a Scruple, to half a
Dram: They are made after this manner.

Take of the best Aloes two Drams and a half, Gummi Gutta prepared, a Dram and
a half, Diagredium corrected a Dram, Gum. Ammoniacum dissolved a Dram and a
half, Tartar vitriolated half a Dram: Make a Mass, and form it into Pills.

Certain Hydragogue Electuaries, are now every where much in use amongst
Practitioners; and especially one given us by tie famous Sylvius, and another
by Zwelfer. This that follows likes us well.

Take Rosin of Jalap two Drams, Tartar vitriolated a Dram, Extract of Rhubarb
two Drams, of Esula a Drm and a half, Roots of the lesser Galingal a Dram,
bruise them very well: And lastly add Conserve of English Orris Flowers four
Ounces; and with a sufficient quantity of Syrup of Peach Rlowers Make an
Electuary, the Dose is from half a Dram, to a Dram and a half, or two Drams.

I might here give you many other Purging Hydragogues, but Catharticks do not
always Cure the Ascites, nay they often make it worse, and (if you insist too
long upon them) render it Incurable. Therefore now let us enquire whether
Diuretics will do good in this case or not.

And truly any Man might easily be induced to believe that Medicines provoking
Urine, contribute very much toward the Evacuation of Waters from any part or
Cavity of the Body: In reality its manifest by frequent experiments, that they
often Cure the Anasarca, and give relief in it before all other Remedies: Let
us see therefore what they can do for draining the Cavity of the Abdomen.

As to this, its manifest in the first place, that there is no immediate
passage open from the Ascitical Mass of Waters to the Reins, how near soever
they lie to them; but whatsoever waters are conveyed from that Mass to the
Reins, must of necessity be first of all drank up again into the Blood, and be
thence discharged into that receptacle of the Urine: Now little is it that the
small Mouths of the Veins (if happily any of them are open) can receive? And this
is that only thing which Diuretics are able to perforem viz. By fusing the
Blood, and driving its Serosities to the Reins in a plentiful manner, to make
it draw to it self, being so drein'd, the Waters floating in the Belly. In the
mean time there is no less danger lest Diuretics unseasonably given, whilst
they fuse the Blood too much, drive the Serum, which is forced to part from it,
into the watery Mass of the Ascites, more than into the Reins, and so rather to
increase than remove that deluge of the Belly. And truly I have frequently
observed that this sometimes happens; and it is for this reason tha the Ancients
always mixed Astringents and Corroboratives in their Medicines for the Dropsy,
not that such (as is vulgarly said) strengthen the tone of the Liver, but
preserve the Crasis or Mixture of the Blood from being wholly dissolved by too
much fusion. Therefore in an Ascites which happens chiefly, or in part, by
reason that the Serous humor stuffs and mightily swells the Compages of the
Viscera and Vessels, and especially the Tunicles, Glands and Fibers themselves,
and the spaces betwixt them; even as Cathartieks are proper, so are also
Diuretics, and are often taken with success, for as much as by the use of
these, the Mass of Blood is drein'd (the Serum being derived to the Reins in a
plentiful manner) and readily receives into it self those waters every where
stagnating about the Mouths of the Vessels, and conveys them to the Urinary
Common-shore: But on the contrary in a true Ascites where the Textures of the
Viscera being free from such stuffings with Serum, the filthy Mass of Waters
fills the Cavity of the Belly, Diuretics are given either to no purpose, or
with prejudice, because they fetch out nothing of the water stagnating in the
Belly, and very often by fusing the Blood, drive the waters more violently
thither, being apt to distill into it of their own accord.

In an Ascites all Diuretics of every kind are not equally proper, nor ought
to be indifferently give; for it is to be observed, that Persons troubled with
this Disease make little Urine, which is also reddish, and resembling as it
were a Lixivium; which is a sign that the Crasis of their Blood is so close
bound by reason of the fixed Salt and Sulphur being exalted and combined
together in it; and consequently that its Serum is not duly separted within the
Reins, which nevertheless is thrown off in the Involutions of the Obstructed
Viscera, and so is deposed in the Cavity of the Belly. Wherefore in this case
we must give only those things to move Urine, which so restore and corredct the
Constitution of the Blood, that the Irregularities of the fixed Salt and Sulphur
being taken away, the Serous part may be separated within the Reins, and sent
forth in a more plentiful manner: For which end not Acid or Lixivial things,
but such as are endowed with a Volatile Salt are proper; for I have often
observed in such Patients, that when Spirit of Salt, and other Acid distilled
Liquors of Minerals, and when the Deliqia or Solutions of Salt of Tartar, of
Broom, and of other things have rather done hurt than good; the Juice of
Plantain, of Brooklimes, and of other Herbs abounding with a Volatile Salt;
also the expressions of Millepedes have given relief: For the same reason Sal
Nitre thoroughly purified, or Crystal Mineral has often a mighty good effect.
You may find Forms of Medicines proper for this use in our preceding Tract,
where we have set down Examples of Diuretics, in which both Volatile and
Nitrous Salts are the Basis: Moreover to this place belongs that notable
Experiment with which Johannes Anglus says he often Cured an Ascites from a hot
Cause, which Medicine also the most experienced Physician Dr. Theodore Mayern
usually prescribed in the like Case, and was wont to extol. It is as follows.

Take Juice of Plantain and Liverwort, and fill an earthen Pot with it to the
Brim, then stop it very close, and put it in a hot Oven as soon as the Bread is
drawn, and make a gentle Fire round the sides of the Pot to continue the heat
of the Oven; after it is boild strain the Liquor, and being sweetened with
Sugar, let it be drank Mornings and Evenings, and it Cures.

In Imitation of this, I have often prescribed with success after the following
manner:

Take green Plantain Leaves four handfuls, Liverwort and Brooklimes, of each
two handfuls, being bruised together, pour to them of small Compound Raddish
water, or of some other Magisterial water half a pound, wring it forth hard:
The Dose is three Ounces thrice a day.

Diaphoreticks, though most efficacious in an Anasarca, yet are of little or no
use in an Ascites; for being unseasonably given, they often cause a great
prejudice to the Patient, without doing him the least good, because by heating
the Blood they make the waters floating in the Cavity of the Belly, to grow
fervid, and to boil as it were, so that the Spirits and Humors are mightily
troubled by the Vapors thence raised, and so a disorder of all the functions
follows, and the Viscera themselves being sodden as it were, are very much
injur': Moreover when a Sweat is thus unduly raised, the Blood being forced to
a fusion and precipitation of Serum, discharges more yet into the watery Mass
of the Ascites; therefore when some prescribe Fomentations and Liniments to be
applied to the swollen Paunch, and order Bathing, for the most part it falls
out for the worse to the Patients; for besides Feverishness, a Headache,
Vertigo, faintings of the Spirits, and other ill Symptoms of the Heart and
Brain, most frequently caused by such means, the Belly also swells the more by
it, because the Blood being agitated and dissolved, deposes the Serum there in
a larger measure: Nay, and the Mouths of the Vessels are thereby made more
loose and open, so that they distill forth waters faster, they being now
disposed to part from the Mass of Blood. The Remedies which are wont to be
Administered with most success, when we will not proceed to an Incision, are
Glisters and Plasters.

The former draw the Serum out of the Vessels and Glands of the Intestines, and
Mesentery, without fusing the whole Mass of Blood (which strong Catharticks
will do) which being so emptyed, receive into them some of the extravasted
Lympha; For this end the following Glister usually prescribed by us in the like
case is mighty proper; in regard at the same time it irritates the Fibers of
the Intestines, and draws the Serum imbibed by the Blood, or before contained
in it, to the Reins.

Take Urine of a sound Man that drinks Wine one pound, Venice Turpentine
dissolved with the Yolk of an Egg, an Ounce and a half, Sal Prunella a Dram and
a half: Make a Glister, repeat it daily.

Plasters sometimes do good in an Ascites, but let them be such as strengthen
the Viscera by some restringent and comforting virtue, and help to close the
Mouths of the Vessels, that they do not dicharge the Serosities in too great a
plenty: For this end I usually apply Emplastrum Diasaponis to the swollen Belly
with good success. Or,

Take Emplastrum de minio, and Paracelsi, of each what suffices: Make a
Plaster to be applied to the Belly. If at any time this Disease be complicated
with a Tympany, other sorts of Epithems are proper, as we shall decalre
hereafter.

The great and most present Remedy for an Ascites, is to make an Inision, and
draw forth the water, tho this practice as often Kills the Patient, as Cures
the Disease; wherefore there is need of great caution in what Persons, and in
what time of the Disease this ought to be attempted: In Cachectical Persons,
and such as have been long ill, in whom the Conformation and temperament of the
Viscera are generally vitiated, it cannot prove of any good effect to let forth
the waters by piercing of the Belly; for presently upon it the Spirits faint,
the strength is dissolved, nay and a fresh inundation of the Morbifick humor
soon succeeds it: But those who before having a good constitution of the
Viscera, and being sound enough as to all other parts, fall into an Ascites
upon some great evident cause, as they need not presently at first attenmpt an
Incision, so they ought not to defer it long if it be judged requisite. For
upon a long delay the Viscera which are immerg'd in the waters, and as it were
sodden in them, become incorrigibly vitiated.

Its besides my purpose to describe here the Administration of this Incision,
whether it be performed the ordinary way, or according to the way of Sylvius,
with a Perforated Needle. As physicians seldom prescribe this operation, they
looking upon it as dangerous, so Quacks and Empiricks never consulting them,
attempt it very often inconsierately and uprosperously. For conclusion, I shall
here give you a relation of a true and terrible Ascites lately Cured without an
Incision.

A young Woman tall and slender, an Merchants Wife, giving Suck to her Child,
drank both by day and by night to increase her Mild, an immoderate quantity of
Ale, sometimes plain, and sometimes made into Posset Drink; after having used
this ill way of Diet for six Weeks, she feel suddenly into a cruel Ascites, the
beginnings of which she never had minded; for her Abdomen being full of waters
floatig within it, swelled mightily, and its Bulk when she turned her self,
from one side to the other, fell without the Ilia, and the borders of the rest
of her Body; in the mean time the Flesh of all her Members was mightily
consumed, and she seemed not less Consumptive than Hydropical.

The Child being weaned, and better Diet ordered, she entered upon Physic, and
in the first place took gently Hydragogues both Purging by Siege and Urine, but
without any benefit, nay after all Purging she was worse: Afterward being
Committed to our care, and almost in a desperate condition, I proceeded with
her after the following method.

Having wholly forbidden her the use of Ale, and all other drinks but what were
Physical, I prescribed these things.

Take Leaves of Plantain, Brooklimes, Clivers, of each four handfuls, being
bruised together, pour to them water of Earthworms, and Radish-water Compound,
of each three Ounces, wring ti forth; she took it twice a day, viz. at eight of
the Clock in the Morning, and at five in the Afternoon, she continued the use
of this Medicine a long time, but altered now and then the Composition,
changing sometimes the Herbs, sometimes the Liquor to be poured to them.

Take of the reddest Tincture of Salt of Tartar an Ounce and a half; she took
twenty Drops going to Bed, and early in the Morning in two spoonfuls of the
following Julape, drinking after it seven spoonfuls.

Take of the reddest Tincture of Salt of Tartar an Ounce an da half; she took
twenty Drops going to Bed, and early in the Morning in two spoonfuls of the
following Julape, drinking after it seven spoonfuls.

Take water of the Flowers of Elder, and of Saxifrage, of each six Ounces, the
waters of Snails, Earthworms, and Radish Compound, of each two Ounces.

On her Belly she wore a Plaster made of Empl. de Minio, and Oxycroceo.

The following Glyster was given her first every day, afterward every other or
third day.

Take Urine of a sound Man a pound, Turpentine dissolved with the Yolk of an
Egg an Ounce and a half, Sugar an Ounce, Sal Prunella a Dram: Make a Glister.

By the constant use of these things, in six Weeks time the swelling of her
Belly came down, but her flesh daily falling away, a Consumption was feared:
Wherefore to prevent it, she went into the Country and drank Asses Milk, and by
the benefit of this nourishment and of the fresh Air, taking continually the
above mentioned Medicines, she recovered perfectly within three Weeks or a
Month, and lives still, and is in good health.

CHAP. IV. Instructions and Prescripts for Curing the Tympany.
A Tympany may be thus defined, or at least described, viz. that it is a fixed
and continued tumor of the Abdomen, equal, hard, stiff, yielding a sound upon
striking, taking its rise from a sort of Convulsive Inflation of the Membranous
Parts and Viscera, by reason of the Animal Spirits being driven into those
Fibers in too great a plenty, and there hindered from a Recess, through the
fault of the Nervous Juice obstructing it: To which affect a gathering of Winds
in the empty places is consequently added for completing it.

That we may have timely notice of its beginning, we must understand that there
are some previous affects which dispose to it, as especially a Hypochondriack,
Colic, Hysteric, and sometimes an Asthmatick disposition: And if after
frequent returns of Fits in any of these Distempers, a tumor of the Abdomen
follows, though never so small at first, a Tympany is presently to be feared.

A Tympany seldom kills of it self, but after it has continued a long time, to
make more sure work, it joins to it self at length an Ascites as a forerunner
of death.

In order to the Cure of a Tympany, as in most other Diseases, there are three
primary Indications, whereof the first and always the most pressing being
Curatory, endeavors to remove the tumor of the Abdomen, by recalling the
Animal Spirits from that Convulsive extention, and reducing them to order: The
Second being preservatory, keeps those Spirits or others from inordinate
excursions into the Nervous Fibers of the Belly, and at the same time corrects
the faults of the Nervous Liquor accompanying them, as to its Crasis or Motion:
The Third is Vital, and by removing the Symptoms that are most pressing,
relives and upholds as much as may be all the functions that are oppressed or
weakened.

The First Indication is always of chiefest moment, the whole stress of the
Cure consisting in it, but its very difficult to be performed: For it does not
readily occur to us with what remedies or ways of Administration it ought to be
attempted. Bleeding has no place here, but in a manner always is shunned as
hurtful; also Catharticks for as much as they irritate the affected Fibers, and
trouble the Spirits, and drive them more violently into those Fibers, do rather
increase than diminish, or Cure the tumor of the Belly: So likewise
Diaphoreticks force the Spirits together with the Morbifick Particles deeper
into those Fibers, from which they ought to be summoned forth and withdrawn.
The chief means of Cure seems to be placed in the use of Diuretics and
Glisters; and great things are likewise expected from Topics, because they are
applied more immediately, and by contact to the Disease it self, and because we
see they excellently dissolve or discuss tumors in other places; but all
dissolvents are not proper here, even though in other tumors they are very
Medicinable: For those that are hot, being accounted discussors, most commonly
rather do hurt than good in a Tympany, whether they are used as a Fomentation,
or Liniment, or applied in the Form of a Cataplasme or Plaster: For they both
open and dilate the Ductus's of the Fibers, so that they lie more open to the
Inroads of the Spirits; and at the same time rarify the Particles sticking in
them, so that they coming to occupy a greater space, the Inflation and Swelling
of the Belly is augmented. Lastly as to Alteratives, even of those which do
good against other affects of the Genus Nervosum, only some few are proper in a
Tympany; for where the Morbifick matter sticking within the strait Ductus's
cannot be driven forwards or quite through, Elastick Medicines, by fastening the
matter deeper, render the obstruction still greater or more fixed: Wherefore the
Spirits of Hartshorn, Soot, Sal Armoniack, and so Tinctures, Elixirs and other
Medicines endowed with a Volatile Salt, or Particles otherwise active, do not
only cause a very troublesome heat and drought in persons troubled with a
Tympany, but also make the Abdomen swell more, because they trouble the
Spirits, and fuse the Blood and Nervous Juice, so that the Particles deposed by
each of these are forced into the parts affected.

Nowwithstanding Physic can do so little against this Disease we must not
cease to move every stone in order to Cure, or give ease to the Patient:
Therefore in the First place (because it is the Custom to begin with
Evacuatives) though strong Catharticks always do hurt, and the more gentle are
scarce ever able to carry off the Conjunct Cause; yet these latter, for as much
as they withdraw somewhat of that which feeds the Disease, and prepare the way
for other Medicines to exert their Energies more freely, ought to have their
turns in the Practice of Physic, viz. once in six or seven days; and at other
times let Glisters (the use of which is much better) he frequently Administered:
Hydroticks being forbidden, let moderate Diuretics be diligently plied, to
which at the same time let such things be joined which regard the altering and
reducing of the Spirits and Humors, which truly make up the chiefest part of
Pharmacy for a Tympany: Moreover in the mean time let not the use of Topics be
neglected. We shall set down certain Select Forms of Medicines appropriated to
each of these ends: For a Medicine gently loosening, use the Laxative Wine
prescribed for a Tympany by the famous Greg. Horstius in the Fourth Book of his
Observations, Chap. 30. or instread of it, let the following be prescribed in a
shorter Form.

Take Flowers of Peaches, and of Damask Roses, of each two Pugils of Broom,
Elder, and the lesser Centory, of each a Pugil, Leaves of Agrimony and Sea
Wormwood, of each a handful, of the best Sena an Ounce, Rhubarb six Drams,
Carthamus-seeds half an Ounce, of Dwarf-elder two Drams, yellow Saunders three
Drams, Galingal Roots two Drams, being sliced and bruised, sew them up in a
Silken Bag, and put it in a Glass with two pounds of Whitewine, Saxifrage water
a pound, Salt of Tartar a Dram and a half; let them stand for forty eight
hours, then let the Patient begin to drink it, taking about four or six Ounces
every third or fourth day.

In a hotter constitution let the following Form be given, which I have
sometimes tried with good success.

Take of Purging Mineral waters eight pounds, Salt of Wormwood two Drams, let
it evaporate with a gentle Bath-heat to two pounds: To this I use to add of
water distilled from Purgers with Wine four Ounces: The Dose is from four
Ounces to six.

Or to that Liquor evaporated to two pounds, add of the Roots of Mechoacan and
Turbith, of each half an Ounce, Rhubarb six Drams, yellow Saunders two Drams,
Cloves a Dram: Let there be a close and warm digestion for two hours filter it
warm through lawn paper, the Dose is three or four Ounces.

Glisters are of frequent use in this Disease, because they loosen the Belly
without any great irritation of the Fibers.

Take water of the Infusion of Stone-Horse-dung with Cammomile Flowers a pound,
Honey of Herb Mercury two Ounces: After the same manner also let Decoctions or
Infusions be prepared of Dogs-turd with Carminatives.

Take of the Emollient Decoction a pound, Sal Prunella, or Sal Armoniack, from
a Dram to a Dram and a half: Make a Glister.

Take of the Urine of a sound Man a pound, Sal Prunella a Dram, Venice
Turpentine dissov'd with the Yolk of an Egg an Ounce and a half: Make a
Glister.

2. Dinreticks, If any other Remedies, premise help in this Disease.

Take live Millepedes cleans'd three Ounces, one Nutmeg sliced, being bruised
together, pour to them of the following Diuretic water a pound, express it
strongly: The Dose is from three Ounces to four twice a day.

Take of the green Berries of Juniper and Elder of each six pounds, Firr tops
four pounds, green Wallnuts two pounds, Winters Bark four Ounces, the outward
Rinds of six Oranges and four Limons, the Seeds of Ameos, Rocket, and
Watercresses, of each an Ounce and a half, Dill-seeds two Ounces, being sliced
and bruised, pour to them of Whey made with Whitewine eight pounds, distill it
with common Organs: Let all the Liquor be mixed.

Take Crystal Mineral half an Ounce, Volatile Salt of Amber two Drams, Powder
of wild Carrot-seeds a Dram, Venice Turpentine what suffices: Take small Pills,
take three at Night, and in the Morning, drinking after it of the foresaid
water three Ounces.

Take sweet Spirit of Salt half an Ounce, give from eight drops to twelve twice
a day with a Draught of the same water, adding Syrup of Violets a spoonful.

Take Spirit of Salt of Tartar an Ounce; give from a Scruple to half a Dram,
twice a day after the same manner: So also Spirit of Nitre, and Tincture of
Salt of Tartar may be given.

Take Leaves of Plantain, Chervil, and Clivers, of each four handfuls, being
bruised together, pour to them of the former distilled water a pound, express
it strongly: The Dose is three Ounces twice or thrice a day with some other
Medicine.

Take Grass Roots three Ounces, Roots of Butchers-broom two Ounces, Chervil and
Candied Eringo's, of each an Ounce, shavings of Hartshorn and Ivory, of each
two Drams, burnt Hartshorn two Drams and a half, Burdock-seeds three Drams;
boil them in three pounds of fountain water to two pounds: In the warm
straining put Leaves of Clivers and Watercresses bruised, of each a handful,
adding of Rhenish Wine six Ounces; let there be a close and warm Infusion for
two hours; then strain it again, and add of the Magisterial water of
Earthworms two Ounces, Syrup of the five Roots an Ounce and a half, make an
Apozeme, the Dose is four Ounces twice a day, with some other Medicine.

Whilst these things are taken inwardly, let Topics also, and outward
applications be carefully Administered, not such as are hot and discussing, but
such as are endowed with Particles of a Volatile and Nitrous Salt, which
destroy the combinations of the other Salts, and make void the efforts of the
Spirits, for which ends we propose the following things: If Fomentations ought
to be used at all, let them not be applied too hot, and let them not be
prepared of the vulgarly called Carminatives, but chiefly of Salts and
Minerals. Cabrotius (quoted by Helmont) says, he Cured a Person eighty years of
Age, whose Belly he somented twice a day with a Lixivium, in which he boiled
Salt, Alum, and Sulphur, and after applied Cow Dung, for a Cataplasm, I use to
prescribe as follows.

Take Flowers of Sal Armoniack an Ounce, Crystal Mineral two Ounces, small
Spirit of Wine containing much Phlegm in it two pounds: Mix them, and dissolve
them in a Glass.

Let a Woolen Cloth dipped in this warm, be applied on the whole Abdomen, and
be changed now and then, dipping it afresh: Let it be done twice a day for half
an hours space, afterward let there be applied either a Cataplasm of Cow Dung,
with the Powder of Dogs-turd, or the Plaster following.

Take Emplastrum Diasaponis, that is, of Minium with Venice Soap what suffices:
Let it be thin spread on thin Leather, and applied to the whole Belly, renewing
it within ten or twelve days.

The Second Indication requires chiefly altering Medicines, viz. such as put a
stop to the Fermentations of the humors in the Viscera of the Belly, and to
the wild Efforts, and irregular excursions of the Spirits, and which likewise
procure the even mixtures and due motions of the Chyle and Nervous Juice: For
which ends Chalybeats are principally used; and truly not only for this
Disease, but for many others belonging to the Viscera of the Belly, it is usual
to have recourse to Steel Medicines, though in the mean time many Empyricks
confidently prescribing them, do not consider after what manner such Medicines
work, or what alterations for the better may be expected from them: And indeed
it very often falls out, that nature her self is destroyed, and not the
Disease, when Chalybeats, of which there is a great variety, and of diversified
Operations, are given without any distinction or choice, or without respect to
the Temperament, Constitution, and state of the Disease in Patients.

We have treated elsewhere ex professo concerning Medicines prepared of Iron
and Steel, and of their virtues and manners of working; so that it is needless
to repeat the same here: As to this Disease, if any of them are proper for it,
certainly they are not all: For those in which the Sulphur still remains, and
being free, predominates over the other principles after that the texture of
the mixed Body is opened, must be wholly excluded from this number; for by their
powerful fermentation, they greatly ferment the Juices of the Viscera, and put
the Blood and Spirits in such a Commotion, that the whole Region of the Belly
is puffed up in a greater Bulk, as though some Spirit rushed violently into it.

Nor are those more proper here, from which the Sulphurous Particles are
wholly driven away with the Saline, as in Crocus Martis prepared by a very
strong and long Calcination; for as this Medicine is good to stay all fluxions,
so it sixes more any Impactions of Spirits and humors, and renders them more
obstinate.

But there remains a Martial Remedy of a middle kind, in which the Sulphur
being wholly, or for the greatest part expelled, the Vitriolick Salt remains,
and has for the greatest part the Predominancy, as it has in a Solution of the
Filings of Iron, or in its Infusion either simple, or in Mineral waters, in
Salt or Vitriol of Mars, in our preparation of Steel, with many others,
preparations and compositions of which have been often found by experience to
have done great good in some cases; for these destroy the Exotic, and restore
the Genuine Ferments of the Viscera; open their Obstructions, fix the Blood,
and keep its Texture from much dissolution: Wherefore Chalybeate Medicines, as
also some other Alteratives have happily some effect against the Procatarctick
and more remote Causes of a Tympany, but do little or no good at all against
its Conjunct Cause.

Take of our Steel ground very fine two Drams, of the Distilled water above
written two Pounds, Syrup of the five Roots two Ounces, mix them in a Glass,
and let it Clarify by settling; the Dose is three or four Ounces in the Morning
and at five in the Afternoon.

Take Powder of Aron Roots, and of Crabbs Eyes of each three Drams, Crystal
Mineral two Drams, Vitriol of Mars a Dram and a half, Sugar of Rosemary Flowers
two Drams: Mix them, the Dose is half a Dram, twice a Day with a fit Vehicle.

Hartman highly extolls the Liquor of the Flowers of the Herb Mullein as a
Specific Remedy in this Disease: Put those Flowers fresh gathered into an
Alembick and press them in hard, then the Vessel being carefully stopped that
nothing can breath forth, let it stand in an Oven whilst bread is baked, and
afterward the Flowers being taken forth press forth the Liquor very hard, and
let it be Distilled in Balneo: The Dose is a Scruple in Decoction of the Seeds
and Roots of Fennel. Certainly if this Medicine can do any thing, it ought to
be given in a greater Dose.

Johannes Anglicus Commends the Electuary Rosata Novella with Diatrion Santalon
and Ants Eggs; which Medicine truly being probable enough seems to promise
something: In Imitation of these I shall here propose the following.

Take Conserve of the Flowers of Cichory and Indian Cress of each three Ounces,
Powder of Aron Roots, Lignum Aloes, yellow Saunders of each a Dram, Crabbs Eyes
a Dram and a half, Salt of Wormwood an Ounce, Ants Eggs an Ounce, Liguor of
male Mullein half a Dram, with a sufficient quantity of Syrup of Citron Pills
make an Electuary, the Dose is two Drams, twice a Day, Drinking after it of the
former Distilled water, or of the following Julape three Ounces.

Take water of the Leaves of Aron, of the Juice of Elderberryes, water of
Juniper and of Elder Flowers of each six Ounces Magisteriall waters of Snails
and of Earthworms of each two Ounces, Syrup of the Juice of Elderberryes two
Ounces, mix them, make a Julape.

The third Indication being vital Prescribes Remedies chiefly against Faintings
of the Spirits, and difficulty of Breathing, and against Watching and Thirst: I
shall briefly set down certain Forms of both kinds.

1. Cordials.
TAke water of Navews, of Marigold and Cammomill Flowers of each three Ounces:
Dr. Stevens's water two Ounces, Tincture of Saffron two Drams, Sugar an Ounce.
Pearl a Dram; make a Julape, the Dose is four or five Spoonfuls thrice or
oftener in a Day in Faintings.

Take Conserve of Marigold Flowers two Ounces, Confection of Alkermes and of
Hyacinth of each two Drams, Pearl Powdered an Ounces, of the Juice of Citrons
what suffices; make a Confection, take the quantity of a Nutmeg Evening and
Morning drinking after it a Draught of the Julape.

2. Hypnoticks.
TAke Aqua Hysterica six Drams, Syrup de Meconio half an Ounce; mix them, take
it late at Night, Or,

Take small Cinnamon water an Ounce, Diacodium three Ounces, Tincture of
Saffron two Drams, mix them, take to the quantity of a Spoonful late at Night
if Sleep be wanting. Or,

Take Syrup of Cowslip Flowers three Spoonfulls, Compound Peony water one
Spoonful, Laudanum Tartarizd a Dram, take a Spoonful late at Night if you
cannot Sleep.

Quenchers of Thirst must be frequently given in this most Thirsty Disease, but
it must be in a very small quantity, that we may allay that most troublesome
Symptom without much Drink, which is always pernicious: For which end,

Take Conserve of Wood Sorrel passed through a Sieve three Ounces, Pulp of
Tamarinds two Ounces, Sal Prunella a Dram, Syrup of the Juice of Wood Sorrel
what suffices, make a soft Lohoch of which let him lick often.

CHAP. V. Instructions and Prescripts for Curing the Anasarca.
AN Anasarca is described after this manner, that it is a white and soft Tumor
of the whole outward part of the Body, or of some parts of it, yielding to the
Touch, and leaving a Pit upon Compression, proceeding from an Aqueous Humor
extravasated and heapt together, both within the Interstices of the Muscles,
and within the Pores of the Flesh and Skin, and even of the Glands and
Membranes.

That watery Humor proceeds wholly or for the greatest part from the Blood,
for being continually produced within the Mass of Blood through the defect and
fault of Sanguification, it is poured forth of the Mouths of the Arteries in a
greater quantity than that it can be received and carried back by the Veins and
Limphaeducts and be sent forth by the Reins and Pores of the Skin, and other
Emissaries of the Serous Latex.

And Anasarca whilst it is simple, is the least dangerous amongst all the
species of Dropsies: And a particular Anasarca occupying only the Inferior
Members, so the Belly do not swell withal, is much safer than an Universal one.

In order to a right proceeding toward a Cure, two chief scopes of Curing here
present themselves, viz. First we must take Care that the water betwixt the
Skin and the Flesh be some way Evacuated and Consumed; and Secondly that a new
supply be not continually engendered and heapt together: For which end we must
use what means we may both that the Viscera of Concoction being cleans'd from
Excrements, and free from Obstructions, prepare always a good Chyle, and supply
the Mass of Blood with it in a due quantity, and likewise that the Blood, (its
Principles being restored to their fermenting Power) may duly ferment and
convert into its own Nature the Juice of the Chyle continually sent into it.
The Vital Indication seems not necessary in this Disease as in many others,
because Faintings of the Spirits, or Watchings, for which Cardiacks, and
Hypnoticks are required, seldom happen here: And there is little need of
restoring Diets because Fasting and Abstinence do more good, and most commonly
are the greatest part of the Cure; the reason is that the Vessels being drained
by Fasting, drink up the waters Stagnating betwixt the Skin and the Flesh, or
elsewhere, and send them forth partly by the Reins, the Pores of the Skin, and
other Emissaries, and partly employ them most Advantageously for nourishing the
Body, they being yet full of a Nutritive Juice. First, to perform the first
Indication which is for the Evacuation of the Morbifick matter, all Hydragogue
Medicines both Simple and Compound, and likewise the Forms of Medicines set
down before in the Chapter of the Ascites ought to be applied to use: Moreover
not only Catharticks and Diuretics, but likewise Diaphoreticks have often
place in the Cure of the Anasarca, though for the most part they are forbidden
in other kinds of the Dropsy.

In a simple Anasarca you may Purge Strongly, and it often does much good.

I have given you before Forms of Hydragogue Catharticks of both kinds. viz. of
such as exert their force both upwards and downwards, and both of a gentle and
strong Operation; from whence you may take them, and apply them to the present
Method of Curing.

If you ask how Catharticks work in this Disease, and wherefore they carry
forth waters better and more efficaciously than in other kinds of the Dropsy:
I say that in an Anasarca the Morbifick matter (which is a Lympha) resieds
partly in the Mass of Blood, and partly in the habit of the Body within the
Pores and empty Spaces lying betwixt the Vessels: Wherefore a strong
Cathartick being given, it presently Exagitates the Mass of Blood, fuses it,
and moves it to an Excretion of any supersluous or heterogeneous thing: And at
the same time irritates the Mouths of the Arteries which lie open toward the
Cavityes of the Intestines, that the water cast out of the Blood may find a way
forth rather by these Emissaries. Hence in the fust place the waters floating
within the Mass of Blood are cleared forth in a plentiful manner, and then the
Vessels being drained soon drink up the waters betwixt the Flesh and the Skin,
and presently send them forth partly by seigh, and partly by Urine or Sweat:
There is no fear in the mean time, lest, as in an Ascites, the Morbifick matter
being Exagitated, and put in Fusion by the Medicine, be driven from the Blood
into the places affected, whence it cannot easily get out again; or lest, as in
a Tympany, the Viscera by reason of the Fibers of the Ventricle and Intestines
being too much irritated, are moved into Convulsive Extensions; for whilst the
Viscera are sound, and in a good state, the Particles of the Medicament do them
no hurt, but being carried thence into the Blood, do not only fetch waters from
it, but by Exagitating its Mass, raise up its Active Particles before oppressed,
and dispose them for recovering their power of Fermentation.

Secondly, I have also set down before the Hydragogues operating by Urine, both
simple and compound, and have given you Forms of Medicines prepared of both,
and the ways of giveing them: Wherefore I shall not repeat them here: But
because all Medicines of this kind do not good alike in all affects we must
here observe that Lixivials (as I have often found by experience) far exceed
the rest of Diuretics in Curing the Anasarca. And now it is a much used and
common Remedy for any one who has his Members swelled, to Purge first, and then
to take twice or thrice a Day six or eight Ounces of a Lixivium made of
White Wind with the Ashes of Wormwood or of Broom, and to continue its use for
some Days: This Medicine as I have observed in many, powerfully provok's Urine,
nay sometimes in such Abundance that the Patients within the space of twenty
four hours making above a Gallon and a half of water, have presently recovered
almost to a miracle.

The reason why Medicines containing a fixed and lixivial Sal expel Urine more
in an Anasarca than such as are endowed with an Acid, or Alchalisate or
Volatile Salt, is, that in this Disease the watery Homours which upon failing
of the Fermentation of the Blood, and of its sanguifying Virtue, are gathered
together as well within its Mass as in the habit of the Body, upon stagnating
there some time are turned somewhat sharp: Wherefore the Lixivial Particles of
the Medicine entering the Blood presently grow in a heat with the Acids of the
waters, which as they exagitate and ferment, they cause a mighty Fermentation
in the whole Mass of the Blood and a following excretion.

Take of the Ashes of Broom, or of Wormwood, or of the Prunings of Vines
calcined to a whiteness and sifted, four Ounces, put them in a Glass-bottle
with two Pounds of White Wind; let there be a close and warm Digestion for
three or four hours, then strain it, the Dose is from six Ounces to eight twice
a Day.

Take white Tartar calcined with Nitre, and after melted in a crucible till it
look blew, three Ounces, small Spirit of Wine a pound and half, water of Snails
and Earthworms, of each four Ounces, let them digest close luted in a
sand-furnace for two Days, the Dose of the clear Liquor is two or three Ounces,
with four Ounces of the Decoction of the Roots of Butchers Broom and Burdocks
made in Ale.

For Ordinary Drink.
TAke white Ashes of Broom cleans'd two Pounds, put them in a Bag, with
Raspings of Sassafras three Ounces, Roots of the lesser Galingal an Ounce,
Juniper berryer and wild Carrot Seeds of each an Ounce and a half, make a Bag
for four Gallons of Ase, after seven or eight Days begin to draw it.

Diaphoreticks often do excellently well in a Leucophlegmatia (which begins or
concludes an Anasarca) and they usually agree better in this Disease when
confirmed than in other kinds of the Dropsy: And though at the beginning they
are not able to move Sweat because the habit of the Body is invested with a
deal of waters, however by exagitating the Blood they are a means that the
active Particles implanted in it, which were dulled before, and almost
overwhelmed, are raised up again, and disposed to a Fermentation, and that all
the dreggy Excrements, especially such as are Aqueous, are put in Motion, so
that presently breaking forth of their Receptacles in a plentiful manner, they
readily pass off by Seige, or Urin, and often in some measure by transpiration:
But after that the waters being well cleared by Purging, the Morbifick matter
is so far diminisht that the bulk of the Body and the swelling of the Members
begin to abate, the remainder of the Humor is excellently consumed by moderate
Sweats, and by a constant perspiration.

We have given you before a List and Forms of Hydroticks; but as to our present
purpose for the Cure of an Anasarca, those things are most proper which are
given in somewhat a large Dose; for as to such as are prescribed in a small
quantity, their active Particles being immerg'd in the waters are overwhelmed
before they can be diffused in the Blood so as to exert their force; wherefore
Spirits whether Armoniack, or Vinous, also Tinctures and Elixirs, nay and
Powders, seldom come in use against this Disease; because in a small Dose they
do little, and if it be made very large, they often offend the bowels by their
excess in operation, therefore let those things rather be made choice of which
being taken in a full Draught and warm may be able to pass the whole Blood
uncorrupted, as chiefly the Decoctions of Woods and Roots, whose Particles
agreeing well enough with the Blood, but being not to be mastered by it, pass
through its whole Mass, and exert an Elastick force, putting all the Humors in
a Commotion.

Take Raspings of Guaiacum six Ounces, Sassafras two Ounces, all the Saunders
of each six Drams, shavings of Ivory and Hartshorn of each three Drams, let
them infuse according to Art, and boil in eight Pounds of fountain water till
half be consumed, adding Roots of Calamus Aromaticus, the lesser Galingal,
Burdocks and Butterburr of each an Ounce, Leaves of Woodsage and Germander
dried of each two handfulls, let the straining be kept for use, the Dose is
from eight Ounces to ten twice a Day warm; to each Dose may be added Spirit of
Sal Armoniack succinated, or of Soot from twenty to twenty five Drops: Or
Tincture of Salt of Tartar from half a Dram to a Dram.

So much of Hydragogue Medicines to be taken inwardly, which cause waters to be
evacuated either by drawing them inwardly toward the Intestines, or by driving
them out to the Reins, or to the Pores of the Skin: Moreover there are certain
outward Administrations used, by which waters gathered together within the
habit of the Body are put in motion, and so disposed either generally to pass
off by Sweat, or Urine, or particularly, are presently let forth, a Vent being
made in some peculiar places.

In the first rank, we place Frictions, Liniments, Fomentations, Baths both dry
and moist: And particular things to evacuate waters are Vesicatories,
Escharoticks, and prickings by a Needle, I shall speak of each of these, or at
least of the chief of them as far as they regard this Disease.

Frictions prove often of good effect in a Leucophlegmatia and an Anasarca: For
as the habit of the Body is not only so charged with a Glut of filthy waters
there heapt together, that nothing can breath through them, but even the
outward parts grow cold upon the Blood's being hindered of an access to them,
frequent and strong Frictions give a motion to the stagnating waters, and in
some measure dissipate them from thence, and by opening the passages call again
the Blood into those parts whence it was banished, wherefore it is good not only
to rubb the swollen Member, but even the whole Body once or twice a Day with a
course Cloth, or with a little brush now commonly made for that purpose.

In rubbing, or after it, Liniments and Fomentations are sometimes proper: They
are prepared either of Salts and other Minerals dissolved, or of hot and
discussing Vegetables boiled with Lees of Wine in water; and being applied hot
open the Pores, give a farther motion to the accumulated Waters and discuss
them, and enlarge the compass of the Blood's circuit, the watery Mass being in
some measure dissipated. The Liniments consist of Sulphur and Salts of diverse
kinds, or of Quicklime and other Minerals, which being powdered and mixed with
the Mucilaginous extracts of Smart Herbs, are made into an Ointment: To which
for their better consistency let a fit quantity of Oil of Scorpions be added:
Nay this Oil applied by it self (so it be right) gives often great relief. I
knew a Boy swollen very much with an Universal Anasarca, who was Cured by this
only Remedy: For his Mother (I know not how advised) anointed his whole Body
Mornings and Evenings with Oil of Scorpions, chafing well the parts with her
warm hand: Upon which within three Days he began to make a vast quantity of
water, and having continued to make water so for some Days, the swelling
vanishing by degrees, he grew well.

Baths are scarce proper for any Dropsy but an Anasarca, nor for this but in
the first Disposition to it, or as it goes off: For since by the heat of Baths
encompassing the whole Body, the Blood being made very hot and instigated, puts
the waters every where in motion which were stagnating before, and drinking
them into it self conveys them sundry ways, there is danger lest (as it
frequently happens) receiving them from the habit of the Body into its Mass, it
presently deposes them in the Praecordia, or the Brain; for there is nothing
more usual than that the affects of those parts, viz. an Asthma, or Apoplexy
happen to Hydropical persons after bathing: But when the conjunct cause of the
Disease ( viz. the swelling) is moderate, or not very great, a Bath of water
impregnated with Salts and Sulphur, or also a hot-house promoting a gentle
Sweat, are often used with good effect. Instead of a hot-house it is better that
the Patients be placed in some convenient Cells in a Salt-house near the
Furnaces, in which the Mineral water is boiled into Salt, which often proves of
mighty benefit to them.

Vesicatories let forth the waters betwixt the Flesh and the Skin in a
plentiful manner, and sometimes too profusely, these are to be applied to
Hydropical persons with very great caution, for such an Epispastick applied to
swollen places makes a vent too wide; upon the opening of which the water first
breaking forth, often draws after it from the whole Neighborhood a great Glut
of it, whence presently follows a great Consternation of the Spirits: Moreover
sometimes the place so drained on a sudden, being deprived of Heat and Spirits,
in a short time becomes mortifyed: Wherefore this Medicine is seldom applied to
the Legs or Feet of hydropical persons where the neat is weak, and the
swelling very great, but sometimes to the Thighs and Arms with security, when
need requires.

Escharoticks are applied somewhat more safely to the swollen Places than
Vesicatories, because the Flux of waters out of this Vent is not so violent and
in such Abundance presently at first: But beginning moderately it grows after
by little and little to a great Current, which nature (after being accustomed
to it by degrees) bears better: Moreover there is less danger of a Gangrene
after an Escharotick than after a Vesicatory, because in that Application, the
part whose Union is dissolved is fortified by the Eschar against the loss of
heat. I knew an illiterate Empyrick who often by an Echarotick successfully
evacuated the Members of Hydropical peasons, though never so much swollen,
after the following manner. viz. First he fomented their Legs Morning and
Evening with a Decoction of Dwarfe-elder, Wormwood Camomill, and other hot
Herbs, the Lees of Wine or Ale being added to them, and betwixt the times of
fomenting he applied a Cataplasm made of the Faeces of that Decoction with
Bran: After these things had been used three Days he covered both Legs and
Feet with a Plaster of Burgundy-Pitch, leaving only a small hole on each Calf
to the bigness of a small Nut, in which places he put an Escharotick of the
Ashes of Ashen Bark to the naked Skin: which being removed after twelve hours a
small Eschar was left, out of whose Pores the Matter first Sweated gently, then
daily distilled forth somewhat more freely, and at length (the Eschar falling
off) it flowed forth in a plentiful Stream as from an open Source, till it was
drawn from the whose Leg both above and beneath.

There remains yet another way of drawing forth waters from betwixt the Flesh
and the Skin, not inferior to the former, though less in use, viz. by the
pricking of a Needle: Which also much be done very cautiously and by little and
little, lest a headstrong and excessive Flux of waters be raised by it. Take
an ordinary Needle, such as Tailors use, and prick the Skin over with it in the
place most swelled, but let it not enter so far as to draw Blood, and so make
six or seven little holes at a time about an inch distant the one from the
other: The water will Issue by drops forth of each little hole and so will
continually Distill forth till all the swelling be gone from the place pricked:
Then the next time, after sometimes twelve, sometimes eighteen, sometimes twenty
four hours prick again in some other part either of the same Leg, or of the
other, and so continue to make such Vents for the waters once or twice a Day in
this Member, or that, one alone, or two, or at the same time in many: For after
this manner the Hydropical Corruption may be drayn'd more freely and safely
than by any other exterior operation whatsoever; and if in the mean time its
flesh supply be provided against by inward Physic, Physic, the Disease will
be the more easily Cured: Moreover in a desperate Dropsy that Administration
serves very well to prolong Life, because the waters being continually emptied
forth by those outward Vents, the inward and vital Inundation is the longer
delayed: A Man of late seventy years of Age, plunged in a Dropsy over his
whole Body has continued in Life and kept his head above the waters for these
many Months beyond the expectation of all Men by the means of this only Remedy.

So far of the kinds and forms of Remedies prompted to us by the first, that
is, the Curative Indication: As for the Preservative Indication which takes
care to restore the Crasis, and fermenting or Sanguifying Virtue of the Blood,
it suggests to us those Medicines with being endowed with hot and elastick
Particles, raise up the active or deprest Principles of the Mass of Blood, or
repair them being wasted; for which ends the vulgarly called Altering Remedies
are wont to be prescribed in the Form of an Electuary, Powder, Pills, Distilled
waters, Julapes, Apozemes, and Dyets, to which also Spirits, Tinctures, Elixirs
are sometimes added for the greater Efficacy: I shall give you an example or two
of each of these.

1. Take Conserves of Sea-Wormood, Scurvy Grass, and the yellow Coats of
Oranges of each two Ounces, Winters-Bark two Drams, Species Diacurcumae a Dram
and a half, Steel prepared with Sulphur three Drams, Salt of Wormwood two
Drams, Syrup of Citron Pills what suffices, make an Electuary: The Dose is two
Drams in the Morning and at five in the Afternoon, drinking after it a Draught
of Julape, or of the Distilled water to three or four Ounces.

Chalybeats very often do great good in this Disease, as in the Green Sickness:
Insomuch that the whole, or at the least the chief scope of Curing Falls
frequently on this Remedy: But we must note that these kinds of Medicines do
not all equally agree in these cases: For those that are chiefly in use, viz.
Salt of Steel, or Vitriol of Mars, and others prepared with Acids, and wholly
deprived of Sulphur, do no good at all, because they do not promote the
Fermentation of the Blood, but on the contrary rather fix it when too
Exorbitant, or Elastick: But for an Anasarca, and any other oedematous Cachexia
in the habit of the Body, let those Chalybeats be given, in which the Sulphury
Particles are left, and are Praedominant, as especially in the Filings of Iron,
and in its Scales reduced into a fine Powder, and in-Steel melted with Sulphur
and Powdered; these Powders being taken are presently dissolved by the Acid
Salts within our Body, upon which the Sulphurous Metallic Particles being set
free and conveyed into the Blood, ferment its whole Mass, raise up the
Symbolous Particles there, before lying dormant, and being joined with them
give a vigor to the Blood, and renew its fermenting or sanguifying power
before deprest: Wherefore we find after a little use of these Chalybeats the
pallid color in the Green Sickness goes off, and turns to a Florid Aspect.

2. Take compound Powder of Aron Roots, and Winters-bark of each three Drams,
Roots of the lesser Galingal, Cubebs of each a Dram and a half, Steel prepared
with Sulphur half an Ounce, Sugar of Rosemary Flowers six Drams, make a Powder,
divide it into twenty parts, the Dose is one part every Morning, and at five in
the Afternoon with a Draught of the Sudorifick Decoction prescribed before.

3. Take of the Gummous extract remaining after the Distillation of the Elixir
Vitae of Quercetan half an Ounce, powder of Earthworms prepared two Drams,
Roots of the lesser Galingal, Wintersbark of each a Dram and a half, Salt of
Wormwood two Drams, Iron Rust two Drams and a half, Balsam of Peru a Dram,
Tincture of Salt of Tartar two Drams, Balsamum Capivii what suffices, make a
Mass, form it into little Pills, the Dose is half a Dram at Night and early in
the Morning, Drinking after it of the Julape or distilled water following three
Ounces.

4. Take Elder Flower water, and the Fermented Juice of its Berryes of each a
Pound, Magisteriall water of Earthworms, Raddish water compound, Aqua
Mirabilis of each two Ounces, Syrup of the Juice of Elderberryes two Ounces,
mix them make a Julape.

5. Take Leaves of Garden Scurvygrass, Rochet, Pepperwort of each six
handfulls, Roots of Calamus Armaticus, the lesser Galingal, Zedoary, Florentine
Orris, Elder, Aron, of each six Ounces, Wintersbarke, Jamaica Pepper of each
three Ounces, Juniper Berryes four Ounces, Cloves, Ginger, Nutmeggs of each an
Ounce. Being sliced and bruised pour to them of old Rhenish-wine eight Pounds;
distill it in common Organs, let the whole Liquor be mixed.

6. 7. An Antihydropick Decoction is Prescribed before amongst Diaphoreticks: A
Dyet-drink to be taken instead of Beer may be made according to the Form
following.

Take Raspings of Guaiacum and Sassafras of each four Ounces, Roots of
Florentine Orris, Calamus Aromaticus, the lesser Galingal, Elecampane, of each
an Ounce and a half, Juniper and Laurel berryes of each two Ounces, Seeds of
Anise, Caraway, sweet Fennel, Coriander, Dill, of each an Ounce, long Pepper,
Cubebs of each an Ounce and a half, Cloves, Nutmeggs, Ginger of each half an
Ounce, Jamainca Pepper two Ounces, dried Leaves of Salvia Acuta, Wood-sage
Calamint, Agrimony of each a handful, Licorice four Ounces, being sliced and
bruised. Let them boil in four Gallons of fountain water to half; when the
straining is cold, let it be put up in Glass-bottles for use: I have known many
persons almost given over in an Anasarce who by the constant use of this Drink
have perfectly recovered. Of many examples of persons Cured of Dropsies I shall
now give you one.

A certain Robust Man, of a middle Age, after having gotten an Epidemical
Quartan Ague, and being ill managed at first, had lain under it above a year,
and in the mean time had used an ill Diet, fell into an Anasarca, which
afterward upon his indulging himself to Drink very freely for quenching his
Thirst, (which was exceeding great) grew in a short time to a vast height; so
that all his Members from the Head to the Foot, and his Belly likewise being
swollen, he was not able to turn himself from ont side to the other in his Bed
without the assistance of Servants.

As I first visited him, and despairing of Cure, I plainly told him that unless
he would abstain from Drink, he must die in a short time; upon which he
promised, so I could save his Life, that he would Drink no more in a Weeks
time, and was as good as his word, for though very Thirsty he scarce took any
Liquid thing into him but Physic for six or seven Days: And during that time
by carefully taking Hydragogue Catharticks and Diuretics, and all other things
Prescirb'd, he grew much better; and afterward a Method as above Prescribed
being sometime followed, he was restored to his perfect Health, and now lives a
sound Man after five years past.

There remains certain other affects of the Viscera of the Belly, of the
Remedies of which according to a due Method I should have treated here; but I
have already performed this Task for the greatest part elsewhere; for we have
delivered most of the Medicines that concern the Reins amongst Diuretics, and
those that concern the Stomach and Intestines among the number of Emeticks and
Purgers: As for what respect the Spleen and the Womb we have fully set them
forth in our Hypochondriack and Histerick Pathology: As for what regards the
Genital parts and their Diseases, and Cure, we have thought fit to reserve it
for another time and place: It concerns us next after having treated hitherto
of inward Pharmacy; to discourse somewhat of outward Medicines, which we shall
do in the next Section beginning with the great Remedy Phlebotomy.

SECT. 3. Of Outward Medicines.
CHAP. I. Of Phlebotomy.
TO Discourse Methodically of this great Remedy, we must first consider how
many ways and for what causes and ends an Emission of Blood happens either of
its own accord, or is indicated by Physic. Then Secondly we shall acquaint you
with the good and ill effects, or with the Advantages and Prejudices of this
Evacuation, and shall give you likewise certain rules and cautions to be
observed in the due Administration of Phlebotomy.

As to the first, Spontaneous Eruptions of Blood being manifold and of diverse
kinds, are usually reduced to these two heads, or orders, viz. either they are
Critical, nature endeavoring something good and for the Advantage of Health; or
Symptomatical, which happen for the most part when she is put by of her
Government, and all things are in Confusion: The Eruptions of Blood of the
first kind are again distinguished, that either they come without a Fever, and
are either Periodical, which often happen at set times as the Menses of Women,
and in some the Flux of the Haemorrhoides, and in others yearly Bleedings at
the Nose, or otherwise customary; which commonly happen upon the great changes
of the year, or of the Air: Or they are erring and uncertain, as when the Blood
breaks forth for our good from those places, and from many others, sometimes in
this part of the Body, sometimes in that. Moreover Excretions of Blood sometimes
happen in a Fever, and often determine it: In all these cases the Blood breaks
forth, because growing Turgid within its Vessels, and being very much rarifled,
it requires a larger space.

Now the Blood grows thus Turgid on two accounts viz. both as its Liquor is
Inflammable, and as it is Fermentative.

1. As to the First, that the Blood may have a due Accension for the
preservation of Life, and the due performance of its Functions, its Innate
Sulphurous Particles must be proportioned to the Nitrous Particles coming to
it from the Air: Therefore as often as the Blood growing very hot, and being
highly rarefied, is much opened and loosened in its Texture, so that the
Sulphur being at freedom is kindled more than ordinary, a quick and toylsome
Breathing follows to draw the Nitre also in a fuller measure than usually: Now
if the abounding Sulphur cannot spend it self after this manner by burning
briskly, nor the vital flame be thus regulated, presently the next course for
lessning the fuel of the Sulphur is that some part of the rarefied Blood breaks
violently forth: Hence not only in Fevers, but after Drinking Wine, Bathing,
being in the Sun, and other Accidents upon which the Blood grows very Turgid,
either Eruptions of Blood happen of their own accord, or it is often necessary
to supply the defect of such Spontancous Evacuation by opening a Vein.

Secondly, the Blood also as it is a Fermentative Liquor is apt to break forth
of its Vessels, for if at any time some Heterogeneous thing, which will not mix
with it, comes into its Latex, it strongly Ferments as Wine in a Hogs-head, and
boyls in its Vessels to expel that disagreeing substance, which seeing it can
neither conquer, nor send forth by Sweat, Urine, or other ways, the Blood it
self throws off some portion of its own substance, as a Vehicle to carry forth
that matter with it: hence diverse Eruptions of Blood variously happen both in
Fevers and without them; which are all raised by nature for some good intent,
though it often happens otherwise through various Accidents and Circumstances;
but for the most part there is a failing in Spontaneous Haemorrhagies
critically intended; either First, because the Blood in boiling knows no
measure in flowing forth; or Secondly because the mouths of the Vessels being
once opened do not presently close, or cannot presently be shut; or Thirdly
because nature endeavoring an Excretion of Blood, does it by places which are
most open, though often improper, as when it happens by the Lungs, Reins,
Intestines, and other Viscera, which therefore from being critical becomes
Symptomatical, and often Malignant.

Nor only these ways, but likewise for many other Failures or Impediments of
nature, Symptomaticall Haemorrhagies happen, in all which either the Blood it
self, or the Vessels containing, or both of them together, are alwarys chiefly
in the fault.

First, the Blood besides the ways above mentioned is apt to extravasate when
its Latex being some way corrupted, is not able to retain its due mixture, but
being apt to coagulate or putrify, runs Into parts, whereof some break forth
into Wheals or Pushes, or show themselves in Spots, others plainly make Bloody
Eruptions where they can first find a Vent; as it is generally seen in the
Plague, Smallpox, Meazles, and in Malignant Fevers, and in some measure in
Scorbutic Affects. Secondly, The Vessels conveying the Blood are many ways the
cause of its Symptomatical Eruption, as first if some of them are in any place
obstructed, as often as the Blood is put in a Rapid Motion, it is forced to
burst forth either there, or near the place, and sometimes also in parts far
distant from it; hence upon a suppression of the Menses, or Haemorrhoides, a
Bleeding at the Nose often follows. Secondly, the little Mouths of the Vessels
have sometimes al ill Conformation, for that the fleshy Fibers with which they
are guarded are grown Lax, or resolved, so that when the ends of the Arteries
gape too much, the Mouths of the Veins close; by reason of this affect
Scorbuticall and Cachectical persons are very subject to Eruptions of Blood.
Thirdly, It oftens happens that the Vessels having this ill Conformation are
likewise affected with Convulsions, so that the Muscular Fibers of the Vessels
being disorderly contracted, cause sudden and violent Sallyes of the Blood,
sometimes upwards and sometimes downwards, and consequently Eruptions: For I have
observed in some, when the Current of the Blood has been slender enough, with a
low and weak Pulse, that the Convulsions of the Vessels beginning in some
place, and carried forward as a Wind running here and there in the Body, have
driven the Blood vehemently, though never so low of it self, and forced it into
violent Eruptions: And in these cases when opening a Vein, and Medicines
cooling and qualifying the Blood have done no good, we have found the greatest
relief from Narcotick's, Anticonvulsives, and Ligatures.

To speak now of Bleeding by Art, we generally observe that Physic in some
cases imitates nature, in others exceeds it, and often regulates it, and
reduces it when it acts amiss; though there are some cases in which nature far
exceeds the efficacy of Art in Excretions of Blood. I shall speak briefly of
each of these.

First therefore in whatever affects Spontaneous Eruptions of Blood use to do
good, if at any time these fail, Physic the Handmaid of nature aptly suplys
its place by Phlebotomy, therefore if happily the Blood by reason of its Sulphur,
being too much at liberty and exalted, is kindled too much, upon opening a Vein
the superfluity of that Inflammable fuel will issue forth: So likewise
immoderate Turgescencies of the Blood by Reason of some unsubduable substance
gotten into it, are allayed by this means: Wherefore Bleeding is presently
ordered both against continual Fevers which proceed from the former cause, and
against such as intermit whose fits are from the latter: And so, as often as an
accustomed Evacuation at set times which is stopped, or a humor struck back from
the outward parts, or a sudden stoppage of the Pores, or if a Surfeit, Drinking
of Wine, and other Accidents of this nature, by crowding the Blood with
Heterogeneous Particles, cause a Turgescency in it, Phlebotomy is usually a
most present Remedy.

Secondly, Physic does not only imitate nature in letting forth of Blood, but
often exceeds it; nay and frequently aids it, and reduces it when it labors,
and acts amiss. For if at any time the Blood taking a Head, rushes in a Body to
one part, and there either presently breaks forth in a disorderly manner, or
being gathered together in a large quantity causes an Inflammation, a Vein
being opened in some remote part stops that Praeternatural Salley of the Blood,
and often puts an end to the Eruption, or Inflammation: Wherefore in the
Plurisie, Sqinancy, Perpneumonia, in Spitting, or Vomiting Blood, when nature
either yields it self overcome, or bing sturck as it were wiht a Rage seems to
lay violent hands on it self, Surgery withdrawing the Blood to some other
place, and letting it forth, restores all things, when almost in a loft
Condition.

Moreover Physic often moderates or reduces nature when too profuse, or
extravagant in the Effusion of Blood, for in Truth all immoderate Eruptions of
Blood must be stayed rather than promoted: Again in regard in the Plague,
Smallpox, and Meazles broken forth, and in Malignant Fevers a Spontaneous
Eruption of Blood always foreboads ill: Therefore in those affects Stiptick
Medicines restraining the Eruption of Blood are more proper than breathing a
Vein.

Nevertheless there are some cases of an Effusion of Blood by nature, which
Physic can no way imitate, nor supply by Phlebotomy if happily they fail: In
Fevers about the Crisis of the Disease, viz. after the Digestion of the matter,
that is, its preparation for Separation, a Spontaneous Eruption of Blood, in
regard it comes in a due nick of time, is far better than any Bleeding by Art,
the due season for which is unknown: And so a flowing of the Menses and
Haemorrhoides hapening by the Instinct of nature is much more Advantageous than
if Blood be caused to flow thence by Art.

There is this notable difference betwixt Blceding by opening a Vein, and a
Spontaneous Eruption of Blood, that in this the Blood flows in a manner wholly
out of the Arteries, and in the other Evacuation it is drawn only out of the
Veins.

So far of Phlebotomy compared with a Spontaneous Eruption of Blood: I shall
now show its use and effects both good and evil in the Practice of Physic:
Therefore in the first place let us show in general what sort of alteration
this Evacuation causes in the Mass of Blood, and then to what Diseases either
of the whole Body, or of particular parts it most immediately has respect to.

Concerning the first it is obvious that the Blood after Breathing a Vein is
altered both as to its quantity, and as to its Temper and Crafis, and as to its
Motion.

The first and most common Indication for Breathing a Vein is that by this
Administration the Mass of the Blood be lessened: Hence even the vulgar growing
to an overful habit of Body cause themselves to be let Blood to remove that
Plethorick Disposition, but though the evils of that affect are removed or
prevented by nothing better, yet the necessity or this Evacuation ought to be
avoided as much as may be: Because the Blood is rendered by it more Sulphurous
and less Salt, and consequently it disposes Men to a Feverish habit, and to
grow Fat: Moreover the great Remedy, Bleeding, if made common on every slight
occasion, will become of no effect in grand Distempers when it is needed: To
which we may add that according to the observation of the vulgar, the more
familiarly any one uses Bleeding, the oftener he will want it: For the Blood
being let forth to avoid an overgreat fullness, the rest of the Mass soon rises
again to a Plenitude, though it is worse in its Crasis, For by this means being
much berest of its Balsamic Salt which preserves it from Putrefaction: Instead
of it, it is more filled with a Fatning and Inflammable Sulphur.

2. Phlebotomy amends the Mixture and Temperament of the Blood in sundry
respects: First if any Heterogeneous thing be gotten into its Mass, which can
neither be mastered, nor easily separated, and sent forth, upon opening a Vein
the Blood flowing forth carries with it often a great Portion of that matter:
So again the Blood declining from its Temperament is often restored by
Phlebotomy; for when its Mass upon the exaltation of the Sulphur, or fixed Salt,
of both of them together, is degenerated into a sharp, Salt, or
Salino-Sulpureous nature; a Portion of the Blood being drawn out, presently it
ferments anew, and often there is such a change made of all those kinds of
Particles, that thence forwards the Spirits with the Volatile Salt begin to
rise again, and recover their Dominion, keeping he Sulphur, and fixed Salt
under, as they ought to be: Hence Bleeding gives often great relief not only in
Fevers, but likewise in the Scurvy, Jaundise, and even in a beginning
Phthisick: For the Blood after the Vessels are emptyed, as the Stomach when
discharged, Concocts and Assimilates all Humors that come into it better, and
more easily separates any Heterogeneous thing and sends it away.

But if the mixture of the Blood begins to be much dissolved, or wholly to
sink, as in the Plague, and Malignant Fevers, we must utterly abstain from
Bleeding; for upon taking away of Blood the provision of the Spirits (whose
only business it is to preserve the Mass of Blood from Putrefaction and
Corruption) is diminisht: So that all things presently tend to a pernicious
Dissolution. Moreover if the Discracy of the Blood be such that the more noble
Principles, viz. the Spirits, Volatile Salt, and Sulphur being deprest or
spent, the watery and earthy Particles, have the Praedominancy, the Blood must
by no means be let forth, but be preserved as the Treasure of Life: Hence in a
Dropsy, Cachexia, Consumption and other affects, where the active Principles
are mightily deprest, you had as good cut a Man's Throat as open a Vein.

In the foresaid cases where the Crasis of the Blood is considered, it is easy
to determine whether Bleeding be proper, or not, but in certain other cases, as
especially in a Putrid continual Fever, when Life and Death depend on this
point, there is need of great Deliberation. Now in this difficult case we must
consider the State of the Blood, the tendency of the Morbifick Matter, and the
strength of nature: First as to the former, if in a Putrid Fever the Blood
boiling very much canses a mighty heat, with Thirst, Watchings, and a parching
heat of the Jaws, and no free Sweat, or Eruption of Pushes appears, or is
expected in any short time, Bleeding is so plainly indicated, that it were a
crime to omit it: But on the coutrary if in a weak Body, a slow and remiss, but
continual Fever arises with a weak Pulse, forbear taking away any Blood, and
let it be cleans'd by Transpiration, Urine, and Blistering. In a middle State
of the Blood, let Bleeding, being of it self indifferent, be determined by
other things. Therefore in the second place we must consider the Tendency of
the Morbifick matter, or its Propension, which matter if it lies dull in the
Mass of Blood and unapt to separate, and so (as it frequently falls out) a
Translation of it to the head instead of a Crisis happening, it threatens the
Brain, and the Genus Nervosum, Bleeding ought to be seasonably Administered for
the prevention of these evils: But if that matter moved with a sudden Impetus,
and either rushing inwards to the Viscera of the Belly causes a violent
Vomiting, or Flux, or driven outward brings forth the Smallpox, Meazles or
other Pushes; every such Impetus of nature, of good ought not to be disturbed,
if evil must not be rendered worse by Phlebotomy: For to let Blood in these
cases is not only dangerous, but very often also Extremely Ignominious.
Thirdly, concerning Bleeding in a doubtful case, we must consider the strength
of the Patient; for in a sound Constitution, a Vigorous Age, the beginning of a
Disease, and whilst the Functions both Vital and Animal are in a vivid or
indifferent State, we may with confidence order Bleeding unless something
indicates the contrary; but when it is otherwise as to those conditions we must
not inconsiderately proceed to that Evacuation.

Thirdly, the disorderly Motions of the Blood, viz. when being struck, as it
were with a Rage, it either rushes violently, or conveys offensive matter
sometimes into one part, sometimes into another, it is excellently moderated, or
reduced by Phlebotomy; wherefore for violent Headaches, all Convulsive, or
Sleepy Fits, for Catarrhs, Inflammations of the Eyes, and for the Cough,
Asthma, Fits of the Gout, and of the Stone in the Kidneys, or for Phlegmons,
Erisipela's and for many other affects caused by the Fluxions of the Blood or
Serum, Bleeding is commonly prescribed, and that with good success, for upon
draining the Vessels, the Blood getting a more free passage is Circulated
calmly and undisturbed: Moreover whatsoever of this, or of the Serum is
extravasated, is drunk up again and brought into its due course.

Having thus shown you the effects both good and evil which happen to the Blood
in its different State upon Breathing a Vein, we must now enquire to what chief
Diseases either of the whole Body, or of some particular part that kind of
Remedy had a most immediate regard to it: And first as to general affects it is
well known that Bleeding is indicated by a hot and dry Distemper, and forbidden
by a cold and moist. In every Fever it is usually proposed, never in the
Dropsy: Next if we consider particular Diseases, there is no region or part of
the Body but some time may require it: The Headaking, the Brain oppressed with
Blood, or Serum (whence a world of evils spring) the Inflammation of the Eyes,
Face, Mouth and Throat, all Diseases of the Breast, and Praecordia (to each of
which the disorder of the Blood gives a Rise or affords Fuel; also
obstructions, or inflamed affects of the Liver, Spleen, and other Viscera, so
likewise both the overgreat fullness and athletick habit of the whole Body, and
the Tumors, and Painful, or Convulsive Passions of each particular Member seem
to accuse the Blood as the Author of all the evil, and require its Emission as
it were by way of satistisfaction.

If at any time in these and may other affects Bleeding be manifestly
indicated, before we set upon it we must consider of these four things, viz. in
what place, after what manner and by what instrument, at what time, and in what
quantity the Blood ought to be let forth.

1. As to the First, though according to the Laws of the Circulation of the
Blood there be little difference from what Vessel it be drawn, so it be large
enough; yet because besides a general Evacuation of Blood sometimes a partial
Derivation properly so called (as when the Blood is to be drawn from some
particular place where it is gatered together) and likewise a Revulsion, when
it is to be withdrawn into this or that part, are intended, therefore in the
Body of Man various limited precincts, as it were, are assigned, out of which
Blood may be let according to occasion, and for most necessary uses, sometimes
out of this, sometimes out of that, or the other.

If therefore at any time a general Evacuation of Blood be indicated the common
or middle Vein of the Arm is best to be opened for this being of a good
largeness easily admits the Lancet, and the Blood flows equally from the whole
Body to its wide Orisice, upon the free Emission of which not only the
Plethorick Disposition is taken away, but the greater Vessels being every
where emptyed by this means, the Bloood stagnating in any place is restored
agin to Motion, and if extravasated is drank up agin into the Veins: Wherefore
in great affects, where the Blood gathered together in the Brain or about the
Praecordia threatens a sudden Destruction, the best way, not only of a general
Evacuation, but likewise for a Revulsion is to let forth the Blood in a full
current by opening a Vein in the Arm with a large Incision.

But if without any great Plethora the Blood be to be Evacuated from the whole
Body, and to be withdrawn from the Superior Region of the Body to the
Inferior, as in suppressions of the Menses, or Haemorrhoids, it is more propper
to draw Blood from the Foot, or from the Haemorhoid Veins by Leeches: And if
after an Evacuation of Blood from the whole, it must also be derived from some
particular place where it is gathered together, let it be taken near the place
affected; Hence in Cephalic Diseases we open the Vein of the Forehead,
Temples, or Thorat: To Cure Tumors and Pains happening in the Joints, we either
open a Vein beneath or near them, or draw froth the Blood by applying
Cupping-glasses, or Leeches there: And so in affects of the Thorax and of the
Belly either Cupping-glasses are applied to the Region Distempered, or Leeches
to the Vessels of the Fundament.

As to what is said that some Vessels have a peculiar respect to some of the
Viscera in particular, as the outward Vein of the Arm to the Head, the inward
to the Liver, etc. All this is a mere vnlgar error, grounded on no reason or
Anatomical observation: Therefore as soon as it is agreed on for opening a Vein,
and of the place, make choice of some large Vessel, and very fair to the sight
that it may be more easily opened, and let it not have any Artery, Nerve, and
Tendon near it, that it may be Lanced more securely. Wherefore the middle Vein
of the Arm is most commonly made choice of, though the Exterior called the
Cephalic be more safe, being less crowded with other Vessels.

The Jugular Vein, so generally opened in Beasts is most safely and easily
lanc't, and is as proper as any other what soever for a general Evacuation of
Blood from the whole Body, besides its excellent Derivation from the Head.

If you open the Vein above or near the Ancle you must take a mighty care lest
you hurt the Tendon, which sometimes happens through the unskillfulness or
rashness or Surgeons, to the great prejudice of the Patient: Moreover you
must take care of opening a Vein near its Anastomosis with an Artery: For if
this be done the Blood springs forth violently all of a Scarlet color, and its
stream is not easily stopped, nor the Orifice of the Vessel soon closed.

As to the ways or Instruments with which Blood is drawn forth, it is done
either by opening a Vein with a Lancet, or by Suction with Leeches, or by
Cupping-glasses after Scarification.

It Is known by sad experience that in Lancing a Vein sometimes an Artery is
pricked, whence either Death, or a cutting off of the Member sometimes follows;
the reason is that an Artery ought incessantly to vibrate and beat in like
manner as the Heart it self, its Fibers iterating the perpetual charges of
Systole's and Diastole's, wherefore a hole made in its Ductus becomes as it
were incurable by reason of the continual Motion of the Vessel, and the Efflux
of Blood: It is far otherwise in a Vein whose Aperture presently closes again
of its own accord; there being little stress of contraction laid on its
Tunicles, and indeed only so that its Fibers being a little dilated on
occasion, the Blood flowing back, may be gently driven forwards: If at any time
a Physician of Patient are fearful of opening a Vein, an Extraction of Blood by
Leeches, or Cupping-glasses with Scarification will aptly enough supply its
defect, and often with the like Advantage; nay these Administrations for
removing the Conjunct cause of a Disease, where there is need rather of a
Partial Derivation, or Evacuation than a general one, are often preferred to
Phlebotomy.

The due season for letting Blood is often of so great moment, that whereas
this Evacuation does good at one time, at another it proves mighty prejudicial:
There are various respects of times to be considered concerning Bleeding, but
chiefly these four, viz. the time of the Disease, Age, Year, and Day, the First
of these chiefly concerns the Cure of the Patient, and the rest his
Preservation.

First, therefore if we ought to let Blood in any Disease, the fittest time for
it will be about the beginning of it, or in its increase, but not at all, or
very cautiously in its height, or Declination: For in the former whilst nature
endeavoring a Crisis is extremely busied, so that the Spirits labor mightily,
and the Blood ferments very much that its last effort ought not to be
disturbed, and when a Disease is upon remitting, either nature being
conqueress, does not stand in need of that Aid, or belng conquered will not
bear such Evacuation.

Secondly, if at any time we deliberate of Bleeding for prevention, Infants,
Children, and aged Persons are exempted from it by the general Practice of all
Nations: This Evacuation also heretofore was forbidden to Women with Cnild, but
now it is very ordinarily prescribed: Men of a strong Constitution, and of a
middle Age herr Bleeding well encugh, and want it very often, but ought not to
admit it the first and second time without great occasion, for once begun, and
then repeated, it soon passes into an Inevitable custom: Hence those who use to
Bleed Spring and Fall cannot afterward omit this Evacuation without danger:
But those for whom it is good or necessary to be let Blood once or twice a
Year, the most seasonable times for it will be about the beginning of the
Spring and Autumn, when the Blood being apt to Ferment anew, is in danger of
changing its Crasts. Bleeding in season prevents the exaltation of the Sulphur
and Salts, and consequently keeps the Blood from any Feverish, Scorbutic, or
otherwise vicious Distemper: And likewise from susing it self and pouring its
Serous and other dreggy Excrements on the Brain, Lungs, or Viscera of the
Belly. About the Solstices when our Bodies are very cold, or hot, the Blood,
^as also the Juices of all Vegetables being in a fixed State, and unapt for any
Turgid Motion, ought not to be let forth unless some urgent cause requires it.

3. Whereas some religiously or rather ridiculously observe in Bleeding the
Position of the Heavens and the Aspects of the Moon and Stars, it is altogether
Frivolous.

4. As to the time of the Day, in Acute Diseaes when immediate Bleeding is
indicated, a Physician being called, after the Body is prepared, may order that
operation at any hour of the Day or Night. But if there be room for delay, then
it is more proper to Bleed rather in a Morning when the Stomach is fasting and
the Vessels are emptyed by the Night Perspiration, so that the current of the
Blood is then in a very great Calm and free from Serous Excrements: Nay though
necessicy presses, let it be delayed a little till the fresh Juice of things
taken into the Body be past into the Blood; for the Vessels being emptyed will
draw hastily into them the Chymus not only crude, but often disagreeing with,
or disproportionate to the Blood; whence not only its Motion is disturbed, but
also the Vital flame is sometimes in danger of being overwhelmed: I have known
some who upon Bleeding shortly after large Drinking, or pouring in of Vinous
Liquors, have fell into dreadful swounding Fits, which continued a very long
time, till the Vital Spirit half overwhelmed happened at length to recover.

5. As to the quantity of Blood to be taken, besrdes the manifest error of
those who are sparing, or profuse of it in the greatest extremes, there is
likewise an error of no small moment committed within the moderate Limits,
whilst in some cases the Blood is taken too sparingly, and in others in a
greater quantity than is fitting: In a burning Fever, the Pleurisy,
Peripueumonia, Squinancy, Frenzy, Apoplexy, and other great Diseases rising
from the Turgescency or Inflammatory Incursion of the Blood, a spare Bleeding
always does more hurt than good: For besides that it does not remove the
Antecedent cause of the Disease, viz. the Plethora, it moreover increases its
Conjunct causes, viz. the Inflammation, or Irruption of the Blood: For it is a
constant observation that after a spare Emission of Blood, its whole Mass
presently boyls in a high measure, and makes new Sallyes into the part
affected: The reason of which is, that in a great Plethora many Portions both
of the Blood and Serum being driven into strait and by receptacles, are forced
to reside there, which upon the Vessels being a little emptied rush back
hastily into the Mass of Blood, and trouble it mightily, driving it here and
there in a violent manner.

As a spare Bleeding in some cases is not only useless but hurtful, so in
others a too large Effusion of Blood is seldom without danger, and sometimes
proves mighty prejudicial to Health: For if at any time there be a failing of
strength, or the Body labors under a great Cachexia, we must be spare of
Bleeding, and it is either forbidden, or being indicated by reason of some
accident it must be allowed but in a small quantity: Wherefore in Men of a
tender, weak, or cold Constitution, and in Consumptive Persons, and such as are
affected with a long or Malignant Fever, also in those that the Hydropical, or
very Cacochymical, we must not lightly open a Vein, at least being opened we
must not let forth much Blood.

The quntity of Blood to be drawn being agreed upon, the next care must be,
that a large Orifices being made, it flows forth equally mixed in as short a
space as may be: For otherwise if it issue, forth at a slender Orifices either
by Drops, or in a small stream, the Mass of Blood fermenting will separate into
parts, and what is most Subtle and Spirituous will spring forth, the thicker,
and more dreggy Portion remaining behind: Hence it is to be observed, that if
at any time the Blood being let out of a large Orifice with a full stream be
stopped a little by putting the Finger on it, and in a short while after be let
run again, the Blood issuing forth the Second time will be much purer and
brighter than the former, because in the interval of its running, the more
subtle Particles having got free of the thicker and gatered themselves together
in a Body prepared themselves for flying forth.

CHAP. II. Instructions and Prescripts for stopping an Eruption of Blood.
There being various and manifold kinds of Haemorrhagies or Eruptions of Blood,
Physic is not needful to all of them: If a great Effusion of Blood happens
through a Wound, etc. Surgery undertakes to stop it: Moreover an Eruption of
Blood, if it be Critical, ought not to be disturbed by any Medicine but to be
left wholly to the governance of nature (so she be free and enjoys her power)
nay in Symptomatick Bleeding, so long as it is but small, or not very
prejudicial Physic is not required: But then chiefly and in a manner only it
is needsul, if at any time the Flux of Blood be either immoderate, or breaks
forth in improper places.

Bloody Eruptions of the latter kind require help chiefly if happily the Blood be
cast forth upwards by coughing, or vomiting, or be voided downwards by the
Fundament, or the Urinary passages, for in these cases though the quantity of
Blood voided be not commonly much feared, yet because a dangerous or pernicious
Ulcer often follows the Solution of Unity so made in the Lungs, or in the
Stomach, or Intestines, or in a Vein; therefore we must diligently take care of
those Haemorrhagies from their very first appearance, and therefore such Bloody
Excretions are ranged amongst the Diseases of those parts, and we have already
delivered elsewhere the Theories and Cures of Bloodspitting, and the Bloody
Flux, so that there is no need for us to repeat them here, no more than that of
Pissing Blood which belongs to the Pathology of Nephritick affects, wherefore I
shall pass to those Passions, in which there being an immoderete Fffulx of
Blood, there is a particular necessity for Medicines to stop it.

The chiefest kinds of those sorts of affects are these three, viz. an Eruption
of Blood from the Nostrils, and of the Menses, and immoderate Fluxes of the
Haemorrhoides. The Cure of this latter belongs rather to Surgery than
Physic, and we have thought fitting to refer the consideration of the other to
the Pathology of the Womb: An Effusion of Blood by the Nostrills is the most
general kind of those sorts of Passions, and what I shall here deliver for the
Cure of this Eruprion of Blood may be applied to all other Haemorrhagies
whatsoever.

Therefore concerning the Cure of an excessive Bleeding at the Nose there are
three primary Indications, viz. Curatory, Vital, and Preservatory: The two
former have regard to the immediate sptopping of the Symptom as often as it
presses; and the later undertakes to remove the cause of the Disease that the
returns of the Eruption of Blood may abate of their violence, or wholly cease:
Again this Eruption of Blood must be managed one way if without a Fever, and
somewhat after a different manner if joined with it.

If at any time therefore without a Fever much Blood flows from the Nostrils,
presently as there will be need of Remedies to stop the Blood, there will be
three chief intents of Curing, all of them to be put in Practice together, viz.
the Turgescency of the Blood must be so allayed that it be not prone to make
disorderly Sallyes: We must farther take care that its Fluxion being withdrawn
from the Nostrils, be diverted eisewhere, and that the gaping Mouths of the
Vessels within the Nostrils be closed: For which ends a great many Remedies
both External and Interna, and of diverse kinds are wont to be administered, we
shall speak of the former in order and briefly.

First, therefore let the Patient keep himself quiet with his Head in an
upright posture, then let the Joints of his Arms and Thighs, many of them
together, but not all of them be bound with strait Ligatures, which must now
and then be loosn'd and removed to other parts; for upon their being bound all
at once, and so continued a long time, I have known that terrible Swoundings
have happened, by reason of the Bloods being detained in the outward parts, and
kept too much from the Heart: Though otherwise this Remedy being prudently
administered gives often relief. For since by this means the Blood which passes
into the Members by the Arteries, is hindered from its quick return by the
Veins, its violent taking to the head is stayed: Moreover by the painful
Ligatures of the Joints the Muscular Fibers of the Carotide Arteries from whose
Branches the Blood issues at the Nostrils are freed from the Convulsion which
they often fall into.

2. To withdraw the course of the Blood from the Nostrils, sometimes it is
proper to open a Vein in the Arm, or Foot, for the more Blood is carried by the
Arteries to the place where a Vein is opened, the less will flow to the
Nostrils: Yet this Administration does not always prove so successful but its
contrary effect sometimes happens; as we have observed before, where we treat
of Spitting Blood: The reason whereof is that the Vessels being suddenly, and
not sufficinetly emptryed, draw into them again the disagreeing Homours before
ejected, and stagnating within the Pores, by which the Blood is presently
stirred up again to a greater Turgescency for Eruption.

3. Cold things applied to the Forehead and Temples, also to the Nape of the
Neck where the Vertebral Arteries ascend, constringe the Vessels, and somewhat
repress or repel the Flux of Blood: But it is ill done of some who advise
topical coolers to be applied to the Jugular Veins, for this retarding the
course of the Blood in its return, causes it to flow more plentifully out at
the Nostrils: Moreover as to the usual way of applying a Linnen-cloath or a
Sponge dipped in Vinegar to the Share and Genitals, it gives relief only, as a
Ligature of the Members, viz. in as much as it hinders the return of the Blood
of the Veins. A sudden and unexpected Sprinkling of cold water on the Face by
striking a Terror often stops an Eruption of Blood.

4. Cupping-glasses applied to the Hypochondres, Flanks, inward parts of the
Thighs, and to the Soles of the Feet, have been accounted both by Ancient and
Modern Physicians a famous Remedy for withdrawing an Eruption of Blood from the
Nostrils.

5. Frictions of the extreme parts are commended in this affect by some
Practitioners, which nevertheless we judge not so very good, nay scarce safe:
For though they cause a greater confluence of Blood to the Hands and Feet, yet
they so accelerate its return, that it endangers a more violent Sally of it to
the Nostrils.

6. Zacutus Lusitanus among Revulsory Remedies proposes an actual Cautery to be
applied to the Soles of both Feet, and Crato the bending of the little Finger
of the same side, which last you may do well to try in regard it is done
easily: Though I do not advise so of the other Remedy, unless the Cure by it
were more certain, which might recompense the Pain, and Lameness that will
ensue.

7. A Swounding by what means soever caused, stops presently for the most part
an Eruption of Blood, be it never so refractory: Wherefore when persons seized
with an Eruption of Blood and grown weak by it are pulled out of Bed, or if
Blood be taken from them though in a small quantity by opening a Vein, they
apprehending a danger in it, or if their Members are long bound, or they are
suddenly put in a fright with some feigned Rumor, and upon any other occasion
fall into a Swound, or a Fainting Fit, the Eruption of Blood from the Nostrills
presently ceases: The reason whereof it evident enough, because as soon as the
Motion of the Heart fails both the Blood and Spirits presently rush thither, so
that all outward Effusion is incontinently stopped and that which before was
immoderate does not begin afresh.

8. In the last place we must take a view of those Remedies for repressing an
Eruption of Blood from the Nostrils which are said to work after an Occult
manner, and by Sympathy, and Antipathy: Of which kind chiefly are the
Sympathetical Powder, made of Roman Vitriol Calcined to whiteness by the Sun in
the Summer: Also a piece of the Wood of a Maiden or young Ash, cut about the
moment that the Sun enters Taurus: The efficacy of which Remedy is attested by
many credible witnesses to have been proved in stopping Eruptions of Blood in
wounded Soldiers during the late Civil Wars. So a dried Toad sewed up in a
Silk Bag and worn on the Pit of the Stomach is said to stop any Flux of Blood,
and to prevent its return.

There are many other famous Medicines for stopping Blood, whose operation is
wont to be referred to Occult causes, and to some secret Virtue: As Neck-laces
of the Boodstone worn about the Neck, also Vsnea, or the moss of a Man's Skull
carried in the hand: Epithems of the Leaves of Netles stamp and applied to the
Soles of the Feet, and the Palms of the Hands; which Empirical Administrations
being to be tried without trouble or charge, we have no reason to reject them,
especially since in a dangerous case we ought to leave nothing unattempted, and
in regard that those applications may do good sometimes in this respect, that
they fortify the imagination of the Patient.

Whilst these outward Administrations are used for repelling or withdrawing the
Flux of Blood from the Nostrils, let Topics also be put into the Nostrils to
close the Gaping Mouths of the Vessels, for which use Injections of Liquid
things, Pledgets, Powders to be blown in, and Fumes are wont to be prescribed,
which failing of effect we must come at last to Escharoticks.

9. Amongst Liquids, a Solution of Vitriol made in fountain water, is accounted
not only the chief, but as good as all the rest: Some boast of this as of a
great secret, and an infallible stopper of Blood: Indeed the same applied to a
fresh Wound, for as much as by corrugating the extremities of the cut Vessels
it closes them, it keeps back the Flux of Blood and powerfully stops it: But in
regard in an Eruption of Blood from the Nostrils (where the Blood is conveyed
to the gaping Mouths of the Arteries and ought to be received by the Veins,
this application closes these as well, or rather than those, it does here
little, or no good at all, as I have often known it tried. This Medicine is
prepared of green Vitriol, viz. the Hungarian, or of that of our own Country,
also of the Factitious Vitriol of Mars dissolved in a sufficient quantity of
fountain water. I know some commend a Solution of Roman Vitriol, which they are
wont to use not only by injecting it, but by applying it Sympathetically to a
Bloody Linnen-cloath: I have also known a Water prepared of an Infusion of
white Vitriol with Bole and Camphire used successfully to Wounds, and often to
other Eruptions of Blood.

But in regard a water injected into the Nostril does not stick enough to the
Mouths of the Vessels, but is washed away by the Bloods breaking forth before it
can exert its Virtue; therefore it is better either that a Stiptick Powder be
blown into it, or that a Pledget dipped in the water of Vitriol be thrust into
the Nostril to the upper part of it, either by it self, or strewn to the
Nostril to the upper part of it, either by it self, or strewn with an
Astringent Powder. Many Stiptick Powders and of diverse kinds are wont to be
prescribed for this purpose: I commonly use either Crocus Martis Calcined to
the highest reduess, or the Powder of Vitriol Camphorated, or a Vitriolick Soot
scrap't from the bottom of an old Brass Kettle, the Powder of which I have
often tried with success in this case. In obstinate Haemorrhagies and not
yielding to other Remedies, let a Pledget having on its top a Caustic
Colcother be thrust up into the Nostrils as far as it will go, that the little
Mouths of the Vessels being burnt, and covered with an Eschar, all Eruption of
Blood may be presently stopped. There are many other Errhines famous amongst
Practitioners for stopping Blood, as Hogs-dung thrust up into the Nostrils,
which is thought merely by the Nastiness of its Odor to repel the Blood ready
to burst forth: Also the Fume of the Blood dropping on a red-hot Iron and
returned up into the Nostrils, the Powder of which also when burnt is blown up
into them. Vsnea or the growing Moss on a Man's Scull which has not been interred
is highly commended by some for this effect.

So much of outward Remedies for stopping Bleeding, whose Virtue ought likewise
to be promoted by inward things seasonably given and cooperating.

Therefore a thin Diet being prescribed, and the Patient ordered to keep
himself in an erect posture, or not much leaning back, whilst the foresaid
Administrations are orderly applied, let Medicines appropriated to the same end
be prescribed also to be inwardly taken: Remedies of this kind have two chief
scopes, viz. First to cause the Blood being kept within its Vessels to be
quietly Circulated, its Effervescence, whether happning through its Accension
or Fermentation, being suppressed. Secondly, to retard by fit Remora's, the
violent Motion of the Heart, driving round the Blood too rapidly.

1. The first intention requires those kinds of Medicines which suppress the
too great Accension of the Blood, and appease its undue Fermentation; for which
uses I am wont to prescribe the following.

Take the waters of Plantain, red Poppies, Purslain, and of the Spawn of Froggs
of each four Ounce, Syrup of Water Lillies two Ounces, Sal Prunella a Dram; mix
them, make a Julape, the Dose is three Ounces thrice or four times a Day.

Take Barley-water two Pounds, red Rose-leaves a handful, Spirit of Vitriol as
much as will give it a grateful Acidity, or about half a Dram, make a warm
Infusion for extracting the Tincture, add Syrup of the Juice of St. John 's
Wort two Ounces; the Dose is three or four Ounces to take at pleasure often in
the Day time, or by Night.

Take Leaves of stinging Nettles, and of Plantain of each three handfuls, being
bruised pour to them of Plantain water four Ounces, express it strongly, and
take it.

2. For the Second intention, viz. to retard the over-violent beat of the
Heart, Hypnoticks and Opiats are proper.

Take red Poppy-water three Ounces, Syrup of Diacodium half an Ounce: Mix them,
make a Draught to be taken going to Bed. (Or)

Take Conserve of red Roses an Ounce and a half, Powder of the Seeds of Henbane
and of white Poppies, of each two Drams, Syrup of Poppies what suffices. Maek
an Opiate. The Dose is the quantity of a Nutmeg every six or eight hours (Or)

Take Laudanum Cydoniated a Dram, the Dose is fifteen Drops twice a Day in a
proper Vehicle.

So much of an immoderate Eruption of Blood, and its Cure, whilst it happens
without a Fever, but when it happens in a Fever, and must be stayed because of
too much loss of Blood, it is either Critical, growing to be immoderate by
reason of some Accident, to which the Method and Medicines even now prescribed
may be accommodated, though with some caution and a due respect to the State of
the Fever: Or it is merely Symptomatical, which happening in a Malignant, or
Spotted-fever, the Smallpox, Meazles, or Plague, it scarcely either can or
ought to be repelled or stopped by the foresaid Remedies: For letting Blood is
not proper; repelling Topics, also cooling Julapes or Decoctions, or
Narcoticks have no place: The chief intention of Curing will be to change the
Eruption of Blood into a Sweat, for upon raising a gentle Sweat, the Flux of
Blood, if it be not extremely dangerous, ceases of its own accord.

Take water of Meadow-sweet and Tormentil of each four Ounces: Of the cold
Cordial of Saxonius two Ounces. Treacle-water an Ounce and a half. Bezoartick
Vinegar three Drams, Syrup of Coral an Counce and a half, Confection of
Hyacinth two Drams, make a Julape; the Dose is six spoonfuls every third hour.

Take Powder of Toads prepared half a Dram, Camphire two Grains; let it be
taken with the foresaid Julape every sixth hour. (Or)

Take Pulvis Pannonici Rubri from half a Dram to two Scruples give it after the
same manner.

Take Confection of Hyacinth three Drams, Pulvis Pannonici Rubri a Dram, Syrup
of Coral what suffices; make a Confection, the Dose is the quantity of a Nutmeg
every other hour.

Take Roots of Bistort and Tormentil of each an Ounce, Leaves of Meadow-sweet,
Burnet, Wood Sorrel of each a handful, burnt Hartshorn two Drams, Shavings of
Ivory and Hartshorn of each two Drams, boil them in three Pounds of Fountain
water to two Pounds, add toward the end Conserve of red Roses three Ounces,
sirain it, the Dose is three Ounces often in a Day.

So far of the first Indication which is Curatory together with the scopes of
Curing and the forms of Medicines destinated for an Eruption of Blood from the
Nostrils, happening either with, or without a Fever. The second Indication which
is Vital prescribes only a thin Diet, temperate Cordials, and a fit ordering of
the Patient: The provision for the two For former is so small and easy, that it
seems not necessary to set down a form and rules particularly for them:
Concerning the latter the chief question is whether we ought to keep those that
are seized with an Eruption of Blood either in Bed, or out of it: It Is an
unquestioned thing that those that are weak, and subject to fall often into
Swounding Fits, ought not to be stirred from Bed, unless happily it, be to try a
Cure (as we have intimated before: As to others that are not so weak, we say
thus, those whose Blood has not an easy Transpiration by reason of the
Constipation of the Pores, and upon its being put in a stronger Motion by the
heat of the Bed is disposed to greater Turgescencies, and to Eruptions, it will
be good for them not only to stay out of Bed, while Bleeding, but likewise
sometimes to be cooled by outward Applications in the whole habit of the Body,
or at leastwise in most of its Members: Wherefore Fabritius Hildanus relates
how he presently Cured one of a violent Bleeding at Nose, after many ordinary
Remedies tried in vain, by putting him into a Vessel of cold water: with the
like success also Riverius having ordered another affected in like manner to be
taken forth of his Bed, and laid on a Woolen Rugg in the Floor, fomented his
whole Body with Linnen-cloaths wetted in an Oxicrate: Yet this method is not
generally proper for all Persons, and at all times: But on the contrary those
whose Blood being of a free Transpirable disposition, and enjoying open Pores,
readily evaporates, and is wont upon any moderate ambient heat to be resolved
into Sweat, and consequently to become more calm, it is good for such to
continue in Bed, not only whilst Bleeding, but as long as that Eruption is in
danger of returning in a short time after: For this reason it is that many
Persons subject to violent Eruptions of Blood live free from that Distemper
during the Summer, whilst they have a free Transpiration, but when the cold of
the Winter presses them, their Pores being stopped, they undergo more frequent
and dreadful Fits of it.

3. The third Indication being for Preservation, which regarding the removal of
the cause of the Distemper, either hinders the Eruptions of Blood, or renders
them less frequent or less considerable, suggests to us these two chief intents
of Curing: viz. First, that the Blood being restored to its due Temperament and
Mixture, be quietly circulated within its Vessels without Turgescencies and
Eruptions; And Secondly, that the Blood Vessels be kept in their due State as
to their Conformations of their little Months, and the Tones of their Muscular
Fibers, so that those Vessels neither cause those disorderly Sallyes of the
Blood to the Head, or give way to its Eruption from the Nostrils: For both
these ends, in the first placelet the Redundancy of the Blood, and its great
foulness be provided against by a seasonable Administration of Phlebotomy and
Purgation; and then forprocuring and preserving its right Temperament let the
following Alteratives be given in fit seasons for Physic.

Take Conserve of red Roses, and of the wild Rose, of each three Ounces, Powder
of all the Saunders, of each half a Dram, of Coral prepared a Dram, of the
reddest Crocus of Mars two Drams, Sal Prunella four Scruples. With a sufficient
quantity of Syrup of Coral, make an Electuary, take early in the Morning, and
going to Bed the quentity of a Chestnut either by it self; or Drinking after it
of the following distilled water three Ounces.

Take of the tops of Cypress and Tamarisk of each eight handfuls, tops of St.
John 's-wort and of Horse-tayl of each four handfuls, all the Saunders bruised,
of each an Ounce, Pith of White-bread two Pounds, being slic't very small pour
to them of New-milk eight Pounds, distill it with common Organs: Sweeten each
Dose as you take it with a sufficient quantity of the Syrup of the Juice of
Plantain.

Take Leaves of Plantain, Brooklimes, and stinging Nettles of each four
handfuls, being bruised pour to them of the foregoing water half a Pound, small
Cinnamon water two Ounces, express it strongly; the Dose is three or four
Ounces in the Morning at nine of the clock, and at five in the Afternoon.

Let Medicines of this kind be taken Spring and Fall for twenty or thirty Days,
giving sometimes a gentle Purge between whiles: But in the Summer let Mineral
Chalybeat waters be Drunk for a Month, than which there is not a more excellent
Remedy in this case. I shall now give you an example of one Cured of an
Eruption of Blood, whose case was somewhat particular.

I was lately sent to for advice for a Gentleman living far off who had been
troubled a good while with frequent and violent Eruptions of Blood, sometimes
from the Nostrils, sometimes from the Heamorrhoids; this person had been often
let Blood by the advice of his friends, but found no good thereby, nay most
commonly after opening a Vein falling into cold Sweats, and Swounding Fits, and
still as liable to Eruptions of Blood, he was wont to be much worse: To this
Person (not having seen him) I prescribed Julapes, and cooling Decoctions, and
Anodyns, also Juicy expressions of Herbs, and other things to cool the Blood,
but these things also (as though all yet were far from the makr) had nothing a
better success; at length being called into the country to see him, I found the
affect with which he was seized to be merely or chiefly Convulsive, for the
Blood breaking forth daily, his Pulse was weak, his Extreme parts cold, and all
the Vessels were fallen, as though too much emptied: Moreover the Patient was
troubled with a continual Giddiness, and a Trembling of the Heart, and was
taken now and then with Swounding Fits, or with the apprehension of it: Truly
it was so far from it that the Blood should break forth of the Vessels by
reason of any Redundancy or Turgescency, that rather on the contrary its
Current was so extremely low and small, that it seemed scarce able to maintain
the Stream of Circulation: But the thing was, that often in a Day he sensibly
pervceiv'd somewhat on a sudden to pass privately sometimes up, and sometimes
down his Body like a wind, and for the most part an Eruption of Blood from the
Nostrils or Haemorrhoids followed the Tendency of that Motion. So that it was
easy hence to conclude, that the moving Fibers of the Blood Vessels, by which
they are contracted, being seized with Convulsions, drew suddenly every way in
a disorderly manner the Stream of the Blood, as small and low as it was, and
forced it now and then to an Eruption: Which also was the easier done, because
the Lax and Gaping Mouths of the Vessels permitted the Blood driven to them to
flow forth without any due stay: A Method of Cure ordered pursuant to this
Aetiology confirmed it by its good success: For Bleeding, and the use of
Blood-stopping Medicines being thenceforwards omitted, I prescribed the use of
the following Powder whereof he took a Dose every sixth hour with a proper
Julape.

Take Powder of the Roots of Male Peony, red Coral, and Pearl of each a Dram,
Ivory, Crabbs Eyes, Boodstone, of each half a Dram, Sal Prunella a Dram, make
a Powder, the Dose is half a Dram.

Take black Cherry water eight Ounces, Balm water and small Cinnamon water, of
each two Ounces. Treacle water an Ounce, Syrup of Coral an Ounce and a half.

I farther ordered that Ligatures should be used in due course to certain
places, and now and then to others as occasion required, both to stop, and to
intercept the Convulsions of the Vessels: And by these Remedies and ways of
Administrations he soon grew well without any Relapse.

CHAP. III. Of Vesicatories.
HAving treated of the Emission, and stopping of the Blood, according to
occasion, there ramain certain other Humors, to wit the Nervous and Nutritious
Homours, and likewise the Serous and other Excrementitious ones which are wont
to abound within the Brain, Nerves, and within the Nervous and Fleshy Fibers,
and even in the Pores of the Skin, and of the Solid parts, which being often
deparved or let in their Motion, require an Emission, being otherwise apt to
prove greatly prejudicial, and often to cause dangerous Distempers: Wherefore
for a seasonable prevention of affects arising, or which are apt to arise from
such cause, Physic has found out certain other Emissaries to derive
immediately, or meidately the foresaid Homours from the parts and places where
they prove offensive: And those Emissaries are either coutinual, viz. Issues of
various kinds, which as everlasting Soures continually discharge that Ichor or
Excrementitious Humidity; or they are Temporary, when upon occasion the Scarf
Skin being removed in some part of the Body, the extremities of the Vessels in
the Skin are laid naked, and withal so irritated, that they discharge in a
great abundance Serous Homours of a verious Origin and Nature, and continue so
too Evacuate them for some time, sometimes longer, and sometimes a shorter
while. Now such a manner of drawing forth Serous Homours from the Exterior
Surface of the Body, or of some certain part of it is wont to be effected by
Medicines called by the Ancients Phaenigms, or Synapisms, by the Modern
Vesicatories; of which (because their knowledge prepares the way to the
Doctrine of Issues) we shall in the first place treat here, and shall
particularly insist on the explication of, these three things, viz. first it
shall be shown of what substances, and after what manner ordered, Vesicatories
are prepared. Secondly, they being of various kinds, we shall declare what are
the ways and manners of working in each, or at least in the chief of them: And
Thirdly, we shall enquire for the Cure of what sort of affects they ought to be
used, and to what places applied.

1. As to the first, the most simple Blisterers are either Fire, or Solid
Bodies, or Liquors endued with Fiery Particles, which nevertheless are seldom
put to this use by reason of the Terror they give, and the Imminent danger
lest being roughly applied they do not so much Blister the Scarf-skin, as burn
both this and the Skin, and other parts: What therefore is more safe and less
to be dreaded, let Epithems made of Concrets which have smart Particles, or (as
is said) Potentially Fiery, be applied to the places to be Blistered; which
being either more mild were called by the Ancients Phaenigms, because the
Scarfskin being removed they made the part red: Or in respect of the matter
they were called Synapisms, and were wont to be prepared of Mustard,
Pigeons-dung, Squills bruised, Garlic, Milk of the Fig Tree, and the like; or
they were more strong and for the most part consisted of Euphorbium,
Cantharides, Flammula Jovis, Batrachion, water Plantain, with many other
things, which being endowed with a certain Burning or Corrosive quality are
outwardly applied for the said use, but inwardly taken are Poisonous and often
Mortal.

The Compositions and Forms of Blisterers are manifold and of sundry sorts:
Though one, or two, and the more simple the better, may suffice here, and in
most cases it is all one which you use: According to our wont we shall here set
down some of the more select, and most useful prescripts of these sorts of
Medicines: And to say little here os Dropax's, Synapisms, and Phaenigms, which
are now in a manner out of use: Almost all Vesicatories at this time made use
of, have Cantharides for their Basis.

Take Powder of Cantharides from half a Dram to a Dram, Powder of Ameos-seed a
Scruple: Stale Leaven wrought with Vinegar what suffices; make a Mass for a
Plaster, spread part of it on Leather, and apply it to the part for twelve
hours. This works infallibly and strongly enough; but because it is not
compact, and sticking, but is apt to slide from the place where it is put, or
to crumble, therefore for a more convenient application the following does very
well, and is now every where in use amongst most persons.

Take Cantharides three Drams, Euphorbium half a Dram, Powder of Ameos-seeds a
Dram, Melilot Plaster what suffices; let them be incorporated with a warm
hand, using as much of the Powder as the Mass of Plaster will receive. Let a
sufficient-quantity of this be spread on Leather, and be applied for twelve or
sixpeen hours,

Some use to incorporate as much of the said Powder with Burgundy-pitch as it
will receive, and to spread it on Leather, and then to cover the edges of this
Plaster with another Mass of Plaster, made of Powder of red Saunders
incorporated with Burgundy-pitch, so administering a Dropax and Vesicatory
together: Moreover by applying continually the said Plaster to the place
rubified and ulcerated after the Scarf-skin is Blistered and removed, and by
wiping it clean only once or twice a Day, and presently applying it again, they
make the little Ulcers, raised by Blistering, to run as long as they please,
nay sometimes above a Month, and to discharge a great plenty of Ichor, or
Excrementitious Humidities,

Others sew up Cantharides bruised and sprinkled with Vinegar in a little Bag
of very fine Silk, and apply them to the place to be Blistered,

Some Empiricks instead of Cantharides lay on the place to be Blistered a Mass
of the Leaves of Batrachion, or Flammulajovis bruised, by which the Scarf-skin
being Blistered, or rather eaten away, the Skin it self, as if touched with an
actual Fire, is often mightily inflamed, and deeply ulcerated; whence not only
a great discharge of Ichor, but sometimes an Inflammation of the whole Member,
and a Feverish Disposition ensue, wherefore those things must not be used
without considertation.

2. If we enquire into the manner and way how these and other Vesicatories
operate, First we must show after what manner actual Fire, and things endued
with Particles proceeding from Fire, cause a Blistering; and then by an easy
Analogy we shall come to know the force and manner of working of those sorts of
Medicines which are said to contain a Potential Fire: Therefore concerning the
former we observe that Fiery Particles, not applied too roughly, Penetrating
the Scarf-skin without Solution of Continuity, enter the Skin it self, where
the extremities of the Blood Vessels, Nerves, and Nervous Fibers, are
terminated; and there altering these from their Position, wrest them sundry
ways, and pervert the Conformation of the whole Texture of the Skin: So that
from all the Vessels being mightily irritated, a Watery Humor filled with
Fiery Particles, and therefore rejected both from the Blood, and from the
Nervous Juice, is voided in a great abundance: That Lympha, because it cannot
pass through the Scarf-skin, separates it from the Skin and raises it into a
Blister.

Hence it will be easy to understand after what manner Vesicatories perform
their operation: viz. Cantharides (and so all other things of the same virtue)
being outwardly applied, and coming to be made warm by the Effluviz's of the
part they lie on, and so stirred up to exert their force, emit from them a
great plenty of Smart and Fiery Particles as it were, which penetrating the
Scarf-skin without breaking it, strongly fix themselves in the Skin: Where
sirst they act on the Spirits and then by their means on the Humors and Solid
parts: Those Particles very much irritate the Spirits and make them cause
painful Convulsions of the Fibers, and they fuse the Humors and make them
separtate into parts, so that the Watery part being mightily filled with those
Smart, and as it were Venomous Particles, is thrown off on every side by the
rest of the Latex: And the extremities of the Vessels and Fibers being either
in the mean time Eaten away by Burning, or opened and emulg'd as it were by
Twitching, that Ichor is voided in a plentiful measure from their little Mouths
carrying with it the offensive Particles. Which Ichor afterward separates the
Impervious Scarf-skin from the Skin, and raises it into a little Blister. And
after this is broken and removed, is plentifully voided for some time from the
Ulcerated Skin.

But this is not only so done, because the Serous Latex inbibing the Smart
Particles of the Medicine, and conveying them forth, does not always carry them
back all the same way that they came in; but sometimes being imbued with those
Particles it regurgitates into the Mass of Blood, and afterward being
circulated with it, and voided with its offensive Load by other Emunctories, it
offends in its passage or as it goes forth certain weak, or tender Ductus's.
Hence many after the use of great or many Vesicatores having their Urinary
passages thereby affected with an Acrimony or Erosion, get a Strangurie which
in some is most sharp and intolerable: Again in others troubled with the Stone
that application sometimes causes Bloody Urine: Hence also it may be suspected,
that tender Lungs, or such as are inclined to a Consumption, may be much
endangered by the outward application of this Medicine: Which nevertheless I
have not hitherto known happen to any; but rather on the contrary I can
testify by frequent trials that it rather proves to their advantage than to
their prejucice: For the smart Particles of the Catharides, upon long
application being sometimes plentifully imbibed by the Blood, infect its whole
Serum; which Latex nevertheless so aculeated, as long as it is mixed with the
Balsamic Blood, offends no part; but being separated from it by the Reins, it
sometimes hurts them, and often not only twitches the Neck of the Bladder with
its Acrimony, but sometimes Corroding it fetches thence a Mucus, and little
Schims, and even Blood it self: But in the Mass of Blood, those same sharp
Salino Volatile Particles often do great good; because they destroy the fixed
and acid Salts in it, and likewise open the too close Texture of the Blood, and
so cause its Serous and other Morbifick Particles before fast bound in it, to
be separated from it, and to be readily sent forth by Urine and Sweat; hence in
Fevers, Vesicatories long applied cause a large Evacuation by Urine and a free
Sweat: Moreover the same open the Obstructed passages, and stir up the Portions
of the Blood and Serum stagnating in any place, or extravased, and restore them
to Circulation: Wherefore they are wont to do good not only in Distempers of
the Serum, but also of the Blood, nay in the Pleurisy, Peripneumonia, and in
any other Fevers whatsoever.

Hitherto having shown after what manner Vesicatories work, first on the
Spirits, and then on the Humors and Solid parts; I must next set down their
effects both good and evil; also the manner of using them: That they work first
on the Spirits it is plain from hence, that they exert no power on the Dead:
And its an ill Omen in very weak persons when Vesicatories do not work, because
it is a sign that the Animal Spirits are mightily dejected, or lessened in their
store.

Therefore to explain well the Energy, or Virtue of this Medicine, we must
consider what Humors it evacuates, or alters immediately or mediately: And
then in what Diseases, and in Bodies how disposed it does good or hurt.

As to the first, the Humors immediately let forth by a Vesicatory partly
issue from the Pores and Glands of the Skin, and partly from the Mouths of the
little Arteries, and partly from the extremities of the Nervous Fibers; happily
some little of the Juice fresh received may be cast back again from the little
Mouths of the Veins, though much of it cannot: The Humors mediately voided by
a Vesicatory are those which the foresaid parts being emptied receive from
elsewhere, and convey forth.

1. The Scarf-skin being removed by a Vesicatory from the Skin a Serous Humor
is drawn from the Glands and Pores, and this not only from the place Blistered,
but those Pores being pervious to others, a Portion of Serum coming from other
Pores sometimes succeeds in the Cells of the first drained, and thence also
distill forth, wherefore in an Anasarca the little Ulcers raised by a
Vesicatory empty waters on every side in great plenty, and derive them from all
the Neighboring parts, nay sometimes from those that are very remote.

2. The Mouths of the Arteries do not only Spew forth the Portion of Serum
brought to them according to common course, but the Serous Latex being imbued
with the irritative force of the Medicince in the whole Mass of Blood is
thereby separated from the Blood in a more plentiful manner, and carried forth
by the said Mouths of the Arteries, and with it other Excrements, and sometime
the Morbid matter it self in a large measure: Hence in Malignant Fevers, nay
and in some Putrid Fevers of a difficult Crisis, when the Refuse and
Corruptions of the Blood unapt for separation threaten the Praecordia, or
Brain-vesicatories deriving it forth continually and by degrees, often give
great relief: To which may be added that the same also (as we have hinted
before) alter and restore the Blood degenerated or depraved as to its Salts,
and likewise by opening or rarifying its Texture, dispose it to a Eucrasy:
Wherefore this kind of Remedy often agrees excellently well, not only in a
Feverish State of the Blood, but likewise when it is otherwise vitiated, or
Cacochinical.

3. Reason and Experience convince us that Vesicatories draw from the
extremeties of the Nerves, and Nervous Fibers the Latex contained within their
Ductus's, and free it from Stagnation, and that they exagitate the
Heterogeneous Particles mixed with the Latex, and deriving them from the Brain
convey them forth, whence they are found of excellent use in Convulsive affects.

From these things we may gather for the Cure of what Diseases this kind of
Remedy is chiefly conducing; for in order to an Evacuation from the Pores and
Glands of the Skin as often as a Serous, sharp or otherwise offensive Humor
is gathered together in or near them, and being excluded from Circulating with
the Blood obstinately sticks there, certainly there is no readier, or easier
way of clearing the same forth than by applying a Vesicatory on or beneath the
place affected; wherefore it is not only indicated in an Anasarca, and all
Cutaneous foulnesses and breaking forth; but a Vesicatory is likewise required
in Pains either of the Gout, or Scurvy any where sixth in the outward habit of
the Body, or in some Member.

Secondly, Vesicatories are always used in Malignant Fevers in respect of the
Blood, both to Purge it by degrees from all Heterogeneous and Morbifick matter,
and to alter it from its two Acid, or Salt, or otherwise vitiated Disposition
into a due Temperament: Nay they are of most excellent use in all Putrid Fevers
threatening ill, and of a difficult Determination: Therefore also in the Scurvy,
Leucophlegmatia, the Longing Disease of Maids, and in any other Cacochimia that
kind of Remedy does often great good: Again, Vesicatories are generally applied
with good success not only for correcting the Blood it self, but likewise as
often as being depraved it pours its Corruptions on the other parts, and so
gives a beginning to Diseases, and cause Fits of them in the Head, Thorax,
Belly, or Members. Wherefore in Headaches, Vertigo's, and Sleepy affects this
is a known and vulgar Remedy; and so in a Catharrh, and any Defluxion either
into the Eyes, Nose, Palate, or Lungs, every ordinary Man Prescribs Cantharides
for a Revulsory without advising with a Physician. I must own that my self
having been often seized with a violent Cough accompanied with much and thick
Spittle (to which I am Originally inclined) have not found more good from any
Medicine than from Vesicatories; therefore I am wont when that Distemper
presses, first to apply Blistering-plaisters on the Vertebrae of the Neck, then
those little Ulcers being healed, I apply them behind the Ears, and afterward
if need requires on the Shoulder-blades; for so the Serous Filth breaking forth
in abundance from the dissolved Texture of the Blood, is derived from the
Lungs, nay and the mixture of the Blood sooner recovers its Crasis, its
irregular Salts being by this means destroyed.

3. In respect of the Humor to be evacuated or derived from the Genus Nervosum
and the Brain it self, Epispasticks as they are of most common use in Sleepy,
Convulsive, and Pain-causing affects, so they often prove mighty beneficial:
Was ever any one seized with a Lethargy, Apoplexy, or Fallingsickness, but
presently his Friends or Attendants, though never so ignorant, flead his Skin
with Cantharides? In strange Convulsive Motions, usually ascribed to no less
than Witchcraft, I have applied Vesicatories with great success to many parts
of the Body together, and by renewing them now and then in fresh places, I have
continued them above a Month: Again fixed and cruelly tormenting Pains in the
Membranous parts are seldom Cured without this AdminiAstration: For sometimes
Humors and Morbifick Particles, which being thoroughly radicated, yield not at
all to Catharticks, or Medicines working by Sweat, or Urine, seem to be utterly
rooted out by Vesicatories, laying hands, as it were, on the Disease.

Yet this Remedy though very general, does not work so readily and successfully
in some Diseases and Constitutions; wherefore we must not use it
inconsiderately, or indifferently to all persons; for those that have the
Stone, and are subject to frequent and great Fits of the Strangury scarce ever
undergo its application without prejudice. Wherefore in persons so affected we
must not use Vesicatories but in Malignant Fevers, or in Acute Diseases of the
Head to prevent a greater Mischief.

As to the various Temperaments and Constitutions of Men, in respect of which
Vesicatories agree or dissagree, more or less: Concerning these things this
threefold notable difference presents it self, fiirst some in a manner always
bear the use of this Medicine well, and the little Sores made in the Skin by it
distill forth the Excrementitious Humidities plentifully enough without any
Disury or great Inflammation of the place Blistered, and then heal of their own
accord: Which effect happens only in a Blood of a good Temperament, where the
Salt and Sulphur being in a moderate quantity and in a due state, there is a
good plenty of Serum; whose Latex receding readily and in a copious manner from
the rest of the Blood takes with it the smart Particles of the Medicine
imbibed, and partly distills them forth by the place Blistered, and partly
conveys them out by the Urinary passages without offending them: On this
account also those good effects before mentioned are puoduc't in the Mass of
Blood.

But Secondly, this Medicine does neither agree, nor work well with others, for
it makes the place on which it is applied mighty red, or rather excoriats it
with a violent Pain, and a great Inflammation: And yet the little Sores there
made, though they torment the Patient a good while, cast forth but a very
little Ichor, or scarce any at all: Moreover in those to whom Blistering always
proves so torturing, a cruel Stangury for the most part succeeds it: This
troublesome and withal unprofitable use of Vesicatories happens very frequently
to Men of a hot and choleric Temperament, whose Blood contains Salt, and
Sulphur, in a great plenty, and but a little Serum, which is wholly tainted
with the others: Wherefore when its Latex which ought to carry off the smart
Particles of the Medicine, does not part readily, nor in a plentiful manner
from the rest of the Blood (to wash them away presently) those Particles still
sticking in the Skin, Taint and Poison, as it were, the Blood in its passage,
and being thereby hindered in its Circulation, they cause it to gather together
and stagnate within the extremities of the Vessels, whereby they are inflamed:
Moreover the Serous Latex at length separated by the Reins, being but in a
small quantity and sharp of it self, and made more sharp by the Particles of
the Medicine, irritate the Neck of the Bladder, and often corrode it with its
Acrimony.

There remains a Third, though more rare case, of persons Blistered, in whom
the little Sores raised in the Skin presently pour forth the Serous Humor in
such abundance, that there is straight way need of repelling Medicines, and
such as close the Mouths of the Vessels; otherwise upon the too great Efflux of
waters a Dissolution of the strength, and a failing of the Spirits are
endangered to ensue: I have known this to have happened so constantly in some,
that they were forced for the time to come to abstain from the use of
Cantharides, how great soever the need were of them: The reason of which seems
to be that the Blood being endowed with an Over-salt and sharp Serum had its
Texture too easy to be dissolved: Besides this great Efflux of Serum raised
upon the first application of a Vesicatory, it happening sometimes late in
Malignant Fevers, and in others of an ill or no Cirsis, and continuing for some
time, wholly drains the Morbifick matter, and often frees the Patient from the
very Jaws of Death: In such a case after that the little Sores have voided
little, or an indifferent quantity of Ichor the first Days, at length nature
attempting a Crisis this way, a vast quantity of Serous-filth flows from the
same; and so continues to flow forth for many Days, nay sometimes Weeks, till
the Patient looked upon before as given over, recovers his perfect Health: As it
is not easy to heal the little Sores so flowing in abundance, so it is not safe
to do it before the whole Seminal Root of the Disease be spent: Not long since
a famous Dr. of Physic of London recovering with much ado of a Malignant
Fever, had in many parts of his Body places Blistered, daily distilling forth a
plenty of Ichor, after some time (they being troublesome and tedious to him) he
applied strong Repercussives to them all, and so presently stopped all Issue of
Matter: Those Sources had been scarce stopped two Days, but falling into a
Relapse of his Disease, on a sudden he was seized with a Languor of the
Spirits, and frequent Fainting Fits, with a cold Sweat, and a low and weak
Pulse; and not being able to be relieved by any Remedies, however cordial they
were, he died within three Days: The cause of which seems to be that the
Malignant matter suddenly struck back into the Nervs of the Heart; whose action
being thereby hindered, the Vital Function soon failed.

CHAP. IV. Of Issues.
VEsicatories differ from Issues in this, that these are ordered for longer
continuance. Moreover the former for the most part being requisite in Acute
Diseases and others, whose Morbid matter requires a speedy removal, regard
chiefly the taking away of the Conjunct cause of the Disease, and therefore are
made of a good breadth, but superficial withal, that such running Sores being
large may evacuate much Matter, and then be easily Cured: But on the contrary
Issurs being chielfy indicated for Preservation, are designed for removing, or
overcoming the Procatarctick cause of the Distemper: Wherefore they consist of
a narrower, but deeper Orifice, made through the whole thickness of the Skin,
so that letting forth the Morbifick matter still in less quantity, they derive
it farther, and continue longer to empty it forth.

Concerning Issurs there are these three chief heads of inquiry viz. First
what Humors chiefly those Emissaries evacuate, and whence they derive them.
Secondly, in what Diseases and Constitutions they agree better, or worse; And
Thirdly, in what places, after what Form, and with what Instruments they ought
to be made.

1. As to the former, Issues in like manner as Vesicatories Purge forth all
Humors within the Skin, though lying in a less compass, or such as are
conveyed through it both from the Sangui-ferous and Nervous Vessels; nor do
they only like Vesicatories irritate and draw from the outward Superficies of
the Skin, but perforating the whole Skin, convey forth whatsoever flows from
the sides of the Orifice through the broken Vessels, and whatever comes from
elsewhere under the hole: Wherefore not only the Humors gathered together
within the Pores and Glands of the Skin, or conveyed thither by the Arteries
and Nerves flow to Issues, but moreover the Serous Excrements under the Skin,
which are wont to be conveyed, or to pass from place to place through the
Interstices of the Muscles and Membranes, tend to them from all parts, and
there find their way forth. Again, an Issue made in a fit place anticipates
Mothisick Humors, which are wont to be conveyed to parts that are weak, and
long afflicted, and so frees sometimes this part, sometimes that, from their
Incursion: Hence the Gouty, or Nephritick, or Colic, nay sometimes the
Paralitick, or Scorbutic matter is intercepted by Issues in its passages from
its Sources to the Weakened places or Receptacles; and so the usual Fits of the
Disease being evaded, is conveyed forth: And this Emissary even as Trenches cut
for draining Fenny moistures, empties forth by defrees Humors sticking in any
part or region of the Body, and there doing hurt, and so it prevents or cures a
Morbid Disposition.

2. From these various ways of giving relief, with which Issues are wont to do
good in general its easily gathered for what affects chiefly they are required;
for though there be in a manner no Disease, in which this Remedy either does
hurt, or proves useless, yet it seems more necessary in some cases than in
others; it is prescribed even by the vulgar for almost every Distemper of the
Head, both outward and inward: Every ordinary person advises an Issue above all
things for the Convulsions of Infants and Children, for the Inflammation of
their Eyes, their Swellings of the King's Evil, and so for Headaches, Sleepy,
Vertigious, or Convulsive affects of Adult or Aged persons: Nor is this Remedy
less extolled against Diseases of the Breast; is there any one subject to a
Cough, Bloody or Consumptive-spitting, or to an Orthopnaea, who has not an
Issue made him? In like manner also Issues are commended for affects of the
Belly, there is scarce any Hypochondriacal person, or Hysterical Woman, and no
Gouty or Cahecttical person but have their Skin pierced in more places than a
Lamprey. It would be a tedious thing to recount here particulary all the
Distempers for which Issues are good.

3. Nevertheless this Remedy, however good and useful of it self, does not
agree with all persons, nor therefore must it be indifferently prescribed to
all: For there are two sorts of Men, who thongh they happen to be sick, may be
excused from Issues; because this Emissary evacuates too much in some, and in
others little, or less thanit ought, and in the mean time is mighty painful and
intolerable.

An Issue sometimes does not agree well because it evacuates or spends too much
the Humor, or Spirits: For I have observed in some that an Issue made in any
part of the Body voids forth an Ichor in quantity immoderate, and in quantity
vicious; for out of it at frequent times, if not continually, a Watery, thin,
and faetid Latex, often making the Pea, and coverings black, flows in a great
abundance, so that from its too great Efflux the Strength and Fiesh are
consumed.

An Issue sometimes vioding forth no very great quantity of Ichor spends the
Spirits and Strength more than it ought, which is known by the effect, and
sometimes not till afterward; to wit, because some upon keeping one or more
Issues open, grow weak and lean, and upon their being stopped, become presently
more Vigorous, and of a full habit: Moreover it is a common observation that
many upon having an Issue made near the Head, have been soon after seized with
some defect and weakness in their Sight, so that they were forced presently to
close it up, which seems to happen for this reason, because where the stock of
Spirits is but small, and their consistency very thin, little spendings of
them, or of the Juice out of which they are engendered, in case they are
continual, are with difficulty endured.

Moreover in an other, and that a different respect, Issues, as also
Vesicatories are forbidden to some, or are prescribed to them with great
caution; because voiding little or scarce any thing at all, they mightily
torment the place in which they are made: For those who being of a Choleric,
or otherwise hot Temperament, have their Mass of Blood thicker, and of a closer
Texture than it ought by reason of its being but little diluted with Serum, in
these persons a Solution of continuity being made, and kept in being by an
Issue, the Blood (not deposing Serum enough to keep it self free) sticks it
self in the passage, adn so being extravased causes a mighty painful
Infsammation; and in the mean time such an Issue voiding such a very small
quantity of Ichor proves as useless as troublesome.

As to the places where Issues are to be made, they are to be chosen according
to the ends of Curing, or the intentions required from them; which are chiefly
these three, viz. First, a general Evacuation of Humors from the whole Body.
Secondly, an Evacuation, and at the same time a Revulsion from some particulare
Member. Thirdly, an Evacuation and at the same time a Derivation from some
particular Member. In respect of the former it is proper to have an Issue cut in
the left Arm; The Second intention requires it to be made far from the part
affected, and the Third near it.

For these ends, viz. sometimes this, sometimes that, or the other Issues are
wont to be made, and that either by Incision, or a Cautery, or Perforation, in
every Region of the Body, viz. in the Head, Breast, and Abdomen, and in the Arms
and Legs, nay in most parts of each, and in their Orifices Peace or Wooden
Peace, Pellets, or Pledgets are put, and there continued for keeping them open.
By running through the Parts and Members of the Body, we shall observe the
chiefest places, and kinds of Issues.

Some order an Issue to be burnt by a Cautery in the Coronal Suture, and
recommend it for withdrawing the Humors and evacuating them from the Brain and
its Envelopings: Though some make a common Practice of this, yet I have found
it not to have succeeded well in many; so that I have ordered many Issues so
made on the Crown of the Head to be closed up, And this not without being
taught by reason and experience: For the Blood conveys much Filthy Matter
toward the place where it uses to discharge its Excrements, and deposes it in
the whole Neighborhood, and especially in the part affected (as being weaker
and more apt to receive them) whence it often happens that the Disease is
rather increas't than Cured: For the same reason, viz. to derive Humors from
the inward part of the Head outward, others make Issues in the Bregma on the
Sagittal Suture, and others in the hinder part of the Head about the beginning
of the Lambdoides: But the same exception lies against these as against the
former. Certainly an Issue made in the Arm much better anticipates the
Morbifick matter which is wont to be deposed about the inner parts of the Head,
if made in the Leg it revulses it, and made a little beneath the Head it
derives it thence. Hence for great affects of the Brain, and its Meninges, in
Infants and Children, we cut an Issue on the Nape of the Neck: To Adult or Aged
Persons we apply a Cautery on both sides the Spine betwixt the Shoulder-blades:
And there we often make two Issues capable of containing many Peace with great
success. As to Issues cut or burnt behind the Ears, or a Setaceum past through
its carneous Lobe; I have observed these things to have been seldom
advantageous, but often troublesome; because a Solution of continuity made in
these places neither discharges much Ichor, nor lasTs long, for the Orifice
though filled with a Pea, or Pill, will be covered with a thin Skin growing
over it in despite of all we can do.

Issues in the Back do excellently well, not only in Diseases of the Head by
evacuating and deriving the Morbifick matter, but likewise in the Gout, Stone,
and all Colicks, by anticipaing the Matter that feeds the Disease, and
intercepting it as it passes to its lurking holes, which is plainly made appear
by Experiments and Observations made in persons relieved by them.

Issues betwixt the Shoulder-blades are good for Diseases of the Breast; also in
the Arm, or Leg to evacuate or anticipate Humors flowing toward the Lungs,
and to withdraw the same there deposed; That an Issue in the Thorax cut betwixt
the Ribbs sometimes derives immediately the Consumptive matter from the Lungs,
we have shown elsewhere.

The Region of the Abdomen seems unfit to have an Issue in any part of it:
Nevertheless the Practice of some, though it be rare, is much cried up, which
order that a large Issue capable of containing many Peace, be burnt on the
Region of the Spleen for all hypochondriacal affects; I have known this done in
some without any great good, certainly not enough to recompense the trouble of
such a Remedy.

Some time since by an Issue in the Groin Isuccessfully Cured a mighty weakness
and ache in the Loins, not yielding to any other Remedies, and in another
person an inveterate Sciatica: For the Glandulous Emunctories seated in that
place, imbibe a great store of Excrements of the Blood and Nervous Liquor,
which if forthwith discharged from them, and that in a continued manner, it
will conduce much to the freeing of the Neighboring parts from any Morbifick
Seminal Root.

The ^^ugh being a large Member seems fit enough for bearing many and large
Issues to evacuate Humors plentifully from the whole Body, yet it does not
happen so in many, partly because having a Figure too much declining like an
inverted Cone, there is no convenient place for binding to keep in the Pea; and
partly because a Solution of continuity made amongst the meetings of many
Tendons, proves frequently Inflaming and Painful; so that it has been found
necessary sometimes when an Issue has been made there to cause it presently to
be closed up again to free the Person from Pain, and the trouble of Lameness:
Though in some it does better, because an Inflammation does not always happen
to the place perforated, and a Ligature applied to it, continues steadfast to
those that use to Garter above the Knee.

Moreover we must not only make choice of a fit part of the Body for an Issue,
but likewise of a fit place in the Member where it is made, which particularly
requires the Judgment of a Physician, or skilful Surgeon: For we must be
very careful that a Cautery or Incision be not admitted over, or too near the
Tendons or greater Vessels: Nor must an Issue be made in the very Body of a
Muscle, but in the Space or Interstice betwixt the Muscles; where the hole must
pass the whole Skin and so much farther till the little Membrane of the Muscle
underneath be penetrated, wherefore this operation is not to be
committedindiscreetly to Quacks and others ignorant of Anatomy; for upon an ill
performance herein there ensues not only a Frustration of all good, but often
great prejudices thence arise, nay sometimes eve^ to the hazard of Life.

It Is needless for me here to describe the way of preparing and compounding a
Cautery, or the figure and uses of the Incision Instrument for making Issues,
for these are commonly known, yet it will not be amiss to discourse somewhat
here after what manner we must deal with the Symptoms which happen to those
Emissaries after they are made, and hinder or pervert their Energies.

There being many and sundry sorts of affects hapening to Issues, a Cure is not
required for them all, but only for those of greatest moment: Therefore in the
first place it is needed whenever an Inflammation happens to the part or place
where it is. Secondly, if the Orifice voids more or less Ichor than it ought.
Thirdly, if the Sore be apt to dry up of its own accord, and now and then to be
covered with a little Skin, or to grow rank with a Spungy Flesh growing up in
its Circumference. As to the lesser defaults, as when the Sore bleeds often, or
if changing its place it gets by little and little into a worse, with many
others in which it is wont to prevaricate, it will not be worth while to mind
them here.

1. An Inflammation sometimes happens to an Issue, and that sometimes so great
that it threatens a Spacelus or Mortification of the part, nay and sometimes
brings it: Now such an affect comes either upon the fresh making of the
Orifice, or happens afterward by reason of the Blood and Humors being upon
some occasion put in a Commotion, and rushing in a throng to that place.

When an Issue is first made, presently by reason of the Solution of
continuity, and consequently the Blood's being somewhat let in its
Circulation in that part, some Inflammation and Soreness happen to all persons:
But in some who have a very hot Blood, and little diluted with Serum, this
proves much more violent, there hapening sometimes a Mortification of the part
inducing a Spacelus: Or Secondly, the Blood there stagnating is changed into a
Pus to be evacuated by an Abscess: Or Thirdly, which more frequently happens,
and ought to be always procured in our case, the Blood causing an Inflammation
is returned again into the Vessels, and restord to its Circulation by other
Ductus's into which it is forced.

But that it be conveyed back these two things are necessarily required, viz.
First, that it be much diluted with Serum there plentifully abounding, or
rather protruded into the part; And then Secondly, that the emptied Vessels
behind the Tumor Drink up again the Blood diluted by the Serum, and driven
back: For the Blood driven toward the Tumor, when it can go no farther
forward, yet at least that upon lessening its Bulk it may go back, discharges
Serum plentifully from it self, and drives it into the places obstructed; which
entering into the stagnating Blood, dilutes it, and getting into it is place
drives it into the Ductus's of the Vessels; and that Serum in the mean time
passing forward exhales through the Pores, and so the Blood which was
extravasated being diluted, and sent back by the Serum, and the Serum it self
evaporated, the Tumor with the Inflammation vanish by degrees: But in case (as
it often happens in hot Temperaments) the Blood extravased and driven into the
Pores be not diluted with a plentiful access of Serum, it will not only stick
there with obstinacy, but will cause a violently Inflamed Tumor with a Fever,
and sometimes other dreadful Symptoms. Not long since a great Divine whose
Blood was thick and hot, having an Issue made in the inside of his Leg, though
the Skin only was cut, an Inflammation shortly followed, which grew so violent
within a few Days that it could scarce be hindered from turning to a Gangreen by
the use of any Remedies whatsoever. Wherefore when the Blood extravasated
through a Solution of Unity, and wanting an access of Serum for diluting it,
and carrying it back, tends to a violent Inflammation, Fomentations, and
Cataplasms of Emollient things outwardly applied often do much good, because
the moist and mild Parricles parting from them, enter the stagnating Blood, and
dilute it, and so giving it a gentle motion cause it to return more readily
into its Vessels; so that those moist applications outwardly used supply the
defect of the inward Serum required for diluting the Blood: Nevertheless that
the Blood so diluted, and put in motion be restored to Circulation, it is
farther necessary that the Vessels which are to receive it be fufficiently
emptied, for which end besides a slender Diet, Bleeding and Purging are often
of necessary use; and indeed it is usual to Purge and often to Bleed
Cacochymical, and Plethorical persons a little before, or after an Issue is
made. Nor are these Remedies only proper to prevent or remove an Inflammation
in case of a fresh Issue, but are likewise good whenever that affect happens to
an Issue of a long standing: For if at any time the Blood being very impure,
and withal Feverishly boiling enters upon an Excretory Turgescency, it often
falls out that it deposes its Excrements and Filthy Dreggs about the Issue,
being hardly to be Purged elsewhere, and that it being there hindered from its
Circulation upon their being heapt together, is extravasated, and so causes a
violent Inflammation: Such an affect lately hapening in an Ancient Nobleman,
and at first neglected, soon turned to a Gangreen, from which nevertheless by
the help of proper Medicines carefully administered both inwardly and outwardly,
he escapt not without great danger of his Life.

2. If at any time an Issue discharges too much Ichor, which for the most part
is thin, and of a very ill Smell, and sometimes discolored, so that such vast
Spendings of Humor, and withal it is intolerable Stench requires a Cure: In
such case there are two chief Therapeutick intentions, viz. First, to
strengthen the mixture of the Blood that its Texture be not too prone to a
Dissolution, and Fusion of Serum: And Secondly, to preserve the place Ulcerated
by the Issue, and to keep it free from any Coruptive Ferment, so that no
Noisome Filth there lodged may defile the Blood as it passes through in
circulating, whereby being infected it may presently run into parts, and be
forced to depose the Serum there in such abundance.

The former scope of Curing orders scarce any thing but now and then a moderate
Purge, and a good Diet, viz. that the person keep himself from all Surfeits,
and irregularity as to the quantity, quality, and seasons of taking his Food;
and particularly from thin Wines, Cider, and other Acid Liquors, with which the
Blood is wont to be fus'd, and driven to flowings of Serum: For Persons so
affected most surely pay for any error or irregularity committed in Diet, a
Pain presently being raised about the Issue.

For the due Preservation of the Tone of the place where the Issue is made, and
for keeping it free from Putrefaction, you must take a particular care that for
avoiding all Nastiness, both the Solids to be put into the Orifice, and the
Coverings, be they either Plasters, Ivy Leaves, or Oyl-cloaths be changed
twice a Day: For in some each of these soon gets an ill savor, and presently
causes the Ulcer of the Issue to stink: In case this tends to Putrefaction,
presently instead of a Pea, or Woodenpill, let a Pill of Virgin-wax
incorporated with red Saunders and Verdigrease be put into it; and likewise let
a Fomentation of the Decoction of St. John's Wort, Yarrow, Centory, etc. be
applied Morning and Evening.

3. Sometimes it happens that an Issue even as a dried Fountain, discharges no
Humor: The reason whereof usually is either because the hole being not deep
enough does not penetrate the whole Skin, which is easily Cured by making it
deeper; or the Sore though large and deep enough, yet still continues dry
because the Serum does not readily nor freely separate from the Mass of Blood,
this having too close a Texture and then the only Remedy is to wear within the
Orifice, Solids more irritating, and working more strongly on the Mouths of the
Vessels: For which purpose Pills are made of the Wood of Ivy, of Box, or of the
Roots of Gentian, or of Hermodacts, and are often used with good success.

4. It often falls out that the Orifice of an Issue being too small, and
distilling forth little Ichor is covered over with a thin Skin with the Pea
included in it, and that with the hole it is healed up: For which default there
is scarce a proper Remedy to be applied; wherefore (rather than still to fret
the Skin to no purpose) it is better to let such an Issue close up, or to
transfer it to some other place.

5. The Sore of an Issue inclining to heal, and being hindered from it, has very
often about its edges, and sometimes in its Cavity a Spongy Flesh growing up;
the reason whereof is that the Nutritive Juice conveyed to the ends of the
Arteries, and Nervous Fibers, and not presently washed away by the Serous ichor,
sticks there, and beginning to be assimilated extend, both those Vessels to
fill the Cavity with Flesh; and the Blood in the mean while brought thither
Forms within that Mass little Sprouts of Veins for its return; nevertheless
that Flesh, as yet rough and shapeless, being kept from the greatest part of
the Orifice, grows up above its Brim, and when it is risen so high that it can
be no longer veiled and covered with the Skin, it continues still Naked and
Spongeous: This Excrescency is easily enough Cured by sprinkling on it
Escharotick Powders, of burnt Allom, Colcothar, or Mercury Praecipitate; for
these sorts of Medicines with their Acrimonious and Stiptick force eat away the
Flesh thus Luxuriant, repel the Nutritive Juice, and shut close the Mouths of
the Vessels. When that superfluous Flesh grows continually and increases about
the edges of an Issue, it is a sign that the Nutritive Juice abounds more there
than the Excrementitious Humor, and consequently that in persons so affected
that Emissary is not so very beneficial, wherefore under the pretext of this
reason many are mightily averse from that Remedy (which certainly is
inoffensive in most, though it be not equally advantageous in all.)

There is now an unperswadable opinion which has taken footing amongst many
here in England (I know not if it be so in other Countries) that an Issue or
Issues dipose to Barrenness; wherefore to all married Women, and desirous of
Children, this sort of Remedy, though otherwise never so conducing to their
Health, is Religiously forbidden; though no reason is yet given for this strick
Prohibition; only stories are told of certain Women having Issues who are
Barren; when it is as easy to show more Barren Women without Issues, and many
fertile with them: And truly I use to retort this as a chief Argument against
that opinion, there being no need of any other.

CHAP. V. Instructions and Prescripts for Curing Cutaneous affects.
IN the First place the Cuticle or Scarf-Skin being void of Life and Sense has
scare any Diseases belonging to it: This sometimes being too compact hinders
Transpiration; sometimes also by reason of some Accidents it becomes too gross
and callous in some places: But of it self being absolutely insensible, it is
not Distempered, though it be the cause that some affects, to be past off happily
by Transpiration, stick about the Superficies of the Skin; because the
Recrements and Filthy Dreggs of the Blood and Humors being driven outward and
having pasT the whole Skin, when by reason of the close Texture of the
Scarf-skin they are not able wholly to breath away, fixing on the outward part
of the Skin, they produce various discolourations and foul affects thereof: Of
which sort chiefly are those we call Summer Spots, also Scorbutical and
Malignant Spots, and likewise Spots and any other Stains whatever bedecking the
Skin, or Scarf-skin with any Marks or Specks without any tumor or unevenness.

As to the affects of the Skin it self in general, in regard they are various
and of sundry sorts, they are wont to be distinguished in a various respect, and
first of all that they are either with or without a Tumor: We took notice of
these latter even now.

Cutaneous affects with a Tumor are either universal, dispersed through the
whole Body, or particular, raised in these or other Members at random, and as
it were by chance.

The former either happen in a Fever, as chiefly the Smallpox, Meazles, and
other Malignant Pushes, to which also may be added the Flitting breaking forth
of Children which soon vanish; or they come without a Fever, as especially the
Itch, the running Scab, and Leaprous affects. Particular outward Tumors
happening sometimes in one part, and sometimes in another, for the most part are
not only belonging to the Skin, but also to the parts under it, viz. sometimes
to the Flesh, Membranes, or Glands, and consequently are of a various Nature
and a differing Form? It would be too long to treat of all these here
particularly, therefore at present I shall briefly speak merely of Cutaneous
affects such as before mentioned.

First, as to Summer Spots it is a sign that they proceed from Choler and other
yellow Recrements of the Blood, because they ave: most familiar to those that
are yellow Hair'd; again they happen to the Fairest Complexions, and in parts
most exposed to the Sun and Air, because their Skin being of a subtle Texture
transmits the Humor rarefied by the heat of the Sun, so far till it be stopped
by a thick Scarf-skin, near the places where it should break forth: This affect
as to the State of Health does not foreshow or threaten any ill: These Spots
differ little or nothing from those they call Lenticular Spots.

There are other large Spots about the breadth of the Palm of the Hand which
defile the Skin in many places, but especially about the Breast and Back with
Stains sometimes of a dun color, sometimes wan, or blackish. These being wont
to rise and go away at certain times, and as I have observed in many, in
certain parts, are commonly called Liver-marks, though not properly, for these
Stains happen on this account, that the Filthy Dreggs and Refuse of the Blood,
when not sufficiently received by the Vessels of separation, are carried to the
Skin together with the Serum, with which they are diluted, and there being
thrown off by the Blood, and left by the Serous Latex which evaporates, they
stick fast to the outward Pores and little Orifices, as a Mossy down does to
the narrow passages of a River.

Those Spots appear chiefly in the Summer, and most upon the Back and Breast,
viz. at that time, and in those places that Men are most apt to Sweat in; that
is to say, that Serous Latex which has carried those Filthy Dreggs from the
Mass of Blood to the narrow Pores of the Skin, leaves them there, as being
unmeet to pass forth by Evaporation. This affect has no evil joined with it,
nor is it the Symptom of any present Disease, nor does it portend any shortly
to ensue, and in regard for the most part coming in places out of sight it
causes no deformity, or trouble, there seems little or no need of its Cure: But
because an opinion is spread amongst the vulgar, that the Liver is much in
danger by reason of those Spots, and that it necessarily requires help,
therefore to fatisfy some importunately desiring Physic, besides outward
Consmeticks we are wont to prescribe inward Hepatick Remedies; the use of which
though not very necessary, yet because thereby the Blood is purified, and the
Obstructions of the Bowels are opened, they are not altogether in vain. The
inward Medicines useful for this purpose are set down before amongst Hepatick
Remedies: The very same outward Remedies, or Topics are proper in this, as in
all other kinds of Spots, of which we shall give you some choice Forms.

Having treated elsewhere professedly concerning Spots of the Plague and
Scurvy, I need not repeat them here; especially because the Method for these is
quite dissering from that of the other: For in one kind of Spots in a manner
only outward Medicines are wont to be administered without any that regard the
Heart or the Viscera of the Belly, and in the other only inward things are
given without applying any thing to the Skin.

Therefore as to the Summer Spots, Lentiginous Spots, and the vulgarly called
Liver Spots, the Art of Beautifying properly takes care of them, and for
removing these Blemishes from the Skin, only Cosmetick Remedies are prescribed
without any Method of Cure; there is an infinite store of these amongst curious
Ladys, and others that are nice in keeping the Skin fair; but all of them
having regard only to two intentions of Curing may be reduced to these two
heads: viz. either by opening the Pores of the Skin, and Scarf-skin, and
sometimes by excoriating this, they endeavor to draw the Humor outward, and
wholly to evaporate it; or on the contrary they are administered, and that with
no less success to strike back the Impure Matter which makes the Spots, and to
drive it inward: I shall here set down some ordinary Forms of Topics of both
kinds, which have been rationally invented, and often used suceessfully enough;
since I may not without offense to great Persons unvail the more secret
Mysteries of the Cosmetick Art, and prostitute them to the vulgar.

First, therefore to cleanse the Skin, and to draw the Matter of the Spots
outward.

Take of a small Lixivium of Salt of Tartar four Ounces, Oil of bitter Almonds
made by expression what suffices, let it be mixed in such a proportion that the
whole Liquour presently turn white, and so let it stand: Let the parts affected
be anointed and gently rubbed Mornings and Evenings with this mixture.

Take fresh Roots of Aron, Briony, and Solomons-seale, of each an Ounce, Powder
of Fenugreek Seeds a Dram, Camphire half a Dram, being bruised together pour to
them Oil of Tartar per Deliquium three Ounces, express it, let it bapply'd with
a Ragg dipped in it twice a Day.

Take Sulphur-vive powdered an Ounce, black Soap two Ounces, bind it in a Ragg,
let it hang in a Pound of Vinegar for nine Days, then apply it to use, washing
and rubbing the places affected with it twice a Day.

Secondly, for the other intention, viz. for discussing the Spots from the
Skin, and repelling the matter, and driving it inwards. Lac Virginis was a
famous Medicine amongst the Ancients, and is still commended and used by many.
The preparation of this is well known, viz. a Solution of Litharge made in
distilled Vinegar, by the affusion of Oil of Tartar per Deliquium is
precipitated into a Liquour as white as Milk: With which let the Face and Hands
be washed and gently rubbed twice a Day: A Medicine like this, or the same, at
leastwise of the same Virtue is prepared of a Solution of Minium or Ceruse made
in the same Menstruum, and preclpitated with water of Allom, or Sal Gemm. (Or)

Take Camphire sliced two Drams, bruise it in a Glass-mortar pouring on it by
little and little the Juice of one Limon, then add to it of White Wind a Pound,
strain it and let the Camphire remaining behind be tied in a Ragg, and hung in
a Glass.

Take Verdigrease four Ounces, pour to it of White Wind two Pounds, being put
into a Gourd-glass, let it be distilled in Sand, let the Phlegm first coming
off be kept for use, wherewith let the Face be anointed twice a Day. For this
purpose also the Dew or Phlegm of Vitriol distilled by it self does excellently
well; some are content with the water of Bean-flowers, or the simple distilled
water of Fumitory, or with the water which Bleeds from the Sprout of a Vine,
cut in the Sprin: But the more curious Women and Pretenders to the mosi
exquisite knowledge in the Cosmetick Art are scarce satisfied with any Remedies
for the Skin but Mercurial: Wherefore the following water is highly recommended
and sold by Empiricks at a great rate for all Blemishes of the Face.

Take Mercury sublimate an Ounce, being reduced to a Powder let it be put in a
Tin-vessel with three Pounds of fountain water, let it stand for twentyfour
hours stirring it now and then with a Wooden Spatula till the whole Liquor
grows black, which nevertheless being filtred through Cap-paper becomes clear;
a Ragg or Feather being dipped into this, let the Face be gently done over with
it once in a Day or two.

This Medicine is of great efficacy against all foulness of the Skin, for it
clears the Humors sticking in the little Pores and Orifices, though never so
strait, and dissolves the obstinate and inveterate Combinations of the Salts
and Sulphurs, and as to any ill Conformation of the Pores, it restores the
whole Skin, and makes it freely perspirable. Wherefore it is not only good for
cleansing the Stains or Blemishes of the Face, but likewise for removing
Pushes, and the redness of it, and Erysipelous affects: Moreover it sometimes
happens that many parts of the Face, but especially the Nose and Forehead are
thick beset with blackish Specks as though burnt by Gunpowder; which
nevertheless proceeds from hence, that the Sudatory Pores are filled sometimes
with a black thick Humor, sometimes with little Worms having black head,
(which little insects being squeezed forth of the Pores, and laid in the Sun
are easily perceived to live and to move themselves) and in such an affect of
the Skin, no Washes or Ointments but Mercurial are wont to do good:
Nevertheless a too severe Sting often goes a long with this Honey: For the
Particles of the Quicksilver, together with the Salts (with which they are
minutely divided and quickn'd) being applied to the Face, discuss thence the
offensive and defiling Matter from the Pores, and drive it away, and being
struck inward they follow it, and soon insinuate themselves with ease into the
Blood and Nervous Liquour (whose Crasis they injure) and through their means
very frequently pass their Venom, often not to be rooted out afterward into the
Brain, and sometimes into the Praecordia, and other parts: Hence it is
frequently observed that Men or Women using long and much a Mercurial Ointment,
become subject to the Vertigo, and Convulsive, or Paralytick affects, and that
their Teeth turn black, and sometimes grow loose.

CHAP. VI. Instructions and Prescripts for the Cure of the Psora, or the Scab
with the Itch.
AFter the more simple affects of the Skin which happening without any Tumor or
Sore, soil it only with Filthy Spots, I shall now speak in order of the greater
affects dissolving continuity: And in the First place of the Psora or Scab
which molests the Skin in most places of the Body with small Pushes, or
breakings forth, being sometimes dry and often scally without much Itching, as
in persons of a Choleric or Melancholic Constitution, sometimes moist and
disposed for Ulceration with a mighty troublesome Itching, as in Persons of a
moist Temperament, with a foul Blood: And this affect is most peculiarly a
Disease of that part, seeing that it often has its beginning in the Skin it
self by outward Contagion, and is frequently Cured by certain Remedies applied
only to the Skin; at leastwise the reason of both holds good so far that it is
seldom perfectly gotten, or Cured by other means.

This Scab, or Itch is commonly described to be a breaking forth of Pushes
here, and there through out the whole Body, proceeding from a sharp and salt
Humor gathered together within the Pores of the Skin; and by reason of its
mighty Itch, causing a necessity of scratching to discuss it thence.

I conceive the Morbifick matter of the Itch to be the Lymphick Humor
constantly residing in the Glands of the Skin, but degenerated from its
Genuine, viz. Salino-volatile Disposition, into an Acid, or otherwise vitiated
Temper.

That Lymphick Humor is wont to be depraved these three ways, and consequently
falls into a Coagulative and Vicious habit with the Serum newly supplied from
the Blood: viz. First, the Blood it self being very impure, and withal
dissolved leaves a great store of its corrupted and Filthy Dreggs in the Glands
of the Skin, which becoming there a Leaven more Corruptive, strongly ferment,
and are coagulated with other adventitious or transient Juices, and so bring
forth not only Scabby affects, but Leaprosies of diverse kinds; hence frequent
and continual feeding on Shellfish and others, and on Salt Meats, and such as
have been dried in the Smoke or Sun: Also improper Drinks, and Venomous
Medicines taken into the Body cause breakings out all over the Skin, and those
often very dreadful.

Secondly, the Humor gathered together within the Glands of the Skin sometime
putrefying by mere Stagnation does not only breed Scabs, but also frequently
Lice. Wherefore not only Persons long Imprisoned, but likewise such as leading
a Sedentary Life use themselves withal to Stench and Nastiness, are still
subject to the said affects.

Thirdly, if happily those causes are wanting, that the Glandulous Humor of the
Skin be neither desil'd through the fault of the Blood, nor its own Stagnation,
yet a Virulent infection from without disposes it as readily to produce those
Diseases, as it is daily manifested to us, the Effluvia flowing from the Pushes
of a Scabby Skin, being of no less efficacy than Barm or Yest, whereof if a
very small Portion be put into new Ale unfermented, it presently ferments the
whole Mass, be it never so great, and changes it into the nature of the Liquour
whence it was taken.

Therefore the Itch as to its Origin, either is taken by Contagion, or by
reason of an ill Diet, its Incentive and Fuel is communicated from the Chyle
and Mass of Blood being vitiated, or through nastiness and want of Perspiration
it is generated in the Skin it self: To which we may add that Infants sometimes
get this evil Hereditarily contracted from their Parents.

Though this Disease be never Mortal, or very dangerous of it self, but always
easy of Cure, yet it has often an ill issue, because being long continued it
mightily vitiates the Blood, and the Nervous Liquour; and if Cured on a sudden,
the Matter whioh is driven from the Pores being inwardly received, brings a
pernicious Taint on the Praecordia and Brain, or on other Noble parts.

The greatest danger from the Itch threatens Children, and Cachectical Persons,
because in both these the Taint of the Cutaneous Humor is more easily sent
into the Noble parts, which after the outward Contagion of the Itch is taken
away, remaining within, cannot be thoroughly overcome but by a great deal of
Physic (which neither of them can well bear) wherefore such persons ought to
be preserved with all care and diligence from the Itch, as from the Plague it
self.

Concerning the Cure of the Itch there are two primary Indications, and both of
them twofold: viz. the First being Curatory has regard to these two things,
that the Glandulous Humor (its Corruptive ferment being wholly extinguished) be
restored to its due Crasis. And then Secondly, that the Pores and Passages of
the Skin it self being freed from those Concretions of Ichor recover their
Ancient Conformation or free Perspirability.

The Second Indication being Preservatory, provides against these two things,
viz. First, that the Impurities and Corruptive Miasms of the Itch, which are
driven from the Skin when the ferment is Purged, do not regurgitate into the
Blood, and Nervous Liquour, and cause not only Discrasies in them, but likewise
(as it often falls out) bring great damage to the Brain and Praecordia.
Secondly, it must be endeavored that the infectious Taint of the Humors and
Noble parts, contracted from the Scabby Matter, be eradicated at the same time
that the Nasty Distemper of the Skin is Cured.

All these intentions of Curing ought to be complicated, or at leastwise to be
interchangeably prosecuted by Remedies both inward and outward used together,
to the end that the Morbifick matter being chased from its private Receptacles,
may not any where retire and lie hid in any lurking places, but being persued
by Medicines in all parts both within and without, may be wholly removed;
therefore Purges ought always to begin and end this Method of Cure, whatsoever
Helmont says to the contrary, and I dare affirm that this Disease is scarce
ever Cured easily, and never with safety without that Medicine. Moreover open a
Vein one of the First things you do, unless somewhat indicates the contrary;
besides these let alteratives have their turns, such as purify the Blood, and
strenthen the Viscera, and fortify them against the Ineursions of the Scabby
Matter: And in the mean time let Liniments, or Baths, or Topical Remedies of
other kinds, and appropriated to the Skin be applied, for without them, not
only Catharticks and Bleeding, but even Diaphoreticks, Diuretics, nay any kind
of Medicines whatsoever evacuating or altering the Blood and Humors prove of
no effect: We shall set down some select Forms of the Medicines of each kind
before mentioned: And First, for due Purging give a Purging Medicine, or a
Vomit the first thing you do: Also after Bleeding (if it be necessary) let the
person use a Purging Apozeme, or Ale for seven or eight Days.

Take the Electuary Diacarthamum three Drams, Species of Diaturbith with
Rhubarb a Dram, Cream of Tartar, Salt of Wormwood of each half a Scruple,
Purging Syrup of Apples what suffices, make a Bolus to be taken with
Governance. (Or)

Take Sulphur of Antimony seven Grains, Scammony Sulphurated eight Grains,
Cream of Tartar half a Scruple, make a Powder.

Take Roots of Polypody of the Oak, and of sharp pointed Dock prepared of each
an Ounce, Leaves of Sena ten Drams; Turbith, Agarick, Epithimum of each an
Ounce, Carthamus Seeds half an Ounce, yellow Saunders two Drams, Seeds of
Annise, and Caraway of each two Drams, being sliced and bruised digest them
close luted and warm in four Pounds of White Wind for twentyfour hours, pour
off the clear Liquor without expression, the Dose is six Ounces by it self, or
with a spoonful of Syrup of Epithimum. (Or)

Take the foresaid Ingredients and boil them in six Pounds of fountain water,
to half, then add of White Wind a Pound, and strain it presently; make an
Apozeme, give it after the same manner. (Or)

Take Roots of Polypody of the Oak, and of sharp pointed Dock of each three
Ounces, the best Sena four Ounces, Epithimum, Turbith, Mechoacan of each two
Ounces, yellow Saunders an Ounce, Coriander Seeds six Drams, let them be
prepared according to Art, make a Bagg for four Gallons of Ale, after five or
six Days drink it, and take to twelve Ounces more or less every Morning for
eight or ten Days.

For ordinary Drink let a little Vessel of four Gallons be full'd with small
Ale, into which put the following Bag.

Take tops of Tamarisk, Fumitory dried of each four handfuls, Roots of sharp
pointed Dock dried six Ounces, Rinds of Bittersweet two Ounces, being slic't
and bruised mix them; or let a Bouchet of the Decoction of Sarsaparilla,
Saunders, with the Shavings of Ivory, Hartshorn, Licorice, etc. be taken.

As to altering Remedies besides the Physic Ale for ordinary Drink there seems
not need of many others, only that a good Diet be observed by avoiding Salt and
Peppered Meats, Shellfish and others which have been laid in Brine: Also let
them forbear Wine, strong Waters, strong Beer, and all Liquors apt to trouble
the Blood too much, and to ferment it: In an obstinate Scab, seizing a
Cacochymical Body it is proper to give the following Electuary with the
distilled water twice a Day.

Take Conserve of Fumitory, of the Roots of sharp pointed Dock of each three
Ounces, Troches of Rhubarb, Species Diatrion Santalon of each a Dram and a
half, Salt of Wormwood a Dram, Vitriol of Mars four Scruples, with a sufficient
quantity of Syrup of Cichory with Rhubarb, make an Electuary, the Dose is from
a Dram to two Drams twice a Day, drinking after it of the following distilled
Water three Ounces.

Take Firr Tops seven handfuls, Leaves of Fumitory, Agrimony, Female Fluellin,
Liver-wort, Brook-limes, of each four handfuls, Roots of sharp pointed Dock
two Pounds, Rinds of Elder two handfuls, the outward Rinds of six Oranges,
being sliced and bruised, pour to them Whey made with midling Ale eight Pounds,
distill it in common Organs, let the whole Liquor be mixed.

Ointments to be anointed on the Skin are prescribed most frequently, and that
very effectually for Curing the Itch: Though those that are used to many other
Tumors and Sores do no good here: But Sulphur and preparations of it, seem to
have a certain Specific Virtue in this Disease, so that they are ingredients
in almost all Ointments for the Itch, and are the basis of the whole
Composition. This is a very common receipt with the vulgar.

Take of the Powder, or Flowers of Sulphur half an Ounce, Butter without Salt
four Ounces, Ginger powdered half a Dram, make a Liniment.

Somewhat a neater prescript, though not much more Efficacious, is after this
manner.

Take Vngentum Rosatum four Ounces, Sulphur-vive powdered half an Ounce, Oil of
Tartar per Deliquium what suffices, make a Liniment, to which add Oil of
Rhodium a Scruple, to give it a scent.

When you will strengthen or raise the Energy of the Sulphur by the addition of
other things.

Take of the Ointment of Elecampane without Mercury four Ounces, Power of
Sulphur half an Ounce, Oil of Tartar per Deliquium what suffices: For the same
purpose an Ointment is made of the Roots of sharp pointed Dock boiled in
Butter, or Oil with Whitewine till the Wine be consumed; and with Sulphur and
Oil of Tartar. Moreover those Ointments are sometimes used by themselves, by
curious persons abhorring the ill odor of the Sulphur.

The Third kind of Liniment against the Itch is made of Mercury needing no
assistance from Sulphur, or Vegetables; nay this being more than enough
efficacious of it self, is not wont to be applied to the whole Body, but only
to the Joints of the Arms and Legs, or being put in a Girdle is to be worn
about the Loins, for so it seldom fails of Curing the Itch: Nevertheless there
is danger lest this Practice (as it often happens) causes ill and pernicious
Symptoms: Frequently after the Mercury Ointment a Salivation, sometimes also a
Scotomia, or Sleepy, or Convnlsive affects ensue: Moreover sometimes the Poison
of the Medicine produces within the Praecordia, or Viscera, horrible affects of
the Asthma, Leipothymia, or Bloodyflux.

The vulgar Form of a Mercural Ointment for the Itch, and very much in use, is
this.

Take Quicksilver reduced into minute parts with an Acid, and (as they call
it) Killd, an Ounce and a half. Fresh Haggs ^ard six Ounces, incorporate them
well by stirring them a long (...) in a Stone or Glass Mortar.

Nor only in the Form of a Liniment, but many other ways the foresaid Medicines
may be used: For the Fume of Cinnaber (which is prepared of Mercury with
Sulphur,) cast on the Coals, and taken in at the Mouth, or breathing against
the Superficies of the Body, Cures the Itch: The Mercurial Cosmetick water
before written made about half weaker, and applied to the Skin with a little
Cloth in the Sorest places, kills the Itch: Yet the use of these is not so
very safe as to be generally administered to all persons.

Of Sulphur and Vegetables either separately, or conjunctly, boiled in water
Baths are prepared, which Cure this Distemper, not by washing off only the
Filth of the Skin as common Baths, but likewise by destroying its ferment:
Besides these there is yet another easier, and much more neat way of Curing the
Itch, viz. by boiling a Shift in fountain water with Powder of Brimstone, and
after it is dried in the Sun, or before the Fire to wear it four or five Days
next the Skin: For so that Disease is wont to be Cured without Bathing, or the
Nastiness, or ill Odor of an Ointment.

Poor people usually Cure themselves of this Distemper only by taking the
Powder of Brimstone in Milk inwardly, and by anointing themselves with the said
Powder mixed with Butter outwardly: Sulphur seems to be so Specific an Antidote
against the Itch by reason of its Balsamic Virtue which destroys the
Acidities, and all Exotic and Corruptive Sharpnesses of the Blood and Humors,
and restores to each Latex a Benign, that is, a Mild, and as it were Oily
Nature.

As to Mercury, it is no wonder if medicines made of it, perfectly Cure any
places of the Skin infested with the Itch wherever they are applied: For by
the application hereof breakings forth, and all Virulent Ulcers, viz. any that
are Venereal and Scorbutical are wholly conquered: Moreover it seems not
strange that this Medicine applied to some particular place should Cure an
inveterate Itch in case it raises a Salivation; but sometimes it Cures without
any such thing, as when a person wears a Girdle of it; to this we say that the
Particles of the Mercury pass then into the Venous Blood, and after being
diffused through its whole Mass, are driven outward from all parts, and deposed
in the Skin where they kill the Itch, and when it happens that these Mercurial
Particles are all again evaporated through the Skin, after the Cure is
performed, then no Salivation, or other inconvenience ensues.

CHAP. VII. Instructions and Prescripts for the Cure of the running Scab, or
the Leaprosie of the Greeks.
AFter the Scab with the Itch, it follows that we treat of another affect
somewhat allied to it in its breaking forth in Pushes, which is commonly called
the running Scab, by some a Tetter or Ringworm, or Morphew, by others the
Leaprosie of the Greeks; but the Names of this affect being variously
confounded, and the Nature of it happily being differing in several Countries, I
shall describe it as it is now understood by us.

The running Scab begins and affects persons after this manner, viz. First
little red Wheals or Pushes, sometimes single, sometimes many of them joined
together, arise in many parts of the Body, but especially in the Arms or Legs;
and grow at length in heaps or clusters; the Surface of each Scab when grown in
clusters appears rough, and somewhat whitish and scaly, so that upon
scratching, Scales fall away, and a thin Ichor often issues forth, though its
soon dried again, and hardens into another crusty Scale.

These clusters of Pushes at first are but small and few, as in the Arm or
Leg, or some other particular Member, happily three or four appear to the
bigness of a penny or two pence: Afterward if the Disease be suffered to
increase, they break forth in many places, and grow to a crowns breadth, and at
length if not stopped, cover not only particular Members, but the whole Body with
a whitish Leaprosie, which raised to this degree was judged for the most part
incurable by the Ancients.

These breakings forth in some are only temporary, as coming in the Winter, and
going away in the Summer, in others on the contrary they come in the Summer,
and vanish in the Winter: In many others this Distemper is continual, having no
time of remission or mean.

The running Scab differs from the Itch, that in this the Pushes are generally
single, and separated from each other, though but by small spaces, but in the
other they rise in clusters: Again the Itch is extremely infectious, but the
running Scab is not so.

This Disease is also distinguished from the Leaprosie, that this is likewise as
infectious as the Itch, and its breakings out are much more violent and
terrible than in the running Scab, wi viz. being crusty and scaly, and diffused
in a continued manner throughout the whole Body.

Hence it appears that the material cause of the running Scab is not a mere
Cutaneous Humor depraved and degenerated from its Crasis by reason of some
Corruptive Effluvia's received from without, or upon other occasions; because
the infection is not easily communicated to others, as in the Itch, nor
presently dispersed through the whole Body; but the Pushes first breaking forth
about the beginning of the Disease seem to proceed from hence, that some
Acido-saline Concretions happen in the Mass of Blood (like Tartar in Wine)
which seeing they can neither be subdued, nor again dissolved are driven to the
Skin, as to the sides of the Vessel.

This Disease takes its rise for the most part on two chief occasions, viz.
First, from an ill Diet, as from frequent eating of Salt Meats, Pork,
Shellfish, or others, or Secondly, from the corrupted Seminaries of other
Diseases left in the Body, as especially of the Scurvy, and French Pox ill or
not Cured.

For First, those sorts of Food either because they are rank, or otherwise
disproportioned, convey Particles to our Blood, that cannot enter a due mixture
with it, or are not easily mastered by it: To which Heterogeneuos Particles
gathered together in great abundance by long continuance of such Diet, Saline
Particles of all kinds readily associate themselves, and so make Tartarous
Concretions, which are driven to the Skin, and are the Seminaries of the
running Scab, or Leaprous affects.

Secondly, the Miasms of the Scurvy and French Pox lest left in the Body, and
at long run raised to the highest degree in Combinations of Exorbitant Salts
and Sulphurs, engender a most plentiful Seminary of this Disease: For the
corrupted Taints of the Blood, after that upon long continuance they are become
wholly Heterogeneous and unsubdueable, gather to themselves at length the
Saline Particles, with which growing together in that Tartarous Concretion, and
driven to the Skin, they produce Eruptions of the running Scab.

Concerning the Crew of the running Scab there are two primary Indications,
viz. the Preservatory which regards the cause of the Disease, and the Curatory
which has regard to the Symptom, viz. the breaking forth of Pushes: The Vital
has seldom place in this case, unless grown altogether desperate, where there
is a deficiency of Sleep and Strength: The Method of Cure ought always to begin
with the Preservatory Indication, which removes the causes of the Disease by
inward Remedies, for otherwise outward things are scarce ever administered to
any purpose (as in the Itch) but the roots of the Disease being cut off within
the Blood, the Cutaneous Pushes soon dye away: Though for removing them we must
proceed one way when the running Scab begins of it self, and somewhat a
differing way when it comes after an inveterate Scurvy, or the French Pox, ill
or not Cured: We shall consider each of these cases severally and distinctly by
themselves.

When therefore this Disease is simple, and primary, and fresh coming, let the
evident and external cuases be removed, let the ill Diet and the
Unwholesomeness of the Air be corrected; therefore let persons who have been
long and too much used to feed on Salt Meats, Pork, or Fish betake themselves
to a Diet of good Juice, and easy of Concoction. Moreover if they live by the
Sea side, or in Marshy places, let them remove to a more dry and clear Air; and
withal let them be as careful of their Drink, avoiding thick and dreggy Beer,
and thin and acid Wines which are too much filled with Tartar: Finally let them
take care that their Drink or Food be not prepared of Mineral waters apt to
petrify.

2. In respect of the Conjunct and Procatarctick cause, viz. a Saturation of
the Blod with Saline Particles of a differing Disposition and Nature, there are
two chief intents of Curing; to wit, that the Blood and Humors be forthwith
cleans'd of their impurities: and that the Acido-saline Discrasies, of the
Blood and Nervous Liquour be altered for the better to keep them from
engendring a Tartarous matter: For which ends both evacuating Remedies of
diverse kinds, and altertives are wont to be prescribed: Nevertheless because
not all but in a manner only great Remedies are here proper, therefore those
that are chiefly in use, and found to do most good, are Catharticks, Bleeding,
Whey, Mineral waters coming from Iron, Juicy expressions of Herbs, Decoctions
of Woods, Chalybeat Medicines and Salivation: We shall set down certain Forms
of each of these, and the manners of ussing them.

In the Frist place therefore, a general Purge and Bleeding (as in the Cure of
the Itch) being premitted, let the following Cathartick Infusion or Tincture be
prescribed, whose Dose is from six Ounces to eight, to be repeated whithin six
or seven Days.

Take Roots of sharp pointed Dock dried, of Polypody of the Oak of each half an
Ounce, Sena ten Drams, Epithymum six Drams, Rhubaru, Mechoacan, of each half an
Ounce yellow Saunders two Drams, Celtick Spike half a Dram, Salt of Tartar a
Dram and a half, put them in a Glass with three Pounds of White Wind, and a
Pound of Elder-flower water; let them stand close covered in a cold place for
three Days, then use it, pouring forth daily a sufficient quantity of the clear
Liquour,

Secondly, to sweeten the Blood, and cleanse ti from its Salts, drink every
Morning to two or three Pounds of Whey by it self, or with Fumitory,
preparations of Cichory, and with sharp pointed Dock infused in it, and let
this Drink be continued for twenty or thirty Days if it agrees with the
Stomach, and withal in the Evening and early in the Morning let a Dose or the
following Electuary be taken.

Take Conserve of the Roots of sharp pointed Dock six Ounces, Crabbs Eyes,
Coral prepared of each two Drams, Ivory a Dram, Powder of Lignum Aloes, yellow
Saunders of each a Dram and a half, Sal Prunella two Drams, Vitriol of Mars a
Dram and a half, Syrup of the Juice of Wood Sorrel what suffices, make an
Electurary, the Dose if two Drams.

Thirdly, for the same reason as Whey, also Mineral waters coming from Iron are
prescribed against this Disease, and often do great good: For when all other
Medicines have proved of no effect, I have sometimes Cured a great and almost
Leaprous running Scab with this alone: Moreover to add to their efficacy we may
fitly join the use of Sal Prunella, or of Vitriol of Mars, or of the Electuary
before written.

Fourthly, in some persons having much Serun, and a Watery Constitution, where
drinking of Whey, or Mineral waters is not proper, it is good for them to take
constantly a Decoction of Woods at Physical hours, and likewise for their
ordinary Drink.

Take Raspings of Willow-wood half a Pound, Roots of Sarsaparilla eight Ounces,
white Saunders, Wood of the Mastick-tree, of each two Ounces, Shavings of Ivory
and Hartshorn of each six Drams, Shavings of Tin, crude Antimony of each four
Ounces, both tied in a Rag; Licorice an Ounce, let them infuse according to
Art, and boil in sixteen Pounds of fountain water of half, keep the straining
for use.

Fisthly, Chalybeat Medicines, because generally accounted of among the more
excellent Remedies, are seldom omitted in this Disease, though they as seldom
prove successful: For a great many preparatious of Iron in which the Sulphurous
Particles predo minate for as much as they ferment the Blood, and put it upon
Excretory Effervescencies, increase rather than diminish the Eruptions of the
running Scab: Nevertheless Vitriolick Salts, Syrups, Tinctures, and Infusions
in regard they fix the Blood, and somewhat restrain the Exorbitant excesses of
the Salts, answer aptly enough to the intention of Curing now proposed, but
being too weak cnnot master so Herculean a Disease.

Wherefore Sixthly, these, and a great many other Remedies doing no good, many
reommend Salivation as the stoutest Champion, and only fit to contend with so
potent an Enemy: Yet the event does not always answer this mighty expectation,
for I must own to have tried this Remedy my self in four persons afflicted with
a grievous running Scab, not yielding to other Medicines, but without any
benefit; some of these were put in a very high Salivation by a Mercury Unction,
others by Pills of the Solar Praecipitate, which Salivation they lay under for
about twenty Days, after which time all the Scaly breakings forth, and clusters
of Pushes vanished: Nevertheless for perfecting the Cure a Diet Drinkd ordered
of the Decoction of Sarza with frequent Sweating under a Cradle, and deu Puring
betwixt while was continued for a Month: Yet this course being ended when no
footsteps of the running Scab seemed to be left behind, within the second Month
a new stock of the same Disease biginning to spring forth, grew up in a short
time to its wonted Maturity: Moreover when one of these persons would repeat
this Medicine, and another after two returns of the Di2ease would try it a
third time, both of them at length despaired of Cure after they had underwent
so much Misery: Whence it appears that the French Pox though Malignant in the
highest Nature, and causing most Filthy and Virulent Ulcers consuming the Flesh
and Bones, may much more easily and ceratinly be Cured than the running Scab.

The reason of ti is, that the cause of the Pox consists in a Malignant and
altogether Heterogeneous Miasin defiling, and as ti were Poisoning the Blood
and Nervous Liquor for some time, though not wholly subverting their Crasis, or
utterly depraving them for the future: Wherefore that Cure is performed by
Salivation, or a Sweating Diet, extirpating all that Venom, the Genuine
Disposition of the Blood and Humors then remaining: But in a deep sort of
running Scab the Elementary and Originally composong Particles of the Blood are
corrupted, so that unless the Crasis and due Disposition of these be restored,
all sorts of Evacuations, and Purgings of the Malignant and Venomous matter,
though never so fll and eradicative will effect little or nothing: Wherefore it
is not without ground that many famous Physicians formerly have judged this
Disease when coufirm'd, and drawing near to a Leaprosie to be hardly or never
Cured.

2. No better event attends this Disease when if succeeds an inveterate Scurvy:
Happily the intentions of Curing are somewhat more certainly pitched upon when
this effect is supposed to be the basis or root of that: viz. the Terapeutick
intention being thence taken, we insist chiefly on Antiscorbutick Remedies; but
yet the more smart and hotter things of this kind, as Scurvy Grass, Cresses,
Horse-raddish, Pepperwort and other things irritating the Blood too much, in
regard they more dissolve its Crasis, and drive the Tartarous Concretions more
plentifully to the Skin, are always found rather prejudicial than advantageous:
And for this reason the use of hot Baths or Bathing in hot waters, which in
regard it evacuates the Humors of the whole Body by a most plentiful Sweat,
and cleanses the Pores of the Skin, and mightily purges them, amy seem to be
very available in this Disease, most commonly is so far from doing good, that
the Eruptions are wont thence to be mightily encreast, and exasperated: For I
have known many persons not very much over-gone with the running Scab, who
going to our Bath to bathe themselves in the hot waters have returned thence
perfectly Leaprous: Wherefore when this affect is a Symptom arising from the
Scurvy, all Smart, and Elastick things being avoided, let only the more
temperate, and such as are endowed with a Nitrous, Vitriolick, or Volatile Salt
be administered: We shall give you some kinds and froms of each of these sorts.
In the First p;ace things chiefly excelling in a Nitrous Sal are Crystal
Mineral, the Juices or Decoctions of certain Herbs, and some Purging Mineral
waters.

Take Crystal Mineral, or Nitre purified to the highest degree an Ounce,
Flowers of Sal Armoniack a Dram, bruise them together in a Glass Mortar, give
to a Dram thrice or four times in the space of twenty four hours.

Take Leaves of the great House-leek two handfuls, being bruised boil them in
two Pounds and a half of fresh Milk till it turn to Whey and Curd, being
strained let the clear Liquour be taken to a Pound twice a Day.

Take Leaves of Dandelyon six handfuls, being bruised put them in a Glazed
Earthen Pot with a cover, which put in an Oven after the Bread is draum, and
let it stand for six or eight hours, then the Mass being put in a strainer let
the clear Liquour run out, the Dose of which is from four Ounces to six thrice
or oftener in a Day.

Cucumbers being endowed with a Nitrous quality are found by experience to be
good against this Disease, wherefore let store of them be often eaten, as a
Sallet. Moreover let three or four of them being cut into slices be infused and
close stopped in three Pounds of fountain water all Night; to the clear Liquour
poured off, add of Sal Prunella two or three Drams; the Dose is half a Pound
thrice or oftener in a Day; for the same purpose also Decoctions of the Leaves
together with the Fruit made in fountain water are proper.

Some Mineral Purging waters, as especially those of Northhal, being resolved
by Evaporation mainifestly show the Nitrous Salt wherewith they are imbued: And
I have sometimes found by expericence that daily drinking about two quarts of
them for many Days Cures a small running Scab.

2. But as I have hinted before, Mineral waters endowed with a Vitriolick Salt,
as those of the Spaw, and ours of Tunbridge and Astrope far exceed those
Nitrous waters, nay and all other Medicines, and are of greater efficacy in the
Cure of the running Scab.

To those who have not the convenience of using these waters, I ordinarily give
with good success against this Disease common waters impregnated with our
Steel, and so most exactly resembling those Mineral waters. It happens that Tin
and Antimony by reason of their Mineral Salts, or at leastwise by reason of the
Mercurial Particles in them are extolled by many for curing the running Scab,
and are wont to be prescribed with other Medicines. Let Shavings of Tin, and
Powder of Antimony be infused in Beer for ordinary Drink; they enter also the
Decoctions of Sarza with Woods which are ordered against this affect.

The use of the Viper, and preparations of it, sufficiently recommend the
excellent Virtue of Volatile Salt for the Cure of the deep sort of running
Scab, nay of the Leaprosie it self: For it being manifest by frequent
observations that Remedies prepared of Vipers do good in the running Scab, and
Leaporfie, certainly the reason of the help it affords ought to be ascribed to
the Volatile Salt, with a great plenty of which this Animal is endowed: For the
Particles of this destroy the fixed and acid Salts predominating in the Blood of
the Diseased, and dissolve their Combinations; Nevertheless the Salt, Spirit,
and Oil of Vipers Chymically extracted, by reason of their Empyreumatick, and
mighty Elastick Particles, which they draw from the Fire, are not proper in
this Disease; so neither the Spirit, or Volatile Salt of Harts-born, Soot, or
Blood, and other such like Armoniacks, because by exagitating the Blood and
Humors above measure, they cause their Crasis to be more dissolved, and their
Corruptions to be driven forth more plentifully to the Skin: Wherefore the more
simple preparations of Vipers, as Broaths of their Flesh boiled in water,
Drinks impregnated with Infusions, or Incoctions of the same, and Powders made
of the same dried and beaten are rpescrib'd with more success against this
Disease: Moreover not only the Flesh of Vipers, but of other kinds of Oviaprous
Snakes being boiled and eaten for ordinary Food, give often great relief.

The running Scab, or scaly breakings forth of Pushes, and growing in figures
like clusterings is so frequent and familiar a Symptom of an inveterate
French Pox, that the first thing we do is to ask persons affected with the
former Distemper, whether they do not conveive that there amy be something of
the Malignity of the other bying hid withim them; and if it be found to be so,
presently all Specificks against the former and Antiscorbuticks being laid
aside, we forthwith betake our selves to Decoctions of Woods, and those doing
little or no good, to Mercurial Medicines, And truly by this Method I have soon
and easily Cured many persons accounted to have a running Scab, and Leaprosie,
who had been long under Cure, and miserably tormented with Remedies
appropriated to these Diseases: And we refer this kind of running Scab to the
Pathology of the French Pox, whereof it is an Appendix.

The Second Indication which is Curatoyr, having regard to the Disease it sefl,
and its primary Symptom, viz. the scaly breakings forth, and the clusters of
Pushes, prescribes Topical Remedies to be applied to the Skin outwardly for
removing these effects: For which purpose Baths and Liniments are peculiarly
proper; though they seldom, or never Cure of themselves, unless the
Procatarctick ause, viz. the Tartarous Disposition of the Blood be first
cleared.

There is a mighty store of these Topics to be found as well among Physical
Authors, as among Empiricks and Quacks: Though among them all, Baths or
Liniments made of Tar far exceed all the rest of the Remedies of both kinds: So
that in truth we should make use of these alone were it not for their ill
smell: wherefore I shall give you certain Forms of Compositions with Tar and
without it:

Therefore for Baths it is a common thing to use water kept some time in Vessels
in which Tar has been before, and so impregnated by Infusion. (Or)

Take two Pounds of Tar, and incorporate it into a pretty thick Mass with white
and sifted Ashes, which boil in a sufficient quantity of fountain water, adding
Leaves of ground Ivy, Fumitory, white Horehound, Roots of sharp pointed Dock,
and of Elecampane, of each four handfuls: Make a Bath to be used with
governance; or let such a Decoction be prepared without Tar for persons
troubled with the running Scab, and loathing the smell of Tar.

Sulphurous Baths, both Natural and Artificial, are found by frequent
experience not to agree, nay and the former commonly to do hurt: Moreover all
Bathing whatsoever ought to be used with great caution; for in regard this
Administration exagitates and heats the Blood, it endangers to dissolve its
Crasis more (as is said before) and to disperse its corrupted Taints in a more
plentiful manner to the Skin.

2. Liniments, whose use is more safe, and proper, are of three kinds, or
degrees, viz. gentle, mean, and strong: I shall give you an example or two of
each of these.

1. First, therefore in a small running Scab, where the breakings forth and
clusters of Pushes are few and very small, fasting Spittle is recommended: Also
the Liquour distilling from green Wood in the Fire: So likewise a mere rubbing
with the Root of sharp pointed Dock bruised, and macerated in Vinegar. (Or)

Take Oil of Tartar per Deliquium, Oil of Nuts, or of bitter Almonds by
expression, of each equal parts, make a Liniment to be applied to the places
affected twice a Day.

2. Liniments of the Second kind have Tar for an Ingredient which is esteemed
as good as all the rest.

Take Vnguentum Rosatum six Ounces, Tar two Ounces, being melted together let
them let mixed. (Or)

Take a good fat piece of Weathers Mutton, stick it with bits of the Roots of
sharp pointed Sock, spit it, and roast it: And baste it with Tar, letting it
drop leasurely on it, keep the Dripping as a most excellent Ointment for the
running Scab.

3. The strongest Ointments against this affect are Mercurial, which consist
either of running Mercury, or Praecipitate; let the Forms and Cmposition of the
foriner be the same as is prescribed before against the Itch. As to the other,

Take white Praecipitate three Drams, Vnguentum Rosatum three Ounces: Mix them,
to anoint the parts chiefly affected: The use of these in this Disease ought to
be very much suspected: For if happily a Salivation be raised, a mighty glut of
Matter sticking in the pores of the Skin will be put in motion, which if the
whole, rushing too much together toward the Ductus Salivales, gathers in a
body about the parts of the Throat, it will endanger Suffocation.

Some years since a Virgin of a noble Family, whose Temperament was hot, as
having originally a sharp and salt Blood, after having lived a very long time,
almost from her Cradle somewhat touched with a running Scab, about the time of
her coming to ripeness of years began to be troubled with it in a more grievous
manner: For clusters of scaly Pushes did not only every where overrun her Arms,
and Thighs, and other parts of the Body out of sight, but likewise made her
Hands and Face so loathsome, that she was ashamed to go abroad and converse
with others of her quality: An infinite number of the lesser sort of Remedies
were given her without any success: By the use of hot Baths she seemed to grow
better at first, but in the end she became worse after them. The waters of
Astrope wells which have perfectly Cured some persons of a running Scab, did
her little or no good; wherefore seeing all ordinary Methods would not do, I
proposed that she should try Salivation, as being a more powerful Remedy than
all the rest, and (as it is said) the last: The Patient and her Parents readily
consenting to this advice, presently her Body being duly prepared by Purging
and Bleeding, I gave her (after our wonted manner) Pills of the Solar
Praeciptitae for two Days, and after the Intermission of one, the Medicine
being repeated the third time she began to Salivate very well and freely, it
continuing upon her for a Month without any ill Symptom: Nevertheless to keep
it in its due Tenor, I took care that a Mercurial Ointment was now and then
applied to the Joints of the Limbs, sometimes to these, and sometimes to
others: Before this course was ended all the breakngs forth were vanished;
Notwithstanding which to perfect the Cure, and withao to extirpate the Mercury,
she spent another Month in Purging, Sweating under a Cradle, and in a Diet
Drink of a Decoction of Sarsa, China, etc. at which time seeming to be
perfectly Cured, she continued so for about forty Days: But from thence
forwards, though she observed an exact Form of Diet, the same Disease began to
spring forth afresh, and increasing by degrees, rise at length to an overgrown
state as before: I, being in some confusion at this event, persuaded her to
hope an alteration for the better after the flowing of her Menses, which,
having not yet happened, was expected in a short time: Nevertheless after long
expectation, that Excretion at length happening, and thenceforward continuing its
constant course, brought no Cure or relief to that Disease, but rather made it
worse: Wherefore she had recourse again to Physic, and tried sundry sorts of
Remedies, almost of all kinds: Which proveing all of no effect, her Friends
earnestly desired that she should enter again the course of Salivation, hoping
that that Method which Cured her at first for a short time, being used again,
would Cure her at least for a longer, or happily restore her to her perfect
Health: Therefore according to their desire the same course of Salivation and
Sweating being repeated for the two Months space, and thereby the Pushes and
Scaly breakings forth being every where vanished, the noble Virgin seemed then
again to have recovered her Health: But within six Weeks after the course was
finished, the Pushes, and their heaps, or clusters appear again, and daily
increasing by degrees in number and bulk, at length rendered the Body all over
in a more loathsome condition than before.

I knew another, a robust Man of an Athletick habit of Body, who after he had
been troubled with a running Scab many years, the Disease at length growing
worse, and being risen to an overgrown state, had his whole Body covered over
with a white, and as it were Leaprous Scurf: So that every Night the Scales
falling off in a great pleaty within the Bed like Bran, might be gathered up in
heaps: This person, in order to his Cure, first tried ordinary Remedies almost
of all kinds, but without any good: And then having undergone a gentle
Salivation of Mercury, he found himself nothing better; afterward that Method
being repeated, after a long and high Flux, he seemed restored to his Health:
But within three Months the same Disease springing forth afresh, rise in a
short time to its Ancient Enormous state: Nay and having undergone this
irksome kind of Cure a third time, that affect seeming for a while to be driven
away, returned again, and thenceforward in despite of this, and any other
Method whatsoever, exercised its Tyranny during the Life of the Patient: I need
not say any thing of the Leaprosie, which being only a more intense degree of
the former Disease, seems scarce to admit of any Cure.

THE LONDON PRACTICE OF PHYSIC, Contained in Dr. WILLIS'S Tract OF CONVULSIVE
DISEASES.
CHAP. II. Instructions and Prescripts for the Cure of the Falling Sickness.
THE Epilepsy, or Falling Sickness is thus described; First, as to the Idaea of
the Disease, a Fit of the Epilepsy seems to be an Universal, and only a more
violent sort of Convulsion; in which the Spirits that are in the Brain being
first irregularly moved, and as it were in Confusion; all the rest residing in
the Appendix both Medullary and Nervous of the Brain fall together into
Convulsive motions, or disorderly contractions, and continue them for some
time, with frequent twitchings. The access of the Disease for the most part is
by way of surprise, so that the Diseased fall suddenly on the ground, grind
their Teeth, foam at Mouth, and often beat their Heads against the ground;
their Arms, and Legs in the mean time, nay and their Neck and Back either
presently become stiff, or are twisted in and out with various Flexions; some
violently beat their Breast, others stretch forth their Arms and Legs with
great force, and impetuously throw them, and sometimes the whole Body from one
place to another: In many the Praecordia and Hypochondres, and all the lower
Venture swell, and are greatly blown up: After some time, which is sometimes
shorter, and sometimes longer, these Symptoms cease on a sudden, and then the
Sick come to themselves again, and recover their Senses, there remaining
nevertheless after the Fit a pain of the Head with a drowsiness, and a deadness
of the Senses; and often a Vertigo and Scotoma. Epileptical Fits are wont to
return sometimes, at set times of the day, month or year, but for the most part
they are wont to have a more certain return, and to seize more violently
according to the greater changes of the year, or the conjunctions, or opposite
aspects of the Moon or Sun; sometimes the accesses are erring and uncertain
according to the occasion and variety of evident causes: And the Fits are
sometimes more mild, soon passing away, so that the Diseased scarce fall on the
ground, or are deprived of Sense; sometimes they are more violent, keeping the
person Senseless for many hours, and inducing other dreadful Symptoms.
Sometimes, though seldom, certain Signs, forewarning a Fit, give notice to the
Diseased before hand, as a heaviness of the Head, a flashing of the Eyes, a
ringing in the Ears: Sometimes in some exterior part, to wit, in the Arm, or
Leg, or also in the Back, or Hypochondres, a Convulsion precedes, which,
ascending thence like a cold wind, and creeping toward the Head, seems to
cause a Fit of the Falling-evil: Nor is it less usual for it to have its
beginning in the Stomach, Spleen, Womb, Intestines, Genitals, and other of the
Viscera, and to pass thence to the Head in like manner.

It is to be observed that sometimes the Epilepsy terminates of its own accord,
viz. about the time of Puberty, so that those who are not Cured before that
period is past, viz. the twentyfifth year, scarce ever recover their Health:
For about the time of Puberty a double alteration happens to humane Body, and
therefore often a release from the Epilepsy, or any other Disease more deeply
rooted: For First, at this time the Genital Humor begins to be gathered
together in the Spermatick Vessels, whence it follows that the Spirituous
Particles, and the Nitrosulphureous which are wont to accompany them, and such
as are Morbifick, are not only deposed in the Brain, but also in the Testes,
wherefore if the Heterogeneous Combination of the Spirits, before taking to the
Brain, and causing the Epilepsy, be freely carried into that new Storehouse,
the Brain also being more free, often shakes off the Epileptical, or otherwise
Morbid Disposition. Secondly, about the time of Puberty, as the Blood conveys
somewhat, which before was designed for the Brain, to the Genitals by the
Spermatick Arteries, so also it receives some ferment from those said parts by
way of return by the Veins, viz. some particles imbued with a Seminal Tincture
are carried back into the Mass of Blood, which strengthen it, and inspire into
it a new and sprightly Vigor, wherefore at that time the endowments of the
Body and Mind chiefly exert themselves, the Hairs shoot forth, the voice
becomes more sonorous: The Menses flow from Women, and other Accidents
supervene, by which it manifestly appears that the Blood and Nervous Juice are
impregnated with some new Fermentation: Wherefore unless the Morbifick
Ferments, or Seminal Roots are overcome by this new Natural Ferment, they
continue afterward unconquered to our dying Day: If the Epilepsy does not
cease about the time of Puberty, nor can be Cured by the use of Medicines, it
either terminates immediately in Death, or is changed into some other Disease,
viz. a Palsy, Stupidity, or Melancholy, for the most part incurable.

Concerning the Cure of the Falling Sickness the Indications (as vulgarly set
forth) are either Curatory, having regard to the Fit, and either keep it off as
it is coming, or soon force it off when it has seized: Or they are
Prophylactick, and regard the cause of the Disease, which if they remove, its
accesses will be kept off for the future.

As to the first intention, general Evacuatives have scarce place; nor ought a
Vomit, or Purge, and very seldom Bleeding to be used in a Fit; if the person
continues deprived of Sense a long time, Clysters are sometimes wont to be
administered; but the chief thing to be done is to fix the Animal Spirits, which
are too Exorbitant and Volatile; and to suppress their beginning Explosions:
For which ends two kinds of Remedies chiefly conduce, viz. First, Such as
repress the Animal Spirits, apt to rise to an Exorbitancy and to shoot, and
repel them by a certain Fumigation as it were ungrateful to them; and force
them into their due course: Which Medicines endowed with a Volatile, and
Armoniack Salt, or also with a Vitriolick Sulphur will effect. Of which kind
are Salt and Oil of Amber, Spirit of Blood, of Hartshorn, of Soot, Tincture of
Castoreum and the like: For these being inwardly taken, or held to the Nostrils
often give relief; nay and are thought to drive away the evil Spirits of this
Disease, even as in Tobit the Fume of the Gall of a Fish burnt did the Devil.
Secondly, the Animal Spirits are diverted, or hindered from entering upon
Explosions, when they are allured to, and kept employed in some work that is
usual to them, wherefore in the Fit, Frictions used over the whole Body, and
continued for some time often do good: But as to raising up persons seized, and
wholly restraining the Arms and Legs from the Convulsive motion, or binding
them in this or that Posture (as some people use to do) and so, as to blowing
Sneezing-powder into their Nostrils and pouring strong Cordials into their
Mouths, or applying Cupping-glasses and Scarifications, and dealing roughly
with the Diseased by other ways of Administration, thus disturbing the course
of the Fit: I say this sort of practice is very often ill taken in hand,
because by this means Nature is doubly toiled, viz. both by the Disease, and no
less by standers by, and Servants, whereas it were much better to let the Fit
pass according to its course, that so the Diseased might escape with one
affliction.

Truly the greatest care of a Physician and efficacy of Remedies is in the
Prophylactick part of this Disease, that its cause being taken away, or its
root cut off, all the Fruit may wither: The Medicines required for this
Indication have regard to many intents, which nevertheless may be reduced to
these two chief heads, viz. First, that the fuel of the Disease supplied
immediately from the vicious Blood and Nervous Juice, and more mediately from
the Viscera and first passages, be cut off; And then Secondly, that the evil
Disposition of the Brain, and Spirits in it, which is peculiar to the Epilepsy,
be removed.

As to the first thing indicated, here Vomits, and Purges, and other both
Evacuatives, and Alteratives, nay and Bleeding, and Cauteries have place; for
as much as by these means and ways the Impurities both of the Viscera and
Humors are drawn away, and their Discrasy is corrected: For though these
Medicines and Physical Administrations seldom or never Cure the Epilepsy alone,
yet they remove Impediments, raise up Nature, and stir her up to set upon her
Enemy: They also prepare the passages that thereby Specific Remedies may more
certainly and efficaciously exert their Virtues: Wherefore when the Cure of
this Disease is attempted Spring and Fall, and at other fit seasons, by Secrets
and Arcana's, it is usual to use betwixt whiles those sorts of Medicines.

As to Specific Remedies which are affirmed even alone, though not always, to
reach the cause of the Epilepsy, and to overcome it, of which kind are the Male
Peony, Mistletow of the Oak, Rue, Castoreum, Elks-hoof, preparations of Man's
Scull, Amber, Coral, with many others: In regard these things are taken without
any sensible Evacuation, or even Disturbance following in the Viscera or
Humors, it seems strange by what formal way, or Virtue of working they are
wont ever to do good in this Disease.

If there be any room for conjecture in this intricate and obscure thing, in
regard the Procatarctick cause of the Epilepsy consists in the Heterogeneous
Combination happening to the Spirits in the Brain it follows that those things
which overcome, and remove such a cause are of such a Nature, that by
strengthening the Brain, and constringing its Pores they keep off that
Combination, and so fix, and as it were constipate the Spirits that abound in
the middle of the Brain, leaving their Combination, that they are no longer apt
and prone to irregular Explosions: After the like manner happily as when the
Powder of Aurum Fulminans ground with Sulphur, and sprinkled with Spirit of
Vitriol loses its fulminating Virtue: And in truth we may conjecture nay in
some measure discover that these kinds of properties, to wit, one, or both of
them together, are in many Antiepileptick Remedies; for the Peony, Mistletow,
of the Oak, Rue, Lillies of the valley, with many others excel in a manifest
sort of Astriction, whence it is very likely that their Particles inwardly
taken, and so, by the Vehicle of the Blood, or Nervous Juice, conveyed to the
Brain, so constringe and close its over Lax and Gaping Pores, that they no
longer lie open for the entrance of the Morbifick matter: Moreover because
these concrets breath forth an Armoniack as it were, and dissipating vapor,
therefore the same are said to purify the Animal Spirits, and to fix and
corroborate them, having left their Heterogeneous Combination. This Virtue of
purifying the Spirits, proceeding from the Armoniack Salt, shows it self most
in Remedies taken from Minerals and Animals, such as are the preparations of
Man's Scull, Blood, Amber and Coral; as the other Astringent Virtue appears most
in the parts and preparations of Vegetables.

There is no need for us here to set forth a complete Method of Curing the
Epilepsy with exact Forms of Prescripts, because general Precepts and excellent
Remedies are every where to be had amongst Authors, and a prudent Physician
will easily accommodate both the Indications, and that plentiful Apparatus of
Physic to particular cases of sick persons: But because we give a clearly new
Theory of this Disease, a Therapeutick Method also adapted to the same ought to
be here given; Which we shall presently fully delineate, after I have given you
a story of a person troubled with the Epilepsy.

The Daughter of an Alehouse-keeper at Oxford had been very subject from her
Infancy to a Catarrh falling on her Eyes, being otherwise strong and sound
enough, she lived also daily used to hard labor; about the fourteenth year of
her Age she began to be seized with Fits of the Epilepsy, whereof she underwent
many, they chiefly following her according to the greater changes of the Moon:
Being entreated to endeavor her recovery, I gave her a Vomit of the Solar
Praecipitate, and advised her to repeat the same three Days before every new
and full Moon, and likewise that every time, for four Days after the Vomit
taken, she should take twice a Day a Dram of Powder of the Roots of Male Peony,
with a draught of black Cherry water: By these Remedies the Fits intermitted so
long that the Disease seemed to be Cured. When afterward they returned again,
she was again recovered by the use of the same Medicines: And then her Menses
happening to flow, and keeping their due course, she continued for the time to
come free from that Disease.

The Therapeutick Method.
IN the Cure of the Epilepsy I judge we must begin by Purging, and if the
Diseased easily bears Vomiting, let him take a Vomit in the first place, and
let it be repeated for many Months four Days before the full Moon: To Infants
and Children let Wine of Squills mixed with fresh Oil of sweet Almonds be given,
or also Salt of Vitriol from half a Scruple to a Scruple: To Adult persons and
such as are of a robust Constitution let the following Forms of Medicines be
prescribed.

Vomits.
TAke Crocus Metallorum, or Mercurius Vitae from four Grains to six, Mercurius
Dulcis from sixteen Grains to a Scruple, let them be ground together on a
Marble, mix it with the Pap of a boiled Apple, or with a Dram of Conserve of
Borrage, make a Bolus. Or give from half an Ounce to an Ounce and a half of the
Infusion of Crocus Metallorum, or Mercurius Vitae made in Sack. Or take
Mynsicht's Emetick Tartar from four Grains to six: Those that are of a more
tender Constitution may take Salt of Vitriol from a Scruple to half a Dram, and
after half an hour let them drink upon it many pints of Ale-Posset-drink, then
a Quill, or the Finger being put into the Throat, let Vomiting be provoked, and
let it be sometimes repeated.

The Day after the Vomit, unless somewhat indicates the contrary, let Blood be
taken from the Arm, or from the Haemorrhoid Veins by Leeches: Then the next Day
after let a Purging Medicine be taken, and let this afterward constantly be
repeated four Days before the new Moon.

Purges.
TAke Rosin of Jalap half a Scruple, Mercurius Dulcis a Scruple, Castoreum
three Grains, Conserve of Peony-flowers a Dram; make a Bolus. Take the greater
Pilulae Faetidae two Scruples, Rosin of Jalap five Grains, Ammoniacum dissolved
in Aqua Hysterica what suffices; make five Pills. Take Threads of black
Hellebore macerated in Vinegar, dried, and powdered half a Dram, Ginger half a
Scruple, Salt of Wormwood twelve Grains, Oil of Amber two Drops make a Powder,
give it in the Pap of a boiled Apple. Take Compound Powder of Hermodacts a
Dram, Man's Scull prepared six Grains, make a Powder, give it in a draught of
the Decoction of Hyssop or Sage.

In the Days in which he does not Purge, especially about the times of the
Moons changes, let Specific Remedies be given Morning and Evening, which are
said to Cure this Disease by a certain Secret and innate Virtue: There is an
immense number of these, and they are prescribed according to various Forms of
Compositions.

Specificks.
THE most simple Medicines, and which experience has proved to be very
efficacious, are the Roots of the Male Peony and its Seed: Take Roots of the
Male Peony dried and powdered from a Dram to two or three Drams, let it be given
twice a Day in the following Tincture. Take Leaves of Mistletow of the Oak two
Drams, Peony Roots slic't half an Ounce, Castoreum a Dram, let them be put in a
close Vessel with Betony water, or simple Peony water, and White Wind of each a
Pound, Salt of Mistletow of the Oak, or of common Mistletow two Drams, let them
digest in a close Vessel by a Sand heat for two Days; let him take three Ounces
with a Dose of the Powder before prescribed.

Let poor people take the said Powder in a Decoction of Hyssop or Castoreum
made in fountain water, or White Wind.

At the same time let the Root of Peony, cut in slices, and run through with a
Thread, be hung about the Neck: Let the Roots also fried in a Drying Pan, or
boiled till they are tender, be daily taken with his Food.

Take Roots, and Seeds of the Male Peony of each two Drams, Mistletow of the
Oak, Elks-hoof of each a Dram; being slic't and bruised, let them be sown up in
very fine Linen, make a Bag to be worn on the Pit of the Stomach.

Amongst Specificks this Powder is greatly commended by some Authors. Take
Castoreum, Opoponax, Sanguis Draconis, Antimony, Peony Seeds, of each a like
quantity: Make a Powder, let it be taken from half a Dram to a Dram every
Morning with Wine, or an appropriated Decoction, or with black Cherry water.

Take Man's Scull prepared an Ounce, Mistletow of the Oak, factitious Cinnaber,
Elks-hoof, of each half an Ounce; mix them, the Dose is from half a Scruple to
a Scruple.

If the Form of a Powder be ungrateful to any Person, or if it is long continued
use makes it loathsome, Electuaries, Pills, Troches Spirits, and Elixirs, each
of them consisting of Specific Medicines, are wont to be prescribed.

Electuaries.
TAke Conserve of Male Peony-flowers, of Lillies of the valley, of each three
Ounces: Seeds and Roots of the Male Peony powdered of each two Drams, Coral
prepared a Dram, Pearl powdered, Man's Scull prepared, of each two Scruples, Salt
of Mistletow of the Oak a Dram and a half, with a sufficient quantity of Syrup
of Coral, make an Electuary; let him take Morning and Evening the quantity of a
Nutmeg.

Take Roots of Male Peony powdered an Ounce, Seeds of the same half an Ounce,
Mistletow of the Oak, Elks-hoof, Man's Scull prepared, of each two Drams, Roots
of Angelica, Contrayerva, Virginia Serpentary, of each a Dram, white Amber,
Coral calcined, of each a Dram, Salt of common Mistletow two Drams, Sugar Candy
dissolved in a sufficient quantity of the Antiepileptick water of Langius eight
Ounces, make a Confection, let him take twice a Day the quantity of a Nutmeg.

Pills.
LET those Powders, Salt of Amber, and of Hartshorn, being added to them, be
made into a Mass for Pills with a sufficient quantity of Balsamum Capivii
whereof let three or four Pills be taken in the Morning and Evening, drinking
after it a draught of an appropriated Liquour.

Or let an Elixir of this kind be prepared, whereof let eight or ten drops be
taken twice a Day in a spoonful of an appropriated Julape, drinking after it a
little of the same.

Elixirs.
TAke Hungarian Vitriol six Pounds, let it be distilled in a Glass Retort by a
Sand heat for twentyfour hours; then let the same Retort luted with a large
receiver be put in a Reverberatory Furnace, that the Acid Spirits may be forced
so long by a strong Fire till they go forth: Let the whole Liquour distilled be
drawn off in a less Glass Retort by a Sand heat; and in a Mattress let there be
poured to it Roots of Male Peony cut in slices and dried four Ounces, Seeds of
the same an Ounce, Man's Scull prepared, Elkshoof, red Coral of each half an
Ounce, Mistletow of the Oak two Drams, let it digest with a gentle heat for
many Days till the Tincture be extracted; let the Liquour being decanted, be
drawn off in a Glass retort till only a third part of it remains, let that
which is distilled be kept apart by it self: To the remainder pour a like
quantity of Spirit of Wine highly rectified, and impregnated with the Infusion
of the same Ingredients, and let them digest for six Days in Horse-dung: Make
an Elixir, whose Dose is from half a Scruple to a Scruple. Let the distilled
Liquour be given from half a spoonful to a whole one for the same intentions.

Or let an Oil be prepared of Salt of Venus according to the prescript of
Henricus ab Heers, and let it be given as before.

Empirical Remedies.
AMongst Specific Remedies, which (in case those before do no good) may also
be tried, we may account the Liver of Froggs, the Bladder of a Boar, dried with
the Urine, the Powder of Briony Roots, the Powders of a Cuckoo, or of Crows;
the Rennet and Lungs of a Hare, the Liver of a Wolf, Stones taken out of
Swallows, the Liver of a Kite, Crows Eggs daily to be taken amongst your Food
and Medicines, with many other things, a famous Catalogue of which you may find
in Henricus a Bra a Physician of Zutphen; and out of which prescripts for the
poor may be taken, as being easy to be had, and of a small price.

Whilst these kinds of Medicines are inwardly taken according to the foresaid
Method, some Administrations outwardly applied contribute help, and are justly
taken in as a part of the Cure. Wherefore always in this Disease let Issues, to
wit, one or two be made in fit places, also let Vesicatories be often applied.

Periapts hung about the Neck, or worn on the Pit of the Stomach are judged to
be of use. Let fresh Peony Roots cut into bits and run through with a Thread be
made into Bracelets, to be worn all round the Neck: As Soon as they are
withered, let new ones be put in their place, and let those be made into Powder
to be taken inwardly. Take Roots and Seeds of Peony of each two Drams,
Elks-hoof, Man's Scull prepared of each a Dram, Mistletow of the Oak half a
Dram, being grossly powdered, let them be sewen in red Silk, and make a Bag to be
hung about the Neck.

An Amulet of a young Shoat of Elder found growing on a Willow is greatly
commended.

Plasters.
IT is proper for some to have their Hair shaved off, and to have a Plaster
applied to the Sinciput: Take Roots and Seeds of Peony, Castoreum, Mistletow of
the Oak, Man's Scull very finely powdered, of each a Dram, Betony Plaster two
Ounces, Caranna, Tacamahacca of each two Drams, Balsamum Capivii what suffices;
make a Mass, spread it on Leather, make a Plaster for the Sutures of the Head.

Let the Temples and Nostrils often be anointed with Oil of Amber by it self,
or mixed with Oleum Capivii.

Let Sneezing Powders and Apophlegmatisms be constantly used Mornings. Take
white Hellebore a Dram; Castoreum, Euphorbum of each half a Dram; sweet
Marjoram, Leaves of-Rue, of each two Drams; make a Powder. Let a Decoction of
Hyssop or Sage, with the Confection of Mustard Seed dissolved in it, be
gargal'd in the Mouth and Throat.

Let Glysters sometimes be given according as need requires.

In regard Solid Medicines ought sometimes to be diluted with Liquids, or these
to be drank after those, let distilled waters, Julapes, Decoctions, or
Tinctures that are endowed with some Specific Virtue against this Disease be
in a readiness for this purpose.

Take Hungarian Vitriol four Pounds, fresh Man's Scull powdered four Ounces,
Peony Roots slic't six Ounces; being bruised together in a Mortar pour to them
of Sack, or small White Wind, or Wine of the Juice of black Cherries fermented
in a Vessel two Pounds, let them be distilled in a Glass Retort by a Sand heat.

Take Raspings of Box, Hungarian Vitriol of each two Pounds, Leaves of
Mistletow three handfuls, Leaves of Rue two handfuls, being bruised together
pour to them of Sack four Pounds, let them be distilled in a Gourd-glass by a
Sand heat.

Take common Vitriol six Pounds, Roots of Male Peony six Ounces, Mistletow of
the Oak an Ounce, green Walnuts eight Ounces; being slic't and bruised let them
distill in a Glazed Pot with a Glass Alembick set over it by a Sand heat: Take
of this Liquour a Pound, water of black Cherries and of Lime-tree Flowers, of
each half a Pound, double refined Sugar four Ounces, mix them, make a Julape:
The Dose is two or three Ounces twice or thrice a Day.

Oxymel of Squils, also Hydromel with Hyssop boiled in it, are very much
commended by the Ancients: Or let this kind of Apozeme be prepared, whereof you
may give from four Ounces to six or eight twice a Day.

Take Roots of Male Peony, Angelica, Master-wort, Valerian, of each six Drams,
Leaves of Betony, Sage, Lillies of the valley, Pennyroyal of each a handful,
Seeds of Rue, Gith of each three Drams, of Peony half an Ounce, Raisins three
Ounces, Licorice half an Ounce, being slic't and bruised let them boil in six
Pounds of Fountain water to a consumption of the third part. Toward the end
add Wine of black Cherries half a Pound, or ten Ounces; strain it and let it be
kept in Vessels close stopped; the Dose is from six Ounces to eight twice a Day
after the Remedies above prescribed.

Or let the foresaid Ingredients, the Licorice and Raisins excepted, be boiled
in six Pounds of Hydromel to a consumption of the third part, the Dose is from
four Ounces to six.

But if the foresaid Method, consisting in the use of Catharticks and
Specificks being tried for some time, proves wholly without effect, we must
come to Remedies of another kind, and especially to those which are called
great: In this rank we place Diaphoreticks, Salivation, hot Baths, and Mineral
waters.

Alphonsus Ferrius says he has Cured a great many Epileptical persons, by a
simple Decoction of Guaiacum, being prescribed twice a Day from six Ounces to
eight, and a second Decoction of it being taken instead of ordinary Drink, as
is usual in the French Pox. If to such a Decoction the Roots of Peony and other
Specificks be added, happily it will be more efficacious. It seems probable that
a Salivation powerfully raised by Mercury, and afterward followed by a
Sweating Diet Drink, will infallibly Cure this Disease: What hot Baths or
Mineral waters will do, is not yet known to me either from my own experience or
that of others; I shall try happily some time what our artificial Mineral waters,
viz. impregnated both with Iron, and Antimony being taken for many Days in a
great quantity will be able to effect toward the Cure of the Falling Sickness.

CHAP. II. Instructions and Prescripts for Curing the other kinds of
Convulsions, and in the first place of the Convulsive motions of Children.
IT happens that Infants and Children are so generally, and frequently,
troubled with Convulsive affects, that this may be accounted as the chief and
almost only kind of Convulsions; for those kinds of Symptoms in Adult persons
are denoted by other Names, and are wont to be referred to the Epilepsy;
Hysteric, Hypochondriack, or Colic passions, or also to the Scurvy; but in
Children, as it were by way of excellency, they are called Convulsive motions.

Concerning these we may observe, that Children are found to be very subject to
Convulsions chiefly at two times, viz. within the first Month after they are
Born, and about the time of the eruption of Teeth: Though Fits of this Disease
happen also often at other times, and for certain other causes.

For, in those in whom the Seeds of a Convulsive Disposition are rooted, these
Seeds sometimes display themselves, and come to a Morbid Matureness either
presently after the persons are Born, (as is said before) or lying hid for a
while, sometimes precede in them the Eruption of Teeth, sometimes follow it at
a great distance of time after, and at length in an uncertain course break
forth in act for other evident causes, viz. either inward or outward, such as
are an unhealthy or pregnant Nurse, Milk coagulating in the Ventricle, or
degenerating into an acid or bitter Corruption, a Feverish Distemper of the
Head, and Ulcers of other parts, breakings forth suddenly disappearing, changes
of the Air, Conjunctions or Opposite Aspects of the Sun and Moon, and the like.

These Convulsions in Children are wont to infest three Regions of the Body,
viz. the parts of the Head and Face; the Members and outward Limbs; and the
Praecordia and Viscera: And we observe that sometimes these, sometimes the
others, sometimes two of them, or all the Regions together are troubled with
the Morbifick cause, according as the same is fixed either about the Origines,
or extremities of the Nerves. And when the first of these happens, according as
the superior, middle, or lower spinal part of the Medulla Oblongata, to wit,
one of them alone, or more of them together are set upon by the Morbifick cause.

In Children obnoxious to Convulsions hereditarily, the Convulsive Fits are
excellently provided against, if presently after a Child is Born an Issue be
made in the Nucha, and Blood be drawn from the Jugular Veins by Leeches, for by
the former the Corruptions of the Nervous Juice are conveyed away, and by the
latter the impure Efflorescencies of the Blood are withdrawn from the Head: A
person whose Children dyed all of Convuisions within three Months time, at
length to prevent the like fatal Accident in a Child fresh Born, sought for
Remedies: Being called after some Days after the Birth, I advised that in the
first place an Issue should be made in the Nucha, and then the next Day after,
that a Leech being applied to the Jugular of both sides, Blood should be drawn
to the quantity of two Ounces: moreover that near each of the Conjunctions and
Opposite Aspects of the Sun and Moon about five Grains of the following Powder
should be given in a spoonful of Julape for three Days, Mornings and Evenings.

Take Man's Scull prepared, Roots of Male Peony of each a Dram, Pearl powdered
half a Dram, double refined Sugar a Dram, mix them, make a subtle Powder.

Take black Cherry water three Ounces, Langius's Antiepileptical water an
Ounce, Syrup of the Flowers of Male Peony six Drams, mix them.

I ordered also that the Nurse at the same Physical hours should take a draught
of Whey, in which Seeds and Roots of the Male Peony, and Leaves of the Lilly of
the valley were boiled: The Infant continued well for about four Months, but
then began to be troubled with Convulsive affects: At which time the same
Remedies were given in a greater Dose both to the Infant, and to the Nurse.
Vesicatories were also applied behind his Ears, and Blood was drawn by Leeches
from both Jugular Veins; and within two or three Days the Child grew well:
afterward when within four or five Months the Convulsions returned at times,
still by the use of the same Remedies he was Cured: After a year and a half the
Convulsive affects wholly ceast, but about the lower part of the Backbone a
Tumor without Pain grew up, whence some Crookedness of the Vertebrae, and a
weakness of the Legs, and at length a Palsy were caused. It seems in this case
that the Convulsive matter which was wont to assail the Origines of the Nerves,
at length entering the Spinal Marrow, and being thrown down into its lower
part, wholly stopped the Mouths of the Arteries belonging to it; to wit, because
to the explosive Particles, other narcotick and grosser Particles had joined
themselves.

The Therapeutick Method against Convulsive affects in Children.
IN Infants and Children we must take care either to prevent imminent
Convulsions, or being already begun to Cure them.

For if former Children Born of the same Parent have been found obnoxious to
Convulsions, that evil ought to be prevented in the rest of the Children Born
afterward by a seasonable use of Remedies: For this end it is usual to pour
into the Mouth of an Infant newly Born, as soon as it begins to Breath, some
Anticonvulsive Medicine: Hence some are wont to give it some drops of most pure
Honey, others a spoonful of Canary sweetn'd with Sugar, and others Oil of sweet
Almonds fresh drawn: By some persons a drop of Oil of Amber, or half a spoonful
of Epileptical water is put into its Mouth.

Besides these first things given Children, which truly seem to be of some
moment; certain other remedies and ways of Administration ought to be used;
viz. let a spoonful of a Liquour appropriated to this affect be drank twice a
Day. For Example;

Take water of black Cherries and of Rue of each an Ounce and a half the
Antiepileptick water of Langius an Ounce, Syrup of Corral six Drams, Pearl
prepared fifteen Grains, mix them in a Glass.

On the third or fourth Day after it is Born, let an Issue be made in the
Nucha, then if it has a Florid Countenance, let a little Blood to an Ounce and
a half, or two Ounces, be drawn from the Jugular Veins by Leeches, care being
taken lest he Bleed too much when he Sleeps: Let the Temples and Neck be gently
rubbed with such a Liniment.

Take Oil of Nutmeggs by expression two Drams, Oleum Capivii three Drams, Oil
of Amber a Scruple; let a Periapt of the Roots and Seeds of the greater Peony
with a little addition of Elks-hoof be hung about the Neck.

Moreover let Anticonvulsive Medicines be daily given the Nurse: Let her take
Morning and Evening a draught of Whey in which the Roots and Seeds of Male
Peony, and the Seeds of sweet Fennel are boiled.

Take Conserve of the Flowers of Betony, Male Peony, and Rosemary of each two
Ounes, Powder of the Roots and Flowers of the Male Peony of each two Drams, red
Coral prepared, white Amber of each a Dram, Roots of Angelica, Zedoary prepared
of each half a Dram, with a sufficient quantity of Syrup of Peony, make an
Electuary: Let ber take the quantity of a Nutmegg Morning and Evening.

Take Powder of the Roots of Male Peony two Drams, Seeds of the same a Dram,
make a Powder; double refined Sugar dissolved in the water of Lime-tree
Flowers, and boiled to a consistency for Tablets three Ounces, Oil of Amber a
Scruple: Let Tablets be made according to Art, each Weighing half a Dram, let
her eat one every sixth hour, and let her keep an exact Form of Diet.

In case any Infant be actually affected with Convulsions, because an Issue
works but little and slowly, it is proper to apply a Vesicatory to the Nucha,
and behind each Ear, and unless a cold Temperament forbids it, let Blood be
drawn from the Jugular Veins by Leeches: Let Liniments be applied about the
Temples, Nostrils, and Neck, and Plasters to the Soles of the Feet: Let
Clysters be daily injected, which plentifully empty the Belly: Moreover Let
Specific Remedies be taken inwardly often in a Day, to wit, every sixth or
eighth hour.

Take Oleum Capivii, and Oil of Castoreum of each two Drams, Oil of Amber half
a Dram, make a Liniment.

Take of the Emplaster Oxycroceum two parts, Galbanum dissolved one part, Oil
of Amber a Scruple, make a Plaster for the Soles of the Feet: Let the Powder
of Gutteta according to the description of Riverius be given twice or four
times a day.

Take Man's Scull prepared, Peony-seeds, Elks-hoof, Pearl prepared, of each half
a Dram, Amber-greice six Grains, make a Powder, the Dose is six Grains in a
Spoonful of the Liquour beneath, written three or four times a day.

(Or) Take Man's Scull prepared, Pearl, of each half a Dram, Salt of Amber a
Scruple, Sugar of Pearl a Dram, the Dose is half a Scruple.

(Or) Take Spirit of Hartshorn three Drops, let it be given every sixth or
eight hour in a Spoonful of the Julape beneath prescribed.

To poor peoples Children let Powder of the Root of wild Valerian be given from
half a Scruple to a Scruple; let it be given twice a day in a Spoonful of Milk,
or of an Appropriated Liquour.

Vntzerus greatly commends the Gall of a Sucking Whelp, viz. that all the Juice
of the Gallbladder be taken forth and given to the Child with a little Water
of Lime-tree-flowers.

A Learned Physician lately told me that he had known many Cured with this
Remedy: Moreover Empiricks, after the Gall is drank, are went also to give to
greater Children to eat the Liver roasted.

Julapes, distilled Waters, and other Appropriated Liquours may be prepared
according to the Forma following.

Take black Cherry-water three Ounces, Antiepileptical-water of Langius an
Ounce, Sugar of Pearl two Drams, mix them.

Take fresh Roots of Male Peony cut into slices six Ounces, Hungarian Vitriol
eight Ounces, Man's Scull two Ounces, Antiepileptical Water of Langius half a
Pound; mix them, and let them distill in a Glass Retort by a Sand heat: The
Dose is from a Spoonful to two Spoonfuls.

Take fresh Roots of Male Peony sliced four Ounces, being bruised in a Marble
Mortar, pour to them of Spanish Wine a Pound; express it strongly, add Manus
Christi perlated half an Ounce, let it be kept in a Glass close stopped; the Dose
is a Spoonful or two, twice a day.

When Convulsions happen by reason of a difficult breeding of Teeth, this
Symptom is looked upon as secondary, and not dangerous, and therefore in the
Method of Cure it is not always the first or chief thing which requires help,
but sometimes we are rather sollicitous of appeasing the pain, and removing the
feverish Distemper, wherefore both the Patient and Nurse ought to use a thin
and cooling Diet; when the Teeth are upon eruption, let the passage be made
open for them, either by a rubbing, or Section of the Gums: And also let
Anodines be applied to those parts when swollen and full of pain: Clysters and
Bleeding often have place here: We must procure sleep, and allay the fervor of
the Blood: Mean while let Anticonvulsive Remedies be used, but of the more
moderate kind, and such as little trouble the Blood and Humors; Vesicatories,
in regard they evacuate the Serum, which is too apt to be discharged on the
Head, often give relief.

When Children are troubled with Convulsions, and that neither presently upon
their Birth, nor by reason of an Eruption of Teeth, but through other
occasions, and accidents, the cause of such an affect for the most part lies
either in the head, or somewhere about the Viscera of Concoction. When there is
a suspicion of the former, as it is wont to appear by signs which show that a
Mass of Serous Filth is gathered together within the head; the above cited
Remedies ought to be given in a little larger Dose; moreover in those who bear
Purging well, sometimes a Vomit, and a gentle Purge may be ordered them: Wine
and Oxymel of Squills, also Mercurius Dulcis, Rhubarb, and Rosin of Jalap are
of excellent use.

As often as the cause of the Convulsive Affect appears to be in the Bowels,
either Worms, or sharp Humors causing Gripes in the Belly are found to be in
the fault.

Against Worms a Purge of Rhubarb, or of Mercurius Dulcis, with the addition of
Rosin of Jalap is ordered.

Formerly to a Child miserably troubled with Convulsions, so that he seemed
even a Dying, I gave a Dose of Mercurius Dulcis with Rosin of Jalap: With his
Stools, whereof he had four, he voided twelve Worms, and presently grew well.

Take Roots of Virginia Serpentary powdered a Dram, Coral caloin'd to a
whiteness half a Dram, make a Powder, the Dose is from half a Scruple to a
Scruple twice a day for three days one after the other, drinking after it a
Decoction of Grass Roots. Take Species of Hiera a Dram and a half,
Venice-treacle two Drams, make a Plaster for the Belly, or let a Plaster of
Galbanum be applied to the Navel.

If the Convulsive motions are thought to proceed from the Irritation of the
Ventricle, and the Intestines, caused by sharp Humors, a gentle Purge, either
by Vomit or Seige, or of both, the one after the other, ought to be ordered.
For this purpose let gentle Emeticks of Wine of Squills, or of Salt of Vitriol
be taken; to wit, if at any time the Diseased be of their own accord seized
with a straining to Vomit; but if the Evacuation seems rather fit to be
attempted downwards, an Infusion of Rhubarb, or its Powder, Syrup of Cichory
with Rhubarb, or of Roses with Agarick ought to be given: And I have often seen
a Convulsive affect in Children Cured by these Remedies when seasonably
administered; moreover Clysters in this case are of frequent use: But withal let
not outward Medicaments be omitted, viz. Fomentations, Liniments, and Plasters
to be applied to the Belly.

Take Cammomil Leaves small slic't two handfuls, let them be put into two bags
made of fine Linen or Silk, which being dipped into warm Milk, and wrung forth
must be applied successively to the Belly.

Take Tops or Flowers of Mallows slic't, boil them in fresh Butter, or Hogs
Lard, and let them be applied to the Belly in the form of an Ointment or
Cataplasm.

CHAP. III. Instructions and Prescripts for Curing Convulsive Diseases in Adult
Persons, happening by reason of the Origin of the Nerves being chiefly affected.
THough Convulsive affects which happen to Adult Persons, being denoted by
other Names, are also vulgarly accounted to have another Origin, and are wont
to be referred to those they call Hysterical, Hypochondriacal, or Colic
passions, or to the Scurvy; nevertheless if the thing be a little more
attentively considered, it will easily appear, that certain Convulsive Symptoms
frequently happen both to Men and Women, which properly and duly claim the name
of a Convulsion: Now these may be variously distinguished according to the
Manifold seat of the Morbifick cause, but especially into these three kinds,
viz. into certain Convulsions caused by reason of the Origin of the Nerves
being chiefly affected, and into others which are caused by reason of the
extremities of the Nerves being stopped with a Morbifick Matter; and lastly into
others whose Morbifick Matter descending from the Head, gets possession of the
whole, or the greatest part of the Ductus's of some peculiar Nerves, or of them
altogether. We shall treat of each of these kinds of Convulsions one after the
other.

Therefore first of all as to Convulsions happening by reason of the Origin of
the Nerves being affected, we must note first that the Morbifick Matter
besetting the Origines of the Nerves, sometimes passes chiefly into the
foremost Pairs of Nerves, viz. which attend the Muscles of the Eyes and Face;
and thence Contractions and tremblings sometimes of the Nose, Cheeks or Lips,
sometimes of the Eyes or Mouth ensue. Secondly, sometimes the Par Vagum and
Intercostal chiefly imbibe the Heterogeneous Particles, and then Inflations or
Contractions of the Abdomen and Hypochondres, and also a Palpitation and
Trembling of the Heart, a difficult and interrupted Breathing, an intermitting
Pulse, and other Symptoms of the middle or lower Region of the Belly chiefly
molest us. Thirdly, but sometimes the Morbifick Cause lying behind, chiefly
affects the Spinal Marrow; and therefore the outward Members and Limbs are
rendered obnoxious to Twitchings and Contractions.

Moreover as we may conjecture from various Types of the Con\vulsive affect, it
seems that the Convulsive Matter going to these or those Nerves, or to many of
them together, either lodges it self in a manner only about their Origines, so
that upon frequent Explosions of the Spirits there, an almost continual and
very troublesome Vertigo arises; and so Tremblings, and a short Fainting, and
danger of Swounding are perceived about the Praecordia, and often Twitchings
and gentle Contractions in the Bowels or Muscles: Or Secondly, the explosive
Particles conveyed to the Origin of the Nerves, enter deeper into their
Processes, and often falling down into the Plexus's of the Nerves, belonging to
the Praecordia, or Viscera of the Belly; or also to the outward Members, make
there other seats, as it were of Convulsive affects, so that as often as the
Spirits are forced to Explosions about the Origin of the Nerves, presently
Fits, as it were Hysteric, Asthmatick, or otherwise Convulsive arise in the
Belly, Thorax, or outward Members. I shall now give you some instances of
Persons in whom the Morbifick Matter besetting the Origin of the Nerves, and
not yet fallen deeper into their Processes, caused frequent Vertigo's, and only
gentle Convulsions of the Viscera and Praecordia.

1. A Lady of great Quality, about Thirty years of Age, of a tender
Constitution, and of a thin habit of Body, was wont to be sorely afflicted
every Winter with a Catarrh distilling on her Trachaea and Lungs, with a Cough,
Hoarsness, and great Spiting, but the last year, through a diligent care and
caution used, she escaped that evil: But after the Winter solstice, upon taking
cold, she was seized with a violent Headache, a ringing in the Ears, a Vertigo,
with a mighty Distillation of Rheum at the Eyes and Nose, whence it easily
appeared that the filthy Mass of Serum which was wont before to distill on the
Breast, was then wholly deposed within the Head and Brain: The effect whereof
moreover was, that as often as she began to sleep, she was very much troubled
with a sort of Hysteric Fits, to which she had never before been obnoxious:
For if at any time beginning to sleep, she closed her Eyes, presently it caused
a rising of a heavy thing in her Belly, a Suffocation in her Throat, and
Tremblings and Twitchings about the Praecordia: Which affects nevertheless,
when she was perfectly awak't, presently ceas't, so that the Diseased was
forced to abstain in a manner wholly from sleep for many days and nights
together.

Being called to this Lady after she was become very weak upon many days
Sickness, I was forced to use only gentle Medicines: Therefore I ordered four
Ounces of Blood to be taken from her Foot, and a Clyster of Milk with Sugar to
be daily given her, after which she was wont to have three or four Stools:
Moreover every eighth hour I gave her a Dose of Spirit of Hartshorn in a
Spoonful of the following Julape.

Take Water of Pennyroyal, Wallnuts, black Cherries of each three Ounces,
Hysteric Water two Ounces, Syrup of Clovegilly-flowers an Ounce and a half,
Castoreum tied in a Nodulus, and hung in the Glass half a Dram, Pearl powdered a
Scruple, mix them.

I applied with good effect Vesicatories behind the Ears, and Cataplasms of
Leaves of Rue, and Aron, with Bryony Roots, Sea Salt, and black Soap to the
Soles of the Feet.

Sometimes in the Evening I gave half an Ounce of Diacodium in a little Draught
of the Julape before ordered, which was followed by a moderate sleep without
being attended according to wont with Convulsions: Which kind of effect I have
often experienced in such a case after Opiats given: For quenching Thirst I
gave a Ptisan with Diuretic Ingredients boiled in it: By the use of these
things she was very much relieved within a short time: But that which fell out
much for her good was, that an Abscess in the left Ear, breaking of its own
accord, first discharged a yellow Gore, and afterward for many days a vast
quantity of thin Ichor: After which Evacuation the Convulsions of the Bowels
and Praecordia wholly ceasing, the Disease was perfectly determined.

I have known many Persons both Men and Women Diseased after this manner, who
being ill of a Headache, an oppression of the hinder part of the Head, or a
Vertigo, perceived in their sleep presently Convulsive motions in the
Praecordia or Bowels, or in both of them together: Which happens from the
Salley of the tumultuary Spirits reflected from the Brain into the Origines of
the Nerves: And as an Opiate gave the Patient before mentioned a quiet sleep
without the wonted Sequel of Convulsions, so I have often successfully Cured
terrible Convulsive Fits, both Asthmatical, and as it were Hysterical, by
giving Opiats.

1. A Woman sixty seven years of Age having still a florid Countenance, and
being of a gross habit of Body, and who first had lived long subject to a
Swelling of the Face, and great Fits of the Headache, upon the Weathers growing
very cold in the Winter, fell into a very grievous Vertigo, with a Trembling of
the Heart, a Fainting of the Spirits, and a frequent striving to Vomit: Being
put to Bed if she opened her Eyes, or was turned from one side on the other,
she was presently seized with a mighty Scotomia, a danger of Swooning, and
moreover with a cruel Vomiting. As I was to see her I did not doubt but the
cause of the Disease was the Convulsive Matter conveyed from the outward Region
of the Head to the inmost Recesses of the Brain, by the ill Breath, or
Heterogeneous Combination of which the Animal Spirits being struck, they raised
the Vertiginous affects as they made their disorderly sallyes toward the
Brain, and when they tumultuarily rusht into the Roots of the Nerves, they
caused the Scotomia, the disorders of the Praecordia, and the striving to
Vomit: The Cure of this was performed within a few days by the application of
large Vesicatories to the Nucha, and behind the Ears; the daily injection of
Clysters, and by a frequent use of Spirit of Hartshorn, and a Cephalic Julape.

Dr. Willis gives Instances of Persons in whom some portion of the Morbifick
Matter which besets the Origin of the Nerves, descending from the Head, often
enters deeper into the Ductus's of the Nerves, and so about their middle and
extreme Processes and Plexus's makes a fomes of an explosive matter, as it were
of Gunpowder: But for brevity sake I omit them.

It is observed that when a Convulsive Fit begins within the Brain, at the
Origin of the Nerves, presently the remotest Spirits residing in the
extremities of the Nerves (as many as are predispos'd for that Symptom) fall
upon Explosions, and so convey upwards, the Convulsive affect there more
strongly begun; which happens for this reason, that when some whole Series of
Spirits is disturbed, those which are in the extreme parts, are first destitute
of their Original Influx, wherefore those, before others begin to grow in a
tumult, and to be irregularly disposed, as when a Nerve of the Arm or Thigh is
constring'd by lying on it, so that it is hindered of its wonted influence of
the Spirits, a stupor with a sense of pricking is first perceived in the
Fingers or Toes of the hands or Feet; whence it creeps upwards by degrees
toward the places affected: And hence it is we find that if whilst the outmost
Spirits are exploded, a strong Ligature, or Compression intercepts the
succession of others into the same space, or their progress toward the parts,
the Convulsion is usually hindered from ascending upward: Wherefore (as Physical
Histories testify) when a stupor beginning at the top of a Finger or Toe of a
hand or Foot, creeps to the upper parts with a sense of Formication, or like a
cold wind; and at length taking to the Brain, causes terrible Convulsions: If
presently at the first seizure the Arm or Leg be strongly bound about, the
Convulsion being not able to pass that place, is hindered from getting to the
Head: Nay and its an usual thing for Hysteric Women, as soon as a Swelling of
their Belly, or an ascent of a heavy lump is first perceived in their Abdomen,
to bind about hard the Trunk of their Body with Swathes, and so commonly the
Praecordia, and the Region of the Head are kept from being affected with the
Convulsive Fit.

It Is likewise observable that if Blood be let forth of a Vein in the midst of
a Covulsive or Apoplectical Fit, it presently seems to be congealed, so that
being received in a Basin, it does not keep an even and plain Surface like
Liquids, but accumulating it self drop upon drop, it rises in a heap like
Tallow melted and distilled into a cold Vessel: Yet as to what some conclude
hence, viz. that Convulsions depend wholly on the thickness, obstructed motion,
and stagnation of the Blood, we must not allow of it: For Blood drawn from
Persons that are subject to Convulsions a little before the Fit, is diluted
with Serum, and fluid enough: Wherefore we may opine that that Congelation is
caused by the Fit it self: To wit, because in Convulsive motions, from the
excessive Contractions of the Muscles and Viscera, the Blood passing bet wixt
them, its Spirit and Serum exhaling, is a little solved in its mixture, and
therefore is somewhat coagulated, just as when Milk by reason of its too great
agitation and Separation of parts one from another, hardens into butlter,
wherefore this kind of Coagulation of the Blood seems rather to be the effect
of Convulsions than their cause.

The Therapeutick Method.
AS to the Cure of these kinds of Convulsive affects, which in Men or Women
proceed from a Morbifick cause, besetting the Origines of the Nerves: The first
Indication will be to withdraw the fuel of the Disease, viz. to hinder the
Blood from discharging on the Head, the Heterogeneous Particles, either
engendered in it self, or received from elsewhere from the Bowels. For this
purpose an Evacuation, ordered both by Purging and Bleeding, unless somewhat
indicates the contrary, is wont to be administered with good success.

Vomiting very often gives relief, wherefore let Vomits of the Infusion of
Crocus Metallorum, or of Salt of Vitriol, or of Wine of Squills, be given in
the first place. Then in a few days let Blood be drawn, either by opening a
Vein in the Arm, or by Leeches applied to the haemorrhoid Veins; then
afterward let a gentle Purge be ordered either of Pills, or of a Purging
Apozeme, and let it be repeated in due and convenient time.

Take Crato's Pills of Amber, or Bontius's Pills of Tartar two Drams, Rosm of
Jalap sixteen Grains, Castoreum a Scruple, Oil of Rosemary or of Amber half a
Scruple, Gum Ammoniacum dissolo'd in a sufficient quantity of Hysterick-water,
make sixteen Pills, let four be taken every sixth or seventh day.

Take Roots of Polypody of the Oak, sharp pointed Dock prepared, and of
Chervil, of each six Drams, of Male Peony three Drams, Leaves of Betony,
Germander, Ground Pine, Vervain, Male Fluellin, of each a handful, Seeds of
Carthamus and Burr-dock, of each three Drams, let them boil in four Pounds of
Fountain Water to half, add of Whitewine a Pound, let it be strained into a
Mattress, to which put Leaves of choice Sena an Ounce, Rhubarb six Drams,
Gummous Turbith half an Ounce, Epithimum, yellow Saunders of each two Drams,
Salt of Wormwood, and of Scurvy Grass, of each a Dram, the outward yellow
Coats of Oranges two Drams, let them digest close luted in a Sand heat for
twelve hours, let the straining be kept for use: Let it be sweetened (if need
be) with a sufficient quantity of Syrupus Augustanus, or with Syrup of Cichory
with Rhubarb; the Dose is six Ounces once or twice in a week.

Each day in which Purging is omitted, let Remedies be given for strengthening
the Brain, and for garding the Animal Spirits from incurring Heterogeneous
Combinations, or from entering upon Explosions: Of which nevertheless let a
certain choice be made according to the Temperament, Habit of Body, and
Constitution of the Diseased: For to such as have a thin habit of Body, and a
hot Blood, Medicines must be given which are not hot, and which do not stir the
Blood too much: On the contrary to phlegmatic and gross Bodies, whose Urine is
thin and watery, and whose Blood circulates but dully, let hot Remedies be
ordered, and such as are apt notably to ferment the Humors: In the former case
you may prescribe after this manner.

Take Conserve of the Flowers of Betony, Tamarisk, and Male Peony of each two
Ounces, Species Diamargariti Frigidi, a Dram and a half, Powder of the Roots of
Peony, and of the Seeds of the same of each a Dram, red Coral prepared two
Drams, Vitriol of Mars two Scruples, Salt of Wormwood two Drams, with a
sufficient quantity of Juice of Oranges, make an Electuary: Let it be taked
twice or thrice a day, drinking after it a little draught of the Julape beneath
prescribed.

Take of red Coral ground with the Juice of Oranges on a Marble, or in a
Glass-mortar, and dried half an Ounce, Powder of Mistletow of the Oak, and of
the Roots of Male Peony, of each two Drams, Sugar of Pearl three Drams, make a
Powder; the Dose is from a Scruple to half a Dram, twice or thrice a day.

Take Species Diamargariti Frigidi two Drams, Salt of Wormwood, three Drams,
Aron Roots powdered a Dram, mix them, make a Powder, let it be divided into
twenty parts, and let a Dose be taken in the Morning, and at four of the Clock.

Take Powder of the Roots of Butter Bur an Ounce, the Dose is from half a Dram
to a Dram twice a day.

Take Leaves of the Bur-dock, and of Aron, of each six handfuls, being slic't
and mixed together, let them be distilled: The Dose is from two Drams to three
twice or thrice a day after a Dose of the Electuary or Powder.

Take of this distilled Water two Pounds, of our Steel prepared two Drams, mix
them in a Glass, let them be taken after the same manner.

Take Water of Wallnuts simple, and of black Cherries, of each half a Pound, of
Snails four Ounces, Syrup of Flowers of the Male Peony two Ounces; the Dose is
from an Ounce and a half to two Ounces after the same manner.

Take Shavings of Ivory, and Hartshorn, of each three Drams, Roots of Chervil,
Bur-dock, Valerian, of each half an Ounce; Leaves of Betony, Ground Pine,
Scolopendrium, tops of Tamarisk, of each a handful: Barks of Tamarisk and of
Bitter-sweet of each half an Ounce, let them boil in four Pounds of
Fountain Water to the consumption of a third part, add of White Wind eight
Ounces, strain it into a Flaggon, to which put Leaves of Brook-limes, and of
Cuckow-flower, of each a handful, make a warm and close Infusion for four
hours, let the straining be kept in Glasses close stopped: The Dose is six Ounces
twice a day, after a Dose of a solid Medicine. Sometimes in such an Apozeme let
two Drams of our Steel be infused, and taken after the same manner.

In the Summer time the use of Mineral Waters is proper, for want of them let
our Artificial Waters be given in their stead.

But if for the reasons above cited hot Medicines are indicated, we may proceed
after the following method.

Take Conserve of Rosemary-flowers, and of the yellow Coats of Oranges and
Limons, of each two Ounces, Wallnuts, and Mirobalans condited, of each in
number two, Lignum Aloes, yellow Saunders, Roots of Serpentaria, Contrayerva,
Angelica and Aron, of each a Dram, Vitriol of Mars (or prepared Steel) four
Scruples, Salt of Wormwood and of Scurvy Grass of each a Dram, with a
sufficient quantity of Preserve of Wallnuts, make an Electuary. Let the
quantity of a Nutmeg be taken twice a day, drinking after it a Dose of an
appropriated Liquour.

Take Roots of Male Peony, Angelica, red Coral prepared, of each two Drams,
Sugar dissolved in water of Snails boiled to a consistency for Tablets six
Ounces. Oil of Amber highly rectified half a Dram, make Tablets according to
Art, each weighing about half a Dram, let one or two be taken twice or thrice a
day, drinking after it a Dose of an appropriated Liquour.

Take Roots of Virginia Serpentary, Contrayerva, Valerian of each two Drams,
red Coral prepared, Pearls, of each a Dram, Winters-bark, Roots of bastard
Ditany of each a Dram, Vitriol of Mars, Salt of Wormwood, of each a Dram and a
half. Extract of Centory two Drams, Ammoniacum dissolved in Hysterick-water
what suffices, make a Mass for Pills. Let four Pills be taken in the Morning
and at four in the Afternoon.

Take Spirit of Hartshorn, or of Soot, or of Man's Blood, or of Sal Armoniack
what suffices, take from ten to twelve Drops Morning and Evening in a Spoonful
of the Julape, drinking after it a little draught of the same.

Take Leaves of Betony, Vervain, Sage, Cuckow-flowers, Aron, Bur-dock, of each
two handfuls, green Wallnuts in number twenty, the Coats of six Oranges and
four Limons, Cardamoms, Cubebs, of each an OUnce; being slic't and bruised,
pour to them Whey made with Cider or White Wind six Pounds, let it distill
according to Art: The Dose is two or three OUnces twice a day after a Dose of a
solid Medicine: To two Pounds of this add of our Steel two Drams.

Take Water of Earthworms, and of Snails, of each six Ounces; of Wallnuts
simple four Ounces, Raddish-water compound two Ounces, double refined Sugar two
Ounces, make a Julape: The Dose is four or six Spoonfuls twice a day after a
Dose of a solid Medicine.

Take Millepedes cleans'd a Pound, Cloves slic't half an Ounce, pour on them of
White Wind two Pounds, let them distill in a Gourd-glass; the Dose is from an
Ounce to an Ounce and a half twice a day.

We may prescribe for poor People Remedies more easy to be had after this
manner.

Take Conserve of the Leaves of Rue made with an equal part of Sugar six
Ounces. Let the quantity of a Nutmeg be taken twice a day, drinking after it a
Decoction of the Seeds and Roots of Bur-dock made in Whey, prepared of
White Wind.

Or let a Conserve be made of the Leaves of the Tree of Life, with an equal
part of Sugar; the Dose is from half a Dram to a Dram twice a day.

Take Powder of Millepedes prepared three Drams, Ameos-seeds a Dram, make a
Powder, divide it into ten parts, let a Dose be taken twice a day. Or twelve
Millepedes being bruised with White Wind poured on them, let the Juice be
expressed, make a draught, let it be taken twice a day.

In the mean while that these Remedies are taken inwardly, it is proper
sometimes to raise Blisters by applying Vesicatories on the Nucha, or behind
the Ears; for so the Serous and sharp Humors are very much derived from the
Head: Moreover Sneezing-powders, and Apophlegmatisms often give great relief.
The drawing of Blood from the Haemorrhoid Veins, or from the Foot ought to be
sometimes repeated: And during the Fit, Plasters or Cataplasms are applied to
the Soles of the Feet with good effect: It is good also to apply Epispasticks
about the Legs and Thighs.

CHAP. IV. Of Convulsive motions, whose cause lies about the Extremities, or
within the Plexus's of the Nerves.
THat Convulsive affects, sometimes without any fault in the Head, arise from
the Irritation and Explosion of the Spirits lying about the extremities of the
Nerves, it plainly appears even from this, because when Medicines smartly
twitch the Coats of the Stomach or Intestines, or when Worms gnaw them,
Convulsions do not only follow in those parts, but likewise Convulsive motions
are sometimes retorted on the Members and outward Limbs: For as we have shown
elsewhere, when a sense of great pain torments any part, and is communicated
from that to the Primum Sensorium, presently upon it, the Spirits being there
irritated, an involuntary and irregular motion is wont to be thence reflected;
and that not only by those Nerves, by which the sense of pain was brought, but
sometimes the Convulsion is reciprocated also by others, either of the same
pair, or belonging to a pair wholly differing: Thus a Stone fixed in the Ureter
causes Convulsions, not only in the Vessel affected, but in a manner in all the
Viscera of the Belly, and cruel vomitings for the most part follow upon it:
Wherefore it is not to be doubted but Convulsive Diseases also, and some such
Symptoms are often caused by reason of some outward offense offered the
extremities of the Nerves within the Membranes, Muscles or Viscera: Nay and if
at any time in Hysteric, Hypochondriack, and certain other passions,
Convulsive motions are raised through the fault of the Womb, Spleen, or some
other of the Viscera, the Head being without hurt; truly those arise and are
propagated on every side into various Regions of the Body only this way, viz.
by the annoyances of the rest of the parts by the Way of the Nerves, and not at
all by vapors conveyed to the Head. I shall now give you some instances and
observations of Convulsions arising from the Extremities of the Nerves.

A delicate Virgin about the sixteenth year of her Age falling from a Horse,
and dashing her self against a rough Stone, sorely hurt her left Breast, whence
a Swelling with a pain arose, which Symptoms nevertheless at first seemed to be
mitigated by the use of Remedies, and afterward for a long time to pass
indifferently well; but after three years upon taking cold, and having used a
very ill Diet, all things began to return a new; the place hurt swelling up in
a greater bull, was affected with a most acute and almost continual pain, so
that the Diseased, through the mighty torment, passed many days and nights
without sleep; nor could she endure that the Glandules of her Breast, then
become more swollen, shonld be touched or handled, nay nor any noise or
concussion to be made in her Chamber.

When to this Tumor, degenerating toward a Cancer, Fomentations and
Cataplasms of Hemlock and Man-drake, and other stupifying things, and
Repercussives were applied, the noble Lady began to undergo certain Convulsive
affects, which often molested her: In the first place as often as a violent
pain came in her Breast she felt there prickings, and likewise Convulsions and
Contractions shooting in and out: Presently after the Ventricle and
Hypochondres, and after that the whole Abdomen were wont to be blown up, and
mightily distended with a rumbling and a straining to Vomit: By and by the same
affect being conveyed by degrees to the upper parts, took away her Senses, and
shortly upon it so strong Convulsions followed in her whole Body, that the
Diseased could scarce be healed by three or four robust Men.

These kinds of Fits at first came at random, and were only raised
occasionally, viz. they ensued as often as the pain of the Breast was rendered
more intense by some evident cause: Afterward those Convulsions more frequently
molested her, and at length becoming periodical and habitual, they returned
twice a day, viz. constantly justsomany set hours after Meals: And when
Diseased had been miserably afflicted after this manner for six Months; at
length she began to be troubled with a certain Vertiginous affects which
continually followed her: For which evil when a Fomentation of Aromatic and
Cephalic Herbs had been for some time applied, she grew better as to her
Vertigo; but from thenceforwards she was continually molested with a new and
very wonderful Symptom, viz. a violent dry Cough following her day and night,
unless when she was fallen asleep: After this noble Virgin had tried diverse
sorts of Remedies, prescribed by several Physicians, without much benesit, at
length upon the use of the Baths of a moderate heat at Bathe, she was relieved,
and being married presently upon it, after conception and her being delivered
of a Child, she recovered by degrees.

As to the violent Cough above mentioned, it seems that that Symptom depended
on the Origin of the nerves being affected, and not on any stuffing in the
Lungs, for she spit forth nothing with the Cough; we say therefore that the
Morbifick matter depor'd near the Origint of the Nerves being rarefied and
moved by the Fomentation, entered deep in at the Mouths of the Nerves that go to
the Lungs, and stirred up perpetual Convulsions in the Fibers and Filaments
thereof.

A noble Matron Fifty years of Age, after that her Menses had ceased to flow
for a year and a half, first began to complain of a pricking pain in her left
breast, then afterward that affect ceasing, she was taken ill about the Stomach:
To wit, a hard, and as it were schirrous Tumor arose there with an oppressing
pain; this was presently followed by an inflation of the Ventricle, with a
difficult Breathing, a Nauseousness and frequent Vomiting. Then the Disease
growing worse and worse, with a more acute pain, and shooting in and out every
way, she fell into Conulsive affects of the Ventricle: To wit, the Convulsions
shooting in that place several ways, she was almost continually in such a
torment, as though the Stomach were torn in several pieces: Moreover a
continual Perturbation of mind, and frequent Fainting Fits leading even to
Death's door, accompanied with a Thirst and Watchings, pursued the sick Lady;
all which Symptoms she plainly perceived always to arise from that Tumor of
the Ventricle (to wit, its sharp and heterogeneous Particles continually
entering the Extremities of the surrounding Fibers and Nerves.) To this Person
all Vomitory, Cathartick, Antiscorbutick and Hysteric Medicines, without
giving any ease, seemed rather to have proved offensive and prejudicial: After
Bleeding by Leeches, and the use of Asses Milk she received some benefit, and
afterward by long drinking Mineral Waters, she was very much relieved.

What has been said here of Convulsions from a Morbifick cause besetting each
end of the Systema Nervosum will be made more clear when hereafter we shall
treat particularly of the chief kinds of Convulsions, viz. of Hysteric,
Hypochondriack and other Passions: In the mean while it will not be necessary
to add a Therapeutick method to this Hypothesis of Convulsions happening by
reason of the Extremities of the Nerves being affected; because the ways of
Curing this affect may better be accommodated to those that we shall hereafter
deliver in particular.

I have found also by ocular evidence, that there are Convulsive affects whose
cause, or Morbifick matter lies within the Plexus's of the Nerves: For opening
the Body of a noble Lady, who had been horribly troubled with those affects
they call Hysterical a little before her decease, I found the Womb wholly
without fault, but along the Nervous Plexus's of the Mesentery, which (as it
seemed) had been wont to swell and rise up in a bulk, I found the Membranes of
that Entral loosened and severed from each other, so that they appeared every
where swollen and lax, as if blown up in little bubbles or bladders. Nor is it
less probable that the pains of the Colic often proceed from a sharp and
irritating matter contained in those same Plexus's Moreover such a kind of
matter within the Pexus's of the Heart, seems to cause there horrible
Tremblings and Passions, and within the Plexus's of the Lungs or Neck, terrible
Fits of the Asthma, and.

CHAP. V. Of Convulsive motions arising from the Liquour lying in the Nervous
Bodies, and irritating all their Processes into Convulsions.
IT is obvious almost to daily experience, that Convulsive affects ren through
the whole Genus Nervosum, and infest sometimes these parts, sometimes others,
sometimes many together: For in some we may observe that the Tendons of the
Muscles every where leap, and are drawn with Convulsions; in others that all
the outward Members are in many places bent or extended this way, and that,
with various flexions and contorsions: We see some forced by a masterless and
ungoverned impetus of the Spirits, sometimes being struck as it were with a
rage, to run or leap, sometimes strongly to belabour the earth, or any thing
that comes in their way with their Fists, which unless they did, they would
fall presently into Swoonings and horrible Fainting Fits. It would be too
tedious to enumerate all cases of those general Convulsions passing through the
whole Genus Nervosum: But such like Symptoms, though various and manifold, may
in some sort be reduced to three chief heads, viz. as they chiefly depend on
three sorts of causes: For since in these Convulfions passing from place to
place, we ought to suppose the whole Nervous Liquour to be vitiated, and the
Animal Spirits, every where abounding in it, to be adulterated, and
consequently to be almost continually exploded: We may observe that that taint
for the most part is communicated both to the Nervous Juice, and the Spirits
every where accompanying it, by one or the other of these three ways; viz.
First, Either from Poison or Witchcraft; Secondly, from a malignant or
ill-determin'd Fever, viz. in which the Morbifick matter is discharged on the
Brain, or Genus Nervosum; Or Thirdly, When the Nervous Liquour in long process
of time, by reason of a Scorbutic or otherwise vitiated affect, degenerates
from its due Crasis into a sharp, acid, or otherwise Preternatural and
Convulsive Liquour. We shall here consider of each of these cases, and first of
Convulsive Fits, which are product from Poison or Witchcraft.

First therefore, That some Poisons act on the Nervous Liquour rather than on
the Blood, and depraving it, cause chiefly Convulsive affects, it plainly
appears from eating of Cicutaria Apium risus, deadly Nightshade, the wild
Carrot, and other offensive Herbs, which is wont to be followed in a short time
after with horrible Contractions of the Stomach, a Numness, Delirium, and
Twitchings and Convulsions in the whole Body of the tendons: Moreover those
kinds of Convulsive affects ensue in such as are bitten by a mad Dog, and other
Venomous wild Beasts when the Virulent Miasm received by the Nervous Juice,
having lay n hid in it a long time, at length exerts it self, and infects and
poisons with its ferment the whole Mass of the Liquour in which it is involved:
And this is more clearly manifested by the wonderful Symptoms, viz. the painful
Convulsions, and continual Dancing which are affirmed by Authors of Credit to
ensue upon the bite of a Tarantula: Which doubtless happen, because upon the
bite of that Animal, some Venomous Miasms are conveyed into the Body of Man,
which nevertheless being little injurious to the Blood and vital Spirit, as soon
as they have past from it into the Nervous Liquour, presently spread themselves
like a Ferment, through its whole Mass, and infect the Animal Spirits, every
where abounding in it; so that they being forced apart from one another, and
driven hither and thither in a disorderly manner, cause Convulsive affects,
which sometimes are accompanied with a Contraction of the containing parts,
sometimes with a languor and resolution of them.

If it be asked why the painful Convulsions which are raised by the bite of a
Tarantula, being presently appeased by Music, are wont to be changed into a
Dancing, I answer, that the Venom communicated to the Nervous Juice by the bite
of a Tarantula is more mild than to be able wholly to extinguish the Animal
Spirits, or altogether to dissipate and force them to very violent explosions,
being driven into diverse parts; but can only put them to flight, and being
driven hither and thither, egg them to slght, and in a manner only pain-causing
Convulsions: Now Music by its gently soothing Nature, readily gathers together
in one, and mutually associates the Spirits so dissipated: Wherefore when the
said Spirits, by reason of Virulent Miasms sticking to them, are continually
prone to Involuntary and Convulsive motions, the Melody disposes and directs
them, being allured together, into such Convulsions, that entering the Bodies of
the Nerves in a certain feries and order, they are carried in certain limited I
racts as it were, till at length the Particles of the Venom being wholly
evaporated, and the fury and impetus of the Spirits wearyed, they have wholly
shaken off that rage: And indeed Music readily forces sound and sober Men,
even against their wills, or thinking of other things, to actions emulating the
Tune heard; so that a Piper no sooner begins his Lesson, but the standers by
begin to move their Hands and Feet: We need not wonder therefore in Men bitten
by a Tarantula, where the Animal Spirits being stimulated to motion as it were,
are forced to skip and wander from one place to anothe of themselves, if upon
playing on a Harp, they are put upon Dancing, and observing of regular motions.

To this is a kin the Evil, which is called the Dance of S. Vitus, concerning
which Horstius relates, that he spoke with certain Women, who visit yearly the
Chapel of S. Vitus, which is within the Precincts of Vlmes, and there exercise
themselves so long in Dancing day and night, with a Perturbation of mind, till
they fall on the Ground like Persons in an ecstasy: By which means they seem to
be restored to themselves, so that they feel little or nothing for a whole
year, till the time of May following. and then they declare themselves
tormented with such a restlessness of their Members, that they are forced to
betake themselves again about the Feast of S. Vitus to the foresaid place, to
renew their Dancing.

Indeed it is a usual thing (as I have often observed) both for Men and Women
to be infested with such a restlessness, and certain rage as it were of the
Members, that they are forced to walk till they are a weary, and also to dance
and run up and down, by this means to avoid greater Disturbances and Swoonings,
which would otherwise seize them: The reason of which seems to be, that the
Animal Spirits, because stimulated in the whole Genus Nervosum from a
Heterogeneous Combination, become wholly in a rage and ungovernable, which
therefore ought to be so exercised and wearied, both that they themselves may
be mastered, and that the Heterogeneous Combination may be shaken off.

That Convulsive affects are sometimes caused by Witchcraft, it is both
vulgarly believed, and every where affirmed by many Authors that deserve
Credit: And to grant that wonderful affects are often produced in the Body of
Men by tricks of the Devil, viz. in as much as by the wonderful subtlety in
operating, in which he excels, he insinuates Atoms or Heterogeneous Corpuscles
into the sensitive Soul, or the Texture of the Animal Spirits, and so sometimes
stimulates its Functions, sometimes binds them, sometimes violently perverts
them: Nay and farther in some manner he enters the Body of Man himself, and
being as another Soul of a more powerful Nature, is co-extended to it, actuats
all the parts and members, inspires them with an unwonted Vigor, and governs
them at his pleasure, and stirs them up to the performance of wonderful and
supernatural actions: Grant this I say, yet all kinds of Convulsions which
appear prodigious, as being besides the common course of this Disease, ought
not presently to be imputed to enchantments of Witches, or tricks of the Devil,
for often, though appearing strange, they proceed from mere natural causes, and
stand in need of no other Exorcisms for a Cure, than Remedies which are wont to
be prescribed against Convulsive affects: In truth the Animal Spirits when
endued with a very great explosive Combination, and discharged together by it,
exert so much of strength and vigor above their proper and wonted force, as a
flash of Gunpowder above the burning of a common flame, so that such, who,
being obnoxious to this Disease, may when they are out of the Fit be governed,
carried, and led at pleasure by the guidance of one Man, when the Fit comes
upon them, are not to be managed by the greatest strength and endeavors of
four or more robust Persons: But if when any Person is distempered there be a
suspicion of Witchcraft or Fascination, there are chiefly two kinds of motion
which are wont to create and maintain it; viz. First, If the Patient uses such
Contorsions and Gesticulations of the Members, or of the whole Body, which no
sound Man, even a Mimick, or any Tumbler, is wont to imitate; And secondly, if
he exerts a strength, which exceeds all humane force, to which if there be
joined excretions of monstrous things, as when heaps of Pins are cast up by
Vomit, or living Animals are voided by seige, it comes to be without dispute
that the Devil has, and acts his part in this Tragedy.

CHAP. VI. Of General Convulsions which are wont to be raised in Malignant,
Ill-determin'd, and some Anomalous Fevers.
EVery Man knows that Convulsions sometimes happen to Persons in Fevers, and
that from thence a great Prognostic is taken of death or danger: For as in
Malignant Fevers, and sometimes in ordinary Fevers of an Ill-determination, a
Vertigo or Delirium arise from the Morbifick Matter's being deposed from the
Blood in the Brain; so from the same fallen into the Genus Nervosum,
Contractions and Twitchings of the Muscles and Tendons, and also sudden
shakings of the Members and Limbs, and sometimes horrible stiff extensions in
the whole Body ensue, which forts of Convulsive affects happen for the most
part about the height of Fevers, when the Morbifick Matter, first heap't
together in the Blood, is conveyed thence into the Brain, and that being either
presently past through, or infected together with it, is carried into the
Systema Nervosum, and thence Convulsive affects, with or without a Delirium are
raised.

Nevertheless besides these kinds of Convulsive affects which ensue upon
Fevers, and are secondarily raised, we may observe sometimes in a Malignant
Constitution of the Air, and after a breath of a pestilential Contagion, that
the Nervous Liquour is infected before the Blood, or apart by it self from it,
and that then a Delirium and Convulsions precede the Feverish Distemper.
Moreover I have often observed that some Anomalous Fevers have been rife, in
which the Blood being scarce seen to boil or to be extraordinary hot, the
beginnings of a slow, and very dangerous Fever have been first laid in the
Nervous Humor; which being raised by degrees to a Maturity, caused Convulsive
affects with a Delirium or Mania, and other failings or exorbitancies of the
Animal Spirits: For the Diseased not complaining of heat or drought, on a
sudden becoming weak, and as it were enervated, were presently rendered
obnoxious to a frequent Giddiness, also to Tremblings and Leapings as it were
of the Limbs, and likewise to Twitchings and Contractions of the Muscles and
Tendons, and to pains moving from one place to another. This kind of Sickness,
in regard it seems to consist in the solid parts, rather than in the Blood, is
called by some Physicians a Malignant Hectic Fever, when in truth the same
being chiefly rooted in the Nervous Humor, is better said to be a Convulsive
Disease of the Nerves.

Horstius mentions a Convulsive and Malignant Disease, which heretofore was
Epidemical in Hassia, Westphalia, and the Neighboring parts; those that were
seized with it, without any Feverish heat, or immoderate effervescency of the
Blood, as they were about their househould affairs, on a sudden scarce
perceiving themselves sick, were wont to feel a Formication with a Numness
passing in and out about their Hands or Feet, and sometimes in both: Presently
after their Fingers and Toes, and likewise their Arms and Legs, one while were
closely contracted, another while strongly extended, as though they had grown
stiff: These Contractions and Extensions followed each other alternatively, and
now and then changed places, so that at one time the affect lay in this part,
and then presently in another: But in case (as it often fell out) the Disease
seized the whole Brain all at once, Universal Convulsions, and often
Epileptical Fits infested the Diseased; Moreover they were obnoxious at certain
times to a Dilirium, Mania, and sometimes to a Lethargy: This Distemper
continued a long time without a Crisis, or being perfectly resolved, and could
scarce ever be so thoroughly Cured, but ill and morbid Dispositions of the Brain
and Nervous parts lasted afterward during the whole Life.

It plainly appears that this Disease and its Symptoms wholly depend on the
Corruption and mighty Depravation of the Nervous Juice: And the reason why in
this Nervous Fever, there happened a difficult, or rather no Grisis, or
Solution at all, was because the Nervous Juice being tough and mucilaginous, as
it were, and consequently slow in motion, is not purged as the Blood, by an
excretory effervescence, nor does it easily fall into such a fermentation,
whereby the pure is separated from the impure.

I have known a Disease like this, often to have reigned in our Country, and to
have past through whole Families, at least amongst the Children and younger
People. Some years since a popular Fever sorely infesting the Brain and Genus
Nervosum very much reigned about Oxford, and indeed almost throughout England:
The Narrative of which Disease, written at the time it reigned, viz. An. 1661.
I shall here briefly insert; for from hence it appears after what manner, and
by what causes Convulsive Symptoms which happen in all Fevers, are wont to be
raised.

An Account of an Epidemick Fever, reigning An. 1661. which chiefly infested
the Brain and the Genus Nervosum.
AFter the Vernal Equinox An. 1661. a certain Anomalous and unusual Fever,
seized some Persons here and there, which nevertheless within a Month became so
Epidemical, that in many places it began to be called the New Disease: Reigning
chiefly among Children and young People, it was wont to afflict them with a
long, and as it were, Chronical Sickness: Nay and sometimes though rarely it
infested Persons stricken in years, and aged, but it killed them sooner, and
more certainly: The affect first seizing any Person, so tacitly stole upon
him, that the beginnings of the Sickness were scarce perceived: For arising
without any immoderate heat or great thirst, it presently caused a great
weakness in the whole Body, with a languor of the Spirits, and a deadness of
the Animal Functions: The Stomach loathed all Food, and found it self oppressed
by what was taken into it, and nevertheless it was not inclined to Vomit. The
Diseased being indisposed to all motion, sought only to lie on a Bed, and do
nothing: Within a short time, and sometimes from the first invasion of the
Disease, they complained of a great Giddiness, a ringing in the Ears, and often
of a turbulent motion and great perturbation in the Brain: Which sort of
Symptoms were usually accounted a Pathognomick sign as it were of the sudden
approach of this Disease; in case it happened that these were wanting, or
remiss in some Persons, instead of the Head being affected after that manner,
the Disease fixed it self deeper in the Breast, and raised a Cough, as we shall
presently acquaint you: Now whilst upon the Brain and Nervous Appendix, their
being affected after this manner, the Animal Spirits presently from the
beginning of the Sickness wax't dull, a slow and hectic Fever as it were, was
kindled in the whole Body: Nevertheless the effervescence of the Blood, which
was scarce continual, but happening at random, and uncertain, was more intense in
some, and more remiss in others according to the Crasis of the Blood it self:
And consequently the Thirst, roughness of the Tongue, and other Symptoms, which
depend on the Feverish Distemper, troubled them more or less. Sweating did not
happen of its own accord, nor could it readily or with ease be raised by Art:
Nay farther, neither this kind of Evacuation or any other ever happening as it
were by way of Crisis, put an end to this Disease on a sudden: But continuing
for many Weeks and sometimes Months, it brought the Diseased into a mighty
Atrophia, and often cast them into an incurable Consumption.

About the time of the Diseases increase, which in most Persons happened within
eight days, if the affect (as it often was wont) seized chiefly on the Brain,
and Systema Nervosum, severe Symptoms, viz. a plain Frensy, or deep Stupor, or
a total insensibility commonly infested their Economy: For I have frequently
observed in many Children, and often in Women, after seven or eight days of
their being seized, that they have wholly lost both Sense and Speech, so that
they have lain for some time, nay sometimes for a whole Months space, without
knowing Persons present, and their Excrements passing from them after an
insensible manner: And if the use of their judgment and reason in some measure
held, yet they were troubled with a frequent Delirium, and always talked
lightheaded in their sleep. But in Men, and others of a hot Constitution, upon
the Morbifick Matter's being conveyed to the Head, instead of a Crisis, a Fury
or dangerous and often deadly Frensy ensued: But if neither a Stupor nor
violent Distraction seized them, a Scotomia, Convulsive motions, with
Contractions of the Members, and Twitchings of the Tendons greatly molested
them: Almost in all the Diseased, the Belly for the most part was loose, and
voided plentifully sometimes yellow, sometimes thin and serous Excrements,
which stank mightily. It was seldom that any were seized with a Vomiting: The
Urine in the whole course of the Disease (unless when the Morbifick Matter
taking plentifully to the Brain, threatened a Frensy) was of a deep red color,
so that some by reason of its deepness, judged this Fever to be absolutely
Scorbutical: Which nevertheless appeared to be otherwise, because
Antiscorbutick Remedies, (whereof a great many, and almost of all kinds were
tried) had little or no effect: It was very much to be admired, how soon after
the seizure of this Disease, the Flesh of the Sick fell away, so that they were
brought to the dryness of a Skeleton, when in the mean time there was no
exceeding great heat to consume the Solid parts by little and little, nor any
violent Evacuation greatly to waste them.

Besides these evils infesting the Region of the Head, an affect no less
dangerous often seized on the Breast: For in some a very troublesome Cough, with
much and thick Spittle was raised: This in some Persons happened about the
declining of the Disease, viz. when the Confines of the Brain obtained a calm,
the Clouds, as it were, being discharged thence on the Breast, a mighty Catarrh
presently fell on the Lungs. But in some, especially who suffered little from
the Disease in the Head, presently from the beginning of the Fever, a violent
Cough, and a Spitting of filthy Matter, accompanied with a Consumptive
Disposition, as it were, seized them, and precipitated them, suddenly and
unawares into a Consumption; from which nevertheless, by a seasonable use of
Remedies, they often unexpectedly recovered: I observed in some, after a long
failure of the sensitive faculty, and an oppression of the Brain from the
Morbifick Matter, that at length Tumors ensued in the Glands about the Neck,
from which, as soon as ripened and broken, a thin and stinking Ichor flowed for
a long time, and gave ease: I have seen also Watery Wheals sais'd in other
parts of the Body, which have past into bollow Ulcers with difficulty to be
Cured: Sometimes small Spots; and as it were Flea-bites appeared here and
there: Though I have not heard that broad and livid Spots ever were to be seen
in Persons sick of this Disease: However notwithstanding this Fever had not any
very Malignant breakings forth, yet it was not free from Contagion: For in the
same Family it seized almost all the Children and younger People one after the
other; and often Persons stricken in years, who attending the sick, familiarly
used about their Beds and Bed-cloaths, were infected with the same Disease: Yet
I must say there was not so great a suspicion of infection, that for that
reason the Friends of the Sick, should be wholly forbidden to visit them, or
converse with them.

Though all along the course of this Disease (unless when the Brain was greatly
assailed) it appern'd only mild, and past without any dreadful Symptom,
nevertheless its Cure was always difficult, and was not performed but after a
long time: For the Diseased seldom recovered within three or four Weeks, nay
for the most part scarce within so many Months: But if this Disease fell on Men
of a decayed Age or Strength, especially on such as were before subject to
Cephalic Diseases, as the Lethargy: Apoplexy or Convulsions, it often killed
them in a shorter space. Or if there were any hope of recovery, it could be
carried on very slowly, (scarce any Remedies affording a sensible relief) so
that the Diseased were no sooner gotten without the Sphere of this Fever, but
they found themselves within the Confines of a Consumption.

If the formal reason and causes of the foresaid sickness be inquired into, it
plainly here appears that the Liquour which lies in the Brain and Genus
Nervosum, for the most part, together with the Blood, was in fault, and was the
immediate cause of the Symptoms that seemed chiefly pressing, viz. in as much
as the Latex, presently from the first invasion of the Disease was become more
impoverisht than its wont, and effaete, as it were, and therefore a Languor and
Enervation, with a Spontaneous Lassitude, and a Disability to motion, together
with a sudden Consumption of the Body, happened to the Diseased: Though still
the default of this Latex necessarily depends on the Dyscrasy of the Blood, and
of the ill Constiution of the Brain [ but here, as in other places, I refer you
to Dr. Willis himself, for a fall Aetrology of Symptoms.]

I have often observed in this Fever, after Oat Broth, a Decoction of Barley,
and other thin Diet, that no less Ebullition of the Blood has been raised, than
by a full Meat Broth: For indeed on one side as well as the other, the
Nutritive Juice sent from the Chyle into the Blood, in regard it was not
employed in the work of Nutrition, troubled the Blood, as some Heterogeneous
thing that would not duly mix with it: And by reason of the Particles of this
superfluous Juice, sent off in a plentiful manner with the Serum, the Urine was
very thick and red, and mightily filled with Contents: And for this reason the
Belly for the most part was loose, in as much as the Blood being full of a
Nutritious Juice, sucked a less Portion of Chyle from the Lowels, and
discharged again into the Intestines a part of that which was brought into it;
moreover the Feverish Distemper stuck for so long time in the Blood, because
till upon the Restitution of the Animal Governance, Nutrition was rightly
performed, that superfluous Matter was heap't together in the Mass of Blood. I
shall now give an instance or two of Persons affected with this Disease.

A Robust and Florid young Man, about the beginning of the Spring, An. 1661.
falling sick without any evident cause, soon became weak, and as it were
enervated, with a loss of Appetite, and a languishing of the Spirits:
Cathartick Remedies, Antipyreticks, Digestives, nay and Antiscorbuticks, and
others of eivers kinds, being given him, according to the prescripts of famous
Physicians, did not the least good: But the Diseased still continuing in a
languishing condition, lay by it for six weeks, with a slow Fever of uncertain
returns, a quick and weak Pulse, and a deep red Urine. Moreover being mightily
pined away, he complained of a ringing in his Fars, and an Undulation of sound,
as it were, in his head: Though he was affected with a great Stupor, yet his
Sleeps were very much troubled and interrupted with a talking Lightheaded.
After forty days, the Fever not yet declining, it was thought good to draw
about four or five Ounces of Blood from the Vessels of the Fundament by
Leeches. Hereupon presently the Fever began to be very much exasperated, for
the heat became more intense, with a Thirst, Watchings, and an almost continual
tossing of the Body, the Tongue also growing dry and rough; shortly after a
troublesome Cough, with much and discolored Spittle ensued: There were
carefully given him Almond and Barley Drinks, with temperate things against the
Cough boiled in them, Water of Milk distilled with Snails and Herbs
appropriated to the Thorax, Powder of Shells, Niter prepared, and likewise
Cordial Opiats; which nevertheless scarce giving any relief, the Diseased still
became weaker: And when after this manner, having been sick above two Months,
the Feverish Distemper, and the Cough also daily growing worse, he seemed to be
at Death's Door, at length a Sweat hapening of its own accord, which sometimes
came upon him every night, sometimes every other night, he grew better by
degrees thereby, and using afterward the foresaid Medicines, he became
perfectly well within six weeks.

Whilst this Person lay ill, I went to see another about Twelve years of Age,
affected after the like manner; but this, when I was first called, having lain
ill above a Month, was reduced to a Skeleton: Moreover he was affected with a
Giddiness, a ringing in the Dars, and a Deafness, and likewise with a violent
Cough the accompanied with a yellow, and as it were Consumptive Spittle: His
Pulse was quick and weak, his Urine red and thick, his Appetite very much
dejected, his Spirits so faint, and his Strength so fallen, that he could not
keep himself from his Bed: To this Person I gave often in a day Milk distilled
with Snails and temperate Herbs: Moreover instead of ordinary drink, I ordered
him daily to take an opening Decoction, such as is used in the Rickets: By the
help of which Remedies he seemed to be restored to his health within a Months
space.

This Fever in a certain Noble Man's Family, proved very fatal amongst his
Children, who had been originally subject to Cephalic affects. About the
Vernal Equinox, a Boy of about Eleven years of Age, began to fall sick. In the
first place without an intense heat or drought, a loss of Appetite, and failing
of Strength came upon him. Moreover an almost continual Vertigo molested him,
with a frequent inclination to Fainting, so that he often thought himself ready
to fall in a Swoon: To this Person, by the advice of some Nurse that attended
him, Glysters were daily given: And afterward when from the foulness of his
Tongue and Mouth, the manifest signs of a Fever appeared, that Empirick gave
him a Vomit of the Infusion of Crocus Metallorum. And the seventh day giving
him a Cordial Powder, and covering him over with Clothes, she made him Sweat:
His Skin no sooner began to be moist, but presently speaking Lightheaded, he
complained that his Cap was fallen into water, soon after becoming Speechless
he dyed, (whilst I was sent for) within four hours.

Shortly after, the same Disease seized his Sister who was younger; whose
sickness nevertheless, because it was accompanied with a frequent Coughing and
Spitting, was first thought to be only a cold taken: But within a few days,
that Cough became manifestly Convulsive; for in Coughing the Diaphragm being
raised upward, and so held for some time, by a repeated Systole, a mighty
Shrill noise, as though she were suffocated came from her: Afterward this
little Girl growing more manifestly Feverish, and complaining of a thirst and
heat, past the nights without sleep, with a mighty tossing in her Bed, and
after a while speaking Lightheaded, she complained as her Brother had done
before, that her Clothes were fallen into the water; and as all things grew
worse, she began to be troubled with Convulsive motions, first in the Limbs,
shortly after in the Face, and then in the whole Body: The Fits returning
frequently, viz. twice or thrice within an hour, very sorely pursued her, so
that this poor Wretch dyed within the space of twenty four hours after the
greater Convulsive affects had seized her, the (...) of the Animal Spirits
being wholly subverted. Whilst the Convulsive Fits pressed upon her, the Pulse
was very much disordered, and often intermitted, and she was affected with a
frequent Vomiting.

Because this Fever seizes some Persons predispos'd for it almost yearly, and
happily hereafter may at some time become Epidemical, by reason of the ill
Constitution of the year, I think it may not be amiss to delineate some method
in order to its Cure.

The Therapeutick Method.
COncerning which in the first place, you may note, that Critical days are by
no means to be observed in this Fever, as in the vulgar continual Fever: For in
this the Blood, as soon as it begins to boil, presently discharges from its
Embraces on the Head or Thorax, a part of the Morbifick Matter, crude as it is,
and not digested: Wherefore it would be to no purpose to expect that the Blood
should permit its Heterogeneous Particles to be gathered together in its Mass,
and then that an Excretory effort arising at set intervals of times, should
purge forth the same being subtilised: Nay rather the said Blood, when boiling,
Rises not to a great and open flame, but like a fire covered with Turf, emits a
moist Smoke or Breath, rather than a Flame: Yet so that from thence by reason
of the Nervous Juices being presently depraved in its Crasis, and often by
reason of the Lungs being stuffed with a Morbifick Matter, Convulsive or Ptizical
Symptoms are particularly pressing throughout the whole course of the Disease.

I must set down the Curative intentions according to the various times of the
Disease, and the diversities of Symptoms that are chiefly pressing. About the
beginning of this Fever, letting Blood seemed to agree in a manner with all: I
have often found this Remedy of good effect in Children: For by this means a
Breathing place, as it were, is opened for the Mass of Blood, which tacitly
and covertly lies a boiling, and obtrudes its foul smoke on the more noble
parts, and consequently its impure Efflorescencies are withdrawn from the Head
and Lungs: Therefore though this ill disposed Fever be said in some sort to be
Malignant, yet in as much as the Blood is not apt presently to be coagulated,
but to be fus'd too much, and to discharge its Serosities on the noble parts,
viz. the Head and Lungs, therefore Bleeding, so it be used in the beginning of
the Disease, agrees in a manner with all Persons.

For the same reason of Curing, Cathartick Medicines, and especially Vomits,
are given presently at the beginning of the Disease, for these do not only
empty the Vessels of Concoction, and so withdraw both the first, and as it were
original fuel of the Disease, but likewise draw Serosities from the Blood, and
so cause its filth rather to be discharged in the Stomach and Intestines, than
on the Head or Lungs. Moreover in as much as the Glands which receive the
Lymphaeducts, are twitcht and strongly shaken by Emeticks, the Superfluities of
the Nervous Juice are thereby pressed forth into the lower Viscera, that they
cannot offend the Brain, and its Appendix: And for this end, let the Belly
still be kept soluble by the frequent use of Glysters. In the mean time, while
the Blood, being defiled with the taint of this Disease, threatens ill to the
Brain or Praecordia, it will not be safe to attempt any thing with
Diaphoreticks or Diuretics, or also with strong Catharticks: For these sorts
of Medicines, greatly fusing the Blood, and driving its Serosities into the
places most open to receive them, easily obtrude on the Brain or Lungs; if at
any time they are of a weak Constitution, any dreggy filth which is apt to
depart from the Mass of Blood: So in the Youth above mentioned, a Sweat being
unseasonably raised, it was followed by a loss of Speech: And I have known that
Sudorificks, in like manner as Chalybeats, have brought a Consumption in a
Morbid Disposition of the Lungs.

Therefore Bleeding, and if need be, a Vomit or Purge, viz. one of them, or
both being presently ordered at the beginning of the Disease, the other
intentions will be to divert the Morbifick Serosities of the Blood, which are
apt to flow to the Head and Breast, and to derive them, off gently by other ways
of Evacuations, and to clear them forth: For this end Vesicatories ought to be
applied on the Nape of the Neck, or behind the Ears, near the Armpits, in the
Groin, or on the Thighs, or Calves of the Legs, viz. sometimes in this part,
sometimes in that; to wit, that the little Sores made here and there, flowing
continually, may plentifully discharge the Serum filled with Heterogeneous and
Morbid Particles.

Moreover Remedies gently conveying the Serum to the Reins and Urinary
passages, are often given with good effect; for this purpost let Diuretic
Apozems ans Julapes be ordered according to the following Forms.

Take Roots of Scorzonera, Chervil, Grass, Eringo's preserved, of each six
Drams, one Apple slic't, Leaves of Burnet, Meadow sweet, of each a handful,
Raisins an Ounce and a half, burnt Hartshorn two Drams, being slic't and
bruised, let them boil on a clear Fire, in four Pounds of Fountain Water till a
third part be consumed, to two Pounds of the clear Straining add Syrup of the
Juice of Citrons, or of Violets two Ounces, Sal Prunella a Dram and a half,
make an Apozeme; the Dose is from four Ounces to six thrice a day.

Or let that Straining be poured on fifteen sineet Almonds blanch, and on the
four cold Seeds of each a Dram being lruis'd, make an Emulsion according to
Art.

Take water of Dragon-wort, and of black Cherries of each four Ounces, of
Scordium compound two Ounces, Treacle-water an Ounce and a half, Syrup of
Clove-gillylowers two Ounces, Spirit of Vitriol twelve drops, wake a Julape.

Let Sal Prunella be giben often in a day in small Beer or Whey, from half a
Dram, or two Scruples.

Moreover in this Fever Medicines gently promoting Sweat, especially such as
restore the Animal Spirits, and free them from any Heterogeneous Combination,
are of excellent use: Wherefore either let Powder of Pearl, or Spirit of
Hartshorn, or of Blood be given in a small Dose twice a day, viz. Morning and
Evening.

Let Glysters be injected alniost daily, and if it seems convenient, let a
gently loosning Medicine be repeated twice in a week.

Let none but a thin Diet be ordered, viz. such as is wont to be in other
Fevers; Flesh or its Broth being wholly forbidden, let the Sick eat only Oat
or Barley-broath, let his Drink be small Beer or Whey.

But if notwithstanding any Physical provision, the Morbifick Matter gets
possession of the Brain or Lungs, or both of them together, so that a failing
and disorder of the Animal faculty, or also a violent Cough come upon the
Diseased, we must consider what is to be done in either state of the Disease,
raised after this manner to an ill condition; for then the Curative Indications
ought to respect a stupor or madness, or the Cough; and at length, if the
Disease being upon declining, these Symptoms remit, let appropriated Remedies
be given against the Atrophia, it being as the last fortress of this Disease.

1. Therefore if the Morbifick Matter, as it frequently is wont, being brought
to the Head, causes there a Stupor or Sleepy affects, Remedies ought to be
carefully administered, which draw it to another place, and derive it some way
or other from the Head, and likewise such as raise up the Animal Spirits, and
make void the impure Combination: Wherefore in this case, let the use of
Epispasticks be very much encreast outwardly, let Spirit of Hartshorn be given
every sixth hour in somewhat a large Dose, let Blood be drawn again from the
Jugular Veins, the Salvatella, or also from the Veins of the Fundament by
Leeches. If the affect does not remit, the Hair being shaved off, let Emollient
Fomentations be often applied to the Head: Moreover let Cupping-glasses,
Plasters and Cataplasms be applied to the Soles of the Feet; and other ways of
administration, such as are vulgarly indicated for Curing a Stupor, ought to be
used: In like manner, if to the evil or defect of Crisis in this Fever, a
Frensy or Mania Supervene, let Remedies appropriated to those affects be
administered.

2. But if, together with, or without this Detriment brought on the Head, the
Lungs also are injured by the Disease, so that the Diseased, not yet freed of
their Fever, seem to have fallen into a Consumption or Ptizick, with a
troublesome Cough, much and thick Spittle, and that often discolored,
Medicines commonly indicated in such affects are proper; wherefore Pectoral
Decoctions, Lohoch's, Syrups, Waters of Milk and Snails distilled, and other
Remedies of this kind, ought diliently to be used: The Forms of which are to be
found in their above written cases.

Hitherto we have described a continual Fever, for the most part Convulsive,
and taking its rise both through the default of the Nervous Juice, and of the
Blood: I shall now set before you an example of a Disease, resembling an
intermitting Fever, and chiefly radicated in the Nervous Juice.

A fine Woman, of a very tender Constitution, and a weak temper of the Brain
and Genus Nervosum, and consequently very subject to Convulsive affects, after
she had conceived, about the fourth Month of her Childbearing, upon taking
cold, was most sorely afflicted with Asthmatick Fits, and likewise with
frequent Faintings of the Spirits: But by the use of remedies endowed with a
Volatile Salt, she grew well of these Distempers within a fortnight;
nevertheless after six weeks were past, an unusual, and very wonderful affect
seized this Lady.

On a certain morning awaking after her sleep, which had been somewhat troubled
that night, she felt in her whole body a light shivering, as though the fit of a
Tertian Ague were coming upon her: Frequent Gapings and Retchings follow it
with a frequent straining to Vomit: Then her Urine, which just before was of an
Orange color with a laudable sediment, became pale and watery, and was very
frequently voided, viz. every munute of an hour. Moreover about the Loins and
Hypochondres, and in other places, pains with light Convulsions passing from
one place to another were raised. Which kind of Symptoms, being manifestly
Convulsive, with the frequent making of Limpid Water continued from the morning
almost to the evening: In which space of time a vast quantity of Urine, viz.
thrice more than the Liquor drank, was made: In the mean while the Heat became
not more intense, nor did Thirst seem pressing, nor was the pulse raised: In
the eveing the foresaid affects ceast, and the Urine came again to be of an
Orange color, and in a small quantity; and she enjoyed a moderate sleep during
the whole night; and then the next morning the Fit returned near the same hour,
accompanied whol'y with the like Symptoms, and daily acted over the very same
Tragedy.

Going to see this Lady after the had lain ill after this manner for twelve
days; I judged that this disease being chiefly rooted in the Genus Nervosum,
depended on the effervescency and flowing of the Humor that lies in the
Nervous parts: to this Breeding person I Prescribed Bleeding, and to take twice
a day a Powder made of Coral, Pearl, Ivory, and other Cordial things in an
appropriated Liquor: morning and evening she took twelve drops of the Tincture
of Antimony, the effect whereof I have found to be singular in a too great Flux
of Urine: by the use of these things all the Symptoms in a short time remitted.

CHAP. VII. Of General Convulsions which are wont to arise by reason of a
Scorbutic disposition of the Nervous Juice.
SOmetimes universal Convuisions, without Poison, or a Feverrish Miasm, are
caused by reason of aScorbutick or other wise vicious dyscrasie of the Nervous
Juice; for the Liquor which lies in the Nerves, and Nervous parts, sometimes
falling from its natural and due Crasis, is so much filled with Heterogeneous
and Explosive Particles, that the Animal Spirits admitting an incongruous
combination, some ways accruing to them, are irritated to continual Explosive
Convulsions; which kinds of affects of the Spirits are either divided or
separate, betwixt which no Communication or dependence happens, viz. when many
parts of the body are affected together with so many Convulsions peculiar to
them, which do not follow each other successively, but are terminated in the
same Mnscle or Member where they begin: Or secondly, The Convulsive affects
which are raised together in the whole Genus Nervosum, are continual or
connected, and being continued by a per petual sort of Vicissitude betwixt
themselves, succeed each other, so that the disorderly motions of all the
Members through a Mutual Succession when they begin at one part, presently pass
into the others. We shall consider the nature of both those convulsive affects,
and shall show what method of Gure is to be used in each case.

1. As to the former kind it plainly appears that such affects are not simple,
but complicated, viz. of a Convulsion and Palsy, for though the Muscles and
Tendons are continually intested with Convulsive Motions, yet the Diseased
being Enervated cannot move strongly any Members, or the whole body: nay to
these affects Pains Diffused through all the Limbs are added: hence we may
infer that the Animal Spirits are endued with a Manifold Combination, viz. with
particles both Explosive, and Narcotick, and in some sort irritative; so that
though being always oppressed, they fall upon Explosions, yet neither many of them
together, by reason of other Particles of another kind mixed with them, nor
indeed any of them have a free and lively Explosion wherefore the Impetus of
Motion does not reach far, but is always short and interrupted. A strange
instance of this affect take as follows.

A nobleman descended from Parents and Ancestors who had been subject to evil
affects of the Brain, or other Morbid dispositions of the Nerves, about the
time that his Age. began to decline, first was wont to be troubled with a
weakness, a numness, and gentle Convulsions in his Limbs, after having lain
long under these affects, at length he went to Bathe for a Cure, but ufing
there the hot Baths too other, instead of a cure he got only so great an
exasperation of his disease; that from that time the foresaid Symptoms did no
longer follow him at times, but almost constantly, viz. Convulsive Motions, and
Painful Tensions incessantly occupied all his Limbs, nay and each part of his
Body, so that all the Muscles together were perpetually Convuls't with repeated
Twitchings, and that not without a mighty Torture: the only way of appeasing
which was, that sometimes his whole Body, sometimes some of its Members were
continually exercised with a local Motion: for as long as he was awake, he was
forced to be kept moving in his Bed, or in his Seat, or to be carried in a
Coach, or to have his Members pressed or rubbed; for which end Chairs and Beds
were made for him with rockers, like Childrens Cradles, in which as he lay, or
sat upright, he was continually rockt to and fro: without which, he was
tormented with a cruel Pain, and a violent Tension of the Muscies; the diurnal
oppression of this Convulsive affect was followed in the night time, and
presently after sleep with much more severe Syniptoms; for he no sooner awaked,
but presently his whole Body fell a shivering, the Muscles were very much
toiled with painful Convulsions, and all the Limbs, as in an agony of Death,
were wont to be all over in a foul Sweat, which was so Corrosive, that the
sheets, unless they were presently washed, were soon eaten and rotted by it, as
by Aquafortis: the sick person during this conflict, was tortured betwixt
Sweating and Shivering for many hours, till being quite tired, a sleep stealing
upon him, brought some ease: but if, as the fit was coming, he was taken out of
his Bed, he was better, and so he prevented the wonted violence of the Fit:
therefore as soon as he was awaked from his sleep, though this happened within
half an hour, presently to escape the torture, he called his servants, and was
taken forth of Bed: being well enough as to his Akppetite, he did Eat without
nauseousness, nor was his Stomach troubled by what was taken into it, yet he
often complained of a Cardialgia; and sometimes a troublesome Spitting, with a
stinking Breath, as though he had taken Mercury, molested him for many days; any
Hot things, as well Food as Phylick, did not agree with his constitution: he
dared not so much as Sip of Wine, or Strong-beer: in the first years of his
Sickness he was seized with a horror at the sight of Fire, afterward becoming
weaker, her refused to sit by the Fire, even in the Winter: his Urine was
always of an Orange Color, which if Evaporated on Coals in an Earthen Pot, a
Saline filth, amounting to above half the Liquour, fell to the bottom: The
Belly being always Costive, never deposed its burden unless irritated by a
Medicine or Glyster: Moreover, besides the Convulsive Motions, a Bastard Palsy
possessed all the Members of his Body, for he could neither lift up his Hands,
nor walk with his Feet; his Tougue faultring brought forth only imperfect
words, but sometimes when on oocasion his mind was possessed with a sudden Joy,
his Spirits and Strength being strangely raised, he was able on a sudden to
rise from his Chair and to walk upright, and skip about without help; which
interval nevertheless scarce lasted a minute of an hour, but the Members
faultered afresh, and were troubled with their wonted Languor and Trembling. As
this person was ill after this manner above twelve years, he got the advices of
the most Famous Physicians of all England, and tried a great many remedies and
almost of all kinds, viz. Antiparaliticks, Antiscorbuticks, Drying, and
Sweating Dyets, Purges, Cauteries, Baths, Liniments, nay and was twice
Salivated but could not be Cured by any of those Methods, wherefore all hope of
Cure being laid aside, for the seven latter years of his life he used only
remedies that had regard to some of the chief Symptoms; viz. he took thrice a
week a Loosening Medicine of Sena and Rhubarb with Correctives, sometimes in
the form of a Syrup, sometimes of an Extract; he used to take every night a
Dose of an Opiate made of temperate Conserves and Species: Moreover he had a
Julap in a readiness to be taken on occasion, when the Spirits faultered: He
also Drank Oat-bear, Altered with temperate and Diuretic Herbs: By the use of
these things he past at least seven years, without any great alteration for the
worse: At length Old Age pressing opon him and the Disease together, the
Convulsive fits growing more violent, seized him, not as before when his sleep
was over, but as soon as he was warm in his Bed, so that he was forced wholly
to forbear going to Bed, and he put off his Clothes but seldom, unless it were
to change Linen: Hence transpiration being hindered, the Serous and other
Filthy Dregs which were wont to evaporate, were fixed on the Lungs, which first
brought a thick Breathing, afterward an Asthmatick affect, and lastly a Mortla
Consumption.

If the reasons of the foresaid affects be enquired into: it will appear that
all these Evils proceeded from the ill Constitution of the Brain, and Genus
Nervosum, and more immediately from the Dyscrasy and Default of the Juice that
lies in these parts.

The reason is plain why this Disease, first increasing by degrees, was soon
raised to a far worse state by the use of hot Baths, for it is manifest by
experience that hot and sulphurous Baths very much exalt the Saline, and other
Morbid Particles, that abound within the Viscera, or Humors of Human Body, and
soon carry them to the highest pitch, viz. by exagitaing them they render them
more wildly exorbitant, and froce them from the first passages into the Blood,
and thence into the Brain and Genus Nervosum, nay and join them together being
first severed, and lying idle, and stir them, up to a certain Fermentation:
Wherefore such as being hereditarily obnoxious to the Gout or or Stone, have
not yet felt any Fits of those affects, after the use of hot Baths, very often
find that both those diseases are presently brought to a maturity in them. [You
may find the reasons of the other Symptoms in Dr. Willis at large.]

So much for universal Convulsions, which for the most part being joined to the
Paralytick affect, are raised at once in many places separately: there remain
others which we call continual, viz. because being conveyed on a sudden from
these parts to others, they mutually succeed each other, and force the Members
sometimes these, sometimes others, and often the whole Body to be moved
involuntarily, and to be bent and agitated diverse ways. I shall give you an
instance or two of this affect.

A Beautiful Virgin, tall and thin grown, begotten of a Father obnoxious to
very great distempers of the Genus Nervosum, about the twentieth year of her
Age was afflicted for many days with a very violent and Periodical Head ach, at
length the Winter Solstice being near at hand the pain of her head remitted,
but in its stead, a mighty Catarrh succeeded, with thin and much Spittle, and
with an Ulcerous affect of the Nostrils, Mouth, and Throat; having undergone
the tediousness of this for some time, at length by the advice of some old
Women she drew into her Mouth the smoke of Amber through a Tube, and was
presently Cured, viz. the Catarrh was suddenly stopped, but presently upon it she
complained of a mighty giddiness, with a Pain of the Head, and a Ringing in the
Ears: on the third day the Tendons of the Neck were Convuls't that her head was
bent sometimes forward, sometimes backward, sometimes sideways, and sometimes
it stood stiff and immovable, in a short time after this such a Convulsive
affect seized the ontward parts of the whole Body, and the Limbs: the Arms and
Hands were so wonderfully twisted, that no Jugler of Mountibank was able to
imitate their Flections and Convolutions: Her Legs qand Feet were forced awry
this way and that, and were made to beat aginst each other, and to cross each
other alternatively after this manner she was perpetually affected with
Convulsive Motions either sitting in a Chair, or lying in Bed, unless when she
was overwhelmed with sleep; and when she contained her members a little, by
much forcing her self, presently she was seized with a difficult, and short
Breating, and with a danger of being Choakt, yet in the mean time the Eyes,
Jaws, Mouth, and inferior Viscera continued free from any Convulsion: Nor was
she troubled with a Vomiting, Rumbling, nor Inflation of the Hypochondres:
Moreover her mind held always sound, and she duly performed the functions of
Memory, Understanding, and Imagination, she neither spoke nor did any thing
showing want of Reason, or Indiscreetly: but amongst all these stupendous
evils always using Pious and Virtuous expressions, she gave an admirable
specimen of Christian Patience and Piety: her appetite was soon dejected, so
that she was averse from all food unless very much pressed to it; but thirst
continually pressed upon her, she was so very weak, she could neither stand nor
go: Her Urine was of an Orange Color, very much Impreguated with a Saltness,
on the Surface of which a thin Tartareous Film grew.

Being called to this Lady the sixth day after her being ill, I proceeded in
order to her Cure as follows: In the first place having made a gentie
preparation of the Body, I gave her a Loosning Potion of an Infusion of Sena
and Rhubarb, with the addition of Yellow Saunders and Salt of Wormwood, whereby
she had twelve stools which gave her great ease; the day following I drew eight
Ounces of blood from her left Arm, every evening I gave her an Opiate of the
Water and Syrup of Cowslip flowers with the Powder of Pearl: Moreover once
within six hours I ordered her a Dose of Spirit of Hearts Horn to be taken with
a little draught of the following Jalape.

Take Water of black Cherries, Wall-Nuts, and Peony Flowers of each three
Ounces, the Antiepileptical Water of Langius two Ounces, Syrup of Male Peony
Flowers two Ounces, Pearl powdered a Scruple, mix them make a Julape. Because
she could not bear much Purging, Glysters of Milk and Sugar were frequently
used: Besides Anticonvulsive Liniments applied to the Neck and Spine, we
ordered Frictions of the Members affected with Woollen Cloths moistened in an
appropriated Oil, and warmed.

By the use of these things, within six days the diseased seemed to be very
much relieved; for the Convulsive Motions in a manner wholly ceast, she could
keep her Members in their due Site, and without Motion, only she was forced
sometimes by a slight Contraction to bow her head gently this way and that:
Moreover she was able to arise from her Chair and Walk a little, but as she
Walked, she did not go upright, but inclining to one side's Parting from her at
that time, I left her in a manifest state of Recovery, she seeming to be much
better: But somewhat more then a week after, a boistrous North Wind arising in
the night time, and blowing strongly on the diseased as she lay in her Bed, the
window being not well shut; presently upon taking Cold she fell into such a
relapse, that she became not only obnoxious to Convulsive affects, but likewise
to a Universal and Periodical Palsy: For from thence forward her Head and
Members being bent and tossed again from Morning to the Evening as before, she
was made to Wind, Bend and variously Wrest all her Limbs successively; till
about night those Motions being wholly appeased, a Resolution or Palsy of the
Members ensued, so that she could neither move Hand, nor Foot, nor any part
else, or exercise any effort of Motition of the Body, lying in the Bed like a
Stone, immovable: But being somewhat refresht with sleep, about the morning, as
she recovered some strength of the regular moving Faculty, viz. enough, to bend
the Arms and Legs, to and fro, though weakly, so also the Convulsive and
Involuntary Motions constantly returned, and continued for the whole day after,
which in the evening were again Changed into resolutions of the Limbs.

From what is said it plainly appears, that the sick Lady lay under a double
disease, viz. APalsey, and Convulsions: And besides the remedies before
mentioned a great many others almost of all kinds, viz. Antiscorbuticks.
Antiparaliticks, Sudorificks, Decoctions, Distilled Waters, Spirits, Elixirs,
Tinctures, Baths, Liniments with many others were carefully administered; by the
use of which the Symptoms were a little remitted, but the disease was not
perfectly Cured: The Universal Palsy ceast in a short while, so that she could
move her Limbs and bend them to and fro at all times; nay and the involuntary
Motions of her Members seldomer molested her, yet she still continued faint and
weak, and as she was of a tender Constitution, and inclined to a Consumption,
and now become unapt for all exercise, the filthy Dregs of the Blood deposed in
the Lungs, by reason of her let transpiration, brought a Cough, which daily
growing worse and worse, she dyed at length Pthisical.

Many years since I was called to a noble Virgin taken almost after the same,
and somewhat a worse manner. For this underwent Involuntary Motions of the Head
and Members, viz. either Shakings of them, or Bendings this way and that, or
Wrestings of them, returning almost in a constant Course: Moreover she was
affected with a very troublesome, and wholly wonderful Convulfion of the
Diaphragm, and Muscles that serve for respiration for every minute of an hour
and oftener, the Back Bone about the middle of it was made crooked, and at the
same time Breast Springing forward, and the Hypocondres contracting inward, a
very Sonorous Sobbing, and the same sometimes doubled, sometimes tripled, but
still less and less Shrill came from her; she was wont to continue these
Motions, and Reciprocation of noise many hours, so that she was heard
throughout the whole house; if at any time a short intermission of this
happened, presently she was forced strongly to beat or clasp her arms and hands
one with the other, sometimes her Legs and Feet, and sometimes to throw her
Head after a most violent manner; by and by to hold her Neck as it were still
and immovable. Sometimes in speaking her Tongue was so taken, that she repeated
the same word often, nay more than at least twenty times. When the Convulsive
Motions were strong in the Exterior Members she was a little somewhat free
from that stridulous Sobbing affect; and she called this the space of
Intermission and the time of her ease; though in the mean while her Head and
Members were drawn every way with violent Motions: If at any time she lay on
her Left Side, presently an inward Contraction of the right Hypocondre, with a
Sobbing happened, within a few days, her strength being very much dejected by
the assidnity of these affects, she got such a weakness in her Loins and Knees
that she could neither stand nor go: The Stomach being affected either with a
Languor, or Convulsion threw up all by Vomit that was put into it.

Coming to her the fourth day I gave her a Vomit, after which she Vomited sever
times a viscous Phlegm, with store of Yellow Choler; but without any relief: The
day after I drew six Ounces of Blood from her Arm, wereupon the Blood presently
taking violently to the Head, she complained very much of a Headache and
Giddiness; but being Blooded in the Foot, within three days, she was better:
She tooks afterward remedies appropriated to the Nerves, viz. Spirit of
Hartshorn, and of Blood, Powders of Shells, Bezoars, Anticonvulsive Julaps,
and Electuaries: by the use of thse things the Symptoms seemed somewhat to
abate, yet continued still in some Measure according to the Forms before
described: After a fortnight, by the advice of some Country Woman, she took six
spoonfuls of Blood, drawn from the Ear of an Ass, in a draught of bear,
whereuopn on a sudden she seemed to be Cured: For the Convulsive Motions
presently all ceast, and she past twenty four hours free from them,
nevertheless the disease returning shortly upon it with its wonted violence,
yielded not easily to that Medicine, nor indeed to any other whatsoever,
therefore for the time to come she took Medicines methodically prescribed: She
Purged gently once in six days, besides she took a Powder made of Bezoar, Pearl
and Coral, with the Seeds and Roots of Peony, also the Electuary prescribed by
Horstius against these kinds of mavelous Convulsions; and likewise Julaps and
Decoctions appropriated to Convulsive affects: Glysters were frequently given:
Frictions, Vesicatories and Linements, were administered with good effect;
within a fortnight the Sobbing affect wholly ceast, nay and the rest of the
Convulsive Motions, being rendered more mild by degrees, remitted very much; but
as she was recovering of those affects she was so troubled with a Catarrh
falling on her Throat, that she Spit forth almost continually a Sharp, and as
it were Corrosive Spittle, as if a Salivation were raised by taking Mercury:
Which kind of remedy the event proved to be extremely proper in this case; though
I wholly forbore using it, because the diseased and here friends were not free
to admit of it.

After that this Copious and very troublesome Spitting had continued for many
days the disease seemed to be in a manner wholly Cured: So that the Noble Lady,
being free from theConvulsive Motions, walked abroad, and had a good Strength
and Stomach^: Only she complained that at certain times in the day, she was
affected on a sudden with a Shivering of her whole Body for about a quarter of
an hour: which kind of affect, sometimes also happening by night, broke her
sleep. Within a months space this Symptom also, and likewise the Catarrh,
wholly ceast: but afterward she was so afflicted, sometimes with a Sharpness in
the Ventricle and Passage of the Aesophagus, sometimes also in the Jaws and
Palate, that she feared lest those parts, the inner Skin being worn away, would
contract an Ulcerous affect: Moreover often in her sleep, and sometimes also
waking, she used to be troubled with an Incubus. I ordered her a gentle Purge
to be given Spring and Fall with the use of Antiscorbutick remedies, and
sometimes Chalybeats: Which kind of Method she observed with so great advantage
to her, that she has enjoyed her health for many years, and enjoys it still.

Among many remedies which she took against that Sharpness, and Ulcerous
disposition as it were of the Palate and Aesophagus, I ordered that she should
Drink every Morning her own Urine fresh made: This for the most part being very
Salt, was wont to give a mighty relief; but at certain times the Urine that
came from her was thin, and in a great plenty, which nevertheless was not Salt,
but manifestly Acid like Vinegar, after the Drinking of which she found little
or no benefit. The reason of the good effect of the one, and not of the other
is this: In as much as Saline Particles of a differing state, and not those
that are of the same, mutually act on each other, and weaken their strength,
therefore the Salt Urine and not that which was Sharp of sour Cured the
Sharpness of the Throat: And it appeared from hence that the Humor distilling
on the parts of this Ladies Mouth and Throat was Acid and drew near to the
nature of a Vitriolick Vinegar, because the smoke of Tobacco received in the
Mouth of the Diseased seemed wonderfully Sweet as it uses ot do in any that
taste Vitirol before.

Ten years since I went to see the daughter of a certain Nobleman, troubled
with Convulsive Motions after such a manner, that some thought her obsess't
with an evil Spirit: This Virgin being about sixteen years of Age, Fair, and
well in flesh, but begotten of a Father troubled with the Palsy, about the
winter Solstice began to be ill without any evident cause: First for some days
she was affected with a Headache and a Giddiness, though in no severe manner;
afterward she perceived a Trembling, and sudden Contraction in one Arm, and
presently in the other, which kind of Convulsions, returning often that day,
scarce lasted a moments space: The next day after sitting by her Sister in a
Chair, on a sudden she started up, and made a leap or two, and many others
successively to many feets distance with a wonderful Agility: Then when she was
come to the end of the Room, she stood for some while leaping up in the same
place, and every time to a wonderful height, when her legs were able to hold
Leaping no longer, she fell on the ground and presently threw her Head several
ways, as though she would have thrown it off her Neck, as soon as she ceast from
this Motion, through her being tired, presently the same fury seized her Hands
and Feet, that she was forced to keep these members a going in a violent
manner, striking them against the Walls and Doors, or stamping on the Floor:
When through Modesty, or Reverence due to Friends, or Persons present she kept
her self from these Motions by main force (for she was always present to her
self and spoke with sobriety) presently the affect being conveyed inward, she
was very much infested with mighty oppression of the Heart, a Sighing, and very
loud Sobbing, then when she gave way to her self, presently the Rage being
conveyed to the Muscles of the outward Limbs, she was forced either to Leap, or
to throw her Head or Arms this way and that in a violent manner, or also to run
swiftly up and down the Chamber, or to stamp on the Ground with her Feet: Thus
these kinds of violent Commotions of the Limbs or Viscera mutually succeeded
each other, the Tragedy of the distemper returning as it were in a Circle.

Coming the fifth day after this Lady had been ill, I gave her a Vomit of the
Infusion of Crocus Metallorum, Wine of Squills, and Salt of Vitriol, after
which she Vomited a great store of Aeruginous Choler, with a mixture of a most
Sharp, and as it were Vitriolick Humor: The next day after I drew ten Ounces
of Blood from the Saphaena Vein: Moreover she took twice a day Antidotes of the
Powders of Precious Stones, Man's Scull, and the Male Peony: by the use of these
things seeming to be recovered, she lived for many days after free from the
foresaid affects, but after a fortnight, the full Moon coming, she fell into a
relaps of the same disease more violent than before, for besides the wonderful
Leaps, the violent Contorsions, and Convolutions of the Head, and Members, she
was also forced to Run up and down in a Vehement manner in her Bed Chamber: She
took at this time, by the Praescripts of others, Antihysterick Remedies, and
Purges at some set intervals of time, but without any relief: Being called
again, in regard thatshe was of a Robust habit of Body, and seemed affected
with a mighty raging of the Spirits, I gave her a strong Vomit, after which she
Vomited ten times a Choler as green as Verd^grease, with a Phlegm as Sharp as
Aqua Stygia, and was suddenly relieved: I gave her afterward, every morning a
draught of White Wind Diluted with Black Cherry Water, poured on Millepedes
bruised, and strongly expressed. By the use of these things seeming to be Cured,
she was perfectly well for a Month, and more: and when afterward she at any
time perceived any forerunning signs of a return of the affect, presently by
the use of a Vomit, and the same expression of Millepedes, she kept off the
Fit: Within three Months she so recovered her former Health, that she has now
lived many years wholly free from such Convulsive affects: But from the time
that the Convulsive Passions wholly ceast, she was sometimes troubled about the
parts of the Mouth and Throat with a Defluxion of a most Acid Humor, like the
distilled Liquor of Vitriol: Moreover she has sometimes been obnoxious to the
longing disease of Maids, sometimes also to a Cough with a discolored Spittle
threatening a Ptizick, which nevertheless were easily Cured by remedies usual in
the like cases.

Whilst I was writing these things, I went to see a Noble Virgin, who was
troubled with Convulsive affects of another kind, and those Universal, and no
less Admirable: This about the eighteenth year of her Age, being of a fresh
Color, Handsome, and before sound enough, now happening unawares to incur the
danger of being infected with the Plague, it being rife hereabouts, fell into a
Panick Fear, with frequent Swooning Fits, the night following the underwent
such Failings and Disorders of the Spirits that she seemed even ready to Dye.
But having past that evil with much ado, she had afterward every day Convulsive
Fits, though returning first at uncertain hours, and in several forms: But
within a short time the accesses of the disease becoming regular, they returned
constantly twice a day, viz. at eleven of the Clock in the forenoon, and at
five in the afternoon, that no intermitting Fever keeps its periods more
exactly, nay and all the circumstances of the Fit happened daily after the same
manner.

When she had been thus ill three weeks, I was called on a certain day, that I
might observe all the Symptoms, and the whole form of the disease: Rising from
her Bed at ten a Clock in the Morning, she was well, and carried her self so
well in her countenance, walking, and discourse, that no man would have
suspected that any thing ailed her: At eleven, a Clock she began to complain of
a Plenitude, and as it were Inflation in the Brain, and a Deadness of the
Spirits with a light Scotomia: by and by she felt in the left Hypocondre a
mighty beating, and Springing as it were of a live Animal: I plainly felt this
Motion by applying my hand to her side, then a Retching and great Crying
followed, whereupon she was presently led to Bed, and given to be held by a
maid servant sitting on the Bolster: This person clapping her Arms about the
middle of the diseased, held her very hard in her Lap, during the Fit. Moreover
servants were at hand, and relations standing about her, who sometimes held her
Hands and Arms, sometimes pressed down her Belly and Hypocondres which rise to a
mighty Bulk, still forcing upwards: The chief Symptoms of the disease, which
being raised by turns, divided in a manner the whole Fit, were these two, viz.
Sometimes violent Convulsions of the Viscera infested her, so that the Abdomen
rising to a mighty Bulk, withstood the hands of standers by, pressed against it,
that it could not be kept down, and withal the Praecordia being drawn upward,
the Motion of the Heart and Blood was in a manner stopped: For which space of
time the Virgin hanging down her head, with a weakened, and no Pulse as it
were, lay Speechless and almost insensible: After two or three minutes of an
hour these Fits ceast: And then the Sick raising her self, looked round her
cheerfully, and for some time converted the Impetus of the disease into
Discourses and Songs, both which she uttered most Pleasantly and Elegantly
above her Natural disposition; she past such Sayings and Scoffs on all persons
about her, that there is nothing in any Comedy to be met with more facetious;
then she would Sing most Sweet and Pleasant Tunes of Harmony, such as neither
any person else could Sing, or herself at another time: After the she had thus
past about six or seven Minutes of an hour, in Jesting and Singing, she fell
again into the Convulsions of the Viscera and Hypochondres, and the loss of
Speech as before: And these remitting in a short time, and the Impetus of the
Spirits flying back from the inferior Nerves to the Brain, she gave her self
again to the pleasantryes of Talking and Singing. When at any time she
discourst with the standers by, if any thing that was Sharp or Ignominious were
replied by them, she fell into more Violent and Lasting Convulsions of the
Bowels: After this manner she uses to be troubled with an alternate affect of
the Viscera and Brain for about the space of an hour: Then the Fit drawing
toward an end, the Convulsions of the Bowels becoming more gentle, returned
three or four times with very little intermission: Afterward these wholly
ceasing, the Impetus of the disease passes into the outward Members, whence
presently it wholly vanishes: For the Arms and Legs undergo contractions and
twitchings for a minute of an hour, and presently after the diseased rising up,
comes off from her Bed, and is free from all Convulsion till a new Fit returns,
nay and having an indifferent good strength, walks up and down the house, and
during the interval of the affect, cheerfully performs the usual Offices of
Life, still excepting that her Stomach being weak, loathes food during the day
time, in the evening after the second Fit of the disease, she eats a little
supper.

About the beginning of this sickness of the Convulsions of the Bowels were
much more violent, and she lay Senseless with them, and during their intervals
she would talk absurdly, Sing Songs out of tune, and fall out a Laughing, or
Crying, without any ground of reason: But at length the Animal Spirits being
forced into lasting explosions, performed them so regularly, sometimes this
way, sometimes that, as it was most proper, that they seemed to be done in some
sort by the moderation and command of the will.

After I had been again to see this Lady, having lain under these periodical
Fits for many weeks, I ordered that three hours before the second Fit, ten
Ounces of Blood should be drawn from the Vein of her foot, whereupon the Fit,
expected in the Evening, wholly left her, nor did it ever return afterward: But
the other Fit obsrving its ancient course returned daily, till upon Bleeding a
little before its coming, the Patient was free of it that day, which
nevertheless returning the next day after followed her for many months
according to the same form: In the mean while, because the winter cold was very
fevere, she delai'd for some time the use of Remedies: But as the Spring came
on the noble Lady being brought to Oxford was cured by the following Method.

In the first place I gave her this Purge, and took care for it to be repeated
every sixth or seventh day.

Take Sulphur of Antimony six Grains, Mercurius Dulcis a Scruple, Rosin of
Jalap four Grains, Ginger six Grains: Let them be bruised together on a Marble,
then adding Conserve of Violets a Dram, make a Bolus. It was wont to make her
Womit twice or thrice, and to give her three or four Stools: Her Menses
constantly flowed from her at set time in a plentiful manner: Wherefore her
Blood seeming to be in great plenty and hot, in the middle time betwixt the
monthly periods I ordered Bleeding twice or thrice: Moreover on all those days
that she did not Purge, she took four Pills of the following Mass, Drinking
after it a little Draught of the Julap beneath prescribed.

Take Roots of Male Peony half an Ounce, of Virginia Serpentary, Contrayerva,
and Bastard Dittany of each two Drams, Man's Scult prepared a Dram and a half,
Elks Hoof a Dram, red Coral prepared, Pearl Powdered of each a Dram, Salt of
Wormwood two Drams, Salt of Coral a Dram, with a sufficient quantity of Syrup,
of Male Peony flowers make a Mass.

Take the Waters of Male Peony Flowers, Black Cherries, and Wallnuts of each
four Ounces, the Antiepileptical Water of Langius two Ounces, Syrup of Peony
Flowers an Ounce and a half, Castoreum tied in a knot and hung in hte Glass a
Dram, mix them make a Julap.

When she began to loath the Pills, omitting them, she took twice a day, viz.
early in the morning, and late at night, about a Scruple of the following
Powder in a spoonful of the Julap, Drinking after it four or five spoonfuls of
the same.

Take Bezoar Stone of both kinds, White Amber, Pearl prepared, Red Coral of
each a Scruple; Man's Scull two Scruples, Roots of Virginia Serpentary, Seeds of
Rue of each half a Dram, mix them, make a Powder, let her take a Scruple
Morning and Evening with a Dose of the Julap above prescribed.

Afterward when this also began to nauseate her, she used Pills, or also Elixir
Proprietatis, sometimes also Spirit of Hartshorn for many days: afterward at
long run upon taking that Powder daily for some space she began to find help.

Inthe mean while that this Method of Cure was followed; her Hair being Shaved
off, her Head was covered only with a thin Dress, she wore the Hysteric
Plaster with a mixture of Galbanum on the Abdomen: She drank for her ordinary
drink a Bo^het of Sarsa and China with the Roots of Male Peony, and other
appropriated things infused and boiled in Fountain Water: Within a Month the
Fits remitted a little: Afterward becoming more mild by degrees and lesser, at
length they ceased in a manner altogether, unless that near the time of her
Menses she was wont to be troubled with an assault or two of that disease:
Moreover she was troubled almost with a constant Giddiness and a loathing of
Meat; in the midst of Summer the drank Astrope Waters for six weeks, and grew
perfectly well.

As to the way of Cure to be used in general for such Mavelous Convulsions,
it is not an easy thing to assign Remedies equal to so Hereulean a Disease, or
a certain method of its Cure confirmed by frequent experiments: For besides
that cases like those seldom occur, we may likewise observe, that the same
Medicine which did good to this sick person at one time, gave not the least
relief to another person, or the same, when given at another time, the reason
of which seems to be that the cause of the Disease seems to consist in the
Discrasy of the Nervous Juice: Which liquor is not always perverted after one
and the same manner: But from the manifold combination of the Salts and
Sulphurs, gets a Morbid disosition of a various kind and condition, and often
changes it: Wherefore in those difficult affects, we must not prescribe vulgar
Medicines, taken from Apothecaries Shops, but Magisterial ones, as occasion
requires, according to the appearances of the Mavelous Symptoms. A Gentle
Vomit, a Purge, and Bleeding ought in the first place to be used, and sometimes
to be repeated, as it shall seem convenient. And as to Specific Medicines, and
such are appropriated in those cases, since the chief Indication will be to
amend the Crasis of the Nervous Juice, we may try a great many things and sift
their virtues from the effect: Therefore we may try what things endued with a
Volatile or Armoniack Salt will do: For this purpose let the Spirits and Salts
of Hartshorn, Blood, Soot, the Flowers and Spirits of Sal Armoniack be taken:
These giving no relief we must come to Chalybeats; let the Tinctures and
Solutions of Coral and Antimony be given: which sort of Medicines must be given
in such a Dose, and form, and for so many times, that some alteration may be
made by them in the Blood and Nervous Juice: Again, if these have not success
we must proceed to Alexipharmicks, which are good against Poison and a
Malignity gotten into the Humors, viz. of these we must order Decoctions,
Destillations, Powders, Conserves, and other Preparations of Vegetables, and we
must variously compound them the one with the other, and administer them
several ways: It seems likely that those sorts of Medicines which being
inwardly taken are wont to do good to such as are bit by a Viper, or by a Mad
Dog, and likewise against Wolfs-bane, and Napellus, may also be of use in the
above mentioned Convulsions: We may here, after the example of Gregor Horstius
in his Tracts of the Malign Convulsive disease, prescribe also Magisterial
Remedies in form of a Purging Electuary, also of a Powder, and Convulsive
Antidote for these Mavelous Convulsions, and variously Compound the same of
Simples, partly Alexipharmical and partly Antiepileptical.

CHAP. VIII. Of the Affects which are vulgarly called Hysterical.
IF at any time an unusual sort of Sickness, or of a very Secret Origin occurs
in the Body of a Woman, so that its Cause lies hid, and the Therapeutick
Indication be wholly uncertain, presently we accuse the evil influence of the
Womb (which for the most part is guiltless) and in any unusual Symptom, we cry
out that there is somewhat Hysterical in it; and consequently the Physical
intentions and the uses of Remedies are directed for this end, which often is
only a starting hole for Ignorance.

The passions which are wont to be rank't in this number are found to be
various andmanifold, which seldom agree in diverse Women, or happen wholly after
the same manner: the most common of them, and which are vulgarly said to
Constitute the formalstate of an Hysteric affect, are these, viz. A Motion in
the lower part of the Belly, and an Ascent as it were of some round thing
there, then a Belching or Straining to Vomit, a distention of the Hypochondres
and a Rumbling with a Belching forth of Wind, an uneven and for the most part a
let Respiration, a Suffocation in the Throat, a Giddiness, an Inversion, or
Rotation of the Eyes, often Laughing, or Weeping, a Talking Idly, sometimes a
Speechlesness and Immobility with an obscure or no Pulse, and a Cadaverous
aspect, sometimes Convulsive Motions raised in the Face, and Limbs, and
sometimes in the whole Body: But universal Convulsions seldom happen, and not
unless the disease be raised to its worst state, for the Tragedy of the Fit is
acted through for the most part without any contraction of the Members only in
the Belly, Breast and Head, viz. one of them, or successively in all. Women of
all Ages and Conditions are obnoxious to these affects, to wit Rich and Poor,
Virgins, Wives, and Widows: I have observed those Symptoms in Girls before the
time of Puberty, and in old Women after their Menses ceast to Flow, nay and men
are sometimes troubled with such kind of Passions, instances of which are not
wanting.

The cause of these Symptoms must not be imputed to the Ascent of the Womb, and
to vapors raised from the same; nor to the Impetuous rushing of the Blood into
the Lungs, as the Learned Highmore has Judged; But we say that the affect
called Hysterical, chiefly, and primarily is Convulsive, and depends
principally on the Brain and Genus Nervosum being affected, and is produced
wholly by the exposions of the Animal Spirits, as other Convulsive Motions. And
whatever disorder or irregularities happen else about the Motion of the Blood,
they are only secondary and depending on the Convulsions of the Viscera. The
way of the difference whereby the kinds of this disease both differ from each
other, and from the other Convulsive affects is taken from the various Origin,
and chiefly from the extension of the Morbisick Cause: for the Origin of this,
as of many other Convulsive affects sometimes resides in the Head, the Womb
being wholly without fault: Though sometimes this affect happens through the
fault of the Womb, and sometimes through that of other parts: As to the
extension of the Disease, from whatever Origin it proceeds, for the most part
it chiefly affects the Interior Nerves, to with those that particularly regard
the Viscera and Precordia and their appendixes, and chiefly troubles the
Spirits lying in them: Sometimes also, though rarely, the Spirits that presides
in the Exterior Nerves and likewise those in the Brain and Cerebellum, are
involved in the same affect.

As to the Morbifick Matter, or Explosive Combination, which, accruing to the
Spirits within the Brain, and derived with them into the Processes of the
Nerves, often is the cause of the affects, which are vulgarly called Uterine,
or of the Mother: We say this to be Heterogeneous Particles sent from the
Blood, as in other kinds of Convulsions; and which are wont to be made to
cleave to the Spirits that pass into the Origines of the Nerves, on two chief
occasions, viz. either through the fault of the Spirits themselves, or through
the great force of the Matter: instances of both kinds every where occur:
Through the fault of the Spirits themselves as when through a sudden Passion,
suppose of Fear, Anger, Sadness, they are very much Troubled and forced into
Irregularities; through the Exorbitant force of the Matter, as in the evil
Crises of Fevers, also in any Malignant, and Scorbutical, and other Chronical
affects of an ill Determination: these causes are much upheld and promoted by
an ill or weak Constitution of the Brain and Genus Nervosum, whether it be
hereditary, or acquired by an ill diet, hence Women are more obnoxious to
Convulsive affects than Men, and those one more then another.

Though these they call Hysterical affects very often arise from the Brain, yet
sometimes they are raised by a cause beginning either in the Womb, or in other
of the Viscera; and this either by reason of a solution of continuity, through
a Tumor or Ulcer, or Stimulation of the part; or by reason of the obstruction
of the Nervous Juice in its Circulation; thus when some accustomed evacuation,
whereby the superfluities of the Nervous Liquour were wont to be discharged, is
stopped, as upon the sudden stopping of Issues, or drying up of old Ulcers
without Purging, many have fallen into Convulsive affects, which sometimes also
happen to Virgins and widows through a retention of the Semianl humor, which
ought to be Voided its proper way: And sometimes the Nervous Juice regurgitates
toward its Origin, because its passage is somewhere stopped by a Cancrous or
Scirrhous Tumor. To illustrate our doctrine of the, vulgarly called, Passions
of the Womb; I shall now give an instance of a person troubled with them.

A Renowned Lady, extremely beautiful, and endowed with an excellent temper of
mind and manners, lately lived in these parts, who for many years was obnoxious
to Convulsive affects, she having contracted this valetudinary disposition fro
her Birth, or Hereditarily, and having found in herself these fruits of the
morbid root almost every fourth year of her Age; but especially as often as she
conceived with Child (as she often had, and undergone frequent Abortions) she
was wont to be extraordinarily troubled with Convulsive passions, in a manner
Hysterical: For presently upon the stopping of the Menses, the Heterogeneous
Particles being conveyed to the Brain, and Genus Nevosum, brought violent Fits
of the distemper.

After that she had last conceived, in the first Months according to her
ancient wont, she was often troubled with Convulsive affects, about the uinth
week of her being with Child, upon taking Cold, she fell into a dangerous
Fever, in which very acute Pains sorely infesting her in the Loins, and about
the lower part of the Belly, seemed to threaten an Abortion: But those Pains,
as it appeared at last, being rather to be judged of the Colic, proceeded from
a Sharp humor, falling from the Brain into those parts by the Ductus's of the
Nerves; for about the declining of the Fever, that matter being conveyed
elsewhere, a Diarrhaea, Pains of the Feet, and a Blistering as it were ensued.

As soon as this Lady grew well of her Fever, and Pains, the Convulsive affects
returned, for every morning as she awaked from her sleep, she was wont to
undergo violent Contractions and Convulsions about the parts of the Mouth and
Face, and also in the Arms and Legs, which Syptoms doubtless arose from the
Serous filth heaped together in the Head about the Origines of the Nerves; and
deeply Imbibed by them during the sleep, together with the Juice that passes in
them; and when afterward the same matter was carried again by the conveyance of
the Interior Nerves, into the Plexus's of the Mesentery, and the Loins, most
violent Pains of those parts, and likewise Fits as it were Hysterical sorely
infested her.

For those Convulsive Motions of the Face and Members ceast in a short time,
yet she continued still Weak and Infirm, with a Pale Countenance, Trembling as
she went, and having a mind to no Food but such as was improper, and to hot
Liquors: about the end of the third Month, at which time she used constantly to
Abort, her Menses broke forth, which passing from her for two or three days
together, with pieces of broken Membranes, she expected the Abortion: But the
Flu ceasing, Pains, like those of a person in Labor, arose in the Abdomen and
Loins as before, and miserably tormented her day and night for a week: At
length having used a Bath of Emollient Herbs, and then being put to bed to
sweat, she was delivered of the burden of her Womb: the Conception thus
passing from her with a mighty torture was as a Pea-hens Egg in bigness and
figure; the outward coat of this was ragged and broken; the inward coat
remaining whole, contained about half a pound of clear Water, and nothing else:
And no rudiments, of a Faetus that was formed, or about ot be formed, did
appear: Afterward for four or five days the Lochia flowed from her with some
pieces of Membranes: Mean while Pains troubled her with their wonted violence:
And in regard that after a week was past, they did not cease of their own
accord, at length remedies were desired for appeasing them.

For this end in the first place, Liniments, Fomentations, Baths, and Glysters
were freuently administered: And Medicines cleansing the filth of the Womb, on
which the cause of the whole distemper was charged, were inwardly taken: Upon
the use of the former, short intermissions of the Pains followed: But now and
then the affect returned and was mighty tedious: Nay and within three weeks,
the disease growing much worse brought many other horrible Symptoms along with
it: For besides the Pains in the Abdomen and Loins, which grew daily more
violent, she was now troubled likewise with a great torture in her Back, Neck,
Shoulder Blades, also in the Arms and Legs, and that more severely as often as
she grew warm in her Bed: Moreover she was afflicted with a frequent Giddiness,
a Vomiting and Nauseousness, and often in a day with vehement Convulsive Fits,
viz. First a great heavy thing seeming to Ascend in the lower parts of the
Belly, presently raised up the Belly with violence: By and by, respiration
being stopped, she became senceless with a Cadaverous aspect: After that she had
lain thus dead, as it were, for three or four minutes of an hour, she was wont
to start up on a sudden, that she could scarce be kept down or held by persons
present: Then followed violent contractions and distortions in all the parts of
the Mouth and Face, and in all the Members of the Body. These Symptoms were
judged really Hysterical, because the noble Lady had so lately Aborted.

But considering all these things, I was at length of this opinion, That the
cause of both Fits, viz. the Paining, and Convulsive, depended wholly on the
evil affects of the Brain and Genus Nervosum, without any fault in the Womb, to
wit, that the sharp humor heapt together within the Brain, descended thence,
by the passages of the Nerves, into parts very remote, and lying in the
Membranes and Fibers, and fermenting with the humor coming to it from the Mass
of Blood, irritated them very much, and caused violent pains: then afterward,
when the heterogeneous and explosive Particles, admitted into the Brain with
that Humor, and entering the Ductus's of the Nerves, joined with the Spirits,
thereupon the Convulsive disposition, now and then breaking forth into violent
Fits, was caused, as it will by and by appear more at large.

Directing my curative intents according to this Aetiology, I ordered the sick
Lady, at the time she was extremely ill, that Blood should be drawn from the
Saphaena Vein, That a gentle Purge should be given her within two days, and
that it should be repeated once or twice a Week: Also on other days I gave her,
Morning and Evening, Spirit of Hartshorn; and at other hours, twice or thrice
in a day, Powder of Pearl and Crab's-eyes, with a Dose of the following Julape.

Take Water of Snails, Magisterial Water of Earthworms, of each three Ounces,
Water of Saxifrage, and of Black-Cherries, of each four Ounces; Hysteric
Water, an Ounce; Syrup of Coral, an Ounce and a half; Tincture of Castoreum, a
Dram: mix them.

She used frequently a Bath of fresh Herbs when necessity required it; she took
Opiats always with good success: Vesicatories were applied to the inward part
of each Thigh, and to her Neck. Moreover Fomentations, Liniments, Glysters,
Cupping-glasses, Sneezing-powders, and many other ways of Administration were
prescribed, according to the exigency of Symptoms.

After this method of Curing used about fourteen days, the noble Lady, being
very much relieved, was wholly without the Convulsive Fits; nay, and the pains
of the Bowels and Members, and other Symptoms, being very much mitigated, gave
us a very fair hope of a speedy Recovery; but after this, partly by reason of
an ill Diet, to which the Diseased, upon never so little an amendment, always
indulged herself, but especially by reason of a sudden passion of terriour or
sadness, which a severe accident happening within her own House, had raised,
falling into a Relapse, the Disease was presently brought to a much worse
condition; for both the Convulsions, and Pains troubled her in a more violent
manner, nay, and the Stomach, being stirred up in a manner with a continual
Vomiting, neither admitted Food nor Medicines: she took Asses Milk for some
days, with some Benefit; yet in regard it turned to Choler in her Stomach, and
gave her some offense, it was soon left off. At length, in despite of all
Remedies prescribed with all diligence by the advice of many Physicians, the
noble Patient languish't daily more and more, and by degrees drew near to
Death. Two days before her Decease, the pains of her Belly and Loins remitted
very much, and becoming more cheerful than her wont, she had some hope of her
Recovery; but in the mean while she complained of a pain and a mighty
oppression of her Head; and falling into a profound Sleep, about the beginning
of the Night, upon her awaking, she fell into a very horrible Convulsive Fit,
which presently past into a mortal Apoplexy, for becoming insensible and
speechless, she departed this Life within twelve hours. The Body of this person
being opened after her Decease, the Womb was found wholly without fault, though
many of the Viscera were preternaturally disposed: in the Mesentery, about the
midst of it, where it is fixed to the Back, and contains great Plexus's of the
Nerves, a lax substance, and blown up as it were with many Bladders, was seen,
it equalling a hands breadth in extent: opening this place, I found no Humor
in it, but only that the Membranes were separated from each other, and that
nothing was included in the spaces betwixt them but a Wind, which Separations
doubtless were caused by the Convulsions and Explosions of the Spirits, sent
from the Head into those Plexus's: and as to those pains in the Belly, and the
ascent of the great heavy thing, as it were, and the Inflation of the Abdomen
in the Convulsive Affects, it is not to be doubted but the Seat of the
morbifick Cause lay hid in that part of the Mesentery.

As to the method of Curing to be used in the Passions vulgarly called
Hysterical, since the greatest part of the Symptoms of this Disease are
Convulsive, it is thence plain that anticonvulsive Remedies, such as above
written, are chiefly indicated. Nevertheless, since these Affects very often
happen to the Female Sex, in which the Menses, and other accidents of the Womb,
are most commonly taken in as a part of the Morbifick Cause; therefore
Medicines having regard to various dispositions of the Womb ought to be added
to the former, and be sundry ways complicated with them. The Therapeutick
Indications are either Curatory, to be used in the Fit, or Preservatory, which
being prosecuted out of the Fit, remove the cause of the Disease, and prevent
its Accesses. As to the former, if the Fit be but small, let it pass off of its
own accord, without any farther perturbation of the Spirits; but if it so
forely presses that it is needful to give aid to Nature, as being greatly
oppressed, let this one thing be endeavored, That the Spirits being made free
from the Embraces of their Heterogeneous Combination, remit of their Disorders
and Explosions: For this end it is very usual in the first place to apply to
the Nostrils stinking and strong-smelling things, the effluvia's of which
repress and reduce to order the Spirits, which are grown too wild and apt to
make exorbitant efforts, nay and discuss their Heterogeneous Combination, and
often wholly exterminate it. Assa Foetida, Castoreum, Galbanum, tied in a fine
Linen Cloth, and held to the Nostrils, are proper; also the Feathers of
Partridges, or old Shoes burnt, or Sulphur kindled: moreover the Spirit and Oil
of Soot, or of Hartshorn, often give help; though I have known that these kinds
of Suffurnigations have proved very offensive to some Women, and have increased
the Fit; it is probable that sometimes they irritate the Spirits too much, and
force them into greater disorders. As stinking things held to the Nostrils, so
the like being poured into the Mouth, often give help; wherefore we often give
with good success, to Hysterical persons, the Tincture of Castoreum, Solutions
of Assa Foetida, and of Galbanum, also the Spirits of Hartshorn and of Soot,
with appropriated Waters.

Take Spirit of Hartshorn, from twelve drops to fifteen or twenty, let them be
taken in a little Draught of the following Julape.

Take Water of Pennyroyal and Mugwort, of each four Ounces, Water of Bryony
compound, two Ounces; Castoreum tied in a Nodulus, and hung in the Glass, half
a Dram; double refined Sugar, an Ounce; Mix them.

Take Tincture of Castoreum; from, a Scruple to half a Dram; let it be taken in
a little Draught of Small-beer. Take Assa Foetida, or Galbanum, two Drams; let
them be dissolved in Spirit of Wine till a red Tincture be extracted: the Dose
is a Scruple in two or three Spoonfuls of Water of Featherfew, Riverius greatly
extols that of Solenander; Take Musk, Dragons-blood, of each a Scruple; let
more or less be taken in three or four Ounces of Water of Navews. Johannes
Anglicus commends the Seeds of Parsnips, or of Columbines in Wine, or an
appropriated Water, as most certain Remedies. If the Fit, continuing a long
time, renders the Person senseless, or without any Pulse, let smart Clysters,
as of the Roots of Briony, with Carminatives boiled with them in Water, be
injected; let Frictions be used to the Legs and Feet; and if we must proceed to
stronger things, let Cupping-glasses be applied to the Belly or Groin, nay and
let sneezing be often provoked: it is good for some to give them, in the midst
of the Fit, a Draught of cold Water, either simple, or in which Camphire has
burnt.

The preservatory Indication comprehends these three chief intents, viz. First,
To take away, or to drive to some place else, the impurities of the Blood,
which are apt to be discharged on the Brain and Genus Nervosum. Secondly, To
fortify the Brain, and so strengthen the Spirits in it, that they either admit
not at all the Heterogeneous Combination, or readily shake it off. Thirdly, to
amend whatsoever is amiss in the Womb, and contributes to the Convulsive
Disposition.

1. The first Intention is performed by Purging and Bleeding, and other common
ways of Cleansing and Purging the Blood and Humors. If there be room for a
Vomit, I Judge we must always begin with that, especially in Cacochymical
persons, or such as are troubled with the longing disease, in whom a mighty
load of Viscous Phlegm, sticking in the Folds and Coats of the Stomach, hinders
the virtues of other Medicines: Within a few days after the Vomit, (unless
somewhat indicates the contrary,) let Blood be drawn, in Women of a hot
temperament, presently from the Arm, and afterward, if need be, from the Foot,
or from the Veins of the Fundament, by Leeches; but in Bodies troubled with
obstructions and less hot, let Blood be drawn more sparingly and rarely, and
only in places seated below the Womb. After these evacuations (provided always
that they are indicated) being duly performed, let a Purge be given once within
six or seven days according to the forms following.

Take Pil. Foetidae Majores a Dram and a half, Rosin of Jalap twelve Grains,
Tartar Vitriolated, Castoreum of each a Scruple, Ammoniacum dissolved in
Hysteric Water what suffices, make twelve Pills for three Doses. (Or)

Take Rosin of Jalap eighteen Grains, Calomelanos a Dram, Castoreum a Scruple,
make a Powder, divide it into three parts for three Doses, give it in the Pap
of a boiled Aple, or in Conserve of Borage: To persons of a Hot temperament a
dose of our Extract, or Loosning Syrup may be properly given: For the revulsion
of the Morbisick matter from the Head an Issue in the Leg, or Thigh, and
sometimes Vesicatories, Ligatures and Painful Frictions are wont to be used. Nor
must we only have regard here to the cleansing of the Blood, and to the
Revulsion of its superfluous Dreggs from the Head, but likewise to the
alteration of its Liquor, and the reducing of it to its due Crasis: Wherefore
in certain Hysterical persons Chalybeats prove beneficial, in others Mineral
Waters or Whey, in some the use of Hot Baths are wont to do mighty good.

2. The second intention, viz. the rectifying of the Brain, and of the Animal
Spirits, is performed by Cephalic and Particularly by Anticonvulsive
Medicines, and let them be carefully given almost every day when there is no
Purging, or Bleeding; There being various kinds and ways of Administration of
such Medicines, I shall here give you some of the more choice forms of them.

Take Faecula of Briony, Assa Foetida, Castoreum, of each a Dram, Salt of
Coral, Amber, and of Jupiter of each half a Dram; Galbanum dissolved in
Hysteric Water what suffices, made a Mass; the Dose is from half a Scruple to
a Scruple, Morning and Evening, Drinking after it a Dose of an appropriated
Liquor.

Or, Take seeds of Wild Parsnips and of Nettles of each two Drams, Vitriol of
Mars a Dram, extract of Gentian and Feverfew, of each a Dram and a half, with a
sufficient quantity of a Syrup of Mugwort make a Mass, let it be taken to half
a Dram after the same manner.

If the form of a Powder be more grateful. Take roots of Virginia Serpentary
and Contrayerva of each a Dram and a half, Coral prepared, Pearl, White Amber
of each a Dram, mix them, make a Powder, the Dose is from a Scruple to half a
Dram Morning and Evening with an appropriated Liquour.

Let Opiates be made after this manner. Take Conserves of the Flowers of
Lillies of the Valley, Male Peony, and Betony of each two Ounces; Peony Seeds,
Red Coral prepared of each two Drams, Powder of Bastard Dittany a Dram and a
half, Salt of Wormwood two Drams, with a sufficient quantity of Syrup of Citron
Pills, make an Electuary. The Dose is Morning and Evening the quantity of a
Nutmeg. After the same manner to the Poor, let Conserves of the Leaves of the
Tree of Life, or of the Leaves of Rue be given twice aday.

The Liquours appropriated to Hysterical affects, and to be Drank after the
foresaid Medicines are either Distilled Waters, which may be taken by
themselves, or with others in the Form of a Julape, or they are Decoctions, or
Tinctures and Infusions.

Take Water of Mugwort and Pennyroyal of each half a Pound, Hysteric Water
four Ounces, Tincture of Castoreum half an Ounce, Syrup, of Coral an Ounce and
a half mix them; the Dose is from an Ounce to an Ounce and a half with any of
the Medicines above prescribed.

Take Leaves of Pennyroyal, Feverfew, both Southernwoods, Calamint, Nep, both
Horehounds, of each a Handful; Briony Roots four Ounces, Parsnip-Seeds two
Ounces, being Slic't and Bruised, pour to them of White Wind or Sider six
pounds distill them according to Art.

Take roots of Male Peony, Angelica, Valerian, of each half an Ounce, Leaves of
Mugwort, Ground Pine, Calamint, Peny-royal, Misteltoe, of the Oak of each a
handful; Seeds of both the Wild Carrots of each three Drams, Raisins a handful;
let them Boil in four Pounds of Fountain Water till half be Consumed; add of
Whitewine two Pound and a half: Strain it, Let it be kept in Vessels close
stopped. The Dose is three or four Ounces twice a day.

Take Seeds of Wild Carrots bruised two Ounces, Castoreum an Ounce, put them in
a Glass with two Pounds of White Wind. The Dose is two Ounces twice a day.

3. As to the third intent, which putting a stop to the disorders of the Womb,
advances the Cure of the Hysteric affect: I say in the first place that what
was formerly believed concerning the Cause of the Disease, and the Scope of
Curing it, viz. That the Womb did Ascend, and therefore that it ought to be
restored to its due place, is altogether Fictitious, as we have shown
elsewhere: The descent, or falling forth of the Womb often happens, but this
seldom or never produces Hysterical affects: Moreover a Dislocation of the Womb
sometimes happens to Childbearing Women presently after Childbirth, viz. When
the body of the Womb being enlarged and newly emptied, does not settle in a
right place within its Cavity, but leans high, sometimes to the right side of
it, sometimes to the left, and there being Constring'd like a Purse is folded
up in a great Lump, which Lump lying a long time in the side of the Inguen, is
wont to Cause suspicion of another Foetus, or of the after Birth being left
behind, or also of a Scirrhous Tumor there Growing but afterward, when upon
the Lochia's passing away freely, the Womb is reduced to its due magnitude,
that Tumor vanishes by degrees: And whilst it continues there, unless happily
the Lochia are thereby stopped, it does not cause Hysteric Passions: For the
quick reducing of this part to its due position, Fomentations, Liniments, and
Plasters contribute much: But very often that Symptom passes away of its own
accord without any further offense: We have shown elsewhere ex professo to what
affects else the Womb is obnoxious after Childbirth, and with what methods of
Physic we must obviate them: As to the other Distempers of this part, which
happen to other Women, viz. to such as do not Bear Children; we observe those
chiefly to be either a Disease of the Womb caused by a Solution of continuity,
which is either a Tumor or an Ulcer; or to be a Stoppage of some usual
Excretion, viz. either of the Sanguis Menstruus, or of the Fluor albus, or of
the Seminal Humor; by reason of the Menses retained the Heterogeneous
particles being often discharged on the Head Cause Convulsive Passions: In like
manner when the White Humor is stopped the Excrementitious Matter being drank
in again by the Blood is delivered to the Brain and Genus Nervosum. Moreover
when a wonted evacuation of the Seed is stopped, the superfluities of the
Nervous Humor Regurgitate into the Brain, and infect the Spirits in it with a
Morbifick and Explosive Tincture. It will not be necessary for us to discourse
particularly and at large on these particular affects of the Womb, but to
Complicate Medicines and Physical Administrations appropriated to Women's
Diseases, with Anticonvulsive Remedies.

CHAP. IX. Of Affects vulgarly called Hypochondriacal, which are shown to be
for the greatest part Convulsive, and by the by of Chalybeate Medicines.
AS we have shown before that the Passions vulgarly called Hysterical do not
always proceed from the Womb, but oftener from the Head's being affected: So
though it has been vulgarly held that the affects called Hypochondriacal are
caused for the most part by Vapors arising from the Spleen, and running hither
and thither; yet in truth those distempers are for the greatest part
Convulsions and Contractions of the Nervous parts; which may better appear
after we have considered the Symptoms.

As to the affects therefore which are vulgarly called Hypochondriacal it is to
be observed that they chiefly happen to persons of a Melancholic Constitution,
with a wan aspect and a thin habit of body: It is seldom that Disease troubles
persons who are well in flesh, and have a florid, or also an over Phlegmatic
countenance: About the time that persons come to a set age it discovers itself
with manifest signs; Men are found to be more frequently obnoxious to this than
Women, in both being become habitual it is cured with great difficulty, or
searce at all; in Women by reason of their weaker Constitution, it is attended
with far more Convulsive affects: Wherefore it is commonly said in this Sex,
that the Hysteric affect is joined to the Hypochondriacal.

The Symptoms which are accounted as belonging to this Disease are commonly
very many, and of a differing Nature, nor have they in all a like Origin, or
the same mutual dependence on each other: For we see that in these the Viscera
of the Belly, in those the Praecordia, in others the Confines of the Brain are
most affected: in a great many, but not in all, the Stomach much Labors; as to
appetite it has often too much of it, but is presently oppressed by what is taken
into it; and when the food through slowness of Concoction tarries a long time
in it, the Saline particles of it being raised to a state of flowing, pervert
the whole mass of the Chyle into a Pap, sometimes Acid or Austere, sometimes
Salt or Tart: Hence a Cardialgia, a mighty store of Flatus's, a Rumbling, and a
frequent Vomiting ensue; and because through a defect of a Pneumatosis the
Chyme is not volatilis'd throughout, and carried forth, but a Mass of Viscous
Matter, sticking to the Coats of the Stomach is left behind, an almost
continual Spitting molests them, a distention in the left Hypochondre and often
there and under the Ventricle a violent beating is felt, and there pains every
where arise; which shoot here and there at random, and miserably torture the
person with a certain pungent Pain for many hours. Mean while, from the
Contractions of the Membranes and the Fluctuation of the Flatus's thence
raised, Croakings and Rumblings are produced: So in the Thorax there is often a
great Straitness and Constriction, so that the Breathing becomes difficult and
painful upon any motion; nay farther, in some very terrible Astmatick Fits
supervene: Moreover the diseased are wont to complain of a Trembling and
palpitation of the heart, with a mighty oppression of the same, also frequent
Failings of the Spirits, and danger of Swooning come upon them, that the
diseased always think Death at hand: In this Region about the Membranes, and
especially the Mediastinum, an acute Pain, which one while is determined in one
part; another while is extended to the Shoulder, is a familiar Symptom of this
Disease: But in the Head an Iliad of Evils for the most part troubles
Hypochondriacal persons, to wit, most violent Pains Periodically returning
arise; also Scotomia's, frequent Giddiness, Obstinate Watchings, a Fervency and
a most troublesome Fluctuation of thoughts, inconstancy of mind, a disturbed
fancy, a dread and suspicion of every thing, an Imaginary being Affected with
Diseases of which they are free, and many other distractions of the Spirits,
nay sometimes Melancholy, and a Mania accompany this Sickness: Besides these
interior Regions of the Body being beset with this Disease; wandering Pains,
also Cramps and Numbnesses with a sense of Formication seize likewise almost
all the outward parts; Night Sweats, Flushings of Blood in the Face and Palms
of the Hands, Fevers of uncertain returns, and many other Symptoms of an
uncertain Origin on all hands arise, of which in regard it has not been easy
to assign the Genuine causes and ways of their coming to pass, Physicians have
charged, (though unjustly) all the blame on the Spleen: In the mean while it is
to be observed that the chief Symptoms of this distemper are convulsive and
depend immediately upon the Irregularities of the Animal Spirits, and Nervous
Juice, rather than on the Dyscrasies of the Viscera that serve for Concoction.

As a great many have ascribed this valetudinary disposition to the only fault
of the Spleen: So others making all the confines of this Entral a party in the
fault, will have the Blood lying in any part soever of the Vessels of the
Spleen and Epigastrick Region to give the Origin to this evil. But the
renowned Highmore has charged the chief cause of this Disease wholly on the
faulty Constitution of the Stomach.

Concerning this opinion, though I so far agree with this famous Author, that I
may grant the Ventricle to be often greatly distempered in this affect: Yet I
cannot be brought to think that all the Symptoms of the Hypochondriacal Disease
depend only on the Ill constitution of the Ventricle, for I have known many
sorely afflicted with that Distemper, whose Stomachs were well enough; and I
have known others who through an ill diet have brought their Stomachs to be
greatly Distempered, yet, as to the Precordia and Animal Faculties being sound
enough, they were not at all accounted Hypochondriacal.

As to what the Spleen contributes to this Disease, Dr. Willis first curiously
observing the use of this part, to wit that from the Blood brought to it from
the Arteries, a certain Dreggy Portion, viz. consisting of an Earthly matter
and a Fixed Salt, is deposed in this Entral, which being there exalted as it
were by Digestion, and raised to the nature of a Ferment, is again committed to
the Blood as it passes back by the Veins, which inspires it with a certain
Fermentation, and performs the same thing as to its Pneumatosis, as our common
Leaven does when mixed in a Mass of Meal, so that as the Leaven inables the
sluggish parts in the Bread for Motion, so the Ferment of this Entral raises
the sluggish Particles of the Blood to a state of activity. And secondly
considering the intimate communication betwixt the Brain and the Slpeen by the
means of the Nerves, of which there are a world of Plexus's and Fibers arising
from them in this part; he says that the ways of affecting with which the
Spleen being evil disposed, produces, or at leastwise contributes to the rise
of the Symptoms of the Hypochondriacal Distemper are chiefly these following.

Viz. First it sometimes happens that the spongy substance of the Spleen is
very much stuff't and obstructed by the Faeces of the Blood sticking too much
in its Pores and there Stagnating, so that afterward it does not admit into it
the Dreggs of the Mass of Blood as much as it ought, but the same being brought
thither, but not received, Regurgitate into the neighboring Branches of the
Caeliack Artery, whence presently they are conveyed into the Membranes of the
Ventricle, the Caul and Mesentery, and other neighboring parts, and are wont
to stick in them, hence the Tone of those Viscera is so much perverted, that
they cannot rightly execue their due Functions in order to the Concoction of
the Chyle, and the Circumjacent Membranes, being very much filled with
Heterogeneous and Irritative Particles, become mightily obnoxious to
Convulsions arising here and there, to running Pains, Contractions, Distentions
and a multitude of Flatus's.

2. Though the Slpeen should receive freely enough the Melancholy Juice brought
by it from the Blood to the Arteries, yet often it does not duly Concoct the
same, but the salt being very much exalted, perverts it into a humor too
Sharp, or Austere, or faulty some other way; wherewith when the whole Mass of
Blood, and the stock of Nutritive Juice contained in it, are infected, the
fruits of a Hypochondriacal seed display themselves throughout the whole body;
the Blood boiling more then it ought, is driven violently into certain parts,
and at the same time in others it is apt to stagnate: Hence some presently upon
eating have Flushings in the Face, the palms of their hands burn, etc. In some
again running pains with a Pricking happen in many parts of the Body.

3. From the Blood thus depraved through the fault of the Spleen, a prejudice
also is often brought on the Animal function, the Heterogeneous and Convulsive
particles being often discharged on the Brain and Genus Nervosum, hence persons
are troubled with fancies and thoughts, with Giddiness, Scotomia's, Headaches,
and often Paralitick affects. Then as the Morbifick matter passes from the
Brain into the Genus Nervosum, Convulsive affects are raised in many parts of
the Body, but chiefly about the Precordia, and Viscera of the Belly, the
Spirits that are in the Nerves which regard those parts being greatly troubled
by the passions of the mind.

4. It is also very probable that the Nervous Fibers (whereof there are a world
dispersed through the Spleen, sometimes receive into them its most Sharp Juice,
which creeping up the Passages of the Nerves, often is the cause of Convulsive
Motions: And there being an intimate commerce betwixt the Spleen and the Brain,
we judge that besides the long way of the Blood, they have a nearer way of
communication by the Nerves of the Par Vagum and Intercostale by which they
mutually affect each other; so that sometimes the Melancholy being disturbed in
the Spleen, conveys thence the passion to the Brain, whence disorderly and
Hypochondriacal fancies happen: And on the contrary, when a violent Passion of
the mind, occasionally raised within the Brain, troubles the Spirits residing
in it, the impression given the fancy, is conveyed to the spleen by the course
and successive affect of the Spirits, lying within the Nerves of the Per Vagum
and Intercostale; whence many disturbances are caused in that Entral and in the
parts adjacent. I shall now give an instance of a person troubled with the
Hypochondriacal affect.

An honorable person of a Melancholic temperament, and always accounted to be
troubled with the Spleen, complained very much of a Pain and Inflation of the
left Hypochondre, with a frequent Rumbling, and a Sour Belching, also a
Trembling of the Heart, a continual Giddiness, a want of Sleep, and a Troubled
Fancy; about the thirty fifth year of his Age, the Disease growing worse, he
began to get Sleep with difficulty, or very seldom by night, and so in the day
time to be troubled with a Fervency and Inconstancy of thoughts, to be
suspicious of all things and persons, and to be Scared at every thing that came
in his way; the Praecordia seemed to be very much Constring'd and Straitn'd,
and to fall in, as though the Heart it self were deprest into the Belly, which
Symptom pressing him he became very sad, and dejected in mind: Yet afterward,
those affects of the mind remitting, he plainly felt at once both the heart to
be a little raised, and the Praecordia to be Relax't and Dilated: Moreover he
had very frequently Pains and Contractions variously raised about the Muscles
of the Viscera and Membranes, and passing from one place to another.

He used a great many Remedies and Physical Administrations a long time for the
Cure of this Affect, but without any great good; at length, being somewhat
relieved by the use of Mineral Waters, and afterward growing better by
degrees, he became free from those severe Symptoms, though he still continues
obnoxious to the Hypochondriacal Affect.

The Therapeutick Method to be used against Hypochondriacal Affects, requires
chiefly these four general Indications, viz. First, that the Impediments of the
Cure be removed, which intention chiefly regards the cleansing and keeping of
the first Passages. Secondly, We must endeavor to correct the Obstructions or
other disorders of the Spleen. Thirdly, we must see that the excrementitious
Dregs of the Mass of Blood be Purged forth, and that its due Crasis be
restored. Fourthly, that the Irregularities of the Brain and Genus Nervosum,
and also of the Humor and Spirits residing in them, contracted through the
fault of the Blood and Spleen, be amended or abolish't. Since we must drive at
many of these Intents together, or at all of them, let fit Seasons be chosen,
in which we may satisfy each of these purposes without any prejudice to, or
neglect of the Rest.

1. As so the first Indication, since a great Mass of crude or adust matter is
wont to be heapt together in the first passages, and since the Tone of the
Stomach uses to be weakened, and its Ferment to be variously perverted, let us
seasonably obviate these Evils of each kind with fit Remedies; therefore mild
and gentle Evacuations, both by Vomit, if it comes easily, and by Seige, ought
to be given. I advise those whose Stomach easily discharges its Contents
upwards, that once in a Month, by taking the Liquor of Squills, or Salt of
Vitriol, and drinking good store of Posset Drink, or warm Water, they cause
themselves to Vomit several times: In the interval of time, let a gentle Purge,
and only lenitive, be often given. For this end the Pilul. Tartareae Bontii, or
Stomac. cum Gummis, or our Solutive Pills, may be used

Take of the best Senna, an Ounce; Rhubarb, six Drams; Epithymum, three Drams;
Yellow-Saunders, two Drams; Salt of Wormwood, two Drams; Celtick-spike, a Dram:
being sliced and bruised, let them digest in White Wind and Fumitory-water, of
each ten Ounces, for twenty four hours, let the clear straining evaporate by a
gentle Bath-heat to the consistency of an Extract, adding toward the end,
Powder of Senna, Rhubarb, and Cream of Tartar, of each two Drams; let them be
bruised together in a Glass Mortar, and reduced to a Consistency for Pills. The
Dose is from half a Dram to two Scruples or a Dram.

The Remedies that regard the Tone and Ferment of the Stomach, since they are
manifold, and of diverse kinds, let such as are most proper for the Constitution
of each Stomach be chosen; for with one Person bitter things, with another
Salt, with others sharp, or happily smart things, best agree. Of the number of
these Medicines (which are vulgarly called Digestives) are Elixir Proprietatis,
Tinctura Sacra, the Compound Powder of Aron Roots; Salt of Wormwood, Cream of
Tartar, Tartar Vitriolate, Vitriol of Mars, with many others. Besides these
inward Remedies, outward applications also often give help: For to a Stomach
ill disposed a fomentation of White Wine with Wormwood, Centory and other
bitter Plants boiled in it; also Liniments or Plasters often give relief, of
which it will not be needful to discourse particularly, and to prescribe forms
of those Medicines.

2. The Indication that undertakes to amend the Faults of the Spleen, (whether
the same be an Obstruction, or a Tumor or Pain, or a simple Dyscrasy) is wont
to be performed, or at leastwise attempted by Remedies both inward and outward;
those that are of the former kind are coincident with those that are indicated
in the third place, (to wit, with which the purifying of the Blood is intended)
for since the chief, or in a manner all of that which is brought into or
carried out of the Spleen, is by the conveyance of the Blood, the
Irregularities, both of the blood's Latex, and of that Entral, ought to be
cured by an associated Operation, the virtues of the Medicines being joined
together; and we shall presently show after what manner: meanwhile some outward
applications, in the form of a Plaster or Liniment, or Fomentation, have a
more near and immediate regard to the body of the Spleen, and often give a
mighty relief, viz. in as much as they discuss the Tumors, restore to
Circulation the melancholy Filth there stagnating, nay and appease and restrain
the Corrugatious and Convulsive Affects of the Fibers. There is a mighty store
of these outward Medicaments to be found every where amongst Authors, the
choice of which, in regard it ought to be ordered according to the various
passions of the Spleen, and the differing Constitutions of Patients, it will
not be expedient in this place to deliver particular forms of them.

3. The Remedies indicated in the third place, viz. such as take away the
Dyscrasies of the Blood, contracted by the Spleen, and withal cleanse the
primary taint of the Spleen, are manifold, and of a differing kind and
condition; the choice of which ought to be made according to the various taint
of this and of the other. Of these some are more compounded, to be prepared
according to the prescript of a Physician, as Electuaries, Powders, Apozems,
Tinctures, Infusions, and the like: others are more simple, as Whey, Asses
Milk, Spaws, and hot Bath Waters.

There are two chief Cases of sick persons, in which Magisterial Remedies ought
to be accommodated according to their strength and qualities, viz. either the
Blood is thick, coldish, and earthy, with an Obstruction of the Spleen, which
requires hot fermenting, and especially chalybeat Medicines; or the Blood being
manifestly adust, and intensely hot, ferments above measure, and withal the
Hypochondres are in a great trouble, and the Blood and Vapors boil in them, in
which state only temperate Remedies are indicated, for appensing the fervency
and immoderate Fermentation of the humors, where Chalybeats are altogether to
be shunned.

When therefore to a cold Stomach cold Dyscrasies also of the Blood and Spleen
are joined, I use to prescribe according to the following forms.

Take Troches of Rhubarb, Powder of Aron Roots, Winters bark, of each two
Drams; Roots of Virginia Serpentary, Contrayerva, Diatrion Santalon,
Crab's-eyes, of each a Dram; Extract of Gentian and Centory, of each a Dram and
a half; Ammoniacum dissolved in Water of Earthworms, what suffices; make a
Mass for Pills: let four Pills be taken in the Morning, and at four a Clock in
the Afternoon, drinking after it a little Draught of Wormwood or Chalybeat
Wine, with a moderate Exercise.

Take Conserve of the Yellow Coats of Oranges and Lemons, of each three Ounces;
Myrobalanes Condited, in number two; Species Aromatici Rosats, Winters bark, of
each two Drams; Salt of Wormwood, two Drams; Vitriol of Mars, a Dram (or Steel
prepared, three Drams) with a sufficient quantity of the Juice of Citron-Pills
make an Electuary; let it be taken twice a day, drinking after it a Draught of
Wormwood-wine, or of Wine in which the Bark or Flowers of Tamarisk are infused.

To those that like none but nice Medicines, and in a small quantity, you may
properly give the Tinctures of Antimony, of Coral, also of Steel prepared with
Spirit of Wine, ( the Body being first opened by fit Menstruums, and brought to
a Calx) nay, and I have known that Spirit of Soot, also of Blood or of
Hartshorn, taken twice a day, to twelve drops, more or less, in an
appropriated Liquor, have proved mighty beneficial, above any other Medicines.
Again, the assiduous drinking of Coffee, and of Tea, has done some very much
good.

But if a Fervency and overgreat Fermentation of the Blood be joined to the
Hypochondriacal Affect, with a fervent heat of the Spleen, and a restlesness of
mind.

Take Conserve of Hips, six Ounces, (or of Flowers of Tamarisk, and Leaves of
Wood Sorrel, of each three Ounces) Species Diarrhodon Abbatis, the Confection
of Alkermes, of each a Dram; Ivory Powdered, a Dram and a half; Pearl, half a
Dram; Salt of Tamarisk and of Wormwood, of each a Dram; with a sufficient
quantity of Syrup of the Juice of Citrons, or of Clove Gilliflowers: Make an
Opiate; let the quantity of a Nutmeg be taken twice a day.

Take Ivory Powdered, two Drams; Pearl powdered, a Dram, Species Diarrhodon
Abbatis, and Diamargariti frigidi, of each a Dram and a half; make a subtle
Powder; add of double refined Sugar dissolved in Baulm Water and boiled to a
Consistency for Tablets, six Ounces; Make Tablets according to Art: Take from a
Dram and a half to two Drams twice a day. Or to other Medicines of the like
kind let the use of Spaw-waters be joined, which indeed in either, nay in any
cases of Hypochondriack Melancholy, are in a manner always taken with good
Success. For wa^ of these Waters, let our Artificial Spaw Waters be taken in
th^^ stead: nay, and let Whey, and if there be a considerable Atrophia, let
Asses Milk be daily taken.

Besides these inward Remedies, and the other outward Applications above
mentioned, let Bleeding or Drawing of Blood from the Vessels of the Fundament
by Leeches, be frequently used, nay, and it is proper sometimes, according to
the Prescripts of the Ancients, to open the Salvatella Vein. Moreover Cauteries
and Issues, which continually derive forth the Recrements of the adust Blood,
and discharge them by little and little, are wont to do good to all.

4. The Fourth Indication, having regard to the Affects, or Convulsive Symptoms
of the Brain, and Genus Nervosum, which ensue upon the former, is seldom put in
practice by it self, and apart from the others, but the Remedies appointed for
this end are complicated with those above written. Liquors endowed with a
volatile or Armoniack Salt, as Spirit of Hartshorn, of Soot, are very proper
for this intent, and often likewise for the others, even now mentioned:
Wherefore let such Remedies, unless somewhat indicates the contrary, be daily
given at a seasonable hour: Moreover, when the Spaw Waters are Drunk, let
Tablets or Pills, such as are above prescribed for Convulsive Affects, be taken
at least twice a day. In a frequent giddiness. and Scotomia, also in Passions
of the Heart, Faintings of the Spirits, with a fear, and a dread, as it were,
of present Death, I have known a mighty Cure often performed by the use of
Chalybeat Medicines.

Of Chalybeate Medicines.
SInce mention is here made of Chalybeate Medicines, it seems expedient to
enquire into the various Preparations of them, and consequently into the diverse
sorts of Affects which they are wont to produce in the Body of Man, that hence
it may appear by what means, and on what accounts, these or other Preparations
of Iron mightily benefit some Hypochondriacal persons, and very much injure
others.

Steel or Iron consists chiefly of Salt, Sulphur, and Earth; it has very little
of Spirit and Water; and the Particles of the former Elements, especially the
Sulphurous and Saline, in the mixed, combined together with the Earth, remain
wholly fixed and without Action; but being loosed, and divided from each other,
they have a very efficacious Energy.

The foresaid Particles are dissolved and set at Liberty for Action two ways,
viz. either by Art, when Medicines are prepared, or by Nature, after they are
inwardly taken. We shall consider both.

1. The Filing of Iron inwardly taken is dissolved by the Ferment of the
Stomach, as by an acid Menstruum; and upon the Iron's being dissolved within
the Viscera of Concoction, the active Particles, both Sulphurous and Saline,
plentifully display themselves, and mixing with the nutritive Juice, are
carried into the Blood, and as they are of a differing virtue, often both of
them, as it were by joint Forces, conspire for the good of the Diseased. The
Sulphurous Corpuscles, passing into the Blood, furnish it with a new and more
plentiful stock of Sulphur, so that its Mass, if it were before depauperated
and effaete, ferments more sprightly within its Vessels, and being more kindled
in the Heart, acquires a Heat more intense, and a deeper color. Thus many
troubled with a Leucophlegmatia, and the longing Disease, whose Countenance is
pale, and whose Blood is cold and watery, after the use of Steel soon become of
a more florid Aspect, the Blood being given a more intense Tincture and Heat.
Again, upon the Filing of Iron being dissolved in the Stomach, the Saline
Particles also are displayed, and often produce good effects, both in the solid
parts and the Humors; for being of a vitriolick and stiptick nature, they
astringe and corroborate the over Lax and weakened Fibers of the Viscera, and
so restore their broken Tone: Moreover they stop the Impetus of the Blood,
repress its over boiling and rising to a Froth, and keep it in an even
Circulation. And again, (which is their greatest Virtue) they straiten and
close the over lax, open, and gaping Mouths of the Arteries so that neither the
Serum nor bloody Latex may distill forth, or break off the thread of
Circulation; Wherefore in Dropsies and Haemorrhagies Remedies endued with the
Saline Particles of Iron are of notable use and efficacy; for many Diseases
proceed from this Cause, That the little Mouths of the Arteries being too open,
and the Interstices of the Vessels being become too lax, the Serum or bloody
Latex breaks forth; which kind of Affects are oftentimes cured by the
Vitriolick Particles of Steel, they constringing and corroborating the
Blood Vessels and the Nervous Fibers.

After this manner the Filing of Steel inwardly taken seems at the same time to
put Spurs to, and check the Blood; but in regard that this Medicine is much
more powerful in instigating than restraining, therefore it ought to be given
only to those whose Blood is very thick and cold, as to Rusticks and very
Robust persons: It is not proper in a very hot and spirituous Blood, and in hot
Bowels. Moreover in persons of a delicate and tender Constitution there is
danger lest small Portions of Steel, when they are not able to be dissolved,
are thrown on the Membranes of the Viscera, and sticking pertinaciously to
them, cause Ulcers and mortal Gripes, which I have really known to have
sometimes happened.

2. After the Filing of Iron, the next way of preparing it is by Calcining it
with Sulphur, and reducing it to a Powder; in which Preparation of it, some of
the Sulphurous Particles exhale: In the mean time the Saline Particles seem to
be increased, new ones accruing to them from the burning Sulphur, so that the
active Particles of both kinds, viz. the Sulphurous and Saline, come near to
an Aequilibrium; and since by this means this Medicine, the Texture of the
Metal being loosened, may be brought to a very fine Powder, it becomes of a
much more excellent use than the Filing of Iron. In many cases, where Steel
ought not to be given in substance, as in a Cachexia, the longing Disease, and
the like, it is proper to use this Medicine.

3. In the third place follows the Preparation of Steel with Vinegar,
sprinkling the Filings of Steel with Vinegar, and drying it till it may be
reduced into an impalpable Powder. In this Preparation the greatest part of the
Sulphurous Particles evaporate, and the Saline are much increased by reason of
others accruing to them from the Vinegar. This Powder does little in opening
the Obstructions of the Viscera, or in restoring the Ferment of the Blood;
nevertheless in a hot Constitution, in Haemorrhagies, and in the
Hypochondriacal affect it is wont to be given with greater success, than the
foregoing Preparations.

4. The rust of Iron follows, in which there being but few Sulphury Particles,
it does not so powerfully Ferment the Blood, or open the obstructions of the
Viscera, as Steel prepared with Sulphur, nevertheless in Hot dyscrasies of the
parts or humors, it Egregiously performs the Intents required from a
Chalybeate Medicine.

In this Classis our preparation of Steel is justly placed, in which all the
Particles of the Metal being freed from the Bond of Mixture, are contained
together: Which also (the Concrete being first reduced to a Powder) are
immediately dissolved in any Latex, or Menstruum. This Powder inwardly taken
excels in the same virtue, as Steel Calcined with Sulphur; But to the Menstruum
or Liquor in which it is dissolved, it Communicates chiefly and in a manner
only the Saline or Vitriolick Particles, the Sulphurous flying away, and the
Earthly Particles subsiding in the bottom: I use to give common Water
impregnated with this dissolution instead of Natural Spaw Waters, in a great
quantity; And often with excellent Success: Moreover I make Medicinal Wine,
Beer, Cider, Whey, and other Liquours by dissolving this Powder in them, and
order them to be taken for various Physical intents. So far of preparations of
Iron in which the Elementary Particles of each kind, though in a various
proportion are comprehended: There remain others in which the Particles in a
manner only of one kind, viz. the Saline or Earthy are left, the rest for the
greatest part being driven away, of which kind chiefly are Vitriol of Mars,
Salt of Steel, and Crocus Martis.

5. Salt of Steel prepared as you may find here in Dr. Willis, has a Sweetish
Taste with somewhat of a Rough Stiptickness, and so much partakes of a
Vitriolick nature, that it seems not much to differ from Green Copperas: Taken
inwardly as a Medicine it somewhat ferments the Humors, and powerfully
constringes the Nervous Fibers: In Cold and Phlegmatic Cachexia's, because no
Particles of Sulphur are exerted, this Medicine is not proper. It is often
given with success either by it self, or mixed with other Medicines as a Spur,
in Hot Dyscrasies of the Viscera, with a predominancy of adust Sulphur, also in
Flitting, Scorbutical, and Irregular Boylings of the Blood, and Nervous Juice.
Notwithstanding in tender Constitutions there is danger lest through its
acrimony, and too great constriction, the Tone of the Stomach, and the Fibers
be injured.

6. In the last place comes the astringent Crocus Martis, prepared by long
Calcination in the Fire: This Medicine is of egregious use in some cases, and
yields to none of the Chalybeats. viz. in every Extravasating, and too great
Eruption of the Blood and Serum, as in inward, and outward Haemorrhagies, in a
Diarrhaea, a Diabetes, in a Vehement Catarrh, also in an Ascites or a beginning
Dropsy I have known nothing more excellent than this Medicine, and I have
heard it lately mightily commended by a Famous and Expert Physician of our
Country, of which Medicine nevertheless in regard it is wholly destitute both
of Saline and Sulphurous Particles, and in a manner only consists of such as
are Earthy and Fiery, it is much in dispute with what Faculty it operates and
produces so laudable an effect in humane body. For it might seem that nothing
should remain in this more than the Caput Mortuum, or Terra Damnata of Vitriol,
and of other Minerals distilled by a most intense Fire. To give my opinion
concerning these things, it seems in the first place, that a certain activity
whereby it exerts it self and displays its virtues, either by opening
obstructions, or by Astringing the Vessels and Nervous Fibers of the Viscera,
accrues to this preparation from the Fiery Particles being included in the most
fixed Earth, and from their breaking forth within the Body. But the chief way of
giving help consists in this, that the Earthy Particles being wholly deprived
of the Saline, (to which they were most closely bound) most earnestly seek to
be reunited to the same, or the like: Wherefore that Crocus Martis being
Immerg'd in our Bodies, suddenly catches to it self any sorts of Salts that
come in its way, and closely binds them to it, and so whilst it drinks up like
a Sponge a great many Saline Particles, it takes away many Enormities chiefly
arising from the Flowings of the Salts. This way it is that Hartshorn burnt,
Spodium, and Diaphoretick Antimony exert their virtues, if at any time they
give help.

CHAP. X. Of the Convulsive Cough and Asthma.
IT is Usual in Children (and I have known it also sometimes in Men) for a
Cough to arise from Mass of Serous Filth flowing in the Lungs: Which being at
first Simple and Moderate afterward becomes vehement, and Convulsive, so that
in Coughing the Diaphragm being contracted upward, and so held by a long, or
very often repeated Systole; the Lungs are greatly straightened and very much
hindered, in their motion: Mean while by reason of the respiration being
hindered, and the Blood being restrained within the Praecordia, and consequently
its Stagnating in other places, the Diseased are in danger of being Suffocated
and often turn of a Livid or Cadaverous aspect: Moreover in this case, besides
Convulsions with a violent Coughing, raised about the Praecordia, the Stomach
also being often drawn in as a party concerned, throws up all by Vomiting that
is contained within it; nay and I have known, in some Tenderlings affected
after this manner, that the Disease now and then passing into other parts, has
raised Convulsive Motions in the Face, Eyes and Limbs, and at length has become
Mortal. This Convulsive Cough happens very often amongst Children, and in
certain years it seizes so many, that it seems plainly Epidemical, when it has
got a Root, it is very difficultly conquered with remedies, but commonly
drawing out in length, is scarce ever Cured but upon the change of the season
of the year.

The cause of this Distemper seems to be from the Redundancy of the Scrous
Humor in the Mass of Blood, and in some measure in the whole Body: A portion
of which matter Distilling from the Mouths of the Arteries on the Lungs,
creates an ordinary Cough; afterward when the Serous Filth, still abounding in
the Blood, and being filled with Convulsive Particles, is conveyed also into
the Head, the same entering the Nerves of the Lungs, raises the Simple Cough to
a Convulsive one: Moreover, when it sometimes happens, that the same Matter
gathered together in the Head, enters some other Nerves; then other sorts of
Convulsive affects often ensue upon the Convulsive Cough.

As a Cough arises, neither only, nor always through a fault in the Lungs, but
sometimes from a Convulsive cause alone, though oftener from this coming upon an
affect of the Lungs: So we may say the same of the Asthma; for whether this
Disease be continual or periodical, in both cases the Symptom which chiefly
presses, is a difficulty of Breathing; which indeed seems therefore to be
raised, because the Lungs being too much puffed up and Distended greatly, Fill
the Cavity of the Thorax, and do not subside by turns as they ought: Hence
neither can the Breath which lies within be freely sent forth, nor indeed the
fresh Air be easily introduc't, by reason of the space being filled before.
Whilst the Lungs are thus detained, for a long time in a continued, or little
remitted dilatation, oftentimes the Diaphragm, against its Custom, is forced to
a violent Systole, and being contracted upward, is wont to raise the Lungs more
and more, and to withstand their Subsiding: Whence it happens that the
Breathing becomes yet more difficult and laborious.

That this affect of difficult Breathing sometimes happens through the fault of
the Lungs, it has plainly appeared to us by an Anatomical Inspection; for if a
mighty Mass of Serous Filth deposed in the Thorax, very much stuffs the Lungs,
that the Blood being let in its Circulation, does not pass freely the
Pneumonick Vessels, then persons so affected are always short and thick
Breathed. Again, as often as the Blood becoming too Hot, or being rarefied by
exercise, or the heat of a Bed requires a larger space for its Circulation,
Then presently on such an occasion every thick Breathing, or an Asthmatick Fit
is raised, which often becomes Terrible and almost Suffocative when the Serum
Boyls very much within the Lungs. Moreover sometimes besides the Roots of an
Asthma fixed about the Praecordia, some Branches of the same disease springing
from the Brain meet with the former, and being Complicated with them, produce
more Terrible fruits of a difficult breathing.

There are Instances enough of these affects, viz. of a difficulty of
Breathing, raised through the Single and Partial fault of the Lungs: For
nothing is more usual than that persons troubled with an inveterate Cough, or
with some other evil disposition of the Lungs, at length upon the access of a
Dropsy or Scurvy, become Asthmatical, to wit, when the Blood being rendered
very impure deposes also its Serous Filth in the Head, this enters more readily
and easily the Nerves of the Lungs than others, as being become Weak, and
frequently Irritated in their extremities, and heaps together in them a matter
for a Convulsive straitness of Breath.

Moreover I have sometimes observed that great Fits of the Asthma have happened
without any considerable fault in the Lungs, so that I have really judged this
Disease sometimes to be merely Convulsive, and that its Fits are only raised
because a Serous Filth, filled with explosive Particles, entering the Nerves
that serve for the Dilatation of the Lungs, joined with the Spirits there
abounding, which afterward through a fullness, or Irritation being exploded
together, and for some time, the Lungs are held as it were stiff, and blown up,
that they can neither perform the functions of Expiration nor Inspiration: But
the Fit being ended, and also before it is begun, the Breath is drawn free and
evenly enough, there appearing no signs of a Cough, or of a Valetudinary
disposition of the Lungs: I shall give an Instance of a person troubled with
this Shortness of Breath.

A Gentleman of a Robust and Gross Habit of Body having used for some time a
full and disorderly diet, without any exercise, about the beginning of Winter
began to find himself ill: First he was affected with a Heaviness and Pain of
his Head, with a mighty Giddiness, and danger of Swooning, believing himself
now and then, even a Dying, being otherwise sound enough; within a few days
these Symptoms past into a manifest Stupor or rather Lethargy; Being let Blood
in the Arm, I ordered that Cupping Glasses, Vesicatories, smart Glysters, with
many other remedies shoul'd be carefully administered to him: Within the space
of twenty four hours, coming to himself, he was sound in his mind and shook off
all Stupidness: But though his Brain came to be clear, he was seized with a
great Weakness and Deadness in his Members: which affects nevertheless were
Cured in a short time with Antiparalytick, and Antiscorbutick remedies: But
after a fortnight he complained again of the heaviness of his Head, and the
Giddiness, and the next day after he fell into a horrible Asthma, so that the
Lungs were blown up on a sudden, and rise upward; and being scarce at all able
to draw his Breath, which was very short, painful, and greatly let, he was
in danger of being Suffocated every minute of an hour. This fit, as Violent as
it was, past off within twelve hours without a Cough, Spittng, or Vomit, and
for above a week afterward he was without any impediment in his Thorax: But
then a like fit of the Asthma returning, treated him a little more mildly, and
afterward he was wont to be troubled with a like assault of the Asthma upon
great changes of the Air, especially when an intense Cold and Snow were at hand.

Moreover we judge that sometimes this Convulsive straitness of Breath is
raised by reason of the Bronchia of the Trachea being too much straitn'd, and
often wholly closed by the Constriction of the Nerves and stocks of Nervous
Fibers, which every where compass about the Ramifications of the Aspera
Arteria, that Constriction happening when those Nerves are forced to frequent
Convulsions from a Morbifick matter besetting them.

A fine young Virgin, of a soft and tender Constitution, and of a florid
Countenance, was scarce turned of eight years of age but began to be sorely
troubled with Asthmatick Fits; and she lived at least four years obnoxious to
them before she was committed to my care; sometimes she continues two or three
Months free from any Invasion of this Disease, yet oftentimes, by reason of
errors committed in Diet, or upon great changes of the Year, or of the Air, she
falls into cruel Fits of straitness of Breath, so that the Lungs being blown up
and raised toward the Throat, and there held by an almost continual
dilatation, the Diseased can scarce breath at all: mean while the Diaphragm and
Muscles of the Breast are laboriously occupied in thick repeated efforts of
motion, in order to draw the Breath by one means or other; this access, within
seven or eight hours, remitting by degrees, ceases a while; but now and then
within a Week or two it is wont to return either of its own accord, or on any
light occasion being offered: after the violence of the Disease is past, its
matter being spent in many such Fits, the young Lady continues well enough for
many Weeks, nay sometimes Months, and being free from any Distemper of the
Thorax, she Breaths freely. I ordered her Spring and Fall the following Method
of Cure; and now she has been without any Fit of the foresaid Affect above two
Years.

Take our Sulphur of Antimony six Grains; Cream of Tartar, six Grains; mix
them: Let it be given in the Pap of a boiled Apple. After taking this Medicine,
she is wont to Vomit four or five times: After four days, she takes this Purge,
which also she is wont to repeat twice, allowing six or seven days betwixt
whiles.

Take Calomelanos twelve Grains; Rosin of Jalap five Grains; Castoreum four
Grains; with a sufficient quantity of Ammoniacum dissolved: make three Pills.
She takes besides every day, Morning and Evening, twelve Grains of Tincture of
Antimony in a Spoonful of the following Julape, drinking after it six or seven
Spoonfuls of the same.

Take Water of Snails, six Ounces; of Earthworms, four Ounces; Water of
Pennyroyal and Rue, of each four Ounces; Hysteric Water, three Ounces;
Castoreum tied in a Nodulus, and hung in a Glass, half a Dram, double refined
Sugar, an Ounce: Mix them in a Glass; make a Julape.

About Autumn the last Year, another young Girl of Quality, being ill after the
like manner, viz. with a Periodical Asthma, was brought to me to be cured, who
using the foresaid Reme dies in a little less Dose, and repeating the same the
last Spring found a mighty Relief.

As to the Remedies and Method of Cure that ought to be used, if at any time to
a Cough, or straitness of Breath, first raised through a fault in the Lungs,
Convulsive Symptoms also supervene, by reason of an injury communicated to the
Brain; let care be taken that Anticonvulsive Medicines be aptly complicated
with such as have regard to any intents whatsoever of the Thorax; and also
sometimes, That one while, these, another while the others being given apart,
the times of Curing be interchangeably observed. It will be needless to give
here Bechick or Pneumonick Medicines and their forms, whereof there is a vast
store every where to be found amongst Physical Authors; it will be more to our
purpose to set down a method of Physic, and some select Remedies that are
proper in a Cough and Asthma, which are merely Convulsive.

As to the former Affect, which is chiefly familiar to Children, and for the
most part is not Cured but with difficulty, and after a long time; the chief
Indications will be, both to purge the serous and sharp Humors from the Blood
and Viscera, for preventing their Incursion and discharge on the Brain, and
sometimes happily on the Breast, and to strengthen these parts that they do not
easily admit into them the Superfluities of the boiling Serum: for these ends
Vomits and gentle Purges in a manner always are conducing, and ought by some
means to be repeated. Vesicatories are often beneficial; and if the Disease be
obstinate, let Issues be made in the Nape of the Neck, or in the Arm, or about
the Armpits: Let Drink and Liquid Food be taken in a less quantity than usual;
instead of Drink, let a Bochet of Sarsa, China, the Saunders, Shavings of Ivory
and Hartshorn, with Diuretic and Anticonvulsive Ingredients, be used. In this
case certain specific Remedies as it were are greatly commended, of which kind
are Cup Moss, given in Powder, or boiled in Milk, and so given frequently every
day; the Decoction, or Syrup, of Castoreum and Saffron, the Decoctions of
Peony-Root, Misteltow of the Oak, also of Hyssop, have helped many; Water of
Black-Cherries, of Saxifrage, Water of Snails distilled with Whey, and
appropriated Ingredients, are often given with success.

2. I have shown you before by what method, and with what Bemedies I have Cured
a Periodical Asthma in some; but besides, the famous Riverius has observed that
Vomits do most good to many affected with this Disease; for that Medicine,
greatly shaking and irritating the Emunctories that are seated about the first
Passages, strongly expresses and draws away from the same the filthy Dregs of
the Blood and Nervous Juice, which were apt to be forced into, or to stagnate
in the Brain and Genus Nervosum. Zacutus Lusitanus greatly extols, and not
without reason. Cauteries burnt, sometimes in the Bregma, sometimes in the Nape
of the Neck, or about the Armpits: Preparations of Millepedes, viz. in the
form of a dry Powder, or of a Distilled Liquor, seldom want success; for such
withdraw the superfluities of the Serum or Genus Nervosum from the Head, and
convey them to the Urinary Passages: For the same reason gentle Purges, and
such as evacuate per Epicrasin, are frequently used: for this purpose the
Decoction of an old Cock, with altering and gently Purging Medicines, sown up
in the Belly of it, is commended by many. Besides the Remedies hitherto
mentioned, some are said to be appropriated to, and as it were Specificks for
the Asthma, such as are Balsam of Sulphur Teribinthinated; also Spirit of
Hartshorn, or of Soot, impregnated with the same; Syrup of Tobacco, of
Ammoniacum, our Syrup of Diasulphur, Lohoch de allio, Pills of Elecampane
Roots, Milk of Sulphur, Flowers of Benzoin, made up with Tar or liquid Amber;
with many other things, which it would be tedious here particularly to
enumerate.

And now having given you the ways of curing the chief kinds of Convulsions, it
seems time to put an end to this Tract; but since there remains another kind of
Disease, viz. the Scurvy, which contains Passions of a mixed nature, viz. partly
Convulsive, and partly arising immediately from the Dyscrasies of the Blood and
Viscera, I think it expedient to give you briefly the way of Curing that; for
both these Affects, viz. the Scorbutic, and Convulsive, being placed together,
will mutually illustrate each other.

The Practice of PHYSIC, Contained in Dr. WILLIS's TRACT OF THE SCURVY.
CHAP. I.
THE Nature of the Scurvy being so diffused, and extended to so various and
such a multiplicity of Symptoms, that it cannot be comprehended in one only
Definition, or scarce in one particular Description, I think it fit in the
first place to heap together all the Phenomenon of this Disease, or to set
forth in full all the chief accidents of it, and then to accommodate some
Hypothesis for duly Solving those appearances.

As to the former, to consider the signs of the Scurvy from Head to Foot, we
shall begin with those in the highest part: To this place belong violent and
habitual Headaches, and those either happening at random, or periodical;
sometimes a deadness and drowsiness of the Spirits; sometimes obstinate
Watchings, frequent Giddinesses 's and Scotomia's, Convulsions, a Palsy, much
Spitting, soreness of the Gums, a looseness of the Teeth, a stinking Breath. 2.
Meanwhile about the Region of the Breast, Pains in various parts of the
Membranes, and especially in the Sternum, which often being acute and pricking,
miserably torture the Diseased for many Days and Nights, a frequent Asthma, a
difficult and uneven Breathing, a Constriction and straitness of the Breast, a
husky Cough, a disorderly Pulse, a trembling of the Heart, frequent Faintings
of the Spirits, a frequent Swooning, and a continual being in danger of it. 3.
In the Region of the Belly this Disease establishing, as it were, its principal
Seat, produces Iliads of Evils. For there are often a nauseousness, a Vomiting,
a Rumbling, a Cardialgia, Inflations and Murmurings of the Hypochondres, a
frequent Colic, and most troublesome Pains shooting every way, an almost
continual Diarrhaea, sometimes a Dysentery or Tenesmus, an Atrophia, and
sometimes an Ascites.

The Urine is commonly very ruddy and lixivial, with a Scum swimming on it, or
sticking to the sides of the Glass; though now and then, at certain times, the
same being pale and Watery, is voided in a great plenty. 4. Besides these inward
Affects, in the outward Members, nay in the whole Habit of the Body, wandering
Pains, and often very violent, and chiefly infesting by night, are felt; a
spontaneous Lassitude, a Consumption of the Flesh, an Ach in the Loins, and a
weakness and enervation of the other Limbs, Spots of various colors in the
Skin, Tumors, Tubercles, and often malignant Ulcers break forth; about the
Muscles a Stupor, Formication, and ascent as it were of a cold Wind, also
Contractions and Twitchings of the Tendons: Moreover to Scorbutical Persons,
disorders of the Blood, unconstant Boilings of it, restless distemperatures
Fevers, without any constant Course, and great Haemorrhagies, generally
happen. Besides these common and very usual Symptoms of the Scurvy, whereof
sometimes more, sometimes fewer, and those one while of this kind and fashion,
another while of that, infest the Diseased, sometimes also unusual and
prodigious Accidents ensue upon this Disease.

As to the evident Causes of the Scurvy, though an ill Diet, a sedentary Life,
a disorder of the Spleen, and Crudities heap't together in the first Passages,
are very much accused, yet the unwholsomness of the Air, and the Crasis of the
Blood vitiated by former Distempers are wont to be much rather in the fault;
wherefore the Scurvy, in Maritime and Marshy places, is often endemious: It
frequently seizes suh as are long at Sea, and use in the mean while Salt Meats,
and such as are dried in the Smoke, and also corrupted Water: It every where
succeeds long continued Fevers, and other Chronical Diseases ill Cured, also
over great Haemorrhagies and other immoderate Excretions, nay and the
suppression of usual Evacuations, as of the Menses and Haemorrhoids. Moreover
this Disease, without any great procatarxis is often wont to be raised by
Contagion, and sometimes is hereditary.

The material cause of this Disease, or the Scorbutic taint diffused through
the whole Body, is founded either in the Blood, or in the nervous Juice, or in
both of them together. That the Scorbutic Taint is fixed in the Blood, its
disorderly Boilings, the Eruptions of Spots and Pushes, the ruddy and as it
were lixiviated Urine plainly testify; which is also shown by the diversified
production of this Disease, which for the most part succeeds the depravation of
the mass of Blood: That the Taint sticks also in the Nervous Liquor, is shown
by the most troublesome Pains raised both inwardly in the Membranes, and
outwardly in the Genus Nervosum, by the weaknesses or resolutions of the
Members, the Giddiness, the Convulsions and frequent Failings of the Animal
Spirits. Since therefore both general Humors are in fault, let us see which is
first or chief in fault, whence it drew its Taint, and after what manner it is
communicated to the other Humor, and likewise to any other Parts that are wont
to be affected.

As to the Blood, (in whose Mass the Scurvy seems chiefly to spread its Roots)
we have shown elsewhere that in its Crasis it consists of the like kind of
Particles, and is tempered almost after the like manner as Wines. Moreover we
have intimated that as Wine, even so the Blood, for two causes chiefly, is ill
disposed, viz. either because some extraneous thing, that will not duly mix
with them, is got into this or the other, or because the Crasis or temper of
the Liquor is perverted, in as much as one Element, or happily two, to which the
Dominion is due, being suppressed, others which ought to be kept under, are
exalted.

Concerning the former, we observe in Wine, that when the Foeces, first severed
and thrown to the bottom, being stirred again are raised; or if any
Heterogeneous thing, as Sewet or an exotic Sulphur be cast into the Vessel, a
mighty working is thence caused, which unless it be appeased in a short time,
the Crasis of the Wine is in danger of being subverted: In like manner there
are many immiscible things, which coming into the Blood disturk its Motion and
Circulation, and hinder the course of its Economy from being duly performed:
The Nutritive Liquor being filled with filthy Dreggs, Ferments the Blood in a
disorderly manner: Nay and its Liquor being become degenerate, causes Fits of
intermittent Fevers: The Vapoury, Serous, Bilous and Melancholy Recrements of
the Blood retained within it, beget Catarrhs, the Dropsy, the Jaundise,
Melancholy, and many other Affects: Now if that extraneous thing be seasonably
removed, the Blood even as the Wine being free from that Extraneous Mixture,
soon recovers its former Constitution: But each of those Liquors being for some
time infected with Heterogeneous Contents, at length degenerates from its due
Crasis, and consequently is not easily restored.

Again, both Wine and the Blood fall from their due Temper for many other
causes: 1. Concerning Wines we may observe, that sometimes the same do not come
to a ripeness, but for want of a Pneumatosis, because the Spirits, and other
active principles of Salt and Sulphur, being involved in such as are more
Gross, cannot clear themselves, remain wholly Crude: Wherefore they do not
become Spirituous; but being of a Gross consistency, and of an ungrateful
savor, degenerate into a Flat Wine without strength: Even so the Blood,
sometimes the Spirit and Sulphur being deprest, remains Crude and Watery, also
without vigor, and unapt for a sprightly accension in the Heart; such a
disposition causes the longing Disease, and an Hydropical Diathesis. 2. The
Sulphurous part of the Wine being exalted above the rest, causes an Immoderate
Effervescency, or an ebullition in the Liquor; we call it a Fretting of Wines:
In like manner the Sulphurous part of the Blood being too much exalted, and
consequently apt to Boil, and be kindled in the Heart too much, brings a
Feverish distemper, and is really the cause of many continual Fevers. 3. Often
in Wine the Spirit becoming faint, and the Sulphur being bound, the Saline part
is raised to a State of flowing, and praedominates over the rest, wherefore the
Liquor, passes into Vinegar; from such an Acetous disposition of the Blood,
Melancholy is caused. 4 It Is a vulgar observation in Wines, that besides that
they degenerate into a Flat Wine, or into Vinegar, the same sometimes upon the
Spirits being deprest, and the Salt and Sulphur's being together exalted,
become either Rank, or Pendulous, or Mucilaginous, we call it, Wines become
over Fretted or become Ropy: In both changes, the Spirit being brought under,
the Sulphurous and Saline Particles are joined together and are above the
other Elements, and bring the Crasis of the Liquor to their nature: But the
thing is not done in both wholly after the same manner; for in the former
dyscrasie of the Wine the Sulphur is a little above the Salt, and in the
latter, the Salt is above the Sulphur: Nay and either of them being in power,
and having thrown off the Dominion of the Spirit, takes the other to it, and
raises it above its due state.

Now it is probable that the Blood is altered after the like manner in the
Scorbutic affect, as Wines when upon being overheated, become over Fretted, or
become Ropy, and we may conclude the Dyscrasy of the Blood, which is the Parent
of the Scurvy, to be two fold as that of Wine, viz. Sulphureo-Saline, and
Salino-Sulphureous. For there being a very great variety of affects, which are
accounted of, as belonging to the Scurvy, all of them may be aptly enough
reduced to these two, as it were, chief heads, or as the two fountains of the
evil: viz. First that the Blood being touched with a Scorbutic taint, either
is very hot, as in which the Sulphur having gotten the Dominion takes the Salt
to it: wherefore being become rank it Boyls disorderly in the Vessels, and
discharges continually from it self adust Recrements, viz. the concretions of
the Salt and Sulphur, and disperses them every way, which being outwardly
spread, produce Spots, Wheals, Pushes, or Ulcers: But being inwardly deposed
cause Vomitings, Cardialgias, Diarrhaeas or Dysenteries, and also violent
pains. In this kind of Scorbutic rankness of the Blood only temperate remedies
and frequent Bleedings agree; and not Scurvygrass, horse Raddish, and other
things of a smart and instigating Nature: After the same manner as overfretted
Wines are Cured by Racking them from the Lees, and likewise by pouring Milk,
Amylum, Ichthiocolla, and other Lenifying things to them. Or, Secondly in the
Blood which Foments the Scurvy, the Salt having got the Dominion takes to it
self the Sulphur, wherefore it is not so hot, but like Ropy Wine becomes thick
and Mucilaginous, as it were, is Circulated slowly in the Vessels, and is apt
to stuff the Vessels as it passes through them, Furring them with a Muddy
Filth. Such as are so affected for the most part being without Pushes or
Cutaneous Eruptions, become Dull, Pursy, and enervated, are troubled with a
Spontaneous Lassitude, a Straitness of the Breast; nay and are found obnoxious
to Passions of the heart, Faintings of the Spirits, to a Giddiness and
Convulsions: And in this kind of Scorbutic disposition, Hot remedies, and such
as are endued with a Volatile Salt, nay and Galybeates, which Fuse and
exagitate the Blood are wont to be most of use; after the like manner as Ropy
Wines are dealt with, to wit they ought to be very much stirred, and agitated
and also quicklime, burnt Allom, Lime Plaster, Sea Salt Calcined, and other
things of a very smart nature are put into them I shall now show after what
manner the seeds of that Disease are laid in the other general humor, viz. the
Nervous Juice.

About the beginnings of a Scurvy, till the Crasis of the Blood, and the Tone
of the Brain are wholly vitiated, that Subtle Liquor which passes in the Brain
and Nerves, and is distilled from the Blood coming to the Brain, both as the
Matter and Vehicle of the Animal Spirits, is yet Spirituous and Sweet, and not
very unapt for any offices it ought to perform, but afterward from the Mass of
Blood become depauperated, and very much Effaete, a much thinner Latex, and
inclining to a Sourness is distilled: Moreover from the Dreggy, and as it were
Rank, or Muddy Blood, Heterogeneous Particles, and such as are very injurious
to the Animal Economy, are sent, and are admitted without difficulty into the
Brain, which is become weak, and thence are diffused into its appendix both
Medullary and Nervous with the Juice which passes in them: Hence follow the
Fallings and Eclipses, sometimes Distractions, and Painful and Convulsive
Explosions of the Animal Spirits, that happen in each of the Regions. Wherefore
the Palsy, Convulsions, a Giddiness, Pains, Tremblings, and other
Praeternatural affects of the Brain and Genus Nervosum are wont to ensue upon a
Scurvy when deeply rooted. Mean while, we may observe in general that the
Scorbutic Taint, fixed in the Nervous Juice, Consists in these three things,
viz. In some one of them or in all of them together, viz. that the Liquor lying
in the Brain and Nerves becomes much more thin or poorer; that it degenerates
from its Spirituo-Saline Crasis toward a Sourness; that it is stuff't with
Heterogeneous and Morbifick Particles.

As to the Prognostic of the Scurvy, let your judgment in this case be wary,
long suspended, and not rash, for many (as it has occurred to our observation)
accounted for desperate, have recovered: I have seen some even ready to be
Choked with a horrible Asthma; others just a dying with frequent Swoonings,
nay and others seized with a Palsy or Convulsive Fits, or a terrible Colic,
who were wholly freed in a short time by the help of Medicines: I have known
some Scorbutical persons Swollen all over their body by the Dropsy, others
brought to an extreme Leanness by an Atrophia, who were restored again to their
perfect health. Therefore though persons troubled with this Disease are
sometimes press't upon with very dangerous affects, if nevertheless the Viscera
are still indifferently sound, or at least not very much vitiated, you must not
despair of those evils, caused merely by the Scorbutic taint: But on the
contrary, when the Symptoms appear less terrible, if the contents of the
Hypochondres and Abdomen are become hardened, and as it were Scirrhous, or if
the Lungs begin to be corrupted, promise nothing great or favorable concerning
the Cure of the Disease,

Since as this affect grows to a high pitch, a manifold and diversifyed
Morbifick Matter, causing Symptoms of a various kind, and nature, is engendered,
therefore let remedies not only of one kind be administered: But when any Method
of Physic, though prescribed with great judgment, does little or nothing
toward a Cure, the Diseased are not presently to be left, but let other
Medicines, and now and then others be tried; for the same do not agree with all
persons, nor always with the same person. In the affected Body the Powers and
Combinations of the Salts and Sulphurs every where vary, even so let the
Medicines that do no good be sometimes changed, till you light upon some one
that agrees very well, and gives help.

But if notwithstanding the use of Remedies, or upon their not being well
applied, the Scurvy getting ground by degrees is daily raised to a worse State;
it brings at length the Dropsy or Ptisick: From this or that Disease there is a
ready passage to Death; for after that the Blood is very much depraved it
discharges its dreggy Excrements, when at long run they are much heap't
together, either on the Lungs, or on the Viscera of the Belly, and
consequently, it brings one of those two affects which are alike Mortal.

CHAP. II. Of the Cure of the Scurvy.
AS to the Cure of the Scurvy, since it is no one single preternatural affect,
but a Legion that is to be conquered, therefore the Method of curing ought to
comprehend manifold indications, and those variously complicated and
subordinate; which nevertheless according to our wont we shall reduce to three
heads, viz. that they be Preservatory, which have regard to, and take away the
cause of the Disease; and Curatory, which have respect to, and remove the
Disease it self and its Symptoms; and lastly Vital, which uphold or restore the
strength and vigor of the Patient.

From the very beginning of the Cure we ought to level against the Cause of the
Disease, for this being cut off, or torn up as the root, presently the Trunk,
Branches, and Fruits wither away: Since therefore we have shown that the cause
of the Scurvy is founded in the Dyscrasie of the Blood, viz. Sulphureosaline,
or Salino-sulphureous: In the first place we must endeavor the best we may,
the amendment of that Dyscrasie, as well of the one kind, as of the other: For
this purpose, first let the impediments be removed, then let the primary
intention it self be effected: For both intents, remedies are taken from Diet,
Surgery and Pharmacy. As to the Diet, we shall set. down a particular form
of it hereafter: Mean while to proceed with the rest.

The reducement of the Blood to its due Crasis by appropriated remedies is
chiefly hindered by reason of these two things; viz. first because none but a
vicious stock of nutritive juice: is continually carried into it; and secondly,
because the Recrements produced within it are not sufficiently discharged by
fit Common-shores; therefore we must provide both that the work of
Chylification be rightly performed in the first passages, and that the Vapoury
Recrements be sufficiently discharged by Perspiration, the Serous by the Reins
and Lymphaeducts, the Bilious by the Gall Bladder, the Melancoly by the Spleen,
and others of any other kind else by proper Emunctories: Afterward, these
offices being rightly Instituted, let us endeavor to reduce the Dyserasie of
the Blood by specific Medicines, and especially by such as are endowed with a
Volatile Salt. The remedies regarding every of these intents, ought to be
Complicated together, and to be applied jointly to use, but after what manner,
and by what ways of administrations, I must yet more particularly set forth.

1. That Chylification may be rightly performed in the first Passages, we must
take care that the load of Excrementitious Matter heapt together in them, be
cleared forth, that the lost or depraved Ferments be restored, that the
Passages and Pores howsoever stuff't and obstructed be opened: For these ends
Cathartick, Digestive and aperient Medicines are designed.

2. When the Recrements gathered together in the Mass of Blood, are not
sufficiently discharged by their proper Emunctories, let them be now and then
led forth by others ways that are most proper: For this purpose Catharticks
also, and likewise Diaphoreticks, and Diuretics are proper.

3. Let the Scorbutic Dyscrasie of the Blood be corrected by Bleeding and
Specific Remedies; wherefore to draw all that concerns the preservatory
indication to a Head, let the Romedies, which perform its chief intents, be
Catharticks, Blooding, Digestives, Aperients, Diaphoreticks, Diuretics, and
Antiscorbuticks, or Specificks. Moreover, in regard digestive Remedies and
Aperients are often Coincident, since both are chiefly Imbued with Acid, Smart,
or Saline Particles; Moreover in as much as those kinds of Medicines aptly
enough move Sweat or Urine; therefore the Physical Apparatus required for the
foresaid intentions, may be brought yet to narrower limits viz. that it may
consist in a manner only of Cathartick, Digestive, and Antiscorbutick
Medicines, to which Bleeding is added as occasion presents, I must now set down
certain Forms and Praescripts of them, and likewise the manner of using them.

Catharticks.
1. LEt the method of Curing prescribed almost to all Scorbutic persons begin
with Catharticks; for unless the first Passages are cleansed, the Medicines
designed for any other uses, will be depraved by the Filth in them; wherefore
Vomiting sometimes may be no less proper than Purging.

If the Stomach, (as it frequently happens) being loaded with a viscous matter
that turns four or of an ill savor, endeavors to discharge upward its
depraved Burden, by a nauseousness or striving to Vomit, and the Patient has
been wont formerly to undergo such an Evacuation vigorously enough, and with a
well bearing, nothing hinders, so the strength be not too much cast down, from
giving an Emetick Medicine. To those that are strong, let an Infusion of Crocus
Metallorum, or Mercurius Vitae, or the Emetick Tartar of Mynsicht, or Glaubers
Sulphur of Antimony, be given. Those that are of a weak or tender Constitution,
may take Wine of Squills, or Gilla Theophrasti, which being given in a small
Dose, let them drink a great quantity of Whey after it, and then the Ventricle
being filled to a nauseousness, let a gentle Vomit be raised by putting the
Finger or a Feather into the Throat, and let it be sometimes repeated, as the
person sees good. By this manner of Vomiting, the mere Contents of the Stomach
are cleans'd from its folds, and purged forth; neither are painful or
Convulsive Twitchings caused in other adjacent Viscera or Membranes, with a
Swooning, as it usually happens after Stybiate Medicines. To those whose
Stomach, by reason of an ill Digestion, soon gathers together a heap of Phlegm,
or of other degenerate matter, I have ordered that they procure once a Month
such a Vomit, as being safe and wholesome.

Where Vomiting has no place, you must begin with Purging, at least, some days
being allowed betwixt whiles, let this evacuation succeed the other. What has
been formerly inculcated by Authors, concerning the preparation of the Humors,
I judge either to be superfluous, or wholly erroneous, the Circulation of the
Blood being not then understood: but instead of that intention, let Medicines
restoring the Ferments of the Viscera, and altering the Crasis of the Blood, be
substituted: Mean while for clearing away the Filth of the first passages, and
the Excrementitious superfluities of the Blood and Nervous Liquour, first, let
a mild and gentle Purge be ordered, and afterward, according as the Patient
bears it, let it be repeated either once within a week, or oftener or seldomer;
and let the strength of the Medicine be proportioned according to the success
of the first Dose: For this end Pills, Potions, Apozemes, Electuaries, Powders,
and many other forms of Medicines are wont to be prescribed.

If the Constitution of the Diseased be hot, and the Scurvy seems to be founded
in the Adust, viz. the Sulphureo-saline Dyscrasie of the Blood, let all
Medicines of Aloes, and Diagridium be avoided, and let only the more temperate
be given, of Sena, Rhubarb, and other things that do not exagitate the Blood.

Take Leaves of Sena an Ounce, Rhubarb six Drams, Epithimum three Drams, Roots
of Polipody of the Oak, and of English Rhubarb dried of each half an Ounce,
yellow Saunders two Drams, Celtickspike half a Dram, Salt of wormwoed two
Drams, being slic't and bruised, let them digest in a Matrace by a Sand heat
with Whitewine, and Fumitory-water, of each a Pound, (or with our Magistral
Antiscorbutick-water two Pounds) for two days, let the clear Straining
evaporate by a gentle Bath heat, to the consistency of Honey; then add Powder of
the Leaves of Sena and Rhubarb, of each a Dram and a half, Species Diatrion
Santalon a Dram, Cream of Tartar a Dram and a half, make a Mass for Pills; the
Dose is from half a Dram to a Dram.

Or, let such an Infusion be prepared, which let evaporate by a gentle heat, to
the consistency of a Syrup, adding toward the end Manna passed through a
Searce, and double refined Sugar, of each two Ounces, make a Syrup; the Dose is
from a Spoonful to two, with a fit Vehicle.

Or, let four or six Ounces of such like Tincture be given for a Dose, adding
Cream of Tartar half a Dram, and if there be need of Sweetning, Syrup of Apples
three Drams.

Or to the Tincture prescribed, let six Ounces of cleans'd Corinths be put, and
let there be a warm Digestion till the Corinths swell, which being taken forth,
let the Liquour evaporate to the consistency of a Syrup, adding Sugar and Manna
past through a Searce, of each a Dram and a half; then the Corinths being put
in again, let the Medicine be kept in a Glazed Vessel well stopped; the Dose is
from a Spoonful to two.

Or, to the Tincture prescribed evaporated to a half, add fresh Cassia, Pulp of
Tamarinds extracted with Antiscorbutick-water, of each three Ounces, Conserve
of Violets and of Damask Roses, of each two Ounces, the greater Compound Powder
of Sena a Dram, Rhubarb powdered half an Ounce, Cream of Tartar, Species
Diatrion Santalon, of each two Drams, let them be bruised together in a
Stone-mortar, till they are brought to the form of an Electuary: The Dose is
the quantity of a Wallnut, more or less, according to the operation.

For those whose quaint Stomach will not receive any Medicines but in a small
quantity, and nicely prescribed. Take Rosin of Scammony, from four Grains to
eight, Cream of Tartar half a Scruple, Celtick-spike six Grains, mix them, make
a Powder, let it be given in a Spoonful of Panada, or let it be made into Pills.

To those that are troubled with the Scurvy, and are of a cold Constitution,
and the Disease seems to be founded in a Nitro-sulphureous Disposition of the
Blood, resembling ropy Wine, let smart Catharticks, and such as are endowed
with hot Particles be given.

Take Pil. Stomac. cum Gum. two Drams, Rosm of Jalap twenty Grains, Tartar
vitriolated sixteen Grains, Oil of Juniper half a Scruple, with a sufficient
quantity of Ammoniacum dissolved in Water of Earthworms, make sixteen Pills,
let four be taken at a time once a week.

Take Bontius's Pills of Tartar a Dram and a half, Rosin of Jalap twelve
Grains, Salt of Tartar half a Scruple, with a sufficient quantity of Syrupus
Angustanus, make twelve Pills.

Take Extract of Pil: Ruffi a Dram, Extract of black Hellebore a Scruple, Salt
of Tartar half a Dram, with a sufficient quantity of Ammoniacum dissolved, make
nine Pills, let three be taken at a Dose.

Take Leaves of Sena an Ounce, Rhubarb six Drams, Mechoacan, Gummous Turbith of
each half an Ounce, Threads of black Hellebore three Drams, Salt of Tartar two
Ounces, yellow Saunders a Dram and a half, Winters-bark two Drams, being slic't
and bruised, let them digest in two Pounds of White Wind for two days, strain
it off clear without pressing it; let it be taken either by it self, from five
Ounces to six, or let it be made into an Extract or Syrup, or Electuary as the
Tincture above prescribed, adding Pulvis Arthriticus, or Diasena what suffices,
etc.

Or, Let a Tincture of this kind be prepared, which may be given to robust Men,
to the quantity of a Spoonful, or of a Spoonful and a half. Take Salt of Tartar
an Ounce, small Spirit of Wine a Pound and a half, let them digest till it
turns yellow: To this being poured of the Faeces by inclination, infuse Leaves
of black Hellebore macerated in Vinegar an Ounce; yellow Saunders a Dram, the
yellow Coats of Oranges a Dram and a half, make a warm and close Digestion for
three days: Let the clear Straining be distilled in Balneo to a half, let the
remaining Liquour be kept for use.

Take Roots of sharp pointed Dock, Polipody of the Oak, stinging Nettles,
Chervil, of each six Drams, Leaves of Agrimony, Speedwel of each a handful,
white and yellow Saunders, of each a Dram and a half, bastard Saffron an Ounce,
Tartar of White Wind half an Ounce; let them boil in two Pounds and a half of
Fountain Water, till a half be wasted, add of Rhenish-Wine a Pound, and strain
it presently, into which put of the best Sena half an Ounce, Rhubarb six Drams,
Leaves of black Hellebore half an Ounce, the yellow Coats of Oranges two Drams,
make a close and warm Infusion for twelve hours, let the Straining be kept in a
stopped Glass; the Dose is from five Drams to six.

It were easy to set down here many other forms of Catharticks, but there is
no great variety required in these: But of the foregoing, let these or the
others be given as they best agree, and now and then, let them be repeated
within five or six days, as occasion requires. An over frequent and violent
Purging casts down the powers of the Body, greatly impairs the strength of the
Viscera, and in the mean time, does not take away the Disease.

After a Purge or two, if Bleeding be indicated, let Blood be drawn from the
Arm, or from the Vessels of the Fundament by Leeches: It matters not much,
which Vein be opened, nor is the opening of the Salvatella Vein of as much
moment as it is said: As to the large Discourses made by Authors, concerning
the opening of the Liver or Cephalic Veins, rather than any others in the
Scurvy, since the Circulation of the Blood has been known, it comes to nothing.
Phlebotomy is indicated by a plenty and vitiousness of the Blood, which it is
better to let forth at several times in a small quantity, than at once in a
great: For when the Liquour of the Blood is become very impure, it is corrected
by no kind of Remedy, more certainly than by a frequent and spare letting of it
forth; for the old corrupted Blood, as often as it is drawn forth, is succeeded
by a better and clearer fresh Blood; mean while there is need of caution, that
it be not drawn away at once in too great a quantity, for its store being much
drained together, Sanguification fails, so that a Dropsy or Cachexia ensues.

Besides Purging, and (if need be) opening a Vein, many Remedies of another
kind, no less necessary, are required in the Scurvy: And that they may be
prescribed in order, we must forthwith consider, whether only Preservatory
Indications have place here, and whether certain Curatory Indications, viz.
such as have regard to some severely pressing Symptoms, ought not to be
interchangeably pursued with them: And if you are to employ the whole work of
the Cure against the cause of the Discase, you may proceed after the following
method: We shall show you hereafter, what sort of Cure is to be applied to
Symptoms (if happily occasion requires it.)

Therefore if nothing hinders, but you are to employ the chiefest stress of
Physic, in rooting out the cause of the Disease, principally and by it self;
for this purpose, let Digestives likewise, and Specificks, or Antiscorbuticks,
as we hinted before, be used at all times, unless on the days of Purging: To
which sometimes, if it be needful, let Diaphoreticks or Diuretics be added:
Manifold forms and prescripts of Medicines, and of various kinds for performing
these intents, are every where to be found amongst Authors: I shall here set
down some of the more choice of them, which I here thought good to distribute
into two ranks, according to the twofold nature of the Scorbutic Cause. viz.
the Sulphureo-saline, and Salino-sulphureous Dyscrasies of the Blood. And first
I shall deliver such as are proper in this latter kind of affect, viz. where
there is need of Medicines, endowed with a certain instigating virtue, and such
as are very much filled with a Volatile Salt.

Let Digestive Medicines that restore the Ferment of the Stomach, and help the
Functions of that, and of other of the Viscera, which serve for Chylification,
and Anti-Scorbuticks, or Specificks, which take away the Dyscrasy of the Blood,
either be joined in the same Composition, or at leastwise let them be taken the
same day one after the other.

Among digestive Remedies are justly counted the Cream, Crystals, Salt, and
Tincture of Tartar; Tartar Vitriolated and Chalybeated, Elixir Proprietatis,
the simple mixture. The use of each of these, given twice a day, oftentimes
does good.

Moreover you may easily make Magistral Tinctures and Elixirs of various kinds,
both digestive and appropriated to the Scurvy, with the two following
Menstruums.

Take rectified Spirit of Vitriol, Six Ounces; Spirit of Wine Alcholized,
sixteen Ounces; mix them, and Distill them in a Glass retort with three
Cohobations; keep it for use in a Glass well stopped. Elixir Proprietatis is more
easily and better prepared with this Compound Menstruum than the vulgar way.

Take Winters-bark, Lignum Aloes, Roots of the lesser Galingal, of each two
Drams; Cinnamon, Cloves, Cubebs, of each a Dram; Seeds of Bishops-weed and
Watercresses, of each half a Dram; being bruised, pour to them of the foresaid
Menstruum enough to cover them three Fingers over; let them digest in a Matrace
in a Sand Furnace for six days; let the straining be kept in a Glass close
stopped: The Dose is twenty Drops, more or less, in a Spoonful of Canary, or of
an appropriated Liquor. Let it be given twice a day.

Take white Amber, Gum of Ivy, Caranna, Tacamahaca, of each a Dram; Saffron,
half a Dram; Cloves, Nutmegs, of each two Scruples; being bruised, pour to them
the aforesaid Menstruum, and let a Tincture be extracted according to Art. The
Dose is twenty Drops, as above.

Take blew Salt of Tartar, four Ounces; let it digest in a Matrace with a Pound
of Spirit of Wine Alcholized, till a Tincture be extracted: Let this be another
Menstruum, with which you may prepare Elixirs out of Gums, Spices, etc. after
the same manner as with the former Menstruum.

While these kinds of Medicines are given in a small Dose, in the Evening and
early in the Morning, at Physical hours, viz. at eight a Clock in the Forenoon,
and at four in the Afternoon, let the Antiscorbutick Medicines of the other
kind be taken, which for the most part we are wont to prescribe in a twofold
form, viz. in a solid form and a liquid, to be taken all under one; so that the
solid Medicine being taken first, the liquid is drank after it: there are
various kinds and ways of Composition of both, viz. in a solid form,
Electuaries, Confections, Powders, Pills and Tablets; in a liquid form are
Decoctions, Infusions, Expressions, Distilled Waters, Physic Wines, and Ales.
We shall give you some of the more select Medicines of each of these kinds.

Electuaries.
TAke Conserve of Scurvy Grass, Roman Wormwood, Fumitory, of each two Ounces,
Powder of Winters-bark, Roots of Angelica, and Aron, of each two Drams; Species
Diatrion Santalon, a Dram and a half; Powder of Crab's-eyes, a Dram; Salt of
Wormwood, two Drams; with a sufficient quantity of Syrup of the Juice of
Citrons; make an Electuary.

Take Conserve of the Leaves of Scurvy Grass and Brooklimes made with an equal
quantity of Sugar, of each three Ounces; Troches of Capers, and of Rhubarb, of
each two Drams; Salt of Wormwood, and of Scurvy Grass, of each a Dram; Ivory
Powdered, Coral Calcined, of each a Dram, with a sufficient quantity of syrup
of the Juice of Scurvy Grass: Make an Electuary.

I use to prescribe the Conserves of the outward Coats of Limons and Oranges,
also of the purple Flowers of the Ash-tree, of the Leaves and Flowers of
Lady-smocks, of the Roots of sharp pointed Docks, and of English Rhubarb, to be
prepared with an equal quantity of Sugar, which being mixed between themselves,
or with other Conserves and Species, enter these kinds of Electuaries.

Take Conserves of the Yellow-coats of Oranges and Limons, of Flowers of the
Ash, of each two Ounces, Powder of the Roots of Contrayerva a Dram and a half,
of the lesser Galingal half a Dram, Roots of Aron two Drams, Species of
Aromaticum Rosatum a Dram, Salt of Wormwood two Drams, with a sufficient
quantity of Syrup of the Confiture of Nutmegs make an Electuary. The Dose of
these kinds of Medicines is the quantity of a Nutmeg, drinking after it an
appropriated Liquor.

To Rusticks and poor People, by whom Medicines easily prepared and cheaper are
desired, I prescribe after this manner. Take Leaves of Scurvy Grass and
Brooklimes of each four Ounces, double refined Sugar eight Ounces, let them be
bruised together in a Mortar, adding Powder of Winters Bark half an Ounce,
Tartar Calcined with Nitre three Drams, with a sufficient quantity of Spanish
Wine let them be made into an Electuary. The Dose is the quantity of a Nutmeg
twice a day, drinking after it an appropriated Liquor.

Take Leaves of Scurvy Grass a pound; Raisins stoned, double refined Sugar, of
each half a pound, Faecula of the Roots of Horseraddish two Ounces; let them be
bruised together in a Mortar, and made into the Form of an Electuary. The Dose
is the quantity of a Wall-nut, twice or thrice a day.

Confections.
TAke Powder of Aron Roots compound an Ounce, Winters-bark Powdered half an
Ounce, Species Diatrion Santalon, Troches of Capers of each two Drams, Salt of
Wormwood, and of Scurvy Grass of each a Dram and a half, the Yellow Coats of
Oranges preserved three Ounces, let them be bruised together in a Mortar, then
add of double refined Sugar dissolved in a sufficient quantity of Water of
Earthworms, three Ounces; make a Confection according to Art.

Take Roots of Eringo and Scorzonera preserved of each two Drams, Wallnuts
preserved and Mirobalanes Condited of each in number two, the Electuary of
Sassaphras six Drams, Powder of Cubebs and Cardamoms of each two Drams, Powder
of the Roots of Zedoaria and Angelica of each a Dram and a half; Salt of
Woormwood two Drams; with a sufficient quantity of Syrup of the Confiture of
Wallnuts make a Confection.

Take Powder of China Roots, of the Wood Sassaphras of each half an Ounce,
Yellow and White Saunders of each two Drams, Seeds of Rocket, Cubebs,
Garden-cresses, Grains of Paradise, of each a Dram and a half, Species of
Dialacca, Cinnamon, Orrice, the lesser Galingal of each a Dram, Salt of
Wormwood two Drams, Conserve of the Yellow Coats of Oranges, and Sugar of
Rosemary Flowers dissolved in a sufficient quantity of Water of Snails, of each
three Ounces; make a Confection according to art; the Dose is the quantity of a
Nutmeg twice a day, drinking after it an appropriated Liquor.

In some cases of the Scurvy where the use of Steel is indicated, either let
three Drams of Steel prepared with Sulphur, or two Drams of Vitriol of Mars be
added to each of the prescripts either to the Confection, or to the Electuary,
and after the taking of the Medicines once or twice a day, let the body be
exercised according as the strength will bear.

Powders.
TAke Powder of Aron Compound an Ounce and a half, Winters Bark half an Ounce,
Cubebs, Grains of Paradise, Cardamoms of each two Drams, Salt of Wormwood,
three Drams, Tablets of Oranges three Ounces; make a Powder, the Dose is a Dram
in an appropriated Liquor.

To the foresaid Powder add Kernels of the Indian Chocholate Nut half a Pound,
let them be brought into a Mass, or Paste in a warm Mortar. The Dose is two
Drams, after the manner that the confection of Chocolate is taken, viz. in
Fountain Water with the leaves of Rosemary, or of Betony, or the Root of
Scorzonera, or also the shaving of Ivory or of Hartshorn boiled in it.

Pills.
FOr those to whom a Medicine in a less Dose, and in a form of Pills is more
pleasing. Take Roots of Virginia Serpentary, of Contrayerva, of each two Drams,
Winters Bark, Cubebs, Rocket Seeds, of each three Drams, Salt of Wormwood, and
of Scurvy Grass of each a Dram and a half, Extract or Rob of Juniper half an
Ounce; with a sufficient quantity of Syrup of the Confiture of Nutmegs, make a
Mass. The Dose is four Pills twice a day, drinking after it an appropriated
Liquor.

Tablets.
FOr nice persons let Tablets or Tragaea's be prescribed after this manner:
Take Powder of Winters Bark, of Crabs eyes, of each a Dram and a half, Pearl
powdered half a Dram, double refined Sugar dissolved in a sufficient quantity of
water of Earthworms, and Boiled to a Consistency for Tablets, Six Ounces,
Spirit of Scurvy Grass two Drams; make Tablets according to Art each weighing
half a Dram. Let about half a Dram be taken twice a day, drinking after it an
appropriated Liquor.

Tablets of Oranges which are to be sold by the Oxford Apothecaries.
TAke Rinds of Oranges, Limons, Citrons preserved of each an Ounce, preserved
Eringoes half an Ounce, Pine-Nut Kernels, Fistick Nuts of each twenty, Sweet
Almonds blancht in number ten, Annise Seed Powdered half an Ounce, Ginger
Candied two Ounces, Species of Aromaticum Rosatum, Nutmegs of each a Dram and a
half, Roots of Galingal a Dram, Cloves in number ten, Ambergreice four Grains,
Musk, Civet of each two Grains, double refined Sugar dissolved in Rose Water,
and Boiled to a Consistency for Tablets a Pound and a half; make Tablets
according to Art.

So much of Medicines which are wont to be given to Scorbutical Persons in a
solid form, or in a gross substance: and that their virtue may be conveyed the
better into the Mass of Blood and with more benefit, Liquids are prescribed for
the most part to be drank after them. Though there be a great variety of these,
and a diversifyed way of their composition, yet the chief and most usual are
such as we have hinted before, and of each of which we shall now give you forms.

Decoctions.
THough Decoctions are a very familiar kind of Liquid Medicines, yet they are
seldom used in the Scurvy, because the Simples, which chiefly do good in this
Disease, lose their virtues, which they have from the volatile Salt, by
Boiling: Nevertheless because remedies are easily and soon prepared after this
manner, they ought sometimes to be admitted; nay and experience has shown that
some of them are efficacious. For Rusticks and poor people this Medicine of a
very easy preparation is commended by many. Take Leaves of Watercresses three
handfuls, of the lesser Sorrel two handfuls; being slic't, let them be
macerated in six Pounds of Milk, and let them boil to a consumption of a third
part; let it be taken twice a day, from four Ounces to eight. The Decoction of
Wormwood is commended by Eugalenus and others. I have often tried the
following Medicine with good success Take Broom tops three handfuls, being
slic't small, let them boil in three Pounds of strong Beer to a half, let it be
given from two Ounces to three twice a day,

2. Infusions.
AN Infusion added to a Decoction, makes a very profitable Medicine. Take Roots
of Scorzonera and Chervil, of each an Ounce, Leaves of Agrimony and
Ground Pine, of each half a handful; burnt Hartshorn two Drams, Raisins half a
handful; set them boil in three Pounds of Fountain Water till a third part be
consumed: Add of Rhenish-wine half a Pound, and presently let it be strained
into a glass Vessel, to which put Leaves of Scurvy Grass and Brook-limes
bruised, of each half a handful, Orange Pills preserved and slic't small half
an Ounce; make a close and warm Infusion for six hours; let the straining be
kept in stopped Vessels. The Dose is six Ounces twice a day after a solid
Medicine.

Take Whey made with White Wind or Cider a Pound and a half, in this boil Roots
of Bur-dock, and candied Eringo's, of each six Drams, Juniper Berries preserved
half an Ounce. Let the Liquour, being boiled away to the consumption of a third
part, be strained into a Flagon, to which put Leaves of Scurvy Grass and
Brook-limes, of each a handful, make a warm and close Infusion for six hours.
The Dose is half a Pound twice a day after a solid Medicine.

Infusions also made by themselves, are sometimes of excellent use. Take Leaves
of Scurvy Grass a handful, Raspings of the Root of Horse-raddish half a
handful, Winters-bark bruised two Drams; let them be put in a Glass with
White Wind or Cider, and water of Scurvy Grass, of each a Pound, let them
infuse in a Cellar for two or three days. The Dose is from six Ounces to eight
twice a day, as above.

3. Juices and Expressions.
THE most commendable use of Antiscorbutick Herbs and Fruits is, that their
Juices and Expressions be taken by themselves, or with other appropriated
Liquours twice or thrice a day: For so the entire and pure Virtue of the Remedy
is presumed to be given.

Take Leaves of Scurvy Grass, Watercresses, Brook-limes, of each three
handfuls; being bruised, let the Juice be pressed forth, and be kept in a Glass
well stopped. The Dose is from an Ounce and a half, to three Ounces twice a day
in a little draught of Beer, Wine, or distilled Water.

Take Leaves of Scurvy Grass four handfuls, of Wood Sorrel two handfuls, being
bruised, let the Juice be expressed, which being put in a Glass and well stopped,
will soon become clear, for the Acidity of the Wood Sorrel precipitates the
grosser parts of the Scurvy Grass: The same thing comes to pass if the Juice of
Oranges be mixed with the Juice of Scurvy Grass. The Dose is two or three Ounces
twice a day.

Takes Leaves of Scurvy Grass four handfuls, of Brook-limes and Garden-cresses
of each two handfuls, long Pepper three Drams, Raspings of Horse-raddish two
Ounces; being all bruised together, let them be put in a Glazed Pot with two
Pounds of Rhenish-wine, or of Sack, if it be thought better: The Orifice being
well stopped, let them stand in a cold Cellar for two days, then express it
strongly; the Dose is three Ounces twice a day, after a solid Medicine.

Take Leaves of Scurvy Grass three handfuls, of Brook-limes, Garden-cress and
Wood Sorrel, of each a handful, being bruised, pour to them Water of Snails and
of Earthworms, of each six Ounces, make a strong Expression, and keep it in a
Glass well stopped. The Dose is two Ounces twice a day.

4. Syrups.
FOR the same reason as Decoctions, Syrups also are disapproved of in the
Scurvy, viz. in as much as the virtue of the most efficacious Simples,
evaporates in boiling: Yet because sometimes there seems need of such a
Medicine for sweetning appropriated Medicines for some persons, we shall here
propose our preparation, the Virtues of the Ingredients being preserved as much
as may be.

Therefore take Leaves of Garden Scurvy Grass six handfuls, the Coats of four
Oranges, and of two Limons thinly pared off, the Raspings of Raddish-roots half
a handful, long Pepper powdered three Drams, all of them being bruised together,
let the Juice be expressed, which presently being put in a Glass and well stopped,
let it be set in a cold Cellar till it becomes clear by subsiding: Then let the
clear Liquour be poured off into another Glass by inclination, and being stopped,
let it be kept in the heat of a Balneum Mariae. Mean while for each Ounce of
it, take of Sugar an Ounce and a half, and let its whole quantity, dissolved
with a little Water of Earthworms, be boiled to a consistency for Tablets, to
which, presently let the foresaid Liquour whilst warm, be poured by little and
little, and let it be stirred with a Spatula; as soon as it is incorporated, let
the composition be taken from the Fire, and being cold, let it be put into a
Glass: Let this Nodulus be hung in the Glass. Take Cinnamon bruised, a Dram and
a half, Seeds of Garden-cress, and of Rocket powdered, of each an Ounce, mix
them.

5. Distilled Waters.
Distilled Waters, because they are a neat and pleasant Remedy, are in a manner
all in all amongst Antiscorbutick prescripts, some very profitable and neat
Dispensations of these are contained in our Dispensatory, as are Radish-water
compound, the Magistral Waters of Snails, and of Earthworms: Moreover there
are famous Prescripts of these kinds of Waters, delivered by Quercetan,
Dorncrelius, Sennertus, Doringius, and other Authors. It Is also easy for every
Physician to prescribe such appropriated to the condition of each Patient, as
occasion requires: For Antiscorbutick Ingredients, and likewise such as regard
certain Accidents and particular Affects are taken, to which, being slic't and
bruised, a fit Liquour, viz. White Wind, Cider or Whey prepared of either, is
poured: Then the whole mixture is distilled in a Cucurbit, or in a Rose-still: I
shall here give you a form or two of such as we commonly use.

Take Leaves of both Scurvy-grasses, Brook-limes, Watercresses, tops of Broom,
of each four handfuls, Leaves of Germander and Ground Pine, of each two
handfuls, Roots of Horse-raddish half a Pound, of Aron, Angelica, Master-wort,
of each four Ounces, the outward Coats of four Oranges, and of as many Limons,
Roots of Calamus Aromaticus, an Ounce; Cinnamon, Cloves, of each half an Ounce,
being slic't and bruised, pour to them of the best Cider eight Pounds, let them
digest for two days in a Glazed Pot close luted: Afterward distill them in a
common Distillatory, let the Waters first and last drawn, be mixed.

In the Winter season, when green Herbs are scarce, we may prescribe after this
manner. Take Leaves of Scurvy Grass four handfuls, tops of Broom, of the
Pine Tree, and of Juniper, of each three handfuls, the Middle-bark of Elder and
Ash, of each four Ounces, Roots of Horse-raddish, and of Polipody of the Oak,
of each three Ounces, the Rinds of four Oranges, and of as many Limons,
Winters-bark four Ounces, being slic't and bruised, pour to them of White Wind,
or of Cider, or of Whey made with either of them, eight Pounds, let them be
distilled.

The simple Water of the Leaves of Aron, distilled in the Spring time, is an
efficacious Remedy against the Scurvy, if three or four Ounces are given twice
a day, with another Medicine.

The simple Water of Scurvy Grass, poured again on fresh Leaves bruised, and
distilled, and so iterated by frequent Cohobations, becomes an efficacious
Remedy. Moreover a hot Spirit of Scurvy Grass is prepared after this manner.
Take Leaves of Scurvy Grass what suffices, being bruised, let it be made into
Balls, such as are made of Woad for Dying: Then let those Balls be kept in a
Glazed Pot for three or four days very close stopped in a cold place, either
Water of Scurvy Grass, or Wine of the same being poured to them, and covering
them over above four fingers deep: Then an Alembick being put on, let the whole
matter be distilled: Let the distilled Water being put into a Cucurbit, be
rectified; the hot Spirit will come off first, whereof let fifteen or twenty
drops be taken in a fit Vehicle.

6. Antiscorbutick Wines and Beers.
I Use to prepare a simple Antiscorbutick Wine of excellent use, after this
manner: In the Spring or Summer-season, Take Leaves of Scurvy Grass gathered in
clear and dry Weather, what you think good; being bruised, let the Juice be
pressed forth, and let a Vessel containing three or four Gallons be filled; a
spoonful or two of Yest being put to it, let it ferment for two Days; then the
Vessel being close stopped, let it be placed in a Wine-Cellar for six Months; and
then let the clear Liquor, which will be of an Amber color, like Spanish Wine,
be drawn out into Bottles, and be kept for use; it continues good many years:
The Dose is three or four Ounces twice a Day.

Physic Wines, whereof a Glass or two may be daily taken at Physical Hours, or
also at Dinner, may be prepared after this manner; Take Leaves of Scurvy Grass,
four handfuls, Raspings of Horseradish, four Ounces; Winters-bark bruised half
an Ounce; the outward Coats of four Oranges, and of so many Limons; Let them be
put in a Glass, with twelve Pounds of White Wine or Rhenish, or small Spanish
Wine: The Vessel being stopped, let it be kept in a cold place. Let the Wine be
poured off clear as often as you use it.

It Is more usual to prescribe a Physic Ale or Beer to Scorbutical persons, to
be drank constantly for their ordinary Drink. Let Beer be prepared to fill a
Vessel of four Gallons; instead of Hops let three Handfuls of Pine or Fir-tops
be boiled in it: After it has wrought in the Vessel, put into it Leaves of
Scurvy Grass, three Handfuls; Roots of sharp pointed Dock prepared, four
Ounces; the Rinds of four Oranges: After it has stood a Week to clear, let it
be exposed to Drink.

These kinds of Physic Drinks, with other Ingredients, may be variously
prepared, according to the Temperament and Affect of the Patient; by which kind
of Remedy, in regard the Physical Particles, altering the Dyscrasy of the
Blood, are forthwith conveyed into its Mass, together with those of the Food,
often much good is done in removing the Cause of the Scurvy: But since we have
shown the cause of this, as also the Nature of the Disease, to be twofold, and
since the Medicines hitherto proposed regard in a manner only the
Salino-sulphureous Distemper of the Blood, we must next direct Medicines which
are proper in the other, viz. the Sulphureo-saline Dyscrasy of the Blood.

CHAP. III. Of Medicines of each kind of the foregoing forms, which have regard
to the Scurvy raised in a hot Constitution, and in a Sulphureo-Saline Dyscrasy
of the Blood.
IN certain Scorbutical persons the use of Scurvy Grass, Horseradish,
Winters-bark, and of other smart things, and such as are greatly endowed with a
volatile Salt, is found to be very offensive; wherefore in those kinds of
cases, where the Morbifick Cause consists in a hot Dyscrasy of the Blood,
resembling over-fretted Wine, temperate Medicines, and such as do not exagitate
the Particles of the Humors, which are apt to boil too much of them selves,
are indicated: Wherefore we shall set down Forms after the same order, and
running as it were parallel with those before; and in the first place we shall
give you solid Medicines.

Electuaries.
Take Conserve of Brooklimes and Cuckow-Flower, made with an equal part of
Sugar of each three Ounces, Species Diatrion Santalon, Diarrhodon Abbatis, of
each a Dram and a half; Ivory powdered, a Dram; Pearl, half a Dram; Salt of
Wormwood and of Tamarisk, of each a Dram; with a sufficient quantity of syrup
of Coral: make an Electuary.

Take Conserve of Wood Sorrel, and of Hips, of each three Ounces, (or Conserve
of the Roots of sharp pointed Dock and of the Roots of Cichory, of each three
Ounces) Troches of Rhubarb, two Drams; Species Diamargariti Frigidi, a Dram and
a half; Bark of Tamerisk, a Dram; Sal Prunella, a Dram and a half; Myrobalanes
condited, in number two; with a sufficient quantity of the syrup of the
Confiture of Mirobalanes, make an Electuary.

For poor people I use to prescribe this easy prepared Electuary, Take Leaves
of Brooklimes, six Ounces; of Wood Sorrel, two Ounces; double refined Sugar,
eight Ounces; let them be pounded, adding Powder of sweet Fennel-seeds, half an
Ounce; Ivory powdered, two Drams; Sal Prunella, a Dram and a half; with a
sufficient quantity of Syrup of the Juice of Brooklimes, make an Electuary.

Confections.
TAke Powder of the Roots of China, and of the Male Peony, of each a Dram;
white and yellow Saunders, of each three Drams; Ivory, a Dram and a half;
Pearl, half a Dram; Crab's-eyes, a Dram; Coral moistened with Juice of Oranges,
and ground on a Marble, two Drams; white Tartar, a Dram and a half; double
refined Sugar, dissolved in a sufficient quantity of compound Scordium Water,
six Ounces: Make a Confection.

Take Roots of Eringo, and Scorzonera preserved, of each three Ounces, Powder
of Aron-roots compound, half an Ounce; Species Diatrion Santalon, two Drams;
Sal Prunella, a Dram and a half; with a sufficient quantity of syrup of
Clove-Gilli-flowers: Make a Confection.

Powders.
TAke Powder of the Leaves of Ground Pine, of Aron-roots Compound, of each an
Ounce and a half; Ivory powdered, red Coral prepared with Juice of Oranges, of
each two Drams; Tablets of Oranges, two Ounces; mix them: Make a Powder. The
Dose is a Spoonful twice a day.

Pills.
TAke Species Diatrion Santalon, and Diamargariti Frigidi, of each two Drams;
Seeds of Citrons, and of Carduus bruised, of each a Dram and a half; Roots of
Bastard-Dittany, and of Male-Peony, of each a Dram and a half; Salt of
Tamerisk, two Drams; with a sufficient quantity of the Gelly of Hartshorn, or
of the cast skins of Snakes: Make a Mass.

Tablets.
TAke Species Diatrion Santalon, and Diamargariti Frigidi, of each a Dram and a
half; Pearl powdered, red Coral prepared, Ivory powdered, of each a Dram; Sugar
dissolved in Scordium-water, and boiled to a Consistency for Tablets, six
Ounces: Make Tablets according to Art.

But if with those kinds of temperate Antiscorbuticks, the use of Steel be
indicated, to the Electuary, or to the Confection, or also to the Mass of
Pills, let two Drams of Mynsicht's Magistery of Mars, or of Extract of Steel of
our preparation, be added. In some cases, about two Drams and a half, or three
Drams of Crocus Martis may be added to such a Composition: though it is, often
better to make the Liquors which are drank after solid Medicines Chalybeate,
than the foresaid Compositions. It remains for us now to prescribe forms of
Liquors.

Decoctions.
IN a Scurvy raised after a long Fever, these kinds of Decoctions, which
purify the Blood, and plentifully move Urine, are given with good effect.

Take Roots of Chervil, Scorzonera, Sorrel, Stone-Parsley, of each an Ounce;
Leaves of Agrimony and Hart's-tongue, of each a Handful; burnt Hartshorn, two
Drams; Parings of three Apples; Corinths, two Ounces; Liquorice, three Drams;
Let them boil in four Pounds of Fountain Water till a third part be consumed;
add Sal Prunella, two or three Drams: The Dose is four Ounces twice or thrice a
day. Take Eringo Roots preserved, six Drams, of Grass, two Drams, Leaves of
Clivers, two handfuls; Agrimony and Liverwort, of each a handful; Raisins, two
Ounces; white Saunders, a Dram; Liquorice, two Drams; let them boil in four
Pounds of Fountain Water, till a third part be consumed. The Dose is six Drams
after a solid Medicine.

To Rusticks and poor People, lest after a Fever they fall into the Scurvy, I
use to prescribe, That twice a day they take the following Draught, viz. That
they boil a handful and a half of the Roots and Leaves of Dandelion in a Pound
and a half of Posset Drink, till a third part be consumed: Strain it for two
Doses.

Or, take Roots of Dandelion, half a handful; Seeds of Citrons, and of Carduus,
of each a Dram: let them boil in Posset Drink, made with Apples, or a Pound and
a half of Cider, till a third part be consumed.

Infusions.
The Apozems even now prescribed, will become more excellent, against the
Scurvy, if being prepared without Licorice, they are strained into a Flaggon,
into which are put Leaves of Brook-limes, and of Watercresses or
Cuckow-flowers, of each a handful, then make a warm and close Infusion for six
hours; the Liquour being strained again, let it be kept in stopped Vessels. The
Dose is six Ounces twice or thrice a day. Also let Whey, with the Roots of
Dandelion, and the Leaves of Fumitory boiled in it, be strained into a Vessel,
wherein are Leaves of Brook-limes, and of small Celandine, of each a handful,
make an Infusion, etc.

Chalibeat Infusions are wont to be frequently in use, viz. the Salt,
Magristery, or Extract of Steel, are infused in some Decoction, or distilled
Water: Moreover as natural Spaw-waters, so also Artificial ones of our
preparation of Steel dissolved in Fountain Water, and impregnated with the
Infusion of Antiscorbuticks, are drank with great benefit.

Juices and Expressions.
TAke Leaves of Brook-limes and Watercresses, of each four handfuls, of
Wood Sorrel two handfuls, being bruised; let the Juice be pressed forth, being
stopped in a Glass, it will soon become clear by subsiding. The Dose is from an
Ounce and a half to two Ounces with a fit Vehicle.

Take Leaves of Brook-limes four handfuls, stalks of English-rhubarb two
handfuls, being bruised; let the Juice be pressed forth.

Take Leaves of Brook-limes, Garden-cress, Cuckow-flower, the lesser Celandine,
Wood Sorrel, of each two handfuls, being bruised; let the Juice be pressed forth;
add Juice of Oranges a fourth part; let it be kept in a Glass.

Syrups.
AS often as a Syrup is required to be added to any other Composition, we use
either Syrup of the Juice of Wood Sorrel, or of Fumitory, or of Coral compound:
Or also a Magistral Syrup may be prepared of the Juice of Brook-limes, after
the same manner as is prescribed above concerning the Juice of Scurvy Grass.

Distilled Waters.
TEmperate Distilled Waters are prepared by changing either the Ingredients, or
the Menstruum, or both of them together.

As to the former we proceed after this mnner. Take Leaves of Brook-limes,
Garden-cress, Fumitory, Hart's-tongue, Liver-wort, Bawm, tops of Tamarisk and of
Cypress, of each three handfuls, all the Saunders bruised, of each half an
Ounce, Roots of sharp pointed Dock, of Polipody of the Oak, of each two Ounces,
the outward Coats of four Oranges, Snails cleans'd two Pounds; being slic't and
bruised, pour to them Whey made with Cider six Pounds; let them be distilled in
a common Still.

2. When the Menstruum is weak, let the Ingredients be moderately hot.

Take Leaves of Scurvy Grass, Brook-limes, Cuckow-flower, Garden-cress, of each
three handfuls, Rinds of four Oranges, Snails a Pound: being slic't small, pour
to them common Whey, or fresh Milk six Pounds; distill them after the vulgar
manner.

3. In a Scorbutic Atrophia, and Consumptive Disposition, where nothing hot,
that may stir the Blood and Humors, and Spirits, ought to be admitted, let
both the Ingredients and Menstruum be temperate, and lenifiers of the Blood.

Take Leaves of Brook-limes, Cuckow-flower, Hart's-tongue, Maidenhair,
Liver-wort, Speedwel, Agrimony, of each two handfuls, Snails cleans'd a Pound
and a half (or the Pulp of a Capon, or of a Sheeps-heart slic't) all being half
boiled and slic't, pour to them of fresh Milk (or Water of Fumitory) six
Pounds; let them be distilled the common way.

Physick-wines and Beers.
Though the use of Wines may not seem proper in a Scurvy raised by reason of a
hot, or Sulphureo-saline Dyscrasie of the Blood, nevertheless, if at any time
the Stomach either being weak, or a long accustomance require the drinking of
Wine, at leastwise being diluted with Water; a Eiquour of that kind being both
temperate, and in some measure Physical, may be prepared: For especially small
Wines diluted with Water, and impregnated with the Infusion of Bawm, Borrage,
or of Burnet, or other things ought to be allowed.

Moreover let Wines be prepared of the Juice of English Corinths, Cherries, and
other horary Fruits; which when they are brought to a ripeness by Fermentation,
are very grateful to the Stomach, and purify the Blood: Again Cider, the
familiar and genuine Wine, as it were, of our Country, so it be clean, mellow,
and pleasant without any sharpness, does very much good in the Scurvy. Moreover
in this Liquour drawn from the Lees; and put in small Vessels, Ingredients of
various kinds may be infused: Of which kind are tops of the Pine Tree, or of
Fir, Flowers of Tamarisk; also shavings of Hartshorn, or of Ivory, which
sweeten the Liquour, and preserve it from turning four, viz. in as much as the
Particles of the fluid Salt which abound in the Cider, and are apt to make it
sharp, are taken up in dissolving the foresaid Ingredients.

Temperate Physic Drinks may be prescribed after this manner, viz. let a small
Ale be prepared to fill a Vessel of five or six Gallons; into which instead of
Hops, let tops of the Pine Tree, of Firr or Tamarisk, or the Raspings of either
of their Woods be put; them after it has wrought, let the Roots of sharp
pointed Dock dried, be put into the Vessel (than which certainly there is no
Remedy more excellent in the Scurvy: To these, sometimes let the Leaves of
Brook-limes, Watercresses, Winter-cresses, etc. be added: Also Pomecitrons or
Oranges cut in slices.

Leaves of Hart's-tongue, put into a little Vessel of midling Ale after it has
wrought, gives it a grateful savor and odor.

CHAP. IV. Of the Curatory Indication of the Scurvy, whereby we obviate the
Disease it self, and the Symptoms that are most pressing.
HItherto we have shown concerning the Cure of the Scurvy, what regards the
Preservatory Indication, to wit, the removal of the Morbifick Cause, viz. both
the intentions of Curing, and the Remedies indicated: Which kind of method
being seasonably begun, and duly prosecuted, often does the whole work; viz. in
as much as the Cause of the Disease, or the Root of it being cut off, the
affects depending of it dye of their own accord: Nevertheless we must not go on
with this course of Physic always directly, but turning aside several ways:
For sometimes severe Accidents and Symptoms happen, which require a peculiar,
and as it were, extraordinary Physical help, to which we must Immediately
attend, and often interrupting the general Cure. Concerning these we must
observe, that as affects which happen upon the Scurvy, require Appropriated
Remedies, according to the Nature of each of them, and to the disposition of
the Patient, yet Antiscorbuticks ought always to be mixed with them: I will not
be needful to order a Method of Cure against all diseases and affects, with
which the Scurvy is wont to be attended, for so the whole Practice of Pyhsick
would be here transcribed, but we shall have regard only to the Symptoms that
are chiefly pressing, by which either the life of the Patient is endangered, or
the principal Cure Obstructed; after what manner, and by what Medicines such
are Cured, I shall now show.

Of Curing a difficult Breathing, and Asthmatick Fits.
A Difficult Breathing, with a straitness of the Breast and Asthmatick Fits,
ought presently to be removed by appropriated Remedies, to be prescribed
besides the general Method, for other wise the diseased is soon brought in
danger of life. Since these sorts of evils arise in Scorbutical persons for the
most part, either through the fault of the Blood stagnating in the Heart, or by
reason of the Nerves of the Lungs being hindered in their Function, therefore
they are Gur'd either by Cordial, or Anticonvulsive Medicines. Spirit of
Hartshorn, of Soot, of Blood, of Man's Scull, also the Tincture of Castoreum,
of Antimony, or of Sulphur, Flowers of Sal Armoniack, Flowers of Benzoin, also
Elixir Proprietatis are often of excellent use in these Cases, which kind of
Medicines may be frequently given with a Dose of some Antiscorbutick Liquors,
appropriated also against the foresaid afects. For the appeasing of a sudden
difficulty of Breathing which is merely Convulsive, if at any time it very
sorely presses, I have found no more present remedy then our Tincture of
Laudanum with Opium given to ten or twelve drops in a convenient Liquour: For
Sleep Stealing on, the Spirits remit of their disorders, and in the mean while
being refresh't, they resume afterward their accustomed offices after a due
manner.

Take Roots of the great Bur Dock, of Butter-Burr, and Chervil of each an
Ounce: Leaves of Maidenhair, and Germander, of each a handful; Seeds of the
Great Bur Dock, of Bastard Saffron of each three Drams, Raisins two Ounces;
being slic't and bruised, let them Boil in three pounds of Fountain water till
the third part be Consumed, add of White Wind four Ounces, strain it into a
Flagon, into which put leaves of Scurvy Grass slic't a handful, Roots of
Elecampane preserved and small slic't half an Ounce, make a close and warm
Infusion for three hours, the Dose is six Ounces twice or thrice a day.

Of Affects of the Stomach which are wont to happen in the Scurvy.
SCorbutical persons are wont sometimes to be troubled with a great Oppletion
and Pain of the Stomach, also with a Nauseousness and Belching, and sometimes
also with a frequent and violent Vomiting; which kind of distempers sometimes
arise from the Chyle, there degenerated into a Mass of Corruption, but oftener
from the Morbifick Matter brought thither, either by the conveyance of the
Blood, or also of the nervous Juice, and either deposed within the Cavity of
the Stomach, or fixed in the Plexus's of the Nerves and in the Membranes: In
these kinds of Cases, if a Viscous, Stinking, or otherwise Offensive Matter, be
cast up by Vomit, and there be a suspicion that the cause lies within the
Cavity of the Stomach, its proper to give a gentle Vomit of Wine of Squills, or
of Salt of Vitriol; Or let the offending Humors be Purged off by Stool, either
by Extract of Rhubarb, or by its infusion, with the addition of Salt or Cream
of Tartar: But if the Matter sticks deeply within the Membranes, or the
Plexus's of the Nerves; Diaphoreticks, or things, that moderate the
effervescencies of the Salts do better; Let Elixir Proprietatis, or Flowers of
Sal Armoniack, or Spirit of Soot be frequently taken with Raddish Water
Compound, water of Earthworms, or some other Antiscorbutick Liquour. Mean
while, once or twice a day, let Fomentations of Wormwood, Centory, Flowers of
Cammomil, Roots of Gentian, and other things Boiled in White Wind, be applied
to the Region of the Stomach, with Woollen Cloths dip't into it warm and wrung
forth: The use of Glysters is proper, and Opiats often give great help.

Of the Belly Ach, and the Scorbutic Colic.
SCarce any affect requires a more speedy Physical help than the Colic and
gripes in the Belly, which frequently happen in the Scurvy: Against these evils
Glysters of various kinds, Fomentations, Liniments, and Cataplasms are
administered: The use of Opiates is found to be very necessary here: Certainly
in this Case that Praescript of Riverius chiefly has place, viz. that Purging
Pills be given with Landanum mixed with them, for a plentiful Evacuation by
seige, and Sleep being caused, the Fit often is taken away. Moreover Powders of
Shells, by which the sharp Salts are Imbibed, or fixed, conduce very much to the
removal of the Morbifick cause; for example. Take Crabs Eyes and Egg Shells of
each a Dram and a half, Pearl a Dram, make a Powder, divide it into twelve
Doses, whereof let one be taken every sixth hour, with a Scorbutic Water, or
with the Decoction of the Roots and Seeds of the great Burr Dock, as it is
above described, or also with Posset Drink, having the Roots and Seeds of the
great Bur Dock, and the Leaves of sweet Marjoram and Saxifrage Boiled in it,
and the leaves of Scurvy Grass infused. In the Scorbutic Colic, also in the
affects of the Stomach even now described, the use of Purging Spaw Waters, such
as we have at Epsom and Barnet often proves of an excellent effect.

Of the Diarrhaea or Looseness, and Dysenterical Affects.
AN inveterate Looseness, such as frequently happens to Scorbutical Persons,
ought by no means to be stopped with astringent Medicines, nor is it easily cured
by altering Medicines, or by Antiscorbuticks; Spaw-waters, impregnated with
Iron, or Vitriol, are the best Remedy for this Affect: Next these are
Artificial Spaws, or Chalybeate Medicines, which are wont to give a mighty
relief: Crocus Martis, duly prepared, is justly preferred before all others. I
have often used the following Method with good Success: In the first place, Let
a Purge be ordered of the Powder or Infusion of Rhubarb, with the addition of
Aromatic Astringents, and now and then let it be repeated, viz. within the
space of three or four days; on the other days let a Dose of the following
Electuary, to the quantity of a Nutmeg, be taken in the Morning, and at four of
the Clock. Take Conserve of Common Wormwood, made with an equal part of Sugar,
six Ounces; (in a hot Constitution, instead of this, let Conserve of Red Roses
be taken) Species Diarrhodon Abbatis, two Drams; white and red Saunders
powdered, of each a dram; the best Crocus Martis, half an Ounce; with a
sufficient quantity of Syrup of Steel, make an Electuary.

In Dysenterical Affects, and the Tenesmus, you must proceed after the like
method, especially let Spaw-waters be drank, if it may be; Moreover, let
Glysters, prepared of vulnerary Decoctions, be frequently used. I lately Cured
a certain person troubled with a long continued and dangerous Bloody Flux, who
had daily voided many Ounces of Blood by Siege for a long time, with this
Remedy; Take of the best Rhubarb powdered, an Ounce; red Saunders powdered, two
Drams; Cinnamon, a Dram; Crocus Martis, three Drams; Lucatellus Balsom, what
suffices; make a Mass for Pills. He took four Pills sometimes every day,
sometimes every other day, for a Fortnight, and was perfectly cured. To this
person also I prescribed a Physic Beer of the Infusion of the Roots of sharp
pointed Dock, and the Leaves of Brooklimes, to be constantly taken.

Of Giddines, and Swooning, and other Affects usually joined with it in the
Scorbutic Affect.
A Giddiness often happens upon an inveterate Scurvy, to which also a frequent
Swooning, and almost a continual danger of it, and likewise a numness in the
Members, and a sense of Formication, running sometimes in one place, and
sometimes in another, are wont to be joined; which kind of Affects proceed from
the failings of the Animal Spirits in their Origin it self, and sometimes from
the failings of the same with the Nerves, both belonging to the Heart, and to
the Members that serve for motion: and in regard thy depend on the Brain and
the Genus Nervosum, their being very much overcharged with a Scorbutic Salt,
they are not easily cured. Cephalic Remedies, such as are proper in a
Giddiness and Paralytick Affects raised by themselves, ought to be given with
Antiscorbuticks mixed with them: therefore in the first place, a Provision being
made for the whole, by fit Catharticks, and such as are proper in the Scurvy,
you may proceed after this manner with appropriated Remedies against the
foresaid Affects.

About the beginning of the Cure, let Blood be drawn from the Vessels of the
Fundament by Leeches; and unless somewhat indicates the contrary, let it be
frequently repeated afterward.

Take Powder of the Root of Male-Peony, half an Ounce, red Coral prepared, two
Drams; man's Scull, Elks-hoof, of each a Dram: Take double refined Sugar,
dissolved in Peony-water Compound, or in the Water of Horse-raddish, and boiled
to a Consistency for Tablets, eight Ounces; Oil of Amber excellently rectified,
half a Dram: Make Tablets according to Art. Take to a Dram and a half, or two
Drams, Morning and Evening, drinking after it a Draught of the following
distilled Water.

Take Leaves of Scurvy Grass, Brooklimes, Watercresses, Lillies of the Valley,
Sage, Rosemary, Betony, of each three handfulls; green Wallnuts, a Pound; the
Rinds of six Oranges and four Lemons; fresh Roots of Male-Peony, a Pound and a
half; being sliced and bruised, pour to them of the Phlegm of Vitriol, a Pound;
Whey made with Cider, five Pounds; let them the distilled after the common way;
let the whole Liquour be mixed together. The Dose is from three Ounces to four.

Of Haemorrhagies.
Haemorrhagies often threaten a mighty danger in the Scorbutic butick Affect,
the Diseased being thereby thrown headlong as it were into the Jaws of Death,
whilst the Blood breaks froth almost to a Swooning, sometimes from the
Nostrils, sometimes by the Menses, or Haemorrhoids: Moreover, being sometimes
cast up from the Lungs or Stomach, it gives us a Suspicion of an Ulcer, or at
leastwise of a great weakness lying hid in the part affected. Wherefore
excretions of Blood, if they are either immoderate, or happen in an improper
place, ought to be stopped for the present, and prevented for the future.

For stopping Blood when it breaks forth immoderately, the method is vulgarly
enough known, and there remains nothing more, or peculiar to be done, when
happening in this Affect by reason of the Scurvy, than on other Occasions. But
yet to prevent Haemorrhagies, let Remedies be administered which take away the
Acrimony of the Blood, and constringe the over-lax and gaping Mouths of the
Vessels: both intents are excellently performed by Chalybeate Medicines: the
use of Vitriolick Spaw-waters is very proper for this purpose: Moreover,
Infusions, Extracts, Salts, and the like Preparations of Steel, which contain
chiefly the saline or vitriolick part of the Iron, are always very profitable
against Haemorrhagies. We have shown before by what means Iron and its
preparations produce these effects, and diverse others, in Human Bodies.

Take Conserves of Red Roses, and of the Wild Rose of each three Ounces,
Species Diarrhodon Abbatis, and Diatrion Santalon of each a Dram and a half,
Salt of Steel a Dram, Crocus Martis excellently prepared two Drams, Red Coral
prepared a Dram and a half, with a sufficient quantity of Syrup of Steel, make
an Electuary, let the quantity of a Nutmeg be taken thrice a day, drinking
after it a draught of an Appropriated Liquor.

To poor people I use to prescribe thus; Take tops of Cypress and of stinging
Nettles, of each four Ounces; Brooklimes, two Ounces; let them be bruised in a
Mortar, with ten Ounces of double refined Sugar; then add Scales of Iron very
finely powdered, an Ounce; Powder of white and red Saunders, of each two Drams;
with a sufficient quantity of the Syrup of the Juice of nettles, make an
Electuary: The Dose is the quantity of a Wallnut twice a day.

Take of Distilled Water, or of a temperate Antiscorbutick Decoction, two
Pounds; our Steel prepared, two Drams; mix them in a Glass: The Dose is three
or four Ounces.

Take tops of stinging Nettles, Leaves of Brooklimes, of each Four Handfuls;
being bruised, let the Juice be pressed sorth; keep it in a Glass. The Dose is
two or three Ounces twice a day, with an Antiscorbutick distilled Water.

Of the Distempers of the Mouth, happening by reason of the Scurvy.
As Soon as the Scorbutic Taint seizes the parts of the Mouth, that the Gums
swell, and their flesh becomes Spongy, presently let Remedies be carefully
administered, which may keep them from Putresaction: Amongst these, washings of
the Mouth, and Liniments are of chiefest use, both when the Disease is
beginning about those parts, and when it is come to a greater height there;
though as they regard various intents, so they ought to be diversely prepared,
viz. the flesh of the Gums, when first it swells, ought to be freed from the
incursions of the Blood, or of the salt and corrupted Serum, and to be dried:
afterward, the flesh of the same grown flaccid, and fallen from the Teeth, ought
to be freed from Putrefaction, and also to be constring'd, that it might hold
the Teeth the faster. For these and happily other intents, let Gargarisms, or
Washings of the Mouth be ordered, of diverse kinds; of all which, in a manner
the chief ingredients are Vegetables boiled, and Minerals infused: The Herbs or
Roots, which are boiled in a fit Liquor, viz. in Water or Wine, for the most
part are smart or bitter, or stiptick; and then those Decoctions are
impregnated either with a volatile, lixivial, vitriolate, Chalybeate, or
aluminous Salt. I shall here set down certain forms of each kind.

1. When therefore the flesh of the Gums first swells, and becomes spongy by
reason of the Influx of the salt and corrupted Blood and Serum, Take the middle
Bark of Elder, and of Elm, of each half a Handful; Leaves of Savory, Sage, wild
Mustard, Gardencresses, of each a Handful; Roots of Pelitory of Spain, two
Drams; being sliced and bruised, let them boil in three Pounds of Water of
Lime, till a third part be consumed; if sweetning be required, add Honey of
Roses, two Ounces; make a Gargarism. Or, take Vitriol Camphorated, an Ounce;
(vulgarly with us it is called by the name of Captain Green's Power)
Fountain Water, two Pounds; mix them in a Glass; shake it and then when the
Liquor is grown clear by settling, let it be used. Or, prepare a Lixivium of the
Ashes of Broom, or of Rosemary, or of Tartar and Nitre Calcined: In three
Pounds of this, boil Leaves of Savory, Time, Sage, and Rosemary, of each a
Handful; let the straining be poured on two Handfuls of Scurvy Grass; make a
warm and close Infusion for three hours: Let it be strained again, and kept for
Washing the Mouth several times in a day.

For the same Intent, let Liniments also be applied betwixt whiles, and
espectally in the Night, that their Virtue may be conveyed to the Diseased even
when they are asleep. Amongst Authors, a common, famous, and long tried
Medicine is found: Take the Powder of the Leaves of Columbines, the Curled
Mint, Sage, Nutmegs, Myrrh, (which last nevertheless may be sometimes omitted)
of each two Drams; Burnt Allom, half an Ounce; Virgin-Honey, four Ounces, or
what suffices; make a Liniment according to Art.

2. If at any time the Flesh of the Gums growing Flaccid falls from the Roots
of the Teeth, let a Gentle Scarrification be often used, and also let the mouth
be washed with this Decoction. Take tops of Brambles and Cypress, Leaves of
Sanicle, and Cuckoo Flowers, of each a handful, Boil them in three pounds of
Water, in which Iron has been quenched till a third part be consumed, to the
straining ad Honey of Roses two Ounces mix them.

Let a Liniment of this kind be applied. Take Powder of the Roots of Florentine
Orris, Leaves of Sage and St. John's Wort of each two Drams. Bole Armeniack, Sal
Prunella of each a Dram, warm Virgin Honey what suffices, let them be
incorporated by stirring them.

3. When the Gums Putrify, and are Corrupted, and withal the Teeth being
Rotten grow loose, and emit a Stinking. Smell, let stronger Medicines, and such
as greatly resist putrefaction, be used, an infusion of Vitriol Camphorated,
also of the Lapis Medicamentosus, have chiefly place here.

Or, Take Roots of Gentian, and of Round Birth-wort slic't, of each half an
Ounce, Leaves of the Lesser Centory, Pontick Wormwood, Savory, Columbines of
each a handful, let them boil in three pounds of Lime Water, or of a Lixivial
Water, also sometimes in Water in which Iron has been quenched, sometimes in
Alum Water till a third part be consumed; to the straining add Crude Honey two
or three Ounces; mix them.

4. If the falling out of the Teeth be chiefly feared. Take Barks of the Roots
of the Sloe Tree an Ounce, Tormentil and whole Bistort of each a handful,
Pomgranate Rinds and Balaustia of each half an Ounce; Boil them in three pounds
of Fountain Water; to the Straining ad Alum two or three Drams, of the best
Honey two Ounces, mix them. Take Vitriol Complorated, Burnt Hartshorn of each a
Dram, Nutmegs half a Dram, of the best Honey what suffices; make a Liniment. Or,
Take Powder of the Roots of Bistort, Pomgranate-rinds, Bole Armoniack, Burnt
Alum of each a Dram, Honey of Roses what suffices, add Spirst of Vitriol a
Scruple, make a Liniment.

5. If at any time putrid and profoun'd Ulcers (as it sometimes happens)
infests the Gums, or other parts of the Mouth, let the forementioned stronger
Medicines be often administered: Moreover let a Cloth dipped in Vnguentum
Egyptiacum, dissolved in Spirit of Wine, or in an infusion of the Lapis
Medicamentosus, or of Sublimate, be now and then applied to the place affected.
In these Cases let the Cure be committed to to a skilful Surgeon.

Of Pains that are wont to trouble the Legs, and sometimes the other Limbs, and
that chiefly by Night.
AGainst these Pains, in regard that sometimes they are very vehement, besides
the general method of Curing the Scurvy, special Remedies, and such as obviate
that symptom are Indicated; therefore in such a case, a course of purging being
well ordered, also the Person being Blooded (if need be) we ought to set upon
the Disease both with inward Physic, and outward Topics.

As to the former, such things as promote Sweat, and also an evacuation by
Urine often give help, in as much as they draw another way the lixivial and
sharpish Recrements of the Blood and nervous Juice, that are wont to be
gathered together in the Part affected; but especially let those things be
given which free both Humors from their evil Disposition, viz. both saline and
sharpish: Powders of Shells, Crabs Eyes, the Jaw Bone of a Pike, also the
Spirit and Flowers of Sal Armoniack, Spirit of Blood, Tincture of Antimony, of
Coral; Decoctions of the Roots and Seeds of the great Burdock, Ground Pine, and
Germander do excellently well; and let those kinds of Remedies be taken twice
or thrice a day with Antiscorbutick distilled Waters. A Water distilled from
Horse-dung with the addition of Scurvy Grass, Brook-limes, Ground Pine, and the
like, is sometimes very profitable; mean while let Fomentations, Liniments,
Cataplasms, or applications of other kinds, which appease Pains, be outwardly
Administered.

Of the Scorbutic Gout moving from one place to another.
OF this Affect Eugalenus, Wierus, Medicus Campensis, and Georgius Horstius
have written peculiar Tracts: If is said to be very Common in the Northern
Parts of Belgia; a certain token of which appears by putting a live Earth-worm
to the place affected, for its presently wont to spring, bend and knit it self,
and to faint and dye; which indeed I have found pretty often to happen in this
Disease even amongst us; which effect seems to proceed from the very sharp, and
as it were Corrosive Effluvia, that plentifully flow from the place Pained and
Swollen: By Reason of the effect of that Experiment, the Cure of the Disease is
wont to be undertaken by Worms, viz. by Remedies prepared of them; though I
know not whether being inwardly taken they will as certainly destroy the
Disease, as being outwardly applied they are dispatched by it. However,
Earthworms, as also Snailes, Millepedes, and other exanguious little Animals,
in as much as they abound with a volatile Salt, often prove a pretty
efficacious Remedy.

Henricus Petraeus tells us of two Remedies very much used in Westphalia
against this Disease. Take nine Earthworms, bruised with two Spoonfuls of Wine
in a Mortar, and strained through a Cloth; to these let half a Measure of Wine
be added, let three Spoonfuls be taken at Morning, Noon, and Night for many
days. 2. Take two or three Branches of Savine, Virgin Honey two spoonfuls, boil
them with a Measure of Wine, till it pitches two Fingers: Let the straining be
taken to four or five spoonfuls thrice a day. To the former Medicine a certain
vulger potion, mentioned by Horstius, called, Monasteriensis is allied: Take
Sage, Betony, Rue, of each five Leaves, Earthworms with Circles about their
Necks, in number five, a little Savine, and Roots of Devils-bit in number two,
let them be bruised with Water of Elder Flowers, and let the expressed Juice be
given for raising a Sweat; A like prescript also is proposed in Forestus a
Medico Campensi.

Certainly in this affect, the Magistral Water of Earthworms prescribed in the
London Dispensatory is of excellent use. And I have often given with good
success the Spirit and Salt of Hartshorn, Spirit of Blood, and Flowers of Sal
Armoniack. Moreover teslaceous Powders, viz. Crabs Eyes, Coral, Pearl, and
Vegetables which are accounted Antidotes against the Gout, as Roots of round
Broth-wort, Leaves of Ground Pine, Germander, and the like, being joined with
Antiscorbuticks conduce to the Cure of this Disease; outwardly for appeasing
Pains, besides Anodynes which are used under the form of a Liniment,
Fomentation, or Cataplesm: Oil of Earthworms, of Frogs, and Toads are often
very availing. I have been told by a worthy Person who was very obnoxious to
this Disease, that Water drawn by Destillation from the Contents taken out of
the Stomach of a Beefnewly killed, and Clothes being dipped into it when Warm,
and applied as a Fomentation, would most certainly give ease.

Of Convulsive and Paralytick Affects, that are wont to ensue upon the Scurvy.
IF at any time the Scrobutick taint passing into the Brain, and Genus
Nervosum, greatly corrupts the Liquor residing in each Province; thereupon
diverse kind of Affects, and especially Paralytical or Convulsive are wont to
arise; viz. according as the Morbisick Matter brought in to be Animal Aeconomy
is either Narcotick or Explosive: Which kind of Affects, though in this case
they are Symptomatical, yet when they are grown to a hight, they challenge both
the name, and the better part of the Cure before the Scurvy their parent; so
that the diseased are said to be troubled with the Palsy, or Convulsions,
rather than with the Scurvy, also Medicines designed against those Affects,
have the preference to any others at the same time required by reason of other
intents.

For Curing these kinds of Affects happening upon the Scurvy, let this chiefly be
observed, that Remedies appropriated to those same be duly Complicated with
Antiscorbuticks. As to Convulsive Diseases, the Remedies that are in the
foregoing Tract may easily be Transferred hither: And as to the Palsy,
Lethargy, and many other Affects of the Brain, and Genus Nervosum, we shall
discourse of them particulary in some other Tract.

Of the Atrophia, also of the Scorbutic Fever which is often the Cause of the
other, or its Effect.
THere are three kinds of Causes, having some orderly dependence on each other,
from one or more of which a Scorbutical Atrophia is wont to be produced without
a Consumption of the Lungs, viz. either the Chyle is perverted through the
fault of the first passages, so that a laudable or sufficient Store or it is
not conveyed to the Blood. Secondly, or being brought into it yet through the
fault of the Blood it is not duly changed into Blood and a nutritive Juice.
Thirdly and lastly, the nutritive Juice prepared in the Mass of Blood, is not
duly assimilated to the solid parts, through the fault of the nervous Liquor.

The Remedies appropriated to this Symptom regard either the amendment of the
first Passages, or the correction of the foresaid Humors. As to the former, it
sometimes happens by reason of the Tone of the Stomach being broken, or its
Ferment being vitiated, that the Food taken into it is not duly concocted, but
passes into an unprofitable Mass of Corruption. For these sorts of evils let
gentle Catharticks, Digestives and Corroboratives be used: But the work of
Chylification is oftener hindered by reason of a Schirrous Tumor raised
sometimes in the Ventricle, sometimes in the Mesentery, or in other adjacent
parts: In this Case Deobstruents and Dissolvents are proper, the use of
Spaw-waters has the preferance to any other Rinds of Medicines: Moreover,
Fomentations, Liniments, or Plasters ought to be outwardly applied.

Again, it sometimes happens that without any Tumor raised in the Viscera, the
Lacteal Vessels are so much obstructed by a gross and viscous matter sticking
in them, that a sufficient store of the Chyle, though it be laudable enough and
plentifully prepared, is not conveyed into the Blood. In this affect the Belly
for the most part discharges Excrements plentifully, but they are White like
coagulated Milk, and not as other Excrements tinged with Choler or Stinking:
The reason of which is, that the Blood being depauperated, more sparingly
engenders Choler, from the eflusion of which into the Intestines the Color and
Stink of the Excrements proceed: In this case Spaw-waters are chiefly proper;
also Deobstruents being inwarldly given, let Liniments, Fomentations and Baths
be outwardly used.

Against the Marasmus, caused through the fault of the Blood degenerated from
its Crasis, Asses or Cows Milk, diluted with Barley Water, or a proper
distilled Water often give help. Snail Broaths, or Milk Drinks with Snals
boiled in them; moreover Waters distilled of Milk, or Whey with Snails and
temperate Antiscorbutick Herbs, are greatly conducing in this case: For this
end also Decoctions of vulnerary Herbs, and Antiscorbutick Herbs infused in
them, are taken with good success: Mean while let frictions be daily used to
the outward parts with Clothes moistened and made Warm with Vnguenticum
Resumptivum, or fresh oil of Almonds.

When an Atrophia arises through the fault of the Blood, being affected, and
consequently perverting the nutritive Juice, it has for the most part a Fever
of irregular returns joined with it, with Night-sweats, viz. in as much as the
Mass of Blood is forced to irregular and inconstant Effervescencies from that
degenerated Juice, and the matter so offending is cast forth by Night-sweats;
in this case, a thin Diet being ordered, let Decoctions and Distilled Waters,
that fuse and purify the Blood, be frequently taken, with Antiscorbuticks mixed
with them.

Take shavings of Ivory and Hartshorn, of each two Drams and a half; candied
Eringo Roots, six Drams; Roots of Chervil and Dandelion, of each half an Ounce;
Leaves of Hearts tongue and Liverwort, of each a handful; one Apple slic't;
Raisins, a handful; Let them boil in four Pounds of Fountain Water till a third
part be consumed; let the straining be poured on Leaves of Brooklimes bruised,
two handfuls; Sal Prunella, a Dram and half, or fixed Nitre, a Dram; make a
close and warm Infusion for three Hours: Let four or six Ounces be taken thrice
a Day.

Take Leaves of Brooklimes, four Pounds; Roots and Leaves of Sorrel and
Dandelion, of each two Handfuls; Snails cleansed, a Pound and a half; the Rinds
of two Oranges; being sliced and bruised, pour to them of new Milk, or of Whey
made with Cider or fresh Juice of Apples, six pounds; let them be Distilled
after the vulgar way: Let three Ounces be taken twice or thrice a day.

Of the Rheumatism.
WE conclude that this Affect proceeds from the congress and mutual
effervescency of Salts that are of a different origin and Nature, viz. of the
fixed Salt coming from the Blood, and of the acid Salt coming from the nervous
Liquor: The Subjects of both Salts are superfluous Dregs, deposed from the
foresaid Humors forced into certain Turgescencies, and discharged sometimes on
these Parts, sometimes on those: Wherefore that the Disease may be Cured, both
let the Turgescencies of the Humors be appeased, and their superfluous Dregs
be purged forth, and let the Salts degenerating both ways be reduced to a State
of volatility.

For the two first intents a gentle Purge and Bleeding are chiefly required,
and now and then, as the strength will bear, they ought to be repeated; and
also let Diuretics and Diaphoreticks be now and then given which any way
convey forth the Saline Serosities. And that these Evacuations proceeding
calmly, and with a well-bearing, and Nature assisting, may succeed the better,
let Opiats frequently be used. For the other Intent in which the chief stress
of the Cure consists, Alteratives, and especially such as are endowed with a
volatile Salt, greatly conduce: Wherefore in this case its a vulgar, but no
contemptible Medicine, to give twice or thrice a day to four or six ounces of
the Infusion of a Stonehorse Dung, made in a small Wine or Ale, or in an
appropriate Distilled Water: and a Medicine somewhat more grateful, and no less
efficacious, may be prepared, if a Water be distilled from that Dung, with
Antiscorbutick Ingredients infused in White Wind or Cider, which may be given
to three or four Ounces twice a day. I have often prescribed Spirit of
Hartshorn, and of Blood, in this case, with a mighty benefit to the Diseased.

Of the Dropsy.
WHereas we conclude the Dropsy, which is wont to happen upon the Scurvy, to
be twofold, viz. habitual and occasional; Concerning the Cure of the first, for
the most part all labor is lost; for no Remedies are able to restore the Liver
and the Lungs, and sometimes other Viscera, wholly vitiated, and the Crasis of
the Blood utterly subverted: In such a case, if any thing seems fit to be done,
the Scope of Physic is very narrow; for there is no room left for Catharticks,
nor Diaphoreticks, nor for a strong Evacuation of any other kind: We must
insist chiefly, and in a manner only, on Diuretics and Cordials. For these
ends let Elixirs, Tinctures, Electuaries, Powders, Infusions, Decoctions,
distilled Waters, etc. which consist partly of Antihydropicks, partly of
Antiscorbuticks be given; the forms of which I have nevertheless thought good
to omit, as signifying little or nothing.

The Scorbutic Dropsy, raised on a sudden from an evident cause, or on some
accident, often admits of Cure; for the more easy performance of which, the
tumults of Nature ought in the first place to be appeased, and its disorders
composed. Wherefore if Watchings continue very offensive, let sleep be procured
by the use of Opiats, and now and then, as often as it seems very necessary,
let it be procured again. As soon as strength will give leave for Purging, let
the following Powder be taken, and let it be now and then repeated at due
intervals of time: mean while let the Belly be kept soluble by the frequent use
of Clysters.

Take Mercurius Dulcis, a Scruple; Rosin of Julape, from five Grains to ten;
Cloves, half a Scruples; mix them; let it be given in a Spoonful of Panada; at
other times let Diuretics, and sometimes Diaphoreticks be carefully taken.

Take Tincture of Salt of Tartar, impregnated with the Infusion of Millepedes,
as much as you think good; let it be given from a Scruple to two Scruples twice
a day, with an appropriated Liquor.

Take Spirit of Sal Armoniack, what you think good; the Dose is from half a
Scruple to fifteen drops, after the same manner.

Take Millepedes prepared, three Drams; Salt of Tartar, two Drams; Nutmegs, a
Dram; mix them; make a Powder. The Dose is half a Dram twice a day, with an
appropriated Liquour.

Or, Take Bees dried and powdered, two Drams, Seeds of Bishopsweed powdered, a
Dram; Oil of Juniper, a Scruple; Turpentine, what suffices; make a Mass of
Pills. The Dose is from a Scruple to half a Dram twice a day, drinking after it
an appropriated Liquor.

Take Leaves of both Scurvy-grasses, Watercresses, Dittander, Arsmart, of each
three handfuls; Roots of Aron, Briony, Florentine Orrice, of each four Ounces;
the middle Bark of Elder, two Handfuls; Winters-bark, two Ounces; the outward
Coats of four Oranges, and of three Lemons; fresh Juniper Berries, four Ounces;
being slic't and bruised, pour to them of Rhenish-wine three Pounds; Wine of
the Juice of Elder-berries, two Pounds; Distill them the vulgar way; let all
the Water be mix't. The Dose is from three Ounces to four twice a day, after a
Dose of some one of the Medicines above prescribed.

Let Decoctions and Physick-Beers be prepared, such as above written,
Antihydropick Ingredients being added to them.

Of the Crackling of the Bones.
THere remains yet a symptom which happens sometimes upon the Scurvey, though
rarely, viz. the crackling of the Bones, into the Nature and Cure of which it
seems to concern us to enquire. I have known some, though scarce above three or
four, who being long Sick of the Scurvy, found themselves afflicted by it, not
only in the Humors, and the Carneous Parts, but at length in the very Bones:
For as often as they moved any Member any way, the ends of the Bones, as though
they were bare, rubbing against each other, made a mighty noise: Moreover, when
they lay in their Bed, and there turned themselves from one side to the other,
a mighty Crackling was heard, as it were of a Scelleton forcibly shaken,
terrifying even the persons affected.

The conjunct cause of this happily may seem to be, That the soft Interstice of
the Bones, viz. the Fat, Membranes, and Ligaments being greatly consumed, their
Joints, as Millstones when bare without any Corn, by reason of their mutual
rubbing against each other, make a noise: But the thing appears to be
otherwise, because neither persons mightily consumed have this Cracking of the
Bones, nor do persons troubled with this Affect always waste away; wherefore,
we say rather that the immediate Cause of this Symptom is the dryness of the
Bones, or the defect of the Marrow properly so called, which ought to be
contained within the Cavities of the Bones, and especially within their Joints;
for since all Bones include a Marrow or unctuous Humor, either in the great
Cavities, or in the Pores and small Passages every where made in them, we
conclude the use of this to be both, that the Bones irrigated with the same,
may become less brittle, and likewise that that Humor, distilling from the
Joints of the Bones, may make slippery all the Joints, as the Joints of a
Machine besmeared with Grease, and may so facilitate the motions of them;
wherefore the ends of the Bones, destitute of this Marrow, make a noise just as
the Wheels of a Cart seldom greased.

If you ask why that unctuous substance of the Joints fails; I say this seems
chiefly to happen because the Pores and Passages of the Bones are so much
obstructed by a certain extraneous Matter, happily of a Slimy or Tartarous
Nature, brought to them from the Blood, that they do not sufficiently receive
the Balsam designed for them, nor distill it forth for moistning their Joints;
but it will not be easy (the thing being wholly in the dark) to search out the
particular Reasons of this Affect.

Nor are we less at a loss when we proceed to the Cure of this Disease; for
though the Primary Indication, viz. the moistning of the Bones or of the Joints
be obvious enough, yet it does not so plainly appear after what Manner, and by
what Remedies it is performed. For in this case I have known a great many kinds
of Medicines, and various ways of Administrations tried wholly in vain. A
certain Ingenious Man, extremely troubled with this Disease for many years,
tried the Advice of many, and those Famous Physicians; Besides the usual
Remedies against the Scurvy (together with frequent Bleedings and Purgings,
from which he found not the least Relief) he tried moreover various and great
Courses of Physic, without any success: For after a method used by one
Physician for some Months without Effect, he presently betook himself to
another, and so afterward to many; mean while, by each always a new way of
Curing, untryed by the former, is prescribed; Fomentations, Liniments, and
Frictions are applied daily to each of his Joints; he used for some time the
hot Baths of Bathe; afterward Spaw-waters of various kinds, sometimes these,
sometimes others are drank: Which giving no help, a Chalybeat course, at
another time a Decoction of temperate Woods, sometimes a Milk Diet; and at all
time Electuaries, distilled Waters, Apozems, and other Remedies prepared of
Antiscorbuticks are taken: And when he had lived after this manner, above three
years almost constantly, Medice and misere, there was not made the least
progress toward the Cure of the forementioned Affect; yet in the mean time he
was pretty well as to his Strength and Stomach, married a Wife, and as to the
other more common Symptoms of the Scurvy he was better. So that it hence
appears, how stubborn a Disease, and unconquerable by almost any Medicines, the
crackling of the Bones is; which I have known confirmed also in others troubled
with this Affect, and wholly cluding the endeavors of a Physician.

CHAP. V. Of the Vital Indication, in which are included Cordial Medicines,
Opiats, and the Diet requisite in the Scurvy.
HItherto we have set forth at large the Indications both Preservatory and
Curatory, which belong to the Method of Curing the Scurvy; there remains yet to
speak of the Vital Indication, to wit, that it may be declared by what Method,
and with what Remedies the powers of the Diseased, which either being too apt
to faint, may be upheld, or being weakn'd or dejected may be restored: For
these ends Cordials and Opiats, according to the Exigencies of the Diseased,
are prescribed to be taken, and moreover let a right Form of Diet, if at any
time it be needful, Resumptive, and always Antiscorbutick be prescribed.

As to Cordial Medicines, viz. such a exagitate the Blood stagnating in the
Heart, renew its flame half extinct, restore the oppressed, or distracted Animal
Spirits to their liberty and due irradiation, it is obvious that many Remedies,
which are properly called Antiscorbuticks, perform these intents, of which kind
are, Raddish-water compound, the Magistral Water of Snails and of Earthworms,
Spirit of Hartshorn, of Soot, Powders of Shells, with many other things, which
may be taken with good effect, not only at certain hours, and according to a
set Method, but likewise as occasion presents, as often as a Swooning, or any
failings of the Spirits happen.

But besides, those who are found to be very obnoxious to Passions of the
Hearts, frequent Faintings, a Nauseousness, Vomiting, Trembling, Vertigo and
other terrible Symptoms, may also have in a readiness, Medicines of another
kind, more properly Cordial, with hich, all failings of the Spirits are
immediately relieved: In this case, Quercetan's great Elixir of Life, does
excellently well; the second Water in the distillation of the same Elixir being
sweetened, may be given to a spoonful; also Aqua Mirabilis, Aqua Bezoartica,
Gilberts temperate Water, Treacle-water, Cinnamonwater; to each of which, or to
a Composition of them, let the Confection of Alkermes, the Confection of
Hyacinth, Powder of Pearl, or Magistery of Coral, Syrup of Clove-gilliflowers
or of Coral, of Citron-pills, of Cinnamon be added: Of these, and others of
this kind various forms of Medicines are wont to be prescribed. For example;

Take Treacle-water, and Aqua Mirabilis, of each three Ounces, Bawm-water four
Ounces; Syrup of Clove-gilliflowers an Ounce and a half; Confection of Alkermes
a Dram; mix them. The Dose is three or four Spoonfuls.

Or, Take Aqua Mirabilis six Ounces; Water of Snails and of Wallnuts, of each
two Ounces, Pearl powdered a Scruple; Confection of Hyacinth a Dram; Syrup of
Clove-gilliflowers an Ounce; mix them.

When Scorbutic Women are wont to be troubled with Hysteric Fits, and Men
with Convulsions Take Water of Bawm and Pennyroyal, of each three Ounces;
compound Briony-water four Ounces, Tincture of Castoremn half an Ounce;
Tincture of Saffron a Dram; Syrup of Clove-gilliflowers a Dram and a half;
Castoreum tied in a Nodulus, and hung in the Glass a Dram. The Dose is three or
four Spoonfuls.

For those who desire rather to have Cordial Medicines in a solid form; let
Electuaries or Tablets be prescribed.

Take Conserve of Clove-gilliflowers three Ounces; Confection of Alkermes half
an Ounce; Pearl powdered a Dram, with a sufficient quantity of Syrup of Coral;
make an Electuary.

Take Species Diamargariti Frigidi, and Diarrhodon Abbatis, of each a Dram and
a half; Pearl powdered a Dram; double refined Sugar dissolved in Treacle-water,
and boiled to a consistency for Tablets four Ounces; Oil of Cinnamon six drops;
make Tablets according to Art.

As to Opiats and Anodine Medicines, in some certain affects of Scorbutic
persons, I had rather be without any kind of Medicine besides, than the use of
them. For not only against obstinate Pains and Watchings, but in Asthmatick
Fits, in Vomitings, a Diarrhaea, and also in a Vertigo and Convulsive Passions,
as often as nature being irritated above measure, falls into extreme
irregularities, I have found no Remedy more excellent, than to procure sleep by
giving a safe Narcotick: Mean while there is need of a very great caution, that
they be not taken, if at any time something in the Constitution of the
Diseased, or in the nature or time of the Disease, forbids the giving of such a
Medicine.

Besides the Hypnoticks usual in Apothecaries Shops, viz. Laudanum Opiatum,
Nepenthe, the Philonia, Diacodium, and Syrup of red Poppies, two other
preparations of Opium are known to me, which I use to give in the form of a
Tincture, or of a liquid Extract from ten drops to twelve with some other
appropriate Liquour.

The Diet, or Form of Living to be observed in Scorbutical persons, is of no
small importance in the Method of Cure; for that being neglected or ill
ordered, the other Prescripts of Physic do little or nothing toward Health:
The Rule of Diet being extended to various things, is chiefly concerning the
Air and Situation of the Habitation, Meat and Drink, and the motion or rest of
the Body.

As to the first, what kind of habitations and places of Residence, in respect
of the Heavens and the Earth, cause the Scurvy, and consequently ought to be
shunned, it is sufficiently manifested by what we have said before: Those that
endeavor to prevent or cure this Disease, ought to take care to choose an Air
moderately hot and dry, and which also is subtle and pure, and sufficiently
exposed to the Winds.

Such Food only is proper which has a good Juice, and is easy of Concoction,
let such as is gross, viscous, and dried in the Smoke, moldy and rank, also
such as is unfermented or greatly compounded, all manner of Pulse, Milk-meats
and unripe Fruits be shunned. I so much disapprove things preserved, or very
much seasoned with Sugar, that I judge the invention of it, and its immoderate
use to have very much contributed to the vast increase of the Scurvy in this
late Age: For that Concret consists of a very sharp and corrosive Salt, though
mitigated with a Sulphur, as it plainly appears from its Chemical Analysis: For
Sugar distilled by it self, yields a Liquour scarce inferior to Aqua Stygia: And
if you distill it in a Vefica with a great deal of Fountain Water, poured to it,
though the fixed Salt will not so ascend, nevertheless a Liquour will come from
it, like the Hottest Aqua Vitae, burning and very pungent; when therefore Sugar
mixed almost with any sorts of Food, is taken by us in so great a plenty, how
probable is it that the Blood and Humors are rendered salt and sharp, and
consequently Scorbutical by its daily use? A certain famous Author has laid the
cause of the English Consumption on the immoderate use of Sugar, amongst our
Countrymen: I know not whether the cause of the spreading Scurvy, may not also
be rather hence derived.

Let the Drink be midling Ale, mild and clear, and also let it be altered with
Antiscorbutick Ingredients without an ungrateful favor: Let it not be thick
and sweet, nor also too old and turning sharp: Let this be taken in a moderate
quantity, and in a manner only at the set hours of Dinner and Supper: The
custom which has prevailed with many, viz. that as soon as they are out of their
Beds, they presently indulge themselves to drink a large Mornings Draught (as
they call it) seems very pernicious: For by this means the Blood Vessels are
too much filled, a store of new Chyle being almost continually sent into them,
and Crudities and Filthy Morbifick Dregs are engendered in the Blood, and the
office of Sanguification is greatly debilitated: Truly it is better for most
Men (unless it be those whose Ventricle, as long as it is empty, is wont to be
plainfully contracted and corrugated) to keep themselves fasting till Dinner
time: Nor is that vulgar custom less contrary to Health, to swill themselves
with much Drink presently after Meat: Wines and Ciders, so they are mellow,
pure, and not adulterated, being taken in a moderate quantity, do not offend:
But the same being counterfeit, musty, austere, or turning sharp, there is
nothing more hurtful or injurious to our Health

Exercises and Labor are so notably conducing both to the cure and prevention
of the Scurvy, that many by this sole Remedy, either preserve or recover an
entire Health: For the Blood and Nervous Liquour of persons that lead an idle
and sedentary Life, (like Stagnating Waters) contract a clamminess and
mouldiness: But upon the assiduous and much motion of the Body, the Humors and
Spirits become clear, and get a vigor, the Excrementitious and Heterogeneous
Particles evaporate, the stuffings of the Bowels are purged, and their Tone is
corroborated.

CHAP. VI. Some Stories and rare Cases of Persons troubled with the Scurvy.
A Woman of Renown, tall and graceful, about the twenty fifth year of her Age,
had contracted a Scorbutic Taint, by reason of various errors committed in
Diet. The signs of which were a Spontaneous Lassitude, a difficult Breathing,
Pains and Spots in the Legs, and her Gums likewise swollen, and full of Blood;
in the Spring time after an Abortion, falling into a Tertian Ague, she soon
became in a languishing and weak condition, from which Disease nevertheless,
first being Methodically proceeded with in Physic, she had soon recovered, but
that indulging her self to eat Flesh and other improper things, she soon had a
Relaps; and then being a weary of Physic, she took only Empirical Remedies,
with which sometimes the Fits of the Ague were driven away, but often presently
returned, mean while the Diseased being pale, unable for motion, and wanting
Breath, continued swol'n and blown up about the Ventricle and Hypochondres.
About the third Month of her being sick, she began to have Gripes and bitter
Tortures in her Belly; with which shooting sometimes to the Back, sometimes to
the Stomach she was afflicted almost continually day and night: Moreover she
was affected with a frequent Vertigo, and sometimes with Fits as it were,
Hysterical: Also being troubled with a frequent Vomiting, she daily threw up a
viscous and froathy Phlegm: Within a Months space this Disease passing to its
highest pitch, raised pains in the Back and Loins, and so afterward in all the
parts of the Body: Besides, at this time she complained of a mighty straitness
of her Breast, and a great contraction of the Viscera: Mean while the habit of
the Body fell away to a mighty Leanness, so that the Bones being destitute of
Flesh, scarce stuck to the Skin; the Urine was little and very ruddy; on the
surface of which grew a little thin Film garnished with various colors like
the Tail of a Peacock: A short while after this, a Numness and Formication was
perceived sometimes in the Belly, sometimes in the Limbs, and afterward the
Gripes and Pains began to remit; nevertheless in their stead, a Palsy
succeeded, which within a weeks space so pervaded all the Members of the whole
Body, that she was not able to bend, or any way to stir from its place either
Hand or Foot, or any other part.

It is obvious that those severe Symptoms proceeded from a Scorbutic Root, for
by reason of the taint principally fixed on the Blood, the Spontaneous
Latssiude, the difficult Breathing, nay, and the intermitting Fever happening at
random, and often returning, and the Bickerings of other Symptoms previous, as
it were, and light, were caused: Again the Lixivial Urine, and that diversified
color of it plainly showed the Blood to be seized with a Sulphureo-saline
Discrasie; which kind of Urine I have observed to be so marked in many others,
affected with the like Disease: Moreover when in this sick Lady, the Morbid
Seminal Root being increast in its store, and flowing into the Mass of Blood,
came to spread it self on the Confines of the Brain and Genus Nervosum, the
other more violent affects arose.

This Lady living far hence, by the advice of a Neighboring Physician took
Medicines usual against the Colic; which doing no good, and the Disease
growing worse, the Patient being brought to Oxford, tried a great many Remedies
both Antiscorbutick and Antiparalyticks almost of every kind and form, though
without any benefit: Since therefore any ordinary Method of healing seemed not
sufficient for this Disease, it was thought good to proceed to great Remedies,
and truly such as were not wholly void of danger: Wherefore we gave this sick
person, as weak and worn away as she was, a Mercurial Medicine for raising a
Salivation, which effect ensued according to our desire, for a Flux arising
within two days, and gently continuing for many days without any ill Symptom,
gave a very great relief to the noble Lady: For the Pains being mitigated, she
began in some measure to move her Limbs, to have a better Stomach, and to
digest here Food better, and to enjoy a quiet Sleep: The Salivation being over,
she took a Decoction of Sarza and China, with Antiparalytick Ingredients for a
few days: Afterward being carried to Bathe, and having there used the temperate
hot Baths, for some time she recovered an indifferent state of Health. The
whole Winter she constantly took Medicines against the Scurvy and the Palsy:
And upon her renewing the use of the hot Baths the year following, she grew
perfectly well; and since is become the joyful Mother of many Children.

A Man forty years of Age, of a Melancholic Temperament, troubled with the
Scurvy for many years, is wont to find at various times of the year manifold
and diversified Symptoms of it: About his Legs, spots and large black marks,
like those caused by a stroke, appear, Belly-achs, and a Looseness frequently
trouble him, his Urine for the most part appears Lixivial, a Spontaneous
Lassitude, a languishing of the Strength, a want of Appetite almost constantly
attend him; besides these ordinary as it were accustomed evils, he lives
moreover obnoxious to violent Fits of sickness, and those of various kinds.
Above two years since, when I first went to see him, he sorely complained of a
difficult Breathing, as though he were in danger of being choked, with a
Trembling of the Heart, failings of the Spirits, and a frequent danger of
Swooning: Moreover of any thing of these passions in the Praecordia a little
remitted, for the most part he was assailed with a cruel Scotomia and a
Vertigo; he seemed to have perfectly recovered of these affects, after that he
had taken for sometime Anticonvulsive Remedies, complicated with
Antiscorbuticks: Butafterwrad within a few weeks he was affected with a
Nauseousness and a Heart-burning, and with an Inflation of the Hypochondres:
His Urine was little and very lixivial, his Belly swelled in a short time,
moreover his Feet and Legs growing mighty oedematous, showed the marks of an
invading Dropsy: Afterward the like kind of Tumor seized the Thighs, also the
Flesh of the Back and Arms; which affect nevertheless, though it seemed without
hope, was easily cured with Antiscorbutick Remedies, Catharticks and Diuretics
being joined with them: Notwithstanding, this worthy Man, though restored to
his Health, did not continue so long: For half a year being scarce over, he
began to complain of a violent Headache, with a Vertigo, and an obstinate
Watching; afterward without any evident cause, he was seized with a horrible
Vomiting: In a short time after the Asthmatick Fits returned, with a trembling
of the Heart, and failings of the Spirits: At this time also, when he seemed
almost past hope, he recovered again in a short while by the use of
Antiscorbutick Remedies: From this case it clearly appears how great evils the
Scorbutic Miasm, lying hid like a ferment, both in the Blood and in the
Nervous Juice, and displaying its Venom according to occasion, may cause. Which
kinds of affects nevertheless, how dreadful and terrible soever they seem, so
they depend only of the Humors being vitiated in their Crasis, and not on the
Viscera injured in the whole, or in their conformation, for the most part they
are wont to be Cured with little ado, viz. by an Antiscorbutick Method aptly
ordered according to the condition of the Patient as well as of the Disease.

A Renowned Lady, about Twenty five years of Age, of a Sanguine Temperament,
and a thin habit of Body, fresh colored and handsome, had been ill of a
Scorbutic Affect of a long time: For besides broad Spots and red Pushes
breaking forth in diverse parts of the Body, she had been wont to undergo for a
long time Pains and bitter Tortures, chiefly infesting her by night, one while
in the Shins, another while in the Arms: In regard she was with Child, she had
been forced to leave off a course of Physic, often begun in order to its Cure.
After he last Childbirth, her Lochia flowing plentifully, she continued for
many days faint and weak, with a difficult Respiration, and being out of Breath
upon any motion: A Month after being delivered, being taken out of Bed, and
attempting to walk, she fell into a most severe difficulty of Breathing, with a
Trembling of the Heart, and a frequent Fainting of the Spirits: Being presently
put to Bed, she continued almost for a whole day still Trembling, and
continually Panting: Moreover the lower Limbs, as though Death were at hand,
being quite chilled, waxed not warm by any Frictions or Applications of warmed
Clothes: At length, after near four and twenty hours, upon the frequent giving
of strong Cordials, she was better about the Praecordia, though there followed
near the right Groin, in the top of the Thigh, a very acute Pain, reaching even
to the Leg, and within a few hours a pretty hard swelling, resisting the touch,
possessed all that space: Being called at this time, the Diseased still fetching
her Breath short and with difficulty, presently having ordered a Clyster to be
forthwith injected, I gave her twelve drops of Spirit of Hearts-horn in a
spoonful of the following Julape.

Take Water of Snails, six ounces, Hysteric Water four ounces, Water of
Wall-nuts, simple, and of Pennyroyal, of each three ounces, Sugar one ounce,
Castoreum tied in a Rag, and hung in the Glass, a Dram. These Medicines were
repeated every sixth Hour.

I ordered a large vesicatory to be applied to the inward part of the Thigh;
then in the Evening, in regard during this whole Fit she had continued without
Sleep, I gave her of Laudanum a grain, Pearls powdered six grains, confection of
Alkermes without Musk half a dram: she slept quietly, and there next Morning
she was much relieved, the pain and swelling of the Thigh somewhat abated, also
while she lay quiet in her Bed, she was well about the Precordia, but sitting
upright, or turning on one side, presently she seemed almost ready to dye
through straitness of Breath; she continued the use of the Spirit of Hartshorn
and of the Julep, to be repeated every sixth hour for many days. Moreover,
because she was pressed with Thirst, and made water always in a small quantity,
ruddy, and filled with contents, she took twice a day a Dose of the following
Julep to six Drams.

Take roots of Grass, Chervil, preserved Eringos, of each six drams, shavings
of Ivory and Hartshorn, of each two Drams, burnt Hartshorn a dram and a half,
Raisins two ounces, one Apple sliced, Licorish two drams and a half, being
sliced and bruised, let them boil in three pounds of Fountain Water; till a
third part be consumed: then four ounces of Whitewine being added to it, let it
be strained into a Flagon, to which put Leaves of Scurvy Grass, and Brooklimes,
of each a Handful; Salt of Wormwood two drams, make a close and warm infusion
for three Hours, let the straining be kept in Vessels close stopped. Sometimes
every day, sometimes every other day a Clister was administered: By the use of
these things she seemed to grow better daily, so that within a weeks space
arising from her Bed, she was able to sit up two or three Hours by the fire in
her Chair: but if she kept from her Bed, or walked a little more than was
fitting, she was presently wont to fall into a straitness of Breathing, or a
fit of the Asthma, so that on a certain day having stayed out of Bed too long,
she underwent a violent fit of the Disease, and was affected with a difficult
Breathing, a trembling of the whole Body, and frequent Swoonings: Being called
again by reason of this Relaps of the sick Lady, I gave her Spirit of
Hartshorn to twenty drops, with the Julep above prescribed, and in the Evening
a dose of our Laudanum: and as thereby she found her self better about the
Precordia, Pains and Swellings succeeded in the right Thigh and Leg, such as
before had paned in the left. I ordered also vesicatories to be applied to that
Thigh; and besides the Remedies hitherto mentioned, she took twice a day of our
Wine of the Juice of Scurvy Grass four ounces, with two ounces of the Magistral
Antiscorbutick Water: Moreover, I ordered her to be purged with our Solutive
Syrup, above prescribed; which doing well, I ordered it to be repeated within
three or four days. By these Remedies she grew well within a Month.

A Noble man about the thirty third year of his Age, seeming to be of a
sanguine Temperament, tall and slender, of a very acute Wit, and quick
understanidng, tho he had used himself for a long time to immoderate and
excessive Studies, together with a disorderly way of Diet, yet being still
sprightly and full of vigor, he seemed to enjoy a sound Mind in a sound Body:
a little more than two years since, when he had greatly tired himself by
dancing a whole Night with Friends, and in the Morning being put in a cold Bed
in a Room that was too moist, and having slept a little, he began to be sick;
for upon his awake he fell into a mighty troublous Passion about the Precordia,
with terrible Swoonings as though he were ready to dye. After a draught of Wine
and some cordial Remedies taken, he was a little better, but he often relapsed,
so that all that day both himself and his Friends dreaded either a swoon
without returning to himself, or an imminent Apoplexy: Moreover, after that
this Fit of the Disease was past, yet still he lived obnoxious to daily
passions of the Heart, and upon any great Error committed in Diet, he was wont
to be afflicted again with a violent fit. Notwithstanding the use of Remedies,
the Disease growing worse within a few Months, did not only infest the
Precordia, but in the whole habit of the Body Expansions sometimes of heat,
sometimes of cold, moreover in the Limbs a numbness or formication, or light
Convulsions, and sudden contractions were raised; but of late, besides the
Symtoms hitherto mentioned, which still greatly molest the Noble Person, he is
moreover sorely afflicted with a frequent Vertigo, and with Distractions and
Failings of the Spirits residing in the Fore-brain, insomuch that he is forced
to abstain from the Studies and Politic Employs (to which he has been always
addicted) and even from any strong intention of the Mind; for otherwise he
feels both in the Head and in the genus nerevosum these troublous Passions,
that he may fear either an invasion of the Apoplexy, or horrible Convulsive
Affects: a great fit of this Disease pressing upon him, the Ventricle also for
the most part is disturbed: Moreover, he has often found ease after a Vomit,
either happening of its own accord, or raised by the help of an Emetick Medicine:
Hence some have judged the cause of the Disease to be seated wholly about the
Stomach, or Hypochondres: Nevertheless Cathartick Medicines, Emeticks,
Digestives, Cephalicks, Antiscorbuticks, Chalybeats, and others almost of every
kind, prescribed to this Person for two years by famous Physicians, and also by
Empiricks and Mountebanks, have not effected a cure: he lately tried Astrop
Waters, but finding himself the worse by them, he presently left them off, and
is now advised to drink the Sulphurous Waters at Knaresborough in Yorkshire:
But what success he finds in them I know not at present.

This case in regard by reason of the concourse of the various Symptoms, it
does not belong to any peculiar kind of Disease else, is justly referred to the
Scurvy. As to the Method of Cure to be used in this and the like cases, there
are two Intentions on which we must chiefly insist: viz. First, we must cleanse
the Mass of Blood, and withdraw the offensive Ferments conveyed to it from the
Stomach, Spleen, and happily other of the Viscera. Secondly, the Brain and Genus
Nervosum ought to be strengthened, lest they admit extraneous Particles: and the
nervous juice that lies in those Parts, degenerating from its due Crisis to a
sharp and otherwise morbid Nature, ought to be restored and rectified: the
first of these is performed by Catharticks, Emeticks, bleeding, and especially
specific Medicines, correcting or wholly taking away the scorbutic taint of
the Blood. Now that the Iron or vitriolick Spaws, that famous cleanser of the
Blood, did rather injury than give help to this Person, the reason seems to be,
both that the Brain being become weak by reason of Cephalic Affects, with
difficulty throws off the filthy glut of Waters sent into the Blood, nay, and
is in danger of being overwhelmed by it, as it violently makes to its confines:
and likewise, because when the nervous Liquor degenerating from its Crasis
inclines to a sharpish Nature, it is wont to be more perverted by the fluid
Salt of the Spaw Waters. Wherefore we generally observe that in the Rheumatism
and Gout the morbid Disposition is increast by the drinking of those Waters.
The second Intent is excellently performed by Cephalic Remedies, and
especially such as are endowed with a volatile Salt, of which kind are Spirit
and Salt of Blood, of Soot, of Hartshorn, the roots and Seeds of Peony, leaves
of Mistletow of the Oak, etc. with which Antiscorbuticks are mixed.

The London Practice OF PHYSIC, CONTAINED In Dr. Willis's Tract of the
Diseases that regard the Corporeal Soul, and its subjects, viz. the Brain and
Genus nervosum.
CHAP. I. Instructions and Prescripts for the Cure of the Headache.
SInce all Pain is an Action violated, or an irksom Sensation depending on the
contraction or corrugation of the Nervous Fibers, the subject of the Headache
must be the parts of the Head that are most nervous, that is, the Nerves
themselves, also the Fibers and Membranes, whereof it has many, placed both
upon and under the Scull; and those parts which are affected with pain are
chiefly the two Meminges and their various Processes, the Tunicles of the
Nerves, the Pericranium, and other Periostia; the Muscles, the Panniculus
carnosus, and lastly, the Skin it self: As to the Brain and Cerebellum, and
their medullary appendixes, we conclude that these Bodies, in regard they want
sensible Fibers, apt to be corrugated and distended, continue free from pain;
and so the same is also to be said of the Scull.

Now whenever a pain is raised any where about the nervous parts of the Head,
its formal cause consists in this, that the animal Spirits being severed from
each other, and put to flight, cause the Bodies that contain them to be withal
convulsed and corrigated, and so raise that troublesome sensation: And that
which so distracts the Spirits, that a troublesome sensation thence arises, is
somewhat disproportionate, rushing against the Spirits themselves, or the
Bodies that contain them, which entering the Pores or Interstices of the Fibers,
severs them from each other, and withal forces the Spirits there residing to
Irregularities.

As to the Prognostic of this Disease; in case the morbid disposition be
inveterate, so that Fits for many years have often returned of their own
accord, and likewise upon any slight occasion, we predict that the diseased,
though not much in danger of life, will not easily be cured: Moreover, that the
Cure will be yet more difficult, if hypochondriacal, or hysteric affects often
troubling them, are wont at frequent times to raise the Headache, or if the
corrupted taint of an inveterate Venereal distemper be radicated in the Part
affected.

And if the Headache be not only inveterate, but almost continual, that we may
justly suspect it to arise from a phlegmonous or schirrous Tumor, an
Erysipela, Abscesses, or Worms, there remains but small or no hope of Cure.

A Headache, whether continual or periodical, if it be violent, and has a
Vertigo, Vomiting, and other affects, either convulsive or sleepy joined with
it, gives suspicion of great danger; forasmuch as it frequently passes into a
mortal Apoplexy, and often into an Epilepsy, Palsy, Blindness, Deasness, and
other Diseases, either very severe or incurable.

The Therapeutick method of the Headache comprehends many Indications, and
those of various kinds, according to the manifold species, causes, and
differences of this Disease, which it will not be easy to digest, and place
all here in an exact order.

An accidental, or occasional Headache, viz. such as is wont to arise from an
evident cause alone, without any Procatarxis, or previous disposition, as when
it happens upon drinking Wine, Surfeiting, being in the Sun, or through a
vehement exercise, also in fits of Fevers, this for the most part ceases of
its own accord, upon the removal of the evident cause, and its consequences; or
at leastwise is taken away by bleeding, rest, and sweating.

In every habitual Headache, whether continual or intermittent, two chief
scopes of curing occurr; to which all the other Therapeutick intentions ought
to level, and with which provision is made against each cause of the morbid
origin.

1. viz. In the first place, for the cutting off all the fuel of the Disease,
we must endeavor, both that the matter flowing, or oftentimes apt to flow to
the affected or ill disposed places of the Head, be either stopped, or withdrawn
thence to some other place: and likewise that the Convulsions raised in other
places, and thence wont to be propagated to the Head be prevented.

2. Then Secondly, in order to the eradicating of the Disease it self, or (if
it may be) of its conjunct Cause, we must endeavor, that the places of the
Head predispos'd for Aches (whether only weak, or injured in their
conformation) being fortified against the frequent incursions of the offensive
matter, recover their ancient state and vigor; which Indication, though it be
seldom ever performed on a sudden, or thoroughly, yet sometimes by a long and
diligent care, the morbid root, how fixed and radicated soever it be, it
consumed.

As to the first scope of Curing, which we must first and chiefly have respect
to, we say that the matter, or Humors, that are wont to be heaped together
about the parts of the Head predispos'd for a Headache, and to raise the fits
of the Disease, are the Blood, or its Serum, or the nutritive or nervous juice.
Moreover, with all these, vapors and effluvia, also excrements, sometimes
bilous, sometimes melancholic, sometimes acid, salt, sulphurous, and others
of various kinds being received into the Blood from the Viscera, sometimes
these, sometimes others, are conveyed along with it to the Head; against the
salleys and incursions of all which, let Physical defensatives be ordered.

1. And first, if the Procatarxis, or disposition for pains being placed about
the Membranes of the Head, the Blood, as being hot, and apt for turgescencies,
rushes now and then all of a sudden into the Membranes of the Head, and upon
its not easily passing them, stretches the Vessels above measure, and severs
from each other the nervous Fibers, and so raises fits of this disease: (a sign
of which are a sanguine temperament, heat, and a suffusion of redness in the
Head about the Face, also a high and vibrating Pulse, with Veins stroutting
with Blood; we must presently endeavor both that the Blood being rendered more
calm, be not so readily put upon turgescencies; and also that when stirred and
boiling, it be not carried with a greater salley to the Head than to other
Parts, nor be not forced there to stagnate, by reason of the Sinus's of the
Meninges being too much filled: Wherefore, if the fit continues long, let the
Person be blooded in the Arm, or in the Jugular Vein; out of the Fits it is
sometimes proper to draw Blood from the Vessels of the Fundament by Leeches; to
wit, that by this means the Blood happily boiling, may be drawn downward toward
that place, whither it often tends of its own accord: Let Oxyrhodinums, or
other Epithems be applied to the Head; moreover, let Juleps, Emulsions or
Decoctions, which allay the fervor or fury of the Blood be taken: Let the
Belly be cooled and kept soluble by the use of Clysters: Morever, for
prevention, Whey or the use of Spaw-waters is convenient; also drinking of
Water, a thin and cooling diet do good: You must order a forbearance of Wine,
Spices, Bathing, Venery, any violent motion of the Body or Mind, and all hot
things: Moreover, for fixing the Blood, and preventing its effervescencies, let
distilled Waters, expressions of Heerbs, or Decoctions, Electuaries, Powders,
and especially Crystal Mineral be frequently used: It will not be needful to
subjoyn here a method, or particular forms of Medicines, because in this case
almost every Person that is ill, being taught by frequent experience from
things that do him good or hurt, is wont to be his own Physician.

2. It is seldom that the Blood is in the fault alone, or only by it self:
Other Humors oftener, being carried to the Head by the conveyance of the Blood,
and there deposed, cause the Evil: If at any time therefore a filthy glut of
Serum breaking forth in abundance from the Blood, causes frequent Head-achs
(the signs whereof are Catarrhs at the same time infesting the other parts,
viz. the Nostrils, Mouth, or Trachaea) then abstinence and rest being
commanded, and the Belly being emptied by a Clyster, let the fluxion of the
Serum be permitted to appease it self, and the matter discharged on the
Membranes of the Head to evaporate: Which if they do not follow of their own
accord, and in a short time, in a hot constitution Bleeding often is proper;
viz. inasmuch as the Vessels being emptied of Blood, suck in again the
extravasated Serum: But in cold Persons Vesicatories applied to the Neck, or
behind the Ears, are of excellent use: Then after that the Belly is emptied by
a Clyster, let the fluxion be appeased by the use of an Anodyne, or gentle
Opiat: and that being appeased, it is proper to give a gentle Cathartick, and
then Medicines that operate by Urine, or Sweat, or together by both, and so
gently evacuate the superfluous Serosities.

Medicines fit for these ends are every where to be found in Books, which
nevertheless may not be used rashly and indifferently by Empiricks, but they
ought to be chosen, compounded, or altered, nay, and sometimes to be prepared
Extempore, as occasion requires, according to the judgment and discretion of a
prudent Physician, respect being always had to the Constitution, Temperament,
Idiocrasis, and other accidents and circumstances of the Patient. Wherefore, in
regard it would be superfluous to heap together here a great many Receipts, I
have rather thought fit to rpopose here only a form or two of the Medicines of
each kind, viz. of such as regard the chief Intents.

Take Pills of Amber half a dram, Rosin of Jalap four grains, Balsam of Peru
what suffices, make four Pills; let three be taken going to Bed, and the next
morning, if the former do not work enough.

Or, Take Scammony sulphurated half a Scruple, Ceruse of Antimony fifteen
grains, Cream of Tartar eight grains, make a Powder, let it be taken in a
spoonful of Panada early in the morning.

Take Sulphur of Antimony four grains, Rosin of Jalap five grains, Cream of
Tartar six grains, let them be bruised together, and with a sufficient quantity
of Conserve of Violets make a Bolus to be taken early in the morning with
Governance.

Take roots of Butchers-broom, the great Bur-dock, Chervill, Avens, of each an
ounce; preserved Eringo's an ounce and a half, Florentine Orris three drachms,
the lesser Galingal a dram and a half, Bur-dock-seeds three drachms, dried
leaves of Betony, Sage, Vervain, Fluellin, of each half a handful, Raisins
stoned two ounces, boil them in four pounds of Fountain Water, will a third
part of it be consumed; then add of Whitewine half a pound, strain it, let it
be sweetened (if need be) with Syrup of the five roots two ounces, let six
ounces be taken warm twice or thrice a day a good while after meat.

For such as have a Cold and Phlegmatic constitution, let a Decoction be
prepared of the Wood Guiacum, Sassafras, Sarzapar: With the addition of the
foresaid Ingredients make an Apozeme, whereof let six or eight ounces be taken
twice or thrice a day warm.

For Poor People, and often to the Rich, I use to prescribe, with good Success,
a Decoction of the dried Leaves sometimes of Sage, sometimes of Betony,
Vervain, or of Rosemary, made in fountain Water, and then impregnated with the
Tincture of the Powder of Coffee-berries, to be taken twice a day warm to six
or eight Ounces.

3. But, if with the abounding Serum, Particles also saline, acid, bilous, or
otherwise infesting, are violently carried into the Membrances of the Head,
either wholly from the Mass of Blood, or by the Mediation of this, as received
from the Viscera, and there being fixed, cause more acute and lasting Pains;
then it will be proper sometimes to repeat a spare Bleeding, and also a gentle
Purging: to apply Anodyne, and mitigating Epithemes to the Places affected, and
also often to give gentle Hypnoticks by frequent changes, Apozemes also, and
Juices, and Expressions of Herbs, that allay the Fervor of the Choler, and
gently carry it off by Seige and Urine, are of excellent use: but in the mean
time, let smart or strong Medicines, whether they operate by Seige, Urine, or
Sweat, in regard they too much fuse, and exagitate the Blood and Humors, be
carefully avoided. I have often observed in Persons troubled with an acute and
obstinate Pain of the Head, that the Serum swimming on the Blood, when let
forth, have been tinged with a Yellowness, or with bilous excrements incocated
in it: and that also in this Case a spare and frequent Bleeding, and afterward
a free drinking of Whey and Spaw-Waters, have given a notable Relief, and
beyond other Remedies.

4. Moreover, if the Parts of the Head suster through the Fault of some one of
the Viscera, as of the Stomach, Liver, Spleen, Womb, or any other, (by reason
of the Transmission of the ill Ferment) then in the Cure of the Disease, let
such Remedies as regard the Viscera be administered together with Cephalicks:
hence, to certain Persons troubled with the Headache, whose Stomach also is in
a Fault, Elixir Proprietatis, Mynsichts Elixir of Vitrol, Tinctura sacra,
Vitriolum martis, the compound powder of Aron Roots, and other things vulgarly
accounted for Stomachals, often do good; to others whose Heads participate of
the evils of the Spleen, Chalybeats often give help: Some Women sometime find
ease of their Headache by hysteric Remedies; in like manner, when the Faults
of other Parts contribute to the Headache, let the coindicated things taken
from those Parts, be joined with the first things indicated.

5. Sometimes the nutritive Juice is the Cause of a periodical Headache; viz.
in as much as being mixed with the Blood, and not duly assimilated, it causes
a Turgescency in it by reason of its disagreeing Particles; so that the Blood
boiling to the Head, throws off its Refuse in its Meninges, or certain Parts of
them predispos'd for it; and so irritates the Fibers to painful Convulsions.
For this Reason, I have known many to have been obnoxious to a daily Headache
after the Measles, Smallpox, and other Fevers or Sicknesses, with which the
Mass of Blood is wont to be vitiated; viz. so many Hours after Meals, sometimes
sooner, sometimes later, first a flushing of Blood in the Face, then a
Plentiude and Pain in the Head infested them: moreover, after drinking of Wine,
or eating of turgid Food, they were more severely punished. The Access of the
Distemper is wont to happen sooner or later after they have eat or drunk
according as the Chyle begins to grow turgid either a little after its first
entrance into the Blood, or after it has stayed some while in it.

This affect is free from Danger, and for the most part is easily enough cured.
After a Provision being made for the whole, a gentle Purge, and sometimes
blooding being ordered, Remedies which restore the Crasis of the Blood, such as
are chiefly antiscorbuticks, and Chalybeats, prove mighty beneficial.

Take Conserve of Fumitory, Tansey, Wood Sorrel, of each two Ounces, compound
Powder of Aron Roots three Drams, Ivoy, Crabs Eyes, Coral prepared, of each a
Dram and a half, powder of yellow Saunders, Lignum Aloes of each half a Dram,
Vitriol of Mars a Dram, salt of Wormwood a Dram and a half, syrup of the five
Roots what suffices, make an Electuary: let the Quantity of a Chestnut be taken
in the Morning, and at five a Clock in the Afternoon, drinking after it three
ounces of the following Liquor.

Take Water of the Leaves of Aron, Vervain, and of the Flowers of Elder of each
six Ounces, magistral Water of Snails, and Earthworms of each two Ounces,
Sugar on Ounce, mix them.

Various Medicines, wont to be used against the scorbutic Diseases of the
Blood, may be ranged here, and given with good Success; for Headaches, which
are so familiar in the Scurvy, oftentimes proceed from the Fault of the Blood
perverting the nutritive Humor, and discharging its Recrements in the
Membranes of the Head: wherefore, the Remedies mentioned by me elsewhere
against that affect, claim a place also here.

6. There remains yet another Humor, to wit, the nervous Liquor, which being
carried into the Fibers of the Meninges and other parts of the Head, sometimes
becomes disproportionate to the Fibers by its own disagreeing nature, as it is
sharp or otherwise degenerate, sometimes twitches the containing Parts and
irritates them into Convulsions or painful Distentions, as it strongly ferments
with some other humor, viz. the nutritious or serous Humor flowing thither.

The nervous Humor, where it is thus morbifick, either being vitiated in its
whole Mass, brings a very great Injury on the Brain predispos'd for it, or
being faultless of it self, is perverted within the Fibers affected, and so
becomes morbifick secondarily; the Cure of which then depends on the
Restitution of the containing Parts; viz. If the Weaknesses of the Fibers, or
their injured Conformations be amended, the Humor irrigating them, will
presently be free from Fault, With what Remedies the Defaults of the Parts
predisposed for Head-achs are removed, we shall presently acquaint you.

Mean while, if the nervous Humor, being degenerate in its whole Mass, causes
a great Offense to the Head predispos'd for Pain, let those kinds of Medicines,
and that method be used, with which being reduced to its due Crasis, and gently
passing through those Fibers, it may irritate them little, or not at all: for
which end, neither strong Purging, nor large or frequent Blooding are proper,
in regard they exagitate the Blood and Humors, and impair the Strength, and
consequently give a greater Acrimony and Rage to the nervous Humor which was
faulty before. But gentle Loosners, and a spare Bleeding, will now and then be
of use; whereby the Viscera may be cleans'd, and the Mass of Blood be somewhat
purged, and a way be prepared for other Medicines which will succeed the better
afterward.

Now the Medicines that render the nervous Liquor more friendly and benign to
the Membranes of the Head, which are wont to be offended by it, are those which
are vulgarly called Cephalicks, viz. whose Particles, being active enough, and
withal fine and subtle, pass the Blood without any Turgescency or Tumult; and
then insinuating themselves into the nervous Liquor, gently actuate it, and
cause the Ductus's of the Nerves so to open themselves, that thereby the animal
Spirits more freely irradiate all Bodies both sensible and motive, and inspire
them without Swoonings, Convulsions, or anomalous Distentions.

These kinds of Remedies, tho not always efficacious, nevertheless often remove
some Head-achs that are not very inveterate, and in others, tho never so
obstinate, they frequently do good: moreover, those things that are prescribed
against Pains of the Head, are also given against Affects of the Brain and
Genus Nervosum, and on the contrary, the things that are prescribed in these
are also given with good Success against those; viz. the Virtue of them being
displayed within the Brain, does good against the Apoplexy, Palsy, Lethargy,
and other Diseases allied to them, also within are moving Fibers against Cramps
and Convulsive Motions; and likewise exerting their Forces within the sensible
Fibers, they often relieve Pains.

Great stores of these Medicines are vulgarly set forth in Physical Books, but
so, that their Plenty has brought either a Poorness or Confusion to the method
of healing; those things which would do most good, often lying hid, or being
concealed amon gst that confused heap of Remedies; even as Wheat is with more
difficulty separated from much Chaff, than it is first gotten clean from the
Ear. Therefore in this Case Provision being made for the whole, and then those
things being given both by Diet and Physic, which put a stop to or presently
appease the Turgecencies of the Blood, let the Medicines called Cephalicks, or
such as remove the Disorders of the nervous Juice, be prescribed to be
carefully taken: I shall set down some few Forms of these.

Take Conserve of Flowers of Betony, and Clovegillyflowers of each three
ounces, Powder of male Peony Roots half an ounce, bastard Dittany a dram,
lignum Aloes, yellow Saunders of each a dram, red Coral prepared, Pearl, Ivory,
of each an ounce and a half, Salt of Vervain a dram and a half, syrup of Peony
flowers what suffices, make an Opiate; let the quantity of a Chestnut be taken,
drinking after it of the following Julep, three ounces.

Take Water of Black-Cherries, Wallnuts simple, Vervain, of each four ounces,
Water of Cowslip-flowers three ounces, compound Water of Peony three ounces,
Sugar six drams:

Or, Take Leaves of Vervain, Mistletow growing on Apple Trees, of each ten
handfuls, male Peony Roots two pounds, Mace, Nutmegs, of each half an ounce,
Coriander Seeds an ounce, being sliced and bruised, pour to them of fresh Milk
eight pounds, (or of Milk seven pounds, Malaga Wine one pound) distill them
with common Organs, let the whole Liquor be mixed. Let three Ounces be taken at
a time.

Take Powder of male Peony Roots half an ounce, red Coral prepared two drams,
Ivory, Pearl prepared, of each a dram, make a fine Powder of them all, add of
Sugar dissolved, and boiled to a Consistency for Tablets in a sufficient
quantity of Black-cherry Water, six ounces, Tincture of Cotal a dram, make
Tablets according to Art weighing half a dram, let three or four be eaten in
the Morning, and at five a clock in the Afternoon, drinking after it a little
draught of Tea.

Or, Take Tincture of Coral an ounce, take from fifteen drops to twenty twice a
day in a little Draught of the Julep or distilled Water.

Those that are of a cold or phlegmatic Temperament, may take twice a day a
Dose either of the Tincture of Antimony, or of Spirit of Armoniack impregnated
with Amber or Coral, or of Spirit of Hartshorn, or of Soot in an appropriated
Vehicle.

The use of Millepedes ought not here to be omitted, or set lightly by, in
regard that their expressed Juice, distilled Water, and also the Powder
prepared of them, often contribute egregiously to the Cure of ancient and
obstinate Head-achs. I might here propose many other Medicines of various
kinds; nay, transfer hither, the forms in a manner, of all those which I have
formerly heaped together against convulsive Affects. But the most difficult
thing of all concerning the Cure of the Headache, yet remains; viz. How the
Conjunct, and fixed Cause of this Disease, consisting in the Weakness or injured
Conformation of the Fibers, may be healed or removed.

Now this, though it will be sometimes incurable, as when a schirrous, or
callous, or some other ancient and fixed tumor, has possessed the Meninges;
nevertheless, since the Diagnostick of this is uncertain, and the Procatarxis
of a Disease, how unconquerable soever it may seem, sometimes by a continued
method of Cure is overcome; therefore in every kind of Headache, as long as the
Patient will admit of Remedies, let not a Physician be backward in prescribing
those things that shall seem most proper.

Therefore in the first place, as we hinted even now, we must diligently
endeavor, that the Fuel of the Disease being out off, and intercepted, the
frequent Accesses of the Fits be stopped; for so the indisposed Fibers, whilst
they are no longer molested, sometimes recover their sound state, Nature alone
effecting the Cure.

The helps of the Art of Physic, indicated in this Case, are taken from
Surgery rather than from Pharmacy; for whatsoever is taken by the Mouth,
passing through long Circuits, spends all its Virtue before it reaches the
Membranes of the Head.

Amonst Chirurgical things, first Topical Remedies occur, and of those,
Plasters are of most advantageous use, and often prove very beneficial. Let
not these be extremely hot, which may draw the Humors more to the place
affected, but moderately discussing and corroborative. I use to prescribe,
Emplastrum de Minio, or Diasaponis, with a half quantity of Paracelsus's
Plaster, to be applied to the Place grieved after it is shaved, and to be worn
for some time. As to the Ancients frequent use of Phenigms and Sinapisms, and
to the present Practice of applying Vesicatories against violent Headaches,
sometimes to the whole hinder part of the Head, sometimes to the Sinciput: if
at any time ease has ensued these not Topics, it was for this reason, Because
by those Administrations a mighty store of sharp Serum was voided from the Part
affected.

Liniments of Oils, and Unguents, tho freuently used, do little; because (as I
gess) in case they penetrate deep, they render more lax the Tones of the
Fibers, whereby they lie more readily open to the Incursions of the morbifick
Matter; moreover, they stuff the Pores of the Skin, that the Effluvia do not
evaporate: for the same Reason, in a manner, it is, that warm Fomentations,
prepared of Aromatic, or other cephalic Decoctions, oftener do Hurt than Good,
because they draw Humors toward the Parts affected, and withal, open the
Pores and Passages, whereby they are more readily admitted; and therefore also
it is, that bathing of the Head, by pumping Water on it in hot Baths, is used
to Persons troubled with the Headache with no better Success: whereas, on the
contrary, it would be good for many to wash their Temples, Forehead, and
Sinciput, every Morning and Evening, with cold Water: nay, to bath their Heads
every Morning by pumping cold Water on it, or at leastwise, to dip it in a deep
Vessel or Well.

Another Chirurgical help cried up for the Headache, especially if violent and
inveterate, is wont to be a burning or cutting of Issues in several parts of
the Body: It Is a thing without doubt, that these being made in the Arms or
Legs, are both less troublesome, and prove somewhat beneficial; viz. inasmuch
as they withdraw the fuel from the Part, and lead it far away from the place
affected: Moreover, an Issue in the Nucha, and a Setaceum in the Neck, also in
the lap of the Ear, or near it; and likewise a pellet of the Roots of Wild
Black Hellebore stuck in the lap of the Ear perforated, inasmuch as they
evacuate much serosity, and cause more to pass toward the emunctories, viz.
the Glands are often used with benefit. But there is a great deal of talk and a
greater reputation concerning Cauteries applied to the place grieved, or near
it, so that large Issues are made in the crown of the Head, or near the
Commissures of the Sutures. If we measure the fruit of this practice from the
success, it will appear to be little and seldom beneficial, but often
unfortunate; for I have not known any person cured by these kind of Cauteries,
but many aching Heads to have grown worse thereby. And truly Reason dictates it;
for wheresoever an Issue is burnt, a serous humor flows to that place from the
whole mass of Blood, and consequently from the whole Body; and it is often
heaped together there in too great a store, that it may be constantly voided by
that emissary: Wherefore about Issues, Inflamed swellings, pustules, and
various humors every where arise: What therefore can we suspect less, than
that Cauteries being applied near the place grieved of the Head, but they will
cause the Morbifick matter to be more heaped together there.

There remains yet another Chirurgical operation, extolled by many for an
obstinate Headache, but tried as yet by none (that I know) to wit, the opening
of the Scull with a trepand Iron near the place of the pain: Our famous Harvey
endeavored to persuade a Lady of great quality to this, who was troubled with
a terrible and inveterate Headache, promising her a Cure thereby; but neither
she nor any other has been content to admit of the administration: Truly it
does not appear to me what certainty we may expect from the Sculls being opened
where it pains; if an Abscess lay hid there, this were the only way of Cure;
but that is wont to cause the sleepy, or mortal Convulsive affects, rather than
to take away the Headache: if an inflamed Swelling, or Pustules, or an
Erysipela has seized the Diplois, I know not whether those tumors exposed to
the naked Air will evaporate more easily, or whether remedies applied to them,
when bare, will do any thing or not: And in case the pains arise by reason of
the Meninges being beset with tubercles, or a schirrous, or callous Tumor, I
judge the opening of the Scull will turn to little or no benefit.

But this being past by till it comes in practice, let us proceed to other
things: And now let us consider whether Salivation be to be used for curing old
and confirmed Head-achs; in truth if the pains arise from the Venereous
Disease, I make no question but this way ought to be taken; but those that have
tried that kind of remedy, in Head-achs proceeding fro other causes, have not
reaped a Harvest answerable to so laborious a cultivation; I confess the
examples of certain persons have scared me from trying that method in those
kinds of cases. A certain Lady of great quality (whose distemper I shall set
forth beneath) for curing a violent and long continued Headache, has undergone
three copious Salivations, viz. first by a Mercury Ointment directed by Sir
Theodore Mayern, and afterward twic by taking the late famous Powder of Charles
Huis, and this without any relief, (and I wish it were not with some detriment
to her) for since for many years, even to this day, she has given ground to the
cruel Tyranny of this distemper growing by degrees upon her. It fell out
somewhat worse than this with that excellent man. D.G.D. for the cure of whose
ancient Headache, when a Mercury Ointment was applied to his Head pained, the
Salivation raised thereby, made him blind, without curing the disease. Truly
every man, duly considering the operation of Mercury in the Body of man, ought
to dread these kinds of effects from the rash giving of it: For, not to ay that
Mercury is malignant, or wholly venomous, viz. inasmuch as from its united
Particles little or no hurt is caused; so that often a great quantity of
Quicksilver is taken with safety enough; nevertheless, the Mercurial
Corpuscles being divided, and separated from each other, (whether it be done by
Chemical Salts, as in sublimated and precipitated Mercuries, or by percolation
through the Pores of the Skin, when an unction is made) they presently become
exorbitant and masterless, and raise more turbulent commotions in the Body of
Man than any Medicines besides: they sometimes infest the Nervous Parts first,
wherefore by reason of the Fibers of the Ventricle, Intestines, and other of
the Viscera being fretted, Gripes, horrible Vomitings, most sharp and often
Bloody Stools, Cardialgias, Swoonings, and other terrible affects frequently
happen soon after the Medicine is given: But sometimes the Particles of the
Mercury, when they are not presently dissolved, without offending much the
Viscera, scarce exert their forces before they are conveyed into the mass of
Blood: Therefore being mighty active, and displaying themselves every way, they
readily enter this, and presently infecting the whole, exagitate it, and often
(when they are more fully dissolved) stir it to a great effervescency: then the
Blood, to clear it self of the disagreeing Particles, beginning to ferment,
delivers them that way it may, to the humors contained within it self, viz.
the Serum, and Nutritious Juice, and thoroughly mixes them in it, and withal
endeavors to discharge it elf of those, being imbued with so preternatural a
mixture. Now this is not done easily, or plentifully enough by Urine, or Sweat,
for the Liquamina of the Blood being become more viscid and gross, from the
Particles of the Mercury incocted in it, than that they may pass the small
colatories of the Reins or Skin, sometimes breaking forth (unless they are
stopped) by the Caeliak Arteries, pass away upon raising a Diarrhoea or
Dysentery, the intent of Salivation being thus let or frustrated; but ostner
the Latex being imbued with Mercury remaining within the Blood, which is also
somewhat infected, and being carried violently with it hither and thither by
the Veins or Arteries, butts against various Parts, and a way being made,
either breaks forth outwardly, or is hurled into the Viscera, Membranes, and
other Parts, often with great prejudice. Moreover, some Mercurial Particles
also seem to penetrate the Brain, and insinuating themselves into the Nervous
Juice, t be diffused not only through all the inward parts of the Head, but
through all the Nervous Parts, and so in some sort to ferment the nervous
liquor.

But in the mean while the Mercurial Serosities remaining in the Blood, are
deposed for the greatest part in the Glands, which are the proper emunctories
of the Arteries: Wherefore, since about the parts of the mouth both a great
many, and very great Glands are placed (to which a mighty store of Serum is
sent for Spittle) and from those the open Ductus's by the excretory Vessels
gape into the cavity of the mouth, certainly by this way chiefly, the envenomed
Latex of the Blood will find its passage forth, which it cannot readily do
elsewhere. Wherefore, upon a Salivation being raised, the Blood long
fermenting, like Wine or Beer purging it self, throws off by the Ductus
Salivales, and the innumerable Meatus every where gaping into the Mouth,
whatsoever extraneous and degenerate substance it may either contain within it
self, or can drink up, or receive from elsewhere, be it from the Viscera, or
solid Parts, or from other humors. Moreover, it is likely, that as the
off-scowrings of the Blood, so also those of the Liquor that irrigates the
Brain, and Nervous Appendix, being stirred upon the entrance of the Mercury,
are voided forth also this way, viz. by the Ductus Salvales.

Therefore a Salivation caused by Mercury, if happily it succeeds well, removes
sometimes difficult and indeed Herculean distempers, and such as will not be
mastered by any other Remedies, viz. forasmuch as this operation, by a long
expurgation, thoroughly cleanses the Blood and nervous Juice, and other humors,
destroys all exotic serments, quells the enormities of Salts and Sulphurs, and
also exagitates the morbifick matter sticking any where, or stagnating, and
often leads it forth.

Nevertheless, this Medicine is not always free from danger, viz. because the
Mercury being become exorbitant, and carrying with it a mighty store of most
sharp, and as it were, envenomed Serum, and rushing violently into the noble
Parts, and especially the Brain; with the appendixes, both medullary and
nervous, or into the Lungs and Praecordia, brings upon them an indelibel, and
sometimes a mortal prejudice: Wherefore, in an ancient and fore Headache there
is danger lest the indisposed Fibers be more irritated by the Mercury pervading
them with much and Corrosive Serum, and be put upon greater Convulsions and
painful Corrugations: And also, lest upon the mighty recourse of Humors to the
Head, the Brain be invaded, and consequently (which happens too often) lest the
sleepy or Convulsive affects be caused: I would have discoursed more concerning
these things, because it is of a great concern, but that we daily expect an
exact method of Salivation, and a full account of it, as to its ways and
effects, advantages or disadvantages, to be set forth by the Leanred Physician,
Dr. Needham.

From Surgery there remains yet another famous remedy for curing inveterate
Head-achs, viz. the opening of an Artery: Some of the moderns use this, and
very much extol it, it being greatly accounted of amongst the Ancients:
Nevertheless, as far as it has appeared to our observation, success has often
been wanting to that so much cried up operation: Nor is it a wonder, because
that ground on which the Ancients relying, blamed the Arterious Blood, as
differing from that of the Veins, and more exorbitant, and therefore advised it
to be let forth, does not hold good: Nor indeed is thereany other reason,
wherefore Blood drawn from an Artery rather than from a Vein near the place
grieved, should give ease, but rather on the contrary we may expect a greater
help from the opening of a Vein; because an Artery being emptied, receives and
draws away nothing from the part affected; but a Vein being opened, in the
place of the Blood issued forth, draws from the whole Neighborhood, and often
drinks in again, and restores to circulation the Blood, and other humors
heaped together, and Stagnating near the seat of the Disease. However, lest we
recede too far from the practice of the Ancients, attributing nothing to
Arteriotomy, we grant that sometimes happily it gives help tho, not immediately
and causally, but only by way of consequent, and per accidents, viz. forasmuch
as the ends of a cut Artery grow together, so that the passage for the Blood
that way is stopped for the time to come; hence in regard somewhat a less store
of Blood is brought toward the place by the Arteries, and an equal quantity is
still carried away by the Veins, therefore it sometimes happens that the fuel
of the morbifick matter is diminished, and that its flock is consumed by
degrees. For this reason that administration has often succeeded well in
distempers of the Eyes. Moreover, Farriers use a practice not unlike this for
curing malignant tumors in Horses Legs; to wit, they take and bind the Artery
by which the matter flows to the part affected; mean while that which was there
sticking, partly evaporates, and partly is drunk up again by the Vein. I have
heard that in a manner the same method was successfully tried by our Harvey,
for curing strumous and schirrhous tumors also in the Body of man. I might
here set down many other kinds of Remedies, and also Prescripts and forms of
Medicines which are wont to be used both by Physicians and by Empiricks, for
curing Head-achet; but the Books of Physicians abound too much with these. I
shall now give you some rare cases of Persons troubled with the Headache, and
first some examples of a most severe continual Headache, which also, the cause
being invincible, has often proved fatal.

A Woman, fifty years of age, after that she had been ill for about six months
with a very great pain of her Head, troubling her almost continually under the
Sagittale Suture, and yielding to no Method or Medicines, fell at length into a
Lethargy, with a Partial resolution of her Limbs, from which nevertheless being
in a short time recovered by remedies seasonably administered, she had again the
violent pain in her Head as before, and afterward within a fortnight or three
weeks falling into a sleepy affect, she departed this life: The Scull being
opened, on the side of the third Sinus, a schirrhous tumor three fingers broad
grew to the Membranes, by the mediation of which, the Dura Menix also for some
space grew to the Pla; and the Blood Vessels which ought there to open into the
cavity of the Sinus, were stopped; moreover, both the outward Anfractus of the
Brain, and ^its inward cavity, were filled with clear water. From these
observations the invincible, and at length mortal cause of that Disease may
plainly appear. I remember formerly to have observed by Anatomy a case like to
this, in a certain other Person. Moreover, in regard I judge that in many
Persons troubled with the Headache, the Disease depends on such an invincible
cause, I shall here give you one instance that is quite fresh of that kind of
affect.

Some few years since I was called to see a Lady of Quality, troubled for above
twenty years with a Headache, which at first was intermittent, but of lat eis
almost continual. She was endowed with admirable gifts both of body and mind,
so that she was excellently skilled in the Liberal Sciences, and all Learning,
above the condition of her Sex; but (as tho Nature thought it too much for her
to enjoy so great endowments without some affliction) she has suffered very
sorely from this disease: Before she was eight years of age, upon her recovery
from a dangerous Fever, she became obnoxious to pains of her Head, which were
wont to arise sometimes of their own accord, but oftener on some light occasion
offered; the disease being not limited to one place or part of the Head,
sometimes infested the right side, sometimes the lest, and often its whole
circuit. During the access (which seldom ending within the space of twenty four
hours, often infested her for two, three, or four days) she could not endure
light, speech, sound, or any motion; but sitting upright in her Bed in a
darkened room, she was able to speak with none, nor to take any rest, or food:
at length, as the Fit declined, she used to fall into a deep and troubled
sleep; from which awaking, she was wont to be better, and then by degrees to
recover, and during the time of intermission to be indifferently well. Formerly
the Fit being raised only occasionally, seldom returned within twenty days, or
a month, and then afterward much more frequently; but of late she is seldom
free from them. Moreover, through many occasions, or rather evident causes
(such as are the changes of the Year, and of the Air, the great Aspects of the
Sun and Moon, violent passions, and errors in diet) she is sorely tormented
with them. Now tho this affect having sorely afflicted this noble Lady (when I
went to see her) above twenty years, and pitching its Camp near the Confines of
the Brain, had so long besieged its Royal Fort, however it had not yet gotten
possession of it: But the diseased being free from a Vertigo, Scotomia,
Convulsive affects and any sleepy symptom, had still the chief Faculties of her
Soul whole and sound.

In order to the obtaining, or rather endeavoring a Cure, throughout the whole
progress of the Disease, a great many Remedies, prescribed by most skilful
physicians, as well of our Country, as Foreigners, were used without any
success, or ease: She tried all the Great Remedies of every kind and form, but
always in vain: a great many years since she underwent a long-continued, and
most troublesome Salivation, by a Mercury Ointment, so that she incurred a
great danger of Life. Afterward a Cure was twice undertaken by a Flux, tho to
no effect, by a Mercury Powder, (which the famous Empirick Charles Huis
generally gave): She tried hot Baths, and drank Spawwaters almost of every
Country and Nature, with the like success as the rest: She was frequently
blooded, and once in an Artery; she went with many Issues, made sometimes in
the Sinciput, sometimes in the hinder part of the Head: She took the Air in
diverse Countries, viz. besides her Native, that of Ireland and France: She took
Medicines of all kinds whatsoever; to wit, Cephalicks, Antiscorbuticks,
Hystericks, all famous Specificks, nay, and Empirical Remedies, given both by
the learned and unlearned, by Mountebanks and old Women; yet she declared that
she had not received any where from any remedy, or method of Cure, the least
help or relief: But the refractory and obstinate Disease, being deaf to all
enchantments of Medicines, would not be mastered. Moreover, having possessed so
long the precincts of the Brain, tho it could not enter its recesses, yet when
I went to see her, extending its limits into certain other parts of the Genus
Nervosum, it began to raise violent pains in the Limbs, also in the Loins and
Abdomen, such as are usual in a Rheumatism, and in a Scorbutic Cholick.

A worthy man, about forty years of age, robust, and sound, when, upon riding a
whole day in the rain, he had gotten cold, by reason of the hinder part of his
Head being continually wet, soon began to feel a pain in that Part, which in a
short time being very much increased, miserably afflicted the Diseased both day
and night, and kept him in a manner, always without sleep. Blooding, Purging,
Clysters, Vesicatories, Hypnoticks; nay, and a great many Remedies of all
kinds, diligently administered by the joint advice of a great many Physicians,
did little or nothing toward the Cure of this affect: When the Disease,
notwithstanding all these, daily grew worse, after six weeks, Glands,
preternaturally swollen and painful, arose all over the Neck, the Hemicrania in
the mean while abating nothing: Moreover, the Tendons of the Neck being very
much distended, and stiff, proved very tedious to him; to which in a short
time, Convulsive motions, and leaping of the Tendons succeeded in various
Parts, with a Delirium; and at length the Diseased being worn out with pains
and watchings, yielded to Death.

As in the foregoing cases, the Headaches proceeded from Nodes and tubercles
of the Meninges, so sometimes mortal and incurable Head-achs arise from a
Phlegmon and Abscess. A while since, a University Scholar, after he had
complained for a fortnight of a very great Headache, afflicting him almost
constantly; at length the Fever becoming stronger, presently Watchings,
Convulsive motions, and a talking lightheaded ensued; at which time a
Physician being called, Blooding, Clysters, Playsters, Revulsives,
Vesicatories, also inward Remedies for withdrawing the course of the Blood and
Humors from the Head, being carefully administered, he could do no good, but
Death in a short time followed. The Scull being opened, the Vessels spread over
the Meninges were filled with Blood, and very much distended, as tho the whole
mass of Blood had flown thither; so that the Sinus's being dissected and
opened, above half a pound of Blood flowed forth: Moreover, the Membranes
themselves being affected throughout with a Phlegmonous tumor, appeared
discolored: These coverings being taken away, all the Anfractus of the Brain,
and its Ventricles were full of clear water; and its substance being too much
irrigated, was moist throughout, and nothing firm: For the Blood being there
heaped together, when it could not circulate, threw off from it self a plentyof
Serum, by which the whole Head was soon floated; so that the Disease, curable
happily at the beginning by Phlebotomy, afterward became mortal.

I remember another University Scholar, who after being constantly, and very
sorely afflicted with a Hemi^^ania under the temporal Suture for three weeks,
fell at last into a fatal Apoplexy. The Head being opened, a Phlegmon had grown
in the Meninges near the place paining, from which at length suppurated and
broken, the Sanies falling on the Brain, had affected its substance with a
lividness and corruption.

But tho a continual Headache (especially if it be drawn in length for many
weeks without intermission) be not without danger, nevertheless we must not
presently despair of its Cure, because the cause of this, how fixed and
immovable soever it may seem, is often cured by a long use of Remedies, nay,
sometimes without them, by Time and Nature; tho in a case that is almost
desperate, there is need of some Physic, lest the present affect pass into a
worse, viiz. into a sleepy or Convulsive distemper. So much of the continual
Headache; it now remains for us to propose some Examples, and some rare
Instances of an intermittent Headache.

Therefore, not to set forth here cases of the Headache, whose Fits being
erring and uncertain, proceed from the Blood or Serum rushing into the places
affected, in regard that these are very frequent, and vulgarly known. I shall
now set before you certain choice Observations of this Disease, being either
periodical, or seeming to arise from some one of the Viscera, per Consensum. As
to the Former, the period^^^ invasions of the Headache are produced either from
the nutritive Humor, or from the nervous Juice; I shall now give you example
of both.

A venerable Matron, in the forty fifth year of her age, being of a thin habit
of Body, and a bilous temperament, after having lived for a long time obnoxious
to Head-achs wont to be occasionally raised; about the beginning of Autumn she
began to be troubled with a periodical Headache: This affect seizing her about
four a clock in the Afternoon, was wont to hold her almost till midnight, till
the diseased being tired with watchings and tortures, was forced to fall
asleep; then after a pretty prosound sleep, upon her awaking in the morning she
was well. The Diseased having undergone daily Fits of this Disease for three
weeks after this manner, delayed the use of Physic, which she very much
abhorred; but at length her appetite being dejected, and her strength worn
away, she was forced to desire a method of Cure, and after a gentle Purge and
blooding, she took twice a day, for a week or a fortnight, the quantity of a
Chestnut of the following Electuary, and grew perfectly well.

Take Conserve of the Flowers of Cichory and Fumitory, of each three ounces,
compound powder of Aron Roots two drams and a half, Ivory a dram and a half,
yellow Saunders, Lignum aloes, of each half a dram; Salt of Wormwood a dram and
a half, Vitriol of Mars a dram, Syrup of the five Roots what suffices; make an
Electuary.

The cause of this periodical Headache doubtless was, that the assimilation of
the Chyme, or nutritive Humor into Blood was hindered. For when its store
received into the mass of Blood could not be overcome, it was wont, after a
little stay, to fall at odds, and ferment with its particles: Therefore
presently the Blood falling into a turgescency, that it might shake off that
incongruous mixture, deposed its recrements, as on other Parts, so chiefly, and
with a greater sense of offense on the Fibers of the Meninges, being before
weak, or injured in their conformation, so that the pain lasted till the
heterogeneous particles, boiling by their mutual congress, either were subdued,
or did exhale

A handsome, tall, and slender Woman, long and sorely obnoxious to cephalic
affects, was wont to be infested sometimes for many days, nay weeks, with a
violent Headache, which seized her daily at her awake early in the morning, and
afflicted her for three or four hours: In the mean space she was also affected
with a heaviness of the whole Head, a deadness of the Senses, and a stupidity
of Mind: which affects vanishing together with the pain before Noon, like
Clouds dispersed, left all things calm and serene: Till the next morning they
possessed again the Brain like a sogg and dark mist: For curing these distempers,
I prescribed parging Pills, a spare Bleeding, Vesicatories also, and the use of
Spirit of Hartshorn, or of Soot, with Cephalic Juleps, or Waters.

In this Gentlewoman the pains of the Head rather followed sleep than was cured
by it; because in this morning Headache the morbifick matter resided in the
nervous Juice, whose greatest curdity, and aggravation about the Head, happen
presently after sleep; but the other evening fit of this disease, in regard it
depended on the plenitude and turgescency of the nutritive liquor within the
mass of Blood, therefore happened so many hours after dinner, and was not
mittigated but after sleep, which appeases the disorders of the Blood.

Tho the Experience and Complaints of sick Persons manifestly show that Fits of
the Headache sometimes arise by consent from the other Parts, viz. the Womb,
Spleen, Stomach, etc. Nevertheless it as clearly appears from the accounts of
them, and the Phoenomena being duly considered, that this is done by another
means than by Vapors raised from the Viscera affected to the Head. And first,
as to the pains of the Head seeming to be raised from a Womb, nothing occurs
more frequently than for violent Head-achs to ensue upon the suppression of the
menses or lochia: moreover, tho the menses observe their due course, yet some
Women are wont to be afflicted with a violent pain of the Head just as they are
coming, others as soon as they are past: But yet, tho at the same time that the
Head is affected, the Womb is also, yet it does not follow that the Injury is
conveyed immediately from this to that: but it is the Blood it self which fixes
the morbifick matter on the Head; viz. it sometimes perversely conveys it, being
engendered within its own bosom, and designed for the Womb, into the Meninges of
the Brain: and sometimes withdrawing it from the Parts of the Womb, it delivers
it to the Head with a greater mischief. This Aetiology agrees also with the
Headache, vulgarly imputed to the Stomach, Spleen, and other Parts.

A beautiful young Woman, of a thin habit of Body, and a hot Blood, having been
obnoxious to an hereditary Headache, was wont to undergo frequent Fits of it,
and those coming at random, to wit, some happening on a light occasion, and
others arising of their own accord, that is, without any evident cause. On the
day before the spontaneous access of the Disease, being very hungry in the
Evening, she greedily eat a plentiful Supper, with a hunger-starved, not to say
Canine appetite, most certainly fore-knowing by this sign that a pain of the
Head would seize her next morning, which sign never failed of Event; for as
soon as she awaked, being afflicted with a most cruel torture throughout the
Sinciput, she was affected likewise with a vomiting of a humor, sometimes
acid, and as it were vitriolick, sometimes bilous, and extremely bitter; it
hence seeming to appear that that Headache had its rise from the fault of the
Stomach.

To undertake to give the reason of this, in the first place it is known that a
vomiting ensues upon the Head's being injured, viz. after a stroke, Wound, or a
fall from an high place; nevertheless, a pain of the Head seldom or never
follows a vomiting, Cardialgia, or the Stomachs being otherwise troubled,
unless an effervescency of the Blood happens. Wherefore, in the foresaid case
of the Person diseased, since it plainly appeared that the Meninges of the
Brain were predispos'd for Headaches, and that its Fits had raised an
agitation of the Blood; hence it will be obvious to conceive, when the
heterogeneous Particles by reason of the fault of Chylification, were heaped
together in the mass of Blood to a fullness, presently upon its beginning to
flow in order to the expulsion of that which was offensive, they being severed
from the blood, as disagreeing with it, and partly being sent from the Arteries
into the Ventricle, stirred up its ferment, and so produced hunger, and partly
rushed into the predispos'd Meninges of the Brain, and there deposed the fuel,
or rather incentive of the Headache which was presently to ensue. This Patient
loathing all Medicines, and refusing undergo any method of Cure, became at
length also obnoxious to paralitical and convulsive affects. From what is said
it will be easy to give the Aetiology of any other Headache; viz.
hypochondriacal, hepatical, or otherwise sympithical, so that it will not be
needful to add here more Hystories or Observations.

CHAP. II. Instructions and Prescripts for curing the Lethargy.
HItherto we have described with what Disease chiefly, and how diversely the
precincts of the Head, or the Coverings of the Brain are wont to be affected:
Now, descending to its inward Parts, and to its cortical Substance, which
immediately lies under those Coverings, let us see to what affects chiefly this
Part is found to be obnoxious. We have shown elsewhere that the Cortex of the
Brain is the Seat of Memory, and the Entry of Sleep; wherefore we justly
ascribe to the cortical part of the Brain that Disease which is wont to cause
an excess of Sleep, and a defect, or eclipse of the Memory, to wit, the
Lethargy.

The word Lethargy is wont to signify two kinds of affects, which are only the
act and disposition of this Disease; for those that are said to be troubled
with a Lethargy, either altogether keeping their Beds, through a very great
Invasion of it, are so far overwhelmed with Sleep, that they are scarce able to
be raised by any impression of a sensible Object: nay, and if hapy they open
their Eyes, or raise their Limbs upon pricking, or a smart stroke, presently
becoming insensible again, they sink down, and often, when they are left to
themselves, falling into a perpetual Sleep they dye out right: which kind of
Fit has very often a Fever joined with it, though when the diseased awake, and
come perfectly to themselves, for the most part it ceases of its own accord. Or
secondly, those are accounted for Lethargical, who being oppressed with an
immoderate deadness of the Senses, are in a manner always prone to sleep: so
that in walking, nay whilst they are eating or doing any other thing, they now
and then fall into a dead Sleep: and since there are diverse degrees of this
Sleepiness, and various manners of affecting, hence also there are made many
Species of the Lethargick Disposition. at present we shall speak of the former
Lethargy, and so properly called, and afterward of the continual Sleepiness,
also of the Coma, Carus, and other sleepy affects allied to them: and likewise
of continual Watching.

Mean while you may observe, that almost in every kind of Lethargy, a
Drowsiness or Sleepiness, and Forgetfulness are always present, as Pathognomick
Signs, and equally attend it. Wherefore, that the formal Nature and Causes of
the Lethargy may the better be known, We must first enquire here concerning
Sleep and Oblivion, what they are, and for what causes they are raised.

The Essence of Sleep consists in this, that the corporeal Soul withdrawing it
self a little, and contracting the Sphere of its Irradiation, in the first
place renders destitute the outward part of the Brain or its Cortex, and then
all the outward Organs of Sense and Motion of the Emanation of the Spirits, and
closes the Doors as it were; so that they being called in for refreshment sake,
lie down, and indulge themselves to rest: mean while the pores and passages of
the outward part of the Brain being free, and void of the Excursions of the
Spirits afford a passage to the Nervous Liquor distilled from the Blood for new
Stores of Spirits. In natural and usual Sleep, these two concauses conspire
and happen together as it were by some mutual compact of Nature: viz. at the
same time the Spirits recede, and that nervous Humor enters: but in
nonnatural, or extraordinary Sleep, sometimes this cause, sometimes that is
first: for either the Spirits being weary or called away withdraw themselves
first, and afford an entrance to the Nervous humor heaped together in a
readiness for it: or a plenty of Nervous humor coming to those Places, and
making a way by force as it were, repells the Spirits, and entering their
Passages, floats them as it were. Concerning Oblivion, or the Eclips or defect
of Memory, the cause of this is wholly the same as of immoderate Sleep, viz. an
Exclusion of the animal Spirits from the passages of the outward part of the
Brain, which are filled with some Humor, and their return prohibited for a
time.

Preternatural Sleep or insatiable Sleepiness (which is the chief Symptom in
the Lethargy and in the sleepy Effects) seems to arise wholly from the same
causes as non-natural Sleep, raised to a greater Energy, viz. either the animal
Spirits being first affected leave the outward part of the Brain, and yield an
entrance not only to the Nervous, but likewise to the Serous, or otherwise
vicious Humor, or the serous and excrementitious Humors together with the
Nervous force open the cortical Gates of the Brain, and floating as it were its
Pores and Passages, repel and drive away the Spirits thence: sometimes this
Cause, sometimes that is the first and chief, and sometimes both happen
together.

Therefore the conjunct Causes of the Lethargy are, 1. a heaping together of a
redundant or incongruous Humor within the Pores of the cortical part of the
Brain; which depends on other, both procatarctick and evident causes: As to the
former, both the Blood uses to be in fault, in that it sends morbifick matter
to the Part affected, and the Brain it self, in that it admits it too easily.
The evident causes which join with these are chiefly, Over-eating, Drunkenness,
and especially immoderate drinking of Wine and hot Waters, then upon such an
Excess to sit up all night, or to sleep in the open Air: Moreover, a long
suppression of an usual evacuation of Serum by other ways; Also if Spaw-waters,
drank in a large quantity, are not presently discharged again by Urine, they
threaten a Lethargy; the same also is caused by the recrements of other
Diseases, coming to an ill or no Crisis, conveyed to the Head: so that a
Lethargy happens upon acute, or long continued Fevers, and other Cronick
Diseases, and very often upon a Headache, Frenzy, Empyema, and Cholick.

2. In regard, as non-natural, so sometimes preternatural sleep begins from the
Spirits being first dejected; therefore the other Conjunct cause of the
Lethargy consists in a stupefaction inflicted on the Spirits, which proceeds
either from Opiats taken inwardly, or from narcotick particles engendered in the
Body.

The sum of what is said concerning the Lethargy, is this, that the animal
Spirits residing in the outward part of the Brain being stopped from their
wonted motion and emanation, yield to a profound and insatiable Sleep; Now they
are stopped either through their own fault, in as much as being spent, or
affected with a stupefactive force, they are congealed as it were; or because
their Paths or tracts are obstructed in the outward part of the Brain, and are
possessed by a strange guest, so that they have not a space granted them fit
for their expanson.

The chief Symptoms of this Disease, are Sleep and Forgetfulness; a cessation
of every other knowing, or spontaneous function, an uneven and slow
respiration, a Fever, and often the affect growing worse, Cramps, leapings of
the Tendons, and lastly, universal and mortal Convulsions.

The prognostic of the Lethargy is included in very narrow bounds; for the Fit
of the Disease being for the most part acute, is soon terminated in Death, or a
Recovery, and most commonly is wont to give more cause of fear than hope.

If it happens upon a Fever that is malignant, or of a difficult
determinations, or if upon other cephalic or convulsive Diseases, as the
Headache, Frensy, Mania, Epilepsy, or also if on a long continued or severe
Cholick or Gout, the Physician can prognostic nothing but ill, nor is it less
to be feared, if it happens in a cacochymical Body, or in one long subject to
sickness, and in old age.

In like manner, it is an ill Omen, if the Diseased being presently overwhelmed
with a great deadness, and becoming almost Apoplectical, cannot be awaked, if
he breaths unevenly and flowly, or with great snoarings: Moreover, if the
Disease growing worse and worse, the sick Person be affected with Tremblings,
Cramps, leapings of the Tendons, and lastly, with convulsive motions, he is to
be looked upon as in a desperate condition.

But if the affect without any great Procatarxis, be raised by an evident Cause
alone, as from over-eating, drunkenness, the use of Narcoticks, or from a
stroke or wound of the Head that are not very dangerous, we may expect a less
fatal event. Moreover, if the affect arising on such an occasion, happens to a
Body which was sound and robust before, if at the first invasion it does not
wholly take away the Sense and Memory, and after a little time the symptoms
begin to remit, we may not despair of such a sick Person.

In any Lethargy, if the cause of the Disease seems somewhat to be shaken and
moved, so as plentiful and laudable evacuations by Sweat, Urine, or Seige
happen by the help of Medicines, or by the instinct of Nature, and give ease;
if upon the application of Vesicatories, a great glut of filthy Waters flows
forth; if inflamed swellings, or great pushes arise behind the Ears, or in the
Neck; if a great sneezing with a dropping at the Eyes or Nose shall happen, we
may thence conceive some hope of recovery. And sometimes an Empyema happening
upon a Lethargy, puts an end to it, viz. inasmuch as the morbifick matter which
was fixed in the Head, and first caused the Lethargy, being afterward drank up
again by the Blood, and deposed in the Breast, produces the Empyema: In the
description of the Epidemical sleepy Fever, which reigned An. 1661. we have
observed that this happened to many.

Concerning the Cure of this Disease, since it allows no truce, we must not be
long deliberating: After the injection of a smart clyster, presently let a Vein
be opened; for the Vessels being emptied of Blood, more readily drink up again
the Serum, or other humors deposed in the Brain: Moreover, I advise in this
case the Jugular Vein to be opened, rather than a Vein of the Arm, because by
this means the Blood very much heaped together, and happily stagnating within the
Sinus's of the Head, will be more easily reduced to an even circulation.

After Bleeding, other Remedies of every kind are presently to be applied to
use; let large Visicatories be applied to the Neck and Legs; the Faces and
Temples are to be anointed with Oil of Amber, or Cephalic Balsams; let
Cataplasms of Rue, Pepperwort, or Crowfoot, well pounded together with black
Soap and Sea Salt be applied all over the Feet, let smart frictions be used to
the Limbs, let Salt of Urine, or Spirit of Sal Armoniack be frequently held to
the Nostrils.

In the mean while let Cephalic Remedies be now and then taken.

Take Water of Peony Flowers, Black Cherries, Rue, Walnuts simple, of each
three ounces, compound Peony Water two ounces, Castoreum tied in a Nodulus and
hung in the Glass, two drams, Sugar three drams, mix them, make a Julep; let
four or five spoonfuls be taken every third or fourth hour; moreover, to each
dose of this add from twelve to fifteen drops of Spirit of Hartshorn, Amber,
or Sal Armoniack, or a paper of the following Powder.

Take Powder of Male Peony Roots, Man's Scull, Roots of Virginia Serpentary,
Contrayerva, of each a dram; Bezoar, Pearl, of each half a dram; Coral prepared
a dram, make a Powder, divide it into twelve parts.

Moreover, it is here to be considered, whether a purging by Vomit or Seige
ought not to be ordered just at the beginning. I know that this is variously
controverted amongst Authors, and I have known it used in practice with a
various success: which being considered, and compared betwixt themselves, I
shall briefly declare what is my opinion.

If a Lethargy has arose from a fresh over-eating, or being drunk, or if from
taking improper and narcotick things, presently let a vomit be raised:
Wherefore, let Salt of Vitriol be given, with Wine and oximel of Squils; or in
robust Persons, an infusion of Crocus Methallorum, or Mercurius Vitae, with
Black-Cherry Water: and afterward, unless it works of its own accord, let a
Vomit be provoked, by thrusting a Quill into the Throat.

But if the invasion of the Disease happens upon a Fever, or other Cephalic
affects; or if it be raised primairly, or per se, by reason of a Procatarxis
first laid in the Blood, or in the Brain, Vomits and Purges given presently at
the beginning, whilst the matter is flowing, are wont oftener to do more hurt
than good: to wit, inasmuch as whilst the humors are in motion, those
Medicines more exagitate them; and since they are not yet able to subdue them,
and lead them forth, they drive them into the part affected.

On the second day, if the dead sleepiness be not yet remitted, let bleeding,
in case the Pulse indicates it, be repeated, or in its stead let Blood be taken
away in the Shoulder-blades by Cupping-glasses after Scarification: Then a
little afterward let an Emetick Medicine (if nothing prohibits it) or a
Cathartick, be given.

Take Sulphur of Antimony five grains, Scammony sulphurated eight grains, Cream
of Tartar six grains; mix them, make a Powder, let it be given in a spoonful of
the Julep prescribed.

Or, Take Scammony sulphurated twelve grains, Cream of Tartar fifteen grains,
Castoreum, three grains, make a Powder: give it after the same manner: Mean
while let the same, or the like altering or deriving Remedies be still
continued.

On the third day, and afterward, those things which at the beginning of the
Disease were forbidden for fear of a new fluxion, viz. Errhines, Sneezers, and
Apophlegmatisms ought to be used. Moreover, then it will be sometimes
profitable to apply the warm Viscera of a fresh killed Animal to the Sinciput,
after that the Hair is shaved or cut, and now and then to change it; and
sometimes also to foment those places with a cephalic and discussing
Decoction: But beyond other Topics, I have known great relief given by a large
Vesicatory, raising Sores that ran very much all over the Head: I saw two
Lethargical Persons cured chiefly by this Remedy, after that the Disease was
protracted in length, and therein having lost not only the memory, but even all
knowledge: for in both, the excoriated places, in regard they could not easily
be covered with an Eschar, discharged a vast quantity of a thin Ichor, to wit,
daily about half a pound. It will not be needful for us to describe or set down
other Medicines of this kind, they being vulgarly and every where to be found,
what remains, for the illustrating of what is said before, I shall give you
some Histories of sick Persons.

A Husbandman about thirty years of age, of a phlegmatic temperament,
inclining to a sanguine, being long obnoxious to requent Headaches, about the
beginning of Winter became very sleepy and drowsy; afterward, on a certain day
when he was tilling a field, he laid himself on the ground, and fell into a
profound Sleep; and when he could not be awaked by a Servant, and other Persons
called, being carried home he was put to bed: his Friends in the mean while
expecting that the Sleep being at length ended, he would awake of his own
accord. After the space of twenty four hours was past, when they were not able
to awake him by pinching, pricking, making a noise, and other ways, they call
me; when I came, I applied a large Vesicatory presently to all the hinder part
of his Neck, then Blood being drawn to sixteen ounces, I ordered a smart
Clyster to be given, his Face and Temples to be anointed with Oil of Amber,
Frictions, and painful Ligatures to be used to his Legs: Moreover, I prescribed
Spirit of Soot to be taken often in a day with a cephalic Julep:
notwithstanding he lay stupid all that day, without any sense, if, being
irritated by hard pinching, he raised himself a little, and opened his Eyes,
presently falling down and closing them, he yielded again to his Lethargy.
About the Evening I ordered Cupping-glasses with much flame to be applied to
his Shoulder-blades, which being done, he began to become a little awake; and
as about that time he purged freely by Seige, and the Plasters being taken
off, a great deal of Serum flowed from the little bladders, we had thence a
great hope of his Recovery. Therefore Remedies being frequently used afterward
that night, awaking the morning following, he knew his Friends, and answered
well to what was asked him: but the whole cloud did not yet vanish, for he
continued sleepy and forgetful for many days, till being twice purged he
perfectly recovered.

An Oxford Gardener, sick of a putrid Fever, and about the height of the
Disease, instead of a Crisis falling into a Lethargy, was overwhelmed with a
drowsy evil for three or four Days afterward, that he could not be so roused
from his Sleep by the use of any Remedy, as to become perfectly awake: but at
length, when his Head being shaved, and Vesicatories being applied almost all
over it, had raised a grea many Sores that flowed plentifully, awaking from his
Sleep, he recovered some sort of Sense: nevertheless his Memory being almost
wholly abolisht, he was so stupid, that remembering no ones Name, or Words, he
had scarce more apprehension than a Brute. When he had lain after this manner
for almost two Months void of Understanding, and full of Sleep, the cloud began
by degrees to be dispersed; and he at length returning to his wonted Labors
became indifferently well, though he never got again the same Vigor of Mind,
and former quickness of Sense, which he enjoyed before the Disease.

As for a Lethargy arising from the use of Opiats, I remembr I formerly
observed a good exact type of it in a Country Village, in which I was sorc'd to
stay a night, my Journey being stopped by reason of bad Weather: For as I was
just a going to bed, my Host entreated me that I would go and see two poor
People in the Neighborhood, who were affected after such a strange and
miserable manner; which Office being induced to perform, not only through
Charity but also Curiosity, I was willingly led to a very small and low
Cottage, where I found an aged Father and his Daughter (in two little Beds
placed here and there in the same Cell) overwhelmed with a most profound Sleep,
which had oppressed them the day before, after they had eaten Henbane-roots,
then freshly dugg up in their little Garden, which they mistook for Parsneps.

To both these, after a Vomiting plentifully raised by pouring Oil and Oximel
into their Mouths; and thrusting a Feather into their Throats, I prescribed
tincture of Castoreum to be given frequently during the whole Night in a
Spoonful of treackle-Water (which Remedies I then casually had by me); moreover
that their Temples and Nostrils should be anointed with the same Tincture, and
if it could be done, that a smart Clister should be injected: the day
following, first the old man, and afterward the Daughter, awaking, came to
themselves, the dead sleep being wholly shaken off, in these Persons, after the
remainder of the Narcotick being cast up by Vomit, lest it did farther
mischief, it was only needful that the Spirits being raised up by fit Remedies
(in the number of which Castoreum is justly accounted against the Poisons of
Opiats) they should be freed from the Stupefaction inflicted on them.

CHAP. III. Instructions and Prescripts for curing certain other sleepy
affects, viz. the continual Sleepiness, the Coma, and the Carus.
TO begin with the first; many Authors call this not a Disease, but a drawsie
Disposition; for the affected as to other things are well enough, they eat and
drink well, they walk abroad, they take care indifferently of their household
Affairs, but in speaking, or walking, or eating, nay their Mouths being full of
Meat, they now and then nod, and unless they are stirred by others, they are
presently overwhelmed with Sleep: and after this manner they Sleep almost a
continual Sleep, not only for some Days or Months, but for many years (as it
is reported of Epimenides.) Wherefore we judge this Affect by which we are
defrauded of more than half of our Life, to be really a Disease and to deserve
a cure.

The seat of sleepiness, as of the Lethargy, is to be placed in the outward
part of the Brain, but with this difference, that the material or conjunct
cause of this Disease, tho always pressing at the entrances of the Brain, does
not penetrate so deep as it is wont to do in the Lethargy; but affects in a
manner only the surface of the Brain, or the mere cortical substances of the
Anfractus, the medullary part within being as it were untouched; in which
regard it differs not only from the Lethargy, but also from the Coma, for in
the affect which we describe, tho Sleep be continually pressing, yet it is
easily broken off: and moreover being perfectly awaked the diseased remember a
great many things, discourse with the Friends, being presently ready to fall
again into their sleepiness: whence it appears that the cause of the Disease
sticks only in the outward border of the Brain, nor does it enter deeply its
substance, as in other sleepy affects.

This affect, as I have observed in many, is not very dangerous; for either (as
it is often done) it is perfectly cured, or at leastwise continuing for many
years, without a Carus or Apoplexy (which are wont to be feared) it does not
presently become mortal or terrible: the release of this affect often happens
upon the change of the seat of the Disease: to wit, the Brain becoming clear,
the morbifick matter is conveyed to the Cerebellum, where lying, it produces
Tremblings of the Heart, the Asthma, Faintings of the Spirits, and other
troublesome Symptoms accounted for Hypochondriacal.

The Therapeutick method suggests chiefly these intentions, viz. that after a
provision being made for the whole by bleeding (if it be proper) and by
purging, these Remedies may be afterward carefully given, with which the Blood
and Brain may be freed from their watery filth, and the later may be
corroborated, that it may not for the future receive and retain serous
Superfluities. For these ends let the Pilulae de Succino, or Cochiae, be given
with Rosin of Jalap once or twice a Week: at other times going to bed, and
early in the Morning, let a dose of a Cephalic Electuary, or of the Spirit, or
Tincture of Sal Armoniack, Amber, Soot be daily taken, with a Cephalic Julep.
The Forms of which may be chosen from those before written: At eight a Clock in
the Morning, and at five in the Afternoon, let a draught of Coffee be taken,
first boiling in the Liquour of which it is prepared, Leaves of Sage or
Rosemary, till it acquires a green Tincture: for ordinary Drink let a Decoction
of Guaiacum be taken, adding about the end, Leaves of Sage, Betony, and other
Cephalicks. Moreover it will be profitable to make two large Issues betwixt the
Shoulder blades, and likewise frequently to apply Vesicatories about the Neck;
the Hair of the Head being cut off, let a little Cap of Cephalicks and
Armoaticks be worn. Let a Vessel filled with Salt of Urine, or Spirit of Sal
Armoniack, be now and then held to the Nostrils. Moreover an exact form of diet
being ordered, let some Servants, attending the Diseased, not only stir him up
now and then as he falls asleep, but keep him waking daily for some set Hours.

A certain Gentleman, of a sanguine temperament, and, whilst he was young, of
an acute and subtle understanding; afterward, in his declining age, being given
to Idleness and Drunkenness, became dull and torpid, and likewise Hydropical
with a great Paunch, and swellings of the Thighs and Legs: but from these
Diseases (into which he frequently fell) if at any time he abstained for some
while from his drinking, and applied himself to Physic, he both often and soon
recovered: but at length tho free from his Dropsy, he was oppressed with so great
and almost perpetual Sleep, that he would be sleeping in all places, and doing
any thing; moreover, being awaked by his Servants or Friends, he was wont to be
present enough to himself, and to discourse well enough for some Minutes of an
Hour, of things proposed, falling presently again into his Sleep: To this
Person, after many Medicines tried almost to no purpose, I prescribed at length
that he should take every Morning and Evening a Spoonful of the Powder of the
Leaves of Betony dried in the Summer Sun, and kept in a Glass, in a little
Draught of Water distilled from the Flowers of Lavender: by which Remedy
receiving ease within a few days, he was perfectly cured within a Months space,
and enjoyed an entire Health for four years from that time. Afterward when by
reason of an ill course of Diet the same evils returned, he repeated the same
Remedy, tho not with so great success. But besides there being need also of
other Medicines, he took sometimes Spirit of Hartshorn or of Soot, with an
appropriate Julep; sometimes Electuaries of Cephalic Conserves and Powders,
adding sometimes steel. As often as he would indulge himself to his wonted
genius of drinking, instead of Wine or Beer, he drank Coffee: moreover for his
ordinary drink, he had sometimes Ale with the Leaves of Scurvy Grass, Sage and
Aromaticks infused in it, sometimes a Decoction made physical with Woods,
Spices and Cephalic Herbs, for many years. Afterward, being in a Manner always
intemperate and cacochymical, yet he lived free from the Lethargy; at length a
Cachexia seizing his Breast, being cast down by degrees by a Cough with an
Asthma, he dyed.

The next sleepy affect, viz. somewhat greater than the former, and less than
the Lethargy, is that which is vulgarly called the sleepy Coma: those that are
obnoxious to this, for the most part are oppressed with a great sleepiness, to
which in a manner always giving themselves over, they lie with the mouth open,
and the lower Jaw fallen, more like to Persons dead than living: being stirred
up by hard pinching or pricking, they look about them, speak to the standers
by, answer to things asked, but presently sleeping again, they seem very much
troubled to be hindered or disturbed from Sleep, thus pleasingly stealing upon
them: and being indisposed after this manner, they continue in a sleepiness for
many days, nay, and sometimes Months, without a Fever accompanying it, or
following it, or an injured respiration, and being easy to be awaked, and not
very forgetful, in which things they differ from Lethargical Persons: mean
while they differ no less from others troubled with the affect even now
described: for as much as those that have the Coma, keeping for the most part
to their Bed, or a Chair, do not walk abroad, or take care of domestical
Concerns, as the others. They answer appositely to some short Questions, but
are not able to hold a Discourse, or deliberate of things to be done.

The cause of this doubtless is of the same kind as of the former Diseases, but
of a middle degree betwixt both before described. For we may conjecture that in
this affect the morbifick matter penetrates the Brain a little farther than in
the continual Sleepiness, viz. that it invades the outward parts of the
Anfractus or Gyri, together with the lesser Branches of the Medulla enclosed:
but that it does not reach to the greater Sinus's of the Medulla joining to the
Corpus Callosum, and which are wont to be possessed in the Lethargy.

The Coma sometimes beginning primarily and of it self, as the Lethargy, either
proceeds from a serous filth discharged from the Blood on the Cortex of the
Brain, or from a stupefaction inflicted on the Spirits there residing: and then
this affect, by how much less it is than the Lethargy, by so much is it
accounted less dangerous, but more commonly this Disease ensues upon other
Cronick or acute distempers, viz. the Headache, Convulsions, and most
frequently upon Fevers of an ill crisis, especially in Children, old, and
phlegmatic people. Some years since, in an Epidemick Fever, happening through
the affect of the Nerves (which we have elsewhere described) as I observed some
to be Lethargical, so many to be troubled with the Coma: of whom a great many
recovered, the morbifick matter being conveyed from the Head into the Breast:
Moreover, in other cases this affect being of a doubtful event, betwixt hope
and fear, requires the sedulous care of a prudent Physician.

In a Primary Coma the Therapeutick method suggests to us the like, and in a
manner the same intentions of healing as in the Lethargy: As to the morbifick
matter, we must endeavor, both that its new afflux to the Brain, and that
which is already sticking in it, be discussed, or drawn away: Moreover, the
Animal Spirits ought to be raised up, and all drowsiness or stupefaction ought
to be shaken off from them. For this end we must order Purging, Blooding,
Cupping-glasses, Vesicatories, Revulsing and discussing Topics, give Cephalic
Medicines, and especially such as are endowed with a Volatile Salt, and use
many other ways of administrations beforementioned.

But if this Disease ensuing upon other affects, happens to any Person whose
Body is much worn away, the Blood vitiated, or greatly depauperated, we must
seriously deliberate concerning letting Blood; and Purging before we order
them, nay, and for the most part we must abstain from them: tho sometimes, that
the conjunct cause of the Disease, or the matter sticking in the Brain may be
put in motion, it may be convenient to draw Blood in a small quantity from the
Forehead, or from the Temples by Leeches, or from the Shoulder-blades by
Cupping glasses, with a Scarification: Vesicatories have a chief place here,
not only to be applied to the Neck or Head, but to the Legs and Arms, and to
other parts of the Body by turns. Moreover, let Spirit of Hartshorn, of Soot,
or of Sal Armoniack, impregnated with Amber, Man's Scull, Coral, and other
Cephalic things be frequently given, with an appropriated Julep, or other
Liquor. Forms of these, and of other Medicines usual in these cases, together
with stories of sick Persons, and examples of their Cures, are to be found in
the description of the foresaid sleepy Fever; so that I need not here again
inculcate the same, or the like.

There remains yet another sleepy affect, or kind of the Lethargy, vulgarly
called a Carus, which being greater than the Lethargy, and somewhat less than
the Apoplexy, is so allied to this, that it often passes into it, but is wont
to be distinguished from both: for those that have the Carus for the most part
breath well, if at any time they are hard pinched, they move their members,
sometimes raise up themselves, open their Eyes, and often speak, which
Apoplectical Persons do not do; but the same, tho stirred or roused up, scarce
understand, or plainly discern any thing, in which respect they are
distinguished from those that have the Lethargy.

From what is said it seems to be manifest, that the conjunct cause, or
morbifick matter of the Carus, penetrates somewhat more deep toward the middle
of the Brain, and to have its seat at least in the outward border of the Corpus
callosum; and sometimes, as that matter gradually advances from one part to
another, the Diseases beforementioned successively arise, and each last is
only the increase of the other.

But sometimes the morbifick cause, without a gradual progress through those
Parts, at the first assault affects the middle part of the Brain, and there (as
it sticks shallower or deeper) causes a Carus, or Apoplexy. In which case it
must not be thought that the whole circumference of the Corpus Callosum, as
also of the cortical part of the Brain is possessed by the soporiferous matter;
for it suffices, that rushing into any one place, it has seized some part of
the middle, for thereupon presently in all that Region follows an eclipse, or
at least a prosternation of the Spirits.

The Prognostic of a Carus for the most part is ill, especially if the Disease
happens upon a malignant or long continued, or a slow Fever not determined, or
on that which happens in Childbirth: Nor is less danger threatened, if it
succeeds other Cephalic Diseases, or is raised by reason of a wound in the
Head; though in these cases sometimes there is a Cure.

The event of this Disease either for death or recovery is wont to be various:
The Carus often passes into an Apoplexy, which soon kills; so that after the
loss first of the animadversive faculty, in a while a deprivation of sense and
mortion, and then by reason of the taint conveyed to the Cerebellum,
alterations of the Pulse and Respiration, and in a short time Death it self
follows.

But sometimes the morbifick matter sinking deeper, and falling from the Corpus
Callosum into the Corpus Striatum, one, or both together, the Brain becomes a
little clear; so that the Diseased look about them, speak and know things;
nevertheless, in the whole Body besides, the Palsy, or Hemiplegia ensues:
Neither are thus things in safety, as to Life; for often when the Brain begins
to be restored, the Cerebellum is worse; so that thereupon the Spirits which
execute the offices of the Vital, and mere Natural function being there ill
affected, either Convulsions in the Viscera and Praecordia, or mortal lettings
of the Pulse and respiration are caused: tho sometimes when the morbifick
matter is neither too redundant, nor too malignant, it is partly drank up again
into the Blood, and partly discussed, so that the Diseased perfectly recover.

The Therapeutick method suggests the same intentions of Healing, and indicates
altogether the sanie Remedies, which are wont to be used in the Apoplexy:
Wherefore it will not be needful to set down here Classes of Indications, or to
heap together a mighty mass of Medicines, but that which seems more to the
purpose: I shall here propose a story or two of Persons diseased, whereof I
have a great many ready to relate.

A worthy man, about forty years of age, having lost his health through
intemperance, when he had begun to use I know not what Remedies, prescribed by
an Empirick, fell into a Carus; happily because the morbifick matter being
stirred, and agitated by the Medicine, rushed into the Brain. Going to see him
the second day, I found him buried in a profound sleep, and almost insensible;
for tho upon hard pinching or pricking he opened his Eyes, and moved his Limbs,
yet presently falling asleep again, he perceived nothing at all of what he did,
or endured. In this case, tho declaring a sad Prognostic, however I did not
forbear to use Physical means; abstaining from Phlebotomy, by reason of his
strength being much spent, and his Blood depauperated, I presently ordered a
large Vesicatory to be applied to his Neck, and a smart Clyster to be given
him, of a decoction of Briony Roots, with Carminative Flowers and Seeds, adding
likewise two drams of the species of Hiera: His Temples and Nostrils were
anointed with Balsams: Cataplasms of Rue and Briony Roots were applied all over
his Feet: Moreover, every other or third hour I gave him a dose of Spirit of
Hartshorn, with a Cephalic Julep; and many other administrations, usual in
this case, were carefully put in practice. To which nevertheless the Disease
not at all yielding, the day following I prescribed him a Purge of Scammony
prepared, to be taken in a spoonful of Broth: After which, when he had
frequently and freely Purged, he began to open his Eyes, to speak, and to know
standers by, and a little after, coming to himself, he fully awaked. This
Disease (as I ghess) was therefore cured more easily, and sooner than was
hoped, because that cloud sent happily into the Brain by a Medicine, could the
better be drawn thence by the help of another Medicine.

A renowned man, fifty years of age, of a gross Body, and formerly abnoxious to
a Vertigo, and asthmatick affects, had lived very sound for two years, having
used Physic Spring and Fall, and having a large Issue near both
Shoulder-blades: At the beginning of Summer, he living in the Country, and his
Issues being neglected for many weeks, the filth which was wont to be purged
forth, ran much less from them; yet he was still in good health, till about the
Solstice, when as he was sitting one morning in a Porch, and talked cheerfully
with his friends, arising on a sudden he complained that he was ill: going in a
doors, and setting himself down in a Chair, he vomited very much, then
presently leaning to one side, he fell into a profound sleep, and lay so
overwhelmed with it, that he could scarce be raised from it all that day.
Coming in the Evening, I ordered Blooding, a Clyster, Vesicatories, and many
other Remedies proper in such a case, carefully to be administered: The next day
after, his Brain began to grow a little clear; so that he looked about, and
spoke distinctly a few words: Seeming to know his Friends, he could tell no
ones name; but by reason of this matter sinking deep in the Brain, a Palsy of
the whole right side seized him. Moreover, a mighty sleepiness yet persisting,
on that day Blood was taken from the other Arm: Other Remedies also being
continued as before, on the third day, becoming less drowsy, he began to know
many, and to call some by their names, to perceive his illness, and to be
sollicitous for Remedies: But whilst the Brain grew better, the injury
communicated to the Cerebellum and Genus Nervosum discovered it self; for on
the fourth day his breathing became uneven and difficult, and his Pulse weaker:
Moreover, he was often affected with a shivering, and a Convulsive concussion
of the whole Body: On the fifth day, the Cramps and Convulsions becoming more
violent, oftener infested him; then the Pulse growing weaker by degrees, on the
sixth day, tho more free from sleepiness, he dyed: In this, and other the like
cases, it is probable that the morbifick matter invades the Brain and Cerebellum
together; but whilst it sticks in the Cortex of this (contrary to what happens
in the Brain) it causes no very sensible injury, because here the parts
offended are neither the seats of sleep, nor memory: but afterward, happily about
the fourth or fifth day, the matter sinking further to the Medulla of the
Cerebellum; whilst as to other things the Diseased was better, the Vital
function, by reason of the Spirits appointed for it being oppressed in their very
source, began to fail, and afterward declining on a sudden, unexpectedly cut
off all hope of recovery, which before was great.

CHAP. IV. Instructions and Prescripts for curing the Watching Evil, and the
Watching Coma.
AS Light and Darkness, so Sleep and Watching being set together, excellently
illustrate each others natures.

Concerning a continual waking, or the Watching-Evil, we must in the first
place here distinguish, that either it is a symptom which happens upon some
other Disease, as a Fever, Frensy, Mania, or Colic, Gout, and the like; and
then its consideration and cure belong to that affect, whose offspring it is;
or else immoderate Watchings arising alone with out any other known cause,
seems to be a Disease as it were of it self, as I have known it in some
Persons, and some of these Watchers, tho destitute of Sleep, seem scarce to
want it, For the Spirits appear not thereby either torpid, or wearied, or
exhausted: but others bearing ill watching, soon become thereupon languid, and
lose their Stomachs, and are forced to have recourse to Opiats, which sometimes
they use daily, and in a large dose without hurt.

We have intimated before, that the cause of natural waking, which has Sleep
interlaced with it, consists in these two things, viz. in one of them or both
together; To wit, first, that the animal Spirits being sufficiently refresht,
and freed from the fetters of the Nervous Liquor, vigorously exert themselves,
and are expanded every way, and especially from the middle part of the Brain to
its circumference; then secondly, tho they enjoy a clear space every where, and
especially in the outmost part of the Brain, being then free from the
incursions of the Nervous Juice; yet lest this expansion of the Spirits (which
is being awake) be any where protracted longer than is fitting, to their too
great loss, both the Spirits being now and then weary, flagg, and as it were
repose themselves of their own accord, and withal the Nervous Liquor coming to
overspread the Cortex of the Brain, stuffs and closes their Passages. Hence it
follows that preternatural and immoderate watching depends also on one or both
of those two; for either the Spirits being two exhorbitant, and struck as it
were with a rage, do not retreat of their own accord, and withal the Nervous
Liquor does not so fill and stop the Pores of the outward part of the Brain,
that the Spirits may be forced thence inward to a repose: Types of both these
every where present themselves to be observed.

And first we may observe that the Animal Spirits becoming sometimes
exhorbitant, and so elastick, or otherwise irregular, cannot only be appeased
and repose themselves, but are scarce able to be contained within the proper
Sphere of their emanation; Wherefore being expanded in a continual watching,
they so fill the Brain, and keep it extended, that the nervous Juice, tho heapt
together in a great plenty at the entrance, cannot be admitted; and if the
Spirits are recalled inward from the Cortex of the Brain, for that to enter,
presently being there restained, or making a tumult within the midst of the
Brain, they raise a thousand, and often horrible Fantasms, with which Sleep is
kept off; or directing farther their Tendency into the Genus Nervosum, they
raise there great disorders which continually drive away, and break off Sleep,
tho seeming never so much to be stealing on, or to be at hand.

As for the former of these, I have often observed some troubled with watching,
who dreaded to begin Sleep, tho it came on according to desire: for as soon as
being about to sleep, they closed their Eyes, presently starting up again they
cried out that a confused multitude of Fantasms made them mad, so that they
found themselves necessitated to abstain from Sleep.

Secondly, when the Spirits being become exhorbitant, are called from the
circumference of the Brain toward the inward parts in order to Sleep,
sometimes they convert their Sallies into the Genus Nervosum, and then either
rushing in a tumultuous manner into the Nerves that go to the Precordia, or
Viscera, they cause disorders in the respective Parts; (hence to such as are so
affected, as often as closing their Eyes they invite Sleep, either Tremblings,
Leapings, and Constrictions of the Heart, with Failings of the Spirits, and a
let Respiration happen or inflations and Swellings of the Viscera, a Sense
of Suffocation, and other Symptoms vulgarly accounted for hysterical) or
secondly, the Spirits being called from their Watchings, and converted to the
Genus Nervosum, sometimes transfer their Sallies into the spinal Marrow, and
thence into the Nerves that pass into all the outward Members: wherefore to
some, when being a Bed they betake themselves to sleep, presently in the Arms
and Legs Leapings and Contractions of the Tendons, and so great a Restlessness
and Tossings of their Members ensue, that the diseased are no more able to
sleep, than if they were in a Place of the greatest Torture. Sometime since I
was advised with for a Lady of Quality, who in the day time was wont to be
afflicted with a Cardialgia, and a Vomiting, and in the Night was hindered from
Sleep by reason of those spasmodick affects which came upon her as now and then
she was upon the point of rest: nor indeed was she able to sleep all Night,
unless she took first a pretty good dose of Laudanum: Wherefore of this
Medicine which at first was allowed her only twice a Week, she took afterward
daily for about three Months, receiving no injury thereby, either in the Brain,
or about any other function, and when in the mean while by the use of other
Remedies, the discrasies of the Blood and Nervous Juice being corrected, the
animal Spirits became more benign and mild, she afterward leaving off wholly
the Opium, was able to sleep indifferently well.

As to the cure of the VVatching-evil (which we even now described) because it
cannot be long endured, therefore those things are chiefly to be given, which
give a present relief: for this end those things are proper which sooth the
Spirits, and gently appease their Disorders, as the vulgarly called Anodines,
viz. distilled waters, Decoctons, Syrups, and Conserves of Flowers of Nymphea,
Cowslips, Mallows, Violets, Knapweed, the Leaves of Lettice, Purslan, the
Willow, also Emalsions, or juicy Expressions. And if the restles Spirits will
not be mitigated by fair means, we must force them to be quiet, by imposing
Fetters as it were, and using Severity: their stores ought to be diminished,
and withal the spaces in which they may freely, and without tumult expand
themselves, ought to be dilated, and cleared from the stuffings of other
humors, viz. of Blood and Serum: for which ends opening a Vein sometimes is
proper, Vesicatories in a manner always have place; moreover let Diacodium and
Laudanum, in case they agree well, be frequently taken; and mean while that the
Opats give truce from the violence of the Disease, let the cause of it be
eradicated by the use of other Remedies, as much as may be: Wherefore day after
day, at Physical hours, let things be given that take away the sharpness of the
Blood and Nervous Juice, and restore them to sweetness. In which rank we
account Testaceous Powders, Apozemes and altering distilled Waters of temperate
Antiscorbuticks, gentle preparations of Steel, spirit of Hartshorn, of Soot,
and above all things, tincture of Antimony.

There remains another kind of Watching-evil, whose cause consists for some
part, if not mostly, in the almost continual opening or too great gaping of the
Pores or Passages in the cortical part of the Brain: for besides that the
animal Spirits being sharp and somewhat exhorbitant, refuse to lie down of
their own accord, and to yield to rest; and that they are not kept down or
subjugated by the Nervous Liquor entering the Pores of the Brain, but being free
and exempt from all imposed Burden, they are expanded also within the outward
spaces of the Brain which are every where open for them, for which cause those
that have the watching evil perceive no drowsiness or heaviness of the
Sinciput, no appulse or desire of Sleep. I have known some affected after this
manner, who when they had past many Nights one after the other wholly without
Sleep, yet being still cheerful and brisk, having a good Stomach, and ready at
business, seemed not as yet to have wanted Sleep. The cause of this doubtless
is a burnt and melancholy Blood, which supplies the outward part of the Brain
with a Nervous Juice, not mild and benign, but too much scorcht and filled with
adust Particles, which consequently is neither apt to flay long within the
Pores of the Brain, nor kindly to receive and contain the Animal Spirits:
Moreover the Spirits themselves engendered from it become too elastick and
restless in their Nature, so that they are neither easily appeased, nor
inclined for Sleep of their own accord. Nevertheless, being of a fixed Nature,
they do not readily fly away, nor are soon tired so as to flag, but last a long
time and continue vigorous without any great refreshment. Concerning this
sleepless Disposition of the animal Spirits, since it is the same as in Persons
troubled with melancholy, we shall have a fit place of speaking somewhat more
largely of it in the sequel. We may observe that Coffee also on the same
account keeps Persons from Sleep, for that Drink insinuates its adust Particles
(with which we find it to abound both by the taste and smell) first into the
Blood, and then into the Nervous Juice, which thereupon by their Agility and
Restlessness both keep the Pores of the Brain still open, and add spurs and a
certain rage to the Spirits (all other Combination and Stupefaction being
deposed) by which they are stirred up to a longer execution of their Functions.
Again, as to what regards the prophylactick cure of this Watching-evil, or the
removal of the morbifick cause; we shall give it you in the Sequel, where we
shall treat of Melancholy mean while for the immediate removal of that Symptom
as often as it sorely presses, we observe that Opiats will not do; for being
given in a good large quantity they seldom cause Sleep, and render the affected
more faint and weak. It often succeeds better if going to bed they take some
gentle and pleasant drink, as especially our Ale being clear and mild, or also
posset drink with Cowslip Flowers boiled in it, or an emulsion of the Seeds of
Melons and Almonds in a great quantity, viz. to two or three pounds.

I was advised with some time since for an old hypochondriacal man, who,
besides other symptoms usual in that case, had lived for many years obnoxious
to a frequent, loud, and very troublesome belching: He was wont every day to
fall a belching twice or thrice, for about two hours together, and with so
great a noise that he was heard to a great distance: But sometimes for a week
or two, and sometimes for a month, that belching was changed into a watching;
for the former affect becoming much more remiss, the worthy man past often
whole nights without sleep; and when sometimes he had been constantly waking
for three or more days, not yet seeming to want sleep, he complained of no
drowsiness, dullness, or failing of the Spirits. Narcoticks having seldom or
never given him relief, he took sometimes in the evening Posset Drink made with
Ale, or Canary; at the beginning of the night he drank sometimes Ale, sometimes
Distilled Waters, by the use of which a little sleep often followed; then
afterward the Watching-evil vanishing by degrees, the belching returned. Whence
it may appear that the cause of both was the same, viz. adust and irritating
Particles sent from the mass of Blood, sometimes into the Coats of the Stomach,
sometimes into the cortical part of the Brain.

2. Besides these distinct affects or exorbitancies of sleep and waking, there
remain other conjunct or complicated irregularities of them, in which the acts
of both functions are perverted together, which we may observe in the affect
vulgarly called the Watching Coma; concerning which we shall now speak in
short.

Those that are troubled with the Watching Coma, tho they are always inclined
to sleep, yet they can scarce sleep at all, but seem, like Tantalus, to stand
always up to the Lips in the River Lethe, for sipping of which, whenever they
sink themselves deeper, the yielding Waters always subside lower. They feel a
very great heaviness of the Head, with a drowsiness of the senses, and all the
faculties; so that they are troubled to move themselves any way in their Bed,
or to be disturbed by the speech of standers by, that speak to them, still
expecting to fall presently into a quiet sleep: to which nevertheless when they
wholly yield up themselves, and endeavor straightly to embrace it, various
phantasms presenting themselves to their mind, keep them still waking, nor
permit them at all to enjoy that Sleep which seems always to be ready for them.
To this often is added a Delirium, so that whilst the Diseased lie with their
Eyes closed, they talk always absurdly and at random, and throw their Arms and
Legs this way and that in a disorderly manner, and being awaked, look ghastly.
It Is a usual thing for such as are in Fevers to continue all night overwhelmed
with a sleepiness, as it were; but so that in the mean while they are scarce
silent for a quarter of an hour, but mutter various things with themselves,
nay, sometimes cry out, howl, and leap out of Bed. If the reason of this be
inquired into, it seems that we ought to say, that the Pores and Passages in
the Brain, which are the avenues of the Spirits, are very much possessed by a
gross and soporiferous matter, sent from the mass of the Blood, so that the
Spirits being very much let from their wonted expansion and mutual commerce,
a great and invincible Sleep seems presently to be at hand: but in as much as
certain sharp and very active Particles stick to those Spirits as so many
stings, they are incessantly incited to motion, and therefore some of them
forcibly pass the ways, however stopped and beset with fence, and meet against
each other directly or obliquely, according as they can find a way: and such
their motion, tho it be not able to procure a complete exercise of the animal
function, yet it easily hinders its rest and cessation, so that those that are
troubled with this Disease keep betwixt Sleep and wake.

The VVatching-coma is seldom a Disease of it self, but for the most part is a
symptom, and happens upon other affects, as a Fever, the Frensy, Lethargy, and
the like, wherefore, it does not require a peculiar method of Cure; but it
seems only to be needful, that to the Remedies primarily indicated, other
Cephalicks be joined, which may disperse these meteors, as it were, like Clouds
and Lightning; or if both of them cannot be exterminated together, let the
Medicine join it self to the aid of one affect, by which that being become
superior, let it presently overcome the other; so in a sleepy Watching it is
proper to procure either a perfect Sleep or a perfect Watching; and in this
case I have often given Narcoticks with good success.

CHAP. V. Instructions and Prescripts for curing the Incubus or Nightmare.
SO far of the irregularities, or morbid Exorbitancies of Sleep and Watching,
which being proper to, and as it were peculiarly attending the Brain, affect
the Cerebellum but rarely, and only secondarily; but there remains an affect
(vulgarly called the Incubus or Nightmare) which being peculiar to this Region,
and in some sort analogous to the soporiferous Diseases; in as much as its Fits
arise in a manner from hence, that by reason of the Animal Spirits being bound
or suppressed in the Cerebellum, an Eclipse or interruption of them (tho short)
is caused in the exercise of the vital Function.

That the nature of this Disease may be the better known, in the first place
let us consider its Phoenomena. A Fit of the Incubus most commonly, and in a
manner only seizing us whilst we are asleep, is wont to be raised for the most
part after the Stomach's being loaded with food of ill digestion, and a lying
on the back in bed: those that are troubled with it seem to perceive themselves
chiefly offended with it in the Breast and about the Praecordia: for
respiration being suppressed or very much hindered, they think themselves oppressed
with a certain weight lying heavily on the Thorax, which weight cheats their
imaginations sometimes with one Apparition, sometimes with another; and when
they think to shake it off, or put it from them by the motion of their Body or
Limbs, they are not able to stir either their Body or any Limb any way; but
after a long struggling in the Praecordia, and sometimes almost to the loss of
Life, at length they awake, and being fully come to themselves from their
sleep, the imaginary weight vanishes on a sudden, and the moving force of the
Body is restored, there remaining nevertheless for the most part a trembling of
the Heart, and often a very quick and violent vibration of the Diaphragm;
afterward, the Fit being ended, the deception of the Fancy, apprehending the
dreadful species of an Incubus, comes also to be known.

Now, tho we allow the monstrous Species (which is conceived) of the Incubus to
be a mere Dream; yet it is manifest that the Praecordia are really affected,
and that the motions of the Pulse and Respiration are in a manner suppressed or
let, viz. in as much as that oppression of the Breast is plainly perceived
by many whilst they are awake, nay, as they are freshly stirred from sleep, and
when that is removed, tremblings and disorderly motions of the Heart and
Diaphragm ensue; whence it follows, that these Parts are cumbred, and undergo a
real damage.

Wherefore, whatsoever others may think, I judge that a Fit of the Incubus is
caused, insomuch as in sleeping a certain incongruous matter is distilled into
the Cerebellum together with the nervous juice, which causing a heaviness or
certain stupefaction to the Spirits in their first source, forces them
presently to forbear a little from the performance of their Functions; so that
by a second Lethargy, as it were, raised within the Cerebellum, the vital
actions suffer a short Eclipse; during which, partly from the striving of the
overcharged Praecordia, and partly from the Blood being very much heapt
together and stagnating within them, that oppression, and sense of an incumbent
weight, as it were, is caused: moreover, because all the other faculties of the
whole Body depend on the motion of the Heart, therefore this being hindered and
suppressed, those presently fall into faintings and disorders.

Tho it be seldom that any Person dies of this Disease alone, yet those that
are frequently obnoxious to it, if at any time they are seized with other
cephalic affects, as the Lethargy, Carus, Apoplexy or Lethargy, they are in a
very dangerous Condition, because the morbifick matter, sent from the Blood
into the Brain, easily invades the Cerebellum also, being so predispos'd; so
that the Diseased suffering an Eclipse of the vital function together with the
animal, are brought into a greater danger of Life: hence its a common
observation, that those that are wont to be frequently troubled with the
Incubus often dye Apoplectical.

Another Issue of the Incubus is wont to be less pernicious, that it often
leads to the passion of the Heart, and other Affects commonly accounted for
Hypochondriacal. I have known many troubled with the Incubus in their Youth,
who, as they grew farther in years, being free from that, were affected with a
Trembling and Panting of the Heart, and with other Griefs about the Precordia,
and Hyphochondres, and very sorely with Convulsions; we judge the cause of this
morbid change to be, that the morbifick Matter, after having been often wont to
beset the circumference of the Brain, at length, making a violent assault,
penetrates deeper into some private Place, and passing its texture, rushes into
the Nerves appointed for the Precordia.

As to the Cure of this Disease, for as to its Fits, because they soon pass
away of their own accord, there is no need of it: the therapeutick Method,
after a provision to be made for the whole by blooding (where it is proper) and
a gentle Purge, suggests to us the chief use of those Remedies which are
vulgarly accounted Cephalicks: therefore the Powders of Amber, Coral, Pearl,
Roots of male Peony, bastard Dittany, Contrayerva, also Electuaries, Tablets,
distilled waters, Tinctures, Elixirs, and other things wont to be prescribed in
the Lethargy and Apoplexy, have place here; but in the first place, a due form
of Diet being ordered, let food that is gross, and of an ill concoction, Pulse,
and horary Fruits be avoided, nor must the Person indulge himself to sleep,
studying, or reading presently after eating: let large and late Suppers, and
lying on the back be forbidden.

Because Infants and Children are often troubled with this Disease, (a sign of
which is, that they are shaken in their Sleep, and upon their awake cry out
terribly) and having undergone frequent fits of it, often fall into convulsive
affects: therefore as soon as they seem affected with it, let a due method of
cure be used to them: let it be enquired concerning the Milk they suck, whether
of it self being without fault, and landable, it agrees well with their
Stomach? let them not be permitted to Sleep presently after having sucked their
fill: Let the Nurse, using a good form of Diet, take also Morning and Evening a
Dose of a Cephalic Powder or Electuary, drinking after it a draught of
Posset Drink, with the Leaves of Sage, or Betony, or the Roots or Seeds of
Peony boiled in it: Let the Infant take twice a day a Spoonful of an
appropriate distilled Water: Let it have an Issue in the nape of the Neck, let
it lie sometimes on one side, sometimes on the other, but seldom or never on
the back. It will not be wholly without benefit, for it to wear about the neck
or on the pit of the Stomach, Coral, or Bracelets made of the Seeds or Roots of
male Peony: If at any time in sleeping, being often and sorely shaken, they
seem to be dangerously affected with this Distemper, let Vesicatories be
applied to the Neck, or behind the Ears; Moreover Evening and Morning let a
Dose of the Pulvis de Gutteta, or some other that is appropriate, be daily
given in a Spoonful of distilled Water, or in Juleps.

CHAP. VI. Instructions and Prescripts for curing the Vertigo.
AFter having viewed the outward circumference of both Brains, and discovered
the Diseases that beset the sensitive Soul, about the first beginnings, and the
first sources of the Animal Spirits; now descending to the middle of the brain,
where the Fancy and common Sense reside, let us see to what affects these Parts
are obnoxious. Concerning this, let it be observed in the first place, that of
the Spirits residing in those places, sometimes Troops, or rather mighty
Armies, sometimes also small handfuls are affected; and then that the same,
whether many of them together, or a few only are affected, either from their
heterogeneous combination are made elastick, and consequently are forced into
disorderly, or rather explosive motions, as in a Fit of the Epilepsie; or
undergoing an Eclipse, as in the Apoplexy, are deprived of all motion: We have
discoursed amply enough before of the former spasmodick affect of the Spitits;
and concerning the Apoplexy we shall treat in the sequel. At present we shall
speak of a certain Passion belonging to these Parts, viz. the Vertigo, in which
some Files of the Spirits are affected, and their motions seem partly to be
perverted and partly to be suppressed.

The Vertigo is thus described, viz. that it is an Affect in which visible
Objects seem to turn round, and those that are affected with it find a great
trouble or confusion of the Animal Spirits in the Brain, so that they do not
duly influence the Nerves: wherefore the seeing and locomotive Faculties often
somewhat waver, so that the Diseased fall down and are often offuscated with
Darkness.

In a fit of this, it is to be observed that the Imagination and common Sense
are in some sort deceived: whilst they think the Objects that stand still do
move, but the rational judgment holds good, for we know our Error.

That the morbifick cause of the Vertigo, and the preternatural way of its
happening may be known, we must enquire after what manner the same affect, how
suddenly soever it comes upon us, is wont to be raised by non-natural things,
for by a long turning round of the Body, by looking from an high place, passing
over a Bridge, by sailing in a Ship, or going in a Coach, by Drunkenness, or
taking Tobacco, and certain other ways, Persons every where become Vertiginous,
or contract a Giddiness: which Affect those occasions produce, in as much as
the animal Spirits being greatly disturbed in their set Series and orders, are
both moved loosely and in a disorderly manner this way and that within the
Passages of the Brain, and break off certain Lines or Threads, as it were, of
their wonted irradiation into the genus Nervosum; for those two things being in
a manner always reciprocal, mutually succeed and depend on each other, viz. the
Perturbation of the Spirits within the middle of the Brain, and their let
emanation into the genus Nervosum: On whatever cause either affect is produced,
presently the other follows. A turning round of the Body, being carried in a
Coach, or Ship, also Drunkenness, an unusual taking of Tobacco, force the
Spirits to fluctuate or to reel disorderly in the Brain, which thereupon are
presently hindered from their due emanation into the Nerves, so that the Persons
affected are scarce able to stand or go; In like manner, a looking from an high
place, passing over a Bridge, a Fainting or Swoon seizing us, recall the
Spirits from their wonted emanation into the genus Nervosum, which therefore
falling in a tumult, or being disorderly moved within the Brain, cause a
Scotomia or a running round of Objects.

these things being thus premitted concerning the Vertigo, raised by reason of
some accident, or by some evident, solemn, and non-natural cause; we must now
enquire how, and after how many ways it is wont to be produced by an
intrinsecal and preternatural cause.

Concerning this you may observe, that the Vertigo is sometimes a symptom
depending on some other affect, seated sometimes within the Brain, sometimes
without it; but that sometimes it is a Disease by it self, which being raised
within the middle of the Brain, is very troublesome, and often terrible, and
difficult to be cured.

As to the former, many Diseases of the Head, viz. an acute Pain, the Lethargy,
Epilepsy, Carus, Apoplexy, with many others, have often a Vertigo joined with
them, viz. inasmuch as an even expansion of the Spirits in the Brain, and their
irradication thence into the Genus Nervosum, is lightly disturbed from those
various morbifick causes.

Moreover, this symptom is wont sometimes to be produced by reason of other
affects seated far from the Brain, and that chiefly after two manners; For
first, it is usual for a Scotomia to arise by reason of the afflux of Blood
called on a sudden from the Brain, as in a swoon, and great fainting, in great
hunger, hard labor, a very great hemorrhagy, long fastings, violent passions
of fear or sadness; nay, through other occasions, if at any time the motion of
the Blood fails or faulters in the Heart, so that the affected are ready to
fall into a fainting of the Spirits, presently because the supply of the Vital
Liquor is withdrawn, the Animal Spirits also failing in the Brain, withdraw
their irradiation from the Genus Nervosum: For their Head-spring being cut off,
those that remain flying back from their emanation, run to and fro confusedly
in the Brain, and raise vertiginous, and often delirous affects.

Secondly, a disorderly retreat of the Animal Spirits from some one of the
Viscera, or some outward member into the Brain, often causes a Vertigo, viz.
inasmuch as the Spirits being troubled in a long series from the Part affected
by the Ductus's of the Nerves, at length trouble others inhabiting the middle
part of the Brain, and force them into the like disorders: for this cause it
is, that sharp humors twitching the Fibers of the Stomach, and that often an
offensive and irritative matter stirred in the Spleen, Pancreas, or Intestines,
and an acute pain, Ulcers, etc. in the Foot or Arm, often cause light Scotomias
in the Brain.

But the Vertigo is not only a symptom, but sometimes is a disease primarily,
and of it self: for the through understanding of the nature of which, we must
enquire into its subject, formal state, and causes.

The Immediate Subject of the Vertigo are doubtless the Animal Spirits, which
every person troubled with this affect perceives to be very much troubled, and
to move about in a confused manner; but the mediate subject are those parts of
the Brain in which Imagination and common sense reside, and whence the next way
leads into the Genus Nervosum: Now these are the Corpora Callosa, and Striata.

For the Animal Spirits love to expatiate themselves within these medullous
Bodies; and when they smoothly flow in one series from the two extremes
attending the Corpus Callosum ( viz. from the Corpora Striata, and Gyri of the
Brain) toward its middle part, they represent pleasant imaginations and
fancies: and when in another series and happily by other Pores, they flow from
the midst of the Corpus Callosum into the Gyri of the Brain, they carry thither
the signatures of notions for the memory; and when they direct themselves
thence into the Corpora striata, and origines of the Nerves, they actuate all
the moving parts, and as often as there is occasion, convey to them the
Instincts of setting upon motions.

Now in a Vertigo those even emanations of the Spirits seem to be intercepted
in various places, and to be diversely perverted, for some files of the Spirits
are rendered obscure, others are wrested another way, and are driven this way
and that into Gyri and Vortex's, and often are forcibly drawn cross-wise;
wherefore by reason of the Spirits being so troubled in the Brain, confused
fancies, erring and unconstant species of sensible things or turnings round of
them are represented: And then, according as the Irradiation into the Genus
Nervosum is lessened or stopped, a Scotomia, and sailings and faulterings of the
locomotive function ensue.

It seems probable that such disorders of the Spirits depend on two causes, viz
first, that some exorbitant and extraneous particles being entered the Brain
deeply together with the Nervous Juice, cleave to the Spirits, and force them
into irregular motions; it being manifest to vulgar experience, that this
happens to some persons after immoderate drinking of Wine, or Strong Waters,
unusual smoking Tobacco, the eating of certain Vegetables, an anointing with
Mercury, etc. Secondly, we may imagine that sometimes a serous glut of filth
gets by degrees into the Brain, together with the Nervous Juice, and when at
length it has penetrated deeply into it, it defiles these pure Medullae, and
greatly stuffs its Pores: So that the Animal Spirits do not display their beams
with a light that is clear and full, but such as is weak and broken, with many
little Clouds, as it were, scattered here and there.

In an habitual and inveterate Vertigo, the conjunct cause comprehends both
these, as it appears from the things that give relief, or prove offensive. For
I observe that that affect is altered for the better or worse, on two kinds of
occasions: For whatsoever things inwardly taken engender turgid Particles, and
such as are too exorbitant and apt to be troubled, as Wines, Strong Waters,
peppered and flatulent meats, in a manner always affect vertiginous Persons:
nor do they find less injury by reason of occasions by which the Brain is
filled and stuffed, as are surfeiting, sleeping at Noon, or too long in the
morning, a Southerly Wind, a moist, misty, and thick Air; a low seated and
marshy habitation: and on the contrary, the same are very much relieved by a
thin and light Diet, a clear Air, and an open Country exposed to the Winds.

If we enquire into the procatarctick Cause of this Evil, viz. for what morbid
predisposition this double evil is wont to be brought on the Spirits residing
in the middle part of the Brain; we find that here both the Brain with the
nervous Liquor, and the Blood with the Humors residing in it are in the fault.

It is a common fault of the latter, that degenerating from its due Crasis into
a sharp or otherwise vicious temper, it perverts the nutritive juice, and
likewise heaps together within it a Serum, and filthy dregs of various kinds,
which it is ready to discharge on the Head.

The fault of the Brain is, that its temper is moist and weak, its texture
loose and not firm, and has its Pores more open than they ought, and too much
gaping, so that any heterogeneous and elastick Particles, and likewise serous,
or otherwise morbid recrements, being sent from the Blood into the Head, are
easily admitted into the Brain together with the nervous juice, and by reason
of its passages being too open, descend without obstacle into the midst of it,
viz. the Corpora callosa and striata. Moreover, such as are of a tender
Constitution, easily contract this vertiginous disposition; for the Spirits of
the Brain being weak, and unable to resist foreign incursions, yield a passage
to any matter coming thither: Again, to others, tho robust Persons, a
disorderly Diet, a sedentary Life, frequent surfeiting, also immoderate Sleep
and Studies, likewise the Scurvy, an inveterate Cachexia, Fevers of long
continuance, and other Cephalic Diseases, often bring this ill habit of the
Brain.

As to the prognostic of this Disease, every new Vertigo for the most part is
void of danger; but being habitual and continual, tho it seldom threatens a
great or imminent danger, yet because it admits not but a long and very
difficult Cure, it most commonly so tires both the Diseased and the Physician,
that before the Disease can be cured, one grows weary of the other.

A primary Vertigo seated in the forepart of the Head, which scarce at all
causes a dizziness or falling on the ground, being more safe and curable, is
often changed into a Headache; sometimes also it goes off of its own accord, by
a bleeding at the Nose, or a Flux of the Hemorrhoids, and is often removed by
Physic.

A vertiginous affect arising in the hinder part of the Head, and intercepting
the irradiations of the Spirits into the Nerves, being far more dangerous,
often passes into an Apoplexy, or Palsy, or into Convulsive Diseases.

A Therapeutick Method does not properly belong to a Symptomatick Vertigo. It
will only be necessary that certain Cephalic Remedies for discussing the
Clouds of the Brain, and appeasing the disorders of the Spirits be joined to
the first things indicated; or rather, to speak according to the capacity of
the vulgar (which we must sometimes, tho only for show) that certain Medicines
against vapors be added to them.

An Accidental Vertigo, or any other that is new, for the most part is cured
only by Blooding and a gentle Purge, sometimes repeated: Nevertheless, for the
more certain extirpation of the disease, let Cephalic Remedies likewise, such
as shall presently be written, be carefully administered.

For the Cure of an Habitual Vertigo, and such as is become inveterate, in a
manner the like method ought to be ordered as against most other Cephalic
Diseases, Which suggests these three chief intents of Healing: viz. first, we
must endeavor that all fuel of that Disease being cut off, the Brain may
continue free from any new afflux of morbifick matter; for which end, a due
form of diet being ordered, sometimes bleeding, and very often a gentle Purge
given at due intervals of time will conduce: Let a dry and well ventilated Air
be chosen, let immoderate and unseasonable sleep and studies be shunned; let
morning and evening draughts be wholly forborne: Instead of the former, let a
draught of Coffee or Tea be given, with the Leaves of Sage boiled in them; let
an Issue be made in the Leg or Arm; and sometimes let the Hemorrhoid Vessels be
opened by Leeches: Let the Person affected always rise early in the morning,
and wash his Temples and Sinciput with cold Water, and rub them with a course
Cloth.

The second Therapeutick Intention will be to remove the Procatarctick cause of
the Vertigo; wherefore let it be endeavored, both that the Cacochymical
dyscrasy of the Blood be taken away, and that the weak and over-lax
constitution of the Brain be corrected. In order to the former, Remedies
powerfully altering, as temperate Antiscorbuticks, Chabyleats, and sometimes
Spaw-waters, or Whey are proper: To which, always by reason of the latter thing
indicated, let Cephalic Medicines, viz. such as are prepared of Coral, Amber,
man's skull, the root of male Peony, Mistletoe, Peacocks dung, and the like,
forms of which we shall presently give you, be added.

The third Intention, and which is properly curatory, attempts the taking away
of the conjunct Cause of this Disease, tho it ceases for the most part of its
own accord, upon the removal of the procatarctick Causes. For if the passage of
every extraneous matter into the Brain be cut off, nothing will hinder, but
that the Spirits being as pure as may be, and having gotten free and open
spaces within the Corpus callosum, may flow thence every way. However, that we
may prosecute this scope of curing together with the former, we must also
interchangeably use Medicines endowed with a volatile Salt, whose Particles
being very subtle and active, refresh the animal Spirits; of which kind chiefly
are the Spirits of Hartshorn, Soot, Sal Armoniack impregnated with Amber,
man's skull, etc. the tinctures of Coral, Amber, Antimony, the Elixir of Peony,
etc.

These things being thus premitted concerning the Vertigo in general, it seems
likewise proper for us to delineate a therapeutick method more particularly,
and to give an orderly process of it: And first, it shall be shown what is to
be done in the Fit for curing it, and then what out of the Fit for preservation.

1. As to the former, tho an invasion of the Vertigo, how violent soever it may
seem, for the most part is free from danger, and often passes off easily of its
own accord; yet because those that are affected with it, fearing themselves a
dying, desire Physical Aid; in such a case, if the Pulse indicates it, a
Clyster being premitted, let bleeding be ordered; then a Vesicatory being
applied to the Neck, let strong-smelling things, as Castoreum, Spirit or
volatile Salt of Hartshorn, Urine, or Sal Armoniack be presently held to the
Nostrils: moreover, let those Spirits be given twice or thrice a day, with a
convenient dose of a Cephalic Julep; going to bed let a bolus of Mithridate
with powder of Castoreum be taken: the day following, if the affect be not yet
gone, let a gentle Purge be given; or if the Diseased be inclined, or easy to
vomit, let an Emetick be taken, than which there is scarce any Remedy more
excellent.

Take Pillulae de Succino twenty five grains, Rosm of Jalap six grains, Tartar
vitriolat seven grains, Balsam of Peru what suffices, make four Pills to be
taken going to bed, or early in the morning: or,

Take Sulphur of Antimony five grains, Cream of Tartar half a scruple,
Castoreum two grains, make a powder, to be taken with governance, expecting a
vomiting.

That Vomits often do good in the Vertigo, besides the testimony of Authors, it
sufficiently appears also by common observation; and since vertiginous Persons
vomit often of their own accord, hence an opinion has grown amongst many, that
the cause of this Disease lies hid in a manner always in the Stomach, but we
have shown elsewhere that this is otherwise, and that the vomiting frequently
happens by reason of the Spirits being troubled in the Brain. Now the reason
why Emeticks do good in this Disease, is, that by this kind of Medicine, both a
very great Revulsion is made of Humors from the Brain, and that the Spirits
there being in a tumult, are presently restrained. When the Membranes and
Fibers of the Ventricle and the Viscera placed near it are twitcht, various
Humors, viz. the nervous, serous, lymphick, pancreatick and bilous, are drawn
into those Parts, and so dreined that the Brain continues free from their
Incursions, nay, and easily throws off a great many then sticking in it; Then,
as to the animal Spirits, we have shown elsewhere that there is always a very
great communication and intimate accord betwixt those that reside in the
Stomach and those of the Brain; so that a grateful or ungrateful affect of the
Stomach from things taken, causes erections or dejections of the Spirits
residing in the Brain. Opiats, whilst remaining in the Stomach, bring a
sleepiness, so in the Vertigo and other Cephalic Diseases, it will not conduce
a little to the redressing and regulating of the Spirits in the Brain, when all
in confusion, and mightily agitated, if their consociates or relations be put
in a consternation within the Ventricle by an irritating Medicine; for whilst
for the aid of these, a great many are called from the Brain, the others
remaining remit of their disorders, and resume their ancient Offices; doubtless
it is chiefly for this reason, that Emeticks often give great Relief in affects
of the Mania, insomuch that certain Empiricks use in a manner those alone.

2. But returning from this small digression, let us consider what is to be
done for curing an inveterate, and almost continual Vertigo, out of the Fit:
therefore in the first place a method being ordered concerning blooding and
purging to be used, and repeated at fit intervals of time according to the
Constitution and strength of the Patient; I also use to advise that a Vomit (if
nothing indicates the contrary) be taken once a Month; for which end, to weak
Persons, after the Stomack's being filled with light food, let Wine and Oximel
of Squills be given, to two or three ounces, and afterward let posset drink
with Carduus leaves boiled in it be drank in a great quantity, and let it
presently be thrown up again with a spontaneous or forced vomiting: To others,
let an Emetick be given of Salt of Vitriol, or of the Infusion of crocus
Metallorum: Concerning Issues, Vesicatories, the opening of the hemorrhades,
also of a Plaster or Cap to be worn on the Head, and of topics to be applied
to the soles of the Feet, or to the Wrists, for revulsion or derivation, let a
Physician deliberate.

Take Conserve of the Flowers of male Peony six ounces, powder of its Roots an
ounce, Peony seeds powdered two drams; Amber, Coral, Pearl powdered of each two
drams and a half, Salt of Coral a dram, Syrup of coral what suffices, make an
Electuary. The Dose is a dram and a half, or two drams in the evening, and
early in the morning, drinking after it three ounces of the following distilled
Water.

Take fresh leaves of Mistletow six handfuls, roots of male Peony, Angelica, of
each a pound and half; the white dung of Peacocks two pounds, Cardamum bruised
two ounces, Castoreum three Drams, all being sliced small, and mixed together,
pour to them of White wine, or of Whey prepared of it, eight pounds, distill it
with common Organs, let the whole Liquor be mixed.

Take powder of the root of male Peony half an ounce, red Coral prepared,
Species Diambroe of each a dram and half, powder of male Peony flowers fresh
bruised and dried in the Sun, a dram, make a powder, to which add of double
resin'd Sugar dissolved in Peony water, and boiled to a consistency for Tablets
ten ounces, make Tablets according to Art, weighing half a dram, let one or two
be taken often in a day.

Because all things do not agree with all Persons, but a Physician ought to
assay diverse Medicaments, and insisting on a various Method, at one time to try
these Medicines, another those, therefore I shall here set down certain forms
of another kind.

Take our Syrup of Steel six ounces, let a spoonful be taken in the Morning and
at five of the Clock, with three ounces either of the distilled Water even now
described, or of some other Cephalic Water: or take from fifteen to twenty
drops of our Syrup of Steel with a draught of the same distilled Water twice a
day, I have known these things to have given great Relief to many.

Sometimes let doses of the Spirits of Soot, Hartshorn, or Sal Armoniack,
impregnated with Amber, Coral, or Man's Scull, or let tincture of Amber,
Antimony, or Coral be daily given after the same manner.

Take Powder of the Roots of male Peony an ounce and a half, Peony Seeds, Coral
prepared, white Amber of each three Drams; Pearl prepared, Powder of male Peony
Flowers fresh bruised, and dried in the Sun, of each two Drams, Sugar Candy one
Ounce, make a Powder, let a Dram be taken twice a day, with a draught of Tea or
Coffee, or a Decoction of Sage or Rosemary.

For poor People let a Powder be prescribed of the Leaves of Misteltow growing
on Apple Trees, dried in the Sun and powdered, to a dram, to be taken twice a
day: or take the white Dung of a Peacock six Ounces, powder of the Flowers of
male Peony an ounce, Sugar two Ounces, make a Powder, let a Spoonful be taken
twice a day in a convenient Liquour.

Let vertiginous Persons use for their ordinary Drink small Ale with the Leaves
of Mistletow growing on Apple Trees boiled in it instead of Hops, and in a
Vessel of four Gallons let a Bag be hung, in which put of Peacocks Dung half a
pound, and of Cloves bruised three Drams.

So frequent and daily Examples of Persons troubled with the Vertigo occur,
that it seems but to little purpose to give here any instances of them: however
that the Types of this Disease may be known, I shall relate here some few and
rare Cases.

A Divine sixty years of Age, after that he had been troubled for about three
Months with a slight Vertigo, or a frequent Coruscation as it were of the
Spirits in the Sinciput, at length the Disease increasing, he became affected
also with a dizziness and a falling-Evil; in so much that in walking sometimes
he would fall flat on the Ground; Being called to cure him, I prescribed
blooding, with a gentle purge to be repeated at fit intervals of Time, moreover
I diligently gave Electuaries and mixtures, such as above-written, Vesicatories
and other Administrations being not neglected: after a fortnight no relief
being found from these things, I gave him a vomit of Salt of Vitriol, and an
infusion of Crocus Metallorum; upon which having ten easy vomits, he presently
from thenceforth was better, and Cephalic alteratives being used for about a
fortnight longer, he grew perfectly well, and from that time he took yearly
Spring and Fall for six years a vomit, with certain other Medicines, and even
at this time is in perfect Health,

A certain Gentleman sixty six years old, after that he had lived for a long
time obnoxious to a light Vertigo, and which was wont to be raised as it were
only occasionally, about the end of Autumn being more severely troubled with
that affect, became also forgetful: going to see him after he had been ill
about three Weeks, I found him very much changed in his Countenance and Aspect,
the vigor of both being very much broken. To this Person, who had every
Evening a smart Fever, with a high and strongly vibrating Pulse, in the first
place I ordered Blood to be drawn from the Arm, and after six or seven days
from the hemorrhoide Veins; moreover I had Vesicatories presently applied to
his Neck and incontinently after behind his Ears, and Cauteries betwixt his
Shoulder-Blades for two large Issues to be there made: he took daily inwardly
at Physical Hours Cephalic Remedies almost of every kind. Within a Months
space seeming to recover, he began to walk abroad and to take care of his
domestic Affairs and other Concerns. But at the beginning of the Winter, upon
taking cold, as he went daily abroad, he fell into a small Fever with a great
Perturbation of the Spirits within the Brain: for every day toward the Evening
being lightheaded, he scarce knew what he did, or said, nevertheless within
seven or eight days, the Fever vanishing after blooding and a thin diet, the
affect of the Brain was changed from its former state. For the Vertigo wholly
ceasing he became very forgetful, and withal Paralytical in the whole right
side. Being often asked concerning his Head, whether it was clear, and free from
a Scotomia and confused Phantasms, he answered, that as to those things it was
never better: for he understood well his Infirmity, knew his Friends,
Relations, and others that came to visit him, but could scarce call to mind any
of their Names: and when he went about to discourse of any thing, he wanted
words to express the Sense of his Mind: Moreover as to the side affected, in
the right Arm and Thigh, there was not only a total Resolution and Immobility,
but likewise in both a very great aedematous Tumor grew, insomuch that not
only almost all hope of cure was laid a side, but even of keeping him long
alive; nay, others were already soliciting for the State Offices and Employs
he enjoyed.

However, I desisted not from proceeding with a Method of cure, and prescribed
him loosning Pills to be taken by intervals: and on other days, at physical
Hours, Cephalic, Antiscorbutick, and Antiparalytick Remedies: I ordered a
Plaster of Gums and Balsoms to be applied to his Head shaved, the parts
resolved to be anointed and strongly chafed with Oils and Balsoms: whilst
these things were done with some kind of success, as to the greater clearing of
his Understanding; I know not through what cause, in the midst of Winter he
fell into a Fever, so that he was greatly troubled every Night with a heat,
and mighty drought, and an interrupted Sleep, his Tongue was parched and rough,
his Pulse high, his Urine ruddy, and full of contents; we abstained from
blooding by reason of his old Age, and Palsy, and chiefly by reason of a
Dropsy began in the side affected: nevertheless a thin diet and Barley and Oat
Broths being commanded, we gave him day after day Juleps, Apozemes, and other
Remedies moving Sweat and Urine: and as at this time the Issues made by his
shoulder Blades ran plentifully, the diseased began to be better as to his
Memory and Palsy, and thenceforward recovering by degrees from both these
affects, and withal from his Fever, and daily growing better; within six
Months he was restored to his perfect health, and at this time is very well.

Being tired of late with the almost daily complaints of a certain importunate
Person, troubled with the Vertigo, after a great many Remedies used to no
purpose, I prescribed at length that for a Months space he should take every
day twice about a spoonful of the following Powder, drinking after it a draught
of a Decoction of Sage or Rosemary, impregnated with the Tincture of Coffee.

Take powder of the roots of male Peony two ounces, flowers of the same bruised
and dried in the Sun, one ounce; the white dung of a Peacock half a pound,
double refined Sugar, two ounces, make a powder.

It is scarce credible how great a Relief he found by this Remedy. Coming to
see me again a Month afterward, he seemed to be a new, and another man; being
freed from his Vertigo, he did not only walk about with confidence, but was
able to take care of his Household affairs, and to manage other difficult
Concerns, of which before he was wholly incapable.

CHAP. VII. Instructions and Prescripts for curing the Apoplexy.
THE seat of the Apoplexy seems to be within the same inward portion of the
Brain, viz. The Corpus Callosum, as that of the Vertigo; to wit, in as much as
in both affects the Imagination, common Sense, tho in a far differing degree,
are affected, viz. in the former the irradiation of the Spirits, is wont to be
obscured in some places, and to be inetrrupted with little Clouds, as it were,
scattered here and there, but in the latter, the same is forthwith wholly
darkened, and undergoes a total Eclips.

The Apoplexy, according to the import of the Word, denotes a striking, and by
reason of the stupendous Nature of the affect, as tho it contained somewhat
Divine, it is called a sideration: for those that are seized with it, as tho
they were Planet-struck, or smitten by an invisible Deity, fall on the Ground
on a sudden, and being deprived of Sense and Motion, and the whole animal
function (unless that they breath) ceasing, they lie dead as it were for some
time, and sometimes dye outright: and if they revive again, they are
oftentimes affected with a general Palsy or an Hemiplegia.

Tho it may seem a Paradox, it is not disagreeing with Reason to say that the
Apoplexy is twofold, and that one of them belongs to the Cerebellum, and that
the other has its seat in the midst of the Brain: the former happens by reason
of the animal Spirits designed for the vital function, being suppressed in their
very source, viz. within the Cerebellum, the motion of the Heart being often
thereby let or suppressed, as we have intimated before that this happens in
some sort in the Incubus: and doubtless to this cause ought to be attributed
what I have observed in some, that after a great heaviness in the Occiput, a
Swooning with a sudden privation of all the animal function ensues: in which
the diseased lie without Motion or Sense, with a Pulse and Respiration greatly
diminished, and scarce perceivable, and being all over cold for many Hours,
nay, often a Day or two, more resembling Persons dead, than living: We have
sometimes known Persons so affected, who have grown cold and stiff, their Pulse
and Respiration seeming wholly to be ceased, and who have been really taken for
dead, and put in their Coffins, yet after two or three days to have come to
life again.

To enquire into the causes of the other, and the ways of its coming to pass,
we must first distinguish concerning the various Invasion of this Disease; to
wit, how sometimes being raised from a sudden, solemn, and invincible cause,
without any previous Disposition or Procatarxis, it is for the most part
mortal; against this no Procatarctick or preservatory Method can be ordered;
and the method of curing it, which is ordinarily entered upon, for the most part
becomes ineffications: or secondly an Apoplectick Fit, having an antecedent
Cause, or a previous Procatarxis is brought into act through various Occasions
or evident Causes.

As to the seizure of the former kind, viz. being sudden and unawares, its
conjunct, and immediate cause is either a great Solution of Continuity happening
some where within or near the middle of the Brain; through which its Pores and
Passages being obstructed, or comprest, all emanation of the Spirits is
suppressed, or it is a great and sudden putting to flight, or extinction of the
Spirits residing in the Brain.

The things which are wont to cause a great solution of Continuity within the
Brain, are, Blood extravasated, an Abscess suppurated and broken, and an
inundation of a serous humor; and tho this latter seldom or never happens of
it self, yet sometimes, by reason of strong evident causes, such a glut of
serous filth rushes into the Brain, that presently filling and stuffing all its
medullary Pores, it renders the Person speechless, which I have known to have
happened to some upon sleeping presently after having drank too largely of small
Wine and Spaw Waters; I have observed the like affect upon a total and long
continued suppression of Urine. And in malignant Fevers the serous recrements
by a critical Metastasis being conveyed to the Brain have often caused a loss
of Speech with Death.

Of the evident Causes by which an extemporary Apoplexy is wont to be procured,
the other kind consists in a sudden profligation, or extinction of the Spirits:
which strong Narcoticks, and an immoderate drinking of hot-Waters often effect.

Thus much concerning the Causes of the accidental and extemporary Apoplexy,
which bring a fit of it on all Persons indifferently, tho not predispos'd; and
wherefore there can be no Prophylaxis ordered, and it is seldom that a Cure
succeeds. But we observe besides, that this Disease sometimes is habitual, viz.
That there remains in certain men a constant Disposition, by reason of which
first slight Bickerings trouble them, afterward by short intervals greater
accesses come upon them: of which for the most part they dye at last.

As to the conjunct cause of this Disease, it consists in the sudden filling of
the Pores of the Corpus Callosum, and the destroying of the Spirits by the
approach of a malignant matter.

Its procatarctick Causes are the like as in most other affects of the Brain,
viz. both the Blood is in fault, that either engendring of it self, or taking
from elsewhere extraneous Particles, and such as are very adverse to the
texture, or constitution of the animal Spirits, and as it were extinctory of
them, it sends them to the Brain: and moreover, the fault of the Brain is, that
being weak in its Crasis, and too lax and loosned in its Pores and Passages, it
always admits so easily and without resistance the morbifick matter obtruded
from the Blood.

The Subject of this Disease being the Brain, or the Cerebellum, or both
together; the Brain is shown to be most obnoxious to it, by previous and
frequent Scotomias, and vertiginous Affects: the Cerebellum is argued to be
ill-disposed by a frequent Incubus, an intermitting Pulse, a Swooning, and
frequent Fainting.

The Prognostic of this Disease is never declared but fatal and dubious: for
an Apoplexy is never without danger either present, or to come, but the worst
is, in which, besides all the spontaneous Functions being abolished, the Pulse
also and Respiration either fail, or are carried on with much ado, and then
for the most part it happens with a foaming at Mouth, and a Swooning, to which
at length a sweat (which most commonly is colliquative) supervening, foreshews
that Death will happen very suddenly.

Those who being seized with the Apoplexy are deprived of Pulse and
Respiration, and a little after growing cold, seem to be dead, ought not
presently to be taken forth of Bed, or to be left without Physical
Administrations: moreover, tho no hope of Life appears, let them not be buried
till after three or four days: for such, either of their own accord, or by the
use of Remedies sometimes revive: which happens not by reason of the vital heat
being raised up again in the Heart, (for it was not wholly destroyed here) but
for that the morbifick matter being discussed, or evaporated from the
Cerebellum, the motion of the Heart is renewed, as that of a Clock upon hanging
on Weights.

In an Apoplectick Fit, if after letting Blood relief follows, some hope of
well-doing appears: but if after this and other Remedies the affect continues
above four and twenty hours without remitting, or grows worse, all hope is over
concerning the diseased.

If after the first seizure of a speechlesness being well over, the diseased
afterward becoming more drowsy and dull, is affected with a Scotomia, and a
frequent Vertigo, it is a sign that he will be obnoxious to other accesses of
the Apoplexy: for the foresaid affects proceed from the morbifick matter at
that time deposed in the circumference of the Brain, and there floating here
and there, and now and then descending by small parts only, into the midst of
it, which matter, whether it be Vitriolick or Narcotick, after that it is
gathered together to a fullness, brings the Apoplexy.

The Therapeutick method either is curatory, for removing the fit, after it has
seized, or preservatory for preventing it from returning: the former regards
every Apoplexy, the other only that which is habitual.

A fit of the Disease happening (if it does not proceed from an outward or
violent hurt of the Head) tho it be unknown whether it be raised by an
invisible cause (such as are an extravasating of the Blood in the Brain, or an
Abscess broken) or not: however we ought diligently to endeavor its cure. And
because the Blood being too turgid is wont to induce the morbifick cause, or at
leastwise to increase it, and when it subsides and becomes more calm is wont
sometimes to remove the same: therefore in the first place we ought to
deliberate concerning the moderating of its course. And here a question arises
concerning the site of the diseased, viz. Whether he ought not presently to be
put to bed, or rather to be kept out of it for some time? some religiously
observe the latter, nor is it without reason, because in Bed there is a greater
propension to sleep, and the Blood boiling more, and burning more freely by
reason of the ambient hear of the Bed, sends more of the recrementitious matter
into the head affected: on the contrary, when the diseased being thinly
clothed, is placed in a Chair, the Blood flows more slowly, and the subsiding
Vessels seem more fit rather for drinking up humors sent from the Brain, then
for sending them thither. Wherefore, if the Patient be strong enough, it may
happily be better for him to stay out of Bed for six or eight Hours, till the
Fluxion of the morbifick Matter be past, and the course of the Blood be made
more calm by blooding, and other Remedies carefully administered. But let those
that are weak, and of a tender Constitution, be put presently to Bed as soon as
they are seized. Let the site of the diseased, whether he be in Bed, or out of
it, not be on his Back, but the Head somewhat raised, and learning sometimes to
one side, sometimes to the other.

Blooding, being necessary almost in all Apoplectical Persons, may not be
delayed: but a smart Clyster being injected, let Blood be taken in a plentiful
quantity. In the Clyster let there be dissolved Species Hierae Diacolycinth:
and a thick infusion of Crocus Metallorum: let a large Vesicatory be applied to
the Neck, and others to the Legs, and drawing Cataplasmes to the feet: let the
Temples and Nostrils be anointed with appropriate Oils and Balsoms, and let
painful Frictions be used to the Limbs, nay to the whole Body: meanwhile let
those things be now and then given, which raise up the animal Spirits, and free
them from their Fetters, viz. Spirit of Hartshorn, Soot, and the like, with a
Cephalic Julep.

Afterward, the diseased being put to Bed (if he seems easy and able enough to
bear a Vomit) let a vomitory of Salt of Vitriol, Oxymel of Squils, or an
infusion of Crocus Metallorum be given: and now and then a Quill being thrust
into his Throat, let a vomiting be raised four or five times, Posset Drink by
intervals being poured into him.

The vomiting being over, let comforting things, as Quercitans Elixir of Life,
Spirit of Lavender, or of Treacle camphorated, Tincture of Peony, or of Amber,
or Coral, be given in a fit dose, with Apoplectick and other appropriate
Waters, and as occasion requires let them be repeated.

On the second day the same Remedies being still continued, let dry
Cupping-glasses or with a scarification, also be applied about the
Shoulder-blades, or in the Neck: or if more Blood ought to be drawn, let the
Jugular Vein be opened; let the Clyster be repeated; Let Spirit of Sal
Armoniack, or a steam of Galbanum boiled in sharp Vinegar be held to the
Nostrils: Moreover, let Errhins, and Apophlegmatisms be used: afterward in the
Evening let a purge of Pilulae Rudii, or the Electuary of Roses solutive
dissolved in some Liquour be given.

These things doing no good, tho there be small or no hope, let either a
burning hot Iron, or a large Vesicatory be applied to the Crown of the Head
shaved; let the remaining part of it, and chiefly the Forehead, and Sinciput be
somented with Bezoardick Vinegar: Let Leeches be applied to the Temples, or
behind the Ears; Let Spirit of Hartshorn, or of Soot be given him in a large
dose, and often; we must insist on these and other ways of adminstrations till
death seems to be at hand, which (as Celsus has it) those kind of Remedies
often only delay, and in the mean while prove troublesome to life.

The Prophylactick Method regards both those, who have been formerly set upon
with one or more Invasions, and those who seem prone to them, as being born
from Apoplectick Parents, or being obnoxious to the Vertigo, Incubus, or
frequent Faintings, and such as have the Neck short and thick grown.

Spring and Fall let purging and blooding (where it is proper) be used; as to
the former let those that are easy to vomit, take first a vomitory of the
Infusion of Crocus Metallorum, with Salt of Vitriol, or of Sulphur of Antimony,
and then after three or four days, let a dose of Pilulae Rudii, or of Amber be
given; and afterward by due intervals let it is be repeated three or four
times: let two large Issues be raised near the Shoulder-blades, or if those
Places do not please some, let them have one in the Arm, and another in the
opposite Leg.

On other days free from purging, let altering and cephalic Medicines be
taken twice a day.

Take Conserve of the Flowers of Lillies of the valley (or of male Peony) six
ounces, powder of the roots of male Peony half an ounce, man's skull prepared
three drams, seeds and flowers of male Peony powdered, of each two drams, red
Coral prepared, Pearl and white Amber of each a dram, Salt of Coral four
scruples, syrup of the flowers of male Peony what suffices, make an Electuary:
the dose is two drams morning and evening, drinking after it of the following
water two or three ounces.

Take roots of male Peony, Angelica, Master-wort, of each half a pound, roots
of Zedoary, the lesser Galingal, of each an ounce, leaves of Mistletoe of
Apple Trees, Rue, Sage, Betony, of each four handfuls, the outward coats of ten
Oranges and eight Lemmons, Cardamums, Cloves, Nutmegs, of each half an ounce;
all being sliced and bruised, pour to them of White Wind (in which two pounds
of Peacocks dung has been infused for a day) ten pounds: let there be a close
infusion for three days, then distill it according to art, let the whole
Liquor be mixed.

Take species Diambroe two drams, powder of the roots of male Peony, choice
Zedoary of each a dram and a half, Pearl a dram, Oil of pure Amber half a
dram, double refined Sugar dissolved in Peony Water, and boiled to a
Consistency, for Tablets, six ounces, make Tablets according to art, weighing
half a dram; let the Patient eat one or two often in a day at pleasure.

Within fifteen or twenty days, the Remedies, that they may be less loathsome
and more advantageous ought to be changed; therefore instead of the Electuary,
give for a fortnight or three weeks sometimes Spirit of Sal Armoniack
saccinated, or coralliated, or impregnated with Man's Scull, or Castoreum;
sometimes the Elixir of Peony, or the tincture of Amber, or Coral, or
Quercitans Elixir of Life, mixtura simplex: Also, instead of the compound
Waters let them take either the Water of black Cherries, or of Walnuts, or of
Rosemary, or of Lavender simple, sometimes a draught of Posset Drink with the
Flowers of male Peony, or of Lillies of the Valleys boiled in it, or a draught
of Tea or Coffee, in the Morning (those Ingredients being first boiled in the
Water of which it is prepared) or let a Confection of Chocolate be made after
this manner.

Take powder of the Roots of male Peony, man's Scull prepared of each half an
ounce, Species Diambrae two drams, make a Powder, to every paper of which add
Cocao-nut-Kernels a pound, Sugar what suffices, make a Confection, let half an
ounce or six drams of this be taken every Morning in a draught of a decoction
of Sage, of Peony Flowers, or the like.

Take Powder of the Roots of male Peony, man's Scull prepared of each an ounce
and a half, Roots of choice Zedoary, bastard Dittany, Angelica, Contrayerva of
each two drams, make a subtle Powder of all of them, add the yellow Coats of
Oranges and Limons preserved of each two ounces, let them be bruised together
to a Powder, let about half a dram, or a dram be taken an Hour before and after
meals.

For ordinary Drink, let a Vessel of four Gallons be filled with midling Ale,
in which boil the Leaves of white sweet smelling Hore-hound dried six
handfuls, Anacardiums, Cardamums, of each an ounce and a half, being sliced and
bruised, make a Bag.

But especially, let an exact form of Diet be observed: Let a temperate, dry,
and well ventilated Air be chosen; let food only of an easy concoction, and
light, be eaten; let the Supper be spare, or none at all; let sleeping at noon,
drinkings, and other ill accustomances about nonnatural things be shunned.

I might here instance several stories of Apoplectical persons, viz. of some,
who, tho seized once or twice, are still living; and of others killed by the
first, or second, or afterward at the third Invasion. The Right Reverend Father
in Christ, Gilbert Lord Archbishop of Canterbury, lives still, who escaped
above six years since from a severe Apoplectick fit, (God, to whom ever be
praise, giving success to Physical endeavors,) and from that time, tho he has
now and then undergone light touches of the Disease, yet he has never been so
prostrated by it as to become speechless, or insensible: But it is to no purpose
to dwell long in setting forth this and other examples, in regard they contain
nothing very rare, whence the Aetiology of the Disease may be illustrated. I
have dissected some dead Bodies, but they were in a manner only of such Persons
as were seized Apoplectical after the Head being greatly hurt, as by a stroke,
or a fall, in all which the Blood extravasated, or an Abscess was the cause of
Death: As to the opening of Persons dead of an habitual Apoplexy, we are most
commonly hindered by Friends, who expecting their revival, both delay the
Interrment, and wholly forbid Anatomy. But I shall give you here one notable
Anatomical Observation made about five years since at Oxford.

An ancient Divine, an honest and pious man, of a gross Body, and having a
short and full grown Neck, being long ill-dispos'd in his health, and leading a
sedentary life, had contracted a very Scorbutic Cacochymia; being affected
with a difficult and pursy breathing, and with an unwonted heaviness and
drowsiness of his Head, he was scarce able to perform any thing of labor or
exercise, but to go and come daily from his Chamber to the Chapel, and
Refectory: On a certain morning, entering the Chapel a little before Prayers,
as he set himself on his knees, being struck on a sudden, and presently
becoming speechless and insensible, he fell on the ground; but being forthwith
raised up, and his Clothes taken off, he was put into a warm Bed: My self and
other Physicians being called, and coming as quick as might be, we found him
not only without Sense, Pulse and Respiration, but cold and absolutely stift
throughout his whole Body: Nor could he be brought to life, or to a heat by any
Remedies, or ways of administration, tho applied with all diligence for some
time: Whence we imagined, that from his first being struck, the beat of the
Heart was wholly stopped, and its flame being extinct, that presently all
motion of the Blood was suppressed.

The next day after we opened the Body, it appearing to be quite dead and
stiff; nothing doubting but very clear footstepts of an affect so suddenly
mortal, left within the Brain, would show themselves to the eye; but neither
there, or in any other part, was there remaining so much as any shadow of the
Disease, tho very violent: the vessels irrigating the Meninges were
indifferently filled with blood, but without any inflammation or extravasation:
the Brain, Cerebellum, and medulla oblongata, with all their processes and
prominences, appeared every where firm and well-colored throughout, both
within and without: neither was there Serum nor extravasated Blood heapt
together any where within their Pores and Passages, nor also within the greater
Ventricles: nay, and the plexus choroeides placed both within the Cavity of the
Brain, and behind the Cerebellum, seemed free from all fault, so that the
morbifick matter being as fine and subtle as the Spirits which it affected,
remained wholly inconspicuous, and we could only argue its presence there from
the effect.

Nevertheless, lest it should lie hid elsewhere without the Head, after having
accurately inspected all the Contents of the Brain, we came to the Thorax,
where the Lungs being discolored, and stufft throughout with a frothy Ichor,
showed manifestly enough the cause of the difficult and pursy breathing; but
the Heart being sound and firm enough, was wholly free from any obstructions,
or polipous concretions. Moreover, neither near it, nor in other adjacent
Viscera was any Abscess or Impostume found, by whose contact or ill favor the
Heart could so be oppressed, or the Vital Spirit (in case this be possible) on a
sudden be suffocated.

Wherefore in this case we could imagine nothing else, but that the Animal
Spirits residing within the middle of the Brain were on a sudden put to flight,
and extinguished as it were by certain malignant, or narcotick, or otherwise
infesting Particles; so that the motion of the Heart, as of the first mover in
a machine, failing on a sudden, presently all the other Functions, their
impulses being taken away, wholly ceased.

CHAP. VIII. Instructions and Prescripts for curing the Palsy.
THE middle of the Brain, or the Corpus callosum, where we have assigned the
Seats of the Vertigo and Apoplexy, seems also to be the place primarily
affected in the Epilepsy; but of this, as also of convulsive Diseases, we have
treated elsewhere: wherefore let us descend to other lower Regions of the
Brain, and its Appendix, and next let us describe the affects that belong to
the Corpora striata, medalla oblongata, and also to the nerves and nervous
Fibers.

These Parts execute all the Functions that regard motion and sense, wherefore
the failings or enormities of these must be affects of those Bodies, or of the
Spirits residing in them: now sense and motion are injured chiefly two ways;
for both are wont to be perverted, or stopped; when motion is perverted, Cramps
and Convulsions; when Sense, pains arise; when either Function or both of them
together are let or abolish, the Affect thence raised is called the Palsy;
of which we must treat at present.

The Palsy is described after this manner, viz. That it is a Resolution, or
Relaxation of the Nervous parts from their due Tention; by reason of which
Motion and Sense, to wit, either one of them alone, or both of them together
cannot be exercised in the whole Body, or in certain parts of it after a due
manner.

The Nervous Parts are resolved because the animal Spirits do not sufficiently
irradiate, raise, and actuate them with vigor: The cause of which defect is,
either an obstruction of the Ductus's, whereby their passage or conveyance is
hindered; or an impotency of the Animal Spirits, inasmuch as being affected with
a stupefaction, or being but few, they do not display themselves vigorcusly
enough: By reason of these various ways of affecting, diverse kinds of the
Palsy arise: For first, as to motion by it self, this spontaneous faculty
(which chiefly, and in a manner only, is obnoxious to the Palsy) sometimes in
the whole Body, or in certain parts, is wholly abolished; but sometimes it
being only let, is diminished or depraved. Secondly, in like manner we
observe as to Sense by it self, that either one Sense, or many together,
sometimes wholly are taken away, and that sometimes they are very much
diminished or vitiated. Thirdly, sometimes it happens that both powers are
injured together; we shall speak of each of these in order, and in the first
place of the Palsy, in which spontaneous motion is abolished; which we
conclude to happen chiefly for two causes, to wit, by reason of the Ductus's
being obstructed, or of the Animal Spirits being struck with a stupefaction,
or, as it were, with a certain malignant blast.

As to the former, the Interception of the Spirits from the Parts resolved by
reason of the Pores being obstructed, it being always above the Parts, is wont
to happen in various places, and for diverse causes; but especially either in
the primum sensorium, viz. in the Corpora Striata, or somewhere about the
Caudices Medullares; or lastly, in the Nerves themselves; and so lightly it
happens either in their origines, or in the middle of their Processes, or in
their extreme parts, viz. the Nervous Fibers. When the Injury happens to the
Corpora Striata, or Medulla oblongata, or Spinalis, it either obstructs the
whole running of the marrow of the Backbone, whence a universal Palsy arises
beneath the place affected; or one half of it, whence a Hemiplegia: or it
affects the heads of some certain Nerves either in one side, or in both
together, whence resolutions are caused in this or that member separately from
the others.

There are many ways, by which the passages of the Animal Spirits in the
foresaid bodies are obstructed; viz. either, first, their Ductus's are filled
with an extraneous matter forced into them; or secondly, they are compressed by
extravasated Blood, a glut of serous filth, or some tumor lying on them; or
thirdly, there is a solution of their continuity, as by a wound, stroke,
concussion, also by an excess of heat or cold.

As often as a Universal Palsy, or Hemiplegia (as is usual) ensues upon a
Lethargy, Carus, or Apoplexy, it is obvious to conceive that such a change of
the Disease happens by reason of the removal of the matter, viz. inasmuch as
this passing at length from the pores and passages of the Corpus Callosum
(which if first possessed, and falling a little lower,) enters into the medullary
tracts of one Corpus Striatum, or happily of both.

If it be asked why Sense is not always hindered as well as Motion in the Palsy,
since both are performed by the same Nerves and Fibers, and as it seems, within
the same medullary tracts, so that one faculty is only the inversion of the
other; it seems here to be said, that, as Light passes through Glass where the
Wind is excluded, so also Sense continuing entire, Motion often is abolisht:
Moreover, Sense is only a Passion, and sensible impression, which is propagated
by the continuity of the nervous process, from the Organ to the sensorium
commune, without any effort or force of the Spirits, which might be done, tho
the Sensorium Commune be somewhere obstructed, and the Spirits residing in it
are grown dull; But Motion is a difficult and laborious Action, to which it is
required that the Spirits display themselves vigorously, and make as it were
explosive affects, not only in the moving Organs, but especially about the
parts where the principle of Motion and its first Impetus is, also in the whole
passage through the Nervous parts. Wherefore, whereas a few Spirits, and those
disabled, suffice for Sense, many are required for Motion, and those free and
prompt as to their Expansions.

I have observed in many that when they were first affected with an
Indisposition of the Brain, a Dullness of the Mind, and a Forgetfulness; and
afterward with a Stupidity and Dotishness, they fell afterward (as I was wont
to predict) into a Palsy; viz. the morbifick matter being fallen by degrees,
and at length heaped together to an opilative plenitude somewhere within the
Caudex Medullaris, where the medullary Tracts are more straightened than in the
Corpus Striatum.

What before we said in the Apoplexy, we affirm now in the Palsy, that the
morbid Particles are not only opilative, but sometimes narcotick, and
extinguish the Spirits; thus the steams of Antimony, Mercury, and Auripigment,
cause weaknesses, tremblings, and often, resolutions of the Members to some
using amongst furnaces of Metals. In like manner we may imagine, that in
certain scorbutical and very cacochymical Persons, heterogeneous Particles, and
seemingly of a vitriolick nature, enter the Ductus's of the Nerves, and subvert
certain files of the Spirits, or suppress their motion; hence stupors or
resolutions suddenly arise in the Members or Muscles, sometimes in these, and
sometimes in those, they often removing from place to place, and sometimes a
fixed Palsy is settled: And in every Palsy caused by obstruction, the
morbifick matter is not a gross and viscous phlegm, (as Galen and many
Physicians affirm) for such does not pervade the Brain, much less the Ductus's
of the Nerves; but seems to consist of subtle and very active particles, tho
injurious to the animal economy, for the Palsy happens to men, as a blight or
rust does to Plants; for some Winds endued with Vapors more than cold, viz. of
a vicious or vitriolick Spirit, when they blow upon young tender Plants
presently cause them to wither; viz. in as much as the tender stamina
interwoven every where like Nerves in the Leaves and Branches are so thoroughly
constring'd by the blast of the malignant Air, that they no longer admit the
Juice sent from the Trunk and Root, through defect of which they wither: after
the like manner extraneous, and as it were, vitriolick Particles admitted
within the Organs of Sense and Motion, in as much as at the same time they stop
the Pores, and deject the animal Spirits, or restrain them from Motion, bring
as it were a blast on the respective Parts.

As to the evident causes of an habitual Palsy, viz. through what occasions
those that are disposed to this Disease contract it sooner, or being already
seized with it, are more severely troubled with it: I say all such things make
for this, which add to the vitiating of the Blood, also which fill the Brain,
and its nervous Appendix, or raise suffusions of a morbifick matter in it,
those things likewise which affect the Spirits with a Stupefaction, or diminish
their Stores: in the number of these first occur disorders in the six non
natural things, an ill form of Dyer, a drinking of strong Wines, or hot Waters,
too much or unseasonable Sleep, Idleness, and a sedentary Life, immoderate
Venery, too great losses of Blood, a moist and marshy Air, houses fresh
plaistred, metallic Fumes and Vapors, frequent use of Narcoticks, or Tobacco,
an excess of Cold, Heat, or Moisture, vehement and long continued Passions of
Sadness and Fear, with many other things, which I shall not here stand to
relate.

There is another kind of this Disease depending on the scarcity and fewness of
the Spirits, in which tho motion fails wholly in no Part or Member, yet it is
performed but weakly only, or depravedly by any: to wit, the affected, tho not
become without Motion, yet they are not able to move their Members, or to
sustain any Burden with strength; moreover in any moving effort they are
troubled with a trembling of the Limbs, which is only the effect of Weakness,
or a broken strength in the moving Faculty.

Persons become subject to this affect by reason of an extreme or valetudinary
old age, also through immoderate losses of Blood or Seed; and likewise by
reason of being very scorbutical, or cacochymical: and many recovering with
difficulty and slowly from a chronick distemper are troubled with a languishing
of the Limbs, and a great resolution of the Members from their due Vigor and
Strength; so that tho their Stomach holds good, and their Pulse and Urine be
well disposed, yet being enervated, as it were, and without Strength, they
scarce dare to set upon any local motion, and if they begin it, they cannot
hold it long: nay some, without any considerable sickness, keep their Beds for
a long time, as Persons ready to dye; whilst they lie undisturbed they
discourse with their Friends, and are cheerful, but they neither will, nor dare
be raised up, or walk about, nay they abhor all motion as some dreadful thing.
Doubtless in these, tho the animal spirits in some sort actuate and irradiate
the whole Genus Nervosum; yet their Stores are so slender and loosly set
together, that when many Spirits ought to be gathered together somewhere in it
for motion, there is great danger lest presently in the Neighborhood their
Continuity be broken off, and consequently the tension in the Nervous Parts ber
esolv'd. Wherefore, in regard the Spirits residing in the Brain are conscious
of the Weakness of the others placed in the Members, they refuse to impose
local motion on their Companions, as being a task too difficult for them; for
which cause the affected are scarce led by any persuasion to try whether they
are able to go or not: but those who being troubled with a scarcity of Spirits,
will force them as much as they may to local Motions, are able at their first
rising in the Morning to walk, move their Arms this way and that, or to lift up
a weight with strength; but before Noon the store of the Spirits which
influenced the Muscles being almost spent, they are scarce able to move Hand or
Foot. I have now a prudent and honest Woman in cure, who for many years has
been obnoxious to this kind of bastard Palsy, not only in the Limbs, but
likewise in her Tongue; This Person for some time speaks freely and readily
enough, but after long, hasty, or laborous speaking, presently she becomes as
mute as a fish, and cannot bring forth a word, nay, and does not recover the
use of her Voice till after an hour or two.

In a certain species of the Palsy the sensitive faculty is hurt by it self,
motion being still entire; this is obvious enough concerning the Organs whose
Nerves are only relating to Sense, as of the Sight, Hearing, Taste, and Smell,
and the Reason is plain enough. But that in the uttermost habit of the Body, or
the Members, sometimes the touch perishes, the locomotive Power being without
hurt; as it is every where seen in Persons affected with the Leprosy,
Elephantiasis, and in some troubled with the Mania who are wont to go naked,
and to lie on the Ground, and who are become so insensible in the Skin and the
Flesh of the Muscles, that they do not feel the cuts of a Penknife, or Needles
any where thrust into them. This I say is very difficult to be explained; But
concerning this it must be said, that the same Nerves happily convey forward and
backward the instincts of Motions, and the Impressions of sensible things; but
that the same Fibers which are locomotive are not always, or chiefly sensible:
We have shown elsewhere that the muscular and tendinous Fibers execute the
former Power, but the sensible Species is received in a manner only by the
membranous Fibers; wherefore the outward Skin is the primary Organ of the
touch; after this the Membrancs that cover the Muscles, and lastly, those that
compose the Viscera are in the same sort affected by the tangible Object,
wherefore the hurt or loss of the touch happens by reason of an Injury offered
the outward Membranes; viz. when the Fibers of these are obstructed with a
Vitriolick Matter, or are very much constipated by an excess of Cold, so that
the animal Spirits which ought to receive their Impressions, are excluded from
their Organs, and that these Inhabitants of the outward Members are only
affected it thence appears, because the Members deprived of Sense do not wither
as those deprived of Motion, but continue full and fleshy; which is a sign that
the animal Spirits still entering the Nerves and carneous Fibers give their
virtue to the Function of Nutrition: but when Motion being abolished, the
Spirits are in a manner wholly banished from those parts, the Flesh withers
away, because the nutritive Matter tho brought to them by the Arteries, is not
assimilated.

As to the Prognostic of the Palsy, 1. Any Palsy that happens, the knowing
and vital faculties being unhurt, ought not to be judged an acute Disease; but
being free from sudden danger, admits of a cure at long run, or at leastwise of
an endeavor for it.

2. This disease happening through an evident cause alone, as by a stroke, a fall
from an high Place, a wound, etc. or coming upon an Apoplexy, Carus,
Convulsion, Colic, or other affects of the Brain, or Systema Nervosum, if it
be not altered for the better, or yields to Medicines in in a short time, for
the most part proves incurable.

3. If upon the origin of the medulla oblongata being wholly obstructed, or
through the Spine's being vehemently hurt, a total resolution follows and takes
away Sense and Motion, the affect is cured with difficulty, or scarce at all.

4. A Palsy happening to men that are Aged, Cacochymical, greatly Scorbutical,
or intemperate, tho the affect be not great, is cured with difficulty.

As the Types of the Palsy are many fold, and its causes diverse, so its cure
ought to be undertaken not always after one manner, but by a various method,
viz. appropriate to each species of that Disease: for the most part there will
be these three kinds of it, or rather there will be three ways of healing,
whereof sometimes this, sometimes that, or the other, ought to be entered upon
in order to the cure of this Disease, to wit, according as the resolution (of
what kind soever, and in what place soever it be) is either first caused on a
sudden by an outward accident, viz. a stroke, a fall from an high Place, a
wound, an excess of cold, or the like; or secondly, succeeds some other affect,
viz. The Apoplexy, Carus, Colic, or a long continued Fever; or thirdly, being
a Disease primarily, and of it self, depending of a Procatarxis, or previous
apparatus, is raised by degrees: we shall speak of each of these particularly.

1. When therefore a Palsy is caused by reason of some accident, with a
violent hurt, there will not be many Intentions of curing, but only that the
part injured may recover its ancient confirmation; and first, left the Blood
and other humors flowing to it, as being affected and weak, and there staying,
increase the evil, let Phlebotomy, which most commonly is requisite in this
case, be presently put in practice; afterward a thin diet, if the case requires
it, or a diet of easy concoction being ordered, we must insist chiefly on
moderate Hydroticks; to wit, that whilst the diseased, put to bed, is kept in a
gentle sweat, all sorts of Superfluities withdrawn from the part injured may
plentifully exhale, and that the Spirits being gently agitated within the Pores
and Passages of it, so opened by the warm effluvia, may recover their former
Paths and Tracts.

For this end, let the Powder for a fall, described in the Pharmacopoea August
and be given to the quantity of about a dram in a draught of Whitewine, or of
Posset Drink made with it, (it being usual amongst us to give to the like
quantity of Irish-slat,) and let it be repeated every six or eight Hours:
Moreover let a Traumatick Decoction, if it may readily be had, either of the
Roots of Madder, or Butter-burr, or of the Flowers of St. John's wort in
Posset Drink be frequently given.

Moreover, let the place affected in the mean time be diligently searched
after, which will easily be known, partly from the hurt inflicted on it, and
partly from the member resolved. If any thing be dislocated in it, we must
endeavor that it be presently put in its place: If a tumor, contusion, or
wound be made, let relief be given them by balsas, liniments, fomentations, or
cataplasms: But if nothing preternatural appears outwardly, let as much as
suffices of the Oxycroceum and Red Lead Plasters, mixed together in an equal
quantity, be applied to the part hurt, and let the Diseased by kept at rest,
and in a moderate warmth for three or four days: if the resolution continues
obstinate, and an afflux of new matter be not feared, let more resolving and
discussing Remedies be applied about the places affected; wherefore let
fomentations, and hot liniments, nay, and natural hot Baths, if it be
convenient, or at leastwise artificial ones, be used: Sometimes it is good to
put the members affected in warm Horse-dung, or Grains, and to keep them there
for some time: and now and then to interlace Clysters and gentle Purges with
the use of these things. But if no relief follows these Administrations, this
affect ought afterward to be handled with the like Method, and the same
Remedies with which an habitual Palsy, or any other that is confirmed, or
follows upon other Diseases is dealt with: which way of cure we shall give you
beneath, in regard it is common to every Palsy deeply rooted.

2. When a Palsy, happening upon a Fever, Apoplexy, Carus, or other Cephalic or
Convulsive affects is great, and comes on a sudden; we must chiefly use a
Physical means for the removal of its Conjunct cause, which has its seat in a
manner always in the Medulla oblongata, or Spinalis: Wherefore in the beginning
of the Disease let Blooding and Purging (if nothing indicates the contrary)
Clysters, Vesicatories, Cupping-glasses, Sneezers, Liniments, and other
administrations usual in Cephalic Diseases, viz. such as some way drive out,
or withdraw the morbid matter sticking in the Caudex Medullaris, or the little
Heads of the Nerves proceeding from it, be used: And if the first effort of
Physic does nothing within fifteen or twenty days, the affect afterward, in
regard it is firmly rooted, and become habitual, is to be overcome by a long
method, and by Preservatory, as well as Curatory Indications; of which we shall
presently speak.

3. An Habitual Palsy, depending of a Procatarxis, is either in fieri, or in
its disposition, or in facto, or in its habit; both require a peculiar way of
Cure.

Of the former there are two chief cases, in both of which the Therapeutick
method, regarding only the Procatarctick causes, is ordered after the like
manner: to wit, whether any Person be in danger of being seized with the
Palsy, or recovering from it, be in hazard of a relapse, we must insist in a
manner on the same Medicines.

Therefore the Intentious of Curing must be, first, that the functions of
Chylification and Sanguification being duly performed, a laudable matter for
the generation of Animal Spirits be sent to the Brain in a sufficient plenty:
and then, secondly, that the Brain being still firm and of a due conformation,
admits into it, and duly exalts into Animal Spirits all apt particles,
excluding such as are heterogeneous; for these ends we have thought good to
propose the following method, which ought to be varied according to the various
constitutions of the Diseased.

Spring and Fall, let solemn courses of Physic be entered upon, nay, and the
whole year besides, let some Remedies be constantly used: Bleeding is not
generally proper for all Persons: and if we forbid this, it is not for the same
reason with the Ancients, supposing the Palsy to be a cold Disease; but
because the Animal Spirits are both engendered from the Blood, and become
elastick within the moving Fibers, by reason of a sanguineous combination;
therefore if the store of this be lessened too much, they will fail and flag.
Which truly I have observed in many, and that for the most part in the Arm,
from which the Blood was drawn, languishings and tremblings have begun.
Nevertheless, a spare and moderate Bleeding sometimes agrees with some that are
endued with a Blood that is hot and sharp, and apt to too great
effervescencies, tho they are disposed to the Palsy.

About the Equinoxes, purging ought to be ordered, and to be repeated by due
Intervals three or four times; but in the first place let a Vomit, if nothing
indicates the contrary, be given of Salt of Vitriol, Sulphur of Antimony, or an
Infusion of crocus metallorum, or Mercurius vitae; afterward let Pillulae de
succino or Aloephanginae be taken by themselves, or with Rosm of Jalap, every
seventh or eighth day: At other times let Cephalic Remedies, such as we have
prescribed for the sleepy affects, viz; Electuaries, Powders, Spirits and
volatile Salts, Tinctures, Elixirs, with distilled Waters or Apozemes, viz.
sometimes these, sometimes those, or others be frequently used. Let Issues be
burnt in the Arm or Leg, nay, in gross and cachectical Persons together in
both, or near the Shoulder-blades. Let a Physick-drink of Sage, Betony,
Stoechas, the wood Sassafras, Winters bark etc. be drank the whole year. Wine
and Venus ought either to be forbidden, or to be allowed only sparingly.

But if the Palsy, after a previous disposition in the whole, or in one side,
or in certain members, thoroughly seises, and, notwithstanding the first
encounter of Physic, comes on again; for its cure a long and complicated
method, which is always requisite, often times does not suffice; for not only
the Disease, or its conjunct or procatarctick Cause severally, but all
together, must be assaulted: for which ends, blooding for the most part being
forbidden, only a gentle purge, and that but now and then, is proper. Again,
and indeed chiefly, against the Procatarxis of the Disease, Cephali^^ and
Antiscorbutick Medicines are wont to do good: but not all of these kinds agree
with all Persons, but, as we have observed in the Scurvey, according to the
various Constitutions of the Diseased, the Remedies also must be of a differing
kind and virtue: for with bilous paralyticks, in whose sharp and hot blood
there is much Salt and Sulphur, and very little Serum, hot Medicines, and such
as are endowed with very active Particles, do not agree, nay often prove
offensive to them; which nevertheless prove greatly beneficial to phlegmatic
persons, whose blood is colder and contains a great deal of Serum, and a few
active Elements. Wherefore, according to this twofold state of the Diseased,
it seems fit for us to propose here a double method of Cure, and two Classes of
Medicines, whereof this will do well to be given to cold paralyticks, and the
other to such as are hot.

In the former case, for the removal of the procatarctick Cause, after a Vomit
and a Purge duly ordered, I advise to be prescribed according to the following
forms.

Take Conserve of the leaves of Garden Scurvy Grass, and of Rochet made with an
equal part of Sugar, of each three ounces, Ginger condited in the Indies an
ounce, the yellow coats of Oranges and Limons preserved of each six drams,
powder of the Claws and Eyes of Crabs of each four Scruples, species diambroe
two drams, winters-bark a dram and a half, roots of Zedoary, the lesser
Galingal, Cubebs, the seeds of Garden-cresses, rochet, of each a dram, Spirit
of Scurvy Grass, and of Lavender, of each two drams, Syrup of the conditure of
Ginger what suffices, make an Electuary: Let the quantity of a Walnut be taken
at eight a clock in the Morning, and at five in the Afternoon, drinking after
it a pound of the following decoction, or six ounces of the Tincture of Coffee,
with the Leaves of Sage boiled in it, or three ounces of Viper-wine.

Take Raspings of Guaiacum six ounces, Sarzaparilla, Sassafras of each four
ounces, red and yellow Saunders, shavings of Ivory and Hartshorn of each half
an ounce, infuse them according to art, and boil them in sixteen pounds of
Fountain Water, to a half, adding Crude Antimony, powdered and tied in a
Nodulus, four ounces, roots of Calamus Aromaticus, the lesser Galingal of each
half an ounce, Florentine Orris an ounce, Cardamum six drams, Coriander seeds
half an ounce, six Dates, make a Decoction, and let it be used for ordinary
drink.

Going to Bed, and early in the Morning, let a dose be taken either of the
Spirit of Soot, or of Hartshorn, of Sal Armoniack succinated, of Blood, etc.
with three ounces of the following distilled Water.

Take of the Leaves or Roots of Aron a pound, Leaves of Garden Scurvy Grass,
the greater Rochet, Rosemary, Sage, Savory, Time, four handfuls, Flowers of
Lavender three handfuls, the outward rinds of ten Oranges and six Limons,
Winters bark three Ounces, Roots of the lesser Galingal, Calamus Aromaticus,
Florentine Orris of each two ounces, Cubebs, Cloves, Nutmegs, of each an ounce,
all being sliced and bridsed, pour to them of White Wind and Brunswick Beer of
each four pounds, let them be distilled with common Organs, and let the whole
Liquour be mixed.

Sometimes instead of the Electuary, for fifteen or twenty days let a dose of
the Tincture of Sulphur terebinthinated, or the Tincture of Antimony, or of
Amber: sometimes also let the Elixir Proprietatis, or of Peony be taken in a
spoonful of the distilled Water, drinking after it three ounces of the same.

Sometimes also let the following Powders or Tablets have their turns in the
course of Phyfick.

Take powder of Vipers Flesh prepared at Montpellier an ounce, Hearts and
Livers of the same half an ounce, Species Diambroe two ounces, make a Powder,
let a dram be taken twice a day, with three ounces of the distilled Water, or
with Viper Wine, with a decoction of the Leaves of Sage, of the Roots and Seeds
of the great Bur-dock, and Eringo roots condited made in a sufficient quantity
of Fountain Water to a half, to the quantity of six or eight ounces warm in the
morning, expecting a sweat.

Take Solar Mineral Bezoar half an ounce, Cloves powdered two drams, mix them,
make a powder, to be divided into twelve parts; let one part be taken twice a
day after the same manner; with the use of these kinds of Remedies, let gentle
Catharticks be pretty ften interlac'd.

Take powder of choice Roots of Zedoary, and the lesser Galingal of each a dram
and a half, Species Diambror a dram, powder of the Seeds of Mustard, Rochet,
Scurvy Grass, Watercresses, of each half a dram, make a subtle powder of all:
add pure Oil of Amber half a dram, with six ounces of white Sugar dissolved in
compound Peony Water, and boiled to a Consistency for Tablets, make Tablets
according to Art, each weighing half a dram, let three or four be eaten twice a
day, drinking after it a dose of some one of the Liquors even now mentioned.

Take powder of the roots of Virginia Serpentary two drams, of the lesser
Galingal a dram, of the Gummous extract from the residency of the distillation
of Quercitans Elixir of Life a dram, Flowers of Sal Armoniack (or of pure
volatile salt of Soot, or of Hartshorn) a dram, Balsam of Peru a scruple,
Balsamum Capivi what suffises, make a Mass, let it be made into little Pills,
rolling them in species Diambrae, the dose is half a dram evening and morning.
(or)

Take Rosin, or Gum of Guaiacum three drams, species Diambrae a dram, Chemical
Oil of Guaiacum excellently rectified a dram and a half, liquid Amber what
suffices, make a mass, let it be formed into Pills, to be taken after the same
manner.

But if a Palsy, happening in a bilous Temperament, or in young Persons, admits
only mild Medicines, being wont to be exaspirated by any that are hot and
elastick, the following forms will be of use for removing its Procatarxis.

Take Conserve of the Flowers of Betony, Fumitory, Primrose Flowers of each two
ounces, species Diambrae a dram, Ivory, Crabs Eyes, Crabs Claws of each four
scruples, Powder of Peony Flowers two drams, Lignum Aloes, yellow Saunders, of
each a dram, Salt of Wormwood, a dram and a half, with a sufficient quantity of
Syrup of Peony Flowers make an Electuary, the dose is two drams a day, drinking
after it either of the simple Water of the Leaves of Aron, or of the following
compound Water three ounces, or of a Decoction of Sage, with the Leaves of Tea
infused in it four or six Ounces.

Take Rots of Aron, male Peony, Angelica, Masterwort, of each half a pound,
Leaves of Sage, Rosemary, Marjoram, Booklimes, Watercresses of each four
handfuls, the Flowers of Primroses, Cowslips, Marygolds, of each three
handfuls, the yellow coats of six Oranges, and four Limons, all being sliced
and bruised pour to them of new Milk six pounds, Malaga-wine two pounds,
distill them with common Organs, let the whole Liquour be mixed.

Instead of the Electuary sometimes for fourteen or fifteen days, let the use
of the Syrup of Steel be interlaced, wherefore let a spoonful be taken in three
ounces of the distilled Water, it may be made after this manner. Take double
refined Sugar dissolved in black Cherry Water, and boiled to a Consistency for
Tablets eight ounces, adding of our Steel powdered three drams; let them be
stirred together on the Fire, and then pour to them by degrees, Rosemary Water
warmed twelve ounces, let them sees gently for a quarter of an hour, taking
off the froth, and pour it out warm through a hair Strainer.

Chalybeat Tablets also may be made after this manner; viz. To the Sugar
sufficiently boiled with the Steel add Oil of Amber, or Chemical Oil of
Rosemary half a dram, and presently pour it forth that it may run abroad into a
Consistency for Tablets, the dose is two drams twice a day, drinking after it
of the distilled Water, or of the following Apozome six ounces.

Take China Roots an ounce, shavings of Ivory and Hartshorn of each half an
ounce, white and yellow Saunders, Mastick-wood of each half an ounce, let there
be a warm and close infusion for a Night, in six pounds of Fountain Water, in
the Morning add Roots of Chervil, Avens, Butchers-broom stone-Parsley of each
an ounce and a half, dried Leaves of Ground Ivy, Sage, Germander, Betony, of
each a handful, Coriander Seeds three drams, let them boil to a half, then add
of White Wind half a pound, and strain it into a Bottle on two handfuls of
Leaves of Watercresses bruised: make a warm and close infusion for two hours,
strain it again, and keep it in a stopped Vessel.

In a scorbutic Palsy Juices and Expressions of Herbs often give an excellent
relief.

Take fresh Leaves of Brooklimes, Watercresses, Plantain, of each four
handfuls, being bruised together, pour to them of the distilled Water even now
described eight ounces, express it strongly, keeping it in a Glass, and let
three or four ounces be given twice or thrice a day.

At the earliest and latest physical Hours, viz. in the Evening and early in
the Morning, let the following Pills be taken.

Take Millepedes prepared three drams and a half, Pearl a dram and a half,
Roots of bastard Dittany a dram, Venice Turpentine what suffises, make a mass,
form it into small Pills, the dose is half a dram, drinking after it a little
draught of the distilled water.

For ordinary drink let either a Bochet be prescribed of Sarsa, China, yellow
Saunders, etc. or small Ale, with the dried Leaves of Ground Ivy boiled in it,
and of Sage, with the wood Sassafras infused.

While these things are done for removing the Procatarxis of the Disease, no
less a curatory endeavor is required for its conjunct Cause, viz. that any
places obstructed, being again opened, may admit and give a free passage to the
animal Spirits, freed from stupefaction.

There are two chief kinds of Remedies which conduce much for these ends; viz.
the one particular and special, to be applied to the Places affected, to wit,
that by Fomentations, Liniments, Plasters, and other outward Applications the
stupefied Spirits may be raised up again, and their Ductus's be opened: the
other universal, to wit, that the Blood and Spirits, and the other humors (and
the active particles abounding in the whole Body) being very much agitated and
put in a more rapid Motion, making as it were a swift current, may force from
before them and remove damms, or Obstacles any where sticking, by which the
Spirits are obstructed.

The Administrations to be used to the outward Parts, are so generally and
vulgarly known, that it would be superfluous to insist here in describing them
at large. First, let Liniments of Oils, Unguents, and Balsams, more or less
hot according to the temperament of the diseased, be applied twice a day with
Frictions. Let Fomentations of a Decoction of Cephalic Herbs and Aromaticks in
Fountain Water be sometimes used before these; adding sometimes hot Waters,
Wine or Beer, or their Lees: moreover, it is proper sometimes to apply Vesica
ories, Cupping-glasses, a Pication, or Urtication about the places affected.
Bags, and Playsters often do good. Again, if the case admits it, it is profitable
for the resolved Members to be put into Grains, or the Dregs of Grapes
remaining after pressing, or to be thrust into the Belly or Thorax of a Beast
fresh killed, or also be bathed in an artificial Bath, or natural hot Baths,
and to be kept in any of these for a long time.

But if these things do no good, we must come to the Universal or great
Remedies: such as chiefly are Diaphoreticks, Mercurials raising a Salivation,
and strong Vomitories: of each of which we shall speak in short.

There is no one of the Vulgar but every where observes that Diaphoreticks
sometimes do great good in the cure of the Palsy, and that sometimes they
prove very prejudicial. Wherefore it much concerns us that the reasons of so
different an effect should be explicated; to the end that Indications may be
thence taken concerning the use, or rejecting of them.

Therefore a copious sweating is wont sometimes to prove very advantageous to
Paralyticks, chiefly for two reasons; to wit, that it may plentifully drive
forth the impurities of the Blood, and nervous Juice, which are apt to exhale,
so that the morbifick Matter may no longer flow to the Brain, and the Parts
affected, and that that which has already flown to them may in part be conveyed
forth. And then secondly, that the effluvia of heat passing from the boiling
Blood very much open the Ductus's of the Nerves before obstructed, as they pass
through them in evaporating, and open ways for the Spirits. Wherefore this
Administration agrees chiefly and in a manner only with those, whose Blood,
being not filled with a fixed Salt and Sulphur, is diluted with a limpid and
insipid Serum: for on the contrary, Paralyticks, whose Blood and Humors are
greatly stored with wild, Exotic, and fixed Particles of exorbitant Salts and
Sulphurs, and such as are unfit for exhaling, often receive a great damage from
a sweat violently raised, of which effect we assign these two Causes, to wit,
that the morbifick Particles being too much exalted by reason of their
Agitation, become more exorbitant: and then secondly, that being driven
plentifully into the Brain, and Genus Nervosum, they often increase the ancient
Obstructions, and not unfrequently produce new.

For raising a plentiful and easy Sweat, both inward Medicines and outward
Administrations are wont to be used: the former stir the Blood or Serum to
effervescencies, or stimulate the Heart to quicker Motions, and thence (whether
one of them, or both be performed) when the Liquor of the Blood, being rapidly
circulated through the Heart and Vessels, is put into a frothy Turgescency, it
cannot but discharge from it self a great many Effluvia, which are the matter
of Sweat: for this end Medicines of various kinds are recommended to
Paralyticks, of which those of chief note are, a decoction of Guaiacum,
Sarsaparilla, etc. Spirit, and Oil of Guaiacum, mixtura simpelx, Flowers and
Spirit of Sal Armoniack, Aurum Diaphoreticum, Salt, Powder, and Wine of Vipers,
mineral solar Bezoar, Tincture of Antimony, etc.

Outward Administrations promote a Sweating, for as much as they raise and keep
a moderate heat in the whole circumference of the Body, and then the Blood
being heated, is forced to move more swiftly, and to evaporate more, and
withal, the pores of the Skin being opened, more readily let forth all
Particles apt to exhale; for this end, besides Bed-coverings (which only keep
the Effluvia of heat emitted from the Body in its circumference) a Cradle
likewise with Charcoal, or Spirit of Wine, kindled, a Hot-house, and Baths of
various kinds and forms, and natural Hot Baths are wont to be used; but above
all, our Hot Baths at Bathe, than which (if they agree well with the
temperament of the Patient) no more excellent Remedy can be imagined, which is
sufficiently shown by the Crutches of a great many Persons cured of resolved
Members, hung up as so many Trophies of the Conquest of this Disease.

Nevertheless, as generous Medicines, if they do not prove Alexipharmicks,
often pass into Poisons, so the use of hot Baths, when it has not cured some
Paralyticks, has rendered them much worse; so that more Members, and such as
were before affected, being more resolved, there has been no other occasion for
the Diseased for leaving their Crutches there, but that being rendered more weak
they could use them no longer: we have hinted the cause of this before, to wit,
that bathing exagitating the Blood and all the Humors, exalts more all
Morbifick and heterogeneous Particles, and being rendered more exorbiant, drives
them from the Viscera into the Mass of Blood: whence (in regard they cannot
easily evaporate) entering the Brain, and Genus Nervosum, they increase the
Paralytick affect, and often bring a Convulsion with it: for this reason
Bathing sometimes first actuates a Nephritick, and Gouty Disposition, moreover,
it brings to many a Blood-spitting Asthma, or Consumption, where no Disposition
was; wherefore hot Baths ought not to be tried without the advice of a
Physician, and being tried, if they seem not to agree, they ought soon to be
left.

I have it sufficiently confirmed both by my own Experience, and that of some
other Physicians, that some Paralyticks are cured by a Salivation raised by
Mercury, but I judge that this kind of Remedy is to be used only in an habitual
Palsy, viz. which has a Procatarxis in the Blood and Brain readily enough to
be moved, and a conjunct Cause in the nervous Appendix, which is not very
fixed: but when that affect is caused by an outward and great hurt, or happens
upon a Carus, Apoplexy, or Convulsions, Salivation is attempted in a manner
always in vain, and sometimes not without a mighty Prejudice; and let not those
who, having a weak or over-lax Brain, are frequently subject to a Vertigo,
drowsiness, and convulsive Motions, use Mercurial Medicines inconsiderately.
But sometimes a Salivation does mighty good in an habitual Palsy, and which is
not very fixed, for as much as by taking away the Impurities of the Blood, it
cuts off all the fuel of the Disease; and in as much as some Mercurial
Particles, whilst having past the Brain, they enter the Ductus's of the Nerves,
divide the Morbifick matter sticking in them, and severing its parts one from
another, disperse them several ways, some forward and some backward. Whereas it
is a common fault of other Medicines, that often they press forward only the
damm that obstructs the ways of the Spirits, and therefore if they do not force
it asunder, they drive it more firmly into the places obstructed.

And it is in some sort for this reason that Vomitories often do egregious
service in Curing the Palsy: to wit, that they withdraw the fuel of the
Conjunct Cause, and do not drive only forward the matter sticking in the
Nerves, but revulse it, mightily shake it, and often break it into minute
parts, so that when the Continuity of the damm is broken, the animal spirits
themselves easily dissipate the Particles of the Morbifick matter severed from
each other; we have intimated before another reason concerning the relief of
Emeticks in the sleepy affects, which has also in some sort place in the Palsy.

So very many Examples and Instances of Paralyticks daily happen every where,
that the various Types and Histories of them (if they were described) would
fill a mighty Volume, wherefore I shall only set down here some of the more
rare, viz. one or two, with which each chief species of that Disease may be
illustrated, and since it would be to little or no purpose to give a Relation
of Resolutions of Members happening by reason of some outward Accident, as a fall
from an high Place, a Wound, or a Stroke, I shall insist only in describing
those Cases, where the Palsy arises either by it self after a previous
Disposition, or follows upon some other Disease.

Some time since, a certain Gentleman, Robust, well in Flesh, and above forty
years of Age, having been in a manner always in health, at length giving
himself to a sedentary Life and Idleness, and afterward becoming more dull than
usual, refused any exercise and vigorous motion of the Body: moreover, being
melancholy and sad, on any light occasion, nay, sometimes without any manifest
cause, he was wont to break forth into a weeping and tears: this Person a short
while after (which I have also observed of many others) was affected with a
Weakness and a Trembling of all the Members, and afterward with a Resolution of
the lower Parts, by which Disease (being melancholy and soon a weary of
Physic) yielding himself overcome, and growing weaker by degrees, he dyed
within six months.

I remember many others, but especially two committed to our care, being as to
the first part of their Life mighty Ingenious, and well Learned, who afterward
in their declining Age, partly by reason of a Cacochymia of the Body, and
partly through a trouble of mind growing dull and forgetful, at length
(notwithstanding the use of Remedies in the beginning of the Disease) became
Paralytical.

A young man of a sanguine temperament, clear spirited, and for the most part
Healthy, sitting in a Chair after a plentiful Supper, and an immoderate
Drinking of Wine, was so affected with a stupidity in his right Hand, that his
Glove, which he happened to hold, fell down against his will; afterward
standing up and endeavoring to go, he perceived a resolution in the Leg and
Thigh of the same side, falling a little afterward into a certain dullness of
Mind, and a stupidness, tho without an Apoplexy, for he was always present to
himself, answering aptly enough, tho slowly, and with some trouble, to things
asked, and doing things that were commanded him; a very skilful Physician being
presently called, Blooding, Vomiting, Purging, were used in order,
Cupping-Glasses, a Scarification, Liniments, Frictions, and other fit
Administrations were diligently applied: nevertheless the Palsy increased, so
that besides Motion almost taken away from the Members of the right side, he
lost also the sight of that Eye: yet, tho dull and sleepy, being still Compos
mentis, he knew his Friends, and being conscious of his Infirmity, and
sollicitous for the recovery of his Health, he took all Remedies offered, but
notwithstanding this, the animal functions daily failed more and more, and
through a consent with them, at last the vital, so that about the seventh or
eighth day falling ever and anon, sometimes into a Delirium, sometimes into
Convulsions, and other distractions of the Spirits, at length his strength
being gone, he yielded to Death.

A certain Noble-mans Bailiff, about forty years of age, having a sharp Blood
and a bilous temperament, and long obnoxious to a Vertigo, as he rode through a
certain Village in the Country, being seized on a sudden with a Scotomia, fell
headlong on the ground; where being presently taken up by the Inhabitants, and
put to Bed, he lay for many hours insensible, and dead as it were; but
afterward awaking, he found all the members of both sides resolved into a
Universal Palsy: going to see him the next day after, I presently drew about
twelve ounces of Blood, and forthwith prescribed other Remedies, both as to
outward administrations, and inward Medicines to be diligently used, and indeed
with good success; for after five or six days he began to stretch forth, or
bend his feet, nay, to move them from their place this way and that, tho
slowly; afterward, by the constant use of Remedies, he was able within two
months to raise himself, stand on his feet, and go a little with Crutches, then
having used at his house an artificial Bath for some time, he daily gained in
the motion of his members, and his strength; at length, as soon as the season of
the year was fit, going to Bathe, and by the use of the hot Baths perfectly
recovering within six weeks, he returned sound, leaving there his Crutches.

The following Relation will manifestly show that the Palsy does not only
follow upon Cephalic affects, but also on the Colic and Scurvy.

A handsome Woman, and young, after Childbirth fell into a Tertian Ague, this
afterward becoming a Quotidian, and the cure protracted, brought a very violent
Cholick, and of long continuance. Pains first raged only in the Abdomen, with a
vomiting and most bitter tortures: being long tormented, and almost worn away
with these, at length she began to be troubled with a stupor, and a sense of
pricking, such as arises in members lain on. Nor was it long after but a Palsy
(which that other affect very often fore-runs) followed in the whole Body. In
this state being brought to Oxford, she was committed to our care; another
famous Physician, D. D. Lydall, being called to join with me. Not only all the
greater Members of this Diseased, but even the lesser of each Limb were so
wholly resolved, that she was not able to stir from its place either Hand or
Foot, or any finger of either hand. Moreover, she was so far affected with an
Atrophia, that the flesh being wholly vanished, the Skin scarce stuck to the
Bones, yet she still had a good Pulse and vivid Aspect, from which alone we
gathered somewhat of hope.

After that we had given this Person for many Weeks the choicest Medicines both
Antiparaliticks, and Antiscorbuticks, almost of every kind, and according to
various Methods, without any success, at length we proposed to her self and her
Friends a Salivation, as a Remedy more powerful than any others, but withal
dangerous: not deliberating long concerning this, they resolve rather to try a
doubtful Medicine than none, or which is the same, one wholly ineffectual.
Therefore we gave her Precipitatum ex Mercurio cum sole in a small Dose, and
repeated it the next day after: on the third day, an easy and gentle Salivation
beginning, went on fairly for a Week without any malign Symptom; but then the
Diseased complaining of a great Headache and Vertigo, begun to be affected with
Convulsive Motions, so that we were forced presently to let fall the
Salivation, and to break off this Course as soon as we could, withdrawing the
fluxion of the serous latex from the head toward the other parts, which
frequent Clysters, Epispastick and Revulsive Plasters applied in various
places, together with Cordials and Opiats inwardly given, soon effected; and
presently upon it the noble Lady being somewhat better, begun to stretch forth
and bend the Joints of her Hands and Feet, and to move sometimes those members
or these from their place, the Spitting ceasing: being gently purged, she took
for many days a decoction of China, Sarsa, red Sannders, Ivory, etc. with the
addition of the dried leaves of Sage, Betony, Speedwell, etc. with which she
was wont to interlace the use of Spirit of Hartshorn, or of Soot, of a
Cephalic and Cordiack confection, also of an appropriate Powder and Julep:
within a Months space she was able to stand on her Feet, and to walk a little
in her Chamber being supported by Servants: moreover, getting Sleep, and taking
Food indifferently, the bulk of her Flesh and her strength daily increased, and
at length using the temperate hot Baths at Bath she grew well.

But that hot Baths do not do good to all Paralyticks, nay (as we have
intimated before) that they do great hurt to some, the following relation will
plainly show: A London Merchant after a Luxation of a Joint of the Foot, became
lame in that part, being otherwise sound enough, and robust: when Topic
Remedies of various kinds, tried for some, time did not do, at length by the
advice of a Physician going to Bathe, he began to try the temperate hot Baths,
from the farther use of which (becoming forthwith worse upon it, the Palsy
presently beginning in other Members) he had abstained, but the Physician being
then present, assuring him that he would be better afterward, advised him to
persist: wherefore he took the hot Baths again for about thirty days, till all
the lower Members, to wit, from the Os sacrum to the Feet being wholly
resolved, were withered, and that in the Thorax a very great and as it were
Asthmatical dyspnaea was raised: for the Muscles employed in Respiration (being
as it seemed affected also with the Palsy) the breast was not able to be
dilated for drawing the Breath deep enough, wherefore, being always out of
Breath, he labored under continual affects of those Parts, and an Agitation of
the whole Thorax. In this state departing from Bathe, he is commanded by his
Physician to abstain for a whole Month from any Remedies taken from Pharmacy:
which when he had religiously observed, through hope as it were of a
Resurrection, that time being past, all deliberation was now late concerning
the use of Medicines: for besides the Paralytick and withered Members, his
Belly swelled, his Respiration was yet more difficult and let, that the
diseased was scarce able to draw his Breath: his Pulse being very weak, with
frequent Swoonings, and Faintings happening upon any Motion of his Body: so that
hereby scarce any place at all being left for Catharticks, he must insist only
on Cardiack and Paralytick Remedies: notwithstanding the use of which, the
diseased within six weeks laboring under a very great dyspnaea for many hours,
at length dyed: the immediate cause of whose decease I conceive to be Polypous
Concretions of Blood in the Heart, for in regard the Motion of the Praecordia
was greatly let for a long time, nothing seems more probable than that those
kinds of carneous lumps as it were, were concreted within the Ventricles of the
Heart.

For illustrating a little farther the Theories of the Palsy, and also of the
Lethargy and Carus, I shall here give you another Example, with Anatomical
Observations, which happened whilst the precedent things were printing.

A child, little more than three years of Age, of a moist Brain, as it appeared
by sore Inflammations of his Eyes, and watery pushes of his Face (to which he
had been sometimes obnoxious) at the beginning of Autumn being ill, with a slow
Fever and a dejected Appetite, became very drowsy and sleepy, so that he slept
almost continually day and night; but being awaked, he knew the standers by,
and answered aptly enough to things asked: meet Remedies, viz. Clysters,
Vesicatories, Catharticks, also Juleps, Spirit of Hartshorn, Powders, with
many other things usual in this case, being forthwith, and carefully given him,
did so much good, that within six or seven days the diseased being free from
his Fever, waking sufficiently, and desiring Food, seemed to recover, and
scarce to have any more need of Physical help, But in a short while after (I
know not on what occasion) undergoing a relaps, and being drowsy again, he was
presently affected with a great Stupefaction, so that being with difficulty to
be awaked, he scarce knew any thing, or did any thing with Knowledge; the next
day after, being utterly stupid, tho being pinched hard, he would open his
Eyes, and roll them this way, and that, he saw nothing: and within a day or two
a Palsy of the whole right side followed: The former Remedies repeated to him,
and likewise Sneezers, Apophlegmatisms, drawing of Blood, Cataplasms to be
applied to the Feet, and Epispasticks to the whole Head shaved, with other
Medicines and ways of Administrations prescribed in order, did nothing; but
the diseased, after he had lai so for three or four days insensible, the Pulse
and Respiration at length failing, he dyed.

The Scull being opened, the foremost Region of the Brain, almost as far as the
Insertion of the fourth Sinus, was swollen, being covered with a limpid Water
shining through the Membranes, which upon the dissection of the Meninges
presently flowed forth; Moreover, at that place the portions of the Brain cut
off by piecemeal appeared too moist, and almost without red or bloody specks;
but in the hindmost part of the Brain the Vessels were red with Blood, and the
cortical Substance appeared more low and firm without a Tumor, or being
floated with Water: from these things (as we have concluded before) it will
manifestly appear that the Cause of the Lethargy depends on a watery glut of
filth in the outward part of the Brain.

The Brain being cut off piecemeal, and a hole being made into the foremost
cavity, strouting with a lympha, the limped water sprung forth as tho it had
been pent up in too narrow a space before: whose mighty store had filled all
the Ventricles to the top, and (as it seemed) by compressing the Thalami Optici
had caused the blindness, and by entering or compressing one Corpus Striatum, or
its Pores, had brought the Palsy.

The Plexus Choroeides appeared as parboyled, somewhat white, and almost
without Blood, its probable that all the Lympha, or the greatest part of it,
wherewith the Ventricles of the Brain were floated, distilled from those
Vessels; tho in this case if (as some think) the watery latex sinking lower
from the cortex of the Brain, at length having wholly passed the Brain, could
fall into those Sinus's, a reason may not uneasily be thence taken wherefore
the Lethargy seeming first to be cured, by and by being more violent, returned
again, with a Blindness and Palsy joined with it, to wit, as at first the
store of soporiferous matter fell from the Cortex of the Brain into its cavity,
the animal Function grew a little clear; but afterward, when a new matter
sprung in the Cortex of the Brain, and this falling into the Sinus's, was
gathered together to a fullness, thereupon a Relapse of the former Disease
happened with the addition of a blindness and Palsy.

Now tho the Dropsy of the inner part of the Brain, or an inundation of its
Ventricles, by compressing the corpora striata or thalami optici causes a
Palsy, or blindness, or by twitching the Origines of the Nerves, Convulsive
affects; yet it most evidently appeared by a late observation, that the
Lethargy does not arise from such a Cause, but only from the outward part of
the Brain being floated or compressed.

A certain Gentleman, long sickly, after that he had been troubled almost for
five Months with a Colic, or rather with a most violent scorbutic and running
Gout, (in which not only the Viscera and Fibers were affected with great
Gripes, but likewise the Membranes, and all the Muscles of the whole Body
almost with continual Tortures) and at length suffered in his Members sometimes
horrible Convulsions, sometimes Apoplectick Invasions as it were, or an
offuscation of the Sight, at last his Strength being spent, and the Stores of
his Spirits wholly exhausted, he dyed. For seven days before his decease
(excepting only the last save one) being more lively as to his Sense and
Understanding, he lay almost continually awake: a little before this long
waking, upon a Vesicatory's being applied to his Neck, a vast quantity of water
flowed to it; and thence-forward flowed forth daily, even to his death, that I
may hence suspect he continued thus without sleep, by reason of the watery
humor withdrawn from the Brain in too great a plenty.

The Head of the defunct being opened, the inward Cavities of the Brain, or all
its Ventricles appeared filled to the top, and strouting as it were with a
limpid water, nay about the top of the Spine the Funis medullaris it self
seemed to be surrounded with, and immerg'd as it were in Waters there heapt
together. Without doubt for this reason such violent pains and cramps infested
him in his Loins and Members, and in the whole Habit of the Body; and by reason
of the deluge in the Ventricles, he became obnoxious to frequent offuseations
of the Sight, and resolutions of the Limbs: nevertheless there was no Lethargy
here, tho the long watching was caused by reason of the waters derived in too
great a plenty by the Vesicatories from the circumference of the Brain. This
Person had also gotten a Dropsy in his Breast, by reason of the Lungs being
much vitiated: the Liver being of a vast bigness, appeared every where with
white spots, and almost without blood; so that the depravations of the blood
and nervous juice ought to be ascribed in some sort to these faults of the
Viscera.

CHAP. IX. Instructions and Prescripts for the cure of the Delirium and Phrensy.
SO far of Cephalic Diseases, by which the Animal Functions by themselves, and
as they are Corporeal, are wont to be let or perverted, without respect to
the rational Soul; in some of them, viz. in the Vertigo and Palsy, the
Understanding for the most part continues clear and lively: and in the rest, as
an Eye placed in an obscure place, it beholds either no Species at all, or a
few only set before it with a gross appearance, but is not easily carried into
a great Error, or a Fury: which kind of Symptoms are generally caused by other
affects of the Brain, and of the Spirits residing in it, of which we shall now
treat, for if at any time the Imagination be so troubled, or perverted, that it
either conceives amiss, or ill compounds, or divides the Species and Notions
presented by the Sense or Memory: thereupon presently the Understanding
descryes, or frames only deform Conceptions and Thoughts, distracted from each
other, and greatly confused, which are represented to it by the Brain ill
affected, as erroneous appearances by a variegated, and distorted Glass: there
being many ways with which the Imagination, and consequently the Mind and Will,
and other Powers of the superior Soul are wont to be perverted or depraved,
they all are denoted by the common word Desipientia. Now this Affect is
distinguished into a short one, which is called a Delirium, and a long or
continual one, which is either joined with a Fever and is called a Frensy, or
happens without a Fever, and to it either a Rage, or Sadness, or Stupidity is
joined; and therefore it is divided into a Mania, Melancholy, and Fatuity. We
shall speak of each of these in order, and at present of the Delirium and
Frensy.

Tho the Delirium be not a Disease by it self, but is only a Symptom,
proceeding from other affects: yet because in the cure of these on which it
happens, it is usual to obviate it for the most part with appropriate Remedies;
Therefore it seems to concern us to inquire somewhat strictly into its Nature
and Causes. That word taken properly is the same as Dementia, and denotes such
an annoyance of the animal Function, as arising in the fits of Fevers,
Drunkenness, and sometimes in the Passions called Hysterical, induces men to
think, speak, or do absurd things, ( viz. some of these or all of them
together) for a short time.

A Delirium is raised in as much as the Animal Spirits either being too much
irritated, or put in Confusion, are carried hither and thither within the
globous frame of the Brain (where the Fancy and Memory have their Seats) in a
disorderly and tumultuous manner, for so whilst the various species of the
Imagination and Memory being raised together, are confounded with each other,
only absurd and incongruous Phantasms are presented to the Rational Soul, and
therefore the Acts of the Understanding and Will are wrought only irregularly.
But reason of the Animal Spirits being irregularly moved within the Meditullium
of the Brain, or the Corpus Callosum, incongruous conceptions and confused
thoughts are presented to the Rational Soul, it happening in like manner, as when
the Species of visible things are brought to the common sense after a long
turning round of the Body, whence all things seem to run round, sometimes to be
raised on high, sometimes to be depressed low; so that nothing is seen fixed
and settled in its due site and position. In a Brain rightly disposed, the
motion of the Animal Spirits is performed in certain numbers and measures, as
it were in a Dance; while certain Spirits are moved in these tracts, others lie
still in those, afterward these maintain those with a supply in motion, and the
several Acts of each Faculty become as so many distinct undulations of Waters
in a River, but in a Delirium all the Spirits skip about together, and meeting
each other in a tumultuous manner, or taking several ways, dance about like
People distracted: Moreover, even as these being struck with such a Rage within
the frame of the Brain, raise manifold and very troubled thoughts: so while
they are carried beyond the confines of it into the Nervous Origin, they
produce an Idle talking, absurd Gestures of the Body and Members, and often
Convulsive motions, yet since such a wild motion of the Spirits (otherwise than
in the Frensy or Mania) soon ceases, and after that that tumult is over, no
deviating tracts are made in the Brain, the Delirium soon passes off, and the
affected in a little time come to themselves again, no footsteps of the
distraction remaining.

If it be asked, whence this short Fury is given the Spirits residing in the
Brain, that shaking off the Reins of the Mind, they are so all in confusion in
their Economy; we say, that they enter upon this disorder for a double reason,
viz. this Rage is either immediately communicated to them from the Blood
irrigating the compages of the Brain; or certain animal Spirits residing in
some outward part within the Genus Nervosum, first begin a certain disorderly
Motion; and afterward the same disorder being communicated to the Brain by the
Nervous Ductus's, and affecting in like manner the Spirits there residing,
causes the Delirium. There are various kinds and causes of both these,
wherefore we shall here briefly touch the chief; and first, it shall be shown
how and on what occasions the Blood, either swelling with too great an
effervescency, or being full of a venomous matter, becomes the Parent of the
Delirium: in as much as it insinuates into the Pores and Passages of the Brain,
either exorbitant and masterless Particles, or such as are malignant, and
subverting the animal economy,

1. As to the former, in the Fits of intermittent Fevers, and the height of
such as are continual: the Blood being troubled with an immoderate burning,
sometimes raises a Delirium by the mere Impetus of its Ebullition; viz. in as
much as being very turgid, while it passes the small Branches of the Arteries
spread all over the outward circumference of the Brain, it greatly puffs them
up, and stretches them: and therefore compressing the substance of the Brain,
it drives the Spirits several ways, and forces them into very confused crowds
as it were. Moreover, from the Blood's growing thus turpid through a frothy
Rarefaction, Effluvia of heat, and Heterogeneous Particles with them entering
the Pores and Passages of the Brain, exagitate the Spirits, and carry them
violently hither and thither in a tumultuous manner.

2. For a like reason in a manner to this, Drunkenness causes a deep Sleep or a
Delirium: viz. In as much as the mass of Blood insinuates into the Pores and
Passages of the Brain, the spirituous Particles of the Wine, which causes it to
boil, and by which the Spirits residing in them, are either overwhelmed, or put
into disorderly or confused Motions.

3. Nor does the Blood only ministering febrile and turgid, or vinous and
masterless Particles, but sometimes such as are malign and venomous as it were,
cause a Delirium with or without a Fever. As to the former, in the Plague,
Smallpox, malignant Fevers, (tho the heat be moderate) the malignant matter
conveyed to the Head produces abrupt, incoherent, and at length distracted
Notions, in as much as it dissipates the stores of the Spirits, rather than by
driving them into a tumult.

4. For a like reason to this some Poisons, and venomous things inwardly taken,
and (as some say) outwardly applied, soon bring a Delirium: this is vulgarly
said of Solunum furiosum, Mandrake, and certain other Plants: the thing is most
notorious concerning the Roots of the wild Parsnip. An intimate Friend of mine,
and a Man worthy of credit, and also very learned, told me once, that he went
into the House of a certain Gentleman, where the Lady, her Daughters, and all
the maid Servants (one only excepted) being all delirous at the same time, ran
about the House leaping and talking incongruous and absurd things; he thinking
them plainly distracted, was given to understand by the Maid, who was well in
her Wits, that all this happened from eating Parsnip Roots, which she alone had
not touched; and the event also confirmed it; for after, being tired, they had
slept, all of them awaked sober.

5. But moreover, we observe that a Delirium is sometimes raised by a scarcity
of the animal Spirits, and their great dissipation; for when their Orders are
broken and discomposed, they minister confused and incongruous Notions, as well
as when tumultuarily hudled together. Hence we observe, that some have grown
delirous after great Hemorrhagies, or long Watchings, and a long Fasting: for
this Reason many dying Persons speak lightheaded and incongruously.

There remains the other kind of Delirium, in which the Blood being without
fault, the animal Spirits residing somewhere in the Genus Nervosum, first begin
to fall in disorder, and afterward the same affect creeping to the Brain by the
Ductus's of the Nerves, moves the Spirits residing in its Meditullium to a
Delirium: this is obvious in the Passions called Hysterical, to wit, that after
a rising of the Belly, and an Oppression of the Heart, at length sometimes a
privation of Sense, sometimes a talking idly, with a Weeping and a Laughter
ensues. In like manner, I have observed in a violent Colic, that sometimes
extreme Tortures about the Viscera or Loins have presently past into a
Delirium, then a little after this ceasing, that the Tortures returned. I knew
a Girl, who after taking an Emetick Medicine was wont constantly to be delirous
till it wrought: for this also makes what I often observe, that a Delirium is
raised by a Gangreen, beginning in some outward Member: and this is generally
accounted for a mortal sign in a Wound, or Ulcer; because it denotes the animal
Spirits to be generally a killing in the part affected.

Nor does that Symptom afford a better Prognostic to such as have been long
valetudinary, and are almost worn away: in the Fits of intermittent Fevers, its
in a manner always safe, but in continual Fevers it is of a doubtful and
somewhat a suspected event; in malignant Fevers it commonly threatens ill: in
Convulsive Diseases, the first invasions of a Delirium for the most part are
without danger, but a frequent access of it often begets a disposition to a
Carus, Apoplexy, or Palsy.

This affect, as often as it seems safe, does not require a Cure, for the Fit
soon and easily passes off: but because some, whose Brain is weak and lax, and
whose animal Spirits, being too dissipable, are apt to a flight and confusion
being troubled on any light occasion, are wont presently to act or speak
delirously; therefore there is need of Physic for these, tho not of Hellebore,
but of Cephalic Remedies for corroborating the Brain, and fortifying it
against the incursions of the morbifick Matter; also for strengthening the
animal Spirits, and rendering them more fixed and stronger to resist. We have
given the Forms and ways of Administration of these Medicines before, they
being profitable for removing the Procatarxis of any other Cephalic Disease.

A Delirium happening upon continual and malignant Fevers, requires a peculiar
way of cure, for it particularly indicates that the morbifick matter,
dangerously conveyed toward the Head, ought to be revuls'd thence some way or
other; for which end, let Vesicatories be applied to the Neck, Plasters or
Cataplasms, or the Flesh or warm Viscera of Animals to the Feet: Inwardly, let
Temperate Cephalicks be given, as Powders of Coral and Pearl, the Waters of
Black Cherries, of the flowers of Cowslips and Poppies, and other things
refreshing and soothing the Spirits.

These things being thus premitted concerning the first and lightest manner of
Raving, let us ascend to a higher degree of it, viz. the Frenzy, which is far
greater, and more durable than the former affect. In a Delirium the
perturbation raised in the Spirits, residing in the Brain, seems like an
undulation of Waters in a River, upon throwing in a stone; but in a Phrensy
their commotion seems as the troublous motion of the Sea-waves raging upon a
tempest.

The Phrensy is defined, That it is a continual raving, or a depravation of the
chief faculties of the Brain, arising from an inflammation of the Meninges with
a continual Fever. With this Disease another allied to it is ranked, viz. the
Paraphrenesis; and its cause is said to be not the Inflammation of the
Membranes that cover the Brain, but of the Diaphragm; moreover, in both affects
the Fever, as tho it were only symptomatical, is said (as also in the Pleurisy
tho falsely) to arise from the same Conjunct Cause, viz. a Phlegmon of some
Part: but that the Phrensy rather succeeds the Fever, both Hippocrates
heretofore, and now every Vulgar Person observes, and that it is produced
because the boiling Blood conveys its adust recrements to the Head; viz.
forasmuch as the Urine of a Feverish Person being changed from being troubled
and thick, to be thin and watery, indicates an imminent Phrensy: of which
affect therefore the cause is gathered to be the removal of the febrile matter
into the Brain.

But as to the Conjunct Causes of the Phrensy and Paraphrenitis, it will be
easy to show, that the former does not always proceed from the inflammation
of the Meninges, and the latter never from that of the Septum: in Anatomical
Diffections I have commonly seen the Meninges, nay sometimes also the outward
circumference of the Brain beset with a Phlegmonous tumor; but the diseased
being not affected with a Phrensy, but on the contrary with a drowsiness, dyed
of a Carus or other sleepy diseases. And indeed Reason plainly dictates the
thing to be thus, for inflamed Meninges, and much more swollen, greatly
compress the Brain, and stop the passages of the Spirits, which causes a
Lethargy; whereas in a Phrensy the Spirits are dilated above measure, the Pores
of the Brain being all opened tho it may happen by a long continuance of that
Disease, that the Blood being heaped together too much within the Veslels of
the Meninges, and there stagnating, at length begets a Phlegmon in them; but
then we suspect for that cause (by reason it frequently falls out so) that the
Phrensy passes into a Carus or Lethargy, of which such as have the Phrensy
often dye.

Nor do we less reject the inflammation of the Diaphragm, which Galen with
others have assigned for the cause of the Paraphrenitis: Anatomical
observations plainly make out the contrary: some time since, opening the Body
of a Girl dying of a sudden Leipothymia, we found in the fleshy part of the
Diaphragm, a great Abscess with a bagg, full of a gore and little bladders of
Water, yet she was never wont to be troubled with a delirium or phrensy. And
heretofore, when we dissected the Body of a Renowned Person of the University,
who dyed of a bastard and long continued Pleurisy, it manifestly appeared that
a great Abscess in the Pleura and intercostal Muscles, being suppurated and
broken inwardly, had poured a mighty quantity of Pus into the cavity of the
Thorax, which corroding the subjacent Diaphragm, had made a mighty hole in it;
and yet this Person in all his sickness had neither the Phrensy, nor was
delirous; wherefore I judge that this affect is scarce ever produced by such a
Cause: but that opinion seems to have risen thence, that oftentimes in a true
Phrensy, together with a continual Raving, the motion of the Diaphragm is wont
to be hindered or perverted: as may be gathered from the uneven and difficult
Respiration, viz. sometimes being painful and suspended, as it were, sometimes
thick and swiftly repeated with an Inspiration, sometimes doubled, which kind
of symptoms, and withal the alienation of the mind are said to proceed from
the Septum being inflamed, and therefore convulsed: wherefore the Ancients
called the Diaphragm Phrenas: tho they need not have done it, if they had
considered that all the action of the Diaphragm depends on the efflux of the
animal Spirits from the Cerebellum, and therefore, if when the Phrenetick
matter invades the Brain, some part of it withal rushes into the Cerebellum,
besides the raving, the motion also of the Septum, tho in it self being without
fault, will be altered.

Therefore the formal nature of the Phrensy seems to consist in this, that the
animal Spirits being very much irritated, chiefly in the whole brain, are
driven into disorderly, very confused, and withal impetuous Motions; so that
the acts of every animal Function are depraved, and variously perverted: the
Ideas of things are confounded, etc. Moreover the Spirits, not only in the
Brain, but likewise in the Cerebellum, and every where in the Genus Nervosum,
being struck as it were with a rage, fall in a tumult; wherefore such as have
the Phrensy do not only speak ravingly, but breath unevenly, cry out, beat
their Fists, throw their Hands and Feet, and exert all their Members with a
mighty strength and force: that really the whole Soul seems furiously to fret
and rage in the whole Body, or rather being set on fire as it were, to be all
in a flame: and indeed the Phrensy cannot be more aptly defined, than that it
is a Phlogosis or inflammation of the whole sensitive Soul, or of the animal
Spirits in their whole Hypostasis; This burning flame always beginning from the
Spirits residing in the Brain, and thence passing into the other parts of the
sensitive Soul, seems to receive both the matter which first kindles it, and
the constant supply of Fuel for it from the Blood, first burning with a
feverish blast; for its probable that the Blood, feverishly burning, brings
into the Brain sometimes sulphurous Particles together with the spirituous;
which being half kindled, and in a manner on light fire, if they have
penetrated together with the others, thence presently entering all the medullary
and nervous Ductus's, every where cleaved to the Spirits, and render them,
being so inflamed, mightily exorbitant and implacable. Certainly it is more
likely that the Phrensy is caused after this manner by the inflammation of the
Spirits, than by that of the Meninges of the Brain, which (as I have found by
frequent dissections) will more certainly bring the Headache or Lethargy, than
a Fury.

As to the Procatarctick Causes of the Phrensy, we shall find them partly in
the Blood, and partly in the Brain, and in what resides in it.

The previous disposition of the Blood disposing to a Frensy, sometimes is
simple, and sometimes twofold: the former is its hot and sharp or bilous
constitution, to wit, that it contains a great many sulphurous particles in it
self, which being kindled more than they ought in a Fever, are apt to inflame
the Blood more, and to insinuate ills burning flame into the Brain: this
disposition, when it is powerful and mightily actuated, often produces that
Disease by it self; but for the most part there is another disposition of the
Blood, which aids the former, and renders it more efficacious, to wit, that
besides sulphurous and inflamable particles, there are others sharp and
penetrative, which enter the Pores and open them, and so more readily introduce
the others: Saline Corpuscles joined with sulphurous in some sort effect this;
hence Choleric and melancholy Persons that are in a Fever, are more inclined
to Phrensies: but much rather heterogeneous Particles, when they are in the
Blood, being stirred by a Fever, open the entries of the Brain, and let in all
such Particles as are inflamable: wherefore the Phrensy frequently happens upon
the small Pox, and malignant and pestilential Fevers.

The other Preparation for a Frensy, belonging to the Brain, consists partly in
the temper and conformation of it, and partly in the disposition of the Spirits
residing in it: as to the former, those that have a hot and dry Brain are found
more prone to a Frensy; not that that Constitution is more obnoxious to an
inflammation, or Phlegmon, (for it is less apt to this) but because in such a
Brain, otherwise than in a hot and moist, or a cold and dry, the pores and
passages are more open, and gaping too much, afford a passage to the incentive
matter minitred by the Fever: Whih likewise will much more easily be admitted,
if the Spirits being very apt to be put to slight, and pathetick, on any light
occasion are prone to the passions of sadness, fear, anger, or hatred; so that
they less withstand the incursions of the extraneous matter, and more readily
take fire themselves.

The evident causes of the Frensy are either remote, viz. whatsoever things are
wont to raise the febrile distemper; as Surfeiting, Drunkenness, a violent
perturbation of the body or mind, solemn evacuations suppressed, with many
others; or immediate, as a Fever, and its little appendixes and adjuncts; viz.
if it be pestilent, malignant, or ill disposed; if it arises by surfeiting with
meats or drinks which are very disagreeing; or if it follows upon violent
passions of love, hatred, envy, indignation, or sadness, or immoderate studies:
for these kinds of occasions render the Blood and Spirits severishly boiling,
very much inclined to the affect of the Frensy.

This Disease, according to the temperament of the Diseased, is said to be
sanguine, bilous, phlegmatic, or melancholy; and this not improperly, for the
Animal Spirits, according to their various dispositions, are wont to rage after
a different manner in this Disease.

The Prognostic in this distemper is always dubious, and to be made with the
suspicion of an ill event: For the Frensy is a most acute and dangerous Disease
of it self; moreover, if it happens upon a pestilent, malignant, or ill
disposed Fever, we may expect none but a fatal event.

If a Frensy happens to a sound Body, well in flesh, a sanguine temperament,
and in youth, there is a greater hope of doing well, than if the Diseased be
elderly, lean, bilous, and subject to violent passions.

If a Frensy frequently remitting, has lucid intervals, it is better than if
the fury be without discontinuation: but if the Diseased seeming sometimes to
be better, after moderate sleep always awake frantic, it is a sign that the
Disease will be obstinate, and consequently dangerous; viz. inasmuch as a new
store of incentive matter is often ministered to the Brain, which we have shown
elsewhere to be done much more plentifully during sleep, than whilst waking.

The Frensy is either terminated in a short time with a Fever, by a Recovery,
or Death; or being long protracted, and remaining after the Fever, it is either
cured at long run, or passes into other Diseases, viz. a Lethargy, or Mania, or
Melancholy.

If a Fever having a laudable crisis, by a plentiful sweating or making water
be thoroughly solved, the Frensy also for the most part will wholly cease; but
if the Fever being not determined, still sends the morbifick matter into the
Brain; so that besides the animal functions being depraved, the vital begin to
fail (which will plainly appear from the Pulse and respiration altered for the
worse) if the Urine be pale, if frequent droppings of Blood from the Nose, if
Vomitings, and Convulsions happen, the Physician may conclude that Death is at
hand.

Sometimes a Fever, tho it be not determined at once and perfectly, yet
afterward passing off by degrees and leisurely, leaves the Frensy or raving
behind; which if by its long stay it has not defaced the former tracts of the
Spirits in the Brain, afterward it either ceases by degrees of its own accord,
or is cured by the help of Medicines.

But if by reason of the Frensy being long protracted, the Meninges, or Cortex
of the Brain are at length possessed with a phlegmonous tumor, or a serous glut
of filth happening from the Blood or Serum there heaped together and stagnating,
the Lethargy, or the sleepy affects ensue; whose Cure is often difficult, or
none at all: But if after a long Frensy, either the Animal Spirits (tho their
burning ceases) contract a vicious disposition, or if the Pores and passages of
the Brain are perverted, often a perpetual raving (the former Disease passing
into a Mania, or Melancholy, or Fatuity) ensues: Wherefore it is vulgarly said
of Franticks, not soon cured, that the Brain is cracked; so that afterward they
always are mad, or become delirous.

In the Cure of the Frensy, we must have regard both to the Fever and to the
fury: The feverish burning, or immoderate effervescence of the Blood, which for
the most part is the antecedent cause of the other affect, ought in the first
place to be restrained and appeased, and withal the Animal Spirits ought to be
pacified and freed from any violent excandescence. If a Frensy happens about
the beginning or middle of a Fever, in a manner the same remedies and method of
Curing conduce for both ends: But if that affect happens upon this whilst it is
in its greatest force or height, the ways of curing often are contrary to each
other; and there is need of great caution, lest while we give help to one
disease, we increase the other; in this case the vital indication concerning
the preservation of the strength has the first place, and let not Blooding or
Purging be used rashly, and in a large measure.

In the former case, when the Fever and Frensy are almost of the same standing,
let Phlebotomy, which is seldom or never to be omitted, presently be used; and
if the strength bears it, let it be sometimes repeated for nothing depresses
and diminishes the immoderate flame of the Blood as much as this Remedy, and
nothing more removes or withdraws its burning flame from the Animal economy:
Wherefore, if the case requires it, let a Vein be opened sometimes in the Arm
or Hand, sometimes in the Leg or Foot, sometimes in the Neck or Forehead;
sometimes happily it may be expedient to open the Artery of the Temples; and
sometimes also to draw Blood from other places by Leeches or Cupping-glasses,
for this is the chiefest relief: And according to Galen, this being the first
and greatest of all Remedies, is wont to satisfy a great many indications in
the Frensy.

Moreover, to prevent the violent recourse of the febrile matter from the
Viscera to the Head, Clysters will be of chief use; with which, if need be, let
the Belly always be kept soluble: Vemits and Purges, unless only such as are
lenitive, have seldom place here: Let Cataplasms of Rue, Cammomil, Vervain,
Briony Roots, Red Poppyflowers, with Soap be applied all over the Feet: or in
their place let Pigeons slit in two be applied whilst they are warm. Mean
while Juleps, Apozemes, Powders, Confections; by which both the boylings of the
Blood, and the excandescence of the Spirits are appeased, ought to be
prescribed according to occasion.

Take the waters of Apples, Black Cherries, Cowslips, of each four ounces; of
whole Citrons two ounces, Pearl powdered a dram, Syrup of the juice of Citrons
an ounce, mix them, make a Julep, let three ounces be taken three or four times
a day.

Take Roots of Grass, Leaves of Wood Sorrel, Burnet, of each a handful, Barley
half an ounce; Apples sliced, Corinths, or Strawberries, or Rasberries, a
handful; let them boil in four pounds of Fountain Water to the consumption of a
third part, to the clear straining add Syrup of Violets an ounce, Sal Prunella
a dram and a half.

Take fresh and tender leaves of Borage four handfuls, Wood Sorrel two
handfuls, two Apples pounded to a mash, Sal Prunella two drams, the pulp of one
Orange, double refined Sugar an ounce, being bruised together pour to them of
Fountain Water two or three pounds, make a strong expression, keep it in a
glass to be clarified by settling: Let six or seven ounces be taken at pleasure
often in a day. For quenching thirst, drink at pleasure the divine drink of
Palmarius, viz. Fountain Water with Sugar, and the Juice of a Limon, or Water,
or Whey with the leaves of Meadowsweet, or Burnet infused, or boiled in them;
emulsions of a decoction of the roots and flowers of Nymphaea, with the seeds
of Melons, or fountain, or distilled Water, with the pulp of boiled Apples
dissolved in them.

Hypnoticks are often necessary in this Disease, but such as are strong are not
proper presently at the beginning, nor may they be frequently used, because
sleep caused by opiats brings the matter more to the Brain, and fixes it there
more deeply.

Take Water of Cowslip flowers four ounces, Syrup of Maeconium half an ounce,
Pearl a scruple, make a draught to be taken late at night.

Take white Poppy-seeds two drams, Sugar Candy a dram and a half, being bruised
together, pour to them of white Poppy-water six ounces, wring it forth, and
take it after the same manner.

Let Narcoticks, consisting of mere cold things, be given with caution; because
they do not agree with some, whose Stomachs have their fibers very tender and
sensible. I have often observed that these kinds of Hypnoticks have caused a
great oppression in the Ventricle, and that then presently its inflation, and a
little afterward distractions and disorderings of the Spirits in the Brain,
nay, in the whole Body followed: So that not only a frustration of sleep, but a
mighty restlesness was caused.

Let a dose of liuqid Laudanum, prepared with Salt of Tartar, or the Juice of
Quinces, be given in a convenient liquor.

Epithemes also, which provoke Sleep, are often applied to the Temples,
Forehead, and Sinciput, with success: of which kind are Oxyrrhodinum, an
Embrocation of Water or Milk, liniments of the Oil of Nutmegs by expression,
and unguentum populneum; to which sometimes let five or six grains of Opium be
added; or a cake of Roses, or of Poppyflowers, with Vinegar and Nutmeg, etc.

Again, on this account, rather than for removing the inflammation of the
meninx, the warm lungs of a Lamb or Weather, also Pigeons or Chickens cut in
two, often give an excellent relief. For this use the great Burr-dock bruised
and mixed with Woman's Milk, and applied to the Sinciput shaved is greatly
commended. Also Penotus's Epitheme of twelve grains of Musk, half a scruple of
Camphire, and twenty ounces of Rosewater, impregnated with the Tincture of Red
Saunders, is commended by some.

Moreover, not only to the Head, but likewise to the Heart, Liver, and other
parts, Epithemes are wont to be applied: Let a Sacculus of fine Linen, with
lays of cordial Species and Cotton stuck in it, and irrigated with the
distilled Water or Vinegar of Roses be applied to the Praecordia; also let
Linen Clothes dipped in Vinegar of Roses be laid on the Testles: Let the Feet be
bathed with a decoction of the leaves of Willow, Lettice, and the heads of the
white Poppy: But let these kinds of cooling and mitigating topics be used only
about the beginning of the Disease; in its greatest height let Resolvents, and
Emollients, as the flowers of Cammomil, Melilot, Elder, etc. also the leaves of
Mallows, Arach, Marjoram, Hyssop, and the like be added: In the declination of
the Disease let Resolvents only, and those sparingly be used.

In the mean while a very great regard ought to be had of the Strength, for
this being too much broken, all hope of Cure is lost: Now the strength is wont
to be soon consumed by reason of great watchings, perpetual agitations of the
body and mind, a thin diet, and Blooding sometimes, it being often needful.
Wherefore we must take a great care, lest whilst we go about to eradicate the
Discase by Purging, and frequent Bleeding, we on a sudden weaken the Vital
function; if this begins to waver, neglecting the Frensy, and allowing a more
nourishable Food, we must chiefly use Cardiacks.

Take Tincture of Coral half an ounce, let twenty grains be taken twice or
thrice a day, with a dose of a Cephalic or cordial Julep, or let the milkly
solution of Coral, made with the Juice of Oranges be given to a spoonful often
in a day.

Take Rob, or Conserve of Rasberryes, and Barberryes an ounce, Pearl prepared,
Magistery of Coral, of each a dram, Confection of Hyacinth two drams, Syrup of
the Juice of Kermes what suffises, make a Confection: let the quantity of a
Nutmeg be taken three or four times a day, drinking after of the following
Julep three ounces.

Take Waters of the Flowers of Nymphaea, red Roses, and of the Leaves of
Medow-sweet, of each three ounces, Syrup of Coral two ounces, Aqua Cordialis
Saxoniae a dram, mix them.

Take Conserve of the Flowers of Nymphaea, of Violets of each an ounce, Lettice
Stems condited half an ounce, Powder of red Coral ground on a Marble with the
Juice of Oranges, and dried, two drams, Species Diamargariti frigidi a dram,
white Poppey Seeds a dram and a half, with a sufficient quantity of Syrup of
the Juice of Wood Sorrel, make an Electuary, let the quantity of a Nutmeg be
taken often in a day.

In the Phrensy not only the Belly, but likewise the Bladder, when unmindful of
its Office, ought frequently to be moved or irritated to it. Wherefore the
diseased are to be admonisht, and a Chamber Pot being presented, to be
entreated to make water; which if they do not obey, Let the Region of the Share
be fomented with a Decoctionof Pellitory of the Wall, Elder Flowers, the Seeds
of Parsley and wild Carrots with a Sponge, and after the Fomentation let it be
anointed with Oil of Scorpions and Vnguentum Dialthaea: in a long Suppression
of Urine you must put a wax Candle into the Vrethra.

So many and so various Cases and Stories of Persons troubled with the Frensy
are written by Hippocrates in lib. Epidem: that it may seem to little purpose
to add others here: especially because it would be a thing of an immense Labor
and Tediousness to relate the various Conditions, and Gestures of Franticks:
mean while, as to the event of the Disease no great diversity occurs. For, for
the most part either, the Fever being determined, the Frensy ceases by degrees,
or that having no Crisis or an ill one, either death or a long raving ensues:
Nevertheless for the Illustration of our Hypothesis concerning the Inflammation
of the Spirits, I shall here set before you one rare instance.

Soime time since I was called to cure a robust Maid servant, who being in a
Fever, and very much distracted, was continually kept bound in her Bed: to this
Person I ordered Blood to be drawn in a plentiful manner, and afterward the
blooding to be repeated, the Belly to be frequently loosned by a Clyster, and
all other Administrations usual in this case to be performed in order; mean
while I gave her Emuslions, Juleps, Hypnoticks: but these doing little or no
good, she continued still for seven or eight days without Sleep, and extremely
raving, howling, and crying out contintually for cold Drink: wherefore it being
allowed her to drink her fill of cold Water, she became not at all the more
appeased or less dry; Therefore (it being Summer) I ordered, that in the midst
of the night, being taken up by Women and led forth, she should be put into a
Boat, then her Clothes being taken off, and the Cords with which she was bound
being untyed, she should be dipped in the deepest part of the River, only a Cord
being bound about her middle to keep her from drowning: but there was no need
of that support; for she swam of her own accord almost as well as a man that
had well learned: after the third or fourth part of an hour, she was taken out
of the Water sound and sober, then being put to bed she slept, and sweated
freely, and afterward grew well without any other Remedy. This Cure happened so
suddenly and successfully, in as much as the excesses both of the vital and
animal flame being increased to a vast height together, were taken away by the
proper Remedy of an intense Fire, viz. a Humectation and Infrigidation.

CHAP. X. Instructions and Prescripts for the curing of Melancholy.
AS the Frenzy arises from the burning of the animal Spirits, or from the
inflammation of their Substance; so other affects of raving proceed from their
Substance being altered after other manners, and its being changed from its
genuine disposition, viz. spirituo-saline, into an acetous or sharp nature,
resembling aqua stygia, or into a flatness or deadness; which therefore are
either Melancholy, or a Mania or Madness, or a Morosis or fatuity: of which we
shall now speak ion order, and in the first place of Melancholy.

Melancholy is commonly defined, a Raving without a Fever or Fury, joined with
fear and sadness; whence it follows to be a complicated affect of the Brain and
Heart; for, that melancholic Persons rave, it proceeds from the fault of the
Brain, and the disorder of the animal Spirits residing in it; but that they are
sad and timorous, this is attributed to the Passion of the Heart.

There are various and sundry kinds of the Imagination'sbeing depraved in
Melancholy, concerning which we may observe in general, that the affected
either rave concerning all things, or at leaswise concerning most, so that they
pass a right judgment in a manner concerning no subject; or they imagine amiss
only in one or two particular cases, but of most others form notions not
altogether absurd. First, we shall enquire concerning this affect, as it is
more Universal, how the Imagination is prevaricated concerning most things, to
wit, for what Causes, and with what difference of Symptoms this is wont to be
done, afterward we shall speak of the particular raving.

Tho the delirous affect of universal Melancholy contains manifold symptoms,
yet they consist chiefly in these three things; first, that the affected are
almost continually occupied in thinking, so that their Fancy is scarce ever
idle, and at rest. Secondly, in thinking they comprehend fewer things in their
mind than they were wont before, so that they often roll in their mind the same
Object day and night, being nothing follicitous of other things, which
sometimes are of far greater moment. Thirdly, the Ideas of Objects or
Conceptions appear often deformed, and like frightful Apparitions as it were,
and they are always represented in a greater Species, so that every small
thing seems to them great and most difficult, and by reason of this horrid and
unusual appearance, the Image once conceived is not easily, nor soon let go.

The Indisposition of the animal Spirits in this affect is wont commonly to be
described after this manner, to wit, that whereas they ought to be transparent,
subtle and light, in Melancholy they become obscure, opake and darkish, so that
they represent the Images of things covered as it were with a Shadow or
obscurity. But I conceive the state of the animal Spirits in raving is most
aptly explicated according to the Analogy they bear with certain chemical
Spirits, as it will appear from what follows.

1. Liquours chymically distilled are of diverse kinds, according as the active
Elements are combined in them after various manners; the most excellent of
these, by the consent of all, is said to be, in which the Spirit united to the
Sal^^olatizes it, and is again acuated, and recieves somewhat of a firmness
from it: of this nature are conceived to be the great Elixir and the Liquour
Alkahest: and in truth, in some sort are the Spirits of Blood, of Hartshorn,
of Soot, and the like, they being very subtle, volatile and penetrating, and
yet not inflamable, or apt to be soon dissipated. And indeed the animal Spirits
enjoying a sound and meet disposition, seem in some sort to be as the
spirituous Liquour filled with a volatile Salt, which is distilled from the
Blood: unless it be that to this a mighty Acrimony and Empyeuma are caused by
the Fire, of which the Liquour which is in the Brain and Nerves is wholly free.

2. Other Chemical Liquours are too sulphurous and burning, as Spirit of Wine
and of Turpentine, which consisting of Spirit and Sulphur combined together,
are easily inflamed and readily separate from others, and take this way and
that, as they find a Passage: of which kind of nature the animal Spirits in
some sort participate in the Phrensy.

3. Some Liquours or Spirits are produced by Chemistry, in which the fixed salt
being raised to a flowing has the Dominion: of which kind are those which are
distilled from Vinegar, ponderous Woods, and certain Minerals by a gentle Fire;
whose particles are very movable and restless, but of a shorter activity, so
that the effluvia do not flow far from them, and if they are distilled in
Baleno, nothing but an insipid Phlegm is raised into the Alembick: And indeed
we conjecture that the animal Spirits have such a kind of acetous Nature with
the dominion of the fluid Salt in melancholy Affects, as we shall by and by
show more at large.

4. Some Liquours spagyrically drawn are sometimes extremely sharp, in which
the wild Particles of a fluid Salt, and of an arsenical Sulphur combined
together are exalted, as are the Stygian Waters distilled from Nitre, Vitriol,
Antimony, Arsenick, Verdigrease, and the like; all which are of a wild, very
penetrative and invincible Nature, so that their diffuse themselves to a great
wideness: and these kinds of Liquours aptly enough resemble the Disposition of
the animal Spirits acquired in a Mania, as we shall declare beneath.

But at present, that we may deliver the formal nature and Causes of
Melancholy, we may opine, that the Liquour distilled from the Blood into the
Brain (which filling and irrigating all the Pores and Passages of the Brain,
and its nervous appendix is both the Vehicle and Vinculum of the animal
Spirits) has degenerated from its mild, benign, and subtle Nature, into an
acetous and corrosive Disposition, such as that of the Liquours drawn from
Vinegar, Box and Vitriol, and that the animal Spirits, which dispersing their
Rays from the Meditullium of the Brain, both into its globous Substance, and
into the Systema Nervosum, produce all the Functions of Sense and Motion both
inward and outward, are disposed in like manner as the Effluvia passing from
those acetous Chemical Liquours. Concerning which we may observe these three
things, viz. First, that they are in perpetual Motion, secondly, that they do
not flow far; thirdly, that they are not only carried by open Passages, but
make new prosities in neighboring Bodies, and insinuate themselves into them.
From the Analogy of these Conditions concerning the animal Spirits it happens,
that melancholy Persons are always thoughtful, that they comprehend only a few
things, that they form their Notions concerning them amiss. [ you may find this
fuller explained in Dr. Willis at large.]

So much of the primary melancholy Affect, viz. a Delirium raised through the
faults of the Spirits residing in the Brain: whose beginnings tho chiefly, and
often in a manner only proceed from the acetous Disposition of the Spirits; yet
afterward the conformation of the Brain it self is frequently taken in as a
part of the cause. viz. In as much as the Recrements of the melancholy Blood,
continually sent into it, renders its substance more gross and opake, and the
primary Tracts or Paths of the animal Spirits being almost defaced, new oblique
and devious Tracts are made, so that tho there be a supply of the better sort
of Spirits, they cannot easily irradiate the Brain, or presently recover their
former Passages.

Melancholy is not only an affect of the Brain, and Spirits residing in it, but
likewise of the Praecordia, and of the Blood there kindled, and thence sent
forth into the whole Body: and as it produces in the former a Delirium, so here
a Fear and Sadness: but after what manner let us now see.

In Sadness, in the first place the flamy or vital part of the Soul is
straightened as to its circuit, and is restrained within a less space; and then
consequently the animalor lucid part of the Soul contracts its Sphere, and has
less vigor: but in Fear both are suddenly represt, and made to stagger as it
were, and to contain themselves within very small spaces: in both affects the
Blood does not circulate and burn lively and with a full flame, but being apt
to be heapt together and to stagnate about the Precordia, it causes there an
oppression, or fainting; and in the mean while the Head and Members being
destitute of its plentiful efflux, languish.

Now that those Passions become habitual in melancholy Persons, the cause is
partly in the Blood, and partly in the animal Action of the Heart: for the
Blood, by reason of saline Particles exalted, becomes less inflamable: whence
it is neither sufficiently kindled in the Lungs, nor does it burn within the
Ductus's of the Heart and Vessels with a flame sufficiently clear and
plentiful, but such as is apt to be represt, and almost blown out by any puff
of Wind: hence in regard the vital Flame is so slender and languishing, that it
staggers and trembles at all Motion, it is no wonder if a melancholy Person,
the Soul as it were subfiding and being half overwhelmed, is always sad and
tlmorous. By reason of this saline discrasie of the Blood, melancholy Persons
are seldom troubled with a Fever, but being seized with it, they are more
dangerously ill by reason of the irregular burning of the Blood.

Nor does it happen less through the fault of the Heart, that melancholy
Persons by reason of the course of the Blood being retarded, or often drawn
back, become sad and timorous: for since that Muscle is not actuated but by the
influence of weak and irregular Spirits, it is not able to perform its
Contractions with Strength and Constancy enough, whereby the Blood may be
driven forward throughout the whole Body without stop, or flying back.
Therefore the Blood and animal Spirits mutually affect each other with a
reciprocal injury, and bring damage on each other: the melancholy blood, that
is, consisting of saline Particles exalted, together with such as are
sulphurous, engenders animal Spirits of an acetous nature, as we have shown:
and these Spirits performing the vital Function amiss, cause such a dyscrasy of
the Blood to be increased.

So far of Melancholy in genera, viz. of its Essence, conjunct Causes, and
chief Symptoms: before we proceed to the kinds and differences of this Disease,
we ought to explicate from what causes both procatarctick, and evident, it is
wont to arise and be fomented: and first, whence both parts of the Soul. viz.
both animal and vital acquire their morbid Dispositions.

Of these we have shown the former to be acetous, resembling Spirit of Vitriol,
or of Vinegar, and the other to be Salino-Sulphureous, or Atrabilarious;
moreover, and that as they both soment each other, so that they first engender
each other: for sometimes melancholy beginning from the animal Spirits being
troubled and put in a certain confusion, and persisting some time, brings a
melancholy habit to the Blood; sometimes also the Blood, contracting first that
discrasy, perverts the Nature of the Spirits.

That Melancholy oftentimes begins from the animal economy, its easily seen in
excessive Love, extreme Sadness, pannick Terrors, Envy, Cares, and immoderate
Studies, for on these occasions the animal Spirits being driven out of the
wonted Paths of their Expansions, and persisting in their error through the
assiduity of their Passion, at length fall into devious Tracts, which afterward
keeping to, they are with difficulty reduced into the ancient and right again.
Moreover, since thereupon the Motion and Vigor of the Heart are diminished,
therefore the Blood falls from its due Crasis and Pneumatosis, and thereby
being rendered more fixed and salino-sulphureous, furnishes only animal spirits
degenerated to a sourness; and so the Blood being depraved a posteriori, gives
a Fuel to the melancholy disposition begun by the Spirits.

Nor does it happen less frequently that the seeds of melancholy first laid in
the Blood, give at length that taint to the Spirits: for this reason some
hereditarily become obnoxious to that Disease. Moreover, a disorderly diet, the
intermission of an exercise long used, solemn Evacuations, as of the Menses or
Hemmorhoids, also of the Seed, or serous Ichor suddenly suppressed, and many
other occasions, easily defile the Blood, and render it melancholic, whose
evil Disposition will afterward of necessity be communicated to the Spirits.

As to what a great many Physicians think, that melancholy rises from a
melancholic Humor engendered somewhere primarily and per se and assign
particular Places for its Generation; viz: the Brain, Spleen, Womb, and the
whole Habit of the Body, we do not easily grant all this: for besides that no
secret Stores of such a humor, lying any where, appear, unless happily in the
Spleen, it is indeed the Blood it self which first conceives per se the
melancholic Distemper, or any other, and afterward deposes recrements of that
Nature in proper Emunctories or Receptacles: nor would the yellow Choler be
stored up in the Gallbladder, or the black, so called, in the Spleen, unless
the mass of Blood first engendered those Humors. If at any time these, or other
recrementitious humors, some where deposed, be received by the mass of Blood,
they produce its effervescence, but not presently, or easily its distemperature.

1. As to that therefore, that the origin of Melancholy is sometimes ascribed
to the Head, and the distemperature of the Brain is accused by some as too hot,
and by others as cold: I think we ought rather to say that the affect sometimes
first begins from the Brain, and from the Soul residing in it.

2. As for the Origin of this affect being sometimes drawn from the Womb, it
must not be thought that the melancholy Humor is there first engendered, but
that the occasion of melancholy proceeds thence: either because by reason of
the Menses suppressed, the whole Blood being defiled and become degenerate,
afterward falls into a melancholy discrasy, or for that by reason of the
Stimuli of Venery restrained with a great reluctation of the corporeal Soul,
the animal Spirits being long contained and kept in, at length become fixed and
melancholic.

3. That melancholy is sometimes either primarily raised, or very much fomented
by the Spleen being ill affected, and thereupon by a peculiar word called
Hypocondriacal, it is both the common and our own Opinion; but the Blood being
first in the fault, engendring in it self filthy melancholy Dregs at the
beginning, deposes them in the Spleen, which afterward receiving again, being
exalted into the nature of an evil ferment, it is vitiated more in its Crasis
by their defilement.

4. As to that that besides, another species of melancholy, distinct from the
Hypocondriacal and the former, is said to be engendered together in the whole
Body, it is nothing else than that the whole mass of Blood becoming degenerate
from its right Nature, by reason of errors in the six non-natural things, and
on many other occasions, acquires a melancholic Discrasy (that is, where the
Spirit being depressed the sulphurous Particles together with the saline, and
some also that are terrene are exalted) this melancholy disposition of the
Blood being very much allied to that sulphureo-saline Habit, which we have
shown to be often prevalent in a certain kind of Scurvy.

The Prognostic of Melancholy, tho, as to Life or Death, it be for the most
part safe, yet, in reference to the event, it is very uncertain: for some
recover soon, others are not cured but after a long time, and others not at all.

This affect, raised on a sudden from some solemn evident cause, as from a
vehement passion, is much safer than invading by degrees after a long
Procatarixs: for if the evident cause be presently removed, that often ceases
of its own accord, or is cured with little ado; but in this, in regard both the
mass of Blood, and the whole troop of Animal Spirits have fallen from their due
crasis, and often the conformation of the Brain, as to the tracts of the
Spirits, is altered, a Cure does not happen but with great difficulty, and not
but after a long time.

Melancholy long protracted often passes into a Fatuity, and sometimes also
into a Mania, or Madness: Moreover, sometimes it brings Convulsive affects, or
a Palsy, or Apoplexy, nay, sometimes a violent Death.

There is little or no hope of a Cure, if the affected, being very stubborn and
refractory, refuse all Medicines, and any method of management: Moreover,
scarce any thing better may be expected from those, who being sick of Diseases
in a manner only imaginary, take any Remedies, and often require many, and of
diverse kinds, to be given them.

The Cure of Melancholy, as it is always difficult, and long, so it is wont to
be very intricate and perplexed; seeing that in respect of the causes of every
kind, evident, procatarctick and conjunct; also by reason of the symptoms daily
energing, it ought to be diversely taken in hand, and often to be varied: Nor
must we only change the Remedies and method of Cure, but variously intermix
with them advices, deceptions, flatteries, entreaties, and punishments.

But in the first place let the evident cause of the Disease, if any notable
one has preceded, be searched out; and if it may be, let it either be presently
removed, or let the removal of it be some way counrais'd, either be appeased,
or be subdued by others that are opposite. Wherefore in an excessive passion of
Love, Indignation and Hatred come in as a relief; to Sadness, let baits of
Pleasures, Music, the desire of vain Glory, be opposed, or also a pannick
terror: In like manner you may proceed with other Passions, either for
curbing, or cluding them.

The Therapeutick Method, fitted to the Cure of Melancholy, suggests many other
Indications: Whereof the chief, and to which the rest may be best reduced, are
those three so vulgarly known, viz. the Curatory, which regards immediately the
disease, and its Conjunct cause; the Preservatory, which regards the
procatarctick and evident causes; and the Vital, which is occupied in
preserving the strength.

As to the first Indication, the Physical Intentions will be, so far to raise,
volatize and corroborate the Animal Spirits, being become fixed, or dejected
also, and apt to act overthwartly, or go astray, that afterward being more
freely expanded, they may irradiate the whole Brain with a full and steadfast
beam of Light, for the acts of the Imagination, Judgment, and the other chief
Faculties; and may so vigorously actuate the Praecordia, and make them vibrate
so strongly, that the Blood being plentifully kindled may thence spring forward
without stop or restagnation throughout the whole Body.

Therefore, for the cure of the Spirits, let it be chiefly procured, that the
Soul be withdrawn from the troublesome and forced Passion, viz. from excessive
Love, Jealousy, Sadness, Commiseration, Hatred, Fear, and the like, and be
composed to a Cheerfulness and delight: let a merry or jocose Discourse,
Singing, Music, Painting, Dancing, Hunting, Fishing, and other pleasant
Exercises be brought in ure: those to whom Delights, or Sports are not pleasing
(for these are always ungrateful to some melancholy Persons) may be put upon
some light Employs; mathematical or chemical Studies, sometimes also traveling
does great good; moreover it is often profitable to change the Places of their
Habitation in their native Soil. Those, who must always stay at home, should be
advised to look after their household Affairs, and govern their Families; to
cultivate and order their Houses, Gardens, Orchards and Fields: for a Mind,
employed in necessary Cares and Offices, more readily deposes vain or mad
Thoughts, and at length quits them: Let melancholy Persons be seldom left
alone, for if at any time they. are permitted to follow and dwell long on their
Phantasms, and aereal Speculations, the Soul subsides within, and leaving the
Body, and undergoing a certain Metamorphosis, indues a new species, and often
contrary to the state of Man; wherefore the affected ought to be continually
disturbed by the discourses of their Friends and Acquaintance, to wit, that
they animal Spirits being called outward from their bye ways, be brought again
into their former and usual Tracts. But if the diseased, being seduced by
fantastical Illusions, imagine and firmly belived certain prodigious things of
themselves; the Mind is to be withdrawn from those things by artificial
Inventions, of which manner of Cures there are many Cases and Examples to be
found in Books, and a prudent Physician may invent the like as occasion
requires.

Tho a melancholy new contracted is sometimes cured by a mere ordering and
management of the Mind and the animal Spirits, yet in a lopng continued to
inveterate melancholy, where the Spirits have contracted an acetous
Disposition, and the Blood an atrabilarious dyscrasy, and that the Conformation
of the Brain, as to its Pores and Passages is injured, and other indications,
called preservatory, are required for removing the procatarctick Causes of the
Disease. Concerning this thing, the Physical intentions must be in the first
place to reduce the Blood to a better and genuine, to wit, a spirituo-saline
Crasis; and then to give a vigor to the Brain, and, its Pores being opened, to
render it clear and diaphanous, and withal to strengthen the animal Spirits,
and to stir them up to a vigorous Emanation: for which ends I propose the
following Method, which nevertheless ought to be varied according to the
various Constitutions of the diseased.

Blood-letting has place in a manner in every melancholy, and sometimes it is
often to be repeated, for the adust and effaete Blood being withdrawn at times,
a new and more sprituous Blood springs up in its place. Concerning the
Quantity, Place, and Ways of administering this Remedy, Authors are of various
Opinions; but the Motion and Affects of the Blood being duly weighed, it may
suffice first to draw an indifferent quantity of it from the Arm, and
afterward, if need be, a less, either from thence, or from the Vessels of the
Fundament by Leeches: how the opening of the Slavatella Vein should give so
notable a releif, as is said, I confess is unknown to me: if melancholy Persons
are strongly persuaded that blooding there will cure them before any where
else, happily it may do them good: a frequent opening of the Hemorrhoid Vessels
afterward to endeavor that evacuation, which spontaneously happening (as
Hippocrates tells us) often cures this disease.

Purging ought to be used from the beginning, and to be repeated by intervals,
in regard it withdraws the fuel of the disease from the first Passages, and
removes the impediments of other Remedies: as to what some judge, that for the
speedy eradicating of the Disease, we must chiefly use Hellebore, or the
Spurges, and quote Hippocrates their Author, those things, if the success be
looked upon, are not found so generally to agree; but that they often very much
injure the Diseased: for strong purgers do not take away the cause of the
Disease, to wit, the dyscrasy of the Blood, but rather increase it: moreover,
they farther weaken and prostrate the animal Spirits before dejected. Hellebore
is so frequently prescribed by Hippocrates, because scarce any other
Catharticks were then known, at least wise they were not in common use; but now
it is far better to draw gently from the receptacles of the Humors by such as
are mild and without roughness, and to cleanse the Viscera and first Passages
without troubling much the Blood and Spirits.

Vomitories (as in most Cephalic Diseases, free from a Fever) are wont to give
relief after a peculiar manner in any sorts of Distractions; the reason of this
partly consists herein, that the viscous load of the Ventricle, which (as we
have shown elsewhere) greatly oppresses the mind, being cleans'd forth, the
Spirits thereupon being more free, expand themselves more vigorously and
cheerfully. Moreover, in as much as vomiting compresses and evacuates the
neighboring Receptacles of the Humors, to wit, the Gallbladder, the Ductus
of the Pancreas, and the Glands of the Mesentery, it keeps their Contents from
being conveyed to the Head.

Vomits.
Take Oxymel of Squills an ounce and a half, wine of Squils an ounce, Syrup of
Tobacco two drams, mix them, make a Vomitory: if it works not at all, or
slowly, let a Vomit be raised by a free drinking of Posset Drink having the
leaves of Carduus boiled in it.

Take of the decoction of the middle bark of Elder four ounces, Salt of Vitriol
from one scruple to two scruples, Oxymel simple three drams, mix them: let it
be taken after the same manner.

To strong and well set People, give the Infusion of Crocus Metallorum, or
Mercurius vitae; also the Emetick Tartar of Mynsicht, or Sulphur of Antimony.

Take roots of Polypody of the Oak half an ounce, Epithymum three drams, Senna
half an ounce, Tamarinds six drams, Coriander-seeds, three drams, yellow
Saunders two drams, let them boil in fourteen ounces of Fountainwater to ten
ounces: adding Agarick two drams, Rhubarb a dram and a half; to the clarified
straining add of the purging Syrup of Apples two ounces, let six ounces be
taken, repeating it within three or four days.

Take choice Senna three drams, Epithymum, Rhubarb, of each a dram and a half,
yellow Saunders half a dram, Corinader-seeds two scruples, Salt of Wormwood
half a dram, Celtick Spike a scruple, let there be a close Infusion for a Night
in White Wind and water of Apples, of each four ounces; to five ounces of the
clear straining add Syrup of Epithymum six drams, Aqua mirabilis two drams, mix
them, make a potion. In Bodies hard to be wrought on, let there be added to
these, fibers of black Hellebore macerated in Vinegar, a dram or two.

Those who like better Pills, Powders, Bolus's or Syrups, may use the following.

Take Quercitan's Pills of Tartar, or Crato's Pills of Amber, half a dram,
Rosin of Jalap, or Scamony, six or eight grains, Tartar vitriolate half a
scruple, Ammoniacum dissolved in Aqua mirabilis what suffices, make pills, let
four be taken going to bed, and unless they work first, one the next morning.

Take Calomelanos, extract of black Hellebore of each a scruple, Resin of Jalap
six grains, Ammoniacum dissolved what suffices, make four Pills, let them be
taken with governance.

The Powder called Haly, is greatly commended by Valescus de Tarenta, Pereda,
and others. And indeed in rustic or robust Bodies, this seems a pretty fit
Cathartick. Take Epithymum half an ounce, Agarick, Lapis Lazuli of each three
drams, Scammony a dram, Cloves in number thirty, make a Powder, the dese is
from half a dram to a dram.

Take Pulvis Diacennae, Diaturbith with Rhubarb, of each half a dram, make a
powder, let it be taken in a draught of posset drink, or in a single decoction
of Epithymum, to four or five scruples.

Take choice Senna two ounces, roots of Polipody of the Oak two ounces,
Epithymum an ounce and a half, yellow Saunders half an ounce, Tamarinds an
ounce, Coriander-seeds six drams, let them boil in four pounds of Barnet-water,
to an half, strain it, and let it evaporate by a bath heat to the consistency
of a Syrup, adding toward the end pure Manna, double refined Sugar, of each
four ounces, make a Syrup: the dose is stwo or three spoonfuls, in three ounces
of a convenient distilled water, or in any other Liuqor. Or,

Take of the same Liquor evaporated to the consistency of Honey, six ounces,
fresh Cassia four ounces, pulp of Corinths two ounces, Cream of Tartar, Salt of
Wormwood, of each a dram and a half, pulvis Diasennae two drams, yellow
Saunders powdered three drams, mix them, make an Electuary, the dose is from
three drams to half an ounce.

Catharticks must not be used without intermission, nro too frequently, but let
it suffice to give them within six or seven days, and at other times, let the
belly, if it be bound, be loosened by Clysters: as to what regards other
Medicines which do not evacuate, tho the Ancients placed the least, we put the
greatnest stress of the Cure in them; for they (with whom also many Moderns
accord) concluded, that there was nothing more to be done for curing
Melancholy, than to purge forth the atrabilarious Humor: Wherefore making
purging the thing of chiefest moment, they ordered the rest of Pharmacy, called
by them preparatory, only for the sake of this; directing thus their
intentions, that as soon as the Humor was brought to a fit consistency by
altering Medicines, and the ways made open enough for its excretion, then to
carry it forth by Catharticks: which kind of hypothesis seems not to agree with
Reason or Physical Experience, to wit, in as much as melancholy Persons, after
a frequent purging, how methodically soever ordered, receive rather an injury
than a relief. Therefore we, placing the cause of this Disease in the
dyscrasies of the Blood and Spirits, and in the weakness or ill conformation of
the Brain or Viscera, put alteratives, and corroboratives in the first rank of
Medicines, and sometimes interlace Catharticks only for the sake of these.
Purging therefore being prescribed for the due removal of Impediments, and at
due intervals of time, as to the rest you may proceed after this manner.

Take Conserve of Clove-gilliflowers and Borage flowers, of each two ounces and
a half, myrobalan rinds condited six drams, Coral prepared, Pearl, of each a
dram and a half; Ivory, Crab's-eyes, of each a dram, Confection of Hyacinth two
drams, Syrup of Coral, or red poppyes, what suffices, make an Electuary, let
two drams be taken, morning and evening, drinking after it three ounces of the
following Julep, or distilled water.

Take water of Cowslip-flowers and of Black-cherries, of each six ounces, of
Bawm four ounces, Dr. Stevens's Water two ounces, Sugar six drams, mix them,
make a Julep.

Take leaves of Bawm, Borage, Bugloss, Fumitory, Watercresses, Brooklimes, of
each four handfuls, Clove-gilliflowers, flowers of Marigolds, Borage, Cowslips,
of each three handfuls, the outward coats of six Oranges' and four Lemmons,
being all sliced and bruised, pour to them of Whey made with Cider, eight
pounds, distill them with common Organs, let the whole Liquor be mixed.

Take powder of Pearl, Ivory, Coral prepared, of each two drams, Species
loetificantis, Diarrhod. Abbatis of each a dram, Oil of Citron-pills half a
scruple, double refined Sugar dissolved, and boiled to a consistency for
Tablets in a sufficient quantity of Bawm-water, six ounces, make Tablets
according to art, weighing a dram, let two or three be taken in the morning and
at five of the clock in the afternoon, drinking after it a draught of the
distilled water, or of Tea. Or,

Take Roots of Chervil, Polypody of the Oak of each an ounce and a half, leaves
of Hearts-tongue, Spleenwort, Ceterach, Germander, of each a handful, Tamarisk
half a handful, bark of the same half, an ounce, Raisins stoned two ounces, one
Apple sliced, being sliced and bruised let them boil in four pounds of
Fountain Water to a consumption of the third part, toward the end add leaves
of Watercresses a handful, strain it and clarify it, let six ounces be taken
twice or thrice a day, let it be sweetened with Syrup of Fumitory.

Iron-Spaw-waters are wont to contribute egregiously to the Cure of Melancholy
Persons; viz. in as much as being plentifully drank, they wash away the
salino-sulphureous tincture of the Blood, and destroy its evil ferments.
Moreover, they cleanse the filth of the Viscera, open obstructions, and which
is of mighty benefit, by their astriction they both strengthen the weak or
over-lax Viscera, and close the mouths of the Vessels gaping into the Brain,
that a passage may not lie open into it for the extraneous matter, together
with the nervous Juice: and in this respect, to wit, by corroborating the
Viscera, and closing the passages into the Brain, Vitriolick Preparations of
Iron are wont to be given with good effect in Melancholy, and also in the
Vertigo.

Take our Steel prepared three ounces, infuse it in two pounds of the water
above prescribed, let three or four ounces be taken twice a day by it self, or
with some other solid Medicine.

Take filings of Steel an ounce, put them in a Glass with two ounces of the
Juice of Oranges, let it stand for a day, shaking it now and then, then pour to
it water of Apples, and White Wind of each a pound, or of small, and mild Cider
two pounds, let three ounces be taken twice a day after the same manner.

Take Vitriol of Mars, Cream of Tartar, Crabs Eyes, of each a dram, mix them,
make a powder, divide it into nine parts, le tone part be taken every Morning
in a draught of an appropiate distilled Water, or a Decoction, or appropriate
Julep.

Take Syrup of Steel four ounces, let a spoonful be taken twice a day in a fit
vehicle.

Take extract of Steel, from our Steel prepared with an appropriate Decoction
three ounces, powder of Ivory, yellow Saunders, Lignum Aloes of each half a
dram, Salt of Tartar two Scruples, Ammoniacum dissolved in Water of Earthworms
what suffizes, make a mass, let it be made into little Pills, let three or four
be taken every Evening, drinking after it three ounces of Water of Apples or of
Cowslip-flowers.

Whey, if it agrees with the Stomach, being drank plentifully for many days,
is often used with good effect, for the like reason as Spaw-waters. viz. by
washing away the salt and sulphurous Particles of the atrobilarious Blood:
Whey with Epithymum infused, or boiled in it, is egregiously commended by some.

Let Broaths be prepared of the Decoction of a Chicken, with the Roots of
Polypody, Chervil, Fennel, Butchers-broom, and the Leaves of Ceterach,
Hartstongue, Scolopendrium, etc. let a draught be taken in the Morning and at
five of the Clock in the Afternoon, in which dissolve Vitriol of Mars from six
grains to ten, Salt of Wormwood, Cream of Tartar of each a scruple.

Juices and Expressions of Herbs sometimes contribute egregiously to the taking
away of the Dyscrasy of the Blood. Take Leaves of Borrage, Watercresses of each
six handfuls, two Apples mash'd, the pulpe of two Oranges, double refined Sugar
an ounce, all being bruised together pour to them of excellent Cider a pound
and a half, make a strong expression, let it be kept in a Glass, the dose is
four ounces twice or thrice a day.

In the Summer, a Bath of sweet Water, inasmuch as it cleanses the filth
sticking in the Skin, and promotes insensible transpiration, does great good to
some.

Because Melancholy persons Sleep with difficulty, and after long or frequent
watchings are worse, therefore let Anodynes, and sometimes gentle Hypnoticks be
prescribed to be taken late at night, when there is need. For this purpose, a
decoction of Cowslip-flowers or of the leaves of Lettices, or the distilled
water of the red Poppey, or Syrup of the same: Moreover, Emulsions of the seeds
of the white Poppey, Syrupus de Meconio, and other things that are mild, and
soothing the Spirits, are proper.

There being an infinite number of Melancholic persons, as well as of Fools, I
shall illustrate our hypothesis only with two examples; in one of which the
Disease began from the sensitive part of the Soul, or from the Animal Spirits,
and in the other from its Vital part, to wit, from the Blood.

Some time since a renowned man, about forty years of age, of a florid
countenance, cheerful, and quick at all business, being afflicted in mind, and
very much dejected by reason of some misfortunes, became thenceforward very sad
and melancholy, with a dead and fallen aspect: When first I went to see him, he
complained of much trouble and distraction of his thoughts, which were so
great, that his Fancy being occupied day and night without intermission, he
lived wholly without sleep: and nevertheless this Person minded not at all the
concerns of the Public, nor of his own Family, nor was he greatly sollicitous
concerning the welfare of his Soul, or the health of his Body, but rather was
continually perplexed about petty things, and almost of no moment: he was so
fearful of all things, that he fancied some harm, or Death would presently
happen to him upon any little accident. In fine, he always lived so sad, as tho
he endeavored to exceed Heraclitus in mourning. Moreover, he was troubled with
so great a straitness and constriction of his Heart, that it seemed to him as
tho the whole Praecordia were most closely strained together as a first
contracted, and he thought that he always carried a vast and very oppressive
burden there, which forced him always to go forward, and stooping toward the
Earth. Whilst he was discoursing with his friends, that constriction and
oppression of the Praecordia was wont somewhat to remit; but then upon any
unusual object striking him with a terror, it returned with more violence: Nor
was he only troubled with a certain constriction in the Precordia, but in the
whole Body besides, and a certain weight, as it were, seemed to lie on the
Region of his Loins, also on his Shoulders and Arms.

As to the Cure of this Person, after various Medicines used without any great
success, at length I persuaded him, because it was Summer, to drink our
artificial Spaw-waters for six weeks: Therefore in the first place, in four
pounds of Fountain Water, I infused for a night, of our Steel prepared half a
dram, and afterward as much in eight pounds of Water. The Diseased every
morning drank the clear Liquor, and within four or five hours discharged the
greater part of it by Urine. He took moreover going to Bed, and early in the
morning, a dose of an appropriate Electuary, such as above-described, with a
Cephalic Julep: Within two months he was m uch better, and afterward came to
himself by degrees.

Whilst I was writing these things, a young man of Quality, lately returned
from traveling beyond the Seas, and being become sickly, committed himself to
our care: This Person, being formerly of a sanguine and cheerful temperament,
of a gay behavior, also of an acute wit and a clear disposition, as he
traveled through Foreign Countries, and being in a certain Summer in Spain, he
felt in himself a great alteration from the intense heats of that place: For
first, he became obnoxious to frequent effervescencies of the Blood, with
sudden flushings of heat in the palms of his Hands and the soles of his Feet,
and to prickings often wont to arise in his whole Body, and presently to go
away again. Afterward, finding himself worse as to his Appetite and Sleep, and
likewise growing dull and somewhat sad, he began to affect less, and sometimes
to shun any business or delights, nay, and conversation with his friends. At
length this indisposition daily growing worse, without any manifest cause, or
real trouble of mind, he became Melancholic, so that always being thoughtful,
fearful, and sad, he took delight in nothing: For Studies, Exercises,
Traveling, Conversation with learned men, and all other things which before he
delighted in, were then wont to be a trouble or terror to him: Being affected
after this manner for two years, he was so much changed from himself, as tho he
were another man: In order to a Cure he consulted the most skilful Physicians
of Spain, France, Holland, and of late in England, and tried various methods of
Curing, tho scarce with any benefit. To wit, that melancholy Discrasy of the
Blood, first contracted by the distemper of the Air, continuing still, caused
Spirits of an acetous nature, as it were, to be supplied to the Animal
economy. In the first place I thought good to commend to this Person the
following Remedies.

Take Gerion's decoction of Senna (with Tamarinds half an ounce) four ounces,
Purging Syrup of Apples an ounce, Aqua mirabilis two drams, mix them, let him
take it with governance, repeating it within nine days: afer Purging let Bood
be drawn with Leeches, to three ounces.

Take of our Syrup of Steel six ounces, let a Spoonful be taken in the
morning, and atfive of the Clock, in three ounces of the following Liquor,
walking upon it for an hour or two.

Take leaves of Baum, Borrage, Buglosse, Burnet, Meadow-sweet, Hart's-tongue,
Watercresses, of each four handfuls, roots of Borrage half a pound,
Clove-gilliflowers, Marygold flowers of each three handfuls, the outward rinds
of eight Oranges and four Lemmons, Mace half an ounce, being sliced and bruised
pour to them of Whey made with Cider eight pounds, distill it with common
Organs.

Take Conserve of Clove-gilliflowers, the flowers of Betony and Borrage of each
one ounce and half, Pearl powdered two drams, red Coral prepared a dram and a
half, Species of the Confection of Hyacinth two drams, Syrup of Coral, and red
Poppyes of each what suffizes, make an opiat, let the quantity of a Chestnut be
taken every Evening, drinking after it two or three ounces of the water of
Cowslip flowers.

After sixteen or twenty days, the method of alteratives being changed,
instead of these let him take the following. Take powder of Ivory, Pearl, red
Coral prepared of each two drams, Roots of male Peony a dram and a half: Lignum
Aloes half a dram, Orange Tablets four ounces, a solution of Tragacanth made in
Baum-water what suffises, make Tablets weighing half a dram, let four be eaten
in the Morning, and at five of the Clock drinking after it a draught of Tea.

Take of the same Powder without Tablets half an ounce, Flowers of Sal
Armoniack, Salt of Coral of each a dram, with Chios Turpentine six drams, make
amass, let half a dram be taken Morning and Evening, drinking after it three
ounces of the distilled Water.

Let him feed only on Food of a good Juice, and of an easy Concoction, let him
drink small Ale, with the Leaves of Hart's-tongue infused in it, he may sip a
little now and then of Wine with Water in it, or of Cider. Let him lead his
Life continually occupied sometimes in easy Employs, sometimes in moderate
Exercises, or Recreations of various kinds.

So far of universal Melancholy, in which the diseased are in a manner
indifferently affected by any Object, so that in every place, by any Accidents
and Circumstances they are continually perplexed with a multitude of Thoughts,
with a Raving, Fear and Sadness.

A Melancholy is said to be Special, when the diseased have regard to some
particular thing, or to some certain kind of things: of which they in a manner
always think, and by reason of all the Powers of the Soul being continually
spent in this one thing, they live always pensive and sad: Moreover, they have
absurd and incongruous Notions, not only concerning that Object, but also
concerning many other Accidents and Subjects. In this affect the corporeal soul
being altered from its proper Species, assumes a certain new one, and being not
conformable to the rational Soul, or to the Body, or to it self, it undergoes a
certain Metamorphosis.

There are two kinds of occasions, from which a particular Melancholy chiefly
and most frequently arises; viz. first, if at any time some severe pressure of
an Evil present or at hand (whether it be true or imaginary) lies upon the
Soul: or secondly, if the privation of a good before obtained, or the despair
of that which is desired happen: In these opposite Cases the corporeal Soul
either being allured outwardly omits all domestic care of it self, or of the
Body, or of the rational Soul: or being inwardly compressed, it leaves or
perverts the offices both of the Reason and of the Vital and Animal Function.
It were a thing of an immense Labor to enumerate the various Cases and ways
of affecting in both kinds; among the mighty store of them, those which being
of greatest moment seem chiefly to require a physical help, are a furious Love,
Jealousy, Superstition, despair of eternal Salvation, the imaginary
Metamorphosis of the Body, or of its Parts, or the fantastical Goods or Evils
of Fortune; we shall speak briefly of each of these.

It is a vulgar and most common observation, that if any one once being taken
with the Aspect and Conversation of a Woman, begins inwardly to be lovesick
for her, and to desire her earnestly, and for his most devoted affection gets
nothing but denials and Contempt, unless he be upheld by a very strong Reason,
or being seized by other affections, be turned another way, as it were, there
is great danger lest he fall into a Love-melancholy; with which Passion if he
happen to be affected, presently he seems transformed from himself into a
living Statue, as it were, he thinks or speaks of nothing but his Mistress; he
seeks to put himself upon any of the greatest dangers of Life and Fortune for
her sake; mean while he does not only neglect the care of Domestic or Public
Concerns, and even of his own Salvation, but, being frustrated of his Desire,
often lays violent hands on himself; or if he be content to live and survive,
pining away both in Body and Mind, he almost deposes man; for the use of right
Reason being lost, omitting Meat, Drink, and Sleep, and the other necessary
offices of Life, he yields up himself wholly to sighing and sobbing, and to a
mournful habit and gesture of Body.

If we enquire into the reason of this affect, we easily find, that the
Corporeal Soul of Man being obnxious to violent Passions, when it is wholly
carried forth into an Object most dear to it, viz. a Woman beloved, and is not
able to get and embrace her, it is delighted, or contents it self with naught
besides, also paying no obedience to the Rational Soul, it wholly grows deaf,
and does not hear its Dictates; and crowding the Imagination only with Tragical
Notions, it dulls the edge of the Understanding. Moreover, in as much as the
Praecordia (a plentiful afflux of Spirits be ing denied to them) fail as to
their Motions, the Blood heaped together in the Sinus's of the Heart, and apt
to stagnate, causes there a great heaviness and oppression, and consequently
Sighs and Groans; mean while the Face and outward Members, by reason of the
afflux of Blood and Spirits withdrawn from them, grow pale and languish: hence
it is commonly said of Desperate Lovers, that their Heart is broken; to wit, in
as much as this Muscle being not vigorously enough actuated with the Animal
Spirit, vibrates slowly and weakly, and does no longer send forth the Blood
with vigor into all the Parts.

Such disorder of the animal Function as an excessive Love brings concerning
the Acquisition of its Object, the like in a manner is brought by Jealousy
concerning the keeping of the same when gotten: so that always (viz. both in
the Fruition and in the Desire)

Res est solliciti plena Timoris Amor. That Soul, if it be not secure of its
most dear prey, presently growing troubled, casts a Cloud and Darkness on its
own sereness: and afterward, being infected with a bilous Tincture, every
Object seems to it tinged of a yellow color: for as a ferment of the Stomach
grown sharp perverts all things taken into it into its own Nature, so the
affect of jealousy once risen, turns all Accidents and Circumstances to a food
for its own venom: and since in this affect the sensitive Soul being bent awry
as it were, does not become conformable to its Body, therefore the economy of
the Animal, Vital, and vegetative Functions, being depraved, the jealous Man
raves and pines away.

Superstition and despair of eternal Salvation are wont to imprint almost the
like affects of Melancholy on the sensitive Soul, the Blood, and the Body, as
Love and Jealousy, but somewhat after a differing way of affecting; for in
those the Object whose acquisition or loss is in danger, is wholly immaterial,
and its affect being first conceived by the Rational Soul, is imprinted on the
other Corporeal Soul; in the prosecution of which, if this readily obeys, then
no disturbance of the mind of Man arises; but if the Corporeal Soul showing a
reluctance, (as it often falls out) the Rational still presses with advice and
threats, presently that growing troubled, stirs the Blood and Spirits in a
disorderly manner, opposes the Corporeal goods and delights to the Spiritual,
presented by the Understanding, and endeavors to draw the man to its side. And
as thus there is a continual bickering between the two souls, and sometimes the
Will is superior, sometimes the Sensitive appetite prevails; at length a Court
of Conscience is set up by the Mind, where every act is narrowly examined; By
reason of these frequent variances of the Souls, the Animnal Spirits, as being
too much, and almost continually exercised, being often commanded, and as it
were distracted, now this way and now that way, at length fall somewhat from
their vigor and good disposition, and at last being become fixed and
melancholic, in as much as they are withheld from their wonted Expansion,
they form bye and unusual Tracts in the Brain, and so bring a Delirium with a
mighty Fear and Sadness; in those kinds of affects the corporeal Soul being
violently drawn away as it were, both separates from the Body, and being
modified according to the character of the Idaea imprinted, is wont to assume a
new Species either Angelical or Diabolical; mean while the Understanding, for
as much as the Imagination suggests to it only disorderly and monstrous
Notions, is wholly perverted from the use of right Reason.

After a like manner of affecting as this, it happens that some melancholy
Persons undergo imaginary Metamorphoses either as to their Fortunes or their
Bodies. viz. Whilst one imagines himself, and acts a Prince, another a Beggar:
another believes himself to have a Body of Glass, and another thinks himself a
Dog or a Wolf, or some other Monster; for after that the corporeal Soul being
affected with a long continued melancholy, the Mind being blinded, is wholly
fallen both from it self and the Body, she affects a new species or Condition,
and, as much as in her lies, really assumes it.

CHAP. XI. Instructions and Prescripts for curing Madness, or the Mania.
AFter Melancholy, it remains for us to treat of Mdness, which is so far allied
to the other, that these affect often change turns, and each passes into the
other; for A melancholy disposition growing worse brings a Fury, adn a Fury
coming to abate, often ends in a melancholy disposition.

Since Madness, raised withot a Fever, and with ^^^ighty annoyance of the
animal Function, is wont to be continual and long-lasting, its next and
immediate subject must be the animal Spirits; which being affected not per
consensum, nor by another thing forcibly moving them, but per se, and
habitually, fall from their proper and genuine Dissposition, viz.
salino-spirituous, into a salino-sulphureous nature, resembling Aqua Stygia, as
we have hinted before: and consequently they exert none but disorderly Actions,
and continue so acting amiss for a long time: to this their Fault happily the
Brain, the Blood, or other parts contribute something, but the Spirits
themselves are first, and chiefly in the fault.

Concerning Maniacal Persons we must observe, that thief three things are in a
manner common to them all, viz. First, that their Fancies or Imaginations are
perpetually occupied with the raging of impetuous Thoughts, so that mumbling to
themselves, or crying out and yelling, they talk aloud various things both Day
and Night. Secondly, that their Motions, or Conceptions are either incongruous,
or are represented under a false or erroneous Species to them. Thirdly, that
with their raving a Boldness and Fury are most commonly joined, contrary to
what it is in melancholy Persons, who are always astected with a Fear and
Sadness.

The Depravation or maniacal Disposition of the animal Spirits, together with
the Juice irrigating the Brain, is wont to arise after various manners, and for
diverse causes; but for the most part that affect (as we have observed in
Melancholy) begins either from the Spirits themselves, or from the Blood.

1. A madness beginning from the Spirits, sometimes arises from a solemn
evident cause, as from a violent Passion, sometimes also it proceeds from a
Procatarxis laid in the Brain, as when it happens upon Melancholy or a Frensy;
Let us confer a little the Cases, Reasons, and the various ways of the coming
to pass of both.

1. As to the former, when a vehement Passion turns any one from his right
mind, that so happens to be done either because the Animal Spirits are too much
cast down, and driven into confusion, or because they are raised above measure,
and endeavor to expand themselves beyond their Sphere.

1. The Spirits are wont to be cast down by a violent and terrible Passion; so
it many times happens, that some upon areal or imaginary seeing of a Ghost,
presently being struch with a pannick terour, fall into a perpetual madness.
Moreover, some, by reason of some great disgrace, or reproach, others by reason
of the hope of an excessive Love being frustrated on a sudden and unexpectedly,
and others by reason of Vows rashly broken, and their Conscience being
violated, first being mightily disturbed in Mind, become shortly after mad: the
reason whereof is, that the animal spirits being driven out of their ranks and
usual Passages, and put in a Confusion, frame new and bye ways for themselves,
which entering, they presently form delirous Phantasms: mean while the sline
Partcles of the nervous Juice fall from their volatility, the spirituous being
depressed, and coming to flow, take to them the sulphurous Corpuscles sent
from the Blood into the Brain, being then weak and open; whence this Liquour
presently becomes most sharp like Aqua fortis, and the animal Spirits
exorbitant, and very much troubled.

Secondly, the animal Spirits, sometimes, whilst they are raised too much,
almost after the like manner, bring both to themselves, and the nervous Juice,
a Disposition to Madness; hence Ambition, Pride and Emulation have made some
run and; the reason whereof is, that whilst the coproreal Soul, swelling
through the Opinion and Pride of its own excellency, raises and endeavors to
expand it self every way as far as may be beyond the limits of the Body, the
animal Spirits tumultuarily called into the Brian, are not able to be contained
within their wonted Treacts, but being there refracted, and diversely reflected
by reason of their too great exertion, are forced into new and wholly devious
Tracts; wherefore, both themselves being disturbed from the course of their
proper Emanation, and the nervous Liquour, soon acquire a sharp and irritating
disposition, and consequently a madness ensues.

So far of Madness raised by reason of a solemn evident cause alone: but this
disease also arises often by reason of a Procatarxis praeexisting in the Brain,
and chiefly by reason of a preceding Melancholy or Phrensy: in that the animal
Spirits being exalted a little too much with the nervous Juice, and in this
being a little too much depressed, acquire the Disposition to madness.

2. The Disposition to madness no less frequently has its roots in the mass of
Blood, and at length is produced into act, to wit, when the Blood being
mightily depraved, and nitrosulphureous, either perverts the nervous Liquour
together with the animal Spirits, or furnishes such as are evil, which kind of
taint of the Blood is eiter hereditary or acquired.

First, its a common observation, that men born of Parents that are sometimes
wont to be mad, will be obnoxious to the same disease: and tho often they have
lived prudently and soberly above thirty or forty years, yet afterward without
any occasion or evident cause will fall mad. The reason whereof is, that the
Blood at that time being fallen from its due crasis by degrees to be
nitrosulphureous, furnishes the Brain with animal Spirits, and a nervous Juice
of a most sharp Nature. We heave formerly shown that the Elementary Particles
in our Body persist during Life, separately from those that are scondary,
supplied by Nutrition, and that they have times of their Crudity, Maturity, and
Decay: wherefore we judge also, that the morbid Seminia come to a ripeness also
according to the periods of ages: Moreover, we observe, that often these mobid
Fruits being ripend, continue a good while, or during Life, and that sometimes
they wither away again as it were of their own accord, and then that afterward,
after some tract of time, new Fruits spring forth again from the miasm left
behind, and rises by degrees to their height; wherefore an hereditary Madness
sometimes is continual, sometimes interrmittent, and its Fits sometimes are
wont to return after shorter intervals, sometimes after longer.

2. As the Procatarxis of the Mania, sticking in the Blood, is often innate or
originally in it, so the same sometimes is engendered by degrees, either by an
ill form of diet, or by a suppression of solemn Evacuations, by reason of a
precedent Fever, or for other causes, and at length being brought to a
maturity, breaks forth into a madness. It Is usual in a great dearth for certain
poor People who are forced to love only on disagreeing Food, or such as is of
an ill digestion, at first to become sad, with a staring and wan aspect, and in
a short time after to turn mad: the Flux of the Hemorrhoids or Menses being
restrained, or malignant Ulcers suppressed, dispose toward this Disease.
Moreover, those who originally or acquiredly are of an eager Temperament, an
extravagant Behavior, and an earnest Countenance, because of being nigh to a
nitrosulphureous Disposition of the Blood, are in danger of falling mad upon
some strong evident cause.

3. Venomous Ferments insinuated into the Blood and nervous Juice, as
especially from the biting of Animals that are mad, or by the taking of some
venomous things, are wont to cause Madness. Concerning the reason of the
former, we have elsewhere proposed our Conjectures. Of late a noble Lady, and
worthy of Credit, related to me of her own Knowledge, that a certain Gentleman
after having eaten at Dinner the tender Leaves of Wolf-bane in a Sallet with
other Herbs, found himself ill in the Evening, and complaining of a great
agitation and restlessness of his Blood and Spirits, entreated his Friends that
a Surgeon might be called to open a Vein, and said that otherwise he should
presently run mad: which indeed happned as he said, for, before he could be let
blood, falling mad, he dyed within the space of twenty four hours; which deadly
affect happened so on a sudden, in as much as the Poison did not only pervert
both the Blood and animal Spirits as to their Crasis, but by its malign Ferment
presently subverted them utterly.

The reason why mad Persons are bold and very confident, so that they fly no
dangers, and set upon the most difficult of things, is, that the animal Spirits
being very exorbitant, and vehemently moved, both fortify the Imagination,
that no Object seems greater or more terrible to it than usual, and actuate the
Praecordia with Vigor, so that they strongly and swiftly convery the Blood,
and briskly drive it into the outmost bounds of the Body. In this affect the
Soul strives to outgoe, and to springit self as it were beyond the
circumference of the Body, and so making an effort every way, it bears it self
undaunted against any incursions of exterior things.

2. The Reason why mad Persons are strong to a miracle, is, that Particles as
it were nitrosulphureous, or otherwise very sharp, or as it were Stygian, ar
contained in their Blood and nervous Juice, whence the animal Spirits excel in
a stupendous and incredible elastick, or explosive force, far above the natural.

3. It is to be observed, that mad Persons are hardly ever wearied, for tho by
raging and striving they strongly exercise their Limbs for many days and
Nights, and in the mean while live without eating and sleeping, they scarce at
all faulter, nor desist from their struggling through a failure of Strength;
which doubless so happens, for as much as the animal Spirits, tho very movable
and elastick, yet are not volatile and easily dissipable, but by reason of the
saline Particles depressed from their volatility into a flowing state, and
being combined with the sulphurous ones, become firm and fixed, and therefore
hold out veryling in their Activity.

4. Almost for the same reason, many Persons, how much soever they suffer or
are afflicted, are not hurt: but endure Cold, Heat, Watchings, Fastings,
Stripes and Wounds, without any sensible damage, because the Spirits being
strong and fixed, do not faulter nor fly away. Moreover, the Blood having got a
nitrosulphureous dyscrasy, is incapable of any other change, wherefore, tho
insensible transpiration be stopped, and other solemn evacuations are suppressed,
or supplies of te nutritive Juice are denied, neither a Catarrh, nor Fever,
nor an Atrophia, or Cacochymia lightly ensue upon Madness, for in this affect,
tho the Particles of the Blood are grown very turgid, yet by reason of the
store of Salt, they do not take to a feverish Flame.

As to the prognostic of Madness, since the affected are never obnoxious to a
Fever, nor to oter Diseases besides, nor are easily hurt by outward Accidents,
it is not a mortal Disease of it self: but is very of Cure, because a great
alteration is to be made in the Blood and Spirits, and the Diseased are
refractory to any method of Cure, being Enemies both to the Physicians, and
themselves.

If the Madness be inveterate or hereditary, or be caused by the bite of a mad
Dog, it admits of a perfect Cure with difficulty, or not at all; that which is
raised through some occasion, whether it be from an evident cause alone, or
comes upon a Fever, also on which the Itch, Small Pox, Hemorrhoids, or Varix's
happen, is more easily Cured.

Those that are obnoxious to this Disease at times, are very much in danger
about the Summer Solstice, or in the Dog days; also in great changes of the
Air, as when long colds or heats are changed into opposite constitutions of the
Heavens.

Since there are two kinds of Madness, to with, a continual and intermittent
one; the method of Curing also ought to be twofold.

1. The Therapeutick method to be used in a continual Mania, suggests to us the
three primary Indications so vulgarly known: viz. the first Curatory, which,
regarding the Disease if self, endeavors to correct or appease the furies and
exorbitancies of the Aniaml Spirits: The second preservatory, which, levelling
at the causes of the Disease, undertakes to remove or amend the sharp and
nitrosulphureous Dyserasies of the Blood and the Nervous juice, and the Stygian
disposition, as it were, of the Spirit. The third Vital, which directs such a
way of Diet and resumptive nourishment, that both the nutritive and vital
functions may be able to be carried on and maintained as is barely necessary in
this Disease.

The first Indication, viz. Curatory, requires Discipline, viz. threats,
bindings, or stripes, as well as Physic; and therefore the mad Person, being
put into a House fit for that purpose, let him be so managed both by the
Physician, and prudent attendants, that he be kept in a manner always in his
due behavior, and in meet gestures and motions, either by advice, chiding, or
by punishments now and then inflicted on him; and indeed there is nothing more
efficacious or necessary for curing mad Persons, than that they always dread
and stand in awe of certain Tortures, as it were; for by this means the
Corporeal Soul, being somewhat deprest and restrained, is forced to remit of
its haughtiness and exorbitancy; and therefore afterward grows mild by degrees,
and is reduced to order. Wherefore mad men are sometimes sooner and more
certainly cured by punishments and tortures, in a pent up room, than by
Physic, or Medicines.

But withal, such a course of Physic also ought to be used, which may restrain
and bring down the haughtiness of the Corporeal Soul: Wherefore in this Disease
Blooding, Vomitories and Catharticks, how strong soever they are, and given at
rovers and boldly, very often do good. Which indeed manisestly apperars,
because Empyricks, only with this kind of Physic, together with governanace,
and a severe discipline, often successfully cure Madmen. Tho this rough way of
handling, does not so well agree with all mad persons, but chiefly with such as
are raving mad, oters being more remissly mad, are often cured by fair usage
and gentle Medicines.

But in most mad persons, it is both the common voice and general practice to
bleed plentifully about the beginning of the Disease; and indeed it will be
good now and then to repeat it as far as the strength will bear, and sometimes
to perform the operation in the Arm, sometimes in the Jugular Vein, Forehead,
or Foot; and sometimes to open the Hemorrhoid Vessels by Leeches: For these
evacuations being seasonably made, both the exorbitancies of the Spirits, and
te haughtiness of the Soul are excellently suppressed; and likewise the
Dyscrasies of the Blood are corrected, in regard that a new and more mild
springs up in the place of that which was taken away, being sharp and corrosive.

That Vomits also do great good in curing mad persons, it is past even into a
Proverb, so that all Hellebore, nay, all Anticyra is assigned to them: After
what manner Emeticks often do good in Cephalic Diseases, we have shown before:
Quacks in this case giving a large dose of Stibium, tho it be rashly and
dangerously, yet have often success. In truth, Chemical things best agree here,
both because they move more powerful, and because the Disased may be deceived
more easily by them.

Take sulphur of Antimony from eight grains to ten, Cream of Tartar half a
scruple, mix them, by grinding them together, make a Powder, let it be given in
a spoonful of Panada, or if it must be given craftily, and the Person not
knowing of it, let it be put in a crust of white Bread, to be taken in Broth
or Milk: let this vomitory be frequently repeated, viz. once within four days.

Take Mercurius Vitae six or seven grains, make a Powder, let it be given after
the same manner. The Emetick Tartar of Mynsicht, Hercules, Bovii, and other
various preparations of Mercury, may begiven after the sme manner. Aurum Vitae,
or the Solar, and also the Lunar precipitate are accounted by Chemists
specific Remedies against against Madness, and indeed Mercurial Medicines, in
as much as they work by Vomit, and Seige, and often also by Sweat, Urine, or
Salivation, prove egregiously beneficial: a copious Spitting, and of long
continuance has perfectly cru'd some mad persons.

Strong Pruges (where the strength and constitution will bear them) in as much
as they depress the exorbitances of the Blood and spirits, and much evacuate
the emunctories for receiving the recrements of the Rlood and Nervous juice,
often give relief also in this Disease. For this use, preparations of black
Hellebore, as especially its extract, and the Wine of the infusion of its
Fibers, or the pap of an Apple boiled with the Roots of it sticking in it, are
very much commended.

Take extract of black Hellebore, Calamelanos, of each a scruple; make; a
Bolus.

Take Calamelanos a scruple, Diagridium from twelve grains to fifteen, make a
Powder.

Take Confectio Hamec, or the Electuary of the Juice of Roses from half an
ounce to six drams, let it be given in Broth.

Take Gereons Decoction of Senna, or the Decoction of Epithymum (with two drams
of the roots of Black Hellebore) six ounces, make a draught.

The Pulvis Diasennae two drams, let it be taken in Whey.

In the mean while that these things are done, let the preservatory Indication
take care of the Cause of the Disease. Wherefore with these frequent Purges and
Bloodings let alterig Remedies be interlac'd, for tempering the Blood and
nervous Juice, and for reducing them to their due Crases; if happily the
diseased, being obsequious and tractable, do not refuse to take such things
methodically.

Take crystal Mineral, or Nitre excellently purified two ounces, Pearl powdered
two drams, Sugar Candy two drams and a half, Camphire half a Scruple, let them
all be ground into a subtle Powder; let two drams of this be put in a
Glass-bottle holding a quart, with Fountain Water, or small or mild Beer for
ordinary Drink, which may be given at pleasure.

Let boiling Whey be poured to the Flowers of Violets or Nymphea, after an
infusion for two hours let it be drank off plentifully: Spaw-waters also drank
regularly and in a plentiful manner, are proper for mad Persons.

Take fresh and tender tops of Borrage and Bugloss of each four handfuls, three
mash'd Apples, Sal Prunella two drams, Sugar half an ounce, being bruised
together, pour to them three pounds of Rountain-water, express it strongly, let
half a pound be taken thrice a day or oftener.

Take Conserve of the Flowers of Borrage and Violets of each three drams,.
Confection of Hyacinth, Alchermes of each two drams, Coral prepared a dram and
a half, Pearl powdered a dram, Salt of Coral a dram, Syrup of red Poppyes what
suffices, make an Electuary, wherefore let two drams be taken twice or thrice a
day drinking after it of the following Liquour four ounces.

Take Water of Nymphea, Borrage, Bugloss, black Cherryes, of each four ounces,
of red Poppyes six ounces, red Rose Water two ounces, Camphire tied in a
Nodulus and hung in a Glass half a dram, Syrup of Coral an ounce and a half,
mix them, make a Julep.

Take the yellow Flowers of a Willow what suffises, distill them with common
Organs, repeat the distillation, pouring the Water on fresh Flowers by three
Cohobations, let it be given to four ounces twice or thrice a day, sweetning it
with Syrup of Nymphaea.

Take leaves of the Willow, Meadow-sweet, Burnet, Borrage, Baum, of each six
handfuls, Flowers of Nymphaea, tops of St. John's Wort of each four handfuls,
Camphire powdered three drams, all being sliced together pour to them of fresh
Milk eight pounds, distill it with common Organs.

Let Sheeps Brains be distilled with milk, and let the Water be given to three
or four ounces, thrice a day.

Moreover, let specific Remedies be applied to use, of which kind the
Decoction of Pimpernell with a purple Flower is famous, also the tops of St.
John's Wort, and other Decoctions, Opiats, and powders against Madness, well
known by all famous Empiricks.

As to the cure of Madness caused by the biting of venomous or mad Animals,
since it is in a manner only Empirial, and vulgarly known, there is no need for
us to discourse of it in this place, we having also proposed our Conjectures
concerning it elsewhere: Again, the Decoction or infusion of Apples either
crude or boiled in fountain Water; the Liquour Tea, Emulsions, with many other
things, forms of which we have given in the cure of Melancholy, are proper in
this case.

Moreover, many other helps besides Blooding are wont to be afforded from
Cbirurgery for curing this Disease: Cupping-glasses, with a Scarification often
do good; Vesicatories, Cauteries, both actual and potential, are commended by
many. Some commend Arteriotomy, others trepanning, and others Salivation: But
these kinds of administrations, besides that they are of a doubtful effect,
cannot easily, and searce with safety, come in practice, by reason of the
intractable disposition of the Diseased. Wherefore it would be superfluous here
to enquire into the reasons of the relief or Cure to be expected from those
things. It is good sometimes, the Head being shaved, to apply the warm Lungs of
a Lamb or Sheep, and other fomentations to the Sinciput, and now and then to
change them. But these Epithemes also, in regard they cannot be methodically
applied and repeated to the Diseased, who admit them with reluctance, often do
more hury than good.

30. The Vital Indication directs how mad persons ought to be handled, as to
their Government, Diet and Sleep. In this Disease, otherwise than in many
others, there is no need of restoring: for neither ought the strength to be
restored with Resumptives, nor the Spirits with Cordials; but on the contrary,
a suppression, or as it were, a certain extlnction is to be used to both, being
too exorbitant of themselves, resembling a flame, as it were, burning above
measure: Therefore let the Diet be thin and not delicate, the clothing course,
the lodging hard, the dealing with them severe and rigid. But Sleep, because it
is very necessary, if it be wholly wanting, ought sometimes to be caused by
giving Remedies; for which end, the Hypnotick Medicines prescribed before for
Melancholy, are proper also in this disease, those who have an inveterate
habitual Madness are seldom put to a Physical cure, but being committed to
Hospitals for mad Persons, by the ordinary discipline of that Place, either
return at length to themselves, or are kept there from doing hurt to themselves
or others.

It is not needful to illustrate the nature of this Disease with Histories and
Examples, and to set forth many Types of it; but rather address your selves to
the Hospitals of mad People, where, not withour a great admiration, you may
behold as it were a new and monstrous Generation of Men, viz. contrary to such
as are rational, and as it were our Antipodes; who, if they could all be
gathered together into one place, and all the Fools and senseless Persons be
joined with them, I know not whether they would not make an equal division of
the whole Earth with the sober and prudent.

So far of the cure of a continual Madness. But the intermittent has perfectly
lucid intervals, in which the diseased return to a sound Mind, or the Fury only
ceases, the Delirium still remaining, so that the affected become gentle and
tractable: yet continuing still to err as to their Imagination and Judgment,
they speak and do a great many absurd or incongruous things, and afterward
become mad again at times.

The remedy of both these affects, as to the curatory Indication, is the same
as in a continual Madness, that it will not be needful to fet down here any
other Method or Medicines: but as to what regards the Prophylaxis, or
preservatory Indicatin, to wit, whereby the way of curing to be used out of the
Fits for preventing or lessenging them is ordered, in which the Fury only
intermits, the Delirium remaining, the very same physical Method and Remedies,
which we have prescribed for removing the Procatarxis of Melancholy are proper.
pa In a madness which intermits perfectly, as to all smptoms; at the most fit
seasons, to wit, Spring and Fall, solemn courses of Physic ought to be entered
upon; and also there is always need of a care and governance of the Diseased;
both that as to his diet, and way of Life, lie be kept always in an even and
moderate Temper; and that as soon as the signs of an imminent Fit appear,
blooding and purging being presently used, its access be kept off.

Therefore, at the approach of the Equinoxes, let Blood be drawn from the Arm,
and then after seven, or eight days from the Hemorrhoid Veins by Leeches: Let
Purges and Vomits by due intervals be given twice or thrice: moreover on
intermitting days, let altering Remedies be orderly taken at physical Hours:
forms of these are delivered both in this Chapter and in the foregoing for the
cure of Melancholy: let the diet be thin and of good digestion; as to Sleep,
Motion, and other non-natural things, let all be maderate: If at any time
aperson seems to be threatened with an access of Madness, constantly before the
Summer solstice, let blooding with vomiting, and a thin diet be used.

CHAP. IX. Instructions and Prescripts for the cure of Stupidity or Folly.
STuidity or Folly, tho it chiefly belongs to the rational Soul, and signifies
the defect of the Undertanding and Judgment, nevertheless it is not improperly
placed among the Diseases of the Head, or of the Brain; to wit, in as much as
that Eclips of the superior Soul proceeds from the Imagination and Memory
injured; and the failings of thofe depend on the saults of the animal Spirits
and of the Brain it self.

1. As to the Animal Spirits, how they ought to be qualified of their proper
and genuine Nature, and what they are by reason of a preternatural dispositio
in the Frensy, Melancholy, and Madness we have sufficiently declared; but
besides, sometimes the animal Spirits being in a manner destitute of active
Particles become as it were dead and essaete, to wit, whereas the spirituous
Particles ought to predominate and gather to them the saline volatiz'd; in a
Stupidity as well both these as the sulphurous, being too much depressed, are
almost drowned and overwhelmed in such as are watery and earthy.

2. As to the fault of the Brain, first, its a vulgar Observation that the Wit
and towardly Disposition depends somewhat on the greatness and figure of the
Head, and consequently of its Brain, for as to its bulk, it is a Proverb, that
too little or too much Brain argues Folly: And tho this does not always happen
so, yet it does frequently, the reason of which is, that in a little Brain only
a few Spirits are engendered and exercised: and a great Brain, consisting for
the most part of a course texture, is not fit for any acuteness of Wit.

Secondly, the genuine and best figure of the Brain ought to be globous, to
wit, for this end, that the Spirits may be diffused with an even efflux from
the midst of it on every side to its circumference, and may be thence retorted
every where with equal Agles of Reflections, but those who have a flat Head, or
too copped, or otherwise disproportionate, for the most part have some notable
failing in the animal Faculty.

3. The Substance of the Brain ought to be well tempered and of a laudable
texture, nor only as to the qualities of Heat and cold, drought and moisture;
but is it Constitution should be sublte and aereal, consistig of a plenty of
volatile Salt and Spirit, with a moderate proportion of the other things, that
the Spirits may readily pass the whole, and frame Tracts for themsnlves; and
withal it should be indifferently firm and compact, that the Tracts and
Passages may remain when made, nor presently be defaced by the subsiding of
Parts too tender. But in Persons that are stupid we may imagine, sometimes an
excess of some manifest quality in the Brain, as chiefly of moisture and cold,
for which reason Children and aged Persons are often wont to be affected with a
Dullness of the Senses; sometimes a Texture too gross and earthy, so that the
Spirits cannot easily irradiate it, or make Tracts for themselves. To this
gross Texture of the Brain some, born of Rusticks, are frequently obnoxious, so
that in some Families, looking back upon many Generations, you will scarce find
one wise or witty Man.

4. Sometimes the evil conformation of the Brain as to its Pores and Passages,
acquired by reason of some Disorders, is the cause that the animal Function is
not duly performed: for sometimes these Pores are either wanting, or
perverted, that the animal Spirits cannot duly operate.

So far of the conjunct Causes of Folly, as to the procatarctick and evident
Causes, there are many Occasions by reason of which the foresaid blemishes are
brought on the Brain, or Spirits, or both of them.

For first, Stupidity is sometimes originary, or born with a man; and so either
it is hereditary, as when Fools beget Fools, the same effaete Particles
concurring to frame the Animal Organs in the Son which were in the Father; or
the Connate Stupidity is accidental, as it were, to wit, it frequently happens
that wise and mighty ingenious men beget mere Sots, which sometimes so falls
out for these reasons, either that the Parents spend their Spirits in Study and
too much thinking, or weaken and enervate the Body through intemperance,
luxury, and ill living: Whereas we see in other Animals, as in a good breed of
Horses and Cocks, that their young ones do certainly patrizare, so that
presently they are sold at a great rate, their Virtues, in regard they are not
broken by a disorderly and preternatural way of living, descending in a long
series to their posterity.

Secondly, there are many evident causes, by which Stupidity is brought on such
as are originally sound: Some at first being witty and ingenious, in their
declining years grow dull and doltish; on the contrary, some at first being
dull and incapable of Learning, as they grow further in years, become very
witty.

Thirdly, sometimes a great wound, or concussion of the Head, especially which
happens by falling headlong from an high place, brings a prejudice and weakness
to the animal faculty, dulling the understanding.

Fourthly, frequent drunkenness and surfeiting, especially if men sleep
presently on eating and drinking, very much weaken the understandings of some,
and impair the use of Reason; as a frequent use of opiats has shrewdly blunted
the edge of the understanding of others.

Fifthly, violent and sudden Passions, such chiefly as an exceeding great
terror coming unawares, or an extreme sadness, have rendered some doltish.

Sixthly, We may observe, that some Men by reason of great Diseases of the
Brain have turned Fools: this frequently happens in a severe and long continued
Epilepsie; in as much as this affect possessing the Meditullia of the Brain,
perverts, and so stuffs with Feculencies, and fills all the Pores and Passages
by reason of the Spirits there frequently and vehemently exploded, that the
Tracts of the Spirits being close shut, the Acts of the inward Senses and
Motions are hindered: Moreover, I have observed Stupidity to accompany and
precede the Palsy in many, to wit, the same matter which in the Corpus
Striatum brings a Resolution, being gathered together in the Corpus Callosum,
if it does not bring an Apoplexy or Carus, often causes Folly.

There are many differences of this Disease, and first, we use to destinguish
betwixt Folly and Stupidity; that those who are affected with the former,
apprehend simple things well and quick enough, and keep them fast in Memory,
but for want of Judgment, ill compound, or divie Notions, and far worse infer
one thing from another: Moreover, by fooling, and doing, and speaking a great
many things unhappily or ridiculously, they move Laughter in the Standers by:
on the contrary, those that are stupid by reason of the defects of the
Imagination, Memory, and Judgment, neither apprehend well, nor nimbly, nor
argue well: moreover, they do not behave themselves as the former, in making
Sports and Gestures, but blockishly and unfeatly, and as it were, like Apes,
and consequently the simplicity of these is more, who so carry their Disease in
their Countenance and Gesture. In Folly, it seems that the animal Spirits being
somewhat nimble, but unstedfast, and having only short and oblique Tracts, do
not pass the Brain with an even and constant irradiation, but making excursions
this way and that after a desultory manner, kexercise only slight or ridiculous
Acts of animal Functions: but in Stupidity, the Spirits of their own nature
being dull and obtuse, and residing in a gross and unpervious Brain, are not
able to exert themselves for duly performing the Offices of the animal economy.

There are many degrees of stupidity, for some Persons are accounted unfit as
to the comprehension of all things, others only as to some: some being wholly
unfit for Learning, and the liberal Sciences, are apt enough to mechanical
Arts: others, tho incapable of both these, yet readily comprehend Apriculture,
and Country Affairs: others, being incapable in a manner of all business, can
be taught only those things that regard eating and drinking, and the common way
of living, others being mere Dolts, scarce understand any thing as all, or do
any thing with Knowledge.

As to the Prognostic, Stupidity contracted by birth, or hereditary, or
happening through some unknown causes, if it continues to the time of Puberty, is
scarce ever cured: tho sometimes it happens that little Children, at first
dull, and almost senseless, when the Crases of the Brain and Spirits come
afterward to a maturation, become ingenious, and apt enough to Iearn.

The Disease raised through some sole evident Cause, as by a hurt of the Head,
or a violent Passion, also happening upon an inveterate Epilepsy, if it persevers
some time, is afterward incurable.

That, which ensuing upon other sleepy Affects, depends chiefly on the hurt of
the Memory, sometimes those affects being cured, vanishes of its own accord: if
at any time therefore in these Cases the cure of Stupidity is ordered, in a
manner the same method of healing and Remedies which we have prescribed for the
preservatory indication of the Lethargy will be proper here: whereof the chief
intents must be, that the animal Spirits being free from any Deadness and
Stupefaction, make Pores and Passages within the translucid Brain, and duly
expand themselves in them.

Sometimes a Fever has cured some Fools and stupid Persons, and has rendered
them more acute, Huartus relates, that a certain Fool in the Court of Corduba,
being affected with a malignant Fever, arrived in the height of the Disease to
so great an acuteness of Judgment and Discretion, that he put the whole Court
in Admiration, and for the whole remainder of his Life continued a very prudent
Person: and we have known a certain Person of a dull, and indeed Boeotian
Understanding, who raving in a Fever, was very quick at breaking smart Jests,
and seasoned with much Salt: the Reason of which things seems to be, that the
Febrile heat sometimes rarefies and disperses the mist investing the Brain.

Therefore, as to the cure of this Disease, Stupidity, whether innate, or
acquired (if it be not a plain senselesness, and doltishness incapable of all
Erudition) tho it be not usually cured, yet it is wont to be amended. Wherefore
the cares both of a Physician and Tutor must be used for polishing somewhat the
Understanding of such as are so affected, and that being brought to the use of
at least some little Reason, they may be exempted from the rank of Brutes.

For this end, because Bards, or such as are very blockish, learn not the
Notions of things more readily than Children their A. B. C. therefore they are
to be instructed in all things by an assiduous and very diligent Master, and
the same things are to be incultated again and again; For by this means the
Spirits, tho dull and torpid, will in some measure be actuated by perpetual
Exercise; and being continually stirred up, will make at length for their
Expansion some Tracts or Passages, tho imperfect, in the Brain, how gross
soever. For the better and more easy effecting of these things, physical
Remedies also ought to be given for purifying and volatizing the Blood and
nervous Liquour, together with the animal Spirits; and also for clarifying the
Brain, and rendering it as it were diaphanous.

For purifying the Blood, let a gentle purge sometimes, and letting blood in a
small quantity, if the strength will bear it, frequently be used; for the same
pursose, and likewise for deriving Faeculencies from the Brain, Issues are
proper in the Arm, or in the Leg, or together in both: in gross Bodies, and
such as have a moist Brain, it is good sometimes to cut two by the Shoulder
blades. Moreover, it is on this account that some mightily extol trepanning,
(to wit, whereby the Brain may transpire and evaporate the more freely) let the
diet belight and attenuating, the Habitation in a free and dry Air; the Sleep
moderate.

After that these things have been used for some time, and in a solemn manner,
if there be found no change, it will be in vain to waste any more physical Oil
and Labor; but if after the use of those things, signs of benefit, or some
hope appear, sometimes it seems proper to add altering Remedies, to be taken
daily at Physical hours for a long time: Forms of these may be taken from our
curatory part of Physic before delivered for removing the Procatarxes of most
Cephalic Diseases: Moreover, I have thought good to add here besides some
Magistral Receipts which particularly regard this case.

Take Spirit of Armoniack succinated six drams, give from fifteen drops to
twenty in the Evening, and early in the Morning in three spoonfuls of the
following distilled water, drinking after it seven spoonfuls of the same.

Take fresh leaves of mistletoe growing on Apple Trees six handfuls, Sage,
Rosemary, Savory, Wild-time, Calamint, Pennyroyal, Marjoyam, the greater
Rochet, of each four handfuls, roots of Angelica, Master-wort, of each six
ounces, Zedoary, the lesser Galingal, Calamus Aromaticus, Winters bark of each
two ounces; Cloves, Nutinegs, Mace, Cinnamon, Ginger of each an ounce; Cubebs,
Cardamums, Grains of Paradise of each six drams; all being sliced small and
bruised, pour to them of the best Canary wine twelve pounds, let them digest
cold and in a close Vessel for three days, then distill them according to Art,
let the whole Liquor be mixed, and sweeten it with Sugar as you use it, the Dose
is two or three ounces.

After the use of Spirit of Armoniack for fifteen or twenty days, let other
Medicines have their turns for about the same space of time, such as are the
Spirits of Soot, Hartshorn, man's skull, the tincture of Coral, Antimony,
Castoreum, Amber, Quercitan's Elixir of Life, Elixir Proprietatis, Spirit of
Lavender, etc. Or,

Take Conserve of the flowers of Lillies of the Valley six ounces, roots of
Aromatick-reed preserved six drams, Ginger condited in the Indies, Nutmegs
condited of each half an ounce, Species Diambrae two drams, Lignum Aloes,
yellow Saunders, roots of choice Zedoary, Cubebs, Jamaica Pepper of each a dram
and half, Coral prepared two drams, Syrup of the Preserve of Ginger what
suffices, make an Electuary; the Dose is two drams morning and evening,
drinking after it three ounces of the distilled Water.

Let those, whose Brains abound with too much moisture, drink every morning a
draught of Coffee with the leaves of Sage first boiled in it, to those whose
animal Spirits are effaete and depauperated, the drink of Chocolate, such as
before described, seems profitable. For ordinary drink prepare small Ale, or
Beer, and in a Vessel of three or four Gallons let the following Bag be put
after it has wrought. Take leaves of Salvia acuta dried four handfuls, Cubebs
an ounce, Cloves, Nutmegs, being sliced and bruised, mix them according to art.

Outward Applications have place here, or which kind are, a Cucupha, or Cap,
Plasters, and Liniments, and sometimes let these, sometimes those, or the
others be used.

Take Flowers of Lillies of the Valley, Rofemary, and Staechas of each a
handful, Celtick spike two drams, Roots of Cyperus, the lesser Galingal,
Florentine orris of each three drams, Labdanum, Benzoin, Balsam of Tolu, Amber
of each two drams, Nutmegs, Colves, Mace, Cinnamon, of each a dram and a half,
make of all a jubtle powder, and sew it into a cap interlacing it with Cotton.

Take of the Plaster called Flos Vnguentorum two ounces, Tachamahacha,
Ceranna, Balsam of Tolu of each three drams, powder of Amber and Myrrh of each
two drams, Cloves, Nutmegs, Mace, of each a dram, being melted together, let
them be made into a mass, of which let a Plaster be made, to be spread on
Leather, and to be applied to the Head shaved.

Take Oil of Palm half an ounce, oleum Capivii three drams, Balsam of Peru a
dram, oil of Nutmegs by expression two drams, oil of Amber half a dram, make a
liniment for the Head.

I could add here many other Medicines and ways of Administrations; but let
these suffice in a Case almost desperate, where most commonly no Remedies do
good, and the Cure is never perfected.

CHAP. XIII. Instructions and Prescripts for curing the Gout.
AMong the Diseases of the Head and Genus nervosum, we justly rank also certain
Affects which are wont chiefly to infest the Feet and Belly, to wit, the Gout
and Colic. For we may conclude from the primary symptom, viz. Pain, that the
Seats of both are in the nervous parts. I shall speak in the first place of the
for mer.

The Gout most commonly is wont to arise about the Internodia of the Bones of
the Feet; tho often it happens in the Joints of the Hip, Knee, Elbow, Shoulder,
Wrist, Ancle, and of other Parts.

The Fits of this Affect (which in a manner is always intermittent) either
seize at random, or periodically; which ending sometimes sooner, sometimes
later, good lucid Intervals ensue; presently, upon the first invasion, Pains
for the most part arise without any swelling; tho afterward, about the height
of the Disease, the Part affected often swells; the Pains about the beinning
scarce yield to any Remedies, but are wont to be very much exasperated by
Catharticks, and not presently to be driven away, or asswag'd by Topics; the
Fits most commonly seize on a sudden, and without a precious affect, tho
sometimes it has a fore-running effervescence in the Blood, or a little Fever.
The Disposition to this Disease sometimes is Hereditary, sometimes acquired
through an ill Diet: the Occasions or Causes, which being wont to actuate the
Disposition, raise the Arthritick Pains, are some violent alterations, or
Passions inflicted on the Humors and Spirits. Hence Surfeiting, immoderate
drinking, especially of acid and thin Wines, Transpiration let, Anger,
immoderate Venery, Sadness, also the Revolutions and great changes of the Year
and Air, every where bring Fits of this Disease: those that are obnoxious to
this, are also in danger of being sometimes troubled with the Stone or Gravel
in the Kidneys, and on the contrary: moreover, the Gout increasing gathers
together every where about its chief Seats, to wit, the Joints, a calculous
matter, and there raises a tophous mass.

The Parts affected, upon the twitching of whose Fibers the Pains are raised,
for the most part are the Periostia, or the Membranes covering the heads of the
Bones, also the Tendons, and happily the Ligaments there placed: but since the
Pain in those Parts depends wholly on the solution of continuity, and this
proceeds from a certain matter sticking in, or lying on those Bodies we must
enquire, first, of what kind that morbifick matter is; secondly, whence it is
brought thither, and thirdly, after what manner, by solving unity in them, it
causes such periodical Fits of the Gout.

As to the morbifick matter, it seems in the first place that it is neither the
Blood nor the nervous Juice by themselves; nor also one single Humor deposed
by either of them, but that in the chief Seat of this Disease many fermentative
Juyces, and not easily miscible, meet; and then that from their contest and
effervescency painful twitchings of the nervous Fibers arise.

Therefore a saline or tartarous matter, deposed from the arterious Blood about
the spaces betwixt the Bowels, is as it were the feminine Seed of this Disease;
which nevertheless, tho heaped together in a great plenty, is wholly unfruitful
of it self, till the nervous Liquour growing turgid, sends acetous Recrements,
falling from it, to the seat of the former, which, as the masculine Seed,
presently renders the other prolifick: for, in as much as those two particles,
which are of a differing state and origin, meet, and mutually contest, they
twitch the Fibers of the Membranes and Tendons, and so cause the Fit of the
Gout, the appeasing of which depends wholly on the mutual subduing and
dissipation of the sharp Particles of both kinds.

As to the evident causes for which the nutritive liquor, brought from the
Blood to the Joints, is too much stored with a fixed Salt, and by reason of
which these Parts become over-ready and easy to receive what is
disproportioned to them, in regard they are various and manifold, we shall here
briefly touch the chief of them.

1. And first, an hereditary disposition is wont to produce both the failures:
for Gouty Persons for the most part engender Gouty Children; and this Disease,
descending from Parents to Children, is wont to have in both not only the like
fruit, and to be brought to a ripeness about the same terms of age; but for the
most part it fixes its first roots in the same members, and every where
observes the like progress.

2. But nevertheless, the Arthritical disposition, without an original taint,
is often caused by reason of an ill diet, and errors in the six nonnatural
things; for those who being given to feasting and good fellowship, delight
themselves in eating and drinking much and disorderly, and especially if they
feed on salt and sumptuous provisions, and drink, Wine plentifully, easily
contract this Disease. For by this means none but an indigested Chyle, and such
as is endowed with wild and unmeet Particles is prepared in the Viscera;
moreover, after much drinking of Wine, Salt dregs and heterogeneous filth,
which otherwise would stay in the first passages, being too much exalted, are
conveyed into the Blood: To which irregularities in Diet, if a sedentary Life,
Idleness, and much sleeping are joined, so that neither the superfluities
exhale, nor the saline Impurities are blown off by exercise that they do not
subside about the Joints; certainly a great store of this Alchalisate seed will
be sown for producing this Disease of the Joints.

The weakness and Arthritick disposition of the Joints is not only hereditary,
but is frequently caused on several occasions; the falling down of the
morbifick matter often brings it: for if by chance it happens that the firs fit
of the Gout be in this or that Part, the peccant humor will afterward more
readily fall on that member; and in a short time will make there, as it were,
its nest, where it will continually lodge its brood: Moreover, solution of
Continuity also, or an injury happening to some Joint by cold or moisture, a
wound or luxation often cause a Gouty disposition.

The evident Causes, which in respect of the Nervous Liquor, cause Fits of the
Gout, either pervert the particles and Portions into an acetous nature, or
being before degenerated, stir them to fluxious.

1. Many acid Liquors and small Wines ought to be avoided, and experience
teaches us that Cider and stale Beer ought of all things to be shunned by
Arthritical persons, for those kinds of drinks do not only bring into act the
latent cause of the Disease, but by filling the Brain and Nerves with a great
many acetous particles, they contribute to its fuel, and increase the morbifick
matter.

2. Immoderate or unseasonable exercise of the Body, Violent passions,
immoderate Venery, and a disorderly Diet, and likewise whatsoever things
greatly trouble or exagitate the Spirits and Humors, and consequently raise
fluxions of the nervous Juice, or of its Recrements cause Arthritick pains.

3. Solemn Evacuations suppressed, also an admittance of cold and moisture,
forasmuch as by this means the Blood, and consequently the Nervous Liquor fall
into effervescencies and fluxions, bring fits of that Disease.

4. For the same reason changes of the places of abode, also the revolutions of
the year are wont to bring pains of the Gout, that it is become a Proverb, that
Couty persons carry their Almanac in their Bones, and from their pains draw
most certain prognostics of the seasons; for as often as a moist constitution
of the year, and South or North Winds, or Snows are at hand, they are wont to
predict those things from the accesses of their pains. Moreover, at each
quarter of the year, especially Spring and Fall, they are more sorely
tormented; wherefore the Aequinoxes are always religiously observed by them:
The reason of these things partly consists in this, that insensible
transpiration is variously altered by reason of the changes of the air and of
the year; for which reason, the Effluvia, which were wont to transpire, being
restrained, ferment the Blood and Nervous humor, and easily stir them to
Arthritick flucions. Moreover, the humors of our Bodies, as the Juices of
Vegetables, and other natural or artificial liquors, diversely ferment according
to the changes of the seasons, and fall into various states, sometimes of
fixation, sometimes of volatility, sometimes of flowing.

The chief differences of this Disease are taken from the places affected, and
therefore they are made, as it were, the distinct species of the same, viz. to
wit, the Hand Gout, the Hip Gout, the Knee Gout, the Foot Gout: Mean while,
pains usually raised in any other Members, go by the common name of the Gout:
Whether the Toothache, the pain in the Loins, and pains of other Parts ought to
be referred to this, I have not now leisure to enquire.

A long continued Gout very often joins to it s Scurvy, and some Scorbutic
affects so plainly counterfeit the Gout, that they cannot easily be
distinguished: The reason of the former is both a like Dyscrasy of the Blood,
in both affects depending on the fixed Salt; and likewise that the Scorbutical
disposition easily comes upon Gouty persons; for that keeping long to their Bed
or a Chair, they use no exercise. Secondly, the Scorbutic affects which
initate the Gout, are a Rheumatism, and the Arthritis vaga Scorbutica,
concerning which we have written in our Tract of the Scurvy.

The Gout has so near a Relation to the Stone in the Reyne, that both affects,
as tho they were of the same Origin, most commonly concur: for scarce any
Person is troubled with that Disease, but he is found obnoxious to this;
Moreover an inveterate Gout is wont to cause strong concretions in the Joints,
such as the Nephritick Disease in the Reins: hence I think it very likely that
the ach in the Reins arrises from a like, or wholly the same cause which we
have assigned for the Gout to wit, that the Salino-fixt-matter deposed by the
Blood in the Reins ferments with the acid humor often sent thither by the
Nervous Ductus's; and that therefore Nephritick Pains are frequently caused;
and that afterward the Stone is formed by both matters coagulated after
fermenting.

As to the Prognostic of the Gout, every man knows it to be a Disease that is
safe enough, but extremely difficult to be cured. 1. As to the former, this
Disease is not only void of danger as to it self, but is a prevention against
most other Diseases: for gouty Persons by reason of a saline-fixt Discrasy of
the Blood are not obnoxious to Fevers; Moreover they live for the most part
free from other affects of the Head or Viscera, in as much as the Recrements
both of the Blood and Nervous Juice are continually deposed in the Joints. 2.
But as to the way of its cure, it is so diffcult, that for the removal of the
Procatarxis of the Disease there is required both a most perfect amendment of
the two Humors, viz. of the Blood and Nervous Juice, to wit, that they
engender not any Saline-fixt, or acid Particles, and likewise a Restitution of
the weakened Joints (neither of which can ever easily be done) to which may be
added, that the conjunct cause of this Disease lies in parts very remote, where
the Virtues of no Medicine reach.

Sometimes it happens by reason of the fluxions of the Arthritick matter being
suppressed or struck back, that one while gripes of the Belly or Viscera of the
Abdomen, another while a Dyspnaea, Asthma, or other affects of the Breast, and
sometimes also that the Apolexy, and other sleepy or convulsive Diseases are
raised; from which things being observed, it will be obvious to object, that
the Minera of the Gout is not such as we even now describedit, because its
saline part, in regard it is the same which is appointed for the nourishment of
the Joints, cannot be driven thence, or conveyed, or deposed elsewhere: when as
to the other part, to wit, the acid Seminium deposed in its usual place, it
seems that that cannot easily be driven back, and being suppressed by it self, or
in its Passage, or conveyed elsewhere, that it will not much hurt any part; but
it may easily be replied to this, that the acetous Portion of the Arthritick
matter flowing in the Ductus's of the Nerves may be repelled or stopped, and that
being discharged on other parts, it often causes very sore Diseases, and indeed
the nervous Liquour and its Recrements, since they consist of Particles that
are very subtle and active, upon any small let or repulse are driven into
diverse sorts of sallies and fluxions; Moreover, when those grow turgid about
the noble parts, or within the Ductus's of the Nerves, or meet with Particles
of other Humors of another kind, and ferment with them, they cause various
affects either inducing pain, or convulsive: and often, in as much as Particles
of a differing nature are coagulated together, Tumors, sometimes Strummous,
sometimes Cancrous, or otherwise malignant arise.

Whilst I was writing these things, I was called to a renowned Matron, who
formerly having been very obnoxious to the Gout, after that she had been ill of
late for about three Months of a very great weakness of the Stomach with an
Anorexia, a Nauseousness, and almost a continual Vomiting, at length I know not
on what occasion, falling into frequent Swoonings, a little after she was often
troubled with a Vertigo, with a failing of Memory, and sometimes with a slight
Delirium, and when she had continued so for many days, and in the means while
being free from the Gout, and having a good Stomach, she eat Broth twice or
thrice, and flesh once a day with an Appetite, and disgested it without
trouble; this was a plain sign that the Recrements of the Nervous Humor which
formerly were wont to fall by the spinal Nerves into the feet, to the seat of
the Gout, afterward being deposed by the Nerves of the Par vagum and
Intercostale in the Ventricle, raised continual Troubles in it, which at last
partly restagnating in the Brain, and partly being conveyed into the Nerves of
the Heart, were followed by those affects of the Leipothymia, Vertigo, and
Delirium.

The Theraputick method suggests three primary Indications, whereof the first
being curatory, is used only in the Fits, for the appeasing, or sooner putting
an end to the Pains: The second being preservatory, and appointed for the
intervals of the accesses, endeavors to remove the Procatarxis of the Disease,
so that the invasions of the Pains may return but seldomj, or more mildely, or
not at all. The third being vital, orders by what kind of diet, and with what
Remedies, the strength may be supported among the said Tortures, and Life,
notwithstanding the frequent and almost continually troublesome oppressions of
the Disease, may be prolonged, and withal reinvigorated.

The first indication, viz. the appeasing of the Pains, contains these two
chief intents: viz. That the Solution of Continuity be taken away, and in the
mean while that the irritation or excandescency of the Fibers, or of the
Spirits abounding in them, be allayed.

1. To take away the Solution of Continuity in the places affected, both the
fluxions of the Humors which are apt to tend thither ought to be stopped, and
the Minera already there sticking ought to be discussed or dissipated, and its
Particles be restrained from their mutual Effervescencies. For these ends
evacuating and altering Remedies, and both of them, as well inward as outward,
are appointed: we shall-set down certain select Forms and ways of
Administration of these in order.

Blooding in a new Gout, or which is not very inveterate, and especially in a
hot constitution, being used about the beginning of the Disease, often gives
relief: but in an habitual Difease, also in a cold temperament, and in old Age,
it is wont to do more hurt than Good, in as much as it depresses the vigor of
the Blood and Spirits, which are not too exorbitant, without a diminution of
the morbifick matter.

Concerning Purging about the beginning of the Disease, the thing is very much
controverted, whilst some Physicians religiously abstain from all Purging,
before the declination, or end of the Fit; and others on the contrary
constantly give strong Purges about the beginnings of the Disease: the reason
of the difference seems chiefly to lie in this, viz. that in some gouty
Persons, who are yet firm in the Constitution and Tone of the Humors and the
containing Vessels; and whose Joints are not yet weakened, as often as the Blood
and Nervous Liquour are troubled by a medicine, their Superfluities and
Recrements are not presently precipitated into the Minera of the Disease, but
yielding to the Medicine irritating and stirring them, they are drawn from the
Mouths of the Arteries into the Cavities of the Intestines; and mean while the
emptied Vessels withdraw or drink up again a part of the morbifick matter. but
on the contrary, in tender and weakened constitutions, upon the gentlest
commotion of a Medicine, the Recrements of both humors fall into the Place
troubled with the Gout. To those therefore with whom purging agrees, it ought
to be ordered with a strong and exagitating Medicine: for this purpose are
vulgarly famous the Electuary Caryocostinum, Syrup of Buckthorn, compound
Powder of Hermodacts, Pilul. ex duobus, Pil. Rhasis; which, if we may believe
the Author, will make such as are not able to go, presently to walk about.

Take of the best Aloes half an ounce, red Roses two Scruples, Hermodacts
pill'd a dram and a half, Diagridium a dram, Honey of Roses what suffises, make
Pills. Rodericus a Fonseca wonderfully extolls the roots of black Hellebore,
and amongst other things, an Apple with the Fibers of it stuck in it to half a
dram, roasted under the Embers and eaten.

Take Calomelanos a Scruple, Rosm of Jalap three grains, or of Scammony three
grains, Oil of Cloves a drop, Balsam of Peru what suffises: make three or four
Pills for one dose.

In purging, what Solenander prescribes happily may be of some moment; viz. by
putting a Plaster, or some other defensive Medicine on the place, to hinder
the falling of the humor to it.

Vomiting, with those with whom it uses to be safe and easy, does well also in
this Disease; for which end the Emetick Tartar of Mynsicht, Sulphur of
Antimony, its Flowers, Mercurius Vitae, Vinum Emeticum, Gutta Gamba may be
given.

Moreover, in a Fit of the Gout, Powder of Stones, Bones, and Shells, and also
of smart Vegetables do good, which being said to be the Antidotes of this
Disease, subdue all Particles, and fermenting with them, mortify them as it
were, and at length being subjugated, send them forth by Urine, or sweat.

Take compound Powder of Crabs Claws two drams, Ivory, Roots of bastard
Dittany, Roots of male Peony of each a dram, Lignum Aloes, yellow Saunders of
each half a dram, make a Powder, let it be taken from half a dram to a dram,
either by it self in a Spoonful of red Poppey water, drinking after it six
Spoonfuls of the same, or let it be made into a Bolus, or Pills with Venice
Treacle, or Venice Turpentine what suffises; the dose is a dram twice a day,
drinking after it of the distilled water beneath prescribed, two or three
ounces. Or,

Take of the same Powder six drams, conserve of Clove-gilliflowers and Betony
Flowers of each an ounce and a half, Diascordium two drams, Syrup of Maeconium
what suffises, make an Electuary, the dose is a dram, to two drams Evening and
Morning.

Mean while that these things are done for withdrawing elsewhere the morbifick
Matter which would flow into the places affected, or for sending it forth, let
altering and qualifying Medicines likewise have their turns, which may appease
the Turgescencies of the Blood and Nervous Juice, and stop the fluxions of the
Recrements falling from them; for this end a thin diet, and a drinking of Water
(if it be proper) being ordered, let Emulsions, Juleps, Apozemes of mild things
and Anodines be prescribed.

As to what concerns the other Scopes of curing, viz. the discussion of the
Minera sticking in the Parts, and the mitigating the excandescencies of the
Fibers and Spirits; we must insist first on this latter, without the
performance of which we cannot answer the other intent: for this end therefore
it is expedient to use both outward things, viz. Topics of various kinds, and
inward things, viz. Hypnoticks.

There being a vast number of Topics, they either being only Anodines, have
regard to the Pain it self; or levelling at this, together with the Tumor,
they are either Repercussives, or Resolvents and Discussers; there are various
Forms and Ways of Administrations of every kind of these: but those of
chiefest use are wont to be Fomentations, Cataplasms and Plasters; we shall
set down some of the most noted of these, and first Anodyne Applications, which
moderate the Fibers and appease the Spirits by a certain soothing: for this
use, a Cataplasm of Milk and Crum of Bread, or of those things with the
poundings of the Leaves and Roots of Mallows and Althea, and the like, are
every where in common Practice with the Vulgar.

Others commend a Cataplasm of fresh Cow Dung applied warm.

Take Water of Nightshade, or of the Spawn of Frogs, of each six ounces,
Saccharum Saturni a dram, mix them, let linen Clothes dipped in this be applied
warm.

Take of red Lead three ounces, distilled Vinegar two pounds, digest them for
many days: let either this Liquour by it self, or a Water drawn from it by
distillation be used for a Fomentation.

Also a distilled water made of the Tincture of Verdigrease distilled in
Vinegar, often appeases Pains.

I was told by a Gentleman often troubled with a severe Gout, that he, in the
cruel Tortures of that Disease, had always present ease from a Fomentation with
a Water distilled from the contents of a Bullocks paunch newly killed.

Against extreme Tortures of the Gout outward Narcoticks sometimes ought to be
used.

Take Leaves of Henbane, and Hemlock of each three Handfuls, let them be put
into boiling Water, and as soon as they grow tender, let them be taken forth;
to which, being bruised, add Powder of the Flowers of Cammomil about two drams,
the yolk of one Egg, make a Cataplasm. Or,

Take Tincture of Saffron made in Spirit of Wine four ounces, Camphire and
Opium of each a dram, let there be a close and warm digestion till they are
dissolved; let the part that pains be anointed with this Liquour: there are
innumerable Medicines of this kind every where to be found in Books of Physic,
and are every where wont to be prescribed by every vulgar Person; which
likewise may suffice for fulfilling the other intent, to wit, the repercussion
of the Humors, if at any time it seems to be indicated.

As to what regards resolvent, and discussing Topics, such are not required,
which only open the Pores, that the Serum may evaporate, and the Blood may be
restored to Circulation, as in a Phlegmon or Aedema, but whose saline Particles
being destinated for strongly assaulting the saline Particles of the Arthritick
Minera, may either draw them forth by laying hold of them, or, by precipitating
them, keep them from their Pain, causing Effervescencies: wherefore, in this
Disease, when Fomentations, or Cataplasms of Chammomil, Mallows, Marshmallows,
Linseed, and Faenugreek seeds do little or no good, nay often much offend the
nervous parts by relaxing them, the Dissolutions, or Stillatitious Liquours of
Sal Armoniack, Sea Salt, Nitre, Vitriol, quick Lime and the like; which in
other Humors and Pains are always offensive are wont to prove very beneficial.

Of these kinds of Liquours to be applied to the part pained in Fits of the
Gout, several are prescribed by Quercitan, Crollius, Hartman, and other
Chemists; which since other famous Physicians, upon frequent trials have
approved off, we conclude them to have given relief for the foresaid reason.

I need not repeat here the forms of these; as I could suggest many other
Preparations of the same sort, I shall here only add one or two.

Take Salt of Tartar and Armoniack powdered of each two ounces, dissolve them in
four pounds of Rainwater or Fountain Water: let it be used lukewarm with
Linnen-Cloaths dipped in them.

Take spirit of Vitriol not rectified a pound, Sea Salt calcined and powdered a
pound, mix them, and distill them in a Glass Retort with a sand heat; there
will come forth a pure spirit of Salt, to wit, which being driven from its seat
by the distilled Liquor of the Vitriol, and leaving to it its possession, will
easily dscend: to the Caput mortuum pour Spirit of Wine two pounds, make a
close and warm digestion, adding of Camphire two drams, let it be applied warm
to the part grieved with Linen Clothes.

Take filings of Iron, Flowers of Sal Armoniack of each six ounces, mix them by
boiling them together, let it be distilled in a Glass Retort till the Flowers
are sublimed: to the caput mortuum bruised pour spirit of Wine, digest, and
keep it for use.

I have heard that some for appeasing Pains of the Gout, put the foot affected
in a bag filled with Sea Salt calcined and powdered, from which they still
expect a certain and quick relief.

In the declination of the Fit, to strengthen the part, and to discuss the
remainder of the morbifick matter, Plasters are usefully applied, which
nevertheless do not all agree indifferently with all Persons; but with these
more hot, with others less hot, tho with most those are wont to be most
efficacious, in which are red Lead, Litharge, Mercury, and other mineral or
saline things, we use chiefly a Plaster of red Lead, Cerusse, and Soap boiled
with Oil, or take the red Lead Plaster two parts, Paracelsus's Plaster one
part, mix them and spread them on Leather.

Inward Remedies to be used against Pains of the Gout, are in a manner only
Narcoticks, which ought to be given in a cruel and long continued Pain. Of
these we most commend Preparations of Opium, with Salt of Tartar or its
Tincture. Moreover, for this use Paracelsus's or the London Laudanum, Pilul. de
Styrace, de Cynoglosso, Syrup of Meconium, Venice Treacle and Diascordium are
wont to prove beneficial.

The second indication called preservatory, has respect to the removal of the
Procatarctick Causes of the Gout; so that the Fits of the Gout may molest with
invasions more seldom, and less, or not at all. For this end evacuating,
altering, and corroborating Remedies, together with an exact sorm of Diet are
prescribed to be used out of the Fits.

1. Therefore Gouty persons ought to Purge solemnly Spring and Fall. and it
will be convenient then to give a Vomit, if nothing indicates the contrary, and
afterward to repeat it sometimes by intervals. Those who have a strong Stomach
and Praecordia may take Mineral Emeticks, prepared of Antimony and Mercury:
Those who are of a more tender constitution, after having eaten slippery food,
may take Wine of Squills, or Salt of Vitriol with Whey: Afterward, the Stomach
being filled with warm Water, or plain Posset Drink, or with the leaves of
Carduus boiled in it, let a Vomiting be raised twice or thrice, or oftener. For
Purging to be used also frequently at fit intervals of time, the forms of
Purges above prescribed may be proper enough. Or,

Take threads of black Hellebore cleansed an ounce, lignum aloes, Cloves, of
each two drams, being bruised, pour to them of Spirit of Wine not rectified,
two pounds; let there by a close and warm digestion for many days; the dose is
two or three spoonfuls in the morning twice or thrice a week, and let Vomiting
and Purging always be begun before the Equinoxes, lest happily the fit, happening
first, may prevent the course of Physic. Blooding, or opening of the
hemorrhoid Vessels are sometimes proper Spring and Fall to Persons of a hot
temperament and a sharp Blood; Cauteries made in the Arms and near the
Shoulder-blades are useful in a manner to all that are obnoxious to this
Disease.

Moreover, altering Remedies, called by the Ancients the Antidotes of the Gout,
are of excellent use, and being taken sor a long time, together with an exact
governance as to the six nonnatural things, often give great relief: In this
rank, Medicines endowed with a Volatile Salt, or a Balsamic Sulphur; to wit,
inasmuch as these exalt the fixed Salt, and those reduce the acetous, are
accounted the chief; again, bitter and astringent things, as the Herbs
Germander, Groundpine, Centory, Roots of Gentian, and Birthwort, etc. (since
they are approved of by experience in this Disease) seem to be profitable for
this reason that they help the offices of Concoction and Chylification, and
keep the saline faeculencies from being carried into the Blood. Let us set down
certain forms of each of these.

Take Powder of Groundpine six dram; Crab's-eyes two drams, Venice Turpentine
what suffices, make small Pills, let three or four be taken in the evening and
morning for thirty or firty days; drinking after it of the following distilled
Water two or three ounces.

Take leaves of Cypress, Firr, Misteltoe growing on Apple Trees, of each six
handfuls; Roots of Avens, the great Burr-dock of each a pound, the outward
rinds of ten Oranges and six Limons; Nutmegs, Mace, of each an ounce, being all
sliced and bruised, pour to them of fresh Milk seven pounds, Malaga Sack a
pound, let them be distilled according to art; let the whole liquor be mixed.

Or let a plain Water be prepared of the leaves of the great Burr-dock,
cohobating it twice or thrice on fresh leaves.

Take Powder of the Seeds of the great Burr-dock six drams, Crabseyes two
drams, Nutmegs half a dram, Balsamum Capivii what suffices, make a mass, and
let it be made into little Pills, let four be taken in the evening and morning
for many days.

Take Tincture of Antimony an ounce, the Dose is twenty drops to twenty five in
the evening and early in the morning, with three ounces of the water even now
described.

To poor People I use to prescribe after this manner. Take powder of the leaves
of Sage half a pound, Crab's-eyes, Saccharum Crystallinum of each two ounces:
mix them, let it be kept in a glass, let a spoonful be taken twice a day with a
draught of the decoction of the leaves of Sage, or of the roots of the great
Bur-dock.

Or, let Dornorellus his powder be prescribed to be taken after the same manner.

Take powder of the leaves of Germander, Ground Pine, the lesser Centory,
Marjoram, Sage, Betony, roots of Gentian, round Birth-wort, of each an ounce,
Sugar a pound, mix them, make a powder.

Or the Powder of Johannes Anglicus, called by him Saracenicus.

Take powder of the Leaves of Ground Pine an ounce, of the Bones of Mansfoot
burnt two drams, Licorice three drams, mix them.

For ordinary drink let a Bochet be prepared of Sarsaparilla, Saunders, Lignum
Rhodium, shavings of Ivory and Hartshorn, etc. Or, let a small Ale be prepared
for a Vessel of four Gallons: in which instead of Hops let the leaves of
Germander and Ground-pine^ be boiled: and after it has wrought, put into it of
the leaves of dried Sage four handfuls, Sassafras two ounces, Roots of Avens
eightounces.

Among altering things, a Milk Diet does not claim the last Place; viz. that
the Patient use no other Diet for three or four Months; Morning and Evening let
him drink Milk as it comes from the Cow; about Noon let him Eat of it boiled
with White-bread, Barley, or Oatmeal. I have known some who by this kind of
Diet have found great Relief; and that others have been much worse after the
use of Milk, and the Gout being not cured, to have contracted great
Obstructions of the Viscera and a Cacochymia. Therefore, let not that Method
rashly be entered upon without the advice, and careful observation of a prudent
Physician whether it agrees or not.

Not long since, it grew a vulgar Custom for Gouty Persons to drink every
Morning their own Urine, which I remember to have done good to some: The reason
of which relief seems of be, that the Saline latex of the Urine, passing again
through the Blood, carried with it the Salino-fixt Particles, which were wont
before to be conveyed to the Joints: Wherefore this Method, if at any time it
give ease in the Gout, for the most part it increases the Nephritick affect.

A very learned and Pious man, the Glory both of our Nation and of Learning, D.
D. H. H. having lived for many years greatly obnoxious to frequent fits of
Pains, Vomiting, and pissing Blood, at length, upon the constant use of the
following Remedies, becoming almost free from the Nephritick affect, he lived
above seven years without any very great Fit of it. The Method of Cure which a
certain Gentleman had taught him, without any Physic, was thus, Abstaining
from Wine and Cider, he drank for ordinary Drink a small Ale made of Oaten
Malt; Moreover, once a week he took in the Morning a draught of the same Ale to
about half a pound, with three spoonfuls of the Powder of Ossa Senelorum
dissolved in it: by the use of these things seeming to have bid farewell to the
Disease of the Stone within four Months, he presently begun to be troubled with
the Gout, and was often infested with severe Fits of it during all the time of
his being free from the Stone; and at length, upon every little occasion, he
became so obnoxious to them, that if presently after Eating he any way
exercised his Body or Mind, viz. either by walking or study, he certainly
expected invasions of the Pains; the reason of which was, that the Blood being
saturated to a fullness with Salino-fixt Particles, and the Nervous Liquor with
Acetous, when, upon a fresh supply of Nutritive Juice, they were stirred and
grew turgid, presently they deposed their Superfluities, viz. the morbifick
matter of both kinds in the Joints, as being very weak.

Therefore that Venerable Person, being tired with so srequent and almost
continual a Torture, by the Advice of a certain Friend drank his own Urine
every Morning, by the use of which, within a Month or two he was tormented
somewhat less with his Pains of the Gout, but by an ill change the Nephritick
affect begun to come upon him again; for he was often affected with a Pain
about the Loins, with a Vomiting, and Dysuria, which being not to be overcome
by any Remedies, caused the Death of the Renowned Person after about a
Fortnight.

The Body being opened, all the Viscera excepting the Reins appeared very sound
and firm, but the right Kidney seemed to have been almost consumed long before,
there remaining only a little heap of Glands, all the Vessels and the Ureter
growing together, and being wholly stopped, that no Urine had passed there for a
long time; The left Kidney being large enough, contained a great heap of
Gravel-Stones within it is Cavity and Ductus's. Moreover, a round, hard, and
whitish little Stone being fallen about three Inches deep into the Ureter, and
there sticking, had wholly stopped the Passage of the Urine, the Membrane of the
Ureter, where the Stone stuck, was become so thick and callous, and
consequently without Pain, that it could not be stirred thence by any means
upward or downward.

It seemed in this Case, that whereas the Coagulative Particles of the Blood
and Nervous Juice, viz. Salino-fixt, and Acetous first meeting together in the
Reins, had long caused the Nephritick affect; afterward, by the use of that
abovesaid Powder the Saline being still sent into the habit of the Body, and
not readily conveyed forth, heaped together a Seminium for the Gout in the
Joints, the Reins in the mean time being almost free: but at length, when by
drinking his own Water the Saline-miner a was brought back to the Reins, the
Disease of the Joints was changed into a fatal Nephritis.

CHAP. XIV. Instructions and Prescripts for curing the Colic.
OF what right we place this Disease among the affects of the Brain, and the
Genus Nervosum, it is intimated in the foregoing Chapter, to wit, in respect of
the Symptoms chiefly pressing, which are Pain and Convulsive Motions, arising
thence.

Concerning the word Colic taken from the Intestine Colon (which vulgarly, tho
falsely, is supposed to be chiefly affected in this Disease) we shall not
contend; the affect may be described, that it is a mighty Vellication of
certain Parts of the Abdomen, whence a very acute pain, to which for the most
part a vomiting, also Cramps and Contractions almost of all the Viscera of the
Belly are wont to be joined. For the Navel and its neighboring parts sometimes
are drawn inward as it were with a certain perforation, sometimes they swell
out with an inflation, and a great springing forth as it were; the intestines,
by an inverted motion of the Fibers, are often drawn upward: Wherefore the
Belly, being mightily bound, discharges little or nothing at all, nay, tho it
be frequently provoked by Clysters, it does not easily depose its contents.
That the Ventricle is likewise convulsed with the Duodenum, and Gallbladder,
it plainly appears from the copious vomiting and casting forth of the yellow or
green Choler: sometimes also the Ureters, and the Bladder which contains the
Urine are so contracted, that during the whole Fit the Urine is either stopped,
or voided more sparingly: besides, in the Head vertiginous affects frequently
preceed or follow the invasions of this Disease: nay, and the Colic increasing
and becoming inveterate, often brings Pains in the outward Members, and at last
is terminated in a Palsy: Since therefore many Parts are wont to be troubled
by it, we must enquire which is primarily affected, and by the means of which
the rest suffer, and show what is the conjunct Cause of this Disease; in what
place it subsists, and whence it draws its Origin.

As to the Part primarily affected, when the Disease presses, the whole region
of the Belly is wont to be troubled, yet its primary seat ought to be placed
where the pain infests chiefly, and sticks most obstinately. Now this is said
by many Physicians to be somewhere in the Colon, because we generally observe,
that the Intestines, and chiefly the Colon, being irritated by Flatus's, by
which choler and happily other humors, contained within their cavities, fall
into pains and gripes; but if the pains of the Cholick proceeded from the sharp
and irritative contents of the Colon, doubtless those things which loosen the
Belly, and copiously expel Flatus's and the Faeces, would bring a most certain
relief: the contrary of which oftentimes happens, viz. that after frequent, or
violent Purging, that Disease becomes worse.

Wherefore, that the seat and nature of this Disease may be duly known; we
must first distinguish here concerning the Gripes or Pains of the Belly,
vulgarly accounted as of the Colic. For either, being merely occasional, they
arise from an evident cause alone, and without a previous disposition in any
Person indifferently; thus alterations about the six non-natural things, often
raise mighty disturbances in the Viscera of the Belly with pains: Which kind of
affect never theless ought not to be looked upon as a Disease, but only as a
symptom raised from a manifest cause.

But besides, the Colic properly speaking, does not only happen to any men
indifferently, being produced by an accidental cause, but following some men
predispos'd after a peculiar manner, depends wholly on a procatarctick cause
brought to a ripeness by degrees: the greater fits of the Disease for the most
part have their periods, and observe the alterations of the Air, and of the
Year. Moreover, being raised, they do not easily yield to Remedies, nor soon
pass off: But notwithstanding the use of Epithems, or the Belly's being purged,
tho in a plentiful manner, by Clysters or Catharticks, they often continue many
days, and sometimes weeks with great violence; the pains in every fit take
always to the same Part, and for the most part are attended with the like
concourse of other symptoms: Moreover, Colic pains, tho they have not the same
seat in all; but sometimes rage most about the Ventricle, sometimes about the
Navel, or hypochondres, sometimes in the hypogastrick Region, or toward the
Loins: Yet as often as they return in the same Diseased, they most commonly
observe the same seat.

I say now, that the Part primarily affected in the Colic is the Mesentery: We
have shown elsewhere that the causes of certain convulsive motions, which are
vulgarly called hysterical, oftentimes lie hid in the Plexus's of the
Mesentery: and then we asserted the pains of the Colic sometimes to have their
seats in the same places, and we made it plain enough from Anatomical
observation. But it is not the same, but somewhat a differing matter which is
wont to raise those so different affects under the same roof: in the Passions
called histerical, we have set forth at large in the former Tract, that the
Animal Spirits being overcharged with an Elastick Combination, burst from one
another, or, are exploded as it were, and consequently that they force in
despite the containing Bodies into irregular or preternatural motions: but in
pains of the Colic the same Spirits being irritated by reason of a Matter
annoying them, and being disproportionate to them, and thereupon being divided
and severed from each other, they force the sensible fibers to very troublesome
corrugations: after what manner this is done in the Colic, and what is the
Conjunct cause and Procatarxis of that Disease, we shall now say somewhat more
plainly.

Therefore, for the Seminium or Minera of the Colic, we suppose that certain
recrements of the nervous humor falling from the Brain by the Nerves, and
passing into the Mesentery, and other Plexus's of the Abdomen, are there heaped
together. Which, if they are so gross and viscous, that they cannot be received
and sent away by the Lymphaeducts, or distill forth into the cavities of the
Intestines by the small branches of the Vessels, then stagnating and being
heaped together by degrees in those Parts, they arise at length to an
irritative plenitude: Afterward, that matter becoming more degenerate, and more
offensive by stagnation, and growing turgid on some occasion, or of its own
accord, or happily fermenting with the Saline-fixt humor sent thither from the
Blood, will torture with very troublesome and painful corrugations the branches
of the Nerves and Nervous Fibers, with innumerable of which the Mesentery is
stored. Which affect of them does not wholly cease till the fermenting matter
either is discussed, or expressed into the cavities of the Intestines, or at
length is subdued.

Again, forasmuch as from the Mesentery and its Plexus's, nervous branches and
fibers are most thickly protended to the bottom of the Ventricle, the
Gallbladder, the Ductus Choledochi, all the Intestines, and on every side
almost into all the Viscera of the Abdomen; therefore, whilst the Colic
matter, fermenting in its Minera's, causes there often most sharp gripes and
tortures, at the same time in most other membranous Parts, Cramps and
Convulsive or painful contractions will be every where raised. Hence, by reason
of the Mesentery primarily affected under the Navel, there is a cruel pain, as
tho a stake were stuck there, or a piercer were making a hole; moreover, all
about almost in the whole Abdomen, by reason of the Intestines being variously
drawn forward and backward at the same time in differing places, erring pains
shoot this way and that; and by reason of the motions of the Fibers being
distracted or inverted, as well in those parts, as in the primary Vessels, the
Belly is in a manner always bound, and there ensues sometimes a suppression of
Urine, or very little is made. Moreover, the Duodenum, the Gallbladder with
its Ductus's, and the bottom of the Stomach being affected with a cramp, and
their Fibers being drawn upward, a frequent vomiting, with a copious casting up
of a yellow or greenish Choler often happens during the Fit.

In a Fit of the Colic, to Pains of the Belly most violent Pains of the Loins
raging in the lower part of the Back are oftentimes joined, which certainly can
arise from the irritation of no Intestine, but it will be easy to conceive
that they are raised from a morbifick cause placed in the Mesentery: viz. in as
much as certain considerable Nerves of the Loins enter the great Nervous Plexus
of the Mesentery: so that hence not only painful Convulsions are conveyed by
consent from one part to the other; but it is likewise probable, that certain
Recrements of the Back also and of the Loins are derived into the Mesentery by
this Passage, and that in some sort for this Reason scorbutical Persons are so
very obnoxious to gripes of the Belly, and to its looseness.

As to the Procatarxis of the Colic, it consists chiefly in these two things,
viz. first, that many Recrements are heaped together in the nervous Liquor, and
secondly, that they being chiefly received by the Nerves appointed to the
Viscera of the Belly, and conveyed to the Mesentery, make there the morbid
Mineras. First, the former of these for the most part happens through the fault
and distemper of the Brain, to wit, for as much as this admits within its
Precincts, together with the Nervous Juice, heterogeneous Particles, and such
as trouble the animal economy, and does not readily discharge other ordinary
Recrements by fit common Sewers: Wherefore the incongruous matter, since it
cannot be otherwise sent from the Brain, most readily rushes into the Nerves of
the Par vagum, which are very open for it: and for this reason it is that
Women, upon any disorder of the Brain, frequently contract the Hysteric habit;
to wit, in as much as the Recrements of the nervous Liquor, whether they are
convulsive and elastick, or only painful and irritative, being apt to be
deposed in the Par vagum, so generally raise convulsive Symptoms, as well as
those of the Colic. Secondly, that this matter running into the Par vagum of
the Nerves, is deposed in the Mesentery, or in other plexus's within the
Abdomen, the reason is, that many, and the greater Nerves of that Conjugation,
are ultimately terminated in these Nervous Plexus's. Wherefore, if the
Recrements of the Nervous Humor subsiding here as it were to the lowest place,
can neither be carried back by any Vessels, nor pass into the Cavities of the
Intestines, of necessity the same must make morbid Seats in this Part.

The evident Causes are of two kinds, viz. First, such as being injurious to
the Brain and Genus Nervosum, make a greater increase of the morbifick Matter:
or, secondly, such as by agitating the Blood and Humors, rouse up the Minera's
heaped together and before lying still, and stir them to Pain causing
Effervescencies. It would be tedious to examine here the manifold and
diversified Occasions by which the Pains of the Colic are stirred up in
Persons predisposed to them; for both great Disorders in the six non-natural
things, and changes of the Air and of the Year, and likewise the Medicines
themselves (from which relief is expected) being unseasonabely given, often
bring these.

As to the Prognostic of the Colic, it is vulgarly enough known, that an
accidental Colic, viz. raised from an evident Cause alone, is most commonly
safe, and cured without much ado; but that an habitual one is both eradicated
with great difficulty, as to its Disposition, so that the Fits may no longer
return, and that sometimes the Fits themselves notwithstanding Remedies are
very obstinate, and persist for many Days, nay Weeks, and sometimes Months.

2. A Colical Disposition frequently ensues upon intermittent Fevers of long
continuance, and upon continual Fevers of an ill determination, viz. in as
much as the Nervous Liquor being mightily vitiated, heaps together many
Recrements which are deposed deep in the Plexus's of the Abdomen, as
Receptacles the most open: Moreover, for this Reason an epidemical Fever has
reigned some years, to which a Colic has been joined as a pathognomick Sign:
hence, in like manner, a long continued and growing Scurvy, for as much as it
perverts the nervous Liquor, brings also the Colic.

3. After that the Colic Pains have raged some time in the Belly, they
oftentimes assail the Loins, and afterward, the Disease increasing, the Limbs,
and almost all the Muscles in the whole Body, and at length are often
terminated in a Palsy, which certainly is a manifest sign that the morbifick
Matter is not conveyed by the Arteries, but by the Nerves, and that its seat is
not the Cavities or Tunicles of the Intestines, but the nervous Plexus's of the
Mesentery: for that the Pains of the Loins happen upon gripes in the Belly,
besides that the Nerves of both Places communicate, the cause also is, that the
morbifick matter being much increased in the Head, gets not only into the Par
vagum but also into the spinal Marrow, and falling to its lower part, it first
causes Pains to arise in the Loins, and afterward many other Nerves which
proceed from the Spine being affected, it causes the like in the Members, and
other Muscles; finally, the Ductus's of the Nerves being stuffed by the Morbifick
Matter heaped together to a plenitude in them, the Palsy is caused.

4. A fierce Colic, and very violent, whose cause is an inflammation or
abscess of some intestine, for the most part brings a mortal Iliack Passion.

The Therapeutick Method in the Colic, as in most intermitting Diseases,
suggests three primary Indications. Wherefore, the first, which is curatory,
being to be used in the Fit, had regard to the appeasing of the Pains, and to
the speedy and easy removal of the access of the Disease. The second being
preservatory, teaches what is to be drawn out of the fit for taking away the
cause of the Disease, that the fits do not often return, or prove sorely
offensive. The third being vital, furnishes Remedies for preserving the
strength, and refreshing the Spirits during the Gripes and cruel Tortures. We
shall speak of each of these a little more at large in order.

1. We have regard in a manner only to the curatory Indication in an accidental
Colic; for the evident cause, which is the irritation of the Intestines by the
sharp contents being removed, the Pains for the most part cease of their own
accord, nor is a Relaps feared without a like occasion: Wherefore, for the
speedy cure of this Disease, there is a practice proper enough known by every
vulgar Person, viz. Presently to administer emollient Clysters, topical
Anodines, and Narcoticks; to which, if there be a Fever, or it be feared,
blooding is often joined with benefit. We shall presently set down Forms of
these and the order of using them in the cure of the habitual Colic.

Therefore, for the curing the Fit of this Affect, there are two chief
Intentions. viz. both the painful Solution of Continuity ought to be removed,
and the Excandescence of the Fibers or Spirits in them to be appeased. On the
account of the former, we must endeavor both that the matter sticking and
fermenting in one or more Miner as be either discust, or subdued, and in the
mean while that the afflux of a new Matter be stopped; the second Intention, on
which we must insist in the first place and without intermission, is performed
chiefly by Anodines and Narcoticks: after what manner, and by what Remedies all
these things are to be done methodically, we shall deliver.

The cure of the Pain of the Colic is begun most commonly, and proper enough
by a Clyster, let this in the first place be only lenifying and emollient: by
which, as by an inward Fomentation, the corrugations of the Fibers may be
mitigated, and the raging of the Spirits be appeased: for this end, warm Milk
with Sugar, or Molossus, or Syrup of Violets: also emollient Decoctions of
Mallows, Marshmallows, Herb Mercury, and the Flowers of Melilot, Elder, with
Oil of Almonds, or of Olives, also a Decoction of a Sheeps-head, or Calves
Feet are proper: sometimes a Clyster of mere Oil of Olives or of Linseeds are
wont to give help before all others.

But in case mild Clysters do not easily come away, or not loosen the Belly,
let such be used as irritate more, and press, and draw out by force as it were
the Humors from the little Mouths of the Arteries: for this end, let
carminative or better Decoctions be prepared, in which let the Electuary
Diaphaenicon, Diacatholicon, or e baccis Lauri, or Species Hierae be dissolved.
Also to those Liquors it is usual to add three or four ounces of the infusion
of Crocus Metallorum: or to a pound of an emollient Decoction, add of Venice
Turpentine dissolved with the yolk of an Egg an ounce, or an ounce and a half,
or take Urine of a sound man a pound, Venice Turpentine dissolved an ounce and
a half, Molossus an ounce, mix them, make a Clyster. I have known this often to
have given a great relief; the reason of which seems to be that the balsamic
Particles of the Turpentine comfort the intestines, and like wise being
received by the Venous Blood, and circulated with it through the whole Body,
they move Urine, so that a copious making of water often follows such a
Clyster, and it always carries a smell of Violets, happily also the Particles of
the Turpentine diftus'd every where, move the morbifick, or stagnating matter,
or incline that which is acetous, or otherwise degenerate, to a better Crasis.

Whilst the Intestines are so washed with Clysters, and fomented, as it were,
inwardly; let outward Epithems also be applied to the Abdomen.

Take leaves of both Mallows, herb Mercury, Wallwort, of each four handfuls;
flowers of Elder, Camomill, Melilot, of each two handfuls, a Calves-head
cloven: Let them boil in a sufficient quantity of Fountain Water. Let the
straining be used for a fomentation, with linen Clothes dipped into it as warm
as may be suffered, and wrung forth, and applied by turns; repeating it as
often as the pains press violently. In the Intervals of the fomentation let a
Cataplasm or Liniment be used.

To the magma of the Herbs bruised add Outmeal what suffices, make a Cataplasm,
and let it be sewn in rows in two bags of a square figure, for covering the
Abdomen: Let one of these be warmed at a time in a Platter on hot Coals, with
Oil of Earthworms, or of Froggs, let it be put on warm, changing it as soon as
it begins to grow cold.

Or, Take Oil of Earthworms, or of Froggs, what suffices, let the Part paining
be anointed after the fomentation; and let cap Paper moistened be applied and
worn.

The Cawl of a Lamb, or the Lungs, or other warm Viscera of Brutes laid on the
Belly, and often changed, sometimes wonderfully appease pains.

I have observed in some constitutions and temperaments, that Epithems of hot
thins, or applied hot; have rather encreast pains, than mittigated them:
Wherefore in these cases it seems necessary to order fomentations of the
Solutions of Nitre, or Sal Armoniack, or of other Chemical Liquors, as in pains
of the Gout, sometimes (as Septalius relates) of meet cold Water.

But if the Gripes of the Belly do not remit by the use of these things, we
must use hypnoticks; viz. which being given in a set dose, often give great
truce: Mean while, for refreshing the strength and failing Spirits, and to
order yet a greater Apparatus against the Disease.

Take liquid Laudanum tartarized from sixteen drops to twenty, give it going to
rest in a spoonful of the water of Camomil-flowers, drinking after it of the
same six spoonfuls; let it be repeated every other or third night, if the pains
are very pressing.

In a hot constitution. Take water of Camomil-flowers three ounces, Syrup of
Meconium half an ounce, Aqua Mirabilis two drams, make a draught to be taken
going to rest.

Mean while that these things are done for appeasing pains, and either for
discussing, or at leastwise loosning this matter sticking in the morbid fears,
let evacuating Remedies have their turns; to wit, both for wholly extirpating
the Minera of the Colic, and for cutting off the supplies or fuel of it, that
it grow no further. For these ends, a Vomit (where it agrees) and a gentle
Purge; and also in a hot temperament, where a Fever presses, or is feared,
Blooding ought to be used.

Take Sulphur of Antimony, from five Grains to seven or eight, conserve of
Borage a dram, give it in the Morning with Governance. In this case, according
to the Judgment of a Physician present, either an infusion of Crocus
Metallorum, or of Mercurius Vitae, the Emetick Tartar of Mynsicht, an
expression of the Leaves of asarum, and in tender Constitutions, Salt of
Vitriol, and Wine, and Oximel of Squills may be given.

Let Purges, lest they nauseate the Stomach, which is distempered, be given
only in a very small Dose, and in a meet Form.

Take Rosin of Jalap, and of Scammony of each five grains, Cream of Tartar a
Scruple, Cinnamon powdered four Grains, make a Powder, or let it be made into
Pills or a Bolus with conserve of the Flowers of Borrage, or of Damask Roses.

Take Scammony sulphured half a Scruple, Cream of Tartar fifteen Grains,
Diaphoretick Antimony a Scruple, make a Powder, let it be given after the same
manner.

If a Fever does not press, give a dose of Stomak Pills with Gums, or of Amber,
either by themselves, or with Rosin of Jalap.

Take Pilulae Rudii from twenty Grains to half a dram, Laudanum one Grain, make
four Pills, let them be taken going to rest: these first bring sleep, and purge
in the morning. Or.

Take Calomelanos a Scruple, Rosin of Jalap six Grains, Scammony four Grains,
Ammoniacum what suffises, make four Pills, let them be taken going to rest. In
a long continued Colic, when all other Remedies have done little or no good. I
have often known this Medicine, given once or twice, to have raised a
Salivation to the great relief of the Diseased: for if at any time the
morbifick Matter plentifully gathered together in the Nervous Plexus's, and
other places about the Abdomen, and there firmly sticking, is not able to be
moved by other Medicines; the Mercurial Particles displaying themselves every
way easily dissolve it, and divide it into minute parts, and drive them
variously this way and that, and at length wholly dissipate them. Wherefore in
a long continued and obstinate Colic, they may sometimes be given with
success, in order to agentle Salivation.

Baths and Sudorificks are generally wont to be prescribed in Pains of the
Colic: tho, as far as it has appeared to our Observation, seldom with good
success: for these, by exagitating the Blood and nervous Humor, make them
depose more yet of Matter into the Minera of the Colic, nay, and make the
Matter there deposed serment more and be more unruly, and very seldom perfectly
discuss it.

Diuretics are wont to be given much more advantageously, by which, in regard
the Blood it fus'd, and its Serosities are copiously precipitated, thereby the
Fuel of the Disease is cut off, and the mass of Blood being emptied, receives
into it a part of the morbifick Matter, so that the remainder of it is easily
discust. For this end,

Take Spirit of Tartar excellently rectified half an ounce, let half a dram be
given twice or thrice a day in a Spoonful of two of the following Julep,
drinking after it of the fame four or five Spoonfuls.

Take Water of the Leaves of the great Bur-dock, or of Aron, or Arsinart a
pound, Water of the flowers of Elder and Cammomil of each four ounces, compound
water of Gentian and compound Raddish water of each two ounces, Sugar six
drams, mix them.

After the same manner as Spirit of Tartar, you may give in a meet dose,
sometimes Tincture of Salt of Tartar, sometimes Mixtura Simplex, or Spirit of
Sal Armoniack succinated.

Take Millepedes prepared two drams, flowers of Sal Armoniack tartariz'd a
dram, Oil of Nutmeggs half a scruple, Turpentine what suffises, make a mass,
let it be formed into Pills, let three or four be taken once or twice a day,
drinking after it a dose of the Julep, or five or six spoonfuls of the
following distilled Water.

Take fresh Millepedes cleansed a pound and a half, the yellow Coats of six
Oranges, and of four Limons, Nutmeggs in number six, being sliced small add to
them Crum of stale white Bread a pound, all being bruised together and well
mixed, pour to them of fresh Milk four pounds, Sack two pounds, distill them
according to Art, let the whole Liquour be mixed, and sweetened with Sugar, or
Syrup of Violets, at pleasure.

In a long continued and obstinate Colic, where there are a hot Temperament
and Viscera, purging Spaw-waters, or Whey with Syrup of Viclets is often wont
to be drank with great relief: for both Liquours, where they agree, being drank
in a plentiful manner, cool the Stomach and hot Intestines, and presently ease
and relax them being contracted with Cramps, and painful Corrugations, or being
convulsively extended with Flatus's. Moreover, whence (I conceive) they chiefly
give help, insinuating saline Particles of another Nature into the morbifick
Minera, they conquer and subdue the Saline and Irritative Particles residing in
it, and often carry them forth by purging.

In this Disease, since all things do not agree with all Persons, nay, nor the
same always, or a long while with the same Person; there is need of the
careful observation and daily advice of a prudent Physician, that by
coindications taken from things that do good good or hurt, the method of Cure
may be rightly ordered, and now and then changed.

The Vital Indication ought to be joined to the Curatory, and be now and then
interchangeably used with it: for since the Diseased, being almost continually
affected with tortures, watchings, vomiting and abstinence, often fall into
faintings, and are sometimes in danger of Life; let Remedies which support the
strength, refresh the Spirits, and procure certain times of truce against the
Fits of the Disease, viz. Cordials and Hypnoticks have their turns.

Take water of the Flowers of Camomil and Elder of each four ounces, of
Cinnamon hordeated, of the whole Citron of each two ounces, Pearl powdered a
dram, Sugar four drams, make a Julep, let five of six spoonfuls be taken now
and then.

Take powder of Pearl, Crab's-eyes of each a dram, divide it into four parts,
let one part be given twice or thrice a day with the Julep, or with the
Decoction of the roots of Contrayerva.

Take Conserve of Clove-gilliflowers an ounce, Confection of Hyacinth, Alkermes
of each two drams, Pearl powdered a dram and a half, Syrup of the Juice of
Citrons what suffices, make a Confection, let the quantity of a Nutmeg be given
twice or thrice a day with a Julep.

In Constitutions that are not hot, Spirit of Hartshorn, of Soot, of Sal
Armoniack succinated, also Tincture of Antimony, or of Coral, often do
excellently well.

Opiats in the Cholick are of necessary Use, without which the Diseased can
neither live, nor the Physicians be at any rest or quiet. Take water of
Cowslip-flowers three ounces, Syrup of Meconium half a dram, Aqua mirabilis two
drams, mix, them, make a draught to be taken going to rest.

If the pain, being very intense, will not yield to such a Remedy, you must
give Preparations and Compositions of Opium. Paracelsus's, or the London
Laudanum, Pillul. de Styrace or Cynoglosso are proper, a Solution of Odium
tartariz'd to sixteen or twenty drops is wont to be of chief use with me. Which
Medicine I have truly given to some Persons long and miserably troubled with
this Disease, sometimes for a long time, one while every night, another while
every other night with good success.

3. The Preservatory Indication, having place only in the Intervals of the
Fits, endeavors the removal of the present Procatarxis of the Disease, and the
hindering of a future: so that the Invasions of Pains may return seldom or never
afterward. In order to these things, the Blood and nervous Liquour ought to be
purified and kept in a due Crasis, that they do not engender a morbifick
Matter, and the Brain and nervous Plexus's of the Abdomen to be strengthened,
that they do not receive it too readily. For these ends a way of dyer being
ordered, Spring and Fall let solemn Courses of Physic, such as we have
prescribed for the Prophylaxis of the Gout, be entered upon.

Let Vomiting, if it agrees, never be omitted in this Case; as by which the
Emunctories of the Viscera being emptied, they may more plentifully receive the
Recrements of the Blood and nervous Liquour, which would otherwise increase the
morbifick Matter. And likewise that the nervous Plexus's and all the parts may
be so shaken, that nothing which would turn to a Minera of the Disease may be
permitted to stagnate or be heaped together there.

Let purging for three or four times by due Intervals, also in a hot
Constitution let blooding be used: Moreover, let altering Remedies, and chiefly
Chalybeats, when the Person rests from purging, be daily taken at physical
Hours.

But above all other Medicines whatsoever, Spaw-waters coming from Iron, drank
in the Summer time for a Month, are wont to give most relief: but when they are
drank, diligent care must be taken that they pass off well and quick by Urine
or Seige; least happily if they stay long in the Body, by taking to the Head or
Feet, they cause the Vertigo or Gout, (as it frequently comes to pass.)

Take our Tincture of Steel an ounce, give from fifteen drops to twenty twice a
day in seven spoonfuls of the following Julep.

Take water of the Leaves of Aron, of the great bur-dock each half a pound, of
magistral Water of Earthworms, of Gentian compound and of Paeony compound os
each two ounces, Sugar half an ounce, mix them.

After the same manner, Tincture of Antimony and of Amber, nay, and many other
altering Remedies, above prescribed for Cephalic Affects, also in the
Preservation from the Colic, in regard its Procatarxis proceeds from the
Brain, have justly place here.

Being sometime since entreated to take care of the Health of a Reverend Old
Man, who had been very sorely obnoxious to the Colic for many years, I used
the Method and Remedies which are now described: by the careful use of which,
after a Month or two, he was better, and within a Year and a half he seemed
perfectly cured, that afterward he lived wholly free from fits of Pains: But
the Colic Disposition had not long ceased, and he omitted the usual course of
Physic, but about the Throat, in the Muscles serving for Deglutition, he had a
Resolution which frequently troubled him, that oftentimes by Aliments, and
especially Liquids there sticking, he incurred the Danger of Suffocation:
Receiving help against this evil by Antiparalitick Remedies, for the six or
seven Years following he enjoyed an indifferent health, and at last, as was
traveling, being then first seized with an Apoplexy, he died: It is obvious
enough in this case, that the Recrements of the Nervous Liquor, wont to be
deposed about the Nervous Plexus's of the Abdomen, first raised the Colic,
afterward that the same being excluded from that part, and betaking themselves
to another seat, about the Nervous Plexus's Ganglioformes of the Throat,
brought the Resolution or short Palsy of the Aesophagus, and at last, by
reason of the same matter restagnating in too great a plenty in the Meditullia
of the Brain, the mortal Speechlessness ensued.

A certain cunning and subtle Lawyer, fifty years of Age, having been wont to
be troubled for many years with a periodical Headache, a deadness of his
Senses, and a mighty heaviness of his Head; About the midst of the Summer,
being mighty ill of the foresaid Affects, upon the Application of Topic
Remedies, on a sudden found ease, but a little after he had a first seizure of
a violent Colic; the Invasion whereof was so fierce, that his strength failing
on a sudden, he fell into frequent Faintings with a cold Seat: which Fit
nevertheless within twenty four Hours vanished by degrees, without any eruption
of Flatus's or Purging. But from thence forward being obnoxious to this
Disease, he had frequent accesses of it: all which (as I carefully observed)
were preceded by a Pain of the Head, with a Vertigo, and a Stupor, fo that he
was wont to foretell hence that the Pains of the Colic were to follow soon
after in a certain Fit, which continued for twelve days with a mighty
fierceness, the diseased himself observed and told me, that the affect of the
Abdomen coming upon him, he had found no illness in his Head, but that as the
colic Passion remitted presently the Vertigo with the Headache returned: from
which reciprocal Metastasis of those Symptoms from the Head to the Belly, and
on the contrary, we may argue that the same morbifick matter abounding in the
Ductus's of the Nerves, sometimes falling downward, brought the Colic Passion,
sometimes restagnating above, caused those Cephalic Affects.

Not long since, a renowned young Man, studious, and using a sedentary Life,
began to complain of a great deadness and dullness of his Senses, also of a
heaviness of his Head, and almost a continual Sleepiness. Moreover, his Stomach
was become so slow and dulled that it was wholly destitute of all appetite:
whilst a cure is ordered against this evil Disposition by Remedies, which rouse
up the Spirits and shake off the burden lying on them, the Person falls into a
most violent Colic, to which he had never before been obnoxious, by which a
violent and as it were piercing Pain, possessed the middle of the Abdomen, the
Navel being drawn inwards, and notwithstanding the daily use of Remedies of all
kinds, it continued with a mighty Violence for three Weeks; so that during that
while he could neither sleep but by taking Narcoticks, nor receive any ease
from his Pain, but by a very hot Fomentation. Certainly, in this case, it is
obvious to any man to observe, that these Impurities of the nervous Liquor,
gathered together to a certain fullness, were the immediate or conjunct cause of
all the illness, which matter first subsisting in the Head, caused the mighty
dullness of the Brain, and the oppression of the animal Function, and afterward
being fallen by the conveyance of the Nerves into the Nervous Plexus's of the
Abdomen, caused the violent and long continued Colic.

THE PRACTICE OF PHYSIC, CONTAINED In Dr. Willis 's Tract of Fevers.
CHAP. I. The Anatomy of the Blood; its Resolution into five Principles: its
Comparison with Wine and Milk.
A Fever is only a fermentation, or an immoderate effervescence brought on the
Blood and Spirits; now that this feverish effervescence may be explicated as it
ought, these three things are to be considered. First, what that Liquor is
which Ferments, whether it be only the Blood, or other Humors besides.
Secondly, of what principles, and of what proportion of the same that Liquor
consists in its mixture. Thirdly, and lastly, with what kind of motion and
turgescency of these Parts or Particles of which the Blood is composed, the
Feverish effervescence is raised.

1. That the Blood boyles violently, and makes an effort in a Fever, it is
evident enough, and we may Conjecture that that Juice with which the Brain and
Nervous Parts are irrigated, is often also in the sault; for since this Liquor
is carried by a constant motion and a certain circulation from the Blood into
the Genus Nervosum, and thence by the Lymphick Vessels into the Blood, its
probable, if by reason of a Taint contracted by the Blood, that Humor is
depraved in its Crasis, or is perverted from its regular motion, that thence
the shivering and the pain, the convulsions, delirium, frenzy, and many other
symptoms of the Genus nervosum, usual in Fevers, arise.

After the Blood and Nervous juice there are two other Liquors which are to be
considered, as being apt to ferment, viz. the Chime or Nutritive juice always
coming to the Blood, and the Serous Latex perpetually parting from it; which,
tho first and last are Liquors severed from the Blood, and distinct from it,
yet whilst mixed with it, they ought to be looked upon as Parts received into it,
or belonging to its Accomplishment: and as long as both these are circulated
with the Blood in the Vessels, they participate of the Effervescencies of the
primogenious Cruor, and often begin the same on occasion, or increase them
being begun.

2. As to the Principles of which the mass of Blood consists in its mixture,
and what Proportion they have in it; We do not allow of the Opinion of the
Ancients, That the Mass of Blood consists of the four Humors, viz Blood,
Phlegm, Choler, and Melancholy; and that according to the Eminency of this or
that Humor, the diverse Temperaments are formed, and that by reason of their
fermentings or Exorbitances, in a manner, all Diseases arise: nor has this
Opinion been so generally used for solving the Phenomena of Diseases, since the
Circulation of the Blood, and its other Affects, before unknown, came to light:
and since those Humors consist of other Principles, viz. Choler of Salt and
Sulphur, with a mixture of Spirit and Water, and Melancholy of the same, with
an addition of Earth; and since the Blood is immediately composed of these kind
of Principles, and is wont to be sensibly resolved into them, I have rather
chosen, omitting the vulgar Acceptance of the Humors, to make use of these
known Principles of the Chemists for explicating the nature and affects of the
Blood: therefore there are in the Blood, as in all other Liquors apt to
ferments, a great deal of Water and Spirit, a small Proportion of Salt and
Sulphur, and somewhat of Earth. I shall briefly run over these Principles, and
endeavor to show after what manner they constitute the Consistency,
Properties, and Affects of the Blood.

1. The Spirits (which without Dispute have the first place) are the subtle,
and most volatile part of the Blood: their Particles being always expanded, and
endeavoring to fly away, exagitate the grosser Corpuscles of the rest in which
they are involved, and keep them always in a motion of Fermentation; by the
Effervescence and even Expansion of these in the Vessels, the liquor of the
Blood continually boyls, and the rest of the Principles are kept in an orderly
Motion, and in an exact Mixture: if any thing that is heterogeneous, or unapt
for mixture, comes into the Mass of Blood, presently the Spirits, being
troubled in their Motion, make an Effort, exagitate the Blood, and make it boil
vehemently, till that which is extraneous and immiscible with it, be either
subdued, or reduced, or driven forth.

2. From the Dissolution of Sulphur in the Blood, it is likely that the ruddy
Tincture of the Blood arises. For sulphurous Bodies, above all others, give
the highest saturated redness to a solving Menstruum; and if at any time by
reason of too much Crudity, the Sulphur is not dissolved, the Blood becomes
pale and Watery, that it scarce gives a redness to Linen. The mass of Blood
impregnated with Sulphur together with Spirits, is very fermentative, and when
the sulphurous part is raised, and abounds too much in the Blood, it perverts
its Crasis from its due state, that thereby the Blood being depraved or rendered
bilous, does not rightly concoct the nutritive Juice, or being wholly inflamed,
falls into heats and burnings, such as arise in a continual Fever. For the
Sulphur being too much exalted, and growing more turgid than it ought, raises
mighty Effervescensies in the Blood; and those whose Blood is plentifully
impregnated with Sulphur, are very obnoxious to Fevers: by reason of the
Particles of this incocted in the Nutritive Juice, and thence applied to the
solid parts, Fatness, Softness and Tenderness happen to our Body.

3. We discover Salt in the Blood by the Taste, which is there highly volatiz'd
by circulation, and if at any time in the Blood, by reason of an ill digestion,
the saline Particles are not duly exalted, but continue crude and for the
greatest part fixed, thereby the Blood becomes thick and unapt for circulation,
so that obstructions are engendered in the Viscera and solid parts, and serous
Crudities are every where heapt together: but if the Spirit being depressed or
fainting, the Salt is exalted too much, and comes to a flowing, an acetous and
austere disposition is brought on the Blood, such as is observed in scorbutical
Persons, and in such as are troubled with a quartan Ague: also from the Salt by
this means variously coagulated, the Gout, King's Evil, the Nephritis, the
Leprosy, and a great many Cronick Diseases arise. When the Salt is exalted in
a due measure, the saline Particles restrain the wild efforts of the Spirits,
and especially of the Sulphur; wherefore those who have the Blood well
saturated with a volatile Salt, are least subject to Fevers, and so also those
who are often let Blood, are more apt to Fevers.

4. By the earthy Particles in the Blood, its too great volatilisation is
stayed, and its over quick accension is hindered: Moreover, from the terrestrial
Particles of the Blood and nutritive Juice, the balk and increase happens to
the Body.

5. On the watery part of the Blood its fluidity depends, for hereby its
stagnation is hindered and the Blood is circulated in the Veins without growing
thick; also its too great conflagration and adustion is qualified, and its heat
is allayed.

What we have said even now concerning the Principles of the Blood, and the
Affects to be drawn from thence, will appear more clear, if we consider a
little the Blood according to its sensible Particles; and compare it with the
Liquours which are frequently in use among us. Now those Liquours which have
the greatest Analogy with the Blood are Wine and Milk; as to its ways of
Fermentation and Effervescence, it is most aptly compared to Wine; as to its
Consistency, Coagulation, and Separation of the parts from each other, it is
compared to Milk.

First therefore we may observe concerning Wine, that as long as it is included
in a Vessel, its subtle and spirituous Parts continually exagitate and refringe
the more gross, and render them apt for an exact mixture; that which is
heterogeneous and unapt to be subdued, is severed by effervescence: mean while
the depurated Liquour gently fermenting, is in perpetual motion, whereby all
the parts expand themselves every way, and pass by a constant circumgiration
from the top to the bottom, and again from the bottom to the top; by the
particular fretting and refraction a great many effluvia's of Attoms part from
the Liquour, which if they are kept in by a Vessel close stopped, the Liquour
ferments too much, and often makes the Vessel fly in pieces. So the Blood
within the Veins is pressed on by a constant circulation: the vital Spirit
subtilises, refringes, and presently subdues the grosser Particles: drives
forth that which is heterogeneous and immiscible: mean while from the
refraction, and working of the Parts and Corpuscles, the Effluvia of heat
constantly flow forth, and evaporate by the Pores: upon the closing of which,
if transpiration be hindered, presently by reason of the too great effervescence
of the Blood a Fever is kindled.

Secondly, we observe concerning Wines, that they grow turgid if any thing that
is extraneous and of a fermentative Nature be mixed with them: nay, that
sometimes they are troubled more than usually of their own accord: for when by
a long digestion the sulphurous part of the Wine is exalted too much, it falls
into an effervescence greater than it ought, and (unless it be presently
appeased) it perverts the crasis of the Liquour by its Turgescency; the same
thing altogether seems to be in the feverish Effervescence raised in the Blood,
which is wont to be introduced for those kinds of causes.

The third observation, or comparison of the Blood with Wine is this: Wines (as
many other Liquours) have their times of Crudity, Maturation, and decay, the
same thing being to be observed in the Blood. [concerning which sec Dr. Willis
as large.]

So far of the comparison of the Blood with wine, what follows, its similitude
with Milk consists in the diversity of its parts and their parting from each
other, which is chiefly seen in it when it is let out of the Veins, and grows
cold in a Vessel, For when the heat and vital Spirit, which preserve all in a
mixture, are fled away, the remaining parts depart from each other, and there
is made a separation of the thin from the thick, of the Serum from the fibrous
Blood, etc.

After having considered the Blood, we may observe, that the nutritive Juice,
supplied from the Blood, and severed from its mass for the nutrition of the
solid parts, sometimes by reason of its depravation and irregular motion causes
many symptoms in Fevers: This nutritive Juice which is supplied from the mass
of Blood, by a certain circulation, after it has past the nervous parts, what
remains of it being effaete and Poor as it were, is sent again by the Lymphick
Vessels to the Blood.

CHAP. II. Of the Motion and Effervescencies of the Blood.
WE must next enquire concerning the Bloods motion both natural ( viz. by the
help of what ferments; and by what fort of turgescency of the parts, it is
circulated in a continual motion through the Vessels) and preternatural, viz.
for what causes, and by the efforts of what parts, sometimes it boyles above
measure in its Vessels, and falls into feverish Effervescencies.

Concerning the natural Motion of the Blood, we do not here enquire concerning
its circulation: viz. by what knid of structure of the Heart and Vessels, as it
were in a Water Engine, it is carried round in a constant course, but
concerning its Fermentation, viz. by what kind of mixture of the Parts, and
their mutual Action on each other (like Wine fermenting in a Vessel) it
continually boyles: and this kind of motion depends both on the Heterogeneity
of the parts of the Blood it self, and on the various ferments, which are
inspired into the mass of Blood from the Viscera.

As to the first, those things which have altogether the like Particles, do not
ferment, wherefore neither distilled Waters, chemical Oils, Spirits of Wine,
or other simple Liquours are stirred at all, but the Blood, consisting of
various Elements of a contrary nature, and working on each other continually,
ferments, and his all its Particles in a perpetual Motion.

It is an Argument that Ferments are required for Sanguification, because, when
they fail by nature, they are supplied by Art with good success: for fixed
Salts, Alchalies, Extracts, Digestives, and especially Chalybeat Remedies give
help only in this respect, that they restore a new the ebullition of the Blood
either weak or almost extinct.

As to what concerns natural Ferments, certainly many may be formed and stored
up in diverse Parts, or Viscera: for any Humor in which the Particles of Salt,
Sulphur, or Spirit, being very much exalted, are contained, indues the nature
of a Ferment: After that manner Yest and Leaven come to be such, with which new
Beer, and a mass of Bread are excellently fermented: In like manner, an acetous
Humor in the Stomach, participating of an exalted Salt, helps there
Concoction: and in the Spleen, the Dreggs of the Blood, by reason of the Salt
and Earth exalted in them, turn to a ferment.

How great a Vigor comes to the Blood from the Womb and genital Parts, appears
hence, because from the Privation or Discrasie of these in Virgins a
Green Sickness, in Men a want of Beard, a weak Voice, and an amission of
Virility follow, but the chief ferment which ferves for Sanguification is
lodged in the Heart; for here is the greatest scat of heat, in which the more
crude Particles of the Chyme are kindled as it were, and acquire a volatility.

Therefore the Motion and heat in the Blood, depend chiefly on two things, viz.
partly on its proper Crasis and Constitution, whereby being plentifully
composed of the active Principles of Spirit, Salt, and Sulphur, it grows turgid
of its own accord in its Vessels (as Wine in a Hogs-head) and partly on the
ferment implanted in the Heart, which very much rarifles the Liquour, passing
through its Sinus's, and forces it to spring forth with a frothy Effervescency.

Let thus much suffize concerning the natural Motion, Heat, and Fermentation of
the Blood, in the even tenor of which the state of our Health consists: to
speak now of its preternatural, or over great Effervescency, on which the
Types, and Fits of Fevers depend. I call an overgreat or preternatural
Fermentation, when the Blood (like a Pot boiling over the Fire) boyles above
measure, and being rarefied with a frothy Turgescency, swells the Vessels,
raises a quick Pulse, and, like a sulphurous Liquour taking fire, diffuses on
all sides a burning heat.

This kind of Motion or Fermentation of the Blood is excellently illustrated by
the example of fermenting Wines: for Wines, besides the gentle and even
fermentation, whereby they are first depurated, at certain times boil so
mightily, that they work over the Vessels: and if they are close stopped, they
make them fly in pieces; after this manner, being put upon an effort as it
were, unless they are presently drawn off from the Tartar, or their Lees into
another vessel, they cease not to boil, till the Spirit, being very much spent,
and the Sulphur or Salt too much exalted, they either become over-fretted, or
degenerate into Vinegar.

Such an Effervescency is wont to be raised chiefly for two Causes; first, when
any thing extraneous and immiscible is put into the Vessel: (so some drops of
Tallow or of Fat dropped into the vessel, produce this Motion) or secondly, when
Wines having too much Lees or Tartar (by reason of the sulphurous parts
exalted above measure) fall into an Effervescence of their own accord, and boil
vehemently: for in whatsoever substance Sulphur abounds, and its Particles
being loosned from their mixture, join with one another, and are kept close
together, there such immoderate Effervescencies are procured.

After the like (tho not wholly the same) manner as Wines ferment, the
Ebullition of the Blood is caused, viz. either some extraneous and
heterogeneous thing is mixed with the Blood, which, in regard it is not
assimilated, is wont to cause a perturbation and Effervescence, till the
heterogeneous thing be either subdued, or sent forth, and the confused and
troubled Particles of the Blood, are cleared again, and take to their former
position and site in mixture. Or secondly, the Blood is troubled above measure,
because some Principle or Element which composesit, (viz. the Spirit or
Sulphur) is raised beyond the natural Temper, and becomes exorbitant, whereby
the Particles of this, or that not agreeing with the rest, are loosned from
their mixture, being loosed make an effort more then they ought, exagitate the
Liquour of the Blood, and cause an effervescence, which is not appeased, till
the Blood, being inflamed as it were, has burnt a long time with a feverish
blast. But there is this difference betwixt these two boylings of the Blood,
that the Effervescence which depends on the mixture of an extraneous thing with
the Blood, is for the most part short, or coming by Fits; which when the
heterogeneous thing is separated or subdued, ceases of its own accord, and the
troubled and disordered parts of the Blood readily return to their natural Site
or Crasis: but the Ebullition which arises from the disordering of the
exorbitant Spirit or Sulphur, is continual: to wit, here the whole mass of
Blood is so opened, and loosn'd from the strict bond of mixture, that taking a
fire like an oily Lpquour, it does not cease to rage and flame till the
Particles of the Spirit or Sulphur, or of the combustible matter are for the
greatest part consumed.

There remains yet a third preternatural way of effervescency, in which the
Blood undergoes an alteration, which does not happen to Wine, but very
frequently to Milk: viz. sometimes a coagulation of that liquor is induced by a
morbifick cause, so that it substance is sus'd, and separates into parts, and
there is a secretion made of that which is thick and earthy from the thin; by
reason of which the Blood is not meetly circulated in the Vessels, but its
congealed portions, being apt to be fixed in the extreme Parts, or to stagnate
in the Heart, interrupt its even motion, and greatly hinder it. For restoring
of which, effervescencies greater than usual are raised in the Blood; to wit,
such as every where occur in the Pleurisy, Plague, Small Pox, and malignant
Diseases.

CHAP. III. Of Intermitting Fevers.
AFever may be described after this manner, That it is a disorderly motion of
the Blood, and its over great boiling, with a heat and thirst, and other
symptoms besides, with which the natural economy is variously troubled. As we
observed before concerning the effervescence of the Blood, so we may now
concerning the Fever, that its access is either short, and coming by sits;
which therefore is called intermittent: or great, and drawn in length, which is
called a continual Fever: We shall speak first of the intermittent.

Concerning this Fever, we shall first enquire in general what kind of
effervescence of the Blood it is which causes its Fit, and whence it is raised.
Secondly, Wherefore the Fit consists of a coldness, with a shivering, and a
sweat ensuing. Thirdly, What is the cause of the intermission, and of the set
times of return. Fourthly and lastly, we shall subjoyn certain irregularities
of Intermittent Fevers.

As to the first, We must suppose, that for an Intermittent Fever, some
heterogeneous thing is mixed with the Blood, whose Particles, in regard they
are not assimilated, make so long an ebullition of the same, till either being
subdued, they are rendered miscible, or being subtilis'd, they are sent forth:
wherefore, such matter being subdued or sent forth, the fit ceases; and when
this matter springs a fresh, it causes a new Ebullition, and consequently a new
Fit happens.

Now that which causes an exactly periodical Effervescence of the Blood, must
of necessity be some thing which against each of the set returns or accesses of
the Fever is engendered in our Body in a set measure, and always in an even
proportion, and is communicated to the mass of Blood: wherewith, when the Blood
is saturated to a fullness, presently it grows turgid, and falls into an
Effervescence: now whatsoever others may think, I judge this thing to be the
nutritive Juice, supplied from the matter of things eaten and conveyed to the
Blood in weight and measure, which, in regard it is not assimilated through
defect of Sanguification, being heaped together to a fullness in the Vessels, it
causes a Turgescency in the Blood for its expulsion.

I have observed before a threefold State concerning the Particles of the
Blood, viz. of Crudity, Maturity and Decay, that is to say, the nutritive Juice
supplied from the daily Food, comes crude, being mixed with the Blood, and
circulated for some time, it is assimilated, and maturated into a perfect
humor; afterward waxing stale, it runs into parts, and is separated, while the
Blood is continually renewed after this even manner, and its losses are
repaired, it ferments quietly, and is circulated within the Vessels without
tumult or immoderate Effervescence; but if the supply of the nutritive Juice be
not maturated as before, nor turns into Blood by a perfect digestion; its
Particles mixed with the Blood, continue in its mass as some heterogeneous
thing, and not exactly agreeing; with which, when it is saturated to a fullness,
presently the Blood grows turgid, and falls into a feverish Effervescence,
whereby the fresh supply of this depraved Juice is either subdued or sent forth.

If it be asked for what cause the nutritive Juice, being mixed with the Blood,
is not assimilated, but degenerates into a heterogeneous and fermentative
matter: I judge that this is done for the most part, not through the fault of
the Aliments, or of the Viscera, but of the Blood it self. For the Blood, even
as Wines, sometimes falls from its native and genuine Disposition, into a
sharp, acid, or austere nature, and because the Blood sanguifies, it happens
that when that is fallen from its due temper, it easily perverts the store of
nutritive Juice, wherewith it ought to be repaired.

Secondly, as to the shivering and cold preceding the heat in this affect,
doubtless the true and genuine cause of those is the flowing and turgescencie
of the nervous Juice degenerated into a nitrous Matter, wherewith the Spirits
and heat being charged, are obunded, and the nervous Bodies being irritated are
put into a Trembling: but afterward when these nitrous Particles, being in part
protruded to the Superficies of the Body, the Blood is somewhat freed from
their cumbrance and oppression, the animal spirits recollect and begin to
display themselves, and then a most intense heat ensues, because both the mass
of Blood being opened by reason of its Effervescence with the febrile matter,
and its mixture being loosned, the sulphurous Particles are freely kindled in
the Heart: and because (the Pores of the Skin being possessed by the same matter
protruded toward the circumference of the Body) the vapory Effluvia are
inwardly restrained, which much exagitate and heat the Blood: and which heat
continues still in it till the fermentative Matter being wholly burnt, and
fully subdued and subtiliz'd together with the adust Recrements remaining after
the Deflagration, and joining with the Serum, they evaporate by Sweat or
insensible Transpiration.

Thirdly, from what is said it will be easy to show the Causes of the
Intermission, and of the Set Returns, viz. the Intermission follows, because
the Morbifick Matter is all cleared at one fit, and so till a new be brought in
place, an intermission follows of necessity. Now a new matter begins to be
engendered from the time that the last Fit ceased, and when the Blood is filled
again to a Turgescency, it boyles and comes to a flowing.

As to the Set Returns of the Fits, these happen, because for the most part the
nutritive Juice is supplied from the Viscera to the Blood passing in the Veins
in an even measure and quantity, tho sometimes, if the Persons who have
intermittent Fevers gorge themselves too much, or are very abstemious, the Fits
happen sooner or later than usual.

If it be asked, wherefore the Set Returns of Fevers are not of one kind, and
of the same distance, but that some come every day, some every third or fourth
day; the cause is the different constitution of the Blood, whereby it is
perverted from its due temper into a sharp, sometimes an acid, or austere
disposition. According to this differing Dyscrasy, the nutritive Juice, fresh
brought, falls more or less from its maturation, and is perverted into a matter
sooner or later apt to Ferment.

The Procatarctick Causes of this Disease plainly show its Origin from the
temper of the Blood being changed. For intermitting Fevers are chiefly rife in
that Season, and those places, in which the Blood receives the greatest
alteration from the Air.

The same thing is made out by the Cure of intermittent Fevers, whether it be
natural and critical; or artificial, and be performed by the help of Medicines:
As to the first, Intermittent Fevers are wont to be terminated after a twofold
manner: the first is, when the temper of the Blood is altered by the Fits
themselves, and it is brought to its natural state; the other way is, when the
change of the Air or Place of abode brings a mighty alteration of the Blood,
for so Fevers begun about the Equinoxes, are terminated about the Solstices;
also the Diseased traveling into another Country often recover.

As to the Cure to be performed with Medicines, it is undertaken either
Empirically or Dogmatically; and in this Disease Empyrical Remedies, taken from
Mountebanks or old Women, are more esteemed, and often effect more than the
Prescripts of Physicians given according to an exact method of Curing.

The Empyrical Remedies which are said to cure intermittent Fevers, are such as
without any evacuation keep off the invading Fit: and are either taken
inwardly, or are outwardly applied where the Pulses chiefly beat, viz. they are
bound for the most part to the Region of the Heart, or to the Hand-wrists, or
to the Soles of the Feet: now it is worthy to be enquired into, after what
manner these work, and by what means they stop the feverish accesses. It is
manifest in the first place, that the virtue and action of these things which
are outwardly applied, are communicated to the Blood and Spirits immediately;
and in regard they drive off the Fit by way of prevention without the
evacuation of any humor or matter, of necessity the reason of this effect must
consist only in this, that by the use of these kinds of Medicines the
Turgescency and Fermentation of the Blood with the Febrile matter are stopped,
that is to say, from the Medicine bound about the Vessels, certain Corpuscles
or Effluvia are communicated to the Blood, which greatly fix, and constringe
its Particles, or also by fusing and exagitating precipitate them as it were:
after both ways the spontaneous Effervescence of the Blood is hindered: like as
when cold Water is put into a boiling Pot; or as when Vinegar or Alum is put
into new and working Beer, presently the fermentation ceases, and the Liquour
acquires a new taste and consistency, and is as fit for drinking as if it had
been ripened a long time. Now that these Febrifuges operate after this manner,
it seems plain enough, because those that are of chiefest note excel in a
styptick and astringent, or also in a precipitating Virtue: hence Sea Salt,
Nitre, Sal Gemm, the Juice of Plantain, Shepherds pouch, all astringent Herbs
bruised with Vinegar, and the like things bound to the Wrists; the roots of
Yarrow, Tormentill, also Camphire hung about the Neck, are said to remove this
Disease: Moreover the things that are taken inwardly are of the like sort, the
Juice of Plantain, red Rose Water, Alum, in as much as they fix and constringe
the Blood; a Decoction of Pepper, Sal Armoniack, or of Wormwood, Spirit of
Vitriol, also a sudden Passion of Anger or Fear, in as much as by fusing and
exagitating the Blood, they precipitate it, often hinder the feverish access:
like as a concussion and exagitation of any Liquour, or an infusion of
astringent things in it hinder a spontaneous Effervescence or Effort. It is
usual with some Empiricks for the cure of intermittent Fevers, to make a hard
Ball of Flax or Paper rolled up, and to bind it so colse to the Wrist where the
Pulses beat, that the circulation of the Blood in that place is in some manner
stopped, and by this means the invading fit of the Fever is driven away. I have
certainly known many cured after this manner of a long continued Disease: the
reason of which seems to be, that whilst the Blood is stayed in its Motion in
any part, it stirrs more violently in the rest, and so from that trouble raised
in the whole Blood, the spontaneous Effervescence of its Liquour, which was to
follow a while after, is stopped: and upon the Fits being put off twice or
thrice, Nature takes to the digestion of the matter, and to its ancient
regularity.

The dogmatical cure for the most part is undertaken by Vomits and Catharticks,
also by letting Blood: with which the Diseased are miserably tormented, and the
Disease is seldom brought to an end, tho sometimes Tertian Fevers are taken
away by a Vomit given a little before the Fit, which happens, because by this
means the Blood is pretty fully cleansed of its bilous Humor: tho its worthy
observation that Vomits do no good in a Quartan Ague, and seldom in a Tertian,
unless they are given presently at the beginning, when the febrile Disposition
is yet light, and not fully confirmed.

Concerning intermitting Fevers in general, there remain yet to be explained
certain irregularities, of them, in which they alter from the common way: first
therefore, the fits are wont sometimes to be without cold or shivering: an
intermittent. Fever was rise this Autumn, whose accesses troubled the diseased
only with heat, and that very intense, in many there was a violent vomiting,
but no cold or sweat; after four or five returns had happened, as the fit
invaded, the diseased were wont to be a little chilled, and afterward plainly
to have the cold fit, and, as it went off, to sweat: the reason of this was,
because by the hot summer the Constitution of the Blood was become sharp and
very much burnt: wherefore the Particles of the crude Juice mixed with it were
presently scorcht and burnt, that they did not wax cold first with a sourness
(like new beer) and then afterward burn out: but a Turgescency being raised,
the whole (like dry Wood laid on the fire) presently burnt out in a light
flame; but afterward, the Liquour of the Blood, after having burnt for some
fits, became less torrified; that the depraved nutritive Juice was not
presently scorcht, but passed into a nitrous Matter, and fermenting with a
sourness; which first growing turgid, brought a sense of coldness on the whole
Body.

There remains yet a great doubt concerning the distances of the returns, which
sometimes seem to be double in the same Fever, that the first access answers to
the third, and both happily in the Morning: and again, the second to the
fourth, and both happen in the Evening, and so on: wherefore such a Fever is
wont to be called a double tertian or quartan: It seems to me, that in this
case sometimes it happens that the Fever is simple, and of one kind, and that
the Types are a like, and all agreeing with each other; but that the error
chiefly arises, because the intervals of the returns are not computed by hours,
but by days: for since the intervals of the beginnings of the Fits are not
distant from each twenty four hours exactly, but either sixteen or thirty hours
in a quotidian, and in a tertian not forty eight hours, but forty or fifty six,
more or less, or thereabout, it will come to pass that the alternate fits will
happen before, and the rest after noon: to which also may be added, that the
uneven way of living which the diseased use, may oftentimes produce great
unevennesses of the returns, that sometimes the fit comes twice a day, as I
have often observed in cachectical Persons, and such as have used a disorderly
diet: nevertheless it often happens that intermittent Fevers have returns of
fits which neither observe the same distance, nor keep wholly to the same sort
of form: I have frequently noted in a quartan Fever, that besides the set
accesses, returning about the same hour, the fourth day, certain erring and
uncertain fits troubled the Diseased, that sometimes, the day preceding the
wonted fit, sometimes following it, another fit also (tho slight) was raised
anew, carrying exactly the Type of an intermittent Fever, with a shivering, a
heat and sweat: and nevertheless the primary access returned at the usual time:
this for the most part is wont to happen either by a diet ill ordered,
especially by surfeiting and drinking of Wine, or by the ill administration of
Physic: the reason of which, I take it, consists in this, that by these
errors in diet more matter is heapt together, than can be cleared off at one
fit.

CHAP. IV. Of the kinds of intermittent Fevers, and first, of a Tertian.
WE call a Tertian Fever, not that which happens at three days distance; but
inclusively from the day in which one fit begins, on the third thence, another
returns: mean while, sometimes if the fits are long, viz. protracted to twenty
four hours, and withal come before the usual time of their accesses, the space
of intermission is often less then twenty four hours.

The essence of a Tertian Fever consists in this, that the Blood (like Beer
made of over-dryed Malt) being too sharp and burnt, does not soon subdue and
ripen the nutritive Juice, which is brought into it crude, from things eaten,
but perverts a great deal of it into a Nitrosulphureous matter, wherewith, when
the mass of Blood is saturated to a Turgescency, like new Beer put in Bottles,
it falls a fermenting: from the flowing of that nitrous matter, which obtunds
the heat and vital Spirits, and twitches the nervous Parts, first a cold is
caused with a shivering: afterward, the vital Spirit prevailing again, this
matter fermenting in the Blood, begins to be mastered and to be kindled in the
Heart, by the burning of whilch, an intense heat is diffused throughout the
whole Body: afterward its relics being severed, and mixing with the Serum, are
sent forth by sweat.

This burnt disposition of the Blood consists in this, that it is impregnated
more than it ought with Particles of Salt and Sulphur: Wherefore the
procatarctick Causes which dispose to this disease are a hot and bilous
Temperament, Youth, a very hot Diet, as an immoderate use of Wine and peppered
meats; but especially the Vernal and Autumnal Seasons of the Year; tho most
commonly some evident Cause besides is required for putting this Disposition in
act, and we ascribe the origin of this Disease to some notable accident:
Wherefore a lying on the Ground, or taking cold after sweating, or
transpiration any way hindered, also surfeiting or a troubling of the Stomach by
disorderly eating, and whatsoever things cause an immoderate effervescence of
the Blood, bring into act the latent disposition of this Disease: for on every
such occasion the nutritive Juice heapt together in the Blood, and somewhat
depraved, falls a flowing, and separating from the rest of the Blood, ferments
it with a nitrous sourness, afterward being kindled and exagitated with the
vital Spirit and Heat, it brings the fit with a very intense burning.

A Tertian Fever is wont to be most common in the Spring, at which time the
Blood is most vigorous and in best plight. A Fever happening, if it continues not
long, is commonly said rather to be Physic, than a Disease, which in part is
true, because by this means the impurities of the Blood are consumed, the
obstructions of the Viscera are opened, and indeed the whole body is
ventilated, so that it is wholly freed from any excrementitious matter, and
from the seminaries of growing Diseases: but if this Disease be drawn out in
length, it is the cause of many Distempers, and of a long sickness: for hereby
the mass of Blood is very much deprived of the vital Spirit; and (like Wine too
much fermented) in some manner looses its strength, wherefore a Jaundise,
Scurvy, or Cachexia follow upon this Fever, when it is long a curing: for by
the frequent fits, the vital spirit very much evaporates, which in regard it is
little restored by things eaten, the Blood becomes thereby watery, and almost
without strength: mean while, the Particles of the Salt and Sulphur are raised
and exalted more, whence the Blood is made sharp and salt; and so more unapt
for Circulation and a Pneumatosis.

Moreover this Disease, protracted in length, often changes its form, and from
a Tertian, becomes either a quotidian, or sometiems a quartan; and afterward,
sometimes it returns from both to a Tertian: the reason of this is, the various
change of the Disposition of the Blood; for when from being sharp and bilous,
as it is in a Tertian, it comes to be less sharp, but more watery, and weaker
in its Crasis, the increases of the fermentative matter are more quick, and the
accesses return daily, but when it turns austere and pontick, the increases of
the matter being more slow, the fit comes but on the fourth day.

Certain Symptoms are wont to happen upon a Tertian Fever, which are vulgarly
accounted for the Crises of this Disease; and in truth, sometimes those
appearing, the affect either clearly ceases, or begins to remit of its wonted
fierceness: those Symptoms are chiefly these three, viz. a breaking forth of
the Lips, a Jundise, and a Phlegmon suddenly raised in any part of the Body;
tho I have sometimes observed, that notwithstanding such breaking forth of the
Lips, the Fever has continued obstinate for a long time. wherefore I think it
must be said, that that eruption of Pimples denotes only a fuller Diaphoresis
in the whole, whereby the gross, as well as the subtle recrements of that adust
Blood, evaporate forth; for I have known in some, that in a Tertian Fever
pushes have broke out all over their Body, as tho they had the small Pox; and
if by this free ventilation, as by a purging, the Blood is so freed, that it
recovers its ancient Crasis, the Fever is come to a Crisis; but if (as it
sometimes happents) some recrements, tho the more gross, break forth, and
others remain within, and still foment the feverish Disposition, those sores
argue only a greater taint of the Blood, and an obstinacy of the Disease:
therefore it is to be observed, if upon sore Lips the Fever does not remit, it
will prove of long continuance and severe.

Sometimes a Jaundise happens upon a tertian Fever, and puts an end to it, the
reason is, because when the Blood has gottne a sharp or bilous Disposition,
that thereby it perverts the nutritive Juice, and so heaps together an
excrementitious matter, it is often freed from that Discrasy, when by a sudden
excretion the recrements of the adust Salt and Sulphur, are freely purged: the
Gall-vessels being irritated by a Medicine or spontaneously, and so plentifully
clearing forth the Choer from the Blood, often perform this: for vomiting,
purging, and especially a Diarrhaea conduce very much to the cure of this
Disease, nay sometimes the Blood alone, exerting it self of its own accord,
throws off its bilous Recrements as its refuse, and deposes it in the Skin in
circulating, and so the Jaundise cures the Fever.

When a Phlegmon (as it sometimes is wont) happens upon this affect, it is
commonly said, that the Ague is fallen into the place swollen. Now it seems not
strange that the Disease is determined by such an abscess: because the Blood by
this means continually severs from its body the store of the degenerated
nutritive Juice, and conveys it to the Part affected: wherefore a Belly
continually loose has freed some by degrees: because by this means the Blood
has presently cast forth its unprofitable Burden, still growing upon it, nor
has allowed it a full increase: and sometimes also, a deafness happening on a
sudden, the tertian Fever has presently ceased, viz. by reason of the continual
Metastasis of the febrile matter from the mass of Blood to the Head.

But if a tertian Fever neither declines by degrees of its own accord within a
short time, so as to cease wholly within seven or ten returns, nor is brought
to a Crisis by any of the ways abovementioned, nor is removed by the help of
Physic; but after ten or twelve fits continues still sorely to afflict the
Diseased, it will prove a very difficult thing to cure it: for the Blood, by
the continual he aping together of the febrile Matter, and by its frequent
being inflamed, becomes at length so depraved, that it concocts nothing rightly
for nourishing the Body and supporting its strength: nor is it able wholly to
shake off the impurities and Excrements from its mass, that it may make a
Crisis of the Disease; but the same daily prevailing, the Blood, besides its
dyscrasie, begins to be somewhat injured in its mixture, wherefore the Flts
return more frequently; nor does a perfect intermission come between, but the
Diseased being very weak and faint, are in a manner always feverish, with a
thirst and heat. When the thing is brought to this pass, unless Art affords a
Remedy, or the change of the place of abode, or the revolution of the Year
bring relief, this Affect often is terminated in Death.

As to the Cure, the Method of healing commonly is directed to this only scope,
viz. that the Minera of the Disease be extirpated, and that the febrile Matter
be eradicated out of our Body without any remaining fomes or fear of a Relapse;
wherefore we diligently insist on Vomits and Purges, whcih, when they do little
toward a Cure, but the strength of the Diseased is very much broken, they are
left by the Physicians, and the whole business is committed to Nature. The
Intentions (as it seems to me) ought to be these; First, the restoring of the
Blood to its natural temper, Secondly, the prevention (as much as may be) of
the depravation of the nutritive Juice. Thirdly, the stopping of the feverish
fermentation for keeping off the Fit. And these Indications have place not only
in a Tertian Fever, but in every intermittent Fever besides: which nevertheless
are not to be performed by the same ways or Remedies, but by one sort and
another, according to the diversity of the Disease, the condition of the sick,
and the symptoms chiefly pressing: howsoever, in the Cure of this Disease,
there is more to be imputed to Nature, and to a well regulated form of Diet,
than to Pharmacy.

1. Concerning the first Intention, viz. that the Blood may be reduced to its
natural temper, Vomits, bleeding, and purging are of great Use; especially if
they are used in the beginning of the Disease. Vomits do good, inasmuch as they
purge the Stomach, that the first concoction may be better performed, and that
thereby a purer nutritive Chyme may be supplied for the Matter of the Blood,
and chiefly, inasmuch as by forcing the Choler plentifully from the meatus
choledechus, they empty the Gallbladder, that thereby the Choler may be more
copioussy cleared from the Blood, and so the Blood may be cleans'd from the
recrements of the adust Sulphur and Salt. Opening a Vein cools and ventilates
the Blood, that thereby it is less torrified or parched, and is circulated more
freely in the Vessels without danger of being burnt. Purging also draws
plentifully the Choler from the Gall-vessels, and consequently from the mass of
Blood, and by irritation them, forces it forth. For this end, ( viz. the
reducement of the Blood, Digestives conduce, being sharp qualifiers, inasmuch
as tey fuse and alter the Blood, and allay its fervor. Sometimes also the
change of the place of abode, and of the Air, egregiously corrects the evil
constitution of the Blood above any other Remedies.

The second Intention is excellently performed by a Diet, and an exact form of
Food, which in this Disease ought to be thin and spare: wherefore Hunger is
commonly said to be the best Remedy of this Disease; and we find by common
Experience, that by a spare feeding the feverish access is most commonly put
off beyond it usual time. There are two things chiefly to be observed
concerning Diet; first, that the Aliments be thin, let nothing be given
sulphurous or spirituous; for so the conflagration of the Blood is lessened:
then secondly, that when the Fit is a coming, or has seized, no Food be taken;
wherefore in fasting Persons the Fit is more mild and is sooner over.

What was proposed in the third palce: a stopping of the feverish access, is
undertaken by Remedies which stop the fermentation of the Blood; and tho this
Remedy be looked upon by Physicians as Empyrical, Immethodical, and Deceitful,
yet I have found by experience, that these Fevers have been oftentimes cured
this way, when Medicines did nothing at all: tho you must observe, that the use
of these after bleeding and purging (if there be need of them) will do most
good, and unless these are duly premitted, those others seldom stop the Fit:
and Vomiting, Purging, and Blooding, unless they are used presently and at the
beginning, do little good, nay, are oftener wont to do hurt; wherefore if the
Choler about the beginning be plentifully cleansed forth, or the Blood be
ventilated by breathing a Vein, it is reduced to its due Crasis; but afterward,
in the progress of this Disease, (the Spirit being very much exhausted, and the
Salt and Sulphur being too much exalted) if these evacuations are used, they
weaken the Crasis of the Blood more; and therefore it is found by observation,
that a Tertian Fever is seldom or never cured, and often passes into a
Quotidian, where these Medicines are used very late. I have known my self in
the Springtime that certain Persons enjoying a good entire health, have fallen
presently into a Tertian Fever, after having taken a Vomit for prevention-sake,
which caused a violent evacuation; and that others, who have been cured for
some time of this Fever, have presently undergone a relapse upon taking a
strong Purge for carrying off the remainder of the febrile matter: it may
readily be said, that the Minera of the Disease lying quiet before, is roused
up by this means by the Medicine, and brought into act; but if you consider
this thing rightly, it seems rather to be said, that by a strong Purge the
Crasis of the Blood is very much injured, and whereas before it was prone to a
bilous Discrasy, so that it assimilated with difficulty the nutritive Juice,
upon this evident cause it presently degenerates more, and that it forthwith
perverts the Nutriment into a fermentative matter, and so incurrs the feverish
disposition. An Opinion has vulgarly prevailed, that a Tertian Fever can scarce
be cured without a Vomit; wherefore some Medicasters are wont, under the
pretext of necessity, to give an Emetick Medicine to any Persons whatsoever
troubled with this Disease (tho weak and infirm) not without great danger of
Life; and those whom they judge wholly unable to bear this Remedy, they leave
to Nature, as not easily curable. But (as I am well satisfied by having often
tried the contrary) that this kind of Practice is ill founded: and I rather
think that Vomits are seldom or never required for the Cure of a Tertian Fever,
unless it be in a robust Body, and readily inclined to vomit, and when it
happens that the Stomach is loaded with an excrementitious matter; but instead
of this, that a gentle Purge may be more properly used; for a Purge in this
case does the same thing as a Vomit, to wit, it evacuates the Vessels
containing the Choler, that this being plentifully exhausted from the blood,
the feverish Dyscrasy may be corrected. Now when the Humor of the Gall,
emptied in the Stomach, is drawn forth upward, a great offense is thereby
brought on the Stomach, and a mighty perturbation is raised in the whole body:
but if by a gentle Cathartick that Humor is allured downward, it is sent forth
without any trouble. Moreover, if to a gentle Purge repeated once or twice, a
very thin Diet, and without any meat, be added, it will often answer the
Preservatory indication, that there will not be need of other Remedies for
removing the cause of the Disease, but these things being duly premitted, let
those things be used, which either inwardly taken or outwardly applied stop the
access of the Fever. By this plain and easy form of Physic, viz. by purging
with an infusion of Senna and Rhubarb, a thin diet, and a topical febrifuge
applied to the Breast or Wrists, I have oftentimes known tertian Fevers cured in
a short time, without the use of any other offensive Medicine. Nay, a thin diet
alone, with Periapts seasonably applied, has cured very successfully a Woman
with Child, aged Persons, and such as were very weak, whose strength would not
bear purging.

I have so frequently experienced the wished success of that method, that I do
not doubt, but a tertian Fever, if it be managed this way from the beginning,
to wit, before the temper of the Blood be more injured by an ill form of diet,
or by Physic ill administered, it will be caured as easily as any other
Disease: for proof of this I shall give the following relation.

A certain noble Youth, of a choleric Temperament, was seized with an
intermittent tertian Fever; as the fit came on him he vomited very much yellow
and grenish Choler, afterward for many hours he was sorely troubled with a most
intense Heart-burning, a heat and a drought. The day of intermission, on which
it was my chance to be present, eight ounces of Blood were drawn by my order
from this Person, and in the Afternoon an emollient Clyster was injected: he
used also, a very thin diet, ( viz. only of Barley Meats) he took every Night
going to rest this Opiate, viz. Conserve of Roses vitriolated half a dram,
Diascordium a scruple, and every Morning a Scruple of Salt of Wormwood, in a
spoonful of the Juice of Oranges: but these things not succeeding (for the fit
returned somewhat more remiss, but with a violent vomiting as before) and
likewise in regard this sick Person greatly dreaded a Vomit (because upon
taking a very gentle Emetick not long before he had vomited about thirty times,
even till being seized with a Cramp and Convulsions, he was brought to a great
failure of strength with danger of Life) therefore, the day following the said
fit, I gave him a potion of the infusion of Senna, Rhubard, and yellow Saunders
with Salt of Wormwood in Fountain Water, by which he purged ten times with
relief: the next Morning, three hours before he expected the fit, I applied
febrifuge Epithems to his Wrists, and blooded him again to six onnces, from
which time he had no fit of his Fever, and afterward, being purged again after
the same manner, he grew perfectly well.

But if a Tertian Fever, by reason of the evil constitution of the diseased, or
by reason of errors committed in diet, or Physic, has laid its roots deep,
that after a long continued affect the fits still grow worse and worse, and the
diseased mightily languish, their strength being dejected, with a thirst, and
burning almost continual, a loss of Appetite, Watchins, a weak Pulse, a ruddy
Urine, and very full of contents, somewhat a differing method of Cure ought to
be ordered: in this case first it must be endeavored that the Discrasy of the
Blood be removed: wherefore let the diseased feed only on thin diet, as Barley
or Oat Meats, with the opening Roots boiled in them, wholly forbearing Meat
Broaths; let the Belly be kept soluble (if it be needful) by the use of
emollient Clysters; Moreover (Catharticks being omitted) it seems that we ought
only to insist on digestive Medicines, which fuse the Blood, and gently lead
forth the serous Impurities by Urine; and comforting Remedies, which strengthen
the Viscera, and refresh the Spirits: for this end apozemes of diuretic Herbs
and Roots, neatly prepared, also Opiats of temperate Conserves with Sal Nitre,
or the fixed Salt of Herbs, and with testateous Powders, and Spirit of Vitriol
mixed with them, excellently conduce, when the Crasis of the Blood is somewhat
amended, that the Urine is clearer and less colured, also the sleep quieter,
with an abatement of Thirst and Heat; then Remedies may be profitably given for
stopping the fit of the Fever: Wherefore let febrifuge Epithems be applied to
the Wirsts, and to the Soles of the Feet; also let the Powder of the Peruvian
Bark, or of its Succedaneum, or also of the Bark of an Ash, of Tamarisk, or of
Gentian, be given in White Wind with the mixture of Salts: After that the
accesses are taken away, and the diseased begin to gather Strength, to have a
Stomach, and in some measure to concoct what they take, gentle Purges will be
of use, but let the diseased still abstain from seeding on Flesh or rich fare,
and it is not to be doubted, but he will soon recover his perfect Health
without violent purging or blooding.

CHAP. V. Of the Intermittent Quotidian Fever or Ague.
NExt after a tertian Fever, by reason of their Affinity and the likeness of
the Fit, follows a Quotidian. viz. whose access is wont to return every day. It
is the Opinion of some that this Fever is only a double Tertian, and that it
arises from the matter being dispersed, and getting possession of a twofold
focus; to which nevertheless I do not agree, and I judge that its rise is to be
attributed to a peculiar Discrasy of the Blood: in this the symptoms of Heat
and Cold are more remiss; but the access holds longer, and is often wont to
continue eighteen or twenty hours: this Fever for the most part follows upon a
Tertian, for when the vital Spirit is much spent by a frequent Deflagration of
the Blood, and (the feverish Disposition still remaining) the Blood is become
weaker, it less concocts, or brings to perfection the nutritive Juice, and
perverts it in a manner wholly into a fermentative matter: wherefore it is
sooner brought to an increase, and is heapt together to a plenitude of
Turgescency in half the time as before: but because the matter heapt together
partakes as well of crudity as adustion, therefore the heat of the fermentation
is more remiss and more uneven, and (like green Wood laid on the fire) it burns
more flowly; wherefore the fit is of a longer continuance.

Sometimes it happens that a Qutidian Fever arises first without a foregoing
Tertian, viz. when a feverish affect seises a Body that is cacochimical, and
filled with evil Juices: for then the Blood, being poor in Spirits, perverts
the nutritive Juice in a greater store, and heaps it together in a shorter time
to a plenitude of Turgescency: and that which at first is a Quotidian often
changes its Type, and becomes a Tertian: even as a Tertian often passes into a
Quotidian, there being a great vicinity betwixt these Fevers, and their Causes;
and a little change of the Constitution of the Blood makes a transition of the
one into the other. An intermittent Quotidian Fever is not so easily cured as a
Tertian: for whether that comes first simply, or follows upon another
intermittent; however it is raised drom a stronger cause, and argues a greater
Discrasy of the Blood, which does not presently yield to Remedies: Moreover,
this Fever if it be of Long eontinuance, or comes upon another Cronick Disease,
besides the vice of the Blood, it has most commonly joined with it infirmities
of the Viscera: to wit, the Blood being vitiated, easily fastens its
Impurities, heapt together by degrees on the Viscera, as it passes through
their Involutions. (Hence in a quotidian Fever; a loading of the Ventricle, a
tension of the Hypochondres, obstructions, or Tumors sometimes of the Liver,
sometimes of the Spleen, or of the Mesentery, are joined) tho these kinds of
Affects are not the cause of the Fever (as is vulgarly thought) but only its
products. Wherefore in this Fever, besides the simple Method of Cure which is
indicated in a Tertian, many other Intents or Coindicants come in
consideration, viz. We must use all our Endeavors that the Ventricle be purged
of its load of Humors, that the stuffings of the Viscera be cleared, that
their Infirmities be strengthened, and together with these, that the Discrasy of
the Blood be amended, and the feverish accesses stopped, so that by reason of
these various kinds of Intentions, we must proceed by a longer way to the Cure.
In this case Vomits, (if the Strength will bear them) will be of use above the
rest; also Purges, with which the assiduous increase of the excrementitious
Matter may be sent forth, must be often repeated; besides these, digestive
Remedies and deobstruents which restore the Ferments of the Viscera and of the
Blood, and correct their Discrasies are frequently to be used. Wherefore, fixed
Salts of Herbs, their extracts, the acid Spirits of Minerals, and sometimes
Preparations of Steel do excellently well. Concerning these means there is a
difficult task, since, because of the manifold evils, many things are to be
done together, whereas, by reason of the assiduity of the feverish fit, the
Diseased can use only a few. In affects thus complicated, tho the way of Method
requires first a removal of Impediments, and then to cure the Disease, yet I
have known this kind of Fever cured often without method, and empirically, in a
cacochymical Body, attended with many other affects; to wit, after a light
provision for the whole, febrifuge Remedies outwardly applied have first taken
away the feverish access, that afterward, time, and occasions of curing, might
be the better afforded for the other affects. I lately went to see a Lady of
Quality, who having long had a cachectical habit of Body, and being weak and
feeble, a month after Childbirth, was seized with an intermittent Quotidian;
after fix or seven accesses of which, her strength was so cast down, that she
was not able to rise from her bed, or scarce to be raised up in it; nor could
she take ever so little food, tho very thin, but it caused great disturbances
in her Stomach: Moreover, the Region of the Stomach, and of the left
hypochondre, was all beset with a hard Tumor, and violently paining: By reason
of the strength being extremely cast down, there was no place here for
evacuation besides the use of Clysters; and the Stomach being mighty weak,
refused all other Remedies, unless they were pleasing, and in a small quantity.
In this difficult case, and pent up within narrow limits of Curing, I advised
these few things, viz. that she should take twice a day this mixture; viz.
Magistral water of Earthworms two ounces, Elixir Prprietatis six drops:
moreover, I ordered a fomentation to be applied to the Stomach, of the Leaves
of Pontick Wormwood, Centory, Southernwood boiled in White Wind with the roots
of Gentian, the Vessel covered; and that after the somentation, a toast dipped in
the same Liquor should be worn on the Stomach; besides, I had febrifuge
Epithems bound to her Wrists; and by these Remedies alone, on the third day she
mist her Fit, and continued free from the same afterward, and then by the use
of Chalibeat Remedies, she grew perfectly well within a short time.

CHAP. VI. Of the Quartan Fever or Ague.
IN a Quartan Fever, the time for the return of the Fit is longer than in the
rest, it being extended to the fourth day inclusively; and it is wont to be of
longer continuance, and more difficultly cured: for this Disease is protracted
for many Months, and often Years, and seldom or searce at all yields to
Medicines.

The Fit for the most part begins with cold, and a shaking, which are followed
with a pretty troublesome heat, but more remiss than in a Tertian, Sweat for
the most part concludes the access. If the Disease sticks long, it brings the
Scorbutic or hypochondriack affect, and involves men in an unhealthy habit of
body.

The Causes which dispose to this Disesse are, first, the constitution of the
Air, and of the Season; for the time of Autumn is always proper for this
affect, that you shall seldom observe a Quartan Fever to arise but about the
Fall: also in certain places, especially about the Seacoast, this affect is
wont to be endemious, seizing any that live there, or come thither as
strangers; for this also makes a declining age, also a melancholy temperament,
and which, by reason of an ill form of Diet, is obnoxious to the hypochondriack
affect; moreover, Fevers of another kind, that are of a long continuance, and
Chronick Diseases, often pass into a Quartan Fever.

These things being confidered, it seems that it must be said, that a Quartan
Fever, even as other Intermittents, depends on the vicious disposition of the
Blood; for the nutritive Juice, conveyed by degrees into the Vessels, is
perverted into a fermentative Matter, and the effervescency of this heapt
together to a plenitude of turgescency, makes the Fit of a Quartan Fever. But
since in this Fever there are some things peculiar from the rest, we must
enquire what sort of dyscrasie of the Blood there is in this Disease distinct
from the rest, and after what manner it raises the most observable Symptoms.

I say therefore, that in this Disease the Liquor of the Blood has passed from
its sweet, spirituous, and balsamic nature, to be acid and somewhat austere,
like Wine turning sour. That is to say, there is a scarcity of Spirits, and the
earthly or tartarous part (which consists chiefly of Earth and Salt) is exalted
too much, and being raised to a flowing, brings a sourness to the mass of
Blood: the Blood degenerated after this manner from its native Disposition,
does not duly concoct, and assimilate to it self the nutritive Juice, but
perverts it into an extraneous matter, wherewith, when it is saturated to a
sulness in the Vessels, and the nervous parts are irrigated with the Juice
thence arising, there follows a flowing, and as it were a spontaeous
Esfervescence of this Matter, whereby the feverish access is wont to be caused
with a shaking, and a heat, as in a Tertian.

In a Quartan Fever the returns have longer Intervals, because the Discrasy of
the Blood being toward an acid, and therefore less smart and hot, it perverts
the nutritive Juice without a contest and tumult; wherefore somewhat of it is
assimilated, and the depravation of the rest does not recede so far from its
natural state as in a Tertian: and hence its heaping together to a plenitude is
slower, and it rises to a Turgesency in about as much time again and a half as
in a Tertian.

The reason why this Disease is of so difficult a cure, and so obstinately
infests the Diseased, is the melancholy Constitution of the Blood, which is nor
easily removed, and yields scarce to any Medicines; for there being in it a
scarcity and defect of Spirits, and the Salt and Tartar being too much exalted
(as when Wines turn sour) it is extreme hard to restore it, and it is in a
manner of the same labor and difficulty as to renew the vinous Spirit and
Vigor in Vinegar; because for restoring the Blood depraved after that manner,
there is need that its whole mass be volatiz'd, and that it spiritualises as it
were anew. Wherefore in this case evacuatives do not the least good, nay by
depauperating the Blood more without remedying it, they often impair the
Strength: but there is need of those things which may exalt and volatise that
which is fixed: and may promote a Pneumatosis in the whole mass of Blood: thence
it is that in this disease the change of the Air and of the Soil most commonly
give relief before any other Remedies whatsoever. For Quartan Fevers arising
about Autumn are often cured by the following Spring, which doubtless happens
because the changed quality of the Air is wont to alter the evil habit of the
Blood for the better: and for the same reason, the change also of the place of
abode most commonly cures this Affect when it will not yield to any Medicine.

The Autumnal Season is most proper to produce this severish habit of the
Blood, because when very much of Spirit and Sulphur has past away by the Summer
heat, and that which remains begins to be pressed upon by the Cold, the Liquor of
the Blood (as Wine turning sour after too much Effervesence) easily degenerates
into a pontick and sharpish Nature: this also is provur'd by the Air of the Sea
infecting the Blood with saline Vapors, which fix the Spirits. Moreover, the
affinity of this Disease which the Scurvy and the Hypochondrial affect plainly
shows that the evil Disposition of the Blood is in fault, whereby it is become
salt and earthy with a defect of a Pneumatosis.

The last year, toward the end of the Summer, which had been very hot, an
Epidemick Fever arose: then Autumn coming on, when that Disease ceased, a
Quartan Fever began to be very rife, so that in many places well near the
fourth part of mankind was seized with the same, and those of all Ages and
Temperaments, which plainly showed that this affect did not take its rise from
a melancholy Humor heapt together through the fault of the Spleen, (as some
have thought) but from the Discrasy of the Blood caused through the
distemperature of the Year.

Tho many Physical Apparatus's were ordered against this evil, yet very few
were cured within the compass of the Autumn: In some, about the first
beginnings of their Sickness, before the Disease had taken root, Vomits gave
relief: tho, in most, Medicines purging any ways, tho repeated a hundred times,
did not the least good at all: those in whom the evil was deeply rooted,
received not any relief from the most exactly devised Remedies used throughout
the whole Autumn; when at this time I saw the vulgar Methods of Physic put in
practice in vain. To a certain noble Virgin who desired a sudden Cure to be
performed by any manner of means, I proposed, that if she would undergo a
Salivation for some days by a mineral Medicine, she might thence hope a speedy
conquest of her Disease: she readily agreeing to this, I gave her a gentle and
very safe Medicine, by which only a gentle spitting was raised, and that ended
within twelve days; from the time the salivation began, she presently mist her
fits; but at the times they were wont to come she found a disturbance in her
whole Body, with an oppression of the Heart, and a danger of Fainting, but
afterward, the spitting being ended, she seemed thoroughly recovered; and when
after two Months time she had again certain slight accesses of this Disease, an
Emetick Powder being given her twice or thrice she was perfectly cured without
a relapse.

After the Winter Solstice this Disease was not so violent, but began to grow
mild, in some, of its own own accord, and to be more easily overcome in most
others by the use of Medicines, for at this time the discrasy of the Blood,
contracted by the Summer heat, is wont to be removed by degrees by the cold of
Winter, and the inveterascent mass of the Blood to depose its old taint, and to
return toward its natural state: but those who were of a melancholy
Temperament, or had the Viscera, and especially the Spleen ill affected, or
those that used an ill form of diet, received no change from this Tropic, but
held their Disease to the next period of the Year, to wit, to the Vernal
Equinox, and then in a great many this affect was seen to be overcome, the
Blood either being renewed of it self, or its Distemperature being more easily
amended by the use of Medicines; but in the mean time many aged, cachochymical,
and otherwise weakly Persons, died every where of this Disease, in this whole
tract of time; and some there were, who having past the Summer Solstice, had
not yet shaken it off: now, tho many were troubled with this, as it were,
Epidemious Fever almost for a whole Year, yet none that I knew of contracted it
first in the Spring, and very few recovered of it during the Autumn, that I
cannot doubt but the Discrasy of the Blood was really the cause of it, and that
its cure consisted in its change.

The Remedies which oftentimes gave relief (at least as far as it agreed with
our observation) were such as stopped the fit of the Fever: for the evil habit of
the Blood being somewhat amended upon the change of the Season of the Year, in
case the habitual usance of the fits be broken off, Nature recollects her self,
and easily recovers her ancient state of Health by her own endeavor. And this
kind of intent (viz. the stopping of the Fits) tho it be sometimes performed by
Vomits given a little before the access (for these often stop the feverish
Motion of the Blood, by raising another contrary to it) yet this indication is
far more certainly, and indeed more successfully performed by the use of those
kinds of Medicines, which do not at all evacuate from the Viscera, but cause in
the Blood a certain fixation, or precipitation of the feverish Matter for a
time. Wherefore those, whom I undertook to cure as the Spring came on, and
thence forwards, I managed with this Method (and in many with good success) a
provision being made for the whole by a Medicine, sometimes Vomiting, sometimes
Purging three hours before the fit, I was wont to order Epithemes to be applied
to the Wrists, and withal a febrifuge Powder to be taken in Sack, and the
diseased to be kept in Bed in a gentle sweat: It seldom happened but at the
first or second time the access of the Fever was stopped after this manner, and
afterward the same Remedy being sometimes repeated, at length the Disease
wholly ceased: this kind of Practice (besides what I have found by experience)
seems to be made good by the use of the Powder of a certain Bark lately brought
from the Indies; which is said most certainly to cure this Disease, whereas the
Virtue or operation of this, without any Evacuation, consists only in this,
that it stops the invading fits of Fevers.

Concerning that Peruvian Bark, because of late it begins to be in daily use,
these few things which occur to common observation are to be said, the vulgar
way of giving it is to infuse two drams of this, being made into a Powder, in
White Wind or Sack for two Hours, the Vessel being close covered, and then as
the fit approaches to let the Diseased, lying in Bed, drink the Liquour with
the Powder. This Drink often removes the imminent access, tho many times that
coming after its usual manner, it prevents the next ensuing, howsoever, whether
the fit be stopped at the first, or at the second, or third time of return, and
the Disease seem to be cured, yet it oftentimes it wont to return within twenty
or thirty days: and then this Powder being given again, the Invasion of the
Disease is again put off for the space of about the same time; and after this
manner I have known many troubled with a Quartan, to have undergone only a few
accesses of it during the whole Autumn and Winter, and so to have held the
Enemy foreguarded till the Spring coming on, by the help of the Season of the
Year, and of other Medicines, the Disposition of the Blood was altered for the
better, and so that affect vanished by degrees: those who by this means procured
frequent times of truce, of the Quartan, being cheerful and sprightly, lived
prompt for all business, whereas otherwise being enervated and pale, they were
brought to a Languour, and a vicious habit of Body; scarce one of a hundred
tried this Remedy without effect, nay, if it be taken in a half quantity, or
less, viz. to the weight of half a dram or a dram, it oftentimes takes away the
accesses, and suspends the same only for a shorter space, nor is it matter
whether it be taken in White Wind or Sack, but with respect to the Temperaments
of the Diseased; for in a hot Temperament it may conveniently be taken in a
distilled Water or Whey; also its clear infusion, the thick substance thrown
away, produces the like effect but of shorter continuance. I have ordered this
Powder to be given to some made into Pills with Mucilage of Tragacanth, with
the like henefit to the Diseased; after what manner soever it be taken, it
cause no manifest Evacuation, unless it be in such as are apt to cast, and
loath all Physic, and it takes away the fit in a manner in all; nor is it only
given with benefit in a Quartan Fever, but in other kinds of intermittents,
viz. in all where there interceeds a time of cessation of the Fever: It is
commonly ordered, that a gentle Purge be given before the use of this; but in
some who have been very weak, and kept their Beds, this Powder taken alone
without a previous Purge, has procured laudable effects: mean while I must
ingeniously consess, that I have not yet seen an intermittent Fever thoroughly
cured by once giving this Powder, nay, not only fits of a Quartan Fever, but of
a Tertian and Quotidian, easy to be wholly overcome by other Remedies, seeming
to be driven away with this, constantly returned after a short time; for this
reason those, who, when there is no case of Necessity suppress intermittent
Fevers only for a short while by this Medicine, they being easy to be cured
other ways, seem to proceed deceitfully in Physic, nor more to the purpose,
than those who heal over a hollow Ulcer which will presently break forth again:
Indeed in some cases the use of this may be proper enough, viz. when by the too
great assiduity of fits, the strength of the Diseased is very much spent, times
of truce may be provured by this means, whereby Nature may recollect her self,
and afterward more powerfully oppose her Enemy; also this Powder is
conveniently given, that the Quartan Fever may be past over with less
tediousness during the Autumn and Winter. But those who desire to be long
vacant from the Incursions of that Fever, are advised to take this Powder in a
great quantity and often, viz. two drams for three fits one after the other,
whether the acccesses return or not, by this means they continue free the
longer, but still keep the latent Enemy within them, tho laid asleep.

If it be enquired concerning the nature of this Bark, and of its Virtue in
suppressing the fits of intermittent Fevers, we must not dissemble, but it is a
difficult thing to explicate the causes of these kinds of Effects, and of the
ways of operating; because we cannot find the like efficacy in any subject
besides: and a general rule is not well adapted to a singular experiment,
however, by a diligent conferring the Phoenomena, we shall make an orderly
deduction of certain Positions, which is they do not attain the truth of this
matter, at least wise may make some step toward it.

In the first place it may be observed, that this Medicine inwardly taken
chiefly exercises its force and energy on the mass of Blood: for it does not at
all irritate the Viscera, nor does it cause any exertion or trouble to them;
Moreover, until its virtue be communicated to the Blood, its antipyretick sorce
is not at all exerted, wherefore the fit immediately ensuing is not always
prevented, but the second or third after its being taken: and for this reason,
that it may affect the Blood the sooner, it is usual, that together with the
Powder a Liquour strongly impreguated with the same be given, for so its
Particles are more readily conveyed into the mass of Blood.

Secondly, the virtue of that Bark conveyed itno the Blood continues for some
time in it, and that shorter or longer, according as a greater or lesser
portion of the Medicine is inwardly taken; for the Particles of this mixed with
the Cruor, are circulated a long time with it, and the more there are of them,
the more they affect its mass, and produce a more lasting affect; for tho
Aliments, and certain other things taken inwardly, in as much as they are
presently subdued by the natural heat, assimilated or cast forth, cease to
operate; yet some Medicines taken into the Body, because they are not easily
subdued, nor by a sudden irritation are presently sent forth, continue very
active for many days, and keep the Blood and Jucies a long time in this or
that course of Fermentation; this may be observed of certain Medicines, also of
Poisons, and many Antidotes; whereof one only giving is wont to affect our
Bodies for many days, and the same repeated for a longer time: for it is usual
after Cathartick Medicines, if at any time they do nto operate by Vomit or
Seige, that Pimples and Pushes break forth outwardly, after many Weeks.
Moreover, if after Toxicum being drank Death be escaped, every man knows that
its virulency lurches for a very long time in the Blood and Juices. In like
manner also this Powder, and happily a great many other things inwardly taken,
continue still to act on the Spirits and Humors how much soever they seem
lulled a sleep.

Thirdly, tho that Medicine acts immediately on the Blood and Humors, yet it
does not thoroughly take away the feverish Discrasy seated in them, for as soon
as its force is spent, and all its Particles are past off from the mixture of
the Blood, the affect, suppressed only for a time, breaks forth anew, and takes
to its accesses after its wonted manner: but for as much as nature during this
time of cessation is become more strong, therefore after the relaps, the fits
are wont to return (not as before) but on the third or fourth day, according to
the first Type of the Disease.

Fourthly, it is to be observed, that this Remedy does not stop the accesses
of Fevers, as vulgar sebrisuges, by fixing or also by susing, the Blood; for
then always the imminent fit, and not the second, or third to follow after
would be prevented.

Which things being considered, that we may subjoyn some things, as a
Corallary, concerning the way of operating, whereby this Medicine seems to
Work, we say, that its likely that when the Particles proceeding from the same
taken inwardly, are mixed with the Blood, they force it into a certain new
Fermentation, wherewith whilst the Particles of the Blood are continually
agitated, they are wholly hindered from heaping together an excrementitious
matter, and from falling into feverish Turgescencies: for, as after the biting
of a Mad-dog, or the stinging of venomous Animals, the Blood it self, and
nervous Juice are long poisoned; yet Alexipharmicks taken hinder them from
falling prefently into great Irregularities, by keeping their Uquours in
another Fermentation, the use of which if so long continued, till the virulent
Corpuscles are wholly past away, no dreadful svmptom is feared from that taint
contracted; but if the strength of the Remedy, given in too small a quantity,
be first spent, presently the Povson springs forth anew, and the ancient venom
which seemed to be driven away, is again brought into act: after the like
manner, when the Blood having gotten a vicious habit perverts the nutritive
Juvce, and for the better expelling it when heapt together to a fullness, falls
into feverish Turgesencies, that Peruvian Bark reduced to a Powder, and given,
by the commerce of its Particles so exagitates, and alters the Blood, tho
affected with a Discrasy, by stirring a new fermentation, that it in some
measure concocts the nutritive Juice, and continually evaporates its
recrements, so that they are not heapt together for a matter of the fit, as
before, but when the Particles of this Remedy are wholly exhaled from the
community with the Blood, and all the virtue is spent, the evil Disposition of
the Blood before contracted breaks forth again, and therefore the fits of the
Fever return after their wonted manner: happily sometimes it falls only that
whilst by the use of that Powder the accesses are suppressed, that Discrasy of
the Blood, by reason of the change of the Season of the Year, or by help of
some other Remedy, or of nature her self, is amended by degrees, and so at
length the Fever disappears of its own accord: tho I have known this to have
happened but seldom, that you may expect the feverish fits to return in a manner
with the like certainty, as they are suppressed by that Powder.

As to the sensible qualities with which this Bark is endowed, it is manifest
that it excells in a bitterness, with a certain stipticity, that by the taste
it is discovered to carry in a manner the like savor as is usually found in
most Alexipharmicks, such as the root of Gentian, Serpentary, Contrayerva, etc.
For things which are actually bitter are mighty powerful in suppressing the
sorces of preternatural Ferments: nay, and the Root of Gentian, which
excellently resembles this Bark, was formerly of famous use for curing quartan
Fevers: and now, tho this Peruvian Powder be the only Alexiterion yet found for
the quartan Fever, which stops the fits of it and of others (tho only for a
time) yet it is not to be doubted, but there are other Medicines in nature,
equally febrisuges; and it may be hoped, that being led by the example of this
new invention, we may be stirred up to search into the Virtues of Herbs yet
unknown to us: thus while we insist on the trial of Fparticulars, and join
Empirical Physic with the Rational, it is not to be doubted but the Cures of
the quartan and of other Herculean Diseases will go on more prosperously: which
I the more freely ensure for in this age, or at leastwise in the succeeding,
because being guided by the Analogy of that Bark, I my self not long since,
running through many things, lighted on a Medicine of no contemptible use for
subduing Fevers: which also I give to all poor People, as a Succedaneum, with
good success.

CHAP. VII. Of continual Fevers.
AContinual Fever is that whereof the access is prolonged to many days without
any cessation: it has its times of remission and exacerbation, but none of
intermission; the burning sometimes is more remiss, sometimes more intense, but
the Diseased are still in a Fever, till the Disease be wholly solved by a
Crisis, or an insensible recovery.

Now there are three degrees or manners of Effervescency by which the Species
of continual Fevers are determined: from the subtle portion of the boiling
Blood, or from the Ebullition of the Spirits arises the Ephemera, also the
Synocus of one or many days: from the sulphurous or oily part of the Blood
too much heated and kindled, is raised the putrid Fever; thirdly, on a venomous
Miasm infecting the Blood, and congealing its Liquour, malignant Fevers depend:
in each of these, from the depravation or rather corruption of the nutritive
Juice, fresh heapt together in the Blood, various Paroxisms, Inequalities, and
critical Motions arise.

If it be asked after what manner the Effervescency of the Blood in a continual
Fever differs from that other which makes intermittents; I say, that the
Effervescence of the Blood in the latter depends only on the mingling of some
fermentative Matter with the Blood, which will not duly mix with it, and on
its heaping together to a plenitude of Turgescency: by reason of the
Effervescency of this with the Blood in the Vessels, and its deflagration in
the Heart, the fit is caused, its difflation is followed by an Apyrexia, so
that in the intervals of the fits neither the Spirits nor the Sulphur make an
effort, but the Liquour circulates evenly and without tumult in the Vessels,
the bond of mixture being entirely preserved; on the contrary, in a continual
Fever, the Disorders of the Spirit or Sulphur, or of both of them together
cause the ebullition of the Blood by their proper Effervescence, without the
mixture of another thing: Wherefore, for a cessation of the hurning heat,
besides the difflation of the excrementitious matter, a deflagration of the
kindled Blood, and its reduction to a due Crasis, are required.

The Constitution of the Blood in a continual Fever, is as that of Wines when
they ferment by too rich Lees; that is to say, they are strong with Spirit, and
grow turgid with an exalted Sulphur, and therefore of their own accord without
the mixture of another thing, they fall into a heat and boil violently: In an
intermittent Fever the Blood is stirred after such a Manner as Wines when they
fall a fermenting by reason of something which is not missible being put into
them: Moreover, in this Fever the Disposition of the Blood is like that of
Wines, when in their declining state they become over fretted, ropy, or also
sour; in which the Spirit is deprest, while the Salt or Sulphur, or both
together, are above the rest, and affect the whole Liquour with their disorder:
an intermittent Fever for the most part is without danger, because the parts
that compose the Blood, tho they have changed a little their Crasis, however
keep their bond of mixture; and whilst they are at liberty, circulate evenly in
the Vessels; and pervert the nutritive Juice into a matter not altogether
preternatural, but rather infesting with its Plenitude and Turgescency. In a
continual Fever, besides the distemperature, the mixture of the Blood, and the
texture of the Liquor are somewhat dissolved, that its corruption easily
follows, wherefore this Disease is often terminated in death; and the nutritive
Juice is depraved to a matter wholly vicious, and altogether offensive to
Nature.

CHAP. VIII. Of the Ephemera Fever.
I Have said that the least degree of Effervescence which brings a continual
Fever is placed in the subtle and spirituous Portion of the Blood, being too
much agitated and heated: for this, like Spirit of wine, boyls on any light
occasion, and gets a heat, being irritated either by too much Motion of the
Body, or Perturbation of Mind; from an ambient heat, as that of the Sun, or of
a Stove; by hot things inwardly taken, as drinking of Wine, eating of peppered
Meats, and the like: for the Spirits of the Blood easily wax very hot of their
own accord, and being violently moved, are not presently appeased, but
exagitate, variously confound, and force to a rapid and disorderly Motion other
Particles of the Blood: also by this Motion of the Spirits, the Sulphur, or the
oily part of the Blood is more boiled, a little more dissolved, and somewhat
more freely kindled in the Heart, whence an intense heat is raised in the whole
Body, but for as much as the Sulphur is heated and inflamed only by minute
Parts, and not throughout the whole, that fervor of the Spirits is soon
allayed and ceases; Wherefore the Fever which is raised after this manner, is
terminated for the most part within twenty four hours, and therefore is called
an Ephemera. And if by reason of a greater heat of the spirituous Blood, it be
prorogued longer, it seldom exceeds three days, and it is called an Ephemera
of many days, or a Synochus not putrid: but if it happens to be extended
beyond this time, this Fever readily passes into a putrid, to wit, from the
long continued ebullition of the spirituous Blood, at length the grosser
Particles of the Sulphur fall a burning, and involve the whole mass of Blood in
this Effervescence.

An Ephemera Fever and a simple Synochus seldom begin without an evident Cause;
besides the things beforementioned, immoderate Labor, Watchings, a sudden
Passion of the Mind, a constriction of the Pores, Surfeiting, also a Bubo or
Wound, in Childbearing Women an increase of milk are wont to bring these; the
procatarctick causes which dispose to them are, a hot temper of Body, an
Athletick habit, a Sedentary Life, and a Disuse of Exercise.

The first beginnings of this Disease depend on the presence of an Evident
Cause; for either the Corpuscles of an extraneous heat mixed with Blood, make it
boil like Water on the Fire or a Fever is brought by motion, or by reason of
Transpiration being let, even as when Wines being heated, or stopped close in
a Vessel, are set in a strong working: after what manner soever the
inflammation be first raised, presently the Spirits make an effort, and moving
hither and thither, force the Blood to boil, and to enlarge it self in a
greater space, with a frothy rarefaction: wherefore the Vessels are stretched,
and the membranous Parts are vellicated; hence a Pain, especially in the Head
and Loins, a spontaneous lassitude, and an inflation as it were of the whole
Body ensue. But if with the Spirit of the Blood some sulphury Part withal be
somewhat kindled, a smart heat is diffused through the whole, the Pulse becomes
high and quick, the Urine ruddy; also Thirst, Watchings, and many other
offensive Symptoms arise.

Concerning the Solution or Crisis of an Ephemera Fever, and of a Synochus not
putrid, there are three things chiefly requisite, viz. a removal of the evident
Cause; secondly, a severing or difflation of the depraved or excrementitious
matter from the Mass of Blood; thirdly, an appeasing of the parts of the Blood,
and their restitution to a natural and even motion and site. According as these
things happen, sometimes sooner, sometimes slower, and with more difficulty,
this Disease is ended in a shorter or longer time.

1. The Evident Cause, which for the most part is extrinsecal, is easily
removed, and Diseased Persons, as soon as ever they perceive themselves injured
by any thing, are wont to avoid the presence of, or continuance with that
thing: no Person being in a Fever upon drinking Wine, continues still to drink
it; when any Person grows more hot than usual by the heat of a Bath or of the
Sun, it is irksome to him to continue in it longer.

2. As to the excrementitious matter which ought to be separated and blown off
from the Blood, this is either brought from without, as when by surfeiting,
drinking of Wine, standing in the Sun, or bathing in hot Water, the Blood is
infected with hot and fermentative effluvia's or Corpuscles, or that matter is
engendered inwardly, as when upon the deflagration of the Blood its Liquor is
stuff't with adust Recrements or Particles; both these Matters must be
separated and blown off from the Blood, and be sent forth either by Sweat, or
insensible Transpiration, before the Fever is appeased: wherefore, when the
Pores are closed, and Transpiration is hindered, the Ephemera Fever continues a
longer time, and passes from a simple Synochus into a putrid Fever.

3. The Evident Cause being removed, and this degenerated Matter blown off, for
a cessation of the burning heat there is required an appeasing of the Parts of
the Blood, and a reducement of them to order. for a rapid and disorderly motion
begun in the Blood is not presently stopped, but ought to be allayed by degrees:
also the diverse Particles of the Blood disordered after this manner, and being
driven this way and that, by reason of the feverish effervescence, do not
presently take to their former order of site and position, but it is necessary
that they be extricated by degrees, and restored to their due mixture by little
and little.

Tho this Disease, after the removal of the Evident Cause, ceases for the most
part of its own accord, yet some Physical Remedies are advantageously applied
to Use, especially where there is danger lest the Ephemera Fever passes into a
putrid. The chief Intentions must be to allay the fervor of the Blood, and to
procure a free Transpiration, to which chiefly conduce blooding, a very thin
Diet, or rather abstinence, cooling Drinks, a withdrawing the excrements of the
Belly by Clysters; but above the rest, Sleep and Rest do most good, which if
wanting, they must be seasonably procured by Opiats and Anodines.

A renowned young man, about twenty years of age, of an athletick habit of
Body, by an immoderate drinking of strong Wine fell into a feverish distemper,
with a drought, heat, and a mighty trouble of the Praecordia; being blooded, he
drank a vast quantity of fountain water, and thereupon a copious sweat
presently ensuing, he soon recovered.

An ingenious young man, of a sedentary Life, and withal very much addicted to
the study of Learning, when of late he had exercised himself above measure in
the Summer Sun, began to complain of a Headache, a want of Appetite, a trouble
of the Praecordia, and a feverish distemperature over the whole Body. To whom
(in regard he loathed all Physic) I ordered a total Abstinence, unless it were
from small Beer and Barley-meats: On the second day, and again more on the
third, the Symptoms remitted by little and little; at length, on the fourth, he
became free from his Fever without any Medicine.

CHAP. IX. Of the Putrid Fever.
A Putrid Fever is when the oily or sulphurous part of the Blood, being too
much heated, grows turgid above measure, and is brought as it were to flame;
and therefore, from its likeness to humid things putrefying which contract a
fervor, this kind of ebullition of the Blood, because it causes an immoderate
Heat, is called a Putrid Fever: Which name it ought properly enough to retain,
because in this Fever the Composition of the Blood (as it usually happens in
Liquors putrefying) is very much dissolved; and so that its Principles are in a
manner wholly severed from each other by the ferment of the Heart, and the
active Particles being loosened from the mixture, break forth as it were into a
flame. Wherefore the Liquor of the Blood being after this manner rarefied, and
as it were kindled in the Heart, is carried thence with a most rapid motion
through the Vessels, and with its deflagration sends a great many effluvia's of
heat from it; hence the whole mass of Blood, (like water set on the fire)
continually boiling, stretches the Vessels, vellicates the Brain and nervous
Parts, raises Cramps and Pains in them, very much consumes the Vital Spirits by
its effervescency, destroys the ferments of the Viscera, hinders the functions
of concoction and distribution, often depraves the nutritive Juice sent into
the Genus Nervosum, that thereby very great disorders of the animal Spirits
ensue; nay, it perverts in a manner the whole economy of Nature.

The Procatarctick Causes which dispose to this Disease, are, a hot and moist
temperament, an Athletick habit of Body, Youth, the Spring or Summer season, a
plenteous and rich Feeding; moreover, an assiduous drinking of rich Wines, a
sedentary and idle Life, a Body cacochymical and filled with evil Juyces: but
above the rest, it is observed, that a frequent letting blood renders men apt
to a Fever; wherefore it is commonly said, that those who have been let blood
once, unless the same be done yearly, are prone to a Fever. The reason is, that
by a frequent letting blood the Sulphur is more copiously heapt together within
the mass of Blood, the Salt in the mean while (which ought to moderate and keep
it from growing exorbitant) being by this means withdrawn.

The Evident Causes which draw the latent disposition of this Fever into act,
are of the same kind as those which bring an Ephemera Fever, and a Synochus
Simplex: in this rank we place chiefly perspiration let, and surfeiting. By
reason of the effluvia being restrained, the mass of Blood, being increased in
its bulk, grows turgid, and being inspired anew with a certain ferment, as it
were, falls a burning, and boyls violently; thereupon presently the Pores are
more obstructed by the stuffing of the effluvia: and the texture of the Liquour
being dissolved, the particles of the abounding Sulphur in the Blood get free
from the mixture, and are inflamed by the fermentation of the Heart, as tho
Fire were applied to them, and so they kindle a very intense Fever. And by
surfeiting, both an immoderate fermentation is caused in the Blood, and also a
nitro-sulphureous matter fit for burning, and being enkindled, is conveyed as a
fuel into the inflamed Blood.

In this Fever four states of time are to be observed, by which, as by so many
Stages, its course is performed; and they are these, the beginning, the
Increase, the height, and the declining state: these are wont to be passed over
in some sooner, in some slower, and in a longer time. The beginning ought to be
computed from the time that the Blood begins to grow hot, and its Sulphur to
fall a burning, till the burning Heats and inflammations are diffused
throughout the whole mass of Blood. The increase is, from the time that the
Blood, being heated and kindled throughout, has burnt for some space, and its
mass is loaded with Recrements, or adust Particles, which also increase the
Fermentation. The height of the Disease is, when (after the Blood has burnt
enough, and its inflammation is remitted) the long troubled Blood, as a noble
Champion, its adversary somewhat giving ground, recollecting all its Forces,
endeavors a subduing and separation of that adust matter wherewith it is
saturated to a fullness, and a driving of it forth, a Crisis being attempted
once or oftener. The declining state follows after the Crisis, in which the
Blood, the inflammation growing weak, becomes less hot, and either the vital
Spirit still prevailing, it subdues and purges forth by degrees what there is
remaining of that adust and extraneous matter, till it be restored to its
ancient vigor: or the same Spirit being too much deprest, the Liquour of the
Blood is still tainted with adust Recrements, and therefore becomes troubled
and depauperated; that it neither assimilates the nutritive Juice, nor
continues fit for Circulation, nor for accension in the Heart, for sustaining
the lamp of Life.

When therefore any one is seized with a Putrid Fever, for the most part a cold
stiffness or a shivering accompanies the first invasion, which is followed by a
Heat which is unequal, and not as yet intense; because the Blood being yet full
of crude Juyces, is kindled only by parts, and therefore it burns a little and
then ceases, and then begins again, like a flame burning wet straw: in this
state the Disease continues for some days, the Urine becomes more ruddy than
usual, by reason of the Salt and Sulphur more dissolved, and incocted with the
Serum: it retains still its Hypostasis, because the coction and assimilation
are not altogether depraved: it has a sediment greater than it ought, which
nevertheless is easily separated, and subsides of its own accord: at this time
you may let Blood, and give a Vomit or a Purge, so it be done without any great
Perturbation of the Blood: It often happens upon the seasonable administrations
of these kinds of Evacuations, that the greater increases of the Disease are
prevented, and that the Fever is killed as it were in ovo: the limits of this
stage are variously determined according to the temperament of the Diseased,
and other accidents of the Disease. Sometimes within a day or two the first
Rudiments of this Disease are laid; sometimes the beginning of the Disease is
extended to more, if it happens in a Body well in Flesh, full of Spirit, and of
a hot Blood and Juice, in the time of Youth, and in a very hot Season, in case
the Disposition to a Fever be great, and a strong evident cause supervenes, the
severish Effervescence once begun, soon pervades the whole Blood, and on the
second or third day, the root being laid, the Disease arises to its increase:
but if the feverish Indisposition begins in a body that is not hot, a
Phlegmatic or melancholy temperament, in old age, or in a cold Season, it has
a longer Proaemium, and scarce passes the limits of this first stage before the
sixth or seventh day.

The increase of this Disease is computed from the time that the burning of the
Fever has got possession of the whole mass of Blood: that is, the Sulphur or
the oily part of the Blood, being long heated, and boiling vehemently by parts,
at length like Hay laid together wet, after a long incalescence, bursts forth
all together into a flame: through the violent boiling of the Blood, at this
time the Diseased complain of an intolerable thirst; Moreover, a headache,
obstinate watchings, often also Deliriums, a Phrensy, and convulsive Motions
molest them: they loath all Food, or cast it forth by Vomit, or if happily it
be retained, being parcht by the too much heat, it turns to a febrile matter;
there is also a bitterness in the Mouth, an ungrateful savor, a roughness of
the Tongue, a vehement and quick Pulse, a Urine very ruddy, for the most part
troubled, filled with contents, without an Hypostasis or laudable sediment: the
Blood at this time being in a manner wholly kindled, it engenders by its
deflagration a mighty quantity of adust matter, like the ashes remaining after
a Fire: whereby both the Serum, being mightily filled, yields a Urine that is
thick and full of Contents: and the Blood being loaded with it to a
Turgescency, is irritated into critical Motions, wherewith that febrile matter
(if it may be) being subdued and separated, may be sent forth: and this brings
the height of the Fever, in which judgment is given betwixt Nature and the
Disease, the contest being brought as it were to a trial, and therefore the
evacuation which thereupon ensues is called a Crisis.

Therefore the height of a putrid Fever, is that time of the Disease, in which
Nature attempts the expulsion of the adust matter remaining after the
deflagration of the Blood: to this are required first, that the Blood for the
greatest part has past burning, for in the midst of it, Nature is not at
leisure for a Crisis, nor ever attempted it prosperously, nor is it procured by
Art with good success. Secondly, that the Spirit first in some manner subdue
this adust matter of the Blood, and separate it from that which is good, and
render it fit for expulsion. Thirdly, that this matter be heapt together in so
great a plenty, that by its Turgescency it irritates Nature to a critical
Expulsion: when either of those things is wanting, the Crisis for the most part
is of no effect and not to be relied on, and seldom puts an end to the Disease.

A Crisis in a continual Fever is in a manner the same as the fit of
intermittents; for as in these, when the mass of Blood is saturated to a
fullness of Turgescency with the Particles of the nutritive Juice depraved, and
unfit for Maturation, there happens a flowing, secretion, and expulsion of that
matter; so in a continual Fever, after the deflagration of the Blood and
nutritive Juice, a great many Corpuseles of adust matter are heapt together,
with which the Blood being oppressed, when it is a little free from burning, it
subdues and separates them by degrees, and then, a flowing being raised,
endeavors to send them forth. Wherefore as the fits of intermittents do not
happen but at a set time, and after so many hours, so also critical Motions
happen from the fourth day to the fourth, or happily from the seventh to the
seventh, for in such a kind of space the Blood burns off, and by its burning
makes a heap of adust matter, as it were of Ashes, which being offensive to
Nature, causes critical Motions by its irritation.

Therefore, as to what some say, that the Crises depend altogether on the
Influences of the Moon and Stars, and that they follow their Quartile, or
opposite Aspects, or their Conjunctions, it is not true: because critical
Evacuations are determined only by the heaping together and Turgescency of the
adust matter, whose Particles, if they can easily be separated from the Blood,
and the Pores of the Skin are open enough, being involved in the Serum they are
sent forth by sweat: and this is the best way of a Crisis, which if it succeeds
well, it often at one bout puts a perfect end to the Disease, without fear of a
relaps: to this next succeeds that crisis which is attempted by an
haemorrhagie, for this matter, as an Efflorescence arising with the Blood (if
by reason of an unfree perspiration it be not sent forth by sweat) it is
conveyed into some part remote from the Heart, and is frequently sent into the
Head by an impetuous sally of the Blood, where, if there be an open passage
from the Sinus's spreading into the Nostrils, the morbifick matter springs
forth together with a portion of the Blood: but otherwise often sticking in the
Brain, it brings a Delirium, Frensy, or other sore, and lasting Diseases of the
Head: and it is to be observed, that in almost any continual Fevers, if at any
time they come to an imperfect or difficult crisis, so that the Blood is
corrupted for a long time with a feverish matter or adust Recrements: thereby
the nervous Juice (as it seems) coming to be tainted, obstinate Affects, viz.
Watchings, also Deliriums, Tremblings, Conlvulsive Motions, and long sticking
Weaknesses of the nervous Parts follow. There are other ways of Crisis's in
which Nature endeavors to expel the febrile matter, not at once and entirely,
but by little and little, and by parts; sometimes by Urine, sometimes by Vomit,
or Seige, sometimes by Pushes, or Buboes; which way soever it be done, that it
may be with good success, it is required that the deflagration of the Blood
preceeds it, and that the adust matter be concocted, and rendered apt for
separation.

Therefore the Height of the Disease is not one and simple, nor always happens
after the same manner, but with a various diversity of Symptoms, and with a
tendency to events far differing: now a prudent Physician must give his
Prognostic, in what space of time the Disease will come to its height, and
what event it will have.

If the Fever from the beginning be vehement, and on a sudden pervades the
whole mass of Blood with a burning, if with the fierceness of Symptoms it
presses in a constant and even manner without remission, for the most part the
Blood will so much burn off within four days, that the adust matter which is
to make a Crisis, rises by that time to a plenitude of Turgescency: but if the
beginnings are slow, and the accension of the Blood be often interrupted, the
Fever will come to its height about the seventh day: if it begins yet more
remisly, the height of the Disease is wont to be protracted to the eleventh or
fourteenth: mean while it is to be noted, that as the fits of intermittent
Fevers return at set times, so do critical Motions in such as are continual,
(and for the most part they observe the fourth day) for tho a perfect Crisis be
prorogued to the fourteenth, or seventeenth, or happily to the twentieth day,
because all things required to a full determination of the Disease do not
concur: yet in the middle space light motions happen, with which the febrile
matter, rising by degrees to an increase is a little emptied, and cut off as it
were by parts, till Nature is able to set upon a more full discussion of it:
and since upon the Blood's burning a mighty store of adust matter is heapt
together in the Vessels within four days, Nature, unless it be otherwise
disturbed, every fourth day being provoked with the store of matter, endeavors
to shake off a part of its burden with a certain Turgescency: wherefore, for
the most part, on the fourth, seventh, eleventh, and fourteenth days, critical
Motions happen, not through a direction of the Planets, but through a necessity
of Nature.

As to the event, whether the Crisis will be good or no, certain
fore-knowledges are taken from the Strength of the Diseased, the Pulse, Urine,
and other signs, and the concourse of Symptoms: if the burning of the Fever
pressing, the diseased holds his strength in some measure, has a strong and
even Pulse, if the Urine be of a middle Consistency, with some Hypostasis, a
Separation of Contents, and an easy subsiding, if the Disease makes its
progress without violent Vomiting, Watchings, a Phrensy, convulsive Motions,
and the Suspiscion of Malignity, the height of it may be expected to be
laudable, with a good Crisis: if the contrary to these things happen, viz. that
the strength be presently cast down, and the Diseased be subject to a frequent
Fainting, Convulsions, or a Delirium, with a weak intermittent or uneven Pulse,
if obstinate Watchings, an intolerable Thirst, and a Vomiting continually
molest the Diseased, if the Urine be thick and troubled, without an Hypostasis
or a subsiding of the parts, if whilst the burning still presses, Nature be
stimilated to critical evacuations, the extremity or height of the Disease will
be dangerous, nor is any good to be hoped of the Crisis.

Concerning the Crisis of a putrid Fever, I shall here subjoyn a particular
prognostic, in which, tho the things that appear at the beginning promise a
wished for event, a very sad one is at hand: I have oftentimes observed in a
putrid Fever, which begins slowly and with a small burning, if the Urine be
ruddy, and, when it is made, be presently troubled, and opake, which is neither
precipitated by the cold, nor deposes a sediment of its own accord, and if at
the same time the Diseased lie for many Nights without Sleep, tho they are
quiet, and without tossing, their state is very dangerous; and there will be a
greater suspicion, if in the mean time they are not pressed with an intense
Fever, nor with a Thirst, and a Heat very troublesome: for those that are
affected after this manner, about the height of the Disease, for the most part
fall into Deliriums, convulsive Motions, and often into a Mania, from which
they are in a short time precipitated into Death, and when these Symptoms
appear, the Urine is altered from being thick and ruddy, to be thin and pale,
Melancholy Persons are most obnoxious to these kinds of Fevers, to wit, in
which the Exorbitancies of the Sulphur are little restrained by the Salt and
earthy Dregs troubled together with it; and all which being raised by little
and little break forth afterward with a greater destruction.

When the Disease is come to the height, either the thing is brought to a
stress at one conflict, and thence forward there is a manifest tendency to
Health with a Declination, or to Death: or there are frequent Bickerings
betwixt Nature and the Disease, and critical Motions are often attempted before
the Victory falls to either fide.

As to the first, if with a good fore-running of Signs and Symptoms, after that
the Blood has burnt enough, and its burning has remitted, the adust matter
being evenly subdued and subtiliz'd, rises with a full increase to a Motion of
Turgescency, and Nature being free from any impediment or depression, is of
strength sufficient for a conflict, the feverish matter is exterminated for the
most part at one motion of Efflorescence, and the Blood being become free from
its Contagion and Fellowship, recovers in a short time its ancient Vigor.

2. But if Nature be irritated to a critical Motion, before the Blood has
perfectly burnt off, or that adust matter be prepared for excretion, tho, as to
the rest, affairs are in an indifferent state, yet none but an imperfect
Crisis follows hence, whereby somewhat of the Burden, or Load wherewith the
Blood is oppressed is diminisht; but in its stead presently another springs
afresh from a new burning, and at set times afterward (happily in the space of
four or seven days) as the fits of intermittents, critical Motions return
happily the second or third time before that, the conflict being divided, the
advantage plainly inclines to this or that side.

3. But when an ill apparatus of Signs and Symptoms preceding, the burning of
the Blood still pressing, without any concoction or subduing of the feverish
Matter, a critical Motion is stirred up, Nature is sometimes overthrown at the
first conflict: nor does she recover her self again, but yielding her self
conquered by the Disease, is precipitated into Death: nor are things in much a
better state, when a Crisis at first being imperfect and of no effect, comes
without any relief of the Diseased, and afterward the next to this happens to
be worse, and then by another or happily another conflict the Disease prevails,
till the strength being wholly broken and prostrated, there is no hope left of
recovery. So much of the height or Crisis of the Disease.

By the Word Declination I understand the Condition of the Diseased and of the
Disease, which follows the height of it, whether it tends to a Recovery or to
Death: whether the Fever, or the Life it self of the Diseased at this time
declines.

As to the times of the declining state, it will be necessary for us to enquire
what the temper of the Blood is, and what alterations it undergoes, as often as
a progress is made from a good Crisis, or an evil, to a Recovery, or Death.

The vice or depauperation which the Blood contracts from a feverish
effervescence, consists in these things; the Spirit very much evaporates and is
lost; the sulphurous Part is too much scorcht, and is much spent by the
deflagration, and after its burning, an adust matter is left, as a caput
mortuum, with whose Particles the mass of Blood is loaded and weak'ned, mean
while the Saline and Earthy Parts are too much exalted; even as it is wont to
happen in Wine or Beer too much fermented. The Blood being tainted after this
manner, ill assimilates the stock of nutritive Juice; nay, and not duly
fermenting, or being inflamed in the Heart by reason of the scorching, or
defect of the Sulphur, it ill distributes the Vital Spirit; mean while, by
reason of the adust Matter, and the Salt too much exalted, it boyls more than
it ought, and destroys it self more.

1. After a good Crisis, the Spirit, tho become weak, still bears the sway;
wherefore it subdues by degrees, and expells what there is remaining of
feverish matter, and concocts and assimilates the nutritive Juice, (so a thin
juice be administered); whence the mass of Blood is refreshed with a genuine
Spirit and Sulphur.

2. After an evil Crisis the thing is otherwise, the Liquour of the Blood (like
Wine too much fermented) wholly loses its strength; its Spirit is greatly
diminisht, what there is remaining of it for the most part is involved, and as
it were overwhelmed with Particles of adust matter: whence a continual
Effervescence remains still in the Blood, tho without coction, or assimilation
of the nutritive Juice, or a separation of that which is useless from what is
good: the benign Sulphur and Food of the vital Flame is much consumed, so that
the Blood is kindled in the Heart less than it ought: mean while, through adust
Recrements, and raised to too great a height with Salt and Earth, it
continually boyles in the Vessels, with a Drought and a Heat, and because it is
daily depauperated upon the continual spending of the benign Spirit and
Sulphur, and is more tainted with the Salt and earthy Faeculencies too much
exalted, its Liquour in a short time grows vapid, and becomes unfit for
circulation and accension in the Heart for upholding the vital Fire; wherefore
Life must necessarily fail.

3. After an imperfect and doubtful Crisis, when the Diseased being broken by a
long continued Weakness, recover not but after a long time, the case stands
thus: the Spirituous and Sulphurous parts of the Blood are very much consumed
by their long burning; the remaining Liquour being not purged from the adust
Recrements and Feculencies is rendered very impure; and there remaining still
somewhat of Oil for the vital Flame, and the Spirits not ceasing wholly from
working upon the febrile Matter, the Blood is still circulated, and (tho in a
small measure) is kindled in the Heart: nay, and the Spirits recover themselves
by little and little, and begin to set upon the matter remaining after the
Fever, and at length wholly subdue it, and restore a sprightly Fermentation de
Novo in the Heart.

CHAP. IX. Of the most observable Symptoms and Signs in a Putrid Fever.
THE accidents which a Physician ought chiefly to consider in giving a true
Diagnostick and Prognostic of this Disease, may be reduced to three Classes,
as it were, or common Places; that is to say, they have regard to the Viscera
of Concoction, viz. the Ventricle and Intestines with their Appendixes; or
secondly, to the Humors flowing in the Vessels; to wit, the Blood in the
Arteries and Veins, and the thin Liquor in the nervous Parts, together with the
first sources of both, viz. the Heart and Brain: or lastly, those Symptoms
regard the habit of the Body, with the various constitution of the Pores, and
the firmness or pining away of the solid Parts; those who will exactly observe
the course of the Disease, and aptly draw the Curative Intentions, must mind
these three heads of Symptoms, and diligently observe what alterations happen
in these distinct Regions, as it were, according to the differing times of the
Fever.

1. Concerning the Ventricle and first Passages, in the whole course of this
Fever, tedious affects and Disorders; as a Nauseousness, a Vomiting, loss of
Appetite, Indegestion, a Diarrhoea, a roughness of the Tongue and Mouth, a
bitter savor are wont to molest them; these things for the most part are
attributed to the Humors, first heaped together in the Stomach and there
putrefying; but besides that, the Recrements of the Chyle being burnt with too
much heat, degenerate into an offensive matter; often those kinds of accidents
happen, because the off-scourings and filth of the Blood and nervous Juice,
whilst they ferment, are carried inwards, and being deposed within the
Membranes of the Viscera, cause Contractions, and make a filthy heap of a
vicious and very infesting Humor: I have often observed, that about the
beginnings of Fevers, the Blood vehemently boiling, still deposed its recrments
in wardly, to the benefit of the Diseased, where, tho some tedious affects
happened about the first Passages, yet the effervescence was thereby more mild,
the Pulse moderate, and the Urine laudable; and after this manner those that
were ill of a Fever, with a thin Diet and the use of gentle carriers forth of
Excrements, recovered in a short time; but if in this case I gave a violent
Cathartick for extirpating the Humors, that natural purging of the Blood being
let, presently the Fever became intense, with a ruddy and troubled Urine, a
high Pulse, Watchings, and other horrid Symptoms; also often after the height
of the Disease, the adust and excrementitious matter is severed from the Blood,
by this kind of inward lustration, hence sometimes a looseness, sometimes crusty
breakings forth of the Mouth and Throat happen: wherefore concerning the
accidents which happen in the first passages, there is need of caution, lest
while we obviate those, we pervert the Motion of Nature: and lest whilst we
fortify these Parts against the incursion of the morbific Matter, we perversely
keep the same shut up in the mass of Blood.

The Symptoms chiefly to be considered in reference to the Mass of Blood, are a
heat diffused through the whole, a great trouble of the Praecordia, a ruddy
Urine, a spontaneous Lassitude, a Swooning, from which, being duly considered,
these following things may become known: viz. what the degree of heat is, or
according to what tenor the inflamed Blood burns, what times of remission or
exacerbation its effervescence observes whilst it burns; whether it retains its
Crasis, or its mixture entire: what strength of the Heart suffises, and what
space the Vessels afford for its burning, and the circulation of it, being
kindled, in what store the Blood, whilst it boyles, heaps together adust
Recrements, after what manner it subdues and severs them, or at leastwise
endeavors to sever them, in fine, what way of Crisis it endeavors, and with
what success.

The Accidents which regard the thin Liquour, with the Brain and the nervous
Appendix, are disorders about Sleep and Watching. a Weakness of the whole Body,
a Trembling, a Tetanus, Pains, convulsive Motions, Contractions of the Viscera,
a Stupor, a Phrensy, and the Observation of which will suggest to us, what is
the Temper and Constitution of that thin Liquour; after what manner it
irrigates and influences the Nervous parts, and circulates through them; how
the animal Spirits perform the Functions of the Viscera; what is the state of
the Brain; whether it continues free from the incursion of the feverish matter:
whether it be not in danger of being overwhelmed by reason of its critical
Metastasis.

Concerning the Habit of the Body, we must consider the manner of its
Perspiration, and the degree of it, whether it be only by vapory Effluvia, or
by Sweat, or also by Pushes; whether the flesh falls on a sudden from its
wonted bulk, or whether it retains it a long time? what is the color of the
Face, and the Vigor, or dullness of the Eyes? from these things being duly
compared together, we excellently measure the Course of the Fever, at what time
it will come to the height, whether Nature will prevail over the Disease or
not? with what way of Excretion, and with what success it endeavors the
expulsion of the febrile matter, by these signs also we are taught by what
degrees the Blood fermenting, and often being coagulated, tends toward a
Putrefaction, or Corruption: whether it any ways concocts the nutritive Juice
mixed with it; or whether or no it does not forthwith cast forth its whole store
by Sweat, as it often happens in the declining state of this Disease.

From the foresaid Symptoms and Signs a fuller instruction yet is had; if it be
first known, on what causes each kind of them depends, and in what orderly
course they are wont to be raised in our Body. Wherefore I have thought it
expedient, particularly to set down the chief of these, and to explicate the
Reasons of them, and their ways of coming to pass: Now in a putrid Synochus, or
continual Fever, the Symptoms chiefly to be observed are, a heat in the whole
Body, a spontaneous Lassitude, a great trouble of the Praecordia, an
intolerable Thirst, a burning and roughness of the Tongue and Jaws, a pain of
the Head and Loins, obstinate Watchings, a Phrensy, convulsive Motions, a
Swooning, a Cardialgia, a Vomiting, Nausecousness, loss of Appetite, a
Looseness, a Dysentery, with which, not all of them together, but sometimes
these, sometimes the others, this Disease is wont to be attended: Amongst the
signs, the Pulse and Urine give the greatest light. I shall observe a few
things concerning each.

1. The heat, which is perceived in the whole Body to be sharp and piercing,
depends on the too great Effervescence of the Blood, and its accension in the
Heart: for the Sulphurous or Oily part of the Blood, being exalted and falling
a burning, is kindled at least in a double portion more than its wont in the
Heart: When the Sulphur is not duly dissolved in the Blood, and kindled in the
Heart, as in the longing Disease of Maids, the Leucophlegmatia, etc. The heat
fails in the whole.

2. A spontaneous Lassitude is felt in the whole Body, to wit, by reason of the
Vessels being extended with the boiling Blood, also the muscular Flesh is much
siuft with Blood, and a copious Vapor, so that it is not fit for Motion: as
those who are troubled with an Anasarca have their Limbs less free, by reason
of the Redundancy of the serous Humor: Moreover in Fevers, by reason of the
inflammation of the Blood, the Juice, which is suppsyed to the genus Nervosum,
falls from its due Temper, so that it is less fit for actuating Bodies.

3. The great trouble of the Pracordia happens, by reason of the Blood being
copiously kindled in the focus of the Heart, which boyles thence with a great
inflammation into the Lungs; wherefore the nearer this Region is to that Focus
of heat, by so much it is affected with a greater burning.

4. The almost unexstinguishable Thirst is caused both by reason of the growing
inflammation in the Praecordia, and by reason of the sharp and hot Particles of
the febrile matter fixed in the Ventricle by the Blood in circulating; which
require to be washed off even as salt and peppered Food eaten in a plenty, or as
sharp things kept sometime in the Mouth or Throat: for this kind of affect
suggests a free taking in of Drink, as a Member too hot does a pouring of cold
Water on it.

5. The burning and roughness of the Tongue and Throat, and often also the
growing of a certain white, yellow, or black Lee upon it, doubtless happen by
reason of the Heat and Fumes breathing from the Ventricle and Lungs strongly
burning; and the Tongue grows white as often as that Moisture (wherewith it is
naturally much imbued) grows dry, the Saliva then growing too thick and
viscous: but if it happens that the Tongue be inwardly filled or outwardly
tinged with a bilous Humor (as it comes to pass in Vomitings of Choler) then
its Villi, in regard they are spongeous, imbibing the yellow matter, present
also a like Color: and if the Heat becomes so intense that it burns the Blood,
and kindles a Fire more ardent than usual, it follows, that Fumes are raifed
from the Focus of the Heart, through the breathing Pipes of the Lungs, they
scarce sufficing for ventilating so great a Blast; which coming to the Roof of
the Palate, strike the Tongue as it were by Reverberation, and tinge it with a
blackness.

6. Sometimes in Fevers (and especially about the time of their declining) it
happens, that the Tongue, Palate, Gums, nay, the Cavity of the whole Mouth and
Throat, are covered with a Viscous Matter, resembling some whitish Crust; which
being often cleans'd, presently a new succeeds; and unless by diligently
rubbing and washing the Mouth, this crusty Mtter be frequently cleared, the
Diseased often incur danger of Suffocation: that kind of Affect very often
happens to Infants newly born; for they are wont, for the most part, within
fourteen days an outward Efflorescence, to be bedecked with large and red Spots
all their Skin over; and if this over-spreading of Redness does not break forth
freely, or disappears sooner than it ought, for the most part, that whitish
Crust ensues in the Parts of the Mouth. This Symptom, when after this manner it
molests Infants, is wont to be ascribed to the fault of the Milk; in feverish
Persons the same is vulgarly attributed to thick and fuliginous Vapors raised
from the Stomach: but it seems more likely to me, that in both, this Affect
arises from the Impurities of the whole Blood, (and happily, in some measure of
the nervous Juice) deposed about these parts; for, as often as in the Mass of
both Humors, somewhat extraneous inwardly mixed with them, is contained which
is neither to be blown off by Sweat, nor is easily sent away by Urine, that
very often is fixed about the Mouth with a serous Filth; whence catarrhous
Affects, Tumors, and troublesome Spittings, are raised: for in regard, for the
Mastication of Food, the salival Humor ought to be plentifully discharged in
this Place, Nature often endeavors to send forth here what is superfluous, or
otherwise troublesome, by these open and accustomed ways of Excretion: hence,
after Mercury is given, when both the Blood and nervous Juice are abundantly
filled with its Particles most minutely divided, and endeavor to send them
forth involved in the Serum, because they are not able to exterminate these
mercurial Corpuscles, inwardly mixed with them, neither by Sweat, Urine, or
other way; what remains, they strive to expel the same, mixed with the Serous
Latex, by the Arteries and other Ducturs's, which convey the Spittle to the
Mouth. In like manuer also in Fevers, when after a long Deflagration of the
Blood, the adust Matter is much heapt together, whereof a good part, remaining
after the Crisis, is still mixed with the Blood and nervous Juice; or being
fixed on the Brain, or other place, is again drank up by the same; it is
probable that that matter, by long Coction, is so parched, and grown thikc
almost like Glue; wherefore it is neither to be blown off by Sweat nor
insensible Transpiration, nor is fit to be separated by the urinary Passages,
but at length distills forth by degrees from the little Arteries, and other
Ductus's of the Saliva, which open themselves into the Mouth, (as being the
usual way of Excretion) and presently, by reason of its thickness, it settles
into that clammy Humor. The same Reason holds concerning Infants, whose Blood
being rendered impure, from the Filth contracted in the Womb, presently, by
making an outward Efflorescence, it endeavors to purge it self; which, if by
reason of the Thickness of the Matter, it does not succeed well, presently the
viscous Impurities are exterminated this way, as the more open. I knew a
certain Person in the Declination of a Fever, who had not only an Incrustation
of this kind of a clammy Humor in the Parts of the Mouth, but a copious
Salivation, as tho he had taken Mercury, was raised in him for many Days, with
a stinking Breath, and a swelling of the Tongue and Gums.

7. A Headache is raised in Fevers by reason of the Meninges of the Brain being
twitcht by Vapors, and by a sharp and boiling Blood; for, the Blood being
violently moved, it is carried in a greater Plenry, to the Head by reason of
the straight Direction of the great Artery, than to the inferior Parts, to
which it is carried obliquely. And sometimes Head-achs arise by reason of the
nervous Juice (which is supplied from the boiling Blood) being too sharp and
pungent; wherefore, when the Membranes and nervous Parts are irrigated with the
same, being twitcht by its Acrimony, they are cast into Pains and Contractions.

8. In like manner also, the other Affects of the Head, as Watchings, a
Delirium, a Frenzy, Conyulsions, etc. sometime arise from the Blood making an
Fffort, and so raising disorderly Motions in the Brain; sometimes also from the
nervous Juice degenerated, and therefore become disproportionate for the
Governance of the animal Spirits: but most commonly these kinds of Symptoms are
rife in Fcvers by reason of a Metastasis of the febrile Matter from the stock
of Blood into these Parts; for the Blood being full of adust Recrements
remaining after Deflagration, endeavors (like working Wine) wholly to subdue
them, and to exclude them from its Society, which when, a flowing happening, it
is not able to expel by Sweat, Urine, or an Hoemorrhagie, it often conveys
them into the substance of the Brain, and there fixes them: and hence chiefly
the foresaid Affects, when they are fixed and firmly rooted, take their Rise;
but, when they are light, and easily moveable, they often proceed from the
Causes before mentioned.

9. Convulsive Motions happen in Fevers for diverse Causes; sometimes by reason
of a Matter heapt together in the first Passages, which, by reason of its
mighty Pravity, twitches there the membranous Parts, and afterward, by the
Consent of the Genus nervosum, presently a Convulsion is communicated to the
Origin of the Nerves in the Brain; and thence is retorted sometimes into these
Parts, sometimes into others: after which manner, Worms gnawing in the
Entrails, sharp Humors moved, and venomous Medicines, cause Convulsions; or
secondly, when a Fever partakes of some Malignity: so Convulsions srequently
happen in the Small Pox, Meazles, or Plague; to wit, because the Blood is
altered from its benign and natural temper to a venomous Nature, whereby the
Nerves, and their Origines, are put upon Motions and Contractions: often also,
without a suspicion of Malignity, in a Putrid Fever, convulsive Motions are
caused by reason of a Metastasis of the febrile Matter to the Brain, as it was
hinted even now; so I have often observed, when a Disease is not presently
solved by a Crisis, the Diseased lie ill of a long Sickness, and become
obnoxious to convulsive and trembling Motlons. Thirdly, for the most part, in
every Fever, convulsive Motions are the sad Fore-warners of Death; which I
think to happen not only through the malignity of the matter, whereby the Genus
Nervosum is twitcht and troubled, but because the Spirits being very much
exhausted and weakened, do not sufficiently influence and extend the Bodies of
the Nerves; wherefore being relaxt from their wonted Tension and tonick Motion
through the weaker effort of the Spirits, they are still put upon a disorderly
motion.

10. Swooning is wont to be caused many ways in Fevers, but chiefly for three
Causes; viz. Either throught the Mouth of the Stomach being affected, which
part being interwoven with sundry Plexus's of Nerves, is very sensible; and
because from the same branch of the sixth Pair, branches of Nerves are derived
to the Heart and Ventricle, if the Orifice of the Ventricle, so beset with
Nerves, be affected with great Pain, the offense also is communicated to the
heart, and in this the Motion is either stopped, or at leastwise a disorderly one
is raised, whereby the even afflux of the Blood and Spirits is interrupted for
a time. I knew a certain Person, in an acute Fever, seized with a srequent
swooning; which Affect, nevertheless, wholly ceased after that he had cast up,
by Vomit, a long and round Worm. Secondly, a swooning also is sometime caused,
because a venomous Matter is circulated culated with the Blood, which fixes and
extinguishes the vital Spirits on a sudden, and congeals the Blood it self,
that it is apt to stagnate in the Heart, as it is usual in the Plague, Small
Pox, etc. of which we shall speak particularly beneath. Thirdly, A Swooning is
wont to happen by reason of the fine Texture of the Spirits, which being very
thin and subtle, easily yield to a Fainting upon any immoderate Motion or Pain:
so I have known some, who lying still in their bed were well enough, but being
moved to any side, presently fainted.

11. A Cardialgia happens in Fevers, when the Ventricle, and especially its
Orifices, being very sensible by reason of the manifold Insertions of Nerves,
are beset with a sharp and betterish, or also with an acid and corrosive
Humor; for hence a Pain arises from the Acrimony of the Humor, after the like
manner as when the Sphincter of the Anus is affected with a tedious Pain in
bilous Dejections.

12. For the like Cause, a Vomiting and a Nauseousness are wont to be raised;
to wit, the Ventricle being beset and irritated to a Contraction by a matter
which is extraneous and not agreeing with it self. Such an excrementitious
matter is heapt together in the Ventricle, after three manners: for, either the
Aliments, partly through defect of an acid Ferment, wherewith they ought to be
duly concocted; partly by reason of the burning Heat of the Ventricle, are
parcht into such a Mass of Corruption: or secondly, this kind of Matter is
deposed into the cavity of the Ventricle, from Arteries terminated in it, as it
usually happens in the Small Pox, Plague, and malignant Fevers: or thirdly,
mere Choler expressed from the Meatus Choledochus into the Intestinum jejunum, by
reason of an inverted, and, as it were, convulsive Motion of the Intestine, is
cast up into the Stomach. The loss of Appetite also happens by reason of the
Ventricle being filled with vicious Juices, and because the acid Ferment is
wholly perverted by the scorching Heat. These kinds of Affects of the Ventricle
and Viscera, sometimes arise from an excrementitious matter, ( viz. the
Alimentary degenerated whilst it was concocting) heapt together in the first
Passages a long time before the Fever, which often is the occasional Cause of
the Fever it self: but sometimes the Nauseousness, Loss of Appetite, Vomiting,
Cardialgia, etc. are the immediate Products of the Fever; for, when the day
before the falling sick the Affected had a Stomach good enough, as soon as the
immoderate Effervescence is brought on the Blood, whilst that boyls above
measure, both the Effluvia and Recrements wont to be evaporated outwardly, and
the bilous Humor flowing from the Vasa Choledocha, are poured into the
Stomach, with which its Crasis is perverted; and the Relics of the Chyle, and
other Contents in the Viscera, are mightily depraved, whence the foresaid
Affects draw their Origin.

13. Nor is a Looseness a less frequent symptom in Fevers, which sometimes
happens about the beginning of the Disease, and arises (for the most part)
either from the Choler flowing from the Vasa Choledoca, into the Duodennm, or
from the Recrements of the Blood and Nervous Juice poured from the Arteries and
Ductus of the Pancreas into the Intestines: Sometimes also about the height of
the Disease, and in its declining state a looseness is raised: and so either
Nature being conqueress, the grosser off scourings of the Blood are this way
Critically voided, or the same being overcome, the looseness is an effect and
sign of the Viscera being wholly dissolved in their strength and firm tone.
Sometimes it happens in a Fever that the Belly is always bound, and unless
irritated by a Medicine it discharges nothing, and tho the Diseased have taken
only liquid things for many days, the stools are always of a solid and
hardish consistency: and this seems for the most part to be done, when the
Blood burning greatly with a smart heat, consumes the moisture lying in any
part like Fire; and by a copious emission of stems draws the watery matter from
the Viscera into it self, and presently causes it to evaporate outwardly;
wherefore the grosser part left in the Intestines, is thickened by the parching
heat, as the Caput Mortuum remaining after distillation.

14. The bloody Flux is an affect so frequent in continual Fevers, that in
certain years it becomes Epidemious, and being as bad as a Plague, it kills
many; the cause useally is not a humor produ'd inwardly in the Viscera, which
corrodes the Intestines with its Acrimony, (as some assert) but some Miasm past
into the Blood, and so in wardly mixed with it, that it cannot be forced from
the Blood under the form of a Vapor or sincere Humor: wherefore being driven
toward the Intestines, it opens the Mouths of the Arteries, and causes little
Ulcers and Distillations of Blood there, as when from a feverish Blood taking
toward the Skin, Pushes and inflamed Swellings break forth outwardly; and it is
likely that those affects of the bloody Flux which accompany malignant or
epidemious Fevers may airse from a certain coaulation of the Blood.

The pulse and Urine bring up the rear of the Symptoms and Signs in a putrid
Fever, which are chiefly to be minded for knowing both the state of the
Disease, and the strength of the Diseased; for there being two things by which
our Life is supported, viz. Heat kindled in the heart, and Coction to be
performed in the Viscera and Vessels, because the Pulse and Urine excellently
show the alterations caused in both by the Fever, therefore hence a most
certain Judgment is taken of the affect whether it will terminate in Death or a
Recovery. First, we consult the Pulse as a Thermometer constituted by Nature
for measuring the heat kindled in a Fever: which if it be intense, and raises a
great ebullition of the Blood, the Artery has a vehement and quick beat, as
long as the Spirits hold a good Vigor; afterward the same being somewhat
exhausted, the strong Pulse remits, which nevertheless is recompensed by
quickness, and becomes quick and small. If the Fever be mild, and be attended
by a less burning, the Pulse also declines less from its natural state; and in
the whole course of the Disease the moderation of this denotes a truce of
Nature, nor does the Pulse only discover the strength of the Fever, as it were
of the Enemy, but plainly shows also the sktrength of Nature, and its ability
of resisting: as long as the Pulse is laudable, things are in safety, and it
gives very good hope: but from the evil state of this a very ill omen is given,
and a despair of doing well. So that without a srequent and diligent examining
of the Pulse, the Physician can neither make a due prognostic, nor safely
order a Medicine.

1. As to the first: he ought to know (as far as he may) what sort of Pulse a
Person has according to his natural Constitution, for in some it is strong, in
others weak; again in each change of Fevers he must weigh by what degrees it
differs from its natural state; for one while it is more vehement than it
ought, and argues the Fever to be intended: another while it is deprest lower
than usual, and denotes the Spirits and Strength to be dejected.

Those whose Artery has a weak and languid beat in their state of Health, when
they are taken with a Fever it is not so very ill with them to have a small and
weak Pulse, that we must presently despair of their well doing: those who have
naturally a strong and vehement Pulse, if after the Crisis of the Disease it
scarce holds a mean Vigor, tho it be not altogether weak, it argures the state
of the diseased to be suspected, and not safe.

If at the beginning of a Fever, before the Blood has much burnt, or if after a
Crisis, when part of the burden is diminisht, or if at another time the Pulse
becomes weak without an evident cause, it fore-bodes ill: but if after long
Watchings, or after a great Evacuation, the Pulse becomes somewhat weaker, we
may not therefore despair of a Recovery: because Strength dejected or impaired
by these means may be again restored, and the Spirits may be refresht.

When the Pulse on a sudden is altered for the worse, tho the Diseased as to
the rest of the Symptoms seems to himself to be better, you may give a sad
prognostic of Death, and on the contary, tho horrid Symptoms are pressing, if
notwithstanding the Pulse be laudable, we may still hope for a Recovery. If in
a robust man, being in a Fever, the Pulse becomes very small and formicating,
Death is near at hand.

2. In giving Medicines, Cautions and Rules of no small moment are taken from
the Pulse: Purging and Vomiting are prohibited by an over quick and violent
Pulse, also by a low and deprest one: for when the Blood boyles too much, an
evacuation does little good, both because that which is offensive is not
separated, and also for that by that Perturbation the strength is more
debilitated. And when the Spirits are broken, and the Strength dejected, a
Purge casts them do wn more, and sometimes wholly resosves them. Wherefore when
a Physician thinks of an evacuation upward or downward, first let him try the
Pulse, and let him set upon this work only when Nature is strong and in a calm;
that it may both be at leisure for the Operation of the Medicine, and have
Strength enough to bear it.

Nor is there need of less Circumspection in Diaphoreticks and Cardiacks; which
if they are given in the feverish fit, they too much intend the motion of the
Heart, which before was violent, and very often break its strength: and when
the Pulse is very faint, if hot and strong Cordials are given, Life is easily
extinguished, (as when a small Flame is pressed with a strong blast of Wind)
wherefore its a vulgar observation that Cordials often accelerate Death, for
that by too much exagitating the Blood, they sooner consume the Strength.

There is yet need of the greatest Caution and Direction of the Pulse in giving
Narcoticks; for those (because they perform their Operation by exstinguishing
and fixing the over fierce vital Spirits) if they are used in a weak or
wavering Pulse, either by diminishing the vital Spirits they render them wholly
insufficient for the Disease; or by suffocating them too much they bring a
perpetual sleep: wherefore in a languid, unequal, or formicating Pulse let
Opiates be shunned of all things.

The uneven and intermittent Pulse have an ill name in the writings of
Physicians: yet tho they are looked upon as ill, they do not so certainly
portend Death as a weak Pulse: for I have known many with those kinds of signs
to have escapt, who were condemned to the Grave: for the disorder of the Blood
and Spirits may much more certainly and easily be restrained or appeased, than
their dejection be restored.

2. The inspection of Urines in Fevers has more of certainty than in any other
Diseases, and is of very great use: for hence the states of the sick Person and
of the Disease are excellently known, and the physical Intentions concerning
things to be done are hence best directed: some of the chief Observations and
Rules concerning this matter are as follows.

Concerning the Urines of Persons in Fevers, the things chiefly to be observed
are the Color, Consistency, Contents, and settling; the color of the urine
shows the degree or excess of heat in the Blood, which as it is increast, or is
more remiss, the Urine also is more or less ruddy.

Nevertheless the Urines of some are mighty ruddy, when they are but lightly
feverish: and on the contrary, the Urines of others troubled with the burning
heat of a Fever are less colored. Those who abound with a vigorous heat, and a
very hot Blood, or are obnoxious to the Scurvy, Ptysick, or the Hypocondriack
affect, when upon taking cold, or through a Fullness, Surfeiting, or drinking
Wine, they are set upon by any small Fever, they make an intensly ruddy Urine,
because the Particles of the Salt and Sulphur are exalted, and half dissolved
in their Blood before; wherefore, of necessity, when the Fever presses, they
are more incocted in the Serum: on the contrary, those who having a cold
Temperament, and a weak Pulse, are taken with a Fever, tho they have a greater
Effervescence of the Blood, void a Urine less colored.

The Consistency, Contents, and Settling of Vrines, being places, as it were, in
the same Rank, depend altogether on the adust and recrementitions Matter, which
remains in the Blood after the burning of the Fever: if there be a plenty of
this, the Consistency of the Urine becomes somewhat thick; and after it has
stood, it is troubled by the Cold: if either the quantity of this be less, or
it be derived elsewhere than to the Reins, (to wit, if it be withdrawn by
Sweat, or by a critical Metastasis into this or that part) the Consistency
becomes more thin, and the Liquor remains clear. And the Particles of this
matter furnish the Contents of the Urine, which are diversely disposed according
as the nutritive Juice is one while somewhat concocted and assimilated by the
Blood, another while is wholly perverted, and turns to a mass of Corruption.
Some signs of Coction and Assimilatiturns to a mass of Corruption. Some signs
of Coction and Assimilation are given in the Urines of Persons in Fevers,
sometimes by a laudable Hypostasis, sometimes by certain Rudiments and
Footsteps of the same. A Privation of an Hypostasis, and a confusion and
troubled state of the Parts of the Urine, denote Coction to be vitiated: and as
this matter is more or less parched in the Blood, the Contents are sometimes
pale, sometimes of a yellowish Color like oker. According as the Recrements
mixed with the Blood, either the Spirit prevailing, begin to be subdued and
separated; or the same being too much deprest, are less able to be separated,
also the Contents of the Urine are wont, more or less, sooner or later, to be
separated from the rest of the Urine, and to subside toward the bottom.

As to the Prognostics to be taken from the Urine, we observe, That somewhat a
remiss Color of the Urine, a mean Consistency, a sew Contents subsiding of
their own accord, or readily gathering together into a little Cloud, portend
Good: on the contrary, an intense Redness, a thick and troubled Consistency,
gross and opake Contents, which slowly, or scarce at all, subside toward the
bottom, denote a great Effervescency, a plenty of adust Matter, and its
subduing and separation to be difficult, or frustrated.

As to Physical Directions, the thing consists in this; that by a frequent
Inspection of Urines we attend to the Motion of Nature, and readily follow it;
nor must we move by Purging or Sweat, but when some Hypostasis shows signs of
Coction and Separation in the Urine.

CHAP. X. Of the Signs and Cure of the putrid Synochus, or continual Fever.
BEsides what is said before of the putrid Synochus in general, there are
moreover certain Varieties, or Irregularities (not to say Species) of this
Disease, by which this Fever somewhat declines from this common Rule; and by
reason of certain accidental Affects, gets new Names and Distinctions.

First therefore, a putrid Synochus is wont to be divided into a symptomatick
and an essential one. That is said to be symptomatick which draws its Origin
from some other Affect or Disease first raised in the Body; so that the Fever
is only the symptom coming upon that other Affect, as that is accounted which
depends on a Squinancy, Plurisie, Wound, Ulcer, etc. in or near some principal
Part; of which we think somewhat otherwise; to wit, that in Truth there is no
Putrid Fever which is merely symptomatical; occasionally perchance it may arise
from some other Affect; but it is founded immediately in the sulphurous part
of the Blood too much heated, and as it were kindled: for, without a
Procatarxis or precedent Indisposition of the Blood, the foresaid Affects
seldom, or scarce at all, bring a putrid Fever.

As to the Squinancy, Plurisie, and the like, I say that those are Products of
the Fever, or Affects following it, but not Causes of it; for most commonly an
evident Cause has preceeded, which has produced the feverish Effervescence of
the Blood, as a taking of Cold, an Evacuation restrained, etc. afterward, tho
the Diseased are not forthwith openly feverish, nevertheless, a greater
Ebullition of the Blood than usual is raised; as we may easily gather from the
Urine, Pulse, and Restlesness of the whole Body. After some Days, (sometimes
sooner, sometimes later) an Inflammation is produced in this or that part;
whereof a probable Reason enough is thus assigned: The Blood by reason of the
Effluvia retained (which are like a Ferment) is increased in bulk, and swells
its Vessels more than usually; and when through defect of Ventilation, it is
straightened in the space of its Circulation, it readily finding a way, springs
forth of the Arteries; and being extravasated, upon the course of Circulation
its being interruptted, it is raised into a Tumor; and because by that kind of
Tumor a Heat and Pain in the Part are made more intense, the Blood is more
troubled in its motion, and so the Fever, first kindled, is more aggravated.

Moreover, in these kinds of Fevers we may observe a certain aptness of the
Blood to coagulate, whereby it becomes less fluxile, and so apt to be congealed
in the lesser Vessels: even as we find in Milk when it begins to turn sour, for
then it cannot be boiled nor warmed on the Fire without coagulating: in like
manner we have reason to suspect in the Blood also a certain Diposition to turn
sharp, by reason of which it is obnoxious to coagulation; for it plain enough
appears, that in the Phrensy, Peripneumonia, Squinancy, and the like Diseases,
an Inflammation or Extravasation of the Blood does not always depend on the
exuberancy of the Blood, and the plenitude of the Vessels: for often with a
weak Pulse, and a subsiding of the Vessels, the Blood is stopped in its Motion,
and being extravasated in the side or else where, causes an acute pain.

It only remains for us to enquire whether the Fever which accompanies these
affects, be to be accounted of the number of those which are called putrid, or
not; To this we reply, that oftentimes they are simple Synochi, in which only
the subtle and more spirituous part of the Blood is inflamed, and therefore, if
after a copious taking away of Blood, or the Vessels being emptyed by sweat,
the extravasated, Blood be restored to Circulation, presently the Effervescence
is restrained, and the Fever in a short time is appeased: Nevertheless
sometimes when a Predisposition happens, as in a Plethora, or mighty
Cacochymia, a putrld Fever is kindled together with these kinds of affects
wholly from the same occasion.

Among Symptomatick Fevers they place that which is vulgarly called Febris
Lenta, those that are troubled with this grow hotter than they ought,
especially after Meats, or any Motion, or Exercise, the Urine for the most part
is ruddly, the Spirits are weak, and the Strength dejected; as to Appetite and
Sleep they find themselves indifferently well, they are without a Cough, or
much Spitting: but daily (like consumptive Persons) they pine away, and without
any manifest cause: the fault for the most part is ascribed to Obstructions in
some one of the Viscera (suppose the Liver, Spleen, or mesentery) by whose
default, the Food is not well concocted, nor duly dispen'd: but it seems to me
that this kind of affect is immediately founded in the evil Disposition of the
Blood, whereby it inclines to an over-salt and sharp Temper, and therefore is
rendered less apt for Nutrition, and an even Circulation.

But the Fever which most deserves to be called Symptomatical, is that which is
raised in Ptysical Persons from an Ulcer or Consumption of the Lungs: for the
Blood, whilst it wholly passes through the Lungs in its circulation, often
imprints on this entral the Ideas of many Diseases; and on the contrary, from
the Lungs being ill affected, it receives the same. Whatsoever impure is
contained in the Mass of Blood is cast forth of the extremities of the
Arteries, as the flowrings of new Wine: Wherefore, when Nature being become
weak, is not able to convey its Recrements to the superficies of the Body, it
deposes the same in the Lungs by a nearer way of purging it self. Hence a
mighty Cacochymia, and many Cronick Diseases frequently end in a Ptysick. In
like manner, when the flesh of the Lungs consumes, or abounding with an
ulcerous Ichor, is become half rotten, the blood passing through it is infected
with the purulent matter, or the consumptive filth, and consequently is put
upon a continual Effervescence, by reason of that immiscible Substance being
confounded with it, wherefore it brings an assiduous Fever, and wholly perverts
the nutritive Juice: the like reason holds concerning Fevers caused from an
Ulcer, or Absess often happening in other parts: for those even as the
consumptive Constitution of the Lungs, often bring the Ptyfick, or hectic
Fever: a full consideration of these things belongs not to this Place,
wherefore let us return to the putrid Fever properly so called, or essential
Fever.

The essential putrid Synochus is wont to be divided into the putrid (such is
above described) inot the Causus or most sharp burning Fever, and moreover into
the quotidian, tertian, and quartan. The putrid Synochus even now described
ought to be the Rule or Square of the rest, according to the Type of which, for
the most part Fevers which are of this kind are compounded, as to the rest even
now mentioned, I shall briefly set them down according as they vary their
Species.

A Causus or burning Fever is that which performs its course with a great
burning, an intolerable Thirst, and other Symptoms showing a mighty
Inflammation of the Blood: its formal Nature wherein it is different from the
rest, consists in this, that the temper of the Blood in those that are affected
with it, is hotter, that is, it more abounds with a combustible Sulphur;
therefore when it rages, it is kindled in a greater plenty, and by its burning
diffuses Effluvia's of a most intense heat throughout the whole Body; its
Motion is acute, and soon comes to its height, it is attended with more
horrible Symptoms than others, it has a difficult Crisis, and its event is very
dangerous.

Now as to what regards those periods or paroxisms in which a putrid Fever now
and then at a set time is wont to have a sharp fit, and (intermitting, as it
were) sometimes every day, sometimes every other, or fourth day resumes its
febrile accension as it were: the reason of this which seems to me most likely,
is as follows. In a continual Fever there are two chief things (as we have
hinted above) which for the most part cause the Effervescence of the Blood,
viz. an exaltation and acsion of the sulphurous part in the Blood; and then
consequently a heaping together of the adust matter remaining after the
deflagration of the Blood, to a Turgescency: on the former, the continuity of
the Fever, on the other its height and critical Perturbations depend: to these
sometimes a third thing is added, to wit, a fullness and turgescency of a crude
Juice from Aliments fresh gathered together, which at set intervals of times
causes a greater effervescence in a continual Fever (as in the fits of
Intermittents.)

Concerning the Cure of putrid Fevers of what kind soever, there are four
general intentions, on which the whole stress of the Business lies. First, that
the Blood (if it may be) be freed from its burning, and that the Flame or Fire
kindled in its sulphury part be wholly suppressed, which often happens to be done
about the first beginnings of this Disease. Secondly, that when the Blood,
being set a burning, cannot presently be extinguished, it may go on with it at
least mildly, and with as little damage as may be. Thirdly, that the burning
being over, the Liquour of the Blood may be cleared of the Recrements of the
burnt and adust Matter, and be restored to its natural Vigor and Crasis.
Fourthly, that the Symptoms chiefly pressing be seasonably obviated, without
the removal of which the attempts both of Nature and Physic will be in Vain.

As to the particular Remedies, with which those intentions are answered, there
are various Prescripts, and Forms of Medicines every where in use, not only
amongst Physicians, but likewise old Women and Empricks; from which
nevertheless, in regard they are used like a Sword in a blind Man's Hands,
without differences, and an exact Method of Healing, more damage than benefit
often accrues to the Diseased. It will not be needful for me to repeat in this
Place the Forms of Purgers. Cardiacks, or other Medicines neatly enough
delivered in many Authors. I shall briefly set down some of the chief
Indications, and Physical Cautions which ought to be observed in the course of
this Fever, according to the various Seasons, and diverse Symptoms of it.

1. About the first Invasion of this Disease, you must endeavor that the Fever
be forthwith suppressed, and that the inflammation of the overheated Sulphur may
be stopped; to which breathing a Vein chiefly conduces; for by this means the
Blood is ventilated, and the hot Particles too much crowded together, and even
ready to fall a burning, are dissipated from each other, as when Hay, being apt
to take on Fire, if it be exposed to the open Air, its kindling is prevented:
Moreover, let a thin diet be ordered: in which nothing spirituous or
sulphurous ought to be used: let the Viscera and first Passages be freed from
the Load of Excrementious Matter; Wherefore Clysters will be of necessary use,
sometimes also Vomits, and gentle Purges, which being now and then given
seasonably and with judgment, the Fever presently at the beginning, its Fuel
for accension beig withdrawn, is extinguished. But if notwithstanding this
Method the burning gets Ground, and daily more and more lays hold on the
sulphurous Particles of the Blood: let it be procured (as far as may be) that
the deflagration goes on gently without any great Commotion.

2. Wherefore, when the Fever is in its Increase, if the Blood boyls too much,
and very much extends the Vessels with a strong and vehement Pulse, if
Watchings, a Frenzy, or Headache, violently press, bleed a second time, and let
as free a Transpiration (as may be) be procured: wherefore, let the Diseased,
for the most part, lie in Bed, let the Diet be sare, of very thin Food; also,
let the Drink be small, and plentiful, that the burning Blood may be freely
diluted with Serum. Clysters are given with Safety, and indeed, with good
Effect; but let Medicines, whether Catharticks or Diuretics, and which too
much exagitate the Blood, be avoided with the same Industry as Blasts of Wind
are where Houses are on fire; nay, rather Opiates and Anodines, which fix and
constipate the Blood and Spirits, are to be used: also, Juleps and Decoctions,
which cool the burning Bowels, qualify the Blood, and refresh the Spirits, are
frequently to be given. Acetous Liquors of Vegetables or Minerals, also Nitre
purified, because they restrain the burning of the Blood, and quench Thirst,
agree well: let hot and spirituous Waters, cordial and Bezoartick Powders (so
the Disease be without Malignity) be let alone. In case the Blood circulates
unevenly, and be carried more violently toward the Head than the Feet,
Epithemes of the warm Flesh, or Inwards of Animals, applied to the Feet, do
well.

3. When the Fever is at its height, let the motion of Nature be diligently
minded, whether it be about to make a Crisis or not; wherefore, nothing is to
be attempted rashly by a Physician: breathing a Vein, or strong Purging, are
wholly forbidden: but aftenward, when the burning of the Fever is in some
measure remitted after the Deflagration of the Blood, and signs of Concoction
appear in the Urine, in case the Motion of Nature be sluggish, a Sweat or
gentle Purge may be procured, which, nevertheless, are performed better, and
with more Safety, by a Physician, when Nature before, by a critical motion, has
set upon a seclusion of the morbifick matter. But if all things are crude, and
in a Perturbation, the Urine be still troubled without a Sediment or a
Separation of Parts, if the Strength be faint, the Pulse weak, if no Crisis, or
only a fruitless one, has preceded, any Evacuation, either by Sweat, or
Purging, is not attempted without manifest Danger of Life: but we must expect
longer, that the Spirits of the Blood may recover themselves, and in some
measure subdue the recrementitious and adust Matter, and afterward, by degrees,
separate them; mean while, let the Strength be refreshed with temperate
Cordials, let the immoderate Effervescence of the Blood (if it be so) be stopped;
and let its due Fermentation be upheld, which, in truth, is excellently
performed by Coral, Pearl, and those kinds of Powders, which are dissolved by
the Ferments of the Viscera, and afterward ferment with the Blood, and greatly
restore its weak and wavering Motion. Mean while (whilst Nature labors) let
all Obstacles and Impediments be removed, and especially let the store of
Excrements heapt together in the first Passages, be withdrawn by the frequent
Use of Clysters.

4. After what way or method the Symptoms chiefly pressing ought to be handled,
it is not an easy thing to prescribe by certain Rules; because the very same
sometimes require to be forthwith restrained and appeased, sometimes to be
moved on faster: and those that have somewhat greater in them, happily ar another
time are to be left wholly to Nature. This, in some, may be obviated with
asswaging and lenifying Remedies, but in others with a rough and irritating
Physic: mean while, it is a Precept to be stood to in all, that we religiously
follow the Footsteps of Nature: which, if it acts amiss, its Disorder is to be
reduced; if rightly, but too vehemently, it is to be cheekt; and if rightly,
but slower or weaker than it ought, it must be our business to encourage and
aid its Effort by physical means.

5. In the declining state of a Fever, when after a perfect Crisis, Nature has
gotten the upper-hand of the Disease, things are in Safety; nor is there much
left for a Pyhsician to do: it only remains, to propose an exact form of Diet,
that the Diseased may soon recover their Strength without fear of a Relapse:
also it is good to clear the Remainder of the febrile matter by a gentle Purge.
Concerning the Diet, Men very often incur a Relapse, to wit, by an overhasty
eating of Flesh or strong Food, the Diseased fall back into the Fever; for
since the Viscera are weak, and do not easily concoct Food, (unless it be very
thin) and since the Crasis of the Blood is so weak what it does not assimilate
a strong nutritive Juice, if any thing disproportionate be brought to either,
the economy of Nature is again perverted, and all things run amiss. Wherefore,
let such as are upon Recovery frobear a long time from Flesh, and let them not
use it till their Urine is become like that of sound Persons, and is no longer
troubled by the Cold: and indeed, then it will be better to begin with diluted
Broth of Flesh, and afterward by Degrees to rise to stronger Aliments.

6 When, after an imperfect Crisits, the thing hangs in doubt, and is not yet
come to a Determination, then the Physician has a hard Task: let a diligent Eye
be had to the motion and strength of Nature, whether it begins to prevail over
the Disease, or yields to the same: if there are signs of Concoction, and the
Strength holds good, a gentle Evacuation, and only per Epicrasin, is to be put
in practice: mean while, let the chiefly pressing Symproms be obviated by fit
Remedies, let all Impediments be removed; let the Strength be upheld, as much
as may-be, by Cordials, and a true method of Diet.

7. When after an evil or no Crisis all things grow worse, and when the
Physician, in a manner, despairs of the Cure of the Disease, he may declare the
event of it to be suspected, and greatly to be feared: nevertheless, we must
not so yield to a bare Prognostic that Fear shall put us by of all things
else; but still, as much as lies in the Art of Physic, let Care be taken for a
Recovery, tho the Case be desperate; let Remedies be used to the Symptoms that
are most dangerous; let the Spirits of the Blood, almost extinct, be
reinvigorated with Cordials. When we despair of a Recovery, let Life be drawn
out in length as long as it may be, at leastwise let an easy Death be procured.

I shall now briefly give you some few Examples having regard to each Species
of the foresaid Fever.

A noble Matron, about fifty Years of Age, of a thin habit of Body, a low
Stature, and a fresh colored Countenance, having clothed her self thinner
than usual on the fifteenth day of June, by reason of the Summer-heat, in the
Evening was taken ill, and upon it, was seized with a Nauseousness, and an
Oppression of the Stomach: she had wandering Pains troubling her sometimes in
the Shoulder Blade, sometimes in the Back, being very thirsty, tho without any
immoderate Heat. On the second and third day she found her self almost after
the same manner. On the fourth day, after a Vomit given her, viz. un ounce of
the Infusion of Crocus Metallorum, she vomited four times a yellow Choler, and
purging thrice by Stool, she seemed to receive ease: the following night she
slept somewhat better; but the next day, the Fever being kindled throughout the
Body, she complained of a Thrist, a burning of the Praecordia, and of a Pain
sometimes in the Side, sometimes in the Back, presently eight Ounces of Blood
were taken from her; her Urine was of a very saturated Redness, opake, and
troubled, without an Hypostasis, or subsiding of the Contents; the Pulse was
uneven, and often intermitting: the following Night was without Rest. On the
sixth day of the Disease, early in the Morning, a small Sweat arose, whereupon
the Heat became somewhat more mild, which grew more intense again in the
Evening. On the seventh day there was a very sharp Heat, with a Thirst,
Burning, a disorderly and intermittent Pulse also a mighty Restlessness of the
whole Body. On the eighth, the Symptoms were somewhat more remiss; also in the
Urine there were some Tokens of an Hypostasis: she took on that day, Whey with
the Leaves of Meadow-sweet boiled in it; she sweated freely; the Fever came to
a Crisis. All the time of her Sickness her Diet was only small Ale, Whey,
Barley and Oat Broaths; Clysters were frequently used; Drink and cooling Juleps
were given her at her Pleasure.

About the beginning of the Summer, Anno 1656. a worthy Man, of an athletick
habit of Body, without any manifest Cause (unless that being very much addicted
to Study, he used no Exercise besides) fell ill: first he complained of a
Nauseousness and a want of Appetite, with a violent Headache. On the second day
he was affected with a cold Shivering, sometimes with a heat coming upon him by
Turns; and likewise with a Thirst, and burning of the Praecordia, with a
roughness of the Tongue, and an ungrateful Savor: on that Day he took ten
Drams of an Emetick Liquor, after which he vomited seven times, and threw up a
mighty quantity of yellow Choler, and had four Stools: the Night following was
restleAss, and in a manner without Sleep; at which time, the Diseased, the heat
being increast, grew more intensly feverish. On the third Day, when the
foresaid Symptoms increast, ten ounces of Blood were taken from him: his Urine
was reddy and thick, with a copious Sediment; the Pulse was quick and vehement;
in the Night he sweated a little, with a short, but troubled, Sleep: the
Morning following the seemed somewhat relieved; but in the Evening all things
grew worse again, with Watchings, and a most intense Heat and Drought. On the
fifth day, after a light Sweat, the burning somewhat remitted; which,
nevertheless, returned again with its wonted Fierceness a little before the
Evening; the Night again was without Sleep, with an almost continual tossing of
the Body: in the Morning, upon a gentle Sweat, he found a little Relief; in the
Evening again there was an Exacerbation of all things; the night also was very
restless. About the beginning of the Day following a Sweat happened as before,
and somewhat more plentifully: this day there was a manifest Change toward a
Recovery; the Heat and Thirst abated by degrees; the Urine was less ruddy, with
somewhat of an Hypostasis: afterward, for three days, the Fever leisurely
declined; yet he had every Night a certain Fit, tho more remiss than before. On
the eleventh Day he sweated more freely, and came to a perfect Crisis. During
the whole time of the sickness he used a very spare Diet, as desiring no Food
but small Ale, and Whey made with it: he took now and then cooling Drinks, and
Juleps of a Decoction of Barley, and distilled Waters; every day, if he had not
a Motion to Stool of his own Accord, an emollient Clyster was injected: he used
no Medicine beside, viz. either Cathartick or Cardiack; but the Fever being
over, he was twice purged, and afterward soon grew well.

A young Student, about twenty five Years of Age, of a pale Countenance, and a
melancholy Temperament, without a manifest Cause, in August, 1656. began to be
sick: first he complained of a feverish Distemper, with a Thirst, a spontaneous
Lassitude, and a want of Appetite. On the second day he was troubled also with
a Pain in the right side, and a Distension of both Hypocondres, also with an
almost continual Vomiting, Watchings, and a violent Headache. On the third day,
a Physician being called, presently twelve Ounces of Blood were taken away: in
the Evening he grew hotter and delirious; afterward a Sweat, tho small,
happening, he was better the next Morning. On the fourth day, he presently threw
up again whatsoever was given him, and was troubled with an almost continual
striving to vomit; the giving of a Vomitory being proposed by the Physician,
both the sick Person, and his Friends, refused to admit of it, being taught by
Experience of the Danger of it before: a Clyster being given him, he had six
Stools, and seemed to be somewhat relieved, and the Night following he slept a
little. On the fifth day again there was a frequent Vomiting, with a continual
Thirst; he burned inwardly; but the sense of that immoderate Heat was not
perceivable outwardly to the Touch, because the Recrements of the boiling
Blood, which ought to have breathed forth through the skin, seemed to stagnate
within, and so float the Viscera; therefore in the Evening, for provoking a
Sweat, this Bolus was given, Conserve of Roses vitriolated a dram, Gascoins
Powder a Scruple, Laudanum dissolved in Bawm Water a Grain: That Night he slept
indifferently, and a copious Sweat ensuing, the Symptoms seemed to be
mitigated: nevertheless, on the sixth day all things grew bad again; a Heat
throughout the whole Body, a Thirst, and a burning of the Praecordia pressed
violently. On the seventh and eighth days the Pulse was uneven and disorderly:
for the most part, he spoke delirous, and if he was stirred in his Bed he fell
frequently into a fainting Fit. On the ninth Day the same Symptoms continued;
moreover, he was troubled with a Contraction of the Tendons, in the Wrists, and
with Convulsive Motions of other Parts, so that we despaired, in a manner, of
his welldoing. That Morning, because Nature seemed to yield her self overcome,
it concerned us to do what Art could afford; wherefore, intending a copious
Sweat as the last Refuge, I gave him at one taking, a Dram of Spirit of
Hart-born in a little Draught of a Cordial Julep; from thenceforward, for four
Hours, being very restless and raving, he could scarce be kept in Bed; but
afterward, Sleep stealing upon him, he sweated very much, and his Case was soon
brought to be out of danger: the following Night, in order to continue the
Sweat, I ordered a Dose of the Powder of Contrayerva to be given him every six
Hours. The Fever, and the Affects of the Genus Nervosum, ceased in a short
time, and the sick Person recovered.

A Woman about thirty Years of Age, of a robust Body, and a melancholy
Temperament (as we might guess from her very austere way of Behavior) in the
third Month after Childbirth, as she gave her Infant suck in the Night, the
Clothes falling from her, took Cold, and shortly upon it fell into a cold
Shivering; a Heat, greater than usual, followed it, which afterward (a gentle
Sweat arising) soon remitted. On the second and third days she was very
thirsty, and had no Appetite, tho without any immoderate Burning, that she
scarce yet believed her self in a Fever; every Night she lay quiet, but wholly
without Sleep, the Urine was intensly ruddly, and somewhat thick and opake
through the multitude of contents, which nevertheless being not disturbed by
the cold, continued still after the same manner without an flypostasis or
subfiding of the parts: on the fourth day, the heat was, kindled throughout the
whole, wherefore a Physician being then first called, about twelve ounces of
Blood were taken from the Arm: after the letting Blood, and the Belly being
copiously emptyed the same day by a Clyster given, in the Evening she fell into
a Sweat, by which Nevertheless being not relieved, she past the Night without
Sleep as before, tho an Anodyne Medicine were given her: on the fifth day,
after a Clyster injected she had three stools, and found ease: the Urine still
continued the same, ruddy and troubled: when it was prescribed her to have
Blood taken from the Vein running under the Knee, the Diseased earnestly
refused it, thinking herself upon a Recovery: the Night following, after that
she had lain without Sleep, and restless for a long time, at length she fell
into a sore fit, such as is vulgarly said to be Hysterical, and in the first
place she was affected with a certain Numness or a Sense of pricking, which
seized the extreme parts of the Body, especially the Feet, Legs and Thighs,
and withal with a Flatus violently distending the Intestines, Ventricle and
Hypochondres: she selt in the lower part of her Belly a certain great and heavy
things, as it were, to rise up gently, which when it was risen to the Heart,
and thence to the Brain, presently the Diseased failed in her Understanding,
and for all the Night afterward lay delirous and talked lightheaded: on the
sixth day, after the Belly's being loosned by a Clyster she came to her self
again, was very sound in her Mind, and seemed to be indifferently well: but in
the Evening, as she was moved in her bed, she began to feel an invasion of such
a kind of fit, as before, to wit, in her whole Body she had a sense of
Pricking, as tho she were stung with Nettles: and withal in her Belly she felt
a Ball, as it were, which creeping upwards distended the intestines and
Ventricle, so that store of Flatus'd and Belchings were thence caused: for
relief she desired cold Water might be given her to drink, moreover Remedies
usual in Hysteric Affects, as Castoreum, a smell of Assafetida, Fumes of
Feathers burnt, Ligatures, and Frictions of the Legs and Thighs, and the like
things were used, by which she seemed for the present free from the said
affect, and was wholly cleared from it for four hours; but as she lay on her
Back in the Bed, settling her self to sleep, on a sudden she complained that
the same Symptoms pervaded her whole Body together, and presently upon it fell
into a Delirium, all the night without sleep, howling and crying, she talked
lightheaded; on the day following, she lay with her Eyes open, without Motion
or Speech; in the Evening again, as the Fever increast, the Diseased grew
raving, that she could scarce be kept in her Bed; and so for three days,
sometimes she lay delirous, orying and howling, sometimes stupid as it were
without Motion or Speech, but still she was troubled with convulsive Motions
about the Tendons of the Muscles; on the tenth day she feteht her Breath deep
and short, with a weak, and as it were formicating Pulse, in the middle of the
night she dyed.

A Learned Young Man, of a thin habit, and a pale Countenance, in the beginning
of the Spring, not being conscious of any error in Diet, began to complain of
a Lassitude and a Debility in walking, also of a Drowsiness of his Head, and a
Sleepiness: on the second day he was withal tormented with a Thirst, a loss of
Appetite, and a burning of the Praecordia; on the third day, a Physician being
called, he took a Vomitory, after which when he had thrice vomited, and had
voided five times by Seige hot and bilous Excrements, he became somewhat more
cheerful, and the following Night slept indifferently well: on the fourth day
he bled a little at Nose: afterward the Thirst and Heat were very much
increased: the Urine was ruddly, with a copious Sediment and somewhat of an
Hypostasis: but because after signs of Concoction in the Urine there appeared
an effort of Nature, oppressed as it were, for voiding something without a
sufficient Evacuation, therefore seven ounces of Blood were taken away, and
thereupon he seemed to be very much relieved: Nevertheless, in the Evening all
things grew worse, and thence forward for three days the Fever seemed still to
be rendered more intense, on the seventh day he complained of a great Drowsiuess
in his Head, and of a Dimness in his Eyes: in the Afternoon a very large
Haemorrhagie happened, that through the vast loss of Blood the strength of the
Diseased was almost wholly spent, and there was an extreme need of physical aid
for stopping the Blood: for this purpose, when Blooding in the Arm, Ligatures,
Evithems applied both to the Head and the lower part of the Belly, and a great
many other Remedies (the instantancous occasion of Cure pressing for it)
prescribed by all Persons, were tried in Vain; at length, by the persuasion of
a Woman being there by chance, a red hot Iron was held to the Nose as it dropped,
and on a sudden, upon the receiving of the Fume of the burnt Blood into the
Nostrills, its Flux was stopped: I have known this Remedy used since in many
others with good success: by that copious Haemorhagy the contrinual Fever came
to a Crisis; tho an intermittent Quotidian followed it, which afterward was
soon cured according to the Merhod above delivered.

A Matron sixty years of Age, lying a certain night in Sheets not well dried,
began to be ill: first she was affected with a suffocating Catarth, that
through the serous Mass of filth distilling on the Larynx, she could soarce
breath, much less fleep: the next day after she had a Nauseousness and a want
of Appetite, with somewhat of a Thirst and an Excess of Heat: on the third day
an acute Pain seized her fide, with a Cough and an increase of the Fever, the
Urine was ruddy, and clear, with a laudable Hypostasis; the Pulse was uneven
and intermitting. A Phyfician being called, ten Ounces of Blood were taken
away; also, on that day a Clyster being given, she purged freely: about night
the Pain vanished, and she slept indifferently: the Urine then was ruddy,
troubled, and filled with Contents. On the fourth day the Fever was somewhat
more increast; in the Evening the Cough was very troublesome, being followed
with an acute Pain in the same Side as before; the Urine was again with an
Hypostasis: the Pain, upon letting Blood again, soon ceased. On the fifth Day
the Fever was somewhat more remiss; yet the Night was restless with a Heat and
a Tossing of the Body, but without Pain: the next Morning she sweated freely,
and was relieved: afterward, by a thin Diet used for some Days, and being once
pnrged, she recovered without a Relapse. It is worthy to be observed, that the
Pain pressing, the Urine was clear, and with an Hypostasis; nor was it troubled
by the Cold: which nevertheless, the same being appeased, presently grew thick
and more ruddy, and filled with Contents.

A robust Young Man, and well in Flesh, about the Summer Solstice, after
immoderate Exercises, and then a sudden Cold coming upon the Heat, fell ill.
First, he was affected with a loss of Appetite, a Nauseousness, a violent Pain
of the Head, also with a Thirst, and a Heat more intense than usual. On the
second day, an acute Pain in the Right-side, with a Cough and a difficult
Respiration, seized him; Blood presently being plentifully drawn from the Arm
of the same Side, that Pain somewhat remitted; which nevertheless, returned
more violently in the Evening, with a Cough and a spitting Blood; the night
past without sleep, and very restless. On the third day Blood was taken away
again; and moreover, Liniments and Fomentations were applied to the Side
pained; Antipleuritick Powders, Juleps, and Decoctions, were inwardly taken:
about night, the Pain, in a manner, wholly ceased; presently after, the
Diseased was affected with a violent Headache, and a Vertigo. On the fourth day
he bled two ounces of Blood at the Nose; after which, that Affect of the Head
clearly ceased; but in the Evening the Pain returned in the Side first
affected, with a greater Fierceness: mean while the Pulse was low and weak;
that when it was consulted concerning letting Blood, there was danger lest the
dejected Strength would not admit of such a Remedy; wherefore, Blood being
taken only in a small quantity, it was prescribed, that a Fomentation and
Cataplasmes should be diligently applied to the Side; moreover, that twenty
Drops of Spirit of Hartshorn should be given in a Spoonful of a Cordial Julep,
and that the same should be still repeated every six Hours: he sweated
plentifully that Night, and the Pain very much abated; the Spittle was but
little, sprinkled with Blood, which wholly ceased within a Day, the Pain also
vanishing by Degrees: the Diseased took twice a day a Scruple of the same
Spirit of Hartshorn, and perfectly recovered within a few Days, without a
Relapse.

CHAP. XI. Of the Malignant or Pestilential Fever in general.
BEsides the Continual Fever, such as above described, and which arises by
reason of some Principle in the Blood exalted too much, and disproportionate
with the rest; there is another Species of it, which is raised by reason of the
Blood being tainted with some venomous Miasm, and thereupon ready to incur
various Coagulations and Corruptions; in which, not only the Spirit and the
Sulphur, as in a Putrid Fever, make an exorbitant Effort, and force the Blood
to boil immoderately, but withal, the mixture of the Blood is forthwith
dissolved, and its Liquor runs into parts; and so that horrible Symptoms, with
a manifest danger of Life, are caused in this kind of Affect. Under this Rank
we comprehend Malignant and Pestilential Fevers, the Plague, the Small Pox, and
Measles; concerning which, it remains for us to treat at present.

By the unanimous Consent of all, the Force and Power of these Diseases are
placed in a venomous Matter; because, upon a Pestilential Affect, even as upon
drinking Poison, we find that the Strength is suddenly cast down, and that Life
is soon destroyed: and therefore, for explicating the nature of the Pestilence,
it will not be amiss, first to enquire concerning Poison in general, and after
what manner it affects our Bodies; and then to show what sort of Venom is
dispersed in the Plague and contagious Diseases: which being premitted, we shall
speak in particular of the Affects even now mentioned.

We may justly give the name of Poison to whatsoever sticking in our Body,
violently and after a secret manner, injures the Temper and Actions of any
part, or of the whole, destroys the Spirits, or perverts their Motions,
dissolves the mixture of the Liquors, causes Coagulations and Corruptions,
subverts the Ferments and Functions of the Viscera, and so on a sudden, and
privily, endanger Life. There is a vast store of these in Nature, which are
often engendered within our Bodies, and abundantly supplied outwardly from the
Earth, Air, and Water, and from the distinct Families of Minerals, Vegetables,
and Animals.

As there is a great variety of Poisons, so there is no less a diversity of
them, as to the Subjects, and the ways of their hurting; for, tho a great many
poisonous things are said to be contrary to us, as to the whole Substance, so
that they set upon any thing, and like a Funeral Flame, with a caustic Force
reduce it, as it were, into Ashes: yet some of these, being endowed with a
peculiar Force of offending, rather hurt one Part or Substance than another.
The Subjects on which the Taint of the Venom fixes it self first of all, and
most immediately, are twofold, to wit, the Animal Spirits, or the spirituous
and subtle Liquor passiing in the Brain and 'Genus Nervosum, and the Blood
flowing in the Heart and Vessels. When a disproportionate Object presents it
self to one of them alone, or to both together, so that thereupon the Crasis of
the Liquors or of the containing Parts, is subverted, whereby Functions
necessary for performing the Offices of Life and Sense, are let and this is
done after a secret manner, and as it were on a sudden, these kinds of Effects
we ascribe to Poison.

The nervous Bodies, with the animal Spirit, are not set upon wholly after the
same manner by all sorts of Poisons; for sometimes they are assailed with a
Stupor, sometimes with Cramps and convulsive motions, and those of diverse Kinds
and Conditions. The Bite of the Tarantula causes a Dancing; the force
transmitted from a Tortoise by a Spear, or the Cords of a Net, stupifies the
hand of the Fisher; the Roots of Wild Parsnips, or the Seeds of Dranel, eaten,
make Men tun mad; Opium, Mandrake, Henbane, and the like, cause a deep, and
sometimes a mortal Sleep. These, and a great many other things, without any
mighty Perturbation of the Blood, or Injury brought on the Heart, fast'n
chiefly their Venom on the Animal Faculty or Spirit.

There are also some Poisons which chiefly insinuate their Malignity into the
mass of Blood; wherefore, after using some Medicines, a yellow or black
Jaundice, sometimes a Leprosy, leprous Affects, or Swellings of the whole
Body, are produced; Vapors rising from subterraneous Vaults, also from
Charcoals newly kindled, often suffocating the Vital Spirits, congeal the Blood
withal, and stop its Motion; so that the Flame of Life cannot be continued in
the Heart. Every Man may see how great a Corruption is communicated to the Mass
of Blood from the pestilential Miasm, by the Spots and Pushes which are the
infamous Marks, as it were, of the blasted Blood.

If the Injury first inflicted on either, viz. the ceconomy of the Heart or
Brain be light, for the most part it is brought to an end without any great
Offense of either; wherefore, Convulsive Motions, a Stupor, Lethargy,
Melancholy, Paralytick Affects, often begin with a landable Pulse, and without
an immoderate Effervescence of the Blood; and afterward, if the Affect does not
wax strong, they come to an end, and cease by little and little. There are
other Poisons which often deprave the Blood, and corrupt its Mixture by
dissolving it, the animal Functions in the mean time continuing whole and
sound; but if the Ferment of the Poison be stronger, and lays deeper Roots,
presently the Venom is dispersed from the one into the Province of the other;
for when the nervous Parts are filled with a virulent Juice, a Portion of the
Venom, brought back with the nervous Latex, by the lymphatick Vessels into the
Veins, is readily conveyed into the Mass of Blood, and defiles it with the
Corruption prevailing in it: also from the Blood greatly infected with Venom,
the Juice wherewith the Nerves are irrigated in a short time becomes tained;
Hence, Persons that are mad are feverish, and such as are seized with a
pestilential Fever very often are assailed with a Delirium or Frenzy.
Concerning these things, we must consider what kind of Alteration or Impression
of Injury it is which is inflicted by Poison on the Animal Spirits with the
Brain and nervous Appendix; also what on the Blood, with the Heart and the
Vessels annexed to it.

As to the first, we observe, that that subtle Liquor, or the Animal Spirits,
with which the nervous Bodies are influenced, and by the Expansion of which,
Sense and Motion perform reciprocal Actions, are easily perverted from their
Continuity, and even Expansion; for, the Nerves being of a sost Texture, and
the Spirits wherewith they are filled being of a very subtle Substance, they
are not able to endure any sorts of Objects that are strong or vehement;
wherefore, when any violent or disproportionate Thing assails them by Surprise,
they are often forced from their Expansion and Excursion, to a Flight and a
Retreat, and often into Irregularities of motions; wherefore, sudden Passions
of the Mind distract them, and stir them to Twitching and Convulsions: when the
nutritive Juice wherewith they are supplied is sent to them too sharp, acid, or
austere, they undergo sometimes Resolutions, sometimes Shrinkings: and if some
Object more contrary (such as we affirm Poison to be) presents it self, whose
Particles are of such a fierce Nature, or of such a Configuration, that they
violently ferment with the nervous Liquor, they strongly drive the subtle or
spirituous Part of it this way and that, or wholly drive it away; and either by
their styptick Force they fix the rest of the Liquor, or force it by an
Ebullition into disorderly Motions; Hence necessarily arise the evil Affects of
the Brain and nervous Parts, viz. sometimes a Convulsion, a Trembling, a
Shivering, sometimes a Stupor, or Resolutions, and other severe Symptoms. The
Things which infect with Venom the nervous Juice after this manner, sometimes
are gross, and only inflict their Injury when they are applied in a very
corporeal Substance; sometimes they are subtle, and being resolved into a
Vapor, or even to a Breath, they disperse the Ferment of the Poison from a
little Point throughont the whole Genus Nervosum. Sometimes the Poison of an
ill Thing eaten first begins its Tragedy in the Stomach, but oftener by a bare
Contact on the Surface of the Body, it leaves the virulent Miasm, which soon
and readily defiles, with its Ferment, the Spirits dispersed through the whole.
A Taint inflicted on the Extremities of the Nerves, any where, whether inwardly
or outwardly, it dispersed to a distance by their ready Conveyance, presently
many Sprouts of the same Branch being brought to communicate of the Evil.
Often, a light Touch of a venomous Thing by the Finger, or the extreme part of
any Member, presently conveys the Taint received to the Brain, and thence it is
retorted on the whole Body, and the most remote Members: the Reason of this is,
that the Particles both of the nervous Juice, and of some venomous Miasm, are
so active and quick of Motion, that either of them pass most swiftly through
the whole Mass of the others, as Rays of Light through a Diaphanous Medium.

2. As often as the Blood gets Mischief by a venomous Thing, the Venom sticking
in it, either is dull and of less Activity, which does not presently discover
it self, nor breaks forth into terrible Symptoms, till after a long time, when
it is brought to a Ripeness by a tacit Fermentation, and has first infected the
whole Mass of Blood; as we may observe in some Poisons, which are said to kill
at a distance, and not but after some Months or Years: or the Poisons inspired
into the Blood are imbued with a much sharper Sting, that the Taint contractef
by their Contagion presently breaks forth into terrible Symptoms; and thereupon
follows sometimes a feverish Effervescence, with a Vomiting, a Thirst, and a
burning of the Praecordia; sometimes a puffing up of the whole, a discoloring
of the Skin, often an Eruption of Pushes and Buboes; frequently also a sudden
falling of the Strength, so that a sudden Death steals on without any Stir, and
almost unperceived: where it is to be noted by the By, if the Spirits of the
Blood provoked by the Enemy, are able to set upon him and to contend for the
Victory, from this Conflict a feverish Ebullition is raised in the Blood; but,
if the Particles of the Poison far exceed them in Strength, presently the Mase
of Blood is corrupted, that it can neither be circulated in the Vessels, nor be
duly kindled in the Heart.

If it be farther enquired, what Changes in its Substance, or Consistency, the
Blood infected with Poison undergoes, that thereby it is rendered unfit for the
Support of Life; I answer after this manner, Some Poisons fuse the Blood, and
precipitate its Serosity, as those Medicines which being destructive either by
Purging, or by causing a Flux of Urine, or by a puffing up of the whole, or by
a Discolouration, or an Eruption of Pushes, make a very great Separation of the
Serous Latex: mean while, a great ebullition is caused in the mass of Blood,
whereby the Vital Spirits are greatly spent; the Particles of the Salt and
Sulphur, by the too much Contion, are exalted, and often so scorched, that a
Jaundise, either yellow or black, is caused.

There are Poisons of another kind far more dangerous, which congeal the Blood,
and corrupt its mixture by destroying it, viz. first they bring a Coagulation
on the Mass of Blood, and then a Corruption; for, when the Spirits of the
Blood, put to flight by the Contagion of the Poison, are dissipated, the even
mixture of the Liquor is dissolved; wherefore, the grosser Particles mutually
lock with each other, and (like Milk upon Rennets being put into it, or turning
sour of its own accord) they are coagulated together; hence the Blood grows
clotted in the Vessels, that it is not readily circulated in them: the
coagulated Portions of it being conveyed inwardly into the Sinus's of the
Hearts, are there apt to stagnate, and so they cause frequent Faintings and
Swoonings: being carried outward, and stuck in the Skin in circulating,
sometimes, when cast on every side in a plentiful manner, they cause an
over-spreading of Blackness throughout the whole; sometimes being dispersed more
spartingly, they cause only Spots, or black and blew Marks, and the rest of the
Phoenomena of Malignity: now the Coagulation of the Blood soon disposes it to
Putrefaction or Corruption, as it is to be seen in extravasated Blood, which
soon turns black, and is wont to putrefie; for the Spirit being exhaled the
remaining Particles of the Salt and Sulphur in the Blood begin to separate from
each other, and to dissolve the Bond of Mixture, whence Putrefaction ensues.

These things being thus premitted concerning Poison in general, the method of
Healing requires that we set upon the Tract of Fevers, which draw their Origin
wholly from a venomous and malignant Miasm: and since among these, the Plague
is undoubtedly the chief, I shall begin with the Consideration of that, and
shall speak afterward, in order, of Malignant Fevers, the Measles, and
Smallpox. But before I give its Definition, I shall enquire briefly concerning
the Pestilential Venom, of what Nature and Disposition it is; also whence it
arises; and lastly, after what manner it is propagated by Contagion in others.

The Essence of the Pestilential Fever is founded in a vapory and spiritual
Miasm, from which Effluvia's diffused on every side so powerfully display
themselves, that from the least Seminary they soon propagate a fertile Harvest
of Death and Destruction. By reason of its mighty Activity, this Miasm deserves
to be called, a certain Quintescence, as it were, of Poison: its very nimble
and subtle Particles penetrate all Bodies, and inspire them with their Ferment;
for, whether being dispersed through the Air, or stored up in some Fomes, if
they come to hit upon a Homane Body, tho it be lightly, and as it were, with a
Glance, they readily penetrate it, soon infect the Animal Spirits and those of
the Blood, and thereby overspread all the Members with a Venomous Contagion.

When a pestilential Breath or Vapor has assailed any one, and that Venom has
first seized the Animal Spirits, or those of the Blood, or both of them
together; from the subtle and thin Substance of these the Taint is soon derived
into the grosser Matter, for in a short time it ferments the whole Mass of
Blood, or nervous Juice, and the excrementitious Homours in any place
abounding; and thence is drawn into the solid Parts, and fixes the Evil in
them. If this Contagion first seises the Animal Parts, presently the Injury is
communicated to the Brain, and the Genus Nervosum, and esecially to the
Ventricle; it forthwith poisons the Humor lodging in these, dissolves its
mixture, perverts its regular Motion, and renders it wholly disagreeing and
offensive to the tender substance of the containing Parts: thence forthwith
Cramps, and Convulsive Motions, violent Vomitings, a Cardialgia, also a Frenzy,
Delirium, or obstinate Watchings, are raised about the first Invasion of the
Disease; whereas in the mean while, the Taint being not yet dispersed through
the Blood, the Diseased are not in a Fever, nor infested with a disorderly,
Pulse, or a Swooning, or an appearance of Tokens; which Symptoms, nevertheless,
as soon as the Blood is infected, show themselves afterward. If at any time the
Spirits of the Blood are first seized with the venomous Miasm, either breathed
in with the Air, or attracted by the Pores, by and by its ferment is dispersed
throughout the whole mass of Blood, the infected portions presently begin to be
loosned from their even mixture, to separate into parts, and to be coagulated,
and the same being conveyed into the Sinus's of the Heart, to stagnate there,
and to cause a Swooning, Faintings, and often a sudden Death: also being
carried outwardly, and fixed about the Skin, they are wont to cause Bubo's,
Pushes, and the other marks of a Venenosity, mean while the Diseased are
present enough to themselves, and are not assailed with a Delirium or
convulsive Motions: but if from a stronger cause an Injury be inflicted on both
Parts at once, the course of the Disease is carried on with a more horrible
appearance of Symptoms, and with a Phrensy infesting together.

As to what regards its rise; when the Plague first arises in any Region or
Tract of the Earth (whatsoevre others may think) we place the first and chief
natural Seminary of this Poison in the Air, for it seems consonant to reason,
that from the same Fountain from whence the Food of common Life is derived, the
beginnings also of Death, which is no less diffused, should be taken: the same
necessity lies upon us for breathing the Air, as for Fish of living in the
Waters; wheresore, as the common Destruction of Fish dying in Multitudes is
ascribed to Waters being infected with Poison, so nothing but a Taint of the
Air, breathed by all, can kill Men that dye without a manifest Cause, by an
epidemick Destruction.

For the Air, which we necessarily breath in for the Support of Life, consists
of thick Steams and Vapors, which continually are breathed from the Earth; to
which the exhalations of Salts and Sulphurs being mixed, they make here a thick
Fog, as it were, of Atomous Corpuscles. The Motions of these being both very
swift and restless, are of a manifold and very differing Figure; wherefore some
of them continually encounter others, and according to their various
Configurations, they close with these and are mutually combined, and are driven
and fly from others: on this the Reasons of every Sympathy and Antipathy
chiefly depend; from the diverse Agitations of these kinds of Atoms near the
Surface of the Earth, this or that Tract of the Air undergoes diverse
Alterations, with which Bodies, especially those that are living, are variously
affected, for the inward Motion of the Particles of each Animal depends very
much on the motion and temper of the Particles of the Air: Since these
continually exagitate those, stir them up when they are drowsy, repair the
Losses of those that fly away, exagitate the vital Flame with their Nitrosity,
and supply it with a nitrosulphureous Food, and eventilate it being kindled by
the continual Courses of Accesses and Recesses: as long as an apt
Contemperation happens for the Motion and Configuration in both, Animals enjoy
a perfect Life and Health; but if the Corpuscles flying in the Air are of such
a kind of Figure and Power, that they are manifestly contrary to the Spirits
implanted in Animals, they loosen the mixtures of these from the rest of the
Elements with which they are bound, and pervert their Motions: hence the Crases
of things are destroyed, Life is overthrown, and that being scarce extinct, the
Bodies incur Putrefaction; hence the Tops of Trees or Corn being struck with a
Blast wither on a sudden; hence the Murrain oftentimes reigns amongst Cattle,
which kills whole Herds together. For this kind of Cause the Seeds of the
Pestilence first exert themelves, and threaten a universal Slaughter of
Mankind; for even as venomous Corpuscles gathered together in the Bowels of the
Earth, or on its Surface, produce Arsenical Mixts, or venomous Herbs; so these
being resolved into a Vapor, and gathered thick together in the Air, create
pernicious Blasts, from which malignant and pestilential Diseases arise: and it
seems to me not improbable, that the things which first give a seminary of the
Pestilence to any peculiar Tract of the Air, are the venomous Effluvia of Salts
and Sulphurs grown exorbitant, and breathed forth of the Bowels of the Earth;
which sometimes, being first long included in the Earth, are exhaled by
degrees; sometimes, by reason of Tremblings of Openings of the Earth, break
forth together; of which kind also there are generally breathed from the Tents
of Soldiers filled with Nastiness, by reason of dead Carcasses lying unburied,
or from places filled with staguating and stinking Mud. And Corupscles exhaled
after this manner, by a long Putrefaction, acquire to themselves wonderful
Powers and Discongruencies, that thereby they are disagreeing and heterogeneous
to all others whatsoever; and so being received into to the Air, they ferment
it (like a mass of Liquor) and pervert it from a'wholsome and benign into a
pernicious and cursed Nature.

Some Bodies easily receive the malignant Tincture of a pestilential Air,
others not so readily; those who have a very great Cacochymia by reason of an
ill Diet, and those who by reason of a Plethora have a Blood filled with an
inflamable Sulphur, a light Blast of a venomous Air fastens the pestilential
Venom on them, especially if they lie under a Fear and Sadness, which convey
inwardly the lightest Parts of Contagion, as it were by a certain Infusion. On
the contrary, those who have the Viscera clean, and the Mass of Blood well
tempered, and those who carry a strong and undaunted Mind, do not so eafily
receive this Infection; and sometimes being received they expel it again.

So far of the Pestilence and its Communication, according to its first Being,
and the Source of the infected Air thence drawn; it remains for us to speak of
its Propagation by Contagion, as it is often communicated from some Men to
others, as it were ex traduce.

By Contagion we understand that Force, or Action, whereby any Affect being in
one Body stirs up the like to it in another; but since this happens either
immediately by Contact, as if any one lying in the same Bed with another Man
seized with the Plague, gets the same Disease; or mediately, and at a distance,
as if it happens that the Contagion be conveyed from one House to others at a
distance; and so if the Plague assails any Person handling a Garment or
Household Stuff of an infected House, after some Days, or Months, or happily
Years: tgherefore, that the nature of a Contagion, and the diverse manners of
it, may be plainly known, let us examine first, What that things is which flows
from an infected Body: secondly, How it is fisposed in the medium through which
it passes: thirdly, After what manner it engenders an Affect like it self in
another Body.

1. That from every Body, though of a fixed Nature, Effluvia's of Atoms
constantly flow, which make, as it were, a mist or cloudy Circle about them,
and invest them, as it were, like the Down of a Peach, it is so received a
thing among the soundest Philosophers, that there is nothing more; and the more
active Particles any thing consists of, by so much it sends from it Corpuscles
of a more notable Virtue, and Energy: hence the Effluvia which part from
Electrick Bodies, are albe to move other Bodies from their Places; from
Sulphurs Emanations pass, which fill the whole Neighborhood with Odours: since
therefore the pestilential Venom, as is said before, tho in a small Bulk, is of
a mighty Efficacy and Operation, wheresoever it is fixed, certain Emanations
necessarily proceed from the Bodies imbued with it, which carry the nature of
the same Poison and Malignity, and diffuse it on every side according to its
Sphere of Activity: but since these Corpuscles which retain the Contagion of
the Pestilence, when they flow from one body, are not presently received by
another, let us inquire how they are disposed in respect of their passing
through the Medium.

Where presently occurrs the difference of them from most others, in regard
that the Effluvia, which generally evaporate, do not long retain the Nature of
the body whence they flow, but either vanish in the tenuated Air, or closing
with other bodies, are assimilated with them: but those Particles which part
from a pestilential Miasm, are not easily absorbed by the Air, or other Body,
so that they wholly perish; but among various Consusions of Atoms, and
Dashings against other bodies, they preserve themselves entire: for this Poison
being ina manner masterless, and insuperable by others, continues still the
same; and tho it consists of a very small heap of Atoms, it does not presently
vanish, but taints with its Ferment the next Corpuscles to it, and so acquires
to it self new Stores, and gets Strength as it goes; whence it lies long hid in
every Fomes, and after a long time, when it has lighted on a fit Subject, it
exerts it self, and communicating the Infection of its Venom to the other, it
resuscitates anew the Disease of the Plague, which before seemed to be driven
away, and tho from a very small Seminary, it disperses its mortal Povson far
and near.

For the Plague discloses such most certain Signs of its Contagion, that some
Authors affirm it to subsist among Mortals only by this means, and that it not
where arises anew, but is preserved only by a Fomes, and that it is now and
then conveyed from one Region into another. Histories tell us, that the Seeds
of it have lain dormant for many Years in a Garment or Bed-Cloaths, that upon
the same afterward being stirred, they have shown themselves, and have brought
the Disease of the Pestilence, arising a-fresh, with a mighty Destruction of
Mankind: when by reason of a Fomes the Pestilence is propagated to a distance
after this manner; the venomous Corpuscles which remain in the Miasm, being
stirred, presently spring forth, and display their Venom on every side, as it
were by a certain Irradiation: if they any where light on a humane Body, they
presently seize the Spirits, and are conveyed inward by their Vehicle, and then
easily enough infect the Blood, and all other Homours flowing in the Vessels
with their Ferment, and in a short time cause Coagulations and a Putrefaction
in them. And after this manner, by most subtle Effiuvia, there is made a
certain Transmigration, as it were, of the pestilential Disease, even as when a
graft cut from some Tree, and laid aside for some time, and afterward inserted
in another Trunk, is able, though from a very small Bud, to produce a Tree of
the same Kind and Nature.

CHAP. XII. Of the Plague.
THE Plague may be described after this manner, That it is an Epidemious
Disease, contagious, very destructive to Mankind, taking its Rise from a
venomous Miasm first received by the Air, afterward propagated by Contagion,
which setting upon Men after a hidden and secret manner, causes Extinctions of
the Spirits, Coagulations of the Blood, Syderations and Mortifications of it,
and of the solid Parts, and brings the Diseased in danger of Life, with an
Appearance of Pushes, Bubo's, or Carbuncles, and with the addition of other
horrible Symptoms.

There are a great many Signs occurring to us, which fore-shew that the
Pestilence will happen in a short time, to wit, if the Year does not keep its
Temperament, but has immoderate and very unseasonable excesses of Heat or Cold,
Drought or Moisture: if the Measles or Small Pox are every where very rise, if
Phlegmons, or Bubo's accompany reigning Fevers; from a preceding Famines a
most certain Presage is taken of an ensuing Plague; for the like Constitution
of the Year which for the most part brings a Dearth of Provisions, by reason of
the Corn being blighted, is apt also to produce a Plague; also the evil sort of
Diet, which such as are pressed with Hunger make use of, eating all kinds of
unwholesome things without choice, disposes their Bodies more readily to receive
the Contagion. Moreover Earthquakes, and fresh-opened Grotto's and Caverns
upon the cleaving of the Earth, by reason of the Eruptions of a malignant and
venomous Air, have often given Beginnings to Plagues. Again, as there is need
of great Diligence in taking a fore-view as it were, from a Watchtower, of an
imminent Plague, so we ought to be no less sagacious in observing the same as
if first arises, and cast its first Darts; for often, being too sollicitous, we
dread even vulgar Fevers, if happily they end in Death, for this Contagion; and
sometimes being too secure, contemning the Pestilence by reason of its Symptoms
resembling those of a common Fever, we find our Dangers but too late:
wherefore, for the fuller knowledge of this Disease, we shall set down its
Signs and Symptoms both common and pathognomick.

Besides the Signs above delivered, which by a certain Demonstration, a Priori,
give a Suspicion of an ensuing Plague; there are others whose concurrence with
it plainly show its Presence in a Body diseased: of these some are common to a
Plague with a putrid Fever, some are more proper to this Affect; for the
Impression of the Plague oftentimes stirs up an Effervescence of the Blood, and
has a Fever so frequently joined with it, that by some, in the Definition of
the Plague, the Fever is put as a Genus; wherefore, by reason of the Ebullition
of the Blood, and the Injury brought on the Viscera, presently an Incalescence
with a spontaneous Lassitude, a Thirst, a burning of the Praecordia, Vomitings
often violent, a Cardialgia, Gripes in the Bowels, a Roughness or Blackness of
the Tongue, a Swooning, and a sudden Fall of the Strength, ensue. Tho vulgar
Fevers are oftentimes attended with these kinds of Symptoms, yet if at the same
time a Plague be rife in the Neighborhood, and a fear of the same seises the
Minds of Men, hence a greater Suspicion of this Evil is given; and especially,
because, when a Plague reigns, all other Diseases leave their own Nature and
pass into that: wherefore, if to the Affects even now mentioned, there be added
a Communication of the same Disease to many, and many dye of it, so that it
generally becomes mortal and spreads it self; and if besides, Buboes,
Carbuncles, Pushes, or others Marks of a pestiferous Contagion appear, the
thing is put without doubt, and we hence proclaim a Pestilence, with no less
Confidence, than we do a Fire when we see a Flame burst forth through the Roofs
of Houses: but because a mention is here made of Buboes, Carbuncles, and other
Symptoms, it remains for us to give briefly the Causes of them, and the ways of
their being produced; they are these, a Carbuncle, Bubo, Pushes, Wheals, and
malignant Pustules.

Concerning these, we say in general, that they are all Products of the Blood,
and nervous Juice, struck with a pestiferous Venom, and coagulated by Parts in
their Circulation, and variously affected with Purtrefaction; for the Spirits
residing in both Liquors, especially in the Blood, are no sooner touched with
the breath of a malignant Contagion, but a Coagulation is caused in the
remaining Liquor, even as when Milk turns sour, or has an acid Juice mixed with
it: wherefore, Portions of it being greatly tainted with Venom, soon grow
clotty, and like extravasated Blood, fall into a Corruption with a Blackness;
whence presently they stop the Motion of the rest of the Blood in the Heart and
Vessels, and coagulate it more by reason of their Ferment. Now whatsoever is
gathered together into Clots by Coagulation, unless it be presently cast forth,
brings Death in a short time, by stopping the Circulation of the Blood; and
being driven outward to the Circumference of the Body, is stopped in motion in
the narrow Involutions of the Vessels; and either being wholly destitute of
Spirit, as tho it were Planet-stricken, it produces black or blew Marks by its
Mortification, or by reason of the Salt and Sulphur exalted by the pestilential
Ferment, and affecting new things, it grows, into Tumors of various kinds.

A Carbuncle is a fiery Tumor, with very smart and burning Pustules about it,
infesting the Diseased with an acute Pain; which arising in various places
indifferently, does not suppurate, but spreading largely round about, burns the
Flesh, and at length throws off lobes of it being corrupted, and leaves a
hollow Ulcer, as tho burnt by an Eschrotick.

The Generation of Carbuncles seems to be after this manner; when venomous
Miasms light on a Blood parched with Heat before, its congealed Portions are
fixed in the Superficies of the Body; and at that place, because the motion of
the Blood is a little let, first a little Tumor is made, which afterward,
the malignant Venom presently spreading it self farther, being increast by
little and little, creeps into the Neighborhood, Suppuration does not follow,
because the matter extravasated, and stagnating, is not concoted and digested
with a gentle heat, but by reason of the Particles of the Sulphur, grown
exorbitant together with the Salt exalted, being heaped together into these
Tumors, and by reason of the Stagnation being forthwith dissolved from
mixture, an Adustion is caused, as if a Cautery were applied to the part: the
pieces and lobes of Flesh, eaten as tho covered with an Eschar, fall away,
because the corrosive Venom sticking to the Muscles, does not corrode them only
in their Sursace, but through their whole Substance; wherefore, before the
whole Flesh is consumed, the Membranes in which it is involved being eaten
away, some pieces fall from the rest as tho cut from it: often one, often more
Carbuncles arise; sometimes they are alone, sometimes they have a Bubo
accompanying them.

A pestilential Bubo arises only in glandulous parts; toward the bulk of which,
not only the Blood congealed by the Venom, and carried thither by the Arteries,
but also the nervous Juice there heaped together, and to be carried back into
the Veins, contribute. Because this Tumor happens from Juices less parched,
and in a colder part, therefore it partakes of Suppuration; for, the Matter
heaped together by degrees when (the vital Spirit departing by reason of
Stagnation) it has lost the Form of Blood, through the Particles of the Salt
and Sulphur being exhaled, and kept in the Tumor, is converted into a Pus by
long Concoction. Now that these Tumors only happen in the Glands, the Reason
is, not that the Fuel of the Diseass is conveyed to these parts by a certain
Appointment of Nature, but as the Particles of the virulent Miasm abound every
where in the Blood and nervous Juice, they are heaped together there more
readily, as in a common place of Retreat, where both the Blood conveyed to the
Extremities of the little Arteries, is with difficulty and not so readily
received and carried back by the Veins, and withal, where the nutritive Juice,
to be carried back from the Nerves into the Veins, is deposed. That both done
about the Glands, it is manifest, both by Experie natomical Experiments;
wherefore, since both Homo Seeds of the pestilential Contagion met together in
these Parts, a seat of Malignity is here made by reason of the Virulency
deposed here by both.

Pushes, Wheales, and Purple Spots, in respect of the Venenosity, are of the
same Batch with the Tumors even now described; but in these the Products of
the Virulency are less in bulk, tho with a greater danger, by reason of the
Seeds of the Venom being more dispersed: small Portions of coagulated Blood
sticking in the Skin, make these lesser Phoenomena; wherefore, some of these,
raised into Bladders, suppurate; others, by reason of a certain Mortification
or Syderation of the corrupted Blood, turn into Purple Marks and Spots.

Tho the Plague, by reason of Destruction wherewith it threatens the Diseased,
both secretly, and very much on a sudden, scarce affords Place or Time for a
Prognostic; and tho by reason of the occult ways of doing Mischief, this
Disease carries all things suspected in it; yet it is manifest, by frequent
Observation, that some Signs appear in the Course of it, from which we are wont
to divine a Recovery or Death. The Case is full of Danger if the Contagion
suddently passes into an universal Sickness, and makes violent Invasions; if an
Haemorrrhagy, or only a small Pain happen in the beginning of the Disease; if
the Urine be thick, and troubled, the Pulse unequal and weak; if a Convulsion
or Frenzy presently follow; if the Vomitings, or Stools, are livid, black, or
very stinking; if the Pushes at first red, afterward turn black and blue; if
the Carbuncles are numerous, if the Buboes first arising, disappear; if the
Strength be cast down on a sudden; if the Countenance looks dismal, or turns
black and blue; if with a cold Stiffness of the extreme Parts there be a
burning of the Viscera, especially if these or most of them happen in a Body
very cacochymical, or in an unwholesome Season. On the contrary, the be lighter,
and lefs dangerous; if the Disease happens in a sound and robust Body with a
Fortitude of Mind; if Remedies are seasonably administered before the Disease
has seized the whole Mass of the Blood; also, if the Course of the Disease goes
on with a constancy of the Strength, a Vigor and Evenness of the Pulse, a
Suppuration of Buboes, and a large Discharge of Pus, and with the absence of
horrible Symptoms: mean while, tho we may hope here all good, yet it is not
free for us to be secure, because sometimes, with a laudable Appearance of
Signs, Ambushes are privily laid for Life; and, as srom a reconciled Enemy, we
suffer most severely, when we seemed to have escaped his raging Threats.

In the Cures of most Diseases, the chiefest Work is committed to Nature, to
whose Failure Physic gives a helping hand: and the Office and Science of a
Physician chiefly consists in this, To wait fit Occasions of giving Aid to her,
when she is at a Fault. But the Plague has this peculiar, that the Cure of it
is not to be left to Nature, but we must fight against it always with Remedies
taken from Art; nor must we be here sollicitous of a more seasonable, and as it
were, a milder Time: but we must get Medicines as soon as may be, and insist on
them at all Hours, and almost Minutes. But, because when a Plague reigns there
is need of no less care for driving away the Contagion, than that the Contagion
received, be cured: therefore a Physician has a double Task; to wit, both that
he take care for the Prevention of this Disease, and for its Cure.

Prophylactick Cautions either regard the Public, and belong to the
Magistrate, or private Persons; by which it is taught what must be done by each
Man when a Plague is feared.

The public care, in a time of the Plague, chiefly consists in these things;
That Divine Worship be duly observed; that all Matters maintaining
Putrefaction be taken away; that Filth, Dunghils, and all stinking Things, be
removed from the Streets, and every occasion of Contagion be most diligently
avoided; that Commerce with insected Places be forbidden; and that a wholesome
kind of Diet be constantly kept to by the Citizens; let the Poor, who have not
a plenty or choice of Provisions, be fed at public Charges. If the Plague be
already grown rife, let the venomous Force of the Air be corrected as much as
may be, which will excellently be purged by a frequent burning of sulphurous
things: let the insected be separated from such as are sound, and let these
keep from their Carcasses or Household Stuff Lastly, let skillful and meet
Physicians and Attendants be gotten to supply the Wants both of those that are
in Health, and of the Diseased.

The Rule of a private Prophylaxis is wont to be concluded in these three
things; viz. Diet, Pharmacy, and Surgery: The Deit regards the six
non-natural things, amongst which, those of chiefest Note are the Air, and the
Passions of the Mind: as to the rest, the Precept of Hippicrates suffices, viz.
that Labor, Meat, Drink, Sleep, and Venus, all keep a mean: let the
Pestilential Air either be avoided by removing into another place, or let it be
corrected by sulphurous things duly kindled, or let it be refreshed in
breathing by Fumes and odoriferous things frequently help to the Nostrils: As
to the Passions of the Mind, Fear and Sadness, whilst a Pestilence reigns, are
as a second Plague; for, by these the seeds of the venomous Contagion, which
lie on the Superficies of the Body, as it were in the outmost Margin of the
Vortex, are violently drawn inward, and delivered to the Heart; wherefore, a
cheerful and confident Mind is better than the most exquisite Antidote. I have
known many, who were wont to say in the Words of Helmont, That by fortifying
the Archeus with Wine and Coufidence, and using no other Alexipharmicks, they
past their Time among infected Persons without any injury by Contagion; and
those who lived otherwise, imbibed the Seeds of the Pestilence, as tho derived
from the Stars.

Among Chirurgical Things to be used for Preservation, Blooding, Cauteries, and
Amulets, are usually recommended: where there is a Plethora with a great
Turgescency of the Blood, or when by a long Usance Persons have accustomed
themselves to be let Blood, opening a Vein agrees with them; for, by how much
the less the Blood boyls, and is circulated in the Vessels without trouble, by
so much the slower is it infected with the venomous Contagion. Issues made by
Cauteries are so much approved of by the Suffrages almost of all Men, for
Preservation against the Plague, that their use is Generally received among the
Vulgar; for these constantly drain the assiduous increase of the
excrementitious matter: and if any Miasms of the Pestilence are inwardly
admitted, they cast them forth by their open passage.

Amulets, hung about the Neck, or worn about the Arm-Wrists, are thought to
have a wondersul Force against the Pestilence: of these the most excellent are
accounted by some, which consist of Arsenick, Quicksilver, the Powder of Toads,
and other venomous Things: that the same do good in some Cases, besides the
Observations of Physicians, this Reason seems somewhat to convince; the
Effluvia, or atomous Corpuscles which sometimes flowing from certain Bodies,
sometimes settling on others, fly about the whole Region of the Air; these
being diversely figured, some of them excellently close with others; but if they
jut against Corpuscles of another Form, they enter a Conflict with them, and
subvert them; hence the Particles of the pestilent Miasm, which are contrary to
our Spirits, excellently agree with those Corpuscles of the Poison coming to
them, and readily close with them: wherefore Amulets made of Poison do this; to
wit, they gather into themselves the Seeds of the Pestilence coming against us,
by reason of a Simiiitude of Parts; nay, and by drawing the same from our Body
to their Embraces, they in some sort free the Infected from the Malignity.

The Pharmaceutick Prophylaxis has a double Scope; first, That the assiduous
Increase of the excrementitious Matter, or Humors, be removed by a gentle
Furge as often as there is need: secondly, That by Alexipharmicks daily taken,
the Spirits and our Bodies be fortified against the Incursion of the Venom: by
the former, the Food and Fuel which increase the Putrefaction caused by the
Venom, are withdrawn; by the other, the first kindling of the pestiferous
Contagion, as it were of a suneral Flame, is hindered: for Alexipharmicks seem
to give help against the Contagion of the Pestilence under this two-sold
Respect; both because the Mass of Blood, and the Viscera filled with the
particles of these, also the Spirits being first possessed by the same, do not
easily admit the Fellowship of the venomous Miasm, and for that the Blood being
quick in its Motion by the gentle Instigation of these Particles, is freed from
Coagulation.

So far of Preservation: it remains now for us to treat of the Cure of the
Pestilence; the Doctrine whereof is either general, and comprises the Remedies
which are taken for this end from Diet, Surgery, and Pharmacy; or special,
which delivers the use, and cautious concerning the giving of those Remedies,
and after what manner we must obviate Symptoms variously emerging.

The Diet comprehends the use of the six non-natural things, tho the chief Care
and physical Cautions are concerning the Food; the primary Indications of this
have not place together, and at the same time, but ought to be supplied as
occasion requires, now one, now another, and according to the Exigency of
Nature. In respect of the Malignity and the Dejection of the Strength, Aliments
are required, which greatly refresh the Spirits, and afford a plentiful
Nourishment: in respect of the feverish Distemper, a Diet seems to be required
which is thin, cooling, and qualifying of the Blood. Let a Physician take care
of both; but let him direct his Remedies rather against the Malignity than
against the Fever.

The Aids which belong to Surgery are Bleeding, which ought to be used
seldom, and with great Caution in this Disease, because the Blood being too
much exhausted, and the Vessels falling, a Sweat is not so easily procured; the
place of this is better supplied by Cupping-Glasses with a Scarification; for
this, and Vesicatories are aptly used for drawing forth the Venom. Moreover,
against Buboes, Carbuncles, and malignant Ulcers produced by them, Cataplasms,
Fomentations, Plasters, Liniments, and many other things, to be applied
outwardly, are taken from Surgery, with which some poisonous things, as
Drawers of Venom, are prescribed to be mixed by some: wherefore, Preparations
of Arsenick, viz. its Oil, and Balsam, are recommended in this Case, as of
excellent Use and Efficacy.

Medicines, in order to the Cure of the Plague, are either Evacuatives or
Alexipharmicks. The Intention of the first is, that the Serous Latex in the
Blood, and the excrementitious Humors, which abound in the Viscera, be sent
forth; and together with them, a great many Particles of the venomous Miasm
every where dispersed in the Body. Now these things are performed by Vomitories
and Purges, whose use is rare, and only in the beginning of the Disease; also
by Diaphoreticks, which at all times, as long as the Strength is able to bear
them, are indicated in the Plague: for these evacuate more fully, and withal
from the whole Body, and also by exagitating the Blood, they free it from
Congelation, and in regard they move from the Center to the Circumference, they
drive the venomous Ferments, and also the Corruptions of the Blood and Humors
far from the Heart, and repel the Enemy from the Fort: but Vomitories and
Purges evacuate less generally, and often by concentrating the malignant
Matter, draw it inward, and fix it in the Viscera. Now these Medicines, whether
they work by Purging, or Sweat, ought to be such as have Particles of the same
kind with the venomous Miasm, rather than with our Blood or Spirits; for such a
Medicine will pass through the various Involutions of our Body with its entire
Force, and by reason of the Similitude of both, will certainly lay hold on the
virulent matter of the Disease, and through a mutual Adhaesion of Parts, Nature
being irritated, will carry it forth with it self: wherefore Medicines, whether
Catharticks or Sudorificks, are most recommended, which are prepared of
Mercury, Antimony, Gold, Sulphur, Vitriol, Arsenick, and the like; which, in
regard they are not subdued, or overcome by our Heat, become excellent Remedies
against the Venom of the Pestilential Contagion; for, these do not only
powerfully evacuate superfluous things, but for as much as they exert, and
display on every side in our Body very strong and masterless Particles, they
dissipate, and hinder from Maturation, the Ferments of the Venom gliding every
way. And since the Remedies themselves, being insuperable by Nature, must of
necessity be sent away by the open passages of the Body, they carry forth
together with them whatsoever is extraneous and hostile.

As to Alexipharmicks, which are said to resist the Venom of this Disease
without a sensible Evacuation, they are for the most part such whose Particles
are neither very agreeing with Nature, that they turn to an Aliment, nor are so
contrary to it, that they stimulate an Excretion. The same being inwardly
taken, and refracted to most minute Parts, they, by their Corpuscles, inspire
as it were with a new Ferment, the Blood and Juices flowing in the Vessels and
Viscera, and by moving them gently, and keeping them in an even mixture, they
free them from Coagulation and Putrefaction: by the same gentle Agitation they
dissipate from each other, and hinder from maturation the Particles of the
Venom beginning to be gathered thick together. Lastly, by praeoccupying the
Blood and Spirits, they defend them from the Ingressions of the pestilent
Character: of these Remedies some Simples are recommended, as Rue, Scordium,
etc. but those are esteemed far better, which are more compounded; wherefore
Treacle, Mithridate, and Diascordium, whereof some consist of at least fifty
Simples, are accounted Medicines so complete in all Respects. that it is
esteemed a Crime to omit, in the making of them, even one Plant; the Reason
happily is, That many things being put together make a Mass, whose diversifyed
Particles, being exalted by a long Digestion, cause a greater Fermentation in
our Blood and Humors.

Having thus set down the Remedies with which we ought to be provided for
curing the Plague, we should speak next of its method of Cure, to wit, what is
to be done in the first place, and what next in order; but that all things are
so precipitated in this Disease, that there is no room for Deliberalion, nor
will a Physician be frequently present with the Diseased for fear of Contagion:
wherefore there is no need here of many Praescripts, or a long Series of
Indications. This thing is to be done quick, and must be comprehended in a few
words: when therefore a Pestilence reigning, any one is infected with this
Disease, God's help being implored, we must presently fly to Remedies. If the
Plague happens in a Body that is not well purged, and prone to Vomit, presently
let a Vomitory be taken; the Operation of which being ended, presently
Diaphoreticks being given, let a Sweat be procured, and let the same be
continued as the Strength will bear; afterward let it be often repeated:
moreover, Alexipharmicks must be used almost every moment, till the Venom be
wholly sent forth by the eruption of Pushes, Carbuncles, or Buboes;
nevertheless, in the mean while, let respective and proper Remedies be opposed
to the Symptoms chiefly pressing; but especially for the cure of Buboes and
Carbuncles, let fit Aids be taken from Surgery. The whole stress of the
Business relyes on these two chief Intentions, that the pestiferous Venom be by
all means expelled from within, outward; and then that the Return of it, being
expulsed, be with an equal Diligence prevented.

It is not an easy thing for us, in the Plague, to give Examples and Histories
of Persons diseased, with exact Diaries of Symptoms; for these kinds of
Sicknesses do not happen every Year, nor when they are rise is it free for
every Physician, who minds his own Health, to visit the Sick with a curious
Eye, or to stay long with them, that he may diligently observe every Accident,
and carefully weigh the Reasons of them; which Task, nevertheless, the Famous
Diemerbroch has so accurately performed, that since him, others may lawfully
surcease from this Work. When heretofore in this City, viz. Anno 1645. a Plague
(tho not exceeding great) was rise, Mr. Henry Sayer, a Physician very learned,
and fortunate in Practice, boldly went to visit all sorts of sick Persons, both
poor and rich, many others refusing this Undertaking: he daily gave them
Medicines, touching Buboes and virulent Ulcers with his own Hand; and so by a
dliligent, tho dangerous, means, cured many of the Diseased. To fortify
himself against the Contagion, before he went to infected Houses, he only was
wont to drink a good Draught of Generous Wine, and after he had gone his
Circuit, to repeat the same Antidote. After that he had taken Care a long time
of the Sick in this City, without receiving any Injury, as though he were
Plague-free, he was sent for to Wallingford Castle, where this Contagion
violently raged, as a^ second Aesculapius, to the Governor of that place; and
there, in a short space, having dared to lie in the same Bed with a certain
Officer seized with the Plague, whose Society he very much delighted in, he
took the Infection of the same Disease: nor could then those Arts prove of Use
to their Master, which had been beneficial to all others, not without a mighty
loss in the Art of Physic, did he perish by that Disease. To others seized
with the Pestilence, he was wont to order this method of Cure; If he was called
before Pushes or Buboes appeared outwardly, for the most part he gave
Vomitories, the Praescripts of which were of the Infusion of Crocus Metallorum,
sometimes with white Vitriol, and sometimes with Roman; the Vomiting being
over, he caused them to be cast into a Sweat, by giving presently
Diaphoreticks; and afterward, some Intervals being allowed for the restoring of
the Strength, he ordered the Sweating to be continued even to the Declination
of the Disease: but if he was called to Persons affected after the Tokens
appeared, Vomiting being omitted, he insisted only on Sudorificks.

CHAP. XIII. Of pestilential and malignant Fevers in Specie, and other
Epidemick Fevers.
AFter having explicated the Nature of the Plague, according to the Order of
our Tract, we ought to proceed to those Affects which seem nearest to carry its
Nature; as are chiefly the Fevers called Pestilential and Malignant: for it is
vulgarly known, that Fevers sometimes reign among the People, which for the
Vehemence of Symptoms, the mighty Slaughter among the Diseased, and the force
of the Contagion, scarce yield to the Pestilence; tho because they imitate the
Types of Putrids, nor do not so certainly kill the Affected, or infect others,
as the Plague, they do not deserve the name of Plague, but in a milder
Appellation, of a Pestilential Fever. Besides these, there are Fevers of
another kind, whose Destruction and Contagion are more remiss; yet because they
are more dangerous than Putrids, and contain somewhat of Divine in them, as
Hippocrates calls it, they are called, in a lower Expression than the others,
Malignant Fevers.

These Fevers differ does from the Plague, and from each other, according to
the Degrees and Vehemence of the Contagion and Destruction; so that the Plague
is a Disease contagious, and destructive to Mankind in the highest Degree: A
Pestilential Fever is that which generally reigns with a less Diffusion of its
Miasm, and with a less Mortality: when an Infection is only suspected, and only
a treacherous or unsafe Crisis happens, above the Events of vulgar Fevers, it
is said to be a Malignant Fever: They may be described yet more fully, thus:

When a Fever vulgarly reighs, which for the variety of Symptoms carries the
Nature of a Putrid so called, viz. which has a Thirst, Burning, Lassitude,
restless Pain, a Roughness of the Tongue, Watchings, a Frenzy, Vomiting, loss
of Appetite, Fainting, Swooning, a Cardialgia, and the concourse of other
terrible Accidents joined with it; if moreover, there be added to it Spots
either like small Fleabites, or broad and black and blue like the Impressions
of Stripes; we esteem this Disease of an ill Nature: again, if it does not
discover it self after the wonted way of Fevers, but the Strength of the Sick
falls without a manifest Cause, and Death often happens on a sudden, and
unsuspected, contrary to the Prognostic of the Physician, there grows still a
greater suspicion of Malignity: but if most of the Sick dye, and those that
converse with the Diseased take the Infection of the same Disease, so that
oftentimes the same runs through whole Parishes and Cities, it is called, above
the Appellation of a Malignant, a Pestilential Fever; of which, a farther Proof
is made if it generally rages in most with some common Symptom, as with a
Quinsey, a Dysentery, or if a mortal Sweat, such as heretofore was famously
known in England, accompanies these kinds of Fevers.

But if a Fever arises, which affects many together living in the same Region
for the most part after the same manner, which nevertheless in its Course
observes the laws of a vulgar Putrid, and comes to a Crisis almost after the
same manner, (but that in some, troubled with a mighty Cacochymia, it discovers
certain signs of Malignity by an appearance of Spots or Buboes, sometimes by a
mortal Crisis, and a Contagion spreading to others) this is not called a
petilent, but only a Malignant Fever.

If it be enquired in which Classis of the Fevers above treated off, Pestilent
and Malignant Fevers are placed, we put them only in the Rank of Continual
Fevers, and exempt Intermittents from them, because by Intervals these grant
such firm Truces to Nature, and likewise observe regularly and exactly their
Periods, which will not consist with a venomous Diathesis: we exempt also
Hecticks from Malignity, because otherwise they would not protract Death so
long, but, partaking of Venom, would kill sooner. Of Continual Fevers, tho we
do not look upon Simple Sinochi, as free, yet we assert them to be seldom
touched with this Taint; but most commonly, the Fever which gives marks of a
pestilent Nature or Malignity, is such as imitates the Type of that we call a
Putrid Fever: for since in these Fevers, besides the Phoenomena of a Virulency,
we observe a continued Effervescence of the Blood, which, as in Putrids, passes
through the Stages of a Beginning, Increase, Height, and Declination, we justly
conclude, that the sulphurous part of the Blood here, is heated, and kindled,
and by its burning brings the Fever: wherefore, in these kinds of Fevers two
things are chiefly to be noted, to wit, the Effervescence of the Blood, and a
Malignity joined with it, of which sometimes this, sometimes that, excells, and
in both there is a great Latitude, and there are many Degrees of Intension,
according as the Fever becomes more or less acute, or malignant.

The Effervescence happens after the same manner, as it is said before of
putrid Fevers, to wit, the sulphurous part of the Blood, growing hot above
measure, by its fervor, takes to a Flame, as it were; whilst it burns it heaps
together a vast Store of adust Matter in the Blood; on the subduing and
exclusion of which, after the wonted manner of Fevers, the height and Crisis
depend but besides, the Blood being infected with a certain venomous Miasm,
begins, in burning, by reason of the malignant Ferment, to be coagulated, and
to putrify by Parts: wherefore, besides the usual Symptoms of a vulgar Fever,
by Reason of certain Portions of the Blood being congealed, or mortified, a
Fainting and Dejection of the Spirits, also Appearances of Spots and Marks
ensue. Moreover, the Venomous Effluvia, which part from the Diseased, by the
force of the Contagion, are able to stir up the like Affect in others:
wherefore, by reason of the Destruction and Contagion, and the various Degrees
of the same, it is called a Pestilential or Malignant Fever.

When the Blood, boiling over vehemently, is infected also with a malignant and
venomous Ferment, not only Coagulations of its own Mass, with a Disposition to
a Putrefaction are caused, but the nervous Liquor also readily contracts this
Taint; whence being rendered disproportionate to the Brain, and for the economy
of the animal Spirits, it stirs up great Irregularities in them: wherefore, not
only Spots and Pushes, but oftentimes a Delirium, Frenzy, drowsy Affects,
Tremblings of the Limbs, Cramps, and convulsive Motions, happen upon these
Fevers. We often observe, that in certain Years malignant Fevers are rife,
which without an appearance of Marks, show their Virulency chiefly about the
Genus Nervosum; for in some, presently from the Beginning, a Sleepiness, with a
mighty Drowsiness of the Head, in others obstinate Watchings, a Disturbance of
Mind, with a Trembling, and convulsive Motions: but in most, either no Crisis,
or a deceitful one; and instead of it, a Translation of the sebrile matter to
the Brain has followed. It has been farther observed, that these Fevers have
past by Contagion into others, and that many have died of them; so that they
deserve to be called Malignant.

Now these kinds of Fevers sometimes are first begun by a venomous Miasm; and
the Blood being blasted with the Particles of the Poison, naturally falls into
an over-vehement boiling, and is inflamed; as when any one, by a Contagion, or
by breathing a malignant Air, falls into a malignant Fever, without an evident
Cause, or Praedisposition: and sometimes a feverish Distemper arises from its
own cause; and afterward the Seeds of the Malignity, either lying hid within
the Body, exert themselves in the Blood boiling over vehemently, or come from
elsewhere from a contaminated Air, as a Fuel to a Flame first kindled: for it
is manifest by frequent Observation, that during the time an Epidemick Fever
reigns, others, after what manner soever they arise, pass into it.

Malignant Fevers, as also Pestilential, for the most part are Popular, and
seize many together; but sometimes they are peculiar and sporadical, that happily
they seize only one or two in a whole Country. In such a case we may imagine,
that they proceed, not from an Infected Air, or Epidemick Cause, but from a
morbid Disposition of the Body; for I have often observed, that when, Spring or
Fall, a pretty common Fever has reigned in some City, or Village, of which a
great many Sick escaped; happily some one, on whom an evil Praedisposition, and a
strong evident Cause, brought the Fever, lay seized with more dreadful
Symytoms, and great Notes of Malignity: in which Case, that Malignity is not to
be said a common Fever, but only a sporadical and accidental one.

Tho the greatest Difference whereby these kinds of Fevers are distinguished
betwixt themselves, and from others, consists in their Mortality and Contagion;
yet sometimes they are marked by some peculiar Symptom, from which both the
note of Malignity, and the name they are called by, are taken for that time:
hence in some Years an epidemick Fever reighs, which causes in most that are
affected with it, a Quinsey, at another time a Peripneumonia, Plurisie,
Dysentery, or some other Affect, and that often dangerous and contagious: so
that not only the Seeds of Diseases derived from Parents ex traduce, disclose
their Fruits, by a certain Destiny, as it were, in the same Part or Member; but
also such as are received from a venomous Miasm generally reigning, produce in
all Persons Affects of the same manner and form: which nevertheless I judge to
happen, not because the Seeds of the venomous Miasm regard this or that Region
of the Body by some peculiar Virtue: but they affect thus the Mass of Blood
after the same manner in all, forasmuch as, for washing off that taint, a
Crisis must of necessity be attempted after the same manner in all; for when
without Malignity, the Blood is apt to be extravasated by reason of
Coagulation, or happily for other Causes, the usual Places in which the Portions
of the same extravagated are wont to be fixed, are, the Throat, Pleura, Lungs,
and Intestines: wherefore it is no Wonder when a Congelation, and therefore an
Extravasation of the Blood is procured from a malignant Cause, if the Disease
lodges it self in the usual seat of Nature.

As to the Signs of these kinds of Fevers, besides by the Contagion and
Mortality, the Malignity of the Fever is shown by a sudden Dejection of the
Strength, a weak and uneven Pulse, an evil Affect of the Brain and nervous
Parts caused on a sudden, violent Vomitings, a blackness of the Tongue, an
over-spreding of Blackness over the whole Body, but especially by an appearance
of Spots, Buboes, and other Marks.

For the Cure of Fevers, both Pestilential and Malignant, there is need of a
greater Judgment and Circumspection than in any others whatsoever; for there
being two primary Indicants, to wit, the Malignity and the Feverish
Distemperature, and since we can scarce provide for the one without the
Detriment of the other, it will not be easy to judge which we must obviate
first, and chiefly take care off: in respect of the Fever, Purging, Bleeding,
and cooling things, chiefly conduce; but whilst these things are used, the
Malignity, for the most part, is increased, and they being neglected, it
diffuses it self farther. Against the Malignity, Alexipharmicks, and
Diaphoreticks are required; but these greatly intend the Fever, exagitate, as
by a blowing of Bellows, the Blood and Spirits kindled before, and put them in
a manner all in a Flame: wherefore there is need here of a great Quickness of
Understanding, that these things be duly compared betwixt each other, and that
the curative Intentions be there directed where most danger shows it self; tho
so, that while one is taken care of the other be not neglected: but in these
Cases, besides the private Judgment of each Physician, Experience furnishes us
with the chief method of healing; for, when these Fevers first grow rise,
almost every particular Person trys particular Remedies; and from their
Successes compared together, it is easily learnt, what kind of Method we must
insist on, till at last, by a frequent Trial, as it were by the Footsteps of
Passengers, a common, and Road-way as it were is made to the Cure of these
kinds of Affects, being fortified with various Observations and Precepts.

Besides these kinds of Fevers, which assail many together, and by reason of
their Contagion, Mortality, and conspicuous Marks of Virulency, deserve to be
called Pestilential, or Malignant; there are found some other Epidemick or
Popular Fevers, which almost every Year, either Spring or Fall, grow very rise
in certain Countries, of which a great many of the Inhabitants are wont to fall
sick, and not a few, especially of the more elderly People, to dye: in which,
nevertheless, no Signs of a pestilent or malignant Nature appear; nor does the
Disease seem so much by Contagion to pass from some incontinently to others, as
to seize many together by reason of a Predisposition communicated almost to
all. Now these kinds of Affects depend chiefly on a foregoing Constitution of
the Year; for if a Season very intemperate, by reason of excesses of Cold or
Heat, Drought or Moisture, has preceded, and has so continued a long time, it
changes our Blood, for the most part, from its due Temper, whereby it is apt
afterward to fall into severish Effervescencies; and hence a Fever, sometimes
of this, sometimes of that Type and Idea, is produced, which presently becomes
epidemical, because it draws its Origin from a common Cause, whereby the
Bodies, in a manner, of all Men, are affected together. Now such Fevers, in as
much as they depend on the Blood, getting a Disposition, sometimes sharp,
sometimes austere, or of another kind, according to the Temper of the Year, for
the most part they are of the number of Intermittents, tho they are wont to be
marked with a peculiar Apparatus of Symptoms, according to the peculiar
Constitution of each Year. We cannot comprehend these under a certain common
Rule, or formal Consideration, which aptly answers to each of the Particulars
of this Nature, because they vary yearly according to a great many Accidents:
tho however, of these kinds of Fevers reigning of late Years in this Country,
we shall give the Descriptions taken at that time; and shall set them down as a
Conclusion at the end of this Work.

It remains for us still to add to the number of Malignant Fevers, certain
other private Fevers, partaking of no Contagion, as are those especially, which
are wont to happen to Women in Childbed, by reason of their difficult Labor,
or for that the Lochia are detained; for it is manifest enough, by common
Observation, that these are very dangerous, and often mortal: for if the Parts
of the Womb being injured, or upon the admission of Cold, or happily for some
other Cause, the Lochia are stopped, and the Humor which ought to have been
voided forth, comes to be mingled with the Mass of Blood, it foully defiles it
with a certain venomous mixture, as it were, that thereby presently a Fever is
raised, which for the most part is attended with an ill Company of Symptoms,
viz. a Heat, and violent Drought, a Vomiting, a Cardialgia, and Watchings, and
generally comes either to no Crisis, or a very difficult one; because, unless
the flowing of the Lochia after their wonted way be again restored, after the
Blood has undergone an Effervescence for some Days, the Taint is wont to be
communicated to the Brain, and the Genus Nervosum; whence presently a Delirium,
Frenzy, Convulsions, and other very ill Affects for the most part are caused,
which often terminate in Death. But these kinds of Fevers deserve a peculiar
Consideration; which we resolve to have more fully beneath, in a Discourse
appropriated to this purpose: mean while we must give some Instances or
Examples of the Fevers above treated of, viz. of the Pestilential and Malignant.

The pestilential Fever, of late Years, has reigned more rarely in these Parts,
than the Plague it self. I shall give you briefly the Description of the only
one of this kind which has occurred to our Observation. Anno 1643. when in the
beginning of the Spring the Earl of Essex besieged Reading, kept by the King's
Garrison, in both Armies a very Epidemick Disease began to arise; tho however,
he pursuing his work till the Besieged were forced to a Surrender, The Affect
so prevailed, that in a short while afterward there was a Cessation on both
sides, and thenceforward, for many Months, there was a Conflict, not with the
Enemy, but with the Disease. Essex withdrawing his Forces, seated himself at
--, and the adjacent Places, where, in a short time, he lost a great Part of
his Men: and the King returned to Oxford; where the Soldiers first keeping
themselves in the open Field, and afterward being disposed off in Towns and
Villages, he underwent a loss not much inferior; for his Foot (whom it chiefly
seized) being lodged a great many of them together in straightened Lodgings,
when they had filled all Places with Nastiness and Filth, and stinking Odours
(that they seemed to have defiled even the Air it self,) fell sick many of them
together, and as it were in Files: at length the Fever, reaching farther than
the Soldiery, assailed every where the weak Multitude, to wit, the Persons of
the Houses where the Soldiers lodged, and others, tho many of them at first
(the Contagion being yet but mild upon them) escaped, yet lying a long time in
a very languishing Condition. About the Summer Solstice, this Fever began to
psread it self with a worse Attendance of Symptoms, and to seize a great many
Husbandmen, and others living in the Country: and afterward it reigned in this
our City, and the whole Neighborhood, for at least ten Miles round about; mean
while, those who lived in other Countries far from hence, as tho they were
beyond the Sphere of the Contagion, continued free from harm. But here that
Disease grew so general, that the greatest part of Mankind was infected with
it: whatsoever House it entered, presently it set upon the whole, that there
were scarce enough remaining in Health to attend those that were ill; such as
came to them from elsewhere, or Hirelings called to attend the Diseased, were
presently seized with the same Infection: that at length, for fear of the
Contagion, such as lay sick of this Fever, were shunned by those that were in
Health, in a manner, as Persons troubled with the Plague.

Nor did a small Mortality or Destruction of Mankind attend this Disease; for a
great many old Men, Cachectical, Ptysical, or otherwise unhealthy Persons, fell
under this Fate: also not a few Children, Youths, and such as were full grown.
I remember, that in certain Villages, all the elderly People, in a manner, were
carried off this Year, that there scarce remained alive any for unpholding the
Customs and Privileges of the Parish, by the Traditions rcceiv'd from their
Ancestors.

When this Fever first began it carried somewhat the Type of a putrid Synochus,
but it came with difficalty to a Crisis, and when it seemed to be solved by a
Swear, or a Looseness, it was wont presently to wax worse again: but for the
most part after a Deflagration of the Blood, continued for six or seven days,
this remitting, and instead of a Crisis, the adust Matter being conveyed to the
Brain, the Diseased lying a long time, sometimes raving mad, oftener with a
Drowsiness and a great Weakness, and sometimes with convulsive Motions, scarce
escaped at length with Life. About the middle of the Summer, beside the
Contagion, and the frequent Mortality, this Disease discovered its malignant
and pestilential Force, by open Signs, viz. by the Eruption of Pushes and
Spots; for about this time, without any great burning of a Fever, the Pulse in
many grew uneven, weak, and very disorderly; also, without a manifest spending
of the Spirits, the Strength presently became languid, and very much dejected;
in others, lying ill after the like manner, Pimples sometimes small and red,
sometimes large and livid, appeared; in many, Buboes (as in the Plgaue) about
the glandulous Parts; some of these, without any great Conflict of the Spirits,
or feverish Excandescence raised in the Blood, died without noise and on a
sudden: mean while, others, growing presently raving mad, as long as they
continued in Life, underwent horrible Distractions of the Animal Spirits. Such
as escaped from this Disease, recovered not but after a long time, and that
without a laudable Crisis (unless by a Sweat procured by Art) the Brain at
length, and the Genus Nervosum being affected, and they being seized with a
Dullness of the Senses, Tremblings, a Vertigo, a Weakness of the Members,
and-convulsive motions. During the Dogdays this Disease still infesting, began
to be handled not as a Fever, but as a milder sort of Plague, and to be
overcome only by Alexipharmick Remedies; Bleeding was always thought fatal to
it: Vomitories and Purges were used now and then, tho not so frequently; but
the chiefest method of Cure was placed in Alexipharmicks, and a Sweant
seasonably procured. For this purpose, besides the Prescripts of Physicians
taken from Apothecaries Shops, certain Empirical Remedies deserved no small
Praise: then first in this Country, the Countess of Kent 's Powder began to be
of great Fame; and another ash-colored Powder was not of the least note, which
a certain Courtier, coming by chance to this City, gave to many with good
Success, and sold it others, who approved of its use, at a great rate. The
Diseased were wont, upon drinking half a Dram of this in any Liquor, to fall
into a most copious Sweat, and so to be freed from the Virulency of the
Disease: that Diaphortick (the Preparation whereof I learnt afterward from the
Authors Sisters Son) was only the Powder of Toads, cleansed with Salt, and
afterward washed with good Wine, and lightly calcined in an earthen Pot. Autumn
coming on, this Disease remitted by Degrees of its wonted Fierceness, that
fewer fell sick, and a great many of them recovered; till upon the access of
Winter, a state of Health was again entirely settled in this City, and in the
adjacent Country.

Let us here consider the Rise, Progress, and lastly, the End of this Fever,
which at first was only belonging to the Army, and at length became
pestilential and epidemick: that the Disease first began in the Soldiers Camp,
it seems that it ought not only to be imputed to their Nastiness and stinking
Smells, but in some measure, to the common Fault of the Air; for, since these
Fevers do not happen yearly, their Origin will be somewhat ascribed to the
peculiar Constitution of the Year: for a light Distemperature of the Air being
thereby contracted, tho it does not ill affect such as use a wholesome way of
living, yet in an Atmy, where, to the general Procatarxis, evident Causes, viz.
a great many Errors in the six non-natural things, are joined, those kinds of
Sicknesses must of necessity be more easily raised. Now the Vernal Constitution
of this Year was very moist, being almost continually attended with wet
Showers; to which afterward a hot Summer succeeding, both rendered still more
depraved the Miasms of the feverish Contagion reigning here before, and more
disposed all Bodies to receive them: wherefore, that this Distemper became in a
manner peculiar to this Country, and epidemick at this time, it was long of its
Seminary, arising in the first place from the Army lying round about: but in as
much as becoming afterward pestilential and very epidemick, it infected the
greatest part of Mankind here living, and killed not a few; the cause was, the
ill Affect of the Air, which being unwholesome through the Distemperature of the
year, became moreover so vicious at length, by the continual breathing forth of
stinking Vapors from the Soldiers Camps, and the Cohabitation of the Diseased,
that the Miasms of this Fever, dispersed in it, were greatly exalted, and rise
almost to the Virulency of a Pestilence. Diemerbrochius relates, That from such
a kind of Camp-Fever, raised in the Summer, in the Town of Aquitane, afterward
another malignant and pestilential, and at length the Plague it self grew: and
that this our Fever at last stood in competition with the Plague it self,
besides the great force of the Contagion, and the great Mortality, the very ill
Affects of the Blood and nervous Liquor, presently caused in all from the same,
did declare; for the Strength dejected on a sudden, the weak, intermittent, and
formication Pulse, the Eruption of Pushes and Buboes, argued the Coagulation,
and corruptive Disposition of the Blood. Moreover, a Delirium, Mania, Frenzy,
Deadness, Sleepyness, Vertigo, Tremblings, convulsive Motions, and other
Affects of the Head of diverse kinds, showed a mighty Annoyance of the Head and
Genus Nervosum.

For setting forth the Type, or Idea of the Malignant Fever to the Life, there
are a great many Observations or Stories of Sick Persons ready at hand: Of many
Examples of this Disease, I shall here insert only a few, which some years
since happened in the House of a Venerable Person, after a manner to be
lamented, and not without some Admiration.

About the Winter Solstice, Anno 1655. a Boy about seven years of Age, being
ill without a manifest cause, was affected with a great Pain in his Head, a
Sleepyness, and a mighty Heaviness; there was withal a Fever, tho not intense,
with an indifferent Burning, which nevertheless, by unconstant Fits, had its
time of being intended sometimes once, sometimes twice within the space of
twenty four Hours. Presently, from the Beginning of the Disease, he slept
almost continually, he was wont also to cry out in his Sleep, to talk idly, and
oftentimes to leap out of Bed; being stirred up, and sometimes awaking of his
own accord, he was straitway present to himself, and always desired Drink: his
Urine was ruddy, and filled with Contents; the Pulse was uneven, and strong
enough; the Contractions of the Tendons in the Wrists were light: in the Neck,
and other Parts of the Body, certain red Spots, like Flea-bites, appeared. On
the first days, a gentle Purge was ordered, and a frequent easing of the Belly
by the use of Clysters: Cordial Juleps with Alexipharmicks were daily taken:
Vesicatories were applied to the Neck, and other Plasters to the Soles of the
Feet. On the sixth day, a little Blood dropped from the Nose. On the seventh the
Fever very much remitted without a manifest Crisis, the Heat, being only mild,
was perceivable by the Touch, and the Urine was pale and thin, without any
Sediment; nevertheless, a Sleepyness, and Heaviness of the Head pressed far more
severely, so that the Urine, and Excrements of the Belly, flowed from him
insensibly: however, being called upon by Name, he knew the Standers by, and
answered to things asked. Those Affects, notwithstanding Remedies, daily grew
worse and worse. About the fourteenth Day the Diseased became so stupid, that
he could neither understand, nor speak, yet he still swallowed down things put
into his Mouth, tho unminded by him, and his Pulse was laudable enough: about
this time he had a Looseness, naturally happening to him, for four Days; which
at length ceasing, a whitish and chalky Crust, as it were, began to cover the
whole Cavity of his Mouth and Throat, which being cleansed off often in a Day,
presently a new one arose. When he had been troubled after this manner for four
Days, he was better as to his Understanding and Sensation; so that he could
know Friends, give a Nod to what was said, and do some things he was ordered:
but as the sensitive Faculty began to be restored, so the Evil increased as to
the Organs of the Speech, and Swallowing: doubtless the Matter being fallen
from the Brain into the Beginnings and Ductus's of the Nerves. The Heaviness
and Stupidity were followed by a Palsy in the Tongue and Throat; which Affect
grew so much in a short space, that afterward the Diseased was not able to
swallow at all, but things put into his Mouth presently came forth again, nor
did any thing descend into his Stomach; when, besides the Violence of the
Disease, there was danger, lest he should dye through Hunger, an Instrument was
made of a flexible Whale-bone, and a Lawn Button fixed to the end of it; and
this being thrust into the Throat, opened for a time its Closure, that a
Passage was made for Food given; after the use of this a Day or two he could
swallow again, and afterward take in Food enough; and within a few days he
began to speak, to discern every thing, and growing wonderfully hungry, to
desire all day long Food of all kinds, and most greedily to devour all things
given him: mean while, through his long-continued Sickness, and the nervous
Parts being sorely injured, he grew so lean, that at length the Skin scarce
sticking to the Bones, he exactly resembled a living Skeleton; tho afterward by
the diligent, indefatigable, and prudent Care of his Mother, as to his Diet, he
recovered a perfect Health, and continues still well.

At the Time that this Boy was about the height of his Sickness, his Brother,
about two years elder, fell sick almost after the same manner, on the first day
of January. First, he was affected with a Dullness, and a heaviness of the
Head. On the third day growing feverish, he had a Sleepiness and Stupidity: he
began in his Sleep to talk lightheaded, and upon his Awake, scarce to be
present to himself. After four or five Days these Symptoms increased; he could
understand little, nor speak without tripping of his Tongue, and scarce
arciculately: his Urine was thick, and opake, without an Hypostasis, or
subsiding of the Contents: red and small Spots like Flea-bites appeared, as in
his Brother: the Excrements, as well of the Belly as of the Bladder, passed
from him insensibly; but the Pulse held still strong and even: the Hypochondres
were extended, and blown up with a Swelling of the Abdomen. About the eighth
day a little Blood dropped from his Nose: On the eleventh day of the Sickness he
fell into a Looseness, whereby he had seven Stools, of a bilous, thin, and very
stinking matter, within five Hours; whence there was some hope, that the
Condition of the Diseased would change for the better; tho the next day after,
the Looseness ceasing, a Pain, and Gripes, violently tormented him in his Belly,
that crying and howling, he complained most sorely Day and Night: the
Hypochondres and Abdomen were swollen, and very much distended like a Drum. Not
receiving any thing of ease by any Remedies tried by the most exquisite
Endeavors of many Physicians, he died on the fourteenth day, convulst in these
Tortures.

A little after the Death of this, viz. on the 15th. of January, his Eldest
Brother, about eleven years of Age, a very hopeful Lad, began to be feverish,
being affected with a Dullness, and a Heaviness of the Head, as the former, tho
less intense: but in his Blood, which was of a hot Temperament, a greater
Effervescence and trouble appeared, that on the first six days, besides a Heat
and Thirst, he was molested with a continual Effort of Excretion, sometimes by
Sweat, sometimes by a Looseness; his Urine was ruddy and troubled; certain red
Spots, as in the others, brake forth. On the seventh day an Haemorrhagie
happened to five ounces, which ceasing, a mighty Dullness followed, that for
all that day, and the following Night, he was scarce able to open his Eyes. On
the eighth day a very copious Haemorrhagie of the Nostrils happened again, that
there was danger of pouring forth his Soul together with the Blood; the Blood
sprang forth so copiously from the left-Nostril, that, being received into a
Basin, it made vast Bubbles by its fall: when he had lost above two Pounds of
Blood, and being all in a cold Sweat, began to lose his Strength; Remedies
being at length applied, the Flux was stopped with great difficulty; the
Haemorrhagie being appeased, the Lad slept a sound Sleep, and became sleepy all
that Night; tho often waking, he was present enough to himself, and had a quick
Sense and Understanding: being asked concerning his Health, he said he was
pretty well; the Urine which before was ruddy, and troubled, appeared then
pale, thin, and with a laudable Hypostasis, that the Diseased (especially
because free from Thirst and an immoderate Heat) seemed to be come to a perfect
Crisis, and free from the Fever. The Morning following, the ninth day of the
Fever, he continued still dull; but being stirred up, he seemed without a
Distemperature, and to be cheerful in a state of Convalescence, only that he
began a little to faulter in his Speech: in the Evening, when things were not
suspected, the Fever being kindled again, he fell on a sudden into a Lethargy,
that he was scarce able to be awaked from his Sleep, and being pulled up,
hardly to know any one, or to speak articulately: Tho so great a loss of Blood
had preceded, his Pulse was again quick, high, and strong, and his Urine was
ruddy; after deriving and revulsing Remedies used all that Night, this noble
Youth seemed somewhat in a better state; so that the next Morning he kept
himself longer from Sleep, began to turn his Eyes this way and that, and to
raise himself a little, tho without Speech, or Knowledge of the Standers by;
before Noon, his Eyes being closed again, he wholly lost the use of every
Animal Faculty, and lay, as it were, Apoplectical for three Days, with a high
and vehement Pulse, a Palpitation of the Heart, and a short and broken
Respiration: the Pulse at length growing less by degrees, he died on the tenth
day of the Fever.

On the 18th. of February, his little Sister, having a feverish Distemperature
and a Thirst, began to complain of a Pain, and Gripes in the Belly, a trembling
in the Hands, and a painful Tension in the Muscles of the Neck. On the last day
of February, being more openly feverish, she was not able to keep out of Bed;
moreover, she was affected with a running Heat, sometimes in the Hands,
sometimes about the lower Parts; she became also drowsy and sleepy; awaking
from her Sleep she did not forthwith come to her self. On the first of March
she was gently Purged with an Expression of Rhubarb, which gave her ease; the
Urine was thick and ruddy, also red Spots like Flea-bites (as in the rest) were
plain to be seen. We gave her afterward frequently for four days, to wit, every
six hours, Ten Drops of Spirit of Hartshorn, in a Spoonful of a Cordial Julep:
the foresaid Symptoms afterward remitted by degrees, and this sick Person
recovered her Health, tho slowly, without a manifest Crisis.

About the same time a Brother of these, the youngest of all, fell sick almost
after the same manner; who nevertheless, through a Looseness naturally
happening, voiding bilous and green Excrements for many days, more easily
recovered. Also in the same Family, a great many other Domestics, and some
Strangers, who came there as Attendants, fell ill of the same Disease, the
Taint, as it were being propagated by Contagion: all of which, notwithstanding,
escaped at length with a difficult and long Convalescence, without any Crisis
regularly made.

That this Fever was malignant, it seems to be manifest, from the Contagion,
Mortality, the appearance of Spots like Flea-bites, and many other Tokens; tho
that infecting Miasm, whereby it passed from one to another, was torpid and
less efficacious: for betwixt the Sicknesses of each, many Days, and often
Weeks, interceded, that the Infection of this Disease, tho acute, and its
Propagation in many, were scarce ended within four Months space in the same
House: the Fever about the first Beginnings seemed mild and gentle, not very
terrible by its Burning: but the Matter heaped together after the Deflagration
of the Blood, presently became masterless, and difficult to be exterminated,
also offensive to the Brain and Genus Nervosum; wherefore in each, the
Beginnings of the Disease were known rather by a Drowsiness and a Sleepyness,
than by a Sweat and Burning: also the Crisis, tho attempted various ways, to
wit, by a Sweat, a Looseness, and an Haemorrhagie, did not succced well; but for
the most part, the Blood growing turgid by a critical Motion, was forced to
transfer the febrile Matter from its own Precincts into the mansion Places of
the Animal Spirits; nor did it self, notwithstanding, become purified after
this manner; but about the height of the Fever, both Humors (to wit, the Blood
and the nervous Juice) being vitiated together, and sorely blasted with an
impure Mixture, made the Event of the Disease either fatal, or very dangerous.

CHAP. XIV. Of the Smallpox and Measles.
IN the rank of pestilential and malignant Fevers we place next the Small Pox
and the Measles, which in Truth are mixed Affects, both according to, and
against our Nature: As to their Origin, they have a seminary Connate to us;
but as to the Affects, they produce praeternatural Symptoms, and venomous, as
the Plague it self; so that they constitute a certain peculiar sort of Fevers,
which belong to all Mankind, and only to them, and that but once. If happily any
one lives free from them all his Life, or some one falls often into those
Affects, these are rare, and unusual Events of Nature, which do not derogate to
common Observation: but it may pass for a Truth, that all, and only Mankind are
obnoxious to the Measles and Small Pox, and that they are usually freed of them
at one Bout. We shall speak of the Measles by themselves.

1. As to the Small Pox; The natural Praedisposition which inclines Mankind to
it seems to be a certain Taint, or Impurity of the Blood, conceived in the Womb
with the first Rudiments of the Foetus. All Authors, in a manner, will have
this ascribed to the menstruous Blood: which Opinion does not seem altogether
improbable; because in the Womb of a Woman (otherwise than in most other
Animals) a certain Ferment is engendered, which being communicated to the Mass
of Blood, gives it a Vigor and Pneumatosis, and afterward procures, at set
Periods of Times, a Turgescency, and an Excretion of the superfluous Blood; and
at the time of Conception, when the Menses wholly cease, a great deal of this
Ferment is communicated to the Foetus; and its Particles, being heterogeneous
to all the rest whatsoever, are disorderly confounded with the Mass of Blood
and Humors, as some extraneous thing; in which being involved, and being
separated from each other, they lie hid a long time; tho afterward at some time
being stirred by an evident cause, they ferment with the Blood, and cause in it
an Ebullition, and afterward a Coagulation; from which most of the Symptoms of
this Disease arise.

2. The Evident Cause which stirs these Fermentative Seeds, and oftentimes
brings them into Act, is said to be threefold; viz. Contagion received from
elsewhere, the Disposition of the Air, and an immoderate Perturbation of the
Blood and Humors: Persons related soon infect each other; also those that are
fearful, and mightily dread this Disease, fall more readily into it: for, by
Fear the Particles of the Miasm are conveyed from the Surface of the Body
inward: at the time that the Contagion is rife, and the Small Pox is Epidemick,
all other Diseases in a manner degenerate into this.

3. As to the Conjunct Cause of this Disease, to wit, what is the formal Reason
of it, or its way of coming to pass, the thing seems a little more intricate:
It is vulgarly wont to be compared to the Effervescence of new Wine, or of Ale,
when they are depurated in a Vessel, being put in a Fermentation by the mixture
of some heterogeneous Substance; but if the thing be narrowly considered, a
great difference will here appear: for, the Miasm of the Small Pox is as a
Ferment, but corruptive, and forces the Flood to ferment, not toward a
Perfection, but a Depravation; for when the venomous Particles of this Miasm
light on a capable Subject, they presently stir up Corpuscles like themselves,
and innate to us; with which being joined, they pervade the whole Mass of
Blood, and make it grow mighty turgid, and boil, and after some Effervescence,
to separate into Parts, and to be coagulated: to wit, the dispersed Seeds of
the Venom dissolve the Mixture of the Blood, presently subvert the more pure
Spirits, and afterward gather to themselves the more gross Particles of it, and
congeal them, as it were, by their Adhaesion. The Portions so coagulated,
together with the Seeds of the Venom mingled with them, being left by the rest
of the Blood in its Circulation in the Extremities of the Vessels, are fixed on
the Skin: after which manner, if Nature being strong enough, sends off the
whole Venom with the congealed Blood, the rest of the Mass of the Blood, tho
depauperated, is nevertheless good, and capable of continuing Life; but, if the
Blood being too much coagulated, cannot be cleansed after this manner; or if
the Portions of the Blood closing with the Venom, do not fully break forth,
they either restagnate inward again, and wholly corrupt the Liquor of the
Blood, or fixing themselves on the Viscera, and especially the Heart, they
destroy their Crasis and Strength.

The Portions of the Blood congealed with the Venom, about the fourth day
(sometimes sooner, sometimes later) begin to break forth; for the Coagulation
is caused not presently, but after some time that the Venom displays it self,
and by its Effervescence ferments the Blood: first light Portions of the Blood
being desil'd, and those but few in number, are fixed in the Skin like
Flea-bites; soon after these, more appear, and those which brake forth first,
by the access of new matter, and by the continual Appulse of the congealed
Blood, grow bigger, and are raised into a Tumor; afterward these Pushes, which
at first are red, being increased by degrees, at length turn white, to wit, the
Blood extravasated with the Venom, by reason of the Heat and Stagnation, is
changed into a Pus. About the seventh day after the Eruption, the white Tumors
turn to a dry Scab; for the more subtle Part of the Matter being evaporated,
the rest grows hard, which at length, the Scarf Skin being eaten off and
broken, falls from the Skin.

When the Miasm of the Small Pox is once gotten into the Spirits and Mass of
Blood, it is very seldom that it can be destroyed or cleared off by Medicines
or Bleeding, but the latent Disposition will break forth into Act; wherefore,
first it diffuses it self gently, and inspires the Mass of Blood, as it were,
with a Ferment: hence an Ebullition and Effervescence are produced in the whole
Body, the Vessels are extended, the Viscera are irritated, the Membranes are
twitch'd, till the Seeds of the Contagion, by fusing and coagulating the Blood,
at length being involved in its congealed Portions, are thrust forth. The
Essence of this Disease will be the better known, if I set down the Signs and
and Symptoms which are observed in the whole Course of it, and give you in
order the Reasons of them, and the Causes on which they depend. Now these are
either such as indicate the Disease present, or such as fore-shew the height of
it, and its event.

As to the Diagnostick of this Affect, whereby it may be known whether any one,
at first falling sick, will have the Small Pox or not. There must be considered
at that time, the force of the Contagion, and the Concourse of the Symptoms
first appearing; for, if by reason of the malignant Constitution of the Air,
this Disease generally reigns, no one is then seized with a Fever without a
suspicion of the Small Pox, especially if the Person never had it before: but
if this Disease be more rare, and there be no Fear of Contagion, yet its
unexpected Invasion in a short time discovers it self by these kinds of Signs
and Symptoms.

1. There is an inconstant Fever, coming at random, sometimes intense,
sometimes more remiss, observing no set form of Increase, or coming to a
height, so that the Diseased one while are mighty hot, by and by, without an
evident Cause, they are without any Fever; the Cause of which is, That the
sermentative Seeds are not agitated with an even motion, but like Fire half
extinct, one while they have an extraordinary Flash, another while they lie
quiet, and dye, as it were, till the Burning spreading it self, the Flame
breaks forth every where.

2. A Pain in the Head and Loins is so peculiar a sign in this Affect, that it
alone, in a continual Fever, signifies an imminent Small Pox; the Cause of
which, is vulgarly imputed to the great Vessels being very much extended by the
Effervescence of the Blood; tho it does not appear why the same Pain should not
be as well caused in other Parts by reason of the like Extension of the
Vessels, and why those kinds of Pains are rife in the Small Pox, rather than in
the Causon, or other Fevers, where the Blood boyls more. Again, you may
observe, that mighty Pains are pressing, sometimes in the Head, sometimes in
the Brains, when, the Blood not being turgid, the Vessels are not enlarged,
viz. in the beginning of the Disease, when the Feverish Distemperature is not
yet conspicuous: while the Diseased are yet walking abroad, and have a good
Stomach, the imminent Small Pox first discovers it self by these Pains;
wherefore, it seems that the Cause of these kinds of Pains subsists rather in
the Genus Nervosum; to wit, that those Pains arise in the Brain, and spinal
Marrow, by reason of the Membranes and Nervous Parts being twitch'd by the
Particles of the Venom; for it is likely that the innate Seeds of the Small Pox
are chiefly stored up in the Spermatick Parts, and that the first Contagion of
the Miasm for the most part seises the Animal Spirits: hence the first
Effervescence is raised in the Juice wherewith the Brain and nervous Parts, but
especially the spinal Marrow, are irrigated; and thence the taint is
communicated to the Mass of Blood: wherefore, in the beginning of this Disease,
the Head and Loins are pressed with a violent Pain; afterward, the Venom being
conveyed into the Blood, the feverish Effervescence is raised in the whole.

3. A great Irksomness and Restlessness, and sometimes a Swooning, infest the
Diseased, to wit, by reason of the Motion of the Blood being troubled, and its
even mixture being begun to be dissolved by the venomous Ferment, the Blood
being hence apt to stagnate, and to be let in its Circulation, causes the
Affects even now mentioned.

4. A violent Vomiting, even when the Stomach is free from an impure Mass of
Humors, very often accompanies this Affect; the Reason of which is, because
the Fermentative seeds being put in motion, are deposed in the little Arteries
which open into the Tunicles of the Ventricle, upon each Appulse of the Blood,
and raise a Vomiting even as the Particles of Antimony swallowed down: but
afterward, as soon as a Sweat being procured, the Venom is driven outward, this
Symptom ceases, and the Diseased are well in their Stomach, without any purging
forth of offensive matter.

5. To these may be added the Symptoms, which, according to the various
Dispositions of Bodies, happen after a various manner, as are, a great
Sleepyness, Frights in the Sleep, Deliriums, Tremblings, and Convulsions, a
Sneezing, Heat, Redness, a sense of pricking in the whole Body, involuntary
Weeping, a sparkling and itching of the Eyes, a swelling of the Face, a
Vehemence of Symptoms from the beginning that the Disease seems presently to
have reached its height, etc.

2. As to the Prognostic of this Disease, it is indicated either to be safe,
or mortal, or doubtful, by supervenient Signs.

1. Things seem to be in safety when this Affect has benign Circumstances; to
wit, when it happens in a good Constitution of the Air, and of the Year, at a
time that the Small Pox is not Malignant and Pestilent; also there is less
danger if it happens in Childhood, or Infancy, if in a sanguine Temperament,
and a good habit of Body, if it chances in a Family to whose Predecessors the
Small Pox has not been mortal: moreover, if in the whole Course of the Disease
laudable Symptoms happen; if at the first Invasion there be a gentle Fever
without a violent Vomiting, a Swooning, a Delirium, or other horri^^^ ^^^ts;
if, about the fourth day, the Fever with the most pressing ^^^^ms are appeased,
and then some red Spots begin to appear; (...) second day of their coming
forth, a great many more of those red Spots are conspicuous, which afterward
grow by degrees into Pushes, and are ripened into a Pus; if about the tenth
day, more or less, after the Eruption, the white Pushes begin to grow hard, and
afterward to fall off by little and little; if after the time of their first
breaking forth the Small Pox are soft, separate from each other, few, round,
raised at the Top, possessing only the Skin, and not the inward Part, we may
presume the case of the Diseased to be in a good State.

2. The Phoenomena, which, in the Small Pox signify the Case to be suspected
and full of Danger, are these; if there be a Malignant Constitution of the Air,
that this Disease is become pestilent, and many have died of it; if Persons
well grown in Years are seized with it, if it chances in a cold and
melancholic Temperament, or in a foul and cacochymical Body, where the Blood
is neither readily circulated, nor Perspiration duly performed; or if the
Hypochondres or Praecordia are obstructed, any Viscera infirm, or affected with
an Ulcer; or if the Habit of the Body be too gross, the Small Pox does not
happen without great danger of Life: Nor is it less to be feared, when
presently at the beginning a mighty Fever, a violent Vomiting, a Swooning, a
Dejection of the Strength, a Frenzy, or Delirium, assail Persons, and give not
over when the Small Pox are fully broken forth; for these things signify an
overgreat Perturbation in the Blood and Humors, as also a Confusion and
Contumacy of the mortifying Matter, which can neither be subdued, nor easily
separated, or evenly extruded from the Mass of Blood; if there be an
Irksomness, and a great Restlessness, with a disorderly Effervescence, and
Ebullition of the Humors; or if a mighty Thirst, and a difficuly of Breathing,
also a Looseness, or Dysentery, they show that Transpiration is let, and that
the Malignant Humors restagnate toward the inward Parts. The Small Pox
breaking forth slowly, argue the Crudity and Unruliness of the Matter, and the
Impotency of Nature: much more, when double and confluent, do they show that
there is an excess in quantity, and a Confusion, also a disorderly and
irregular Expulsion of that matter, since it is not cast forth at determinate
Pores or places of Vent, but indifferently on every side. Small Pox which are
hard signify the Incoctibility of the said Matter, and if flat, the weak
Expulsion of it, and they are by so much the worse if black Spots appear in the
midst of them; or if such Spots as are familiar in a Purple or Pestilential
Fever, are mixed with the Small Pox, they show a mighty Malignity and
Corruption of the Blood, such indeed, as is found in the Plague. Finally,
black, livid, or green Small Pox, threaten ill; because, besides the
Coagulations of the Blood, they argue its Mortifications and Corruptions, as in
a Gangrene, or pestilent Carbuncle: if when the (...) Pox are come forth, they
presently wither, and the swelling of (...) remits, it indicates the Recess of
the malignant Matter, or of the (...) congealed with the Venom, and its
Restagnation toward the Inward Parts; whence unless, upon raising a free
Diaphoresis, it be again sent forth, a sudden Death for the most part ensues:
for hence the Blood being more coagulated, falls into Corruption, and is apt to
be let in its Motion, and to stagnate in the Heart and Vessels. If after the
Eruption of the Small Pox, a Looseness, or Haemorrhagie supervenes, it foreshews
ill, because by this means the Venom, driven outward, is again called in; tho I
have observed, that these Symptoms have sometimes happened with a great Relief to
the Diseased; to wit, Nature being before loaded and oppressed, is eased by this
means, part of the Burden, as it were, being withdrawn, wherefore she sets
upon the Work of Transpiration, and more readily dispatches the Expulsion of
the offensive matter.

As to what concerns the Cure, since the Course of this Disease has three
Seasons, like so many Stages as it were, distinct from each other: the curative
Intentions ought also to be accommodated to each of these; wherefore, the
Therapeutick Method concerning the Small Pox, teaches first what is to be done
as long as the Blood boyls inwardly, and ferments by the Motion of the
Fermentative Matter, and the Small Pox do not yet appear; which Period for the
most part is wont to be ended in four or five Days. Secondly, what form of Diet
and Physic ought to be ordered, from the time of the Eruption of the Small Pox
to the height of the Disease, to wit, till the Pushes are come to their height,
and being fully suppurated, begin to wither. Thirdly, and lastly, what we ought
to observe in the Declination of the Disease, till the Small Pox, being dried,
fall clean off.

1. As to the first, the Intention must be, that we remove all Impediments of
Nature, whereby the Blood being defiled with the Ferment of the Small Pox, and
apt to be coagulated, may retain still its even Motion in the Heart and
Vessels, without Stagnation, and that fermenting, it may expel forth the
Portions congealed with the Venom: mean while, a Caution must be had, that the
work of Fermentation, or Effervescence, be neither any ways checked, nor too
much irritated; for by this the Mass of Blood is forced into congealed Portions
more than it ought, and by the other it is restrained too much in motion, nor
are the venomous Particles sent away forth with the congealed Blood. Nature is
wont to be hindered from the work of Secretion and Expulsion, by a too great
heap of Excrements in the Viscera, or by an over-abounding of Blood in the
Vessels; wherefore presently, at the first Invasion of the Disease, we must
endeavor that an Evacuation by Vomit, or Seige, if need be, be seasonably
procured: we must use only mild and gentle Medicines, that is, which do not
irritate, or trouble the Humors; wherefore, at this time, sometimes Emeticks,
Purges, or Clysters, these one while another while those have place; opening a
Vein also, if there be a Plenitude, is used with good Success. During this
Effervescence of the Blood, let a thin, and moderately cooling Diet, be
ordered; to wit, of Oat and Barley Meats, Posset Drink, Small-Ale, and the
like; let Flesh, and Broaths made of it, be avoided, with which the Blood, by
reason of their too great store of sulphurous Fuel, is too much kindled; also
cold and all acid things, do hurt, for these congeal the Blood more, and
contract the Mouths of the Vessels by Astriction, that the Small Pox do not
break forth freely: also let hot and cordial things be cautiously given, for by
these the Blood and Humors are too much stirred, and put in Confusion.

2. When the Small Pox begin to appear, there are three things which we order
constantly to be done to all Sick Persons; to wit, that a mild and gentle
Diaphoresis be always continued in the Mass of Blood; also that the Throat and
Eyes be preserved from the too great Eruption of the Small Pox; that the Blood
gently boiling may push forth the Small Pox, Decoctions of Figs, of the Flowers
of Marigolds, and of the Shavings of Ivory, in Posset Drink, are vulgarly
prescribed, and their use has grown rife for a long time, almost among all
Persons, For the same intent, we are wont to give moderate Cordials diverse
times in a day, but let such as are hot and strong be diligently avoided:
Purging and Bleeding are here censured, and tho the Pretext of necessity may
press for them, Physicians scarce dare use them for fear of incurring a Blame.
For a Guard to the Parts of the Gullet and Throat, we are wont to fasten
outwardly a Chin-stay with Saffron sewen in, and dipped in Woman's Milk; for
these, by opening the Pores, draw the Venom from the inward part of the Throat,
outward: also, for this Purpose we give Gargarisms, and things to wash the
Mouth, which by their restrictive Force repress the Small Pox ready to break
forth inwardly. We fortify the Eyes from the Incursions of the Small Pox by
Epithemes of Rose Water, Woman's Milk, Saffron, and the like, frequently
iterated: Besides these, certain horrible Symptoms are sometimes pressing,
which we must seasonable obviate with fit Remedies: sometimes there are
Watchings, a Frenzy, Haemorrhagies, Vomitings, Loosnesses, Fallings in of the
Small Pox. A prudent Physician knows how to provide against all these, and any
others whatsoever, as occasion requires; in which, nevertheless, there is need
of great Caution, lest while we take care of small things, the great Work of
Nature be disturbed through the overgreat disquieting of Physic: for, during
all this time, there is one continued Crisis; wherefore, nothing is to be moved
rashly. There is required a very great Care and Circumspection both in the
Phyfician and Attendants, when this Disease is in its height; to wit, That when
the Small Pox are fully broken forth, and raised to their greatest height, they
do not hinder Transpiration; for then the Diseased are in danger of having
their Fever renewed, and of the Restagnation of the Malignant Matter in ward,
of which, while we endeavor to prevent either, we often cause the other.

3. When the Disease is in its Declination, and the Small Pox begin to wither
away, and to grow hard, the Case for the most part is out of danger, nor has a
Physician much to do: let the Diseased, tho growing very hungry, still be
content with a thin Diet, without Meat: if the Pox are slow in falling off, we
are wont to hasten their Fall with Liniments and Epithemes, by which they are
prevented from Pitting much. After that the Diseased, the Small Pox being
wholly fallen away, is able to arise from his Bed, and to walk in his Chamber:
a Purge being repeated twice or thrice, let the Filth, and excrementitious
Matter left in the Viscera, and Blood, be carried off, and afterward he may be
permitted a more free Diet.

The Measle are so allied to the Small Pox, that amongst most Authors, they
have not deserved to be treated of apart from them; but the Affects of both are
delivered after the like Manner and Method together. The Essence and Cure
differ as to more or less, or at leastwise accidentally; because in the Measles
the Pushes are not so much raised in height, nor are they suppurated: wherefore
the Disease ends sooner, and with less danger. This Affect is wont oftentimes
to reign among Children, but seldom seises such as are grown in Years, or old
People; also those who have had the Small Pox before, are not afterward so
obnoxious to the Measles, but in most they are allied Affects; to wit, the
Taint contracted from the Womb disposes Men alone, all Men, and that but once
to the Measles: A malignant Constitution of the Air, and sometimes Surfeiting,
but most commonly Contagion, are wont to draw into Act the latent Disposition.
There are Marks of Malignity, and the Disease often becomes Epidemical, with a
Mortality, and Contagion.

To give you the thing in short; it seems that the Measles are a certain light
Efflorescence of an extraneous Ferment, contracted from the Womb; whereby some
Particles, being stirred to motion, cause the Blood to boil gently, and to be a
little coagulated: wherefore, the Pimples thence brought forth, are blown off
by Evaporation, without a breaking of the Skin. But the Small Pox are a more
full and strong Agitation of the same Ferment, and in all its Particles, which
causing a greater Ebullition and Coagulation of the Blood, produces a great
many more Pushes, and those greater in bulk, and not dissolvabe without
Suppuration. When the Small Pox precede, there follows not only an Immunity
afterward from the same Affect, but for the most part from the Measles also.
The Measles, because they consume only a few Particles of the Ferment, leave
still a Disposition to the Small Pox; wherefore, old Persons, or such as are
grown in years, are not so readily infected with the Measles, because having
been before infected with the Small Pox, they are freed from the Contagion; or
their Spirits being robust, easily resist the light Miasm of this Affect.

Of the great number of Stories and Observations relating to Persons troubled
with the Small Pox, I shall in this place propose only a few Cases, and those
remarkable for certain Irregularities.

It is usual thing to treat all Persons, affected with the Small Pox, with the
like, or wholly the same method of Healing, and form of Diet; wherefore, a
Physician is seldom called to the Vulgar, but the Business is wholly committed
to certain Women-Tenders, who boast that they know this Practice beyound all
others; and those are wont to boil Marygold Flowers, and Shavings of
Hartshorn, and sometimes Figs in the Broaths, and any other Liquors to be
taken by the Diseased, and to give at Night a Bolus of Diascordium: such as do
not recover by such a Management, are declared not to be neglected, but that
they are incurable through the Violence of the Disease. But that this kind of
Practice does not equally agree to all, nor is to be used to all indifferently,
the two following Relations plainly show.

A Young Man about twenty Years of Age, of a thin Body, and hot Temperament,
began to be severish in the beginning of the Spring: in the first days violent
Vomitings, an Oppression of the Heart, frequent Changes of a burning and cold
Shivering, a Pain in the Loins, a Perturbation of the Fancy, and Watchings,
infested him: On the third day the Small Pox appearing, those Symptoms
remitted, tho the Fever still continued with a Thirst and Heat. To this Person,
not only the Decoctions usual in this Disease, but Juleps also, neatly prepared
not so much as sip of them without great loathing: as often as he took at Night
Diascordium, or any other temperate Cordial, tho in a small quantity, for
continuing a Transpiration, he passed the Night following without Sleep, and
with a great tossing of the Body, and in the Morning he had an Haemorrhagie,
which happening once, and then a second time through this occasion, after that
the Small Pox were fully broken forth, the well-doing of the Diseased was
mightily endangered; wherefore, when I had found by Experience, that the Blood
of this Person was apt to boil immoderately upon a light Irritation, I ordered
this Method, according as the Occasion required: All Physic whatsoever being
laid aside, for quenching Thirst he took small Ale, and a simple Almond Drink
at Pleasure: His Food, because he refused all Oat and Barley Broaths, was only
Apples boiled to a Tenderness, and then seasoned with Sugar and Rose Water,
which he ate at some certain times in the Day. Nature, content with this thin
Diet, and seeming to be disturbed by any other whatsoever, performed her work
successfully, that the Diseased recovered without any sore Symptom afterward,
the Small Pox ripening by Degress, and then falling off of their own accord.

In the midst of Autumn of the last Year, a noble Youth, having a sharp Blood,
and being obnoxious to a frequent Bleeding at the Nose, fell sick of the Small
Pox; his Blood naturally boiled immoderately, that the Pushes brake forth
extreme thick all over his Body: in this Person, Whey with Marygold Flowers,
and other things usually boiled in it, also Juleps, or nay Cordials (tho
temperate) gently promoting a Transpiration, did most certainly raise a Flux of
Blood; wherefore I ordered him a like way of Diet as to the Diseased before
mentioned, by which indeed he was better: however, in the very height of the
Disease, (when, the Small Pox being fully broke forth, the Fever is wont to be
renewed in all Persons by reason of a difficult Transpiration) this sick Person
fell into a copious Haemorrhagie; that after a large Profusion of Blood the
Small Pox began to be flaccid; after that a great many Remedies for stopping
Blood were tried in vain: at length, upon hanging a Bag about his Neck (in
which was a Toad dried in the Sun and pounded) he first of all, and
immediately, found ease; for the Haemorrhagie being hereby presently appeased,
and not returning afterward, (he constantly wearing thenceforward this Epitheme
in his Bosom) our sick Person using always a most thin and cooling Diet, grew
perfectly well: that it may really seem to be manifest hence, that tho the
Blood in this Affect be mighty apt to coagulate, yet as long as the Vital
Spirits are strong and robust enough, and have a governing Power, relying on
their own Strengty, by a certain prudent Discretion as it were, they
excellently separate and send forth the congealed Portions of the Blood; and
this Work is mightily disturbed when the same Spirits are to much irritated,
and forced into a Confusion by hot Cordials or a hot Diet. But in the Plague it
happens otherwise; for, in this, if delay be granted, the Spirits themselves
are presently destroyed by the Venom: wherefore, here we must presently fight
with open War; whereas, in the Small Pox a Physician rather restores things by
protracting time.

Concerning letting Blood just upon the coming forth of the Small Pox, it is
greatly doubted. Formerly, among our Countrymen, this thing was styled sacred,
nor was Blooding wont to be admitted under any pretext of Necessity: but of
late it is proved by Experience, that it is altogether useful and necessary to
let Blood in some Cases; which Evacuation, nevertheless, if it be used
indifferently in any Constitution, or be done in too large a quantity, when
there is need of it, great Damages often ensue thereby.

Some years since, I went to see a Young-woman of Quality, of a florid
Countenance, and a hot Temperament, who was fallen very feverish after the
fourth Month of her being with Child: she was pressed with a violent Vomiting,
a fierce Pain in the Loins, and also with a most intense Heat and Drought: her
Pulse was very quick, with a strong and vehement Vibration: tho the Small Pox
no where reigned in that place, nevertheless, those Symptoms of that Affect
gave us no small suspicion of them. Be it how it would, the very immoderate
Effervescence of the Blood indicated, that some ought to be taken away:
wherefore, I presently took about six Ounces; thereupon the Heat somewhat
remitted, tho the Vomiting still continued, with the violent Pain in the Loins.
At the time of her going to rest, I gave her a Cordial Bolus with half a Grain
of our Laudanum, whence a quiet Sleep, with a mild Sweat, and an appeasing of
all Symptoms, ensued. The next Morning the Small Pox brake forth, which, tho
the Diseassed had very thick, yet without any dangerous Illness, or fear of
Abortion, she recovered, and perfectly completed her Child. bearing.

In the last Autumn, a robust Man, of an Athletick Habit of Body, tho of a pale
Countenance, and a cold Temperament, fell into a Fever. On the second day he
was tormented with a Heat and a Drought, and a most violent Pain in the Loins;
when, it was ordered that he should be let Blood in a small Quantity: a Quack
Surgeon being called, he took from him almost a pound and a half; a little
after, the Diseased began to fall all into a cold Sweat, and his Strength
failing on a sudden, to be seized with a Shivering, a weak and uneven Pulse,
and a frequent Fainting: being called at this time, I ordered him temperate
Cordials to be taken frequently: then upon the restoring of his Pulse and
Spirits the Fever was renewed, which afterward held the Diseased for many Days,
nay Weeks, after a very irregular manner; for he was wont, for three or four
days, to be very hot, also to be infested with Thirst, Watchings, a Headache,
and other Symptoms, afterward to fall into a copious, and as it were, critical
Sweat, all over his whole Body, by which indeed, in half a days time, he found
himself better, tho afterward the Fever renewing again, frequently heaped
together a new Matter, still to be blown off by a second, and afterward by a
third Crisis. After that he had lay'n thus irregularly feverish for at least
twenty days, at length the Small Pox broke forth here and there in each part of
the Body, and then the Fever first began wholly to remit; tho within a few
days, by reason of Errors committed in Diet, a great many Pushes subsided
again, a few only being brought to a Ripeness: however, in the place of the
subsiding Small Pox, a mighty Bubo grew behind the right Ear; which being
suppurated and broken within a short time, a great store of Pus flowed forth
for many days; and so at length, the Taints of the Blood hardly to be blown off
other ways, were sent forth by degrees, and the Diseased perfectly recovered
his Health.

CHAP. XV. Of Fevers of Women in Childbed.
VUlgar Experience abundantly testifies, that the Fevers of Women in Childbed
are very dangerous, above the Nature of our common Fevers: also it clearly
appears from the Signs and Symptoms of them, duly considered, that the same
very much differ as to their Essences, from a Synochus both simple and putrid:
wherefore I have thought it not amiss, after malignant Fevers, to treat of the
acute Diseases of Women in Childbed, as being very much allied to them by
reason of their Mortality. But before I shall set upon the Explication of the
Affects themselves, we must consider their Subjects, to wit, the Bodies of
Women that bring forth Children after what manner they are predisposed, and
with what Apparatus they become obnoxious to those kinds of Diseases.

Concerning this, it first occurs, That to undergo a Flux of menstruous Blood
belongs to Humane Kind, and that always to Women; concerning the Nature and
Origin of which, it does not concern us here to enquire; but it may suffice to
note, that in them the Particles of the Blood to be voided periodically, are
very fermentative, which if they are retained in the Body beyond the usual
Custom of Nature, they oftentimes become the Cause of many Sicknesses; still
excepting, if the Woman has conceived with Child; for all the time of
Childbearing the Menses stop without any great damage: and mean while, for the
Nourishment of the Foetus, Milk, or a nourishable Humor, is deposed in a great
Plenty about the Placenta of the Womb: but, after Delivery, that long
Suppression of the Menses is recompensed by a copious flowing of the Lochia,
and the Milk, within three days space, leaving wholly the Womb, flies
plentifully into the Breasts; at which time, Childbearing Women are wont to be
set upon by a small Fever: and if the Milk be driven from the Breasts, it
restagnates again toward the Womb, and is voided forth together with the
Lochia under the form of a whitish Humor. Mean while, after Delivery, the Womb
it self undergoes various Affects, for often its Tone is injured, its Unity is
dissolved, and a great many other Accidents are caused, which render Women in
Childbed subject to a dangerous Condition: wherefore, that their acute
Diseases may be duly explicated, we must chiefly consider these three things;
to wit, first concerning the Nourishment of the Foetus, or of the Generation of
Milk, both in the Womb, and in the Breast, and of its Metastasis from either of
them into the other. Secondly, of the Purgation of the Maternal Blood, or of
the flowing of the Lochia after the Menses being long suppressed. Thridly, or the
State of the Womb after Delivery, and of its Influence on other parts of the
Body. And these things being premitted, we shall speak of the Fevers of Women
in Childbed; to wit, both the Lacteal, and that called Putrid, which, by
reason of its Mortality, deserves to be called Malignant.

First, the Milk and nutritive Humor, heaped together in the Uterine Parts for
the Nourishment of the Foetus, are by Nature alike, tho they differ somewhat in
Consistency: the Milk indeed is the thicker, because, being to be received in
the Mouth, it ought to be digested in the Stomach, and afterward its more
tender Portion to be conveyed into the Mass of Blood. The other nourishable
Humor is more thin, and like to distilled Water of Milk, because it is
immediately infused into the Blood of the Embryo, by the umbelical Vessels,
without a previous Digestion. Both Juyces are thought to consist of the Chyle
fresh made in the Mothers Stomach: that which is deposed in the Breast is
grosser and whiter, by reason of the course Strainer, and its Coction in the
greater Glands; it happens on the contrary in the Womb, where the straining is
closer, and the Glands are very small. Now it is greatly disputed among
Authors, by what Ductus's that Humor is conveyed both into the Breast, and
into the Placenta of the Womb. Some say that the Milk is engendered only from
the Blood freely concocted in the Glands, which nevertheless does not seem
probable, by reason of the immense Spendings of Milk which does not consist
with the Blood. Others affirm, That the Chyle, or Lacteal Humor, is conveyed
immediately into both Receptacles from the Viscera of Concoction through occult
Passages, without any Alteration. But till those Ductus's appear, it seems more
likely to me, that from the Food taken into the Mothers Stomach, a Portion of
the Chyle thence made is presently absorbed into the Veins, which having gotten
the Vehicle of the Blood, and being brought by the Arteries into the Glands
destinated here and there for receiving it before it is assimilated, and being
separated, is deposed again from the Mass of Blood.

Secondly, as to what regards the Menses, suppressed during the time of being
with Child, and the Lochia plentifully flowing after Childbirth; we say, That
after the Foetus is conceived, the Menses are stopped by Divine Appointment,
because their flowing often brings Abortion; and in regard the Vessels are
emptied by a continual Exsudation of the nutritive Juice into the Parts of the
Womb, the Mass of Blood does not easily arise into Turgescencies to be appeased
by a monthly flowing. For the same reason, the Menses for the most part are
stopped as long as Women give suck to Infants: in some happily, endowed with a
hot Blood, the Menses flow both in the Time of their being with Child, and
giving Suck; but that is wont to happen but rarely, and not without damage: tho
in the mean time the Menses, stopped while Women are with Child, because far less
of the nutritive Humor at that Time is employed for Milk, deprave the Blood
much more than the same are wont when restrained during the Time of gving Suck:
nay, from those being long suppressed in the first State, a venomous Taint, as it
were, is communicated to the Mass of Blood; which, unless it be purged off,
presently after Childbirth, by a long flowing of the Lochia, it produces sore
and very malignant Affects; wherefore, to give my Opinion of the flowing
Lochia, I say, that that Haemorrhagie immediately proceeds from those Vessels
being broken by which the Placenta sticks to the Womb, and that by this way the
Blood and excrementitious Humors, partly heaped together about the Womb during
the Time of being with Child, and partly flowing from the whole Mass of Blood,
are evacuated; to wit, whilst the Womb, first swollen in a Bulk, falls
presently after Delivery, and is contracted into a less space, the Blood is
copiously expressed from the Vessels that are open in it. And moreover, in as
much as during the Suppression of the Menses, the Mass of Blood is imbued with
very fermentative Particles, as soon as after Childbirth the Mouths of the
Vessels are open, presently, as tho a large flowing of the Menses were at hand,
the whole Blood ferments, even as new Wine in a Bottle opened, and endeavors
to purge from it self the extreme fermentative Particles, by a flowing of the
Lochia, as it were, by an Efflorescence; and therefore, besides the Blood,
which in the first days, by reason of the Vessels being newly opened, often
flows forth pure; afterward very discolored Ichors, to wit, livid, or green,
and those very stinking, are voided forth. This kind of flowing is wont to
continue for fourteen days at least, nay, in some, for a month; and if by
reason of any Errors it be stopped before the Mass of Blood be cleansed enough by
such an Efflorescence, presently a very dangerous Fever, with a horrible
Apparatus of Symptoms, is wont to be caused.

The third Consideration, previous to the Doctrine of the Fevers of Women in
Childbed, chiefly concerns the Womb it self; to wit, how it is affected after
childbirth, and what kind of Influence it has over other Parts of the Body. As
to the first, there are two Accidents chiefly on which the acute Diseases of
Women in Childbed much depend; first, the settling of the Womb, or the
Reducement of it to its natural Site and Magnitude from the Bulk of
Ingravidation: secondly, A Solution of its Unity within its Cavity, by reason
of the Connection of the Placenta being broken. When the Foetus is deposed with
its Envellopings, presently the sides of the Womb it self, before greatly
enlarged, fall together, and contract themselves by degrees into a narrower
space, by the help of the Fibers: By reason of this kind of Contraction the
Blood and Ichors are copiously expressed from the Vessels and Pores of the Womb,
and are voided forth with the Lochia; but sometimes it happens, by reason of
preternatural things contained in the Womb, as are a part of the Secondine, a
Mola, Clots of Blood, etc. even tho after a laborious Delivery, a Contusion, or
great Dilaseration happen, that the Womb does not duly contract it self, but
the Motion of the Fibers being inverted, ascends upwards, and is raised into a
Lump; also the Membranes being affected with a Twitching, it is still assailed
with Tortures, as tho the Throws of Childbirth were in being; which kind of
Affects, if they continue for some time, by reason of the Orifice of the Womb
being constringed with a Convulsive Motion, the Lochia also are often stopped:
hence severe Symptoms ensue; and oftentimes it happens, that a Fever either
thereby is first raised, or being induced by some other cause, is rendered far
more dangerous. Secondly, as to the Unity dissolved by the Placenta being
broken, it happens either at the due Time of Delivery, or when it is
precipitated and overhasty; and then the Secondine is thrown out entire, or
being broken, part of it being left behind, it comes away as it were at halfs.
If a Childbirth happens at the just time, and the Foetus falls away entire,
and without Violence, from the Cavity of the Womb, with its Envellopings, as
ripe fruit from a Tree, the Mouths of the Vessels are somewhat opened, that the
Lochia flow moderately; and hence no severe Symptom is feared. But if the
Foetus, not yet ripe for Delivery, be torn away as it were by force, tho the
Placenta, with the Membrances are torn away entirely, yet the Vessels being
broken, a great Haemorrhagie, and at length the Mouths of the Vessels gleeting
forth a stinking Ichor, an ulcerous Disposition ensues. And if part of the
Secundine or the whole, sticks to the sides of the Womb after Delivery, and
there putrifies, they gleet forth very stinking Ichors, and cause mischievous
Affects: oftentimes the Orifice of the Womb is shut, and retains within Clots
of Blood, and pieces of Membranes, or Flesh; which putrefying through Hear,
Poison the Blood, and Humors flowing thither by Circulation from the whole
Body, and by a'troublesome Irritation stir the Parts of the Womb, which are
very sensible, into Contractions.

Since therefore, after Childbirth an Injury is brought on the Womb after the
foresaid Manners, the same is soon communicated to the other Parts, not without
a Disturbance to the whole Body; which is usually done in a double Respect; for
first, this happens, because the Lochia, hindered from being voided forth,
presently restagnate into the Mass of Blood, and defile it with a sort of
virulent Miasm. Moreover, from the Contents putrefying in the Womb, either the
Substance it self of the Ichor, or the Particles departing from the cadaverous
thing, are mixed with the Blood and nervons Juice, passing through them, and in
a short time infect their whole Liquours, Secondly, Histerick affects are
extended far and near by reason of the mighty accord there is betwixt the Womb
and the Brain, with the Fibers and Membranes of the whole Body, by the means of
the Conveyance of the Nerves: for when the extremities of the Nerves placed
about the Uterine Parts are driven into Cramps and Convulsions by reason of the
presence of the offensive Humor, the Convulsions there entered upon, presently
being conveyed upward by the Efforts and Coarctations of the Nerves, creep
toward the Brain: and so it happens that the Viscera are successively pust up,
and violently convulsed, and at length that the Brain it self is struck with
it, and that its Functions are overwhelmed as it were: hence, upon convulsive
Motions began about the Womb, a puffing up of the Belly and Hypochondres, a
rumbling there, 'a Vomiting, a Belching, a straightness of the Praecordia, and
a difficult Breathing, a sense of Choking, and often a Stupor, and a loss of
Speech, or at least some of these are caused: nor does the Tragedy wholly cease
so, but the Brain being also offended by the continuation of the affect, the
Injury is retorted thence on the other Parts, that often the whole Genus
Nervosum is forced into Irregularities of Motions: for what is vulgarly said to
be done by Vapors, and the affect, which creeping from below upward is called
an ascent of Vapors, is nothing else, but the parts of the Membranes and
Nervous ductus's forced successively into Contractions. Moreover, in these
kinds of Affects the injured action does not always begin, or is first felt in
that Region or Place, where the Injury is inflicted, nor do the Passions which
are said to be hysterical only proceed from the Womb; for sometimes the
disturbance is brought immediately on the Brain, but the Cramps and
Contractions begin in the extreme parts, and sometimes the extremities of the
Nerves are twitched somewhere in the Viscera, suppose the Stomach, Spleen,
Reins, no less than in the Womb; in which Irregularities arising, are continued
in the neighboring Parts, and thence into the Brain: from which again
Convulsions are reflected unto other Parts, and often into the whole Body: that
the thing is so in Women in Childbed, and others that have Fevers, I have
often observed: to wit, some by reason of the Womb being ill affected, and
others by reason of the febrile matter fixed in the Brain by a critical
metastasis fall into Passions in a manner hysterical: and these things being
duly considered concerning the Apparatus previous to the Fevers of Women, in
Childbed, we need not stay here longer, only it may be observed that the
Bodies of Women in Childbed (especially those which are weak and of a tender
Constitution) are very much debilitated after a laborious and difficult
delivery, so that by reason of this sole occasion they easily fall into
feverish distempers, and being caused this or another way, they bear them ill;
now next let us speak of the Fevers themselves, with which Women in Childbed
are wont to be troubled: of which affects three kinds as it were are vulgarly
instanced. viz. the Lacteal Fever, the Putrid, or of that kind which is marked
by some borrowed Symptoms, as especially the Pleurisy, the Quinsie, or the
Small Pox, of which we shall speak in order.

The Lacteal Faver.
I Am of Opinion that the milky Chyme made of the Aliments in the Viscera, and
thence mixed with the Blood for a Nutritive Juice, is again presently separated,
for the greatest part, from its Mass, by the help of the Glands in the Womb, or
in the Breasts, even as the Serum is in the Reins; that it might afford
Nourshment to the Foetus either in the Mothers Belly, or carried in her Arms.
During the time of being with Child, tho the greatest part of it be derived to
the Womb, yet in the last Months, a little of it is deposed in the Breasts, but
about the third or fourth day after Childbirth, the Milk is carried to the
breasts more plentifully, and as it were with a certain Impetus, that it soon
fills them to a Tension, and begins to load them. At this time Women delivered
(tho not all, yet most) are wont to be affected with a feverish Distemperature,
a Thirst, Heat, and Restlessness of the whole Body: they complain of a sad Pain
in the Back and Shoulders, of a fullness of the breasts, and a burning, and,
unless the Mild be diligently drawn from thence, being heapt together too much,
it often causes an In flammation with a following Abscess in the breasts: This
Fever, so the Lochia pass as they ought, seldom last above three days, but
about that time, a copious sweat spontaneously arising, is wont to be appeased:
yet this Distemperature raised by the coming of the milk, is somewhat intended,
and stays longer, if at any time the Milk being freeely entered into the
Breasts, be not drawn away, but be again repelled thence; for upon its
departure, even as upon its coming, a perturbation is wont to happen in the
whole body, with a Thirst and Heat, whcih also more certainly comes to pass, if
that happens to be violently driven away with repelling Topics: but being
driven from the breast by their help, or departing thence of its own accord, it
is voided with the Lochia in the form of a whitish Humor, and a Sweat, or a
full perspiration exterminates the relics of the Disease. But if by this kind
of distemperature, being caused by reason of the commotion of the Milk, the
Lochia are stopped, or errors in diet are committed, or some evident cause
happens. so that the effervescence of the blood be intended, often the Lacteal
Fever, joining to it worse Symptoms, turns to a Putrid or Malignat.

The Cure of this Fever is committed wholly to Nuture, and as long as the
Lochia are as they ought, it passes off for the most part well enough without
any physical Help: for after an effervescence of the Blood, carried on for
three or four days, either a copious Sweat, or a free Transpirations, resolves
this Affect: to wit, either the Particles of the lacteal Humor, degenerated in
assimilating, or the adust Recrements remaining after the Deflagration of the
Blood, or both of them together administering a Fuel to the Fever, are subdued
by degrees, and evaporated forth, which being sent forth, the Blood being
become free from its extraneous mixture, soon recovers its former state, tho in
the mean while some vulgar Rules concerning the admission of the Milk, or
thedriving away of the same from the breasts, are wont to be observed. If the
Milk springs into the breasts in too great a plenty, then to prevent their
Inflammation, and an immoderate effervescence of the Blood, let the diet be
thinn and spare, viz. of Broth wthout Flesh, and in a small quantity: also let
the breasts be emptyed by a frequent sucking: if it be not convenient for the
Mother to give the Infant suck, it is usual on the first, or third day after
delivery, to cover over all the breasts with gently astringent Cere-Cloths, as
withthe red Lead Plaster, etc. For so the spungy Substance of the Glands is
somewhat constring'd, whereby they do not so readily receive the lacteous
Humor flowing thither, tho this kind of Remedy ought to be cautiously used,
lest if the Milk be wholly excluded, or be driven away from the breasts too
much in a crowd, presently restagnating into the Blood, it causes a disorder of
the same; as a forerunner of a putrid or malignant Fever: of which we must
speak next.

The Putrid Fevers of Women in Childbed.
WOmen in Childbed, throught the taint of their ill affected Body, as tho they
were struck with the Contagion of a pestilential Air, are found to be extremely
obnoxious to a putrid or rather malignant Fever, tho all do not equally receive
tha taint of this Disease; for poor Women, Hirelings, Rusticks, and others used
to hard Labors, also Viragoes, and Whores, who are clandestinely delivered,
bring forth without great difficulty, and in a short time after, rising from
their Bed, return to their wonted Labors: but Women that are rich, tender and
beautiful, and many living a sedentary Life, asa tho they partak'd of the
Divine Curse after a more severe manner, bring forth in Pain, and presently
after their delivery lie in an uneasy and dangerous condition: the reason of
which seems to lie in this, that those that use much exercise, continually
exagitate, and eventilate the Blood, and therefore after the Menses are stopped,
heap together fewer Miasms for the matter of the Disease; Moreover, laboring
and active Women, having the nervous Parts more firm, are less subject to
convulsive Mothions, and the affects vulgarly called hysterical: on the
contrary, in nice Women, and such as live idly, during the time of their being
with Child the mass of Blood becomes impure and fermentative: moreover, because
they have the Brain and the System of the Nerves thender and weak, upon any
light occasion they undergo Distractions of the animal Spirits, and disorderly
Motions of the nervous Parts: and here it is to be noted by the by, that Women
before Men, and some of that Sex before others, are troubled with the Affects
called hysterical, not so much by reason of the fault of the Womb it self, but
by reason of the weaker Constitutions of the Brain and Genus Nervosum: for in
Perons so affected, Passions of Anger, Fear, Sadness; also all vehement or
strong Objects easily pervert the Crases or Functions of those parts, which
when they have been once injured, day afterward in a manner always accustom
them selves to the same Irregularities. But to return whence we made a
digression: the Fever even now mentioned is wont to infest Women in Childbed,
at various thimes, and for diver Occasions; sometimes it arises presently after
delivery, especially if it has been difficult and laborious, sometimes the
second, third, or fourth Week; tho the later it begins, the safer it it is wont
to be; the Type of that effect passes after this manner: after a previous
indisposition an open feverishness for the most part with a cold and a
shivering makes the first invasion, which presently is followed by a heat,
afterward a sweat ensues for a day happily or two, there are various
reciprocations of Fits of heat and cold: afterward, the Blood being kindled
throughtout, the Lochia, unlefs suppressed before, either flow a little, or
wholly stop. If the Disease be acute, and of a quick motion, on the third, or
fouth day it comes to its height, then there is an intense heat, with a very
troublesome drought, a vehement and quick Pulse, there are obstinate Watchings,
a great restlessness of the whole Body, so that the Diseased continually toss
themselves this way and that in their Bed, the Urine is thick and ruddy, and
other severe symptoms are rife: whilst the Fever is thus in its height, a
Crisis is not to be expected; for I have never seen this Disease resoled by a
critical sweat; nay, the case is very dangerous, so that after the Blood has
boiled for some time, the adust matter presently being conveyed into the Brain,
dangerous and very sore Irregularities of it, and of the Genus Nervosum
straitway ensue, for convulsive Motions of the Tendons, wonderful distentions
about the Viscera, and puffings up, resembling hysteric Passions, oftentimes
are raised: Moreover, sometimes a Phrensy, a Delirium, often a Stupor and a
Speechlessness also follow; almost in all the strength is suddenly cast down
without a manifest Cause, tyhe Pusse becomes weak and uneven, and the Diseased
are often precipitated into Death: if any happily escape, either the flowing of
the Lochia being restored, or a Diarrhoea superventing, they recover with much
ado after a long lying ill: I have known purple Spots to have appeared in
some; indeed in most the symptoms which regard either the Blood or the nervous
Juice, argue no small malignity.

The Procatarctick Causes of this Fever, on which the malignity and mighty
danger of this Disease depend, are chiefly two; viz. first, an evil dispostion
of the Blood, after a long suppression of the Menses: secondly (after delivery)
the evil affects of the Womb from the dangerous labors of Women (which make
out the Divine malediction:) after the Menses being long suppressed, the Blood
does not only grow turgid, and its sulphurous parts being raised too much, are
rendered more apt for Inflammation, but moreover, the mass of Blood is imbued
with very fermentaive Particles, so that (as is hinted before) being struck as
it were with a venomous Miasm, as it ferments, it forthwith is disposed toward
a putrefaction and corruptive irregularities, and besides, it may presently
poison the nervous Liquour, and render it offensive to the Brain and the whole
Genus Nervosum: this kind of taint communicated to the blood, ought to be
purged forth by a copious flowing of the Lochia; but if after delivery the Womb
be out of order, their is not only a stoppage of the Lochia, and so the
Reparation of the whole blood is hindered, but besides, stinking Ichors are
thence transmitted to the blood, and greatly infect it. Also by reason of
convulfive motions begun about the Womb, and thence continued to the other
Parts, Irregularities are raised in the Blood and Juyces, whcih often conspire
to the production or exasperation of a Fever.

The evident Causes which either cause an actual effervescence in the Blood,
having gotten a Dyscrasy, or trouble the whole Body with the Distempers of the
Womb are diverse; for these make a painful delivery, a solution of unity about
the Womb, a contusion, a retention of preternatural things, an ulcerous
disposition, and a great many other Accidents, which are caused throught some
necessity; but the occasions in the power of Patients, and easy to be avoided,
which are wont to raise this Fever, are chiefly two; viz. an ill form of Diet,
and a taking Cold. It Is a usual thing to give to weak Women after Childbirth,
on the first and second day, the Flesh of Animals, or their Gelly-broths, and
other Food very disproportionate to their Constitutions; whence presently an
indigestion and great disquietings arise in the Viscera, and feverish
turgescencies in the Blood, by reason of a nutritive Juyced richer than it
ought. Befides Errors committed in Diet, often an Injury is Caused, for that
their Bodies, which are very tender, and by reason of the Labors of
Childbirth, and the Exclusion of the Foetus, are all full of open Pores, are
too unwarily exposed to the open Air: for most, being impatient of their Bed,
put on their Clothes, and rise from it within a day or two, or sooner than they
ought: thereby presently the Pores of the Skin being presently stopped, and the
Air getting into the Uterine Parts, tanspiration is checked, and often the
Lochia are suddenly stopped, either of which suffices to raise a feverish
effervescence.

The conjunct Cause, or formal Reason of this Distemper, comprehends chiefly
these three things; to wit, there are present, first a mighty Dyscrasie of the
Blood, that growing very hot from a Fever occasionally raised, it does not burn
evenly, nor does is subdue by degreeds the adust Recrements, and purge them
forth critically; moreover, the boiling Blood is presently loos'ned in its
Mixture, and its Texture being loos'ned, it declines toward Corruption; hence
when it has a little abated of its Heat, the Spirits, being cast from their
Governance, are driven into Confusion: mean while, the sulphurous Particles
become masterless and exorbitant; wherefore the Strength fails without a
manifest Cause, the Pulse becomes weak and disorderly. Tho from the
Deflagration of the Blood a great many adust Recrements are heaped together,
yet nothing is duly concocted or separated; but Nature being greatlyopprest,
although the Diseased continually sweat, they often receive no ease thereby: but
the Febrile Matter, which ought to be purged forth, being conveyed into the
Head and Genus Nervosum, causes there very sore Perturbations of the animal
economy. Secondly, The Tragedy of this Disease, for a good part of it, is
ascribed to the nervous Juice forthwith turning sharp, and therefore rendered
disproportionate to the Brain and its Appendix; for this being defiled with a
Taint contracted from the Blood, does not gently irrigate and mildly inspire
its Subjects, but (as when an Infusion of Vitriol is poured on a Worm) mightily
vellicates, and irrtates into Contrqactions, and as it were into Motions of
Trepidatons and Leapings those tender Parts, and sometimes wholly overthrows
their Functions: hence Contractions, severe Convulsions, a Delirium, Watchings,
sometimes a Stupor, and sleepy Affects, happen to Women after Delivery.
Ihirdly, whilst these things are done, often a third Troop of Symptoms infest
the Diseased; to wit, for that the Womb, being some way hurt, moves it self
disorderly, and is struck with a Contraction in these or those Parts; thence
presently by the Membranes and nervous Ductus's convulsive Motions pervade the
whole Region of the Abdomen, wherefore the Viscera and Hypochondres are blown
up, Belchings and violent Vomitings are raised; afterward the Affect creeping
upward, and possessing the nervous Parts of the Thorax, a difficult and uneven
Breathing, a Palpitation of the Heart, a sense of Choking in the Throat, by
reaon of the Muscles there drawn together, and other Symptoms are raised
throughout the whole, upon the same Injuries being communicated to the Brain.

The Fevers of Women afte Delivery, are scarce ever free from danger, tho
sometimes it happens for them to be cured about the first beginnings, by a thin
Diet, and upon restoring the flowing of the Lochia: but if the feverish
Distemper has laid deep Roots, that the Blood be wholly kindled, and boyls
immoderately, we can give but an ill Prognostic; and there will be a greater
Cause of Danger, if besides a Heat diffused through the whole, the Diseased are
seized with a frequent Shivering, if they are affected with a great
Restlessness, and Watchings, with sudden Concussions of their Bodies, or
Contractions of the Tendons: if on the third or fourth Day they complain of a
ringing of the Ears, with a great Repletion of the Head, you may presently
gather, that a great Evil is at hand, to wit, a Mertastasis of the febrile and
offensive Matter into the Brain; nor is less to be feared if there lies an
Oppression and Load on the Praecordia that the Diseased cannot freely breath,
nor draw their Breath deep, nor form the bottom of the Thorax; but only from
the upper part of it, and that short and with a Blowing, so that in the mean
while the Diseased are forced to fit upright, and to move themselves this way
and that, after a restless manner; for this argues the Blood to stagnate about
the Heart and Lungs, also that it is apt to grow clotty, and to be coagulated:
and if worse yet Affects of the Brain and Genus Nervosum ensue, and the Pulse
becomes weak and uneven, you may declare the Case to be desperate: but if (as
if sometimes falls out, tho rarely) after a Fever is kindled, and threatens
severely, either a flowing of the Lochia, or a Diarrhoea happens with Relief,
some Hope may be admitted.

Concerning the Cures of these kinds of Fevers, a Physician has a very hard
Task; because, among the Vulgar, all Medicines to Women in Childbed are
accounted not only useless, but likewise very hurtful; wherefore, Physicians
are selfom called, but when there is no place left for Medicines, and the
occasion for a useful Assitstance is wholly past: and if they are present about
the first beginnings of the Disease, it will not be an easy thing to procure
Health to the Diseased by vulgar Remedies; and whatsoever they try, unless it
gives Help, is affirmed by old Women, and those that are about them, as
pernicious, and the only Cause of their Death: that in reality, there is wont
to accrue to us about the Cure of no Disease, less benefit and more Disgrace
than of this.

Now the method of Cure (even as in contagious Diseases) is twofold; to wit,
Prophylactick and Therapeutick: the former of these delivers Precepts and
Cautions, with which Women in Childbed are preserved from the Incursion of
Fevers; the other suggests curative Intentions, with which the Diseased (if it
may be) recover again their Health.

1. Tho this Fever, however malignant it be, is not accused of Contagion, and
there be no fear in those that lie in, of a venomous Miasm being received from
without; nevertheless, all Women in Childbed have an innate Minera of
Virulency, and ought to have a care of the mischief of this, as a Fomes of a
mighty Malignity; wherefore they have need of an exact Governance, that after
Childbirth the Impurities of the Blood and Humors may be duly purged without
the danger of a Fever; and that the evil Affects of the Womb be healed; and
that the Strength, broken and debilitated by Childbirth, may be duly
restored. For these ends, these three things are to be chiefly inculcated in
the Praescripts of Physicians: First, I think it necessary that a most exact
form of Diet be ordered Women in Childbed; to wit, that at least for a Week
they wholly feed on Oat Broths, sometimes prepared with Ale, sometimes of Water
mixed with White Wind; because they are much emptied, therefore they may sup
often of them; but let nothing of a solid or strong Food be given; for I have
diligently observed that an overhasty eating of Flesh, or of a rich Food, has
oftentimes brought these Fevers. For, Women in Childbed ought to be managed
not only as Persons sorely woulded, but as having gotten a feverish
Indisposition from a troubled Crasis and Distemperature of the Blood; for in
them, the Blood being for a long time too much exalted and inspired with an
impure Miasm, presently upon the Access of any sulphurous Fuel, takes a light
Flame. The second Care, after Diet, must be, that the Pores be not closed, or
the Lochia stopped, upon the unwary Admission of an outward Cold; for upon the
lightest occasion, the way of the Transpiration being changed, the Blood,
before fermenting, falls into Disorders, also the Womb being touched with the
breath of the Air, contracts it self, and closes the Mouths of the Vessels,
that the Lochia do not flow: wherefore in any wise Women ought to be kept in
Bed five days after Childbearing. I know its the vulgar way to take Women out
of Bed the third day, but I have known many to have fallen into Fevers thereby;
and in truth, if we will have Childbearing Women secure from danger, the
safest way will be, to keep them in Bed longer. There remains a third Scope
concerning Preservation, that in Women in Childbed, by giving somewhat gently
to stir the Blood, we continue a flowing of the Lochia: for this end Midwives
are wont (if at any time after a difficult Childbirth that Evil be feared) to
give Sperma coeti, Powder of Irish Slate, or Saffron steeped with White Wind:
moreover, to prepare Broths, that they may fuse the Blood more, of Water mixed
with White or Rhenish Wine, in which, or also in Whey, they boil Mary
gold-flowers, Penny Royal, or Mugwort. There are a great many other kinds of
Administrations in use for Women in Childbed, which I willingly pass by, as
being valgarly known.

The Cure of the Fever following Childbirth far differs from the Method used
in Putrids: for in that it is not to be expected that the Blood being struck
with a Febrile Burning, should burn on by degrees and then should subdue the
adust Recrements heaped together by degrees in its Bosom, and should separate
the same by a Crisis; but rather (as is best done in a malignant) as soon as the
Blood boyls immoderately, it is good to exagitate it, and to send forth its
haeterogeneous and impure Mixtures by Remedies gently promoting Sweat;
wherefore it is usual among the Vulgar (and that not amiss) to give presently
Sudorificks to Women in Childbed that are feverish: by this means the Blood
being eventilated, its Effervescence is appeased; also by reason of its
Agitation, the Lochia, apt to be restrained, are stimulated to a flowing. It is
much disputed among Authors whence the Beginnings of these kinds of Fevers
ought to be computed; to wit, Whether from the Birth it self, or from the first
Sense of the Feverishness: but it little matters whether it be concluded this
way or that; for, since this Fever does not justly observe the wonted Stages of
Putrids, nor is to have a Crisis, nor at all admits the use of a Cathartick
Remedy, there is no cause for us to be any ways sollicitous concerning its
Period or Mensuration as to days: but it will be only useful for us to
distinguish concerning its curative Indications, of what things are to be done
in the Beginning, Increase, and End of this Disease; what also we ought to
attempt while the Strength holds somewhat good; and what in the same being
depressed and greatly dejected.

When therefore any Woman brought to Bed is first affected with this Fever
(whose Invasion is distinguished from the Lacteal, because it begins for the
most part with a cold Shivering) presently we must endeavor that the Fuel be
plentifully withdrawn from the burning Blood; and, as I have advised above, let
the Flesh of Animals, or Broths made of the same, be wholly forbidden: for
these fix the Blood, and constipate it too much, and hinder its purging, which
is very necessary both by the Lochia, and by cutaneous Transpiration: and
rather, tho the Fever be pressing, let Decoctions, Powders, and Confections, be
given of moderately hot things: of this kind (as I said before) are the
Decoctions, or distilled Waters of the Flowers of Marygolds, of the Leaves of
Pennyroyal, of Mugwort, of the Roots of Scorzonera, also bezoartick Powders,
Spirit of Hartshorn, the fixed Salts of Herbs, etc. If the Lochia are stopped,
we must try all ways to move them to flow again; for promoting these, Frictions
conduce, and Ligatures about the Thighs and Legs, also in the Soles of the
Feet, sometimes cupping Glasses, or Vesicatories about the Thighs, or Hips,
also in the Soles of the Feet; sometimes also Blooding in the Ancle is good:
mean while, let a Fomentation of an hysteric Decoction be applied about the
Share, or let a Weathers Caul, taken forth warm, be laid on the lower Part of
the Belly: it has been found by Experience, that Pessaries, and uterine
Injections, have sometime done good; if the Belly be costive, let it be gently
loos'ned by the Violet Suppository, or an emollient Clyster. We must beware of
a too strong Irritation, because it is known, that in Childbed the Strength is
suddenly cast down, with a Swooning, by a copious Purging, even as in a
Malignant Fever. If at any time, with a Suppression of the Lochia, there be a
mighty Perturbation of the Blood with a Vomiting, a Thirst, and Watchings, I
have often known Laudanum mixed with Saffron given with good Success. Instead
of a cooling Julep, this kind of Mixture may be proper: viz. Take Water of
Pennyroyal, and of Bawm, of each three ounces, Histerick-water two ounces,
Syrup of Mugwort an ounce and a half, Tincture of Saffron two drams, Castoreum
tied in a Rag and hung in the Glass a Scruple. Mix them. Let three or four
Spoonfuls of this be taken diverse times in a day.

2. If, notwithstanding the use of these kinds of Remedies, the Fever still
grows worse, and is increased by degrees with a worse Apparatus of Symptoms, so
that besides the Disorders of the Blood, the Brain and nervous Parts begin to
be affected, Medicines, tho a great many of them of every kind are tried,
oftentimes can do nothing: nay, in this ease, the Indications are in a manner
coincident with those that are to be made use of in the Plague it self; for,
the Lochia being a good while suppressed, they cannot easily, or searce at all,
be brought again in a great Confusion of the Blood and Humors: therefore it is
good quickly to raise a Sweat; to wit, That the Corruptions made in the Blood
and nervous Juice, and restagnating from the Womb, may in some sort be sent
forth by Sweat and insensible Transpiration: wherefore here Bezoartck Powders
and Confections, Spirit of Hartshorn or of Soot, Tinctures of Coral or of
Pearl, conduce. I have sometimes seen, that by the help of these kinds of
Medicines, in a desperate Case, somewhat of Hope has shown it self, the Pulse
and other Symptoms promising a little better; tho the Cure has seldom
succeeded: but when that use of Cordials was remitted, the Diseased fell
headlong into Death, with a weak Pulse, and a Looseness forthwith arising.

3. When still the case of the Diseased grows worse and worse, that the Fever
being increased, the Pulse is weak and uneven, and frequent Shiverings, and
convulsive Motions infest the whose Body, with a Delirium, or a Stupor; then
let the Physician, first giving a Prognostic of Death, insist on fewer
Remedies, and those, in a manner, only Cardiack: and let him wholly abstain
from Blooding, Scarifying, Vesicatories, or the use of Cupping Glasses; for
such Administrations bring only an ill will and Disgrace, that thereby we are
accounted by Women hard-hearted and cruel.

The Symptomatick Fevers of Women in Childbed.
THE acute Diseases of Women brought to bed do not only follow the Type of the
foresaid Fever, but are sometimes attended with some notable Symptom; to wit,
the Quinsey, Plurisie, Peripneumonia, Dysentery, Small Pox, or of some other
kind; and then they are called by the Names of those Affects. It is not proper
to repeat in this Place what belongs to the Natures and Essences of each of
them at large, but I shall briefly set down what those Diseases, complicated
with the Affects of Women in Childbed, have peculiar to them, as to their
Causes or Cures.

We judge that all those Symptoms proceed from a certain Coagulation of the
Blood, and afterward its Extravasation: now while the Blood is extravasated in
one part, every natural and critical Effiux of it is restrained in another;
wherefore there is danger, lest while the Blood begins to be coagulated either
in a particular and usual Focus of Congelation, or universally in its whole
Mass, presently the flowing of the Lochia be stopped; which in reality happens
for the most part, and therefore those Affects are most commonly mortal to
Women in Childbed: nevertheless, the Cause of their Death, for the most part,
happens with some difference, to wit, in the Small Pox, the flowing Lochia call
inward the Malignity began to be sent forth outwardly, and wholly poison with
their Taint the Mass Blood and the Heart it self; and therefore in the Small
Pox those uterine Purgations ought to be stopped: but in the Pleurisy, Quinsey,
and the rest, when the Stimulus of the Disease, fixed here or there in a
particular Place calls to it self, and wholly derives from the Womb the
Impurities of the Blood which ought to be voided by the Lochia, thereby it
increases the Taint of the BLood: the Lochia restrained in the Small Pox might
be sent forth by a more general way of Excretion, with the venomous Particles
of the Disease; with indeed does not succeed in the rest by reason of the small
and more spare way of Excretion.

Among these, the Quinsey, Plurisie, and Peripneumonia, by reason both of the
great likeness of their Cause, and the Analogy of their Cure, may be considered
together. When a Woman in Childbed is affected with either of these, it is to
be judged, that besides the Miasms heaped together during the time of
Ingravidation, there happens a certain acid disposition of the Blood, by the
means of with, whilst it feverishly boyls, certain Particles of it being imbued
with a sharpness, fall into a Congelation in this or that place, like Milk
turning sour and consequently coagulated: the Blood let there, and hindered
in its Circulation, hinders the Passage of the rest; now the Blood, being
obstructed in its Motion, butts against its dam, and so being heaped together
round about, and driven out of its Vessels, grows into a Tumor; thence
presently whatsoever haeterogeneous and separable is contained in its Mass, is
deposed in the Part affected as in a Sink: wherefore, the Corruptions of the
Blood, which ought to be purged forth by the Womb, are derived thence toward
the Seat of this Disease; which since they cannot be purged forth sufficiently
this way, both the Liquor of the Blood is more notoriously corrupted, and a
Crisis of that particular Affect, to wit, of the Quinsey, Plurisie, or some
other, is rendered more difficult.

For the Cure of these kinds of complicated Diseases, presently from the very
first beginning it must be endeavored, that the Blood fixed any where and begun
to be extravasated, be restored to Circulation, and do not make an Impostume,
because it is very rarely that Women in Childbed, seized with those
symptomatick Fevers, are cured by an Abscess or spitting forth of the Matter;
wherefore, inward Remedies, which fuse the Blood and free it from Coagulation,
are to be used; of which kind are chiefly Diaphoreticks filled with a volatile
Salt, as Spirit of Hartshorn, of Soot, of Urine, and the Salts themselves:
also testaceous and bezoartick Powders, Sal Prunella, Decoctions and Juleps of
Vegetables promoting the menses or the Urine; in all which those things ought
to be mixed, which by Experience are found to be appropriated to uterine
Affects: moreover, discussing Remedies, which drive away and expel the Matter
stinking in the Part affected (of which kind are Liniments, Fomentations, and
Cataplasms) are carefully to be applied to it. Mean while, let the violent
Motion, and immoderate Effervescence of the Blood be removed far from thence,
and let its Excretions of Filth be conveyed still to the lower Parts, by what
ways we may: for this end, Frictions, Ligatures, Epispasticks, and (if need be)
cupping Glasses, may be applied to the Feet or Legs: in case the Affect growing
very much worse, blooding be indicated; unless there be a great Plethora in the
whole Body, and a very acute Inflammation in the Part affected, it will be best
to breath a Vein in the Foot, or to open the haemorroid Vessels with Leeches:
but if necessity presses for it to be done in the Arm, after Blooding there,
let another Bleeding (if it may be admitted) follow in the Leg: nevertheless,
we must give a Hint, that opening a Vein ought to be very cautiously ordered in
these Cases: for unless it gives Relief (which I have seldom known to happen)
presently the Pulse being rendered more weak, the State of the Diseased becomes
worse.

A Dysentery takes its Rise in a manner from the like Cause, as the foresaid
Affects; but because in this, the extravasated Blood is presently poured forth,
nor being restrained in the Body creates a mischief there, and is still more
corrupted: and since this way of Excretion is performed near the uterine
Efflux, and does not derive it afterward another way, hence less danger is
feared from this Disease than from the others before mentioned; tho oftentimes
this Affect is mortal to Women in Childbed, and that the rather, because by a
Dysentery things that qualify and gently astringe the Blood are indicated: and
these are found too apt to stop the flowing of the Lochia: wherefore in this
case, till Women delivered are in a manner purged enough by a long flowing, let
the Cure of the other Disease be omitted, and let the fierceness of Symptoms be
restrained only by lenifying things.

The Indications of the Small Pox do not only differ from those even now above
described, but are attended by some Contrary to themselves; for they require
the Flowings of the Lochia to be alittle stopr, (as is said before;) tho
withal, that the Efflorescence of the Blood, and a gentle Sweat, be continued:
for since in this Disease there is a double venomous Ferment, and the corrupted
Particles of the Blood are carried forth two ways, Care is tob e taken that the
less and narrower Passage do not draw to it self all the Matter, or more than
it can let forth: therefore, lest the Lochia too copiously flowing draw
inwardly the Venom, which is apt to make an outward Efflorescence, the form of
Diet must be somewhat changed; and in the first place let things be boiled in
the Broths of the Diseased, which have an Alexipharmick together with an
astringent Virtue (as the Roots of Tormentil and of Bistort,) also it is good
to give at due Intervals of time, Powders, Juleps, and Opiates, endowed with
such a kind of Virtue: moreover, in this Case let it by no means be allowed
Women to feed on Flesh and Broths made of it, or to rise from bed; but a quiet
both Mind and Body being procured by what means we may, and a Diet being
ordered of those things which do not exagitate the Blood, let the business in a
manner wholly be committed to God and Nature.

It were an easy thing to illustrate wlth Stories and Observations what is
said above concerning the acure Diseases of Women in Childbed; ut the Examples
which may be brought in this kind, are for the most part deplorable and of an
ill Event; for those Fevers generally are terminated in Death. Now to describe
these kinds of Sicknesses will neither confirm the Endeavor of a Physician,
nor at all recommend the method of Physic used in them; however, since the
Knowledge of these makes for the better Diagnostick of that Disease, I shall
here propose certain singular Cases and Varieties of Symptoms of Women after
Delivery; in which, tho Forms and ways of curing seldom occur, at leastwise you
will have certain Rules of Precaution of no contemptible use.

A renowned Woman about twenty fix years of Age, was delivered of a sixth Child
with great difficulty, and not without danger of Life. On the second day, she
are a whole Chicken. On the third, being taken up from her Bed, she sat for
four hours in a Chair. The night following she was ill, at which time the Milk
sprang into her Breasts; which nevertheless soon disappeared upon the
Application of the Diachylum Plaster. The next Morning she complained of a
Lassitude, and a Pain like a Soreness of her whole Body, also of a Vomiting, a
Nauseousness, and a Plenitude about the Ventricle and Hypochondres: a very
troublesome Night followed. On the fifth day she was more openly severish, and
felt sometimes a Shivering, sometimes a Burning all about her. She nauseated
all things, had an Oppression of the Stomach, moreover, being restless, and
without Sleep, the Lochia flowed but little, but a whitish Humor (vulgarly
called a flowing of Milk) flowed from her. In the Evening she had a heaviness
about the Forehead and Temples, as tho she were sleepy, and began to sleep a
little: after an hour and a half, awaking with a troubled Fancy, she complained
of her Head being increased as it were to a mighty Bulk, also of her Jaws being
closed that she could not open her Teeth, and of her Fifts being closely
contracted; moreover, in her whole Body she seemed to perceive a pungitive sort
of a Stupor: the Ventricle and Hypochondres continued still distended and
puffed up. To this Person Frictions, Ligatures, cupping Glasses, and other
Remedies, both inwardly and outwardly, were applied for recalling the Lochia,
and deriving the Recrements of the Blood from the Head: the weak and disorderly
Pulse did not admit Blooding: Powders and Juleps for gently moving a Sweat, and
fusing the Blood and nervous Juice, and hindering them from Restagnations, were
diligently given. Moreover, Fomentations sometimes of linen Cloths dipped in an
emollient Decoction, sometimes of the tepid Viscera of Anirnals were applied to
the lower Part of the Belly; mean while, stinking things (as is wont to be done
to Persons troubled with hysteric Fits) were held to the Nostrils, for
hindering the impetuous flowing of the Blood and Spirits to the Head. Now these
things and others being carefully plied for many Hours, she seemed to perceive
some ease, tho she still dreaded of closing her Eyes, or preparing her self for
Sleep; for, her Eye lids being closed, a thousand Phantasms came into her Head,
with a noise, and a ringing in her whole Head. She passed the Night almost
without Sleep; as soon as she began to slumber, presently being frighted, and
being oppressed in the Praecordia, she awaked. On the sixth day, about Noon, she
had a cold Shivering, with a strong Concussion of the whole Body; to which, as
in the Fit of an Intermittent Fever, presently a Heat, afterward a copious
Sweat succeeded, tho no Relief happened to the sick Person thereby: for presently
after the Sweat, the feverish Heat renewed, and convulsive Affects more
infested her. The Night following, when also the other Symptoms grew worse, a
Palsy was raised first in the Tongue, and then presently in the Throat, that
she could not speak, and scarce at all swallow. On the seventh day, about the
same Hour, a cold Shivering again, with a Heat and a Sweating, scised her, and
thenceforward the Pulse was far weaker and uneven; also a difficult Respiraion,
with short Breath, seized her; she knew not the Standers by. On the eighth day
she dyed.

Many Occasions concured to the Death of this Woman, predispos'd to a Fever by
reason of her Ingravidation, they greatly increasing the Malignity of the
Disease; for, the hurting of the Womb through the difficult Delivery, the
sudden striking of the Milk from the Breasts, the eating of Flesh, and the too
quick rising from Bed, all concurred, as tho conspiring together, for a greater
Mischief. The Blood taken with a feverish Burning began Disorders: it drew the
Lochia, and happily other Corruptions of the Womb, into it self, and thence
acquired a greater Taint and a wholly venemons Disposition; the Membranes of
the Viscera, whether upon their being filled with a degenerate nervous Juice,
or upon Contractions being communciated to them from the Womb, were struck with
convulsive Motions: for those kinds of Inflammations and Distensions about the
Abdomen, are really the Effects of Convulsions: for tho the direct Fibers
contracting that Member, often compress it, yet when the Fibers both straight
and transverse, and others placed in a various Site, are convulsed together in
the Membrane compassing about the Cavity, part of it swells like a blown
Bladder, into the Vacuity of which the Air secundarily passes it self. So far
it is from what is ulgarly said, viz. That the Air, or Flatus's first heaped
together there, are the Cause of the Distension. In our Sick Person the Blood
growing hot, and soon being full of an adust and malignant matter, presently,
it being incapable of being subdued, and separated by Sweat, endeavored to fix
it in the Brain; the first discharge of that Matter on the Head, by reason of
the Animal Spirits being half overwhelmed, brought the Sense of the Heads being
very much increast in bulk; which happens after the like manner, as when the
Foot, being seized with a Stupor, seems to be felt much greater than it self:
now that after some ease, by slumbering, and closing the Eyes, the Affect
returned anew, the Reason is, because Watching, and the stirring of the Senses,
in some sort shake off and remove from them the Matter besetting the Brain and
Nerves; which nevertheless, being seated near, and in a Readiness, Sleep
stealing on, is as it were imbibed by them, and thoroughly enters their Bodies
together with the nutritive Juice. Now the Blood, tho it had copiously
discharged the Recrements on the Brain, yet it became not free it self; but
being still full of an impure Load, fell as it were upon a critical
Efflorescence, and with a Shivering, followed by a Heat and a Sweat (as is
usual in a great Excretion) it tried again and again to shake off its Burden;
tho all it could do by that Effort was, that the Matter sticking to the Brain
got deeper Root in it, and fixing it self in certain Sprouts of the Nerves, it
took away Speech, and Swallowing, and then afterward Sensation; and the Mass of
the Blood being depraved more and more by degrees, at length it became unable
for supporting Life.

A Renowned Woman, Married a little under Twenty, being with Child, and during
the time of her Ingravidation having used but little Diet, and almost no
Exercise, underwent in her Travail Pains and Throws, but with Intermission and
a frequent Respite, for twelve Hours, and brought forth a Son; the Foetus came
away with the Secundine, and all things were well about the Womb. On the first
and second days she was indifferently well, but on the third, after a light
Shivering, she began to complain of a Thirst and a Heat; which a Looseness
followed, so that she had four Stools that day; the Night passed in a manner
without Sleep, the feverish Distemper continued afterward for two days after
the same manner; she daily had three or four Stools, the Lochia as yet flowing
moderately. On the sixth day, when by the Persuasion of Women she had taken
somewhat for moderating her Looseness, the Purgings of the Womb were in a manner
wholly stopped: at which time, the Fever became more intense, and Symptoms
resembling Hysterical arose; for, in the Praecordia she had great and frequent
Oppressions, and had a sense of Choking in the Throat. On the seventh day,
there was a more intense Heat, and a difficult and more painful Breathing; and
then by a Physician's Order, at that time first called, three ounces of Blood
were drawn from the Foor, after which, for four Hours, she was better; for a
quiet Sleep, with a copious Sweat, ensued, the Lochia, tho in a small quantity,
appeared again: in the Evening all things grew worse, the Strength being very
much resolved, the Pulse became weaker, and uneven; she complained also of a
Noise and a ringing of the Ears, with a Plenitude of the Head, moreover she had
Leapings of the Tendons in her Wrists, also sudden Convulsions of the whole
Body, and still the Looseness troubled her. To this Person Cordials and other
Remedies and kinds of Administrations diligently used by the Prescripts of many
Physicians, did not the least good; the pulse growing weaker, and the Strength
decreasing by degrees, on the ninth day after Delivery she died.

This Fever depended very much on the vicious Disposition of the Body, as on
the procatarctick Cause; for I have often observed, that it falls out ill with
Women in Childbed, who when they are with Child, unwholsomly seed on fruits
and any sorts of food, and living without Motion and Exercise, indulge
themselves only to Idleness and Rest: the Blood, by reason of the previous
Cachexia, without any evident Occasion, fell a burning as it were of its own
accord; now whilst it boiled, deposing its Recrements and Impurities still
inward, it brought the Looseness: nor did its Mass become more pure from that
almost continued Excretion, but its Mixture or Crasis being still more
depraved, at length the Blood fell wholly from its genuine Nature, and became
incapable of fermenting in the Heart: the Looseness naturally hap'ning was ill
stopped, especially by the use of AsTringents; for I have often observed, that
these things are not attempted without danger: for a Looseness has cured some
that were ill, and in that Lady, and in many others (as we have sufficiently
found by Experience) tho it did not take away the Fever, yet it freed them from
the more severe Afects of the Brain and Genus Nervosum; whence this Diseased
was wholly without a Delirium, nor was she seized with convulsive Motions, till
she was brought almost to the last.

A worthy Matron about thirty six Years of Age, going with Child the
seventeenth time, was very sad, and perplexed with Thoughts that she should dye
in Childbed upon her Delivery: but (as it pleased God) she was very well
delivered of a Son, and was cheerful for three days after. On the fourth day,
having eaten more of a Chicken than she ought, a little before Night she fell
into a feverish Distemper, with a Vomiting, and the Lochia were stopped: all the
night she lay without Sleep and restless; the next Morning, within an Hours
space she had four Stools, and seemed to be relieved; about Noon (at which time
I came) she complained again of a Heat and a Drought, also of a Palpitation of
the Heart, and of the Ascent of a certain heavy thing in her Throat; the Pulse
was quick and small, the Urine was ruddy, the Lochia scarce appeared. I ordered
that Cordial Juleps, and things moving a Uterine Purgation, should be given to
this Person; moreover, That Fomentations should be applied to the lower part of
the Belly, also that the Legs and Feet should be often rubbed with warm
Clothes: at the time for Sleep, I gave her a Grain of Laudanum, with half a
Scruple of Saffron powdered in a Spoonful of Treacle Water. She slept quietly,
and the Lochia flowed plentifully, afterward, using a thin Diet, and things
gently promoting a uterine Flux for a few days, she perfectly recovered.

A Noble Woman, Young, and Handsome, had a good easy Deliverance of a second
Daughter, and for six days being well as to the Lochia and other Accidents, she
was wholly free from the Suspicion of any Distemper; she daily are Flesh, and
being taken forth of Bed she lived cheerfully in her chamber. On the seventh
day, without a manifest Cause, she had a Shivering, with a Fever, and the
Lochia were lessened, tho not suppressed. To the tenth day after her Delivery,
being only gently feverish, and the Purgings of the Womb still flowing, she
lived free from any severe Symptom; but then, tho very feverish, she seemed
more cheerful than usual, and more confident of her doing well; in the night
she slept little or scarce at all; the morning following (at which time I first
visited her) she was manifestly delirous, the Lochia were stopped, and the whole
Body was in a Shivering, the Tendons in the Wrists were convulsed, so that her
Pulse was scarce to be distinguished; which in the mean while was weak, uneven,
and very quick. I declared, That this Person, unless the Hand of God
unexpectedly delivered her, must dye in a short time; however, six Grains of
Oriental Bezoar being given in a Spoonful of a Cordial Julep, and causing a
copious Sweat with a better Pulse, and afterward other Cordials given at due
Intervals, gave some hope of doing well, tho doubtful, and not to be relied on.
After four Hours after I came, being in a languishing Condition, she had a very
large Stool, then presently her Strength wholly fell, and within an hour and a
half she died.

A Woman of Quality, scarce exceeding twenty Years of Age, of a florid
Countenance, and a thin Body, the Lochia flowing immoderately after
Childbirth, used certain astringent Remedies by the Advice of the Attendants,
whereby they were wholly stopped: but a Looseness followed; which increasing for
three days, the Women gave her other Remedies to stop the Looseness, nor were
they frustrated of Success; mean while they brought a dangerous Fever, and
Affects as it were hysterical in the place of the former; for the unfortunate
Woman in Childbed was affected with a Thirst, and a Heat, with Watchings,
afterward with a frequent Swooning, and cold Sweats. Being called at this time,
I ordered Cordial Remedies, and things to promote uterine Purgations to be
drank, and likewise a Clyster to be injected; the Looseness of the Belly being
again procured, the Lochia also came down, and the Diseased being freed from
the foresaid Symptoms, and the more severe Disease, viz. the Nurses Remedies,
soon recovered from her Fever.

Here let it be observed by the By, that it is very dangerous either to stop, or
to alter, or to thwart any Motion raised by Nature, tho anomalous.

A Woman of Note, about twenty years of Age, of a full and well-flesh'd Habit
of Body, aborted twice within a Years space; when afterward she had conceived
with Child, by her Physician's Order, once a Month drinking plentifully of
Whey, she raised a Vomiting, whereby she was wont to cast up a great deal of
thick and clammy Phlegm; also during the time of her being with Child she was
let Bood five times. The time of Childbearing being over, she brought forth a
Boy with great Difficulty: the Secundine came away entirely, and she purged
egregiously. On the second day, as she raised her self on her Feet in her Bed,
that the Clothes might be put in order, she took Cold; and thenceforward the
bloody Lochia were wholly stopped, and only a little serous Water flowed forth.
On the third day she began to complain of an acute Pain in the right-side; the
Women present applied to it Bags of Camomile made warm with Bricks:
nevertheless, the Affect was very much increast with a bloody Spittle. On the
fourth day after Delivery a most acute Pain, with a most difficult and very
painful Breathing, seized her. By the Order of a Physician then coming from the
Neighborhood, six ounces of Blood were drawn from the Basilica, and she
suddenly found Relief, and was better for ten Hours. At Midnight a pricking
Pain returned with the wonted fierceness: at other Physicians being called to
consult, they all concluded that it was necessary to bleed again in the Arm of
the Side affected. Blood being drawn to four ounces, the Pain remitted, and the
Diseased breathed better: afterward Diaphoreticks being given, she fell into a
copious Sweat, with a quiet Sleep; but the Pulse became more quick and weaker:
also Contractions of the Tendons appeared in the Wrists. Presently afterward
she talked lightheaded, and within twenty four Hours after Blood was drawn the
last time, she died.

That this Lady, upon the Lochia being suppressed, together with a Fever, fell
into a pleurisy, the Cause in some measure seems to be the Bleeding so often
used during the time of her going with Child; for by this means the Blood,
accustomed to be breathed by the Arm, afterward fermenting, leaving the Womb,
ran toward the wonted way of being let forth; where not finding a Passage, it
fixed it self in the neighboring side as in the next seat of Extravasation.
Moreover, besides the usual state of a Pleurisy, no small Malignity was added
to this Disease; for the Blood being freed from Extravasation, presently began
to be corrupted in its Crasis, and on the third Day of the Fever was so far
depraved, that it was not able to ferment longer in the Heart, and so to
continue Life.

Not long since, the Wife of a certain Smith was brought to Bed at the time
that her Children were sick of the Small Pox in the same House, and her self,
as it seems, took the Contagion of the Disease; for, on the second day after
Delivery Pushes began to break forth with a feverish Incalescence, and a Pain
in the Loins; which for three days, the Lochia flowing moderately, rise up as
they ought to good Wheals; and tho a uterine Purgation happened copiously at
this time, she had the Small Pox very thick in her whole Body; nor were they
only on the Surface of the Skin, but they likewise so filled the Cavity of the
Mouth and Throat, that she was scarce able to speak or to swallow. On the sixth
day, after being delivered, the Lochia flowed immoderately, whereby presently
the Small Pox falling, a Swooning, frequent Convulsions, and other Symptoms of
an ill nature, assailed the Diseased, which threatened Death in a short time.
Being called, I prescribed half a dram of this Powder to be taken constantly
every three Hours in a Spoonful of the following Julep; viz.

Take Roots of Tormentil powdered two drams, the best Bole-armoniack one dram,
Species of Hyacynth half a dram, make a Powder.

Take Water of Scordium compound, of Dragonwort, of Meadow sweet, of each three
ounces, Acetum Theriacale an ounce, Syrup of Corals two ounces, burnt
Hartshorn half a dram, make a Julep.

Moreover, I ordered that in her Broth, and in all things she drank, the Roots
of Tormentil should be boiled; by these Remedies the uterine Purgation was
wholly stopped, and the Small Pox without any severe Symptom, being ripened by
degrees, fell away.

This Case was really difficult, and was managed with a great deal of Danger;
viz It was dangerous either for the Lochia or Small Pox to be kept in, and
nevertheless, the full Eruption of either hindered the Motion of the other: as
long as both proceeded moderately, the Busmess being left to the Guidance of
Nature, went on indifferently well; but when the one prevailing, the Assistance
of Art was required, it was necessary to check the Lochia, and to put forward
the Small Pox.

CHAP. XVI. Of Epidemick Fevers.
I Had designed to have put an end here to our Dissertation concering Fevers,
it being my Intent rather to write a Commentary than an entire Tract: but in
regard certain Epidemick Fevers are often rise, which observe no Laws, nor can
be reduced to a certain Rule of Doctrine; but being wholly anomalous, vary
yearly, and therefore, as often as some one of them spreads it self, presently
it is called the New Disease: therefore I have thought it necessary, because
general Precepts are not to be given concerning these Fevers, to subjoyn
particular Relations of some of this kind: for from the various Apparatus of
Symptoms whereby they are wont to be marked, the Nature, and the whole formal
Reason of these kinds of Affects, will somewhat appear. Since therefore of late
Years, within a little Tract of Time, three Popular Diseases have reigned in
these Countries, I shall give here, as a conclusion to this Work, the
particular Descriptions of them made formerly in the Tiems that those Fevers
reigned.

A Description of an Epidemick Fever Reigning in Autumn, Anno 1657. made in the
middle of September.
WE, designing a Description of a Fever violently reigning at this time, it is
fit, that being led by the Example of Hippocrates, we first consider the
foregoing Constitution of the Year, and its Distemperatures, and Excesses of
the Qualities; for the Cause of an Epidemick Disease, raised generally among
People, must be common. We must note what the State of the Year was, and the
Disposition of our Body thence contracted, whereby many were affected together.
Now to take the thing stom its Origin, The foregoing Spring, and the Time
thenceforward to the end of the Summer, to wit, all this half years space was
mighty hot and dry: but especially after the Summer Solstice the Heats were so
intense for many Weeks together, that Night and Day every one complained of the
Heat of the Air, and almost of a continual Sweat wherewith they were all
bedewed; and that they could not breath freely. About the end of July, this
Fever being first sporadical, began to break forth in certain Places, that one
happily, or two, in a Town, or Village, were seized with it: in most it carried
the Type of an intermittent Tertian, to wit, the Fits returned every other Day;
which nevertheless, without any fore-running Cold or Shivering, infested the
Diseased with a most intense Heat; Vomitings and bilous Stools happened
plentifully in most, a Sweat succeeding, but difficult, and often interrupted,
whereby the feverish Access seldom went off with an Apvrexia: but all the time
of Intermission the Diseased continued languid and weak, with a Thirst, and a
Restlessness; in some, when they began to amend, after three or four Fits, a
cold and a Shivering began the Access, and the Fever became exactly an
intermittent Tertian; but in most the Disease still grew worse, and presently
became obstinate, and of a difficult Solution, with an ill Apparatus of
Symptoms; for the Diseased being mighty hot in their Fits, and sweating with
Difficulty, Errors were wont to be committed, which daily intended the Strength
of the Disease: for through the Impatience of the Diseased, and the
Unskilfullness of the Attendants, the Sweat, which ought to have ended the
feverish Access, being interrupted, scarce one Fit was ended, but another
presently succeeded, and thereby the Disease was wont to have erring and
uncertain Periods, without an Intercession of an Apyrexia, and afterward it was
wont to pass into a continual Fever as it were; the State whereof was sometimes
very dangerous, with an ill Affect of the Brain, and Genus Nervosum, that not
unfrequently a Lethargy or Delirium, and often Cramps and convulsive Motions
were raised. In the Month of August this Fever began to reign far and near
among the People, that in every Part and Village, many lay ill of it; tho it
was far more common in the country and little Villages, than in the Confines of
Cities and Towns. It still carried the Type of an intermittent Fever, only that
through the Violence of Symptoms, and the Shortness of Intermission, it seemed
more tedious than ordinary, and therefore was generally called the New Disease.
Moreover, it was censured of some Malignity, and gave Proofs certain enough of
its Contagion and Mortality; in as much as it crept from House to House, and
infected many of the same Family with the same corrupted Taint, and especially
such as conversed familiarly with the Sick: moreover, in many Places it carried
off old Persons, and such as were come to a Ripeness in Years.

If you consider the Nature and Essence of the Affect, this Fever must be
placed properly in the number of Intermittents: for the Fits return at set
times; also for the most part they begin with a Cold and a Shivering, and very
often with a Vomiting, and presently going on with a most intense Heat, at
length they are ended in a Sweat. The Urine in most appears of a Flame Color;
clear in the Fit, with some Hypostasis, out of it thick, with somewhat a ruddy
Sediment: the Disease comes not to a Crisis by a Sweat, tho very plentiful, and
often repeated, which might be expected in a continual Fever: but the Affect
holds on for many Days, and sometimes Months, to a very long time, tho there
happens a very great Evacuation by Vomiting, and Sweating almost daily; which
we observe to fall out often in an Intermittent Fever, seldom in a continual:
out of the Fit, at any time of the Disease, Purging is conveniently ordered,
which it were a Crime to attempt in a Synochus before the Signs of Concoction.
Moreover, that this Fever is of the kind of Intermittents, it hence appears,
because most recover of it, that scarce the thousandth part of the Diseased
dies; which I think is scarce heard of an Epidemick Synochus. About the first
beginnings of this Disease, it appears very like an Intermittent Tertian, tho
it may seem in some, by reason of a vicious Predisposition of the Body, and of
Errors committed in Diet, and Transpiration, to have passed into a continual:
for in those in whom the Fits do not come to a due Determination, nor end in an
Apyrexia, by reason of the morbifick Matter being not perfectly blown off, in
those the Blood continually boyls; whence it comes to pass, that the Accesses
return quicker, and infest longer; till at length, by reason of the store of
the Matter, and the languishing of Nature, the Blood becoming weak, is not able
to grow turgid any longer, and to separate the Febrile Matter at set Hours, but
endeavors to subdue it by little and little, and by a continual Effervescence.

Some happily may wholly place the Cause of this so Popular a Disease in a
malignant Constitution of the Air, to wit, that the Particles of the Air
breathed in were infected with a certain extraneous Miasm, the Corpuscles of
which Miasm being inwardly admitted, fermented with the Blood and Humors, and
so caused this Fever in a great many with the same Appearance of Symptoms. But
I do not think that this Fever arose from a certain Contagion communicated from
the Air, and immediately fixing the Taint in Men, but rather from a certain
febrile Diathesis or Predisposition communicated to our Bodies by degrees
before, through the Distemperature of the Year; which at length having gotten a
Maturity, is brought into Act on a light occasion; and it cannot be said so
much to burst forth into this Fever, as to grow into it.

For when about the Beginning of July the Air waxed immoderately hot, through a
most intense Scorching for many days, it easily altered our Blood, toward a
hot and bilous Distemperature; to wit, because (as in Wine fermenting more than
it ought) the sweet and spirituous Part is very much spent, mean while the
saline and sulphurous is too much exalted, that thereby the Liquor readily
contracts a Mustiness or a Sharpness: now we have seen elsewhere, that this
kind of Diathesis of the Blood, whereby from a sweet and spirituous
Temperament, by reason of its too great Scorching, it inclines to a bilous, is
very apt for Intermittent Fevers. Hence the nutritive Juice, which is
continually conveyed into the Mass of Blood, is not duly concocted, nor
assimilated into Blood, but is perverted into an extraneous, as it were, and
fermentative Matter; which arising to a Fullness within the Blood, and growing
turgid at set Periods, according to its Increases, brings the Fits of an
Intermittent Fever. Since therefore from the scorching Heat of this Summer, the
Blood almost of all Men growing hotter than it ought, was very much parched,
it is no Wonder if thereby it contracted a very great Aptness to Intermittent
Fevers: but why this Disease grew not rife during the great Heat, but rather
afterward, the Reason is, because this Indisposition is not imprinted in our
Blood at one bout, but by degrees, and not till after a long time; and
therefore the Fruit, as it were, of the Disease after the foregoing Heat of the
Summer, were chiefly brought to a Ripeness in Autumn. All do not equally
contract this Aptness or Disposition to a Fever; those whose Blood being hot by
Nature most abound with Sulphur, and thereby is sooner parched, and those who
being given to Labors or staying much in the Sun, endured most of the Summer
Heat, by reason of their Blood being more egregiously scorched, easily fell
into this Disease: wherefore it first reigned among the Husbandmen, and chiefly
in the Country: of those who had acquired an Aptness to this Fever from their
Blood being scorched, happily some fell into it naturally, the feverish Diathesis
being raised by degrees to a Maturity, others by reason of a light Occasion, or
an evident Cause, which is otherwise wont to raise a feverish Effervescence, as
upon taking Cold, Surfeiting, drinking Wine, and the like; and others fell sick
by reason of a Contagion received from others; for Effluvia constantly flow
from the Sick, which when they light on Bodies predisposed to the like Affect,
readily raise into Act the latent Powers.

That the Conjunct Cause of this Disease, and its formal Reason may be known,
you must call to Mind what is said elsewhere concerning the Nature of
Intermittent Fevers; to wit, we suppose that the Basis, as it were, of this
Affect, is a burnt and bilous Constitution of the Blood; by reason of which,
the nutritive Juice, daily supplied as it were by Measure, is not duly
concocted, but through its being scorched turns into a fermentative Matter, and
not miscible with the Blood. When the Blood is saturated with this Matter to a
Fullness, (which happens at set Intervals of Times, because the nutritive Juice
is supplied in a set Measure as it were) it naturally falls into a Turgescency,
and the Effervescency raised for the Expulsion of this Matter, brings the
feverish Fit; which lasts so long, till this febrile Matter, kindled in the
Heart, and as it were burnt, is wholly blown off with the Sweat.

From these things premitted, it is plain, that there are some things which in
this Affect, whereof we treat, happen after a peculiar manner from the common
kind of Intermittents, and therefore it is not unfitly called by the Name of a
new Fever; such as are, first, that about the beginnings of the Disease, the
Fits begin without a Cold or a Shivering, but long afflict the Diseased with a
Vomiting, a Thirst, and a most intense Heat, to which a Swear for the most part
with difficulty, and partial, and often interrupted, ensues, whereby the Access
is not ended but in a long time: the reason of which eught to be solely placed
in the very bilous and excessively parched Disposition of the Blood; for, this
proceeding from the prevailing Sulphur, wholly hinders the wonted Sourness of
the Blood, which follows its Turgescency, and is wont to raise the Shivering or
Cold; and by reason of this kind of Temperature of the Blood, scorching too
much and as it were burning the nutritive Juice, the Blood growing turgid
together with that Juice, and stirred to motion, is kindled more than usually
in the Heart, and by its Deflagration, it causes a most intense Heat with a
Drought, which are most tedious to the Diseased. Bilous Vomitings happen not
only at the Beginning, but even in the middle of the Fit, by reason of the
Redundancy of the Choler wherewith the Vasa Coledocha, being oftentimes too
much filled, they pour it into the Intestines; which afterward, a Contraction
being raised in the Viscera, is easily sent into the Stomach: the Sweat follows
with difficulty, because the Choler abounds more than the Serum; wherefore the
burnt Febrile Matter is not easily separated by a Sweat, but, either being mixed
with the Blood, brings a long continued Effervescence, or being conveyed
toward the Intestines, produces a Vomiting or a Looseness. Secondly, this Fever
differs from a vulgar Intermittent, because, after a Fit ended, there is not
given a full Intermission, so far as an Apyrexia, but the Diseased continue
still languid and dry, being ill disposed as to their Appetite, Sleep, and
other Accidents: which really happens, because by the intense Heat of the
Fever, more of the Blood and febrile Matter is kindled, than that the
Recrements remaining after its Deflagration can be soon blown often, especially
because a Sweat, by reason of the Drought of the Matter, with great difficulty
ensues; nor is the febrile Matter, to be voided forth, sufficiently diluted
with a Serous Latex: wherefore, the Blood being not perfectly freed from its
Contagion at the time of the Fit, ferments still, nor the Access being ended,
has it a full Truce from the Disease. Mean while that the Blood is pressed
after this manner with an almost continual Effervescence, it differs from a
Synochus: because in this the sulphurous Part of the Blood being too much
exalted, is inflamed as it were, and makes the Fever by its Deflagration: but
the continual Ebullition which happens to this Intermittent Fever, depends
wholly on the Confusion of the Matter not miscible, and the difficult Secretion
of it from the Blood. A Synochus happens as Wine naturally fermenting by reason
of its Richness; the other like the same Wine when it falls a working by reason
of some haeterogeneous thing mixed with it: wherefore we observe, that when our
Fever has passed into a continual, yet it comes not to a Determination, neither
by a Sweat, nor by a Looseness, tho happening in a plentiful manner and
frequently, because depending on the Blood depauperated, rather than being
inflamed, it continues a very long time, and disposes the Diseased toward a
Cachexia.

The third way of difference, wherein this Fever differs from the common Rank
of Intermittents, is placed in this, that it is oftentimes readily propagated
by Contagion into others; the reason of which is, because here a great many
Bodies are predispos'd after the same manner to the same Affect; which at
another time does not happen: wherefore the mere Effluvia from a morbid Body
are able to stir up the like Affect in a Subject easily capable; even as
certain Rays of a Flame kindle a Flame in a Matter which is very combustible:
mean while, all do not contract the taint of this Fever alike; but some not
prepared for it converse with the Diseased without hurt.

There is another Symptom which does not constantly attend this Fever, but only
happening in some Places, which distinguishes it not only from a common Fever,
but changes its own proper Type, to wit, it sometimes happens that dyssenterick
Affects accompany this Disease; in some bilous Vomitings and Seiges are very
troublesome, as in the choleric Disease, and in others bloody Stools happen
with a violent Pain and Gripes of the Belly. I have often observed the former
in this our Neighborhood; and the reason of it may be deduced from a mighty
bilous Temperature; for by reason of this, the adust Matter, not to be blown
off by Sweat, is copiously separated in the Liver: afterward by reason of the
Vasa Choledocha being over-fill'd, it is sent to the Ventricle and Intestines:
the other Affect of the Dysentery is found only in some Places, and there being
sporadical rather than common, it has seized only some sick Persons. The
Origin of it can be ascribed only to the peculiar Crasis or vicious
Predispositions of some Bodies, also to the Scituations of Places, or the
nature of the Air. Moreover, it may be suspected that the Disease is now and
then conveyed to others, not without the Communication of a certain Miasm.

Concerning this Disease, there ought to be a double Prognostic; first of the
Fever it self, in general, what kind of end it will have, and when; what it
does threaten to our Land; whether it be not a Forerunner of the Plague, or
Pestilential Diseases, (as it is vulgarly feared.) Secondly, We ought to give
the Signs by which we are wont to presage a Well-doing or Danger in the various
Cases of the Diseased.

As to the first, because we have shown that the Origin of this Affect is not
to be taken from the Air infected with a Contagion, or venomous Miasm, nor from
a malignant Seminium of Vapors diffused through the Air; but only from a
mighty bilous Temperature or Diathesis of our Bodies, with a Blood which is
adust and mightily scorched by reason of the Summer Heats: I think there is no
cause of Fear here, whereby we may dread that this Fever, being raised to a
worse state through the fault of the Air, may grow at length to be Malignant or
Pestilential; but rather (what the Change of the Season of the Year, and the
Alteration of our Blood may make us expect) we ought to fear lest this Fever,
which at first imitates the Type of a Tertian, may pass into a Quartan: which I
observe has already happened to some; and think it is greatly to be feared,
lest hereafter, Autumn drawing to an end, it may happen in many.

As to the particular Prognostic, the Signs which happen in the course of this
Fever most remarkable, and which in some manner foretell its Issue and Event,
are these: If the Disease happens in a sound Body, well-tempered, and easily
perspirable, if a Vomiting with a well-bearing ensues, and the Belly be loose;
if the Fit begins with a light Shivering, and after a moderate Heat ends in a
Sweat, and the Interval of it be with an Apyrexia, or a well-bearing; if the
Pulse be strong, the Urine of a flame color, clear, with a laudable
Hypostasis, we predict that the Disease will end in a short time without
danger: but if this Fever be raised in a fat Body, and of a vicious Habit; if
with a troublesome Vomiting, an exorbitant Heat, and an intolerable Thirst,
long torment the Diseased; if the Heat be succeeded by a difficult, partial,
often interrupted Sweat, and interlac'd with frequent Vomitings, and does not
end in an Apyrexia, we declare this Disease to be long, and liable to Danger:
but if the Diseased holds his Strength, and the Urine shows signs of
Concoction, we do not despair of welldoing; especially if after four or five
Returns, the Disease, as it is usual, remits of its wonted fierceness. Thirdly,
we observe, if this Disease happens in a Body which is cold, or broken with
other Diseases, or weakened; if besides horrible Vomitings, and a violent Heat,
a frequent Fainting, Swoonings, Deliriums, or Lethargick Affects happen; if
after many Accesses, the Strength of the Diseased falling, the Disease remits
nothing, but a continual Effervescence troubles the Blood, and very much
dissipates the vital Spirits; if a dejected Appetite, obstinate Watchings,
convulsive Motions, with a weak Pulse, a troubled or thick Urine happen, we
declare the Case to be full of Danger: but it is protracted to a good length,
and it gives Time and Occasions for Nature to recollect her self, and to the
Physician for giving Remedies.

The Therapeutick Indications which have place in the Cure of this Fever, are
chiefly four. First, that the Blood being become burnt, and too bilous, be
reduced to its due temper. Secondly, that the depravation of the Nutritive
Juice, and its alteration into a fermentative matter, be stopped, or at
leastwise, be lessened. Thirdly, that about the declination of the Disease the
Blood being depauperated by a frequent Deflagration, and rendered impure by the
mixture of the morbifick or adust matter be restored, and be rendered volatile
as it ought. Fourthly, that we obviate with Remedies the Symptoms which are
chiefly infesting in the Course of the Disease. To answer these Intentions, I
advise the following Method to be used.

About the first beginnings of the Disease, if a bilous Humor flowing from the
Vasa Choledocha, and sent into the Ventricle, the Diseased be inclined to
Vomit, when the Fit is at hand let a plentiful Evacuation of the same be raised
by a gentle Emetick: Blooding and Purging ought not to be used but during the
Interval of Fits; for while the Blood violently ferments, or is resolved into a
Sweat, Nature ought not to be diverted from its Works begun, nor its Attempts
be disturbed by the Prescripts of Physicians; wherefore after the Access is
over, and the Sweat entirely ended, let a Purging be ordered by a gentle
Cathartick, and let the same afterward be sometimes repeated on the like
occasion: for by this Method, not only the store of the excrementitious Matter
is withdrawn from the first Passages, but especially the Choler-Vessels being
emptied, the Bile is plentifully drawn from the Mass of Blood, and thereby the
Blood is restored toward its natural Crasis. Let Blooding, if it be indicated,
be put in Practice, from the beginning; for so its Liquor growing too turgid,
is eventilated, whereby it both less perverts the nutritive Juice, and when the
Fit presses, it burns with a more mild Blast together with the morbifick
Matter: but otherwise, if after a long Sickness a Vein be opened, when the
Blood being depauperated and rendered watery, has heaped together more of
morbifick Matter, and does not duly concoct it, and purge it forth, much is
drawn from the Strength of Nature, from the Power of the Disease nothing. In
the Interval of the Accesses, when Blooding nor Purging may not be admitted,
let the Belly be kept soluble by a constant use of Clysters; also let digestive
Remedies of acetous or saline Liquors and Powders be given, such as Cream of
Tartar, the fixed Salts of Herbs, Tartar Vitriolate, burnt Hartshorn, Spirit of
Vitriol and of Salt, etc. for these restore the Ferments of the Viscera lost or
grown sluggish, depurate the Blood by fusing it; also separate, and as it were,
precipitate the morbifick Matter: also at this time, if obstinate Watchings
chance to prove infesting, and impair the Strength of the Diseased, we may
interlace Anodyne and gently Narcotick Remedies, but by no means give them in
the Access, for then they greatly hinder the subduing, and secretion of the
febrile Matter, and prolong the Fit which would sooner end.

So far concerning what is to be done in the Intervals of the Fits; but in the
Fit, tho the Diseased then chiefly send for and call upon Physicians, yet their
Prescripts at this time are limited within a narrow Scope: if a Vomiting (tho
an Emetick be given before) be still infesting, let it be freely promoted by
Posset Drink, either simple, or with bitter Herbs boiled in it; but let the
chief way of the Cure be in qualifying the Heat and Drought, which are wont to
torture severely the Diseased in this Fever; for whilst the Blood, fermenting
with the morbifick Matter, and being kindled in the Heart, springs into the
Lungs, it raises there a most violent Inflammation, which requires a pouring on
of cold Water as it were for extinguishing a Flame: wherefore they desire to be
pouring in Drink without measure; without which the Diseased faint through the
too much burning, and in a manner all their Blood, being rarefied as it were
into a Flame and a Smoke, does not easily continue the thread of Circulation;
wherefore, Drink by all means ought to be granted to those that are in the
Fever: which nevertheless, if it be poured in in too great a quantity, first it
exagitates more the boiling Blood, and again brings a Confusion of the febrile
Matter began to be separated, that thereby the Work of subduing and Secretion
is longer protracted, and the Fit is made longer; moreover, a great pouring in
of Drink proves offensive to the Stomach, and by troubling it, and often by
raising a Vomit, hinders Transpiration, and calls in a Sweat breaking forth, or
happily already broken forth: wherefore, when the Heat of the Fever is first
kindled, let the Diseased, tho very dry, drink only by sipping, and, what they
may, let them refrain it; afterward when the burnt and subdued Matter begins to
be sent off by Sweat, let them more freely gratify themselves with it; for so
the Sweating is greatly promoted, and the Fit is sooner over: as to the nature
of the Drink, sometimes let Posset Drink, sometimes small Ale, or Barley Water
be given; sometimes Fountain Water, either alone, or sharpened a little with
the Juice of Limons: in this case, the use of Sal Prunella is justly commended,
given in any Liquor; for this, by its Nitrosity, wonderfully restrains the
boiling Blood, and powerfully moves Sweat. I have often observed in the middle
of the Fit, that the Diseased have fallen into a Fainting or a Swoon, where the
Cordials and hot Liquors, which are wont presently to be poured in, very much
increase the Violence of the Fever, and cause greater Troubles than usual, that
the Fit is more difficultly ended: but these Swoonings, for the most part,
happen either from the bilous Humor sent into the Ventricle, or by reason of a
Sweat broken off abruptly, and against these I have always found the most
present Remedy; that either a Feather being put in the Throat, a Vomit be
promoted, or that a thin Liquor being drank in a plentiful Measure, the Sweat
be again raised: and in the whole Course of this Fever, I am wont to give no
Cordials or Alexipharmicks.

A Diet in this Fever only thin, and not rich, ought to be ordered: let all
Food prepared of the Flesh of Animals be wholly shunned; for these abounding
with Sulphur, plentifully afford a Fuel to the boiling or kindled Blood, as Oil
poured on a Flame: moreover, let nothing spirituous, as hot Waters, strong Ale,
or Wine, be allowed; but let Oat or Barley Decoctions or Broths, altered with
cooling Herbs, be chiefly used; also let Posset Drink, small Ale, or Whey, be
drank by the Diseased at Pleasure: for since by this Means a very thin and
watery nutritive Juice is conveyed to the Mass of Blood, the resolved Particles
of the Sulphur are burnt off sooner, and with less Tumult; also the Recrements
of the adust Matter are more readily sent forth from the Mass of Blood: but if
on the contrary, a rich and plentiful Nourishment be used, the Effervescence of
the Blood is thereby much increased, and the Blood is more infected with the
Mixture of an adust Matter.

When after frequent Fits, the Blood being much burnt off, and the Fever, being
in its declining State, has remitted of its Fervor and Fierceness, Care must
be taken, that the Diseased, while upon their Recovery, do not fall into a
Cachexia, or Scorbutic Affect; for the Crasis of the Viscera being injured,
and the Blood being very much depauperated, the nutritive Juice, tho it be not
scorched as before, yet is not duly concocted, and maturated into a perfect
Blood: but through defect of a Pneumatosis, serous Excrements, imbued with a
fixed Salt, are very much heaped together; and sometimes being fixed in the
Viscera, sometimes in the extreme Parts, bring forth various Affects. Wherefore
in a long continued languor of the Diseased, or otherwise, in order to a
quicker Recovery, let Remedies be given which volatize the Blood, and either
hinder the Stuffings of the Viscera, or remove them being made, and restore
their Ferments being almost extinct; for this Use chiefly conduce the Remedies
and Preparations, which are vulgarly called Digestives and Antiscorbuticks; by
which being seasonably administered, I have known many weak, pale, and bloodless
Persons as it were, to have soon recovered a sprightly Strength and Vigor.

A Description, made the last Day of May, of a Catarrhous Epidemick Fever
happening in the middle of the Spring, An. 1658.
AN immoderate Heat of the Summer before was followed in the Winter with a
Frost equally intense, so that no Man living has scarce remembered a year like
this for an Excess both of Heat and Cold. From the fifth of December almost to
the Vernal Equinox, the Earth was covered with Snow; and from the North Winds
continually blowing, all things, set in the open Air, waxed stiff with Cold:
and afterward, from the beginning of the Spring almost to the first day of
June, the same Wind still blowing, the Season was more like Winter than Spring,
only that sometimes happily it was interlac'd with a day or two of hot Weather.
During the Winter, amongst our People here (save that the Quartan Ague
contracted in the Autumn infested some) the State was indifferently healthful,
free from any popular Disease. In the beginning of the Spring an intermittent
Tertian Fever (as it is usual in every other year) seized some. About the end of
April, on a sudden an Affect showed it self, which being sent as it were by a
certain Blast from the Stars, seized a great many; that in some certain Towns,
in a Weeks space, above a thousand Men lay ill at once. The Pathognomick
Symptom of this Disease, which first seized the Diseased, was a troublesome
Cough, with a copious Spitting, and a Catarrh falling on the Palate, Throat,
and Nostrils; there is also a feverish Distemperature, which for the most part
is joined with a Heat and a Drought, a want of Appetite, a spontaneous
Lassitude, and a great Pain in the Back and Loins: which Fever nevertheless in
some was more remiss, that they walked abroad, and during all the time of their
Sickness followed the usual Offices of Life, complaining in the mean time of a
want of Strength and a Weakness, of a loathing of food, of a Cough and a
Catarrh. Now in some a hot Distemperature very much reigned, that being
confined to their Bed, they were troubled with a Burning and a mighty Drought,
with Watchings, a Hoarseness, and an almost continual Cough; sometimes a
Bleeding at Nose, in some a Spitting Blood, and often bloody Stools, happened
upon this Affect. Those who being of an infirm Body, and stricken in Years,
were seized with this Disease, many of them died; but in a manner all of those
that were strong and of a sound Constitution recovered: those who yielding to
this Disease perished, they died for the most part by reason of their Strength
being wasted by Degrees, and a Mass of serous Filth being heaped together in
the Breast, with the Fevers being increased, and a difficult Breathing, like
Persons troubled with a Hectic Fever. Concerning this Disease, we must enquire
what kind of Procatarctick Cause it had, that it should rise on a sudden in the
Spring, and that within a Months time almost the third Part of Mankind should
be affected with it. Afterward, the Signs and Symptoms being diligently
compared together, the formal Reason of this Disease, also the ways of its
Crisis and Cure, ought to be assigned.

That the North Wind is most apt for producing Catarrhs, besides the Testimony
of Historians, common Experience makes good: but why Catarrhs did not spread
themselves so much sporadically during all the Tract of the Winter and Spring,
but that this Affect should reign epidemically only for the space of one Month,
and then joined with a Fever, the reason is not so plain. I know that many draw
the Cause from the uneven Distemperature of the Air, for that Season; which tho
for the most part cold, yet sometimes, the Northwind remitting, for a Day or
two was very hot; wherefore, on this Occasion, as upon taking Cold after being
hot, many Men might fall sick: this kind of evident Cause might suffice happily
for affecting some with this Sickness; but for causing an Affect arising so on
a sudden, and generally reigning, besides such an occasion, a great Procatarxis
or Predisposition was required: for it ought to be supposed, that all Men in a
manner, were ready prepared for receiving this Disease, otherwise no evident
Cause would exercise its force so powerfully on a great many: wherefore it is
likely that this Disease drew its Origin from the Distemperature, and very
great Irregularity of the Year: and as the intermittent Autumnal Fever above
described was the Product of a preceding immoderate Heat, so this catarrhal
Fever wholly depended on the Tract of the Year happening to be too cold; for the
Blood being already burnt from the over-hot Summer, and inclined to the Fever
above described, then Autumn coming on being made more sharp, and apt to a
Quartan Fever, afterward by reason of the intense Cold of the Winter being
little eventilated, and hindered from its due Perspiration, it held still a
Dyscrasie, and was ready to suffer by it as occasion might be given. Wherefore,
in regard the Blood in the middle of the Spring (as the Juice of Vegetables)
being become more sprightly, and having begun to spring and display it self, by
reason of its Thickness still continued, was straightened in circulating, it was
prone to feverish Effervescencies; and in regard the Serous Latex abounding in
the Blood, was not able to evaporate forth by reason of the Pores being still
closed with the Cold, restagnating inwardly and falling chiefly on the Lungs
(where somewhat succedaneous is performed to outward Perspiration) it raised so
frequent and troublesome a Cough.

Therefore the Rise and formal Reason of this Disease are chiefly founded in
two things; to wit, that there happened together a greater Effervescence of the
Blood than ordinary, caused by the Spring Season, and withal a Density, or a
great Constriction of the Pores caused by the preceding Tract of Time which
was too cold; that thereby there was not a free space granted the Blood
springing in the Vessels: the Case was the same, as if Wine beginning to
ferment, were put into Vessels close stopped; for by this means both the Vessels
and the Wine are in danger of being destroyed.

Wherefore, to draw the thing in short; that this Disease arising in the middle
of the Spring, presently spreading very far, seized a great many, the cause was
not a blast of a malignant Air, whereby the Diseased were affected as tho
struck by a Sideration, as some will have it, but that at this time the Blood
being inspired by the Constitution of the Spring, and so apt to display it self
and ferment, was straightened in its Motion, and the Efluvia being inwardly
restrained, it could not be enough ventilated. Every years tho temperate, it is
usual in the Spring and Fall for certain Diseases to reign epidemically, to
wit, because at this time, the blood being renewed, displays it self as it were
anew, and therefore intermittent Fevers, and sometimes the Small Pox grow every
where rife at this time; wherefore it is no wonder, after a very uneven
Constitution of the Year, and differing from the natural, when in this Spring
the Blood boiling strongly within the Vessels, by reason of a let
Transpiration, was not able to be circulated freely, and to be enough
eventilated, if thence great Diforders follow, and a very epidemick Affect be
raised from this very general Cause.

As to the Symptoms joined to this Disease, the feverish distemperature and the
things depending of it, the burning of the Praecordia, the Thirst, spontaneous
Lassitude, the great pain in the Head, Loins or Limbs, were caused by the
Bloods boiling too much, and not being enough eventilated. Hence in many the
thinner part of the Blood being heated, and the remaining Liquour being only
troubled, a Synochus simple, or of many days was caused: but in some having a
vicious Diathesis of the Blood, or an ill habit of the Body, this kind of Fever
being arisen through the same cause, soon passed into a very dangerous, and
often mortal putrid.

The Cough accompanying this Fever with the Catarrh, draws its origin from the
serous humor heapt together along time in the Blood, by reason of
Transpiration being let, and afterward an effervescence arrising, distilling
in a great plenty from the little Arteries gaping inwardly: for when the Pores
are constringed, the superfluous Serosities in the Blood, wont to evaporate
outwardly, are poured on the Lungs by a nearer way of purifying the Blood:
Wherefore upon taking cold, (as its vulgarly said) that is upon Transpiration
being outwardly let, a Cough for the most part is raised: and in the
Procatarxis for this affect, a redundancy of Serum in the Mass of Blood had
almost the first Place, for from the long continued cold stopping the burning
of the Blood, or the increase of Cholor, and hindering the Transpiration of the
watery Latex, of necessity a great deal of serous Humor was heapt together in
the Blood; wherefore, when the Blood, displaying it self in the Spring, fell
into an Effervescence, the overflowing of the Serum, and its discharge on the
inward Parts was wont to bring first a Cough, as a proper Symptom of this
Disease: and in whom the Blood, being much diluted by the mixture of Serum,
were very obnoxious to the Cough and rheumatick affect, those came more lightly
off with the Feverish Distemper.

The Prognostic of this affect, as to private Persons, for the most part is
easy, that presently from its first invasion it discovers the event. For if
this Sickness be raised in a robust Body and sound before, and the feverish
Distemperature be moderate, and without any severe and dreadful Symptom, the
Case is free from Danger, and the affect is reputed of so light Moment, that
commonly it is only called a Cold taken, and for the most part neither a
Physician nor Remedies are sought after, unless some that are very common, and
of an easy Preparation are used. But if this Affect happens in a weak and
unhealthy Body, with an ill Apparatus, and either the Fever be raised to a
putrid, or the Cough growing strong, causes a difficult Breathing, and a kind
of consumptive Constitution, the event of the Disease is very much suspected,
and often is terminated in Death. The common Prognostic, which is taken hence
concerning the future state of the Year, contains nothing very much to be
feared, or threatens mighty ill; by reason of the uneven Intemperies of the
Year, as great excesses of Heat, and afterward the Cold, we may fear Diseases
arising from the discrasy of the Blood; but from the present state, we neither
suspect the Air mightily depraved, nor infected with venomous Breaths, that we
may hence ground a Judgment of a Plague, or malignant intermittent Disease.

As to the Method of Cure, when this Disease seises lightly, its cure for the
most part is left to Nature: for this Fever being only a simple Synochus, is
wont to be determined within a few days by a Sweat. Wherefore after a copious
Sweat for the most part about the third or fourth day, the heat and Drought,
the lassitude and great Pains are appeased: then the Cough, protracted longer,
afterward remits by little and little, and at length the Diseased recover by
degrees. If at any time this Disease has taken deeper root, there is need of
fit Remedies and an exact Method of Cure; let the Fever growing strong be cured
according to the Rules to be observed in a putrid, tho with this difference,
that because a let Transpiration, and the discharge of the serous Humor on
the Lungs are chiefly in the fault, therefore let Diaphoreticks, and the
Remedies called Thoraciks be of frequent use; for these restrain the great
flowing of the Serum from the Vessels inward, and either by opening the Pores,
convey it outward, or by precipitating it from the Mass of Blood, send it away
by the urinary Passages: therefore let the Method of cure for this Disease
raised to a worse state, regard both the feverish Distemperature, for curing
which you may direct according to the Intentions used in a putrid Fever: and
the Rheumatick Affect, Which nevertheless must be the second Indicant, and does
not admit any evaporating Remedies indifferently, or such as are usual against
a Cough, but only of that kind, which does not intend the Fever. Let the Forms
of these and the fit times of healing, be taken from the Precepts every where
delivered for the cure of the putrid Fever, and of the Cough: the Aides which
now by a frequent Experience are vulgarly said to have given a chief relief in
this Disease, are a Diaphoresis, or a procuring of a Sweat, and a letting
Blood; for the Vessels being emptied this or that way, both the immoderate
Effervescence of the Blood, and the redundancy of it are moderated.

A Description, made the first day of September, of an Epidemick Fever, arising
about the beginning of Autumn, An. 1658.
THE Vernal Fever even now described, scarce lasted above six Weeks, that it
plainly seemed only a light Effervescence of the Blood, which growing turgid in
the Spring, and withal being straightened in its room for want of Ventilation,
boiled violently like new Wine stopped in Bottles, and afterward ceased of its
own accord: but thenceforward, as the Year did not recover its due Temper, so
neither did our Blood, and so a second fuel was soon heaped together for a new
Fever, for after the Summer Solstice, the North Wind still blowing, the Season
continued cold a long time; so that the Husbandman feared that the Fruits and
standing Corn would scarce be brought to a Maturiy this Year: but after this, a
little before the beginning of August, a most intense heat followed for many
days; and in the Dog Days the Air was mighty parching, that it was very
tedious to be in the open Field. By reason of those Excesses of Heat and Cold,
the Temperature of this Year was very uneven: wherefore of Necessity our Blood
must be sometimes fixed, and as it were congealed, sometimes too much parcht,
and therefore preverted from its natural Crasis, to be burnt, or atrabilarious:
also the Pores of the Skin were very much altered from their due Constitution,
that thereby insensible Transpiration was not performed after its wonted manner.

From the time the foregoing Fever ceased there was a healthy state, and free
from any popular Disease, almost to the end of the Dog-dayes: but afterward, a
few, first in Country Houses and Villages fell sick here and there: but
afterward about the end of the Month of August, a new Fever rising on a sudden,
began to be rife throughout whole Countries, on every side in our
Neighborhood; this, also the other, which reigned the Autumn before, chiefly
raged in Country Villages, and Boroughs; fewer of the Inhabitants of Cities,
and the greater Towns in the mean while falling ill of it. At the same time in
other Countries far remote from hence, nay almost throughout all England, an
Epidemick Fever was said to reign, and in certain other Places a far greater
mortality was talked of, than here with us. Happily the Idea of this Fever now
reigning, and its Apparatus of Symptoms is not in all Places alike in all
things, or is it marked wholly with the same Phenomenon and Accidents, I shall
set down succinctly, and briefly, whatsoever I have learned by my own
Observation, or by the Communication of others, concerning its Nature as it was
in our Neighborhood.

About the first beginnings of this Disease, its Type was erring and very
uncertain; for in some there was a continual Effervescence, in others it was
intermittent, and renewed with set Fits; but in a great many of the Diseased it
happened as a pathognomick Symptom at this time to be ill in the Brain and
Genus Nervosim, that presently from the beginnings of this Fever almost all
complained of their Head being very bad, for some were infested with a violent
Headache, others with a hardness of Hearing, and a ringing in the Ears; but to
most, either a Drowsiness, and a great Sleepiness, with a vertiginous Affect,
or obstinate Watchings, with a Delirium, and Distractions of the Animal
Spirits, were wont to happen. I have observed in some, that on the first or
second Days of being sick, broad and red Spots, like the Measles, broke forth
by little and little in the whole Body, which vanishing in a short time after,
presently the Fever became more intense, and especially the Affects of the Head
far more severe: thenceforward a Drowsiness of the Senses, and a Sleepiness
seized some for many days, that they lay a long time without Speech, or
Knowledge of their Friends, like Persons ready to dye. I have known some to
have been cast hence into a Lethargy, others into an Apoplexy, some to have
fallen into Deliriums and a Frenzy. Many of the younger and stronger of these
Men escaped (tho not without a long continued Weakness and a doubtful Recovery)
mean while, the old Persons, and those who were otherwise weak and sickly, dyed
in all Parts: as for such who lay ill of a continual Fever as it were with
these Marks of Malignity, they were but few, and only in some Houses
sporadically: but the Sickness which, most generally reigning in our
Neighborhood, assailed most, and still severely rages, seems to imitate the
Type of an intermittent Fever; viz. of a Tertian or of a Quotidian: for either
each Day, or (which I have more frequently observed) every other day, the
Diseased have Fits, which with a Cold, a Heat, and a Sweat succeeding in order,
infest them a long time and severely: and these kinds of Accesses, and the
whole course of the Disease, are wont to be marked with a various Concourse of
Symptoms and Accidents, according to the different Age and Temperament of the
Diseased: and this is common to most (I had almost said to all) that fall sick
to be troubled with Cephalic Affects together with this Fever.

When therefore any one is affected with this Disease (whether the Sickness be
raised from an evident Cause or from Contagion, or without a manifest Occasion)
a Pain in the Head, and often in the Loins, with a Drought, a want of Appetite,
a spontaneous Lassitude, and a Heat, tho not intense, discover its coming: if
it happens in a young Body, of a florid Blood, and hot Temperament, about its
Beginnings the Fits are without a Cold, or a Shivering, but they prove very
troublesome with a long and sharp Burning. The Sick are often troubled with a
Vomiting, and for the most part they have a violent Pain in the Head; a Sweat
happens with difficulty, which often being partial, and soon interrupted,
seldom ends the Fit; but when they cease to sweat, they burn again, that the
Access is scarce ended in some within eighteen or thirty four Hours. Mean
while, by the Bloods very much boiling the Fancy is troubled, that often a
Delirium, a talking lightheaded, Watchings, and a great Restlessness, are
raised during the Fit; and the same being ended, during the time of the
Interval, still a troublesome Drought, a remiss Heat, a failing of the
Strength, and a great Weakness of the Spirits, with a Headache and a
vertiginous Affect, molest them: they are scarce to be found, who, as in a
common Tertian, are indifferently well in the Intervals of the Accesses. About
the Beginnings of the Disease, the sharp Fits of the Fever are somewhat more
mild, which afterward grow worse every time by little and little, and at length
begin with a Cold or a Shivering; to which nevertheless after a long and very
troublesome Burning, a Sweat with difficulty succeeds in most, so that the Fit
is seldom ended in a due Temperature. Within six or seven Returns, the Strength
of the Diseased is very much consumed, that being become languishing and weak,
they have a hard Task to strive with the Disease; for unless Nature be aided by
Art, the Fever, still prevails; and seldom or never within a short time is
either solved by a Crisis, or remits by little and little, but brings the
affected by a long Siege to the greatest straits, to wit, persisting so long,
till the Blood being become very effaete, or rendered watery, by its frequent
Deflagration, is altogether unmeet to boil too much of its own accord in its
Vessels, or to be freely kindled in the Heart; and then it becomes often so
vapid, and poor of Spirits, that being insufficient for continuing the Lamp of
Life, it brings Death. But sometimes the mass of Blood, depraved and depaupered
by this Disease, is able to continue (tho with difficulty) the Vital fire hlaf
extinct, and to refresh it again by little and little, and in a long time, with
Spirit and Vigor, tho in the mean while after the height of this Disease, when
the Blood being rendered weak, and withal impure, is not able to expel forth
the febrile Matter, or the adust Recrements by a critical Motion, it conveys
the same to the Brain; and therefore abut the increase of this Fever, a
Drowsiness, and a Stupidity of the Spirits, a Sleepiness, a Vertigo, a ringing
of the Ears, Tremblings and Convulsive Motions, with a great Suppression of the
whole animal Faculty are oftentimes caused,

Those, who being of a cold Temperament, or grown in Years, are seized with
this Disease, tho they have not so acute a Fever, yet are wont to lie in a
greater danger of Life: for in these, besides the Disposition of the Blood not
easily reducible; also in the Fits, what is heaped together extraneous and not
miscible, is hardly subdued, and with difficulty separated from the mass of
Bood: wherefore, both the Blood is still more notably depraved in its Crasis,
and in every of the Fits is more infected with an impure mixture: Moreover, the
Nervous Liquour is greatly perverted from its due Temper, and is exceedingly
defiled with adust Recrements continually poured on the Brain: when therefore
old, melancholy, or otherwise unhealthy Persons, fall into this Fever, from the
first Invasion they presently become torpid, and for the most Part Vertiginous:
in the Fits, tho the heat be not vehement and sharp, yet they lie restless, and
tossing very much, often talk absurdly and idly: after a long Incalescence,
either no Sweat, or only a partial one, and often interrupted, ensues, whereby
the fit is not fully solved: but all during the Intervals the Diseased being
very dry, continue to be ill disposed, with a drought of the Mouth, a roughness
of the Tongue, and an overspreading of a viscous Lee: after some fits, their
Strength being mightily dejected, either they are confined to their Bed
altogether, or rising a little in the day time, they are scarce able to stand,
or to creep about from Place to Place: mean while they are troubled with a
Fainting, a difficult Breathing, a Deadness of the Senses, and a great Weakness
of the whole Genus Nervosum. The Urine is intensly red in a great many, of a
more saturated Color, and a thicker Consistency than in a common Tertian; the
Pulse, as long as the Strength is not wholly cast down, for the most part is
strong and even; afterward, when the Diseased grow very faint, it is weak,
uneven, and often intermittent, to which also Contractions of the Tendons, and
convulsive Motions in the Wrists, being iovn'd, for the most part give an
occasion for a Prognostic of Dearth. Those who being weak'ned by degrees
decline toward Death, for some time before they dye, lie for the most part
without speech, or the Knowledge of the Standers by, as Persons stupid: it
seldom happens in this Fever, that any one about to dye, being of a good Memory
and Understanding, disposes things of his Family, or bids his Friends farewell:
and those who happen to escape from a mighty Weakness, and almost from a
desperate Condition, do not recover by a sudden and manifest Crisis, but
wavering a long time, lie torpid and enervated, that not without a doubrful and
difficult Contest, Nature at length, with much ado, prevails over the Disease,
and then they recover their Strength by Degrees by a slow and long-continued
Convalescence.

If the nature and formal reason of the Epidemick Fever even now described be
inquired into, we say that this (as that of the foregoing Year) is properly an
Intermittent, for that which generally reigns, carries this kind of Type; tho
some continual Fevers here and there are scattered with them; of which also we
shall presently give a short Touch. It will not be needful for us to derive the
Seminary of this from the Air infected with some Miasm, but rather to fetch the
antecedent Cause of it from the undue Constitution of the Year, and the
Indisposition of our Blood acquired thereby; for Spring and Fall intermittent
Fevers yearly reign, to wit, because our Blood, as the Juice of Vegetables, is
wont to be moved, and to display it self at these times more sprightly than
ordinary: wherefore, if the Mass of Blood, by reason of the foregoing Season of
the Winter or Summer be altered from its ^ue Temper, and has contracted a sharp
or atrabilarious Diathesis of another kind; its Dyscrasies, began before, are
chiefly maturated about the Equinoxes; to wit, when the Blood, more freely
fermenting (in case it falls from its natural Crasis) does not so readily
sanguifie, but will be apt to pervert the nutritive Juice, mixed with it, into
an extraneous and febrile Matter. Since therefore this Year very much declined
from its due Constitution (that not only the preceding Dog days, but the two
Solstices and Equinoxes before were altogether intemperate) is no Wonder if
intermittent Fevers, more frequent than usual, and those attended with some
unusual Symptoms, reign in Autumn. That therefore an Epidemick intermittent
Fever reigns at this Time, I think it ought not to be attributed to the Fault
of the present Air, but to the Irregularities of the foregoing Season: but on
what Causes and Occasions certain peculiar Symptoms, and distinct from the
common Rule of Intermittents, arise in this Fever, it is worthy to be inquired
into. I have said above, that the Apparatus whereby this Fever became
destructive to Mankind, consisted chiefly in two things; to wit, the Temper of
the Year one while mighty cold, afterward happening to be very hot, both
variously perverted the Crasis of our Blood, and affected the Pores of the Skin
with an undue Constitution. According to the Reasons taken from both, I shall
briefly explicate the Accidents of this Disease, and assign the Causes of its
Phoenomina.

1. First, we observe that the Type of this Fever was various; to wit, in some
with a continual Effervescence, in others with an Eruption of Spots, but in
most intermitting, and like a Tertian, and sometimes (tho rarely) like a
Quotidian, renewing its Fits either each or every other day: we assign the
Cause of this Diversity, because in this Year the morbid Procatarxis was
greater and stronger, than only to produce an intermittent Fever generally
usual in Autumn: wherefore in some (happily of a more depraved Habit of Body) it
raised Fevers somewhat malignant; and in those to whom it brought Intermittents
according to the wonted Custom of the Season, it distinguished them by some
peculiar Appearance of Symptoms.

2. Persons after being seized with the Epidemick Fever at this time (whether
it be continual or intermittent) forthwith undergo ill Affects of the Head; to
wit, they are wont to be infested sometimes with a violent Headache, sometimes
with a Stupor, or a too great Distraction of the Animal Spirits; the Reason of
this is, that the nervous Juice, as well as the Blood, through the
Distemperature of the Year, is very much altered from its due Crisis, to wit,
from its sweet and spirituous Nature, and has become sometimes dull and almost
vapid, sometimes too sharp and pungitive. Moreover, the Mass of Blood also has
greatly contributed to this Evil; for whilst it ferments the vapory Effluvia,
which ought to be blown away outwardly, by reason of the Pores being
constring'd, are sent to the Membranes of the Head and the Brain: and by reason
of this closing of the Pores communicated almost to all, a Sweat happens with
Difficulty, and that but partial, and often interrupted in the Fits. Hence also
in the height of the Disease, a perfect Crisis, or a spontaneous Solution of
it, seldom, or scarce at all, happens: but instead of it, if the thing be
committed to Nature, an adust Matter, or Recrements heaped together in the
Blood, are conveyed to the Brain, and there raise Affects sometimes of the
Coma, sometimes of the Frenzy, and those lasting and obstinate.

3. That the Fits sometimes begin without a Cold, or a Shivering, and are
protracted in length with a troublesome Heat, and a difficult, partial, and
often-interrupted Sweating; afterward, that the same being ended, the Diseased
grow hot again, so that the Accesses are not ended but after a long Evaporation
of a dry Breath, the Cause is the too sharp and bilous Disposition of the
Blood, whereby, being filled with a burnt Salt and Sulphur, rather than with a
Serous Latex, when it grows turgid, it presently takes to a light Flame,
without a previous flowing of the nitrous Matter: and therefore by reason of
its want of Serum, and the Pores being shut, its Deflagration is continued a
long time, in a manner only with a dry Exhalation, and scarce ends at length in
an Apyrexia: and therefore the Intervals of the Fits are very troublesome with
a Heat and Drought, a Headache, a Vertigo, and other Affects; to wit, because
the febrile Matter heaped together in the Blood, is not wholly discussed every
Fit, but part of it being left after the Access, as extraneous and not
miscible, brings almost a continual Effervescence.

4. It is to be observed, that those that are affected with this Fever
presently fall from their Strength and the wonted firm State of their Bodies,
that after a Fit or two, being out of Breath and very weak, they are scarce
able to stand or walk without a Staff; whereas it is usual for such as are
seized with a common intermittent Fever, to be sprightly and cheerful enough
during the Intervals of the Accesses: The Reason of the Difference is; because,
in this Fever, both the Mass of Blood is more depraved with the impure Mixture
of a degenerate Juice, and especially because the same is more perverted from
its natural Crasis, and therefore when out of the Fits it does not boil, yet it
does not ferment duly and evenly in the Sinus's of the Heart: wherefore, when
by a quick Motion, or any Agitation of the Body, the Blood is vehemently
pressed forward into the Sinus's of the Heart, because it is not all presently
kindled there, and springs forth, by its Stagnation, it brings an oppression of
the Heart, and great Faintings of the animal Spirits. By reason of this kind of
Dyscrasie of the Blood, to wit, whereby it is unfit for Fermentation, or a due
Accension in the Heart, some Cattle also, and especially Horses, in the Spring
of Fall, become short-winded, and very unfit for a swift Motion.

5. It remains for us to enquire, lastly, concerning this Fever, wherefore it
reigns chiefly in Parishes, little Villages, and in the Country, when Cities
and great Towns have little of it. It might seem that this Affect might be
raised from marshy and other noxious Vapors, plentifully heaped together in
this or that Tract of the Air; but it is more rational to say, That the
Inhabitants of those Kinds of Places having been more exposed to the Winter
Colds and Summer Heats, contracted a greater Dyscrasie of the Blood, and so a
more apt Disposition to this Fever: for those that live in the Country scarce
go out of their Houses, but are exposed to the Rays of the Sun, or to the
Fervor of the heated Air. Moreover, Husbandmen, and those in the Country,
being used to hard Labors (among whom this Fever chiefly reigned) through
their Toyls and immoderate Exercises in the Fields, and withal using an ill
and course Diet, sooner acquire an adust and burnt Disposition of the Blood,
and therefore more apt to this Disease, than Citizens and Townsmen, who
enjoying Rest and a wholesome Diet, most commonly live in Houses together, or in
Streets cooled by the shadow of Houses. The truth of this Assertion is
confirmed, for that not only the Epidemick Fever now reigning, but the other
also of the Autumn before, raised through a Dyscrasie of the Blood, was chiefly
rife among Husbandmen and the Inhabitants of the Country; but that popular
Fever which arose in the middle of the Spring, depending chiefly on a let
Transpiration, infested most Citizens and Towns-people: mean while, those in
the Country usually procuring a more free Transpiration by Exercise and
Labors, lived more free from it.

The general Prognostic of this Disease only seems to threaten, that in a
manner the like ill consequence will attend it, as followed the Epidemick Fever
of the foregoing Year; to wit, (by a Guess taken from the Distemperature of the
Blood rather than from the Taint of the Air) we may dread an imminent Quartan
Fever again, but not a Plague. As to the particular Observations in it, to give
you in short the Signs which promise Death or Well-doing; they chiefly regard
the Temerature and Governance either of the Blood with the vital Spirit, or
also of the nervous Juice with the Animal Spirit. If from the Pulse, Urine,
Actions not injured, and the Appearance of other Symptoms, it be plainly
indicated, that the Blood, as to its feverish Disposition, be not greatly
perverted from its natural Crasis, that in the Fits it burns only moderately,
and that in every Conflict it easily subdues the load of the febrile Matter,
and wholly shakes it off from its Fellowship, that after some Accesses the Mass
of the same Blood is somewhat restored toward its due Temper, that it less
perverts the nutritive Juice, and sends forth that which is extraneous and not
miscible, with a more mild Turgescency; and in the mean while, if the other
spirituous Liquor duly influences and irrigates the Brain and nervous Bodies,
that Sleep, Watchings, Sensation and Motion are performed well, or at leastwise
indifferently, we may hope all good things of the Diseased. But if it shall
appear from the same kinds of Signs, that the Blood in this Fever has gotten a
Crasis far remote from the natural, if it perverts much of the nutritive Juice,
and afterward from its extraneous and incongruous mixture the Liquor of the
Blood be greatly troubled, and the Spirits are driven into Confusion; if in the
Fits the Blood burns too intensly, and for a long time, and does not duly
subdue the febrile Matter, or send it wholly forth, but its impure Mixture is
still more infected, (and in every feverish Access more and more) and withal,
the Spirits being continually consumed, is become poor, we may declare the Life
of the Diseased to be in a dangerous Condition. If, besides these, the nervous
Juice be faulty, that being altered from its due Temper, or being dull, and
vapid as it were, it does not actuate the Brain and Genus Nervosum, or being
more sharp than it ought, it continually irritates the same into Cramps and
Distractions; and if besides vapory Effluvia continually departing from the
Blood, or adust Recrements, wont to be voided forth by a critical Sweat, are
conveyed to the Head, and there cause Lethargical or Maniacal Affects, the
welldoing of the Diseased stands very ticklish, and we may fear a very fatal
Event.

Concerning the method of Cure of this Disease, three chief curative Intents
come under Consideration: First, A speedy Reducement of the Blood and nervous
Juice to their natural Crasis, (as much as may be) or at leastwise a Prevention
of a too great Depravation of them: Secondly, A due Management of the Diseased
as to their Fits, which ought to procure; first, that less of degenerate Juice
be heaped together for a Matter of the Fit; secondly, that the store of that
which is heaped together be wholly blown off every Access, that the Diseased
may be better in the Intervals: Thirdly, That the Body being altered for the
better, the Fits be stopped with antifebrifuge Remedies: the third Intent regards
the Symptoms chiefly pressing, which must be seasonably obviated, whereby
Nature being not hindered, may reduce whatsoever intemperate is contained in the
Viscera, may subdue and clear forth what is extraneous, and may soon recover
its former Strength and Vigor.

First therefore, for the Reducement and Correction of the Blood and nervous
Juice, diverse kinds of Evacuations, about the beginning of the Sickness, are
wont to be used in this Disease with good Success. It is maifest by modern
Practice, that Vomitories are very much more useful in this Affect, than in a
common Tertian; wherefore in a robust Body, and prone to Vomit, about the
beginning of the second or third Fit an Emetick Medicine is wont to be given.
The Operation of this seems to do more good in this Fever, both in as much as
it plentifully evacuates the filth from the Ventricle, and the yellow Choler
from the Vasa Choledocha, and because it copiously expresses the Serous Latex
from the Emunctories of the Genus Nervosum, placed about the Pancras and
Intestines, and draws it forth by stirring them: wherefore we observe, after a
Vomit given, the Diseased are better as to the Affects of the Head. Let Purging
(where Vomiting is not proper) be ordered the day following the Fit, as a
Succedaneum to the other: also tho a Vomit be premitted, it may do well after a
Fit or two; but let it be performed only with a mild and gentle Medicine, which
does not trouble or exagitate the Blood. It is usual with us in these Fevers,
all Aloetick or diagridiated Medicines laid aside, to give only the Infusion or
Powder of Sena, Rhubarb, and yellow Saunders, with Tartar and Salt of Wormwood:
and to use this kind of Purging a little after the beginning the Disease; but
at other times, to make the Belly soluble by a frequent use of Clysters. That
Blooding in this Disease is very good, frequent Experience has sufficiently
taught us; for since, by reason of the Pores being more closed than usual in
all, the Blood boiling in a Fever wants a Ventilation, letting Blood supplies
the Place of a more free Transpiration, and prevents the Effluvia restrained
from being so readily discharged on the Brain and Genus Nervosum. But this
Remedy is chiefly indicated by a very hot Blood and a hot Temperament; nor
ought it to be used indifferently by old Persons, such as are phlegmatic, and
others very weak, unless happily it be in a small Quantity, that the Mass of
Blood may be somewhat eventilated, and that the Translation of the febrile
Matter into the Brain may be stopped. If it be proper to open a Vein, let it be
done about the beginning of the Fever, or at leastwise before the fourth or
fifth Access; to wit, before the Blood be rendered very effaete by a frequent
Deflagration, and too impure by the Mixture of an adust Matter: for if Blooding
be used when the Blood is mightily vitiated, the vital Spirits, and the
Strength of the Diseased are thereby more debillitated; nor is there any thing
withdrawn from the Power of the Disease, or its Cause. There remains another
Evacuation famous in this Fever; to wit, by Blistering Plasters applied to
many Parts of the Body: these are so vulgarly observed to give Relief, that
such as are against them, and have a great Aversion for such a Remedy, being
led by the Example of others growing better thereby, easily admit of it. After
what manner they separate the skarfe Skin from the Skin, and raise it as it
were into a Bladder full of Water; whether they fetch the watery and limpid
Humor from the Arteries, or out of the Nerves, this is not the Place to
enquire: but, that they are used with benefit in this Disease, besides
Experience, this Reason seems somewhat to convince; to wit, because a large
Discharge of this kind of serous Humor does in some sort recompense the Defect
of a free Transpiration. Moreover, this kind of Remedy opens as it were the
Doors and Gates at which the Blood and nervous Juice may presently void forth
the extraneous Matter mixed with them by a nearer way of Purging; wherefore in
the Plague and malignant Affects, Vesicatories are esteemed very profitable.
Also it is manifest by common Observation, that in this and other Fevers,
happening in the same Season, they prevent the severe Affects of the Head, and
are wont to relieve them being caused before wherefore in Men that are
phlegmatic, aged, and of a cold Temperament, Epispastic. Plasters may be
applied about the first Invasion of this Disease for Preservation; and in any
others, troubled with a Drowsiness, a Vertigo, or a violent Headache, they are
wont to be advantagiously used for the Cure of those Affects. But in very hot
Constitutions, where with a Defect of Serum, the Blood is too much burnt; and
if those that are in Fevers with an intolerable Burning are obnoxious to
Watchings or a Frenzy, Vesicatories do not seem fit to be used.

For correcting the Crasis of the Blood, and the Tone of the Viscera,
qualifying and digestive Remedies have place, in intermediate times, when the
Sick have rested a little from the Evacuations even now mentioned, being such
as fuse the Liquor of the Blood, and separate its Foeculencies, and drive them
toward the Emunctories as it were by precipitating them; for those kinds of
Intents are wont to be given cooling Juleps and Decoctions, acidulated with
Spirit of Vitriol, of Salt, with Tamarinds, the Juice of Oranges, or of Limons,
whereof neat Forms enough are vulgarly to be sound: and for this end conduce
acetous, saline, and testaceous Powders, viz. such as are prepared of Tartar,
Sulphur, the fixed Salts of Herbs, of burnt Hartshorn, also of the Claws or
Eyes of Crabs. For Example, Take Cream of Tartar three drams, Salt of Wormwood
a dram and half: the Dose is half a dram in an aperient Decoction, twice a day,
out of the Fit. Or, Take Cream of Tartar two drams, Powder of Crab's-eyes a
dram, Nitre purified half a dram, mix them, let it be given after the same
manner. Or, Take burnt Hartshorn two drams, Spirit of Vitriol as much as the
Powder will receive by imbibing: the dose is a Scruple. It is of excellent use
when those that are in the Fever are troubled with Worms. These kinds of
Remedies promote the Secretion of the febrile Matter, and restore the almost
lost Ferments of the Blood and Viscera.

The second Intent, to wit, the due Management of the Diseased in the Fits,
comprehends many things: first, a neat Form of Diet ought to be ordered, that a
large heaping together of the degenerate Juice for a Matter for the Fit may be
hindered: wherefore, let the Diseased feed only on a thin Food; let them wholly
abstain from Flesh, or Broth made of it, from Eggs, generous Wine, and all rich
Fare; being content only with Barley or Oat Broths, Panada, Whey, and small
Ale: in regard a more plentiful Diet is not concocted, or assimilated, but it
oppresses the Stomach, and being mixed with the Blood it troubles its Liquour,
and forces it to boil vehemently, as the Fit comes on, and during the while it
lasts, unless it be for quenching Thirst, let no Food be taken: but for
qualifying the Heat and Drought, cooling Juleps and Decoctions, and especially
small Ale and Whey, ought to be allowed. Secondly, a little before the feverish
Access is expected, let a gentle Medicine be given, which either may keep off
the Fit by preventing it, or may render it easy by procuring an easy Sweat.
For this Use, the febrifuge Potion of the Learned Riverius does well, made of
Carduus Water, with Oil of Sulphur and Salt of Wormwood: Or, take Cream of
Tartar, Salt of Wormwood, Nettle Seeds, of each a Scruple: let it be given in a
Decoction of the Roots of Sorrel. When the Fever begins to decline, and the
Fits are a little more remiss. Febrifuge Epithemes outwardly applied often stop
the febrile Accesses; tho in the mean while, as long as the Fits return, let
the Diseased be so managed, that every Access, the feverish Matter heaped
together in the Blood may be wholly blown off: wherefore, when a Sweat happens
with difficulty, let it be a little raised with temperate Medicines; also let
the Diseased be kept in Bed with a gentle Sweat for many hours, nor let them be
permitted to rise too soon: for I have often observed, that the Diseased have
still grown worse, because being impatient of lying in Bed, they put on their
Clothes before the watery Effluvia were exhaled enough.

Thirdly, as to the Symptoms, and particular Accidents, with which the Diseased
are wont to be troubled in this Fever, a great many of them are sufficiently
provided against with the Remedies and Method of Cure hitherto delivered;
against the Thirst, Burning, the Roughness of the Mouth and Tongue, Vomitings,
the Looseness, a Swooning, or danger of Fainting, the Prescripts commonly used
in other Fevers may aptly enough be transferred hither. But the Things which in
this Disease seem to require a peculiar Method of Healing, are chiefly the
Affects of the Head and Brain, with the Genus Nervosum; by which, unless
seasonably obviated, the Diseased are soon brought into a great danger of Life:
Concerning these kinds of Evils of the Head, the Indications are of two kinds.
If it appears by a Drowsiness, a Sleepiness, a Vertigo, or a Headache, that the
nervous Juice is too dull, and as it were vapid, and therefore that it does not
vigorously enough actuate the Brain and nervous Bodies, besides the Remedies
above delivered, and especially the Vesicatories, Medicines full of a volatile
Salt, excellently conduce in this Case; wherefore Spirit of Hartshorn, of
Blood, also the Salts of the same are of excellent Use: but, if the nervous
Liquor be too sharp, or the Effluvia, sent from the boiling Blood, drive the
Animal Spirits into Distractions, those kinds of Remedies of volatile Salt are
given with benefit in somewhat a less quantity. Moreover, a frequent Letting
Blood, and Medicines allaying its fervor, do good, as Emulsions, Whey, pure
Water plentifully drank: let Opiates be used in this Fever with great Caution;
for the Frenzy appeased by them is oftentimes changed into a Lethargy, or a
deep Stupor.

FINIS.
THE TABLE.
A.
AChes in the Head, see Headache.

Ach in the Belly, see Belly.

Aches or Pains in the Limbs happening by Night, their cure, p. 361.

Ague, see Fever.

Alexipharmicks, see Cordials.

Anasarca, its Description. p. 167. Whence it proceeds, ibid. The least
dangerous of Dropsies, ibid. The two chief Scopes of curing it, ibid.
Hydragogue Medicines of good use in curing it, p. 168. How Catharticks work in
this Disease, ibid. Lixivial Medicines the best Diuretics in this Disease, p.
169. Some Praescripts of them, ib. Diaphoreticks of use when the swelling
begins to abate, p. 170. A Praescript of them, ib. p. 171. Outward
Administrations to be used in this Disease, ib. p. 172, 173. Medicines for
Preservation against this Disease, p. 174, 175. An Instance of a Person falling
into this Disease, and recovered of it, p. 176.

Antidotes, see Cordials.

Apoplexy, where seated, p. 420. What the Word Apoplexy imports, p. 421. Two
kinds of it, ib. The various Invasions of the Apoplexy, and the causes of them,
ib. p. 422. The Subject of this Disease, ib. Its Prognostics, ib. p. 423. The
Therapeutick Method for removing the Fit, ib. p. 424. The prophylactick or
preservatory method, with Praescripts of Medicines. p. 425, 426. Instances of
Persons seized with the Apoplexy, ib. p. 427.

Ascites, its Description, and whence it proceeds, p. 150. what to be
considered in order to its Cure, ib. Catharticks often do well in it, p. 151.
An Enumeration of hydragogue Emeticks and Purgers, and Prescripts of them, ib.
p. 152, 153, 154, 155. Diuretics, when proper in an Ascites, ib. p. 156. What
Diuretics proper, ib. Diaphoreticks of little or no use in an Ascites, p. 157.
The best Remedies, when we will not proceed to an Incision, are Clysters and
Plasters, ib. An Incision in whom to be admitted, p. 158. An Instance of a
Woman cured of an Ascites, ib. p. 159.

Asthma, or difficulty of Breathing, its description, p. 126. Two primary
Indications in the method of Cure, ib. What to be done in the Fit, ib. p. 127,
128. What to be done out of the Fit for Preservation, ib. p. 129, 130, 131. Two
Instances of Persons troubled with the Asthma, and the Methods used with them,
ib. p. 232.

Asthma Convulsive, see Cough.

Asthmatick Fits happening in the Scurvey; their Cure, p. 353, 354.

Atrophia Scorbutic; its Cure, p. 363, 364.

B.
BElly-ach in the Scurvy; its Cure, p. 355.

Blistering Plasters, see Vesicatories.

Blood, its Eruption from many Parts of the Body, p. 188. Its Eruption from the
Nostrils, and the Cure of it applyable to all other Haemorrhagies, p. 189. An
Eruption of Blood from the Nostrils to be managed one way if without a Fever,
and a different way if joined with it, ib. How to be managed if happening without
a Fever, ib. p. 190, 191, 192, 193. How to be managed in a Fever, p. 194. How
to answer the second and vital Indication, ib. p. 195. How to answer the third
Indication, being for Preservation, and for removing the Cause of the
Distemper, ib. p. 196. An Instance of Eruptions of Blood cured, ib. p. 197.

Blood-letting, see Phlebotomy.

Blood let forth in a Convulsive, or Apoplectical fit, why seeming congealed,
p. 260.

Blood-spitting, the indications for curing it, p. 96. what to be done in
reference to the first Indication, ib. what to be done in reference to the
second indication, ib. p. 97. Select Forms of Medicines answering to the
Therapeutick Indications, ib. p. 98, 99, 100, 101, 102. An instance of a Person
troubled with Blood-spitting, and how managed, ib. p. 103, 104. The medicine
which did him most good. ib. p. 105.

Blood of Man, its Anatomy, p. 519. its resolution into five Principles. p.
520. its Spirits. ib. its sulphurous, saline, earthy, and watery Particles, p.
521. its comparison with Wine, p. 422. p. 328, 329, 330. its comparison with
Milk, p. 422. its natural Motion, p. 423, 424. its preternatural Motion ib. p.
425.

Bloody Flux, cured, p. 356. see Purging.

Bones, their crackling, p. 367, 368.

Breathing difficult, see Asthma.

Breathing, difficult in the Scurvy, its cure, p. 353, 354.

C.
CArus, what Disease it is, p. 399. where seated, p. 400. its Prognostics. ib.
its Method of cure, ib. Instances of Persons seized with the Carus, and how
proceeded with, p. 401, 402.

Chalybeate Medicines, see Steel.

Chin-Cough, see convulsive Cough, and Ptisick.

Coffee, its effects, p. 68, 69.

Colic, its Description, p. 507. the part primarily affected in it, p. 508,
509. Its Seminium or Minera, ib. The Procatarctick Cause of it, p. 510. The
evident Causes, ib. p. 511. The Prognostic of it, ib. The Method of curing it,
ib. p. 512, 513, 514, 515, 516. The vital Indication to be minded, ib. the
preservatory Indication to be used out of the Fits, ib. p. 517. Instances of
Persons troubled with the Cholick. ib. p. 518.

Colic Scorbutic, its Cure, p. 355.

Coma, see Sleepy and Watching.

Consumption of the Lungs, see Ptisick.

Consumption confirmed, see Ptisick.

Continual Fevers, see Fevers.

Convulsions in Children, p. 250. they are chiefly subject to them at two
Times, ib. What Parts of the Body they infest, ib. How to prevent convulsive
Fits in Children hereditarily obnoxious to them, p. 251. the Therapeutick
Method, p. 252. how to provide against imminent Convulsions, ib. what to be
done when a Child is actually seized, p. 253. for poor Peoples Children, ib.
what to be done when Convulsions happen upon breeding of Teeth, p. 254. what
when happening on other occasions, ib. p. 255.

Convulsions in adult Persons happening by reason of the Origin of the Nerves
being chiefly affected, p. 256, 257. An Instance of a Lady troubled with
Convulsions on this Account, and how proceeded with, ib. p. 258. a second
Instance, ib. why Blood let forth in a Convulsive Fit seems congealed, p. 260.
the method of curing these Fits, ib. p. 261, 262, 263. Prescripts for poor
People, ib.

Convulsion whose cause lies about the Extremities, or within the Plexus's of
the Nerves, p. 264: An Instance of them, and the method used, ib. p. 265. a
second Instance, p. 266.

Convulsions arising from the Liquor lying in the nervous Bodies, and
irritating all their Processes into Convulsions, p. 267. such Convulsions
produced by Poison, p. 268. by the Bite of the Tarantula, ib. produced by
Witchcraft, p. 269. 270.

Convulsions general, wont to be raised in malignant, ill determined, and some
Anomalous Fevers, p. 271, 272. after what manner raised, p. 273, 274. the
formal Reason and Causes of such Fevers, p. 275. Instances of such Fevers, p.
276, 277. The Method of curing them, p. 278, 279, 280, 281. Another Instance of
a Convulsive Fever, p. 282.

Convulsions general wont to arise by reason of a scorbutic Disposition of the
nervous Juice, p. 283. two kinds of them, ib. A strange Instance of the first
kind, p. 284, 285. the reasons of it, ib. p. 286. Instances of the second kind,
and the method used with them, ib. p. 287. 288, 289, 290, 291, 292, 293, 294,
295. The way of Cure to be used in general for such mavelous Convulsions, ib.
p. 296.

Convulsive Cough and Asthma, p. 320. the causes of it, ib. p. 321, 322. An
Instance of a Person troubled with it, ib. A second Instance, with the way of
managing it, p. 323. The Remedies and Method of Cure to be used in this
Disease, p. 324, 325. See Ptisick and Asthma.

Cordial Medicines, improperly so called, p. 48. Kinds of Cordial Medicines for
promoting the Accension of the Blood, p. 49. A Caution concerning the frequent
use of such Cordials, ib. Cordial Medicines for appeasing the too great boiling
of the Blood, ib. p. 50. Such Cordials for opening the Texture of the Blood,
and discharging its Superfluities, ib. Cordials endowed with a volatile Salt,
given in Fevers and Swoonings, ib. Cordials endowed with an Alchalisate Salt,
ib. p. 51. Cordials proper in a Pleurisy, ib. Cordials whose Basis is a fluid
or acid Salt, given in Fevers, ib. Cordial Medicines having a fixed or lixivial
Salt for their Basis, p. 52. Cordials, Alexipharmicks or Antidotes for
Preservation, ib. p. 53. Cordials, Alexipharmicks, or Antidotes for curing, ib.
p. 44.

Cosmeticks, p. 218, 219, 220.

Cough, see Ptisick.

Cutaneous Affects, various. p. 216, 217. Summer Spots whence caused, ib. Liver
Marks, whence caused, ib. chiefly appearing in the Summer. The Cure of Summer
Spots. Lentiginous Spots, and Liver Marks, p. 218, 219, 220.

D.
DElirium, what it is, p. 448, 449. how caused, ib. p. 450, 451. the ways of
Cure hinted, ib. how to be cured when hap'ning upon continual and malignant
Fevers, p. 452. see Frenzy.

Diabetes or Pissing Evil, the method of curing it, p. 28, 29. An Instance of a
Person troubled with it, and the Medicines used in curing him, ib. Kinds and
Prescripts of Medicines that stop Urine flowing in Excess, p. 31, 32, 33, 34.

Diaphoretick Medicines, or such as promote Sweat, p. 34. What things required
for a free Eruption of Sweat, ib. how Persons must be ordered for Sweating, p.
35. Kinds and Prescripts of diaphoretick Medicines, p. 36, 37, 38. a
diaphoretick Diet-drink for curing the French Pox, ib. Diaphoreticks to be
prescribed in malignant Fevers, p. 39. other Diaphoreticks, ib. p. 40, 41.
Diaphoreticks in a cold Constitution. p. 42.

Diarrhoea, see Purging.

Diuretic Medicines, see Urine.

Dropsy of the Breast, whence it arises, p. 133. An Instance of a Person
troubled with it, and how proceeded with, ib. p. 134, 135. the Method of Cure,
ib. Prescripts of Medicines for it, p. 136. An Instance of another Person
troubled with it, and how cured, ib. p. 137.

Dropsy called Anasarca, see Anasarca.

Dropsy called Ascites, see Ascites.

Dropsy called the Tympany, see Tympany.

Dropsy happening in the Scurvy, its Cure, p. 366, 367.

Dysentery, see Purging.

E.
EMetick Medicines; see Vomiting.

Empyema, what the Word imports, p. 119. what to be considered in order to its
cure, ib. An Incision not to be attempted over hastily in it, p. 120. Forms of
Medicines requisite for curing an Empyema, ib. A Julep against Faintings and
Swoonings upon the Operation, ib.

Ephemera Fever, see Fever.

Epilepsie, seeing Falling Sickness.

F.
FAlling Sickness, its Description, p. 138, 139. Sometimes terminates of its
own accord, ib. The Method of proceeding with it, p. 240. What Medicines used
against the Fit, ib. p. 241. The chiefest care in the Prophylactick part, for
removing the cause, ib. What Medicines to be used for it, ib. p. 242. An
Instance of a Person troubled with the Falling Sickness, and with what
Medicines cured, p. 243. The general Method of curing it, with prescripts of
Medicines. ib. p. 244, 245, 246, 247, 248, 249.

Fever, its Description, p. 426. Intermitting Fevers, whence caused, ib. why a
cold and a shivering precede the heat in them, p. 427. whence their
Intermission and set returns, ib. p. 528. their Cure how undertaken, ib. p.
529. Certain Irregularities of them, p. 530.

Fever tertian, Instructions concerning it, p. 531, 532. Symptoms foreshewing
its Remission. ib. 533. Its Method of Cure. p. 534, 535, 536, 537.

Fever quartan, Instructions concerning it, p. 540, 541. Why so difficult to
cure, ib. curd by raising a gentle Salivation, p. 542. Other Remedies for it,
p. 543, 544, 545. etc.

Fevers continual, wherein differing from Intermittents, p. 548. the kinds of
them, ib.

Fever called Ephemera, or simple Synochus, holding one, or many Days,
Instructions concerning it, p. 549, 550. three things required to a Crisis or
Solution of it, ib. p. 551. its Cure, ib.

Fever putrid, its Causes, p. 552, 553. the four observable times of it, ib. p.
554, 555, 556, 557. the most considerable Symptoms and Signs in it, p. 560,
561, 562, 563, 564, 565, 566. the Pulse and Urine chiefly to be minded for
knowing the State and Strength of the Diseased, p. 567, 568. 569, 570. The
kinds of the putrid Synochus p. 571, 572, 573. its Cure, p. 574, 575, 576.
Examples of Persons seized with it, and the Method used with them, p. 577, 578,
579, 580, 581, 582.

Fever Malignant or Pestilential in general, wherein it consists p. 583. What
parts of the Body their venom Affects, p. 584, 585. the Essence of a
Pestilential Fever, in what founded, p. 587. whence it arises, 588, what Bodies
apt to receive it, p. 590. how propagated by Contagion, ib. p. 591.

Fevers Pestilential and Malignant in Specie, and other Epidemick Fevers. p.
601. the distinctions betwixt a Plague, a Pestilential, and a Malignant Fever,
ib. p. 602. Pestilential and Malignant Fevers placed in the rank of Continual
Fevers, ib. Signs of Malignity in Fevers, p. 604, 605. what to be observed in
the cure of Pestilential and Malignant Fevers, ib. an Instance of a
Pestilential Fever, p. 606, 607. its way of cure p. 608. Instances of the
Malignant Fever, p. 609, 610, 611, 612, 613.

Fevers of Women in Childbed, Instructions concerning them, p. 625, 626, 627,
628, 629. of the Lacteal Fever of Women after Childbirth, p. 630. its cure, p.
631. Putrid Fevers of Women in Childbed, ib. p. 632. their Procatarctick
Causes, p. 633. the Evident Causes, ib. the Conjunct Cause, p. 634. they are
dangerous, p. 635. the cure, ib. p. 636, 637, 638.

Fevers Symptomatick of Women in Childbed, what those Symptoms are, p. 639.
what must be done in order to their Cure. p. 640. What must be done in the
Small Pox when happening, p. 641. Stories of Women in Childbed troubled with
Fevers, ib. p. 642, 643, 644, 645, 646, 647.

Fevers Epidemick and Anomalous, p. 648. A Description of one, ib. p. 649. its
Nature and Essence, ib. p. 650, 651. its conjunct Cause, ib. what it has
peculiar from common Intermittents, and a Synochus, p. 654, 653. its general
Prognostic, p. 653. its particular Prognostic, ib. its method of Cure, p.
655, 656, 657.

Fever Epidemick and Catarrhous described, p. 657, 658. the rise and formal
reason of it, p. 659. its Symptoms, p. 660. its Prognostic, ib. the method of
Cure, p. 661. Another Epidemick Fever described, p. 662, 663. its Nature, p.
665. its Accidents, p. 666, 667. the Prognostic of it, p. 668. the method of
Cure, p. 669, 670, 671, 672.

Fever Epidemick chiefly infesting the Brain and Genus Nervosum, p. 271, 272.
its formal Reason and Causes, 275. Instances of Persons seized with it, p. 276,
277, 278. the method of Cure, ib. p. 279, 280, 281. An Instance of a Fever
chiefly radicated in the nervous Juice, and its Cure, 282,

Fever Scorbutic, its Cure, 363. 364.

Fits of the Mother, p. 297. the various Passions vulgarly said to constitute
an Hysteric fit, or a fit of the Mother, ib. those Fits are properly
Convulsive, p. 298. they arise chiefly from the Brain and genus Nervosum, ib.
sometimes from the Womb, and others of the Viscera, ib. p. 299. An Instance of
a Person troubled with them, and what done in order to the Cure. ib. p. 300,
301, 302. The method of Cure to be used in the Passions vulgarly called
Hysterical. ib. p. 303, 304, 305, 306.

Flux, See Purging.

Folly, see Stupidity.

French Pox, safely cured with a Sweating Diet-Drink, p. 38.

Frensy, its Definition, p. 451. whence caused, ib. the formal Nature of it,
wherein it consists, p. 453. another Definition of it, p. 454. the previous
Dispositon of the Blood disposing to a Frensy. ib. another Disposition to the
Frensy. ib. the evident Causes of it, p, 455. the Prognostic of it. ib. p.
456. In the Cure of it regard must be had to two things. ib. Prescripts of
Medicines for it, p. 457, 458, 459. an Instance of a Person Troubled with it,
and how cured, ib. p. 460.

G.
GIddiness or running round of the Head, see Vertigo.

Gout, its Fits either seize at random, or periodically, p. 495. The
Dispositions to this Disease, and the Occasions or Causes which are wont to
actuate them. ib. the Morbifick Matter, ib. the evident Causes of it, p. 496,
497. It Is near allied to the Stone in the Reins. p. 498. The Prognostic of it,
ib. it often turns to Gripes in the Belly, to a difficulty of Breathing, etc.
ib. p. 499. the Method of Cure, with Prescripts of Medicines. ib. p. 500, 501,
502, 503, 504, 505. An Instance of a Person troubled with it. ib. p. 506.

Gout Scorbutic, moving from one Place to another, its Cure, p. 362.

Gumms sore, their Cure. p. 359. 360.

H.
Haemorrhagies, see Blood. Headache, its Subject, p. 370. the formal Cause of
it. p. 371. the Prognostic of it. ib. habitual Headache, two scopes of curing
it. ib, p. 372. Medicines for the Cure of it, p. 373, 374, 375, 376, 377, 378,
379, 380, 381, 382. Instances of Persons troubled with it, and the Methods used
with them, p. 383, 384, 385, 386. Instances of Periodical Headaches. ib. p.
387. an Instance of a Headache, arising by Consent of other Parts. p. 388.

Heart, its Passions. p. 54. its Panting, when happening through the fault of
the Blood, how cured, ib. p. 55. the same cured when it happens through the
Fault of the Arteries. ib. p. 56. Trembling of the Heart, its Description and
Method of Cure, ib. p. 57. the Cure of the intermitting Pulse. p. 58. Medicines
for the Heart, see Cordials.

Hydragogue Medicines, p. 151, 152, 153, 154, 155.

Hypocondriacal Affects shown to be for the most part convulsive, and not
caused by Vapors, p. 307. the Symptoms belonging to this Disease, p. 308. what
the Ventricle and Spleen contribute to this Disease, p. 309, 310. An Instance
of a Person troubled with this Distemper. p. 311. the Method of Curing it. p.
312, 313, 314, 315.

Hysterical Affects, see Fits of the Mother.

I.
JAundise, three primary Indications in the Method of curing it, p. 138. what
Medicines are proper according to those Indications, ib. p. 139. prescripts of
Medicines for curing it, ib. p. 140, 141, 142, 143.

Jesuits Powder, its Nature, and how it stops Fevers. 545, 546, 547.

Imposthume of the Lungs, the morbifick matter of it, p. 121. the three primary
Indications in the method of Cure, p. 122. Physical Prescripts pursuant to
them, ib. p. 123. Instances of Persons having the Imposthume of the Lungs, and
the Methods used with them, p. 124, 125.

Incubus, or Nightmare, it is an Affect of the Cerebellum, p. 408. its
Phoenomina, ib. the Prognostic of it, p. 409. the method of Cure, ib. Infants
often troubled with it, and how to be proceeded with, p. 410.

Inflammation of the Lungs, see Peripneumonia.

Intermitting Fevers, see Fevers.

Issues, what Humors chiefly they evacuate, and whence they derive them, p.
207. in what Diseases and Constitutions they agree better or worse, p. 208,
209. in what Parts and Places Issues ought to be made, ib. p. 210, 211. how we
must deal with the Symptoms which happen upon Issues, p. 212, 213, 214, 215.
Issues do not dispose to Barrenness, ib.

Itch, a Disease of the Skin, p. 221. its morbifick matter the lymphick Humor
in the Glands, ib. that Humor depraved three ways, ib. p. 222. dangerous in
Children and cachectical Persons, ib. the Indications in order to its cure, ib.
p. 223. Purging necessary in curing it, ib. Prescripts of Medicines for curing
it, ib. p. 224, 225, 226.

L.
Leprosy of the Greeks, see Running Scab.

Lethargy, where seated, p. 389 two kinds of it, ib. the conjunct Causes of the
Lethargy so properly called, p. 391. the chief Symptoms of it, ib. the
Prognostic of it, ib. p. 292. the Method of curing it, ib. when Vomits or
Purges are proper, p. 393. Instances of Persons seized with it, and how
proceeded with, p. 394, 395. a Lethargy happening by the use of Opiates, how to
be dealt with, ibid:

Liver its Distempers, p. 146. Medicines against its over-growth, p. 147.
Remedies against other Diseases of the Liver coming from Obstructions, ib. p.
148, 149.

Liver Marks, see cutaneous Affects.

Looseness, see Purging.

Lungs inflamed; see Peripneumonia.

Lungs, their Imposthume, see Imposthume.

Lungs, their Consumption, see Ptisick.

M.
MAdness, or the Mania, allied to Melancholy, p. 478. the Spirits chiefly in
fault in it, ib. three things to be observed in Persons seized with it, ib. how
happening upon a vehement Passion, p. 479. often hereditary, p. 480. why mad
Persons are bold and very confident, p. 481. its Prognostic, ib. p. 482. the
method of Cure to be used in a continual Madness, ib. p. 483, 484, 485, 486.
what to be done in an intermittent Madness, ib.

Malignant Fevers, see Fevers.

Mania, see Madness.

Measles, allied to the Small Pox, p. 621. their Essence and Cure differ but as
to more or less, ibid.

Melancholy, its Definition, p. 460. Universal Melancholy, its Symptoms,
consisting chiefly in three things, p. 461. the formal Nature and Causes of
Melancholy, p. 462. the evident and procatarctick Causes of universal
Melancholy, p. 464, 465. the Prognostic of it, ib. 466. the method of curing
it, ib. 467, 468, 469, 470, 471, 472. Instances of Persons troubled with
Melancholy, and the ways of proceeding with them, ib. p. 473, 474. particular
Melancholy, p. 475. two chief Occasions of it, ib. p. 476.

Morphew, see Scab.

Mouth, its Distempers cured. p. 359, 360.

N.
NArcoticks, see Opiates.

Nervous Liquor, how tainted to cause Convulsions, p. 267, 268, 269, 270.

Nightmare, see Incubus.

Nitre, its Nature, and how it works its Effects, p. 25.

O.
OBstructions of the Liver, see Liver.

Opiates, how they exert their Force, and in what their narcotick Force
consists, p. 59. what they do in a small quantity, and what in a great, ib. the
good Effects of Opiates, p. 60. properly indicated in a want of Sleep, in some
delirous Affects, in all sorts of Pains, in an over-quick or vehement Pulse or
Breathing; also in a breathing interrupted, convulsive, or otherwise variously
irregular, in Fits of the Asthma, in excessive Vomiting or Purging, in Catarrhs
and Defluxions of all kinds, ib. p. 61. Instances of Persons cured by Opiates,
ib. of the evil Effects of Opium, with Cautions concerning their use, p. 62.
the principal Functions of the the Soul often extremely injured by Narcoticks,
ib. p. 63. sometimes hurtful to the Praecordia and Breast, ib. sometimes very
injurious to the Parts within the Belly, ib. Precepts and Cautions concerning
the right use of them, p. 64, 65, 66.

Kinds and Praescripts of Opiates, ib. p. 67, 68.

P.
PAins, see Aches, and Opiates.

Palsy, its Description, p. 428. diverse Kinds of the Palsy, p. 429. why Sense
is not always hindered as well as Motion in the Palsy, p. 430. a dullness of
Mind, Forgetfulness, and Stupidness, often Forerunners of the Palsy, ib. the
evident Causes of an habitual Palsy, p. 431. a Palsy in which the sensitive
Faculty is hurt, Motion being entire, p. 432. the Prognostic of the Palsy, p.
433. three Methods or Ways of curing the Palsy, ib. the method of Cure when
caused by some Accident, with a violent hurt, ib. how to cure it when happening
upon a Fever, Apoplexy, Carus, etc. p. 434. how to be proceeded with when it
depends of a Procatarxis, p. 435, 436. Praescrips of Medicines, ib. p. 437,
438, 439, 440. Hot Baths sometimes prejudicial in the Palsy, 441. Salivation
when to be used, ib. Instances of Persons seized with the Palsy, and the
Methods used with them, p. 442, 443, 444, 445, 446.

Paraphrenitis, not caused by the Inflammation of the Diaphragm, p. 452, 453.

Passions of the Heart, see Heart.

Peripneumonia, its Description, p. 105. the primary Indication in order to its
Cure, ib. the Intents of curing pursuant to it, ib. p. 106, 107. the secondary
therapeutick Indication, ib. Praescripts of Medicines according to the various
Intents, ib. p. 108, 109, 110, 111. Instances of Persons troubled with it, and
the method used with them, ib. 112.

Peruvian Bark, see Jesuits Powder.

Pestilential Fever, see Fever.

Pestilence, see Plague.

Phlebetomy, how many Ways, and for what Causes and End an Eruption of Blood
happens of its own Accord, p. 177, 178, 179. how many Ways, and for what Causes
and Ends it is indicated by Physic, ib. p. 180. the Uses, and Affects both
good and evil, of Phlebetomy in Physic, p. 181. certain Rules and Cautions to
be observed in the due Administration of Phlebetomy, p. 183, 184, 185, 186,
187, 188.

Ptisick, and Consumption of the Lungs, p. 71. the diverse States of this
Disease, ib. p. 72. a threefold method of Cure, ib. the method of curing a new
Cough happening upon taking Cold, ib. p. 73, 74. Praescripts of Medicines for it,
ib. p. 75, 76, 77, 78, 79. the Chin-Cough in Children, its Cure, ib. p. 80, 81,
82. the method of curing an inveterate Cough, when it begins to degenerate into
a Consumption, ib. p. 83, 84. Praescripts of Medicines for this inveterate
Cough, p. 85, 86, 87, 88, 89. the method to be used in a great confirmed
Ptisick, which is commonly past Cure, ib. p. 90. Praescripts of Medicines in
it, ib. An Instance of a Person troubled with a single Cough, and free from the
Suspicion of a Ptisick, and the method used with him, p. 91, 92, 93. An
Instance of a Person troubled with a Cough proceeding chiefly from the nervous
Liquor, and the Method used, ib. p. 94, 95.

Pissing Evil, see Diabetes.

Plague, it is Description, p. 592. Signs which foreshew that it will happen,
ib. Signs which show its Presence in a Body diseased, p. 593. Signs of Recovery
or Death in it, p. 595. Prophylactick Cautions against it, p. 596, 597. its
Cure, p, 598, 599, 600. see Fever Pestilential.

Pleurisy, its Description, p. 113. the method of Cure, ib. p. 114.
Praescripts of Medicines adapted to the Indications, p. 115, 116, 117. An
Instance of a Person troubled with it, and how proceeded with, ib. p. 118.

Poisons in general, how they affect our Bodies, p. 583, 584, 585, 586, 587.

Poisons causing Convulsions, p. 268.

Pox, see French Pox.

Psora, see Itch.

Pulse intermitting, see Heart.

Purging, three Degrees of it, (...) All Purges not to be used in^^ ^^rently,
ib. when improper, ib. (...). Praescripts of purging Poti^^^ Pills, Powders,
Bolus's, Ele^^^ries; some of each kind being (...) gentle, others of a mean,
and ^^^ers of a strong Operation, to^^^her with some Purges of each ^^^d of an
easy Preparation for (...) Poor, p. 9, 10, 11. purging ^^^blets, Wines, and
Ales, p. 12. (...) prevent over-purging upon gi^^^g a Medicine, what to be
con^^^ered. ib. p. 13. how cured if ^^^ning, ib. excessive Purging ^^^ning
without giving a Medi^^^e, for the most part sympto^^tical, ib. two kinds of
Fluxes, ^^^ning almost yearly in London, ^^^ally called the Griping of the
^^^uts, p. 14. the proper method of ^^^ire in that which happens with^^^ Blood,
ib. p. 15. the method (...) Cure in the other which is ^^^ody, ib. p. 16. the
therapeutick ^^^ications into which the said ^^^thod of curing the Bloody Flux
^^^y be resolved, ib. Instances of ^^^sons cured in the Bloody Flux, (...) 17,
18, 19.

Q.
QVartan Fever or Ague, see Fever.

Quotidian Fever or Ague, see Fever.

R.
RAving, see Delirium.

Rheumatism cured, p. 367.

Rickets, Medicines for curing it, p. 147.

Ring-worm, see Running Scab.

Running Scab, or the Leprosy of the Greeks, its Description as it is
understood by us, p. 227. its material Cause, p. 228. whence this Disease takes
its Rise, ib. the method of Cure, ib. 229. Praescripts of Medicines, ib. p.
230, 231. how to proceed with it when it arises from the Scurvy, p. 232, 233.
how to proceed if it arises from the French Pox, p. 234. topical Remedies to be
applied outwardly, ib. p. 235. An Instance of a Person troubled with the
running Scab, and how proceeded with, ib. p. 236. another Instance, p. 237.

S.
SCab, see Itch, and running Scab.

Scurvy, the Signs of it in all the Parts of the Body, p. 326, 326. the evident
Causes of it, ib. p. 328. its material Cause, p. 329. the Prognostic of it, p.
331. Instructions in order to its Cure, p. 332, 333, 334. Purgers to be used in
a hot Scurvey, or in a sulphureo-saline Dyscrasie of the Blood, p. 335, 336.
Purgers to be used in a cold Scurvy, or in a salino-sulphureous Disposition of
the Blood, ib. p. 337. Preservatory Medicines for rooting out the Cause of the
Disease in a cold Scurvy, or in a salino-sulphureous Dyscrasie of the Blood, p.
338, 339, 340, 341, 342, 343, 344, 345, 346. Medicines for rooting out the
Cause of the Disease in a hot Scurvy, or in a sulphureo-saline Dyscrasie of the
Blood, p. 347, 348, 349, 350, 351, 352. the Curatory Indication of the Scurvy
whereby we obviate the Disease it self, and the Symptoms that are chiefly
pressing, p. 353. the Cure of a difficult Breathing and Asthmatick Fits happening
in the Scurvy, ib. p. 354. the cure of the ill Affects of the Ventricle happening
in the Scurvy, ib. p. 355. the scorbutic Cholick cured, ib. the Cure of the
Diarrhoea, and dysenterical Affects happening in the Scurvy, p. 356. the Cure of
the Vertigo, Swooning, and other Affects usually joined with them in the
Scurvy, p. 357. the Cure of Hoemorrhagies happening in the Scurvy, p. 358. the
Cure of Distempers of the Mouth happening in the Scurvy, p. 359, 360. the cure of
night pains in the Legs and Limbs in the Scurvy, p. 361. the Cure of the
scorbutic Gout, p. 362. the Cure of convulsive and paraltick Affects happening
in the Scurvy, p. 363. the Cure of the scorbutic Atrophia and Fever, ib. p.
364, 365. the Cure of the Rheumatism in the Scurvy, p. 365. the Cure of the
Dropsy happening in the Scurvy, p. 366, 367. the crackling of the Bones in the
Scurvy, p. 367, 368. the vital Indication in the Scurvy, where Cordials,
Opiates, and a fit Diet, are ordered, p. 369, 370, 371, 372. Instances of
Persons troubled with the Scurvy, and the Methods used with them, p. ^^^, 374,
375, 376, 377. the Me^^^ of Cure to be used in some (...) of the Scurvy, p. 379.

Skin, its Affects, see cutan^^^^ Affects.

Sleep, Medicines to procur^^^ see Opiates.

Sleepiness continual, the Se^^^^ this Disease, and the Differ^^^ from the Coma
and Leth^^^ p. 396. its method of Cur^^^ p. 397. An Instance of a P^^^ troubled
with it, and the met^^^ used, ib. p. 398.

Sleepy Coma, wherein differ^^^ from the continual Sleepiness (...) the
Lethargy, p. 398. the se^^^^ this Disease, ib. sometimes b^^^ning of it self,
and sometime^ ^^suing upon other Distemper^^^^ p. 399. the Method used in (...)
mary Coma, ib. the method (...) when happening upon other ^^fects, ib.

Sleep wanting, see Watch^^^ Evil.

Small Pox, whence Man (...) ^^clin'd to it, p. 614. the evi^^^ Causes of it,
ib. p. 615. the ^^^junct Cause of it, ib. the Dia^^^ stick of this Affect, p.
616, (...) the Prognostic of it, ib. p. ^^^. its Cure, 619, 620, 621. S^^^^s
of Persons distempered with (...), and the method used with th^^^, p. 622, 623,
624.

Summer Spots, see cutaneous ^^fects.

Spitting Blood, see Blood ^^ting.

Spots in the Skin, see cuta^^^^ Affects.

Steel Medicines, or Cha^^ates, the several ways of ^^^^ring them, and their
various Affects in the Body of Man, p. 316, 317, 318, 319.

Stomach, see Ventricle.

Stupidity or Folly, whence it proceeds, p. 489. the procatarctick and evident
Causes of it, p. 490. the difference betwixt Folly and Stupidity, p. 491. many
degrees of Stupidity, ib. the Prognostic of it, p. 492. the method of curing
it, ib. p. 493. Praescripts of Medicines, ib. p. 494.

Sudorificks, see Diaphoreticks.

Sugar, the Cause of the Scurvy and Consumption, p. 372.

Sweat, Medicines to raise it, see Diaphoreticks. Excessive or depraved
Sweating to cure, p. 42. such Sweating sometimes the symptom of some other
Disease then affecting the Person, as of the Ptisick or Scurvy, ib. its Cure
then depends of the Cure of the Disease, p. 43. excessive Sweating sometimes
the Effect of some foregoing Disease, which is brought to an end, as of an
Ague, ib. the chief Cause of frequent and copious Sweats consists in the ill
Habit and depraved Accension (...) the Blood, ib. the Method and prescripts for
curing it, ib. p. 44. a Distemper relating to Sweating, or an excessive
Perspiration, whereby Persons become extremely tender to take cold, p. 45.
whence this Tenderness proceeds, ib. the Method and Praescripts for curing it,
p. 46, 47.

Swooning cured, p. 357.

Synochus, see Fever.

T.
TAlking lightheaded, see delirium.

Tarantula, its bite causing Convulsions, p. 286.

Teeth when breeding, to ease the pain, p. 254.

Tertian Fever, see Fever.

Tetter, see running Scab.

Trembling of the Heart, see Heart.

Tympany, its Description, p. 160. the previous affects that dispose to it. ib.
the Method of curing it, with Prescripts of Medicines. ib. p. 161, 162, 163,
164, 165, 166.

V.
VEntricle, its various affects in the Scurvy, cured, p. 354, 355.

Vertigo, its Description, p. 411. how caused, ib. p. 412. the immediate and
mediate Subject of it. ib. p. 413. the conjunct cause of it, ib. p. 414. the
Procatarctick cause of it, ib. the prognostic of it, ib. the Method of curing
the Symptomatick, accidental, and the habitual Vertigo. p. 415, 416, 417, 418.
Instances of Persons troubled with the Vertigo, and the Methods used with them.
ib. p. 419, 420.

Vesicatories, of what Substances, and how made, p. 198, 199, 200. after what
manner they operate. p. 200, 201. their good and evil Effects, and the manner
of using them. p. 202, 203. for the Cure of what Diseases this Remedy chiefly
conduces. ib. p. 104, 105, 106.

Vomiting, what things foreshew the want of it, what permit it, and what
prohibit it. p. 1, 2. Prescripts of Vomitories, ib. p. 3. if a Vomit over-work,
what to be done. ib. what to be done in critical Vomiting. ib. p. 4. how to
proceed when the Stomach is primarily affected. ib. Prescripts of Medicines in
a belching and an acid Vomiting. p. 5. Prescrips of Medicines in a hot and
tartish vomiting. ib. p. 6. Prescripts of Medicines in a bilous or bitterish
vomiting. ib. what to be done in an habitual vomiting, through the debility of
the Stomach arising from the Fibers themselves. ib. p. 7. what to be done in a
debility of the Ventricle through the Fibers being obstructed. ib.

Urine, the chief scope of Medicines that purge by it, p. 20, 21. Kinds of
Diuretics. ib. p. 22. Prescripts of Diuretics which have an alchalisate Salt
fot their Basis, ib. Prescrips of Medicines which have a fixed Salt for their
Basis. p. 23. Prescripts of Medicines which have a volatile Salt for their
Basis. p. 24, 25. Prescripts of Diuretics that have salt Nitre for their
Basis. p. 26. Prescripts of Diuretics which have an Alchalisate Salt for their
Basis, p. 27. Sulphurous Diuretics. ib. (...) cure too much purging by Urine.
see Diabetes.

W.
WAshes for the Face. p. 218, 219.

Water. Medicines depurge it. see hydragogue Medicines.

Waters Mineral, prejudicial (...) the Gout and Rheumatism. p. 361.

Watching Evil, p. 402. on what preternatural Watching depends p. 403. the
Method of curing it p. 404, 405. an Instance of a Person troubled with it. p.
406.

Watching Coma, what kind of affect it is. p. 406, 407. what (...) be done in
it. ib.

Witchcraft causing couvulsious p. 269, 270.

Womb, its Diseases, see Fits (...) the Mother.

Women in Childbed, their ^^vers, see Fever.

Worms in Children, to kill th^^^, p. 255.

Worms in the Face, to kill them, p. 220.

FINIS.
ERRATA.
Page 1. l. 9. r. prescripts. l. 14. for which r. what. p. 4. l. 20. r. tone.
p. 7. l. 14. r. successfully. p. 5. l. 25, 26, 29. r. Jalap. p. 11. l. 31, 37,
42. r. Jalap. p. 12. l. 3. r. Di^prunum. p. 16. l. 33. etc. r. viz. l. 37.
after may be, r. the first of these is performed with Diaphoreticks, and the
other with fit Alexipharmicks. p. 39. l. 29. Saits, r. saline things. p. 46. l.
7. r. conformation. p. 51. l. 41. cherbet, called also, r. called cherbet,
also. p. 55. l. 16. the r. a. l. 34. r. these. p. 56. l. 14. r. affect. p. 81.
l. 19. r. successfully. p. 89. l. 24. r. Labdanum. p. 109. l. 20. r. sweet
spirit of Nitre. p. 142. l. 3. blot out the. p. 144. l. 6. though, r. and. p.
145. l. 3. r. water of Earthworms. p. 148. l. 26. r. ciches. p. 156. l. 16.
so, r. too. p. 163. l. 13. take small, r. make. p. 165. l. 31. r. a Decoction.
p. 177. l. 7. r. either happens. p. 183. l. 28. blot out to it. p. 185. l. 18.
r. of. p. 188. l. 4: r. orifice. l. 6. r. orifice. p. 190. l. 11. r.
convulsions. p. 181, l. 23. begin afresh, r. again return. p. 193. l. 7. r.
moss growing. p. 201. l. 42. r. skins. p. 208. l. 41. r. in quality vicious. p.
215. l. 18. extend, r. spreads. l. 40. r. dispose. p. 216. l. 34. r. breakings.
p. 220. l. 24. Ointment, r. Cosmetick. p. 224. l. 23. r. bochet. p. 227. l. 39.
that this, r. that the later. p. 239. l. 17. r. Scotomia. p. 242. l. 13. after
Brain, r. and stirring them up to praeternatural explosions. l. 31, 32
dissipating, r. diffused. p. 243. l. 5. r. of a Brewer. p. 248. l. 5, 6. r.
Euphorbi^m. p. 250. l. 28. r. or breakings forth. p. 265. l. 20. r. held. l.
28. r. the diseased. l. 30. r. affect. p. 268. l. 14. r. slight. p. 275. l. 43.
the, r. that. p. 280. l. 33. from, r. p. 310. l. 18. r. to it from the blood by
the. p. 316. l. 4. r. effects. p. 3.7. l. 34. dele not. p. 321. l. 27. every,
r. a very. p. 327. l. 31. put a comma after distemperatures, and blot out the
comma after Fevers. p. 328. l. 43. r. disturb. p. 349. l. 32. four, r. six. p.
364. l. 44. r. unguentum. p. 367. l. 1. r. Jalap. p. 375. l. 20. r. and as. p.
370. l. 18. r. Meninges. p. 390. l. 39. r. affects. p. 394. l. 15. therein, r.
they. p. 395. l. 29 blot out such. p. 397. l. 7. r. those. p. 398. l. 10. blot
out the full point after years, p. 399. l. 14. r. brain be prevented, and that
that which. p. 403. l. 26. and withal, r. or. l. 32. r. not be appeased. p.
405. l. 18, 19. and that they, r. the same moreover. p. 409. l. 20. r. or
Epilepsy. l. 35. brain, r. cerebellum. p. 417. l. 28. r. hoemorrhoids. p. 420.
l. 37. r. and common sense. l. 28. former, r. later. p 421. l. 2. later, r.
former. p. 422. l. 19. wherefore, r. of which. p. 430. l. 13. affects, r.
efforts. p. 433. l. 42. r. conformation. p. 444. l. 43. make a full point after
please, and a comma only after ceasing. p. 445. l. 13. blot out the comma after
some. p. 447. l. 44. tho, r. and. p. 450. l. 3. whereof. l. 17. r. turgid. p.
454. l. 13. r. cleave. l. 27. ills, r. their. p. 457. l. 23. r. an apple
sliced. l. 28. two apples pounded to a mash. r. two short-start apples. p. 461.
l. 26. light, r. bright. p. 467. l. 41. dele and. p. 469. l. 16, after days
add for purging. p. 472. l. 22. two apples masht, r. two short-start apples. p.
473. l. 14. first, r. fist. p. 478. l. 25. r. notions. p. 484. l. 29. masht, r.
short-start. l. 35. r. whereof. p. 491. l. 19. r. divide. p. 494. l. 10. after
Nutmegs, r. an ounce and a half. p. 495, l. 42. bowels, r. bones. p. 497. l. 3.
r. Acid Liquours, and many small. l. 18. places of abode, r. Heaven's, and of
the Air. l. 38. blot out viz. p. 502. l. 6. or, r. and. l. 38. blot out the
comma after pain. p. 596. l. 15. r. gravel and stones p. 508. l. 6. dele which.
p. 512. l. 2. drawn, r. done l. 28. r. properly. p. 513. l. 27. r. moistened
with it. l. 39. set, r. just. p. 514. l. 7. this, r. the. l. 2. meet, r. neat.
p. 518. l. 16. make a full point before in. p. 527. l. 23. r. obtunded. p. 530.
l. 12. wax cold, r. ferment. p. 553 l. 18. four states of time, r. four times.
p. 555. l. 43. r. as by. p. 558. l. 19. r. decided. p. 572. l. 34. r.
dispersed. p. 573. l. 18. r. such as. p. 573. l. 41, 42. r. accension. p. 571.
l. 2. signs. r. kinds. p. 588. l. 8. parts, r. spirits. l. 32. appearance, r.
apparatus. p. 596. l. 1. r. all ways. p. 618. l. 45. brains, r. loins. p. 626.
l. 12. put a comma after milk. p. 632. l. 25. put: after ensues. p. 634. l. 13.
a little abated of its Heat, r. boiled a little. p. 637. l. 36. blot out also
in the soles of the feet. p. 641. l. 25. r. both of. p. 643, l. 14. r.
inflations. p. 651. l. 2, 3. mustiness, r. overfretting. p. 668. l. 32. r.
gefs. p. 671. l. 44. add. after vehemently.

Books Printed for T. Basset, at the George in Fleetstreet, and W. Crook, at
the Green Dragon without Temple Bar.
THe Institution of General History, or the History of the World; being the
First and Second Volumes. Written by Dr. Howell, late Chancellor of Lincoln, in
Folio.

The Reports of the late Lord Keeper Littleton, in Folio.

The Complete Solicitor, Entring-Clerk and Attorney, fully instructed in the
Practice, Methods, and Clerkship of all his Majesty's Courts of Equity and
Common Law, Superior and Inferior throughout all England. A Collection more
correct and advantageous than any extant. Octavo.

FINIS.

